POLITIC, MORAL, AND MARTIAL Discourses. Written in French by M. Jacques
Hurault, lord of Vieul and of Marais, and one of the French kings privy
Council. Dedicated by the Author to the French-kings Majesty: And translated
into English by Arthur Golding.

LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip. 1595.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable his singular good Lord, William Lord Cobham, L. warden
of the Cinque ports, knight of the most noble order of the Garter, and one of
her Majesty's most honorable privy counsel: long continuance of health, with
much increase of honor, and prosperity.
FOrasmuch as being unknown to your good Lordship, otherwise than by report,
yet notwithstanding I have tasted of your goodness and favor, to my great
comfort in my troubles, of the which when God vvil I hope I shall be well
discharged: I acknowledge my self more bound unto your honor, than any
service or ability of mine can extend unto. And therefore to testify my
thankful and dutiful mind toward you, I have presumed to dedicate this my
labor to your Lordship. And because it is a thing ingreffed by nature,
specially in those that are of best and noblest disposition, to take delight in
the hearing and reading of such things, as are most proper and incident to
their own callings, as whereof they have best skill, and wherein they most
excel, and therefore may most justly challenge to themselves the censure and
judgment of them: I persuade myself that this my presumption will not be
unacceptable, or at leastwise will not seem intolerable, in the sight of your
good Lordship, and of the residue of your most honorable sort and calling, both
for the matter, and for the author thereof. For the matter in substance, is the
due administration of state, and chiefly of a kingdom both in peace and war, at
home and abroad: on the one side through the politic and virtuous government
of the party that holds the scepter of sovereignty, with the loiall linking
in of his magistrates and officers under him: and on the otherside through the
serviceable, willing, and faithful obedience of those whom God has put in
subjection to him: a matter, as of very great importance and behoof, so also
greatly beseeming those whom GOD has set in authority. For of all the states
and degrees which GOD has ordained for the well maintaining of this mortal
life, like as in highness of dignity and honor, and worthiness of
pre-eminence, none is comparable to the state of government, specially which is
well and orderly disposed: so of all the forms of government that have been
in the world, the Monarchy or Kingdom has ever (as well by common and
continual experience, as also by the grounded judgment of the best practiced
politicians, and by the grave censure of the wisest men, yea and even by the
ordinance and approbation of God) bin always deemed and found to be most
ancient and sufficient, most beneficial and behoofful, most magnificent and
honorable, most stable and durable, and consequently most happy and
commendable; as which (besides many other most excellent prerogatives which I
omit here) does most resemble the highest sovereignty of God, the only one
universal Monarch of the whole world, and is most agreeable to the first
original pattern of souereigntie on earth, I mean Adam, whom God created but
one, to have the dominion and lordship of all creatures under the cope of
heaven. The which being justly forgone by that first man's disobedience, God
thought good in his wisdom to repair and set up again much more large and
magnificent than before, in the person of one other man, namely of our Lord
Jesus Christ, whom he has made heir of all things, giving unto him all power
both in heaven and earth, to reign in glory everlastingly world without end.
Who when he was to come into the world, in the last temporal Monarchy of the
world, did thus much further beautify and commend the state of Monarchy by
his coming, in that he vouchsafed not to come, before such time as the state of
Rome was brought into a Monarchy, and settled in the government of one sole
sovereign. Such and so excellent is the matter whereof this book does treat.
The which was written in French by one Jacques Hurault, lord of Vieul and
Marrais, an honorable personage, and (as may well appear by his handling of
the matters here treated of) of great learning, judgment, experience, and
policy. Who for his prudence, gravity, and loialtie, was admitted to be of
the privy counsel to his sovereign lord and master the French king. Whereby
he had fit occasion and means, to see into the states and forms of government,
as well of foreign countries, as of his own, and therefore might be the better
able to discern the truth of things, and to deliver his censure the more
soundly, concerning the managing of public affairs and matters of state.

But now to come home out of France into England, and to apply the case more
particularly to our selves: I am fully resolved, that if we list to look
upon things with right judging eyes, and to consider them with well advised
minds, we shall plainly see there was never any nation under the sun, more
bound to yield immortal thanks unto God for their state, Prince, and
sovereign, than we be for ours; or to magnify him more for the innumerable
benefits received by that means, than we be. For first our state is that state
which is most justly deemed the best and most excellent, namely a Monarchy or
kingdom, wherein one sole sovereign assisted with a most grave Senate of
prudent and sage counsailors, reigns by wisdom, and not by will, by law and
not by lust, by love and not by lordlinesse. And unless we will deny the
thing which the world sees and gladly honors, and which we our selves have
continually found and felt in experience now by the space of xxxvi years and
upward, to our inestimable good and comfort: we must needs confess that God
has given us a prince, in whose sacred person (to speak the truth in as few
words as so great a matter may permit) there wants not any heroical virtue
or gift of grace, that may beseem or adorn the majesty of a kingdom, the
which thing is so much the more glorious and beautiful in her highness being
both a woman and a virgin. By whose means God has also restored unto us the
bright shining beams of his most holy Gospel, late before eclipsed with the
foggie clouds of superstitious ignorance and humane traditions, and the true
ancient and catholic religion, borne down and in manner overwhelmed with the
terrible storms of cruel persecutions: a benefit whereunto none other can be
comparable in this world. Of the which religion her Majesty has continually
showed her self, not a bare professor, but a most earnest and zealous follower,
and a most lightsome example to her subjects: directing al her studies,
counsels and proceedings, to the setting forth of Gods glory, as well by
aduauncing and maintaining the same religion uncorrupted; as also by her most
provident and motherly governing of her people with all justice and clemency,
to their greatest tra^quilitie benefit and welfare. Whereupon has also ensued
Gods most mighty and miraculous protection of her mastiesties most royal
person, her realms dominions and subjects, from exceeding great perils, both
foreign, civil and domestical, such and so fitly contrived by the sleights of
Satan and satanicall practisers, as but by the wonderful and extraordinary
working of the divine providence, could not have been found out, and much
less prevented, avoided or escaped: an assured token of Gods special love and
favor toward both sovereign and subjects. To be short, so many and so great
are the benefits which we have received and still receive, by and from our
most gracious soueraigue lady Queen Elizabeth, that I know not how to conclude
her Majesty's most just deserved commendation, more fitly than with the verses
of a certain ancient Poet, written long since in commendation of that
renowned prince of Britain the noble king Arthur, the which verses I have put
into English, with small alteration of some words, but no alteration at all in
matter and sense, after this manner: Her deeds with mazeful wo^derment shine
euerywher so bright,
That both to hear and speak of the^, men take as great delight,
As for to taste of honycombe or honey. Look upon
The doings of the noblest wights that heretofore be gone.
Alexander the great.
The Pellan Monarch fame co^mends: the Romans highly praise
The triumphs of their emperors. Great glory diverse ways
Is yielded unto Hercules for killing with his hand
The monsters that anoid the world, or did against him stand.
But neither may the Hazel match the Pine, nor stars the sun.
The ancient stories both of Greeks and Latins ouerrun:
And of our Queen Elizabeth ye shall not find the peer,
Ne age to come will any yield that shall to her come near.
Alone all princes she surmounts in former ages past,
And better none the world shall yield, so long as time does last.


What remains then, but that all we her native subjects, knitting our selves
together in one dutiful mind, do willingly and cheerfully yield our obedience
to her gracious majesty with all submission faithfulness and loialtie, not
grudging or repining when any things mislike us, but always interpreting all
things to the best; not curiously inquisitiue of the causes of her will, but
forward and diligent in executing her commandments, even as in the sight of
God, not for fear of punishment, but of very love and conscience. Which
things if we do unfeignedly, then no doubt but God continuing his gracious
goodness still toward us, will give us daily more cause of praise and
thanksgiving, multiplying her majesty's years in health and peace, and
increasing the honor and prosperity of her reign, so as our posterity also
may with joy see and serve her many years hence still reigning most
blessedly: which are the things that all faithful subjects do and ought to
rejoice in and desire, more than their own life and welfare, and for the which
we ought with all earnestnes to make continual prayer and supplication unto
God. But while I am carried with the stream of my desire, to encourage my self
and my countrymen to the performance of our duty toward her majesty,
wherein nevertheless I have been much breefer than the matter requires: I
fear least I become more long and tedious than may beseem the tenor of an
epistle dedicatorie. And therefore most humbly submitting my self and this my
present translation to your honorable censure and acceptance, I here make an
end, beseeching God, greatly to increase and long to continue the honor and
prosperity of your good Lordship, and of your noble house.

Written the xxvii. of January, 1595. Your Honors most humble to command,
Arthur Golding.

To the King.
SIr, forasmuch as it has pleased your majesty, to command the states of your
realm, and to inioine all men without exception, to show unto you whatsoever
they think to be for the benefit and preservation of your state, and the
comfort of your subjects: And I see that every man straineth himself, to give
you the best advice he can: surely I alone ought not to be idle and negligent,
nor to forslow the duty whereby I am naturally bound unto you. The which thing
has caused me to gather these matters of remembrance, which should have been
better polished ere they had been presented to your majesty, if the state of
your affairs and the time would have permitted it. You have voutchsafed me the
honor to be near about your person, and to do you service in such cases as it
has pleased your majesty to employ me, and specially in following the wars,
where I have the good hap, to be a witness of the victories that you have
fortunatly obtained, to the great rejoicing of all christendom. And surely
sir, this makes me to hope, that you will accept this mine attempt in good
part, as a testimony of the good will and great desire which I have always had
and will have, to spend my goods and life in the service of your most christen
majesty, beseeching God to keep me ever in this commendable devotion and
dutiful good will, and to give unto your highness a most happy long life.

From Paris the 28. of October, 1588. Your most humble servant and subject,
James Hurault, lord of Vieul and Marais.

The Contents of such Chapters as are contained in this Book.
The first Part.
OF Office or duty, and of Policy or Estate. Page 1. 2 Of a Prince, a King,
an Emperor, and a sovereign Lord. 4 3 Of the three sorts of government, and
which of the three is the best. 13 4 Whether the state of a kingdom, or the
state of a Public weal be the antienter. 24 5 Whether it be better to have a
king by succession, or by election. 26 6 Of the education or bringing up of a
Prince. 30 7 Of the end whereat a good Prince ought to aim in this life. 36 8
What is requisite in a Prince, to make him happy. 45 9 Of Virtue. 56 10 Of the
Passions of the mind. 65 11 Whether Virtue and Honesty be to be separated from
profit, in matters of government or state. 76 12 That a prince ought not to
falsify his faith, for the maintenance of his state. 89 13 Of Truth. 104 14 Of
Religion and Superstition. 107 15 That the prince which will be well obeyed,
must give good example in himself to his subjects. 138
The Contents of the second Part.
1 Of Wisdom and Discreetnesse. 149 2 That the good governor must match
learning and experience together. 162 3 Of Justice, or Righteousness. 170 4
That a Prince ought to be liberal, and to shun nigardship and prodigality.
212 5 That Gentleness and Courtesy be needful in the orderering of affairs;
the contraries whereunto, be slernenesse and roughness. 236 6 That modesty or
meeldnesse well beseems a Prince, and that over stateliness is hurtful unto
him. 259 7 Of fortitude, valiancie, prowess, or hardiness: and of
fearfulness and cowardlinesse. 275 8 Of Magnanimity. 286 9 That Diligence is
requisite in matters of state. 291 10 Of Temperance. 298 11 That he that will
dispatch his affairs well, must be sober. 310 12 Of continency and
incontinencie. 319 13 Of refraining a man's tongue, of such as be too talkatiue.
of liars, of curious persons, of flatterers, of mockers, of railers and
slaunderers, and of tale-bearers. 333 14 That princes must above all things
eschew choler. 353.
The Contents of the third Part.
1 Of Leagues. 371 2 Of Governors sent into the frontires of countries, and
whether they should be changed, or suffered to continue still. 376 3 Of a
lieutenant-generall, and that it behooves no mo but one to command an army.
379 4 Whether the chief of an army should be gentle or rigorous. 381 5
Whether it be better to have a good army and an evil chieftaine, or a good
chieftaine and an evil army. 386 6 Of the order which the men of old time did
use in setting their people in battle ray. 389 7 What he ought to do which
sets himself to defense. 391 8 Whether it be better to drive off the time in
his own country, or to give battle out of hand. 396 9 Whether it be possible
for two armies lodged one near an other, to keep themselves from being
enforced to fight whether they will or no. 404 10 Whether the danger be
greater to fight a battle in a man's own country, or in a strange country.
408 11 Of the pitching of a camp. 416 12 How to give courage to men of war,
before a battle, or in a battle. 423 13 Of Skirmishes. 430 14 Whether it be
better to bear the brunt of the enemes, or to drown it at the first dash. 432
15 Of a battle, and of diverse policies to be practiced therein. 434 16 Of the
pursuing of victory. 451 17 Of the retiring of an army, and how to save it
when it is in a place of disaduauntage. 455 18 Of Ambushes. 462 19 Of the
taking of towns. 470 20 Of the defending of towns. 480 21 Of diverse policies
and sleights. 488
FINIS.
CHAP. I. Of Office or Duty, and of Policy or Estate.
IT is manifest that the duty of civil life consists in dealing one with
another, Arist. lib. 9. of matters of government.
and that thereupon both honors and empires do depend; so as princes, kings,
emperors, and sovereign lords, do practice the civil life; their Duty lies
in the exercise thereof, their welfare comes thence, and thereupon depends
their preservation. Isocrates in his Panathe.
For policy is the very soul of the publicke-weale, and has like power
there, as wisdom has in the body of man: and as Plutarch says in the life
of Marcus Cato, It is a maxim or principle confessed of the whole world, that
a man cannot atchieue a greater virtue or knowledge, than Policy is; What
Policy is.
that is to say, than is the skill to govern and rule a whole multitude of men,
the which is the thing that we call Estate: to the knowledge whereof man's
nature is so well disposed, that it seems to be borne with him. And the men
of old time called the goddess Pallas, Cicero in his book of the ends of good
and evil.
by the names of Polemike and Politic, as who would say, That the governors
of nations ought to have both chivalry and laws jointly together. And
therefore in treating of the manners that are most beseeming in princes, and
purposing by that mean to set their wise sayings, and politic doings in order,
I have used the word Duty, as a term most fittest to the matter I have in
hand. For virtuous deeds and good works are called Duties by the Philosophers,
whereof Cicero has made three goodly books, wherein he declares at large, in
what things every man's duty consists. For (as he says) there is not any
part of our life, Our life cannot be without Duty.
be it in matters public or private, that can be without Duty, as wherein
consists the whole honor of our life, and likewise the dishonor through the
forslowing thereof; Cicero in the ends of good and evil men.
insomuch that an honest man will rather put himself in danger and endure all
manner of adversity and pains, than leave his Duty undone. And therefore,
before we speak of princes, it will be good for us to decide what a Duty is, to
the end that men may understand whereof we treat. The definition of Duty.
We call that a Duty, to the doing whereof we be bound, as to a thing that our
vocation or calling requires: as for example, The duty of a Til-man, is to
till the ground well; the duty of a Judge, is to judge men's causes vprightlie,
without accepting of persons; the duty of a householder, is to govern well
his house; likewise the duty of a prince or king, is to govern well his
people, to minister good justice unto them, and to keep them from taking
wrong: and generally the duty of man (according to Aristotle in his first
book of Morals) is the inworking of the mind conformed unto reason, or at
least wise not alienated from reason; as when the crafts-man having purposed
some piece of work, employeth his skill and labor to bring his work to a
perfect end, so as the end and utmost point of his honest and virtuous action,
is his Duty.

Two sorts of Duty.
Cicero in his book of Duties, makes two sorts thereof; the one he terms
right and perfect, which is matched with true virtue, and is peculiar to the
discretion of the wise; as when it is demanded what is wisdom, justice,
valeantnesse, or temperance, or what is profit, or what is honesty. The other
he terms mean, which consists in precepts, whereby a man may stablish an
honest trade of life; as when it is demanded, why one thing should be done
rather than another, and what difference there is betwixt one thing and
another, because the thing that well beseems a young man, does ill beseem an
old man; and that which well beseems a magistrate, or a prince, does ill
become a private person; and that which becomes well a private person, does ill
become a prince. But these two sorts may be reduced into one, even by the
saying of the same Cicero, who confesses that these two sorts of duties tend
both of them to the sovereign good, and aim not at any other end than that,
saving that the one belongs to the wise, who aim not at any other law than
only virtue: and the other serves for the directing of the common
conversation, in respect whereof it needs the help of laws and precepts. And
as touching us that are Christians, we may well say, that all our duties tend
to the sovereign good, and are perfect, unless ye will exact that exquisit
perfection, which our Savior taught the young man when he said unto him, That
if he would be perfect, it behooved him to sell all that he had, and to deal it
unto the poor, and to follow him. Therefore to know what is the duty of
every man, both prince and private, noble and unnoble; our lawmakers teaches it
us in two precepts: whereof the first consists in the worshipping of God, and
in the loving of him with all our heart: for it is reason that we should yield
him faith and allegiance for our creation, Men are beholders of heavenly
things.

Cicero in his second book of the nature of the Gods. The loving of our
neighbor is the fulfilling of the law.


and for the great number of so many good things which we receive daily at his
hand, seeing that we peculiarly of all other living wights, are beholders of the
heavenly things that are above. The other is, for the instruction and
stablishment of the common conversation; wherein consists the duty of a
christian, which is to love his neighbor as himself. For (as says S. Paul to
the Romans) it is a fulfilling of the law of God, and a confirming of the law
of nature, which will not have a man to do that to an other, which he would
not have done to himself. And he that keeps this precept cannot do amiss.
For it is very certain, that no man hates his own flesh, ne procures any
evil to himself, and therefore he will not do any such thing to his
neighbor. Now then, we need not to be taught what is Uprightness,
Valeantnesse, and Staidness: for he that keeps the said precept, will not
do any unright. But forasmuch as our own nature, by reason of the corruption
thereof, makes us to step out of the right way; if we will come into the
true path again, it be houeth us of necessity to peruse the law and the
commandments, and to treat of the virtues which are termed Cardinal, namely,
Wisdom, Uprightness, Valeantnesse, and Temperance, or Staidness; and of
the branches depending upon them (the which S. Austine does allegoricallie
term the four streams that watered the earthly Paradise in old time, ^n his
13 book of the city of God.
and daily still waters the little world of them that live well) and to see
how good princes have practiced them, and how evil princes for want of making
account of them, have found themselves ill apaid: Histories ^erue for good
instruction.
to the end we may make our profit of histories and not make them as a matter
of course, but as a good and wholesome instruction. Howbeit, ere we enter into
that matter, it behooves us to know what a Prince, a King, an Emperor, and a
sovereign Lord, is.

CHAP. II. Of a Prince, a King, an Emperor, and a sovereign Lord.
WE cannot enjoy the goods which God has given us on this earth, except there
be a justice, a law, and a prince, as Plutarch teaches us in his book
concerning the education of princes. Justice is the end of the law; law is the
workmanship of the prince; and the prince is the workmanship of God that rules
all, who has no need of a Phidias. For he himself behaueth himself as God.
And like as God has set the Sun and the Moon in the sky, as a goodly
resemblance of his Godhead: so a Prince in a commonweal is the light of the
commonweal, and the image of God; who worshipping God, maintains justice,
that is to say, utters forth the reason of God, that is to weet, Gods mind.
A Prince then is a magistrate that has sovereign power to command those over
whom he has charge. The definition of a Prince.
And under this general term of Prince, I comprehend kings, emperors, dukes,
earls, marquises, and governors of cities and commonweals. The men of old
time called him a Prince, which excelled other men in discretion and wisdom.
For like as to make a fortunate voyage by sea, there behooves a good Pilot,
that is a man of courage and good skill: so to the well governing of subjects
there behooves a good Prince. And therefore we may say, that that prince is the
chief and most excellent of all, which for the pre-eminence of his wisdom and
worthiness commands all others. Plutarch in the life of Pelopidas.
It is the first and chiefest law of nature, that he which is unable to guard
and defend himself, should submit himself to him that is able and has
wherewith to do it; and such a one do we term a chief man, The prince is as
a God among men.
or a prince, who ought to be esteemed as a God among men, (as Aristotle says
in his third book of matters of state) or at least wise as next unto God (as
Tertullian says unto Scapula;) and such a one ought all others to obey as a
person that has the authority of God, as says S. Paul. Homer terms
princes, Diogenes and Diotrophes, that is to say; Bred and brought up of
Jupiter. And Cicero in his common weal says; That the gouerners and keepers
of towns and cities do come from heaven, and shall return thither again
when they have done their duties. And in another place describing a good
Prince, he says that he ought to despise all pleasures, and not yield to his
own lust, nor be needy of gold and silver. A prince should not be bare of
treasure.
For the needinesse of the Prince is but a deviser of subsidies, as the
Empress Sophia said to Tiberius Constantine. Also he ought to be more mindful
of his peoples profit, than of his own pleasure. And to conclude in a word, a
prince ought to imprint in his heart the saying of Adrian the emperor to the
Senate, namely, That he ought to behave himself after such a sort in his
government, as every man might perceive that he sought the benefit of his
people, and not of himself. Also men call them Princes which are of the blood
royal, and stand in possibility to succeed to the crown, and generally all
sovereign magistrates, as dukes, marquises, earls, and other chief lords, of
which sort there are in Italy and Germany, which have sovereign authority
and owe no more to the emperor, but only their mouth and their hands. But the
greatest and excellentest magistrates are the kings and emperors.

An Emperor is a term of war, What an emperor is.
borrowed of the Romans, for in their language the word Imper^ signifies to
command. And albeit that in their armies, the Romans had captains whom they
called Emperors, which commanded absolutely, and were obayed as kings, yet did
not any man usurp or take to himself that title of Emperor, unless he had
done some notable exploit of war. Insomuch that Crassus was counted a man but
of base mind and small courage, and of slender hope, to atchieue any great or
haughty matters, that could find in his heart to be named emperor, for taking
a silly town called Zenodotia. Afterward when the state of the common weal
was changed, by reason of the civil wars, and reduced into a Monarchy, the
successors of Julius Caesar, knowing how odious the name of king was to the
Romans, would not take that title unto them, but contenting themselves with
the effect thereof, they named themselves Emperors, which among us is as much to
say, as chief leaders or Generals of an army or host of men. Plato in his
book of Laws, teaches us seven sorts of ruling or commanding; the first is,
that the father commands his children; the second, that the valiant and
noble-minded command the weak and baseminded; the third, that the elder sort
command the yoonger; the fourth, that the masters command the servants; the
fifth, that the mightier commands the feebler; the sixth, (which is the greatest
dignity) is, that the wise command the ignorant; and the seventh, is that
which comes by lot and by the grace of God; so as he that is chosen by lot,
commands and reigns, and he that fails of it, is bound to obey.

The qualities of a good emperor.
Cicero speaking of Pompey, says, that a good emperor (that is to say, a good
General of a field) must have the skill of chivalry and feats of arms,
virtue, authority, and felicity. He must be painful in affairs, hardy in
dangers, skillful in devising things, quick in performing, and of good
providence to foresee. Titus Liuius says, that the great Captain Hanniball
was wonderful hardy in putting himself to the perils of war, and very
resolute in the midst of danger; that neither his body nor his mind were
fore-wearied with travel, that he patiently abode both heat and cold alike,
that he measured his eating and drinking rather by natural appetite, than by
pleasure; that for sleeping or waking* he made no difference between day and
night; but look what time remained unto him from doing of his business, he
bestowed it in taking his rest, not upon a soft featherbed in some place far
from noise, but ordinarily lying upon the ground covered with a soldiers
cassocke, among the warders, and the whole troops of the men of arms. When he
went among the horsemen or the footmen, he marched always foremost, and was
the first that gave the onset, and when the fight was ended, he was the
hindermost in the retreit. Plutarch treating of Sertorius says, that in
matters civil he was gentle and courteous, and in matters of war he was of
great fierceness and forecast. He was never seen surprised with fear or joy,
but like as in most peril he was void of fear, so in his prosperity he was
very moderate. He gave not place in hardiness to any of his time, nor for
valiantness, in fighting, nor for settled resolution in all sudden
adventures. When any enterprise was to be done that required good advise, or
skill to choose the advantage of some place of strong situation to lodge in,
or to give battle, or to pass a river, or to shift off some mishap, and that
for the doing thereof there behooved great slight, or the working of some
policy, and the giving of some gleeke to the enemy, in due time and place, he
was a most excellent crafts-maister. Besides all this, he was liberal and
magnificent in rewarding honorable deeds of arms, and meeld and merciful in
punishing misdeeds. He was not subject to his belly, neither did he drink out
of measure, no not even when he had no business to do. In time of most
vacation he was wont from his very youth to put himself to great travel, to
make long iourneis, to pass many nights together without sleep, to eat
little, and to be contented with such meats as came first to hand. And when he
was at leisure, he was always either riding, or hunting, or running, or
walking abroad in the fields. I have inserted this the more at length, to the
intent it may serve for a pattern to Princes that intend to prosper, and to
perform their charge happily. Now let us come to a king. The Latin word Rego,
(whereof comes Rex, which betokens a king) signifies to rule or govern.
And so a king is nothing else but a ruler or gouerner of people. Likewise Homer
terms him sometime the Garnisher, and sometime the heardman or shepherd of
the people, because he ought to be careful for his people, Kings are heardmen
and sheepheards of their people.
as the shepherd is for his sheep, and to watch over them as the shepherd
does over his flock, that no man do them wrong. And (as Plutarch says) a
good prince is like a sheepheards dog, which is always in fear, not for
himself, but least the wolf should fall upon the sheep, and so is a good
Prince in fear, not for himself, but least any evil should befall his
subjects. Aristotle in his third book of matters of State, says* There are
four sorts of kingdoms, the first is, where the king has no sovereign
authority, further than in matters of war, and in sacrifising; of which
sort, were the kings of Sparta, or Lacedemon: and this manner of kingdom is as
a perpetual captaineship, matched with sovereign authority of life and
death, such as Agamemnon had, who did put up injuries when he sat at counsel,
but had power to put whom he listed to death when he was in arms. And of such
kingdoms some go by inheritance, and other some by election. The second sort
of kingdoms are those that go both by inheritance and election, the which
notwithstanding approaches unto tyranny, saving that the keeping thereof is
king-like, that is to say, the kings are guarded by their own subjects,
whereas the tyrants are guarded by strangers. And the kings command by law, and
are obayed with good will: whereas the tyrants reign altogether by constraint.
Insomuch that the one sort are guarded by their own citizens or countrymen, and
the other by strangers, against the countrymen. The third is Barbarous, not for
that it is against law, but for that it is not in custom, of which sort was
the government of the Mitylenians, which chose Pittacus against their banished
persons. And the fourth sort is that which was used in the time of the noble
princes, whom the Greeks called Heroes, who usurped not dominion by force, but
had it bestowed upon them by the people, of good will, delivered over afterward
lawfully to their successors. They intended to the wars, and to
church matters, and therewithal judged matters of controversy. Of these four
sorts of kingdoms he makes a fifth, which is, when one commands absolutely.
This kind agrees most to our time, specially in this country, where the king
commands absolutely, howbeit without infringing the law, for then were it
not king-like, but tyran-like. And according to Aristotle, What a king is.
when a Prince reigns without law, it is all one as if a wild beast reigned.
A King then is a sovereign Prince that reigns over a people, not seeking his
own peculiar profit, but the profit of his subjects. This manner of reigning is
like to household government; for although the master of the house do overrule
his train and his servant at his pleasure, yet notwithstanding he regards
above all things the welfare of his family: even so a good king is to have an
eye most principally to the welfare and benefit of his household, namely of his
subjects. For upon them depends his own welfare, as the welfare of the
master of a household depends upon his meiny and servants. A king must
command his subjects as a father does his children.
One being asked upon a time what a prince was to do, that he might reign
well; said, He must command his subjects as a father commands his children;
for the father commands not his children any thing, but that which is for
their welfare. In this respect Homer called Jupiter Father of Gods and men,
according to the saying of our Lord, who has taught us to call the sovereign
Monarch, (I mean the aeternall God) Our father; and not our king and our Lord:
whereby he teaches us, that the true sovereignty is that which resembles the
sovereignty of fathers, and that the true subjects are those that resemble
children. The just commandment of the prince, and the just obedience of the
subjects, are answerable either to other, and cannot be separated.
All such as have written of government, say; that a kingdom well ordered
consists but in two points, namely in the just commandment of the Prince,
and in the due obedience of the subjects. And if either of them both fail, it
is like the separation of the soul and the body, in the life of man; as king
Francis the first, right excellently declared to the men of Rochell, in the
year of our Lord, five hundred forty three. Isocrates in the instruction which
he gives to Nicocles, says thus; It is to no purpose for you to have fair
horses, and fair hounds, if ye take no pleasure of them, ne love them: so is
it also to no purpose for a prince to have such subjects as he desires, if he
take no pleasure in dealing well with them. And as the same author says; Those
kingdoms and states of government continue long, which are charie over the
welfare of their people. The treasure of a good prince that loves his
subjects, is in the houses of his subjects; and it is a common saying, That the
poverty of a prince appears by the poverty of his subjects; but when they
be well at ease, and wealthy, then is the prince to be deemed rich. The mark
of a tyrant.
Therefore the mark of a tyrant, whom Homer terms, A deuourer of his people,
is to be seen in the poverty of the subjects, for that he fleeceth them to
enrich those that are about him, namely the ministers of his pleasures, and of
his evil lusts; which thing causes all men to hate him, and to shun him as a
witless beast, so that for his reward he has the indignation of God, and
hatred of man, a short life, and a perpetual shame: whereas the reward of a
good Prince, that keeps the laws, honoreth uprightness, and judges
according to justice, is to live and reign long time, as Moses affirms.
Which thing Philo laying forth at large* says, That although a prince die in
body, yet lives he still for ever by his virtues, which cannot be abolished or
defaced by death. A Kingdom.
A kingdom therefore is a public state, wherein one only commands, having
respect to the commonweal. Tyranny.
The contrary whereof is Tyranny, which is a monarchy that respects alonly
the profit of the monarch. The state of a king, because it respects the
common profit* and by that means draws the hearts of the people unto it, is
durable, and is vpheld by the only friendship of the subjects. Contrariwise,
because a Tyrant is like a roaring lion and a hunger-staruen bear (as Solomon
says in his Proverbs) and in that respect is not ordinarily beloved of his
people, nor of any good men, therefore he is feign to keep a guard of strangers
about him, to make men fear him and obey him by force, which force of his
makes him the more behated. For the maintaining of which guard, he is feign to
be at great charges, which is a cause that he becomes the more odious, by his
charging and greeuing of the people. The way to win love.
And therefore a certain Gymnosophist of India being asked of Alexander, by
what means he might make himself most beloved, answered wisely: By being very
good, and by dealing so as men should not stand in fear of him. For fear is
an ill preserver of the thing that is to continue. And it is apparent, that
such men endure but a little while, for as soon as the patience of the people
begins to fail, by and by those princes loose their children and their
state: as it befell to Denis the tyrant of Siracuse, and diverse other like.
Injustice is the cause of the alteration of states.
For (as says Ecclesiasticus) a kingdom is transferred from one nation to
another, for the injustice, the injuries, the extortions, and the frauds that
are diversely committed. Paulus Iouius speaking of Ismael Sophie, says, That
after he had recovered his gra^dfathers kingdom, by the favor of the provinces
that were greatly affectioned toward him, he released the tribute
inco^tinently; being alwais of opinion, that the good will of men (which is
easily wone by liberality and justice) was the surest strength of a kingdom;
and (to his seeming) it was not the part of a good king, but of a proud
Potentate and new vpstart, to reign lord-like over the only goods of his
people, when the hearts of them all were estranged from him by the
grieuousnesse of tributes. The kingdom that is maintained by friendly dealing,
is stronger than that which is vpheld by force.
Therefore I will conclude, that the kingdom which is maintained by favorable
means, is much more strong and durable, than that which is vpheld by force.
Which thing Philip king of Macedonia perceiving, sought by all means he could,
to continue in friendship with the Greeks, notwithstnading that he was
oftentimes constrained to use force, in bereauing them of their liberty. And
upon a time when he was councelled by his faithfullest servants, to set
Garrisons in all the cities of Greece that he had conquered, he would not take
knowledge of it, saying, he had lever to be esteemed a good man for a long
time, than to be king or a lord for a short time, because he thought that the
sovereignty which is held by love is durable, whereas the sovereignty that is
held by violence and terror, cannot continue any long time. At another time,
having gotten the possession of a certain place in Peloponnesus, he deliberated
a long time whether he should keep it, or leave it to the Messenians, wherein
he asked the advice of Aratus and Demetrius. The opinion of Demetrius was, That
he should hold fast the Ox by both the horns; meaning, that he should easily
keep the country of Peloponnesus, if he had the said town which was called
Ithomata, together with Acrocorinth, which he had already. But Aratus after
long thinking upon the matter said thus, Sir, the Phocenses have many cities,
and so have also the Acarnanians, all well fortified, as well in the firm land,
as upon the Sea-cost: of all these you shall not enjoy any, and yet
notwithstanding they fail not to do whatsoever you command them, without
compulsion. The outlawes are in the rocks and mountains, No castle so strong
as good will.
and there they hold themselves strong: but unto a king there is no castle more
strong and sure, than good will. Also counsel was given to Antigonus, to place
a good garrison in Athens, to keep it from reuolting any more, and to make it
as a bulwark against all Greece, but he answered, That there was not a better
bulwark, than the love of the people. The best Bulwark is the peoples love.
And as Plutarch says in the life of Aratus, The surest guard that a great
lord can have, is the true and constant good will of his subjects. For when the
nobility and communalty of a country are wont to be afraid, not of him, but
for him that governs them, then does he see with many eyes, and hear with
many ears, and perceives a far off, whatsoever is done. And therefore there is
more profit and more honor also in being a king, than in being a tyrant. And as
it is Gods commandment and will, that the prince should have a singular care
and regard of the welfare and benefit of his people, because he is chosen to
be unto them a defender and protector: so on the contrary part, he is
forbidden by the mouth of Solomon, to pill and oppress the poor, because they
be succourlesse. For the Lord (says he) will take their cause in hand, and
will deal roughly with such as have dealt roughly with them.

CHAP. III. Of the three sorts of Government, and which of the three is the
best.
FOrasmuch as we treat of the state of government, we must not suffer a very
common thing to pass in silence, which yet (to my seeming) ought not to be
omitted, namely, that there be three sorts of civil governments approved in
the world; whereof the one is called by the general name of a Publike-weale,
wherein all men as well poor as rich, noble as unnoble, are admitted to govern
by turn. Another is called Aristocracie, which is compacted of some small
number of noblemen, and men of reputation, who bear all the sway. And the
third is the Monarchy, or Kingdom, wherein al things are at the commandment of
one alone. These three sorts of government, because they tend all to the
welfare of the whole state, are all allowable, and many like well to be under
them, some under one, and some under another, according as the humors of people
be diversely disposed. As for example, The Egyptians could not abide to be
without a king, and the Athenians could not endure to have a king. The
contraries to these three sorts of government are faulty and reproved; namely
Democracie, the contrary to a Publike-weale: wherein the people bear all the
sway alone, and carry all the credit, without calling the nobility and
gentlemen to counsel. Oligarkie, the contrararie to Aristocracie; which is the
government of some few men, that convert all things to their own profit: and
tyranny the contrary to a kingdom, which is the government of one alone that
does all things at his pleasure, without refourming himself to law and reason.
To say which of the said three good states is the best, it is a hard matter;
The praise of Arist^cracie.
yet notwithstanding many men prefer Aristocracie before the Kingdom, because
it is not ruled by the discretion of any one transitory man, upon the valor
whereof the welfare of the whole state might depend, but it is governed by the
immortal counsel of an everlasting senate. For it is a rare matter to find
any one man so fully perfect and worthy to reign. And as Nicholas Foscarin of
Venice said, Kings do not so easily res^st their lusts as private persons do.
Kings do not easily resist their own lusts as private persons do; because
that in as much as they be customably honored in their kingdoms, and are heard
and obayed in the twinkling of an eye, they be not only high-minded and
insolent, but also impatient if they obtain not whatsoever seems just unto
them; and to their seeming, all things is just that they desire; bearing
themselves in hand, that with one word they can put away all impediments, and
overcome the nature of all things; nay, they think it a shame for them to
shrink from their inclinations, for any difficulties; taking counsel, not of
discretion and reason, but of their own will and stateliness. And as Soderin
Gonfalonier of Florence said; (when he moved the Florentines to take a part,
and not to be newtors any more) Princes think themselves wro^ged when they be
denied their requests, and fly upon every man that follows not their will,
and hazardeth not his state together with theirs. The commendation of the state
of a kingdom.
But if they be such as they ought to be, undoubtedly it is the greatest good
turn that can befall to a realm, and most resembling God, who by his
everlasting providence, reigns alone over the whole world. And it is also
conformable and drawing near to our nature, wherein we see one that ouer-ruleth
all the rest; for if we consider our body, we see it is ouer-ruled by a soul,
which gives moving to all the members, without the which, the body is but as a
block. Among our members we have a heart, which is (as you would say) the
Prince and king of all the rest. And in the mind, reason bears chief rule.
The Bees have their king. In an army there is a general that commands, and
in a ship there is a Pilot that guides it. Rome could not abide two brothers
reigning together. Esau and Jacob strove even in their mothers womb. In the
church-gouernment one only bishop or Metropolitan commands. In a house
there is but one master, the residue are but servants, obaying the
commandments of the master of the house. And therefore he that would have
altered the kingdom of Sparta into a popular state, came short; insomuch that
Agesilaus said unto him, It was meet that he should first stablish a popular
state in his own house: doing us to understand, that that form of government
which a man would be loath to have in his house, is not meet to be in a city
or country. For (as says Aristotle) A city is nothing else but a great
household. To the same purpose did Homer say, That the government of many was
nothing worth, and that mo than one governor needed not. After the death of
Cambises, when the Princes of Persia had expulsed the Magies, who had invaded
the empire, they assembled together, to consult how they might thensforth
govern the State. In this meeting there were three sundry opinions. One was of
Othanes, who said there needed no king to be chosen, but that the affairs of
the realm were to be managed by all men in common, and every man ought to be
left at his own liberty, without subjection to any one, because it is
ordinarily seen, Sole government makes men insolent.
that a sole soueraign becomes insolent, and that if he be displeased, he may
satisfy his insolency to the full. Megabysus was of the contrary opinion,
saying that such liberty is more dangerous than Tyranny, because that if the
noblemen and cities should be without a sovereign lord, they might abuse that
liberty at their pleasure. And therefore he thought it good, that neither the
cities themselves, nor the whole multitude of the nobility, should have the
managing of the public affairs; but that the doing thereof should be committed
to some certain number of good and virtuous Princes, which should have the
governing of the State, and be obeyed as a king of all the rest. But Darius
liked none of both those aduises, because that if all men should be at
liberty, without obedience to any, it could not continue long, for so much as
it was not possible, that a multitude of free lords could any long time agree
among themselves; and to take any small number of them to rule the State, it
was also inconvenient, because there would rise innumerable matters, wherein
the princes would not be all of one mind; and moreover, there would always be
some one or other that would attempt to control the rest, which thing would
breed dissension among them, and finally the ruin of the State. And therefore
he was of opinion that of all the kinds of government, there was not a better
than the Monarchy. The which advise of his, Kingdoms have passed al other
states of government, both in largeness of dominion, and in length of time.
all the rest of the princes followed. Of a very truth we see, that neither
the State of Aristocracie, nor the State of Democracie, have atteined to like
greatness as kingdoms have, saving only Rome for the largeness of empire,
and Venice, for continuance of time. For, as for Lacedemon and Athens, their
dominions extended but a little way, notwithstanding that the one of them made
their power to be seen in the lesser Asia, and the other became terrible to
the Persians. But above all other, A commendation of the popular state*
the popular government is most vnweeldie, because it is full of ignorance and
confusednesse of people; whose nature (as said Bellifarius) is to move by rage,
rather than by reason; and who (as says Guicciardine) grounding themselves
upon deceitful and vain hopes, and being furious in their dealings, when
danger is far off, and quite out of courage when peril does approach, are not in
any wise to be ruled or restrained. And (as Philip of Nauar was wont to say)
there is not any certain stay in a co^munaltie; and for that cause he would not
trust the Parisians, nor come within their city, what show of good will soever
they were able to make; persuading himself that he could not be in sufficient
surety, among so great a number of people of so diverse humors. Which thing the
Senate of Rome considering, chose rather to give their people Tribunes, than to
give unto them the reins of authority without a magistrate. People are more
tractable having a head, than being without a head.
For although the power of the tribunes was ouer-great, yet thought they it
better than the ouer-vehement and boistrous power of the people; who become
more tractable when they have a head, than when they be without one; For a head
considers the danger, but the people cast no peril at all. The popular
government is hard to be dealt with; for it is a beast with many heads, which
does good unto them that would it evil, and requite evil to them that do it
good. The reward of such as serve in popular state.
As the Athenians did to Miltiades, whom in recompense of the good which he had
done them in delivering them from a dangerous siege, and in vanquishing ten
hundred thousand Persians, himself having but ten thousand men, they amerced
at a great fine, keeping him in prison till he had fully paid it, and finally
banished him out of the country. They did as much to Themistocles, Aristides,
Alcibiades, and other good captains of their city, whereof anon after ensued
their own decay. We know how James of Arteuill governed the people of Gaunt in
his time, and what power and authority he had over them, and how he was
beloved of all; and yet nevertheless they put him to death upon a small
suspicion, and would not so much as hear his reasons. They did as much to John
Boulle, one of their captains, because that without cause and without
likelihood, they had wrongfully surmised of him, that he had brought them into
an ambush, upon secret compact with the earl of Flaunders; and he was not
permitted to show his reasons and excuses. For without hearing him, they drew
him out of his lodging into the street, and there hewed him into small pieces,
every man carrying away a piece that could come by it. Therefore Demosthenes,
who was banished Athens as others had been, considering how Athens was
dedicated to Minerua, said; O Pallas, what meanest thou to enterteine so wicked
and foul beasts, as a night-owle, a dragon, and a popular government? for unto
Pallas were these things dedicated. And Aristides the best man of life that
ever was in Athens, vpbraided the Athenians with their rashness, who had
condemned him for excecuting his charge faithfully, in not suffering the common
treasure to be robbed and spoiled, and had had him in great love and
estimation, when he winked at the pilfries which he saw committed, as though he
had then worthily and faithfully discharged his duty. For a multitude is hard
to be ruled, and other counsel is there none with them, than such as they bring
of themselves, misconceiued, misunderstood, misiudged by passions; neither is
there any thing so unequal in a commonweal, as that is which they call
equality of persons. All is there equal and even, saving their minds, which
are as far at odds as may be. And yet notwithstanding, because things go by
the number of voices, without weighing them otherwise, they pass always with
the most number, that is to say, with the foolishest opinion. In the city of
Athens, wise men propou^d, and fools judge.
By reason whereof, Anacharsus said, that in the city of Athens, wise men
propounded matters, and fools judged of them. And Phocion wh^neuer agreed in
opinion with the common people, having in open assembly delivered an opinion
that was liked of the whole multitude, insomuch that all the standers-by
yielded to his advise; turned himself to his friends and asked them, whether
some fond thing had not escaped him in his speech unawares. As touching the
commonweal of Rome, albeit that the Romans had conquered the whole world by
battle, yetnotwithstanding they were oftentimes ill governed, for all their
good policy. For after that the kings were once expulsed, the city was never
without quarrels, some while against the ten commisioners; another while the
people against the Senate, and the Senate against the people; one while against
the tribunes, and another while against the consuls: and nothing did ever
uphold and maintain the city so much and so long, as the foreign wars,
which caused them to compound their quarrels at home, without the doing whereof
they could never have continued; for as soon as they had any vacation from
foreign wars, by and by they lost their liberty, and found from that time
forth, that the opinion of Scipio Nasica was grounded upon great reason, when
he would not that Carthage should have been destroyed, that it might have kept
Rome still in her rigo^t wirs, for in very deed, their covetousness and
ambition bred cruel dissentions among them, which in the end did bring the
overthrow of their State. Whether dissension be requisite in a common weal or
no.
And therefore I will not say but that disagreements are often times necessary
in a house, a kingdom, or a coimmon-weale, and that (as Onomademus said after
the rebellon of the Island Chios) it is not behooffull to make clean riddance
of ell enemies, for fear least there should be dissension among friends. I am
fully persuaded it is not amiss to suffer some enemies to spite one another,
as well for the reason aforementioned, as also for that the enemies by their
crossing one another, do discover their own lewdness, covetousness, and
ambition, to the benefit of the prince and of the commonweal; and yet
notwithstanding are afraid to do evil, least men should epsy their doings and
behauior. And (as says Plutarch in the life of Pompey) the disagreement of two
mighty citizens that are at variance among themselves, vpholds the common
weal in equal balance, like a staff that is equally charged at both the
ends, so as it cannot sway one way or other. But come they once to join in one
body, and to knit themselves together in one, then it makes so great an
inclination or sway, as no man can withs^and; insomuch that in the end, The
friendship of Caesar and Pompey was the overthrow of the commonweal.
they turn all things vpside down, and therefore unto such as went about,
complaining that the quarrel and enmity of Caesar and Pompey, had overthrown
the commonweal, Cato said that they ouershot themselves very greatly in
saying so, because it was not their discord and enmity, but rather their
friendship and good agreement that was the first and principal cause thereof.
When Pope July had made a league with the Venetians and the king of Arragon,
against the Frenchmen, many men commended his dealing, as whereby he meant to
drive away the Frenchmen at the costs of the Spaniards, in hope to drive away
the Spaniards afterward, when they had bin tired already by the Frenchmen. But
the best advised sort found this counsel to be pernicious unto Italy, saying;
that since it was the hard hap of Italy, to have both the ends thereof possessed
by strangers, it was better for the country to have them both continue there
still, (because that as long as the one king was able to weigh even with the
other, those that were not yet entered into bondage, should be able to
maintain their own liberty) than that the Italians should be at wars among
themselves, by means whereof so long as such wars continued, the parties that
were yet whole and sound should be torn in pieces by sacking, burning, and
other miserable inconveniences, and finally he that gained the goal, would
punish the whole country with the harder and irkesomer bondage. That was the
cause why Pope Clement turned to the French kings side, bearing himself in
hand, that as long as the emperor and the king continued both in Italy, the
Apostolic sea should be vpheld by the power of either of the^; and therefore he
would not suffer the kingdom of Naples and the duchy of Millan to fall both
into one hand. Small dissentions forasmuch as they be intermingled both with
peril and profit, cannot overthrow a state, but when the dissension is great,
Great dissension between ouer-great personages is dangerous to a state.
and between great persons, it makes strange tragedies, as did the
dissentions between Marius and Silla, Pompey and Caesar. For having once
gained and drawn unto them the whole city of Rome, and having weapon in hand,
and men of war at commandment, they could hardly eschew, that their discord
should not procure the ruin of the state. The enmity that was between
Aristides and Themistocles, had like to have overthrown the state of Athens:
and when upon a time they had nothing prevailed in an assembly by their
quarelings, Themistocles returning thence in a great rage, said; that the
commonweal of Athens could not continue in good state, unless that he
himself and Aristides were both cast down. The envy that some citizens bare
unto Alcibiades, was a cause of the destruction of Athens. Likewise the state
of Florence was in short time overthrown by such partakings. The Romans in
time of danger chose a dictator that had soueraign authority; but he was not
to continue any long time, for fear least his ouer-great authoririe should
turn into tyranny. When Cicero was Consul, there was given unto him a greater
authority than ordinary, in these words namely, That he should have a
special care of the commonweal, that it incurred not any danger; and this
was at such time as they perceived the conspiracy of Catilin to hang over
their heads. Cicero in this his time of authority, did put many noble men of
Rome to death, being first atteinted and convicted of high treason, which thing
he could not otherwise have done. The Senate perceiving that the magistrates of
Rome did not their duties, and that all went to hauoke, determined to choose
Pompey to be Consul alone, to reform the commonweal: and of that mind also
were Bibulus and the younger Cato, howbeit that they liked not of Pompeys
behauior and trade of life, saying it was much better to have a Magistrate, be
what he be may, than to have none at all. The absolute government is best and
most certain.
And this their using of the absolute manner of government by one alone in the
times of danger, does show that they liked better of it, and esteemed it to be
better and more certain, than the manner of government that was in Athens; and
that they abhorred not so much the thing it self, as the name thereof. Also
Mithridates king of Pontus said, That the Romans hated their kings, because
they were such as they were ashamed of, as namely Shepherds, Bird-gazers,
Soothsayers, Outlawes, Bondmen, and (which was the fairest title of all)
Vainglorious and Proud. The Carthaginenses likewise had but one General
captain of war, whom they changed oftentimes. Contrariwise the Athenians
chose many captains at once, The Athenians had many Captains. Kingdoms have
been of longer continuance, and made greater conquests than any other state of
government.
to lead their forces of war. In respect whereof, Alexander marvelled how the
Athenians could find every year ten captains, seeing that he himself in all his
lands, could find but one good captain, which was Parmenio. Also we see that
commonweals have not made so great conquests as Monarchies have done, except
the commonweal of Rome, which brought all kingdoms under the dominion
thereof: But for that one commonweal, ye have many kingdoms which have had
greater possessions, and have kept them a longer time. As for example, the
kingdom of Assyria had mo Kingdoms and countries under the dominion thereof,
than ever had the city of Rome. The Roman empire lasted partly at Rome, and
partly at Constantinople, about fifteen hundred years. The Empire of Almaine
(which began under Otho the second, about two hundred years after the
coronation of Charlemaine) has continued unto this day: but yet in some things
it sauoreth of the Aristocracie. The kingdom of France has endured about a
twelve hundred years. As for the dominion of Venice, the government whereof is
an Aristocracie, is the Paragon of all Commonweals in the world, as which
alonely may vant that it has maintained his state the longest time of all
others, howbeit with such good laws as were able to preserve it, as they well
showed unto one of their citizens, whom they dispatched out of his life without
speaking any word unto him, only because he was of authority and credit to
appease a certain sedition or mutiny among the men of war in their city.
And to say the truth, the thing that overthrew the state of Rome, was the
ouer-great authority which they suffered their citizens to bear.

Of a Tyrant.
Now then, as a good king is a right excellent thing, so when he becomes a
tyrant, he is as excessive a mischief. For the man that is set in that
authority, has power over men's persons to dispose of them at his pleasure: as
Samuel told the Israelits when they chose their first king. And (as said
Othanes) he peruerteth the laws and the customs of the country, he rauisheth
women, and he puts folk to death without sentence of condemnation. If ye
commend him modestly, he is discontented that ye do it not excessiuely: and if
you commend him out of measure, he is offended as though ye did it of
flattery. Policrates the tyrant of the Isle of Samos, made war upon all his
neighbors without any respect; saying that he pleasured his friend the more in
restoring to him that which he had taken from him, than if he had not taken
ought from him first. Nevertheless, it behooves a Prince to think that if he
forget himself and do not his duty, ne performs his charge as he ought to
do; besides, that he shall yield an account for it before him that gave him that
charge, A Tyrant sildome leaves his kingdom to his posterity.
he shall not leave his kingdom to his posterity. Which thing Denis the
tyrant of Siracuse did his son to understand, rebuking him for the adulteries
and other crimes that he had committed, and declaring unto him, that he
himself had not used such manner of dealing when he was of that age. Whereunto
his son answered him, that he had not had a king to his father: neither shall
you (quoth his father) have a king to your son, except you do better. And as
he had said, so it came to pass. Peter king of Castile, for his tyranny and
wicked demeanor toward his subjects, was first driven out of his realm by his
bastard-brother, aided with the help of such as hated Peter; and afterward
when he had recovered it again, by the means of the black Prince, as soon as
his brother the bastard came again with any force, all the country revolted
from him to the bastard, and the Spaniards that were with him would neither put
on armor nor mount on horseback at his commandment; by reason whereof, he
was feign to crave succor of strangers, and yet notwithstanding he lost the
battle, and with the battle, both his kingdom and his life. Alfons the
younger, king of Naples, having done many tyrannical deeds, fled dishonorably
out of his kingdom at the coming of Charles the 8. king of France; and (as
Guicciardine reports) being tormented with the sting of his own conscience,
found no rest of mind day nor night: for a night-times, those whom he had
wronged appeared unto him in his sleep; and a day-times, he saw his people
making insurrectio^ against him, to be revenged. His son also to whom he left
the kingdom, felt himself pinched with the sins of his predecessors: for the
Neapolitanes forsook him as well as his father, Why Tyrants are murdered
rather than private household^rs, being both of them wicked.
and turned to the French kings side. We see what befell to Roboam the son of
king Solomon, for exacting too much upon his subjects; and to the duke of
Guyen, (commonly called the black Prince) for raising a fowage in the country
of Aquitane. Marcus Aurelius said, that the cause why God suffered wicked
Princes to be murdered, rather than other wicked men, is for that the private
man's naughtiness hurts but himself and his own family, for want of
ability to extend his naughtiness any further; but the Prince that is
tyrannous and wicked, overthrows the whole Commonweal. To conclude, the
tyrannical dominion is very dangerfull and noisome to all the people: but the
kingdom that is governed according to law, passes all other states of
government, be it in comfort of the people, or in the durablenesse of itself,
or in making of great conquests.

CHAP. IIII. Whether the State of a Kingdom, or the State of a Publike-weale
be the antienter.
Many be of opinion, that the Kingly authority had his beginning from the
people, and that the state of a Publike-weale was before the state of a King. Of
that opinion is Cicero in his books of Duties, saying that Kings were chosen
at the first, for the good opinion that men had of them. And in another place
he says, That when folk found themselves harried and trodden underfoot by the
richersort, they were constrained to have recourse to some man of excellent
prowess, to defend them from the oppression of the mightier sort, and to
maintain both great and small in a kind of equality. Of the same opinion
likewise is Aristotle. Because the men of old time (says he, were benefactors
to the communaltie, either by the invention and practice of arts, or by making
wars in their behalf, or by assembling them together into corporations, and
by allotting them their territories; the multitude did willingly create them
Kings, and so they conveyed their kingdoms over by succession to their
posterities. Pliny says, that the Athenians were the first that brought up
the popular government, which nevertheless had been used long before by the
Jews, as Josephus witnesses in his books of their antiquities. Indeed
Thucidides in his first book of the wars of Peloponnesus, says, that when
the country of Greece was become rich by reason of the nauigations, there
stepped up every day new tyrants in the cities, by reason of the greatness of
their revenues. For before that time, the kings came in by Succession, and had
their authorities, prerogatives, and preheminences limited. Whereby he does us
to understand, that kingdoms were before commonweals, as indeed there is
great likelihood that the state of a king was the foremost. And it is not to be
doubted, but the first men that were after the the flood, when the earth was
repeopled again, did rule the lands which they possessed, first in their own
households, and afterward (when they were increased) in governing the whole
offspring that came of their race, as we see was done by Sem, Cham, Iaphet,
Ianus, Gomer, Samothes, and such others, of whom some reigned in the West, and
some in the East. And Nembroth of Chams lineage, Nembroth the first King.
was the first that troubled his neighbors, by making war upon them, and the
first that made himself a king, as S. John Chrysostom affirms upon the
ninth of Genesis. For before that time time there could be no king, because
there were no store of people to be subjects. Also Abraham having a great
household, took three hundred and eighteen of his own men, and pursuing those
that had spoiled Lot, discomfited them. The fathers of old time therefore
having many slaves and servants, which were multiplied afterward with the
increase of their issue, had them at commandment as a King has his subjects.
And of this opinion seems Iustine to be, in his abridgement of Trogus
Pompeius; who says in his first book, That at the beginning every nation and
every city was governed by kings; and that such as had none of their own,
did choose one, either for the good opinion which they had of the person whom
they chose, or for some good turn which they had received at his hand, or else
for that they felt themselves misused by their head, whom they themselves had
set over them, as it befell by the sons of Samuel, whose unjust behauior
caused the Jews to demand a King. Here is a fair field offered me, for the
discoursing of this matter on either side, but it shall suffice me to have had
this speech following at a glaunce.

CHAP. V. Whether it be better to have a king by Succession, or by Election.
SOme there are that demand, whether it be more behoofull and expedient for
the welfare of a people, to have a king by Election, or by Succession. For if
ye proceed by Election, it is to be presumed, that ye will choose the best,
namely such a one as has made good proof of himself, and is known to be
wise, fortunat, and valiant. Or if ye let it go by Succession, it may be that
the king shall be young, of small experience, and of little understanding. And
therefore Alexander knowing the duty of a king, said; He would leave his
kingdom to the worthiest. Pirrhus being asked of his children to whom he would
leave his kingdom, answered, To him that of you all has the sharpest sword;
as if he should say, to him that is the most valiant. Whosoever would maintain
this opinion, should have reasons enough to uphold and defend it. Yet
notwithstanding we ought to rest upon the custom of the country, and not to
swerve from it. Such as are wont to choose their king, do well and worthily
therein. And yet the granting of a kingdom to go by Succesion, which also is
a very general custom in most countries, Elections are causes of great wars.
is not to be misliked. For oftentimes it falls out, that Elections are a
cause of many wars, as we have seen in the Roman emperors. In the kingdom
that goes by inheritance there is no cause of war.
On the other side, when the kingdom goes by succession, there is no quarrel
or ciull war, because it is known who ought to be king. For that cause did
Ge^srike appoint by his will, that his children should exceed one another in
the kingdom, so that after the death of his eldest son, dying without issue,
the eldest next him should succeed. And as long as that order was observed
among them, the kingdom continued in the race of Gensrike; as witnesses
Iordane in his history of the Goths. Moreover, a father is desirous to leave
all things in best order to his children, the which thing tends always to
the public commodity. Contrariwise they that are chosen, endeavor rather to
diminish than to enlarge their kingdoms, because they shall not leave them to
their heirs; and therefore they labor to draw all things to their own
peculiar profit, that they may leave to their family some fruit of the
kingdom whereto they were come; and therwithall they be bound to favor and
recompense their Electors, which cannot be done without expenses and charges to
the commonweal. And it will not serve the purpose to say, that oftentimes it
falls out, that kings are young and under age, and consequently without
authority, and without ability to govern themselves, and much less their
people; or else that they be witless, or out of their wits, which is worse.
For it is well known, that nothing is so well ordered in this world, nor any
law so well stablished, which may not admit some inconvenience. But in this
case the incounenience is such, A King that is under age rules by his counsel.
as may easily be remedied. For if a king be young, he has a Counsel, by whom
oftentimes he rules better than some old man that will needs do all things on
his own head; as we read of Josias, who was crowned at seven years of age,
and reigned forty years, in which time he did not any thing which was not to
be done; so as the minority of his age, made him not to be the less honored
and regarded. Hereof we have record in little Europus king of Macedonia, the
presence of whom (notwithstanding that he lay in his cradle) caused his
subjects to win the battle; and the Macedonians said all with one voice, That
when they fled before, they wanted not courage, but their king; in whose presence
they fought as manfully, as if he had been of discretion to have marked them
that did well. And although we have sometimes had wars by reason of the
minority and debilitie of our kings as it happened in the times of S. Lewis,
of Charles the sixth, and lastly of the late king Charles whom God pardon; yet
may we well avow, that we never had so much harm thereby, as the Romans had by
their wicked emperors, that came in by Election, yea even by the best taught of
them, as Heliogabalus was, who being trained up in all duties of honor and
godliness, by Varia Mesa, did nevertheless become one of the wickedst
creatures under the sun. Wicked kings are sent of God for the sins of the
people.
And therefore we may well say, that it comes of Gods will, who according to
his threatening of the Israelites in old time, sends us babes or fools to be
our governors, when he lists to punish us, and oftentimes princes well
brought up, but yet abiding in their wicked and il-disposed nature, such as
were Tiberius, Nero, Caligula, and infinite other mo. Nevertheless there is
this difference, that the king which is of tender years, or simple-witted,
has his counsel, which notwithstanding that they be oftentimes at ods among
themselves, omit not for all that, to give him good counsel in most things. But
as for the Prince that is of a froward nature, he believes nothing but that
which is of his own head; neither gives he himself to any thing else than to
do mischief. I know well that the minority of a prince is oftentimes the cause
of many dissentions and partakings for the government: The state of the time
and of affairs, causes civil wars.
and that men stand not in so great awe of him, as of an elder person, that is
well advised. But yet the state of the time and of affairs, does more in that
behalf, than all other things. For if they happen under a prince that is young
or simple-witted, they procure great tragedies; and yet for all that they fail
not to step in also even under a king that is man-growne and well advised. If
Robert of Artois (who was the cause of all the misfortune that we had in
France, by the Englishmen) had been in the time of a young prince, men would
have said, that the small regard which he had of the princes age, had made him
to despise him. And yet nevertheless, having to do with a king of full age and
well experienced aforehand, he forbear not for all that, to make open war
upon him, and to cause the English men to come into France, upon a choler and
despite, for that Philip of Valois had adjudged the earldom of Artoys to his
aunt. The king of Nauar had to do with a king of sufficient years, and with
such a one as had not then tasted of such misfortune as he felt afterward by
experience, and yet notwithstanding he forbear not to give many proud attempts
against him, to slay his constable, and to refuse to be at his commandment,
until the king had given him his son the earl of Aniou in hostage. At such
time as Charles the fifth was regent of France, the same king of Nauar, being
underpropped by certain seditious persons of Paris, forbear not to make war
upon the said Charles, for all his wisdom, puissance, and good government. In
the time of Charles the sixth, Private quarrels caused the wars under Charles the
sixth.
no such distresses and adversities had befaln in France, but for the iarres
that were between the houses of Burgundy and Orleans. And therefore we must
not impute the misfortune, so much to the unskillfulness of the king, as to
private quarrels, and to the troublesomnesse of the time wherein he reigned,
which was such, that if they had had never so sage a prince, he should have
found himself very sore cumbred. After that Charles the seventh had recovered
all France, he was not so greatly redouted, nor so settled in peace, but there
remained unto him some small civil wars. Lewis the eleventh was a prince of
sufficient wisdom, forecast, and age, to guide himself; and yet he could not
turn away the wars from the common weal, which had not happened under princes
of unripe years. For the governors of a young prince durst not to have despised
the greatmen openly, nor to have defeated the ancient officers, as he did;
whereof insued evil unto him. What would have been said of the war in
Germany, if it had happened under a simple witted Emperor, seeing it befell
under a prince of government, fortunat, puissant, and well advised? Men have
imputed our wars to the minority of the late king. But had he been much
elder than he was, he could not have prevented them, seeing that to the
coffeehouse of most men, the case stood upon the state of religion, a matter
sufficient (being so intermedled both with matters of state, and with private
quarrels) to maintain the tragedies that we have seen. Therefore it behooves
us to yield unto custom, and to say with S. Paul, The hearts of kings are in
the hand of God.
That the power of a king comes of God; and likewise with Solomon in his
Proverbs, That the heart of a king is in the hand of God; as is the course of
waters, and that he inclines them which way he lists. Some men like well of
the kingdom that goes by Election; and othersome mislike not of the kingdom
that goes by Inheritance. Both in the one and in the other, there be diverse
inconveniences, and reasons enough both to commend them, and to discommend them.

CHAP. VI. Of the Education or bringing up of a Prince.
LYcurgus the Lawmakers of Lacedemon, being desirous to make his countriemen to
love virtue, and intending to show them to the eye, as it were with his finger,
that nature and custom be the means to atteine thereto; upon a time when they
were assembled altogether in a place, to consult of the affairs of the city,
brought forth before all the company a couple of dogs, of one litter, of
one dam, and of one sire; the which he had kept up so diversely, that the one of
the^ being altogether given to hunting, was extremely sharp set upon the prey,
and the other being accustomed to the kitchen, and to lick the dishes, had no
desire at all to hunt. For proof whereof, when he had set before the^ a platter
of porrage and a quick Hare, by and by the one of them ran after the Hare, and
the other stepped to the porrage. Whereupon he said, Ye see here, O ye
Lacedaemonians, how these two dogs being both of one dam, and yet diversely
brought up do resemble their bringing up: even so trainment and custom are
means of great importance, to engender virtue in men's hearts. Which thing we
cannot but rightly say of the education of princes, Princes cannot be virtuous
unless they be learned.
which ought to be better learned than other men, and to believe that they
cannot be virtuous, if they be not learned; but are like to a piece of ground,
which being never so good, becomes barren if it be not husbandred; and
contrariwise does bring forth good fruit, being well tilled and composted,
though of it self it be very bad. The body that is strong forgoeth his
strength for want of exercise; and contrariwise, the man that is feeble and of
weak complexion, becomes strong by continuance of exercise and travel.
Plutarke in his book of the bringing up of children, says; That to make a man
perfect in virtue, there behooves three things to concur, namely; Nature,
Reason, (that is to say, instruction or teaching) and Custom or Exercise. It
is no wonder therefore though such as have treated of the qualities that are
requisite in Princes, having begun at their very cradle, and trained them up
from their first infancy. For the time most fit and convenient for the doing
thereof, is while they be yet tender and easy to bend; and of that first
Education of theirs, will they have a taste ever after. For (as Horace says) The
bottle that has licour of good sent put into it at the first, will keep the
tang thereof a long time. Among the authors of our time, Francis Petrarch has
written very largely thereof, teaching of the nursing of a prince, of his
keeping of company, of his tutors and teachers, of the manner how to make him a
god horseman, and consequently of good horses; of running, of wrestling, and of
other exercises of the body; of shooting, of hunting, of hawking, and
consequently of the nature of hawks; of playing at tennis, and other pastimes;
of husbandry, of Geographie, and of Cosmographie. But my intent is not to
train up a prince from his cradle to his tomb; but to gather such doings of
theirs, as may serve them for good example, to the well governing of their
people. Therefore as touching their bringing up, I refer me to the things
which are written by the said Petrarke, and before him by Zenophon, Isocrates,
Plutarch, and many others. Only thus much I say, That the prince which has
children ought to be careful to bring them up well in lerning and virtue. Good
bringing up moderateth men's affections..
For (as Plutarch affirms in the comparison of Agis and Gracchus) good
Education moderateth and stays a man's mind, not only in things of pleasure,
by keeping him from passing the bounds of honesty and honor, in word or deed,
but also in matters of anger; and in the greatest heats of ambition and of
desire of honor. Philip king of Macedon vowed his son unto Aristotle as soon
as he was borne, and afterward did put him happily into his hands; and he
trained him up in Philosophy. For good Education not only fashioneth a man,
Good Education alters a man's evil disposition.
but also alters his nature, as we read of Socrates, whom a professor of
Phisnomie deemed to be full of all vices: and when the man was blamed for his
misdeeming; Socrates answered, that he had not failed in his Art, for by nature
he said he was such a one as he reported him to be, but diligent heed and good
Education had made him altogether another man. The schoolemaister of
Themistocles beholding his ready and quick wit, told him aforehand, that he
should one day do either some great good or some great harm to his
commonweal. And in very deed, at the first he was of a wavering mind,
troublesome, and fleeting. But afterward there was such a change in him, that
when men asked him the cause of it, he answered, That fierce and rough horses
become good if they be well taught and well and orderly handled in the breaking.
Wild horses become good by well handling.
Therefore the man that should be a princes tutor, ought to be a man of skill,
and in any wise very honest, to keep from him all flatterers, and to restrain
him in his youth, from haunting the company of any other children, than of such
as are honest and fear God; in which case men commonly fail. For they teach
them to have a good grace, to entertain strangers courteously, to dance well
and to ride well: but after this geere there must be no speech of learning. I
say not that tutors of sufficient skill to instruct, are not given unto them:
but that they stand them in no steed, And yet most commonly tutors are given
them at the pleasure of such as sue for it to the Prince, who grauuteth it unto
his minions, without respecting the sufficiency of the person: wherein, as
says Plutarch, they deal in like sort, as if a sick man to gratify his
friend, should leave the good and skillful Physician that could heal him, and
take one whose ignorance would rid him out of his life. Now then, it behooves
a prince to make his choice of the greatest personage, and of best estimation
in his realm. For it is no small matter to draw youth to a custom, Good
Education in youth is the root of all goodensse.
when it is tender. For as says Plutarch, Good Education and instruction in
youth, is the fountain and root of all goodness. And like as Gardeners do
stick up proppes by their young graffes, to hold them upright; even so do
wise teachers plant good instructions and wholesome precepts about young
princes, to direct their manners unto virtue. Therefore Solomon in his Proverbs,
commands us to train up a child at the first entrance of his way, that he
may not go back from it when he is grown old. And in the seventh chapter of
Ecclesiasticus, If thou have children, says he, bring them up in learning, and
bow them while they be young. Again, in the thirteeth chapter, Bow down his
neck, says he, in his youth, and smite him on the side while he is a child,
least he wax stubborn and harken not unto thee: for he that nurtureth his
child, shall have joy of him, yea and be commended for him among his household
folk. A young prince of never so good a nature shall hardly do any great
thing* being not trained up in virtue.
For how good nature so ever a young prince be of, yet shall he hardly do any
thing of valor, if he have not been trained and inured to virtue: as a horse
that is not well broken, how good soever he be otherwise, becomes stubborn
and cumbersome, and contrariwise a iadish and restie colt becomes a good
horse, by well handling. My meaning is not to give him such a tutor of skill
and virtue, as dares not give him a cross word, nor make him to stand in aw
of him, and to obey him in all friendly manner. For it were as good to have none
at all, as to have a tutor that is unprofitable, that shall sing to one that is
deaf, and point unto one that is blind, which yields not his heart to his
teachers intent, and his ears to the words of wisdom, as Solomon says in his
Proverbs. One demanded of a Philosopher, What was the cause that young men
were undone? Because (says he) their teachers forbore to compel them to do
well. Plutarch in his book of the Education of princes, says; That kings
learn to do nothing well, but only to ride: and that is, because their
schoolemasters which teach them, do flatter them, and not correct them:
whereas the horse discerning not who it is that sits on his back, and
therefore making no difference between a prince and a private person, spares
him not, but inforceth him to perform his charge, if he will not be in danger
to be cast upon the ground. But as for the schoolmaster that teaches a
prince, he neither can nor will compel him to any thing, but lets him do
what he lists; by reason whereof, a prince cannot be so well taught, as a man
of meaner degree, that submits himself to correction. By what means a young
prince is to be drawn to learning and virtue.
Nevertheless my meaning is not that the schoolemaister should use the rod
toward him, otherwise than as a searing-iron is used in surgerie, namely in
cases of extreme necessity, when all other remedies fail; but that he should
deal with the young prince by all kind of gentleness, and assay to draw him
by favor, rather than by force; as by praising him when he does well, and by
dispraising him when he does evil, which are more auailable means toward
children that are borne in fredome, as well the one to draw them to well doing,
as the other to withdraw them from doing ill, than all the whipping and
scourging that can be. Nevertheless, when being yet young, he is wilful and
stubborn, the schoolmaster is to be dispensed withal, to use that remedy.
For as Solomon says in his proverbs, The rod, and correction give wisdom.
Folly is commonly tied to the heart of a child, but the chastisement of the
rod riddeth him thereof; for the rod and correction give wisdom. Correct thy
child, (says Solomon) and he will give thee rest, yea and pleasure to thy
heart. And in an other place, Withhold not chastisement from thy child, (says
he) for if thou smite him with the rod, he shall not die: if thou smite him
with the rod, thou deliuerest his soul from hell. Therefore it behooves to
give him good instruction in his youth, that his nature may be reformed if it
be evil, or maintained if it be good. A certain Philosopher being asked upon
a time, Why many princes begin well and end ill.
What was the cause that many princes begin well, and end ill? Princes, quoth
he, begin well, because they be of good disposition by nature; and they end
ill, because no man gainsaieth them. Whereof we cannot have a better record
than Nero, who behaved himself like a good prince so long as Seneca was about
him: but as soon as Seneca was sequestered from him, by and by he gave himsefe
over to all vice, for no man gainsaied him, and his flatterers soothed him in
all things that he said; which kind of people, Children are to be kept from the
company of flatterers.
princes ought to shun as the plague. And as Plutarch says, Children must be
kept far from the company of evil persons, and especially of flatterers, for
there is not a more pestilent kind of men, or that more corrupts youth,
marring and undoing both the fathers and the children, making the old age of
the one, and the young age of the other, most miserable, by offering to them in
their wicked counsels, a bait that cannot be avoided, namely, Voluptuousness;
wherewith they allure them. When the flatterers are driven away from the young
prince, the tutor must have a careful eye, that those which are given him to
be his playfellowes, be well borne. For with the good thou shall be good, and
with the evil thou shall be perverted. The hating of lies.
And above all things let young princes be accustomed to speak truth, and to
hate lying, be it in earnest or in jest. For as Plutarch says, Lying is a
slavish vice worthy to be hated of all men, and not to be pardoned even in
bond-slaues, who have least honesty. Ye see then that the profit which a young
child that is a prince by birth, reapeth, by being under a tutor that
flattereth him not, is, that by keeping company with young children that are
virtuous, he shall learn to do as they do; and by his masters instruction he
shall learn virtue, and therefore having chastisement and good bringing up, and
continual exercise unto virtue; it cannot be but he must hold himself to that
education all his life after, and be worthy to command. The best way to
learn rule is first to obey
But let him further assure himself, that nothing does so much teach him, both
to do well and to rule well, as to have obayed. And surely the thing that
troubles most princes, and makes them loath to take in good worth the good
counsel that is given unto them, is, that whereas their schoolmasters ought to
command them, they have obayed them, and have left them to do what they list
at their pleasure. It is reported, that the thing which made Agesilaus a
perfect governor, was, that from his infancy he had learned to obey. By reason
whereof, he could better skill than any other king, to apply himself to his
subjects, and to bear himself upright among them, for so much as unto the
royal majesty and stately behauior of a prince, (which he had learned of
nature) he had added courtesy and familiarity, which he had gotten by
Education.

CHAP. VII. Of the end whereat a good Prince ought to aim in this life.
LL men in this world do choose in this life some certain vocation, some to
earne their living, (as Tailors by making apparel, Shoomakers, by making
Shoes, Masons by building, and so forth of other handicrafts;) some for
delight that they have to do some service to the commonweal, and thereby to
purchase praise, as the Orators, Judges, and Lawyers did in old time, and some
for both together; as Physicians. Some give themselves to matters of state,
Every man is desirous to be the chief of his profession.
and some to Chivalry, and every man is desirous to excel in his own trade,
that he may receive the gain thereof, which is, to see, say, and esteem
himself to be the chief of his profession.

There is not so simple a painter, ingrauer, or caruer, which is not desirous
to match Polycletus, Lisippus, Appelles, Protogenes, Zeuxis, Phidias,
Praxitiles, and such others, because they see that such men have bin esteemed
in the world, and have purchased fame by their cunning. This makes them to
take as great pains as they can, to find the means to attain to the said
perfection, and not to spare either labor or cost to learn. The Physician
looks incontinently to his mark, which is to heal the sick man; the
Surgion looks to the well launcing of a wound; and as for to know the
anotamie of a man's body, there is not that thing which he does not: he
undertakes to touch a dead corse, and to handle it, and to cut it in pieces,
to see the chief parts, and to behold the veins, the muscles, the
flesh-strings, and the knitters, to the end he may attain to the full
knowledge of his science. The end of the Orator is to plead well, and all his
doings tend thereunto. He exercises himself in well pronouncing, and laboreth
to have a good gesture and countenance, as we read of Gracchus and other
Orators, and especially of Demosthenes, The pains that Demosthenes took to
become an Orator.
who to frame himself to a good gesture, would resort into a Cabinet which he
had purposely made in the ground to that end, where he abode two or three whole
months, causing the one half of his head to be shaven off, that he might not
for shame go abroad in that plight. And to abate the impediment of his tongue
which was thick, he amended it by putting little stones in his mouth, and by
pronouncing some orations so with his mouth full. And to strengthen his voice,
which was small and feeble, he used to run up against rough hills, pronouncing
some verses which he could by heart. In old time wrestlers and sword-players
took no care, but how they might harden themselves to endure travel, dietting
themselves thereafter, and absteining from delicate fare, that they might
obtain the honor of one day. Even so after their example, a good prince ought
not to spare himself a whit, for the obteining of a greater commendation than
theirs, by making himself worthy of his charge. For it is a strange sight to
see such a one command, as ought to be commanded, and can no skill how to
govern folk; for it is all one, as if a man should see one made a Pilot of a
ship, which can no skill at all of sailing. And therefore David wills kings to
learn, seeing they be judges of the earth.

The way to learning is to descend into a man's self.
Now to learn well, a man must first descend into himself, as says Persius,
that is to say, he must examine and try himself, that he may know himself.
And of knowing a man's self, there are two sorts; the first consists in
contemplation, when a man beholds his own being as in a mirror, that is to
say; when he considers what he is in very deed, that he fall not into
ignorance the mother of all evil. Now the very being of a man indeed, is his
soul, whereunto the body belongs, as a garment that is made for the body.
Hardly therefore shall we discern what is ours, unless we first know our
selves. And most requisite is this contemplation for kings, who have their
sovereign authority from God. For it will make them both fortunat and wise in
government, as well of household, as of public state, as I will declare more at
large hereafter.

The other kind of knowing a man's self, (as Plato in his Philebus has right
well noted) is, when having first considered the very man it self, which is
the soul, we afterward also behold the shadow and figure thereof, that is to
say, the body, with the goods and abilities which God has distributed unto us
in this world. For we cannot undertake any goodly or great things, unless the
goods both of the body and of fortune, be aunswerable unto the goods of the
mind. And (as says Menander) Thou know thy self if thou take heed to thy
dealings, so as thou do what thou ought to do.

A prince ought to consider his own ability.
Therefore it behooves a prince to know his own ability, and what he has
wherewith to make war, whether it be in assailing or in defending. For
whosoever should enterprise a war without money, might have this saying
ver^fied of him, which Quintius the Roman captain said of Phil^paemen,
namely, that he had arms and legs, but wanted a belly; meaning that he had
store of men both on foot and on horseback, but he wanted money. And as it is
to no purpose to have men, without money, which is the sinews of war; so is
it nothing worth to have money, without men of war.

Also we may say, A prince must be affable, retaining the majesty of his
person and state.
that a king knows himself, when he behaueth himself according to his
degree, yielding himself gentle and affable to all men, howbeit retaining that
which belongs to the majesty of a king, least his ouer-great familiarity
engender contempt. That was the cause why, Alexander refused to run at the
gamings of Olimpus, though he was esteemed one of the best runners in that
assembly; answering his father (who had moved him to put forth himself into
the lists to obtain the honor of winning the reward of so honorable a wager) I
would willingly do your commandment, if I had kings or kings sons to run and
wrestle with me: esteeming it an unseemly thing for him, being the son of a
great king, to meddle with such as were not his matches. For the king that
abaseth himself too much, is counted to dishonor himself as much as he that
is proud; like Nero who played the Wagoner, the Minstrel, and the Iester; for
doing whereof he was so far off from being loved or esteemed, that he was rather
hated and despised for it of all men.

Now then, after that a prince has thoroughly viewed himself both within and
without; he cannot but understand what his charge is, the which consists in
two things, namely in matters of peace, and in matters of war; both which
parts are so necessary for him, that he cannot separate the one from the
other. For (as says Thucidides) Peace is established by war; neither is a
man sure to be out of danger, when he is at rest and without war. It is not
enough then to have good order for the governing of his country, unless he
also have forces in a readiness to succor his friends, to resist his enemies,
and to subdue rebels. As touching civil government, I will speak enough of it
throughout all* this discourse; A prince ought to be a Warrior.
and as touching the case of war, I say that a prince ought to give himself
to ch^lualrie, as much as possibly he can, and that if he do not so, he shall
be subject to contempt of his neighbors, and consequently be constrained to
have war whether he will or no. Therefore it stands him on hand to be a
warrior himself, and to have his people trained to the wars, and sometimes
also to make war that he may have peace; and contrariwise in war to mind
peace. For as the Emperor Traiane said, The enemies of peace are overcome by
war.
God suffers none to be vanquished in battle, but such as are enemies of
peace. And we see by experience, that those which are eagre in seeking war,
do commonly work their own overthrow, as Pirrhus did in old time, and as
Charles duke of Burgoine did a little while ago. But if a prince be compelled
to enter into war, it behooves him to let the world understand, what skill
and cunning he has in feats of arms, and what delight he has in repulsing
wrongful war, whereinto he must enter with a brave courage, vnastonied; as
Plutarch writes of Sertorius, whom he reports to have been meeld and gentle
in matters of peace, and dreadful in preparatiue of war against his enemies.
Wherefore a prince ought to demean himself in such sort, War must not be
made but for to establish peace.
that knowing the means how to carry himself upright in both the times, he
may be disposed to war if need require, and yet use it but to the attainment
of peace, which ought always to be preferred, as rest is to be preferred
before travel. For some love war too much, and some again do shun it too
much. In the one point Marius made default, and in the other Perseus. For
Marius being unfit to live in peace, as one that could no skill of civil
affairs; sowed dissension the seed of war without purpose. Insomuch that
when he was at Rome in peace, he had not the grace to entertain men amiably,
and to gather them to him by courtesy, for want of gifts and qualities
requisite for civil affairs. By reason whereof, men made no further account of
him, than of an old harness, or of a tool that was good for nothing else but
only for war. On the contrary part, Perseus suffered his state to go to
wrack for want of intending to warre-matters, and for that he loved better to
keep his money for the Romans, than to lay it out in waging men of war for his
own defense. For he loved not war, nor defended himself but very slightly;
and therefore was he bereft of his kingdom, and utterly spoiled of all his
treasures.

Many other Prin^^s have fallen from their estate, Kings have lost their states,
for want of applying themselves to the wars.
for want of giving themselves to the wars; among which number, Sardanapalus
and Childerike may serve us for example. The thing that made Vindex and Galba
to conspire against Nero, was the contempt which they had of him, for his
giving of himself wholly over unto voluptuousness, and for his despising of
the exercise of war.

Pepin durst not to have set his princes diadem upon his own head, if
Childerike had loved arms as well as he. But for as much as Pepin had weapon
in hand, and men of war at his devotion, and whatsoever else was requisite for
a good captain, it was an easy matter for him to bring his enterprise to
pass. Francis Sfortia by his valiancie in arms, rose from a simple soldier
to be duke of Millan; and the children of princes and dukes, Captains despise
them that love not chiluarie.
have become mean gentlemen. Men of war do ordinarily follow those whom
they love and esteem, admiring good and valiant captains, and contrariwise
despising those that love not chivalry. And thereupon it comes to pass,
that the prince which knows his neighbor to be unfit for war, and
unprovided of sufficient force to withstand him, does easily setforth into the
field to overcome him, and commonly he carries away the victory. It is no
reason that the man that is well armed should yield to him that is unarmed.
For it is no reason that the man which is well armed, should obey him that is
unarmed. My intent is not to infer hereupon, that a prince should make war
without cause, or imagine that he ought not to enter, but by force of arms. For
as Cicero says in his book of Duties, a prince ought never to resort to
weapon, but when no reason can otherwise be had, or when he is to defend
himself, which is the law of nature.

For as for him that makes war under pretense of some small profit, he is
like to him, who (as Augustus said) does angle wirh a hook of gold, the loss
whereof is greater than the gain of the fish that is to be caught, can be
worth. Therefore a prince ought, not to make war without aduisement; but yet
must he put himself always in a readiness, if he should chance to be
enforced thereto. For if war be not foreseen and well provided for, with men
and armor, it works small effect in time of need.

The things that are to be done in war, are to be learned before hand at leisure.
A man of war (says Cassiodorus) must learn aforehand the things which he
has to do when war comes. And as Xenophon says in is Education of king
Cyrus, It is no time for a prince to make his provision, when necessity is
come upon him; but he must lay for his matters aforehand, before necessity
come. Now, that he may be the readier in all things, and especially in men of
war; it behooves him to have a good number of men well trained aforehand,
after the manner that the Macedonians had their Siluer-shields, the Romans
their Legionaries, the Souldans of Egypt their Mamelukes, the Turks their
Ianissaries, Francis and Henry, kings of France, the old bands of Piemount,
and the emperor Charles the fifth the Spaniards. Princes must inure themselves
and their subjects to the exercise of arms.
Besides this, a prince ought to inure himself and his subjects together, to
all exercises of arms; as to run well with a lawnce, to mount on horseback
handsomely, and to manage him cunningly, to traile the pike, to shoot in
long-bow, crosse-bow, and gun, to vault, to leap, to wrestle, and to handle
all manner of weapons, so as they may serve their turn in time and place.

For such things do not only procure skilfulnesse, but also make men's bodies
the more strong and nimble, and the better able to endure travel. And
therefore the Romans could well skill to practice them in a certain place
which was called Mars his field, where all such exercises were put in ure.

Whether the common people be to be trained to the wars, or no.
I know well, that among them that have the managing of the state in France, it
is held for an heresy to say, that the common people are to be trained to the
wars; but I find the reasons of Seissell, and William Bellay to be of more
force, than the reasons that are commonly alleged to the contrary; specially
in France, where the king behauing himself as a king, is honored, feared, and
beloved.

And we may see plainly, that this people, as untrained as they be, are so well
fleshed one against another, that they forbear not to enter into arms, to
their own destruction, and call in strangers to finish this work, and that
with so great loss, that it were much more for the behoof of the realm, that
they themselves were better trained to war, and more inured to it long
aforehand, that they might forbear the strangers.

For if it should happen the king to loose one battle in his realm, he should
find what a hinderance it would be unto him, that he were not able to make up
his army again, otherwise than of strangers.

It is well known in what danger the Carthaginenses fell oftentimes, by reason
of strangers, who meant to have overthrown their state, by rebelling against
them; and that if the Carthaginenses themselves had been trained to the wars,
Scipio had not defeated them so easily as he did, no more than it lay in the
power of Pyrrhus to defeat the Romans. For when he had overcome them in two
battles, he said, he had been undone, if he had had one other battle more to
win of the like price; considering that his men were so greatly diminished by
those battails, that he grew vveake, even to the view of the eye, because he
had no mean to make up his army again with othermen; whereas on the
contrary part, the Romans did easily supply their army with new soldiers
whom they caused to come from their city when need was, as from a quick
spring, whereof they had the head in their own house.

The Switzers and Almains being called into Italy, one while by the Pope and
Italians, and otherwhile by the Frenchmen, ouermastred those that waged the^,
and through their wilfulnes made them to lose the whole country in short
space, by their returning home or by their fighting, against the will of the
General of the host.

There is yet one other kind of exercise which serves greatly to the state of
souldierfare; for it inureth the body to pain, and therewithal acquainteth
men with the natures and scituations of places, which is profitable two ways:
first, men learn thereby to know their own country, and by that mean to
discern the platform of any other place that differs not from it; for the
knowledge of one country, is a great furtherance to the practice of another.
Plutarch writes that when Sertorius found any leisure, he rode continually a
hunting, and coursed up and down the fields, whereby he got great experience
and furtherance in skill, to shift himself handsomely and readily from shrewd
passages, when he was pressed by his enemies: and on the other side, to enclose
them when he had the advantage of them, and to discern where a man might
pass away, and where not.

A profitable discourse concerning Philopoemen.
Philopemen prince of Athens, during the times that he had peace, did set his
mind wholly upon such means as it behooved him to use in time of war, propounding
to his friends as he traveled on the way, by what means he might assail his
enemies if they were encamped near hand thereabouts, and in what order he were
to pursue or to retire. And in devising after this manner, he heard their
opinion, and told them his, setting down all the accidents that could happen
in a camp; by means whereof, he attained to a certain resolutnesse and
readiness in feats of war. Likewise Books do wonderful service to a
prince in that behalf, as shall be said in another place.

And in any wise he must propose to himself some excellent personage, as a
pattern to follow; after which manner Alexander proposed Achilles for his
pattern; Julius Caesar proposed Alexander; and Scipio proposed Cyrus. To
conclude, a prince must understand civil affairs, that he may do every man
right, and keep the weaker sort from being trodden under foot by the mightier.
And he must have skill in martial deeds, that he may defend his people from
strangers, and maintain his own estate.

CHAP. VIII. What is requisite in a Prince to make him happy.
FOr as much as I have begun to show the end whereat a Prince should aim, it
behooves me to prosecute this end to perfection, and to make the Prince happy
whom we treat of For commonly all our actions tend unto blessedness and
felicity, which is the ground and foundation of all good things, and is set
before us for a crown and reward of our hope, as says S. John Chrysostom upon
the first Psalm of David. Nevertheless, in seeking this happiness we be
often beguiled, taking those to be happy, What the sovereign good is.
which indeed are unhappy, for want of knowing wherein that blessed felicity
consists. Wherein I mind not to follow the Divines, which place the
sovereign good, and likewise the chief evil, without the compass of this
life, because this life is turmoiled with so many mischiefs, that it is not
possible to find the sovereign good in this world, and to attain unto the
true felicity by our own industry and diligence. For, as the Psalmist says,
The thoughts of men are vain; and so does also S. Austine teach us, in his 19
book of the city of God, where he disputes against all the Philosophers of
old time, which placed the sovereign good either in the soul, or in the body,
or in both together; in pleasure, or in virtue, or in both together;
concluding, That the everlasting life is the sovereign good, and the
everlasting death the sovereign evil; for the avoiding of the one whereof,
and for the obtaining of the other, it behooves us to live well, and by faith to
seek the sovereign Good, which we cannot see now, but we live in hope to see
it hereafter.

Now then, for the present time we will omit the true and only perfect
blessedness, and rest upon the worldly happiness, seeking that which is most
beautiful, most acceptable, and most happy in this world, which thing some
do place in pleasure, some in profit, and some in both together. For as the
Poet says, That man has atteined to full perfection, which matcheth pleasure
with profit. But the matter is to know, Wherein the happiness of princes may
consist.
what is pleasure and what is profit, and by what means a man may attain to
it, that it may become sound, substantial, and durable. So soon as a kingdom
is fallen to a prince by Succession or Election, by and by he is counted happy,
because he is honored and followed of all men, and may do his pleasure with
his servants, and take his pleasure of them as much as he can wish.

In old time, Cressus seeing himself peaceably possessed of a goodly rich
kingdom, plentifully stored with gold and silver, which he took out of
Pactolus, a river of Lidia, gazed upon himself in his fortunatenesse and great
riches; and having invited thither Solon, one of the seven sages of Greece,
demanded of him, if ever he had seen a more happy prince. But Solon making
no reckoning of his riches, preferred before him an Athenian named, Tellus; and
in the end told him, That no man could be esteemed happy in deed before he were
dead; because that in this life many mishaps come upon us, which disturb our
ease, welfare, and quietness. And so befell it to that king, for he was taken
by Cyrus, and lost his kingdom, and was put in danger of being burned quick.

This shows us sufficiently, that we cannot stay our selves upon such manner
of blessedness, seeing it accompanies us not any longer than while we be in
this life. And therefore we must seek it further off. To become happy, we must
seek perfection.
Al such as have written of blessedness, say, That to be happy we must seek
perfection. For no man can be termed happy, unless he have thoroughly attained
to the full measure of al good fortune and blessedness. And perfection as says
Aristotle is the thing that is taken and chose for the good that is therein, and
not for any other thing; for albeit that the desire which we have to be
honored, and to be of a good mind, and to have virtue it self, be things
worthy to be desired without any other stay, yet our wishing of them is
chiefly for that we think we shall by means of them be come happy. And so
blessedness and faelicitie lie in all actions that are virtuous. Therefore to
attain thereunto, Felicity lies in all virtuous actions.
it behooves a man to be virtuous. Moreover I say, that in this world there are
three kinds of goods, which make us well contented and happy: The one sort
comes of fortune, as to be rich or honorable; another sort is of those which
we term the goods of the body, as beauty, strength, health, and actiuitie.
And the third sort is of those which we call the goods of the mind, as sciences
and virtues. As touching the goods of fortune; for as much as they easily admit
change, and we see ordinarily how rich men become poor, and poor men rich;
the happy and blessed state cannot be in them. Besides that, it falls out
oftentimes, that the richest and greatest lords are neither well contented, nor
well at ease. Likewise the goods of the body cannot make us happy. For what is
a man the better for being fair and in good health, if he be a beggar or a
vicious person? Therefore it is to be concluded, that forasmuch as the mind is
more excellent than the body and all worldly goods, the blessed state
consists in the goods of the mind: that is to wit, in knowledge and virtue;
which never forsaking us, do yield us continual pleasure and contentment.
Riches without virtue be like a feast without any man to eat it.
In respect whereof, Antisthenes said, That riches without virtue, yielded as
much pleasure, as a banquet without any body at it. Demetrius having taken
Megara, demanded of Stilpon the Philosopher, whether his men of war had
taken any thing of his away or no? and Stilpon answered him no: for no man has
bereft me of my knowledge. Bias one of the sages of Greece, made the like
answer when he was demanded, Why he carried not away his goods, as other of
his citizens did at their fleeing out of the city then newly taken? I carry
all my goods with me, quoth he; meaning his knowledge and virtue, wherein he
thought all his welfare to consist. Aristippus having lost all that he had by
ship-wracke, and being cast upon the coast of the Rhodes by a tempest, after he
had disputed within the schools of Philosophy there, was forthwith
plentifully rewarded with great store of presents by the Rhodians, and set
again in very good furniture. And because he determined to abide among them,
he said unto his friends that returned home, that he could not tell how to do
better, than to bestow such things upon their children, as might purchase them
possessions that might be saved with their persons, if they escaped shipwreck.
Meaning, to gather thereupon, that the true riches of this life, Which are the
true riches.
are those which neither the contrary blasts of fortune, nor the change of
estate, nor waries can appaire. Also Socrates being asked by Gorgius, what
opinion he had of the great king, (that was a title which they gave to the king
of Persia) and whether he thought him not to be very happy: answered, I know
not how he is provided of knowledge and virtue; meaning, that the true
felicity consists in those two things, and not in the slightfull goods of
fortune. Hereby ye may understand, that that prince is right happy, which has
his mind well instructed and well given to al virtue. For of knowledge and
virtue, spring sobriety and wisdom; and wisdom finds the way to govern
well his kingdom, of which government ensues both pleasure and profit, as
shall easily appear hereafter.

Of profit.
And first of all I will speak of Profit as of the lesser; and afterward I will
come to Pleasure. Many do deem this profit to consist in the enlarging of a
man's lordship or dominion, by seazing upon the next cities, or by laying an
impost by the prince upon all sorts of impostes. But the things that are gotten
by evil means cannot be called Profit. As touching the incroching upon
neighbors, it is not easily to be done, if they be of any power; and
oftentimes the sauce costeth more than the meat is worth. And to take more than
ordinary of the subjects, or more than the agreement made by oath between him
and his people will bear, cannot be done with honor. Besides that the
impouerishing of his subjects is the impouerishing of himself, because his
treasure is in their goods; yea, and in the end, for all his exacting, he
finds himself no more eased, than those that content themselves with the
mean. Nero, Domitian, Caligula, and other wicked Emperors, found not
themselves any whit the richer for all the charges that they laid upon their
people, neither gained they any thing by it but infamy, with loss both of
life and Empire. On the contrary part, Traian, Antonine, and other good
emperors, lived in honor and love of their subjects, left behind them immortal
praise, and got more reputation than those monsters of mankind. Those good
princes loved their people, and kept themselves well from incroching upon their
neighbors; and yet they could well skill how to chastise them, when they durst
enterprise any war against them. Albeit that Augustus was the happiest prince
of all the world; yet would he not make any war, or put his fortune in trial
all his life long. For after he had once obtained to sit in peace, he busied
not his head about the getting of one foot of land more, mocking at great
Alexander, whom it grieved to consider what he should do, when he had
conquered the whole world; as who would say, there were not as much pain or
more in the well keeping of things, as is in the getting of them. King Pirrhus
got enough, but he lost as fast as got; and his covetousness was not so strong
and gaping after the things that he hoped for, as he was forgetful to set sure
guard upon that which he had gotten. In respect whereof, Antigonus likened him
to a plaier at dice, whom the dice favored very much, but he could no skill to
make his hand of his good chance.

The good husbandry that Augustus and other good emperors used, was to
entertain men of war, to pay them well their wages, to make them observe the
law of arms, to do justice to the people, to ease them of their subsidies and
impositions, and to beautify the city of Rome with temples and goodly
buildings. The wise king of France did the like, among whom by the common voice
of the people, Lewis the eleventh did bear away the bell, as who by the common
consent of al men was called, The father of the people. The great wars which
he had in Italy for his duchy of Millan, could not make him to ouercharge his
people; he demanded not any subsidies of them, to enrich particular persons;
he encreaced not his tallages for all the wars he had; to be short, he
esteemed notary riches, or any conquest to be greater, than to win the good
will of his subjects, and to see them rich: whereby he left a wonderful
treasure to his successor, wherewith he could well help himself in his affairs.
Thus ye see wherein consists a princes profit, namely, in keeping and
defending well his lands and subjects, and sometime in enlarging his bounds,
when he is driven to enter into arms for his own defense. Of Pleasure.
Wherein if there be profit, surely there is also no less pleasure. For the
commendation that is gotten by well governing, does woonderfully content a
noble-minded prince; whereof I am now to speak, as of the thing that most
rauisheth our minds, and draws us most unto it. I will not speak here after
the manner of the Stoiks, who having no regard to our manner of speech, uphold by
many good reasons, that the thing which is good, is fair; and that the thing
which is evil, is foul; and that there is not only other good, or any other
pleasure, than virtue, which of it self alone suffices to the making of a
happy life, as Cicero has proved in his Paradoxes. But I will speak after
the manner of the Academiks, who unto the goods of the mind have added the goods
of the body and of fortune, as helps to lead a happy life.

But all the difficulty is to find this pleasure. For the covetous man deemeth
it a great pleasure, to be shut up alone in a chamber with a great heap of
money. The ambitious esteems it a great pleasure, to have a great train of
men following him. Another thinks it a pleasure to sit at banquet, laughing
incessantly, and making good cheer: To be short, every man measures this
pleasure after his own fancy, howbeit that that which is pleasure to some,
is displeasure to other some.

And that is, because this pleasure proceeds not from the fountain of
virtue, but from the well of voluptuousness, which ingendreth deceitful lusts
in us, after the manner of such as have the hungry disease, and the
consumption, who are always hungry by reason of a certain sharp and biting
humor, which causes hunger, and an inordinate appetite. And like as some
women, when they be with child, delight to eat naughty meats, even so the
diseased mind, by reason of the voluptuous humor that is therein, seeks the
things that are noisome to it, and whereof they be soon weary. Insomuch that
whosoever looks nearly into the matter, shall find that the things which are
commonly esteemed for pleasure, do oftentimes turn to displeasure. This
caused Plato to say, that we must behold pleasure, Pleasure is to be considered
by her going away.
not at her coming toward us, but at her going away from us. For when we
look upon her at her first coming in sight, nothing is so beautiful; but at
her going away, she is as foul and loathsome to behold as is possible.

And as Varia Mesa said unto the emperor Heliogabalus, Naturally vice
delights the body when it is in committing; but by and by after ensues
repentance in the neck of it. But as for virtue, besides that it displeases
not the body, it leaves always a good taste and contentment behind it, which
endures perpetually. And how much soever a prince would plunge himself in all
manner of worldly pleasure, he could not have the advantage thereof, so much as
a subject of his that were of some mean wealth. For such a one may have as
great pleasure as a king, in eating and drinking, in apparel and lodging for
his own person, in hunting at his pleasure, in music, and in all other
delights.

Again, because a prince has greater conceits than a common person, he
takes no great pleasure in such things, but serves is turn with them as we
do with sleep, to refresh and recreat his spirits, that have been
ouerstrained in matters of state, and for that cause he laugheth, he plaieth,
he daunceth. But if he should be demanded wherein he takes most pleasure; I
believe he would answer with Alexander, That he could not find a finer song or
a pleasanter music, than to hear the singing of his own praises; nor have a
more goodly exercise or a more delightful pastime, than to govern his
kingdom well: and as Plutarke says in his treatise entitled, Whether an old
foreworne man ought to deal in matters of a commonweal: let us grant to
Xenophon that there is not a sweeter thing, than to hear a man's own praises.

The pleasure that comes of the beholding of the things that are done in a
Commonweal.
But in my judgment, there is no present sight, no memory of things past, no
delightful conceit, that yields so great pleasure, as the contemplation of
the things that are done in a publick-weale, as in an open spectacle. The
pleasure then of every gentlemanly heart, and especially of a prince, te^deth
to honor, to glory, to reputation, that his name may be spread abroad with
renown over all the earth, and that he may be esteemed wise and virtuous. A
good name is a sweet sent or savor.
And to show that the pleasure of a good renown passes all other things,
Solomon says, That a good name excels all the precious ointments in the
world. And in other places, the holy scriptures terms a good name a sweet
sent or savor; as who would say, there were not a sweter or pleasanter thing in
the world than that.

As touching the report to be a good warrior, it cannot be common to all,
because it depends upon fortune, and is gotten often times by doing wrong. But
as for the renown of being virtuous, the more certain and rare it is, the
more also is it to be sought. Every man cannot have the good fortune of Sylla
and of Augustus, nor be a conqueror as was Alexander, but every man may be
virtuous, that will take pain to attain unto it. Ferdinand king of Naples,
The wise saying of king Ferdinand.
was wont to say, That to be a king, is a thing that most commonly depends
upon Fortune; but to be such a king as may be reported in all respects to be
the welfare and felicity of his people, that depends alonly upon himself,
and upon his own virtue. Plutarch says, that Lucullus did more esteem and
desire the praises that proceeded of goodness, justice, and cleme^cie, than the
praises that sprang and proceeded of hault and great deeds of chivalry,
because that in these, his army had one part, and fortune had another part, as
well as he; but the other were peculiar to himself alone.

Again, in them he received the fruit he had deserved, so winning the hearts
of his enemies by his behauior, that many of them did willingly put themselves
and all their goods into his hands. All princes are jealous of their honor.
We see how Alexander was curious in procuring himself that report; and that
all princes both good and bad without exception, covet the reputation of good
and virtuous men; but the evil princes cannot obtain it, because they be not
the same that they would be taken to be, whereas the mean to atteine to
perfect praise, is (as Socrates says) to be such a one in deed, as a man would
be esteemed to be. And Antisthenes says, there is but one way to attain to
immortal fame, and that is to live uprightly and religiously. For how fair a
face soever a man sets upon the matter, in the end he is discovered, and
nothing is so hidden which shall not be laid open. And like as a Physician is
not the more esteemed for being a doctor in physic, if he have no skill in
physic, nor an Advocate for his doctorship in the law, if he want knowledge,
experience, and practice in the law: even so it is not to be thought, that a
prince can be had in estimation if he be not a good man, and such a one as
endeuoreth to rule his people well. Men must be such as they would seem to be.
For if a prince be not the same that he would seem to be, it is all one (as
Cirus said to Cambyses his son) as if one being no good Tilman, no good
Physician, no good Musition, nor skillful in any other art or trade, will
nevertheless needs seem to be such a one. For besides the pain that he shall
procure to himself in practicing with his friends to give him commendation and
renown, and in providing the instruments fit for every of these Arts, he may
perchance deceive the world for a time; but in the end when he comes to the
proof of his skill, he shall be laughed to skorne as an ignorant boaster. Nero
and Tiberius were counted virtuous princes in the beginning of their raigns:
but in the end, they were taken for unkindly monsters, wicked, and unworthy to
be had in remembrance among men. Wherefore if a prince will have pleasure, it
behooves him to be virtuous; for otherwise he will loose his pleasure, that is
to say, his honor, whereof he is so zealous, and which is preferred by Solomon
before all the things in the world. There is store enough of evil princes,
which have entitled themselves Fathers of the people, good, virtuous, and such
other like, and which have caused those styles of theirs to be graven in stone
and brass, against whom their people taking just displeasure, have
nevertheless defaced those titles of theirs: but the memory of their wicked
dealings have abidden ingraued in the hearts of their posterity. On the
contrary part, such as were good men, have not only been esteemed, but also
worshipped as Gods, as Theseus, Hercules and others. Insomuch that Pliny
says, That the God of men is a helper of men, and that to do good unto men,
is the way to attain to endless glory, the which way the greatest personages
of Rome walked; and that the name of the other Gods came of the deserts of men.
And before him, Cicero in his first book of the nature of Gods says, A doer of
good to others, is esteemed as a God.
that because much good and much hurt comes of man unto man; and it is the
property of God to do good: therefore if a man do us any good, or rid us out
of any great danger; because in so doing he resembles God, he is commonly said
to have been a God unto him whom he has so gratified: and he concludes, that
the very beasts were canonised for the pleasures that they had done unto men;
as for example, the Egyptians worshipped the Storke, and diverse other birds
and beasts. And Iuuenall esteems a benefactor as a God, saying; If some God,
or some like unto God, or some man better than the Gods, should give thee a
thing. Likewise the Shepherd in the Eglogues of Virgil, makes Augustus a God,
because he gave him leave to feed his cattle where he would. In the same
respect, the oath which the Scithians made by the wind and the sword, was as
great among them, as if they had sworn by God; because the wind gives breath
to live by, and the sword cutteth off life. And to show that nothing pleases a
gentlemanly heart so much as praise. Let us consider what Themistocles did to
attain thereunto. Aforetime he had bin vicious, and had no care either of
virtue or of feats of arms. But when once he had heard the praise that was
given to Miltiades for the battle of Marathon; he never ceased after until he
became the chief of all Athens. And one day, when his companions asked him,
What had so altered him, and what had made him so vigilant? he answered, That
the Ensigns of Miltiad^s victory, suffered him not to sleep or take rest.
Afterward being himself at the gamings of Olimpus, when all the standers by
did cast their looks upon him, without regarding to behold the companions, and
pointed him out with their fingers unto strangers; he was so glad of it, that
he confessed to his friends, that at that time he received the fruit of all the
great travels which he had endured for Greece. Julius Caesar wept at the image
of Alexander, finding fault with himself that he had not done any thing
worthy of memory, being come to the age wherein Aelxander had conquered the
whole world. And Alexander deemed Achilles right happy, in that he had such a
Poet as Homer to register his praises.

Thus you see how the pleasure of princes consists wholly in honor and
reputation; The pleasure of princes consists in honor.
the which cannot be acquired, whether it be in civil matters, or in matters of
war, but only by virtue. Which thing Marcellus intending to make known to
posterities, builded in Rome a temple to Honor, hard by the temple of Virtue;
and he made it in such sort, as men could not come into it, but through the
temple of Virtue; doing men to understand, that honor and reputation cannot be
acquired, but by virtue.

Therefore we must conclude that a prince can have no sound and substantial
pleasure, if he be not virtuous. And (as says Philo the Jew in his Allegories)
Paradise is (by a figure) called Virtue, and the place proper to Paradise, is
called Eden; which signifies pleasure. For joy and peace, being the things
wherein the true pleasure consists, agree very well unto virtue.

CHAP. IX. Of Virtue.
LEt us speak now of Virtue, as of the thing that is most fit and beseeming
for a prince, and wherein he becomes most like unto God. For as for those
foolish emperors, which to resemble Jupiter, made themselves to be painted with
thunder and lightning in their hands: they were not esteemed for all that, but
rather mocked of the world, and made abominable unto God.

For as says Plutarch in his book of the Education of princes, God is angry
with those that imitate and counterfeit him, in following his lightenings and
thunders; but he loves well such as conform themselves to his likeness in
humanity and honest dealing, by imitating his Virtue. And such are his elect,
to whom he imparteth of his uprightness, of his justice, of his truth, and of
his meekness, than the which there is not any thing more divine. For God is
not so much happy for his immortality, as for that he is the prince of all
Virtue.

Aristotle in his Morals says, That Virtue is an habit of the mind, whereby a
man becomes good, and does his duty; the contrary whereunto is vice. A
definition of Virtue.
So that to eschew vice, is to be virtuous; or else we may say, that Virtue is
an habit or having of the thing that is beseeming and of duty to be done*
Cicero says in his Tusculane questions, That Virtue is a certain constant
affection or disposition of mind, which makes the possessors thereof to be
praised, from whence proceed all honest deeds, and determinations. And in his
book of laws, he says, That Virtue is the very perfection of nature. With
him also accords S. Ambrose, in his third chapter concerning faith, following
a principle of the Pithagorians, who hold opinion that al things are perfect by
the virtue of their own nature: as for example, the virtue of a horse is that
which sets him in his perfection; the virtue of eyes, is the good sight of
them; the virtue or perfection of the nature of feet, is to go well and
lightly. There are three things whereby virtue is perfected, Skill, Power, and
Will. Skill serves for conte^plation and judgment, out of the which springs
discretion; Power is a strength whereby we stand fast in our purpose of
well-doing. And Will is as it were, the hand of the soul, whereby we take in
hand the thing that we intend to do.

Some divide virtue into two parts, A division of Virtue.
that is to wit, Contemplative, and Moral; we call that virtue Contemplative,
which consists in well understanding, and well considering, that is to say,
in the inward minding and reasoning, whereout springs discretion and
wisdom. And we call those virtues moral, which belong to manners, and not
alonely to understanding. As for example, when we speak of the manners of some
man, we say not that he is wise, but that he is meeld, liberal, and
kind-hearted.

For Wisdom is a certain hauior of virtue, which consists in the wit and
understanding; but Temperance belongs to a man's actions and manners, and in
respect thereof we term it Moral. Philo the Jew says in his Allegories,
that virtue is Contemplative, and Active; because it uses contemplation by the
discourse of reason, and therewithal has actions also. For Virtue is the Art
of our whole life, containing all actions. Virtue is the Art of al our whole
life.


That is the cause why Moses says, that the Tree of life which betokens the
general Virtue, which we call Goodness, is fair to see too; whereby is
signified, the Contemplation: and that the fruit thereof is good to eat,
whereby is betokened the use, and action.

Others make four principal virtues, the which they term Cardinal, under
which, all other virtues are comprehended: namely, Wisdom, which teaches
what is to be done; Hardiness, or Valeantnesse, which teaches what is to be
endured; Temperance, which teaches what is to be chosen; and Justice, which
teaches what is to be yielded unto every man. Othersome do lodge wisdom in
the understanding and the wit; Justice, in the will; Hardines in that part of
the mind which conceiueth anger; and Temperance, in the lust of the sensitive
appetite. And for the better understanding hereof, ye must consider that we
have two sorts of appetits, Two sorts of Appetites.
the one, of the mind, the other of the sense. The mindly appetite follows
the conceit of the understanding; the sensitive follows the conceit of the
sense. This sensitive is divided again into two, that is to say, Lustful, and
Irefull. We call that the Lustful, whereby we shun the things that mislike us,
and follow the things that are delectable. And by the Irefull we assail the
things that may disappoint us of the foresaid good, and of the foresaid
pleasure. As for example, a lion by his lustful appetit, runs after his
prey, as a thing pleasant unto him; and by his Irefull appetit, he assaileth
such as go about to disappoint him thereof. So that the lustful appetit
tends to rest and pleasure; and the yrefull tends to a harder point,
namely, to resist evil, and whatsoever else annoieth us. There are others
which divide all virtues into three. For Virtue does either direct reason
aright, and is altogether grounded thereupon, and that we call Wisdom: or else
it is the effecter and bringer to pass of good reason, and is grounded in
willingness, to do that which is wisely set down in conceit, and that is it
which we call Justice: or else it maintains the good upon good reason, and
that is the virtue which we affirm to consist in the sensitive appetit. And
out of this virtue proceed Hardiness, and Temperance, Of the reasonable,
Irefull, and Lustful parts of the soul.
two cardinal and principal virtues; and moreover, Magnanimity, Liberality,
Magnificence, Soothfastnes, Mildnes, Meeknes, and Affability. Philo the Jew
does likewise divide Virtue into three parts, according to the three parts of
our soul; namely, Reasonable, Irefull, and Lustful. The first Virtue is that
which shows it self in the chief part of the soul, that is to say, in the
reasonable part, which Virtue we call wisdom. The second is, the force or
strength that lodges in the second part of the soul, namely in the Irefull.
The third is Temperance or Staidness, which is employed about the Lustful
power. And when these three are of one accord, then does Justice or
Rightfulnesse show it self. For when the Irefull and the Lustful obey the
commandment of the Reasonable; then does Rightfulnesse utter the fruit of
that accord and harmony. Aristotle says, that Virtue is a mean, and as a
white in the midst of a butte, whereat all men ought to leuel, and whosoever ever
swarueth never so little from it one way or other, Virtue has her bounds: but
vice is infinite.
misseth his mark. And as it is far more hard to hit the white, than to go
round about it, so is it more hard to be virtuous, than to be vicious. Vice is
infinite, and therefore has not any mean. Contrariwise, Virtue has her bounds,
which cannot be passed, but into vice. Let us for example take Hardines, which
is a mean between Fearfulness and Ouer-boldnesse, of which two this latter
is the excess of boldness, in offering a man's self to danger, and the other
is the default or want of boldness in the same case, when Boldness is
requisite or expedient. And therefore he that through ouer-great Boldness
thrusts himself into dangers unadvisedly, and rusheth into them like a wild
Boar, cannot be deemed hardy or valiant, but rather rash; and he that through
Fearfulness dares not show his head before his enemy, is accounted a Coward.
The measurable mean in giving and taking, is called Liberality, the excess
whereof in taking is Covetousness, and the excess in giving is Prodigality,
and the mean between them cannot be in the vice. For too much or too little
cannot make vice to be Virtue. As for example, a thief or a murderer fail
not to sin, for stealing or murdering too much or too little. Whosoever is a
thief, a murderer, or an adulterer, in what sort soever it be, he does always
sin; and because a man may sin many ways, it is easier to sin than to do well.

Let us ad that which Philo says in his Allegories, that the thing which is
good, is rare, and the things which are evil, be ri^e; in so much that for one
wise man, you shall find an infinite multitude of fools. Furthermore, to attain
unto Virtue, there needs but reason: but to the compassing of vice, men
apply mind, sense, and body: and we see that the way of vice is the larger and
easier. Why the way of Virtue is not so large as the way of Vice.
And in that respect, does Hesiodus say, that the first entrance into the way
whereby men ascend unto virtue, is rough, combersom, and steep, but very
smooth and easy, when a man has ouerpast the little crabbednesse that was at
the first entry of the way. But the hardness thereof must not discourage a
man; for it is a general rule, that (as the Greek Proverb says) The
attainment of all goodly things is painful; because (as Epicharmus says) God
felleth his benefits unto us for pains and travel, God sells his benefits
unto men for travel.
according to the first curse that God gave unto man, namely, that he should
eat his bread in the sweat of his brows.

And as Synesius says, It is peculiar to the Godhead to compass any great
matter without pains-taking. But among men, not only the virtues, but also
every other excellent thing, is gotten with the sweat of the body. Truth it is,
that in all great things nature has purposed a certain difficulty* so as the
party that will live happily, must needs take pains. For as Sophocles says, a
man cannot have the thing that is great and excellent, without pain; for
without that, the noble captains had never obtained the fame which is dispersed
of them through the whole world. To attain unto that, Hannibal forwent an eye,
lay often upon the hard ground, watched infinite times when others slept, and
endured hunger and thirst with great cheerfulness. Pyrrhus, Alexander, Julius
Caesar, Epaminondas, Themistocles, Alcibiades, and all the noble captains that
ever were, have done the like.

A Poet makes not a good verse, nor an Orator a good oration, without pain.
And seeing it is so, that God has made all goodly things rare, we should not
spare our pains to acquire the thing which of all others is most beautiful.
Surely a prince ought most specially to do it; assuring himself that it is
the thing wherein he most resembles God. For as touching a princes strength
and power, it is nothing in comparison of the power of fire, or of the sea, or
of a stream, against the which nothing is able to stand. Men esteem not
princes but for their goodness.
And although he have all our lives in his hand; yet do we not esteem him so
much for that, as for his righteousness and goodness, after the manner of the men
of old time, which called God first, most Gracious, and secondly most High and
most mighty. For Gods gracious goodness is the cause that men love him, honor
him, and worship him: and his power is the cause that men fear him; and so
they made virtue to go always before might and power. And this word, Good,
was in so great estimation with our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would not have
so glorious a title usurped of men affirming that there was none good but the
one only God.

Plutarch says in the life of Aristides, that God surmounteth all other
things, chiefly in three points, that is to wit, immortality, mightiness, and
goodness: of which three, goodness or virtue, is the most honorable, and most
peculiar to the Godhead. For incorruption and immortality (at least wise
according to the opinion of the ancient Philosophers) is as well in the
elements, and in the wast Chaos, as in God; and as for might or power, there is
very much and great in the winds, in thunder and lightnings, in streams, and in
waterflouds. But as for justice, uprightness, and equity, nothing can be
partaker of them, but that which is divine, by means of reason and
understanding. And therefore that men deem the Gods to be happy, it is in
respect of their goodness; that they fear them it is because of their
almightinesse; and that they love, worship, and reverence them, it is for their
justice sake. And if we will believe Aristotle in the first book of his
Morals, we shall say, that what king soever will become worthy of
immortality, must inure himself, as much as is possible, unto virtue, because
it is his charge to make his subjects honest and obedient unto laws.

A Governor ought to be skillful in things belonging to the mind or soul.
For like as to him that will heal an eye, it is behoofull that he know the
nature both of the eye and of the whole body; so he that will govern aright
must know what belongs to the mind. For the skill of government is a thing of
more worthiness than the art of healing men's bodies. For as much therefore as
Physicians and Surgions, take so great pains to know the constitution of the
body: surely he that will be cunning and well skilled in governing of pople,
ought to take pain to get knowledge of the soul, Plutarch in the life of
Pericles.
that is to say, of virtue, which springs from the soul, and has this
property, that the knowing thereof makes a man in love with it, so that
therewithal he finds therein right goodly actions, and is desirous to become
like unto those that do them. A good prince is desirous to resemble such as
have done virtuous deeds.
For as touching the goods of fortune, we have of them a possesion; and as
touching virtue, we have thereof an inworking or action. By means whereof, we
be glad to have those goods of other men: but yet therwithall we would also
that other men should have them of us. For virtue is of such force, that it
quickens up the man that considers it, to be desirous to put it in
execution by and by, and engenders in his heart a certain longing to utter it
by his deeds; framing and fashioning the manners of him that beholds it, not
by way of imitation, but by the only understanding of the virtuous deed, which
out of hand brings him a determinate purpose to do the like. And as Cicero
says in his book of Friendship, Nothing is so auailable as virtue, ne draws
men more to be in love therewith: insomuch that we love those whom we never
saw, upon an opinon which we conceive of their goodness and virtue. For the
true love of virtue (that is to say the affection to imitate it) is not
imprinted in men's hearts, Plutarch in the life of Ca^o.
without a singular good will and reverence toward the person that gives the
impression thereof. Insomuch that even enemies do praise their enemies that
have virtue, and even robbers and outlaws have it in admiration. Whereof we
have a notable example in Scipio, who being all alone in his house in the
country, was beset with a great number of robbers, and when he prepared
himself to resist them, they threw down their weapons, and prayed him to open
them the gate, saying they were come of purpose to obtain the favor to see so
virtuous a noble man as he was. The thing that procures love, (says Cicero in
his book entitled Laelius) is the consideration of the goodness and
liberality of him to whom a man resorteth; so that virtue causes him to be
beloved and esteemed. And as the same Cicero says in his book of Duties, Men
make account of those whom they take to be virtuous.
We highly commend and make great reckoning of those whom we take to be
virtuous, and we despise those that have neither power nor virtue. And in his
Tusculane questions he says, That there is not any thing comparable to virtue,
and that virtue dispising all things, regards not the chances of the world,
but is sufficient of hirselfe to lead a good and happy life, without the aid
of any other thing. Furthermore, praise and honor does necessarily follow
virtue, as a man's shadow follows him by the light of the sun or of a candle,
and for that cause Marcellus made his temple of Honor insuch wise, as no man
could enter into it but by the door of the temple of Virtue, as I have declared
before. Our Lord Jesus likeneth the kingdom of heaven, unto one that sold all
that he had to buy a goodly pearl withal; as who would say, A man would not
stick to spend his money and his goods to purchase a thing that is beautiful
and rare, and wherein there is great gain. Therefore he that will purchase
virtue, the fairest and greatest thing of price that can be as whereby we mount
up to heaven) ought not to spare any thing. A wise man being armed with virtue
cannot be disarmed
Antisthenes said, That Virtue is a good and sure wall, and a kind of armor that
cannot be taken away: be a man never so valiant, he may have his sword taken
from him, and he may de disarmed; but a wise man being armed with virtue cannot
be disarmed or overcome. Also he affirms, that the wise man lives not by
law, but by the rule of virtue. As who should say, no good man ought so much to
respect the commandment of the law, as the direction of reason, which will
have us to follow the thing that is good and honest, and to eschew whatsoever
is shameful and dishonest. The which reason caused the emperor Theodosius to
say, that it most highly beseemed the majesty of a king, to bind himself to
law; and that the authority of the empire depended upon laws, unto the which
he also submitted himself. Contrariwise, Heliogabalus the peerless pattern
of all wickedness, said it belonged to none but to himself alone to stablish
laws at his pleasure, without being bound to maintain them longer than he
listed.

One demanded of Aristotle, what profit Philosophy brought with it? Very
great (quoth he) for it teaches me to do the things uncommanded, which other
folks do for fear of laws. The same is it that makes a king conform
himself to the law. For the prince being the defender, maintainer and vpholder
of the law, cannot do any thing against law, without doing wrong to the state,
and without giving an evil example to his people. And for as much as he has
none above him but only God, and therefore may transgress the law without
punishment, and without fear of man, he ought to have the bridle of reason
and virtue before his eyes, as well to keep the laws himself, as to make
them to be kept of his people.

And as it is a great shame for a scholemaster, when his scholar knows more
than he: so is it a great dishonor to a prince, when his subject is better than
he. And therefore virtue is much more needful in a prince, The private person is
to do well by constraint of laws, but the prince by the direction of Virtue.
than in a private person. For the private person does good of force, by
constraint and rigor of the laws: but the prince can have none other
constraints than virtue, religion, and hope of reward at Gods hand. According
whereunto, Chilo the Lacedemonian being asked, Wherein virtuous men passed
other men? In good hope (quoth he.) Whereby he meant the reward that we look
for after this life. And therefore I say for a conclusion, that Virtue is the
law and rule of princes, according whereunto, they ought to direct all their
actions and doings, for the well governing of their people, and that they may
have a happy reign.

CHAP. X. Of the Passions of the mind.
FOr as much as I have alredie spoken of virtue in general; it will not be
amiss for the understanding of this discourse, to speak a word or twain by
the way, concerning the passions that are in the mind, (which Mercury the
great terms the tormentors of man) to the end that virtue may be the better
known by his contrary. Plutarch in the life of Demetrius.
For whereas Physic discusseth what is sickness, and Music, what is a
discord; that is but casually and by accident, for the better doing of the
contrary; that is to wit, for the preserving or recovering of health, and for
the making of good harmony. Even so temperance, justice, and wisdom, being
the perfectest of all virtues, do give us knowledge not only of the thing that
is just, honest, and profitable: but also of that which is dishonest, It is
Ignorance not to know evil.
unjust, and hurtful. For it is a brutishness not to know what is evil, and
to be ignorant of the things that are most principally requisite, in such as
intend to live uprightly among good and honest men. The passions therefore, are
Ignorance, against which, Mercury opposes the knowledge of God;
Slothfulness, against the which he opposes Cheerfulness, exempted from all
voluptuous delectation; Inconstancy or unsteadfastness, whereunto he opposes
Constancy, or Steadfastness; Unrighteousness, whereagainst he sets
Righteousness; Incontinencie or unchasteness, against the which he matcheth
Continency or chastnesse; which is the virtue that ouermaistreth lusts, and is
the first degree and foundation of all righteousness: Riottousnes, or excess,
against the which he opposes Sparingnesse; Deceitfulness, which he
countermatcheth with Soothfastnesse; and consequently Envy, Frawd, Rashness,
and Malice. Virgil following the manner of the Stoiks, sets down four
passions of the mind, saying thus, Hence proceed the restreints of their
longings, dislikings, ioies, and fears, which are as the welsprings of all the
residue. For enuiousnesse, slaunderousnesse, sorrowfulness, rufulnesse, carke,
and despair, come of disliking or coffeehouse. Slothfulness, bashfulnesse,
and amazedness of mind, come of fearfulness: Iollitie, boasting, and
skorning, come of unmeasured gladness or ouer-ioifulnes. Wrath, rancor,
suspicion, and such other, come of longing or desirousnesse. Othersome divide
the passions of the mind into Love and Hatred, Longing and Loathing, Gladness
and Sadness, Hope and Despair, Fearfulness and Foolehardinesse, Choleriknesse
and Coldness, which coldness is a vice proceeding of a silly mind and feeble
courage, that is not touched with any thing, nor can be provoked to anger, and
is a counterfeiter of the virtue Meeldnesse, which does so well moderat the
affection and passion of the mind, that it keeps a man from being angry out
of measure. All these passions have their being in the sensitive appetite; The
one half of the Passions follow the Lustful appetit, and the other the Ireful
the which I divide into Lustful, and into Irefull or Wrathful. Six of the
Passions, namely Love and Hatred, Longing and Loathing, Gladness and Sadness,
do follow the Lustful appetite. The other six, that is to say Hope and
Despair, Fearfulness and Foolehardinesse, Cholerikenesse and Coldness, This
going before and coming after, is not in respect of time and place, but of
order, reason, and dignity.
do follow the Irefull part. I place Love foremost, because the hating of one
thing presupposes the love of another: as for example, a man would never hate
vice, unless he loved virtue.

Likewise Longing, which is an appendant of Love, goes before Loathing, which
ensues Hatred. Also Hope goes before Despair, for if we have a mind to any
good thing, it is a greater matter to obtain it, than to go without it.
Therefore Hope (which tends to the good) goes before Despair which lets
the good go. Again, fear goes before foole-hardines, because the good goes
always before the evil, and we shun the evil to obtain the good. In like
case is it with gladness, which goes always before sadness, because the
sadness tends to the evil. As touching choleriknesse, some put it before
coldness, and some after. They that put it after do follow the general rule,
saying that the good is always foremost, because the evil presupposes a good,
as I have said before. They that put it before, say, that coldness is not
properly a passion, but rather a default or want of passion: and therefore that
in the matter of passion choleriknesse, anger, or wrath, ought to go before
coldness, which is a disposition void of passion and feeling of choler.
Nevertheless it seems that this want of passion, may be deemed a passion and
an evil thing in man, for as much as through such vndisposednesse of the
soul, a man is so sheepish, that he cannot be angry when need is. For where
both the extremes be faulty, they cannot be without passion, that is to say,
without evil affection of the mind. Now in order of passions, love and hatred
do hold the first place, as passions of most strength, upon whom all the rest
depend. Next unto them do follow longing and loathing, as appendants to love
and hatred. For of love comes longing, and of hating loathing, when as we be
loath to see the thing that we hate. Then ensue hope and despair, and so forth
of the rest. Now it is to be seen after what sort a man is to rule himself in
these passions, and by what means profit may be drawn of them. That the
passions being well taken are not evil.
First as touching love and hatred, it seems that both the one and the other
may be in the mind of a prince, and generally in all gentlemanly minds, without
blame. For we say that love is a desire of the thing that is fair, goodly, or
beautiful. Therefore hatred being the contrary, must needs be a lothing of the
thing that is foul and ilfauored. Of love.
Many have misliked of love as though it were a hinderer of virtuous deeds. But
they that have waded deeply into the matter, have not rested upon that kind of
love, which is engendered in our hearts by the beholding of a fair and
beautiful countenance, or of some excellent beauty, but mounting up higher
and seeking to the very wels head, they have found, that all that is in this
word, is conceived and engendered by love, as Plato teaches us, having perhaps
drawn that doctrine out of the bible, as we may see by Salomons song, which
discovers Gods love toward men, under the persons of two lovers, the which
song is learnedly interpreted by Origin. This love is not always a well liking
of the body; It is of another sort, liking well of nothing but of the soul that
is clad with innocence, chastity, righteousness, and tempera^ce. S. Austin
in his xiiij. book of the city of God, says that the will which is rightly
disposed, is good love, and ill disposed will is evil love, The love then which
is desirous to have the thing that is beloved, is called longing; possessing
and enioieng it, it is called gladness. The fleeing or shunning of the
contrary unto it, is fear; and the feeling thereof when it is come, is called
sadness. And therefore these things be evil, if the love be evil, and good
if the love be good. In consideration whererof, we say that love respects the
good. By which reason, a prince ought to love that which is most beautiful,
that is to say, God; the which thing he shall do by being religious, and by
being afraid to displease him. A prince must love the publike-weale.
Secondly after the example of God our sovereign monarke, he must love the
commonweal, as God loves the world: yea, and by very natural reason, the
public case is to be preferred before the private. And this only way made the
Romans, Athenians, and Lacedaemonians great, who feared not any danger, so it
were for the co^mon-weale. Accordingly as we read that Codrus king of Athens,
vowed his life for the safety of his country, and likewise the Roman
Deciusses. Lacena, in steed of mourning for her dead son, reioiced when she
heard he was slain in the wars, in defense of his country. Leonidas a king of
the Lacedaemonians, holding it for certainty that himself and all his
soldiers should be slain, because they were not of sufficient number to
withstand the power of the Persians, said unto his men, Let us dine my good
fellows, as those which shall this day go suppe with them that are deceassed.
In so much that the prince that has the love of God and of the co^mon-weale
before his eyes, cannot fail but have the virtues whereof I hope to speak
hereafter. But if he neglect the commonweal, and have regard but only to his
own peculiar profit; then in steed of having some virtues, he shall be
replenished with all vice, so as he shall do nothing but pill his people, and
be catching of all things as well holy as unholy. Whereby a man may know him
that is a lover of men, from him that is not so; and a tyrant from a king. For
a king aims wholly at the common profit, and a tyrant at his own peculiar
profit.

Again, the king in doing for the public weal, does for himself: for that
is the thing that vpholdeth him. On the contrary part, the tyrant in doing all
things for himself, does by that means overthrow himself. What hatred
becomme^h a prince.
And even as love is very requisite in a prince, so say I also that hatred does
well beseem him. I mean not the hating of any particular person, or of all in
general, after the manner of Timon of Athens, who naturally did hate all men,
or of Mison, who never laughed but when he was alone: for such kind of hatred
is dangerous in a prince, by reason of his ouergreat power, which would be the
cause of the destruction of infinite men. For so soon as he commands a
thing, so soon is it done, as I will declare hereafter when I speak of anger.
But I speak of the hatred which is the countermatch to love. For if the lover
love the thing that is beautiful, the hater hates the thing that is ouglie.
Virtue is the beautifullest thing that we have; therefore must vice needs be the
ougliest; and so must a good prince needs hate both the vice and the vicious.
Which thing Solomon perceiving very well, says in the twelfth chapter of his
Proverbs, That a wise prince scatters the wicked, and makes the wheel to
turn over them. And in the same chapter he says, That the king with his only
look drives away all evil. As if he would say, that a king (who ought to be
an example of virtue) is a terror to the wicked. For as the sun disperseth the
clouds and mists; so does the countenance of a veruous king drive away all
vice and all naughtiness. For the wicked dare not come near him, for fear of
punishment. By speaking thus of love and hatred, we see what a king ought to
desire, and what he ought to eschew: wherewith he ought to be pleased, and
wherewith he ought to be displeased: namely that he ought to desire the good, as
the end whereto he tends, and to abhor the evil, after the example of S.
Paul, who in his Epistle to the Philippians, desires to be let loose and to be
with Christ. And David in the Psalm 118, My soul longs for thy judgments.
In what manner a prince may be merry and glad.
Likewise a prince ought to rejoice and take pleasure in the welfare of his
subjects, and to be sorry when they fare amiss. For it is permitted unto him
to be merry, so it be in things virtuous, accordingly as we be commanded to
rejoice in the Lord, and to be sorry for the misery and adversity of our
neighbors. Psalm. 15. Psalm. 22.
Rejoice ye righteous (says David) yea leap ye for joy. And again, Ye have
made my heart merry. And in the ninth Psalm, I will confess thee and praise
thee O Lord, and my heart shall rejoice in thee. But the beastly and voluptuous
mirth is reproved, such as belongs (as David says) to the horse and mule,
which have no understanding, but give themselves over to their own sensual
lust. As for sorrow or sadness, it ought to be far from us, Of sadness,
sorrow, and heaviness.
because that (as Solomon says) A sorrowful heart dries up a man's bones;
except it be so that we sorrow for our misdeeds, according to this saying in S.
Matthew, Blessed are they that weep and mourn: his meaning is, for their
sins. For as says S. Paul to the Corinthians, The godly sorrow ingendreth
repentance unto salvation, whereof a man shall never repent him. But the
worldly sorrow ingendreth death. And in his Epistle to Timothy, he finds
fault with such as are affectionlesse. And in the three score and eight Psalm,
I looked (quoth David) if there were any that would be sad with me, but there
was none. For as Cicero says in his Tusculanes, It is an unnatural and
unkindly thing, for a man to abide in such vnagreeuednesse. Socrates made
Alcibiades to weep, for that he showed him by lively reasons, that he was of
less estimation than a torch-bearer, if he had not virtue: and that sorrowing
was behoofful to him. To rid us of the worldly heaviness, we have two
remedies; the one is virtue, and discretion. For a virtuous and discreet man,
is not dismayed for any loss, neither is he out of quiet for any thing, Of
friendship.
but for his misdeeds. The other remedy is Friendship. For as Chilo said, The
sorrows and incommodities of this life, must be overcome by stoutnesse of
courage, and by communicating them with our friends. And in truth there is not
any thing that does so greatly assuage heaviness, as to have a friend into
whose bosom a man may discharge the grief that lies upon his heart. For that
cause does Homer give Achilles a Patroclus: and Virgil, an Achates unto
Aenaeas: Alexander had his Ephestion: Darius his Zopyrus: Scipio his Laelius:
and generally all good princes have had some special friend, unto whom they
might unburden themselves of their griefs. My meaning is not, that I would a
prince should have a friend, but to serve his delights: for such friendships
last not. As for example, if a prince love some pleasant conceited person,
because he takes pleasure in him; the friendship that is so sought for
pleasure or for profit, is but counterfeit, and is easy to be broken, as
Aristotle says in his eight book of Morals, The perfect friendship is among
good men that love virtue: A prince ought to be very precise in choosing his
friend.
and that friendship is durable. And such men ought a prince to be careful to
find out, for fear it be said unto him, as Aristippus vpbraided some saying,
When we buy a thing at a porter, we look nearly unto it, but when we be to
choose a friend, we be careless in examining his life; notwithstanding that
there is no comparison between mouable goods and a friend. For a friend may
help a prince both with counsel and comfort, and also greatly advance his
profit, as Zopirus did unto king Darius, unto whom he recovered Babylon. And
therefore Darius said, That he had lever have one Zopirus, than to take ten
Babilons; and that he wished he had as many Megabisusses, as there be kernels
in a Pomgarnet.

For this cause were Pilades and Orestes, exalted to the skies by the Poets;
and Damon and Pithias, Pithagorians, by the Historiographers. Many examples of
^aith^ull friends.
And among others, we must not let pass the friendship of Seruius Terentius,
toward Brutus. For when Brutus should have been put to death, this Terentius
affirmed himself to be he, and would have bin killed for him in the darkness
of the place, nevertheless being discerned who he was, he was suffered to live
whether he would or no. Neither is the wi^ely love of one Hosts the wife of a
Moore, to be passed over in silence; who seeing her husband dead, absteined from
food nine days together, that she might be buried with him. Timagenides seeing
the city of Thebes besieged for his sake, chose rather to yield himself to
the rest of the Greeks who were desirous of him, than to abide the burning,
spoiling, and sacking of his country. Also there were a couple of
Lacedaemonians, which offered to go to the king of Persia, to be put to torture
for the rest of their countriemen, who had killed the kings Ambassadors. But
yet the love of certain Frenchmen toward their country, shall put to silence
the fables of Orestes and Pilades, and whatsoever is reported of the Curtiusses
and Deciusses of Rome. When the king of England refused to take Callis to
mercy, except they would deliver him six Burgesses of the town, with halters
about their necks, to do his pleasure with them; the people being assembled
into one place, and hearing this sentence, fell to weeping. Then stepped up among
them one Eustace of S. Peter's, one of the richest men of all the town, and told
them that he would not suffer such a number of people to perish, but would
rather give himself to the death for their safety, than see them die for
hunger, or be slain with the sword. After him followed another named John
Daire, and four mo of the richest in Calis, who vowed themselves euerychone to
the death, for the safeguard of their people.

S. Ambrose in his second book of Virgins, reports a notable story of a
maid and a young soldier, who offered themselves to die either for the other.
The maid was condemned either to do sacrifice to the idols, or else to be made
a brothel in the stews. She utterly refusing to do sacrifice to the idols,
was led forthwith to the stews, where after she had made her prayers unto God,
there was brought unto her a young soldier, who altering his former purpose
which he had to have defiled her, prayed her to take his apparel, and he would
put on hirs, that by that means she might go her ways unknown, and so be
saved. When she was departed out of the brothel-house, there came in other
young men in hope to have had their pleasure of that fair damsel. But in her
stead they found the man, and thought she had been turned into that shape by
miracle. In the end, when the conueiance was discovered, the young man was
carried to be punished; whereof the maid hearing, presented hirselfe to bail
him, body for body, that he might escape: but the young man would in no wise
hear of that, affirming that judgment was given against him, and not against
her. The maid replied, that he was there but as a pledge, and that the sentence
which was given against him, ought to be executed upon hirselfe. To conclude,
they disputed so well the one against the other, that with their consents, they
were both put to death. Let this be spoken as by the way, because occasion
thereof was offered. He that is desirous to see more, let him read Aristotle's
Morals, Lucians Toxaris, and Ciceros Laelius.

Now let us proceed to Hope, Of Hope and Despair.
which is an affection well beseeming a Prince. When Alexander having of a
bountiful mind given all to his friends, was asked what should remain to
himself; Hope (quoth he) because he hoped to get much more. And this Hope is
grounded upon a certain nobleness of courage.

I know well enough that some Hope is but the dreaming of a man when he is
awake: for commonly we miss of the thing that we behight our selves.
Nevertheless, I say that the valiant and well advised prince sildome fails
of his hope, when it is grounded upon reason and good fortune. Philo says,
that Hope is the fountain of all sorts and trades of life. The merchant
traffiqueth in hope of gain, the marener in hope to benefit himself by his
sailing; the ambitious in hope of glory and honor: and to attain to these
ends, every of them does take marvelous pains. The hope of the happy state
draws men to virtue. But indeed the true and only hope, is to hope in God, as
in him that is our Creator, and is sufficient of himself alone to keep us
safe and sound.

Despair, or Distrust.
Afterward comes Despair, or Distrust, the contrary to Hope, which may be
taken doublewise, either as when a prince having lost a battle and broken his
force, lets all go without consulting or taking advice what to do, and
through Despair seeks no remedy, which often befalls for want of courage;
to maintain the which, nothing is comparable to stoutnesse of mind. The other
sort is not properly Despair, but a behauior proceeding of humility, which
makes us that we be not ouer-hastie in hoping for great and high things, the
which is convenient enough for a prince, for it restreineth him from hazarding
himself, and from undertaking too great and hard things, after the manner of
David, who reioiceth that he had not enterprised things ouer-great, and
exceeding his power. In this case, both Hope and Distrust are well befitting a
king. For the one makes him to enterprise great things, and the other to
moderat them in such sort, as he undertake not any thing above his ability, or
above that which he ought; for to do so, proceeds either of vndiscreetnes, or
of rage, or of some other inordinat passion. Of Fearfulnes and Fool hardiness.
Fearfulness, and Foole-hardinesse, are the two faulty extremities which
enclose Prowes, or valeantnesse of courage, whereof I will speak more largely
hereafter. For whosoever through the greatness of his courage does put himself
in peril, yea even of certain death for a good cause, he is to be esteemed
hardy, valiant, and manly-minded. And surely, the Fearful is worse than the
Foole-hardie. For as Thucidides says, Fear does not only bereave a man of his
memory, but also of his strength, and impeacheth the execution of the thing
that he had determined. Nevertheless, the fear to do evil is evermore
wel-beseeming, according to this saying of S^lomon in his Proverbs, Blessed is
the man that always stands in fear: but he that hardens his heart, shall
fall into mischief. S. Paul wills us to go through with our salvation, with
fear and terror, and he would not have us to be too skilful. And in the xj. of
Esai it is written, that the spirit of the fear of God shall rest upon the
blossom of the root of Iesse. And in the lxvj. chapter, Whom shall I regard
(says the Lord) but him that is meeld and gentle, and stands in fear of my
words. And in the xxvj. At the fear of thee we have conceived and brought
forth the spirit of salvation. And in the xxxiij Psalm, Ye righteous fear ye
the Lord. And in the xviij Psalm, The true way is to fear the power of God.
The fear of the Lord endures for ever. And as S. Jerome says, Fear is the
keeper of al virtues, and the true way is, to fear the power of God.

Homer in his Iliads brings in Helen, using these terms to king Priam,
Surely dear Lord and father in law, I do both fear you and honor you,
because we ordinarily reverence those whom we fear. And therefore near to the
common hall of the Ephores in Sparta, there was a chapel dedicated to Fear;
for fear does always accompany shame. Also it is a very commendable thing to
be afraid of vnhonesty, and yet not to be afraid to be counted dishonest. As
for example, when one upon a time vpbraided Xenophanes the son of Lagus, that
he was fearful and durst not play at dice; I confess (quoth he) that I am
not only fearful, but also exceeding fearful, but that is but in things
dishonest. For honorable is that fear that restrains a man from doing evil.

As touching meekness or meeldnesse, it beseems a prince very well. For it
makes him gentle, courteous, and affable. And it is one of the three virtues
which David would have in a king. For in the xliiij Psalm, Ride on (says he)
and reign, because of thy meekness, justice, and truth. And this virtue is
contrary to choleriknesse, hastiness, or fumishnesse, which ought to be far
off from a prince, as the which does too much blind him, and bereave him of
reason and judgment. A man ought to be angry* at sin.
But to be angry with lewdness and leaud persons, is very well done,
provided that it be not in such sort as it extend to sin; according to this
saying of the Psalmist, Be angry, but sin not in your hearts.

And for as much as I will treat hereof more largely when I come to speak of
anger or wrath, and of meeldnesse or meek^nesse, I will content my self for
the present, to have showed the passions of the mind, as it were at a glance,
which though they seem at the first blush to encounter against virtue, be such
nevertheless, as a well-disposed mind may greatly help it self by them, and
make them to serve to very good end, and so alter the shape of them, as that
the thing which seemed evil, shall fall out to be good and commendable.

CHAP. XI. Whether Virtue and Honesty be to be separated from profit, in
matters of government or state.
But I fear least by standing too long upon matter of Manners, I forslow the
matters of State, and that in going about to make a prince virtuous, I make him
a prince misaduised. For oftentimes the managing of public affairs is such,
that he must rather have regard of the present case, how to wind himself out
of the briers, and to get out of some shrewd pinch, than to stand musing upon
virtue, because that they which do so busy their heads, do often times suffer
their state to be lost.

If Brutus that conspired against Caesar, had not been too spice-conscienst,
saying it was not lawful to kill any other than a tyrant, but had believed the
counsel of Cassius, he had not left Antonie the tyrants friend behind, by
whose death, the commonweal had been discharged of al danger. In so much that
one little spark of conscience, procured unto Brutus the loss both of his
own life, and of the liberty of his country. The first Brutus did not so,
Sometimes a State is preserved by Cruelty.
for it liked him better to use cruelty, in putting his own children to death,
than to leave any little match of conspiracy against the state: and this
barbarous cruelty and unkindness of his, saved the commonweal. When Cabades
king of Persia was cast in prison by his subjects that had rebelled against him
and chosen one Blases in his steed* this Blases entered into counsel, what
was to be done with Cabades. The most part were of opinion, that he should not
be put to death, but that he should be kept in prison. Othersome gave counsel
that he should be dispatched, among whom Gusanascades one of the greatest
lords, delivering his opinion, showed them a little penknife wherewith he was
wont to pare his nails, and said unto them, Ye see this little cuttle; this
same may now without any pain and without any danger, do that which twenty
thousand men cannot do hereafter. And even so it came to pass in deed. For
Cabades getting out of prison recovered his kingdom, and putting out Blases
eyes with scalding oil, laid him in prison, and put Gusanascades to death.
Theodatus (king of the Goths) was loath to kill Amalasont, being an honorable
and virtuous princess, and wife of Theoderik, and mother of Athalarik; but in
the end he dispatched her at the persuasion of such as told him that his life
could not else be in safety. In state of government things must often be done
according ^o the necessity of the time.
Theophrast reports of Aristides that in private cases between man and man,
he was a perfect, upright, and iust-dealing man; but in matters of government
concerning the commonweal, he did many things, according to the necessity of
the time.

The Athenians in the conference which they had with the Melians, said that the
Lacedaemonians used much virtue among themselves, and in the things that
concerned their laws and customs at home: but in their behauior toward
strangers, they were a people that esteemed that to be most honest and
reasonable, which was most for their profit. Euphemeus an Athenian, said to the
Camerins, that the man which reigns by tyranny, and a city that has an
empire, deem nothing dishonest that may be for their profit, nor account aany
thing theirs which is not safe guarded; and in all cases they esteem others to
be their friends or foes, according to the occasion of time and dealings.

Plutarch speaking of Marius, says he made reckoning of justice when it was
for his own behoof, and took profit both for justice and honor, not
considering that truth is more strong and mighty than falsehood, but measuring
the value of them both by the profit that might rise thereof, and saying that
when a lions skin will not sted a man's turn, The skin of a fox must be matched
with the skin of a lion.
he must take unto it the skin of a fox. This has bin the cause, that the best
advised which have written of government, and they also which have practiced
it, have not stood so much upon virtue, as upon the occurrence of matters;
insomuch that they have said, That a prince oftentimes for the compassing of
his affairs, must be feign to behave himself contrary to faith, contrary to
charity, contrary to humanity, and contrary to religion. But this opinion,
notwithstanding that it be followed of the most part of the world; yet do I
find it far distant from our religion, and from all that an honest man ought
to do. For God puts no difference between a prince and a private person, in
cases concerning virtue or vice. Antigonus the great, whom men would have made
to believe that all things are lawful for kings; Ye say truth (quoth he) for
barbarous kings; but unto us, that which is just of it self, is always just;
and that which is evil is always evil. And to say tr^th, we see not that
writers do make two kinds of virtue, the one peculiar to princes, the other to
private persons. For were it lawful for a prince or for a common weal, to do
evil for profits sake; it ought as well to be permitted also to the private
person: for at least wise by the example of his prince, he will dispense with
himself for doing good. But God will not have us to do evil, for any good
that may come thereof, no not even though it be for the benefit of a whole
realm. Therefore the foresaid proposition cannot be avowed of a christian with a
safe conscience, seeing it is disallowed by the heathen. And to root it out of
the hearts of princes, I am feign to set down word for word (howbeit briefly)
the same things that Cicero in his third book of duties sets down at
large, leaving the rest to divines, who match their reasons with the word of
God, the only thing that is able to captive a lovely and right meaning mind.

Now then, it is not only by our religion, that we be warned thereof, but also
by the wise Infidels, according to this saying of Socrates, the wisest of them
all, namely, That those have done amiss, which have separated honesty and
virtue from profit; seeing they ought of nature to go jointly together. For a
man can not be said to profit himself, when he offends against nature. And
there is not any thing more against nature, and against the law of man, than
to take from another man, wherewith to profit a man's self: for nature can-not
abide, that we should increase our wealth by the spoiling and robbing of other
men. It is better to be poor than to do wrong.
So that the man which obayeth nature, and follows kindly inclination,
cannot find in his heart to hurt his like, but will rather choose to be poor
and to endure hardness, than to do another man harm, especially considering
that the hurt of the soul, (which is vice or sin) is an hundred fold worse
than the hurt of the body.

By the law of nature we should do good one to another, and they that do
otherwise, do take away society from among men, the taking away whereof
makes goodness, justice, and liberality to be laid a-water. And therefore
whenever profit steppeth before our face, If profit be mingled with sin, we
must let profit go.
it is hard for us to escape provocation: but when we have bethought us of it
at leisure, then if we find that the profit is intermedled with vice, we must
let the profit go, and persuade our selves, that wheresoever sin is, there
can be no profit indeed. And seeing that there is not any thing more contrary
to nature, than sin is; because nature requires nothing but that which is
good, neither is any thing more agreeable to nature than profit; it is very
hard for vice and profit to match together in one ground. And for as much as
virtue surmounteth and surpasses all things; it is very behooffull and
needful that the sovereign good should consist in virtue. Now as that which
is good is behoofful and profitable; so that which is honest is profitable
also. The wicked beholding an outward show of profit, do run after it, not
perceiving into what inconvenience they fall by doing evil: by reason whereof
they pervert the laws both of God and man, which thing he that lives after
the law of nature does not. Yet notwithstanding oftentimes there happen cases
which put even the best to their shifts, A case wherein the outward appearance
of profit is followed.
by reason of the profit that offers it self unto them. Not that they
consult whether honesty and virtue be to be left; but whether the thing that is
profitable may be done without sin. As for example, To the intent to wipe the
name of the Tarquins clean out of Rome, Brutus caused Tarquinius Collatinus
the husband of Lucrece, to be discharged of the dignity of Consulship, and to
be put out of the city. This seemed a piece of wrong, because this Collatinus
himself had helped to expulse the kings. But for so much as it was found upon
good advise, that the very remembrance of that so odious name, was to be
utterly abolished: the thing being profitable for the commonweal, imported
also so much honesty, that Collatinus himself ought also to think well
thereof; and so profit prevailed for honesties sake, without the which it had
bin no profit in deed.

There is another case, wherein profit and honesty seem to encounter one
another, by reason of the rigor, and yet notwithstanding, the chief regard is
to be had of the profit, because it fights not against nature. As for
example, It is permitted you by the law of nature, to repulse the injury that
is done unto you, and for performance thereof, sometimes a prince is driven to
do rigourous executions, and such as may seem too too cruel; as Thomiris
queen of the Massagets did, who having vanquished king Cirus in battle, slew
him and two hundred thousand men with him; so as not any one escaped the sword.

This or the like execution were evil in a captain, that should do it upon
cold blood, or quiet deliberation, as Silla did at Rome. But when a prince,
whom God has armed to defend himself, repelleth injury by force, and puts
his enemies to the sword; Cruelty in defending, is not dishonest.
although it seem a cruel deed, yet is it not altogether against honesty and
honor. For the death of the enemies is the welfare of the commonweal, against
whom as a prince ought not to use any treason or treachery whereby to kill them:
so if in assailing the prince, they chance to fall into his hands, it is at his
pleasure to do what he finds behooffull for his own safety, according to the
law of arms, for it is not unmeet that they should fall into the same net which
they had laid for him. Had the Samnits used the way of extreme cruelty
against the Romans, Enemies must either be won by some singular courtesy, or
dispatched with rigorous cruelty.
when gentleness would not serve their turn, they had done the better for
themselves, and they should have learned by the effect, that the counsel of
Herennius Pontius was very good. For his son being captain general of the
Samnits, set unto him to have his advise, what he should do to the Romans, whom
he held enclosed betwixt two mou^tains. Herennius sent him word, that he should
send them home to Rome, without doing them any displeasure; thinking that for
so notable a benefit, they would of enemies become thensfoorth good and
faithful friends. And when he saw that this counsel liked not the Samnits, he
counseled them to put them all to the sword, without sparing any one of them,
for he thought that so great a loss would so greatly weaken the Romans, as
they should not be able to recover themselves a long time after.

This opinion seemed also ouer-cruell, and so they chose a mean way, which was
to save the Romans lives, and to bereave them of their armor and weapon, and
of their stuff, with some other conditions: which afterward was the confusion
of the Samnits. Likewise the Euthalibians committed a great oversight, in that
they dispatched not the Persians, when they had them shut up almost after the
aforesaid manner; or sent them not home in friendly sort, but did neither of
both. For they sent them away without hurt; but they compelled Perosas the king
of Persia, to adore their king, and to promise them upon his oath, never to
make war on them afterward. Nevertheless, as soon as Perosas was delivered of
the danger, he made sharper war upon them, than he had done before, in revenge
of the iniutie and dishonor that they had done unto him. For in matter of
state a prince must either deserve well of his enemies, by some singular
courtesy, or make clean riddance of them, if it lie in his hand to do it. I
would always counsel him to follow courtesy.

But yet he may have to do with such kind of men, that it shall stand him on
hand, to use rigor rather than gentleness, as is to be seen in the deed of
queen Thomiris, where albeit that the revenge of her sons death provoked her
to kill Cirus: yet was it moreover expedient also for her state, to do it in
such sort as she did. Cruelty is to be used against strangers that come to
make conquest.
For a prince that comes out of a far country, to conquer a realm,
whereunto he cannot pretend any right, will not lightly be paid with such
clemency. For his intent is to possess himself of it by some means or other,
and oftentimes for the bringing thereof to pass, to make utter slaughter and
destruction of the inhabitants thereof, as the children of Israel did, when
they came into the land of Promise.

Well might Charles Martell have done all the courtesies that could be unto the
Sarsines; but yet would not that have made them forbear to invade the realm
of France. And therefore the best way was to fight it out with them, and to
overthrow them utterly. If Aetius being aided by the Frenchmen, had not fought
with Attila to the utterance in France, it had been impossible for him to have
got him thence by fair means; and yet because he made not clean riddance of
him, a man may see what mischief came of it.

It is noted as a fault in Constantine, that when he had vanquished the
Vandales, Sweuians, and Alanes, he pursued not his victory in putting them all
to the sword, but gave them respit to resemble themselves again, whereby they
became as strong as he. Darius offered Alexander his daughter, a very
beautiful Lady, with six millions of money, and the one half of Asia; but
Alexander would not admit that honorable offer, because his covetousness was
unmeasurable. By reason whereof, had good fortune gone on Darius side, he had
played an unwise part, if he had not slain Alexander and all his army without
mercy.

Manfred king of Naples, was willing to have made peace with Charles duke of
Aniou; but Charles would never hearken unto it, because he grounded his right
upon the sword, and was bent to be king of Naples whatsoever it did cost him.
With whom courtesy and gentleness is to be used.
Courtesy and clemency are to be used among neighbors that strive but for
their bounds, for hatred, or for honor. For they that are so vanquished, are
always mindful of the courtesy that has been done unto them, and of the
means to requite it, whereof in the fourth book of Kings, the sixth chapter, we
have a notable example' in the king of Israel, who by the advice of the prophet
Elizeus, in steed of putting the Assyrians his enemies to death, which were
come to seek him, caused them to be entertained with all kind of good cheer,
and sent them home without doing them any harm; by means whereof, whereas they
had bin his sworn enemies, he made them his good friends. So also did
Ptolomie, who having overcome Demetrius, and put his host to flight at the
city Gaza, restored him his treasure and all his stuff, with eight thousand
prisoners, saying that he strove not with him, for honor and empire. And
Demetrius receiving those things at his hand, prayed God he might not continue
long his debtor for that courtesy; and even so it came to pass. For anon
after Demetrius overcame Ptolomie, and having taken his treasure, and also
seven thousand prisoners, sent all home again to him, and moreover gave
presents to every of the prisoners whom he sent back. The case stands
otherwise with him that comes a far off, to make conquest of a country.
For his intent is to dispossess them against whom he makes war, and to make
clean riddance of them, as we have seen in the Saxons, Englishmen,
Burgonions, Frenchmen, Turks, Goths, and Lumbards, who have continued owners
of the lands which they invaded. And if they had not had the upper hand of
fortune, doubtless not so much as one had bin fuffered to escape. Wicked
counsel given by the pope.
That is the cause why the pope, after that Charles of Aniou, had gotten the
upper hand of Conradine and the Sweuians, councelled him to cut off Conradines
head, sending him word in a word or twain of latin, That the life of Conradine
was the death of Charles, and the death of Conradine was Charles his life. But
saving the reverence of the pope and of duke Charles, albeit this way seemed
most profitable, yet ought it not to have bin followed, because it was scarce
honorable, seeing that Conradine had escaped the fury of the battle, and his
quarrel was just, in recovery of his kingdom, which his base brother Manfred
had first usurped from him, and Charles had woone away from Manfred.

Man-slaughters committed upon quiet deliberation, are disallowed.
Such man-slaughters done upon quiet determination, and out of the heat of
conflict in battle, are disallowed both of God and man. In confirmation
whereof, I must needs allege a certain text out of the third chapter of the
second book of Samuel. There were in Jury two brave captains, named Abner and
Amasa, which had borne arms for king Saul against David, and David after Saul's
death had pardoned them. But Ioab, David's constable, being ouer-zealous of his
masters honor, forbear not for all that to kill them both; which doing of
his, David so greatly misliked, that he protested before God and the people,
that he was guiltless of their blood. And to show that he was so unfeignedly,
although he punished it not during his life, yet did he take order for the
punishing thereof before his decease, saying thus unto Solomon his son, David's
judgment upon Ioab for murdering Abner and Amasa.
Thou know what Ioab did unto the captains of the host of Israel, namely
unto Abner and Amasa, whom he slew and shed their blood in peace as it had
been in war, and put the blood of battle upon his girdle that was upon his
reins: look therefore that thou deal with him according to thy wisdom, and
suffer not his hoare head to go down to his grave in peace. David being
persecuted by Saul, had him at an advantage, when he found him in the cave, and
might very well have done him displeasure* but would not. But had that good
politic fellow Ioab bin there, he would no more have suffered Saul to escape
than he suffered Absolon.

Now to come again to our matter, like as God gave the victory at that time
to the aforesaid duke Charles; so at another time he made his heir the prince
of Salerne to loose the field, and to be taken and condemned to have his head
stricken off, as the said Conradine had had before. And when this sentence was
pronounced upon him, which was on a Friday; he answered he was contented to
take his death with patience, for the love of him which suffered death on the
like day. The merciful dealing of queen Constance.
But when Constance the queen heard of this his answer, she said, that for the
love of him which had suffered death for us, she was determined to show mercy
to the prince; and without doing him any further harm, she sent him to
Cataloine to the king her husband, full sore against the peoples will, who
would have had him put to death. In which action we have to consider one
notable thing; namely, that Charles who had slain Manfred in battle, and put
to death both Conradine, and his cosen the duke of Austrich, under form of
justice, could not keep his kingdom so long time to his posterity, as the
heir femall of Manfred did by using favor and mercy. But when a stranger
having no former quarrel, comes with a great number of men to invade a
country; I believe it shall be well done of him that gets the victory, to
let none of his enemies escape, least their enlargement provoke them to set a
new voyage abroche, as the Frenchmen did in Gallia, and the Goths in Italy.

Again, there is no love or kindness to be hoped for at such folks hands. But
out of that case, Cruelty is not to be used for the mainteinance of a state.
I see not that cruelty ought to be used for the maintaining of any state; and
as for to leave virtue for profit, it ought not to be so much as once thought.
Augustus for the better assuring of his state, caused Cesarion the son of
Julius and Cleopatra to be slain. It may be perchance that in so doing, he
dealt for his profit, but surely he dealt not virtuously. Contrariwise, Sextus
Pompeius who had the staff in his own hand, to have killed Augustus and
Antonie, his enemies, dealt honorably in letting them go, but to his own
destruction, which thing he chose rather to do, than to falsify his faith, as
I will declare anon more at large, I could allege many mo examples of evil
princes, which have finished their days in wretchedness, and lost their
kingdoms, or at the leastwise their children after them, whom I will omit for
briefnesse sake, Of Caesar Borgia.
speaking but only of Caesar Borgia; that we may see whether such a prince can
be had in estimation. I am well assured that to lay the foundation of his
principality, (which came to him but by fortune as they say) he had many
things to do, the which he brought al to pass by his wit. But yet can I not
allow that manner of dealing. For he caused the Columnians to be destroyed by
the Vrsines, and afterward dispatched the Vrsines too, for fear least they
should take part against him. He used the help of the Frenchmen, to get
possession of Romania, and afterward drove them out when he was peaceably
settled in it. To purchase the peoples favor, he executed rigorous justice upon
thieves, robbers, and extortionors; and for the doing thereof, he set up a very
good and severe Iusticer, named Remy Orke. Afterward perceiving that his
ouer-rigorous justice procured him some hatred; to root that conceit out of
their imaginations, and to show that that came not of him, but of his officer;
he made master Remy Orke to be cut in two pieces, and to be laid in an open
place with a bloody knife by him. I see not wherein this duke Valentine is to
be allowed; I believe he was well advised what he did, and assaied all the
means he could to make his own profit; but that profit was utterly separated
from virtue.

What policy was it to kill folk by treacherous sleights and treason, which
had never trespassed him either in word or deed? What a reward was that for a
judge to receive, for doing his duty, and for serving him faithfully? If
such princes may be allowed, then shall murder and frawd be no vice, so it
bring profit. And then let us take Socrates his saying the contrary way, and
say that virtue ought to attend upon profit. And so should it follow of
consequence, that whosoever could deal most for his own profit, should be the
best and honestest man. But all the pain that this wretched prince took to
stablish his state, stood him in small steed. For he utterly forwent it, and
was deceived himself, as he had deceived others.

Thucidides in his history, interlaceth a notable saying of the Corinthians,
which was spoken to the counsel of the Athenians, If a man will say (says he)
that that which we say is very reasonable, but that the opinion of the other
side is the more profitable, if there be war; we answer, that the more
uprightly men walk in all things, the more is it commonly for their profit.
There is no profit without virtue.
Therefore it is most expedient for a prince that will not fail of his purpose,
to fix his eye continually vpo^n virtue, and to set it before him as his mark
to shoot at, and to assure himself that he cannot have profit without virtue.

Upon a time Themistocles told the Athenians, that he had a way to make them
great, yea and lords of all Greece, but that the same was not to be imparted to
any mo than one, least it should be known. Hereupon the Athenians chose
Aristides to take notice of his device. Unto whom Themistocles declared, that
the navy of the Lacedaemonians might easily be set on fire, whereby it would be
an easy matter to vanquish them. When Aristides had heard the counsel of
Themistocles, he went up into the pulpit with great expectation of the
Athenians, and told them that Themistocles had given a woonderous behooffull
and profitable counsel, but it was not honest, whereupon the Athenians,
without hearing any further what it was, disallowed the counsel of
Themistocles, as not good.

At such time as Pirrhus made war with the Romans, one of his people came to
Fabritius, being then Consul at Rome, and proferred him to poison the king.
Fabritius without taking any further counsel, sent back the traitor unto
Pirrhus: and this his deed was allowed and commended of the senate.

Wickedness is not accompanied with honor.
If sovereignty be sought for honors sake, then must treachery be banished; for
treachery is not accompanied with honor. If for goods, neither can goods do a
prince good, being matched with infamy and dishonor. And as touching that
which Theophrast says of Aristides, That he did many things acording unto
the necessity of the time; we find not so much as any one deed of his that may
be accounted unjust, saving that when the city of Athens wanted money, he
propounded in counsel whether they should take away the gold that had bin laid
up in store in the temple of Apollo, at Delphos in the isle of Delos, contrary
to an article of the league that was concluded by oath, among all the Greeks;
and thereupon gave his advise, that it was behoofful, but not rightful. As
much said he of the counsel of Themistocles, which I have declared already.
Nevertheless, in the first, the Athenians followed uprightness, and in the
later they followed their profit, or rather necessity, which has no law. But
to say the truth, neither the one nor the other was to be imputed unto
Aristides, but to the Athenians themselves, in that they resolved themselves
upon the counsel that was given them, without following any other opinion,
than that which liked them best. But as for Marius, The blame of Marius.
there is no reckoning at all to be made of him, no more than of a man that was
ambitious, without law and without conscience, as he showed in many things, and
specially in this fact following; namely that being at Rome about his affaries,
whereas he ought to have spoken well of Metellus his captain general, he gave
him very evil reports to the people, as though he had prolonged the war of
purpose, saying that if he himself were made consul, he would dispatch the
matter out of hand, and bring them Iugurth either quick or dead. To be short,
he sped so well by playing the courtier, that he was made Consul; but in the
mean while he falsified his faith, and wrongfully slaundered a man of great
honor. But Silla paid him with the like measure; for he challenged to himself
the honor of the taking of Iugurth prisoner, whereupon sprang all the bloody
quarrels that ensued afterward betwixt them. Thus ye see how the wicked are
oftentimes paid with the same coin which they gave unto others. And I marvel
how there should be any that would loose their reputation for the gain of a
little profit. For what profit can be comparable to dishonor? Soothly there is
no difference whether a man be changed into a beast, or whether he play the
mad beast in the shape of man. Wherefore seeing the thing cannot be esteemed
profitable, which is full of villainy and wickedness; we ought to believe most
certainly that nothing is behooffull and profitable, but that which is honest
and virtuous.

CHAP. XII. That a Prince ought not to falsify his faith, for the maintenance
of his state.
IF this proposition hold steadfast and sure, the case is fully resolved by us,
concerning this doubt upon faith in matters of state, Whether a prince ought to
keep his promise or no. Faith (says Cicero) is the foundation of justice and
right, and is a constant and soothfast opinion (or settled determination of
mind) to keep and perform that which is once spoken and agreed upon. The
definition of Fait^, or Faithfulness.


Unto this Faith, Numa Pompilius dedicated a temple, to the intent that by that
point of superstition, the people of Rome should learn to esteem
faithfulness as a godly and precious thing, and afterward the Romans placed
the image thereof in the Capitol, nere unto the image of the great God Jupiter,
to the end that no man should be so bold and presumptuous, as to violat so
sacred and holy a thing. In so much that the holiest and greatest oath that
they could skill to make, was to swear by their Faith, as the thing which they
accounted most divine, and (as Cas^iodorus says) most beloved of God, and most
reverenced of men. For how could man's frailty be vpheld among so many waves
and storms, if there were no firmness in the doings and saiengs of princes?
Among fellows, faithfulness maintains friendship. It makes servants to
obey their masters with all integrity. It makes us to serve God, and to
worship his divine majesty with devout belief: and to conclude in one word,
whatsoever we see to be well done, comes of unchangeable faithfulness. And
yet for all that, we see that those which are best able to keep it, do make
least account of it, specially in matters of state, because (say they) a prince
is feign to promise many things for the maintaina^nce of his estate, which he
being once out of those dealings, is not bound to perform. And as Plutarch
says in the life of Pirrhus, Princes use the two terms of Peace and War,
Princes use the terms of Peace and War, as they do money.
as they do their coin; namely, as it may best serve their own turn, not for
duties sake, or for justice sake, but for their own profit: and they be better
men when they confess roundly that they make war, than when they cloak the
surceassing or intermitting of their wicked intent, with the holy names of
Justice and Friendship. And as says Paulus Iouius, the Faith of some kings is
such, that they stick not to violat and break the most sacred covenants of
accord, at their pleasure; specially when they have once resolved themselves to
intend to nothing but their own present profit, and to apply themselves only
to the time. Archidamus being desirous to make the Athenians to break the
league of peace, that had bin made with Antigonus, and perceiving they stack at
it for their promise sake; told the^ there was difference between a man and a
sheep, for a sheep had but all one kind of voice, but a man had diverse
sorts, so as he might change his voice continually, until he had brought to
pass what he would. As who would say, Faithfulness was but for fools that
could no skill to dissemble, as having but one manner of speech for all turns;
but men of wit altered their manner of doing and speaking, according as occasion
or need required. When Lisander was blamed for breaking the peace that had bin
with the Milesians, Men be deceived by oaths.
he answered, That children were to be beguiled with little bones, and men with
oaths. The tyrants Deuis and Policrates, said as much in that behalf. Marius
esteemed it a point of virtue and high courage, to be skillful in cosenage, as
Plutarch reports of him in his life. There is an Italian author, Machiauel.
who in his book of a Prince, says that in his time the princes that have
made none account of their faith, have become great, and have passed those that
have grounded themselves upon faithfulness. And he will have a prince to be of
two natures, the one of beast, the other of man; and that when the nature of
man will not prevail, he should have recourse to that of the beast. And that
of the beasts, he should choose the fox his nature, to discern snares; and the
lions, to put the woolues in fear. And therefore (says he) a wise prince
cannot keep his faith, if this observation be turned the contrary way. And
because there be wicked men which keep not their promise, neither ought he
also to keep touch with them. Among the examples of the princes of his time,
he alleges pope Alexander the sixth, who made no bones or conscience at al to
deceive men. Never was there any man (quoth he) that assured things with
greater force of words, or affirmed them with greater oaths, and that meant
less good faith, or less performed them: and yet notwithstanding his
packings came always to pass as he would wish, because he gave his mind to
it. I confess that the cosener, the hipocrit, and the dissembler, do commonly
sooner dispatch his business, than he that is open, No good man will ever lie
for any profit or advantage.
plain, honest, and faithful: But it were better for a man not to have so
great success, than to be deceitful and wicked. And it were better for him to
follow the counsel of Cicero in his books of Duties, who says, That no good
man will ever lie for his own advantage. For if he that deals altogether by
frawd, be had in estimation; I see not in comparing the lesser with the
greater, why either a shameless person or a thief should be blamed, of whom
nevertheless the one is hanged, and the other is pointed at with folks
fingers, and baited out of all good men's companies. For their doing so, is but
to avoid poverty, and to find the means to live upon other men's purses, as the
prince that is a deceiuer, is desirous to do his affairs at the cost of his
neighbor. True it is, that because he is a great lord, men say of him as a
certain pyrat said of great Alexander, namely that because he himself roued
but with one gallie, he was counted a robber, and because Alexander went with a
great number of ships, therefore he was counted a king, but in effect they were
both of one trade, saving that the one of them was rich, puissaunt, and well
attended; and the other was poor and meanly accompanied.

And as Plutarch says in the life of Pyrrhus, kings and princes must not blame
private persons, though now and then they step aside, as opportunity fitteth
them for their profit; for in so doing, they do but imitate their souereigns
examples, and follow the footsteps of them that are their ringleaders, in all
untrustiness, treachery, and unfaithfulness: as who would say, that he
dispatcheth his business best, which least lifts to observe law and
uprightness. But although some unfaithful prince do happen to prosper, it
does not therefore follow, that a faithful prince cannot prosper. Titus,
Traian, Antonine the meek, M^rcus Aurelius, and other good emperors of Rome,
have obtained as many victories, yea, and have also far better maintained their
estate, than Tiberius, Nero, Caligula, Domitian, and such others.

A prince should have skill of suttleties, to save himself from them, but not
to entangle others.
Philip grew great by subtlety, and Alexander his son conquered the whole
world by loialtie and magnanimity. I believe well that a prince ought to be
sage and well advised, and to be skillful both in playing the lion to encounter
such as will assail him, and in playing the fox to save himself from the
trains and snares that are laid for him, but not to entangle and entrap others.

After the battle of Cannas, which the Romans lost unto Hannibal, there were
ten prisoners, who upon safe conduct given them by Hanniball, tarried still at
Rome contrary to their promise given unto him, but they were all denounced
infamous, and one of them was sent back again unto Hannibal, to do what he
would with him. The consul Regalus did not so, for he perfourming his promise,
returned at the time which he had set, notwithstanding that he was sure to go
to exquisit torments, that were prepared for him. The Carthaginenses having
lost a battle upon the sea against the Romans, sent Amilcar and Hanno to treat
with them for peace. Amilcar would not put himself into the Romans hands,
because he had a little before taken Cornelius Asina the consul prisoner, whom
the Romans had sent ambassador thither. But Hanno sticked not to proceed
forth; and when he had begun to declare his message, a certain Roman
captain said threatningly unto him, that as much might befall him as had been
done to Cornelius. But the consuls putting the captain to silence, The noble
answer of the Roman Consuls.
told Hanno that the Faith of the empire of Rome, should deliver them from that
fear.

At such time as Tissaphernes brake the truce which he had made with the
Lacedaemonians, Agesilaus said, he thanked the gods that Tissaphernes had angered
them and offended them, and thereby made them gracious and favorable to the
Lacedaemonians; esteeming it a thing very displeasant unto God for a man to
falsify his faith. And therefore Mimus Publianus says, That he which has
lost his credit, has no more to lose, because the whole welfare and honor of
a man depends thereupon. He sustains greater loss which loses his credit,
than he that loses the thing that was promised him.


Bias said there was no excuse for a man that brake his promise, because he
that loses the credit of his word, loses more than he that loses the
thing that was promised him. Cinna having sent for Marius, made it a matter of
consultation whether he should receive him or no. Sertorius was of opinion that
he should not send for him; but Cinna told him, he could not with his honor
refuse him, having sent for him. When Sertorius heard him say so, he told him
he did amiss to make it a matter debateable whether he should receive him or
no, seeing he was come at his commandment. For the binding of your faith
(quoth he) suffers not the matter to be debated or consulted of any more.

Sextus Pompeius was advertised by his admiral Menodorus, that now it was in
his hand to be revenged of the death of his father, and of his brethren, having
both Augustus and Antonie at supper with him in his gallie: and that if Pompei
would give him leave, he would undertake to cause them to be drowned, and it
should never be perceived how. But Pompei sauouring of the ancient honor of
the Romans, answered the messenger thus, Tell Menodorus that he might well have
done it without me, seeing he makes none account of perjury: but it cannot
beseem me to give my consent unto it, seeing I have not been wont to falfifie
my faith. This faithfulness of the Romans, was the cause that Ptolomei king
of Egypt committed his young son in wardship to the people of Rome, who
performed the charge with all integrity, and surrendered the kingdom again
into his hands, when he came to age. Archadius leaving his son Theodosius in
his minority, Faith tieth the hands even of enemies.
and being at his wits end whom he might leave to be his protector, and above
all others fearing the Persians; determined with himself upon advice, to
commit the charge thereof by his last Will in writing, unto Indisgertes king of
Persia, and to set his Faith as a shield against his force, and to tie his
hands with the holy band of Protectorship, praieng him to keep and preserve
the empire for his son. Indisgertes taking the protectorship upon him,
executed it so faithfully, that he preserved both the life and empire of
Theodosius.

The faithfulness of king Lewis the xij.
Don Philip of Austrich, king of Castile, and lord of the Low countries,
considering how he left his son Charles not above eleven years old, and that
before he should be of full age, the king of France might inuest himself in the
Low Countries: to prevent this inconvenience, did by his testament ordain king
Lewis the twelfth to be his protector. Whereupon the king by consent of the
country, appointed the lord of Chieures to be governor there, and never made
any war upon him, notwithstanding that Maximilian gave him sufficient causes
to have done it. Licurgus being counseled thereto by his countrymen, and also
by his sister in law the queen, to take upon him the kingdom of Lacedemon,
after the death of his brother: would not hearken unto it, but kept it
faithfully for his nephew Charilaus, who was borne after his fathers decease;
choosing rather to be a faithful protector, than an unfaithful king: clean
contrary to Lewis Sfortia, who of a Guardian, made himself duke of Millan,
dispossessing his nephew John Galeas and his posterity thereof; But he kept it
not any long time. In all the doings of these good princes, there was neither
oath nor promise, but only a good and sincere will, to keep touch with such as
had relied upon the trust of their faithfulness. For whersoeuer there has
passed either oath, or single promise, good men have never doubt but it was to
be kept, as the forealleaged examples may witness unto us. A perjured person
and a liar are very nigh all one
And Cicero in one of his orations says, That the Gods immortal do punish a
perjured person and a liar both with one punishment, because they be offended
at the treachery and malice whereby men be beguiled, rather than at the
prescript form of words and covenants, wherein the oath is comprised. But
whenever an oath was added unto it, they held it and kept it, whatsoever it
cost them: as we see in the Poets, concerning the vow of Agamemnon, the which
is like enough to have been counterfaited out of the history of Ieptha. Of
Oth^.
In the xxiij and xxx of Deuteronomy. it is written thus, If a man be bound by oath, he
shall perform whatsoever he has promised. And Cicero in his books of Duties,
says, That we ought in any wise to keep the promise wherein we call God to
witness. And as Sophocles says, He that that swears, ought to be sore
afraid that he sin not against God. The Egyptians did punish perjured
persons with death, because they sinned double, as well in violating religion
toward God, as in taking away faithfulness from among men, the greatest and
straightest bond of humane society.

The reverence of an oath.
After the battle of Cannas, Scipio being advertised that certain senators
held a counsel in secret, how to forsake the city of Rome; went suddenly in
among them with his naked sword in his hand, and made them to swear that they
should not for any cause forsake the city; which thing they durst not but
perform, for fear of their oath. As likewise did a certain Tribune, who for
fear of death, had promised Torquatus to withdraw his accusation which he had
exhibited against his father; for he withdrew it indeed for his oath sake,
notwithstanding that Torquatus had compelled him thereto by force, in holding
his swords point to his throat. So great reverence did the men of old time
yield unto an aoth.

The Samnits having warred long time with the Romans, and being almost utterly
destroyed, would needs for their last refuge put themselves once more to the
trial of fortune (whom they had found so contrary unto them) and hazard all
in one battle. And for the better executing of their determination, they swear
by great oaths euerichone of them, that they would never retire out of the
battle, but follow their captain whether soever he led them, and if any of
them all recoiled, they swear all to kill him. This oath had such force, that
never any people were seen to fight so desperately and valeantly, as they
fought at that time. Nevertheless, the valiancie and good government of the
Romans was of more force than their stoutnesse.

The oath of Proculus.
The thing that made the people of Rome believe that Romulus was not slain, but
conveyed up into heaven, was the great oath that Proculus swear unto them that
he saw him deified, and had spoken with him. For the people were of opinion,
that Proculus whom they esteemed to be a good man, and a friend to Romulus,
would not have taken such an oath, except he had been sure that the thing was as
he affirmed.

Lycurgus, to the intent his countrymen should not disanull the laws which he
had newly stablished among them: although he had gotten them ratified by the
oracle of Apollo, yet would needs take an oath of the people, and caused them to
swear, that they should not infringe them until his return, to the end that
the reverence of the oath which they had taken, might restrain them from
altering any thing. After the example of whom, christian princes ought to be
well ware, that they violat not their faith, nor see light by the oath which
they take for performance of their promises. An example of the despising of
oths and vows.
Whereof we have a notable example in the fourteenth chapter of the first book
of Samuel, where God is very sore angry, for that Ionathas the son of king
Saul, in chasing his enemies, had tasted a little honey; which was in respect
of the oath which Saul had made, that neither he nor any of his people should
eat any thing before night, and before he had been fully revenged of his
enemies. In so much that although Ionathas was not present at the making of the
vow, yet had Saul put him to death, if the people had not saved him.

And in the one and twentieth of the second book of Samuel, because Saul being
moved with a good zeal had slain certain of the Amorrhits, contrary to the
promise made unto them by the Israelits of old time, that they would not hurt
them; God sent a famine among the Israelits, which ceased not until they had
delivered seven of Saules children to the Amorrhits, to take vengeance of them.

These examples show how greatly our God abhors perjury, to the intent no
man should excuse himself under pretense that no touch is to be kept with him
that breaks his promise; or, that one companion is to keep touch with
another, but not the master with his servant, nor the christian with the
infidel. For an oath ought to be so holy, and so had in reverence, that it
should not be falsified for all the goods in the world. Promise is to be kept
even with the infidels.
For as saint Ambrose says in his third book of Duties, Promise is to be
kept even with deceivers and forsworn persons; and we ought to set that
before our eyes, which Joshua did to the Gabaonits, who being afraid of the
Israelits, that did put all to the sword, pretended to be strangers come from a
far country, of purpose to join in league with them: and Joshua believing
them to have said truth, made a league with them. And by and by after, when
their frawd was detected, the people would have served them as they served the
rest: but Joshua would not for his oths sake, but chose rather to keep promise
with the fraudulent, and to let the mis-beleeuing infidels live,
notwithstanding that God had commanded him to root them out, than to violat his
promise given, in revenge of their frawd. Whosoever deceives his brother
(says the son of Syrach) his sin shall be upon him: and if he dissemble, he
sins double; and if he swear in vain, he shall not be justified, but his
house shall be full of tribulation. And in another place, Cursed (says he) is
he that is double-minded. And in the 59 Psalm, David prays God to show no
mercy or favor, to such as deal maliciously of deceitful purpose. Also the
best reputation that a Prince can have, Good princes ought to keep well their
promises.
and best beseeming his majesty, is to keep his promise, yea though he have
not sworn unto it. For good princes (said Traian) are more bound to perform
their promises, than to accomplish the things that they themselves desire.

And therefore a prince ought not to falsify his promise under pretense of
profit, nor to say that his counsel wills it, or his estate requires it.
For he ought not to do any evil for the maintenance of his state. And he
that has so discredited himself, shall not often recover it, because he shall
be taken and esteemed as a faithless prince; and if he fortune to be driven
to make any accord or league, it will be hard for him to be admitted into it,
for the opinion that shall go of him: for as says Cicero, When a man is once
perjured, he may swear by all the Gods, and no man will believe him.

And Guichiardine says, there is little sincerity and faithful dealing to be
hoped for at that Princes hand, of whom men have conceived opinion, that he is
a double and deceitful person. Whereby it may come to pass, that he shall
lose more by showing himself to be a periurer, than he can gain by any profit
whatsoever it seem to be. Evil counsel turns to the hurt of him that
counsels it.
Besides that, it falls out that oftentimes the deceiuer himself is
deceived, and that (as says Hesiodus) evil counsel turns to the hurt of
him that gives it. Lewis the eleventh was a deep dissembler, and of great
forecast; but his dissimulation was like to have cost him his life. For the
Duke of Burgoine detecting his trains, took him prisoner at Perone, and
compelled him to grant him whatsoever he required. Charles the seventh who
drove the Englishmen victoriously out of France, auailed more by his plain
dealing, than his son did by all his sleights and subtilties. Therefore
whosoever will leave a good and commendable remembrance of himself to
posterity, will rather forgo some piece of wealth, than willingly be counted
a notable deceiuer, periurer, and liar. And yet such does Machiauell term the
princes of his time, that compassed their affairs well. But yet for all that,
he shall find the foundations which this cunning cosener and wily beguiler
laid of his house, by his subtle sleights, were such as overthrew it
immediately after his death. Neither is it for a man (when he has sworn or
promised a thing) to excuse himself, or to shift it off with captiousnesse of
words, whereby he may seem to have accomplished his promise, Not what men say,
but what they pretend, is to be regarded.
when he has not; For (as Cicero says) Not what a man says, but what he
intends and pretends to do, is to be regarded. As for example, when a
prisoner that is let go upon promise to return again, faineth himself by
and by to have forgotten somewhat behind him, and thereupon comes back again,
and after being clean gone, returns no more to his master; saying that he
had performed his promise, in that he had returned before. Or as he that having
made a truce with his enemies for eight days, did war upon them in the nights.

Herodotus reports a foul and shameful kind of dealing of one Amasis the
colonel of king Darius footme^ against the Barceans, who perceiving himself
unable to overcome them by force, caused a great pit to be made in the night,
the which he ouerlayd with timber well seasoned, and covered it over with earth
in such sort, as no man could suspect any trench underneath it. The next day
he came to treat with the Barceans upon the said pit, where the Barceans on
their part promised to pay tribute to Darius, and Amasis promised on the other
part to use them as friends, and not to make any war upon them, so long as
the earth whereupon they then stood, continued.

Upon the concluding of the league in this manner, the Barceans came to the
camp of the Persians, and the Persians went into the city, the gates whereof
were set open unto them. But suddenly he caused the timber to be pulled away,
and so the earth sunk down to the bottom of the pit, whereupon the Persians
fell immediately to sacking of the city; as who would say, they were
discharged of their promise, because the earth there was not in like case as it
was at the time that the peace was sworn.

The Flemings used the like cautell to cover their perjury; for at such time
as the king of England dealt with Jacques of Arteuil, to get the Flemings to
take his part, whereunto they would have condescended, but for the oath which
they had made to the king of France. To shift off this oath, and to cloak their
perjury, Jacques advised the king of England to proclaim himself king of
France, and to bear the arms of France quartered with the arms of England, to
the intent it might be said, that their bearing of arms was in the behalf of
the king of France. Which thing when the king of England had done, they turned
to his side, without making any stay.

And we must not think it strange, that some to maintain their error, do
very unadvisedly allege this Proverb spoken in Latin by Lewis the eleventh,
That he which can no skill to dissemble, There is great difference betwixt
dissimulation and deceitfulness or guile.
can no skill to reign; as who would say, that all dissimulation were deceit:
but there is a great deal of difference betwixt them; for dissimulation
comes of Wisdom, but deceit sauoureth of Reinard the Fox. To dissemble in
time and place, is great wisdom. It is as much to say, as that a man must
strike sail, and apply himself to the wind like a good pilot, and take good
heed to the seasons. For sometimes it behooves a man to be stern, and
sometimes to be meeld, and after a sort to abay the people, (at least wise so it
be with some majesty) to hear and see disorders, and to put up wrongs, without
saying any thing to them, and to say as Antigonus said to his son; Art thou
ignorant my son, To reign is but a kind of honorable bondage.
that our reigning is nothing else than a certain glorious bondage?

Among the sumptuous he must be bountiful, and with the moderat he must use
moderation, as Alcibiades could well skill to do, who by applying himself
unto the behauiors of all men, and to the customs of all nations, did purchase
to himself their friendship. Brutus played the disard, to the intent that men
should have no mistrust of him, nor be privy to the greatness of his courage.
Clowis in not punishing a certain soldier out of hand, that had denied him
the vessel of S. Remy, did wisely, for fear of a mutiny among the men of
war; but yet he punished him afterward, howbeit after a barbarous fashion, in
that he slew him with his own hand. Lewis the eleventh did now and then hear
himself il spoken of, and wisely dissembled it. Such dissimulation is needful
for a king, and is expressed in the first book of the Iliads of Homer, under
the person of Chalcas the soothsayer, who durst not tell the truth before king
Agamemnon, nor from whence the plague proceeded that was as then in the camp
of the Greeks, until Achilles had undertaken to warrant him. For when a king
(quoth he) is angry, although he make no outward countenance thereof, but
dissemble it for the present time, yet will he not fail to be avenged
afterward.

When any great and princely personage, Ronsard.

Is stird to choler be it nere so small,
Though for the present he suppress his rage,
Yet in his heart to the heat thereof at all
Abateth not; no wink of sleep can fall
Within his eyes, until he do epsy
Convenient means to be revenged by.
It is another manner of thing to pretend to be a man of honesty, and to
promise that which he intends not to perform, for that is called guile or
deceit, and not dissimulation. I know well that a prince for want of aduisement
and consideration, A prince is not to keep his promise made by oath, if it be
against the duty between man and man.
may make some oath which it were much better for him to break than to keep.
As for example, Herod at the feast of his birthday, swear that he would give
his daughter whatsoever she would ask: and she by her mothers counsel, asked
the head of S. John Babtist. The king being sorry that he had sworn, but yet
daring not falsify his oath, caused his head to be smitten off. But had he bin
a good man, he would in that case have broken his oath. For in swearing to give
her any thing of how great value soever it were, he meant not to give her the
life of any good man. And although he had so said, yet was not the oath to have
bin of any value or effect, being made against good behauior. For the vow that
is made against upright and just dealing, is no vow at all, neither ought it in
any wise to be kept or performed. In all cases where two inco^ueniences offer
themselves, always the least is to be chosen. And therefore he should have
answered the fair lady, as Agesilaus answered a friend of his, that charged
him with his promise in an unreasonable thing that he demanded; who refusing to
grant his request, said, If the thing that you require be rightful, I promised
it; if it be vnrightful, I promised it not. A subject ought not to require any
thing that is unreasonable.
And when it was replied that a prince ought to perform whatsoever he
promises; no more (quoth he) than the subject ought to demand any thing that
is unreasonable. Herod therefore was no more bound by his general promise, to
deliver John Baptists head, than Agetus was to deliver his wife to his friend
Ariston, under pretense of his oath. For Ariston being in love with the wife of
Agetus, a woman of excellent beauty, found this fraud to get her out of her
husbands hands: He promised Agetus to give him any one thing that he would
choose of all that ever he had, praying him to do the like for him again
Agetus not mistrusting that Ariston being a married man, would have left his
own wife to take another man's, agreed to his request and swear it. Ariston
discharged his own promise out of hand; and when it came to his turn to make
his demand, he required the wife of Agetus; who thereupon affirmed, that his
meaning was to give him any thing saving her. Nevertheless, although he was
thus circumuented, yet delivered he her for his oths sake, making more account
of his oath, than did a certain Roman in the like case; who having sworn that
he would never put away his wife, did put her away afterward being taken in
adultrie; howbeit not before he had obtained a dispensation of his oath, at the
hands of the emperor Vespa^ian. Which things serve well to show, in what
estimation an oath was had in time past, seeing that men would perform it,
notwithstanding that they were beguiled in the making thereof. The man that
grants advisedly and upon leisurely deliberation, ought no^ to break his
promise.
Much less then is he to be excused, which having advisedly and upon good
deliberatio^, granted a thing, does falsify his promise, under color that it
is against the benefit of his realm. True it is that (as Cicero says in his
books of duties) if a man be drawn by deceit, or driven by fear, to make any
promise, he is discharged thereof; but otherwise he ought to keep it. And he
shall find that his affairs shall prosper better by keeping touch, than by
using deceit; which illbeseemeth all men, and chiefly those that are of
greatest calling. For (as says Thucidides) deceit is always more foul and
shameful, than violence; because violence is wrought by a kind of virtue, and
by authority; but deceit proceeds of very malice and mischieuousnesse.

CHAP. XIII. of Truth.
FOr as much as I have spoken of falsehood and deceit, against the which
Mercury the great opposes truth; to the intent we may be the more provoked to
keep our faith, and to perform our promises: This place inuiteth me to speak
a word or twain by the way in commendation of Truth, the which Plato terms,
The wel-spring of all good things. For as Plato says in his Timaeus, Like as
without being, there is no generation; so without Truth, there is no
faithfulness. And therefore David does ordinarily take Truth for that same
steadfastness which we have in keeping our promise, which we call
Faithfulness. My meaning is not to speak here of the original truth, for that
rests alonly in God, accordingly as our Lord told the Jews, That he was the
light and the truth. And this truth cannot be known of any, but only of the
father of Truth, who is the everlasting God, as says Origin. For none but the
father knows the son, neither does any but the son know the father. And
Mercury in his chapter of Generation, says, That the truth is a thing
vncumbered, vnwithered, unpainted, vndisguised, vnmovable, vnueiled, apparent,
comprehensible of it self, unchangeably good, and spiritual. Wherein the
ancient Philosophers agree with us, saying that we have but a shadow of the
Truth, and that the pure Truth is in heaven. Truth (says Menander) is an
inhabitant of heaven, and dwells with the gods. And the Persians worshipped a
great God, which in body resembled the light, and in soul the Truth, as who
would say, that God was light and Truth. Therefore of all the things that are
on earth, none (as says Mercury in the xv. of his Pimander) can be called
truth, but only an imitation of the truth. And when the wit receives influence
from above, then does it imitate the truth: for without inworking from above,
it abides in untruth; like as the shape of a man in a painted table,
represents a very body, but is not a body indeed as the eye imagines it to
be, in so much that although it seem verily to have eyes and ears, yet it
neither sees nor hears at all: even so the things that men behold with their
eyes are but leasings. Men bear themselves on hand that they see the truth,
but in very deed they be but lies. For truth cannot be upon earth; but yet it
may be, that some men to whom God has given power to see divine things, do
understand the truth: howbeit, that is not the truth of speaking and
understanding things as they be indeed. For the very truth is the sovereign
Good, and true things are the effects thereof, which are the offsprings or
imps of truth. In so much that the truth which remains with us in this world,
is but a countershape and shadow of the very truth, the which we follow when
we forbear frawd, lying, and deceit, and proceed in good and faithful
dealing, truth, and loialtie; according to this saying of the Psalmist, The
works of Gods hands are truth and vprightnes, that is to say, Faithfulness;
his commandments are made in truth, that is to say, in substantial
Faithfulness: which keeps truth evermore, that is to say, which always
keeps promise. The beginning of his word is Truth, that is to say, his word
is a grounded stablenesse. And in another place, All thy commandments (says
he) be Truth. To be true, is the beginning of all Virtue.
For (as says Pindar) to be true of heart is the ground and foundation of all
virtue. And therefore David prays God, not to take the word of Truth out of
his mouth. And in the fourteenth Psalm he says thus, Lord who shall dwell on
thy holy hill? he that deals justly with his neighbor, and speaks the
truth from his heart, and bears true witness. Wherein we have to consider,
that he matcheth Righteousness and Truth together, as who would say, he
esteems a soothfast man to be a righteous man, and a righteous man to be a
soothfast man; and hardly indeed can they be severed, according to this saying
of David, in the 119 Psalm, Thou have commanded uprightness and truth above
all things. Thou shall have folk at thy commandment, because of thy
meekness, uprightness, and truth. The kings throne that judges folk with
truth, shall be stablished for ever. And Solomon in his Proverbs says, That he
which speaks the truth, utters righteousness. And in another place he
says, That meeldnesse and truth, uphold and maintain a king. Tbe maintenance
of justice depends upon truth.
When Iethro councelled Moses to disburden himself of the pain of judging
particular cases, he advised him to choose such men as were wise, true of their
word, and fearing God; as who would say, that the maintenance of justice
depended upon truth. After which manner, Marcus Aurelius said, That in an honest
woman, truth and chastity ought to be matched together; and it was never seen
but the woman that was true of word, The woman that is true of word, is also
chaste,
was also chaste; and that the liar was sildome chaste. And as Varia Mesa was
wont to say, It is no less shame for women that are come of good houses to be
liars, than to be unchaste. Socrates would that a prince should above all things
be true of his word, to the end that his bare word might be more esteemed than
another man's oths. And Cicero in one of his orations says, That he which
shrinketh from the truth, Truth is a sufficient defense to himself.
will pass as little to forswear himself, as to make a lie. And in another
place he says, that truth is of so great might, that it cannot be vanquished
by any subtlety or wiliness whatsoever: and that it is a sufficient defense
to it self, though it have no man of law to plead for it. Euripides says,
That the word of truth is plain, and needs no interpreter. And Solomon
says, that the lip of truth is ever steadie, but the tongue of falsehood is ever
variable. In all thy works let the word of truth go before thee (says the son
of Sirach, in his third chapter) Pithagoras said, That when we exercise truth,
we follow the footsteps of God. Plato in his fifth book of Laws, says, That
truth is the guide to all goodness, be it toward God, or toward man; and that
whosoever will be happy, must be partaker thereof; and that by that means, he
shall be worthy to be believed; and contrariwise, that he shall be unworthy of
credit, The estimation that men of old time had unto truth.
which loves to lie. He that bare the office of lord chief justice in Egypt,
did wear an image of truth hanging at his breast; which image of truth, was had
in singular estimation of the Druides also. The men of old time painted their
God Pan with two faces, meaning thereby that he had skill both of good and
evil, of truth and falsehood, taking the face on the forpart to represent
truth, the which they painted fair, beautiful, and amiable; and the face on
the backpart to betokenfalshood, the which they portraied soul, ilfauored, and
ouglie, like unto a Goat, or some other brute beast, of purpose to show the
difference that is between truth and untruth.

CHAP. XIIII. Of Religion, and Superstition.
IN handling the foresaid question so well discussed by Cicero in his books of
Duties, and well debated among such as have to deal with matters of state. I
have told you heretofore that Machiauell held this erroneous opinion, That a
prince was of necessity to deal contrary to faithfulness and Religion, for
the mainteinance of his estate. Of Faithfulness I have spoken sufficient
already: now remains to enquire of Religion, because in some respects it is
an appendant of our discourse, or to say truly, all that ever we have treated
of hitherto, and all that ever we shall treat of hereafter, depends upon
that. For it is the ringleader of al virtues, and as the but whereat al they do
shoot, without the which, neither prince nor any other person whatsoever, can
be wise, virtuous, or happy, or do any thing that shall be ought-worth; but
religion is of it self behofful and profitable to al thing, as says S. Paul
in his epistle to Timothy. Nothing can continue in his state without calling
upon God.
For it is impossible that any of the things which are in nature, should
continue in their being and state, without calling upon God, considering that
it is through his favor and goodness that all things abide in their
perfection, as Philo says in his third book of the life of Moses. In so much
that a governor of people, cannot have a greater good thing in this world, nor
a thing more beseeming his majesty, than Religion; and that it is the greatest
honor that can be for him, to stand in aw of God: the which duty utters it
self in godliness and religion. For thereby he honoreth God, and is honored
of God, and has an entrance into all virtues.

The same author expounding Genesis, says, that by the tree of life is
betokened the greatest of all virtues, namely Godliness, the which makes the
soul immortal. Whereunto accords S. Ambrose, in the sixth of his Epistles,
where he says, that the tree of life is the root of godliness, and that to
do due honor and service to our Lord and God, is the very substance of our
life. And Mercury says, that by Religion, man is replenished with all good
things, and made to abound in heavenly understanding.

The emperor Theodosius was wont to say, that by Religion, peace is
maintained, and enemies in war time put to flight. Whosoever then will attain
to virtue, and to the sovereign good, cannot come to it but by Religion, and
by seeking it at Gods hand, who has promised to grant us whatsoever we ask
with a good heart, so it be rightful. For God likes well of such as call upon
him with a true heart, God is nere unto them that call upon him with a true
heart.
(says David in the hundred and four and forteeth Psalm) brings to pass
the desires of them that fear and love him, hears their cries, saves them,
and keeps them. He that loves God (says Ecclesiasticus) shall be heard
when he prays for his sins, so as he shall abstain from them, and he shall
be heard in his daily prayer.

And as Plato says in his fourth book of Laws, A good man ought that man to
be, which shall offer sacrifice unto God, and be present at the divine
ceremonies, and there is not any thing more beautiful, more expedient, more
behoofful to a happy life, nor more beseeming a man, than to give himself to
the serving of God, and to the ma^ing of oblations, prayers, Man's welfare
consists in Religion.
and supplications unto God, And the same Plato says in his Theetetus, That
man's felicity consists in Religion to Godward, which is the greatest virtue
that can be among men. And as says Xenophon in his first book of the
trainment of Cirus, It is easier to obtain any thing at the hand either of God
or of man, by honoring them in our prosperity, than by praying and suing unto
them in our adversity. Now then, in treating of virtues, it behooves us (as
says Iamblichus in speaking of mysteries) to begin at the best and most
precious, which is Religion and the service of God, a natural property (as
says Proclus) that is incident to al men, and is essential in man. Religion
and godliness are well near both one. A definition of Religion.
For godliness, as says Mercury the great, is nothing else but the knowledge of
God; and Religion is the knowledge of the ceremonies belonging to the worship
of God. Plutarch says in the life of Paulus Aemilius, That Religion is the
skill how to serve God. And Cicero in his Rhetorike says, That it is the
bringer of the ceremonies concerning the things that belong to the Godhead; so
as there is no great difference betwixt the one and the other. According to
Festus Pompeius, We call those Religious, which can skill what is to be done,
and what is to be left undone. Godliness then or Religion, is the service
which we do unto God in worshipping him as altogether good, almighty, and the
author and creator of all things. In this acknowledgement did Abel make his
offerings, and Enos begin to call upon God. Afterward Moses brought the law of
God to the children of Israel, written in two tables, whereof the first
concerns Religion and the honor that ought to be yielded unto God; and the
other concerns our duty toward our neighbor, commanding us to believe in
God only, to love him with all our heart, to worship him only and none other,
to give no honor to any thing wrought by men's hands; nor to any other
creature, but only to the living God; to forbear to take his name in vain by
swearing by it, and much more by forswearing; and to take one day of rest in
the week to dedicate the same unto God, and to cease from all work, and to
intend to the serving of him. And secondly he commands us to honor our
father and mother, to abstain from murder, theft, sals-witnessing, whoredom,
and the coveting of any thing whatsoever. The Heathen kept the ten
commandments.
Now we find that not only the Israelits, (who had the law written) but also
the heathen which had it not, did wholly observe it, as we shall see by this
discourse, chiefly in the case of Religion. We see what is written thereof, by
such as had not the knowledge of God revealed unto them, as namely how divinely
the great Mercury has written thereof, and how his Pimander reuealeth
wonderful secrets unto him, which are so conformable to our mysteries, that
they seem to be drawn out of the same fountain. The Trinity was known of
Mercury the great.
And the thing that is most wonderful, is that he speaks of the three
persons, as if he had bin instructed thereof, by the writings of the gospel,
and specially of the wisdom, whom he calls the son of God, to whom he
attributes the creating of all things, according to that which S. John says
thereof in the beginning of his Gospel. Next unto Mercury, follows Plato,
who for that cause is called the divine. And after them have followed many
other Philosophers, as is to be seen by their writings, and by the things which
S. Austin of Eugubie has painfully gathered into his books which he has made
of continual Philosophy. The Sabines worshipped God in three persons, naming
the one Holy, the other Fidius, and the third Semipater. And in their oths
they did commonly put Fidius in the midst, as who would say, that under that
name they comprehended all the three persons, whereof came their great oath of
Medius fidius. Numa Pompilius wrote against the multitude of Gods.
Numa Pompilius king of Romans, was not of opinion that there were so many
gods as he himself forged, after the example of others: For he wrote against
such ungodliness, which books being found after his death were burned by
commandment of the Senate, as contrary to the worshipping of many gods,
which folly there was no way as then to put out of their heads; wherein Numa
did very ill, in that he had lever to stick to the Superstition of the
multitude, than to tell them his mind without dissimulation, how he made idols,
nevertheless the people were forbidden to believe that God had the shape of
beast or man; insomuch that in those first times, there was not in Rome any
image of God, either painted, carved, or cast in mould. And for the space of
the first six hundred threescore and ten years, they builded up temples and
chapels to their gods, but there was not in them any image or figure of God;
as who would say, they thought it sacrilege to have the mind to resemble or
liken the Godhead to earthly things, considering that it is not in any wise
possible to attain to the knowledge of the Godhead, otherwise than by means of
the understanding. And that was agreeable to the doctrine of Pithagoras, who was
of opinion, that the first cause was after a sort conceiuable in understanding,
but yet utterly invisible and incorruptible.

As touching an oath, Of Swearing and of Oths.
I have already showed in what estimation it was among the infidels, and how
they abhorred perjury, to our great shame. For surely to take God to witness
in a lie, is a very great wickedness.

And as touching the taking of one day in the week, Of the sabbat day.
to respit both men and beasts from work and travel, Hesiodus the ancient
Poet commands it in his book of Works and Days; and Plato says in his
book of Laws, that the gods pitying men, least they should ouer-worke
themselves, have giuen-them a release of their labor, by leaving them
holi-daies ordained in their honor. Thus ye see how many of the men of old
time, at the beginning of the law of nature, did well enough practice the law
of God, had not the devil thrown them into the wretched and abominable sin of
idolatry, and that some certain persons had not turned all vpside down by
the invention of idols, as is written in the xiij and xiiij chapters of the
book of Wisdom. For that has caused men to be wholly given to earthly
things, bearing themselves on hand, that an image made by man's hand was their
God, and therefore worshipping it as God, by offering sacrifices of beasts unto
it, as though it took pleasure in the smoki^ sent of the multitude of burnt
offerings, and had need of oxen, goats, and sheep. But in the end, God sending
his own son into the world, has made us to know that which many prophets, and
especially David in his fifteeth and three and fifteeth Psalms has said,
namely, That the true sacrifice is to praise the true and invisible God, to
yield him thanks for all his benefits, to lift up our minds unto him, to pray
unto him with all devotion and humility, and to offer unto him in sacrifice, a
pure and clean heart, adorned with fear and obedience, according to this
saying of S. Paul, That we must offer unto him a living host; that is to say,
our bodies without blemish, and as Philo says, Can there be found a goodlier
sacrifice, than the soul that is well minded toward God? Who shall go up
into the Lords hill, but he that is of pure and clean heart, considering that
not he which says Lord, Lord, but he that does the Lords will, shall enter into
the kingdom of heaven? For, as Persius says, When we bring unto God from the
closet of our soul, holiness, and from the bottom of our heart, a pure and
obedient mind, and a meek affection seasoned with goodness, virtue, and
honesty, then may we boldly offer up our prayers and sacrifices unto him; but
otherwise it behooves us to be well ware that we presume not unto him. God
accepts not the offerings of the wicked.
For the sacrifice of the wicked is loathsome unto God, says Solomon. And Plato
in his fourth book of Laws, says, That God accepts not, ne regards not
the gifts of the wicked, and that their pains in that behalf, are in vain;
but that on the contrary part, he does willingly receive the gifts of the
holy. And as Philo says in his third book of the life of Moses, If the
person that offers be evil and unrighteous, his sacrifices are no
sacrifices, his hallowed things are unholy, and his prayers turn to the
contrary, procuring him misfortune in steed of good. This honoring of God
with heart and mind, we call Godliness, and Religion, which is the mean
between ungodliness (whereof alonly we ought not to make mention) and
Superstition. Of Religion and Superstition, Cicero in his third book of the
Nature of the gods, speaks in this wise: Our worshipping (says he) with a
pure, clean, sound, and uncorrupted mind and voice. Of Superstition.
For not only the Philosophers, but also our ancestors have separated religion
from superstition. For such as prayed all the day, that their children might
ontliue them, were called superstitious; and they that were diligent in doing
the things that pertain unto the worshipping of the gods, were called
Religious. Of the word Religio (which signifies to bind-ouer, because Religion
binds men to the performance of their duty toward God.) And so of the ij.
things betokened by the two words of Religion and Superstition, men have made
the one a vice, and the other as virtue. So then, we call those superstitious,
which are ouer-religious, and leaving the true use of the prayers that are to
be made unto God, do busy themselves in babbling, and in requiring vain
things at his hand, as those silly souls did, which ceased not to be
importunat unto God, that their children might ^uruiue them, whose so doing,
has given unto their faulty religion the name of Superstition; whereto full
many do give themselves at this day, prattling incessantly unto God, not knowing
what they ask, notwithstanding that our Lord has commanded us to seek Gods
kingdom and righteousness, promising that all temporal things shall be added
as an income to our prayer, and inioining us as a pattern of praieng, to say
the prayer that every man has in his mouth, namely, the Lords prayer; wherein
our only speech is of the honoring of God, and our praieng is for the
forgiveness of our sins, for strength to withstand them, and for our ordinary
food. Generally we term all those superstitious, which of a misbeleefe,
Superstition slippeth down into the hearts of such as are overwhelmed with
fear.
are astonished at every extraordinary thing that they see. For as Plutarch
says in the life of Alex^nder, Superstition droppeth down continually into
the hearts of them that are cast down and overwhelmed of fear, as for example,
those that are afrighted at the eclipse of the sun or the moon, at the howling
of woolues, at the noise of the Scriech-oule, or of the night-rauen, or at the
flying of certain birds, and such other like things. In all the which the
Romans were too too superstitious, as is to be seen by a procession of
theirs, wherein they caused the Reliks of their gods to be borne upon barrowes
on horseback through the city; wherein because the Carter had taken the
horse by the reine with his left hand, they appointed the procession to be
begun new again. And sometimes for one poor fly, that is to say, for a thing
of nothing, they made some one sacrifice to be begun twenty or thirty times.
Some of the men of old time termed this manner of dealing an exact
Righteousness, and we call it a fond and foolish Superstitiousnesse; howbeit
that we must needs confess, that together with those ceremonies of theirs,
(such as they were) they had Religion also in singular reverence and
estimation; insomuch that they would rather do against their laws, than
falsify their oath, because they deemed it a hainouser matter to offend God,
than to offend man. So deeply had they Religion, (that is to say, Where the
fear of God wants, the realm must needs decay.
The love and fear of God) imprinted in their hearts, without which, a prince
or a commonweal can never prosper. For (as Machiauel says in the first book
of his discourse, a little better than he speaks in his book of a Prince)
whensoever the fear of God once fails, needs must the kingdom decay. Paul
commands us to honor the king, because he has his power of God. Now if we
ought to honor the king in respect of the power which he has from God, what
ought the king himself to do, to whom God is so gracious, as to place him in
that dignity, and to make so many men obedient unto him? Certes seeing he is
the image of God, the least that he can do is to lift up the eyes of his mind
to behold him whom he represents, and to worship that heavenly mirror, wherein
by looking on himself, he must needs behold the goodness and majesty of God.
S. John Chrysostom writing upon these words of Genesis; God made man after his
own image and likeness, says, it is meant of the image of sovereignty. For
like as God commands all men, so man commands all the living things that
God has put into this world. Princes command ^en, and God princes.
A prince commands all inferior persons, and God commands the prince.

Which thing David acknowledging in the 118 Psalm, says that he praised the
Lord seven times a day. He had good store of business to do, but yet could
they not turn him from the serving of God. As proud and high minded a prince
as great Alexander was, yet the first thing that he did every day after he was
up, was to do sacrifice to the gods. There have bin few princes, which have
not at least wise pretended to be religious, or bin religious indeed. But there
is as much difference between the one and the other, as there is betweeene
truth and untruth, or between the soul and the body. Yet notwithstanding
seeing that they which have not any zeal of religion, A prince can not
forbear Religion.
cannot forbear the pretense thereof; it declares unto us, that religion is a
thing most requisite for the maintenance of a state, because men are of opinion,
that the prince which is religious, is so guided by Gods hand, that he cannot
do amiss; which causes them to reverence him and obey him the more easily.
And to say truth, we see, not only that kings have bin maintained and vpheld by
religion, Religion makes princes to be obayed,
but also that princes have obtained kingdoms and empires by religion. As for
example, Numa the second king of Romans, being a Sabine borne, was sought and
sent for by the city of Rome, to be made king of Romans, because they saw him
wholly given to religion, persuading themselves that they could not speed amiss,
if they were governed by a devout and religious prince. And in very deed, it
fell out according to their hope. For he did so much, that that people being
then barbarous, and altogether given to the wars, without law and without
religion, attained to that greatness of state which we have seen since, whereas
it had bin impossible for a warlik nation as that was, to have escaped from
undoing themselves, had they not bin bridled by religion, the only means to
hold the cruellest people of the world in peace, and in obedience to the
Magistrate. Alexander called himself the son of Jupiter, to keep men under
the yoke of obedience.
That was the cause which moved Alexander to name himself the son of
Jupiter. For as Plutarch says, he was not so presumptuous to imagine that he
was begotten of a god; but he served his own turn with it, to hold men under
the yoke of obedience by the opinion of such divine nature, which he by that
means imprinted in them, like as in his ceremonies also, he had the feat to
revive the foretellings of his soothsaiers: which thing he showed specialle at
the siege of Tire. For whereas his soothsaier had assured him that he should
take the city before the end of that present month, and every man laughed at
it, because it was the last day of the month, and the city was impregnable: he
putting all his forces in a readiness for the assault, made proclamation that
that day should be reckoned but for the 28 day of the month, and yet
notwithstanding gave present assault to the city, and wan it out of hand,
contrary to his hope. The emperor Charles the fifth, used the like feat, when
he arrived at S. Lawrencis in Province. For he considered that it was the 25 of
July which is S. James day; and because he had landed in Affrike the same day
twelue-month, the year before, he made great vaunt of his fortunat and happy
luck and handsell, in arriving the same day in France, saying that his voyage
was miraculously guided and directed by the will of God, the disposer and
orderer of humane affairs; and that as on the like day he had put the Turk to
flight at Argier, so he hoped to do as much to the French king, through the
direction and favor of God, seeing they were arrived in France on the same day,
and under the same head. Constantine, Pepin, and Charlemaine, became great by
Religion.
Constantine made himself great by embracing the Christian religion, as the
Ecclesiastical history witnesses unto us. The thing that served Pepins turn
most, was that he was reported to be religious, and beloved of religious men,
because he had caused the churches to be reedified, which had bin beaten down
by the Sarzins; and had restalled the bishops of Reins and Orleans in their
sees, from which they had bin put by his father; and had restored the tenths to
the clergy, that Charles Martel had taken away, and given to his men of war.
And to compass his enterprise with the more ease, he helped himself at his
need with Religion, that is to say by the Pope, without whom he had come short
of his purpose. For the Pope dispensed with the Frenchmen for their oath which
they had made to Childerik; and coming himself personably into France, did
put the realm into Pepins hand: Which thing the Frenchmen had never agreed
unto, as our histories bear witness, if it had not bin under the cloak of
Religion, and by authority of the party whom they deemed to have power to
dispense with men's consciences. The same Religion made Charlemaine emperor,
and diverse persons kings of Naples and Sicilie, by deposing the true heirs.
Religion gave the kingdom of Jerusalem to Godfrey of Bulleine, and made the
Christians to travel over seas and lands to conquer the holy land, vnderzeale
of Religion. Under pretense of Religion, and of an excommunication, the
kingdom of Navarre was wrongfullie seized by the Spaniards. The kings of
Persia lost their kingdom through disagreement in Religion; and the Sophy
(because he was found devout in his Religion) recovered all that his
forefathers had lost. We see at this day, how the contempt and disagreement in
Religion, shakes all the states of Christendom, and will yet shake them more,
if the dissentious spirits be not reunited again in the bosom of the church.
S. Lois got himself more glory in Syria and Egypt by his holy conversation,
than by his wars, wherein he had not any happy success; and the churches
which we see of his building, do show sufficiently how he was given to
Religion. The bountifulness of Philip Augustus to the Clergy.
Philip the emperor was not so much renowned for his victories, as for that
after the battle of Bouvines, he builded the church of Victory near unto
Senlis, the which he dedicated to the virgin Marie, and afterward did great
good to the Clergi-men. And when his officers complained unto him, of his
diminishing of his revenues by enriching of the churchmen; he answered, That
he had received so much good at Gods hand, that he could not deny any thing to
his Temples and Ministers, for the great goods which he had gotten and gained
by help more than humane, and even by the favor of God. But now leaving our
christian histories, because my chief intent is not to speak of them, let us
read Titus Liuius, and there we shall see the devotion that was in the Romans
of old time, and among others, the zeal of Lucius Albinus a commoner, The
devotion of Lucius Albinus a Commoner of Rome.
who having his wagon laden with his wife and young children, and with his
mouables, and fleeing from the Gauls that were come to Rome; as soon as he
espied the Nuns of Vesta on foot, carrying their holy reliks with them;
immediately he caused his wife and children to come down, and his goods to be
unloaded, and lent his wagon to the virgins to ride in, and to carry their
Relikes.

Numa Pompilius, to the intent to make the people attentive to the ceremonies
of their religion, made an herald to go before the priest that ministered the
ceremonies, and to cry with a loud voice, Do this; which was a commanding of
them to intend wholly to the divine service, without intermedling any other
action. The good ladies and personages of reputation, did often frequent the
temples; and the founders of them gate great fame and renown amongst the
people.

Scipio holden for religious, and for one that consulted with God upon his
affairs.
Scipio African was one of the happiest captains of Rome, and best beloved of
the people and men of war, because they deemed him to do all things by the
counsel of God, for that he used to tarry long alone in the capitol; where
their opinion was, that he consulted with Jupiter concerning the affairs of
the commonweal.

And generally all princes being of any good disposition, have had Religion in
singular estimation, as we read by the answer that Alexander Seuerus made to
certain Inholders of Rome, which would have disappointed the Christians of the
building of a chapel to make their prayers in. The things that concern God
(quoth the emperor) are to be preferred before the things that concern man,
and therefore let it be free for the Christians to build their chapel to
their God, who though he be unknown at Rome, ought nevertheless to have
honor done unto him, even in respect that he bears the name of God. And so
he chose rather to apply the place to the worshipping of God, than to worldly
uses.

And for himself, The honor that Alexander Seuerus yielded to Bishops.
he made it not strange that the Bishops, in cases belonging to their
jurisdiction, should give other judgment than he had done; as who would say,
that in matters of Religion, the emperor ought to give place to the authority
of priests, and Bishops.

Plutarch in his treatise of Philosophical discipline, says, That
commonweals, honor and reverence priests, because they pray unto God, not
for the welfare of themselves and their friends and acquaintance only, but in
common for all men; and yet the priests cause not the gods to do us good, but
they only call upon them as dooers of good.

We see in what reverence the Romans had them, The reverence that men in old
time did bear unto Priests.
by their condemning of Cneus Cornelius a Praetor of Rome in a great fine, for
quarrelling unjustly with Emilius Lepidus, their high priest.

Antiochus king of Syria lying in siege before Jerusalem, at the feast of Tents
or Boothes, gave the Jews seven days truce at their request, because he would
not trouble their devotion: and moreover sent an Ox and certain vessels of
gold unto the gate of the city, to be offered in sacrifice unto God. When
Philip king of Macedonie, was about to lay siege to Vdisitane a city of Maesia
belonging to the Goths, their priests came forth to him clad all in white; to
whom he yielded such honor and reverence, that he retired without doing them
any harm.

No less did Alexander to the high priest of the Jews, notwithstanding that
he went against him in great choler, and with full purpose to have destroyed
the town. For when he saw him come in his priestly ornaments and attire, he
not only relented, but also stepped forth alone unto him, with great honor and
reverence and worshipped God. The same Alexander having taken the city of
Thebes, razed it, and sold all the citizens thereof, saving only the priests
and men of Religion. Darius caused an image of his to be set up in the temple
of Vulcane, before the image of Sesostris; the doing whereof Vulcans priest
withstood, saying, that Sesostris had done mo deeds of arms than Darius, and
therefore deserved to be preferred before him; for which free speech, Darius
did not the priest any harm, but pardoned him.

Selim liberal to the Christian Priests, as to men vowed to the service of God.
Selim emperor of the Turks being in the city of Jerusalem, did reverence to
the monuments of the ancient prophets. And albeit that he was an enemy to the
very name of Christians; yet for all that, he let not to give the priests
money to find them six months, as to devout persons and men of good life. When
Alarik king of the Goths had entered the city of Rome by force, he made
proclamation by the sound of a trumpet, that no harm should be done to such as
were fled into the churches of the Apostles to save themselves; by reason
whereof, his soldiers touched not the religious persons, nor the vessels which
they carried with them. Whereas Didier king of Lumbards, intending to have
seized Rome into his possession before Charlemain should come there, fained
himself to have a vow thither, by reason whereof he found the gates open at
his coming; yet notwithstanding he durst not enter, because Adrian the Pope
forbad him upon pain of excommunication. And I believe that the fear which he
had of Charlemaine, helped him well to the taking of that offer. Attila had such
regard of Pope Leo, that as soon as he had heard him speak, he forbear to go
to Rome, and utterly left up all Italy. Religiousnesse makes Captains to
prosper.
Cabaon captain of Tripolie, finding himself too weak to withstand the
Vandales, gave himself over to Religion, and forbad his men of war to do
wrong to any man, enioyning them to abstain from women and deintie meats, and
giving them in charge that if the Vandales happened to unhallow any church of
the Christians that they should do the contrary, and make them clean again.
For he told them, that if Christ was the God of the Christians, as he was
reported to be, he would punish those that did him wrong, and help those that
did him service. Whereupon this Cabaon sent certain of his men to follow the
Vandales in post, who whenever they found any church where the Vandales had
stabled their horses, made it clean again as soon as they were gone out of
it. If any were poor or diseased, they gave them alms, and (as ye would say)
did worship the priests whom the Vandales had misused. The pre-eminence that
Priesthood has had.
To be short, all the men of old time have so greatly honored priesthood, that
it had chief pre-eminence next unto kings; and sometimes kings have bin
priests, and priests have bin kings and governors of people. And at Rome the
priests of Jupiter had a Mace-bearer, Priests in old time privileged from
taking an oath.
and a chair of estate, as who would say, they deemed the dignity of
priesthood to be equal with the authority of a king. And they durst not
demand an oath of them, when they were to bear witness; as who would say, it
were no reason to discredit these in small things, which had the ordering of
the greatest things, and the things that concerned God. Which thing is observed
toward our kings of France, when they be heard upon an inquest, for they
depose without making any oath. Numa king of Romans, would needs be of the
college of Bishops, which he had ordained for the ceremonies. And the name of
King abode with their high priest, whom they called the sacrifising King, or
the king for the Sacrifices. After which manner the Athenians also chose yearly
one by the name of King, who was created but only for sacrifising, and to
punish irreligious dealings.

Octauian the emperor had the priestly dignity, jointly together with his
empire, The emperors did wear the attire of the high Priests.
and so had all they that were emperors after him. For as soon as they were
chosen, there was given unto them the priestly attire, and they took upon them
the title of High priests. Which custom was kept unto the time of Gratian, who
refused the attire when the priests offered it unto him, because he thought it
unmeet for a Christian to take such an habit upon him, as Zosimus reports in
the fourth book of his history. Nevertheless we see by the letter which
Varia Mesa wrat unto the Senate, upon the election of Heliogabalus, that the
emperorship and priesthood, were always divided asunder. For thus says he,
Now shall ye see that which your predecessors never saw, namely, that the
emperor shall be the high priest, and the high priest be emperor, so as he
shall by sacrifice reconcile us to the gods, and by force of arms defend us
from our enemies. But this saying is not contrary to that of Zosimus. For
there is great difference between being of the college of the priests, and the
taking of the dignity or title of priesthood in way of honor; and between
dealing with the ceremonies themselves, as the priests of Jupiter and Quirinus,
whom they called Flamines, and the rest of the peculiar priests of the other
gods did: for these later sort could not bear any office, or be magistrates.
Julius Caesar had the high priesthood for honors sake, and chiefly for profits
sake: but yet for all that he intended not to the administration of the
ceremonies, but contrariwise was continually occupied in the wars, and absent
from the city. Howbeit that Titus Vespasian would needs expressly have it, It
was not lawful for the high priest of the Romans to shead man's blood.
to the intent he might not kill any man, because it was not lawful for their
high priest to shead man's blood, no more than our churchmen may now; which
point the rest of the emperors that came after him observed not. Therefore
whereas the emperors took the priests stole upon them, it was in way of honor,
and not to do the office in administering the ceremonies. Among the Jews,
Aaron the high priest was of equal authority with Moses; and after the Judges
and Kings, the greatest dignity belonged to the high priest. Among us
Christians also, the time has been, that men have yielded sovereign
authority to the Pope, as to the Primat of the church; princes have submitted
themselves to him, and not only have honored him as the chief minister of our
religion, but also have received severe correction at his hand, not refusing to
do open penance at the Bishops commandment: Emperors chastised by priests.
as did the emperors Philip and Theodosius, under Fabian and Ambrose bishops,
the one of Millan, the other of Rome: and Frederik the emperor, and king of
Naples, howbeit that the Pope proceeded not with like zeal as the other did,
but used more choler than religion in his doings, as he showed by his treading
of the emperor under his feet, coating his uncomely dealing with this verse of
David, Upon the Aspworm and the Cockatrice shall thou go, and tread the Lion
and Dragon under foot; a thing so il-beseeming the place that he held, that
Frederik was to be commended for his patient suffering of that disgrace, in the
honor of God and S. Peter. But such was the Religion of those days, that
every man ran upon him that was in the Popes disfauor. When Clement the sixth
had excommunicated the Flemings, The fear that men had of excommunication in
times past.
for taking part with England contrary to their promise and oath, there was not
so much as one priest to be found in all the whole country, that durst say
mass, or say service. John king of England seeing himself excommunicated for
the tenths that he had taken into his hand, and perceiving that the world went
worse and worse with him, was feign to cast himself down at the feet of the
Popes legate, at whose hand, after much intreatance, he received the crown as a
great benefit a six days after, with charge to restore the tenths which he
withheld, and the church-fruits; Which charge he put in execution, with peril
of the loss of his kingdom. For the poor commons which were compelled to
bear that loss, fell to rebelling against him. The like submissions have bin
made, not only among us, but also among the Infidels. For it is reported that
when Hercules had killed his own children and his host, he was purged and
assoiled thereof, by the priests and mysteries of the goddess Ceres. And
Adrastus who had killed his own brother unawares, was purged and assoiled by
Cresus king of Lydia, who took upon him to deal in such reco^ciliations,
because he was religious, and addicted to the fond ceremonies of those times.
Also we read that a priest commanded Lisander, king of Lacedemon, to tell and
declare unto him the greatest sin that ever he had committed. The answer of
Lisander to a Priest that would have had him to confess his sin unto him.
But Lisander being more subtle than spice-conscienst, desired the priest to
tell him whether he required it of him by the commandment of the gods, or of
his owne-authoritie? When the priest had answered him, that it was at the
commandment of the gods; Withdraw your self then (quoth he) a while out of
the temple, and I will tell it them, if they ask it. Zosimus reports in his
history, that while Constantine the great was yet no Christian, he would have
bin purged by the highpriests of the Painims, for his murdering of his wife
and his son; and that when they refused to do it, he became a Christian,
upon report of a Spaniard, who gave him to understand, that the Christian
Religion wiped away all sorts of sin. But this Zosimus speaks like a clerk
of arms, and like an enemy to our Religion, not knowing with how great
discretion penitents are received into the bosom of the church, as we may see
in many treatises of S. Ciprian.

Nicephorus in his seventh book disproueth those that so report, unto whom I
refer my self, concerning the cause that moved Constantine to take upon him
the Christian religion, because it is a thing notably known to all men. For
inasmuch as Religion brings with it humility, Pride undoes Religion.
and lowliness of heart; pride and ouer-weening do utterly defeat it, as we
read of king Osias, who was punished with a leaprosie, for presuming to offer
sacrifice to God; and likewise of Dathan, Choree, and Abiron, whom the earth
swallowed up alive. Concerning the touching of the things dedicated to the
temple, The danger that hangs upon the touching of things dedicated to
churches.
we see what befell to Manasses, and Amon kings of Jerusalem, and to
Nabugodonozer king of Babylon, and diverse others. And as touching the forsaking
of the true Religion, we know the evil end that befell to Achab, Ochosias,
and Oseas kings of Samaria. Now seeing that true Religion is a goodly thing,
The dispraise of Hypocrisy.
needs' must Hypocrisy and false Religion be very dangerous, as which
displeases God and man, when a countenance of the fear of God is pretended,
to deceive folk under show of holiness. For as Cicero says in his Duties,
There is not so great a wickedness, as the cloking of a man's self under the
mantle of Religion, to do evil. Such guiles or cosenages are misliked both of
God and man, specially when they be faced with the countenance of holiness. I
mean wicked guiles, as the Lawyers term them, and not such guiles as serve
for baits to draw folk to that which is good and behooffull, of which sort
Plato speaking in his Laws, says, It is not against the gravity of a
lawgiver, to use such kind of untruths, because it is enough for him to
persuade folk to that which is for their welfare and profit. For it is not
unlawful to beguile men to a good end, and (as says S. Paul) to apply a man's
self to all sorts of men, to the intent to win them, as he himself did in
Jerusalem, by the counsel of S. James, when he made his four companions to be
shaven, and purified himself with them in the temple, according to the custom
of law, notwithstanding that he allowed not that ceremony. Therefore men are
not forbidden to beguile intractable folk, and such as are otherwise vnweeldie
and hard to be ruled, or else which are gross, superstitious, fearful, and
shiwitted; or to induce them to some kind of Superstition, for the compassing
of some commendable matter; A man may beguile the superstitious, for the
compassing of some commendable effect.
or to bridle those with the snaffle of Religion, which can not be compassed by
love nor by force, which is the strongest mean that we have to restrain even
them that are most fierce and vntamable. For (as Sabellicus says) there is not
any thing that does more easily retain the common people, than Superstition,
or is of more force to move and persuade people to the intent and opinion that
a man will rule them and lead them too. Du Bellay in his Ogdoads.
This manner of dealing have the greatest and best advised lawmakers, and the
best experienced captains of the world used. And among others Numa Pompilius
of whom I have spoken before, used it wisely toward the Romans, holding the
people (whom he governed) in awe by a Religion, such as it was, and specially
by the ceremonies which were in use at that time. He saw well he had to do
with thieves, robbers, and murderers, and that his estate could not be sure
among people that had their hands already stained with the blood of their
king, whom they had killed late before; and that it was no need to whet them,
being a people too much given to war, but rather to procure them rest, to the
intent that during the time of peace, they might receive some good laws for
the governing of their city, and have their cruelty assuaged by means of
religion. And to the intent that the thing which he did, might be of the more
authority, he feined that all proceeded from the counsel of the Muses, and of
the nymph or goddess Aegeria, that haunted the forest Arecine, unto whose
company he often withdrew himself alone, not suffering any body to go in
thither with him.

Minos, king of Candie.
Minos the lawgiver of Candie, had used the like feat before to give force and
authority to his laws. For he went ordinarily into a certain cave of the
earth, the which he termed Jupiters cave: and after he had bin there a long
time, he brought his laws with him all written, saying he had received them of
Jupiter, to the end to compel his countrymen to keep them, both by the power
and authority which he had over them, and also by religion, the which he
esteemed to be of more force than all his commandments.

No less did Pithagoras for the ratifieng of his doctrine, for he had so
reclaimed an eagle, that at a certain call she would come and lie houering
over his head in the air. After that Lycurgus had made his laws, he caused
them to be ratified by the oracle of Apollo, who answered that they were good,
and fit to make men live well and blessedly.

Diverse guiles of princes and captains.
And as the superstition of people, has well served the turn of lawmakers; so
has it no less served to make captains obeyed, and to give the^ the
reputation which they deserved, when they could skill to use it cunningly, as
Agesilaus did, who seeing his men dismayed, because they were far fewer in
number than their enemies, fell to making sacrifice before he prepared himself
to the battle, and writing this word Victory in his left hand, took the
liver of the beast at the priests hand, without making any countenance, and
holding it a long time in his own hand, as in a muse, that the liver might
take the print of the letters, went anon after to his men of war there
present, and showed them the liver, telling them that those letters behighted a
sure sign of victory, thereby to make them the more courageous and resolute.

Sertorius one of the best experienced captains of Rome, being brought into a
little country of Spain, where it behooued him to have the help of the
Spaniards, who were but smally accustomed to obey and to submit themselves to
warlike discipline; to the intent he might bear some sway among them, and be
believed and followed of them in all his enterprises; found the means to have a
white Hynd, the which he affirmed to have been sent unto him from Diana, to
give him notice of many things to come; the which Hynd he had so well taught and
inured to the noise of battle, that she followed him wheresoever he went, and
was not a whit afraid to see so great a multitude. Which thing made his
soldiers the more pliable to order, because they believed that all that ever
he did, came of the counsel of Diana, and not of his own good government.

Eumenes perceiving that Antigonus and Teutamus captains of Alexanders old
bands, that were called Siluer-shields, in respect of the shields of silver
that they carried, would not in any wise give place to him, though they had
commandment from Olimpias the mother of Alexander, to obey him, nor come at
him to consult of the affairs of the realm; thinking it no reason, that he for
his part should go to their lodging, found the means to win them by this
superstition: he made the^ believe that Alexander had appeared unto him in his
sleep, Alexanders Tent, or Pauilion.
and had showed him a stately Pauilion, wherein was a royal throne, and had
told him, that if they would hold their consultation there, he would be there
present with them, and aid the^ both in their counsel, and in the managing of
al their affairs, co^ditionally that they always began at him: unto this
Eumenes easily persuaded the^, so as with one common consent they caused a
beautiful and sumptuous pauilion to be set up, which they called the Pauilion
of Alexander, where they made their meetings for counsel. The emperor Charles
the fifth being at Tunes, whether it were that he would by some means remove all
heartburning from among the lords of his army, whom he was to command in his
absence, or that he would give the more courage to his soldiers, and show to
them all, that there was a head above him: took the crucifix in his own hands,
and showing it to them all, told them that our Lord Jesus Christ should be the
chief of that host. Themistocles perceiving that neither reason nor
intreatance could persuade the people of Athens to go to the sea to encounter
the Medes, fell to beating them with heavenly signs, oracles, and answers of
the gods. For he took occasion to serve his turn as with a sign from heaven,
by the dragon of Minerua, which by good hap appeared not in her temple as it
had bin wont to do. And the priests found the oblations to lie whole
vnminished and untouched, which the people offered daily unto her. By reason
whereof being intrapped by Themistocles, they sowed a brute among the people,
that the goddess Pallas, the defender of the city, had forsaken it, pointing
them the way to the sea. And on the other side, The policy of Themistocles,
he won them also by means of a certain prophecy, which commanded them to
save themselves in wodden walls; saying that those wodden walls, betokened
nothing else but ships. Christopher Columb perceiving he could get no victuals
of the Indians neither for love nor by force, went near unto a little city of
theirs, and calling out certain of the citizens unto him, did them to
understand, that if they furnished him not with victuals, God would send them
such a scourge from heaven, that they should die every one; in token whereof, he
assured them that within two days next coming, they should see the Moon full
of blood, if they would take heed of it. They beholding the thing come to pass
the very same day that he told them of, which was nothing else but the eclips
of the moon were so afraid of it, that they went and provided him victuals,
and furnished him of as much as he needed. Lysander being desirous to further
Agesilaus in making him king, whereunto the oracle of Apollo was an impediment,
which had forbidden the Lacedaemonians to choose a king that did halt; told them,
the oracle meant it not of the halting of a leg, but of the halting in lineage
and parentage, after which sort Leotichides halted (which was the person whom
some would have preferred to be their king) whom the wife of king Agis had
conceived in adultery by Alcibiades. Marius led with him a woman of Syria
named Martha, whom he had evermore present at all his sacrifices, and without
her he did not any thing. It is not well known whether he belee^ed verily that
she had the gift of prophecy, or whether he did wittingly pretend to believe
it, for the better furtherance of his devices. Upon a time when Sylla was
ready to give battle, he openly kissed a little image of Apollo, which he had
taken out of the temple of Delphos, praying it to keep promise with him.
Superstition dangerous in a captain.
Thus ye see how the brave captains do easily make their hand of the
superstition of the people, so long as they themselves fall not into the same
vice, as Nicias did; who being dismayed at an eclipse of the moon, delaied his
departure out of Sicilie, when it stood him most on hand to have bin gone; upon
an opinion that it was a token of very great misfortune, notwithstanding that
Anaxagoras in his books had showed the reason of such eclipse: which doing of
Nicias was cause of the utter overthrow of his army, and of his own
destruction to. Likewise when Antigonus was minded to have war with the Romans,
he committed a great fault, in that he believed not the counsel of Hannibal,
but had rather to stand gaping superstitiously upon the inwards of brute
beasts, and to harken to a sort of cosening birdgazers, tha^ to an old and well
experienced captain, that knew the forces of the Romans, and where they were
to be assailed. The superstitiousnes of the Almanes, was their undoing, for the
woman-wizards that were in the camp, forbad them to go to battle against the
Romans* before the new of the moon. Whereof Julius Caesar getting intelligence,
and perceiving that for that cause the Almanes stirred not, went and assailed
them in their own camp, while they were out of courage by reason of their
superstition; and he provoked them so far, that in the end he made them to
come forth into the field in a rage, where they were all discomfited. But the
best and wisest captains never troubled their heads with such doteries. Good
captains have eschewed to be superstitious.
As for example, Lucullus spared not to encounter with Tigranes upon the sixth
day of October, though there were that would have dissuaded him, because the
Romans esteemed it an unlucky day, for so much as Scipio was disco^fited by the
Cimbrians as on that day; whereto Lucullus answered, That of a day of sorrow and
misfortune, he would make it aday of good fortune and joy; and so it came to
pass indeed.

Alexander leading his army against the Persians in the month of June, was
desired not to stir, all that month, because the Macedonians esteemed it an
unlucky month. But yet he let not to proceed for all that: and to turn
away the superstition, he ordained that the month of June should be called
the second May. Likewise when a certain Pope might not make his entrance into
Paris upon a Thursday, because of the vnconueniencie of the next day following,
whereby the rost-meat of the Persians should have bin spared; he ordained that
the next day being Friday, should be called Thursday to, whereupon it came to
pass that that week has ever since been called the week with the two
Thursdaies.

Dion forbear not for all the eclipse of the moon, to weigh up his Anchors
presently, and to depart forthwith from Zacinth, to go to make war upon
Dennis the tyrant of Sicill, whom he drove out of Syracuse immediately upon his
arrival there. Nothwithstanding, to put away the superstition of his
soldiers, he brought them a soothsaier, who said unto the^, My fellows be of
good chere, and assure your selves that all shall go very well with us. For
the God head shows us to our sight, that some one of the things which are now
most glorious, clear, and bright, shall be eclipsed and darkened; now there is
not at this time any thing more resplendant than the tyranny of Dennis: and
therefore ye may well think, that as soon as you be arrived in Sicilie, ye
shall deface the brightness thereof. When Pericles was ready to sail with
fifty vessels, it happened that the son was eclipsed, the which thing did
put all his company in fear, yea and the pilot himself to: wherefore
Pericles seeing the Pilot sore dismayed, did spread out his cloak and cover his
eyes with it, demanding of him whether he thought it did him any harm or no.
The Pilot answered him no. Then said Pericles, there is no difference between
this and yonder eclips, saving that the body or thing that darkeneth the sun,
is greater than my cloak that covers thine eyes.

The Arabian guides that had beguiled Crassus, The pleasant and cunning answer
of Cassius.
by leading him into a place where he and the greater part of all his army
were slain, intending to have done as much to Cassius, who had gotten himself
into the city of Carras, and was purposed to depart thence the next morrow;
did what they could to persuade him to tarry until the moon were passed out
of the sign of the Scorpion, which they affirmed to be an unlucky sign,
hoping to stay him by that superstition. But he answered them, that he feared
much rather the sign of Sagittarius (that is to say, of the Bow-man or Archer)
because the Romans had lately before ben curstly galled by the archers of the
king of Parthia.

When Timoleon was ready to give battle to the Carthaginenses, by chance
there came into his host certain mulets laden with smallage: the which thing
the soldiers took for a foretoken of ill luck, because it was the custom of
those days, to bestrow the graves of dead folks with that herb. But Timoleon
inte^ding to draw them from that superstition, made his army to stand still:
and having declared diverse things to them according to the time, he told them
that the garland of honor offered it self unto them before victory. For among
the Corinthians (quoth. he) such as win the prise at the gamings of Ischmus that
are kept in their country, are crowned with garlands of smallage. And
therwithal himself took of it, and made him a garland the which he did put
upon his head, and after him all the rest of the captains, yea and even the
private soldiers also. As Marcellus was about to shock with the Gauls of
Lumbardie that were on the coast of Genoa, his horse turned back for fear, and
carried him away whether he would or no* which thing helfearing least the
Romans should take for a sign of ill luck, ^emed his horse to the left hand,
and suddenly made him to turn head toward the enemy. and even presently
therewithal worshipped the sun; as who would say, his turning back had not
been by chance, but purposely to that intent, because the Romans were wont
too make such returns, when they worshipped their gods. Of the fallings of
Julius Caesar and king Edward the third to the ground.
When Julius Caesar was arrived in Affrike, as he went out of his boat he fell
to the ground, which thing some that were about him, took for an evil sign.
But to turn it to the clean contrary, I hold thee O Affrike, quoth he; as if
he had done it of set purpose.

Edward king of England being landed in Constantine, at a place called the
Hogue S. Wast, did no sooner set foot on ground, but he fell down, and that so
forcibly, that his nose gushed out a bleeding, vvhereat his lords that were
about him, counseled him to retire again into his ship, because of the evil
sign. But king Edward very nobly and readily answered, It is a very good sign
for me, for the land is desirous of me.

The soothsaiers counseled Julius Caesar not to pass into Affrike before
vvinter: yet let he not to do it, yea and with very happy success. When
he pursued Scipio in Affrike, because there was a brute in his camp, that the
Scipios could not be vanquished in that country; he in derision of that
superstitious opinion, had in his army a Scipio, neither of wealth not
off^me, nor of experience in fears of war, to the end that his soldiers
should be of the better courage, knowing that Caesar had a Scipio as well as
his enemies.

When Paulus Aemilius was ready to give battle to Perses king of Macedonie,
the soothsaiers told him, that by defending he should get the victory, and not
otherwise. To rid his army of this fear, he made an unbridled horse to be
driven toward the enemies, and sent certain Romans after him to catch him
again. Anon the enemies ran out upon the Romans and so began a fray; Paulus
Aemilius sent forth his men to defend them, and thereupon began a skirmish,
whereupon ensued a battle, wherein he wan the victory, according to the
foresaieng of the soothsaiers.

The Romans kept a huge mass of gold and silver in their treasury: Caesar and
Sylla made small conscience of superstition.
and whenever any was put in, they cursed the man with very great ceremonies,
that should touch it, save only for maintenance of wars against the Gauls. But
yet for all that, Julius Caesar wanting money to pay his men of war, made no
conscience to lay hand on it. And to take away the superstition of the people,
and the fear of any curse that should come upon the city, he told them he
might justly take it, seeing he came from conquering the Gauls. Sylla in a like
case showed himself to be neither superstitious, nor yet religious. For upon a
time when he wanted money, he took all that was in the temple of Apollo at
Delphos; and for the doing thereof, he sent a friend of his name Caphis, but
he was afraid to enter upon the consecrated things, and protested with salt
tears that he did it against his will. And when some of the standers by told
him, that they heard the sound of Apollos vial within the temple; whether it
were that he believed it to be so, or that he would have impressed such a fear
in Sylla, he wrat thereof unto him. But Sylla mocking at it, sent him word he
wondered that he considered not, that singing and playing upon instruments of
music, were a token of mirth, and not of anger, and therefore that he should
not fail to proceed on. Pericles wanting money to make war, sold the ornaments
of Pallas for forty tallents of gold. And when he was charged with sacrilege
for so doing: The answer of Pericles.
he answered, That fairer than those were to be had of the spoil of their
enemies. The emperor Justinian did not so; for when Bellisarius had brought him
diverse precious things of the spoil of the Vandals, which had bin conveyed
before to Rome by Titus from the sacking of Jerusalem; a Jew beholding them,
told one of the emperors that it behooved him to be well ware that he suffered
them not to come within his palace, because such goods might not abide in any
other place tha^ where Solomon had first set them: and that the taking of them
thence, was the cause that Rome was sacked by the Vandals, and that the Vandals
which had taken them from Rome, were vanquished by the Romans. Whereunto the
emperor Justinian giving credit, did by and by send all those goods to the
temples and churches that were in Jerusalem. Augustus would not enterprise any
thing on the Nones of any month.
Augustus being a welminded prince, would not enterprise any thing upon the
Nones of any month, saying that he had tried those days to be unlucky: but he
spoke upon pleasure. For in as much as he never tasted of any other than good
fortune in all his life, he might well forbear one day in a month. And yet if
some good occasion had been offered him to give battle to his advantage, or to
retire to good purpose, I would hold him to have been but a bad captain, if he
had let so fair an opportunity slip, which cannot be recovered when a man
will, and whereof the good or bad success, does often times bring with it a
marvelous sequel to the whole host. A notable fault of the Lacedaemonians.
And therefore (to my seeming) the Lacedaemonians were greatly to blame, for
that they seeing the danger wherein all Greece was, and being otherwise
desirous to pleasure the Athenians, who were then in Marathon ready to
encounter with the Persians; would not send them any succor till the moon was
at the full, at which time their succor stood them in no stead, because it
came long after the battle.

The policy of Papirius.
If the consul Papirius had bin of the same superstitious mind, he had never
won that notable battle against the Samnits, which was given contrary to all
the bird-spels, even when the pullets refused to eat, which was taken for an
assured sign of the loss of the field. But the consul espieng the advantage,
meant not to beat his brains about such toies, but dealing discreetly, willed
the master of the Pullerie to assure his soldiers that the Pullets had eaten.
And when one of his company having seen that i^ was clean contrary, had
filled all his army with the superstition thereof, and so as the brute thereof
came to the consuls hearing by the advice of Spurius Papirius; The consul
answered him, that he minded nothing but the doing of his duty, and that if
the pullet-master had lied, the sin should return upon him. And to make his
word good, he placed the pullet-master in the foremost rank, where he was
presently slain, whereof the consul being advertised, said that all went
well, and that the gods had discharged all their wrath upon him. Of such as
have fought unluckily against bird-gazing.
But as for those that in fighting against the bird-spels and against
superstition, have al^o fought against their enemies without likelihood of good
success, they have found themselves oftentimes ill apaid. As for example,
Flammineus and Appius the fair, unto whom when it was reported that the
pullets cared not for their meat; Let us see the^ (quoth he) if they list to
drink, and made them to be drowned, immediately whereupon he was vanquished in
battle. If Hanniball had stood upon Nones, or new mons, when he was beset
round about by Fabius, and was fain to put fire upon the horns of 2000 neat, to
make way to escape out at, he had bin undone. It was not then time to tarry
till the morning, it stood him on hand to get thence that present hour. These
examples serve to teach a prince that has superstitious people, and whom he
cannot rid of that fantasy, at least wise to beguile them to a good end in
their own superstition. No guile is to be used in religion.
For he that will beguile in religion, beguileth himself.

I know well that many princes have made a vizor of religion, and pretetended
to be devout and religious, only to bring their people to a religion, without
the which they could not hold their subjects in obedience to them. But the
reputation that they have gotten thereby, was, that they were evil and
deceitful. Contrariwise, the good and religious princes, have compassed their
affairs well, and left a good reputation behind them. The reward of the
guilefull and wicked.
And as Plato says in his Comman-weale, The wicked and guilefull sort, deal
like them that talk much of running swiftly in a race, as though they would win
the goal from all men, and in the end do nothing but move laughter, and return
home with their tail betwixt their legs; but good and virtuous men are like
those that hold on in running to the end of the race, and are crowned as
victors for their labor. For in the end they be had in estimation of all men.
But as for the wicked and crafty sort, albeit that they conceal their vices
for a time; yet notwithstanding when they come to the end of their race, then
they appear what they be. A prince ought not to be an Hipocrit.
It is best therefore as well to Godward as to man-ward, not to use any
counterfaiting, but to be virtuous in deed. And to attain the more easily
thereunto, it behooves him to do as good and virtuous princes have done, that
is to wit, he must have good and religious men about him; For with the good a
man shall be good, and with the wicked he shall be perverted. He that is
conversant with the wise shall be wise, (says Solomon) but he that keeps
company with fools, shall have sorrow. The prince that has such good men
about him, is councelled and quickened up by them to virtue and weldoing; and he
is afraid to do evil, when he sees such near about him. Besides that, he
purchases to himself a good reputation, which makes all his attempts the
more easy. For the people who judge by outward appearance, are of opinion that
their prince is good, when he entertaineth good and religious men ordinarily,
and has them ordinarily about him. Which thing the younger Denis could well
skill of, though he himself was neither religious, nor a virtuous prince. In
his time men made account of Sophists, but he himself made no reckoning of
them at all. And yet for all that, because he would be the better thought of by
their means, and win the favor of the people who had such men in estimation; he
had of them ordinarily with him. For it is better that a prince should be an
hipocrit; Time causes a man to love the honest things which he did but
counterfeit at the first.
than a despiser of good and virtuous things, because such manner of
counterfaiting and countenancing of good things, does secretly bring with it in
time, an affection of loving them, and a willingness to accustom himself to
them in earnest. The emperor Adrian had virtuous and wise men, and learned
Philosophers always about his person, as well in time of peace as of war,
because the wise men taught to live well, and the Philosophers to govern well.
For (as Alexander Seuerus said) of trusting too much to a man's own wit,
comes commonly labor and loss, Of taking council comes great fruit.
but of taking other men's advise, follows ordinarily very great fruit.
Insomuch that whenever he had any matter to set in order concerning the
commonweal, he consulted of it aforehand with men of skill and experience,
before he did put it in execution, and such manner of men did always follow him;
among whom was one Vlpian a Lawier. Yea, and when he went a walking or a
hunting, he would never be without three or four of the greatest personages
and best experienced of his house, to the intent he would not be without
counsel, if any matter of importance should come suddenly upon him, and that
the sight of such men near about him, might keep him from presuming to do
any dishonorable fact.

Antigonus the second was wont to say when Zeno the Philosopher was dead, That
he was bereft of the Theater and stage of his honorable deeds, because he was
wont to refer all his actions to the judgment of that good man. And if we
will descend into our own histories, we shall see what profit redounded to S.
Lois, by being conversant with men of Religion. For in so much as his mother
had accompanied him with such folk from his infancy, he ceased not to hold
on afterward in the same trade and manner of life, wherein he had bin trained
up, insomuch that all his whole life was nothing else but a mirror of
holiness.

CHAP. XV. That the Prince which will be well obayed, must show good example in
him self to his subjects.
THat which I have spoken of Religion and Superstition is enough,
notwithstanding that it be too little, as in respect of the things themselves.
Now remains the winding up of the matter, and to end this book withal, I am
to show in few words, what it is that vpholdeth both the prince and his
subjects in all honor and honesty, Example in the prince himself serves to
make the prince to be obayed.
especially in the case of Religion; namely the good Example which the prince
gives unto his subjects. For it serves him above all things in the world, to
make him to be obayed, and therewithal accustometh him to the love of all
honest things, though at the beginning he had no such will, as I have said
before. And it provoke the subjects to follow their princes example, whom they
see to be given to all virtuous things, and chiefly when he is given to
religion. Take away religion, and ye take away obedience.
For a prince cannot reign, if his subjects be without religion; considering
that in taking away religion, ye take away obedience to the prince. Therefore
to hold the people in religion, there is nothing like unto Example. And as a
certain Poet says; Laws and proclamations have not so great force to procure
obedience, as has the life of the governor, because the people being subject
to alteration, do change with the prince.

If the prince be devout and religious, the people will be devout also; if he
be superstitious, they become superstitious too; if he be given to vice, so
will they be also; if he be good, they abide good likewise, because there is
not any thing that does so much induce us to do well, as the innocence and
goodness of the prince or judge, as says Cassiodorus. For who will be afraid
to do wickedlie, when he sees his lord do as himself does? In vain does
that prince foad himself with surety of state, who is covetous, ambitious,
and unjust. For men are then afraid to do amiss, when they think that it
displeases their judge. And as Cicero says in his third book of Laws, A
prince does not so much harm in the very sinning, A prince does not so much
harm by his sin in it self, as by the example thereof unto others.
(although it be a great harm in deed) as he does in making others to follow
the example of his vices. And we see commonly, that look what alteration
soever happens in the prince, the same ensues also in his people. For the
change of conversation of life in great personages, is wont to work a change
in the manners of the people; for that they keep not their vices alonly to
themselves, but do shead them out upon their subjects, so as the hurt which
they do, is not only in that they corrupt themselves, but also in that they
corrupt others, doing more evil by their example, than by their bare sin.
For as much therefore, as the well-aduised prince is as a cresset upon a
bushel or rather upon a high tower, to give light to all parts; he ought to
shine among his subjects, and to excel them in all deeds of virtue and
godliness. For (as says Cicero in his Inuectiues) he is to apply himself
not only to their minds, but also to their eyes. And like as a small blemish in
a man's face, A small sin seems great in a prince.
disgraceth him more than a great scarre in all the rest of his body; even so a
small fault shows it self great in a prince, whose life men behold in the
open light. And as Saluian Bishop of Marsels says, The offense is the greater,
where there is the greater prerogative. That is the cause why David was
punished by the death of his son, after that God had taken away his sin;
namely as the text says, For that he caused the enemies to blaspheme the name
of the Lord. So great is an offense in a public person. For he that does evil
without giving cause of offense unto others, damneth but himself: but he that
gives evil example unto others, and causes mo for to sin, must bear their
penalty, because he is the cause of their evil. Plato in his Laws says,
That nothing does more easily change laws, than the example of princes, so that
a tyrant may in short time alter the laws. For whether he intend to lead to
virtue or to vice, he himself must first trace the way unto others, by
allowing the one, and disallowing the other, and by dispising such as obey him
not. And therefore he said in another place, That such as kings and governors
are, such are their people; Wherein he agrees with Ecclesiasticus, who says,
That such as the judge of a people is, such are his ministers; and such as the
ruler of a city is, such are his citizens. Varia Mesa writing to Heliogabalus,
admonished him after this manner; To reform others, it behooves you first to
reform your self; and to chastise others, you must first chastise your self.
The prince is a mirror to all his subjects.
For every person be he of never so mean degree, does commonly take example
at that which he sees done by his superiors, and especially by the prince,
who is a looking-glass to all his subjects. And in deed, we see how the
Egyptians gave themselves to the Mathematical sciences, because the most part
of their kings loved those sciences. Because the kings of Asia gave themselves
to all delicacies, the people of that country were very delicat and
effeminate. Because Nero loved plaiers of enterludes, singing-men, and plaiers
upon instruments; there was not that Senator whose child studied not those
arts. In the time of Marcus Aurelius his house was full of wise and modest
servants. In the time of his son Commodus, Such as the prince is, such will
be his household, his court, and his kingdom.
the palace was full of naughty-packs, and folk of lewd conversation. And the
said good emperor Marcus Aurelius was wont to say, That such as the prince is,
such will his household be; such as his household is, such will his court be; and
such as his court is, such will his kingdom be. We see in France, how the
people have evermore followed their prince. King Francis loved learning, and
his people gave themselves wholly thereunto. He was sumptuous in apparel, and
much more they that came after him. At this day there is not any thing omitted,
for the well and rich attiring of folk, and for the delicate entertaining of
them with all sorts of the choicest meats. Lewis the eleventh, and the emperor
Charles the fifth, went modestly apparelled, and mocked such as decked
themselves in rich attire: and their subjects did the like. That example of
theirs did more in their time, than all the statutes of apparel could do, that
have bin made since. And that good time continued unto the reign of king
Francis, who begun to tread out the way to the inordinate and excessive
chargablenesse, which ouerwhelmeth us at this day. The book entitled the
Courtier, makes mention of a Spaniard that held his neck awry, as Alfons king
of Aragon did, (who, setting that aside, was a prince of very good grace) of
purpose to follow the kings fashion, and to counterfeit him in all that he
could. For this cause Plato in his Laws will have old men (who ought to give
example to young men) to behave themselves discreetly when they be in the
company of young folk, and to take good heed that no young man see them do,
There is not a better way to reform others, than to do the same things which
a man would say in that behalf.
or hear them speak, any dishonest thing. For the best counsel that can be
given to young or old, is not to taunt or check them, but to show and express
the same thing in a man's whole life, which he would have said in checking and
blaming them. Which order Cicero following in his Duties, does utterly forbid
an old man to give himself to excess, beause it brings double harm; first
in that it procures him shame; and secondly in that it makes the looseness
of young folk more impudent. For young folks should be governed by the
discretion of the old. And even so is it between subjects and their princes.
For if princes give them not good example, it will be hard to amend them
afterward. Which thing even the wickeddest princes perceiving, have pretended
to make account of virtue, as I have showed in Tiberius, in Nero, and in Denis,
who entertained the Sophists (...) win the peoples favor. But in the end the
truth bewraied it se^fe (as indeed nothing is so secret which shall not be
revealed and they fell into the disfavor, contempt, and hatred of their
people. Wherefore there is nothing to be compared to open walking, without any
manner of counterfaiting, and to the giving of good example throughout, that a
prince may be the better followed, and the more beloved and esteemed of his
people. Emperors that were warriors, beloved of their soldiers, for behauing
themselves fellowlike toward them.
As for example, Piscennius Niger, Caracalla Maximine, Alexander Seuerus, and
many other emperors that were warriors, did eat of the same bread that their
soldiers did; which thing made them beloved of all, and gave example to every
man to do as they did. For there is not a better exortation, nor a more
effectual way to persuade, than when a prince does the same things himself,
which he would have other men to do. Agesilaus commanded not his soldiers to
do any work to the which he himself did not first set his hand And to give
example to young men to endure cold, he was seen to go all the winter
without a cloak, thereby to allure the young men to do the like, when they saw
that their prince being old and ready to pass out of the world, was not
afraid of the cold. Xenophon in his first book of the Education of Cirus,
brings in Cambises telling Cirus, that to be first at work himself, served
greatly to win his soldiers thereunto. Is it your meaning then (quoth Cirus)
that a prince ought in all things to endue more than his subjects? Yea surely
(quoth Cambises) but pluck up a good heart and consider with your self, that
the prince and the subject take not pains both with one mind. For the honor
that a great lord receives assuageth his pain, for so much as all that ever
he does is known. Notable examples of Alexander, Cato, David, and Alfons.
Plutarch says in the life of Cato of Vtica, That his soldiers honored him
exceedingly, and loved him singularly, because he was wont to be the first that
did set hand to any work that he commanded; and in his fare, apparel, and
going abroad, made himself equal rather to the meanest soldiers, than to the
captains, and yet in greatness of courage surmounted the best captains of
all. Alexander in pursuing his victory against Darius, became very thi^stie,
and when one of his soldiers offered him wat^^ in a Morion, he refused it,
saying, That he would not by ^^s drinking, increase the thirst of others.
Whereupon his men seeing the nobleness of his courage, cried out aloud unto
him, that he should hardily lead them on still, saying that their own
weariness and thirst was quite and clean gone, and that they thought not
themselves to be mortal any more, so long as they had such a king. The like
befell to Cato of Vtica in Affrik, who being almost at the point to die for
thirst, (as likewise all his army was, being then in the midst of the sands
of Lybia) when as the small quantity of water which was in his host was all
offered unto him, not only refused it, but also spilt it on the ground, to the
end that by his example, all the soldiers in his army might learn to endure
the thirst.

Albeit that David longed to drink of the water of a certain well, that was
in the possession of his enemies, and three of his army brought thereof unto
him, with great danger of their lives; yet would he not drink thereof when it
was brought unto him, but vowed it unto God for the safety of the three that
had gotten it for him. On a time, when Alfons king of Aragon and Sicilie, was
in a place where he could get no victuals, and a soldier of his brought him a
morsel of bread and cheese, he refused it, saying that it was no reason that
he should eat, seeing his whole army had not to eat as well as he. Plutarch
says, That the thing that most advanced Marius, was that he never refused the
requital of kindness, for any pain or danger that hung thereon; nor also
disdained any thing, were it never so little; but striued to out-goe even the
meanest soldiers in simplicity of fare, and in sufferance of labor, whereby
he got the good will of every man. For it is a great comfort to such as take
pains, to have company that willingly take pains with them; because that to
their seeming, it after a sort takes away their constraint and necessity. And
it is a thing that wonderfully pleases the soldier, when he sees his
captain eating openly of the same bread that he himself eats, or sleeping
upon some pelting pad of straw, or the first man that sets his hand to the
work, when a trench is to be drawn, or a rampire is to be made to fortesie a
camp. For they make not so great account of the captains that honor them or
reward them, Soldiers set not so much by them that reward them, as by them
that take pain with them as they do.
as of the captains that takes pains with them, and hazard themselves with
them to the dangers of war; yea, and there is this further, that they set
more by those that take pains with them, than by those that suffer them to
continue in idleness.

Artaxerxes king of Persia, marching in the country of the Cadusians, went
foremost on foot, bearing his trusse upon his shoulder in a skarfe, and his
target on his arm, and so traveled over mountains that were cragged and
rough, insomuch that his soldiers seeing the courage of their king, and the
pains that he took, went so light on the ground, that they seemed to have had
wings.

The emperor Julian coming to a Marris, which he saw his enemies had drowned
with water, to stop the passage of his army, did put himself foremost into the
Marris, so that his army being ashamed to refuse that which they saw the
emperor do, passed all through the Marris, marching in water up to the knees.
Great Alexander perceiving at the siege of Nysa, that his soldiers were loath
to go to the assault, because of the deepnesse of the water, O wretch that I am
(quoth he) which have not learned to swim! and yet in the end he passed the
river, to give example to his men. Himself also was the first that entered
into the city of the Malians, howbeit very indiscreetly. Nevertheless his so
doing made all the Macedonians to come in after him, to save his life.
Demetrius being before the city of Thebes, went foremost himself to the
battle, to give example to his men of war, that they should not spare
themselves, nor be afraid to put themselves in danger. Also he was stricken
quite and clean through the neck with an arrow.

Julius Caesar hazarded himself freely to all peril, never forbearing to take
pains; and therefore his soldiers loved and esteemed him. The marquis of
Piscaria, to provoke his footmen to pass the foord of Brents, did set
himself foremost on foot to pass it with the brauest and honourablest
captains of his principal bands, to show himself in like fortune with his
soldiers. The emperors that have not set their hands to good works have been
disdained of their soldiers.
As for those which have refused to put their hand to work, and to give example
to their people, they have not done themselves any good by it, but have been
disdained for their labor. As for example, Macrinus who went but with a wand
in his hand, when he made his musters, or when he visited his men of war, was
despised for it of his soldiers, who said that a prince ought not to enter
into the senathouse with arms, nor come into an army without them; because the
senathouse was to deal with matters of peace, and the camp with matters of
war. Therefore was he of so small estimation, that his men of war forsook
him, and in the end he was vanquished by a woman.

Likewise the very presence of a prince in battle, Of the presence of a Prince.
is a kind of example. For it gives courage to the soldiers, as I have
declared in the beginning of this book, in speaking of the little child
Europus king of Macedonie, whom they were feign to bring forth to the
soldiers in his cradle, and yet his presence gave them such courage, that they
vanquished their vanquishers, and went away with the victory, though they had
been overcome before.

The Almaris at the journey of Gwingate, were ignorant that the emperor
Maximilian was coming to them: but as soon as they espied him all armed
saving his head, by and by taking his presence for a good foretoken of
victory, they began to welcome him after this manner; God save thee O emperor,
God preserve thee good father, God keep thee O invincible captain; we have
already won the victory, seeing that thou our head art here: and it came to
pass as they had forespoken.

When the army of Alfons king of Arragon was ready to join battle with the
army of Renat, that was led by Antonie Caldora: the king fell to consulting
how he should demean himself, and was counseled not to be there in person;
whereat he taking disdain, answered in great choler, How then? By your saying
it should seem, that the thing which has bin wont to do most good in a
battle, (namely the presence of the General) should do most harm. I perceive
now that my men fight valiantly, and I will be the first at it, to show that my
presence is no impediment to your glory and good fortune. When Perses the last
king of Macedonie was to join battle with the Romans, he withdrew himself
out of the field, under color to do sacrifice to Hercules, who could not find
in his heart to accept the offerings of a coward; and so he failed not to lose
the field. But the great captains, as Pirrhus, Philip, Alexander, Antigonus,
Traiane, and generally all the great princes, Whether wars are to be made by
Lieutenants.
have made war by themselves, and not by their lieutenants. I grant that
some have made war luckily by their lieutenants, as Charles the fifth king of
France; and the emperor Charles the fifth, in the battle of Pauie: but yet
there is none to the presence of the prince himself, when any goodly exploit
is to be done. For as the French proverb says, The sheep serve to no purpose
where the shepherd is away. But after his fortunate encounter at Pauie, the
emperor Charles of whom I now speak, did never enterprise any thing, whereat
he himself was not present, as the voyage of Argier, the voyage of Goulette,
the voyage of Province, the war in Germany made in the dead of winter, when he
himself was diseased with the gout, and ill at ease in his body; The presence
of the prince, seruerh greatly to the getting of the victory.
the wars made many times in France, and especially at the siege of Mets in the
dead of winter. For the presence of the prince is worth ten thousand men. When
Antigonus the second was purposed to give battle upon the sea to Ptolomie, his
Pilot told him that his enemies had many more ships than he. And how many ships
(quoth he) think you my presence may counteruaile? As who would say, it is a
great sway to the victory, when a valiant prince is present, which can skill
how to govern. The Numantines had obtained many victories of the Romans,
until in the end Scipio was sent thither to have the commanding of the army,
whose arriual there made the chance of the war to turn. For ever after the
Numantines went by the worst, nevertheless their captains bad their soldiers
that they should not be afraid, for the Romans were but the very same people,
whom they themselves had vanquished so often before. True it is indeed (said one
among them) they be the same sheep, but they have another manner of shepherd.
Antigonus hearing by some prisoners, that Eumenes was sick, (as he was indeed)
and thereupon coniecturing that he should with small ado discomfit his army in
his absence, made all the have he could to give battle. But when he came so
near, that he might well and plainly descry the order and behauior of his
enemies, who were so well ranged in order of battle as possibly could be, The
presence of Eumenes causes Antigonus to retire.
he stayed a long while altogether distroubled, and as it were astonished, in
the which time he perceived the horslitter of Eumenes passing from the one side
of the battle to the other, and therewithal he began to say, Yon same (in
mine opinion) is the litter that makes us war, and offers us battle. And
with that word he caused the retreit to be sounded, and conveyed his men back
into his camp. Julius Caesar did put himself in great peril, by going to find
his army that was distressed by the Gauls, and by his only presence did rid
them of the distress, giving them courage to fight; so greatly was his name
redouted of his enemies. Cabades king of Persia, seeing his men repulsed from
the city Damida, which he had surprised and scaled, and how that many of
them began to come down the ladders, because the men of the city made them
to leap down from above, stepped to the foot of a ladder with his svvord
drawn, and threatened to kill as many of them as came down. And so the
presence of the king caused many to mount up the ladders again, and many that
had begun to give over, fell so lustily to scaling again, that in the end they
took the city. The prince of Wales, to give courage to his men of war,
was personally at the castle of Remorentin, by whose presence the Englishmen
gave such a forcible assault, that they which were within were feign to
yield themselves.

Henry king of Castile seeing his army begin to scatter, assembled them
again three times, and with his encouraging of them, made them to endure the
battle a long time, so as they durst not any more flee for shame, when they
saw their lord and king fight so valiantly, and speak so amiably.

Ferdinand king of Naples does by his presence cause his subjects to return
under his obedience.
Ferdinand king of Naples, perceiving the Neapolitans to rebel at the change
of his fortune, at such time as Charles the eighth subdued all under his
obedience: departed suddenly from Capua and drue straight to Naples. As soon
as he arrived there, every man laying down his weapon, came to welcome him
with singular affection, ceasing their vprores in all places.

Consalua being brought to distress at Barlette, and yet cheerfully
ouerpassing all pains matched with great scarcity of victuals, and of all
other things needful, did by his example hold in the Spaniards a long time,
who were forewearied with travel, and in the end got the upper hand of the
Frenchmen. At such time as king Henry the second was fiercely assailed in his
own realm at two places at once, and could not put garrisons in all the towns
on the frontiers: the admiral Hannibalt being advertised that the enemies made
toward Fere, with full assurance to get possession thereof; conueid himself
into it with a few men, and saved the town by his presence. For the enemies
thought that so great a lord would not shut up himself without a good
company, and otherwise they esteemed him to be a wise captain, as having
had trial of him before, at Mesieres, at Petone, and at Laundersey, how
greatly the presence of a good captain avails, which makes weak towns
impregnable.

The end of the first book.
The second Book.
CHAP. I. Of Wisdom, and Discreetnesse.
IN old time, when by Gods sufferance Oracles had place, the city of Delphos
was renowned through the whole world, for the proud and stately temple there,
which was dedicated and consecrated to Apollo, whereunto folk resorted from al
parts of the world to ask counsel, and to hear the answers that were given
by his image. At the entrance of this goodly Temple, What it is to know ones
self.
were written these words, KNOW THY SELF. In the interpretation of which
words, many have erred, imagining that a man knows himself, when he can skill
of the things that concern his duty or office, and his mystery, trade of
living, or profession; as when a Surgion can skill to lance a sore, or a
Physician to heal a disease, or a Shoemaker to make a Shoe. But none of all
these is the knowing of a man's self. And though a man beheld all the parts of
his body, yet knew he not himself the more for all that. For as Plato says,
He that knows his body, knows that which is his, but he knows not
himself. So that neither Physician nor handicraftsman knows himself, but
their knowledge is of things that are separated from themselves. Wherefore to
speak properly, none of them according to their art, can be said to be wise.
Likewise he that has a care of his own body, minds that which is his, and
not himself. And whosoever loves a man, cannot be deemed to love his body,
but his soul. Therefore when we say, a man must know himself: it is as much
to say, as he must have a care of his soul, to prepare it to the knowing of
God his maker, after whose image it is created, that he may, as it were in a
looking glass behold the invisible Godhead, the efficient cause of wisdom,
and of all good things; and that by the knowledge of the virtues which God has
given unto him, he may consider how greatly he is indetted unto God, and that
he has not any thing of himself, but that all comes of God. And when he
knows what he is, that is to wit a reasonable creature, then lifts he up
his heart (as is soong in the church); that is to say, he lifts up his mind
to the author of his welfare.

To know God, it behooves a man to know himself.
Now then, to know God, it behooves to have the knowledge of our selves, that
is to wit, of our inward man, which is framed of divine essences, to the intent
we despise not the heavenly understanding and mind that was given to man in his
creation, for want of knowing it aright, and for want of considering the virtue
and power thereof; least through want of such understanding thereof, in steed
of being wise and well advised, and in steed of choosing the good way, we follow
the woorser, and (as David says) Become like the horse and mule, for not
considering what God has bestowed upon man. Therefore it stands us on hand
to consider from whence we be, and to what end we be created; that by beholding
the excellency which we have received of God, we may submit our selves wholly
unto him, and to his wisdom; which inuiteth us thereunto, as is to be seen
in five hundred places of the book of Wisdom. Those then which refer al their
actions to the said first cause, we call Wise men, according to the writings
both of the Bible, and also of the Heathen authors, specially of the great
Mercury, The first point of wisdom is to know ones self.
Plato, and Cicero, who affirm, That the first point of wisdom, is to know a
man's self. And by this knowledge a man shall perceive whereat he ought to
level himself, and so he shall foresee the impediments that may hinder and
annoy him. He then which has not wisdom, cannot discern what is his, or what
is well or ill done; neither can we know what is ours, unless we know our
selves. And he that knows not what is his, is also ignorant what is another
man's; and consequently he is ignorant what belongs to the commonweal, and so
shall he never be good householder, or good commonweals man, because he knows
not what he does. By reason whereof, he shall walk on in error, wandering and
mistaking his mark; so as he shall not atchieue any thing of value, or if he
do, yet shall he be but a wretch. For no man can be happy or govern happily,
unless he be good and wise, because it is only he that discerns good from
evil. Now if this saying may be verefied of al me^, much more without
comparison does it agree to princes than to other men, because they have
authority above all: and to execute authority well, it behooves to have
Discretion and Wisdom. For reason would, that the wise should command the
ignorant, according to the saying of Ecclesiasticus, That the freeborn shall
serve the bondmen that are wise. The better sort ought to rule the worser.
And as Dennis of Halicarnassus says, It is a law common to all, that the
better sort should command the worser. It is they therefore to whom the said
goodly precept is chiefly appointed, to the end they should know the being and
state of their soul, the force and power whereof consists in wisdom, whose
ground is truth. For it is the property of wisdom to discern the truth of
all things, whereby the darkness of ignorance is driven out of our mind, and
light is given unto us. In this respect Jacob having gotten wisdom by travel,
is said in Genesis to have had the sight of God: because that to the active
life, he had also joined the contemplative. In so much that we may say, that
the wise man is the cleeresighted, and has judgment and reason to discern
good from evil, that he may keep himself from being deceived. Cicero in his
Academiks.
For nothing is more contrary to the gravity of a wise man, than error,
lightness, and rashness.

Cicero in his books of Duties.
And although Wisdom and Discreetnesse do well beseem all men, because it is
the property of man to search the truth, as who (being partaker of reason,
gathers the co^sequencies of things by considering their principal causes
and proceedings: The excellency of Wisdom.
) yet notwithstanding Wisdom is an essential thing in princes and governors.
For nothing does so firmly stablish a principality, as a wise man, who (as
says Ecclesiasticus) instructs his people, and the faithful are the fruits
of his understanding. The wise man shall be replenished with blessedness, and
as many as see him shall commend him. And in the third chapter of Salomons
Proverbs, it is said; That the purchase of Wisdom is more worth, than all that
ever a man can gain by the traffic of gold and silver; and all that ever man
can wish is not comparable unto her. For that very cause there was a writing in
the foresaid temple of Delphos, which commanded men to honor Wisdom and
justice, whom Hesiodus and Pindarus feigned to sit at Jupiters side. Wisdom
the mother of all good things.
Wherefore we may well say, That Wisdoms is the mother of all good things, and
the tree of life that was in the earthly Paradise, as says S. Austine in his
thirteenth book of the city of God. And to show the excellency thereof yet
more, Ecclesiasticus says, That Wisdom is a greater aid and strength to a
wise man, than ten governors are to a country. And therefore in the 16 of the
Proverbs it is said, That Prophecy is in the lips of a king; which thing is
meant of a wise king. After which manner he says in another place, that the
delight of a king is in a wise servant; which is to be understood of a good and
wise king. For commonly else such men are not welcome to princes. But as Aesop
says, either a man must please a king, or else he must not come at him.

Bion was wont to say, That Wisdom goes before the other virtues, Wisdom
goes before all other virtues.
as the sight goes before the other senses, and that without wisdom there is
no virtue at all. For how were it possible for the just man to yield unto every
man that which belongs to him, if Wisdom had not taught him what is due to
every man? Therefore before we enter into the moral virtues, it is requisite by
the way to speak a word of the contemplatiues; namely of Wisdom and
Discreation: because that without contemplation joined with skill, a man can
do nothing that is beautiful and good. The Stoiks make no difference between
these two virtues, saving that Wisdom consists in the knowledge of things
belonging both to God and man; and Discreetnesse consists only in things
belonging to man. For both of them be contemplative virtues, proceeding from
the mind and understanding. But yet one of them is merely contemplative, Of
Wisdom.
that is to wit, Wisdom, which (after the opinion of ancient Philosophers) is
occupied but in contemplation of the heaven, the earth, and the stars,
respecting nothing but such things as are everlasting and unchanged; and
because they be not subject to any alteration, man needs not to scan of them.
And as Aristotle says in his sixth book of Morals, It behooves a wise man not
only to understand whatsoever may be gathered of principles, but also to
understand the principles themselves truly, Plutarch in his treatise of Moral
virtue.
and to speak truly of them. And as a Geometrician scanneth not whether a
triangle have three angles made by the meeting and closing together of three
right lines, but holds it for an undoubted certainty; Wisdom is not subject
to doubting.
so the contemplative understanding, does not so much as dream of any thing
that admits any alteration; neither is it subject to consulting and
deliberating. But Discreetnesse, which is cumbered with things untrue,
erroneous, and troublesome, and is to deal with casual adventures, is driven
to consult of things doubtful, and after consultation to put it self in
action. All virtue consists in action.
For as Cicero says, All virtue consists in action. Concerning the which, we
will hold still the precept which he gives us in his books of Duties, where he
says, A man must not uphold things unknown, for known.
That whosoever will be wise, must eschew two vices, one is, he must not uphold
things unknown as known: and to eschew the falling into that vice, he must
spend time and labor in considering things aforehand. For if a man's wit be not
confirmed and fortified by reason, Plutarch in the life of Timoleon.
he does easily waver, and is easily driven from the discourse whereon he was
grounded at the first. Therefore it behooves that the resolution whereto he
sticks be firm, and not subject to alteration, least he do things before he
have well considered and tried the^, and so it befall him as does to liquerous
persons, which oftentimes desire some meat with ^ouer-earnest appetit, whereof
when they have once had their fill, by and by they be weary of it, which thing
happens to such as enterprise any thing lightly, and without good aduisement
aforehand. But the choice that is grounded upon sure knowledge and firm
discourse of reason, does never alter, though the thing that was undertaken
come not to good end. The other vice whereof Cicero makes mention, is, that
some men set all their study upon things difficult and needless, after the
manner of the ouer-profound wisdom of men in old time, to the which wisdom
Socrates would in no wise give himself. Therefore let us omit that kind of
wisdom, as whereof we have not to treat here, and whereunto we cannot attain.
For the former Philosophers gave themselves the title of Wise men; yet
notwithstanding, those that have bin wiser than they, would not take that title
unto them. As Pithagoras, who said, He was but only a lover of wisdom. And
Socrates, who confessed himself to know nothing. By reason whereof he was
accounted the wisest man of his time. And never since was there any man so
proud and presumptuous, as to take that title upon him. As for us that are
Christians, we ought to reject it utterly, because the name of wisdom is
attributed to the son of God, and that God only is wise: so that we agree
with the philosophers, That wisdom consists rather in heavenly things, and
in a certain contemplation, Of Discreetnesse.
than in action. And therefore letting it alone, we will return to the other
contemplative virtue, which is called Discreetnesse, and (commonly) Wisdom
also. But that is an vnpropper kind of speaking, whether we apply the term to
matter of understanding, or to matter of art. As for example, when we say that
Phidias was a wise ingrauer, in so saying we intend to show the virtue of the
art, because wisdom is the perfectest of all skils. Which word Wisdom, I
shall be feign to use sometimes, (because it is so used in our common speech)
not for the wisdom that searches things divine, wonderful and hard to
attain unto, but for the virtue of deliberating, which we call Discreetnesse,
wherewith we have to deal in humane affairs. For as Aristotle says in his
sixth book of his Morals, No man consulteth of things that are impossible, and
whose end is not the good that consists in action. Discreetnesse is not
gotten but by advised deliberation.
But Discreetnesse which the common sort call wisdom, and consists chiefly
in the choice of good from evil, is not gotten but by advised deliberation,
wherthrough we refuse the evil and choose the good. Which thing cannot be done
by a fool, or by a harebraind person. For as Solomon says in his Proverbs,
The fool has no delight in Discreetnesse, but in the imaginations of his own
heart. Phil^ the Jew expounding the first chapter of Moses, says, That by the
knowledge of good and evil, Discreation is to be understood, which discerns
and deemeth as a judge between one thing and another. The definition of
Discreetnesse.
Therefore let us come to the definition of Discreetnesse, the which Cicero in
his Academiks calls the Art of living, and which we may say to be the way and
path that leads to the moral virtues. Aristotle says, that Discreetnesse is
an habit matched with the very reason that is peculiar to action, and
discourses what is good or evil. And in another place he says, That it is the
virtue of the reasonable part, which prepares the things that pertain to
happiness, meaning the happiness that consists in the good estate of the
soul, and not in the outward event of things. For the well doing of things is
the end of our actions, and of our taking of the^ in hand. And therefore a good
householder, whom we call a good husband, and a good co^mon-weale man, whom we
call also a man that has good skill in matters of state; (of whom the one has
an eye to the things that are good for himself, The difference between a
discreet man, and a wel-aduised man.
and the other to the things that are good for the commonweal) are esteemed
wise and discreet, when they perform their charge well. There is yet another
difference between a discreet man, and a wel-aduised man. For the man which
aims at some certain point, and imployeth all his natural wits to reach
thereunto, if it be for an evil end, is nevertheless accounted wel-aduised,
whereas (to say more truly) he is subtle and wily; and if it be for a good end
and in a virtuous matter, he is counted wise and discreet. For as Aristotle
says in his Morals, It is impossible for an evil man to be wise. Cicero in
his Duties.
But he that in all thing sees clearly what is true, and can by good
judgment and sharpness of wit conceive the reason thereof; that man is
reputed wise, and therefore men seek unto him in all their affairs. And as in
sailing (says Socrates) men believe the Pilot of the ship; so ought we to
believe the wisest in all the actions of our life. For the Pilot guides the
ship by his discretion; and as Homer says in his Iliads, One Wagoner outgoeth
another by his aduisement. Cicero in his Cato.
It is not by the strength and lightsomnesse of body: but by discreation and
well-aduisednesse, that men do great things. And as Horace says in his Odes,
Force without discretion overthrows it self. For wisdom is better than
strength, says Ecclesiasticus. And Solomon says in his Proverbs, that the
wise man has great strength; for by discretion is war made, and by good
counsel is victory obtained. Phocilides says: that a wise man is more worth
than a strong man. And Euripides says, That wise counsel is able to vanquish
great hosts. And therefore at Lacedemon the captain that had compassed his
matters by policy, did sacrifice to their gods with an Ox; The Lacedaemonians
made more account of an exploit done by policy, than of an exploit done by
force of arms.
and he that had compassed them by force, sacrificed a cock. For although they
were a warlike people, yet they deemed that exploit to be greater and more
beseeming a man, that was achieved by good aduisement, skill, and reason, than
that which was executed by valeantnesse and force of arms. And as Alamander the
Sarzin said, Those that are of most skill in war, how strong soever they be
besides, had lever to entrap their enemies by sleights and policies, than to
encounter them valiantly at the swords point. And Blondus in his triumph at
Rome says, That the chief of an army should fight by discretion and policy,
rather than by boldness and valiancie, because there is no comparison between
wisdom and strength of body. For he that thinks there is no good to be done
but by hand-strokes, is so far off from being valiant, that he is rather to
be esteemed rash, hare-braind, and furious.

Cicero in his book of invention says, That there are of discreetnesse three
parts, Memory, Skill, and Forecast, Memory, whereby things past are called
to mind again; Skill, which knows and vieweth things present; and Forecast,
which considers what may happen before it come. Others do set down eight
parts of discreetnesse; to wit, Remembrance, Forecast, Skill, Reason,
Quickenesse of wit, Teachablenesse, Experience, and Wariness. I count him a
discreet man that is sufficient to govern others. For the doing whereof four
things are to be considered; first the good whereunto the discreet man leads
others, wherein it behooves him to have remembrance and forecast. The manner of
governing, for the which it behooves him to be a man of skill and reason. In
his leading of other men he must have cunning and liveliness of wit, and he
must be teachable and easy to believe good counsel. And in respect of all
those whom he governs he must be of good experience, and wel-aduised, that
he may refuse the evil and choose the good. VVilfull ignorance.
The contrary to discreetnesse, is vndiscreetnesse or wilful ignorance, when
a man neither knows nor will learn to know any thing, (which is the thing
that most troubles the life of man; Cicero in his book of Laws.
and as Plato says in his Laws, That man is ignorant which musliketh the
good, and loves that which is noughtworth.) And when the will is bent against
skill and reason, which naturally bears chief sway.

Discreetnesse then is a virtue of the mind proceeding from a good
understanding and judgment, which is increased by knowledge and experience,
and consists in the looking into things, to the end that men may find them
easy and ready to be dealt with, before they go in hand with them, foreseeing
what may or should ensue by things already past. And because the events of
things (as says Aristotle) yield not themselves unto our wills, we must apply
our wills to the events, Therence in his Adelphis.
howbeit so as our wills be ruled by discretion. For man's life is like a game at
tables, where if a man meet with a cast of the dice that he would not have, he
must amend it by his cunning in play, The effects of Discreation.
as good table-players do. The effects of discreation are to take
deliberation, to discover good and evil, and whatsoever else is to be followed
or shunned in this life, to use all manner of goods honestly, to be of good
conversation with all men, to foresee occasions and adventures, and to have
experience of good and profitable things. As touching memory and quickness of
wit, experience and knowledge, either they be helps to discretion, as
experience and memory; or else they make a part of discretion, as skill and
quickness of wit. The praises of Wisdom.
Thus you see what wisdom is, the which Aristotle, speaking of the virtues,
does rightly term the queen of al other virtues, as which shows us the order
that we ought to keep in all things, which drives away all incumberance and
fear out of our mind, makes us to live in tranquillity, and quenches all the
heat of lust and covetousness. S. John Chrysostom upon the thirteenth Psalm,
calls it the lantern of the soul, the queen of thoughts, and the
schoolemistresse of good and honest things. It is a virtue royal in deed, and
the helm and helue of kings, without the which they cannot govern well. This
is it that made kings at the beginning (as I have said heretofore) and chose
them out of the people, as most discreet and worthy of all the multitude. By
wisdom men dispose of things present, and foresee things to come. By it we
bridle our affections, and purchase honor, as Solomon says in the fourth of
the Proverbs, It makes us to govern orderly, both in matters of peace and
war; and suffers us not to fall nor to be surprised unawares: It makes us to
do the good, and to eschew the evil. For Wisdom (as Alexander of Aphrodyse
says) is the skill what is to be done, and what is to be left undone. Therefore
only the wise man is worthy to govern And (as Plato says) happy be those
commonweals and kingdoms, The wise stand not upon laws, but line by the
rule of virtue.
where Philosophers are kings, or the kings be Philosophers. For the wise man
or Philosopher has this prerogative above othermen, that he lives after the
rule of virtue, without musing upon laws, because he uses reason for his law,
as Antist^enes and Aristippus said, insomuch that if all laws were abolished,
yet would he not cease to live uprightly, as one that knows what is honest,
and what is dishonest.

Aristotle being demanded what profit he reaped of Philosophy, answered, That
I do those things uncommanded, which other men do for fear of laws. S.
Paul to Timothy.
For the law is not set down for the righteous, but for the unrighteous, says
S. Paul* And therefore, if he that reigns be not wise, his kingdom cannot be
happy. Cursed is that kingdom where a babe reigns, because the babe wanting
the use of reason, cannot order his affairs with advised Discretion. Cirus was
wont to say, That no man ought to take upon him the charge of commanding,
unless he were better than they whom he is to command. For he that is a good
man and commands well, is commonly well obayed. When one had said that
Lacedemon had bin vpheld by the skilfulnesse of the kings to command well; The
commandment of the prince, and the obedience of the subject, are answerable
either to other.
nay (quoth Theopompus) but rather by the skill of the inhabitants to obey well.
For the commandment of the prince and the obedience of the subjects, are
answerable either to other. For commonly men mislike to obey those, which have
no skill to command well. Insomuch that the faithful obedience of the subject
depends upon the sufficiency of a good prince to command well. For he that
well guides, causes himself to be well followed. And like as the perfection
of the art of riding and of the rider, Plutarch in the life of Licurgus.
consists in making the horse obedient, and in subduing him to reason: even
so the principal effect of a kings skill, He that well guides, is well
followed.
is to teach his subjects to obey well.

Antonie the Meek was a virtuous and wise emperor, and so well advised in all
his doings, that he never repented him of any thing that he did. Whereat a
Senator of Rome marueling, asked him how it came to pass, that his affairs
had so good success, that he never repented him of any thing that he did, that
he was never denied any thing that he asked, and that he never commanded any
thing which was not obayed. It is (quoth he) because I make all my doings
conformable to reason; I demand not any thing which is not rightful, and I
command not any thing which redoundeth not more to the benefit of the
commonweal, than to mine own profit. To conclude, Wisdom is a shield against
all misfortune. Wisdom is a shield against all misfortune.
Men in old time were wont to say, that a wise man might shape his fortune as
he listed; supposing that misfortune, be it never so overthwart, is wonderfully
well over ruled by the discreation of a wise and sage person. Prosperity
comes of wisdom.
And as Plutarch says in the life of Fabius, The Gods do send men good luck
and prosperity, by means of virtue and discreation, notwithstanding that the
events of fortune be not all in our power, as said Siramnes, who being
demanded why his so goodly and so wise discourses had not events answerable to
their deserts; because (quoth he) to say and to do what I list is in mine own
power, but the sequel and success thereof, is altogether in fortune, and in
the king. Therefore when Phocion the Athenian had resisted Leosthenes in a
certain case, whereof notwithstanding the event was prosperous, and saw that
the Athenians gloried of the victory which Leosthenes had gotten, I am well
contented (quoth he) that this is done, but yet would I not but that the other
had bin councelled. Julius Caesar gloried in his good fortune, but yet his
bringing of his great enterprises to pass, was by his good government and
experience in feats of war. To be short, the wise and discreet man finds
nothing strange, neither fears he any thing, no not though the whole frame of
the world (as Horace says) should fall upon him. The reason whereof is, that he
had minded it long time aforehand, and had fore-considered what might happen
unto him, and had provided remedy for all by his foresight and discreation.
For as Solomon says, The mind of the wise shall not be attainted, no not even
with fear. Such folk are not subject, neither too great grief, nor too
excessive joy: they never want hope, neither do they quail for any misfort^ne:
so that they be hard to be overcome, because they be fully resolved of all
things that may betide them, and do take order for all things aforehand by
their wisdom. For wisdom (says Solomon) is to his ownour as a lively
fountain, as a deep water, and as a flowing stream. And as a joint of timber
closed together in the foundation of a building, cannot be disioined, so also
cannot the heart that is stablished in the thoughts of discretion. And as S.
Austin says, Wisdom teaches us to continue at one stay, both in prosperity
and adversity, like unto the hand which changes not his name, but is always
one, whether it be held out, or gathered up together. And albeit that wisdom
be a gift of God, and come of a well disposed mind, and of a good
understanding, yea and of a body that is well tempered, as witnesses Galen in
his first book of Temperatures, where he says, That the first action of a man
of good temperature, The first actio^ of a man of good temperature, is
Discretion.
is Discretion; yet is it gotten by learning and discipline. For the true
desire of discipline is the beginning of wisdom. Also it is gotten by long
experience and knowledge of things past, and by continual exercise in dealing,
with sundry affairs. For as Afranius said (by report of Aulus Gellius)
Wisdom is begotten by use, and conceived by memory; meaning thereby, that it
consists in books, which put us in remembrance of things past, and in
experience which is the use and practice of wisdom. In so much that neither
he that has but only learning, nor he that has but only experience, is able
to attain unto wisdom: but he that will deal perticularly and universally in
all affairs, must have them both, as well the one as the other. And as
Aristotle says, there are three things needful to the obtainment of Wisdom,
namely, Nature, Learning, and Exercise. For it is in vain to strive against
Nature, Learning must be had at learned men's hands, and Exercise is the
perfection of learning. And therefore it will not be amiss to treat of
Learning and Experience.

CHAP. II. That the good governor must match Learning and Experience together.
AS the body is made the more strong and better disposed by moderat exercise:
so man's understanding grows and increases by learning, and becomes the
stronger and better disposed to the managing of affairs. In which respect,
Demetrius Phalareus counseled Ptolomie king of Egypt, to make diligent search
for such books as treated of kingdoms, and declared the qualities that are
requisite for the well and due executing of the office of a king. And Alexander
Seuerus never sat in counsel upon any case of importance, or upon any matter
of state and war, but he called such to counsel as bare the name to be well
seen in histories. Bias would not have any man chosen a governor in his
commonwealth, but such as were of skill; The want of skill is cause of great
mischief.
saying that the want of skill is the cause of great inconveniences. Philip
commanded Alexander to obey Aristotle, and to be a good student: to the intent
(quoth he) that ye do not many things whereof ye shall repent you afterward.
Adrian as well in peace as in war, had of the skilfullest Philosophers
always about his person; and among others, he had two great lawyers, Saluius
and Neratius. Plutarke in the life of Coriolan says, that the greatest fruit
that men reap of the knowledge of good learning, is that thereby they tame and
meeken their nature, that before was wild and f^erce, so that by use of reason,
they find the Mean, and leave the Extreme. When one asked Alfons king of
Arragon, wherefore he did so greatly love learning? Because (quoth. he) by reading
I have learned war and the law of arms: acknowledging therein, that no wit be
it never so good, can fashion it self well and become worthy of the charge
which it shall undertake, without learning and doctrine. Like as the fattest
ground in the world can bear no corn except it be well tilled: so nature of
it self draws and provoke us, by giving us a desire of knowledge and
skill, as Cicero says in his books of Duties; but Ignorance (which we find
fault with, as with the thing that darkeneth and defaceth man's understanding)
cannot be done away, but by learning. My meaning is not to make a prince
perfectly skilful in all sciences, but only in that kind of learning which
concerns histories, and precepts of good life, according to the counsel of
Demetrius and Isocrates, who said, that the wisdom which is proper to kings,
The wisdom of a king consists in learning and experience.
consists in Learning and Experience; of which two, Learning teaches the way
to do well, and Experience teaches the mean how to use Learning well. And
albeit that Traian, (who was one of the best princes of the world) gave not
himself to learning for any commendation thereof that Plutarke made unto him;
saying that the gods immortal had not made him to turn over the leaves of
books, but to deal with martial affairs: yet was he not an unskillful
person, neither misliked he of learned men, but had Philosophers, Lawyers, and
other men of good learning and knowledge near about him. And notwithstanding
that he was well advised and discreet, yet in doing many things upon his own
head, he failed not to do some whereof he repented afterward, because the
benefit of nature was not sufficiently kiltred by learning, which is the thing
wherein princes fail. For if they be not taught by the dumb scholemaisters,
that is to say, by books, they will hardly be taught by the lively voice;
because the schoolemaister is afraid and dares not compel them, but lets
them do what they list at their own discretion, and therefore they cannot
learn so well as others that are under correction. But the book although it
do not speak, utters what it lists, without either fear or blushing, and
gives such warnings unto Princes, as their tutors durst not do. Therefore all
their recourse ought to be unto books, as well to understand the truth, as to
learn the history, wherein they shall see a thousand policies of war,
infinite goodly sayings, a thousand inconveniences that have lighted upon evil
princes, their grossenes, their lewdness, and their wickedness. On the
contrary part, they shall take singular pleasure in reading the praises of
good princes; they shall see their wisdom, virtue, and good demeanor in
matters both of peace and war. How they defended themselves from their
enemies, how they wound themselves out of their hands, what they did to
maintain their states, and what got them their good reputation, and made them
to prosper in all things. Which thing the valeantest captains could well skill
to put in practice; who not only have helped themselves by learning in the
managing of their affairs, as Cicero and Lucullus (who had small experience of
war) Alexander the great, Julius Caesar, and infinite other great captains:
but also have set down to themselves as it were in a looking-glass, some such
personages as they have liked to follow. As for example, Alexander setting
Achilles before him for his pattern, never slept without the Iliads of Homer
under his pillow. The pattern of Julius Caesar was Alexander; and Cirus was the
pattern of Scipio, who never went without a Xenophon: no more did Alfons king
of Arragon go without the Commentaries of Caesar; nor the emperor Charles the
fifth, without the Remembrances of Philip of Comines.

After whose example, all noble-minded princes, ought first to have the
histories of the holy Bible, and (besides them) of the Heathen histories, the
lives of Traian, Antonie the Meek, Alexander the Stern, and such others, by
whom they shall learn to order their life aright. And to allure them the more
unto learning, The praise of Learning.
I will allege the saying of Solomon, in the xx chapter of his Proverbs, There
is much gold and store of pearls, but books of knowledge are the precious
jewels. By knowledge, chambers are filled with all manner of costly and pleasant
stuff. And as he says in another place, The wise m^n has great might, and
the man of knowledge has great strength. For by skill are vvarres made, and
where many be that can give council, there is victory. Cicero in his oration
for Archias says, That learning is the teacher of virtue, a delighter and
refresher of us when we be at home alone in our own houses, and a companion
that cumbereth us not when we go abroad. It trauelleth with us, it sleeps
with us, it is an ornament unto us in prosperity, and a help in adversity.

Many being in prison, many being in captivity to their enemies, many being in
banishment, have borne their misfortune well by means of learning. Diogenes
was wont to say, That learning made young men sober, comforted old men, enriched
poor men, and made rich men glorious, because learning restrains the
slippernesse of youth, and supplieth the defects of old age. Aristotle says,
that the eyes receive light from the air about them, The mind receives light
from learning.
and the mind from the liberal sciences; and that learning serves for an
ornament in prosperity, and for a refuge in adversity. Aristippus was wont to
say, There is as great difference between the learned and unlearned, as is
between the living and the dead. Send them both (quoth he) into a strange
country, and you shall see what difference there is. The which appeared well
in Dennis, who of the king of Sicilie, became a schoolmaster at Corinth, and
might have starued for hunger, had it not bin for his learning. The foresaid
Philosopher Aristippus was wont to say, That it was better to be a beggar than
to be unlearned; because the beggar has no need but of money, but the unlearned
has need of humanity; as who would say, that he which wanted knowledge was no
man.

Socrates was wont to say, For the life of man learning is better than riches.
That for war, iron was better than gold; and that for the life of man,
learning was better than riches. At such time as Paulus Emileus was for to
encounter with Perseus the last king of Macedonie, and that his army was sore
dismayed at the eclips of the moon which then happened; Sulpicius Gallus
encouraged them by his learning, in that he assured them of victory by his
knowledge in the Mathematical sciences. By the like knowledge Archimedes
defended the city of Syracuse from the force of Marcellus. In this process of
learning, I will not omit Eloquence, Of Eloquence
which the men of old time termed the Queen of men, as one which even by force
drue unto her the affections of as many as she spoke unto. Plutarch in the
life of Pericles, says that Eloquence is an Art that weeldeth men's minds at
her pleasure, and that her chief cunning is, to know well how to move men's
passions and affections to her lure, which are as you would say the Tunes and
sounds of the soul, which is willing to be touched by the hand of a good
musician. And albeit that a good natural disposition be very requisite to have
the tongue at commandment, yet will nature do but small service, if it be not
polished by learning. On the contrary part, the man that is rude of speech by
nature, may become eloquent and well spoken, in amending his evil disposition
by learning. I mean not that he shall become as good as Demosthenes, but that he
may be able to make some brief oration to the people, or to men of war, that
shall be of force to persuade them, as the brave captains of old times did.
Nestor is commended of Homer, not only for his good skill and counsel, but
also for his Eloquence, saying that the words issued from his lips as sweet as
honey. Notwithstanding that Pirrhus was one of the best captains of the world,
Cyneas the orator won mo cities by his eloquence, the is Pirrus did by the
sword.
yet would he say that Cyneas had won him mo cities by his eloquence, than he
himself had done by the sword. Anon after the expulsing of the kings out of
Rome, there fell such debate between the senators and the common people, that
the city was like to have gone to utter ruin by it. But Agrippa pacified the
whole matter by his eloquence, and brought the people back to obedience, when
they had already banded themselves in companies. Pisistratus handled the
Athenians so cunningly with the finesse of his tongue, that he made himself king
of Athens. Such as were sent by Cinna to have slain Antonie the Orator, were
so surprised with his eloquence, that when they heard him speak, they had no
mind at all to kill him. The eloquence of Cicero caused the disanulling of the
law for the dividing of lands, whereof the people of Rome had conceived so
great liking, and which had been so often propounded; in so much that when they
had heard him speak, they utterly abolished it for ever: whereof Pliny makes
a wonder. The like grace of speech enforced Julius Caesar to pardon Ligarius,
whom he was resolutly determined to have put to death.

To be short, it is a thing of so great power, that a prince who has many
under his charge, can in no wise forbear it. And if he fortune not to be
eloquent enough of himself, it would behoue him to have some good orator about
him, as Moses took Aaron to persuade the people, and to preach unto them,
because he found himself unfit for that purpose. For it is to no purpose for a
man to have goodly conceits, unless he put them forth. A man cannot utter the
excellent co^ceit^ of his mind, if he want Eloquence.
For according to the saying of Themistocles, Eloquence is like a piece of
tapistrie wrought with figures and imagerie, which show themselves when the
cloth is vnfold^d and are hidden when it is lapped up together: and even so a
man cannot show the goodly conceits of his mind, unless he have eloquence to
utter them. Cicero saiih in his Orator, that by the eloquence and persuasion of
such as could handle their toungs well, the people that were scattered abroad
in the wild fields and forests, were first brought into cities and towns. It
is of such force that it makes the things to be believed that were incredible,
and smootheth things that were unpolished. And as the mind is the beauty of a
man, so is Eloquence the beautifier of the mind. The same author in the second
book of the Nature of gods says thus, A beautiful and divine thing soothly is
Eloquence, for it makes us to learn the things we know not and to teach the
things we know; by it we persuade and comfort the sorrowful, by it we
encourage them that be dismayed, by it we strike them dead that are too
lusty, by it we pacify the angry, and kill folks lusts: that is it that has
drawn us into fellowship, into society, into cities, to live according to
equity and law.

Of Experience.
Yet is it not enough to have learning and eloquence, unless they be also
matched with experience. Bias in his laws, would have a Prince to be chosen of
the age of forty years, to the end he should govern well by good discretion
and experience. For it is well known, Cicero in his Duties.
that neither Physicians nor Generals of war, (be they never so well instructed
with precepts) can well discharge their duties without experience. And (as the
emperor Adrian was wont to say) in the general ordering and managing of
matters of State, Experience better than Learning* in matters of State.
One years experience is better worth than ten years learning. And for that
cause he preferred Antonie to the Empire before Marcus Aurelius, as making more
account of Antonies experience, than of Marks lerning.

Agamemnon desired not so much to have learned and eloquent men of his
counsel, as to have such as Nestor was, that is to say, men of great
experience. Plutarke says that the wise and valiant captain Philopemen,
presuming that his skill which he had in ordering a battle upon the land, would
also serve him alike upon the sea, learned to his cost, what sway experience
bears in matters of chivalry, and how great advantage they have in all
things which are well experienced. The skill how to guard and defend a man's
self, is not learned (says Thucidides) by talking, but accustoming himself
to pains-taking and to handling of his weapon. One asked Zeuxidamus, why the
Lacedaemonians had no laws written: because (quoth he) they should rather enure
themselves to the doing of noble and honorable things, than to read of them.
Panthoidas said the same to the Anthenians, that asked him what he thought of
the Philosophers, which had disputed before him; assuring them that they had
spoken goodly things, but to themselves unprofitable; whereby he meant to do
the Athenians to understand, that they had virtue in their mouths, but not in
their deeds. The knowledge that is gotten, Knowledge without Practice, is a
body without a soul.
serves to the ordering of men's affairs; but if it be without practice, it is
like a body without a soul. Very unwise therefore was he, which by his
sophistry would have made Iphicrates believe, that the Philosopher is the
only good captain. And we may well say with Anaxippus, that such discoursers
do show themselves wise in words, but in effect are stark fools.

Now therefore we conclude with Aristotle, that such as will deal in matters
of state, must above all things have experience, and this experience is gotten
by practice and exercise, which is the perfecter of Learning. For we see that
by exercise a weak man becomes strong, and does better away with travel,
than he that being strong does not use exercise, as Socrates says in Xenophon.
Again, they that be practiced in all things, deem truly of duties, and
understands what belongs to every man. And (as says Musonius) Virtue is a
science that consists not only in understanding, but also in action. For even
as in Physic or Music it is not sufficient to be skillful of the art, The
skill of governing, consists more in practice than in speculation.
but there must also be a practice of the actions that depend upon the art and
science: so in the science of Government, a prince must be practiced in that
which concerns action, rather than in that which concerns contemplation.

Can he think himself to be of good skill, which when he is to go in hand with
his work, finds it clean contrary to his imagination? Surely (as Terence
says) there was never yet any man so well advised aforehand in his
determinations, whom age and experience have not crossed with some strange
encounter, so as he has found himself to seek in the things wherein he
thought himself most skillful: and when he came to the execution, has
rejected that which he thought to be best before he began to go in hand with
it. And that is allegorically the very tree of the knowledge of good and evil,
after the opinion of S. Austen in his thirteenth book of the city of God. For
in matter of State, It is dangerous in matters of state, to take white for
black.
it is very dangerous to take white for black, and to think a man's self to
know that which he knows not. Therefore it behooves a prince to be a dealer
in his own affairs, and to exercise his mind at times in reading of books,
without forgetting to exercise his body. He must so counterpeise his mind and
his body, as the one be not exercised without the other. And yet it is not
enough for a prince to exercise himself, except he do also make his subjects
to be exercised, which thing he shall easily do, if he make often wagers with
rewards, for shooting in guns, for running, for iusting, for fighting at the
barriers, and so forth of other like exercises, howbeit with least
sumptuousness, and most profit. For nothing does better acquaint men with
feats of arms, Nothing does beter acquaint men with se^ts of war, than the
often practice of them.
than the often exercise of them. Traian was not to learn in that art, for he
entertained masters of chivalry at pensions, to teach young men the art of
war; as to break their horses, to handle their weapons, to shoot in
crosse-bows, to skale walls, to make fireworks, to undermine castles, to pass
rivers in diuing, and to cast themselves cunningly in a square. To be short,
he gave his people so much to do, that they had no leisure to be idle,
neither in time of peace, nor in time of war. When his men of war were most
in peace, then did he most exercise them in feats of war, saying that for
his so doing, strangers would stand in fear of him, when they saw him
continually accompanied with men of experience in chivalry. He made daily new
tournies and iousts to exercise his men of arms, he made forts, combats of ten
to ten, runnings, wrestlings, and such other exercises: saying commonly, That
it was no fair or commendable sight, to see a man either without a book in
his hand to learn wisdom, or without a weapon in his fist to defend himself
against fools and ignorant persons.

CHAP. III. Of Justice, or Righteousness.
NOw remains to speak of the chief of the virtues, which contains all
virtues, namely of Righteousness; the which (as says Cassiodorus) causes
man's life to be contained within order of Law, and to be lead after another
manner than the brute beasts which live at adventure; without the which, the
excellency of wit serves to no purpose, whereas contrariwise, Righteousness
may be without Wittiness. And in comparing them, we make more account of the
duties of righteousness, which consist in action, and in the preservation of
men's welfare, than in the duties of wittiness, which consist but in knowledge.

For it is a greater matter to do a thing discreetly, It is more to do a
thing discreetly, the to forecast it wisely.
than but only to forecast it wisely. Plutarch in the life of Aristides, says
it is the virtue whereof the use and exercise is most continual, and of whose
doing most men do ordinarily feel the force, making the life of them divine
and heavenly, which are placed in degree of prosperity, power and authority,
the which by unrighteousness is made savage and beastly. The men of old time
said that Jupiter himself could not well govern his kingdom without
righteousness, according whereunto David says, That the Lord loves
righteousness, and that his countenance beholds the thing that is just. And
in another place he says, that he has prepared his seat for righteousness
and judgment. And S. Paul in the first epistle to the Corinthians says, That
God has made our Lord Jesus Christ our righteousness, wisdom, holiness, and
redemption. Solomon says in his Proverbs, That a kings throne is vpheld by
righteousness. And Plutarke in the life of Demetrius says, That nothing is more
fit and wel-beseeming for a prince, Noth^ng does better beseem a prince, than
to do justice.
than to do right and to execute justice, because Mar^ (which betokens
force) is a tyrant: but right and law (as says Pindarus) are queens of the
whole world. And Homer says, that kings and princes have received in trust of
Jupiter, the custody and keeping, not of engines to overthrow cities and to
destroy them, nor yet of ships, fortresses, and armies; but of rightful
customs and holy laws. For as David says in the xxxiij psalm, God loves
above all things that right should reign and justice take place. Righteousness
contains all virtues.
Not without cause have I said that righteousness contains all virtues. For
he that is righteous has no need of any other thing, whether it be wisdom,
or valiantness, which is nothing without righteousness, as Agesilaus said. So
that if we were thoroughly righteous, there needed no force, for to what purpose
should force serve, if righteousness were with us, yielding unto every man
that which is his. Valeantnesse serves to no purpose, where Righteousness
wants.
And as Belisarius said in a certain oration to his men of war, Valeancie
stands that man in no steed which wants righteousness. As for Liberality,
we shall find that it cannot be exercised without righteousness. For whosoever
gives without aduisement and beyond his ability, to them that are unworthy,
is not to be called liberal, but prodigal. Contrariwise, he that recompenseth
men of good service, valiant capteines, good judges, and other men of good
behavior and honesty, worthily and according to such ability as he has, is
accounted liberal; Whereby it appears, that he cannot exercise Liberality,
without that kind of righteousness which consists in distribution. If we
intend to speak of Temperance, we shall find that it is united unto
righteousness, and that the Intemperate person which is subject to his
passions, cannot do any thing aright, so long as he is entangled in that vice,
as we read of David and Achab, who leaving right and righteousness, caused Vrias
and Naboth to be put to death; and so did infinite others, whom I omit for
breifnesse sake. Insomuch that no man can be called a temperat or stayed
person, unless he be righteous. Aristides being asked what it was that men
called Righteousness; To abstain (quoth he) from coveting that which is
another man's: as who would say, he was of opinion, that if covetousness be
put away, it is a very easy matter to do well. S. Jerome says, that
righteousness is an equal distributing of all things, whereunto whosoever
cleaves, keeps vprightnes in every thing. It knows what is due to God, to
the saints, to his fellows and companions, to his neighbor, to himself, and
to the stranger. For it is good right that a man should love and worship God,
honor his companions, pay tribute to Princes, abstain from pride* be meek and
gentle, not hate strangers, no nor his enemies, but rather love them, and
submit himself to his superiors or elders. From thence springs mercy, and
the service which we yield unto God. Now then, Definitions of Righteousness.
Righteousness (according to Aristotle) is a virtue of the mind, which
yields unto every man according to his deserts. Or else it is a certain
hauiour of the mind, which observes uprightness, and gives to every man that
which to him belongs. Or else, it is an affection of the mind which makes us
apt to do rightful deeds, wherethrough we do and be desirous to do, that
which is good and honest. For they that do righteously by compulsion of law,
cannot be esteemed righteous therefore. The lawiers define Righteousness, to be
a constant and continual purpose, of yielding unto every man that which
belongs unto him. Cicero says it is an endowment of mind, which disposes a
man unto every one according to his degree; so keeping and maintaining every
man's profit in peculiar, as may best stand with the conservation of the whole.
Men in old time said, that Righteousness was a goddess, sitting at Jupiters
seat. Hesiodus says, she was borne of Jupiter, and Homer says she was borne
of all the gods.

To be short, all the Heathen said it was a Heavenly virtue; wherein they agree
with this which S. Peter says in his second epistle, We look for the new
Earth, and new Heavens, wherein righteousness dwells. And as Plato says in
his Commonweal, G^d is the first author and beginner of righteousness.
Righteousness is the greatest good thing, that ever God bestowed upon us, as
whereof he himself is the very author and first ground; wherein he speaks
divinely and agreeable to the commaundment of our Lord Jesus, who wills us to
seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, because if we so do, we shall
not want any thing. And David counsels us to offer unto him the sacrifice of
Righteousness. S. Paul in the epistle to the Romans, opposes unrighteousness
against righteousness; so as the contrary to righteousness, is evil. For as
says saint Jerome, vvriting to the daughter of Morris, Righteousness sins
not.
Righteousness is nothing else but the eschewing of sin, and the eschewing
of sin is the keeping of the commandments of Gods law. And therefore
Ecclesiasticus says thus, Turn away from thine unrighteous deeds, and turn
again unto the Lord. And in the Proverbs, Righteousness (says Solomon)
exalts a whole nation, but sin is a reproach unto people. And in the
fourteenth Psalm it is said, Thou hate Unrighteousness.

Now then, Righteousness is the virtue of the soul, and Unrighteousness is
the vice thereof, and the procurer of death, And (as Philo says)
Unrighteousness is the lineage and offspring of vice. And this vice brings
with it pain and travel, according to this saying of David in the seventh
Psalm, Behold he trauelleth with unrighteousness and wickedness. Plato in
his Commonwealth, Vnrighteounes is the soul (...) sin.
says, that to order or dispose, to command, to counsel or advise, and such
other things, are properties peculiar to the soul, so as an evil soul
miscommaundeth, misordereth, and miscouncelleth; and contrariwise, a good soul
does all things well which it does. And like as a man is esteemed to be in
health when his body is altogether disposed according to the order of nature;
and contrariwise to be out of health, when the parts of his body be infected,
and all goes contrary to the order of nature: even so to do righteously, is
nothing else but to keep the parts of the soul in such order, as they may
both command and obey, according to the true rule of Nature. The same author
says in his Protagoras, That righteousness and holiness are both one,
Righteousness and holiness are both one.
or at least wise they be virtues very like one another. In so much that, such
as righteousness is, such also is holiness; and such as holiness is, such
also is righteousness. And in his Theetetus he says, That he which is the
holiest amongst us, is likest unto God, accordingly as our Lord teaches us in
his Evangelist Matthew, saying Follow ye the example of your heavenly father.
The duties of Righteousness.
The duty of Righteousness is to live honestly, without hurting any man, and
(as says Justinian) to yield to every man that which belongs unto him.
Cicero in his Duties sets down two sorts thereof, the first is, that a man
should hurt no man, unprovoked by injury and wrong first done unto him, the
which thing notwithstanding, is forbidden by God, as in respect of revenge, and
has also ben put in practice by diverse heathen men. The second is, that we use
common things as common, and private things as private. But according to
christianity, Righteousness consists in two precepts, whereof the first is, to
love God; and the second is to love our neighbor: and on that depends all that
is written in the law and the Prophets. In the first consists the divine and
co^templatiue righteousness, and in the latter consists the distributive
righteousness. For it is not enough for a man to honor God, to fear him, and
to abstain from evil, except he also do good and be helpefull to his
neighbor: and by the word Neighbor, I mean all men, specialy those that are
good. The righteous stranger is to be preferred before the unrighteous kinsman.
For, as says Pithagoras, we ought to esteem more of a righteous stranger,
than of a kinsman or countriman that is dishonest. Which thing our Lord has
told us more expressly, in saying, He that does the will of God, is my kinsman,
my brother, and my mother. And also in another place by the parable of the
Samaritan, that had showed himself to be the wounded Jews neighbor in very
deed, by setting him upon his horse, and by having a special care of him,
wherein he, and not the priests and Pharisees that made none account of the
wounded man, had done the duty of Righteousness. Whereby it appears, the
righteous man takes pains rather for other men than for himself, and had lever
to forgo some part of his own goods, than to diminish another man's. Now
therefore, when men instruct the ignorant, relieve the poor, yield to their
neighbors that which belongs unto the^, by helping them with thing at their
need; when the great personages oppres not their inferiors, nor the king his
subjects, then may it be said that righteousness reigns in that country. And
if every man would live after manner, there should need neither law nor
magistrate. For as says Menander, Their own manners should be as laws. But
for as much as few men do give themselves to righteousness, there must of
necessity be laws and magistrates to enforce such unto righteousness, as will
not be righteous for love: and to that end are kings and rulers ordained of
God. For (as saint Paul says) the king is Gods lieutenant on earth, the
maintainer of righteousness, and as it were his chancellor: so as they which
require justice at his hand, resort not unto him as to a man, but as to the
very righteousness it self, whereof he is the dealer forth, through the will of
God, according to this saying of Salomo^ in the book of Wisdom, By me kings
reign, and counselors determine right; By me princes rule, and all lords
judge their lands. Not without cause therefore, did Homer call kings the
disciples of Jupiter; as who would say, they learned of God to do justice.
David uses terms yet of more force, and calls them, Gods which do justice;
honoring them with the name of their charge, which is of God. And Philo calls
them Gods lieutenants and vicegerents, in cases concerning justice. And in the
6 chapter of the book of Wisdom, Unto you kings do I speak (says Solomon)
harken unto me ye governors of people, and you that glory in the multitude of
nations. For your authority is given you of the Lord, and your power comes
from the highest, who will examine your works, and diligently search your
thoughts: because you being ministers of his kingdom, have not judged
uprightly, nor kept the law of righteousness. Therefore will he appear unto you
with terror, and that right soon. For a very sore judgment shall be executed
upon them that have been in authority. And in Jeremy he swears that if
princes execute not justice, their houses shall be left desolate. Wherewith
agrees that which S. Remy said unto king Clowis, Kingdoms shall continue so
long as Righteousness reigns in them.
namely that the kingdom of France should continue so long as justice reigned
there. Also Totilas king of the Goths said, that all kingdoms and empires were
easily destroyed, if they were not maintained by justice; and that as long as
the Goths dealt justly, their power was had in good reputation; but when they
fell once to covetousness, and to taking more than they ought to have done, by
and by they came to decay through their own discord among themselves. A prince
is called a living law on earth because that laws speak not, A Prince is a
living law.
ne move not; but a prince is as a lively law, which speaks and moves from
place to place, putting the law in execution, and appointing every man what he
should do; and thereof it comes that we be said to do men right. Seeing
then that a prince is the law, it follows that he must be just, and do
justice to his subjects; in doing whereof the world receives very great good.
And as Aristotle says in his mattets of state, the justice of the prince that
reigns, is more profitable to his subjects than riches are. S. Ciprian in his
treatise of twelve abuses, says, that the justice of a king is the peace of
his people, the safeguard of innocents, the defense of his country, the foyzon
of his hand, the relief of the poor, and the hope of blessedness to come to
himself. Solomon in the 20 of his proverbs says, That a king sitting on his
judgment seat, disperseth all iniquity with his look. Hereby is nothing else
meant, but that he drives away all naughtiness by his only showing of
himself to his people, and by bearing a good countenance. Howbeit, the means
it of a good prince, and such a one as is an executer of justice, for such a
one makes the wicked to quake even with his only look; and although this
virtue ought to be chiefly and principally appropried to princes, because
kingdoms without justice are but maintena^ces of mischief, according to S.
Austines saying in his ninth book of the city of God, Justice is needful for
all sorts of men.
yetnotwithstanding it fails not to be behooffull for all sorts of men, yea
even for solitary men (as says Cicero) and for such as never go abroad, as
well as for them that buy and sell, bargain and covenant, which things cannot
be done without uprightness, the force whereof is such, that even they that
live of robbery and lewdness, cannot continue without it, in that it assures
the goods of the robbers unto them. In cities justice procures peace and
equity. For (as says David) Righteousness and peace embrace one another. In
private houses it maintains mutual love and concord between the man and
wife, good will of the servants toward their master and mistress, and good
usage of the master toward his servants. Agathias said, Justice makes a
happy Commonweal.
that the Frenchmen became great, by being just, upright and charitable. For
justice and charity make a co^monweale happy, stable, long lasting, and hard
to be surprised by enemies; whereas a man may reckon up a great sort, that have
bin overthrown by injustice. Of justice or righteousness are two sorts, the one
of the law, and the other of equality. That of the law, is the more universal,
as which comprehends al sorts of virtue, and is that which in our English
tongue we properly call Righteousness. For he that performs the
commandments of the law, is Righteous because he does all the virtuous things
commanded in Gods law, so as he is liberal, lowly, modest, kind-hearted,
meek, peaceable, and so forth. When I say that a man is righteous, I mean not
that he is righteous before God, otherwise than by grace, and not by the law as
S Paul teaches us in his epistles to the Romans and the Galathians, saying,
By the law shall no man be found righteous. For the blessed ^ife consists in
the forgiveness of sins, as David declares in the one and thirtith Psalm.
And therefore what good so ever we do, our Lord will have us to account our
selves unprofitable servants. The other sort of righteousness is of equality,
and consists in dealing uprightly, and in yielding every man that which
belongs unto him, the which in English we term properly Vprightnes and Just
dealing. And this kind of righteousness is divided again into other two sorts,
A subdiuision of Righteousness.
whereof the one concerns distributing, and the other concerns exchange.
This which consists in matters of exchange, serves to make equality where
inequality seems to be, and is occupied about buieng, selling, bartering,
and bargaining between man and man. For we see that one man has money, that
another man wants, who has corn and wine: here does this kind of
righteousness procure an equality. For the monied man giving his money,
receives corn for it, that he wanted; and the other giving corn and wine,
having more than he needed, receives money, where of he had want. Therefore
when lending, buieng, interco^moning, hiring, morgaging, and such other things,
proceed duly without fraud: then is a realm seen to prosper, because right
reigns there. The like whereof we see in our bodies, the eye by the sight of
it, directs our steps, but cannot go it self: the foot is able to go, but it
cannot see, so as it carries the eye, and the eye guides it. The hand wipeth
the eye clean, and the eye directs it; the feet bear up the head, and the
head rules them; and without that, the body could not continue. Even so the
body of a commonweal could not endure, if every man should not succor one
another by such interchange. The distributive justice which the king uses
toward his subjects, consists chiefly in distributing honor and promotion
unto the^, according to every man's desert. Semblably in our bodies there
reigns a kind of justice, as for example, we see how the heart gives life and
moving to all the members, at leastwise according to most philosophers, who hold
opinion that the beginning of life and moving is in the heart, and likewise
that sense is in the brain. Wherefore it is requisite that as the heart for his
excellency, reigns as king over all the other members, so he that is most
excellent of al other men, should have the prerogative to command others, and
that if he be borne to have government, he should make himself worthy of
that charge. For as Cicero says in his Duties, Those that at the first were
chosen to bear rule, were such as the people had great good opinion of. Others
(of whom Francis Petrarch is one) divide Righteousness into 4 sorts, Another
division of Righteousness
namely Divine (which is sister to Wisdom) wherthrough we believe in God, and
acknowledge him to be the creator of al things, without whom, we cannot do any
thing. It is he that directs our footsteps in the right path* and is so
gracious unto us by the intercession of his well-beloved son, that for his sake
our sins are not imputed to us. Wherefore this virtue consists in praising
God, in worshipping him, in giving him thanks, in obeieng him, and in doing
his commandments. For Gods commandments and testimonies, are righteousness and
truth (says David, in the 119 Psalm) and they do bring us forth humility,
patience, innocence, trustiness, and all manner of virtues. Another sort of
Righteousness is called natural, because it is bor^e with us; as for example,
to honor and serve our father^s and mothers, to cherish our children, and to
do good to the^ that do good to us, are properties of nature, and whosoever
does otherwise, is esteemed an unkind monster. For as says Cassiodorus, Even
they that are ignorant of law, do nevertheless acknowledge reason and truth,
because that so to do, is not peculiar to man only, but also is common to the
brute beasts, to whom nature has given such inclination. For we see that all
kinds of beasts do cherish their young ones, whereto they be led and taught by
nature, and therefore the lawyers call it the Law of nature. The Storke
cherishes his sire and his dam, when they be old, and therefore the
acknowledging and recompencing of kindness with like kindness again, is
called in greek Autipelargia, as ye would say, A Counterstorking. The brute
beast knows him that feeds him, and is mindful of him that does him good:
as appears by a certain lion, which could well skill to requite the pleasure
that a slave had done him, in taking a thorn out of his foot. For he fed the
slave a long time in the cave where he had hidden himself, and afterward when
both of them were by chance taken and carried to Rome, and the slave being
condemned to death for robbing his master, was cast unto the lions to be
devoured by them; this lion being there among the rest, and knowing him, saved
him and defended him from hurt, and yet the time was past long before, that the
slave had done him the said pleasure. Now then it is a natural thing to do
good to them that do us good. The third kind of righteousness is that which we
call civil, which consists in yielding unto every man that which belongs
unto him, in governing cities and countries, in maintaining common society, and
in such like things. The fourth is called Judicial, which belongs to those
that have charge to judge of controversies between parties according to laws.
For the maintaining of these lattertwaine, it behooves to have magistrates: and
therefore they belong properly to princes, kings and soueraign magistrates, and
may be reduced both into one, considering that judges do but supply the rooms
of their soueraigns. Also the law which serves for the executing of justice,
in giving unto every man that which is his right, is called of the lawyers, the
Civil Law, and not the Judicial Law.

By these divisions a man may see what the duty of a prince is in case of
justice; for the worthy executing whereof, he must above al things be religious
and fear God, as I have said before, and therefore I will speak no more
thereof. Also I will omit the natural Righteousness, because it is common to
all living creatures, but the civil and judicial Righteousness is peculiar to
kings and governors of countries, and consists, first in well keeping the
laws of their countries, and in causing them to be well kept, secondly in
taking good order in cases of controversy and strife between party and
party, by themselves in their own persons, or by choosing fit persons to do
justice. Thirdly in doing right to the judges themselves, and to the other
officers whom the prince has set in authority; namely in honoring and
rewarding them according to their deserts, and likewise in punnishing them for
their misdoings: and lastly, in doing justice among their men of war. As
touching the first point, which concerns the maintaining of the written
laws, it is so necessary, The majesty of a kingdom depends upon laws.
that it may well be said that the honor of a country depends thereupon,
according to the wise answer of Pittacus, who being demanded of Craesu^ king
of Lidia, wherein consisted the honor and majesty of a kingdom? answered, Upon
a little piece of wood; meaning the laws written in tables of wood: as who
would say, that where law has his force and strength, there the realm
florisheth. For the law is the stickler between right and unright, punishing
the bad, and defending the good, says Cicero in his xij book of Laws. And
Plato says in his commonweal, The law ought to rule the magistrates.
that that commonweal goes utterly to wrecke, where the law ouer-ruleth not
the magistrates, but the magistrates overrule the law. On the contrary part, al
goes well where the law ouerruleth the magistrates, and the magistrates are
obedient to law. It belongs to magistrates to keep the laws, and to bear in
mind, that the laws be committed to their custody, says Cicero in his books
of duties. Aristotle says in his matters of state, that they which would have
law to reign in a city or commonweal, would have God to reign there.
Aliamenes being asked why he would not receive the presents of the Messenians,
Because that if I should have received them (quoth he) I could not have had
peace with the laws. For to say truth, the laws are as the pillars of a
state, upholding it as pillars uphold a house, so as the casting down of them,
is the overthrow of the house. Wherefore men ought to take good heed how they
break laws, Laws must not be broken.
which hold one another together like the links of a chain. For by undoing
one, all the rest follow after. And even so befalls it in laws, when men fall
to dispensing with them. Not without good cause therefore did Adrian the
emperor ordain, that no man should bring up any strange custom in Rome. And
as Plutarch reports in the life of Paulus Aemilius, men forsake the keeping
of the chief foundations of the state of a publick-weale, when they refuse the
care of the diligent keeping of the ordinances thereof, be they never so little
and small. And Plato in his commonweal, forbids the changing of any
thing, yea even of so much as the plays that young children are wont to use;
because the changing of them, changes the manners of youth without feeling,
and makes folk to make no account of ancient things, and to covet and esteem
of new things; a matter very dangerous to any state. And anon after he says
again in these express words, I tell you that all manner of alteration,
except it be in evil things, is very dangerous, both in diet of the body, and
in manners of the mind. And I see not but that the young folk which are
permitted to have other plays, games and pastimes than have been accustomed
aforetimes, will also differ in behauior from the youth of old times, and being
come to such difference, they will also seek a differing kind of life, and by
that means desire new laws, and set their minds upon all manner of innouations.
Sauly king of Scythia did put Anacharsis to death, for offering sacrifice to
Berecinthia, the mother of the gods, after the manner of the Greeks. Also Scylus
king of Scythia, because he wore apparel after the Greek fashion, and
sacrificed secretly after the manner of Greece, as soon as he was discovered,
was deposed for so doing, and in the end being taken in battle, had his head
struck off, and his brother Octumusades was set up in his place: so greatly
hated they strange fashions, and feared in any case to alter their old customs.
Now if Plato was afraid of alteration in so small things: what shall we say to
such princes as daily do abrogat laws for their friends and servants sakes, and
for their own peculiar profit or pleasure make no reckoning of the upholding
and maintaining of the^? Agesilaus being otherwise a good prince and a severe
obseruer of the laws of his country, was worthily blamed for favoring his
friends in cases of justice. For he said that the observing of the rigor of
justice, in matters where friends were to be touched, was but a cloak wherewith
to cover such as lifted not to do their friends good. The inconvenience that
insueth of doing wrong.
And in very deed he acquitted Phebidas who had taken the suburbs of Thebes,
and Sphodrias who went about to have taken the haven of Pyrey by stealth, at
such time as they were at peace with the Athenians. By which unjust dealing of
his, the state of the Lacedaemonians was ouerthrown. So was the city of Rome
also sacked by the Gauls, for that the Romans did the^ not justice, nor made
the^ reasonable amends, for the wrong that had bin done to them by Quintus
Fabius Ambustus. Pompey was misliked of many good men, and ill spoken of on
their behalf, because he himself having by decree forbidden the open
commending of such as were accused by order of law, so long as their case
depended in trial, entered one day into the court, and commended Plancus that
had bin accused. Insomuch that Cato being one of the judges, stopped his ears
with both his hands, saying it was not lawful for him to hear an accused
person commended, seeing it was forbidden by the laws. How much more wisely
dealt the king of Locres, who having made a law that adulterers should have
their eyes put out, and finding his own son to have transgressed the law, would
not suffer him to be dispensed with, but in the end when he was urged by his
people to pardon the offense, which thing of himself he would not grant; yet
somewhat to satisfy their request, and withal to keep the law also, he caused
one of his own eyes, and another of his sons eyes to be put out.

Plutarch says in the life of Aristides, that whenever the case concerned
justice, friendship could bear no sway with Aristides, no not even for his
friends, nor enmity provoke him against his enemies. For law ought to be
ministered uprightly, and never to be broken, unless necessity (which is
without law) enforce thereto. And yet even then also, it ought to be done so
discreetly, as it may not seem to be touched: accordingly as the Lacedaemonians
did, who when they had lost a great battle, brake the law of Lycurgus, in not
punishing them with a kind of infamy worse than death, that had fled from the
field, because that if they should so have punished them, they should have had
but few left to defend their country. And yet notwithstanding to the end they
might not seem to despise their laws, what need soever constrained them:
Agesilaus not intending to do it directly, made proclamation that the law of
Lycurgus should take no place, until the next morrow; and in the mean while
that present day he enrolled the fugitives again to the defense of their
country. But in Rome, where there was no scarcity of men, they made so small
account of them, that even after the battle of Cannas, they would not ransom
8000 men, whom Hannibal had put to their ransom.

The foresaid Lacedaemonians being requested by Cirus king of Persia and other
their confederats, to send them Lisander to be admiral of their fleet, if they
intended the well proceeding of their affairs, because they should do all
things with the better courage under his governance; refused to give Lisander
the title of Admiral, and giving it unto another, made him chief ouerseer of
the sea-matters, taking from him but only the name, and giving him in effect
the whole authority in all things.

Artaxerxes surnamed the Long-hand, king of Persia, being a meeld and gracious
prince, although he thought the law of his predecessors to be ouer-rigorous,
that punished such with whipping and with death as had lost a battle, whether
it were through their own default or no; yet nevertheless would not break it
directly, but ordained that the offender should be stripped, and that his
clothes should be scourged with rods, in steed of his back, and that his hat
should be stricken off in steed of the striking off his head. The Thebans were
yet more rigorous, howbeit that in the end they dispensed with the law. For
when Epaminondas had fortunately begun wars against the Lacedaemonians, and
saw that he could not otherwise bring them to end, because that by the law he
was to give over his charge, by reason that the time of his commission was
expired: he so dealt with his fellow-commissioners, that contrary to the law,
he made them presume to continue in office yet four months longer; within
which time the Lacedaemonians were utterly vanquished and overthrown. And when
Epaminondas was areigned for transgressing the law, and for making his
fellow-co^missioners to transgress it likewise; he confessed himself to have
deserved death for disobaieng the law, praying the Thebans that in recompense
of all the services that he had done to them, they would after his death let
write upon his tomb, That Epaminondas had been put to death, for compelling the
Thebanes to vanquish the Lacedaemonians, whom before that day, they never durst
look upon in the face. By which means, he not only procured the saving of his
life, but also the accepting in good worth, of all the things that he had
done. Marius used the like presuming beyond the law in in his iornie against
the Cimbrians, where he made a thousand strangers freedenisons of Rome, for
their valiant behavior in that battle. And when he was accused thereof to the
senate, he made answer, that by reason of the great noise of the battle, he
could not hear what the laws commanded or prohibited. Wherein Marius could
not be deemed to have done well. For although it was a point of justice to
reward good and valiant men: yet ought it not to have been done with the
overthrow of law, as it was then done by him, not of any necessity, but rather
to have the men of war at his devotion, than for any good to the commonweal,
as he showed anon after in the wars that he had against Silla. Augustus made
great Augustus made account of the Privilege of Freedeniship.
But Agustus would rather have privileged men from paying of subsidies, and
discharged the^ of tallages, than to have made the^ free of the city of Rome:
for he could not abide that the right of citizenship, should be brought in small
estimation, by beco^ming too common. Neither ought the changing of laws to be
excused by this saying of Plato, In what cases laws may be corrected.
That at the first making of laws, there may be some things, which the
magistrates that succeed afterward may well amend; until that by good
aduisement and experience, they see what is best to be allowed. And in another
place he says again, it is not men, but fortune and the enterchange of
things, that make laws. For either nessessitie, or force and violence of war,
subvert states and alter laws; so likewise plagues, tempests, sicknesses, and
inco^modities of many years continuance, do cause very great changes and
alterations. For no doubt but the thing which is set down for a law, is to be
debated long time, and to be altered, if there by any inconvenience therein; as
the citisens of Locres did, who admitted men to devise new laws, howbeit with
halters about their necks, to be hanged for their labor, if their laws were
found to be evil. But when a law is once allowed by long experience and
custom, it is not in any wife to be changed, but upon extreme necessity,
which is above all law. Also it is certain, that many new laws are to be made
upon the alteration of a state. Laws once stablished ought not to be alt^red.
But when the laws are once stablished with the state, they cannot be altered
without injury to the state, exept it be upon very urgent and needful cause.
For the politik laws that are made for the mainteinance of a state, tend not to
any other end, (says Plato) than to rule and command, Law must command and
not obey.
and not to be subject. As for the laws of nature, they ought to be kept most
straightly. For (as Justinian says) forasmuch as the law of nature is given us
by the providence of God, it ought to abide firm and vnmutable. But the
political law is to be changed oftentimes, as we shall show hereafter. And
because that among men there be some monsters, that is to say, men that sin
against nature, and make war against it: it is meet that the sovereign
magistrate, which is set in that dignity of purpose to encounter against
monsters, as Hercules did, and to defend the poor from the violence of the
greater sort, should cause an equality of justice to be observed among his
subjects. For when the poor is oppressed by the rich, it is wrong; of the
which wrong proceeds discontentme^t, which oftentimes breeds a hatred toward
the prince, and finally a rebelling against him. How to reign in safety.
Wisely therefore did Theopompus answer, to one that demanded of him by what
means a prince might live in suertie; by suffering his friends (quoth he) to
do al things that are reasonable, Princes oue^throwne for suffering their
subjects to be wronged.
taking heed therewithal, that his subjects be not misused, nor wronged. For
many princes have bin overthrown for suffering their servants to do all manner
of wrongs and injuries; whereof we have a notable example in Philip king of
Macedonie, who was slain by Pausanias, for refusing to hear his complaint,
and to do him justice against one that had committed a rape upon him. For the
very duty of a prince, consists in doing justice. For as Cicero says in his
books of Duties, the first choosing of kings, was for the estimation which men
had of them, that they were good and just men; such as by defending the poor
from the rich, and the weak from the mighty, would hold them both in concord
and quietness. Folk give greater credit and authority to good Iusticers, than
to any others.
Plutarke in the life of Cato, says that folk give greater credit and
authority to good iusticers, than to any others. For they not only honor them
as they do the valiant, ne have them in admiration as they have the sage and
wise; but they do also love them, and put their trust and confidence in them;
whereas of them that be not such, they distrust the one sort, and fear the
other. Moreover they be of opinion, that valeantnesse and wisdom come rather
of nature than of good will, persuading themselves, that the one is but a
quicknes and finesse of wit, and the other but a certain stoutnesse of heart
that comes of nature; whereas eueryman may be just, at leastwise if he will.
Two precepts for governors.
Wherefore they that will govern well (says Cicero) must observe two precepts
of Platos: whereof the one is, to have good regard of the welfare of their
subjects, employing all their devises and doings to that end, and leaving their
own peculiar profit in respect of that: and the other is to have such a care
of the whole body of the commonweal, that in defending any one part thereof,
the residue be not neglected. For like as a tutorship, so the charge of a
kingdom, is to be administered to the benefit of those that are under the
charge, and not of them that have the charge. And they that are careful of one
part, and careless of another, do bring sedition, quarelling and discord into
the kingdom or commonweal; which is the ruin of realms and commonweals.
Wherefore the duty of a good king, is not only to do no wrong to his subjects
himself, but also to restrain others from doing them wrong, and to strain
himself to the uttermost of his power, to do right either in his own person,
or by his substituts, to such as seek justice at his hand. For the greatest
good that can be done to any people, is to do them right, and to punish such
as do them wrong. And in that case the king must be like unto the law, which
accepts no person, ne punishes for displeasure, but judges according to
right: even so, princes must not suffer themselves to be carried away with
favor, hatred, or anger; but must minister justice indifferently to al men. But
oftentimes they ouershoot themselves, The prince ought to minister justice unto
all men indifferently.
and step aside from the path of justice to pleasure their courtiers; not
considering, that their so doing breeds to themselves great dishonor, and in
their people great coffeehouse. Aristides would never make aliance with any
man in administering the commonweal, because he would not do wrong unto any
man, at the pleasure of those to whom he were alied, nor yet grieve them by
refusing any thing that they might require at his hand. Cato of Vtica was so
severe a iusticer, that he swarued not any way for any favor or pity; insomuch
that sometimes he would speak against Pompey, as well as with him. And when
Pompey thanked him for that which he had done for him; he told him that in any
good cause he would be his friend, and not otherwise. Philip was desired by one
Harpalus, one in greatest favor with him, to call before him a certain case,
to the intent that his kinsman, for whom he made the suit, might not be
diffamed. To whom Philip made this answer or the like, It is better that thy
kinsman should be diffamed, than that I should be dishonered for his sake.
Rutilius made an answer to a friend of his, as worthy to be remembered as this
of king Philips. For when his friend being denied a certain thing that was
unjust, asked him whereto his freindship served him, if he would not grant his
demand; nay (quoth Rutilius) what avails me your friendship, if I must do
for you the thing that is dishonest? Antiochus gave charge to the cities that
were subject unto him, that if he commanded them any unjust or unlawful
thing, they should not obey it, but should take it as though the letters were
written without his priuitie. The notable answer of king Agis.
Agis king of Sparta being desired of his father and mother, to do a thing
that was unjust, for their sakes: answered them on this manner, While I was
under your government, I obaied you as I ought to do, and did whatsoever ye
commanded me, as not knowing what was right or wrong. But now that you have
delivered me to the service of my country, and taught me the laws thereof, I
will do my indeuorto obey the same: and for as much as your will has always
bin, to set me to the doing of things good and reasonabe, I will do according
to your will, and not according to your request. The answer of Themistocles.
Themistocles being desired by the Poet Simonides, to help him in a wrongful
matter; answered him, that neither he should play the good Poet, if he made not
his verses in due measure, nor himself the good prince, if he should deal
against law. Athen^dor being condemned in a certain fine by the Athenians, The
answer of Alexander.
prayed Alexander to write unto them for the release of his fine: the which
thing Alexander refusing to do, sent them the money that he was set at, and so
paid the fine of his own purse. Caricles the son in law of Phocio^, being
indicted for taking a bribe of Harpalus, prayed Phocion to assist him at his
judgment; The saying of Phocion.
but Phocion refused him, saying, I have taken thee, Caricles, to be my son in
law, howbeit but in all just and honest cases only. The judgment of Marius.
Trebonius being accused before Marius, then consul and general of the Roman
host, for killing one Caius Lusius a nephew of the said Marius, and finding no
man that durst defend his cause, did plead his case himself, and proved before
Marius, that his killing of his nephew Lusius was of necessity, because his
nephew would else have forced him. Whereupon Marius commending him for his
labor, commanded such a garlond to be brought unto him out of hand, as was
wont to be given to those that had showed proof of some notable valeancie in
battle, and crowned him therewith as one that had done a very valiant and
virtuous deed. And Plutarch says, that the report of this judgment in Rome,
stood Marius in great stead toward the obtainment of his third consulship.

The just dealing of king Totilas.
Totilas king of the Goths, being importunatly sued unto by all the captains
of his host to pardon a very valiant man that had ravished a maid; said unto
them, that whereas at other times they being out of all comparison far stronger
than the Romans, had nevertheless gone always by the worse, because they had
not done good justice: seeing that God now putting their offenses out of his
remembrance, did give them prosperity and make them to atchieue things that
surpassed their force, it were better for them to hold still the cause of their
victories by executing justice, than to procure their own decay by doing
wrong. The conversation of life carries the fortune of sight.
For it was not possible that the man which has committed rape, or done any
other wrong, should behave himself well in battle, forasmuch as every man's
good or bad fortune in fight, depends upon the good or bad conversation of
his life. Whereupon the man was punished with death, and his goods were given to
the maid.

The princely dealing of king Artaxe^xes.
Satibarzanes, chief gentleman of king Ataxerxes privy chamber, sued unto him
for one, in a thing that was scarce just; for the obtainment whereof he was
promised thirty thousand dariks. Whereof the king being advertised, gave him the
full sum of money that had bin promised him, and said unto him, Take this
Satibarzanes, for I shall never be poor for it, but had I done as thou
would have had me to do, I should have been unjust. And so he neither
disappointed his friend, nor yet did any injustice: The coue^^^sn^sse of
Vespas^an.
whereby he passed the emperor Vespasian in bounty and liberality. This
Velpasian was a good emperor in many things, but his virtues were blemished
and darkened with the vice of covetousness. For he was so far in love with money,
that he made great hoords of it, by taking great tributs of the Dacians, by
sales of things, and by other exactions. Upon a time a certain courtier sued
earnestly unto him, for the gift of an office of great value; pretending that
he sought it for a brother of his. But Vespasian doubting that he sought it for
himself, dealt in such wise that he discovered the truth, whereupon causing the
party to come to him, that had promised his courtier the money, he sold the
office unto him, and took the money to himself. Within a while after, the
courtier becomes a suter again to the emperor for his brother: and the emperor
sends him again to seek another brother, for the party for whom thou suest
(quoth. the emperor) is my brother; an answer as merry conceited as full of
covetousness. Offenses must not be left unpunished.
To come again to our matter, a prince must not do against right, nor suffer
faults to escape unpunished, neither for favor nor friendship. For he that
scapes unpunished for his offense, is always the readier to do evil, because
his nonpunishment provoke him thereunto. And for that cause Ca^o said, He had
lever to be unrewarded for his doing good, Private harms are dangerous to the
publik state.
than to be unpunished for doing evil. Also he was wont to say, That a wrong
done to another man privately, is dangerous to all men generally, because no man
can be in safety among the wicked, if they may do evil without reproof.
Impunitie of vice is dangerfull to a whole state.
And as Antisthenes was wont to say, That commonweal is in great perrill,
where is no difference betwixt good men and bad; meaning thereby that the state
of a kingdom or commonweal cannot stand where virtue is not honored and
recompensed, and vice punished. For this cause God commanded Moses to take away
evil from among the people; that is to say, to punish evil in particular
persons, for fear least folk should pay the deerer for the folly, and that he
should make the multitude to bear the punishment due to some particular
person, To let sin go unpunished, is a consenting unto it.
because it is a kind of consenting to the sin, when it is willingly permitted
to go unpunished. I know well it will be said, that a prince ought to be
merciful, It is no mercy to pardon the faults that are committed against other
men.
and I deny it not. But this mercy consists in pardoning the offenses that
concern but the prince himself, and the party that is hurt by them, and not
any other men's that are done against the commonweal; as king Lewis the
twelfth answered both Christianly and virtuously, unto one that whetted him to
be revenged of a certain wrong that had bin done unto him when he was duke of
Orleans; It besemeth not a king of France (quoth he) to be avenged of injuries
done to a duke of Orleance.

Infinitely was Julius Caesar commended for his clemency, and that of good
right: For he did easily forgive the offenses that were committed against
himself. And Antonine was wont to say, That there was not any thing which
procured greater estimation to an emperor among strangers, than clemency did.
And (as says Statius) it is an honorable thing to give life to him that
craves it. Nevertheless there is great difference between the pardoning of
offenses done to a man's own self, and the pardoning of offenses done to other
men. For it is not in you to forgive the offenses which are done against other
men, In what sort a prince should be gracious.
neither ought they to be forgiven by any other than by such as are hurt by
them; neither can they also do it to the prejudice of the common weal. And
therefore a prince cannot with a safe conscience give pardon to murderers, nor
forgive the offenses of wicked persons, to purchase himself the renown of
gracious and merciful. Mercy to the wicked is cruel^ie to the good.
For favor and mercy granted to naughty-packs, is naught else but cruelty
toward good men, as Arc^idamidas was wont to say. And therefore Cato said,
that those also which restrained not the wicked from evil doing, Princes may
not at their pleasure make la^ish of that which belonged t^ God. Philo in his
treatise concerning Judges.
if they might, were to be punished, because he accounted it as a prouocatio^
to do evil. Wherefore whatsoever is done against the law, ought to be punished
by the law, the which has no respect of servant, friend, or kinsman. Of which
law the prince is the executor, and is nothing else but a living law, or rather
the deputy or lieutenant of God the just judge. Now it is not lawful for the
deputy or vnder-agent of God, to be lavish at his pleasure, of that which
belongs to God, because he has not received it of him otherwise, than in
custody, and upon account; and therefore he is not to bestow it upon any man,
for friendships sake, or for pity.

Thereupon it came that the Thebans, to show what justice is, did paint in their
courts, the images of judges without hands, and the images of princes without
eyes: to show that in Judgment kings ought not to be surprised with any
affection, nor judges carried with any covetousness. Of justice in cases of
treason and rebellion.
And although it be not lawful for a Prince, to be judge in his own cause,
for the avoiding of all passions: yet is he not forfended, to punnish the wrong
that is offered him in cases of treason and rebellion: but rather on the
contrary part, it is a point of justice to punish rebels, as procurers of
trouble to the state. The emperor Maximilian, espieng in a certain uproar that
was in his camp, how a soldier struck up a drum without commandment, of his
captain, slew him with his own hand, because the danger of his host being on a
rore, required the remedy of speedy and present cruelty.

Nevertheless such manner of dealing is to be done with great discretion; for
sometimes things may happen to be in such case, that dissimulation shall
avail more than punishment, as it did with Pompey after the death of
Sertorius. For when Perpenna had sent him a cofer full of letters, of Romans
that had written to Sertorius, and had held on his side: he would not look
upon any of them, but cast them all into a fire, The want of discretion in
extinguishing one faction, may breed many m^.
for doubt least for one Sertorius, then dead, there should step up twenty
others at Rome, when they perceived themselves to be discovered: because it
falls often out, that when a man thinks to overthrow one faction, he
multiplieth the number of his enemies. And as Fabius Maximus was wont to say,
It is better to hold such folk in suspense by gentle and kind dealing, than
severely by rigor to seek our all suspicions, or to deal too sharply toward
such as are to be suspected.

In the city of Athens there happened a conspiracy of certain noble men
against the state, who had determined that if they could not compass their
purpose of themselves, they would call in the Persians to their help. As these
things were a brewing in the camp, and many mo besides were guilty of the
conspiracy, Aristides feeling the sent thereof, stood in great fear by reason
of the time. For the matter was of too great importance, to be passed over
without care: and there was no less danger in ripping up the matter to the
quick, for as much as he knew not how many might be found guilty of the
crime. Therefore of a very great number, he caused but only eight to be
apprehended; and of those eight, two that were to be most deeply charged fled
out of the camp, and the other six he set again at liberty. Whereby he gave
occasion to such as thought not themselves to be discovered, to assure
themselves of safety and to repent them of their wicked purpose: saying that
for judgment they should have battle, whereby they might justify themselves.

The policy of Agesilaus.
At such time as Epaminondas came to besiege Lacedemon, there were about two
hundred of a conspiracy within the city, which had taken one of the quarters
of the town very strongly situated, wherein was the temple of Diana. The
Lacedaemonians would have run upon them out of hand in a rage; But Agesilaus
fearing least it might be a cause of some further great alteration, commanded
all his company to keep their places, and he himself unarmed went unto the
rebels, and cried unto them, Sirs ye have mistaken my commaundment, for this is
not the place where I appointed you to meet in, but my meaning was that some of
you should have gone to yonder place, and othersome to other places, pointing
to diverse places with his hand. The seditious persons hearing him say so, were
well apaid, because they thought their evil purpose to have been undiscovered:
whereupon leaving that place, they departed by and by to the places he had
pointed them. Then Agesilaus seizing that Fort into his hands, the name whereof
was Isorium, caused fifteen of the Rebels to be apprehended, whom he caused to
be all executed the next night.

One Badius having valeantly encountered the Carthaginenses at the battle of
Cannas, The manner of Marcellus dealing in a certain sedition.
and being taken prisoner, to requite the courtesy of Hannibal that had saved
his life, and given him his ransom, as soon as he came home to his own house
to Nola, made almost all his countrymen to rebel against the Romans. Yet for
all this, Marcellus considering that the time required then to mollify things,
rather than to corzie them, sought not by any means to punish him, but only
said unto him, Since there be in you so evident and honorable marks of your
good will toward the Romans (meaning the wounds that he had received in the
said battle of Cannas) how happens it that you come not to the Romans still?
Think you that we be so leawd and so unthankful, that we will not reward
the virtue of our good friends, according to their worthiness, which is
honored even of our enemies? And after he had embraced him in his arms, he
presented him with a goodly horse of service for the wars, and gave him five
hundred dragmaes. Whereupon from that day forth he never forsook Marcellus,
but became very loiall, and a most earnest discouerer of such as took part
against the Romans.

Frederike the emperor, and king of Naples, minding to punish the rebels of
Samimato, made countenance as though he had not espied their conspiracy,
terming them euerywhere good and loiall subjects, to the end that despair
should not cause them to enter into arms against him openly, as the lords of
Naples that followed the part of Conradine, had done against Charles duke of
Aniou. For when they saw that Conradine was overcome, and that there was no
hope for them to obtain pardon at the hands of Charles of Aniou, they fell to
rebelling, and fortified themselves in diverse places.

Likewise when people are to far enraged, it is no time to punnish, but rather
to reconcile and appease. When the Parisians rebelled for the aids: to put them
in fear, men began to throw some of the rebels into the water. But in steed of
dismaieng them, they burst out into greater fury than before; in so much that
the executioners were feign to give over their punishment, for fear of
increasing the commotion, in steed of appeasing it.

Agesilaus having discovered a very dangerous conspiracy, did put some of the
traitors to death secretly without arraignment or indictment, contrary to the
laws of Lacedemon. For unto people that are set upon mischief, Biting words
are dangerous
not only ouerrigorous justice, but also biting words are dangerfull,
considering that in time of trouble, and in time of commotion, one word, or one
letter, may do more harm, than a notable iniutie shall do another time.

And even so besell it to Macrinus for a letter which he wrate unto Mesa,
wherein he told him that he had bought the emperorship of a sort of covetous
soldiers, that had no consideration of deserts, but only who would most give.
With which words the men of war being chafed, did all swear that it should
cost Macrinus his head, in recompense of the wrong that he had done them. And
so it came to pass indeed.

We have spoken sufficiently of the discretion, meeldnesse, and uprightness
which a prince ought to have in cases of justice, for the well and worthy
executing thereof. But for as much as it is impossible for a prince to attend
at al times to the doing of justice: he must needs do justice by deputies, and
set men of good and honest reputation in his place, to do right between party
and party, when controversies rise betwixt them, as Moses did by the counsel
of his father in law, Iethro. In the choosing of whom, Princes ought to make
chois of good judges.
a prince may as far ouershoot himself, as if he judged all causes without any
foreconsideration. For he that makes not choice of good judges, does great
wrong to the commonweal. No importunat suit, no earnest intreatance, no gifts
that could be given, no favor, no familiarity could ever cause Alexander
Scuerus to bestow any office of justice upon any man whom he deemed not fit
^or it, and virtuous in the administration of it.

Such therefore should be chosen, as are of skill and of good life; and they
ought to have good wages, and not to take any other thing, than their ordinary
stipend allowed them by the prince. Traian used that kind of dealing; of whom
it is written, that he could not abide, that judges should take any thing for
their hire, but that they should be reco^pensed at his hand, according to their
service and good dealing. Adrian likewise enquired of the life and conversation
of the senators: and when he had in truth found any that was virtuous and
poor, he increased his intertainment, and gave him rewards of his own private
goods. Contrariwise when he found any to be given to vice, he never left until
he had driven him out of the senate. Now then, the prince that will have good
judges, Officers are to be recompensed according to their deseruings.
yea and good officers of all sorts, must either honor them and reward them, or
else punish them according to their deserts: As touching the honoring of them,
Augustus has showed us an example thereof, who at his entering into the
senat-house, saluted all the senators, and at his going out would not suffer
any of them to rise up to him. Alexander Seuerus did greatly honor the
presidents of the provinces, causing the^ to sit with him in his chariot, that
men might see the honor that he yielded to the ministers of justice, and that
he might the more conveniently talk with them, concerning the rule and
government whereof they had the charge. He neither made nor punished any
senator, without the advice of the whole senate. And upon a time, when he saw a
freeman of his walking between two senators, he sent one to buffet him, saying
it was unseemly that he should presume to meddle among senators, which might
well have bin their servant. Likewise the Emperor Claudius never dealt in any
affair of importance, but in the senate. Even Tiberius himself had great
regard of them, and saluted them whenever he passed by them. The rewarding of
judges and officers.
And as touching the rewarding of them, the foresaid Alexander may serve for an
example to good princes. For he did great good to judges, and rewarded them
bountifully. And being asked on a time why he did so, As a prince (quoth he)
neither ought, nor in reason can be truly called a prince, except he minister
justice: so be ye sure, that when I find an officer which does his duty in
that behalf, I cannot pay or recompense him sufficiently. That is the cause
why I do them so many courtesies; and besides that, in making them rich, Of
the punishing of wicked judges.
I bereave them of al cause to impouerish other men. But like as a good judge
cannot be too much reco^pensed, so an evil judge cannot be too much punished.
We have a notable example known to all men, concerning the punishment of the
judge, whom Cambyses made to be flaine quick, and with his skin curried, caused
the seat of judgment to be covered, and made the same judges son to sit as
judge on it, that in ministering justice, he should bethink him of his fathers
punishment Albeit that Antonine was very pitiful, yet was he very rigorous to
judges that did not their duty; insomuch that whereas in other cases he
pardoned eue^ the greeuousest offenses, in this case he punnished even the
lightest. There was also another thing in him right worthy of comme^dation in
the execu^ion of justice; namely, that to avoid confusion, he caused al such to
be dispatched out of hand, as had any suit in the court. And when any office
was void, he would not that one should su^ for it, but made the suitors
themselves to come to his presence, as well to gratify them himself, as also
to know whom he gratified. For he that receives not the benefit at the princes
own hand, thinks himself beholden to none but unto him by whom he had it,
as we have found by experience in (this our realm of) France, within this
fifty or threescore years.

The Justice of war^e.
LEt us come now to the justice of war, which ought to be like the same that we
have spoken of, and consists in penalties and rewards, namely in punishing
the wicked, and in recompensing the good and valiant men with honor and
regard. For honor nourishes the liberal arts and virtue. In which behalf
the emperor Adrian did so greatly excel, that he was both feared and loved of
all his men of war; feared because he chastised them, and beloved, because he
paid them well. Upon a time one demanded of Lisander, What manner of
commonweal he liked best? That (quoth. he) wherein both the valiant and the
cowards are rewarded according to their deserts; as who would say, that virtue
is furthered by reward; and that men of no value are spurred up to do well, by
the shame and reproach which they receive by doing amiss, and in being
despised. Ennius Priscus demanded of Traian, What was the cause that he was
better beloved of the people than his predecessors? Because (quoth. he) that
commonly I pardon such as offend me, and never forget them that do me service.
The Law of Arms.
But before I speak of rewarding or recompensing, we must know what is the law
and discipline of arms, whereof the first and principal point (that is to wit,
to do no man wrong) depends upon natural justice. And yet-notwithstanding,
this seems so strange among us, that the chief and principal point of
warlike behavior, seems to consist in pilling, swearing, rauishing, and
robbing, and that a soldier cannot be esteemed a gallant fellow, unless he be
furnished with those goodly virtues. Contrariwise, if the Romans had any
soldiers that were never so little given to looseness, they would not use
their service* no not even in most extreme necessity, (as is to be seen by the
doings of Metellus in Affrike, and of Scipio in Spain) making more account of
one legion that lived after the law and order of war, than of ten that were out
of order. Now the laws of arms were diverse, according to the diversities of
the captains that have had the leading of Armies. The virtue of obedience,
depends upon the gentleness of nature.
The first consists in the obedience of the men of war. For (as says
Plato) it avails not to have a good captain, unless the soldiers be
discreet and obedient, because the virtue of well-obeieng, has as great need
of a gentle nature, and of the help of good trainment, as the princely virtue
of commanding. All other precepts tend generally to natural justice, the
which will not have wrong done to any man. Alexander being advertised that two
soldiers which served under Parmenio, had ravished the wives of certain
soldiers strangers, wrate unto Parmenio to inform him thereof, charging him
that if he found it to be so, he should put both the soldiers to death, as
wild beasts bred to the destruction of men. When the Romans marched under the
leading of Marcus Scaurus, there was found in their trenches at their departure
thence, a tree hanging full of fruit, so great conscience made they to take any
thing that was not their own. And if any man went aside in any field, farm,
or grange, at such time as the camp marched, he was punished immediately, and
it was demanded of him if he could find in his heart, that a man should do as
much in his lands. Whersoeuer Bellisarius went with his army, he restrained
his men from doing wrong to laborers and husbandmen, insomuch that they durst
not eat the apples and pears that hung upon the trees. After the death of
Campson the Sultan of Egypt, Selim king of Turks being possessed of Damasco,
and the rest of the cities of Syria, would not suffer his men of war to come
within them, but lodged his camp by the walls of the town, and of all the time
that he was there, there was not any guard set to keep the goodly and
fruitful Gardens, that were without the city, because the rigorous justice
that Selim executed, restrained the Turks from misdoing; wherthrough the whole
army found themselves well apaid. For they never wanted victuals, but had
plenty and abundance of all things. Traian caused a captain to be banished,
for killing a husbandmans Oxen without need; and awarded the husbandman for
amends, to have the captains horse and armor, and also his quarters wages.

Tamerlane king of Tartarians, made a soldier of his to be put to death, for
taking but a cheese from a poor woman. Totilas was so severe in the discipline
of war, that he would not leave any one misdeed unpunished. He that ravished
any woman, was punished with death, or at least wise forfaited his goods, the
which were given to the party that was outraged. Insomuch that he passed by
the cities and towns that were in friendship and league with him, without
doing them any harm; saying that kingdoms and empires were easily lost, if
they were not maintained by justice. Which thing Justinian found to be very
true, who through the injustice and disorder of his captains, lost the empire
of Italy. Paulus Emilius was a stern obseruer of the law of arms, not seeking
to purchase the love of his soldiers by pleasing them, but showing them
himself from point to point, how auailable the ordinances of war were. And
this his austeritie and terriblenesse toward them that were disobedient, and
transgressed the law of arms, vpheld the commonweal vnappaired. It is a less
matter to overcome the enemy, than to uphold one country by good discipline.
For he was of opinion that to vanquish a man's enemies by force of arms, is (as
ye would say) but an accessorie or income, in comparison of the well ordering
and winning of a man's countrymen by good discipline.

The Laws of arms have bin diverse, according to the diversity of captains,
Of the laws of arms,
the which we may learn in one word of the best and most valiant emperors
that ever have bin. Julius Caesar would make countenance, as though he saw not
the faults of his soldiers, and let them go unpunished, so long as they
tended not to mutiny, or that they forsook not their ensign; and in those
cases he never pardoned the^. Insomuch that in the time of the civil wars, he
cashed a whole legion at once, notwithstanding that he stood as then in great
need of them, and ere ever he would admit them again, he ceased not, till he
had punished the misdoers. Among the Egyptians, they that had disobayed their
captains, were noted with a reproach worse than death.

Augustus was so severe toward such as recoiled in battle, The severity of the
Romans.
or disobayed his commandments, that he would put every tenth man of them to
death, and unto them that had done less faults, he would give barley bread in
steed of wheaten. So also did Marcellus cause barley to be delivered in steed of
wheat to the bands that first turned their backs unto Hanniball. Antonie tithed
the Legions that had forsaken their trench, at a sallie that was made upon them
by the Persians out of Phraata. And unto those also which remained of that
tithing was barley given in steed of wheat, for their food to live by. Licinius
the consul, being sent against Spaerta^us chief leader of the bondmen that
had rebelled, tythed to the number of a 4000 men, and yet failed not for all
that, to obtain the victory. At such time as Timoleon was minded to give
battle to the Carthagineans who were ten to one, there were a thousand of his
men that recoiled back and would not fight, whereof Timoleon was well apaid,
that they had bewraied themselves in good time, because that else they had done
him more harm than good. But when he had once woone the field, and was
returned unto Syracuse, he banished them euerichone out of Sicilie, with
express commandment, that they should get them out of the city, before the
sun went down. Lucullus laid a reproachful infamy upon such as had fled in a
certain skirmish against Mithridates; causing them to dig a pit of twelve
foot, all vnapparelled in their shirts, the rest of their company standing by
to see them do it. Traian would not suffer any soldier to be put to death,
for any fault committed in war, except it were for blaspheming God, for
treason, for flying in battle, for rauishing of women, or for sleeping in the
watch; and in those cases he pardoned not any man whatsoever he were. Albeit
that Pirrhus was a stranger, yet caused he the law of arms to be observed
straightly among the Tarentines, and he punished those that failed. Marius was
a sore man in that behalf, but when he had once inured his soldiers to
abstain from offending, Severity in war is wh^lsome.
and from disobaying, then they found that his sternnesse in commanding, and
his sharpness in punishing such as forgate their duty, was not only
reasonable, but also just and wholesome. The laws of the Switzers are such,
that such as slay and recoile in battle for fear and cowardlinesse, shall be
cut in pieces by their fellows in the sight of the whole army, to the end
that the greater fear should ouer-wey the lesser; and that for dread of the
violent death, they should choose the death that is honorable. This caused the
emperor Julian in a certain battle to slay ten of the first that fled away,
thereby to compel the rest to turn again upon the enemy. Captain Franget
was degraded from the order of knighthood, and proclaimed unnoble, both he and
all his posterity, for yielding Fontrabie to the Spaniards, notwithstanding
that he excused himself by a secret compact that Don Peter the son of the
marshall of Nauar had made with the Spaniards; because it was thought that
although it were so, yet he ought not to have bin negligent in forseeing such
co^spiracie. Auidius Cassius dealt more cruelly tha^ any others, The cruelty of
Auidius Cassius
in executing the law of arms. For he made all such to be crucified, as had
taken any thing from honest men, in the self same place where the crime was
committed. Also he caused the arms and legs to be cut off, of al such as
departed from the camp without pasport: and he put them not to death, saying
that there was more example to be seen in a miserable catif alive, than dead.
It happened upon a time, that a very few of his men of war, having discovered
that the Sarmatians kept no good ward, slew of the^ to the number of a three
thousand. And when his capteins sued for reward of their good exploit, he made
them to be al crucified, saying it might have happened that there had bin some
ambush of enemies, and by that means the honor of the Roman empire might have
bin lost; in doing whereof, he followed the example of Torquatus, the history
of whom is known well enough: nevertheless in the one there was a breach of
the prohibitio^, but in this there was no such thing at all. This cruelty was
far differing from the meeldnes of Scipio, who said, that a good general of a
field, ought to deal like the good surgion, which never uses launcing but
when all other remedies fail. And as Plutarch says in the comparison between
Agis and Gracchus, It is not the property either of good surgion or of good
governor of a state, to set his hand to sword or launcer, but only in extreme
necessity, when there is no other remedy. How a soldier is to be dealt with*
that he may be good,
But to make a man of war obedient, and refrain from doing wrong to any body,
he must be well paid. And (as Alexander Seuerus says) he must be well
apparelled, well shod, well armed, well fed, and have some money in his purse.
For poverty makes men hartlesse. The same thing was some cause, that the
soldiers of Macrinus rebelled against him. For when they saw themselves so ill
paid, they fell to mutiny, whereat Mesa taking occasion to lay hold of the
opportunity that was offered, fell in hand with the men of war, and by
offering them to pay them of his own treasures, he made them so affectioned
toward him, that for his sake they set up his little son Heliogabalus.

Iphicrates an Athenian captain, was content that his soldiers should be
covetous, amorous, and voluptuous, to the intent that they might hazard
themselves the more boldly and aduenturously to all perils, to have wherewith
to furnish their desires. And Julius Caesar would have his soldiers fair and
richly armed, to the end they should fight valeantly, for fear to loose them.
Finally, to teach whatsoever belongs to a soldier to have, the epistle
suffices which Dioclesian writes thus to a certain governor of a province;
If you will be a Tribune (says he) or rather if you intend to live, bring to
pass that your soldiers meddle not with other men's goods, that they take
neither pullerie nor sheep, that they trample not down other men's corn, that
they take not any man's oil, salt, or wood unpaid for, that they find
themselves of the booties of their enemies, and not with the tears of your
subjects, that every of them have his armor neat and clean, that they be well
shod, and that they be well clad.

The keeping of equality among men of war.
There is yet one rule more to be kept in the law of arms, which is, to keep
equality among men of war; the which rule Adrian the emperor observed very
well and fitly. For when he would have any labor done in his camp, all were
put to the labor; when any watching was, al watched; and he would not suffer
any man to be exempted: insomuch that he himself would be the foremost among
them. Soldiers have most need of discipline in time of peace.
Also there is consideration to be had in warfare, how to make difference
betweeen a camp and a garrison. For in a camp it is not amiss, to take some
respit that men may make merry, so the time of feasting be not ouer-long. And
therefore in that behalf, Julius Caesar looked not too nearly to his soldiers,
because he did keep them commonly occupied. But when rhey lie in garrison,
where they shall not need to fight, nor stand in fear of any enemy; It will
not be good to accustom them to live too delicatly and at too much ease. For
in so long continuance of time, they become the more vnweeldie to war, and if
they pill the country where they lie, there follows upon it the hatred of
that people. Charles of Aniou was esteemed and commended for his good fortune,
and for a good warrior. But yet was this renown somewhat defaced, for that
after his victories, he gave his soldiers too much liberty in time of peace,
to the great damage of his subjects. Therefore in time of peace is it wherein
they have most chiefly need of discipline and labor, least they wex vnweeldie
by weltering in idleness. For by that are they often undone. And in very deed,
because the Legions in Germany were very much marred, by being too much nusled
in licentiousness before; Adrian was driven to do in time of peace as in time
of war, and to set up the order of war new again, which had bin discontinued
from the time of Augustus. And for example to his men of war, he ate not any
other victuals than such as were ordinary, and he marched on foot five or
six leagues a day. Also we read that after the time that Hanniball fell to
maintain his wars with less fear against the Romans, by reason of his
victory at Cannas, and for that he had met with a delicate city replenished
with all sorts of pleasures, he found not his soldiers so good a good while
after, as they had bin before. In that respect did one say, That the vanquished
Asia, had vanquished the Romans. The natious least delicat, have bin best
warriors.
And of a truth the nations that have had least things of delight, have ever
bin the best warriors. As for example, Julius Caesar deemed the Belgians to be
the valiantest of all the Gauls, because they were furthest off from the Roman
province, and had fewest of the things of delight brought out of the province
to them. The Greeks did alwais with small numbers make head against the
Persians. The Lacedaemonians ouer-mastered all the rest of the Greeks, and
continued invincible, so long as they kept their warlike discipline; but as
soon as they forwent that, they were vanquished by the Thebans, as Darius was
by Alexander, notwithstanding that Darius came with five hundred thousand men,
against a fifty or threescore thousand Macedonians; and that was because the
one sort was tender and trained up in pleasure and not in war, and the other
sort was enured to war, and accustomed to pains taking. The Turks observing
some piece of the Roman discipline, drink no wine: by mean whereof, they be
discharged of a great deal of baggage, without the which our men could not
live so much as one day. Pesennius Niger suffered not any wine to be brought
into his camp. And on a time when the garrison that lay in Egypt, desired
leave to have wine, he answered, that the water of Nilus ought to content them.
So also did Augustus, when complaint was made unto him of the dearth of wine,
saying, That his son in law Agrippa, had well provided for that want, by the
goodly conduits that he had made in Rome.

Of the rewarding of men of war.
Thus much concerning the laws and discipline of war. Now must I speak of
rewarding, which is the thing that most holds the noble and gentlemanly
hearts in their duties. For (as says Titus Liuius) there is not that thing
which men will not undertake to do, if the hardy and valiant adventurers upon
great things may be rewarded accordingly. In which behalf the emperor Adrian
bare the be^: For he rewarded valiant persons bountifully; yea he went and
sought them out of far countries, without sparing of money, horses, or armor.
King Lewis the eleventh did the like to men of service. And the like manner of
dealing ought to be observed toward a man's household servants to make them
honest; namely their services ought to be recompensed in time and place,
according to their deserts. For nothing does so much encourage household
servants, as when they see that their master knows them, Of household justice,
or household righteousness.
and enquireth after them. This manner of uprightness we call Household justice,
wherein the emperor Antonine excelled. For he would understand the order of his
house to the uttermost; so as he would know who served him, and in what place
or degree, whether every man were paid his wages for his pains, whether every
man behaved himself faithfully, and whether all together did their duty. And
this manner of recompensing and rewarding, we term Justice distributive; which
is, when preferments and commodities are distributed according to men's deserts,
that have profited the co^mon-weale, and done service to their masters. The
rewarding of good (...), shows the justice o^ him that (...).
For this liberality being joined with vprightnes, takes unto it the nature
thereof, insomuch that the reco^pensing of deserts, shows the justice of him
that reigns, as ^heoderik writes unto Arthemidorus. But if wicked me^,
cowards, iesters, unthrifts, and such as are unmeet to have the ordering of
matters, and are void of skill in cases of justice or fea^s of war, do carry
away the reward of good men, it may well be said, that the state is very sore
sick, and that the prince does utterly loose all that he bestows, thrusting
from him his worthy and good seruitors, by his not reco^pensing the^ according
to their deserts* having no thank for the good he does to the unworthy. For
as Budeus says in his Institution of a prince, the unworthy perceiving that
the great benefits that they receive of their master, proceed of ignorance and
want of good discretion, and not of wise and well governed affection; despise
both the gifts and the giver of the^. And therefore I purpose to speak here of
the reco^penses that ought to be made to those that deserve the^, of which
reco^penses some be made with honor, and some with money. Of the recompen^es
that are (...) in honor.
Of honorable titles, many were given in old time: as for example,
wal-garla^ds, city-garlands, and such other without number. And in these dais
we have the order of knighthood, the which within a while has bin so
shamfully abused, that no account is made of it. The rewards that consist in
profit, are to be given to the peti-captains, and valiant soldiers in ready
money, if the revenues of the crown will bear it. For, to rack and rake from
the people wherewith to recompense the men of war, as did the emperor Seuerus,
is an evil king of dealing. Not long since we have had two kings of great
fame, namely Lewis the eleventh, who was liberal in pampering men with money,
howbeit at the cost of his commons. And Lewis the twelfth, who was of small
liberality to his men of war, but a great lover of his commons. This man being
well served of all sorts of men, died with the reputation of a good, valiant,
and virtuous prince, and had borne the the title of Father to his people. The
other never attained so near, nor was so much beloved as he, for all his
liberality.

The mounting to dignity by degrees.
There is yet one other sort of recompense, and that is of honor and profit
matched together, when men attain to dignities by degrees, as when a mean
soldier becomes the leader of a squadron, captain, master of the camp, and
colonel. And when a man of arms mounteth by degrees to be chief herbinger,
guidon, ensign, lieutenant; then chief of the companies, great master,
admiral, marshall, and so forth.

What a prince is to do that he forget not those that do him service.
Also to the intent that the prince forget not them that do him service, and
deserve recompense, because they be so great a number, that he shall not be of
memory sufficient to remember them all; it behooves to have a book or a pair
of tables, wherein to set down the names of all such as do him any notable
service, that he may reward them in due time and place, as the emperors Charles
the fifth, and Alexander Seuerus did; who wrate down those that did him
service, and the rewards which he had given to many of them. And if in perusing
his notes of remembrance, he saw any man that had done him service and was not
worthily recompensed; he made him to come before him, and asked of him why he
had not sued for recompense, willing him to sue boldly for any thing agreeable
to his estate.

Two offices, or mo be not to be given to one man.
And for as much as it is an easy matter for a prince that has so many
subjects, to recompense them all; it behooves him to take good heed that he
bestow not two offices or mo upon one man. For in so doing he bereaueth
himself of the means to recompense many, and is not so well served as he
else should be. For (as Alexander Seuerus was wont to say) it is a hard
matter, that he which has two charges at once, should be able to use them to
his own honor, and his masters profit. When I speak of the recompensing of
Services, my meaning is, that it should be done measurably, and not by putting
men in trust with too great a charge, nor by making them too mighty, least
perhapes they turn head against their master. For mightiness ingendreth
riches, envy, and pride, Power breeds Pride.
as it befell to Perennius, who perceiving himself to be ouergreat, and the
ordering of all affairs to be in his own hand, conspired against the emperor
Commodus his master, to whom he was beholden for all his welfare. But his
treason was bewraied, and he punished according to his deserts. We know what
happened in France to the maires of the palace; which caused Consaluo to be
called home out of Naples, where he managed the king of Aragons affairs so well,
and unto whom the king his master was beholden for the kingdom of Naples;
which thing was done for fear least he should have seized upon the kingdom,
considering his credit, his good government, and his experience in war. There
remains yet one doubt more concerning the execution of justice; Whether a
prince ought to shift officers or no.
to wit, whether a prince for the benefit of his commonweal ought to change
his officers, as they did in old time in Rome, and in Athens. If it be objected
that those were pulick-weales, wherein every man ruled by turn; I will oppose
Alexander Seuerus a sage prince and such a one as minded not any thing but the
publick-weale, who also changed his officers; saying that when princes are
governed continually by any one sort, means are found by intreatance, gifts,
and other corrupt dealings, to pervert their good dispositions. And
peradventure at that time, Alexander had seen the inconveniences thereof, the
which he meant to remedy, or at leastwise to assay to remedy. But in this
manner of dealing there may be as great inconvenience, as in the other: namely
that their king shall not have them so well affectioned toward him, as they
ought to be. For they that are accustomed to the service of a good prince, do
love their master far better, than those that are but new come in. And as the
Proverb says, A man must first know, ere he can love. Besides this affection,
they be the better acquainted with his humors, and the better experienced in
his affairs. For practice makes men sufficient, and the new come is as easy
to be corrupted as the old seruitor, when the way to corruption is once set
open. Moreover, they that come fresh, try by all means to make their hand of the
bounty and liberality of the prince; insomuch that most commonly, the oftener
that there is a change, the oftener the princes purse is emptied. Record hereof
is the fable of the flaine fox, who would not suffer the flies to be driven
from him, that had fed upon him, for sear least when they were gone, there
would come others fresh and fasting, which would do him more harm and pain
than the former that were already full. Augustus altered not the manner of
dealing which the Romans had used, of sending senators into a province, for a
certain time. Nevertheless being disquieted by a feat that had been done in
Germany; to make all sure, and to hold the people of that province in
obedience, he would not have the senators to remove thence, to the intent that
the subjects should be held in obedience by men of experience, that were
already acquainted with the people of that country. And therefore it is best
for all events, that a prince should not change his officers, but that if any
of them offend, he should well punish them, as Augustus did a secretary of
his, whose thighs he caused to be broken, because he had taken a bribe to show
a letter. Lewis the twelfth king of France, lived in all prosperity, because
he was served by the ancient officers of the crown, yea even by those that
had taken him prisoner in battle when he was duke of Orleans. Contrariwise,
king Lewis the eleventh, was in hazard to have lost his crown, by changing all
new.

Treasurers and officers of account.
I grant that the dealing of Alexander Seuerus was well to be admitted in cases
of account, where the prince has more need of a man of honesty, than a man of
great skill. Also the said good emperor permitted them not to continue in
office above one year at once, for fear least their ouer-long continuance in
those dealings should make them thieves, terming the offices of general
Receipt, a necessary evil; because that on the one part they cannot be
forborne, and on the other part they teach men to play the thieves. Froissard
says, that the earl of Fois, of whom he makes very great reckoning, took
twelve notable men to be of his Receipts, of whom two served every month, and so
from month to month other two by turns, which alwaie yielded their accounts to
a controller, in whom he put greatest trust.

To conclude this discourse, Precepts of Justice.
the prince and he that is authorized under him to be a judge, must keep well
the precept of Martian, namely, that he be neither too soft nor too rigorous
inpunishing, but as the cause deserves. For he must not affect the glory of
meeldnesse, or of severity, but when he has well considered the case, he must
do justice as the case requires, using mercy and gentleness in small
matters, and showing severity of law in great crimes, howbeit always with
some temperance of gentleness. For as Theodorike was wont to say, It is the
property of a good and gracious prince, not to be desirous to punish offenses,
but to take them away; least by punishing them too eagerly, or by ouerpassing
them too meeldly, he be deemed unadvised and careless of the execution of
justice. S. John Chrysostom says, That justice without mercy, is not justice
but cruelty; and that mercy without justice, is not mercy but folly. And to
my seeming, Suetonius has no great likelihood of reason to commend Augustus
for merciful, in that to save a manifest parricide from casting into the water
in a sack, (as was wont to be done to such as had confessed themselves guilty
of that fault) he asked him after this manner; I believe thou have not murdered
thy father. For he that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the
guiltless, are both of them abominable to the Lord, says Solomon in his
Proverbs. Punishment must not ^asse the offense.
And above all things (as says Cicero in his book of Duties) he must beware
that the punishment be not too great for the offense, and that where many be
partakers of one crime, one be not sore punished, and another slightly passed
over.

CHAP. IIII. That a prince ought to be liberal, and to shun niggardship and
prodigality.
THus much in few words concerning justice, the which Cicero divides into two,
namely into that which is termed by the general name of Righteousness, and
into that which is termed Liberality, accordingly as the holy scripture does
ordinarily take righteousness for the liberality that is used toward the
needy, the which we call Alms or Charity. He has dispersed and given unto
the poor, (says the Psalmist) and his righteousness endures for ever; that
is to say, He will continue still to show himself righteous, and he shall have
wherein to execute his liberality all the days of his life. And S. Paul in
his second Epistle to the Corinthians, prays God to increase the revenues of
their righteousness, that is to say of their liberality or bounteousnesse.
And in the one and twentieth of the Proverbs, He that follows righteousness
and mercy, (says Solomon) He that is kind-hearted and pitiful to the poor,
shall find life, righteousness, and glory. And in the same place, The
righteous gives (says he) and spares not. Now therefore I must speak more
particularly of the distributive righteousness, which is called Liberality,
and is as it were the mean betwixt niggardliness and prodigality, a virtue
well-beseeming a rich man. For (as says Plato) He that has store of goods, if
he make others partakers with him, is to be honored as a great man:
Liberality beseems a prince.
but specially it most beseems a prince, as who is better able to put it in
use, than any private persons. For Liberality undoes liberality, because that
the more a man uses it, the more he abateth his ability of using it toward
many, A king who has great revenues, may honorably use it in his life,
without abating the mean to do good to such as deserve it. Therefore Plutarch
in his book of the Fortunatnesse and virtue of Alexander, says; That as the
fruits of the earth grow fair by the temperatnesse of the air: even so, good
wits are furthered by the liberality, honorable countenance, and courtesy
of a king; and that on the contrary part, they droope and decay through his
niggardship, displeasure, It is the duty of a king to do good unto many.
and hard-dealing. For the very duty of a king (said Agesilaus) is to do good
unto many. Ptolomaeus Lagus said, It was a more goodly and princely thing to
enrich other men, than to enrich himself, according to S. Paul's saying, That
it is better to give than to take. And Fabricius had lever to have at
commandment men that were well monied, than the money it self.

Dennis the tyrant of Siracuse offered presents to the ambassadors of Corinth,
the which they refused, saying, That the law of their country forbad them to
take ought of any prince whatsoever. Whereunto he answered, Surely ye do
amiss, O ye Corinthians, in that ye bereave princes of the best thing that
they have. The misliking of great power, is taken away by Liberality.
For there is not any other mean to take away the misliking of so great a
power, than by courtesy and liberality. Alexander was wont to say, That
there was not a better hoording up of treasure, than in the purses of his
friends; because they will yield it him again whenever he needs it. Now
then, this virtue does maruellously well beseem a prince, because he has
wherewith to put it in ure; and yet nevertheless it ceasseth not to be in the
mind of a poor man also. Liberality (...) not to be measu^^d by the gift but
by the will.
For a man is not to be deemed liberal for his great gifts, but for the will
that he has to do good. For a poor man may be more liberal than a rich,
although he give far less without comparison than the rich, because
liberality (like as all other virtues) proceeds chiefly from the disposition
or inclination that a man has to give.

As for example, the poor widow that did put the two mites into the offering
box, was esteemed to have given more than all the rich men, though the thing she
gave was nothing in comparison of the gifts of other men. For liberality
consists not in the greatness of the gifts, but in the manner of the giving.
And he is liberal, which gives according to his ability, unto good men, and
upon good causes. This virtue represseth nigardship, and moderateth
prodigality, causing a man to use his goods and his money aright. Three ways
of v^ing a man's goods well.
The mean to use these well, consists in three points. The first is in
taking a man's own money where he ought to take it: and hereunto makes the
good husbanding of him that spares his revenue, to spend it to good purpose.
For he that has not wherewith to maintain his expenses, does amiss in making
large expenses at other men's cost: and he that has it, does amiss if he spend
it not, because there is not any thing that wins a prince so much the favor
of his people, as liberality does. Dennis the tyrant inte^ding to try his son,
furnished him with much costly stuff, jewels, and vessel, both of gold and
silver of great price. And when long time after, he had espied that the plate
remained with him still, he taunted him, saying that he had not a princely
heart, since he had not made him friends with his plate, having such abundance;
for he was of opinion, that such gifts would have gotten his son good will at
all men's hands. For as Solomon says in the xix. of the proverbs: every man is
a friend to the man that gives. And in the chapter going before, Gifts get
f^iendship at al men's ha^d^.
he says, That a man's gift makes way for him, and leads him to the presence
of great men. And in the xvij he says, That a gift is as a precious stone in
the eyes of him that possesses it, that is say, that a gift has such grace,
that it can do all to the winning of men's hearts. The second mean for a
prince to use liberality well, is, not to take his money where he ought not.
Wherein consists the honor of his power, in that he will not take from one to
give unto another, nor strip one naked to clothe another. The third mean, is
to spend it as he ought, which is the very true mean of liberality, whereunto
both the other be referred. Now then, liberality consists chiefly in the
well using of money; To use money well, What it is to use money well
is to spend it and give it to such as want and are worthy to have. As for the
only keeping of a man's revenue, it is not the using, but rather the getting of
money. Therefore liberality cannot consist in the well keeping of a man's
revenues, neither consists it merely in not taking from others, but in
benefiting others. For it is more praise-worthie to do good, than it is to
keep a man's own (whereunto we be inclined by nature) or not to do any man
hurt. For it is not enough for a man to abstain from doing harm, unless he
also do good. And yet for all that, it behooves the liberal to be careful in
keeping his own, that he may have wherewith to maintain his liberality, A
poor prince is neither well (...)ued of his subjects, (...) feared of
s^rangers.
specially a prince. For as says Alexander Seuerus, the prince that is poor
and needy, is neither served with good courage of his subjects, nor feared of
strangers: and much less the prodigal, who wastes all without reason, and
catches other men's goods to maintain his lavishness withal. There are
othersome that give, but they be also greedy of gain; and they cannot be
counted to do the deeds of liberality. For Liberality lies chiefly in the
heart, and regards not gain. But to love money, is a spice of covetousness,
notwithstanding that afterward a man spend it more for oftentation, than upon
any liberal mind. For there are many which deface their reputation, by taking
unworthily, foully, and filthily, to give it away afterward. As for example,
the bawd that makes dishonest gain, the judge that suflereth himself to be
corrupted with bribes, and the prince that deuiseth a thousand kind of taxes,
to maintain his indiscreet expenses, as Caligula did, who took of every
courtizan as much of her gain as she could get of any man at once; and as the
emperor Vespasian did, who said that the gain of money was good from whence
soever it came, yea though it were made of men's urine. But to order our
expenses well, there are three things to be regarded; first, the quantity
which we give, that our gift be neither too small nor too great: for the
ouer-smal, is unbeseeming a gentlemanly heart; and the ouergreat dreineth the
purse too much, as it befell to Alexander, who gave so excessive gifts to his
friends, that they were feign to refuse them.

A prince must moderate his ordinary expenses.
Plato will have a prince to be temperat in the expenses of his house. For if
he have not a regard to moderat his ordinary expenses, it will be hard for him
to provide for his extraordinary affairs, and for his wars. To furnish out
these expenses, they are wont to levy a thousand sorts of impositio^s of the
people; and so to do, they be councelled by claw-backs and bloud-suckers of
the court. But they should answer them as Antoninus Pius the emperor of Rome
did; The order and manner (quoth he) which is to be sought to make me great, is
to augment the commonwealth, and not my rents; and to devise means not how to
impofe new tributes, but how to abate mine extraordinary expenses, and to use
sparing, which is a certain and sure revenue. Sparing is a sure revenue.
And as Machiauel says, This manner of giving to al men, makes the prince
beloved, and it carries a goodly show for a time; but in the end, the people
conceive more disliking of the prince, than those to whom he gives, receive
contentment; and so at the last he is hated of all. For as Cicero says in his
Duties, in this kind of liberality, there is ever a desire of taking perforce,
that there may be wherewith to give still.

Most men esteemed Lewis the twelfth to be niggardly, The treasure prepared for
the necessity of the state, is not to be ^ashed out in time of peace.
because he gave no great gifts; but he had wrong, for he could not both make
war, and pay his soldiers well, and also give lauishly. For as Paulus Iouius
says, Princes do great harm both to themselves and to their subjects, when
by spending prodigally in vain expenses, during the time of peace, they wast
away the treasures prepared for the necessities of war. Secondly according to
the precept of Cato, it is to be considered, to whom a man gives. For most
commonly men give to those that have no need of it, or to unworthy persons, as
flatterers, ribauds, and other leaud and unprofitable folk, whom good princes
have always bin wont to drive out of their courts. For it were much better to
spare their benefits, than to bestow it upon such people: and whosoever deemeth
that to be liberaltie, mistaketh the case, and considers not how Crates
says, That the money of the most part of rich men, is like the figs that grow
upon the high mountains and rocks, which are not eaten of men, but of rooks
and crows, and other vile birds. Even so is it with the goods of prodigal
persons, wherewith none but harlots and flatterers are maintained. Liberality
is underpropped by two things.
Therefore Valerius says, that liberality is vpheld by two things, namely,
true Judgment, and good Love. For they that give indiscreetly, do it either
for want of judgment, or else to attain to some evil end.

Alexander said, Good turns misbestowed, are evil turns.
There were two faulty extremities in liberality, the one of giving to
unworthy persons, because, as Menander says, Good turns mis-bestowed, are
evil turns: and the other, of not giving to the worthy; for it is a great
fault, when they that are hindermost in desert, are foremost in rewards of
profit and honor. Good must be done for good desert, and not to get praise.
Thirdly, it is to be considered wherefore a man gives: namely for well-doing,
and not to purchase praise as most men do, and not for charity; and therefore
they give to flatterers and claw-backs, and not to such as have need, or to
such as deserve it.

Cicero says in his book of Duties, That there are two sorts of liberality.
Two sorts of Liberality.
For we utter our liberality, either by our travel and pains taking, or by
our purse. The former proceeds of virtue, and is more difficult and of more
worthiness than the other; as when a man solliciteth matters for his friend,
or attends in suit for some good turn for him, or procures him a councellor
to defend his cases. Liberality must be used without prejudice to any.
But in especially a man must beware, that he offend no man in seeking to help
his friend. And if you fortune to offend any man against your will, you must
excuse your self to him, and deal in such sort as you may recompense your
ouer-sight with doing some good. For as Cicero says in his book of Duties,
Liberality is to be used as may profit a man's friends, without prejudice to
any person, because liberality is accompanied with just dealing.

And as to^ching the giving of money and the bestowing of benefits, they ought
to be done unto the distressed and needy, rather than to others, the contrary
whereof is done most commonly. For lightly men give where they may hope for some
good again, though there be no need at all. But this is rather covetousness
than liberality, because it is but a putting of a small fish upon a hook,
therewith to catch a greater. Likewise liberality consists in redeeming
prisoners, Of Alms.
and in giving to the poor; in which behalf Cicero speaks like a Christian.
And this manner of liberality is called Alms, Pity, and Charity. Solomon in
the xxij of the Proverbs says, He which is pitiful, shall be blessed, because
he has given bread to the hungry. And in the xxviij, Who so gives to the
poor shall not want, but he that turns his eyes from them, shall have much
misery.

In the third of Ecclesiasticus, it is said that as water quenches the burning
fire, so alms withstandeth sin, and God will have consideration of him that
shows pity; for he will be mindful of him in the time to come, and he shall
find assurance in the day of his death. Again in the seventh chapter, Reach
out thy hand to the poor (says he) that thou may be thoroughly blessed and
reconciled. Again, in the xvij chapter, A man's alms-deed (says he) is as a
purse with him, and preserves a man's favor as the apple of an eye. And again
in the xxix, Lay up thine alms-deed in the bosom of the poor, and it shall
make thee to be heard against all evil. There is another sort of liberality
approaching to pity, Hospitality a spice of Liberality.
which is called Hospitality, (for which Abraham and Lot were highly
commannded, and had the honor to receive angels) when the houses of rich men
are open to entertain honest strangers. Among the men of old time, the
almighty God (whom they named Jupiter) was called the Harberor, and so is he
termed of Homer and Virgil. Cimo of Athens made a house with his own hands, to
lodge strangers in. Plato says, That the offenses which are done against
strangers, are greater than those that are committed against a man's own^
^^untrimen; for in as much as a stranger has no kindred nor friends, men ought
to be the more pitiful toward him. The Almans made so great account of those
with whom they had eaten and drunk, that they imparted their houses unto them.
And the Lucans had a law that condemned that man to be fined, which suffered
the stranger to pass vnlodged, after the sun was down. T^eata^^ene^ of
Liberality.
There is also another branch of liberality, called Treatablenes, which is,
when a man is not rough in requiring that which is borrowed of him, but is
easy to be dealt with in all bargaining, whether it be of buying or of selling,
and will not stick sometime to forbear, yea and release some part of his
right, as is to be seen in the end of Ciceroes second book of Duties, where
he treats of it largely enough, and that in such sort, as he may seem to
have drawn it out of our books of divinity, which command us to be charitable
to our neighbors, rather in doing good to the poor than to the rich, and
especially in doing the spiritual works, whereof I will speak briefly
herafter, when I come to treat of kindness; referring the residue to Divines,
who have made so goodly treatises, and so pleasant and wholesome discourses, that
it is not possible to do more. Liberality of despising money and gifts.
There is another kind of liberality, which consists not in giving, but in
despising money and gifts, and the same is directly contrary to covetousness,
whereof we have Pericles for an example, who was not in any wise to be corrupted
with gifts, neither could covetousness in any wise weigh with him; insomuch that
although he was the prince of Athens, yet notwithstanding he enriched not
himself one half penny. And also Phocion who refused 600000 crowns at
Alexanders hand, though he was both poor and needy: neither would he take ought
of Antipater, though he was his friend: insomuch that Antipater said, that he
had two friends in the city of Athens, namely Phocion and Demades, of who^ he
could never cause the one to take any thing, nor give the other enough to
satisfy him. The Philosopher Xenocrates sent back 500 talents unto Alexander,
when he had given him the^, saying, That so long as he lived in such sort as he
did, he should never need so great a sum of money. Fabricius the consul did as
much to Pirrhus, refusing the gold and silver that he offered him.

These men could not give, because they themselves were needy, but yet had
they a liberal nature, in that they made none accout of worldly goods, and yet
were contented to part from that which they had.

Liberality consists b^^h in giving and in taking.
Artaxerxes king of Persia was wont to say, That liberality consists not
only in giving, but also in taking; as when a man through a kind of
covetousness, does courteously accept the gifts that are offered him, though
they be but of small estimation and value. For thereby the prince does men to
understand, what account he makes of small things, in that he receives them,
and it is an occasion for him to requite it with very great usury. And
although king L^wis the eleventh do say, that a man ought neither to bind a
prince, nor to be afraid to ask of him, and to make himself indebted unto
him, and that his so doing makes the prince the forewarder to do for him,
because the nobleness of the princes courage is such, that he loves them most
which are most bound unto him, and naturally we love the things that are of our
own making (as says, Aristotle, where he demands why benefactors are more
inclined toward such as are bound unto them, than toward such as are not:)
yet notwithstanding a subject ought not to be afraid to offer a present to his
prince, in witness of his service and good will. Neither did king L^wis the
eleventh mean it concerning presents or gifts, but of services done by
subjects, whereof they had no recompense. For thereof the prince is ashamed, and
therefore is loath to see them. Contrariwise he loves, likes, and aduanceth
those that are made by him, even through a certain natural reason, which
makes us love the things that come of our selves, and which we have brought
forth, whether it be by nature, or by wit, or by good doings. But the
wel-aduised subject bestows not any gift upon his prince, as upon one that
has need, or thereby to bind his prince: but as in way of duty or submission to
do him service. And therefore of such a present, a prince must accept very
gladly. For the despising thereof, imports a kind of pride and disdain, as
who would say, the prince made no reckoning of him that offered it. And
therefore Alexander did willingly receive the burgesship which the Corinthians
offered unto him, when he once knew that they had never made the like offer to
any stranger, save only to him and Hercules: insomuch that ever after he
esteemed that gift more deerly, than all the presents of the queen of Caria. Of
Magnificence.
We have one other kind of liberality belonging to great lords, called
Magnificence, which respects the greatness of expenses: as the building of
temples, the making of stately dwelling-houses, of conduits, of bridges, of
Theaters, and of other things serving for common use, and the bountiful
entertaining of such as come to visit them, as did Lucullus, Pompeius, and
Cicero, and also Paulus Aemilius, who took great pains himself in furnishing
and marshalling a feast. And when he was asked why he was so curious in setting
forth a banquet; he answered, That there was as great discretion to be used in
the ordering of a feast, as in the ordering of a battle, that the one might
become terrible to the enemies, and the other be acceptable to friends. And to
show that he set not his heart upon riches; after that he had subdued Perseus,
he took not to himself one pins worth of his treasures, neither would he so
much as once see the money that was there, but caused an inventory to be made
thereof, by commissioners appointed to that purpose, and sent it every whit to
Rome. Scipio was of the same humor; and when one blamed him for his excessive
bountifulness, because it might be that he should be accused for it at Rome,
(as he was afterward) he answered, That treasurers and receivers were to make
account of money; and captains, of feats of arms, Contrariwise Cato
(notwithstanding that he was a sound and a good man) yet was he blamed for the
ouer-great curiosity and precise neernesse that he used, in causing the great
treasures of Cipres to be conveyed to Rome. Too great sparing be comes not a
great lord.
Therefore in a great personage, as il-beseeming is too great thriftinesse, as
too great bountifulness; as was to be seen in Lucullus, who rebuked the
steward of his house, because he had prepared no more store of meats for his
supper: And when his steward had answered, That he had so done, because he was
to sup alone. That is all one (quoth Lucullus) for do not you know that others
were to sup as well as Lucullus? As who would say, That the supper of Lucullus
had bin a prodigal man's feast. Also he was ouer-sumptuous in his buildings,
causing mountains to be cut through, that the salt water might come into his
channels. In respect whereof Pompey scoffing at him, was wont to call him the
Xerxes with the long gown; because that Xerxes at his coming into Greece,
caused a bridge of ships to be made over the sea, and mountains to be cut
through. Therefore whenever we be to build a house, we must remember how
Cicero in his books of Duties teaches us, that it may well beseem us to
commend the dignity of our estate with a fair house, howbeit so as we seek
not our reputation altogether in the costlinesse of our buildings, but rather
that the house may be famous for his master, and not the master for his
house. Stratonicus taunting the Megarians, said, That they builded as though
they should never die, and feasted as if they should no longer live.

The honest expen^e of a ^able is to be commended.
The honorable expenses of a table are to be commended, so they be without
superfluity, as was the table of Cimon of Athens: who was beloved of all men,
and accounted liberal, because he kept an honorable table for all comers,
not furnished with dainties, but with sufficient to feed many persons. He
clothed such as were il-apparelled, and put money secretly into the hands of
such as were needy. He made his house an hospital for the nourishing and
susteining of all poor citizens, having his hands in the mean while clean
from all manner of nipping and corruption. Pelopidas the Thebane, spared not his
purse toward his friends. And Valerius Publicola, relieved the poor with his
goods. Whereupon he was called by the name of Publicola Fabius Maximus
co^pounded with Han^iball for the ransom of certain Roman prisoners, The
charity of diue^s Romans.
that were men of service: Whereof when the senate had no liking, he perceiving
that he could not obtain at their hands the money that he had promised for the
ransom of the prisoners, sold his own goods to serve the turn. Tullus
Hostilius king of the Romans, is worthy of great praise for giving a great
part of his goods to the poor. And so was also Nerua Cocceius, who in the one
year that he was emperor, gave unto the poor fifteen hundred thousand crowns,
for the doing whereof, he sold his jewels and plate. Pomponius Atticus was
princely, bountiful, and liberal, and such a one as bestowed his liberality
to good purpose, as he well showed in Brutus and Cassius, whom he helped not
with one penny toward the charges of their wars, as the most part of the
Romans had done: but when he saw them go by the worse, and that they were
driven out of Rome, then sent he the^ 100000 Sextercies, as a friend that aided
the^ at their need, when other men had forsaken them. The charity of Gillias
and Buza.
Valerius makes mention of one named Gillias a Sicilian of the city Agrigent,
who was wont to cloth and feed the poor, to bestow their daughters in
marriage, to help such as were in distress, to lodge strangers, and not to
suffer the^ to go away without reward: to be short, he gave intertainme^t along
while together, to 500 men whom the sea had cast upon that coast. Also he
makes mention of a noble lady of Pouil, named Buza, that relieved ten thousand
Romans which had escaped from the battle of Cannas. The bountifulness of Hiero.
Hiero king of Sicilie gave unto the Romans in a time of their need, 300000
quarters of wheat, two hundred of barlie, and two hundred and fifty pound
weight of gold. Quintus Flamminius having conquered the Macedonians, discharged
them of all tallages and impositions, contrary to the manner of other
conquerors, who are wont to lay burdens on the backs of them that are
conquered. The ^l^teians.
Also the Plateians did a princely and bountiful deed, and worthy to be had in
remembrance. For to the intent to satisfy the oracle of Apollo, which had
promised the Athenians victory against the Persians, so it were within their
own territory (which could not be, unless the Plateians gave them the place
which they had chosen for their advantage* near the city of Plateia) the
Plateians plucked up the bounds of their territory, and gave the ground of free
gift to the Athenians, to the intent that as it had bin behighted by the
oracle, the Athenians might fight within their own grounds against the
Persians, to the welfare of all Greece: whereof king Alexander long time after
had so good liking, that having conquered the emperor of Asia, he caused the
walls of Platea to be reedified; and in doing thereof, he made it to be
proclaimed by a herault, at the gamings of Olimpus, that Alexander did that
grace and honor to the Plateians, in remembrance and recompense of their noble
courage, for that in the Persian wars, they had liberally given their lands to
the Athenians for the welfare of Greece; wherein they showed themselves to be
men of great courage, and wel-minded toward the defense of Greece.

Alexander was reputed the bountifullest and liberallest of all princes; but I
am of opinion that Fabricius, Aristides, Lisander, Epaminondas, and infinite
other Greeks and Romans, had as liberal and princely hearts as he,
notwithstanding that they had less means to utter it. There are greatdeeds of
liberality to be found in the life of Alexander, and some also that pass the
bounds of liberality; but yet the balance weighs most on the side of
liberality. For he gave to none but such as were worthy, as to men of war, to
Philosophers, to men of service, and to men of council, as he showed very well
in a certain iugler, who by his subtle slight threw a dry pease a great way
off through the eye of a needle, in hope to have obtained some great reward for
his labor at the kings hands. But king Alexander making no reckoning of him,
commanded one to give him a bushel of those peason to practice his feat
withal. The bountifulness of Alexander matched with courtesy and cheerfulnes.
The thing that seemed most beautiful in Alexanders gifts, was the
cheerfulness that he used in giving. For the amiablenesse made his gifts the
more acceptable. A certain Poeonian showing unto Alexander the head of an
enemy whom he had cut off, said unto him; such a present as this should in my
country be recomponced with a cup of gold. To whom Alexander answered smiling
and said, Yea mary, an empty cup, but I drink to thee in this cup full of
good wine, the which I give unto thee. One day he found a poor Macedonian
driving of his mules laden with gold. And when the mule began to faint, the
muleter laid the burden upon his own shoulders and carried it a good way
himself: but in the end, he felt himself so ouercharged, that he was about to
cast it to the ground. Which thing Alexander beholding, said unto him, Weary
not thy self, but take leisure that thou may carry it to thine own tent, for
I give it thee. Intending upon a time to encounter Taxilles with deeds of
bounty and liberality, he drank to him at a certain supper saying, I drink
to thee a thousand talle^ts; which are in value almost 600000 French crowns.
He more misliked of them that would not take of him, than of them that craved
of him. Among his friends he had one named Perillus, to whom he gave fifty
talents, to marry his daughters withal. Perillus said that ten would content
him: to whom Alexander replied, It is enough for you to receive but ten
talents, but it is to little for me to give. He had given his treasurer charge
to give to Anaxarchus the philosopher, Alexander passed the bounds of
liberality.
whatsoever he asked: and when the philosopher had asked a hundred talents,
which are about threescore thousand French crowns; the treasurer being
astonished at such a demand, told it unto Alexander; who answered, that
Anaxarchus knew well enough that he had a friend that both could and would
bestow as much as that upon him. Hereby it must needs be confessed that he was
too lavish in his gifts, howbeit that his giving was to such as were worthy,
whereby he made his friends too great, which thing turned to the hurt of his
posterity For his friends were so great, that after his death they made no
reckoning of his wife, nor of his mother, nor of his children. And that was
afterward found true, which his mother Olimpias had justly warned him of before
by a letter that she wrate unto him; I like very well (quoth she) that you
should do good to your acquaintance, and that you should hold the^ in honor
about you: but you make them as great as kings, and enable them to purchase
themselves friends, and to bereave you of yours. And before that time his father
also had checked him for the same, saying, Who has put thee in hope to think,
that those should be faithful unto thee, whom thou thy self have corrupted
with money? would thou have the Macedonians to esteem thee, not as their
king, but as their briber? Let us come to Julius Caesar who was a great
counterfetter of Alexander, and was reputed very liberal: and let us see i^ he
were co^parable to Scipio, who never bought ne sold, and died poor with his
small patrimony, notwithstanding that he had subdued and sacked two mighty
cities, Numance and Carthage: or unto Lisander, a stirring man, who having very
great means to enrich himself, made no account thereof; whereas on the
contrary part, Caesar prodi^al^.
Caesar owed more than he was worth: insomuch that being the praetor, he said
he needed three hundred talents, (which were more than ninescore thousand
French crowns) because he had nothing. And when he sued for the
highpriesthood, he wist not of what wood to make his arrows. And going out one
morning to prefer his suit, he told his mother that she should see him that
day, either highpriest, or dead. Yet notwithstanding neither the pretorship,
nor the highpriesthood, (which he made easier than it had been aforetimes) nor
the consulship, were able to suffice and discharge his expenses, without the
help of the Gauls, by whose means he set himself clear, and bribed one part
of the city of Rome. Suetonius speaking of his liberal expenses, says that
he gave a great sum of money to every soldier of the old bands: and that
after the vvarres in Spain, he made them two feasts; whereof because the
first was not ro^all enough according to his liking, he made them another more
royal within five days after.

Such was the bountifulness of Julius Caesar, which tended more to
liberality than the other which he had used before to get the Consulship, the
Pretor^ship, and the Highpriesthood. For the lauishnes that he had used at
those times, sprang not from the fountain of virtue and liberality, but from
extreme ambition. But when he had discharged himself to the cost of the
Gauls, and was become lord of the whole world, he might be liberal at the
charges of the countries that he had conquered. Verily we may well say he did
it not of his own cost, and that it had been much better for him and for
Alexander also, to have been less liberal, so they had left their pilling and
polling of the world; and that if fortune had not favored them, the one of
them must have become a cruel tyrant, and the other a worse cittisen than
Catilin; for he had been driven to have raised a more dangerous insurrection in
Rome to escape from his creditors, than Catilins was.

To spend prodigally of other men's goods, It is evil done to borrow under vain
hope.
and to borrow upon vain hope, is a very ill kind of dealing. And it is to be
considered that every man cannot make himself lord of a mighty city, as
Caesar did, nor a conqueror of Asia as Alexander did, who maintained his
prodigality with the sacking of Asia; for the doing whereof, he fleeced the
country so bare, that Antigonus coming after him, said in witness thereof,
That Alexander had reaped the full crop of it, and he himself did but gather
up the gleanings after him.

Othosilanus to win the love of his men of war, made a seast unto them, and
gave every of the vvarders a piece of money, not ceassing for all that to
bestow many rewards upon them besides. And upon a time being chosen an vmpire
between two neighbors, to make them agree, he bought the land that was in
controversy betwixt them. This had been just, bountiful, and liberal
dealing, in one that had had wherewithal of his own to do it with: but he
did more than his ability would bear, which caused him to enter into arms,
and to use force to make himself emperor, saying, That he had as leeue to be
overthrown in battle, and to die in the field, as among his creditors in Rome.

Bellisarius was beloved of his men of war for his liberality, The
libe^al^^^ of (...)
because he gave them horse and armor whensoever they had lost them, so it
were not through their own fault: and in so doing, his liberality was well
ordered.

Vitellius denied not any man his request, but was gracious in giving, and made
himself familiar with his men of war, but all that was done to attain to
the imperial dignity. It was otherwise with Titus, who also denied not ought
to any man, for he was emperor by birth, and had great means wherewith to
maintain his liberality. In the one was seen very great kindness, and true
love toward men, which was the cause of that his facility and liberality: in
the other appeared ouer-great facility, matched with injustice and
prodigality, as he well showed in his ouer-sumptuous feasts, insomuch that he
could abide his own brother to make him a feast full of all excess, wherein
there were 2000 sundry sorts of fishes, Caligulaes prodigality.
and seven thousand sorts of fowls. Caligula was prodigal in all his feasts,
he drunk up pearls dissolved with vinegar, he would be served with loaves of
gold, and he caused so precious ointments to be made for his bathes, that he
was esteemed to have surmounted all the prodigal persons of his time; saying,
That it behooved a man to be either thriftie, or an emperor. And to maintain
so excessive expenses, he caused men that departed the world, to bequeath unto
him some part of their inheritance and goods, and of such as bequeathed him
nothing, he disanulled their last wills. With this excessive prodigality, he
was extremely covetous, and so desirous to feel money, that he would walk
barefooted upon heaps of coin, and when he had so done a good while, he would
lie down and wallow in it. Nero was so prodigal, that he never wore one
garment twice: but in the end, by reason of his excessive expenses, he wa^ted
wherewith to pay his men of war, and was constrained to draw money out of
offices, saying to those whom he placed, Sirs ye know what I need; wherein yet
he was more modest, than those that sell them openly at the outcrie.

Heliogabalus was extremely prodigal, and when one blamed him for it, he
answered that he would spend all, and leave nothing for other men to receive
after him. Was it not a goodly sight to see an emperor in the street begging
his gifts and presents, causing men to bequeath legacies unto him upon pain of
disanulling their testaments, and receiving unmeasurable legacies to the
prejudice of the lawful heirs. Prodigality is a counterfeiter of Liberality.
By these examples we see what prodigality is, how it prete^deth it self to
be liberality unto those that look not nearly unto it, because the prodigal
and the liberal do both of them deal largely, howbeit with great difference:
for the one does it with judgment and profit, and the other without discretion.
Cicero in his books of Duties says, that there be two sorts of those that
spend largely, whereof the one is called liberal, and the other prodigal. The
liberal are such as ransom prisoners out of the hands of enemies and
wightriders, or pay their friends debts, or help them to marry their
daughters. And the prodigal are they that spend their money in feasting, to
feed idle people, in rewarding fensers, and in furnishing plays, and such
other things whereof the memory perishes by and by after, and does more harm
than good. For (as Plutarch says) he that first made common feasts and gave
money to the vulgar people, was a defacer of his own authority, and an
ouerthrower of the commonweal. He therefore that spends without aduisement
and skill, not considering how or to whom he gives, or how his living is able
to maintain it: is counted a prodigal person, which is a very dangerful vice.
For it causes a prince to take from his subjects by force, wherewith to
maintain his prodigality; and it is impossible that he which cannot husband
well his own, should husband well that which is another man's. As for the private
person, he is soon cured of that disease, when he has no more to spend. And
here I will not pass over with silence, a merry conceit of Diogenes, tending to
this purpose, who upon a time asked of a prodigal man a piece of gold, as it
were a French crown, or a ducat. Whereat the prodigal person maruelling, (for
Diogenes was not wont to ask above a small piece of coin, such a one as a
duble or a liard) desired to know why he asked so great a value: because (quoth.
he) at other men's hands I hope to have oftentimes, but of you I look for no mo
but this. If a man w^ll be w^l^hie, he must not be too lavish.
As touching them that excuse their over great expenses, by the greatness of
their reuennues, let them vouchsafe to consider the answer of Zeno, who tells
them that by the same reason, cooks may exc^se their ouer-salting of their
sauces, and the ouer-poudring of their meats, under pretense that they have
store of salt. The duty of liberality consists in distributing a man's goods
measurably, to such as have need: if he go beyond that, it is a vice, whether
it be in the overmuch or in the over little. For in the one consists
prodigality, Of Coue^ousnesse.
and in the other nigarship, which is an incurable disease, whereas
prodigality may be changed into liberality, or into nigardship; or else the
lauishnes may utterly sease, for want wherewith to uphold it. For (as says
Democritus) the desire of getting, (if it be not bounded by some reason) is
more dangerous than extreme poverty, because the ouergreat greedines of
getting, causes great want of al things, and is as little staunched by the
coming in of abundance of riches, as a burning fire is by the casting on of
wood: insomuch that on the contrary part, the coming in of riches, does the
more sharpen the desire of hoording up, and of coveting still to have* The
Scithians on a time said thus to Alexander, What need have thou of riches,
which do enforce thee to covet ever more and more? Thou art the first that of
abundance have made penury, insomuch that the more thou possessest, the more
eagerly do thou covet that which thou have not. Plutarch in his book of
Covetousness, Covetousness withstande^h the (...) of (...).
says that all other lusts do help toward the assuaging of themselves, but
this vice does ever withstand it. For there was never any glutton that through
gluttony forbear the pleasant morsels that he liked, nor drunkard that through
drunkenness forbear the good wine: but the covetous man through covetousness
forbeareth to touch his money; which is as strange a thing, as if we should see
a man refuse to put on a good gown, because he quaketh for cold, or to refuse
meat, because he is ready to die for hunger. Covetousness co^pelleth men to get*
and forbids them to enjoy that they have gotten: it stirs up the
appetite, and bereaueth the pleasure. In so much that the covetous person
wants as well that which he has, as that which he has not. And he likeneth
them to mules, which though they carry great store of gold and silver on their
backs, yet they themselves do feed upon hay. Yet does not this import, that a
man should not make account of money, and provide therewith for his necessities,
but that it ought to be done after a reasonable manner, and of purpose to bestow
it well in due time and place. And hereunto relieth the answer of Simonides, of
whom when one demanded why he hoorded up money toward the end of his old
age; Because (quoth he) I had leauer to leave my goods to mine enemies when I
am dead, than to have need of the relief of my friends while I am alive. To
the same purpose Bion the Boristhenit said, that riches are the sinews of men's
deeds, and that (as it is said in the proverb) Without goods goodness is
maimed; that is to say, it cannot well show it self. But yet must a man beware
that he set not his heart too much upon them, ne use them too basely, in
banishing the pleasure of them, to endure all the misery.

For it is the use that makes riches. It is use that makes riche^
If you take your part of them, they be yours: if you reserve them for your
heirs until that time, they be none of yours. For he that is a slave to his
money, can have no good of his riches. But a man of understanding takes the
present use of his goods, and he that will not use them, is needy of all
things. And as Plutarch says in his book of the Desire of riches, Richness
consists in the not having of superfluous things. For niggardliness comes
of an inordinat coveting to have: and we see how such as sometime had neither
bread nor drink, nor house nor home, as soon as they came to be rich, have
occupied their minds about gold and silver, horses, and hounds, changing the
desire of things needful, into the desire of things dangerfull, rare, hard to
be gotten, and unaccustomed. Therefore whosoever possesses more than is be
hooffull for him, and is still desirous of more, it is neither gold, nor
cattle, nor horses, that can cure his disease, but he has need of a vomit and
a purgation. For his disease comes not of penury, but of insatiable love of
riches, proceeding of a corrupt judgment.

Of this vice proceeds robbery, Covetousness breeds thee^erie.
a foul and filthy sin, expressly forbidden of God in the ten commandments:
howbeit that Licurgus permitted it to the Lacedaemonians, to the intent they
should be the warier in keeping their things, but yet they were punished for
it, if they were taken with the fact.

There are that excuse their couetuousnesse by the multitude of their children.
And soothly it is a sufficient cause to restrain ouer-great expenses, and to
hold a man's hand from selling, for fear he should leave them poor. But to
pine a man's self for their sakes, and to hoord up heap upon heap to make
them rich, I count it neither husbandry nor thriftinesse, but the very desire
of having, which we call Covetousness. And for that cause does Plutarch in the
same treatise of the Desire of riches, say thus; Why desire we so great riches
for our children? Surely to the end that they also should convey them over to
their children, after the manner of conduit-pipes, which keep not any liquor
resting in them, but convey it forth from pipe to pipe, until some backbiter
or some tyrant come, that cutteth off this good keeper, and breaking his
conduit-pipe, conueieth the watercourse of his riches another way; until the
veriest unthrift and naughtipacke of all his race, come and devour all those
goods alone. The goods that are hoorded up by the covetous, shall be wasted by
the prodigal.
For as the emperor Constantine said, All the treasures that are hoorded up by
the covetous, shall be spent by the hands of the prodigal. But for as much as
of covetousness comes the desire of riches, and there is no man but he
esteems it a great happiness to be rich, it were for our behalf to know
what richness is, and what is the mean to become rich. This question is not
now first of all demanded; for it was demanded on a time of Socrate^, Whom he
esteemed to be the richest man? Even that man (quoth he) that needs fewest
things; meaning that richness is to be measured by the use of riches. And he
said, That a man was the^ rich, Who is rich, and who is poor.
when he had sufficient wherewith to live honestly, accounting those to be most
poor, which having store of goods, wanted wit and will to use them. For
poverty consists not in the small quantity of goods, but in the
insatiableness of the mind. Cicero says in his Paradoxes, That the fruit of
riches is in the abundance of them, and that sufficednesse shows that there
is abundance, and that to be contented with the goods a man has, is the
surest richness.

One demanded of Alcamenes, What a prince is to do for the wel-garding of his
kingdom.
What means a prince should use to keep well his realm? The best (quoth he)
is, not to set his mind upon money, nor to make his revenue ouergreat. Plutarch
in the life of Marcus Cato says, There is not a more needful provision for
them that intend to deal with the government of a commonweal, than riches;
but yet there is a sufficiency, which being contented with it self, without
desiring particularly things superfluous, does by that means never distract the
party that has it, from minding and intending the public affairs.

Anacharsis said, That the covetous person and the nigard, The miserable case
of the covetous.
is unable either to conceive any good doctrine, or to give any good and wise
counsel. Lucrece said, It is great riches, when a man lives trimly of the
little that he has: because that of that little, there is not any want. Horace
in his twelfth Ode, says, That a man may live well and merrily of a little,
without breaking his sweet sleep through fear or hope. For the affectionat
minding of riches (says Eccles^asticus) pineth the flesh, and the carke thereof
bereaueth a man of sleep. The same Horace writing to Crispus Salustius says,
That that man is rich, not which is a great king, but which has his lusts in
subjection; and that the thirst of him which is diseased with the dropsy, is
not to be stanched, but by drawing the waterie humor out of the veins, and by
removing the cause out of the disease. The mean to become rich.
Here by it is easy to decide the other question, namely, By what means a man
may become rich? For Socrates teaches it in one word saying, Ye shall easily
become rich, if you impouerish your lusts and desire. Epicurus said, That he
that will make a man rich, must not increase his goods, but diminish his lusts.
For there is no riches so great as contentment. And therefore the Philosopher
Crates beholding how folk did buy and sell in the market, said; These folk
are counted happy, because they do things contrary one to another, and I
think my self happy, that I have rid my hands of buying and selling.

The true way then to become rich, is to covet naught, and to be unmindful of
gain, specially of dishonest gain; for that is no better than loss, as says
Hesiodus. For like as the liberal man is loved of all men, (according to this
saying of Solomon in the nineteenth of his Proverbs, Every man is a friend to
him that gives) so the covetous person is hated of all men: For the one
helps the poor with his goods, the other is loath to give any thing. In this
respect Socrates said, that a man must not require either talk to a dead man,
or a good turn of a nigard. But there is nothing so royal and princely, as to
do good unto many, Nothing so royal as to be helpful to many.
as says Cicero in his book of Duties. And it is found, that there is more
pleasure in giving than in taking, as says S. Paul, and also Hesiodus in his
book of Works and Days. And Ecclesiasticus says, Let not thy hand be open to
receive, and shut to give. David esteems him happy, that lends and has
pity of the poor, saying, That he shall ever have wherewith to do good
without failing, but he that stops his ears at the cry of the needy, shall
cry himself, and not be heard. The same does Solomon also say in the xxj of
the Proverbs. And the Psalmist says thus; I have bin young and now am old, yet
saw I never the righteous man forsaken, nor his seed driven to beg their
bread; but he is still giving, lending, and releeuing, and his offspring is
seen to grow in good fortune and foyzon. On the contrary part, The
unrighteous shall be driven for very hunger to borrow, and not be able to pay;
but the righteous shall have wherewith to show their burning charity. Virgil in
his sixth book of Aenaeas, puts those persons in hell, which have done no
good to their friends, kins-folke, and neighbors, but have bin wholly wedded
to their riches, without imparting them to other folks. Acheius king of Elis,
was slain by his own subjects for covetousness, and for his ouer-charging them
with impositions. Ochus king of Persia, was blamed, for that by reason of
covetousness, he would never go into the country of Persland, because that by
the law of the realm, he was bound to give to every woman that had born
children, one French crown, and to every woman with child two. The only vice
that Vespasian had, was that he was extremely covetous, and devised many taxes,
and moreover bought things to sell the^ again, dealing more nearly for gain,
than a poor man would have done, which was great pity, for this emperors
other virtues were defaced by that vice, whereof princes ought to be well ware.
For as Plutarch says, never shall any civil matter proceed well without
justice, and without refraining from the lust and desire of getting.
Covetousness is naught else than injustice a^^ wickedn^^^
Hereby we see, that as liberality is called justice, so covetousness is
nothing else but injustice, the which Bion the Sophist termed the principal
town of all ungraciousness. And Timon said, That covetousness and ambition are
the grounds of al mischief. S. Paul in his first Epistle to Timothy, calls
it, The root of all evil; and says, That such as are wedded to it are fallen
from the faith. Whosoever has an ambitious or a covetous mind, (says
Euripides) sauoreth not of any just thing, neither desires he it, and moreover
he is cumbersome to his friends, and the whole city where he dwells; I am of
opinion (says the same Euripides in his Heraclides) that the righteous man is
borne ^o the benefit of his neighbor; but as for him that has his heart
turned away unto gain, he is vprofitable to his friends, and hard to be dealt
with. A covetous king undoes his realm.
Solomon is the 15 of his Proverbs, says, That he which is given to
covetousness, troubles his own house, but he that hates gifts shall live: for
gifts do blind the wise. And in the 29 he says, That under a good king, the
land shall ^lourish, but under a king that is covetous, or loves impositions,
it shall soon be destroyed. And in the xxiij again he says, Labor not to be
rich, neither cast thine eyes upon the riches which thou can not have. For
they make themselves wings like eagles, and fly up into the air, that is to
say, they vanish away. Again in the xxviij he says, The faithful man shall
have abundance of blessings, but he that hastes to be rich, shall not be
guiltless, neither knows he what want shall befall him.

The oracle of Apollo had foretold, that Sparta should not perish, but by
covetousness; and so it came to pass. In like manner befell it to the city of
Athens: For about the end of the wars of Peloponnesus, Amyntas began to corrupt
the judges with bribes, and thence forth they never prospered. No other thing
was the ruin of Rome. Which thing Iugurth perceiving, who had bribed a great
part of the senate with his money, said this; O fair city set to sale, if a
chapman were to be found for thee. Plutarch in the life of Coriolane, says;
That after that bribes began once to prevail in the election of officers, it
passed from hand to hand, even to the senators and judges; and from the judges
to the men of war, insomuch that in the end, it caused the commonweal to be
reduced to a Monarchy, and brought even the men of arms themselves in
subjection to money, so as the Pretorian soldiers sold the empire to them that
paid fair gold for it, and proceeded so far as to set it to open sale by the
drum, to him that offered most, and was the last chapman.

CHAP. V. That Gentleness and Courtesy be needful in the ordering of
affairs, the contraries whereunto be sternnesse and roughness.
OF Liberality proceeds courtesy and Gentleness, or rather Liberality
proceeds of kindheartednesse and good will; for (as says S. Paul in the
second Epistle to the Corinthians) Ready good will goes before liberality.
Thereupon it comes, that ordinarily the liberal man is kind-hearted and
gentle, so as Liberality, Kindness, Affability, and Gentleness, resemble
either other, and may al be reduced under the name of Charity, which
co^prehendeth them all, and much more; the which S. Paul has so discribed in
the first Epistle to the Corinthians, that a man cannot tell how to add more
unto it, saying; Charity is patient, meeld, and gentle, she seeks not her
own, she enuieth not, she deals not frowardly, she imagines no evil,
Kindness or Kindheartednesse reaches further than uprightness.
and so forth. Now then we call kindness a certain good will and love
toward men, and a certain natural goodness which extends it self further
than uprightness, because nature teaches us to use uprightness and
iust-dealing toward men only; but kindness and good will sometimes even to
the brute beasts, in cherishing them when they be tired, forworne, and broken
with travel and labor in our service: which doing proceeds from the
fountain of gentleness and kindness, which never ought to dry up in a man.
And therefore Solomon in the fourteenth of his Proverbs, says, That he which
disdaineth his neighbor, sins; but he that pitieth the afflicted, is
happy. And David, Blessed is he that considers the poor in his need, or
which has a care of them which are in distress; for surely God will relieve
him when he is in distress. We call that man gentle and courteous, which
behaueth himself familiarly toward all men, and is easy to be spoken to, as
were the emperor Titus, Philip king of Macedonia, Scipio, and many others; for
ordinarily he that is kind-hearted, that is to say, which has a care of his
neighbor, and is willing to do him good, must yield him his ear as well as his
purse, specially seeing that of both it is the less to his own cost.

There be five sorts of kindness or gentleness. Five sorts of Gentleness or
Kindness.
The first is, that which we term by the general name of kindness, which is
a certain meeld, charitable, and loving disposition of mind toward men; as
when a man pitieth the poor, the oppressed, or the needy; and generally when
a man behaueth himself courteously toward all men, be they poor or rich,
according to the example of our Maker, who delights to be among the children
of men, to do them good. The second sort of kindness may be called
Familiarity or familiarnesse. For there be that are kind-hearted, and ready
enough to do good to every man; and yet notwithstanding they have a certain
native ^ullennesse that barreth men from having access to them. But they that
are gentle in all points, are also meeld and easy to be dealt with, persuading
themselves that the way to do men good, is to hear their requests. And they
that have intended to show themselves yet more kind and courteous, have gone
further, as Alexander Seuerus did, who blamed his good servants, for that they
required not recompense at his hand. Some other princes to draw men the more
unto them, have called men by their names. For it does the subject good, The
subject is d^sirous to be known of his prince.
when he sees that his prince knows him, because he gathers thereby that
his prince loves him. And for that cause did Cirus call al his men of war by
their names, howbeit that was a thing that could not be done without a divine
memory. And to the same purpose I will not omit Scipioes answer to a certain
Roman which vaunted, that he could call mo men by their names, than Scipio
could. You say true (quoth Scipio) for my study has not bin to know many, but
to be known of all.

The third sort of kindness, consists in Clemency, that is to say, in
forgiving offenses, or in making light of them, which thing God has commanded
us in the fifth chapter of saint Mat^e^, and in the xxv of the Proverbs, If
thine enemy hungar (says he) give him bread to eat, and if he thirst give him
water to drink, for so shall thou heap coals upon his head, and God will pay
it thee again. But let us leave the handling of this point to Divines, and
take us again to the examples of the heathen. It was asked to Cleomenes king
of Sparta, What a good king ought to do? To his enemies (quoth he) all evil,
and to his friends none at all. Then Aristo replying, A prince ought to (...)
N^y sir (quoth he) how much more beautiful and commendable a thing is it, to
do good to his friends, and of his enemies to make friends? Whereof the prince
reapeth such profit, that he makes himself beloved of all men. And therefore
Traian said unto a friend of his, That the thing which made him better beloved
than his predecessors, was, that he did easily pardon such as had offended him.
Agesilaus by his good doing, made those that were his enemies to become his
friends. Augustus made one his servant that would have killed him. Lewis the
eleventh assaied by all means to draw those to his service, that had bin his
enemies, if he knew them to be men of service; but he was moved thereto more for
the profit that he hoped for by their service, than of any meeld disposition of
nature. Julius Caesar being worthily commended for his clemency and mercy,
was no sooner reconciled to any enemies of his, but he would by and by use them
as friends; insomuch that he would even set them at his own table the same
day. While Bibulus was in Egypt, a certain man killed two of his children by
mischance; whereof Cleopatra being advertised, sent him the two offenders with a
couple of hangmen, to take such punishment of them as he listed: but he would
not touch them, but sent them back again, saying, That the punishing thereof
belonged not to him, but to the people of Rome. When Philip king of Macedonia
had lost one of his eyes at the siege of Modon, he became never the more
rigorous to his enemies for it, but received them to mercy upon reasonable
conditions. King Francis the first being dangerously wounded in the head with
the stroke of a firebrand, would in no wise be informed who it was that threw
it at him, saying, That seeing he had committed folly, it was good reason he
should taste his part thereof.

The fourth sort of kindness may be called Mercy, He is to ^e pit^ed which
submits himself ^o ou^ mercy.
when such as have offended you do cry you mercy. For it is Gods will that
we should have pity upon them that submit themselves to our mercy, and that
(as the earl of Derbie was wont to say) He that cries mercy, should mercy
have. Plato says, That the greatest sin which we can commit, is to use outrage
toward them that humble themselves to us, and that he which does such folk
evil, shall never go unpunished. The fifth kind of kindness is Meeldnesse and
Moderation, as when a prince having overcome his enemies, does use them gently.
For such dealing serves to win the hearts both of subjects and of enemies.

When Alexander saw Darius dead, he fell not to dancing, laughing, and
singing, as one that had made an end of a great war, but what did he then? he
took off his own cassoke, and covered therewith the body of Darius,
philosophically hiding (as says Plutarch) the royal offspring. Alcioneus the
son of Antigonus understanding that one had cut off the head of Pirrhus, went
to see it, and required to have it; the which as soon as he had received, he
ran to his father, and cast it down before him. But as soon as Antigonus had
seen it and knew it, he drove away his son with strokes of a cudgel,
calling him cruel, a murderer, barbarous, and unnatural, and thereupon hiding
his face with his cloak, he began to cry for compassion sake, and afterward
caused the head to be honorably buried. Within a while after, Alcioneus met
Helen the son of the aforesaid Pirrhus in very poor estate, apparelled in a
very simple cloak, and receiving him courteously with gentle and amiable
speeches, brought him to his father. Whom when Antigonus saw, he said to
Alcioneus; My son, this deed of thine is much better, and pleases me far more
than the other; but yet thou have not done altogether as thou ought, in that
thou have not taken away this course cloak that hangs upon his shoulders,
which does more dishonor to us that have gotten the victory, than to him that
has lost it. Therwithall he embraced Helen, and having set him in good
apparel, sent him home into his kingdom of Epire; and being possessed of the
army of Pirrhus, he dealt very courteously with all his servants. Of the excess
of Gentleness.
But in Gentleness as in all other virtues, a man may offend in too much or
too little; as they do, which through shamefastness do condescend to all
things; of whom Plutarch speaks in his book of Misshamefastnesse, and as
soothers and slatterers do, which sooth men in all that they say, as Gnato
does in Terence. The other sort is of them that deny all requests that are
made unto them, be they never so just, and which through a froward disposition
of gainesaying that accompanies them, do encounter all things that are spoken
to them: or else are so rough and stern* that they never laugh, neither can a
man tell how to be acquainted with them. And so kindness or gentleness matched
with meeldnes, is a virtue that represseth the excess and moderateth the
default; keeping men from exceeding in overmuch pliantnes, like the soother and
the flatterer; and from the default of vnpliablenes like the cloune and the
churl. For oft-times ouer-great familaritie, makes a prince to be had in
contempt, and ouergreat sternnes and gravity make him odious, hard to be
entreated, and not to be come unto. Therefore it behooves him to hold the
mean, and to consider what may best beseem him. For (as the Preacher says)
All things have their times; there is a time to laugh, and a time to weep, a
time to grant, and a time to refuse. Whether a prince ought to be meeld or
stern.
The which some not considering advisedly, do either counsel princes to make
themselves too familiar, and to deny nothing; or else to refuse all things, and
in no wise to give their subjects easy access unto them: saying, that if a
king make himself too gentle, and too easy to be spoken to, he shall be
despised, and consequently ill obayed of his subjects, because that overmuch
familiarity breeds contempt. And therefore the Englishmen, Spaniards, Turks,
and Scithians, do reverence their kings well near as gods, and dare not prease
into their presence. For they that suffer themselves to be comne unto, do
oftentimes promise more than they can perform, as Titus did, who often promised
more than he was able to do; saying that no man ought to go away sad and
discontented from the presence of a prince. Insomuch that many me^ allowed the
apophthegme of Brutus, who said, That that man had misspent his youth, which
granted all things. Caligula made no niceness to deny all men's requests,
saying, That there was nothing in his own nature that he esteemed so much, as
impudency and stoutnes of denying all things. The which point the emperor
Maximilian practiced upon a poor man that craved an alms of him, and told him
that the emperor and he came both of one father, to wit of Adam, and so
consequently were brethren, and therefore he desired him to deal brotherly with
him and to do him some good. The emperor consented, and gave him a small piece
of silver. Whereat when he saw the poor man discontented, he told him that he
ought to take his gift in good worth, saying that if every of his brethren
would give him as much, he should be richer than he himself was. A certain
courtier whom Archelaus loved well, prayed him to give him a certain goodly
vessel: by and by Archelaus commanded one to give it to Euripides. Whereat the
party marueling that had craved it, received none other answer but this; thou
art worthy to ask it and to go without it; and he is worthy to have it
without asking. Meaning that he had given the courtier access to ask what he
would, but that the goodness of Euripides was such, as deserved some gift
without asking. Philip counseled his son Alexander to behave himself gently
and graciously to his subjects before he were king: for were he once king, he
could not be so gracious. Deeming very wisely, that as there is not a better
thing to stablish a kingdom, than the love of the subjects, so it is very hard
for him that reighneth, It is hard for him that reigns to be gentle to all
men.
to be gentle to all, as well because the state of a king, is subject to envy,
as also because it cannot maintain it self against it, unless it punish the
wicked. For it behooves a king so to temper his goodness and gentleness, as
therewithal he retain his authority and gravity. For oftentimes ouer-great
gentleness causes men to make no account of a prince. And as Plutarch says in
the life of Pericles, It is very hard for a prince to keep a severe gravity,
for the upholding of his reputation, and therwithall to suffer all men to have
familiar access unto him. After the time that Pericles had the managing of the
public affairs, he was never seen abroad in the streets, nor at any feasts.
They that would have a prince to be familiar, defend their cause by reasons and
examples, saying that gentleness makes a prince well beloved, well-willed, and
acceptable.

For as Terence says, he that is a man, ought to be a partaker of that which
belongs to man, that is to say, he ought to be gentle, loving, and
merciful. And (as says Iuuenal) nature has made man's heart tender, that he
should pity such as are distressed, who crave help of the prince, whose
throne is vpheld by goodness, gentleness, and kindness, as says Solomon in
the twentieth of the Proverbs.

Dennis the father said, That he had chains of adamant to uphold this
dominion; namely, a guard of eighteen thousand strangers, besides his ordinary
soldiers, and a great number of galleys. On the contrary part Dion said to
the yoonger Dennis, that the cheins of adamant to assure a kingdom, Only good
will makes a kingdom sure.
were neither fear nor force, nor great multitudes of men of arms, as his
father had said; but the good will, hearty affection, favor and love of the
subjects gotten by the princes execution of Justice. Which chains though they
be looser than the other that be so sturdie and stiffly stretched out, yet be
they more firm, strong, and long lasting, to keep and maintain a
principality.

Titus because he had the perfection of gentleness and princely courtesy,
was termed, The deintie delight of mankind.

Plutarch says, that Brutus was beloved of all men, because he was a man of a
gentle and gracious nature, having a right intent and will, without swaruing or
varieng. Philip was of so courteous conversation, that he got mo cities by
that means than by force of arms. Alexander his son was gentle and familiar
amongst his men of war: in so much that being suddenly taken upon a time in
Asia, with such a sore tempest and cold, that there was not one in his company
which fainted not; when he saw a simple soldier of Macedonie half past
himself for cold, he arose out of his chair where he sat at a fire, and
made the soldier to be set down in it; whereof the soldier being aware when
he was comne to himself again, by the warmth of the fire; he start up
astonished out of the chair to excuse himself unto Alexander. But Alexander
with a smiling countenance said unto him; Know thou not my soldier, that
you Macedonians live after another sort under your king, than the Persians do
under theirs? For unto them it is a deadly crime to sit in the kings chair;
but unto thee it has bin life. The great princes of old time ^anqueted
priua^ly with their friends.
He banqueted oftentimes privately with his friends, and so did also king Lewis
the eleventh, notwithstanding that he was feared and drad, which thing procured
him great good will. The like also did Hismaell Sophy king of the Persians,
taking his repast openly in a great company of his lords, with whom likewise
he took his pleasure in hunting, continuing always gentle, easy to be come
unto, and willing to hear such as were desirous to speak with him.

Julius Caesar was fingularly beloved and liked of the common people, for his
gracious manner of saluting, embracing, and conferring with all men, privately
and familiarly. And on a time, when he saw a friend of his sick, he gave him
his chamber and bed, because there were no mo beds not chambers in the Inn but
that, and went out and lay himself xpon the hard ground. And when his host one
day gave him old oil in steed of new, and they that sat at his table with him
were offended therewith, he to save his host from shame, did maruelously praise
it, and ate more thereof tha^ he was wont to do. Antonie was highly esteemed
and commended of his soldiers, because he ordinarily exercised himself, and
ate and dra^ke often with them, and sent them gifts according to his power and
ability. He was so obeyed, that in the voyage of Parthia, although the world
went against him, yet notwithstanding his men of war followed him, and never
forsook him, because he went to visit them from tent to tent, The visiting of
the sick.
comforting the sick and wounded with great compassion, insomuch that he could
not forbear weeping; whereas they on the contrary part made good countenance
unto him, calling him with great reverence, their General, and praying him
that he would not disease himself for their sakes. Insomuch that his kindly
simplicity and liberality, his familiar manner of playing and making mirth in
company; and specially the pains that he took at that time in succouring,
visiting, and bemoning them that were sick or wounded, wrought such effect,
that he made the sick and wounded men, to continue as affectionat toward him,
and as resolute to do him service, as those that were whole and sound. The
Emperor Adrian had the good wills of the Romans, because he visited as well his
enemies as his friends that were sick, and relieved them all that he could.
Also he would go to the houses of old and ancient folk, that by reason of
their years could not go abroad, of whom he would enquire how they had
lived, where they had dwelled, what customs they had seen, and what
distresses and dangers they had endured. By doing whereof and by showing
charity toward them, he profited himself, because that oftentimes, he served
his own turn in matters that befell him, by the examples which those good old
folk had told him of the time forepast. Cimon was greatly accepted of the
common people for his plain dealing, and for the same was advanced to great
offices. Contrariwise Nicias for his ouergreat sternnesse and hardness to be
acquainted with, was envied of most men, and but for his great virtue and
integrity, which caused men to reverence him and fear him, he could never
have weelded his affairs as he did. Lucullus for want of behauing himself
courteously and gently enough to his soldiers, and for want of skill to
entertain them, could not make an end of his wars, which he had so happily
begun, and brought almost to the point of perfection. For his soldiers became
heady, and would not follow him. Dion was blamed, not only of the Sicilians,
but also even of Plato, for his manner of dealing, in speaking more roughly
unto such as sued unto him, than the state of his affairs could bear. The
Macedonia^s forsook Demetrius, because he was uneasy to be dealt with, and
very hard to be spoken to. Coriolanus was hated of the people for his
sternnesse, notwithstanding that he was a wise captain. Contrariwise
Alcibiades, notwithstanding that he was full of vice, yet was he well-beloved and
esteemed of all men, for his courteous behavior toward all sorts. Among the
good parts that were in Aristides, one of the best account was, that he could
well skill to win and alure men's hearts unto him, which thing (says Plutarch)
comes of gentlnesse: but as for gravity, it is accompanied with solitarines,
that is to say, such kind of men have few to follow them, and are forsaken of
all men. The gentleness of Pompey was so great, that he contented al men that
spoke with him: insomuch that even they that complained unto him, of the wrongs
done unto them by his friends and servants, were persuaded to bear them
patiently; so greatly did he content them. And that was the very thing, that
procured him so many honorable offices of great charge. Suetonius reports
Augustus to have been so gentle, that he caused his doors to stand open to as
many as would come and salute him, and received their petitions with such
meeldnesse and courtesy, that after a smiling manner, he reproved one for
making too much nicenes in preferring his suit unto him, as though he had
showed a piece of coin to an Elephant. The people of Rome purposed to have
kept Crassus by force, from going to make war against the Parthians. Which
thing Crassus fearing, prayed Pompey to accompany him. When the people saw
Pompey coming before him, with a smiling countenance and amiable look, they
were altogether appeased, and opened themselves to make way for him to pass.
Yet notwithstanding he could not always hold his native gentleness of his:
for the honorable offices of great charge which he had, made him oftentimes
too grave. Crassus being of less authority than Pompey, got the favor of the
people against him by Gentleness and Courtesi^
In so much that Crassus by behauing himself lowly and courteously, and by
admitting men easily to his speech, doing pleasure with good will, to as many
as sought it, defending his friends in places of judgment, lending money to
such as stood in need, and assisting and furthering such as sued for offices;
made himself in the end more acceptable than Pompey, who toward the end of
his life altering his natural gentleness into a certain s^ueritie, became
more difficult to be spoken to, and did less for his friends. And although
Crassus had not the like authority and reputation, yet notwithstanding he
obtained his suits, and most commonly prevailed against Pompey. Pyrrhus is
highly commended for his gentleness and familiarity with his household folk
and friends. Plutarch says of him in his life, that he had won the good
favor of the people of Sicilie, by speaking more graciously than any other had
done: and that afterward when he fell to be rigorous and sharp, he soon lost
the realm of Sicilie. As soon as he went about to compel the Tarentines to
the discipline of war, by and by he lost their hearts. Cimon by his gracious
speeches, and by his gentle harkening to the Greeks, recovered the
principality of Greece out of the hands of the Lacedaemonians. Contrariwise,
Lisander king of Lacedemon, by his hard dealing caused the confederats of
Greeks to depart from the Lacedaemonians, and to allie themselves with the
Athenians.

Plutarch reports that the gentleness of Quintus Flaminius, was the cause
that the Greeks submitted themselves to the Romans; for had he not been meeld,
gentle, and tractable, using reason rather than force, Greece would never have
submitted it self to the dominion of the Romans.

Totilas having many prisoners of the Roman camp, The gentlnes of Totilas drue
the soldiers to him that had warred against him.
handled them so courteously, and with so good entertainment, that many of them
did put themselves in his pay, for the courtesies sake which they knew to be in
him. Demetrius did a deed of great courtesy to the Athenians, when they had
rebelled against him; for when he had overcome them, he gave them a great
quantity of corn, whereof they had then need, and in his offering it unto
them, committed a solicisme, whereof being reproved by one of the^, he said that
for that correcting of his speech, he would give the people as much corn more;
showing therein his goodness toward the vanquished, and his gentleness and
meeldnes toward his corrector. Paulus Iouius speaking of Lewis Sforcia, who of
a governor ungraciously made himself duke of Millan, says he was very
courteous (which thing wan him the good will of the people) and ready to admit
such to his presence and hearing, as sought it at his hand. He says as much of
Lawrence Medicis, who could well skill to win the hearts of the Florentines, by
gracious speeches, courtesy, and meeldnesse. And likewise of the Marquis of
Mantua, who appeased a mutiny that was between the Italians and the Almans.
For the Almans regarded him for his gentleness, because he kept company with
the mean soldiers in incredible familiarity, and yet notwithstanding held
his honor as general of the host. Bellisarius was beloved of all men for his
gentleness, because the poor as well as the rich had access unto him, and he
imparted himself equally to all men. The Cardinal of Medices (who afterward
was Pope Leo) by giving courteous intertainment unto all the Florentines that
had to do at Rome, and by admitting them favorably to his speech, made the
Florentines to forget the hatred which they had borne unto his brother Peter,
and so by conforming himself in qualities agreeable to his citizens, opened
the passage for his family, to enter into the city of Florence. The constable
of France using the like fashion at the camp before Auinion, and talking by
the way eft with one and eft with another, did by that means draw to obedience
a troop newly assembled of sundry and diverse nations.

Men are to be tuned by gentle means as well as brute beasts.
Fabius was wont to say, That he marvelled that men dealt better with horses,
hounds, and other beasts, in taming them by gentleness, than with men; for
even by fair and gentle means, are froward men also to be won and tamed. And
we ought not to be more hard-harted toward them, than husbandmen are toward
wild vines, who do not cut them up for their harshnesse, but do make them
become sweet by grassing them. And even so must evil men be by benefits
appeased, and good men by the same means be maintained. Cleomenes said, That
the pampering of men with money was gross, void of policy, and full of
injustice; and that to his seeming, the most honorable and the most royal
means, was to allure them by courtesy of delightful entertainment and
communication, wherein both grace and faithfulness went matched together. For
he was of opinion, that there was none other difference between a friend and
an hireling, but that the friend is gotten and kept by gentleness of nature and
good usage, The tyrant that is a coward, is most cruel and suspicious.
and the hireling is caught by money. Hereunto we may ad that which Plutarch
says in the life of Artaxerxes, namely, That the tyrant which is most coward,
is most cruel and thirsty of blood. And contrariwise there is no man more
gentle and kindhearted, or less suspicious, than the valiant and hardy man.
And therefore the beasts that are not to be tamed, are commonly cowards and
fearful; whereas on the contrary part, those that be noble and full of courage,
do think themselves sure, and acquaint themselves with man, because they be
void of fear, and refuse not the allurements and familiar vsages, which man
proffereth unto them. Even so when princes yield themselves gentle to their
subjects, their subjects also by that means become meek toward them, in hope
that their king will hearken to them, whenever they request it. And that kind
of demeanor is oftentimes a cause that the courtiers keep themselves in right
mind, for fear least they should be complained of to the prince, if they do
amiss. And the princes that deal otherwise, are subject to this saying of
Dioclesian the emperor, That only the emperor knows that which he should
not know, and is ignorant of that which he should know; because there are
three or four about him, which keep him from knowing the truth. But to eschew
the falling into this inconvenience, Antonie the meek, one of the best
emperors that ever was, gave easy access unto his presence, and willed that
his palace gates should be open every day, to all such as listed to come in,
to crave justice of the emperor; as I have said already in the title of
Justice. Moreover he had good and discreet men about him, of whom he would
enquire in secret what men reported of him, and if he found that their speaking
evil of him was for just cause, he endeavored to amend his fault. And therefore
it is better that a prince should be too gentle, than too slerne; howbeit, that
it is to be considered, that the excess in any of both ways, cannot be
without vice, and that as well in this as in all other things, the best is to
be followed, which is the mean, in matching gravity and gentleness together;
as the Athenians said of Pericles, that no man's nature could be more moderated
in gravity, nor more grave with meeldnesse and gentleness, than his was. And
as Gueuara says in his first book, Princes ought to endeavor to get the good
wills of men by courteous conversation, and also to be feared and redouted for
their maintaining of good justice, as we read of Liberius Constantine the
emperor, who was both feared of many, and loved of all.

Plutarch in the life of Phocion says, That too rough severity, as well as
too meeld gentleness, Too great gentleness and too great severity are both
very dangerous.
is a very slipperie and dangerous downfall; and that the middle way of
yielding sometimes to the peoples desire, thereby to make them the more obedient
otherwise, and to grant them the thing that does delight them, thereby to
require of them the things that are for their profit, is a wholesome mean to
rule and govern men well, who suffer themselves to be led to the executing of
good things, when too lordly authority is not used over them. Therefore when
majesty is mingled with courtesy, there is no harmony so perfect and
musick-like as that. For it is the thing wherein the prince may resemble God,
God enforces (...) to obedience.
who enforces not us to any thing, but does sweeten the constraint of
obedience, with demonstration and persuasio^ of reason. Chilo said; That
princes must match gentleness with puissance, to the intent they may be the
more reverenced and feared of their subjects. For this reverence is accompanied
with love, but fear is accompanied with hatred. Now it is both more sure and
more honorable to be loved than to be feared. Therefore a prince must moderat
his behavior in such sort, as he may be neither too much feared of the meaner
sort, nor too much despised of the greater. For to be too much feared of his
subjects, belongs unto a tyrant. But yet must he also beware that he be not
despised of the great, he must keep his estate, and be grave, howbeit, such
gravity as is accompanied with gentleness, so as when he is abroad he show a
princely majesty, and when he is to hear requests, he show himself affable
and easy to be dealt with. After that manner did Julius Casar behave himself in
his dictatorship, but that was to his own overthrow, because he had taken upon
him that pre-eminence by force of arms, and had altered the state of the city,
He that alters a state, must have force to make men fear him, until he be
surely settled in his tyranny.
in which case it is more safety for a prince to be feared than to be loved.
For it cannot be but that the prince which has changed a state, has many
enemies. Augustus his successor was better advised than he, for at the
beginning he was cruel, and put those to death who^ he thought able to impeach
his doings at any time after. But when he once saw himself thoroughly settled
in his tyranny, and that the most part of the citizens that had bin brought up
in liberty were dead, then began he to be a gentle, affable, and gracious
prince. Antigonus did the like in the beginning of his reign, dealing roughly
at the first, and afterward beco^ming meeld and gentle. A new dominion is to be
gotten by force, and to be maintained by gentleness.
And when it was asked of him, Why he had altered his manner of dealing? he
answered, That at the beginning he needed a kingdom, and now he wanted but
favor and good will, because a new dominion is gotten by force of arms, and by
austeritie, but it is maintained by love and good will. But in lawful kings
love is more auailable than fear. The kings of France demean themselves
better in that behalf than all other kings. For their attendance represents
a great majesty, and yet notwithstanding no man is barred from preferring his
suit unto him after he is out of his chamber, specially in the morning when he
goes to mass, where certain masters of requests atte^d upon him, and deliver
him the petitions that are brought unto them. There is a kind of gentleness that
is hurtful to a prince, To be ouer-easily entreated may be hurtful.
and his granting of every man's request, may breed many great inconveniences.
For by granting some point of favor in case of justice, wrong is done: and by
granting money, the prince his purse is emptied, whereby he is driven to take
where he ought not, or else where he can. The laws of France have well
remedied that matter. For the king has set down by his ordinance, that he
will not have his letters regarded which concern not justice, and for the view
of the^ he refers himself to his judges, for his checker matters: moreover,
there is his court of parliament, and a chamber of accounts which controlleth
the kings gifts: so as no man can go away discontented from him, because he
grants all things that are demanded of him, and yet those gifts are without
effect, whereof the ministers only do bear the disgrace, as Machiauell has
very well marked in his book of Princes. And so long as this law stood in
force, the affairs of France did always prosper.

Now let us speak of Envy, Of Envy.
which extends it self further than roughness or austeritie, which properly
is contrary to Gentleness and Courtesy. For the rough and stern person is
contrary to the gentle and kind-hearted, as Terence teaches us in his comodie
of the Brethere^, under the persons of Mitio and Demea. But Envy contains in
it churlishness, hatred, ambition, and manslaughter, according to the saying
of S. John Chrisostom upon the xxvij of Genesis, where he says, That Envy is
the root of manslaughter, and manslaughter is the fruit of envy.

S. Ambrose in his Duties, makes no great difference between the wicked and
the envious, saying, That the wicked man delights in his own welfare, and
the envious man is tormented at the welfare of another: the one loves the
evil, and the other hates the good; so as he that desires the good, is more
tolerable than he that would the mischief of all men. Envy then is nothing
else but a sorinesse conceived at the prosperity of another man.

Bion the Boristhenit speaking to a certain envious man, whom he saw sad,
said unto him; I cannot tell whether some harm has happened to thy self, or
some good to some other body. For Envy is not sorry for another man's harm,
but contrariwise is glad of it. The Greeks call it, Epicaireca^ian, as ye would
say; A ioying and reioicing at other men's harms. Themistocles said; He had
not yet done any thing worthy of praise, seeing that no man envied him.
Hereby we see, that as charity extends further than gentleness, so envy
extends further than hatred, which seems contrary to love and charity.
The difference between hatred and Envy.
For envy (as Plutarch teaches us in his book of Envy and Hatred) never
departs from those whom it has once caught hold of, neither in prosperity
nor in adversity: whereas hatred vanishes away in the extremity of either
fortune. Furthermore, when a man is persuaded that he has received no wrong,
or takes an opinion that those whom he hates as wicked persons, are become
honest men, or if they have done him some such pleasure as is a cause to
dissolve the former injury, the hatred ceasseth. But as for the envious
person, although no man do him harm, yet ceasseth he not to be spiteful. And
if he see an honest man, or a man of good qualities, or if he receive a good
turn, it does but provoke him the more to envy, so as he is exasperated by
the things whereby hatred is assuaged. Envy is vndeterminable.
Envy is vndeterminable, and resembles diseased eyes, which are offended at
all brightness and light. But hatred is determinable, and is always founded and
settled upon certain grounds, in respect of it self. By envy came death into
the world, for through Satan's envy were we deceived, through that deceit
became we disobedient, and through that disobedience came death upon us. It is
a very perilous vice, which seazeth not only upon men's states and livings, but
also upon their lives, as we read of Abell, who was murdered through the
envy of Cain; and of Joseph, who was sold through the envy of his brethren.
Saint John Chrysostom in his 44 Homily, says; That this vice in respect of
other vices is inexcusable: The sin of Envy is inexcusable.
for the lechor excuses himself by lust, the thief by poverty, and the
man-slear by choler; but the envious man can find no excuse at all God
commands us to love our enemies, and the envious man hates even his
friends. And in his five and fortith Homily, and likewise upon the one and
twentieth of Genesis, he says; That as the worm marreth the timber wherein it
breeds, before it go out; even so does envy mar the man. Antisthenes said,
That as rust eats iron: so the envious are consumed by the fretting of their
own envy. For the envious (says Horace) pineth away at the prosperity of
another. And Alexander said unto Meleager, That the envious man carries his
own torment with him. Solomon in the fourteenth of the Proverbs, says, That
as a sound heart is the life of the body, so envy is a consumer of the bones.
Plutarch likeneth envy to smoke, For before the flame break out, it mounteth
up great, but as soon as the flame shows it self, the smoke vanishes by
little and little, and in the end is no more seen. Plato in his book of
Laws, says; That the envious man imagining to vaunt himself the more by
finding fault with others, can never attain to true virtue, and is a hinderer
of those whom he spighteth, by the wrongful slanders which he reports of
them. Plutarch in the life of Lisander, says; that in the pursuit of virtue,
the envious and ambitious men do hold those for their adversaries whom they
might and ought rather to serve and help, in the doing of great and goodly
things. For through their iealousnesse of glory, they commonly envy their
like. Whereupon comes this saying of Martial, That there no account is made
of them that are alive.

It is Envy that causes us to esteem more of men of old time, than of men
now living. And as Ovid says, We take no pleasure in reading men's books, until
the authors of them be dead, because envy has accustomed us to wound the
living with venomous tooth. For envy feeds upon us so long as we be alive,
but be we once dead she ceasseth, and then is praise given according to desert.
Some man will say, that this discourse may well be directed to common persons,
Whether a prince be subject to Envy.
but princes are out of enuies reach. For if a prince be envied, it cannot hurt
him; and therewithal he is too great to bear envy to his subjects. The envy
that Saul had unto David, for fighting with Goliath, shows sufficiently that
kings are not exempted from envy. For albeit that he received right great good
by that deed of David's, yet notwithstanding for as much as he was blinded, and
as it were drunken with envy, he held him being his benefactor as his enemy.
Abimelech was a king and a great lord, and yet when he saw Isaak a stranger
prosper and grow rich in his realm, he drove him out. When Laban saw Jacob his
son in law grown richer than himself, he could not afterward give him a good
look. Wherefore it is not to be douted, but that a prince may be envious, and
also be envied, and thereby receive harm. For man, whatsoever he be, the more
goods and power he has, the more envy bears he on his back. Denni: the
tyra^t kept himself not only from his enemies, but also from his friends, yea
even from the wisest of the^, saying that there was none of them which had not
rather reign than serve. Had D^on and Julius Caesar done as he did, it had bin
the better for the^: but they said, they had lever die than to distrust their
friends. And ye must not think that a prince can be privileged from being
envious, as who would say, there were no person who^ he could or ought to envy,
for envy is a disease of the mind, as well as jealousy is. The jealous person
forgoeth not his iealosie by having a discreet wife, that gives him no
occasion to misdout her, for he is jealous of all that he sees: even so the
envious man must needs feed his own fancy, though there be no apparent matter
wherewith. Othanes said that kings do envy good men, yea and hate them deadly,
and that virtue is commonly hated of kings. His so saying was to serve his
turn in pleading against regalitie, as I have said in the 1 book. For a good
king loves virtue and vertuos folk, but an evil king does both hate and envy
the^. Whereto envy serves.
And as Manlius said in Titus Liuius, Envy serves but to speak evil of
virtue, to deface the honor thereof, and to bereave it of reward. Plutarch says
in the life of Cato, That all the great men were enemies to Cato, because they
saw him to be upright in justice, and they were ashamed of their own injustice.
This was but an envy that they bore unto Cato, The Envy o^ Caligula*
and therefore they were enemies unto him. Caligula was desirous of his own
ease, and yet was he envious toward those that were at ease as well as he. In
the voyage that he made into Germany, so hastily that the ensigns were folded
up and carried upon sumpter-horses, that the ba^ds might march with the more
speed, albeit that himself went in a goodly couch, and made plain paths all
the way that he went, yet notwithstanding he wrat unto Rome that seeing he was
in such danger, and ready to give battle, he marvelled that they gave
themselves to feasting, to haunting of the theaters, and to make pastimes in
the fields and gardens. This doing of his proceeded of nothing else, but of an
inordinat and unreasonable envy, that fretted his brain, the which he showed
sufficiently toward the noblemen, in bereauing the^ of their cote-armors, and
of the ancient cognisances of their houses. And if he spied any fair boys
that had fair hair, he caused the hinder parts of their heads to be shaven.
And he was so spiteful, that he envied even Homer, the greatest Poet that ever
was: insomuch that being determined upon a time to abolish the remembrance of
him, he said he might well have as much power as Plato, to weed him out of his
commonwealth.

Alexanders envy was the chief cause of the death of Clitus. The
inconveniences of Envy.
For he so envied the high exploits of Philip his father, that he fell into a
rage when any man compared him with him. Lisander accompanying Agesilaus in the
voaige into Asia, was so honored of the men of Asia, because he had had the
government of them aforetimes, that in comparison of him, they made no
reckoning of the king: by reason whereof, Agesilaus bare him such envy, that in
all that voyage he committed not any honorable charge unto him, but employed
him about such things as a man would not have employed the meanest of Sparta,
and it was thought that that would have cost the city of Lacedemon deerly: For
had not death prevented Lisander, he would have overthrown the king. Envy
made Socrates to be put to death; and Aristides, Themistocles, and others to be
banished. Also it was the death of Coriolane, because the chief princes of the
Volses envied his virtue and his greatness. And by his death, the Volses were
vanquished of the Romans. Through envy, Dion was slain by Calippus; and
Sertorius by Perpenna: and by their death were they themselves vanquished and
disappointed of the fruit of their former enterprises. The envy that was
rooted between Themistocles and Aristides, hindered the Athenians from doing
many goodly enterprises; insomuch that Themistocles said, that it was
impossible for the affairs of the commonweal of Athens to prosper, until
they were both of them cast into the barather, which was a deep dungeon,
whereinto men were thrown headlong, that were condemned to death. And no doubt
but the affairs of Greece had gone to wrack, if Aristides had continued his
envy against Themistocles. But when he saw the danger whereinto all Greece was
like to fall, if he and Themistocles did not agree: he bespake him after this
manner; Themistocles, if we be both wise, it is high time for us to leave the
vain spite and iealosie which we have hitherto borne one against another, and
to take up a strife that may be to the honor and welfare of us both; that is to
wit, which of us shall do his duty best for the safeguard of Greece; you in
commanding and doing the office of a good captain, and I in counselling you
and in executing your commandments. Hereunto Themistocles answered: I am
displeased Aristides in this, that you have showed your self a better man than
I; but since the case stands so, that the honor of breaking the ice is due to
you, for provoking me to so honorable and commendable a contention: I will
strain my self henceforth, to out go you by good continuance. The envy that
was borne to Peter Saderin Gonfa^^nnier of Florence, for the great credit and
authority that he had in that city, caused the return of the Medices, and
the utter ruin of the commonweal.

Now we must consider what remedies there be, to defend a man from this
malady, Remedies against envy.
that a man may not be envious, nor envied. As touching the first, the curing
thereof is by the contrary, that is to say by being meeld, gentle, and
charitable: for he that loves men, cannot envy them. And that is the cause
why we be commanded to love our neighbor as our selves, to the end we be not
envious against him, but rather glad when he has good success in his affairs.
And (as S. Paul says in the 12 to the Romans, Rejoice with them that rejoice,
and weep with them that weep; and bear well in mind, that envy does more
harm to the envious man himself, than to the party whom he enuieth,
remembering how Solomon in the seventeen of the Proverbs says, That he which
reioiceth at another man's fall, shall not be unpunished. And in the four and
twentieth of the Proverbs he says, Rejoice not whe^thine enemy has a fall,
neither be thou glad that he stumbleth: least perchance the Lord do see it and
be displeased thereat, and turn away his wrath from him. If this be spoken of
enemies, what ought we to do concerning friends? I will not allege the infinite
precepts and examples touched by Divines. I will take but the only example of
the Heathen Aristides, of whom I have spoken. When his enemy Themistocles was
banished, he neither spoke ne did any thing to his prejudice or disadua^tage,
neither reioiced he any more to see his enemy in adversity, than if he had
never envied his prosperity. How to eschew en^y.
Envy is eschewed or diminished by modesty, as when a man that is praised,
chalengeth not such honor to himself, but refers it over to those that
praise him. Whereof we have example in Pirrhus, who after many victories, when
his men of war called him Eagle, I am (quoth. he) an eagle by your means, being
carried up by your knighthood and chivalry, as the eagle is carried up by his
feathers: and so he cast back the honor and title to his men of war. So also did
Philip abase the praise that was given unto him for his beauty, his eloquence,
and his good skill in hunting; saying, that the one belonged to women, the other
to sophists, and the third to sponges. Othersome do attribute this answer to
his enemy Demosthenes. Contrariwise, Alexander for enforcing men to worship
him, and to esteem him as a god, began to be hated in his camp. Augustus
disallowing al such doings of Alexander, did the clean contrary. For when he
was entered into Rome in triumph, as lord of the whole world in peaceable
possession, and one in a certain comedy said, O good lord, and every man
turned that word unto Augustus, flattering him and clapping their hands for
joy: he gave a token presently that he liked not of it, and the next morning
made prohibitions, that men should not use the term of lord unto him, neither
permitted he any man, no not even his own children, to call him by that name,
either in jest or in good earnest. There is another way to avoid envy, which
was practiced by Dennis the tirant; which is, that he advanced a man that was
wicked and hated of the people: and when he was asked why he did so; because
(quoth he) I will have a man in my realm, that may be more hated than my
self. Caesar Borgia to avoid the envy of his cruel deeds, did put the party
to death by whom he had executed the same, to the end that the envy should
light upon his minister, and die with him. For such is the disposition of the
common people, that they can the better endure a hard prince, when they have
upon whom to discharge their ^urie. Alcibiades to avoid the over great envy of
the people, and to turn aside the evil speeches that they had of him, did cut
off the tail of a dog that he had bought very dear, and drove him through the
city, to the intent to busy men's heads about talk of his dog, and not about
other matters. For they that set their minds upon small things, are not so
envious as they that deal in great matters.

CHAP. VI. That Modesty or Meeldnes well beseems a prince, and that
ouerstatelinesse is hurtful unto him.
THere is yet one vice more that makes a prince irksome, and uneasy to be
dealt with; and likewise one virtue that makes him gentle and easy to be comne
unto: the one is Pride, and the other is Lowliness or Humility. Pride makes
him sower, waiward, choleric, ambitious, envious, impatient, hard to believe
counsel, and full of injustice. For arrogancy is a spice of injustice,
exacting more honor at men's hands than is due, whereupon rises the despising
of them, as Chrysostom has very well noted upon the fourth Psalm of David.
The other makes a man courteous, gentle, patient, and free from all evil.
Proverb. 11.
Therefore humility makes a man wise and wisdom makes a prince to govern
his people well. On the contrary part, nothing is so much against wisdom, as
ouerweening is. For the proud man is so far in love with himself, that he
cannot in any wise endure any man to be equal with him in virtue or power. And
because that cannot be; needs must envy issue out of that spring. And because
he is of so small patience, and esteems none but himself, the least thing in
the world sets him in a choler; whereas the lowliminded man, having small
opinion of himself, and beholding his own infirmity, is not so easily in a
chafe with his neighbor, as says S. Chrysostom in his Homily of Fasting.
The lowly is at rest both in body and mind, but the proud man has no rest in
neither of both. And therefore our Lord says thus, Learn of me, for I am meek
and lowly of heart, and you shall find rest unto your souls. And among the
blessednesses, he sets this for most in S. Matthew, saying, Blessed be the
poor in spirit; that is to say, the lowly minded, unto whose prayer he
hearkeneth. Of whom shall I have regard (says he) but of the meek and lowly?
Lowlines then is the root of al vertrue, and pride is the ground of all sin, as
says the Preacher: He that holds of it s^albe filled with cursednes, and it
shall overthrow him in the end.

S. Austin in his fourth book of the City of God, calls pride, A Definition
of Pride.
a froward lust or desire to be great: so as we may define pride to be a
certain ouer-lo^tinesse of mind, that makes us to despise every man, and to
esteem none but our selves. This sin comes of self-soothing, and of too much
selfeloue, as S. Peter has noted, in that he calls the proud man a
Selfe-pleaser, because he which is in love, is blinded in him whom he loves,
as says Plato in his Laws: whereby it comes to pass, that the man that is in
love with himself, thinking that he ought to be more honored, than in truth he
ought, deemeth evil of that that is righteous, good, and fair. Therefore he
that is desirous to be great (says he) must not be in love with himself, but
with the thing that is just, whense soever it come. This sin makes him to
imagine his ignorance to be wisdom: and when we will not forbear to do that
unto another, which we cannot do; we be constrained to fail in doing it. And
he concludes in the end, that we must refrain from loving our selves too
much, God abhors all lof^^nes of heart.
and follow our betters without restraint of shame* Solomon in the sixteenth of
the Proverbs, says that the Lord abhors all loftines of heart; and in the
xv, That he breaks down the houses of the proud. There is no health in the
house of the proud, for the seed of sin is rooted in them. And in the
seventeenth of the Proverbs, Loftines of heart (says he) presupposes a fall,
but lowlines and humility go before honor and glory. And in the nine and
twentieth, the pride of a man abaseth him, but glory and honor shall be heaped
upon the lowliminded. And in the tenth of Ecclesiasticus, God has cast down
the seats of the proud, and in their steads has made the meek to sit in their
rooms. God has dried up the roots of the proud, and in their place has
planted the humble in glory. And in the eighteenth Psalm, Thou will let the
lowly live in thy protection, and the springs of the presumptuous thou will
dry up. On the contrary part, the lowly and meek shall inherit the earth,
and without trouble they shall have all the pleasure that man can get. And in
the 40 Psalm, Blessed is the man that makes God his defense, and has no
regard of the proud. King Lewis the eleventh said, That when pride rode
foremost, shame and loss followed after. Esdras is specially commended of the
angel, for his humbling of himself as he ought to do, and for that he deemed
not himself greatly worthy to be glorified among the righteous. But as for
them that have walked in great pride, they shall have great store of miseries.
The angel would not suffer St. John to worship him, saying that he was a
servant of God, as he was; and bearing in mind that for the vice of pride the
wicked angels fell. St. Peter did as much to Cornelius the Centurion, not
suffering him to kneel down before him. Whereof pride comes
This vice comes of the want of judgment, that is to say, of the want of
knowing a man's self, and of the want of the bearing in mind of the goodly
precept written in the temple of Apollo at Delphos, whereof I have spoken so
often before. For as the great Mercury says, The first disease of the mind is
Forgetfulness. And the man that forgets himself, is compared to the
unreasonable beasts, and becomes like them, as David says in the 48 Psalm.
The prince therefore must descend into himself, and know himself. To know
himself is to view the nature, as well of his body as of his soul, and to
consider that he is no better but man, as David says. For whosoever knows
what he is, will beware that he forget not himself, and not suffer himself
to be cast into sin, the which Bion the Boristhenit did rightly affirm to be a
hinderance to profit, and a more hindera^ce to the fruits of righteousness.
Pride a hinderance to all the fruits of righteousness.
For if we speak of becoming righteous to Godward, we cannot attain thereto,
but by Humility. The lowly heart and repentant soul, are an acceptable
sacrifice unto God, as witnesses unto us the parable of the Publicane, who
went home justified by humility, and for acknowledging himself a sinner, in
accusing himself to God, of which accusation ensewed immediately reward, clean
contrary to the judgments of men, who upon accusation and confession, do by
and by give death. And therefore that we may be justified, we be commanded to
tell our sins: and in old time (as Macrobius reports) the priest before he
made sacrifice to his idols confessed that he was a sinner, and thereat began
his ceremonies, as we also do in our religion. Our Lord commanded his
disciples to say, that when they had done all manner of good, they were
unprofitable servants; to the end they should not seem to have any trust in
their good works. Wherewith agrees the doctrine of Plato the heathen
Philosopher, Whosoever (says he) will be good, must believe that he is
evil, He that will ^e good, must believe himself to be evil.
Philo expounding the laws of Moses, which ordain above all things, That men
should abstain from Pride, telling us that it is only God that inableth us to
utter our power; says that he which has received strength and power of Gods
mere gift and bethinketh himself of the weakness that was in ^im before he
enioied that grace, will put away that proud stomach, and yield thanks to him
that is the cause of his better state. Now then, the mind that acknowledges
the grace that is given unto him, is enemy to pride: whereas the unthankful
is linked in with pride. Solomon forbids us to justify our selves before the
Lord, likewise David shunneth to enter into judgment with the Lord, saying
that no man shall be justified before him; which is to be understood of trusting
to any other thing than only Gods mercy. Humble your selves (says S. James)
in the presence of God, and he will exalt you. And S. Peter, Be ye apparelled
with humility; for God resists the proud, and gives grace to the lowly. The
proud provoke God to wrath.
Philo says, That the proud person provoke God to wrath. Also Moses gives
him no temporal punishment, but reserueth him to Gods judgment; because Pride
is a sin of the soul, which is not seen and perceived but of God. If we
speak of the righteousness that is to be used toward men, it is hard for a
prince to apply himself thereto, unless he be humble. For this virtue makes
a prince meek, ready to hear poor men's requests, and to do them reason,
and loath to give ear to flatterers and tale-bearers; it skorneth not any man,
but makes account both of poor and rich, behauing it self lovingly and
gently toward both, giving easy access unto either of them. Job among his
complaints protests that he never despised the judgment of his servants,
were they man or woman, but esteemed of them as of himself. But he that is
too high-minded, will hear none but slatterers and tale-bearers; he regards
no counsel, he despises the poor, he disdaineth every man, and easily takes
leave to do wrong and injury, according to this saying of David, The froward
are set on fire through their pride, to trouble the lowly that makes small
account of himself. To be short, he is full of vainglorie, envy, and
trouble, according unto this saying of Solomon, Among the proud there is always
debate. Plato in his Laws says, That he which is proud of his riches and
honor, and burns with a glorieng in himself as though he needed no prince
or guide, beating himself on hand that he is able enough of himself, is by
and by forsaken of God, and so left, and then finding as very fools as
himself, he triumphs and turmoileth all things, A proud person overthrows
a whole city.
seeming unto many not to be a man to be despised. But within a while after,
being punished by Gods just judgment, he overthrows himself, his house, and
his whole commonweal. Also there is another spice of pride, when young men
despise their elders, and believe not their counsel. For it is a young man's
duty (says Cicero in his book of Duties) to yield honor to his auntients,
which thing was inuiolably observed in Egypt and Lacedemon, whereupon rose the
proverb, It would do a man good to be old in Sparta. Of the said vice
springs the disobedience of some young folks to their fathers and mothers,
He that honored not his parent, is proud.
contrary to Moses precept, which commands the honoring of the father and
mother, with promise of reward. In the temple of Eleusis, there were but three
precepts set down to be read of all men; the first concerned the praising of
God; the second the honoring of father and mother; and the third, the
forbearing to eat flesh. And (as Cicero says in his Duties) youth is first of
all to be enjoined modesty and kindness toward their father and mother.
Plato in his fourth book of Laws, does in honor such as seek to please God
in two things: first in worshipping God with prayers and sacrifices, and
secondly in honoring their father and mother. and he says, That the child
ought to believe, that all that ever he has belongs to those that bred and
brought him up, so as he ought to succor them with all his goods, whether they
be of fortune, of the body, or of the mind, and to recompense them in their
old age, for the things which they have endured for them in their younger years,
and to be short, that they ought to yield them reverence both in word and deed,
and to give place unto them in all their doings both in word and deed, and to
think that a father is not an^rie without a cause, when he perceives that his
son does him wrong. Generally we may well say, That all disobedience and all
mis-behauior comes of pride, All disobedi^n^ comes of P^^de.
as S. John Chrysostom witnesses in his 45 Homily, and S. Luke speaking of
the rich man, who was damned for taking too much delight in his riches and
brave apparel, and for his despising of the poor. Solomon in the 17 of the
Proverbs, says; That proud, froward, and skornfull, are the names of him that
deals arrogantlie with anger. For bloodshed is in the report of the proud,
and their curse is grievous to hear, says Ecclesiasti^us. As for Ambition,
Ambition springs of Pride.
no doubt but it proceeds of Pride, for it is nothing else but a desire to be
great, and to be had in honor.

Antonie the meek said, It was vnossible for that man to govern a country
well, which was atteinted with pride and ambition. My meaning is not in
speaking of pride and ambition, to take from a young man the desire of honor,
and a virtuous emulation that may make him to glory and delight in his
well-doing. For (as says Theophrast by the report of Plutarch in the life of
Agis) virtues do bud and flourish in that age, and take the deeper root for
the praises that are given unto them: proceeding still in growing and
increasing, after the measure of the growing of their care and courage. But
whereas too much is dangerous of itself in all other things; it is most
pestilent and deadly, in the ambition of those that put themselves in the
managing of public affairs. We see how Alexanders ambition, wrought the ruin
of all Asia; and for one Alexander that made profit of his ambition (howbeit
with the loss of his reputation among all good men) infinite numbers were
brought to ruin, as Pompey, Caesar, Crassus, Mariw, and others innumerable.
P^^rhus might have bin a great prince, if he had not bin too ambitious, and it
had bin better for him to have credited the counsel of in^as, who being
desirous to have diuerted him from his voyage into Italic, asked him to what
purpose that so far voyage should serve him for the getting of one city?
Whereunto he answered, That from Tarent he would go to Rome. And when you have
taken Rome (quoth Ci^^as) what will you do then? We will go to Sicilie,
answered Pirrhus. And when we have done with Sicilie, whether shall we then?
We will to Carthage, said Pirrhus. And when Carthage is become yours, what
will you do then? I will make my self (quoth he) lord of all Greece. And when
we have done all this, what shall we do afterward. The^ will we rest our selves
(quoth. Pirrhus) and make good cheer. And what lets (quoth Cineas) that we
should not fall presently to this making of good cheer, since we have enough
wherewith to do it. Princes therefore must not only beware of ambition, but also
withdraw themselves from all ambitious persons. For they be never satisfied.
Pride and Ambition never grow old.
And as Plutarch says in the life of Silla, Pride and ambition are two vices
that never wex old, and are very dangerous to a state, like as it is
dangerous to sail in a ship, where the pilots be at strife who shall govern
it.

Ambitions is never without quarrelling, for every man falls to heauing at
other, and seeks to take his fellows place: As for example, Pompey to take
Lucullussis, Marius to take Metellussis, and Silla to heave out Marius; until
in the end they brought the state to ruin. Envy proceeds of pride.
As for Envy, no doubt but it proceeds of pride, as Alexander showed very
well, who would needs be the perfectest of all men, and was sor^e that his
father did so many goodly exploits, esteeming it as a bereauing him of occasion
to purchase himself reputation. He would not that Aristo^le should publish
the books that he had taught him, to the end that he himself might pass all
others in skill and in feats of war. Now as pride is the first and greatest
sin, so also commonly it seeks not any other than the most excellent
things, be it in virtue, in prosperity, in riches, or in dignity. Pride is
the ordinary vice of estates.
And therefore Salust said, That pride is the ordinary vice of nobility; and
Claudian, That it comes ordinarily in prosperity. For adversity, poverty,
and sickness, do light he cut off the occasions of arrogancy, and there is
nothing worse than a poor man that is proud, as Solomon says in his Proverbs.
Darius the father of Xerxes, said; That adversities and troubles make a man the
wiser. Antigonus seeing himself sickly, commended his sickness, saying;
that it had done him great good, by teaching him not to advance himself above
measure, considering his infirmity. It is no small benefit, when a small
disease drives away a great. And therefore David boasts in the 119 Psalm,
That God had done him a great good ^^ne in bringing him low. And a little
after, Before I was afflicted (says he) I went astray, but now I keep thy
word; now lord I acknowledge that thy judgments are just, and that thou have
humbled me of very love, that is to say, thou have afflicted me to a good end.
And in the 131 Psalm, Lord I (...) not high-minded, I have no lostie looks, I
have not dealt in things that are greater and more wonderful than becomes me.
Secondly, the virtuous and wise are more assailed with pride, than are the
vicious, and the painful more than the idle. And therefore S. P^ule said, That
God had given him an angel of Satan's to bullet him, least he should be puffed up
with his revelations. For the mischief of pride comes of ouerfulnesse. And as
S. John Chrysostom says in his homily of Humility, Like as too much eating
ingendreth an inflammation of humors in our bodies, which inflammation breeds
the ague, and of the ague often comes death: even so is it with pride, which
comes not but of too much ease, and too much welfare. Pride assaulteth good
men, and such as are best occupied*
The same author in the same place says, That other vices steal upon us, when
we be idle and negligent, but this vice presses and assaulteth us when we be
doing good. And like as they that intend to go upon a cord, do by and by fall
and break their necks, it their sight go astray never so little, so they
that walk in this life, do cast themselves down headlong out of hand, if
they take not great heed to themselves. For the way of this cord is without all
comparison far more narrow and straight out than the other, for so much as it
mounteth up unto heaven, and therefore it is the more danger to slip or to miss
footing, because the fear is wonderful to them that are mounted so high,
whereof there is but only one remedy, which is, never to look downward, for
fear of dazeling. He makes yet one other goodly similitude, saying, That
like as Sea-rouers pass not to assail merchants when they set out of the
haven to fetch merchandise, but when they come laden home: so when the
mischievous enemy sees our ship full of precious s^ones, of all sorts of
godliness, then does he bend all his force to light us of our treasure, Pride
step^^th ^n even i^ devotion.
to sink us in the havens mouth, and to leave us stark naked upon the strond.
And as says S. Ambrose in his epistle which he writes to the virgin
Demetrias, Satan watches to cast in a collup of pride, in place of our
devotion. And he finds not a better occasion to tempt us, than by our
virtues, which are the cause why we be of good right commended.

After that manner befell it to Osias king of Judah, a good man, for in the end
his heart was puffed up, and he would needs offer sacrifice to God, whereupon
ensued that he was by and by punished with a leprosy. Through pride and
ouerweening Dathan, Coree and Abiron, moved sedition against Moses, and would
needs be equal with him, but the earth swallowed them up quick. Herod taking
pleasure in the flattery of the people, which said, That his words were the
voice of God and not of man, was eaten up of lice; so odious is that vice unto
God. Thereof it comes that it is said, not that God forsakes the proud, but
that he resists them; to show that he will fight against them with his power,
so greatly does he abhor that vice, according to this saying of the Psalmist,
Thou did cast them down when they advanced themselves. Virgill seems to
approach hereunto, when he says, That they which humble themselves are to be
pardodoned, and that the proud are to be encountered and subdued. For as
Herodotus says, God will have none to be great but himself.
God will not have any other than himself to report or make himself great.
The proud man never escapes unpunished (says Seneca) and whenever ye see
any man praise himself out of measure, and more than is due unto him, ye may
assure your self, (says Euripides) that Gods vengeance follows hard at
hand. Froisard says, That Philip king of France, and John his son, and the
prince of Wales, lost Gwyen by their ouer-haughtinesse, and that king Charles
recovered it by gentleness, bountifulness, and humility. David was proud of
the multitude of his people, but God to humble him, bereft him of a great part
of them, and made him to understand in good time, that he was offended thereat,
to the intent to set him in right course again, and to reform him before his
fall were grown too great. The way to keep a (...) from Pride.
And for as much as it is hard to be raised out of so foul a fall, because the
proud man will not acknowledge it, it stands us on hand to seek all means to
keep us from it. S. Paul gives us an excellent one in his Epistle to the
Philippians, where he says, That we must go through with the work of our
salvation in fear and trembling, because it is God that works in us, and
therefore the more good we do, the more cause have we to stand in fear. And S.
Peter in his first epistle, gives us the fear of God for a remedy, When any
man speaks (says he) let him speak as the words of God, that God may be
honored and glorified.

The second mean to keep us from this vice, is to make little account of
ourselves, and to humble ourselves when we be advanced to dignity, according
to Ciceros precept in his Duties, and to the principle of the Gospel, which
says, That he which humbles himself, shall be exalted, and he that exalts
himself shall be brought low. And in Ecclesiasticus it is said, The greater
that thou art, the more see thou that thou humble thy self in all things, and
thou shall find favor at Gods hand. Humility (...) lowliness is as a bit or
a bridle against ouer-weening, to subdue it to reason.
Wherefore we must take humility for a bit, and for a bridle to tame this
ouer-weening of ours, and to subdue us to reason, as many heathen princes could
well skill to do. When Philip spoke more loftilie after the winning of a
battle than he was wont to do before, one willed him to measure his shadow,
and he should find that it was no greater after the battle, than it was before.
This saying caused him to humble himself so well, that thenceforth he spoke
not more loftily than he had bin wont to do, giving one of the grooms of his
chamber charge to put him in remembrance every morning, that he was a man. For
there is none so insolent (says Plutarch) as he that is carried away with an
opinion of being happy. And as says Gui^ciardine, men have not a greater
enemy than ouergreat prosperity; for it makes them impatient, full of
looseness, bold to do evil, and desirous to trouble their own welfare by
attempting new devises. Epaminondas perceiving himself to be somewhat at too
much ease after the battle of Lewstra, and somewhat the prouder for so goodly
a victory, came forth the next morning homely apparelled, and as it were in
some grief. And when it was demanded of him, Whereof that sadness proceeded?
he said, He had no cause of heaviness, but did it because he had bin too well
pleased the day before, and therefore intended to chastise and moderate the
intemperance of his joy by that means, There are many that do now adays as
Epaminondas did, and are outwardly modest, but inwardly they burn with
ambi^ion and desire of glory. For that vice is not discovered alonlie by the
outward pomp and bravery; it lurketh within in an hypocritish and ambitious
mind. (...) that (...) modes* and meek.
And such are they that affect the glory and estimation of modest, religious,
and honest men, who have none other reward at Gods hand, than that which they
gain of the world, which is very small, for in the end they be noted for such
as they be indeed. And therefore David reputeth him to be blessed, in whose
heart there dwells no hypocrisy, nor any point of deceit. In the time of
Alexander, the world did wonderously commend the frugalitie of Antipater, who
led a stoure life, without any delicatnesse of meat and drink or apparel. But
Alexander said of him, That outwardly he was clad all in white, and inwardly
all in purple; meaning that it was but a counterfeit kind of sparing, and that
within he was full of ambition. Of which sort also was Diogenes, who using a
straight kind of life, as much for ostentations sake, as for love of virtue,
did wash himself often with cold water in wintertime: whereof when folk having
pity, desired him to use no such hardness any more; Pl^to said unto them, If
ye will have pity upon him, go your way from him. For he saw that he did it
not so much for love of virtue, as to be famous among the people. Likewise at
another time he very well encountered him when he trod upon Platoes beds
which were finely decked, for diverse men of good calling to take their
refection at. For when Diogenes vaunted himself to tread Platoes pride
underfoot: you do so indeed (quoth Plato) but with another greater pride;
meaning that Diogenes had more pride and presumption in his poverty, than
Plato had in his wealth. The same Plato beholding one day a brave Rhodian
passing by, cried out; O what a vanity and pride is here. And anon after
seeing another come like an hypocrite in a very simple Philosophers robe,
Behold here (quoth he) another kind of pride. For he knew that the Philosopher
burned with ambition under his habit. Also he said, That pride was like a gilt
armor, the which is fair without and far otherwise within. Even so the
proud person carries a good countenance, though he have no good at all within
him, for it is nothing but vanity and mere folly. Pride is l^k^ b^a^ (...)
wind
And as Socrates said, like as an empty bladder seems great when it is
puffed up with wind, so fools are puffed up with nothing but opinion, neither
can they agree with any but with flatterers, as Terence shows us in his
Comedy entitled the Eunuch, under the person of Thraso. And if there happen
any of the^ to be a man of valor, as there are some, that only vice hinders
all their welldoing Plutarch in the life of Coriolane, says, That the proud
and stoure nature of Coriolane, was the cause of his ruin, notwithstanding
that therwithall he was one of the absolutest men of all the Romans. For
whereas pride of it self is odious to all men, surely when it is matched with
amibition, then becomes it much more savage and intolerable. The proud man
resembles him that is sick of the falling evil.
Philo says, that the proud man is like to him that is sick of the falling
sickness, who is altogether unsettled in his countenance and in all his
gestures and mouings.

The presumptuous opinion that Pompey had of himself, surmo^^ted the reach of
his reason; by means whereof forgetting the heed that he was wont to take in
standing upon his (...), whereby he had always assu^ed his prosperity afo^^,
he changed it into rash and bold bravery. Gaulter Brenne having conquered the
greatest part of the kingdom of Naples, and holding Diepold an Almane besieged
within Sarne, happened to be taken in a salie that Diepold made out upon a
desperate adventure, and being prisoner was used courteously by Diepold. Who
having caused him to think upon the curing of his wounds, would have sent him
home again, and have put the kingdom into his hands. But Gaulter having too
lordly a heart, answered, that there was not so great a benefit, nor so great
an honor, that he would receive at the hands of so base a person as he was:
with which words Diepold being provoked to wrath, threatened him that he should
repent it. Whereupon Gaulter fell into such a fury, that he opened his wounds,
drew his bowels out of his belly, and within four days after died for very
mood. Had he been lowlie-minded, his imprisonment had profited him, and he
had gotten a faithful seruitor of Diepold, who would have made the kingdom of
Naples sure unto him, whereas now through his passing pride, he lost both
kingdom and life. Alfons of Arragon dealt not so, for when he was prisoner, he
did so much by his gentleness and humility, The fruits of Humility.
that he made his enemies to love him, and practiced with them in such sort,
that they helped him to win the realm of Naples. Taxilles gained more at
Alexanders hand by his humility, than he could have conquered in all his
life, with all his forces and men of arms. And yet notwithstanding his humbling
of himself unto Alexander, was after a brave and princely manner, somoning him
to the combat with such words as these: If you be a lesser lord than I, suffer
me to do you good; If you be a greater lord that I, do by me as I do by you.
Well then (quoth. Alexander) we must come to the encounter, and see who shall win
his companion to do him good: and therwithal embracing him in his arms with all
gentleness and courtesy, in steed of taking his kingdom from him, as he had
done from others, he increased his dominion. Herod by humbling himself before
Augustus, saved and increased his kingdom. Plutarch says, That Pirrhus could
very well skill to humble himself toward great men, and that his so doing
helped him very much to the conquest of his kingdom. Lois the eleventh, king
of France led the county of Charrolois with so sweet and lowly words, that he
got the thing by humility, which he could never have obtained otherwise, and
by that means, wound himself from all his enemies, and settled his state in
rest and tranquillity, which had bin in great hazard, if he had used bravery
toward him. The lowlines of Aristides did marvelous great service, to the
obtainment of the victory which the Greeks had of the Persians, at such time
as he agreed to the opinion of Miltiades, and willingly yielded him the
sovereign authority of commanding the army: For there were many captains,
which had every man his day to command the whole army as generals; but when it
came to Aristides turn, he yielded his pre-eminence into the hands of
Miltiades, thereby teaching his other companions, that to submit a man's self
to the wisest and to obey them, is not only not reproachful, but also wholesome
and honorable; after whose example, all the rest submitted themselves to
Miltiades likewise. I told you in the chapter going before, how he submitted
himself to Themistocles his enemy for the profit of Greece. And I will say yet
further of him, that being sent with Cimon to make war against the Persians,
both of them bahaued themselves gently and graciously toward the Greeks that
were their allies: on the other side, Pausanias and the rest of the captains of
Lacedemon, which had the sovereign charge of the whole army, were rough and
rigorus to the confederate people. In doing whereof he bereft the Lacedaemonians
by little and little, of the principality of Greece, not by force of arms, but
by good discretion and wise demeanor. For as the goodness of Aristides, and the
gentleness and meekenes of Cimon, made the government of the Athenians well
liked of the other nations of Greece; so the covetousness, arrogancy and pride
of Pausanias, made it to be the more desired. To have honour^ a man must flee
from it.
S. John Chrisostom says in his nine and thirtith homily, That honor is not
to be had, but by flying from it. For i^ we seek after it, it flees from us,
and when we flee from it, it follows us. And as Salom^n says in the xviij of
the Proverbs, The heart is puffed up against a fall, and lowlines goes before
glory. Not without great reason therefore is pride esteemed the greatest of all
vices, and humility set foremost among all the virtues. And as S. Austin says
in his thirteenth book of the city of God, For as much as the glori^ieng and
exalting of a man's self refuses to be subject unto God; it falls away from
him, above whom there is not any thing higher: but humility makes a man
subject to his superior. Now there is nothing higher than God, and therefore
humility exalts men, because it makes them subject unto God. And as S.
Chrisostom says, It is the mother, the root, and the good of all goods. The
Centurio^ was esteemed worthy to receive the Lord, because he protested
himself to be unworthy. And S. Pa^l who counted not himself worthy the name
of an Apostle, was the chief of all the Apostles. S. John who thought not
himself worthy to untie the Lords shoes, laid his hand upon his head to
baptize him. And S. Peter who prayed the Lord to depart far from him vretched
sinner, was a foundation of the church. For there is not a more acceptable
thing unto God, than to muster a man's self among the greatest sinners. Hereby
we see the profit that is gotten of the small esteeming of a man's self. For
the less a man esteems himself, the more is he esteemed; first of God, and
secondly of men. Also we see that ordinarily, the lowly prince is loved of
every man, and the proud is hated of all. And therefore let such as have the
government of young princes, teach them chiefly among other things to be lowly
and courteous toward all men; as knowing by experience, that nothing wins
men's hearts so much as humility, which kills vainglorie, Insolency,
Impatiencie, Envy, Ambition, and all manner of vices.

CHAP. VII. Of Fortitude, Valiancie, Prowess, or Hardiness: and of
Fearfulness or Cowardlinesse.
LEt us come to the third cardinal virtue, which the learned call Fortitude,
Prowes, or Valiantness, the which the Poet H^mer said to be the only moral
virtue that has as it were salies and outmouings inspired into it of God,
Plutarch in the life of Pirr^us.
and certain furors that carry a man out of himself. This virtue is more
generally followed of princes, than any of the other as we have seen in
Alexander, Pirrhus, Hanniball, Pompey, Julius Caesar, Themist^cles, Alcibiades,
and many others, who were not so curious of other virtues, as painful to
excel in Prowess and greatness of mind. A definition of Prowess.
Cicero in his Tusculane questions says, that valeantnesse or Prowess, is a
skill to endure; or an affection of the mind fitly disposed to sustain
adversity; or else a certain stable or steadfast purpose, to undertake or
repulse the things that seem to be dreadful. Plato in the fourth book of his
Commonweal, brings in Socrates, saying thus; I say that Prowess is a
certain fastholding. Glaucus. What manner of fastholding? Socrates. Of the
opinion which a man has conceived by trainement and education, whereby he
judges of things terrible. Glaucus. And after what sort shall we call a man
valiant? Socrates. When the force of his choler or anger is so ruled, that he
continues resolute in his opinion between pleasure and grief, not deeming
otherwise of that which we call terrible or not terrible, ^
than reason wills him. Aristotle says, It is the duty of Prowess to be
utterly vndismaied with the fear of death, to be constant in suffering
adversity, to be void of dread of danger, to choose (...) for to die with
honor, than to live with dishonor, or to be conquered in battle. At a word,
it is the duty of prowess, to be vnafraid of any dangers, which reason
shows that we ought not to fear. Cicero in his Duties sets down three
sorts of Prowess: Three sorts of Prowess.
the first consists in not fearing any thing; the second, in not making
account of worldly things; and the third, in believing that there is not any
adversity, which a man is not able to endure. The same author in his first
book of the ends of good and bad, says, That the strong-hearted and
high-minded man, is free from all care and grief; considering that he
despises death, and is so fully resolved concerning sorrows, that he always
bears a mind, that the greatest miseries are ended by death, the smallest
have ever some release, and the meaner sort we ouer-master, either enduring
them if they be tolerable, or patiently passing out of this life as from a
stage, if they be intolerable. Which passing out of this life, we must so
understand, as it must be without hasting our own end. For (as Plato says)
we must not depart hence, without the commandment of our captein general,
that has set us in ward. It is no point o^ P^owesse (...) to eschew ^is^hiefe
And to kill a man's self to avoid poverty, love, or trouble, is not the
property of a noble and stout courage, but of a base, fearful, and cowardly
heart.

Ari^totle lib. 8. Floral.
The Lacedaemonians were above all things trained up to valiantnes, and had but
three principal precepts, the first to obey magistrates, the second to endure
travel, and the third to get the upper hand in battle, Appendants. of Prowess.
or else to die. Upon Prowess do depend, travel, resolution, strength,
boldness, magnanimity, confidence, and sufferance. Not without cause do we
put travel into prowess, Of Travel.
for as Diogenes said, No travel is praiseworthie, which tends not to
magnanimity, and such travel is to be understood, as well of mind, as of
body: For in strength (says Socrates) and in prowess, there goes a moving
both of body and mind. And commonly all good capteins have put themselves to
travel as much as was possible, both with body and mind, as we read of
Alexander, who of a great courage rowed over waters, scaled towns, and put
himself foremost in perils and pains-taking. Pirrhus, Hannibal, Sertorius, and
Julius Caesar did the like, and so did many emperors also, who sticked not to
march five or six leagues on foot with their armies, put themselves into the
water up to the knees to pass a large marrish of a two or three leagues over,
ate of the same bread that their soldiers did, endured hunger and thirst, and
slept upon the hard ground, as I have said hertofore.

Next I say, Of Resolution.
that Resolution is requisite in a man of prowess and valor: for the very
substance of prowes, is to be resolut. For resolutenes keeps a man from
wavering, so as having determinatly set honor and virtue before him as his
mark to shoot at, he fears not any impediment that may cross him. Leonidas
chose rather to die with three hundred men whom he had all resolute to die with
him, than to abandon the place which he had taken to keep, notwithstanding
that he was sure he should be ouerlaid with force: And when one said unto him,
the sun was hidden with the shot of the Persians; So much the better for us
(quoth he) for then shall we fight with them in the shadow. One asked of Agis
how many Lacedaemonians he had to the wars; Enough (quoth he) to chase away the
wicked. Also he said of them, That they demanded not how many their enemies
were, but where they were. Sceua a Jew having long time defended every man, at
the last after much slaughter by him made, abode still having his eyes stopped,
his head, his arms, and his thighs broken, and his shield stricken through in
sixscore places. I see no resolutenes comparable to the Machabees, who to
maintain their laws, offered themselves to all perils, and in the end
rebelling against Antiochus, did with three thousand men discomfit forty
thousand. Likewise Eleasar thinking to kill the king, whom he took to have bin
him that was mounted upon the greatest Elephant, opened the th^ong, and did so
much that he killed the Elephant, and died himself under him. And Judas
Machabeus chose rather to die than to flee in battle, though he had but few
men in comparison of his enemies. Likewise Ionathas the third brother, renewed
his army being broken, and carried away the victory. The Christian martyrs
were resolute to die, rather than to do sacrifice to idols: and with that
resolution they endured death, and all manner of torments with wonderful
constancy.

Of Strength.
Strength also is needful to prowess, so as it behooves good courage to be
accompanied with strength, that it may put in execution that valeancie and
noblenes of heart. Antisthenes said, That a man ought to will all the good in
the world to his enemies, saving only prowess: because all his goods should
come one day to him that is valiant. And whenever he saw a brave dame, and
well appareled, he was wont to go to her husband, and to pray him to show him
his horses and armor: and if he found them good and well provided he said no
more to the woman: but if he were not well horsed and well armed, he would
desire him to take from her all her goodly jewels, for fear least they became
a pray unto some other, for want of a man of desend them.

Of Boldness.
Likewise Boldness is necessary to prowess. And does in some sort resemble it.
Nevertheless as says Plutarch in his Protagoras, there is a difference
between prowess and boldness. For ordinarily every man of prowess is bold,
but every bold man is not valiant and full of prowess. The difference of
Boldness and Prowess.
For boldness may come by art, by fury, or by choler: but prowess comes of
good education, and of a certain inworking secret force and goodness of nature.
Cato seeing his sword salne among his enemies, took it up again as boldly and
constantly, as if his enemies had not ben there. We call this a Boldness,
howbeit not simply a boldness, but rather a prowess, because it had been a
shaine for him to have lest his sword to his enemy. So then, there was a cause
of this boldness; otherwise it had been but rashness. Likewise the deed that
Robert de la March did at the journey of Nouara, was full of virtuous Boldness
accompanied with prowess and natural kindness: for his fatherly affection made
him to enter bareheaded but with one squadron of horsemen, into the thickest or
the Suitzers that had (...) die gotten the victory, to save his two sons
Florange and Iamais captains of the Lanceknights, who lay sore wounded upon the
ground, where he fought with such fury, that the Suitzers themselves marvelled
greatly that he could recover them alive out of so great danger. Julius Caesar
perceiving the Neruians, that is to say, the people of Turney, to have the
better hand, caught a buckler out of a soldiers hand that began to quail, and
taking his place, did such feats of arms, that all his army took courage
again, and got the victory. The same Caesar seeing his standard bearer ready
to fly, caught him by the throat, and showed him the enemies, saying, Whether
will thou? Behold, these be the enemies with whom we have to deal. And he
did so well by his Boldness, valeantnesse and words, that he won the
victory. And in that case boldness was needful. When Cirus the yoonger was
about to give battle, Clearchus counseled him to hold himself behind the
Macedonians; What say you Clearchus, quoth. Cyrus, would you have me to seek a
kingdom, and to make my self unworthy of it? To put a man's self in peril
to no purpose, is rash boldness: but if need require, a man must not be
afraid, and he that is not so afraid, is deemed both bold and valiant. And as
Plato said in his defense of Socrates, the man that is valiant and full of
prowess, is without fear. So that they are in an error, which say that
prowess is a moderating of fear. As for Magnanimity, it is the self same
valiantness which has respect to nothing but virtue, as shall be declared
hereafter.

As touching Confidence, Of Confidence.
it is annexed to valeantnes, and victory does often depend thereon. For the
beginning of conquest is an assuring of a man's self that he shall conquer, as
Plutarch says in the life of Themistocles. We have seen with what confidence
Alexander went to make war against Darius, having but a handful of men in
comparison of him. Agesilaus having but ten thousand men, nor only defended the
Lacedaemonians, but also willingly made war upon the king of Persia. As
Hanniball stood looking upon the great and brave army of the Romans, at the
battle of Cannas, one Gisco said unto him, That it was a wondrous thing to
see so many men; It is yet much more wonderful (answered Hanniball) that in
all that great host there is not one like unto thee. This confidentnesse made
the Carthaginenses the more assured, when they saw their General take so great
skorne, and so little regard of the Roman army. Therefore it is neither
rashness to be confident, nor prowess to thrust a man's self into peril
without cause, after the manner of that Lacedemonian which had lever to
overthrow his army through his rash boldness and vain-glorie, than to shun
the battle; not considering that in loosing himself, he lost a great number
of his countrymen, whom Scipio would have held so dear, that he would rather
have saved one of them, than have discomfited a thousand enemies.

Paulus Emilius being ready to give battle to Perseus, retired his people
without doing any thing, and lodged them in his camp, the which he had
fortified. And when Scipio Nasica and other young noble men of Rome, desired
him to make no delay; I would make none (quoth he) if I were of your age: but
the victories that I have gotten in time past by deliberation, have taught me
the faults that are committed by such as are vanquished, and do forbid me to
go so hotly to assail an host, ready ranged and set in order of battle,
before I have rested my people that are but newly arrived. Pericles never
hazarded army where he saw great doubt, or apparent likelihod of danger. And
he thought them no good capteins which had gotten great victories by
aduenturing ouer-far, but was wont to say, That if none other than he did lead
them to the slaughter, they should abide immortal. Upon a time when he saw the
Athenians desirous to fight with the Lacedaemonians whatsoever peril came of
it, for wasting their territory; When trees (quoth he) be cropped or cut
down, they grow again within a while after: but when men are once lost, it is
impossible to recover them.

Also in prowess there is Sufferance, Of Sufferance.
and as Epaminondas said, To bear with things in matters of state, To bear
with things amis^e, is a ^oint of Prowess.
is a spice of prowess. For it behooves oftentimes to put up injuries, and to
hear mis-speeches of himself, without making account of them, which is the
property of Magnanimity, as I shall declare hereafter. Insomuch that the
goodly precept of Epictetus, which commands to bear and forbear, is to be
understood of nothing else than Valiantness, meaning that men must bear
adversities with a constant mind, and princely courage, not suffering
themselves to be dismayed by them, or to be corrupted by prosperity. Prowess
o^ Valiantness is most proper to wa^.
And for as much as this virtue does ordinarily follow difficult things,
because great things will not be had without great danger, (as says
Herodotus) and the danger of war is greatest: we attribute Valiantness
chiefly to chivalry and war, as wherein the conceit of death is greatest. Why
the conceit of death is greater in battle than in other places.
For commonly we conceive not death so much when we be sick, because the
mischief is hidden; nor when we be in peril on the sea, because by the
touching of the water, we feel not the inconvenience that comes by the touch
of the sword in the maiming of our members, which causes us to conceive the
violentnesse of death so much the more, as it lies in us to avoid it by
flight. Werevpon it comes to pass, that few men resolve themselves to die
the death that lies in them to eschew. But such as resolve themselves to it,
do get themselves great honor and reputation among men.

When one d^maunded of Agesilaus, What was the way to atchieue honor? he
answered, To make no reckoning of death. For he that is afraid to die, can do
nothing worthy of praise. This virtue is the mean between fearfulness and
foo^ hardiness; for it repres^eth fear, and moderateth boldness. It is
easier to (...) boldness, (...).
True it is, that it is harder to restrain fear, than to moderat boldness.
For to abide danger, time and custom be requisite for the enduring of the
inconvenience: but when a thing is to be adventured upon it is done upon the
sudden, and with a speediness, the which is easier to be moderated than
fear. Wherein Prowess does chie^ly consist.
Therefore the state of Prowess consists chiefly in the contempt of grief
and death. And that man is counted a man of noble courage, which when an honest
or honorable death is offered unto him, is nothing afraid of it. But for to
put a man's self in danger upon a brunt of sorrow or anger, cannot (as says
Aristotle) be counted valiantness. Fearfulness is the contrary to
valiantness* and a corruption of the lawful judgment, The definition of
Fearfulness.
concerning the things that are to be feared, or not feared; or rather an
ignorance of that which is to be feared, or not feared. Aristotle says, It is
a vice of the courageous, wherethrough a man trembles for fear of danger,
specially of death, believing that it is more commendable to save life, by any
manner of means, than to die honestly. And as says Ecclesiasticus, Like as
chafe and dust in the air cannot stand against the force of wind, so a
cowardly heart in the conceit of a fool, cannot stand against the violence of
fear. Generally we fear all that is evil, for fear is an expectation of
evil, as of poverty, sickness, and such other things, whereof we be afraid,
because of their hurtfulnesse. The bold man is clean contrary to the
fearful, for he is not afraid, neither of death, The differen^e between the
vali^nt and the foo^e-hard^e.
nor any other thing. He does not offer, but rather cast himself headlo^g into
danger, before danger come, and oft-times in danger he is lasie, and repents
him that he has cast himself into it. But the man of prowess is cold before
he undertakes, but ready and sharp in doing and undertaking. Which thing
Thucidides declares sitly and elegantly in saying thus, This we have above all
others, that not only we be hardy, but also we deliberate of the things whch
we be to take in hand, whereas others are bold through ignorance, and lasie and
slow to undertake, by reason of their uncertain con^ultations. But those men
are above all others most excellent, who having foreconsidered both the good
and the evil, the pleasure and the displeasure, do, not for all that shrink
away from danger. On a time one pr^ised in Catoes presence, a rash-na^die man
for a valiant man of war, whereunto Cato answered, There was great odswhether a
man made great account of virtue, or none account at all of his life: esteeming
those men to be of noble courage, not which despised their life without
purpose, but rather which made so great account of virtue, that in respect of
that, they passed not for life. At what time Epaminondas besieged Sparta, and
was gotten by force into the town, a certain Lacedemonian named Isadas, being
not only vnsurnished of armor to defend him, but also of apparel, came
anointed all over his body with oil, as one ready to wrestle, and holding
in the one hand his Partisane, and in his other a sword, went and thrust
himself into the press of them that sought, laying about him, and beating
down all his enemies that he found before him, and yet was never wounded
himself. A notable judgment of the Lacedaemonians.
Afterward the Ephories gave him a crown in honor of his prowess, but they
amerced him by and by at a fine of an hundred crowns, for being so rash as to
hazard himself in the peril of battle, without armor to defend him. Cicero in
his Duties says, That we must not show our selves cowardly for fear of
danger, and yet we must refrain from thrusting our selves into danger; but if
necessity require, we must not make account of death. And therefore when the
Lacedaemonians were afraid, least some hurt might befall them, for refusing to
take part with king Philip, Dannudas said unto the^, Ye half men, what harm
can befall us, which pass not for death? According to some men, there are
seven sorts of valiantness, ^euen sorts of Pro(...).
which we may rather term Visors of valiantness. For they have a resemblance
of prowess, but if ye pluck off their masks, ye shall find them an other
thing than they seemed, The first fort is termed civil, which is when a man
hazardeth himself for the honor, dishonor, and penalties set down by the laws,
unto such as mis-behaue themselves in war, The fear of (...)
or otherwise. This sorth has more likelihood tha^ the rest, because the fear
of transgressing the laws, is a certain kind of prowess. And as Plutarch
says in the life of (...) It seems that the men of old time took (...) not
an vrter priua^^on of (...) reproach, and a dread of dishonor, because that
commonly they that are most afraid to transgress laws, are safest when they
be to encounter with the enemy. And they that stand not in fear, to have any
reproach, are not careful to endure any adversities.

Prowess is a skill.
Socrates said, That Prowess is a skill, and that many are not noble-minded,
for want of knowing what it is. For this cause laws are very needful to set
every man in his duty, but they cannot make a coward hardy, no more than the
punishing of lewd men by laws can make all men good. But they hold all men to
their duties, so as good men hate sin for virtues sake, and evil men are wary
to offend for fear of punishment; but no whit does that change their
disposition unto evil. Also the law may enforce a fearful man to a adventure,
but it discharges him not of his inclination. And as there be some bodies
stronger than othersome, so also be some minds stronger by nature to endure
casualties, than othersome.

X^nophon in his fourth book of the de^ngs and sayings of Socrates.
Another kind is called Slavish, which is, when neither for honor, nor for
dishonor, but for necessities sake, a man becomes courageous, for necessity
makes even cowards courageous, (as says Salust) or else for fear of
punishment, as when Julian the emperor in a battle against the Persians, slew
ten of the first that ran away, to restrain the rest from doing the like.
For that punishment compelled them to sight whether they would or no. And
William Conqueror, duke of Normandy, who caused his ships to be set on fire,
as soon as he was landed in England, to take from his people all other hope of
safety, than only in the sword. For the greatest mean of safety, is to be
out of hope of safety.

Accustomednesse unto peril* makes those to seem ha^die that be not.
The third sort is called Warlike, which is, when we see men of war that are
expert in arms, do deeds that seem to be of hardiness, to such as have not
the experience; and yet they fail not to retire when they see the danger. And
that also cannot be called Valiantness, no more than mareners can be called
Valiant, Aristotle in his ninth book of Morals.
for they being accustomed to tempest, do less fear them than does the man
of greatest magnanimity in the world: and surely no man is ignorant but that a
man of magnanimity may die at the sea without fear, not after the manner of
marinets.

The fourth is called Furious, when a man fights upon hatred, choler, or
passion. In so doing he seems courageous, because (as Aristotle says)
Choler is a great spur to prick one forth to danger; yet notwithstanding
he is not so: for as soon as his rage is over, he begins to wexlasie, and
is willing to be gone at the least intreatance that can be. Aristotle in the
eight of his Morals. Sorrow and Anger make men to seem hardy.
Now then, it is no valiancie to put a man's self into danger, when he is
spurred with sorrow or anger. Likewise the foole-hardie seems of great
courage though he be not so, because he puts himself forth to danger
without cause. But men ought in all things to deal by reason: for that which
done with reason, is wel-beseeming and commended of all men, and that which is
done otherwise, is blamed. Such as discern not good from evil, think a man
to be of great courage, because he seems so, whereas indeed it is either
rashness, folly, or rage, that makes him to seem so: as we read of Coriolan,
who when he was condemned of the people, showed not any grief and that (as
says Plutarch) was not through any drift or persuasion of reason, or through
any calmness of disposition, that made him to bear his misfortune patiently
and meeldly, but through a vehement despite, and desire or revenge, which
carried him so forciblie away, that he seemed not tofeele his own misery:
Despite makes a man to forgee the baseness of a lasie and languishing mind.
the which the common people suppose not to be sorrow, though it be so in deed.
For when such grief is set on fire, then turns it into despite, and then
forgoeth it the baseness, lasinesse, and faintness which is natural unto it.
And therefore as he that has a fever, seems full of heat; so he that is
chollericke seems as though a man's mind were puffed out, and made greater and
larger by his being in such disposition. The fifth kind is called Customarie,
which is when a man has always bin wont to overcome, and never bin foiled,
such customablenesse makes him to go the more boldly to the encounter. But if
he found resistance, then would he fly as well as other men, for want of
resolute purpose in valiantness. The sixth sort is called Beastly, which is,
when a man goes like a beast to find his enemy, not thinking him to be
courageous, and that he will make resistance against him, whereby it may befall
him as I have said of the other. The seventh sort is called Virtuous, which is
the true and only kind of Prowess, as when a man warreth or puts himself
in danger, not by constraint, nor upon choler, experience, or ignorance, but
because it is expedient and behoofful in reason to be done. As for example, a
prince must not make war, unless it be just, and for the benefit of his
realm, or for the tuition and defense thereof, and of his subjects, and not
upon ignorance, or for Ambition, or desire of revenge.

CHAP. VIII. of Magnanimity.
Magnanimity approaches unto Prowess and Valiantness, but yet it has some
thing greater. And like as magnificence being nothing else than liberality, is
notwithstanding counted a greater thing, even so is it with Magnanimity, which
ought to be proper and peculiar to princes who set their minds, They that have
the managing of great matters, ought not to set their minds upon base things.
or at least wise ought to set their minds, on none but great matters. For as
Demosthenes says, it is a hard matter for them that set their minds upon base
things, to have a high and bold spirit, or for them that have the managing of
great affairs, to mind the small things. For such as the state of a man is,
such is his mind. Alexander by reason of his valiant and hardy courage,
thought nothing to be impregnable, nor any thing too strong for a firm and
resolute mind. Wherefore being about to assail a place that was impregnable,
he demanded what courage the captain was of, that was within it. And when he
understood, that he was the veriest coward of the world, that is well for us
quoth he, for that place is alwais to be won, which is held by a faint-hearted
coward. And in very deed he won the place, by putting the keeper thereof in
fear.

Now then, The definition of Magnanimity.
Magnanimity is a certain excellency of courage, which aiming at honor,
directs all his doings thereunto, and specially unto virtue, as the thing that
is esteemed the efficient cause of honor; in respect whereof, it does all
things that are virtuous and honorable, with a brave and excellent courage,
and differs from valiantness of prowess, The differ^^^^ between (...)
Magnanimity.
in that prowess respects chiefly the perils of war, and magnanimity
respects honor. Insomuch that Magnanimity is an ornament unto all virtues,
because the deeds of virtue, be worthy of honor, the which are put in
exceution by Magnanimity. As for example, when it is said, That it belongs
not to a man of Magnanimity to do wrong; this is a virtuous and just deed,
which brings honor to the man of Magnanimity, and therefore we say, That
Magnanimity is an ornament to all virtues, because it makes them the greater,
in that the honor whereon the nobleminded man sets his eye, surmounteth all
things.

But yet in this do Magnanimity and prowess agree, that both of the^ are void
of fear, and despise death, grief, peril, and danger, not suffering
themselves to be ouer-weighed by prosperity or adversity. Cicero in the fifth
of his Tusculane questions, says, That if a man bend himself to despise the
things that are commonly had in estimation, as strength, beauty, health,
riches, and honor, and regards not their contraries; he may go with his head
upright, and make his boast, that neither the frowardnes of fortune, nor the
opinion of the common people, nor sorrow, nor poverty, shall be able to put
him in fear, but all things are in his hand, and nothing is out of his power.
And in his first book of Duties, We deem it (says he) the part of a noble
courage and a constant mind, to be so firm and stable through the working of
reason, as to make no reckoning of the things which other men esteem to be
goodly and excellent; and to bear the things in such sort which seem hard
and bitter, as he swerve not from the state of nature, The nobleminded-man is
not trubled either with prosperity or with adversity.
and from the dignity which a wise man ought to have: and that it is the point
of a nobleminded and constant man, not to be dismayed with adversity, nor to
shrink a whit from the place where he stands, nor to step aside from reason.
For it is a token of lightness, not to be able to bear adversity, as well as
prosperity. On the contrary part, it is a goodly thing to keep one
selfsame manner of dealing in all a man's life, yea and even one selfsame
countenance.

The magnanimity and constancy of Aristides was so great, that for all the
honor that was done unto him, he was never high-minded, nor for any reiection,
putting back, or rebuke, was never discouraged or troubled. Metelius having
only, of a great number of senators, refused upon peril of his life, to be
sworn to a wicked law that was proclaimed by Saturnius a tribune of the
people: said unto his friends that accompanied him, That to do evil, was too
easy and too loitering a thing; and that to do well, where no danger is, was
too common a thing: but to do good where danger is, that was the property of
a man of honor and virtue. Cicero in the second book of his Orator, says, It
is a great commendation to endure adversity wisely, and not to be discouraged
by misfortune, but to hold a man's self upright, and to retain his dignity
in the time of distress. He that has a lofty courage in adnersitie is a
noble minded man.
For there is not a thing more beseeming a noble minded man, than to be of
great courage and lofty in adversity, the which would ill-beseeme him in
prosperity. And as Plutarch says, like as they that walk with a stately
gate, are accounted vainglorious, and yet notwithstanding, that manner of
marching is allowed and commended in them that go to battle: even so he that
aduanceth his mind in adversity, A brave port and stout countenance is in
adversity comme^^able, but in prosperity discommendable.
is deemed to be of excellent and unvanquishable courage, as having a brave
port and stout countenance to encounter adversity, which in prosperity would
ill beseem him. For we read that he which is of great courage, despises and
makes none account of all that may befall to man, ne esteems any worldly
thing in comparison of himself. They therefore that are endued with a great
and lofty courage, are always happy, as who do know that all the
turmoilings of fortune, and all the changes of matters and times, are light and
weak when they come to encounter against virtue. Noblemindednesse the mean
between Fainthartednes or Bacemindednes, and Foolhardines.
Magnanimity or noblemindednes is the mean between bacemindednes and
ouerloftines. For he that applies himself to great things, is called
nobleminded; and he that dares not adventure upon them, is called baceminded.
Likewise he that aduentureth upon all things, though he can do nothing aright,
is called foolehardy. The nobleminded man adua^ceth not himself for honor,
riches, or prosperity, neither makes he the greater account of himself for
them; if he fall from his degree or loose his goods, he stoopeth not for it;
for he is vpheld with a certain force and stoutnes of mind. Contrariwise, the
baceminded or faintharted man, becomes wonderfully vainglorious of every
little piece of good fortune or advancement that befalls him, and at every
little loss that betideth him, he shrinketh and is cast down like an abject,
as if he had lost al, because he has not the force of mind, to bear his
fortune either good or bad. The foolehardie is of the same stamp, saving that
without reason, he aduentureth upon the things which the other dares not
undertake. The nobleminded has six properties.
The nobleminded man has six properties: the first is, that he thrusts not
himself into perils rashly and for small trifles, but for great matters,
whereof he may have great honor and profit. As for example, Alexander liked not
to have the honor of winning the wager at the gamings of Olimpus, because there
were no kings to encounter with him. This came of a noble and princely mind.
But when he was to go to the assault of a town, or the give battle: he was
ever one of the foremost. The second property of the nobleminded, is to reward
virtuous persons, and such as have employed themselves in his service. Whereunto
a king ought to have a good eye, as I have said in the title of righteousness.
The third property of the nobleminded, is to do but little, and not to hazard
his self at all times. For a man cannot do great things easily and often. The
fourth property, is to be soothfast, and to hate lying and all the
appurtenances thereof, as flatterers, talebearers, and such others, which ought
to be odious, most chiefly unto princes, who should be a rule to other men, as
I have said already in speaking of truth, and shall speak again hereafter in
discoursing of untruth. The fifth property of the nobleminded, is that he is no
great crauer nor no great borower; assuring himself that nothing is so deerly
bought, as that which is gotten by intreatance. Wherefore as for the emperors
that hild out their hands at their court gates, to receive presents and newy
earsgists of the people: they were so far off from being princely minded, that
they were rather to be esteemed inferior to rogues and beggars and al such like
rascals. The sixth property of the nobleminded, is that he passes not whether
he be praised or dispraised, so long as he himself do well: of which sort was
Fabius Maximus, who regarded not to be called a coward, but went forward
continually with his platform of the overthrowing of Hannibal, without giving
him battle of hazarding any thing. Pericles, what outcries so ever men made
upon him, forbear not to go unto the multitude, but did like the good pilot of
a ship, which gives order for all things in the ship, without staying at the
tears and shriekings of the passengers, tormenting themselves with the terror
of the storm. Magnanimity passes not for vain turmoils.
For magnanimity consists, not only in despising death, but also in not
regarding the vain discourses and turmoiles, of such as understand not what
the matters mean. In which behalf Pompey made a great fault, when he yielded
so easily to go to battle, least he should displease the young captains of his
army and had lever contrary to his own determination, to hazard the victory
which was as good as sure unto him without stroke striking, than pacie^tly to
here the wro^gful railings that were cast forth against him.

CHAP. IX. That Diligence is requisite in matters of state.
FOrasmuch as valeantnes or prowess comes of a constant mind that is ready
to adventure without regard of danger, and magnanimity spares not it self in
any thing, so honor may ensue, ne regards what men say or do, so she may
compass her affairs, for the attaining whereunto she forbeareth not any pains:
me thinks it is reasonable to treat here, of that branch of Prowess and
magnanimity, which is called Diligence, a virtue very well beseeming a prince,
as without the which he cannot reign happily. And as Xenophon says in his
first book of the Trainemnt of Cyrus, It is agreeable to reason, that such
should prosper in their affairs, as are skillful in them, and be diligent in
going forward with them, rather than they that are ignorant and flouthfull. A
prince should pass his subjects in diligence.
And a little after he says, That a prince ought to endeavor to pass his
subjects, not in sloth and idleness, but in discretion and diligence. Plutarch
says, That as water corrupts that is not resored to: so the life of idle
folk is corrupted and marred by slothfulnes, because none are helped by them.
Thucidides reports Alcibiades to have said, That a city given to idleness did
mar and corrupt of it self; but did uphold and amend it self in experience
of many things by keeping it self occupied with diverse wars. We see ordinarily,
that such as have given over themselves in idleness, have had ill success in
their affairs: of which sort was Galba, who said that no man was to yield
account of his idleness, contrary to the christian doctrine, which teaches us
that we must yield account of all our idle words, and that we must put forth
our talent to profit, under pain of punishment, and also contrary to the law
of Draco, which punished idle folk with death. In doing nothing men learn to
do evil.
For (as the men of old time said) in doing nothing, men learn to do evil.
And as Ecclesiasticus says, Idleness teaches many evil things. And therefore
Amasis king of Aegipt, commanded all men to give a reckoning daily of their
days labors. And Solon ordained that the high court of Areopagus, should have
authority and charge to enquire whereof every man lived, and to punish those
whom they found idle and vn-occupied. An army must not be su^^ered to be idle.
And Cambyses forbad Cyrus above all things, to suffer his army to be idle.
Upon a time one asked D^onisius, whether he were at leisure and had nothing to
do? God forbid (quoth he) that ever that should befall me; thinking it to be a
foul and shameful thing to be unoccupied. And Scipio said he was never less
alone, than when he was alone: because that when he was alone, he busied
himself as well as when he was in the senate. Among the great affairs wherewith
Alexander was occupied, he would now and then take some recreation; but during
those weighty affairs, there was neither feast, nor banquet, nor play, nor
marriage, nor any other pastime that he would stay upon. The diligence of
Julius Ca^sar.
Julius Caesar obtained many victories by his diligence, in such wise that he
amassed the Carnuts, that had revolted from him. For he passed the mountains
with such speed, that he was in their country with his army, in shorter time
than a messenger could have bin, and began to waste the country out of hand,
before they had any tidings of his coming: Wherewith, and with some loss that
they had received in a battle, his enemies were so dismayed, that in the end
they submitted themselves to his will. And as he was diligent in war, so was he
not idle in the city: but was occupied in pleasuring his friends, in doing
justice to every man, and in ordering the affairs of the stare with great speed
and skill; in so much that he did bring the year into that order which we
have at this day, and was about to have set the civil law in order of art.

Albeit that the lord of Chaulmont had but few men, yet if he had gone speedily
to the besieging of Bolonia, according to his former deliberation, he had
brought the Pope to such a pinch, that he had driven him to make peace, because
there were but few people within the town. The harm of going slowly about a
man's business.
But by his ouerslow setting forth to the siege, he lost the opportunity, for
in the mean time there came in sufficient force to encounter him. Contrariwise,
Monsieur de Foix, by his hardines and diligence, did within fifteen days
compel the army of the Churchmen and of the Spaniards, to dislodge from
before Bolona, discomfited John Paul Baillon, with part of the Venetian
companies in Campaine, and recovered Bresse by force of arms, where eight
thousand men were put to the sword, and the rest were made prisoners. Hanniball
was not only diligent, but also a despiser of all pleasures. Traian and
Adrian were so diligent and skillful in war matters, that they knew the
account of their legions, and called the most part of their men of war by
their names, the which they did so precisely, least vagabund strangers should
intermeddle themselves, with them that were Romans born. And they permitted not
any man, which could not good skill to handle his weapon and to fight.

Epaminondas never gave himself any respit from dealing in matters of the
state, saying that he watched for his countrimens sakes, to the intent that
they might make good cheer at their ease while he traveled for them. Homer
says, That it becomes not a man of government, and such a one as is to
command many, to sleep the whole night. Of overmuch sleep.
For too much sleeping is a spice of idleness, according to this saying of
Solomon in his Proverbs, Slothfulness causes sleep to come. Whereof Plato
speaks after this manner, Overmuch sleep is not good, neither for the body
nor for the mind, nor for the doing of any business; and that he that is a
sleep, is as a dead man. Wherefore whosoever will be wise, and well advised,
must wake as much as he can, and take no more sleep than is requisite for his
health. For overmuch sleeping feeds vice, as Cato says in his paires of
verses. Solomon in the twentieth of his Proverbs says, Delight not in sleep,
least thou become poor, but open thine eyes that thou may have foyzon of
food. And in the 23. chap. he says, That overmuch sleeping makes a man to go
in ragged clothes. For these considerations the king of Persia caused a groom
of his chamber to waken him every day, and to bid him arise and intend to the
affairs of his realm, as I have said heretofore. Therefore the Prince that is
well advised, will not give himself to overmuch sleeping, nor shut up himself
in a corner to do nothing, like to Domitian, who took pleasure in pricking
flies to death, nor cast off all affairs to thrust out the time by the
shoulders. For they that will disburden themselves of their affairs, have
commonly more to do than they would have. And as the Greeks said in their
common proverb, A solitary life is al^ one with the life that is troublefull.
Adoxia, that is to say, The life that is without honor, or rather the life
that is elendge and solitary, is all one with the painful life, because that
they which think to live without pain alone by themselves, are more troubled
to defend themselves, from the wicked which be not afraid of them, and
therefore do vex them, than those which following some trade, do travel for the
common weal. And as says Thucidides, The rest that a man takes through
negligence, is more hurtful to a man than laborsome toil. That was the cause,
why Darius would needs plunge the Babylonians into all manner of idleness, that
they might not have the heart to rebel afterward. A policy of Cimon.
The same policy used Cimon, to diminish the force and power of his allies, by
granting them whatsoever they required. After that the Persians were driven out
of Greece, the allies of the Athenians ceased not to contribut both men and
money, toward the making of new wars, and the maintenance of an army on the
sea, whereof in the end they waxed weary; and considering with themselves that
the Persians troubled them not, would not furnish them any longer with men and
ships: well were they contented to pay money for their fines; but the Athenian
captains enforced them thereunto, and condemned them at great fines if they
failed. The which dealing made the dominion of Athens to become hateful to
their allies. But when Cimon came to the governing of the state, he took the
clean contrary way. For he did not compel or enforce any man to the wars,
but was contented to take money and empty ships of such as listed not to serve
in their own persons: and he liked well of it that they should wax lasie and
grow out of kind, by the allurements of rest at home in their houses; and of
good men of war, to let them become laborers, merchantmen, and husbandmen.
And in their stead, he caused a good number of the Athenians to go into their
galleys, in hardening them with travel of continual voiages. Insomuch that
within short time after, they became lords of those that had waged and
entertained them, healing themselves at their cost. And in the end they made
those to be their subjects and tributaries, which at the beginning had bin
their fellows and allies. Such as were but captains, have in the end made
the^ selves Dukes, Kings, and Emperors, by their dilige^c^.
The like has come to pass of diverse captains that served in the camp, and
had the leading of armies: for in the end, of Captains they have made
themselves dukes, kings, and emperors, as Vespasian, and other emperors without
number. Tamerlane king of Tartars, Othoman king of Turks, Sforsa duke of
Millan, and other great lords whom it would be too long to number. Nero and
many others have by their wickedness and negligence lost their empires.
Sardanapalus by his lasinesse, lost the kingdom of Assyria. So long as the
kings of France suffered their affairs to be managed by others than themselves,
they were less esteemed than an image, surely no more than liked the master of
their Palace to allow the^, who at length drove out the kings without
gainsaying, as men of none account and unprofitable. For it was the opinion of
all men, that those were unworthy to reign and to command men, which were
themselves inferior to women, and by their vnweeldines had made themselves
very sots and beasts. Sl^ggishnes (...) an enemy to wisdom.
For as Anacharsis says, Idleness and sluggishnesse are cruel enemies to
wisdom. But he that loves virtue, shunneth not any pains, says
Theodericke. Plutarch in the life of Dion, says That the carelessness and
negligence of Dennis the soon, getting continually the upper hand of him,
carried him to women and bellicheere, and all vicious pastimes, and at length
did break asunder his adama^t chains, that is to say, the great number of his
warlike soldiers, and his store of Galleys, of whom his father bosted that he
le^t his kingdom fast chained to his son. A king ought to be diligent in
looking to his estate.
And that is the reason why he that is the governor of a people, should intend
to the state whereunto he is called, lest he receive blame at a womans hand, as
Philip and Demetrius did; of whom the one being of his own nature gentle and
easy to be spoken to, yet at that time having no leisure to do justice, and
the other being hard to be come unto, did either of them learn their lessons
at two poor women's hands, who told it them in one word, saying, Then list not
to be kings. This free speech of the one, made Philip to do justice unto her
out of hand, and the same free speech of the other, made Demetrius to begin
thenceforth to become more affable to all men. Although Augustus was as
peaceable a prince as ever reigned, yet failed he not to intend continually to
other men's matters: and sometimes to refresh his spirits, he would go from Rome
to a pleasant house that he had near unto Naples, and yet even there he could
not be without doings. But the hypocrite Tiberius made his soiourning there to
serve to cloak his lasinesse, or rather to discover it. The harm that Tiberius
took of his lasines.
For whenever he was ready to depart thither, he gave strait commandment
that no man should be so bold, as to come thither to speak to him of any
matters. And besides that, he set warders upon the way, to stop such as
traveled thither. And he received the reward of his lasinesse. For as he was
playing the drunkard in all excess, news was brought unto him of the inuading
of three of his Provinces by his enemies. Vitellius was so deep plunged in
voluptuousness, that he had much a do to bethink himself that he was
Emperor: and his end was like his life. All slothful princes have either had
a miserable or violent death, or else their names have been wiped out of the
remembrance of me^. S^othfulnesse brings darkness, which is a great
punishment.
For as Plutarch says, The manner of punishing those that have lived lewdly, is
to cast them into darkness out of all knowledge, and through everlasting
forgetfulness, to throw them down into the deep sea of sloth and idleness,
which with his wauing brings darkness, and puts folk out of knowledge. And
as Theodorick says to the Goths, under idleness and slothfulness
commendable prowes is hidden, Sloth and idleness ouerwhelm prowess.
and the light of that man's deserts is darkened, which has no life to put the
same in proof. Contrariwise, by aduenturing, by undertaking, and by setting
hand to work, Great things are done by diligence.
great things and of great value have been compassed, which to the careless
and negligent seemed impossible, and not to be hoped for. And if the diligent
and painful have happened through their desire of honor, William Bellay in
his Ogdoades.
or by some misfortune, to end their days with violent death: yet has the
remembrance of their noble deeds flowne through all the world, and been
commended and honored of posterity. And as Solomon says in the 12. of the
Proverbs, The hand of the diligent shall bear rule.
The hand of the diligent shall bear rule, but the idle hand shall be under
tribute. And in another placed, An idle hand makes poor, but a diligent hand
makes rich. The slothful person shall not gain, nor have whereof to feed,
but the store of the diligent is precious. The slothful person wishes, and
his heart always wants. The idle folk shall suffer famine, but the life of
the diligent shall be maintained. The slouthful man comes to penury.
And in the 21. of the Proverbs, The thoughts of the diligent tend altogether
to abundance, but whosoever is slothful, shall surely come to penury. And in
the 36. Like as a door turns upon the hinges, so does the slothful man
wallow in his bed. The sluggard hides his hand in his bosom, and is loath to
put it to his mouth. And in the 21. of Ecclesiasticus, The slothful man is
like a filthy or mirie stone, whereof all men will speak shame. Hesiodus
says, Not travail but idleness is a foul thing.
That men grow rich by travail and diligence. For not pains taking, but
idleness is dishonest. And he says moreover, that slothfulness is accompanied
with scarcity, which feeding it self with vain hope, ingendreth many evils
in a man's mind, and keeps a man idle in four way leete without getting
wherewith to live. To them that watch, God reaches out his hand.
Aeschilus says, That unto such as watch, god reaches out his hand, and
likes well to help them that take pains. We see how goods do melt away
between the hands of the slothful, without his spending of them, and that
oftentimes he has as little as the prodigal person that is diligent,
according to this saying of Solomon, in the 18. of his Proverbs, That he that
is slouthful at his work, is brother to the scatter-good; therefore men must
beware of idleness. For as says Theodorick writing to Festus, Like as man's
nature is furnished by pains taking; so by sluggish idleness it decays and
becomes beastly. Men's minds wax rusty and forgrowne by doing nothing.
Plutarch says that men's minds do rust and forgrow through idleness; and that
as the waters that stand unoccupied in the shadow, do gather filth and
infection: so the life of them that live in idleness, if it have any thing
that may avail, yet because it is not derived unto others, that other men may
taste thereof, the native force and virtue thereof becomes corrupt and stale.
And by and by after, I am of opinion (says he) that whereas we live and are
borne, and grow to be men, it is given us of God to make us to know him. Now if
this be spoken of all men, who ought to employ themselves to all virtuous
actions, and make their talent profitable: what shall we say of Princes, who
have that charge of purpose, not to hide themselves in a chamber, but to be
always doing, and to travel for those that are under their charge.

CHAP. X. Of Temperance.
The definition of Temperance. Cicero in his second book of the Ends of good
and bad.
NOw remains the last cardinal virtue, called Temperance, which in the things
that are to be sought or eschewed, warns us to follow reason, and is nothing
else but a natural and interchaungeable agreement, of those parts of the Soul
which have the rule of delights; the which virtue Socrates called, The brideler
of bodily pleasures; because all passions are moderated by that Virtue. And
long time before him, Mercury in his Pimander, in the chapter of Regeneration,
calls it Staidness, a virtue contrary to all lustings, the which he
terms, The foundation of Righteousness.

Plato in his Phoedo says, That when Reason guides a man's opinion to that
which is best, that power is called Temperance. Like as on the contrary part,
we call it Intemperance, when lust without reason draws us to our delights,
Temperance the strength of the soul.
and ouermaistreth us. Pythagoras said, that Temperance is the strength of the
mind. For as the body that is well compacted together, indureth heat and cold:
so they that have their minds and understandings well disposed, do easily
bear the passions of the soul, as anger, joy, sorrow, and such other
affections.

Philo the Jew says, That the soundness of the soul consists in the good
temperature of the irefull, lustful, and reasonable powers; whereof the
reasonable, as lady and mistress, by means of Temperance, brideleth the other
two as restie horses. Democritus was of opinion, that Valiantness consists
not only in ouercomming enemies, but also insubduing desires. And as Cicero
says in his Duties, It is no reason that he which cannot be overcome by fear,
should be overcome by his lusts: or that he which has not shrunk for pains
taking, should yield to his delights. An evil commander is he (says Cato)
that cannot command himself. For the patient man is better than the strong;
and he that ouermaistreth his own heart, is better than he that wins a
city by force, The difference between Valiantness and Temperance.
says Solomon in the sixteenth chapter of the Proverbs. Nevertheless, this
virtue differs from Valiantness in this, that Valiantness undertakes
things great, terrible, and difficult, and the other withdraws men from the
things that are pleasant and delectable. And like as Valiantness holds more
of boldness than of fear, though it be the mean between them both: so
Temperance being the mean between sensual delightfulnes, and insensiblitie,
approaches nearer to insensibilitie, because it represseth the sensual
delight. Socrates said, That no man could be wise, which was not temperat.
Saint Paul says, That a good life consists in three things, namely
Godliness, Uprightness, and Sobriety; which sobriety is nothing else but
Temperance, when we abstain from all lusts, and suffer not our selves to be
overcome by our desires. Mercury says, that temperance is a virtue that
brings joy, Temperance makes us happy.
because we become happy by abstaining from our lusts. Among the beasts that
are good or evil to eat, Moses does chiefly commend the Lopiomache, which
represents unto us Temperance, which has continual and deadly war against
Intemperance and voluptuousness, termed of Moses a Serpent, because the one
imbraceth frugalitie, by contenting it self with that which is necessary for
this life without superfluity, and the other is given to a kind of
sumptuousness, which makes the body efteminat, and the mind troubled and
beastly. And like as Temperance appeaseth all desires, making them obedient
unto reason: Intemperance utterly confounds the state of the m^nde.
so Intemperance marreth the understanding utterly. And as Cicero says in the
fourth of his Tusculane questions, The fountain of incumberances is
Intemperance, which withdraws and estraungeth us from true reason, and is so
contrary unto it, that it is impossible to govern and restrain the lusts and
desires of the heart. And therefore in the ten Commandments, we be forbidden
to covet or lust after any manner of thing. For of this coveting springs
Intemperance, the root of all evils, as Saint Paul after many others calls
it in his Epistle to Timothy. And saint John says, That in this world is
nothing else but coveting and lusting after the delights of the flesh (under
the which may be comprehended Lechery, Sloth, and Gluttony) and coveting
after the delight of the eyes (under the which are comprehended the desire of
riches) which contains in it all manner of usury, robbery, niggardship and
extorcion. And desire of honor which he calls the pride of life, (under the
which we may comprehend all vaineglorie, wrath, and envy) as I have said
before in treating of envy. There was a certain young man, that said it was a
goodly thing to have all that a man could wish. But a certain Philosopher
named Monedemus, answered, that it was a goodlier thing not to desire that
whereof a man had no need. Plato and Thales of Milet, counted that man happy,
which was not covetous, because he was master of his lusts. And Socrates (as
Xenophon reports) was of opinion that that man could not be virtuous, that
was a servant to his delights, and that none but they which have stay of
themselves, do say and do that which is best; who choosing the good, and
refusing the evil, do make themselves happy. For he lives well at ease, He
lives most at ease, that is contented with least.
that is contented with a little. And Epicurus said, That that man had nothing
at all, which could not away with a little. Menander called Temperance the
storehouse; and Socra^es, the foundation of virtue: because he which thrusts
down voluptuousness, Temperance the founda^io^ of all virtue*
does consequently and of necessity acquire all virtues. As for example, He
that is not nice, dainty nor gluttonous, nor desirous of women, nor covetous
of riches, nor reaches out his hand to receive rewards, and can skill to
bridle his anger, his hearted, his envy, his sorrow, his fear, and his joy:
for joy (as says Plutarch in the life of Aratus being entered into a man's
mind, makes him sometimes besides himself, and works him greater
incumberance of mind, than either sorrow or fear do. On the contrary part,
we call him an vntemperant man, which is vicious and lets himself loose
unto voluptuousness, and which (as Plato says in his Phoedon) suffers
himself to be ouerruled by his delights, the which a man ought to pass by,
with his ears stopped, as if they were Meremaids. For they be enemies to
reason, Voluptuousness blinds the eyes of the mind.
impediments to all good advice, and blindness of the understanding. For
wheresoever voluptuousness is, there virtue has no place. Therefore
Ecclesiasticus turns us away from it in these words, C^cero in his duties.
Go not (says he) after thy lusts, neither turn thee aside after thy
pleasure. Architas the Tarentine said, That the greatest plague that ever
Nature brought forth in this world, is delectation or voluptuousness. For out
of that fountain come all the mischiefs that we have. Philo the Jew says,
That voluptuousness is likea harlot, who to enjoy the man whom she loves,
seeks bawds to set her love abroch, the which are the senses whom
voluptuousness wins first of all, by them to subdue the understanding
afterward. For the senses reporting within what they have seen without, do
represent unto the understanding, whatsoever they have seen, and imprint in it
the same affection. Antisthenes affirmed that he had lever to be senseless,
than to be surprised with voluptuousness; for voluptuousness bereaueth a man
of his understanding, Voluptuousnes bereaueth men of their wit.
no less than folly does, and folly may be remedied by medicine, but so
cannot the other. And when it was said unto him, that it was a great pleasure
to live deliciously, I pray God (quoth he) that such pleasure may befall to the
children of our enemies. At such time as Fabricius was Ambassador unto
Pyrrhus, Cineas told him how he had heard a great Philosopher in Athens,
counsel men to refer all their doings to pleasure. Which thing seemed so
strange to Fabricius, that he prayed God to give such wisdom to Pyrrhus, and
the Samnites. When one asked of Agesilaus, Voluptuousnes the plague of all
co^monweales.
what profit the laws of Licurgus yielded: The despising of pleasures (quoth
he) meaning to declare thereby, that all commonweales, are more confounded by
deliciousness, than by other things. And for that cause, when Darius had
overcome the Lydians, he ordained that they should use perfumes, and that they
should do nothing but dance, leap, haunt tauerns, and be finely apparelled,
to the intent that by that means becoming altogether effeminat, they might
not have the courage to rebel afterward. Pyrrhus seeing the Tarentines to be
too full of dilicatenesse, and to set their minds to make war with words more
than with deeds: forbad all assemblies to feasts, to mumries, and to such other
effects of ioifulnesse, then out of season, and brought them back to the
exercise of arms, showing himself severe to them that were enrolled in his
muster-booke, and bound to go to the wars.

When one wondered that all the Lacedaemonians lived so soberly: Liberty is
maintained by frugalitie.
Marvel not (quoth Agesilaus) for of this thriftinesse we reap a good crop,
meaning freedom: as who would say, that liberty could not continue long with
voluptuousness and delights. The Persians on a time would have shifted their
dwelling place, from the hill grounds into the plains: but Cyrus would not
permit it; Men's manners change according to the countries.
saying that as plants and seeds, so also men's manners altered according to the
nature of the soil; deeming wisely, That the less delicate country, yields
the best men. As for example, Ulysses said of Ithaca, That it was a poor
country, but it bred very good men. And so said the king of Scythia to Philip
king of Macedonie: Thou reignest (quoth he) over the Macedonians, who be great
warriors; and I reign over the Scythians, who be wont to endure hunger and
thirst.

Sandaris a well advised lord of Lydia, would have stayed Craesus from leading
his host into Persia against Cyrus. You go to make war (quoth he) against a
people whose clothing is but of leather, whose food is not such as they list,
but such as they can get, whose drink is water, who eat not figs, or any
other such dainties. If ye overcome them, ye can take nothing from them,
because they have nothing: and if you be overcome, consider well what goods ye
shall lose. As soon as they shall have tasted of our goods, they will hie them
apace hither, and we shall not be able to drive them away. It is very hard,
yea and utterly impossible, that persons tenderly brought up, should vanquish
them that be temperat and inured to travel and pains-taking. And no marvel
though Ep^ctetus had this saying always in his mouth, To bear and forbear.
Bear and forbear: that is to say, we must with patience bear and endure
things hard and evil, The intemperate man is unjust.
and by the virtue of Temperance forbear our delights and pleasures, for that
is the thing wherein the virtue consists. And as Plato says, He that is a
staid man, is a friend to god, After what manner pleasure is to be ^ought.
for he resembles him. And whosoever is intemperate, is contrary to God, and
unrighteous. I say not that pleasure is not to be sought at all: but (as Plato
says in his Gorgias) it is to be sought so far forth, as it is matched with
profit, as health and strength of body are, the which we seek for the benefit
of them, and not the benefit for the pleasures sake. And as Aristippus says,
That man moderateth pleasure, not which abstaineth utterly from it, but which
uses it in such sort, as he is not carried away with it, as we govern a ship or
a horse, when we lead them whether we list. For Reason (as says Demosthenes)
must be the mistress of lusts. Also a man may take pleasure of the five senses
of nature without offense, as when a man takes delight in eating and drinking,
because he is well a hungered and a thirst, for the pleasure that a man takes
in his taste, comes of sobriety: and when a man scratcheth where it itcheth,
that touching is not faulty; as for example, Socrates took singular delight
in rubbing himself after he had endured the stocks. The difference of the
five senses.
Yet notwithstanding, ordinarily these two senses are most dangerous above all
the other, when a man takes more pleasure of them than he should do, the
which befalls not to the other: as for example, if a man take pleasure in
colors and paintings, albeit there be too much or too little, yet is he not
therefore accounted either temperat or intemperate; neither he likewise that is
too much given to the hearing of accounts, or of songs; nor he that takes too
much delight in sents and smells, but rather they that delight in the savors of
meats and drinks, because that those sents renew the remembrance of the things
which they love: as for example, the emperor Claudius at the only sent of the
rostmeat, that was prepared at a feast that was made for the Salian priests,
did by and by leave all his affairs, and went to dine with them. Also they that
see or hear any speeches of the things which they love, are tickled with some
pleasure thereof, which being entered in at the eyes or the ears, takes such
root in the heart, that it is hard to put it away again. For that cause when
Sophocles beheld a fair young boy and commended his beauty, one told him,
That it became him to have not only chaste hands, but also chaste eyes.
Candaules king of Lidia having a lady of most excellent beauty to his wife,
showed her naked to a friend of his named Gyges: but the sight of her so
inflamed the heart of Gyges, that he murdered the king, to marry her. The
people of Bisance being besieged of Philip, sent Ambassadors unto him to know
what injury he pretended to be done by them. And he sent them back again
without any good answer, saying that they were great fools, and like to one
that having a fair wife demanded of them that resorted often to her,
Concupiscence the cause of very great sins.
wherefore they came thither: meaning that the beauty of their town, made him
desirous to win it. And for that cause does our Lord and lawgiuer say, that he
which lusts after a woman sins as much as if he had to do with her, by
reason of the consent which he has given to the sin, the performance whereof
ingendereth death. For when lust is once entered in, it is hard to keep the
rest from following after, or at leastwise to forbear to give attempt to
obtain the rest, as the judges did to Susan, David to Bersabee, and Tarquin to
Lucreece. Well may we hear, see, and smell a far off; but we cannot touch or
taste, but the things that are near at hand. And that is the cause that we have
most delectation by those feelings. Moreover, nature has conveyed into them,
all the pleasantnes that she could, to the intent that that pleasure should
maintain al living wights, which cannot live but by eating and drinking, nor
be increased and continued without the act of copulation, specially the brute
beasts, which would neither feed nor engender, if they were not provoked
thereto by nature. And as touching hounds which follow freshly upon the sent of
things, it is not for any pleasure that they have in the hunting, but for the
pleasure which they have to eat it. The lion takes no delight in the lowing of
a bugle or an ox, nor in the sight of a goodly stagge, otherwise than by
accident, that is to say for that he hops that it is meat prepared for him to
dine upon. Temperance consists most in eating and drinking and in use of
women.
Therefore I say that temperance, consists chiefly and most peculiarly in
eating and drinking, and in use of women. And as Plato says, Al things seem
to depend chiefly upon three necessities and inward desires; of the which being
well ordered, springs the virtue of temperance, or contrariwise the vice of
intemperance, if they be unruly. Two of them be in all living wights as soon
as they be borne; namely, the desire to eat and to drink: and because every
living creature has a natural appetite, even from his very birth, therefore
is he carried unto it even with a violent and forcible desire, and cannot
abide to hear him that shall tell him he must do otherwise. But the third
necessity, lust, or pregnant desire, which serves for propagation and
generation, comes a certain time after, and yet it burns men with a hot
fury, and carries them with a wonderful looseness. These three diseases
enforcing us after that manner to the things that we most like of, must be
turned to the better by fear, by law, and by true reason. S. Jerome writing to
Furia says, The lust of women is within us, and therefore hard to oue^come.
That this lust is harder to subdue that the others, because it is within us,
whereas other sins are without us. As for example, Niggardliness may be laid
down by casting up a man's purse a far of: the railer is corrected, if he be
commanded to hold his peace; a man may in less than an hour, change rich
aparell into mean: only the desire which God has endued us withal for
procreation, does by a certain constraint of nature, run to carnal
copulation. Wherefore great diligence is to be used for the vanquishing of
nature, that in the flesh a man may not live fleshly. Some have taken
Temperance more largely, as Anaoharsis the Scythian, who said that a man ought
to have stay of his tongue, of his belly, and of the privy parts. Which thing
Plato has declared more largely in his Phoedon, saying of the inordinat
appetits of Intemperance, that there be diverse sorts of names of them,
according as they themselves are diverse. For the lust of things above the
navel concerning food is called gluttony, and he that is possessed of that
vice, is called a glutton; he that is ouermaistered with drinking, is called a
drunkard: that which forces a man to the pleasute and ouerliking of a
beautiful visage, and surmounteth reason in the desire thereof, is called
love: and the like may we say of all lust that ouermaistreth the opinion which
tends to well doing. Pythagoras said that we must chiefly moderat these
things; namely the belly, sleep, the desire of the flesh, and choler, whereof I
will speak particularly hereafter, after that I have exhorted princes to
Temperance generally, as to the virtue which is most necessary. For the desire
of honor may lead a prince to prowess, Co^^tousnes an ordinary fault in
princes.
and withdraw him from cowardlines, but it is hard to reclaim him from
covetousness. For the desire of having more, is the ordinary vice of princes
and great lords; so that if they desire women, banquets, or feasts, no man
pulls them back, but rather flatterers allure them thereunto. Wherefore it
stands them on hand to withdraw themselves from them and to bear in mind,
that a man may be temperat without danger, but he cannot attain to prowess
without putting himself in peril of war. And the cause why valeantnes is
preferred before Temperance, is, that valeantnes is the harder to attain unto:
But to have the train of virtues which consist in the sensitive appetit;
Temperance will obtain more than valeantnes, which is peculiar to those that
are hardy, and is hard by reason of the peril wherewith it is matched. Wherein
Temperance consists.
But this virtue of Temperance is easy and void of all peril, and consists
but in the contempt of voluptuousnes, the which as S. John Chrysostom says in
his xxij Homily, Voluptuousnes like to a dog.
Is like a dog: if you drive him away, he is gone; if ye make much of him, he
will abide with you. Democritus says that Temperance increases the pleasure
of things. Temperance increases pleasure.
Which thing Epicurus considering, who placed all man's pleasure in
voluptuousnes, drank nothing but water, ne ate other than crible bread, saying
that he did it according to his profession, because it liked him better to eat
little, and to use meats that were least delicat. And yet nevertheless he gave
himself to Temperance, granting the thing in effect which he denied in his
words, namly that virtue was the chief cause of pleasure. Also it is most
commonly said, that there is not a better sauce than appetit. And to have grear
pleasure of any thing whatsoever it be, a man must taste of his contraie, as of
hunger to find meat sweet, and of thirst to feel drink pleasant; after the
example of Darius, who drinking up a glass of water, good God (quoth he) from
how great a pleasure have I bin barred heretofore. Ptolomy in making a rode
through the country of Egypt, happened to want wherewith to dine, because his
vittels followed him not, insomuch that for the hunger that pinched him, he was
feign to eat a morsel of bread in a poor man's cottage, saying he never ate
better bread nor with better appetite. Diogenes said, It was a strange thing,
that wrestlers and singing-men despised their belly and their pleasures; the
one to have a good voice, and the other to have the stronger body: and that
for temperance sake no man regarded so to do. A notable precept for Temperance.
Isocrates in the exhortation which he gives to Demonicus, gives this precept
for temperance worthy to be noted, Bethink your self (says he) to become
temperat and stayed, in the things which you would esteem vile and shameful,
if your mind were hild down in them, as lucre, wrath, sensuality, and sorrow.
Now it will be easy for you to have stay of your self, if you set your mind to
the obtainment of the things that may increase your renown, and not your
revenues. As touching anger, you must use no greater toward others, than you
would that others should use toward you. In the things that bring pleasure,
you shall easily temper your self, if you consider what a shame it is for you
to command your slaves, and in the mean while your self to be a slave unto
voluptuousnes. Your sorrows you shall be able to moderat, by beholding the
miseries of other men, and by considering that you be a mortal man. And above
all you shall be stirred up to do good, if you consider that upon that point
depends pleasure. For in the idle life which seeks nothing but feasting and
cheering, the pleasantnes ends forthwith together with the pleasure: but when
a man intends to virtue and purposes upon a sobriety in all his life, What
pleasure is to be sought.
it gives him a true joy and a longlasting. Therefore none other pleasure is
to be fought, than such as brings honor: for the pleasure is noughtworth that
is not matched with honor. Alexander Seuerus said T,hat an ill conditioned
prince does often spend his treasures in superfluity of apparel and curiosity
of feasts, which he needs for the maintenance of wars. Again he ware no gold
nor precious stones: saying that a prince ought not to measure himself by the
things which cover the body, but by the goodness and virtue of his mind.
Plutarch in the life of Philopemen says, Voluptuousnes makes men nice and
effeminat.
that by superfluity and sumptuousness in household stuff, apparel, and
fare, many have been brought to seek the delights, that make nice and
effeminate the courages of such as use them, because the tickling of the
outward sense that is delighted with them, does by and by soften and loosen the
stoutnes and strength of the mind. I say (quoth Agapete to Justinian) that you
are now rightly a king, seeing that you can rule and govern your delights, by
wearing on your head the diadem of Temperance. A king is lord of al, but then
specially when he ouerruleth himself, and is not subject to evil lusts, but
(by help of reason wherthrough he ouerruleth the unreasonable affections)
makes himself lord and master by means of Temperance, over the lusts that
bring all the world in subjection, which thing those could well skill to do,
which have had most estimation in the world. Scipio was so temperat, that in
four and fifty years which he lived, he neither sold nor purchased nor
builded: and having rased two great cities, namely Numance and Carthage, yet he
enriched not himself with the spoils of them; insomuch that at his death, he
left behind him no more but three and thirty pound of silver, and two pound of
gold. Paulus Aemilius had such stay of himself, that he never took one penie
of the treasure of Perseu^, ne died richer than did Aristides. Lysander and
infinite other Greeks and Romans famous in histories, Lacedaemonians trained up
from the shell in Tempera^ce
and specially the Lacedaemonians, were trained up in Temperance from their
youth, and taught to keep themselves from being corrupted with money, as
Herodotus reports of one Gorgo a little daughter of Cleomenes, of the age of
eight or nine years. In the presence of this little wench, one Aristagoras
entreated Cleomenes to do so much with the Lacedaemonians, as to cause them to
send an army into Asia, promising to give him ten talents for his labor; when
Cleomenes refused, he offered him fifty: The pretty wench hearing that took
her father aside, and said unto him, My father, if you get you not hence, this
guest will corrupt you. Whereat Cleomenes departed presently, without harkening
to Aristagoras any more. The Temperance and staidness of Titus Quintius,
Quintius won mo cities by Temperance than by the sword.
gate mo countries to the Romans, than all their forces had done. First of all
after that he had won the battle, although his vittels followed him not, yet
made he his men of war to march on still, in such sort as they took not any
thing in the country where they went, notwithstanding that they found great
abundance of goods, the which his forbearing he found anon after how greatly it
auailed him: for as soon as he was come into Thessalie, the cities yielded
themselves willingly unto him, and all the rest of the Greeks required nothing,
but to give themselves unto him. Demetrius was subject to his belly, and to
women; and yet in the time of war he was as sober and chaste, as they that be
naturally given thereunto; rightly deeming that he could not overcome his
enemies unless he were temperate. But yet at length, Demetrius exp^l^ed for
(...)
when he let himself loose to his pleasures, the Mac^do^^^ns drove him out,
saying that they were weary of bearing arms, and of fighting for his
pleasures.

CHAP. XI. That he that will dispatch his affairs well, must be Sober.
I Said before, that Temperance is chiefly over the belly, and the privy
parts, the tongue, and choler. Now must I speak in order of these four sorts
of Temperance, and first of all I will speak of that which concerns the
belly, that is to say, which concerns eating and drinking, the which we call
Abstinence or Sobriety; the contrary wher^of we call Gluttony, a foul and
filthy vice, specially in a Prince. For as says Mercury Trismegistus, It
berea^eth a man of all goodness, whereas Sobriety does maruellouslie become
him. For Sobriety withdraws him not from his affairs for chearing, and
therewith it exempteth him from al diseases, that often come of fullness,
through too much eating and drinking. The sober man has his wit the more at
will.
It preserves a man's wit the clearer, to judge soundly of the matters that
come before him; whereas he that has vapors in his brain through too much
meat that is cast into the stomach, cannot be so fit for the ordering of them,
by reason of his distemperature. Cicero in his Tusc^lan questions.
For it is hard to occupy our wit well, when we have eaten and drunken too
much. And S. Ierom says, in his rule of Monks, We cannot apply our selves to
wisdom, if we set our minds upon the abundance of the table; and that nothing
but belly-cheare and lechery do make us to court riches. For this cause Solomon
esteems them unhappy, that are under a king that is early at his feeding;
that is to say, which is subject to his mouth. Cato said, That we must take so
much meat and drink, as is requisite to maintain the strength of the body,
and not as shall accloy it. And as Cicero says in his Duties, We must refer
our feeding to the health and strength of our bodies, and not unto pleasure.
And Socrates says, That we must so use our feeding, as neither body nor mind
be ouercharged therewith. And therefore Ecclesiasticus in the seven and thirtith
chapter says thus; Be not greedy of thy meat, neither thrust thy hand into
every dish, for the multitude of meats procures diseases, and of full feeding
breeds choler. A man of moderat diet prolongeth his life.
Many have died of Gluttony, but he that abstaineth shall prolong his life.
Our Lord in the 21 of Saint Luke commands us to beware, that our hearts be
not accloied with wine and meat. And S. Paul to the Ephesians, forbids us
to take too much wine, as wherein lies surfeiting. Horace in the second of his
sermons, describes naturally the pleasure and disco^moditie of too much
feeding. Pliny says, That simple meats are most wholesome for the body, and
that al sawses and sawcepikets are dangerous and deadly. Such as have written
of antiquities, say, That in the time of Saturn, the world neither ate flesh
nor drank wine; wherein they agree with our divines, who put us out of doubt,
that the use of flesh and wine was unknown before the universal flood. The
Esseans lived longest of all the Jews, because they did most abstain, and
used least dainty meats. There were three sorts of feeding in Persia, whereof
the excellentest contented them selves with herbs and meal. Saint John
Chrysostom in his five and fiftith Homily says, A poor table is the mother
of health.
That a poor table is the mother of health, and a rich table is the mother of
diseases, as of headache, of quaking of the limbs, of agues, of gouts, and of
other diseases more dangerous than hunger. For hunger kills within few days,
but excess rotteth a man's body by peecemeale, and pineth away the flesh with
sickness, and in the end kills him with a cruel death. Again in the mind
it breeds testiness, melancholy, sloth, and vnweeldinesse: and there is
not any thing that drives away so many diseases, as moderat diet. That which I
say tends not to the utter taking away of all feasts, Of feasts and ba^quets.
for as Plutarch says in his banquet of the seven Sages, They that take away
the use of eating and drinking one with another, take away that which is
strongest in friendship. And our bodies cannot receive a greater pleasure, nor
a more rightful, familiar and agreeable to nature: because that by that means
men communicate, and participat of the self same vittels. Socrates did
oftentimes banquet and gather good companies together, whom he entertained
well, howbeit soberlie and without superfluity, delighting them more with his
mirthfull and sweet talk, than with his meats and drinks. Insomuch that
afterward, sober and merry meals were called Socratissis meals.

And this manner did Plato well hold still of his master: For he entertained
his guests well, but without any superfluity. Which thing Timothy of Athens
marked well in him, who having had very good and convenient intertainment at
his hand, howbeit without any great furniture of meats; at his meeting with him
the next morning, thanked him for that his supper had done him pleasure, not
only for the present time, The Sobriety of the Lacedaemonians.
but also the day after. The Lacedaemonians were wonderful sober in eating and
drinking, and had certain public places called Phidities, where they ate
very soberly; whereof it came, that when men would speak of a small pittance,
they would liken it to a meal of the Phiditie. A spare diet is the
Schoolmist^es of wi^e counsel.
And when a certain stranger asked them, Why they drunk so liltle? To the
intent (answered they) that we may counsel other men, and not other men
counsel us. Meaning to show by that answer, that the greatest drinkers are not
the best in counsel, but that Sobriety breeds good advice. For temperate
diet is the schoolmistresse of good and sage counsel, as said Sophocles.
Epicurus said, That he should esteem himself always alike happy, so he might
have bread and water. For the appetite of eating and drinking, consists more
in hunger and thirst, than in the delicatnesse of wines and meats. The
Lacedaemonians in stead of all other dainties, had for their first dish a broth
that was black and of small taste, whereof notwithstanding they made great
account. Dennis the tyrant would have tasted thereof, because they liked it so
well; and he had a Lacedemonian cook that prepared thereof for him: but when
he had tasted of it, he liked not of it. Then said his cook unto him, that it
was not to be wondered, if he misliked it, seeing it was not seasoned as it
should be, that is to say, with travel in hunting and running, The sawces of
the Lacedaemonians.
nor with hunger and thirst, which are the sawces that the Lacedaemonians use to
season their meats withal.

On a time the queen of Caria gave Alexander great store of delicate meats,
for the which he thanked her: howbeit in taking them, he told her that he had
much better than those, that is to wit, for dinner the journey that he marched
before daylight, and for supper a small dinner. For a great dinner hinders a
good supper, as Diogenes said to a young man that ate nothing to his supper but
Olives; If thou had dined (quoth he) after this manner, thou would not feed
as thou do. Mo men die of eating too much, than of hunger, as says Theognis.
And as the common proverb says, The mouth kills mo men than the sword. Cato
said it was hard for that commonweal to endure long, wherein a little fish, was
sold deerer than a great ox. Socrates said, That most men lived to eat, but he
himself ate to live. It was said of the emperor Bonosus, that he was borne to
eat and drink, the which has a better grace in latin, Non vt viuat natus est,
sed vt bibat. He that lists to see more thereof, let him read Iuuenal in his
eleventh Satire. Let us ad hereunto, The pampering of the body s^arueth the
soul.
that which Porphirie says, That the pampering and glutting of the body
starueth the soul, and by increasing that which is mortal, it hinders and
casts us back from the life eternal. And as Galen says, The mind that is
choked up with grease and blood, cannot understand any heavenly thing. A fat
belly afordeth not a good wit.
And S. Ierom says, That a fat paunch cannot breed a good and sharp wit. For
Pliny says, That such as have great bellies, have slender wits. Therefore we
call him a glutton, A Glutton.
which eats either too much or too hastily, or oftener than he needs
besides his ordinary meals, or that seeks delicate and dainty meats. A
Drunkard.
And we call him a drunkard, which drinks out of measure. For, to drink wine
moderatly, is not forbidden. And as Anacharsis said, The first draught serves
for health, the second for pleasure, the third for shame, and the fourth for
madness. For as Herodotus says, Drunkenness puts a man out of his wits, and
makes him mad. Moses forbids the priests to drink wine, or any other
drink that may make men drunken, during the time that they were in their
course of sacrifising.

Plato in his commonweal forbids magistrates wine, during the time of the
executing of their office, and also children until they be eighteen years
old, for fear of putting fire to fire. For great heed ought to be taken, that
we drive not youth into a settled disposition of fury. And after that time he
will have them to use wine moderatly. And when they be come to forty years,
then they may drink the more liberally, as a remedy against the waywardness
of old age. And in the same book, He that is full of wine (says he) both
draws and is drawn hither and thither. And therefore a drunkard as a man
besides himself, The drunkard is vnm^et to beget children.
is unmeet for generation; because it is likely that his procreation shall be
unequal, crooked and unstable, as well in members as in manners. And therefore
he says, That a drunkard being set in any state of government, whatsoever it
be, undoes and marreth all, whether it be ship or armed chariot, or any other
thing whereof he has the guiding and government. The Carthaginenses prohibited
wine to their magistrates and men of war, and so does also Mahomet to all
those that hold of his law. It was felony for the magistrates of Locres to
drink wine, without the license of a Physician. And the young Romans drank no
wine, before they were twenty years old.

Atheneus says, That the Greeks never drank wine without water, and that
sometimes they put five glasses of water to one of wine, and sometime but two
of water to four of wine. Hesiodus will have men to put three parts of water
to one of wine. Sophocles mocked the poet Aeschylus, for that he never wrote
but when he was well drunken. For although he write well (says he) yet writes
he unadvisedly. Aristophanes termed wine the milk of Venus, Wine is the milk
of Venu^.
because it provoke men to lechery. And Horace says, That a cup of wine, is
the companion of Venus. And for that cause, a certain Jewish sect called
Esseans, who were holier and of better conversation than the Pharisees, or than
the Saduces who were heretics; abstained from wine and women, as witnesses
Josephus in his Antiquities. Osee says, That wine and fornication bereave men
of their hearts; that is to wit, Wine dimmeth and overcomes wisdom*
of right understanding and discretion. For wine hides and darkeneth wisdom.
And Solomon in the the 23 of the Proverbs, says, That the drunkard and the
glutton shall become poor. And in another place, Who (says he) have
misfortune, who have sorrow, who have trouble, who have sighing, who have
stripes without cause, and who have ^aintnes of eyes? Even they that sit at the
wine, and strain themselves to empty the cups. Wine is alluring, but in the
end it stingeth like a serpent, and leaves his sting behind him like an
aspworme. At that time, thine eyes shall see strangers, and thy heart shall
utter fond things. Pliny in the 14 book of his natural History says among
other things, The inconveniences of drinking too much.
that it makes the eyes water, the hands quiuering, the nights unquiet, lewd
dreams, a stinking breath in the morning, and utter forgetfulness of all
things. Moderate wine helps concoction, and the sinews; and abundance
thereof hurts them. Esau by his gluttony, lost his birthright. Noe by his
drunkenness became a laughing stock to his own children; and Lot dealt
shamefully with his own daughters. Between a drunken man and a mad man,
Drunkenness is a peti-madnesse.
is small difference. And as Crysippus says, Drunkenness is a peti-madnesse;
as we read of Alexander, who in his drunkenness was commonly furious. And as
Strabo says, Like as a small wind does easily carry him away that is swaieng
forward alredie, so a little greef does easily make him mad, that has taken in
too much wine. And Sophocles says, A drunken man is easily carried away with
choler, and has no understanding: whereby it comes to pass, that when he
has rashly discharged his tongue, he is constrained afterward whether he will
or no, to hear of it at their hands of whom he railed in his lustiness. For
who so evil speaks (says Hesiodus) shall shortly after hear more of it
than he had spoken. Theognis says, That as gold is tried by fire, so is a man's
mind by wine. A man's disposition is bewrayed by wine.
For wine bereaueth him of all knowledge, and consequently of all aduisement
and mean to dissemble, so as it is ill done to commit any secrets to a
drunkard. If a drunkard offended in his drunkenness, Pittacus would have him
punished with double punishment, that he should the rather abstain from
drunkenness.

The Romans did put them out of the Senate, that were drunkards. In old time a
man could not put away his wife except she had been an adultresse, A remedy
for drunkenness.
a witch, or a wine drinker. To eschew this vice, we will take the remedy of
Anacharsis; who counseled them that were subject to that vice, to behold how
drunken men behaved themselves, or rather (as Pithagoras said) to bethink them
of the things that a drunken man has done. That was the cause why the
Lacedaemonians made their bondslaues drunken, that their young folk might learn
to hate drunkenness, when they saw those poor souls out of their wits, and
scorned at all hands. Furthermore it is to be considered, what mischiefs have
come of drunkenness, whereof all stories are full: as how the army of
Thomiris was discomfited by Cyrus, for that they having drunk too much, were
laid down and fallen a sleep. How the city Abida in Mesopotamia was lost by
drunkenness, because the men that were set to guard the tower of
Hipponomethere, having drunk too much, were fallen into so deep a sleep, that
they were surprised by their enemies, and slain before they could awake. In
general for frugality, we must have the virtue of Temperance before our eyes,
which warns us to follow reason, and to eschew superfluity of eating and
drinking, under color that we have whereof to make good cheer; and say as
Alcamenes did, who being vpbraided that he lived so sparingly and poorly for
the riches that he had, said, That he which has great revenues, ought to live
according to reason, and not at his pleasure. For frugalitie does always well
beseem a Prince, so long as it proceed not of nigardship. Our former kings
lost their kingdom, through following their delights. Of the sobriety of
diverse princes.
King Charles the seventh, who was wont to sup with three young pigeons, and a
breast of mutton, raised the siege of the Englishmen before Orleans, and
recovered the whole realm of France from them. Antonie and Cleopatra, who
spent three or four hundred thousand French crowns at a banquet in one day,
were vanquished by Octauius, who was sober, and contented himself with common
meats, eating and drinking but little. Also Julius Caesar was sober, and a
small drinker, and it was said of him, That he was the only sober man that
went about to overthrow the state; as who would say, the subuerting of states
belonged rather to drunkards and giddi-headed persons, than to men that are
sober and discreet. Romulus was sober, and a small drinker. And when it was
said of him, That if all men did as he did, wine would be good cheap: Nay
(quoth he) it would rather be dear if every man should drink as much as I
do, who do drink as much as I list. Tiberius as if he had been a very
thriuing and sparing man, would be served the next day, with the meats that had
been dressed for his supper the night before, with a pretense of nigardship: but
to say the truth, it was but to mock and deceive the world: for at the last he
would drink well. By means whereof, when he was yet a young man long before he
was emperor, being in the camp, in stead of Tiberius, he gate himself the
name of Biberius, and in stead of Claudius, he gate himself the name of
Caldius, and in stead of Nero, he gat himself the name of Mero. And good cause
why: for he bestowed two days, and one night together, in nothing else but
eating and drinking with Pomponius, Flaccus, and Lucius Piso, to whom he gave
great presents, and committed unto them the managing of great affairs, in
recompense of their gluttony, calling them men for all hours.

The way to eschew gluttony.
To eschew this vice, we must follow the counsel of Socrates, who would have
men to forbear all meats and drinks, that allure the appetite more than is
behooffull for the staunching of hunger and thirst. For dilicat meats provoke
feeding, and make men tender and subject to many diseases. Contrariwise, they
that use no dainty meats, are more strong and lusty than the other sort, as
we see in men of the country, servants, and poor men, who without comparison
are stronger than citizens, Through disorder of diet we deprive our selves of
the health which we pray for.
masters, and rich men. Democritus said, There is not any man which does not
pray and make vows to God for his own health, and yet we do the contrary to
that which we sue for. For by our unruliness we bereave our selves of the
health which we might obtain by Sobriety. If we see a country infected with
any dangerous disease, we flee from it a hundred leagues off, and as much as
we can, we shun all contagious aires. There is no man but he shunneth blows,
and dreadeth death, unless that prowess put him forward. And yet all men run
into int^mperance, which causes death, and which (as Hesiodus says) betraieth
us into a cruel old age, that is to say, to a swift, hasty, untimely, and
unripe old age.

CHAP. XII. Of Continency, and Incontinencie.
THe second sort of Temperance concerns women, which we may call Continency
and Chastity: and the contrary we may call Incontinencie, or lecherousnesse.
Tertullian calls Chastity the flower of manners, the honor of the body, and
the ground of holiness. The greatest personages have eschued marriage and women.
Saint Cyprian calls it the ornament of manners, the holiness of fathers, and
the crown of concord. How great this virtue is, and how acceptable to God,
those holy persons that have vowed themselves unto it, do witness unto us;
and also the excellentest Philosophers, the most part of whom eschewed both
marriage and women, to the intent they might have their minds more attentive and
lifted up to heavenly things, because that such are meetest for contemplation,
and beloved of God. Which thing Saint John intending to show unto us, says in
the fourteenth of the Apocalips, That he saw a hundred and four and forty
thousand men, which sung a new song before the throne of God, and that none
other but those hundred and four and forty thousand could sing that song. And
these (says he) are those which have not defiled themselves with women,
because they be virgins, and follow the lamb whether soever he goes. He
magnifieth the martyrs and other holy co^fessors, but of these only he says,
That they follow the lamb whersoeuer he become: giving honor and prerogative to
virgins. And such as cannot be so, have marriage for their remedy, wherein a
man may live chastely, when the man keeps himself to his wife, and the wife
to her husband, according to the precept of Saint Paul, and of Solomon, who
says, Let thy well-beloved servant keep company with thee; meaning his wife.
And let us drink of the water of our own cup, of our own pit, or of our own
well, to the intent to debar the vice of adultery, which oftentimes causes
the ruin of realms and common-weals. Nero being wicked and incestuous, said,
There was not a chaste and continent person in the world, but only that most
men cloked the vice by subtlety and hypocrisy. And because he was so much
given to that vice himself, he thought it impossible for any man to be clear.
Yet notwithstanding it is said of Laelius, That in all his life he never had to
do with any other than his own wife, and that after her death, he never knew
any other. Julian the Emperor lived in continual continency after the death
of his wife, notwithstanding that he was a young man. There are many men and
women, both Greeks and Romans to be found, which have been marvelous chaste
and well staid. Porcia the sister of Cato, said, That the chaste woman never
marries more than once. Men attribute the continency of Xenocrates, The
continency of Xenocrates.
to a certain insensibilitie: But he was too wise, and too great a personage,
to be without any feeling: for he was a Philosopher of great renown, temperat
and well staid in all things, such a one as passed little for money, women, and
other pleasures, but continued always as sad and grave as was possible; whom
Plato counseled to offer sacrifice to the graces, that he might become more
courteous and gracious. In his time there was the most beautiful and gentle
courtisan of the world, named Phrynee. Now certain young men laid a wager with
this Phrynee, that they would lay a man by her, that should not be moved by her
beauty, nor by all her daliances. When the wager was made, they made the said
Xenocrates to be laid in a fair bed, and the curtisan tarried not long after
ere she came into the bed unto him, where she forgate not any thing that might
serve to kindle a man's courage, though he had bin of marble: finally after many
kissings, touchings, and wanton daliances, all that euershe could win of him
that night, was that she was feign to leave him as she found him. The next
morning her paramours came to know whether they had won or lost. Phrynee
confessed that the philosopher was not moved at all with her daliances. And
when they required the money which she had lost upon the wager; she answered
them, that she had made her wager of a man, and not of a block: truly in the
opinion of the covetous and unchaste, he was a very block and senseless; but in
very deed he showed himself to be well stayed and a right philosopher, in that
he could so well skill to ouermaister his affections, specially considering
that the courtisan would have triumphed over him and his philosophy, in
maintenance whereof he stood so resolutly grounded, that it was not possible
afterward for the courtisan, to make him to stoop to the feats of her amorous
temptations. And so this his doing proceeded not of any gross insensibility,
but rather of a gallant mind that stood resolute in his purpose. After which
manner we read of certain saints and martyrs, which by the grace of God did
wonderful deeds of chastity, resisting such temptations with inuinsible
courage, whom we will omit for shortness sake, The continency of Joseph.
after I have set down the wonderful staidness of Joseph, who could not be
moved with the beauty of his mistress, nor with the good that he might have
received at her hand, nor with the danger that he incurred by refusing. At
whose continency S. John Chrysostom maruelling says, upon the nineteenth of
Genesis, That it is not so great a wonder, that the three children overcame the
fire in the furnace at Babylon, as it is wonderful and rare that this righteous
man, being in this furnace of the incontinencie of the Aegiptian woman, far
more dangerous than the furnace of Babylon, abode safe and sound, and so waded
out of it, keeping the mantle of his chastity pure and clean. S. Ierom being
half broiled with the heat of the sun in the desert, confesses that he could
not refrain, from thinking upon the delicat delights and beautiful dames of
Rome. But yet the austeritie of his life restrained those lusts, from taking
place in his head. I know well that some even of nature are too cold, and
othersome again be too whot, and too sore given to flesh: but yet reason and
resolutenesse aided by the grace of God, get the upper hand. Polemon king of
Licia was put away by his wife, for being to rough in dealing with her, as
witnesses Josephus in his twentieth book of his Antiquities. Among the
greatest praises that Mahomet gives to himself, he vaunteth in his Alcoran,
that he had not his fellow in that feat. And James Churre reports, that in
his time there was a woman that complained to the king of Arragon, The
prodigious lechery of a certain Spania^d.
of her husbands prodigious lechery. Whereupon he was forbidden to have to do
with her above six times a day, which was a restraint to the fifth part of his
ordinary dealing; who so marketh and considers this man's dealings, he shall
find mo hours in the day, that the Egyptians made, who ruled their hours by
a certain beast dedicated to Serapis, which pissed twelve times a day by
equal distances: at leastwise if such as are hard of belief will not muster
this in the same rank with the fable of Hercules, who is reported to have
defloured fifty daughters of one man in one night. The profit of chastity and
the harm of unchastity.
Now must I speak of the good that is reaped by chastity, and of the harm
that is received by unchastity: which good and harm extend themselves to the
goods of the body, of the soul, and of fortune. As touching the goods of the
body, it is certain that a man cannot be beautiful and well disposed, if he
be given to that pleasure. For as Cicero says, An unchaste youth yields an
ouerworne body unto old age. As touching strength, nothing is so noisome to it
as that, according to this saying of the Poet, Venus and Bacchus bereave men of
all strength. And Menander says, A woman is a shortener of man's life. Women
shorten men's lives.
Cornelius Celsus says, That lechery dissolueth the body. And Hippocrates
says, That nothing does so much wither and wast a man as that, calling it an
vnderkind of the falling sickness.

Paulus Aegineta says, that it makes the body col^ and feeble. And therefore
Clinias and Pithagoricall philosophers said, That the company of women was but
then to be used, when men were desirous to fall into some disease: wherein he
followed his master Pithagoras, who prohibited the use of women, unless it
were to make them the weaker and feebler. That is the cause why Solon in his
laws ordained marriage; The laws of Solon and Licurgus concerning marriage.
howbeit with charge that the husband should not have to do with his wife,
above thrice in a month. Licurgus to make the Lacedaemonians the stronger,
prohibited them to lie with their wives, enioyning the^ to take them vnapareled
and secretly, of purpose to take away the abuse of them and the overmuch use,
whereby they might afterward become weak and less able to take pains.
Plutarch among his precepts of health, sets down chiefly the conservation
of the vital seed. Plato in his laws, commands young men to employ their
strength about other things than that, and to weaken the lust of the flesh by
much travel, which will easily be done, if a man use it not too unchastly. For
if a man use it rarely and with shamefastnes, lechery shall have the less
power over him. Wherefore we must persuade our selves to do so, by custom
without law written, and think it a shame and note of insamie, to do otherwise.
And if it could be, a law should be made, that no man might touch any woman but
his wife, nor beget bastards upon concubines, and that if any man kept a
concubine, he should be proclaimed as an infamous person, and be deprived from
all honor and offices of the city or commonweal. Incontinencie makes men to
grow out of kind.
As touching the mind, nothing does so much abate it and make it to grow out of
kind. It is evident how Antonie managed his affairs amiss, after that he fell
in love with Cleopatra; namely how he made an unfortunate voyage against the
Parthians, and knit up his doings with a mis-incounter at the journey of Actium.

It would require a whole book, to number the mischieues that have come
thereof, and to show the alterations that love has wrought in the minds of
men. And as Parmeno says in Terence, It is a strange thing, to see how men are
altered by love, and how a man that was well staid, and stern, becomes loose
and ill disposed through love. And for all, Solomon the wisest of all men in
the world may suffice, who through love became more fond and unadvised than any
man; insomuch that he left his religion, and became an idolater.

We read in the 19. chapter of the Judges, what a bloody battle there was
between the Israelites and their fellows of the tribe of Benjamin, for a
Leuits wife that was ravished by them; in which battle there died three score
and five thousand men on both sides, and in the end the Beniamits being
overcome, were feign to accept such conditions as their conquerours would give
unto them. Alexander would never give himself to love, until he was lord of
Asia, for fear of being vanquished. And therefore he would not see the wife
and daughters of Darius, for fear to be caught in love by them, saying
commonly, that the ladies of Persia were eye-sores unto him. And albeit that
vain-glorie made him so to do, for fear least he should have been hindered in
his enterprise: yet he saw well that a man which does such things, could not
prosper. And as long as he set not his mind that way, his affairs went well,
and he purchased great praise, yea even at the hand of Darius himself, who
hearing of a truth how the world went with his wife and children, besought God
that he might have none other successor but Alexander.

Thus ye see how Continency does good both to body, ^oul, and worldly state;
that is to say, even to the getting of kingdoms and empires, The Continency of
Scipio.
whereof there be so many examples, that a man cannot reckon them up without
wearying of his readers. I will but only set down the Continency of Scipio
toward Indibilis, because comparison is made between that and Alexanders. Now
therefore Scipio having by the law of arms, taken prisoner the wife of one
Indibilis, a noble man of Spain, and a great enemy of the Romans, a woman of
rare beauty, with diverse other fair ladies and gentlewomen of Spain, would
not shut his eyes, but would have a ^ight of them. And after courteous
entertaining of them, sent them home to Indibilis, without doing any wrong to
their honor. For which courtesy, Indibilis finding himself infinitely bound
unto Scipio, turned to the Romans with mo than five hundred Spaniards, and was
the cause that Scipio became master of the whole country. There have bin few
good captains which have not abhorred, if not simple fornication, yet at
leastwise adultery, saving only Julius Caesar, who always entertained some
other men's wives. But he was punished by the son of one whom he held in
adultery, who slew him in the senate. And when he entered into any city, the
soldiers would say, Ye chief men of the town keep well your wives, for we
bring unto you the bald aduouterer. Alexander showed himself more stayed in
that respect; The Continency of Alexander.
for he would do no wrong, neither to men's wives nor to their Lemans. Upon a
time having long waited for a certain woman, when she was come, and he had
asked her why she came so late, she answered, because I was feign to tarry till
my husband was abed. Which thing Alexander hearing, commanded his men to convey
her home again out of hand, saying that through their default, it wanted but
little that he had become an Adulterer. He did as much to Antipater. For seeing
a fair wench that Antipater kept, come to feast, he began to cast a fancy to
her. But understanding that she was Antipaters, Noughty fellow (quoth he) why
take thou not this wench hence, which enforces wrong to be done unto
Antipater?

Francis Sforcia duke of Millane, being offered a very fair woman whom he had
taken to lie withal, perceived that as soon as he would have come near her
she began to weep and prayed the duke that he would not touch her, but that he
would send her back to her husband, who also was a prisoner. Of whose request
the duke had such regard, that he cast himself down from the bed for fear
of touching her, and delivered her again to her husband the next morrow.

Dennis the tyrant rebuked his son sharply for an adultery which he had
committed, asking him if he had ever seen him do the like. When his son had
answered no, for he had not a king to his father: he could well skill to
foretell him what would come of it, that is to wit, that he also should not
have a son that should be a king after him, unless he changed his manners,
as I have said in my first book.

Agesilaus one day refused a kiss, whereat when all men marvelled: he said, He
had rather to fight against such affections, than to take a good city well
fortified and well manned with men of war.

Many examples of the chastity of princes.
Alexander rebuked Cassander very sharply for kissing; and was angry wirh
Philoxenus for seeming to inuit him to dishonest things by his letters.
Antiochus beholding a very beautiful religious woman, that was vowed to Diana,
was by and by surprised with her love: and for fear least ouer-great love
might enforce him to some incest, he went his way by and by out of the place,
for doubt least he should do any thing that might not become him. Heliogabalus
not only defloured, but also married a virgin vestall, saying it was reason
that priests should marie nuns, because that in times past he had been priest to
the sun. But he was so wicked, that the rememberance of him ought to be wiped
out of the world. When Pompey had put Mithridates to flight, he would not touch
his concubines, but sent them all home to their friends. Julian would not see
the goodly ladies of Persia that were his captives, for fear least he should
be taken in love with them, but sent them home every chone. Selim the emperor
of the Turks did as much in the same country. For when he had won the field
against the sophie, he found many noble women in his camp, whom he sent home
without touching them, or without taking any ransom for them. Dioclesian
having taken the wife and daughters of the king of Persia, did as Alexander had
done. Which deed caused the Persians to render unto the Romans, all that ever
they had taken from them. Totilas king of the Easterngoths, having taken Naples
and many Roman ladies that were there, sent them all home to their friends,
without doing or suffering any wrong to be done unto them. He that would here
rehearse the tragical histories that have ensued of Adultrie, should be feign
to make a whole book by itself. Let us but only bethink us of the
euening-worke of Sicilie, which befell unto us Frenchmen, more for our
incontinencie than for any thing else; and let that be added unto it, which was
done by Alexander the son of Amyntas unto the Persians. The good turn that
Alexander the son of Amyntas did*
Amyntas made a banquet to the Persians, whereat were present the noblemens
wives of Macedonie. Whom when the Persians had before them, they would aproch
unto them; insomuch that when they were set down by them, they began to feel
their breasts and to do diverse unseemly things unto them. Whereat Alexander
being extremely grieved, did nevertheless set a good countenance upon the
matter, and told them that he would make them cheer to the full. Whereupon
when bedtime drue nigh, he desired that the ladies might go aside to wash
themselves, and they should come again by and by unto them. Anon the ladies
departed, in whose stead young men attired like women, were brought in to the
banquet; at whose coming, the Persians began immediately to handle them
ouerboldly. But the young men set hand to their weapons, and slew them every
chone not one excepted. Ioane queen of Naples was hanged up for her aduoutrie
in the very same place where she had hanged her husband Andreasse before,
because he was not a lusty companion to her liking. I will forbear to speak
of Fredegund and other unchaste women, and for this matter will allege but only
the guile of the Madianits, who perceiving the children of Israel to be
impregnable and invincible, so long as they sinned not: took of the
beautifullest young women that they had, and sent them before to the camp of the
Israelits to entice them to sin: which thing caused the Israelits to be
overcome by them.

The Trojans were utterly destroyed for the aduouterie of one man. And Homer
makes Apollo to send the pestilence into the camp of the Greeks, because the
king had taken away the daughter of Chryses his priest. Let us now speak of
punishments ordained by laws. The punishment of adultery.
The Persians were rigorous in punishing adulterers; and likewise the
Egyptians, who punished the adulterer with a thousand lashes of a whip, and
the adulteress by cutting off her nose. And sometimes (as says Diodorus) they
did cut off the privy members of him that had deflowred a gentlewoman, because
of the corrupting and confounding of issue. Herodotus reports, That Feron
king of Egypt, did cause all the women in a city to be burned, whom he
understood to be adultresses. The same king had been blind ten years, and the
eleventh year the Oracle told him, that he should recover his sight, if he
washed his eyes in the water of a woman, that had never had to do with any
other than her husband. First he made trial of his own wives water, but that
would do him no good: and afterward of infinite others, which did him all as
little; save only one, by the rubbing of his eyes with whose water he
reeouered his sight, and then put all the rest to dearh. By the law of Moses,
adulterous persons were stoned to death, as appears in the one and twentieth
of Leuitticus, and in the two and twentieth of Deuteronomie; and before that also
in eight and thirtith of Genesis. The law Iulia, punished both the offenders
with death, whereof there is an express title in the Digests. Ecclesiasticus
speaking of an adulterous woman, says, That her children shall not take root,
and that her branches shall not bear fruit. They shall leave their
remembrance accursed, and the shame thereof shall not be wiped out. Such as by
reason of their greatness have escaped the rigor of law, have not failed to
be defamed, as Faustine and the exceeding infamous Messaline, who in that trade
went beyond all the courtesans that ever were, returning from the brothel house
rather tired than satisfied. And Iulia the daughter of Augustus was so
shameless and unchaste, that the emperor was never able to reclaim her. And
when one thinking to have good credit with her, desired her to leave that life,
and to follow chastity as her father did: she said, That her father forgot
himself, and considered not that he was Caesar, but as for her, she knew well
she was the daughter of Caesar. The means to remedy Incontinencie. Cicero in
his Cato.
Now must I treat of the means to avoid this inconvenience. Saint Paul gives
one, which is very certain, that is to wit, marriage. Another remedy is, to
eschew occasions. For there is more pleasure in not desiring, than in enjoying.
When one demanded of Sophocles, whether he gave himself to women still in his
old age, or no? No (quoth he) I have withdrawn my self from it, and have left
up that trade, as a wicked, wild and harebraind master. Occasions are
eschewed, by the eyes, by the tongue, and by the ears. By the eyes, when a man
turns them away from looking upon fair women, as I have said of Alexander,
and diverse others. Cyrus would never see the beautiful Pantea: And when
Araspes one of his courriers told him, That her beauty was a thing worthy the
beholding; Even therefore (quoth he) is it best to abstain from seeing her. The
same cause (as witnesses Josephus in the eleventh book of his Antiquities)
made the Persians not to show their wives unto strangers. And as Tertullian
says in his treatise of the veiling of Virgins, Of the veiling of maidens and
married women.
The Corinthians veiled their maidens. Contrariwise, the Lacedaemonians did let
them go vnueiled, that they might get them husbands: And when they were married,
then they veiled them. Sulpitius Gallus did put away his wife by deuorce,
because she went abroad bare faced, as Valerius says in his sixth book: but
that was but a slender cause of divorce. It is said in Genesis, That Rebecca
covered her self as soon as she saw Isaac. This was not done without cause.
For as Plutarch says, Love is nothing else but a well-liking of beauty, which
carries us with an ardent desire to the obtainment of that which we covet. And
Ovid writing to a certain woman, says, Would God thou were not so fair, for
then should I not be so importunate, but thy beautiful face enforces me to be
bold. Theocritus termed a fair face a mischief of yuory, because it is
pleasant to see to, and causes many mischiefs. It is a speechless
commendation, for it commends it self sufficiently without speaking. It is a
kingdom without halberders; for the beautiful command even kings, and without
force obtain what they will of them, yea and they be of such power, that some
have said (as Tertullian and many others) that even angels have been in love
with them, alleging the sixth chapter of Genesis, howbeit misunderstood by
them, the which thing Saint John Chrysostom, writing upon the same chapter,
Saint Ambrose in his book concerning Noe and the Arc, S. Austen in his
fifteenth book of the city of God, and all the right believing doctors have
disprooued at large. If Paris had not seen Helen, the city of Troy had not
been destroyed. Sight is an intisement to adultery.
If David had not seen Bersaba, and Gyges the wife of Candaules: none of them
both had been murderers and adulterers both at once. If Caracalla had not
seen his mothers thigh, he had not married her. Suetonius says, That Tiberius
caused many boys and girls to come to Capree, whither he had withdrawn
himself, that he might not be seen of the Romans in such lewd dealings. And
he caused them to do a thousand villainous things in his presence, to delight
his sight withal, and to quicken up his lust, which was almost dead unto such
things. So that the surest way for a man, is to withhold his eyes from the
sight of all vanities. Next, a man must keep himself from speaking foul and
filthy speeches, Speeches is an other inticement.
and from hearing them spoken, as such men and women will do, as list not to
read unchaste books, nor to hear ribaudrie talk, nor to come in place or
company where such are read. For words spoken in jest or in earnest, serve
well to kindle the fire of love, according to the answer that Popilia made,
when one asked her why beasts endure not the male after they have once
conceived, seeing that women endure them at all times: Because (quoth she) they
be but beasts.

The emperor Sigismundus widow, intending to marry again, albeit that in so
doing she did no unlawful thing, yet made she a meetly pretty answer, to him
that would have persuaded her to lead the rest of her life unmarried, after the
manner of the Turtle-doue, who never seeks any make again, after she has
once forgone her own. If you counsel me (quoth she) to follow the example of
birds, why speak you not to me as well of pigeons and sparrowes, which after
the death of their makes do ordinarily couple themselves with the next that
they meet? A Vestall virgin named Spuria, because she was foule-mouthed, was
accused of incest, and discharged by the censor, upon condition that she should
no more speak filthily as long as she lived. For it behooves to be chaste in
words, as well as in body. For by men's speech is it known how they be minded,
By a man's speech is his disposition known.
as Bacchus says in Terence.

And Jesus the son of Sirach in his seven and twentieth chapter, says, That
like as a man's labor makes a tree to show forth his fruit: so does a man's
speech bewray the thoughts of his heart. Socrates said, That such as a man is,
such are his affections: such as his affection is, such are his words; such as
his words are, such are his deeds; and such as his deeds are, such is his life.
Hiero king of Syracuse punished the poet Epicharmus, because he had spoken
wantonly before his wife: and very justly, for his wife was a true mirror of
chastity. And upon a time Hiero perceiving himself to have a strong breath,
found fault with her that she had not told him of it. To whom she answered
plainly, That she had thought that all other men's breaths had had the like
sent.

Aristotle in his seventh book of matters of State, Law makers ought to banish
all filthy talk out of their co^mon-weals.
says, That lawmakers ought above all things, to banish all filthy and
ribaudrie talk out of their common-weals; because the liberty of filthy
communication, draws vile and dishonest deeds after it. And therefore Epictetus
said, That amorous talk was an allurement unto whordome. And for that cause
Saint Paul to the Ephesians would not have any corrupt word to pass out of
our mouths. By the laws of Romulus, He that spoke any filthy words before
women, was punished as a manslear. In the Digests under the title of Injuries,
we have a notable book-case of Vlpian, who says, That he which utters any
filthy speech before women, although he stain not their chastity, shall
nevertheless be sued upon an action of trespass. And as men ought not to
attempt the chastity of women by lewd speeches: so likewise women must not
provoke men thereto, by too much decking and painting themselves. For, that is
no better than an enticing of men unto whordome. And like as hunters lay baits
upon their snares, to allure wild beasts unto them, and to draw them in; so do
adulterers (says Saint Chrysostom) lay baits for the amorous, by their eyes,
by their speeches, and by their attires. And afterward they entangle them, and
mask them in their nets, out of the which they suffer them not to escape,
until they have sucked out all their blood, and then they give them a mock
for their labor. The ornaments of a good woman.
The ornaments of a good woman are meeldnesse, shamefastness, and chastity.
Poppea the wife of Nero was misliked of, for her ordinary using of asses
milk, to make her color the fresher. What would they have said, if she had
every day used the Spanish white, and vermilion? A wife ought to go cleanly
and comely apparelled, but neither ought she to be painted, nor to be curiously
attired: which thing Homer shows unto us, when he says in his Iliades, That
Juno washed herself to do away the spots of her body, and then anointed her
with oil after the manner of old time. But of the curiosities and fond tricks
that are used now adays, I will not speak at all. Secondly a woman must
beware that she show not herself naked: for that provoke men to do evil,
and makes women shameless.

A woman in stripping her self out of her clothes, strippeth her self of all
shamefastnes.
As touching the first, the example of Caracalla and others are a sufficient
testimony unto us. And as touching the other, Herodotus assures us in his
first book, That a woman in stripping her self out of her clothes, bereaueth
herself of all shamefastness. And Saint Cyprian in his first book of the
apparelling of maidens, will not have them to be naked, or to be bathed; saying
that in putting off their clothes, they put off also all shamefastness. And
for that cause, Saint Ambrose rebukes sharply one Siagrius bishop of Veron,
for ordaining that a certain maiden should be searched upon a pretended
deflourment. As for the Lacedaemonians, their short apparel, beneath the which a
man might see their knees, and some part of their thighs, was ordained to make
them the stronger, and the more warlike. But in very deed, that kind of
apparel was light. We have yet one other great remedy of love; which is, to
eschew idleness: for idleness nourishes love, the taking away whereof
breaks Cupids bow. Therefore hunting and all exercises of travel serve well
to that purpose. And for that cause Phedria in Terence, promises that he will
toil himself as much as he can during the absence of his lover, that his
travel may make him to rest without thinking upon her. Likewise, he that
takes pains, and is altogether given to study, is not subject to Venerie.
And in very deed the Poets feign that Diana and the Muses are enemies to
Venus, and care not for Cupid. For it is hard that the man which has any great
conceit in his mind, should have leisure to think upon the pleasures of Venus;
or that he which has his limbs tired with travel, should desire any thing
else than rest: howbeit that Caelius Rhodiginus in his eleventh book of ancient
Readings, makes mention of a man, that the more he was beaten, the more
fervently did he desire women.

CHAP. XIII. Of refraining a man's tongue, of such as be too talkatiue, of
liars, of curious persons, of flatterers, of mockers, of railers and
slaunderers, and of tale-bearers.
THe third kind of Temperance consists in ruling the tongue, when a man
keeps himself from speaking too much. Socrates enioined his disciples to have
silence in tongue, demurenes in countenance, and discreetnes in heart. Cato in
his paired verses, sets down the brideling of the tongue among the chiefest
virtues, saying, That never man repented him of holding his peace, but many
have taken great harm of speaking. The greatest speakers be not the greatest
doers.
It is commonly said, That he which is lavish of his words, is a niggard of his
deeds. Numa taught the Romans to reverence one of the M^ses more than all the
residue, and her he named Tacita, as ye would say, Silent and speechless; to
the intent they should highly esteem of silence. And in very deed, they were
very secret in all their enterprises, as we read of their victory which they
had against the Persians, which was known of in Rome, before it was understood
there, that the war was begun.

Quintus Fabius Maximus, was rebuked by the consul, for giving intelligence
out of the counsel, of the third war in Affricke. Secrecy a most behooffull
thing to a frato.
For there is not a more behooffull thing to a state than Secrecy. Pythagoras
enjoined silence to his disciples above all things. And good cause why, For
speech bewraieth what a man is, as says Ecclesiasticus. Periander one day
demanded of Solon, whether he held his peace for want of ability to speak,
or folly. A fool (quoth Solon) cannot hold his peace: for the heart of the
fool (says Ecclesiasticus) is in his mouth, and the mouth of the wise in his
heart. Therefore when Socrates saw an ignorant person sit mute at the table:
Thou have (quoth he) but this one token of a learned man. And as Solomon says
in the sixteenth of his Proverbs, The man that is of understanding and skill,
is sober in speech; yea, and the fool while he holds his peace, is counted
wise: but he is to be hated which is shameless in speaking, and which for a
drop of wit, flasheth out a whole flood of words.

An orator is known by his speaking, and a philosopher by his silence in due
time.
Macrobius says, That an orator is seen by his speech, and a philosopher also
is known by his holding of his peace, and by his speaking in their due times.
And that could Isocrates well skill to tell one, which at a banquet desired him
to say somewhat of the art of eloquence. For he answered him after this manner,
I know not (quoth he) what time and place require to be said, and that which I
know, is not meet for this time and place. For as the son of Sirach says,
Some man holds his peace, because he discerns the convenient time. And
thereupon it comes that in the thirteenth of the Proverbs, Solomon teaches us
that he which keeps his mouth, keeps his soul, and that he which opens
his lips rashly, shall feel hurt by it. And in the twelfth he says, That he
which keeps his tongue, keeps his soul from sorrow; and that he which
bableth many words, wounds his own soul. Again in the same chapter he
says, That rash speaking is like the sting of an aspworme: but the tongue of
the wise is health. And therefore he counsels us to hedge up our ears with
thorns, He that gives a man ear, inuiteth him to speak.
and not to hearken to a wicked tongue: and to set a door to our mouths, and a
lock to our ears: because that he which gives ear to a man inuiteth him to
speak, as S. Ambrose says in his Duties. And Mercury in the tenth chapter of
his Pimander says, That the religious man is he, which neither speaks much,
nor hears many things; and that he which intends to hearing and speaking,
fights with his own shadow, considering that God is neither spoken nor heard;
that is to say, cannot be expressed, neither by word nor by hearing, who above
all things will have us to yield account of our idle words. Sirach in his 20.
chapter says, That he is to be hated, which is shameless in speaking. The man
that speaks little shall be honored.
And in the 21. chapter, A babbler defiles his own soul, and shall be hated
where he dwells; but the man that speaks little, and is well advised, shall
be had in honor. Who art thou O man (says the Psalmist) that desire to live
long, and to see good days? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from
speaking guile. And therefore he prays God especially, to set a watch before
his mouth. And Ecclesiasticus says thus, Who shall give a watch to my mouth,
and set a seal upon my lips, that I fall not by mean thereof, and that my
tongue destroy me not? And in another place, Many words are not without fault.
Weigh thy words (quoth he) and put a bridle on thy tongue, and consider
aforehand, least thou sin with thy tongue: for in many words must needs be some
fault.

And as Solomon says in the third of the Proverbs, The tongue reueleth
secrets, but he that is of a faithful heart, keeps things close. And in the
twelfth, A man shall be had in estimation for his wise mouth: for a wise heart
(says Solomon in the sixth of the Proverbs) guides the mouth discreetly, and
shall put learning upon his lips. But upon the lips of the froward, there is as
it were a burning fire. He that cannot refrain from speaking, is like a city
that is open without walls. When the Lacedaemonians sat down to their meals,
the eldest of the company, pointing to the door, said unto them all, Let no
word go out yonder: meaning that if any thing were spoken freely at the table,
it ought not to be blabbed out abroad. Sabellicus in the fourth Aenead of his
fourth book, says, That in old time it was the custom of the Persians, to
concele and keep close all secrets, as a thing enjoined them by their ancient
discipline, upon pain of their lives. And no vice was rather punished among
the^ than the vice of the tongue: The vices of the tongue punished above all
vices among the Persians.
for they deemed the^ worthy of great punishment, which could not hold their
tongues, seeing that nature has made it most easy for man to do. For (as Ovid
says) what less pains can we take, than to hold our tongues? Pittacus says
in his Sentences, He cannot well speak, that cannot skill to hold his peace.
That that man cannot speak, which cannot skill to hold his peace. Unto a
certain governor of a province, that demanded of Demonax how he might well
keep his province? Demonax said, It should be easy to him, if he restrained
his choler, and hearkened much, and spoke little. Among the vices of Thersites,
Homer blames chiefly his overmuch babbling. The Psalmist to show the danger of
the tongue, says, That men's teeth are weapons, and their tongues arrows and
sharp knives, which may do much good, and much evil, after as they be
applied, the one way or the other. The king of Egypt sent Pittacus a mutton,
desiring him to put asunder the good flesh from the bad. Pittacus sent him
back the tongue, as the instrument of the greatest good, and of the greatest
evil that is done in the world. For as Solomon says, Both life and death are
in the power of the tongue. Saint James in his canonical Epistle says, That
though the tongue be but a small member, yet it does great things: and is like
the helue of a ship to the whole body, and like a bridle by the which being in
the horses mouth we turn his whole body which way we will. And a ship how
great soever it be, yet is it ruled by a small piece of timber. Saint John
Chrysostom in his two and twentieth Homily to the people, warrieth them that
they should not undo themselves by their tongues. For it is the tongue that
marreth the whole body; and when the body is corrupted, the mind must needs be
corrupted to. Evil words corrupt good manners.
For evil words corrupt good manners. Yea and in our daily prayers which we make
unto God, he will not have us to use abundance of words, as Ecclesiasticus
says in the fifth chapter, that it is the property of fools to use many
words unto God, and that the multitude of words without reason, betoken a
foolish prayer. And our Lord will not have us to pray after the manner of the
Heathen, who think they shall be heard for the multitude of their words. For
as S. Paul says in the second to the Corinthians, The kingdom of God
consists not in words. As touching the manner of speaking, Of the manner of
speaking.
Cicero shows it us briefly in his Duties, saying, That in talking a man must
not be too stiff of opinion, but must suffer every man to speak in his turn,
and consider whereof he speaks; so as if it be a matter of earnest, it be
done with gravity; or if it be a matter of mirth, it be done cheerfully: and
in any wise a man must not speak without the bounds of reason. The unbridled
tongue finds ever mis^ortune.
For as says Euripides, In the end every unbridled tongue shall find it self
unfortunate: and the great talker has this inconvenience, that he is not ever
believed; and yet our speaking is to the end that we would have our sayings
believed. Plutarch speaking of a babbler in his treatise of too much speaking,
says, That as corn shut up in a moist vessel, increases in measure, The
words of great talkers are unfruitful.
but impaireth in goodness: even so does a babbler. For he increaceth much his
words, by putting them forth, but his so doing bereaueth them of all power to
persuade. And as it is held for a truth, that the seed of such as company with
women too much, is not of strength to beget children: so the words of great
talkers is barreine and fruitless. And like as in our bodies, the parts that
are infected and diseased, do always draw to them the corrupt humors of the
parts next unto them: so the tongue of a great babbler, being as it were in the
whot fit of a burning fever, does always gather together and draw unto it some
secret lurking evil. He that will see the mischiefs that have happened to
many men by too much speaking, and the mean to remedy the same: let him read
the treatise of Plutarch concerning too much speaking, where he treats of it
so largely, that nothing can be added unto it: and also Erasmus book of the
Tongue. Nevertheless I may say in general, that to keep a man's self from
the vice of the tongue, he must eschew curiosity, lying, flattery, Of
curiosity.
mockery, slaundering, and tale bearing. I call curiosity or inquisitiuenes,
a discovering of things that are to be kept secret. For commonly it comes to
pass, that he which is desirous to know too much, is a great babbler. And that
is the cause, why a certain great Poet counsels us to shun inquisitiue
folk, because he is a great babbler, and the property of a great babbler is io
bewray secrets, The property of a babbler.
to sow discord, to make quarrels, to offend friends, and to make enemies. The
fashion of inquisitiue folks is, to learn men's pedegrees, the vices of their
races, the doings of their houses, the faults that befall in men's families:
what the neighbor owes, and how he governs his wife; also to silch letters,
to stand listening by men's walls, to harken what they say, to mark diligently
what servants and chambermaids do or say; if he see a woman pass through the
streets, to enquire whence she coms; if he see men talk in secret, to learn
whereof they speak. To be short, as Plutarch says in his book of
Inquisitiuenes, they be like to pullerie, which as long as they have a grain
to eat, do never leave scraping in the dunghill, to have one little grain of
corn more: so the inquisitiue folk, in stead of setting their minds upon
histories and good doings, and other needful things, the which are not
forbidden to be enquired of; do fall to gathering and hoording up the evil of
some house. In this case the Athenians showed themselves to be good men to
Philip, and little inquisitiue of household secrets. For having intercepted his
courriers, they opened all his letters and read them, saving those that were
written unto him by his wife Olimpias, the which they sent unto him closed and
unbroken up as they were.

Lisimachus demanded of Philippides, what he would have of him; ask what you
will sir (quoth. he) so it be no secret, because that commonly men conceal not any
thing, Men conceal not any thing but that which is evil.
but that which is evil, and that is the thing that the underminer is
inquisitiue of. And like as the spondgie places of leather, do draw into them
the worst of the leather: so the inquisitiue ears do draw all the matters that
are to be had. The law of the Locrians.
Therefore the law of the Locrians was good, which amerced the party at a good
fine, that enquired after news. And like as cooks to stir coals well in
their kitchins desire but good store of flesh meats and fisshermen good store
of fish: so the inquisitiue sort desire abundance of mischieues, great numbers
of dealings, store of novelties, and great chaunges, that they may have
wherewith to hunt and kill. The remedy of curiosity.
The remedy of inquisitiuenes, is neither to here nor to see the things that
belong not unto us. For the eye is one of the hands of curiosity, and is
matched with blabbing, that is to wit, with babbling out again, as says
Plutarch in his treatise of the Fruit of foes. As for the Lier, The lier.
he has no need of eyes, for he forgeth what he lists: of whom Horace
speaking, says, That he that can forget that which he never saw, and has no
skill to conceal things committed to him in secret, is a naughty fellow and
to be taken heed of. Lying is a vice detested of God and man, as I will declare
anon, after I have treated of the several sorts of lying. For this vice should
seem to be common to all men, considering how David says that all men are
liers. And so it might seem that this vice were in some sort excusable, until
we consider that the word Lie, Lying is the foundation and substance of all
vice.
is taken in diverse significations. Mercury in his chap. of understanding;
says that lying is the foundation and substance of all vice, and therefore
sin is termed nothing, and leasing or lying, The first sort of lies.
because it consists of not-being, or of bereauing, and all not being or
bereauing, is out of the truth, which truth is God: and whatsoeuet is out of
the truth is leasing. And therefore saint Austen in his fourteenth book of the
City of God, says, That the man which lives after himself, that is to say,
after his own imagination, and not according to Gods ordinance, which is the
truth, does surely live in leasing, because he lives according to himself,
and not in such sort as he was created to live. And although a man live well;
yet do we say that he is subject to leasing, by way of privation of the truth,
which privation he is run into by the sin of Adam. For there is not one
that does good, no not one. And therefore Saint Paul to the Romans says thus:
If Gods truth abound through my lying.

The second sort of lying.
Also there is another sort of leasing, that draws nigh unto this, whereof
David speaks, where he says, The sons of men are nothing but vanity;
insomuch that if they be put into the balance, they shall be found lighter
than vanity it self. Also the Preacher says, That all that is in this world
is vanity of vanities, or nothing of nothings: that is to say, there is not
any thing in this world, that can give a man true and sure contentment, neither
is there any thing settled and certain, as says Mercury speaking of the will
of God. And therefore we say that in man there is nothing but leasing. For they
be not so certain as other things, no not even as the heavenly bodies and
elements, which be not changed. For fire continues always fire: earth,
earth, and so of the rest. But man consists of the four elements, which are
diverse, and alters from age to age, so much that fathers know not their own
children, when they have been long absent and unseen of them. Now the thing
that changes after such sort, and is subject to growing, breeding,
diminishing and dissolution, and consequently to shifting and alteration,
cannot be true. And as Mercury says in his fifth chapter of Generation, The
shape of mortal things is changed from day to day, by reason that in time it
returns from growing to decaying like a leasing; for that which is not
permanent and certain, cannot be true: and therefore it must needs be a
leasing.

Another kind of leasing whereof I intend to speak here, The third sort of
leasing.
is when we disguise the truth by falsehood and deceit, or when for our own
pleasures sake, we say otherwise than it is, a vice proper to Satan, (whom our
Lord in S. John calls a lier, and the father of lying) and clean contrary
to God, as full opposite to his divine nature, which consists in truth. And
for that cause it is said in Wisdom, the mouth that lies sleyeth the soul.
And David in the threescore and third Psalm says, That the mouths of such as
speak lies shall be stopped. And in the xxiiij Psalm, it is said, That that
man shall go up into the Lords hll, which gives not over his heart unto
leasing, ne swears to beguile. For the words of the Lord are pure words, as
gold fined in the furnace from the earth, and seven times tried. And the man
that will live long and see good days, must keep his tongue from evil, and
his lips from speaking guile. For the mouth of the good liver, teaches nothing
but wisdom, and his tongue utters nothing but that which is righteous and
fruitful, as says Solomon. Saint John in the xiiij of the Apocalips, sets
down among those that follow the lamb, them that have not defiled themselves
with women, and them in whose mouths no guile or lying has been found. And in
the last chapter, he excludes out of the number of the blessed, all liers and
them that love lying. Plato in his fi^t book of Laws, says, That he which
chooses to lie, is worthy to have no credit given unto him: And that he which
lies against his will, is a fool; and of those two names, we should desire
none of them both. For distitute of all friends is that man, and unworthy to be
believed and credited. And in time when he is known to be such a one, he is so
forsaken of all men in his hateful old age, that he is feign to lead a
solitary life ever after. And in his Timaeus he says thus, If ye be liers,
ye shall be despised, how great so ever ye be. The manners of liers are without
honor.
For the manners of liers (says Solomon) are without honor, and their
confusion accompanies them continually. And in the same place, Lying is a
shameful reproach to a man, and will continually be in the mouth of them that
be without nurture. And to show the enormitie of the vice, A thief is better
than a her.

The benefit of suffe^ing (...) in princes courts.


That a thief is better than he that accustometh himself to lie: but both of
them shall have destruction to their heritage. Anachars^s said, That when liers
are suffered in the houses of princes, it is a sign that both the king and the
realm be going to decay. Ecclesiasticus abhors three sorts of men; A poor
man that is proud, a rich man that is a lier, and an old man that is a fool.
And Salom^n in his Proverbs says, That as words of authority become not a
fool: so lying lips become not a prince. Lying lips become nor a prince.
And in the xxix he says again, The prince that herkeneth to lying words,
has all his servants wicked. And in the vij of Ecclesiasticus he says, He
will not lie any manner of leasing, for the custom thereof is not good. And in
another place he says, That the Lord abhors lying lips, and that he which
gives ear to lies, is like one that catches a shadow, and pursues the wind.
And David in the hundred and nineteenth Psalm, prays God to take from him
the untrue way, the which he protests himself to hate above all things, and
utterly to abhor it. And in the Psalm next following, Deliver me (says he)
from false lips, and from a guilefull tongue. And in the eight and fiftith,
They that speak lies (says he) are as venomous as serpents. And in the fifth,
Thou will destroy them that speak leasings. And in the thirtith of the
Proverbs, Put far from me all vanity and lying words. All good men hate
lying.
Menander says, That all good and wise men hate lies. Aristotle and Demetrius
said, That the gain which hers gained by their lying, is that men believe them
not when they say truth. And as Ecclesiasticus says, What thing can be made
clean by him that is unclean? or what truth can be spoken by a lier?
Archidamus intending to withdraw the Lacedaemonians from believing a certain
ambassador of Chio; stood up and said: How can this fellow say any truth,
which bears his lying not only in his soul, but also in his head; because
the ambassador had caused his gray hears to be died black. Alcibiades to
hinder the peace that the Lacedaemonians granted to the Athenians, did craftily
counsel their ambassadors, to be more streight-laced to the senate than they
had been before the people, and to hold another course of speech, than they had
done. The which thing they did, believing that Alcibiades had given them that
counsel for their benefit. But he taking occasion thereby to set all things in a
broile, said in open senate, that no credit was to be given unto men that were
proved to be liers, and which in one self-same matter, said one while one
thing, He that is mutable in words deludeth princes. Why the Persians hate
(...) debtors.
and another while another. For he that is mutable in his words says Solomon
deludeth princes. The Persians esteemed lying to be the greatest sin in the
world: and therefore they hated debtors, and numbered them among offenders,
because it is hard for a debtor to forbear lying, seeing he assaieth to
deceive: and to deceive, a man must needs lie. Notwithstanding, Darius said to
his companions, That it was meet that men should lie, when it was for their
behoof, and that the liers and they that speak the truth, tended all to one
effect; and it was for men to lie, when there was any hope of gain to be had
by force of persuasion. But it is no marvel though a Persian said that: for
that manner of lying was to a good end, namely to deceive the guard of the
Magies, who had usurped the crown, that they might be killed, as they were
afterw^rd. And in this and such other like, it is lawful to lie, else not.
David detesting this vice, compares it to murder; saying in the fith Psalm,
The Lord abhors the blood thirsty and deceitful man. Periander ordained by
his laws, that he which had lied to another man's harm, should carry a stone in
his mouth the space of a month after. The Gimnosophists of Caldie condemned
liers to perpetual prison; and the Scythians condemned al such to death, or to
some other grievous punishment as took upon the^ to foretell things that were
false. And it is to be noted, that b^b^ing, lying, and inquisitiuenes, are
three grounds or under beings that resemble one another, and may be reduced
into one: For the inquisitiue person is commonly talkatiue, and the talkatiue
person is a her, and a lier is inquisitiue, and the inquisitiue person is a
lier. And from this fountain spring slaunderers, talebearers, ^
mockers, flatterers, and backbiters. The slaunderer and the talebearer are
the impes of the inquisitiue, of whom Ecclesiasticus speaking says, That the
slaunderer desileth his own soul, and shall be hated in all things. And he
that so continues shall be odious: whereas the peacemaker and wise man shall
be honored. And therefore he will have us to stop our ears with thorns, to
the end we may not hear the slanderous tongue. David in the fourteenth Psalm
reckoning up many sorts of innocence, ^
makes great account of him, that yields not his ear to hear the slander
of his neighbor. And in the hundred Psalm, he says, That he pursued him that
secretly slaundered his neighbor. And Solomon in the eighteenth of the
Proverbs, says, That the words of the talebearer are as wounds, and do enter
even into the entrails. For he that purposes with himself to raise slanders,
searches out all the evil that is in a house, to publish it abroad afterward.
If a woman by her oversight have given any occasion of suspicion, by and by he
blazeth her abroad, as though she were the wickeddest woman in the world. As
for them that are unchaste indeed, they besisted to the uttermost, and their
legend is disciphered without omitting any thing. If a man have never so small
a specke of vice, or of evil grace in him, the slaunderer fails not to make
every fly an elephant. They that offend in this case, do sin directly
against that commandment of the ten, which prohibiteth us to bear false
witness against our neighbor. For he that lies (says Solomon) is a false
witness. Also he sins against the law of the Gospel, which says, It were
better for a man to be drowned in the bottom of the sea, than that he should
give occasion of offense or stumbling to his neighbor. And in the nineteenth
of the Proverbs, The false-witnesse shall not escape unpunished, ^
and he that speaks lies shall perish. And in the five and twentieth, The man
that bears false-witnesse against his neighbor is as a club, a sword, and a
sharp arrow. And in the sixth of the Proverbs, God hates false lips, and the
false-witnesse that brings forth untruth. Saint James says, Speak not evil
one of another, He that speaks evil of his neighbor, speaks evil of the
law: that is to say, in speaking and judging after his own fancy, he usurps
the authority that belongs to the law. It is written in the first chapter of
the book of Wisdom, That the spirit of wisdom is gentle, and will not
discharge him that speaks evil with his lips: For the sound of his words
shall mount up unto God, to the punishing of his iniquities. Therefore beware
of grudging which booteth nothing, We must not eat with the slaunderer.
and refrain your tongues from slander. And Saint Paul in the sixth to the
Corinthians, forbids us to eat meat with the slanderer. The Psalmist says,
That he that will live long, must keep himself from mis-speaking, and from
speaking deceit, reproving them that set their mouths to slaundering and evil
speaking, and their tongues to the kindling of fraud and anoyance. And the
seven and fiftith Psalm says, My soul is among lions, I dwell among
firebrands, even among men whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue
a sharp sword. By the teeth are meant false reports. And in the threescore and
fourth Psalm, they shoot forth their arrows, even bitter words: that is to
say, False and stinging reports, The man that accustometh himself to evil
speaking, shall receive no instruction.
to smite the innocent in secret. And in the 2^. of Ecclesiasticus, The man
that is nusled in words of reproach or wrong, will receive no instruction all
the days of his life. And in the eightenth chapter, The backbiter and the
double tongued man are accursed for they trouble many that are at peace. A
double tongue has removed many, and dispersed them from nation to nation. It
has destroyed cities that were walled with riches, and defaced the houses of
great personages. The tale b^^^er sets princes at variance.
It has disseuered the powers of peoples, and set strong men at division. And
in the sixteenth of the Proverbs, The froward man sets forth debate, and the
talebearer sets princes at division. Pl^to says in his Laws, That we must
forbear to offend against good men, either in word or deed, and that we must
be well advised, that we ouershoot not our selves when we either praise or
dispraise any man: because God is angry when we blame him that resembles him;
that is to say, a good and honest man. Solon (as Plutarch reports of him in
his life) made an ordinance, whereby he prohibited men to speak evil of those
that were dead. For it is well and devoutly done, to think that a man ought
not to touch the dead, no more than to touch things consecrated to God, and to
refrain from offending against them that are no longer in the world. Railing
and slandering do bring forth vnreco^cilable enmity.
And it is wisdom even in policy, to beware that enmities grow not to be
immortal; sagely deeming, that railing and slaundering proceed of
unreconcilable enmity. Alexander Seuerus said, That princes ought to esteem
liers and slaunderers, as great enemies unto them, as those that enter upon
their lands by force. For these do but seize upon their grounds and lordships,
but the others do rob them of their reputation and renown. In the city of
Naples there was one Demetrius, who ceased not to rail upon Totilus without
cause, and to do him all the spite he could. But being taken afterward with
all the residue, he only had his tongue and hands cut off. Nicholas Scot was
beheaded, for railing upon Maximilian Sforcia duke of Millan. And Liuian a
captain of Venice, having taken many prisoners, used them all well, saving
Godfrey Galear, whose head he caused to be smitten off immediately, because that
in scoffing at him, he called him ordinarily the little crook-backt beast.
Augustus showed by his punishing of it, how much more dangerous railing and
slaundering is, than manslaughter. For he pardoned Cuma that would have
murdered him, and made him consul; whereby he won him to be his friend. But
for railing upon him, he drove Timagenes out of his house: deeming that of an
enemy he might make a friend, and of a friend a defender: but of a railer, A
backbiter cannot be reclaimed.
backbiter and slaunderer, a man can make nothing else. And therefore he
thought good to drive away the slaunderer, because he was not to be reformed.
And lie did it not so much for revenge, as to sequester the slaunderer far
from him. For ordinarily he was not moved at such people, saying, It was
enough for him that men did him no further harm than in words. Wrong returns
to him that tells it.
Among slaunderers we put them, that upon choler do tell of their cruel wrongs:
of which sort of men a wise man will make none account, because he deemeth that
the wrong returns always to him that has told it.

Like as dust flies back into the eyes of him that puffs it, as says Saint
Ambrose; or like as the reflection of the light offends weak eyes the more,
as says Plutarch: so those are most offended at their wrongs, which the truth
has made to rebound against them that offered them. A wicked life draws
wro^gs unto it. Princes must not have tickle toungs, not ticklish ears.
And as the North-east wind draws clouds unto him: so a wicked life draws
wrongs unto it. And therefore a prince must be well ware, that he have not a
tickle tongue, and ticklish ears, as Saint Ierom says in the life of Clearks.
That is to say, he must neither mis-speake others, nor hear others mis-spoken
of, to the end that men may learn, not to be hasty in misreporting men, when
they see the king takes no pleasure in it, who ought to shun such persons as
the plague, and to show them no good countenance. For as the wind, drives away
the rain, so does a frowning look drive away the slaunderer. For if the
Prince suffer them to come near him, Of mockers and scornets.
he shall become like them, not only a ^launderer, but also a scorner, whom
David detesteth in his first Psalm, affirming that man to be blessed, that
has not sit on the seat of the scornful. Solomon in the two and twentieth of
the Proverbs, forbids us to scorn any man in the bitterness of his soul.
For God who sees all things, is he that exalts and pulls down. And in the
ninth chapter, he opposes scornfulnesse against wisdom, saying thus: If thou
have understanding, thou shall be wise to thy self: but if thou be scornful,
thou shall suffer all alone. Scornfulnesse procures a prince the ill will of
his people.


And in the 14, The scornful seeks wisdom, and finds it not; and nothing
makes a prince to incur the ill will of his subjects more than
scornfulnesse. Fur as Terence says, They that are not rich, and they that are
nothing in respect of the great ones, do take all things in ill part, and think
continually that all men hold scorn of them. Plutarch in the life of Phocion,
says, That commonly adversities make men fretting, wayward, and easy to be
set in a choler, loath to give ^are to any thing, and soon offended at all
speeches and words, that are but somewhat roughly spoken. Whosoever reproves
them when they do amiss, seems verily to vpbraid them with their
misfortunes, and he that speaks freely, seems to rail upon them.
Admonish^ments must be tempered with some sweetness.
For like as honey being of it own nature sweet, does nevertheless breed
pain, when it is laid to sores, wounds, and parts infected: so oftentimes wise
and true admonitions do bite and exasperate them that are in adversity,
unless they be well sweetened. Whereupon it comes to pass, that if a man do
scorn a man that is poor and distressed, the poor man bears it
impatiently. The which thing Scipio Nasica was made to seele, who suing for the
Edilship at Rome, and being in a manner sure of all the voices, took one of his
electors by the hand, and asked him if he would go hand in hand with him,
because the man had rough hands, as commonly all laborers and artificers have:
Wherewith the people being provoked to displeasure, did flatly refuse him.
(...) ^asting.
There is another sort of scorning, which is called ^easting, the which may
well enough become a man if it be to good purpose, but there are few that use
it without some bitterness. For as Macrobius says, A jest is as bitter as an
accusation, if it be not spoken fitly. And when it is cast forth by a great
lord, it is in such sort, as lightly it has some bitterness with it. Iea^^i^g
does ill beseem a great lord.
Ptolomie king of Egypt ieasting with an ignorant Gramarian, asked him who was
the father of Pelius? Sir (quoth the Gramarian) I will answer you, if you will
first tell me who was the father of Lagus; meaning thereby to give a quip to
the kings race, whereat when all his men were offended, he said, If it be not
meet for a king to put up taunting words at other men's hands, neither is it
meet that he should taunt any other man.

Next the scorner and the slaunderer, Of the flatterer.
comes the flatterer, which is a very perilous beast. For it biteth
laughing, and turns kingdoms and principalities vpside-downe. One demanded
on a time of Diogenes, what beasts teeth did bite most venemously, and
daungerously. If ye speak of tame beasts (quoth he) the flatterer: if of wild
beasts, the backbiter. Both of them have a mischievous tooth, but the tooth of
the flatterer is the more dangerous. When we hear a man speak evil of us, we
do what we can to correct our fault: but it is hard for us to beware of the
flatterer. For he is not easy to be discerned, because he pretends to be a
friend, and not to gainsay us, and in the end he suffers himself to be
overcome with reason, and does so thoroughly bewitch the mind of him whom he
possesses, that it is easy for him to deceive him afterward. The allurements
of flatterers are more daung^rous than the wounds of foes.
For as Cicero says in his Duties, We be of such nature, that to our own
seeming we be worthy of praise. Now the allurements of such kind of people,
are more dangerous, (says Solomon) than the wounds that come by enemies.
Their words are sweet, but they wound and pearce even into the bowels. And
therefore Esaias says thus: My people, they that praise thee, seduce thee, and
disorder the paths of thy feet. And David in the 12 Psalm. wishes that God
would cut out the tongues of all flatterers. And the thing that makes them to
prevail with us, is the love of our selves, as says Plutarch in his treatise
how to discern a flatterer from a friend. By reason whereof, forasmuch as every
man is the first and greatest flatterer of himself, it is easy for him to
admit unto him another flatterer stranger, whom he will have to be a witness
and a confirmer of the opinion, which he has conceived of himself. In which
case a prince is more deceived than a private person, because he is not gainsaid
in any thing, nor wont to hear any thing that may displease him. Insomuch
that the flatterer plaieth his feats the better, and more safely with him,
unless the prince do as Agesilaus did, who liked well to be commended of such
as were not afraid to find fault with him. On the contrary, Alexander loving
flatterers, was overthrown by them, and slew Calisthenes, Parmenio, and
Phil^tas, to whom he was beholden for his crown. This caused Anacharsis to
counsel Craesus to banish al flatterers out of his court, saying, The prince
that loves flattery loves not the truth.

Two sorts of flatterers.


That the prince which loves flatterers, loves not the truth. Now there are
of flatterers two sorts; the one are but trencher-men, which for a morsel of
meat will sooth a man whatsoever he says, like Gnato in Terence. The other be
close flatterers, which put upon them the visor of a friend, and hold aloof
from the ordinary fashions of the peti-flatterers, that delight men to deceive
them the better: and these are hard to be discerned. And as a wolf resembles
a dog, so a flatterer resembles a friend, And therefore it behooves a man to be
ware, that he take not the wolf for the dog. But in this point they iumpe
together, that commonly they follow not poor men that are of no ability, but
stick ordinarily to the greatest. The flatterer seeks but credit.
And as Plutarch says, Even as lice does go away after death, and forsake the
body so soon as the blood is quenched, whereby they were fed: so flatterers
never resort to those whose affairs begin to go to wrack, and whose credit
decaieth. He that is desirous to learn the mean how to discern a flatterer
from a friend, let him read the fore-alledged treatise of Plutarch, from whence
I have taken part of that which I have said. And the matter it self compels
me to ad this, which I have taken out of a thousand of the good and goodly
things that are there. We have (says Plutarch) two parts in our soul, the one
true, which delights in things honest, and is obedient to reason; the other
brutish, which delights in untruth and lets it self go after affections.
The friend sticks to the good after the manner of physicians, preserving and
increasing that which is sound: but the flatterer holding himself to the
brutish part that is subject to affections, does rub it, tickle it, and put it
quite away from reason. And like as there be meats that are good neither for
the blood, nor for the sin^es, and do but swell the belly, and breed gross and
evil ^lesh, such as is rather lush than sound and substantial: so the talk of
a flatterer, adds not any thing to wisdom and sobriety, but either
provoke to wrath, or stirs up a man's own discontentme^t, or else makes
him proud. The description of a flatterer.
For the flatterer has no piece of truth, or of plain meaning, or of
free-dealing. But like as an ape puts up wrongs, because he cannot keep the
house as a dog, labor as an ox, or bear burdens as a horse, and therefore does
nothing but make mirth, and provoke to laughter: even so the flatterer, because
that abhorring all peril and danger, he cannot do good to his friend by his
words in counsel, or by his deeds in war: refuses not the doing of any
thing that may delight or please, as to be a trusty messenger of love, a
cunning conueyer of young venerie, diligent to discharge you of the care of the
furnishing out of the charges of a banquet, ready to prepare suppers, a
careful conueyer of concubines, troublesome and impudent toward friends, and
practicing to cast the wife out of the house, if he can. Those in few words are
the virtues of flatterers, whom princes of all others ought to beware of,
specially the close ones. For as Cicero says, Every man may epsy the open
flatterer; but the close one is not easy to be discerned, because his
flattering lurketh under pretense of gaine-saying, and in making countenance to
have a man in estimation, and in the end he suffers himself to be overcome,
to the intent that he which is deceived, may think himself to have gotten the
advantage. The last impe of the wicked tongue, The talebearer or backbiter.
is the backbiter or talebearer: of whom Solomon speaking in the eighteenth of
the Proverbs, says, His words are as wounds, and that they pierce even into
the entrails within the belly. This trade was devised first by tyrants, who
being acquainted with men's humors, chose the greatest bablers and the
wickeddest persons, to serve their turns in listening for news, and in
hearkening what men said of them. Zozimus says, That under the emperor
Constantius, there were even forges and shops of slanders, and that those
backbiters laid chiefly for such as were in prosperity, in hope to have the
offices and promotions of those whom they could put out, the which made them to
apply themselves wholly to bring up slander upon them. We in French do call
such folk Mouches, that is Flies; The Romans called them Delatores, that is to
say, Talebearers; and the Greeks called them Acoustes, that is to say,
Hearkners, or Spies, Talebearers were first brought up by evil princes.
which go and report unto princes all that ever they here and see. That first
that used them was the younger Darius, who suspected all men. And next him
Dennis, the tyrant of Siracuse, who intermedled them among the burgesses, that
by that means he might easily hear all news. But at the alteration of the
state, they were the first whom the Syracusans put to the sword. Since that
time princes have so doted upon that kind of people, that they have given them
certain fees to promoote men, that is to wit, the one half of the goods of him
that was accused, concerning the which matter there was a law called Papies
law. But Nero abridging them of their unmeasurable liberty of accusing all
men, did cut off that gain, and brought it to a fourth part, whereof they were
ever after called Quarterers, because they had a quarter of the goods that were
so excheated. Tiberius was the first of all the emperors of Rome that brought
them credit, and after him Domitian. Nevertheless, he punished slaunderers
very sharply, saying, That the prince which punishes them not does stir them
up. Vespasian and his son Titus, caused them to be whipped, and afterward
sent them unto the sands to be seen of al men. Caligula would not admit any
mention of a certain conspiracy that was made against him, saying, That he
had not done any thing why he should be hated, and therefore he would give no
ear to Talebearers. Traian said, It was safer for a prince to hearken to such
as discovered their faults unto them, than to hear the reports of the other
sort: and that it is hard that that prince should have unbloody hands, which
has too tender ears. Antonine did put the Talebearers to death, which could
not prove their sayings. And if they proved them; then gave he them their hire,
but yet did he declare them to be infamous. The punishment of fals-accusers is
written in the Digests, and in the books of Moses, where all men may see them.

CHAP. XIIII. That princes must above all things eschew Choler.
THe fourth sort of temperance consists in moderating anger, Anger
unseparably matched with rashness.
the which Mercury said to be vnseperatly matched with rashness. And therefore
Socrates said, It was less danger to drink foul and muddie water, than to
stanch a man's choler with revenge. The contrary thereof is meeldnesse,
clemency, or meekness, which is the mean between anger and blockishnes or
sheepishnes, and moderateth the passions that rise in us by reason of some
wrong or evil spoken or done unto us, the which we would punish more than
reason will admit, if we should suffer our choler to go unbridled. And as a
wise and mild man must not be angry at every word; so not to be angry at any
time, and to leave malefactors unpunished for fear of being angry, is ill
done. And we may offend as well in too little, as in too great desire of
punishing crimes. For it is meet we should be angry in due time, with such as
deserve it, provided that reason accompany our anger, the which taking from
anger the eagernes of revenge, (as Plutarch says) does the more safely and
more profitably punish the party that deserves it, without putting a man's
self or the party in danger, as choler often does. Impatiency.
For as Solomon says, he that is impatient shall bear the pain of it.
Meeldnes neither seeks revenge of the faults that are committed, ne leaves
great faults unpunished. Whereof all such ought to take good heed, as are in
authority, least they pass the bounds of meeldnes and gentleness, through
too rigorous correction; or lay away the rigor of correction, through too much
meeldnes and lenity, as Saint Gregory says in his morals. Aristotle in the
fourth book of his morals, says that as inordinat anger is a vice, so is also
the utter want of it. For when there is a heinous crime, a man ought to be
angry, and they that in such case are not angry, seem ignorant, misaduised,
and careless to encounter the faults that are committed. Cicero in his Duties
says, There is not any thing more commendable than meeldnesse, nor more
beseeming a great lord: and yet must it be with condition, that severity be
matched with it, without the which, no commonweal can be well governed.
Meeldnesse, and cleme^cy, and the difference betwixt them.
Aristotle in his Rhetoriks, calls meeldnesse a pacifying of choler; and
differs from clemency, in that clemency is a gentleness in punishing,
proceeding from the superior to the inferior, whereas meeldnesse is common to
all men, according to the distinction of S. Thomas of Aquine.

What anger is.
Anger is a boiling up of the blood about the heart, which (as says Aristotle in
his book of the Soul) works an eagernes to punish the offender, or else (as
he says in his Rhetoriks) it is a desire of revenge appearing with a grief,
or an eager disposition to revenge: or else (as Plutarch says) a certain
enforcing of the courage vnmeasurably swelling, with the affections that
provoke a man to revenge. Chrysostom in his third Homily says, It is a
certain violentnesse void of reason. Cicero in his Tusculanes, says it is a
certain eagernes and inordinat desire to punish a party, whom we deem to have
done us wrong.

Let us speak first of meeldnesse, and afterward of Anger. Meeldnesse is
commended of all men, and numbered by Saint Matthew among the eight points of
blessedness. And yet notwithstanding he that is meeld and merciful, fails
not to be angry. For else he should be blockish and without any feeling. But he
is angry with reason, he is angry at the vice, and not at the person. And that
is the meaning of the Psalmist where he says, Be angry and sin not. After
that manner was Saint Paul angry, at the horrible wrong done by Elymas the
Magician; and Saint Peter at Saphyra. Moses was counted the meeldest man of
his time, and yet he made men oftentimes to pass the edge of the sword. For
his meeldnesse was no impeachment to justice, and to the punishing of sin.
Meeldnes then is a virtue that neither seeks revenge of all faults, nor
leaves the great faults unpunished. In which behalf many deceive themselves,
The leaving of wicked men unpunished is cruelty against good men. Of clemency
or mercy. Examples of clemency or mercy.
calling a prince merciful, when he pardons one that has committed a wicked
murder, or some other notable mischief. But (as Archidamus says) this is to
be counted cruelty against good men.

Mercy is occupied in pardoning, not the faults done against the
publick-weale, but the faults committed against our selves, as Titus did, who
forgave them that had conspired against him: and Agesilaus, who by his benefits
made his enemy his friend: and likewise Augustus, who pardoned Cuma a traitor,
and banished Timagenes that did but slander him without hurting him. There was
one Caelianus accused unto him to have spoken evil of him: Prove it (quoth.
Augustus) and then shall ye see that I have a tongue, and that I can speak evil
of him also. Tiberius wrate unto him that one railed upon him: and he answered,
it was enough for him that no man did him harm. Alexander said it was a
princely thing, to be ill spoken of for well doing. Philip did so much good
unto one that railed upon him incessantly, that he won him to be a faithful
servant, and a trumpet to sound abroad his praises. And when he had enquired
of his friends that had counseled him to punish the railer, whether he had been
as outrageous in his words as he was wont to be or no; and understood by them
that he spoke good of him every where: It is in our own power to have good or
ill report
Lo (quoth he) ye see it is in our own power to have good or bad report. The
same Philip having one of his eyes stricken out at the siege of Modon, when he
was possessed of the town, dealt never a whit the worse with the townsmen for it.

Antigonus walking abroad in his camp, heard certain soldiers speaking evil
of him, whereupon lifting up the tent, he showed himself unto them, and said, Ye
shall weep for it if y^ go not further of to speak evil of me. Pirrhus was
easy to pardon, whenever any man had angered him; insomuch that one day (as
Plutarch says in his life) when certain young men were brought unto him, that
had spoken many outtrageous words against him: he asked them if they had spoken
those words or no. Yea sir (quoth. one of them) and had spoken many mo, but that
our wine failed us. At which saying he smiled, and pardoned them. The same
prince being counseled to banish a tailer that spoke evil of him, answered: it
is better that he should raise an ill report of us among a few by tarying here
still, than that he should sow abroad his railing here and there, by driving him
^urther of. Quintus Flaminius was soon angry, but he hild it not long, and he
gave but light punishment to him with whom he was angry. Anon after that Adrian
was created emperor, he met with a deadly enemy of his to whom he said, Thou
art escaped. He that most can, least should, in seeking revenge.
Meaning that he would never go about to be aue^ged of him, now that it lay in
his hand to do it. King Lois the twelfth did the like (as has bin said in
another place) when he would not be revenged for the wrongs, that had been done
unto him before he was king. Pittacus had but one only son, who was slain
through misfortune by a sawyer, the sawyer was taken and brought to Pittacus to
be punished: But he let him go, saying it was better to pardon than to punish.
Plutarch reports in the life of Pericles, that there was a shameless railer,
that railed upon him all a whole day together, to whom Pericles answered not a
word, but intended to the dispatching of matters of importance until it was
night, whom the railer followed home to his lodging still railing upon him. And
when Pericles was come thither, he commanded one of his servants to take a
torch, and to light the man home back to his own lodging. Ye see here a
wonderful temperance in a prince that had absolute power in the city of
Athens: who notwithstanding that he had such power, yet yielded not a whit to
hatred, spite, or anger. Insomuch that he made his boast that there was never
any Athenian that wore a black garment by his means. Pompey also was greatly
commended for pardoning the Mamertines that had taken part with Marius, howbeit
that his so doing was for his hosts sake. Cicero says that Caesar in setting
up again the Images of Pompey, did the better fasten and settle his own: as
who would say, that by this clemency of his he woone the favor of the
citizens, whereby he himself should be guarded. Albeit that Augustus took the
Alexandrians his enemies by force, yet did he pardon them in honor of
Alexander the founder of their city. In respect whereof the Alexandrians found
themselves more beholden to him, than to Alexander himself, and commended him
in all cases, saying that Alexander was the founder, but Augustus was the
preserver of their city. But the softness, patience, The meeldnes of David.
and meeldnesse of David is not to be compared withal by those that I have
alleged: For he did put up infinite injuries at the hands of Semei, without
giving him any answer, commanding his men to let him alone, and telling them
that God had raised him up to humble him; and after his victory, he pardoned
him that misdeed, notwithstanding that he followed him casting stones at him.
Which serves to show, that the precept of the gospel concerning the forgiving
of enemies, was practiced by princes of good nature, as David himself
witnesses in his seventh Psalm, where he says, If I have requited evil for
evil, I am contented that he shall pursue me in war, and that he shall take
me and fling me against the ground, and so forth. Saint John Chrysostom in his
treatise of meeldnesse, says, That meeldnesse becomes all men, but specially
kings and such as are set in authority. Meeldnes well beseems kings and great
states.
And the more power that the majesty of a king has to do al things: the more
ought he to bridle himself, and to take Gods law for his guide, if he will
have glory and honor of his doings. Our Lord in S. Matthew will have us to
learn of him, because he is meek and lowly, that we may find rest to our
souls. David commends his own meekness unto God, saying thus, Remember
David and his meekness. The which he showed well toward Saul, when he let
him go, at such time as he was in his power. S. John Chrysostom in his xxix
Homely against Irefulnes, The benefit of meeldnes.
says, That the meek man is pleasant to himself, and profitable to others:
and that choleriknesse displeases a man's self, and does harm unto others, of
the which I must now speak in order. Two sorts of cholerik persons.
And it is to be understood, that there are two sorts of choleric persons,
the one will out of hand have revenge, and those are the less dangerous, so a
man sh^n the first brunt of them. For by and by they cool of themselves, and
suffer not the sun to go down upon their wrath. For commonly they burst
forth into words, and utter their choler in wh^t speeches, by means whereof the
rigor of their doings is assuaged, as the lord of Chaumont told wisely to the
Vincentines, which were afraid of the emperors anger. The other sort dissemble
the wrong that is done them, that they may have time and place to consider of
it, and those are very dangerous, as Homer says of Agamemnon, Although he
dissemble his anger for a time (says he) yet ceasseth he not to hold it fast
in his heart, until he have revenged himself indeed. And as Peter of
Gauntwood said, Some men do forgive with their mouth, An argument of the
choleric.
but hatred and malice abide still in their heart. Nevertheless it seems to
the common people, (as Plutarch says in his treatise of the Bridling of wrath)
that because it is stormy, therefore it is workfull, so that an angry man's
menaces are hardines, his headines stoutnes, his cruelty disposition to do
great things, his unappeasable hardness firm stedinesse, and his furiousnes a
hating of vice; after the manner of Helias, who was angry at the peoples sins,
through a certain zeal that he had to Godward: and of Cato, who was always
of the same mind, C^olericke pursons aptest for learning.
toward such as were given to vice. And to that purpose serves this which is
said in philosophy, that the choleric folk are aptest to learn sciences. And
the Proverb says, That he which has no choler, has no wit. Many esteem it to
be as it were the sinews of the soul. Plato in his Laws, says, That a good
man must be both meeld and also courageous; that is to say, not utterly void of
kindly choler. For we can hardly without it, eschew the wrongs and harms that
are hard to be cured otherwise, than by fight, by victory, and by defending a
man's self, and by not suffering a man's self to be wronged: the which thing
cannot be done without anger and stomaching. And in his Theeterus he says, It
is hard to find a man both soft and witty together. And they that have sharp
and ready wits, and apt to be taught, are commonly choliricke and hasty, as
being carried with waves like ships without ankers.

Aristoile says, Chol^ricknes is a token of a ready wit.
that cholericknesse is a true sign of a ready wit, and of a forward, brave,
and gallant nature, that is not sleepie and drowzie; and that anger must be
used not as a captain, but as a soldier. Saint John Chrysostom upon the
fourth Psalm of David, says, That anger is good and profitable against them
that do wrong, or be negligent, and that it is a fit instrument to waken us out
of our sleepiness, to make us the more fierce in being angry for their sakes,
that have received any wrong or harm. Alexander from his very youth did burn
with desire to go to war, and to do some exploit of arms. The which thing
Aristotle perceiving, to turn him away from it, told him that he must tarry
till he were of age. Nay (quoth Alexander) for if I tarry so long, I am afraid
that the great hardiness and forwardness which is now in my youth, will then
be quite gone: and this vehement desire gives the greater force to our doings.
Yet notwithstanding these reasons cannot move us to think, Arguments against
choler. That which is done through perturbation cannot be don steadily.
but that all perturbations are attainted with vice, and this above al others.
For as Cicero says in his Duties, A man cannot do well and advisedly with
anger. For that which is don with a trobled mind, cannot be done steadily, nor
be allowed of them that see it. And as says Theodericke writing to John the
consul of Champaine, Choleric persons have no feeling of the thing that is
just, neither seek they any moderation of their revenge. For this cause Saint
Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, bids us give place unto wrath, and to
let it vanish away, waiting for the judgment of God. And Saint James in his
Epistle says, That the anger of man performs not the righteousness of God;
that is to say, hinders the accomplishment of Gods work in us. And Saluian
bishop of Marsels says, That wrath is the mother of hatred. Anger is the
mother of hatred.
And therefore the Lord would in any wise exclude anger, for fear least anger
should breed hatred.

And for that cause he said in Saint Matthew, That whosoever is angry with his
brother, is worthy to be punished in judgment. Solomon says in his Proverbs,
That a stone is heavy, and sand is weighty, but the wrath of a fool is
heavier than they both. I confess that oft-times it incrocheth upon good
dispositions, as evil weeds do upon good grounds: but the diligence of the
good husband does easily destroy them, to make room for good corn, and good
herbs. And as touching that Aristotle says, That anger must be used as a
soldier: he means a certain kindly and princely coragiousnes, which makes
men to follow a brave and difficult object, as I have said already of
Alexanders forwardnes, which provoked him to war. For such a boiling
forwardness, sauoureth more of nobleness of mind, than of wrath. And whereas
Saint John Chrysostom says, That anger is behoofful; that is meant for the
punishing of faults. But as he says in the same place, That is not properly
wrath or anger, but a care, a wisdom, and an orderly disposition, as the
father that is angry with his child's fault, for the care that he has of him.
And whereas some say, That anger has a kind of noble-mindednesse, and of
resemblance unto prowes, it is like as if a man should say, that a man which is
sick of a fever were well dsposed, because he does some parts of a lusty man
in his fits, which he could not do if he were in health: Cholericknes
proceeds of weakness of the mind.
Even so is it (says he) with anger, which gives a man a certain
forwardness that oftentimes is taken for prowess, and yet is so far off
from sauouring of prowess and true forwardness, that contrariwise it rather
proceeds of weakness and feebleness, than of hardiness, as witnesses
Plutarch, making this comparison; Like as the swelling and puffing up of the
flesh, betokens a great soreness in the flesh: so in tender minds, the more
they relent and yield unto sorrow, the more abundance of cholericknesse do they
cast forth, arguing the greater imbecilitie. That is the cause why women are
commonly more treaf and testie than men; and sick-men, than men in health; and
old men, than men that are in the flower of their youth; and men in adversity,
than men in prosperity. But to subdue anger is a point of prowess and
noblemindednesse, as says Plutarch in the life of Dion, To subdue anger is a
point of a noble and valiant courage
the proof whereof is showed, not in bearing a man's self modestly toward his
friends, or toward honest men, but in the gentle forgiving of them that have
offended him, and in his meeld releasing of his displeasure. That is the cause
why Solomon says, It is better for a man to bridle his wrath, than to win a
city. And if a man will say, That irefulnesse is as it were the sinues of the
soul: Irefulnes likened to the crampe
in the opinion of Plutarch he should rather liken it unto the crampe, which
retcheth a man out, or draws him in with so much the greater vehemency, as
it is the more desirous to revenge. And as the same author says in the life
of Coriolanus, Anger seems to be magnanimity, because it has a desire to
overcome, and will not yield to any man: and yet for all that, it is but a
feeblenes, the which thrusts the choler forth, as the weakest and most
passionate part of the soul, no less than a corrupt matter of an impostume.
They that have vpheld, Choleric persons unfit for government.
that choleric persons are apt to learn, have added that they were not fit
for government, and therefore that the Lacedaemonians prayed daily unto God, to
enable them to bear wrongs: esteeming that person unworthy to be in
authority, or to deal in great affairs, that is subject to anger. That is the
cause why Chilo the Lacedemonian, being asked by his brother, why he was not
made a judge as well as he; answered, It was because he could skill to bear
wrongs patiently that were done unto him, which thing his brother could not do:
That man is unworthy of authority which cannot bear injuries.
as who would say, He is not worthy to be a magistrate, which cannot bear
injuries and discountenance them. There is a Greek proverb which says, That
a prince must hear both the just and unjust. And as Lois the eleventh said, He
that can no skill to dissemble, can no skill to reign. For they that run
headily upon their own opinions, and will not yield to any other, do in the
end become desolate. But they that will live among men, The impatient are
forsaken, or else have few followres.
and have to do in matters of state, must of necessity become patient; or else
they shall have few to follow them, or rather they shall be utterly forsaken.
One asked a philosopher, wherefote he durst not meddle with the public affairs?
It is not (quoth he) because I am afraid of them, but because I am afraid of my
self: whereby he gave inckling of his own ouer-great cholericknes, which he
knew to be clean contrary to the managing of public affairs. Another asked
one why he liked not to teach children: because (quoth he) I like not my self:
meaning that he was too choleric to teach children. The choleric are unmeet
to teach children,
For as Plutarch says, Men are not wont to draw a fresh cheese with a hook:
but as for the choleric, they draw not, but brooze, break and shatter in
pieces; and in stead of drawing, do thrust off children from coming to
learning. Coriolanus was a great personage, and but for his choler, one of the
forwardest in Rome: But that did reign so sore in him, that it made him of
small account, and unmeet to live and be conversant with men. Insomuch that to
avenge himself, he displeased all his friends, and of friends made them
enemies, and so he refused the repeal of his banishment, the which the people
offered unto him. Albeit that Philopaemen was an excellent captain, furnished
and endued with many virtues: yet Plutarch blames him for his cholericknes,
saying, That in the controversies that happened in matters of government,
oftentimes he could not hold himself within the bounds of gravity, patience,
and meeldnes, but flang out often into choler and wilfulnes: by reason whereof
he seemed to have mo parts of a good captain for war, than of a sage governor
of a commonweal for peace. For nothing is more contrary to the admitting of
good counsel, than choler and too much hastines. Anger is a medly of all the
passions of the mind.
Plutarch in his treatise of the Brideling of choler, says, That choler is a
medly composed of all the passions of the soul. For it is derived and drawn
out of pleasure and sorrow, insolency and audacitie: it holds of envy, in
that it is well apaid to see another man's harm; and it is matched with
violence and manslaughter, for that it fights, but not in a man's own
defense, and cannot suffer but to make other men suffer, and to ouer-throw
them: and it takes part of covetousness in the thing that is most dishonest, and
worst to be liked, namely in that it is an eager and fierce desire to do harm.
Anger a furor of short continuance.
Horace says, That anger is a short madness. And Cato says, There is no
difference between a man that is in choler, and a mad man, but only in the
length of the time, esteeming anger to be a madness of short continunce. Saint
John Chrysostom in his thirtith Homily says, There is no difference between
a man possessed with a devil, a madman, a drunkenman, and a man that is in
choler. And if ye mark well a man that is thoroughly angry, ye shall find his
countenance of another sort than when he was in quiet. Ye shall see his eyes
sparckling, his face red and fiery, his mouth writhed, all his lims trembling,
and as it were in a palsy, his tongue stammering, his words misplaced, and
without discourse of reason, like the words of a fool, of a drunken man, or of
a man out of his wits. Therefore a wise man will to the uttermost of his power,
beware that he give no place to his choler, no not even in mirth, The
inconvenience that insueth of cholerickne^.
Because that (as Plutarch says) it turns sport into enmity: nor in talk
or writing, because that of conference in learning, it makes a headie
heart-burning and contention: nor in judging, because it matcheth authority
with insolency: nor in admonishing and teaching children, because it puts
them out of heart, and makes them to hate learning: nor in prosperity,
because it augmenteth the envy that accompanies good fortune: nor in
adversity, because it takes away pity, when they that are fallen into
misfortune are angry, and fall to encountering against those that should have
compassion of their misery. The praise of meekness.
On the contrary, mild behavior gives to some succor, and to some honor;
it sweetneth sowrenesse, and by the meekness thereof, overcomes all
roughness and harshnesse of men's manners. The operation of either of them is
like a clear and fair day, in winter and rainie weather. And therefore
meekness does specially become a prince, Anger dangerous in a prince.
and him that is set in authority. For if there be any dangerous thing in the
world, it is the anger of a prince.

And as Solomon says in his Proverbs, The indignation of a prince is as a
messenger of death. And in another place he says, That the indignation of a
prince is like the roaring of a lion, but his favor is like the deaw upon the
grass. And as Plutarch says in his book of the Trainment of princes, After
they have once spoken the word, the party that is but suspected to have
offended, is undone. And as the natural philosophers say, as the lightning
comes after the thunder, and yet is seen before it; Among princes men are often
condemned before ought be proved against them.
and as in a wound, the blood is seen before the wound it self: so with
princes and great potentates, punishment goes before appeachment, and men are
seen to be condemned, before any thing be proved against them: and that is
because the prince cannot refrain his choler, unless the force of reason set
it self against their power, and break it. For as says Ecclesiasticus,
According as the wood of the forest is, so burns the fire, and according as
a man's power is, so burns his anger, and so mounteth up his wrath in
substance. Therefore the first and chiefest remedy that we can find for
cholericknesse, Remedies against anger. The first remedy.
is to submit our selves to reason For as says Aristotle in his seventh book
of Morals, Anger hearkeneth unto reason, howbeit confusedly and negligently,
like a quick and hasty page, that goes his way ere he have heard half his
errand, which causes him to do his message amiss: or like a dog that barketh
as soon as he hears any noise at the door, without knowing whether he that
knocks is a friend or a foe. Even so anger, through favor and light moving,
does give some ear to reason, but yet so as it runs forth to punishing,
without understanding his commission. For reason had judged that there was some
reprochful deed, or some contempt, but choler flingeth forth incontinently at
randon, as though it had been concluded and resolutely determined by discourse
of reason, that the party which has done the wrong, Naturally we covet
revenge and esteem wrongs to be greater than they be.
is to be fought withal out of hand. For naturally we covet revenge of the
harm that is done us, and esteem it greater than it is. And like as bodies
seem great through a cloud, so do men's faults seem greater through anger,
than they be in deed; by reason whereof we be desirous to punish them more than
reason would we should. Insomuch that he which will punish as he ought to do,
ought to be clear from anger. For when anger bursteth out, it punishes
without reason, clean contrary to the manner of eating and drinking, the which
we use not but when we be a hungered and a thirst. But we do then use revenge
best, when we neither hunger it, nor thirst it, but have begun to forgo the
appetite thereof, applying it to reason and discretion, without the which we
cannot master our choler. And as the smoke that steameth up into our eyes,
lets us to see the things that are before our feet: so choler dimmeth
reason, and suffers us not without pain and labor, Reason must be applied
to anger.
to enjoy the good wherewith reason could furnish us. And therefore it must be
put in readiness long aforehand. And like as they that look to have their
city besieged, do gather and lay up in store aforehand, whatsoever may serve
their turn, and tarry not til succor come to them from abroad: enen so (says
Plutarch) must the remedies provided long before out of Philosophy, The
troubled mind hears not what is said without.
be applied in time, against ire. For by reason of the turmoile that is within,
the mind hears not that which is said without, unless it have reason of it
own, and such discretion of it self within, as does by and by set it self
against the anger and suppress it. And that is the palace which Homer in the
first book of his Iliads, fameth to have restrained Achilles from killing
Agamemnon.

The second remedy is, The second remedi^^
to retire from the mischief aforehand, as soon as a man perceyueth it
coming; as they that be diseased with the falling sickness, do withdraw
themselves in due time, for fear of falling into their disease before company.
The third remedy is, The third remedy.
to follow the counsel that Athenodorus gave to Augustus, which was to say over
the whole alphabet or Apsie at our entering into choler, to the end that that
space of time, may give us leisure to moderate our anger. For the wise man
(says Solomon) delaieth his anger, and it is a glory unto him to ouerpasse
faults committed, that is, to let the offense pass, and not to do as Darius
did, who being in an exceeding great rage against the Athenians for sacking the
city Sardus, prayed God that he might revenge that injury, and ordained that
thrice every day when his meat was upon the table, one should say unto him,
Sir, remember the Athenians; but rather as the Romans did, who to show that
magistrates ought not to be angry in have, tied the rods of their pretors unto
halberds, to the intent that the delay which was made in the untying of them,
should break and appease the headines of the pretors wrath. If the
Pythagorians happened to be angry, their custom was to touch one another in the
hand, before they departed out of the place, to the intent that they would not
let their anger take place, according to the precept of Saint Paul. The fourth
remedy is, The fourth remedy.
never to take upon ones self the chastising of the party that has offended
him, but to put over the doing thereof to some other body, as some
philosophers have don, who prayed their friends to chastise their bond-slaues,
saying, That they themselves could not do it, because they were too much moved
with anger. As for example Architas of Tarent, who would not chastise his
servant because he was in anger with him. Cicero in his Duties says, That a
man must be well ware that he be not angry when he punishes, because anger
never keeps the mean that ought to be between too much and too little. And
magistrates ought to be like unto laws, which punish men, not for anger, but
for justice. The fifth mean is, The fifth remedy.
to consider that we would be loath to be punished as we would punish others;
whereto agrees the parable of the Receiver in the Gospel, who having obtained
favor for his debts at his masters hand, yet nevertheless would needs play the
torme^tor toward a poor debtor of his own. By the which parable we be
commanded to forgive the wrongs that our neighbors do unto us, as god forgiueth
us freely our misdeeds. And for want of so doing, we cannot have grace at gods
hand. For thus says Ecclesiasticus, Does man keep anger against man, and
crave health of God? If he that is a mortal man (says he) do keep anger, and
crave forgiveness of God; who shall forgive him his sins? Be mindful of the
fear of God, and bear no anger to thy neighbor. And in the 20. chap. Say not*
I will requite evil, but wait thou the Lords leisure, The sixth remedy.
and he will deliver thee. Sixthly, he must eschew all occasions of anger, as
Cotis king of Thrace did, to whom, one gave very fair and dilicate vessel,
but very easy to be broken. Cotis received the present willingly, but he
brake the vessels out of hand. And being asked the cause, he said he did it for
fear, least he should be angry with some other body for breaking them. The
seventh remedy.
Seventhly, He must consider with himself the inconveniences that may come of
anger, seeing that as Ecclesiasticus says, Anger and wrath do shorten men's
days. Valentinian was so angry at certain ambassadors, which brought him
news that misliked him, that he brake a vein within his body, whence the
blood issued so abundantly out at his mouth, that he was immediately choked with
it. Gaston earl of Fois had but one only son, against whom he was so
outragiously fumish, that the poor child died of it; whereof the father
repented him afterward at leisure, as Froyssard reports at large in his
history. Of manslaughter.
As for manslaughters, the most part of them come of choler. Now to assure us
that manslaughter is detestable before God, we have a precept in the ten
Commandments, the which forbids us to kill. Romulus called all
manquelling, Parricide, because the one was villainous and detestable, and the
other was not tolerable. Moses appointed out five cities of refuge, for them
that had committed manslaughter, so it were by chance and not upon malice;
meaning that such as had their hands defiled with blood, should not be
conversant among other men. David being well-beloved of God, and an earnest lover
of God, would have builded him a temple; but he was dissuaded from it by
Nathan, who had commandment from God, to bid him leave the doing thereof to
his son Solomon, because his own hands were defiled with the blood of his
enemies. And as he himself says in the five and fiftith Psalm, Bloody men
shall not live out half their days.
Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days. And we may say
generally with Ecclasiasticus, That a man full of anger, kindles strife and
variance among friends, and sets enmity among them that were at peace.

Of anger come injuries, discords, disagreements, and oftentimes the utter
overthrows of cities, Anger causes the overthrow of cities.
whereof princes repent them afterward, or at leastwise are blamed for it, as
Philip was for Olinthus. And when some marvelled at his power, that he had so
soon rased so great a city: one Agesipolis said, It would behoue Philip to
have a longer time to build up such another: whereby he meant that it is a far
more princely act to build cities, than to overthrow them, and to destroy them
when they be builded. The same anger does oftentimes make many to pass the
edge of the sword, even after the field is won, yea and sometime even those
that had yielded themselves to the mercy of the conquerours; which thing
Cicero forbids in his Duties. Agesilaus said, He thought it a wonder, that
men took not those for traitors to God, which do evil to poor folk, that
cry for mercy, and beseech them for the honor of God to pardon them; and
that they punish them not more grievously, than the robbers of churches:
deeming well and wisely, that men's lives are dearer than all the ornaments of
temples and churches. The eight remedy.
Lastly, let him read hystories, and consider the blame that has lighted upon
irefull persons. I will not speak of Coriolane and others, who through that
only vice have defaced great virtues, and misguided their affairs. Nor of
Alexander who slew Clitus, whereof ensued repentance by and by, and that so
great, that men had much a do to keep him from killing himself, for the
misliking that he had conceived of his fault. No nor of Clitus himself, who
procured his own death by his impatiencie and choler. A prince is pacified
with patience.
For a prince (says Solomon) is pacified by patience, and a mild speech
breaks all hardness. A mild tongue breaks all hardness.
But I will speak of Augustus, whom we have commended for his mildnes. For we
must needs confess, that it was disgraced by these two deeds of his. The one
was, that with his own hands, he put out the eyes of one (...) was accused
unto him of treason: and the other was, that (...) used most shameful outrage,
toward one that had com^^^^ted adultery with his daughter. But when the young
man had showed him the law, that he himself had made for adultery, and was
contented to be punished according to the law, if he had offended. Augustus was
so grieved thereat, that notwithstanding that he had just cause of punishing
him, yet he ate no meat that day. And he moderated his choler so well afterward,
that he did not any deed unbeseeming himself. The chole^iknes of Marius and
Syll^.
Plutarch speaking of Marius, says that his cholericknes, ambition, and
covetousness, did drive him like a mighty wind, into a bloody, cruel and
unkind old age. The same Plutarch in the life of Sylla, says, That Sylla
suffered himself to be carried away with choler without aduisement, without
setting any other consideration before his eyes, than only the revenge of his
enemies, without making any account of his friends and kins-folke, and without
any touch of mercy and compassion: and his fury was so fiery, that he put no
difference between such as had offended him, and such as had done nothing. If
these examples suffice not, let him consider that a man ought to be more
tractable than a lion. Now the lion how fierce so ever he be, is made gentle
and tame by art, which surmounteth his nature. And shall not man which by
nature is meeld, take pain to tame the beast that lodges within him? he
overcomes the nature of beasts, A man may command anger seeing it harbereth
within him.
and yet for all that he cannot overcome himself. And as S. John Chrysostom
says upon the first of Matthew, If I charged you to appease another man; you
might answer me that you have not other men's wills in your hand: but I speak to
you of anger, which is your own beast, and lion, whom you may command. Anger
impaireth the health both of body and soul.
And if by cunning and good means ye can make a lion a man; how happens it that
through your negligence, you suffer your selves of men to become lions? For
there is no lion that does more mischief, than anger; as the which not only
hurts the body, but also marreth and impaireth the health of the soul,
weakening her strength, and making her vnweeldy to all things. And a man must
not excuse his cholericknes by this common saying, That the first motions are
not in man's power, and therefore it is hard to resist anger. For if it have an
earnest desire to any thing, it will boldly adventure to obtain it with loss
of a man's own blood, and with the peril of his life. Reason staieth the first
brunts.
For the mouings thereof are stayed by the stepping in of reason. And to excuse
any evil that is happened through anger, it is like as if a man should excuse
himself of the giving of a blow, by saying it was not he that did it, but his
hand. As little also ought we to excuse our selves, by that, that we were not
the beginners of the quarrel, for it is as if a man should excuse himself of a
murder, by saying that he was not the man that gave him the first deadly wound.
For as says Chrysostom in his xxxj Homily, He that takes not example by
another man's offense, is more to be punished than the other; like as he is that
seeing another man drunken, becomes drunken after him. Solon in his laws
forbad men to wrong any body, by outrageous words in the time of divine
service, in place of justice, and in places of open assembly, under pain of
three drams to be paid to him that was wronged, and of two to the commonweal:
deeming it a point of ouergreat licentiousnes, not to be able to bridle men's
choler in any such place.

The end of the second book.
The third Book.
CHAP. I. Of Leagues.
AS Pyrrhus king of Epyrots was at a solemn feast, one asked him, whether of
the Flute-players, Pithon or Cephesias was the best? to whom he answeswered,
That in his opinion Polyperchon was the best captain; as who would say, That
that was the only thing whereof a prince should enquire and learn to know.
For to say the truth, the very office of a prince, is to deal with
war-matters, and to make himself a good captain, that he may know how to
defend himself, and to assail his enemies when time serves, The prince that is
valiant is esteemed and had in fear.
which is the thing that sets his subjects most in peace. For the prince
that is valiant and practiced in fears of arms, is commended, feared and
redoubted of his neighbors. Contrariwise, the coward, and he that despises the
art of war, and has not weapon in hand, is subject to the contempt of his
neighbors, and to endure war whether he will or no. Wherefore as a prince
ought to have great understanding in matters of government, so ought he not to
be ignorant what belongs to war. And as his duty consists, The art of
war vpholdeth the co^mon-weale.
first in the well-ordering of the commonweal: so is it also necessary for
him to have skill of martial affairs, to maintain the commonweal. Now as
touching the art of war, I find not a better book or a better scholemaister
thereof, than experience; though enough have written thereof. For it is learned
more by practice than by speculation, and it belongs not unto any other to
treat thereof, than to such as have spent some part of their life in the wars.
And if any man of my calling would treat thereof, it might be said unto him
that he played the fool, as Hanniball said to Phormio. But to treat of policies
and sleights of war practiced by captains, is not a dealing with the Art of
war, otherwise than by accident, and after the manner of Historiographers, who
forget them not in their histories; but in bringing again of the histories to
remembrance which make mention of them, according to my fore determined
purpose, which was to show how noble princes have demeaned themselves, both in
peace and war, and to deliver as in evidence, their quick sayings and
politic stratagems. Of the one I hope I have in some sort discharged my self
in my former two books: and now in this, I will treat a little of the feats of
war, and of some policies found in histories for the instruction of princes, to
the end that among the notable things which I have inserted here out of diverse
histories where they were dispersed; this which is the principal point, may
not tarry behind untouched, leaving the larger discovery thereof, to such as
deal with arms. Wherein if I keep some order and fashion of precepts, it is
but to treat of those things in some method, which are dispersed in the
histories; and not to give any certain judgment* what is to be done in that
behalf. For I hope that when the matter is once set down, a prince may upon
this discourse, choose what he thinks good, as bees do upon flowers. I know
that the most part of the stratagemes that were found good in time past, are
now out of use, and that as Cambyses said unto Cyrus, like as in music the
newest songs and such as were never heard before, do like men best: so in war,
the policies that have not erst ben practiced, have best success, because the
enemy does least suspect them. But we may also say, that many times old songs
are renewed and song for new: and likewise in war, Nothing is done, which had
not ben (...).
old policies may be renewed, and taken for new. For there is not any thing
done, which has not ben done before. By means whereof I have gathered and
compacted together, a part of the old policies of time past, to the intent that
among many, the prince may choose that which he shall find best, or at leastwise
not be ignorant to keep himself from them. For the knowledge of the policies
of times past, together with those which he has seen by experience, will give
him a great judgment in the feat of war, and will make him to call to mind
again, and bethink him of the things that he has seen at other times.
Wherefore to keep the order that I began with, it is to be understood, that to
reign happily and to maintain himself and his subjects in peace and
tranquillity; it is not enough for a prince to stablish good laws and
ordinances, if he do not likewise set good order for matters of war, which may
light upon his army whether he will or no; and sometime the wrong that shall
be offered him, shall compel him to war upon his neighbor. So that it is
hard for a prince to reign long without some war, either in assailing or in
defending, whereof it comes to pass that he increases and diminishes his
state and reputation, according to his fortunate or unfortunate success. And
to make himself the stronger he makes leagues with his friends and allies; or
else his enemy preuenteth him, who having made an offensive league with his
associats, comes with great power to enter into his country. For the which a
prince must provide before hand, as it shall be easy for him to do in time, if
he have strength, howbeit that it be a terrible thing to see so many nations
against him alone. In ma^ters of (...) hours (...).
Nevertheless we have seen almost continually, that he which has stood upon
his defense, has had the skill to untwist such knots well enough. And the
reason is, ^or that the princes or commonweals that are neighbors, do never
yield mutual love one to another, and that which they do, is for their own
peculiar profit, fearing nothing so much as the advancement of (...). By
reason whereof such leagues are easy to be broken, by a prince that has
courage, and some small mean to prolong time, and a little skill to sway with
the time. The way to disi^ine leagues.
Wherefore when a prince is assailed by a puisa^t army, he must oppose another
against him, he must furnish well his holds, and he must incampe himself in a
place of such advantage, as his enemy may not be so bold as to adventure upon
him. And in the mean while, he must attempt by all means to disioine the whole
league, or at leastwise to get some one out of the league, which is so easy a
thing to be done, that as many as have bent themselves unto it, have almost
never failed. King Lois the eleventh was very excellent in this feat. Every man
knows how he accorded with the county of Charolois at Constans; so that when
he was once taken out of the play, it was of necessity, that the dukes of
Berry and Bretaine should be comprised in the accord, because they were not of
sufficient power to encounter the king of France, without the help of the
Burgonions. Another time, having to do with two mighty neighbors, the king
of England and the duke of Burgoine, when he saw that the duke of Burgoine was
not yet knit to the king of England; he made peace with the king of England, so
as he had no mo to deal with, but the duke of Burgoine. King Francis the
first was assailed by the emperor, and by the king of England in the year
1544. By reason whereof he opposed against the emperor a strong host, and
against the king of England towns well fortified. And in the mean while he
found means to agree with the emperor, without calling the king of England
thereto; and by that means it was the easier for him to agree with the
Englishmen afterward. The emperor was sore combred, in having to deal with two
mighty armies at once, to wit king Henry the second, and the Protestants. By
reason whereof he advised himself to grant the Protestants their demands,
that he might afterward bend himself upon the king. Which thing makes me to
think, that in leagues there is somewhat to be feared, and that there is
danger in entering into them, the which it stands a prince greatly on hand to
provide for. But it is not hard to undo them, because the leguers look more to
their own peculiar profit, Leaguers respect their own peculiar profit.
than to the common profit of them all; and the society which all of them do
make, is lion-like, as they term it; for every of them respects his own
peculiar profit. And if ye set that aside, by and by all is laid a water. But
if there befall too happy success to any one that is in league, and the
prince see that fortune smileth upon his companion: he must not by and by give
him over there, and make league against him, Leagues broken by diverse means.
as the Pope, and the duke of Millan, and all Italy did for king Francis the
first, upon his taking of the emperor Charles prisoner, with whom they had
been lincked in league before against the king. The Leontines, and Rhegines,
having entered into arms against the Syracusanes, made a league with the
Athenians, by whose aid they maintained the war along time. But in the end,
when they understood by the report that Hermocrates made unto all the Sicilians
in general, that all that the Athenians did, was to make themselves lords of
Sicilie: they gave over the league, and made peace among themselves. The
drawing back of one leaguer, disappointeth the whole le^gue.
Moreover, in most of these leagues there is always some one that draws
backward, and comes lagging behind, as the emperor Maximilian did, when he
was allied with king Lois the twelfth, against the Venetians. For king Lois was
in the field at the day appointed, and had spoiled the Venetians of the places
that should have fallen to his share by agreement of the league, before the
emperor was entered into Italy. And this slacknesse of his saved the city
Padoa, and a good part of the state of Venice. And had the Venetians been
warriers and well provided, they had put king Lois to a plunge. For they had as
then no mo but him to deal with, so that his league did him small service. The
duke of Burgoine should have joined with the king of England, to invade the
country of king Lois the eleventh; but he lingered so long at the siege of
Nuis, that the king of England was feign to return and make peace, as I have
said already. The league of the Spanish king and the Venetians against the
Turk, turned by and by into smoke by reason of distrust that rose betwixt
them, notwithstanding that the Turk was overcome upon the sea by the
confederats at Lepanto. Many times did the Italians and Spaniards, jointly
conspire to drive the Frenchmen out of Italy. But one while the Spaniards
departed from the confederacy, another while the Pope shrunk back, and
another while the Venetians fell in with us, which was a cause that we held our
footing still, notwithstanding their leagues. These examples with a hundred
others which I leave for briefnesse sake, may warn us, that a puissant and
well advised prince, shall never want means to disseuer such as confederat
themselves against him.

CHAP. II. Of Governors sent into the frontiers of countries, and whether they
should be changed, or suffered to continue still.
WHen a prince has associated himself with his friends and neighbors, to
defend himself or to assail his enemies; It behooves him to take order for
his frontiers, and to provide himself of a good wise and valiant chieftaine,
to lie ordinarily with a good number of soldiers, in the province that is
most subject to the invasion of enemies. But here some man might demand,
whether such a Governor or chieftaine ought never to be changed, or whether
he ought to be changed as the pretors, proconsuls and presidents of provinces
were among the Romans. I have declared in the title of Justice, that the
emperor Alexander Seuerus changed his officers often, and that Augustus altered
not the custom of the Romans, in sending senators into provinces for a
certain time. Aristotle in his books of Commonweal- matters, reproved the
Candiots, for suffering one of their magistrates whom they called Consuls, to be
perpetual, whereas they should have been shifted from time to time. And it is
not to be doubted, but that that manner of dealing was very behooffull in a
Commonweal, where every man looks to bear office of honor, which few
should have enjoyed, if the charge of government should have been tied to one
alone, to occupy the place of many good citizens, who could have discharged
the office as well as he. The danger of suffering one governor continually in a
province.
And thereof would have ensued a great inconvenience, namely that an army
being governed ouerlong by one citizen, would have grown partial in his
behalf, and not have acknowledged any other for their head, than him under
whom they had so long served. Moreover the General or chief captain of an
army, that shall have continued so long together in office, would become so
rich and increased in honor, that he could not find in his heart to live as
mean citizen afterward. Whereupon it would follow of necessity, that the
citizens should fall to war among themselves. That was the cause that Silla
and Marius found men at their devotion, whch durst maintain their ambition
against the welfare of the commonweal. The prorogation of the five years,
which was given to Julius Caesar for the governing of the Gauls, and the
ouergreat number of offices of honor, that were bestowed upon Pompey, were the
cause of the ruin of Rome. For there was not in his time any goodly
enterprise, whereof he was not the executor. And although there was great
reason, that the Senate should prorogue the consul, Philoes authority before
Palepolis, and likewise of Lucullus and Metellus, without sending Pompey to be
successor to the one, and Marius to be successor to the other: Yet had it been
better for the commonweal, to have forborne that gain, and to have left the
war unfinished, than to have suffered the seed of tyranny to grow up, to the
overthrow of the publike-weale. And I marvel not that Epamin^ndas was put to
his necke-verse, for executing the Pretorship, contrary to the law, but only
three months beyond his appointed term, though in that while he finished the
war that had bin begun, and delivered the Thebans from bondage. For as on the
one side, the greatness of the benefit encountered the law: so on the other
side, there was as an apparent breach of the law, which might procure great
prejudice in time to come. Too great a mightiness is dangerous in a
co^monweale
Now in a free city, this ouergreat mightines is to be feared: and therefore
it is no wonder though Publicola was in good time redoubted of the Romans, and
compelled to show that he meant to make himself equal with the meanest. And in
mine opinion, the Ostracisme of Athens, which afterward was mocked at for
banishing a fellow that was naught worth, was not without great reason. For had
not the excellent citizens been brideled by exile, they would at length have
grown so proud, that they would have made themselves kings and masters of the
city, as Pericles might well have done, if he had been of an ambitious mind,
and as others did afterward that were meaner than he. And therefore I make no
doubt of it, but that in common-weals there ought to be no such thing. In
monarchies needs no change of governors.
But in Monarchies where one alone commands, it is better to set a governor
or viceroy, that shall continue there all his life. After that manner have our
kings done in Piemont with happy success. But if the people of the provinces
make any complaints of the covetousness of their Governor, or of his
extortion and great cruelty, or if the prince doubt of his loyalty, in such
cases the prince must revoke him, and send a new in his room. Consaluo was
called home from Naples by the king of Aragon, who was so jealous of him, that
he feared least he should abuse his authority, and defeat him of the realm.
But if a Governor be not too full of vice, it is much better that he continue
still. For he shall learn how to behave himself toward the men of his
province, by acquainting himself long time with their humors. And for his
knowledge of the country, he shall do goodlier exploits than a new lieutenant
could do: besides that he shall be more loved and regarded of the Soldiers,
with whom he shall have spent his young years.

CHAP. III. Of a Lieutenant-generall, and that there behooves no mo but one to
command an army.
FOrasmuch as a prince cannot be always with his army, it behooves him to
choose some excellent captain, to have the commanding thereof. Now it may be
demanded, whether it were better to appoint two or three to that charge, or to
be contented with one, for if one alone have the execution of that charge, no
man shall control him, whereas mo doing their duty well, may do more
faithful and trusty service, by striving who shall do best. And this manner
did the Athenians use, who for a time held the dominion of the Eastern seas;
and so did the Romans who subdued the whole world. The Athenians in their
wars of Sicilie (which were of great importance) sent thither Niceas and
Alcibiades. And ordinarily they had two at the least, and sometimes ten
together that commanded. The Romans most commonly sent the two consuls to the
wars, who ruled the army with equal power. But they that did so, found not
themselves ever best at ease, We have an example thereof in three Tribnnes of
Rome sent to Fidene with authority of consuls, It is not good to have many
commanders in an army.
who through their disagreement and mistaking one anorher, were like to have
brought the Roman host to ruin. Also they used but light wars. For in times of
danger they made a Dictator, that one might absolutely command alone: being of
opinion that one alone might better govern an army than many could, because
it is hard to find two or three excellent captains in a whole country: as
Philip of Macedonie said, He marvelled how the Athenians could every year
appoint ten captains to command their army, whereas he could find but one in
all his realm.

And in good sooth, had the captains whom the Athenians appointed, been no
wiser than they that appointed them, their commonweal had smarted for it. In
a certain dangerous war, they had appointed many companions to Miltiades,
among whom was Aristides, who as wise as he was, yielded unto Miltiades the
authority of commanding; the which thing the rest of his companions did
likewise, being constrained to do it by his example, which was the cause that
al things went well. It is hard for two generals to agree in one army.
He did as much to Themistocles his enemy, whereby the Athenians received
marvelous profit. For ye shall never find two men of one selfsame humor. And
if it were so; yet the one is so thrust forward with ambition, envy, and
jealousy against his fellow, that they fail not to mar all. If Niceas and
Alcibiades had been never so long together, they would never have agreed. For
the one was too slow, and the other too quick, after the same manner that
Fabius and Minucius, Paulus Aemilius and Varro were: for if the one did well
one day, the other mard all the next day, the harm whereof the Romans felt a
long time after.

In our civil wars we had two princes in our armies, of whom the one took
upon him to command, and the other would give no place to him. And in hope to
content them both, unto the one was committed the vauntgard with the tokens of
battle; and unto the other was committed the battle, rather in name that in
effect: whereat the other disdaining, was a cause that a good part of the army
was broken. Therefore the best is to have but one general. And we must not
here take example at commonweals: for their upholding of themselves is dearer
unto them, than the overthrowing of their enemies. And because the ouergreat
mightines of a citizen is dangerous to their state, they had rather fail in
the other point, than to give too great authority to one alone, for fear
least he should fall to usurping, or that his greatness should cause some
sedition in the city. But a king, who cannot be deposed by any one alone, how
excellent and valiant a captain so ever he be, is never in that doubt, nor in
the distrust wherein common-weals are. And therefore he ought not, but upon
some necessity, There must be no equals to the general in an army.
to commit the charge of his army to any mo than one. Aso he must beware, that
with his governor he send not other captains, that esteem themselves as great
or greater than the general. For that were the way to set all out of order.
Olympius thought she did well, in sending the Siluershields to the succor of
Eumenes, but she mard all by it: for their captains made so great account of
themselves, that they would not obey him, no nor scarcely accept him for their
companion. By reason whereof they betrayed him, and delivered him to his enemy.
The ruin of the commonweal of Rome, came of two citizens well near of
equal power, of whom the one would abide none greater than himself, and the
other would have no peer. And because either of them was of great credit with
the Senate, they set the whole city together by the ears But the king who
carries his counsel with him, and has neither tribunes not consuls, disposes
of his state at his own will, and no man dares intermeddle with the
government, further-forth than is to his liking.

CHAP. IIII. Whether the chief of an army should be gentle or rigorous.
HEre is offered a question which is no small one, that is to wit, Whether the
chief of an army, be he prince, king, or lieutenant to a king, ought to use
rigor rather than gentleness, as well toward his soldiers, as also toward the
country which he intends to conquer? For there have been, which by their
rigor have been obeyed and reverenced, both of their soldiers and of the
country where they warred, and by that means have compassed their affairs
very well. And othersome have gotten so great good will by their gentleness,
that they have won more by their courtesy, than the others have done by their
cruelty. They that prefer gentleness, For gentleness and courtesy.
allege Pericles, who was very mild and patient, and was wont to say, That
there should never be any cause, why any man should were a black gown by his
means. Yet notwithstanding as gentle and patient as he was, he governed that
insolent people without any rebellion, specially at the beginning of the wars
of Peloponnesus, where the people of Athens saw their goods spoiled from out of
their windows; whom notwithstanding their eager desire to go out against the
Lacedaemonians, he kept still at home by his gentle and honorable persuasions.
Xenophon makes Cyrus gentle, courteous, familiar, and void of all pride,
roughnes, and cruelty. Scipio was meeld and gentle to his men of war, and
used his enemies with so great courtesy, that he won the hearts of the
Spaniards by such means, and overcame them rather with honorable dealing than
with force. Plutarch says as much of Lucullus. Infinite other examples may we
allege; of such as have been obaied by their men of war, and ben loved of all
their countries. For rigor and cruelty.
On the contrary part, we have some that have kept their people in order by
austeritie, as Manlius Torquatus and many others. Hanniball was cruel and
stoure, as well to his men of war as to his enemies. And yet had he an army
of sundry sorts of strangers, all obedient and well ordered; and besides that
he drue to his side many of the allies of the Romans. And they that hold this
opinion, have for their ground a sure and undoubted reason, namely, that
nothing holds men in awe so much as fear, and that he which is dreaded, is
better obaied than he that maks himself beloved. Nothing outweareth, so soon
as a good turn.
For nothing does so soon wex stale as a benefit. All men love and commend him
that does them a pleasure, and such a one is followed of all men, but soon
also is he forgotten: whereas he that is feared and had in awe, is never
forgotten. For every man bethinketh him of the mischief that he shall run
into, In governing of a multitude, punishment avails more than pity.
if he fail to do the thing that he is commanded. And this fear is of much
greater force than love. In that respect Cornelius Tacitus said, That to the
governing of a multitude, punishment auailed more than gentleness. When Tamerlan
came to besiege a city, the first day he would have a tent of white, which
betokened that he would take all the city to mercy, and good composition. The
second day he would have one of red: which betokened that although they yielded
themselves, yet would he put some of the^ to death at his discretion. The third
day he had a pauilion all black, which was as much to say, as that there was
no more place for compassion, but that he would put al to fire and sword The
fear of such cruelty caused al cities to yield themselves at his first coming,
That captain is to be punished, which holds a place unable to be defended,
against an army royal.
And he could not devise to have don so much by friendly dealing, as by that
means. Nevertheless it is the custom of war to deal hardly with that captain,
which defends a place not able to be kept, against an army royal: to the
intent it may serve for example to such as would withstand an army, in hope to
come to composition. For when they see there is no mercy, they yield themselves
before it come to the cano^-shot. Which manner the Romans practiced. For had the
battel-ram once begun to beat the walls, there was no great hope of any
composition. Some time it is needful to use cruelty.
When Julius Caesar had lost the battle at Dirrhachiu^, as he fled, a little
town did shut their gates against him: wherinto he entering by force, sacked it,
to the intent to put others in fear, that were minded to do the like. Caesar
was mild and gentle: but his gentleness could nor procure the opening of the
gates to him; and this cruelty of his, was the cause that no man durst deny him
to come in. And as for Scipio, although he was a valiant and fortunat captain
and as gracious as could be: yet was he not always obeyed, but had rebellions of
of his soldiers against him, so as he was compelled to turn his gentleness
into rigor. Machiauel handling this question, is long time balancing of his
discouse upon Quintius, Valerius Coruinus, and Publicola, al which being mild
and gentle, were good captains and did many noble feats of arms, were well
obeyed of their me^ of war, and obtained many fair victories. These he
compares with other valiant captains, Machiauels distinction.
that were rough, stowr, and cruel, as Camillus, Appius Claudius, Manlius
Torquatus, and others. And in the end he makes a good distinction, saying,
That to men which live under the laws of a publik-weale, the manner of the
proceeding of Ma^lius is commendable, because it turns to the favor of the
publick-weale. For a man can win no partakers which shows himself so rough to
every man, and he discharges himself of all suspicions of ambition. But in
the manner of the proceeding of Valerius and Publicola, there may be some
mistrust, because of the friendship and good favor which he purchased at his
soldiers hands, whereby they might work some evil practices against the
liberty of their country. But when it comes to the consideration of a
prince, as Xenophon painteth us out a perfect prince under the person of Cyrus:
the manner of Publicola, Scipio, and such others, is much more allowable and
dangerlesse. It is good that a prince should have his army affectionated to him
alone.
For the prince is to seek for no more at his subjects and soldiers hands,
but obedience and love. For when a prince is well minded on his own part, and
his army likewise affection it only toward him, it is conformable to all
conditions of his state. But for a private person to have an army at his
devotion, is not conformable to the rest of the parts, whom it stands on hand
to make him live under the laws, and to obey magistrates. But there remains
yet one doubt undecided, which is whether a lieutenant-generall of an host,
Whether a liuetenant general should be gentle or rigorous.
who is neither prince nor king, but is sent by a king to command, ought to be
gentle or rigorous. For he cannot be suspected to make his army partial. And
though he had it so, which thing he can not do, he should smally prevail
against his prince. Wherefore in this behalf, I would hold as well the one as
the other, to the observation of the laws. I would be rigorous to the men of
war. For there is not so beautiful and profitable a thing to an army, as the
execution of justice, and the keeping of the law vninfringed. The which if ye
once break in any one man, though he be a very brave and valiant fellow; it
must needs be broken in diverse others. But, the discipline of war being well
kept and observed, The general ought to be familiar in behauior and rigorous
in discipline.
the general ought to be familiar toward al his soldiers. Alexander was
familiar, gentle, and courteous to the common soldiers. Antonie was to them,
both gentle and loving. Julius Caesar was likewise, and so were all the
excellent emperors. On the other side, they also were well-beloved, and yet in
discipline they were rigorous. I have told you heretofore in the chapter of
Justice, how the said Julius Caesar, Augustus, Traian, and certain others
winked at small faults, but were rigorous in others, as toward mutiners,
traitors, and sleepers in the watch, and such others aforealledged. The reason
was, that they would not in any wise corrupt the discipline of war, for fear
of the mischief that might ensue: and therefore they never pardoned the faults
of them that infringed it. It is a wondrous thing, that Caesar being but a
citizen, and having his army but of such as served him of good will, and being
lately before discomfited at the battle of Durazo, and fleeing before the army
of the senate; was notwithstanding not afraid, to punish such as had not done
their duty in the battle; insomuch that whole legions were feign to sue to
him for mercy. Which doing, shows the good discipline that was in the Roman
armies, and the faithful service which they did to their general, to whom
they had given their oath. Anon after again, when he gave battle to Pompey,
with what cheerfulnes did all his soldiers accept it? With what zeal and good
will did they bear with their general? Austerity abateth not the love of men
of war.
and with what feercenesse did they fight? The which serves to show, that
severity takes not away the love of men of war, when they perceive that
otherwise their chieftaine is valiant and worthy to rule. For then they impute
it not so much to his austeritie, as to their own faults. Which ought to be
punished according to the law. Tamerlane hanged a soldier of his, for stealing
a cheese. This rigor was was very needful. For else he should have had no
vittels in his camp, which was always followed with infinite vitellers. And by
being so rough toward his soldiers, he got the good will of whole countries,
in executing justice upon his men of war according to the law. He was gentle
to such as submitted themselves unto him, but sharp and cruel to such as
resisted him: which was the way to win much people. And no man withstood him.
Wherefore I conclude, that whether it be the prince himself, or whether it be
his lieutenant; he must not be so gentle to his soldiers, as to bear with all
their faults: nor so courteous to the plain countrie-men, but that he must
show them all some examples of his severity, that they may stand in aw of him.
But he must reserve his austerity for the wicked and stubborn sort; and he must
use gentleness, meeldnes, and louingnes, toward his good soldiers and such as
hold out their hands to yield themselves unto him, whom he ought to entreat
well, not for a day or twain a some do, but for ever, to the end that the
people which are his neighbors, may be allured to do the like, when they find
that this his good dealing, proceeds not of dissimulation, but of the very
love, meeldnes, and good nature of the prince.

CHAP. V. Whether it be better to have a good army and an evil chieftaine, or
a good chieftaine and an evil army.
THe prince that has to deal with arms, ought to be provided of two things,
namely of valiant and well experienced captains, and of good and well trained
soldiers. For little booteth it to have a good chieftaine, that has not good
men of war; or good men of war that have not a good captain to lead them. But
the question is, in case that both meet not together, whether it were better to
have an evil army and a good captain, or a good army and a bad captain.
This question seems to be doubtless. Notwithstanding forasmuch as Machiauell
puts it in balance, although he resolve it after the common manner; yet am I
to say a word or twain of it by the way, to confirm it the better. In this
discoursing upon the history of Titus Liuius, he says, The valeantnes of the
soldiers has wrought wonders, and that they have done better after the death
of their captain than before, as it befell in the army which the Romans had in
Spain under the conduct of the Scipios, the which having lost those two
generals, did nevertheless overcome their enemies. Moreover he alleges
Lucullus, who being untrained to the wars himself, was made a good captain by
the good peticaptains of the bands that were in his army. But his reasons are
not sufficient, to encounter the opinion of those that uphold, That an army of
stags having a lion to their leader, is much better than an army of lions, that
have a stag to their captain.

And in very deed, The winning of a battle dep^^leth upon the sufficiency of
the captain.
if ever battle, were won, the winning thereof is to be attributed to the
captain. It is well known, that so long as the Volses had Coriolane to their
captain they had always the upper hand against the Romans. But as soon as he
was dead, they went by the worse.

When the Romans had cowardly captains, they were continually beaten by the
Numantines: but when Scipio was once chosen general, they did so well ouerset
their enemies, that in the end they rased Numance itself. And as I have said
in this discourse, when one vpbraided the Numantines, that they suffered
themselves to be beaten by those, whom they had so often beaten before; they
answered, That in very deed they were the same sheep, whom they had encountered
before, Some one man is of great value in an host.
but they had another shepherd. This shows sufficiently, how greatly some one
man may avail in an army. Antiochus not regarding the multitude of his
enemies, asked a captain, How many me^ he thought his presence to be worth?
making account, that he himself alone should supply the number which the
captain desired. Eumenes had not an host so well trained as his enemies: and yet
he guided it in such sort, as he could never be overcome. When Antigonus
supposing this Eumenes to have bin extremely sick, was purposed not to have
lost the fair occasion of discomfiting his army, as soon as he saw the good
governance thereof, judged incontinently that it was a good chieftaine that had
the ordering thereof. And when he perceived the horslitter of Eumene^ a far
off, by and by he caused the retreit to be sounded, fearing more that which
was within the litter, than he feared five and twenty or thirty thousand men.
The bondmen of the Romans had not beaten them so often, unless it had been by the
good guidance of Spartacus. Sertorius had the whole force of Rome against him,
and yet could never be overcome. Epaminondas and Pelopidas did by their good
government, train people that had no skill of war, and vanquished the
greatest warriors of all Greece. For it is a hard matter that any army, be it
never so well practiced in wars, should be able to maintain it self against a
politic and valiant enemy. The sk^lfulnes of a captain may disorder his
enemies battle which want a good chieftaine.
I say not but that they may fight valeantly; but the skilfulnes of the
captain of their enemies may be such, as to disorder them by using some
cunning device, the disappointing and preventing whereof, belongs to the
captain and not to the soldiers. As for that which is alleged of the
Scipios, it will not serve. For inasmuch as the battle was well ordered before,
the Romans might well obtain the victory, though both the consuls were there
slain. Likewise, notwithstanding the death of the duke of Burbon, yet was Rome
taken by his army, because the soldiers that had adventured upon the assault,
knew not of the death of their captain. And the Thebans failed not to get the
victory though E^aminondas was wounded to death. Again, the emperors army
which was sent against the marquis of Brandenbrough, gat the victory
notwithstanding that duke Moris the general of the field lost his life there.
And as touching that which is said of Lucullus, who had little experience of
war; that is very true: Nevertheless he behaved himself so discretly in the
war wherein he was employed, that he was nothing beholden to Pompey, which
bereft him of the honor of conquering the whole East.

And to show that he was not led by the advice of his army, but by his own
skill; being at the siege of Tigranocerta, and being counseled by some to
raise his siege, and to go meet his enemy who was coming toward him with
great forces, and not to stay about the city: he believed his own wit, and
undertook a ieoperdous adventure. For with the one half of his army he went
to encounter his enemy, whom he overcame, and left the other half before the
city, the which he took at his return. Also Plutarch commends him highly,
for governing himself so well, considering his small experience. I know that
an army without a head, may fight so valeantly as no fault may be found in
them; but a very small oversight may put them out of array. And he^unto the
saying of Machiauell, That a good army without a captain, becomes rebellious
and vnweeldy to be dealt with, as it befell to the array of Macedonie, after the
death of Alexander. Therefore we must conclude, that as the members have no
function without a head; no more has an army without a good chieftaine.

CHAP. VI. Of the order which the men of old time did use in setting their
people in batel-ray.
Since we have given a head to an army, now we must come to the heart, and
provide it of that which is requisite for it within, which is nothing else but
the good order that is to be used in ranging the men of war in battel-ray. For
in this order consists the welfare and life of the host. This in mine
opinion, should be handled by a man that had followed the wars the most part of
his life; the which thing I cannot do for want of experience. Wherefore I leave
this chapter as a blanke paper, to be filled with good and goodly discourses,
by some valiant and wel-experienced captain. I will but only set down the manner
used in old time, showing how they ordered their battles. The Greeks had a
great battle compacted and closed together of many ranks, which they named a
Phalanx. When a soldier of a former rank happened to be slain or beaten
down, Of the Phalanx.
he of the next rank stepped into his place; and he of the third rank into the
place of the second: and so consequently all the rest, as the Suissers also do
at this day, so as no rank was disfurnished but only the hindermost; the
former were always kept whole and unbroken, by reason of their great number,
so thronged and close couched as they were hard to be opened. And albeit that
the Romans were most expert in war, The policy of Paulus Aemil^us.
yet could they not tell how to have dis^orced the Phalanx of Perseus, except
Paulus Aemilius had bethought him to choose a place, where they could not march
so linked together. And when he discovered any part of their battle opened, he
made some small troop of his men to enter into it, and so by fighting in small
companies in places where he perceived any default, he brake their array and
discomfited them. But the Romans had another order, which might hold the^ tack
in fight a whole day, after such manner as I will tell you, presupposing that they
divided their people into many sorts of companies. One was of a Camarada of ten
men, the which they termed a Maniple, a word whereby they betokened that which
we call a band. And setting aside many degrees like unto ours; they had their
cohorts, of six hundred men a piece, or there abouts. Then was the legion,
which was of six thousand footmen, comprehending with it three hundred horsemen,
and was compacted of ten cohorts: Wherein were two sorts of armor, the one
light, and they that wore those, were named Velites, which served to skirmish
as our harquebusirs, our forlorn hopes, and our light horsemen do now adays.
And they that wore the heavier armor, were called Cataphracti. Now having
their battle compacted of a legion, The order o^ the Roman legions.
or making many battles of every legion, they ordered them to battle, not in
the form of the Phalangs, to supply the places as they failed from rank to
rank; but by receiving one rank into another, after which manner they would
continue the fight stoutly a whole day together.

And to that end they parted their legion into three manner of men, that is to
wit, Pikemen, Principals, and Triaries. The Pikemen being the foremost and of
least valeancie and experience, Pikemen.
fought thick set, and had many mo men in their battle, than were in the
second, which was of the Principals, who were of more practice and experience
than the pikemen. For these had their ranks clearer tha^ the former, ^he
Principals
to the intent that if the first battle were foiled, they might retire without
disorder within the battle of the Principals, and there begin the fight
again. And if it happened by mischance, that the battle of the Principals was
foiled also, which happened not often, The Triarie.
then they were received by the Triaries, who had their ranks looser than the
Principals, that they might receive into them the soldiers of the other two
battles. Now these Triaries were the valiantest and best experienced of all the
army. Therefore by the orderly retyring of the Pikemen and Principals, into the
ranks of the Triaries, who were old soldiers, the fight was maintained more
than before. So then the Pikemen who made the foresront, had their battle well
stuffed and furnished with men. The Principals had their battle somewhat
thinner, that they might without disorder, receive into them the former ranks.
And the Triaries were twice as thin as they. And after that manner they fought
stoutly, without disorder all the day long. And it may be, that the same order
being brought in use again, might be found good and profitable.

CHAP. VII. What he ought do which sets himself to defense.
IT behooves him that is assailed in his own country, to set himself in
defense, and to do what he can, as well to prevent, as to break the force of
his enemy. This is to be done diverse ways: either by laying aforehand to
stop the passages where he must come; or by suffering him to come into the
plain fields to fight; or by fortifying the towns, and by setting of good
garrisons in convenient places, without respect of spoiling and wasting the
country where he is to pass; or by maintaining an army not to fight with the
enemy, but to keep him at the staves end, and to cope with him in a narrow
room; and to cut him off from all commodities that he might have if he were at
large, to the intent to comber him, or to make him retire; or else to draw him
to some combat to his great disadvantage. As touching the keeping of a passage
to stop the enemy, The keeping of a passage.
it is misliked by William Bellay in his second book of Warlike discipline, and
by Machiauell in his discourse, because that seldom or never has it been
found, that an enemy has been let to make himself free passage, if he had
a great army. The Swissers (as the aforeledged authors witness) in the year
1515, did ceise the common passages of the mountains, to stop king Francis from
going down into Italy. But yet for all that he failed not to pass another
way, whereof they no whit doubted: insomuch that he was seen in the plain of
Lombardie, before the Swissers were come down from their rocks. The Spaniards
that kept the passage of Suze, notwithstanding that they were many, and had
fortified themselves, were broken nevertheless by the constable of France. The
same Spaniards being encamped by the river Behamby, and strong enough to stop
our army from passing, did nevertheless abandon the place, when they saw the
duke of Guise with lance in hand, and his army following him, enter into the
water to encounter with them. The king of Castile had caused the river of Derne
to be well guarded, and yet the duke of Lancaster and the king of Portugal,
found the foord and passed over it. No man could stop Hannib^l from passing the
mountains Pyren, and the Alps, to come down into Lumbardie. Marius
encountered the Cimbrians, not in their passage, but on the hitherside of the
mountains, before they had gotten to the passages of the Alps. And the residue
having passed the mountains, were met withal in Lumbardie. King Philip of
Valois had appointed Godmardu Fa^ to keep the passage of Blanch take in the
river of Some, with a thousand men of arms, besides crossebowes of Genoa, and
six thousand men on foot. And yet was he forced from the passage, and the king
of England passed with all his host, having but six hours to pass them in,
which was the time between the ebb and the tide. The Flemings took stoutly
upon them, to stop the passage of the Frenchmen over the river Alis, which was
both deep and maddie; and although it was about the feast of Saint Martin, yet
notwithstanding a part of the vauntgard passed about a league from the bridge
of Comines, in two or three boats, whereof the greatest carried not above nine
men at once, who after they were arrived, did hide themselves in an Aldercarre,
right over against the place where they took boat. And when they were all
together, they marched against the* Flemmings, and won the bridge of Comines.
When the marshall of Hesse sent the Reisters into France, by the conduct of
Monsieur D' Andelot; the late earl of Neuers, and the marshall of Saint
Andrew, were sent to stop their passage, because the rivers began to swell
being in the end of October. Yet for all that, they let not to pass, even
in the sight of our men, and so they went over to Orleance without gainsaying.
In the year 1567. they came again under the leading of Casimire the county
Palatines son. To stop whose passage, because it was not meant to hasard a
pitched field, a part of the kings power was sent under the leading of the duke
of Neuers that now is, who spared not the pioners to make trenches, nor to set
lets in places that might be waded, nor to enterlace trees to stop the
passage: and yet all this could not let them, but that they passed at their
ease. Afterward the king to stay the meetings of those whom he meant to punish,
ceised all the bridges and passages, and set good gards at them: and yet for
all that they ceased not to pass in two places of the river Loir, to Bonnie
and Rosyers, where the Monsier d' Andelot leading great companies, passed his
men both on hors-backe and on foot at a foord, though he had some of them
drowned. Charles M^rtil^ waited not for the Sarzins at the passage of Loir, but
went to meet them on the further side of the river, and gave them battle near
unto Towers. Actius tarried not for Attila at the straits of the Alps, but with
the help of the Frenchmen encountered him in France. Monsieur d' Aumalle had
a fair and great army upon the borders of Germany, and there he tarried for
the duke of Bipount, but he spared not to pass on, and to get the town and
bridge of Charity. Liuian captain of the Venetians, had ceised all the ways
that lead to Brent, hoping thereby to keep back Cardon captain of the
Spaniards, or else to give him battle to his disaduauntage. But Cardon found a
foord somewhat higher, and passed his army in silence, before Liuian had any
inckling thereof.

The duke of Saxony stayed with a few men at the riuage of the river Elbe,
thinking to stop the passage of the Emperor Charles the fifth. But he found
another shallow, where he passed his army, to the duke of Saxonies confusion.
The mountains of Italy never made the Hunnes or Herules afraid: for they
leaving those high rocks behind them, got the passage of Aquileia, and passed
all their people there. Although the Greeks bare themselves in hand, that they
could defend the straits of Thermopyle against the Persians; yet could they not
quit themselves so well, but that in the end they were environed, and the
Persians found a path that one Epialtes showed unto them, whereat they passed,
and made the Greeks abandon the place which they kept. But Themistocles gave
advice, The wholesome counsel of Themistocles.
neither to guard the enterances of Greece, because he knew it was impossible;
nor to hold any fort in the city of Athens, seeing they were to deal with
millions of men: but he chose a place of advantage upon the sea, to encounter
the Persians to his advantage, who were nothing near so expert in sea-matters
as the Athenians were. And whereas they should have encountered at the passage,
Machiauel is of opinion, A passage is not to be kept but with great forces.
that they should have encountered there with all their forces. For it is hard
to keep a passage against a puissant army, without great force. And if an
army happen to be defeated at the passage which they take to keep, it is an
utter discouragement to the whole country; as it be^ell at the coming of king
Francis into Italy. For as soon as the cities of Lumbardie which had put
their trust in the Swissers, saw the French army, they were so wholly
discouraged, that they wist not to what Saint to vow themselves, ne could take
any other counsel of themselves than to yield to the Frenchmen. Of the
pla^^ing of garrisons in cities.
As touching the fortifying of a city, and the planting of a garrison there,
Pericles used that fashion against the Lacedaemonians. For albeit that they had
burned all the territory of Athens, yet would he not suffer one man to go out
to skirmish with them, but thought it better to keep still his forces than to
hazard them, because he knew well he was not of strength to match them. An
army to pursue the enemy without giving him battle.
Another manner of defending, is, to have an army, not of purpose to encounter,
but to weary the enemy, as Fabius had against Hannibal; as king Francis and
under the conduct of the Constable in Auignion against the Emperor Charles the
fifth; as the duke of Alua had at Naples against the duke of Guise; and as the
same duke had in Flaunders against the prince of Orange. And this manner of
encountering is most sure, and least dangerous, so it be not in way of
defense, as I will show anon. For in case of assailing, a man must always be
resolute to encounter, and think that great enterprises are not without some
hazard. The fault of Niceas.
In which behalf Niceas did greatly amiss: For having a great power in
Sicilie, he did nothing but turn to and fro, and lose his time in consulting,
so long till the courage and hope of his people were quite quailed. On the
contrary part, the fear which his enemies had conceived at the first brunt,
when they saw so great a power, by little and little vanished away. And he was
to blame, for that by too long lingering, upon desire to do his things too
surely, he let slip the occasions of doing many good and ^aite exploits,
notwithstanding that he undertook them well, and executed them with speed: but
he was slow in resolving, and cowardly in aduenturing.

An army to bid the enemy battle.
The fourth manner of defending, is to have an army ready within the country,
and there to wait to give him battle, as Thomyris did against Cyrus. For she
tarried for him with a quiet foot, and her Massagets about her within her
country of Scythia. And as Basiil duke of Moscouia did, who did the like on
the further side of the deep and swift river Boristhenes. But therein he did
amiss, for that whereas by encountering with Constantine the chieftaine of the
Polonians as he was passing the river, he might have made the victory
certain: by his fighting with him in the plain field, without advantage, he
lost the battle. And so did the Aetolians against the Romans, for want of
prohibiting them the passage of Naupact. So did the Venetians under the conduct
of Lalmian at the river Dade, against king Lewis the twelfth. So did the
viceroy of Naples, and Prosper Columna, against the Frenchmen. And so have many
others done, who very seldom have found good speed. For the courage and
lustiness of a conqueror, must be broken by taking him at some advantage, as
when he is incountered at some passage, before he have set his men in array, or
have passed them all over: or by delaying and driving off the time, if he
cannot be stopped otherwise. But if necessity require, then must he be fought
withal, as Themistocles did unto Xerxes, Hanniball unto Scipio, and Charles
Martell unto the Sarzins.

CHAP. VIII. Whether it be better to drive off the time in ones own country,
or to give battle out of hand.
The fortune of a batell is not to be hazarded, unless some great advantage be
offered.
John Jacques of Trivulce marshall of France, said, That a prince must never
attempt the fortune of a battle, except he be allured by some great advantage,
or compelled by some urgent necessity. It is to gross a kind of play, to
hazard a battle when a man stands upon his guard. Gasely one of the great
captains of Egypt, said, That the wars of greatest importance, which at the
beginning have vehement and sudden swayes, are wont to assuage of themselves
by intermission and space of delay: A prince can not adventure a battle in his
own country without great danger.
and that on the contrary part, man cannot assay a battle in his own
country without great danger, because there is no way to amend a fault that
is done in battle. For if the battle be lost, the country is in great peril
to be lost too, as befell to the Romans at the battle of Cannas against
Hanniball. To Campson and Tomombey against Selim; and unto the last king of
Hungary, who chose rather to bid the Turk battle, than to win time of him:
for he lost both his life and his kingdom. Xerxes by loosing the battle
against the Greeks, lost but his men, because he was the assailant. But Darius
by giving battle in his own country, lost his whole kingdom. And to say the
truth, it was to gross a kind of play, against one that had so small a rest.
And he showed himself too negligent in his own defense, and too hasty in
bidding battle. Too negligent, in that he being so great a lord, and having
wherewith to set out a million of men, he took not order to have three armies
in a readiness, one to enter into the country of Greece, thereby to turn
their forces back again; another to watch at the passage into his own
country, and the third to be about him in his realm, to gather up those
again together, which had not been able to defend the passage, and to have
encamped himself in a sure place of advantage, to follow the tail of
Alexanders host, as Fabius did the host of Hannibal, that he might not be
compelled to come to a battle. But in stead of bethinking him what he had to
do (as commonly they do which upon an ouerweening of their own greatness, do
despise their enemies) he let Alexander come in so far, that it gave him
courage to try his fortune. And when Darius saw him well forward in his
country, he made very great have, with an in^init number of men, to find the
new conqueror, and he was sore afraid least he should escape his hands and
return without battle. But Alexander eased him well of that fear, for he
came to meet Darius in the face, and with a well ordered army gave him
battle, and discomfited him. Wherein Darius did greatly amiss, for he might
have held him play with his great number of men, and have wearied him with some
of his light horsemen (as the Parthians could well skill to do afterward to the
Romans) without hazarding the substance of his army. The despising of their
enemies, is the overthrow of great princes.
And the thing that undid him, was his ouerweening opinion that he should
overcome Alexander with ease, which is the thing that overthrows all such as
upon disdain to their enemies, do set no good order in their affairs, and in
the leading of their armies. This dispising of enemies caused the loss of the
battle at Poyctiers, where king John was taken prisoner. And of the battle of
the Moscouits at the river Boristhenes, which also did put the city of
Semoleuch in danger of taking, if the winter coming on, had not foreclosed
the Polonians from besieging it. Caesar being in penury of all things, went to
seek Pompey, with intent to give him battle. Pompey being wise, would not
tarry for him there, because he was sure that ere long he should have him by
famine. Nevertheless being overcome with the suit of his captains that desired
battle, upon trust of their power which without all comparison was ^arre
greater than Caesar's, he gave him battle and lost it, by putting the assured
victory together with the time, in hazard of a battle, to the ruin of the
Senate, and of the whole commonweal: Now then, it is a great fault to put
that in hazard at one hour, which is sure, They that hazard themselves upon
necessity, have commonly good success.
in tarying the time. And they that have so hazarded themselves, have commonly
been undone. Contrariwise, they that have hazarded themselves upon necessity,
have had the upper hand. The Spaniards being entered a good way into the lands
of the Venetians with a power well armed, were suddenly abashed, to see a
mighty army ready at hand; and to avoid the danger wherein they saw
themselves, they fled before the host of the Venetians, and took the way to
Trent, but yet in order of battle, howbeit with small hope to escape them.

But Lalnian and Loridam, suffering not the fair occasion that was offered
them, to slip away, did thrust themselves forward in such headlong have, that
the viceroy of Naples, and Prosper Colonne, chose rather to try the uncertain
chance of battle, than to trust to the small hope of saving themselves by
flight; and so standing resolute upon that point, they carried away the
victory. The duke of Guelders finding a great power of the Brabanders coming
upon him, was sore astonished, for he saw that he must either fight thirty to
one, or else shut up himself in a city. To shut up himself he was loath, and
therefore fully resolving himself to abide the battle, he fell to giving
charge upon his enemies unprovided, who being taken with a lunatike fear, fled
away without striking a stroke. Stillico went and charged suddenly upon the
Goths, as they were going into Gallia. At the first they were astonished at
the sudden and unprovided onset: but at length, resolving to abide the battle,
they not only overcame him, but also returned into Italy by the country of
Genes. When Manfride gave battle to the duke of Aniou, A notable fault of
Manfred.
the duke of Anious army began to want food, as well for the men, as for their
horses. And in driving off the time a while longer, and in tarying for his men
that were dispersed in diverse places of his realm, he had both made himself
the stronger, and also brought his enemy to extreme necessity. But in choosing
rather to set upon his enemies while they were weary, and ill at ease of the
long journey that they had made; he found by experience that nothing is
impossible to a conqueror: for he lost the battle and died. Carafa the
county of Mathalon, would not believe the counsel of them that would have had
him to follow the Frenchmen that drew toward Salerne, and to have cut off
their vittails without fighting with them, unless they could take them in some
place of advantage; or to get between Salerne and their camp, to keep them
from entering into the town, and to make them return into the Basilicat,
because they wa^ted both vittels and artillery. But of a bravery he would
needs give them battle, because they were but few in number: and for his
labor he lost the field. For the lord of Perfie attending him with resolution,
discomfited him. Had he been trained in the school of king Lewis the
eleventh, he would have learned, that he which has the profit of a war, has
also the honor thereof. When Ferdinand king of Naples began to reconquer the
realm of Naples, he was so joyful of his good fortune, that in a bravery he
would needs give battle to the Frenchmen, contrary to the advice of a great
captain, who counseled him to hold himself close within Seminara, until he
were more certainly advertised of the intent and power of the Frenchmen;
telling him that the counsels which promise surety in all things, are
honorable enough; and that they which by a fond ouerlustinesse of courage, do
hinder the means whereby a matter should come to good issue, are void of
honor, shameful, and miserable. But this good counsel was overcome by the
worser, so that he gave the Frenchmen battle, who won the day, to the great
confusion of Ferdinand, and of the Arragonians.

The Frisons being advertised of the great preparations, that the county of
Ostreuant made for war against them, met in counsel to consider what was
best for them to do; many gave counsel to bid him battle at his first
arrival, but Iues Iouire, a man of personage as big as a giant, and wonderful
valiant withal, counseled them to watch the time, and not to hazard their
forces against stronger than themselves, saying* That they had many good
ditches and trenches, which would disappoint horsemen wherein their enemies
ouermatched them, and that their footmen should soon be wearied and tired with
the combersomnesse of their journey, and with the small store of vittails which
they should find abroad in the country, so as they might be rid of them for the
burning of a dozen villages. Yet notwithstanding they forbear not to give
battle, and lost it. The men of Liege would needs fight with the duke of
Burgoins men, who was entered with an armed host into their country: and they
did it against the counsel of the lord of P^erandes, who would have them to
win time of them, and to put their men in garrison. But he could not persuade
the common people to do so, and therefore they were all discomfited, and left
eight and twenty thousand men dead upon the field. Now must we a little see,
how we in France have sped in that behalf. King Philip of Valois, gave battle
to the Englishmen in his own realm at a place called Cressye, and was there
overcome. King John trusting in his own force chose rather to give the
Englishmen battle at Poictiers, than to subdue them by famine and unrest: and he
^or his labor was taken prisoner: but Charles the fifth, having taken another
course, and helping himself with the counsel of Fabius, would never hazard
his state upon a battle; by means whereof he ouermatched the Englishmen, and
did so much by his countenances, that he took from them almost all Guien even
from under their nose, and seized upon the towns and cities of the duke of
Bretaine. And when any man spoke to the king of giving battle* his counsel
would say thus unto him; Sir, let them go, they can never get your inheritance
for smoke. For when a storm comes into a country, it must in the end needs
depart again. King Edward was wont to say of him, That never any king did
less put on armor, nor ever any king did work him more incu^bera^ce: Charles
the fifth ouermatched the Englishmen by taking opportunity of time.
for he conquered Guien without battle. And the king of England with two
puissant armies levied both at one time, could do no more but wast and burn
the country, without winning so much as any one city of account. At the
beginning of the wars of Peloponnesus, Pericles chose rather to see the
forraying and burning of the territory of Athens, than to go out of Athens to
hazard a battle; persuading himself that the delay of time, would quail the
force of the Lacedaemonians. Fabius Maximus overthrew Hanniball more by not
fighting, than other captains had done by fighting with him. At the first
encounter of Trebia, because Sempronius had given a foil to the Affricanes, he
was so puffed up with that first skirmish, that he thought al was won, and
that the want of a little hardiness, was the only let that the war was not
brought to a full end, contrary to the opinion of Scipio his
fellowcommissioner. And so he lost the field, Flaminius being unmindful of
this loss, would needs do the like, and he also was served with the same
sauce. Minutius striving to follow their steps, had been undone, if Fabius had
not ben; as Varro was, who by like headines was the death of fifty thousand
Romans at Canna^.

A man may say that Marcellus wearied Hanniball in so many combats, that he
feit himself discomfited by winning, but yet in the end Marcellus abode by it.
And although fortune began to turn her back upon Hanniball; yet
notwithstanding, had not the foresight of Fabius ben, the valeancy of Marcellus
had served the Romans to small purpose. But Hanniball having two valiant
captains upon him at once, of two diverse humors, was sore incumbered how to
deal with them. For when Marcellus had lost a battle, Fabius was ready at
hand to stop Hanniball from passing any further. And in this case, seeing the
Romans were able to maintain two armies, and it stood them on hand to
conquer, or at leastwise to recover that which they had lost at the iourny of
Cannas: they were not misaduised in their counsel, to choose these two brave
captains of so differing humors, to the intent that the continual fighting of
the one might weary Hanniball, and the lingering of Fabius might overthrow
him. But this is not easy for all men to do, and specially for the^ that have
not their people trained to the wars as the Romans had, who sent them out of
Rome as it were by swarms. After whose example, the prince that is able to
levy store of men and well trained, needs not to be afraid to give battle,
to vncumber himself of a noisome enemy that cannot be driven away but by
fight.

The Romans did so against the Gauls and Germans, against Pyrrhus, and
against Hanniball. So did Charles Martell against the Sarzins, and Philip of
Valois against king E^ward. But when a prince sees that fortune is against him,
then must he alter his manner of dealing, as Charles the fifth did against the
Englishmen. For the former victories that they had obtained against the
Frenchmen, had taught him to seek the opportunity of time. For since the former
way auailed him not, it behooved him to try another.

The Gauls were valiant and furious in fight; and therefore Cneus Sulpicius did
well to protract time with them. Hanniball was invincible in Italy, and
therefore Fabius did wisely in trying another way; and Scipio did boldly and
valeantly in making war in Affricke, to turn him away from Italy. If
Manfred had taken the advantage of time at Naples, he had done well: for he had
cut the combs of the Fenchmen, who are furious and almost vnpregnable at the
first brunt; and had in short time brought Charles to utter want of vittels and
money. Contrariwise it stood Conradine on hand, to give battle to Charles duke
of Aniou as he did: For he was to reconquer the country. And Charles of Aniou
being but a new conqueror, and as yet scarce well assured of his kingdom, was
not to have refused him; There are times that admit no delay.
neither did he. For there are times and seasons which permit not delay, but
require of necessity the hazarding of a battle.

In our civil wars we have seen two captains, that have used means clean
contrary one to another, and yet the purpose and resolution of either of them
was commendable, and had come afterward to a good end, if it had been ripe.

The duke of Guise a brave and valiant captain, if ever any were, sought
battle by all the means he could, and could not away with lingering delays,
the which he did not without great reason. For first he meant to alay the fire
which he saw increasing in such sort, as it would be hard to quench, if it were
once thoroughly kindled in all parts. Again, he feared least the prolonging of
time, would increase the contrary side, and that many would incline that way,
if it were not prevented by destroying the chief leaders of that part by a
bloody battle. And as for winning thereof, he thought himself sure of it. For
although the contrary party had the choice of the soldiers of the old bands;
yet had he not such a number of horsemen as the duke of Guise led, the which
alone might be a cause of victory; for the footmen do nothing without horsemen.
Moreover he had a great number of Suislers, and a goodly b^nd of French
harquebuzers, store of ordnance, seeld pieces, and whatsoever else is requisite
in an army royal; whereas the other side was but an army patched up, howbeit
that there were some good and well practiced captains, and valiant soldiers.
Contrariwise Monsieur de Tauanes, perceiving that there behooved many battles to
be given for the utter defeating of the contrary side, though it be better to
delay the time, and that the king should by length of time bereave them of the
country that they had conquered, forasmuch as he had sufficient wherewith to
hold out the war at length; which ability they had not, who oftentimes wanted
money and men of war to be at commandment of the ring leader, because the most
part served of good will, and could not enforce us to hazard a battle, but to
their own great disadvantage. And if that manner had continued any longer than
it did, they had been brought to a great afterdeale.

CHAP. IX. Whether it be possible for two armies lodged one near another, to
keep themselves from being enforced to fight whether they will or no.
WE have seen the profit that comes of waiting to take the opportunity of
time, and of ouermatching the enemy by long delay and protracting of time: but
yet there remains a doubt concerning the possibility thereof, whether it lie
in a man's power to refuse to come to battle, when he is near his enemy, and
marches side by side with him. They that hold the opinion that a man cannot be
enforced to battle, allege the examples of Cneus Sulpicius against the
Gauls, of Fabius Maximus against Hannibal, of Pericles against the
Lacedaemonians, of Charles the fifth against Edward king of England, of the
constable of France at Auignion, of the duke of Alua at Naples against the duke
of Guise, and of diverse others, who by delay of time brought the enterprises of
their enemies to nothing, and were never enforced to come to handstrokes. On
the contrary part, they that have hazarded a battle in their own country,
have found themselves ill apaid, as Craesus against Cyrus, Darius against
Alexander, Philip of Valois against king Edward, and many others aforealledged,
whom we forbear to speak of to avoid tediousnes. A mighty enemy may compel us
to come to handstroks.
But these examples are not able to prove, that a captain cannot be compelled
to fight whether he will or no. For when a conquering enemy comes strongly
into a country, he may compel you to come to battle, or else to flee, or
else to shut up your self in some city, which are dishonorable points, and
of dangerous consequence. The duke of Saxony meant to have wone time of the
emperor Charles the fifth after that manner, upon trust of the great river
Albis that was between the two camps: but the emperor found a foord, the
which was showed him by a miller, whereat he passed some of the troops of his
horsemen; and the residue did so much by swimming and by boats, that they got
land on the side where their enemies lay. Philip king of Macedonie the father,
and Perses his son, encamped themselves upon a mountain, whereunto there was
but one only access, very difficult. But the Romans at length caused them to
dislodge, and the said Perses, who feared nothing so much as to come to ba^tel,
was compelled to come to handstrokes. Ye know how the late prince of Condie,
trusting to the river Charent, came before Newcastle, thinking it impossible
for us to have enforced him to battle, but to our disadvantage: and yet was he
driven thereto without any difficulty. An army may be compelled to come to
handstroks.
And therefore I say with Machiauell in his discourses, that a very small army
may well weary and vexa conqueror, but in the end they shall not keep
themselves from battle, unless they will leave the field free to their
enemies. As for the examples that I have alleged of Pericles, and of king
Charles the fifth, they will not serve the turn in this case. For they had no
armies, and therefore were contented to hold themselves close and in covert.
For the one knew well enough, that the Lacedaemonians were not of power to
besiege Athens, nor to do any more than burn the country; and the other having
well provided his towns, and set good garrisons in every of them, wist well
that the Englishmen being wont to overcome the country, could do him no harm
in wasting it, but were as a flash of lightening that passes away. For the
king of England was not able to maintain a continual army as the Romans were.
But if king Charles had had an army, he could not have followed the
Englishmen, but he must have been driven to fight with them some one time or
other. And therefore he suffered them to cast their ^ite, and to travel a
hundred leagues without any profit, during all which time, king Charles spared
his men and money. But they that ma^ch near their enemy, cannot exempt
themselves from coming to a battle, would they never so feign. Preu^^^^ng is
to b^ ^^ght (...), and not by refusing t^ fight.
Neue^^^elesse i^ (...) ^^ue a convenient nu0mber of men and well trained, they
may fight to their advantage. Such was the resolution of Fabius, who would not
^aue refused battle, if he had seen himself forced thereto, because he knew
he should have the advantage, as he well showed in the succor that he gave to
Minutius. For he left the hillgrounds and came down into the plains, and the
let was in Hanniball that the matter was not tried by battle. But Hanniball
thought it better to sound the retreit, than to hazard himself against so
mighty an enemy, that could not be deceived by his slights, as other captains
had been whom he had sought withal. As touching that which the constable did at
Auinion, it proved him to be of good discretion. For being unable to make head
against so mighty an enemy, he was feign to fortify and strengthen himself,
in a place where he might not be forced. And in the while that he stayed the
emperor and quailed the luslines of his army, men came to him from all parts,
whereby his own army became so increased and strenghned, that it was
sufficient to encounter the emperors power. And it is not to be doubted, but
that if sickness had not cast down the constable, he would have followed the
emperor as Fabius followed Hanniball, encamping himself in places of
advantage: and in that case, if he had been forced to battle, it would have
bin to his advantage, and to the emperors los^e. As for example; The Spaniards
could not exempt themselves from encountering a^ Bicocke, but that was to the
Frenchmens loss. As touching the fact of the duke of Alua, holding fast
continually this principle, Not to come to battle in his own country, without
necessity; when he saw that the duke of Guise had not yet taken sooting in the
kingdom of Naples, but rather that he was stopped at a little town which he
could not obtain: the protracting of time was needful for him. And if the duke
of Guise would have passed on further, he should have wanted vittels, having so
great an army attending upon him at hand to cut them off, and not one town
wherein to make his storehouse. Protracting of time is profitable, when an
army may lodge at advantage.
So that the duke of Aluaes protracting of time, having lodged his camp in a
strong and sure place, was profitable to himself, and prejudicial to the duke
of Guise, who sought nothing so much as to come to hand strokes, whereby he
might have opened unto himself a way into the realm of Naples, if he had had
the luck to win the battle: but he could never come unto it. The emperor
Charles and the king of France, played at the barriers one against another in
Picardie and Arthois. For as soon as the one did put off arms, the other
entered by and by into his country with an armed power. And all the fruit of
their salies one against another in all a whole summer, was but the taking of
some little town: and so they skirmished one with another at handie strokes. And
in this case, although there was a light army against the assailant, only to
cumber him, and to cut off vittels from him: yet was it wisely done to shun the
combat. For it was well known, that the winter would cause the army to break
up, and there was no need to put any one man in ieopardy.

But when a puissant enemy is in a country, whence he intends not to
depart: the prince thereof must oppose against him as strong an army as his,
or at leastwise an army sufficient to encounter his, if he will not lose his
estate; and yet notwithstanding to the intent he tempt not fortune, the wisest
counsel is to abstain from encounter. When a man has the advantage of the
ground, he is not to let s^p the occasion of co^bat.
For at length, if he have not gotten many towns, ye shall ouermatch him. But
yet for all this, a good occasion must not be ouerpassed, nor the winning of a
battle be refused, which is made sure unto you by having a place of
advantage, the which is easier for him to choose that stands upon his guard,
than for him that is to make the conquest, as you may see by Fabius, who used
it wisely. For although he had an army well trained; yet would he not without
purpose adventure against another more trained to the wartes, and against so
brave a captain, seeing it was more for his own profit to make delay, than
to fight out of hand. But if his enemy would have enforced him to forsake his
ground, he would have answered him without refusing the battle, because he
could not but be sure to have won it, having a good and strong army, and the
advantage of the place. Paulus E^nilius was determined to have followed the
same counsel, had it not been ^or the headines of his fellow. And that manner
of dealing, would in the end have compelled Hanniball to abandon Italy,
without stroke striking, and without the hazarding of any one man's life.

CHAP. X. Whether the danger be greater to fight a battle in a man's own
country, or in a strange country.
THis principle being well observed, not to fight at home, but upon necessity,
or upon some good occasion of assured victory offered: it is doubted whether
it be more dangerous to loose a battle at home, o^ in a foreign country,
Monsieur de Langey in his Discipline of war, is of opinion that it is less
danger for a captain to fight in his own country, (if he be a man of power
as the king of France is) than to fight in a strange country. And hereunto I
will add that which Paulus Iouius says in his history, Why the Sophie
invaded not the Turks dominion while Selim was in Egypt.
where he demands, Why Ismael Sophie king of Persland, did let slip so fair
an occasion of inuading the kingdom of Selim emperor of the Turks, at such
time as Selim was so sore incombred in Egypt? The reason is, that the king of
Persia has not sufficient power to make war out of his own country, upon
so mighty a prince as the Turk is, considering that the noble men and
gentlemen, in whom consists a great part of the Persian strength, are loath to
go to the wars out of their country, because they serve at their own charges.
But when the case concerns the defense of the realm, and that they be to
fight in that behalf, they employ themselves wholly thereunto, managing the
war fiercely, and behauing themselves valiantly. Also we have seen how the
Parthians before them, never passed so much to conquer out of their own realm,
as to keep their own at home, and that they have discomfited all the armies
of the Romans that ever came against them. Neither has the common saying been
verified of them, That the assailants have ever more courage than the
defendants. For that is not ever true. Besides that, there be means to assure
the natural subjects, by showing them that the quarrel is just and holy, which
men undertake in defense of their country, which ought to have more force than
the covetous hope of enriching men's selves by other men's loss. And if it be
said, That the assailant bereaueth the prince defendant of the commodities,
which he had before of his subjects to help himself withal; because his
subjects are destroyed. A man may answer, The loss of goods turns not away
the hearts of subjects.
That the loss of goods turns not the hearts and affections of the subjects
away from their prince: but contrariwise, the harm that they rec^yue, makes
them fiercer against their enemies. Whereas it is alleged, That a prince
dares not to levy money of his subjects, nor to tax them at his will, because
of the neernesse of the enemy, to whom they might yield themselves if they
were molested by their prince. Monsieur de Langey answers thereunto, That
that prerogative cannot be taken from a priuce, so long as his lands and
friends be not taken from him, as appears by the succors which the kings of
France have had of their subjects against the Englishmen, and against the men
of Navarre. Tyranny gives great cause of rebellion.
True it is, that he excludes tyranny, saying, That if a prince should misuse
his subjects, and outrage them for every trifle, he might doubt whether he
should be well followed and well obeyed of his people or no. And as for that
which is said, That the ass^ilants being in a strange country, do make
necessity a virtue, because they be driven to open the ways by force of
arms: The same necessity lies also upon the defendants, whom it stands on
hand to fight stoutly, because they be in danger to endure many mo things than
the assailants. For the ransom, or the prison, makes their budget good for
the assailants; but the defendants lose their goods, and the honor of their
wives and children, and moreover look for perpetual bondage, with an infinite
number of other mischiefs. Furthermore, he that is assailed, may wait upon his
enemies to his great advantage, and distress them with famine without peril
of enduring any scarcity his own side, and therwithall he may the better
withstand the enterprises of his enemies, by reason that he has better
knowledge of the country, and of the passages. Besides that, he may assemble
great companies of men in few hours, because there is not any subject of his,
that is not ready at need, to fight in his own defense. And if the defendant
do chance to take a foil in his own country; he will relieve himself
again within few days to be at the pursuit, and new succors shall not need
to come to him from far. To be short, the defendant needs to hazard but a
piece of his force. The d^fend^nt may soon repair^ his power.
But if the assailant lose, he puts her men and the goods and wel-^are of
himself and his subjects in peril, though he be out of his own country,
considering that if he be taken, he must either continue a prisoner all his
life time, or else accomplish the will of his conqueror. Yet notwithhanding,
for all the good reasons of Monsieur de Langey, a learned and valiant knight,
and of great experience in feats of arms; Arguments against Langeyes opinion.
I will follow the opinion of them that say, That it is better to go fight with
a man's enemy far from home, than to tarry his coming home to him. Craesus
counseled Cyrus, not to tarry for the Massagets in his own country, but to
give them battle in their own, because (quoth he) if you should lose one
battle in your own country, you should be in danger (being once chased) to
lose your whole country; for the Massagets having gotten the victory, will
pursue it and enter into your provinces. And if ye win the battle, you shall
not gain thereby an inch of land. But if ye overcome them in their own land,
you may follow your good fortune, and be master of the whole realm of
Thomiris. This fashion did the Romans use, who were the most politic and best
advised men in war-matters, that ever were in the world. For they never
suffered the enemy to approach near their gates, but encountered him aloof.
Which thing Hanniball knowing well by the proof that he himself had had of
their policies and ^orce, counseled Antiochu^, not to tarry the coming of the
Romans into his country, but to go and assail them in their own, T^^ Romans
(...) country.
because that out of their own country they were invincible. And in very
deed they were ever assailants, and seldom times defendants. At the beginning
when their territory was very small, they went and made war upon the Fidenats,
Crustuminians, Sam^ates, Falisks, and other neighbor-people, from whom they
always got the victory. And whenever they were assailed, it was to their
extreme danger. As for example: When Horatius Cocles sought upon the bridge of
the city, and sustained the whole force of the enemy, while the bridge was
^ut asunder behind him, wherewith he fell into the Tiber, and by that means
saved the city. Also they were in extreme danger against Porsenna and the
Volses: and they were feign to employ all their priests, and all the women of
the city, to raise the siege of Coriolanus, who our of all question had made
himself master of the town, if the intreatance of his mother had not let
him. The Romans could not va^quish Hanniball in Italy.
It was never in their power to overcome Hannibal in Italy: but out of Italy
a young Roman overcame him utterly in one battle. When Pyrrhus came to Tarent,
the Romans suffered him not to approach to their gates, but sent to encounter
him before he came there. And when they had lost one battle, they renewed it
again with a fresh supply, as though it had been with the water of some
continual running spring. And although this was in Italy, yet was it not in
the country of the Romans. For they sent so many men to meet him, that he
could never come home to them: in so much that Pyrrhus said, That if he should
win but one battle more of them, it were enough to work his own utter
overthrow; because he could never get any victory of the^, but with great
loss of his people. So soon as the Romans understood that Hannibal was
determined to pass the mountains, they dispatched an army out of their
country, to be in a readiness at the foot of the hill, either to encounter
him, or else to weary and cumber him by all means possible. And it was seen
by experience, that the two or three battles which he won, stood him in little
stead. For he could not for all that, get so much as any one city into his
hands. But when he once came near to Rome, and had won the famous battle of
Cannas against them in their own soil: then he wanne many cities, and made
many people to submit themselves to his obedience. And there was none other
impediment that he took not Rome it self, but only the fatal destiny of
the city. Such danger cannot befall a man in a foreign country. As for
example, The Romans were utterly overthrown by the Parthians, and yet for all
that, they needed not to fear the inuading of their city. They lost many
battles to the Carthagenenses, both on sea and land, and likewise the
Carthagenenses unto them, and yet neither of them both took care for the
defense of their city, but to make a new army to work revenge. But Hannibal
saw, that the best way to have a hand at the Romans, was to seek the^ at their
own doors. And the Romans themselves being schooled by Hannibal, perceived
well that the way to drive the Carthagenenses out of Italy, and to bring their
own matters to good effect, was to show their legions before the gates of
Carthage, and to bid them battle there, and so they did. After the winning of
the which battle, the Romans became lords of Carthage. Actius liked better to
fight with Attila in France, than to attend his coming into Italy. And
Charles Martel thought it better to encounter the Sarzins on the further side
of Loir, An ^nswer ^o Bellays first argument.
than to wait for them in France. And nothing to the purpose makes the saying
of Bellay, That the defendants may be encouraged by the justness and holiness
of their quarrel, in defending themselves, their country, their goods, their
wives, and their children, which ought to have more force than the covetous
desire of the assailants. For say what can be said, yet does the assailant
adventure upon his enterprise with the best courage: whereas there abides a
fear and misgiuing in the mind of the defendant, which fear defeateth all
cheerfulness, when every man considers the danger that he is like to fall
into by the loss of the battle; so as the mind being daunted with that fear,
cannot do any thing of value. We see that towns which have been counted
invincible, have bin taken in short time, through the couragiousnesse of the
soldiers, desirous of the booty within, who fearing neither gun, fire, water,
nor steepness of place, have with invincible courage, disappointed all
defenses that could be set against them.

And if a man will say, An answer to B^l^ays second argument.
That the loss of towns takes not away the affection of the subjects, but
contrariwise exasperateth them against the enemy: I answer, that such
affection serves to very small purpose, if it be not accompanied with means
to maintain it. For he that sees the burning of his granges, his garners, and
his house, has more list to shed tears than to sight. And if the hatred which
he bears to his enemies, bereave him not of the fear of them, it will serve
well to cut the throtes of them that straggle far from the body of the
army, as the people of Province did to the dispersed Spaniards; but it can do
neither good nor harm to the victory. And whereas it is said, that the king
of France had succor of his subjects against the Englishmen within his
country; An answer to the third argument.
that was done for the good will that they bore to their king, that loved them
and dealt well with them, and was not wont to levy subsedies, but in case of
necessity, the which are levied nowadaies as well in time of peace as of war.
As touching the necessity of fighting, An answer to the fourth argument.
which is affirmed to be greater to the defendants, because they stand for
their goods, wives, and children: surely their fear and grief bereaueth them
of all chearfulnes, and makes them to think more upon their misery, than
upon their manhood. The same necessity lay upon the Persians: for they saw
Alexander ranging oueral Asia with forty or fifty thousand men: and yet as
many millions of men as were of them, they durst not set themselves against his
army: neither durst the Lydians encounter Cyrus; nor the Gauls fighting for
their liberty, encounter the victorious army of Caesar. An answer to the
fifth argument.
As touching the advantage of place, and the commodity of vittels; surely if
the defendant can have them to serve his turn, the assailants also will not
want either of them both. For he that is master of the field, will have
vittels at his advantage, wanting neither carts, guides, nor spies. As long as
Hannibal was in Italy, he could better skill how to plant his camp, and to
give battle to his own advantage, than could the Romans being in their own
country. And as concerning the easy assembling of people at home after an
overthrow; I find it a hard matter to supply an army again, An answer to the
sixth argument.
after they be broken asunder, either in ones own country, because they be
near their retreit, or in a strange country, unless they come together
again immediately, because they have no place to retire unto; whereas they
that are of the same country, go to refresh themselves in their own houses,
and tarry longer there than they should, or else come no more again, as we
have seen in these civil wars, where the armies have broken off themselves,
by reason that the soldiers and men of arms have been too near their own
houses; which thing was not done so in Spain, England, and Italy. And as for
the assembling of much people, it would behoue a man to seek another country
than this, where the princes listing not to train their subjects to the war,
are constrained to crave aid of strangers. An answer to the seventh argument.
Whereas it is said, That the defendant hazardeth but a part of his power:
certainly he hazardeth as much as the assailant. For when the assailant
departs out of his country, he leaves garrisons and men of war behind him
to defend it against sudden troubles that might ensue of insurrections by
absence of the prince, or by some sudden invasion of some neighbor that would
take him unprovided, as James king of Scots did to his own undoing, against
the king of England, at such time as he was passed to Calice with a great
force, and was occupied about the siege of Tirwin and Turney. So that no well
advised prince sets up all his rest upon the hazard of one battle, but does
ever reserve a store for after-claps. And if a prince chance to be taken
prisoner in a foreign country, he shall be discharged upon his ransom, and
upon such conditions as the conqueror lists to give him: An answer to the
eight argument.
but if he be taken in his own country, it is hard but that diverse weak and
il-furnished rownes will yield themselves to the conqueror upon report of his
victory, which towns shall not be admitted in account, when they come to
treat of peace. And oftentimes fortune is so favorable to the vanquisher, that
after a victory he makes himself lord of the whole realm, and needs not
to make any other agreement with his prisoner, than to grant or take away his
life at his own pleasure. Fortune furthereth the aduenterous.
It is commonly said that fortune furthereth the aduenterous, and we see it so
by experience. Nin^^, Semyramis, and Alexander, were fortunate in their
conquests. Pyrrhus was fortunate in getting, but unfortunate in keeping. And
they that go forth with that intent, do seldom fail of their purpose. Charles
the eight conquered Naples in short time, and brought back his army through
the midst of Italy, passing upon the bellies of his enemies.

Edward king of England coming into France, with resolute purpose to conquer
the realm, gave battle to Philip of Valois, and overcame him both by sea and
by land, notwithstanding that Philip of Valois did what could be done by a
well-aduised prince. For he encountered him upon the sea, before he took land,
but it booted him not. For God made fortune to turn against him, in which case
it is better to strike sail, than to hazard a battle, as Charles the fifth
could well skill to do, being taught by the adversities of his grandfather and
father. William duke of Normandy, after one battle, made himself sovereign
lord of the realm of England, being fully resolved either to conquer, or else
to die. I will not say therefore, that an inuader shall always be sure of
victory: for sometimes it falls out clean contrary, as it did with Cyrus,
who was defeated by the Massagets in their own country: with the Swissers, who
were discomfited in Province by Julius Caesar: with the Sarzins which were
discomfited by Charles Martell, who caused Eu^o duke of Gascoyne to turn
against them. He that loses a b^^^ell in a strange country loses but his men.
To be short, He that loses a field in a strange country, loses but his
men: but he that loses it in his own country, loses both men and goods, and
sees his land daily wasted, and his subjects pilled.

CHAP. XI. Of the pitching of a Camp.
NOw seeing it is so, that in both sorts of war, as well of assailing, as of
defending, men must be brought to march together, either to receive or to
follow the enemy: we must needs speak of the seating of a camp, as upon the
which alone depends the winning of the battle; ^^rr^us excelled in pit^^ung
a camp.
as Pyrr^us showed full well, who in that point was esteemed the excellentest
of all captains. The camp that is well planted, ought to be nere a river, that
they may have the commodity of water, which cannot be forborne; and also for
the fortifying of themselves, and for the doing of their enterprises. For a
river does wonderfully strengthen a camp, because the enemy cannot pass it
without danger. But a captain must also be master of the river, and not coope
up himself between two rivers, except he have means to get out again at his
pleasure, least it disappoint him of the commodity of vittels and of succors,
as it befell to Julius Caesar in Spain, against Affraenius and Petreius. But
that happens commonly by some extraordinary ouerflowing, whereof
notwithstanding a man shall discharge himself so well, Of woods.
that he shall overcome them afterward. Secondly, woods serve for another
fortification, and yield means of goodly enterprises. Thirdly mountains give
great advantage, Of hills.
to them that are encamped in them. For they that are feign to mount up to
their assault, are wearied before they come to handstroks. Contrariwise, they
that come downward, go with the greater force upon their enemies. Hanniball
vanquished the Romans at Trebia, by having his camp planted near to a wood.
He had lodged himself near a river, and near thick copses, full of brush
wood, and thorns, taking occasion to beguile the Romans by that seating of his
camp, for when they should com to encounter him, he sent his brother Mago into
that place ouernight, accompanied with a thousand horsemen and a thousand
footmen, to lie in ambush there. And the next morning he caused his light
horsemen of Numidie to pass the river, and to skirmish with the Romans, and to
draw them into the stale. The which thing was done so cunningly, that when the
Romans were in the heat of the fight, they were assailed behind by Mago, who
lay in ambush there, so as they could notwithstand the Carthaginenses, but were
constrained to give back, with great loss of their men. The danger of passing
a^uer.
As for to pass a river to assail the enemy, the danger thereof is very great,
as appears in Manlius, who would needs pass a river that had but only one
foord to pass at, to encounter with Asdruball, contrary to the advice of
Scipio, who warned him of the peril wherinto he did put himself. Nevertheless,
he passed the river and assailed Asdruball, who suffered the Romans to do as
they listed, without offering them battle, until he saw them encumbered in
passing the foord. And then with all his force he set upon the tail of them,
and made so great a slaughter, that all their army was at the point to have been
discomfited, had not Scipios forecast bin, who made the enemies to recoile by
the help of his men of arms. Timoleon seeing the army of the Carthaginenses
sore troubled and put out of order in passing a river with great peril, and
thereby deeming that he might take them at advantage ere they were half passed:
showed his men of war with his finger, how the battle of his enemies was parted
in two halues by the river, the one half of them being on the one side, and
the other half on the other: and commanded Demaratus to take his horsemen, and
to go and charge upon the foremost of them, to keep them from ranging
themselves in battelray. And therewithal he caused his footmen to go down
into the plain, by means whereof, together with a storm that fell suddenly
against the Carthaginenses, he gat the battle. As touching the advantage of a
hill, it is very great, so there be nothing above it that may command it. The
advantage of a hill.
Perseus had planted his camp to great purpose on a high ground of advantage
near the mountain Olimpus, and had caused all the passages of the hill to be
warely kept, saving one that seemed vnapprochable. By reason whereof it behooved
the Romans to be ill lodged, and unable to do any exploit of war. For Perseus
stood upon his defense, intending to weary them by protracting of time, for he
assured himself that he could not be assailed in so strong a place. Paulus
Emilius understanding that there was but that only one passage whereat to
distress Perseus, bethought himself how he might win it. Whereupon feigning
to fetch about by the sea and to come upon his enemies at their backs, he
dispatched Nasica secretly with eight thousand footmen and six hundred horsemen,
to get the the passage: and he himself took his way toward the seas side.
But when night came, he led them clean the contrary way from the sea, until
he came to the top of the hill, where he lodged himself upon a plain in the
sight of Perseus, who was so astonished thereat, that he removed his camp
immediately. Julius Caesar having to do with the Belgians, who were the hardiest
and of greatest number of all the Gauls, took a certain little hill, the
which he caused his men to entrench in two places beneath, least the Gauls who
were without comparison mo in number than the Romans, should enuiron him. But
neither the one nor the other durst go find out his enemy, because there was a
maris betwixt them. But above all things a captain must beware that he lodge
not in the midst of a hill, unless he be sure from above, sor by that means he
may easily indomage his host: as Solomon a captain of the Romans endomaged the
Maurusians, The policy of Solomon.
whom being encamped upon the midst of a high hill to their great advantage,
he was come to assail from below. But yet he bethought himself to take first
the top of the hill, and for the doing thereof appointed Theodericke with
certain footmen, to climb the hill over night, by a way most difficult, and
whereof his enemies had least doubt; commanding his men not to make any noise
when they were come nigh them, but to keep themselves close till the
sunne-rising. In the dawning of the day he marched with his army directly up
the hill, and at the same instant the other part of his army showed themselves
to the enemies upon the top of the hill, so as the Maurisians perceiving
themselves to be between the two armies, and having their enemies both above
them on the top of the hill, and beneath them at the foot, were constrained
to take them to flight through the thick forest, with the loss of sieve
thousand men, and not one Roman slain. Sylla to compass Mithridates, Of Sylla.
got the back of a hill that was almost vnapprochable, in the day of the
battle, and there showing himself to his enemies above them, did put them all
to flight and to the chase. Of Lucullus.
Lucullus being within the view of the camp of Tigranes, who was imbattelled
upon a high ground somewhat near the city Cabyra, durst not come down into
the plain, because he had but a handful of men in comparison of Tigranes. But
by good hap one Arthemidorus offering himself unto him, promised that if he
would follow him, he would bring him into a place, where he should lodge his
camp safely, and where he had a castle above the city Cabyra. As soon as
night was come, Lucullus making great store of fires in his camp, departed
thence; and after he had passed some dangerous places, came by the next morning
to the top of the mountain, whereat his enemies were sore abashed to see him
above them, in a place where he might come down upon them with advantage, if
he listed to fight, and could not be forced to fight except he listed. Of
Flaminius.
Quintus Flaminius perceiving that he could not give his enemies battle, by
reason of a certain straight; found the means to discover a way, which within
three days brought him to his enemies camp. And for his guides he took the
shepherds, who assured him that that way was not guarded. Upon trust of whose
word, Flaminius sent three thousand footmen and thirteen hundred horsemen, who
marching by moon light and resting a day times, came the third day to the top
of the hill. All that while he stirred not until the said third day; and then
he caused his army to march up the hill against the cragged cliffs. And as he
marched, he espied his own men upon the top of the hill, which doubled the
courage of the Romans that were with him. And on the other part, his companions
that were above perceiving him so mounting up against the hill, began to raise
a noise behind their enemies, wherewith they put them in such ^eare, that by
and by they took them to flight. The constable of France considering the
sortification of the passage of Suze, how that upon two little hills on either
side of the straight, his enemies had made two sconses, and had cut a great and
deep trench betwixt them: perceived that by winning two other hills higher than
those were where his enemies had their fortifications, a man might force them
with the shot of harquebusses to abandon their fortification. Whereupon he
ceised immediately upon those hills. The which thing when his enemies perceived,
they forsook the passage, and betook themselves to flight. How a small band
may defend themselves against a great army.
When the commodity of woods, hills and rivers is not to be had, and a small
company of men is to deal with a great number: they must entrench themselves
with all speed, and if it be possible they must choose a place uneasy to be
comne unto, ^ull of hedges and vineyards; as the prince of Wales did at
Poitiers, when he took king John pri^soner. For he had put himself into a
place of such advantage, as there was but one way to come at him, and that was
full of hedges and bushes, and he had laid the hedges full of archers. And as
for his horsm^n, they were all alighted on foot in the vineyards in so strong a
place, as no men on hors-back could enter into. For when an army is to be
assailed in their hold, neither horsemen nor footmen can approach the^ without
breaking their own array, as it happened to the Frenchmen at Bicock, through
the wilfulnes of the Suissers; and to the king of Castile against the king of
Portugal, at the battle of Iuberoth. The Entalits seeing themselves to weak
for the Persians, A policy of the Entalits.
encamped themselves very sharply in a place of great advantage, and enclosed
themselves about with great deep, and large trenches, leaving only one way to
pass at with ten men a ^ront: and when they had so done, they covered the
trenches with leaves and russhes. And when they saw the Persians approach, they
sent out certain light horsemen, with express commandment that they should not
be too earnest in fighting but that as soon as the Persians charged them any
thing whotly, they should turn their backs and run home to their hold upon the
spur, and that when they were against the trenches, they should step to the
passage, so as they might pass the strait at their leisure. The Persians
perceiving them, failed not to charge upon them, and they on the other side
failed not to ^lie, and to mount up the side of the hill, until they were come
to their company again. They were pursued by the whole host of the Persians,
who having gotten the side of the hill, fell to running against the Enthalits,
and not perceiving the trenches, drove down one another and tumbled into them
with great violence one upon another, by means whereof they were all
discomfited, and the king with his 30 sons whom he had brought thither, were
all found dead. Tomombey would have done the like to Selim, but his enterprise
was discovered. Cabaon captain of Tripolie, The policy of Cabaon.
finding himself not strong enough for the Vandals, if he should fight with
them in the plain, (because they were all horsemen, and the most part of his men
were footmen) and yet notwithstanding having no means to choose any other place,
bethought himself to make fair great trenches, and thereto environed his camp
with a great number of camels, amongs the which he placed his choicest
soldiers, who were hidden among the camels. Besides this, he set twelve camels
in the face of the battle, to scare his enemies horses, for horses are
woonderfully afraid of camels. When his enemies attempted to approach, they were
driven back with shot of arrows. On the other side, in stead of coming on,
their horses gave back for fear of the camels, insomuch that they were all
discomfited. The Marrusians used the like stratageme against the Romans: but
the Romans had taken order for it. For when the Marrusians had ordered the^^
battles, as it is said before and that the Romans were constrained to flee,
specially the horsemen: Solomon the general of the Roman army seeing it,
alighted from his horse and commanded all his horsemen to do the like, and with
five hundred men entered into their camp. The enemies who had put all their
strength in their camels, and in their fortifications, when they perceived them
disappointed, and their camels terrified and putting all things out of order:
were driven to flee, and to leave their wives and children to the mercy of the
Romans.

CHAP. XII. How to give courage to men of war, before a battle, or in the
battle.
IT happens oftentimes that soldiers conceive a fear, when they see they have
to do with too great a number, or with an enemy that is mighty, and a great
warrior: or else that in the conflict they be suddenly dismayed* so as it
behooves them to be encouraged by some cunning, in which behalf the skill of
the captains serves maruellously well, who have used their own devise, and
diverse policies according as the case required. Of Orations.
Some use long orations and declarations, as Julius Caesar did, to rid his men
of the fear that they had of the Gauls and Almanes: and it is an ordinary
matter to make an exhortation to the soldiers in the day of battle. Others
do put their people in heart by speeches and countenances, as the Lacedemonian
did, Of the countenance of a captain.
to who^ when one said that they should be overwhelmed with the arrows of the
Persians: so much the better (quoth. he) for then shall we fight with them in the
shadow. And as another did, to who^ when one said, That the enemies were very
many, I ask not (quoth. he) how many, or how few they be, but where they be, that
I may fight with them. The day before the battle of Cannas, The assured^e^ of
Hanniball.
Hanniball took certain men with him, and went to view the Romans. And as he
beheld the^, one named Gisco said to him, It is a wonderful thing to see so
great a number of men of war. To who^ Hannibal laughing answered, There is
another thing much more marvelous tha^ that, which is, that there is not one of
them al like thee. Whereat every man began to laugh so heartily, that the bru^t
thereof went from hand to hand through the host, and greatly encoraged the
soldiers, when they saw their captain so assuring himse^f of good ^peed.

Of Lisander.
Lisander seeing his soldiers dismayed at the siege of Corinth, and refusing
the assault, sought by all means to reco^fort them, and as it happened, a hare
started out of the town ditch, whereupon he took occasion to say thus unto
them. Are you not ashamed to be afraid to assail those enemies, which are so
slothful and negligent, that hares sleep quietly within the precinct of their
walls? Quintius.
Quintius beholding his men astonished at the great power of Antiochus, made this
account unto the^. On a time at a certain supper in Chalcis where I was, there
were brought in many sorts of meat, and I asked of mine host why he had
prepared so much: whereunto he answered, That it was all but one sort of meat,
namely porke dressed after diverse manners: even so, whereas you hear that
Antiochus has so many light horses, so many men at arms, so many archers, so
many light armed footmen, and so many corslets; assure your selves that all
this people are but Syrians, armed and furnished after diverse fashions. Marius.
Marius perceiving his men to be afraid of the great number of the Dutchmen
that would have passed into Italy, Of the often beholding of the enemy before
battle.
thought it good not to permit his soldiers to join battle with them, until
they had seen them often before. And therefore after he had made great and fair
trenches, he made them to come upon the rampires of his camp one after
another, to view their enemies, and to enure them with the sight of their
countenances, looks, and marchings, that they might not be afraid of their
voices and words, and that they might understand the fashion of their armor,
and the manner of their government. The strangeness of things makes them more
terrible than they be in deed.
By the means of which ordinary sight, he made the things familiar which had
been terrible to them at the first blush, so as they were no more moved at
them. For he was of opinion, that the strangeness of things makes men through
error of judgment, to think things unaccustomed more horrible and dreadful
than they be in deed. And contrariwise, that customablenes abateth much of the
dread and terror of things, which of their own nature are terrible. Which
thing was seen at that time by experience. For their daily accustoming of
themselves to the ordinary beholding of those barbarous people, not only
diminished some part of the former fearfulness of the Roman soldiers, but
also whetted them unto choler, by the proud brags and intolerable bravery of
the barbarous people, which did set their courage on a burning desire to fight
with them. Pelopidas and Epaminondas, Pelopidas and Epaminondas.
captains of the Thebans, did the like, inuring the Thebans to behold their
enemies oftentimes, who were valiant and redoubted. And before they would come
to fight in good earnest, he sent them diverse times to light skirmishes, like
good young greyhounds let slip for the nonce, and then led them to it the more
safely afterward, when he had well fleshed them, by giving them a little taste
of the ease and pleasure that comes of victory. And by that means he
hartned them more and more, and made them the more sure and strong, insomuch
that by such skirmishes, they became more hardy and warlike than they were
before.

Sometime a good captain, turns the fearfulness of his soldiers into a
fury of fighting, by reason of the travel that they endure; as Sylla did, who
when he saw his soldiers astonished at the great and puissant host that
Mithrid^^es led well armed: for he would not make them to fight in that fear,
but kept them occupied in cutting great trenches, without giving any of them
leave to rest, to the intent that being weary of the pains that they took
about such works, they should the rather desire to try the hazard of battle,
as it came to pass. For the third day after they had begun so to labor, as
Sylla passed along by them, they fell to crying upon him, that he should lead
them against their enemies. Whereunto he made answer, That those cries were not
of men that were desirous of battle, but of men that were weary of their
work. And if ye be desirous to fight (said he) I will have you all to go in
your armor to yonder passage on the side of the hill. Which thing they did,
and obtained it, before their enemies that were sent thither to get it, could
come there, and so they possessed themselves thereof to lodge therein. Morius
did almost the same, when he went against the Dutchmen; for he made his
soldiers to run, and to make great and long steps, compelling every man to
bear his own fardels, and to carry with him whatsoever he should need to live
with. But he did that to inharden them, and to make them the more tough to
abide the travel of war.

The policy of Iugurth.
Iugurth to assure his own men, and to put the Romans in fear, slew a
soldier at his arrival, and brandishing his bloody spear to the Romans,
told them in their own language, that he had learned with them before Numance,
that they ^ought upon credit, having lost their consul Marius. Which saying
made the whole army of the Romans in mind to have fled, and they were like to
have turned head, had not Sylla staid them.

Of Necessity
Marius a good captain (if there were any at those days in Rome) intending to
fight with the Dutchmen, had planted his camp in a place of very great
advantage, but he wanted water. The which he did of purpose, to whet the
courage of his soldiers by that means. For when it was told him that they were
in danger of great thirst, he pointing them to the river that was along the
side of his enemies camp, said that it be^ooued them to fetch drink from
thence; and so they did. For the pages having no water for themselves, nor for
their beasts, went thither in great companies to fetch water, and there fell
into so whot a ski^mish, that the Dutchmen were feign to pass the river to
come to the bickering, where being taken out of order, and wanting time to
raunge their battles in array, they were all discomfited, and the most part of
them were drowned in the river. Next unto pains, Despair is a great incourager
to fight, Of Despair.
when men are forced either to fight or to die, and that there is no place of
refuge to retire unto. This is a thing that oftentimes makes men to fight most
valiantly in a strange country. William duke of Normand^e, to dispatch his
men of al hope of returning home, made all his ships to be set on fire. Many
others have done the like. But if a general be accompanied with leaguers, and
allies, it is hard for him to enforce them to fight, unless he do it by some
policy, as Themistocles did at the famous battle at Salamis. For when it was
vniue^sally agreed upon, to fight with the Persians upon the sea, in a strait
that was greatly to the advantage of the Greeks, because it was easy to be
kept. The Lacedaemonians and other their allies and confederats seeing the sea
covered with the ships of the Persians, determined to depart the next morning,
and every man to go home. Themistocles being grieved thereat, The policy of
Themistocles.
bethought himself of this policy. He had with him a Persian that was a
schoolemaister to his children, named Sincinnus, whom he trusted; him he sent
secretly to the king of Persia, to advertise him that Themistocles the
chieftaine, general of the Athenians, having a good will to do him some
special service, gave him knowledge of the good hap, that the Greeks were
minded to retire and flee away; counselling him not to let them escape, but to
set upon them lustily, while they were so combred and afraid, and disseuered
from their army on land, and so to vanquish all their whole power by sea at
once. Xerxes believing the counsel, environed them in such sort, that they
could by no means depart thence; the necessity whereof made them to resolve
themselves to abide the battle, wherein Themistocles had the upper hand, and
utterly defeated the whole power of Xerxes by sea.

Zabdas, Constable unto queen Zenobia, The policy of Zabdas.
being retired to Antioch, after he had lost a battle to the emperor Aurelian,
and fearing least the people should fall upon him in a rage, if they understood
the news of that discomfiture; took a man that resembled Aurelian, and made
it to be bruted that he brought the emperor prisoner with him. By which guile
he kept the Antiochians from rebelling, while he caused his men to retire
secretly by night unto him, without being perceived of any man.

The county Petilian seeing the army of the Italians defeated by king Charles
at Foronouo, The county Petilians policy.
and being escaped out of the hands of the Frenchmen, where he had been a
prisoner; to the intent to assemble again the men that were fled, and to give
them courage, ran as fast as he could to the Venetians, and told them that the
Frenchmen were vanquished, and put all to flight, counselling them not to let
the victory escape out of their hands: whereby he made them that were
astonished, to take courage again in such sort, that by the authority of his
name, he made as many as he met, to return into the battle, which partly was
the cause that the army was not utterly defeated.

When Charles duke of Burbon was slain with a bullet before the city of Rome,
by and by his body was covered with a cloak, to the end that the report of his
death, should not stay the soldiers from entering into the breach. The Romans
perceiving themselves unable to match the Persians, kept themselves in order
within the river Phasis, of which army Iustine led the one part, The sowing of
a report of succors at hand.
and Martin the other. Martin to encourage his people, and to sow a false
report among his enemies, That Justinian the emperor had sent succors unto
them; assembled the whole army as it had been to consult what was to be done.
And as they were so all assembled, suddenly comes in a post, whom he had
procured, as coming from Constantinople with letters, which he presented:
wherein the emperor sent them word that he had sent them another army, as
great or greater than that they had already. The post was asked whether the
army was far off or no: and he answered, that the army was not much abone
four and twenty furlongs off. Then captain Martin, as if he had bin
thoroughly angry, said, He had not to do with it, and that it was no reason
that they should reap the honor and profit of his travel. Whereupon he
demanded of his people, whether they thought his saying good or no? and they
all answered, yea. In the mean while the report of fresh succors was blown
abroad into the enemies camp, who thereupon disposed some of their men to the
straits, to stop the new army from passing to join with the other, and at the
same instant brought their whole power before the city, to give assault unto
it. Now it fortuned that the same day, captain Iustine had a f^ncie to go make
his prayers, in a certain church of the Christians, that was near the town;
and for his convey, carried with him five thousand horses unperceived of the
enemies, who by chance took another way to come to the camp before the
town. When Iustine understood by the noise, that his enemies were before the
town, setting up scaling ladders, digging, and making a great assault to enter
in, immediately he turned head, and with his horsemen went and charged upon his
enemies, that were at the point to have won the town. Whereas they being
greatly amazed, and thinking that it had been the fresh succors which they
had heard of, took themselves to sight, and being pursued by the men of the
city, were almost all put to the sword. Eumenes using dissimulation wisely, To
keep soldiers from knowing the enemy, to whom the general suspecteth to be
betrayed by his own men.
got the victory against Craterus. For when he understood that Neoptolemus and
Craterus came against him, in hope to cause his soldiers to turn to their
part by the only brute of their coming, and also to take them unawares as
they were making good cheer, becaue they came then freshly from the
discomfiting of Neoptolemus: he held his army in good order, and ready to
fight, and therewithal caused a report to run abroad, that it was Neoptolemus
and Pigres that came back upon him a fresh, with certain horsemen gathered at
adventure out of Cappadocia, and Paphlagonia. And to keep his countrymen from
knowing Craterus, he set not one Macedonian against him in the forefront, but
placed there two companies of strangers that were men of arms, commanding
them expressly to run upon their enemies as soon as they saw them, and to
charge upon them immediately, without giving them leisure to parlie, or to
retire, and without giving any ear to the heraults and trumpetters that should
be sent unto them; because he feared least the Macedonians would turn against
him, if they once knew that Craterus was there. Wherefore as soon as Eumenes
men espied their enemies, they failed not to run against them a full gallop, as
they had been commanded. At the sight whereof, Craterus was greatly abashed:
for he thought that the Macedonians should have turned on his side, as
Neoptolemus had promised him. Nevertheless, dealing like a man of valor, he
also spurred his horse against his enemies, and did so well that the battle was
fought a long time with doubtful balance, but in the end Eumenes won the
field, and Craterus and Neoptolemus the chieftanes of his enemies were both
slain. Sometime a valiant captain that has the report to be fortunat, and a
great taker of towns, does even by his menaces strike a fear into the hearts
of soldiers, that are enclosed in a place, and make the^ to yield it up, as
Glesclin did; who sent word to the men of Hannibout, that he would sup within
their town that night, and that if there were any of them, that threw but a
stone whereby any of the least of his pages were hurt, it should cost them
their lives. With the which menace the townsmen were so scared, that they
stirred not out of their houses, and the Englishmen being too few to abide the
assault, were ouerlaid with force, and put all to the sword. The county of
Fois intending to go from Bolonia to Bresse the nearest way, to recover it,
took his journey through the duke of Mantuas territory. And because he was to
pass by certain sluices, which were fast shut up and well guarded, he sent to
the duke of Mantua to desire passage: who notwithstanding that he was against
the Frenchmen; yet being abashed at his so sudden coming, was feign to open
him the passage, the which he would have denied him if he had not seen his
power.

CHAP. XIII. Of Skirmishes.
Skirmishes are so near both to good and evil, that it is easy to take the
one for the other.
WHen two armies come within sight one of another, they cannot be kept from
skirmishing, the which is sometime necessary, and sometime very dangerous. And
this point (as says Machiauell) is one of that number, wherein the evil is so
near unto the good, that the one is easily taken for the other. I have often
heard this fashion of making skirmishes blamed by Monsieur Tauannes, who would
not put any thing in peril, but all to profit. For he would either fight in
good earnest, or hold himself quiet without fighting, and reserve his forces
to some good occasion. Some will say that such skirmishes give the more courage
to men of war, and make them, as it were to record their lessons, and the
things that are to be done in battle. It is a making of the^ to look upon the
wolf, that by beholding of him thoroughly, they should not be afraid of him. But
on the contrary part also, if the wolf bite them, it is to be doubted least
they will become the colder in hunting him. Three days before the battle of
Moncounter, the army of the Monsieur, and the army of the princes, skirmished
upon the bank of the river Dine, but that skirmish was so rough for them, that
they began that day to despair of the victory, and to be shie of the encounter
which they had anon after. But now to make some resolution upon the discourse
of the history (which is the thing that I pretend) I say that skirmishes are
of two or three sorts. The sorts of skirmishes.
Sometimes when men lie in garrison, and wars are prolonged, they skirmish
with a few men to give a stroke with the spear, or to make some gallant
enterprise, as was done at Bolloyne against the Englishmen: For they that were
in the great fort, and in the fort of the Chastilion, did often times issue out
against the Englishmen that lay in garrison in Bolloyne, and there made certain
light skirmishes, and so returned into their holds again. This fight was
commended of men of war, who should but have lingered there, if they had not
now and then led forth their bands, and come down into the plain.

Sometimes it is needful to make skirmishes to assure and to train your men,
as Pelopidas and Epaminondas did against the Lacedaemonians. These two captains
were valiant in their own persons, and had men of good courage, for they
fought for their liberty. But they were but meanly trained to the wars, and
had to do with the Lacedaemonians, who had not their peers in all Greece.
Therefore to encourage their men, the said captains did erewhiles let them
loose to the Lacedaemonians at advantage, as men do young hounds to a hare.
Skirmishes made to advantage, do make the enemy despised.
And as they were somewhat fleshed, they drew them back of purpose, and would
not hazard them too much before battle, to the intent that tasting the
sweetness of victory, they might learn to shake off the fear of their
enemy, which was thought to be invincible; and contrariwise, that the
beholding of him, and the often victories had of him to their advantage, might
cause them to set light by him. Therefore it was needful to assure them by
such skirmishes, before they should come to battle. Valerius Goruinus did the
like against the Samnites, for fear (as Titus Liuius says) least the new kind
of war, and the new enemy, should dismay them. But such skirmishes must be
made with discretion, and not upon a head, neither must the general of an
army permit them, except he perceive some very great advantage on his own
part, to be had without loss or danger. Sometime skirmishes are made to begin
battles, and those may and must be: for it is the entrance into the battle. But
for as much as some do but only sustain such skirmishes, without breaking out
upon their enemies, I will speak a word thereof, before I speak of the battle.

CHAP. XIIII. Whether it be better to bear the brunt of the enemies, or to
drown it at the first dash.
THis would not deserve a chapter, no nor to be once spoken of, but that
Machiauel in his discourses has made a pretty small chapter of it, with a
short resolution thereupon. And forasmuch as in mine opinion, his resolution
seems not to agree with Julius Caesar's; I will speak a word of it by the
way. Now then he says, that when Decius and Fabius consuls of Rome, made war
against the Samnits and Tuscanes, Decius went with his whole power to assail
his enemies; and Fabius did but only ward him, deeming the lingering assault to
be the more for his behoof, by reserving his force to the vpshot, when the
enemy should have forgone his first heat; and therefore that the dealings of
Fabius, had better success than the doings of Decius. For Deciussis legions
were all discomfited, and himself slain; whereas Fabius went away with the
victory, by reserving his forces unto such necessities. Of which example he
gathers his resolution, that the doing of Fabius is more sure than the
others. But this resolution cannot satisfy me. For it is impossible to keep
ones self from fighting, when the enemy comes with full purpose to assail.
Well may ye do so when you be well entrenched, for the enemy cannot assail you
but to his own loss. But when a day of battle is set, either you must
forsake the place, or else fight. And in this case the running together and the
shouting of the hosts, gives the greater cheerfulness and force to the men
of war. We must then reserve our forces for battle, when the enemy lets us
alone.
It is another thing that Fabius did in reserving his forces for battle, while
the enemy did spit out his fire in another place. And this policy was
practiced by the late duke of Guise, at the battle of Dreux: for how much
soever he was entreated to give battle, he would never come to it, until he
saw that his enemies had spit out all their fire, and that persuading
themselves to be sure of the victory before hand, they fell to pillage. For
then he set upon them with all his forces fresh and undiminished, and gave them
the foil. By the way, it had not ben in the power of the constable to refuse
battle, nor in the duke of Guisis power neither, if he had been set upon. For
then had it behooved him of necessity to fight, and to that intent came they
thither. But it was a great point of wisdom in the duke of Guise, that seeing
his enemies had left him behind, he reserved his power for such a need. And
therein he did as Fabius, and as Charles of Aniou did against Conradine. But to
know whether in a battle, men ought to sustain the assault of the enemy
without running upon him, or to daunt him at the first push; the case is to be
ruled by the resolution that Caesar makes thereof in his Commentaries, where he
finds fault with Pompey, Pompeyes fault at the battle of Pharsalie.
for causing his army to stay at the battle of Pharsalie, when they were
going forward to the encounter, and ready to shocke with their enemies.
Wherein he says he did a notable fault, because the shoutings and the running
together, increases the force of the soldiers, who go therewith the more
cheerfully and fiercely to the battle. If such a captain found that fashion
of encountering to be best; surely we ought not to reject it, we Frenchmen (I
say) which have a certain fiery fury at the first, greater than other nations,
the which being restrained, would wex so cold afterward, that we should become
too slow when we needed to use our hands.

CHAP. XV. Of a Battle, and of diverse policies to be practiced therein*
Since the end of war consists chiefly in giving battle; I must now speak
thereof, and of the policies that are practiced in that behalf. Now there are
two sorts of giving battle, either in tarying for the enemy, or in assailing
him. He that tarieth, has the choice of the place, and the mean to cut off
himself at leisure, if he list to fight to his own advantage. But he that
assaileth has many things to look unto. Sometimes he must be feign to pass a
water to find his enemy, and for that purpose to make a bridge over the river,
the which may be impeached by his enemy that is on the further side of the
river. And for the providing thereof, To pass a wa^^r safely.
Phil^p duke of Cleueland says, that great diligence is to be used, and
artillery is to be placed on the rivers side to shoot at such as adventure to
come near the other bank, in the time that the bridge is a laying. And when
the bridge is made well and dilligently, he must pass over four faucons, and
five or six hundred men on foot, and some cariages with speed to stop them, and
also some pioners to make trenches at need. For five hundred or a thousand men
enclosed within their cariages will always hold four thousand tack, until the
rest of the army may come forward, and then shall it be easy to pass the
residue of the host in despite of the enemies. But the best and surest way is,
not to use open force, but to make passage by some policy. The policy of
Julian in passing his army over a river.
When the emperor Iulia^ warred against the Persians, before he passed a certain
river, he sent Lucilius with fifteen hundred men to the further side of the
water, and yet for the passing of the water he used no open force, but caused
captain Victor with a good number of men of war, to pass over secretly in the
night season, and a good way off from the camp, for fear least he should be
perceived, and to ioin himself with Lucilius. This had so good succes, that
being joined together unperceived of the enemy, they charged upon him behind
unlooked for, wherewith he being afraid betook him to flight. This bickering
gave the emperor leisure to pass his army in boats, and to obtain the further
bank. Sometimes have is made to take the enemy unprovided, and out of array, to
astonish him and to break the order of his battle, as Henry the bastard of
Castile did against his lawful brother don Peter, by the advice of Bertrand of
Guesclin. For he saw he had but few men, and considered that if don Peter
should have come against him in battle, raunged in good order, he had not
been able to stand against him, by reason of the small number of men that he
had to encounter so great a number of well trained soldiers, as don Peter
brought with him. Therefore he set forward and led his men of war thick set and
in good order before him, without any incling of his coming known to don
Peter. And finding him out of array, with his bands scattered here and there far
from him, he discomfited him and put him to the woorst. Marius was like to have been discomfited, by being taken after that sort unprovided: and yet by another
policy he took his enemies in a trip, in such sort as I will tell you. Bo^chus
and Iugurtha came to assail Marius upon the sudden over night, The policy of
Marius.
as he was retiring his army into garrison. All that Marius could then do,
was but to get two little hills for his defense, very fit for the seating of a
camp. And when he had retired himself thither to his advantage, he let his
enemies alone, who environed the two hills with great noise, and so passed forth
the most part of that night. On the contrary part, the Romans made not any
noise, but held themselves quiet. But when they perceived that their enemies
beg into fall asleep, and to take their rest, then Marius caused his men to
issue out with great noise upon the Moors and Getulians, of whom he slew a
great number as they lay asleep, and compelled the rest to forsake the place,
and to go seek another more sure at the favor of the night: by means whereof
he escaped that danger. Sometimes men are afraid to give battle, by reason of
the advantage of the place. In that case policy is to be used, as to take a
higher ground than where the enemy lies as Paulus Emilius did against Perseus
in Macedonie, and Sylla against Tigranes, and diverse others of whom I have
spoken heretofore. For then must they either dislodge, or fight to their
apparent loss. The policy of Bertram of Guesclin.
Or else he must draw them by some train, as Bertram of Guesclin did the men
of Navarre; who seeing their army in a high place of advantage, and on the
other side being advertised that succor was coming to them; the next day,
when he and all the army of France ranged in battle, had spent a great part of
the day in the plain, sore vexed with heat and travel; he thought therefore
that it was not for him to fight with them in a place of so great disadvantage.
But forasmuch as he was sure, that the Nauarrians desired greatly to come to
encounter them, and yet that they would not leave their strength: to draw them
to battle, he made countenance to retire, so long until the day began to
decline, causing his armor, bagage, and pages to pass over a bridge, holding
himself always still in one quarter, to see what countenance the Na^arrians
would make. And the better to conceal his pretense, he caused many of his men
of arms to pass also. Anon one John Iouell a captain of the Nauarrians,
contrary to the advice of the captall of Buze, went down the hill and led his
men to the encounter, whom the captall of Buze followed and all the army after
him. When the Frenchmen saw him in the plain, they turned again upon the
Nauarrians amain, of whom in the end few or none escaped which were not
either slain or taken ptisoners. A policy to pretend battle, and yet not to
do it.
Sometimes when a captain comes near his enemies, he will not by and by
give battle, because his men are weary of their way. But yet to hold his
enemy in expectation, he keeps his men a long while in battelray, as if he
meant to come to handstrokes, and in the mean while makes trenches: the which
being done, he retireth his men fair and softly into them, lodging the
hindermost first, and so successively those that are next them one after
another, whereat the enemy is astonished, to see the army of his adversaries
lodged safe within their trenches, as Paulus Emilius did against Perseus. For
he made so fair a show of encountering, and lodged his men so cu^ningly, that
he had by little and little undone his battle, and lodged his people in their
camp well fortified, without any noise or hurly burly, ere his enemies had
perceived it. A policy to ta^e the enemy vnpr^uided.
Yet does it not follow, but that it may at some times be for a man's advantage
(though he be weary and have traveled a long journey) to set upon his enemies
out of hand. But that must be when he is sure to find them out of order, as the
county of Egmount did to the Frenchmen near unto Graueling, and Bertram of
Guesclin did to don Peter of Castile. Timoleon intending to fight with Icetes,
who kept the way to Adrane, twenty leagues distant from Tauremenion, departed
thence with all his army, of purpose to bid him battle. The first day he made
no great journey, but the next day he marched more speedily. And when it drue
toward euentide, tidings was brought him that Icetes was but then newly
arrived before Adrane, and was there encamped. Whereof the captains hearing,
caused the foremost to stay to take their repast, that they might be the better
disposed to fight. But Timoleon advanced himself forward unto them, and
prayed them not to do so, but to march on still, as speedily as they could,
that they might take their enemies out of order. And he himself marched
foremost as if he had held the victory in his hand, and so the residue
followed him with like confidence. As soon as they came there, they charged
upon their enemies, whom they found all disarmed, and therefore they took them
to their heels as soon as they saw them come near.

The Suissers used the like policy against the Frenchmen, when they had raised
the siege of Pau^e, taking them suddenly unprovided and not entrenched. But
as I have said) this manner of dealing is very dangerous, The danger (...)
too much to give battle.
if a man be not sure that he shall find his enemies out of order. It was one
of the faults that the Frenchmen committed at the battle of Cressie, in that
they having traveled six leagues, did give battle to the Englishmen that were
fresh and lodged at advantage. For the Frenchmen were tired and weary, and had
the sun upon their faces, and had marched in great disorder. In respect
whereof, they should have entrenched themselves as Paulus Emilius did, to the
end they might have had leisure to take breath and gather their strength
again, and to understand of their enemies behauior, and to take advantage as
well as they, and to tarry for the rest of their power that was coming after.
For the next day after the battle, they also were discomfited, and a seven
thousand of them were slain, which had the battle ben delaied till the next
morrow, would have been a marvelous succor to the rest of the army, and have
helped at need to reunite the army when they were broken; as the soldiers of
the earl of Mountfort did, after that the Frenchmen had discomfited them
before Roche Darien. For by and by they gathered themselves together again to
the lord of Cadudall, who coming then newly with a hundred men of arms and
certain footmen, went by the sun rising to the camp of Charles du Bloys,
(who doubting nothing because he had gotten the victory, slept and took his
rest:) and finding him in that disorder, did put his men to the utterance, and
carried him away prisoner to Hannibout. The see^ing of advantage to fight (...).
Sometime in fighting a battle, a man has the sun full in his eyes. To
avoid this danger, Paulus Emylius was so long a raunging his men in battle,
that by the time that the battles should join, he had the sun upon his back.
Marius used the like policy against the Cimbrians, and Philip Augustus against
the Flemmings. At the battle of Cannas, Hanniball helped himself both with
the sun and the wind, and thereby chiefly wan he the battle. There blew a
mighty strong and boistrous wind like a tempest of thunder and lightning,
which raised the parched dust from the sandy plain as hot as fire, and
driving it through the battle of the Carthaginenses, struck it full into the
faces and eyes of the Romans with such violence, that they were enforced to
cast their heads back, and to disorder their ranks.

Themistocles being determined to fight with Xerxes king of Persia upon the
sea, chose a strait and narrow place, that he might the better revenge
himself against the multitude of the kings ships: and moreover waited the
time most fit and favorable for his purpose. For he raunged not his ships
in order of battle, before a certain hour, when a great wind was wont to
rise upon the seacoast, which raised great wa^es in the channel. Now this
wind did no displeasure to the Greek galleys, because they were low, but it
did great annoyance to the Persian ships, which had their hatches high, and
their foredecks raised high, for it made their flanks to lie open continually
to the Greeks, who went and dashed lightly against them. The Athenians did the
like under the leading of Phormio against the Peloponnesians. The Athenians ^ad
but twenty ships to keep Na^^^ct, and those were but ill furnished to fight
upon the sea, and the Peloponnesians has seven and forty well furnished, by
reason whereof they sticked not to make their vagaries all along the coast of
Epyrus, to pass over into Acarnania. Nevertheless, they were pursued by the
Athenians, who compelled them to raunge themselves in battle, and to fight in
the midst of a strait, where for the better fortifying of themselves, and to
stop the Athenians from issuing out, they raunged their ships in a ring, wi^h
their noses outward, and their sternes inward: and in the mids of the ring
they placed their small and light vessels, to set them out upon their enemies
when time should require. As for the Athenians, they set their ships all in a
row, enuironing the ships of their enemies, and pretending yet more. But
Phormio had charged them not to fight, until he had given them a token,
assuring himself that when the land-wind arose, which began to blow in the
morning, the ships of the Peloponnesians would dash one against another. Now as
soon as the wind began to blow, the ships fell to iustling in deed: and
specially those that were in the midst, being the light or sort, did great
anoyance to the rest: insomuch that they were al occupied in setting planks
before their ships for fear of d^shing. And there was so great a cry and
disorder among the Peloponnesians, that they could not hear the commandment
of their captains. Which thing when Phormio saw, he gave a token of battle to
the Athenians, who charging lustily upon them, ba^^ered and sunk the first
that they encountered, and put the residue to flight.

To come upon the enemy behind, while he is fighting.
Sometimes a company of men are kept out of the battle, and are commanded to
set upon the enemies behind in the heat of the battle, to put them in fear,
and to make them break their array. When To^^us was to give battle to the
Romans, he drew aside three hundred men of his army, and gave them
commandment, that in the fiercest of the battle, they should charge upon the
Romans behind. Which thing they did so fitly, that the Romans thinking them to
be a fa^re greater number than they were, betook themselves to flight. Aignas
a Roman captain, seeing Bellisarius ready to give battle to the Persians,
bestowed himself with his men covertly in a valley, and when they were well
forward at the battle, he mounted up a little hill, and taking the Persians
unawares behind, did easily put them to flight. When Marius was about to fight
with the Dutchmen, he sent Claudius Marcellus out of the way, with three
thousand footmen, willing him to keep himself close, until he saw the
Dutchmen tied to the fight with him, and then in the chiefest of the battle,
to go charge upon them behind. The which he did so fitly, that the Dutchmen
feeling themselves assailed behind, were forced to turn head, and by that
means falling in disorder, were all vanquished. John duke of Burgoine, in the
battle of Tongres, sent a thousand footmen, and five hundred horsemen, to
assail his enemies on their backs in the chief of the fight: Which thing
when Pieranes would have provided for aforehand, by sending a company of
chosen men to encounter them; the common people would not permit him, and so
they felt the smart of their wilfulness.

As touching the ordering of an army, Diverse manners of ordering an army.
it is done by the eye, according to the aduertisments that are had of the
enemy, and after as he is seen to be disposed. Now to give a certain rule
thereof, it is impossible; neither is it my intent, but only to put in
practice the ancient histories, and to put in writing the policies that have
been used by men of old time. Hanniball that captain of singular experience,
ordered his battle in such wise at Cannas, that he set the best men of their
hands on the two sides, and filled up the midst with the worser. The which
two wings he caused to shoot themselves forth in a point, inioyning them that
as soon as the Romans had broken the forefront, and pursued them as they
retired back, so as the middle of the battle came shrinking in, and bowing in
compass like a new moon, and that the Romans were come within it; then they
should fall upon them on either side, and enclose the^ in behind. Insomuch that
the battle which at the beginning was inform of a wedge, was at length in
form of a Cressant, which was a cause of the great slaughter. The constable of
Clisson used almost the same fashion, at the battle of Rosebecke. He led his
host divided in three parts; a vauntgard, a maine-battell, and a rereward, and
all three near one another. But when they began to approach, they stepped forth
into wings, so as the middleward was somewhat shrunk in, and drawn backer: but
the men of arms that were in the wings fell to it so furiously, that the
Flemmings were not able to follow them that were in the battle, insomuch that
it set it self in strength again, and the Flemmings being cooped in between
the three battles, lost almost five and twenty thousand of their men. Amur^t
did the like at Nicopolis. For he caused his two wings to advance forward,
wherein he had almost threescore thousand men, and set himself well closed in
the bulcke of the battle, sending eight thousand men before to skirmish, and to
keep his army from being discovered, whom he commanded, that when they were
assailed by the Christians, they should tetire to the body of the battle. The
which thing they did so fitly, that the Frenchmen which were in the vaward were
enclosed on all sides, and the most part of them slain or taken, and the rest
were driven to flee, to their great loss. But he that does this, The ranks
must not be enlarged where is but few men.
must have a great number of men. For it is a dangerous matter to enlarge the
ranks, when a man has but few men, because that thereby he makes them the
thinner, and consequently the easier to be broken. For there is no force like
to the force of them that fight close set, for they give the less scope to
enter into their ranks. Paulus Emylius won the battle against Perseus by this
policy: He saw it was not possible for him to work any thing against the
maine battle of the Macedonians. In this despair he fell to viewing wistly the
seat of the enemies camp. And perceiving that the field where they fought was
not plain, ne lay whole together, he considered that the battle which was
lodged foremost, could not always maintain that hedge of pi^es and of targets
joining together, but that by fine force they should be compelled ^o open in
many places, as it falls out in all great battles, according to the
inforcement of them that fight against them, so as in one place they thrust
themselves forward, and in another they be driven back. A mean to open a
battle.
Wherefore Emylius taking suddenly this occasion, divided his men into small
troops, appointing them to take up the places which they found empty at the
front of the battle of their enemies, and so to join themselves unto the^, not
by maintaining a continual charge upon the^, but by setting upon them here and
there, in diverse places at once by diverse companies. According to this
commandment delivered to the captains from hand to hand, the Romans slipped
immediately into places which they found empty or ill guarded, and being entered
in, assailed the Macedonians, some upon the sides where they were naked and
bare, and othersome behind, in such sort that the strength of the whole body
of their battle, which consisted in holding themselves close together, was by
and by defeated by being opened after that manner. What is to be done when a
general has but few men.
But to come back again to our purpose. When a general has but few men, he
must choose narrow places, that he may be able to resist many, and not be
enclosed about by a great number. For, to do so with a great number of men is
vnauailable, yea and sometimes noisome. It was the first mischief that Darius
received at the hand of Alexander. His wisest men councelled him to tarry for
Alexander in a plain and open country, seeing he had a desire to fight with
him, and not to go seek him in Cilicia, in strait and narrow places, where if
he took him in the straits, his army would stand him in no stead to fight, A
great army must not choose a hill-ground, but a plain champion.
so pent up. But he not crediting that wholesome counsel, found too late, that
a great army ought always to choose a large place, where a man may with his
great number enclose his enemy, which he cannot do in a narrow room. And so
shall the horsemen fight at their ease, whereas in a narrow country full of
hedges, they can do no good at all. This was a lesson that Xantippus a captain
of the Lacedaemonians taught to the Carthagenenses.

Although the Carthagenenses had a goodly great army, good footmen, and great
store of horsemen: yet were they ever vanquished by the Romans. At length they
took this Xantippus to be their general, that had the report to be a good
captain. Who having considered their warlike furniture, marvelled that they
encamped in the mountains, having so many elephants, and horsemen, and that
they did not rather keep the plains, which without comparison was most for
their advantage, seeing that the force of the Romans consisted in footmen, and
not in horsemen. Therefore he made them to come down into the plains, where he
fought with the Romans and overcame them, under their consul Attilius Regulus,
who was there taken.

A battle often times is so well ordered on all sides, that there is no way to
enter into it. The policy of captain Pelinian.
In such case a man must seek the weakest places, as I have said already, or
else use the policy of captain Pelinian, who to make his men the forwarder in
assailing the Macedonians, took the Antsigne of his band, and threw it into
the thickest of his enemies: whereupon his men pressed with great violence
after it, because they esteemed it a great dishonor to abandon and forsake
their Antsigne. But yet notwithstanding all was in vain, and to their loss;
because the Macedonians were so fast linked together, and held their pi^es so
steddie, that it was impossible to remove them.

To reassemble an army that goes by the worst.
When an army goes by the worse, or is ready to break their array, the
presence of the general is maruellously behooffull, to make them return to
the fight again, by his encouragement, or by fighting before them in his own
person. For when they see their general in danger, they be ashamed to leave
him without fighting for him. So did Sylla against M^thridates. For when he saw
his army almost defeated; he cast himself a cross them that fled, until he
found his enemies, crying, Ye soldiers of Rome, mi^e honor wills me to die
here. And therefore whenever ye shall be asked where ye have abandoned your
captain, remember that ye answer, ye forsook him in Orchomene. Whereat they
were so ashamed, that suddenly they turned their faces again, and wan the field.

Julius Caesar being in the like peril in Spain against the Pompeyes, said
unto his men, Seeing ye forsake me thus, deliver me by and by into the hands of
Pompeyes sons. The which saying made them for very shame to return into the
battle, the which they won in the end. At another time he caught the standard
out of the standard bearers hand that fled, and made him to return, saying, It
is here my soldier, it is here that we must fight. Julian the emperor seeing
certain men fl^e at the beginning of a battle, caused ten of them that first
fled to be put to death, to the intent that the residue, for fear of the
danger that was behind, should fight valiantly, seeing the peril was greater
in fleeing than in fighting. Charles Martell did the like against the Sarzins;
for he appointed certain men, to do nothing else but to kill such as fled
back. And besides that, he did them to understand, that the gates of Towers
were shut, and that they should not be opened for any misfortune that befell.
Sometimes, to tempt and allure soldiers, To tempt an army with d^sir^ of prey.
men offer them a prey or booty, that by being eagre of it, they may break
their array, as Charles the eight did at Foronouo by the counsel of Triuulce.
For he made all the baggage of the camp to march on the left hand where were
all the kings costly jewels. The which thing when the Albanois espied, by and
by they flang out to that part, killing and overthrowing the muleters and pages
that made countenance of defense. The footmen perceiving how the Albanois made
spoil, ran thither also, so as it put the army of the Italians quite out of
order, and ministered the more occasion to king Charles, to compass his matters
well. To remedy the matter that a man be not surprised behind, To let or
impea^h the assailing of an army behind.
whether it be in assaulting a town, or in giving battle: he must leave some
men of purpose to abide that brunt, which must intend to that and nothing else;
or else he must do as Demetrius or Sertorius did. When Sertorius had laid siege
to the town of Lauron, Pompey went thither in great have to succor it. Near
unto the city was a little hill to lodge a camp in, and to annoy the
townsmen. By means whereof, the one hasted thither to win it, and the other
hasted to keep it. But Sertorius came thither first and took it. And anon
after Pompey came thitoo, who was well apaid that it had so come to pass;
thinking to hold Sertorius pent up between the city and his army. But he
was greatly astonished, when he saw the six thousand of men well armed, whom
Sertorius had left in the camp whence he departed, to the intent that if
P^mpey came to assail him, they should sit upon his skirts. Which thing Pompey
perceiving, durst not offer battle, but was constrained to see the town
destroyed before his eyes, and was not able to rescue it.

Ptolomie was deceived after the like manner. For when he had his army on the
sea ready to encounter Demetrius, he gave his brother Meneleus charge, that
when he saw them grappled to come to hand-strokes, and that they were busiest
in fight, he should set out of the haven of Salamis, and come set upon
Demetrius ships behind, to scatter them and to break their array, with
threescore galleys, whereof he had the leading. But Demetrius having provided
for it aforehand, had appointed ten galleys to stop him, thinking them enough to
shut up the mouth of the haven that was small and narrow, so as none that were
within it could get out. By reason whereof being sure behind, he charged so
stoutly upon Ptolomie, that he discomfited him.

To beguile the enemy in ordering of ones battle.
When the enemy knows that a captain uses an ordinary manner of ordering
his battles after one fashion, he orders his own after the same manner. But
to beguile him, he must do as Cornelius Scipio did in Spain against
Hasdruball: who knowing that his enemy was advertised, that he was wont to
place his best soldiers in the midst of the frunt of his battles, and the
worst behind; and doubting least Hasdruball would do the like, altered his
order in the day of the battle. For he set his best soldiers in the corners
of his army, and the worser sort in the midst. And when it came to the
onset, Scipio caused the soldiers of the middle part to march sostly, and the
two wings to advance forwarder, who encountering with men of less experience,
did easily ouermatch them. In the which time, those of the two middlewards,
which on Asdrubals side were the chiefest men, and on Scipi^s side the woorst
of his army were but beholders of the others. By means whereof Asdruball was
easily defeated by the Romans.

At the battle of Tongres, when the lord of Pieranes saw the duke of Burgoyne
send fifteen hundred men on his back, he altered the form of his battle,
which was pointed triangle-wise, and brought it into a square, setting his
horsemen and shot hindermost, to withstand them that were coming behind, and
fencing the sides with cariages, by reason whereof he had gone away that day
with the victory, if he had had men that had been good warriors, and well
trained. But the want of them both, made him to lose both the battle and his
life. When a man has few horsemen.
When the general of an army has too few horsemen, he must set some company
of pikemen behind them, and now we may set harquebuzers that are accustomed to
fight with horsemen, as Julius Caesar did at the battle of Pharsalie against
Pompey. For having set forth the best and most practiced legionarie soldiers
that he had, he was suddenly assailed with a great company of young Roman
gentlemen on horseback. To whom when his horsemen had given place, they came
upon those old fellows, who flung their iauelings full in their faces. Whereat
the young gentlemen being astonished, turned themselves by and by to flight.

Sometime to beguile the enemy, To beguile the enemy by pretending weakness.
a captain makes his army to seem less than it is, that the enemy may be
the bolder to fight: or else he causes a brute to be raised, that he has sent
a part of his army abroad, which he has not done in deed; by either of which
ways many have been deceived. One army was sent before against Asdruball,
who was come down into Italy with a great puissance: and in an other part
Nero the consul had another army near unto Hanniball, and to his seeming well
rampired and fortified. Nero departed secretly with the most part of his power,
and went to join in camp with his fellow consul, without increasing the
number of Antsignes, so as the camp appeared not to be any greater than it was
wont to be. This beguiled the Carthagenenses: who finding greater force than
they looked for, were all vanquished. As much befell to Curio in Affricke,
against Iuba king of Mauritania. For the king made a report to be blown
abroad, that he was sore encombered in his own country, and that he had sent
but some small number of his men thither; and yet in deed he marched himself
with his whole army. But he had sent the said former band a good while before,
and he himself came speedily after with his whole power. Whereby Curio being
deceived, gave him battle: Then was he greatly abashed to see his enemies
continually succored with fresh men, and their army still increasing to the
eye, so that in the end he was overcome. Ferdinand king of Naples, being
advertised that the lord of A^b^ey was but feeble, gave him battle upon a
iolitie of courage, without further enquiring, and was as bravely received by
the lord Awbney, who had joined unto his own the forces of the lord of Precie,
and so with those forces together encountered king Ferdinand.

Catos policy.
While Cato was in Spain, ambassadors were sent unto him from a city that was
besieged, to demand succor of him. Cato granted them their demand, and
causing the third part of his army to be embarked in their sight, dispatched
them away, with charge that they shouid give notice what succors were sent to
them. But as soon as the ambassadors were gone, he secretly caused his
embarked men to come back again. The Spaniards thereupon thinking they should
have had to do but with a few Romans, came boldly to bid them battall; but they
were overcome for their labor. Diverse times when a captain has but few men
in comparison of his enemy, A false pretense of fear.
he will pretend a fear, to make his enemy the more careless.

And when he perceives him to be so, then aduentureth he to take him
vnpurueied, as Lisander did the Athenians. Who perceiving himself unable to
match them in strength, rode at anchor in a streit near to the city
Lampsacum, after he had taken it by assault. The Athenians on the other side,
came with great speed into the bay of Sestros, and when they had refreshed
themselves with food, they presented themselves to the galleys of Lacedemon,
whereof Lisander had the government; who on his side ranged his men in order of
battle, but he forbad them to fight or to row out against the Athenians. Who
retiring themselves toward night, went a land, whereof Lisander was informed by
such as he had sent after them to mark their demeanor. The next day they did
as much, and so the third and fourth days: insomuch that the Athenians
conceived a great confidence in themselves, and a great disdain of the
Lacedaemonians, thinking that their keeping of themselves so pent up, was for
very fear. The fifth day when the Athenians having made the like offer of a
battle to their enemies, were retired toward the evening in disorder:
Lisander sent certain Galiots after them to note their behavior, commanding
the captains of them, that as soon as they saw the Athenians out of their
galleys, they should return to him with all speed possible: and that when they
were in the midst of the streit, they should heave up a copper shield a high
into the air upon the point of a pike, as a token to make the whole fleet to
come rowing in battelray. By reason whereof, as soon as the shield was lifted
up, Lisander having all his men in a readiness, and being not past one league
off from the Athenians, made sail so swistly in the smooth sea, that the
Athenians had no leisure to take their weapons and to put themselves into their
galleys, because their soldiers were scattered abroad, some gone to buy
vittels, some to supper, some to walking in the fields, and some to sleep, no
man doubting that which happened; insomuch that of nine and twenty galleys,
only nine escaped, the which Conon saved by swiftnes when he perceived the
disorder: and of this unfortunate adventure ensued the utter ruin of the
Athenians. Julius Caesar being come but with seven thousand men in great have
to rescue Quintus Cicero, that was besieged by threescore thousand Gauls, was
greatly abashed when he saw all the Gauls upon him, who had left their siege
to come against him. By reason whereof he was feign to retire, and to put
himself into a place fit for a captain, which with a few men was to fight
against a great number of enemies, forbidding his soldiers to go out to
skirmish in any case, and compelling them to heighthen the rampires of their
camp, and to fortify their ports as men that were afraid, to the intent that
their enemies should have them in the more disdain, until such time as one
day he spied a fit occasion by their disorderly coming to assail the trenches
of his camp, and then he made a salie out upon them, and put them all to
flight, with the slaughter of a very great number of their men. To make an army
seem greater than it is.
Sometime to deceive the enemy a captain makes his army to seem greater than
it is; As when he raungeth his soldiers, his pioners, and all other sorts of
people in battle upon the side of a hill, and on the other side sets his
varlets and lackeies on horsbacke with the men of arms, so as it makes a long
and terrible hedge to look on. King Ferdinand used that policy, to keep the
lord of Presy from winning the rock of Naples. For he chose a place by the
which the French men must needs pass, and there did set his army and fortify
his camp. For he meant not to put any thing in hazard, because he had twice
already had proof of the valeantnes of the Frenchmen, to his very great
disaduauntage, and the loss of his men. And as he was a making his trenches,
the Frenchmen showed themselves to his Arragonians; which thing made them to
leave their work, and to put themselves in array ready to give battle. And
therewith he caused the pezants to be armed, so that all the hills glistered of
the troops of them. And below, the host of the Arragonians was imparked in a
strong place uneasy to be approached, which thing caused the French army to
stop short, and not to hazard the battle, least they should be too few in
respect of their enemies. Antonie fearing least Octauian that was coming
against him with his army by sea, should seize upon his ships, (which were
utterly unfurnished of men of war) if he came to the encounter: made the
gallislaues to arrive there, and set the^ in order of battle upon the hatches
of his ships, and afterward caused all the rows of oars to be pitched up an
end and set upright into the air on either side of the galleys, with their
prowes bent against Octauians galleys, at the entrance of the gulf that
begins at the point of Actium. And he held them so in order of battle, as if
they had been furnished as well with men of war to have abidden battle, as with
rowers. Wherefore Caesar being deceived by that sleight of war, retired. Hugh of
Moncada viceroy of Naples, and Gobby an expert and famous captain of
seamatters, intending to give battle on the sea to the Frenchmen, that were at
Naples under the conduct of Phillippin Doree, caused many fisherboats to be
added to their galleys, to amase their enemies withal. But yet this trick was
no impediment, but that Phillippin wan the battle. Agesilaus, to hide the
flight of such as had robbed him in his camp to go with the Thebans, and to
keep his men from being discouraged thereat; concealed them as much as he could;
and for the doing thereon, ordained that every morning when they went to visit
the straw beds of the soldiers, they should hide the stuff of them that were
gone thither.

CHAP. XVI. Of the pursuing of victory.
WHen the enemy is put to flight, the chief thing that the general has to
do, is to pursue his enemy with all speed, that he may astonish him the more,
and not to give him respit to resolve himself what to do. Julius Caesar
excelled in that point; for he never won battle, but he toooke his enemies
camp the same day. Alexander never left to pursue Darius, until he saw him
quiet in his own country. On the contrary part, this only fault is noted in
Hannibal, that he pursued not his victory after the battle of Cannas, by going
to besiege Rome then utterly dismayed with the present los^e. Insomuch that one
said unto him, He could well skill to get the victory, but not to use it.
Aetius was reproved for doing the like fault, when he would not proceed to make
a clean dispatch of Attila, as he might easily have done. But he feared least
if Attila were dispatched, he should have to do with the Goths, when they once
perceived themselves to be rid of such a common enemy. Lewis of Aniou won a
battle in the realm of Naples, wherein he discomfited his competitor
Ladislaus. And it is said that if he had pursued that victory without
suffering Ladislaus to take breath, he had continued lord of the realm, the
which he forwent for want of doing so. The which thing Ladislaus himself
confessed saying, that the first day of the battle, his enemies had been
masters both of his person and of his kingdom, if they had done their duty;
that the second day they had been masters of his kingdom, but not of his
person, if they had pursued the victory; and that the 3 day they had not any
power, either over his person or over his kingdom. Men must not be too what in
following a chase.
Also in chasing the enemy, a man must be well ware that he cast not himself
into danger, as it befell to Monsieur de Foys at Rauenna. The Achaians having
overthrown the Lacedaemonians in battle, would needs follow the victory. And
among others, Lysiadas pursued the chase among the men of arms, contrary to
the counsel of Aratus, general of the Achaians, who would not permit his men
to pass further, because of a great and deep bog which they were to pass,
and for that the way forth on was uneven and ill joined together, which thing
Lysiadas found true to his own harm. For when he was come thither, he found
himself in a place full of vines, walls, and ditches, where he was constrained
to disseuer his people, whence he could not get out again. The which gave
occasion to Cleomenes king of the Lacedaemonians, to charge upon him, to kill
him, and to disco^fit all his men. And this victory made the Lacedaemonians to
take such courage again unto them, that returning back they gave a fresh charge
upon the Achaians, whom it was easy to defeat, because the one half of their
power was gone from them. Demetrius having discomfited a wing of his enemies,
chased them so far, that he could not ioin again with his footmen; by reason
whereof they being destitut of their horsemen, were all discomfited. Philopemen
perceiving that Machauidas the tirant of the Lacedaemonians, had put his archers
to slight at the beginning of the battle, determined to let him pass on
without resisting him. And when he saw that the horsemen of Machauidas were far
enough off from his footmen; he made his men to march against the
Lacedaemonians, whose flanks were then bare of horsemen, and charging upon the
side of them, did put them to flight with a very great slaughter. The which
being done, he met suddenly with Machauidas coming back from the chase and
thinking to win all: and slew him as he would have leaped a ditch. The same
Philopemen did much better, when he had put the army of the tirant Nabis to
slight. For when he saw his enemies sled, not all on a heap toward the city,
but scattered themselves here and there abrod in the fields; he sounded the
retreit, forbidding his men to chase them any further, because the country
thereabouts was full of covert ways, and uneasy for horsemen, by reason of
brooks, valleys, and quagmires which it be houed them to pass. But suspecting
that toward the euentide when it began to wex dim, they would retire into the
city one by one, he sent a number of archers to lie in ambush along the
coasts and hills that are about the city, who made a great slaughter of Nabisis
men, because they retired not in troop, but one by one, and went to put
themselves into the hands of the archers, like silie birds that flee into the
foulers net. Julius Caesar regarded not to chase the horsemen whom he had put to
slight in the battle of Pharsalie, but went on to charge upon the battle of
footmen, as more easy to compass about and to enclose, who being assailed on
the flank by thos^ that had foiled the horsemen, and on the frunt by the tenth
legion, could not long stand and make head, but clean contrary to all their
hopes, saw that by seeking to entangle their enemies, they brought themselves
into the briers. How victory is to be used.
Sometimes it is neither good nor expedient to pursue the enemy too much, but
rather to make them a bridge of silver to pass away apace, least despair
drive them to adventure and to get the victory. The danger of fighting with
folk in despair.
For as Iornand says, Easily does he resolve himself to fight, which has no
means to fly away; as befell to the Goths against Stillico, and to the prince
of Wales against king John, who would not admit any reasonable composition. For
there is not so dangerous a thing, as the driving of a man into despair. That
was the cause that Themistocles, after he had gotten the victory against
Xerxes, in the battle upon the sea at Salamis, would not try his power any
further in fighting with him any more, but rather sent one of the grooms of
the kings chamber whom he had taken prisoner, to advertise the king that the
Greeks were resolved, to break the bridge of ships which he had made over
the streit of Hellespont. Whereof he was very willing to advertise him, to the
intent that in good time, he might withdraw himself out of the seas of his
territory, and pass over again into Asia with all speed possible, in the
mean time that he withheld the residue from pursuing him, whereof Xerxes was
so afraid, that he departed with all the have he could. Paul, a Roman
captain, perceiving that he could not hold out against the power of Totilas,
determined to make a salie out, and to sell his life as dear as he could. But
Totilas dreading this despair of his, granted him reasonable conditions, that
is to wit, either to give him entertainment to serve him, or to go home into
his own country with all his soldiers; for he would not lose his people
against men that were desperate. The Venetians at Foronouo would not stop the
way of king Charles, but let him go and return home at his ease; fearing least
through necessity turned into despair, he should make himself way with great
blood shed, of those which indiscreetly would have stopped him. Notwithstanding,
the Italians and Spaniards being carried away with the contrary counsel, found
to their exceeding great loss, how dangerous a matter it is to hold back an
army that is desperate, and driven by necessity to fight.

CHAP. XVII. Of the retiring of an army, and how to save it when it is in a
place of disaduauntage.
IT happens sometimes that an army, either through the default of the
guides, or otherwise, lights into such a place, as it stands them on hand
to retire speedily, if they will not be foiled. In this case the captain is
to use policy and quickness, as Hanniball did, The policy of Hanniball.
who being come into the bottom of a sack by the oversight of his guides; to
escape the danger wherein he was, because he had Fabius at his side, who would
have starued him for hunger, or made him to fight to his great disaduauntage;
chose out a thousand oxen, and tied to every of their horns a faggot of willow
and of vine twigs; commanding them that had the charge, that in the night time
when he should lift them up a token in the air, they should set the fagots on
fire, and drive the oxen up the hill, toward the passage which the Romans had
seized. He for his part had set his men in order of battle, and as soon as
night was come, he made them to march a leysurely pace. Now so long as the fire
that burned the fagots upon the oxens horns was but small, the oxen went fair
and easily up the foot of the hill, like as it had been an army marching in
array with torches lighted. But when the fire once burned the roots of their
horns, then they began to push one another, and to run here and there over the
hills for the pain that they felt. This did so astonish the Romans that kept
the passage, for fear least they should be beset, that they durst not tarry at
the passage where they were appointed, but leaving the straits fell to fleeing
toward their camp. By means whereof, anon the v^untcu^rors of Hanniball took
the passage, whereat he passed all his host without fear or peril. Brasidas
being charged by the Illirians, and intending to retire, did cast his army
into a square, and made them to march on so in good order; and he himself
tarried b^hind with three hundred of the best and forwardest soldiers of his
army, to abide the shocke of the foreriders. When he was in the plain, he
bethought himself that there was but one narrow passage, whereby he might save
himself, which was between two rocks, whereof the Illirians had begun to take
possession. Which thing when Brasidas saw, he commanded his three hundred men
that were with him, to run with all the have they could, to seize the strongest
of those two rocks, before the Illirians were assembled in greater number. The
which thing they did so readily and cunningly, that they drove the Illirians
thence, and by that means passed their army in safety.

The policy of Q^intius.
Quintius used another sl^ight to escape another danger wherein he was, when he
saw himself hemmed in on all sides by his enemies. And this it was. He sent a
cornet of Numidians to skirmish with them: who played their part so well, that
one while approaching them, and another while recoiling, they deceived their
wards, and having so done fell to pilling and wasting the count^ie, which was
the cause that the enemies drawing back their garrison to chase the N^midian
sorragers, gave leisure to the Romans to escape the danger wherein they were.
Epaminondas, to turn away Agesilaus, and to keep him from succouring the
Man^ineans, to the rescue of whom he was come with all his power: d^p^ted from
Tegoea one night, without any inckling thereof to the Mantineans, and went
straight to Spart^ by another way than Agesilaus came, insomuch that he had
surprised the city Sparta before they had any advertisement of his coming.
This feate caused Agesilaus to leave the Mantineans, and to return to Sparta
in great have. The policy of Artaxerxes.
Artaxerxes being entered very unadvisedly into the country of the Cadusians,
where he was like to sterue for hunger, was beset by two kings, that had their
armies inca^ped asunder the one from the other. Now Tiribasus having talked
with king Artaxerxes, and having made him privy what he meant to do, went unto
the one of those kings himself, and sent his son secretly to the other the
same time, doing either of them to understand, that his fellow had sent unto
Artaxerxes to desire peace in deceit of his companion. And therefore (quoth he)
is you be wise, ye must get the forehand, and make speed before the treaty be
concluded, and for my part I will help you what I can. Both the kings believed
his words, either of them thinking that his companion had maligned him;
insomuch that the one of them, sent his ambassadors unto Artaxerxes immediately
with Tiribasus, and the other likewise with his son, and so was peace
concluded betwixt them.

Eumenes also avoided a great danger, The policy of Eumenes.
by a ready shi^t. His soldiers had set themselves at large to pass the
winter, against his will, and held almost threescore leagues of the country in
length. Antigonus being advertised thereof, determined to ouerrunne them, when
they nothing suspected it, thinking it had been hard to have assembled them
together in small time. And to go unperceived, he took a rough and elendge
way. But he was encountered with so hideous winds, and so great cold, that his
men were constrained to ^est themselves, and to make provision against the
rigor of the season. For the doing whereof they kindled great store of fires to
warm them, the which being perceived by those that were nearest, gave warning
thereof immediately to the garrisons who were ^urther off from them, whereat
they were all afraid. But Eumenes appeased this great fear by and by, in
promising them that he would stop and stay that sudden surprise, so as their
enemies should be three days later in coming than they were looked for. Of
the co^cealing of a man's fear.
Thereupon he commanded his captains, to assemble their soldiers into a place
certain, and in the mean while he himself went to choose a place meet to
encampe in, that might be plainly seen, upon the top of a mountain where his
enemy should pass, in coming on the side of the wilderness. Then fortified
he his trenches, and departed them in four quarters, wherein he made good
store of fires, in such distance one from another, as are wont to be made in a
camp. This was no sooner done, but Antigonus came under the hill, who
perceiving the fires all along, was greatly displeased thereat, thinking that
his enemies had been advertised of his coming long before, and that they were
come to meet him. Wherefore fearing least he should be compelled, to come to
battle with them being fresh and well rested, whereas his men were weary and
half tired: he returned home an easier way. In the mean while Eumenes
gathered his men together at his leisure. Sometime a general of a camp
dissembleth his flight, and dislodgeth so secretly in the night, that his
enemies are not ware of it till it be too late, as king Francis the first did,
after he had vittailed Laundersey. And in this case he must make fires after
the accustomed manner, and in such sort as they may not go out of a long time:
he must set up men of straw in the tre^ches with some motions, he must lay
trunchio^s and bats of wood along the rampire, and leave matches burning, as
the marshall of Fois did at Parma, to the end it may be thought a far off, that
they be harquebusses, and such like conceits as a man may devise. But the thing
that may most deceive the enemy, is the leaving of some horsemen to come last
away, to occupy the vauntcurrors, in case that any be sent out to follow the
tail of the host. The ^eti^ing (...) day is d^^gerous.
But if the retreit be made by day, the danger is far the greater, as says
Bellay in his Warlike discipline; because that when a general retireth without
fighting, he abateth the courage of his own men, and gives heart to his
enemies. For they that have determined with themselves not to fight, and see
their enemies charging upon them, are in extreme fear, and do not any thing
of value, as befell to the Frenchmen at Saint Quintins, and to the Spaniards at
Zerbes, in the year a thousand five hundred and seven and fifty. For in
either of those discomfitures, were mo men undone for not resolving themselves
to fight, than had been if they had been resolutely bent unto it. The like
happened to Cleon chieftaine of the Athenians, against Brasidas chieftain of the
Lacedaemonians. Cleon went to view Amphipolis how to besiege it, not supposing
that Brasidas would have encountered him, neither had Cleon any desire that he
should, because he had not his whole power with him, without the which he would
not fight with him. But when he saw his enemies come upon him to bid him
battle, contrary to his expectation, he gave his men a token to retire, and
so they did with all the have they could. But when Brasidas saw his enemies
begin to shrink, he had the more courage to press upon him. The which he did
with such speed, that he overcame him and got the victory. He that will read
the 11. chapter of the fifth book of Thucidides, shall find there a retreit,
much resembling the retreit of the Frenchmen at Saint Quintins, and well near
a like discomfiture. Therefore a captain must conceal from his soldiers, what
fear he has to fight, and give them to understand, that his retiring is not
to eschew battle, but to draw his enemies into a more commodious place, and of
more advantage: and he must leave some horsemen in the face of his enemies, as
well to hide the departure of his footmen, as also to stay such as come to
skirmish with them: and in any wise he must take the places of advantage and
straits whereat his army is to pass, as Hanniball did by the policy
aforementioned, to the intent that the strait be not an impediment of the
passing of his army, and that it may serve to stop the enemies that would
thrust into it to pursue him. Philopemen seeing himself too weak, made his
retreit after that manner in the sight of his ^^^^ies, and put himself among
the hindermost, to make head against the enemies, that his army might march
away the more safely. And turning often his face upon his enemies, he made them
play so often, that at last being far disseuered from his troop, he was
astonished to see himself alone, entangled on all sides among a great number
of his enemies, and in the end after long fighting was taken prisoner. The
Romans having been well curried, by the Parthians, and considering that they
were not strong enough for them, resolved to retire. But they retired in good
order and leasurely, and fought valiantly when the Parthians came to trouble
them, always making head upon the enemy. But when they came to the discending
of any hills and mountains that were rough and steep, they were distressed by
the Parthians, with the shot of their arrows, and with their darts, because the
Romans could not come down but slowly step by step. Wherefore to save
themselves from those hail-stormes, The policy of the Romans.
they devised this shift. The legionarie soldiers carried ordinarily great
pauesses, to cover those that were lightly armed. These they made to be set by
them, and then kneeling down on the ground with the one knee, they cast their
pauisses before the^, and they of the second rank covered the former sort with
theirs, and the third rank likewise covered the second, and so forth through
out the rest, so as this manner of pauissing and covering one another, was made
like the rows of tiles on the side of a house roof, and (to see to) resembled
the greeces of a Theater, so as the shot of the arrows did but glaunce over
them. The Parthians seeing this behavior of the Roman legionaries, thought
they had been tired with travel, and thereupon couching their lances,
approached even to handstrokes. Then the Romans stepped quickly upon foot, and
with their Iaueli^s slew the foremost of them, and put the rest to slight.

How to save ones self when a battle is lost.
When a battle is lost, the retreit is very difficult, unless there remain a
great surplusage of horsemen. For then may they retire making head, as the
Swartrutters did at the battle of Mouncounter, and the Spaniards at Rauenna.
But commonly in a chase, every man shifts for himself. And in this case the
general may use dissimulation, when he knows that there is yet another power
ready, as Sertorius did, who to procure mean of safe retire to his men that
were disperpled, and to join them to a new power which he had caused to come,
and to gather them all together at their ease, fled openly to a certain town
that was strongly situated, and fell in hand with fortifying it, as if he had
meant to abide the siege there, for doubt least his enemies should come thither
to find him out. The which they failed not to do. But as soon as he understood
that his people were in safety, and the supply of new force ready, he went
out of the town to join his new forces together, with the which he came back
again to find his enemies. Nevertheless, the retiring into a town, except it
be defensible, and well provided of vittels, is very dangerous. Yet
notwithstanding, sometime a man is constrained to retire thither, The policy
of Agesilaus to escape out of a town at the coming of his enemies.
because he has none other place of refuge, as it befell to Nectanebus king of
Egypt, who was compelled to save himself in a fortress, wherein he was by
and by besieged by the pursuers, who forthwith began to make trenches round
about to keep him in, by reason whereof Nectanebus would have hazarded the
small power that was left him, rather than yield himself by constraint of
famine* if Agesilaus had not let him. For he would have no speech of
fighting, until he saw the trenches almost finished, and that there was no
great space between the two ends of them that they were not fully met
together. And then he showed Nectanebus how he might escape without danger,
because the trench should serve their turn, and be an impediment to the
enemies, that the whole multitude of them should not run upon them at once,
because it should guard them on either side, and by that means they should match
them with equal number. And in deed as soon as the evening was shut in, they
marched in order of battle out at the gap that was not entrenched, and having
foiled the first that encountered them, they saved themselves at ease.

Sometime a captain saves himself by the commodious seat of his camp, A
cawsey may serve for a retreat.
as Agesilaus did; who in accompanying Nectanebus king of Egypt, was compelled
to turn his back upon his enemy and to flee. Near unto his camp was a
maris with a narrow cawsey, cast up on both sides with broad and deep ditches
full of running water. He turned so long to and fro in his flight, that at
length he drew a great sort of the enemies that lay upon his hand, unto the
said cawsey, the which he passed, and afterward upon the midst thereof he
suddenly stopped their passage with the forefrunt of his battle, the which he
made equal to the breadth of the cawsey, and thereby made the number of his
people equal to the number of his enemies, because they could no more come
about him, neither on the sides, nor behind: by means whereof, after he had
fought a while, he put them all to flight. Eumenes being discomfited by
Antigonus, and fleeing before him, took a path a little out of the way clean
contrary to those that chased him, and traveled so long, till he came again
to the field where the battle was fought. There he caused the bodies of his
men that were slain in the battle, to be gathered up and to be buried with the
accustomed funerals, and also took him that had betrayed him, whom he had
pursued so freshly, that he gave him no respit to retire to the enemies. And he
might also have taken all the stuff and baggage of Antigonus, but that he
thought it would be a let to his escaping.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Ambushes.
NOw must I speak of Ambushes, which diverse times are the cause of the winning
of a battle, and sometime of the taking of a city, and are practiced
diversely, after as the places and occasions are offered. Hanniball excelled all
captains in that feat, Hanniball wan his victories by his well laying of
ambushes.
and never fought battle without laying some Ambush. I speak of the journey
of Trebia, wherein he overcame the Romans, by laying his brother Mago in ambush
in a wood with ten thousand men, that the Romans might be assailed both before
and behind, when they thought least of it. Demosthenes being general of the
Athenian army, fearing to be enclosed by the Peloponnesians, who were far
stronger than he in number of men, ^ent four hundred men to lie in ambush, in a
fair green way that was ouergrowne with bushes, commanding them to break out
when the battle was begun, and to lay upon their enemies with maine blows. As
soon as the battle was once begun, and that the men which lay in stale, saw
the Peloponnesians fetch about to have enclosed the Athenians, they assailed
them behind, so as they put them out of array, and finally to flight. When
Brasidas discomfited the Athenians at Amphipolis, he kept a good sort of men in
store, who were of the city, to fall upon the enemies when they were in the
hotest of the battle, saying that they which come suddenly to a conflict,
strike more fear and terror into them, than they that fight face to face. Selim
won the field of Acoma^ his elder brother, by means of an ambush. For before
the battle, he sent his brother in law Camolis with a thousand good horses,
into a forest near hand, willing him to come out and assail his enemies
behind, when every man was most busy on all sides: and that only thing won
him the battle. ^or Acomat being a valiant prince, entered violently every
where with a few men, and began to overthrow. Selims people: when suddenly
Camolis came upon him, and assailed his men behind, at such time as they fought
best, and made them to turn toward him with great outcries. Then Selims
footmen began to march close linked against Acomat. And Selims horsemen that
were fled perceiving that, returned to the battle, so as Acomats army was
environed on all sides, and cut in pieces.

Marius did as much to the Almans, by sending Marcellus to lie in a stale
behind a little hill, as I have said before. Julius Caesar used the like feate
against the Swissers, by sending Labienus with two legions in the night, to
win a certain hill, when he was to show himself the next morning in the
field, to bid the Swissers battle. But the enterprise abode unperformed, by
reason that he was falsely advertised, that the Gauls had taken the hill
aforehand, which caused him to draw his army back. Hanniball having chosen a
fair plain, wherein there was a deep vallie, and a certain little hill,
very aduauntageable for his army, which had been no hard matter for him to
have gotten; to the intent to draw Minutius to battle, left it indifferent for
a bait to train his enemies to the encounter. And one night he couched a
certain number of his men of war in those, and afterward at the break of
the day, sent a small troop to take the said hill: Minutius likewise sent out
his vauntcurrors, and after them all his men of arms, and finally when he saw
Hanniball come thither in person, he himself also went thither with the rest
of his army, and gave a great assault to have driven away those that defended
the hill. Then Hanniball perceiving that his enemy had cast himself into his
nets, gave the watchword to his men that were in ambush, who brake out with a
great noise upon the tail of the Romans, of whom they slew a great number at
the first dash, and had put the rest out of array, but for the ready succor of
Fabius, who aided him at need, and wrested the victory out of Hannibals hand.
Insomuch that Hanniball sounding the retreit, said smiling to his friends,
concerning Fabius: Did not I tell you that yonder cloud which we see houering
upon the top of the hills, would one day break out into a stormy tempest, that
should light upon us? Also Flaminius the Roman consul, was discomfited by a
like policy. For Hanniball suffered him to win the passage that was in the
hills above the lake of Trasimenus; but yet higher above the^, he had laid his
men in ambush. Now beyond the passage that was kept (by the Romans) there was a
fair plain, where Hannibals army was; so as the Romans being cooped up, in a
place where they had their enemies both before and behind, lost the battle.

The same Hanniball, perceiving that Marcellus, neither by vanquishing, nor by
being vanquished, could hold himself from troubling him, used this policy,
when he saw him nie him. Between the two camps was a certain piece of ground
of strong situation, and covered round about with bushes, and therein were high
places where a man might discover them far of toward both the camps, and at
the foot of it ran many springs and brooks; insomuch that the Romans marueled
that Hanniball who was come first, had not seized it. But his so doing, was for
that it seemed to him a very fit place to lay ^t^les in, to which purpose he
chose rather to reserve it. Therefore he (...) the woods, the watersprings, and
the valley throughout, with a good number of men of arms of all sorts,
assuring himself that the place it self would draw the Romans thither; wh^
(...) was not deceived. For the two consuls Marcellus and Cri^p^^^, went both
thither with two hundred and twenty horses, to view the place. Which thing
when the Carthaginenses perceived, they suffered them to come on, until they
were full against them, and then suddenly stepping up and winding Marcellus in,
began to draw to him both with shot and with handblowes, so long til he lay
dead upon the ground, and his fellow being wounded to death, recovered to his
camp by the swiftness of his horse, where he died by and by after. The
county of Anguien was discomfited almost after the same manner, as he would
needs give battle almost hard at the bars of Gaunt. For the men of Gaunt being
desirous to entrap him, because he was valiant in battle, laid a hundred men
in ambush for him without the town, who hemmed him in so close when he was
come a little too forward, that there was no mean to save him, and so fighting
valeantly, he died upon the field, ^
and all his men with him. Sometime a stale is made by occasion of a pretended
fear. As for exam^^e* Hanniball taking occasion to flee, upon the discomfi^^^
(...) ten or twelve hundred of his men, withdrew himself be (...) the hills as
a man dismayed, leaving in his camp^ from whence he was d^lodged, great
abundance of riches and vitte^^: and d^p^rting in the night, left the burning
fires in his camp, as (...) his meaning had been to conceal his departure from
the Romans. But this trick was discovered by (...) it stood him, in no stead.
Thomyri queen of the M^ssagets after the destruction of her army wherewith she
lost her son, had great reason to flee and to (...) the (...) that flight she
made a bait, to draw Cyrus forth into the mountains, from whence it was not
easy for him to get back again; and so it came to pass. For Cyrus
courageously pursuing the Queen, found himself hemmed in on all sides in the
mountains, where he lost an army of two hundred thousand men, and his own
life with them. The emperor Aurelian seeing his enemies too strong for him in
horsemen, and better weaponed and armed than his, prohibited the Roman knights
to abide the battle, and willed them to flee as soon as they were charged
upon, until they saw their enemies horses weary and tired with the pursuit;
and then to turn head. The which thing they did so handsomely, that the
emperor wan the victory. Paulus Vitellius having been troubled two whole
days together by the pesants on the coast of Genes, who flang stones and darts
and shot arrows at him from the hills, (yea and some of them were so bold as to
come down into the plain and to fight with him): bethought himself to
pretend as though he would save himself by flight, and retired so far, that
he was chased in full race by infinite pezants. But when he saw his game at the
best, he made all his troops to mount on horseback, and to turn their faces;
insomuch that all at once they charged upon the pezants of the mountains and
discomfited them. Secco a Florentine being desirous to draw Monfronk captain
of the Pisanes to battle, who of his own nature was forward enough to it,
laid an ambush between Bientina and Pisa, commanding them not to stir, until
he gave them their watchword. Then sent he forth certain light horsemen into
the fields, even into the view of the city Pisa, who a long while pursued the
forragers of Pisa. When Monfronk out of the higher part of the town saw these
forragers, and the^ that did co^uoy them, to be pressed by the ouergreat number
of them: he also made certain of his light horsemen to go forth, and anon he
himself followed them with his men of arms and footmen. Secco did the like on
his part, so as the fight was full, and well foughten. At length Secco of set
pupose began to recoile and turn his back, as it had been for fear. Monfronk
followed after him lively, not giving him any respit to assemble his men
together again, until he came to the stale, where issued out men both on
horseback and on foot, which so enclosed the Venetians and Pisanes on al
sides, that having hemmed them in every way, in the end they overthrew a great
number of them. Mal^testa Balion, to make his enemies that were in garrison at
Veron to fall into his snare, commanded his Albans to go into the marches of
Veron, and to gather all the cattle that they found, and to drive them toward
the stale, which he had laid a good way off from thence. The which the Albans
did with such noise, that the garrison of Veron understood it out of hand.
Whereupon some of them mounted upon their horses to pursue those robbers. The
Albans to conceal their craft the better, did first shock themselves on a
heap, and begin to turn their backs and to drive the cattle before them a full
trot. Which thing when Succar (who made the salie out) perceived, he made no
nicenes to pursue with all the have he could. Then Malatesta who waited for them
under the covert of certain trees, did suddenly give a watchword to assail
them, and therewith all running overthwart in an open path, assailed his enemies
behind as they pursued his men exceeding whotly; and enuironing them on all
sides, The policy of Bert^am of Guesclin.
did put them to the foil. Bertram of Guesclin perceiving the Englishmen were
come to succor the men of Sireth, and doubting least the townsmen would make
some salie out by reason of their coming, held himself still in his camp,
forbidding any man to stir, without his commandment. In the mean while, he
laid an ambush of two hundred men, and then went to pull down the pales that
were about the town, that the townsmen might the easlier issue out, which
disappointed not his hope at all. For there issued out about a threescore of
them, hoping that they which were without, would have set upon the Frenchmen
behind, as soon as they heard the bickering: but it was quite otherwise. For
being environed by them that lay in the ambush, they were all either slain or
taken, asore the Englishmen wist it. The mayor of Rochell intending to put the
city into the kings hand, bethought him of this policy. He told the captain
of the camp, that he had received letters from the king of England, whereby he
was commanded to take musters both of the townsmen and of the garrison. This
letter well sealed, was showed to the captain of the castle, who knew the kings
seal, but could not read. The mayor made semblance to read the letter, which
contained no such thing as he spoke, and yet nevertheless he red it as boldly as
if it had been written, clean contrary to the tenor of the writing. According to
this commandment, the next morrow every man was ready with his armor and
weapon in the place appointed, and the captain of the castle sent thither
threescore men well furnished, reserving not past a dosen or fifteen men to
keep the castle? Now the maire had aforehand laid two hundred men in ambush
behind the old walls and houses of the town, which were not far from the castle.
When they of the garrison were a little gone forth, they found themselves
enclosed by the townsmen well armed, and in great number before, and by them
that lay in the ambush behind, so as they could not return into the castle, and
the captain who with so few men was not able to resist them, was feign to yield
himself. Constantine being embarked at Pirey, The ambush of Constantine.
to give battle to Licinius that was at Adrianople, pretended to make a bridge
over the river Ebron, and to that end prepared a great quantity of timber, to
busy his enemies about the keeping of that passage, while he bestowed five
thousand men secretly in ambush in a wood. As soon as they were passed, he
himself also passed the river with a few men at a shallow foord, causing all the rest of his army to march leisurely after him, and he with those few men
that he had, assailed his enemies upon the sudden unprovided, by which taking
of them unawares, he did maruelously astonish them. But when they that lay in
ambush showed them^elues, then was there nothing but running away; insomuch
that all the host of Licinius was overthrown, and four and thirty thousand
of his men were slain in the field. The Enthalits seeing themselves ouerlaid by
the Persians, made countenance to flee to the mountains, among the which there
was a fair large way that had no way out, but was environed with hills. Now the
Enthalites in small number fled continually before the Persians, toward the
greater part of their army, the which they had laid in ambush in those hills,
where showing themselves suddenly on all sides, they made the Persians to
agree to what conditions they listed. Charles of Aniou being greatly incumbered
in resisting Conradine, The good counsel of Alard to Charles duke of Aniou.
who was entered with great power into the realm of Naples, found in very good
season, an old French knight named Alard, that came from Jerusalem. By whose
counsel Charles ordered his army in such sort, that he made three squadrons;
whereof the first two were led in the plain by the Palentine, the one marching
a mile before the other, and thereof was chieftaine Philip of Mountfort marshall
to Charles of Aniou, apparelled and attired like a king, with the standards of
Charles. And in the second squadron was the said Philip of Mounfort. In the
third squadron, which was of the men of most valor, marched Charles himself,
and this squadron lodged in a little valley underneath the enemies. Alard did
set himself upon the hill of Alba, between the valley and the plain, to give
order to all events as need should require. Conradine on his side had two
squadrons, much stronger than the squadrons of Charles, whereby the foremost
squadron of Charles was so well handled, that Philip of Mountfort was fain to
advance his squadron forward to the rescue thereof, and by that means was driven
to sustain the battle three hours, without stirring out of that place, and
yet in the end was discomfited and slain. Upon the brute of whose death, it
was believed that king Charles himself had been dead; insomuch that his men
taking it to have bin so, betook themselves to flight. By reason whereof
Conradines soldiers fell to rifling out of order, insomuch that even his guard
ran to the spoil, and left him all alone, accompanied with a few pages and
other people unfit for war. Alard seeing from the hill this fit occasion to do
some good exploit, caused Charles to go out of his little valley well and close
set in battelray, and with great violence to charge upon his enemies laden with
preies and in great disorder, whom he had no great ado to break asunder:
insomuch that they were all slain, taken, or wounded; and by that good counsel
Charles abode master of the field. The duke of Guise did the like at the
battle of Dreux, as I have said before. For when he saw that the prince of
Condie was rushed into the battle, where the constable was who was taken: he
stood still and would never stir to rescue the others, but waited still to see
them in some greater disorder, until they fell to the spoil, as if they had
won all. A policy of Sertorius.
And then he rushed upon them so boistously, that within a while he was master
of the field. Metellus finding himself short of vittels at the siege of the
Lagobrits, sent Aquini^^ with six thousand men, to recover some vittels.
Sertorius being advertised thereof, laid an ambush for his return, in a valley
covered with wood, where he bestowed three thousand men in wait to set upon him
on the back, while he himself assailed him on the face. By this means he put
him to flight, and took the most part of his men prisoners, so as Metellus was
driven to levy his siege with dishonor. The Spaniards being within Pauie, made
a salie out upon John Medices, and foiled his guard. To have revenge hereof,
John Medices laid a double ambush, the one in ditches near the town, and the
other further of. The Spaniards spared not to make another saly out; and when
they had chased those good fellows a good way, they perceived the ambush a far
off, wherewith they began to retire. But their way was cut off by the other
ambush that was laid nearer the town, insomuch that finding themselves assailed
both ways at once, they had no mean to save themselves, but were all put to
the sword.

CHAP. XIX Of the taking of Towns.
THere are diverse manners of taking of towns, either by force or by policy. We
will treat here of policies, and only of some such policies as the men of old
time have used. For new be daily devised, the which I ouerpasse with silence,
because it were unmeet for me, to give counsel to such as have bin at them and
seen them, and have invented and practiced them. Sometime great speed, and
sudden coming unlooked for, give occasion of the taking of a town, as it did
to Demetrius at the city of Athens, The policy o^ Demetrius.
which had received the garrison of Ptolomie; whom Demetrius was desirous to
expulse, to the intent that Ptolomie should not pruaile against him in so great
a city. Wherefore he rowed thither so swiftly with his galleys, that he was
seen there ere his coming was heard of. Insomuch that Ptolomies garrison,
supposing they had bin Ptolomies galleys, went out to receive them. But
perceiving too late what they were, they had no way to defend themselves; for
Demetrus was come within the haven, the entrance whereof he had found wide
open. And to bring his enterprise the easilier to pass, he made proclamation
by the sound of a trumpet, that his father Antigonus had sent him to deliver
the Athenians from all garrisons, and to set them free: the which thing caused
the Athenians to turn unto him, and to yield him the town, so as the garrison
was put away, and they were set at liberty. Nicias intending to lay siege to
Siracuse, sent a man of Catana thither as a spy, to tell them that if they
would take the camp of the Athenians unawares, they should come with all their
power toward Catana at a certain day that he appointed, because the Athenians
would for the most part of the time be within the city, wherein there were a
number of natural citizens, which favoring the affairs of Siracuse, were
determined to seize the gates of the city as soon as they perceived the
Siracusanes to approach, and at the same time to set fire upon the ships of the
Athenians; and there were a great sort of the towns men of that confederacy,
who did but wait for the day and hour of their coming. By this policy he
made the Siracusanes to come out into the fields with all their power, so as
they left their city utterly empty, and he in the mean season departing from
Catana with all their fleet, took the haven of Siracuse at his ease, and chose a
place to plant his camp in, where his enemies could not indomage him. The
Athenians having secret conference with some of the city Megara, ceised one of
the gates before dailight, by the which the citisens were wont to take in a
Brigantine, which they sent a nights to scour the sea, and before day brought
it in again upon a chariot, within the enclosure of the walls, which went from
the city to Nisey, where was their haue^, which was the cause that the gate
could not be shut so soon, but that the Athenians ceised it, and mounted upon
their walls, giving a push to take their city. But the garrison of the
Peloponnesians arrived there in that instant, who had been a sufficient
impediment to the Athenians, if the Athenians had not bethought them to make
proclamation by the sound of a trumpet, That all the Megarians which would yield
themselves to the Athenians and lay away their weapons, should be saved. Which
thing when the Peloponnesians heard, fearing least all the townsmen had bin of
that confederacy, they forthwith forsook the sea, and saved themselves at
Nisey. Alcibiades took the city Celibrie in Hellespont, by intelligence with
some of the citizens, but not without some peril of his own person, yea and
to his confusion, if he had not remedied the matter quickly. He should have bin
near the city by a certain hour, and for his watchword a burning cresset
should have bin put up about midnight: But they that were within, were
constrained to put up their token before the hour, for fear of one of the
confederacy, who repented him of his doing. Which token when Alcibiades
perceived, although he had not his troops ready, yet would he not let slip
the occasion, but taking with him thirty men, and appointing his troops to
follow him with all speed possible, ran straight to the walls. There was he
received, and the gate opened unto him, whereinto he entered with his 30. men,
and 20. others that came by chance. But they were no sooner entered, but they
heard the townsmen coming in arms against them, so as there was no likelihood
that he should have escaped if he tarried there. On the otherside he was loath to
flee, and leave the taking of the town. Wherefore he advised himself upon the
sudden, The policy of Alcibiades.
to cause silence to be made by the sound of a trumpet; and when the noise was
appeased, he made it to be proclaimed, that the Celibramians should not take
weapon against the Athenians. This did somewhat cool those that were desirous
to fight, because they doubted least all the army of the Athenians had bin
already within the city. And so as they were parlying, the rest of his army
came in, by means whereof he became master of the town. Also he used another
policy to get Bizance, which is now called Constantinople. For lying in siege
before the city, he had secret intelligence with two of the town, which had
promised to betray it unto him. To bring this enterprise to pass, he made a
show to levy his siege, and to go his way into Ionie with great diligence, for
some that had made an insurrection there. And in very deed he departed in the
open day with all his galleys: but the same night he returned back again, and
coming on land with his men that were best armed, approached near the walls
without making any noise. And he had appointed the rest of his men that were in
the ships, that in the mean while they should with all speed row into the
haven* and there make as great noise as they could, to the intent that the
Bizantines should draw thitherward. In which mean time he himself by the
help of his intelligencers, entered the city and won it, howbeit not without
fighting. As Robert of Artois besieged Vannes, The policy of Robert of Artois.
he caused an assault to be given in three places at once, and the assault
endured all the day long. At night every man retired; and the French men put
off their armor to rest and refresh themselves. But Robert of Artois suffered
not his men to unarm them, but only to rest them a little, and to eat and
drink. Afterward having set his three battles in order, he began the assault
again in two places, commanding the third battle to stand still, until it
were time to depart: and because it was night, the assailants had kindled so
great fires, that they which waked on the sudden, went right whether soever
they saw the fires, without attending any commandment of the captain, and
without putting themselves in order. During the time that every man's hands were
full, the third battle chose another part of the town unfurnished of warders,
and there setting up store of ladders, did so much that they entered the city,
and put the whole garrison of Vannes to flight. The earl of Derby perceiving
that he could not win the city of Naunts by assault, The earl of Derbies
p^p^licie.
used this policy by the advice of one Alexander of Chaumount, a Gascoin. In
the morning he made countenance to dissodge, leaving only a hundred men behind
under the leading of the lord Wentworth, telling the^ what they should do. And
in a covert valley not far from the town, he laid a stale. The men of Naunts
ran with 400 men upon the 100: who retiring to the passage, drew the Frenchmen
into the ambush. And when they were passed, one company went right to the
town, and took the gates which they found open, (for the Frenchmen thought
them to have been their own men,) and they that issued out were enclosed both
before and behind, and utterly ouerthrown. The Seneschal of Beauquere
understanding that great store of rother beasts should pass by the town of
Athenie, sent threescore men to drive them, and in the mean while lay in ambush
himself near the town. The Englishmen with the more part of the garrison of
the town, ran to the rescue, so far that they fell into the ambush, who
chased the Englishmen so lustily, that they defeated them every chone, and
therwithall went straight forth to the town, the which they took by assault,
for want of men to resist them. Lucullus purposing to take the Mitelenians by
policy, A policy of Lucullus.
besieged them with maine force. Then suddenle in the open day, and in the
sight of the townes-men, he mounted upon the sea, and rowed toward the city
Elea. But in the night he returned back sectetly, and without making any noise,
couched himself in ambush near the town. The Mitilenians doubting nothing,
went out unadvisedly, and without order the next morning; and without standing
upon their guard, went to rifle the camp of the Romans. But Lucullus stepping
out suddenly upon them, took a great number of them prisoners, and slew about
five hundred that stood at defense, and wan about six thousand slaves.
Frederick used another policy to get Saminimat. A policy of Frederick
Barbarossa.
It happened that he had received a great loss before Parma, where his army
was overthrown, and he was feign to take the way of Tuscan for to return into
his realm of Naples. There was no likelihood that he minded the^ of Saminimat,
that had played the traitors and rebels against him, neither was he determined
to rest there. But to compass them without great pain or study, he
dissembled their treason, and chose a number of his best, most courageous, and
most loyal soldiers, whom he caused to be chained together as if they had bin
prisoners. The which being done, he caused his mules to be laden with a great
sort of hampers, full of all kind of armor and artillery, and covered them
with the same sumpterclothes, wherewith the sumpters of his chamber were wont
to be covered. These prisoners so made at the instant, he sent unto Saminimato,
with Peter of the Vineyard, his steward of household, secretary and chauncelor,
who had the whole government thereof, and was a prisoner in deed, accompanied
with messengers of credence, which should declare unto the inhabitants of the
town, that the emperor having not a more loyal town, seut them those
prisoners men of importance, and his preciousest stuff with them, praying them
to keep them carefully till his return, because that being now on his way
into his kingdom of Naples, he would not be troubled with such baggage. The
men of Saminimato seeing the emperor in arms round about them, made good
countenance, notwithstanding that they mistrusted themselves to be bewraid, and
thereupon showing themselves very obedient, received all the train with good
cheer, causing them all to come into the city. When the soldiers of
Frederick saw their convenient time, they cast off their chains, (which were
disposed in such sort as they might vnlinke them when they list) and out of
hand taking them to their weapons, wan the gates, whereat they let in the
emperor Fredericks army, so that the town was yielded to his obeisance.

The Slauonians used another policy to take another town. There approached a
certain of them to the walls, so few in show as were not sufficient to take the
town, and yet did they incontinently give an assault. They that were within
beholding the small number of them, ran out upon them, and followed beating them
a good way off from the town. And when they were a sufficient farnesse, the
residue showed themselves behind them, and slew a great sort of them, so as
they could not recover into the city again. Then the Slauonians coming to
the assault, entered at ease, because there were none but the citizens left to
defend the town. The king of Portugal perceiving how the Britons that were
within Feroll in Castile, made often salies out; laid fifty men in ambush, and
a three days after, went with a few men and skirmished hard at the barriers of
the town. The Britons failed not to come out against him, and pursued the
Portugals so hard, that they took about five and twenty of them, and were
fain to open the barriers wide, to let in the prisoners, and to let out those
that pursued them. At length, they that lay in ambush, riding as fast as they
could, right to the barriers, and making themselves masters of them, entered
mingled with the Britons into the town. The men of Capua being desirous to
receive the Imperials into the city, and to expulse the Frenchmen, willed the
Imperials to lay themselves in ambush near the town, and when they knew them
to be laid, they would persuade the Frenchmen to make a rode out of the city,
to fetch vittels before they were more straightly besieged. The Frenchmen
perceiving their reason to be apparent, went out to do so. But when they came
back again, they found the gates shut, and understood that the Capuans had
received the Imperials in at another gate. Sertorius used an other policy to
win the Characitanians, A policy of Sertorius.
which did nothing but rob him, and spoil him, and mock him without fear,
because they retired themselves into rocks and caves that could not be come
unto. He considered that right against their caves, there was a light clay that
fell to dust like sand, the which the northwind blowing full into their caves,
did ordinarily carry up that in dust, and drive it into their dens. When
Sertorius had detected this in himself, and understood by the inhabitants of
the country therabouts, that the like was don customably: he commanded his
men to gather together a great quantity of that light earth, and thereof to
make a huge mount right against their caves. When this great mount was
finished, he made his horsemen trot up and down on it, and anon the wind taking
the dust as soon as it was raised from the ground, carried it full into their
caves, striking it right into the eyes and eielids of them. Whereby their eyes
were stopped, and their cave was filled with a hot and sultrie air. Insomuch
that being not able to take breath but with great pain, they submitted
themselves the third day after to his discretion. When a man has taken a
city, it is not enough to enter into it, and to sack it, except he set a good
guard at the gates, for fear of afterclaps; as befell to the Castilians in
Spain, who with the help of the Grisenians, rebelled against the Romans for
their ill using of them, and slew a good sort of them. As soon as Sertorius
heard the uproar, by and by he gat him out of the town with a few of his men,
and assembling together such as were escaped, returned again to the town, and
finding the gate still open, whereat the Grisenians were entered in, he slipped
in also, and setting a good guard at the gates, (in which point the Grisenians
had ouershot themselves) and in other parts of the town, did put all to the
sword that were of years to wear armor. Then apparelled he his soldiers, in
the apparel and armor of those whom he had slain, and went in that manner to
the city of the Grisenians, from whence those came by whom they were surprised
by night. The Grisenians thinking at the sight of their own furniture, that
they had been their own men, opened them their gates, and went out to meet
them as their friends, whom they thought to have dispatched their matters very
well. So the Romans slew a great number hard at the gates of their city; and
the rest yielding themselves to the mercy of Sertorius, were by him sold. At
such time as the prince of Orange sacked the city of Rome, Guy Ran^on came to
the gates with his light horses, and eight hundred harqu^buzers, thinking to
have gone in to defend it: but when he understood those news, he retired
back. Many were of opinion, that (considering the disorder of the Imperials,)
if he had entered in by the castle (which was unguarded) he might have done
some notable feat, or at leastwise he had delivered the Pope. But (as it is
commonly said) little woteth a man what is done in his enemies host; and it had
bin a great hazard, to have put himself in danger with so few men, against so
great a number of enemies. Bellisarius perceiving that he could not win
Panormus by land, A policy of Bellisarius.
made his ships to come into the haven: Then having manned certain small
vessels with crossebowes, he made them to mount up into the tpps, (the which
were high^r than the wall) and from those small ships to shoot incessantly at
the townsmen, whom they saw lie open; insomuch that the townsmen seeing
themselves so greatly annoyed by them, were feign to yield the town to
Bellisarius. A policy of the lord of Estourne^
The Lord of Estourney surprised the town of Audenard in this manner. He laid
four hundred chosen men in ambush, near the gate of Graundmount. Then sent he
two chariots laden with provision, and four soldiers apparelled like carters
to drive the chariots, well armed under their apparel, who feigning them selves
to come out of Henault, caused the great gate to be opened unto them. Now when
they came upon the bridge, they stayed, and plucked out the taypinnes that held
the traces. The warders being offended at their long tarying, took the horses
by the heads to make them go, but the chariots abode behind, because the horses
were loosned. Then the warders perceiving themselves to be deceived, began to
strike the carters, who defended themselves so well, that they slew two of the
warders. In the mean while the lord of Estourney having good leisure to
approach, came at the instant, and took the gate, whereby he became master of
the town. If they that enterprised to take the city of Turin in the year
1542, had so vnyoked their oxen, or turned a chariot within the gate, the town
had bin lost. For it was saved alonely by the letting down of the portcullis,
which stopped a ten or twelve hundred men that came in good array, while those
that were entered into the town in chariots covered with hay, were fighting at
the gate, and at the place. The city of Ortingas was taken after that manner.
Peter of Auchun, who lay in garrison at Lourd, sent in the month of May, two
good soldiers apparelled like seruingmen, to seek masters in the town. They
had not been long there, but they were provided of marchantmen: whom they
served so well, that their service was very well liked. About the midst of
August, a fair was kept in that town, whereunto many merchant strangers
resorted. Now while the townsmen bought and sold, and made good cheer, Peter
of Auchun went out about midnight, and laid himself in ambush within a vvood
near the town, having sent six men before with two scaling ladders, whereby
they entered secretly into the town, by the help of the two soldiers, while
their masters was drinking. As soon as they were entered, the two soldiers
brought the^ to the gate where was the body of the guard ready to set forward
as soon as they should whistle the^. Herewithal the two serving me^ knocked at
the gate, telling the warders that their master had sent them for good wine.
The warders knowing them opened the gate, and suddenly at a vvatchword, the
other six soldiers came running thither and slew the warders. This being done,
they took the keys of the gate, and did let down the bridge so softly, that
no man perceived it. As soon as the bridge was down, they began to sound a
blast of deceit, whereat, Peter of Auchun and his company set forward, took
the bridge, and made himself master of the town. To famish the city of
Athens, Lisander used this devise. After he had overcome the Athenians by sea,
The policy Lysander.
he determined to lay siege to Athens. But before the doing thereof, he went
with his fleet to all the sea-townes, where he commanded upon pain of death,
that as many Athenians as were there, should get them home to Athens, which
thing he did upon a policy, to pester them up close together within the walls of
Athens, that they might the sooner be famished; and so it came to pass. For
whereas he was not able to overcome them by force, he suffered them to rest a
while, and afterward when he knew that vittails began to wax scant, he besieged
them so narrowly, that they were feign to yield the city to the Lacedaemonians.

To attempt the taking of the rock of Vandois which was impregnable, the
vicount of Meaus laid a stale of 1200 men in a cave near the fort, and sent
others to skirmish with them at their bars, charging them that if any came out
of the town against them, they should retire softly until they came to the
stale. The Frenchmen failed not to make countenance, but went slowly to the
skirmish, as if they had been men unwilling and smally trained, which thing
gave courage to Guion du sell (who had the government of the fort in the absence
of Amerigoll Marcell) to sallie out with certain of the garrison. And he
chased the Frenchmen so far, that he was enclosed between their ambush and
their camp, so as he could not save himself, nor any of his company.
Whereupon the Frenchmen approached nearer the castle, and told him that he and
all his companions should die, if the ^ortresse were not yielded, and that if
it were yielded, they should all be saved. They that were within perceiving
that they were like to lose the best men of all their company, yielded
themselves at his persuasion. The earl of Arminak was discomfited almost after
the same sort by Jacques of Berne, before Alexandria: which was the cause that
the siege of Alexandria was broken up.

CHAP. XX. Of the defending of Towns.
THere is not so great a mischief, but there is a remedy for it. And as the
common saying is, Well assailed, well defended. For when he that is within a
town, knows that another would have it: then by good watch and careful
diligence, he keeps himself from being taken on the sudden. And if he be
advertised of his enemies coming, he does what he can to keep them from
coming near the ditches, until the greatness of their number enforce him to
retire. The like is done when a city is to be assailed by sea and by land. For
he that is within, does either by force or by policy impeach their landing as
much as he can, as did that gallant pyrat named Franday, at Port Venerie. The
Arragonians intending to have taken that place upon the gate toward the sea,
approached with the prowes of their galleys to the haven, to have set their
soldiers a land. But Franday had caused the great stones, whereupon they were
to leap, in coming down from their galleys, to be besmeared with grease, so
as the most part of them fell down through the slippernesse of their footing,
and the cumbersomnesse of their armor, among the stones which were very high.
Sometimes a city is in hard case, for that they cannot certify their state by
reason of the straitness of the siege. A pol^^ie of the Goths.
In this case they must do as the Goths did, who being straightly besieged by
Bellisariu, and not able to give intelligence of their distress to Vitigis,
made a great noise one midnight: whereat Bel^^sarius wondering, and fearing some
ambush or treason, commanded that every man should stand upon his guard,
without removing out of his place. While Bellisarius was thus musing, more to
guard himself than to look to the walls of his enemies: the Goths sent out two
men, The policy o^ Bellisarius.
to give knowledge to Vitigis in what state they stood. But Bellisarius did yet
much better when he himself was besieged in Rome. For when he understood that
succors were coming to him, fearing least the Goths should set upon them by
the way; he caused a certain wall, vvherwith one of the gates of the city
was dammed up, to be beaten down in the night, and set a good number of men
of war at it, causing a thousand horsemen to issue out at one of the other
gates, whom he commanded to return to the same gate again when they were
charged by their enemies. Now while they were in hand with their enemies,
Bellisarius went out with a great power at the gate that was toward the
sea, whereof his enemies had no mistrust, and easily putting those to flight
that encountered him on that part, he went on till he came right against the
other gate, where he assailed his enemies behind, as they were fighting with
his men that had issued out first, in which conflict many of his enemies were
slain; who being sufficiently occupied in defending themselves, gave leisure
to the Greeks to join with the army of Bellisarius, without any let.
Sometimes there is scarcetie of vittels in a town, so as it needs to be
vittelled. And therefore he that has the charge thereof, seeks by all means to
get some in, without the enemies priuitie. Bellisarius intending to vittell
the city of Rome, which was streitlie besieged by the Goths, under the
leading of Totilas; devised this shift. Totilas had made two towers of timber
to be builded upon a bridge over the river Tiber, to keep men from coming to
Rome by water. And without the overthrowing of these towers, there was no way
to pass. To do it by plain force it was not possible for him, for he had too
few men. Wherefore he took two lighters, and joined them together with rafters:
upon the which he builded a tower of timber, of equal height to the other two;
upon the top whereof he had a little boat full of pitch and brimstone. After
this tower boat followed two hundred other boats covered over with board, and
made full of loope holes, that his men standing surely fenced in them, might
shoot at their enemies. Within those boats he put great abundance of vittels
guarded by the choicest of his soldiers, by whom upon either bank of the river
(as near as might be) he sent of his soldiers both on horseback and on foot.
When he came at the towers of the bridge, he cast upon them the said little
boat that was full of brimstone, which immediately burned up the towers and the
two hundred men that were within them. In the mean while the Romans brake
down the bridge, and made way for the litters that conveyed the vittels, the
which had out of all doubt gone forth to the city, had it not ben for the
fault of Isaces one of Bellisarius captains, who by his rash going out of the
haven town of Ostia, contrary to Bellisarius appointment, was discomfited and
taken prisoner by the Goths. For Bellisarius being abashed thereat, and thinking
that the town it self had been taken, wherein was his wife and all his
mouables, returned suddenly back thither, without accomplishing his
enterprise. Sometimes either men or money be to be conveyed into a town; To
get vittels or money into a city.
in whch behalf example may be taken at the doings of Bellisarius: who bearing
that money was brought him from Constantinople, to the intent that the bringer
thereof should not be taken by the Goths that besieged him in Rome, caused a
report to be noised, that he would give battle to the Goths. In the mean
while he sent out two hundred horsemen to safecundit the money, and the next
morning caused his men to go out and raunge themselves in battel-ray; and the
Goths did likewise. At noone he caused his men to dine, and in the afternoon
fell to skirmishing, so that while they were bickering so together, Attalius
that brought the money, entered into Rome without any danger. The duke of
Guise understanding the distress wherein the Marshall of the March was, within
Peron, for want of men and poulder; departed from Han with two hundred men of
arms and four hundred chosen harquebusers, and coming by night near the
camp of his enemies, led his harquebusers secretly and without noise to the
side of the marris: and having with him all the trumpets that he could get
together, did suddenly give an alarm to all parts of the emperors camp, so as
they took them to their weapons. During this great alarm, which let the
enemies to intend to any thing else, or to hear the flashing of the water
through the which the dukes me^ went, the harquebusers were received into the
town, every of them carrying upon his neck, a bag of poulder weying ten pound.
The viceroy of Naples and Antonie de Leua, to convey money into Pauie, procured
two men whom they trusted, to carry four hoggesheads of wine to sell, to the
French camp that besieged the town, within the which hoggesheads were three
thousand French crowns. And for the selling of their wine, they went, and
lodged as near the town as they could. Antonie de Leua being advertised
thereof, made a sallie out on another side, and while they were busy at the
skirmish, one of his men brake the hoggesheads and took away the three
thousand crowns, with the which he saved himself in the town. Sometime
sallies are made of purpose to surprise the enemies in their camp, as the
Siracusans did at the camp of the Athenians. But Nicias to remedy the danger
speedily, commanded fire to be put to wood, and to the engines that he had made
to beat the town, which doing caused the Siracusans to stay, because that
when they saw so great a flame in the air between them and the Fort, they
returned out of hand to the town. Many times they that are besieged have
scarcity of water, and by that means are in danger to yield themselves, if it
be not provided for, as Se^torius was in peril to have done to the Lagobrits.
Who caused two thousand. Goats skins to be filled with water, promising a
good sum of money for the bringing of every skin. The which thing many men
undertook. And therewithal he gave commandment at the delivering of the
bags, that all unnecessary mouths should forthwith depart out of the town,
that the water might serve them the longer, which abode to defend the town.
Sometimes skirmishes are made to vex the besiegers, that they may be made to
break up their siege; A sally of the Englishmen.
and such sallies do erewhiles turn to the vvinning of a battle, as befell
to the Englishmen under the conduct of the earl of Derbie before Amberoch. Who
having laid a thousand men in ambush in a wood, and being advertised that
succors were coming to the besieged, went together upon the Frenchmen and
defeated them. This discomfiture came of the Frenchmens disdaining of the
Englishmen, for the small number of them, whom they thought not to have bin so
bold, as to have assailed them, by reason whereof, they stood not upon their
guard. As much befell the Athenians, who were overthrown by Brasidas, because
they despised him for the small number of his men, not looking that he durst to
have encountered them. But Brasidas taking this their skornfulnes for an
occasion to do some good exploit, did set upon them unawares, and discomfited
them. Mariu^ did as much to the Carthaginenses, after the discomfiture of the
Scipios. For he coniecturing that they would be negligent and disdain him,
took them unprovided. The Suissers did as much to the Frenchmen, by the advice
of Martin their coronell, who told them that the Frenchmen coming but to have
a lodging, looked for nothing less than the coming of the Suissers, and that
the accidents that happen unlooked for and vnforseen, do soonest overtake men.
According to which counsel, they assailed the Frenchmen and overcame them.
Wherefore the surest way is, not to despise the enemy, but to stand warily
upon ones guard. Nothing is so dangerous as an enemy vndistrusted.
For nothing is so dangerous, as an enemy vnmistrusted. Necessity drove
Leopold to make a sallie out against Walter Brenne, the which fell out well
and happily on his side: For he discomfited those that had besieged him, and
took the county of Brenne prisoner, as I have said in another place. But to
return to our matter again. Oliver of Clisson and sir Walter Mannye, having
intelligence that Lewis of Spain meant to cut off the heads of John Butler and
Hugh Fresnoy; used this policy to save them from that inconvenience. They had been long besieged within Hannibout by Charles de Blois. Now one day about
dinnertime, they issued out of the town with a thousand men, and went with
great force to assail the camp of Charles de Blois, so that all of them were
at the alarm, and drew toward the trenches where the fight was sharp and
hard on both sides. In the chiefest of the fight, Walter Manny and Oliver
Clisson issued secretly out at a little postern, and came on the backside of
the host unperceived, to the tent of Charles de Blois, where the said Butler
and Fresnoy were, whom when they had recovered, and had mounted them on two
coursers which they had brought thither of purpose, they returned again to
Hannibout the same way they came out. Reuze being besieged in Crescentine by
Siluius, and finding occasion to invade his enemies on their right side, which
was not fortified with any trench or rampire, because of a marris which had no
coming to it but by a broken causey, coniectured that his enemies would
misdoubt nothing that way, wherefore covering the marris in the nightime with
hurdls and planks, he caused his footmen to pass over, and he himself stayed
in a convenient place with his horsemen, to succor them if need were. In which
time the footmen quitted themselves so well, that they slew the skoutwatch, and
then passing on to the camp, threw wild fire upon the vvarders half asleep,
and upon the soldiers lodgings that were nearest, which they had brought with
them closed in trunks of wood. Insomuch that their tents were burned in the
turning of a hand, and the fire glistering through all the camp in the night,
struck such a terror into the soldiers so assailed both with sword, and with
the fire that was cast incessantly out of the trunks and firepots; that
without any regard of Siluios commandment, they fled thick and threefold, to
shun the fire. By reason vvherof the Venetians falling upon those dismayed
people, defeated a great part of them; and bending their artillery upon them
tha^ fled, killed a great number of them, and so returned with a very great
booty of horse and men. The Plateians being streitly besieged by the
Peloponnesians, and hopeless of all succor, found this shift to get out of
the town. The Peloponnesians had made a double wall about the city Plateia,
one toward the town to keep them from coming out, and the other along the
side of the camp, to keep the succors of the Athenians from going in, which
walls were distant sixteen foot asunder. Between the two walls were the
lodgings of the^ that guarded the^, and at every tenth battlement were towers
that coupled the two walls together, so as a man could not pass along the wall,
but he must go through those towers, into the which those that kept the watch a
nights, withdrew themselves when it rained. To compass their determination,
the Athenians made skaling ladders full as high as the walls, the height whereof
they took, by considering the thickness of the brickes whereof it was made,
numbering them from the top to the foot. The townsmen therefore having gotten
intelligence of the manner of the watch, spied a night when it rained and the
wind blew loud, and the moon shined not: and came to the foot of the wall
unperceived, because of the darkness of the night, and went severally by
themselves one from another, least the iustling of their harness together,
should make any noise. When they had set up their ladders against the void
spaces where they understood that no man warded, they that brought the ladders
mounted up first, and after them the rest. Now when a good sort of them were
up, they that watched within the towers perceived them, by a crannie of one of
the battlements that was cast down in their coming up. Insomuch that at the
first alarm, all the camp came to the wall, not knowing wherefore, by reason
of the night and the foul wether. On the other side the Plateians that abode
in the city, went out and assailed the walls in other places, to busy their
enemies heads, who were all sore amazed what the matter should be, so as
neither they, nor those that guarded the towers, stirred not out of their
places. Nevertheless, they that had the charge to releive the watch, lighted
up beacons on the side toward Thebes, to betoken the coming of enemies. Which
thing the townsmen perceiving, lighted up a great sort of them upon their
walls also, to the intent that their enemies should not know wherefore those
fires were made, and that their companions might save themselves, before any
rescues came to the watch. In the mean time, those that mounted up first,
won two towers, and having slain them that were within, got up them fellows
that remained yet beneath, putting those back with shot and throwing of
stones, which came to rescue the wall. Insomuch that all they which were to
salie out of the town, mounted up the wall, and then going down from the
towers, came to the ditches on the outside, upon the brim whereof they found
those that should have succored the watch, who had lighted up the beacons; by
means whereof, being well and perfectly seen, they were overthrown by the
Athenians, and by the townsmen with shot of arrows, And so the Plateyans
passing the ditch with ease, did knit themselves well and close together, and
so passed all in good order by the way that leads to Thebes, because they
doubted that the way to Athens was guarded. But when they had gone that way a
while, they turned aside the way of the hill, and by a privy path came all to
Athens without disturbance.

Sometime to command a town, they make a mount: and in old time it was
wont to be made against the wall, because there was none other fighting but
with handblowes, for artillarie was not yet invented. Cabades king of Persia
made such a mount of earth to be cast up against the wall of Amyda, which he
saw to be impregnable. But the Amydans to defend themselves from it, made a
mine within their wall, whereby they drew away a good piece of the ground that
vpheld the mount, and underpropped it with timber-worke, that it might not be
perceived. And when they saw the mount covered all over with Persians, they let
it sink, so as all that were upon it were slain, which caused them to raise
their siege.

Spartacus having but a few men with him when he rebelled against the Romans,
The policy o^ Spartacus.
took a mountain that was very strong and vnapprochable, where he was
besieged by three thousand Romans, who guarded well the passage that he should
not escape. For there was but only one place to go up or down at, the
residue was a rock cut steep. Spartacus finding that there grew wild. Vines
aloft upon the rock, did cut off all the biggest twigges, and with them made
ladders of coards, so stiff and long, that being fastened above, they reached
down to the bottom of the plain. Upon the which they went all down
secretly, saving one who tarried casting down their armor after them, and when
he had so done, he also saved himself by the same means. The Romans mistrusted
it not. By reason whereof, they that were besieged, coasting round about the
hill, came and assailed them behind, putting them in such fear with their
sudden coming upon them, that they all took them to flight, so as he took
their camp.

CAHP. XXI. Of diverse policies and sleights.
I Can not pass with silence certain other policies and sleights, that diverse
brave captains have used, the which I will set here unorderly. Eumenes being
put to flight by Antigonus, as he retired, found Antigonus stuff, the which he
might easily have taken, and diverse prisoners therewithal. But he would not,
because it would have hindered his flight. And besides that, he saw it was
impossible to have kept the Macedonians by direct means, from rifling so great
goods offered into their hands for so goodly a prise. Therefore he commanded
them to ease themselves a while, and to bait their horses, and then upon the
sudden to go and distrusse the baggage. But in the mean while, he sent
advertisement by a secret messenger to Menander, who had the charge of
conueying the said stuff, that he should with all speed get him out of the
plains, to the hanging of a hill near hand, which was not to be approached
by horsemen, and there to fortify himself; telling him that his giving of
this advertisement unto him, was in respect of the friendship that he had erst
had at his hand. Menander understanding the peril wherein he was, made the
stuff to be trussed up out of hand, and then Eumenes sent out his foreriders
openly to discover him, and therewithal commanded every man to put on his
armor, and to bridle his horse, as if he had bin minded to have led them
against their enemies. But anon returned the foreriders, who made report that
there was no means to force Menander to fight. Whereat Eumenes pretended to be
sore displeased, and so passed on. Themistocles used the like policy toward
Xerxes, when he caused him to be secretly advertised, to get him out of Greece
with all the have he could, that he might avoid the hazard of battle, as I
have said elsewhere. Hermocrates being advertised of the intent of Nicias, in
breaking up his siege before Siracuse, and in going his way; and perceiving
that as that day (because it was a festival day, and they were occupied in
doing sacrifice to their gods) he could not cause his men to march to take the
passages, that he might vanquish the Athenians at his more ease; sent a
familiar friend of his to Nicias, with instruction (...) tell him, that he came
from such as gave him secret aduertisements within the city, who sent him
warning to beware that he went not on his way that night, unless he would
fall in^o the ambushes that the Siracusanes had laid for him. Nicias being
bleared with those words, tarried all that night, so as the next morning the
Siracusans took all the passages: by means vvherof the Athenians were
unfortunately overcome. Eumenes perceiving that the rest of the princes envied
him, and sought means to kill him: to the intent to prevent them, bare them on
hand that he wanted money, and borrowed a good round sum of every of them,
chiefly of those whom he knew to hate him, to the intent that thenceforth they
should trust unto him, and desist to lie in wait for him, for fear of loosing
the money that they had lent him: By mean whereof it came to pass, that other
men's money was his safeguard, and the assurance of his life. And whereas other
men are wont to give money to save and assure themselves, this man did set
his life in safety by taking. There was not a greater cause of the bringing in
again of king Edward the fourth into the realm of England when he was driven
out, than the merchants and other men to whom he was indebted, and the women
that were in love with him, because he was voluptuous, who to the uttermost
of their power, persuaded their husbands to be a mean of his return.
Sometimes it is needful to set neighbors at odds; but that must be done
covertly and cunningly, least it be perceived. The Athenians fearing the power
of the Lacedaemonians, had forsaken the league which they had made with the
Thebans, and in stead of holding with them, had showed themselves to be against
them, which was a mean to overthrow the Thebans vpside down. But Pelopidas
and Gorgidas captains general of Beotia, espying a way how to set the
Athenians again in a jealousy and heartburning against the Lacedaemonians,
found out such a practice as this. There was a captain named Sphodrias, a
very valiant man of his person, but therewithal lightheaded, and fond
conceyted, such a one as easily conceived vain hopes in his head, upon a
foolish vain glory to have done some goodly feate in his life. Pelopidas
linked to him a merchant of his familiar acquaintance, who tolled him on to
attempt great things, and to go and surprise the haven of Pyrey, while the
Athenians mistrusted no such thing, and therefore kept it not with any sure
guard; assuring him that the lords of Lacedemon would l^ke of nothing so well,
as to hold the city of Athens under their obeisance, and that the Thebanes,
who wished them evil to the death for their forsaking and betraying them at
their need, would not in any wise succor them. Sphodrias being moved with
his persuasions, took those men of war with him that he had, and departing
by night, went into the country of Attica, even to the city Eleusine. But
when he came there, his men were afraied, and would go no further. And so being
discovered, he was feign to return from whence he came. Whereby he procured
to the Lacedaemonians a war of no small importance, nor easy to be undone
again. For thence-foorth the Athenians sought the alliance of the Thebanes
again, and succored them very earnestly.

Coriolanus used the like practice. For when he saw he could not cause the
peace to be broken, that was between the Romans and the Volses, he procured a
man to go tell the Magistrates of Rome, that the Volses had conspired to run
upon the Romans as they were looking upon their plays and gamings, and to set
fire upon the city. Whereupon, the Volses were commanded to depart out of the
city of Rome, before the Sun going down. Wherewith the Volses being
displeased, proclaimed war against the Romans. Alcibiades used the like
trick. For the Lacedaemonians were come to treat of peace with the Athenians,
and had for their patron one Nicias, a man of peace, and well renowned among
the Athenians. Alcibiades went unto them aforehand, and warned them in any wise
to beware, that they told not that they had commission to conclude a full
agreement, least the people compelled them of authority to grant them
whatsoever they would have; counselling them but only to set down certain
conditions, as in way of conference. The next morning Alcibiades asked them
very smoothly, what they came to do. They answered, that they came to make
some profers of peace, but had no commission to determine any thing. Then fell
Alcibiades to crying out upon them, calling them untrusty and variable,
telling them that they were not come to do any thing that was of value. And so
the ambassadors were sent home without doing any thing, and Alcibiades was
chosen captain to make war against them.

Coriolanus to increase the dissension which he knew to be betwixt the
nobility and commons of Rome, caused the lands of the noble men to be with all
care preserved harmles, causing the peoples in the mean time to be wasted and
spoiled: which thing caused them to enter into further quarrel and
disagreement one against another, than ever they had done before. The noblemen
vpbraided the common people, with their injurious banishing of so mighty a
man; and the people charged the nobility, that they had procured him to make
war against them in their revenge. Hanniball to bring Fabius in suspicion,
whom he feared above all the Romans, caused his lands of purpose to be kept
harmless, when he wasted all other men's, to the end it might be thought, that
he had some secret conference with him, and that that was the cause why he
would not fight with him, howbeit that in very deed, his refusing to
encounter, was of great wisdom, to make his enemy consume away without
putting any thing in hazard. Timoleon practiced another notable policy, to
shift himself from the hands of the Carthaginenses. Whereas he was sent by the
Corinthians, to deliver the city of Siracuse from the tyranny of Dennis, as
soon as he was arrived at Rhegium, Icetes whom the Siracusanes employed to the
same effect, and who dissembling his purpose, intended to take the place of
Dennis, and to do as much as he; sent messengers to Timoleon, desiring him not
to pass his men into Sicilie, because the war began to draw to an end, and
the Carthagenenses, with whom he had secret intelligence, would not that his
men should pass into Sicilie, but that he himself should come alone, to aid
them with his counsel in such affairs as should be offered to deal in. And
because he doubted least Temoleon would not consent to his request; he had
desired the Carthaginenses (who lay near unto the haven of Rhegium with
twenty galleys) to stop his passage over, and to fight with him, if he
attempted to enter by force. Tim^leon seemed to like well of the saying of the
messengers, nevertheless he said it behooved him for his discharge, to have the
same decreed in the assembly of the Rhegians, and in their presence, as of
them that were friends to them both. The which thing he did of set purpose, to
hide his own intent the better, by making the Rhegians privy to the matter.
The next day all the parties met in the Mootehall, where the whole day was
purposely spent in talk, that Timoleons galleys might have leisure to prepare
themselves unsuspected of the Carthaginenses, forasmuch as they saw Timoleon
present with them. Who as soon as he understood that his galleys were departed
all, saving one that staid behind for him, went his way secretly through the
prease by the Rhegians, who being secretly made privy to the matter by him,
had staid him from speaking any more. And so embarking himself without any
disturbance, he arrived within less than an hour at Tauromenion, where
Andromachus waited for him. Sylla in the civil wars, seeing his enemies to
be many in number, thought it stood him on hand to use policy, as well as
force. Whereupon he solicited Scipio, one of the consuls, to come to agreement
with him: the which thing Scipio refused not. Hereupon many goings and commings
were about the matter, because Sylla protracted the conclusion very long,
finding still some occasion of delay, that in the mean while his soldiers
(who were made and accustomed to such policies, as well as their captain)
might practice with Scipios soldiers to forsake him. For they going into
Scipios camp, inueigled some of his men with money, some with promises, and
other some with necessity, so that in the end when this practicing had
continued a certain time, Sylla approached to their camp with twenty
Antsignes, where his soldiers fell to saluting Scipios, and they saluting them
again, turned and yielded themselves unto them, so as Scipio abode alone in his
tent, where he was taken and not suffered to go away any more. Thus like the
fowler with his fine birds made to the stale, Sylla with his twenty Antsignes,
drew forty Antsignes of his enemies into his net, whom he led all into his
own camp. Which thing when Carbo saw, he said, That in Sylla he had to deal
with a fox and lion both together, and that the fox did him more harm than the
lion. The emperor Julian, to keep himself from being disappointed of the
number of prisoners that he demanded, used such a policy as this, to the
Almans whom he had vanquished, and to whom he had granted peace, upon
condition that they should deliver him all such prisoners as they had of his.
For doubting least they would not deliver him all, but keep some good number
of them, he demanded of every of them that were escaped and saved out of
prison, what were the names of them that were prisoners, because it could not
lightly be, but that they were either of kin or of alliance, or neighbors, or
friends unto them; and he wrate their names in a paper. In the mean season,
the ambassadors came with their prisoners; of whom Julian caused the names to
be set down in writing, and the secretaries conferring the one paper with the
other, marked those whom the ambassadors mentioned not, and named them
secretly to the emperor behind him. The emperor began to be angry with the
ambassadors, for that they had not brought him all his prisoners; telling them
that they had kept back such and such of such a city or town, naming them
all by their names; whereat the Almans were sore abashed, supposing that it
came by revelation from God. Whereupon they failed not to deliver all. Triuulce
perceiving the garrison of Millan, and specially the Millaners themselves, to
be astonished at the coming of Maximilian and the Swissers into Lumbardie,
bethought himself of this policy, to put a suspicion into the emperors head,
of some cause of distrust in the Swissers. He wrate letters with his own hand,
and sealed them with his seal, to the chief leaders and captains of the
Swissers, that he might bring them in suspicion with the emperor, and sent
them by a servant of his own that spoke the Swissers tongue well. By these
letters he willed them, to perform within two days the thing that he and they
were agreed upon, for he should then have all things ready according to their
platfourme. The messenger offered himself of purpose be taken by the emperors
scouts, and being examined wherefore he came thither without the watchword, he
prayed pardon, promising to tell the truth, and thereupon confessed, that he
brought letters to the captains of the Swissers. At that word his pardon was
granted him: and he plucking off his neatherstocke, took out the letters
which were sowed in the sole of it, the which were carried to the emperor
immediately. When he had read them, although he was in great perplexity, yet
was he not of opinion that they should be showed to the cardinal of Sion,
because he would not accuse a captain of so great authority among the
Swissers, and much less cause them to be attached, for fear of putting his
affairs in danger. But in his heart he distrusting the disloyalty of the
Swissers, he repassed the mountains again, without making any further speech
of it, and returned home into Germany. Cyrus by the counsel of Croesus, used
this policy to save Sardis from sacking. He caused it to be cried by the sound
of a trumpet, That no man should convey away the booty, because a tenth part
thereof was to be given of necessity to Jupiter. And for that cause he set
warders at every gate, to see that nothing should be conveyed away. He did this
to hold them at a bey, for fear of some mutiny, if he should have taken it
from them by force. But when they saw the king did it of religion and devotion,
they obeyed him without gainsaying, by means whereof, the greatest part of the
goods of the city was saved.

Thus have you a part of the feats of war of times past, the which I thought
good to add unto the ancient quick sayings, and to the principal points of
the goodliest hystories, to the intent that a prince may find in one place, and
take out of this celler or warehouse, whatsoever he lists to choose. For it
is far easier to take in one place, the wares that come from diverse parts of
the world, than to go seek them a far off, and in places dispersed. And yet
is it to no purpose to seek them all in one place, unless they be sorted out
aforehand, so as a man may put his hand to whatsoever he requires. For that
cause it behooved me to use a method, in referring every history to his proper
place. There are many other points of war to be found in hystories, the which
my have to make an end of this my discourse, causes me to let alone, and to
content my self for this present, to have declared unto you the things that I
have drawn out of Plutarch, Thucidides, and some other authors that came to my
remembrance. Also I have left many, which you may see in the Mounsieur de
Langies Discipline of war. Of others I will say as an evil painter, That they
lie hid behind the Cipres cloth. As touching the feats of war of our days, I
will not presume to speak of them, because they which are yet alive, have
seen the practicing of a great part of them, and can better and more
particularly report them, than they be written. And to say the truth, when I
considered the feats of war of these times, I find them so honorable, that
they be nothing inferior to those of old time. But it is better to leave the
reporting of them, to those that were at the doing of them, than to speak of
them like a clearke of arms, for fear least it be said unto me, That the
things were not so done as they be written: The which I doubt not but men will
think, even of those also which I have here alleged. But they be drawn out
of such authors, as for their antiquity and authority, have purchased
prescription against all reproaches.

FINIS.

