The Nobles or of Nobilitye. ** THE ORIGINAL nature, duties, right, and
Christian Institution thereof three Books.

FIRST ELOQVENTLYE written in Latin by Lawrence Humfrey D. of Divinity, and
Presidente of Magdaleine College in Oxforde, late englished. Whereto, for the
readers commodititye, and matters affinitye, is coupled the small treatise of
Philo a Jew. By the same Author out of the Greek Latined, now also Englished.

1563. Imprinted at London in Fletestrete nere to S. Dunstons church by Thomas
Marshe.

* TO THE MOST Christian Princess Elizabeth Queen of England, France, and
Irelande. etc. The noblest protector and defendour of the true faith.
THAT GOOD, happy, and fortunate may prove to al christians: but chiefelye the
people of England For stoaringe this our flourishing state with holesomst
ordinances, and most politic laws: for recouerye of our lorne liberty, for
tender cherishinge and renewynge the Church, by Gods singular mercy and
providence: for restoaringe religion from exyle (as it were) to her ancient
sincerity, and primitive pureness: for the merye quiet, and clear calm,
ensuing the tossinges, and troublesome storms of later times: for the luckye,
prosperous, and quiet setlynge al things, as well abroad as at home: is
none, so vnmindeful of him self, his countreye, or all godliness, who sees
not, we ought first render hartiest and immortal thanks, to almighty god. And
next your godly travail, singular endeavor, and saythfullest service, (O most
Christian Queen) ought be registered in every book, and spread to all
posterytye. For what by thereto, nor force, nor power, nor all the fetches of
man's wit or pollecy could compass, that now to have happed not through the
manhood, might, or government of a manlye king: but under the conducte, of
a woman queen, without tumult, quietelye, and even by Gods hand: such so
famous benefit, who nold lock in mind? Who not roll in amassed thought? Who
not renoume in every age? Wherein notwithstanding (O Queen) we advance not
your might, not your arm, not your wise dome: but wonder at your weakness and
infirmitye. We praise not man's power: but ascribe it to the bouneye and mercy
of God. To whose beeke, word, and providence, all and whole this wondrous
fact (howesoeuer great) must freelye and wholly be imputed. Therefore, that
Hymn and tryumphante song, which Moses and the children of Israel song in the
desert, after the buryal of Pharao in the red sea: in the co^gregations of the
godly, ought always resound, singinge with one tune and joined hertes. The
lord is our strength and praise, and he is become our salvation. He is our
God, and we will prepare him a tabernacle, our fathers god and we will exalte
him. The lord is a man of War, his name is Jehovah. Thy right hand lord, is
glorious in power. Thy right hand lord, has crushd the enemy. But sith, these
his benefits, are already sufficiently blased by others wrytynges, and I
otherwhere have somewhat signified my mind and good will: I need not here to
express my joy. Especially since now my greetynge may seem ouerlate.
Nevertheless, so great and incredible mercy of our God, so meruaylous power,
so strange and unhoped hap, so sudden and heavenly joy: meante I in no
wise to ouerstippe with silence. But this time asks, yea craves, other
charge of me.

Namelye, to show the argument of this my small treatise, and dysclose the
chyefest causes of the title. That your Majesty, seeing at one glymse the
whole sum, and understanding wythall, what occasyons moved me to write: both
by your wisdom may more certaynelye know the whole cause, and according to
your judgment, judge vpryghtly thereof, and as best sytteth your gracious
favor, if it seem worthy your patronage, maintain and defend it, as a
poor and naked Clyent, as well against the close whisperynges, as open
inuectyues of curyous Carpers.

Seeing Nobilitye spredde through all realms and coasts of chrystendome,
flouryshe in all estates of honor, bear the sway in pryncely courts, and in
manner the pillar and stay of all commonweals: and through it, either the
greatest aids, or chiefest hynderances conueyghed into men's life and manners: I
thought, this chose^ order once seasoned with right and christian opinions, and
reformed by the uncorrupted squier of antiquity, both princes should more
sou^dly govern their subjects and ecclesiastical ministers more faythfullye
perform their charge, and the people execut all their bounden duties more
diligently, and so the whole commen wealth more stro^glye breath, live and
recover. Sith their councils all these seem to follow, and on their authority
lean and stay. And therefore, considered, the divine Plato, was not cause les
chyefelye earnest in his books of common wealth, That the wardens, otherwise
the rulers, called to office in each state, and be guydes of the rest: should
from their you the vpwardes, be seasoned with holiest precepts and
principles. For in them he judged, the weyghtyest part, of such goods or
euelles, as hap in the commen wealth to consyst. Nor was I ignorant of the
matter it self, there were diverse opinions: yea, some books written. And
infinite were it, to reckon so many surmises, as touching it, are tossed to
and fro, in the monumentes of ancient Philosophers. For Anacharses said, the
wise Prince was happy. Socrates, who first could rule him self. Pittacus, who
so ruled his subjects, as they feared not him but his. Others think him
meetst to be a prince, who has lived under a prince As Agesilaus says, he
rules well, who has sometime obeyed. Cambises in Xenophon thus lessoneth his
son Cyrus. One only mean (O Son) in all estates is left to win the a
noble name. Namely to embrace wisdom. Others affirmed Virtue a compendious
mean to Nobilitye and honor. And these truly thought not al amiss, but told
truth. Howbeit not all. For part they show. But what chyefe is, and
pryncipall, touch not. Moreover, one thing is it to be a chrystian, other an
heathen Noble. One thing taught Stoa, Academia, Lyceum: other the Chair of
Moses, the Gospel of Christ, and the Epistels of the Apostels But, that my
purpose may more plain and clearelye appear, suffer me I beseech you (O most
gracious Queen) to forespeake somewhat. And in this entrye (as it were) to
discourse a while, how expedyente this knowledge is, how profitable,
necessary, aad meet, for these times, the handlynge of this argument. Not to
warn you a^readye myndeful enough, but, for if other Nobles see the sum
shortly abbridged, authorized by your noble doom: for the weyghte and
authority of the pa^ronesse, they need not contemn it. I have gathered and
heaped out of the best writers, so much, as concerns the true and ancient
Image and institucion of Noblesse. Nor teach I only mine own opinion, but
prove it. And what erst I supped out of the sweet sprynges of the holy
Bibles, and others not despised ryvers of good writers: that now I apply to
the enquirye and search, of the source and offpring of Nobilitye: to show the
channels and branches, the nature, doctrine, and duties thereof. That it may
casely appear by what virtues it is kyndeled, by what vices quenched. Truly,
thus I persuade my self, Nobilitye is far greater then many conteyue of it.
And the calling heavenly but hard. The honor lightsome, but the burden heavy.

And to vaunt and profess him self, others superior and better: of all
others the most massye charge. Nor place I the honor of Nobilitye in those
things, which so the commen people honors, hawkynge, hunting, hastines,
mighty power, vain vauntes, traynes of horse, and servants, riot,
myschyefes, brauerye, roystynge port, or great line. For these are partly
fond, partelye frail, partly filthye and abominable.

But this account I the surest sign and token of Nobilitye, how much men
pass beasts, so much the Nobles to excel the rest: and by all the degrees
and stayers of virtue, to clyme and scale, the steep ^lyeue of Nobilitye. For
so, nor shall cowardry amate the chaungelynge courages, nor stayne of life
clypse or blemyshe with infamye, the bryghtnes of their birth. But they shall
playnelye prove them selves, descended of that reverend, ancient, and
Goddishe race: which for the excellencye of her virtue, and many merits of
mankind, is deemed to have had heavenly birth, and glyded from the skies: and
as the Savior and preserver of mankind, is honored with the tunges, and
pens of all men. These are the true proves, the Noblest Petygrees, and
surest oruamentes and arms of an ancient stock. To conclude, I thus defyne
it.

The hawtiest, worthiest, and honourablest Nobilitye is that, which with the
renoume and fame of auncestrye, has coupled excellent, Chrystyan, and far
spread virtue.

Whereby, both civil societyes are maynteyned, and the commen life of man
supported. Wherein the profitable bloomes of Virtue approve their root. With
these sparks of true praise, and Virtue enflamed our Nobilitye, strives with
it self. And treading the steps and paths of her auncestoures, fyndeth the
entry open only by two steaites Namely, the commendation of Justice and
religion. By Justice the commen wealth is governed, by religion the church is
sowdred Justice, with right eye beholds each cause with even care listneth
them, with straighte foot, wadeth to the indifferencye of right, with
incorrupt, and vpryght heart, truly weighs them. Nor ever is spotted with
dregs of couetyse, or by ambicious lust, of rule bearyng, wryed from right
judgment. The nursers of religion are Kings, and Princes. Her nurses,
Queens. As heavenly teaches the evangelical prophet Esaias. But for every
man can not hereto reach, two aids are requisite. First wisdom and
learning. Where without, what kingedome, what state, what City, what
household may stand: Nay, who may limite him self laws of life, either
greenelye or nothing nousled in knoweledge of heavenly divinity, or human
philosophy? The truth whereof the Paganes learn us.

Who seeing, the unlearned blundred as crows in the mist, confounding and
disorderynge all things: and contrary wise, wisdom fined by knowledge,
shoane and cleared all mystes: aduysed to join to them selves teachers, or
philosophers, as guydes and moderatours of their whole lives. As Achilles,
Chyron, Agamemnon, Hector, Hector Polidamas, as witnesses Homere. And Ulysses
we read in the Odissees, accompanied with Minerua, entered and departed Cyclops
cave drunk vnchaunted Circes cup, herd but approached not the Syrenes
temptynge songs, trauayled to, but abode not with the Lotophagi, escaped
vndrowned Silla: People that feed only on the tree Lotos.
to conclude, sailed to hell, but returned safe. What need I mention Cicero?
Who joined to him Molo, and many more? What Augustus?

Who had Athenodorus? What Alexander?

Who had Aristoteles. Since it is euydente yea, Tyrans had teachers? Dionisius
Plato. Hiero of Siracuse, Simonides, Policrates, Anacreon? and Nero the monster
of the whole earth, held with him a while Seneca? The other part, is the
stomach and stoutenes of a high and hawtye courage. For, as learning shows
how justly, and godly, to do, so this refuses no travail, no peril, no
torment, runs into fire, on weapons points, ventreth and bears with a
pryncelye courage, all hasards of life and limme: rather then suffer the duties
we have reckened, lie stained or forsaken. This judge I (most noble Queen) the
true, unfeigned, the bryghte and clear, not smoakye and shaded Nobilitye.
Which is just, louinge to religion, and studious of learning. And herewythal
stout and with a royal readynes inflamed to action. But O immortal God, would
we but in thought ouerrunne all realms, how few find we furnished with these
virtues:

Nay rather, how many blemishd with contrary vices, and mischieues? How few
Aristides in Justice? David's or Josias in religion? But how many tyrauntes,
oppressors, brybe mongers, and rauenours of the people? How many fettred and
lymed, with supersticions? or ignorant, dysiemblers or persecutours of the
truth? How few learned Maiestrates, to whom notwithstanding is credited
power of life and death? To whom is permitted, to draw and vnsheath the sword
of authority on al men? To waste all, as well holy, as profane, with fire and
flame? How many, who not only not guerdon learning and the learned, but even
hate, spyte, and condemn them? How few of them stout warriors in Christ's
cause, whom it behooued, to have been his souldyours, yea champions? They, who
receive of him all things, yea, more aboundantlye then the rest, even they for
a matter of nothing, a goats fleese, or an ashes shade, for then heritaunce
of a little burroughe or land, what wars wage they not? What hasards venture
not? How often spend they life? How often their blood? But the same for
religion, for defense of their head, scarce hasarde one finger, no not one
farthynge. Wherefore, to such ought this exhortacion worthelye, profitablye,
and necessarilye be applied, to move them to join and purchase aunciente
Noblesse, to this their new gentrye, that all may with one honest and
commendable emulacion, be enflamed to one self desire. and like contencion,
and strife toward Virtue. I account it truly my labor worth, that (though
grossly) I attempted to describe the right pathe to Nobilitye. Sith of it,
whatsoever either felicitye or calamitye, is in our present state, seems to
issue. But, that my talk may purchase better credyte, and win greater
authority, I have coupled to me, as a companion and fellow Theseus in my
travail, the excellent, treatise of Philo a Jew. Whom plainly, for the use
of studious and noble young gentlemen, I translated out of Greek into Latyne.
That jointly with the knoweledge of the tongue, they may drink godlynes. Thus
hear you most noble Queen, what I treat. You have also heard, what chyefelye
moved me to it. But though neither to England, nor our Nobilitye namelye my
talk be referred, but generallye the cause it self debated, (god helpyng), to
profit al: yet after the custom and wont of writers, meante I to fly to
some ones protection, under shadow of whose defense I might arrest my self.
And therefore chyefelye to you my Queen and pryncesse, thought my self bounden
to offer, this simple sygnyfyeng of my obseruaunce and duetye toward you.
Beseechynge ye. this small volume of Nobles or Nobility, may appear under
safeconducte and protection of your name. Not for I mind to teach your Noble
majesty any duties of Nobylitye: but for (which is no mean plague through
all Chrystendome) if my choice should chance on some other, hardlye perhaps
could he skyll the latyne phrase.

So should I chose some such Tutor and patron, to defend my cause, as knew it
not.

But on you, and your most victorious brother, the king your father employed
no benefyte, either greater or Nobler: then in procuryng ye to be p^olished
with all sorts of good arts. For how much rarer, so much welcomer title it
is, truly to term a prince trende to the Muses and learning.

Farther meant I at this present to beseech your hyghenes, that for you know
my first heste, and gladlye (I hope) grant it: you would next, chiefly
furnishe your court, (as most paynefullye and pollitikely ye do) with men
famous for commendacion of Justice, godlynes, and learning, And studious and
earnest appliers and practisers thereof. Continue to cheryshe and honor true
Nobilitye, wherewyth your kingedome swarmeth, and now your Court
flourysheth. Sith it is the keye of your reygne, the light of your realm,
and the safest guard of your person But from Mockecourtyers and counterfayt
Nobles, if any such yet lurk (as Augustus Caesar whilome disfra^chised the^,
who could not use their city) either reeue you as unworthy this privilege:
or at least with Dauyd, banyshe your court forswearers, blasphemers, money
marchaunts, and bribe takers. Which is more wyshed, for it is gentelest and
most commodious for them. Which also I despair not shortly to see. Both by
your grave counsaylours aduyce, and other Nobles, and your own president. For,
as the rulers lead, so follows and forms it self the rabble rest. Worthy
it is, that Plutarche notes of Dionisius. To whom lieng at Siracuse when Plato
came, while he gave him self to study of philosophye, all the court was sprent
with dust. And every corner swarmed with clusters drawyng Geometrical fygures.
But after his breach with Plato, when he forsook philosophye, and fell to
women, and banketting: the other courtyers alyke, with changed mood, altered
their minds and thoughts, to like of wantonness of life, like hate and
contempt of dust and learning. This therefore, may be other cause, of my
geuinge it to your grace To propose your majesty pattern of the ancient
dignifye, Image of tholde honor, and pillar of true Nobilitye. That in a woman
Noble men may find, what to learn, what to follow, what to wonder. Whether
they weygh your vpryghte Justice welcome to the good, dreadful to the enemy:
or the synguler learning, wherewyth even to men's mase, you are stoared: or
your fervent zeal, love, and furtherynge of religion, or your noble and hawtye
courage: who in greatest tempests and storms, both a woman and sole, weeld
and steare, most wisely and stoutelye the stern of so great a kingdom. Which
hawtynesse of stomach, to tonfyrme and keep I see I need not exhort you. For
may we doubt, but who with so synguler prudence, so sweet consent of all
degrees, so quietely and happily restored the church, myserablye and horriblye
deformed with erroures, supersticions, and infinite heaps of Idolatrye, to the
state of her primitive pureness: the same if yet any dregs remain, any
limpinge or haltyng, either in ordes or manners: will with all help, care,
council, speed, provide for it, withstand it, and reform it? For neither
will who began this good work in you, not finishe it (to whom only belongs
to give princelye minds to princes). Nor is your wisdom ignorant, what you
do is Gods work, not your own. His ye house, yours the building. Wherein nor
the fear of few nor murmuryng of many, ought withdraw you from your forward
foundation. For, his will it is, his temple should be raised, the walls of
Jerusalem repaired. Our Cirus our anointed, and Christ wills, what your
mightyest father Henrye began, your godlyest brother furthered, that you even
you should finishe and accomplish. Though Foxes bark and howl, though
Sanbaliet and the Gentyles rulers with all their might and power withstand it.
The lord of Hoastes he is, who byds you buyld: men they are that withstand you.
As in the person of god speaks Esaye to this effect. I, I am he who comfort
the. Who then art thou that fear a mortal, or the son of man, who shall
become as hay? I have put my words in thy mouth, and with the shadow of my
hand shyelded the. That I may plant the heavens, and settle the earth: that
it may be said, to Syon, to England, my people art thou. Wherefore most
humble thanks we yield the god of Sabbath, who so has armed and assisted
your valyaunte courage, in finishynge so perfectlye and boldelye this his
business: as nor the darts of envy have pierced you, nor the shot of malice
shaken you, nor the wyles of your enemies snared you, nor the enmye camp of
Satan ouerrunne you. We greet well also our christian Nobilitye, who provoked
by your pryncelye presydent, and enflamed with gentilmanlye courage, doubted
not to follow the call, and authority of their guide and Captain.

Yea, so to follow, as they blushed not, to set to their hands, to employ
their council and travail, to repayrynge and building this heavenly frame.
Proceed therefore, proceed O most noble Queen, with this your noble train, in
setting like rooffe and end to your beginninges. But so have you a Maiden
Queen begone, so began your brother a child, and king: as ye seem to
shadow all your grau^dfathers and great grau^dsyres, to have lyghtned your
own name, and vaunced an enseygne, and glysteryng pattern to all your famelye
and posteritye. As you have begone therefore, so proceed. Though aloane,
though a woman. So wonteth Christ to daunt the world. Not in men's might, but
enfantes, sucklynges, women. Debbora, brake the Iron Charrettes of Labinus the
Cananite. Judith slew Holofernes. Hester saved the Jews condemned to dye,
from the rampyng mouth, and yawninge Jaws of death. Nor is he sole, whom god
assisteth. Who sees Gods camp. As Jacob against Esau. Whose mount is
enuyroned with horse and fierye chares. As against the king of Siria the
prophet Elizeus. How are ye desolate, when god encampeth in the syghte of his
servants? So as Dauyd sole, feared not thousands of enemies. For the lord
was with him. Who can when him pleases from heaven command whole legions. He
fyghteth not with noumber, but with his only breath, prostrateth and felleth
kings. Holy war will he wage for you his ha^dmayde^. That only he may
tryumphe, who only is the mightiest champion, and noblest conqueror. But
whereto tease I and provoke you to this christian battle, of your self,
through the holy spirits inspiracion, prone enough? Or wheretoe mention I
war, where no suspicion of war, no camp, no foe appears? God having on
all sides planted peace, and granted all nations time and place of rest? All
iarres appeased at home: al broils buried abroad? O meruaylous goodness of
God. O deep judgments, which no oblivion ought raze: worthy trembling and
honor of all posteritye. Call to your secret thought, and mind (O Queen) what
strange and huge wonders, how singulerlye, and wonderously, the providence of
our God, has wrought. And ouerrunne attentiuelye, only the course of these
nine later years. So shall you see the lord and God of vengeance, has
scattered his foes, with his only beck and countenance.

Snaught hence, the butchers of his saints, from amiddes their slaughters,
walowyng in their chyefe delyght and calmest quiet. At home in your England,
in manner at one stroke, mowed of many Bishops, with the Cardynall and their
head. In Germany somewhat before, with a stretched out arm, smytte Dukes and
Bishops, warryng against the godly. In Italye at the self instante, typpled
three or four Popes with the self cup of madness. Whistynge the Emperoures
death ensuynge, and the king your neighbor late amids his tryumphes, after
his vain and smoakye words, and the bloody decree of his cruelty publyshed,
slain with the self staff of God. So as more princes and Prelates have
fallen by his hand, then the sword and fire of Tyraunts. What now they be, it
lies not in my power to determyne. What living they were, hereby appears.
That not only the realms where they raygned, seem cased and lyghted, of a
heavier yoke and mass then Ethna: but even whole Christendom laugheth, and
ioyeth it has vomyted out so strong a venime. Whose spyrytes I disquiete not.
Ne does my talk now combatte with the dead. Would they had been here good,
hereafter saynctes. Only meant I hereby (O most gracious Queen) to imprynte in
all Christendom, deeper memory of Gods providence. Continually to behold his
gentleness toward the vessels of his mercy: and just seueritye, toward
his enemies: rentyng with all cruelty and mercyles rage, Christ's friends and
brethren.

A worthy consideracion, wherein ought anchor, as well the thoughts of the
godly that suffer, for their comfort: as the injurious ungodly, to move
them while time is to turn to the Lord. Thus much therefore wrote I to you,
that seeing God fyghteth for you and yours, you qwayle not that hawetines of
courage. But rather more stoutely withstand your foes. Seruyng under the
standerd of that general and captain who is God almightye. But though namely
to you I have thus much said, of fortitude the fourth part of Nobilite yet
meant I by you to counsel al Nobles, burieng al baseness and weakness of
stomach, to further, cherishe, defend, and maintain unstained, religion with
their council, authority, might, and force. Call to mind O Queen: weyghe
they also, who, what, and whersoeuer long since, not the deuel, but the true
God said to the Sybarytes.

Happy, thryse happy shall shou be Sybarite Whiles in thy weal thou worshypst
God aryght. But when thou him neglectst for mortal men Whote broils abroad,
at home bate have thou then. But whether has the stream of my talk
ouerborne me? That whom I may well give the hearing, I enterprise to learn.
But I beseech your majesty pardon my boldenes. Ascrybyng it to my willingness
by you to help others. To you meant I only to signifye, what in this book I
treat, that if my purpose be not contemptuous, it dysplease not your hyghenes
to have it dedicate to you. I beseech the Lord Ihesus, Prince and fountain of
all Noblesse, to enryche and furnyshe all Nobles with your like thewes. To
anoint your breast, with the spyryte of Justice, Godlynes, wisdom, and
fortitude and preserve your majesty, to the greater increase of the glory of
his name. That your reygne may be to your self honor, to the church aid
and comfort, to the commen wealth, stay and ornament. That by your godly
president, and Scotland now in faith our sister: The other neighbor Nations
France, Spain, Flaunders, and all realms and kingdoms may at length awake
from their long slomber, to like light of the Gospel. That all Princes with
Christ, think their kingdoms not of this world. So at last to gain an
everlasting crown. Amen.

Your majesty's most humble and obedient Subject. L. H.

TO THE RIGHT honorable and worshhipfull of the Inner Temple.
WHAT OTHERS, with long perswasio^s, sometime all in vain, Nature and Art,
the warest guides assay to learn: that at this prefe^t, the rather to enforce
in me, they have coupled to their authorities, unavoidable necessity. Namely,
to cause me, what I mean to maintain or excuse, first to propose. For, what
either for necessity could I, or without breach of the comely course of
nature and order should I, in my preface prefer before the title? Yet again,
what weaker? what more impugned? I say not of the captious carpers, but even
the patrones of whom iustliest it awaited succor? Which notwithstanding,
rather I say as fearinge what I doubt, then foreiudginge my hope. For since the
wise even with example teach, it may perhaps be argument enoughe of refusal
that hitherto they accepted none. And whereto chooses he them (say some)
whom none tofore?

Hops he to reach, what never any erst? Whom as easy is to answer, their
not accepting, rises of want of profferynge. For whom succourles have they
dismissed? Whom rejected? Who remains pattern of their rigor or crueltye?
Patrones not only of the learned, but all afflicted good. Yet my guylt, (if
ought) I confess less colorable, for without Presydente, late at least, I
ventred the unattempted mean. But, if like reason forde like law, since
sundry Pamphlets sought and found succor, in ladies lappes, in lords
arms, in the Queens bosom: well may a Templer hope, to roost in the Temple,
under the rooffe of your honors and worshyppes names.

Which notwithstanding, I claim not of curtesye, but both I prove it my
part to proffer it, and unseemly and vnsittyng to your honors, to spurn
it. For the first, three reasons proffer to acquit me. The first, is the
consideration of the bounden duty, whereby I am indetted to this Noble house.
Which, as I want the wyshed means to express: so never the heart to continue.
Rest it ye my lords, to vnlads by proof your affection. Nor yet by vnladinge
(as the swollen heart by the weepynge eye) to assuage the passion. Suffice me,
the offer of this myte of fame, to the teasing of greater. To like end run,
though by far distant means, the creapyng Ante, the rampyng, Lion. As ready
and pressed am I, by halinge in my one wheaten grain, to signifye my engraffed
pietye: as your honors by conferryng whole reekes Only crave I, my deuoyre
be no fraud to me. That what I mean simply, ye incerprete not presumptuously.
The next of no less efficacye, issues from your honors and worshyppes.
Whose honorable state, as it earneth the praise, so of duty claymeth the
patronage of your honor. Whom thus linkd and knyt in one, as a corporacion or
fellowship, just cause inhibiteth me to term: so as weighty respect,
enforces to adiudge the most honorable society, and civil body of
Gentlemen. For wherewith has that high Jove (to whom worthelye is ascribed
the honor, of first assembling and uniting sondred multitudes) honored other
states: not especially above the rest priuileging this? Famous for all
preferme^tes both of fortune and virtue, but chiefly, for Concord,
Continuau^ce, and Gentry. For, what surer or faster league of amity, then the
wrythen band with green and tender hearts, which dried with elde, rather bow
then bend? Or what for continuance more lasting or immortal, then the exempt
from death? Which, if a corporacion be, may these the maynteyners and
preseruers of all societyes, not be? But of gentrye what need I speak? where
the whole realm vau^teth her stoare. Some Noble vaunis of their whole house.
Some vauntours of their Noble house. Some glorious for both. None moath or
caterpiller of his parents praises.

Where, if each severally ye deny a co^plete gentleman: certes the whole in
love but one, eue^ in Momus judgment, shall mate, I say not the Courtier, but
even this our christian Noble. Each one so seeming to supply others want as
with one voice, thus satisfy they the Courtyer, demau^ding what wa^tes they
best bear: even those, whereof our feeres are cloyed with stoare.

From ye also proceeds this, that emonges ye, and of ye they are, who
fynding me deaffe at then chaunting reasons, wherewith long they sought to
charm me, to conceive of my self more then either I ought or might: at
last, with their undeniable frendshipps so pressd me, as violently they yoaked
me to the charge, that thus ladeth and crusheth me. No otherwise withholding,
and lingering, then the enforced to leave his loved home, permits the
directing of his dumpishe coarse, to his vnwelcom guydes: him self, with his
twyned neck and twinned mind, altogether ententife on the place he parts
fro. Whose Choice, had it light so luckelie as it ought nor needed I at this
present to plead my pardon, nor they be accessaryes, if not principalls, in my
unwilling crimes. Whose requests, as I vouch not to prejudice ye, so mention I,
to make my blames more excusable, for their importunitye. Who emplied in this
title, are partners both of the praise and infamye, to the venture whereof,
they pushed forth me.

So recompensed with as massye charge, that bequeathd them, which sole I
confess my self unable to welde. Join hereto, that only the Queens
hyghenes, deserved at first to surname it. Knowing therefore, by translation
it must fall (which yet only so much I wishd, as our tongue yeldeth to the other)
howsoever therein I am master of my wish through willingness, at least I meant
to provide, it should stoop but one step in authorizing. Which how it
less may, then by ye: certes I see not.

Whom, as severed, some exceed: so joint, next her majesty none. The third
and last, concerns the cause it self. Which though now stoared with
patrones, claymeth yet none so ryghtlye as ye. First, for it is yours, as
heritage by your auncestoures, as purchase by your own prowess.

Next, for it is pestred with counterfaytes. Whom but ye discover, and punish
for intrusion, needs must they argue ye of baseness. For two so contrary ympes
never bred Nobility Thirdlye, for if ye retain it not, and the other it self
abhorrre, and obscure it can not lie: (for it coueyteth the statelyest Towers
and Sunnye mountes) needs must that lamp of your Gentry quench, that Moon
of your honor wane, that Son of your glory clipse. And by reiecryng,
either condemueth other. Whereof, whether is most prejudicial, who seeeth not?
Of such importau^ce your example is, as Socrates well termed ye, yt cities
leuel. How crookedly the and all amiss shall the meaner sort judge of that,
which though plainly ye condemn not, yet in withdrawing your maintenance,
little allow? Who^ shall we seek to shield it, if ye betraye it? The deuines?
They prise no persons nor look to states but sowles. The commens? They have
declared their affection by often impugninge it. The Prince? Her fear I to
provoke, by de basing that erst so honored her.

Whose elder protection, discharges not, but authoriseth ye, to defend who^
your princess has received to patronage. These therefore thus removed, since we
may well despair, to find your progeny heirs to that ye never left them:
who but ye only rest, to father orphane honor? And thus hear ye right
honorable, the three causes. Which, as they charged me to give it ye, so I
hope, discharge me of presumption in proferyng it. The next, has for a great
part, relacio^ to the already proved. For if it behoue me to proser it ye,
since this relyenge necessity has a vent, probable it is my constraint of
profering, emplieth your necessity of taking. Hereto therefore collaterallye
serves, what has been said. But with more force to move ye, and not neglect
any part of my promise: somewhat mean I to say, why ye ought take it. With
open mouth lo curtesy, the refuge, road, and succor of al afflicted, the
patroness of hartye though meanest presents: fearing stayne in ye in this,
cries ye may not spurn so humble, so just, so heartye proffer. Now hyeth
she to vouche her old forworne preside^tes, of that Noblest prince, that
disdaind not the proffered rape. And Artaxerxes who so much prised, yt heaued
up hands of his well wishinge Subject, though but filled with water: as he
boughte the licour wc gold. And thothers apple gift, as he plainelye
pronounced him one of that sort, whose big heart, were able to swel a Coat to
a kingdom. Acknowledginge the mind that sugreth every present, to
counteruaile the most precious jewel She says, the gift is but ye hearts
husk only the heart the presented kernel. And most precious present is it,
that so noble gift honors.

For of every benefit, the receiuours gain is the heart. And the affection
names the gift. Yea, of such force is the geuers mind, as though Cicero
account the misplaced benefyte loss, yet Aristotle aloweth this recom pe^ce.
That were the taker unworthy the gift is given to courtesy. And never want
gifts where will abounds. For, hit is the gift, what so the sign be. And,
who sticks in the sign, not attendinge the signed: fares, as who not
prisinge the Nutie, should stick in the Nutshale. Nor is here any mean or
base gift offered, (which if it were, no mean praise of bountye were to
stoop to it) but the honourablest and noblest. Yea such, as without discurtesy
ye may not frown on. Tiberius the emperor, in shieldinge naked, miserable, and
needye Christ: in warted the whole Senate. And, when though emperor, through
his whole Empire, he prevailed not to deifye him: yet in his own oratorye,
honorably enstalled his image. Though missinge the manner, not yet the substance
of his faith. And will ye betray not naked but Noble christ, not beggered
christianitye, but honored christian Nobility? I know, some marvel why in a
matter of taking, I so long stand with the good takers of this time. And
account it all superfluous talk, saying Nobilitye each where so coueit and
coueited: to exhort any to undertake, yt magnifice^t, and glorious title, of
tutors and gardens of it ^nhose excelle^ce so tickled yt base Hero stratu: at
Ephesus: yt otherwise despairinge same, to ennoble him self, with flame he spent
yt Noblest Sinagoge of yt world. And one day rased, what hundred years saw
raising. Those wish I to wite, that not Nobility generally (for the name is
indifferent to Hero stratus merit) but christian noblesse, bequeath I our
nobles. Whereof lately so reckeles their protection was, as scarce durst,
either christian spiritual tie or co^minaltie peep. Hereof therefore miss I
patrones, hereof protectours, hereof shieldes and targes be ye. pryuate
prowess mind, that enny so^reth alofte, to sowse their mountyng honor. That
Nobility is won and kept alyke. And their suspicious rysynges needs
wemlesse soundnes, which so both high and low malice, as they not only
coneyte to plu^ge to their former mean: but eue^ hopeless of springinge, to
delue in the deep dunghill of misery. Lastly those happy wights, whom Fortune
and the virtues so vouchesaued to honor, as in their hertes and bodies to
harber: acknowledge and reverence so precious ornaments. Scorn not to
communicate them with the commen Society. which hourded roust, emparted
brightest shine. In fine apply their whole Noblesse, not finally to any earthly
court, but that heaven lie palayce which here only by faith they seek, by
hope embrace. So doing, as wont your honors after long and trusty trial, to
guerdon your loved Servant, with farther preferments: so that Noble state,
which under your honorable pryncesse here ye serve: if no other wise, at
least by restles intercession and entreatye, shall prefer ye to that
myghtiest Monarche, and statelyest Court. With whom and where, no fla^tery
gloseth no ambicion loareth, no pride bloustereth, no wantonness dalyeth: but in
most assured, and constant wealefulnes, abide the vnwythered crowns, not of
same but klisse, your sacred heads.

Lo virtue and Fortune littled in amity.
In first, framinge of Nobility.
THe prouydence eterne that all does guide.
And first found out a commonwealth to frame
For men's behoose: foresawe how on each side
Great mischyeties grew, when well to weld the s^^^^
Wife chieuetaines want, whose might and counce^ sa^^
Should he of force, to appease the peoples rage.
He had therefore dame kind renew her would.
And fash you such a wight in after days
As to his king and country proouen should
A Noble stay. He said and kind obeyes.
Great strife betwixt old emnyes two then ^ell
Virtue and hap: which better might advance
This Iinp of Ione. Which ehiefely might excel
She by desert, or fortune else by chance.
Each part her self prefers with proubest boast.
And either seeks alone to rule the roast.
Assembled all the powers here from above
That skies contain, the doubtful end to see
Of this debate. great Jove the right to prove,
The aucthour first, him self eke judge would be.
Fortune steps forth, ne at the sight dismayeth
Of such a Judge, ne of the Noble preace:
But boldly forth her golden gifts dysplayeth,
Chief helps in war: and fruits of quyete peace,
Health, youthly force, and (nursse to foster both)
King Ditis'stoare, the type of honors throne
The peoples praise, the Dyademe eke goes,
Next God she says, by her good will alone.
The tylman crouned king that plowe lace held
Takes Scepter at her hand. she strikes the stroke
That daunts the greater band full often in fyeld,
And bows the prowdest neck to enmyes yoke.
The tyrant taken, and his City rased
Her feate she calls, but whom she list up hold,
They which in honors feate by her be placed,
By long dyscent a worthy race unfold
Of Noble-bloud: surmountynge so the best,
As Venus sterre in sky dymines all the rest.
And here she stayed when virtue thus replied.
These gifts (quod she) are such in balance weyed,
As they report that wort, and best have tried,
That happyest him they deem, who least has flaied
Him self thereon: and bliss the golden mean,
That breeds contempt of these as fansyes vain.
That mean am I, which constant mynds do frame
Undaunted to each change that chance may bring
By just desert to scale the forte of saine.
In Justice weights to payse each worldly thing,
And each his own to yield. then to foresee
By wysedoms lore, what chiefest were to choose
In things of greatest weight men learn of me:
And not to have but things had well to use.
No walls I boast to raze, but towns to save,
While wars I teach to fly, or to defend
The ryghtful cause. great hope perdye they have
That rightly sow, to reap like fruit at end.
Great port to bear, what praise if vertuclesse
Thou live? A Prince to be, if retchelesse
He raygne? Or sword to welld if mercylesse
The common soar he seek not to redress?
These fruits if virtue yield, and none but she,
Let virtue raygne; and fortune subject be.
She said. And straight ways whysted all the place
To hear the Judge give sentence on the Case.
Whose sentence such ensued. Since both agreed
To further kind in framyng such a wight,
As should his Countreies cause in time of need
Mayntaine, against the stroke of enmyes might:
Their wills he praised. But eythers force aloane,
Might fail (quod he). For virtue wanting power
Were soon oppressed. And virtue where is none,
Wealth workth bale as proof shows life each hour.
But hap with virtues loare if lynked were,
Redouble should your forte. Wherefore we will
Your wylies to join quod he, and fortune there
To abide, where wisdom fostreth virtues skyll.
This is our doom; whereto if ye assent,
Let cry the peace in open parlyament.
Their hands they give: and well allow the same
The heavenly preace. Him self I saw to stand
Dan Aeolus amyd the house of fame,
Who blewe the blast with golden tromp in hand.
Whose voice was this. That in each Noble heart
Where virtue harbored were, good hap was bound
(By heavenly doom) to advance each other part.
And all the skies reioysed at the sound.
But of this amity the perfect end,
The league, and articles thereof to know,
How Fortune frames with virtue lynkd her friend,
The kingdoms guide: this author all does show,
Who does descriue, as he that wyselye can
The mould that makes a worthy Noble man.
V. P.
See shortly here the sum of all
Whereto the Noble and base we call.
Behold the touch to try the boastinge preace
That basely borne do vaunt of Noble line.
Behold descrybed the perfect Nobleness
When Noble Virtues in nobled race do shine.
Here who so list, may see the rascal sort
Whom kind brought forth to bondage and to toil:
Sondred from such as unto Noble port
Are borne, and bred for rulers of the soil.
Here are the steps by which the base asscend
To honors mount, and nobled name deserve.
Here Nobles learn their Noblesse to defend.
Here yoaked is the unnoble wight to serve.
The Noble peer to fear as myghtier
And yield him praise as to his worthyer.
Wherefore all ye that from a Noble race
Draw forth your lengthed line till these our days:
Receive this work, receive with friendly face
Your perfectinge and your perfections praise.
And ye that lothinge thral of elder time,
Though Mothers womb unnoble brought ye forth
By Virtues mean now coueyte hye to clyme:
This your aduauncer work take well in worth.
And ye unnoble in cradel and in tomb
Herein show forth the obsequy ye owe
Unto your Lords. Read here their due renown
Whose thralls ye are, and all that read, bestow
Due thanks on him that first wrate such a work
And him that nold in Latin let it lurcke.
A. B.
Only the Souls deuyne excellence
Earneth the praise of perfect Nobleness.
Prometheus theft cloasd in Deucaleons babe
Searches through each vain to blase her glisteringe works
In some it shynes. Often clipsd with bodies shade,
Unnoble in unnoble home it lurcks.
As Phoebus rays borow hewes of perted Aer:
So some it shade, in some it shyneth fayer.
Some quenching it with moldy walls vnswecte
Of danky she prysons, and dystayned homes.
Some suffering not the mountinge flames to peep
In actions out, restrained Choke at once.
Salamandras rather nursinge, them to slaye
Then wyllinge they the Souls hests would obey.
These dumpish stoanes abyenge Prometheus theft.
Lie chaynd in savage Scithia on Caucase hoare.
Where gredye gripe their gnawen minds does freat
With tyrant talents for guilts done of yore.
These never may to honors throne aspyre:
Their coarse with earth cares cloggo, nere soaringe higher.
Some others, whom much less this mass does lade.
Their natures mounting higher by fervent heat:
Yield them through wit a vent to search the trade
There to remount, whence them Prometheus fet.
And while they rest here, maintain them with skill:
Their only food, where they obtain their will.
These how to honor seekth the enclosed flame
And through their active parts sends forth such gleames
As so astonne the sense of tattlyng fame
That domine she fifteth the^ straight to honors beams
Where so they shine with streams of their Souls light
As never glistered Phoebus half so bright.
These rauenth no other foul then flyttinge fame.
That mounteth to skies their noble deeds erst done
whom while she prays, their bleedyng prayed name
As growing Hidra gives such stoare to plumme:
That all the earth and hawtye heavens resound
The fame they got yet grouelynge on the ground.
Such how to be, such honor how to gain
Our Humfrey here his ^oyle emparieth with the.
Whom if thou lasye yet neglect the pain
To Latium hence to travail, there to see:
Embrace at home yet as he best deserves.
Whose living fame shall live while fame ne sterueth.
D. HVMFREYES first Book of Nobilitye.
IF, how much travail and endeavor each thing requires of us, so much we
employed on them according to their worthiness: both we should often place our
toil on weygh tyer matters, and things them selves stand in better and more
happy state. For as the things such commonly are the men, whose happiness
depends of the^. Therefore, if the best and chiefest continued their
worthynes, necessary were it men should live happily and heaped with all kind
of bliss. Those therefore, who excel the rest, either in wit, or soundenes
of judgment, and rightly paise the weight of each thing: chiefly travail in
ordering, handeling, or disposinge those things (as the nature of them will
bear) of which either great profit spryngeth, or more plenteous glory
ryseth. That, as to the excellencye of the things, the greatness of their
travail: so, to their travail, the increase of their prosyte may answer.
Contrary wise, ignorant, and altogether vnsa^sful is he to be demed, who
sweteth most in toys: where either the worth of the thing matcheth not his
sweat, or the weyghte of his labor, over weyeth the profit of his work. But
those that match great travail with great affairs, are worthelye praised:
who leaninge tryfles, lean and lie, with all their labor and diligence, on
things excellent and singular. For Paynters and Caruers in times paste, in
drawinge or grauinge cunningly, Gods or noble men, counted it glorious to
employe all the force of their wit and learning. And curiously to carue the
counterfeit of Minerua, the Image of supiter Olimpius, Hele^^, Venus, or
Alexander the great, it grie^ed not the excellent and famous workmen Phidias,
Xeuxes, Apelles Protogenes, to spend all the treasure of their travail. They
also that profess physic the more dangerous and doubtefull medecines they
minister, in remedyeng sharp diseases: and, the more perilous their cure is:
so much the more glory, and favor deserve and artayne, if, what they attend
diligently they f^nishe well and luckely. Of praise and meede far worthier
is he, who cures a prince, a King, or Kaysar, tha^ who heales a poor man or a
hynde. Since of him lost, the miss is not so great: but in the hasarde or
death of the other seems in manner to consitte the peril of the whole state.
The same are commonly more warye and hedefull in curyng the head than the
finger tops: the heart and stomach then the feet. For those parts are sooner
hurt and more esteemed: these contrariwise less weighed, and there withal less
subject to peril. So always wise men gladlyest prove their force on some
precious thing: and therefore are both more hyghly praised, and more
plenteouslye guerdoned. Wherefore, sith at this day, almost every state, and
even the pillars of kingedomes, stay on the counsel will and authority of the
Nobility: and hit (wherso it come) is al ways honored and esteemed: He then
most co^modiously and profitablye bestows his travail, who learneth it yet
rude, heals it helples, reformeth it disordred, and restores if lost. That,
whereof misordred the woeful wrack of the commen wealth might ensue: of it well
ordered the chiefest commodities might grow. For, they be the heads they the
stomakes and hearts of commonweals. So that who coueytes the safette of the
other parts, must of necessity first minister to these. That they may conceive
most deeply, savor most suttelly, foresee most sharply, that they may
deryue and spread as through veins into every other part, parcel of their
commodities.

For they, be both the eyes, and ears of princes, to see, hear, and foresee,
such things, as be not only profitable to them selves, but also commodious
and wholesome to others. And as they be the subjects of kings: so be they in
manner yt lords of ye people. Wherefore such mean and rule is to be proposed
and prescribed the^, as they may learn to serve the first politikely, low ly
and honorably, to rule the other orderly, lovingly, and uprightly.

Wherefore, who so enstrueteth any one man with precepts and institucions of
learning to live morallye, and amend his manners: he truly is to be esteemed,
and deemed a worthy man. But who enformeth a whole house and family, how it
may housholdlye be guided, is far greater. Who lear neth then, how men may
politykelye govern their common wealth: he true lie, must needs be far better
prysed than all the rest. In like manner, who yeldes a Noble man either
learnedder or better, causes not that one or a few become more helthefull:
but that many yea the whole commen wealth is the better, and more sound. This
to do are two fortes of men requisite. The One to point and foreshewe the way:
the other to follow it foretold.

The first ought to bring diligence, the other obedyence: they, not be
aggrieued to teach, the other not to disdain to learn. For painful teachers
do in one workno unprofitable service both to the prince, his subfectes, and
the Nobles the^ selves. And the learners, this gain, that they vauntage not
all only them selves, but learn their deuoyre both in humble service
toward their Princes, and in honorable gouernemente over their people.

The first forte therefore, Teaching of Nobilitye.
(first to speak of them) ought paynefullye to teach the nobles, and often
and glad ly to haunt their housen. That learned by them, they may learn in
all things well to welde their lives, and wisely to govern common charges:
that their life incur no infamy, but they perform their duties with the
princes favor, and the commen commodity of their country. There are in deed
books already ersant of the teaching and framing of princes, but those
precepts, though often they may be applied, and are in deed common to all men:
neuertheles', sith other is the person of a prince, other of a noble man, one,
their estate as lords, other as subjects: The self same precepts, as to
rulers and princes ca^ not always feetly scrue the^. Wherefore peculierly,
precepts both ought and may be given theyin: and that so much the rather, as
where there be but few kings, yet great and in manner infinite is the number of
Nobles.

Princes also have small traffike with the common people, but these entermedle
with them and under the commandment and name of princes, welde the commonwealth at their pleasure. Further where kings do few or no^th^nges them selves,
but credit to these the rule, and (as it were) the raynes of the realm: it
happes many times, they be not only Princes lieuetenauntes and Agents, but
some times even the lords, and kings of kings. So that, as it were with
their bytte they manege and turn the^ as they please. To conclude, Nobilitye
is also combred with his faults: which it be houeth it to know. But, know it
shall not but it hear them. Hear the^ it can not but they be told. Told they
be not. For where the ears stand open to flattery, there wont the gates to be
closed to aduisement and truth. And therefore commenly they se not their
diseases, wherewyth they are of custom combred, and enwrapped but first they
be openly printed.

So that the^ selves may read, and by reading understand them of written
books, which freely roame and wander each where, and abashe not to tell the
truth. It is therefore requisite, there be some, that may enstruct and reform
them, according to the principles and institutions of their au^cestors.

Now (next to speak of learners) in vain teach they, Nobility ought learn.
if these either hear not, or necligently harken. Wherefore as it is their
charge to teach soundly: so is it these men's, to obey their teaching. For, if
they strayghtly require and of duty challenge of their servants to do their
commandments, in trifeling toys, I will not say unlawful, sometime in deed
impertine^t to any part of bliffull life: them selves not to obey those that
teach them faithfully such things, as tend to the commodity and profit as well
of the commen as pryuate wealth, and concern ye health of their souls: is the
point of arrogant minds, and altogether dissolute. Wherein by no means, this
our true and perfect noble, whom in this book (God helping) we will frame:
shall once offend. But this is chiefly to be sought, that he remember what
calling, and how great a charge is cast and laid on him of God. For such as
are noble are clear and bryghte, on whom all men's eyes and countenaunces gase.
And therefore so they walk in the eyes and sight of al men, so are they viewed
and pried at by every one that no fact, no deed of theyrs may be dark because
of their Nobilitye.

Where others of the commen sort, still lurk in darkness, nor almost see
any, nor are seen of others.

A mole in the face stares, and is apparent to all men. In the other parts to
have a mark or mayme, not so unseemly. For it is not so fightlye, but farther
removed from the eyes. Faults therefore in a noble man, famous through the
co^mendacion of his stock and lineage, are far more heinous then in other of
the meaner sort. As well, because they are more seen and marked of all men:
as also, for that every man the nobler he is, the less ought to be blemished
with vices, and more embelyshed with virtues. Dron kennes, what fober man
denies to be a gross and filthy fault enough in all men? But a poor knave or
a beggar to se drunk, is neither new nor rare. So much the person alters the
crime Why so? For, if a noble man sin, he offends hurtfully to the
destruction of many, and hales with him many mates both of his crime and pain.

Small doubt it is, but there were (yea often) among the Romans many
cupshotten, yea and sometimes plain dronken. Yet read we, dronkennes was
only vpbrayded to Cato, and that for only one escape. Yet only this his
fact, is bewrayed to posterity, and communicated with all me^. where even the
double dronkennes of the other sort, is many times healed with silence, and
buried with everlasting forgetfulness. For, some things men ween lawful for
the commen sort, which little beseem a Noble. It is permitted them sometimes
to toye, to tryfle, to dalye, childishelye to observe wakes and typple: when
most expedient were a Prince or Noble man should be watchefull and sober. The
presydent most worthy memory of the Theban Captain Eoamimendas, I can in no
wise ouerpasse: worthy of all Nobles that will steare in the commonwealth and
travail in public affairs and service, to be worn in common talk and
imitated in their lives. Who while the Citesens of Thebes, gave them selves to
feasting, banketting, and excessive cheer: was espied by certain his
familiers, walkinge sole-sadde, and mourning, to trudge hastelye to arm him,
and thence to hie toward the city walls. Which hereto he said he did ye the
rest might safelier be dronke^. For otherwise, if the captains, if the
princes, if the magistrates, in comme^ bankettes should licenciously partake
with the rest, that City would soon berome (as the same Epamirumdas other
where said), a flat and plain yard, and in manner a stage open to the reads
and invasion of all men. Others, eke are lycensed by commen consent to sleep.
But we read in Scipio sleep was erst much noted: where otherwise he was both a
most watchefull and valiant Captain. And therefore Cato the elder says,
that often by night he rose, and neglecting the care of household, cared for the
state of the common wealth: thinkinge belike, it behooved him to wake while
others flept. But hereof what doubt we? since Jupiter in the second of Homeres
Ilyades signified the same to Agamemnon, when be sent him the God Sleep with
this embassy.

Great shame it is al night a Prince to sleep, Who should his realm and
country care to keep.

Men also commenlye, in all other things, in all estates, but chiefelye in the
worthyest, awayte not so much what to praise as carpe, nor what is well done as
what ill. For seeing them bett in gold and silver, their gorgeous garments,
golden fingers, and al about the^ semely and well besene: they wene their inward
mind should aun swear their outward glistering: that they should surmount the
rest in store of wisdom, quicknes of invention, weight of counsel, and
sincerenes of life. That from so fair and comelye countenance, should
proceed wise talk, and spiced with learning. But if contrary wise, it happen
that some one richely cladde, talk either filthilye or foolishlye: they cry
forthwith with Diogenes. A leaden blade out of an yuery scabard. And (as
graueli and far above the reach of a Philosopher preaches Solomon) a golden
ring in the noset brilles of a Swyne.

Then commonly they whisper, and privily mutter, that in that gorgeous cladde
body indweith a bare and naked soul. Wherefore the auctority of the personage
he bears, and the greatness of the burden which he weldeth, ought to provoke
a noble and lofty sto make, to hear and lysten those things, whereby he may
worthelye and honorably maintain his countenance, and support his charge.

Which since it is so, to end at last this tedyous talk, I determine it the
duty of teachers painefully to enstruct, and of Nobles lowely to learn.

But what may we deem the cause why neither the one nor the other answer
their charge? For very few se we, that willinglye give them selves to this
travail of teachinge: but as few know we, that taught, will understand or
amend. For, wereit otherwise, we should have greater store of true Nobles: that
is, good, godly, wise, and learned. Truly, as sarre as I can reach, two
stays chiefelye let, that men in these days neither write nor speak freely of
the state of Nobilitye. First, for they understand the undertaking and
compassing of so great a charge, to be farsd full of hardenes and peril. For
hard seems it to him, whose style is base thin, and lean, to write ought of
the Nobility, of the most honorable estate, of the flower of the common
wealth. For it behooves him, who speaks of the highenes of that degree, and
of such men, to use a stately, high, and loftye style: least the barennes and
leanenesse of his talk, rather dishonor the majesty of so honorable
personages, then advance or honor them. Further, this cause requires such
one, as has long trauayled therein, and long been conuersannt with such sort
of men, who has groaped their minds and meaninges, and nearely viewed their
manners and vsages. Next, peryllous and scarcely safe think they it, chiefelye
in these envious and suspicious days, even to whisper ought cyther of the^ or
other: whom unless ye clawe they will kick. And not, sceld bath he ill
spedde, who writes against him, that may write his death. For there is almost
none, no not of the commen sort, who wonderful lie pryseth not him self. And,
for the most part, the more honorable we be, the less we list be admonished
or reproved. For willingly wonres every man to hear his own praises or
virtues, and gladly beholdes ye Table of his shape and seemelines: but his
faults, his spots, his deformity hardly abydes represented to his eyes. And
(for all blame bears with it a stinge) nor suffers, nor licenseth others to
control him. Whence it appears, that secretly men confess this matter most
profitable and necessary to be treated of, but for ye frowardenes of the times
had rather whist for dread of danger. Howebeit that to dread no cause, so
they teach profitablye and gentlye. The profit pertaines to the taught And
every man not altogether foolish abides, yea coueteth, to hear the things
that tend to his profit and commodity.

Our Noble man therefore, will bear with him who holesomely counsayles him,
Counsaylors must be heard.
and abide it so the need require) to be even chidde for his desert. Therefore,
this I wish and warn them, in this entry to my travail, frendlye to accept
aduisemente: that what good men tell them freely, not sharply: that they take
patiently not disdainefully. For, better is it dayntye ears be displeased,
then the whole body whyrled into hell. Better to be whipped with the tongue of
man, than the rod of God. To be smitten with a word, tha^ ascurge: to be
scorcht with the smart of reproof, than everlasting fire.

Such therefore must they banish from them, as wont to tickle their ears, and
feed their humors. Such must they entertayne and embrace, as correct and
chaste them. And love rather the stripes of a frendely blamer, than the kisses
of a training flatterer. Choling here rather to learn to judge and condemn
them selves, than else where to he are their deadly doom pronounced, by him who
is altogether vnparciall: who neither acknoweledgeth nor respects any
persons.

With who^ neither wealth ne honor ne majesty may prevail, at whose bar
kinted shall not plead: Nay, where rather these goods by missuse shall
become euelles unto you, and purchase ye the anger of the highest judge,
heapyng on you the severity of judgment and rigor of punishment Now
therefore, while time is, suffer your selves to be reproved. And, sith it is so
profitable for you, let your ears ware deaf at the hearing of smart
speech, rebukes, and checkes, with Socrates, Cato, Phocion, or rather with
Christ (...) self, ye noblest prince And if Nobilitye give ye greater stomach,
co^^ider this quietly and advisedly with your selves. If ye are so much
pinched by their words, they are much more provoked thereto by your odious
deeds. Remember it is of it self hard to be thral. Harder to a rude and
unlearned lord. Hardest and wretchedst, for a free and learned man, to obey an
ignorant and slave of sin. Unseemly is it a noughty and vicious person
should rule. Far more unseemly he should rule his betters. But most
unseemly and unsitting of all, that a proud person, and impacient of reproof
should go uerne. Who after many vilanous fleshly, shameful, and cruel crimes
committed, will neither acknowledge the fault, nor once lifte^ his blame, but
rather cruelly rage against ye teller. For let me I beseech you, for examples
sake imagine so much. We must therefore hear the sage counsaylour Paul,
saying. If any brother be possessed with sin, or error, let him be reproved
with the spirit of lenity. Wherein he rightly connsaileth either part, both
ye reproved and the reprouer. For him he wishes reproved and chastened. Of
the other he requires a meek and gentle spirit. That not only he persuade
what profitable is: but also couple we his teachinge moderacion and lenity.
That he accuse none of wantonness, but reprove of duty and trust. That he
chide not causeles, but disprove by reason, and that quietly, not angerly, or
on Choler.

But to speak of my self, not I profess the performaunce hereof, linked with
so great difficulty and peril: but find my self enforced to faint under so
heavy and massy burden. For truly, ye weakness of my power, forces me to
confess my self unable, to compass or atchieue so weighty charge. But this
comfort, and refuge mids my distress I have, that the toil which with the
might of my wit and eloquence I can not crushe, I will endeavor with travail
and deuoire if not to conquer, at the least to supple.

And, when for want of might I may no farther wade, I will yoke to my aid and
strenthning, diligence. But peril herein can be none, as well shall the sincere
justice and equitye of such as peruse my writings judge. For, so will I
handle and use the whole matter, as mindinge not to cut or lance any, but to
hea^e and help all. Meaning rather to teach and persuade, than nippe or
reprove. That the Nobility by reading hereof, may become better not sharper.
For, neither will I so much as name any man, but honorably And ouerpauing the
person note only the fault, which of necessity I must. Wherein yet so will I
bridle my talk, as buildinge on others judgments, not only bolstering my
own opinion: and so fortifye what I speak, with borrowed reasons from all the
memory of antiquitye, as if not always the fairest, at least the truest, I
will utter: according to reason, not affection. For hereto tendes al our talk
in these books, that the ancient Nobilitye, shaped by the monumentes of
ancient writers, and drawn from the pattern of Kings, Princes, and other
ancient nobles, may be raised as a mirror in a high and plain mount, to
shine and glyster to the mon of our days, That leaving their new and noughty
way, they may be revoked to the ancient discipline, and true praise of their
ancestors: Which my purpose, I hope none will condemn. Neither truly make I
with the^, who tore and bleate against the manners of Nobility. Who perhaps, were
they not altogether wants h^mewardes, Linces outwardes, might se their own
faults, though less harmeful, no less heinous. Which part do of hate and
envy. For them selves placed in the basest degree, can not bear so bright a
light. As erst the Owl accused ye Sun, not for ye suns fault perdy, but the
weakness of her night eye impacient of his light. Of true Nobilitye, somewhat
wrate Lucas Gauricus. truly in deed, but somewhat to bitterly licenciously, and
roughly. More ciuily and modestly, entreated of civil Nobility, Hicronimus
Osorius: an eloquent writer and a good. Of courting Augustinus Niphus, wrate a
book. Wherein he travailed rather to prove him self a philosopher, tha^ a
Courtier. And little to this purpose, whereof we entreat: al though perhaps to
that he meant fytly enough. But Gauricus, in this sort, sharply and bitterly
inuadeth Nobility. Many of the^ (quod he) most slouthful, ignorant, and
desperate persons have I seen, and even heard, and daily hear: not ashamed to
mock many virtuous and good men, especially the poor. Who falsely and
wrongfully challenge to them selves the name of Nobility. Nay, rather, walowing
in weith, proud, boasters, stubborn, froward, flatterers o^ them selves, with
proud looks, and scorneful tauntes, in the open streets, and por^hes, yea
every where, in ye churches, and common assemblies of the city, mock and
fingerpoint every virtuous and learned man. Vau^ting the selves ye only true
nobles and gentlemen. Whereas they be altogether ignorant, and unskillful,
viler, then Herdes, mulettours, butchers, smithes, or huxters. Two leggd asses,
and even improperly termed men: and so forwards. For he is like him self in
all the rest, seeming to offend no less lice^ciously in his talk, tha^ they
in their lives. But of me the true Nobility shall perceive it self touched not
so much as with a taunt or bitter word, through al my talk: But rather
honored, so they will rightly weigh it He bites not y^ cou^salies. Nor hates
but loves, who toileth and trauaileth for the true honor of Nobility: who
teaches and shows how gotten it may be preserved, how lost, recovered.

For, that the ancient Image of Nobilitye is for the greatest part rased, and
cancelled in most: many and those no light reasons persuade me. Which so much
the more I fear, as I love it more entierly. For I have been ever louinglye
aff^ction^d to Nobilitye, and as I ought, so I wont to reverence it. As a
thing of nature excellent, through fortune honorable, to it self glorious,
to others neither seld nor smally profitable. Wherefore, as other beautiful and
honest ornaments draw and allure us to them, and enforce us to love them in
whom they harbor: so ought even the enemies thereof to love and honor this
excellent state of Nobilitye. But this my love wants not his fear. And much
I dread, least in these wretched and in fortunate times, wherein the best wo^t
soonest to rotte, emonges the rest this precious Jewel have loss her former
price. For so we se it (I wot not how) provided, that whatsoever accident in
man's life excels, the same both oftener, easier, and filthier is staynd,
than the baser or meaner. For what heavenly art, was not in these later days
miserably corrupted and deformed? Even Divinity the art of all arts, and
knowledge of al knowledges, yea, the Queen and Empress of the rest, was she
not maimed, in these former years? Was not then the ancient sinceritye of
reverend religion, counterfayted and corrupted? But though the whole world has
more and more swarned out of kind, each estate and calling degenerated: yet
wot I not, if more then all the rest this heavenly nobility. which as it is
brighter and nobler than the other, so through this contagion and infection of
times seems farther and deeper to have slidden, from the ancient glory of
her dignitye.

For so much greater men account each sin
As he is nobler that offendes therein.
Wherefore Noble men must so much the more care and endeavor with all speed to
return to them selves: busily to enter into the search of them selves: and
spedely to know, them selves their charge, and known diligently accomplish.
That so they may again recover their estimacion or whollye lorne, or much
diminished. To this end, decreed I in this book to bring some helps to ye
better institucio^ of it God grant it attain the fine I propose. That yet at
the last, the aucient and reverend Nobilitye may return, which with the
glory of their wit and learning, and the fame of their deeds may darken and
shade the praise of their au^cestours: and purge the unjust spot and stain
from their honorable name Here present I them, a mirror of either Nobility,
the true and false. Wherein they may clearly see them selves. And what
Socrates, or Byas said of beauty, that I in my opinion may not vnfeetly say of
Nobilitye. For be they noble men in deed, and honorably bear them selves, and
answer their calling and the fame of their ancestors: here have they in
this mirror their praise bewrayed, that in this I mage acknowledging their
virtues, they may inwardly rejoice: and the same maintain with well doing
ever. But, be they deformed, unkindly, and base, here may they discern their
fault, acknowledge it and amend it.

But since we promise to entreat of true Nobility, Division.
gladly would I first of of al perform it. But it is requisite to fore, to
clear a few doubts, for clearer plainness, and more evident proof, which
else would continuallye darken and clipse the whole matter. For there be neither
few, nor those altogether euel, that think this Nobilitye ought be banished,
and not borne in the commen wealth. And seeing some nobles infect them selves
and the state, with ydlenes, pleasure, sloth, licencious living and euel
example, and disdainfully, proudly, and arrogantly de spise their inferiors:
think they ought have no place in a right and christian common wealth. First,
therefore must we endeavor to discuss, whether they ought to be in free cities
and peoples Next, for Nobilitye is not sufficiently known to al me^, nor
understood whence it rose, howt it grow to this stoare and estimation, we must
see what it is that commonly is termed Nobilitye. Lastly v^il I come to the
point of the whole matter, and descriue the Image of true Nobility: showing
what manner thing it ought to be.

It likes me therefore, The first C^uestion.
under Christ's conducte, to begin of that, which both wontes, and ought
first to be questioned. Whether Nobles ought to be borne in a well ordered, and
Christian like governed state. For I hear it at this present much doubted,
and called in question of many. And truly, all in vain should I wear my while
in framinge Nobilitye, if (as some think) it ought not be suffered. For some
impugn it with words, some with weapons. Either part thinks it ought he
abolished. With words fight not only the Anabaptystes and Lybertines: but
even some learned hold opinion: that they deserve as unprofitable members to be
cut of. With weapons both often and sharply have the commens invaded them.
Neither presently obey them but so far forth as forced with fear. Whom in
deed they fear, not love. Nay, certaynelye they hate. And when occasion
serves show their good will, by their force and violence. Wherefore, though
for a while they cloak and dissemble it, as oppressed with force, yet fearet
liberty peepeth up at length and breaks violently forth with commen wrack
It is worth the travail therefore, to appease these factions, and spedely to
prevent this ranckled priuye grudge, least they harm both them selves and
others. Truly, for mine own part, to speak indifferentlye, I agree to
neither. But the judgment of the one, I think neither sound nor sober, but
violent and cruel. And the commotions and tumultes of the other, them count I
most pernicious and abominable.

For first, Against the enemies of Nobility
to deal with reason with those, that fight with words, no soud reason see I
move them, to think it commodious for the commen wealth to root out Noble
men. For the Anabaptists I ouerpasse, whose error is already sufficientlye
condemned by all men's tongues and pens. The Other that will seem more
indifferent, while they seek (what in them lies) to overthrow the civil
difference and public order given and established by almigh ty god, while they
weake^ the fonndacion of common weals: se not, ye almost unwitting, they slide
into Anabaptistry Who to several degrees leave not their estates and rooms:
as though there ought be no superior: as al me^ should in city and realm have
equal right: As there ne were some regymente by one only. Some by few nobles,
some of the people, and some of the best. Which distinction almighty god who
first gave, and partly placed in ye Jews common welthe, partly permitted in
others: with his second law and new league repealed not. Therefore, these well
settled who so remoueth, co^ueigheth in disorder, confusion, sedicio^, and
discord. In Christ Jesus I deny not, al are of equal right. In whom, is ney
there bond nor free, male nor female, Greek, Jew, nor Barbarian. For with him
is no account of persons. But foolishly reasons he who herby weneth to
confound the certain and several estates to root up the limits and boimdes of
nature, kind, nation, kin or stock. And since by the laws of god and man, by
the law of nations and nature, there is lordship, and servitude, parents power,
household pollecy, marriage and discretion of nations, and people: albeit there be
but one like bond of al in christ, small dout is it, but both there is, and
ought to be difference of degrees. Some being no bles in ye higher room, other
meaner in the lower place. And this allowed division to seek to disprove, is
mere madness. But, where they think it small commodity to ye common wealth, to
have Nobles, as they were burthe^s of the earth, combrous to al men, commodious
to none: to affirm indifferently of al, that truly and aptly may be applied to
few: is the part of men neither discretely judging, nor wisely weying what
they talk. How much more rightly and discreetely Cicero, though provoked of
ye nobles, and therefore more partial, in his oracio^ for Sestius, thus faith Al
we good me^ ever favor nobility, Both, for it is profitable, for yt whole
state, that they endeavor to carne the fame of their ancestors: and also, for
the aged memory of their welde, serving sires of the commen wealth, (though
dead) ought much to avail with us. wherefore, if any care or love of cur own
commodity prick us, they ought to be dear to us, and beloved of us, since
they profit us. Of we will seem courteous and mindeful of recey ued benefits,
which their ancestors most plentifully powered on us, on the common wealth:
then ought we truly to favor them, wish, speak, and say well of the^, for
their forefathers have pleasured us. Of ever they may hurt us with their
power, they may in like manner pleasure us. Of they may oppress us, they may
also succoure us. Of iniurye us, they may eke defend us. Of hurt us, they
may also heal us. As power linked with malice, weyghes to the one part: So, if
happily it light on a good plant it helps: and wonteth not to endamage, but
succoure. For as the Be with his sting, both hurtes and helps to the working
of honey: so the mighty and rule bearers, hord in their power not only hurt but
help. And presently who swarm in princes courts but Noble men? Who their
counsaylours but they? Who welld the chiefest dignities, Who are present? who
presidents as well in private as public affairs, but the highest and noblest?
Who leads in the parliament, ouerweyeth in the law, sweyeth both far and
nere? Even princes and nobles. Who bids, forbids, does, undoes, twineth
vntwineth, al things? Who makes and vnmaketh laws? Who weldeth the commen
wealth in peace, or wageth war against the enemy, but great and Noble men?
Neither any marvel is it, the rule of all is credyted him, who both through
his own prowess, and the long continued commendacion of his ancestors, has
earned the report and estimation of al men. For, as it is in the books of the
kings, out from the wicked issues iniquity: and of a shrimpe sprynges not a
rose, or marigold, or of a bo^d woman a freesonne borne: as says the holy
poet Theognis, so contrarywyse of the good often are bred good.

Nor bardy Egle ders the fearful Dooue. As witnesses Horace. But commonly
the child erpresseth his sire, and posse city (if not chasigeling) couets to
tread the steps of their auncestonrs. But here against obiecte they a rabble of
their vices. Their insatiable couetise their incredible pride, their tickle
credit, their intolerable lust. Whereto I answer, these inconveniences,
rest not in the thing it self, or nature of Nobilitye: but in the faults and
manners of some, not all: whom either the prosperity of Fortune dasles, or
ryott and pleasures effeminate, or license and liberty mar, or ill
presidentes spyll, or plentye and abundance of wealth ouerbeareth, or troops
of flatterers tickle. Which easily may ouertourne the hautiest, and stoutest
stomach, from constancy of mind, and tryppe him mids his race, to praise.
Yet emonges them are some, who sailing by these Sirens suffer not them selves
to be wryed from the right. Contrary wise, there be eke of the commen sort,
that partake with them in these crimes.

Who though poor, yet burn in couetise, and mids their beggerye, (which is
most unseemly) look loftely: and in their slavery become cruel, and mids
the want of all things leacherous. Wherefore less maruay'e ought it seem, in
them, sith they have the baytes and entisementes to vice, which the other want.

Whereby it appears, that vicious demeanor grows not in Nobilitye, but
cleaves thereto: was not borne in it, but added to it, not peculyer to it, but
commen with others. But this is not here to be reasoned, whether they be
naturally growinge in it, or forenly cleauyng to it.

But lamentablye it is to be sorowed, that in those they are, from whom they
ought farthest be.

And so much the rather must we travail and endeavor, not to extinguishe
Nobility, but to cleanse it: aut to provide it be better enfourmed. and so
informed, as it may be reformed, and so reformed as it need not be rased.
Other their light and trifelinge reasons, I need not here to mention.

Which they account strongest garrisons. Which I dense not to be truly spoken
of the holy ghost, but of them to be aptly applied: that flatly I nay.
Impossible is it (say they) rich men should enter into the kingedome of
heaven. I hear it, and grant it. But he says rich, not Noble men. But who
be rich, Mark the best interpretour of Mathewe, expounds. Those namelye,
that place all their hope of safetye, in their wealth and riches.

Who repose them selves on their sub staunce, as the god of this world.

Trifelinge also, is that they vouche out of Paul, to the Corinthians. That,
not many mighty not many Noble were called. For, albeit the young man in the
Gospel followed not Christ's calling: yet Zacheus called came. Paul, the
lieuetenaunt, and Dionisius Areopagita, themperours courtyers believed Paul.
And th^^^h he saved Lazarus the pore he saved him yet in ye bosom of Abraham,
the rich. For God would al men were saved, and calls all to the knowledge of
his truth. Namelye of every nation, as Jews, Gentiles: of every estate and
condition, as Kings, Nobles, welthy, poor: of either kind, as males, and
females. Happy in deed he pronounces the poor, but in spirit. And, both
may a Noble man be poor and low of mind, and a poor man of degree higher
minded than any Noble man. For there be even proud rags, and boasting
beggary Diogenes said, he spurned the ease and pride of Plato. But with other
pride, as elegantly replied Plato. Wherefore thus we conclude, that Noble men
ought be beloved for their own sakes for their elders merits of the comme^
wealth. That many of them are good bountiful, and profitable, that they have
passage with others into ye kingdom of heaven, that they are called of God, to
be short, that many Nobles are poor and humble hearted, and therefore ought not
all be e^^^led and banished realms, or abolished: but chastened, taught, and
corrected, if otherwise they demean them selves.

With the people, whom ranckled grudge, Against the commocion of the Commens.
and long, yea to long lengthened hatred, has armed against the Nobilitye,
we have somewhat more to do. Although among those also be many grave, quyete
and peaceable men, who soyntly with us sorrow and syghe, to see so great
dyscorde in one civil body. Wherein, all the members linked, the highest with
the lowest, the lowest with the highest, and coupled with the louelye knotte of
Frendeshippe and charity, might yield most plenteous profit both privately
to every one, and universally to all. Which separated, severed and sondred by
dissencion, vnioynt the state, and rende it in wretched sort. It happens
nevertheless, (I wot not by what fate, or compuision of what furies) it
happens, I say, that twixte the lords and commens is but simple concord.

So that, though for a while they live together, linked with league of amitye,
yet time not long after bewrays priuye grudge, and utters what hate, what
malice, lurkes within.

As betwixt the birds called Acgathili and Acanthilides, writers report so
great hate: that their blood, though violentlye mingled, yet forthewyth seuers
it self, and skippeth a sunder. So often it happens, either for the cruel
destenyes envy us peace and quietness, Or, that so our God list to plague
mortalles, or that Noble men most mightelye work iniurye, or the commen sort
most frowardlye perform their duties, or for all their wylles so conspyre:
the fates of hate: God of Justice, the Nobles of pride, the others of murmr
and envy.

The matter is evident. This preach the vproares of Israel against Moses,
the rebellion of the Romayne commens in the hyl A^entine, the civil war of
Silla, and Marius, the commotion of the hindes in Germany, and Switzerland, the
sundry tumultes and conspiracyes of England, and in foreign realms many
other, and those most bloody battles. What need many words? Since even the
deeds them selves in number such so massy, so many sedicions, vproares
conspiracies, witness to true what I say. Small doubt is therefore, but it is
so. That henceforth it be not so we must provide. Whereto much material is the
trauatle of the guides, and teachers of the people. Whose duty and part it
is, so to temper both their tongue and style: as by their books and sermons,
they be not enflamed to war, but persuaded to moderance, patience,
peasablenes, and lenity. that so either part be clawed and smothed as weapons
may be laid not taken: their furies quenched not kindled.

Of the duties of Nobility, when talk of that order so requires, I will speak
hereafter. Now must I commen with the commens, and those that ween that degree
ought be extinct, and Nobility wasted with might and maine. But, al to sharp a
medecin is war. And far feeter for brute beasts than men. Though in
these desperate and bloody days to slaye and be slain, is accounted but a
feat of Mart. Where what a man is, what humanity, is altogether unknown.
Whereof I say little. It is to copious a theme. whereto is far easier to
find entrye than end. Only thus much I say. It is a sharp and sower
plaster, that so salueth the sore, as it maimeth one half and murthereth the
body of the commen wealth. How much better were it to imitate Surgeons, than
tormen tours? The surgian heales the sore, the tormentour quelles the man.

And neither does he cut or sear him when he may cure him with potions, with
ointments, or with gentle platsters. It is no medecin, that in healynge the
sore part of the commen weal harmeth the whole and sound. Nay, it is a
butcherye, and beastlye crueltye. They rather heal it, who provide that by
good order and lawefull means, the ill be punished.

Or (if need so require, if at home emonges them selves bate can not be
quayled and quieted) procure those to whose power it appertains, to execute
the authoures of sedicion, not rage on the whole order: But mow of ill heads,
as infections and plagues of commonweals. They must ever think, war
booteth neither part, that it is vnfeete for men, much less to be tendered to
our own countrymen, scarce to our enemies.

Ought ye not rather in this case, to debate these Questions with your selves?
Ought ye not thus to reason? what ye entende? whereto? Gaynste whom?
wherefore? who ye are that mind it? Which let us a while severally consider.
What wage ye?

War. Whereto? For proposing euel end, ye must know, the wicked pretense
proves worst to the worker: and what ye come for others shall light on your
own head. This high estate, truly is maruaflous brickle.

For, it is in manner planted and mounted on heyghthe, open to the blastes of
all enuies flawes. Wherefore, if for ye envy the honor and dignity of
Nobility, and coueit your self to clime and scale their rooms ye attempt
this bloudye mean: and more respect your private glorft, than the manifest
hasarde of the common wealth: and so cruel and bloody murder them in field:
this be ye most assured: who lives not content with his own estate shall
rue to worse. Who climes the highest shall sink lowest. With what measure ye
meat to other, with the same ye shall be repayed.

But if to good purpose in claymynge and demau^ding right ye wage war if in
fight ye demean your selves, moderate and merciful: yet, if you who in hope
of victory first took the fyelde, be conquered (as commenlye it happens) in
how wretched state your goods, hope, fortune, liberty, and life consiste, is
none so ignoraunte who knows not, so blind who sees not But admit ye
conquer, yet is not your conquest so gaynefull as harmerul, in bearinge arms
against those whom ye ought have shielded. For, with whom war ye? whom
wythstand ye? Whom assault ye? Whose blood and life pursue ye? ye murder
perdy a noble man. Which when I say, much more say I then a private or loan
person. Of god he has what so he has. For all power, rule, dignitye,
paternity, Nobility, Nouity, auncientye, descondeth from that author and geuer
of all heavenly and earthly gifts. But whom provoke ye? whom invade ye? perdy
either your natural countrymen, or your liege lord, or some civil
magistrate. To slaye your own countreiman nature and reason gain say. Since,
for ye are in one commen wealth as one bark: together of necessity ye must
either suffer wrack or escape. To lay hands on your liege lord, to whom ye
owe all honor and reverence: the civil laws bear not. To violate the
magistrate, all laws both of God and man forbid. Whom then provoke ye? whom
assault ye? perhaps good men. For emonges the^ are of the best. But good men
every man not altogether ill, will love and reverence. But be they euel?
Patience is the armor and conquest of the godly This meriteth mercy when any
cause les suffers sorrow.

But let us also consider the cause that enflameth the commens against the
Nobility. For if in a wrongefull quarrel they run to weapon, it is not only
injurious but wicked. Admytte the cause be just. Yet needs the people
naturally to rash, rather a curb to rain and bridle their stomach, the^ a
spur to provoke it. For, even just causes have their courts. And ought
rather be decided and determined by the doomes of grave and sober, than the
blades of mad and furyous men. For naught else is war, than mere fury and
madness, wherein not advice, but rashenes, not right but rage rules, and
rayneth. We must therefore try all means, ere we fly to force. We must fight
with reasons not weapons. We must run to the counsaylours. But in common
courts (say they) is no place for the poor. Then must we appeal to other
judges, to higher offices. But here also hard it were the better monyed should
speed worse in judgment. Then must we fly to princes: whose charge it is to
end controversies, and to hear and determine ehe causes of the poor But here
likewise, for the entryes to princes are narowe, for their officers wont to be
corrupted with brybes, nor poor Roscius may have passage to Silla for
Chrisogonus: (say they) not according to justice and truth, is the cause
balanced. Whether then shall the poor afflicted miser turn or wind him
self? By prayer let him appeal to god. whose ears open not to plaint, to
favor, to affection. whose court is holy and judgment right.

Whereto nor couetise scales, nor envy has made breach. To him must he present
his woeful supplication: him must he beseech and entreat. He is the stout
auengeour of the poor. He will maintain their cause against the highest and
noblest. Al means must they rather seek, the^ fight. For though the Nobles
ouercharge the^ with injuries, crushe them with labors burdens and perilles:
he yet that discharged ye Israelites of the yoke and bondage of Pharao, of the
clay and brick works: he, even he, with the same high and mighty arm, with
the self same auenging and assisting hand, which is not now abridged, shall
deliver ye wretched and afflicted people groaninge and sighing to him. Whereto
he needs not any fleshely or man's arm. Forasmuch as he is the lord of Hosts,
and puissaunt of power.

But now to the last part, who art thou that encounterest Nobility? The naked
people of number huge, of power none, policy less, who mids thy warfare,
neglectest thy home and country thrift. Where while thus ye strive thy foe with
power and policy, thou with noise and number, ye minyster cause and courage to
the foreign foe as Aesopes kite, to raven and rent either warrior: both
frogge and mouse. Whereby, even the meanlye witted understand, how many
mischieues, how sundry slaughters, how infinite heaps of calamities ensue
this glorious and gaye conquest. But ^ho warreth? The people which is (as
says Horace), a monstrous many headed beast. As I think, a rash multitude,
raging enough voluntarily, yea vnteased. Whose wars, and causes of war are,
and ever ought be suspicious. To whom in no wise, ought the governance of so
weighty charge be credited without a guide, without a prince. But let us nearer
view who wars. A private person, to whom belongs, nor judgment nor
vengeance. He bears armoure and weapon, wherewith who smites, perishes by
the divine doom. He warreth who bears no public person, who is not enspired
with the spirit of God. Wherefore neither can I allow the attempt or
enterprise of the clustered commens: nor favor the success though fortunate
and flattering. For the attempt proceeds from the evil spirit and furious
Atc: and the success though in semblant happy, plongeth yet many, as well
conquered, as conquerours, into infinite calamities ruineth as well the private
as public weal. I know some both of our time and also of the aunciente
Ethnike sages, are of opinion, a tyranne may justly be slain, and taken from
amids the quick. But me otherwise to think diverse and sundry weightye reasons
move. Which for this present I ouerpasse. For we entreat not now of civil
obedience to magistrates, nor of rebellion against the prince or country.
Only we enquire, what we ought determine of their opinion, which think
Novility ought be rooted from all civil societye, and from emo^ges me^. But
this suffiseth to that whereof we entreat, to know, ye no private man ought lay
violent hades on a noble man, since it is not lawful to mucther a tyranne, a
commen and open enemy, a tearer and tormenter of his own subjects. For if we
but slightly ouerrun ye monuments of antiquity, it will ealely appear, that
evermore (excepting few) their ends were unfortunate, who, not armed with
commen authority, but enflamed with a manner zeal of defense of their country,
attempted the overthrow of tyranny. I speak of private men and few. Not of ye
universal consent of all degrees, neither of the most and best. To whom it
belongs to minister justice, to bridle tirannie, to maintain ye laws.
Sicilye was ever counted the hold and arche city of tirants. An Island tossed
with many and sundry motions. Hit whereas many, under show of virtue and piety
to their country sought to restore to livertye, they were not only frustrate
of their end but, both doubled the tirants cruelty, and purchased the^ selves
untimely end. Emonges who^ I may recke^ those excellent wights, far drowning
all the rest: Divine Plato and Dyon. Of whom the first, sailing thither to
challenge it from the servitude whereto it long lay thrall: nor atchyeued his
purpose, nor escaped him self. The Other for he conspired the death of that
Tyranne, or rather Arche tyranne Dionisius: was endited and condemned of
treason.

What should I mencio^ Apollontus Tyancus emprisoned by Domitian the emperor,
for conspiring against him with Nero? What should I vouch the murderers of
Caesar? Who though they accomplished their purpose, yet in ye compass of one
year, all died? What should I mention Zeno Elcates, the conspirer of Nearchus
death? Who tormented with many deaths, was at last enforced (to utter some
partners of his ^o^spiracy) guililes to appeach ye tira^ts nerest friends: so to
procure their deaths These are foreign and heathen presede^ts. For religious
paternes, and of our private practice, wherewith we abou^d I pass by.
Unpunished shall they then wage war against them, who in peace are
ornaments, in war bulwarks? Who at home with connsell abroad aid with
arms? For such is, and ought to be, this well ordered Nobilitye, which we
maintain. For droanes we prise not, that awayte to spoil the labors and
honey of bees. Who of others sweat and blood, purchase their commodities, and
feed their pleasures. Such is that counterfayte Nobility. Which Diogenes
(not unfitly) termed the cloak of mischief. God shield it I should favor or
defend.

But, as in elder pears, Menenius Agrippa (an eloquent orator and famous, for
commendacion of thanncient eloquence) appeased the teased minds of the Roman
people: and, either from the hill called Sacer, or (as others will) Auentine,
revoked the enraged multitude into the city, with a fable of the iarringe
limbs: so thought I it my part, to use these few reasons, to repair
concord, and sowder discord.

To persuade the people not to think all Nobles gross paunches, living on
others swears, them selves labourlesse: but with their labor, counsel, and
service, to minister to the other limbs what they want: to purueye for the
body of the whole state, that it fall not in incurable maladye: nor more to be
maynetayned of the commens then to maintain them. Dividing and spreading life
blood through every limme: graftinge on the good many benefits, whereby both
they may live, and well and blisfully live. Wherefore, if those grounds of our
defense, which I have before laid, well understood and minded, they will often
roll in their minds and memory: they will easily abhor from wars and
sedicions: if they rightlye ponder either the cruelty and beastlines of it, or
the trifeling causes wherewith they wont to be stirred thereto, or the end
thereof, or the honor of Nobility, or them selves and their estate. Be this
therefore the sum of all. That the commen^ win the nobles with service: the
nobles the commens with benevolence. They obey lowlye, the other rule sauourably.
They strive to excel in justice, the other in obedience. They know they govern
fres men not beasts: The Other think them selves not bond by nature, but by
the law and Gospel aids and helpers. They rule with counsel, the other be pressed
we their travail. They perform their charge with the practice of their wit:
the other with ye toil of their body. Either rule and serve other in the lord.
That so they wholly apply and frame the^ selves we sweet consent to the glory
of christ, the honor of the realm, and their own safety. So shall there be
no care no thought of arms. But they shall melt their spears to coulters,
their swords to syckles. And not only suffer each other to live and be: but
by enterchanged benefits, help, and (with burning Charity) embrace each
other. But my purposed ordet hales ne otherwhere.

We have showed as we first meant that Nobility is not only to be borne but
even a singular gift of God.

Not to be banyshed or displaced, but preserved and reverenced. It is therefore
consequente to search, what is Nobilitye. Wherein, (as power will serve) we
will express the whole nature Natiuitye, and branches of it.

For all which be and will be accounted nobles know not the reason of their
name. Neither has it like fence in all tounges. For it is wellknowen, this
word (Noble) is indifferent, and doubtefull: taken in either part good or
ill, deryned of the Grammaryans from the Verb Nosco, which signifies to
know, Whereby properly it rests in him who is famous either for virtue or vice:
or for any other cause renoumed or notable. But this large and general sense
men leave.

And cloase in narowe bounds the effect of Nobility: and apply it to the
br^ghtenes of birth, and pleuty of poffessions. For every estate and ciu^^
society, though it consist of many m^bers nevertheless was parted of y^
Romans, after the manner of the Athenyans (who severed it twixt the Lords and
Husbandmen) into two degrees, and forms as it were. Accordingly it may emonges
us be divided into the nobles and commens. The One part contains the Prince, and
men of greater port, and substance, surmountinge far the other in living and
lynage. The Other the inferioure multitude, the mean and baser sort. But though
we commenlye term those Nobles, who are next to the Prince and counsel: yet
the Latins name him noble, whom ye Italyans, French men, and we otherwise
term a gentleman. Whereby it appears, this word with his largest reach
contains not only the highest estates and callinges: but whatsoever
worthies, of what so ever power or place: as also the Germaynes name theyrs
Iunkers and Idelles, which sounds in english Idle men. These also both be,
and may (not vnproperlye) be named men of the best sort. For albeit the best
be of the best sort, of whatsoever estate or degree: yet is this name restraynd
to wealth and dignitis. Cicero writes those are of the best, who neither are
noisome, nor of nature evil: not furious, not stained with any domestical
spot: who support and maintain religion, laws, their allies warfare, the
realms honor, the privileges of magistrates, the authority of the counsel.
Noble men therefore, so they fly vice and follow virtue: so they serve not so
much their pryuate as public honor: so they be indifferent and upright: as
in favor, authority, and power they pass, and find most prosperous the
pleasant gale of fortune, and bear the chiefest charge and swaye in the
common weal so both be and termed are the worthyest sages, the noblest
members, and stays of states. The Hebrews term them men of name and fame,
most famous and farthest known, and cristall (as it were) and white clothed.
Whereby they signify free and Noble men. For such emonges them is the weed
of the free borne. For the. 70. innterpreters translated it in the old bibles
fre borne. And as the Latins call them, great and lordly men: so also the
Hebrews: in place whereof, the. 70. in the fifte of Jeremy, write bright,
gorgeous noble, and lordly. And generaliye of the name, thus much may it
suffice to speak.

But though to aunciente house this name of nobility be commonly and most apity
knitte: Th^e sorts of Nobility
yet of those that are termed nobles, are three sorts. First, truly and
properly those, which are noble through their house and au^cestors. Next they
that are of them selves noble.

Thirdlye, a mean and mixte forte: of such as partly rise of them selves, and
partlye claim from their forefathers as the source of their nobilitye. Of
which let us severally treat.

The noble by birth, the Grecians term a well borne man: Nobilite, of (...)
severed from ye rascal fort, by the renoume and auncienty of his race. Though
it may be also interpreted noble, as appears in that book of Cice^^, which
he entituleth Cato the el^er. As in scoff (op he) they say Themistectec twited
a Scriphian, Vpbrawinge him, he might thank his country, not him self of
his glory.

Neither truly (quod he) were I a Scriphid were I base: nor thon glorious al
had thou ben an Athenian. For so Plutarche reports it. In like sort, the
excellent learned man Theodorus Gasa translated that self word. Whereby the
Greeks wont properlye to note a famous or glorious man. In the Hebrewe
likewise they are called glorious and renoumed, translated of the. 70
(notable). Jude, in his epistle terms the^ glory or majesty's. Which emplieth
men heaped (...) majesty and glory. Other names are among the Hebrews, but
taken to the worse. Of which we will sprake hereafter if place serve. The
Latins ^^rme him a gentleman. Feetly counterfayting ye Greeks. Betwirt well
borne, gentle, and kindly, this difference is. That the first signifies a man
famous and comme^dable by birth only. The Other two note not only a ge^tlema^,
but also a german, fre borne and natural child Who besides the name expresses
eke his parents the was. Those Nobles which by others gained the name and
dignity of their Nobilitye, are named by Appyan well fathered in imitacion of
the latin word, Patricii. Whose fathers, flourishing with the grene glory of
their deeds, left their children heirs and partners of their praise. That
such were of the lords and Senate: Liuye witnesses in the life of Romulus.
But though at the first only such were counted noble: yet after wards, who
so gave arms by their ancestors, were honored with that title. Yea the
common sort, had they once borne the chair office.

The source of Nobility.
But that the of spring of Nobilitye may more clear and plainly appear we
will more plentifullye pursue this purpose. Best, and briefeliest, in the first
of his Rhetorikes, Aristotle described Nobilitye, and deuideth it in two
parts. The One he terms commen or civil: which farther spreads. The Other
nearer, and more proper. The commen is borrowed of some famous nation or city.
as heretofore, to have been a Greek was more commendable then a Barbarian. And
an Athenian, than any other Greek. Which Plate a wise man, reckneth among
his happes. To be borne at Room nobler than at Tibur or Lilibeum and at this
day to be a Florentine, Parisian or Londoner, is accounted more glorious, then
to have been borne in a base village. More noble also it is, to be in manner
borne of them selves, and in the country, where they abide: then to be ghestes
or strangers as the Athenians boasted by Isccrates report, in his Panegirica.
That others as the remnanntes of dyners mixtures, were raked into sundry
corners: But they not other whence came into Attike: but were from ever borne
and bred there.

Which to signify, they wimpled their heads with caules wroughte with golden
Gressehoppers: for as Gressehoppers they crepte out of the soil, which they
fiil inhabited. Which mencioneth also Hicronimus Osorius. It is also more
noble, to descend of the ancient people, than of any late founded city. As
the Athenians vauted their auncientie beyond all memory. For which also, the
Acthiopians contended and sought to prove them selves first borne. The
Arcadians feigned, they prevented the Moon. Thegiptians also and Scithians,
were parteners of the same strife. For men ween much material to their own,
their countries glory. And therefore wo^ted to demand at meetinges as often is
in Homere.

Who are you, or whence, where borne o^ where bred? Contrariwise, it is the
commen reproach to be infamous or base herein. For, Antigonus twited Byon
(infamous through uncertain parents) co^temp tuously, and contumeliously,
with the same verse of Homere.

Whence he was, where borne, what country, of what kin? Whom wittely he
answered in this wise. When thou entertaynest archers thou enquerest not their
race: but who cleaues the mark, him deemest thou best. So neither demand
(quod he) whence I am, but what I am. It was reckned also a sport and mayme in
Anacharses, yt he was a Scithian. For they were counted barbarous and cruel,
dronkelewe, and wild people. The philosopher acknowledges the just reproof
of his country: But auoydeth it saying, in birth not manners: yelding him self
a cithian home not manerd. And this is that commen and farce spread Nobility.
But hit we term proper, is derived from the ancestors, and tamilie: either
principal famous and notable, or fruitful as well of men and women, or of
either part free and worshipful. Whereby such as can reckon their
graundfathers, great graundesyres, and higher, are accounted noble.

This at the first became famous, either through power and richesse (chieflye,
if they employed them to the succor of the poor and nedy, if lordlye and
liberally they powered on the people, if they founded churches, colleges,
hospitalles) or grew through their virtues, godliness. counsel, wisdom
Justice, (whereby Cicero in his second book of duties, thinks kings were
first created: by whom rose lords, and Noble men) or through nobly and
gloriously atchiened enterprises, hastayles conquetes, or whatsoever else
stirs admiracion, or is highly prised. For as Adam was the firfte parente of
the Hebrews, and the original of mankind, and before the flood, as a
Patriarche, or auncestour, to the godly fathers Abell, Seth: after the flowde
Noe left three Imps, from whom all the socieries of mankind descended: Then
Abraham the honor of the Jews, next Isaac, and after Jacob rose, from whom
issued those twelve tribes, the auncientest lamps of the Iewishe Nobility:
(of which ancestors, the Jews chiefelye vaunte, as in the Gospel and other
where, not seeld we read) so emonges the Greckes the progeny of those fyzsre
and famous captains, Cecrops, Acacus Hercules, Achilles, and other most
renoumed princes, were adopted to the succession of their name and glory, with
the general grant and agreement of all Greece, with the allowance of the
mouths and minds of al men So much furthered them to honor the memory of
their worthy ancestors, whom thankeful posterity honored only not as
gods. For those whom that Golden age bredde, they surnamed worthies, half
gods and spirits as witnesses Hesiode. And probable it is, that from the
posterities to great love and admiracion of their ancestors, the most part of
ydolatry first flowed. As we read in the. 38. of Esaye, Senacherim worshipped a
certain Patriarche, or patron. Whom Cirille the bishop of Alexandrye,
commenting on that place, writes to have been some of his parents, or
graundsircs in lineall ascencion. In like manner, emonges the Romans, who
held the fourth and last monarchye, the monumentes of weighty authors
witness the like spreading and commendacio^ of kindred. To noble men also were
certain honorable obseruaunces allowed, both by princes and cities to honor
them. As humble curtesy, vprising, haring of the head, chief place commen
pensions in their lives. Magnificence of monumentes, tombs, fuveral oracions,
Images, Chappelles, and Epitaphes after their deaths.

Emonges the Parthians, ridinge they executed commen and private charge: and
thereby were discerned from the commen sort. Emonges the Romans, the golden
ringe though sometime it were given to knights and others: yet properlye
emplyed fredome by descent. Which that nobles ware, Liuie me^cioneth. Who
writes in his ninth book, that the election of Cn. Flauiu, (made free by
manumission) chamberlain, the Senate so much disdaynd: that most of them
surrendered their gold rings and robes. Which to have been accustomed chyefelye
to be given such, as had stoutly, passinglye, or couragiouslye attempted or
atchyeued ought: appears by Ciceros fyfte action against Verres. For often
(quod he) our captains, their enemies conquero, and the commen wealth hap^elye
gouernd: guerdoned their Scribes, with gold ringes. But thou after what
achieved enterprise, what daunted enemy, durst assemble yt soldiers to
reward them? For neither only thy scribe with a ring, but even the stoutest,
and most unlike the L. Ri^brius of singular manhood, power, and authority
feedst thou with a crown, chaye, and trappers. Whereby it appears sundry
ornaments were allowed to stout and valiaunte capitaynes. Hence also first
came the title of arms, whereby Nobles more and more gilstered. These in
ancient times were graven in courts, or in the utter and princelyest parts
of their palayces. That Children might gase on the Images and titles of their
ancestors: and not only read their virtues, but learn to counterfayte them.
That gentlemen's Images we^ted to be borne at their buryalles, Pliny is a
weyghtye witness. In the courts of our ancestors (quod he) were Images set,
not the vauntes of foreign workmen, nor brass or marble monsters, but formed
shapes of ware placed in every Armarye, seruyng to accompany the tombs of all
that house. So ateuery man's burial, was present all his race. And Stemmes
ranue by branches to the shapen Images.

Whole Tablines stuffed with registers and monumentes of their acts in common
affairs. Whereby it is evident, that as these Images of their stock, so kept
they registers of all their noble acts, and praise worthy offices.

Armaries, Plinye calls those, which Polibius names closetres. Housen wherein
these Images were hourded and reserved. For he also, touches this bearing and
show of Images in burialles. And in his fifth book, defines an Image to be a
likeness, cunninglye counterfaytinge the proporcion of the countenance, shaped
with maruaylous art, and shaded with colors and payntinges. Tabline, was a
chest of those Tables, wherein were contained the writings and monumentes of
their deeds. Stem, properlye in Greek, a crown. Here signifies the race
of the stock, and degrees of descent, severed with branches, and lines Which
custom has continued to our times. So as now, not only kings and free
cities: but even every Gentleman has his petigrees. Cities in times paste (as
we now) wonted to stamp in their coin certain Images. They of Delos or
Athenes an ox. Moreover the Athenians maids, or night owls. The Corinthians
chicken, The Peleponnesians snayles. Whence grew these latin proverbs (for
Seruius also king of the Romans used the stamp of an ox) to stop his
mouth with an ox. The night Owls fly Snayles ouerrunne virtue and wisdom.
And as of beasts coins: so noble men's arms were borrowed. As of the Lion,
Leopard, Gryphon, Dragon, either grene, white, or black. The Horse the Bear,
and others, wherewith our gentlemen are honored. There be who derive them of
herbs and flowers As the white or red rose, and others like. Which they
enuironne with certain feate poesies, and devises.

Which would they followed as feetly These wonted they to grave on pillars.
Now, it is counted worshipful to place them in their housen, streets,
churches, walls, and funeralles.

These call they arms, for they are the price of their deeds. All which fortes
of out ward show and vaunt, the nobles of this age are content to bear. But,
the endeavors, duties, and practices thereof leave to others. But, not these
only honors descended to posteritye, and the whole house: But even the names
of their ancestors So, as now, they use not so commenlye their own names,
as other surnames. Whyebe first were given them, either for some rare happes,
or for their diuerselye disposed manners, or the affections of their minds, or
bodies, or for their sundry skylles, their large possessions, their many
conquestes, or of the soyles they inhabited. As emonges us. Buckingham,
Bedforde, Northfolke, Somerset, Suffolk, Stafforde. Dukes, Earls, Barons.
Whose proper names are either unknown, or vnworne in common talk. These also
in times past descended to their heirs As appears by Plutarche, where he
writes of Cicero. who first bare the surname of Cicero seems to have
flourished with chiefest praise. For ye surname, was not only not neglected,
but even gredely continued of his posterity. And Cicero him self in yt dream
of Scipio, imagines Scipio thus speaking. That name shall thou win vi" thine
own purchase, which now thou" claimest by disce^t from me. We need not here to
heap examples, since it is of it self most evident. Other privileges, as
diuinacions and such like, may by diligent reading be found and noted in Liuie
and other authors. To our purpose it shall suffice, to have said thus much. This
is therefore the first branche of Nobility. Adourned with Images, wealth, ware
pictures, petigrees and glorious titles, by their fathers and forefathers But
much it is to be feared least what Cicero plaind of his cou^treme^ in his
passed years; yt same may rightly be reported of these. That sometimes some
prove worthy to succeed their au^ cestours. But the most seek to compass this.
That so much honor may seem due to their ancestors, as both their same was
satisfied, and their heirs paid of the overplus.

An other sort of Nobility there is, begone of it self: famous through no
commendacion of house or arms, but nobled by her own deeds and industry. New
sprung Nobility
Such the Romans termed new men. Which least I seem without book or
witness to affirm not confirm: Appyan a Greek writer of the Roman
history, witnesses with these words. Them call the Romans new who not by
their ancestors, but of them selves waxt famous. As contrariwise, Gentlemen
we term those, that have continued from the beginning of the nation, whose
ancestors were never bond, nor ever staynde with treason. But though it be
great to desce^d of great house: yet greater is it to be great him self. And
better to begin then end thy house: as also to be good then borne of good. As
writes that worthy Gregory Nazienzent. Hit behooves to ouerrunne, not lagge
behind thy kin. Therefore when baseness of birthe was vphrayded Sostratus, he
answered he ought be so much the more esteemed, for his house began at him.
Likewise Ciccro refoyneth to Salust. Who, where men thought after he had borne
office, he would have avoided or changed the name of Ciscero: vowed to
endeavor to yield it more famous, then ever was the Catos Catulles, or the
Scaures. Which how he performed, well can thankful posterity witness.
Neither are these new nobles any less praise worthy, then, the auncientst: if
with right foot and by straight pathe, they aspice to honors. For the other
are in manner feathered with others plumes. These with their own virtues: They
as yt yuie and vine lean on others proppes. These, as the fish Trochus is
reported to engender with him self, and conceive: so be the first begetters of
kin name, and honor to their posteritye, But more to clear the matter with
experience, became not Romulu of a heard, the king and founder of the Romayne
state? Or did not Tullus Hostilius a young Impe, busied in entending his sheep,
from his countreye coat scale the heyghthe of ye Romayne scepters? Happd not
the like to Tarquinius Priscus son of Demaratus a Corinthian mat Merchant, a
bannished wight? dyscended not Scruius Tullus of a Niefes wherefore as of the
kingdom, so like is the account of other offices: which were also emparted
with the common sort, as the Tribuneshyppe Counsulship, and others. M.
Valerius Coruinus a Noble man, witnesses the Consulshyppe was communicated
with them: As the price, not of blood, but virtue. And therefore reed we, that
even from the plough and Houell, many were called to the Senate to the
Dictatourshyppe, and stateliest honors. Truly to pass by profane matters, God
it is, who rayseth the poor from the dunghill as Saul, David, and others. Many,
that only arbiter and dyspenser of humayne happes, makes of slaves Lords, of
Rhetors, Consuls: from base estate and fortune, lifts to the highest rooms
and houors whom him lifts. which well knew that Pagane Poet Hesiode. Who, in
the entrye to his treatise of works and days, moving this doubt whence it
proceeded, that some were Noble, others base: answers. Of the will of God.

The third and Noblest sort, Nobility matched with virtue.
is not simple, but compounde of either, consistinge of such, as with their
own travail, gistes, and ornaments, amplysie, and increase thenheritaunce, of
the recetued name from their ancestors. So, as they be not only parteners of
their Nobility, but resemble them also, in imitacion of their deeds: Not only
evening but even surmounting them. Which, that noblest Socrates prince of
Philosaphers, see meth to have signified, when, demanded what was Nobility, he
defines it, the just and even temperature of body and mind. So, as they
ought be not only meanly, and so much as suffiseth other, endewed with goods
and gittes of the body: and commended with foreign graces, either of fortune,
nature or kindred: But further ought couple hereto, the care and tillage of the
mind, ioynte with their earnest endeavor. That not in body only, but mind,
they be well affected and by sposed.

And besides the prowess of their au^cestours, purchase the^ selves commen
dacion of wisdom. Of this Nobility in the fourth book of his commen wealth,
forespake Aristotle. Saying there be three things that strive in civil
equality. Liberty, wealth, and v^rtue. But ye fourth which we term Nobilitye,
is compounde of the two last. For Nobility is long lasted wealth linked with
Fortune. And so forwards.

These therefore are, in my opinion, and as the ciuilians sever them, the three
sorts of Nobility. If any other be, they may rightlye be referred to these.
For Plato, as writes Diogenes La^rtius appointed four kinds. The first, of
them that descend of good and virtuous parents. The next of such as had
princes, or noble men their progenitors. The third of those whose
auncestoures were victorious in wars, or crowned for conquestes Which three
may well be comprised under our first part. Namelye, that Nobilitye, which
descends from others. As we imitatinge Aristotle have parted it. The fourth
sort is of such as flourishe with the glory of their own deeds. Which part
is also subject to our second branch.

Now therefore, our first promise discharged, the name of Nobility discussed,
and examined, the source thereof shortly shadowed, and her parts expressed:
Let us again peruse them more distinctly, and advisedly, and more at large
ouerrunne them. And search as we may, and can, which is the true Nobility.
For, both it needs search and inquiry: and is of it self most worthy
consideracion. Because not all that have attaynd the name, have eke the thing:
But they are deemed to have both name and thing, who clime those steps,
whereby rightly we scale to dignity. For to be a noble man is no base or
rascal honor. But the especial gift and honorable orname^t of God.
Therefore, of him to whom greater charge is credited, more duties are required.
As Christ by parable taught us in the Scriptures.

That, as he is most famous and floryshynge, in reverend names; honorable
titles, bright Images, Riches, Pomp, and power: as every man vpryseth to him,
and yeldeth him place: as he is saluted, loned, honored, and byghlyer prysed
then all others: so, he endeavor to excede all others, in true honor, and
Nobilytie. And, as in these foreign goods: so in the other greater, he excel
the multitude. Therefore, as Nobles wear rychest roabes, so are honorablest
and princeliest qualities required of them. Unless they will betraye the
state, that god allotted them, and therwithall, their dignity, their native
Nobility. For it is not given all men, nor boughte by Princes favor, neither
comes by the benefit of nature, nor as perquisite, happes by chance and
casualtie: but even given from above, by the providence, and dispensation of
god. Who plongeth low the lofty from their seat: and lifts up the lowely.
Who, with his ryghtewyse eye regards man's life, and with his mighty arm and
heau^enlie beck, guydeth and governs it. To whom ought Noble men impute,
what so they have. And, what have they, not received? if received why glory
they, as they ne had received it? Wherefore, since in dyscourse of the first
Question, we have showed, that this Nobility groundeth on the laws both of
God and man: and therefore, ought not be abolyshed, but preserved and honored:
as a profitable, necessary, and honorable ornamente of the whole body, both in
war and peace: And, in the second part of our deuysion, opened what it is,
discribynge the name, nature, original, and parts thereof: it rests
consequently, to speak of the third part namely, which is true Nobility,
and what manner thing it ought be.

Which may the better be known and understood, Counterfaite Nobility.
if first we carue out counterfaite Nobility, and hit which tracketh the true
by stelth: least we mistake the forged for true, and the false semblant of
truth, deceive the^ simple. For herein miss many. Partly, of the Nobles them
selves, through self love and conceyt of them selves: And partly, the commen
sort, in reuerencinge whom they ought not, or cherishing those vices with
flatterye, which hit behooved to reprove with aduisement. Few be there, that
boldly speak the truth. Whereby either Nobles may know them selves: or others
learn to know the Nobles.

As truly to Nicocles said Isocrates (the father of eloquence), of tyrants and
heavy lords. For where private and poor men their enemies accuse, their
friends warn: few, as they ought reprove those, that pass the rest in
dignity. So who most behooued to have been best enfourmed: rest neglected and
untaught. For few accompany them: and such as are conuersaunt with them, or
fauourablye flatter them, or dread with frank and christian freedom to
reprove them.

But, though noble men's ears must not be launced: yet must they accustom to
listen not only sweet sawes, but true withal. Therefore, that we may the
better discern the true Nobles, the apishe and chaungelinug must be discovered.

Vaynest therefore, and plainly mischeuous are those, The sundry sorts of
counterfayte Nobility.
most unworthy this name (whereto most impudentlye they entrude them selves)
leude cutters and roysters. Who in their utter behavior, apparayle, practices,
and talk, counterfaite a manner Nobility. In deed affecters of Nobilitye, and
counterfayte rich. With who^ almost now every corner throngs: who^, who is so
madd to reckon in this number? Of who^ Solomon says in manner thus There be
some (quod he) yt having naught yet counterfaite riches. For such are they. Of
no substance, less possibility basest birth, desperatst life, most lavish
tongue. For gain, sometime Gnathos, sometime Thrasoes, Importunately boasting
their bravery, as he in ye Comicall Poet. Craking their cheualrous facts (in
need none) their fraies and scarres: with open mouth and false and forged lies.
These walowing in excess, maskd in suits and colors, with impudent face and
hard favor, not walking, but rouing: belche forth no mean matters, but
w^rres, Princes, emperors, Cities, castles, realms. And as Taurus a small
bird, by report of writers cou^terfaites ye Ores lowing: so these misers of no
substance, no ability, no possessions, stoop to no base or mean matters, but
comme^ only of high, princely and lordlye affairs. And least ought should
want, scrape to them selves en signs of honor, and feign the^ new found
ancestors. And rake to the^ for hyre traynes of slaves, or rather troops of
felons like them selves, to flatter the^, to shoute at al their iestes and
sayenges, who live of the spoil, snatche, prays, and robberies: thriuing only
by theft, forced by this bloody gain and cruel vauntage, to maynteyne their
false and copper Nobility, their lewd fame and wretched glory, purchased from
the beginning by lies and theft.

Which three halfeny gentlemen I reckon not in my Scrowe. As in whom rests not
so much as one ioate of honesty, much less of Nobility. For neither are they
borne of good house, nor commendable for any glimse of goodness. Wherefore, as
Noble noughtye packs let us ouerpasse them.

Vain also, and counterfaite is their nobility that are priestly, and church
nobles. Of whom yet, Church Nobles.
more question is, then of those other. For, they are authorized by the consent
of many, and Nobility of house, and ye maintenance of their great might. For
comme^ly they are cleped lords and Princes. Nor in the church only comber
the chyefest seats and sees, but coueyt to rule the world in temporal and
civil causes: wage wars, carye with them courts and traynes. As not in
name only Nobles, ^ut passing the mightyest princes, in fertilest lands,
plentifullest possessions, and largest dominions. Who would they had rather
chose to enryche them selves of their own enheritaunce and patrimonies: the^
of church profits. which since they earne not by sowing, pla^ting nor
preaching: neither ought they reap. Manifest is the Popes policy, and well
known for what wile, their Roomishe father and enstaller, him self lord of
lords, has placed them over so many provinces. For who doubts, but in
settling these in so many realms, and kingdoms, he sought his own honor: and
prepared him self a mean to maynteyne and stablishe his vsur^ed dignity?
Truly not altogether the best, provided their parents for their own honor,
much less for the church, who stoared with plenteous and abundan^t issue: their
youngest either banishd into cloisters, as Abbottes, or Abbesses, to rule yt
Conents: or procured to be created Chations or Bishops. Bishops I say, not to
ouersee their flock, but to forese their private gain. So, as they become the
lords of their bodies, not feeders of their souls. Which for it is ungod lie,
ought greatly of the godly to be plained. For hit is wisked, ought by yt
magistrates to be punished. But I can neither disgrade the^ of the name, n^r
title of Nobilitye. But by what title, claim, or rightful interest they sue
to be registered in this rewe of Nobles, which here I search, truly I see not.
For albeit the manner and phrase of commen speech, has otherwise determined:
yet* if more we credit the authority of sound learning, then vicious custom,
or the truth, then vanity and the terms of the rude and ignorant people: of
necessitye we must either judge them belyed priests, or sclasidred Nobles. For
if abandoning the world and their birth right, they fled to the church: in that
station and calling must they abide. For one sole man must use one only
calling. And the first right surrendered to late it is to reclayme. Both at once
they can not be. Sith God and Mammon, service, and lordshippe, are no less
contrary, then fire and water. Neither, well governs he a spiritual charge,
who entermedleth with the wo^lde. And therefore is it in some comm^n wealths
decreed, that none shall bear at once two offices, or practice two sundry
crafts. For each duty claymeth not the half, but the whole man.

Except perhaps they will be like those Serpents, which are said to be double
headed, and tayled. For, so are these double faced and chaungelinges, sometime
for auantage ecclesiasticals, otherwhiles Nobles, as me^ of al degrees and
sorts. For to such (not unworthily) Erasmus resembled them. But by their
patience, this state as euel, and opinion as false ought be rooted When the
Apostles strove for lordship when ye.ii. brethren sued for the right and lest
place in the kingdom of heaven, our savior otherway wried their ambitious
lusts and earthly minds.

Nor granted what they fondly craved nor flatly denied their ^est. But seemed
in manner to yield, and yet in yelding to root out the affe^t^o^. For expressly
he forbids to practice lordship or dominion, affirming it to belong to heathen
princes. Also the deuiue Peter (whose vicar the Roman bishop has lately
found him self, and opened these a more honorable gappe) in his epistle in no
wise will that Pastors or bishops rule over their flock, If the Apostles
refused to serve the lords Table, the better to ente^d preaching: and posted
this as a great let and hinderance to others: if Paul whollye to apply the
preaching of the gospel, in manner forsook ye ministracio^ of baptism: where
yet those offices are sibbe, and in manner joint: truly these most repugnat
charges, whereof either chalengeth and occupies the whole man, with what bond
they may be coupled: or how two such contraries may be applied to one: none I
think may easily ymagyne.

Or if he conceive, shall not so easelye confyrme. Neither by any indifferent
law, ought one self member be a thrall of Jesus Christ, and a worldelye
lord: a teacher and preacher of God, and retainer of ye world. Nay rather,
such a compou^d creature, is neither-simply to be termed a noble man, nor
simplye a priest. Put to speak truly and indifferentlye, is a neuter and
mongrell. ye will happily say then, shall the bishop or minister be so cloggd
to preaching of the Gospel, as he may entende naught else?

Truly, I deny not, they may also entermedle with some forreyne affairs, as
Moses and Ambrose to determine doubtful controuersyes, sometimes travail in
embassyes, purchase peace, aid their Princes with their cou^sayles, and
frequent judgments. But these seeld happen and are no necessary burdens. But
to preach and proclaim yt new covenant, is their proper and appointed
charge. And woe to the^, if they preach not. They challenge also benefices in
manner by title, for their ancestors gave the^. But other was the mind, other
the intent of the geuers. Namely, that fervent prayers should incessa^tly
flame* religion spread and yt kingdom and gospel of Christ be enlarged. To
other end if they tended, il founded gifts will fail. And so the geuers mocked
of their reward. What so they willd, thus has God decreed. And albeit this
ecclesiastical nobility ground on Popes patentes, whereby, both entry is
forclosed the poor, to y^ highest Ecclesiastical degrees, and noble desce^t
required of either pare^t and all their ancestors of such as shall attain
them: yet since they have neither godliness, nor learning, their pledges or
warrantes: Unworthy are they of this authority, all were they able to vouche
infinite descents, and petigrees of their race, and those confirm (as they
wont) with their sacred oath. Why then? (they will happily ask me) may not a
noble man take charge of souls and preach? What else? if, when he bears the
simple person of a preacher, he disgrade him self of the honor and pride of
his Nobillitie. For they ought not be debarde that kind of life, if faithfully
they will discharge their charge. But of ghosts, shades, and Images, my talk
entreats, that devour the Church goods. Who account it vilanous to learn,
vile to teach. Such Archebishops, Archepryestes, or Archecourtiers, we remove
from this rewe of Nobles, as counter faites and Newters. For as Moyles
engendered twirre a Horse and Ass, are neither Horse nor Ass, but, a mixed and
myngled kind: even so are these. As begotten not of men but Gods, who not
only descended of aunciente house, but also imitate the aunciente mean and
manner of life. As says in Virgyle Dido of Aneas.

I think (and not amiss) he is Impe of Gods For, the child is the fathers
Image, and in manner him self: if as in body, so in mind, he endeavor to
resemble him. Neither is the phrase strange in the Scriptures, to term
Maiestrates and Nobles, gods, and Sons of the highest. We ought also to prise
auncientie, since god for Abraham, David and their fathers, showed mercy to
their Children: as appears euydently in the bible. And often we love the
Child, as the fathers mirror. But so much the more if many his auncestoure,
continued the self possession of praise with continued worthiness. Wherefore,
some force to provoke love, bathe the aged memory of well deserved parents.
Nobility also, has her several ages, increases, and degrees. Wherefore, as we
reverence age: so, since this springs, spireth, prospers, and buddeth,
having her blossoms as youth, and ripenes as hoare bears: truly, we ought and
wont all to honor this hoarie auncientie of Nobility, lasted through so many
ages and families. Chiefly, if the moare of virtue be not cropped, but daily
rooted deepelyer. But since Cain Cham, the children of Jacob, and after Absolon,
Rhoboam, and other ill suits, sprung of holiest roots: and the heirs of
Scipio, Fabius, and Cicero, prove that Children tread not always their
fathers steps, but often degenerate: and commonly it happeth, the most
chaungelinges, most crake the simple glory of their auncientie, them selves
suinge no sound or perfect virtue: therefore, for it is lawful, it likes and
behooves me, somewhat to reason, not against antiquity, but the vain
confidence of antiquity: not of mine own head, but the authority and
judgments of learned Sages. And as hitherto we have pulled naught from it,
so henceforth will we add naught to it, but his own, least with borrowed
plumes, it seem to it self. What other then, shall we term ancient blood,
then goare, or putrified? as said Gregory Nazianzene to like effect.

Blushe to be termed ill, not base or bare
Race is their praise, who long since notten are.
Lo, he terms them putrified, festred and rotten in their graves, from whom
these boast their birth. And Cicero in scoff, rightly termed Pisos aged and
aunciet Images, smoakie. Vain therefore is this vaunt of ancient Nobility, if
naught else renown him, but his worm eaten stock, or empty rewes of drawn
descents. For, who walowes in this error, and weenes him self greater for
this shade of forreyne happes: is not to be reckned amongs the Noble and
honorable, but rather to he deemed a fool and fondlinge. But happily you will
reply, their race is not only ancient, but rich and mighty. But therein
others either match or pass them, and yet not therefore are accounted Noble.
And riches often are blocks, mids the race to our nobility, and often forslowe
the voyage to this true glory: at least not always further hit. Further, it
may perhaps be douted, who were those Nobles, and glorious worthies of whom
these Impes descended. Truly what may be said, I see. But how I may
playnelye speak without offense I doubt. For what more froward or stately,
then he who seems to him self happy? Who is hardlier taught, the who
dreauth him self most fortunate? Plato refused to give the Cirenenses laws,
for he counted it most difficult, to order so welthy people. Nevertheless, both
for it is true and profitable for thym to heare^, necessary for me to speak:
my conscience mouynge me to utter hit, I must not conceal it. I wish
therefore, all Nobles would call to mind, and reap up out of all memory their
ancestors, and progenitors. So shall they find perhaps a petygree and
genealogy, whereof they ought rather blushe tha^ swell. I stir not this mixen.
Let the^ selves search the chronicles, and their petygrees and mark if their
ancestors have hene murderers of their brethren, as Cain: reprobate as Esau:
of whose house the book of Genesis reckeneth many dukes and kings.

Whether they have been rouers as Nimrod the great hunter: or tyrants, as
Nero, Phalaris, and others: Idolaters, as Their the father of good Abraham:
persecutours of christian religion, as Julian the Apostate, or effeminate and
vicious persons as Sardanapalus. Whose children or posterity, have small cause
to vaunte the honor of their ancestors, but rather to lament their miserable
state. And declynyng their bypathes, them selves sue better. And so begin to
raise to their posteritye, some pattern of true Novility. What says Christ
of the buylders of the Apostles tombs, and such as decked the monumentes of
the just? Saying, Had we lived in the times of our fathers, we would not have
been partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets. Therefore ye are
witnesses to your selves, (says he) that ye are their children, who slew the
Prophets. Fill ye also up the measure of your parents. O ye serpents vypers
brood, how will ye escape damnacion? If is to be feared, least he will say
the like to them, Who proud the blood of their bloudye syres, vaunte such
arms, as purchased by the spoils and slaughter of the good, not honor but
dishonor them nor ought to raise, but quayle their stomachs, and abashe and
shame them. God in Esaye calls the Israelites, traitors children and froward
brood. This therefore, (in manner) was the head of the Iewishe Nobilitye: These
be also the ofspringes of ours. For to come nearer, were they not Gentyles from
whom this: Gentrye descended? Lived they not without god, without law, without
Christ^ Which infamye, though it be commen to all, and farther of, nor
peculyer only to Nobles: yet pertayneth to them for it is universal.

And thereto this our talk tends, that such as advance them selves for
birth above others, may link them selves in this commen line with others, and
be included in one self throng with every abject person: not exempting them
selves from this contagion for their Nobilitye. For such as now ween them
selves nearest god, are the re^nauntes of this wicked and accursed brood. So
are they of ye condemned sede of the Gentiles, as al ye rest Which had been a
simple Nobilitye, had not ye precious cross of Christ our noblest savior
legitimate them. But nearer yet let us touch this spring and root of these
noble twiggs. Let us in thought ouerrunne and peruse all countreies of
christendom, and see if in any of them, appear any spark of true and
ancient gentry. Italye the queen and empress sometime of the rest, abundant
in pleasures, commodityes, and sundry blessings of God, how large it was,
how little it is, if any will but recount: he shall find no sure signs, no
evident steps of any ancient Nobility. Not whole towns, not waste playnes,
retain their former and principal names: no pure and whole families
remaining. The noble housen either ruined, or decayed, and new and barbarous
vpcrept.

For that part, which sometimes the Apulians, Samnites, Greeks and Campanes
inhabited, is now the realm of Naples Latium, Capaigne: Gawle, termed of Caesar
behither the Alps, Lombardye, Flaminia, Romandiola: the river Liris, Galirian:
Ticinus, Pauie: Egnatia in Apulia, Iuuenacium as Raymond Martian notes. So as
almost at this day, it retayneth no ioat of antiquity. For it has been the
pray and spoil of al nations. Not only in elder times mixed with mongrel and
foreign people: as the Greeks, Oenotrians, Morgetes, Sicilians, Ausonians,
Aborigines, Pelasgians, Auruncans. But also at last, with al Barbary: the
Lombards, Saracens, Hungarians, the factions of Gwelphes, Gibellines and
others, wherefore, what marvel is it, if the private antiquity of Nobility and
famous housen be decayed? what shall I say of Spain which suffered like calamity
what privy murders they committed with what barbarousnes they infected it, both
I sorrow to think, and abhor to recount. Neither the Germans, al were they
of others most free, and least open to invasion: were altogether quite from
foreign bondage: from the Romans, from the Gentiles, and Pagans. For the
Sarmatians and Goths, wild and cruel people, they bred in their own bosoms.
What I speak of the^, I wish also understood of others, professing now the
name of Christ. But to what end tendes this far set search? To revoke noble
me^ to their original. That such as be aunciente, may with attentive thought
peruse the puddle whence first they sprung. Wherein, whether they wail the
ruin and subversion of their nation, or sorrow the ignorance, cruelty,
impiety, and shame of their ancestors: Let them look nearer the^ selves, not
boast the^. For were they euel, no cause have the good to vaunt them, al were
they kings. Neither think I them or ours rightlye termed Nobles, if they be
infected with the contagyon, of their oryg^nall ancestors.

For, neither are their ancestors therefore not vicious, for they were
accounted Nobles: for they were clothed in ^purple, and gold. For so, should
Nobility be, (as said Diogenes) a veil of vice. For, as neither ye account
the Aspis, or Scorpion harmles, for ye see them pent in^golden Cages: so
neither ceasseth vice to be vice, though dysguised with gold, and other gifts
of fortune. As singulerly said Epictetus. As an Ape is an Ape all wear he a
golden Robe: so neither power so alters men, but they persevere aye like them
selves. For, vice is neither masked nor honored, with the weed, but rather
bewrayed and descried. But, admit they were ancient, rich Noble and good
withal. Yet, naught worth is it, to have good ancestors: but to be him
self good, is some what, or rather all. For, as each man bears the pain of
his own misdeedes, so are children esteemd by their pryuate virtues. Nor so
much skilles it, who or what man begat thee, as whom and what thou prove and
show thy self. For comme^deth it ought thy deformity, yt they were fair? Or
supplye their riches thy want? Ought avails it thee in sycknes, that they
were strong and helthy? Truly, as their beauty, health, and richesse, in thy
wants serve the not as thine: so neither art thou by them, either richer,
fairer, or helthier. Wherefore well may the virtue of thy ancestors, be in
deed a president and spur to provoke thee to well doing, that begotten of
good thou may co^tinew good: but by theyrs against thou no praise, but thou
practice like. Sooner shall thy noughtynes clipse their Nobility, then by their
worthiness it shadowed, or thou made better. This Nobility, is others gift,
not thine* who otherwise thincks, is fond and witles. Even as, who seeing the
emperors or others fleet at Genua would ween they were his, and thereof boast
to the beholders. Or as ye fond rich man Caluisius Sabinus, who (as mencioneth
Seneca in his Epistles) thought him self learned and mindful, for he kept
learned and mindful servants. And deemd he knew and understood, what so they
knew. To these may worthelye be said, that in their Fathers arms lies all
their gentry. As Herod a Sopbister reproched an insolent craker that all his
Nobility lay in his shoes. For then used they amongs the Romans, on their
shoes an Iuory ornament, shaped like a die. These be therefore foreign happes,
and placed in the rash dealing, and favor of fortune: without the man,
indyfferente both to good and evil. And often it happeth, that as of an ill Crow
comes an ill egg: so contrariwise, not seeld, of stout, modest, and godly
parents, descends a Cowarde, shameless, and wicked Son. Which well declare
the discents of the Patriarchs, and kings of the Jews. This proves also the
rewe of the Roman Emperors, who so will by leisure pervse them. This shows
Valerius Maximus, in his title of unkindly children. Wherefore, not country, not
parents, not au^cestours give Nobility: but other whence it comes, nor is a
thing so rife by all men to be gaynd. Godly said Hierom. Not to have been at
Jerusalem, but well to have lived at Jerusalem, is worthy praise. So, not to
be borne of good parents, but thy self to be good, is commendable: and
worthiest al praise and honor. Be therefore this Nobility of birthe beloved,
reverenced, and esteemed: be it a step and staier to true Nobility: it self
sure, true and perfect Nobility is not. Hereby is it apparent to all men,
that ancient family, or descent, some what aydeth to this perfection: but
those natheles are far wide who customably and commonly are counted Noblest.
If new nobility be the true gentry.
Let us now come, to the sudden glory (as Pliny terms it) and new
Nobility. Which, since it grows and clymeth of it self, seems somewhat
nearer to approach the tipe of perfection. Or may at least, as well as the
auncientest. But contrariwise it proves, and other wise have others practiced
tofore.

Who by fraud, guile, and deceit, like ill means, or princes blinded
judgment, bought or purchased Nobilytie. Of whom presently swarmeth each
where, a great or rather to great multitude. Emonges the Romans, infamous was
the name of new men. And not once reproched to Cicero, and chiefly laid in
his dyshe by Salust. That he was perdy, a new man, come from Arpinas, late
found, and sent for: and a Citezen lately grafted in the City of Rome. But,
would we had all Ciceros: who with travail, industry, eloquence and wit,
would open them selves paths to the attayninge of honors. But alas, other
engines use they to break unto it, other mines and privy policies, to win
this Nobility. Who, as they enter by a posterne, and wyndowe on the wrong
side: so once entered, prove more skilful in vices, Couetise, pride, ambition,
cruelty, then the auncientest Nobles. As though, far longer they had learned
in the Schole of noughtines. So blind fortune their promoter, them promoted
blynds. Whom it contenteth not, to prefer the ill, unless with aucthorytie
she arm them, to make them more harmefull. Then at length honor bewrays
him, and detecteth his couerte ragyng Tyranny. So, who of all other weakest and
most contemptuous, powerless and bloudlesse, barer then any Irus, could hurt
none: they once armed with power, office, and honor, as a Caruynge Sword:
learn not only of their own nature to stynge, but also with the edge of
their aucthority murder good subjects, far their better, godlyer, and
nobler. And, for as hongry flies they crall to oftice, of the blood and beggary
of ye impoueryshed, suck the wealth they want. So these wretched vpsterts,
creping first on ground, and (as rightly Cicero terms the^) even bratts of
the earth, begotten of them selves suddenly with their brightness, port, and
might, dimne the au^cientest families. Whose lamps once quenchd them selves
invade the regiment. Is this true Nobility? Is this the pathe to glory? Hither
may they aspire, who neither dare vouche their father, nor can their
Graundfather? thieves of all both dyuine and humayne things? or dare such,
claim the glorious and excellent title of true Nobility? Not only rich, but
good must they be, who seek to attain this praise. Which hardely may they
be, who so untowardly hie to riches. For, true is that saying of the Greeks.

Never, vpryght man rashly rich became. And therefore, of Silla erst in his
ruff one demanded how he might be honest, who having naught by discente,
possessed so many men's substance. For hardly prove they good, who suddenly
prove rich. Record of Plato in the fifth book of his laws. which Solomon
also, of al kings ye wisest proves. Saying, hasty enheritance at first, is
never fortunate at last. An other disease eke have these new nobles. Namely
pride and vain boast. whiles they look not whence these rose, but what their
coffers bourd. Me^ say, Bucephalus y^ stead of Alexander the great, vnsadled
and vnharnessed, would suffer his keeper to sit him. but once furnished with
his princely bosses and trappers, abide none but they king him self,
snuffinge and snortinge at all others. So is it with these new found nobles.
Then whom poor and base, none more modest, peasable, or crouchinge: but once
enriched, whom late they honored, forthwith dysdayne and spurn. Such is the
change of their mind with fortune, as he were not he, who late he was. But
let them look to it. I accuse them not of pleasure. How be it, he accuses not
Nobility, who severely entreats the evil, to procure their amendment. Nor
speaks he always ill, who tells the truth, though freely. It will be
worth their travail, both again, and again to behold from what puddell
they spring. For so God chasteneth Saul; vpbrayding him his late baseness, and
mysery. Wast thou not (quod he) anointed King over all the tribes of Israel;
when thou waste but simple even in thine own sight? and thus likewise to
David, whom entierly he loved. From the sheepefoldes took I thee, to be
prince of the people. Let such therefore as are dronken and reele with the
meathe of new honor, and forget the dungehil whence by God they were raised,
to the type of honor: call to mind their fathers coat, and first homely
cradles, and not be ashamed of the baseness of their natyue birth.

If by their own virtue and commendation of wisedoms, they attaynde to this
higher room, as many at this day both singulerly learned, and guyltles and
sincere in life: then are they truly most honorable, and worthy a higher
state. But if either by force, as lions, or fraud as foxes, basest and
obscurest misers be enriched by others goods: (I Will speak naught bitterlye of
them, only this I say,) as they quickly climed through others wrack and
misery: so shall they stoop, or rather totter as spedelye. Marius the tyranne
grew to such pride, that he forgot he had been a smith. But mark the end of
his sudden glory. In one day made Emperor, the next he seemd to raygne,
the third he was slain of his own soldier, with the sword him self
forged. Loath I were to boade vnluckly to the Nobles of our days: but this I
wyshe, they would often and earnestlye consider, whence they rose, and how,
what way, what passage they hewed them selves to Nobilitye. Cicero in his
oracion for Roscius complayneth, that under the conquest and empire of Silla,
the best Orators? and chosen counsayloures slain and beggered, arose a
familye called Grucii, whote accusers, as after Cannas fyeld. And likewise, the
Capitons, Chrisogons, courtyers of Silla, thirsting others goods, and lives,
waxd suddenly mighty: and triumphed over the riches and possessions of
noblest counsayloures. Who coueit to know what late happd in Naples, Millan,
and other realines, co^sulting Chronicles nothing domme therein, and listening
tatling fame, each where pratlinge of it: shall learn that Barons, Earls
besides others worshipful, were fined partly we the loss of life, partly we
banishment That strange ghests succeeded, or rather roi^ted into ye auncie^tst
possessios and families of ye true owners. Truly this plentiful and fruiteful
harvest of Sillas tyine, was neither at Room, nor then only. But is at al
such times, and where is, as private men condemn nobles in loss of life, exile,
or fine of goods, to enter them selves on their possessions. When new come
ghests displace the old inhabiitants, when either circumuent other, when they
coin the^ selves heirs by forged testaments, or by fraud for small value wrye
to them selves thenheritance of their naked neighbor, or beg wards of the
prince to ryfle ye poor Orphans, or by any like wicked means by others
wrack enriche them selves. New shifts and polecies have the Nobles of these
days, unknown to ye elders. First to rake to the^ revenues of benefices,
wherein though the name of ministry they neither bear nor coueit, Beneficed
not beneficial Gentlemen.
yet reap they the greatest part of the profits. Bestowing on the toylinge,
sweating, and swinki^g minister, ye sma^ lest part and porcio^. Of which sort
ye to many such be and have been, even y^ blind see, and such as be in
authority, ought see reformed. That every man have with his labor his hire,
his guerdo^ with his charge. Ab^eye Gentles.
Like is their risinge, who in the rasynge of monasteryes, sought not the
commen but their private commoditye. Whereby many first became and were termed
gentlemen, to whom before neither that worshipful name, nor so large,
possessions were imparted. Which neuerthelas, were they good men, frank
housekepers, liberal, lovers and mainteiners of true religion, staynde by the
old Tenants: both them selves should be less envied, and others less
iniuryed, and their new possession more excusable. The third sort is of
Courtiers retaynens and such like. Who by the preferment of their lords or
Princes gifts, ^er^a^uts presented.
or worshipful marriages, clime to this crown of worship, which also Cicero
co^playnd under the blondy varte of Silla and Caesar. When at the (...) of Noble
men's sec^^^^tes* good ^^^s goods and ^^^^annres (...) ryfled. Albeit herein
also, our cou^ryers pass them in slight. For they only in that calamity, were
honored with such prays and spoils. But these think it continuallye
lawefull by flattertuge their lords, and hanging on the chiefest
counsayloures, to watch their commodity and oportunitye. To catch the farm
or lease they coueyte, though with the iniurye of some poor wretch, aged,
creple, widow, or orphane. whereof the folly rests in Sillas and Cesars, and
such as suffer them selves to be flattered and corrupted, to wrest from the
right owners, by their authorityes and commandments, honors, and
possessions to bestow commenly on the unworthiest. Which Budee writynge on the
Pandectes, compleyneth of ^ ^au^ce, his country, being master of the
requests, borne in Parise of a noble house and honorable parents, how be if
Nobler for his learning then his honor. Which I am not here ^gre^ed to
write, for that mischief far spreads, and extends to many persons and
places. That both they may be condemnd by the authority of so honorable
person, and ashamed of so just complaynt, and by wisdom and council renoked
to a better mind. By Ciceros mind (quod he) the chiefest courtiers, in manner
Princes eyes and ears, and even of their priuye counsel, in preferringe
vnfeete men, and en^talling lorelles in chiefest benefices, highest officer,
and other pryses of virtue (justice freating thereat) seem to have seared
their names with perpetual infamye, and to have staynde their memory with
fretting and vnanoydable envy. For what may we think of them, to whom the
Prince bath credited the seasonynge of yong^ suits, If partial either for hate
or affection, ouerpassyng men of greats discrecion and approved tr^fte, they
entrude to such charge either dreamishe doltes, or loselles, most unworthy
that credyte: or sometime not so worshipful, as famous for the ill prayer of all
men to both? Of which sort are some pernicious much Catos, who favor the
good more from ye teeth forwards then with their hearts. Who seem to me, to
show as many scarres in their forheads, as either they preferred such, or
suppressed worthy men, with the mockerye of their prince. Yet, what horrible
mischieues have such wrought? How much misery has happened, for the
default of wiser and more worthy teachers? All this his talk, refers to
the words of Cicero, wrytinge to Atticus that Pompeye hanged his name for
ever, in preferring by his authority one most unworthy to the Consulshippe.
But the son of Aulus (quod he) so bebaueth him self, that his Consulshippe
is no consulshyppe, but plainly the sclaunder and infamye of Pompeye, who
preferred him thereto. Thus is hit to true, both that promocions are bestowed on
the unworthy, and that their faults are imputed to their promoters. For which
only cause, we have also seen in England diverse excellent, good, and godly
Nobles, deadly hated and defamed, for placynge under them ill and ravening
rulers and officers.

Whose avarice turned not to their own harm, but to the discredit and death
of their innocent and guyltles patrones. Wherefore the true Nobilitye (and
chiefly princes) must be circumspect, to who^ they credit the government
either of private or public affairs. For if ought happen ill, to them the
gain turns, the shame and check to their placers and preferrers Nor lights
ever the blame and punishment, on those, whose is the fault. But I ouerpasse
our home happes, and soars. Much is it to be feared least these Giantes
brood, earth birds, dunghill Nobles, prove ye traytoures and plagues of their
country, and tread underfoot the commen wealth. In Homere Achilles ragynge
freateth, for uneven honors were laid on unable porters. Nor plainelier
ought prophecieth the near and approaching death of cities and realms, then
like account of good and evil: and (as Plato says) unmeet shoulders charged
with uneven payse.

But, how great storms and Tragedies, these new found Nobles stir in commonweals, historyes will easily teach: if any man will either unfold the
records of aged memory, or search and see the later presidentes. But to repeat
so far of the aunciente paterns, it greueth me truly: chiefly, for I mean
not to dwell in any one part, but hie to other. And, to revive and rub up green
soars, is both odyous, and superfluous, for they are graven in the green
memory of all ye quirke. Certainly, somewhat there is, that all universally
envy the honors of vpsterts: and abhor them as pernicious to commonweals.
Neither causeles is it, that Historiens, Poets and Orators, always plain it
in their monumentes. For not to touch here Caria, in times past most
flourishynge, ruyned by the multitude of new Rulers: Let us weighe the
complayntes of Orators, in the Noblest and auncienst Cities. Demosthenes
chief Orator of Athenes, of all wise men eloquentest, of all eloquent wysest,
writes, that when Nicias, Aristides, an other Demosthenes, and other auncyente
Gentlemen, governed the state of Athenes, they ruled far and near: And three
score and five years held (in manner) a Monarchy, with the consent of all
Greece. Had in their treasure, of spare money, more then ten thousand
Tallentes: The Kings of Macedon at their beck, many noble shrines of
victory, (after happily atcheued Conquests by land and Sea), erected, the
Common buyldinges most sumptuously furnyshed, and pryuate homes neglected.
But, since the people and new men preaced in place, who attended on private
men's bec^es, not served the common wealth: the Monarchy of the Greeks, swerued
to the Lacedaemonians, the common dignity waned, private profit grew,
suddenly of base many became Noble, of beggars rich, the beggered fains to
become their s^aues, and for refectio^ to take ye reuersio^s of their tables.
Which self same reports Iso^^ates in his oration of peace and other where.
Of ye Roman state the ^oete (...) thus writes as me^cioneth Cicero^

Hope happ^ so soo^^ ye wrackd your comm^n wealth?
New lawiers ruled, fond princockes grew by stealthe.
Also the Romyshe youth, that they only might give voice in elections, wonted
to tumble the ancients over the bridge. who once dispatched of honor, life,
and dygnitie: forth with new m^^ stirrd factions and discord. As also it
happened in Room under the Papacye: And namely in Julius the Seconds time.
Who, from the Ores, (wherewyth he wonted to earne his alehouse halfepeny)
lyfted to the highest honor of the chief See, fildd all Realms with war,
tumult, and rage. Then whom, that Church had never stouter Champyon.
Wherefore, like as (as gravely warns Paul) a strange unknown person must
not be admitted to ministry in the church, as commonly proud and ignorant: so
in gouerninge the state, none more insolent, none more intolerable, then new
and skillesse nobles^ raised from the Carte to the Court, from the rascalles
to the Nobles, or to any rule or excellency of Nobylytie. Whom not vnfeetely,
with Homere may we Imagine borne of Oak and Flint: both for their basest
birth, and their Flintie and Iron heart. As well Eustathius, ^he playnest
interpreter of Homere, blaseth it. For this is most true.

Naught souwerer then a shrub, when once he springth alofte. For, so giddieth
and ouerbeareth him the prosperous gale of Fortune, that (in manner past him
self) he forgets what he was, what he is, and what he ought be. Where
in deed how much higher he is, so much more lowly, humble, and gentle,
should he show him self. These so enchaunted and dronken, with the charm and
Hippocrace of new honor, I wish to imitate the humble highness of Agathocles:
needful president for all Nobles to follow. So shall they both be myndefull of
their former state, and not shake or trouble Commonweals, and aspire to the
higher place by virtue, not vice, by industry, not malice, or pollecy: and hit
gotten govern justly, modestly, and uprightly. For he though the Son of a
potter, yet called to the Crown of Sicyle, not forth with proudly dysdained the
rest, but surmounted them all in humblenes: not shook, but settled each state:
not vaunted he was king, but plainly professed, he was once an earthen
potter. Of whom thus writes Auson^us.

Men say, King Agathocles fed in potters plate.
And charged with Samian claye, his table where he sat,
Myds which, his golden Chargers served in would he see,
And myngled all in one, his pride and poverty.
Whereof this cause he gave, I lo, who now am king
Of Sicyle, late of potter poor was simple of spring.
Lear^ hence, your Rooms to reverence ye that clyme
And honored beggar know thy former time.
For on his table, besides goblets, he caused also earthen pots to be placed,
which in manner of encouraginge, he wonted to show to youngemen. And pointing
to the earthen, said. Such I made. Shewinge the golden. Such I make by
travail, diligence, and courage. So had he ever tofore his eyes ye baseness of
his beginning and science. Least at any time, pufte up by prosperytie, he
might forget his old being, and proudly disorder, and confound all things.
Such Agathocles it is expedyente our new Nobles be. Which would they, it
were to be wyshed, they were more, and their greater estymation by all means
procured. For none but vicious, will not love and reverence them, in whom virtue
shines, and the nobility of honesty glistereth. In which sort of praise that
heretofore have been, and presently are many syngular and excellent: is none so
deuoyde of common sense, who hears and sees not. Nor meant I by my long
talk, to dysproue there were such: but to show that others (of whom I fear
the number) are no right Nobles. For, Vicious Nobylity
whereas tofore we denied, the only Nobility of birth, to be hit we seek
and miss: shall we think this what s^ it be, new or old, cloggd with vices,
to be hit? If any be perhaps, who stole up by shifts and sleights, feeds
on myschiefe and rauenynge, lives by and in slaughter, who is a bane and
burden to him self and others: him shall we deem a right Noble man? Much
may Stoically be said of a slave and thrall of vices, a wordly fool, or who
is in deed free, wise, good, or even a man at all. But I refer the Reader to
Ciceros Paradoxes, there gravely discoursing them. Where he shall learn, that
the rychest, best borne, heads of cities, whom graven gold and Tapistry,
Images and Tables honor: notwithstanding, if they defraud any, gape for others
right, forge Testaments, ^o^ite or catch others goods, thrall them selves to
vices, not chiefly reverence virtues: are fools, though costly and courtly:
poor, notwithstanding their groaning chestes, if barren minded, most filthy
slaves, and to conclude, beasts. But that reasoninge I leave to the Stykes and
Cicero: the reading to good and studious Gentlemen.

Hitherto have I severally discoursed certain parts of Nobility. Both that
ancient, which is borne with the man, and this new, which spryngeth from it
self. Wherein, if either the first have no other ground then blood, or this
last be purchased or mayntayned by ill means: we have far removed either
from the true, and lively counterfaite of Nobility.

If there? ought be any estate of Idle Nobility.
Now jointly some what farther will we suppose of either. And ouerpassing other
faults, whereto it wonts to be thrall, consider (for we mean to examine all
points as far as seems good) such a Noble man, (if any such be) or (if
none such) imagine him, since either he might or may be: who is neither
enflamed with cruelty nor chafed with anger, nor boiled with ambicyon, nor
whelmed or ouerborne with couetise, nor rakes by hoke and croke, nor purchases
by force, fraud, or like crooked means, his forged Noblesse, nor increases it
gotten by disloyal practices, iniuryes none: but maynetayneth him self and
his, with his own goods and enherytaunce, with them contenteth him self, in
them reposeth him self: but yet neither applies any study, nor gouernth any
commen charge, but lice^ciously roames in riot, coasting the streets with
wavering plumes, hanged to a long side blade, and pou^ced in silks. And so
brave vaunts him self to ye simple sort, guarded with a rout of seruau^ts.
Learns naught but customably, and courtlike to entertain gentlemen, to call the
king his lord with ii. or.iii. French, Italian, Spanishe, or such like terms, to
greet a stranger, and know the courtlike titles, your lordship your grace,
your majesty, bestowing them in convenient times, and with courtly grace and
bravery: to be short, in feasting, dainty feeding, riot, Venus stelths, Mars
combattes, huntinge, haukinge, dise, and Tables, naught doing, at home sleping,
abroad toyeng, ill wears and wastes the good while ouerpasseth whole days,
and most part of the nights, in vain and fruteles tryfles: This noble man
consider we, and show what we judge of this idle and voluptuous life. For the
not spoilyng others, for the mayntenance of their private pleasures, not to
praise, were hard. But in flowing with licentious idleness, applieng no honest
labor or exercise, we such one crime and guylt they stayne the^ selves, as
co^pryseth the other and is deemd the mother and beldame of al mischieues. For,
first they offend in neglecting arts, and contemning learning: traitors to
al noble knowledges. Whence springs ignorance, linkd with contempt and hate
of al thrift And, for the motion of ye mind ceasseth not, but is ever busyed in
somewhat: it happth, that either in base and fruitless worldly trifles, or
thefts, or extorcio^s, or innumerable mischieues, their devices are spent. Nor
Cupide but they chase idleness, has lost his bow, nor quenchd lie ye flames
and brands of lust. Wherefore, though a while it neither injury nor wrong any,
yet will it speed lie, both purchase infamye to the good, stayne to the chaste,
and blemishe to the just. So as now it is not ease, but the concourse, medlay,
and synke of all sin. But let be this army of vices, wherewith idleness
wonteth to be guarded and accompanied. And enquire we only of an Idle noble
man Truly, if any be that neither knows nor coueytes learning, nor in travail
of his body, or exercise of mind, passes the course of his weary life: but
spends his years in pleasure ease and rest: haunteth plays, feasts, bathes
and bankettings, and uses this vicious trade and custom: (though spending
only on his own stock, his fathers gift) nor seeks or compasses, but how
to rise nobler, richer, or welthier: nor is beautified with any excellent
ornament, al be he not spotted with monstrous cruelty, couetise, or mischief:
yet so far am I from deeming him a right noble man, as I allow him not so
much as one ynche of Nobility. This hear all ye Nobles, both new and
ancient: and for it is true, credit it. That (...)this careless, sluggyshe,
and rechelesse Nobility, repugneth with the laws both of God and man, and
ought by the same be punyshed. Yea, plainly I profess, any such vocation
prescrybed in holy write, could I hitherto never find. For it suffiseth not
each hold what he has, and that enjoy not spoylynge others: nor he
discharges his duty, who only not hurtes: but who faythfullye perfourmeth
not what God commands, is guyltye and accessory to heinous crime, and in
danger of judgment. For all we are charged to labor, not licensed to sytte
and sleep by our gotten goods: not to content our selves with others labors,
but forced to bend our boanes to the crooked plough, and sweat at work. For as
soon as Adam man's first parent fell, forthwyth he heard^ God the most wise
and just lawegeuer, pronounce this smart sentence.

In the sweat of thy browe shall thou eat thy bread. which extends not to
Adam only, but generally to al Adams and all his posterity, no man, no Noble,
no King, no Emperor exempted. By this curse are they charged to labor, in the
sweat of their brows, to eat their bread as the hindes of ye almighty god and
lord. But it needs not (say they) they should moyle the^ selves with needles
and superfluous toil. Since by gods hand al necessaries are abundantly
ministered the^, al things plenty with them, and sufficient left of their
parents, well and worshipfully to maintain them, and furnyshe their estate. But
if they scorn to bear this yoke of labor, with Adam, with their fathers,
with their brethren, if in sloth idleness, and lasines they suffer hours and
days to slide: they shall yield to god the most sever auditour, account of their
misspent time, al were they Cresus, Crassus, or Midas, and possessed silver
Vynes, gold mountes, all bear they Chain, Brooche, or Jewel on their coarse.
And though perhaps of custom they presume, this ought of right pryuyledge be
pardoned them, and neither account of their life mysled nor time lost, nor
fine for their idleness exacted: yet, will they be faultlesse, will they escape
unpunished, they must attend, not what is licensed or permitted emonges a few
men, but what by Gods word they may. For this gappe opened not laws, but
lycencious custom, not civil ordinance but corrupted times. Reverend
antiquitye nor used, nor meante it. But more by deeds than words, and yet by
words sufficiently, condemns this lewdnes and ydlenes in gentrye. Hit is
therefore labor worth, to displaye here the aunciente, busye and paynefull
life: that our Nobilitye may ever cast their eyes to this antiquytye, and hit
propose them selves for pattern. First the Iewishe Princes saw this
laboryous lotte of Adam, pertayned to them as his posteritye. As the Noble Noah
the Vine setter, Abraham and Isaac well myners, Jacob the shepeheard, as all
the rest: either shepeheardes, Husbandmen, Artificers, or earnest toylers in
some fruitful travail. Not we ease effeminate, or nice with pleasure, lashd
out (as Penelopes woers, their wealth in feasting and banketting. Shall only
these men then exempt them selves, from the law indifferentlye given all men?
Since these Patriarchs so thought, and that taught by their lives: shall not
our nobles measure them selves by the same meatrod of manhood? Who, would or
could they read ancient monuments, should sufficientlye see what were the
travails of the Paganes, with how many labors their life was laden: how
idleness was algates punished in whatsoever estate, degree, or dignitye, and
that by some commodious travail, and commendable sweat, they earned this name
and honor among their people. For albeit some Romans borrowed their
forefathers names as ye Vitellians, Antonies, Mamilians, Naucians, Sergians,
Cecilians, Cluentia^s, Iulians, Acmilia^s who derived their surnames either
from Eneas or his sons, or fellow exiles: or of ye Sabines, or other au^cie^t
people: yet both endeavored they stoutly to deserve the^, and were for ye most
part, farther termed either for their excellent wisdom Sages, as the Catons,
Brutes, or surnamed of other virtues. As emonges the Greeks some Beneficial,
Brotherlye, Sauioures, ^monges the Romans, Godly, Favorers of the Commens.
Or of conquered cities, as Coriolane, Isaurike, Numidian, Asiatike, Achayke,
Macedon, of such realms and cities. Or of other noble feats either of war,
or peace, as Runner, Lingerer, Chaynd, Valiant, Conqueror, and Drusus, for he
slew the king Drausus: and Valerius the greatest, for he reconciled the lords
and co^mens. Or of their sugared eloquence, as Pleasant, wel-spoken, Attike, and
others infinite. As they therefore, not for they were rich, meante to wither in
idleness: so nor ought ours, for they be noble ware stark and stiff. Nay
rather, so much the busier it behooves the^ to be in all exercise, as well of
mind as body, to suppress growinge vice, and cut of the buddynge baytes of
evil, which the poor want. To chasten and subdue their bodies, that they
become not to wanton, with the abundance of fortunes gifts: and finally so
master them selves, as they may honest their stock answer their name,
accomplish the great expectacion conceived of them. Least otherwise they
become desperately vicious, lycentious lybertines, wantonly froward, excessyue
rich, noughtily Nobles, and altogether dissolute. Since hereto their many
baits, and slipper traynes allure them. Let them pervse the whole bible. Yet
shall they not (I think) find any Idle degree instituted, or once named of
god. In Moses, and the Christian commonwealth, Kings, Judges, Soldiers, and
rich men have their rooms. And to each sort their charge prescrybed. Of
whose number if Nobles be, (as if they will be, they must) they are doubtless
bound to their labors and taxes. Plato and Aristotle in ordeyninge their
Common Welthes, admit n^ Idle state, nor sluggishe Nobilytie. But appoint all
either husbandmen, or Craftsmen, or Merchants, or hired Servants, or wardeins,
or gardens. But what is the cause, why Nobles may not labor? For they be
honorable? But, are not all worldly creatures, how much more excellent and
precious, so much more enwrapped in restles labor? Nothing more honorable
then the heavenly army, the son, the Moon, the s^erres, nothing in the whole
world more beautyfull or excellent. Yet leapeth the Son forth as a Giant to
run his course.

The moon takes charge of ye night, and serves men, plants, living
creatures. The stars rise and set. To conclude, every creature labors and
travails. For, even the noblest beasts, and Princeliest fowls are bound by
this law: and most wretchedly captiued to daily and nightly toil, if they
hap on miserable and cruel lords. Of fowls the Eagle, of beasts the Lion,
and Elephant, of tamer beasts, Axen and such like. To whom, (besides the
shadowed Images of certain virtues, which ye universal consent of al writers
aloweth them, as of swiftnes, strength stomach, godliness, Justice, Prudence)
this is peculier: to dig the^ selves and their whelps caves, to purue y
their food and other necessaries, with their own labor. None of them, that
either flies not, as Eagles, or eareth not as Oxen, or gallopth not as Horses,
or senteth not as Hounds.

Thus reasonles beasts perform their duties, and deny not the Noble man at
due times, their woll, milk, labor, and Service. They are ever pressed to
serve him, bear burdens, suffer strypes, day and night are plaged, and yet
shrynke not from their duty. Shall only then their Lord, (Brute beasts
labourynge), sit Idle and sluggyshe? Credytynge them (while he snorts), to
feed so many hongrie mawes? In hope, Fortune will fyshe for him while he
sleeps, and poor Cattle bring home his wantes, and in manner poor meat in
his mouth? The Lord says the Foul was made to flee, and man to labor.
Where under (Man) he encludeth all estates. Solomon the wysest prince, posteth
them not to these Pryncely creatures, but to the simple Ant. Saying, go
sluggard to the Ant, mark her paths, so to become wise. Without master,
teacher, or chastner, she provides her food in summer, and in harvest
stoares her barnes. How long will thou sluggarde snorte? wylt thou never
awake? Lo Solomon deemth a sluggard worse then the Ant. But him terms he
sleepy, who but a little slombers, and somewhat lasely retcheth out his arms.
Lo man lifted to honor understands not, but is resembled to beasts, and
compared to brutishe creatures, as song David this kings father, the kingly
prophet. If then the scripture, by proposing us simple creatures provoke us to
work, if it be sufficiently and euydently proved, that each excellentest
creature in his kind, is not for his Noblesse exempted from labor: nor ought
the privilege of Nobility be pretended, for an excuse and veil of Idleness in
our Nobles, to purchase them vacation, and (as forworne Soldiers) a
pastporte. But rather the better and Nobler they are, the more ought they
vpraise their courage thereto. As stronger beasts bear greater burdens.

Will you then (will some happily say) set hie borne lords, Husband dry not
dispysed of the ancient Nobilytie.
to plough and Cart? I call them not thereto, but only provoke them to labor.
The certainty and specialtie I limite not. Howebeit, if I should move them to
the practice of some honest art, or even of husbandry, what hurt? For, nor
therein should they begin any new presydent, nor greatly disparagethe
brightness of their honor: if either they credit antiquity, or examples, or
the manifest reasons of writers, and the sound judgment of the good. For, to
speak of husba^dry not what I think but know, and have red: antiquytie
thought naught more liberal, naught worthier a Noble man. Nor was hit erst, as
now, counted a base and contemptuous state, which Consuls, lords, and
Princes, which kings and Monarchs coueited. Which to prove, first of the
Romans, and then of others will I borrowe somewhat, which may serve to double
purpose. Both, that our Nobles may imitate the labourious antiquytie of the
auncyents, with like success: and also to show, that even the auncyentest
Nobles, esteemd and used tyllage. For, we read, that even from the Ploughe to
the Senate, from their Coat to the Council, from Tyllage to office, many
stout and worthy men were called. For. L. Quintius Cincinatus, then held the
Ploughe, when news came to him, he was chosen Dictator. Cato thelder writes
in Cicero, he was merueilously rappt with the love of Husbandry, which he
affirms most sibb to a wise man's life. And therefore many, for their
merueylous and incredible delighte therein, gaynd them selves many surnames,
which for honors sake descended to posterytie. And those not base or obscure
famylies, but even of the Noblest and most famous. Hence came the surnames of
Hoggyshe, Sheepyshe, Asses, Swinishe. Hereby, of the pulse Cycer was Tully
named Cicero, of pease Piso, of beans Fabius, of Lintelles, Lentulus, and
likewise diverse other. Yea the Iunians refused not the name of herds, the
Valerians of milkers, the Licinians of spriggs, the Statill^ns of bulls, the
Annians of Goats, nor the Pomponians of Calves. Nay rather they chearelye
culd them as honorable tytles, and carefullye retaynd them, to them and their
posterytie. And thus much of the Romans. Now somewhat of others. Homere, in
whose tales (if they be tales) is formed and shaped the Image of the
auncyentest mauners, Imagyneth in his Odyssees, Laertes the old man, the Lord
and King of Ithaca, the father of Ulysses, deluynge, tillinge, sowinge, and
dounginge. That the practice of husba^dry was also familyer to Kings, the
example of Cirus the younger, proves. Who accounted it no stayne, paynefully
with his own hands to sow whole fyeldes, to graffe in his Orcharders, cut and
border flowers and Herbs in his Garden, and curyously to plant his trees in
seemly order. Nay, when Lisander, the Lacedemonian Legate, came to him with
presents, vaunted to him, that all he saw, him self had sowed and set.
Whereat he wondering, and viewinge his purple Roabes, his bodies beauty, the
sumptuous Persian ornaments, embrawderyes of gold and pearl, amassed cried
out. Justly O Cirus men deem the happy, since in the virtue and Fortune meet.
For so almost translated it Cicero out of Xenophon. Wherefore learned men, for
they see this labor greatly accepted and honored of the Consuls and lords
of Room, and the ancient greeks and kings, think it not unmeet or
vnsittinge to our Nobles.

Noble men's children taught arte^.
Further, not so unseemly seems it to many Sages, that Noble men's sons
should learn some art. For, since Fortune standing on unstable wheel, and in
small moments sweyenge vpside down, both may and wonteth to change her
cheer: it may hap (say they) whom pleasant and merry she raised to the
highest fane of honor, the same frowning and froward, she may whyrle lowest.
Dionisius king of Sicile deposed from his kingdom, was driven to keep a
school. And wheretofore he ruled men, then ruled boys So, if any time they
want, they have wherewyth to succoure their need.

For ever the art maynetayneth the artsman. But need they not? Their art
lades the^ not. Nor is any burden lighter. Therefore, that our forefathers
dischargd the Nobles of baser crafts, was not for they should walowe and
freese in ydlenes: but to practice warlike feats, and employe good arts. For
not all arces are base and filthye, so as we ought be ashamed of their
knowledge. This therefore is (as I have said) the advice of many, deeminge not
altogether euel, nor as me seems wholly to be condemned. For heretofore both
the custom was, and by written law decreed emonges the Athenians, that
children at thage of discrecion should be brought to occupacions, the
instruments of each science laid before them. Where, to whatsoever tools
any voluntarilye ran, those was he taught. Wherefore, if Noble ympes would
spend some portion of their youth, in learning any profitable or commendable
art, it were not discommendable. Nay rather, their earnest will, and modest
labor, were hyghlye to be praised. Forasmuch as, thereby naught should they
lessen their estimacio^, and yet provoke many others by their commendable
example to greater diligence. At least, this rather ought they do the^ nothing,
or live idellye. So shall not their childhood and youth pass wholly fruiteles,
and many vices shall they kill which ydlenes to fertile of sin, breeds Right
often have I heard many Nobles cloyed with ease, complain their werines. Knowing
not how to pass the long days, and therefore wish the^ short which plaint
shall cease if herein they will sometime vouchesafe to exercise them selves,
and taste the commen trauayles, miseries, and grieves. So shall they both better
spare ye crooked plowman, and them selves enjoy not altogether vain delight,
and mock the time with profitable pleasure: to conclude, please less the^
selves, god more. But other I confess, and those most weightye charges some
have, chiefly princes Who be they good, care, how, counsel, watch, commen
with them selves, their counsel, while others chiefly their subjects,
careless snorte at home. Which duties of Nobilitye, (god willing) I will
prosequute in my other books, as occasion serves.

But hitherto I assent to this opinion, so it want a covetous and nigard mind
and measure be used, and other poor laborers not pinched of their profit and
this travail, referred rather to the refreshinge of their minds, then the
heapyng of coin.

Business never wants a noble man, if he cast his eyes through his house,
through the commen wealth. Chiefelye, if inwardes he behold his mind, he shall
ever see somewhat, to be learned, unlearned, known, unknown, followed, fled,
amended, altered, and with all care and heedefulnes to be pursued.

But herein have I dwelt the longer, for I would persuade, that no sort of
honest labor ought be despised.

Chiefly, since the aunciente Jews, Romans, Greeks, lords and kings,
refused it not. But (howsoever) labor they must. For Paul charge every
man to abide in his calling, and not betray the standinge by God credyted bym.
The laws bear not droanes, but punyshe them. Erasmus also enstructyng Charles
the fyft, deemth slouthful Nobles, and unlearned Princes, worse then Sowters or
Hindes. If any therefore pass the bounds of his calling, and forsake his
duty, preferring idleness before travail: he is neither of God called, nor of
men ought be placed in this reverend room. But the desire of briefenes, and
the long residue of our purpose, reuokes us from the chase of this false and
shaded Nobilitye When as yet we had but entered to it. In blasinge which,
notwitstandinge, we were therefore the longer that we might be bryefer in the
rest. For thus the contrary known, the true, most honorable, and royal
nobilitye brighter shyneth. We have showed therefore, that farthest wander from
this scope a lewd sort of roisters and mocknobles. Only in name and title,
not in deed Noble. As far wide are they, who are jointly pryestes and Nobles.
Nor always are these well borne gentlemen, much less vpstertes and slippes
the true Nobles, chieflye if either first they rise by crooked means, or
risen give the^ selves to ill practices. To who^ join those yt live in
idleness. Now therefore must our nobles diligently endeavor, to shonne this
counterfayt descried noblesse, and embrace the true. For hitherto, in miserable
manner has it swerued from the ancient state, and lost her former flower and
dignity. which how it may be recovered, and perfectly restored, henceforth we
must treat.

THE SECOND book of Nobility,
Sithe therefore these four sorts, as unworthy this honorable title, are
worthily rejected from so high honor: Who so, in all his manner and trade of
life, is most unlike them, most resembles a noble man. Who suttelye
insinuates not him self, for such as he is not who is no traitor or rebel to
his state, who boasts not the brightenes or auncientye of his birth, but
proves him self worthy the^. Who swells not with access of honor, or
purchases envy by vice, or importunitye: but scaleth honors honestly, growing
in favor through commendable virtue well governs them gotten, and lothinge
ydlenes, buselye executes his To charge, and to be short.

To me the good is Noble, poor or rich. Whereby the Poet adiudgeth a good man,
a right Noble man. For albeit some receive Nobility delivered them (as it were)
other find it: Yet neither all they whose auncestrye long lasted are borne
Nobles, nor these new men made Nobles, by whatsoever means But the first, by
suinge the steps of their good auncestoures: these by pursuyng the path, that
Hercules is said to have proposed. Of whom Cicero reports out of Prodicus
the Sophister, that seeing two paths, he turned to the right not left: and
leaving pleasure the flattering dame and the baytes of vices, lystned virtue
a thryftye and sober maiden, sadlye and soundlye disputynge, assented to her,
and served her. And this is that Nobilitye that fylleth the third room, when
with stock and forreyne Noblesse, the inward ornaments and virtue, (the true
honor of the mind) are matched. As Antisthenes defynd well borne, well manerd.
But virtue, albeit in whatsoever home it harbors, is ever one aye like it
self: Yet (I wot not how) more shines and glistereth in a noble man. Nor
coueteth so much the shade as Sun, the couerte as the open light, the dark
and shady laundes, as bright and Sunnye mountes, where resort and assembly is
most frequente. For both she honors her place, and is honored by such
subject, as shows it most apparent, and where she brightest shines. This
therefore I add That no base or mean virtue, is requisite in a Noble man, but
even the noblest and highest. So as, the divine bountye and grace assistynge
him, he may wisely and tymely mind, and diligently and faythfullye compass,
those things, which most besee me I say not a man, or free borne, but even a
Noble man. For to such perfection who so is Noble, is thought to have scaled:
not only to have attaind what is common to all. For in being men partakers of
speech and reason, we differ from brute beasts. In being free, we excel
bondmen, or those of servile nature: as fools, or dolts vnfeet for all parts
of life. Or Villens by war, in whom natheles, often lurketh secreate fredome
and gentry, though mastred by Villenage, it dare not peep out. As the bird
Attagen, albeit of nature tatling, yet taken is said to ware ^umme. But far
more is it to be a Noble man. Who, as he excels in honor, so ought to
excede in virtue. If others creep, they ought run, if others run, hit them
behoues to fly. Nor only fly, (for flight is commen to each rascal foul,)
but noble Eagles must they be. Whom as many give in their arms, so god grant
they resemble. For as they she swifter and sore higher then others: so nor
ought Nobles stoop to the Car^on of the world, nor be sibbe to vices and
filth of the rascal sort, nor debase them selves to the baseness of viler
varlets, but soar on high and seek the loftyest. Neither are Nobles causeles
compared to Egles. For as they are queen's o^ Nobles therefore, as well who are
famous by descent of auncestrie, as who first purchase Nobility by virtue and
polecy: I exhort, and s^irre, to the contemplacion of this true Nobility. I
spoil not your house or auncestrie of their due glory, but admit it:
Coueytinge yet, to amplify and enriche it with an other ornament. This is the
true and only path, to all praise, dignity, and Nobility: to despise in respect
of this Christ, all pomp. Without whom, naught in this world may be stable,
high, stately or Noble. Not kin, not country, not parents, not petigrees, not
Noblesse of le^gthned line, not length, bredthe, heighte, or depthe. What
braggest thou then thy stately enseignes, or thy vain arms? Whereto attemptest
thou to spread, and root in earth, the memory of thy name to all eternitye? It
is written in Ecclesiasticus, the lord will root out the roots of the proud,
all be it they assay to delue and grave them, never so deep in earth. And the
Prophet Esaias witnesses, he turns the mighty to naught and empouerysheth the
lords of the land, so as they neither pla^t nor sow, nor their stock
spreads. who withers them with his breath, and causes the wherlwynde to
toss them as straw. And albeit fools and doltes, as David terms them, seek
to leave their children infinite substance, and to root their seats and
memory for ever, and name whole lands after them: yet shall they not long last
in price and honor. But their beauty wither, their buildinges molte, them
selves rott like dienge beasts. Yea truly, all can they vouche infinite
ancestors, and grandsyers, possess they whole myllyons of Coin, add hereto,
be they beautifyed with virtues, and furnyshed with all those parts of
Nobility which erste we mentioned: but they join hereto Jesus Christ, the
pillar, crest, and perfection of al Nobillty: naught worth are all these which
most are prysed, and accounted most precious. Be thou auncienter then Adam,
stronger then Sampson, wyser, rycher, and more learned, then Solomon, more
vprighte then Abraham: Have thou most Noble and virtuous ancestors, possess
thou all goods, purchase thou all virtues, be skillful in all things, be thou
Noblest, best, highest, and learned yet not but in Christ only, may
thou be termed Noble: yet shall thou remain anvnprofitable servant For, with
God is no account or respect, either of stock, honor or person, either of
deserte or dignytie: but through Christ Jesus. For ye see For ye see
brethren, (says Paul) ye are called not many wise, as to the fleash: not many
mighty, not many Noble: But god chose the foolish of the world, to shame the
wise: the weakest to confound the myghtie: and basest, and most contemptuous,
and such as were not, to abolyshe the things that are. That no flesh might
glory in his sight. Albeit who cleansed Naaman the Sirian, the general of his
Princes army, and counsailour of greatest authority with his lord (as
witnesses the holy ghost, in the second chapter of the fifth of the kings)
taught him to profess his true confession, and not rejected him: who called the
Noble chamberlain of Candace Queen of Ethiope, treasurer of all her Jewels,
to acknowledge his truth: will also admit Nobles, if first they seem to them
selves unnoble: so they follow Christ, the prince and spring of al Nobility. Who
being in form of God, thought no robbery his equality with god. But so far
humbled him self, that taking on him a servile form, he became like men, and
in shape a man. So low abiected him self, that he was obedient even to
death, yea the death of the cross, as we read in the second Chapter to the
Philippians. But yt this may more plainly appear, and the Nobles understand
how they ought follow christ, let them a while with me recount his high
humility, and noble baseness. Far different is his and the worlds Nobilytie.
Christ's Nobility.
As near as the East and West, the heaven and earth. For of how base, how
infamous line (good God) as to his manhoade, descended he? Not of the
aunciente Monarchs of Assiria, Persia Greece: but of the scorned Jews
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, shepheardes. Not of Queens or Coye Ladies, but of
Thamar, Ruth, Rachel, either strangers, or harlots. And in clothinge his
godheade with flesh, would not be fathered of August then Emperor, or any
other Monarche: but chose Joseph the carpenter his Father, Mary an humble Maid
h^s Mother. Not at Jerusalem, but in Bethlem was he borne.

Nor lay in princely down, or proud Palayce, but in maunger swathed with
bratts. Nor went he guarded with great train of Servant, but picked out
his Disciples, Fishermen and Publicanes: to whom as Servant he served. Nor
haunted he the scornful Courts: but more beggarly then Birds or Fores, had
neither benne nor neast to couche his head. Nor road he on moile, but ass,
accompanied with no gards, but enfants and sucklinges cryenge Hosanna: and the
lame, blind, and deaffe limpinge after. Nor fared he sumptuouslye, but fasted
in the desert, thirsted, hongred. Nor bare he arms, but pryntes of nails,
wounds, whiplashes, and ye cross, which for our sake he bare. He rose, as
witnesses Esaye, as a sprygge or root, out of a dry thirstye ground, where
in is neither shape nor seemelynesse, the worlds scorn, a soppe of sorrow, a
pacient of all infirmityes, bearer of our grieves, a simple sheep led to
slaughter, and dombe lamb, not bleatyng before the shearers.

And yet his Genealogye who may blase? Blush not, for I propose ye this Christ
as pattern: Blushe not (though noble) to humble your selves as base: though
rich, to be poor in spyryte, though somewhat, to account our selves as
nothing. But by his president lay of your pride, your stomach your plumes.
Prostrate your selves and youres at his feet. Submit your Nobilitye, maces,
Scepters, and arms to him. Nothing weygh your discents, your petigrees,
though fette from farthest auncientye. Flesh Blood, Circumcision, and forreyne
happes, what other are they in respect of this Nobilitye, then rubby she, as
Paul terms them. Condemns he not the auncienties and Genealogies of the
Jews? Rejects he not the carnal sons of Abraham, when the Jews boasted
Abraham their father?

For this Nobilitye is carnal, mannyshe, durtye, sadinge, incertayne, which
God can even of stones raise. Be not then ashamed of this his leadyng: Blushe
not of Christ, whom god has now advanced with highest honor, and given a
name above all names, even Jesus: whereto al knees how, as well heavenly,
earthlye, as under the earth. He once inglorious, now glorified, will heave ye
to the self same glory. He humble will raise ye high. He poor will enryche
ye. He unnoble, will make ye most noble. Nor will he reeue the Nobility ye
have, but give ye grace to use it.

Then this Nobility nothing nobler. Nor ought more honorable then he, who
borne to God, regenerate in Christ, stampynge foreign pomye reposeth him
self in this heavenly and Chrystyan Gentrye: who is begotten not of blood,
not of the will of flesh or man.

Of this father, this brother, these auncestoures who so is borne, is both
most happelye and truly Noble.

Gloryenge not in him self, but God. For he nor stayneth, nor blemysheth but
honors his parents.

Nor leans only on their shadow but to the praises received of his aun
cestoures adds his own, and heapeth their gifts with his: worthelye
reuerenceth virtue, yea more then the meaner sort, for he is Nobler.

Yet contemns nobilitye, honors, yea his virtues, good deeds, and deemeth
hym^ self aboundantlye honored in Christ, not nobled or bettred by them.

Nevertheless, stantelye and with Gentylmanly courage, marches forwards, in
good works, and trauayleth in excellent actions, prepared of God for every
man, according to to his dignity^, power, and office to waine in. But what der
des and duties pertayne to Noble men, we will now perticulerlye describe, so
far forth, as our lord Christ, the master of all truth, and teacher of al
knowledge, has revealed unto us. Whereby they may attain to the silver rou^t
of glory, which flows from God, and glistereth in the exercise and practyse
of virtue.

These thus determined, sith sufficientlye it appears, What ma^^^ thing
^^ue No bilitye is.
what is the true pathe to perfect Nobilitye: it remains we show, what manner
thing it is, and with what ornaments of virtues it ought b^ cladde. Infinite
were to exprects, and orderly to reckon the noumber and sum of at her
virtues. For all such as severed are in the rascal rabble, ought generallye
to foyne, and thronge in a Noble man Only the general kinds it shall
suffyce to show, whereto Nobilitye ought raise their minds and eyes and by
them as the rule of life, eramyne all their deeds and duties. Which, albeit
for the most part they may be also applied to others. yet as Erasinus in
framyng a preacher, Cicero, an Emperor, and Oratoure, reckon certain
virtues, not always peculyer to them, but commen with others: so will we (God
belpinge) prescribe and assygne^ certain precepts of ordering noblye and
honorably the life: which if not altogether, at least chyefely seem proper
to Nobles. For of others, neither is so great perfection required, nor can they
accomplish all, for they want the helps the others have, and are not asigned
to like watch and ward.

Wherefore as they bear other state, place, and office in the commen wealth: so
in teaching and enstructyng them otherwise ought we proceed, and far
unlike order and mean observe. Let us therefore settle to it.

But this notwythstand^nge shall be no new institucion of Nobilitye, invented
or Imagined by me, but confyrmed(...)

The first Channel therefore of their duty, and fountain of all wisdom, is
the fear of the Lord.

Namelye, the true unstained worship of God, and sincere relygyon. Wherwyth
Noble men, must even from their cradles be seasoned. I mean not that they
learn only to know God: For even the Gentyles know him: and Hermes,
Pythagoras, Socrates, denied not there is but one God.

And Plato confesses the knoweledge, wisdom, and power of God most
certain: and the ignorance thereof manifest blyndes and wickedness.

For the law establyshed first in Iewry, and spreading from Syon and
Jerusalem, to the Chaldees and Egipcians, thence ouerspedde Afryke and Asye.
Whence derived into Greece, out of Greece it was shypped into Italye, France;
and other costs of Europe. So as there is none, whose mind this opinion of
God has not pierced. Of the Philosophers, some doubted what he was But all
affirmed he was.

Some termed him the being of all beinges, and first mouer, as Aristotle.
Others an everlasting mind and God as Cicero. Nor any time was their any
nation so rude or barbarous, nor any one so far strayed from humanity and
godliness, in whose mind, some form and Image of this godheade was not graven.
Alike superfluous is it, to will them to fear, to believe god, or pray to him.
For the euel fear, the deuels believe, the Paynems pray. As teaches Hesiode.

When sleep thou list, when first thou wakenest, pray
The Gods, to assiste the ever, and that dave.
Needeles also it is, to will them partake in ceremonies and church rytes, with
others. For, so much, long since, Isocrates wrate to Demonicus, and the
infidels observed. who ordaind public, private, and foreign sacrifices,
feasts, wakes, and plays. These toys familier even to the commen sort, and
most uncivil people, wholly ignorant of gods misteryes: what needs to
teach? For Epicures, godless persons, blasphemers, forswearers, mockers, and
scorners of Gods Relygion, (if any be in this sort) I determyne, no
otherwise then dogs from Sacraments, or swyne from pearls, to be chased. To
whom, this our talk nor sauoureth nor belongs. But far otherwise be
our Noble man instituted, and learn he not only to fear God as judge, but
also to love him as Father. And not only love him, but acknowledge Jesus
Christ the cause, and aucthour of this love and reconcilemente. Whom he
ought believe to be God, partaker of one self substance with the Father,
become man, to have taken flesh of a wemlesse Virgin, to have walked in
earth in Servile form as man:, to have taught, proclaimd ye new league, made
Caytifes and sinners just and blessed, to have redeemd with his Cross the
forlorn Captyues, to have risen from the dead, ascended with his fleashe,
left here a Sacrament of his blood and body: And therein commended to us, the
holy memory of his happy death, and ensealed the same, with a lyuelye and
effectual monumente, as his Sygnet. To be the only head of the church, not
absente, but present, not dead, but mouinge, quycknynge, and nouryshynge his
lymmes. To be also the husband of the Church, whom he credyteth not as
strumpet to any Vycar, but relyeueth from heaven warrynge in earth, rules
and enstructeth with his spirit. To be short, to be the only, yea the
only and most absolute Solycitour. This Christ, not quartered, but whole,
who swaloweth and embraces by faith, is a godly Noble man. Whom also he
ought call on, and reuerendlye worship, and according to knowledge honor,
but only him: Not transfer his proper honor, to stocks, stones or
Sainets. That he assure him self, this is the true and catholic religion
which kindles, not que^ cheth our faith in him: which aduaun^eth him, debaseth
us and ours: which refers all gifts and received benefits, to his grace,
abateth the pride of our flesh, the liberty of our will, the merits of our
works the swellynge of our nature. Acknowledges him only, king, Prophet,
Bishop, and all in all. This must our Noble man learn, this must he redite
and follow. Who otherwise hale him, and whisper in his ears pernicious
heresies, and fantastical opinyons, must be shound and not herd, as proud
and presumptuous persons, self lovers, and estemers of their own works and
worthiness. Who vaunt them selves Creatours, Mediators, Saviors, Christ's,
gods. Who better then their lord, are scarce contented with a tryple golden
crown where he bare only one, and hit of thorn. Humble christ requires
humility, and condemns arrogance. But humblenes nor weneth her self worthy,
nor gloryouslye professes to justify others, but shieldeth her self with the
shade of her lord hovinge in him, not her self: of whom as the Cananite woman
or hongry whelp, she beggeth some crumme of mercy. With these instructions
ought the mind of our young prince be seasoned. Which must be sought not
out of men's decrees, but holy write. Which the Nobles them selves, ought
with search and readinge see, and (not credytinge others eyes) them selves
knock, ask, seek, to enter, find, receive. Nor suffer them selves to be
scorned of wicked pryestes, feeter for a plough tail, then a pulpit. The
sound and only proof of true relygyon, is the conference and examinynge of
dyuine Scriptures.

Wickedly therefore distinguyshed they (who so first fatherd it) who termed
some spiritual, some lay men, some temporal some seculer. For who wants
Gods spirit, is not Gods. The people therefore are spiritual, the lay men
spirytuall, the Nobilytie spirytuall, to fly the fruits of the flesh,
fornication, Idolatry, and like vices reckened to the Galathians. To follow
faith, Charity, and other good motions, consonant to gods will, to
scriptures, to reason, and exacted of the spirytual and Chrystian man. For,
shall ignorance ercuse them? Then should the same acquyte the Jews and
Turks. Suffiseth it to depend of the priests, mouth? But the Prophets,
Pithonisse. Sothsaiers, Bishops, Archebishoppes, the gentiles Pryests, were
mocked, and mocked. But happelye they will say, they like the Relygion that
lyketh all men. But generallye all, both Jews, and Gentyles, conspired to
crucify Christ. Perhaps they credit received custom. But Custom is the
vicious scholemistresse of all errors. Nor do we all accostome our selves
to the best. Does then the length of time argue truth of Relygion? But the
Gentyles erred long before Christ's coming, and superstytion is anncyente,
and vice grew even from Adams fall, and presently blossometh. But ground
they on their Fathers traditions? If we credyte Christ, the Jews brake gods
commandments, for the traditions and doctrines of men. Shall this serve, to
believe as new Princes and laws bid? But how chaungeable are the wills of
men? How often turninges and terrors? wherewith how chaungeable and monstrous
shall this faith be? And to Caesar must we give what Cesars is: to God, what
Gods. God first stablyshed Relygyon, which Caesar ought nor abrogate, nor
alter. One fixed and standing law there is, which all ought know, and
keep. Which but Caesar and Cesars, but the Pope and Popes fulfill: they
encurre the penalty of damnation, by the just judgment of the law geuer.
Many Emperors decrees are extant. Much decreed, Heliogabalus, Caligula, and
Julian. And all Eu^perours for the most part empairers of christ. Ought then
the people to obey them? ought the godly lords, swear to these laws of their
rauynge Prince against Christ? Nothing more wanering then princes will. Shall
then religion, and the word of god, be whirled vpside cowne, at the lust of
man? Perdye, Constantines, and Theodotians, raygne not every where and when.
Lo so many, so victoryous Emperors dead, yet lives the Gospel: and they
buried, hit reuiueth. Nor may kings, or Princes, so choke or smother the seed
of the word, but it will spring a new. Heaven and earth shall perish, but the
word of god remains forener. Wherefore, since false superstitions have had
their Apollos, Trestles, Dephos, Sees, and mystical Prophets, and have gotten
kings their protectours, ground on custom, pass in auncientie, strive with
number and multitude, are bolstred by the authoryty of priests and kings:
other line is there truly, other touchestone, whereby the truth and sincerity
of doctrine, ought be touched and leueled. Profitable is this precepte for all
men, but truly most necessary for the Nobility.

But greater charge must great men undertake for the Gospel. Not only to
believe truly to ryghtwisenes, but also to confess franckly to salvation. For,
this vtwarde confession and witness, as it is hard and rare, so is it most
honorable and commendable: and much moves the constant and earnest assertion
of a noble man. And he in the cause of religion is a most substanciall
witness, and most able to persuade. wherefore even at this day we much honor
and praise Nicodemus, and Joseph the Arimathea, honorable and mighty
counsaylours: though secret nightlye, and eueninge disciples, nor scholars
stout enough of Christ. For in the counsayles and asseblies of the Jews, they
sought occasion to discover their covert favor, and secret zeal to Christ.
And professed them selves Christians both in word and deed, though somewhat
more covertly, and secreetely. But the testimonial of Pylate the presydent, a
Pagane, and alyene from the doctrine and faith of Christ, what, and how great
is it? Who sittinge in judgment, amids the prease of the high priests,
protested to the people, he found Christ guyltye of no crime. Then how
aggreuedly hears he his accusers? How posteth he and refers them to
Herod? How excuset and defends he him, cyted before him* How lingreth he? ye
have here accuse this man (quod he) as a seducer of ye people. But lo,
examininge him here before ye, I find in him none of those crimes whereof ye
appeache him. Nor Herod truly. The^ for it was a solemn usage and necessary
at that high feast to loase some one: him would he loose. And furne the
proffered opportunity, to the safetye of the guiltles person. Which when it
succeeded not, the Jews raging past all measure, and crienge crucifye him: he
protests both again and again he found in him no crime, and therefore would
acquit him. At last when more and more the noise andt uinult grew, and he
preuaild naught: he condemnd him not, but yielded him to their lust. And washed
his hands, protestynge him self clear and innocent, of the guilt les blood.
This did a Heathen for Christ against the Jews, in the Remains, yea the
Emperors cause. Whose crown he was accused to claim, to deny him tribute,
and forbid others to pay. Shall Christ at his coming (ween ye) find such
faith in our christian nobles? Who, their consciences gnaweynge against it,
persecute causeles, their poor brethren, with fire and sword? Daring not for
the^, to qwatch against an ungodly princes, no not a prelates beck? Who
decree against the^, whose cause, either through ignorance they understand not,
or in secret conicience allow: These christya^ judges, shall have at that last
and just judgment, that Heathen Pylate their judge: When Christ shall
gloriously come in the clouds, to redress his servant wrongs and injuries.
But Pylat: lo, forscoke him not now dead, nor could forbear to grave on his
healthful and happy cross in Hebrewe, Greek and Latin that al nations might
read: Jesus of Nazareth king of the Jews. By which title, he confesses him
both king, savior and Messiah. He gave also his body to Joseph the
Acimathcan, demau^ding it to honorable burial. And undertook his patronage
after tomb, and wrote in defense of him to Tiberius the Emperor a
comme^datory letter. Which Egesippus exemplified out of ye Roman records,
which I for the singular protite, have here subscribed. Pontius Pilate to
Tiberius the Emperor sends greting. Hit happd of late, as afterward I
proved, that the Jews deadly plaged them selves and their whole nation. For
where God had forepromised their fathers, to send them a holy man called their
king, borne of a virgin: and the self god, during my lieuetenantshippe now
sent the same to Iewrye, they seeing him restore syghte to the blind, cleanse
the leprous, heal the palseye, cast forth deuelles, raise the dead, rule the
winds, walk dry shoode over the waves of the sea, and work many like
miracles: all the commen people confessing him the son of God, ye chief
rulers notwithstanding, moved with rancour, and envy, brought him bound to me.
And forginge crime on crime, affirmed him to be a Sorcerer, and to work
contrary to their law. Which I crediting, whipped him, and delivered them, to
use according to their luffes. Whom they crucified, and besette his tomb with
a waker watch. Which notwithstanding, my garrison heedefufly garding the
tomb, the third day he arose. Which so redoubled the rage of the Jews, ye
moneyeng my men, they sought to bie their silence therein.

Which caused the^, more and more to brute the rumor thereof. which therefore I
thought to certify you, that you suffer not your self, to be misled by ye
missen forminges of the Jews. Thus fare ye well. A worthy fact not of Pilate
only, but al courtiers and Nobles. wherein he doubts not only to profess
what him self thought, But also seems to endeavor, by heapinge his many
miracles, to assaye to hale his emperor to the same faith. So must Nobles
confess, so call, lead, and allure by all means their princes to christian
doctrine. So confute and reprove contrary ^ales and sclaunders. And, who other
where, in every tryfle and matter of nothing are stout, and ouerflowe with
^tomake: they much more here should prove them selves Lions, men, yea noble
men. As David also the noblest king, who blushd not, before kings and
princes, to talk of Gods praises. As it is in the psalms. For this confession
seems in them more commendable and glorious, then in any other. Nor is there
any cause, why they should be ashamed, truly to profess christ, and freely
from the bothomes of their hearts, to protest his religion: but rather such as
they ought account most glorious. Nor is it a shameful but an honorable
profession. Nor, shall it ought decrease, but increase their estimacion, if in
perilous and adverse times, they be accounted godly and Gospellers.

But then (say they) they must divorce them selves from wealth, and lyuinge
now in honorable estate, forth with resign both honor and richesse. This
heavy and importable burden of pouertye, they think them selves unable to
bear. But Christ, though otherwise most rich, and rightfullest owner of all
they possess: became for them most beggerlye. And whereto lent he them the
same, but to spend them selves and theyrs to renown his glory? But far is
he beguiled, who accompteth this christian profession and cross, a loss It is
the greatest gain, yea ryghtlye gaineful, not damage. O happy loss, that
renders hundred fold, both here and hereafter. So as, for earthly ye receive
heavenly, for fading, lasting, for vain, true, and impassable joys. England
at this day, ministers many presidents of gods providence. Whereby it is
manifest God hourdeth not hate nor is altogether unmindful of his servants,
but at length respects his, and locketh up for them the guerdon of their
patience and confession. Many great and noble men, late exiles can I cite, now
worshipful gentlemen, knights lords, cou^tesses, and duchesses, wives, and
virgins of noblest house, plentifullest possessions, most worthy and
honorable rulers and counsailours in their country: who when after the wrack
of al their wealth, shonnyng the surges of that ^rese^t storm, they fled to
the church no Christyan congregation, then dispersed in forreiue realms, as to
a safest baye: now the anger of the wrathful god appeased, returni^g with
calm sea and prosperous sail, what lost they? Who not only are restored to
their former authority, but also raised and preferred to higher. The virgin
princess Elizabeth, most famous for godliness and learning, not dissembling,
but freely, constantly, and faithfully, disclosing her says, tossed with many
stormye injuries, afflicted and wounded with many launcinge troubles and
calamities, pente up in prison though a kings daughter, the quene^ sifter,
where daily and hourly she awaited present death: what loss at length
sustained she? From infamous prison lifted to the scepters of the realm, from
wailing and dishonor, to glory, from death to life: and of a prisoner crowned
Queen of England: Herein shines the provident mercy and politic pity of our
God. who chastneth his for a time, ye chastned with his rod, as purged with fire,
he may make them worthy higher dignity, and m^ete for greater charge.

But both they shrugge, sorrow, and flatly deny, to lose their parents their
Children, their wife, and dearest life. Nay, will they nil they, they shall lose
them, if by denieng Christ, or not confessinge him, as they ought, they coueyte
to keep them. For who finds his life (says Christ) shall lose it. And who
loses his life for my sake, shall find it. For why refuse they to repay this
loan of life? Chiefly since the lender condicionallye lent it, that when he
should demand it, we should faithfully restore it? why render they it not to
him demaundinge it, who iustlye and rightfully claymeth it as his due? Why
stick they to adventure their lives for Christ, and surrender him their body
and blood, who is their creator and carpenter? They replye they are of noble
blood. But hit receaueth no stayne, by sheadinge in assertion of Christ's
faith: but then is most Noble and precious in his syghte, who on the altar of
the cross, suffered most plenteouslye his heavenly and noble blond, to stream
out for our sakes. Life is not here by loss, but won. Yea and such life,
where they shall find, other father, other kin, other brethren, and Sisterne,
other ancestors most nearelylinked and coupled to them, not so much by flesh
as spirit: where also, with heavenly pleasure and glad some eyes, they shall
behold and embrace their forefathers foregone them. Blessed therefore are those
troops of heavenly souls, who both in former years, and this our later age,
yielded them selves to death in the lord. Who now at length live everlastingly:
who ever in this life, bare about them death. As often as I recount the armies of
Martirs, I mean not, of so many poor or welthy men, so many servant and
artifycers, so many old grayberds, and grene Imps of all degrees, kinds, ages,
both in all other realms of Christendom, and in this our England marchinge
toward the sky: but even of the Noblest and stateliest personages, flieng
from this world to the heavenly seats: who for they would needs be
confessors, were by the mischief of the time made Martirs: so often greet I
them who^ this hap befell, and dread thothers lot, that did them die.
Seeinge the mean while, a Noble presidente proposed all men, for Christ to
contemn all dreades, threats, horrors, and terrors. Whose reverend train
the earth aba^doning, the heaven received. There enjoy they immortality, and
perpetual felycitie. Whom no other guilt, then justice, then constancy, then
godliness condemned. Who seem to me, not so much with the Noblesse, as the
sheading of their blood, to have renou^med them selves, and all their house.
Marvelous, and most reverend, was that troop of Alsatian Gentlemen. Of whom
in one day (as it is written) the Bishops burnt an hundred. Innocentius the
third, then raging, the year. 1212. A great number, a grievous pain, a
trifeling cause. For they taught, the use of marriage to be permitted priests,
and eating flesh licensed christians at all seasons. Out of whose cinders, such
gentry I wish to revive and spring, as not only joyful in prosperity, would
tryumpbe with Christ in glory: but also with him afflicted suffer: afflicted,
wretched, and farsed with calamity. For hit (if so that Nobility we frame) is
guarded and accompanied with such stoutnes of courage, such hautines of
stomach: that in storm it is calm, in baseness Noble^, in prison free, in
poverty plentuous, in darkness bright, in exile as at home, in the mids of fire
untouched, vnscorched, not meltyuge, not consuminge. But we (say they) are no
pryests, teachers, nor pastors. So great perfection is not required of
Nobility. But since they be christians, they ought not shrink to die for
christ. And since they be Nobles, armed with this frank gentry of stomach, so
many bulwarks of scriptures, so many prooffes and presydents: they ought
dread no force of Satan's tyranny, no furnace, no rage of flame or fire. For
that unnoble doggyshe Philosopher Diogenes, (a man excellent in wisdom and
virtue, albeit in substance bare, surnamed the dog,) adjudged those most
Noble, who contemn pleasure, honors, life: who fear not poverty, infamy,
death. But to believe faithfullye, to embrace with faith, what true is and
sincere, and the same with tongue to blase, and conceived words to confess,
and even to yield for it throat and life: pertaynes alike to all earnest
Christyans, yea to those of the basest sort. But this is peculyer to Noble
men, to relieve the cause of the gospel faintinge and falling, to strengthen
with their aid empoueryshed religyon, to shield it forsaken with their
patronage. For as it is incydente to all wretched, pore, and beggarly to
suffer: so to succor the afflicted, belo^gth not but to them, who excel in
aucthoryty, whose power and lieuetenant labor, god uses in redeemynge and
defending relygion. Their part hit is, to fight for their homes and Churches.
They be in manner the pastors of the people, and gardens of fre^dles piety.
For great, yea greatest weight, has a noble man's judgment on either part.
Whereby, both the Tyranny of Princes is brideled, and the rage of the commen
people repressed, and the pride of Prelates tamed. And therefore, as they may,
so they ought, rule and moderate kings with their council, the people with
their authority, the pryests with their gravity. For, never had so many bin
haled to firc and torments, never so many drawn to present death, ne blasinge
brandes: had not Nobles entermedled, and lent their wicked aid: would they
have bin either sharp scourges of the wicked, or means and intercessours for
the guiltles, and innocent, or favorable Judges to the godly. For not causeles
is their authority credited the^. The power whereof, not in staieng, but saving
the afflicted, they ought display. And, as yt true faith, ought by them be
defended by the sword delivered them of god, and the aucthority, wherewyth
they are from above armed and invested: so ought they race out all the roots
and suits of superstition: and suffer no delusion of Idolatry creep into the
Church. Nor must they vnsheath the sword of their authority, against the
good and guyltles. But all the dread and ferrour of their power, ought they
redouble and revive, in restraining, and tormentinge the wicked. Nor must they
raise the bristles of their severity and sharpnes, against the godly, who in
life, and sound opinions, sue christ: but shoot them at yt wicked and
mischeuous persons. Nothing more noble then power, if it meet with mercy and
equytie. Heinous of it self it is, to stay a man. More heinous, if for
error of judgment, not of froward will. Most heinous, wicked and iniuryous,
to disturb from life, no erroneous, but well minded member.

Much were it to be lamented, if that estate, that ought to be a safe Baye
and refuge for the godly, should be the plage and butchery of the good. But, as
often as I consider the frailty of ma^s nature, and the slippery state of
Nobilytie: as often as I renew the memory of later years: so often think I it
may hap, that the Nobles may fall with the people. yea often I see, they who
most should, stand not aye stoutest with the truth, nor undertake yt patronage
of each rightful cause: but worship false and feigned superstitions, and
command the^ to be reverenced of others. wherewith also I remember, that every
excellentest nation, and most noble personage, were not only more
superstitious, and severe in mayntenance thereof, then the rest: but even more
sharp, and four. Who more ancient then the Egyptians? who more Noble? Again
who more superstititous? Who more cruel? Whose minds were so much infected
with the errors of Idolatry, that if any vnwyttinge, had harmed the foul
Ibis, the poysonful serpent Aspis, a Cat, dog, or Crocodyle: the same were
always most severely, and rygorously punyshed by the laws. Thathenians in all
men's judgments, the Princes of Greece, reverenced with their profane honor,
not only Minerua, Neptune, and their house gods: but Protagoras, for he seemed
somewhat to doubt of them, forthwith banyshed. Socrates for he denied their
godhead, condemned to die. Like was the impiety, and no less rigor gor in
punishment of the Romans: on the behalf of their great God Jupiter of the
Capitol, and their other mammeties. For when Christ dead, was commended unto
them, and proposed to be canonised emonges the rabble of their Gods: and
Tiberius the Emperor had set him in his closet, commanding the^ to worship
him, the Romans by a counter decree of the Senate, withstoode it. And, what
they granted filthiest Idolles and vncleanest spirytes that they (though most
politic, sage, and noble men) denied the true living god and only savior.
Beware Nobilitye therefore, what they decree in their parliamentes, and
assemblies. What religion they establishe, what they condemn. For, after the
Roman Senate, thus denied Christ, nor would admit him either god or guide:
what mo^sters reigns ensued? What slaughters of Senators under Nero? What
sighs and sobbings of the people? What miseries felt they? what gulfes of
calamities swalowed the caytifes, their Emperors, wasting them with tyranny, the
barbarous nations spoiling the^, and lastly the Gotb^s and Vandales, frettinge
al things to utter ruin? And ever since began the majesty of the Romain empire
decline and wane. The wicked Synagoge ^f the Jews rejected Christ, and feared
the Romans more then God. Whose favor and frendshippe they thought to
purchase, in crucifieng Christ. But what they feared, not long after happened.
For the Romans after the death of Ghrist besteging them, rased the temple of
Jerusalem, pasted, spoiled and translated all thing^^. So they, that dra^ie
Christ to the cross: found other kings crosses, and scourges to the^. Let
Nobility therefore, which in all things chalegeth lordshippe, rules al
asse^blyes, provide it offend not God the father, if either dissembling it deny
Christ his son, or stubbornelye withstand him, or condemn Christ's quick
and lively members to fire and faggot. This to believe, is the part of true
piety. This to confess, and for the same to suffer, the charge of constancy:
This to defend and withstand the contrary: the duty of perfect Nobility. And
thus of the duties concerning god and religion, be it hitherto spoken.

Some duties also (as erst I said) they owe others, and some respect must be
had to the commen society, and general corporacion of mankind. But, albeit
no man's safety, or commoditye ought be neglected, but all duties employed on
all men, that all may be won to Christ and God: yet shall it be our labor
worth, to determine what duties, with who^ chiefly they ought communicate. So
much at least, as shall seem in each respect, to this sort of men, and our
purpose necessary. Generallye in deed precepts may be given, ye they do not
to other, what they nould feel them selves. To love their neighbors as them
selves. But these are appliable to al parts of life, and to al indifferently.
And spread to largely through al degrees, and duties. We will note a few,
which chiefelye Nobilitye ought practice, and use, toward special sorts of
men.

The first therefore they owe to God, the next to their country. Piety toward
their country.
For this is a reverence, and loving zeal, grafted in each gentle courage, to
with and will hit all good, bliss, and fortune:

Which is the common parent, nurse, and preser^er of all men. Which piety,
worthily honored the Romans as a goddess, as it which contains all
charities, ^^^^s, and frendships. The law of God commands to reverence our
parents. Whereby, we entend not only reverence due to those of whom we are
borne: but also that we are datters of many duties, to our country, which
contaynes our parents, kinsfolks, friends, and familiers Wherefore, since it
wills them to reverence the first, it is consequente of necessity they
honor the last, which nurseth and cherishes the^ all, in her lap, and
arms. Nor swarueth this affection, from the meaning and majesty of the
Scriptures. Sith even Paul writes, he is vexed with great gryefe and
incessant torment, yea and wishes to be accursed for his brethren, kynsemen,
and countrymen the Jews to whom he was linkd, only by the bond of the
flesh, and zeal of his natural soil and country. But, as al men are
enforced by natural inclinacion to love their countreye, wherein they were
borne and bredde: so chyefely the Nobles, who receive more ample and large
benefits, of the fruytefulnes and bountye of the soil, then the commen sort.
To whom moreover they owe, that both they be, and are termed Nobles. For, in
foreign realms, that home noblesse is either unknown, or not so hyghly prysed.

For truly, within their own territories, and the limits of their country is
the whole ornament of their Nobilitye bounded. But these may profit
singulerlye, yea far more then the commen sort. Both quyete, peace,
flourishynge: and warlyke in warfare. In peace, if all their polecyes persuade
not war, but peace: if they garnishe the same with counsel, wisdom, and
good ordinances: if all their labors and sweates tend to the profit of
their country: if they apply their endeavor, experyence, and practice to the
government of the commen wealth: if they be disposed to civil societye, and
meet to continue amiable company emonges men: if they can snaffle and bridle
the lawelesse people: if they respect not their own, but the commen
commoditye: if they quench the flames of ciuyle wars, not with arms, but
wisdom, and counsel: if they revive sleapyng laws: if they settle
judgment: if things decated, and much misordred, they sowder by law: if they
procure to spread through all their regions christian religion: if they
refer wholly the^ selves and al their doings, to the glory of god, the
co^moditye of their commens, the safety and ornament of their country, and
increase of their princes honor. Of war what to council, I am not
sufficiently adusted. For never gladly blow I the war blaste. For the rage
of (...), and wrath of battle, hurtful to all men, utterly disswadeth me to
think, almost any war, just emonges christians. They must war with vices,
with ambicion, with self love: and be at defyance with pride.

Which sort of war, is both christian and bloudlesse. In this combat ought
they fight, even to the knees in blood. For the conqueroures wherein, is
reserved in heaven, an assured incorruptible crown. But man's, yea christians
blood to sheade, not ever for just, and weighty cause: and while princes play
(as they say) for balls, or howesoeuer they rave, to plague the poor co^me^s:
repugneth with nature, reason, humanity wisdom, divine, yea and civil laws.
Let such therefore, as tender their country, and are of authority with princes,
persuade yea uneven peace, to dissuade war, the utter subversion of all
virtues, the seed and root of al vices. But it for man's sins such times
happen that it please god, with that plague to reclayme and chasten his
whorynge and roaming people: remember they, as whylome Pollux said to Commodus
the emperor to be warrionrs, not war lovers: wise not willig captains. For
this warlike practice flourished always chiefelye emonge those, who were beset
with enemies. But every coaste is fraught with foes. Hereby the Romans
lengthned the bounds and limits of their empire, even to this our Britain.
Hereto, were the Lacedemoni^s to prone even plain war cocks, borne either to
bidd or take battle. Of them therefore, many abounded with warlyke praise:
yea, guerdons, prices, and tryumphes, were adjudged the valtaunt. Hence the
oken, grass, wall, city, and golden crowns. Hence the preferme^t to degrees:
hence the many surnames hence their arms, I mages, pensions of the
commentreasure: hence the division of landetas to Cesars old soldiers, the
field Stellas: to Sillas, Velaterrane, and Auentine: and to others other. Hence
sprung in times past the name of knights: kept yet in England and otherwhere.
Hence almost al Nobility rose and grew, as in touching the original thereof we
showed tofore. To this labor (namelye ye practices of peace and warfare) I
exhorted the nobles somewhat above, when I touched, they ought not saint and
forslowe their eutye in idleness. For worthily is Sardanapalus scorned, as a
rascal, esseminat, and woe ma^ly king. Who chose rather amo^gs women to handle
the distaffe, and spyndle then to weld weapon with men. Against whom, when his
lieuetenants Belochus and Arbaces made insurrection: he with his womannishe
train, scarce she wynge his face in syelde, filthylye fled. And understanding
the loss of the field, threw both him self, and his, a mids the tier.
Bring therefore Noble men to the common welthe, warlyke skill and Courage,
which teasd they may utter against their enemies, the Turks and other
infidels. For, since hindes til the ground, Craftsemen cleave to their crafts,
Preachers ward Churches with the spiritual sword, against the assaults of
Satan: the Nobles must in the shadow of their palaices, and in peace,
practice and ponder these duties, ere they leave their walls, and take the
field, whole labor, their country more properly challenges, and thinks
both more commodious and necessary for her. Nor unworthily. For they releassed
of bodily travail, wear not hand crafts greatly, and, sithe they may well
spare them selves this leisure, may labor in these feats: and learn so
much art and skill by use, as is requisite in any general, at ye least in a
mean captain. For, without a Captain, an army is (as said Epammondas) as a
faier beast. and Philip, those rather an army of hearts, under the conduct of a
Lion, then of Lions, conducted by a heart. For, the chief part of warlike
success, consists in a stout and polytike captain.

But the efficient causes and limits of war, may be. For the flock. For the
law, which devise, Alphonsus king of Arrago^, gave in his arms. Whereto this
also may be added. For the prince. For in the Princes, is comprysed the Realms
safety. And thones life, depends on thothers welfare. I mean a godly king
as Josias, Ezechiel, David, or such like. who employed their service, to the
king of kings, and established intheyr Realines sincere religion. Otherwise
counsl I none to war, either to bolden Idolatry, or strengthen wyckednes,
with word or deed. Rather oughst thou wythstande him: with thy Council (not
force) to hinder his attempts. Wythstande him (I say) with patience, not
power. And fear rather god, then man. For his flock the shepherd: For their
country, the Codries, Decians, and Curtians die. Iustest is the quarrel, for
law and faith. If the whole consent, and concord of all, or the most part
of the good, join: be they stirred of zeal, (God calling them for his glory)
to obtain what they coueyte: then know they, this last and extreme remedy,
to be most commendable. How much more detestable they are, who not defend,
but betraye their country. (As Tarpeia Room,) Or their Prince. As Pyrrhus
Phisician, whom Fabrit^us sent back bounden. Or the law and relygion. which
happeth, as often as relygious cay tifes, to esiablishe their pryuate gains,
and dignities, receive into the bosom of their Country, a stranger, and
foreign Prince.

Nor have regard of ought, so they may with foren violence, maintain their
old rooted superstitious opinyons, and retain the Roman heresies.
Contrariwyse, shall our Noble man demean him self. And bend all his might
and main, against foreign force. Not ransom, or maintain his fanly, with
the destruction and death of bys country. Mischievous is this pol^e^e, with
the loss and ruin of the Realine, to stablishe their pryuate opinyon, and
accomply she their own lust. O horrible treason, wantinge worthy cerme.

Toward the multitude cke, and commen sort, some duties must be obsecued:
that Nobility may (as it were) flow, into all men's hertes. To win them
with curtesy, not affray them with cruelty. Whereof much may, and somewhat
has been said. Which here it needs not tediouslye to repeat, or other like
causeles to heap. Aristotle mencioneth in his Politikes, an horrible oath used
in certain states, consistinge of the regimente of sewe Nobles: in manner,
thus: I will hate the people, and to my power persecute them. Which is the
croppe and more, of al sedition. Yet to much practiced in our lives. But, what
cause is there, why a Noble man, should either despise the people? or hate them?
or wrong them? What? know they not, no tyranny may be trusty? Nor how ill
garden of continuance, fear is? Further, no more may Nobility miss the
people, then in man's body, the head the hand. For of truth, the commen
people are the hands of the Nobles, since them selves be handlesse. They
labor and sweat for them, with tillinge, saylinge, running, toylinge: by Sea,
by la^d, with hands, with feet, serve them. So as wtoute their service, they nor
eat, nor drink, nor are clothed, no nor live. we read in ye taleteller Esope,
a done was saved by the help of an Ant. A lion escaped, by the benefit of a
Mowse. We read again, that even Ants have their choler. And not altogether
quite, the Egle angerd the bytle be. For, albeit careless and safelye thou
despise each severally: yet not without peril, prouokest thou all
vninersallye. Right godly therefore, and wisely says Augustine. The multitude
is not so contemptuous for their simple power: as dreadful for their huge
number. For many little worms may slay. And cast ought mids a swarm of fleas,
shall it not be eaten? Wherefore, neither sharply, nor rigorously, nor
tirannously, must they entreat the people. Since no man's power, may match the
might of many. Rather must they love them, as the greatest, and befte part of
the common wealth. And be they subjects, they are so much more to be loved,
for they yield them their labors, whose profits they enjoy. As the father to
his children, the king to his subieccs, the good husbandman to his ground: so
ought the Nobility, be affectioned toward the commens. Whom they ought win
and join to them, by virtue, as a most effectual charm. But, how love is
purchased, and entry made into the minds of the multitude: Excellentlye
learneth Cicero in his second book of duties. Whom I leave the Nobles even
again and again to pervfe.

And this is the first part, concerning their country and commen wealth.

The other is, Agreement of the Nobles.
that Nobility agree not only with the people, but even live, and love,
within it self. For, hit suffiseth not, the Commens and lords agree: but also
it both beseems, and behooves, the Lords be sowdered amongs them selves.
Since hence also, spryngeth Civil jar and dyscorde. For, stout stomakes,
cannot bear pryuate grudges, without the commen misery and calamity. which
well witnesses, the rage and madness of C. Caesar, and the twinninge of. Cn.
Ponpeye, the great from him his father in law. which caused the alteration of
the state, and new countenance of the Empire. For, this is no play, or
pageant, nor any counterfeit combat, or stage Tragedy, sweatelesse or
bloudlesse, nor Homeres fraye twixt froggs and Myse: But the frayes and combats
of Noble and mighty men, are, as the graspinges of Lions, or giants wars,
who join with great power, greater stomakes, but greatest peril of either
part. Although, nor Lion deuoureth the Lion, nor dog the dog, nor wolf the
wolfes kind. So as nature it felfe, without other reason, sufficientlye
cries out on it. For it is, as if the limbs of one self body, should jar.
Were it not monstrous, and unnatural, (think ye) the heads should wyshe it
self ache?

The hand should buffet him self? the lounge curse hit self? For easily then
ceasseth any their Tirannye to other lymmes to seem cruel, when thus they
rage against them selves. But whereto forces not ambition mortal minds?
Which lightlyest breeds in the highest wits, and hawtyest courages. Yet
less ill, and more tolerable were hit, if only with hit self, hit conceived,
quickened, and tranayled. But it brasteth and blaseth forth. And what mischieue,
(enflamed with the lust of raygne) it has erst imagined other: that now it
compasses. And haleth aye in her guard envy, her vnparted bandmayde, the bawd
of all her mischieues. Envy again, comes not unaccompanied but couples to her
an other mate, namelye crueltye, armed and furnished for the deaths and
slaughters of many. Hence comes it that Nobilitye can bear no peer, and all
ambicion is impaciente of mate. For envy gloyteth with bloudye look,
breaths mischief, and whetteth and sharpneth crueltye.

So as goare envy so dimmeth ye eyes of the mind, and clipseth all the senses:
as it respects nor friend, nor kinsman, nor alie, nor his own dear and
german brother. For rare is the concord of brethren. And their breathes most
bitter and pestilent. Nay, the bloody son runs on the sire. As Absolon
burning and ragyng with ambicion, on Da^yd, his father and most godly king.
This deadly dew^ of envy, croppeth aye green, springing, and growyng virtue.
So as, if anys prince surpass in power, excel in learnyng^, flouryshe in
wit, or pass in any singular ornament, hynt strayghte it assayleth,
assaulteth, oppresses. Which the Athenians comme^ wealth, whilome proved most
true, in their oystershel exyle, and the deaths of the valiaunst Themistocles,
iustest Aristides, eloquentst Demosthenes, godliest Socrates. For gladlyer
vouche I foreign and stale examples, the^ pryuate and fresh. Albeit, I see in
these days, Tarquinius bloody counsel renewed. who is reported walking in his
garden, swollen we hate and pride, to have field with a wa^d the highest poppie
heads. Cruel land of Canaan that devoured her inhabitants. Cruel Scithya
manqueller, and men monger. But we such hate and envy is our Nobles ambicion
meddled, and with so horrible cruelty enflamed: that each noble man wounds his
own limme, and turns toward him self, his rage and furious force. Rare is
in Germanye rarer in Switzerland, the presidente of a subjects death. But
rarest of all the execution of a ruler, or magistrate.

Not only for they seeld offend: but atso, for they think it ought be a wonde
rous crime, wherefore they should part from their body, so noble and precious
limme. Esaye cries. Ye princes of Sodom and Gomorrhe, your hands are dyed
with blood. And woe to that nation, where no Nobility nor affinitye of blood,
saves from shameful slaughter, where is no respect of dignitye, no room ne
refuge, left for mercy. Where one Noble man, is hangman or butcher to another:
or rather to him self. Who seem not (in my conceyte) according to their
grauitye, to weyghe discreetlye enough, nor the weyghte of the fact, nor
worthynesse of the person. For, if but a while, they would mu^ble with them
selves, even but these few words (A noble man must die) and therein examine
what it is to dye, what a Noble man to dye: their fury I think would
lyghtelye swage, and they not rent from life, so noble limme, either for light
cause, or often unjust. Cicero reckeneth eyghte fortes of punyshementes,
cmonges the Romans. Damage, emprysonment, whipping, recompense, shame, eryle,
servitude, death, which seeld, and not but fustly, and for great cause were
executed. But, so were the lyghtest applied, as the fear often spredo to many,
the pain to sewe.

But that they seeldst wonted to execute any Roman Citesin, it appears by
Cicero, not once only in his Actions agains Verres. In the seventh of which be
dwells altogether in amplysieng this crime: and this last, and weyghtyest
argument, reserueth to the rear ward most to move the judges. Emonges the
rest, of a citesen, cruelly and sharplye scourged, by Verres commandment,
thus speaks he to the Judges. A Roman Citezen my lords, at Messana, in the
mids of all the markett. was whipped. When, as all the while no sighe, no
other cry of yt poor wretch mids the smarte and clashinge of his stripes,
but this was heard. I am a citesen of Rome, He hoped perdye, by this mention of
the city, be should have escaped all strypes, and shielded al torments from
his torn body. But this not only nor prevailed him, to avoid the crueltye of
his scourge: but mids his often cryeng mercy, and resounding the cities name: a
galowes yea a galowes, I say, was prepared, for the unhappy and wretched
caytise: who never tofore bad seen so lawelesse power. O sweet name of
liberty O the favorable laws of our city. O the law of Porcius and decrees
of Sempronius. Thus spoke he of one whipped by Verres. O, saw he at one
instant, for no crime, so many famous Nobles, so many honest citesens, so many
Magistrates and heads of Cities, not of forteyners, or rascals, but even of
the noblest, yea Princes, yea of their own degree, haled to slaughter, and
done to death: How would he roar? With what cries, what coutenaunce, would be
accuse this cruel envious, and ambicious rage? If it be by his witness, a
baynous crime to bind a citesen, a mischief to whyppe him, yea almost
parricide to slay him: what shall I say, to prefer him to the galowes? What
to beheade him? What to shone flame, burning fire, and other torments, to the
tender bodies of noblest personages? No more to spare the blood or life, of a
Noble man: then a hegge or dog? Pardon I pray, if I be some what to hot,
in reclayminge those importunate natures (whom ouermuche madness has blinded)
from so great, so cruel discord and unmeasurable rigor. With Esaie therefore,
I counsel all Princes and Nobles to be clear from blood, to judge iustlye,
and mercifullye, jointly to foye and sorrow, to pardon each other, to
acknoweledge their own faults, and forgive their offenders, not to punyshe
all offenses so rigorouslye, not to tread under foot nor afflict innocencye,
to cleanse their bloody hands, and nourishe mutual concord emonges them
selves, to banyshe discord, borne of ambition, nursed by envy, fed by
cruelty, and consure her to the Crows, to the furyes Alecto, and Megera, far
hence, to the Indes, to Hell. For, as concord mayntayneth and increases
private, and public wealth: quieteth the Subjects at home, dryueth terroure
and dread in their enemies: so the Nobilitye living in tumulte, and discord,
both their own might is hocked, and the foundacions of the commen wealth are
shaken, their subjects wrynge, their friends mourn, their enemies laughe and
tryumphe, for so wide gappe opened to spoil them.

This, other commen wealths prove and every corner is farsd with examples, as
well emonges the Heathen, as Christians. I coueyt here to ouerpasle our
countries sore. I would wish, our ciu^le broils were known but at home.
But since, of their own force and bitterness, they utter and blase them selves,
moned with love and conscience, I can not whollye cover them. Let therefore my
countrymen pardon me in this one point, much pertinent to their safety. I
think, had they rather chose to cleave in one, with mutual consent, the^ thus
to be distraited with dissencion: nor had the civil sword shed so much
Noble blood, nor ennemies sudden roades, of late refte so many garrisons. The
truth can not lie. He says. Every kyngedome divided, and scuered in it self
becomes desolate. And every city and house farring can not stand. If each
Noble man root out other, Nobility^ may not last: nor the commen wealth live,
her strength and flower wythered. Truly, this think I, Nor Julius Caesar had
made our Britame tributarye had he not at his entry found the princes and
rulers of the realm at vary^unce: (for both before his coming they kept
continual wars, and afterward the Troinouantes the strongest citys (which
now we call London) the Catimagns, Secuntiats, Ancalites, Bibrokes, and others
yielded them selves, and many at his coming (as him self reports in his
commentaries) rebelled from Cassiuellantius, who then ruled the realm) nor yet
the Saxones, nor that VVilliamthe Normayne Conqueror, would ever have
attempted to innade it: had they not (procured by often messages) in manner
presentesentlye, beheld the iarringe, and dyscordante state of the Nobles. To
conclude, nothing plageth England, but the many breaches, and ever unsure,
never faithful, frendshyppe of the Nobles. What wonder then, though the ennemy
oppress, the weak vnatined remnant, and open part to iniurye? Since always,
the surest armor, and strongest wall, is their steadfast and constant amiry,
who are most of might and power? What mcruayle, though other ouerrunne them,
when they seek, to riue their own throat? For, to ouerpasse the aunciente and
elder presydentes, and to giaunce by the later grieves even with one word, was
not the twinninge of our Nobles, the mean to al our misery? Let me vouch for
example, Edward Duke of Somerset: Prince of passing godlynes, Noblest house,
trustiest Protector of the young Kings person: emprysoned for a trifle, yea a
light suspicion, and beheaded. whose life, all men prosecute, with worthy
praise and commendation: his death, with due tears, and lamentacion. For, when
he being protector of the Realm, a most trusty and good Garden to his
orphane Prince, a man godly suspicyous, and scareful for his King, permitted
his brother the Admyral, by others sleights for few unproven suspicyons, to
be headed: Him self, shortly after towered, by the means of the Duke of
Northumberlande, (a man truly of a stout and hawtye Courage, and in war
most valyaunte: But to much ragynge with Ambycyon.) with the self same kind
of death, that tofore his brother, (O worthy man) to the great sorrow, and
mourning of the whole Realm, was beheaded. Who once dead, we were shortly
after robbed of our Crystal King. Whose death, ensued the change of
Keligio^. And somewhat after, the self Duke, pent in ye self prison, appeachd
of like crime, ended his life by like death. Nor only he, but even all, that
by corrupted and suborned witnesses, conspired the protectours death. Ever
since the commen wealth waned, and we lost our passingst men, our highest
honors, our chosen Nobles, our honorable Nobylytie, our valiauntst guides.
with what slaughters, (O immortal God) what murders, what butchery of the
good, with what streams of noblest blond, yea with what men's blond, that he
that land, sweat and surrounded? which I recount not, for hate or envy of
any, (for the contriuers of these mischieues, are all redye dead: And envy
freates not the dead^) But, that by their example, either the quycke may
amend, if any remain yet, accessaryes to so shameful sin: or others may
be warned, and ware, to encurre like fault and penalty. The same may we
see, in the Athenians and others. But one example suffices.

Who slays, shall be slain. who ill pretends to other, shall be prevented,
and meashd in his own purpose. As Hesiode, having perhaps proved it, even in
his days song.

Worst to the worker proves the council wyck^. Remember they, who lay violent
hands on other, how borrible hit is, to fall into the hands of the living god.
Who is not only careful of his, but even knows all, and every them. And
has nombred all the hears of their head, and will epsy if any die. And (if
unjustly) not leave hit unpunished. Wherefore, auant that churlishe Nemesis, and
envious Ate. Depart hence factions, in the deutls name. God is charity, and
who is not in charity, is not in God, nor God in him. What? shall a Noble man's
courage, be pent up with such impotence, such envy, such baseness of stomach,
as the dunghyl, and wretched rascal people? The potter hates the potter, as (
Hesiode says), the Poet the Poet, the Chantour the Chantor. But god forbid,
one Noble man should hate another, sith envy, without horrible blame, and
mischief, cannot pearce their hearts, Greater and higher, then whom envy may
subdue. And, how shall he love the people, who hates his own degree?
Wherefore, if they covet to save the commen weal, to maintain their dignity:
this is the most compendious mean, that neither fear, hate, or threate
other: Neither jar with other, neither conspire others death, and
destruction: But all suspicion severed, they cleave together with ioynte heart,
and mind. And so be lynked with the insoluble chain of charity, as with one
consent, they study to preserve their country, to with stand their enmy, to
love the people, and with absolute concord, and unity, to be sowdred and
glued in Christ. The restoring of which happy calm, in these our days, to
the Chrystian world, after the stormy warlike tempests: I greatly joy, and
wish hit christian, and everlasting. And greet to our England, the brightness
of this season, and the summer days, which god has granted our noble Queen
Elizabeth: Under whose raygne, all these storms are appeased, and stilled.
which quyetnes, I hope shall* and beseech almighty god, may be everlasting.
But this ought the Nobles perform both to show favor to their inferiors, and
lovingly agree amongs them selves. No fond council, though a Sithian, Jaue one
Silurns dienge to his Children. To whom, he gave abundel of bruckle arow
steals, to break. which when they could not: severed he easily cracked them
in their sight, whom bound in bauand al they could not crushe. By which dumme
show, he signified to his children, (whom he had in number. 80.) that with
concord they might be inuinctble, with discord easily re^t. what else is
nobility then a manner brotherhead? As natural brethren then, ought they
cherishe, shyeld, aid, and embrace each other: but they will rather together
with their country, with the rest of the people, peryshe. For, if tarringe they
lose one, all the rest flittinge and scattering, will lightly stumble in the
self pit of perdycion. And, if any rauener, rent and devour one, he will
sever also the rest, till he have spente all. Even as the lanar, seuereth
first from the whole flighte one dove, and then another, that since at once
conioynd he could not, at sundry times dysioyned, he may suttelly invade
and devour all. For coupled strength is stronger, as the old poesy is. wicked
is he, that chaseth not if he may, his approchinge enemy. but how much more
hated, both of god and man ought he be, who renyenge his country, flieng his
fellows, sueth the ^nmy camp, and betraieth the Realm? Plutarche mencioneth
one Cretinus a citezen of Magnesed, who long time with one Hermias had borne
pryuate grudge Yet, when Mithridates war began, in open asse^bly, counsayled
to choose Hermias general, reckni^g and comme^dig his many virtues. which
Hermias hearing willingly yielded, and departed into volu^tary exile, ye
Cretinus might be general of ye army. So, ought, all private offenses be
buried, and commen peril foyne eue^ ye deadliest foes: to perform their
common duty, with commen consent. That, as much as in the^ lies, they nor harine
their prinate enemy, nor aid their foren so, nor suffer the common wealth to
be abandoned, which well may the elustering concord of the Nobles, perform.
whereof is now sufficient said.

They ought also practyfe, another virtue toward others, Liberality.
namelye lyberality. For, nothing more purchases men's favor and
frendshyppe. whose praise, as it ought be common to all rich: so is
espectally most proper, to Noble men. For ever, a Noble courage, accompteth
hit more hap, to help, then be helped: and to be a geuer then taker, to
use Aristotle's words, yea, rather reckneth hit a shame, and stain to his
honor, to take: glorious to give. For, both they have to give, and none give
more largelye or readelye. So as, almost by no ryffer prooffe, may you read a
Noble man, then by geninge wyllingly, often, and bountifully. wherefore, the
Hebrews call them princes, which emplyeth, lyberall, bountiful, half gods, and
Noble men, even of theyr-owne accord and nature, free barted. which word,
Christ in Luke converted thus. Their kings rule them, and such as have power
over them, are called beneficial. That is bountiful. Whereof, both an
honorable proof, and worthy witness is Alexander the great. Whom scarsely
suffised the great treasures of Darius, to power out on his friends.

With whom, he thought his treasure most safelye kept and horded. Perillus
suynge to him for dower to marye his daughter, he wylled to take fiftye
Talentes. Which when he modestlye refused, au^swereng that ten suffised: He
replied, perhaps for the to take, but not for me to give. This princely
stomach, ought all Nobility wonder at, and according to their power smitate.
For, albest in wealth they be not Alexanders, yet in mind and bounteful
benevolence they may be. All see they may: such is their abilitye.

Men ween also they ought, since it behooves as they have freelye received
much, so to render somewhat, to succor the necessities of others. Which also
our Paul writing to Timothe commanded, willing them not to place their
confidence in uncertain riches, but in the living god. And to smitate his
heavenly example, who ministers all men aboundauntly, and largely to their
needs: that they may he bountiful, rich in good deeds, liberal
co^municaters and emparters of benefiees, large and bounteous. And hereto
knitteth he reward, namelye, that layeng here this sure soundacion, they may
obtain everlasting life. Thus must he despise mouie, as a heavy and
unprofitable clogge to him. mounting to greater and higher hope. For how shall
a money slave, rightlye rule others? Or how may he be termed free, who
serves a thing reasonles, and lifeles? They ought therefore neglecte money, not
as some unwise Philosophers, and froward and foolish sages. Who either cast
away their goods, as Diogenes his cup and maser for he see a boy make the
same of the holowe palm of his hand. Or drowned them in the sea, as Aristippus
and Crates. Or left them behind, when they might have saved them, as Byon. Or
neglygentlye forsook them, and let their grounds lie waste, for others
beasts to pasture, as Anaxagoras and Democritus. But, neither lauishe they out
their goods, as prodigal, nor bestow the^ on vicious persons, as many
hippocrites and ambicious. But in placing benefits, weyghe what is each man's
due. So much therefore, of Ciceros notes of bountifulnes, as shall seem
expediente to this place, I with few words and briefly, will mention out of
our Scriptures, as far forth as seems loyned with a Noble man's duty.

So therefore must liberality be tempered, and limyted, that chiefly therein
two faults be avoided: that neither you bestow on the unworthy, or
needelesse, nor seem bountiful for besire of honor and glory, or hope of
gayn. So ought there be choice and account of person, and the end respected.
Of the end, Christ spoke in Mathewe in that first, and heavenly sermon, he
made to his disciples in the mount.

When he says, alms is to be given not in men's sight, for show, nor after
the trompets blast. as Hippoer^tes in the Synagoges, and streets, for they
would be seen and praised of men. But of the end, and other things that
might be heaped hereto, I will here say nothing. It shall suffice, to add
so much, as shall seem pertinent to the calling, and function of a Noble man,
touching those persons on whom this liberalitye ought be employed.

Liberalitye toward Beggars.
The first therefore, and neediest are beggars. Whom in no wise he ought forget,
who depends as a beggar on the alms of god. Of whom so many, so great gifts
he receives daily.

These mencioneth Christ in Luke, in the Pharisces banquet, in this manner,
lessoning his feaster. When thou make a dinner or supper, call not thereto thy
friends, brethren, kinsfolk, nor thy rich neighbors: least they cross the
with like, and so requite the. But when thou bankettest, call to thee the
poor, the lame, the halte, the blind. And happy art thou then, for they can
not requite thee. Wherein, both he touched those Pharisaicall feasters, and
also, notes not a few of our days.

Who give not the needye, but such of whom they hope or awayte, hongerlye the
doubled worth. Nor any where. truer proves that old saw, Like will to like.
For to feasts and bankettes not the needy and hongrye (as our savior
wills) but the Noble, the rich, and the feasters fellows fly. Who are able
to recompense them, and render like, yea with vsurye.

But, best deserved they of the comme^ wealth, who first founded hospitalles,
and alms housen, for poor and wretched lasers. Where not lasie loyterers or
welthy dissemblers: but the weak and nedye, might be harbored.

For, every where is stoare enought of vagaboundes, and none more theuishe,
sluggyshe, or dissolute in all lycenciousnes: then the wandering sculles, of
roges and roamyng beggars.

Which well by experience, espied that famous and worshipful gentleman
Anthonye Cave, of worthy memory: my beneficial patron and tutor. Who being
in Buckinghamshire, commissioner and Justice of peace: trauayled day and night
to banishe this sort And, at length by his wit, industry and polecie,
compassed, that provision was made for the weak, wydowes, orphans, and aged:
and the stout and mighty lubbers compelled to labor. So that at last,
almost no where through the whole shyre, should you find a vagabou^d. This
was pryuate. But that of the city of London, public and most commendable:
worthy eternity, and immortalitye: founded in the fortunate reign of king
Edward the syxt, Where in a large room with wages masters, servants, and
all other necessaries allowed, and ministered, an innumerable multitude of poor
is fed: the healthie labor, the sick, lame, deaf and blind, are cured:
many children bred, some to occupations, some to searninge and studies: that in
after times, may serve either the church, or the common wealth. Which with
such like, I tell to this end. That every noble man, in his Shire, City, or
Countreye, may in like manner, to their power, provide the realm be not
charged, or whelmed with that wanderyng and pernici us draffe of vagaboundes,
and lasye loyterers.

Be this therefore decreed, that liberallye they aid the needye, that simplye
they give, not suttellye let to vsurye a benefit. And such gift scripture
terms an alms and pitye. For it is given to the pitied and alms worthy The
Philosophers call it bountye, benignity or liberality.

Liberalitye toward the learned.
Let also a Noble man's chest open to the famous in skyll, or study of
knowledges. For in times paste, kings, Nobles, and al honorable, were
protectours and nurses of learning, learned, and students. And accounted (as
it were) Apollines, and maynetayners of the Muses, who (in manner) watered and
refreshed with their liberality, as plentyfull dew, the same sterued or
destitute.

Whom unless the ayding and beneficial hand of Nobles assiste, and supporte:
necessarily must they faint and fall. For arts are fed by honor, preferments,
aids: and faynte through want, contempt, and pouertye. Hence spring those
bothomles praises, and glorious titles of Alexander the great, Hence those of
Augustus, and Mecenas, prynted by the famous pens of Ouide, Virgile, and
Horace. But that other king of the Macedons munificence, Anaxagoras, D^ogenes,
and many other, both proved and praised. Whose emba^sado^rs bringing
Xenocrates. 50. talentes when he refused, aunswering, he neded not so much, and
notwtstanding of curtesye, seeing the^ somewhat dismayed, took 30. pounds: the
king willed him, to gratify any his friend (if any neded it) with ye rest. To
Anaxarchus, he sent by his cofferer so much as he requirrd. Namely a. 100.
calentes. which he not only not denied, but seemed in manner to thank him, for
be would so boldly demand it of him, as his friend, who both might and would
give it him. For, this cause, with immortal thanks, and everlasting memory,
ought they be honored, and reverenced, who first founded schools, and
universities: appoyntinge stipends, and privileges, as well for the studious to
learn as professors of arts to teach. wherewith, we wont to be allured, and
provoked to study paynefully, and profit merely. But gone is that golden age,
present are our brazen and iron years* wherein, who ought augment these
benefits, are rather spoylers, then patrones of learning. Who either by
flattery, suit, or extorcion, seek their pryuate gain in students revenues:
and compass, rather to raze, what is builte, than to lay or found new. To
many politic artificers, be there in this suitle, and wylye skill. who, either
purchase for naught, of wardens and Rectours of colleges, their lands and
livings: or enter on them ere they fall, or aided by the Princes letters
patents, dispossessinge the old tenant, will in spite of their nose become
their tenaunts: or if the heads deny their requests, chafe like young
Dukes, and threate I wot not what, to the whole felowshyppe. But otherwise
would I our Noble man both do, and mean. To surmount the benefits of his
ancestors, to maintain the dignity of learning, to augmente their profits,
to employon them with a gentilmanly frankenes, so much as they want, and shall
not be burdennus to him self. To garnishe also libraryes, with store of
books, is not the least commendation of Nobility Wherein Ptholomeus
Philadelphus, whylom excelled. Which praise is now descended, to the Noble
familye of the Fuggers. Next, Liberalitye toward^s Gods Saynctes.
be liberality unlocked to them, who suffer for religion, and areemprisoned, or
otherwise afflicted for Christ's cause. For, in the Apostles time, they
bestowed their alms on the godly poor. And Paul, often gathered for the
brethren at Hiernsalem, and others. And councelleth the Galathians, both
generally to be bountiful to all men, but chiefly to the householde of faith.
For what we contribute to the godly, and the persecuted for Religions sake,
is most accepted of god. and who receives them, receives Christ. Yea who
receives a Prophet, in the name of a Prophet, or a just man, in the name of
the just: shall receive the reward of a Prophet, and righteous. And who
gives the least of these, but a cup of cold water, to drink in the name of
a Disciple: shall not miss his reward. How much the detestabler is their
myschieuous beneficence, and accursed bounty, who not to feed, or clothe,
hungrye or naked, Christ: but rather to spoil, and dysrobe him, not to
cheryshe, but rende him, not to save, but stay him: lauishelye power out, and
waste their goods, wealth, and power. And who, to advance supersticion (not
build Religion) either renew raised Monasteryes, or found new. Rigorous in
sacking the poor, but superititiouslye Relygious in deckinge Images, Masses,
Relikes, pardons, pilgrimages, clothinge Sainets counterfaites, prodigally, and
wyckedly liberal.

Which erpence is so much the lamen tabler, as it is in the mids of the light
of the Gospel used, and for they ryfle from the good, and gospellers, what
they bestow on the euel. And turn the substance of the godly, as the rent and
scattered relikes of their life, to horrible abuse. But these, have other where
their price, worthy their deeds. In mean time, ill gotten, and worse spent,
worst wastes. but what is employed on godly uses, and subsidies of the holy
Saints, shall with usury return to the owner. So as for carnal things, he
shall reap spiritual, and heavenly. And thus, hitherto have we entreated, of
their reverence to their country, their love of the multitude, concord twixt
them selves, alms toward the poor, liberality to the learned, bounty to the
godly. which all, be members of the commen wealth, whom as germane brethren,
this our Noble man ought embrace, with favor and amity.

Nor ought their beneficence be withholde^, but emparted with strangers,
soudred, Hospitaltye toward^^ Strau^ger^
and (as hit were) grafted, in the commen weal. which virtue is termed
hospitality: namely commended to the Jews, in the old law, by god. whom he
wylled, to be courteous to strangers, who were pilgrymes erst them selves, in a
foreign land. For, lyghtlye learn they that have proved like misery, to succor
misers. And are moved with greater compassion, and sense of others grief.
Caesar therefore commended the Germans, for they thought it detestable to missuse
a stranger. And shielded all such, as for any occasion fled to them, from
wrong: accompting them holy, and communicatinge all their house, and tables
with them. The Britains, chiefelye the Kentishmen, he terms of all other
most civil. which it appears, was prejudicial to them, and the chief cause
of Cesars war. For they aided the frenchmen, his enemies, and succourd them
with friendly and commodious harborough. Beware the new Germans and Englyshmen,
they change not, but continewe this manor, and custom. which so much the
more they ought, for, as now they exceed their elders, in Christianity: so
ought they pass them in virtues. That charge, credited Paul to the
bishops. Namely to entertain, and love strangers. Nor less careful ought
Nobles be, whose power as hit is greater, and more abundant: so ought their
bounty be larger, and plentifuller. For, sith Monks, each where, have yet
good names her ^fore: ware ought Nobles be, who succeaded in their Rooms,
and setsed their possessions, that herein they prove not their inferiors. Nor
yield to them in this practice of Charity, whom far they pass in pureness of
farthe. Therefore, as ministers, so noble men's part it is, to provide them
harborough, to leasse them use of housen and City, to open them the churches,
to succor them chiefly, if relygious exiles need their aid. Ever truly,
have Noble men's housen lain open to Noble ghestes. Let eke their gates lie
open, to the miserable and banished for christ's cause, other wise
succourlesse. That so both they be, and may be rightly called, alms gods on
earth. The ancient gentry, is reported, far to drown these our later
nobles, in this part of curtesy. Since now, many men's charity cools. The
paynims, counted it their chiefest comme^dation, to have their entries worn.
And wonted to sit at their gates, that no ghest might escape them. Herefore, is
that Cimon magnified in Cicero, by the report, of Theophrast. Who took such
order, and so commanded his farmers, that whatsoever inhabitant of Latium came
to his manor, should have al necessaries allowed him. But he was liberal to
his benefactors. but once father Abraham and Lot his brother, indifferently to
all men. Of whom the first, sat in ye gate, the other in the entrye of his
tabernacle, either spy, and pry for some stranger. Which once seen, they
rise, run, mere him, embrace him, crouche do^one to the ground, and humblye
entreat him to enter.

For, this is the request, and suit of Abraham in Genesis, to the Angels whom,
both he saw, and took to be strangers. I beseech you sir, I may find so
much favor with you, that you pass not my house. Tarry I pray you, while a
little water be fette, to wash your feet. Rest ye under this tree, and I will
fetch you a loaf of bread, and make you merry, and then go forwards on gods
name. For therefore, turned ye into your servant. Lo Abraham, the
honourablest Prince of the Israelyte^, the father of faith and all faithful,
abundant in Cattle, Conqueroure in wars, dreadful to whole Nations and
kings: prostrateth him self on the ground, entreats the^, professes him
self their Servant, to whom he gives: Runs to the herd, his whole house
attends those strangers and abiectes. Sara bestirs her, she moulds three
bushels of finest meal* and knedeth Cakes, the boy, with all speed kills a
fat and fayer steer, butter and milk is set them him self standinge serves
them. O simple and happ^e age: O ma^gled manners: O strange Metamorphosis: O
new couersion up side down, in and out. Let Abraham humble, paineful,
hospital: learn our proud, slouthful, inhospitall Nobles. Who not only not
give, but chase away and stubbournely entreat strangers, checking them with
threats, scoffs, and tauntes. That Englishemen are ^urteous, I deny not: yea
they have been ever counted the chiefest honourers of strangers. And truly so
they be: delyghted rather with forreyne wits and traffyke, then their own
countries. Where notwithstanding they have both plentye of excellent wits,
and abundance of all necessaryes, and most civil inhabitaunts. Yet so
delight them all foreign pleasures, that in manner they disdain, their home
commodityes.

Which affection toward strangers I condemn not. Nay, I rather exhort
them more to embrace and love them. but warning withal they despise not but
reverence and embrace the good gifts of God, their home commodities. How
sumptuous are they, in enterteining Princes, or ambassadors? How excessive?
what glisteringe Nobles? what pomp? What show? Whom truly, for the
mayntenaunce of their dygnitie I commend. But that unmeasurable magnifice^ce,
much myslike: whence, what I covet dymynished, that wyshe, I employed, on
poor pylgrimes, Christ's, and exiles. To provide them necessary living,
admit them into felowshyps, and allow them yearly stypendes. Which well I
wotte, the Noblest Prince Edward, of happy memory, most lyberally did, both
in London, and either vnyuersitie. whom, some Dukes, Nobles, and bishops
imitated. Chiefelye, the reverend Father, and late primate of England, of the
priuye Council to King Henry the.viii. and his son Edward, Crowned with
blissful Martirdom of Mary his daughter, Thomas Cranmar Archebyshop of
Caunterbury: a worthy successoure of william warram in that See, whom so
lyuelye he resembled, in sincerytie and bounty. Emouges the Nobles, not the
least praise, earned Henrye Graye, Marquess Dorcet, and Duke of Suffolk,
now a Noble Citezen of heaven. Who lyberallye relieved, many learned exyles.
The like may we say of many other, who renouncing the world, and worldely
pleasures, have exchaunged life with death, or rather mortalytie with
immortalytie. Thus some dead have I voutched. Nor want there presidentes of
the quick. But them will I not praise, but rather erhorte, daily to contend
with them selves, that, since not a few of them were strangers in Germany, and
therefore understand their estate by experience, they would more and more, put
on that sense of humanytie, and affecte of mercy. To relieve pilgrims, wearned
with travail, and destitute of aid, banyshed now their Country bounds, and
succor and cherishe their need^, with their plenty.

In conclusion, be Nobility bountiful to all men.

But Justice (if ought else) chiefly pertayneth to man's societye. Justice


Wherefore worthily of Aristotle, it is called others virtue. Where properly
takes place that saying of Pollux to Commodus the emperor: termynge it the
balanced law. For in manner of balance, with even hand paysyng and eaming each
thing, it sweyeth not from right, nor more then just is, leans on either
part. And that virtue is both fectest and necessariest for a Noble man. Whose
whole life and practices, are chiefly busied in mayntaynyng commen commodityes.

Where with once adourned, easelye has he gotten the princess of al virtues.
Whereby he shall rule both him self and others. For neither is fortitude
needful where Justice is: and if laws ruled, arms should hushe, sith none
should be iniuried. But insurious they become through couctise and thirst of
coin. For what work we not to heap and hourd goods?

Truly, a filthy fault in all men, but hardly think I any may be sayned
filthier in a noble man. For whom we would have free, and liberal, whom we
wish of high mind and undaunted courage, who should esteem all worldly
toys as draffe and chippes, how unseemly and servile were it, What blotte to
his estimation, he should encurre that mock of Euripides? To be a happy horder
and cofferer, an unwilling steward and disbourser of money: Hieremye accuses
the princes of Israel, as ranening wolves, bloud-sheaders, manquellers, gredy
guts: and Dauld calls them Lions lieng in their dens, in wait for the
simple and ravening the poor, halinge him into their nets. But beware, least
they cry to god and the mourning of the poor, ascending, and peareyng the
ears of the lord of Sabbath, provoke him against the. And of a most merciful
lord and father, make him thy wrathful and rigorous judge.

For the cominalty complayneth new lords succeeded their old ancients.
Excessive in askinge, rigorous in exactinge, readier in taking, sparer in
geuinge, worste almost in all things. For all commend the ancient Nobility,
condemn the children, advance their parents to the heavens. This posterity
therefore, briefly warn I, not to oppress with fines or incoms their
tenants, or countreimen. Not to peruerte judgments, not to enclose that erst
was commen, not raise their farms higher then of old, or beyond reason, not
to crushe their backs with labor, not to dyffer to pay. For all these are
forbidden by the law of god. Esaias cries. Cease ye to afflicte, learn to be
beneficial, search judgment. And in his third chapter. The lord shall come
(says he) to plead with the elders, and Princes of his people. For ye have
cropped his vine, and the spoil of the poor is in your house. Why beggar ye
my people? and grind (as hit were) the pore men's countenance? And there vice
notes he in his fifte chapter. Woe to them that join house to house, and
land to land, leaninge room for no Neighbor. Will ye only in dwell the
earth? These be those Giants of the earth, in times paste, before the floude,
famous and Noble, valiant and notable, strong, sound, and mighty, terryble,
and chayned. These be the successors of Nimrod, stout and boisterous
hunters, and rouers on the earth. Whom each where mention the sacred
scriptures. Thus cou^celleth Solomon. Move not from their place, the aunciente
bounds, nor enter on the land of the Orphane. For whereto stain Noble men,
them selves with this mucke? whereto, are they of so low, and base spirit, as
to be chained to these earthly clogges? who ought soar far higher. For what
are the riches, which here so much they prise, but burdens, and clogges of
Cares? Therefore said Socrates, our minds were no less hamperde, and laden
with them, then our bodies with long and side garments.

Ant Democritus featly depaynted money, which vngotte wringes, is kept with
cares, departs with grieves. Whereto then serves this insatiable thirst of ye
which wantyng ye wayle, having how, loosing mourn. This therefore know al
Nobles, and with like salues, arm their breasts against this vnstanched thirst
of coin. Well wite they, they are no less bounden by laws, then every
poorest slave.

And first learn they, they ought injury none. Next (whereto they are most
bounden) not only them selves be not injurious, but also repress they like
rauenours and extorcioners Worthy honor he is who harmeth none. But who
neither suffers others, earneth doubled praise. Recor^ of that divine Plato
in his books of laws. For many think power parted from injury, bare and
contemptuous, and falsely persuade them selves, they are laweles and lordeles.

Imagining the laws Cobwebbes, That meashe a flea, or fly, which crows or
mighty beasts soon break Some think, a well moneyed man, master of all
laws. As erst said Cicero of Verres. Nor ought so holy or reverend, that money
may not pearce.

There be Judges that gape for bribes and are corrupted with gifts. There are
lawyers, Noble men's counsaylours, who sell their patronage, hyre out their
tongue and travail.

Gaynst those, let this our Noble man watch and ward. And hear Esaye rightly
counsayling. To aid the oppressed, to render the orphane right, to plead the
widows cause. For herein ought they not credit their assystantes, their
soltcitours, their lawyers: who, since they purchase their reames and offices,
must consequentlye sell them. Which well saw and foresawe that worthy
Alexander Seuerus. Who commanded Vetranius Thurinus, for taking bribes of
suitors, chayned to a stake, with grene wood syered about him, to be smothered.
That smoakes he might be paid, who smoakes sold. Sit therefore the Nobles
them selves in counsel: hear causes, and honor judgments with their
presence, as erst those mightiest Monarchs, and Emperors of the world,
Mithridates, Philippe, and Alexander the great. For, Noble men are princes
lieuetenants, and wardens and ministers of the laws. For, whereto are good
laws decreed, if none be, by whose travail, they enacted may be kept? Both
again and again, hit delights me to honor the former age, wherein Noble
men were lawyers. when, the Roman gentlemen, blushed not, to profess this
knowledge. when Antonians, Crasses, Sulpitias, Sceuolas, Cicerons, were no
less skilful in the lawiers aunswers, then the decrees of the.xii. tables. Yea
this profession, was peculier to gentlemen. Which would hit were renewed, that
them selves might order judgments, the art hit self have more authority,
and these pedlers less luker. For, a right and Noble Prince, and garden of
the laws, is a beneficial and earthly god to commonweals.

In whom are many sores, which he easelye either with word, or beck, might
remedy Be this therefore the first part of justice: him self to wrong no man.
The next in just cause to defend others, and withstand iniurye. Nor only is
it requisite, he be right of deed, but of word also. Which virtue is termed
faithfulness, and truth. To stand to his promise, to perform and dyscharge his
credit. For a Noble man ought accomplish, yea what so he noddeth to. Who
hates not a lyenge Lord? Deep in his mind therefore must be imprint this
saying of Solomon. Six things god hates, and the seventh utterly abhors.

Proud looks, a lyeng tongue, blondye hands, a mind ymagining mischief,
swift feet to evil, a false witness, a vain man, and sower of strife twixt
brethren. A golden sentence, and worthy to be graven in the hearts of all
noble suits, even from their tender years. But I must measure my measurelesse
talk.

The neighbor virtue to this is equitye. Not to rack al things by extreme
right, to yield somewhat, and think nothing more beloved, then mercy or
curtesye. Mercy consists in pardoning, winkinge at faults, and forgiveness,
seeld punishinge, and that unwilling, accusinge not often, nor but compeld of
necessitye. Curtesye requires easy speech, civil company, friendly,
pleasant, and courteous talk. For whereto show Nobles the^ selves so seeld? Why
are they so statelye, and hawtye in talk, to their brethren their semblables?
Nothing more high or loftye then the sun. Yet vayleth he his golden rays
down to the base earth. Communicates his influe^ce with herbs, plants,
seeds: shines, lights, and heateth, as well the unjust as just, the poor
as rich, yea the brute beasts. Again, the higher and loftyer he is, the
slower and slacker mocio^ he has Even so, ought Noble men, the higher they are
raised, the humbler and quieter to be: the more to use lenitye and curtesy to
al men, and bridle their stomakes, and bury their unbroken rage.

The contraries therefore, statelines, importunitye, crueltye, and anger, much
more must they fly. Which, when they light on any armed with authority,
Nobility, and power, more trouble and stir each state. For inflamed with
these nourishementes, and oil (as it were) they have more force to hurt. Of
anger well counsayled Aristotle, they ought be angrye.

But how, when, and with whom, they ought. Of other vices, other blames might
I heap. But more may they of this little conceive. For every philosophers
books, are laden with like precepts. From whom, the divinity and
contemplacion of these virtues must be borrowed: Albe the practice required, of
the Nobles them selves. For the praise of virtue, consists in practice, and
is accomplished not so much in knowing, as doing.

But of those virtues, that are referred to others be here an end. It rests,
henceforthe we speak of the residue.

THE THIRD BOOK of Nobilitye.
HItherto have we determined hit, that is guided by virtue, and accompanied
with fortune, to be the truest and perfectst Nobilitye. For, both it behooves
and beseems all men, to live virtuously: and most requisite is it a Noble man
pass in rare, singular, and perfect virtue. And join to his bryghtnes of
birth, the arms of honor and virtue.

For, shame it were, who surpasses herein, should be barren of better gifts
Who^ rather it behooved, with white steedes (as they say) many miles to
forerunne the rest. Much must he paynefully learn, firmly remember stoutely
practyse, and wisely speak. Which all ought in him excel, where in the common
sort it suffiseth, al be they mean. For, both he has all the helps of
practice, which others want, and the more God has credited him, the
strayghter and more severe account shall he render, of his words and deeds.
Wherefore dyscretely, truly, and maruaylously, said one of the fathers of the
primitive Church: that hardlye might Prince or priest be saved. Which
extends to all the burdened, with any hard laborious charge, linked with
the safety, care, and preservation of many. For who wonteth to foresee, to
beware, to watch, and wake for others ought also abye others trespasses. So
payneful and perilous charge is hit, to be a Noble man: if by his example, the
subject be either offended, or perish. For he synneth not sole, but the
contagion of his disease infecteth others. And with his fault, he makes others
faulty, and with his fall and ruin, debruseth thousands. Nor can alone fall,
but his adherents, and such as depend of him, will accompanye him. For of much
force are they, to the marring or making of cities manners, either deprauinge
the Citizins with their lusts, and vices: or reforminge them, by the
presidentes of their virtue, and continence.

For it appears in historyes, that as the cities chiefes, such ever was the
whole city, and whatsoever change of fashions the prince began, the same the
people followed. Which is far truer, then the conceyte of our Plato. Who
thought by the change of musicians songs, the states of cities were altered.
For truly the Nobles life and living changed, who sees not the cities manners
change? Wherefore, so much the more hatefullye vicious princes deserve of the
commonwealth for not only them selves embrace vice, but spread the same
into the whole state. Nor hurt only for they are infected, but also for they
infecte. And more harm with their example then sin. For he it lawful this
once for me to use Cicero, words, in his book of laws, to purchase my talk
more authority. Of necessitye therefore, ought noble men be good. Both, for
them selves and others: that they may train many in their virtues, not vices.
Of which sort of Nobles, the less plenty there has been hither to, the
earnestlier, ought al men, with their whole might and power endeavor: that
these of our days increase the number, and even drown their ancestors, so
to become more famous, and acceptable to all men. Even in his days writes
Aristotle, in his polytikes, that a right Noble man, was a rare sight.
Nobility (quod he) and virtue, are found in few, but riches in many. For
scarce any where a hundred Nobles, or good me^: but infinite swarms of rich,
each where may you find. Thus writes he. Why so? The false opinion of
felicity mocketh them, for they wene them selves happy enoughe, for their
descent from Nobles. And restinge on this vain confidence, reach no farther.
But truly says Plato, love breadth of need. For the needy seek. Who seek
find. But such as ween they abound, and think they have raught the chiefest
bliss, slay as at ye gole, nor mind to run further in that race. For who
seeks the Phisician, but first he feeie disease? Christ calls the
labouringe, and laden. Them promises he rest and disburdening. For the charged
with no burden, need none to unlade them. Therefore (for I return to my
purpose) the fewer Nobles we have, the more constantly and earnestly must they
travail, to attain this christian, geason, and unwonted perfection, and
excellence. And with all speed, clear and scour out the stain that so long
has fretted their Noble names. In whom all men, as I said, seek and miss the
perfect duties, and orders of the excellentst. So, shall they both accomplish
their duty, and escape just blemishe of infamye, and further with their
example, and aspire to the glory of true Nobilitye.

But fyth at first, we comprysed the whole nature of Nobility, in three
branches: forasmuch as, of duty toward God, and love and behavior toward
others, we have already spoken: the third, and last^ Act^ must we now furnishe.

The third and last therefore, is the consideracion and ordering of him self.
Duties of the Nobles toward the^ selves.
For to him self is he much indetted, to adourne either part with certain
private virtues. least vtwarde exceeding and surpassing in bravery, at home and
inwardes he be naked and beggarly. For what we have tofore mentioned, is
public, and has relacion to others. For holiness and religion are referred to
God. Nor may a man be stout, but in common peril, and the affairs of his
country: nor liberal, but to others, nor just but in civil government. But
the better to skyll and learn to practice these, let him at his own home, as
in a free school shape and form him self: before thence he be thruste
abroad as into an open stage before he determine with others in the church
divine ordinances religiously, and civil duties toward all and every men.
Herein must he learn to know him self, which is hardest: solitary to
reverence him self, which is seemeliest, to rule him self which is
mightiest: to conclude, to co^quer him self, which is most victorious. For,
who inquireth of others life and manners ignorant of his own, and is outwardes
eyed, but homewards blind, and wanteyed: is plainly a fool. who blusheth not
within him self, is shameless.

Who mastreth others, not him self, a slave. who risinge others superior,
becomes his own inferior, is a cowarde and impotente caytife. Let us
therefore somewhat say, of certain the chief and principal pryuate practices,
which him self under his own rooffe ought exercise, that properlye honor him
in his own home. Temperance.


The first pryuate virtue, and least sightly, but not least seemly, to be
coueited and honored of a Noble man: is Temperance. which, Aristotle restrayneth
to the pleasures of the paunche, and belie. Cicero stretches farther, whom we
at this present gladlier follow. So notwithstanding, as we extend our
arbitrament, and judgment chiefly to those things, which properly and most
commenly, are applyable to our purpose, and the duties of a Noble man. Since
manifold therefore, is the consideracion and respect of Temperance: we will
refer it to three parts. Wherein, all her power is closed. That a Noble man
think modestlye of him self, live temperatlye, and continently, behave him
self moderately, and soberly in all things.

For so her whole nature, though not most suttellye boulted, yet may he
plainliest understood. For truly it happeth, that as worms soonest breed in
most precious wood, so these three vices, Pride, Pleasure, Riot, or excess: (I
wot not how) in manner naturallye cleave and creep into Nobles. Pride therefore,
shall modestye master. Pleasure shall continence tame. Excess shall modera^ce
and sobriety banyshe. Be therefore, our noble man's mind guarded with such
modestye, that he prise not overmuch him self, as flesh and blood: little
account his stock, arms, name, titles, his parents glory, his own fame,
honor, wealth, and all the rest, that seem to other noblest, and most gorgeous:
compare with none, advance not him self before other, no not his younger
brethren: not boast his liuinges, not ruffianly crake his scarres, not presume
to the highest rooms, nor ought challenge otherwise then comelines and honesty
will bear. So be his mind formed at home, so his thoughts disposed, that he
account him self naught better for the access of any foreign hap.

But so far forth, as he proves him self a man, by virtue. Whence (Vir) the
name of man is borrowed. This virtue the deuines term humility.

Which Dauyd used, when he terms him self no man, but a wormelynge and the
scoff and scorn of the people. and Mary likewise blusheth not to name her
self the handmayd, and ser nau^t of the lord. For most truly says Peter that
God withsta^deth the proud and is gracious to the humble and meek. It is
surely the mother, ground and scale to al other virtues. Begin Noble men
therefore, to know them selves. So shall they not be famous for Vice, but Noble
through Virtue.

Learn they perfectlye, whence, and what they be. But this be known and
learned neither know they them selves, nor judge sincerelye of the selves. But
either the cloud of ignorance clipseth their judgment, or the mist of pride,
dimmeth their sight, se as neither they may for ignorance, nor will for pride,
behold the lively shape and form of Nobilitye. Therefore whence they be,
albeit clearly enough perhaps, without these my spectacle^ they see: yet
briefly will I show, that they may the easier mind from how base beginning,
they have climed to this high clieue of Nobilitye.

For they are as the rest, men. That is Earth, Dirt, Dust, and Hay, as all
flesh. Record of the Prophet.

Td be short, to the orderlye knoweledge of their miserye, propose they these
three parts. Their birth, their life, their death. The self same birth the
like life, even and equal death.

For, as to our birth, we are in far worse plite then was Adam our ancient
progenitour. Of the earth was he created, then blessed. Of the same take we
our beginning, but accursed and detestable.

He framed in paradyse, we without, wretched, mortal, miserable, beset with
millyons of miseryes, treasons, chances, foes, both civil and foren. would
god, at lafte, amids their dainty feasts, and pleasures, the Nobles would
recounte this father, this mother, namely the earth. And ever have these
ancestors to fore their eyes, that so they moughte no longer vaunt them
selves, other poorers superiors or betters, whom so much they despise. But
even confess them selves, their german brethren. Desrended of the self
parents, equal in baseness, misery, and obscurity of birthe. For so preach
the holy scriptures. So thonder they to us, yea often and earnestly. But hardly
will a proud man, and to well persuaded of him self, pufte up with the Nobility
of his aun cestours, acknowledge this earth, which with his feet he
trampeth, his mother. But so is hit written, so taught, that herein a rich and
poor man join, that the lord, is creator of both. what cause of pride, then
have they above the rest? why recount they not often, with Philippe the King of
the Macedons, that they are borne as other? and are men, and no more. For he,
after many lucklye achieved enterprises, in his wars against the A thenians,
his enemies vanquyshed, and put to flighte, him self remaining glorious
co^querour: feling in him self, after this victoryous success, some ma^nishe
ticklinge and pricks incident to man's nature, that also he become statelier
then of wont: commanded one his servant, every morninge at his vprisinge, to
cry to him. Remember thou art a man. Would our Nobles in like manner, charge
herewith some one of their seruaunces, whom to to many, to other use they
keep: Who still should sing this song in their deaffe. ears and revive to their
dulled memory, their frail mortality, weakness, mutabilitee, beggary,
swathing cloutes, and first cradels: of what mortalles, them selves mortalles,
were borne: How suckling babes they were fed with pappe, and nursed with the
self food, and the self forte, as other wretched rascalles: and hereby,
enforce them to acknowledge them selves men: It would I think much abate their
statelines and pride, but the glory and immortalitye of their name nothing.
For, would sometime their minds and thoughts stoop hereto, would they
diligently ponder, consider, and weigh it: both more modestly and humblye would
they judge of them selves. For come we not all alike, into this light? Weak,
feeble, of tenderest flesh, skin, and body? Unable to speak, go, or eat,
only beggynge, wralling, and hanging on our mothers or nurses teates? Are not
in like forte, both the rich and poor, the Noble and rascal, bred, nursed,
and fostered? Begin we not all, our life, with wrallyng, and cries? Wiseliest
therefore, often wondreth the princely prophet Dauyd, at the mighty hand work
of God. And recounteth his maruailous creacio^ in his mothers womb. How
wonderously his bodies substance was compacted in secret, and him self
proporcioned in parted limbs, formed day by day, and registered (as it were)
in Gods book. How erst he lay in his mothers womb, an unformed shape, and
lifelesse fleshely mass.

Which freely be protefteth, and gladlye professes he was borne, framed, and
fashioned as other meanest men. So, though anointed king, he blusheth not his
mothers womb, whence first he parted, nor his first wrallyng Cradles, or
swathing bands.

What preeminence therefore, herein has Nobilitye? Sith of men, men, of
mortalles, mortal, of wretches, wretched, and feeble they descend?

Worthily said Euripides a Poet in deed, but herein true.

Naught proper have we. All alyke begone.
Though some byrths be more fortunate then some.
So is none priuileged, but semblable, the birth of the noble and base.

To conclude, to leave their natiuityes, and base birth, if nearelye you view
their life, and death, you shall find them dealte withalll, I say not worse
then other, but truly no whit more parcially. I pass by their infancy,
which where others commenlye spend with their mothers, these against all
nature, suck strange Nur ses, not their mothers breasts. I pass over also
their childehoode, often to dain tie, nice, and wanton, while others apply
either free crafts, learning or labor. Narowlye pry into the whole course
of their life, and compare their plenty with the others ponerry, their riot
with thothers thrift, their daynties with thothers sparenes, their Idelnes with
thothers travail, yet neither have they more, nor honger ofter, nor eat
gredelyer, nor live dayntier, nor sleep swetelier, nor fare helthier, but
sicken ofter, and so die sooner. Such is their beginning, such their mean
race of life, such their death. For are not their deaths alike? See we not them
daily die? Yea as I said, often preventing others? and some time more
perillouslye? some spente with war, other with surfeit and effeminate
pleasure, other suddenly rest by the swords edge, the princes dyspleasure, or
infinite other means and causes? By all which, their weak and frail Noblesse,
and brickle mortal state, as well approved. To which thought, by this
rehearsal hereto I hale them, that mindful of their base beginning,
consideringe their unassured life, awaitinge with others death ever pressed: they
may join humilytie, and modesty, as the blasingest lamps, to the reft of their
virtues. wherewith as pleasant sawse, their whole life may be sweetened.
where without, all dignity stincketh, Nobility is contemptuous, yea their
virtues are este med vicer. Justice liberality, magnanimity, fortitude, yea
religion it self, wax beggarly, hateful and infamous not for their ill
nature, but for they dwell ill, and harbor in a proud and arrogant person.
Pride is it, to vaunt Princely robes, not princely virtues. Pride is it, to
lowte men of lower sort or pore lasers, as is some men's guise. Pride is it, to
term civil subjects, and honest citesens, knaves, thieves, villens, as wont
the french Nobility. of which word notwithstanding, the Etymologye and reason
them selves know not. For villens be all, even gentlemen, such as though free
borne, lasted not from yt nations of spring, but were since received amongs
them. So termed, of the word (Villa) for the^ selves or their ancestors,
delighted in ferme places, or applied husbandrye, and tillage. As Budee
witnesses. But villens term they them in great despite, and reproach as
vile. Of which sort many scorn^ful, big, and wyndy words they use, chiefly
against hulband men, and their poor neighbors, whom rather they ought
embrace, cherishe, and greet, as friends, neighbors, and brethren. But this
is their prides blame. It is also a touch of pride, not to listen their lofty
cares to admonishemente, reprooffes, or threats pronounced out of Gods
word, and the mouths of his mynisters, rghtly displayeng them their sins,
to provoke repentance.

They disdain to hear their courtise lust, ambicion, stirred. Yea, therefore
have I often known, good ministers guerdoned with tauntes, scoffs, checkes,
and boysteous threats, yea imprisoned some. Pride also it is, to contemn
Culesiasticall discipline, in all connsayles to withstand it, and with all
their might, to endeavor to hinder it. What? are Nobles grown to such
insolence, that they gnawe Gods byt to be unbridled? That lawelesse they
sinning and faulty, would by no censure, no law be chastued? For I am not
ignoraunte, what threats, what terrors they thunder, what mistes they stir,
what fears they raise, if any dare once open his mouth to excommunicate a
Noble man.

But why plain I herein the pride and statelines of this order? Since them
selves that excommunicate, that write them selves servants of servant, and
successors of humble Peter, yea vicars of humblest Christ: they they I say,
in this abuse, seem seem not only comparable, hut even far to excede them?
These are agreued to be touched by name. If out of scripture ought be
objected them, they rage, rave, burn, and curse as black as pitche, even flea
and tear men. But of such excommunicatours, meant I not tofore. Other
Christian ministers mean I, who to this intent proclayme their adulteryes,
whordomes, dissolutenes, mischieues and sacrileges: For they should repent and
not return as dogs, to their former vomit and elder pride. Nothing more
glorious then an humble noble man, nothing more intolerable then a proud
Lord, nothing in a gentleman more commendable, then modesty. Wherefore here
in first shine their tempera^ce, to bear not lofty but lowly mind not seem
in their own conceit wise, show no sign of arroga^ce, in words, life, or
apparayle, either by iesture or countenance. The mate and sign of modestye, is
shamefastnes, and basheful blushing. The hew of virtue, wherewith hit is
commendable, to see young gentleme^s cheeks stained.

The second mayme of mind, Co^tine^ce
that ought be rased, is also a certain intemperance to cure whereof,
inserueth continence. For so translate I word for word. Aristotle's (...). Hit
he reposeth only, and properly, in delights of sensual feelinge, and thinks
by abuse, extended to honor money, and other like. The proper praise whereof,
is to abstain Venereall sweetes, to bridle fleshly lusts, to contemn and
reject voluptuous pleasures, not led by them, them to lead, chain, and drive.
For that sort of pleasure, dasleth the minds sharp sight, dimmeth the
wits light, in fecteth wisdom with follye, weakeneth the strong,
peruerteth the godly, transformeth the Noble to swyne, to Sheep, whirleth the
whole man now here, now there besides him self. She as sole Empress of the
world, bewitcheth emperors with her bawdie potion. She only conquereth
capitaynes, commands Kings, and triumphs on Emperors. For infected not
Flora Pompey, a prince otherwise not altogether vicyous? Conquered not
Cleopatra Caesar, so valiant conqueror? Married not Antonius the self same
minyon, though a commen harlot? Spoiled not the Campane Queanes Haniball, the
Greeks Philyp? Phrine that famous strumpet, bewitched Timothee: Lamia
Demetrius: and other Nobles, other strompets led and byledd, as captives, at
their will and beck. whicke slanderous stayne of so Noble personages,
historyes whist not yet at this day. Which every wise, chaste, impartial
reader, and such as abhors not virtue, detesteth yea in those, to whom
only nature, has lyghted some spark of knowledge. But otherwise far, will
all posterytie judge of Christians when they shall pervse their bankettes',
ryotts, lusts, adulteryes.

Christ wylled us, to be gods holy temple. Why then profane we our selves,
with unclean, and filthye harlotry? Why fear we not, with horrible
mischieues, to stayne the harborough of the holy ghost? The darkness, night and
corners, bewraye much. But (O shame) why search I corners, since the Son,
mydday, and al men's open sight dyscouer most clearlye as at noone days, and
the high market Cross, so abhomynable factes? But herein Nobilytie, vaunt them
selves in manner, priuyleged. If so, the more they may, the less list they.
For who more may then meet is, has wicked license. But may any, offend with
lecherous life, the immortal and chastest God, and the eyes of his purest
servant? follow stolen venerye, and facts not in deed only, but even in
talk stinkinge? Nicocles in Isocrates, though a King, though a Paynim,
teperately passed his unstained life. And bosteth he never knew other, then
his own wife. teaching his subjects, by his presydent, to live a like.

But what in these days, is done by those, who fill the highest honors, and
empyres, so god save me, my talk blusheth to tell. And I forbear to lance
godly ears, with the filthiness of the talk, such deeds require.

But thappeachers thereof, are the Sun and Moon, the heaven and earth. Nor
lies ought covered, to the great offense of the weak, the Iewe^, and Turks,
seeing such crimes commen emonges those, that bear the name of Christ, and
profess his gospel. And with such especially, as seem, and are accounted
Christianest. Who should be to others, both their countrymen, and forreyners,
presidents of perfect^t continence. This license ought be restrained even in
the highest. Dionisius king of Sic^le, understanding his son had forced the
wife of one his subject: in great rage asked him, if ever he learned that
touch of his father^? To whom the prince replied. Your father sir, was not a
king. So princely seemd it to this gentleman to haunt whoredom. But hereto,
what reioyned the father? Nor shall thou truly, if ever thou double this deed,
have son. Threatening him death, if ever he incurred like crime. If a wicked
tyranne, wonlde not suffer so heinous crime unpunished in his son, What? shall
we think it lawefull for Noble men, quite, I say not to rauishe others: but
divorce their own wives, commendable for good name, beautye, and dowry? to be
double, yea treble married at once? To wed their brothers wives? To abuse their
true wives as harlotts, and use harlottes as wives? But since in my first entry,
I promised to use gentleness in chiding, chastity in talk: albeit the borrour
of the fact, require vengeance, not only with nippinge words, but severe
rigor: Yet will I stay my self, nor chafe in talk, since here I mean to
give enstructions, not amplify abuses. But this ca^ I not dissemble.
Whoremongers and adulterers god will judge. And that otherwhere hereto Paul
joins. No adulterer shall enter the kingdom of (...)which sounded war, he
much honored. Which well may we extend to all iestes, tryfles, wanton and light
toys. But by these few, had I rather the rest were conceived, then with much
talk to breed lothsomnes, or offense to the reader.

Against excess and overmuch magnificence.
Now remains it we speak of the third part, wherein consists the mean
of all things, and comelines it self, and as it were a certain honor of
life, and temperate refrayning riot, and superfluous magnificence. What we have
taught, is of things fastened and grafted in him self. What follows,
touches those that are in deed without him, but yet belong only to him,
his pryuate house, and household. In conclusion, five points ought here be
touched. A noble and honorable man's. Table, apparayle, buildinges, plays,
train. Wherein I will briefelye note the simplicitye of the auncientes, the
riot and excess of our Nobles. That by the one may appear, what is
commendable: by the other what discommendable and needs refourmyng.

Of his Table, and provision, A Noble man's Table.
as lawgeuer I decree no thing. Nor will I prescribe him, any diete of meats
and drinks. Which according to his bealth, his acquaintance with his body, and
his own wit and wisdom, he ought limite him self. For, well I wot, this
estate, for the most, breeds sober, ciusle, and most temperate personages.
And many Nobles shall you find, small caters, less drynkers:

Far greater gluttons, and quaffers emonges the commen sort. But in the most
miss I domestical discipline and blame their excess. Wherein, fault may
grow two ways. Either in quantity: or qualitye. Quantity mean I, when in
sumpiuousnes, and magnificence they exceed mean. For, it happeth many times,
they feed not so much their bellyes, as eyes. And albeit them selves
modestlye use it, yet so great furniture is there, such store of dainties, as
would not only suffice the ghestes, but even cloye any Hercules, herdes of
wolves, for our need, but pleasure. But what so is superfluous is loathsome,
and unsavory, and loses all the sweet, in enioyeng. For neither take they
meat to stay their harkinge stomachs, or to appease their hongers rage, nor
feel they therein any pleasure.

The emperor Pertinax had nine pound of flesh scrued in at. 3. several
courses But now, what show of dishes, what store of services? Nor now. 9.
but a hundred pounds, and more, are served to a small number, I say not in
kings or emperors courts: but every lords house. In times past, as Plinye
witnesses, they kept in their housen no cooks, but hired them from the
shambles. Now. 5.6.7.10. suffice not to bye, furnishe, scald, sees rosle,
bake, stewe, mynse, and sawse, so infinite sorts of dyshes. Nor yet contenteth
it some daintye mouths, but they have foreign and strange cates. We read, that
Romulus was a very sober and spare prince. And before, I mentioned, Epaminundas
would be sober in others dronkennes. For, how infamous is it, any where to
find a Noble man a bibber? But dronken, or dronkerd most villaynous. Wherefore
the quaffing of the dutche Nobilitye, is presently haled through al realms And
for there are found some sturdye cospottes, their blame turns to the infamy
of the whole nation. As some also term Englishmen, gluttons, not for they
raven fo much, for they are for the most, as spare feeders as any: But, for
they prepare so much, and with such plenty and variety of meats, and
sumptuons furniture, charge not the^ selves, but their tables, with superfluous
dishes. And to speak indifferently, no where else ever saw I or heard, tables
spread with such excess, all parts so farsed with lauishenes, as some Nobles
may worthelye compare, even with any Lucullus. For that most unworthy is, the
very scrappes, which might suffice many families, and feed huge heaps of
beggars, are lothed not only of their servants, but even of the boys, and
scullerye. And that most villainous is, not only whole beef and mutton, but
even capons and connyes, left by servants, are cast to hounds and
spanielles. The mean while, many Lazares lieng at yt doors, vnrelieued, yea
with a cromme of bread. Which albeit I presuppose, happeth often the masters
unwitting, through the neg linence of their servants: yet thus warnet, but
timelye they abate somewhat of this their immoderate excess they will abye it
most dearly.

Both, for they suffer the good gifts of god be spilt, and also, for through
their defaulte, so many needye members of Christ peryshe with famine, which
might be relieved with a bare boane. Neither warn I only our English
nacyon, but all others, who more pryse their hounds, then the poor, for whom
Christ dyed. Not only shall they be called dogs as that Cananite, but also
in the kyngedome of heaven, the poor be preferred them.

Ancient Nobilitye, I much reverence whose Tables were spredde in deed, not
laden with diuecs dyshes, but always open to their neyghhoures, the needye, to
all strangers and comers. Which at this day, also is continued of some, but
only in Christemas times, and other solemn feasts. Hawebeit of some
commenly, and gladly would I, both sparer and seelder. But not only in
varietye, and quantity, but in quality also they trespass. As in times paste,
many Apitii. Who were to nice with ouerconning and queynt mouths.

Cicero twiteth Hircius, for he could not suppe without a peacocke.

Who was (as him self reports) his scoler in learning, but his master in
feastynge. For of Heliogabalus what should I say? Who appointed pryses for the
inuentours of strange dishes. Who exceded all the Vitellians and Luculles. Who
lived with preservatives of the Fowls tounges, which we call Phenicopters,
and the brains of Geese and Peacockes.

Whose fishepondes had springes of rosewater. O daynty monster, worthy to die
in a draught, as after happed. But we must imitate, and express the thrifte of
the auncientes, I say not philosophers, as Taurus, Socrates, Plato, Diogenes:
But princelye personages, Emperors, and good laws. Before the third Punike
war, by C. Fannius it was enacted, that none should eat more birds then one
hen. Which ill they observe, who have every where factours for their bellye,
their carpenters of Coquerie, and deuisours of pleasures and daintyes. who
feed on sparowes, peacockes, flesh, fish, and all so, tes of vyands And bye
up the farthest, rarest, and costlyest, neclecting their home cates, at their
noses, or of easy price. As who lyenge far of the sea, would cate but
fyshe: and nearer to it, the dayntyest flesh. To nice and fine be these
cormorants, not unlike those ladies, who^ they say things far fet, and dear
bought best feet. Or women, I have heard of, who scorned to bye eggs at ten
or twelve the penny, but gladly give as much for one. As though, the
quantitye of price, commended the goodness of ye vittayle. In ancient times,
rarest was the use of wine. For many years was it forbidden women in Rome. So
that long before any law therefore decreed, one Egnatius Metentinus, for
kyllyng with a batte, his wife drinking wine from the hogseheade: was quyt and
cleared by the judgment of Romulus. And their Nobles as I said, drunk but
their country wine. But by the Consuls, the foreign and strange wines, were by
little and little brought in. So as at length, four sorts were chyefelye commen,
and received, in the time of Julius Caesar. Of Phalerne, of Chius, of Cyprus,
and Lesbos. Lucullus only once, saw Greek wine in his fathers house. But him
self retourning from Asia, distributed more than a hundred thousand tonnes, to
make his largicion magnificent.

So stealyngly creapt in dronkennes. at length, of such impudence, that M.
Antonius, wrote a book of his own dronkennes. Whose dronken praise to drown,
M: Giceros son, was wont at once to drink.ii. gallons. Which now is no
strange strife. Otherwise read we of Cato, who seeld dronk wine. And being in
Spain, used no other then his mariners. Of Noble men therefore require I
moderate use of meals and drinks. Nor only moderate use, but more spare
furniture. That all excess be abolyshed, measure kept, and respect had of
their dignity. Follow they the honorable exaumple of Antoninus Pius, not
nygard but Noble, not filthye but fruitful, that their plentye want reproof,
their sparyng, nygardise.

And their Table be stored, not so much, with far set or sought dayntyes: as
the provision of their own servants, fawconers, fishers, hunters. And thus
much of the measure, quantitye, and qualitye. But sith their meats are powdered
with many sawses, to provoke appetyte: purchase they chiefly these 3 past all
spicerye. Honger exercise talk meet for a free and civil feast. That honger
is the sweetest sauce, Socrates taught. Who wonted with exercise to hunte for
it before meals. Travail, runnynge, sweat, were the Lacedaemonians sawces, as
withnesseth Cicero. Whom well pleased and liked, that black broth, that so
much misliked Dionisius Then therefore must they eat, when they hunger, then
drink when they thirst. The mighty prince Darius, cloyed tofore with rables
of Cooks, Hurtors, Cators, masters and doctors of Kitchenrie, and greasers of
the throat: drinkyng in his flight, muddye puddle water, though stynkynge with
dead coarses, denied he ever drank sweeter draughte. For than drank he
thirsty, which never tofore. But wise and godly talk, and reasoninge of
matters pertinente either to godly life, or concerning the common wealth (so
within their bounds and in due time) sometime also pleasant and merye, so not
trifelinge or filthy: profit not only to provoke stomach, but also to
feed the mind. Which wants neither reason, nor presidents of Princes. For,
Adrian the emperor, whose modestye, stood in steed of law to his Subjects,
exhibited in his diners, Tragedies, Comedies, Poesyes, and Doulcimers. Nor is
the use of Music amiss at this day, so Herodiades wanton daunsyng and bawdye
ballets want. For the custom is ancient, as appears by Homere. Fayning one
Demodocus synginge the Troyan war in Ulysses presence. Nor ought time of
laughter be denied pleasant wits, so they pass not their bounds, and no
talk or banquet exclude Christ, ever present both a ghest and feaster.
Doubteles they may unbend their brows, and revive their spirits with merry
talk: yet wholesome and profitable. As Cicero a sage counsaylour, reports
him self a ghest not of much meat, but much mirth. Macrobius writes in the
feast days called Saturnalia, the princes of the Romayne Nobilitye assembled,
spent most part of the day, with weighty consultacio^s: but the supperwhile
wasted with table talk. For, I mean not so to plie the Nobles with study, as
that Chrisippus: into whose mouth, incessauntly reasoning of Philosophical
suttiltyes, Melissa poared meat. Nor require I all men, to be Plinyes, who
studied, red, and noted even supperwhile, and runninge, as Plinye reports of
his uncle. But, that wise, christian, and learned talk flow from Nobles in
their feasts.

What ghestes they ought bydde, we have already showed, entreatynge of
liberality, not parasites, or fools, not iessers, not bawdy minstrels, not me^
made to please the ears or tickle the mind. nor simple souls for laughters
sake, (as reports Demosthenes of Philippe, and Cicero of Chrisogonus) Nor the
nedeles rich, ne yet the poor rather to laughe at, then pitye, as some do.
Which is also accounted emongs Heliogabalus worthy feats. Namelye, to bid
emonges other his ghestes. 8. bald, 8 purblind, 8. gowtie, 8. deaffe, 8.
murrions, 8. slimsbies, 8. fat and foreaten slouens, to feed with extreme
laughter his wretched lust. Christ wills to call the poor, either living
thinly, or hardly toyli^g with travail, and enforced to live on others
trencher, and supplye their wantes otherwhere. These are Christian suppers,
most honorable seastes and worthy Nobles.

But of apparayle, this must we principallye hold. Of appacell.
That it is a matter indifferente, nor greatly materyall what any wear. For,
neither lends the garment Nobilitye, nor harmeth or dishonors the person.
Nevertheless, sith we are al naturally proner to evil then good, when to our
nature of it self corrupt, occasion cleaves as a prycke or provoke meant:
brave garments, may in one not altogether persecte, nor whollye Christ's, be
instruments of pride.

Instruments I term them, for eue^ in base apparayle, the mind may be no
less hawtye, then in gorgeous Nor less pride lurketh in the brattes of a
Beggar, than the purple Roobes of a Noble. Yet somewhat herein ought as well
Noble men as women observe. First that all superflutiye be shonned, and
immoderate desire of brauerye. Which also (as the rest,) I will teach by
example of antiquiquitie. For the laws of the Censors, and expenses, forbadd
excess no less herein, then in banketting. The emperors therefore, partly
thinking hit a po^nt of a base and abtect stomach, to vaunte gorgeous
garments, and partlye for others example, dyfferd in apparayle, not much from
meaner men. But far beneth their honor and dignity, apparayled them selves.
For, Agesilaus used ever this saying. It was a Princes part, not in wantonness
and nicenes, but the ornaments of virtues, to exceed the commens. And
therefore in the four chaunges of the year, used one only coat. In his
tents had no costlyer couche, then any commen souldyor.

And the sharp winter walked always coatlesse, covered only with his cloak.

That by his example, both aged and king, he might induce young men to like
hardness of life. Volaterranus mencioneth that Jews the. 11. of France,
Alphonsus of Sicyle, and Mathye kings of Hungarye: for the baseness of their
apparayle, were hardely discerned from the commen sort. Such are, and have
been, many in England. Who ware the self livery they gave. Nor differd from
their men, so much in vt ward as inward ornaments. But now, but on all parts
they glyster, with long and massy chain, with flauntynge plume, with costlye
and rare array: scarce think they them selves accounted gentlemen. And as
whylome Heliogabalus never doubled the wear of one garmente: so these exceed
in change, and hit most sumptuous. So as almost day by day, they wear
several, and those suitable. Showing the^ selves one day crimsen, other white,
the next black from the crown to the sole. Just cause is there or fear,
least coveting to seem to trim in a matter of naught, at last they become to
beggerlye and bare. Scarce clothed with one course garmente. But besette with
years and brattes.

But as to women, there is a manifest decree in the scriptures, enacted by Peter
and Paul Apostels, that they exceed not in sumptuousnes, that with modest
habit, shamefastnes, and huswifery, they attire them selves. Not with spanges,
gold, pearls, or gorgeous ara ye. But as beseems women professing godliness,
in good deeds. Hierome also mencioneth, an honorable lady, at the
commanndemet of her husband Hymet^us, uncle by the father, to Eustachius the
virgin: changed her habit, and attire And tressed up her scattered hear,
after the worldly guise. For truly christians and christian women, beseems a
clean and comely habit, not unworthy Christ their head. But whereto tends
effeminate and nice array, but to bewray an vnmanlye mind? Wherefore Socrates
going ever for the most unshod: said these players weeds were feet for
Tragedy and Comedy actors, but nothing auaylable to honest life. Next, must
they observe, that to the vtward glistering, the comelines of mind, and inward
beauty, and brauerye of manners be aunswerable* least, when the attire
beseems, the fylthe of mind shame. Therefore, when they do on their costly
robes, with that self labor remember they, they are the tokens and signs of
virtue. That likewise ought the inward ornaments shine, and (as it were) the
glistering of virtue appear. Not ill warned Diogenes one curiouslye sleekynge
his hear with oyntmente, that the neat order of his head, caused not the
disorder of his life. Beware also they must, least shininge vtwardes,
perfuming the air with sweetest odoures, and altogether dayntye and neat:
inwardes they be found unclean and stinkyng. Nor think they them selves
happyer, for their rich and costlyrobes: but acknowledge their coats the
couers of many cares. As the king Antigonus hearing an old Vecke pronounce him
happy: discretelye and wisely replied. Wist thou, o woman, how many euels
these roabes shroud, scarce would thou stoop to take them from the mire.
For, not only are good Nobles more careful and combred then others: but
also, more open and proane to peril. Which consideracion brings modesty, and
self contempt. Hereto also calls them, the baseness of the things, that
swell them. For gold, silver, velvet, naught else renoumeth, then man's fond
estimacion. The first, being only fruits of the earth, the basest elemente:
the last, the seed of a simple worm, of the people Seres, which two monks
brought from Serindia, a city of Indye, to Iustmian at Constantinople, shipped
thence into Italye, and other parts of Europe. For, of her seed covered with
dunge, sylke worms bred, fed with mulberye leaves, spinne silk. And
therefore, the emperors esteemed ndt so hyghely Silks, and Veluets, which
Aurelianus had never in his wardrobe. Saying, he would never paise thread with
gold. For then was an ounce of silk, sold for like weight of gold.
Alexander Seucrus also, seeld ware sylke, velvet never. So nothing was
antiquity proud of this worms flyece.

But now, what more esteemed? Yet what commenner. For when once in Italye,
store of mulberyes planted, bred plenty of the^: every varlet ware it. So as
now, it is turned to saddels and horse trappers. The Milesian were in times
paste noted, for abroad, they would be princely, at home beggarly. Which well
may we at this day apply, to some wrongfully termed Nobles. Then whom abroad
none brauer, none trimmer: at home, none baser none filthier. Wherefore, either
the matter whereof it is wroughte, or the commennes and stalenes, ought breed
contempt thereof in a noble courage. And cause, that not so much with foreign as
home cloth, he clothe him self. Or, if needs he would so be apparayled,
think at least, so light a toye should not so lightly raise his stomach But,
both the dear price of the substance, and fondness of fashyons, is much
reprehensible. For it is changed and altered daily. And what Raphaell
Volaterranus complayneth of his Italye, that may we much trulyer, of our
England. Which not content with her own, or the present guise, lives as
strange. Counterfaytinge, this day one, tomorowe another, the next day other,
and so continually strange shape and form. As either new fashion is borrowed
of foreign realms, or inverted in the wily tailours shop But, what more
monstrous then only on the making of a daunsinge doblet, to bestow almost.
90. crowns.

But what now I mean to tell (which I speak but on report) is almost
incredible, and most monstrous.

That. 3. pair of hoose for one man, cost 800. crowns. And what sums of
money, even only feathers waste, London merchauntes know, and I have heard.
But since prefentiye I remember not the certainty, I list not feign, Least
happly I mysse the truth and lie. Shortly, be this the sum, that none wax
proud of apparayle. But, repose him self in his minds gifts. That peacocke
like, they prise not more then right them selves, with their painted plumes.
Since nor the horse for his Velvet trappers, nor the byrd for her golden cage,
wonteth to conceive any stately pride. But rather the first in swift race, the
other in swift winge. So contemn a Noble man those vtward, and more and more
coueyt these inward ornaments. Be the end of apparayle, to shrowde the body,
to chase cold, having respect of health, strength, honestye^, and comelynes.

Of a Noble man's b^^se.
Hit follows now, we speak of Noble men's buildinges. For, who ween any
part of happy life, consists in this worlds bricklenes: seem not to them
selves happy enoughe, though finely clad, daintely fed, but also they dwell
princely. Then which hap, is naught more miserable.

Which Solomon the kinglye preacher, reckeneth among the commenlye accounted
goods, in his search of the sovereign good. I have compassed (quod he) great
driftes. Built house^, planted vines, leueld gardens and Paradises, and in them
set all sorts of fruytfull trees. Plentiful pondes have I made to water shadye
groves. Wherein he describes al men's driftes. Yea, of our days. But some
what after follows. I turned to all the works my hands had finished, and the
travail I took, and lo al vanity and trouble of mind, and nothing lasting
under the son. A golden saying of the wysest preacher. Which, would Nobles
grave and carue on their posts, pillars, walls, house, and entryes, over
their doors, and privy chambers: no poesye should they find more passing or
pithy. For vanitye of all vanities says the preacher, and all truly vanitye.
If then there be so great vanity, and vainenes rest in all things: what
dignity, what Nobilitye may be purchased by building? Yet this vanitye work
we not (say they) on vain consideracion but just cause. Both hospitality
grow, justice more indifferentlye be ministered, Cities more flouryshe,
Citesens be linkd in nearer amity, and the neighbor poor ofter relyeued.
Which all, by this their solitarye secession, are executed seelder, colder,,
negligenter, and through their farther distance, less commodiouslye. Why
rather imitate they not the aunciente Romayne Nobles? who reserved their
manoures and farms, rather to sport and refreshe them selves, then to
inhabyte. as Pompeye, Pomponius Atticus, Crassus, Ciccro, and others. Whose
succor, presence, ward, neither yt city wanted, nor their patronage, council,
or ayde^ the citesens. For in those days rather chose they to deck the
public buildings, then private, the commen city then their own homes. As
Aristides, Pericles, at Athenes, Curious, Fabricius, at Room. In whose housen,
only them selves, were beautiful and golden.

Noble was that vaunte of Augustus, and worthy a Monarche.

Left to al Magistrates and Nobles, to imitate. Brycke huylt took I Room, I
leave it Marble. Ever, more ought he their care of publyke safetye, and
dignitye, then private honor. But, the renoume and glory alleged for second
cause, is alike vain and vayneft. Which yet moved and tickeled many, even in
Chrisostoms days. For, do we good to the poor (say they) who sees it? If
any, not many, if many, but for a time. And time passes, and there withal, the
memory of themployed benefit. Better therefore, to raise buildinges, which men
not now only, but many ages after, may behold. O fool, what profits thee
this memory, tormented where thou art, and where thou are not commended? And
this commendacion of the quick how reaches it to the dead? Again, time will
end this praise, and aged years shall blot and freat out thy name and house,
with thy proud praise and memory. For, if the golden Capitol now mustye
wayleth, if the noblest frames lie drenched in darckenes, if Lucullus most
magnifice^t manors are so^ke into oblivion, chrough the malice of al frea ting
time, and now lie rased and neglected: why vainly flatterest thou thy
buyldinges, with any eternity or lasting length? Where are now those famous
temples of Jerusalem and Delphos? Where the church of Minerua?

Where the Image and huge statue of the Ephesians great Diana? Where the
Pyramydes of Memphis? Where the vawtes? where the triumphante arches? Where so
huge platformes? Where the owners, contriuers, and carpenters, of so princely
palayces?

Thy house though glisteringe with gold, silver, and precious stoanes, is but
a swalowes neaste, of durte and strawes. In winter shall it fall, and as a
spiderweb, be pierced with every blast, and perish. So is this cause like
vain. Nor ought sounder is the third: for they will leave it their children.
Whom thus answers Dauyd They hoarde treasure, knowing not for whom. For if
thou quick forgot them often, after thy death they may be reft thy son. For
either tyrants seek to entrappe thee, or false accusers with forged crime, as
poisoned darte, in one momente, with one lie, one wyle, will bereue thee, that
thou with so great charge, so long time have raised. So shall thy children be as
couduyte pipes, which receiving water, and serving others, drink none. Or if
others prevent them not, them selves as gulfes and qwaues, consume right often
great patrimony. For often, a thryftie father succeeds a prodigal soonne. Who
sells all, not leauyng so much as tyle or stone. As Crassus bordeth on
Brutus. Or with gluttony, and dising, scatter they infinite substance, gathered
with great sweates. And strain whole manners and lordships, through a deyntye
throat. Such one mencioneth Valerius Maximus, one Crassus, surnamed bankrupte
and rich. Who though beggerlye, and unable to satisfye his creditours, and a
needy wretch, was still saluted rich. So these gluttons, as if naked they
gathered nuttes, as iesteth Cicero, pocket all in their bellyes. Wherefore,
since both vain is their hope of securitye, and search of glory, and
superfluous their heirs care: No sufficient causes are there, why these
earthlye, frail, temporal harborowes of our body, wauing with every biast,
open to al enemies roades, ryfe to al peril, should be decked with such cost,
statelines, and magnifice^ce. These faults therefore avoided, be this moderance
used. First, having of his parents, a house able to shroude him from showers,
and keep hospitalitye: rashely enlarge it not, (as many that raze, raise,
build, alter from square to round, from round to square) but use it
thankefullye. For the house honors not the owner, but the owner the house.
Nor deem he him self his parents better, but worthy a fayrer house. Ever
bear he this of Horace in his breast.

Happy who far from courtly toil
As Princes did in elder while
Eareth with his beasts his native soil.
But if need and constraynt require new building, pryncipallye prouidehe,
the groundeworkes be iustlye laid, not with others iniurye or nusaunce. Not in
others soil, but his own. Not in any commen but his several. That he build
not of the sack, and spoil of the poor, but his own goods. God would not
bloudye Dauyd should buyld his temple. Have the whole frame and work this
respect. To tend to use, not show. Be it large, but to entertayne strangers.
For, therein is not largenes discommended. As witnesses Ciccre. So be his doare
and entrye contryued, as they open to all good, poor, and Pilgrims: close to
al vagabonds needelesse and vicious.

As in fare, apparayle, buyldinges, they must observe dignitye, Of Noble men's
sportes.
so in their plays and sportes, ought they keep the golden mean.

Thereof are two fortes. That more commendable which is stouter and manlier.
And has in it somewhat stately and warlike. The Greeks used five sorts,
whirling, leaping, casting the darte, wrestling, running. Who conquered in all,
was guerdoned with a five double game. Who in four was termed a quartane. In
Virgyle, Eneas is both a game maker and lawegeuer. And ordained plays and gave
pryses. The other sort, many doubt whether christians, made for earnest, not
sport: or Nobles that should couple majesty with their leisure, may use. As
daunsing, fayninge to instruments, play at dise, chesse, or tennes Wherein if
oaths, excess, gain, and couetyse of lucre be left: if honest plea sure, not
filthye gain be sought: I think, they may in time and place be used. Since to
the clean, naught is unclean. And not the thing so much as the users intent
is faultye. Solomon says. A time to sighe, a time to sing. Dauyd with the
harp swaged Sawles fury. And Achilles emongs the Greeks maistred his own
passion. Yea Hercules with young children, Agesilaus with his son, Socrates
with Alcibiades, Architas with his servant, not only played but trifeled.
Men yet no fools, but sagest, princelyest, and godliest philosophers, kings,
and dukes, past al com parison. Sceuola also, played at tennesse Swimming and
shooting, have some show of warfare, and are wholesome for the body, yeldinge
it by exercise, nimble to obey the mind. The citisens of Cuma, trained their
chyldre in fightinge, swimminge, and wrestlyng. But herein, as the rest, this
is worthy not only blame, but sharp correction. That Nobles use dyse and
cards, oftener, and to other end, than they ought. Nor, once begone, end or
keep mean. Yea, some so profit in madness, that their whole enherita^ce, they
set at one unhappy throw. Endinge at last their sport, in earnest, brall,
bludsheds and slaughter. So as of the disinge Comedy comes Tragical end.
Namelye oaths, curses, blasphemies, banninges, miserye, calamitye, beggerye,
Tyburne. In daunsing also fiye they lascivious and wanten gesture. Observe not
so much measure, as the health and exercise of body. To conclude, never
slip, that not so comicall as sage saw (To much of nothing) from their
minds.

That play be a releasing of the mind to renew our strength, to strengthen our
health.

Of a Noble man's train.
Of their train, in sum observe Nobility three things. Whom they ought
reject, whom retain, how to entreat them. Reject they ought generallye, all
superfluous servants. Who nor already skill, nor travail to attain any good
art. For if we have condemned sluggishe* Nobles, much less allow we their
servant idle. Yet how many handlesse men, has the present Nobility? How
unfruitful train? what flocks? how much idle service? but chiefly chase
they flatterers who houer under their rooffes, as swalowes and mise, for their
own gain, not their love.

Who with their tales transform and color all things. Crouche at every
beck, Mask vice for virtue. As the Parasites, and cuppeflyes of Alexander,
Dionisius, Philyppe. The Table mates, Apes, yea Lyse, and Flees of rich and
Noble men. As wonted Platos friends to cou^terfayt his crompe shoulders, and
Aristotle's his stutterynge. Have accusers and taletellers no entrye. Who droupe
tales in Noble men's ears, and accuse and slander their fellows. To such be
their ears and doares locked. For they breed debate says Solomon. Nor, must
wise heads keep naturalles, bawdes of pleasure, or iesters. Nor, lurk there
covetous Gehises, brybetakers as that Elizeus servant. For, these are either
stark with idleness, and loyterers: or mischeuous. of who^ neither forte ought
their gates admit. For living ydell, attendynge only at dyners or suppers,
or following their lords to the court, or otherwise, flattering them: the whole
day naught doing, co^suming their wages in dise and gamning (to name no worse)
they become contriuers of many mischieues: and apply their minds to theft,
to whicked devises horrible to be named. Which sink must be pompd. Else shall
their lord abye to the lord their blame. These rascalles, and rakehels, thus
ridden, shortly learn they whom to retain. Only necessary servant, as
hyndes to entende their tillage, or other officers of house hold. As
secretaries, Butlers, Purseuaunts, and other inferior. Then, good
counsailours, friends and trusty servants. For the evil stayne as pytche. A
divine is a singular ornament in a Noble man's house. Not only in his
sickness to comfort him correct him strayenge, council him in all his
affairs: but also to be to him both a spur, judge and preacher.

A counsaylour he can not miss, to resolve all his neighbors, that they be
not forced to sue the law, wrapped with so infinite crickes and moote points.
But forthwith, this our christian and learned Sceuola freely enstruct them in all
controversy, and discharge of all care. Alexand er Seuerus had assistants, in
penninge his letters, his libelles, in aydinge his memory, teachers six. or.
7. lawyers, what more what less twenty. Nor enacted he any law, which was not
first by the^ boulted to ye bre^ne. Always is a learned man an ornament in a
Noble man's house and continues his whole familye in their duty. Which ever
kept the ancient and reverend Nobilitye.

Scipio, when sent in embassy, he had in his train but five: One was his
friend, familier, and teacher, Panetius. Touching the third point, he must
not entreat them rigorouslye. Tiran nous was the Romans power of life and
death, and therefore ryghtly reft.

Otherwise teaches Paul in our law. To deal gently, mildely, familierlye,
with the^, least we have as many foes as servant. To admit them to talk and
council. For they are not all slaves of nature. The good says Augustine, all
be he bond is free. The ill, though a king, bond. They must upon account of
their travail, render their duty. Jacob had servants, and handmaydes, but
such as toyled, kept Asses and Camelles: none idle loyterers. Nor be their
lord so lordely, as just. Nor yet so just as gentle Be Antoninus Pius their
pattern.

Who is reported, never to have done ought, whereof he attempted not in
writing to render probable cause So suftiseth it not to command, but but is
sometimes auaylable, not to conceal thy servant, the cause of thy
commandment.

Socrates in Phedris, cou^sayleth to learn of any thing. Yea, were it a
speaking Oak. For, we ought not attend who speaks, but what is spoken. Be
they therefore frendelye to their servant* and prefer the worthy. Not as
Antes gaawe the grain on that part it first spryngeth, least it become
vnfeete for their use: So they keep under their servants, as they would keep
them ever: but rather be means to raise them higher. But to cast out of
service, their old and aged men, now dottardes, and foreworne, how cruel is
it?

Kynder far Alexander to his steed Bucephalus. Whom aged, he caused other
horses to bear to the fyelde.

Some there are, who not only frowardelye and importunatelye brall, with
their servants: but also, threate, and thunder (not speak) no less than
mylstoanes, lightening, hayle. Of whom says Solomon.

In a Fools mouth is the staff of Pride. But hereof sufficient, so first I
add that of S neck.

As well to pardon all, as none, is exueltye. Wherefore, herein what to do,
may each man, according to his discretion and moderance, easily discern. So
he come angerlesse to punishynge. And before judgment, guyete and sober, well
weyghe the qualitye of the crime.

Athenodorus preservative, given Augustus, against sudden rage, is bolesome
for all men.

Neither to do or speak ought, til orderlye he have recited the. 24. Greek
letters. Nor propose the greatest princes the greatest ragers for paternes, Nor
do on Achilles wrath, or Alexanders fyerye stomach. But follow of all nations
the pacientst. Of the Hebre^wes Dauyd, the Lacedemoma^s Agesilaus, the
Athenians Socrates the Romans Pomponius At ticuS. Who thought all wrathful
anger ought be rooted, and repressed, chiefly toward them we love. And thus of
temperance and her branches be it hitherto spoken.

Prudence, is the gouernesse and guide of the rest. Prudence
Yet, for it lies in the secret mind, we referd it hither. Which yet is
there so enclosed, as it ought issue into judgment seats, the Princes court,
common congregacio^s and assemblies, and even into the churches. Which, how
necessary it is for a noble man, Solomon shows in the fourth of the
proverbs. I (quod he) heing my fathers dearlynge, and the only and tenderly
beloved of my mother, thus taught he me. Purchase wisdom purchase
understanding.

Swerue not from it, it will preserve the. Love it, it will save the. Advance
it, it will advance the. Embrace it, it will also honor the. It will give thy
head increase of grace, and crown the with a crown of comelines. To he
short, that whole book is an exhortacion to wisdom. Solomon listened this
his parents counsel, and proved the passingst and worthiest in all sorts of
learning, of any mortal. Contrary was Mydas wyshe. Masters.
For that fool wish^ gold. This sage, wisdom. O how unseemly is hit he
should pester the highest honors, who most unworthy that seat, dares not
open his mouth in council.

Shame and reproach was it to the un skillful Megabirsus to babble, in Apelles
presence, of lines and colors. For the youge boys standinge by pounding
colors, whom before they honored, and gased at for his glisteringe roabes, and
gold: his unlearned igno raunce, talk, and judgment, as a blind man of
colors, scorned and scoffed Truly, as in charge and office, I require it
not, so in skyl and knowledge faynest would I (were it possible have him pass
any. The citesens of Berrhea the noblest of the Thessalonians, are worthily
praised, for that returning from Paul's preaching, they were able to examine,
were it true he spoke. For Noble men, ought not only be hearers, but judges of
ministers. Nor should such darkness shadow men's life, nor so long night
clipse the church, if they corrected and reproved erring pryestes, not leaned
to their erroures. Nor is ought at this day more lamentable, then the
ignorance of Magistrates and Nobles. Head cause of all euels, both in the
state and religion. And why will they rule, if they can not inform the ruled*
For they rule, as wyser, not as myghtyer. Otherwise is it cart before the
horse. If the foot rule and prejudice the head, the fool his wiser, the
ignorant the learned. And even as the blind, by main force, should hale the
seeing with him self to the ditche. But, of their barbarous custom, and
blind opinion, who scorning the rude reign of Poliphemus, that Gyaunte huge,
but witless, and al his Cyclops: judging also the Turks empire, for
contempt and ignorance of arts, most filthy: yet roar, they are borne to
arms not learning. Nor scarce account them selves good warriors, if learned.

Where nevertheless, the myghtyest conquerours, ever coupled this glory of wit
and learning, with warrlyke knoweledge: nor in manner thought they could
maintain warfare, had they not learned the noble feats and polecies of
princes, the success of wars, the many broils and chances yea yt whole
art of war, of books and teachers. For that great Alexander learning made
greatest. Nor live his deeds so green, as the commendacion of his learning.
Nor so happy he, for he was Philippes son, as for though a king, he would be
Aristotle's scholar. Who wondreth at Julius Cesars empire, wars, the yoaked
Rhene and Oceane? Nay, who detesteth not, that intolerable stroke and
tyranny? but his commentaryes, are loved, lyked, and studied of all men.
Numerian both an Emperor and Orator, chose rather to have his Image in the
L^^rary graven with this title. To Numerian the Orator then Emperor. Yet
blushe our Nobles of learning, which he preferred before Empire. Claudius though
otherwise warlyke, reckned it not so glorious to war as write. What need I
vouche, Augustus what Titus, what M. Antonius, what Justinian? who Valyant in
wars, famous for Conquestes, infinyte nombers of achieved Empryses, honor,
Nobilytie, and estimation of all men: would yet both by studyes and writing,
bequeth and spread the glory of their name, to posterytie. For no men, much
less Nobles, be they, that know not learning. and if Cleanthes be of any
credit, only in shape differ from beasts. what means then Nobylytye, to
think it reprochefull to be termed students? Ween they it more commendable,
to be pamperers of their coarses then lovers of learning, and honor? or monye
mongers then students of wisdom? Or to plaunche their fleashe, pursue honors,
shirte for Coin, worthier then to be rauyshed with the love of wisdom, and
zeal of knowledge? For of to many such plaineth the philosopher Zeno.
Alexander whom late I named, so little feared, to profess Philosophy, that
plainly, he protested, were he not Alexander, he would be Diogenes. yet
what baser and vyler then that curre? Such was that kings courage, such his
thirst of wisdom and learning, that lever had he be learned, then a king,
a Philosopher, then a Prince. Who naming AleXander, names more then a king.
And emplyeth both a Monarche, and a Philosopher, yea ^iogenes to. Whose that
saying is princelye, in his Epistle to Ariftotle. Rather had I excel in
learning, then power and plentye. Cease Nobles therefore, to hate learning.
Cease they to vex, despise, and persecute the learned, seeing such pyllers
and stays of learning, and so Noble wightes excelled in knowledge. But albeit
so clear a matter, need not many proves: yet for maugre their heads, I
would hale them to my purpose, and what I council, compass, and confyrme: I
will vouche out of Diogenes Lacrtius seventh Book, the worthy example of
Antigonus, successor with others, of the Noble Alexander. Whereby shall easelye
appear, how much that high prince reverenced learning. In what estimacion he
had the learned, and how covetous him self was of knowledge. Antigonus King,
sends Zeno philosopher greeting. I truly know in riches and worldly pomp,
mistate far exceeds yours. But in knowledge, liberal studies, and perfect
blisfulnes, acknowledge my self your inferior far. And therefore, meant to
entreat you, to come over to me.

Persuading my self, you would not neglecte my request. Provide you
therefore, in any wise we want not your company. Assuringe your self that
not to us only, but all the Macedons, you shall be a most welcome teacher, and
enstructour. For who frames and seasoneth with virtue, the king: the same is
it most euidente, enformeth all his subjects. For like prince, like people.
And, who enflamed with the love and zeal of wisdom, declineth that vicious
and vulgar pleasure, which wa^tonneth young minds: he not only by the
instyncte of nature, but even the lore of virtue, mayntayneth Nobility. Which
liberal and noble nature, if moderate exercise accompanye, and a wise teacher
want not: lightly attayneth the highest type of virtue. Lo both the kings
thirst, and the singular profit of learning, which by his effectuous
writing, every man not altogether senleles, may conceive. To whom it appears
by Zenos answer, one Perseus and Pbilonidas a Theban, were sent.

O princely stomach, in deed humble Who, both entreats and pursues with
reason his entreatie. Where our Nobles, not once command, where both they
may, and otherwise wont and will. Since hitherto therefore, it has by some
presidents and prooffes bin showed, Nobilytieloughte study: consequently will
I dysclose, in what sort. not mindynge amplye to dylate this Theme, or
prosequete the perfect Method: But shortly and briefelye, to touch, in what
studyes they ought be conversant, what chiefly to read. For I am not
ignorant, many study. Who notwythstandynge, in the mean, way, manner and
choice of arts and authors, fowlye err. For first read they humane
things, not divine, love toys not fruteful lessons Venus games not weyghtie
studyes, tendyng to increase of godlynes, dignytie, or true and sound
commodity. As Ouide of the art of love. Boccace, and others, nor sonnde nor
pure, writers, in whom they study strange toungs, to the decay of godlynes.
Which might yet better be borne, would they by whiles, meddle herewith holy
Scripture, as a contrary and triacle, to expel from manners, that pestylent
and pernycious poison.

Therefore, what I think they ought chiefly learn, what entry, grows, and
increase, each Noble man both may, and ought make herein: I will now without
dyssemblynge tell. Not so much pestrynge my talk with mine own Council,
opinyon, or deuyce: as she wynge (if I may so term it) the ancient pryncelye
way. Tracynge the paths which ancient gentry led, and wherein it waded. All
be it, even those elder Sages, and princes teachers, well taught in their
leafure, and shadow of their rooffes, of Noble men's studyes. For Socrates, no
less briefly then wifelye willed first and forthwith, to learn the best.
Diogenes also, charged with the children of one Xeniates a Corinthian, proved
him self no simple workman in framing Nobilytie. Seasonynge the^ first with
lyterall arts. Which as a foundacyon laid, then brake he them to ride the
great horse, to stinge, to cast the dart, and shoot.

Thirdly, out of poets, and other writers, gathered and selected such
sentices, as be thought feetest for them, to kenne by roat. Fourthly abridged
the sum of all they learned. That at one glimse they might see much, which
being little might surer abide.

Fystely, enjoined them obedience to their parents. Charginge them diligently
to serve them, living them selves with thin fare, and clear water. Sixtlye,
forbad them to bushe or curle their hear, but poll it. Seuenthlye commended
them the practice of huntinge. These be Diogenes lessons. These the mysteries
of the Cinicall school. Which might perhaps, not vnfeetly be applied to
our nobles But, for it were shame to learn of that Dog (though Demosthenes
did) I will open the matter more evidently and amplye. And not be aggrieued what
I have red and know, concerning ye studies, those ancient nobles, and kings
most applied: to emparte with you. Immediatlye therefore after they are weaned
from their mothers kindly milk, and some ripenes of wit be ginneth to cleave
to their knitting strength: they may with good luck enter this school. Yea,
it behooves they be entered, under some worthy teacher. Wherein Aulus Gellius
reports Philips king of the Macedons diligence. Whose letters herein to
Aristotle, lo reported out of the self author in his work of ye Attyke
nights. Both for they are brief, and also for the president is notable, and
famous for others to follow. Philippe greeteth well Aristotle. Know you, we
have a son borne. whereof we much thank the Gods: not so much for his
birth, as for it happed him to be borne in your days.

For our hope is, that trained by you he will prove worthy both us and our
inheritance. Thus wrate Philippe, far wyser prince, and loving father then
the Nobles of our time. Who provide their costs breakers without respect of
costs: leaving the mean while their children untaught. Of the Megarenses
said Diogenes. It was better be their ram then their child. which properly
exte^deth to all such as pasture well their horses: and either ill break, or
force not their children.

Where it belongs to fathers, not only to beget children, but begotten well
to break. Which means Solomon, when often he mentions his mothers parables,
in his proverbs.

And king Agasicles says. Their scholar will I be, whose child I am.

Nor ever had those two Gracchi, climed to so loftye fame in pleading: But eue^
weaned from her teates, their learned mother Cornelia, had poared eloquence
into their mouths and minds. Nor half so great, grown the glory of
Hortensius, had not the first seeds of his sugared style been sown, while yet
he lay in his fathers arms. Suche^ was whilome Noble parents care, in
breeding noble Impes. This their glory, that now with them lies raked in
grave. Of instructing Noble we^s children.
But yield we thus much, either to their ease or ignorance. Certes at least,
masters ought they on al sides proui^e, for whatsoever hire: herein at least
to prove them selves fathers, not only of their bodies but minds. For how
foolyshe thy, and infamous to the fathers estimation is it, If his body well
provided and costlye cladde, his mind vnframed, he lewdly demean him self,
in honorable assemblye? And there bewraye his childishenes, where lad^n talk,
with grauest and wisest sense, is looked for. For what test were it (think ye)
if a musician of seemly favor and well proportioned body, just heighte,
and manly beauty, well clad in silckes, holdinge a sweet melodyous instrument,
hold enter in honorable presence: and having thus on, all parts raised great
erpectation: all noise hushd and solemn silence made, suddenly begin to
bleate, with a harshe, rustical, and rude voice? and mow with his mouth, and
filthe lie wrye in and out his body? Or how hiss we out a well apparayled
plaier, if counterfaiting a king on the stage, he fail of his iesture, speak
yawning have a sower and harshe voice, mysse his action, or use unseemly
iesture for so stately personage?

Does not be then much more abandone him self to laughter and contempt, who
abounding with all the gifts, god and fortune may give: placed by them in chief
and swarming plentye, lyfted to the highest tipe of honor, His body decked and
trimmed at all peyntes: bears about a rude, rusticall, and rough mind? And
with filthiness of life, defameth both him self and his auncestoures? Wherefore,
more heedefull care must parents take, for their childrens minds, then
bodies noblesse. These are the parents parts. This the duty of learned
teachers. To undertake this Noble and honorable charge of enfourming Nobility,
when either the parents can not, or wyllnot.

For nothing may they do, either for their renown more glorious, or for the
learners profit more commodious, or more appliable, to the safetys and
dignity of their whole country. For most gentlemanlye wits have they,
which poolished with liberal sciences, may with their council gravity, and
wisdom, singulerlye deserve of mankind. Rude and vnpolyshed become means of
many doleful Tragedies. For the fruitfuller the soil is, the sooner waxes it
bushye, brierd thornye thistied, and weedye: lyenge a while unhusbanded. So
happs it in the Nobles pleasanter wits, without learning, soon ouergrowen
with filthy vices. So as boldened by blunt power, blind ignorance, and
unskillful aucthoritye: the mightier they be, the rather, not whereto they
ought, but list they apply their power. wherefore, as rather we sow, the land
that yelds most plenteous increase, to feed the greatest multitude, then
Antisthenes piddel, scarsely suffising him self: (as singulerlye said
Plutarche) so is it no great matter, to enstruct some private man, lurkynge in
a corner, Coyninge Sillogismes in Soles, chempalinge him self with Geometrical
Cyrcles, delued in some poor Coat, and of no estimation or possessions. But
most glorious is the employed travail, in teaching such one by whom, not one
only, but many, yea a whole commonwealth, may thou profit. In earing
therefore, this most plentuous and fruitful plot, busily toil parents and
masters. Herein sweat they night and day, to til the Nobles with learning,
sow them with virtue, weed them from vice. For of them selves ca^ they not
without teacher learn. As neither the fruitfulst grounds yield grain without
tillage. And the good year (as they say) not the soil causes plenty nor the
lyeng, bounty, or nature of the plotte, but rather the favor, showers and
rain, distilde from the heavens, and diligent husbandrye. So, neither here
avails dyscente of stock, but enstruction. Nor gentlema^ly towardnes, but
education, and the teachers travail. For, proner are they to evil, but they be
taught aright. Aristo Chius euel hearing for reasonynge rechleslye with all
men, and admittinge all indifferently to conference: answered godly as a good
man, wyselye as a lover of wisdom. He would enstructe even beasts, if they
understood the talk that tends to virtue. If a soueraygne wise, and learned
Sage, doubted not to profess, to teach even reasonles beasts, so they could
conceive: much more then ought the learned employe their council, travail,
and care, to shape and form a man.

And if a man, how much more a Noble man? who is on either part armed with
aucthorytie, either to overthrow or mayntaine a state? For why alas choose
both Fathers and children, rather to rest blind then see? Why rather to use
others eyes, then their own? Where if possible were, they ought have as
percynge sight as Linx, as plenteous as Argus. Yea even a hundred eyes, to see
their heavy charge. why will they as bears, be led about byothers, who^rather
it behooved to lead others? Why keep they such troops of saylekes, nayliks,
loiterers and flatterers? retainyng ye while not so much as one learned man, or
teacher, either for them selves, their Children, or their whole familye? but
sith we have sufficyently proved it their part, to see their Children
taught, return we now to the manner of teachinge. First therefore be be
taught the art of words, then the practice of deeds. that both he know, how
to frame his talk dyscretely, well, and wisely: and order and dispose his life
and doings, comely and consonant to virtue, nature, and gods will. That these
meats and bounds, determine a Noble man's school, it is manifest by Homere.
Saying one Phoenix was allowed Achilles, by his father Peleus, to make him an
Dratour of words, and practiser of deeds. Of the first grounds of grammar,
and pryncyples of speech and talk, I will say naught Thus much only at this
present I warn, he be with all speed provided a master, both learned and
godly. For hardlye is it rased, that is graven in tender years. As witnesses
Hierom, wrytinge of the institution of a Noble gentlewoman, to her mother Laeta
in this wise. A master must she be provided of reasonable years, fauteles
life, and learning. Nor will any I think, refuse to do for his sister a Noble
virgin, that Aristotle did for Philyps son Whom for want of A. B. C.
masters, him self taught his characters. Small things without whom greater
may not stand, ought not be neglected. The very sound of the letters, and
first institution of prynciples, otherwise proceeds from a learned and
unlearned teacher. Wherefore those only A. B. C. Masters, must they banishe
their housen. For the same Hierom witnesses, Alexander in his manners and gate
could not forgo his master Leonidas faults, wherewith though young he was
infected. Now much more then, must the author of any unsound doctrine, or
master of superstition, be chased?

Provide therefore this learned and godly teacher, A noble man's school and
manner of study.
after the precepts, and rules of grammar most briefly, and compendiously
abrydged, and taught out of some one, not many auctours: (since there is great
diversity and confusion) that the best Latin writers follow. As the
familyerst exquisitest, and briefest of Ciceros Epistles. Dialoges most delight
that age. And therefore, Ciceros Cato, or Lelius, may they read. Hereto may
certain chose colloquies of Chastalio, and Erasmus, be coupled. Tymely to
sow the seeds of godlynes and virtue, in their tender herts. And Terence
also, but with ryper years and judgment. If any fylthe be entermedled, let
the trusty diligence of the teacher remedy it, vsinge sounder authors, as
tryacle to expelle it. Nor truly, would I yield Terence this room but for I saw
Cicero so much esteem him who, took not the least part of eloquence of him. As
Chrisostom of Aristophanes, ye excelle^ce of the Attyke tongue. A poet
nevertheless, both nippynge in taunts, and wanton in talk, and no less
hurtful to honestye. But be the hardest first imprinted. For grown ryper in
years and knowledge, they lightly neglect them as trifles. Therefore, not little
helps it, even at first, to learn them Greek and Hebrewe. preposterously
do al vnyuersities, schools, and teachers that contrary it.

For about the bushe run they to arts, who understand not the Original
tounges. Of the Greek, no unpleasant authors, are Esope, Ioachimus
Camerarius, Ethike Arithmologie: a little book, but ladynge few precepts,
with great stoare of learning. of orators, Isocra^tes, Demofthenes, and the
most reverend aucthour, and Orator Christ Jesus, with Thapostles. whose
wrytynges, I allow ever first and last. The Hebrewe out of the Bybles most
purelye, and only flows. In these harder tounges, much avails the
trustye, plain, and learned explycation, of a paynefull teacher. The ancient
Nobilytie reverenced chiefelye Poets. Therefore Senekes Tragedyes, Plautus
Comedies, Vergiles Georgykes, and Warryour: of the Latynes, for the statelynes
of the matter and style are most honored. which yet, ought yt knowledge of
versifieng forgo. Euripides Ciceros authority prevails to admit. Whose every
verse, he deemth as many Oracles. The diuynitie of Sibilles verse, commends
be he also skillful in the Chronicles of his country. Least amids his trauail
in foren Realms, he become a foreign at home. To this ciuyle knowledge also
belong Justinians institutions, the Pandects, and the whole course of the
ciuyle law. And both all antiquitye, and the law and statutes of our own
realm. wherein, so skilful ought he be, as he dare profess it. For, the Nobles
palayces, ought be the whole contries Oracles. Plato had I almost ouerpassed,
with whose laws and commen wealth, he ought most samylierlye acquaynte him.
The Mathematicals have their manyfolde profit. Arithmetike, can he not want.
Geometry much helps, to placinge, framinge, and conueyinge of buyldings.
Great dolyghte and profit, brings Geography. But Astrology, I see so
rauened, embraced, and devoured of many: as they need no spur to it, but
rather a bridle from it, no trompetter to encourage them, but a chider to
restrain their vehement race. Whereto some have so much credyted as almost
dyscrediting god, they lyghted not on altogethe^ luckye end, nor fortolde of
the stars nor foreseen of them. I condemn not universally the art: but
thereto, get they me nor counceller, nor favorer it has plenty enough of
praysers. Be the fine of their whole study, first to know god, next them
selves. To govern well their famylye, the state. Thus, leave I much to
private reading, and ouerpasse, both Christyan and heathen writers of later
age, or nearer years. I pass by also, the Cate chifmes and institutions of
Christian Religion. Wherein the chief of our age, is John Caluir. And forgot
Commentaryes wherein, both of our time, and the ancients, many excelde. Nor
meant I to enter that large plain, of determining what autthours specially
they should follow, in each trade of study. Wherefore now will I end. If
first I propose our Nobles Alexander Seuerus pattern. Wherein as a most
compendyous form, is closed the sum of their whole study. For he, was not
altogether estraunged from our relygion. But in his Oratory, and secret
Closet, besides the Images of the great Alexander and Appolonius: had also
Christ's and Abraham's counterfaites. Of all aucthours he most delyghted
Virgil and Cicero of the commonwealth (Which spent through the malice of time,
now appears not,) and the same aucthour of duties. But commonly red-hee
Greek writers. After long reading, reuyued his spirytes with wrestlynge, and
Musyke. In the after noones, gave him self to wrytinge, pennynge, and
pervsynge letters. which exercises likewise, must our Noble man observe.
Translate in to diverse tounges, pen Orations Epistles, declame, expound
aucthours, recount historyes and Apothegmes, dylate and amplyfie tales, ken by
roate sage sawes, and pleasant and wittye proverbs, have in store civil
phrases of talk, to greet all comers, entertayne strangers, and furnish
embassades. And courteous manners of speech, in thankinge, table talk,
demands, suits, requests, counsayles, persuasions, and other usual cyuyle
theames. which practices may not neglect, who coueteth to thrive and profit in
learning. of Aristotle and Plato I gather, the practices of the auncyents
were, exercise, Music, paynting a gentlemanlye recreation, and those parts of
learning where of presentlye we entreat. But whereto babble I thus much? since
this matter requires a peculyer treatise, and more plain and plentiful
dyscourse: yea of such one, as abounds both in wit and leisure. Therefore
this last pillar and precept add I, that in all his life, myds all his sorts
of siudyes, he be a deuyne. For, as the aunciente sages, accounted philosophy
the end of all studyes, and even the Castle of knowledge: so I in this our
Noble man's race of study, determyne dyuynytie, both the bound whence, and the
gole whereto he runs. So shall he imitate the ancient manner of the
auncyentes, and become a godly and Chrystian Noble.

There are also other pryuate virtues, embrace others, be dutieful to his
country; loving to the multitude, and eve populer. In amtry with ofter his
poeres, beneficial to the poor; bol^^tifull to the learned, a ^atrone and
garden of schools, and universities hospital and gent^^^ strangers,
fanotable to the godly, and gods fainces, rust to all. The thir^e and
principal, e^arge, is to be religious to Gos wards. As Moses, Iost^s, David,
Iostas, Ezechias, Constantine, Theodostus, Aurchiar. Who though a heathen
Emperor, him self assisted with his presence, the church of Antioche, against
Samosatem^^ the heretyke bishop. Whom by his authority, he enforced to resygne
both the bishops house and goods.

Thus much at this presence, thought I necessary to counfayle Nobilitye.
Namely, to use godlynes, goodness, wisdom and learning. This commen death the
lord to them by the mouth of Diuyd, that wisest king of ye Helrewes, in the
second psalm saying. Ware wise O ye kings, be learned ye that judge the
earth. Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice with reverence.

Embrace his son, least bappelye he ware wrathful, and so ye wander from the
way. If his furye but a little kindle, o happy who trust in him. Wisdom,
learning, worship, service, joy with reverence, the embracinge and kissyng of
the Son: In fine, what within so long process I have preached, this small
sentence co^priseth. And in this short circle and compass of words, the
divine prophet closes faith, religion, and pureness of life and manners.
Wherefore, forasmuch as to the^, as gardens, God commits the custody, of his
orphane and widow church: they ought provide, in the burning heat to be
cool shadows to it, in affliction stays, in persecution refuge, in tempests
bays. Finally, remember they, that in accomplishinge the duties we have
reckened, consists the whole nature, majesty, and honor of true Nobilitye.

Wherefore O Noble worthyes, both again and again recount the with your selves.
what herein I think I have vttred. And vttred, in my parciall fancy truly.
With you rests, both the power to judge, and will to accomplish. Whereto to
train ye, many causes have ye. Far other aids than the rest, brought ye
with ye to this light, even from your Cradels, borne and bred with ye. For this
native Noblesse, so great honor and renowned name: your parents bequeathd ye.
Your selves with your own sweates and toils earned not. Which thus gotten ye
are bound to preserve and amplify. Certes, without great shame and villainy,
may ye not duske and blemishe. This therefore ought inflame and encourage ye
for we see Nature has so parciallye dealt with ye, that even the Nobility of
your birth, is a thing of it self amiable. As it were a loadstone of love And
what others, with sundry sweates and long travail, hardly or scarce at last
attain: that ye have eue^ with your birth dealth from above. Namelye the
reverence, love, honor, and estimacion of all men. To ye lie open the easy
entries to honors. Which both wont and ought raise and quicken the dullest
courages. which is far unlike with others. Howebeit, it beseems ye, not to
crave, but earne them: not so much to coueyt, as execute them. Hereto also
provoke ye your might and power. The sino was and necessary mayntenances, of
all honorable enterprises. wherewyth since ye abound, the meaner want, it shall
be your part, to furnishe these foreign and accessory gifts of Fortune, with
the iewelles of wisdom, learning, and virtues. These lo encourage ye. But
the same headlonges whirle, the world, flesh, pleasures, riches, honor.
which baytes many times, turn other by ways, a mind not suerly settled, nor
altogether constant. wherefore, as your guerdons are greater, so greater
charges are required of you. And as ye abound in more plentuous and fruitful
gifts so more painefullye must ye travail not to seem vnwdrthye those
benefits of God. And the more occasions call ye to your duty, the greater
peril depends on neglectyng they m^ On all sides, even the things, that
most ought have furthered ye, in well doing: awayte to entrappe ye. On all
sides, that deadlye and: hateful foe of all mankind, but chiefly the Nobles:
barks at ye. He snareth not the simple only, but even the greatest, the
highest, the Noblest. If any of them he angle, happy he accounts him self.
And thereof victoriouslye triumphs. For his throat is dainty as says the
prophet. And he will be fed with fine prates, not commen cates. And hard is it
truly with so many wiles of that old fox not to be circumnented. True is
that doom, by God pronounced of your order. That few princes believed on
Christ. Many persecuted hym^ Not many Nobles were called, the kings and
princes of the earth, assembled and withstood the lord, and his anointed.
wherefore, if any gentilmanly conrage rest in your royal hearts, if any Noble
blood remain, if ye have any care of true dignitye, any love of praise,
wherewith wonteth for the most, all Nobilitye to be trained, and tickled: see
and foresee that often ye recounte these precepces. Beware ye despise not ye
chief part^ yea the whole and self Nobilitye. More affectioned to light
trifles and toys. Fear God, practice vertus, charge other with benefits,
your selves with virtues. Which may turn to the honor of your selves,
thornament of the realm and commodity of others. Which yet at length to see,
from the bottom of my heart I beseech almighty God for his Noblest sons
sake. Amen.

THE LITTLE Treatise of Philo a lewe, concerning Nobilitye. Latyned by D.
Humfrey.
WHo aduau^ce Nobilitye as the chiefest bliss, and cause of greatest happes,
deserve no mean blame. If at least, they account al suits of Noble house and
stock, of welthye and famous men Noble. Since, nor their aucestours from whom
they so vaunte their glorious birth, were ought the fortunater for their
dayntic plenty. For that, which simply good is, consists nor in any foreign
hap nor ornament or grace of body: no nor in every part of the mind. But
only it, which is princess and lady of the rest. For, when it pleased God of
his loving kyndnes to place here emonges us the; greatest good: nou^nteter
harborowe or Temple found he for it, then man's mind. For the soul bears
imprynted the stamp of that sovereign good: though hardly some think it. Who
not so much as with their lips brymmes, tasted wisdom, or beheld that
bryghtest light. For silver, gold, honors and offisye is it for any to
maynteyne good talk in sh^we, but to exchange ill man^^s for good not so
ryfe. Which whiles I consider, both presentlye I account them foes, and
hereafter will: who fyrstr lyghted these brandes of dyscorde, twixte their
ancestors virtue and kin. Yea, henceforth will I more suspecte them, then
who are reckned most base and dishonorable. For their excuse is ready, they
have no private or householde presydente of honor. But ye by no means may be
cleared of crime, descended of Noble familyes. Who for their long continued
stainelesse race, earned great praise and honor. Yet having at your noase yea
in manner borne and bred with ye domestical paternes, your selves never mind
to practice ought worthy praise. By how many reasons is it evident, ye should
place Nobilitye only in the possession of virtue? And adiudge him only Noble
which it has, not every ympe of good and honest house. That ancient issue
of the first earthly couple who may deny Noble? Yea, the princes of Nobles? To
whom befell more excellent lynage then the later posteritye. Who spreng of the
first marriage of man and woman, then first coupled to sow their like shape.
Nevertheless, of their two first fruits, the elder feared not by vyolence to
stay the younger. But actomplishing his horrible pretended parricide first
embrued the guylties earth with blood. Ca^n. Abell.
What auayled him the Nobility of his race praciuing thus villanye of mind?
Which also. the surueyour of all worldely things. When first he saw,
detested.

And detestyng, decreed it vengeance. Not strayghte sleainge him to reaue him
forthwyth sense of calamitye: but allottinge him thousand deaths. Heaped with
many and sundry grieves and terrors. So as for guerdon he ^cceyued the
greatest miferye.

Again, of those which ensued godlyest, descended that holiest father. whose
godlynes the reporter of the holy laws, thought worthy registring even in the
Bibles. Noah.
He only in that great fioud, wherewith all Cities were drenchd, and whelmed,
(for even the styepest hills were sonke and swalowed, with the rage and
swellynge of the guife) was saved with his whole familye. Receyuynge so great
guerdon of his goodness, as none may ymagine greater. Yet of his three sons,
yea partners with him of the self benefyte: Cham
one durst scorn the cause of his safelye, and turned his unwilling fall to
a ieste and scoff. Discovering to the rest blyndyng them selves, those
parts, which modestye, and his parents shame would have covered. Therefore,
degeneratynge ^ro^ glorious Nobility he became accursed. And the author and
original of such miserye to his progeny, as meet was to light on him, who so
light esteemd his parents honor and reverence. But whereto mencyon we
these, skyppynge that first, and auncientst earthlye parent? With whom no
mortal may in this forte of Noblesse compare.

Fashiond holy scriptures. Whereby we set it most evident, that Noblenes of
house naught avails the unnoble. Thus hitherto have we cited presidents of
the stained with vice Whom, become evil, though descended of good, their
parents virtues nothing help: but their own vices infinite ways anoyed
Contrary wise, now others of better sta^e will I vouche whose auncesters,
stained with many and sundry crimes, yet proved they most worthy praise and
emulacion. Abraham


The auncientst of the Iewishe stock, was a Chaldee. His father an Astronomer,
of those that study the Mathematicalls. Decmyng these sterres, and the whole
frame of the world, and sky Gods. Flynging down both good and evil, to
every one, supposing no other cause, then with their foreign senses they
discern. Then this what more villainous? What more dishonor to the soul?

By the contemplacion of many means, and creatures, to grow to the the
ignorance of thauncientst, uncreate, and framer of al things: And both for
those and other infinite consideracions, which man's reasons comprehends not,
most good? Who he, when once conceived, he rightly worshypped, forthwith
forsook his country, kinnc, and fathers bowers. Knowing yshe abode, his
errors also of many gods continued.

Whereby, his mind should less further, in search of the one only
everlasting God, and father of all things, as well conceived in mind, as
subject to sense. If he fled the vanitye of his opinion, altered into truth,
the error also would depart his mind.

Which his desire to know the chief being much more enflamed, certain
expounded prophecyes, on whom, as steps treading, he scaled the speedye
knoweledge, and search of that unity. Never ceassyng till he had conceived the
clearest vision, not of Gods substance (for that may not be) but as far forth
as may be, of his Nature and prouydence. And therefore, is first reported, to
have believed in God. For he first held an unmoved and constant opinion, there
was one supreme cause, governor both of the world, and worldly. This
Science, of all virtues the certainst, once at^aind, forthwith he gat the rest.
So as of yt people where he forourned, he was renerenced as a prince, not for
his robes, wherein he passed not a pryuate person: But the hawtye reach of his
wytt, and pryncely mind. As subjects their prince, so honored they him. A
mased at his majesty and reuerendnesse of Nature, as more perfect, and
precious the^ man's. For not the commen phrase of speech, but more statelye and
loftye talk he used, nearer approchyng the deuyne majesty. For, enflamed with
Gods spyryte, he grew always better in countenance, he we, stature, habit,
iesture, and voice. The spyryte of God descended from above, possessing his
mind, and geuynge I is body grace, his talk persuasion, his hearers
understanding. And will any deny this exile, destitute of all his friends and
familyers, (couetyng Nobilitye coupled with god and trauaylyng to be accepted
and acquaynted with him, placed emonges the Noblest ranks of Prophets,
crediting no mortal created man, before the uncreate immortal Father of all,
esteemd as a king of them that harbored him, not conqueryng yet his Empire
(as some) by arms, not with warlike force, but the gift of the almygh tie
God, the honourer of his godly servants, with heaped authority, to their
commodity with whom they are conuersaunte:) to have been Noble: He is
doutelesse to all exyles, flyenge the observance of monstrous manners and
detestable customs (attributing to stones stocks, and lyueles counterfaytes,
almost heavenly honors) and so iour neying to the very liuelye, and quycke
commen wealth, whose presydent and watch is truth: the very squire and pattern
of Nobilitye. Which many godly, not only men, but women imitated. Unlearning
the ignorance which eue^ in their cradles they sucked, of worshypping hand
wrought I mages. And learning the doctrine of that ones gouernemente, by whose
Monarchye the whole is paysed.

Thamar a simple woman, borne in that part of Philistia, that bordereth on
Syria, was bredde in a city worshipper of many Gods, stuffed with Sinagoges, I
mages, and all fortes of Idols. But after amyds she dungeon of darkness, as
through a narowe chynke, the light glimse of truth was revealed her: she fled
to it forthwyth though with manifest peril and hasard. Not prysyng the life
she might not well lead. Accountyng thonely right life, the worship and
honoring of one only cause. Who though after wedded to two brethren, both
wicked, to the first a maid, the next by the law of enheritaunce, for his
brother left no issue: preserving yet unstained her wemles life, both purchased
her self the praise that wonteth to accompany all good, and became thoriginal
and pryncesse of Nobilitye to her whole posteritye. But she though an alyene,
was peraduinture free, and borne of Noble, and no base parents. But the poor
handmaydes, in the farthest borders of Babylon beyond Euphrates, Agar given hy
Sara to Abraham
were given to the wedded spouses, and vouchsaued of the Sages beds, first
scaled the name and dignitye of wives. And of handmaydes became (almost I
should say) peers in honor to their ladies, yea by them (which is almost
incredible) preferred to this dignity. For envy harboreth not in sage breasts.
Which, where it wants, all things are commen. Their bastard sons were
actompted legitimate, not only of the sire (for no wonder were it, if the
father show like countenance to his children) but even of their right wives,
their stepdames. Who forgettyng their wonted hate to their sons in law, used
like care and love toward all. The Children aunsweryng with exchaunged love,
reverenced their stepdames as their natural mothers. The half brethren also,
severed only by virtue, loved not with parted or quartered tone. But supplied
what wanted in Nature, with doubled, yea redoubled affection. And in sweet
harmonys and consent of manners, endeuouted to resemdle either parent. We must
not therefore pelde to those, who boaste others gifts as their own. Who
exceptynge such as we last mentioned, may worthily be deemed enmyes of the
Israelites, and all other Nacyons. Of them, for they license all of one
stock, to neglect the pryuate practice of virtue, through confidence of
thonour already gotten by their ancestors. Of the Gentyles, for they teach
they aspyre to the tipe of virtue altogether in vain, for their au^ce stours
were vicious. Then which doctrine scarce wot I if any be more pestilent. For
if the evil progeny of the good, auengyng plage awaite, why should honor be
foreclosed the good descended of the euel? Since the law praises or punishes
all, not for their kinsfolks, but their, own deserts.

Scapes in Prynting.
Fo. Pa. Li. 7 2 21. for like of wantonness, read like wantonness. 10 1 32.
for who what and wheresoever, who, and wheresoever, what. 21 2 1. for great,
greater. 58 2 3. for aut, and. 45 1 13. for happy, happy. 69 1 12. for dreauth,
dreamth. 88 1 19. for Cyesus, Cresus 144 1 23. for wearned, wearyed. 156 1 6.
for as, is 180 2 1. for of, to 194 2 21. for gaawe, gnawe. 201 2 18. for that,
a 204 1 22. for Soles, Schools, for chempaling, empaling 208 1 3. for
Denonicus, Demonicus 209 1 21. for Cea, Caesar.

The rest, small iudgentente, by respect of the circumstances, may reform.

Imprinted AT LONDON IN Fletestrete nere to Saynct Dunstons Church by Thomas
Marshe.


