Ane TREATISE OF CONSCIENCE.

QVHAIRIN Diverse secreits concerning that subject, are discovered, as may
appear, in the Table following.

AT EDINBVRGH. PRINTED BY Robert Walde-graue Printer to the Kings Majesty.
1594.

Cum privilegio Regali.

THE TABLE
Chap. 1 QVhat Conscience is, and how it differs from knawledge 2 How the word,
Conscience, is diversely taken, and of the diverse sottes of Consciences 3 Of a
good Conscience, and the diverse kinds thereof. 4 Of ane evil Conscience, and
the diverse kinds and qualities thairof. 5 Of the troubled spirit and
Conscience, and how it differs from melancholy, from other natural diseases,
and worldly sorrowis. 6 The markis quhairby, the wounded Conscience may be
knawne. 7 The remedy of a troubled spirit and Conscience. 8 Quhat things man
aucht cheiflie till eschew, and quhairin he should be exercised, during the
wanrest and trouble of his Conscience. 9 A prayer to be said be sik as are
troubled in spirit and Conscience, through the sight of their sins. 10 Quhat
comfort they may have, that are afflicted in spirit and Conscience. 11 How long
the trouble of the Conscience may continue, how peace enters in, and how long
it may remain. 12 How man aucht to behave himself, having obtained peace of
Conscience, after his internal trouble. 13 A form of praise and prayer, to be
used, be them quhilk are delivered from vexation of the spirit and Conscience.
TO THE CHRISTIAN REIder, ane Epistle general.
I Will use na other Epistle Dedicatorie of their my little treatises (good
Christian Reidar) save only this unto thee, to quhais knawledge they sall
come: neither do I seek any praise, thanks or recompense of men, for any thing
that I have done. The only thing that I crave for my labor, is, that the
praise and glory heirof may be given unto God, and that the commodity may
redound to the members of his Kirk. Now, to declair schortly the circumstances,
and occasion of my writing: the truth is, that being in great affliction, and
assaulted with many temptations, (as the godly ever runs to God in time of
trouble) I took purpose to compose somewhat to his glory, and to the comfort
and edification of good men. And the subject quhilk I chused was, how to resist
the temptations of poverty, sickness, schame, and sorrows of this life:
Siklyke, of the felicity of the life to come, and certain discourses in
praise of the mercy, justice, power, and providence of God. Al these I
conceived, first by a general notion, and for helping of my memory, I set them
down in writ, in manner of a table, or memorial: ever awayting the occasion
quhen, and how I micht follow them forth in order, as I had devised. But I was
so hindered and drawn away with warldly affairs, that mair nor the space of
half a eir, I came but little speid in my interprised wark Quhill at last, in
the eir 1592. it pleased God to visit me with a Fever alterne, quhilk vulgarly
we call the Excess, In sik sort, that all warldly cares and impediments were
removed, and my mind altogether settled on the service of my God. Nevertheless,
my infirmity was so great, that during the time of my sickness (quhilk lasted
three Months) I was unable to compose or write any thing: save only at sometime
to read the Scripturs, or cause them to be read to me: Always, being viuely
touched with the Lords rod, It brocht forth good effects in me: For thereby I
was far humbled, and not without great feeling both of mine awin sin, and
of Gods mercy: my chief exercise was to meditate on the law of the Lord, and
to clenge my defiled heart. But sa sone as the Fever began to slaik, and I to
convalesse* sa soon did I search out my memorial, and put my hand to the pen,
earnestly prosecuting my interrupted warke. And beginning at the resistance of
temptations, I thocht they micht all be commodiously comprehendit under a
general treatise of affliction: quhilk by reason I had laitly before tasted:
It micht appear that by gods grace I micht write the more feelingly thereof.
Having then accomplished the first treatise, I proceeded without delay to the
second: And in the mean season, while I was in hand thairwith: behold, I
contracted ane other heavy disease: even a swelling, and a defluction of a
putrified humor in my legs, and other parts of my body (quhilk commonly
followis that kind of Fever) So that I was thereby made unable for any travel:
But for the may part, and by reason of the cold supervenient winter, I was
tied to the bed, mair nor the space of sax Months. This made both my self,
and the time mair proper for the accomplishing of the wark begun: For I was
grim, and brocht wondrous low with pain in my flesh: And being seperat from
the company of men, my delectation for the may part was, to be occupied in
contemplation, in composing, and serving of my God. So having finished the
second treatise, I proceid it to the discourses or praises: And last, for
coronation of my little wark, to the effect that the inward trouble of the mind
might be alsweill discovered, and resisted, as the external troubles of the
world, I began a treatise of Conscience: all the quhilk treatises, it pleased
the Lord to prosper and accomplish in the waik hands of his servant, as thou
may see in half a eirs space: quhilk being out-runne, the extremity of my
pain did cease, and the Lord from day to day restored me: In sik sort, that
appearantly, he had casten me on the bed, to the effect, that he micht warke
this his wark in me: Now as to the treatise of affliction, it may perhaps
appeir, through the multitude and prolixitie of egressions, to be less
methodicall nor the rest: But I hope gif you mark it narrowly, and richtly
discern the digressions, from the lineal point of the treatise, as they are
set down in the Argument thereof, thou sall find it not without coherence, and
the amplification not without profit. The treatises of praise, and of the lise
to come, are a large field: by reason quhairof many things may be eiked
thairto. But the treatise of Conscience, because it is divided in Chapters, I
esteem it to be of best method, and may solid doctrine. Finally, I will
assure thee, that I never entered to meditate on this my little warke, nor put
my hand to the pen, without earnest invocation on the Name of the Lord, for the
assistance of his spirit, That I micht utter the words of knowledge, and of
truth, to his glory, and to the comfort of my brethren. Therefore, that I may
end, as I began, whatsoever comfort or instructioun thou receive (my Brother)
of these treatises, give the praise thereof only to the Lord, and to his
undefiled Lamb Christ Jesus, seeing to them, all glory justly apperteinis for
ever. God grant you may be na less moved in the reiding, nor I was in the
writing of these treatises: the grace and peace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with thy spirit. Amen. At my chamber the 26. of September. 1593.

By me, a loving Brother of al them that loves the second coming of the Lord
Jesus. A. Hume.

ANE BRIEF TREATISE OF CONSCIENCE.
CHAP. I.
Quhat Conscience is, and how it differis from knowledge.
BLissed is he (say is the Apostle Paull) that condemns not him self in that
thing quhilk he allows: Romans 14, 22*
For he that doubtis, is condemnit gif he eat, because he eatis not of faith:
And quhatsoeuer is not of faith, is sin. In their wordis the Apostle countis
him blissed, that is not condemnit nor accusit be his awin Conscience, in that
thing quhilk he dois. On the other pairt, he countis the man condemnit, that
doubtis quhidder that thing be good or evil quhilk he dois: And he subjoynis
the ressoun, because (say is he) it is not done in faith, that is to say, the
doer thairof is not certified be his Conscience that he dois weill: For all
that is not of faith, that is to say, all that proceidis not of ane vpricht
Conscience, is sin. Now, seeing that this point of Conscience, is of so great
importance, it is verry necessary that we know quhat Conscience is. It wald
appear be the phrase of speaking, quhilke men are accustomed to use, that
Conscience were a certain substance, and substantial pairt of man, that
subsistis be the self: Bot leist any should be dissaifit heirin; it is to be
understand, that Conscience is na mair a substance, nor the thocht, the
ressoun, or the memory; bot is only a function or office of the saul, like
as they are: For man consistis only of two substantial pairtis, to wit, the
saull, and the body: All the rest of the pairtis of man are bot accidentis,
even qualiteis and offices of the body, and of the saull. Conscience then, is a
perfect knawledge, or a suir perswasioun in the hairt of man, that his
thochtis, wordis, or deidis, ar good, or that they ar evil. Thairfoir like as
that office of the saul, quhairby man dois think, imagine and apprehend
thingis, is callit the thocht, or the mind: And that functioun quhairby he
discussis, and decernis of the thingis consauit, is callit reason or judgment:
And that office of the saul quhairby the thingis apprehendit, and discussed, ar
conseruit and keipit, is callit the memory: Euin swa, that functioun and
office of the saul quhairby man is certified that he hes done, said, or
thocht that quhilk is good, or that quhilk is evil, is callit, Conscience.

Now the difference betuix Knawledg and Conscience, may be this: First,
knawledge is mair general, nor Conscience: For knawledge may be extendit to
all thingis that fallis under the understanding, alsweill spiritual, as
temporal and warldly thingis, and to the effairis of other men. Bot Conscience
is a particular knawledg quhilk every man hes of himself, and that only of the
thochtis, words and deids, quhilk he hes committit, whether they be good or
evil. As for example: I know quhat the commandementis of God ar, quhilk he hes
geuin us to keip, This cannot as it be callit Conscience, for it is only a
naked knawledge quhait na deid is done: Bot quhen I know that I have brokin
their Commaundementis quhilk God hes geuin me, their arrysis Conscience, e ane
evil Conscience, that is to say, ane evil knawledge of my self through the
deid that I haif done: Again I know it repents me, that I haif violat the
commandment of God, and that I belief that Jesus Christ hes satisfy it for my
offense: Heir arrysis the testimony of a good Conscience. Siklike, I know sum
men that hes committit grievous sinnis: That hes nathing to do with my
Conscience, for it is ane other manis deid: Bot quhen I know that I haif
committit ane heinous offense my self; that twichis my Conscience. Again, I
know, and am certainly perswadit, that Abraham was a faithful man and familiar
with GOD: Nevertheless, this knawledg cannot be callit Conscience: Bot gif I
would deny that, quhilk I know, and quhairof I am certainly perswadit, in sa
doing, I should haif ane evil Conscience: For in a word, their mon be ever a
deid done, a word spoken, or a thocht consaifit, annixit, and joynit with the
knawledge, to make it arrise in Conscience. The other difference quhilk I mark
betuix knawledge, and Conscience, is; that manis knawledge is mair certain, nor
his Conscience sumtyme is: For that quhilk man knawis, he either comprehendis
it with his outward senses, or vnderstandis the causes thairof; either else hes
ane sufficient authority and warrant for him, that it is swa: Bot at sumtyme
he may haif ane evil Conscience, quhair he hes na sufficient warrant for him,
save on lie a suir perswasioun, and estimatioun within himself, of that thing
quhilk is false. As for example: he that estemis it vnlauchfull to cit of every
kind of meit indifferently at all times; Gif he notwithstanding, make na
difference in eating of every kind of meat at all times; he man haif ane
evil Conscience; because he dois that thing quhilk he estemis to be wrang in
his heart, and in sa doing sins: Nevertheless, he can haif na sufficient
warrant for him, to esteem it vnlauchfull to eit of every kind of meat
indifferently at all times, seeing it is false of itself. To conclude, that
quhilk the Lord is to lay to manis charge, and quhairof man is astrictit to
rander account at the latter day of judgment, it fallis all under Conscience:
For then every manis Conscience, sall beir him witness, 1. Cor. 4. 5.
quhat he hes done, said, thocht, or beleifit, whether it be good, or evil,
and how secreit soever it be, it sal be disclosed that day, quhen the counsels
of all hearts sal be maid open and manifest.

CHAP. II.
How the word Conscience, is diversely taken: and of the diverse sorts of
Consciences.
WE haif declared heirtofoir, that Conscience, is a function or office of the
saull, even a knawledge, or suir perswasioun, quhilke man hes with himself,
that the thing is ather good or evil quhilk he dois, quhilk he hes done, or is
of intentioun to do: As the significatioun and pith of the word it self does
import: For the latin word, Conscientia, (from the quhilk the word,
Conscience cummis) is composed of the Preposition, cnm, quhilk signify is in
our language, with, and Scientia, quhilk signifies Science, or Knawledge; as
gif we wald say, the knawledg quhilk man hes inwartly with himself, of all
his actiounis, wordis, and cogitations: Bot to make the sound of the word mair
agreeable, the Prepositioun cum, is changit into con, be a little mutation of
the letters: quhilk is a thing very frequent in the composition of words in
the Latin tongue. This is the proper signification and original of the word
Conscience. Nevertheless, the Conscience of man, is not only taken for the
knawledg, and suir persuasion quhilk he hes with himself, as a function and
office of the saull: But also, is oftymes taken for the saull it self: as may
appear be the phrases, and figurative kind of speaking, quhilke men are
accustomit to use. As quhen we say, a peaceable Conscience, a remording or a
biting Conscience, a wounded Conscience, a sensles Conscience and without
feeling, a troubled, afflicted, and tormented Conscience. It is evident, that
these Epitheits and titles, are not sa proper to Conscience, (quhilke is but a
knawledg, and ane office of the saul) as they ar to the saul it self:
Thairfoir, to the effect that every thing may have the awin proper and may
convenient name, I wald rather say, that through the testimony of man's
Conscience, that is, by the inward knawledge of that quhilk he hes done, ather
good or evil, the saull is made peaceabill, is made to haif remors, is woundit
or tormentit: Nor, to attribute sik styllis unto the Conscience. Bot
forasmeikle, as the former kind of speich is commonly vsit in the scriptures,
and that the offices of the spirit are oftymes taken, by a borrow it kind of
speich, for the sprit it self: I will also attribute their titles and stylis,
both to the Conscience, and to the Saul indifferently, as they are commonly
vsit: For I esteem it salbe very easy, be that difference quhilk we haif
already made, to understand quhat may be properly spoken of the saull quhilk is
a substance; and of the Conscience quhilk is na substance, but only a function
or work of the saull wrocht in man.

Our chief division then of Conscience, salbe this: quhen the deide quhilk man
hes done is good of it self, his knoledge is also good, and heir arrysis a
good and vpricht Conscience. One the other pairt, quhen the deide done is
evil, the knawledge and Conscience is likewise evil: In sik sort, that of the
good and righteous deide, proceidis the good and vpricht Conscience: and of the
wickit and evil deid, proceidis the corruptit and evil Conscience: And under
their two sortis of Consciences, good, and evil, all the rest of the sortis are
comprehendit: To wit, a peaceable Conscience, a remording or a biting
Conscience, a cauterized or a sensles Conscience, a wounded Conscience, and a
troublit or tormentit Conscience: Of the quhilkis speces and kinds, we are
particularly to entreat: And first of a good Conscience, and the diverse
kinds thairof.

CHAP. III.
Of a good Conscience, and the diverse kinds thairof.
THe Conscience of man may be callit good and vpricht, three manner of wayis;
First, quhen he eschewis that quhilk is evil of it self, ather upon
knawledge, or upon a suir persuasion that the thing is evil quhilk he eschewis.
Secondly, quhen he followis that quhilk is good and richteous of it self,
ather knowing assuredly, or being certainly perswadit in his hairt, that the
thing is good and richteous quhilk he dois. Thridly, quhen he ather dois, or
leiffis the thing undone that is indifferent of it self, that is to say,
neither good nor evil; and that vpoun knawledge, or upon a suir perswasioun
that the self same thing is indifferent quhilk he dois, or leiffiis undone.
But quhair man, ather eschewis that quhilke is evil, or indifferent of it
self: ather else follow is that quhilk is richteous, or indifferent, upon
ignorance, or upon accident: Their can be na testimony of a good Conscience
their: For that quhilk is done upon ignorance, is opponit unto that quhilk is
done upon knawledge, quhairupon Conscience mon proceide. In sik sort, that to
make the testimony of manis Conscience, good, both the deed quhilk he dois
mon be good of it self, or at the leist indifferent, and the doer thairof mon
ather know perfytlie, or haif a suir persuasion in his heart that the thing is
good or at leist, indifferent quhilk he dois. The difference quhilk I make
betwixt knawledge, and a suir persuasion, is this: that knawledg is groundit
upon a suir authority, and warrant* out of the word of God: and that suir
persuasion, is only a constant opinioun consauit in manis hairt, that a thing
is sa, or not sa, without any certain warrant: Bot foralsmeikle, as man's
Conscience can nather beir witness with him, nor aganis him, but according to
man's awin knawledge and under standing: he should beware that he lippin not over
meikle in the testimony of his awin Conscience: For albeit, all that man dois
aganis his awin Conscience be sin: Nevertheless, all that is done according to
Conscience, is not good and without sin: In respect that man's Conscience,
will oftymes certefie him, that the deed quhilk he dois, is good of it self,
quhen it is evil: And be the contrair, that the deed quhilk he hes done is evil
of it self, quhen it is good and richteous. As for example the Iewis quhen they
crucify it our Savior Jesus Christ, were perswadit in their Conscience, that
they had not crucified the Son of God; and it they were dissaifit: Sicklyk,
na doubt but some of the Papists are certefy it be their awin Conscience, that
they do well in making their supplications unto the saul's of the saints
departit; and it they are dissauit be their Conscience. Heirfoir, seeing the
testemonie of man's Conscience, is oftymes dissauabill and falls: In the thingis,
quhairby the doing, or not doing of them, may follow sin; he aucht to haif
his warrant out of the word of God, and not to confide in the testimony of his
Conscience. Notwithstanding, in thingis indifferent; as to marry, or leif
unmarried: to wear costly apparel on the Sabbath day, or not to wear it: to
use, or not to use moderate exercitioun of the body; or til eat meat with
weschen or vnweschin hands: In doing of their and siklike thingis, a suir
persuasion of them, that they ar things indifferent, is sufficient to saif man
from sin, without any farther warrant: But he that doubtis whether he haif
done weill or evil in following, or eschewing any thing, albeit the thing be
indifferent of it self, it he sinnis: because he hes na testimony nor
assurance of his Conscience for that quhilk he dois, quhilk every man aucht to
haif in all his actions.

As concerning the nature and qualities of a good Conscience; It will be
peaceabill, it will sometimes have remorse, and sometimes it will be woundit and
troublit. Man's Conscience may be callit peaceabill, two manner of wayis: The
ane is, quhen his Conscience giffis him rest, and accusis him not, but allowis
and apprevis all that he dois, as weill done. This kind of peace is not only
proper to the good Conscience, and weill doer, but also to the evil Conscience
and evil doer: For he that committis wickitnes ather upon ignorance, or upon a
persuasion that he dois well; or he that hes the heart hardened, and is not
mouit nor troublit with the evil quhilk he dois; that man (I say) will haif
sum time peace of Conscience for a time: although in the end, the accusation
and torment of his Conscience will be horrible and great. In consideration
whereof, it wald be diligently marked, that man's Conscience. dois not always
accuse, nor trouble him, sa sone as the sin and wickitnes is committit: Na, na,
he will have inward peace of mind for a time, his Conscience will flatter him,
the eyes of his mind will be blindit, and his heart will be shut up: during the
quhilke time his Conscience will be peaceabill, he will haif inward rest of the
mind, and lief in careless security: Bot quhen the lord begins to chop, to
appeall the Conscience, and to open the eyes of the hairt, that man may see the
vglines of his awin sin: Then begins the Conscience to accuse, to condemn, and
to torment man with terribil prickis, with fearful terrors, and intolerable
pain. Thairfoir, quhen this kind of peace proceidis from knawledge, that is,
quhen man hes asuir warrant of the word of God for that quhilk he dois, then is
it good, and the Conscience vpricht: But quhair it lacks that warrant of Gods
word, it is dangerous, and not to be lipnit in: For as I haif said, the wickit
man's Conscience will flatter him, and bear him false witness, quhairby he will
haif peace and rest for a time. The other kind of peace is, quhen after great
trouble of the spreit and Conscience, through the sicht of man's sin* and of
the wrath of God aganis sin; man obtainis inward peace and rest of his
Conscience, by apprehending mercy through Jesus Christ, and by the assurance
quhilk the spreit of God gives to the spreit of man, that his sins ar
forgiven him. This is the true peace of Conscience, and is only proper to the
chosen children of God.

Mairouer, the good Conscience will remord and bite: that is to say, it will
ofttimes call to remembrance the sins, quhilk man hes committit, and will
accuse, and prick him with an inward pain thairfoir: This remorse and biting,
is also a quality that is common, both to the good and evil Conscience: Bot
the difference betwixt the remorse of the godly and of the wickit, is notable
and great: For that remorse quhilk the godly has, bringis a godly dolor with
it for the sin committit, makes man to seik the remedy of the inward prick and
pain quhilk he hes, even to humble himself befoir his God by earnest
repentance, and fervent prayer, quhairby he finds relief and comfort: But
the wickit man, albeit he have the remorse and pain of his Conscience:
Nevertheless, he is not mouit with any godly sorrow, neither seiks he the
remedy for the pain, nor ressauis any releif or comfort from above. Heirfore
I mon say, that the remorse and biting, is the quality of a good Conscience: I
say not, that the deed is good, quhilk makis man to have remorse of
Conscience, for that is sin: But I say, that to have remorse of Conscience
for the sin, it is good, and is proper to the children of God: For, without
remorse their can be no repentance: And seeing that the fragilitie of man's
nature is so great, that he can not abstain from sin so long as he is in
this life, e the may just and vpricht man fallis oftymes every day; and the
estait of a true Christians life, is but a continual falling and arrysing: It
is may necessary that the Conscience of man be exercisit with a frequent
remorse: For as I have said, without it, repentance can not be, and it makes
man to seik the remedy, and to find releif and heavenly consolatioun.

Finally, the good Conscience will be sometime wounded, and troubled: and
whereby? even by the commemoration and consideration of the sins quhilke man
hes committed: e not only the conscience, but also the spreit and saull, and
all the functions thairof, and the hail estait of the richteous man, by the
sicht of sin will be sair vexit and troublit. But meikill mair the spreit and
saull of the wickit man, through the sicht of sin will be tormentit,
considdering that the same turnis in the end, to his utter confusion: Quhairas
the trouble of the richteous saull salbe turned into glaidnes, and redound to
aeternall salvation: But of this trouble of the spreit and Conscience, we sall
heirefter entreat mair at large.

CHAP. IIII.
Of ane evil Conscience, the diverse kinds, and qualities thairof.
LIke as of weill doing, arysis the testimony of a good Conscience: even sa of
evil doing, arysis ane evil Conscience: For look where sin, in any form is
committed; either in thocht, word or deid; whether sa it be wittingly, on
ignorance, on rashness, or on set purpose: Of force their mon be ane evil
Conscience, ane evil knawledge their: And as their is degrees of sins; even
sa is there degrees of Consciences: For the fewar, and of less weight the
sins be, the better is the Conscience of him that commits them: And the
main number, or mair grievous the sin be, the worse is the Conscience, of the
committar. Now, of the sins whereby the Conscience of man is woundit and made
evil: There is a sin quhilk may be committed aganis knawledge: A sin
according to knawledge, and a sin done upon ignorance. Al their three kinds
of sins are accessorie, and annexit to ane evil Conscience. As to the first,
quhen man knawis, or is suirly perswadit with himself, quhat is wrang, and it
dois it: And quhat is richt, and it leifis it undone; he then sinnis aganis his
awin knawledge: and this is a high degree of sin; and the worst kind of
Conscience, quhilk is guilty of wilful error: In sik sort, that albeit the
deid be good, or indifferent of it self, If man esteem, and be perswadit in
his hairt that it is evil, and it dois it: It is evil to him, and in doing
thairof he sinnis and offendis: For all that is done aganis knawledge, or
aganis the thinking and persuasion of the hairt, is sin. The second sort of
sin is, quhilk is not done directly aganis knawledge, but rather according to
knawledge, and it it is sin; and at length producis ever the testimony of
ane evil Conscience: As quhen man dois that quhilk is evil of it self, upon
a false trust and persuasion that he dois weill: or quhen he dois that quhilk
is unjust, upon a good intentioun, to the effect that good may come of it. This
is also ane evil Conscience, quhilk flatters man in his awin sin: And thou (O
man) that vsis sik a form of doing, thy Conscience quhilk flatters thee now,
sall ane day accuse and condemn thee for leaning sa meikil to thy awin waik
wit and deceauable opinion. Bot you will object and say, that thy Conscience
mouis thee so to do, being suirly perswadit in thy hairt, of thy well doing;
Indeed I eild unto thee, that in doing the things quhilk are good, or at the
leist indifferent of them selves, a sure persuasion that thou dois na wrong,
may be a sufficient warrant to thee: But in those things quhairby the doing or
omitting of them, the Majesty of God may be offended, thy vain persuasions
and false witness of thy flattering Conscience, can be no defense nor warrant
unto the: For in all things quhilk may import sin, thou aucht to have the
authority of the word, and command of God for thy warrant. Siklike will thou
(O foolish man) do evil that good may come of it? I pray thee tell me, where
hes thou sik a commandment given thee of God? or thinks thou, that thou may
transgress the ordinance of the most high, either by doing that quhilk he hes
forbidden thee to do, or by leaving that undone quhilk he hes commandit thee to
do; and then cloak thy sin with thy intention, by saying, that thou did al
for the best, that thy purpose and intention was good, and that man is judged
according to his intention? Na, na, thy intention sall be na releuant defense
unto thee, in that respect: For thou perverts that good sentence. I grant,
where thy intention agreis with the will of God, quhen thou intends, and
endeavors thy self to please God, and to keep his Commandments: The Lord, for
his sone Jesus Christ's sake, will accept thy good intention, and be well pleased
with the good affection of thy heart, albeit (throw thy awin fragilitie, or
other external impediments) thou never execute nor perform thy intentioun.
But quhair thy actions are repugnant to the ordinance of God, of necessity thy
zeal mon be blind, and thy intention evil, how good soever it appeir in thine
awin eyes: neither sal it serve for a lawful excuse unto thee, but for a point
of dittay to condemn thee, in the day of the Lords richteous judgment: For
when the Lord sal lay down his Law, as a rule before thee, sall open the
blinded eyes of thy heart, and appeal thy Conscience: Thou sall then know, and
confess, that the Lord should be served according to his holy statutes and
commandments, and not according to thy foolish brain and conceits, nor it
after the traditions of men. The third sort of sin, quhairby the Conscience
of man is damnifyit and hurt, is nether committit aganis knawledge, nor it upon
a persuasion and pretense of weil doing: But is done on mere stupiditie and
ignorance. As when man either is in doubt, whether the thing be good or evil,
that he dois: ather else is altogidder negligent and careless quhat he dois;
nocht taking heed, nor trying whether his actions be just, or unjust. Heir it
wald appear, that this kind of sin can nocht touch the Conscience: In
respect, that Conscience is a knawledge of a deid done; but ignorance is
opponit to knawledge; and therefore cannot concern, nor corrupt the
Conscience. The truth is, that all kind of sin infects the Conscience and
saull of man: And seeing that all iniquity done upon ignorance, is sin: For
neither ignorance negligence, rashness, nor waiknes, can be a just defense and
excuse to sin: Thairfore, it mon follow, that sin committit upon ignorance,
corrupts and infects the saull and Conscience. Mairouer, albeit the wicked man
will be sumtime careless, and ignorant of the quality of his deeds, whether
they be good or evil, and sa will have peace of Conscience for a season:
Nevertheles, he cannot be ignorant quhat he hes done, at the time when the
fact is committed: Yea, although he were both forgetful quhat he had done,
and ignorant of the quality of the deid: it quhen it sall please the Lord to
knock at the door of his Conscience, and to illuminate his dull
understanding: he sal then both have his deids recent in memory, and sall
clearlie understand, that they ar evil and wicked, quhairvpon his awin
Conscience sall beir witness against him. Heirfore, to sin upon ignorance, It
is a dangerous thing. For we aucht neither to be ignorant, nor to doubt of the
quality of our actiouns; but should have assurance of our Consciences for all
that we do; and our Consciences the assurance of Gods word: The quhilk
assurance all men may have, that delights to be exercised in the Law of the
Lord: For this is may certain, that there is nathing quhilk may serve to the
salvation of man, but it is reveiled by the word of God, and set down in the
scriptures: And all that the Lord has commanded us to do, is good and
richteous: All that he hes defendit, and forbidden, is evil and wicked: And
all that is not inhibit and forbidden be the word of God, may be saifly done
without sin or offense: providing, that man do it upon knawledge, and doubt
not of his awin doing. Thus then we see, that by these diverse kinds of sins,
the Conscience, and saull of man is infected and corrupted: And by the sicht
and consideration thairof, is grievously wounded; quhairvpon there arrysis a
great remors, and trouble, in the spreit and Conscience: For quhen it pleases
the Lord to let man see the vglines of his own sin, his Conscience then
begins to accuse him, and to byte like a worm, inwardly in the heart: and
for that cause is callit, a biting or remording Conscience: The quhilk remorse,
gnawing, and biting, is perpetual in the wicked, that hes not the grace to
seik the remedy, as it was in Cain: But in the children of God it is temporal
only, and is cured and taken away with blenks of heavenly comfort. Again, the
perversed Conscience that is opponit unto this, is not moved with remorse, for
any wickedness that man can commit: But as the flesh is persed and burnt up with
the cautaire quhilk the Chirurgien dois apply, 1. Tim. 4. 2.
and is thereby made sensles and without feeling: Euin sa the Conscience is
infected with sin, and it hes na sense nor feeling thairof: and therefore it is
called, a cauterized, brunt up, or sensles Conscience. This proceidis from ane
obdured, obstinate, and hardened heart; quhilk continues in this obstinacy and
blindness, ay and quhill the Lord in his fearful judgment, begins to strike
the saul and Conscience with terrible terrors and torment: The form and manner
quhairof, we have nixt (be the grace of God) to declare.

CHAP. V.
Of the troubled spirit and conscience, and how it differs from melancholy,
from other natural diseases, and warldly sorrowis.
THe Spirit of man, and every function of the spirit (either the imagination,
the reasoun, the judgment, or the memory) may be diverse and sindrie ways
damnified and troubled: Some time by natural sickness and diseases, sometime by
natural melancholy and evil disposition of the body, sometime by contracted
melancholy, quhilk man apprehends through sorrow and care of warldly
thingis, sometime by the exterior leision of the parts of the head, quhilk are
called, the seats of these functions: And sometime through sudden and extreme
fear, love, joy, or other sicklyke passions of the mind. All the quhilk
thingis, are observed by the mediciners and chirurgiens, and in their warkis ar
abundantly set forth. Yea sometime the Lord by his immediate power, will
abstract the judgment, the memory, or other offices of the spirit, and will
strike man with frenzy, with madness, or forgetfulness; and restore them again
at his pleasure. But the troble of man's Conscience, is far different from any
of these troubles: quhilk is observed for the may pairt, to arrise after this
manner. Quhen it pleisis the Lord at any time, to show his angry face, and to
rebuke man for sin, incontinent man is stricken with sudden fear and trembling,
and begins to call to remembrance quhat sins he hes committit, and quhairin he
hes offendit his God: ea, the Lord will object his sins clearlie before his
eyes, albeit they have been never sa lang buried and forgot with man: Quhilk
quhen he remembers, sees the vglines thairof; is accusit by his awin
Conscience, and feillis the fearce wrath of God kindled against him for his
sin; his spirit and Conscience is marvellouslie troubled, and is suddenly
oppressed, with extreme pain and torment: In sik sort, that the trouble of
the spirit will oftimes redound to the body, and trouble the whole estate of
man; as though he were takin with sum agony, or sharp fevar. It is true, that
every man whom the Lord so visits, will not be alike sore troubled and
tormented; But sum in a higher, sum in a lower degrie, according to the
modificatioun of the Lord: But he that hes the feeling of his awin sin, and
of the wrath of God aganis his sin, in the highest degrie; that man sall see
nathing but the angry face of God, burning like a consuming fire against him,
and sal think na other thing, but that the Lord in his just judgment hes
castin him away, out from his presence and kingdom: Quhilk of al torments, that
man can suffer in this life, is the gretest. This kind of trouble that
proceids from the Conscience, seemis sa strange and difficil to natural and
warldly men, that they can hardly consaue it, but takes it ever up wrang: and
estiems those persons that are so troubled, either to be furious, lunatic, or
fantastic: either else to have taken sum apprehension, melancholy, or vain
conceit: ea, not only appeirs it hard unto them, but also to the very Children
of God, unless they have either had some taisting of it them selves, or else
have been well instructed therein, by sik as hes had the lively experience
thairof: As it is na wonder that flesh and blude understand it not: For it is a
great mystery, and a wonderful wark of the may high, quhilk by natural
reason, can not be comprehended. But as I have said before, the difference
betuix the trouble of the conscience, and other troubles, is notable and great.
For the diseases before rehearsed are natural; the disease of the Conscience,
supernatural. The natural diseases proceids from the evil constitution and
disposition of man's body, and his warldly sorrow, and wanrest from the
solicitude and care quhilk he hes of warldly things: But the wanrest and
anxietie of the conscience, proceids from the sicht and consideration of man's
sin. Mairouer, we see that the natural diseases of the body may be cured, by
using of natural remedies: sickness may be healed, by the application of
salutaire medicaments: The melancholious humors may be purged, and the body
brought to a good temperature and constitution: But all the Physicians, and all
the natural medecin under heaven, can na mair remeid the woundit conscience,
nor corporal meat and drink can nourish the saul; or naked words can satisfy
the hunger and thirst of the body. Siklike, the displesure and sorrow quhilk
man contracts, either through the loss, or through the care and desire of
earthly things; will either, through tract of time vanish away, quhair thingis
lost cannot be recovered; or be turned into joy and contentment, quhen he
obtains the things that he disired; whether sa it be riches, promotion, or
victory over his enemies: But all the riches, honor, and plesures of the
world, will never relieve the pain of a tormented conscience; (unless it before a
very short space) while inward comfort be given of the comforter, the haly
Ghost. I deny not but that the Lord will sometime use outward affliction, as a
means quhairby he will cause man to call his sins to remembrance, and
consequently, will make his awin conscience to condemn and torment him: But the
saul and conscience being once deeply woundit; na worldly consolation, nor
earthly remedy can avail: while the spirit of God work first inwardly in
the heart. Farther, it is to be understand, that not only the wicked and
reprobate are accustomed to have this trouble and prick of conscience: But also
the very chosen children of God, yea his dearest servants hes ever been, and it
are, may subject to the feiling of their awin sin and weakness: Quhairby they
will be sometimes reduced to sik extremity, that their faith will be altogether
smored for a season, and they brocht to the very brinke, and bordour of
desperation. Notwithstanding, al their sufferings, in the end redounds to their
eternal joy and salvation: Quhair by the contrair, the troubles of the wicked,
turnis at last to their utter wrack and confusion: For albeit the Lord, to try
and to humble his awin, and to let them know their awin infirmities, will sumty
me hide his face for a little season, and cover them as it were, with a cloud:
during the quhilk space, they will be in greit anguish and perplexity,
overshadowed with heavines and darkness, like the Moon ecclipsed, and private
of the licht of the Sun: Nevertheless, in the mids of their miseries, he
will edge by the cloud, and show them blenks of mercy, of comfort, and of
licht: and at last will turn his loving countenance again, and drive away all the darkness, and heavines of their saul's, and illuminat them with eternal
licht, and gladness. To conclude, I will say this meikle farther, That there is
nane whom the Lord hes predestinat to salvation, quhilk sal not, at sum time
of their life, be troubled, and tormented in some measure (though not all
equally) in their saull and conscience, through the sicht of their awin sin:
For this is certain, that we cannot enter into the kingdom of God, except we
first suffer, and abide trial: It is not possible, that we can be exalted
with everlasting exaltation, except we be first casten down and brocht low:
It is not possible, that we can be partakers of eternal glory and gladness in
the heaven with Christ, unless we be first participant of pain with Christ, and
feill with him, in some mesure, the torments of hell in our saul's and
Consciences. Thairfore, let every ane of us make us for it, and prepare our
selves for the day of trial and temptation: Let us turn in time to God, by
earnest repentance, and amendment of life, before he strike us in his
judgment: Let us always flee sin, and follow richteousnes, that in the day
of trial the accusation of our Conscience may be the less fearful: And above
all things, let us apprehend Jesus Christ crucified for our sin, with a true
and a lively faith: For if we once constantly believe that; we may be assured,
that how low soever we be brocht, how extreme soever our pain and torment
be, it the issue thairof salbe happy, and our deliverance joiful.

CHAP. VI.
The marks quhairby the woundit conscience may be knawin.
QVhair the saul and Conscience is wounded and oppressed, through the sicht of
sin, and through the feeling of Gods wrath against man for sin; there is na
quietness nor contentment there: For, how can there be any rest, or
delectation, quhair man hes a feiling of Gods wrath kindled aganis him, and is
persuaded in his heart, that he is out of the favor of God? Na, na, sa lang
as he is in that estate, there is nathing for him but wanrest, nathing but
fear, sorrow, languishing, wearines, heavines, darkness, and pain, both
within, and without. In sik sort, that if there were not intermissioun, at some
time, of the torment, the body were not able to sustain it: For the saul and
the body being joined together by a perfect union, The vexation of the saul
extendis to the body, quhilk hes a compassion and a suffering together with the
saull. Quhairvpon it followis, that he quha is troubled in spirit and
Conscience, will be bereft of all natural rest, though vtherwaies he be hail
both in body and spirit, and that nature use all the right offices; it the
Conscience being wounded, the trouble thairof, sall bereif man the nichts
sleep: his slumbrings will be short, and encombred with ugly dreams: his
waiknings will be triste, and his body commoved with heit and beitting, as
though he were in a fiever: and his sins will come often in mind, quhilk on na
wise he can eschew, nor forget. Siklike, the meat and drink will be loathsome
unto him: neither will he delight meikil in any warldly pleasure: But all earthly
recreation will be mair fashious, nor delectable unto him: ea it will appear to
himself, that all the creatures of God are animate, as it were, and conspired
against him. Nevertheles, the inclination and behavior of the wicked man,
being visited by the hand of God, will be far different from the behavior of
the godly: For the wicked man will be mair sorrowful for his awin wanrest, and
pain, nor for his sin, quhairby he hes offendit the majesty of God. He will
also blame the isntrumental causes of his trouble, mair nor himself: and will
seek unlawful means to be releifed of his pain; sometime laboring to
delait it out of his mind, by giving himself to warldly pleasures, and using
of wanton and riotous company: sometime by revenging himself on them whom he
estiems to be the instrumental causes of his trouble: and sometime by
consulting with sorcerers, and seeking responces of unclean sprits. To be
short, he hes ever a looking back to the world; and if he get any releif of his
pain, incontinent he returnis to his former impiety, like a sow to the
puddle, and heaps sin upon sin, quhairby his conscience is mair and mair
wounded, and his pain thereafter incresed: Quhil at the last, he fallis in
utter despair; and ather puts violent hands in himself, as Judas did; or else
is perpetually tormented with the worm of his conscience, as Cain was, during
his whole life time. By the contrair, the Child of God, quhen he feels the
correctioun of his Maker, and is accused by his awin conscience, he is
immediately taken with a godly sorrow for his sin, and hes a seeking to God
for mercy and releif. Notwithstanding, he will find in himself a great
inconstancy, and waiknes: For some time he will be ouerset with sadness, and in
ane instant will be changed, quhairof he cannot render a reason, but as the
spirit mouis him: Sometime, he will be fervent in prayer, sometime cold and
remitted: Sometime, he will pray formally and weil, sometime informally, being
interrupted with tears, Psalm 77. 4.
or with wavering thochts: ea, sometime he will be sa confused, that he cannot
pray, but will utter his passions with groans, with sichis, and with sobbes.
Attoure, he will have ane earnest desire to hear the word of God preached, or
red; and will think it marvelous comfortable and sweit: and when he hears any
part thereof that touchis him self, whether sa it be the description of his
misery, or the gracious promises, and mercies of the Lord rehearsed; he will
rejoice exceidingly, and partly for joy of the gudnes of God, and partly for
grief of his awin fall, and unthankfulness toward his Creator; he will oftymes
burst out with tears in abundance. Besides this, the wounded conscience may
not abide to hear any cursed or profane speaking: or to hear the name of God
in any ways blaspheamed, meikil les will he do it himself, For he is taken
with a great fear to offend the majesty of God, having already felt the stroke
of his hand. Siklike, the leist offense quhilk he can commit, will appear to
him to be of great gravity and weight: For like as the wound of the body will be
sa sair, that the patient can scarcely suffer any thing to touch it: Even so,
the woundit conscience is sa waik that the lest unseemly word, wrang luke, or
wavering thocht quhilk man can use, will hurt and trouble it, and make it to
remord. Finally, when the oppressed conscience gets any blenk of comfort, or
release of his pain; he will spring for joye, and think that he sal never again
be moved with sik perturbation: Bot sa sone as the Lord turnis away his face,
new troble and doubtings will arrise again, as though he had never received
comfort. And that quhilk is admirable, and a wonderful wark of Gods spirit; at
sometime the remembrance of a sin, or of a deed done, will sa trouble man,
that he cannot be comforted: And at ane other time the commemoration and sicht
of that same sin, will na mair move him, nor gif it had never been committed.
This appearantly proceedis in the wicked, from a hardened and obdured heart:
But in the faithful, from the assurance of the holy spirit, that the sin is
forgiven, and that mercy is granted through Jesus Christ.

This meikle I thocht necessary to write, concerning the discovery of a
wounded Conscience: To the effect, that the disease being discovered, the
remedy may be the mair easily found out, and skilfullie applied to the same.

CHAP. VII.
The remedy of the troubled spirit and Conscience.
ART thou troubled (O man or woman) in thy spirit and Conscience? Then I wald
exhort thee, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to enter into this
meditation and thinking with thy self. I perceive the Lord is mindful of me,
and hes visited me: For I feel my self inwardly touched: The Lord knocks at the
door of my Conscience* but quhat his will is, or quhat wark he is to wark in
me, I knawe not: howsoever it be, this is doubtless the day of temptation, and
the time of my trial: so that my estate is dangerous: For I know, that the
sprit and image of Satan will strive in me; aganis the sprit and image of God:
and if I harken not to the Lords call, but eild unto the sprit of Satan, I am
but lost. Thairfore, I beseik the Lord to be on my side, and to assist me with
his haly spreit in this perrellous battle, that I may stand fast, and submit my
self wholly to his haly will. This done, prepare thy self for the trial, by
fasting and abstenance, from the sensual lusts of the flesh: For thairby thou
sal be meikle eased of thy pain, and sal both be better disposed to serve thy
God, and be made a mair meet subject to the spreit of God to wark in. Being
humbled and prepared, first of all clenge thy heart and Conscience: For, gif
thou present thy self before the Lord with a polluted heart, and corrupted
Conscience; All that you can do or say, will be but abomination unto him; and he
will nather regard thy prayers, nor accept any service at thy hands; Deuteronomy. 4.
24 Heb. 12. 29
But will rather be a consuming fire ready to destroy thee. Thairfore, let the
manner of thy clenging be this: Enter in sharp trial and examination of thy life
and conversation, from thy youth up: Call to remembrance quhat kind of vice or
vices hes greatest dominion in thee; and quhat offenses thou hes committed from
time to time, either against God or thy Neighbor: This do, not only at a time,
but at diverse and sundry times: For thou will remember at ane time, that
quhilk thou can not do at ane other: Quhilk if thou examine narrowly, not
flattering thy self, I doubt not, but thou sal find thy sins ugly enough,
and of ane hudge number: ea, it may be, that the memory and consideration of
them humble thee very far, and make thee both to abhor them, and thy
self, that should have committed sik abominations. Having now ryppit up thy
sin, quhilk is the fountain of al thy misery; thou hes nixt to turn thee
with thy hail heart to the Lord, seeking help and releif at his hands, quha is
only able to deliver thee. But how sal I turn (may thou say) to the Lord?
for I know not the way. Surely, the lord hes taught the way, how a sinner sall
turn unto him: Mat. 4. 17.
To wit, even by earnest and unfeigned repentance; Acts. 2. 38.
and by a true and lively faith in the mercies of God, Iere. 41. and 6. 16.
through the death of Jesus Christ. As to the form of thy repentance, let it
be this: Cast down thy self on thy face and knees before thy God, and with a
broken heart; First, confess thy sins freely unto him, without hypocrisy,
how secreit or abominable soever they be: For if thou dissemble, or mean to
hide any thing fra him, that knawis the leist hirne of thy heart; Iere. 11. 20
thy labor is al in vain; and thou but provokes his indignation mair and mair
against thee. Secondly, thou mon be sorrowful in thy heart for thy sin: For
except thou be displeased with thy self, that thou hes offended thy good God;
think not that thy offenses sal be forgiven: neither sal it suffice to say,
that it repents thee of the evil quhilk thou hes done; unless thou rue in very
deid: For the Lord that is the searcher of the heart, 1. Sam. 16. 7.
knawis quhat thou dois think, albeit thy sayings be never sa good. Thairfore,
beware that thou use na dissimulation with him, leist for thine hypocrisy he
confound thee. Thirdly, amend thy life in times cumming, by abstaining not
only from the sins, quhairvnto thou hes been may addicted: But also, from
al other kind of sin: and, be doing that quhilk is good and acceptable in the
sicht of the Lord: For, this is the fruit of repentance. So, that he quhilk
sayis he repents, and amends not his life in some measure, but continues in
his former wickedness; he is a liar, and the spreit of God is not in him. But
foralsmeikle as al sin, is either committed aganis God only, and the first
table of his Law: either else aganis man, and the second table: Thou aucht
diligently to mark both the ane and the other, that is may ryfe in thee, and
that sorest pricks thy Conscience. Al sin is aganis God, but al sin is not
aganis man: Thou may also offend God by thine evil thocht, because he knawis
thy thocht: But be thy thocht man cannot be offended, because he knawis it not.
If then thy sin be aganis God only, thou hes God only to satisfy, by
acknowledging thy sin, by sorrowing for thy sin, by imploring mercy for thy
sin, and by refraining thy self thereafter from that sin. But if thou have
sinned aganis man, by offending him in word or deed; either in body, goods, or
name: In that case, thou mon both crave pardone at the hands of God, and
travel by all means possible to be reconciled with man: ea, except thou first
endevoure thy self, sa far as in thee lyis, to satisfy man whom thou hes sa
offended; assure thy self, that God will not be satisfied in the* Hes thou made
a godly vow to the Lord, quhilk thou hes not performed? Perform thy godly
vow (if it be possible) unto him: Hes thou made a lawful promise unto man,
quhilk thou hes not kept? Fulfill thy promise if it be possible, albeit it be
to thy loss. Be not ashamed to address thy self to him, quhome thou hes
offended, although he be thy inferior, and crave pardone of him for thine
offense: And look quhat satisfactioun he can justly crave of thee, either in
words, in gudes, or other kind of deid; See thou be willing to make it,
according to thy power: That thou may obtain peace of Conscience; and that the
cries of the oppressed saul quhilk sustaines bitterness and wrong, ascend not to
the Lord, and procure his vengeance against thee. Farther, quhasoeuer hes
offended thee, thou mon forgive them their offenses freely: That the Lord may
also forgive thee thine offenses: But gif thou forgive not men their
trespasses, Mat. 6. 15
Jesus Christ certifies thee, that thy heavenly Father will na mair forgive thee
thy trespasses. Finally, thou mon renounce thy corrupted affections, and every
thing that withhalds thee from God, how dear and precious soever it be in
thine eyes: Root out thy vices, ane by ane out of thy heart, quhilk hes had sa
lang dominion over thee: And in every thing do that quhilk thou knawis to be
the will of God: Setting aside thine awin will, and removing al warldly respects,
and impediments quhatsoeuer; how vnapeirand, or far repugnant soever it be, to
the natural inclination of thy heart: That the Lord may be weil pleased with
thee, and that thou may have the testimony of a good Conscience. O! But these
are hard sayings to flesh and blude, and here sal arise a strong battle
within thee, quhen thou art this ways tried with the renunciation of thy awin
will, and affectiouns; and urged to do that quhilk is contrary to thy manly
heart: For oftymes will thou think with thy self: Sall I forgive him, that hes
done me sik wrang, and craves na pardon of me? Sal I suffer this of him? Sal I
not be revenged of this injury, and on him with whom I am sa far behind?
Siklike, quhen it comes to the renuncing of the affections of thy heart,
quhilk thou hes followed and served sa lang; and of that domestic Idol,
quhilk thou and every man hes erected in the heart: whether sa it be, the lusts
and plesures of the flesh, warldly honors and vain glory, covetousness of
warldly gudes, the desire of revenge, or other quhatsumeuer vice, quhairunto
thou art chiefly bound in servitude: That conflict (I say) will be felon, and
that departing difficil: For the spreit of the devil, and the natural
corruption of thine awin heart, will strive michtelie aganis the spreit of God,
and the regenerate part of thy saul, if any be: Swa that thou sal make many
shifts and excuses to satisfy thy a win will and appetite, to fulfill the
desire of thy heart, and to retain that Idol, quhilk like a bond-slaue, thou
serves and adores. Yea, the young rich man, Mat. 19. 21.
quhome Christ bad sell all that he had, give it to the poor, and follow him;
made never greater mourning, nor the natural man will make to quyte his Idol,
the strongest affection of his heart, quhairvnto he is thrall: For the devil was
never lother to come out of the person whom he possesses, nor natural vices
will be to come out of man's heart, where they have once taken deep root. Bot
thou, O man that art inwardly touched! may knawe quhairon it stands: either mon
thou forgive man, Deu. 32. 35
and remit the revenge to God (to whom vengeance apertaineth) and to his
lieutenants whom he hes appointed to execute justice upon earth: or else look
not to be forgiven of thy heavenly Father, Mat. 6. 15
nor to be releeved of thy present trouble. Luke 9. 23.
In like manner, either mon thou renounce al thy wicked affections
quhatsumeuer, and reform them, in some measure: or else renounce thy part of
the kingdom of heaven. This meikle concerning the turning to God, by
repentance and amendment of life* nixt followis, the turning to God by faith.

Hes thou tried thy warks, and turned to God by earnest repentance, and with a
resolute mind to amend thy life in times coming? Now try likewaies thy faith,
and take diligent heed, whether it be waik, wavering, and full of doubting or
not: and whether it agrees with the true, haly, catholic, and apostolic faith,
or not: and where thou finds it deficient in any of these points, turn with
speid to the Lord, and embrace him with a true and a lively faith: For without
faith, al thy repentance, and all thy good warks cannot avail a whit; but ar
like a filthy menstrous clout in the sicht of the Lord. There is many men that
will take heed to their warks, and will fly from vice and vnrichteousnes;
quhilk takes na tent to the nature of their faith, and to their zeal, and
fervencie in the true service and worshipping of God; quhilk is a matter of
greater consequence. But it is not thy warks can make thee free from sin,
Romans 3. 27 28.
nor from hell: Romans 5. 1.
It is by faith thou mon be justified; and through thy belief thou mon be
saved. 1. Pet. 1. 9.
Yea, John. 6. 47.
but quhat sal I believe (would thou say) that I may be saved? Even this thou
hes to believe. First, that the God of heaven, quhilk was worshipped in
Israel, is the only true God, the Almichtie, and eternal father, quha hes
created all the world, and by his divine power, gouerns the same, and all
things therein contained. Secondly, thou mon believe that this same God,
according to his promise made to our Fathers, hes sent his only Son Jesus
Christ, down from heaven into this world, to take away the sins of mankind,
quhairin all were shot up through the disobedience of our first progenitor Adam:
Quhilk, as a gracious Savior became a natural man, and by his death and
obedience, hes made the reconciliation betwixt God and us, and hes redeemed us
from the hell quhairvnto al were condemned. Believe that in him the Lord is
weill pleased, and with thee for his sake: That he hes made a full and
sufficient recompense for all thy sins bypast and to come: that he is risen
again from death, and by his resurrection hes overcome the same, and the sting
thairof, quhilk is sin, the devil, and hell the recompense of sin. Believe
that he is ascended again to the heaven, and there sits at the richt hand of
his Father, making intercession to him for thee, and all that believes in his
death; and that he sal yet come again from heaven to judge the world, and sal
raise thee to everlasting life. Thirdly, thou mon believe, that after the
ascension of our Savior Jesus Christ; the Comforter, the haly Ghost and spreit
of God, was sent down from the Father and the Sone into this world; To rule,
to preserve, to instruct, to strenthen, to comfort, to renew and sanctify by
his michtie power, all the chosen children of God (quhilk is his halie and
universal Kirk) ay and quhill Jesus Christ come again to finish al things. If
thou apprehend these three persons and ane God with a true faith; and believe
al their warks, their precepts, and promises quhilk are set down in the
Scriptures; as also the doctrine of their Prophets, Apostles, Pastors, and
ministers: Thou may certify thy self, that though thy sins were never sa
heinous and detestable, they sall be freely remitted, and never laid to thy
charge; That thou art ane whom the Lord hes predestinate to eternal salvation;
and that al thy present pain sal be converted in everlasting pleasure. But thou
may justly object unto me, that thou can nather use sik a form of repentance:
nor it can find sik strenth of faith in thy self, as is here required. Indeed
it is true, that nather faith, nor repentance are at thy taking: nor it can be
given thee by any creature: but mon proceed from the michtie working of Gods
spirit in thy heart. Thairfore, thou mon prostrate thy self before the Lord,
and by earnest and diligent prayer, crave them incessantly at his hands, quha
hes only power to give them. Show him in thy prayer that thou art miserable;
that without his help thou art but lost, that thou can do na good thing, except
he give thee grace, that thou art there reddy to obey his will, and inquire of
him, quhat he wald have thee to do; burding him with his merciful promises;
remember him of his wonted mercies, and warks of old; but cheiflie of the
sufferings and satisfaction of his Son Jesus christ, to quhais richteousnes
thou mon cleave; and in his name, and for his sake, mon crave mercy, grace,
patience, strength, increase of faith, and relief of thy pain, according to
his good pleasure, at the bountiful hands of God. Oh, but here is all the
difficulty, will thou say, I am sa troubled and dejected, that I cannot pray.
Surely, I grant that the oppressed spirit, will be sometimes brocht to sik
extremity, that it can neither believe, repent, pray, nor meditate: But like a
brute beast, will remain for a season, altogether stupifact and confused.
Therefore when thou art in that perplexity, abide pacientlie the Lords will and
leisure; for their is na remeid but patience, quhil the Lord drive away the
darkness of thy mind; seeing that obscurity will not tarry lang: and at leist,
sa far as is possible, have the eye of thy heart direct toward the Lord, and
thy thocht carried up to the heaven; have a desire to pray, and utter thy
intention with sighs: For the Lord that is a spirit knawis what thy spirit
wald, albeit there be nathing uttered in words. Romans 8. 27.
And when thou gets a blenk of licht, and release of thy pain, have refuge
hastily to the Mediator Jesus Christ, quha hes bidden sik as are weary and
laden come to him and he will ease them: Power out thy complaints and
supplications before him, and beseech him to make mediation to his Father for
thee whom he hes redeemed with his blood, to appease his Fathers wrath, and to
present thee faultlesse unto him. Father, least thou be over far casten down
with the remembrance and sicht of thy sin; have not thine eyes always fixed
upon the vglines of thy sin: but rather upon the infinite mercies of God,
quhilk exceids thy sin in greatness. Remember likewaies, his merciful
promises, and mercy showed to his servants, that hes been in the like eestate,
that thou art now in: And if thou can remember that the Lord hes showed mercy
at any time on thee before, by delivering thee out of danger or troble: Then
thou may be suirly persuaded that he will show mercy on thee again: for the
mercy of God is without repentance. To. 11. 29.
Heirfore, if thou continue after this manner, in fasting, in prayer, in purging
and circumcising thy heart and conscience, in suffering patiently the Lords rod
and correction, and in hope daily waiting for his deliverance: Their is na
question, but thou sal see a blessed issue of thy trouble: For thou sal resaue
the haly Ghost quhilk sal redress thy falts, cure thy misery; illuminate thy
understanding, sanctify thy saul and make thee a new man, far above thy
expectation. Bot foralsmeikle as the rest and wanrest of the spirit and
conscience consists meikle in the daily exercise and conversatioun of man: I
will also breiflie set down what yt should eschew, and how thou should be
exercised during the time of the trouble and wanrest of thy Conscience.

CHAP. VIII.
Quhat things man aucht chiefly to eschew, and quhairin he should be exercised
during the wanrest and trouble of his conscience.
VVAld thou not have thy Conscience to bite, to accuse, nor to trouble thee?
Then give na matter to thy Conscience, quhairupon it may bite, or accuse thee,
and be not the cause of thine awin troble. The matter or subject quhilk both
makes the Conscience to bite, and disquiets the spirit of man, is sin.
Thairfore, to pacify and acquiet thy sprit and Conscience; thou should flee
sin and follow richteousnes, quhilke brings peace and quietness with it. And
albeit, it be impossible to man, sa lang as he is in this tabernacle of flesh,
to be altogether without sin, and to abstain from doing evil: seeing the
whole course of this life is but a continual falling, and a rising.
Nevertheles, the regenerat man, is not often seen to fall in the public and
notorious sins, quhilk are manifest to the world; But will be unreprovable, and
upright in the sight of men; neither will sin have dominion, or the upper
hand in him. Herefore, thou aucht at all times, but principally now in this the
time of thy inward trouble, and of the Lords visitation, to take diligent heed
to thy ways: and at least to eschew al occasions of evil, whereby thy weak
Conscience may be wounded, on the other part, thou aucht to use all convenient
means, whereby thou may be stirred up to serve God, and to follow
righteousness, that the wound of thy infirm conscience may be healed. First
then beware, that during the time of thy vexation, thou use no worldly means to
put away the memory, and sicht of thy sins; and to cause thee to forget them:
As by drinking, banqueting, daunsing, singing sporting* or by hanting the
ryotous company or wanton and merry men: For in so doing, thou lulles thy
self a sleep, and like as the Serpent stoppes her ear with her tail, least
she should hear the voice of the inchaunter: So stoppes thou thine ear, that
thou should not hear the Lord calling, and knocking at the door of thy
Conscience; least by his holy spirit he should enter in, and convert thee.
Beware thou seek any vnlauchfull means to relieve thee of thy pain, and to
content thy mind: as by witchcraft, by taking of thy warldly and fleshly
pleasures, or by revenging on thine enemies: Considdering, that this sal at
length augment thy pain, albeit it seem pleasant for a season, and sall
prolong thy trouble: Because thou seeks not to God, that is seeking thee; but
turns thy back upon him, and seeks help where it is not to be found. Beware
thou continue not in thy woonted vice and wickedness, heaping sin upon sin,
without regard what thou dois, or taking up of thy self from thy ungodly
course: For then in contemptible manner thou despisest the Lords correction,
and will not be reformed by his discipline, but takes a plain banner aganis
him, and kindles his fearce wrath more and more agains thee, in sik sort, that
thou sall at the last bring thy self to utter desperation. Beware thou revile
not thy estate, and form of thy trouble rashly to every man: neither crave
thou the advice, and counsel of natural and worldly men; meikle less, follow
thou their opinion in the matter of the trouble and disease of thy Conscience:
For then thou dois no otherways, nor if thou would crave the consultation of a
jurisconsult, in the matter of thy health: or advise thy process with a
medicinar. There is neither help, nor true comfort to be found that way, in
respect the natural and unregenerate man; yea the unregenerate part of the
regenerate man (for there is no perfyte regeneration in this life) is
altogether blind in spiritual things, and will ever give a counsel direct
contrary to the will and spirit of God. Mairover, bridle and refrain thy
tongue, that unruly member, as with a bit, from lying, slaundering, backbyting,
mocking, railling, vpbraiding, and cursed speaking: For thereby thy Conscience
may be grievously wounded. And for as much as the world is full of temptations,
and stumbling blocks, whereon man is daily in danger to fall: Therefore I would
wish thee, so long as thy Conscience is diseased, not to entangle nor meddle
thy self much with worldly business: but to abstract thy mind from the
solicitude of temporal affairs; and to withdraw thy self from the society
of the profane multitude: to the effect, that being free from al outward
perturbation, thou may be the better disposed to serve thy God, to give thy
self to contemplation, and to be exercised in all spiritual and godly
exercitions. Let then thy daily exercise, during the disease of thy Conscience,
be this: If thou can read, give thy self to the lecture of comfortable books
composed by learned and godly men; and to the reading of the holy Scriptures:
But in special revolue diligently the books of Genesis and Exodus, the
history of Job, the Psalms of David, the Evangel of Jesus Christ according to
Matthewe and John, the Acts of the Apostles, and their Epistles. Where thou
shall find singular comfort in the wonderful works, and divine providence of
the Lord in delivering and preserving of his people; in his healthsome
instructions and gracious promises made unto them; and in his exceeding great
mercy, and loving kindness toward his servaunts, quhilk have been in the like
estate, that thou art now in. The company quhilk thou frequents, let it be of
godly, wise, and learned men; of whose conference thou may receive instruction
and consolation. And if thou would communicate thy secreit vexation to any
man; or would be resolved of any thing whereof thou art in doubt. Address thee
to some notable servant of God, approved in life and knawledge, to whom the
Lord has committed the dispensation of his word: To him disclose thy mind,
and seek resolution of him, in those things quhilk concerns thy Conscience, and
weill of thy soull. Isa. 56. 7
Haunt the Kirk; Mat. 21. 13
for it is the house of God: Haunt the Assemblies of the faithful convened to
serve the Lord: And give diligent ear to the preaching of his holy word:
Nevertheles, while the darkness of thy mind be driven away, while thy heart
and Conscience, be purified, and that by some mesure of faith thou apprehend
remission of thy sins, and salvation through the death of Jesus Christ; I would
not counsel thee to present thy self to the haly Communion, and supper of the
Lord Jesus. Delight in solitair meditations of the wonderful works, the mighty
power, the infinite mercy, and divine providence of God; in delivering,
governing, comforting, and preserving his Kirk, and the members thereof, from
the beginning of the world. Rehearse and meditate likewise, on the office,
life, and sufferings of our Savior Jesus Christ. Remember the strange miracles
wroght by him, his notable doctrine, his gracious advertisements, Read John 6.
13. 14. 15 16. and 17. chapters.
of tribulation and persecution to come, his own coming again, and his
comfortable promises made unto al them that believes in him, and looks for his
returning. Call to remembrance his patience, tender love, humility, and
meekness, whereof thou should learn and labor to be a follower. Be ever
cleansing thy heart, and rypping out the latent vice, and heritable corruption
that lurks within thee: that thou may be a meet receptacle, and temple of the
holy Ghost: For where the heart is polluted, and the Conscience defiled, the
spirit of God can make no residence nor dwelling. Reconcile thy self, so far
as is possible, with all men: Expel all malice, hatred, and envy. Be not a
revenger of thine own cause: For thereby thou sall renew and ranckle the wound
of thy conscience: but remit the vengeance thereof to God, and crave justice of
the Magistrate. Try and examine thy self, how thou profits in knawledge, faith,
and amendment of life, by the reading and hearing of Gods word. Reduce in
memory what dangers of body, of soul, or oflosing thy goods, thou hes ben in,
during the course of thy life, and how the Lord hes delivered and preserved
thee. Siklike, call to mind what good gifts of the body, of the spirit, or of
other temporal things, thy God hes bestowed on thee: Be thankful to him
therefore, and thereupon thou may take assurance, that considering the
constancy of the Lord, he will never leave thee altogether destitute of help;
but will ever have mercy and compassion on thee, as he hes had in times
preceiding. Be always occupied in well doing and exercise the works of
righteousness: visit the sick, comfort the sorrowful, support the poor and
needy, defend the poor oppressed, treat peace and concord among neighbors
and brethren: Instruct the ignorant in the knowledge of Jesus Christ. Finally,
let al thy actions, thy words, and cogitations tend to the glory of God, to
charity and meeknes. And every night, when thou go to bed, or being in thy
bed, take count of thy self how thou have bestowed that day: If thou hes been
well exercised, praise God for it, and travel to continue: If thou hes been evil
occupied, sleep not while thou repent, and crave God mercy for thy offenses:
Take purpose to do better the nixt day, and endeavor thy self to amend, take
new resolution to reform thy ways, and aspyre daily by the grace of God, to
a greater perfection. But above all things, be diligent in fasting and prayer:
Pray continually; for thereby al good things are obtained: Pray in the
Morning, in the Evening, at midday, and at al times when the spirit movis
thee: yea, chiefly in the night when others are at rest, arise (if the
commodity may serve) or secretly in thy bed enter in familiar and earnest
conference with thy God. And when thou finds a coldness and sluggishnes in thy
self to pray, and to worship God: The commemoration and remembrance of the
woonderful works and mercies of God, of thy deliverance out of thy former
troubles, and of his manifold benefits bestowed on thee (which thou for that
same purpose, should collect and keep for a memorial in write.) The memory, I
say, of these things, shall kindle and inflame thy spirit to be fervent in
prayer, and zealous in the service of thy Creator. And albeit this form of
living may perchance appear austere, painful, and tedious to thee in the
beginning: (though nothing should seem painful or fasheous to thee, considering
thy dangerous estate, and the importance of the matter it self, quhilk concerns
thy salvation and damnation) Nevertheles, by frequent custom, thou shall find
it most easy, comfortable, and sweet: For, like as thou hes now a sicht and
sore feling of thy sin, and of Gods wrath kindled against thee for thy sin: So
sall thou doubtless in short time, by this thy godly behavior, get a sicht and
feling of thy regeneration and newnes of life, of the remission of thy sin, and
of the favor and mercy of God through the intercession of the mediator Jesus
christ. Whereby thou sall obtain peace of Conscience, with such contentment,
and gladness as cannot be expressed. And seeing prayer is the chief part of the
true service and worshipping of God; and the principal mean and way, whereby
we ought to seek to him, to obtain al good things at his hands: Herfore I
have also set down here to thee, a form of prayer to be vsit, during the time
of the trouble of thy Conscience, quhilk thou may read and consider, and
thereafter collect thereof so much as agrees with thy present estat and may
serve to thy purpose.

CHAP. IX.
A Prayer to be said by such, as are trobled in spirit and conscience, through
sight of their sins.
Just, dreadful, almighty, merciful, and everliuing God! Who by thine al seeing
spirit, see the deeds, hears the words, and knows the secret thochts of al
hearts: Behold me poor wretch, in thy mercy, here on the face of this low
earth, prostrat before thine holy and high throane. Alace! I confess Lord, that
I am not worthy to lift up my face to heaven, nor to receive any comfort or
good thing of thy hands: For I have sinned, alace! I have sinned aganis thee, I
have broken thy statutes, I have abused thy clemency and benefits, I have
committit abomination, and followitthe affections and lusts of mine own
heart. Wherefore, thou have now, Lord, afflicted me, and that most justly:
Thou have made mine own Conscience to accuse, and torment me: my soul is
vehemently vexed, and heavy unto death, my heart is faint through anguish, and
my flesh consumes and pines for fear of the stroke of thy hand. Thou art
angry, O Lord? thou art angry: but who is able to abide thy fearce wrath?
Thou know that man is but a vain thing, Psalm. 39. 5
his life is like a vapor, or a shadow which vanishes away in an instant, and
the imaginations of his heart are evil and wicked. Genes. 8. 21
I am but dust, and like the flower of the field which withers and decaies
suddenly; I cannot abide the heat of thine anger. It is true, Lord, that I am
inexcusable, and sinful out of measure; but mercy belongs unto thee; let thy
mercy therefore abound, and appear infinite in forgiving me many sins, I turn
me unto thee, O Lord, turn thee again unto me; I seek thy face, hide not thy
favorable face from me; but let the bright blenks of thy loving countenance
shine on me: For thou know, it repents me of the evil which I have done,
and that I trust in thee: But, Lord supply my deficient repentance, and help
my unbelief: For my repentance is imperfect, and my faith is weak. None can
come to thee, unless thou draw them; John. 6. 44.
nor can believe while they be converted by thy spirit: Draw me therefore unto
thee, and I shall come; convert me, and I shall be converted. O Lord, Thou
know the dolor and sorrow of my heart for my sin, thou see my misery
and trouble: Day and night I mourn and I lament, my face is al bedewed with
tears, and my soul werieth of my life: I am a monster to them that beholds me,
and mine acquaintance wonders at my misery. There is no help in man, neither
does any worldly consolation avail me. No Man, nor Angel is able to relieve
me, but thou only: without thy help, Lord, I am but lost for ever. But when
did you ever reject the heavy heart, and the oppressed Conscience quhilk did
seek to thee with continuance? Thou delights not in the death of sinners but
would have al men to repent, Eze. 18. 23
and be saved: 1. Tim. 2. 4.
Thou art slow to anger and ready to forgive: 2. Pet. 3. 9.
Thy wrath is consaued in the morning and forgot in the evening: Thy mercy
exceeds my sins, and all things in greatness; and there is no end with thy
compassion. Let not then, O Lord, thy mercy be shut up in displeasure; be not
angry with me for ever, neither correct me any more in thy wrath: For I am no
more in thy hands, nor the potshard is in the hands of the potter: But
remember thy wonted mercies, and works of old showed to thy servants Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, to Moses, David; and to thy people Israel: Remember the death
and obedience of thy dear son Jesus Christ; remember the anguish of his
heart, when he prayed unto thee, that night he was betrayed; and his cries on
the cross, when he cried unto thee, My God, my God! why hes thou forsaken me?
Was it not for my sin, O Lord, that he suffered these things? Loose not then
thy poor servant whom thou hes so dearly bought with the blud of thy Lamb:
Behold him, Lord, sitting at thy right hand, and let thy wrath be apesed with
me, in regarding his humble countenance: Have not respect to my deseruings, and
unworthiness; but unto his death and obedience: Impute his righteousness unto me,
and let his justice, be made my justice; for he hes redemit me: yea, for thine
own mercies sake, and merits of thine only Son, my savior, cast my sins behind
thy back, remember my iniquities no more, and have pity on my distres and
misery. Behold, Lord, I am here, what is thy will with me? what sal I do? what
course sall I take? how sal behave my self in this my troble, and during the
whole pilgrimage of my life? Make answer unto me: for I will not leave crying
unto thee. Yea, though thou should kill me, yet will I not depart from thee, but
will still trust in thee. My whole desire is to please thee, show me thy will,
therefore, and enlarge my heart, that I may obey thy voice, and fulfill thy
commandments. O my God! Raise me up in thy mercy, as thou have casten me
down in thy justice: let me see thy salvation and deliverance from the bondage
of Satan, of sin, and of mine own concupiscence. I thirst for thy mercy and
grace, O Lord, as the dry ground dois for the running waters: Redress my
faults therefore, let them be freely forgiven, as though they had never been
committed: And as thou hes given me a feeling of my sin, and of thine
indignation against sin: So give me a sure persuasion of the remission of my
sin, and a feeling of thy favor, without the quhilk I cannot live. Drive away
the darkness of my mind; Let all these troublesome cogitations, vain fear,
incredulity and mistrust depart from me: Settle and pacify my perturbed
spirit, bind up my wounded Conscience, heal my contrite and broken heart,
restore my courage and my strength, restore me to that joye quhilk I was wont
to find in thee. And if it be thy pleasure, Lord, remove thy scourge from me:
for I have felt enough thy hand: mitigate my pain, and let me see the issue of
my troubles, that I may be able to bear them: yet, not as I will Lord, but as
thou will: If thy glory may be advanced through my sufferings; or thy power
made perfect through my infirmity and weakness; let me suffer whatsoever
pleases thee: Try me, as the gold and as the silver, quhilk is purified in the
furnace, while I be made a meet temple of thy holy spirit, and be well
prepared for thy kingdom. Always acording to thy promise and faithfulness,
tempt me not above that quhilk I am able to bear: For thou know I am weak,
and am but flesh. Give me therefore patience, strenth, and constancy with the
trial, that I may suffer, resist, overcum, and inherit al things. Let thy
constant and good spirit rest in me, O Lord, that I may stand steadfast unto the
end of this battle; that I fret not with my self, after the manner of the
wicked, nor cast off thy cross through impatiencie: but that I may adhere
firmly unto thee, humbly submit my self to thy will, patiently wait and
watch for thy coming and deliverance, and be heartily well content with thy
good pleasure, whatsoever cross or afflictioun it shall please thee to lay on
me: For thou know what is good for me, thou hes al power in heaven, and in
earth, thou hes a continual care and love toward thy chosen Children, thou
art constant, and true in thy promises, and thy mercy and loving kindness
indures for ever. I will always wait on thee (my God) I will suffer thy
stripes and correction: for I have deserved them. I render my self unto thee;
I give me over, soul and body, in thy hands; I submit me all wholly to thy
will; rule, and use the work of thy hands, as seems good in thine eyes: For I
am thy servant: yea, whether I be in prosperity, or adversity; in wealth, or
in poverty; in estimation, or disesteemed; in joy, or in heavines; in pleasure,
or in pain; in health, or in sickness; whether I live or die, I am always
thine, thy servant, and work of thine own hands. Grant me therefore, O Lord,
only thy loving countenance, thy blessing, thy favor, and thy grace; and then
I sall have enough; they salbe sufficient for me; that is all that I crave: For
thou sall make my heart more joyful thereby, nor they quhilk possesses great
kingdoms. O loving father, hide me under the shadow of thy wings, and
perform that work quhilk thou hes begun in me, to thy glory to my comfort
and salvatioun; that I may praise thee, and thy dear son Jesus Christ, in
whose name, and for whose sake I crave these things at thy bountiful hands,
Ioh. 16. 24
as he hes taught and commanded me. To thee through him, be al honor and glory,
in heaven and in earth, for ever. Amen.

O holy Lamb, and only son of the everliving God! The light of the world,
and redeemer of mankind; (my sweet Savior Jesus Christ) I come unto thee, as
unto my only stay and refuge, weary, and laden with sorrow, and with sin, and
sore thirsting for thy grace and mercy. Therefore, according to thy promise,
ease me of my burden; Mat. 11. 28
and give me of the water of life to drink, John. 4. 14
whereby my thirst may be quenched for ever. Thou have promised likewise, O
Lord, to be with us unto the end of the world: Be with me then, as thou hes
promised, now in my extreme trouble, and urgent necessity: For I am thine,
and I trust in thee. Behold (my God) I have gone long astray, like a lost
sheep, my sins hes almost deceived me; For through the multitude thereof, I
have provoked and kindled the wrath of thy Father against me* Wherefore I am
brought wondrous low, and am reduced to great extremity: my soul is woe and
sore grieved, that I have offendit his Majesty: but thou art able to raise me
out of the dust, and to reconcile thy Father with me: For thou art his
anointed: He hes sent thee to bind up the broken hearted, Esai. 61. 1
to preach liberty to the captives, to preach good tidings to the poor, the
recovering of sight to the blind, the opening of the prison to them that are
bound, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord, to comfort them that morn,
to give them beauty for ashes, the oil of joye for mourning, and the garment
of gladness, for the spirit of heavines. O gracious Savior! thou came not in
the world to save the righteous, but to bring sinners to repentance, whereof I
am one of the greatest: Raise me up therefore O my God, be thy mighty hand,
wash away my sins with thy precious blood, make me white, as the snow and
wool, cloth me with thy righteousness, pacify the wrath of thy father
conceived aganis me for those sins, for the quhilk thou hes already made full
satisfaction. Stand betwixt him and me that his burning ire consume me not: O
gracious mediator! make intercession to his divine Majesty for me: present me
faltles unto him: And let the comforter comfort me, and put me in remembrance
of al things; that through his governance I may be safely conducted through all the perrels and temptations of this world, to thy celestial kingdom, there to
glorify thee, the father, and the holy spirit, in eternal unity, with all
kind of praise, and exaltation for ever. Amen. Make have, O Lord, and tarry not;
that having obtained new experience of thy mercy, I may declare the same to my
brethren, that others through my example may fly sin, and they quhilk are
likewise dejected, may learn to seek help, and comfort in their trouble, where
it is to be found; even at thy hands, O Lord, to thy perpetual glory, to the
comfort of thy Kirk, and overthrowe of the kingdom of Satan.

CHAP. X.
What comfort they may have, that are afflicted in Spirit and Conscience.
FOr so much as it is impossible to man, or Angel, by any reason, persuasion,
or consolation; to comfort that person from whom the Lord hes hid his
favorable face: while it please his majesty to turn again his loving
countenance, and to work a sure persuasion of his favor inwardly in the heart,
by the operation of his holy spirit. Nevertheles, the ordinary means and
citation of the gracious promises of the Lord, whereby man may receive comfort
in troble, ought not to be contemned: Bot by the contrary, we should have refuge
in all our afflictions thereunto, being left to us by God to that effect: For
comfort must proceed from faith, and faith must come through the hearing of the
word, and promises of God sounded, quhilk the holy Ghost thereafter makes to
work in the heart. Therefore, the sweet comfort that thou may receive (O man!
that art afflicted in spirit and Conscience) is greter nor I am able to
express; whereof, a part is this. First for confirmation of thy faith, thou may
know by extraordinary experience, that there is a divine power, even a God
that rules the hearts of al men; and that the same God among all his creatures,
is mindful of thee. Secondly, It is a manifest token, that thou art beloved
of God, when he chastises, and rebukes thee: For, whom the Lord loves (says
the Apostle) he chastises, and scourges every Son that he receives: Heb. 12. 5.
When he corrects thee, Prou. 3. 11.
he offers himself unto thee, Reu. 3. 19.
as unto his Son; and does it for thy profit, that thou may be partaker of his
holiness. Thirdly, It is not possible, that thou can be exalted to Christ's
kingdom, except thou be first assaulted with temptation, Act. 14. 22
except thou be casten down, and have a lively feling of thine own sin and
wretchedness: Thou can not be victorious, unless thou fight; and thou cannot
obtain a crown of victory, unless thou be victorious. 2. Tim. 2. 12
But if thou suffer with Christ, Rev. 3. 21.
thou sal also reign with him: and if thou resist and overcome temptation, as
he did, thou sal be sure also to sit with him in his throane, as he sits with
his Father in his throne. Fourthly, albeit thou be in great perplexity, thou
should not think that the Lord hes forsaken thee, or is wrath with thee: For the
Lord is not at all times angry with his children, when he appears to them to
be angry, and when they have a feling of the lack of his favor: Neither does
he always chastise them for their sins: but is accustomed at some time, to
hide his face from them for a little season; to let them know their own
weakness, and wretchedness, to work patience in them, to acquaint them with his
Discipline, and to let them know how miserable their estate is, when his
favorable face is hid from them. Fifthly, John. 3. 3.
There is a time, at the quhilk the Lord makes intimation to al his chosen
children, of their election and salvation, by sending them his holy spirit,
Tit. 3. 5.
by whom they are baptized, and regenerat to amendment of life: And commonly
before this calling and receiving of the holy Ghost, there goes a great trouble
of the mind, a dejection, and a terrible fear; that it wald seem to man,
that God had forsaken him, and casten him away; where by the contrary, he is
drawing him to him, and knocking to have entry in his heart by his holy spirit.
What sal I recount the gracious and comfortable promises of the Lord, to his
afflicted members, that are touched with a feeling of their own sin, and
misery? He says, by the mouth of the Prophet; Psa. 103. 13
That as a Father hes compassion on his Children; so hes he compassion on them
that fear him: Esai. 49. 15
And though a woman should forget the son of her womb, yet will he not forget
his elect. For a little while (says the Lord to his people) have I forsaken
thee, Esa. 54. 7
but with great compassion will I gather thee: For a moment, in mine anger, I
hid my face from thee for a little season, but with everlasting mercy have I
had compassion on thee. Psalm. 34. 18
The Lord (says David) is near unto them that are of a contrite heart, and
will save such as be afflicted in spirit. Psalm. 51. 17.
And again, The sacrifices of God, are a contrite spirit: a contrite, and a
broken heart, O God, thou will not reject and despise. Mairover, says not our
savior Jesus Christ, that he came not to save the righteous, but to bring
sinners to repentance? The Son of Man (says he) came to save that quhilk was
lost: Mat. 18. 11.
hes he not also commandit such as ar weary and laden, to come to him, Mat.
11. 28
promising that he will ease them? Esa. 55. 1.
and such as are thirsty to come to him, Ioh. 4. 14.
and he will give them of the water of life to drink, Esa. 61. 1
quhilk sal spring up into ever lasting life? Luke 4. 18.
yea, certainly his very office is and for that effect was he sent in the world
by his father; to heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the
captives, recovering of sight to the blind, and to set at liberty them that
are in prison. Farther, dois not the Lord assure us, that so soon as ever a
sinner sal repent him of his sins, from the bottom of his heart; he will put
away his wickedness out of his remembrance? And speking to his people be the
mouth of his prophet, he says wash you, Esa. 1. 16
make you clean; take away the evil of your works from before my eyes; cease
to do evil, learn to do well; seek judgment, releue the oppressed, judge the
fatherles, and defend the widow: Come then, and let us reason together (says
the Lord) Though your sins were as crimsin, they salbe made white as snow:
Though they were red, like skarlet, they salbe as wool. Besides this, he hes
commandit us by the mouth of the Psalmist, saying, Call on me in the day of thy
trouble, Psalm. 50. 15
so will I deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.

Are not these also the undoubted words of our savior speaking to his
Disciples? Verily, Ioh. 16. 23.
verily, I say unto you, that whatsoever ye sal ask the Father in my name, he
will give it you: ask, and ye sal receive, that your joye may be made full. What
more gracious and comfortable promises can the heart of man wish, nor these? Or
what greter assurance wald thou have of the mercy and compassion of the Lord,
toward penitent sinners, nor this quhilk he gives thee in express terms,
with his own mouth? whereof one jote sal not fail: for he cannot lie. But I
know thou will have recourse to predestination, to the secret election, and
reprobation of God, and is persuaded with thy self, that thou art one of them
whom God hes forsaken and casten away. O fool! quhilk certifies thy self (to
thine own damnation) of that quhilk is hid, not only to man on earth, but also
to the very Angels in heaven: For whom hes the Lord admitted on his secreit
counsel to know them* whom he hes chosen, or them whom he hes forsaken?
Nay, nay, that knowledge is reserved only to himself. Therefore, albeit thy
affliction be never so great, thy sins never so heinous, thy repentance and
amendment never so small, and thy faith never so weak: yet, neither thou, nor
any mortal man can conclude, absolutely, that thou art reprobate, and forsaken
of God. My reason is this, Because it is unknown to thee, or to any man, when
it may plese God to call thee to repentance, when he will instrengthen thy
faith, and consequently forgive thy sins, and bring thee to his kingdom. Why
art thou then discouraged, and dispaired of thy salvation for the bitterness of
thine afflictioun, for the multitude, and gravitie of thy sins, for the
slacknes of thine amendment, or weakness of thy faith; considdering, that none
of these tokens can import the necessity of thy reprobation? For thou
knawis, that affliction hes ever ben most proper to the children of God, from
the beginning of the world. As to the number and weight of thy sins, They can
be no hinderance to the mercy of God: In respect, that where it pleases the
Lord to show mercy, it is no more difficil to him to remit innumerable sins,
of whatsoever gravitie and weight; nor to forgive the least offense that man
can commit: The whole generation of mankind, was shut up in sin, Romans 3. 23.
and was sinful out of measure: But of the free mercy of God, the sins of the
world were taken away, by the death of Jesus Christ: In such sort, that all
that repents them of their sins, and believes in him the savior, sal obtain
free remission of al their sins whatsoever. Now, as concerning thy repentance
and amendment of life; art thou dismayed, and dispaired of thy salvation,
because thou cannot abstain from sin, nor attain to a perfect vprightnes?
Surely thou hes na just occasion: For no flesh can be without sin, nor attain
to a perfection in this life. Pro. 24. 16.
The most vpricht man (says Solomon) falls every day seven times; Job. 4. 18.
and the very Angels are not without spot in the sight of the everliving God.
Romans 3. 30.
Know thou not, that man can not be justified by the works of the Law? Na,
doubtless, Psa. 143. 2.
if the Lord will enter in judgment with man, and deal with him according to
the precise rule of his law; no flesh should be saved: For albeit the law of God
be set before us, as a rule whereunto we should apply and confer all our
actions: yet are we not any more under the law, but in the estate of grace
through the coming of Jesus Christ. And albeit the children of God have his
law deeply imprinted in their hearts, and likes well to keep the same: Galat. 3.
11
yet sall they not be counted righteous for fulfilling thereof, as though they
had deserved everlasting life, Act. 13. 39.
seeing no man ever fulfilled the Law: But because they believe, that they are
redeemed by the blood of Jesus Christ, who has accomplished the law in all
points, and hes merited all good things of his Father for us: Therefore, the
Children of God sall be justified, and receive eternal life. If then thou be
sorry, that thou can not amend thy life, if thou have ane earnest, desire, and
bent intention to do good, and eschew evil, joined with a true faith in Jesus
christ: assure thy self, that the spirit of God works that in thee, and that it
sal be impute unto thee for righteousness, and that the Lord in his own
appointed time sall make that desire, and intention to be effectual, bringing
forth good works to amendment of life. What can thou say farther? that thou
art daily relaps in public sins, from the quhilk thou cannot refrain; and
that neither thy sorrow therefore, nor thy desire to abstain, are any thing
earnest and notable. Indeed, if so be thou art in an evil case for the
present. Nevertheles, there is yet no cause here of desperation: Forasmuch as
none can truly repent while they be called of the lord to repentance. No man
can come to me, (says our savior) except the Father that sent me, John. 6. 44.
draw him. Seeing then, repentence is not the gift of man, but of God; and
that thou know not the time, when it sall please the Lord to call and
convert thee: Thou ought in no wise to despair, but to live continually in
good hope, daily attending thy calling and conversion. Hes thou not heard the
Parable of the laborers in the Vineyard, Mat. 20. 1.
That he quhilk came at the last hour of the day, received equal wages, with
him that came in the morning? whereby our savior signifies unto us, that there
is no time of man's life at the quhilk the Lord will not call and convert man unto
him. I have heard of some men, quhilk at the latter hour on their deathbed,
being put in remembrance of their god, by the assistants; hes burst forth with
horrible blasphemies against God, and uttered words of plain desperation. But
in ane instant, through the singular mercy of God, and fervent prayer of the
assistants, was converted to the Lord, by lamenting carefully such
blasphemies, by making manifest declaration of their faith in Jesus Christ, and
giving al lively signs of their election, departed plesantly, and in a happy
estat to the sight of men. When Paul wasted the Kirk of Christ, and persecuted
his Saints, Act. 9. 1.
both men and women, to the death; who wald have thought but that he had bin a
reprobat, and a faggot prepared for hell? Nevertheles, he was called to
repentance, and was made a chosen vessel of the Lord. Who wald have said, Mat.
26. 69
but that Peter had bin the son of perdition, and that there could be no
salvation for him; when after he was called to be one of the disciples of
Jesus christ, had been sa long conversant with him, had heard his doctrine,
seen his miracles, and confessed that he was the very Christ of God: For all
this, he denied him thrice on a night? Notwithstanding, he came to repentance
that same night, was accepted of the Lord, and made a notable Apostle, and
Preacher of the Evangel of Jesus Christ, both to the Jews and Gentiles. Finally,
who wald not have thought, but the Gentills had been forsaken of God, and
predestinat to eternal damnation, quhilk both misknew God, and committit al
kind of abomination under heven? Yet the Lord forgot al their iniquities, and
of his infinite mercy brought them to the knowledge of him, of his Son
Christ Jesus, and called them to be partakers of his caelestiall kingdom. Have
we not also seen in our days, men of may disolute and licentious lives,
quhilk afterward being converted and sanctified by the spirit of God, hes
become notable and profitable members of the Kirk of Jesus Christ? Heirfoir,
albeit such as leads a life repugnant to the Law of the Lord, may be justly
counted reprobates with this restriction, except they turn to God by
repentance: nevertheles, let no man condemn absolutely, either himself, or his
neighbor before his death: because there is nothing in any man, but corruption
and sin, til he be sanctified, and regenerate by the spirit of God; the time
whereof none knows but God only: John. 3. 8
for as the wind blows where it lists, so is every man that is borne of the
spirit. I come now to thy faith, quhilk because thou finds it weak, and full
of doubting, thou art dispaird of thy salvation. Indeed the truth is, that no
man can be saved unless he believe: But if al were condemned whose faith is
weak, and doubtful; I pray thee then tell me who should be saved? when the
Disciples of Jesus Christ inquired of him, Mat. 17. 19
why they could not cast the Devil out of the Lunatik person; he answered,
because of their unbelief: and declared to them, that if their faith had been as
meikill as a grain of mustard seed, they should remove mountains, and that
nothing should be impossible to them. Farther, albeit our Savior had oftimes
instructed his Disciples and forewarned them with his own mouth, that he wald
rise again on the 3. day after his death. Nevertheles, when Mary Magdalen told
them of his resurrection, Mark. 16. 11. 12.
and that he had apeared to her, they believed it not: Thereafter, he appeared
to two of themselves, quhilk show it to the remnant, but they beleuit it not:
yea, after he had shawin himself to the eleven in Galile, Mat. 28. 17
yet some of them were in doubt and believed not. Luc. 24. 41
If this weakness of faith then, and doubting was in the disciples of Christ,
who notwithstanding shall sit on twelve throans, Mat. 19. 28
and judge the twelve tribes of Israel, when the Lord shall sit on the throane
of his Majesty: What cause hes thou, O nauchtie man! to be dispaired of thy
salvation, although thy faith be weak, and full of doubts? Certainly, if thy
faith continued as weak as the faith of the Disciple Thomas, quhilk wald not
believe the resurrection of Jesus, whil he put his finger in the wound of his
hands, and of his side; thou might think that thou were in an evil case: Ioh.
20. 27.
But seeing Thomas after he had seen Christ believed, and was blessed; Blessed
art thou if thou believe in him, quhilk saw him never. What sal I speak of the
waknes, dulnes, and ignorance of man? The haill Apostles after the ascension of
Jesus Christ, Act. 11. 2.
For all their reading of the scriptures, and doctrine quhilk they had heard of
his mouth; were ignorant of the caling of the Gentiles, and knew not that the
Evangel should be preached to them, till it was first showed to Peter in a vision,
quhilk thereafter declarit the mystery and circumstances thereof to the rest,
being assembled at Jerusalem. O! But thou will say, I feel no spunk of faith in
me, I feel the wrath of God kindled aganis me, and a strong persuasion that he
hes forsaken me. Their ar hard sayings: but I have already shown thee the cause
of this thy persuasion; To wit, because the Lord hes hid his face from thee for
a little while; to humble thee, to try thy patience, and to let thee know how
miserable thy estate wald be, if thou were altogether destitute of his favor.
But I pray thee, remember, what thou believed before thou entered in this
troble, before the Lord hid his face from thee: and have not respect what thou
believes now, but what thou beleeuedst then. And if at any time of thy life
thou believed assuredly, that Jesus christ hes suffered death for thy
redemption: thou may certify thy self, that the Lord sal turn his loving
count nance toward thee, and that then thou sal receive that same faith
again in greater mesure. Mairover, it is to be understand, that man's election,
and reprobation are not ruled according to man's own Imagination: For who lives
in greater security, (in their own conceit) who brags faster of their faith,
and persuades themselves more of Gods favor, nor the most profane, and godles
livers? Will they not boldly and confidently say, that they dout nothing of
their salvation, but thinks to be as high in heven, as any other? When
nevertheles they are running a course direct contrary to the ordinance of God.
The Jews spoke hardly to Christ and said, that they were not borne of
fornication, Ioh. 8. 41.
but had a father, quhilk was God. But Jesus answered them, that if God had
been their father, they would have loved him, who proceeded from God: Quhilk
seeing they did not; he declarit unto them, that they were of their father the
devil. By the contrary, there is none that hes a greater feling of their own
sin, ar sorer troubled with tentations, and doubtings (as thou art presently
now) nor the dearest servants of God. Example of David, Hezekiah, Job, the
Prophets and Apostles, and a number of notable men in these our days, whereof
the particulars were long in this plaice, to allege. Wherefore, gird up thy
loins, like a man, and comfort thy self in these things: ground and repose thy
self in the merciful promises of God, and merits of his Son Jesus Christ: And
not on thine own fantasies, and vain imaginations. And if thou wald be counted
the Son of God, submit thee willingly to his correction: If thou would receive
a crown of glory, fight valiantly, and be victorious: If thou would receive
the holy Ghost, cleanse thy heart, and be lowly minded: If thou would be exalted
for ever to reign with Christ on his throne, be content to be cast down, and
patiently to suffer with him: For by these degrees of necessity thou mon pass
and ascend to the highest heuens. Stand fast then, watch, and have patience,
yet a little while, and thou sall see great things: Heb. 12. 11
For albeit no chastesing seems joyous, but grievous for the present, yet
afterward it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness to them, quhilk are thereby
exercised. After Winter, comes summer, peace after war, gladness after
sorrow, and after the tempest comes the fair wether: Psalm. 103. 9
The Lord will not threat and rebuke continually, nor keep his anger for ever,
but is near unto them that are of a broken heart. He will come, he will come
with speed, strange, merciful, and gracious, his holy name be praised, through
his son Jesus Christ for ever. Amen.

CHAP. XI.
How long the trouble of the Conscience may continue, how peace enters in, and
how long it may remain.
AL men that are in troble or in pain, wald gladly understand when their pain
and trouble should take an end: And in special, they that hes an inward trouble
of the mind, that hes a pain in their soul and Conscience, and a feling of
Gods wrath, burning aganis them, that are may desirous to have that feid
reconciled, and to know how long their pain and troble will endure. All men (I
say) wald hear of comfort and relief: but few hes regard how long they have
rebelled agains God, how long they have followit the affections of their own
heart, and hes refusit to be reformed by Gods holy word and discipline. Were it
not then good reason, O man! that the Lord punished thee as long, as he hes
suffered thee? and that thy pain should continue as long, as thou hes continued
in thy sin and rebellions? But it is with a merciful party thou hes to do,
quhilk is slow to anger, and ready to forgive; whose clemency I would exhort
thee not to abuse, but to comfort thy self in it: For he is also just in his
judgments; Heb. 10. 31
and it is a fearful thing to fall in his hands. He hes shown thee himself,
when he will forget thine iniquities; to wit, even then, when thou turns to him
by earnest and unfeigned repentance: But as to the time, when the inward pain
of thy Conscience sall cease, and thou receive peace thereof, It is unknown to
man: yea, it is als uncertain when the Lord will remove his scourge and
punishment, as it is uncertain when he will lay it on: For it is to be marked,
that the chastisement is not always removed so soon as the sin is remitted:
but for the singular weill and profit of the offender, will continue to work
patience in him, and to serve as a bridle to refrain him from falling in the
like offenses; while the Lord have sufficiently purified him from such
corruption. 2. Sam. 12. 10. 14.
When David committed adultery and murder, by taking the wife of Vriah, and
causing him self to be slain; upon his repentance, the Prophet Natha^ said
to him, that the Lord had put away his sin, and that he should not die:
Nevertheles, because by that deed, he had despised the Lord, and caused the
enemies of the Lord to blaspheme; he declarit unto him, that the sword should
never depart from his house; and that the child that was borne in adultery to
him should surely die. But to return to the point of the matter quhilk we have in
hand: I have heard of sundry persons, quhilk hes ben disquieted in spirit and
Conscience, some for a year, some for two, some for three years, and some
longer: (though not continually tormented, but by certain intervalls of time)
and at length hes obtained inward quietness and rest. But of the day and hour
knawis no man. Psalm. 119. 82. 148. and 69. 3.
The man of God, David says, that he was weary of crying, that his throat was
dry, and that his eyes were blinded with looking for the Lords deliverance: If
then he suffered so long, thou should not despair albeit thine affliction appear
longsome, but rather should be content to suffer with the elect vessel of god.
Always thou may comfort thy self in this; that the lower thou be brought, the
greter thy torment be, and the longer it continue; apparently, when the releif
comes, thy comfort and exaltation salbe the mair notabil and great. Bot what
matter is it, when thy deliverance be, if thou haif certification of gods
spirit, that it salbe; and that upon thy true repentance thy sins ar remitted
and forgiven? To. 8. 18.
Considering, that all the pain quhilk thou can suffer in this life, is not
worthy of that glory quhilk the Lord hes prepared for all them that loves him.
Prescribe not therefore any time of thy deliverance, neither think that the Lord
is slow: for he hes his own appointit time for all things; and when thou art
farthest casten down, and hes given over al hope of warldly help, and reposis
on thy God only, then is the Lord nearest unto thee, to comfort and deliver
thee. Now as to the manner and form how the trouble of man's conscience passis
away, and true peace enters in; It is observed in some persons to be this: There
will preceid and go before, an earnest repentance of the evil past, and a
fervent desire to amend, and do well: Man will be heavily displesit with him
self for his foul deffections, and will tak a determinat resolution to reform
his life, and to do that quhilk is pleasant in the sight of God; In sik sort,
that through fervencie and grief, he will feel an extreme dolor, and will weep
bitterly: Yea, he that before could never wring out a tear, nor be perfitly
moved for his sin; when the spirit of God enters in and pearsis the heart, he
sal be lively touched, sair grieved, and sal not be able to contain himself,
nor to refrain from weeping. Nixt after sik perturbation, will follow a
calmnes and quietness of the mind; and suddenly will arise a sure persuasion in
the heart of the favor of God, and of the remission of sins: quhilk sall bring
with it an exceeding great gladness and reviuing of the spirit. Man will then
begin to banish all vain fear and superstition in his doings; and with greter
confidence will use a christian liberty in doing of things lawefull to be
done; his fear will be no more servile, but childish: For he will not then fear
the Lord, as the servant fears his awful master, or as the criminal person
fears the terribil judge: But as the Son fears to offend his loving father; so
will he (being inflamed with love and fervent zeall) fear to offend the
Majesty of his good God. Farther, he will cum with a greter assurance to the
Lord, in making his supplications: and will not be moved with such vain
cogitations and doubtings; as he was, when his Conscience was weak and wounded.
To be short, he will be mair constant nor of before, and will have a certain
contentment and rejoicing in all his actions, joined with the testimony of a good
and peaceable Conscience: yea, having obtained this inward tranquillity and
peace, man will think himself so strong and sure, that he sall never be
troubled again, with the like accusation and terror of his Conscience. But
leist any should be deceived in this point; It is to be understand, that so soon
as ever it sall please the Lord to turn away his favorable face, to show his
angry countenance, and to menace man for sin, so soon sal new terrors and
torment of the spirit and Conscience arise again. The chosen vessel of God,
Psalm. 30. 6
King David, said in his prosperity, I sal never be moved: but thou Lord
(says he) did hide thy face, and I was troubled. Therefore when thou hes
received hevenly consolation, look not to keep it at thy pleasure: For
temptation cease not any long time, neither is that comfort laudable, but to
be feared, quhilk makes a man to forget his sin altogether. The Lord cures his
elect by temptation, and comfort. And Job says, Job. 7. 18.
that the Lord dois visit man every morning, and tries him every moment. I
know a notable Preacher of Gods word (whom I doubt not but God hes ordained
for his kingdom) who being sum time sore afflicted in Conscience, at last
obtained comfort, and had inward peace for the space of many years.
Nevertheles, at the pleasure of the Lord, he was visited again of new; and
diverse and sundry times wald be for the space of a Month or two, grievously
troubled: Of this same man, while he was yet in good estat, I inquired, how he
reposed in the night: I will take reasonable good rest (says he) If God make us
not to remember the faults quhilk we have committed in our youth: Yea, surely,
when it pleasis the Lord at any time, to present man's sins before him, in
their vgliest form, and therewithal to perce the heart; albeit man thocht
himself in never so great security, and confidit never sa meikil in his own
constancy, and strength: yet the sight thereof sal ever trouble him, after an
extraordinar manner. Heirfore, my dear brother, when new trouble arisis, and
when thou feel a want of the favor of God; be not dismayed nor despaired:
For it is no new thing; John. 3. 9.
but a thing costomable to the dearest servants of God. The spirit of God goes
and comes at his pleasure, but will never abandon his Elect altogether. Seeing
then, that the whole course of a christians life, is but a continual battle, a
continual falling by sin, and rising by repentance: And that the Lord will not
suffer the Consciences of his servaunts to be long unexercised: I will now show
thee my opinion, how thou should behave thy self, having (after long troble)
obtained comfort, and peace of Conscience, and while thy spirit is yet at rest.

CHAP. XII.
How man ought to behave himself having obtained peace of Conscience, after
his internal trouble.
LIke as all good things are received at the hands of God, by fervent and
diligent prayer: Even so, by thankfulness, the benefits received, ar kept and
retained. Hes thou obtained comfort and peace of Conscience at the bountiful
hands of thy God? Then, if thou wald retain it, and have it to continue with
the, see thou be thankful to thy God for the same. But such is the fragilitie
and corruption of man's nature, that in whatsoever estate he be, he can not
contain himself long within bounds. For get he a blast of adversity, then is
he dejected over law, and falls oftimes in mistrust: Get he a blenk of
prosperity, then is he incontinent exalted over high, and falls shortly in a
careless security. Heirfore, I wald admonish thee to behave thy self, as the
skilful and expert Skipper dois, quhilk during the time of the tempest, is ever
on foot, and busily exercised; and in the greatest calm is ever looking and
preparing for a storm to come: Even so thou, In adversity behave thy self
patiently, constantly, and confidently; Again, in prosperity, behave thy self
warely, humbly, and thankfully. But specialy now, having obtained comfort from
above, and peace of conscience, I wald exhort thee to take diligent heed to thy
behavior, and to be on this manner exercised. First of all, without delay,
retire thee to thy chamber, or to the house of prayer; Mat. 21. 13
and with all humility of heart, prostrate thy self before the Lord,
acknowledge thy deliverance to have proceeded from him, and rander all hearty
thanks to him therefore. Sing psalms and songs of praise cheerfully to the Lord:
whereof, thou may find great plenty among the Psalms of David, agreing with
thy case: as in special, the 23. 24. 40. 91. 103. psalms, and a great number
of others. Yea, not only praise him thy self alone, but also stir up and
exhort others to magnify him with thee. Advaunce his glory in thy words, thy
writs, and thy deeds; and abhor those things quhilk may derogate, or be
hinderfull thereunto. Hide not his goodness shown and reveilled unto thee; but
declare his mercy and loving kindness to the members of his Kirk, and
assemblies of them that fear him. Farther, dedicate thy self al wholly to thy
God, Psalm. 119. 106.
and henceforth vow thy self, and thy service unto him, and defend his cause,
and the cause of his servants: And for confirmation of thy faith, and of the
league betwixt the Lord and thee; go to his supper, the holy communion, renew
the testament of our Lord Jesus Cstrist, by the participation of those seals
and testimonies quhilk declaris his death and body broken for us. Mairover*
look what is set down in the eight chapter of this treatise for reformation of
thy life, repeat the same in this place, and apply it to thy present estate.
Specially, anent the diligent trial, how thou profits in religion and taking
nightly a sharp count, how thou hes employ it the day preceiding. Examine often
and narrowly, if thou have gotten any dominion over any of thy unruly
affections; and if thou have dauntoned or reformed them in any measure, think
well that thou hes obtained a great victory. In all thy affairs, and interprises
whatsoever, either of great or of small importance, crave counsel at the mouth
of God in thy prayers, what thou should do; crave his asistance, that it would
please his majesty, to direct and teach thee the right way: lere. 10. 23
For the way of man is not in himself, neither is it in man to walk and to
direct his steps: And whatsoever succes or effect thy procedings tak, albeit it
be never so far aganis thy heart, yet hold thee content and thank the Lord it:
For he sees farther nor thou dois, he knawis that quhilk thou knawis not, and
will turn all things about to the best, for them that loves him. Hunt not
after worldly things; neither care thou meikill for them: But as the Lord Jesus
hes commanded, seek first the kingdom of God, Mat. 6. 33.
and his righteosnes (which is amendment of life) and then sall these worldly
things be sufficiently ministered unto thee. Respect not thine own commodity
in serving God; neither make thy dependence on him, in hope of a temporal
reward: But respect chiefly his glory, let thy service tend always to please
him, and that in hope of an everlasting recompense. Think not that thou art
placed by God here upon earth, to live at liberty, to enjoy thy plesures, or
to make long residence: but only to serve him, looking for nothing in this
life, but for affliction, Ioh. 16. 33.
and that as a pilgrim and stranger thou art to pass away suddenly home to
thine own cuntry, there to give acount to thy Lord and maker, how thou hes
bestowed thy time here upon earth, and how thou hes obeyed his holy will and
commandments. If the Lord bestow his temporal benefits on thee, or grant thee
any repose and contentment in this life, be thankful to him therefore, and use
his gifts to his glory: Nevertheles, let not thy heart nor affection be fixed
upon earthly things: but let ever thy mind be carried upward, let thy chief
delight, thy hope, thy rejoicing, felicity, and comfort, be in the merciful
promises of God, in the merits of Jesus chirst, and in the joys of the eternal
life to cum. Fly sin, as a contagious pest, and in all thy actions, remember
weill that the Lord is ever present in spirit, who sees thy deeds, hears thy
words, and knawis al thy secret thoghts; His Angels also, whom he has given
charge over thee; Psalm. 34. 7 and 91. 11.
albeit thou see them not yet they both hear and see thee and thy procedings;
before whom thou should be ashamed to do, Heb. 1. 14.
or say any unseemly thing. Finally, for conclusion of this tretise, besides
all the precepts before rehearsed: there is yet a thing whereof I wald admonish
thee; quhilk in the mercies of God, I beseech thee to remark, and exactly to
carry away: having obtained peace of Conscience, whil thy spirit is yet at rest,
take pen and ink, and spedily write up, for a memorial, the time and manner of
thy trouble, and of thy deliverance; yea, whether thou can write or not,
imprint it deeply in thy heart and memory; and for all the days of thy life,
let it serve thee for these uses. First, so often as ever thou reads it, or
calls it to remembrance, let it serve as a perpetual lesson, to learn thee to
be thankful to thy God. Secondly, let it serve, as a perpetual bridle, to
refrain thee from sin, and offending the majesty of god: Certifying thy self
that if thou be ingrate, or delight in wickedness, the Lord hes ever the same
wand above thy head, wherewith he will scourge thee again mair viuely, and will
make thy own Conscience a bourior to torment thee. Thirdly, where ever it shall
please the Lord to cast thee again in the like trouble, then collect this
document, and comfort: Assure thy self, that if thou seek to him with all thy
heart and with continuance; as he delivered thee of before, so will he deliver
thee again at al times thereafter, unto the end of thy life: For the mercy of
God is without repentance. Romans 11. 29


Now, my dear brother, let not this be thy behavior, and exercise, for a day,
or for a short time only: but see thou continue therein during all the days
of thy life: In respect, the reprobat and wicked man, sumtime for fear of the
Lords judgments, sumtime to be releved of his present pain and trouble,
sumtime to get his intention accomplished, or upon other worldly respects, will
have good motions, and will begin a good course: but so soon as the Lord dois
avert his plague, so soon as he is eased of his pain, or comes to his intent;
so soon returns he to his former impiety, and upon light occasions falls
suddenly and shamefully back. Be thou not therefore like to him, but as a good
soldier of the Lord, endure and persevere constantly unto the end, Mat. 23. 13
that thou may be saved and inherit all things. Reve. 21. 7
Watch, Psa. 94. 13
pray, and meditate the law of the Lord, that in the evil day of his
visitation, thou may get rest, when the pit is dug for the wicked: and that
at the glorious coming of our Lord Jesus, Mat. 25. 21
thou may be found a good and faithful servant, 1. Pet 5. 4
and receive an incorruptible crown of glory in his everlasting kingdom, where
thou sal dwell with the Angels, and glorified bodies, lauding and praising the
almighty father, the son, and the holy ghost for ever. Amen.

CHAP. XIII.
A form of praise, and prayer to be used, by them quhilk are delivered from
the vexation of the Spirit and Conscience.
O Loving, gracious, and bountiful Father! I render al praise unto thee, for
thy manifold mercies showed on me thy poor servant; quhilk are more in number
nor I am able to recount. Behold, thou hes not taken me away in my sin, but hes
spared me long, and at last hes given me a sicht of my sins, a lively sorrow in
my heart for the same, a fervent desire to abstain from doing evil, and to do
that quhilk is pleasant in thy sight: Blessed be thy name for that hope, and
sight of mercy and salvation, quhilk thou hes given me in the death of thy Son
Jesus Christ: Praise be unto thee, in that it hes pleased thee also to have
chastised me with the rod of thy fatherly correction: For thereby, thou hes
tamed, and humbled me, being insolent and unruly: Thou hes thereby let me know
mine own weakness, and unworthiness, and thy justice and mercy: Thou hes drawn
me unto thee, as it were, by force, and wald not suffer me to persever in
wickedness: Thou succored me when I was led captive with my own affections,
and was transported with the vanities of the world: Thou hes drawn out
fervent prayers* sighs, and sobs from my heart, and tears from mine eyes, for
my sin, quhilk I could never have done of my self, without the motion of thy
holy spirit; And thou vouchsafest from time to time, to harken to my prayers,
and to grant my requests. Thou hes brought me from the door of death, and
brink of despair, to the quhilk I was near: Thou hes brought me out of the
dark cloud of ignorance and heavines, wherewith I was overshadowed: and did
ministrate wonderful means to comfort me, and to bring me to the knowledge of
thy truth, in the days of my trouble, and ignorance: Thou hes cast me down,
thou hes raised me up; thou hes tried me like the silver in the fournace; thou
hes eased my pain; thou hes exercised my Conscience; thou hes trained me up in
thy discipline: and hes made me partaker of thy holy Sacraments institute by
thy son our Lord Jesus, as sure seals and testimonies of thy love, and of my
adoption and salvation. These benefits, O heavenly Father! and al other good
things* I acknowledge me to have received, and to receive daily of thy only
goodness, and bountiful hand: for the quhilk I render unto thee, that quhilk
thou hes also given me; even my heart, my soul, my affection, and my strength,
with all thanks: For lo! they appertain justly unto thee, the fountain of all
goodness, and original of my being: I dedicate my life, and service to thee, and
will vow my self thy servant for ever.

But now, my God, I still remain in great danger, and distres; and unless thou
preserve me, I am but lost; unless thou uphold me, I am not able to stand: For
so long as I am in this tabernacle, I am but poor, weak, ignorant, impacient,
and imperfit: So long as I am in this vail of misery, I am daily assalted
within, and without, with manifold tentations; with the intisements of the
world, with the snares of the devil, with the injuries of men, and raging of
mine own concupiscence: If thou take thy good gifts frame; I sal stand up
poor, naked, and miserabil: If thou tak thy spirit and grace from me I sal
then doutles fall suddenly, and be a pray to my enemies foresaids. Have mercy
on me therefore (O Lord) for Jesus Christ thy dear sons sake; and let me not
be overcum, nor drawn from thee with the trifles, and entisements of the
world; by the power and subtlety of Satan; by the fellowship, or provocation
of men; nor by the unruliness of my corrupted affections. But as thou hes wrocht
that great work of my redemption, by the death of thine only son, so work
likewise, and accomplish the work of my regeneration, by the virtue of thy holy
spirit. By the mighty operation of the comforter, make my heart new within me;
my stubborn, and polluted heart, pearce it, purge it, mollify it, enlarge it,
frame and fashion it to thy holy will: Crucify the old man, quicken the new
man; bridle, and mortify my sinful lusts and natural affections, that they be
not inordinate nor excessive; but make them always obedient and subject to my
spirit, and my spirit to thy spirit. Let thy word and will, be a precise rule to
al my deeds, my words, my thoughts, my appetites, and desires. Let me be daily
renewed, comforted, instructed, instrenthened, preserved, and governed by the
spirit of truth, till I come to the full perfection; and albeit Lord, I cannot
be altogether without sin, so long as I am clad with flesh and blood; yet, let
not sin reign, nor have the upper, hand in me; but so often as I fall by sin, als
often raise thou me up again by repentance: sanctify my soul, good Lord, my wit,
and memory, that I may be always occupied in thy service: purify, and bless
my body and members, quhilk ar defiled with the works of the flesh, that I may
be a meet and well prepared temple of the holy Ghost: Bless likewise, and
prosper, acording to thy good pleasure, mine interprises, proceedings, and
works of my hands, that it may go well with me. Dress my affairs, and put them
in good order: Preserve me always, that I attempt nothing repugnant to thy
holy will; let thy will, be my will (my God) And whatsoever succes my
proceedings take; whatsoever cross or affliction it sal please thy majesty to
lay on me; make me heartily well content therewith. For thou knawis what is good
for me. As concerning temporal benefits, I crave them only in such number and
measure as seems good in thine eyes: Give me those things quhilk thy wisdom
knows to be most expedient for me: seeing thou know whereof I have need.
Always, Lord, let me not lack the thing without the quhilk I cannot serve thee:
but grant me thy blessing, thy favor, and thy grace, and then I sall have
enough.

Arm me, O heavenly Father! with spiritual armor, in this great conflict,
and high tentations: Give me a true, lively, and justifying faith, whereby, I
may stand steadfast in all assaults, and quench the fiery darts of Satan:
Imprint thy true fear in my heart, and let me be replenished with thy fervent
love: Give me patience, and long suffering, unto the end of the battle;
humility and meeknes, give me a humble heart, and a lowly mind, a forgiving
heart, a penitent heart for my sin; a pliable heart, will, and mind, to thy
voice, thy word, and thy will; and a thankful heart for thy benefits; Lord, let
them never slide out of my mind. Give me sobernes, temperance, constancy,
truth, vprightnes, contentment of mind, peace of Conscience, charity and love
toward al men for thy sake: That I be not only a hearer, reader, and
understander of thy word; but also, a keeper and practiser of thy word and
commandments.

These things, I crave of thee, my God, in the name of thy son Jesus christ:
For so he hes commanded me to do, promising, that thou will grant my petitions
for his sake. But, Lord, my mouth is not able to express, my heart to
understand, nor my thocht abil to conceive the hundredth part of those things,
whereof I have need and ought to do. Heirfore, let the comforter, teach me,
and put me in remembrance of al things, loh. 14. 26.
as thy dear son hes promised; that both in prosperity, and adversity I may
behave my self as one of thy good soldiers and faithful servants, to the end
of my course and race. Be thou ever my strong rock, my buckler, and my shield;
and then though the world should turn vpside down; yet sall I be in perpetual
security. Be on my side, and neither man, nor the devil salbe able to
overthrow me. Give me everlasting life, O Lord! that after this life be ended,
I may dwell with thee in thy kingdom, beholding thy glorious face, magnifying,
and praising thee, thy Lamb Jesus Christ, and the Comforter thy holy Spirit;
together with thy chosen children, and armies of thy bright Angels, for ever,
and ever, world without end.

Amen.
Finished the 27. of March. 1593.

