A discourse upon the present estate of France.

Together with a copy of the kings letters patents, declaring his mind after
his departure out of Paris.

Whereunto is added the copy of two letters written by the Duke of Guize.

Translated out of French into English: And now newly reprinted, and corrected
by E. Aggas.

Imprinted. 1588.

A Discourse upon the present estate of France.
MOst men do say, that it is a pleasure to behold from the shore, the waves to
swell, and to mark from the land how the storm and the winds play with the
Sea. I believe it well: and it is as much to say, as that it is better to see a
danger a far off, then to be in it. But if from the top of a Cliffe I
should perceive a ship wherein either I had a share, or my friends were
enclosed, in danger of being cast away, and without help, carried against the
rocks by the currants and tempest; what a grief were it unto me, to find my
self at such a spectacle. If France were nothing unto me, and I knew her state
as exactly as I do, it were no matter unto me to discourse of it: when men
should bring me the news, I would take them indifferently: yea I should
receive them without any passion, being otherwise glad to be out of her
broiles, and hear talk of her stirrings with as little commotion and fear,
as if one should rehearse unto me things that happened at Rome under Tiberius
or Nero. I can not being a Frenchman: no I cannot so do, seeing the only bark
of my hope, the vessel wherein I have all that which is dearest unto me, and
which of it self is dearer unto me than my self, now see run to wreake my
country, my first mother, whom such sundry diseases have brought to
extremity, hardly panting out her last gasp. But there is no remedy: yet some
part of the grief passes away with crying: and such words as sorrow
wresteth out of our hearts, are more violent then those which joy brings
forth. If at any time in our affliction we sigh out some extraordinary
speeches, witnesses of our grief, they are more listened unto, then if they
came from a careless mind, quailed with continual contentations: which also
brings forth no other then vulgar matter. These accordingly shall deserve
commendation of their matter only, and not for any order or method. Others
do service unto their country with their bodies and goods. They do well,
seeing they be able: as for me, I can but lament mine own, I bestow only my
tears on her, having nothing else left that might stand her in any steed: I
commend those men, let them not blame me: I will do as they do when I shall
be able: and they as I do, when they are brought to this pass.

My Dicaeus, lying idle in the country whether other businesses had lead me,
I heard the first report of the kings driving out of Paris by the Duke of
Guize. As all matters are made greater, according as men esteem of them, so
was there this first report. Every one does bring forth his passions in steed
of comments, upon such news as are told him. I know not whether being infected
with this common vice, I did presently gloss upon this report: well do I
remember, that even then I answered unto some that were speaking to me of it,
that I could scarce believe that the matter was fallen out so rawly, although I
did esteem the one capable enough of such a fear, yet would I never have
thought altogether such presumption to have remained in the other. At that time
or soon after, there were two sundry pieces of work brought unto me: the one
is a declaration of the King, upon that which happened against himself at
Paris, the 12, of May: but that so cold, so timorous as nothing more; much
like unto a man that complains, and yet dare not name him of whom he has
been beaten: like unto a man that is afraid least that his enemy be yet in
his choler, and will not be content with that harm which he has done him
already. He dare not say that he has been constrained to fly, neither
that he has been driven out: he dares not term it an injury, much less
declare, that he will punish it. He commands no more his people, but
entreats them. And to make up the matter, (which is the most shamefullest of
all) he wills prayers to be made in the Churches, to the end that this
quarrel may be appeased, even as if he should fear that Monsieur de Guize
were offended that he had not suffered himself to have been taken in the
Louure, but fled away. The other clean contrary, were two letters of the Duke
of Guize, the one unto the King, the other public, both letters of a
soldier, brave ones, courageous, whereby he gallantly commends himself of
his doing: says that God did put that day into his hands the means of a
notable piece of service, rehearses it with few and stout words, without any
show of fear, neither thinking to have done amiss. Last of all, he
concludes with a resolute threatening, that in spite of all the world, he will
maintain the Catholics side, and drive from the king such as do favor the
Heretics, meaning the Duke of Espernon. My Dicaeus, this has moved me to
send them unto you, you are curious of such matters: and even withal, the
very indignation has drawn from me this discourse of the state of France,
such as it is now a days, whereby you may judge the better of these two
writings. Publish it if you think it good, so that you keep in your name and
mine, for we are called to other affairs. If not, keep it in your study.

France is divided into three factions. The Duke of Guize and his kinsmen on
the one side: as the dukes of Maine, of Aumall, of Elbeuf, of Merceur, his
brethren or cousins german, to my judgment hold that which seems the
greatest, and that is it, which with their partakers, they call the holy
League. The king holds the second, the most lawful, but the weakest. The king
of Navarre and some Catholic Princes of the blood, My Lords of Mountmorency,
chief Officer of the Crown, of Turraine, of Chastillon, and many other noble
men, as well of the religion as Catholics: the third, which may be termed the
iustest in deed, and as yet the surest. I call the first, the greatest: be it,
because there is likelihood that it is derived, and as it were a member of the
general conspiracy of all the Catholic Princes of Christendom, united and
confederat together under the authority of the Pope, to make war against
those which make profession of the religion: be it, because this band is new,
and rare novelties do for a while carry away all: an argument whereof we may
gather in the show that the Protestants during the first troubles made in this
Realm, where they had seized upon all the good towns saving one or two
only, and yet within the space of one year they had never a one left: or
finally, for that it was framed among the Catholics, who do in number far
exceed the Protestants, and who, albeit they be not wholly in all and through
al of the League, do yet notwithstanding agree in this point, that they wish
the preservation of their religion, and so seem to favor those that undertake
the defense thereof: all which in deed do make this first faction to seem the
greatest at this time, albeit that in troth it neither is, neither can so
continue. I said that the kings was the lawfulest, No man dare deny it: So
long as according to his own will he ruled his people, he only was obeyed,
and so might still be if he list: but this list must come upon him betimes, for
if it lingereth but a little longer, and that every man perceive that in his
dominions any man may lawfully not only disobey him, but even coope with him
without danger, he shall never recover his authority: God has planted the
means in his only courage. I said likewise that his faction was the weakest.
It is true: albeit it seems otherwise, yet it is so, as by sundry reasons we
may prove. First, the king who rules, has so behaved himself that every
man knows that of the three heads of the three factions, he is the weakest,
he stands in greatest fear, he dares enterprise least: and contrariwise,
that he is the man against whom every man dare most safely and easily
undertake what they list. He I say has taken such a course that now he has
nothing left wherewith to detain the minds of his subjects in his obedience,
saving only the ancient regard that they have of their kings, together with
the custom of the realm: which in truth are most mighty means in a
peaceable estate, and yet such a civil war of four years continuance
only, is able as easily to subvert it, as heretofore it has don in shorter
space at Rome and all other places where it has lighted: for it springs
only of a contempt and disdain of the Prince, which are contrary both to
duty and majesty. And then judge you what one of thirty years continuance,
as ours is, may be able to do. Secondly, he is in his Realm the declining
sun, and so weak in his declination, that even in his presence he sees them
dispute, both by writings and weapons, of him that shall rise after him, In the
days of the Roman Caesar's, it was treason to speak of that, that should
happen after the Emperors death: much less durst they name him that they
thought should succeed. Tiberius were able to say somewhat hereof, who after a
certain sown that he fell into, in his old age lying sick in his bed was
stifled by his heir Caligula, a young and flourishing Prince, for fear least
the old man coming again to himself should put him to death, only for that
he was saluted as Emperor, when all men took the other to be deceased. So
great was their power to keep their authority inviolable even to their graves.
The Ottomans or Turkish Emperors will never suffer their children, whose
possibilities they can not endure, to come near them. But if we must needs
find a domestical example among our own kings: It is said, that the mighty
king Francis, this man's grandfather, being weak and sickly, was in the
beginning of May in his last year, at his Castle of Fontainebleau, where his
sickness on a time so increased, that he was thought to be dead, or not like
long to live: Suddenly all the Court came running to the Dolphin Henry, who
for the like gelousie of succession durst not in six or seven years come
near his father: every one ran to worship this new son, so as almost no
man of account tarried about the king. Well, the king for that time recovered,
and upon the Ascension day (a very solemn festival day in France) being
somewhat eased of his sickness, this old Prince arises, decketh up himself,
comes out of his chamber, painteth his hair and his face, to hide his age
and sickness, appears himself in youthful attire, and in this arraie
comes forth to procession, wherein himself carries the Ca^nopie over their
Corpus Domini, and at his return uses these speeches, I will scarre them once
yet ere I die. It proved true, the case was altered: for so soon as the kings
recovery was bruted abroad, all the courtiers came dropping in by one, and by
one in great fear, and the Dolphin yet once again, while his turn came,
remained as solitary as his father had done. This it was to be a king: yea,
this it was to be feared. How many lands be there yet in the world, wherein
it is death to enquire who may pretend any title to the Crown after the
Princes decease, since that is the thing that Princes do covet to leave most
doubtful. Alas! It is not so with our king: his weakness has given all the
world leave not only in his presence to argue of his succession, but also to
some to endeavor to force him to provide for it and to make his will, as if
there were no more for him to do but even to die. His faint heart and the
liberty to offend, have brought all to that pass, that at this day a
Frenchman may as boldly as a Spaniard say, I am not on the kings side:
whereas thirty year ago, such a word had been blasphemy, yea even
parricide. Finally, his want of courage is so dishonorable, that my self being
in a foreign land in the presence of a mighty Prince confederate with the
Crown of France, where there was some speech of our estate, did hear one
discoursing thereof, use these words. That our King stood but as an o in
Ciphre, which of it self can do nothing, but being added to any other
number, increases the value thereof. I heard it, and with great grief blushed
thereat, even for the shame of our Nation, albeit the divisions of our Realm
which force us to extraordinary remedies had carried me thither for an other
purpose then the particular service thereof, neither was that speech any
hinderance to the matter that I came about. Thirdly, he cannot assure him self
of any of those whom he thinks to be on his side: for they are daunted,
because they see him quailed: They dare not fix themselves about him, because
they see him totter. They dare not earnestly oppose them selves against those
that war against him, because they see him suffer it, and yet scarce so bold
as to complain. In this sort are all his Counsel, all his towns, and all
his subjects grown into factions: And I do verelie believe that among all
those that are about his person, he perceives none, except some one or two
that are his own creatures, that he dare assuredly trust: as having some
other particular meaning then he, or taking part with some one or other of his
enemies. For so soon as a king seems to fear any one within his Realm, or
to mistrust that an other may be greater than himself, his Majesty is gone,
he is no body, every man has recourse to the other. Albeit we can not be
free, yet will we have but one master: and if that master has another master
above him, we straight leave the first to run to the last: such is the
nature of man.

As for the king of Nauarres side, the beginning of these wars do prove it to
be the iustest: he defends himself, to defend it both lawful and natural,
yea he so defends himself, as forgetting all occasions of complaint, he
always made conscience to molest the king (albeit in the midst of the wars)
whom he see otherwise busied against those of the league, notwithstanding he
knew certainly that all those iars among them would light upon himself.
Neither has he so rested, but so often as he might, he has offered him both
his person and goods for the recovery of his authority out of the others
hands, with condition afterward to submit himself to whatsoever form of peace
that his majesty would prescribe: he has offered it, yea even since the last
commotions, notwithstanding in all this war he has had a thousand and a
thousand occasions to prove that he is not to trust any but God and his sword.
I have also very great reasons to term this as yet the surest. First his
person is a great help: for his enemies have done him that favor to teach him
to be a Captain. And surely so he is, yea such a one as may compare with the
mightiest that ever was, and albeit it has cost him somewhat, yet has his
apprentishippe cost them more: his partakers are more steadfast, they regard
none but him, and are retained by the duty of conscience, which has united
them together, either for religion, or because they find themselves entered into
a just cause: having had a better proof of his partakers, he cannot fear any
greater brunts then he has already borne, neither can his enemies practice any
novelties against him: And if this third side had courageously assailed the
other two, as they both have done it, they had bin better shaken then this is.
Moreover he has achieved right of natural succession to this realm, which
no particular person does any way challeng against him: so that albeit all
France were agreed to take from him the crown when it should fall, yet could
there be none that ought to have it in his stead: for it is a great advantage to
have no certain adversary. These undoubted hopes do purchase him many
servants, and retain him many more, where in the mean time many men's minds,
who are loath to see the alteration of the ancient form of their common
wealth: being assured that it cannot be compassed without violence, are glad
to rest upon him, who coming in by the ordinary gate needs not to make any
breach.

This is at this day the order that is in the disorders of the Realm of
France. These are the principal factions already ordered and framed. Others
there be that have no set faction, but so far as may stand with the
commodity of their affairs, leaning to one of the three, they come in a
cross, having several purposes agreeing with the others, as concerning the
beginnings, though to other ends. Of these there are the Q. Mother, the K of
Spain, the dukes of Lorraine and Sauoy. These do very well agree in setting
forward the divisions of the Realm, to the end to dispossess the King of
Navarre, with the Princes of the blood, but not in the patition. No. Each one
coueteth the whole or at the least the greatest part. Other Catholic Princes
there be of the house of Bourbon that remain with the king and in deed take
his part, as being united in religion, which is the only separation of the
king of Navarre, yet will never proceed so far, as to consent to the
aduauncing of the house of Lorraine or Guize, before their own: and in that
case will rather support their elder, the king of Navarre, as the head of their
house. These bear great sway in France: For were the K. of Navarre away, the
succession of the Crown should light upon some one of them: which is also a
great hinderance to the D. of Guizes purposes.

Besides all these confused and yet several divisions, whereto our mishaps do
seem (as I have said) to have already given some shape and rule, every of
these partakers has his particular intent and proceedings.

The Duke of Guize with those which truly acknowledge none of the league in
France but him, have this intent and principal scope, to seize upon the
estate, either wholly or in part: a council which by inheritance his uncle the
late Cardinal of Lorraine has engraffed in their family. This Prince, the
sole author of our broiles, had a father and an uncle both cunning fellows.
When our divisions first began in the days of the last king Charles between
the Catholics, and Protestants, and that they perceived that the Prince of
C^^de then living embraced the other party, themselves having been the
stirrers up of the troubles, set themselves on the other: and indeed the late
Duke of Guize was already become captain of his faction, hatching in his
imagination, through his brother the Cardinals practices, a secret intent to
usurp this crown, either for himself or his posterity, whereas in respect
of the K. and his brothers minority, but especially by the civil wars he
see the way open. He deceased leaving this in manner a child under tuition of
the Cardinal his brother: from whom, even with his Milk he sucked the seeds
of his domestical ambition, which this young Eagles bird did so well digest,
that in short space all men might perceive that the least part in him was
greater then his fathers loins. To say the truth, there are many good parts
bred in him, fit for great purposes, and for my part I always took this man's
birth to be fatal, and as it were a certain token that God purposed the
alteration of somewhat in our country. He only is the whole league: the rest
of his house are not equal with him: yea, they all together are not able to
perform the least part of that which he enterpriseth. Full of dissimulation,
very wary and discreet, and greater then all the rest of his faction. This
does all the world perceive by the effects. I have found it in his writings,
and under his own hand in a matter of great importance: where had it not been
for him, one of the greatest of his partakers, next him self had like to have
committed a gross ouerfight. This is his intent and purpose. Now let us see
his proceedings, and how he behaueth himself. His mischief was this, that
entering into a world of affairs, there yet remained many children in France,
and those in a manner of his own age, who all were capable of succession each
after other, of marriage, and of children, which might have been enough to have
daunted him: howbeit all this notwithstanding, beginning to feel his own
courage he was nothing astonished: but for a time disguising his drifts, he was
content only to lay anchor hold, and in the mean time to insinuate himself
into the Catholic faction, according to the instructions of his family,
wherein fortune was his friend: besides, he is of great valor, and some of his
enterprises have good success, so that together with the fame and memory of
his father, he by and by framed himself, through the civil wars which his
uncle the Cardinal still kindled, by one means or other, to be chief of the
Catholic faction, carrying favor to those towns especially, which the
massacres had continued very seditious and troublesome: and he stood still in
fear of a Protestant Prince, whose citizens he entreated with great
familiarity, courtesy, and popular behauiors, (the chiefest and most assured
tokens of a mind that aspireth to tirannie). The late king Charles deceased
without issue, and this king married, but has no children: moreover, he
seems that the Crown wants heirs in direct line, and that the Collaterals
are called, whereupon he draws near, and already shows tokens that he
craves a part. It was given out in hugger mugger that he is the very stock of
Charles the great, those of Valois are of the house of Capet, who usurped the
Crown of France from his house, whereby there was some likelihood that he
would scarce tarry the death of the king now reigning, and his brother, the
remnants of the children of France, before he pleaded his succession against
the Collaterals, but would even prevent them.

Now was there nothing more against him then peace, for leaning only upon
the factious Catholics, and seditious towns faction: he should thereby lose
his credit, except the controversy were renewed against the Protestants. For
as it is a plain case, that as civil war nourishes diverse factions in a
state, even as certain it is that a long peace overthrows them all, except
the kings: so as his only remedy consisted in stirring up of coals, and
returning us unto our civil weapons, and then to enterprise according as
occasion might serve. And in deed in the year 1578, he made such a league as
this last, but then was the king in his full authority* and Monsieur his
brother alive, who retained a number of french minds, and so consequently kept
him short of a many: It was straightwaie quenched, and we rid of it for a
little war against the Huguonets, which soon after was appeased. Thus was
France quiet for two or three years: during the which, it was incredible how
many matters his troublesome, ambitious, and consequently, courageous stomach
endured, suffering himself to be pulled down, and eat and drunk in diverse
manners, so to eschew all suspicion of this practice, which during the time of
the peace, and the kings ablolute authority, he so cunningly dissembled, that
many which knew not the last reasons of this obstinate patience, the token of a
long and profane practice, did even contemn him. In the end Monsieur the
kings brother, who was a great block in his way, died. He bare him some
displeasure upon other occasions: for as he practiced somewhat about the state
of Flanders, so this man having private intelligence with the king of Spain,
played him some badde parts thereabout: so that if he had lived (I have heard
some say) that he would have been on the duke of Guizes jack: in whose time
at the least, it had been hard for him to have enterprised any thing in
France. This death, whether it were by chance or through any practice, came
well on his side: I say through any practice, because the araigments and
depositions of the lord of Salcede have kept many in doubt of such a matter.
Immediately upon Monsieurs burial, when there was none but the king left, he
thought that he had gotten fit occasion to atchieue the practice which his
father and uncle began thirty years ago, which him self also with so great
labor had now brought to this pass. Some were of opinion that about the same
time he had practiced somewhat against the kings life: others that he
grounded him self only upon some vain hope and protestations sent him out of
all quarters, which assured him of the kings speedy death: But howsoever it
was, he did not think it convenient, the state should be quiet at the Princes
decease, as knowing very well that in France a king never dies, because that
so soon as one is gone, there is an other straightway in his place, who at his
entry would overthrow whatsoever the purposes that any man could commence
against him: and therefore that it was requisite he should bear weapons
against the heir even before the kings death, and so be armed with the late
kings name and authority. According therefore unto these fatherly precepts:
and with his own domestical means he began to trouble this Realm again in
the year 1585. beginning first with the king: whom because he could not by any
persuasions induce to make war upon the king of Navarre, he thought to
co^straine by force. His pretenses are, that the king has no children, so as
the Crown is like to fall unto Heretics, whereby he and all other the
Catholics of France are put in a fright, especially seeing the Protestant
Captains (so noting the king of Navarre) are in favor and have their secret
intelligences with the chiefest and those that are nearest about the kings
person. This he spoke of the Duke of Espernon, who was lately returned out of
Guienne where he had seen the king of Navarre. Finally, very fitly using the
fear that he had put the king in: corrupting all his Council, and all that
were about his person, he causes war to be denounced to the king of Navarre
and the Protestants, which lasts yet to this day: through the whole course
whereof I imagine that he seeks no more but some occasion once to attempt,
(as his fact at Paris well testifies:) for as he weeneth, he needs no more
but that. Well, the wars being thus open against the king of Navarre even by
the kings advise, consent, and authority, yet will it not suffice, These are
daily labors. This Prince is stout: of great valor, he has goods plenty,
and many friends. There is now nothing to be gotten of him but stripes. As
for his person it is safe enough, if they neither murder, nor poison him, as
God forbid they should. And for his towns, twelve Realms of France will never
be able to take them all. Yea, had he lost all but his sword, when soever God
should call him to this Realm, yet were that enough. How many kings have
there been fecht both out of prisons and Monasteries to their sacring. In our
days we have seen Charles the seventh, who was banished into the Mountains
of Auuergne, crowned. Jews the twelfth was yet in manner prisoner in the great
tower of Bourges when he was proclaimed king: neither is it credible by any
human appearance that the king of Navarre should ever be brought so low: and
yet will not all this suffice. A lawful right in succession is a marvelous
point. These considerations do break the Dukes ambitious brain. He sees
that he must not only make the place for the Crown void, but also he must
make himself capable both to enter and usurp. The one consists chiefly in
the king of Nauarres subversion, the other in the increase of his own wealth
and credit, which will grow on but slenderly, so long as he is content with
governing the armies under the kings authority, and of himself to war
against the Protestants. A thousand other things there are that may fall out in
such an enterprise, which would utterly disgrace all his affairs: and as I
have said, there is not much to be won from those that know how to
defend themselves. Again he mistrusted, that since he had perforce brought the
king into this war, he would never furnish him of things necessary for the
performance thereof, but against his will, and yet that so long as himself had
the leading of the armies (if he compassed not such effects as might be
worthy the great hope and brags that he had given forth) he were quite
overthrown. These things considered, he was content to send his brother into
Guyenne against the king of Navarre, while himself did here set upon the kings
person: at whose hand he first hoped by sinister means to gain more, and
with less loss. Hereupon at his brother the Duke of Maines return out of
Guienne, where he had done nothing but increased the credit of the king of
Nauar and his lieutenant general the lord of Turraine, with whom he had
chiefly had to do, they both together with their kinsmen and partakers do
openly set at jar with the king: albeit still under their general pretense,
viz. of warring against the heretics: whereupon the holiness of their weapons
did depend, and whereby they still retained the catholic faction on their
side. Now at the first blush, to set upon the king it is a shame: they can
have no color. There is never a prince of the blood among them, neither is any
of them so great an officer of the crown, as that it may beseem him to
reform the king and the realm: and yet without this, their general pretense
against him is to no purpose. The king is no catholic, he is superstitious: he
hates not the Huguonets* the Huguonets are poison unto him, he thinks it a
sin to talk with any of them, and that day that he has so done he must go
to shrift: he has brought more of them to their ends then the Duke of Guize
has seen: he has done them more harm than the duke of Guize wishes them,
and of him have they more cause to complain than of any of the league, the
heads whereof have always showed more favor and courtesy to them particularly
than he, a commendation which cannot be denied them. What is the remedy then?
Immediately upon the duke of Maines return out of Guienne he publishes a
libell against the Marshall of Matignon the kings lieutenant in that province,
whom the king had joined with him in office: wherein he accuses him of treason
and intelligence with the king of Navarre and the protestants: and that (says
he) was the cause that in all that journey he could perform no great matter:
yea he accuses him so covertly that he also taxes the king, of who^ he
complains, saying that he cut him short of coin, victuals and munition, and
so takes from him all means to atchiue any thing: yea he proceeds so far,
as to say that he is the best friend that the heretics could have. Hereupo^
the duke of Guize on the other side cries out, that it is the D. of Espernon,
who for malice toward him favors his enemy the king of Nauar, and therefore
restrains the king and makes him to have no care of this war: thus for
that he dares not beat the master he strikes the dog. That man, says he, is
the support of all the heretics in France, and so he stirs up all the world
against him: and presumptuouslie he protests that he will not suffer him to
have any part, town or government in France. Yea albeit the kings guard be
free of all suspicion of heresy, yet because that lord had the rule of them,
he causes the^ twice or thrice to be assaulted and overthrown in Picardie:
and upon this pretense does he as well in that government as else where seize
upon as many towns as he may. Well, the king would pervert him, and retain
his towns in obedience, and to that end does use such power as he has about
him* which are (as I said) his gards and those regiments whereof the duke of
Espernon is coronell. Hereupon is the quarrel proclaimed against the king
himself, and things brought to such pass that the duke of Aumale besieges
Bulloin, the duke of Guize takes Paris, expels the king, slaieth, takes
and strippeth his guards, as himself boasts. By his account every one that
has any towns or gouernements which he will not hold to his use, is an
heretic: whosoever endeavors to keep him from the kingdom is an heretic:
These be new articles of faith. It is said that the D. of Espernon has since
resigned his gouernements into the kings hands: namely that of Normandy, which
was given to the D. of Monpensier, I know not whether it may make him an
heretic also: which were somewhat strange. Well, to conclude this matter: the D.
of Guizes intent is to be king if he can, his proceedings and means are the
civil wars and division of the french catholics against the protestants,
whereby he becomes captain of the first, with whom he is in greater
credit then the king himself, or any catholic Prince of the blood. Herein
let them not mistake: for of these two things by his devises he hops for
one: either so to satisfy himself during the kings life, and so to settle his
affairs that after his decease he may overthrow the king of Nauar and keep him
from the estate: or else, if he cannot keep him from it, at the least to force
him to parley with him, who will still be protector of the catholic faction, and
that now without example: for it he once overthrow him, and with him the rest
of his house, this must needs ensue (for the one depends upon the other) that
either he will possess the kingdom alone, or else he will divide it with his
partakers, still keeping the greatest and best part to himself. To this banquet
does he inuit the king of Spain, the Pope, the Potentates of Italy, and al
catholic princes near hand, to whom the mightines of the realm is as
prejudicial the kings prosperity and the king of Nauars hope is as greatly to
be feared, as the overthrow of either of them is to them profitable. But the
very worst that I see in this practice is, that he can in no sort bear with
the kings long life, whereof he had need to take heed: and I believe that if he
had stayed but a while longer in Paris, the matter had been dispatched. But
howsoever it is, I suppose that that is the thing which at this time does most
trouble the one and scarre the other.

He that shall now call to mind that he that is now king of France is the same
person that wan the battails when he was but seventeen or eighteen years
old, who never came in place but he had the victory, whose valor and
reputation even in the spring of his youth purchased him foreign Crowns, yea
crowns over the most warlike nation that we know in the world, cannot but
he must acknowledge that the only slacknesse and mistrust of his own power,
which through the impression of others have seized upon this sometimes so
valiant a heart, is the whip wherewith God at this day scourges our realm. Of
this Prince we must needs say, that had he been borne in a good world: had
he had servants worthy himself, which had loved his mightiness: had they
not even in his nonage caused him to take the affairs in hand with pain, and
pleasures with ease, which makes him now to hate the one and love the other:
had no man since ceased his government, and molested his mind, God had
undoubtedly indewed him with great good parts, whereby he might have compassed
great matters: but his mothers passions, who sought to advance him, to the end
he might stand her in stead, with her other son, thrust him forth to labor
when he should have given himself to pleasure: glutted him with honor before
he had any stomach to evil, and brought him out of taste with ambition before
he had any mind of it. Besides all this, if a man may lawfully note any
imperfection in him, this is it, that he has been somewhat given to love his
ease and rest, which is a common vice, not in Princes only, but also in most
men. In fine, coming to the crown, he found the realm full of
licentiousness, which the long civil wars had brought in: and replenished with
factions and disobedience: he found all his greatest lords infected with
several purposes, in lieu of one general mind that they ought to have been
off for his service: and hereto was his own patience a great furtherance, as
having this imperfection, that he found no resistance, if he were not crossed,
or if he lived in peace, he would deal absolutely and with great majesty: but
if he met with never so little difficulty, he always preferred a soft and
fearful remedy before boldness and severity, whereto also the mind of one
of his chief counsailers of estate, who has likewise had most government
over him ^ has been a great help to inure him. He is the first king that
ever the captains and governors of his holds compounded withal, or demanded
money of to give them up: I mean not those only, whom the jealousy of the
civil wars had made partial, but the others also that have always taken his
part. He is the first king whom men might boldly without fear offend. For, for
my part that which another would peradventure in a king term clemency and
mercy, and which particularly he would commend in this man, because he never
sought greatly to revenge such injuries as many had committed against him, I
would sometimes; especially when it does exceed, call negligence: which is
prejudicial to his majesty, and which if it be not to be reproved, is not at
the least greatly to be commended in a prince. Albeit this is to be granted,
that when these miserable wars began again, God had put sundry good motions
in his mind, and he was entered into a way fully to reform his realm, and
relieve his people, so as those of the league had never committed other
trespass in France then this breaking of his good intents, yet have they
heaped a wonderful burden of cursses upon their own heads. Well, now to
return to the present estate wherein he now stands, and his purposes:
undoubtedly he has such as are most lawful, for they tend only to the
preservation of his life, and maintenance of that authority which God has
given him, howbeit in the conduct of them he has a very bad cause, cruel to
his people, noisome to his realm and dangerous to himself, as the effect does
sufficiently show. This mighty prince does as well know whereat the D. of
Guize shoots as another: and he has reason, since it is at himself that he
chiefly aims, albeit being miscounsailed he has hitherto taken but a
crooked way to withstand it. Indeed he is in some sort to be excused, as having
no one about him, whose counsel is not prevented either by desire or fear,
and having on his side almost none but himself. When the D. of Guize had thus
armed himself under the name of the holy league (a name but too well known
already in France) they straightway propounded unto him a most false principle,
viz. that in his realm there were but two factions, The Huguonets and the
Catholics: that unless he would take upon him the government of the one
he should have none to take his part, and so according to the proverb,
between two stools the tail goes to the ground: That the Huguonets were the
weakest and therefore that consequently it were best for him to join with the
catholics, for in so doing he should win to himself all the credit which the
house of Guize had alredie gotten, which would be their destruction and his
preservation: that for the atchiuing hereof he must show himself most
passionate and cruel to the heretics, and make war upon them in earnest, yea
and exceed al men in wishing their harm: and that by that only means
reclaiming all the catholic faction to himself, and taking upon him to be head
thereof, he might with ease both overthrow the house of Guize which he both
feared and hated, and by war rid himself of the Huguonets and their captains,
to whom he wished no great good. This was their counsel, which is to the
great prejudice both of his realm and himself, he has hitherto believed: God
grant he may now consider of it, and perceive that the effects thereof in lieu
of making him, as he was persuaded, captain of the catholic faction, have
now brought him to be the only minister of the D. of Guizes passions: in such
sort that so soon as the other did but stir against him, he believed, that to
diminish his credit and means, he must needs show himself very busy against
Huguonets and thereupon with notable commissions, terrible edicts, and mighty
armies show himself rigorous to those that fear and honor him, and which offer
him no injury, and favorable to those that devour him at his own gate. Thus so
soon as he had received some crack by those of the league, as soon as they
began some mutiny against him, or that they seized upon any town of his, so
soon I say, might the king of Nauar be sure that he would be upon his jack,
and with all send an army against him. Oh blind Prince, that thought that
those men which willingly would have seen him dead, grounded themselves but
upon one pretense, and in case that should fail him, he would wrest from them
by imagination that which by force he durst not prove! Curssed be you that give
him counsel. Are ye not ashamed ye traitorous counsailers? must a king
suffer factions in his estate? must he needs have any other the^ his own? Is
it not a goodly part to be a king? If you say that these two factions were
there already, and past remedy: O ye wretches, who brought them in but your
selves, that still do norish them? Is not civil war the mother of these
factions: cease that, and you shall see them fly. Let a king keep himself in
his strength, and kinglike say, I will have peace, and you shall see that the
boldest of these partakers durst not gainesay it: if he must needs make war,
let it be against him that would hinder the peace, and he will soon overcome
him. Nevertheless, according to this principle, they made him to believe that
there was no safety for him unless himself would undertake the same
pretense, as the favorer of the league: also that it were requisite that he
should in appearance show himself more earnest against the protestants the^
they: That the catholics were alredie united with the D. of Guize against the
others: That the only means to disunite them, was to take the D. of Guizes
place, and thunder against the Huguonets. This was his belief and his
counsel. In the mean time together with this persuasion, fear seized upon
him: yea such a fear as was chiefly grounded upon a just mistrust of those
whom he had even about him: so as so soon as he saw the league armed, the
gates of Paris were scarce sure enough for him, himself visited them, and
whereas he might with his only countenance have sent all the authors of this
mutiny an hundred foot under ground, so soon as he heard of it he was amassed:
he by and by sent his mother to the^ to desire them to be content: to excuse
him, for that in the time of peace he made not so great account of them as he
ought: to promise that hereafter he would content them, yea that they should
but ask and al should be granted them. To be short, he did in a manner humble
himself before his subjects, to the end to keep them from mutining against
him; whereas it had bin his part to have taught the^, that he both would and
could punish their rebellion. All this notwithstanding he had no great mind to
the war, as wisely considering that it was a diminishing of his authority, and
if he feared it against the league, he was not desirous of it against the
protestants: but at length being overcome by his mother, who had other drifts
in her brain then he, and almost by all that were about him, he grew to a
final acco^de with the Duke of Guize, and perforce consented to the war
against the K. of Nauar, unto whom not one month before he had by thirty
letters of his own hand testified his own judgment of the intents of those
of the league. This has been the counsel that the king has hitherto had.
Now there is no doubt but he could have wished the king of Navarre to have been
strong enough to have forced both the others and himself to grow to peace: but
of his own motion to propound it he never durst: for had he done it, he
looked straight to have been stifeled by the mutinous faction of the league.
Well, he minds to live, to reign and to be obeyed as well of the
protestants as of those of the league. A desire both just and reasonable, and
so he might, if he would: but with these pernicious principles, since himself
calls his power into question, and dare not do the part of a king, let him
not think it strange that others should enterprise to counterfeit his person.
God grant that at length he may earnestly desire to be that he is, that is, the
master and greatest lord of his realm: but this can not be, unless he be
king, and that shall he never be, except he resolve himself to wish the
wealth and peace of his people.

As touching the king of Navarre, his condition and intent, it is clean
contrary or differing from both the others, of which I have already spoken.
Even as he agrees with the kings purpose in the behalf of preserving of his
life and authority, where against he neither could, neither would attempt any
thing: so likewise he differs from him in that that concerns the liberty
of the churches of France, for the which the war is made against himself,
whiles he goes about to release them from it. But he is every way contrary
and opposite unto the enterprises of the duke of Guize and the league. First,
whereas the other, to whom ambition gives the same hope for the crown of
France, which right and nature has given unto this, cannot put it in practice
but by war, by the subversion of laws, and alteration of the state of the
realm: for if he should make no invasion, or if every thing kept their
ordinary course, he has no right to it, no he could not be called to it. This
on the other side cannot look for it but by the means of peace, by keeping
every thing in order, his desire is ordinary, and in maintaining the laws,
his title is lawful. And if he would take any other way by violence or
usurping, he should find his rival as much stronger and surely settled in this
behalf, over that he is, as he has an advantage in the true succession. In
the mean while besides the right of the realm which looks on him, he
carries moreover upon his shoulders the burden of all the churches of France,
he bears all their hope upon his head: his overthrow to man's likelihood is
their ruin and oppression: his greatness their liberty. And that is it which
increases the power of his enemies, and which lincketh together against him all the catholics of Europe. Of truth, whiles I think now upon this one, as I
did lately upon the other, me thinks that God under these two mighty men,
will exercise our state: the one having yet more strength of body and mind to
preserve it, than the other has to destroy it. But the other having as yet
more means, by the reason of the opportunity which he had, to join with the
greater side, and to have had the means to use even the kings authority: this
will cause me to make some small digression to compare them together: for such
are they, as they well deserve to be inserted into Plutarkes paralels, I force
my self as much as may be, to judge of them without affection, although I
should in respect of my religion, my side, and infinite other occasions favor
the one more than the other: yet I wot not whether this affection does not
rob me of the liberty of my judgment. But me thinks that this man, how
worthy so ever the other is, has many good parts in him whereby he goes
beyond him. I speak not of their practices, I call them not in question. I do
not so much as give my judgment of those of the duke of Guize, but condemn
them: For I am a Frenchman: I speak only of such qualities as God has endued
them withal, proper in the one to have them such, and in the other to oppose
himself against them: I will say then that this man has all his life through,
yea from the beginning of his youth fought against necessity it self, all his
business has been full of it, he never did any thing but with pain, the
other contrariwise has had all to his mind, had always all opportunity for
the first. Item of his enterprises, wanted always rather workmanship than
work, rather form then matter, rather will then means. Nothing did assist
this, neither did any thing resist the other. This makes me to conclude
first, that seeing by these sundry ways they have found themselves one as
great as the other: the one must needs have learned more, have more experience
more courage, more force: the other more ambition, more hope, a thing bred in
him by the greatness of his means, and by consequent of more enterprise, and
more audacitie. That the one has less show, less vanity, less pomp, and
less bravery in his affairs: the other less experience, less assurance,
and less stabilitie. Which makes me to think that whenever this man shall
find himself in great abundance, he shall be better able to use it, then the
other could defend himself against necessity, if ever he were brought to it.
I will make no mention of the former wars, wherein notwithstanding the duke of
Guize had fortunes gifts always at will: and this man contrariwise has often
tried what misery may, yea even the extremest: (I speak of that whereof I will
now say:) that if I had seen this great enterpriser assailed two whole years,
by eight French armies, which were sent to the refreshing one of an other, and
led on a row by the best Captains of France, amongst the which I account his
brother the duke of Maine: and that at his departure from thence, not only he
had lost nothing, but besides that he had taken seven or eight good towns, and
won a great battle, having in his hands no other means in the world to
build his deeds upon, but his courage alone, as I have seen happen to the
king of Nauar, I would then think that I might compare them together: but
until then, there is no reason so to do. Some will say to me that the D. of
Guize has had many more enterprises and greater ones, and all that the king of
Navarre could do, it was to resist, I grant it. It was an easy matter for the
one to enterprise, every one favoring him: difficult to the other to resist,
every one being against him. As the labor, so the glory ought to be greater.
They have notwithstanding many humors both like and different, but no small
things, no slender ones. Both are of great courage, they had need of it: both
are gentle, courteous, friendly: both are active of body, used to toil, and
acceptable. But their minds are much diverse. The one is most honest, frank,
openhearted, free minded, sometimes somewhat hasty, well resolved
notwithstanding upon present occasion, and dangers: so earnest about that which
is said before him, and so bestirring himself about the vron that ought to
be beaten whiles it is hot, that he has the less regard to that which is
passed, as also to that which he must follow: he will conceive few far
fetched practices, being content with his hope, and referring all thereto. The
other is diverse and as bad as may be, secret, close, crafty, patient, even so
far as to be blamed for it, as I have said, dissembling, laying down his
platformes a far off. For he must forge his own hope, looking a loofe off,
taking nothing in hand but what he is sure to bring to pass: but I wotte
not, if he were upon the very point of danger, whether he would usually grow
to so ready a resolution, since he has not had so often trial thereof.
Howsoever the matter goes they are both worthy men, and of the woorthiest
that ever France did bear, such as could have performed notable actions, if a
mighty king would have used them, and his time have suffered it. To come
again to the matter. As for the king of Nauar, he neither has, neither ought
to have any practice about the state, his possibility does sufficiently
furnish him, and besides, he has enough to do to break those of his enemies:
his war tends only to peace, and the quietness of the realm: but such a
peace as to the which he will never agree, except the churches of France, and
so consequently the strangers if he can, may be at liberty. He needs not plead
his right to the crown it is no time: moreover, that which is sure, ought not
to be called into doubt or question: much les need he busy himself about the
overthrow of those of Guize and Lorraine. He wishes not their harm, except as
they wish the realms, to the which if they would be profitable, he
acknowledges them most sufficient, as concerning their particular persons.
Their degree is not equal with his, who uses the name of a king. That name
keeps him from thinking upon theirs. His only drift and purpose (if he has
any) tends to defend himself, and after such a sort, that he may constrain
his enemies to render unto France her peace, to the king his authority, to him
and his their liberty. After that, let them of Guize enrich and advance
themselves as much as they can, so it be not to the cost of one of these three,
it skils him not. The proceeding and the way that he takes about it, is not
certain, it depends upon the same which the others do hold against him. If
they let him alone, he stirs not: if they come to weapons, he runs to
them: if they lay them down, he does the like: that is the reason why the
king knows in his heart, that when the rest of France shall be agreed, that
there will be little or no difficulty at all with this man, who being led
only by reason, may be at all times easily brought to it again.

I have spoken of the three principal heads which uphold the three factions
that are in France: we are now to mark such as come in by bi-waies, what
drift and scope they have, whereat they aim, and what hope they have to hit on
it. Amongst these, the first is the Queen mother unto the king, who for her
credits sake, and in show, keeps her self on her sons side, as she did
always, when she had many sons, hold with him that was king: but who
notwithstanding hates nothing more than his absolute power, as being the
worse for it. When France was in peace, she was feign to spin her rock at home,
her son left her no charge, nor deling in any matter. That she might recover
her authority, she was fain to shuffell the cards, or have intelligence with
those that shuffeled them, otherwise she was of no use: which her mind, that
could not think on small matters, could never brook. And of this Princess
whose race has ruled, and rules at this day over the best parts of Europe, it
may be said as it was of Agrippa, V^^ribus curis mu^ebria vitia exuisse, If
that already were not a vice in a woman: it has been always her custom, in
France to stir up one against another, that in the mean while she might rule
in these divisions. The mighty against the mighty, Princes against Princes,
yea her own children against her children. For she know well enough that our
state stands so, as that a woman, except it be by some extraordinary ways,
is of no credit therein.

In the time of the late king Charles, this that now is, was then her
protector, whose power she did increase as much as she could, to the end she
might use him to make her self necessary unto the other. The king at length
perceived it, but too late. Since that, this being come unto the Crown,
wherein to speak the truth, he was infinitely bound unto her, whiles he was
in Polande, being as well assured that except she had wisely provided for it,
there had been such stirringes in France as perchance at his coming home he
had been kept from getting in. She kept her credit for three or four
years, whilst this young king dreamed of nothing but the pleasures of his
age, and the deliciousness of his new estate: but since, beginning to take
upon him the affirmative voice, and to seek to rule alone, she was forced to
have recourse unto Mounsieur her yoonger son, who for a while vphelde her,
and made her to be esteemed necessary. He being dead, she chose other
remedies: for howsoever it be, she has ever wished two things. The one, to
make him that was in possibility of the Crown to be beholding unto her, for
to keep him in when he were come to it: The other, to make him in the mean
while so great, that he that were master of the State, should be forced to use
her help in brideling the other, employing after this manner very quietly
both their powers one against the other, that betwixt them she might rule and
be sought to: such a council as particularly for her self was as full of
wisdom as often full of troubles and inconveniences for the commons. Now, if
after Mounsieurs death, she had found the king of Navarre fit for these
practices, she had made her buckler of him: but seeing that his religion, and
many other considerations did hinder her, she has cast both her eyes and her
heart on the house of Lorraine, and her daughters children, whereunto the
hatred that she did bear unto this Prince, even from his infancy has been
a great help: So that esteeming her self not able to be reconciled with him,
she consequently does fear him, and is fully resolved to hinder him in all
that she can, from getting any part in France. She can never do it without
the overthrow of the order of the Realm. For (as I said) after this hatred
comes in the love she bears unto the children of the D. of Lorraine, who
are her daughters children, toward whom she has a secret inclination, never
ceasing day nor night to reproach unto the king, that he ought rather to love as
his heirs, his Nephews, his Sisters children, then a stranger unto his house:
so does she term the king of Navarre. The daughters of Spain are also her
daughters children, upon whom she would likewise be glad to bestow some part
of the same: not being grieved in the mean while that her sons state is in
trouble, to the end that he should have refuge unto her, and that she may be
employed. Now in this manner she agrees well with the Duke of Guize, to cross
her son, to stir up, and open the way to confusion, and about the means to
alter the order of succession in our realm: but to wish that he should wax
so great that he might overthrow the king himself, and dispossess him, and
himself afterward to invade the whole state, it is not likely, I cannot
believe that she desires it. Now under this the Queen mothers intent, I
comprehend also that of the Marquise du Port, her little son, son unto the
Duke of Lorraine, who likewise has no intelligence or hope in this our state,
any further then she his grandmother does procure him to conceive.

Next, there is the king of Spain, who from the beginning of these wars,
seeing the Queen of England to knit a strait alliance with our king, seeing
in the same time also the Commissioners of the low countries at Paris to offer
him the sovereignty over their provinces, it came in his head to cast three or
four thousand crowns into the hungry hands of the league, so to set France
in troubles, as being assured that by these means he should keep the king
from thinking upon Flanders, the which he did most fear: as indeed, there is
but the only king of France, so he be in peace, that can easily take these
Provinces from the Spaniarde. This is that which brought him in, and
consequently, that somewhat ouerhastned the Duke of Guizes devises. Besides
that, he fears now extremely, least the king of Navarre should attain to
the crown of France: he is his enemy by nature: he detaineth a kingdom from
him, which no doubt if the others ^^awes may grow on, will be wholly pulled
away, and more perchance withal. He knows well enough, that he being old,
his children young, his state divided and scarce settled, small matters after
his death will trouble it: much more a king of Navarre, if he were king of
France. Therefore he is glad to frame himself unto those of Lorraine, to find
them means to stir up coals, that in the mean while he may more freely go
about his wars of the low countries, and of England: to molest the king of
France, thereby to overthrow the king of Navarre: to the end that afterward
the realm being left for a pray, he being the mightiest, might catch the
greater part. This is his drift as concerning our state: but that he would
proceed so far as being burdened with many other particular expenses, he
would yet draw his treasors dry, to make the Duke of Guize king: he I say, who
is persuaded that if it were so that the manner of succession must needs be
altered, his daughters the kings Nieces, ought to have the better part: That
which I say of the K. of Spain may likewise be applied to the duke of Sauoy
his son in law, who is of much less power, and has no other devises then his
father in laws. These are all that either do good or evil unto France. These
are her good or bad humors: These are the prosperous or contrary winds which
torment and trouble it. And of their discordes and passions as diverse as
themselves, as differing and contrary as they are, depends her good or evil
hap. Oh mighty Empire! the glory of Europe: to the which the course of
1200. years could bring nothing but increase, thy enemies nothing but glory,
there was some reason that after so many victories, thou should end by thy
own hands, thou should stoop under thine own force, seeing destiny had
not created in the world any conqueror over thee.

But leaving of this manner of speech, which rather provoke me to weep than
to write: seeing that the division of religion does serve for a pretense in the
alteration of our Realm, and so consequently in his destruction, if God suffer
it so, this evil being almost common to all the states of Europe. I will
slip a little a side to speak somewhat of the general affairs of
Christendom, in that which concerns these two great factions, the one
resting yet under the obedience of the Pope, the other having cast it off. I
will not entreat hereof as a Divine. I know very well that God commonly
tries his by affections, as the means to keep men in their duties, and
immediately to have recourse unto him whom they think but little upon whiles
their neck is swollen up with prosperity. Neither am I ignorant that the
son of God pronounces these words: My kingdom is not of this world:
thereby teaching to the true Christians, that it is not here that they ought to
seek their ease, and although they find themselves afflicted, yet must they
not mistrust of their cause, as if God did detest them, and were purposed to
root them out from the face of the earth, albeit contrariwise, they see the
Turks, the Heathen, the poor blinded ones in Popish superstitions, have all
at will: and conquer Realms, furnish Provinces, and them of veins of gold
which never dry up, and their armies prosper every where. That their good
hap procures them such men as to do them service will attempt upon those
Princes lives that are their enemies, even in the midst of their Gardes.
Finally, they scarce have yet wished, when God suffers them to see their
desire fulfilled. Where clean contrariwise he has laid this necessity
upon his true servants, that they shall take his cross upon their shoulders
if they will follow him, pass through the straight gate, and after his
example pass away their whole life in grief, affliction, and in necessity.
According to these rules and tokens, which cannot be applied to any other, then
those that make profession of the true reformed religion, it might suffice me
to conclude, that they whom God afflicts after this sort, are his true
children, whom he will afflict, but not utterly cast away: whom he will
chastise, but not punish: whom he uses as his children that offended him, in
doing otherwise than he commanded them, and not as servants that have robbed
him. And after such a manner, that although at this day throughout all
Christendom the greatest potentates of the world be confederated, united,
and joined together against them, it is all in vain. God will never suffer
that which is his to be cast away: they are his, he well may dippe them two
or three fingers in the water: but presently he will stretch forth his arm
of deliverance to pull them out of the gulf: and that could I (besides the
indubitable truth of that promise which he made unto his) prove by the course
of things that are passed in the church since the foundation of the world. But
as I have said, my purpose is not to reason like a divine. It suffices me to
prove that we have not only that great supernatural pillar of Gods power for
our defense, as an impenetrable shield, against the which, all the darts of
the world turn their points backwards: but also even in the world it self,
and among all human means he has given us without comparison more then our
enemies: so that if we suffer that they afflict us, it is but our fault,
because we cannot help our selves with that power that he has given us. All
Christendom which is under the Popes obedience, is at this day joined together
to root out those of the religion. Who are those wicked ones? let us judge of
their power, and see whether it be so great as that we need to fear it. It is
the Pope, it is the Emperor it is the king of Spain, there be certain
Potentates of Italy: In France are the duke of Guize and his kinsmen, who make
the king and the realm to serve their turns as they list. In Switzerland
there are certain Cantons: In Germany, diverse princes. I have named all, and
them by the most glorious names that I could devise: there are Popes, Emperors,
Kings, and numbers of Princes. It is said that all these terrors of the world
are gathered together to this purpose only, to make an end of those which
profess the true religion, God grant it, so be it. The more enemies, the
greater glory. But let us search them a little nearer, we shall find that
all these men have some particular intent which they keep to themselves, and
that to ^^intaine their unity they all agree only in the general. What
intentes? let us specially consider of them. The Popes is manifest: Luther,
Zuinglius, and Calvin, have abridged him of two parts of his revenues: the
third is in great danger, they labor about it. He would both recover that
which he has lost, if it were possible, and assure against hereafter, that
which he holds. The whole realm of England is slipped out of his hands: if
the king of Spain could plant there again the catholic religion, it were so
much recovered for him. France has never showed him any great obedience, the
church of France had always her privileges by her self: yet it is nothing,
thinks he, in respect of that it should be, if ever the king of Navarre
should come to be king of it. He fears least he should come over the Alps:
he is of the race of Bourbon, fatal unto Rome: besides that he is already
egged on against the Popes, for his kingdom of Navarre, which most unjustly
they have passed over unto the Kings of Castile. Moreover, he fears least
that a mighty Prince like unto this, do one day bring a great reformation in
religion, which can not be done without diminishing the authority of the
sea: which notwithstanding will be as easy for him to do, as it was for
Philippe the fair, and many other kings of France, enemies to the Popes
usurpations. Thus his chiefest interest is to cut this Prince short of his
hope. For his part he does what he can, he thundreth, he stormeth, he
curses, he declares him an heretic, a rebel: finally, not capable of the
Crown of France, as though it lay in him to take it away, or to give it. For
the execution of this Bull, which in deed of it self could do but little
against the bulwarks of Rochell, (if that were all) he armeth all
Christendom, yea even the Cardinal of Bourbon, to whom he sends a
hallowed sword, of the race of Saint Paul: he promises money unto the
Guizians: he promises, but he sends not, as having not yet paid that
which his Popedom did cost him, according to the Romish style.

To conclude, as it belongs to him, he works miracles with his Crosier
staff, and his purpose and drift is, to animate all the world against the
heretics, among whom he comprehends the Queen of England, and the king of
Navarre his principal enemy to his thinking, whose overthrow he looks
for, by the means of this universal league. As much or more occasion has he
to complain of the high and low Germany, as of France, and England: but
he thinks that after that the king of Spain and those of Guize shall have
chasticed, that is to say, usurped France, and England, in driving out the
heretics, that is to say, the true princes and lawful lords: after that they
shall have tamed the low countries, they may without any gainesaying join
their forces with the Emperors, so to constrain either by friendship or force
the Princes of Germany which are Protestants, to come again under the yoke of
his obedience: that after that, being no great likelihood that the Suitzers
would obstinate themselves against such great forces, seeing their Cantons are
already divided, they altogether might easily assist the Duke of Sauoy, to
recover Geneua, and to sack that town which they call the spring and
fountain of all heretics of Christendom. It is there that he concludes the
end of his desire, and of his holy leagues enterprise. Which I have seen
written by Pope Sixtus himself, in a letter intercepted about the beginning of
these troubles in France, sent from Italy into Spain. And as for him, this is
his pretense, that is his intent grounded upon that general hatred which he
bears to the heretics, but especially unto the king of Navarre, and the
Queen of England, of whom he has received harm enough already, or is afraid
to receive more.

The king of Spain has three particular purposes, for the which he wishes
this general league. The first to compass the wars of the low countries
which are held by those whom he calls heretics, and against the Queen of
England, who is likewise of their number. The second his hereditarie desire
to join France unto his dominions: which he thinks he may now the more
easily do, in respect of the right that belongs unto him through his wife, a
daughter of France, and his daughters gotten betwixt them: for as for him, he
thinks not that the Salike law, the honor of our kings, was made for him.
The last, the overthrow of the king of Navarre, whom he purposes,
whatsoever it costeth him, to remove as much as he can possibly from the
crown, for many reasons that he has to fear this great enemy, whom God
keeps for to be one day the destruction of his house. For the benefit of
these three purposes, he is come in, and has much solicited this general
league, which strengthens to h im his title of war against England: of enmity
against the king of Nauar: ministers to him opportunity to enterprise under
hand against the state of France whilst he favors the affairs of the Duke
of Guize his partner, with whom, except it were for this, he could have no
intelligence that might yield him any profit: by his means in France he does
hope to overthrow the king of Navarre, also he hops to use the havens of
Picardie, and Normandy against England, and the low countries: being sure
enough afterward, that the king of France being dead, his lawful successor
dispossessed, and the realm left as a pray, he shall be able easily to divide
their part unto those of Lorraine, being stronger then they: and thus may we
see that he turns the general pretense of this goodly league to his
particular benefit and purpose, even as though it had been only made for his
domestical affairs.

The Emperor would galdly, that all the other Princes of Christendom which
are of the religion, were overthrown, to the end the whole body of the league
might come to set him free from the protestants which are his neighbors: but
because it is yet a long piece of work, and that it were not good for him to
bestirre himself much, least he should waken those mighty princes which are
stronger then himself: he rusheth not far in amongst them, no more then the
other princes of Germany.

I have discoursed enough of the duke of Guizes intent and purpose, which is to
make himself alone king of France, if it be possible, or at least (...) the
better part: such a purpose as willingly admits no fellow, and for the which
a man will not lightly labor for another. This I do here note only to show
that to help himself in France by the means of Spain, to the furtherance
of his enterprise, and in recompense thereof himself to help the Spaniard to
recover his low countries: to see the Queen of England, to whom he wishes
even death it self, whom likewise he knows to be the only support of his
enemy, quite overthrown, he will have notable intelligence with the king of
Spain: but to yield him wholly the crown of France, and to hold it of him by
homage, if he be able to usurp it, or to give him over the better part, I
believe he will not. In the mean while these pretenses being grounded upon
nothing else then the division of religion, we must confess him to be one of
the chiefest pillars of this holy league.

The princes of Italy have no other purpose at al then their own
preservation, being enclosed on one side by the Pope, on the other by the
Venetians, on the third by the king of Spain: besides divided, and their
States so small, that they have small leisure to think of any other matter the^
to maintain themselves: and for this reason only are they come into the
league. But they are not so good catholics, but that they fear more the
increase of the house of Spain, then the decay of their religion. Such as have
been in their countries do know this

The Duke of Sauoy is also comprehended in this general union: so long as his
father in law shall live, he will have the same enterprises that he has: if he
dies, he will have others, as I shall show anon, which altogether do
synpathise with those of the league. The duke of Lorraine likewise, when every
body shall come to reap the fruit of his labor, and the interest of his
charges, his conclusion will not agree with the D. of Guizes proposition. The
Cantons of Zuitzerland are not in my opinion entered into the league, because of
the alliance which they have with our king, and the bond that knitteth them
together in their country. Notwithstanding I doubt not, but that for money they
will find forces, not generally unto the league, but particularly to the Duke
of Guize, yet have they after made some difficulty thereof.

Of purpose have I showed the intent of each partaker of the league, to prove
that which I have said, that every one of them had some particular meaning
disagreeing one from another: to the end that thereby I might show, that
whatsoever good intelligence they had one with another, it were very easy for
us to have a better. All with one course will I seek out, what are their
means and their forces: in the which I hope to find so many wantes in respect
of that which is in our hands, that we would be ashamed to suffer our selves
to be beaten. I will begin with the weakest. Of which number I take the
Emperor and the Catholic princes of Germany to be. For although undoubtedly
they be of great power, yet the Protestants their neighbors are of such
force, as every man does know: to wit, the king of Denmark, the Electours
Palatin, of Saxony, and Brandenbourgh, the Landgraue of Hessia, and many
other great princes and lords; so that if they would, the other durst not
seem to have enterprised any thing at all. I have showed what the forces of
the Cantons of Zuitzerland are, and how the general league may have use of
them. As for the princes of Italy, the Duke of Sauoy, as our nearest
neighbor, is the most to be feared of them all. But first, it is but a small
matter of forces that may come from him: next, he rather rests upon sure
possibilities, then upon uncertain ones. His father in law is old, at his
death he hops to get somewhat, and I do think that he will rather cast
his cies upon the states of Millaine and Naples, if the succession of Spain
come to be divided, as there is great likelihood: for the daughters who are as
ambitious as may be, and already by their father himself trained up in the
handling of affairs, and almost put in full possession of his kingdoms, will
hardly be content to be married for a piece of money, and leave such great
riches unto their young brother, sickly, and as they say, an Idiot: so that,
me thinks this Duke has work enough cut out already, needing not to busy
himself much about any enterprises on this side of the Mounts, which enclose
him in. On the other side beyond them, he can do so little though he would,
and he finds himself in a country so full of disadvantage, that being of
one side kept by the Germans, on an other by the Zuitzers, on the other by
the Frenchmen, and on all sides by the Alps, such forces as he could raise
out of his country, which can be but very small, cannot be transported to
any place, where they may perform any thing without great loss and
difficulty. As for his money, to make good cheer at home he has enough: but
to make a great war, not so. The other Princes of Italy, as the Dukes of
Ferrara, of Mantoue, of Florence, and of Vrbin, which are almost the chiefest,
be all added to, for to increase their roll, and to say: Lo what a number
here is, and not for any other matter: If there were any war in Italy
betwixt two mighty Princes, such as were Charles of Spain, and Francis of
France, they might indeed much further his affairs, whom they would assist.
If there must be an army made up by sea against the Turk, each one of them
shall well be able to set forth a Galley or ^waine, and that is all: but that
they may do much in a great war, either against us in France, or in England,
or in Germany, or in Flanders, not so. Besides that, as I have noted, they
will never be so deep in the league, but that they will fear more the
increase of Spain, then the decreasing of Rome. The Duke of Parma, as he is
Duke of Parma, may be of the number of them, but in respect that he commands
over the forces of the king of Spain in the low countries, surely he is a
great captain, without doubt he has gotten great reputation and credit, be
it amongst the Armies which he commands over, be it amongst the countries
where he makes war, yea, a credit by inheritance, the remembrance of his
mothers government, being most agreeable amongst them. But withal, he were
but unwise, as well as the Duke of Sauoy, if he had not certain purposes to
himself, or if he would stick more to vain possibilities then to
certainties. For my part I believe, that he is not resolved to have labored
all this while in Flanders for an other. But there is a farther point in this
matter, which is, that as long as he shall make war there, as Lieutenant to the
king of Spain, he may do much harm: but if once he take the way to make
himself lord of it, as he may easily in that which he holds, after the good
man's death, seeing he can only perform it by gentle means, and the good
will of the people, he is not to be feared any more, but must needs withdraw
himself out of the league. As for the Duke of Lorraine, he is a great lord,
but a petty Prince: take away from before his eyes the hope of possibilities,
which they made him conceive in France, for his son, which only has brought
him in, with the league, he will eftsoons take that side which may breed his
own quietness, and not seek any quarrel. He is very wise: and therefore I
believe that our stirrings in France proceed not from him at this time.
Notwithstanding there is no doubt but that he employeth himself in this
general matter against us: but I think that in this point there rests this
benefit, viz. as long as he shall hinder the growing up of the Duke of Guize
his cousin, as he must needs do, for his sons sake, he does us more good,
then otherwise he could do us harm: now he hinders him in respect of the
crown, the which at length agreeing and having some intelligence with the
Queen mother unto the king, his mother in law, he will rather demand for his
son then for the other. And I hold it for a most true principle, that the
duke of Guize our capital adversary, is already so far in, that he must
needs either be king, or be undone altogether: there is no mean for him
between these two extremities. Marius, Cinna, Pompey, Lepidus, and Anthony
may be examples hereof. As soon as a man has aspired unto tyranny, Aut Caesar
aut nihil. I have spoken heretofore of his means: they are indeed great
enough in France, because the side of the catholics is great, amongst whom he
is of great credit, and his assurance being his chiefest strength, that the
king will put up al his presumpteousnesse. But as for him, I doubt not, but that
as his particular purpose tends to our state, so, if he had in his chests the
ducats of the Indies, he would make a breach in them, and afterward do much
harm unto others. But he is extreme poor, and indetted, the second token of
a man that commonly aspireth unto novelties. Besides that, he has too many
that stand against his purposes, not only of his enemies, as the king of
Navarre, and the princes of the blood: but of his own friends, as the heirs
of Spain, of Lorraine, and of Sauoy, and those of his own house, which do
pretend as much right to the usurping of our crown as he does: and to the
which, seeing he must needs use them for his turn as he does, he must
needs likewise give some part of his pray, if he can pray upon any thing:
which will breed him infinite gelousies, so that all the power me thinks, of
this partner can stretch no farther than to the dissipation and dismembring of
our realm: yet shall he be feign to have help thereto. For, that he should
make war either against the Germans, or Englishmen, he will hardly do it,
or at least it will never be, before he has made an end of his matters in
France, which is a long piece of work. And upon that I will observe one most
true quality of our nation: that is, that such is our nature, that we can be
content under a king that is already established to divide our selves, we will
make civil wars, and vproares: but if there were none, or that we were to
provide for the Crown, we would never suffer the renting a sunder of it. For
if a prince should nor find himself to set foot in the whole, he would hardly
be suffered to divide it, except he were a mighty Prince near unto it, as the
king of Spain, who by his strength, and by the means of his Countries, might
hold the part that he had ketched up: yet were it hard for him. Finally, I
will use but two testimonies to show that this man's power, is no such great
matter. The one, that in the beginning of the league, when his fire was most
kindled, when men thought that at a word of his mouth, all France would set up
their crestes, he never found himself accompanied with a thousand French
horsemen, and four thousand footmen at the most: yea all those vanished away
in one month, notwithstanding, that he had prodigally spent all the money
which he received out of Spain, and his own in gathering them together. The
other, that being since entered into the war, a small army of reisters,
consisting of four thousand five hundred horsemen, and of three or four
thousand Lansquenets, with a few Switzers, did pass in spite of him through
his government even to the very heart of France: did beat him, and beat him
again in their passage, as often as they saw him: albeit that he had called
about him all his friends, partakers, and power, and that he had besides all
this, the best part of the kings: albeit likewise that a year before, he had
boasted, that he would fight with the Germans eue^ upon the Rhynes side, and
that it stood him greatly upon for his credit so to do. But yet without
doubt, if men should suffer this head of a saction, to grow on, and except God
had bridled him, he is the greatest, the ablest, and the most dangerous
enemy, that such states as make profession of the religion can have.

There are yet behind two of the worst: to wit, the Pope, and the king of
Spain. The first is the brawlingest, the most seditious of all, and yet
nevertheless the weakest. It is a common thing, Acutum reddere qui possit ferrum
(...) ipse secandi. To speak the truth, he serves for nothing else but to
edge their knives. The Popes they cannot tell an hour before they are, whether
they shall be Pope or not. Before they come to that, they are most commonly
petty Italian Cardinals (for gelousie keeps the greatest from it) who
during the Cardinalship, had no farther practices then to catch some annate or
benefice. Those that are able to stir up coals, are not lightly preferred:
Italy has fared the worse for it. Last of all, none can come by it without
paying well for it: and they are all such good husbands as that they leave as
little as they can to their successor: insomuch that the new Pope has enough
to do for the three or four first years to pay those which have sold him
his See, and afterward to live. And it is an extraordinary thing when they
pass nine or ten years: else straightwaies they say: Exiit sermo
interfratres, quod discipulus iste non moritur. For they are very old when
they are chosen: so that ere they can do any harm, they are carried to their
graves. And as for this man if there were no more but he, we should not need
to fear any thing else then Bulls and lead, which hurt none but those that
are afraid of them. The king of Spaines gold were much more to be feared:
whom I have kept for the last, as the greatest of all, and the first moouer,
who makes all the others to move. But he for his part has likewise many
discommodities which bind his hands: and of this one, because all Europe
ringeth of his name, we must say somewhat the more.

This Prince is son to Charles the fifth, that great troubler of the world,
who has tossed all so much topsie turuie, so long as he was in it: who was
happier by the means of his Lieutenantes then by himself: who had either for
his friends or for his foes at sundry times all the Princes of his time: a
mighty Prince notwithstanding, vigilant, a warrior, (if ever there were any)
and painful in the wars: besides full of courtesy and humanity, and such
a one as truly was worthy of the name of Caesar, and worthy of the Empire.
This same was brought up in affairs by his fathers, even from his cradle: yet
was he much more happy than he: and his good hap consists in this, that as
long as his years could encourage him to great matters, he never met with
any that crossed him. His father had at one time the great Francis of France,
the great Henry of England, Solomon in the East part, and the Princes of
Germany, which thoroughly exercised his wits: So that, on what side so ever
he turned himself, he found business enough. Besides that, he found all the
Countries round about him, as strong, and as like to set upon him, as he upon
them. That was it, that made his fortune so diverse. Contrariwise, Philip at
this day king of Spain has been favored with such fortune as had never
interruption. But that is more to be attributed, to that which tell out about
him, then to himself. France in his time has been ruled by a woman, and by
children, or so toyled by civil wars, that they have always found work
enough within themselves. England likewise ruled by a woman, who following the
nature of her kind, has wisely contented her self with mainteining her
subjects in peace, and defending her state from her neighbors attempts, not
enterprising any thing against them. Germany by peaceable Princes. The East
parts by Selim a great drunkard, who took pleasure in nothing but his drink,
and since by Amorat his son, half an Idiot, who stirs not from the
Mosquetta. So that we must not say, that he had good luck every where, but
that he found no where any body that might breed him any evil luck: all
which notwithstanding, he has performed no great matters. The conquest of
Portugal and of Jndia, has been more easy then luckie: there was no great
labor. The conquest of Tercyera, and the victory over the Frenchmen shall not
seem so strange, if we consider that it was a whole army of Spain, against
a company of ships gathered together in France. As for the battles of
Graueline, and of Saint Quintin, they were yet remnantes of his fathers
victories, they were the armies that from their youth had followed the old
man's fortune, there was but little of his, his person it self was not there.
Nothing did stir in Italy, in Burgundy, in the kingdom of Naples, in
Sicilia nothing: where contrariwise in Africa he has lost Gouleta, the only
labor of Charles his father, and all that he had there. His victories have not
stretched so far in Flanders, but that there is more behind to do. The
reason why? because he has found there some resistance. It is an easy
matter for a man to win, when no body plaieth against him. Now, even now,
having gotten enemies worthy of his forces, we shall see what he can do in
England with all his great preparations: we shall see whether he shall keep
still that renowned great fortune. Concerning the state that he finds
himself in at this time, it is such. First he is extreme old, and yet more
broken. He has but two daughters, and a young boy: they great ones, ambitious
already, and proud to the uttermost: the one Duchess of Sauoy, the other
brought up in her fathers arms, and in the affairs of his estate, the which
she alone governs: his son is little and sickly, as I have said: now are
these occasions of divisions. For in Spain the daughters may succeed. Besides
that, his state is much divided. The low Countries, which were his best mesle,
are far scattered from him. All that which is cut off from him, as the
Provinces which are united with the Queen of England, he can see no hope ever
to recover. That which the Prince of Parma holds under his authority, he
scarce assures himself, that after his death he will faithfully surrender it
unto his children. The other is a brave Prince, a great Captain, beloved of
those over whom he commands, esteemed of the others as I have said, who has
used great moderation, and observed his faith to his people, that are already
highly pleased with that manner of government, which his mother had used before
him: who has purchased great credit amongst them, and that enough, to make
him hereafter able to keep this portion instead of Portugal, which to his
judgment the king of Spain has taken from him: and who howsoever it be, will
be grieved that all his labors should be dedicated to a maid, or to a little
boy. The Duchy of Mylan is near unto the Duke of Sauoy: he will pretend
right unto it, in the behalf of his wife, and according to his contract of
marriage? The kingdom of Naples, and the towns of Italy will follow the
fortune of the Duchy of Mylan. Portugal is he as yet scarce assured of: the
Portugalles grieved that Spaniards should rule over the^, as much the more
their enemies as they are nearer unto them, as it is an ordinary thing to all
people. The Indies a^ well the Portiugalles as the Spanish ones, the only
sinnew of this state, will belong unto him that shall possess either Portugal
or Spain. The case thus standing, this Prince has henceforth more need to
think upon the preservation of his house, and his Lordships (which doubtless
are like to be divided after his death) then to trouble his neighbors. To
speak the truth, he is rich: but he is at infinite charges, scarce having
any country where he is not forced to keep a great garrison. That he
stands in need, he makes it known sufficiently to the troops which he
keeps in Flanders, where he is sometimes a year or eighteen months
without giving them a penny. As he is rich of money, so he is poor of men:
he can get none but only out of Germany, out of Spain, out of Italy, or
out of Burgundy. Now therefore mark his weakness. As touching the
Germans, if we were all united together, we would keep him either from
raising up any, or from bringing through any, the Italians and Spaniards, of
whom he can furnish no great number, (for they are no populous countries, as
every man knows.) Before they can come to deal either with France, the low
countries, or Germany, the places where we are, he must lead them either by
sea, or through such hard ways, that if we were all of one mind, he should
loose half of them before they were able to do him any service. The
Spaniards cannot come but either by sea, or over the mounts Pyrenees: The
Italians over the Alps, or thorough Germany: such ways, as if we would we
might stop them all. Last of all, there is nothing more wretched than himself
in his own country, nothing so easy to be beaten. And it is most sure that
he might easily have been overthrown by Portugal, if he had been lively
set upon that way, since Don Antonio was driven out of it. Thus have you
briefly the state which the migthiest of our enemies is in. Which to my
judgment, being well considered, ought not to seem so mighty, as he is
esteemed. The effects with all and example do declare it: Seeing that in
twenty years, that he has employed to conquer Flanders again, the only
place where he has employed all his power, he has not profited much* yet can
it not be said that he has found there any resistance worthy of him:
notwithstanding it is evident, that, had it not been for the late Mounsieurs
evil rule, and the Prince of Oranges death, most wretchedly by murdered, a
manifest token of this enemies weakness, he was almost driven to despair, and
had lost all these Countries, without any remission, whatsoever he could have
done.

When our enemies state shall thus be considered one by one, it shall be
found according to the common saying, That all is not gold that glistereth.
But if they be yet nearer observed in gross, it will stand well with that
judgment which I give of them. They shall be all found far distant in
places and Countries. The greatest and strongest part is in Spain, and Italy:
yet they be distant four hundredth Leagues by land: the other is in France,
but it is such a small thing, that if the power of Spain and Italy should
not join together to help it, it would be soon smothered up. We shall see
that each of these partakers, which enter into this general League, do bring
but the least part of their wishes unto the general intent, all the rest
being for their own particular, we shall find that the most of them tend
in manner to one thing: the king of Spain, the Duke of Lorraine, or Sauoy, and
of Guize, to the Crown of France. Wherein, it cannot be chosen but that there
be some gelousies, and that the same thing which unites them, seuereth them
again. We shall see also, that they have contrary purposes one to another, as
those which I have observed of the Duke of Parma, and the Duke of Sauoy. And in
fine, we shall mark that of the two last, viz. the King of Spain and the
Pope, who are as it were the pillars of this league: the one is extreme old and
so sick, that even this year he has given over all manner of business: yea
so far forth, that many are of opinion that age has bereaved him of his
senses. The other, which is the Pope, can make no reckoning of his power, but
so long as he shall live: and considering his age, he cannot live long,
leaving perchance such a successor as will rather busy himself to build up
his own house, then to pull down another man's: that will rather devise new
practise^, then follow his Predecessors. Thus have you by whole and piece (...)
seen all our enemies forces. Now if against their general means we oppose
ours generally: if we gather together those of the Queen of England: of the
king of Navarre: of the king of Denmark: of the Princes of Germany: of the
states of the low countries and of the Cantons of Switzerlande, what a power
shall we find? If we use ours against them, by reason of the commodity we
have, to join our selves without any let, France, England, Germany, both high
and low, and Switzerlande, joining one to an other, shall we not sooner
overthrow all their practices, than they can take them in hand? We I say whom
our religion may knit surer together then them, as being better than theirs:
we that have no other purpose but to defend our selves and maintain our
rightes, which united us together: who have no particular intent that might
breed any gelousie amongst us, or being contrary might divide us. There is no
doubt of it: let us them see the proof. It is three years agone, since the
king of Spain cut down all the Forestes of Italy to build his Carraqu^^^
buyeth all the moors of Africa, to make Galley slaves: turns the Indies
vpside down, with digging and seeking to find out an the Goldmines, as though
he had no more to do hereafter. It is three years agone since he had no other
speech but of Ankers, of Cables, of ropes and sails: since he threatens the
Ocean, if it does not use his ships gently: since that he charge the
winds to favor them, and all this to make up a mighty and spanish (that is
to say) proud army by sea, whose shadow alone may cause not only the masts
of ships, but also all the tops of the steeples of England to stoop. For
these three years space he is with child of an army. And to speak the truth,
as these great pieces of work are not soon brought forth, nor with ease, so
he bestows much time and labor to be delivered of it: but things commonly
are lesser at their birth then men think of. Then in the end it shall be borne
in Biscay, weaned at Conquet, and finding it self right against England, it
shall have strength and stature enough to receive the order of knighthood. Does
not this prove, that in one only place, viz. England we are able to resist the
most dangers of our enemies? It is three years since he threatened it, he
has not yet so much as made it afraid. Tush, when will he be able to hurt it?
It is as long since the Duke of Guize (who in a manner plaieth with the king and
the realm of France, his power being helped with money out of Spain, with the
forces of the Prince of Parma, and all the Catholic states) makes war
against the king of Navarre: in which space there has been eight armies by
land levied to that purpose, and the ninth by seas. Of nine of them thanks be
to God, eight are gone back again without doing any thing: the ninth has
been quite overthrown in a battle. Now, if it can not be said that this
poor Prince was in the mean while assisted either with one penny or one man,
the money and helps which his friends had sent him, being not yet come as far
as unto him, is it not a certain proof that this people has more facing than
doings. It is twenty years since that the low countries are set upon by the
same king of Spain, with all the forces that he could make out of his
country, out of Italy, and all those that he could get out of Germany. He has
bin always fortunate in it. Almost all the battles that have bin fought
there he has won. What has he done. They are yet at this day in such a
case, as if they can once have good correspondence one with an other, he is to
begin of new, and in danger of loosing his labor, his pains, and his charges
that he has laid out in that country. Judge you now, if so it were that the
king of Denmark the Princes of Germany, and the Cantons of the Switzers, which
they durst not meddle withal, had brought their helps and forces to make
these violent dealings of the king of Spain in Flanders and England to cease,
and those of Guize in France: how long to man's judgment, were they able to
stand before us? I leave more to conclude hereupon, that I speak not of. In
the mean while, although we have mo forces then they, that we have better
means of intelligence one with an other, yet do they agree better one with an
other then we do, and are stronger than we are. Let us return that reproach
unto our negligence: and not attribute it unto their industry: to our base
minds, and not to their courage. God has put into our hands the means both
to live at rest and to defend our selves from their tyranny: yea and to bring
them under the yoke, if we would so do. But to make an end of this speech
divine like, even as I have begun it, I believe that it is the same God, and
the same Lord, who will not have us to hold our deliverance as from our
selves, neither from our own arm, but from him alone.

Me thinks that my mind is now much eased, when that after I have run
over all Europe, which is altogether almost troubled and afflicted with
dissentions in religion, I return unto France, which I thought only to have
been plagued with this evil. God visits not it only, neither is it alone
threatened: other places have their part, I return then to her again better
satisfied then I was, to conclude this discourse which I began for her sake.
This visarde, this veil, which had bleared up first the kings eyes, and after
him all the Frenchmens, is at length pulled away. When the league began first,
three years agone, there were men yet that were either so without shame, or
without sense, as that they excused this rebelling, they shadowed it with a
zeal of religion, with a care, least that after a good catholic king, there
should succeed him a Huguonet. This served the traitors pretense that were
about the Prince, whom they knew so dedicated and passionate toward his own
religion, that even with this word they stopped his mouth, they took away
from him all manner of replying together with all the means that he might use
to judge what he had to do about this matter. But now, I do not think that
there is any body in all the realm, nay not the veriest Jesuit, that could
excuse the Duke of Guizes attempt at Paris, against his own king. What a manner
of one it was, I desire no other discourse then his own, the very same which
he has published. Now if one should ask what, in my mind will ensue upon it?
he should trouble me shrewdly. I have said elsewhere, that nothing is more
dangerous for a king, then the empairing of his Majesty: that there is nothing
which diminishes it more, then if he show, that he fears some body in
his realm: it is a kind of fear, to suffer presumpteousnes, and not punish
it: Yet when it is but a common presumption which concerns particular ones,
the cloak of gentle clemency sometimes does excuse thnorousnesse: but if it
be toward the Prince himself, if it does violate the holy respect which men
owe to the sacred person of the king: whosoever suffers them, is no longer
king. If this inexcusable treachery be pardoned, if the king lets it slip
under silence, it may be well said, Sceleris finem putas? gradus est. And there
is no doubt but that within these two years there will be such bold and
villainous actions committed, as that this shall be counted but for a light
trick of youth. I am of the reformed religion, thanks be to God, who has
vouchsafed to make me such an one: me, I say, who through the forgetfulness of
his great benefits, had made my self altogether unworthy of this latter one,
which is not to be compared with any other: nevertheless, if so it were that
the king should think that the king of Navarre and we with him had attempted
such treacherous and detestable practices against his life, and estate, that
with good conscience he might not pardon us. God forbid, that under pretense
of this quarrel I should counsel him to call us to him, to forget our
offenses, and to use our help to bring him out of those troubles, whereinto
he is put daily by his own folks. But not as a Frenchman, not as a
Christian* but as a man, I dare well counsel him. What, counsel him? nay
prophecy, that if this argument of the wrath of God against him, does not
stir him up to wish his own good, and with his own good, the quietness of
this realm: the way of peace: the means to become a king: to take away all
part takings out of his realm, except his own: and as the Scepter belongs
to none but himself, not to suffer it to be broken in pieces, and every one
most vnwoorthilie to carry away a morsel of it, himself being the first, and
most true cause of his mischief, let him be assured, that in steed of taking
it away from him, God will increase it double fold unto him. I will not only
speak of those of the league. I do yet speak of our selves. That which
others do through wickedness, we do it by necessity: yet notwithstanding al is
a like to him in regard of his crown: it is as well spoiled, and pulled a
sunder by the one as by the other: his people as much trodden down by us as by
the league. And were it not that we defend our selves, where they set upon us:
that where we are pursued, they pursue: that where we submit always our
selves unto him, the others would submit him unto them: it might be well said,
that the harm which we do perforce unto his realm, is as great as that which
they do for their pleasure, and to sati^^ie their ambition. For this evil,
alas, there is but one remedy: let him only take upon him to remedy it, he
may be a peaceable and absolute king, obeyed, feared, beloved, dreadful, if he
list. But what do we wish that God should put the power into his hands, except
first he has the will in his heart? Mighty Prince, why do thou not
believe thy self? thou have nor so faithful a counsailour. I have heard thee
heretofore blame the king of Portugals fault, who adventured all his state
upon one battle: as judging wisely, that there is nothing more miserable
then a disherited Prince. Oh! where have thou laid up thy wisdom? thou
venturest thy self upon less a hundredth times then a battle. Who has bin
able to persuade thee, that these men who have no other desire then thy death,
no other scope then thy crown, will lay down their weapons which they have
vowed against thee only, when they see thee bitterly bent, and very cruel
against those of the religion? No no, thou must give over thy crown, else thou
shall never have peace with them: and I believe if thou could give it over
without danger of thy life withal, thou have enough about thee that have such
brazen faces, as to counsel thee thereto. They have driven thee out of Paris
which never the Englishmen, the Spaniards, nor the Germans did thy great
grandfathers: yet by thy letters patents thou show unto thy people, that in
stead of revenging thy self of it, it seem th^thou think it very long,
until they have pardoned thee. Thou comma^dest the^ to pray to God for this
reconcilement: there is then belike no other danger to lift up any man's hand
against his king. Believe the^, that he that durst to day make thee fly, will
dare to kill thee to morrow. But is not this, oh mighty king, an aduenturing of
thy self, when thou let thy subjects perceive that it is so easy a matter
to attempt against thee: when in stead of reue^ging thy self, thou praiest
that those may be pacified, whom thou ought to have punished? Who could so
mischieuously persuade thee that the remedy of my mischief was the civil war^
that by that course thou should recover thine authority over thy subjects.
Alas* how art thou deceived? There is nothing more dangerous in a building then
fire: in a body, then a continual fever: and in a state, then a civil war.
If thou will remedy these evils, quench the fire which burns thy house:
assuage the continual fever of the body of thy estate, give it peace. For
that is the only mean to preserve thy realm. Thou say that if thou
should but pronounce this word of peace to them of the religion, thou
should have presently upon it all the catholic armies of Christendom
against thee, which will spoil thee of thy state. Yea if thou pronouncest it as
he that lately fled away from Paris, before the duke of Guize. But pronounce
it as he that wanne the battles of Iarnac and Moncontour, who alone were more
dreadful then all the rest of thine army: utter it only after that sort,
that thou shall find all men to tremble.

If upon this good and holy resolution, thou will arm thy self, England,
Germany, and Suitzerland will cover all thy plains with horse and armed men,
for thy service. They will send thee sufficient forces to beat Spain and
Italy, yea and thy France, if it were joined with them. Think thou that this
will be first the benefit of thy realm, and it will be easy afterward so to
persuade thy people, when thy self shall believe it. And thy people, if thou
be willing of it, they will account all such as shall wish the contrary to
be their enemies and thine. But thou fear the league: Who then shall be
bold for thee: whence shall we take courage but from thine. Grant a
reasonable peace and quietness unto thy subjects, begin with thine own
first: with the catholics, make them to be content with reason, and fear not
then but the rest will be brought to it: they are too weak to stand against
thee in an evil cause. Such a one will theirs be if they refuse an indifferent
peace: but they will not do so: they never did it. It is too common a proverb
in thy court. Let them be pleased with a sermon. Thou art yet afraid: good
Lord of whom? of the king of Spain? Show him the pictures of thy father, and
thy grandfather, and he will tremble even to the farthest of Castile. Of the
Pope? Have thou not yet about thee some heirs of Charles of Bourbon? these are
but toies. How can it be possible, that thou who have seen so much, who have
handled so many matters, who have so great experience, can have this
apprehension engraued so deep within thee, and upon so small an occasion?
Believe these two principles: the one, that thy enemies have their best friend
of thee: the other, that if it were not for that black cloud which thou see
about Rochell, which they fear more than thee, they would have buried thee
long agone: but yet add this third also, and believe it, that whenever thou
shall earnestly wish the good and rest of thine estate, it shall lie in thy
power to be master, to bring as well the one as the other so far under, in
respect of thy obedience, and thy place, that they shall not be able to turn
an Egg, without thy leave. They persuade thee, that the strongest side is the
catholics, and that thou must needs ground thy self very deep therein, and
become chief of it, to take away this title from the Duke of Guize. They
persuade thee, but they deceive thee. The parties ought not to receive thee,
neither thou to go unto them. They ought to come to thee, and thou to receive
them. To be a king is thy part: thou have no need of any other: let all the
rest yield unto this. What means this? that a king of France should enter
into gelousie with a Duke of Guize, that he should be put in danger of loosing
his credit by his means. Do thou not know that this gelousie makes thee
equal? and presently being equal, inferior? well may there be steps to clime
up to a crown, but there is none to come down: it is a down right fall. If a
king come never so little downward, he falls down right. They counsel thee
to feign thy self sore angered against us: after thou have feigned a while,
thou becommest so in earnest. They yet deceive thee more, and were it not for
thy affection to thy religion, thou might judge easily of it. Assure thy
self that this D. which becomes so mighty in thy realm, keeps to no
otherend the best part of that which he has with him, but only because it is
to thy self that he has a meaning to. Do thou think that those which
serve him have no other scope then the destruction of the Huguonets? No, no.
What is there to be gotten against them? If I had given my self over to follow
him, for my part I would think to have done it, in respect of his hope to be
king one day. For that he should be thought well of in respect of his zeal
toward his catholic religion, in putting many Huguonets to death, it will
serve to raise up all the porters of Paris, and make them cry: Have amongst
the Huguonets. Those which are sufficient to help him to turn up a realm,
have other considerations then that. Now these considerations are not put out
of their heads, by thy fierce countenance against those of their religion, and
thy quaking looks toward the league. This is contrariwise, the way to
increase them, their helps, their servants, and their authority. When men
see, that thou show, that thou art thy self afraid of them: who then shall
not fear them? What emboldeneth men, but impunitie? Of nature we love to be
at liberty. There was never any realm but that it did strive to become, if it
were possible, a popular estate. There is nothing that a prince ought to keep
more preciously then his respect, his majesty, and his fear: which being once
lost, can never be recovered, but only by such things as breed fear, that is
to say, by violence and cruelty. Mighty king, thou shall accept this speech
as it shall please thee: it belongs not to me to limit thy purposes. But if
thou read it with as much passion for thine own good, as I write it, thou
shall think, if any too violent a word does escape me, yea against thee, that
it is the very indignation and heart burning that forces me unto it, when I
see the wrong and injuries that are done unto thee: to the which it seems
after a manner, thou do consent by thy patience. Do not think that I did
mean to accuse the courage which is in thy self: all Europe would give me
the lie: and if thou would have any witnesses of it, thou should need
none but our selves (whom thou have beaten so often) to speak of it. Verelie
believe, that the grief which I conceive to see thee suffer through evil
counsel, those bold parts which are only attempted upon confidence that
thou will suffer them, do wrest this both out of my heart and my pen. I
know that all those which are about thee, have hither to betrayed thee: that
that which thou have done against thy self, thou have done it by taking that
counsel, where by contrariwise other princes do most commonly err, that is,
by believing of counsel. I was present when it was told thee, that all thy
towns, all thy people, all thy provinces were already the duke of Guizes, all
thy men were his. They told thee it, but none other then themselves that told
thee it, were belonging unto him: and tkey did tell thee it to no other end,
but only to sell thee, and betray thee unto him. The strongest armies of the
league which are against thee, have been in thy court, in thy counsel, in thy
privy chamber. So that it was very hard but that thou should be hindered
by so many things contrary to thy good purposes. But seeing that God in this
last danger where into he had brought thee, has taken away al excuse, and
occasion of doubt, let this at the least give thee a mind to love thine own
self more the^ thou have done: to will earnestly thy own good, thy rest, thy
highness: and when thou shall wish it, thou shall by consequent, wish thy
realms withal.

I will end in thee, thou firebrand of the war, which have turned to the
destruction of thy king and country, those great graces which God had given
thee, for to have bin able to have done worthy service as well to the one, as
the other. Do thou not think to be punished one day for the parricide
which thou co^mittest against thine own mother, for so many evils that thou art
cause of, or which thou do thy self to her, who has done thee so much good?
so many evils I say, the which thou might have remedied, either by desiring
less, or by desiring more wisely, or at least, by bringing in thy desires at
length into some compass? Nay, nay: thou need no other punishment the^
thine own practices. They are thy torment. Poor soul, thou art almost forty
years old, and yet dare thou not take upon thee the name of a king: when will thou bring it to pass? Think thou to make easily an end of those which can
bar thee from thy vain hope? For these thirty years, men have lost their
labor in making war against the^. I will abate thee ten upon the bargain, thou
have yet twenty left. What a king art thou like to be at those years end,
being 60. years old? Thou have bin heard scoffing at the cardinal of Bourbon,
whom thou had persuaded to have been one at that age: scarce will thou come
sooner to it, and yet must many things come well to pass for ^hee. Thou will
overthrow the king of Navarre (a vain labor, I am sure both for thee and thy
children) dream rather to save thy self from him: his claws are greater than
thine: but I grant it, thou shall overthrow him: and it were so, how will thou
do to reign? If after his overthrow France lies open to the spoil, as it can
hardly choose: art thou stronger then the king of Spain? have thou more right
than he has? More than the Duke of Sauoy, who is son unto a daughter of
France, and nearer of blood than thou, and is married also unto a daughters
daughter of France? More than the Duke of Lorraines son thine elder, the
son likewise of a daughter of France, and the kings Nephew. If contrariwise
the estate be kept whole and found, how will thou lawfully take away the
right from the Catholic Princes of the blood which shall be remaining, who are
yet in number enough, and young enough to live as long as thou, except thou
shortnest their lives? Moreover, before all this comes to pass, who can
persuade thee, that the king who reigns now, will not keep thee from
reigning? thou can not so long as he shall live: thy first blows must
begin with him (that can thou do well enough) thou must make him away: for
he hinders thee ten thousand times more than the king of Navarre: and except
this be thy first intent, thou have no judgment in thy practices. For thou
can not possibly, whilst he is alive, be a king, neither continue long so,
in taking the course that thou dooest: but thou purposest to reign. What then
poor wretch, except this be it that drives thee on? except some great and
mighty ambition does puff up thy mind, such a one as sometimes possessed
either Marius, Sylla, or Caesar, thou should be accursed enough hereafter,
for having wrought so much mischief in the world to no end. Ambition is the
plague of human society: notwithstanding, it has always most gloriously
set forth by many and worthy deeds all such as have been possessed with
all. Let us blame ambitious men, yet do we admire them. If thou can bear
so worthy a mind, as to look for a kingdom, there will be found
hereafter some body that will say, that thou were worthy to have been
borne a king, since thou could undertake to have been one. Such mischieues
and calamities as thou must needs breed, to bring it to pass, shall not be
paraduenture imputed unto thee: but it shall be said, that fortune would by
these means make thy coming notorious, that thou were too great to come
forth by an ordinary gate, and that thou must needs have ruins to receive
the and make thee room. Nec aliam venturo fata Ner^ni inuenere viam. Thou
shall also be found fault withal: but many that shall find fault with thee
will wish to be like unto thee: otherwise thou wretch, if upon a villainous
mind thou have no other end of the evil which thou do, then to hinder the
benefit and quietness of all the world; what will our posterity say of thee?
who amongst them will not call thee the scourge of our age? But seeing thou
can not be king, thou have no mind to be it: it is enough for thee to
trouble and divide our estate, to the end thou may keep the better part for
thy self. Thou show thy self yet more wretched. Had not God endued thee
with sufficient virtue for to deserve an honorable portion at their hands, to
whom all by right does belong, who would have been always so glad to have
thee about them as their kinsman, as thou art: and in steed of a good and
profitable servant as thou might have bin? Had thou not rather have been
beholding to thy Prince for thy good, in bestowing thy service upon thy
country, then to a foreign Prince in overthrowing it quite? Mark what thou
do: thy father, and thy grandfather have allotted unto the king of Spain,
his part in Italy: and thou would allot him it in France: Sic ne patrissas?
Yet is not this all? What then? The only zeal unto the catholic religion
does kindle thy heart? Thou say it (I believe) in the face of the world, not
in thy Closet: nay I am afraid, except thou use shortly other manner of
terms, least thou repentest to have driven thy king out of Paris. He is not an
heretic, no^ but he is a king. Whosoever shall be it, either in deed, or
possibility, he is thine enemy. Thou will make it known at length, that it
is only for that that thou medlest with the king of Navarre, and that thou art
more gelous over his possibility then his conscience: I believe it well. And
if so be it were that he would suffer thee to be king, thou would easily
grant him to be a Hugnonet. It is thy zeal unto religion: good Lord! What, to
increase it? There are yet so many Turks and Sarrasins alive which keep from
thee thy kingdom of Jerusalem, belonging by inheritance to thy house: why
do thou not rather bend thy practices that way, then upon the realm of
France? To defend it? Tush, who deals with it? who durst say any thing
against the Catholics? My opinion then is, that thou should persuade us
that the wolves ought to take heed least the sheep might surprise them, that
Lions were best to mistrust the Dear. Thou say the very same. Where there
is one of the religion in France, there are a hundred Catholics. If the king
of Navarre should take that course, as to persecute them during the kings life,
he should be evil handled: if after he should be worse received. Nay, allege
not these excuses: men laugh at them. Say only that thou would reign, thou
would be king: it is the truest and the best color of thy Ensign.

I will conclude at length, and in two or three words answer those Letters
which thou have spread abroad. Thou publishest first that thou were the only
man that did set forward the voyage of Guyenne, (Id est, against the king
of Navarre) to the which thou have such a mind. But what need thou to
stir up an other? Why go not thou thy self? Seek out there either a
victory or an honorable death, as the Duke of Ioy^use did. Make offer unto the
king to go in thine own person. He will take thee at thy word: carry
thither all thy friends, all thy forces, he will increase them with his own.
Carry thither the fire of war, seeing it is there that thou should find
thine enemies, and thou shall find them in deed. Why do thou kindle it in
Pycardis? is there any heretics also there? I would to God that Caliis and
Bulloine were as well minded toward the king of Navarre, as thou chargest
them to be: thou should be kept well enough from quarrelling at Paris. Thou
should have leisure enough to enclose thy self within Challons, and think
upon nothing else but thine own defense. This is the matter. Thou would
that the king should leave in thy hands the protection of France, and that he
should go and make war in thy quarrel in G^^enne, that he should
overthrow thine enemy the king of Navarre, that he should give order unto
thy affairs, to the end, that whilst he should there busy himself about
the beating of some sconce, thou might here take some good town from him:
and upon condition, that whenever he would return, he should give thee
room, as often as it should please thee. I grant thee it: it is well and
wisely considered of thee: but yet is he wiser than thou art, in that he will
not do so. Thou say that the Duke of Espernon favors the Heretics: all
those that bar thee from being king are Heretics, according unto thy
reckoning: or at least, they favor them. There will be then enough in the
world, if God will. Think this to be most sure, that if that man would have
had but the least intelligence of the world with the King of Navarre, if he
had put into his hands even the least of those towns which he had in his
power, or helped him never so little with that commodity of money that he
might have had, there had not been room enough in France to have hidden
thee: thou should have been undone already, I say quite undone. Give
him thanks for thy preservation, which his fidelity has purchased thee, to
his own cost and his masters. He is come, say thou, to seek quarrelles in
Pycardi^, and in Normandy. What part have thou in these two Provinces? Of the
one, my late lord the Prince of Conde was governor: in his absence, there
were Lieutenants from the king: of the other, the Duke of Ioyeuse was the like.
Neither thou, nor any of thy kindred have any right unto it.

But soft, I must needs excuse thee: thou would reign: all is lawful for
thee. Thou dooest complain moreover, that there have been slanders spredde
abroad against thee, and thine honor, the which (thanks be to God) thou
have blotted out by this latter fact of thine. Thou art a marvelous Orator:
surely it is true, thou have well cleared thy self. Thou were accused to have
stirred up the people of certain towns of this Realm, against such
governors as the king would have appointed. Thou have taken this slander away,
in raising up them of Paris against the king himself. Thou were blamed to have
seized upon his money at Challons, at Rheymes, at Soyssons, and every where
that thou setst thy foot. Thou have purged thy self in taking that of his own
store in his chief town. Thou were suspected to have certain enterprises
against the state, and to aspire unto the crown, and that to that purpose thou
had already seized on some good towns, which either thou or thy parents did
hold, to the which the king would not have obeyed. Thou have put away this
false report by thy personal coming to make thy self master of Paris, and
driving out of the king, after thou had forced, killed, and unarmed his
guard, and caused the common people to rise in arms against him. So that after
this sort thou gallantly wipest away a theft with a sacrilege: a murder with a
parricide: a sin with a crime. Thy subtletie is too gross. Thou triumphest,
that thou durst come with eight Gentlemen into Paris, a token of thy pure
innocence. These be great news. Be thou in Rochell with all thy new court, all
thy train, and all thy guard: the king of Navarre will come in with four men,
and if going away thou do not fly, he will trouble thee. This is easy to
be said in Britain: but those that know that all the kings council stand for
thee, that his mother favors thee, that all the pickquarrels, all the
porters of Paris, and all the common people are at thy beck: they will say
that thy simplicity was very crafty, thy innocence much suspected. How will thou have us to believe that thou have trusted so gently unto the king, seeing
that after the League was made, when you made your worthy agreement at S. Mor,
thou would never come to him before that thou were as strong as he, seeing
that whilst he has been in his army against the Reyters, thou never have
set thy foot toward him, saving once when thou did surprise him, and that
but a quarter of an hour. Nay, believe me: it is thy occupation to work such
fears, but not to excuse them: thou can better do the one then the other.
It is plain enough, seeing thou vauntest thy self, that thou might have
retained thy king, against his will. Ah, what say thou, thou stranger?
retain a king of France? It is all that Europe being confederated were able to
do: it is the enterprise of an Emperor, yet a very dangerous one. If thy
Grandfather had thought, that thou would ever have pronounced these words,
he would have smothered up thy father, to let thee from coming into the world:
in a peaceable estate, in a quiet realm, that word only would have cost thee
thy head. That is likewise the reason why thou troublest it.

As for the rest of thy public letter, all the words of it are too plain,
too well set down to be found fault withal. Whilst thou make a discourse
of thy valor, they show what is thine intent better than any man can do. I
will only note the end of it, where thou say, that thou have seized upon
the Bastille, the Arsenall, and other public places, the kings Coffers and
Exchequor, to surrender all again into his Majesty's hands well pacified, as
thou hopest to bring to pass by the Popes intercession, and other the Princes
of Christendom: if not, with the same helps thou will try to reskue the
Catholics out from the persecution of those that are about him, and favor the
heretics. What a brave dilemma is this. I believe, thou meanest not by
pacified, peaceable or appeased, but in such state as that he be not able to
make war against thee: which thou hopest to procure by the forces and helps
of Spain, and Italy: that is the intercession which thou meanest. And in
fine, thou mean and simple subject denouncest war against thy king. Others
endure it, thou beginnest it. If the late Emperor had but said so much to his
father, all Christendom would have been up in arms, both of one side, and
other, upon this word. If God also stir up his heart, I hope it will be thy
last.

A declaration of the Kings pleasure, published after his departure from
Paris: importing the cause of his sudden and forced going away.
Trusty and well-beloved. Being in our town of Paris, where we bent our only
cogitations to no other thing but the appeasing of all sorts of ielousies and
disturbances in Pycardie and else where, which hindered our journey into our
country of P^ictou, there to prosecute the wars enterprised against the
Huguonets, according as we had resolved; our cosen the Duke of Guize, unawares
to us, did there arrive the 9. of this month. His coming after that sort so
increased the said gelousies and distrustes, that we were much troubled
therewith: the rather for that before we had from diverse places been
advertised, that he should come in such manner: also, that he was looked for, by
sundry the inhabitants of the same town, who were suspected to be the authors
of the said distrustes, besides that our self had before for the same cause
given him to understand, that we were nothing desirous of his coming before
we had appeased the aforesaid troubles of Picardy, and quite taken away the
causes of the same. Considering nevertheless, that he came accompanied only
with 14. or 15. horses, we were content to see him, and that the rather to the
end to endeavor so to deal with him, that all occasions of gelousie and
distrust might be extinguished: wherein seeing how smallie we profited, as
also that our said town grew daily more and more replenished with gentlemen
and strangers, retainers to the said Dukes train: also that such searches, as
we caused the magistrates and officers thereof to make, were through the fear
wherinto they were driven, performed to halfes: likewise, that the hearts and
affections of sundry the inhabitants were daily provoked, and more and more
alienated: together with the ordinary aduertisements whereby we were from time
to time informed of some great troubles to fall out in the same town, we
determined to cause the said searches to be more exactly performed
thoroughout all the quarters thereof than the former: to the end thereby to
discover and truly find out the state of the same: also to avoid such strangers
as should be found not to be aduowed as they ought. For the performance whereof
we thought it good to strengthen certain the bodies of the gardes of the
inhabitants and burgeses of the same town whom we had appointed to be planted
in 4. or 5. corners thereof, with the companies of Zuitzers, and such as were
of the regiments of our guard: who before were lodged in the suburbs: also to
command diverse the lords of the council and knights of our order of the holy
ghost, to march along the streets and quarters thereof accompanied with the
quarter masters and others the officers of the said town, such as have been
usually accustomed to make the said searches, to the end by their countenance
to authorize and assist them in the same, as has sundry times bin practiced.
Whereof also we gave notice to the said Duke, and all the inhabitants of the
said town, least any thereof should take allarome, or any whit doubt of our
intent in this point: which order at the beginning the Burgeses and dwellers
seemed to take quietly and in good part: howbeit within a while after matters
grew so hot, and that the rather through the induction of diverse who wandering
up and down informed the said inhabitants that we had not brought in the said
forces for any other end, but only to establish foreign gartisons within the
town aforesaid, yea, and to deal worse then so: whereby in short space they
had so animated and stirred them up, that if we had not expressly forbidden
the leaders of our troops from attempting any thing against the said
inhabitants, and withal commanded them rather to bear and endure all
extremities then to offer any violence, we do undoubtedly believe that it had
bin impossible to eschew the general sack of the town, and much bloodshed.
This when we perceived, we determined to cease the execution of the searches
aforesaid, also to cause our forces to retire, who^ we had not brought in, but
upon that only occasion: as also it was no other like, but that if we had me^t
otherwise we would have attempted, yea, and peradventure put in execution
whatsoever our purposes, before the rising of the said inhabitants either that
they had drawn their chains or erected their defenses in the streets, which
immediately after noone they went in hand withal, and in a manner in one instant
throughout all the streets of Paris, being thereto induced and persuaded by
sundry gentlemen, Captains, and other strangers sent in by the said duke of
Guize, who to the same end, in very short space appeared, divided and aranged
throughout every quarter of the town. Hereupon causing the said Switzers and
french companies, to return, the said inhabitants to our great grief
discharged diverse Harquebuze shot, and dealt some blows which light
chiefelie upon the said Switzers, whom the same evening we commanded to retire
and lodge about our Castle of the Louure, there to expect the event of this
commotion of the said townsmen: for the appeasing whereof, we did all that
possibly we could, yea so far forth, as the next day to procure all the said
companies, except such as before their coming in, we had placed in guard before
our said castle, to depart the town, as being informed that in so doing, we
might greatly content and pacify the said inhabitants: as also we caused to
stay some remainder of the companies of foot men of the regiment of Picardy,
albeit they were 7. or 8. leagues off, together with diverse lords and gentlemen
our servants that drew unto us: as considering that the same had bred some
shadow to this people, also that they took hold of this pretense, whereby the
more to provoke and stir the^ up. All this notwithstanding, in lieu of finding
our wished effect to their own benefit and our contentation, they
nevertheless still proceeded in raising their bulwarks, strengthening their
guard night and day, and approaching the same toward our said Castle of the
Louure, eue^ to the very sentinels of our ordinary guard, as also they seized
upon the townhouse of the same town, together with the keys of S. Amthonies
gate and other the gates thereof: so that by the 13. of this month, matters
were run so far, that it seemed impossible by ma^s power to stop the effect of
greater violence and commotion, even before our said castle gates. This when we
perceived, and being nevertheless unwilling to employ our said forces against
the said inhabitants, as having evermore held the preservation of the said
town with the inahbitants thereof, as dear as our own life, as in sundry
their occasions they have well tried, and is evident to al men, we determined
the same day to depart, and rather to absent our selves, and abandon the place
which above all the world we most loved, and so do still desire to do, then
to see it incur further hazard, or receive greater damage: having withal
entreated our most honorable Lady and mother to stay, and try whether she might
through her discretion and authority in our absence be able to find any means,
how to appease the said tumult, which notwithstanding, whatsoever her
endeavors, she could not in our presence perform, and so are come into this our
town of Chartres, from whence we thought good immediately to send you these
presents, therein desiring you to consider of the consequence of this cause,
how prejudicial and hurtful it will be, in case it go forward, unto the common
cause, especially to our holy catholic, apostolic and / romish religion,
since that they who were wont to fight together for the propagation thereof,
shall through this accident (if it be not remedied) be disunited and forced to
turn their weapons each against other: to eschew the falling whereinto we
pray you to believe, that for our parts we will do whatsoever possibly we may:
of such force is the zeal that we bear unto our said religion, as hitherto we
have sufficiently caused to appear. We also, so much as in us lies, exhort
and pray you, to procure supplications unto God in your churches for this
reunion, as also for the obedience unto us due, to be observed according as is
meet, and not to suffer the inhabitants of our town of M. to depart the right
paths thereof: but to admonish and persuade them to remain quiet and constant
in their loyalties to their king: and in union and concord one with an other,
so to maintain and preserve themselves under our obedience, and not to incur
the discommodities for them provided, if they take any other course. Thus
besides that you shall perform an action worthy your discretions, fidelities
and duties, which may be a notable example to al subjects, we shall yield you
thanks for ever, and acknowledge it to you and yours.

Given at Chartres. May. 1588.
The copy of a Letter written by the duke of Guize unto the king, the xvii,
day of May.
SIr, such is my mishap, that they which of long time have by sundry sleights
sought to estrange me from your presence and favor, have been of power
sufficient to make whatsoever the good endeavors that I have put in practice,
for to come near you, and by my services to grow into your Majesty's liking,
utterly unprofitable. Whereof of late days (to my great grief) I have had more
trial then ever before. For being wearied with so many false bruits and
slanders wherewith they have used to keep your majesty in mistrust of me, I
thought it good, even with the hazard of that with which I was threatened, to
justify my life, being (to that end resolved) to come unto you with so small
company and so great confidence and franchise, as I hoped thereby to show, and
that to every man, that I was far off from that wherewith my evil willers so
subtly sought to bring me into suspicion: but the enemies of the common peace
and mine, not being able to abide my presence about you, as imagining that the
same would in few days discover the subtilties which they practiced to bring
me into hatred, and fearing least by little and little I should recover your
favor, they chose rather by their pernicious counsels to bring again al
things into confusion, and to bring both your state and your town of Paris
into hazard, then to suffer me to be about you. Their bad minds have
manifestly been descried in the resolution, which without the Queen your
mothers knowledge, and the advice of your wisest Counsailors, they have caused
your majesty to take: that is, by an unusual way, and in time full of
suspicion and partiality, to bring in forces into your town of Paris, and to
seize upon the public places thereof: yea, the common speech is, that they
hoped, having once become masters thereof, to be able to induce you to many
things far from your nature, which also I had rather pass over in silence.
The terror hereof, sir, has forced your good and faithful subjects to arm
themselves, through a just fear, least by this means the things whereof long
before they were threatened might be put in execution. But God of his holy
grace contained matters in better stay then man could hope, and as it were
miraculously preserved your town out of a most perilous hazard. The
beginning, course and event of this matter has so justified my intents, that I
suppose your Majesty and all the world does thereby clearly perceive how
far my behauiours have differed from those practices, whereof my slanderers
do seek to make me guilty. The manner how I did voluntarily habandon my
self into your power, do show what confidence I reposed in your goodness,
and the sincerity of my conscience. The state wherein I was found when I first
understood of this enterprise (which many of your servants can testify) do
sufficiently show that I stood in no doubt of being hurt, neither had any
mind to enterprise, as remaining more solitary and unarmed in my house, then
one of my calling either may or ought to do. The respect that I have used,
containing my self within the simple bounds of a just defense, may
sufficiently testify unto you, that no occasion whatsoever, is able to make me
fall from the duty of a most humble subject. The pains that I took to
restrain the people, and keep them from proceeding to those effects which
such accidents do for the most part bring in, do discharge me from the
slanders heretofore laid upon me. viz. That I was want to trouble your town
of Paris, My care to preserve even those whom I know to have played some
badde parts against me about you, by the provocation of my enemies, do
manifestly declare to every man that I never intended to attempt any thing
against your servants and officers, as they have falsely accused me. My
behauiours toward your Suitzers, their captains, and the soldiers of your
guard do sufficiently assure you, that I never feared any thing so much, as
to displease you. If your majesty have known of all these particularities (as
I imagine, that sundry your good servants, lovers of public quietness, who
are witnesses of the same, have not concealed them from you) I do assuredly
think that you are thereby persuaded that I never had, even the least of those
badde meanings whereof my enemies through false reports have sought to bring
me into hatred: and I hope sir, that the end will yield more assured
testimony thereof, as having conceived one of the greatest griefs that could
happen me, when I heard that your majesty was resolved to depart: because your
so suddeine going away took from me al means of being able, according to my
purpose, to accommodate every thing to your contentation: whereto I did already
see them disposed at such time as it pleased the Q. your mother to come hither,
whereof I gave her such testimonies as I account she cannot but think to be
certain. Howbeit since I then could not, yet will I sir still continue the same
mind, and hope so to bear my self, that your majesty shall judge me to be a
most faithful subject and servant, who desires nothing so much, as by well
doing and procuring the benefit of your realm to obtain the good hap of
your favor, which I will never cease seeking until God has given me the
means: whom I beseech, sir, to grant unto your Majesty, etc.

From Paris the 17. of May. 1588.
An extract out of other letters written by the said L. duke of Guize.
WE had enough to do to strengthen our selves against the sleights daily framed
against us, whereby to seek some color not to pass into Guyenne against the
heretics: we went to satisfy the king about his garrisons in Picardie, and
albeit this regiment had not taken the countercourse, but to refresh ancient
enmities, and to seek new contritions, yet did we force our friends for one
month, unprofitably to suffer the forces of Espernon over their heads, when
afresh for the greater hinderance, the said Espernon went to seek some brawle
in Normandy, and there had he found it very hot, had not we, upon a desire to
see the war against the heretics proceed, husbanded his affairs and procured
our friends to refrain, and not to hinder, or in any wise to molest him. All
this notwithstanding, the more to entangle us as well through these superfluous
garrisons and lost iournies, as also for the utter breaking of the course of
this war, and turning it against us, they framed us a match to our honor,
spreading abroad diverse rumors, whereby to cause us to be more feared then the
heretics themselves: as that we delighted in a massacre at Paris: That we
purposed to seize upon the kings person: That we meant to sack the town, and
so to leauie coin wherewith to make war against whom we list, with many
other like impressions which they beat into his majesty's head with the best
colors that they could, so to make them the more receiueable. This was their
last slight, which also drive us into greatest despair, considering that the
king went about rather to provide for these mistrustes then to continue the
war against the heretics: also that our wretchedness was such, as among
some to be so accounted of, yea so far forth, as even his holiness thereupon
took an argument, by a writing of his, to exhort us to fidelity toward the
king our sovereign. This despair, I say, at the last impression thereof took
sure hold of men, when I understood that his majesty strengthened his guarde
with four ensigns of Frenchmen, and three of Zwitzers, so that to the end not
to remain so much as one hour in suspicion of so villainous actions, I came
about twelve of the clock into Paris, accompanied with eight gentlemen, and
through the midst of all the guards aforesaid, I passed to kiss his majesty's
hands, carrying with me no other safe conduct then my services, together with
the confidence that every good subject ought to repose in his king. This
franchise, sincerity and open heart, should, as I thought, have brought me a
clear justification from all these passed false reports. And in truth there
was no honest man but was glad in his mind, as every one might manifestly
perceive. The next day, being still in my conscience assured, I was all the day
about the king, sometime enclosed in the Tuilleries, discoursing of the voyage
into Guienne, and of this war, whereto I was so affectionate. In these days, as
it is to be presumed, the king took informations from all parts, whither I had
any greater train than the same that was seen at my coming: Then knowing, as
the truth was, that I was thus alone, and had not so much as one man of war
within forty leagues of me, see, the very next morning the twelfth of May,
there entered by day twelve ensigns of Zwitzers and eight ensigns of French
footmen at S. Honors gate, besides the four of the guard, the king and all his
court being on horseback to receive them. The master of the camp of the
regiment of the guards, and the Zwitzers Colonels were commanded to go and
seize upon all the strengthes of Paris, and least they should find any let, the
inhabitants were from the one end of the town distributed clean contrary to
their quarters, so to breed the^ a desire to break off themselves through the
care of abandoning their wives and children in such an accident. While these
things were thus ordered, I being a sleep in my lodging with so small a
company (for my train, was not yet come from Soissons) as God would, while
they were distributing their forces into so many places, I had leisure to be
advertised thereof, and sundry Gentlemen my friends, being at Paris about their
affairs, came unto me: but especially God myraculously stirred up all the
people with one consent to run to arms, and without any conference together,
being assured of my presence, and through some order which suddenly I took
among them, of themselves they went about to accommodate their affairs, and on
every side to fortify themselves within ten paces of the foreign power, and
that with such readiness and vehemency, that in less than two hours they
warned the said troops presently to retire out of the town and suburbs.
Hereupon also about the same time it chanced in some quarter a Switzer to wound
a townsman, whereupon the townsmen fell upon the Switzers that were there, of
whom they slew some twelve or fifteen, wounded some twenty or five and
twenty, and unarmed the rest. In an other place some companies of the kings
guardes were also unarmed and cast into the houses, where with their Captains
they were forced to shut up themselves. Here upon I marched through the town,
and at my first coming, delivered nine hundred Switzers prisoners, and sundry
of the soldiers of the guard, whom I caused to be safely conveyed to the
Louure. This day (all things shining with the infallible protection of God)
being come to an end, I went through all the streets until two hours after
midnight, praying, entreating and threatening the people, so that through Gods
grace there ensued neither murder, massacre, pilferie, or loss of one penny,
or of any one drop of blood over and above the aforesaid, albeit the people
were extreemely enuenimed, as knowing (said they) that there were twenty
gibets ready together with sundry schaffalds, and that they had seen the
executioners of high Justice ready to put to death a hundred or six score
persons, whom they named, and I had rather you should imagine then I write
down. I can not conceal the great contentation that this wonderful grace of
God bredde in me. First, for that I see my hand so clearly freed from these
suspicions of sack and massacre which they had endeavored to persuade so many
good men of: for since I was able to perform it and yet so happily kept it from
being known, I thereby stopped all my enemies mouths. Secondly, because I
gave sufficient proof of my zeal to my kings service, and how in that I
procured the delivery even of the weapons which had been borne against my
self, together with their fifes and droms, the reconducting of the prisoners,
the returning of their ensigns, and the delivery of the besieged, and so
declined in no jot from the due respect in matter where the most constant might
have lost it. Then labored they so much that they persuaded the king to
depart, four and twenty hours after that I might (if I had list) have stayed
him, but God forbid that I should so much as have dreamed thereof. Since his
departure his Majesty has had some other counsel and bitterness. I took
into my hands the Arsenall, the Bastile and other the strong places, and
procured the coffers of his excheker to be sealed up, to the end to consigne
the whole into his Majesty's hands when he shall be at peace, as we hope to
yield him through our prayers to God, and the intercession of his holiness and
all Christian Princes, and in respect of this notable and not common proof of
fidelity which it has pleased him to commit into my hands. Otherwise, if
this mischief continue, I hope by the same means to preserve both the
religion and the Catholics, and to set them free from the persecution which
the heretics confederates that are about the king did prepare for them.

FINIS.

