AN EPITOME OF THE HISTORY OF FAIR ARGENIS AND POLYARCHUS, Extracted out of
the Latin, and put in French, by that Great and Famous Writer, M. N. COEFFETEAV
Bishop of Marseilles.

And translated out of the French into English by a young GENTLEVVOMAN.

DEDICATED To the Lady ANNE WENTVVORTH.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for Henry Seile at the Tigers head in Fleetstreet.
1640.

TO THE MOST VIRTUOUS MY MOST HONORED LADY, THE LADY ANNE WENTWORTH, Eldest
Daughter To the Right Honorable the Earl of Strafford, Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland.
MADAM,
IT is not needful, I should use many words, to let You know, that this Book
belongs to Your Ladyship, It sufficing that You know, I am Yours, (since You
gave me the liberty, to call my self so, when I had the Honor to be admitted
into the House of my Lord Your Father, where my Parents did introduce me, and
where I have profited near You and my Lady Arabella Your Sister, as in a
School of Virtue) whence it follows, that Jonely give You that which is
Yours, being found in me: and though it should be otherwise, I could not
present it to any one, that deserved it better then Your self.

The reading of this Epitome, MADAM, which I dedicate unto You, as being Yours,
and which I put to light under Your protection, will represent ARGENIS unto
You, as the Fairest, most Virtuous, and Constant Princess of Her time. And I
have thought, reading this History, that I have seen Your true portraiture in
the person of this Fair Lady. For, making a Parallel of this Princess with
Your Honor I find You very suitable; yea I can witness with truth, that You
surpass Her: since that besides the Beauty of the Body wherewith Nature has
endowed You; You are also enriched with that of the Soul beyond measure; and
as touching Virtue whereof You are a Pattern, You excel Her, being Virtue it
self. You have besides the knowledge of the True GOD, which is the Ground and
Basis thereof, and whereof our ARGENIS was ignorant; and as for Constancy, You
have not (I dare say,) Your equal, seeing You are resolved, to be conformable
unto the Will of GOD, and of my Lord Your Father. To which may be added Your
Birth (as well as unto our ARGENIS) which makes You truly worthy to bear the
Pearled Crown, wherewith my Lord Your Father has been Honored, without
asking or intercession; but by the Kings only Will, who gave it Him for His
eminent Virtue and good Services; being of the number of those of whom the
French Proverb makes mention; saying, TELL DEMAND ASSEZ, QUI BIEN SERT.

And to conclude MADAM, I say, that-even as it has pleased GOD, to fill our
ARGENIS with Joy and Content, giving Her, Her POLIARCHUS, as the most Complete
Prince of the Earth, He may send You for Your, and Your most Honorable Parents
Comfort, a Husband worthy of You, And I am confident, He will be far
Compleater then POLIARCHUS. These are the Wishes

MADAM, Of your most humble, most affectionate, most obedient, and most obliged
servant, Judith Man.

To the Courteous Reader.
Gentle Reader, my humor inclining to Melancholy, induces me sometimes, to
seek in my Closet for some diversion, in the reading of Books, suitable to a
Gentlewoman of my quality, and of eighteen years of age; That is it wherein I
have most perticularly applied my self this Christmas, and amongst the rest,
in the reading of this Book, which has pleased me; not only for the subject
whereof it treats, but also, coming from the hands of an Author, whose memory
I honor, though of a contrary Belief to mine, because that being in France, in
my Parents company, I have heard a great esteem to be made of him, as of the
most learned Prelate of his time. So as I might make my self, so much the more
perfect, in the French tongue, I resolved to translate it, for my own
particular satisfaction, having no other design, then to warm my self
therewith; as I have done with some others: But I could not make this Work so
secretly, but that those who watch over my actions, and endeavor my diversion,
had notice thereof, by whom I have been in a manner forced (least I should
trangresse against the Law of God)* to expose it to the public view; And all
the favor which I could obtain, has been to suffer me to make choice of a
second ARGENIS, under whose Protection I sent it. And J entreat thee, Gentle
Reader, to oblige me so far, as not to presume that J do it, out of vanity;
because it is not without example, and could produce thee many of my sex, who
have traced me the way, witness the translation into French of Sir Philip
Sidneys Arcadia, the New Amarantha, and the Urania, with many others; neither
have I done it to be spoken of, knowing very well, that those of, my sex, who
are least spoken of, are the more to be esteemed: But only have I done it by
mere obedience and duty, therefore I pray thee to excuse the faults, if there
be any, and remember, that women (for the most part) are unacquainted with the
study of Sciences; and by that means, may sooner err; Also, I esteem that
thou art Courteous enough, to use me according to the courtesy and custom,
due to the Ladies of this Country, where I was borne; And of whose Privilege
I make use, giving ARGENIS the precedence, rather then unto POLIARCHVS in the
Frontispice of this Book; And in so doing, I shall not be a little obliged to
thee.

J. M.

The Stationer to the Reader.
GEntlemen, I should not hold my self satisfied with my Impression, if I did
not tell you, that I hold it for a favor, in the beginning of this year, to
see my Shop adorned with this little Volume, which comes from the hands of one
of the most Virtuous, and Comeliest Gentlewomen of this Country, and which
belies not her birth, which is truly Noble. And but that she is full of
respect and humility toward ARGENIS, and the FAIR LADV, unto whom she has
Dedicated this Work, they could make the most agreeable concordance, that
could be seen; Also viewing them together (though with the eyes of the mind)
I imagine I see the Graces, or those three Fair Goddesses, which puzzled so
much, that Judge of Beauty. And therefore I desire You Gentlemen, to esteem
it, as this reputation merits, that you may not but applaud her, to the end
that hereafter, she may make you partakers of her lucubrations; and in case you
find any faults, attribute them unto the Printer, for they are his, as
proceeding from the Impression. God preserve you.

THE HISTORY OF FAIR ARGENIS AND POLIARCHUS EPITOMIZED.
FORTUNE proud and insolent, beyond all imaginationd, emands a sumptuous
Theater, to cause the might of Her Empire, to appear. It is in the Court of
Great Kings, where She elevates the Trophies of Her tyranny, and where She
brandishes Her vanity. It is there that She takes delight, to break a Scepter
a sunder, to overthrow a Crown, and to tread under foot, all this pride of the
earth, to the end She might render Her victories, so much the more glorious by
such magnificent ruins, and Her Trophies the more illustrious, by such noble
spoils. But if amongst those Tragic accidents, She does afford some cause of
contentment, She does temper it with so much bitterness, that ordinarily,
there is more prickles then Roses found in Royalty. This History is a lively
portraiture thereof, and causes us to see remarkable examples in it.

Meleander King of Sicily, possessing a rich State, and seeing himself adored
by His subjects, who tasted with an extraordinary delight, the mildness of His
government, thought to be arrived at the height of His glory. And that He might
say he was happy on all sides, He was Father of a Daughter so accomplished in
all kinds of perfections, that those who saw Her, imagined that Heaven had
assembled all the treasures of beauty, and gathered all the riches of
comeliness, to form this lofty Masterpeece of nature. He imagined that this
young Sun, should be the ornament of his Crown, the prop of his State, the
delight of his Life, and the consolation of his Old age. But men are ignorant
of their destinies, and know not what may befall them. The event then, made Him
know, that as the greatest lights are subject unto the greatest shadows, so the
greatest prosperities are exposed unto the greatest accidents, therefore one
must not so much trust unto the favors of Fortune, but that one must dread Her
inconstancy.

Argenis then was the name of the Heir of Sicily, which ought to be as a
living spring of all goodness to Her Father and Her State, sees Her self to
be the subject of a furious and bloody war, raised by a Prince, one of
Meleander's subjects, who having had the temerity, to ask Her in marriage,
received the refusal which his presumption merited. The image of this
contempt, made such a furious impression upon this wild and ambitious spirit,
that to take revenge, he resolved to put the Father out of the world, and to
steal away the Daughter to crown his parricide. This execrable design had
come to pass, if the Divinity, which has a special care of Crowns, and
which loves Kings, had not miraculously put by, the misfortune whereof the
Sicilian Scepter was threatened. All Europe, and Afric also were filled with
the rumor of Argenis's beauty, which was placed amongst the wonders of the
world and nature. A thousand young courageous spirits, taken with Her love, had
resolved to serve Her, and to employ all their industry and valor, to
insinuate themselves in Her favor. Amongst the rest Poliarchus Prince of
France, and Heir of one of the fairest Crowns in the world, suffering
Himself to be transported with this passion, sought out for this glory with
more success then wisdom. (But ought one to look for any in love?)
Imagining in Himself that an extraordinary beauty merited no common pursuits;
He left his Kingdom, and taking a Gentlewomans habit, crossed the sea, and
went to Sicily, where He informed Himself diligently of the place where the
Princess was, to whom He desired, with so much passion to offer His service.
Meleander fearing least despair should cause Lycogenes to procure some shame
unto Her, had placed Her in a strong Hold, where She passed the time with Her
maids, being visited of none but Her Father, who sometime going from Syracuse
(which was not far from thence,) came to see Her, and stayed with Her to
divert Himself in Her company. Poliarchus following His design, goes that
way, and spying the means, to enter in this agreeable solitariness, takes His
journey toward Syracuse, where being arrived He finds by good fortune
Solenissa Argenis'ses Governesse within the Temple of Juno, where She was at
Her devotions. He had learned in what rank she was with the Princess. He calls
her aside, and having cast Himself at her feet, beseeches her to take pity on
the most unfortunate Lady which the Sun shined on, on earth, and to give Her
the means to tell Her some thing, which could not be known to any but she,
unto whom She brought letters from a great Princess. The Strangers comely
behavior, the novelty of Her habit, and Her language, which showed She was not
of the Court of Sicily, caused in Selenissa a desire to learn what She would
say. Then going out of the throng, She leads Her, to her sisters house, and
entered alone in a Closet fit to receive Her most secret thoughts. Then
Poliarchus kissing the letters gives them unto Her, and at last leads so
happily this enterprise, that He causes himself to be taken for a French
Princess, which the rage of Her Uncle had driven into Sicily to look out for
the refuge and surety, which She could not find in Her Realm amongst Her
friends. My name, said he, is Theocrine the Kings daughter, and Sister unto the
Heir of the Crown of France, whom this parricide (who has procured all my
misfortunes,) has caused to be poisoned that he might usurp his Diadem.
That which made her to give more faith unto his words, was, that calling a
Freed slave who gave Her a Cabinet, which She had committed to his charge, She
drew forth the most exquisite riches, and the fairest precious stones, that
were ever seen in Europe; then with a magnificence which truly resembled a
great Princess, gave such a great number unto Selenissa, that at the instant
(suffering her self to be dazzled with their sparkling and radiation) She
bound her self with a strong tie of affection unto Poliarchus, which she took
for Theocrine. Whereupon Theocrine conjured her to embrace Her affairs, and to
procure that favor toward Argenis, that She might receive Her into Her
company, where She pretended not to hold the rank of a Princess, but would
esteem her self happy to hold the quality of a Waiting Woman.

Selenissa being touched with Her complaints, offers Her all manner of
assistance, nevertheless, said she unto Her, to give you access in the
Princesses house, is a thing which is not in my power, by reason of the strict
defense, which the King has made, not to suffer any strangers of either sex
to see Her. But Theocrine, who desired noting more, then to enjoy this glory,
conjures her to break this obstacle, and to mediate this favor toward the
King, with whom She doubted not, but she was powerful, since He had committed
to her trust that which He held most dear in the world, the Princess his
daughter. Being overcome by such charming entreaties, she undertakes to
inform Meleander of this, whom She soon after caused to yield, telling Him all the good which she could invent of this fair Stranger. At her return, she
declares unto Argenis, the occasion of her journey, and makes Her so favorable
a report of the beauty, comeliness, and magnificence of Theocrine, that She
offers not only to receive Her as a great Princess, but also to love Her as
Her Sister. Being then inflamed, with a desire to see Her, She commands that
without any further delay, She should be brought in, that She might see if Her
presence would equal the glorious praises which were given Her. She is then
where She desires. At this first enterview, She forgets nothing of Her good
behavior, allurements, and attractive looks, to charm the Princesses heart,
who begins to be but one Soul with Hers. She can so artificially accommodate
Her humor unto that of Argenis, that in a short time She does purchase a full
power over Her mind, though not in the same quality which She wished. They
then, passed away the time so sweetly together, that they thought they were in
Heavens glory. But Licogenes, unto who^ the remembrance of the injury, which he
thought to have received, gave him cruel torments, raised a tempest which
troubled the calm of their delights. For, having plotted with his friends, the
means to revenge himself, the resolution of this infamous counsel was, that
the Fort ought to be surprised, to make away the King, and take perforce from
thence the Heir of the Kingdom, and so put himself in quiet possession of
the Crown; that, to differ any longer, it would be the way to ruinate their
affairs, considering the accidents which might happen. Therefore that he
should show himself a man, and that he should find in them the succor and
assistance, which he could hope for, of those who had a whole interest in his
trouble. There needed not, to make use of stronger reasons, to persuade a
spirit already imbrued with this crime.

It was long, since Licogenes saw with grief the Scepter of Sicily in the
hands of Meleander. But to bring this furious counsel to pass, he thought it
fit to corrupt certain Soldiers, who should know the entrances of this
Fortress. He finds out one, who being conquered by his promises, offers to
fulfill his desire, so that he procure him confederates whose courages may be
like his, and declares unto him, that he knew the means to enter, by the Sea
side where there was no guard. Licogenes glad to have found such a fit
instrument for his perfidiousnesse, gives him consorts as desperate as he, and
as resolute to commit a parricide. Upon a night then, that Meleander was
arrived there, to disburden (according to His wonted use) some part of his
sorrows in His daughters bosom; these traitors knew how to follow their
enterprise so well, that they entered into the Fort, and having separated
themselves in two bands, went the one to the Kings lodgings, and the other to
the Princesses. Argenis thought on nothing else, but sweetly to pass away the
time* amongst Her Ladies, and caused Selenissa and Theocrine (whose beds were
in her chamber) to entertayne Her with a thousand pleasant discourses:
Meleander whose age took away the sweetness of this entertainment, had
retired himself to take rest. Argenis understanding a noise, which She was not
used to hear, holds up Her eyes, and seeing so many armed men to enter
thronging in one after another, is frighted, and begins to cry out with fear.
Her other Ladies surprised with the like astonishment, show no more assurance,
and for all their defense, have recourse to their tears. But the gentle
Theocrine perceiving one, (who had advanced himself first) to lay hands on the
Princess, lets the reins loose to Her rage, and with an extraordinary
courage, lays hold on that traitors sword, wreathes it from him, and presently
employes it, against him from whom She had taken it, and lays him dead in the
place. Then taking up his buckler, She runs upon the rest of these rascals,
whereof She cuts some part in pieces, and causes the rest to look out for the
door. Another band of the conjurors, had rushed in Meleander's chamber, whom
having found asleep in His bed, there needed no great strength to seize on Him.

Theocrine, who had none left to fight with, hearing the noise, which those
wicked rogues made about the King, went that way, and entering in the chamber,
perceived a spectacle which would have drawn tears from a Tiger. Those
infamous Hang-men had bound this great King with cords, and loaded Him with
chains, who amongst so much insolence and brutality, perceived before His eyes
naught else, but the images of despair and horror. The sorrow to see the
Father of Her Argenis so unworthily abused, swells Her courage in such sort,
that without any fear of danger where She was going to precipitate Her self,
She enters upon these desperate fellows, and having made a cruel slaughter,
amongst them, addresses Her self unto Meleander, and taking away the cords and
chains, said these few words unto Him. SIR, Those who have committed this
outrage against you, have not kept the respect due unto Scepters, and your
virtue. But the Gods have given me the grace to put you again in case, to make
an exemplary punishment, of the authors of this barbarous attempt. Arm your
self, I am going to take order about the rest of your affairs; for it is to
be feared, least those who have had the audacity, to plot so infamous a treason
should make a last attempt, to assuage their rage, which will not be thus
ended. At the instant Theocrine gives a general allarum, and gives notice to
the Guard, of their fault, and of the danger wherein the King had lately been.
And as She saw Meleander's safety to be made sure, She came unto her Argenis,
and kneeling on the ground, used this language. Fair Princess, it is
bootlesse now to dissemble, any longer; the miracles of your beauty, have given
strength to my arm, to take revenge for the cruel injury, which has been
done to the Sicilian Scepter. I am not a Lady, as hitherto you have believed. I
also esteem, that, what you have seen me perform, has already dis-abused
you. At least, it is impossible, that henceforth, Meleander should take me to
be, what he thought I was. For fear then, least I should ruinate my designs,
instead of advancing of them, I take my leave of you: But before I go from the
presence of your fair eyes, I most humbly desire you, by all the graces,
whereof Heaven has so richly endowed you, to pardon me this offense, which is
an effect of the power of Love, unto which the Gods themselves cannot resist.
You have prostrate at your feet, the Heir of the Crown of France, who begs
pardon of you. My name is Poliarchus, and not Theocrine. I have borrowed this,
that I might enter where Poliarchus could not have had access: I part from you
with the same sorrow, that I should part with my life: but I hope that by my
services I shall open the way to more liberty. Pronounce my sentence, and I
will take it from you, even as the conquered, receives it from the Conqueror.

Argenis being, as it were, thunderstruck, by the freedom of these words,
finds Herself surprised, and at the same instant, has an inward combat by two
several passions, of Love and Fear, which held Her soul in agitation, in
such sort that being astonished at Theocrines language, She knows not what
answer to make Him. Fear, that this action should make a spot, in Her Glory,
causes Her at first, to breath forth some sparkles of Choler. She complains of
this audacity, and shows She does not approve those fictions, whereby She
might receive more blame, then the Author could expect contentment.
Nevertheless, at last Love, that (so many present victories went fortifying)
banishes all those Fears, and causes Her to find Theocrines excuses good, to
whom at that time She does in few words disclose Her thoughts, and testifies
unto Him, that those proceedings are not displeasing to Her, but enjoynes Him
to publish His sex, and to make himself known, to be the valiant Poliarchus.

This generous Prince, who only sought triumphs to insinuate Himself by His
valor, into Argenis's favor, reassumes the name of Poliarchus, and at the
same time, kissing His Mistresses fair hands, goes out of the Fortress and
steals away from Meleander, and His Guard, busied in the seeking out of the
factious, whereof they made a horrible slaughter. In the mean time the King is
troubled to find out the Author of His liberty, and as His Daughter tells Him
that He is obliged of His life, unto Theocrine, He desires to see Her, that He
might give Her the praises, and recompense due to so eminent, and prodigious a
virtue. But being informed that She is vanished, as a lightning, and that She
is not to be found, He presently imagines, that doubtless, She was no mortal
creature, but the Goddess Pallas, who foreseeing his misfortune, had taken the
form of this Lady, to put by the ruins of Sicily, which was in Her keeping.
Thereupon, even as superstition is fertile in new devotions, He revolves with
himself, with what new tribute of piety, He may repay, this remarkable good
deed, which seemed to be beyond all manner of retribution: and wandering in His
thoughts, He caused the Chiefest of His Counsel to be assembled, unto whom
speaking of this adventure, He testified to owe His life and safety, to a
particular assistance of the Divinity, rather then to any man's succor, letting
them know thereby, that He had a design to erect new honors and worship, unto
the Goddess unto whom He imagined to be indebted, for His miraculous
preservation. Such a Religious design having been greatly applauded and
approved by the common voices of all the Counsel; Meleander whose soul was
already full of these religious thoughts, and who feared, that showing Himself
ungrateful toward the Gods, He should oblige them, to draw back their
blessings from His Crown, was easily led away with this advice, and calling
His Daughter, opens His deliberation unto Her, and persuades Her, so
artificially, that She freely accepted, the quality of Minervas High Priest, in
acknowledgement of the favor which She had showed, to Her Father and State.
There She is then wholly tied, to the Goddesses service, by virtue of Her new
Office, now She thinks on nothing else then the ordering of the sacrifices, and
ruling of the holy ceremonies.

In the mean time Lycogenes, who knows his crime to be unpardonable,
assembles his friends, represents unto them, that their safety consists in
hoping none, and that they must come to an open force, since craft and
artificial cunning have not succeeded. And whereas the horror of this offense,
should have caused the arms to have fallen from his hands, he prepares to
give battle unto his King. His felony gives means unto the French Prince, to
cause His great courage to appear, as well under the name of Poliarchus, as it
had done, under that of Theocrine. He had gone and presented Him elfe unto
Meleander as being newly arrived in His Court, not making Himself known to be
Him, who had newly saved His Life and State. He had been received there as a
stranger, and in few days, had left both to the King, and all the Court, a
great opinion of His valor. During that time, He found the means oftentimes,
to see, His Argenis, amongst the sacrifices, which were rendered unto Minerva,
for Theocrines victory. Neither His, nor Argenis's devotion, was not so much
fixed, on the contemplation of the ceremonies nor on the admiration of all the
pomp, as to enterchange amorous looks, wherein lay all their felicity.

The envious army, which was already in the field, troubled all this solemnity,
and obliged the King to take up Arms, to oppose the fury of the rebels. He had
a singular confidence in Poliarchus His valor, which belyed not this hope, nor
the good opinion which the world had conceived of the greatness of His
courage. The two Armies being in sight, He began the fight, and as a mighty
warlike thunder, unto which nothing can resist, did so much by the wonders of
His sword, that Meleander won a glorious victory, and put the rebels out of
hopes, to attempt any more, the hazard of Combats. Despair made them seek
after peace; they have permission, to send their Deputies in Court, to make the
overture of some treaty. Poliarchus, who could not live in rest, at the first
news of this peace, which He did not approve, not believing, that the King
ought to trust to Traitors; resolved to go elsewhere, to find out new
occasions of Glory. Having then left the Court, and traversing a great forest,
having no other thoughts then on His Argenis, which filled all His spirits; He
meets those whom Licogenes sent unto Meleander, rather ecquipped like
Cavaleers, or to speak the truth like Robbers, then Ambassadors. They
immediately knew Him for the Author of their misfortune, and enraged, with
fury, resolve to revenge on Him the affront, which His valor caused them to
receive. At the same time, they set on Him, and make it appear, that they
would bereave Him of His life. But He, who could fear nothing, not being
astonished, at their threats, makes them feel the effects of His courage,
overthrowes two, dead upon the place, scatters the others, and puts them to
flight. Those that could escape, go and fill the Court with their complaints,
and aggravate this outrage, done unto Ambassadors, whose persons are held for
sacred, yea amongst the Barbarous. They demand Justice which cannot be denied
them, because the Court has no knowledge of their crime, nor of the innocence,
of Him, whom they accused. It is true, that Meleander could not imagine, that
so notorious a villainy, could have entered, in so noble a courage, and besides
all that, that which came from Licogenes'es party was to be suspected, also
the Soldiers wholly affected to Poliarchus, who in their sight, had done so
many wonders in the Field, did openly jeere at this accusation, which, in what
kind soever, it could be interpreted; could not, but turn, to the shame of
those, who made it, since they accused, one man alone, to have beaten five,
well armed, and in case to defend themselves. But, the conjurors faction, was
so puissant, in Court; that, at last, it obtained that Poliarchus, should be
condemned, and to be destined, to serve for a sacrifice, unto the Kings enemies
fury, who in defending of Him, might have caused a suspicion, amongst those
diffident spirits, that He had done nothing, but by His authority. Order is
then given every where to take Him, and also, the Commons are armed, to the
end, that all means of escaping, might be taken away.

In the mean time, it happened during the fight, that, Archombrotus Prince of
Mauritania, who was also searching out adventures, under a disguised habit, was
by chance, near the place, where the combat was given. He was newly landed,
(having been beaten with sundry tempests at sea) near unto that great and
thick Forest, where He was gone, thinking to take some rest under the shade of
some trees, being wearied of the sea. But the vertuons Timoclea, who had seen
the furious outrage, done to the Prince of France, came unto Him weeping and
waking Him, conjured Him, that if He would do an action, worthy the generosity
which appeared in His visage, that without any further delay, He should go and
succor the most valiant man in the world, that Robbers endeavored to murder.
Opening His eyes, He searches for His Armor confusedly, and preparing
Himself, at all adventures, endeavors to put Himself in case to fight.
Timoclea fearing, least the number, might oppress valor, urges Him to
advance, and represents unto Him the necessity, and danger, wherein Poliarchus
finds Himself. He who was enflamed with desire, to have His courage to
appear, in so fair an occasion, without further delay, spurs His Horse
toward the place of the combat. But He sees, with some kind of sorrow, that He
arrives too late, and that He, whom He is desirous to succor, has needed no
other assistance, then that, of His sword. Ravished with this wonder, He does
accost Him, and having courteously saluted Him, informs Himself of the
particulars of this encounter, offers to assist Him, in case there remains any
enemy, to fight with, and conjures Him, to honor Him so much, as to employ Him
in this quarrel. Poliarchus resting extremely satisfied of the Prince of
Mauritania's good behavior, and courtesy, thanks Him for this freedom, and
assures Him of the esteem He makes of His courage, not refusing to make use
of it, in case, His affairs oblige Him thereunto. But, Gentle Cavaleere, said
He, I know neither those, who have so cowardly assaulted me, nor the reason of
the furious hatred, which they bear me. Timoclea arriving thereupon with some
of Poliarchus His servants, breaks off the two Princes discourse, and taking
the word conjures them, to go out of this Forest, and follow her, to a house
which she has, near unto that place, where they might learn the true causes
of this encounter. They went then altogether with Timoclea, where they are
hardly arrived, when the Shepherds of the Country, come to give them notice,
that all the champion, is full of kindled fires, every where, and that
doubtless, there is some accident fallen out at Court; seeing that was never
done, but upon great and important occasions. And that He might take no rest,
news were brought, that Poliarchus was the subject of all this emotion, to
which they add that upon the Ambassadors complaint, He has been condemned
in Court. Poliarchus seeing that it is He, whom this tempest threatens, breathes
forth all manner of outrages against Meleander, does reproach His services,
complains of His ungratitude, accuses also the innocent Stars, as if they
were the cause of His misfortune. Timoclea fearing least He (unto whom all
Sicily owed their safety) should fall in the hands of those Traitors, that they
should advance His ruin, by their artificial deceits opens Him the way, how
to shade Himself, against this tempest, shows Him at the going out of a
closet, of Her house, a long Vault, which went under ground, whereof the
avenewes, were known to few, and conjures Him to make use of this opportunity,
not only to steal away, from the eyes of those, who sought Him, but also to
go out of Sicily under the favor of a borrowed visage, wherewith she could so
artificially disguise Him, that His most intimate friends, would hardly take
Him to be Poliarchus. At last, He is overcome with her persuasions, makes use
of the opportunity, which she presents unto Him, and though unwilling, confines
Himself within this Vault, (until he can give some order for His retreat)
where Timoclea, and the Prince of Mauritania, would needs conduct Him, daring
not to trust those of the household, whose faith they suspected; having left Him
in this cave, and being come back to the house, Timoclea began to entertain
her guess, with the best and most civil discourses which she could invent. In
the mean time Timoclea and Archombrotus, thinking to assure Poliarchus His
life, did almost ruinate His affairs. To take away all suspicion, they
bethought themselves, to cause a rumor of His death, to be spread abroad, and
that none might doubt of it, caused His servants to be seen, weeping the loss
of their Master, and they also showed sad testimonies of their sorrow. This
rumor did fly as far as Argenis's ears, who would not survive Him, having as
She thought, lost Him, who made Her take all the delight She had in the world.
Selenissa brake this design, by her wisdom, showing unto Her that She ought
not so slightly to give faith to a rumor, who had no assured Author. That
assuaged something Her grief, but did not altogether heal the sore. Her
thoughts were then tossed, with irk some cares, which altered by little and
little the beauty of Her face. Also Meleander being come to entertain Her,
with His affairs, though She had resolved, to oppose Her constancy, to Her
misfortunes, and to suppress Her sorrows, for fear, that Her Love should be
known, nevertheless when He began the discourse, of Poliarchus His accident,
and to tell Her how He had bin constrained, to abandon Him, to His enemies
rage, She could be no longer mistress of Her senses, but fell down in a trance,
at the recital of this adventure. Selenissa smothered this accident, in the
best wise she could, and assured the King, that She had had sundry such fits
lately, but that she believed, there was nothing to be feared, and that they
were but little faintings, caused with the displeasure, which She had suffered
during Licogenes his war; Her Father left Her, amongst Her Women, who, with
the several remedies they gave Her, made Her come to Her self again. But She
received a full cure, by the news which were brought unto Her, few days after
of Her Poliarchus, by an intimate friend of His, named Arsidas. This trusty
confident had learned by Gelanore, a domesticke servant unto Poliarchus, the
truth of His History, thereupon he came to find Him out in Timocleas house,
where having had conference (of all His affairs) with Him, Poliarchus conjured
him, to see His Fair Argenis, in His name, and to know of Her, as of His
Oracle, what He should do, in this extremity; He knew to what end the rumor of
His death had been spread; He had also had notice, with what violence the
Commons (to show themselves passionate for the Kings service,) pursued
Poliarchus, seeing, that being persuaded, He was in Timocleas house, had run
thither, and without any respect, had violently entered in 't, to take and make
Him prisoner. In which, having had no success, because Poliarchus was in a
place of safety. They nevertheless, discharged their choler, upon His Fellow
the Prince of Mauritania, who was, at last, constrained, to suffer Himself to
be led captive, unto Meleander, as if it had been He whom they sought after.
Arsidas then, who had seen all these violences, came to give Argenis notice of
the state of Her Poliarchus His affairs. At these pleasing news She was as
much troubled to keep back Her soul, and to hinder it, from leaving the
body, as She had been, in the excess of Her grief. But Joy settled Her mind
again; insomuch that the rays of this Sun of the Court, began to appear
again. During which time, news were brought unto Her, that Poliarchus was led
as a prisoner unto the Court: But the intelligence, which She had received, by
Arsidas of Archombrotus accident, hindered this ill rumor, from making an
impression, upon Her spirit. So that this cloud was soon over. As the Commons,
which had taken him, were arrived at Court, one of the Captains of the Guard,
seeing so fair a prisoner, in the hands of rusticall men, asked of him who
conducted Him, what that Cavalleere had done, whom they used so rigorously.
This Head of the common people, having replied, that it was Poliarchus, whom
the King had commanded, should be taken, that He might be punished, according
to justice; He began to smile, and said unto this people, that to speak the
truth, they had showed their fidelity, for the Kings service, but that they had
not sped, in this occasion, seeing their prisoner, was not Poliarchus which was
sought for. Nevertheless, He was led before Meleander, who, after He had
praised His subjects zeal, addressed Himself unto Arcombrotus, and made Him a
thousand excuses, for this offense happened not by His command* but by the
ignorance, of this people, who had mistaken themselves, in His person. The
Prince of Mauritania, though full of rage, to see Himself so unworthily
abused, nevertheless dissembled His choler, and making His complement, with a
very comely behavior, most humbly desired Him to believe, that in what manner
soever, He could be brought before Him, He held it always for a singular
glory, that He had the means, to offer Him His service. In fine,
nevertheless, showing Himself more sensible of the injury done to His friend,
then to Himself, He could not hinder Himself from representing his complaint,
and said with a haughty courage unto Meleander. But, concerning Poliarchus His
disgrace, which has been the subject of my misfortune; Your Majesty, will
give me leave to tell Him, that if accusations make crimes, there will be no
innocence, assured in the world, since, that the most just, will by this means
be exposed, unto the rage of slander, which is perpetually, about Princes
ears, to surprise and give them all manner of ill impressions, against those
which they would put out of favor. Your Majesty may be pleased to remember
Licogenes his brazen face, and the insolency, of all his confederates? Do not
You imagine also, that those who have made such an outrage, against the Crown,
will spare Your best Servants? Those who conspire against Kings, and that will
have their Empires, to grow desolate, do first endeavor, to corrupt and
seduce those whom they know to be most passionate for their service, and when
they cannot do it, make use of other crafts, to cause their Masters to suspect
their fidelity, to the end that daring not to trust them any more, they should
remain wholly ^^^sefull unto them, I have learned of a Lady of this Court (
who by chance was in company with that Cavalleer, when I first saw Him,) the
great assistance which He has given You, in the War, that those seditions
have most unhappily kindled in the midst of Your Kingdom, and the hurt which
He has done to Your enemies. The grief which they have conceived thereat has
caused them, to seek out the means to make Him away, by open violence, that
they might rob You of that powerful prop, of Your State. But this design
having failed, by the great valor that was in Him whom these cowards
assaulted; They now have had recourse unto vayled artificial deceits. And to
circumvent Your goodness, do father upon an innocent, the odiousness of an
action, where there is no crime, but that which proceeds from their
perfidiousnesse. Your Majesty who has purchased so much glory, by the true
execution of Justice, not only amongst His subjects, but also amongst
strangers, will reserve, if He pleases, an ear for Poliarchus, to learn by
His own mouth, the particulars of this encounter, which troubles all Your
Court, and may be pleased to remember, that though He were guilty, it would
always be a kind of injustice, to condemn Him, and not hear His reasons.
And if Your Majesty will grant, that I may find out the truth of this
business by those means, which are used amongst Cavalleers, I offer my self
to enter in combat against the authors of this slander. I am sure that having
the Gods, ( whom they have offended,) for their enemies, and that having a
continual remorse, in their consciences, their arms will fall from their
hands, and that their cowardice will be a visible proof, of the infamous
treason, whereof they have been the inventors. The King, who was a generous
Prince, was not offended at Archombrotus His freedom, but by the mildness of
His face and speeches, testified altogether the belief He had of Poliarchus
His innocence, and the esteem He made of His friends great courage, who
offered Himself so freely to fight, in the behalf of His cause. All the Court
made acclamations of joy, at this lofty testimony, which the Prince of
Mauritania rendered unto Poliarchus. Argenis who took the best part therein,
thanked him, with much courtesy, and by this civility, did put Herself in
danger to spoil all, seeing that Archombrotus who had nothing of the Moore but
the name, being kept back, in Her Fathers service, and having gotten the
reputation of the most valiant Cavalleere in the world, after Poliarchus, was
surprised with vanity, which made Him so far to forget, all His promises,
that He became His friends Rival, and endeavored to rob Him of the Princess.
In the mean time Argenis, sends a dispatch by Arsidas to Poliarchus, conjures
Him by Her letters, to believe that all these crosses of fortune, were useful
only, to increase Her love, rather then to diminish it, that Argenis will
never be to any, but to Poliarchus, that She passionatly desired She might
assure Him thereof, with Her own mouth but that She fears, least coming to
Court He should be known; therefore let him take the surest party, and if He
thinks it fit, He should return in His Kingdom: But that He should not
forget, to cause His greatness to appear, by bringing so fair an army, from
His Country, that among'st the obstacles, which might oppose themselves to
their design, He should be able to free Her from those cares and troubles,
which Their separation causes, that in the mean time, She will endeavor, to
change Her Fathers anger and bring Him again, in His favor. Which She
imagines will not be very difficult, considering the esteem which He makes, of
His virtue. Poliarchus having read this letter, could not tell what to resolve.
The imagination, of the peril and fear to be discovered, caused Him to
apprehend the journey to Court, where he doubted not, but His enemies, were
watching to surprise Him. Arsidas and Timoclea fearing, least* He should
miscarry, represented Him the danger, yet greater then it was. But the desire
He had to see Argenis, made Him despise all the hazzards, which they
represented. He then calls aside, His dear friend, and declares unto Him, that
He had rather expose Himself to His enemies rage, then to go out of Sicily,
and not see the Princess. Arsidas seeing the ardour of His passion, in lieu of
opposing, fortifies it, by the assurance which he gives Him, to run the same
hazard. They take leave of Timoclea, unto who^ Poliarchus protested, to be so
much obliged, that it is out of His power, to acknowledge the innumerable
courtesies, which she has heaped upon Him; conjures her to believe, that at
least, she has a Crown and a King at her devotion; assures her, that He will
return into Sicily, so well accompanied, that the greatness of His birth,
shall not be doubted, and that then, He shall have some manner of means, to
acknowledge the good offices, which His trusty friends have done him; and then
adds, that He is going to make use, of the perriwigge, and beard (whereof she
had made Him a present) to disguise Himself. Thus with an extreme sorrow He
takes His leave of this virtuous Lady, which did shed, an Ocean of tears at
His departure He soon after arrived at Court, with Arsidas His Conduct, where
immediately after, He gives notice unto Argenis of His coming, the joy which
She received thereat, cannot be expressed; but seeing Him, with a form, so
different, from that of Poliarchus, She did shed some tears, seeing in what
danger, He did precipitate Himself for Her sake: on the other side, the
contentment which She received, to see before Her eyes, that which She held
most dear in the world, caused Her, presently to leave off Her tears. It was
in the Temple, in the midst of the devotions and sacrifices, where they saw
each other, but it was impossible to continue this practice, full of danger,
any longer; Argenis sent Him word by Arsidas that He should with expedition
sail into France, to raise there, with promptitude, an army able, not only,
to overcome the Kings enemies, but also all Sicily. Arsidas undertook to
freight a ship, for that voyage, under color that he had another to make in
Italy. They imbarque themselves, intending to hold their course toward France,
but the fates disposed otherwise of it.

In the mean time, the War is kindled afresh, and the Confederates, having
reunited their forces, caused all the State, to rebel against the King, who
had but four Holds remaining, in one of which (being scituat in an Island) He
retired Himself with Argenis, and the choice of his trustiest Servants. In
this distress, Fortune brought forth new causes of trouble, unto Poliarchus
and the Princess. The young King of Sardany and Corse, taken with Argenis's
beauty, whereof the glory as well as the pictures had flowen, throughout all
the Universe, makes a puissant Army, takes His course toward Sicily, and
arrives with His Navy, near unto the Town where Meleander had retired
Himself. The sight of so many Sails, frights all the Kings party, as if they
had been new enemies, arrived to dissipate the relickes of His fortune. But
the King of Sardany, sends to Meleander, gives Him assurance of His Army, and
declares Him, that taking that interest which He ought, in the common case of
Kings, He was come to assist Him, and to help Him to chastise His subjects
rebellion. This new joy, causes Him to open His Gates, and the King Himself
prepares to go, and receive Him, in His own shipping. But being desirous to
take away all suspicion unto Meleander, and His; He commands His Navy to
remain in the road, till they had news of Him, and with a small train, goes
to meet with Meleander, who with a great freedom leapes into His Ship, to
honor Him so much the more. After the complements, the King of Sardany, to
witness, that He had no less confidence, then that of Sicily, goes in His
Gally, and went in company together toward the Town, where Meleander receives
Him, with as much magnificence, as the state of His affairs would permit.
Having courted a while, He hastens the war, and being enflamed with the love
of Argenis, whom He had found much fairer, then Her picture, wishes for naught
else, but Combats, desiring to make Himself remarkable in them, to show
Himself worthy of the love of so fair a Princess. Archombrotus is jealous of
this new Rival, does protest in His heart, He will never yield Him this glory,
which He could not suffer that it should be enjoyed by another, which was
better then He, who was Poliarchus. These young Cavalleers, edged on by their
passions, do wonders against the enemies. But the Moore, was so happy, that
having saved Meleanders life, He, with His own hand, slew the chief of the
factious; Nevertheless, the forces which the King of Sardany had brought,
which doubtless had opened the way unto the Victory, seemed exceeding
considerable unto the King and Court of Sicily. Being all returned in the place
where Fair Argenis was, the only subject of so many heroical actions,
jealousy inflames it self; the Moore, (though covertly) imployes all his
industry, to chase the Princesses favor, who has His solicitations in
disdain, and detests in Her heart, so visible an infidelity, which tends
only, to make a shameful wound in Her constancy. The King of Sardany asks
Her in marriage openly unto Her Father, who dares not refuse Her, after so
powerful a succor wherewith He has newly obliged Him. Nevertheless knowing
that His Daughter, had no inclination, for that Prince, He makes use of all
manner of artificial delays, to feed Him with vain hopes, without breaking
with Him, fearing least being moved with His refusal, He should turn His
arms against Sicily. But where art thou Poliarchus?

Some few months before, He had shipped himself in that Vessel, which,
Arsidas had caused, to be prepared, to sail toward the Gauls: but He was
beaten, with such contrary winds, and His Ship was so much persecuted, with
tempestuous storms, that He was constrained, to abandon it, and put Himself,
under the mercy of the waves in a little Cock-boat, which went and split it
self, near unto a rock, where, with much trouble He saved Himself, with His
trusty Gelanore: But it was not the end of His adventures. Perceaving from the
top of this clift, a Brigantine which sailed upon the sea, He began to call
out, and to conjure, those which were within it, that they should take pity at
His misfortune: They were Pirates, who had no feeling of humanity:
Nevertheless imagining that those who called them, had saved some great
riches, among'st the relickes of their Shipwreck, they came near the Rock, and
took them in their Brigantine. Poliarchus His port, and the sumptuous
clothes, wherewith He and Gelanore were clad, was like to be their undoing:
The Captain with his consorts, would have put them to the Chain. Poliarchus,
astonished at this barbarousnesse, retires a step backwards, and putting His hand
upon His sword, asks Him whence came this change, having newly saved His life?
Desires him, not to blot so great an obligation, by so bloody an outrage. But
He speaks to a barbarous man, to whom entreaties envenom and swell the
courage. Poliarchus who would dispute His liberty, takes hold on a piece of an
oar, whereof He makes use in lieu of a buckler, and drawing His sword, shows
that He is not a man, to suffer that affront; Gelanore seconds Him: They fight,
but the match was so unequal, that the Prince had infallibly bin lost, if some
prisoners (unto whom He had the dexterity to cut their bonds wherewith they
were tied, arming themselves, with the Pirates own arms, which they had
slain) had not succor'd them. At last this assistance made Him victorious, and
master of the Brigantine, and fortune of those which were within it. He learned
by the Galli-slaves, and prisoners, that those Pirates, had newly taken a great
prey, in Mauritania, and that they had carried away, all the Queens Treasure,
who had an uncomfortable sorrow thereof. One of them, to whom Poliarchus had
saved the life, told Him all the particulars thereof, and also showed Him, the
place where the Boxes were hidden. Poliarchus having caused them all to be
opened; was astonished, at the sight of so much riches, together, and then
thought it fit, that being so near unto the Queens Territories, He was, (in
Honor) obliged, to seek Her out, and to restore unto Her Her Treasure, to free
Her from the affliction wherein this loss had plunged Her. But as they were
throwing the dead over-boord, He perceaved, that His folks were searching one,
upon the sands, of whom having pulled off one of his buskins; they found a
packet of letters very carefully bound up upon his leg. Curiosity, made Him
desire to see what it was; He perceaves presently, that the letters were
directed unto Him, and having opened them, sees the name of Licogenes, which
was he who writ unto Him. The little love they bare one to another made Him
admire this novelty: But having read them exactly, He was struck with an
incomparable astonishment, greater then the first, wherein He had found
Himself.

Licogenes having had notice that Argenis had made Poliarchus His peace with
Meleander; and that Meleander, to assure Him of His good will, did not only
write unto Him, but also sent Him a rich Bracelet, in token of His affection;
had found the means, to cause this present, to be poisoned, by the artificial
cunning of one of his confidents; and to cause the horror of his crime to fall
on Meleander, had sent him who was found amongst the dead in this ship, to the
end he might give notice unto Poliarchus, of the treason, which was intended
toward Him.

Poliarchus having seen by Licogenes His letters, the advice which He gave
Him, could never imagine that He had so much care of His life, nor that a great
King would have procured Him such an infamous death. He puts off the
deliberation of the business; till He was arrived in Mauritania, where at the
instant he caused the Brigantine to sail; He sent His Gelanore before, to
advertise the Queen of His arrival, and to assure Her that He brought back
Her Treasure which He had taken from the hands of the Pirates. These news
rejoiced the Affricans, but the Queen could not imagine that Her Treasure was
yet whole; and there was something in it, when it was taken, which troubled Her
more then all the rest. She takes what was next to Her, and goes to the
Seashore, to welcome Poliarchus. At their meeting, He salutes Her, and declares
unto Her that He believes that Heaven had conducted Him by this tempest about
this coast, to quench Her tears, since He brought Her back all Her riches,
which She had so much deplored. The Queen impatient to know the truth, leaps
aboard, where He follows and shows Her immediately the Boxes, well locked up.
She opens them, and found therein all what She sought for, and particularly the
Cabinet, which served afterward to reconciliate Her Son with Poliarchus.
Then She cried out with great joy, and embracing the Prince, called Him, the
God Savior of Mauritania, thence She led him to Her Palace, and forgot no
kind of magnificence and good entertainment, to testify how welcome He was.
Amongst all this mirth and gladness Poliarchus His soul was all troubled with
Licogenes His letters, and though He could not suspect Meleander of this
perfidiousnesse, He was not fully satisfied of Him; To pull out all these
thorns from His soul, He resolves to send Gelanore into Sicily, and to give
him letters to His Argenis, but not unto Meleander, to whom He was contented to
send Licogenes His letters, to the end Gelanore might judge by His countenance
what He had in His soul, and if one might believe of Him so unworthy a
wickedness. It was in a good time that Gelanore arrived in Sicily, because
Arsidas accompanied with Timonides, which was he unto whom Meleander had given
the Bracelet to carry, was going to spread abroad the rumor of Poliarchus His
death throughout all the Court. The Pilote of the ship in which He had made
shipwreck, having by good fortune saved himself, had brought word unto
Arsidas of the misfortune which was happened unto Him, and had described unto
him the manner of His loss. Arsidas having at the same time met with
Timonides, and learned of him the subject of his journey, had stayed it, and
had made him partaker of these bad news. They had then gone together very sad
unto the Court, knowing not how to publish this accident, which was enough to
cause Argenis's death with sorrow. The first whom they encountered at their
landing was Gelanore which came from Affricke from the Prince of France: At the
sight of him they thought they had been in another world, because they had bin
assured he had perish't with his Master: it was then as a sun of good hope
which began to shine upon them. But said they unto him; Gelanore, where is
Poliarchus? the ill news which we have heard puts us in such trouble, that
we cannot begin our complement, but with this question. Poliarchus is very
well, replied Gelanore; I have left Him in Afric, and am come to see the
Princess on His behalf. You revive us, replied the Princes two friends,
without any further delay Argenis must have notice of it, for fear least this
ill rumor which we have heard should have bin spread in the Court, Arsidas
undertakes this commission, and as soon receaves a command to fetch Gelanore.
When he comes before the Princess, he kisses the letters, and presents them
unto Her together with his Masters commendations: She took a singular content
at the reading of the letters: But when She, had opened Licogenes His letter,
She was seized with horror, and resolved that Her Father should see them, as
also Gelanore had order to present them unto Him. Meleander having seen them
conceav'd an extraordinary spite, not only against Licogenes, but also against
Poliarchus, that without writing, had sent unto Him, such infamous letters, of
a traitor; and testified not unto Him the little faith which He gave to them.
Insomuch that as Gelanore who had all the Princesses dispatches, went to take
leave of Him, and ask't Him if he would not do the honor unto His Master to
write to Him. Go your ways, said he, and tell your Master, that I am a King,
and not a Poisoner: Nevertheless that caused two of Licogenes's friends, who
had lately bin arrested, to be tortured, as having plotted something against
the Kings honor, and against the quiet of His State, Gelanore went back,
toward Mauritania, where he found Poliarchus yet sick of His fever. Having
delivered Him the Princesses letters; he told Him all the particulars of the
Court of Sicily, and amongst other things, complained, of Archombrotus His
great pride* who would not daigne to look upon him, insinuating thereby,
openly enough, that he believed he aspired to marry the Princess; there needed
no more to put Poliarchus in the field. Then, notwithstanding Gelanore's
remonstrances who charged Him on the behalf of Argenis, to go in His Kingdom
and bring succors, to put Sicily in liberty, He resolved to return, disguised
as before, in Meleanders Court; And to that end, seeks out the cure of His
ague, in a strange remedy, having better succeeded therein, then the Physicians
had judged; he went presently to take His leave of the Queen, who would by all
means stay him: but He alleag'd Her so many reasons, that She was forced to
let Him go, for fear She should be a hindrance in the effecting of the great
affairs which (as He said) He had in hand. She would have given Him
magnificent presents, but He who would not take any thing, of all Her
treasures, but one only ring, which perforce She caused Him to accept, remained
satisfied with the honor of Her favor, and having ship't Himself, hastened so
much the Pilote and Mariners, that in a short time He arrived at the Court of
Sicily. Gelanore had charge to advertise Arsidas, to the end he should bear
the news unto the Princess; he did it with such dexterity, that there is
Poliarchus amongst the King of Sardany's and Archombrotus His practices, near
unto His Argenis, under favor of His borrowed face. The joy which They
received at the sight of each other, is beyond expression: The conclusion of
Their enterview was, that at this present He should break all obstacles, and
should go directly in His Kingdom, to leavie a puissant Army, that He might
free Her out of the hands of so many Suitors, who were so importunate unto Her.
He then leaves Sicily, and happily arrives in His Realm, where He raises a
Royal Army, which He presently ships, for the effecting of this great voyage,
and to show unto the eyes of Sicily, as a sparkling of the glory of His birth.
But it happened, that being at Sea, the Navy was beaten with a furious storm,
that intending to hold their course toward Sicily, He was cast upon the Coast
of Mauritania, where He found wherewith to cause His valor to appear, and to
give that success to His affairs, which He did not imagine, should be there.
Nevertheless His absence, a hundred times blamed by Argenis, which could not
tell what Star to accuse, of this misfortune, was the cause that the Moore
and the King of Sardany continued their pursuits; The Sardiot imagining He was
abused, resolved to steal away Argenis, and to ship Her in His own Navy, and
so return with so rich a Prey into His Kingdoms. The Moore, who had an eye on
all sides, discovers this design, advertises the King, and gives Him such true
tokens thereof, that Meleander gives notice unto Radiroboranes that He ignored
not His practices, which gave Him cause to break wholly with Him. To be
revenged on Meleander, He writ Him a letter, full of contempt and outrages
against Argenis, whose Governesse He had suborned, which had discovered unto
Him, Poliarchus His secrets and Their loves, Meleander afflicted beyond measure
of this affront, is angry with Argenis, which justifies Her innocence, by she
her self who had betrayed Her. This miserable wretch seeing her self
discovered did seek (by the means of poison) the expiation of her crime, and
procured her own death, before the eyes of the Court. Meleander to shun a
greater misfortune, and to fortify Himself with friends, went to His
Daughter, and speaks to Her to marry the Prince of Mauritania, of whose merit
and valor He spoke advantagiously to enduce Her to consent. She demands some
time to resolve Her self, and represents unto Him, that it would be a shame
for a Kings Daughter, to give Her faith so slightly unto a man who had not so
much as demanded it, with the solemnities accustomed in like occurrences. Her
Father grants Her two months time, and Fortune lengthned this term: The King
of Sardany full of rage and despite, for so bloody an affront, puts under
sail, leaves Sicily, and having a favorable wind, within a short time,
arrives in His Kingdom. His soul being wounded, causes Him to undertake
revenge (of the injury which He had received in the Court of Sicily) upon
Mauritania; He imagined that He could easily conquer that Great Kingdom, where
there was but a Queen, which held the reins of the Empire; but the storm,
which was like to cast away Poliarchus, saved the Moors and their Crown. The
tempest having cast Him upon that coast, He offers His Army, unto their Queen,
who knew the obligation which She had unto Him in the former voyage: She
accepted those advantageous offers, and recommended unto Him, the safety of Her
State. After many encounters, sometimes the victory was seen to lean on the
Sardinians side, and sometimes on the Affricans, assisted with the Gaulois. At
last they came to a set battle, which having been bloody amongst the
soldiers, was no less cruel betwixt the Generals. These two generous Princes
edged on, by a secret hatred which they bare one to another, sorted themselves
during the horror of the fight, and filled with a furious animosity, caused
their soldiers to retire, that they might end the Combat, and end their
differences by the death of the one or the other; After a great conflict they
were separated twice: But both aspiring to the victory, and being impatient at
this succor, out of rage and despite threatened their soldiers to fall on
them, if they had the audacity to hinder them any more. They begin their
conflict the third time, but they appeared so wearied and weakened by reason of
the loss of their blood, that it was thought the Conqueror should have no
great cause to glorify himself of his victory, at the end of the Combat. In
the end nevertheless Poliarchus who had some advantage upon the Sardiot, for
the last blow, finding out a place through the defect of His Armor, thrusts
His sword through His throat, and sacrifices Him to the Princess of Sicily's
wrath; Radirobranes whose soul was already upon His lips thrust Himself on
Poliarchus, and fell down upon Him: but being bereaved of life, Poliarchus
disengaged Himself by little and little, from under this body, and appeared
victorious in the Head of His Troops: The Moors know not what Trophies to
erect, to the French Princes virtue; their Queen avouches, that Her Son and
She owe unto His courage, all the remainder of the good fortune which they have
in the world. Going to visit Him; when He was sick, of the wounds which He had
received in the Combat, after many praises said to the Conquerours glory, She
speaks unto Him of the happy purchase, which Her Son had made in Sicily, and
in few words gives Him to understand that Meleander, holding Himself
extremely obliged unto His valor, had offered Him His Daughter in marriage.
At this word all Poliarchus His wounds did bleed afresh, and seems by the
palenesse of His face, that His soul is going to abandon His body, as being
weary to dwell in it: But this is not all, here is a mightier wave, which comes
to encounter Him, to banish out all patience from His soul. The Queen had
conjurd Her Son by Her letters, that He should make a journey into His
Kingdom, before He married the Princess of Sicily, and to induce Him to make
this voyage, had represented unto Him the misfortunes whereof His State was
threatened by the K. of Sardany's Army. There He is come, and led to Poliarchus
His chamber, who^ He had cruelly offended: Poliarchus feared not this encounter
at all, because the Moore bore another name in Sicily, then in His Kingdom,
but knowing His Rival, reme^bers what the Queen had told Him, touching Her
Sons marriage with Argenis. Grief so over-mastered His senses, that at this
sight, all full of rage, he turned His head on the other side, shows tokens of
His spite, and receaves no better countenance of the Moore; who resolves to
avenge Himself of the obstacle, which He gives to His Nuptials, imagining,
that the delay, which Argenis had ask't, was for His sake: They come to words
which testify the great adversion which they have against each other. The
Queen much astonished, brings forth Her Son out of the sick man's chamber, chides
Him for His incivility, represents unto Him the obligation which He has to the
French Prince, and by way of reproach, gives Him to understand, that He shall
be for ever blamed, to have so unworthily used an outlandish Prince, unto who^
His Crown is so strictly obliged. In the mean time examining exactly the cause
of so cruel a hatred, who had made Poliarchus, to resolve to take Sea, thus
sick and ill as He was, She finds out, that it was Jealousy, which they had
each of the other concerning Argenis, which had stirred up this storm: That
comforts Her, believing She had found the means to agree them without much
trouble. She speaks to both the Princes; Imperiously, to Her Son;
Courteously, unto that of France: She conjure Them, to refer the decision of
their differences, unto Meleander: And I will cause, (said She unto Poliarchus)
that you shall have the Fair Argenis, and that my Son shall not loose Her This
promise, as an Oracle, with two faces, does astonish the Princes, but the
respect which they bare to the Queen, obliges them to believe Her, and to give
a true Faith, unto Her words, and stay with patience, what the event will be,
whereof both the one and the other seemed to hope well. Thus, Poliarchus is
conjured to remain in the Court of Mauritania to cause His wounds to be
healed, and in the mean time the Moore lands His Navy in Sardany full of
factions by the death of their King. He conquers it with little trouble; He
comes back Victorious to meet the Queen his Mother, which at Poliarchus His
entreaty, dispatches them both with Her letters, to go, and decide their
difference, before Meleander unto whom they had referred it by Her Counsel.
She gives a Cabinet, unto Her son, to carry unto Meleander; the precious
stones which were in it, were of an inestimable value, but that was not the
secret. Having taken leave of the Queen, the two Rival Princes, hoise up
sail, showing no sign of anger, against each other: They arrived much about
one time in Meleanders Court. Argenis has notice that Poliarchus is so near
unto her: This joy had transported Her, if rage had not cross't it, when She
heard, that He had made Her Father Umpire of Her marriage. Is it then, said
She, all the esteem He makes of me, to put Himself thus in hazard, to lose
Me? And if my Father who has an inclination for the Moore, gives Me unto Him,
does he think, that I will ever consent thereunto? Before that shall happen,
steel, or poison shall put Me out of the world: I shall have more courage then
He: my death shall blot out all the Trophies that this Moore goes fancying in
his mind, and Poliarchus shall know that I can love, more constantly, and
truly then He. At least if My sex takes away the means, to dispute against
Him, the glory of Arms, nothing shall hinder Me, to take from Him that of
Constancy. This list is open to all the courageous spirits, without distinction
of sex, and I shall not be the first Virgin, who has surpassed men, in
fidelity.

In the mean time the two Lovers are favorably received at Court, where
Poliarchus began to reassume His luster, and as it were, to darken a little the
Prince of Mauritanias glory, they go to salute the King, who at first sight,
makes them the best welcome which they can desire. Poliarchus was the first
which made His complement in few words. But the Moore having presented those
letters with the Cabinet whereof His Mother had charged Him to give unto
Meleander, saw Himself engaged in a longer discourse.

At the opening of the letters, the King changed color, having read them very
exactly, and with an extraordinary attention, He took a little Golden Key,
which the Queen of Mauritania had enclosed in them, and opened the Cabinet,
where He found things, which did balance His Spirits in such sort, that
among'st the tokens, which He gave of His contentment, the tears were seen to
trickle down His cheeks, in such abundance, that all the company was astonished
thereat. At the instant forgetting Himself a little in point of ciuility, He
left the Prince of France alone, and drew the Moore aside as to entertain Him
more privately and with more liberty; this negligence was nothing to what
followed: holding of Him aside, takes Him about the neck, embraces and kisses
Him, and gives Him, the most sensible testimonies which He could wish, of His
affection. Not contented with that, He sent in all have for His Daughter, to
whom as She arrived, He said softly, some few words accompanied with an action
which seemed to be an image of joy, in His heart. The Princess taking no heed
to what was so near unto Her, advances to salute the Moore with visible signs
of Love, Poliarchus remains astonished at this spectacle, and knows not how to
behave Himself, but judging by the good entertainment, which Argenis gave unto
Archombrotus, that all his hopes were ruinated, and that His rival was going
to triumph, with His pursuits; yielded unto despair, and in the bitterness of
His thoughts, began to say within His soul; Is this then the fruit of so many
pains which I have taken, and so many hazards which I have runn'd, to assure
My self of the love, of this prodigious inconstancy, She to whom the most
violent rigors of a Father, with a thousand Martyrdomes ought not to have
changed, nor altered, suffers Herself to be surprised by some flatteries,
which this Old man rounds Her in the ear: What mountains of gold? What
perpetual springs of felicity, have been promissed Her, thus to change Her
affection, and alter Her mind? unfortunate Queen of Mauritania, a scion of
the old stock, what characters and enchantments host thou made, upon those
letters, to print upon them, that force, and give them that power, to cause so
monstrous a change, and to ruinate in so small a time, that which I had built
with so long a patience? How am I punished of the folly which I have committed,
trusting in the words of a Woman and unto the promises of a Damzell, whereof
the cunning and lightness, (qualities unseparable to that sex) ought to have
made me to suspect them more then the Winds which have brought and driven me on
this infamous Shore: But however, If Poliarchus has been deceaved, He can
take such a cruel vengeance, that neither the Authors, nor confederates of this
perfidiousnesse shall have no great cause to build triumphs, nor erect trophies
to their vanity. This wretched Old man, who by the artificial deceits whereof
He is full, has always opposed my contentments, and these two insolent
Lovers, who sport at the ship-wracke of my fortune, shall be the sacrifices of
My fury: But it is not all, I will also dye, to the end my Ghost may pursue and
persecute that ungrateful Argenis, unto the Throne of the immortal Gods:
Before whom I will reproach Her prodigious infidelity, that a thousand oaths
taken in their name, ought to have stayed, if She had had the feeling and
belief which She should have had of their power and justice; It is apparent,
that it was Poliarchus His good Genius, or the Tutelary Angel of Sicily, which
busied His Spirit, in these Tragic thoughts, to stay His design, and to
divert Him during as much space as needed, to give Meleander and Argenis, time
to remember themselves, and to come and make their excuses. As He was then,
upon the point to go and execute so furious a design, and to put Meleander,
Argenis, and His Rival out of the world, and after this bloody execution, to
run His sword through His body, and by that means to leave Tragic tokens of
His jealousy and despite: Those who seemed, to have too much neglected Him,
came to themselves again, and perceaving their fault, went toward Him to make
their excuses, and discover the cause of this joy, which having ravished them,
out of themselves, had made them, to forget all civility: Poliarchus finds the
charms of His fury and frenzy in their discourses and reasons: The Moore is
acknowledged to be Argenis's Brother; the Queen of Mauritania, had discovered
the History by Her letters, and had given such good tokens unto Meleander, that
He could not doubt, but that He was His Son, and the true Heir of the two
Crowns, insomuch that Archombrotus receiving the succession of His Estates,
left freely the possession of the Princess His sister, unto Poliarchus, who
would not have changed it with a thousand Scepters.

Meleander, seeing that the most part of the assistants, understood nothing in
these wonders, and that every one desired, a more particular enlightening, took
the word, and making a short discourse of the voyage which He had made in
Affricke during the heat of His youth, avowed that He had been enamoured of a
Beauty, whose favor having purchas't, He had at last married Her secretly, and
that His affairs, having called Him back into Sicily, He had left Her with
child, of a Son, which was Archombrotus, whom, since Hyanisbe, seeing
Herself without children, by the King Her husband, had supposed; fayning to
have been brought a bed of Him, that She had been induc't thereunto, because
Her Sister, (which was She, whom He had loved,) seeing Herself ready to dye, in
childe-bed, had discovered the Secret, unto Her. Therefore it was not to be
doubted but that Archombrotus was Argenis's Brother, to whose marriage for that
cause He could not aspire, but left the free possession of her, unto
Poliarchus, an Incomparable Prince, and worthy the Alliance of the greatest
Princess of the earth; and accordingly, if ever Sicily had seen Her self at
the height of good Fortune, it was now where the destinies had brought it unto,
by unknown means unto men, that therefore all the World should give signs of
a public gladness, and that every one should run unto the Temples of their
Gods, to give them a thousand thanks, for so many blessings showred down upon
His Crown. At these words the people was seen transported with a secret
ravishment, by giving such testimonies of joy, amongst their Feasts, and
Sacrifices: Meleander with Archombrotus consent, offers the Kingdom of
Sardany, unto Poliarchus for Argenis's Marriage; Poliarchus being mavelous
well contented, makes ouverture of an Alliance, for Archombrotus with a Sister
of His, Daughter of France, which does accept this glorious party with a
thousand thanks, so that the two Crowns of France and Sicily remained united
with such strong Bonds, that it seemed, the destinies would make this Alliance,
perpetual.

On the other side, Poliarchus sees Himself at the height of His desires,
seeing that He was in possession of Her, whom He loved more dearly, then His
own life. Truly even as the rigours of a long Winter, causes the Spring to be
found more pleasing, so all the crosses which He had suffered in this pursuit,
caused Him to find the enjoying of it, so much the sweeter.

FINIS.

