A DIDVCTION OF THE TRVE AND CATHOLIC meaning of our Savior his words, this is
my bcdie, in the institution of his last Supper through the ages of the Church
from Christ to our own days.

Whereunto is annexed a reply to M. William Reynolds in defense of M. Robert
Bruce his arguments in this subject: and displaying of M. John Hammiltons
ignorance and contradictions: with sundry absurdities following upon the Roman
interpretation of these words*

Compiled by ALEXANDER HVME Master of the high School of Edinburgh.

EDINBVRGH Printed by Robert Waldegraue, Printer to the Kings Majesty 1602*

Cum Privilegio Regi^

TO THE RIGHT Honorable the L. Prouest Bayless, and counsel of Edinburgh
ALEXANDER HVM^ wishes true wisdom, and felicity.
THE Spouse of Christ (right Honorable) who lies in his bosom, hears his
voice, that is his word: and keeps his sacraments in the integrity, which
she received. This glorious title of his wel-beloued the Church of Rome does
falsely arrogat. For she has preferred her own decrees to his word: to the
one sacrament she has ^dded oil, spittle, salt, and cream: From the other
she has taken away the blessed cup of his precious blood: she has set up in
his chair the man of sin: she has given his office of intercession to
Saints, and Angels: She has made his house a den of thieves, and a market of
merits masses, pardones, and other pelf, selling heaven, and hell for silver,
and gold. Whereby it is clear to all men that has not drunk of the wine of
her fornication, that she is not the spouse of Christ, but the skarlet whore,
that sits on the beast with seven heads, and has poisoned the nationes
of the earth with her abhominationes. It is the guise of a whore to disgrace
the lawful spouse, to whose bed she presumes, what lies in her. To this
end this strumpet has per secu^ed the well-beloved of our Savior, ever since
she got up her head. And now in our days slandereth her with the
opprobrie of a whore, never hard of before the days of Luther. To meet with
this contumely, I have contrived this little treatise the last winter, at
such hours as I could borrowe of my bed: because my calling holds me
occupied at other times. In it I have taken for one of the surest notes of the
true spouse, the sacrament wherein he communicates him self, and all his
graces with her. First I gather be seven arguments drawn out of the well of
truth, the true meaning of the words of the institution ( this is my body)
containing the right manner how Christ feeds us with his precious body, and
blood. Secondly I prove be their own testimonies that the fathers of the
primitive Church, received that sense from Christ, and his Apostles, and kept
it, as they received it 500 years after the first institution. Thirdlye I
prove the occasion of the corruption: and how it sprang, and grew with the
truth like darnell amongst wheat without offense for the space of 300 years.
Fourthly I show how in the year 800. it began to ^appe the truth, and that
some grew either so impudent, or ignorant as to deny a figure, and maintain
a literal sense in the words of the institution. Fifthly that about that
same time Ioannes Scotus in the time of Charles the great, and Bertrame at the
commandment of Carolus Calvus, opossed them selves, and refuted that error,
whereby it may seem, that that noble Prince was of the same mind. Sixthly
that the better sid continued long a party, and that these books were not
condemned ^il the counsel of Lateran 250. years after they were published.
Seuenthlye that this counsel condemned Berengarius unhard for an heretic,
and the truth which he mentained of heresy. Lastly I follow the story, that
the Church of Rome ever since persecuting the truth with fire, and faggot could
never get it extinguished. That it had always assertoures, and many that
sealed it with their blood. In which discourse my intent is to prove that the
church was planted in the truth be Christ, and his Apost. not be Calvin or
Zuinglius as our adversaries bears the ignorante in hand. That there has
been always since a Church professing it. That the Church of Rome ever since
the Counsel of Lateran about 550 years has persecuted her. That this little
bark howbeit driven into many obscure harboures, yet all the storms which
the devil, and antichriste could raise, has not sunk her. This little
treatise I have thought good to dedicate to your Wisdoms: because I, and al my
trauelles am consecrated to your common wealth. Accept my good will, and
protect the truth with your authority. The Lord give you wisdom to
discern, and hearts to maintain his cause. Farewell in him, who is the well
of welfare. Edinburgh the 18. of Febr. Anno. 1602.

TO M. JOHN Hammilton his old Regent, grace, and right judgment.
HEaring great report of a book, which you had set out, I met with your
treatise entitled of the Lords Supper, printed anno 1581. supposing that your
coming home had stirred the minds of men to read and praise the thing, which
had lain long despised: I red also with hope to find the arguments, that
induced you to turn your coat. But finding no thing, which you might not, and
in all appearance did not know before your peruersion: I pitied your miserable
case who has a heart at one time capable of contrary persuasions of your
salvation* and was woe, how be it it be worthy no answer, that our men had
let it lie 19. years without an answer: because it seemed that that silence
had made you confident, and your sectaries hope that it was unanswerable.
Wherefore thinking it to be the work so much spoken of, I resolved to do it
the honor, that no man thought it worthy, and set my self to answer it,
because you were some time my Regent. After that I had answered the first cap.
and a good part of the second: there came to my hands your second work.
Then I perceived my error, and stayed my hand to read it also. Having red
it, I rewed al, For arguments in both I found none indeed, and few in show.
To flite, which is the greatest part of both these books, I thought it meeter
for a scoulde then a scholar. And the last I found contrary to the first,
not only confuting, but condemning of heresy the very inscription thereof.
Your greatest gift for any thing that I can see is in nik-naming, and beleing
the Saints of God. That gift we can well be contented to leave to papists:
because such graces are more acceptable to your pope, then our God. Some of you
has purchased Bishoprics, and some Cardinalshipes, be that kind of eloqu^ece
But we are assured that he, whom we serve, never rewards that art with
better hyre then hell. Yet I wonder at your impudency, or rather stupiditie,
to hope that naked lies can win credit, even where the men of whom you speak
are most hated. Can any man beleeu^, that if GOD had showen so notable a
judgment on John Knoxe in the pulpite, and presence of such a frequent
assembly, as uses to be in the Church of Edinburgh, the people would not
have only abhorred his doctrine: but stoned him self out of the town. Or can
any man that has a man's heart (that is reason and understanding) believe,
that if John Calvin had used that manifest iuglarie, which ye are not ashamed
to publish in the face of the Sun, in the congregation at Geneua, that that
people, who found the moyen in a private grudge to banish him their town for
certain years: would not, on such a notorious cause as that, have either
stoned him in the streets, or expelled him at the least with shame for ever.
But this is a note of gods judgment, that he has so besotted your senses,
that you have not the wits to cast a probable color upon your lies. This
was an other cause, that made me leave my purpose to confute your book. For if
I had gone fordward, I saw that I was to meet with many slanders, which was
not worth the hearing, nor reading and needed no other to confute them, then
the mouth that toulde them: if the hearer had but half a nose to smell alye as
whote as a fox. Yet having spent many days, and nights in gathering
materialles to that work, I resolved not to lose them: but with some travel
contrived them in this form, which you see: hoping that the power of reason
and truth might not only stay such from that error, as your sectaries had
made to doubt: but also make you, and them to doubt of that, which you teach so
confidently: if you would read as advisedly as you have bequeathed your self
vnconsideratlye to that abomination. And hear I charge you in the bowels, and
mercies of lesus Christ, as you will answer in the great day of the Lord, if
you doubt indeed (which is not likely for any matter that we can see in your
books to have turned you) or left the truth for any particular, to open your
eyes again to the light, and to return to the grace from which you are
fallen. I have here deduced the truth of this question whereon stands the
foundation of the Roman religion from Christ to our own times. I have taken
this pains partly for our people, partelye for you, to whom I wish the good
that a Scholar should to his master. And therefore I pray you, as you love to
live for ever, to leave the way of death everlasting. Otherwise in the court
of conscience, where truth will be revealed, and the popes indulgence will do
no good, I must bear witness of your wilfulnes, and proud contempt of the
revealed truth. The Lord give you a heart to love him better then men.

Yours if you be Christ's, ALEXANDER HVME.

The diduction from the fountain.
OUR Lord and master Jesus Christ, that night that he was betrayed, into the
hands of the high preiste to continue in his Church a solemn remembrance of
his blessed passion, which he was shortly to suffer: instituted at his last
supper with his disciples; after that he had finished the law of the pascall
Lamb, in place there of a new Sacrament in the Elements of Bread and Wine.
In this and with this after an unspeakable manner, be a secret divine efficacy,
he delivered also to their Faith his precious Body and Blood, to unite them,
and all that should succeed them to be bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh, to nourish their souls unto eternal life. In this mystery there is such
a secret co^iunctio^ between the elements and his precious flesh, that in all
ages it has exercised the hearts and minds of men in the deep contemplation
thereof some to life, and some to eternal death and condemnation. For seeing
the glory, and excellency of our omnipotent God, consists in the highest
perfection of mercy, and justice: his infinite wisdom has tempered his word
and Sacraments to minister matter to both. Therefore between his elect, whose
hearts he illuminates with the light of his spirit: and those whom he has
left to the judgment of their own fenses, and illusions of error, there has
risen out of this cloud great storms to exercise his Church, that it might
not lie sleeping in the son of security. It is forty years and more, since
the Lord began to sow in this country being then overwhelmed in the mists
of ignorance the seed of his eternal truth. Now seeing our unthankfulness,
he suffers the enemy to repair home again, and to sow darnel in his
harvest He is busy, and we are secure. Wherefore to meet his practices, and
to arm the simple against his sophismes, I have chosen this argument of real
presence as of greatest importance to confute all papistrie. For if the
natural body of our Savior is not in the sacrament (as they call it) of the
altar, they have no sacrifice for the quick, and dead, and wanting that,
their market of masses this five hundredth years has been a fair of false
wares. In this disputation I will use no rethoricall colloures, to fill men's
eare^ with words: but shortly will aim my arguments to the point, hoping
that in all sound judgments weight of reason will be more effectual then
the rattling sound of empty words. I will deduce the truth of this point out
of the well of truth, and then will prove the Church to have received it from
Christ and his Apostles: and notwithstanding the craft, and cruelty of the
enemy to have kept it sincere, and pure to our times. Lord show to me the the
light of thy truth: put weight in my words, and force in may arguments to
bear thy truth through the midst of thy enemies and to confound the wisdom
of the wise.

Our Lord and Savior at the institution of this Sacrament, took bread: and
after that he had given thanks broke it, and gave it to his disciples saying,
Thus is my body, which is broken for you this do ye in remembrance of me.

The words this is my body, the Church of Room takes literallie, ^ffirming
that the bread is turned into the very natural, and real body of christ,
having no nature thereof but color, savor, taste, and other inseparable
accidents.

We on the other side, take them figuratiuelie, denying that there is any
change of the substance: but that the bread remains bread representing to our
souls the body of Christ to feed our souls to eternal life.

As for the words them selves without other inforcements, they are capable of
both senses, we grant that if both scripture and nature did not deny, they
may be taken literallie. Again that they may be taken figuratively, if the
perverseness of the adversary will not grant, other scripturs in the same
form will easily convince.

He that said of the bread This is my body, said likewise of him self I am
a vine, I am a door, and Paull says the rock was Christ. But these words
inforces not a literal sense, that he is a very door, vine, or rock. Ergo,
these words enforce not literallye that the bread is his body, The speaker
is one, the form is one, and there is nothing in the one which is not in the
other, to enforce a literal sense. Of this see more in the answer of Master
William Reinoldes fourth replye to Master Robert Bruce cap. 19. hereafter page
96.

This ground being laid that these words are as opportune ^o a figure, as to
the letter we join with these men upon a new conclusion, that the figure is
most consonant to the truth, and agreeable with the scriptures.

To begin then, my first argument is taken from the name, and nature of a
Sacrament. No sacrament is the same thing, which it signifies. The bread and
wine in the Lords Supper are sacraments of Christ's body and blood. Ergo, they
are not the thing which they signify: that is, they are not the body, and
blood of Christ, The first part of this argument is a rule of nature delivered
us be a common consent of all the learned before the days of ignorance, and
papistrie. Let August. serve for all sacramenta (says he) sunt signa rerum
aliud existentia, ^^ntra maxim lib. 3. cap, 2^*
aliud significantia. Sacraments are signs of things being in deed one
thing, and in signification an other. The answer here that the accidents are
the sign, and that the substance is changed is a trick of Roman iuglarye
without warrant of the word, or testimony of any father, for eight hundredth
years after the institution of this sacrament. Of this see more hereafter in
defense of Master Robert Bruce against Master William Reinold. cap. 19.
reason. 2.

My next reason shall be from the analogy of the sacraments of the new and old
covenant. The sacraments in the new covenant, are the same to Christ now
commed, that the sacraments of the old covenant were to Christ to come, But
the sacraments of the old covenant were types, and figures of Christ to come.
Ergo, the sacraments of the new covenant are types and figures of Christ
already commed. 2. Cor, 10* 3.^^
The proposition Paull confirms. The fathers did all eat the same spiritual
meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink. And Aug. sacramenta
iudaeorum in signis diuersa fuerunt a nostris, in rebus significatis paria.
That is, the sacraments of the Jews did differ from ours in signs; but are
the same in signification. Joan (...) 26.
The assumption the adversary cannot deny.

Thirdly, I reason out of Christ's own words after that he had absolved the
hole action, and his disciples had al eat of the bread, and drunk of the wine:
I will (says he) no more drink of this fruit of the vine, Ma^^. 14 25.
while I drink it. laying this foundation which I hope no man can deny, that
the bread is no other ways his bodi^ then the wine is his blood. The fruit
of the vine is not the natural blood of Christ. But that which he had
consecrated, and his disciples had drunken, he calls that the fruit of the
vine. Ergo, that which he consecrated, and they had drunken was not his
natural blood, and be like reason that which they had eaten, was not his
natural and real body. The proposition being a negative of things disparate,
and diverse is not deniable, and the assumption is a text uttered be the mouth
that could not lie.

Fourthly, the order of the institution Jesus the night that he was betrayed
took bread, and giving thanks broke it, and said take eat this is my body
that is broken for you, yealdes us this argument. That which he broke, was the
same which they did eat. But Christ took bread and broke it, not his
essential body: Ergo that which they did eat was bread and not his essential
body. The proposition is manifest in the words as they lie. he took bread,
he brake it that is bread: he bade his disciples eat that same bread, and
of it said, this is my body which is broken for you. That which he took he
broke: that which he broke he gave them: that which he gave them they did
eat; and that which they did eat, he calls it his body. To apply the
verbes following, to an other thing the^ that, which the first verb is joined
with, is to tear Christ's words in sunder; and to part the things, which he
spoke coniunctly. The assumption is the very text. And further, when he broke
the bread, Christ had not uttered the words, be virtue whereof these men
holds that the bread is changed into the body of Christ.

Fifthly, out of the same words we^ draw this argument. The thing which he
gave them was his essential body, as the breaking of it, was the breaking of
his body. But the breaking of the bread was not the breaking of his body for
our sins, as it was done upon the cross. ^rgo, the bread was not that same
essential body, which was broken on the cross, but in a figure. The
proposition is true* because as he says of the bread it is his body: so he
says with one breath, that it is his body broken, this is my body broken
for you. The assumption is true, because the body of Christ was not broken
before his passion: and because the bread was broken in pieces, which his
body was not.

Sixthly, it is said in the sixth of John He that eats my flesh, and drinks
my blood dwells in me, and I in him. Which words yealdes us this reason: He
that eats the flesh, and drinks the blood of Christ dwells in Christ;
and Christ in him. But all that eat the sacrament dwells not in Christ, nor
Christ in them. Ergo, not all that eats the sacrament, eats the flesh, and
drinks the blood of Christ. The proposition is the text: the assumption the
great heap of unworthy receauers does prove. This Peter Lumbard the great
master of sentences alleadges out of August. lib. 4. did. ^. in A.
Qui discordat a Christo, non manducat carnem eius, nec sanguinem bibit: et si
tanterei sacram^n^um ad iudicium sibi quotidie accipit. He that follows not
Christ eats not his flesh, nor drinks his blood: how-be-it he daily
receive the sacrament, of so great a mystery to his damnation. Which sentence
afterward in B. and C. he labors to answer without sense, or sentence.
That the wicked eats the proper flesh of christ which was borne of the
Virgin Marie: but not the spiritual flesh of Christ, which is received only,
be faith and understanding. We read in the scripturs but of one flesh of
Christ, which was borne of the Virgin Marie: and suffered on the cross for
our sins. Of this flesh says Christ, whosoever eats dwells in me, and I
in him. But the wicked says Lumbard eats this flesh, and so be his worthy
sentence the wicked dwells in Christ, and Christ in the^. The faith which
believes, or understanding which conceaueth any other flesh of Christ then
this, believes and understands the thing that never was. Of the wicked, 1,
Cor, 11, 27
Paull says, he that eats this bread, and drinks of this cup
unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation. He says, not he that
eats the body, and drinks the blood of Christ unworthily. And hear I
dare lay my head, which I will not give for the popes head, and his triple
Crown too, that all the Schools in Room and Remes, shall never prove be the
Scripture, that the body of Christ can be eaten unworthily. How often does he
promise himself in John, Ion, 6. 33 35, 40, 47 50, 51. 56, 58,
eternal life, sumtime to him that eats his flesh, sometime to him that
believes. Whereof it is manifest, that none eats his flesh unworthily,
seeing that all that eats of it, shall have eternal life. This besides the
place quoted be Lumbard that worthy Fatder. August, in John tract. 26. strikes
dead. Sacramentum quibusdam ad vitam, quibusdam ad mortem sumitur: res vero
cu^us est sacramentum, omnibus ad vitani nulli ad mortem. That is, some
receaueth the sacrament to life, some to death: but that whereof it is the
sacrament brings life to all, death to none:

Seventhly, in the fore cited words of Paull. 1, Cor, 11. 17.
He that ^ateth of this bread, and drinks of this cup unworthily, ea^eth
and drinks his own damnation. We find this argument. The elements in the
Sacraments remain that which Paull be the spirit of God does call chem. But
Paull be the spirit of god does call them bread and wine, and that after the
consecration, or else they could not be received unworthily, nor draw on so
heavy a judgment, as to be guilty of the Lords body, and blood. Ergo, the
elements in the Sacrament remains, bread and wine, and are not changed into
the natural body and blood of Christ. Hear the base shift, that the Apostle
uses, the names which they seem for the names which they are will not houlde,
for that were to feed the error of the fenses, and to brangle the foundation
of faith: which thing be far from this Apostle who trau^lled so faithfullye
and discreit ye (...) Apostleshipe.

Hear thou have seven arguments, gentle reader, the weakest of all which, if
we hade no more, were sufficient to bear out this cause with greater
probability, then any that our adversary has to the contrary. The first,
third, fifth, and sixth, concludes the negative that the bread, and wine,
are not the reale, and essential body of our Savior: The second proves,
that they are types an^ figures of Christ, exhibited for the ransom of our
sins. The fourth, and seventh, that the bread and wine, remains in their
own natures, and are not transubstant^a^ted, as the Church of Rome labors
^o earnestly to bring the world to believe* And so of these seven arguments,
four erefutes the adversary, and three confirms the truth.

Now that the Church maintained this truth, as she received it from Christ and
his Apostles; for more then five hundredth years after Christ I will prove be
the the testimonies of the fathers, who lived, and taught the Church in that
age. And hear I would pray the reader not to mistake me. I allege not
these testimonies to confirm this truth as not sufficiently proved already or
to ad more authority to the testimonies of the scripture, for we acknowledge
the authority of the word of God to have that Majesty, that if all the world
did say against it: yet it remained the certain truth of the eternal God,
who is truth it self, and can not lie. And we greatly lament the misery of
this age, wherein there is so many found and of them some, who knew the truth,
to oppose them selves against so manifest a light. But seeing be the
perverseness of man, and malice of the devil it is controuerted: in my simple
judgment the consent of the Church is no small inducement to indifferentmen,
and a great slap in the adversaries saill, who bears the world in hand that
they saill before the wind, and that all the fathers of the primitive Church,
does row in their bardge. Which confident assertion how false it is, I hope
with gods good help, to make it manifest: and to prove be their own words,
that none of the fathers did ever know that transubstantiated monster, which
was whelped in the counsel of Rome five hundredth years after them, and after
that fostered in the bosom of that Church. To begin. De resur, ^arnis.


Tertullian who lived in the year two hundredth, says, of the eating of
Christ in the Sacrament. Auditu deuo^andus est, intellectu ruminandus, et fide
digerendus. That is, be hearing he is to be eaten, Di variis locis in math*
ho^ 9
be understanding chawed, and be faith digested.

Chrysostom teaches the same. Magnus i^^e panis, qui replet mentem non
ventrem. This is the great bread, which filles the mind, and not the belly.

And August. in Joan tract, 25.
Quid dentem, et ventrem para^? creed, et manducasti. Why preparest thou thy
teethe and thy belly? believe and thou have eaten.

Cyprian says, De ^oena dom^ni,
esus eius carnis e^t quadam aviditas, et desiderium manendi in Christo. Quod
est esus carni, hoc est fides animae: non dentes ad mordendum acuimus, sed fide
sinceva sanctum panem edinms. The eating of his flesh is a certain gredinesse
and desire to dwell in Christ. As eating is to the flesh, so is faith to the
soul. We sharp not our teethe to bruise: but faith to eat that sacred bread.

Basilius says, est quoddam spirituale os interni hominis, Psalm. 33.
quo pascitur recipiens panem vitae, qui descendit do caelo. There is a
spiritual mouth of the inward man, be which he is fed who eats the bread
that came down from heaven. Be the testimonies of which fathers, it is most
clear, and apparent that the Church then took the eating of Christ's flesh,
and drinking his blood to be a spiritual action of the soul, not a bodily
action of the mouth: that it is eaten be faith, not with the teethe: and
digested into the mind, not into the belly, and foull^stomache of the
receauer.

Of sacraments in general, August. says, contrae maximinum.
in sacramentis videndum est, non quid sint, sed quid ostendant: signa enim
rerum sunt, aliud existentia, aliud significantia, in sacraments it is to be
noted, not what they are, but what they mean: so they are signs of things
signyfiing one thing, and in deed an other.

Of figures that they are usual in the scripture, Super levite. 56, quest.
and that the name of the figure, is set for the thing figured, and
contrariwayes of the thing for the figure, he says. Solet res quae
significat, eius rei, quam significat nomine appellari. Hinc dictum erat petra
erat Christus. Non dixit petra significat Christum: sed tanquam boc esset
quod^vtique per substantiam non erat. The thing which signifies, uses to be
called many times be the name that it signifies Hereupon it is said, that
Christ was the rock: he said, not that the rock signifies Christ, but as if
it were the thing, which it was not in substance.

To the same effect he says. Ioa^, (...) 36.
Non dictum est petra significat Christum: sed petra erat Christus: it a enim
scriptura solet loqui. It is not said that the rock did signify Christ: but
that the rock was Christ: for so the scripture uses to speak.

This form of speech, Psalm, 3^
he and sundry other of the fathers acknowledges in the sacrament. Ad* hib^^t
Iudam ad conuiuium in quo corporis sui figuram discipulis commendauit. Christ
admitted Judas to the Supper, in which he commended to his disciples the figure
of his body.

And again, contra ad ^mant* 12
Non dubitauit dicere hoc est corpus meum, cnm daret signim cerporis sui. He
doubted not to say, This is my body, when he gave to his disciples the sign
of his body.

Chrysostom says, Christus mortuus non est, Mat hom ^3
cuius symbolum ac signum hoc sacrificium est. Christ is not deed, of whom
this sacrifice is a symboll and a sign.

Theodoret says, Dial, 1
Qui seipsum vitem appell at, ille symbola, et signa, quae videntur,
appellatione corporis, et sanguinis honor auit: non naturam mutauit. He who
called himself a vine, honored the signs, and symbolles, which are seen
with the name of his body and blood, not changing their nature.

Nazianzenus calls them ^oon megaloon mysteerioon antitypa, ^pitaph f^atris
The figures of great mysteries. And in another place tou timiou soomatos
antitypon, The figure of his glorious body. lib. 3 cap 16


Tertullian to prove against Marcion that the body of Christ is not a fantasy
takes an argument from the Sacrament in these words. Acceptum panem,
acdistributum discipuilis corpus suum illum fecit hoc est corpus meum dicendo,
id est figura corporis mei: figura autem non ^uisset, nisi veritatis fuisset
corpus. That is, taking bread and dividing it among his disciples, he made it
his body, saying This is my body. That is, this is a figure of my body. Now
it could hot have been a figure of his body, if his body had not been a
very body: because men uses not to make figures of fantasies.

August. lib, 4
de doctrina teaching in a long discourse, that the scriptures always implies
some figure, when they seem to command, facinus or flagitium. That is as he
him self expounds it, an ill turn to him self, or to an other: in the end
brings for example, the place out of the 6. of John. The letter whereof these
men urge so instantly, and concludes it to be a figure, in dispite of the
pope, and the counsel of Rome, which did in cannon it eight hundredth years
after him to be catholic doctrine to grind and rend the sacred body of
Christ with sacrilegious teeth. Nisi manducaueritis carnem filii hominis, et
sanguinem biberitis, etc. Facinus (says he) vel flagitium videtur iubere,
figura ergo est. Except thou eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his
blood, seems (says August) to command a foull turn: and therefore is a
figure.

In these places of August. Chrysostom, Theodoret, Nazianzen, and Tertullian:
and many more, that might be alleged to this effect, it is manifest that these
fathers, and the Church in their times, took the words of the institution
this is my body, figuratively.

Origin says. Si secundum literam accipis id, ^omil* 7 in le^it
quod dictum est, nisi manduca^eritis carnem filii hominis litera illa occidit.
If thou understand after the letter, the words of our savior (except you eat
the flesh of the son of man, etc.) that letter kills.

Hyeronimus says. De hac quidem hostia quae in commemor atione Christi
mirabiliter fit, De consee ^ift, ^,
edere licet: de illa uero quam Christus in ara crucis obtulit secundum se nemo
potest edere. Of that oblation which was made wonderfully in remembrance of
Christ, a man may eat but of that which was offered upon the alter of the
cross, of it self no man can eat.

Chrysostom says, Si carnaliter accipis, Joan hom 27.
nihil lucraris. If thou receive it carnally, it will do thee no good.

Of these places it is plain, that the flesh of Christ is not eaten with our
teethe, and that the eating the flesh of the son of man, is not to be
understood literallie.

Cyrillus says, Joan, lib, 4, cap, 14,
Christus credentibus discipulis fragmenta panis dedit. Christ gave to his
believing disciples, pieces of bread.

Hieronymus says. Christus in typo sanguinis sui non obtulit aquam, ad ioui^i
anum, lib* 2,
sed vinum. Christ in the type of his blood offered not water, lib, 1, epie^^
6,
but wine.

Cyprianus says. Dominus sanguinem suum vinum appellauit de botris, et acinis
plurimis expressum. The Lord called wine pressed out of many clusters, and
grapes his blood.

And again, lib* 2* epi^^ 3
Inuenimus vinum fuisse, quod dominus sanguinem suum dixit. We find that it
was wine, which the Lord called his blood.

Of these places it is clear, that it was bread and wine, which Christ gave to
his disciples: bittes of bread, and wine wrong out of grapes.

Irenaeus says, lib, 5 cap 1
panis eucharisticus carnis nostrae substantiam auget. The bread of the
eucharist (that is of the Lords supper) turns to the substance of our flesh,
and augumentes it.

Origenes says. mat cap. 15
Ille cibus, qui sanctificatur, iuxta illud, quod habet materiale, in ventrem
abit, et in secessum e^citur. That meat which is sanctified (that is
consecrated to a holy use) according to the matter or substance of it goes
down into the belly, and is cast out into the iakes.

Be these two fathers it is plain that the bread in the Sacrament does
nourish the body, passes through the belly, and auoydeth into the draught,
which were an absurd thing, to speak of the precious flesh of our Savior.

Cyrill says, Christus cum discipulus suis etsi non corpore: lib. 9. cap 22
tamen virt^te deit atis semper futurus. Christ will be with his disciples
howbeit not bodily: yet be virtue of his divine power always. And in an
other place.

Christus non poter at in carne versari cum apostolis, Joan, lib 11 cap 3
post quam ascendisset ad patrem Christ could not in his flesh converse with
his disciples, after that he was ascended to his father.

Athanasius says, De peccat in spirit, sanctum
Quomodo vnius hominis corpus vniuerso mundo sufficeret? Quod tanquam in
illorum cogitationibus versatus Christus commemorat. A quibus cogitationibus,
vt eos auocaret, quemadmodum Paul^ ante suae descensionis de coelo mentionem
fecit, ita nunc reditus sui in coelum. How can the body of one man suffice the
whole world? which thing he records, as if he had been in their hearts.
From which thoughts to draw them, now he makes mention of his ascending into
heaven, as he had done before, of his descending from heaven.

By these two fathers you may see, that Christ is ascended into heaven, as
concerning his body. And to persuade the Capar^aites, says Athanasius, that
he meant not, that they should eat his very body: he tells them that it
should return to: heaven again, and that they should not have it to eat.
Which thing August* sets down most plainly answering the same Capernaites.
Si ergo videritis filium homi^is ascendentem, vbi erat Prius quid est hoc? hinc
apparet vnde fuerant scandalizati. Illi enim put auerunt illum erogat^rum
corpus suum^ille autem dixit se ascensurum in coelum, v^ique, integrum. Cum
videritis filium hominis ascendentem, vbi fuerit prius certe vel tunc
videbitis, quia non eo modo quo putatis erogat corpus suum. Certe vel tum
intelligetis* quod gratia eius non absumitur morsibus. That is, if you see the
son of man ascending, where he was before, What is that? heerof appears the
ground of their offense. For they thought that he would exhibit to them his
own body. But he tells them, that he was to go whole to heaven (as if he
would say) when you see the son of man ascending where he was before, then
shall you see that he will not so bestow his body, as you think, then shall
you understand that his grace can not be consumed peecemaall, or bit and bit.
This is that Christ him self teaches, The poor shall you have always, but me
you shall not have always, and that which Peter teaches. That the heavens
must hold him, while al things be restored. This is that which our belief
teaches, That he sits at the right ^and of his father. Here their
distinction of his visible and unvisible presence is a dreg of man's brain.
Christ him self never taught us of that unvisible presence. And we will not
learn such deep mysteries at men, who may deceive, and be disceaued, that
Christ can do it, we deny^ not: but that he will do it, we will believe no
man but him self, of whom we are sure, in paedagogio lib, 2, cap.
that he will not lie.

Clemens Alexandrinus says, Duplex est sanguis domini, alter, carnalis, quo
redempti^ sumus, alter spiritualis quo uncti sumus. Et hoc est bibere Jesus
sanguinem participem esse in corruptionis domini. There is two sorts of the
Lords blood, the one carnal, where with we are redeemed: the other spiritual,
wherewith we are anointed. To drink the Lords blood is to be partaker of his
purity, and incorruption.

Cirill says, contr^ nestor anathe^ 11
Number humanae carnis co^mestione^ hoc nostrum sacramentu^ pronuncias, et ad
crassas cogitationes vrges irreligiose mentes ^orum, qui crediderunt. Et
attentas tu humanis rationibus tractare ea, qu^ sola et purafide accipiuntur.
Call thou our Sacrament caniball barbaritie, and presest irreligiouslie the
minds of them that believe to gross thoughts? and aseyes thou to handle that
with human reason, which is received by pure faith only.

Ambrose says. Fide tangitur Christus, ^ide videtur: Lue, lib 10,
non tangitur, Corpore non oculis comprehenditur. Christ is touched be faith,
and seen be faith. He is not handled with the hands, nor seen with the eyes.

August. says, lo^n tract 2^.
Dominus dixit se panem qui descendit de c^lo, hortans, vt credamus in illum,
hoc est manducare, panem vivum, qui credit in illum manducat. The Lord said
that he is the bread which came down from heaven, exhorting us to believe in
him: for that is to eat the bread of life, that came down from he^uen. He
that bele^ueth in him, eats him. Be these places you see, that to eat
Christ is to believe in Christ, and partake his purity, and that he is eaten
only be faith not with the teethe. Dial, 2, c^p 24


Theodoret says. Christus naturam panis non mutat, sed naturae addit gratiam.
Christ changes not the nature of the bread: Dial, 1, cap ^,
but to nature adds grace.

And again, Post consecrationem mystica signa non exuunt naturam suam: manet
enum prior substantia, forma, et species. The mystical signs after
consecration puteth not of there own nature? for the former substance, form,
and shape abides.

Ambrose says, Sunt que eraut, et sn aliud commutantur, De iis qui initiantur
they are the same thing they were before (that is, bread and wine) and are
turned to on other, that is turned to an other use, to present to us the body
and blood of our Savior to feed our souls spirituallie. contra eu^icha^


Gelasius says in sacramento manet panis, et vini substantia. In the
sacraments the substance of bread and wine remains.

Irenaeus saith^ Quemadmodum qui est aterra panis percipiens vocationem domini
iam non est communis panis, sed eiu haristia ex. duabus rebus constans terrena
et celest^* sic et corpora nostra percipientia cucharistiam iam non sunt
corruptibil^a spem resurrectionis habentia. lib, 4. cap 34
As the bread growing out of the earth, receiving the Lords institution, is no
more common bread: but the eucharist consisting of two things the one
earthly, the other heavenly. So our bodies receiving the eucharist, are no
more corruptible having hope to rise again.

Be these fathers it is clear, that the substance of the bread abides: and
that the eucharist, that is the communion of thanks giueing consists of an
earthly, and a heavenly thing.

To conclud this matter, Chrysostom says in Vasis sanctificatis non ipsum
corpus Christiest: sed mysterium eius continetur. In the sacred vessels, the
very body of Christ is not but a mystery thereof.

And August, says more peremptorily. Non hoc corpus, quod videtis, manducaturi
estis: non bibituri sanguinem, quem fusuri sunt qui me crucifigent: sed
sacramentum vobis aliquod commendaui. You are not to eat the body which you
see: nor to drink the blood, which they are to shed, who will crucify me. But
I commended a certain mystery to you, etc.

In these places which I have quoted, you have plainly without any gloss all that we teach, and believe of this sacrament. That the words of the institution
are figurative: That the action of eating and drinking these mysteries is
spiritual: That the body of Christ, is received b^ faith, not be the mouth:
That the words of the institution are to be taken literallie: That the body
of Christ which suffered for our sins, is in heaven, and not in the
Sacrament: That to eat the flesh of Christ is to believe in him: That the
substance of the bread, and wine abides, and is not transubstantiated: And
lastly, that the body of Christ is neither in the holy vessels, nor eaten be
them, who receaueth this sacrament. All these things I have here proved (I
say) in plain categoricall words, which the adversaries can not avoid,
without most odious and absurd gloses, which the actours never knew, nor
thought. Yet not-withstanding, they vendicat these five hundredth years, as the
other five hundredth also, until the days of Berengarius, and bears the
ignorant in hand, that all is theirs without contradiction. They have such a
confident grace in shameless lies. But here I would beseech the diligent
reader to judge between us, and them indifferently. Bellarmine the great
Rabbi of the seminary at Rome, and the go^^ah of that uncircumcised
congregation gathers what ever he could^ find with his own travels or the
travels of the whole seminary which be report served him, what ever had any
show for his purpose. He has gathered together above a hundredth and nine
places of all which I dare promise the diligent reader, that he has not two
which speaks the thing, which he would have. In them all he has neither
found transubstantiation of the elements, nor accidents without subjects: nor
subjects without accidents, nor the body of Christ rent with teeth, nor that
the accidents are the outward signs in the sacrament: nor that ^he body of
Christ, is at one time, both in heaven and all other places where the sacrament
is ministered: nor any other of these new theoremes of the Roman faith without
a gloss, and that sometimes impertinent; sometimes obscurer then the text,
sometimes repugnant to the text, and always perverting the true sense of the
author. I hope that no man will count these allegationes equivalent, except
they prove all the theoremes, and appendices of transubstantiation as cleerelye
as we have done. Notwithstanding whate uer they or we can do in this kind,
is no proof of the truth, but a witness of the consent of times.

Now in this place follows next to be considered how this monstrouse
opinion of transubstantiation began to insinuate it self into the hearts of
men in the ages following, for from this time forth it began dailye to grow,
and to gather strength. In the mystery of the sacrament, there is such a
secret, and sacred conjunction of Christ's blessed flesh, with the seals as we
can not well understand, nor is lawful for us curiously to enquire: but
reuerentlye to believe: that his body is the bread, which came down from
heaven, and gives life unto the world. On Christ's part by the secret and
unseen efficacy of his divinity he conuaieth him self into our souls to
feed them unto eternal life. On our parts there is an action jointly of the
soul and body, the one receiving the elements with the mouth of the body:
the other receiving the body and blood of Christ be the mo^th of faith. In
this action the whole powers of the soul, and body are occupied at one instant
applying all the comforts of the senses to the soul. The mouth tasting
sweetness, presents sweetness to ye soul: the stomach receiving refreshment,
minds the soul of refreshment: The vitales receiving strength, comfort, and
life offers to the soul, the strength, comfort, and life: that flows from
the bread, of which, who-so-euer eats, shall never hunger nor thirst again.
To printe this analogy into our hearts, and to lift our senses from the
sensual consideration of these present objects, to the spiritual
contemplation of his absente flesh, it pleased the wisdom of our Savior, to
name the figures of bread and wine his body, and blood, broken and shed for
the faithful partakers of these mysteries. And that he does not changing the
substance as these men would have us ween: but turning the use of bodily
meat to present to our deep speculation, the meat that feeds the soul to
eternal life. This besides the places alredie cited, Theodoret about four
hundredth years after Christ teaches as resolutelie as ever did either
Zuinglius or Calvin, his words ar these faithfully translated because they
are over long to set down in his own language. Our Savior changed the names,
to the body giving the name of the sign, and to the sign giving the name of
the body. His purpose is mantfest: for he would have them, who did participate
his divine mystery to have no eye to the thing, which they saw: but be
changing the names to apprehe^d the change made be grace. For calling his
natural body bread, and meat, and calling him self a vine, he honored the
signs with the names of his body and blood, not changing their natures, but
adding grace to nature.

This example of our Savior, all true preachers in all ages, who labored to
instruct the hearts of men in these mysteries followed: and when they saw the
minds baselye contented, with the external action, many times they amplifyed
the presence of Christ, with hyperbolicall arguments of his divine power, to
lift the heart from the elements, to the thing presented be the elements. For
as mariners, between two dangers in the seas, bears of that which they most
fear, toward that which they least suspect: even so these teachers drew the
people from the elements subject to the sense toward a bodily presence,
contrary to sense, never surmizing, that men would be so credulouse as to
take such hyperbolical amplificationes for simple suthes. The devil who has
always been reddie of good to take occasions of ill, watered this weed with
all helps. First he bred in the hearts of men such a cold regard of these
holy mysteries, that few resorted to them, as it appears be the grievous
complaints of the fathers of that age, and laws made be sundry emperors to
mende that fault. Be this means he so incensed the hearts of them, who had the
ha^dling of them, y^ no man thought his eloquence suf^icie^t to amplify the
presence of Christ in ye sacrament, and with high speeches to imprint a
reverent estimation of these sacred mysteries in the dull hearts of the
people. This continued well nigh three hundredth years, without suspicion of
ill. With the opinion of a corporal presence the devil drew in be little and
little, that the very body of Christ offered to the father in the mass was a
sacrifice propitiatory for the quick, and dead: and the people (as we are all
borne to superstition, and idolatry) embraced that more gredelie then any
truth. The Clargie spying the masses to become good merchandise, and hopeing
for great cheates to the kitc^in be that market, put to their shoulders, and
lifted the sacrifice above the sacrament. So this weed grew daily, as weeds
commonly grows fastest, till few could find the truth, and that only such as
diligently sifted the Scripturs, and fathers of former times. It was long
before men grew so brazen faced, as to deny the figure in the words of the
institution. The first that we read to have commed so far was Damascene,
about the year eight hundredth. After him followed Pas casius, and Theophylact
well nigh a hundredth years. These men broke the ice to them that followed: but
pearsed not into the depth of this divinity, Transubstantiation of the
elements, accidents without subjects, and subjects without accide^t^ the
monstrous brude of the Roman Church were not yet clecked. She had not yet sit
upon that egg, neither was these men yet so well resolved as upon all
occasions to sing one song. They disse^ted in many things from them that
followed, and in sundry things from themselves. At this time and before this
monster grew to a head the Lord raised up one Ioannes Scotus besome termed
Erigena paedagoge to the worthy Emperor Charles the great, a man of great
learning, and well red both in Greek and Latin. This man wrote a learned
work, against this error, and in the beginning of it began to descry the
first conception and whole genealogy of this mo^ster. Soon after followed an
other called Bertram a priest, or as some thinks a monk of Corsbie in
saxony, where Pascasius also was bred. This book is yet extant, wherein he
learnedly cites the fathers, mightily vrges the scriptures, and providently
preuents the whole matter of transubstantiation. This work and the author also
Tritemius highly commends, both for life and learning. It escaped, I can not
tell be what divine providence, the fyrie purgatory of verselles, in the
flames whereof the book of Ioannes Scotus was quite consumed. Yet there was an
other provided for it be the Doctors of Louan, and be the counsel of Trent
called index expurgatorius, not to consume all (for that would have been a
discredit to the holy Church) but to raze such sentences as were incurable
and where it would serve the turn to charge no thing but the affirmative into
the negative, substance into accidents, temporal into eternal, etc. That is
to say, white into black, light into darkness, and truth into a lie. These
two book^ were then published not in a nooke, but in the open light and face of
the world, and the one of the^ at the co^man dement of the Emperor Carolus
magnus. They continued from about the year eight hundredth to the troubles of
Berengarius, which fell out about the one thousand and fifty year, without
condemnation or accusation of heresy: which wa^ an argument that the weed had
not then ouerrshadowed the corn, Bertram makes mention of (...) eat
contention the^ in Fra^^e about this matter, which arg^^s that the right side
was yet a party. They who had hard the reverent Beda or his scholars, for the
most part, swaied that way. Here Master William Reinolds in his book
against Master Robert Bruce seems to leave his reader to think that these
two men, are either theirs, or neuters. They wrote darkely (says he) of the
truth of this Sacrament, and so doubtfully, that the Zuinglia^s use their
authority, against the Catholics, and the Lutherans against the Zuinglians.
In which words, he would lead the reader to think that Scotus, and Bertram
wrote for transubstantiation but in such obscure terms, as might be drawn
to any sense: so loathe are they that we have the shadow of any antiquity,
before the days of Berengari^s. ^t that time (because it is written in the
Revelation, that after a thousand years, the devil should be let loose) he is
content to grant that opposition was made to the verity of Christ's body, in
the sacrament, and cites for witness, to blot it no^withstanding with a note of
newne^, (...) Fox whom he terms the Martyr^^ker. But to let him go with
his tantes (for we must bear worse then that, if need be) if that prophecy
be to be referred just to that time, let them see if it may not better be
understood of the Church of Rome. Which at that time began to pursue their
brethren with fire and fagott: and made Laws, to compel all men to believe
under pain of both deaths temporal, and eternal, that a round wafer, with
the picture of Christ in it, was the very essential body of Christ, that was
borne of the virgin Marye. This was more like to have been the loose devil
and the lying devil to, which ever since has raged in these parts, then that
of Berengarius, which was soon bound again, and under pain of burning
compelled to fing tongue thou lied. If that was the devil, who is daily
roasted in the eternal flames of the f^re of hell, he was fell fleed for a
fire that would have been done in one day. But if these books were not plain
with us, I would ask of Master Reinolds, why the pope burned the one, and the
index expurgatorius mangled the other. But we are much beholden to him,
how-be-it he denies us this antiquity: yet he would feign have it believed,
that our doctrine was condemned of heresy, in the very days of the Apostles.
To prove this, Dial3 cap 19
he quotes Ignatius out of Theodoret, who says, that some acknowledged not the
eucharist to be the flesh of christ that suffered for our sins. These some
heritiekes he would have taken to be men of our mind, that in those times
denied transubstantiation of the body of Christ. Yet if he had marked with
advised iudgmente the drift of Theodoret (for out of him the meaning of
Ignatius is to be gathered) he might have seen that Ignatius spoke of such
heritickes as Theodoret alleges him against: or else the allegation of
Ignatius had been impertinent. But Theodoret alleged him against Valentinian,
Marcion, and Manes, who denied Christ, to have suffered real pains in a real
body. Ergo Ignatius spoke of heritikes, who denied Christ to have suffered
real pains in a real body. For as odious as we are in Master Reinolds
eyes, it will be as hard for him to convince us of this error, as to make the
place of Ignatius other ways to be spoken of us. This argumeut of Ignatius
was common amongst the fathers against that heresy: that if Christ had not a
true body, and suffered not real pains for our sins, the sacrament could
not be a figure thereof. As Tertullia^ reasons before, because me^ use not to
make figures of fantasies. And hear it will be hard for Master Reinolds, to
clenge his heart, and hands of falshoode, and forgerie, for alleging Ignatius
out of Theodoret against that which Theodoret plainly and frequently teaches:
that the sacraments are Tou pathous typoi, Dial, 3 cap 15
figures of the passion: and, Dial^ cap 8
symbola cai typo^ ou tees theoteetos, allatou s^matos, cai haimatos. Signs
and figures not of his deity: but of his body, and blood. But to return to
our story. We read after Bertram, about the year nine hundredth and fifty,
that their rose ^ great controversy likewise in Ingland about this question,
which is a proof that a hundredth and fifty years after the debate in France,
which Bertram makes mention of, that the right side was then also a party,
and that, the better part. For transubstantiation (for now that term was
clecked) stood Odo Archbishope of Canterbury guarded with a great army of
rascal ignorante priests, who woone their daily drink by a disceatfull market
of bread, for flesh. On the other side, was the rest, and better part of the
Clergy. The Bishope was so armed with multitude, that mayor pars picit
meli^rem, the greater part conquered the better with arguments which in those
times were grown to a great hea^ (...), universality, and false miracles. A
hundredth years after that about the year one thousand and fifty Berengarius
deacon of Saint Maurice in Angieres, wrote a letter to Lanfrancus abbat of
Bec-heloin in Normandy, declaring the abuses of the Sacrament, and commending
unto him Ioannes Scotus his learned work upon that question. It fell out that
Lanfrancus himself was then absent, and his convent opening the letter sent it
to the pope. There the Pope summoned a counsel and condemned the man being
absent of heresy and commanded Lanfrancus at that time being his friend, to
answer him under no less pain then to be as great an heretic as he.
Lanfra^cus following the swaye of the world, for afterward he was made
Bishop of Canterbury in England, performed the charge laid upon him, without
all regard ^fformer freindshipe. Berengarius not-withstanding, abiding
constante Pope Leo the ninthe summoned him to a counsel at Verseles and there
damned* him again, being absent, and burned the book of Ioannes Scotus, which
he had commended to Lanfrancus before. After this Victor the second seeing
Berengarius for all this in high estimation, and account, both with the
Nobiliti^, and people, for he was a man of singular graces, g^ue direction to
the French Church to summon, and take order with him. They therefore assembled
at Toures, whether the Pope also sent his legate Hilde br^nd, who afterward
was Pope himself, one of the cursedeft that ever was clecked. Before them
Berengarius appe^red, and for as ill as the world was, satisfied them and
Hildebrand also, proving his doctrine be the Scriptures, fathers, and
counselles to have been the ancient faieth of the Church. But pope Nicolas the
second, not contentented, with this summoned him to Rome again, to a counsel
held in the Castle of Lateran there: and drawing him thither with fair
promises, gave it him to his choice, whether he would recant or burn. Where
the cowardly man, now in his oulde age, for fear of that, which was most
spent, made that beastly recantation, which is yet extant in Gratian, a
perpetual argument of his dasterdlye courage, and the brutishe ignorance of
that counsel, of which the fyner papists since has been ashamed, and their
own gloss says in the decreits, that if it be not well taken, it is a fouler
error, then was that of Berengarius. Thus was that silly man counted before
(as records Fuldebert bishop of Cenomanum) both for life and learning, the
flower of his age, compelled against his conscience be a hersel of ignorant
mules to condemn and curse the truth, to his great ^reife, and terroure in the
hour of his death. After this the truth began to sink, and ignorance
overwhelmed almost the whole Church. The knowledge of tongues decayed and he was
counted the greatest clarke that could speak most barbarous Latin: and tear
out of whole pieces, such distinctions as would have troubled all the schools
in Athenes to understand. Notwithstanding this cruel dealing with Berengarius
Benno Cardinal of Hostia records, that Gregorte the seventh, before called
Hildebrand, who at the commandment of Victor the second, had hard Berengarius
him self in the counsel of Towers, remained so unresolved hereof, that he
sent to Anastatius, to pray, and commanded his College to fast, to get some
secret revelation from heaven, of this mystery. By which doubt of the pope
himself, it should seem, that the reasons of Berengarius were not light, that
sunk so deep into his heart (as hard as it was) that the hole sea of rome ^uld
not wash them away. After this, this truth was still persecuted, till these
our times be the wolfes of Rome, that got the custody of Christ's sheep, be
hook, and crook, and forged falsehood. The first that we read of, to have
abide the flames of this purgatory (for now it was grown hotter, and burned
not only books, but both book, and body, was one Peter Bruce, about the
yea^e one thousand two hundredth. He was a doctor in Tolouse of great account
at that time, and many flocked to his lessons, of all degrees. He for his
labor was burned quick, for that was now become the stipend of truth,
how-be-it it had been as clear as the sun, if the pope of Rome allowed it
not. Notwithstanding the fall of his Master, one Henry his scholar took the
(...) in hand, and boldly sustained i^. Their followers, which were many, and
the more be the cruel handling of Peter (for sanguis sanctorum semen
ecclesiae, the the blood of the saints, is the ^eede of the Church) were in
dispi^e called Petro-Brucianes, and Henricianes, as these men are ever reddie
to nik-name whosoever dissents from them. About the same time, there was an
abhot in an other part of France, I cannot find the name of the place, and a
priest at Lismoore in England of the same opinion* The centuries calls them
sacramentaries that they might no more go without a nikname, then their
fellows. About the year, one thousand one hundredth and three score, there was
in Lions one Waldus a Merchant, for wealth and wisdom of good account. This
man walking in the fields, for repast as some writes, or on the counsel of
the town as other records, saw one in the company fall down dead. With
which spectacle entering into a deep speculation of the frailty of this life,
and the vanity of our cares s^t on a thing so fraill, he turned his studies
to provide for the life that lasts without end. Wherefore he got him a
Bible which book in those times was rare in the hands of the Laity, and not
so frequent in the hands of the Clergy, as worse books: and like the man in
the gospel ^o buy the Jewel of the kingdom of heaven, spent the rest of his
travels (for he was learned) to seek out of it the true water of life. The
thing which he learned him self, he imparted to his family and catechized
it. His manner of teaching was so familiare, and effectual, that sundry of his
neighbors, resorted to his house to hear him. This congregation grew
frequent, and the priests grew angry. Wherefore like dogs in a manger, that
neither can eat the hay, nor will let the horse, they charged him, to let
that labor alone, and not to put his hook in their harvest, except he would
do worse. The man carried more with conscience, which straited him; then caring
for their boaste, whom he saw do no other good, but roar in a Church:
followed his godly course, and his neighbors for all the fear refrained not
his house. Whereupon they excommunicated and cursed him with bell, book, and
candle, and al his followers, and confiscated al their substance. There they
sundred some seeking this way, and some that, where they could find any
succor: and woone where ever they came the praises of good life, and godly
learning, being named commonly in way of pity, pauperes Lugdunenses, the
poor of lions, as they were in deed stripped out of al and left as pure as
Irus. Some of them went into Lombardy, some into Boheme, and some settled at
home in Province, Guien, Langue^ock, etc. In Bohem being delated to the King
be ane Doctor Austine, they wrote to him a confession of their faith most
sound, and Catholic, mistake me not, I mean not Roman Catholic, but that
which Christ delivered to his Apostles, and the Apostles to the Church, and the
Church to this hour has kept pure, and clean, as they received it, and
unmingled, with the dregs of man's wit. But to our purpose, they who settled
at home got noe long rest. They were daily and heauely persecuted, by the
Bishopes Arelatensis, Narbonensis, Aquensis, and Albanensis. They possessed two
towns called Cabriers, and Merindoll till our days, that is to say, till the
year, one thousand five hundredth forty five, and the veil of Angroingu^. The
Bishope had accused the^ to the Parliment of Aix for defection from the
Catholic faith. The Parliment had given out sentence that they should have
been destroyed, man, woman, and child. And their Towns, and Trees, euerted be
the roots. This bloody sentence, lay over five years, and was once
attempted be the President Casson, and afterwa^de forbidden be the King, as
over c^uell against innocent people. At last one Mineres, Lord of Opede, a
bloody tyrant, and their merciless enemy, at the request of the Bishope,
delated them to ye King falsely, that they were all in arms against his
Majesty, and be moyen of the Cardinal Turnonius, got the Kings letters
patent, to take the forces provided for the English wars, to meet them. This
bloody monster, atchiued with cruelty the thing, which he had begun with
a lie, and put to the sword, those two towns, and two and twenty villages
about, without mercy of sex, or age. It were horrible and tedious to tell the
perticulares. Let them who would know that, read Sl^idan or she book of
Martyrs. Only for a taste: he burned forty women, in a barn, of which,
many were with child* The like cruelty was used against the rest of them in
Piedmo^t and in Valleys of Angroing, Lucern, Perouse, and Saint Martynes.
About the same time, Anno one thousand five hundredth forty five. Thus were
that innocent people with the great regrate of their neighbors, destroyed
among whom the Lord till then had preserved to himself a Church, worshipping
and serving him, according to his own word. Now having deduced this doctrine
to our own times, it remains to open the hidden mines, through the which
these men has drawn this rotten water, as out of the well of life, wherewith
this eight hundredth years they have poisoned many milliones of souls.

The foundation that they lay to raze this monstrous work on, is the words
of the institution. This is my body* which is broken for you. To mentaine in
these words a literal sense, they pervert the true sense, of many places of
scripture, and to null a figure in this place, they force many monstrous
figures on other places, they deny common sense, they pervert nature, and at
one word, they mingle heaven and ^arth together. Before I buckle with their
arguments, I hope this reason shall satisfy any mind, that will hear reason,
that these words are not evident enough, to lead our faith to such a
monstrous (...). Noe scripture that will (...) anad^^^t ^ther meaning is of
^ufficient importance to lead the heart of a Christian, to a persuasion
contrary to sense, and abhorring from nature. But these words of the
institution, will bear an other meaning. Ergo, these words of the institution,
are not of sufficient importance, to lead the heart of a Cristian to a
persuasion contrary to sens^, and abhorring from nature. That the words will
bear an other meaning, admitting both a figure, and the letter, is proved
already. That the persuasion is monstrous no man sees not. That ^eeing
breead, feeling bread, and tasting bread it is not bread, which thou eatest,
but the very flesh of Christ, which thou neither see, feel, nor tastest,
is against sense. To rend with thy teethe, and put down into thy foul
belly, the precious body of Christ, which was broken for thy sins, beside
Cannibal cruelty, were impious inhumanitie. And therefore the scripture, that
must induce the faith to believe a thing so contrary to faith should be
single, simple, pregnant, and uncontrollable. And now to their arguments.

The first is, that all sacraments should consist of simple, M, John hammilto^
con,
and plain words without ambiguitie, but figurative words, are not plain
and simple without ambig^itie. Ergo, Sacraments should not consist of figurative
words. First this argument destroys utterly the nature of a Sacrament.
For as August. teaches, all Sacraments are visible signs, of vnvisible
graces, that is seen figures of graces, which are not seen. As for plainness,
figurative speeches are many times playner then they, which are without all
figure. As for the words whereon we stand, there is no speech more usual,
when men presents themselves be lots, then this is I, and that is thou.
Mistake me not, I have proved alredie sufficiently, that the sacrament is not a
naked figure. As for ambiguitie, will these men set the eternal word of GOD
to the school, and ^each him to speak? What if the spirit of God will have
his word so tempered, that it may be the sauoure of life, to them that live,
and the sauoure of death to them that dye. Doubtless his sheep knows his
voice, and he goes in and out before them. He makes them rest in green
pastores, and leads them to the still waters As for his enemies, he has
tempered their cup with galle, and mad^ the word of life to be a block in
their way. He has left ambiguities for heritickes to waken his Church out of
the dream of security. It is good (says he,) that offenses be: but woe to
them be whom they come. And in this point it is a wonder, to see how God
has infatuated the ^ense of these men, to seek a knot in a rushe, and to
force a senseless sense on his word against sense.

Secondly out of the same words they make this argument. That which Christ
divyded amongst his disciples, was his body broken for them. But his essential
body was broken for them. Ergo, that which he divided among his disciples, was
his essential body. All this we confess to be most true, as our Savior spoke
it, that is sacramentallie. That which he divided amongst his desciples was
sacramentally or figuratiuelye his body, which was broken for them, that is
his real and essential body in a figure but not be transubstantiation or
mutation of the bread into his body.

Thirdely, they urge hard this letter I am the bread that came down from
heaven. Joan, 6,
And again, my flesh is meat in deed, gathering that therefore his
essential body is in the sacrament. This enthymem I have done what I can, to
cast into a syllogisticall moulde, for I wou^defaine play fair play, and
displaye their arguments in their best geere. But it will not be for me
without a manifest, and seen blemish. Yet if it can be (for I acknowledge my
own weakness) the answer is clear, and reddie. Christ's flesh is the meare
of the soul, and not of the body, of the mind, and not of the mouth. It is
eaten be hearing, De res^^ carnis
chawed be understanding, and digested be faith, says Tertullian. This our
Savior teaches him self, who knew it better then the pope without saving his
holiness, and all the Jesuits to help him. I am the bread of life (says
he) he that comes to me shall not hunger, Joan ^ 53
and he that believes in me shall never thirst. Out of which words this
argument flows. To come to Christ and believe in him, is to eat the bread
of life, that thou never hunger nor thirste again. But to come to Christ, and
believe in him is not to eat with thy tethe the real flesh of Christ, which
was borne of the Virgin Marie. Ergo, to eat the real flesh of Crhiste which
was borne of the Virgin Marie with thy tee^h^, is not to eat the bread of
life, that thou never hunger nor thirst a gain. (...) 48,
And a little after, he that believes in me has everlasting life. I am the
bread of life. Which Syllogism adding the proposition, may have this form.
Whosoever believes in the bread of life has everlasting life. But I am the
bread of life. Ergo, Whosoever believes in me has everlasting life, where
you ^ee believing for eating. But that which follows in the rebuke of them,
who took him to speak of a carnal, and fleshly eating is most pregnant. It
is the spirit which quickneth: (...), 63
the flesh profits no thing: the words that I speak are spirit; and truth:
That is to say it is the spiritual eating of my flesh, that quickneth, and
gives life: the fleshlye and carnal eating of it, can do you no good. For my
words are spiritu^ll and lively, that is effectual to life. In all that cap.
he that will mark attentively shall find that whole discourse with the
c^pernaites to be spiritual: and the difference between them and him, to be
their carnal concept, of his spiritual words. He shall find the meat
spiritual: the life that it feeds spiritual: and the teethe that eats
spiritual. There he shall find, verse* 53*
that he that eateeth not his flesh has no life in him, verse, 47,
that is, verse, 33.
no spiritual life: and he that believes in him has eternal life, that is
to eat the bread of life that came down from heaven, and gives life unto
the world.

Thirdlye, cap, ^* sect, ^,
Master Rainolds against Master Robert Bruce reasons thus. Christ's body
is there present, where it is broken. But it is broken in the sacrament. Ergo,
it is present in the Sacrament. To the maiore we answer that it is present in
the Sacrament, as it is broken in the Sacrament. But it is broken only in a
figure, and therefore is present only in a figure. But to the faithful Christ
presents in deed be a divine communication with the Sacrament his very body
to feed the soul. But if he were bodily in the Sacrament, then the wicked
would also participate his body: which thing Christ himself denies, in Joan.
c. 6. v. 56,

Fourthly. Exodus 24, 8 (...) 22 2^
the same man in the same place reasons out of the words of Moses concerning
the old couenante, and the words of Christ concerning the new thus. That
whereof Christ spoke is the blood of the new Testament, as ^ whereof Moses
spoke, was the blood of the old. But y^ whereof Moses spoke was the very
blood of the old Testament. Ergo, that whereof Christ spoke, was the very
blood of the new Testament. Of this argument, we deny the minor. The blood of
both covenants wa^ one, the blood of Christ Jesus, who made the union in the
old Law, between god and them, and makes the union in the new Testament
between god and us. The blood of be^es in the old testament, was not the very
blood of the covenant. And therefore this man has found a knife, to cut his
own throat. The wine of the new Testament is the blood of the new
covenant, as the blood of^ beues and sheep, was the blood of the old
covenant. But the blood of beues and sheep, was not the very blood of the
old covenant, but a figure thereof. Ergo, the wine in the new Testament, was
not the very blood of the covenant, but a figure thereof.

Lastly, they cast up to us incredulity, and not believing the omnipotency of
Christ. M, John hammilto^ of the L. supper
They bear the world in hand that we denying Christ to turn the bread
into his body, are more incredilous then sath^n, who believed, that he could
make bread of stones. To cast this sweet simile into the teethe that it came
from: These men are as captious as the devil. He reasoned a potentiae ad
actum, If thou art the Son of GOD command that these stones be made bread:
they follow the same ^rade: he was the son of God* Ergo, he changed the
bread into his flesh. The question is not hear, what Christ could do, but
what he would do. We know and confess as well, as they, that Christ can do
what he will: but will not do all that he can. To prove that Christ's will was
to do a thing* (as I have said) so contrarious to nature, and so refuted be
sense, it behooves the testimony to be without exception: That Christ was
borne of a virgin, that he walked on the waters, that he turned water into
wine, (these are the exemples of their induction) the spirit of truth that
cannot lie, has t^stified in plain terms. If that spirit had testified as
plainly, that in his last Supper he turned the bread into his body, and
left nothing to our taste; but accidents, we should believe this as well as
that, and be Gods good help have stood as surely to it, as all the Jesuits
since the first Jesuit Ignatius Laiola.

But seeing these proofs are no^ thing, but figured scriptures turned to their
naked skin: we hope that all Christians will abhore that ugly sin, to rend
with merciless teethe, his flesh, that has borne the horror of hell, M, John
hammil^on ibid.
^o purchase mercy to us.

Hear they would feign buckle on us an absurdity out of the words of the
institution, which we may not pass by. In the worde^, This is my body which
was broken for you. The prononne (this) demonstrateth that which was broken for
the sins of the elect. But in our opinidion the pronoune (this) demonstrateth
the bread. Whereof (say they) it will follow, that bread was broken for the
sins of the elect. First the maiore is not true, for the pronoune (this)
demonstrates not the thing, but the figure of the thing, tha was broken for the
elect Secondly, there is a part of the maiore left out of the conclusion,
which should have been, expresse^: Ergo, the bread is the body which was
broken for y^ elect, which conclusion is true in a figure. And hear it is a
world to see the blindness of these men: for of their li^erall sense, this
absurdity will follow without a ward. The pronoune (this) demonstrates, that
which was broken for the elect. But the pronoune (this) demonstrates, the body
of Christ under the shape of bread. Ergo, the body of Christ under the shape
of bread, was broken for the elect.

This is al to my remembrance, which they can draw from the scriptures. with
any show of reason, or probability. But hear to get more elbowe-roome, and m^e
startling holes, they appeal to the Church, and all writers of all ages. A
large forest in deed, where their is many bushes to hide a lie. First for the
Church, they will prese us to accept the Church of Rome. If they had any such
promise as Jerusalem has many, that. The spirit of the Lord should never
depart from her: and that he would set his tabernacle their for ever: the
world would be over little to hold them. But seeing Jerusalem is fallen
not-with-standing these promises: we may well doubt of Rome that has no
promise. And seeing Rome has had 7. Kings, was set on seven hills, was
drunken and is drunken with the blood of the saints, and was the great city
which reigned over the Kings of the earth: it is very suspicious that she is
the seat of the scarlet whore. And therefore let them set their hearts at
rest: for we will not admit the shadow of her name. As for the writters of
all ages we will not refuse them on certain conditiones. We acknowledge the
scriptures the only well of truth and life. If any man bring us water out of
their cesterns we have example of him that sent us to the scriptures only, to
suspect poison, We will ken noe strange fire that is no new doctrine in the
Lords sanctuary, without the warrant of the wo^de of truth. For we count
(...) authority of man, no not of all men sufficient to give laws to the
conscience. Only God is Lord over i^, and able to con^roll i^. He that sees
not the heart, can not bind the heart to any law, if these men, who would
so feign lay on us the yocke of man's authority, can produce one man with
warrant from him, that made man not to be a man, that is, in no thing to err,
and be disceaued. we will take his word. when we have seen, and tried his
warrant. But if he dwells in neighbor row among his brethren: they must
pardon us to try his gold with the true tuich stone, which cannot deceive,
nor be disceaued. Of this mind was August. that he would try all men's
writtinges, ad (...) epist, ^.
were their names never so Catholic be the scriptures* and wishes others to
do the like with his. On this condition then we will admit the testimonies of
men, to prove that this light (as I have said) be Christ and his Apostles,
once kindled in the Church, for all that his enemies could do, was never
extinguished since. For the Church of God his true spouse may be banished to
the wilderness: but never utterly destroyed. It is true that our adversaries
hear, musters the names of the fathers, and bragges of al antiquity. It would
be long and tedious to examine all their particulare allegations. Therefore to
be short, I will set down two observations, which cutteth off what ever
seems to make for them for six hundredth years after Christ, of which I have
touched the one alredie, declaring the causes, how transubstantiation crap into
the hearts of men. That is, that it is our part, when we receive these holy
mysteries, to lift our senses so from the elements, that we never let it enter
into our thoughts, that we receive bread and wine: but assure our
consciences, that Christ be the secret ministry of his divinity does feed
our souls with the true bread of his body to et^rnall life. in Genel, ^omil,
24,
That is, that which Chrysostom teaches. Oculifidei. quando vident haec in
effabilia bona, ne sentiunt quidem h^c visibilia. When the eyes of ^aith
beholds these unspeakable good things, they no ways feel the sensible
things, which are set before them. This then being hard for our senses to
mount above their own objects, and to set their intention on graces so
insensible to our corrupted instruments: the fathers to stir up this
spiritual consideration in us, faleth out many times in hyperbolycall
speeches, which they neither meant them selves, nor any man of indifferent
judgment considering ye drift of their words can suspect to have been their
meaning. In this form Hierom says. In Psalm 97
Christus nobis quotidie crucifigitur. Christ is daily crucified unto us.
Gregory says. De conse^ distinct 2 quid sit*
Christus iterum in hoc mysterio moritur, eius caro in populi salutem patitur.
Christ dies in this Sacrament: his flesh suffers again for the life of the
people. Chrysostom says, In his mysteriis mors Christi per^icitur. In Act hom
2^
In these mysteries the death of Christ is perfited. August. says, Vos estis
in mensa, vos estis in calice. You are on the boorde, De conse, dist^nct 2 quia
pass,
you are in the cup. Chrysostom in an other place says, Ecce agu^m dei
mactatum a principi^ mundi: De sace^^ lib, 3.
I am hauriture latere eius sanguis: I am ^otus populus eius sanguine sparsus
et r^bore persusus est. Behold the Lamb of God slain from the beginning.
Even now the blood is drawn out of his side: even now the whole people is
sprinkled with his blood and spotted with the redness thereof. Who can be so
gross headed as to think that these men did mean as they spoke: That Christ
is crucified, that Christ is slain again: that Christ suffers in the
Sacrament; that the blood is drawn out of his side, and that the people are
sprinkled and made red there with. Seeing then the fathers are sometimes
extraordinary in this kind of amplification: we would pray the modest and
discrete reader, when he meets with such speeches in them, either in his own
rerding, or alleged be the adversary, to weigh them with their own
circumstances, and other places of the same authors, to see if they have any
hyperbolicall weight, to settle them deeper into the heart of the hearer. The
other thing which I would commend to the discretion of the reader is the name
(nature) which is not always taken for substance, b^t sundry times for the
natural power, virtue, or use of things. So Chrysostom says of Elizaeus
potuit vndarum mutare naturam, vt ferrum sustinere cogeret. De virt^e^ vit,
^om, 5.
He had power to change the nature of the water, and to force it to bear iron.
Where you see that the water was not changed into a more solid body, but the
natural liquiditie was altered that against nature it stood together, and bore
the iron. So speaks Ciril of the water in Baptism. Quem admodum viribus
ignis intentius califacta aqua, In Joan lib, 2, cap 42,
non aliter, quam ignis vrit: sic spritus sancti operatione, aquae ad diuinam
reformantur naturam. As water who^e be the power of the fire burns as sore
as fire it self: so the water be the working of gods spirit is changed to a
heavenly nature* I am persuaded that these men will not say that the substance
of the water is also changed in Baptism into the blood of Christ, how-be-it
the reason be as good to say this as that. Be these examples I would have
the circumspect reader warned, that when he reads in any of the fathers, that
the nature of the bread is changed in the Sacrament he take it not for
substance always. I will give the an example or two of the most peremptory
places that these men has, and which may beg^^le a wise and circumspect
reader. Harding against Jewel alleadges out of C^prian these words. Panis
iste, Articul 10 sect 2,
quem dominus discipulis porrigebat, non effigi^, sed natura mutatus
omnipotentia verbi factus est caro. This bread which the Lord gave to his
disciples changed not in shawe, but in nature be the omnipotency of the word
was made bread. Where first note that he calls it bread, which he gave
his disciples, which thing, as this day, were heresy in Rome. Secondly, that
he says not the substance of the bread is changed: but the nature of it,
which being created to feed the body of man to temporal life, is now changed
be the omnipotency of the word, that is Christ, to feed the soul to
eternal life. Thirdelye, where he says the bread was made flesh it proves
not a cha^ging of the one substance into the other. Cap 1
For John says of the son of God. that the word was made flesh, which
not-withstanding was not turned into flesh. Lastly, the hyperbole of the
omnipotency of the word sundry of the fathers uses of the water in
Baptisine, which abides water still, and is not changed into the blood of
Christ. Beda says, In octa^^ epiphan
Panis, et vini creatura in sacramentum ^arnis, et sanguinis Christi ineff
abili spiritus sanctificatione transf^rtur. The creature of bread and wine, be
the unspeakable sanctification of the spirit is translated to the Sacrament of
Christ's body and blood. Where you see as hyperbolicall words, not to change
the bread and wine into the body, and blood of Christ, but into the Sacrament
of his body and blood.

Master William Rainold, against Master Robert Bruce, Cap ^ sect 5
alleges two places out of Ambrose, which being weighed in these
confiderations will prove no transubstantiation. De iis qui untiantur cap. 9
Ambrose comparing the efficacy of Christ's words with the words of Elias, at
last concludes if his words were of such force that they caused fire to come
down from heaven: shall not Christ's speech be of sufficient force, to alter
the nature of the elements. First the Latin word (which he interprets
nature, is species elementorum, The shapes of the elements which it is certain
to the sense remains unchanged, and so the words bears a manifest
hyperbole. It is true that Ambrose in that place uses sundry high
amplifications, not to persuade the bread, to be transubstantiated into the
essential body of Jesus Christ, but from the authority and power of the
consecratoure, to settle into the hearts of men, a dreadefull account of the
consecration. That this is his drift, it is plain in the same place, Where he
says, ante benedictionem rerborum coelestium alia species nominatur, post
consecrationem corpus Christi significatur: Before the celestial blessing, an
other form is named, after consecration Christ's body is signified (says he)
not in deed transubstantiated. For that which does signify his body, can not
be the same thing which it signifies.

In the other place, De sacr^, lib, 4, cap, (...)
Ambrose teaches that the consecration is made be the words of Christ, the
self same whereby all things were created, and after a long induction
concludes, it was not the body, but bread before secration: but after when
Christ's words came there to, then was it the body of Christ. (and adds) thou
see then how many ways, the speech of Christ is able to change all things.
This long induction of Christ's power (as I have said) is to noe other end
but be the powerful consecration of the elements, to settle a resolute
persuasion in our hearts of Christ's presence, which is the unseen subject of
our faith. That Ambrose knew not transubstantiation of the elements, it is
plain in that same cap: also. Where he says, Si tantavis in sermon domini
fuit, vt inciperentesse, quae non ^rant, quanto magis operatorius est, vt sin^
quae erant, et in aliud commutentur. If there was such power in the word of
the Lord, to make things begin to be that they were not: how much more
powerful is it to make things bide that which they were before, and to be
changed into an other. Where note that he says the bread, and wine abides the
thing, which they were, that is, bread and wine, which these men denies. And
a little after ward he says, similitudinem pretiosi sanguinis bibis. Thou
drinkest the l^kenesse of that precious blood. In the cap. following also he
calls it figura corporis, et sanguinis, A figure of the body and blood of
our Savior Jesus Christ. If Ambrose had thought the elements of bread, and
wine, to be the essential and real body of Christ, he would never have
called them similitudes, and figures thereof. If these men would buckle that
opinion on Ambrose, or any other father, let them produce him in his
monstrous colors of accidents, without their natural subjects, and
subjects without their natural accidents, and substance changed into
substance. For we are surely persuaded that transubstantiation was never
believed before these strange theoremes were universally received. And if they
cannot find these theoremes, which must have rung in all the pulpits and
schools, if that doctrine had been received, before the counsel of Rome,
which condemned Berengarius: let them pardon us to think that, that doctrine
was not till the^ known in the own complexion. To conclude this matter of the
fathers: it is no wonder, that these men presum^^g on the ignorance of their
readers, draw the amplifications of the fathers to their bent: seeing they
blush not to take Calvin, and Master Robert Bruce, whom all men knows to
dissent from them at such stottes. Master Rainolds, Cap, ^ sect, 2
quoteth out of Caluines instituti^ns four or five places, which if he had
written a thousand years before, would make a greater show for their
transubstantiation, then any thing that father Robert Bellarmine, has found
among all the fathers, and more pregnant then these places, which I have
answered of Cyprian, and Ambrose. The first is in the mystery of the Supper
(says Calvin) Christ, Insti^u^. 4, lib cap, 17 sect, 10, (...), 11.
that is Christ's body, and blood, be the signs of bread and wine is truly
delivered unto us. And al-be-it it may seem incredible, that in such distance
of places, he should pass down to us: Yet let us remember how far his
power exceeds our sense, and that our mind cannot comprehend, let our faith
conceive. Ibid, sect 31,
Again, in his holy supper, he wills me under the symboles of bread and
wine to take, eat, and drink his body and blood: I no thing doubt, but he
truly gives it, and I receive it. The like ^e plays with Master Robert
Bruce. Cap, 6, sect, ^,
To the end (says Master Robert) that this sacrament may nourish thee to
life everlasting, Thou must receive in it thy whole Savior, whole Christ, GOD
and man, without separation of his substance from his graces, Ibid, sect ^
or of one nature from an other. And again, It is not enough to see Christ in
heaven be faith: but he must be given to us, or else he can not work health
and salvation in us. These places he quotes, and sundry others as pregnant as
these, not that he would have it thought that these men did believe
transubstantiation: but producing other places of theirs, against
transubstantiation to stayne their constancy with contradiction. But if
Ignatius had wrote these words within one hundredth years after Christ: Had
they not been as purpose-like, as the words which I have answered page. 40. Or
if Cyprian or Ambrose had written them what had they been behind the places*
which I have even now answered In which practice it may appear that al is not
gold y^ these men can make glister. And y^ al men means not ^ran
substantiation. whose words these men can make sound that tune. As for
Calvin, or Beza, or Master Robert Bruce, it is as easy for men of this
faculty to qualify any thing written be them against this heresy, saving
the denying the name of transubstantiation, and other new the oremes, which
the fathers never hard of: As sundry places of the fathers which our men has
alleged against them. In which it would set ones teethe an edge to see their
shifts, August. means not this: Cipryan speaks not that: nor no father
what ever he says, speaks any thing. but that which they put in his
mouth, howbeit, he never knew any such thing as they father on him. For
example, Master Robert Bruce alleges in his Sermon the place of August. which
I have cited page, 20. to prove the words of John: Except ye eat of the flesh
of the son of man figurative. Out of which words thus it may be gathered.
All script^^^ which seems to command a foul dead, is figurative and not
literal. For that is August. drift, in all that place teaching to know the
scripture, where it implies a figure, and where not. But this scripture,
Except you eat the fl^she of the son of man etc. S^emeth to command a foull
deed. Ergo, this scripture, Except you eat the flesh of the son of man etc.
Is figurative, and not literal. To this Master Rainolds answers with a
boulde face, as if it straited them not. Saint August. Cap, 19 (...), ^.
words answers them selves: and so he does in other places, and even hear
the second place an^wereth the first: because it notifyeth how far forth
this speech is figurative. Only this may be added to the first etc and the
rest of it, no thing to the purpose. This answer would trouble as good a
wit as his that made it to understand it. For my part I must confess my
ignorance except his meaning be that August. would have this place partly
figurative, and partlye plain for so his words sounds how far forth
these words are figurative. If this be his meaning, it is an other new lesson
such as nature never bred. August. that silly man had never been at this
school. In all that book De doctrina Christana he knows no other senses of
words but figurative, or proper. The words of Christ, Except you eat the
flesh of the son of man* he denies to be proper, and so concludes them to
be figurative. Now comes in Master Wiliam Rainoldes with how far
figurative: as if they might be three or four inches in the tope, or the
bottom figurative, and all the rest of them proper. This is strange
divinity. It may go in the Church of Rome, among their false miracles: but
we admit noe miracles now, and therefore Master William Rainlods, must
make this place either all together figurative, as does August. or else
altogether proper which August. denies. Let him lay his hand to his heart,
and take which he will. Marie if he will take that which August. denies, he
must pardon us to follow Aug. and let him go.

Now having deduced this cause to our own times, and opened how these men
pulls the mouths of the fathers aside, to make them speak their fantasies:
it remains, because I hear that some men braggeth of Master Will. Rainolde
his sharpnes against Master Robert Bruce, to lay open his quicknes: For my
part I wonder what sharpness they see, except it be ye bitterness of an
unclean mouth, spitting not only on the men that he deals with, and never
saw* the galle of an uncircumcised heart^^ but also tantinglye scoffing at
Chri^^es blessed ordinance, Cap, 3* sect, 1
calling it a beggarly bitt of bread, which vnreuere^t word, could never
have fallen from a heart that reverenced Christ's institution, how ever men
might misuse it. But to let alone his bitterness, and taste his sharpnes.

Master Robert Bruce reasons thus. Cap, 18, sect, 1,
No finit body can be at one time in sundry places. Christ's body even now
glorified is finite. Ergo, Christ's body now glorified can not be in sundry
places at once. To this and other two arguments takin from visibility, and
palpability, he answers without any authority, but his own, That these
things are no more necessary to the body of a man, then to eat, drink,
sleep, rest, increase, decrease, and wear to corruption. Now mark his
sharpness, to eat, drink sleep, etc. are no longer necessary to a man's
body, then it lives a life subject to alterationes. But to be finite,
visible, and palpable, are necessary to a body being dead, risen again, and
even glorified in the kingdom of heaven. Our Savior after his resurrection,
was seen of more then five hundredth. Thomas and sundry others felt him, and
when he was at Emaus with the two disciples: he was not in Jerusalem with the
other nine, for as near as it was: and when he was in Jerusalem with the
eleven, he was not in Ierico nor no other place of Judea nor of the world.
And here the ingenious reader may see, that his sharp answer shuts
beside the mark, and hitteth no part of the argument.

To three places of August. Ad Da^d In Joan tract, 3,
that the body which is not in some place, is not at all. That the body, in
which the Lord rose, must be in some place. And that all bodies be they great
or small must be in some place. To one he answers, that he speaks of
common bodies: to an other that he speaks no^ of Christ's body in the
sacrament. This last is easy to be believed. Augustine never thought
Christ's real body as it was borne of the Virgin Marie, to be in the bread
of the sacrament: and therefore it is liklie that he spoke not, of the thing,
which he knew not. Yet this man says, that he every where acknowledges it,
but produces no where. Thou have hard August. In Psalm, 98
say page 28. that they who receaueth the sacrament, eats not the body,
which his disciples saw, And page 18. that Christ doubted not to say. This
is my body. When he gave the figure of his body. And therefore I would pray
thee, not to take Master Will. Rainolds naked word against seen proof. If he
can produce one where of this every where, where Aug. says plainly, that the
body of Christ is in the Sacrament as it hanged on the Cross, I shall give
him my hand. That Christ is in the Sacrament we grant and places out of
August. or any other to that effect makes no thing against us, nor no thing
for their presence flesh blood, and bone. The scripture teaches of Christ,
that he was like us in all things, sin only excepted: and so his body
must be in all things like our bodies. Now in the place quoted be Master
Robert Bruce Saint August. speaks of all bodies in general, and therefore of
Christ's body also even in the sacrament, if it were in the sacrament. And
hear I would pray the reader, to mark a trick of Roman Logic, to have
no exception from an universal axiom, but only the thing in question where of
the doubt is whether it be or not.

To a text out of the Acts of the Apostles, Acts, ^ verse, (...)
that the he auens must contain Christ till all things be restored, he
answers with a perhapes (such credit these men gives to the eternal truth)
that it may prove Christ's body to be in heaven: but that it is no where
else, he utterly denies it to prove, Cap, 1^ sect, ^
except it be in the reprobate sense of a sacramentarie. This you see is well
said to it. And yet for all this boulde face, I hope this argument will hold
in the sanctified sense of a chosen Christian. He that says the finite body
of Christ is in heaven, denies it to be any where else. But Peter in this
place says, that The finite body of Christ is in heaven. Ergo Peter in this
place denies the body of Christ to be in any other place, till all things be
restored. etc. This answer it seems that he mistrusted, and therefore flees
to a better shift, and denies the text. The words are translated verbatim out
of the greek and latin also. For in these words the fintax of both languages
agrees. Hon dei ton our anon dechesthai. Quem opertet caelum capere. Whom the
heavens must contain. In deed they are not thral in english to the
perverseness of a wrangler, as they are in greek and latin. If that be a falt
it is the falt of the language, and not of the translator. And therefore that
these words were never spoken be Peter, nor written be Luke: but forged be
Master Robert, or some phanaticall brother of his sect: is a thudde of Master
Rainold his choler, which many times blows louder then his love. As to the
English Bible of King Edwardes time we are not bound to it. That Christ
must contain the heavens until the time that all things be restored, which
he must contain also after that restitution, is over impertinent and improper
a sense to shoulder out the other lyeing so plain to the words, and
containeing an assertion, that the aduersari^ can not deny. Moreover it is to
be marked that to bring in that sense, the accusative Onranon which praeceedeth
the verb, must violently be cast behind the verb, which thing to avoid an
inconvenience were tolerable: but to bring in a nedlesse and imperfect sense
is perverseness.

Next Master Robert reasons. Cap, 1^ sect, 3
Every human body is visible, and palpable. Christ's body if it be in the
Sacrament is a humane body. Ergo Christ's body if it be in the sacrament, is
visible, and palpable, This argument he calls the weakest of all, for it is a
part of these men's faculty to cry when they are sorest bitten, that they
feel no thing. But I hope to make this argument stick as fast to their
skin, as the best in the pack. Luk, 24 verse, 39
To our Savior (says he) to prove the verity of his body, this argument
was forcible* but to Master Robert to prove the negative that Christ's body
is not in the sacrament it has no force at all. And this he exemplifyeth in
his spiteful manner with A. B. a minister that preaches heresy (he might have
taken William Rainoldes for example, for except I am deceived he was a
minister, or at least a preacher of that, which now he calls heresy) of
whom it will follow (says he) affirmatiuly that he is an heriticke: but of
that he is no minister, and preaches no heresy, it will not follow that he
is no heretic. But his simile, if he had any of that sharpness, with which
some slandereth him, holds not. It is common to all humane bodies to be
visible, and palpable but it is not common to all heritikes to to be ministers,
and preachers. But that M. Roberts argument holds both negatiuely and
affirmatively, thus I prove. All negatiues of inseparable accidents proves the
negative of the subject. But visibilitie, and palpabilitie are inseparable
accidents of a humane body. Ergo, the negative of visibilitie, and
palpabilitie, proves the negative of a humane body. This argument, for as
weak as it is, it will pass the cunning of all the Jesuits in Rome, and
Remes to answer without an instance in the question, that the natural body
of Christ in the sacrament, is neither visible, nor palpable. Which assertion
is contrary to sense, damned be reason, and without warrant of the word,
except an ambiguous place which I have proved the fathers for 500. years to
have taken figuratiuelye. If any amongst them believes the fable of Gyges his
ringe which he there alleges let them believe lies, that will. We admit no
such proof in matters theological.

After this Master Robert alleges the articles of the Belief, not as an
other argument, then that of Peter in the third of the Acts, as this wrangler
pretends: but as an other testimonye against their monstrous presence. The
argument is the same that before. That Christ seeing he is in heaven, is not
in the Sacrament. To eleuat this place, this wrangler alleges Calvines
interpretation of sitting at the right hand of God: and supposes Master
Robert to gather his conclusion thereupon, that therefore, because he has all
power given him in heaven, and earth, he is not in the sacrament. But this is
wrong libelled, he leaves out the tongue of the trumpe, and then scorneth,
because it will not play. Master Roberts argument is, that Christ is in
heaven, at the right hand of his father, as it is in the belief. Ergo he is
not chowed, and champed amongst the teethe of men in the Sacrament. The force
of the argument is not from his sitting, at the right hand of his father: but
from his being in heaven. And there fore Caluins interpretation of his fitting
at the right hand of his father, is an untimely birthe. The same way he
misshapeth the argument of the Acts but of that alredie.

Lastly, he answers three places of John, with an answer, and that (as we
say) 1^, 28, ^17, 11, 14, 12, ^, 16,
hough inoughe. The first place is I leave the world and go to my father.
The second is, I am no more in the world. The third is, I go to my father,
and will pray ^im to send an other comforter to abide with you. All this he
answers, that Christ be the world means his conversation in the world
with men, to give or take any bodily help, as he did before his pa^sion. It
is true that be the world he may mean that: but that he means that only,
is as untrue. For he left the world, as he went to his father: so the text
speaks plainlye. But he went to his father body, and soul. Ergo he left
the world, and as he speaks in the second place, he is no more in the world
body and soul. The last place yealdeth an other argument, which how-be-it he
is answered sufficientlye, yet I can not omit. Christ going to his father, did
not that in his humanity, which he sent the other comforter to do. But he
sent the other comforter to abide with them for ever. Ergo Christ in his
manhood bideth not with them, that is with his Church for ever ^ which he most
needs do if he were daily received in the Sacrament.

The 19. cap. he begins with a great contempt of the arguments which he is
to deall with. Calling them Judicial, heritical, and founded upon manifest
lies some derogatorie to Christ's glory, and all without pith or power. The
peevish ignorance whereof (as he speaks in the former chap.) he imputes to
Master Robert, as the only author of them. M. Robert is better known
amongst them, to whom I write, then that the lauishing tongue of a railing
Roman priest, whose mouth runs over with ye venom, of the whoores c^ppe,
can impair an hair-breadth of his name. As for the arguments, which he in
spyte calls peevish, there is in them more quickness, and sound pith to
bear the conclusion through all the Popes seminaries: than there is color of
probability in all Master Reinolds book a capite ad calcem, that is, from
the first word before, to the last word for ever. But to the purpose.

The first is. Of an unseen and unheard ^orporall presence, no spiritual
effect can flow (for that is Master Rob. meaning) But the effect of the
sacrament is spiritual: Ergo the effect of the sacrament can not flow from an
unseen, and unheard corporal presence. This argument is in festino in the
second figure. so the mayor and the minor this Priest like a Doctor of the
Popes divinity makes no answer. The conclusion he condem neth of Iudaisme, as
making as strongly against the incarnation, death, and passion of our Savior.
I would rather there were neither Pope, nor Cardinal in the world, then that
were true. Christ came in the flesh to do a bodily work, not only a
spiritual. To perform the law, to plant the gospel, to suffer death, and at
a word, to offer sacrifice after the order of melchisedech were works to be
performed in our flesh. And so it was of necessity that he took our flesh
subject to injuries, sickness, death, and all the illes that hell, and death
could inflict. But Christ in the Sacrament has no bodelie work to do: and
therefore needs no body in the Sacrament to effect the whole work of the
Sacrament. This argument for as peuish and pithlesse as it pleased Master
Rainoldes to call it, let him do what he can will leave noe room in the
Sacrament for Christ's real body.

The second is that if the bread and wine are changed into the body, and
blood of Christ: there remains noe sign of feeding, and nourishing, which
is a thing necessary to the essence of a Sacrament. This argument he calls
false in every pa^te, and parcel thereof and flat repugnante to the first.
And why for-soothe? because if Christ's corporal presence can not work a
spiritual effect, what need we a sign of it? See the wit of a sophist. Is
this the sharpnes that some commends? be the clean contrary, if he were
present bodily we need noe sign of his body. But now that he is absent in
body, the sign is given us, to mind us of his body, and the great work of
our redemption, which he accomplished in his body. And so the deep
contemplation of that body, and that work, moved and wakned in us be grace
from Christ, works in our hearts the spiritual effect of that Sacrament.
But sait^ he, the accidents moves the senses, and not the substance, as
ordinary meat does nourish, be means of the accidents. And therefore
accidents are the sign in the sacrament more properlye then the substance.
And this he proves be the brazen serpent. This is like the rest of it, his
collection is quite contrary to his text. The brazen serpent is a figure of
Christ. Ergo accidents is a figure of Christ without a subject. How so? is a
brazen serpent an accident? No, but it has no thing of a serpent, but the
external figure, which is an accident. Well libelled Sir William. Did God
ordain that shape only, to be the figure of Christ? The text says, Moses
made a serpent of brass, and set it up for a sign: not the shape of a
serpent. And because it has no thing of a very serpent, but an accident, will
it follow that it is no thing but a bare accident? Be such Logic ye may well
defend the corporal presence of Christ in the Sacrament, and a greater
absurdity then that, if a gr^sser, and greater could be devised. But to
Master Robert his argument. That which can not nourish corporrallie, can not
be a sign^ of spiritual nourishmente. But accidents of bread and wine ^an
not nourishe corporally. Ergo the ^ccidents of bread and wine, can not be a
sign of spiritual nourishment. To this he answers, that meats does
nourish be means of accidents. But that is doubtful: and if it were
certain yet that reason can sound to no sense, but such as have prostituted
their reason to serve Antichrist. Meats does nourish be accidents. Ergo
accidents does nourish. If the Pope him self or the fattest Cardinal in Rome
were so fed but forty days, he would count accidents a warish meat. He
asks Master Robert where he finds in all the evangelists, or the
writtinges of Paul, that this Sacrament was ordained to signify spiritual
nuriture, which (says he) was indeed appointed to nourish spirituallie.
Hear Master Robert asks him again, where he reads in the whole body of
the Bible, that this Sacrament is appointed in deed to nourishe spirituallie.
As for the first, Master Robert needs no other proof, then the name of a
Sacrament. for the other I doubt me that ever Master Rainoldes will ^inde any
warrant from God and his word.

The third is, if their had been such a wonderful thing in the Sacrament,
as they speak of, their would have been plain mention made thereof in the
scriptures. To which he answers that no plainer mention can be required
then this is my body which shall be delivered for you. And asks M. Robert if
he can with all his study devise words more plain^, more effectual, and more
significa^t. This is pertly said to it. These men has herein a special grace.
But not-withstanding if we get no plainer, and more manifest proof, we are
very like never to believe, that there is any miracle in the Sacrament. For
besides that, this text is ambiguouse, and capable of two senses: it has no
mention of changing the substance, nor that the body of Christ is invisible,
and vnpalpable: Nor that there remains noe bread, saving accidents, nor that
the body of Christ can at once be in heaven, at the right hand of his
father, and between the priests hands, at the elevation of the mass, with
sundry other miraculous mysteries of this divinity, which they never learn^d
of God nor his word.

The fourth is about the pronoune (this) in the words of the institution, in
which he answers noe thing, but only makes a bai^nelye objection, that it
can not demonstrate bread. His reason is for tharin Latin congruitie, in (
hoc est corpus^ m^um) hoc can not agree with Panis. And in ( hicest sanguis
men's, hic can not agree with Vinum. In which objection either he shows him
s^^fe a mere ignorant, of the Latin grammar, or else speaks agai^ste hi^
knowledge. For it is observed in that tongue that an adjective, or relative
between two substantives, or two antecedentes may accord with either of them.
As that of Cicero, Anunal plenum rationis, quem Vocamus hominem for quod
vocamus hominem. He would be counted a man either of notable Ignorance, or
peruer^e resolution, that would deny Animal to be the antecedent to Quem,
because it accords in gender with H^minem. And what may we think of Master
William R^inoldes. Who in the words of our Sauiou^ den^eth Hoc to respect
Panis, which Christ did demonstrate because it agrees with Corpus. This doubt
is not worthy a child in the grammar school. But to strike this dead with a
syllgisme. In these words our Savior took hreade and after that he had
given thanks brake it, and ga^e it to his disciples saying, this is my body.
The pronoune this demonstrateth that, which he took and brake. But he took
bread, and brake it giving it to his disciples. Ergo in these words of our
Savior the word (this) demostrateth the bread. And so the sense must be;
This bread is my body, which this man pertlye says, that Christ never
spoke. That it cannot demonstrat their Indiuiduum vagum, or the body of
Christ under the shape of bread thus I prove. A pronoune demonstratiue must
demonstrate a thing certain subject to sense or reason, But the body of
Christ in the shape of bread is not a thing certain nor subject to sense or
reason, much less their Indiuiduum vagum. Ergo, the pronoune (this) can not
demonstrate the body of Christ^, under the shape of bread and wine, much less
Indiuiduu^ vagum, which it is not possible to english except it be some
wandering vagabond.

The fifth and last about the place of August is answered alredie.

Now to Master John Hammilton my old master. I began with him, and
therefore think it reason to give the reader a taste of his reason. The first
markable thing that I find in him is, that since he was made Doctor, he is
become a worse divine. He has written two books. The one printed anno 1581.
before his Doctour-shipe be intituleth of the Lords Supper. And least any
m^n should think that he gives it that name, as from the subject, which he
labors to confute: he says in the beginning of it, that of all the
controuerted heads, there is none of greater importance; ^hen that which
concerns the Sacrament of the altar, otherwise called the Lords Supper. The
words (the Lords Supper) he writteeth also in the letters; 1, Cor, 11, ^0.
which he sorted for the texts of Scripture, and citations of the ancients
remembering belike that Paull gives it that name. When you come together
therefore in one place, this is not to ^^te the Lords Supper. Deipnon Kyriacon
that is ^aules own words. Now he is doctoured either he has forgotten this:
or aduising withsome other Doctor of greater account then Paull was; Page, (...)
in his last book he condemns both himself, and Paull of heres^e: because
this Sacrament was instituted (as he says) after that our Lord Jesus had
supped: and therefore is an heresy repugnant to the euangell to call it The
Lords Supper. He has an odd argument for him, to stope even Paul's mouth, if
he were alive, to speak one word for him self, ab auctori^te negative. The
fathers called it not the supper of the Lord. Ergo it is rank heresy to call
it so. Be the same argument no father for 600 years after Christ ever knew or
wrote the name of transubstantiation, nor accidents with out subjects, etc.
Ergo all these theoremes of the Roman divinity are heresies. But if it were a
wonder to see Master John Hammilton change behold^ a greater wonder then this.
There was nyntene year between his books, and therefore in nyntene years
he might well change his concept of Paull who in less then nyne-tene months
(if we ^re not misinformed) changed his opinion of Christ, and of a
protestant became a papist. But this is stranger, for within nyntene days, if
the printer was not very slow, he changes also the title of this last
treatise. Page, 286
At the beginning condemning the title of the Lords Supper for heretical, and
allowing the title of the Sacrament of the alter only for Catholic, he
begins with that, Page, 34^
and for 61. Pages he keeps it. At last he changes that again, and to the
end which contains 54. pages he intituleth it of the Holy communion. A
wandering mind is inconstant in all his ways.

But let us take a vewe of his reasons. Page, 191
God (says he) made all things with hi^ word. Ergo the words of Christ (
This is my body) turned the bread into the body of Christ. This says he
the Centurion confessed. Math, 8, 8,
Say the word, and my son shall be made whole. And the de^ill^ Math, 4^ ^
command that these stones be made bread. (...) this argument Christ him
self saying, John 6 53
I am the bread that came down from heaven, is turned into bread, John 15
and I am the true ^ine, and my father the husband man. He is t^rned into a
vine, and his father into a husband man, with a snedding knife in his hand to
prune him. Man ^ (...)
And where he says to his disciples Ye are the salt of the earth, they were
turned into a pillar of salt like Lots wife. And to the pharasies generation
of vipers, Mat 12 (...)
they were turned into a nest of young vipers. A^ for the power of God, and
might of his word, we believe with the Centurion, that he can do what he will.
But that he will do al, that he can, was the faith of the devil, who
persuaded him to make bread of stones because he could. As for this question,
when Master John Hammilton can prove to us, that Christ his will was to create
him self a new^ body of bread, be the eternal word of truth, we shall
address our hearts to believe it.

Secondlye he argues. It is blasphemy to say that Christ's blessing works no
thing in the bread: and if it work anyething, it is no thing but
transubstantiation. To this it may be replied, that Christ has not left us in
the word that powerful form of blessing, and that no other, not the Pope him
self, can supplye that want, with words (...). As for the words (...) thanks,
or (to give him that) blessing the bread, it contains only an assertion that
he blessed it, not the form how he blessed it Which thing it may seem the
Lord left out, foreseeing that these men would have misconstrued it, if they
had gotten it. Further they are not yet agreed on it, whether the words of the
institution, or the blessing, if they had them, works this miraculous change.
When they are all agreed let M. John Hammilton, if he like not this answer
send us word, and we shall shape him an other.

Thirdely he says, we give Christ the ly^^ Page 295,
^enying the bread to be turned into Christ's body. Be that rule (as is said
alredie) he gives Christ the lie. that says he is not a vine, nor a door.
Alace that M. John Hammilton should set his faith upon such grounds as these.

Fourthlye he would prove be the institution, Page, 298
that Christ said mass in his own person: sitting at the table with his
disciples. Mass at a table! ^ye man ^oulde he not get an altar, twenty to one
that Mass was not Catholic, that w^nted an alter hallowed he some pope. For
seeing it is a necessary instrument to that action, it was no harder for him
to have raised up a (...) to that end; then to turn the bread into his body,
nether having two bodies, nor changing the forms of the ^reade: This
doubtless was a great ouer-sight. B^t hear I would ask an other question
also: whether he said mass sec imdum ordinem sarum, vel Romanum. And what was
the form of his mass ^loths: whether in the consecration he kept the just
number of Crosses, beckes, binges, Ioukes; and turns prescribed in that
action, whether in his memento he prayed for his father and his mother, and in
the oblation offered sacrifice for them. And to omit the rest, for I can no^
stand on all, whether he repeted the five words, hoc est enim corpus meum,
with out taking his breath. For if he omitted these murgines, or any of many
more then these: he was not so catholic a priest, I mean so Roman catholic
(and for all my correction pardon my comparison) as for M. John Hammilton and
ten thousand more, that is^ and was far more formal, to mummill (...) Roman
Mass, then he. Here also might be asked, whether the Mass which Christ
said was perfect, or imperfect. And if it was perfect as perhaps they may
grant, whether all the crosses, and kisses in the rubric of the canon of the
Mass, and the rest of the ceremonies prescribed there, be unnecessary
additions: and if they be, what they were that durst presume to ad to that,
which the eternal wisdom of God had praescribed such trashe, and make their
inuentiones as necessary, as his institu^ion. For now it is grown to that
head that if M. John Ham. for as catholic as he is, or the highest headed
Bishope within the Popes precincts would acknowledge no other Mass, then
Christ ordained, (...) 298
he would soon be as odious an heritike, as either Martine Luther, or John
Calvin. But to his syllogism. That Christ said Mass thus he reasons. The
Mass is no other thing hut the giving and offering of Christ's precious body
and blood, contained under the external forms of bread and wine, after the
order and ri^e of melchisade^ to theliuing God for the people. But Christ Jesus
after that he had consecrated the bread and wine in his precious body and
blood, gave the same to God the father for his Apostles, sitting with them at
the institution of this holy Sacrament. Ergo Christ said Mass at the
institution of the Sacrament. To the (...) of this syllogism I have answered
that if M. John Hammilton would say no other Mass then that, he would be
condemned of heresy for imitation of Christ. The minor I utterly deny. The
text says not that Christ gave the bread and wine consecrated to his father
for his disciples: But to his disciples for a remembrance of his blessed
passion. That which he gave to his disciples for a remembrance of him self:
it will pass M. I. his intandement to prove it given to God for them. But to
find the Mass in these words behold, how many leapes he takes. First that
Christ gave this Sacrament to his father. Secondly that ( he gave) is that he
offered. Thirdely that he offered it even then, when he gave it. Fourthly that
h^ offer^^ a sacrifice for his disciples: Page, 287
Fistly that ^ee o^fered it for them, that is not for their redemption (for
that would be derogatorie to his bloody sacrifice) bu^ to adore GOD for
their! redemptioni And therefore as if their were noe more doubt of these
words, then the worde^ of the Mass book Iube (...) perserri, per ^ianus^
sancti angel^ t^^ etc. He runs out vpou us as blasphem^ers of this holy
sacrifice, and pernerters of this holy text^

To conclude with him in a place he^ proves that the wicked eats not, Page,
369
no^ dri^keth the body, and blood of Christ His argument is the foundest
syllogism in all that work. But that men may se^ how lo^h h^ is to speak
truth, Page, 380
or reason for it: (...) ^^teth up that assertion argument and all at once, and
calls it an impious he^e sie, and proves it be the in^tance of ^udas, who
with the rest of the twelve Apostles rece^^^^^ the Sa^rament. In which reason
the ingeniou^ reader may take up an inc^anted, and besotted head with the
sot^sh poison of the Roman dregs. The question is whether the wicked in the
Sacrament ^eceaueth the real body of Christ: And for proof he alleges the
euang^listes. Matthew, Mark, and I uke, to prove that I^das received the
Sacrament. That Judas received the Sacrament it is a thing that might have
been, and some affirms, and some denies. But that, Judas did eat the
flesh, and drink the blood of Christ, it will pass all the schools of Rome
to prove be the ^racles of truth. Of that Augustine says (...) panem dominu^
^^das did eat not the bread the Lord: but the bread of the Lord. This much
to give the reader a taste of M. John his doctourall learning. For any thing
that appears in his writtinges he might have been vndoctored this dozen
year^^, and if he profit no more then he has done, he might have wanted a
Doctor. hoode so long as he lives Of all the vnlea^ned books (...) I red: of
all the inconstant, and wand ring styles running a^ the ^^ubiect on every
^ighte occasion I give it the first place.

Hitherto I ^aue laid down what little reason they have to deny the words
of the institution to be ^iguratiue. Now beside the seven argument in the
beginning. And the sound arguments mightily laid in be M. Robert Bruce, and
weakly warded be M. William Rainoldes. I will open, what matter of
inconvenience, what forcing of textes, what coining of figures, what monsters
in nature, sense, and reason might have chocked this monster in the cradle: if
a drifte of heresy raised be the enemy of truth, had not dazaled the eyes
of men, and driven them into the wilderness of error.

To begin at the lightest, to maintain that there is no figure in the
institution: they are driven to force a stranger figure on the words of Paull.
H^^ that cateth of this bread, (...)
and drinks of this cup, etc. Compelling the spirit of God, in which the
Apostle wrote, with rash and inconsiderate ^duise be the names of bread and
cup for wine, to feed the error of the sense, against the truth of faith,
if it were as they s^y not bread, and wine, but the very body and blood of
Christ. As is said alredie page 13. in my seuent reason.

Secondlye in the words of our Savior, I will drink no more of the fruit of
the vine, Mar ^424
they shape two monstrous figures leaving it indifferent to take which a man
likes best. Either that be the wine is understood the blood of Christ under
the show of wine: or else that the kingdom of God is the time of the gospel,
in the which we drink the very blood of Christ in the Sacrament.

Thirdelye the words of our Savior John 6 ^6
He that easteth my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and (...)
him. They are compelled either to mangle miserably, or else to deny them, and
make the incredilous to eat the body of Christ, which neither dwells in
Christ, nor Christ in them.

Fourthly the Article of our belief, and the place of the Acts That the
heavens must contain him, Acts 32^
until the (...) that all things be restored. They are driven to seek some
defense be hook, and crook, how Christ may not only be in heaven at the
right hand of his father: but also in the Sacrament between the hands of a
gredie preiste reddie to eat him up stoup and roupe. These four textes they
are compelled to mangle to maintain a literal sense in one. But behoulde more
absurdity.

First they will compel us, under pain of damnation to believe that the
body of Christ having all properties of a humane body sin only excepted is
handled and not felt, eaten and not tasted, looked on and not seen in the
Sacrament.

Secondlye that the accidents of bread, that is, savor, color, taste,
hardness, moistnosse, etc, are in the Sacrament without the substance of
bread, where to they are inseparablye anne^ed.

Thirdely that these same accidents having no nature, nor power to feed; are
ordained be Christ to be the sign of the spiritual bread that feeds our
souls to life everlasting.

Fourtlye that the substance of the bread, is changed into the very real and
natural substance of Christ's body, that was borne of the Virgin Marye, and
suffered on the cross for the sins of man.

Fistly that accidents does nonrish, W, R. Cap 19, sect, 1,
and feed the body, because the substance does nourish be means of
accidents.

Sixthly that the body of Christ being finite, and local, as it was, when he
walked on the waters, taught in the shipe, and died upon the Cross, is now in
heaven at the right hand of his father, and also on all the altares in the
world, in the hands of all the prestes, in the bellies of all that eats
him, and in the coffers of al, that will keep him in store for an evil day.

Seuently that in this matter of transubstantiation under pain of both
deaths, that is, temporal and eternal, we are bound to believe nether nature
sense, nor reason.

And that eighthly heerefore how-beit we see it to mould, rott, and consume, we
must be persuaded in faith that it is the immortal body of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

Nynthly when Aug. or any other of the fathers calls it a figure, we must
believe that it is both the figure of Christ's body, and Christ's body it
self.

Tenthly that the parts of Christ's body are not distinguished as eye from
eye, Tho Aquinas in 3 quest 76 art 30
hand from hand, head from foot, or (with reverence be it spoken) tail
from tongue; but all confused together in the compass of the round wa^er.

Eleuenthly that the priest is the creatore of his own creatore, Stella
cle^icorum
and eats him, when he has created him.

Twelfthlye that Christ having but one body, the people consumes him as many
bodies in one day as communicantes receaueth the Sacrament in all the world.

Thirtenthlie that the substance of Christ's natural body may be made of
other substance then the substance of his mother the virgin Marie.

My wit can not comprehend the absurdities of this absurdity. On many they
are not yet agreed among themselves. First if an oulde wife or any other
superstitious body keep that sacred bread for a need, and chance to lose it
(which may well fall out) Thomas Aquinas, Alexander de Hales, and Gerson,
holds that a mouse, hog, or doge, if they find it, and eat it, finds, and
eats the very body of Christ: Bonauentura and sundry others counts it more
honest, and reasonable, that they eat it not. But Peter Lumbard the grand
master of catholic conclusiones leaves it to God what they eat, and with
all thinks that it may be said that brute beasts eat not the body of
Christ. Some will have the mouse if she can be gotten burnt, Anto^^ (...)
and buried about the altar: Others will have her opened, and some well
stomached priest to eat that, which is found in her mawe, or else to reserve
it in the tabernacle till it naturally ^nsume. Pe^^us de plaud
In this kind one highly commends one Goderanus a priest for lapping up the
vomet of a leper man, Hug of clunice
who had not long before received the Sacrament.

Secondly in the words of the institution This is my body Gerson says that
the demonstratiue pronoune (this) demonstrateth the substance of the bread:
Occam says that it demonstrateth the body of Christ. Thomas Aquinas says
that it demonstrateth the thing contained under the form of the bread. Hokot
says, that it signifies a thing between the body of Christ, and the bread,
which is nether this nor that, but common to both. Durand says, that it
signifies nothing, but is set materialiter. After all comes Steven Gardinar
Bishope of Winchester and turning his judgment (for once he thought it might
stand very well with demonstration of the bread) he says it demonstrateth a
thing which he calls Indi^duum vagum, and to expound him self to the
capacity of the simple he calls it also Indiuiduum in genere, or Indiuiduum
entis, Induiduum insignitum, Indiuiduum Iudiuidui. vnum substantia, and (...)
entis. Which deep divinity I can not expound to men that has noe other but
their mother tongue except Indiuiduum vagum may be some wandering vagabounde.

In this matter there is much more diversity of opinions: which would be
tedious to reckon up particularlye. Some says that the body of Christ is
rent with the teethe, Gratian de cons, did, 2, can ^go Be^^n (...)
and some says no. Some says that the accidents of bread, and wine does
nourish: and some says no. Some says that as soon as it comes to the
toothe the body of Christ returns be a miracle, and some say no. Some say
that Christ is in the Sacrament in quantity, and quality, Caie^a^ et alii,
as he was on the Cross, and some say no. Some sa^e that he did consecrate
be a divine power, and some say no. Some say that he consecrated be his
blessing, and some say no. And some say that he did consecrate be virtue of
the ^iue words hoc, est, enim, corpius, meum, and some say no. To make them
sieve they added enim of their own, because the poet testifies that numero
deus impare gaudet God delighteeth in an odd number, how-be-it the poet meant
three, not five. But to go fordwarde. Some says that the natural body of
Christ is in the Sacrament naturally, and some say no. Some says that the
substance of the bread, is turned into the substance of Christ's body, and
some s^^e no: but that it vanishes to no-thing and that the body of Christ^
succedeth into the place of it.

There are many more doubts which I would ask of the Masters of this
theology, to be resolved me be clear (...) timonie of scripture.

First whether the bread be changed materia, et forma, or materia only.

Secondlye if the form be changed. whet^er it be changed into the form of
Christ's body.

Thirdelye if the essential form of bread be that, which makes bread to be
called bread, and distinguishes it from flower, and wheat: whether color,
^auer, taste, substance, friabilitie and virtue to feed be not that essential
form.

Fourthly whether the bread be turned into whole Christ God and man.

Fifthly if into his manhood only, whether that be not a separation of hi^
inseperable natures.

Sixthly if into his divinity also, how a piece of corruptible bread can turn
into the incorruptible, and eternal essence of the deity.

Seuently if the deity assumes the humane body made of bread, as he did the
flesh borne of the Virgin Marye: whether there be now as many Christ's, as
has been hosts consecrated since the first which Christ did con^ecra^e him
self.

Eighthly if not, what can become of them being all immortal, and incorruptible.

Nynthelye whether they have universal knowledge of all things, paste,
present, and to come.

Tenthlye whether Gregory the seventh that sweet bird did sin asking of it
certain secret matters, and casting it into the fire, because it would not
answer.

I could here move many more questions: As whether the body of Christ in the
wafer cake be formatum, or inform. If it be formatum, whether it has the
form of a living or dead body. If of a living body, whether it lives vitam
vigetatiuam, without which sensitiua and rationalis can not continue un fed
without a miracle. With many more such strange conclusiones upon this strange
assertion. But these I will superseede till I have gotten a resolute answer to
the former ten out of the undoubted truth of God.

These strange concequences made Cuthbart Tonstall Bishope of Durham a man in
his time amongst the learnedest, and wisest, to think, and write de modo, quo
id fieret (meaning the body of Christ in the Sacrament) fortasse satius esse
curiosum quenque suaerel^nquere coniectur^^ De eucha ^ist,
sicut liberum suit ante conciliu^ later anum. In which words thou may first
note that before the counsel of La^eran no man was troubled for denying the
real presence: and secondly that this wise man, how-be-it, he dare not
condemn the Church of Rome: yet he thinks it had been better to have left
it free, as it was before, then to have bound men to unnatural
inconveniences. Scotus subtilis one of the greatest auctoures of the Roman
faith, plainly attributes this head of their belief to the Church of Rome:
and proves it because the scriptures may have an easier and in all appearance
a truer meaning. De sacramentis (says he) tenendum sicut tenst sancta Romana
ecclesia. Na^ verba scriptura possent saluari secundum sensum faciliorem,
sentence 4 ^ist 13
et veriorem secundum appareatiam. We must houlde the Sacraments as the
holy Church of Rome does houlde. For the scriptures may be salued in an
easier sense, De captiv^ babil.
and truer be appearance. Fisher Bishope of Rochester one of their Martyrs
confesses the like that the scriptures has nullum verbum quo probctur in
missa veram fieri carnis, and sanguinis pr^sentiam. Not one word to prove the
true presence of Christ's flesh and blood in the Mass. Thus thou see gentle
reader that these men who were of greater account in he Roman Church, then M.
John Ham* or M. Gilbert Broune, or any of our apostat doctors, who neither for
(...) nor letters are worthy to bear their books, confesses that, which I
have been all this while proving: that the Roman Church never received this
truth out of the scriptures. And therefore seeing this point is so clear that
the enemies of it confesses it: I would request all men that has a care to
live in Christ, and be Christ: to avoid the poisoned doctrine of these
masters, who can not deny but that the soul of their religion that is the
sacrifice of their Mass is a devise of man's brain, without witness, or
warrant from the authore of life, and truth. Lord opon our eyes to see the
truth, and (...) leeue it: to profess it and obey its to love it, and live
be it through Jesus Christ our Lord and Sauiou^. Amen.

Page 44. In imitio carrige. Summoned him again to Rome to a counsel of 114.
Bishopes held in Basilit a Constantiniana.


