HYMNS, OR SACRED SONGS, wherein the right use of Poesy may be espied.

Be Alexander Hume.

WHEREUNTO ARE ADDED, the experience of the Authors youth, and certain
precepts serving to the practice of Sanctification.

The table follows in the next page.

Ephesians. 5. 18. But be full filled with the Spirit speaking unto your selves in
Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs singing and making melody to the
Lord in your hearts. EDINBVRGH,

Printed by Robert Walde-graue, Printer to the Kings Majesty. 1599. Cum
privilegio regio.

The contents of this book.
1 The Authors Recantation. 2 Of Gods benefits bestowed upon man. 3 A
description of the day Estiuall. 4 Consolation to his sorrowful soul. 5
Praise for delivery of the sick. 6 Of gods omnipotency. 7 The triumph of the
Lord after the manner of men, alluding to the defait of the Spanish Navy, in
the year 1588. 8 The humiliation of a sinner. 9 An Epistle to master GILBERT
MONCREI^ Mediciner to his Majesty, containing the experience of the Authors
youth. 10 Christian precepts serving to the practice of Sanctification.
TO THE FAITHFVLL AND VIRTUOUS Lady, Elizabeth Mal-vill, Lady Cumrie, grace,
mercy, and peace, from God the father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
WHEN I read that Epistle written by the Apostle John, unto an elect Lady
(beloved in the Lord Jesus) I call to mind the Godly and elect Ladies in this
our age, which within this country ar^ known unto me. Of the which number I
count you to be one, even a Lady chosen of God to be one of his saints, and
the Godly daughter of a faithful father: forth children of God have their
own marks. Therefore when I first perceived the spiritual conference, the
grave behavior, the fervent zeal, and the great sense of natural corruption,
with the strange resistance of the same that was in you: I think them as
infallible signs of Sanctification: Let no man suspect me of flattery, for I
speak not after the flesh. N^ther fear I (Sister) that this my commendation
puff you up: for where the spirit of Jesus dwelles, there is humility: But
rather that thereby ye shall be stirred up and incou^aged to persevere, and grow
in Godliness. It is a rare thing to see a Lady, a tender youth, sad, solitare,
and sanctified, often sighing and weeping through the conscience of sin. Would
to God that all the Ladies of this Land, especially they of the greatest rank,
were of the like modest and godly disposition: for the most part of them we
see, to delight mair in covetousness and in oppression of the puire for the
intertainement of their pride, or else to spend their days in chambering,
wanto^nes, decking of their bodies in delicat feeding, and in satisfying their
lusts, nor to have ane incorrupt and holy heart, with a meik and quiet spirit.
Araying themselves in cumly apparel, with shamefastnes and modesty, and with
good works, as the Apostles of Jesus Christ has commanded them. 1. Tim. 2. 9.
1. Pet. 3. 3. Let such women remember that a day they shall appear and give a
count before the judgment seat of Christ, and shall receive a reward in their
bodies according to their works. I would wish them to have this weighty
saying of the Apostle ever recent in memory, as a dicton: She that lives in
pleasure, is dead while she lives. 1. Tim. 5. 6. But ye live more in
murmuring and in pain: Therefore ye shall rejoice eternally. Now to come to
the point, having composed in my youth a few songs in verse to the glory of
God: seeing the custom of men is to dedicate their works to their favorites
and patrones: Shall it not be lawful to me also, after the manner of men, to
present unto you (a faithful and beloved Lady) a part of my little labors?
And sa meikle the rather, because I know ye delight in poesy your self; and as
I unfeignedly confess, excelles any of your sex in that art, that ever I hard
within this nation. I have seen your compositiones so copious, so pregnant, so
spiritual, that I doubt not but it is the gift of God in you. Finally, because
so little a work as this is, requires a short epistle, I take my leave, not
doubting but my good meaning shall be favorably accepted. Continue (good Lady
and sister) in that Godly course which ye have begun: let nothing be done upon
ostentation. Love your Husband: have a modest care of your family, and let
your chief care be casten upon the Lord Jesus, who will recompense us at his
coming. To God therefore the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, be all praise
for ever, Amen. At Logie the 16. of February. 1598.

Your brother in the Lord Jesus, Minister of the Evangell.

Alexander Hume

To the Scottish youth.
AS It is a thing very customable unto thee, O curious youth, greatu^ly to
delight in poesy, ather by playing the part of a poet thy self, or by
exercising thy spirit in reading and proclaiming the compositions of other men:
So is it as common to thy indiscreit age to make a choose of that naughty
subject of fleshly and unlawful love. In such sort that in Princes courts, in
the houses of great men, and at the assemblies of young gentilmen and young
damesels, the chief pastime is, to sing profane sonnets, and vain ballats of
love, or to rehearse some fabulos faits of Palmerine, Amadis, or other such
like raueries and such as ather have the art or vain poetike, of force they
must show themselnes cunning followers of the dissolute ethnike poets, both in
phrase and substance, or else they shall be had in no reputation. Alas for
pity! Is this the right use of a Christians talent to incense the burning
lusts of licentions persons by such evil ex amples and allurements? Art thon
(O miserable man) well occupied, that day and night busies thy brain to invent
these things which may foster the filthy vice and corruption that naturally
is seized in the hearts of all men? Was ii to this end, that thy maker sent thee
in the world, to be an instrument of wickedness? or hes he given thee such
gifts, and viuacitie of spirit, to be exercised in vanity, and provoking
others to uncleanness? knows thou not that thou must render account of every
idle word that proceeds out of thy mouth? And that thy ungodly conversation
banishes the spirit of GOD from thee? suffocats thy good gifts, rottis thy
conscience, and makis thy GOD to become ane Enemy against thee, What count
thinks thou to give unto the, just and fearful judge of the world (who
doubtless will crave it of thee, thou knows not how suddenly) that has
employed thy time, and abused his good gifts after this manner? I think the
consideration of it the more terrible, because sometime I delighted in such
fantasies my self, after the manner of riotous young men: and were not the
Lord in mercy pulled me a back, and wrought a great repentance in me, I had
doubtless run forward and employed my time and study in that profane and
unprofitable exercise, to my own perdition. For what seeks man by that kind*
of study? nothing but a name, but a vain praise, and an undeserved
commendation. Why should thou not then (aspiring youth) rather bestow thy good
gifts to the right use, to wit, to the glory of god, and to the weil of thy
brethren? which thou sall do when by thy poesy or prose thou declares the
mercy, the justice, the power, the providence, the wisdom, the holiness, the
gudenes, or wondrous works of thy God unto the world: Whereof thou may have so
large a field in the scriptures, that al thy pithie words, thy figures of
Rhetoric, thy subtle arguments, thy skill in physic, metaphysicke,
mathematicke, or moral philosophy, shall not be sufficient to expres the
dignity thereof. Would thou entreat of prodigious miracles? luke the books if
Genesis and Exodus, or the works of our savior, of the Prophets and Apostles?
Would thou have a subject of valiant deids of arms? read the buikes of Joshua
and the Judges. And of the Kings of Israel and Judah? Wald thou have store of
wise sentences, read the Proverbs, and Ecclesiastes? walde thou have a subject
of love? look the song of songs, of the love betuixt Christ and his kirk.
Would thou rejoice, or lament praise or disprais; comfort, or threaten; pray,
or use imprecation Imitat the ald Hebrew David in his Psalms, as a pattern of
all heavinly poesy. In a word, the high and holy mysteries, and felicity of
the life to come, contained in the auld and new testament, may be a more noble
and worthy subject, where upon the hole cunning and Eloquence of man's lofty
Spirit should be employed nor upon these trifles, and sensual villainies. But
thou will peradventure say, that such a subject is over grave, and that a light
and merry matter were more agreeable to young folks: I answer thee, that
indeed vanity and corruption are most agreeable to a corrupted nature: But
let that mirrines wherein is sin, be far from all good Christians. But if
thou would meditate on this spiritual subject, and exercise thy self in the
Law of the Lord with continuance, thou should with time alter thy fleshly
affectiones, and nourish thy spiritual gifts: In such sort, that thou shall
detest that which is sensual and brutish, and delight in that which is holy
and pleasant in the sight of the Lord, and by thy example shall stir up
others to do the like: Heirefore, I have here set down before thee, a few
spiritual songs, begun in my youth, and prosecuted in my wraslings with the
world, and the flesh, whereby thou may clearly see what abundance of good
matter is offered, which the most part of Poets foolishlie reiectes, and
dedicates their hole study to things most vile and contemptible. Farther, I
contemn not the moderate and true commendation of the virtuous, and noble
acts of good men: nor yet the extolling of liberal sciences: But thou have
notable examples in the French tongue set forth by Salust of Bartas. Only thus
much have I written in rude Scottish and hask verses, to provoke the more
skillful in that art to flee higher, and to encourage the meaner sort to
follow. To the effect, that the spirits of men in all their actions may be
applied to the right end, even to glorify God, who must ever sanctify and
prosper the interprises of his own. At Edinburgh the 9 day of december. 1594.

Thy loving friend,

Alexander Hume

A Sonnet of Love.
NOt lawful love, bot lechery I lack:
Not women wise, but witless I disdain:
Not constant truth, but tromperie I detract:
Not innocence, but insolence prophaine:
Not blessed bands, but secreite working vain:
As Pyramus and Thisbe tuike on hand,
As Jason and Medea made their train,
As Daemophon and foolish Phillis fand,
As Hercules at Iolees command,
Which like a wife for love sat down to spin.
And finally all folly I gainstand,
Which may allure the heart to shame or sin:
Beware with vice, be not the cause of ill,
Sine speak, and sport, look, laugh, and love your fill.
THE HYMNS, AND sacred songs, of Alexander Hume.
His Recantation. I.
ALace, how lang have I delayed,
To leave the laits of youth?
Alace, how often have I essayed,
To ^aunt my lasciue mouth?
And make my vain polluted thought.
My pen, and speech prophaine,
Extol the Lord, quhilk made of nocht,
The heaven, the earth, and rain?
Skarse nature yet my face about,
Her virile wob had spun,
Quhen als often as Phoebea stout:
Was set agains the Sun:
Zea, als often as the sterie flames,
Arise and shine abrod,
I minded was with sangs and Psalms,
To glorify my God.
Bot ay ye cancred carnal kind,
Quhilk lurked me within,
Seduced my heart, withdrew my mind,
And maid me sclaue to sin.
My sensis, and my saull I saw,
Dehait a deadly strife,
Into my flesh I felt a law,
Gainstand the law of life.
Even as the falcon high, and hait,
Forth fleeing in the sky,
With wanton wings her game to gai^,
Disdaines her callers cry:
So led away with liberty,
And drowned in delight,
I wandered after vanity,
My vice I give the wight.
Bot (Lord) now from thy haly throne,
Bow down thy luifing eye,
At last I mourn, I make my moan.
I turn my self to thie.
Oh: If this fragil flesh unclean,
Had never had na lust,
Or that I had not formed bein,
Of filthy worms and dust.
Ah: if I never had bin thrall,
To these infirmities,
Quhilk causes men so often to fall,
In foolish fantasies:
Or had nocht had a sinful heart
Ingraffed in my breast,
Quhilk makes me from my God depart,
Ilk hour of day at least.
Then should I have from sin bin fr^,
And never seen the grave:
Bot (Lord) be merciful to me,
I know not what I crave.
Thy wonders are not wrought to please,
Man's foolish appetite,
Bot as seems good into thine eyes,
And for thine own delight.
For to our wavering wit, thy warks,
May secreit are not shawin,
And to what end thy wisdom marks,
To catiues is unknown,
Even things unpossible (think we)
Thy providence divine,
Brings them to pas as pleases thee,
And all the praise is thine.
Bot suffering Lord to anger slaw, ^sal. 103. ^

To mercy reddie bent,
Mair glad on sinners grace to shaw,
Nor they are to repent:
That Zoar sa^'d for luife of Lot, Genesis 19. 21

And cause of Godly men,
Wald have remitted Sodoms spot,
And Gomorah for ten. Gen, 18. 32.

That was to wraik in forty days,
the men of Niniuie, Jonah. 3. 4 ^0.

Bot when they left their wicked ways,
Forgave them fatherly:
That did not from thee plaint thine ears,
Nor yet the vile despise, John. ^. 32, 12. 3. Math. 26. ^o. 75.

Of Magdalene, nor Peter's tears,
Quha thee denied thrice.
Avert thy wraith, my saull relieve,
Within my body bun,
My grievous sins of grace forgive,
Throw Jesus Christ thy sun:
Thy halie sprit in me let rest,
To teach me what to crave,
For why? thy wisdom knawes far best,
Whereof I mister have.
Grant that these instruments of shame.
Quhilks daily do offend,
May serve and sanctify thy name,
Unto my livis end.
Bot sen so lang as in the race,
Of mortal men I rin,
I cannot of my self, alace?
Abstain fra vice and sin.
Zit never suffer me to fall,
So deeply in disdain,
That there na farther hope at all,
Of mercy may remain:
Or may be frustrate of the fude,
Whereof thy sain^s are sure,
Or of that blist beatitude,
Which ever sall endure.
Oh, let me not the merits lose,
Of my redeemer dear,
Bot when I waill with weeping vos^,
Lord, to my plaint give ear.
Ye though I often decline from thee,
And grievously do fall,
Let Jesus bitter death ay be,
Ane recompense for all.
O mighty God? quhilk for thy gloir,
May animat the stains,
And make the sowking babes adore, Psalm. ^. ^.

Thy majesty atains:
That maid thy Prophets months reveill,
Thy mysteries grit to cum,
And did the tung inutile heill Luke 1. ^4. 1. Sam. 16. 11. 12.

Of Zachary that was dum.
That gave thy servant David king,
A scepter for a staff,
Syne made him sacred Psalms to sing,
a hundredth and a half.
And thine Apostles preaching sweit,
With virtue did inspire,
And send them down thy haly spreit, Act, ^. ^.

In cloven tungs of fire.
Lift up mine heart, my lips disclose,
My tendered tung untie,
Then sall my singing saull rejoice,
And flee above the sky:
Blis thou my work, be my support,
My teacher, and my guide,
Then sall my mouth thy praise report,
Through all the world so wide,
Then sall my sacred pen delight,
Enduring all my days,
Thy wondrous works in verse to write,
Five hundred diverse ways:
Even on my iolie Lute, by night,
And trimling trible string,
I sall withal my mind and might,
Thy glory gladly sing.
Then they that sall thy puissance heir,
And tender clemency,
Sall moved be with lui^e and fear,
To praise and worship thee:
Zee when my spirit is past away,
Among the godly gostes,
Yet sall the reader sigh, and say,
Blist be the Lord of hosts.
Of Gods benefits bestowed upon man. II.
MY saull is reueist up fra me, my reason is berest,
my sensis are astoneist all, my mind her use hes left,
My memory is quite confusde, transported is mine heart,
My spreit is in ane ecstasy, as I were to depart:
When as the gracious gifts of God profoundly I perpend,
Beleifing ay to compass all, bot can not find ane end:
I marvel mair the mair I muse, the mair I knawledge crave,
Of hid and halie things, the mair my self I do disceaue:
May like a man qu^ilk dois behald, the face of Phoebus bright,
And thinks through earnest luking lang, to perse it with his sight,
His optik beims trenspersis nocht, his ve wing is in vain,
The fers reflex his dimmed sight, repousis back again:
Sa when I cannot comprehend with weak and wavering thought,
^or penetrat gods mighty warks, sa weill and wisely wrought,
I am compelled then to cry, O Lord, thy gifts are good,
My dull capacity they pas, I am but flesh and blood.
Great God, thy gifts are infinite, even granted unto man,
Whereof a part I sall recite, as truly as I can:
Exhause my prayer and thy praise, shaw me thy lifelie light,
Thy benefits, and bounty both, that I may sing aright.
When Lucifer the Prince of pride, first interprised evil,
And from his happy hie estate, was changed in a devil,
Great was the number, and the fall of his unhappy sect,
Quhilk fearfully from heaven to hell, the Lord he did deiect:
Their was na light of day as yet, nor shining beims so clear,
The Moon yet in the firmament, nor sternis did nocht appear,
Their was na earth to foster fruits, nor for the fishes seyes,
Na subtle fire, nor hailsome air, to flurish flowers or treis,
Nor finally, man was not made, na beast nor creeping thing,
Na skaillie fishes in the fluds, nor foull that flies on wing,
With pure immortal creatures clear, and sangs of Angels bright
The majesty of God was praist, with louings loud on hight,
Bot yet his great beneficence, qubilk ever mair hes bein,
But mesor large and infinite, the heavens could not contain,
Abundantly deborded all, and flowing heir, and there,
May plenticusly replenist all, extending every where,
Even be his wisdom, and his word, sa wondrouslie of nocht, John, 1.

This machin round, this universe, this other world he wrocht:
He creat first the heaven, the earth, and all that is thairin, Genes. ^.

The swelling seas, the fire, and air, sine man deuoid of sin.
Necessity it moved him nocht, nor hope of future gain,
Sic passions falls not in the Lord, but in his sicht ar vain:
Bot for his pleasure and his praise, his precepts to fulfill,
And last in peace for to possess, his high and holy hill, Genes. 2. 7. Geues
1. 26

A perfect comely corpse of man, he made of earthly dust,
The other part like to himself, true, holy, wise, and just:
This lifely Image of the Lord, can not defaced be,
Na creature the creator knawis, nor worship can, but he:
In earth nane this character hes, saif only man him sell,
Quhilk maks him master over the beasts, and over the devils in hell. Luke 9. ^

Than in his deadly visage wan, he braithed braith of life, Genesis 2. 7* ^ 22.

And gave him of a weaker sex, to pleasour him a wise,
Two living and Immortal saul's, he blissed with his grace,
Syne placed them in Paradise, a peerles pleasant place, Cen. 1. (...),

Quhat sall I all the gifts recount, qubilk cannot numbered be*
Mair nor the glistering sternes of heaven, or sands into the sea?
Quhilk with the Lord endued hes, both Adam and his kind*
Sick beantie of the body rare, sick graces of the mind,
And for external benefits, all things hear under heaven,
To pleasour, and to profit man, bes he not freely gevin?
The gifts of the body.
A seemly membred microcosme be number, and be weight,
Be measour, and proportion just, he maid erect and straight,
And every member maid to have a certain sympathy,
Amangs themselves, and with the heavens a decent harmony,
Quhilks dois their office execute, may promptlie but delay,
As Instruments and organis pressed, thy will for to obey:
Sa sharp the senses they are all, intrinsic, and without,
That easily man may decerne of every darkesome doubt:
The eyes sa reddie are to see, so bissie to behald,
With bemming blenks, and persing luiks what sa the fantasy wald
The ears erected ar to heir, and quickly to conceive
Ilk lively voice, Ilk speech, Ilk sound, and knawis then be the leave
The smelling nostrels quick of sent, they smell or they come neir
All odors, quhilks the eyes, nor eirs, can neither see, nor heir.
Of every substance sapient, the sapor and the taist
If it be ather good or bad, the mouth will try in haist.
The helping hands appointed ar to graip, to feill and tuitche,
And diligent in doing ar qubair ever they may reitche,
The Lord hes placed pith and strength within the bains and nerfs,
Agilitie into the blude 'quhilk spilt the body sterfs.
The feit ar swift and members meit, for to sustain the rest,
And spedilie will pace and run quhair sa man likis best.
All this external qualities, and graces corporell,
Albeit they be batth great and good, zit vthers dois excel,
How far the pure immortal saull in substance dois surpas,
The mortal, caduck, carnal corpse (a lowrd and brukill mas:)
Als far the functions of the saull surmounts the bodyis micht,
The puissance, and perfection both, the science, and the slight,
For all these actions lodge in man, dois from the saull proceid:
Quhilk once dissolved fra the corpse, the body is but deid.
Even as the fire dois animat, and poussis in the air,
A weighty and material ball, rebounding here and their,
Bot when the flames extinguished are, down falls the machin round
Sa when the active saull is gain, the body goes to ground. The gift of the
mind.

The mighty God he gave to man, a swift and agile thought,
Quhilk like a foull up through the skies, from earth to hevin hes sought,
A strong imagination ^ixt, ilk figure to consaue,
A quick revoluing reasone ripe to rewle all the laue,
A memory for to conserve, quhilk like a the saure deep,
All things conceived in the heart, dois weill retain and keep.
I wonder at the wit of man, whom God hes made so wise,
That all things speedefull for his use, he promplie can devise,
That can the present time observe, and call to mind the past,
Confer and prudently espy, the future cumming fast.
The natural course and causes all, of every thing he knawes,
What moves the mighty thunderclaps, and windy tempests blaws
What maks the fearful flauches of fire, and lightnings in the skies
And why the shill and freesing frosts, the waters deep vpdryes,
And how the hard congealed ice, dissolved is again,
What forms the hail, the stormy snawes, and sounding showers of rain,
Why thik infectiue mists sa mark, ore hails the earth and air,
And why the silver drops of dew, down falls in wedder fair,
Why often the earth, quhilk of it self, is stable, firm, and steif,
With trimling and with awful quaiks, in two is like to cleif,
Why many diverse he was appeirs, into the heavenly bow,
And why the caging Ocean seas, dois only fleit and flow,
Why Suddenly the Sun by day, is private of his light,
And why the shining Moon at full, indures eclipse by night,
Why monthly the Moon renewes her hew, and horns so paill,
Why monethlie her fowie face is round, and lightened haill,
Why whylome in the firmament, strange tailed sterns appeiris,
Why whilome sindrie shaps of beasts, and flaming strie speiris:
He knawes the restles course and race of all the planets seven,
The influence and order great, of all the host of heaven:
The form and fabrik of the earth, and ample universe,
He knawes the force of every flower, of every plant and gers,
The virtue of all kind of fruits, and every vegetal,
The properties of precious stanes. and metals mineral,
He knawes the strange instinctions all, of every brutall beast:
Of fishes and of flichtring fouls, and reptils which are least,
The ravenous and the rascal rout, wild, venomous, and tame,
The hideous monsters meruellous man knaws them be their name:
And to be short, he knows him self, and his original,
That he mon die, and after death the heaven inherit sall.
The Lord hes be his word, his will reveild unto his awin,
And made his counsel, and his court to mankind clearly knawne,
He Adame lent a libre will to follow what he list,
And with his holy spirit, and grace his chosen dois assist:
Man hes a fragrant fresh ingyne all science to invent,
A fair and flowing facund tung, till utter his intent,
And all are gifts, and graces great which with the living Lord,
But meriting a mortal man divinely hes decord.
I long to love thy larges (Lord) and prudent providence,
But now ^f force I mon proceed, Lord prosper my pretense.
How worthy are the sonns of men, and Adams catiue kind,
That thou (great God) should them regard, or have so much in mind,
Such thing is fantasy to frame, and pansing vain procures
For what is all the universe, and living creatures?
All nathing worthy of themselves, but as thou list of love,
With graces them to dignifie, and highly to promove:
Man is a wark which thou hes made, sa is the sun and moon,
Thou hes him placed above the rest, thy holy willbe done.
With earthly pleasures manifold, man compast is about, External benefits
Deuteronomy 28. ^.

He pleased is in coming in, and glad in going out,
Ilk beautiful and pleasant sight, he pleasure hes to see,
In hearing hes he not delight all kind of facetie,
Ilk symphonie and seemly sound is pleasant to his eir,
True sapience and science both, his heart delits to leir,
In smelling every savor sweet he pleasour hes perfect,
In taisting every dainty dish, he daily hes delight,
To reason he rejoicing hes, to learn, to teach, and talk,
He recreation takis to read, to run, to ride, and walk,
By nicht to ly and softly sleep, to rest and to repose,
His helper to behald and treit he suirly may reiose,
And as the Lord hes institute to kiss her pleasant face,
Ane propagation for to make, in love her to embrace.
The joy, the wealth, the mirth of man and pleasour to compleit, Psalm. ^. 5. ^.
Genesis 1 2^.

All things beneth the voult of heuin ar sterned under feit,
He is may like ane God on earth, for God he gave him charge
Over every bald and brutall beast, that feids in forests large,
over every ^ing feathered foul that swif^st is of slight,
Over every swimming finned fish with shyning scales sa bright:
our every litil creiping thing, or other animant,
That in the sea, the fire, or air, or on the earth dois haunt:
the fires and hardy Elephant, the horses swift and strange.
as brutalls brave and bellicose, the battles from amang,
From dangers they his body beir, or quhair he list to pass,
The Camel bears his charges great, the Mule and simple Ass,
the busy beufs, laborious beasts they teill the fertile ground,
Least man with wearines, and wark in bondage should be bound:
all venneson, and other wild they serve him at his neid,
The scheip, the nolt, and naughty worms they do him cleith and feid
the little friand fish in flude, and dentie volatile,
Quhilks shedds the waters, and the winds, he traps them at his will
Both cruel and abased beasts that hants in banks and bewis,
In denns, deserts, or cauerns deip, for pastime he persewis.
Not only over the beasts on earth man's power dois extend, Math. 10. 11 Luke
9. 1.

But over the Dragon, beast of beasts, a subtle serpent kend,
Above the devil his deidlie fa, and frowart suries fell,
God gave him might and moyen both be force them to expel,
For thocht that enemy fell and fierce the state of man invyis,
And aye in wait him to deuore may like a Lion lyis:
Yet all the fellon feinds of hell that trimble fast for fear,
And stoups when as the awful curs, and dreadful dume they hear,
Pronounced by the mouth of man, against that bailfull band,
The rebels nather dow, nor dare the word of God gain-stand,
The secreits of religious rites, the sacred sacraments,
The blist Evangell may of all, the tormentors torments.
But now fly far away, fra me ye cursed cateifs all, The wark of man's
^demption.

Increduils hence ga hide you hie, the cluds are like to fall:
A mystery high and halie both, I sing without delay,
Ye misbeleeuers bide abacke, fly (fugitives) away.
My lips delights not now in lies, vain fictions I refuse,
The book of God sall be my guide, the holy ghaist my muse.
When subtle Satan had deceived, the tragile femall Eve, Genesis 3. 6. 19. 23.

Who made the sinles man consent, defended fruict to preue,
Till e it against the Lords command, and greeuouslie offend,
He banished was from blis to baill, to hell and death but end:
The Lord of mercy mesourles, man to redeem again, ^ohn. 1.

From Satan sin, and second death, from hell and endless pain:
Down sent the word, which with himself had coeternall bein,
In essence with the father God, and deity divine,
Which was before beginnings all, or times were yet begone,
Begotten of the father God, and called is his Son,
Be whom al kind of things were made, within the machin roun^
The only Son of God (I say) descended down to ground,
And for the foul offense of man, the father thought it good,
Be virtue of the holy gaist, to make him flesh and blood.
Sa great a wonder was not heard, sen first the world began,
The only son of God to be, both very God and man,
Even of a virgin to be borne, to suffer death and shame,
The sacrifice for manly sin, Christ Jesus is his name,
Which on the third day after death, arase forth of the grave,
And gloriously past up to heaven, the seed of man to save,
Where at the right and holy hand, of God ^mnipotent,
He intercessor sits for sick, as truly shall repent,
Quhilk puts their hope into his death, and praises God therefore,
They shall receive eternal life, and crowned be with glore:
All graces he will give to sick, as dois him fear and serve,
And all without desert, for what can worms and dust deser^?
Na nathing (Lord) bot all proceids, and flowed first from thee.
O mortels: sen we merit not, yet let us thankful be,
Acknowledge what society sure, it pleases God to have,
With all the human kind and how, he loves it by the laue:
For men on earth the mark of God, and Image bright he bears,
And Christ in heaven the nature weak, of man be waild and wears,
Christ vanquished death, the devil and hell, and hes suppressed their heid,
He surely is the savior sweet, of sinful Adams seid.
Lord, lose not thy redeemed flock, Christ's death were then in vain
Bot let thy favor and thy grace, with mortals ay remain:
And thou (O man) with all the gifts, where with thou art endued,
Extol the Lord, let ay his praise, and glory be renewed,
Thy domicile and dwelling place, Christ Jesus hes prepared
Above, quhilk blis but end salbe thy last and best reward,
The word and covenant of the Lord, his promises are sure,
Man's joy and mercies of the Lord, for ever shall endure.
But now my lips, and thou my Lute ming melody amang
Again unto the mighty God, go sing a newar sang,
Of the day Estivall. III.
O Perfect light, quhilk schaid away,
The darkness from the light, Genesis 1. 4. 16,

And set a ruler over the day,
Ane other over the night.
Thy glo^ie when the day forth flies,
Mair viuely dois appear,
Nor at midday unto our eyes.
The shining Sun is clear. The crepuscule mantutni^

The shadow of the earth anon,
Remooues and draws by,
Sine in the East, when it is gone,
Appears a clearer sky.
Quhilk Sun perceaues the little larks,
The lapwing and the snyp,
And tunes their sangs like natures clarks,
Over midow, mure, and stryp.
Bot every bais'd nocturnall beast,
Na langer may abide,
They hy away both may and least,
Them selves in house to hide.
They dread the day fra they it see,
And from the sight of men.
To saits, and couars fast they flee,
And Lions to their ven.
Our Hemisphere is poleist clein,
And lightened more and more,
While every thing be clearly sein,
Quhilk seemed dim before.
Except the glistering astres bright,
Which all the night were clear,
Offusked with a greater light,
Na langer dois appear.
The golden globe incontinent, A description of the morning.

Sets up his shining head,
And eu'r the earth and firmament,
Displayes his beims abread.
For joy the birds with boulden throts,
Agains his visage shein,
Takes up their kindly music nots.
In woods and gardens grein.
Up braids the careful husbandman,
His corns, and vines to see,
And every tymous artisan.
In buith work busily.
The pastor quits the slothful sleep.
And passis forth with speed,
His little camow-nosed sheep,
And rowtting kie to ^eede.
The passenger from perrels sure.
Gangs gladly forth the way:
Breife, every living creature,
Takes comfort of the day,
The subtle mottie rayons light,
At rifts they are in won,
The glansing thains, and vitre bright,
Resplends against the sun.
The dew upon the tender crops,
Like pearls white and round,
Or like to melted silver drops,
Refreshes all the ground.
The mystie rock, the clouds of rain,
From tops of mountains skails,
Clear are the highest hills and plain,
The vapors takes the vails,
Be garied is the sapphire pend,
With spraings of skarlet hew,
And preciously from end till end,
Damasked white and blew,
The ample heaven of fabrik sure,
In cleannes dois surpas,
The crystal and the siluerpure,
Or clearest poleist glass.
The time sa tranquil is and still.
That na where sall ye find,
Saife on ane high, and barren hill,
Ane air of peeping wind.
All trees and simples great and small,
That balmie leise do beir,
Nor they were painted on a wall,
Na mair they moan or steir.
Calm is the deep, and purpour se,
Ye smuther nor the sand,
The walls that woltring wont to be,
Are stable like the land.
Sa silent is the cessile air,
That every cry and call,
The hills, and dails, and forest fair,
Again repeates them all.
The rivers fresh, the callor streams,
Over rocks can softly rin,
The water clear like crystal seames,
And makes a pleasant ^in.
The fields, and earthly superfice,
With verdure green is spread,
And naturally but artifice,
In party coulors cled.
The flurishes and fragrant flowers,
Throw Phoebus fostring heit,
Refresht with dew and silver showers,
Casts up ane odor swett.
The clogged busy bumming beis,
That never thinks to drown,
On flowers and flourishes of treis,
Collects their liquor brown. A descripri on of the midday.

The Sun may like a speedy post.
With ardent course ascends,
The beauty of the heavenly host,
Up to our Zenith tends.
Nocht guided be na Phaeton,
Nor trained in a chyre,
Bot he the high and haly on,
Quhilk dois all where impire.
The burning beims down from his face,
Sa fervently can beat:
That man and beast now seeks a place
To save them fra the heat.
The brethles flacks draws to the shade.
And frechure of their ^ald,
The startling nolt as they were made,
Runs to the rivers called.
The herds beneath some leaffie try,
Amids the flowers they lie,
The stabill ships upon the sey,
Tends up theirsails to dry.
The heart, the hynd, and fallow dear,
Are tapisht at their rest,
The fowls and birds that made thee bear,
Prepares their pretty nest.
The rayons dures descending down,
All kin^lis in a gleid,
In city nor in borrough stowne,
May nane set forth their heid.
Back from the blew paymented whun,
And from ilk plaster wall:
The hot reflexing of the sun,
Inflams the air and all.
The labowrers that timellie rai^
All weary saint and weak:
For heat down to their houses gaise,
Noone-meate and sleep to take.
The callowr wine in cave is sought,
Men's brothing breists to cule:
The water called and clear is brought,
And sallets steipt in vle.
Sum plucks the honey plowm and pear,
The cherrie and the pesche,
Sum likes the rhyme, and London bear,
The body to refresh,
Forth of their ^keeps some raging bees,
Lies out and will not cast,
Some other swarms hyves on the trees,
In knots togidder fast.
The corbeis, and the kekling kais,
May scarce the heat abide,
Halks prunzeis on the sunnie brais,
And wedders back, and side.
With gilted eyes and open wings,
The cock his courage shawes,
With claps of joy his breast he dings,
And twenty times he crawes.
The dow with whisling wings sa blew,
The winds can fast collect,
Her pourpour pens turns money hew,
Against the sun direct.
Now noone is went, gain is midday, A descripti on of the evening.

The heat dois slake at last,
The sun descends down west away,
Fra three of clock be past.
A little cule of braithing wind,
Now softly can arise,
The warks throw heat that lay behind,
Now men may enterprise.
Forth fairis the flocks to seek their fude,
On every hill and plain,
Quhilk labourer as he thinks good,
Steps to his turn again.
The rayons of the Sun we see,
Diminish in their strength,
The schad of every tower and tree,
Extended is in length.
Great is the calm for every quhair,
The wind is sitten down,
The reik thrawes right up in the air,
From every tower and town.
Their firdoning the bony birds,
In banks they do begin,
With pipes of reides the iolie hirds,
Halds up the mirrie din.
The Maveis and the Philomeen,
The Stirling whissilles loud,
The Cuschetts on the branches green, The ere* puscule ve^pertine*

Full quietly they crowd.
The gloming comes the day is spent,
The Sun goes out of sight,
And painted is the occioent,
With pourpour sanguine bright.
The Skarlet nor the golden threid,
Who would their beawtie try,
Are nathing like the color reid,
And beauty of the sky.
Our West Horizon circuler,
Fra time the Sun be set,
Is all with rubies (as it were)
Or Rosis reid ou'rfret.
What pleasour were to walk and see,
Endlang a river clear,
The perfect form of every tree,
Within the deep appear?
The Salmon cut of cruifs and creils,
Up hailed into skowts,
The bells, and circles on the weills,
Throw lowpping of the trouts.
O: then it were a seemly thing,
While all is still and calm,
The praise of God to play and sing,
With cornet and with shalme.
Bot now the birds with money schout,
Calls vt^er be their name,
Ga Billie turn our good about,
Now time is to go ^ame.
With belly fow the beatres beliue,
Are turned fra the corn,
Quhilk soberly they hameward driur,
With pipe and lilting horn.
Throw all the land great is the gild,
Of rustik folk that cry,
Of bleiting sheep fra they be filled,
Of calves and rowting ky.
All laborers draws have at even,
And can till other say,
Thanks to the gracious God of heaven,
Quhilk send this summer day.
To his sorrowful saull, conso lation. IIII.
Jmmortall Spirit, my best, may perfect part,
Why dois thou thus thy self consume with caire?
O noble chieftain of my manly heart,
Why art thou thus with thought ou'r-set sa saire?
Why is thy grief augmented mair and mair?
Why art thou sad, and sorry to the dead?
Why art thou almaist drowned in deep despair,
And comfort nane can find, nor na remeid:
Hear in the flesh thou taistis the pains of hell,
Thou vthers helps (my saull) now cure thy sell.
My heart is faint, my flesh consumes away,
Within my veins the blood is skant and called,
My bains thy bow, my strength dois clean decay,
My hairs are schyre and gray, yer I be ald,
My march it melts, my febill limbs thy fauld,
My skin is dry, my hide hes lost the hew,
My force it faillis to do the thing I wald,
My beauty faids, my face is paill and blew,
My sight is dim, for sunken ar mine eyes
How in my head, and all throw thy diseis.
Into this life thou knawis their is na rest,
But daily pain, inconstancy and grief,
For quhen thou alwayis vois attend the best,
Perchance sall come the greatest new mischief:
Thou knawis thy stay, and only true rel^efe,
Quhair thou in thrall hes comfort fund before,
Embrace thy God with prayer and belief,
And in the end thou sall triumph with glore:
Beware, and wise thy fa^s the nocht be gile,
Loss not thy right for suffering hear a quhile.
Thou hes not yet bein threttie yeirs and ane,
Into this fleshly prison resident,
And lo the half neereby the space is gane,
Quhilk to remain here nature hes thee lent,
Ye natures course the Lord he will prevent,
And call thee ham^, if that he think it good:
Or if he length this life, hald thee content,
And be commander of the flesh and blood:
While thou art heart (my saull) see thou contend,
This point of time in worthy warks to spend.
Though thou a stranger be, and thinks great lang,
Anon thou sall pas to thy native land,
The hiest judge he will revenge thy wrang,
His sentence sure the earth can nocht gainstand,
The day is near, the hour it is at hand,
The mighty God will come without delay,
Deliver sall his awin afflicted band,
And from thine eyes sall wipe the tears away:
Hope and reioise, for in the midds of strife, ^eu. (...). ^.

Thou sall be sure of comfort in this life.
And in the end when death would thee devore,
Her mortal stang sall nocht take halde on thee,
Bot be her means she sall the quite restore,
Unto thine awin eternal liberty,
With little pain thou sall dissolved be,
Forth of the bands of flesh where thou art bound,
Sine like a foull aloft sall swiftly fly,
And leave the body breathles on the ground:
With agile wings thou sall transcend the sky,
In sepulchree the corpse sall sleiping ly.
The angels sall with singing thee convoy,
Throw air and fire up to the heavens sa bright,
Where thou sall dwell in blis and perfect joy,
With happy saul's and messengers of light,
Free from the thoughts and sorrows of the night,
Uoide of all care, calamity and fear,
For of the Lord thou sall enjoy the sight,
In whom all grace, and pleasour sall appear.
With Christ thy head thou happy sall remain, 1. These. 4. 14.

To judge the dead, while he return again.
O happy death to life the ready way,
The end of grief, and salve of sorrows all,
O pleasant sleep thy pains they are bot play:
Thy coup is sweet, although it taste of gall,
Thou brings the bound, and wretched out of thrall,
Within the port sure from the stormy blast,
For after death na mischief may befall,
Bot woe, wan-chance, and perrels all are past,
Of kindly death nane should affraied be,
Bot sick as hope for na felicity.
The day sall come when all the planets seven, Mat. 24.

Sall lose their light, and mighty influence,
The glistering starnis, and powers of the heaven,
Their force sall fail, and haill magnificence,
The saints of God sall suffer violence,
The common course of mortal things sall stay,
The lively word sall get na audience,
For pity, love, and lawtie sall decay:
Then sall the Son of man be seen descend,
Quhilk to all things sall put a final end.
It sall be then as in the days of Noy,
When mortal men continued in their sin, Mat. 24* 1^

They build, they wed, they ^rinke, they live (...) joy,
Into the arc while godly Noy went in:
Yet fear sall fall to hear the awful din,
To see the end and sudden change of all,
The guilty minds avaisedly sall rin,
And wish the hills for fear on them to fall,
Bot vppright men shall clearelie understand,
Their sure relief, and comfort is at hand.
The heavens above with noise shall pass away, 2. Pet. ^. (...)

And be dissolved with hett consuming fire,
The elements sicklike that latter day,
Shall melt with heat and tyne their fair attire,
The sea and earth, and all this hail impire,
Sall be brunt up, and every thing shall burn,
Contained theirin, flesh, body, bain, and lyre,
Man maid of ash to ashes sall return:
Bot God the Lord, whose promissis are true,
For heaven and earth hes height us vthers new. Isa 65 17 66. 22. Reu. 21* 1^

Who can devise? or yet he words expres?
What heart can think? or high ingine invent?
The majesty the perfect holiness,
The glory great, the beauty excellent,
The shining light, the heavenly ornament,
The day, the way, or yet the appointed place,
Of Christ's d^scense, down throw the firmament, Psalm. 110. 1. 1. Cor. 15. 25

When all his foes shall fall before his face?
No (Lord) our wit na higher can atteine,
Nor be thy word is set before our eine.
As fiery flauches with sudden thundering thuds, Mat 24, 27

And glansing gleims, shines all the world throughout:
Sa sall the Lord appear into the cluds, 1. These. 4. 16. Mat. 24. 3^

With leaming light, and with a sudden shout,
The angels clear shall compass him about,
With mighty sound the trumpets blast sall blaw,
The dead sall hear, and rise all in a rout,
And all that sleep in Christ sall thither draw: 1. Cor* 15. 23. O^id. 1.
M^amor. fab, 7. 1. Cor. 15. ^5.

Then thou (my saull) this body sall resume,
To meet the Lord and see the day of dume.
Sum sayis that Pyrrha women made of stains,
And men were formed be Deucalion.
But certainly of deid corrupted bains:
A livelie corpse that day sall rise anon,
Yea be the word, and wark of God alone,
As kindly corn cummes of the rottin seid,
Or flowers reverts that withered were and gone:
Sa sall all flesh reu^ue that taisted deid,
Be sea or land, sen first the world began:
This may the Lord, quhilk of dust creat man. ^. These. 4. 15. 1^.

Quhen all the dead obeyed hes the blast,
And clad themselves with immortality,
Then sall proceid the living at the last,
Quhilks sall not sleip, nor yet dissolved be,
But in ane clap and twinkling of ane ey^, 1. Cor. 15* 51. 52. 53.

They sall be changed, and all transformed new,
An substance pure, apt for eternity,
Clean, incorrupt, and of ane heavenly hew:
Swa both the quick and dead sall them prepare.
Syne mount and meit Christ Jesus in the air.
The judge may Just with justice sall proceid, ^. These. 4. 17.

Quhair na defense, nor cautele, sall availl,
Na butie, blude, nor riches sall remeid,
But wealth and wit, friends, force, and all sall faill:
Quhen all the world sal be convened haill,
Before the throne, that feirfull sight to se,
His a win elect the Lord sall then out-waill, Man. 25. 31

At his right hand quhilks sall all planted be.
Then sall he say: Cum have your right reward,
My blessed flock quhilk was for you prepared.
But at the left, and on the other hand,
In qua^king dread, in misery and woe,
The (...) troup of climinals sall stand,
To whom the dume sall be pronounced so: Mat. 25. 41

O ye accu^st into the hels ye go:
For ugly devils a just prepared ^yre,
Ye knew me not, therefore I know ye no,
Pas to be cast in everlasting fire:
In dying death ye weeping sall remain,
And gnashing teeth, into the endless pai^e.
O tyrants proud, O stinking worms and dust,
O infidels and libertines prophain,
Ye obstinate and Judges may unjust,
Remord ye nocht to hear this speiking plain?
Or think y^ not that Christ shall cum again,
Though for a time he patiently you spair?
O brutall beists, your thoghts are false and vain,
Your punishment it is reserved their:
Watch and b^ware the diet is unkind, Mat. ^4. 36

Stoup and repent while ye have grace to mend.
Then thou my saull with great triumph and glore,
With saints assembled on the other side*
Sall take the corpse quhair thou was first before,
Unto the high and holy cietie wide,
With melody we sall all thither glide,
Sing and rejoice even as the Lord hes said,
Into that blis and lasting life to bide,
Prepaird for us before the earth was laid:
So when the Sun ^es finished every thing.
To God may high he sall re^it the ringe.
Bot now my heart within my bowdin breist
I feill reuert and wondrously reveif,
My saull siklike her sorrowing she hes ceist,
And of my sang a perfect Joy can preif:
The life to come so firmly I believe,
That though all flesh to death were ready boun
I should be sure the Lord wald me relieve,
Thought all the world were turned vp-side down:
Lord, hallowed be thy holy name divine,
For power, praise, the reign, and all is thine.
Thanks for deliverance of the sick. V.
Q^hy dois my silent tung repose, and hald her peace?
Quhy dois my voice, the worthy praise of God, from singing cease?
My ^outhfull lips that should pronounce, ar closed night and day.
My mouth is sealed up as though* I had nathing to say,
Behald with money holocaust, and undeserved glore,
The pagane blind his mightles God, and idol dois adore:
The altar with the blude of beasts, is sprinkled be the Jew,
He makis a smuike, and smelling sweet for payment of his vow.
And should not I, an impe of Christ, rede^ed from my sin,
Ane sacrifice of thanks present: But quhair sall I begin:
For quhy? our God in all respects, is infinite perfect,
Yea, more divine nor Man can think, conceive or yet indite,
All good, all just, all wise and true, all merciful, and kind,
Almighty, strange, and liberal, all provident in mind.
Yet as I haight, so sall I hald, to magnify the Lord,
Quhilk h^s the pyning patient, again to health restord.
The wonderful and diverse means can not be fully shawin*
Quhairby the Lord the wicked wraikes and conquisis his a win:
Be w^ire, be want, be loss of friends, be grievous thought and care,
Be servitude, be lang exile, ^e sickness sharp and sare.
The Monarch great, the tirant proud, the liver insolent,
Quhen ^e the mighty hand of God, as air dis^ase is sent,
For all their force ano^e they faint, they are dejected law,
From all society and game, themselves they do withdraw:
May like the Dear quhilk wonted is, with gun, or deadly dart,
Flies from the heard to sum desert, quhair he may lie apart:
^ust, luxury, (...) deintie fair, they raik not by a leik,
Na mi^th nor earthly vanity, (...) pleasant to the seik.
Quha wald not in his heavy plight, and cruel pining pain,
All worldly wealth and glore r^nunce, to have his health again?
The bew^full wald lose his hew, the strange wald quite his strength.
The rich his store his threasor great, and ^ertile lands of length:
The burning may ambitious breist, wald quite his noble fame,
And be content without renoum, to lead his lise at haine.
Bot all in vain the bir^ist gold, nor heaps of silver bright,
The stately stains, the jewels rich, nor buildings huge of hight:
The brave dependers mon^e ane, nor highest dignities,
May not their duyning master mend, nor yet his torment ^ase:
The precious drinks medicinal, sum sweit, sum bitter sower,
Nor minerals may not prolong his loathsome life ane hour:
Whom God a^is be his judgment just, appointed hes for deid,
Na medicine, na elixir, nor mon^e may reme^d.
When irefullie Antiochus, from Persia lute draw,
Into ^is rage he made a vow, the Jews to ouerthraw,
Agains the sa^les saints of God, to turn his cruel face,
And make Jerusalem for Jews, a common burial place:
Bot in his pride the Lord him smote, while he was thither bown,
With sick disease that from his couche, for faintnes he fell down:
Sick bitter pain remediles his bowels did divide,
That of his flesh the men about, might nocht the stink abide:
And nocht appeased was the Lord (a fearful thing to hear)
While be the naughty worms his corpse consumed was inteir.
The Lord sicklike when least be weind, may justly maid to fall,
The thryse extreme Herodian pride, be litil vermin small,
While be did persecute the k^rke, and li^es of preachers sought,
They greedily deuord him quich, and eat him up to naught,
With uncouth, and in^ura bill diseases wonder fell,
Even from the earth the Lord cuts of the wicked that rebel.
Bot as the sickness justly sent confounds the fais of God,
Sa serves it to his servants of a needful whipping r^d:
For luke as when the little child, gainstands the fathe^s will,
Ca^s down his face with froward looks, and (...) dois ill:
The wise and loving father then, puts to his gentill (...),
And for his weill with aw^ull boast lays on the biting wand,
Quhill tawnd with strypes, the tender chilo, with sobs and monse tesre
And reuthfull skreikes cries often alace, Gods mercy fa^er dear,
^a when the children of the Lord, transgreised hes his law,
And blinded with their awin delights, their dewtie dois misanaw,
He takes the rod and sickness sends, the punishment of sin,
And strikes the flesh with torment sair, external and within:
Quhill all def^it the sickly saull, unfeignedly repent,
Sine on this ways, unto the Lord direct his heavy plent.
I mon confess (O mighty God) I have offended thee,
And justly through my great trespass, deserved hes to die,
In serving thee I have bin slack, I have unthankful been,
My cheritie was growin called, my life it was vncleene:
For quhilk I feel thy sellon wraith, against me kendled het,
How can I lift, my head and heart with sickness are ouerset,
I taist na kind of fude by day, I take na rest by night,
The figour only of a man, but only force or might:
Bot (Lord) when thou art boune to strike, quha dow abide thine ire*
Thou knawis that I am frail, therefore forbear me I desire,
Forgive me anis, restore my strength, relieve me of this pain,
And all that mis I sall amend, and sall not sin again,
All this and mair with broken voice, and hands to heaven out-spred,
The Godly patient he powrs out, upon his careful bed:
The highest God from heaven benalds, and is content to see,
The sinner earnestly repent, and to his mercy flee:
Then be his halie helping hand, he raises from the dust,
The pure afflicted faithful saull, intending to be just,
He makes the physic take effect, the slummers soft he geifis,
The force quhilk did before decay, from day to day reveisis:
While to the glory of the Lord, and joy of his elect,
He fully to their health restore, them whom he did deiect:
The godly Hezekiah king, was sick in great distres,
And be the Prophet wairnd, that he sold never conuales:
Bot when he called to the Lord, and wept with bitter tears,
The God of health withdrew the rod, and to his plaint gave ears:
The morning thrice had nocht renewed her heavenly ornament,
When to the temple of the Lord, to worship he up went,
And thrice five belthie happy years, were granted him so least,
In sign whereof, that he such heichts might constantly believe,
The Sun retird haill ten degrees from Occident till East.
What vails the waters of the wols, or pardons of a priest,
O pilgrim blind, what can the bains of men prolong thy days?
That God is gever of the health, whom sun and Moon obayes.
Right sa the just and suffering Job, a mirror to the rest, Job. 11^. and. 2.
7. ^. 4* 1. 7* 17 and. 42. 10.

Was he nocht sair with byles, and bruiks, and pou^rtie epprest?
From head to heel with botches black, his body was (...),
Contemnet be his wise and friends, the ashes were his bed:
Yet when the Lord him tried had, his health he did restore,
And purchased to himself thereby, an^ everlasting glore.
This then we see: the mighty God, the cross of sickness sends,
Unto his a win adopted sons, to money diverse ends,
Now as a plegue, now as a pruife, that man may clearly know:
How he is weak, and of himself cannot fulfill the law,
Now as a prick to call to mind quhat evil is, and good,
To move the ^ull forgetful heart, demerst in flesh and blood.
What bitter tears? what inwart fighs? what servent prayers deep?
Be sicklike means the Lord draws out, of them that are a sleep?
Even as beforce forth of the flint, is forced the fyrie spreit:
Or as the Be, out of the weids, extracts the honey sweit,
^ne hundredth heavenly thoughts, the sick will meditate in mind,
Contemn the world, and man's conceits to wickedness inclind,
^iuinely with themselves discourse, of money pleasant thing,
Quhilk they forget, and in their health, to mind could never bring.
O gracious rod, whereby the Lord and man are reconcealed,
O happy sickness of the flesh, whereby the saull is healed,
O meruellous great mediciner, and sovereign mediceine,
Quhilk be the body to the s^ull, dois mightily atteine.
Of sickness sower the end is sweet, for be these sharp diseasi^,
^e wunds the senseles hearts of men, quhilk pleasor cauteris^:
^ot mightily he raises up the faithful when they fall.
I have been seik, and to the Lord did airly cry and call,
Quhilk ever did exhause my voice, and healed me with speed,
^boue my wit he did provide, and send me help at need:
Nocht only me ^e did relieve, when I was sair affrayed.
Bot also from the dure of death, even them for whom I prayed.
He is the rare physician wise, the true Medicinar,
In Chirurgie of per fire skill, the traist Apothecar:
And all that falsely is asseryued to Esculapius,
To Zoroast, till Apuleie or to Democritus:
He can perform in ver^e deed, he can the dolor swage,
Restore the health prolong the days, renew the widdered age,
Revive the dead, and sins forgive, the only source of all,
Quhile I may last (O living Lord) thy praises sing I sall.
I sall thee vlis quhill vital braith within my breist remains,
Quhill I have memory or wit, or heat within my veins,
For all thy gifts and graces great, thou granted hes to me,
With thankful heart this sacred sang, I dedicate to thee:
Lord, try me nocht with sair assalts, least suddenly I slide,
Bot if thou try, augment my strength, sick trial to abide:
And syne to serve and worship thee, I presently intend,
God give me grace to persevere unto my lives end.
Of Gods omnipotency. VI.
O Every living warldly wight,
Awake and dres your self with speed:
To serve and praise the God of might,
From whom all bounty dois proceed:
For gif ye drift, and still refuse,
The heavens and earth will you accuse.
The brutell beasts but any ^ryse,
They willingly his voice obey:
The creatures that bes na life,
Soto forth his glory day by day:
The earth, the air, the sea, and fire,
Ar subject all to his impire.
The heaven it is his dwelling place,
The earth his littil fute-stule law, Mat. 5. 34 85.

His warks are all before his face:
Of hearts the secreits he dois know,
And every thing as in a glass,
He seis before it cum to pas.
The swift and active sterie spreits,
The Cherubins of substance pure,
They walk amang the bolte streits, ^ King. 2^ 19 Job. 1. 6.

And makes him daily service sure:
Yea, at all times they ready stand,
To gang and cum at his command.
When Jonah in the sea was cast, Jonah. 1. 7. 15. 17. and. ^. ^.

By Lot, for safety of the leave,
A mighty Quhaill did fellow fast,
Prepared the prophet to receive:
Quhilk at command did him deuore,
Sine brought him safely to the shore.
And as Eliah lurking lay,
Lang solitar by Cherith side, 2. King. 1^ 5. 6.

The ravens left their common pray,
His sustenance for to provide,
As they were charged him to feed,
They brought him daily flesh and bread.
Quha learned Balaams brutall ass, Number. 22. 23.

The angel of the Lord to know?
A foot she forward wald not (...),
That way where she him standing saw,
Bot spoke that marvel was to see,
Against her masters cruelty.
The roaring lions fires and fell, Dan. 6. ^. 22. 23. Mat. 8. 28.

Brought up and baited ay with blood,
They spard the godly Daniell,
Exposed to them in place of fude:
Sa fishes, fouls, and ravenous beists,
Of God may high they hald the heists.
The very devils dare nocht ^ebell,
Against his Majesty and might,
The spreits unclean he did err ell,
Forth of the pure possessed wight,
Quha but his privilege divine,
Durst na way enter in the swine.
Into the prophets mouths the spreit, ^. King. ^. ^1.

Of lies could never enter in,
Quhile he did license first entreat:
Of God the Lord, for Ahabs sin,
Quhilk be that means did him entyse,
His awin defait till enterprise.
His halie statute to fulfill,
And potent power to declaire,
The massiue earth reposis still,
Suspended in the cessill eire:
And at her dew appointed hours,
Brings forth may pleasant fruits and flowers.
Quhat thing is fiercer nor the sea?
Mair raging nor the awful deep?
Quhilk back retird at his decrie,
And dois her bounds and marchis keep: Genesis 1. 9. ^ Exodus 14. ^.

Syne at his charge apart stude by,
To make his host a passage dry.
Without the subtle air but dout,
Na plaint nor living thing may left:
Therefore it cleaues the earth about,
And is in every place possessed,
Then as his godly wisdom wald,
Decernes the seasons hett and called.
The brimstane and the burning fire,
May sudenely from heaven fell down, Genesis 19. 24

For to consume into this ire,
Both Sodom, and, Gomorrah town:
Bot in the fiery furnace he,
Preserved safe the children three.
The mighty winds blaws to and fra, Dan. ^. 23.

From every airth be day and night,
We hear them thudding by us ga,
Yet not conceaues them with our sight:
Bot in a clap the Lord to please,
Their blasts they quietly appease.
Like flocks of fowls the clouds above,
Forth flies and couers all the sky:
Again they suddenly remove,
We wat not where nor reason why:
Bot till obey his holy law,
They pour out rain, sharp hail, and snaw.
Behald the fearful thunder crack,
And fiery flauchts sa violent,
Appears nocht in the cloudis black,
Quhile be the highest they be sent:
The hearts of men are dashed with fear,
Sik lights to see, and claps to hear.
The heaven sa high, sa clear of hew,
Declares his power passing weill:
Sua swift of course ay recent new,
Revoluing like a turning wheill,
Nane knows whereof the globe is made,
Quhais be autie at na time dois fade.
He made the Sun a lamp of light,
A woll of heat to shine by day,
He made the Moon to guide the night:
And set the starnis in good array,
Orion, Pleiads, and the Vrse,
Observes their dew prescriued course.
O Poets: paganes impudent,
Quhy worship ye the planets seven?
The glore of God be you is spent,
On Idols and the host of heaven,
Ye pride your pens men's ears to pleis,
With fables and fictitious leis,
Your knowledge is bot ignorance,
Your cunning curiosity:
I find your facund eloquence,
Repleete with fekles fantasy:
Ye never knew the lively rod,
Nor gospel of the sun of God.
He is above Mercurius
Above Neptunus on the sea,
The winds they know not Eolus:
Their is na Jupiter but he,
And all your Gods both great and small,
Are of na force for he is all.
Bot sons of light ye know the truth,
Extol the Lord with heart and mind,
Remove all stays and sluggishsleuth,
Obey his voice for he is kind:
That heaven and earth may witness bear,
Ye love that God which bought you dear.
The triumph of the Lord, after the manner of men. VII.
Alluding to the defait of the Spanish nauie^ in the year, 1588.

TRiumphant Lord of armies and of hosts,
Thou hes subdued the universal coasts:
From South to North, fom East till Occident,
Thou shawes thy self great God armipotent:
O captains, Kings, and Christian men of weir,
Gar harraulds haist in coats of armor cleir,
For to proclaim with trumpet and with shout:
A great triumph th'vniuers throughout:
For certainly the Lord he will be knawin,
And have that praise quhilk justly is his a win.
O ye that wuns amang the pleasant feilds,
Quhair fertile crofts their yearly profit yealts,
And all that heigh up in the hieland dwells:
Amang the mures, the mountains, and the wells,
And ye that in she forest fare remain,
Far from the burghs, ga to the burghs again:
Both man and maids, put on your garments gay:
And ornaments made for the holy day,
Leave of your wark, let al your labor be:
This brave triumph, and royal feast to se.
Let cities, kirks, and every noble town.
Be purified, and decked up and down,
Let all the streets, the corners, and the rewis,
Be str^wd with leaves, and flowers of diverse he wis,
With birke, and laurel of the wod^ is wild,
With ^auendar, with Thime, and Cammamild:
With Mint and Medwortes seemly to be seen,
And lu^kin Gowanes of the meadows green,
Let temples, stairs, the porchis, and the ports,
And windows wide quhair luickers on resorts,
With tapistrie be hung, in Turkey sought,
With claith of gold, and silver richly wrought,
Let every place, and palice be repleat
With fine perfume, and fragrant odors sweat,
Suffumigat with nard and cinnamon,
With myrhe, and must, camphyre, and bdellium,
With incence frank, Aloes, Calamus,
With Saffran, Mastick, and Iuniperus.
Expose your gold, and shyning silver bright,
On covered copbuirdes set in opin sight,
Ou'rgilted coups, with carved couers clear,
Fine precious stains, quhair they may best appear,
Lawers in ranks, and silver baissings shine,
Saltfats outshorne, and glasses chrystalline.
Make scaffalds clare for cumlie comedies,
For pleasant plays, and moral tragedies:
All to decore with joy, and ane accord,
This new triumph, and Sabbath of the Lord.
Right as the point of day begins to spring,
And Larks aloft melodiouslie to sing,
Bring forth all kind of instruments of weere,
To ga before and make a noyce clear:
Gar trumpets sound the awful battalls blast,
On dreadful drumms gar strik alarm fast,
Make shouting shalms and persing phiphers shall,
Clean cleave the cluds, and piers the h^est hill,
Cause mightily the weirly notis breik:
On hieland pypes Scots, and Hibernik,
Let heir the shraichs of deadly Clarions,
And syne let of a volie of cannons,
Quhill quhat for reick, rude rummishing, and reard,
The heavens resound, and trimbling take the eard.
L^ enter sine in proper painted carts,
The buting rich, brought from the fardest parts,
And ample pray quhilk great Jehovah wan,
From his (...), sen first the world began.
Their s^ll be sein the ensigneis displayed,
Bright baners braid, and standdards weill arrayed,
Sum white and reid, sum yeallow, grein, and blew,
Quhilk God perforce out of their hands threw:
The portrators of every vanquest town,
Of Cittadells, and rampires of renoune,
The lifely form of fousseis large and deep,
The modalls great of castills eith to keep,
The form of forths invincible to se,
Of mighty walls, and ramforst towers so hie,
Demolist all, into a birdis nest:
With great and just artailzerie celest.
Sa sall be seen the figoures of the flots,
With fearful flags, and weill calfuterd bots,
Of gallays swift, and many gallias,
Quhilk through the seas but perrell thought to pas,
Fair seemly ships of four, five hundredth tuns,
All furnished full of fire warks, and of guns,
Quhair^f be force their was sum captives led,
Sum clean defait, sum fugitives and fled:
Yet from the Lord na way could find to fly,
Bot in their flight were tossed on the sie:
The waitering walls, and raging windy blast,
Maid up their towes, and caused them hew their mast,
And sine were cast for all their brags and bost,
Sum on a schald, sum on ane yrin cost,
Sum gaid in tua buird on ane foreign lan^,
Sum on a rok, sum on a whirling sand,
Quhile nane were safe vnperisht to be found,
Bot men and all went to the water ground.
Let follow nixt in ordor to be sein,
Their armor clear, and warlike wapins schein
Hard halecrets, helmets, and hewmonts bright,
Ticht habe^schons, habriks, and harneis light,
Murrious for men of fute, and shining sheilds,
Barding for horse appointed for the fields,
Gantlets ou'rgilt, wambraissis gainand weill,
Corslets of pruit, and money targe of s^eill,
Sum varneist bright, sum dorred diuersi^e,
That men may muse sic precious gei^ to see.
Th'^lk samin wayis, exemple for to give,
Draw in on ^eaps their armor offensive,
Great ordinance, and feilding pieces fell,
Muskets may meit with men of arms to mell,
Hagbuts with lunts, Pistolles with rowets fine,
Swift (...) darts deuisd be great ingine,
Crosbowes of weight, and Gnosik gainyeis kein,
Strange pousing picks the charge plaist to sustein,
Bunshes of speirs, and Lances light, and lang,
Steill ax, and mass, for barded horses strange,
Fine arming swords, and other grunding glaues,
Quhilk maid na stead when they were rendered slaves,
Their guns misgaue, theirspeirs like buinwands brak
Their fainted hearts for fear retird aback.
Their thresours rich, wherein they put their trust,
To all the world salbe maid manifest:
Let men expres appointed be to beir,
Their silver heaps in plaits of silver clear:
Their silver wark, and precious ornament,
Sall follow next in order subsequent,
Not to their praise, but to their shame and scorn:
Their ^uinzied gold, in baissings sall be borne,
Of moltin gold discovered to be sein:
With precious stains quhilk fed their greedy ^in,
Their goldsmith wark and vessels of great weight,
Token sick sooles agains the Lord to fight.
Let publicly be carried throw the towns,
The diadems, the scepters, and the crowns:
And honored swords of many puissant king,
Whom Iah our God down from their throne did thring
Besides these things use all the means ye may,
To sanctify the Lord that solemn day:
For great Pompeie, nor Paull Emilius
Marck Antony nor Caesar Julius
The Scipioes the hardy brethren two,
Nor nain in Rome triumphed never sa.
When on this ways the buiting is inbroght,
And all their force declared to be naught,
The emperors, and kings sall ga behind,
That greater nain was ^n the earth to find.
As men defait ^led all in dulefull black,
In coschis traind with slander, shame, and lack:
Their children young, and minzonis in a rout,
Dressed all in ^ule sall march their cos^h about,
With bitter tears, with sighs, and courage called:
When they their Lords in sik estaite behalo,
Their counselors sall gang with drerie cheir:
And count their wit to be b^t sollie mere.
The multitude then diversely sall deim,
And of that fight sall diversely esteim:
For sum sall r^n and gase them in the face,
And sair be wail to see them in sick case,
Yea they that wished their wrack and death before,
Their misery sall mein and pity sore.
Bot sum sa soon as they them see ga by,
Sall heave their hands and make a mighty cry,
Deride their force and shout into their e^r:
Take their the kings quhilk made the Lord the weir.
Ane other sort sall such, and whisper thus,
Hear is behald a matter marvelous:
Their monarchs great con^ided in their strength,
And thought by force to win the world at length:
To way the hills, and right up to the skies,
Bot now their pride and puissance broken lies:
Kings are bot men, men are bot worms and dust,
The God of heaven is only great, and just.
Bot now I leave the ordor and array,
Of men defait and entering of the pray:
Over whom the Lord triumphed hes or now,
And sall triumph for he hes maid a vow,
To put his fais to flight and open shame,
To purchase him a praise and lasting name.
I will the form now summarly set down,
How Christian Kings, and captains of renown,
Sall enter in the burghs that holy day,
What they sall do, what they sall sing and say:
Their perfect joy and pleasour to expres,
To magnify the might and holiness
Of God the Lord the great triumphe^ strange:
The chastiser of wickedness and wrang.
Even sik (I say) as Jove our God erected,
As instruments and messengers directed,
To woork his wark, and fight into his field
Sall armed be that day with spear and shield,
Both horse and suit in weirlike manner dressed:
In glittering gear quhilk brauest is and best,
All weill arrayd in squadrons, troops and bands,
May muster-like: syn, in their doughtie hands,
Ilk man a palm, and laurel branch sall bear,
The proper sign of victory in weir,
And on their heads sall have their laurel crowns:
Sa sall they march and enter in the towns,
As conquerers, and soldarts of the Lord,
Quhilk valliantlie with courage and accord,
Were reddie bent till execute his charge,
And fight beneath his blissed banner large.
The music then, and heavenly harmony
Of instruments accorded in a kie,
May musical and delicate to get,
Sall their be heard together sweitly set:
As clarshons clear, douce friddonning of flutes,
The viols swift, and finest Venus lutes,
Joined with the voice of men; and breisting boys,
Quhais measour just sall modulat the noise:
That Cleopatra in her gallay gay,
Nor fingars on saint Cecils holy day:
Empedocles the wise Sicilian,
Nor Orpheus the crafty Thracia^,
Phylirides, nor skillful Arion,
Nor famous lute of cunning Amphion,
Struike never note so pleasant to the eir,
Nor sang sa sweit as they that sall be heir.
Bot quha pretends the puissance to declare,
Right as it is, or enters to compare:
The glore of God with that of mortal men,
Sail tyne bot time, and tire his painful pen,
Als far as light, the darkness dois deface,
Or hell is from the highest holy place,
Als far as sclaues are from the stait of Kings,
Or widdring weids, from everlasting things:
Als far his might surmounts the might of man,
His Pomp and pride, and all the craft he can.
The Romans (...) quhilk had the earth our thrawin,
At their triumphs in chariots great was drawin,
Be diverse beasts quhairin they tuik delight,
For sum were trained be horse of coulor white,
And sum be hearts contrary to their kind,
Be cruining Bulls of heigh and hautie mind,
Be Elephants, and sum be Lions laid,
In claith of gold and finest purpor claid.
But he quhais wraith consumis like burning coals,
Quhilk turns the heavens upon the stable poles:
Hes left the earth, and rydes upon the sky,
Na mortal eyes may face to face espy
The Lord, and live: his chariots are of fire,
He makes the earth to trimble in his ire,
Great Jesus Christ con^ucts his army stout,
The angels bright they compass him about:
His majesty the tounes can nocht contain,
Yet is, and hes be power present bein.
Heave up therefore (ye christian men of weir)
Your hands, your hearts, your eyes, and voices cleir,
Unto the high and great triumpher strange,
That solemn day sine let this be your sang.
The song of the Lords soldiers.
O King of Kings, that sits above,
Thy might, thy mercy, and thy love,
T^ works are wonderful to tell,
In earth thy name mot praised be,
And in tha holy placis h^e,
For nane is like thee but thy sell.
Upon the firmament thou ryds,
And all the world divinely gydes,
To hell thy power dois extend,
Men may imagine, men may devise,
Men may conclude and interprise,
Bot thou dois modifie the end.
This day we magnify thy name,
For thou hes put till open shame,
And turned thy fellon fais to flight,
Their Idols and their armies greit,
Their force availd them not a whit,
Their towers and towns hes felt thy might.
Thou staid the tower of Babylon, Genesis 11.

Unbuilded higher be a stone,
Though Nimrod thought to reach to heaven,
The toungs of men were so confused,
That they their foolish wark refused,
And sundry through the earth were driven, Exodus 13. 21. and 14. 17, 28.

God send to guide his army right,
A cloud be day, a fire be night,
And led them safely through the sie,
For all King Pharaos pride and bost,
His chariots, horsemen, and his host,
Were drowned and fand na way to fly.
Of Jericho he bruisd the wall,
And quickly maid it ^latling fall, Ios. 6.

When as their priests their trumpets blew,
The people maid a mighty shout,
When they had past the town about,
And sa the city overthrew.
Five Kings he chaist at Gibeon, Josh. 10.

And as they fled to Beth-horon,
With hail he flew them by the way,
The Sun and Moon at his command,
Into the lift he maid to stand,
To make the Amorites a pray.
Quha ever hard of armor sick,
Qnhat bullets ever flew sa thick,
As hail stains fell down in that schower?
Na gunners could that bartsene clenge,
They knew not whom on to revenge,
Bot gazed on the heavenly tower.
Be Joshua he wrought their things,
And vainqueist ane and threttie Kings,
As Jorden rins on every side, Josh. 12.

Quhilk may all kings example give,
Sa lang as men on earth may live,
In God the greatest to confide.
He both de visde, and wrought the deeds,
Of Gideon against the Medes, Judge. 7.

And struck the multitude with fear,
Three hundredth men defait their camp,
With trumpet, pitcher, and with lamp:
That was a stratageme of weir.
He strength and manheid by the laue, Judge. 14, 15, and, 16, 1, Sam, 17, 22.
27. 2. Sam, 5, ^,

To Samson, and to David gave,
Quha maid the Philistims to fall,
His a win he mightelie susteins,
Be wonderful and uncouth means,
To shaw that God is guide of all.
The puissant King of Syria, 2. Kings. 7.

Quhen he beseig'd Samaria,
The God of battles succors send,
For in that camp was hard sick din,
Of carts and horse quhilk seemed to rin,
That nain durst bide to see the end.
Quhen proud Saneherib blasphemed,
Invincibill his puissance seemed,
Zit hame with shame he turned again,
Nine score, five thousand on a night, 2, King, 1^

Were smote by them that took the flight,
Sine be his sons, himself was slain.
In weir the Lord gives victory,
From time to time, as we may see,
Be means vnluked for of men:
As he was then, sa is ^e now,
Though faithles folk will never trow,
Quhile be experience they ken.
He is the mighty God of weir,
He strykes his f^es with sudden feir,
Quhen they appear may strong and stout,
The hearts of Kings are in his hands,
He breaks their legs and bloody bands,
And brings his purposis about.
Even in our days have we not sein,
The wicked fall before our ein,
Into their hetest cruel rage?
The greatest dukes and kings anointed,
We saw them lastly disappointed,
And get their weill deserved wage.
As wax is melted by the fire, Psalm. 6^. 2.

Sa be the Lords consuming ire:
The might of man mel^s clean away,
To sick as constantly believes,
He courage and good succes gives,
And will not see their cause decay.
Though for a time the proud prevail,
Their glass will run, their force will fail,
Unto the Lords eternal glore:
And when before our fais we fall,
Be sure our sins are cause of all,
Quhilk we should earnestly deplore.
O Iah our God: be thou our guide,
In battails be thou on our side,
And we sall nather fall nor flee,
Through Christ thy son our sins forgive,
And make us in thy law to live,
That we may praise and worship thee.
The great triumph this way sall take ane end
And all the host sall to the temple wend,
A^ custom is in well arrayed ranks,
With sacrifice of prayers and of thanks:
The soldarts stout sall all receive reward,
For lo, the Lord the banquet hes prepaird:
To feed his boste with heavenly lively fude,
Even with his son Christ's body and his blude:
Quhat should the gifts that lasts bot for a space?
Or drinking of the river Euphrates?
The woll of life (as happy men and blist) Reu. 21. 6.

They sall anis taist, and never mair have thrist.
4. October- 1589.
The humiliation of a sinner. VIII
THe weight of sin is wondrous great,
Quha may that grievous burdin heir?
My God may humbly I submit,
Myself before thy hienes heir:
Oh: rewthfullie incline thine eir.
Unto my pitiful complent:
Thy punishment, and plagues retire.
From me pure pyning penitent.
Quhen darkness hes the heaven revest,
Bot ather Moon or Starnie light,
Quben man and beast are at their rest,
Throw secreit silence of the night,
I woltring like a woeful wight,
Still waking in my bed I ly.
My sins presents them in my sight,
Oh harken, Lord, for help I cry.
My pans^ng dois augment my pain,
Because I cannot be excused,
I am sa often relaps again,
Into the sin quhilk I refused,
Thy clemency I have abused,
Be leading of a wicked life,
My spreit within this flesh infused,
Is like to perish in the strife.
Ah: to my sais then sall I yield?
And all thy mercies great despair?
Ah: sall I now give over the field?
And never look for mercy mair?
Quhilk hes sa often both lait and air,
Sung praise to thee with joyful heart,
No Lord, preserve me from that snare,
And let this cup from me depart.
I have assurance of thy spreit, Mat. 11, 28

That thou the laidned will relieve,
Quhilk cums to thee with heart contreit,
And in thy bounty dois believe:
My feebill faith, O Lord, revive,
For though my sins be like the sand,
Zit thou art abill to forgive,
And raise me with thy helping hand.
Quha can unfeignedly repent?
Quha can from wickedness abstein? La, 5, ^1, John, 6, 44

Unles the grace be to him lent,
To sigh and sob with weeping eyn?
Your prayer profits not a prin,
Except the same from faith proceid:
Let faith and grace in me be grein,
That I may turn to thee in neide.
Lord with my self I am displeased,
And wearies of this burding fast,
Thy wraith therefore let be appeased,
Forget my foul offenses past:
I fear, I faint, I am aghast,
Quhen I perpend mine ^win estait,
Bot this relief I find at last,
My penitence is nocht to late.
Albeit thou be ane upright judge,
Thou art my father not the les,
My buklar and my sure refuge,
My only comfort I confess:
Have pity on my great distress,
Cast nocht me catiue clean away,
Thou knawes the invart heaviness,
For sin I suffer every day.
This then (my God) of grace I crane,
With humble heavy heart of thee,
My sins are like me to deceive,
Bot let me not deceived be,
Take not thy helping hand frame,
For I am fraill and imperfite,
Give me not over to drown and die,
Into my fleshly hearts delight.
Thy working Spreit let me assist,
Into this fellon fechting fell,
That I may valiantly resist,
The flesh, the world the devil and hell,
My secreit sins from me expel,
My nature is corrupt thou knawes,
Make me to practice and forth tell,
Thy precepts, praise, and holy laws.
Their gifts, I grant, I merit not
For I in sin, was borne and bred,
Bot Jesus Christ he hes me bought,
From death even with his blood he shed,
His merits hes me freely fred,
Make me thereof participant,
Let me be with his justice cled,
And counted thy redeemed saint,
Nocht he, but I, has death deserved:
Nocht I, but he, dois merit grace,
For me, naught for himself, he sterued,
With thee to purchase me a place,
Throw him I am in happy case,
Even with thy Godhead reconceiled,
To thee, through him, whom I embrace,
Be praise* quhilk hes these joys reveiled.
Here ends the Hymns.
ANE EPISTLE TO Master Gilbert Mont-creif mediciner to the Kings Majesty,
wherein isset down the experience of the Authors youth.
MY tender friend ( Montcreif medicinar)
To kings is kend thy knawledge singular
Thou shawis thy self be practice evident:
Of natures warks obseruer diligent,
Thy quiet life and decent modesty,
Declares thy cunning in philosophy:
Sen first we were acquaint I ^and thee kind,
Sum medicine assign me for the mind,
My sickness be the symptom sall appear,
Unto my discourse, if thou list give ear.
O happy man is he (I have hard say)
A faithful friend that hes with whom he may,
Of every thing as with himself confer,
As I may do (disert mediciner)
Qu^en pubertie my freedom did enlarge,
And Mercury gave place to Venus charge,
I knew not yet the wavering vame estait:
Of human kind, I knew of na dehait,
Na lurking hait, inuie, nor cursed strife,
As followis fast our short unhappy life:
I traisted not, believe me weill (Montcreif)
The bitter pains, the sorrows, and the grief,
Nor miseries quhilk daily dois betide,
And compassis man's life on every side.
Bot like a chaste and pudick virgin clein,
Inbrought to bide where she had never bein,
Into the house of women, let for hyre,
Quhen she behalds all pleasour at desire,
A lostie troup of Ladies in array,
Sum on a luth, sum on a si^tre play,
Some sangs of love begin and sweetly sing,
And minzionlie sung dansing in a ring,
A lover here, discoursing all his best,
Ane other there, delighting all the rest:
The buir^s decorde with dainty dishes fine,
With diverse drogs, and wafers wet in wine:
A none to dwell the maid dois condescend,
Incertaine quhat sall be her catiue end.
Swa inexpert yet at that time and hour,
I felt the sweet, but had not cund the sour
I thought that nocht was able to remove,
From men on earth, truth, equity, and love,
Nor banish* from their hearts humility,
Reuth, pity, joined with affability,
Bot that the force of reasone should maintein,
The binding band quhilk lastinglie hes bein,
Be nature knit, and ordoned till endure,
Men's amity and friendship to make sure.
For this I often reduced and brought to mind:
How sall men be but until other kind?
Lo, all the wichts that in this valley wuns,
Are brotheren all, are they not Adams suns?
Quhy should a friend his friend and brother gree^,
Sen all are borne of a first mother Eve?
Upon this earth as in a cietie wide,
Like citizens we dwell and dois abide:
And nature hes preferred us to the beasts,
Be prenting reason d^iplie in our breasts:
The barbar rude of Thrace or Tartarie
Of Boheme, Perse, of weirly Getulie,
Of barrain Syrt, and wastie Scythia,
Of Finland, Fresland, and of India,
Of reason they are made participant,
With them quhilk dois the civil cities hant:
The facund Greec, the learnd Athenian,
The Roman stout, the rich Venetian,
The Frenshes franck of great civility
Ar ^blist all to this society.
Then with my self I reasond on this sort,
If this be true quhilk truly I report,
How mekill mair sall love and lau^ie stand
Amang the pepill native of a land,
Quhilk dois embrace, obey, and only know,
A kirk, a King, a language and a law:
Or sick as in a city doie remain,
Particepant of pleasour and of pain:
Or of a race hes lineallie descended
And hes there time and life together spended:
All this and mair I tosted in my thought,
And these effects to se I dowted nocht:
As for my part I plainly did pretend,
My life in peace, in joy, and ease till end,
Into the way to walk and happy rod,
Preseriued be the law and word of God,
To love my friend and neighbor as ray sell,
With lips but lies the simple treuth to tell,
Till euerir man to to keep my promise dew,
And not but right but rigor to persew,
From vice to fly, and virtue till embrace,
Ane upright heart to have in every case,
Contending hearts again to reconceill
Was my pretense, and tender ay their weill,
To fortify my friend in time and need,
With good report, with counsel, and good deed:
And finally what reason taught to crave,
I thought to do, and ay the like receive.
Bot thoughts are vain, my labor was bot lo^
He counts again, that counts without his host.
Through tract of time quhilk swiftly slides away,
And sundry sights occurring day by day,
At last I learnd to mark, and clearly ken,
The course of mortal things, and mortal men,
The maistres sharp of ^uiles experience,
I see the wit the nature and the mind,
Of warldlie wights to wickedness inclind,
And naturally ane austere frawardnes,
The hardened hearts of mortal men posses.
Behald na realm, na cietie nor estait,
Ar void of strife, contention and dehait,
Ilk man his so, like roaring Lions kein,
Waitis to devore with rigor tygerrein:
How few regards we daily may epsy,
Their fallowes los, if they may gain thereby:
Sa hautie minds fulfilled with disdain,
Sa deep deceat, sik glosing language vain,
Men's doubill tungs are not ashamed to lie,
The mair they heght, the wors to trust they be,
Particular gain dois sa ma^s reasone blind,
That skars on earth ane upright can I find,
Sa poisoned breasts with malice and invy
Sum deadly haitis, and cannot shaw you why.
O monstrous beast (inuie) O cruel pest?
Quhair thou remainis their is naquiet rest,
Thou waists the bains, thou blaickenes flesh and blood,
Ay glad of ill, ay enemy to good,
Thou vexed art to see thy brothers weill,
Quhilk vailis thee nocht, nor harms him never a deil.
I try na truth, nor na fidelity,
I see na reuth, nor na nobility,
Na tender love, nor humble gentleness,
As first they say, our fathers did profes,
Bot (...), bot rude austeritie,
Bot ^einzed fraud, and feebili vncourtesie.
Quhen that I had employed my youth and pain,
Four years in France, and was returned again,
Ilangd to learn, and curious was to know:
The consuetude, the custom and the Law,
Qu^airby our native soil was guide aright,
And justice do^e till every kind of wight:
To that effect three years, or near that space,
I hanted may our highest plaiding place,
And senate quhair great causses reasoned were,
My breast was brus'd, with leaning on the bar,
My buttons brist, I partly spitted blood,
My gown was trald and tramped where I stood,
Mine ears were deisd with maissars cries and din,
Quhilk procutors and parties called in:
I daily learnd, bot could not pleased be,
I saw sick things as pity was to see.
Ane house ov'rlaid with process sa misguided,
That sum to late, sum never was decided,
The pure abused ane hundredth diverse lays,
Postpond, differd with shifts, and mere delays,
Co^ sumde in guds, ov'rset with grief and pain,
Zour advocate man be refresht with gain,
Or else he faints to speak or to invent
A good defense or weighty argument,
Ye spill your cause, ye truble him to sair,
Unles his hand anointed be with mair.
Not ill bestowed, he is consulted often,
A good devise is worthy to be cost:
Bot skaffing clarks with couetice inspired,
Till execute their office man be hired,
Na cause they call unless they hyrelings have,
If not, it sall be laid beneath the laue,
Quha them controls, or them offends, but dout,
Their process will be lang in seeking out,
In greatest need sum pieces will be lost,
And then to lait fund on the parties cost,
In every point they will be slack and lang,
The minutes of the process may be wrang,
For acts, decreits, they man have double prise,
If their he have, but ^yre they make it nice:
As sangu^sugs quhilk finds the feeding good,
Cleaue^ to the skin quh^le they be full of blud,
Quhile all the veins be bludles, dry and tume.
Na other ways the simple they consume.
The agent als man have his wage provided,
Least all the cause in absence be misguided:
He will let pass on wilful indignation,
Agains the actor ane stolen protestation,
The poor defender if he lack expenses,
Sall tyne his cause perhaps for null defenses,
The pieces shaw he will, and cause reveill,
For greater gain be he not pleased weill.
And thought the Lords should take good heid thereto,
Yet are they laith to make the house adoo:
"The censor is impropre to correck,
"That in himself hes any kind of bleck:
Even they themselves the ordor partly sp^ls,
With bringing in of heaps of bosom bills,
Their oulks about on friends they do bestow.
With small regard of table or of row.
Alace: s^ck Lords had need of reformation,
Quhair justice may consists in sollistation,
Zit all sollistars cannot justice have,
Bot s^ck as may acquit them by the laue,
A Lord, an^ Earl, or a wealthy man,
A courtier that meikill may and can,
Without delay will come to their intent,
Howbeit there cause it be sum deill on sklent:
Bot simple saul's, unskillful, moyenles,
The pure quhome strange oppressors dois oppres,
Few of their right or causses will take keep,
Their process will sa lang lie over, and sleep,
Quhill often times (there is na other bute)
For poverty they man leave of persute.
Sum senators als weill as skaffing (...),
Are blinded often with blinding buds and bribes.
And mair respects the person nor the cause.
And finds for diverse persons diverse laws,
Our civil, cannon, and municipall,
Should equally be ministered till all:
They mon shaw favor to their awin dependers,
Quhat sa they be persewers or defenders,
I faint to tell their pervers partial pactions,
And how they are divided all in factions,
Confederate haill with subtlety and slight,
A way to vote in voting wrang or right.
O men in whom no fear of God is Judged:
O faithles judges worthy to be judged:
Eshame ye not, or stand ye not in aw,
Laws to profes and err agains the law,
O members meet, for mere iniquity,
Of Rhadamanth or Minos court to be.
The haill abuse were our prolixt to tell,
That council house it is may like an^ hell,
Where there is thrang ay fear, and awful cries,
Where on the bar without puir parties lies,
As on the riue of Acheron for sin,
Awaitting fast quhile Charon take them in:
Where every man almaist is miscontented,
Quhair silly saul's are greeuouslie tormented,
Ay sorry, sad, ay plunged in pain and grief,
Pen sieve in heart and musing of mischief
Their bowels, entraills, with the robbed row^
Of gredie Harpyes, they are rugged out.
To lead that kind of life I wearied fast,
In better hope I left it at the last,
And to the court I shortly me addressed
Believing weill to choose it for the best:
But from the rocks of Cyclades fra hand
I stru^k into Carybdis sinking sand.
For reverence of Kings I will not strine
To slander courts, but them I may descriue,
As learned men hes them depaint before,
Or near the suith, and I am woe therefore.
In courts (Montcreif) is pride, in vie, contention
Dissimulance, despite, disceat, dissension,
Fear, whisperings, reports, and newsuspition,
Fraud, treasone, lies, dread, guile, sedition,
Great greedines, and prodigality,
Lusts sensual, and partiality,
Impudency, adultery, drunkinnes,
Delicacie, and slothful idilnes,
Backbiting, lacking, mocking, mutenie,
Disdainefulnes, and shameless flattery,
Mere vanity, and naughty ignorance,
Inconstancy, and changing with mischance,
Contempt of all religion, and devotion,
To Godly deeds na kind of perfect motion.
These qualities in general I say,
Into all courts are commoun every day:
I need not now sick properties apply,
Thou knawes our Scottish court als weill as I*
Our princes ay, as we have heard and sein,
Their money years infortunat hes bein,
And if I sold not speike with flattring tung,
The greater part bot sluggishly hes rung,
Our Earls and Lords for their nobility.
How ignorant and inexpert they be,
Upon the privy counsel mon be chused,
Or else the King and concill ar abused,
And if the Prince augment not ay their rents
Quhat is their mair: they will be mal-contents.
^uhat should the court quhair virtue is neglected?
Quhair mon of spreit sa little ar respected?
Quhilk is to be lamented all the mair,
That few of learning should take keip or cair,
As Cicero of Julius Caesar sayis
Even in his time, government, and dayis,
Quhilk easily excells all other Kings,
In learning, spreit, and all scholasticke things.
Sum officers we se of naughty brain,
Mere ignorauts, proud, vicious, and vain,
Of learning, wit, and virtue all denude,
May blockish men, rash, riatons, and rude:
And flattering fallowis often ar mair regarded:
A lying slave will rather be rewarded,
Nor they that dois with reasons rule confer
Their kind of life, and actions, least they err,
Nor men discreit, wise, vertous, and modest,
Of galland spreit, brave true and worthy trest,
Quhilk far from hame civility hes sein,
And be their manners shawis (...) they have bein:
Quhilk have the word of God before their eyes,
And weill can serve but cannot princes pleis:
For sum with reason will not pleased be,
But that quhilk with their humor dois agree.
Hes thou not heard in oppin audience,
The purpos vain, the feckles conference,
Th'informall reasons, and impertinent
Of courtiours: quhilks in acco^ttrement
Were gorgians, may glorious, young and gay:
Bot in effect compare them weill I may
Till images, quhilks ar in temples set,
Decorde without, and all with gold over ^ref,
With colors fine, and carved curiously,
The place where they are set to beautify
Bot when they are remarked all and sum,
They are bot stocks and stains, bos, deid, and dum.
Bot now the court I will not discommend,
I may it mean bot may it not amend.
As for offense of speech I nathing fear it,
For upright men thereby are nathing deirit:
And sick as are with wickedness bewitched,
I sussie not how viuely they be tuitched.
And if perhaps sum wald allege that I,
Have this inuaid on malice and mute,
As he whom in the court few did regard,
And got na gain thereby nor na reward,
I grant that may be true, bot quhat of that?
I little gain deserved, and les I gat:
Bot men behald his hienes royal trine,
His palaces, and their apparel fine,
Behalde his house, behald his yearly rent,
His servants heir if they have cause to plent,
Observe this realm throughout from east to west,
From south to north, if any be oppressed,
Quhilk justice lacks, behald the common weill,
Then judge if I be writer falls or leill.
Bot sick as sold it mend, let them lament,
I hanted court to lang, and I repent.
These cursed times, this wors not irone age,
Where virtue lurks, where vice dois reign and rage
Where faith and love, where friendship is neglected,
Contagiouslie with time hes me infected:
As vthers are, of force sa mon I be,
How can I do bot as men do to me?
In bordels vile a virgin chaist and puir,
Be tims with time a vile effronted huir:
A true man taine with pirates on the sea,
Is ferst to take a part of piracie.
O sentence suthe: I say for to conclude,
I^ company corrupts manners good.
True Damons part to play I wald me bind,
Bot Pythias kind yet can I never find:
Love mutual wald be, for all in vain,
I fauaur shaw, if nain I find again.
My heart is stane within, and iron without,
With triple bras my breist is set about,
For when of strife, and great mischance I hear,
Of death, debate, they do me little dear:
For vthers harm me tuitches not at all,
Swa I be free, quhat rak I what be fall?
The line of love almaist I have forget it,
For why, think I, to nain I am adbettit.
Not threttie times as zit the shining s^,
His carrier round and propre course hes r^,
Sen nature first me buit to joy his light,
And yet I walt ((...) wish I might)
Dissolved be, renewed, and be with Christ,
Or flesh to fardar sollie me intist:
I fear the world, I dread allurements sair,
And strange assaults corrupt me mair and mair.
Let Satan rage, let wickedness incres,
I thank my God I am not comfortles:
My comfortlo, my haill felicity,
Consicts in this, I may it shaw ^o thee:
To serve the Lord, and on his (...) repose,
To sing him praise, and in his (...) reiese,
And ay to have my mind lift up on hie,
Unto that place quhair all our joy sall be:
My life and time I know it is s^ short,
That hear to dwell I think it bot a sport:
I have delightin heart may to behald,
The pleasant works of God sa manifold,
And to my mind great pleasour is indeed,
The nobill writs of learned men to reed:
As Chremes had, I have ane human heart,
And takes of things human na little part,
Be word and writ my mind I make it plaint,
To fekfull friends, and they to me again.
Christian precepts serving to the prac tise of Sanctification.
INterprise nathing (...) thou first call unto the Lord to bles it, and to
blesso the (...), and then refer the succes theirof to him.

Sa soon as any of thy interprises hes taken effect, incontinent run and thank
thy God.

Beware of presumption, self love, and vain ostentation, whatsoever good or
great work thou accomplise, for thou may know it is the Lord that works by
thy hand, and not thou: seeing thou hes had expertence of thine awin weakness
and insufficientie.

Beware thou justify not thy self in thy heart: for thou knaws that thou cannot
abstain fra sin, nor cannot be saved without the mere mercy of God shawin
in the righteous merits of Jesus Christ.

Instruct and teach thy children and servants, albeit they be few in number
(...) the fear of God, as though thou had a great house and family.

When thou hes the command of God reueiled be his word that thou sold do any
thing, obey thou cuer the command, and let it be a rule to all thy actions, how
vnappearant soever it be, or far against thy heart, setting aside both thy
awin affections, and all worldly respects: for quhair God speaks, never
speire onie f^rder question, Because he knawes that quhilk thou knawes not.

Give thou find thy desire extreme earnest in any matter, beware thou execute
not thy desire, unless thou have a special war and of Gods word, that thy
desire be agreeable to his will: for the devil enters in be our inordinat
appetits and affections.

When then art in doubt if that quhilk thou art to do or say, be good or evil:
perform it not until thou be resolved.

In doing thy affairs use diligence and he quick: for thou knawes what hurt
and grief thy flawnes and stouthfulnes hes wrought thee.

Because thy corruption is great, exercise thy self in the law, of the Lord
continually, by reading, and bearing his word prea ched, least thou rowst like
iron: fast, pray, sigh, weep, singe, meditate, and confer with good men of
spiritual things.

Albeit thou be not lang in ane estait, Bot now hett, now cauld in Religion, be
not therefore discouraged, for sick is thy weakness, and sa being the single
eye of thy mind be direct toward God, that thy intention be to please him,
and that salvation be thy end through faith in Jesus Christ: quhat rach what
befall unto thee? follow forth thy course and resolution constant lie in
serving God unto the end of thy life.

Because it is not possible that thy wit or memory can be abill to comprehend
all things needful, and all good precepts, except they be sanctified:
Therefore crave that thy heart may be circumcised and clenged, that the halie
Ghaist may dwell in thee and put theein remembrance of al things according to
our Lord Jesus Christ's promise.

His thou need of any thing? pray to God for it.

Wald thou retain and heepe the good thing quhilk thou hes received? Be
thankful to God for it.

Finds thou thy self dull and sensual, and wald have thy heart stirred up to
prayer and to praise God, humble and heat down thy body by fasting. Remember
on the day of judgment, call to memory the Lords benefits bestowed on thee,
and how he at any time hes preserved thee from dangers of body or of Saull:
Singe with thy mouth, and lift up thy mind and affectiones unto him.

To make thee stand in aw when thou art over secure and iollie, remember thy
awin weakness, thy monstrous sins, and foul defections, and how the Lord at
any time did chastise thee for them.

Althought thy prayer appear to be without effect, yet cease not from praying,
for if thy petition be lawful, and that thou submit the granting thereof
unfeignedly to the will of God, be sure that at length thou sall ather get thy
desire, or else content meant, as though thou had gotten it.

To make thee charitable toward all men, think that they with whom thou has
to do are of the number of the children of God. And quhen thou speakis of the
dead, think that they are in Christ's Kingdom, and this will make thee bridle
thy tongue.

Sa soon as ever thou fallis in trouble, ather outward, or of the mind,
incontinent have first refuge to God for relief, cra uing counsel of his
mouth, and thereafter seek lawful means to be relieved: for begin thou first
to seek worldly help, thou art out of the right way? therefore seek first
to God, and soon to God.

Beware thou seek not comfort in outward things, where their is na soliditie
nor true comfort: for quhen it is past it brings greater grief with it: The
solid and true comfort then is in spiritual things, in avoiding the society
of men, and profane company, in acquainting thy self with thy God by pray er,
by reading, meditation, teaching, hearing of the word preached, conferring of
spiritual things, and in doing of charitable warks.

Also gif occasion serve, frequent often the Lords supper? Quhilk is the
Sacrament and seal of Gods promise, appointed for thy comfort and confirmation
of thy faith: In doing whereof thou declares thy obedience and thankfulness to
God. Their fore remove all impediments whatsumeuer quhilk may debar thee from
that holy action.

Gif thou wald es^hew anger, pass by a multitude of injuries and offenses that
are done thee: for gif thou mark narrowly every feulte and oftence that is
done, it sall not be possible to be lang in patience.

East thy self to a certain calling and vocation, that thou be not lowse and
without a craft: And in chuising thy vocation, (because it is a thing very
hard and difficile) first ^rane earnestly the direction of God, that thou may
ch^se the best: Secondly, consider to what vocation thy heart is may inclinet:
And third ly, consider gif God has endued thee with gifts meet for that
calling quhilk thou likes off, And thereafter make election of it.

Having chosen a vocation, apply thy heart to thy vocation, and weary not of
it, nather go about to avoid and cast it off: Bot willingly, and not by
constraint embrace it, he diligent in it and ^lyte in it.

Be teraperate although it be never so painful to thee that thereby thou may
be humbled, and made (...) of t^y ^uety, least thou wound thy conscience, and
become profane, and harden thy heart be doing the contrare.

Quhen thou art in perplexity and knowis not qubat to choose, intrinche thy
self, and flee to the throne of ^ace to seek resolution.

Think not that thou by thy industry, convoy, or diligence, art able to
accomplish onye ^ude thing: Therefore, crave the Lords blessing to thy
affairs, and wait patiently upon him.

Walk with gravity, integrity, and with ane upright heart in all thy actions:
and not craftily, feircely, or wilfully, bot with out ^retting, murmuring, or
vpbraiding.

Be silent and modest, and not light, revealing thy grief, imperfection and
weakness to every man least thou be despised: But pour out thy griefs before
the Lord, and lament thine estait to him.

After well doing, beware then of presumption, walk warili^ modestly, and
sadly, and be not ^olly nor intemperate: For tem tation will not cease any
long time, bot thou man suffer in earnest, and not for the fashion.

Be been volent till all men, and patient toward all, suffering every thing
patiently for Christ's sake and after his example.

^auaile to be familiar and acquainted with thy God, be prayer and meditation,
and walk with him.

Quben thou art sorrowful, or joyful, consider qubere fra the sorrow, or the
joy proceeds, if they proceid from warldlie causes, thy ^row then is evil, and
thy reioy^ng vain, b^t if thou be sorrow full for thy sin, thy sorrow is
good and Godly: And if thy joy be grounted upon God, and arise upon ^ne inward
persuasion of his favor, and remission of thy sins through the merits of
Jesus Christ: Ther^o thy ^oysing ^w and happy.

Remember that nothing can come unto thee but b^ Gods providence and permission
w^y ^hen sul^ then bear e^ thing (...), seeing it is the (...) wa^k?

The Lord is able to ^oo (...) above all that we ask or think: why should thou
then be careful, or a ver^tious?

Study earnestly to be temperate of thy mouth: for intemptrancie hurts the
memory and the judgment, ^ores the spitituall gift, makes the heart fat and
sensual, banishes bea^enke thoughts and meditations, and makes men unable for
any gu^ exercise.

Be continually occupied ather in the (...) service, or (...) thine a win
vocation, for the negle^ing the^of wounts the conscienser?

Gif the Lord have given thee any reasonable maintenence of thy a win, haunt
not meikle the tables of v^er men.

Kiframe t^y t^nge from cu^ speaking, ^rawarb or ^ilthy speaking, where by the
conscience is wonder sull^e wounded, and the spreit ^f Christ that (...) in v^
s^ (...).

Cra^e of God a large and liberal (...), for a gnew^us, and pinc^ing heart iu
matters of small importance is odi^us.

M^ole not thy self with ^risle matters, and be not earnest in (...), for that
is mechanic.

Endeavor thy self to have thy mind ^abill in thy prayer and meditation, and
suffer not the s^min to be interrupted with valn^ thoughts or naughty actiones.

^e not bitter, fraward, earnest, or offended for trifles.

Study not nor pause not meikle on the feeding of the flesh, nather be cu^us
for the belly, bot be thou s^ber, and (...) pleased.

If thou be a pastor, or a teacher, where ever thou cummis, let thy secreit
purpose be to conqueis sum to Christ.

Be ware thou lightly nocht, nor despise not vthers, bot rather consider how
lowrd and gross thine awin imperfectionres at.

Where ever thou art injured, or heirs words vtte^ed to thy reproach or grief,
incontinent persuade thy self that it proceids ^ra God, and that he has
stirred up the speaker or iniurer against thee. Therefore considder if thou he
iu^lie quarreiled, and then take it as a chastisement for thy sin: Bot if thou
be falsely and unjustly quarrelled, then think it is done by God to try thy
faith and patience, wherein thou should rejoice and receive comfort.

In taking thy resolutions, and in doing thy affairs, do that quhilk may best
please God, and may best serve to the expedition of thy turn, to the weill of
thy neighbor, and thine awin commendation: Not regarding for a small coast, or
halding in of travel.

Beware thou be not exercised in vain and childish things, and be not given to
thy pleasour or satisfying of thy lustis: specially quhen thou hes Gods turn
in hand: for that quenshis the Spirit.

Be not opiniater and wilful in trifill matters, or over precise in things
indifferent, least thou seem indiscreit and saucy: bot rather yield to the
desire and will of vthers.

Beware of the first and sudden motions of the mind, quhilk (as the
Philosophers alleges) it is not in man's power to resist therefore seek thon
the power of the Spreit of God, that they break not out or thou be war, bot
that thou may halde in, qubill thou reason with thy self.

Crave light of God in all thy particulars, that thou be not guided be the
light of nature, and ditement of flesh and blood: Bot be the spiritual light of
gods word and his Spreit: for it is a great difficulty to know what is best to
be chosen in all our particulars, and to discern between the light of nature,
and the light of the Spreit of Jesus.

Learn to be sad, silent, sober, and sanctified: having thy ^ind eder lifted
upward, and pausing on heavenly things, and not on cartblie and base things.

Remember daily on the death thou mon die, on the count thou hes to make to
God, and on the reward quhilk thou art to receive thereafter, either of joy,
or of torment everlasting.

P^nse deeply and consider with thy self what kind of thing Eternity is,

Albeit thou know thy self to be subject in sick sort till oni^ vice or sin,
that thou cannot abstain from it: Nevertheless cease not to fight against it,
and to make resistance, for give thou cease to resist, thou gives over the
christian battle: Therefore, at least be sorry for it, take purpose daily
till amend, and though thou fall this day, think weill to rise again the
morn, and sa forth continually follow out that course unto thy lives end:
Craving grace ant strength daily of God to resist it: then may thou be assured
that he in his awin time will remove it, and deliver thee from the tyraunte
thereof.

It may be that ane evil spreit follow upon thee, and rage in thine
affections, seven years, twenty years, forty years: yet for all this thou
(...) nocht despair of thine esta^t: For gif thou make enie resistance, thou
art not his obedientseruant, bot his prisoner, thou art led captive to ^n: ot
give thou obey him willingly and with a gladness, without any reluctation or
regrait, thou art then his slave and servant. Therefore consider not only the
evil quhilk the^ hes d^ne, but also if thou be displeased with the doing
thereof.

Be sure of thine election, and that thou art in the favor of God, whereof
their are infallible marks.

First, when thou art come to the true knawledge of Christ and the veiw of his
death and resurrection, by the light of the E uangell.

Second when the Lord suffers thee not to slip without correction for thy
sins committed against him.

Thirdly, When thou knawes thine a win wants and imper fections, and art sorry
for them.

Fourthlie, When thon hes ^ne earnest houger and a thirst, for righteousness and
perfection.

Fiftlie, When thou hopes assuredly aday to obtain through Christ Jesus, that
quhilk thou hungers and thirsts for in this life.

Think not that thou art able to attain unto perfect halines in this life: for
in us there is na perfection, bot our sufficiency is from God. The greatest
perfectisn then, that man can attain unto during the course of this life, is,
to be of a life unreprovable, or without sklander in the sight of men: To hait
sin, and to love righteousness, to love the appearance of Christ Jesus: And some
time to taist and seele a part of that heavenly joy and peace of Conscience,
arising upon hope quhilk the halie ghaist works in the saul and is called the
earnest or erlis^mne of the Spireite, whereby we are sealed to saluatio. Bot this
sense of joy remains not always, bot is rare and induces not onle long space
albeit all the faithful feels it not alike, bot some ofter, some sin ^illar:
some in a greter, some in ^ smaller measur^. Always, the truth is that the
may part of the children of God are ofter subject till a feeling of fear and
wraith in this life, nor of joy and peace.

Think not that thou art sufficiently mortified, and speaned ^om the world,
quhil^ thou he so well acquainted with thy God that albeit thou were spoiled of
friends, force, and of every world ly comfort, though thou were contemned of all
men, and that every thing appeared to go against thee: yet not the les thou
wald not be discouraged, bot wald be assured to find comfort in the Lord.

To know thy a win nature, take beede how thy mind is occu^red when thou art
solitary, and free from all external affairs: If altogether on earthly and
carnal things, thou art yet earthly and carnal: Bot if on spiritual and
heavenly things, it is the wark^ of the spirit. Also examine thy self what thou
wald do if thou were in prosperity, and had liberty to do what thou lust: If
thy inclination be to seek riches, hono. s, estimation of men, to enjoy thy
pleasor, or to revenge thy quarrels: certify thy self thou art yet in nature:
Bot if thy intention be to glorify God, and to be exercised in every manner of
good warke: then he assuced thy regeneration is begun.

FINIS.

