THE FLYTTING BETWIXT MONTGOMERIE AND POLWART.

Newly corrected and ammended.

EDINBVRGH.

Printed by the heirs of Thomas Finlason, for John Wood, and are to be sold in
his Shop on the South side of the high Street, a little above the Croce. 1629.

TO THE READER.
NO cankring Envy, Malice, nor Despite,
Stirred up these men so eagerly to flyte,
But generous Emulation; so in Plays
Best Actors flyte and rail, and thousand ways
Delight the itching Ear; So wanton Curres
Waked with the gingling of a Courteours spurs
Bark all the Night, and never seek to bite
Such bravery these Versers moved to write,
Would all that now do flyte would flyte like Those
And laws were made that none durst flyte in Prose
How calm were then the World? perhaps this law
Might make some madding Wives to stand in aw,
And not in filthy Prose out-roare their Men
But read these Roundelayes to them till then.
Flyting no reason has, and at this time
Here it not stands by reason but by ryme;
Anger t'asswage make Melancholy less,
This flyting first was wrote, now tholes the Press.
Who will not rest content with this Epistle
Let them sit down and flyte, or stand and whistle.
POLWART and MONTGOMERIES flytting.
Montgomerie to Polwart.
POlwart ye peip like a Mouse among thorns,
Na cunning ye keip, Polwart ye peip:
Ye look like a sheep and ye had two horns,
Polwart ye peip like a Mouse among thorns.
Beware what thou speaks, little foul earth Tade,
With thy Cannigate breiks beware what thou speiks,
Or there shall be wat cheiks for the last that thou made,
Beware what thou speiks, little foul earth Tade.
Foul mismade myting, borne in the Merse,
By word and by writing, foul mismade myting
Leave off thy flytting, come kiss my Erse,
Foul mismade myting, borne in the Merse.
And we mell thou shall yell, little cultron Cuist,
Thou sall tell, even thy sell, and we mell thou salt yell,
Thy smell was sa sell, and stronger than Muist,
And we mell, thou salt yell, little custoun Cuist.
Thou art doeand and dridland like an foul beast,
Fykand, and fidland: thou art doeand and dridland,
Strydand and stridland, like Robin red-brest,
Thou art doeand and dridland, like an foul beast.
Polwarts reply to Montgomerie.
DEspitefull spider poor of spreit,
Begins with babbling me to blame,
Gowke wit me not to gar thee greit,
Thy tratling, truiker, J shall ^ame,
When thou believes to win a name,
Thou shall be banishde of all bield,
And syne receive both skaith and shame
And sa be forc'de to leave the field.
Thy ragged roundels, raueand Royt,
Some short, some lang, some out of line,
With scabrous colors, fulsome floyt,
Proceedand from an pynt of Wine,
Quhilke haults for fault of feet like mine,
Yet fool thou thought no shame to writ them,
At men's command that laikes ingyne,
Quhilke doyted Dyvours gart thee dyte them.
But gouked goose, I am right glade,
Thou art begun in write to flyte,
Sen Lowne thy language J have laid,
And put thee to thy pen to write:
Now dog J shall thee sa despyte,
With pricking put thee to sik speid,
And cause thee (Curre) that warkloome quite,
Syne s^^k an hole to hide thy heid.
Yel kna^e acknowledge thy offense,
Or I grow crabbed, and so clai^ thee,
Ask mercy make obedience,
In time for fear lest J forfair thee:
Jll spreit I will na langer spair thee:
Blaide blecke thee, to bring jn a gyse,
And to dry pe^nance soon prepare ^^ee
Syne pass forth as I shall deuyse,
First fair threed-bair with soundred feit,
Recanting thy unseemly sawes,
Jn Pilgrimage to Allare it.
Syne be content to quite the cause,
And in thy teeth bring me the Tawes,
With becks my bidding to abide,
Whether thou will let belt thy bawes
Or kiss all cloffes that stands beside.
And of their two take thou thy chose,
For thy awin profit I procure thee,
Or with a prick into thy nose
To stand content, I ^all conjure thee.
But at this time think I forbuir thee
Because I can not treat thee fairer,
Sit thou this charge, I will assure thee,
The second salbee something sairer.
Montgomerie to Polwart.
FAlse fecklesse foulmart, lo heir a defyance,
Ga sey thy science, do Droigh what thou dow,
Trot tyke to a tow, Mandrag but myance,
We will heir tydance, peil^d Polwart of thy pow,
Many yeald yew have thou called over a know,
Syne hid them in a how; stark thief when thou staw them,
Menswearing thou saw them, and made but a mow,
Syne fylde in a Row, when the man came that awe them.
Thy dittay was death, thou dar not deny it,
Thy trumpery was tried, thy falset they fand,
Burreau the band, Cor mundum thou cried,
Condem^'d to be dried and hung up fra hand:
While thou paid a pand in a stowre thou did stand,
With a willie wand thy skin was well scourged,
Syne feinzedly forged how thou left the land,
Now Sirs I demand how this Pod can be purged.
Yet wanshapen shit thou shupe such a sunzie,
As proud asye prunzie your pens shall be plucked,
Come kiss where I cuckied, and change me that cunzie,
Your gryses grunzie is graceless and gowked,
Your mouth most be mucked while ye be instructed,
Foul flirdome, wanfucked, tersell of a Taide,
Thy meter mismade has lousilie lucked,
I grant thou conducted thy terms in a slaide.
Little angry Attercop^ and auld vnsell Aipe,
Ye grein for to gape upon the gray meir,
Play with thy Peir, or I Will pull thee like a Paipe,
Go ride in a raipe, for this noble new yeir:
I promise thee heir to thy chafts ill cheir,
Except thou go leir to lick at the louder,
With Potingars powder thy self ouersmeir
The Castle ye weir well seiled on your shoulder.
This twice sealed trumpet with his tratling trowes,
Making vain vows, to match him with me,
With the print of a key well burnt on the brows
Now God salbe witness, wherefra came ye
For all your bombill ye'r ward a little we:
I think for to see thee hing by the heils
For terms that thou ste^lis of old Poetry,
Now who should trow thee that is past both the seilis.
Proud poysonde pykethanke, perverse and perjured,
I dow not endure it to be bitten with a duike,
I's fell thee like a Fluike, flatlings on the flure,
Thy scrowes obscure are borrowed fra some buil^,
Fra Lindsay thou tuik, you are Chancers Cuike,
Ay lying like a Ruike, gif men would not skar thee;
But beast J debar thee the Kings Chimney nuike,
Thou flees for a look, but I shall ride nar thee.
False strydand stickdirt, I's gar thee stink,
How durst thou mint with thy Master to mell,
On sik as thy sell, little prattling pinke,
Could thou not ware ink thy tratling to tell,
Hoy hu^son to Hell amang the fiends fell
To drink of that well that poysonde thy pen,
Where devils in their den do yammer and yell,
Heir J thee expel from all Christian men.
Polwart to Montgomerie.
BLeird babbling bystour, baird obey
Learn skybald knave to know thy sell,
Vile vagabound, or I invey
Custroun with cuffes thee to compel,
Yet, tratling truiker, truth to tell,
Stoup thou not at the second charge,
Mischievous mishant, we shall mell
With laidly language loud and large.
Where Lowne as thou loves thy life,
I both command and counsel thee,
For to eschew this sturtsome strife,
And with thy manly Master gree,
To this effect, I summond thee
By public proclamation,
Gowke to compeir upon thy knee
And kiss my foull foundation.
But Lord I laugh to see thee bluiter,
Gloir in thy ragments, rash to raill
With maighty manked magled meiter,
Tratland, and tumland top o^^ re taill,
As Carlings compts their farts doyl'd snaill,
Thy roustie ratrymes made but matter
I could weill follow, wald I saill,
Or preasse to fish within thy water.
Only because, Owl, thou dois use it,
J will write verse of common kind,
And Swingeour for thy sake refuse it,
To crabe thee, bumbler, by thy mind,
Peddler, J pity thee sapin'd,
To buckell him that bears the bell,
Jackstro be better, anes ingyn'd,
Or J sall flyte against my sell.
But bre^flie beist, to answer thee
Jn sermon short, J am content,
And says thy similitudes vnslie
Are na ways very pertinent,
Thy tired comparisons a sklent
Are monstrous like the Mule that made them,
Thy borrowed barkings violent,
Yet were they worse let men out war them.
Also J may be Chaucers man,
And yet thy master not the less:
But wolf that wastes on Cup and Kan,
In Glu^rtony, thy grace J guess;
Ga dr^nken Dyvour, thee address:
And borrow thee embessed breiks,
To bear me now thy praise express
Knave if thou can without wat cheiks.
First of thy just Genealogy
Tyke J shall tell the truth I trow,
Thou was begotten, some says me,
Betwixt the devil and a dun Kow,
One night when that the fiend was fow,
At banquet birland at the beir,
Thou sowked syne a sweit brod sow,
Amang the middings many a yeir.
On ruites and runches in the field
With nolt thou nourish^d was a yeir,
Whill that thou past both poor and peild
I^to argyle some lair to le^^.
As the last night did weil appeir,
When thou stood fidgeing at the fire,
Fast fykand with thy Heiland cheir,
My fly^ing forc^de thee sa to flyre.
Into the Land where thou was borne
I read of no^ght but it was skant,
Of Cattle, Cleithing, and of Corn,
Where wealth and welfair both does want.
Now Tade-face, take this for no tant,
J hear your housing is right fair,
Where howlring howlets ay does hant,
With Robin red-brest but repair.
The Lords and Lairds within that Land
I know are men of mekill rent,
And living as J understand,
W^ill in an Innes, we be content
To lieue and let their house in Lent:
In Lentron month and the lang So^mer
Where twelve Knights kitchins has a vent
Quhilke for to furnish dois them cumber.
For store of Lambs and lang-tailde wedders
Thou knows where many couples gaes
For s^ealing tied fast in tedders
In fellon flocks of anes and twaes,
Abroad athort your banks and braes
Ye do abound in Coal and Ca^ke,
And think as fools to fley all faes
With Targets tullies and toome talk.
Alace poor hood-pykes, hungerbitten
Accustom^d with scurrilitie
Rydand like boys^ures, all beshitten,
In fields without fertility:
Bare, barren, with sterilitie,
For fault of cattle corn and gerse.
Your banquets of most nobility
Dear of the Dog brawne in the Merse.
Wi^le^se vanter, were thou wise
Cus^roun thou would Cer mundum cry.
Ou^^laiden lowne, with lang-tailde lyee.
Thy doytit dytings soon deny,
Tro^ker, or I thy trumpery try
And make a legend of thy life,
For flyte I anes, folk will cry fie,
Then thou'll be wa^de with every wife.
Polwarts medicine to Montgomerie. being sick.
SJR Sweingeour seeing I want wars
And salues to slake thee of thy saires
This present from the Pothecares
Me think meet to amend thee.
First for thy fever feid on folly
With fasting stomach take oyld-oly
Mixed with a mouthfull of melancholy
From fleame for to defend thee.
Syne pass a space, and smell a flower
Thy inward parts to purge and scowre
Take thee three bites of ane black hour
And Ruebarb bache and bitter.
This duly done but any din
Sup syne seix sops but something thin
Of the Devil scald thy guts within
To heal thee of thy skitter.
Unto thy bed syne make thee bown,
Take ane sweit Syrop worth a Crown
And drink it with the Devil ga down
To recreat thy spreit.
And last of all, craig in a Cord,
Send for a powder and pay for'd,
Called the vengeance of the Lord
For thy mug mouth most meit.
Gif this preserve thee not fra pain
Pass to the Pothecars again,
Some recipies does yet remain
To heal bruik byle or blister.
As Diadragma when ye dine,
O^ Diabolicon wat in wine
With powder I drait fellon fine,
And mair yet when ye mister.
Montgomeries answer to Polwart.
Vile venomous viper, wanthriftiest of things,
Half an ^lf, hal^ an Aip, of Nature deny it,
Thou fl^^^ with a Cuntry the quhilk was the Kings
But that barga^, vnbeast, dear sall thou buy it,
The cuff is well wared that two hame brings,
This Pro^erb foull pelt to thee is apply it,
First spider of spyte, thou spewes out springs,
Yet wanshapen wowbet of the weirds invy it,
J can tell thee, how, when, where, and quha gat thee,
The quhilke was neither man nor wife
Nor humane Creature on life,
Thou stinkand stei^er up of strife,
False how let have at thee.
Jn the hinder end of harvest on Alhallow even,
When our good Neighbors do is ride, gif I read right,
Some buckled on a bunewand and some on a been,
A^ trottand in troops from the twylight,
Some sadled a she Aipe, all grathed into green,
Some hobland on an hemp stalk, hove and to the hight,
The King of Pharie and his court, with the Elfe Queen,
With many Elrich Jncubus was rydand that Night,
There an Elf on an A^p an vnsell begat,
Jnto a pot by Pomathorne
That bratchart in a busse was borne,
They fand a monster on the morn
War faced nor a Cat.
The weird sisters wandering, as they were wont then,
Saw Reavens rugand at that ratton by a Ron ruit,
They mused at the Mandrake unmade like a man,
A Beast bund with a bounevand in ane old buit,
How that gaist had bein gotten to guess they began,
Weill sweilde in a swynes skin, and smeirit over with suit,
The belly that it first bair full bitterly they ban,
Of this mismade Moldewart mischief they muit,
That crooked camschoche croyll vncristened they curse,
They bad that baiche should not be but
The glengoir gravel and the gut
And all the plagues that first were put
Into Pandoraes purse.
The coch, and the connogh, the collicke, and the cold,
The cords, and the cout-euill, the clasps and the cleiks,
The hunger, the hart-ill, and the hoist still thee hald,
The botch, and the barbles, with the Cannigate breiks,
With bock-blood, and benshaw, speuen sprung in the spald,
The fersie, the falling-euill that fells many freiks,
Ouergane all with Angleberries as thou grows ald,
The kinkhost, the Charbucle, and worms in the cheiks,
The snuff and the snoir, the chaudpeece and the chanker.
With the blaids and the belly thraw,
The bleiring bats, and the beanschaw,
With the mischief of the melt and maw,
The clape and the canker.
The frencie, the fluxes, the fyk, and the felt,
The feauers, the fearcie, with the speinzie flees,
The doyt, and the dysmall, indifferently dealt,
The powlings, the palsy, with pocks like pees.
The swerf, and the sweiting, with sounding to swelt,
The weam-ill, the wildfire, the vomit, and the vees,
The mair, and the migrame, with meathes in the melt,
The warbles, and the wood-worme whereof dogs dies,
The teasicke, the tooth-aik, the tittes and the titles,
The painful poplesie and pest,
The rot, the roup, and the auld rest,
With parlesse and plurisies oppressed,
And nip'd with the nirles.
Woe worth (quoth the weirds) the wights that thee wrought
Thread bair be their thrift as thou art wanthreiuin,
Als h^rd be their handsell that helps thee to ought,
The rotten Rim of thy womb with Rookes salbe reiuin,
All bounds where thou bides to baill salbe brought,
Thy Gall and thy Gu^sserne to Glaids sall be given,
Ay short be thy solace, with shame be thou soght,
In Hell mot thou haunt thee and hide thee fra Heavin,
And ay as thou auld grows so eikand be thy anger,
To live with limmers and outlawes,
With hurcheons eat and hips and hawes
But when thou comes where the Cock crawes
Tarry there na langer.
Shame and sorrow on her snout that suffers thee to sowke,
Or shoe that cares for thy cradill cauld be her cast,
Or brings any bedding for thy bl^e bowke,
Or l^^ses off thy lingals sa lang as they may last,
Or o^fers ^hee a^y thing all the lang owke,
Or first refreshes thee with food, howbeit thou so^ld fast,
Or when thy d^des are bed^rten that gives them ane dowk,
All grooms when thou greits at thy ganting be aghast,
Als froward be thy fortune as foull is thy form.
F^rst seven yeirs be thou dumb and deiff,
And after that a common theiff,
Thus art thou marked for mi^cheiff,
Foul unworthy worm.
Outrow'd be thy tongue, yet tratling all times,
Ay the langer that thou lives thy luck be the less
All countries where thou comes accuse thee of crimes,
And false be thy fingers, but leath to confess,
Ay raving and rageing in rude ratrymes.
All ill be thou use and, and ay in excess,
Ilk Moon be thou mad fra past be the primes
Still pleagu'd with poverty thy pride to oppress.
Wih warwolfes and wild Cats thy weird be to wander,
Dragleit throw dirtie dubs and dykes
Tousled and tuggled with town Tykes,
Say lousie liar what thou lykes
Thy tongue is na sclander.
F^a the sisters had seen the shape of that shit
L^t^e l^^k be thy lot there where thou lies,
T^y fumard face, quoth the first, to flyt salbe fit,
N^^n^^e^ quoth the nixt sall nou^ish thee twyse,
To ryd post to elphin nane abler nor it,
To d^i^e dogs but to dryt, the third can devyse,
All thy days sall thou be of ane body but a bit,
Als ^uith i^ this sentence as sharp is thy syse,
Syne duly they deemed what death it sold die:
The first said surely of a shot,
The second of a running knot,
The third be throwing of thee throt
Like a tyke over ane tree.
When all the weird sisters had thus voted in one voice
The deid of the dablet, then syn they withdrew,
To let it ly all allaine they thougt it little loss
Jn a den be a dyke or the day dew:
Than a cleir company came soon after closse
Nicneuen with her nymphs, in number anew,
With charms from Caitnes and Chanrie of Rosse,
Whose cunning consists in casting of a Clew,
They seeing this sairie thing, said to them self,
This thriftles thing is meit for us
And for our craft commodious,
Ane ugly Aipe and Incubus
Gotten with an Elf.
Their venerable Virgins, whom the world call witches,
In the time of their triumph, tirr'd me the Taide,
Some backward raid on brodsowes, and some on black bitches,
Some in steid of a staig over a stark Monk straid,
Fra the how to the hight some hobles, some hatches.
With their mouths to the Moon, murgeons they maid,
Some be force in effect the four winds fetches,
And nine times withershins about the throne raid,
Some glowring to the ground, some grieviously gaipes.
Be craft conjure and fiends perforce
Forth of a Cairne, beside a croce
Their Ladies lighted fra their horse
And band them with raipes.
Syne barefoot and bare-leg'd to babtize that bairne
Till a water they went be a wood side,
They fand the shit all beshitten in his awin shearne,
On three headed Hecatus to heir them they cryde
As we have found in the field this fundling forfairne,
First his faith he forsakes in thee to confyde,
Be virtue of their words and this raw yearne,
And whill this thrice thretty knots on this blew thread bid,
And of their men's members weill sowed to a shoe
Whilks we have taken fra top to tae
Even of ane hundredth men and mae
Now grant us goddess or we gae
Our duties to do
Be the hight of the heavins and be the hownesse of hell,
Be the winds and the weirds and the Charle waine
Be the horns, the hand-staff and the kings ell.
Be thunder be fyreflaughts, be drouth and be rain,
Be the poles and the planets, and the signs all twell
Be mirknes of the Moon, let mirknes remain,
Be the Elements all that our crafts can compel,
Be the fiends infernal, and the furies in pain,
Gar all the Gaists of the dead that dwells there down
In Lethe and Styx thae stinkand strands.
And Pluto that your Court commands
Receive this howlat off our hands
In name of Mahowne
That this worm in our work some wonders may wirk,
And through the poison of this pod our pratiques prevaill,
To cut aff our cumber fra coming to the Kirk,
For the half of our help and hes it heir haill,
Let never this vndogh^ of ill doing irk,
Bu^ ay blyth to begin all barret and baill,
Of all bl^s let it be als bair as the birk
That ti^test the taidrell may tell ane ill taill,
Let no vice in this world in this wanthrift be wanted.
Be they had said, the fireflaughts flew,
Both thunder, rain, and winds blew,
Where be their coming comers knew
Their asking was granted.
When thae Dames devotely had done their devore
In heauing this hurcheon, they hasted them hame,
Of that matter to make remained no more
Saving nixt how thae Nuns that worling sold name,
They know'd all the kytrall the face of it before,
And nip'd it sa doones neir, to see it was a shame,
They called it peil'd Polwart they pulled it so sore,
Where we clip, quoth the Comers, there needs na kame,
For we have height to Mah^wn for handsell this hair,
They made it like a scraped swyne,
And as they Cowed they made it whryne,
It shau'd the self aye on sensyne
The beard was sa bair.
Fra the Kummers that Crab had with Pluto contracted
They promeist as parents syne for their own part
A mouer of mischief and they might for to make it.
As an Impe of all ill most apt for their Art,
N^cneuin as nourish, to teach it, gart take it
To saill sure in a sciff but Compass or Cairt.
And milk of an hairne tedder, thought wi^es should be wrack it,
And a Kow give a chopin was wont to give a quart
Many babes and bairnes sall bless thy bair banes,
When they have neither milk nor meill,
Compelled for hunger for to steill
Than sall they give thee to the Deill
Able ofter nor anes.
Be an after midnight their office was ended,
At that tide was na time for troumpeurs to tarry,
Syne backward on horseback bravely they bended,
That cam-nosed Cocatrice they quite with them carry,
To Ka^t of Crief in an creill soon they gar^d send it
Where seuin yeir it sat both singed and sairie,
The kin of it be the cry incontinent kend it,
Syne fetched food for to feid it forth from the Pharie,
Jlke Elfe of them all brought an almons house Oster.
Jndeid it was a dainty dish,
A foull phlegmatic foulsome fish,
In steid of sauce on it they pish,
Sik food feed sik a foster.
Syne fra the fathers side fynely had fed it
Many monks and mar^asites came with the mother,
Black botch fall the briest and the belly that bred it.
Ay offered they that vndoght fra ane to another,
Where that smatched had sowked, sa sait it was to shed it.
But belyue it begane to buckle the brother,
In the bark of ane bourtree whylome they bed it.
All talking with there tougues the ane to the other,
With flirting and flyring their physnome they slype.
Some luikand lyce in the crown of it keeks,
Some choppes the kiddes into their cheeks
Some in their oxster hard it cleeks
Like an auld bag-pipe.
With mudyones and murgeones and moving the brai^e
They lay it, they lift it, they louse it, they lace it,
They graip it, they grip it It greets and they grane,
They bed it, they baw it, they bind it they brace it,
It skittered, and skarted, they skirl'd ilk ane,
All the Ky in the country they skared and chaced
That roaring they wood-ran and routed in a reane,
The wild dear fra their den their din hes displaced,
The cry was sa ouglie of Elfes Aipes and Owls
That geise and gaisling cries and craikes,
Jn dubs douks down Duikes and draikes,
All beists for feir the fields forsakes
And the town Tykes yowles.
Sik a mirthlesse Music their men^tralls did mak^
Whill Ky cast caprels behind with their heels
Littill tent to their time the To^ne leit them take,
But ay rammeist red wood, and ravel'd in their reeles,
Then the cummers that ye ken came all in a clak
To conjure that coidyoch with clewes in their creeles,
Whill all the bounds them about grew bla^kned and black
For the din of their daiblets raised all the deils
To concur in the cause they we^e come sa far,
For they their god bairne gifts wald give,
To teach the child to steal and reiue.
And aye the langer that it live
The world sold be the war.
Polwarts third flytting against Montgomerie.
IN fernall frawart feaming furies fell
Cursed cankered, crabed ( Clotho) help to quell
Yon Caribald yone catiue execrabill,
Provyde my pen profoundly to distell
Some dure despite to daunt yon devil of hell,
And dryve with doole to death detestabill
This mad malicious monster miserabill,
Ane tyke tormented, troting out of toone,
That rynnes red wood at ilk mids of the Moon.
Renew your roaring rage and eager Ire,
Jnflame'd with fearful thundering thuddes of fire,
To pleague this poisoned pykthank, pestilent^
With flying fyreflaughts, burning bright and shyre,
Devoir yon deuilish dragon, I desire,
And waste his wearied venom violent,
Conjure this beastly beggar impotent,
Suppress all power of this evil spirit
That bydes and ba^kes in him als black as Jeit.
But reekie Rookes and Ravens or ye ryue him
Desist, delay his death whill I descriue him,
Syne rypely to his rauing rude reply,
To dreadful dolor dearfly or ye dryve him
Throw Pluteos power, pleasure to depryue him,
The Lowne may lick his vomit, and deny
His shameless sawes, like Satan's slavish smy
Whose manners with his mismade members heir.
Do correspond, as plainly does appeir.
His peiled pallat and unpleasant pow,
Thy fulsome flocks of flies dois ouerflow,
With wames and wounds all blaikened full of blaines
Out over the neck athort his nitty now
Jlke louse lies linkand like a large lint bow
That hurts his harnes and pearse them to his pains,
Whill wit and virtue vanished fra the veins
With scars and scores athort his frozen front
In rankels run within the stews all burnt.
His lugs both lang and lean wha cannot lack
That to the Tron has taken so many a tacke,
With blasted bowels, bowden with bruised blude
And happening hairs blown withersuns aback,
Foot foundred beasts, for fault of food, full weak
Hes not their hair so snod as other good,
The bleared Bucke and boisterous to conclude
Hes right trim teeth somewhat set in a thraw
Ane topped turde right teughly for to taw.
With laidly lips and lyning side turned out,
His nose weill lit in Bacchus blood about,
His stinking end, corrupted as men knawes,
Contagious cankers carues his snafling snout,
His shaven shoulders shawes the marks no dout
Of teugh tarle there is ty^es and other tawes
And girds of Galeyes growand now in gawes.
Swa all his fowsome form thereto effeirs
The quhilk for filth I will not fyle your eirs.
The second part of Polwarts third flytting.
But of his conditions to carpe for a while
And count you his qualities, compast with cair,
Appardon me Poets to alter my style
And wissle my verse for fyling the air,
Returning directly again to Argyle
Where last that J left him, both barefoot and bair,
Where rightly I reckoned his race very vile,
Descending of Devils as I declair,
But quhilk of the gods will guide me aright,
Abhorring so abominable,
Sa doolfull and detestable,
Sa knauish, cankered, execrable
And wearied a wight.
In Argyle amang Gaits he gead within glenns,
Aye there using offices of a bruit beast,
Whill blislesse was banish'de for handling of hens,
Syne forward to Flanders fast fled or he ceast,
From poor anes the pultrie he plucked be the pens,
Delighting in thift, the heart of his breast,
And courage inclin'de to knavery ^men kens,
To pestilent purposes plainly he preast,
But truly to tell all the truth unto you
In no ways was he wise,
He used both Cairts and Dyce,
And fled no kind of vice,
Or few as I trow.
He was ane false Shismaticke notoriously named,
Both whoredom and homicide vnsell he used,
With all the seven sins the smached was shamed,
Pride, ire, and envy, this vndoght abused,
For greedy covetousness bitterly blamed
For bawderie and bordeling lucklesse he loved,
Thrist, drynes, and drunkenness, the dyvour defamed,
False, fenzeit, with flyting and flattery infused,
May sinful and sensual, shame to rehearse,
Whose fecklesse foolishness
And beastly brukilnesse
Can no man as I guess
Weill put into verse.
A warloch a warwolfe a wowbet but hair,
A deill, and a Dragon, a deid Dro^adarie,
A conterfoot custroun, that clarks do is not care
A clauering cohooby that craks of the Phary,
Whose fauourles Phisnome does duly declair
His vices, and viciousnes, although J would vary,
Arcandam's Astrology, a lantern of lair,
Affirms his bleardnesse to wisdom contrary,
Betaikening both babbling and baldness of age.
Great fraud and foull deceit,
Cappit, with quiet conceit,
Witness some verse he wreit
Half daft in a rage.
His Anagrame also, concerning that case,
Says surely it is a sign of a leacherous Lowne,
His palenes next partly, with brown^in the face,
Arcandam ascriues to babbling aye bowne,
And tratling intemperate, tymeles, but place
A cowart yet choleric, and drunk in ilk town,
And als his ass ears they sign in short space
The frantic fool shall grow mad like Mahowne,
^ut yet sall he live long, whilk alas were a loss,
For sik a tried traitor,
A babbling blasphe natour
Was never formed of Nature
Sa gooked a Goose.
Whose origin noble, the note of his name
Called Etymology beirs rightly record,
^is surname does flow fra two terms of defame,
from Mont and Gomora where devils be the Lord,
His kinsmen was cleinly cast out to his shame
That is of their Clan whom Christ has abhorred
And beirs of the birth place their horrible name
Where Sodomite sinners with stinking were smor'd.
Now sen all is suith that is said of this smy
Unto that capped Clark
And pretty piece of wark
That bitterly does bark
J may this reply.
Polwarts last flytting against Montgomerie
Vile villain vain, and war than I have tauld thee,
Thy withered wame is damnified and dried,
Beshitten bystour, baldly I forbad thee
To mell with me, or else thou should dear buy it,
Thy speech but purpose, sporter is espied,
That wrytes of witches, warlocks, wraiths and wratches,
But invectiues against him well defied,
Rob St^^in thou raues, forgetting whom thou matches.
Leave boggles, brownies, Gyre-carlings, and Gaists
Dastard thou daffes that with such deuilry mels
Thy pe^l'd preambles over prolixly lasts,
Thy reasons ^auours of reek and nothing else,
Thy sentences of s^it sa sweetly smells,
Thou sat so ^eir the chimney nuike that made them,
Fast by the Ingle, amang the Oyster shells,
Dr^idand my danger durst not weill debate them.
Thy tratling, truker, w^ld gar Taides spew,
And Carle Ca^s weep vinegar with their eine,
Thou sa^d I borrowed blad's that is not true,
The contrary falls smatched salbe seen,
I never had of that making ye meine
A verse in writ, in print, or yet perqueir,
Quhilk I can prove, and cleanse me wonder cleine,
Though single words no writer can forbeir
To prove my speeches probable and plain
Thou must confess thou used my invention,
I reckoned first thy race, syne thou again
In that same sort made of thy Master mention,
Thy wit is weak with me to have dislention,
For to my speech thou never made reply,
At liberty to lie is thy intention,
I answer ay quhilk thou can not deny.
Thy friends are fiends, of Aipes thou fenzies mine,
With my assistance saying all thou can,
I count sik kindred better yet nor thine,
Ch^^^ly of beasts that most resemble man,
G^^^t gif that my invention wars thine then,
Without the whilk thou might have barked waist
I laid the ground whereon thou best began,
To big the brig whereof thou brags may.
Thy lack of Judgment may be als perceived,
Their two chief points of reason wants in thee,
Thou attributes to Aipes, where thou hes reaved,
The ils of horse, ane monstrous sight to see.
Na marvel though ill won ill waired be,
For all these ills thou staw, J am right certain,
From Semples dytements, of ane horse did die
Of Porterfielde that dwelt into Dumbartan.
Amang the ills of Aipes, that thou hes tauld,
Though to ane horse perteining properly,
Thou puts the spaven in the forder spauld
That uses in the hinder hogh to be,
Fra horsemen anes thy cunning hear and see
I fear auld Allone get na mair ado,
Allace poor man he may lie down and die
Syne thou's succeed to wear the silver shoe.
Farther thou flies with other fowls wings,
Ouer-cled with cleirer colors than thy awin,
But specially with some of Semples things,
Or for a plucked goose thou had bein knawin,
Or like an Cran, in mounting soon o'rethrowen,
That must take ay nine steps before she fly,
So in the gout thou might have stand and blown
As long as thou lay graueld like to die.
J speak not of thy vicious divisions,
Where thou pronunces and yet propons but part
Jncumbred with sa many tried confusions
Qahilk shawes thy ryme but rhetoric or art,
Thy memory is short, beshrew thy heart,
Telling one thing over twice or thrice at anes,
And cannot from a proper place depart,
Except J were to frig thee with whin stanes.
The things J said gif that thou would deny,
Meaning to wry the verity with wyles,
L^ck where I laid, and pickle of that pie,
Thy knavery credence fra thee quite exyles,
Thy feckles folly all the air defyles,
J find s^ many faults, ilke ane over other,
First I must tell thee all thy sta^ly styles,
And syne bequeath thee to thy birken brother.
Fond flyter, shit shyter, bacon byter all defyl'd,
Blunt bleittar, paddock pricker, pudding ester, perverse,
Hen plucker, closet mucker, house cucker, very vyld,
Tanny cheiks, J think thou spelks, with thy bre^k, foul er^e,
Woodtyk, hoodpyk, ay like to live in lack,
Flower the pin scabbed skin, eat it in that thou spoke.
Gume gade, bald skade, foull fa'd, why flait thou foul,
Steill You, fill tow thou dow not defend thee,
Quha kend thy end, false fiend, fantastic mule,
Theif siny, they wald cry, fie fie to garr end thee,
Sweir sow doyl'd kow, ay fow, foull fall thy banes,
Very wyld, defyl'd, ay woodwyld ilk month anes.
Tarry tade, thou's defate; now debate, if thou dow,
Huch padle, lick ladle, shyte sadle, do thy best,
Creishie soutter, shoe clouter, minch mouter, dar thou mow,
Ragged railer, sheep stealer, double dealer thou's be dressed.
False preif, lean theif, mischief fall thy lips.
Blaird beard, thy reward is prepared for thy hippes.
Erse slaiker, gly'd glaker, room raiker for releif,
Lunatic, frenatik, schismatik, Swingeour sob,
Tu^^ defaced, ay chased, almaist fyld for a theif,
Misly, kyt, and thou flyt I Will dryt in thy gob,
T^it mow, wild sow, soon bow or I wand thee,
Hell ru^k, with thy buik leave the nuik, I command thee,
^^^d lowper, light skowper, ragged rowper, like a Raven,
Halland shaker, draight raiker, bannock baiker, all beshitten
Craig in peril, toom the barrel, quyt the quarrel or be shaven
^ude ratler, common tratler, poor pratler, out flitten,
Hell spark, scabbed Clark, and thou bark I sall belt thee,
^kad skald, ouerbald, soon fald or I melt thee.
^ousie lugs, leap jugs toome the mugs on the midding,
^anny flank, redshank, pykthank, I must pay thee,
^pew bleck, widdie neck, come and beck at my bidding,
^alse Lowne, make thee bowne, M^howne mon have thee,
^ank ruittour, scurlie whitour, and ^uitour, nane four,
Decrest, oppressed, possessed with Plutoes power.
Capped knave, proud slave, ye rave aye vnrocked,
Whiles slauerand, whiles taverand, whiles wauerand with wine
Greedy gouked, poor and plucked, ill instructed, ye's be knoked,
Gley^d ganrell, auld mangrell, to the hangrall, and sa pyne,
Calumniatour, blasphematour, vile creature untrue,
Thy cheiping, and peiping, with weeping thou salt rue.
Mad manter, vain vaunter, ay haunter in slavery.
Pudding pricker, bang the bicker, nane quicker in knavery,
Kailly lips, kiss my hips, into grips thou's behind
Baill brewer, poison spewer, money truer hes bein pin^d
Swyne keiper, land leiper, tuird steiper from the drouth,
Lean limmer, steal gimmer, J sall skimmer in thy mouth.
Fley'd fool, mad muile, die with doole on an aike,
Knave kend, Christ send ill end on thee now,
Pudding wright, out of sight, thou's be dight like a draike,
Jock blunt, thrawin frunt, kiss the cunt of the Kow,
Purse peiler, hen steiller, Cat killer, now I quell thee.
Rubiatour, fornicatour by nature, foull befall thee.
Tyk sticker, poisoned Viccar, pot licker, I mon pay thee,
Feared flyar, loud liar, gooked gleyar on the gallows
Jock blunt, deid runt, I sall punt whil I slay thee,
Buttrie bag, fill knag, thou will rag with thy fellows
Tired clatterer, skin batterer, and flatterer of friends,
Vyld widdered, misordered, confedered with fiends.
Blind brock, louse dock, bored block, banished towns,
Alace theifes face, na grace for that grunzie,
Beld bisset, marmissed, lansprezed to the lownes,
Deid dring, dried sting, thou will hing but a sunzie^
Lick butter, throat cutter, fish gutter, fill the fetter,
Come bleitand and greitand, fast eitand thy laidly letter.
FINIS.

