The argument of the Tragedy.
AT a banquet made by Other Pendragon for the solemnising of his conquest
against the Saxons, he fell inamoured with Igerna wife to Gorlois Duke of
Cornwell. Who perceiving the Kings passion, departed with his wife and prepared
wars at Cornwell, where also in a strong hold beyond him he placed her Then
the King (...) an a^mye to suppress him, but waxing impatient of his desire to
Igerna, transformed himself by Merlin his cunning, into the likeness of
Gorlois, And after his acceptance with Igerna he returned to his siedge, where
he slew Gorlois. Igerna was delivered of Arthur and Anne twins of the same
birth. Other Pendragon 15. years after pursuing the Saxons was by them
poisoned. Arthur delighted in his sister Anne, who made him father of Mordred.
Seventeen years after Lucius Tiberius of Rome demanded a tribute due by the
conquest of Caesar. Arthur gathered the powers of 13. Kings besides his own,
and leaving his Queen Gueneuora in the tuition of Mordred, to whom likewise
he committed the kingdom in his absence, arrived at France, where after 9.
years wars, he sent the slain body of Tiberius unto Rome for the tribute.
During this absence Mordred grew ambicious, for th'effecting whereof he made
love to Gueneuora, who gave ^are unto him. Then by the assistance of G^lla a
British Lord he usurped, and for mainteinance entertained with large
promises, the Sa^ons, Irish, Pictes, and N^rmands. Gueneuora hearing that
Arthur was already embarked for return, through despair purposing diversely,
sometimes to kill her husband, sometimes to kill her self, at last resolved to
enter into religion. Arthur at his landing was resisted on the stronds of
Dover, where he put Mordred to flight. The last field was fought at Cornwell,
where after the death of one hundred and tweentie thousand saving on either
side 20, Mordred received his death, and Arthur his deadly wound.

The Argument and manner of the first dumb show.
SOunding the music, there rose three furies from under the stage apparelled
accordingly with snakes and flames about their black hairs and garments. The
first with a Snake in the right hand and a cup of wine with a Snake a^hwart
the cup in the left hand. The second with a firebrand in the right hand^, and a
Cupid in the left: The third with a whippe in the right hand and a Paegasus
in the left. VVhiles they went masking above the stage, there came from another
place three Nu^^ which walked by them selves. Then after a full sight given to
the beholders, they all parted, the furie^ to Mordreds house, the Nuns to the
Clois^er. By the first fury with the Snake and Cup was signified the Banquet
of Other Pendragon, and afterward his death which insued by poisoned cup. The
second fury with her firebrande and Cupid represented Vthers unlawful ^ea^e
and lo^^ conceived at the banquet, which never ceased in his posterity. By the
third with her whip and Paegasus was prefigured the cruelty and (...) which
thenc^ insued and continued to th'effecting of this tragidie. By the Nuns was
(...) the remorse and d^spaire of Gueneuora, that wanting other hope took a
Nunrie for (...) refuge. After their departure, the four which represented the
Chor^^ (...) plaeces.

The argument of the first Act.
1 IN the first scene the spirit of Gorlois Duke of Cornwell, the man first and
most wronged in this history being dispoild both of Wife, Dukedom and life
craves revenge for these injuries, denouncing the whole misfortune ensuing.

2 In the second scene* Gueneuora hearing that Arthur was on Seas returning,
desperately manaceth his death, from which intent she is dissuaded by Fronia, a
Lady of her Court and privy to her secrets.

3 In the third scene Gueneuora perplexedly minds her own death, whence
being diswaded by her sister she resolves to enter into Religion.

4 In the fourth scene Mordred goes about to persuade Gueneuora to persist in
her love, but misseth thereof: And then is exhorted by Conan (a noble man of
Brytain) to reconcile himself to his Father at his coming, but refuses so to
do and resolves to keep him from landing by battle.

The names of the speakers.
Gorlois Duke of Cornwalls ghost. Gueneuora the Queen. Fronia a Lady of her
train. Angharad sister to the Queen. Mordred the Usurper. Conan a faithful
counselor. Nuntius of Arthurs landing. The Heralt from Arthur. Gawin King of
Albanie. Gilla: a Brytishe Earl. Gillamor King of Ireland. Cheldrich Duke of
Saxony. The Lord of the Pictes. Arthur King of great Brytain. Cador Duke of
Cornwall. Hoel King of little Britain. The Heralt from Mordred. Aschillus
King of Denmark. The King of Norwaye. A number of Soldiers. Nuntius of the
last battle. Gildas a noble man of Brytain. CHORUS.
THE FIRST ACT and first scene.
Gorlois. GORL. SInce thus through channells black of Limbo lake,
And deep infernal floude of Stygian poole,
The ghastly Caron's boat transported back
Thy ghost, from Pluto's pittes and glowming shades,
To former light once lost by Destnies doom:
Where proud Pendragon broylde with shameful lust,
Dispoylde thee erst of wife, of land, and life:
Now (Gorlois) work thy wish, cast here thy gaul,
Glutte on revenge: thy wrath abhorrs delays.
What though (besides Pendragons poisoned end)
The vile reproach he wrought thee by thy phere,
Through deep increase of crimes alike is plagude?
And that the shame thou suffredst for his lusts,
Reboundeth back, and stifeleth in his stock?
Yet is not mischiefe's measure all fulfilde,
Nor wreake sufficient wrought: Thy murdered corse
And Dukedom reft, for heavier vengeance cries.
Come therefore bloomes of settled mischiefs root,
Come each thing else, what fury can invent,
Wreake all at once, infect the air with plagues,
Till badd to worse, till worse to worst be turnde.
Let mischiefs know no mean, nor plagues an end.
Let th'ofsprings sin exceed the former stock:
Let none have time to hate his former fault,
But still with fresh supply let punished crime
Increase, till time it make a complet sin.
Go to: some fact, which no age shall allow,
Nor yet conceal: some fact must needs be darde,
That for thy horror great and outrage fell
Thereof, may well beseem Pendragons brood.
And first, whiles Arthurs nauies homewards flott
Triumphantly bedeckt with Roman spoils:
Let Guenouer express what frantic moodes
Distract a wife, when wronging wedlockes rights,
Both fond and fell, she loves and loathes at once.
Let deep despair pursue, till loathing life
Her hateful head in cowle and cloister lurk.
Let traitorous Mordred keep his sire from shore.
Let Bryttaine rest a pray for foreign powers
Let sword and fire still fed with mutual strife
Turn all the Kings to ghoastes, let civil wars
And discord swell till all the realm be torn.
Even in that soil whereof my self was Duke,
Where first my spowse Igerna brake her vow,
Where this ungracious offspring was
In Cornwell, there, let Mordreds
Let Arthurs fatal wound bewray the wrong,
The murder vile, the rape of wife and weal,
Wherewith their sire incenst both Gods and man:
Thus, thus Pendragons seed so sown and reapte,
Thus cursed imps, ill borne, and worse consumed,
Shall render just revenge for parents crimes,
And penance due t'asswadge my swelling w^ath.
The whiles O Cassiopaea gempright sign,
Most sacred sight, and sweet Celestial star,
This Clymat's joy, placed in imperial throne
With fragrant Olive branche portending peace:
And whosoe'r besides ye heavenly powers
(Her stately train with influence divine,
And mild aspect all prone to Bryttaine^ good)
Foresee what present plagues do threate this Isle:
Prevent not this my w^eake. For you their rest's
A happier age a thousand years to come:
An age for peace, religion, wealth, and ^ase,
When all the world shall wonder at your bliss:
That, that is yours. Leave this to Gorlois ghoast.
And see where com's one engine of my hate.
With moods and manners fit for my revenge. Exit.

The second scene.
Gneneuora. Fronia. GVEN. AND dares he after nine years space return,
And see her face, whom he so long disdain'de?
Was I then chose and wedded for his stale,
To look and ga^e for his retirelesse sails,
Puffed back, and flittering spread to every wind?
O wrong content with no revenge: seek out
Undared plagues, teach Mordred how to rage.
Attempt some bloody dreadful, irksome fact,
And such as Mordred would were rather his.
Why stayest? it must be done: let bridle go,
Frame out some trap beyond all vulgar guile,
Beyond Medea's wiles: attempt some fact,
That any wight unwieldy of her self,
That any spowse unfaithful to her phere,
Durst ever attempt in most despair of weal.
Spare no revenge, b'it poison, knyfe, or fire.

FRON. Good Madame, temper these outrageous moodes,
And let not will usurp, where wit should rule.

GVEN. The wrath, that breaths blood, does loath to lurk.
What reason most with holds, rage wringes perforce.
I am disdainde: so will I not be long:
(...), that he shall first arrive,
(...) shall aforde him life.
(...) lands, nor wars abroad
Sufficed for thy foil: yet shall thou find
Far worse at home: Thy deep displeased spowse.
What ever thou have ^ubdude in all thy stay,
This hand shall now subdue: then stay thy fill.
What Is this? my mind recoyls, and yrkes these threats:
Anger delays, my grief gynnes to assuage,
My fury faintes, and sacred wedlockes faith
Presents it self. Why shunst thou fearful wrath?
Add coals a fresh, preserve me to this venge.
At lest exyle thy self to realms unknown,
And steal his wealth to help thy banished state,
For flight is best. O base and hartlesse fear.
Theft? exyle? flight? all these may Fortune send
Unsought: but thee beseemes more high revenge.
Come spiteful fiends, come heaps of furies fell,
Not one, by one, but all at once: my breast
Raues not enough: it likes me to be filde
With greater monsters yet. My heart does throbbe:
My liver boyles: some what my mind portendes,
Uncertayne what: but whatsoever, it is huge.
So it exceed, be what it will: it is well.
Omit no plague, and none will be enough.
Wrong cannot be revenged, but by excess.

FRON. O spare this heat: you yield too much to rage,
You Are too unjust: is there no mean in wrong?

GVEN. Wrong claymes a mean, when first you offer wrong.
The mean is vain, when wrong is in revenge.
Great harms cannot be hid, the grief is small,
That can re^eaue advise, or rule it self.

FRON. Hatred concealde does often hap to hurt,
But once professed, it oftener fails revenge.
How better tho, were to repress your ire?
A Ladies best revenge is to forgive.
What mean is in your hate? how much soe'r
You can invent, or dare: so much you hate.

GVEN. And would you know what mean there is in hate?
Call love to mind, and see what mean is there.
My love, redoubled love, and constant faith
Engaged unto Mordred works so deep:
That both my heart and marrow quite be burnt,
And synewes dried with force of woontlesse flames,
Desire to joy him still, torments my mind:
Fear of his want does and a double grief.
Lo here the love, that stirs this meanelesse hate.

FRON. Eschew it far: such love impugnes the laws*

GVEN. Unlawful love does like, when lawful lothes.


FRON. And is your love of husband quite extinct?


GVEN. The greater flame must needs delay the less.
Besides, his sore revenge I greatly fear.

FRON. How can you then attempt a fresh offense?


GVEN. Who can appoint a stint to her offense?


FRON. But here the greatness of the fact should move.


GVEN. The greater it, the fitter for my grief:

FRON. To kill your spowse?


GVEN. A stranger, and a foe.


FRON. Your liege and king?


GVEN. He wants both Realm and Crown.


FRON. Nature affordes not to your sex such strength.


GVEN. Love, anguish, wrath, will soon afforde enough.


FRON. What rage is this?


GVEN. Such as himself shall rue.


FRON. Whom Gods do press enough, will you annoy?


GVEN. Whom Gods do press, they bend: whom man annoyes,
He breaks.

FRON. Your grief is more then his deserts:
Each fault requires an equal hate: be not severe,
Where crimes be light: as you have felt, so grieve.

GVEN. And seems it light to want him nine year space?
Then to be spoild of one I hold more dear?
Think all to much, b'it never so just, that feeds
Continual grief: the lasting woe is worst.

FRON. Yet let your highness shun these desperate moodes,
Cast of this rage, and fell disposed mind.
Put not shame quite to flight, have some regard
Both of your sex, and future fame of life.
Use no such cruel thoughts, as far exceed
A manly mind, much more a woman's heart.

GVEN. Well: shame is not so quite exilde, but that
I can, and will respect your sage advise.
Your Counsel I accept, give leave a while,
Till fiery wrath may s^ake, and rage relent. Exit FRON.

The third scene.
Gueneuora. Angharat. GVEN. THE love, that for his rage will not be ruled,
Must be restrainde: fame shall receive no foil.
Let Arthur live, whereof to make him sure,
My self will dye, and so prevent his harms.
Why stayest thou thus amazde O slothful wrath?
Mischief is meant, dispatch it on thy self.

ANGH. Her breast not yet appeasde from former rage
Has chaungde her wrath, which wanting means to work
An others woe, (for such is furies wont,)
Seeks out his own, and raues upon it self.
Assuage (alas) that over fervent ire,
Through to much anger, you offend too much:
Thereby the rather you deserve to live,
For seeming worthy in your self to dye.

GVEN. Death is decreed: what kind of death, I doubt:
Whether to dround, or stifill up his breath.
On forcing blood, to dye with dint of knife.
All hope of prosperous hap is gone, my fame,
My faith, my spouse: no good is left vnlost:
My self am left, there is left both seas and lands,
And sword, and fire, and chains, and choice of harms.
O gnawing easelesse grief. Who now can heal
My maimed mind? it must be healde by death.

ANGH. No mischief must be done, whiles I be by,
Or if there must, there must be more then one.
If death it be you seek, I seek, it too:
Alone you may not die, with me you may.

GVEN. They, that will drive the unwilling to their death,
Or frustrate death in those, that feign would die,
Offend alike. They spoil, that b^otelesse spare.

ANGH. But will my tears and mournings move you naught?


GVEN. Then is it best to die, when friends do mourn.


ANGH. Each where is death: that, fates have well ordainde,
That each man may bereave himself of life,
But none of death: death is so sure a doom:
A thousand ways do guide us to our graves.
Who then can ever come too late to that,
Whence, when h'is come, he never can return?
Or what auailes to hasten on our ends,
And long for that, which destenies have sworn?
Look back in time, to late is to repent,
When furious rage has once cut of the choice.

GVEN. Death is an end of pain* no pain it self.
Is It meet a plague, for such excessive wrong,
Should be so short? Soould one stroke answer all?
And would thou dye? Well: that contents the laws,
What then for Arthurs ire? What for thy fame,
Which thou have stainde? What for thy stock thou shamst?
Not death, nor life alone can give a full
Revenge: join both in one. Die: and yet live*
Where pain may not be often, let it be long.
Seek out some lingering death, whereby, thy corse
May neither touch the dead, nor joy the quick.
Dye: but no common death: pass Natures bounds.

ANGH. Set plaintes aside, despair yields no relief.
The more you search a wound, the more it stings.

GVEN. When guilty minds torment them selves, they heal:
Whiles wounds be cured, grief is a salve for grief.

ANGH. Grief is no just esteemer of our deeds:
What so has yet been done, proceeds from chance.

GVEN. The mind, and not the chance, does make th'unchast,

ANGH. Then is your fault from Fate, you rest excusde:
None can be deemed faulty for her Fate.

GVEN. No Fate, but manners fail, when we offend.
Impute mishaps to Fates, to manners faults.

ANGH. Love is an error, that may blind the best.


GVEN. A mighty error often has seemde a sin.
My death is vowed, and death must needs take place.
But such a death, as stands with just remorse:
Death, to the world, and to her slipperie joys:
A full deuorce from all this Courtly pomp.
Where daily penance done for each offense,
May render due revenge for every wrong.
Which to accomplish: pray my dearest friends,
That they forthwith attyrde in saddest guise,
Conduct me to the Cloister next hereby,
There to profess, and to renounce the world.

ANGH. Alas* What change were that, from Kingly rooffes
To Cloistered celles? To live, and die at once?
To want your stately troops, your friends and kin?
To shun the shows and sights of stately Court.
To see in sort alive, your Countries death?
Yea, what so'er even Death it self withdrawes
From any else, that life with draws from you.
Yet since your highness is so fully bent,
I will obey, the whiles assuage your grief Exit.

The fourth scene.
Mordred. Gueneuora. Conan. MORD. THE hour which erst I always feared most,
The certain ruin of any desperate state,
Is happened now: why turnst thou (mind) thy back?
Why at the first assault do thou recoile?
Trust to it: the angry Heavens contriue some spite,
And dreadful doom, t'augment thy cursed hap.
Oppose to each revenge thy guilty head,
And shun no pain nor plague fit for thy fact.
What should thou fear, that see not what to hope?
No danger's left before, all is at thy back.
He safely stands, that stands beyond his harms.
Thine (death) is all, that East, or West can see,
For thee we live, our coming is not long,
Spare us, but whiles we may prepare our graves,
Though thou were s^owe, we hasten of our selves.
The hour that gave, did also take our lives:
No sooner men, then mortal were we borne.
I see mine end draws on, I feel my plagues.

GVEN. No plague for one ill borne, to dye as ill.


MORD. O Queen! my sweet associate in this plunge,
And desperate plight, behold, the time is come,
That either iustifies our former faults,
Or shortly sets us free from every fear.

GVEN. My fear is past, and wedlock love has woonne.
Retire we thither yet, whence first we ought
Not to have stird. Call back chaste faith again.
The way, that leads to good, is never to late:
Who so repents, is guiltless of his crimes.

MORD. What means this course? Is Arthurs wedlock safe?
Or can he love, that has just cause to hate?
That nothing else were to be feared:
Is most apparent, that he hates at home,
What ever he be, whose fancy strayes abroad?
Think then, our love is not unknown to him:
Whereof what patience can be safely hopte?
Nor love, nor soueraignetie can bear a peer.

GVEN. Why do thou still stir up my flames delayde?
His strayes and errors must not move my mind.
A law for private men binds not the King.
What, that I ought not to condemn my liege,
Nor can, thus guilty to mine own offense?
Where both have done amiss, both will relent.
He will forgive, that needs must be forgiven.

MORD. A likely thing* your faults must make you friends:
What sets you both at odds, must join you both:
Think well he casts already for revenge,
And how to plague us both. I know his law,
A Judge severe to us, mild to himself.
What then auailes you to return to late,
When you have past to far? You feed vain hopes.

GVEN. The further past, the more this fault is yours:
It served your turn, t'usurpe your fathers Crown.
His is the crime, whom crime stands most in steed.

MORD. They, that conspire in faults offend a like:
Crime makes them equal, whom it jointly stains.
If for my sake you then pertooke my guilt,
You cannot guiltless seem, the crime was joint.

GVEN. Well should should she seem most guiltless unto thee,
Whate'r she be, that is guilty for thy sake.
The remnant of that sober mind, which thou
Had heretofore nere vanquished, yet resists.
Suppress for shame that impious mouth so taught,
And to much skild to abuse the wedded bed.
Look back to former Fates: Troy still had stood,
Had not her Prince made light of wedlocks lore.
The vice, that threw down Troy, does threat thy Throne:
Take heed: there Mordred stands, whence Paris fell. Exit.

CONA. Since that your highness knows for certain truth
What power your sire prepares to claim his right:
It nearly now concerns you to resolve
In humbliest sort to reconcile your self.
Against his return:

MORD. will war.


CONA. that lies in chaun^^


MORD. I have as great a share in chance, as he.


CONA. His ways be blind, that makes chance his guide.


MORD Whose refuge lies in chance, what dares he not?


CONA. Wars were a crime far worse then all the rest.


MORD. The safest passage is from bad to worse.


CONA. That were to pass too far, and put no mean.


MORD. He is a fool, that puts a mean in crimes.


CONA. But sword and fire would cause a common wound.


MORD. So sword and fire will often sear the soar.


CONA. Extremest cures must not be used first.


MORD. In desperate times, the headlong way is best.


CONA. Y'haue many foes.


MORD. No more then faithful friends.


CONA. Trust to it, their faith will faint, where Fortune fails.
Where many men pretend a love to one,
Whose power may do what good, and harm he will:
It Is hard to say, which be his faithful friends.
Dame Flattery flitteth often: she loves and hates
With time, a present friend an absent foe.
But yet y'll hope the best: Even then you fear
The worst* Fears follow hopes, as fumes do flames.
Mischief is sometimes safe: but never secure:
The wrongful Scepter's held with trembling hand.

MORD. Whose rule wants right, his safety's in his Sword.
For Sword and Scepter comes to Kings at once.

CONA. The Kingliest point is to affect but right,

MORD. Weak is the Scepters hold, that seeks but right,
The ca^e whereof has danger'd many Crowns.
As much as water differs from the fire,
So much man's profit iarres from what is just.
A free recourse to wrong does often secure
The doubtful seat, and plucks down many a foe.
The Sword must seldom cease: a Sovereigns hand
Is scantly safe, but whiles it smites. Let him
Usurp no Crown, that likes a guiltles life:
Aspiring power and Justice ^ield agree.
He always fears, that shames to offer wrong.

CONA. What son would use such wrong against his sire?


MORD. Come son, come sire, I first prefer my self.
And since a wrong must be, then it excels,
When it is to gain a Crown. I hate a peer,
I loath, I yrke, I do detest a head.
B'it Nature, be it Reason, be it Pride,
I love to rule: my mind nor with, nor by,
Nor after any claims, but chief and first.

CONA. Yet think what fame and grievous bruits would run
Of such disloyal and unjust attempts.

MORD. Fame goe's not with our Ghosts, the senseless soul
Once gone, neglects what vulgar brute reports.
She is both light and vain.

CONAN. She notes though.
She fears States.

CONAN. She carpeth never the less.


MORD. She Is soon suppressed.


CONAN. As soon she springs again,

MORD. Toungs are vntamde: and Fame is Enuies Dog,
That absent barckes, and present fawnes as fast.
It fearing dares, and yet has never done,
But dures: though Death redeem us from all foes
Besides, yet Death redeemes us not from Toungs.
Ever Arthur land, the Sea shall blush with blood.
And all the Stronds with smoking slaughters reeke.
Now (Mars) protect me in my first attempt.
If Mordred escape, this Realm shall want no wars.

Exeunt. CHORUS. CHORUS. 1
Se^ here the drifts of Gorlois Cornish Duke,
And deep desire to shake his Sovereigns Throne:
How foul his fall, how bitter his rebuke,
Whiles wife, and weal, and life, and all be gone?
He now in Hell tormented wants that good*
Lo, lo the end of traiterous bones and blood.
2
Pendragon broylde with flames of filthy fires,
By Merlins mists inioyde Igerna's bed,
Next spoiled Gorlois doubting his desires,
Then was himself through force of poison sped.
Who sowes in sin, in sin shall reap his pain:
The Doom is sworn: Death guerdon's death again.
3
Whiles Arthur wars abroad and reapes renown,
Gueneuora preferres his sons desire.
And traiterous Mordred still usurps the Crown,
Affording fuel to her quenchlesse fire.
But Death's too good, and life too sweet for thease,
That wanting both, should taste of neithers ease.
4
In Rome the gaping gulf would not decrease,
Till Curtius corse had closde her yawning ^awes*
In Th^b's the Rotte and Murreine would not cease,
Till Laius brood had paid for breach of laws:
In Brytain wars and discord will not stent:
Till Vther's line and offspring quite be spent.
The Argument of the second Act.
1 IN the first Scene a Nuntio declares the success of Arth^^ wars in
France, and Mordred's foil that resisted his (...).

2 In the second Scene Mordred enraged at the overthrow, v^^eth a second
battle, notwithstanding Conan's disswasio^ the contrary.

3 In the third Scene Gawin (brother to Mordred by (...)) with an Heralt from
Arthur to imparle of peace, but (...) some debate thereof peace is rejected.

4 In the fourth Scene the King of Ireland and other foreign (...) assure
Mordred of their assistane against Arthur.

The Argument and manner of the second dumb show.
WHILES the Music sounded there came out of Mordred's (...) man stately
attyred representing a King, who walking once (...) Stage. Then out of the
house appointed for Arthur, there came (...) Nymphs apparailed accordingly,
the first holding a Cornucopia in her han^ second a golden branch of Olive,
the third a sheaffe of Corn. These (...) one after another offered these
presents to the King who seemefully refu^^ After the which there came a man
bareheaded, with black long shagged hair down to his shoulders, apparailed
with an Irish Iacket and shirt, having an Irish dagger by his side and a dart
in his hand. Who first with a threatening countenance looking about, and then
spying the King, did furiously chase and drive him into Mordreds house. The
King represented Mordred. The three Nymphs with their proffers the treatice of
peace, for the which Arthur sent Gawin with an Herault unto Mordred who
rejected it: The Irish man signified Revenge and Fury which Mordred conceived
after his foil on the Shoares, whereunto Mordred headlong yields himself.

THE SECOND act and first Scene.
Nuntius. VNT. LO here at length the stately type of Troy,
And Brytain land the promised seat of Brute.
Decked with so many spoils of conquered Kings.
Hail native soil, these nine years space unseen:
To thee has long renowned Rome at last
Held up her hands, bereaft of former pomp.
But first inflamde with woonted valures heat,
Amidst our sorest s^edge and thickest broils,
She stoutly fought, and fiercely waged wars.
Tiberius courage gave, vpbraiding often
The Roman force, their woonted luck, and long
Retained rule, by wars throughout the world.
What shame it were, since such atchiued spoils,
And conquests gaind both far and wide, to want
Of courage then, when most it should be moved.
How Brytaines erst paid tribute for their peace,
But now rebel, and dare them at their doors:
For what was France but theirs? Herewith incenst
They fiercely rau'd, and bent their force a fresh.
Which Arthur spying, cried with thundering voice,
Fie, (Brytaines) fie: what has bewitched you thus?
So many Nations foilde, must Romans foil?
What sloth is this? Have you forgot to war,
Which never knew hour of peace? Turn to your foes,
Where you may bath in blood, and fight your fill.
Let courage work: what can he not that dares?
Thus he puissant guide in doubtful wars,
A shamde to shun his foes, inflamde his friends.
Then yielding to his stately Stead the reigns,
He furious drives the Roman troops about:
He plies each place, least Fates might alter ought,
Pursuing hap, and urging each success.
He yields in naught, but instantly persists
In all attempts, wherein what so withstands
His wish, he joys to work a way by wrack.
And matching death to death, no passage seeks,
But what destruction works, with blade or blood.
He scorns the yielded way, he fiercely raues
To break and bruise the rancks in thickest throngs,
All headlong bent, and prone to present spoil.
The foes enforced withstand: but much dismaide
They senseless fight, whiles millions lose their lives.
At length Tiberius, pierst with point of spear,
Does bleeding fall, engoard with deadly wound.
Hereat the rest recoile, and headlong fly,
Each man to save himself. The battle quails
And Brytaines win unto their most renown.
Then Arthur took Tiberius breathless Corse,
And sent it to the Senators at Rome,
With charge to say: This is the tribute due
Which Arthur ought, as time hereafter serves,
He Will pay the like again: the whiles he rests
Your debtor thus. But O! this this sweet success
Pursued with greater harms, turned soon to sour.
For lo: when foreign soiles and seas were past
With safe return, and that the King should land:
Who, but his only son (O outrage rare)
With hugie host withstoode him at the shore?
There were preparde the foreign aides from far,
There were the borrowed powers of diverse Kings,
There were our parents, brethren, sons and kin,
Their wrath, their ire, there Mordred was thy rage.
Where erst we sought abroad for foes to foil,
Behold, our Fates had sent us foes unsought.
When foreign Realms supplanted want supply:
O blessed Home, that has such boonne in store.
But let this part of Arthurs prowess lurk,
Nor let it ever appear by my report,
What monstrous mischiefs rave in civil wars.
O rather let due tears, and waylings want:
Let all in silence sink, what hence insu'd.
What best deserves mention here, is this:
That Mordred vanquished trusted to his flight,
That Arthur each where victor is returned.
And lo: where Mordred comes with heavy head,
He wields no slender weight that wields a Crown. Exit.

The second scene.
Mordred. Conan. MORD. ANd has he won? Be Stronds and shoares possessed?
Is Mordred foilde? the realm is yet vnwonne:
And Mordred lives reserved for Arthurs death:
Well: it was my first conflict: I knew not yet
What wars required: but now my sword is flesht,
And taught to goare and bath in hoatest blood.
Then think not Arthur that the Crown is won:
Thy first success may rue our next assault.
Even at our next encounter (hap when 'twill)
I vow by Heaven, by Earth, by Hell, by all,
That either thou, or I, or both shall (...).

CONA. Naught should be rashly vowde against your sire.


MORD. Whose breast is free from rage may soon b'aduisde.


CONA. The best redress for rage is to relent.


MORD. It Is better for a King to kill his foes.


CONA. So that the Subjects also judge them foes.


MORD. The Subjects must not judge their Kings decrees.


CONA. The Subjects force is great.


ARTH. Greater the Kings.


CONA. The more you may, the more you ought to fear.


MORD. He is a fool, that fears what he may.


CONA. Not what you may, but what you ought is just,

MORD. He that amongst so many, so unjust,
Seeks to be just, seeks peril to him self.

CONA. A greater peril comes by breach of laws.


MORD. The Laws do license as the Sovereign lists.


CONA. Lest ought he list, whom laws do license most.


MORD. Imperial power abhorres to be restrainde.


CONA. As much do meaner rooms to be compeld.


MORD. The Fates have heau'de and raisde my force on high.


CONA. The gentler should you press those, that are low.


MORD. I would be feared:

CONA. The cause why Subjects hate.


MORD. A Kingdom's kept by fear.


CONA. And lost by hate.
He fears as man himself, whom many fear.

MORD. The timorous Subject dares attempt no chaundge.


CONA. What dares not desperate dread?


CONA. What torture threats.


CONA. O spare, tweare saffer to be lou'de.


MORD. As safe
To be obaide.

CONA. Whiles you command but well.


MORD. Where Rulers dare command but what is well:
Power is but prayer, commaundment but request.

CONA. If power be ioynde with right, men must obey.


MORD. My will must go for right.


CONA. If they assent.


MORD. My sword shall force assent:

CONA. No Gods forbid.


MORD. What? shall I stand whiles Arthur sheads my blood?
And must I yield my neck unto the Axe?
Whom Fates constrayne, let him forgo his bliss:
But he that needless yeldes unto his bane,
When he may shun, does well deserve to loose
The good he cannot use: who would sustain
A baser life, that may maintain the best?
We cannot part the Crown: A regal Throne
Is not for two: The Scepter fittes but one.
But whether is the fitter of us two,
That must our swords decerne: and shortly shall.

CONA. How much were you to be renowned more,
If casting off these ruinous attempts,
You would take care how to supply the loss,
Which former wars, and foreign broils have wrought.
How to deserve the peoples hearts with peace,
With quiet rest, and deep desired ease.
Not to increase the rage that long has raignde,
Nor to destroy the realm, you seek to rule.
Your Father rearde it up, you pluck it down.
You loose your Country whiles you win it thus:
To make it yours, you strive to make it none.
Where Kings impose too much, the commons grudge:
Goodwill withdrawes, assent becomes but slow.

MORD. Must I to gain renown, incur my plague,
Or hoping praise sustain an exiles life?
Must I for Countries ease disease my self,
Or for their love despise my own estate?
No. It Is my hap that Brytain serves my turn,
That fear of me does make the Subjects crouch,
That what they grudge, they do constrained yield.
If their assents be slow, my wrath is swift,
Whom favor fails to bend, let fury break.
If they be yet to learn, let terror teach,
What Kings may do, what Subjects ought to bear.
Then is a Kingdom at a wished stay,
When whatsoever the Sovereign wills, or nilles,
Men be compelde as well to praise, as bear,
And Subjects wills enforced against their wills.

CONA. But who so seeks true praise, and just renown,
Would rather seek their praising hearts, then tongues.

MORD. True praise may happen to the basest groom,
A forced praise to none, but to a Prince.
I wish that most, that Subjects most repine.

CONA. But yet where wars do threaten your estate,
There needs friends to fortify your Crown.

MORD. Each Crown is made of that attractiue moulde,
That of it self it draws a full defense.

CONA. That is a just, and no vsupred Crown.
And better were an exiles life, then thus
Disloyally to wrong you Sire and Liege.
Think not that impious crimes can prosper long,
A time they escape, in time they be repaide.

MORD. The hugest crimes bring best success to some.


CONA. Those some be rare.


MORD. Why may not I be rare?


CONA. It was their hap.


MORD. It is my hope.


CONA. But hope
May miss, where hap does hurl.

MORD. So hap may hit,
Where hope does aim.

CONAN. But hap is last, and rules
The stearne.

MORD. So hope is first, and hoists the sail.


CONA. Yet fear: the first and last do sielde agree.


MORD. Nay dare: the first and last have many means.
But cease at length: your speech molests me much:
My mind is fixed. Give Mordred leave to do.
What Conan neither can allow, nor like.

CONA. But lo an Herault sent from Arthurs host:
Gods grant his message may portend our good.

The third scene.
Herault. Gawin. Mordred. HERA. YOUR Sire (O Prince) considering what distress,
The Realm sustaines by both your mutual wars,
Has sent your brother Gawin Albane King
To treat of truce, and to imparle of peace.

MORD^ Speak brother: what commaundment sends my Sire?
What message do you bring? My life, or death?

GAWI. A message far unmeet, most needful tho.
The Sire commands not, where the Son rebels:
His love descends too deep to wish your death.

MORD. And mine ascends to high to wish his life.


GAWI. Yet thus he offreth: though your faults be great,
And most disloyal to his deep abuse:
Yet yield your self: he'il be as prone to grace,
As you to ruth: An Uncle, Sire, and Liege.
And fitter were your due submission done,
Then wrongful wars to reaue his right and Realm.

MORD. It is my fault, that he does want his right:
It is his own, to vex the Realm with wars.

GAWI. It is his right, that he attempts to seek:
It is your wrong* that drives him thereto.

MORD. It Is his insatiate mind, that is not so content,
Which has so many Kingdoms more besides.

GAWI. The more you ought to tremble at his power.


MORD. The greater is my conquest, if I win.


GAWI. The more your foil, if you should hap to loose.
For Arthurs fame, and vallure's such, as you
Should rather imitate, or at the least
Envy, if hope of better fancies failde.
For whereas Envy reigns, though it repines,
Yet does it fear a greater then it self.

MORD. He that enuies the valor of his foe,
Detects a want of valor in himself.
He fondly fights, that fights with such a foe,
Where it were a shame to loose, no praise to win:
But with a famous foe, succeed what will,
To win is great renown, to loose less foil.
His conquests, were they more, dismaie me not:
The oftener they have been, the more they threat.
No danger can be thought both safe, and often:
And who has oftener waged wars then he?
Escapes secure him not: he owes the price:
Whom chance has often mist, chance hits at length
Or, if that Chance have furthered his success,
So may she mine: for Chance has made me king.

GAWI. As Chance has made you King, so Chance may change.
Provide for peace: that is it the highest piers,
No state except, even Conquerours ought to seek.
Remember Arthurs strength, his conquestes late,
His fiery mind, his high aspiring heart.
Mark then the odds: he expert, you untried:
He ripe, you green: yield you, whiles yet you may,
He will not yield: he winnes his peace with wars.

MODR. If Chance may change, his Chance was last to win*
The likelier now to loose: his hautie heart
And mind I know: I feel mine own no less.
As for his strength, and skill, I leave to hap:
Where many meet, it lies not all in one.
What though he vanquished have the Roman troops?
That boots him not: him self is vanquished here.
Then weigh your words again: if Conquerours ought
To seek for peace: The Conquered must perforce.
But he'ill not yield, he'il purchase peace with wars.
Well: yield that will: I neither will, nor can:
Come peace, come wars, choose him: my danger's his,
His saffetie mine, our states do stand alike.
If peace be good, as good for him, as me:
If wars be good, as good for me, as him.

GAWI. What Cursed wars (alas) were those, wherein
Both son and sire should so oppose themselves?
Him, whom you now unhappy man pursue,
If you should win, your self would first bewail.
Give him his Crown, to keep it peril breeds.

MORD. The Crown I Will keep my self: ensue what will:
Death must be once: how soon, I lest respect.
He best prouides that can beware in time,
Not why, nor when: but whence, and where he falls.
What fool, to live a year or twain in rest,
Would loose the state, and honor of a Crown?

GAWI. Consider then your Fathers grief, and want:
Whom you bereave of Kingdom, Realm, and Crown.

MORD. Trust me: a huge and mighty kingdom it is,
To bear the want of Kingdom, Realm, and Crown.

GAWI. A common want, which works each worldlings woe,
That many have too much, but none enough.
It were his praise, could he be so content*
Which makes you guilty of the greater wrong.
Wherefore think on the doubtful state of wars,
Where Mars has sway, he keeps no certain course.
Sometimes he lettes the weaker to prevail,
Some times the stronger stoupes: hope, fear, and rage
With eylesse lot rules all, uncertain good,
Most certain harms, be his assured happes.
No luck can last, now here, now their it lights:
No state alike, Chance blindly snatcheth all,
And Fortune makes guilty whom she listes.

MORD. Since therefore fear, and hope, and hap in wars
Be all obscure, till their success be seen:
Your speech does rather drive me on to try,
And trust them all, mine only refuge now.

GAWI. And fear you not so strange and uncouth wars?


MORD. No, were they wars that grew from out the ground.


GAWI. Nor yet your sire so huge, your self so small?


MORD. The smallest axe may fell the hugest oak.


GAWI. Nor that in felling him, your self may fall?


MORD. He falls well, that falling fells his foe.


GAWI. Nor common Chance whereto each man is thrall?


MORD. Small manhood were to turn my back to Chance,

GAWI. Nor that, if Chance afflict, kings brook it not?


MORD. I bear no breast so vnpreparde for harms.
Even that I hold the kingliest point of all,
To brook afflictions well: And by how much
The more his state and tottering Empire sagges,
To fix so much the faster foot on ground.
No fear but does foreiudge, and many fall
Into their Fate, whiles they do fear their Fate.
Where courage quails, the fear exceeds the harm,
Yea worse than war it self, is fear of war.

GAWI. War seems sweet to such as have not tried:
But wisdom wills we should forecast the worst.
The end allows the act: that plot is wise,
That knows his means, and least relies on Chance.
Eschew the course where error lurkes, their grows
But grief, where pain is spent, no hope to speed.
Strive not above your strength: for where your force
Is over matchte with your attempts, it faints,
And fruitless leaves, what bootlesse it began.

MORD. All things are ruled in constant course: No Fate
But is foreset, The first day leads the last.
No wisdom then: but difference in conceit,
Which works in many men, as many minds.
You love the mean, and follow virtues race:
I like the top, and aim at greater bliss.
You rest content, my mind aspires to more:
In brief, you fear, I hope: you doubt, I dare.
Since then the sagest counsels are but strifes,
Where equal wits may wreast each side alike,
Let counsel go: my purpose must proceed:
Each likes his course, mine own does like me best.
Wherefore ever Arthur breath, or gather strength,
Assault we him: least he assault us first.
He either must destroy, or be destroide.
The mischiefe's in the midst: catch he that can.

GAWI. But will no reason rule that desperate mind?


MORD. A f^^kle mind that every reason rules.
I rest resolved: and to my Sire say thus:
If here he stay but three days to an end,
And not forthwith discharge his band and host,
It Is Mordreds oath: assure himself to die.
But if he find his courage so to serve,
As for to stand to his defense with force:
In Cornewalle if he dare, I Will try it out.

GAWI. O strange contempt: like as the craggy rock,
Resists the streams, and flings the waltering waves
Aloof, so he reiects and scorns my words. Exit.

The fourth scene.
Gilla. Gillamor. Cheldrichus. Dux Pictorum. Conan. MORD. LO, where (as they
decreed) my faithful friends
Have kept their time, be all your powers repaird?

GILLA. They be: and all with ardent minds to Mars.
They cry for wars, and longing for th'allarme
Even now they wish t'incounter with their foes.

MORD. What could be wished for more? Puissant King.
For your great help and valiant Irish force,
If I obtain the conquest in these wars,
Whereas my father claims a tribute due
Out of your Realm, I here renounce it quite.
And if assistance need in doubtful times,
I will not fail to aid you with the like.

GYLL. It does suffice me to discharge my Realm,
Or at the least to wreke me on my foes.
I rather like to live your friend and piere,
Then rest in Arthurs homage and disgrace.

MORD. Right noble Duke, through whom the Saxons vow
Their lives with mine, for my defense in wars:
If we prevail and may subdue our foes:
I will in liew of your so high deserts,
Give you and yours all Brytish lands that lie
Between the flood of Humber, and the Scotts.
Besides as much in Kent as Horsus and
Hengistus had, when Vortigern was King.

CHEL. Your gracious proffers I accept with thanks,
Not for the gain, but that the good desire
I have henceforth to be your subject here,
May thereby take effect: which I esteem
More then the rule I bear in Saxon soil.

MORD. (Renowned Lord) for your right hardy Picts,
And chosen warriers to maintain my cause,
If our attempts receive a good success,
The Albane Crown I give to you and yours.

PICT. Your highness bounty in so high degree,
Were cause enough to move me to my best.
But sure your self, without regard of meede,
Should find both me and mine at your command.

MORD. Lord Gilla, if my hope may take success,
And that I be thereby undoubted King,
The Cornish Dukedom I allot to you.

GILLA^ My Liege to further your desired attempts,
I joyfully shall spend my dearest blood.
The rather, that I found the King your Sire
So heavy Lord to me, and all my stock.

MORD. Since then our rest is on it, and we agreed
To war it out: what rests now but blows?
Drive Destnies on with swords, Mars frames the means,
Henceforth what Mordred may, now lies in you.
Ere long if Mars ensue with good success,
Look whatsoever it be, that Arthur claims,
By right, a wrong, or conquests gaind with blood,
In Brytaine, or abroad is mine to give.
To show I would have said: I cannot give,
What every hand must give unto it self.
Whereof who lists to purchase any share,
Now let him seek and win it with his Sword:
The Fates have laid it open in the field.
What Stars (O Heavens) or Poles, or Powers divine
Do grant so great rewards for those that win?
Since then our common good, and each man's care
Requires our joint assistance in these toils:
Shall we not hazard our extremest hap,
And rather spend our Fates, then spare our foes?
The cause, I care for most, is chiefly yours:
This hand and heart shall make mine own secure.
That man shall see me foiled by my self,
What ever he be, that sees my foe vnfoilde.
Fear not the field because of Mordreds faults,
Nor shrink one iotte the more for Arthurs right.
Full safely Fortune guides many a guilt,
And Fates have none but wretches whom they wrenche.
Wherefore make speed to cheer your Soldiers hearts,
That to their fires you yet may add more flames.
The side that seeks to win in civil wars,
Must not content it self with woonted heat.

Exeunt omnes preter Mordred and Conan. CONA. WOuld God your highness had been
more aduisde,
Ere too much will had drawn your wits too far:
Then had no wars indangerd you, nor yours,
Nor Mordreds cause required foreign care.

MORD. A troubled head: my mind reuolts to fear,
And bears my body back: I inwards f^ele my fall.
My thoughts misgeue me much: down terror: I
Perceive mine end: and desperate though I must
Despise Despair, and somewhat hopeless hope.
The more I doubt, the more I dare: by fear
I find the fact is fittest for my fame.
What though I be a ruin to the Realm,
And fall my self therewith? No better end.
His last mishaps do make a man secure.
Such was King Priams end, who, when he dyed,
Closde and wrapped up his Kingdom in his death.
A solemn pomp, and fit for Mordreds mind,
To be a grave and tomb to all his Realm. Exeunt.

CHORUS. 1
Ye Princely Peers extold to seats of State,
Seek not the fair, that soon will turn to foul:
Often is the fall of high and houering Fate,
And rare the room, which time does not controwle.
The safest seat is not on highest hill,
Where winds, and storms, and thunders thumpe their ill.
Far safer were to follow sound advise,
Then for such pride to pay so dear a price.
2
The mounting mind that climes the hauty cliftes,
And soaring seeks the tip of lofty type,
Intoxicats the brain with guiddy drifts,
Then rowles, and reeles, and falls at length plum ripe.
Lo: heauing hie is of so small forecast,
To totter first, and tumble down at last.
Yet Paegasus still reares himself on hie,
And coltishly does kick the clouds in Sky.
3
Who saw the grief engraven in a Crown,
Or knew the bad and bane whereto it is bound:
Would never stick to throw and fling it down,
Nor once vouchsafe to heave it from the ground.
Such is the sweet of this ambitious power,
No sooner had, then turnde eftsoons to sour:
Atchieu'd with envy, exercisde with hate,
Guarded with fear, supported with debate.
4
O restless race of high aspyring head,
O worthless rule both pittyed and inuied:
How many Millions to their loss you lead:
With love and lure of Kingdoms bliss untried?
So things untasted cause a quenchlesse thirst,
Which, were they known, would be refused first,
Yea, often we see, yet seeing cannot shonne
The fact, we find as fondly dared, as done.
The argument of the third Act.
1 IN the first Scene Cador and Howell incite and exhort Arthur unto war: Who
moved with Fatherly affection toward his son, notwithstanding their
persuasions resolves upon peace.

2 In the second Scene, an Herault is sent from Mordred to command Arthur to
discharge his armies under pain of death, or otherwise if he dare, to try it
by Battle.

3 In the third Scene Arthur calls his Assistants and Soldiers together,
whom he exhorts to pursue their foes.

4 In the fourth Scene Arthur between grief and despair resolves to war.

The Argument and manner of the third dumb show.
DVring the Music after the second Act. There came upon the stage two
gentlemen attyred in peaceable manner, which brought with them a Table, Carpet,
and Cloth: and then having covered the Table they furnished it with incense on
the one end, and banqueting dishes on the other end: Next there came two
gentlemen apparelled like Soldiers with two naked Swords in their hands, the
which they laid a cross upon the Table. Then there came two sumptuously
attyred and warrelike, who, spying this preparation smelled the incense and
tasted the banquet. During the which there came a Messenger and delivered
certain letters to those two that fed on the daineties: who, after they had
well viewed and perused the letters, furiously flung the banquet under feet*
and violently snatching the Swords unto them, they hastily went their way. By
the first two that brought in the banquet was meant the servant of Peace, by
the second two were meant the servant of War: By the two last were meant
Arthur and Cador, By the Messenger and his Letters was meant the defiance from
Mordred.

THE THIRD ACT and second scene.
Arthur. Cador. Howell. ^RTH. IS this the welcome that my Realm prepares?
Be these the thanks I win for all my wars?
Thus to forbid me land? to slaie my friends?
To make their blood distaine my Country shoares?
My son (belike) least that our force should faint
For want of wars, preparde us wars himself.
He thought (perhaps) it might empaire our fame,
If none rebeld, whose fotle might praise our power.
Is this the fruit of Mordreds forward youth,
And tender age discreet beyond his years?
O false and guilfull life, O crafty world:
How cunningly conuaiest thou fraud unseen?
Thambicious seems meek, the wanton chaste,
Disguised vice for virtue vants it self.
Thus (Art^^^) thus has Fortune played her part,
Blind for thy weal, clear sighted for thy woe.
Thy kingdome's gone, thy phere affordes no faith,
Thy son rebels, of all thy wonted pomp
No ^ot is left, and Fortune hides her face.
No place is left for prosperous plight, mishaps
Have room and ways to run and walk at will.
Lo (Cador) both our states, your daughter's trust,
My sonn's respect, our hopes reposde in both.

CADO. The time (puissant Prince) permits not now
To moan our wrongs, or search each several sore.
Since Arthur thus has ransackt all abroad,
What marvel is it, if Mordred rave at home?
When far and near your wars had worn the world,
What wars were left for him, but civil wars,
All which requires revenge with sword and fire,
And to pursue your foes with presence force.
In just attempts Mars gives a rightful doom.

ARTH. Nay rather (Cador) let them run their race,
And leave the Heavens reuengers of my wrong.
Since Brytaines prosperous state is thus debasde
In servile sort to Mordreds cursed pride,
Let me be thrall, and lead a private life:
None can refuse the yoke his Country bears.
But as for wars, insooth my flesh abhorres,
To bid the battle to my proper blood.
Great is the love, which nature does enforce
From kin to kin, but most from sire to son.

HOW. The noble neck disdaines the servile yoke,
Where rule has pleased, subjection seems strange.
A King ought always to prefer his Realm,
Before the love he bears to kin or son.
Your Realm destroide is near restord again,
But time may send you kine and sons enough.

ARTH. How hard it is to rule the aspiring mind,
And what a kingly point it seems to those,
Whose Lordly hands the stately Scepter swaies,
Still to pursue the drift they first decreed:
My wonted mind and kingdom lets me know.
Think not, but if you drive this hazard on,
He desperate will resolve to win or die:
Whereof who knows which were the greater guilt,
The sire to slaie the son, or son the sire.

CADO. If bloody Mars do so extremely swaie,
That either son or sire must needs be slain,
Give Law the choice: let him die that deserves.
Each impotent affection notes a want.
No worse a vice then lenity in Kings,
Remiss indulgence soon undoes a Realm.
He teaches how to sin, that winkes at sins,
And bids offend, that suffers an offense.
The only hope of leave increases crimes,
And he that pardons one, emboldneth all
To break the Laws. Each patience fostereth wrongs.
But vice severely punished faints at foot,
And creepes no further off, then where it falls.
One sower example will prevent more vice,
Than all the best persuasions in the world.
Rough rigor looks out right, and still preuailes:
Smooth mildness looks too many ways to thrive.
Wherefore since Mordreds crimes have wronged the Laws
In so extreme a sort, as is too strange:
Let right and justice rule with rigours aid,
And work his wrack at length, although too late:
That damning Laws, so damned by the Laws,
He may receive his deep deserved doom.
So let it fare with all, that dare the like:
Let sword, let fire, let torments be their end.
Severity vpholds both Realm and rule.

ARTH. Ah too severe, far from a Fathers mind.
Compassion is as fit for Kings as wrath.
Laws must not lowre. Rule often admits ruthe.
So hate, as if there were yet cause to love:
Take not their lives as foes, which may be friends.
To spoil my son were to dispoile my self:
Often, whiles we seek our foes, we seek our foiles.
Let Us rather seek how to allure his mind
With good deserts: deserts may win the worst.

^OWE. Where Cato first had saved a thief from death,
And after was himself condemnd to die:
When else not one would execute the doom,
Who but the thief did undertake the task?
If too much bounty work so bad effects
In thanklesse friends, what for a ruthlesse foe?
Let Laws have still their course, the ill disposde
Grudge at their lives, to whom they owe too much.

ARTH. But yet where men with reconciled minds
Renew their love with recontinued grace,
Atonement frames them friends of former foes,
And makes the moodes of swelling wrath to swage.
No faster friendship, than that grows from grief,
When melting minds with mutual ruth relent.
How close the severed skin unites again,
When salues have smoothly heald the former hurts?

CADO. I never yet saw hurt so smoothly heald,
But that the skarre bewraid the former wound:
Yea, where the salve did soonest close the skin,
The sore was oftener covered up than cur'de.
Which festering deep and filde within, at last
With sudden breach grew greater than at first,
What then for minds, which have revenging moodes,
And never forget the cross they forced bear?
Whereto if reconcilement come, it makes
The the one secure, whiles the other works his will.
Atonement sield defeates, but often deferres
Revenge: beware a reconciled foe.

ARTH. Well, what auailes to linger in this life,
Which Fortune but reserues for greater grief?
This breath draws on but matter of mishap:
Death only frees the guiltless from anoies.
Who so has felt the force of greedy Fates,
And dur'de the last decree of grisly death,
Shall never yield his captive arms to chains,
Ner drawn in triumph deck the victors pomp.

HOW. What mean these words? Is Arthur forc'de to fear,
Is this the fruit of your continual wars,
Even from the first remembrance of your youth?

ARTH. My youth (I grant) and prime of budding years
Puffed up with pride and fond desire of praise,
Foreweening naught what perils might ensue,
Adventured all, and raught to will the reigns.
But now this age requires a sager course,
And will aduisde by harms to wisdom yields.
Those swelling spirits the self same cause which first
Set them on gog, even Fortunes favors quaild.
And now mine oftnest skapes do skare me most,
I fear the trappe, whereat I often have tript:
Experience tells me plain that Chance is frail,
And often, the better past, the worse to come.

CADO. Resist these doubts: it is ill to yield to harms.
It Is safest then to dare when most you fear.

ARTH. As safe sometimes to fear, when most we dare.
A causeless courage gives repentance place.

HOW. If Fortune fawns.


ARTH. Each way on me she frowns.
For win I, loose I, both procure my grief.

CADO. Put case you win, what grief?


ARTH. Admit I do,
What joy?

CADOR. Then may you rule.


ARTH. When I may (...)

CADO. To rule is much.


ARTH. Small if we covet naught.


CADO. Who couets not a Crown.


ARTH. He that discernes
The sword aloft.

CADOR. That hangs fast.


ARTH. But by
A hair.

CADOR. Right holds it up.


ARTH. Wrong pulls it do^

CADO. The Commons help the King.


ARTH. They sometimes hurt.


CADO. At least the Peers.


ARTH. Sield, if allegiance want.


CADO. Yet Sovereignty.


ARTH. Not, if allegiance fail.


CADO. Doube not, the Realm is yours.


ARTH. It Was mine till now.


CADO. And shall be still.


ARTH. If Mordred list.


CADOR. It Were we^
Your crown were won.

ARTH. Perhaps it is bettes lost.


^OWE. The name of rule should move a princely mind.


^RTH. Trust me, bad things have often glorious names.


^OWE. The greatest good that Fortune can afford.


^RTH. A dangerous good that wisdom would eschew.


^OWE. Yet weigh the hearesaie of the old renown,
And Fame the Wonderer of the former age:
Which still extolls the facts of worthyest wights,
Preferring no deserts before your deeds.
Even she exhorts you to this new attempts,
Which left vntryde your winnings be but loss.

^RTH. Small credit will be given of matters past
To Fame, the Flatterer of the former age.
Were all believed which antique brute imports,
Yet wisdom waighes the peril ioinde to praise:
Rare is the Fame (mark well all ages gone)
Which has not hurt the house it most enhaun'st.
Besides, Fame's but a blast that sounds a while,
And quickly stints, and then is quite forgot.
Look whatsoever our virtues have atchieu'd,
The Chaos vast and greedy time deuours.
To day all Europe rings of Arthurs praise:
T'wilbe as hushed, as if I never had been.
What boots it then to venture life or limme,
For that, which needs ever long we leave, or loose,

CADO. Can blind affection so much bleare the wise,
Or love of graceless Son so witch the Sire?
That what concerns the honor of a Prince
With Countries good and Subjects just request,
Should lightly be contemned by a King?
When Lucius sent but for his tribute due,
You went with thirteen Kings to root him out:
Have Romans, for requiring but their own,
Abode your nine years brunts: Shall Mordred escape,
That wronged you thus in honor, Queen, and Realm?
Were this no cause to stir a King to wrath,
Yet should your Conquests late atchieu'd against Rome
Inflame your mind with thirst of full revenge.

ARTH. Indeed, continual wars have chafte our minds,
And good success has bred impatient moodes.
Rome puffes us up, and makes us too too fierce:
There, Brytaines, there we stand, whence Rome did fall.
Thou Lucius make me proud, thou heau'st my mind:
But what? shall I esteem a Crown ought else,
Then as a gorgeous Crest of easelesse Helm,
Or as some brittel mould of glorious pomp,
Or glittering glass, which, whiles it shines, it breaks?
All this a sudden Chance may dash, and not
Perhaps with thirteen Kings, or in nine years:
All may not find so slow and lingering Fates.
What, that my Country cries for due remorse
And some relief for long sustained toils?
By Seas and Lands I daily wrought her wrecke,
And sparelesse spent her life on every foe.
Each where my Soldiers perished, whilst I won:
Throughout the world my Conquest was their spoil.
A fair reward for all their deaths, for all
Their wars abroad, to give them civil wars.
What boots it them reserved from foreign foiles
To die at home? What end of ruthelesse rage?
At least let age, and Nature worn to naught,
Provide at length their graves with wished groans.
Pity their hoary hairs, their feeble fists,
Their withered lims, their strengths consumde in Camp.
Must they still end their lives amongst the blades?
Rests there no other Fate whiles Arthur reigns?
What deem you me? a fury sedde with blood,
Or some Ciclopian borne and bred for braules?
Think on the mind, that Arthur bears to peace:
Can Arthur please you no where but in wars?
Be witness Heavens how far it is from my mind,
Therewith to spoil or sack my native soil:
I cannot yield, it brooks not in my breast,
To seek her ruin, whom I erst have ruled.
What relics now so ever both civil broils,
And foreign wars have left, let those remain:
They Are few enough, and Brytaines fall too fast.

The second scene.
An Herault from Mordred. HOW. LO here an Herault sent from Mordreds Camp,
A froward message, if I reed aright:
We might not stir his wrath: perhaps this may:
Persuasions cannot move a Bryt^ines mood,
And yet none sooner stung with present wrong.

HERAV. Hail peerless Prince, whiles Fortune would, our King,
Though now bereft of Crown and former rule.
Uouchsafe me leave my message to impart,
No iotte inforst, but as your Son affords.
If here you stay but three days to an end,
And not forthwith discharge your bands and host,
It Is Mordreds oath: Assure your self to die.
But if you find your courage so to serve,
As for to stand to your defense with force,
In Cornewell (if you dare) he'il try it out.

ARTH. Is this the choice my Son does send his Sire,
And must I die? Or try it if I dare?
To die were ill, thus to be dared is worse.
Display my standart forth, let Trumpe and Drum
Call Soldiers nere, to hear their Sovereigns heast.

The third scene.
Gawin King of Albanie. Aschillus King of Denmark. King of Norway. A number of
Soldiers. ARTH. O Friends and fellows of my weriest toils,
Which have borne out with me so many brunts,
And desperate storms of wars and brainsicke Mars.
Lo now the hundredth month wherein we win.
Has all the blood we spent in foreign Coasts,
The wounds, and deaths, and winters boad abroad,
Deserved thus to be disgraced at home?
All Brytaine rings of wars: No town, nor field
But swarms with armed troops: the mustering trains
Stop up the streets: no less a tumult's raisde,
Then when Hengistus fell and Horsus fierce
With treacherous truce did ouerrunne the Realm.
Each corner threatens Death: both far and nere
Is Arthur vexed. What if my force had faild,
And standarde fallen, and ensigns all been torn,
And Roman troops pursude me at the heels,
With lucklesse wars assaid in foreign soiles?
Now that our Fortune heaues us up thus hie,
And Heavens themselves renew our old renown:
Must we be darde? Nay, let that Princocke come,
That knows not yet himself, nor Arthurs force,
That never yet waged wars, that is yet to learn
To give the charge: Yea let that Princocke come,
With sudden Souldyers pampered up in peace,
And gowned troops, and wantons worn with ease:
With sluggish Saxons crewe, and Irish kernes,
And Scottish aid, and false redshanked Picts,
Whose slaughters yet must teach their former foil.
They shall perceive with sorrow ever they part,
When all their toils be told, that nothing works
So great a wast and ruin in this age,
As do my wars. O Mor^red blessed Son:
No doubt, these market mates so highly hier'd
Must be the stay of thy usurped state.
And least my head inclining now to years,
Should joy the rest, which yet it never reapt:
The Traitor Gilla, traind in treacherous iarres,
Is chief in arms, to reaue me of my Realm.
What corner (ah) for all my wars shall shrowde
My bloodlesse age? what seat for due deserts?
What town, or field for ancient Soldiers rest?
What house? What rooffe? What walls for weried lims?
Stretch out again, stretch out your conquering hands,
Still must we use the force so often used.
To those, that will pursue a wrong with wreke,
He gives all, that once denies the right.
Thou soil which erst Diana did ordain
The certain seat and bower of wandering Brute:
Thou Realm which ay I reverence as my Saint,
Thou stately Brytaine th'auncient tipe of Troy,
Bear with my forced wrongs: I am not he,
That willing would impeach thy peace with wars.
Lo here both far and wide I Conqueror stand,
Arthur each where thine own, thy Liege, thy King.
Condemn not mine attempts: he, only he
Is sole in fault, that makes me thus thy foe.
Here I renounce all leagues and treats of truce,
Thou Fortune henceforth art my guard and guide.
Hence peace, on wars, run Fates, let Mars be judge,
I erst did trust to right, but now to rage.
Go: tell the boy that Arthur fears no brags,
In vain he seeks to brave it with his Sire.
I come (Mordred) I come, but to thy pain.
Yea, tell the boy his angry father comes,
To teach a Nouist both to die, and dare. Herault Exit.

HOW. If we without offense (O greatest guide
Of Brytish name? may pour our just complaints:
We most mislike that your too mild a mood
Has thus withheld our hands and swords from strokes.
For what? were we behind in any help?
Or without cause did you misdoubt our force,
Or truth so often tried with good success?
Go to: Conduct your army to the field,
Place man to man, oppose us to our foes:
As much we need to work, as wish your weal.

CADO. Seems it so sour to win by civil wars?
Were it to goare with Pike my fathers braest,
Were it to riue and cleave my brothers head,
Were it to tear peecemeale my dearest child,
I would enforce my grudging hands to help.
I cannot term that place my native soil,
Whereto your trumpets send their warrlike sounds.
If case required to batter down the Towers
Of any Town, that Arthur would destroy:
Yea, were of Brytaines self, which most I read:
Her bulwarks, fortress, rampires, walls and fence,
These arms should rear the Rams to run them down.
Wherefore ye Princes, and the rest my mates,
If what I have auerd in all your names,
Be likewise such as stands to your content,
Let all your Yeas auow my promise true.

SOUL. Yea, yea, etc.


ASCH. Wherein renowned King my self, or mine,
My life, my Kingdom, and all Denmark power
May serve your turn, account them all your own.

KING And whatsoever my force or Norwaie aid
Norway. May help in your attempts, I vow it here.

GAWI. As heretofore I always serude your heast,
So let this day be judge of Gawins trust.
Either my brother Mordred dies the death
By mine assault, or I at least by his.

ARTH. Since thus (my faithful mates) with vows alike,
And equal love to Arthurs cause you join
In common care, to wreake my private wrongs:
Lift up your Ensigns efts, stretch out your strengths,
Pursue your Fates, perform your hopes to Mars,
Lo here the last and outmost work for blades.
This is the time that all our valor craves.
This time by due desert restores again
Our goods, our lands, our lives, our weal and all.
This time declares by Fates whose cause is best,
This, this condemns the vanquished side of guilt.
Wherefore if for my sake you scorn your selves,
And spare no sword nor fire in my defense:
Then whiles my censure iustifies your cause,
Fight, fight amain: and clear your blades from crime,
The Judge once changde, no wars are free from guilt.
The better cause gives us the greater hope
Of prosperous wars, wherein if once I hap
To spy the wonted signs, that never failde
Their guide, your threatening looks, your fiery eyes,
And bustling bodies pressed to present spoil:
The field is won. Even then me thinks I see
The wonted wastes, and scattered heads of foes,
The Irish carcas kicked, and Pictes oppressed,
And Saxons slain, to swim in streams of blood.
I quake with hope. I can assure you all,
We never had a greater match in hand.
March on: delaie no Fates whiles Fortune fawnes,
The greatest praise of wars consists in speed.
Exeunt Regis et Cohors.
The fourth scene.
Cador. Arthur. CADO. SInce thus (victorious King) your Peers, allies,
Your Lords, and all your powers be ready pressed,
For good, for bad, for whatsoever shall hap,
To spend both limme and life in your defense:
Cast of all doubts, and rest your self on Mars:
A hopeless fear forbids a happy Fate.

ARTH. In sooth (good Cador) so our Fortune fares,
As needs we must return to woonted force.
To wars we must: but such unhappy wars,
As yield no hope for right or wrong to escape.
My self foresees the Fate, it cannot fall
Without our dearest blood: much may the mind
Of pensive Sire presage, whose Son so sins.
All truth, all trust, all blood, all bands be broke,
The seeds are sown that spring to future spoil,
My Son, my Nephew, yea each side my self,
Nerer then all (woe's me) too nere, my foe.
Well: it is my plague for life so lewdly led,
The price of guilt is still a heavier guilt.
For were it light, that even by birth my self
Was bad, I made my sister bad: nay were
That also light, I have begot as bad.
Yea worse, an heir assignde to all our sins.
Such was his birth: what base, what vulgar vice
Could once be looked for of so noble blood?
The deeper guilt descends, the more it roots:
The younger imps affect the huger crimes. Exeunt.

CHORUS. 1
When many men assent to civil wars,
And yield a suffradge to enforce the Fates:
No man bethinkes him of his own mishappe,
But turns that luck unto an other's share.
Whereas if fear did first forewarne each foil,
Such love to fight would breed no Brytains bane.
And better were still to preserve our peace,
Then thus to vent for peace through waging wars.
What folly to forgo such certain happes,
And in their steed to feed uncertain hopes?
Such hopes as often have puffed up many a Realm,
Till cross success has pressed it down as deep:
Whiles blind affection fetched from private cause
Misguiding wit has maskt in wisedom's veil,
Pretending what in purpose it abhorred.
2
Peace has three foes encamped in our breasts,
Ambition, Wrath, and Envy: which subdude,
We should not fail to find eternal peace.
It Is in our power to joy it all at will,
And few there be, but if they will, they may:
But yet even those, who like the name of peace,
Through fond desire repine at peace it self.
Between the hope whereof, and it it self,
A thousand things may fall: that further wars.
The very speech sometimes and treats of truce,
Is slasht and cut a sunder with the sword.
Norsield the name of peace does edge our minds,
And sharpeneth on our fury till we fight:
So that the mention made of love and rest
Is often a whetstone to our hate and rage.
3
Lo here the end, that Kingly pomp imparts,
The quiet rest, that Princely palace plights.
Care upon care, and every day a new
Fresh rysiyg tempest tires the tossed minds.
Who strives to stand in pomp of Princely port,
On guiddy top and culme of slippery Court,
Finds often a heavy Fate, whiles too much known
To all, he falls unknown unto himself.
Let who so else that list, affect the name,
But let me seem a Potentate to none:
My slender bark shall ceeepe anenst the shore,
And shun the winds, that sweep the waltering waves.
Proud Fortune ouerhippes the saffest Roades,
And seeks amidst the surging Seas those Keeles,
Whose lofty tops and tacklings touch the Clouds.
4
O base, yet happy Boores! O gifts of Gods
Scant yet perceau'd* when poudred Ermine roabes
With secret sighs mistrusting their extremes,
In batlefull breast forecast their foultring Fates,
And stir, and strive, and storm, and all in vain:
Behold, the Peasant poor with tattered coat,
Whose eyes a meaner Fortune feeds with sleep,
How safe and sound the careless Snudge does snore.
Low rooffed lurkes the house of slender hap,
Costlesse, not gay without, scant clean within:
Yet safe: and oftener shroudes the hoary hairs,
Then haughty Turrets rearde with curious art,
To harbor heads that wield the golden Crest.
With endless carke in glorious Courts and Towns,
The troubled hopes and trembling fears do dwell.
The Argument of the fourth Act.
1 IN the first Scene Gildas and Conan confer of the state of Brytaine.

2 In the Second Scene Nuntius makes report of the whole battle, with the
death of Mordred and Arthurs and Cadors deadly wound.

3 In the third Scene Gildas and Conan lament the unfortunate state of the
Country.

The Argument and manner of the fourth dumb show.
DVring the Music appointed after the third act, there came a Lady Co^^^ly
attyred with a counterfaite Child in her arms, who walked softly the Stage.
From an other place there came a King Crowned, who likew^^^ walked on an other
part of the Stage. From a third place there came four Soul^^^ers all armed,
who spying this Lady and King, upon a sudden pursued the (...) from whom they
violently took her Child and flung it against the walls; (...) in mournful
sort wringing her hands passed her way. Then in like manner (...) set on the
King, tearing his Crown from his head, and casting it in peeeces (...) feet
drove him by force away; And so passed themselves over the Stage* (...) this
was meant the fruit of War, which spares neither man woman nor (...) with
the end of Mordreds usurped Crown.

THE FOVRTH ACT and first scene.
Gildas. Conan. GILD. LORD Conan, though I know how hard a thing
It is, for minds trainde up in Princely Thrones,
To hear of ought against their humor's course:
Yet: sithence who forbids not offense,
If well he may, is cause of such offense:
I could have wished (and blame me not my Lord)
Your place and countnance both with Son and Sire,
Had more preuailde on either side, then thus
To Have left a Crown in danger for a Crown
Through civil wars, our Countries woonted woe.
Whereby the Kingdom's wound still festring deep,
Sucks up the mischiefe's humor to the heart.
The staggering state of Brytaines troubled brains,
Headsicke, and sore encumbered in her Crown,
With guiddy steps runs on a headlong race.
Whereto this tempest tend's, or where this storm
Will break, who knows? But Gods auert the worst.

CONA. Now surely (Gildas) as my duty stood,
Indifferent for the best to Son and Sire:
So (I protest) since these occasions grew,
That in the depth of my desire to please,
I more esteemde what honest faith required
In matters meet for their estates and place:
Than how to feed each fond affection prone
To bad effects, whence their disgrace might grow.
And as for Mordreds desperate and disloyal plots,
They had been none, or fewer at the least,
Had I prevailed: which Arthur knows right well.
But even as Counters go sometimes for one,
Sometimes for thousands more, sometimes for none:
So men in greatest countnance with their King,
Can work by fit persuasion sometimes much:
But sometimes less: and sometimes naught at all.

GILD. Well: we that have not spent our time in wars,
But bent our course at peace, and Countries weal,
May rather now expect what strange event,
And Chance insues of these so rare attempts:
Then enter to discourse upon their cause,
And err as wide in words, as they in deeds.

GONA. And Lo: to satisfy your wish therein,
Where comes a Soldier sweating from the Camps.

The second scene.
Nuncius. NVNC. THOU Echo shrill that hauntst the hollow hisses,
Leave off that wont to snatch the latter word:
Howl on a whole discourse of our distress,
Clippe of no clause: sound out a perfect sense.

GILD. What fresh mishap (alas) what new annoy,
Remoues our pensive minds from wonted woes,
And yet requires a new lamenting mood?
Declare: we joy to handle all our harms:
Our many griefs have taught us still to mourn.

NVNC. But (ah) my tongue denies my speech his aid:
Great force does drive it forth: a greater keeps
It in. I rue surprisde with woontlesse woes.

CONA. Speak on, what grief so ever our Fates afford.


NVNC. Small griefs can speak: the great astonished stand.


GILD. What greater sins could hap, then what be past?
What mischiefs could be meant, more then were wrought?

NVNC. And think you these to be an end to sins?
No. Crime proceeds: those made but one degree.
What mischiefs erst were done, term sacred deeds:
Call nothing sin, but what has since insu'd.
A greater grief requires your tears: Behold
These fresh annoyes: your last mishaps be stale.

CONA. Tell on (my friend) suspend our minds no more:
Has Arthur lost? Has Mordred woonne the field?

NVNC. O: nothing less. Would Gods it were but so.
Arthur has woonne: but we have lost the field.
The field? Nay all the Realm, and Brytaines bounds.

GILD. How so? If Arthur woonne, what could we loose?
You speak in clouds, and cast perplexed words.
Unfolde at large: and sort out sorrows out.

NVNC. Then list a while: this instant shall vnwrappe
Those acts, those wars, those hard events, that all
The future age shall eu'r have cause to curse.
Now that the time drew on, when both the Camps
Should meet in Cornwell fields the appointed place:
The reckelesse troops, whom Fates forbad to live
Till noone, or night, did storm and rave for wars.
They swarmde about their Guydes, and clustring called
For signs to fight, and fierce with vprores ^ell,
They onwards hayld the hastening hours of death.
A direful frenzy rose: each man his own,
And public Fates all heedlesse headlong flung.
On Mordreds side were sixty thousand men,
Some borrowed powers, some Brytans bred at home.
The Saxons, Irish, Normans, Pictes, and Scotts
Were first in place, the Brytanes followed last.
On Arthurs side there were as many more.
Islandians, Goths, Noruegians, Albanes, Danes,
Were foreign aides, which Arthur brought from France,
A trusty troop, and tried at many a trench.
That now the day was come, wherein our State
For aye should fall, whenceforth men might inquire
What Brytaine was: these wars thus near bewraide.
Nor could the Heavens no longer hide these harms,
But by prodigious signs portende our plagues.
For lo: er both the Camps encountering coapt,
The Skies and Poles opposed themselves with storms.
Both East, and West with tempests dark were dimmed,
And showers of Hayle, and Rain outrageous powered.
The Heavens were rent, each side the lightnings flasht,
And Clouds with hideous clappes did thundering roar.
The armies all aghast did senseless stand,
Mistrusting much, both Force, and Foes, and Fates.
It Was hard to say, which of the two appal'd
Them most, the monstrous air, or too much fear.
When Arthur spide his Soldiers thus amazed,
And hope extinct, and deadly dread drawn on:
My mates (quoth he) the Gods do skowre the skies,
To see whose cause and courage craves their care.
The Fates contend to work some strange event:
And Fortune seeks by storms in Heavens and Earth,
What pagions she may play for my behoof.
Of whom she knows, she then deserves not well,
When lingering ought, she comes not at the first.
Thus said: rejoicing at his dauntlesse mind,
They all reuiude, and former fear recoylde.
By that the light of Titan's troubled beams
Had pearceing scattered down the drowping fogges,
And greeted both the Camps with mutual view:
Their choler swelles, whiles fell disposed minds
Bounce in their breasts, and stir uncertain storms.
Then palenes wanne and stern with chearelesse change,
Possessing bleake their lips and bloodlesse cheeks,
With troublous trembling shows their death is nere.
When Mordred saw the danger thus approacht,
And boystrous throngs of Warriers threatening blood:
His instant ruins gave a nodde at Fates,
And mind though prone to Mars, yet daunted pausde.
The heart which promised erst a sure success,
Now throbs in doubts: nor can his own attempts,
Afforde him fear, nor Arthurs yield him hope.
This passion lasts not long, he soon recalls
His ancient guise, and wonted rage returns.
He loathes delays, and scorcht with Scepters lust,
The time and place, wherein he often had wished
To hazard all upon extremest Chance,
He offered spies, and spide pursues with speed.
Then both the Armies met with equal might,
This stird with wrath, that with desire to rule:
And equal prowess was a spur to both.
The Irish King whirlde out a poysned Dart,
That lighting pierced deep in Howels brains,
A peerless Prince and nere of Arthurs blood.
Hereat the Air with uproar loud resoundes,
Which efts on mountains rough rebounding reares.
The Trumpets hoarce their trembling tunes do tear*
And thundering Drums their dreadful Larums ring.
The Standards broad are blown, and Ensigns spread,
And every Nation bends his woonted wars.
Some nere their foes, some further off do wound,
With dart, or sword, or shaft, or pike, or spear,
The weapons hide the Heavens: a night composde
Of warrelike Engines ouershades the field.
From every side these fatal signs are sent:
And boystrous bangs with thumping thwacks fall thick.
Had both these Camps been of usurping Kings,
Had every man thereof a Mordred been,
No fiercelier had they fought for all their Crowns.
The murders meanelesse waxt, no art in fight,
Nor way to ward nor try each others skill,
But thence the blade, and hence the blood ensues.

CONA. But what? Did Mordreds eyes endure this sight?


NVNC. They did. And he himself the spur of fiends
And Gorgons all, least any part of his
Escaped free from guilt, enflamde their minds to wrath.
And, with a valor more, then Virtue yields,
He chearde them all, and at their back with long
Outreached spear, stirde up each lingering hand.
All fury like frounst up with frantic frets.
He bids them leave and shun the meaner sort,
He shows the Kings, and Brytaines noblest peers.

GILD. He was not now to seek what blood to draw:
He knew what juice refresht his fainting Crown.
Too much of Arthurs heart. O had he wist
How great a vice such virtue was as then.
In Civil wars, in rooting up his Realm?
O frantike fury, far from Ualures praise.

NVNC. There fell Aschillus stout of Denmark King,
There valiant Gawin Arthurs Nephew dear,
And late by Angels death made Albane King,
By Mordreds hand has lost both life and Crown.
There Gilla wounded Cador Cornish Duke,
In hope to win the Dukedom for his meede.
The Norway King, the Saxons Duke, and Picts,
In woeful sort fell groueling to the ground.
There Prince and Peasant both lay hurlde on heaps:
Mars frownde on Arthurs mates: the Fates waxt fierce,
And jointly ran their race with Mordreds rage.

CONA. But with what joy (alas) shall he return,
That thus returns, the happier for this field?

NVNC. These odds endure not long, for Mars retires,
And Fortune pleased with Arthurs moderate fear,
Returns more full, and friendlyer then her wont.
For when he saw the powers of Fates opposde,
And that the dreadful hour thus hastened on:
Perplexed much in mind, at length resolves,
That fear is covered best by daring most.
Then forth he pitched: the Saxon Duke withstoode,
Whom with one stroke he headless sent to Hell.
Not far from thence he spide the Irish King,
Whose life he took as price of broken truce.
Then Cador foreward pressed, and happily met
The Traitor Gilla, worker of these wars,
Of whom by death he took his due revenge.
The remnant then of both the Camps concur,
They Brytaines all, or most: few Forreines left.
These wage the wars, and hence the deaths ensue.
Nor the one, nor the other side, that can destroy
His foes so fast, as it is it self destroyed.
The brethren broach their blood: the Sire his Sons,
The Son again would prove by too much Wrath,
That he, whom thus he slew, was not his Sire.
No blood nor kin can swage their irefull moodes.
No foreign foe they seek, nor care to find:
The Brytaines blood is sought on every side.
A vain discourse it were to paint at large
The several Fates, and foiles of either side.
To tell what groans and sighs the parting Ghosts
Sent forth: who dying bare the fellest breast:
Who changed cheer at any Brytaines fall:
Who oftnest struck: who best bestowde his blade:
Who ventred most: who stood: who fell: who failde:
The Effect declares it all: thus fared the field.
Of both these Hoasts so huge and maine at first,
There were not left on either side a score*
For Son, and Sire to win, and loose the Realm.
The which when Mordred saw, and that his Sire
Against foes, and Fares themselves would win the field*
He sighed, and twixt despair and rage he cried,
Here (Arthur) here, and hence the Conquest comes:
Whiles Mordred lives, the Crown is yet vnwoonne.
Hereat the prince of prowess much amazed,
With thrilling tears, and countnance cast on ground,
Did groaning fetch a deep and earnefull sigh.
Anon they fierce encountering both concurred,
With griesly looks, and faces like their Fates:
But dispar minds, and inward moodes unlike.
The Sire with mind to safeguard both, or t'one^
The Son to spoil the the one, or hazard both.
No fear, nor fellnes failde on either side:
The wager lay on both their lives and bloods.
At length when Mordred spyde his force to faint,
And felt him self oppressed with Arthurs strength,
(O hapless lad, a match unmeet for him)
He loathes to live in that afflicted state,
And valiant with a forced Virtue, longs
To die the death* in which perplexed mind,
With grenning teeth, and crabbed looks he cries,
I cannot win: yet will I not be won.
What should we shun our Fates, or play with Mars,
Or thus defraude the wars of both our bloods?
Whereto do we reserve our selves? Or why
Be we not sought ere this, amongst the dead?
So many thousands murthred in our cause,
Must we survive, and neither win nor loose?
The Fates that will not smile on either side,
May frown on both: So saying forth he flings,
And desperate runs on point of Arthurs Sword,
(A Sword (alas) prepared for no such use)
Whereon engoarde he glides, till nere approcht,
With dying hand he hewes his fathers head.
So through his own annoy, he noyes his Liege*
And gains by death access to daunt his Sire.
There Mordred fell, but like a Prince he fell.
And as a branch of great Pendragons grafte
His life breaths out, his eyes forsake the Sun,
And fatal Clouds infer a lasting Clips.
There Arthur staggering scant sustaind him self,
There Cador found a deep and deadly wound,
There ceast the wars, and there was Brytaine lost*
There lay the chosen youths of Mars, there lay
The peerless Knights, Bellona's brauest train.
There lay the Mirrours rare of Martial praise,
There lay the hope and branch of Brute suppressed.
There Fortune laid the prime of Brytaines pride,
There laid her pomp, all topsie turuie turnde. Exit.

The third scene.
Gildas. Conan. GILD. COme cruel griefs, spare not to stretch our strengths,
Whiles bailefull breasts inuit our thumping fists.
Let every sign, that mournful passions work,
Express what piteous plightes our minds amaze.
This day supplants what no day can supply,
These hands have wrought those wastes, that never age,
Nor all the brood of Brute shall ever repair.
That future men may joy the surer rest,
These wars prevent their birth, and nip their spring.
What Nations erst the former age subdude
With hourelie toils to Brytaines yoke, this day
Has set at large, and backwardes turnde the Fates.
Henceforth the Kernes may safely tread their bogges:
The Scots may now their inrodes old renew,
The Saxon^ well may vow their former claims,
And Danes without their danger drive us out.
These wars found not the'ffect of woonted wars,
Nor does their weight the like impression work:
There several Fates annoyde but several men,
Here all the Realm and people find one Fate.
What there did reach but to a Soldiers death,
Contains the death of all a Nation here.
These blades have given this Isle a greater wound,
Then time can heal. The fruit of civil wars:
A Kingdom's hand has goard a Kingdom's heart,

CONA. When Fame shall blaze these acts in latter years,
And time to come so many ages hence
Shall efts report our toils and Brytish pains:
Or when perhaps our Childrens Children read,
Our woeful wars displaid with skillful pen:
They Will think they here some sounds of future facts,
And not the ruins old of pomp long past.
Twill move their minds to ruth, and frame a fresh
New hopes, and fears, and vows, and many a wish,
And Arthurs cause shall still be favored most.
He was the joy, and hope, and hap of all,
The Realms defense, the sole delay of Fates,
He was our wall and forte, twice thirteen years
His shoulders did the Brytaine state support.
Whiles yet he raignd, no foreign foes preuailde,
Nor once could hope to bind the Brytaine bounds:
But still both far and nere were forced to fly,
They thrall to us, we to our selves were free.
But now, and henceforth aye, adue that hope,
Adue that pomp, that freedom, rule and all:
Let Saxons now, let Normans, Danes, and Scotts.
Enjoy our meadows, fields, and pleasant plains:
Come, let us fly to Mountains, Cliffes and Rocks,
A Nation hurt, and never in case to heal.
Henceforth the weight of Fates thus fallen aside,
We res^ secure from fear of greater foil:
Our leisure serves to think on former times,
And know what erst we were, who now are thus. Exeunt.

CHORUS. 1
O Brytaines prosperous state were Heavenly powers
But half so willing to preserve thy peace,
As they are prone to plague thee for thy wars.
But thus (O Gods) yea, thus it likes you still.
When you decree to turn, and touse the world,
To make our errors cause of your decrees.
We fretting fume, and burning wax right wood,
We cry for swords, and harmefull harness crave,
We rashly rave, whiles from our present rage,
You frame a cause of long foredeemed doom.
2
When Brytaine so desired her own decaie,
That even her native brood would root her up:
Seamde it so huge a work, (O Heavens) for you
To tumble down, and quite subvert her state,
Unless so many Nations came in aid?
What thirst of spoil (O Fates?) In civil wars
Were you afraid to faint for want of blood?
But yet, O wretched state in Brytaines fond,
What needed they to stoop to Mordreds yoke,
Or fear the man themselves so fearful made?
Had they, but lynckt like friends in Arthurs bands,
And ioynde their force against the foreign foes:
These wars and civil sins had soon surceast,
And Mordred reft of rule had feared his Sire.
3
Would Gods these wars had drawn no other blood,
Then such as sproong from breasts of foreign foes:
So that the fountain, fed with chaungelesse course,
Had found no nearer vents for dearer juice.
Or if the Fates so thirst for Brytish blood,
And long so deeply for our last decaie:
O that the rest were sparde and safe reserved,
Both Saxons, Danes, and Normans most of all.
Hereof when civil wars have worn us out,
Must Brytaine stand, a borrowed blood for Brute.
4
When prosperous haps, and long continuing bliss,
Have past the ripeness of their budding grouth,
They fall and foulter like the mellow fruit,
Surcharged with burden of their own excess.
So Fortune wearyed with our often wars,
Is forced to faint, and leave us to our fates.
If men have minds presaging ought their harms,
If ever heavy heart foreweene her woe:
What Brytaine lives, so far removed from home,
In any Air, or Pole, or Coast abroad:
But that even now through Natures sole instinct,
He feels the fatal sword imbrue his breast,
Wherewith his native soil for aye is slain?
What hopes, and happes lie wasted in these wars?
Who knows the foyles he suffered in these fields?
The argument of the fifth Act.
IN the first scene Arthur and Cador returned deadly wounded and bewaild the
misfortune of themselves and their Country, and are likewise bewailed of the
Chorus.

In the second scene the Gho^st of Gorlois returns rejoicing at his
reue^dge, and wishing ever after a happier Fate unto Brytaine, which done, he
descends where he first rose.

The Argument and manner of the fifth and last dumb show.
SOunding the Music, four gentlemen all in black half armed, half unarmed
with black skarffes overthwart their shoulders should come upon the stage.
The first bearing alofte in the one hand on the trunchion of a spear an
Helmet, an arming sword, a Gauntlet, etc. representing the Trophea: in the
other hand a Target depicted with a man's heart sore wounded and the blood
gushing out, crowned with a Crown imp^riall and a Laurel garland, thus
written in the top. En totum quod superest, signifying the King of Norway
which spent himself and all his power for Arthur, and of whom there was lest
nothing but his heart to enjoy the conquest that insued. The second bearing in
the one hand a silver vessel full of gold, pearls, and other jewels
representing the Spolia: in the other hand a Target with an Olephant and
Dragon thereon fiercely combacting, the Dragon under the Olephant and sucking
by his extreme heat the blood from him is crushed in pieces with the fall of
the Olephant, so as both die at last, this written above, Victor, an Victus?
representing the King of Denmark, who fell through Mordreds wound, having
first with his soldiers destroyed the most of Mordreds army. The third
bearing in the one hand a Pyramid with a Laurel wreath about it representing
victory. In the other hand a Target with this devise: a man sleeping, a snake
drawing near to sting him, a Leazard preventing the Snake by fight, the
Leazard being deadly wounded awaketh the man, who seeing the Leazard dying,
pursues the Snake, and kills it, this written above, Tibi morimur. Signifying
Gawin King of Albanye slain in Arthurs defense by Mordred, whom Arthur
afterward slew. The fourth bearing in the one hand a broken pillar, at the
top thereof the Crown and Scepter of the vanquished King, both broken
asunder, representing the conquest over usurpation: in the other hand a Target
with two Cocks painted thereon, the one lying dead, the other with his wings
broken, his eyes pecked out, and the blood every where gushing forth to the
ground, he standing upon the dead Cock and crowing over him, with this
emblem in the top, Qua vici, p^rdidi, signifying Cador deadly wounded by
Gilla whom he slew. After these followed a King languishing in complet
Harness black, bruised and battered unto him, besprinkled with blood. On his
head a Laurel garland, leaning on the shoulders of two Heraults in mourning
gowns and hoods, th'on in Mars his coat of arms, the other in Arthurs,
presenting Arthur victoriously but yet deadly wounded. there followed a page
with a Target whereon was portraited a Pelican pecking her blood out of her
breast to feed her young ones, through which wound she dies, this written in
the top, Quafoui, perit, signifying Arthurs too much indulgencie of Mordred,
the cause of his death. All this represented the dismayed and unfortunate
victory of Arthur, which is the matter of the Act ensuing.

THE FIFTH ACT and first Scene.
Arthur. Cador. Chorus. ARTH. COme Cador, as our friendship was most firm
Throughout our age, so now let us link as fast.
Thus did we live in wars, thus let us dye
In peace, and arm in arm partake our Fates.
Our wounds, our grief, our wish, our hap alike,
Our end so near, all crave each others help.

CADO. O King, behold the fruit of all our Fame:
Lo here our Pomp consumed with our selves,
What all our age with all our wars had woonne,
Lo here one day has lost it all at once.
Well: so it likes the Heavens: thus Fortune gibes:
She hoyseth up to hurl the deeper down.

CHOR. 1 O sacred Prince: what sight is this we see?
Why have the Fates reserved us to these woes
Our only hope: the stay of all our Realm:
The pillar of our state: thus sore oppressed?
O would the Gods had favored us so much:
That, as we lived partakers of your pains,
And likewise ioyde the fruit of your exploytes:
So having thus bereft our Sovereigns bliss,
They had with more indifferent doom conioynd
The Subjects both, and Sovereigns bane in one.
It now (alas) ingendereth double grief,
To rue your want, and to bewail our woes.

ARTH. Rue not my Brytaines what my rage has wrought,
But blame your King, that thus has rent your Realm.
My meanelesse moodes have made the Fates thus fell,
And too much anger wrought in me too much.
For had impatient ire indu'rde abuse,
And yielded where resistance threatened spoil?
I might have lived in foreign coasts vnfoilde,
And six score thousand men had been vnmoande.
But wrong incensing wrath to take revenge
Preferred Chance before a better choice.

CHOR. 2 It Was Mordreds wrong and to unjust deserts
That justly mooude your Highness to such wrath:
Your claim required no less then those attempts:
Your cause right good was praised, and praide for most.

ARTH. I claimd my Crown, the cause of claim was good,
The means to clame it in such sort was bad.
Yea: rather then my Realm and native soil
Should wounded fall, thus bruised with these wars:
I should have left both Realm, and right, and all:
Or dur'd the death ordaind by ^ordreds oath.

CADO. And yet so far as Mars could bide a mean,
You hatelesse sought the safeguard of them all.
Whereto the better cause, or badder Chance
Did draw, you still inclinde: preferring often
The weaker side, sometimes for love, sometimes
For right, (as Fortune swaide) your Son, your self.
So pity spared, what reason sought to spoil:
Till all at length, with equal spoil was spent.

CHOR. 3 Would Gods your mind had felt no such remorse,
And that your foes had no such favor found.
So might your friends have had far frendlier Fates,
If Rebels for their due deserts had did.
The wickeds death is safety to the just.
To spare the Traitors, was to spoil the true.
Of force he hurtes the good, that helps the bad.
In that you sought your Countries gain, it was well:
In that you shunned not her loss, it was hard.
Good is the friend, that seeks to do us good:
A mighty friend, that does prevent our harms.

ARTH. Well: so it was: it cannot be redrest:
The greater is my grief, that sees it so.
My life (I feel) does fade, and sorrows flow,
The rather that my name is thus extinct.
In this respect, so Mordred did succeed,
O, that my self had fallen, and Mordred lived*
That having conquered all my foes but him,
I might have left you him, that conquered me.
O heavy wretched lotte: to be the last
That falls, to view the burial of my Realm.
Where each man else has fealt his several Fate,
I only pine oppressed with all their Fates.

CHOR. 4 Although your Highness do sustain such gree^e,
As needs enforces all your Realm to rue:
Yet since such ruth affords no relief,
Let due discretion swage each curelesse sore,
And bear the harms, that run without redress.
The loss is ours, that loose so rare a Prince, The breathless body of
Mordred in Armor as he fell is brought upon the Stadge.
You only ^in, that see your foe here fo^lde.

ARTH. A causeless foe. When wars did call me hence
He was in years but young, in wit too old.
As virtue shines most in comliest wightes,
When inward gifts are decked with outward grace:
So did his wit and feature f^ede that hope,
Which falsely trainde me to this woeful hap.
His mind transformed thus, I cannot choose
But long to see what change his face sustaines.
My blood and kindred doubled in his birth,
Inspir^s a mixed, and t'wice descending love,
Which drives my dying veins to wish his view.
Unhealme his luckelesse head, set bare his face:
That face which erst pleased me and mine to much.

CHOR. 1 See (worthest King) the hope of all your Realm,
Had not his lust to rule prevented all.

ARTH. I see (alas) I see (hide, hide again:
O spare mine eyes) a witness of my crimes:
A fearful vision of my former guilte:
A dreadful horror of a future doom:
A present gaul of mind. O happy they,
Whose spotless lives attain a dreadlesse death.
And thou, O hapless boy, O spite of Fates,
(What might I term thee, Nephew, Son, or both?)
Alas, how happy should we both have been,
If no ambitious thought had vexed thy head,
Nor thou thus st^m'de to reaue thy Fathers rule,
But stai^e thy time, and not forstalde us both?

CADO. The hot spurde youth that forste the forward steedes,
Whiles needs he would his Fathers Chariot guide,
Neglecting what his Sire had said in charge,
The fires, which first he flung about the poles,
Himself at last most woeful wretch inflamde.
So to much love to houer in the Heavens
Made him to pay the price of rash attemptes.

ARTH. Wha^ ruth, (ah,) rent the woeful Fathers heart,
That saw himself thus made a Sonnelesse Sire?
Well: since both Heavens and Hell conspired in one,
To make our ends a mirror to the world,
Both of incestious life, and wicked birth:
Would Gods the Fates that linckt our faults alike,
Had also fram'de our minds of frendlier mouldes:
That, as our lineage had approcht too near,
So our affections had not swaru'd to far.
Then might I lived t'inlarge the Brytaines praise,
In rearing efts the first triumphant Troy
And after thou succeeding mine attempts,
Have spent thy courage in a iuster cause.
But it would not be: Ambition grew to great:
We could not join our minds: our Fates we ioynde:
And through thy blood, a way was made to mine.

CHOR. 2 And must we needs (O worthiest Peers) forgo,
By this untimely Fate our greatest hope?
That in your ripest years and likelyest time,
Your chiefest force should on this sudden fall?

CHOR. 3 Have you throughout your youth made Brytaines pomp
A Sovereign of so many Nations stout,
To the end ere half your age untimely death
Should leave us Subject to our woonted foiles?

CHOR. 4 See* see, our idle hopes, our brittle trust,
Our vain desires, our over fickle state.
Which, though a while they sail on quiet seas,
Yet sink in surge, ere they ariue to hode.
O woeful wars, O Mordreds cursed pride,
That thus has wrought both King, and Kingdoms woe*

CADO. Let plaints and mournings pass, set moanes a part.
They made much of themselves: Yea too too much
They loved to live, that seeing all their Realm
Thus topsie turuey turned, would grudge to dye.

ARTH. Yea sure: since thus (O Fates) your censure seems,
That free from force of foreign foes, there rests,
That Mordred reap the glory of our deaths:
B'it so: drive on your doom, work your decree:
We fearelesse bide what bane so ever you bid.
And though our ends thus hastened through your heasts,
Abruptly break the course of great attempts:
Yet go we not inglorious to the ground:
Set wish a part: we have perfourmd enough.
The Irish King and Nation wild we tamde:
The Scots and Picts, and Orcade Isles we wanne:
The Danes and Goths and Friseland men, with all
The Isles inserted nere those Seas, And next
The German King, and Saxons we subdude.
Not France, that could prevail against our force,
Nor lastly Rome, that rues her pride suppressed.
Each foreign power is parcel of our praise,
No titles want to make our foes affraide.
This only now I crave (O Fortune erst
My faithful friend) let it be soon forgot,
Nor long in mind, nor mouth, where Arthur fell*
Yea: though I Conqueror die, and full of Fame:
Yet let my death and parture rest obscure.
No grave I need (O Fates) nor burial rights,
Nor stately hearce, nor tomb with haughty top:
But let my Carcass lurk: yea, let my death
Be ay unknown, so that in every Coast
I still be feared, and looked for every hour.

Exeunt. Arthur and Cador. CHOR. 1 Lo here the end that Fortune sends at last
To him, whom first she heau'd to highest hap.
The flatt^r^ng look wherewith he long (...) le^^
The smiling Fat^s, that often had fed his Fame:
The many wars and Conquests, which he (...)*
Are dashed at once: one day inferres that fo^^^,
Whereof so many years of yore were free.

CHOR. ^ O willing world to magnify man's state^
O most unwilling to maintain the same.
Of all misfortunes and unhappy Fates,
Th'unhappiest seems, to have been hapie once.
It Was Arthur sole, that never found his joys
Disturbed with woe, nor woes relieved with ioy^.
In prosperous state all Heavenly powers aspi^'d^
Now made a wretch, not one, that spares his spoil.

CHOR. 3 Yea Fortunes self in this afflicted case,
Exacts a pain for long continued pomp.
She urges now the bliss of woonted weal,
And bears him down with weight of former Fam^.
His praises past be present shame: O tickle trust:
Whiles Fortune chops and changes every Chance*
What certain bliss can we enjoy a live,
Unless, whiles yet our bliss endures, we die^

CHOR. 4 Yea: since before his last and outmost gasp,
None can be deemde a happy man or blessed,
Who dares commit him self to prosperous Fates,
Whose death preparde attends not hard at hand?
That sithence death must once determine all.
His life may sooner fly, then Fortune flitte.

The second scene.
Gorlois. GORL. NOW Gorlois swage thy self. Pride has his pay:
Murder his price: Adult'rie his desert:
Treason his meede: Disloyalty his doom:
Wrong has his wreake: and Guilt his guerdon bear^^.
Not one abuse erst offered by thy foes
But since most sternely punished, is now purged.
Where thou did fall, even on the self same soil
Pendragon, Arthur, Mordred, and their stock,
Found all their foiles: not one has s^apte revenge:
Their line from first to last quite razed out.
Now rest content, and work no further plagues:
Let future age be free from Gorlois Ghost.
Let Brytaine henceforth bath in endless weal.
Let Virgo come from Heaven, the glorious Star:
The Zodiac's joy: the Planets chief delight:
The hope of all the year: the ease of Skies:
The Aires relief, the comfort of the Earth.
That virtuous Virgo borne for Brytaines bli^^^:
That pierelesse branch of Brute: that sweet remain
Of Priam's state: that hope of springing Troy:
Which time to come, and many ages hence
Shall of all wars compound eternal peace,
Let her reduce the golden age again,
Religion, ease, and wealth of former world.
Yea, let that Virgo come and Saturnes reign,
And years often ten times told expirde in peace.
A Rule, that else no Realm shall ever find,
A Rule most rare, unheard, unseen, unread,
The sole example that the world affordes.
That (Brytaine) that Renown, yea that is thine.
B'it so: my wrath is wrought. Ye furies black
And ugly shapes, that houle in holes beneath:
Thou Orous dark, and deep Auernas nooke,
With duskish dens out gnawne in gulfes below,
Receive your ghastly charge, Duke Gorlois Ghoast:
Make room: I gladly thus reuengde return.
And though your pain surpass* I greet them the:
He hates each other Heaven, that haunteth Hell.

Descendi^. EPILOGVS.
SEe here by this the tickle trust of time:
The false affiance of each mortal force,
The wavering weight of Fates: the fickell trace,
That Fortune trips: the many mockes of life:
The cheerelesse change: the easelesse brunts and broils,
That man abides: the restless race he runs.
But most of all, see here the peerless pains:
The lasting panges: the stintlesse greefes: the tears:
The sighs: the groans: the fears: the hopes: the hates:
The thoughts and cares, that Kingly pomp impartes.
What follies then bewitch thambicious minds,
That thirst for Scepters pomp the well of woes?
Whereof (alas) should wretched man be proud,
Whose first conception is but Sin, whose birth
But pain, whose life but toil, and needs must dye?
See here the store of great Pendragons brood,
The to'ne quite dead, the to'ther hastening on,
As men, the Son but green, the Sire but ripe:
Yet both forestalde ere half their race were run.
As Kings, the mightiest Monarchs in this age*
Yet both suppressed and vanquished by themselves.
Such is the brittle breath of mortal man,
Whiles humane Nature works her daily wrackes:
Such be the crazed crests of glorious Crowns,
Whiles worldly powers like sudden puffes do pass.
And yet for one that goes, another comes,
Some borne, some dead: So still the store indures.
So that both Fates and common care prou'de
That men must needs be borne, and some must rule.
Wherefore ye Peers, and Lordings lift aloft,
And whosoe'r in Thrones that judge your thralls:
Let not your Soueraingty heave you to hye,
Nor their subjection press them down too low.
It is not pride, that can augment your power,
Nor lowly looks, that long can keep them safe:
The Fates have found a way, whereby ere long
The proud must leave their hope, the meek their fear.
Who ere received such favor from above,
That could assure one day unto himself?
Him, whom the Morning found both stout and strong,
The Evening left all groueling on the ground.
This breath and heat wherewith man's life is fed
Is but a flash, or flame, that shines a while,
And once extinct, is as it never had been.
Corruption hourly frets the bodies frame,
Youth tends to age, and age to death by kind.
Short is the race, prefixed is the end,
Swift is the time, wherein man's life does run.
But by his deeds t'extend renown and fame,
That only virtue works, which never fades.
FINIS.
Thomas Hughes.

Sat cyto, si sat been: vtcunque:
Quod non dat spes, dat optio.

Here after follow such speeches as were penned by others, and pronounced in
stead of some of the former speeches penned by Thomas Hughes.
A speech penned by William Falbecke gentleman, one of the society of
Grayes-Inne, and pronounced in stead of Gorlois his first speech penned by
Thomas Hughes, and set down in the first Scene of the first Act.
ALecto: thou that have excluded me
From feeldes Elysyan, where the guiltless souls
Avoid the scourge of Radamanthus Ire:
Let it be lawful, (since I am removed
From blessed Islands, to this cursed shore,
This loathed earth where Arthurs table stands,
With Ordur^ foul of Harpies fierce disteind,)
The fates and ^^^den secrets to disclose
Of black Coeytus and of Acheron,
The floudes of death the lakes of burning souls.
Where Hellish frogs do prophecy revenge:
Where Tartars sprights with careful heed attend
The dismal summons of Alectoes mouth.
My self by precept of Proserpina,
Commanded was in presence to appear,
Before the Synod of the damned sprightes.
In fearful mood I did perform their hest,
And at my entrance in th'inchaunted snakes,
Which wrap themselus about the furies necks,
Did hiss for joy: and from the dreadful benthe
The supreme fury thus assignde her charge.
Gorlois quoth she thou thither must ascend.
Whence through the rancour of malicious foes
Wearyed with wounds thou did descend to us.
Make Brytaine now the mark of thy revenge
On ruthlesse Brytaines and Pendragons race,
Disbursse the treasure of thy Hellish plagues.
Let blood contend with blood, Father with Son,
Subject with Prince, and let confusion reign.
She therewithal enioynde the duskie clouds
Which with their darkness turnde the earth to Hell,
Convert to blood and pour down streams of blood.
Cornewell shall groan, and Arthurs soul shall sigh,
Before the conscience of Gueneuora
The map of hell shall hang and fiendes shall rage^
And Gorlois ghost exacting punishment.
With dreams, with horrors and with deadly trance
Shall gripe their hearts: the vision of his corse
Shall Be to them, as was the terror vile
Of flaming whippes to Agamemnons son.
And when the Trumpet calls them from their rest
Aurora shall with watery cheeks behold
Their slaughtered bodies prostrate to her beams.
And on the banckes of Cambala shall lie
The bones of Arthur and of Arthurs knights:
Whose fleet is now tryumphing on the seas.
But shall be welcomed with a Tragedy.
Thy native soil shall be thy fatal gulf
Arthu^: thy place of birth thy place of death.
Mordred shall be the hammer of my hate
To beat the bones of Cornish Lords to dust.
Ye ravening birds under Celenoes power,
I do adjure you in Alectoes name.
Follow the sword of Mordred where he goes.
Follow the sword of Mordred for your food.
Aspyring Mordred, thou must also dye.
And on the Altar of Proserpina
Thy vital blood unto my Ghost shall fume.
Heaven. Earth. and hell, concur to'plague the man.
That is the plague of Heaven, Earth, and hell.
Thou bids Alecto: I pursue my charge.
Let thy Cerastae whistle in mine ears,
And let the belles of Pluto ring revenge.
One other speech penned by the same gentleman, and pronounced in stead of
Gorlois his last speech penned by Thomas Hughes, and set down in the second
Scene of the fifth and last Act.
DEath has his conquest: hell has had his wish.
Gorlois his vow: Alecto her desire.
Sin has his pay: and blood is quit with blood.
Revenge in Tryumphe bears the struggling hearts.
Now Gorlois pearce the craggie Rocks of hell.
Through chinckes whereof infernal sprites do glaunce,
Return this answer to the furies court.
That Cornewell trembles with the thought of war:
And Tamers flood with drooping pace does flow,
For fear of touching Camballs bloody stream.
Brytaine remember. write it on thy walls.
Which neither time nor tyranny may race.
That Rebels. Traitors and conspirators,
The semenarye of lewd Cat^line,
The Bastard Coouie of Italian birds.
Shall feel the flames of ever flaming fire.
Which are not quenched with a sea of tears.
And since in thee some glorious star must shine.
When many years and ages are expirde
Whose beams shall clear the mist of miscontent
And make the dampe of Plutoes pit retire.
Gorlois will never fray the Brytans more.
For Brytaine then becomes an Angels land*
Both Devils and sprites must yield to Angels power,
Unto the goddess of the Angels land.
Uaunt Brytaine vaunt, of her renowned reign,
Whose face deterres the hagges of hell from thee:
Whose virtues hold the plagues of heaven from thee,
Whose presence makes the earth fruitful to thee:
And with foresight of her thrice happy days,
Brytaine I leave thee to an endless praise.
Besides these speeches there was also penned a Chorus for the first act, and
an other for the second act, by Master Frauncis Flower, which were pronounced
accordingly. The dumb shows were partly devised by Master Christopher
Yeluerton, Master Frauncis Bacon, Master John Lancaster and others, partly by
the said Master Flower, who with Master Penroodocke and the said Master
Lancaster directed these proceedings at Court.


