To write and many please is much,
to please not write, is pain:
Than rather write and please the good,
then spend thy time in vain.
HVLOETS Dictionarie, newelye corrected, amended, SET IN ORDER AND ENLARGED,
with many names of Men, Towns, Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, Trees, Shrubbes,
Herbs, Fruits, Places, Instruments etc. And in each place fit Phrases,
gathered out of the best Latin Authors. Also the French thereunto annexed, by
which you may find the Latin or French, of any English word you will.

By John Higgins late student in Oxeforde.

Liber ad Lectorem.
Simplice iampridem qui sum tantum ore loquutus,
Bino contentus reddere verba sono,
Nunc ego triglottos trinis en prodeo linguis
Illustris, mira commoditate nouus.
Higginus claro vos istoc munere douat
Heus iuuenes, grato me accipitote s^^^
LONDINI, In aedibus Thomae Marshij. ANNO. 1572.

The wise will vewe and deem the best,
unwise the worst will mark:
The wise do use reprouinge least,
the foolish ever carke.
Then care the less be thou at rest,
though Momus baule and bark.


COLVMNA GLORIAE VIRTUES
blazon or coat of arms

CLARISSIMO VIRO, AC BONARVM LITERARVM SVMMO PATROno Domino suo, Domino Georgio
Peckham equiti aurato, Ioannis Higgini, de huius operis dedicatione EPISTOLA.
MEMINI ET DVM VIVAM SEMper meminero (Clarissime vir) Platonicum illud: Ortus
nostri primas Dij immortales, secundas patria, tertias parents vendicant.
Illud enim ipsum quoties cogito, (cogito autem saepissime) toties iustissimi
debiti memoria, atque recordatione sic co^moueor: vt (quia soluendo non sum)
incredibilem ex eodem reminiscendo anxietatem, dolorem, atque molestiam
percipiam. Cui quidem aegritudini quo possim expeditius, citiusque mederi,
nullum te^pus intermisi (diligente interim adhibita deliberatione) vel
cogitandi, vel etiam inuestigandi, quid tandem Deo Optim. Max. gratum, quid
patriae commodum, quid summatim parentibus, tibique (quem propter singularem in
omnes literatos beneuolentia^ patris loco colui) non iniucundum exhibere^. Nam
vt de te (patron benignissime) dicam quod sentio, illud tacere non possum, te
post reditu^ tuum e Gallijs, in Academia Oxoniensi aedes magnis sumptibus
extruxisse: doctissimorum hominum familiaritate saepissime vsum esse: linguarum
cognitionem (cuius magno desyderio tenebaris) summis encomijs ornasse: mihi
caeterisque tuis alumnis opem, auxiliumque praebuisse: denique lectiones,
disceptationes, exercitationesque cunctas in scholis publicis ita frequentasse:
vt omnes te virum rarae virtutis, literarum decus, ac bonarum artium amatorem
vere praedicarent. Itaque existimaui si quicquam in lucem laud dignum ederem,
quod a tuo studio non dissentiret. id neque Dijs immortalibus, neque patriae,
neque parentibus, neque vllis studiosis ingratum vel iniucundum fore* Qua de re
maiore cum deliberatione cogitanti, etiamsi multae res sese mihi obtulissent,
in quibus non inutiliter versari poteram: inter reliquas tamen iuuenum
praesertim nobilium erudiendorum cupiditas, caeteras long multumque superabat.
Quorum tyrocinio cum Gra^maticae disciplina diligens and exquisita maxim
necessaria esset, ego me verborum inueniendorum arti alicui and methodo
tradidi. Et quia eorundem vniuersalis tractatio magnam and operam, and
industriam desyderat: Etymologiam vt iuuentuti sine magistro faciliorem, ita ad
prima rudimenta intelligenda magis idoneam, nobis ornandam tractandamque
suscepimus. Qua de re foeliciter perficienda animi omnino dubious, cum diutius
cogitassem, and doctissimorum in hac re cu^ labores, tum etiam lauds
ponderassem, forte fortuna Huloeti imperfectus, sed doctus labor mihi in mentem
veniebat, quem quasi diuinitus datum in manus sumpsi, singula folia legi, atque
relegi, paginas lustraui, lineas notaui, verba consyderaui, syllabas, literas,
apices, atque charecteres dilige^ter perpendi: tandem cum ex aequa censura
cognouissem quid redundaret, and quid de^sset: proxima mihi cura fuit, vt and
ea reijcerem quae superflua videba^tur, and ea adijcere^ quae desyderabantur.
Eum igitur hijsce noctibus hybernis locupletaui, existimans nullum tempus
perire, quod optimis studijs impertiretur: minimeque liberi hominis esse
iacturae adscribere, quod patriae, and amicoru^ vtilitati impenderetur. Sed ne
obtrectatorum canina inuidia impetum in nos faciat, videto (vir singularis)
atque animaduerte scopum nostri laboris. Non alienis vestigijs desidiose
insistere conati sumus, non in aliena^ messem furtiuam falcem immittere: sed
more prouide^tis atque frugi agricolae Huloeti ego sementa ad messem perduxi,
perducta in horreum congessi, and quod ille seminauit, ego vicissim meto. Nam
illum primo Gallice loqui institui, atque ex bilingui triglotton effeci:
secundo nouas voces, idiomata, atque phrases adiunxi: denique, ex paruo magnu^,
ex libello in volumen transformaui. In me tamen ego aequissimos tuos oculos
nimium intentos esse nollem, Huloetum sicut antea intuere, qui non nisi mutata
vest a me ditior factus, atque splendidior in luce^ prodit, laudemque Huloeto,
laborem Higgino attribuito. Deu^ enim testor me nihil aliud spectare, quam
iuuenum omnium emolumentum atque co^modum, haeredis praesertim tui, qui and in
lingua latina and iure nostro Britannico tantu^ profecit, quantu^ in illa
aetate vix expectari potuit. Illud interim no^ nescio nihil tam recta ratione,
sapienterue dictu^ esse, nihil tam been prudenterue factu^, quod quorundam
improborum non incurrat maleuolentiam: qui neque ipsi recte quicquam aut
faciu^t aut facere possunt, and alijs tame^ ne recte faciant, impedimento sunt.
Habuit enim diuinus vates Romanorumque poetarum facile princeps, suos Bauios,
suosque Meuios, habuit etiam sacratissimus Graecorum poetaru^ Homerus suum
Zoilum: Quare quemadmodum hic Alexandru^ bellicossimu^, ille Caesare^
Augustissimu^, co^tra malorum amarissima^ dicacitate^ patronum habuit: sic and
ego quo sim ab obtrectatorum odijs tutus atque securus, ad te bonarum literarum
fautorem, and ad tuum patrocinium co^fugio, tibi tuaeque fidei, me meaque omnia
comittens. Na^ si obtrectatores (quorum omnia sunt plenissima) te protectorem
atque propulsatorem videri^t, aut iniqua^ maledicendi consuetudinem deponent
atque abijcient, aut saltem ita coercebunt, vt tantum clandestine nobis
insidientur: ita eoru^ inuidia aut parua, aut certe nulla erit, seque sui omnes
quam primum poenitebit. Huc etiam and illud accedit, vt tanto ardentius in his
versetur iuue^tus, quanto magis intelliget haec eadem tam pio, tamque generoso
viro placuisse. Sic eodem opere and tu patriae, and ego tibi, patriaeque
debitum officium praestabo, dum patriae nostri studij fructum, tibi vero omnem
obseruantia^ offeramus. Accipias idcirco gratissimo animo, hoc quicquid est
muneris (quod tuo nomini reuerentiae causa dicamus) non tam oblati dignitatem,
qua^ offerentis in te animum atque pietate^ ponderans: quod si pro tua
consuetudine feceris, maiorem mihi scribendi alacritatem, maxima^ tibi nominis
tui gloriam parabis.

Nomini tuo deditissimus Ioannes Higginus.

To the Reader.
AT first I took this work of Master Huloets in hand (gentle Reader) only
to enlarge, and when I had herein passed some paineful time, I perceived it
almost a more easy matter to make new, then to amend: for there were many
such words, as either served not for the matter, or were out of use. Yet since
I had taken so much pains therein, and brought thereto welnighe then a Thousand
words and Phrases, I thought not so to lease my labor and forsake the
enterprise, but once again took pen in hand, and such words as were not
sufficient (by consent of authority) I either displaced, and put far bettter
in their roumes, or if they were doubtful, confirmed by sclender authority, or
else served the place but not so fitlye, I gave them an Asteriske or note in
this manner * and in some places if I had better, and yet thought those would
stand, I gave the same note * and set such words or Phrases as I found
after it. I have also where mine Author wrote the English and not the Latin,
filde those places: so where it was far out of order, and ill to find, there
have I not without great pain brought it in, and put too many names of things,
yea and sometime their natures, cyting the book or Chapter where I red them and
adding thereto the French. And for ye better attayning to the knowledge of
words, I went not to the common Dictionaries only, but also to the Authors
themselves, and used the rein conference with them which wrote particularly of
such things, as ye place required. As in herbs I followed the judgment of
Master Turner, Dodoneus, Pineus, Fuchius, and sometime Plinius: In beasts,
fishes and fowls, Conradus Gesnerus: In instruments of war Vegetius: In
buildinge Vitruuius: generallye Hadrianus Iunius: In names of places Ptolomeus:
In the nature of words Valla and others: In Phrases Thierre out of which I
confess I have taken a great part of this Book, notinge the Phrases with S.
after the French, for that Stephanus was the first Author thereof: and
finallye I wrate not in the whole Book one quyre, without perusinge and
conference of many Authors. Therefore where you find in the Book any of ye
first letters, of the names above, or the like: that same stands for a note
of the Authors name, where I found such Phrase, French, name, or word as is
there placed. And if any shall doubt hereof, let him but confer Huloet and
this together, and peradventure in one letters lookinge over he shall find so
much added, as shall seem more painful to him in account, then I deemed the
labor in doing it. I fought be taken away, be sure it was done, not without
some conference with ye best Authors: the same shall you find observed in the
additions, which thing those that can judge better, and use less
reprehension shall sooner find, then those that use more, with less and weaker
judgment. And though the book needs no explication, sith it is far more
easy, as well for the Phrase, as also for the order then it was before, yet for
the better understanding thereof, observe this followinge. Where you find a
verb without this sign To, before him (which is our English note of the
infinitive mode of al Verbes, (except Passiues) you may add the sign thereto,
as in this Verb Lay, where is Lay blame, Lay to ones charge, Lay in wait,
which are in their places so easy for him to understand that knows a Verb
from a Nowne, that they need no exposition: and signifye, To lay blame, To
lay to ones charge, To lay in wait. Yet have I in many places added this
sign To before them, as in Lead, thus: To lead one to etc. For where I
cannot begin the Phrase with the word wherein it is, and keep the order of
letter still in the first front, there begin I the line with such a Paragraphe,:
As in Lie thus, To tell a lie, To forge a lie, To maintain a lie, To take one
in a lie, To imagine a lie, and likewise in others. And where ever you find
the Paragraphe, that same is all by me added yt follows it. Wherefore gentle
Reader accept my pains, as thou would others should (in like case)
accept thine, which if I perceive, assure thy self (or it be long) to
receive other fruits of my labor that shall profit thee more.

Farewell gentle Reader.
Domini Buggans
carmen ENCOMIASTICON.
SI quis Romanas studeat cognosoere voces,
Gallia quosque sonos, Anglia quosque ferat:
Higgini ingenium fuluo protiosius auro,
Cunctas en vno codice praebet opes.
Prodit and hinc triplici titulo liber iste vocatus
Triglottos, linguis sedulitate tribus.
Hunc decet amplecti studiosos semper alumnos,
Cuius in amplexu docta Minerua cubat.
Hunc decet amplecti pueros, iuuenesque senesque,
Cortice sub cuius munera tanta latent.
Hunc decet amplecti cupidis iunctisque lacerti^
frigida Parnassi quos tulit aura viros.
Discite qui sapitis, ter doctas discite voces
Galli, Britanides, Romulidesque simul.
Higgino et tanti precium praebete laboris,
Aeternas lauds, perpetuumque decus.
Hoc quoque continua pariter prorumpite voce,
Proueniat meritis gloria vera suis.
Henrici Torquati
carmen in laudem Higgini operis.
SI cupis exiguo doctum parare libellum
Aere: puer celeres hac move quaeso pedes.
Trinas quas vno conclusit codice linguas
Solers Higinus: parua moneta dabit.
Parua moneta dabit, quicquid Romana vetustas:
Quicquid et Herculeo venit ab ore, dabit.
Albia quodque tulit, (nomen mutata yetustum)
Hic breuiter codex ingeniosus habet.
Hunc si tu voluas studijs intenta iuuentus,
Tunc feres ex isto commoda magna libro.
Inque tribus semper doctus versabere linguis,
Singula si teneas quae dabit iste liber.
Huloeti succos nanque emendauit acerbos,
Auxit and innumeris vocibus iste librum.
Carmina,
A. W. Oxoniensis.
VT saeuo fortis defendit Mart Camillus,
Impite Senonum terribili patriam:
Vt clarus miseram seruauit Tullius vrbim,
Ornasset tetras cum Catilina faces:
Higginus linguam nobis sic reddidit Anglis,
ac pepulit patriae barbara verba suae.
Hoc duce barbaries pulsa est, nunc Anglia gaudet,
Totaque Castalijs plena rigatur aquis.
Perlegat hunc igitur, Parnassi scandere culmen,
Musarum and seeds quisquis adire velit.
E. B.
Carmen Sapphicum
VIn' leui lector precio libellum,
Atque thesaurum potius parare,
Qui Midae gazas superat, Luculli
Diuitis aurum?
Ac docens te triplice sensa mentis
Eloqui lingua: eximias phrasesque
Qui tibi ignaro Copiae ministrat
Diuite cornu?
Hunc Higgini suscipe, volue, quaere
Sum, compara, lege, verte librum,
Magna nam vobis minimo labor
Commoda reddet.
Thomas Churchyard
Give learning laud, that burns like lamp, in dim and darkest soyles,
Which precious Pearl shall show it self, and craves no forged foyles.
And where does knowledge favor find, but where some virtues budde.
Her fountain runs with gushing streams, and flows like Nilus floudde.
Her foes are froward minded men, whose blindness cannot see,
The blasinge beams and skillful arts, of those that learned be.
We read that Kings gave place and fame, to Poets grave and sage,
Dionisius honored Plato.
And such as could set forth good books, were likte in every age.
A tyrante honorde Plato sure, and with a triumph great,
Vespasianus a covetous king, gave. 1500. crowns yearly, to the master of
every schole.
Did fetch him in, and made the man, to sit near Princes seat.
An other king whose greedye mind, like glutton gapte for goulde,
To make good schools and scholars both, great treasure give he would.
To every master that did teach, lo how a sparinge hand
Did flinge forth fruit, in hope thereby, to frame a learned land.
A king whose conquest claymde renown, for one bare work did yeilde,
More crowns of goulde then in one Camp, are men to fight a field.
Alexander.
The self same Prince laid Homers works, as pillowe for his hedde,
And for companion did he hold, this book about his bed.
Caesar's Com.
The fame that mighty Caesar gave, to learned men is known,
Who in his life at leisure wrote, a volume of his own.
These proves are to be found, in Chelidonius Tigurinus Institution of Princes.
Of Kings and Captains could I show, a swarm which knowledge sought.
Whose works record what virtues rare, may rest in noble thought.
Then think the best you lookers on, of those that takes pains,
Or prease in place and play a part, to show your cunninge veins.
An idle head may soon find fault, but that no glory is
Till better skill, with judgment deep, attempt to mende the miss.
The labrer does deserve his hyer, a writers chief reward
Is that with comlye quiet words, his works ye do regard.
Thus book pass on, through every hand that can thee gentlye use,
The wrangling head, and hateful house, thou freelye may refuse.
Since he meant well that set thee forth, where calmye winds do blow,
Repair and bid thy master seek, in place where he shall go
A patron that does learning love, and hates no gift of grace,
To keep this book from busy brains, that would this work deface.
Which work well wayed the wise will like, and such as learning crave,
From Scholars pen and Printers shop, a schole of rules may have.
For French and Latin as it faules, and as men list to look,
I say no more the work it self, shall serve to praise the book.
FINIS.
A. ANTE A.
A The first of all the letters, and has in our English tongue small
signification, because it is no perfect word, yet it is a note whereby the
substantive is known from ye adjective, as thus, A man, A woman, etc. which
in the latin tongue is without any such note, for the latin substantive is
known by article and termination, Homo, Mulier, etc. neither is the latin
article expressed, but in demo^stration or speaking of, as, hic vir, this man.
And in the latin speech. A. is a preposition (serving to the ablative case) of
diverse significations. As in these phrases of speaking. Ouercommed by Scipio. A
Scipione victus, Vaincu par Scipio. or thus, vapulauit a praeceptore, he was
beaten by his master, Il a este batu du maistre, ou par le maistre. It is the
same that with, As to begin his souper with drink, A potu coenam incipere.
Commencer son souper par boire. Also, since, or from, As from, or since the
beginning, A principio, Ab initio, Des le commencement, de puis le
co^mencement. From his childhoode, or since he was a little one, A prima
adolescentia, Ab ineunte adolescentia, Ab adolesce^tia, Ab adolesce^tulo, Ab
ineunte aetate, Ab initio aetatis, A primis cunabilis, A prima aetate, Ab
incunabilis, A pueritia, Ab infantibus, Ab infa^tia prima, Ab iuue^ta, A
paruulo, A puero, A pueris, A tenero, A teneris, A paruis, A puero paruulo, A
pusillo puero, A teneris vnguiculis, Des, ou de puis l'enfance. And A, is as
much as after, After dinner. A prandio, Apres disner. After supper, A coena,
Apres souper. The second after the king, A rege secundus, Le second apres le
roy. This letter A. was the letter of safegarde amongste the Romans, as with
us it is used that those which are saved by their book, have a letter (though
not the same) burned in their hand, A note of ye princes mercy (in hope of
repentance) and mark whereby they are known if they itterate the offense. An
other thing is to be noted, that as often as, A. comes before a word that
begins with a consonant, it is simple as in the example before, but if the
word followyng begin with a vowel it must be compounde with N. As an age, an
army, and not a age, a army, and so is it in the latin tongue, for we join B.
thereunto, and diverse other letters, both in apposition, and in composition, on
consideration of the letters followyng, for we say A principio, because P. is
a consonant, and ab initio, for that I. is a vowell. A. also by him self was
written for Augustus. Aulus. and for diverse other proper names of noble men.
And A. is the first of all the vowelles. A. A. A. Is the primative speech, or
natural voice of a Baby, or crying of an Infant, Lallatio. onis, and Lallo.
as, ang. to speak like a Baby. The Greeks approaching more near the English,
then the Latin, say Babazin, which (made a lattin word) is Babare. The opinion
of some is: it to be the lulling, singing, or babbling of the Nowrice: when she
tendreth to the child her breaste or dugge, or when she will have him to
sleep. Verbum fictitium, vel de sono tractum. But Pers. Satyr. 3. has
Lallare, to suck.

Et similis regum pueris pappare minutum
Poscis, and iratus mammae lallare recusas.
And like the princely infantes thou desire little pappe,
And angry leauste to lall her dugge that lulles thee in her lap.
Aad a river in Brabant, Fluuius Brabantiae, Fleuue ou riuiere. etc. Aar, a
river in Valesia, Fluuius Valesiae. Fleuue ou riuiere. etc. Aaron, vel Aharon
the son of Amram: and brother to Moses, signifying the mountain of
fortitude, or strong hill. He was the first bishop of the Jews. Aaron, id est
mons vel montanus. Vne montaigne.
A. ANTE B.
ABach, the name of a City in Bauaria, Ciuitas Bauariae, La Bourgeosie de
Bauiere. Abacuck, a name of one of the Prophets, it signifies embracing,
Amplexatio, onis, Embrassement. He prophesied and lamented the taking of
Jerusalem by Nabugodonosor. This Habacuck, ( as he was carrying meat and
drink to his harvest men) was taken up therewith, and carried into Babylon by
an Angel of the Lord, into a dongeon where Daniell the Prophet, was put to
be devoured by Lions, and was carried home again the same day, as in the last
end, of the last chapter of Daniels prophecy may be seen. Abacuc the Caspian
and Hyrcan Sea. Mare Caspium and Hyrcanum, La mer d'Abacuc ou Abacuth. Abandon,
to leave, or forsake, Desero, is, ui, ere. Abandonner. Abandoned, left, or
forsaken, Desertus, ta, tum. Abandonne. Abandoner, leauer, or forsaker,
Desertor, toris, Qui delaisse and abandonne. Abandoning, leaving or forsaking,
Desertio, defectio, destitutio, Abandonnement. Abase, put down, or to humble
one, Deprimo, demitto, humilio, deijcio, Abbaisser. Abasede or put down.
Deiectus, demissus, depressus, Abbaisse. Abasement or depressio^ of the voice,
Submissio vocis, Abbaissement de voix. Abandon chastity. Pudicitiam
prostituere. Abandon one to all sorrow, as to let him to be possed with all
heaviness and care. Frenos dolori remittere. S'abandonner a toute tristesse.
Abashe, or make abashed. (^) Consterno, as, naui, nare, natum. Obstupefacio,
cis, facere, factum. Stupefacio, cis. Espouanter, estonner. Abashed.
Consternatus, a, um. Demissus, a, um. Deterritus, a, um. Obstupidus, a, um.
Stupefactus, a, um. Stupidus, a, um. Verecundus, a, um. Espouante. Abashed
nothing at all. Frontosus, a, um. Eshonte. Abashed to be. Brupeo, ere.
Obstupeo, es. Obstupesco, scis. Stupefio, fis. Stupeo, ere. Stupesco, scis.
Estre tout estonne, espouante. Abashme^t. Consternatio, onis. Verecundia, ae.
Honte. Abate. Demo, is, psi. Diminuo, is. Hostio, iui. Leuo as, Oster de
quelque chose, regner. Abate courage. Animos comprimere, vel retardare,
Demittere animum. Procello, is, culi. Abbaisser son courage and Appaiser. Abate
pride. Supercillium ponere. Idem. Abate the sum total. Dimittere de summa.
Rabbattre de la sum. Abating. Diminutio, onis. Appetissement. Abbot, Abba,
Coenobiarcha, Hetaeriarcha, Antistes, Abbas, Abbatis. Abbe. Abbot eats, or
banqueteth with his couente. Hetoeriarcha epulatur cum sodalibus. L'Abbe mange
en convent. Abbotesse or Abbess, she that has the governance of a religious
house. Antistes, vel Antistita, Abbatissa. Abbess. Abbaye or religious house
of monks and friars, Antistitium, Coenobiarchia, Hetaeriarchia, Abbatia.
Abbaye. Abbot, which signifies (at Thassirians) father. Abbas, atis. Abbe. A.
B. C. a book for children, called Abcedarium, rij. Alphabetum, ti. Et
Abcedarius. Vel abecedarius, angl. he that makes a book of the order of, A. B.
C. vide Alphabete. Abdenago, a man also named Azarias, interpreted the servant
of brightness. Seruus claritatis. look Azarias. Abdias, a prophets name,
interpreted the servant of our lord. Seruus domini. Abdicate or put away.
Abdico, cas, caui, care. Abastardir. Abdicate, or put away his son. Abdicare
filium. Iecter son fills horse de la maison. Abdicate, Abolishe, or put down a
law. Abdicare legem, Abrogare legem. Abolir la loy. Abdicate, for refuse.
Abdicare pro respuere. Refuser. Abdication, as when the father does wyllingly
exclude the son from his enheritaunce. Abdicatio, onis. Abastardisement.
Renoncement. Abel, the second son of Adam, and brother to Cain. the first
martyr that ever was, he was slain by his brother, as Gene. 4. witnesses.
Abominable. Abhominabilis, le. Detestabilis, le. Obscoenus, a, ura.
Teterrimus. a. um. Detestable. Abhominably. Tetre. Detestablement. onis.
Abomination. Abomination. Oscis, propudium, ij. Abhominatio Abhomined.
Fastiditus, a, um. Abhomine, deteste. Abhor. Abominor. aris. Aspernor, aris.
Auersor, aris, Detestor, aris. Execro, cras. Execror, raris. Fastidio, dis.
Inhorreo, es. Inhorresco, scis. Nauseo, as. Vatesco, scis. Detester, Auoir en
horror en abomination, Abominer. Abhorred. Abominatus, a, um. Aspernatus, a,
um. Aduersatus, a, um. Detestatus, a, um. Execratus, a, um. Fastiditus, a, um.
Abomine, Deteste. Abhorring. Detestatio, onis. Nausea, ae. Abominatio, onis.
Detestation. Abhorring marriage. Misogamus. i. A nuptijs abhorrens. Misogynea.
i. odium mulierum. Abhorring the common fascion or old usage. Ectrapeli. Abi.
An arm of the sea, which deuideth Lincoln shere from York shore, commonly
called Humbre. Abia or Abian, A king of Judah, Rex Iudaeae. Abiathar, A high
priest of the Jews, and is interpreted an excellent or high father, Pater
excellens. Abide. Contor, aris. Cunctor, aris. Maneo, es, si. Moror, aris.
Operior, iris. Resido, dis, di, dear. Restito, as. Resto, as. Sedeo, es. ere.
Sisto, stis. Tarder. Abide at home. Co^tinere domi. Se tenir en sa maison.
Abide, tarry, or rest in the mydde way, Ad medium iter cunctari. S'arrester a
mi chemin. Abide and tarry for love of some one or other, Magno alicuius amore
cunctari, S'arrester pour l'mour d'aucun. Abide, stay, or tarry long in going,
Gressus cunctari. Estre long a marcher. Abide hasarde, or put him self in
danger, Aleam subire, Se mettre a l'aduenture and en danger. Abide, have, or
sustain a great loss, or misfortune, Calamitatem subire, Endurer, porter,
soustenir un grand malheur and calamite ou aduersite. Abide adventure, Fortunam
subire. Se mettre a l'aduenture. Abide the judgment of the unskillful
multitude, Iuditium imperitae multitudinis subire, Se mettre, ou tomber au
judgment de. etc. Abide or receive great losses, or sustain losses, Subire
incommoda, Receuoir dommage. Abide the judgment of the law, or submit him
self to the laws, Leges subire. Receuoir loix, se soubmettre and obeir. Abide
boldly. Consisto, stis. S'arrester hardiment. Abide firmly, steadfastly or
surely. Persisto, stis. Co^sto, stiti. Persto, as. Sto, as. Idem. Abide still.
Remaneo, es, ansi. Remoror, aris. Sto, tas. Subsisto, stis. Substo, as.
Subsister. Abide or tarry for a time. Commoror, aris. Expecto, as. Permaneo,
nes. Peto, it is, tij. Sto, stas. Seiourner, S'arrester. Abide the judgment of
others. Iuditium subire. Se mettre. etc. Abide with ill will, or pain. Strito,
as. Abide very long. Mansito, as. Obmaneo, es, ansi. Tarder long temps.
Abiding. Contatio, onis. Cunctatio, onis. Expectatio, onis, Mora. ae,
Moramentum. ti, Remansio. onis, Retardement, delay. Abiecte. Abiectus, vel
abiecta, Humilis. De qui on ne tient compte. Abiected. Abiectus, a, um.
Dimissus, a, um. Dechasse, deiecte. Abiecten, or to cast away. Abijcio, cis.
Dimitto, it is. Iecter par disdaign. Ability. Potentia, ae. Valentia, ae.
Puissance, and force, authorite. Abjure. Abiuro. as, Desnie par serment. She
has forsworn ye debt. Abiurauit creditu^, Elle a faict serment qu'elle ne
debuoit rien, Money denied by an oath. Pecunia abiurata. Denice par serment.

Able. Potens, it is. Valens, it is. Puissant Able to be. Possum, potes. Valeo, es.
Pouoir. Able to rule his body, Potens corporis. Puissant. etc. Able to fight or
run away. Pugnae and fugae pote^s, Qui peult combatre and fuir. Able to have
ye kingdom, or of age to receive the kingdom into his own hands, Regni
potens, Qui est en aage de pouoir administrer le royaume. Abillitie, power,
dominion, strength, counsel or rule. Potestas. tatis, Pouoir and puissance,
authorite et seignourie. Able to do heavenly things. Diuini potens, it is. Able
much to be, or to be of great power. Repolleo. es, Pouoir, estre fort and
puissant. Able to do maruelles. Mirapotens, it is. Able to conceive, or well
wytted. Capax, cis. Capable. Abner, a name in the old testament, and
signifies the light of the father, Patris lucerna. Abolishe, put out, undo,
to raze or disanulle. Aboleo, es, leui and abolui, abolitum, abolere. Abolir,
mettre a neant, anichiler. Abolshe, or put out of office, Magistratum abolere
alicui, pro abrogare magistratum. Abolir and oster quelque office. Abolyshe,
put away clean, and utterly destroy, Vires alicuius abolere. Oster du tout.
Abolished to be, or brought to naught. Abolesco, scis, abolescere. Estre aboli
Deuenir a neant. Abolished, and out of use. Abolitus, ta, tum, Aboli and horse
d'vsage. Abolition, destroying, or putting out of memory. Abolitio, onis.
Aboliton. Abolition of a law. Antiquatio, onis. Abolition. Abortiue or borne
before time. Abortiuus, a, um. A vorton, a vorte. Above, super, supera, supra,
sursum, sus. Sur. Above a thousand, or there were more then a thousand. Erant
super mill, Ils estoient plus de mill. Above. 800. years, Super octingentos
annos. Plus d' huit cens ans. Above and besides this, Super haec. Oultre ce.
Above all. Supreme, Plus hault. Above any price. Extra precium. On ne le
scauroit estimer ne priser. Above, or being a lofte, or over. Supernus, a, um.
Supremus, a, um. Le plus hault. Above measure. Prae modum, Oultre mesure.
Above, on high or alofte, Superne, Supreme, D' enhault. Above others. Ante
alios. Qui surpass touts autres. Above other to be as chief. Praesum, es,
fui. Auoir la charge de quelque affair, estre par dessus. Abound Affluo, is.
Circumfluos, is, xi. Exubero, as, Superfluo, is. Supersum, es. Color par
dessus. Abundance. Foelicitas, it is. Saties. Satietas. Saturitas. Vis. Trop
grande abondance. Abundance of riches. Opulentia, ae. opulentietas, it is.
Richesse, Abondance. Abundance of sin. Asmodeus, nomen spiritus. Abundance
of water mixed with claye. Alluuies, ei. Alluuio, onis. Rauine d' eaue, petit
deluge. Abounda^t. Copiosus, a, um. Dapsilis, le. Hubertus, a, um. Locuples,
it is. Opimus. a, um. Opule^tus, a, um. Satur, saturis. Vbertus, a, um. Abondant.
Abundant to be. Opulesco, scis, Abonder. Abundant to make. Opulento, tas.
Enricher. Abundant, or to have abundance. Abundo, as, aui, are. Abonder,
auoir abondance. Abundant plentiful, Abundans, antis. adiectiuum. Abondant.
Abundance, Abundantia, tiae. Abondance. Abundantly. Abunda^ter, Abunde,
Affatim, Afatim. Copiose, Dapsile. Effuse, Opime. Opipare, Opulenter, Plena
manu, Plene, Prolixe. Richement. About. Am, prepos. and inuenitur in Composit,
Ampho Greece, Circa, Circiter, Circum. Sub vt sub idem tempus. Aupres. About.
200. Ad ducentos. Abra, a Greek word, and is as much as to say, a maid
servant. Ancilla, ae. Chambriere. Abram, a name signifieng an high father,
Pater excelsus. Abraham the Patriarch, and the son of Their, Interpreted the
father of many nations. Elegantius tamen Habraham, pater multitudinis.
Abrecocke, or an hasty peche. Armeniacum, Armenium, vel praecox malum. Audunt
pesche, Abricot, pesche de troyes. Abreuiat. Abreuio, as. Decurto, as. Reprimo,
is, ssi. Acourcir. Abreuiated. Abreuiatus, a, um. Decurtatus, a, um. Repressus,
a, um. Abbrege, retenu. Abridge. Abreuio, as. Contraho, is, axi. Decurto, as.
Reprimo, is. ssi. Acourcir. Abrigement. Breuiarium, rij. Epitome, es. Un
entraict, and abbrege de quelque chose. Abroad. Fusim, Late, Vulgo, Au large.
Abroad in the air. Sub dio, vel diuo. soras, foris, and Subdialis, le. Ang.
that which is abroad, open, or without covering. Horse, de horse, par de horse.
Abrogate. Abrogo, as. Antiquo, as. Abolir. Abrogated. Abrogatus, a, um.
Antiquatus, a, um. Horse d' usage. Absence. Absentia, ae. Absence. Absent.
Absens, it is. Vnde absentaneus, a, um, quod crebro fit in absentia. Ang. often
absent. Et habet co^parat. secundum August. Absent. Absent to be. Absum, es.
Estre absent. Absenten. Absento, as. Absenter. Absolve. Absoluo, is. Absouldre.
Absolved. Absolutus, a, um. Absouls. Absolute, perfect, excellent. Absolutus,
ta, tum, nome^ adiectiuum. Parfaict, excellent, en parfection. Absolved,
absoiled, being quitt. Absolutus, ta, tum. participium. Absouls. Absolute,
perfect, Absolutus, nomen ex participio, Parfaict, consomme. Absolute,
perfect, and excellent in each respect, Numeris omnibus absolutus. Parfaict
de touts poincts, Accompli. Absolution, deliverance, or discharge. Absolutio,
ad crimen relatum. Deliurance, absolution. Absolutely, perfectely. Absolute,
perfect. Parfaictement. Absoyler, any thing that delivers a man, the remedy.
Absolutoriu^, ij. Remede qui deliure, deliura^ce. Absolute discharge,
Aquittance, or byll containing ones delivery. Tabella absolutoria. Lettre de
remission, abolition ou absolution. Absolutely or effectually done.
Profligatus, a, um. Abstein. Abstineo, es. Parco, cis. vt parce mero. Abstener.
Abstain, to forbear, to temper, not to meddle with, to forbid, let and
excommunicate. Abstineo, es, ui, abstentum, abstinere, ex abs and teneo
compositum. Abstiner. Abstain, or keep him self from business. A negotiis
abstinere. Se garder d' entendre aux affairs. Se abstenir d' affairs.
Abstaineth or g^ydeth him self from doing injury. Se ab iniuria abstinet. Il
se guard de fair tort a autruy. Abstain thy self from so wicked a fact. Te
abstine a tam nefario scelere. Abstain from his meat. Se cibo abstinere.
S'abstenir de manger. Abstaineth him self from other men's goods or from
extortion. Abstinet se ab alieno. Il se guard de toucher a l' autruy.
Abstaineth, or absenteth him self from the wars, or he leaves the wars.
Abstinet se ab armis. Se deporter de la guerre. Abstain to forbear chyding,
Abstinere a iurgiis, Segarder de noyses. Abstain from flesh. Abstinere a
carne. Fair abstinence de chair. Abstain, or to keep a diet. Cibo abstinere.
Ne manger point, fair diete. Abstain, or forbear to touch. Tactu abstinere.
Se garder de toucher, ne point toucher. Abstayn from company, or not to come
abroad. Publico abstinere. Ne se monstrer point en public, ou par la ville, se
cacher des gens. Abstain, or to keep him self from robbinge other men, or
taking their goods. Abstinere manum alieno. Se garder de desrobber, ne toucher
a l' autruy. Abstain and keep him self from bribing the offi, cers in matters
of law. Manus in iuditio abstinere. Se garder de do^ner argent, and corrompre
les Iuges Abstain, or hold his hand from striking some body, Manum ab aliquo
abstinere. Se garder de le frapper. Abstain from speaking of some thing.
Sermone^ de re aliqua abstinere. Cesser de parler. Abstain, or not to make
war, or use violence against some people. Bellum and vim ab aliquo populo
abstinere. Ne luy point fair la guerre, ne le forcer point. Abstayning.
Abstinentia, ae. As: abstaininge from wine. Abstinentia vini. Abstinence de
vin. Abstinence, or abstayning from souper. Caenae abstinentia. Abstinence de
soupper. To mittigate or assuage a Fever by abstine^ce Mitigare febrem
abstinentia. Appaiser la Fiebure par diete.

Abstinente to be. Summam praestare abstinentiam. Estre fort sobre.
Abstinently, or abstainingly. Abstinenter. Ad. qualitatis. Sans prendre ou
attoucher rien de l' autruy. Abstain from drinking and eating. Ieiuno, as.
Absteiner from wine, as he that is no drinker of wine. Abstenius, vel,
abstemius. Qui ne boit point de vin. Abstinence. Abstinentia, ae. Ieiunium, ij.
Abstinence. Abstinence by the space of three days. Diatritos.* Absurd,
inconvenient, foolish, discording, dishonest, abhorring, odious, against rhyme
and reason. Absurdus, a. um. Adiectiuum. Chose sotte and badine. Absurd,
foolish and inconvenient. Ineptum atque absurdum. Mal conuenable. Absurd and
foolish fellow. Vir absurdus. Male propre, and qui n' est adroict a fair
quelque chose. Absurd, or it is foolyshe to do this. Absurdum est hoc facere.
C' est chose estrange etc. Absurdly, foolishely, ineptly. Absurd, Ad.
qualitatis. Estrangement, and sottement, lourdement, ineptement. Abuse, to use
ill, dishonestly, uncomely, contrary to that it serves for, to use out of
order, or in vain, also to were out. Abutor, abuteris, abusus sum, abuti.
Abuser, vser mal de quelque chose, fair degast, mal gouuerner, degaster. Abuse
riches by prodigality. Diuitiis abuti. Les despendre prodigalement. Abuse a
woman. Abuti muliere. Abuser d' vne femme Abuse the ignorance of an other, to
his own commodity, and advantage. Ignorantia alicuius abuti, vel ignoratione
alicuius abuti. Fair son prouffit de l' ignorance de quelqu' un. Abuse the
law to his own gains. Legibus ad quaestum abuti. Fair estat de gaigner
argent soubz ombre and couleur de garder l' authorite des loix and ordo^nances
Abuse an other name, or under color of an others name procure his own
proffite. Abuti nomine alieno ad suos quaestus. Fair son prouffit soubz le nom
d' autruy. Abuse, or misuse study, and learning. Abuti otio and literis.
Employr mal son temps and son estude. Abuse to wear out. Abuti. Consumer.
Abuse, Abusio, onis. Abusus, us. Catachresis. Frustratio, onis. Abus. Abused.
Circumscriptus, a, um. Delusus, a, um. Deceu, abuse. Abusen. Abutor, eris.
Deludo, dis. Frustra habere, Imponere alicui. Offundere errorem. Abuser. Abusen
a child in lechery. Emasculo, as. Abusen any hallowed thing. Profano, as.
Prophanu^ facere, vel per veram orthographiam, Prophano, as. Profaner. Abusing.
Frustratio, Abusio, Ludificatio. Abusement. Abushmently, or in abushme^t.
Confertim. En un tas. Abydus, a city of Asia, upon the sea side, called
Propontis, which deuideth Europe from Asia.
A. ANTE. C.
ACan, a name in the Bible, signifieng tribulation. Tribulatio, onis.
Troublement. Acanthium, An herb or bushe callid (by master Turner) Ote
thistell, or Cotto^ thistell, of other Gum thistell. Acanthion, sieve
acanthium, Acanthij. Neut. genesis Herb semblable a vne autre nommee bedegar.
Acca Laurentia, the wife of Faustulus, a shepeherde, which for that she was a
notable harlot, was named Lupa, for her rapacitie and evil life, and so are al
harlottes named Lupae, wolves and the brothell house or stews, Lupanar, is,
vel Lupanarium. Un bordeau. This Acca nourished and kept Remus and Romulus,
being cast out to be devoured on the banks of Tyber, which after were the
buylders of Rome, of this comes that fable that Remus and Romulus, were
nourished by a Wolf, for this cause and to her honor, were the feasts in
Rome instituted, which they called Laurentinalia. Accenting or true pronou^cing
or reading. Acce^tus, tus, tui. apud Graecos prosodia dicta, a Latinis tenor,
and tonus, quos veteres nunc Moderamenta, nunc voculationes appellarint. Inde
sunt tres. Acutus, grauis, and circumflexus. De hiisce vide Priscianum, and
Tortellium. Prosodia, ae. idem. Accent, elevation ou abaissement de la voix.
Accept. Accepto, as. Prendre souuent. Accept, to receive, to take in good
part. Accipio, is, cepi. Receuoir, prendre. Accept or take in good part, or
friendly. Aequo animo accipere, Amice aliquid accipere, grate, libenter,
moderate, mollius. Prendre en gre, en bien, en bonne part, Amiablement. Acepte
or take admonition patiently. Monitionem pacienter accipere, non repugnanter.
Porter pacientment. Accept friendly. Ponere beneficii loco. Acceptable.
Acceptabilis. le. Gratus. a. um. Aggreable. Acceptable with joy and mirth.
Plausibilis le. Acceptance, acceptaunce, or acception. Acceptatio, onis.
Acceptio, onis. Prinse. Vide Acquitance. Accepted to be. Acceptor, aris.
Accipior. Estre. etc Accepted of the people. Popularis, re. Qui sauorise au
peuple. Acception. Acceptio, onis. Prinse. Accessarie, abettoer or comforter of
a robber or thief^. Spoliarius, ij. Pilleur. Accessarie. Conscius, a, um. and
tunc exig. cas. genit. vt conscius sceleris. Coulpable de quelque cas.
Accidence, a book also in English, called the Introduction of the Latin
tongue. Accidentia, ae. Introductio, nis. Introduction. This word Accidentia,
ae. signifies also an accident, or chance, or adventure. Adventure. Accident.
Accidens, it is. Chose qui aduient. Accion or plaint. Accio, onis. Actio, nis.
Querela, ae. Action. complaincte. Accion personal in the law, or appointment
to a day certain. Condictio, onis. Accion personelle. Accion of taking and
wrongful withholding of cattle. Actio, vel formula repigneratitia. Accion.
Accion of trespass. Damni dati formula, formula iniuriarum. Vide plus Action.
Accion real. Actio realis. Action royal. Accion to bring against one. Agere
iniuriarum. In iuditium, vel ius aliquem vocare, Intendere formulam.
Accommodate, apply, appropre or make apt. Accommodo. as. applico. as.
Appliquer. Accommodate, to appropre, to apply, to make apt, fit, like, or
agreing, for to set in order, to lend, to confirm. Accommodo. as. aui. are.
Approprier, Accommoder, fair rapporter vne chose a vne autre, Adapter.
Accommodate, give or to apply himself to the governance of the common
wealth. Ad rempublicam, and ad magnas res gerendas se accommodare. S' addonner,
S' appliquer a gouuerner la chose public. Accommodate, or apply his mind to
learning, Accommodare animum literis. Appliquer son esprit a l' estude.
Accommodate or give his council according to th'aduice of an other. Suum
consilium ad consilium alterius accommodare. S' accorder a l' aduis d'autruy. I
would have spoken more here of this: were it not that accommodate is no usual
word, and therefore look Apply, Lend, and Propre.

Accommodate him self to an others age. Aetati seruire. Look more in apt.
Accompany or go with one by way of good fellowship. Comitor, aris. and comito,
as. Accompaigner. Accompany him self with one. Addere sese comitem alicui.
L'accompaigner. Accompany one by the way, or go with one. Ire comitem alicui.
Luy fair compaignie. Deny or refuse to accompany, Negare comitem. Luy
refuser compaignie.

Accompaignie one in some furious enterprise. Comitem se praebere alterius
furoris. Suyure autruy a mal fair. Accompany ones funeral, to go with him to
his burial. Comitare exequias. Aller au conuoy d' un trespass. Accompany with
honor, to solemnise his funeral. Mortuum honor comitari. Luy fair conuoy
aux funerailles. Accompaignie in journey. Iter alicuius comitari.
L'accompaigner par le chemin. Accompanied. Comitatus. ta. tum. Participium.
Accompaigne. Accompanied better. Comitatior. Mieulx acco^paigne. Accomplish.
Impleo, es. Perago, is. Perficio, cis. Persoluo, is. Absouldre, acheuer.
Accomplish that he thought and purposed. Cogitata perficere. Fair and mettre
en execution ce qu' on a pense and propose. Accomplish his promises. Promissa
perficere. Accomplir sa promise. Accomplished, perfect, and absolute in all
points and conditions. Perfectum, expletumque omnibus suis partibus and
numeris. Parfaict de touts poinct, accompli. Accomplished. Impletus, a, um.
Peractus, a, um. Perfectus, a, um. Persolutus, a, um. Absoules.
Accomplishement. Peractio, onis. Perfectio, onis. Parfection. Account.
Calculus, li. Compotus. Ratio, nis* Ratiocinium, ij. Scriptura, ae. Et
Ratiuncula, ae. Diminit. Angl. a little or short account. Compte. Account cast
with counters. Abaculus, li. Compte. Account to take. Putare rationem.
Accomptable to be. Tractare rations. Qu' on peult compter. Accompten or make
account. Computo, tas. Numero. as Putare rationem, Rationem dare, dicta re,
reddere, refer, Ratiociniu^ colligere, Ratiocinor, aris. Refer impensum.
Compter. Accompten or cast account upon the fingers. Dimetiri digitis. Compter
par ses doigts. Accord. Pactio, onis. Transactio, onis. Condictum, i. Un
accord and complot faict enter plusieurs. Accord or consent in Music.
Consentus. us. ui. Vide plus in Consent. Accord de uoix. Accord in reckening
where the allowaunces and receiptes been equal. Quadro, as, aui, are.
Esquarrir, conuenir, and accorder. Accorded. Conuentus, a, um. Condictus, a,
um. Promis and accord. Accord or agree. All udo, dis. Concilio, as.
Conditiones pacis subire. Consono, as. Conuenio, is. Paco. as. Respondeo, es.
Subseruio, is. Transigo, is. Respondre. Accord or agree in one tunee.
Symphonio. as. Accorder. According. Quantum, Secundum, adu. Aupres. According
to my part I help, I did help as much as I could. Pro mea part adiuui,
vel pro viribus. De ma part, tant que in ay peu. According to my power I am
occupied in these arts. In his artibus pro mea part versor. De tout mon
pouoir de ma part. etc. According to our riches. Pro opibus. Selon noz
richesses. According to my custom. Pro mea consuetudine. Selon ma coustume.
According to our power, as we are able. Pro nostra facultate. Selon nostre
puissance and faculte. According to the thicknes or bigness of it. Pro modo
crassitudinis. Selon qu' elle est espesse, selon l' espesseur. According to his
power. Pro suis opibus. Selon son pouoir. According to the proportion: ratably.
Pro portione. Eu esgarde, a la grandeur, ou autrement. According to the portion
or rate. Pro rata. Au sold la liver. According to your old diligence that you
always used. Pro caetera diligentia. Suyuant la diligence de laquelle tu as
accustom d' vser. Accordingly. Merito, pro merito, prout, sic. Selon que
Accumulate or gather together. Accumulo, as, aui, are. Colligo, gis, legi,
ligere. Congrego, gas, gaui, gare. Amasser, Amonceler, Assembler en monceau, ou
par monceaux, entasser. Accumulation or gathering or heaping together.
Accumulatio, tionis: f. genesis Verbale. Amassement, Amas, A moncellement,
Accumulation. Accuse. Accuso, as. Arguo, is, vt arguere aliquem pecuniae
interuersae. Compello, as. Criminor, aris. Defero, ers. Incesso, is. Indico,
cas. Insimulo, as. In iuditium, vel ius aliquem vocare. Noto, tas. Peragere
reu^. Postulo, as. Accersio, sis, siui, sire. Accuser. Accuse one. Accusare,
Arcerssere, facessere alicui negotium, sieve periculum, reum agere, reum facere,
reum postulare. Accuser aucum. Accuse, reprehende or blame one* Arguere,
increpare, carpere, crimine dare aliquid alicui. Accuser and reprendre aucun.
Accuse one and bring him into the law. Aducere aliquem in Iuditium. Accuser
aucun en Judgment. Accusing woman. Accusatrix. tricis. f. genesis Accusatrice.
Accused by the people. Factus reus a populo. Qui a este accuse du peuple.
Accus^ one of a deadly offense. Accusare capitis crimine. Accuser de crime
capital. Accuse one of sloth, slougishenesse, idleness or dullness. Accusare
inertiam alicuius. Blasmer, vituperer, reprendre. Accuse or blame one for some
vice. Accusare vitium, culpam aut crimen alicuius. Reprendre blasmer aucun de
quelque vice, blasmer son vice. Accuse of treason. Proditionis crime^ infer
alicui. L'accuser de trahison. Accused falsely, or to have a crime laid to his
charge faslly. Falsi criminis ^eum agi. Estre accuse d'vn faulx crime. Accuse
falsely or with much falshod. Calumnior, aris. Sycophantisso, as. Sycophantor,
aris. Falso accusare. Accuser faulsement. Accusation. Accusatio, Categoria,
Dica, ae. Insimulatio. Crimen, is. Accusation and blasme. Accusation or false
tale against an innocent. Sycophantia. Conflare accusatione^. Forger un
accusation Accusation properly made against such a person as has been
sometime in authority and borne rule, and is now called to reckening to
answer as well for the execution of his office as for all extortions, and
vsuries done. Repetundarum accusatio. Accused. Accusatus, a, um. Compellatus,
a, um. Criminatus, a, um. Factus reus, Insimulatus, a, u^. Notatus, a, um.
Argutus, a, um. Lege interrogatus. Accuse. Accused for breaking peace. Reus de
vi. Accused to be. Reus agi. Estre accuse. Accuser or empeacher. Accusator.
oris, vel trix. Index. icis. Vnde accusatorius, a, um. Vt vir accusatorius,
eiusdem vocis est. Accusateur. Accuser which does accuse innocents falsely.
Sycophanta. Calomniateur, faulx accusateur, trompeur and deceueur. Accustom or
to use. Insuescere, Consuescere, Consuefacere, Adducere aliquem ad
consuetudinem, Assuefacere. Accoustumer. Vide plus, use and custom.
Accustomed. Assuetus, a, um. Consuetus, a, um. Creber, a, um. Freque^s, it is.
Solennis, e. Solitus, a, um. Accoustume. Accustomed or wont to be. Asoleo, es.
Soleo, es, litus sum, vel lui, ere. Suefaceo, cis. Suefio, fis. Suesco, scis.
Auoir de coustume, souloir. Accustomed gentleness, or myldnes. Semperlenitas,
it is. Doulceur. Achaia, a part of Greece. Achaia. ae. Ache in the huckle bone,
the Sciatica or Gowte Sciaticke. Ischias, ischiadis. f. genesis Sciatica, ae. f.
genesis Vne goutte Sciatique. Achie or gowtie, that has the gowte Sciaticke.
Ischiacus, ca, cum, vel Ischiadicus, ca, cum. Qui ha vne goutte sciatique.
Acheron, as the Poets feign, is a river in hell, but Seruius says, it is a
place in Campania, compassed in with mountains where Necromantie was used.
Fluuius, ij. Fleuue. Achilles which slew Hector at the siege of Troy, a
valiant warrior of the Greeks: This man was seven cubittes high, some
affirm him brother to Priamus. Achieue or bring an enterprise to an end or
purpose. Colophonem addere. Ago, is. Besongner, fair quelque chose. Achieued.
Transactus. a. um. Actus. a. um. Faict. Acorne. Balanus, ni. Glans, dis. f.
genesis Gland. Acquitance. Apocha, Acceptilatio, qua creditor testatur sibi
satisfactum a debitore. Vne quitance. H. Acquit. Pendo, dis; di, dear.
Acquit, or make a quitaunce for money received. Acceptam facere pecuniam.
Acquitted of felony or trespass. Noxis, vel noxijs. solutus. Deliure. Acre of
ground. Iugeris, Iugerum, iugeri. Arpent. Acrotche, take up, to take with
hand, or to lay hand on a thing. Apprehendo. dis. di. dear. Prender de la
main* accrocher, empoigner, prendre. Act. Actio, onis. Actus, us. Factio,
onis. Factum, ti. Negotiatio, onis. Perpetratio, onis. Pragma, ae, vel atis.
Faict and act d' vne person. Act in generation. Coitus, us. prelium, lij.
Compaignie charnelle auec vne femme. Act of parliament, or ordinance made by
the common counsel, or senate. Senatus consultum. La deliberation and aduis
du conseil de la ville. Acts. Gesta, orum. Les haultes faictes and vaillances
des peuples, roys and princes, capitaines, ou autres. Acts or gestes of
kings. Basilica facinora. Faictz de roy. Action of favor. Gratulatio,
gratiarum actio. Actio^ de grace. More of action, Look in Accion. Active.
Actiuus, a, um. Actuarius, a, um. Gnauus, a, um. Industrius, a, um. Nauus, a,
um. sine. g. Strenuus a, um. Industrieux, Actif. Active person, or a man
expert in all feats of actiuitie, as casting of the bar, daunsing, leaping,
running, shoting, skipping. Pancratiastes, pancratiastae, and pancratius, tij.
Celuy qui ainsi sexerce. Actiuite or exercise in all martial feats.
Pancratiu^. tij, Strenuitas. it is. Vne sort de luicte en laquelle l'homme use
de touts moyens pour ruer son homme par terre, tant des iambes que des bras.
Actual sciences, as ciuell, dispensatiue, and moral. Actualis scientia.
Accursed out of the church. Abstentus. a. um. Eco^municatus. ta. tum.
A. ANTE. D.
ADage, a quick answer or pretty proverb. Adagium, adagij, adagio, adagionis.
Prouerbium. prouerbij. Adage, proverb. Adam the first man that ever was
created and signifies a dweller, or red earth, and he was called also
Protoplastes, or Protoplastus, as first created, and autumatur ab Adama ceu in
Genesis 5. And Adam was also the name of an heretic in Bohemie. Adamante stone,
or a Diamante. Adamas, mantis. m. genesis Pierre precieuse, nommee Diamant.
Adama^tlyke, hard, invincible. Adamantaeus, taea, taeum. Faict de Diamant, ou
aussi dur que Diamant. Add, to increase or amplify. Addo, addis, addidi, ad
dear, com. ex prepositione ad, and do, das. Adiouster, bailler d' auantage.
Add moreover. Superaddo, is. Adiouster. Add to. Adijcio, cis. Ascribo, bis.
Refero, ris. Subdo, is. Admolior, iris. Subiungo, is, nxi. Bailler. Addid, as
what may be added to this gentleness? Quid ad hanc mansuetudinem addi potest?
Cic. Est il possible d'estre plus doulx? Addid by number. Adnumero, as, aui,
are. Annombrer, adiouster, number, compter, payer. Added to. Additus, a, um.
Adiouste. Added to as things been added. Epacta. Adder serpent. Anguis,
Coluber, Vipera. Vne couleuure, vne serpent. And there are three kinds, as a
Snake of the water, a Dragon of the temples, and a Serpent of the earth. Est
anguis aquarum, Dracho templorum, and Serpens terrarum. Anguinus, na, number.
Anguineus, ea, eum. Viperinus, na, number. Of a Snake or Viper. Adiectiuum. Adders
tongue, an herb which grows in moist meadows in the end of April, and in
the beginning of May, it is called in latin, Lingua serpe^tina, Ophyoglosso^,
Lingua and lingulaca existimatur esse nonnullis. The Apothecares call it: Lancea
Christi. L'angue de serpent. Adders skin. Exuuiae serpentis. Vernatio, onis.
La vieille peau d' vne couleure don't elle se de suest au printemps. Addice, a
coupers instrument. Harpago. inis, Un croc. Addice or addle egg. Vrinum. Vide
Egg. Addicte or give him self to live pleasauntly. Persequi voluptates.
S'addonner a toute voluptez. Addicted or fervently disposed. Studiosus, a, um.
Addition or adding. Ascriptio, Additio, Adiectio, Accessio, Appendix,
Auctarium, Corollarium, Suppleme^tum, Additamentu^. Addition, Accessoire.
Addition or proper adjective joined to a substantive, or applied for some
peculiar quality, as a barking dog, pure gold, white snow. etc. Epitheton.
i. proprium adiectiuum. Adiouste. Addition in weight. Mantissa, ae.
Additamentum, ti. Advantage. Addition of a lettre to a word, which lettre
bears no voice, as thus. Gnatus for Natus. Protheses. Et est quaedam figura
quasi additio sieve adpositio literae in principio dictionis, and componitur a
pros quod est ad, and thesis positio. Adioustement. Addition voluntary or
addinge to a thing parteyninge nothing to the original or principal as when
a painter makes an Image* he adds thereunto flowers and trees. Parergon, vel
parergum, gi. Tout ce qu' on fait oultre la besongne principale qu' on a
interprinse. Addoulce or mitigate with swetnes. Complacare, Dimitigare vel
demitigare, Edulcare, Lenire, Mitificare, Mitigare, Mulcere, Placare,
Tra^quillare, Temperare. Addoulcir. Adieu, or farewell. Salve, Vale. Dieu vous
guard. Adioyne. Proximo, as. Adiu^go. is. Adioindre, altar ad iouster
accoupler. Adjoining as one house to join to another. Affinis, and hoc affine.
Affin, voism. Adjoining next unto. Confinis, ne. Contiguus, a, um. Adiunctus,
ta, tum. Adiectus, ta, tum. Adioinct. Adiourne. Comperendinare, Differ,
Intercalare, Procrastinare, Prolatare, Protrahere, Moram interponere, Proferre,
Extrahere. Delayer. Adiourneing. Dilatio, Mora, Procrastinatio, Suste^tatio,
Extractio, Protractio. Delay, dilation, delayement. Adiourned properly
till.xxx. days. Comperendinatus. a. um. Adiourned. Comperendinatus, a, um.
Delaisse. Adiourne from day to day. Diem de die differ. Dilayer de iour en
iour. Adiudge. Adiudico, cas. Decerno, nis. Iuger and arrester. Adiudge and
esteem. Arbitrare, Autumare, Computare, Decernere, Dijudicare, Interpretari,
Iudicare, Opinari, Putare. Iuger and estemer. Adjure, or conjure. Exorciso, as.
Vide Constrained. Adiuration or coniuring. Exorcismus. Adiurour or coniurour.
Exorcista, ae. Vide Co^iure. Administre and to govern a province. Procurare
vel administrare prouinciam. Administrer and gouerner vne province.
Administrator, one that has administration of any thing. Administrator,
Procurator. Administrateur. Administration or administering. Administratio,
Gestio, Actus. Administration. Administration or charge of a Realm. Esse in
procuratione regni. Auoir la charge and administration du royaume. Admirale, he
that has governance of things pertaining to the sea. Praefectus rei nauticae
vel rei naualis. Admiral. Admiraltie or the office of the Admiral. Maris
praefectura, Thalassiarchia. L'admiraulte. Admiration or marueling.
Admirabilitas admiratio. Admiration. Worthy of admiration. Mirus, mirandus,
admirandus, suspiciendus. Qui est digne d' admiration. Marvelous, admirabilis,
admirandus, suspiciendus. Admirable. Maruelously an aduerbe. Admirabiliter.
Cic. Admirablement. Admonish or to warn one. Monere, Admonere, Commonere,
Commonefacere, Emonere, Praecipere. Admonnester. Admonished. Monitus,
Co^monitus, Admonitus, Co^monefactus. Admonneste. Admonisher, or one that
warnes one before. Moninitor, Admonitor. Admonnesteur. Admonition. Monitum, vel
monitio, Admonitio. Admonition, admonnestement. Admit. Admitto, it is, si.
Adscisco, scis. Recipio, is. Admettre. Admitted. Admissus, a, um. Receptus, a,
um. Admis, permis. Adolescencie, or age between childhoode and man's age, which
is between.14. and.21. Adolescentia, ae. Adolescence. Adonai, the name of God
among the Gentiles and Jews. Adopte or make one his son. Adoptare and
arrogare aliquem in filium. Adopter and prendre a filz. Adopter that makes the
adoption. Adoptator. Celuy qui adopte un autre. Adoptiue. Adoptiuus, a, um.
Adoptif. Father by adoption. Per adoptionem pater. Pere qui m' a adopte en filz.

Adoption, or taking by election out of the course of enheritau^ce by gift,
will, or other wise, in stead of heir, to be a man's heir. Adoptio, onis, vt
Demea dedit alterum adolescentulum suum Mitioni fratri adoptandum. Vnde
adoptatitius, a, u^. adoptatiuus, a, um. and adoptatus, a, um. ang. Taken by
way of adoption, in stead of their own child. Et adoptiuus dicitur etiam
filius adoptitij. (?) In adoptione tria requiruntur, Extraneitas generationis.
Voluntas adoptantis, Bonum ad quod ordinatur. Adoptio, Adoptatio. Adoption.
Adore, and to worship. Adorare, colere. Adorer. Adorer, or a worshipper.
Adorator, Cultor. Adorateur. Adoration or worshipping. Adoratio. Cultus.
Adoration. Adourne, garnishe or beutifie. Adornare, Aptare, Comere, Instruere,
Ornare. Accoustrer. Adourne a banquete. Conuiuium aptare, parare, apparare.
Accoustrer un banquet. Adourne or dress ships. Naues expedire. Naues
instruere. Accoustrer nauires. Adourned or beutified. Ornatus, Pectitus,
Politus, Compositus, Accommodus. Accoustre. Adourning, or beautifying. Ornatus,
huius ornatus, Cultus. Accoustrement. Adrastus a king of Argiues, which warred
against the Thebanes, with great slaughter of his soldiers, and no victory.
Adrastus also was son of Percosius (a man of excellent knowledge in the
science of divination) and had to brother Amphius. This Percosius being a very
friend to the Troyanes, and perceiving the unfortunate end of his sons
eminente: if they went to war, he persuaded them not to go, but they (neither
obeying his commandment, nor believing his council) went, and were both
slain. Of one of these comes that proverb, Adrastia Nemisis, vel Adrasti
Nemisis. Ill luck of Adrastus. It may be prouerbially englished, pride will
have a fall. Adrianus, an Emperor so called, in English Adrian. Advance.
Effero, rs. Extollo, lis. Profero, rs. Promoueo, es. Proueho, is, xi. Esleuer.
Aduau^ced in stomach as properly to have a proud stomach. Elatus, a, um.
Hault. Advanced. Adornatus, a, um. Praepositus, a, um. Prouectus, a, um.
Sublatus, a, um. Treshault. Advanced. Altus, Celsus, Excelsus, Editus,
Profu^dus. Hault. Aduauncing and hautenes. Fastus, Spiritus, Elatio,
Excelsitas, aut sublatio animi. Haultenete. And the aduerbe hautily. Elate.
Haultainement. Advance to honor. Adorno, as. En honor. Advanced to honor.
Adornatus, a, um. Auctus honoribus. Treshault. Advancement. Fortunae, arum.
Richesses. Aduaunt, boaste and brag. Effero, rs. Extollo, lis. Glorior, aris.
Iacto, as. Ostento, as. Vanter. Advantage. Compendium, dij. Corollarium, rij.
Lucrum, cri. Vsus, us. Advantage. Advantage gotten by th'occupatio^ of other
men's good^s. Vsus, Fructus, us. Vide profit. Aduenge, punish or to correct
one for a fault. Persequi iniurias, Petere paenas, Punire, Afficere paena,
Paenam capere ab aliquo, Sumere paenas de aliquo, Paenam irrogare, Paenas ab
aliquo agere, Castigare, Mulctare, Plectere, Sumere supplicium ab aliquo,
Vindicare, Animaduertere in aliquem, Sancire. Punir. Adventure, chance or end
of a thing. Accidentia, Casus, Fors, Fortuna, Euentus. Adventure. Adventure, or
try fortune. Emere aleam. Acheter l'aduenture de quelque chose, and un hasard.
Adventure, or ieopard life, or try some perrill. Aleam subire, Committere se
fortunae, Experire vel subire fortunam. Se mettre a l'aduenture and en dangier.
Adventure, or by chance. Forsan, forsitan, fortassis* Paraduenture.
Adue^turer. Audaculus, Periclitator. Aduentureux. Adventure, or ieopard life.
Subire periculum, seu tempestates, vel vim. Idem ac supra. Aduenturously.
Audaciter, Audacter, Confidenter. Hardiment. Aduerbially, or like an aduerbe.
Aduerbialiter. Adversary to Christ or Christen religion. Satanas. Aduersaire.
Adversary, or to be contrary to one. Aduersor, aris, are, aduersatus sum vel
fui, aduersari. Estre aduersaire and contraire. Adversity. Aduersa fortuna,
Aduersum, Casus aduersus, Res aduersae, Aduersitas, Aduersa, orum. In plural.
nu. Aduersite. Adversary, or enemy. Aduersarius, Hostis, Inimicus, Iniquus,
Antagonista. Aduersaire. But when it is spoken by a woman, it is used in the
feminine gendre, as. Aduersatrix, tricis. Celle qui est aduersaire and
contraire. Adversary, or against. Aduersarius, a, um. Aduersaire, Party
adverse. Advertise, or tell one of some thing before it comes to pass.
Commonefacere, Certum alicui facere, Docere, Monere, Emonere, Iudicare,
Praedicere. Aduertir aucun de quelque chose. Advertised or to be warned.
Co^monefieri, Rescire, Resciscere. Estre aduerti. Advertised, or warned.
Monitus, Commonitus. Aduerti. Advertisement, or admonition. Monitum, vel
monitio, Significatio. Aduertissement. Advise. Censio, onis. Ratio, onis. Vide
plus Consultation. Advise, counsel or warn. Commonefacio, cis. Co^stituo, is.
Persuadeo, es. Aduertir. Advise or coniecte how a thing shall be done.
Praemeditor, (...) Against one, as in meting. Obuiam, Adu. Au deuant. Against
or contrary. Aduersus, a, um. Contraire. Against the stream. Aduerso flumine.
Contre eaue. Against to be, as one thing is set correspondent against an other.
Respondeo, es. Respondre. Agamemnon, son to Atreus, and king of Mycene, was
captain general in the siege of Troy, and after (his return from thence)
was slain by Aegisthus through the council of his wife Clytemnestra: and she
(with her aduoutrer Aegisthus) was rewarded for murder and adultrie by her own
son Orestes, who reue^ging the death of his father Agamemnon, slew them
both. Agonae a noble woman, which slew her son Penthea, for his
lasciuiousnes. A notable example of a Panime Lady, for her virtuous act,
which willed rather the death of her natural son, then his vicious life.
Other affirm that Agaue ( whom our Author names Agonae) was very vicious
and cruel: and her son Pe^theus was a man given to all abstinencie, in so
much that he would not go to that filthy feast of Bacchus, (which was kept in
the night, with all furiousness, vice and abomination) neither would have
suffered the women to go: for which cause in the night, when they were drunk:
they tore him in pieces. Wherefore I could not well allow the former history
were not the meaning so modeste. Agaue, es. f. g. Agar, handmayde to Sara, on
whom Abraham begat Ismael, and is interpreted. Aduena. Estrangier. Agaricke,
an herb growyng in Syria, Armenia and Lybia, it is called in Latin, Laser,
sieve Laserpitiu^ galicum, but Ruellius thinks it is that which the common
people call Angelica. Austrice, Angelique. Age. Aetas, it is. Senecta, Senectus,
it is. Senium, Vetustas, it is. Aage, vieillesse. Age decrepit, Old or crouked
age. Summa aetas, Effeta, Decrepita, Exita, Extrema. Le dernier aage ou l'homme
peult paruenir. Age increasing. Aetas ingrauascens, Progressus aetatis.
Accroissement d'aage. Age of a boy under.xiiii. years, and of a wenche
under.xii. years. Impubertas, it is. Aage maniable and aisee a gouerner. Age
of.xv.xvi. or.xvii. whereat one enters the state of man. Ephebia, ae. Le
commencement d'adolescens qui est a l'aage de quinze ans. Age of.xiiii. years,
a young striplinge. Ephebus, by. Qui ha quatorze ans accomplis, Adolescent. Age
of.xiiii. years of a man, and.xii. of a woman. Pubertas, tatis, vel puber
aetas. L'aage de quatorze ans es masles, and de douze es femelles. Age of
infancy. Cunabula, plur. Cunae, arum. Aetatula. Petit aage. Age of the world.
Aetas mundi. Vide in the world. Age perfect. Aetas perfecta, vel plena,
Praedura, Adulta, Firmata, Confirmata, Corroborata. Aage robuste. Age passed.
Superior aetas, Affecta, Acta, Exacta, Decursa, Praeterita. Aage pass. Aged.
Annarius, a, um. Annilis, le. Annosus, a, um. Aetate confectus, Aetate exacta
vel prouecta, Grandaeuus, a, um. Longaeuus, a, um. Maturus, a, um. Prouectus,
a, um. Vide Ancient. (?) Et Grandiusculus, a, um. ang. Of more age. Qui est de
long aage. Aged like, or of one age. Coaetanius, a, um. D' un aage. Aged or
very old. Aetate, vel annis obsitus. Homme aage. Aged to be. Aetate procedere,
Seneo, es. Senesco, scis. Enuieillir, Deuenir vieil. Agedly. Vetuste,
Seniliter. Vieillissement. Agilitie, nimblenesse, quicknes, promptenesse.
Agilitas, tatis. Alaigrete, Souplesse de corpse. Item Agilis and hoc agile,
nomen adiectiuum. Nymble of body, quick, prompte, and Agiliter, Agilius,
Agillime, Aduerbium qualitatis. Nimblely, lightly, quickly. Alaigrement. Aglet
or little plate. Bracteolum, li. Bractea. Fueille.* Agony, great pain and
dolor, both of mind and body. Agonia, ae. Angor, oris. Agony. A good
fellowship, or of a good fellowship, a familier word used among friends. Amabo,
adu. Ie vous pry mon amy. A Gods name or truly. Sane. Vrayement. Agree.
Astipulor, ris. Alludo, dis. Congruo, is. Consentio, it is. Quadro, as.
Respondeo, es. Subseruio, is. Teneo, es, Vnio, is. S'accorder. Agree or
appease, or make an end. Compono, is. Accorder. Agree in one tune. Concento,
as. Concinno, is. Symphonio, as. Conuenir. Agree, or join two things
together. Apto, as. Approprier. Agreeable. Congruus, a, um. Consentaneus, a, um.
Agreeable for the time. Tempestiuus, a, um. Agreeable to a man's judgment. Ad
pedem. Proverb. est iuxta sententiam Pauli Aemilij. Agreeable, of one consent,
mind, or will. Concors, dis. Gratus, a, um. Accord. Agreably. Condecenter.
Conuenablement. Agreement. Consentio, onis. Consensus, us. Vnanimitas, it is.
Vnio, onis. Accord. Agree to any man's will. Confirmare se ad alicuius
voluntatem, Annuere, Cedere alicui, Concedere in sententiam alicuius, Alicui
accedere, Assentiri, Astipulari, Consentire, Fauere sententiae alicuius.
S'accorder a aucun. Agreement. Pactum, pactio, Compositio, Conuentio, Consensus,
Compactum, Vnio. Accord, Paction, Conuention. Agreement or consent. Consensus.
Accord and conuenance. Agreement inconstant. Lubricus assensus. Accord
inconstant. Agree well with some body. Optime cum aliquo conuenire. Estre fort
bien d'accord auec un autre. Agreement and reconing is made between them of
receate and payment. Conuenit inter eos ratio accepti and expensi. Ils sont
d'accord quant aux mises and receptes. Agreed with one accord. Vna voce, Vno
animo, Vno ore, Concorditer. Tout d' un accord. Agree of some thing by common
consent. De communi sententia aliquid co^stituere. Ordonner quelque chose tout
d'vn accord, and d'vn aduis. Agreement, peace or concord made for one, or to
bring one into favor. Ad co^cordiam adducere. In gratiam redigere, vel in
concordiam. Pacem alicui componere, Coagmentare pacem. Mettre d'accorde.
Agreement, or accord in proporcion. Symmetria. Proportion. Agreament in
communication. Transactio, onis. Un accord and complot faict. Agrimony herb.
Hepatorium, ij. Eupatorium, ij. and Eupatoria, iae. foe. g. Herb que
vulgairement on appelle Aigremonie. Aggrauate, or make heavier or more grievous.
Aggrauo, as, are. Fair plus pesant and plus grief, Agrauer. Aggreable.
Consentaneus, a, um. Conuenable, Accordant, and semblable. Aggrega^e, or gather
together. Aggrego, as, aui, are, com ex ad and grex, gregis. Assembler,
Aggreger.
A. ANTE. H.
AH, an interiection, or sudden voice uttered, whereby some hasty motion is
signified. as in laughter. Ter. Ah ah ah, perij defessa iam misera sum te
ridendo. Ah, ah, I die poor weary wenche In laughing the to scorn. Or in
rebukyng, or correcting him self, as Vergil. Ah Corydon Corydon quae te
dementia cepit. Alas why Corydon in love, What madness has thee caught. In
pytie, or taking compassion: As Vergil. Hic inter densas corylos modo namque
gemellos spem gregis: Ah silice in nuda connixa reliquit. For here but late
twen haselles thick, two twins she eande at ones: My hope of herd, allasse
she left on naked flinty stones. Ah ah, an interiection of sighing as we use:
oughe, oghe. Quand on sospire. Ah, an interiection when we be angry with some
body, and blame him as in Terent. Ah tantamne rem tam negligenter agere? Alas
does he so great a thing with negligence devise? Ahazias, called also Ochosias,
the nynthe king of Judah, reigned one year, and was slain for Idolatie.
Aherna, a city of Hetruuia, Plin. Ahias, the name of a prophet, in the third
book of the kings, and.xi. chapter. Ahinas, a hye priest in Judea the year
before Christ. 986.
A. ANTE. I.
Ajax, was the name of two of the most worthy warriors amongst the
Gretians, of which the one was surnamed Telamonius, next to Achilles in
fortitude, he fought with Hector for the victory, and had obtained it: had not
night ended the combat, for which cause he returned with a sword given him
by Hector, and he likewise gave Hector a sword gyrdle, which gifts (as the
end declared) were both their destructions. For Achilles drew the body of
Hector with that gyrdle round about the walls of Troy at a horses tail, and
after slew him in the sight of his father Priamus. And Ajax when Achilles was
slain, striuinge with Ulysses for his armoure, and being overcome by the
eloquence of his adversary, fell mad and slew brute beasts, thinking them
to be Ulysses and Atridas, but when he came to him self again, and perceived
how he was deluded, and failed in his purpose, being stricken with great
doloure and grief, he slew him self in a desert place: with that same sword
which Hector gave him. There was an other Ajax ( surnamed Oileus) king of
Locris, swyft of foot, cunninge in throwyng the darte, and showed many
examples of fortitude at the siege of Troy, but when it was destroyed, he
deflowrid the virgyn Cassandra in the temple of Minerua, wherefore the goddess
being moved to wrath, fyerid and drowned him and his ships with lightning, as
he was sailing into Crete after the Troyane wars were ended. Ajax, cis. m. g.
Aid, or to help one. Iuuare, Adiuuare, Adiutare, Opitulari, Adiuuento esse,
Adiume^tum dare, Adiumentum afferre, Adiumenta importare, Auxilium afferre,
Operam alicui dare, Operam praebere, Opem refer, Suppetias far, Ire
opitula^ tum, Saluti esse alicui, Comministrare, Commodare alicui in re aliqua,
Alicui auxilio venire, Auxiliari alicui. Aider. Aid and succor one. Mederi
alicui, Aliquem tegere ac tueri, Adiumentum dare. Aider and secourir aucun.
Aid one in each respect. Nullo loco deesse alicui. Aider a quelque un par
tout. Aid and serve in warrefare. Praestare operam in re militari. Aider and
seruir a fair la guerre. Aid and defend one in some cause. Adesse alicui ad
rem aliquam. Aider and defender la cause d'aucun. Aid with all pain. Nauare
opera^. Aider de toute sa peine. Aid, or as God help me. Ita me deus been
amet, Ita me dij iuuent, Ita viuam, Medius fidius, Ita mihi deum propitium esse
velim. Ainsi me vueille dieu a^der. Aid, or by gods help. Iuuante deo, Deo
auspicate, Fauente deo. A l'aide de dieu. Aid, or help me. Da dextram misero.
Aid moy. Aided one by the other. Alter ab altero adiutus. Aidez l'vn de
l'autre. Aider, or one that s^cooureth. Adiutor, Administer, Auxiliarius. Qui
aid. And she that aideth is called. Adiutrix, tricis, f. g. Celle qui aid.
Aid. Adiuuamen* inis. Adminiculum, li. Auxilium, lij. Copia, ae. Opis, pem,
pe. Ops, pis. Patrociniu^, ij. Praesidium, dij Subsidium, ij. Suppetiae, arum.
Aid. Et praesidiarius, a, um. angl. That which is ordained to help an other
thing. Qui aid. Aid in battle, as when England does aid France.
Symmachia. Aided. Fraetus, a, um. Se confiant en quelque chose. Aiden, help,
or succor. Adminiculo, as. Adminiculor, aris. Auxilior, aris. Dare dextra^.
Operor, aris. Porrigere dextram. Subleuo, as. Suppetior* aris. Suppetias far,
sustento, as. Aider. Aiding, or succouring. Auxiliaris, re. and Auxiliarius, a,
um. Qui aid, seco^rable. Air, one of the four elements. Aer, Diuum,
Spiritus. L' vng des quatre elemens, L'aire. Air, abroad without doors. Sub
dio, vel sub diuo. A l'aire. To live, or be abroad without doors. Sub dio
agere. Estre a l'air. Air misty. Aer concretus. Air assemble. Air clear.
Bonum cielum. Bon air. Temperaunce of the air. Salubritas caeli atque
temperies. Bonte and attrempance de l'aire. Air, evil and vnhelthfull.
Malitia caeli^. Gros air and mal sain. Air, sometime blaste, breathe, sound,
or wind. Aer, era, Aethera, ae, Aethra, ae. Air. Et Aerius, a, um. and
Aerinus, a, um. possess. de aer. angl. Of the air. Qui est faict en l'air ou
qui vit de l'air.
A. ANTE. K.
Ache, or grieve. Doleo, es, ui, ere. Auoir douleur. My head aketh. Dolet mihi
caput. La test me deult.

My ears ache with a stroke. Dolent ab ictu aures. Les oreilles me deullent
d'vn coup que ^^dy receu.

My head aketh with the sun. Dolet a sole caput. La test me deult d'auoir
este trop long temps au soleil. Vide plus Dolor and pain.

Ache, or ache of the tethe. Vide Totheache. Aching to the. Rabidus dens. Dent de
la quelle si on est frappe, on deuient enrage. S. Vide plus, Tothe.
A. ANTE. L.
ALaba, a city of Spain. Ciuitas Hispaniae. But as an other says, it is a
city of France. Celticae ciuitas in Galia. Alabanda, a city in Caria.
Ciuiras. Cariae. Alabastrum, a mountain, and a city of Aegipte. Mons and
ciuitas Aegypti. Alablaster box, or vessel. Alabastru^, tri. Alabaster, ri.
Vaiseau d'alabastre. Alabaster. Alabastrites, tae, m. g. Alebastre. Allay, or
appese ones mind. Pacare, Complacare, Lenire, Mitigare, Pacificare, Placare,
Propitiare, and Propitiari, Sedare, Resedare, Tranquillare, Mulcere aliquem,
Aliquem propitium facere, Conciliatum animum alicuius reddere, Sedatu^ affere,
Incensum restinguere, Tranquillum ex irato facere. Appaiser and addoulcir
aucun. Vide plus Appease. Alaie wine. Diluo, is. Infuscare vinu^ vel meru^
aqua. Vide plus, Wine. Alaide wine. Aquaticum vinum, Defaecatum, Dilutum vinum,
Lymphatum. Vin trempe. Alas. Eheu, Heu, O, Vaeh, Vae. Helas. Albe, which a
priest did wear. Poderis, est etiam vestimentum album and militare. H.
Albion, the ancient name of this I Will, which conteyneth England and
Scotland. Some say Olbion, the doubt whereof I refer to the
Historiographers, etc. Alcoron, Mahumettes book. Alcoranum, ni. A book of
most shameful, detestable, blasphemous and horrible lies, the Turks laws
and ceremonies, made by Mahumete. Alcyon, birds which do bread in the mids
of winter, when the seas be most troublous. Alcedines, number. Alcyones, number. A
small bird which makes her nest upon the sands of the sea, and then it is a
token and a sign of fair wether. Un petit oiseau qui fait son nid sur l' eau
de la mer, and lors est sign de beau temps, etc. S. Alder tree. Alnus, ni.
Sambucus, ci, and Sambuceus, a, um, ang. Of an Alder tree. Aulne. Alnus, may be
taken also for a boat, for at the first boats were made of Alder, as in
Vergil. Tunc Alnos fluuii primum sensere cauatas.
Then first the floudes began to bear, the holowed Alder trees.
Aldermen of a city. Senatores, Patres, Viri seniores, vel ab aetate, vel a
curae similitudine. Les senateurs ou conseilliers. Alecoste, cost, or
costemarie, an herb named in latin. Menta Romana, Menta Saracenica, vel Sali^a
Romana. Ale, or beer. Ceruisia, ae. Zythum. De la biere. Ale new, or new ale
in the corns. Mustum, ti. Alehouse, or an Inn, a house where each geste may
have vitayles and lodging for money. Caupona, Diuersorium, Stabulun^, Taberna,
Diuersoria, Pandochaeum, Domus viatoribus mercede patens. Hostelerie, logis.
Aleknight, a tippler, a tospote, a quaffer, a quasser, a renspitcher, a
blowebotel. Ebriosus, Bibax, Bibulus, Potor, Compotor, and co^potrix, tricis.
She that loves to make a mess at the alehouse. Yurongne, buueur, compaignon a
boire and a yurongner, compotrix. Compaigne a boire and a yurongner. Alehouse,
or tavern, where riote is exercised and maintained. Popina, ae. and Popinalis,
le, angl. Pertaining to such a riotous alehouse or tavern. Look in Tavern.
Aley to walk in. Ambulacrum, cri. Deambulatorium* rij. Hypoethra, ae.
Topiarium, rij. Pourmenoir. Aley maker. Topiarius, rij. Iardinier. Aley making,
or that faculty or occupation. Topiaria. Alexander the great, was son of
Philip king of Macedony. And scoller to Aristotell, prince of Philosophers. A
man of great wit, learning, and fortitude, for at the age of twenty years he
took on him the conqueste of all the world, with an army prepared by his
father, which was of 32000. footmen, and.4500. horsemen, having no captain
under the age of.60. years, that not in flight, but in fight, they should
put the hope of victory, and so with valiant courage did set upon the whole
world, and had always the victory, for in the first year he was saluted
Emperor of Greece. He passed over into Asia, at Granicus, overcame the
Persia^s, took Sardis, and Halicarnassus, subduing all the lands unto Phrigia,
and obtaining all the regions as far as Cilicia. He wanne Egypt, and buylt
Alexandria, he took Babylon, subdued Hyrcania, he obtained Paropamissa, builded
an other Alexandria upon the mountain Caucasus, he caused Mophis ye king of
India, to submit him self to him, and subdued ye Cosseans. And when he had
reigned.12. years, to the great peril of his soldiers and destruction of
many nations, in vanquishyng the East part of the world (and unvanquished) He
supposed in his mind he had also overcome all the Weste, through which being
blown up with pride, he caused him self to be named king of all lands, and
lord of the whole world, and sent forth his navy into the East Ocea^, to
search if there were any other world to conquer, but retourning home, in his
greatest glory, at Babylon abiding for the Ambassadors of all countries, he
was poisoned by his own men, for cruelty, dronkenesse, and tyranny.
Alesandre herb, Angelica, Equapium, Hipposelinon, Olusatru^, Smyrnium, ii.
Herb appelee Ache. Alienate or to put away. Alienare, Abalienare. Estranger.
Alienate one from his favor or frendshippe. Alienare quempiam a se. Estranger
aucun de son amity. Alienate, to make a depriuatio^ of his favor.
Alienationem facere. S'estranger. Alienate, or to turn his mind from one.
Auertere Animum ab aliquo. S'estranger de quelqu'vne and en ouster sa fantasy
ou amor. Alienated, or made a stranger. Alienatus, Abalienatus, Alienus.
Estrange. After a strange facion. In peregrinum modum. En estrange facion.
Alien, a stranger or a geste. Peregrinus, Aduena, Alienigena, Alienus,
Externus, Exterus, Extrarius, Hospes, Allophylus. Un estrangier. Alienation.
Abalienatio, onis. Alienatio, onis. Distractio, onis. Secessio, onis.
Estrangement. Alien, sell, or put away. Abalieno, as. Alieno, as. Inde Tor,
Trix, Tio. Verbale. Vide Put away. Aliened, put away, or sold. Alienatus, a,
um. Emancipatus, a, um. Estrange. Alienour. Alienator, oris. Emancipator, oris.
Alien made a denisen by me. Receptus in prouincia^. Ce luy ou celle que i'ay
affranchy. A* little. Aliquantulum, Aliquantum. Quelque bien peu, vne tantinet.
Alive, or as yet living. Superstes, stis. Viuus, a, um. Suruiuant. All. Omnis,
ne. Singulus, a, um. Tophos, Totus, a, um. Tout. All about. Circa, Circum,
Vndique, Vsquequaque. Par tout, du tout en tout. All at once. Strictim.
Brieuement. All for the most part. Plerique omnes. Le plus part, ou touts.
All what ever it be. Quicquid id est Tout ce que c'est. All is one with me.
Nihil moror. Cem'est tout un. All days, every day. Omnibus diebus. Per omnes
dies. Tous les iours. All of spyte, or for the nonce. Ob industriam, De
industria, Dedita opera. Tout de gre. All one, equal, even. Par, Idem. Tout
un. All hayle. Aue, Salve. Dieu te guard. Al hallowes, or al good saints.
Superi, Diui. Coelites, Dij. Deaeque. Les dieux. All manner. Omnimodus, a, um.
Tout manier. All manner of ways. Omnifariam, Adu, Omni ratione, Omnibus
partibus. En toutes manieres. Almighty. Omnipotens, it is. Tout puissant. All of
pleasure, as given all to carnalitie. Voluptarius, a, um. Voluptuarius, a, um.
Voluptueux. All one to make. Aduno, as. Vnir. All that. Quecunque. Quaelcunque.
Altogether. In omni part, Omnino, Perinde. Totalement. Altogether, all whole,
or all and singular. Cunctus, a, um. Integer, ra, rum. Vniuersalis, le.
Vniuersus, a, um. Vniuersel and general, tout l'assemblee. All whole. Integre.
Totalement, purement. Allect, or styre with some pleasant mean to entice.
Allicio, cis. Duco, cis, xi. Allicher, attraire. Allectiue, or swetenes in
fealing. Delinimentum, ti. Delinitio, onis. Amodouement. Allege. Allego, as.
Alleguer. Allege Authors, or authorities. Laudare authoritates, In medium
proferre vel citare authoritates. Alleguer. Allege falsely the authority of
constitutions and laws. Legum vel constitutionum authoritatem ementiri.
Alleguer faulsement vne loy. Allege and tell the good deeds, of his elders and
predecessors. Maiorum suorum beneficia proferre. Alleguer les biens faicts de
ses maieurs. Alleluya an herb, otherwise called Sorrel de boys. Oxis,
Oxytriphillon. Panis cuculi. Alleluya. Alliance. Propinquitas, it is.
Necessitas, Necessitudo. Parente. Alliance, of a neighbor or of kin.
Propinquus, Propinqua, Propinquum. Prochain, parent. Alliance by marriage.
Affinis. Voisin, affin and allie par marriage. Alliance, league, or truce to
make. Percutere foedus, Coire in foedus. Fair alliance. Allied, confederated.
Adiuratus, a, um. Allow, approve, or commend. Accepto, as, Approbo, as.
Probo, as. Aduouer, Approuer. Allow costs and expenses. Suggerere sumptus.
Fournir aux despens. Allowable. Acceptabilis, le. Vide plus Tha^keful.
Allowaunce, acception, or estimation. Acceptio, onis. Prinse. Allowaunce, or
that which fulfilleth, makes good, or up, or supplieth that which wants in
measure, number or quantity. Supplementum, ti. Supleement. Allowed. Acceptus,
a, um. Ratus, a, um. Approuue. Allowed to be or well taken. Acceptor, aris.
Estre approuue. Allure. Allecto, as. Allicio, cis. Lenocinor, aris. Mouere
animum. Pe^licio, cis, exi. Prolecto, as. Attraire, Allicher. Allured.
Allectus, a, um. Illectus, ta, tum. Attractus, ta, tum. Attraicte and alliche.
Allure the minds of men. Mentes hominum trahere. Attraire le courage de gens.
Allure one to his favor or friendship. Captare beneuolentiam: Inescare,
Conciliare ad beneuolentiam. Attraire a soy. Allure one to talk. Elicere ad
colloquium. Attraire a parlementer. Allure or move one to reading. Ad legendum
inuitare. Attraire a lire. Allure or join one to him by his benefit.
Adiu^gere alique^ sibi beneficio. Attraire quelqu' vne a soy par plaisir fair.
Allurer, or one that can move affections. Allector, Illex, illicis. Attrayant.
Allureing, or wanton eyes. Illices oculi. Yeul^ attrayans. Allured with desire
of praise. Studio laudis trahi. Estre attraict de counoitise de louange.
Allurement or intisement. Illectus, huius illectus, Lenocinium, Allectatio,
illicium. Attraict ou attrayement. Almaynes, or people of Germayne. Alemani,
orum. Teutones, number. Almenacke or calender, for the days of the year.
Calendarium, ij. Almanach. Almery. Almariolum, Almonariu^. Loculus, li.
Scrinium, ij. Un escrin, ou cabinet. Alms. Agapa, ae. Agapes, pis.
Elemos^^a, ae. Aumosne. But Agapes signifies properly charity and love,
therefore it may be called alms because for the most part true alms
proceeds from that virtue. Alms, or gift, drink, meat, or money,
distributed to the poor. Sportula, ae. Stipis, pis. Sportula, sportule, f. g.
A free banquet or repast, or money that the rich Romans did give to them,
that in the morning (when they rose) came to do them reverence, and bade them
good morrow. Banquet and repue fraunche, ou argent qui bailloyent les riches
Romans a ceux qui au matin a leur lever leurs venoyent fair la court, and
dire le bon iour. Alms or other liberal gifts of princes. Congiarium, rij.
Vng present and liberalite, d'argent que aucu^ prince ou grand seigneur fait au
peuple, ou a vng particulier. Alms given to the poor. Eleemosyna, Stips
collatitia, Pia benignitas. Aumosne, Aulmosne, ou aumone. Alms giver, or one
that gathers to give to the poor upon some good intent. Eleemosynarius,
Sacrae, vel piae stipis erogator. Aumosnier. Alms house for old men only.
Gerontocomion. L' hospital. Almonde. Nux Graeca, Nux Thasia, Amygdala and
Amygdalum. Amande. Almonde oil, or oil of almondes. Oleum Amygdalinum. Huile
d'amandes. Almonde oil makes a fair color. Oleu^ Amygdalinum commendat
colorem. L'huile d'amandes fait auoir belle couleur. Et Amygdalinus, na, number.
angl. Of an Almonde. Almond butter. Butyrum Amygdalinum. Beurre d'amandes.
Almonde mylcke. Lac Amygdalinum. Du laict de Amandes. Almonde tree. Amygdalus,
li. Amandier. Almost. Fere, Pene, Prope, Propemodum, Quam pene, Quasi, Tantum
non. Presque. Almost, or about seven of the clock. Hora quasi septima.
Presque sept heures. Almost by ye space of fourtene years. Paulo minus per
quatuordecim annos. L'espace presque de quatorze ans. Almost, I freat as much
as he. Proxime atque ille laboro. I'en suis presque ausi marri que luy. Almost
he is a hundredth years oulde. Prope centum confecit annos. Il est venu presque
au bout decent ans. Almost equal, even, or like. Suppar, ris. Almost night.
Serum lumen. Le soir. Almost pure. Submerum. Presque pur. Aloe or Aloes. The
juice of an herb so called, of the which there be two sorts, the one
Succorina, the other, Caballina. Aloes perroquet. Alone. Solitarius, a, um.
Solus, a, um. Vnicus, a, um. Singulus, a, um. Seulet. Alone without company.
Incomitatus, a, um. Persolus, a, um. Solitarius, a, um. Vnus, a, um. Idem.
Along by the river side. Secundum flumen, vel ripa^. Aupres ou au long de
l'eaue. Alonely son, or only child. Vnigenitus. Seul fills. Alonely, none,
not one, no creature. Nemo vnus, Ne vnus quidem, Nemo gentium. Point un seul.
Alonely. Modo, Solum, Duntaxat, Tantum, Tantu^modo. Seulement. Alofte or high,
or being alofte. Sublimis, e. Supernus, a, um. Supinus, a, um. Hault. Alofte on
high. Sublime, Sublimiter, Superne, Sursum, sursus, sus. Haultement. Alphabet
or table of a book. Elenchus, ci. Syllabus, Index libri. Vne table. Also.
Etiam, Etenim, Idem, Necnon, Pariter, Quin, Quoque, Sicuti, Similiter, Simul,
Ve, Vel. Aussi d'auantage. Altar. Altar, ris. Ara, rae. Vng Autel.
Alternately, or by turn. Subalternatim. Vide Coursly. Alternatis vicibus.
L'ung apres l'autre. And Alterno, nas, naui. To do one after another. Fair
puis l'ung, puis l'autre. Alternation or changing one after an other.
Alternatio, tionis. Variation and changement de l'vng apres l' autre. Although.
Etiamsi, Quanquam, Quamuis, Si, Tametsi, Etsi, Licet. Ia soit. Although, or be
it so that, etc. Iam ita sit quod, etc. Faciamus ita esse. Ia soit que ie, etc.
Although the cause require. Tametsi causa postulat. Ia soit que la cause le
requiert. Altitude, or height of a thing. Altitudo, Fastigium, Summitas.
Haulteur. Alter or change. Mutare, Commutare, Demutare, immutare. Changer.
Alter or change some thing with one. Mutare aliquid cum aliquo. Changer
quelque chose auec aucun. Alter his nature or condition. Induere sibi ingeniu^
nouum. Changer de nature. Alter, or change his mind or opinion. Desedere de
sententia. Changer quelque fois d'opinion. Alter, or transform out of one
form into another. Transfigurare. Changer d'vn form en autre. Altered with
the time. Tempore commutari. Se changer par temps. Altering, chaungeable.
Mutabilis, Versatilis. Qui se change and turn facilement. Alteration, or
changing. Mutatio, Permutatio, Co^mutatio, Immutatio, Conuersio. Changement.
Alter conditions, person, or state. Recedere a condition, Persona, Statu, vel
deflectere a moribus vel mores. Changer de nature, etc. Alter a ma^s name.
Transnomino, as. Changer le nom. Alter a thing to better. Verrunco, cas. Alter
custom. Deflectere consuetudinem. Changer coustume. Altered or changed.
Alienatus, a, um. Alteratus, a, um. Mutatus, a, um. Change. Altring, or
changing in a short time. Momentaneus, a, um. Altrication. Rixa, ae. Noise.
Altrication, or full of brawling or chiding. Rixosus, sa, sum. Noiseux,,
rioteux. Altrication to make. Rixor, aris. Noiser, rioter, se de batre contre
aucun. Altrication, without ground, occasion, or wisdom. Logomachia. Noise.
Always. Demum, In summa, Nunquam non, Omnino, Perpetuum, Perpetuo, Prorsum,
Prorsus, Semper, Vsque, Vsquequaque. Tousiours. Alume. Alumen, inis. Whereof
been three kinds, the one Catinae, which is boiled or sodden. The other
Scissile, or Plume, which is naturally stony: and yet may be altered with a
struck. The third Zucharinu^, made with alume relented, rosewater, and the
white of eggs like a sugar lofe, the which harlottes and strumpettes do
commonly use to painte their faces and visages with, to deceive men: But God
grant they deceive not them selves. It is named in French. Alun. Alysson, an
herb also called Healebyte, because it heals the biting of mad dogs, and
it is thought to be wholesome to hang about the house against inchaunting. And
bound about in a lynnen cloth, it drives away the diseases of cattle: some
think that only by sight thereof, the biting of a mad dog is cured.
Alyson. quidam putant eandem esse, quam rubeam minorem vocamus. Alive, Viuus,
viua, viuum. Vif, viuant. Vide plus Live.
A. ANTE. M.
AMabilitie or love. Amabilitas, tatis, f. g. Amor, Amiablete. Amadoca, a
city of Sarmatia in Europe. Amalchium, the north part of the Ocean sea.
Amalthea, was nource of Jupiter, and daughter of Melissus King of Crete, she
and her sister Melissa, nourished Jupiter with Goats milk and honey. Amalech,
a name (in the Bible) of a king of Syria, which slew many of the children of
Israel as they returned out of Egipte, and may be interpreted a licking or
striking people. Populus lambens. Read Exodus. 17. Deuteronomy. 25. Number. 14. 1. Re.
14. Of the Amalachites and of their king, his life and his death. Amaranus, was
father to Moses. Amorous, or full of love. Amabundus, a, um. Fort amoureux.
Amorous letters. Amatorie scripta epistola. Epistre escripte d' un style
amoureux. Amorously. Blande, Amice, Placide. Amoureusement. Amassed, or abashed.
Attonitus, a, um. Obstupidus, a, um. Estonne. Amassed to be. Obstupeo, es.
Obstupesco, scis. Stupeo es. Stupesco, scis. Torpeo, es. Estre toute estonne.
Amassed, or astonished to make. Obstupefacio, cis. Stupefacio, cis. Conturbo, as.
Horrifico, cas. Obtundo, dis. Estonner. Amasedly. Attonite. A l'esbahi. Amasis,
a king of Egypt, whose tomb was one of the pyramides, a curias and
unspeakable costly peace of work, built high in form of a steple, and so
small vpwardes that it was almost impossible to think it could be so wroughte
by any invention of man. In the botome of these were the sepulchers of kings.
This Amasis made a ^awe that all his subjects should yearly give an account
of their living, by what trade and gaynes they maintained their estate, which
who so did not, was put to death: and Solon brought thence this law to the
Athenians. Amazones, women of Scithia, which killed al their male children,
and did cut of their right pappes, because they ne would be hindered of the
casting of their darts, or Iauellins. Vnde Amazonicus, a, um, and Amazonius,
aum. Perteining to the nature of Amazones.

Ambassade or office of an Ambassador. Legatio, onis. L'office d' ambassade.
Which was not sent in this ambassade that he is in, by his countremen. Qui
hanc ipsam legationem, quam habet non accepit a suis ciuibus. Le quel n'a pas
este enuoye en ambassade par ses citoyens.

Ambassador or Harault at arms. Caduceator, ris. Legatus, ti. Ambassadeur,
legate. Ambassador, or being Ambassadoure, he went over al Egypt and Syria.
Obijt legatus Aegyptum and Syriam. Estant ambassadeur feit vne passade par
toute l'Egypte and la Syrie. Ambassador or to be legate. Gerere legationem.
Estre Ambassadeur. Ambassador which has commission to treat of all causes.
Ambassitor, oris. Legatus, ti. Pater patratus, tus. Ambassadeur, legate.
Ambassador, which is sent only to congratulate or salute. Orator, toris.
Orateur. Ambassador, or legate to send. Lego, as. Enuoyr en ambassade.
Ambiguous, doutfull, uncertain, variable, inconstant. Ambiguus, a, um.
Creperus, a, um. Ambigu, vne chose doubteuse. Ambiguous, or in doubt what to
do. Ambiguus consilij. Qui ne scaeuoit quil deuoit fair. Ambiguous, or in
doubt between shame and fear. Ambiguus pudoris ac metus. Iecertains and
suspens enter houte and crainte. Ambiguous, or doubtful what will chance.
Ambiguus futuri. Estant en doubt de l'aduenir. Ambiguous, variable, or an
inconstant wit. Ingenium ambiguum. Esprit variable. Ambiguitie. Ambiguum, ui.
Ambiguite, doubt. As Ambiguum est. It is in doubt or in ambiguitie. Ou ne
scait, il est uncertain. Ambiguitie, or doubtefulnesse, uncertainty.
Ambiguitas, tatis. Ambiguite. Ambiguously. Ambigue. Aduerbium, dubie.
Ambiguement, doubteusement. Ambition, immoderate des^er of honor, seeking for
the favor of men, suet or labor. Ambitio, onis. Trop grande couuoitise
d'honeur ou de gloire. Whose ambition is to manifest. Ambitionis manifestus
aliquis. Du quel l'ambition est toute manifest.

Ambitious, or importunate request, suit or labor. Ambitio, co^tentio and
flagitatio. Importunite, requests importunes. Ambitious, very desirous of
honor. Ambitiosus. Ambitieux, trop couueteux d'honeur and de gloire.
Ambitiously, proudly, stately. Ambitiose, ad. qualitatis. Affectueusement.
Ambling hackney, or horse. Gradarius equus, Mannus, ni. Tolutaris, Tolutarius
equus. Qui va les ambles. Ambling pace. Tolutim. Aller les ambles. Ambre.
Ambra, ae. Electrum, tri. Ambre. Ambre grice. Secera, ae. Ambre, called Lambre
or yelowe Ambre. Sualternicum, ci. Succinum, i. Electrum, i. Ambre. Ambre
which comes out of Scithia. Sacrium, ij. Ambre, which has in it the figure
of an heart, black or grene. Ecardia, ae. Ambulatorie, or ouermoste part of a
wall, withim the battlementes where men may walk. Procestrium, ij. n. g.
Amend, or to make better. Emendo, as. Reficio, cis. Resarcio, cis. Sarcio,
cis. Amender, corriger, ou emender. Amend a falte. Talum reponere. Amender.
Amend all faults, and return to grace. Resipisco, scis. Laisser sa folly.
Amend the faults, or to pay the loss. Damna resarcire. Recompenser les
damages, reparer les dommages. Amend his gaynes. Quaestum resarcire.
Recompenser and la perte passee, and prouffit aduenir. Amend, translate, or
new make his will and testamente. Reficere testamentum. Refaire son testament.
Amendid or made better. Emendatus, ta, tum. Corrige, Amend, emende. Corrector,
amender, or one that inlargeth any thing. Emendator, totis. Correcteur,
radoubeur, eme^dateur. And she that mendeth any thing. Emendatrix, tricis.
Celle qui corrige and amend, emendatrice.

Amend a garment. Concinnare vestem. Reparer. Amend or aparell wine in
Sackes. Sacello, as. * Amended. Refectus, a, um. Refaict. Amended to be
eftsoons of Sickness. Reualesco, scis. Recouurer sante. Amends to make.
Sarcio, cis, ire. Reparer. Amethyst or precious stone, of color purple.
Amethystus, Anterites. Amathiste. Vnde Amethystinus, a, um. ang. Of an Amethyst.

Amiable, fair, pleasant, beautiful, dlectable, eligante to the eye,
sightly. Venustus, ta, tum. Qui est tresbeau. Amiable pleasant, delectable, or
having a good grace. Venustum. Quintil. Chose belle, plaisante, gentille, and
de bonne grace. Delectable and pleasant. Venustus and vrbanus. Gentil
plaisante, and civil.

Amiable to sight, or pleasant to behold. Venustum ad aspectum. Beau a veoir.
Amiable countenance, or speech. Venustas, it is. Amabilitas, tatis. Amiablete.
Amiable, pleasante, or having a good grace. Amabilis, le. Gratiosus, sa, sum.
Charopus. Amiable. Amiably, friendly and lovingly. Amabiliter, Venuste, Amice,
Mite, Placide, cum bona gratia. Amiablement. Amiss. Perperam. Adu. Faulsement,
mal. Amity, love, favor, and mutual frendshippe. Amicitia, Coniu^ctio,
Co^suetudo, Necessitudo. Amity. Amity and firm friendship. Firma amicitia.
Amity qui ne vary point. Amity, is necessary among good men. Amicitia inter
bonos, vel bonis necessaria est. Amity est necessaire parmi gents de bien.
Amity variable. Desultoria amicitia. hoc est, identidem euarians, Inconstans,
Non constans. Amity variable. Amity and pure love is not cold. No^
refrixitamor. L'amitie n' est point refroidie. Amity, and true faithful
frendshippe, goes through all nations. Serpit per omnium vitam amicitia.
L'amitie sespand enter toutes gens. Amity great, or faithful, firm, sure and
constant friendship. Coniu^ctio, onis. Grande amity. Amity ancient, durable
or of long time. Magna vetustas and consuetudo. Ancienne amity. Amities
feigned, faynte, coulered, couerte, and (as we say) from the tethe forward.
Fucosae amicitiae. Amitiez fainctes and couuertes. Amities of great show and
no prouffe. Amicitiae ambitiosae. Amity de trop grande monstre and appearance
sans effect. The bands of amity being kept. Saluo iure amicitiae. Sauf le
droict d'amitie.

Amomum, is a small bushe, about the quantity of a man's hand, like a cluster
of grapes foulden into him self like sticks of wode one within an other,
after the manner of a net, and it has a sweet savor, it is named in latin,
Amomu^, rosa Hierosolymitana, seu beatae Mariae, sieve Hierichuntis, it grows
in Assyria, as it seems by this verse of Verg. -- Assyrium vulgo nascetur
Amomum.
Amomum sweet th'Assyrian shroube shall spring in every place.
Among, or amongst. Inter. Parmi. Amongst his cups, or as he was a
tippling, bibbing, bowling, swilling or drinking. Inter vina, inter pocula. En
beuuant. Amongst which we are. In queis sumus. Enter lesquels nous sommes.
Amongst good men. In bonis. Intre les gens de bien. Amongst princes, rulers
or great men. In principibus vel inter principes. Enter les plus grans.
Amongst whom, or amongst which. In queis vel in quibus. Intre lesquels.
Amongst our selves let us play, or let us play alone by our selves together.
Inter nos ludamus. Iouons enter nous. Among, all.(?) Commune, Medium, Vulgo.
Par tout. Amongst good men. In bonis. A gents de bien. (^) And note that this
phrase among may be referred to few, or one. etc. And also that amongst may be
referred to the more or greater part.

Amoue, or put of. Amoueo, es. Apello, lis, ulsum. vide plus. Put away and
remove. Ample, large, abundant, wide, great, etc. Amplus, ampla, amplum.
Adiectiuum. Ample, large, and de grande enstendue, de touts costez. Amplefie,
to enlarge, to augment, to make better, to extolle and magnify. Amplifico,
cas, caui, care. Amplier, fair ample, eslargir and aggrandi^, amplifier.
Amplify and to increase. Augere, Ampliare. Amplier, Amplifier. Amplify and
increase the greatness of ones honor. Amplitudinem ac gloriam alicuius
amplificare. Augmenter and accroistre. Amplify, and to increase ones
substance and honor. Amplificare and ornare aliquem Luy donner accroissement
en bien and honneur. Amplify, or inhaunce the price. Pretium amplificare.
Encherir, mettre enchere. Amplify, augmente or increase his goods. Rem
familiarem amplificare. Augmenter son bien. Amplificate, or increase the common
wealth. Amplificare rempublicam. Accroister le bien public. Amplified, or
augmented. Amplificatus, ta, tum. Parti. Auctus, ta, tum. Ampliatus, ta, tum.
Amply and augmente. Amplifier, or one that does enlarge. Auctor, Amplificator,
toris, Ampliateur and augmentateur. Amplification, or the augmenting, or
increasing of any thing. Amplificatio, onis. Accretio, tionis. Accrementum, ti.
Ampliation. Ampully, largly, nobly, with great magnificence. Amplifice,
aduerbium. Magnifiquement.
A. ANTE. N.
ANa, a river in Spain, that divides Granato from Portugale. Fluuius
Hispaniae. Anabaptists, a sort of heretics of late time in Germany, about
the year of our Lord God. 1524. and the.xv. year of king Henry the eight.
Anabaptistae, arum. Which signify rebaptisoures. Anacharsis was a
Philosopher: which said that laws were made like cobwebbes, for the small
flies were tied, but great flies brake away. This man did also inuente the
potters wheale. Ananias, interpreted the cloud or divination of the Lord, it
was the name of one of the three Hebrew children that were put into a furnace of
fire, at the commandment of Nabugodonosor, and were delivered by the mighty
power of God. Of this read the third of Daniel. An other Ananias is spoken of
in the fifthe of the Acts of the Apostles, which dissembled with God, and was
at the Apostel saint Peter his words stricken dead, and so was his wife Saphira
for the same offense. Also there was one of this name (who was endued with
great virtue) a disciple of our Savior Christ, which restored Saint Paul to
his sight by the commandment of God, and Christened him, as in the ninth of
the Acts. It was also the name of a bishop, that sat in judgment when
Saint Paul was examined, and bade them that stood by, stryke him on the mouth,
because he spoke the word of God. Acts. 23. Ananias, ae. nomen viri.
Anaxagoras, a famous Philosopher of noble blood, which leaving his patrimony
to his kynsfolke, gave him self only to the study of phylosophie: in so much
that he was utterly negligente of worldly affairs, and private businesses.
Being asked of one if he had no care of his country, he answered, truly I
have great care of my country, and therewith pointed upward to the heavens.
Anaxagoras, ae, nome^ philosophi clarissimi. Anotomie, or cutting up of bodies
(to se the parts within) thereby to know, and deem, the causes of
infirmities, or other passions pertayninge to each part. Anatomia, ae, vel
Anatome, es. Incision, Anatomy. Anatomiste, or one that is scilfull in cutting
up an Anatomy. Anatomicus, Anatomiae peritus. Anatomiste, Anatomique,
Anatomien. Anaxarchus a Philosopher, being contused or stamped in a mort^r with
Iron pestles: spoke in the time of his tormente to Nicrocreon his officers
these words. Beat on, Beat Anaxarchus wyndbagge. For Anaxarchus you beat
not. Anaximander a Philosopher, who first invented the Nauticall, or shipmans
compass which shipmen do use. And made first the Sphere. Anchises, father to
Aeneas. Anchor. Anchora, ae. Ancre a retenir les nauires. Vnde Anchorarius, a,
um. ang. Pertaining to an Ancker. and Anchoralis, le. Qui sert a l'ancre.

Ancklebone. Malleolus, li. Le plus bas de la iambe. Anckle of the leg.
Talus, li. Talon. And. Ac, Et, que, Con. cop. Et. And to tell you the truth,
you are to to hard, I can not praise or commend it. Et quod dicendum nunc
si^t,
Tu quoque perparce nimium, non laudo.
Pour dire la verire etc.
And that you now angry, think with your self. Et quod nunc tute tecum iratus
cogitas etc. Quant a ce que etc. And I fear not. Ac non vereor. Et sin'ay pas
paour. And first of all. Ac primum. Et tout primierement. And behold, see. Ac
vide. Et mais voy. And do you see? Atque vides? Le vois tu pas? And in deed I
confess, it has happened by right as I deserved. Atque id confiteor iure
obtigisse. Et certes a bon droict, il est bien employe qu' ainsi me soit
aduenu. And I speak not of that. Atque id omitto etc. Or ne dis ie rien de ce.
And in deed why go not I in? Atque adeo autem cur non egomet introeo? Mais, ou
and mais voirement que n'entre ie? And lo yonder he is. Atque eccum. Mais le
voyla luymesme. And in very deed that is it, or you have hit the nail on the
head. Atque aedepol, ea res est. Et ie vous iure, ou c' est cela sans point de
fault. And also, and that is more, and further, and again. Atque etiam. Et
aussi. And so. Atque ita. Et ainsi. And so not long after. Neque ita multo
post. Non pas fort long temps apres. And therefore. Itaque. Parquoy, par ainsi.
Andiron, or Brandiron. Andela, ae. Andena, ae. Heperpyrgium, ij. Alaria,
Sustentaculum ferreum. Andrewe, one of the.xii. Apostles, brother to Peter.
Andreas, ae. Androgini, which been people of both kinds, both man and woman.
Qui est masle and femelle. Andromache, Hectors wife. Andromede, the wife of
Perses a valiant man. Andwarpe, a town in Braband. Antuacutum, ti. Antuerpia.
Anduile, or stithe. Incus, cudis. Un enclume. Anduile worker. Incudo, onis.
Angew a contry in France. Andagauia, ae. Angiers. And the people there been
called Andes.

Angelica, it is the name of an herb, whereof are two kinds, the one is
called imperial or Angelica, and the other is called Lungworte. Angelica, cae.
Angelique. Angle, or corner of any thing. Angulus, li. Angle. Whereof comes
triangle, quadrangle, quinca^gle, and sexangle. Trigonus, Tetragonus vel
quadrangulus, Pe^tagonus, Sexangulus vel hexagonus.. That is even cornerd.
Rectangulus, orthogonus. Qui ha les angles droicts. Angle, or take fish with a
hook. Piscor, aris. Pescher. Angler, or fisher with an angle. Hamota, Hamiota.
Pescheur a la ligne. Angling gad, or rod. Pertica, ae. Un perch. Anger or to
chafe one. Bilem alicui mouere, vel co^mouere, Exacerbare, Obacerbare,
Offendere alicuius animum. Courroucer fort aucun. Anger or to chafe to the
very heart. Exulcerare animum alicuius. Piquer and courroucer aucun. Angry or
to chafe. Aspere accipere, Indignari, Irasci. Se corroucer despiter and marrir
de quelque chose. Anger. Angustia, Iracundia, Ira. Courroux. Anger vehement.
Excandescentia, ae. Courreux. Angrely. Acerbe, Irate, Stomachose. Par courroux.
Angry. Acerbus, a, um. Aduersus, a, um. Commotus, a, um. Infensus, a, um.
Seuus, a, um. Stomachosus, a, um. Turbulentus, a, u^. Turgidus, a, um.
Courrouce. Angry, or he chaffeth for little or nothing. Facile fit illi quod
doleat. Il fault peu de chose a le courroucea. Angry for every straw, or
quickly moved, or to keep anger in mind. Iram in promptu gerere. Se
courroucer legierement, incontinent, ou tout a coup. Angry to be greatly, or
very angry. Irasci grauiter, Incendi ira, Indulgere irae, Excandescere. Se
co^rroucer grandement and asprement. Angry for some thing, or take it
grievously. Dure ac grauiter aliquid accipere, animo iniquo far ac pati
aliquid, Non mediocriter far. Se marrir and courroucer de quelque chose fort
and firm. Angry to be. Emulor, aris. Irascor, sceris. Stomachor, aris.
Succenseo, es, sui. Zelor, aris. Se marrir. Angry to be, sore and vehemently.
Excandesco, scis. Incandesco, scis. Seuio, is, ire. Courroucer. Angry to be
properly, where as a man does grynne for fumme. Ringo, is, ixi. Despiter en
etc. Angry to be like a mad man. Seuio, is, ire. Angry to make, or anger.
Acerbo, as. Angusto, as. Commoueo, es. Exagito, tas. Exaspero, as.
Excandefacio, cis. Lacesso, ssis. Infesto, as. Incesso, is, iui, and cessi.
Obacerbo, as. Offendo, dis. Molesto, as. Prouoco, as. Tristo, as. Courroucer
aucun. Angry to wax. Excandesco, scis. S'emflamber, Se courroucer asprement.
Anguishe of the body or mind. Angor, goris. Angoisse. Any. Quidam, sing.
Vllus, a, um. Aucun. Any man or woman. Quisnam, Quaenam, Quisqua^, Quisquam
gentium. Aucun, quelqu' vng. Any other. Alterquisquam. If there be any man that
studieth to please good men. Si quisquam est, qui placere se studeat bonis. S'
il y a aucun etc.

Is there any man in the world, so very a wretch as I? An quisquam gentium
est aeque miseratque ego? Ya il homme au monde aussi miserable etc.

Will any man in the world doubt of this, but he, etc. An hoc dubitabit
quisqua^ omniu^, quin is, etc. En y aura il aucu^ d' enter vous qui doubt, que,
etc.

If you prove that I have made any lie, kill me, Si quicquam mentitum inuenies,
occidito. Que in aye menti d' aucunne chose, etc.

Any thing. Quicquam, Quidpiam, Quelque chose. Any time. Vnquam. Quelque fois,
Quelque temps. Any where, or whether. Quopiam, Quoquam, Vspiam, Vsquam, Vsquam
gentium. En quelque lieu. Any while. Aliquamdiu. Quelque temps. Any wife.
Quidpiam. Anna, an Hebrewe word, which signifies gracious, giving, piteful,
or resting: of this name have been many noble women. Ania, a Roman woman,
which after the death of her husband, said to such as counsaylled her to
mary again, these words. If I shall hap to have as good as I have had, I
will not be in fear to lose him. If I shall have an ill husband, what shall I
need after a good man to have a shrewe. Annexe together. Vnio, is. Vide plus,
Join. Annexed all to one. Vnitus, a, um. Annexing together. Vnio, onis.
Coniunctio, onis. Connexio, onis. Connection. Annyse. Anisum, si. n. g. Anis.
Annyuersary, or that which yearly runs at one time. Aniuersarius, a, um.
Qui se sait chascun an. Annoye, or hurt. Noceo, es. Offendo, dis. Nuire.
Annoye, hurt, or to harm one. Laedo, laedis, Laesi, Laedere. Laesum. Blesser
aucun de parolles and mesdire de luy. Annoye or hurt one with iuiurie. Laedere
aliquem iniuria. Iniurier. Annoye, or hurt ones good fame and name. Laedere
famam alicuius. Blesser sa bonne renommee. Annoye, or hurt one with a weapon.
Laedere ferro. Couper, Inciser. Cold hurts or annoyed me. Laedit me frigus.
me nuist.

It nothing at all annoyeth me. Nihil me laedit. Il ne me nuist en rien.

Annoyed to be with a savor. Laedi odore. Quand vne senteur faict mal. Annoye,
hur^e or to speak evil of one in his presence. Laedere os alicui. Mesdire d'
aucu^ en sa presence. Annoying, hurting, or displeasing. Laesio, onis.
Blessure, offense, nuisance, lesion. Annoyed. Laesus, sa, sum. Bless, offense.
Annoyed with cold, or sone hurt. Alsiosus, a, um. Frilleux, subject a froid.
Annoyed or vexed. Pertaesus, a, um. Offense. Annoynte. Adlino, is, eui, ere.
Delinio, is. Illinio, is, ire. Linio, is, iui. Lino, is, ire. Mulceo, es. Vngo,
is, nxi. Vide Nointe. Oindre. Anointed to be with oil. Vngi oliuo. Estre
oinct d' huile, ou enhuile. Anointed with Cerusse. Vngi ex Cerussa. Estre
^oinct de la Cerusse. Annoincte al over, or to lay oinctment on any place.
Superinungere. Oindre par dessus. Anointed with odours and smelling
ointmentes. Nimbatus. Qui est oinct d'odours and senteurs. Anointed.
Adlinitus, a, um. Vnctus, a, um. Oinct. Anointed, and the name of our Savior.
Christus. Anointed hard. Perlitus, a, um. Oinct. Anointing. Chrisis, Vnctio,
Vnctura. Unction. Et vnctuarium, rij. angl. A place nighe unto a hot house,
or stewe, wherein men be anointed. Annotations, or inscriptions to make.
Praenoto, as. Annoto, tas. Noter, annoter, marquer. Annotation, mark, note, or
sign, whereby to know a thing. Annotatio, onis. Marque, note, annotation.
Annual, or yearly, which is done every year. Annuus, a, um. Solemnis, ne.
Qui se fait d' an en an. Annuitie, or pension. Annuitas, it is. Annuum, ij.
Pensio, onis. Pension annuel. Annull. Aboleo, es. Vide Disanull. Annull a
sentence. Calculu^ reducere. Vide Abolish. Anon. Extemplo, Ilico, Inibi, Mox,
Statim, Subin, Subinde, E-vestigio. Apres, tantost. Anon, or without tarrying.
Actutum. Another. Alius. a, ud. Alter, ra, rum. Un autre. I report me to the
judgment of others, let other judge, I refer it to others arbitrament.
Aliorum sit iudicium. Ie m'en rapporte au judgment des autres.

One of us asks of another, or we one of us ask another. Alius alium
percontamur. Nous demandons l'vna l'autre.

Living one after one sort, and an other, after another. Alius alio more
viuentes. Viuants l' un d' vne sort, l'autre d'vne autre.

One subtle device, bringes out an other, or when thieves fall out, true men
come by their goods. Fallacia alia aliam trudit. Vne finesse affine l'autre.

One encouraging an other. Alius alium hortati. Les vns enhortoyent les autres.

One worse then an other. Alius alio nequior. Les vns pire que les autres.

He cast one from an other. Aliud alio dissipauit. Ila tout iecte, les vns ca,
les autres la.

One after one sort, an other after an other. Alius alio modo. L'vne en vne
maniere, l'autre en autre.

That is an other matter. Alia res est. C'est autre chose.

Another. Alius quisque. Un chascun. Another I, As my friend is my self, or an
other even as my self. Alter ego. Vnsecond moymesme. Un semblable a moy. To
live after an other manner or sort. Alieno more viuere. A la mode ou a la
guise d' autruy.

Another man's words or talk. Aliena oration. La parolle d' un autre. Another
man's matter. Aliena res. Chose d' autruy. Another time. Alias, Adu. temp. Un
autre temps. Another way or wise. Aliorsum. Autre lieu. Answer to agree, to
accord, to consent, to be like, equal or even, to appear or answer, when
one is calde to resemble like or be over right against. Respondeo, des, di,
sum, dear. Respondre. Answer to that I ask thee. Responde quod rogo. Respons
a ce que ie te demand. Answer one according to the constitutions of the law.
De iure respondere. Donner conseil and resolution des difficultez de droicta
ceulx qui vienent consulter. Answer, or give council, to all that come for
matters in the law. Ius civil public respondere. Consulter and donner
conseil a touts venants sur les poincts de droict. Answer, or purge him self
of crimes laid to his charge. Respondere criminibus. Se purger d' aucun cas
qu'on nous met a sus. Answer, and appear when they are called. Ad nomina
respondere. Comparoir au iour de la monstre. Answer nothing, neither appear
and answer. Non respondere. Fair default, ne comparoir point. Answer, and
pay his creditour at the time and day appointed. Ad tempus respondere, vel ad
diem, debtor dicitur. Cic. Payer ou satisfaire au iour nomme. Vide plus
Equal. Answer. Oraculum, li. Responsio, onis. Responsus, us. Folium, vt
Sibillae folium. Response. Answer, which is colorable, or feyned.
Obtendiculum, li. Un problem. Answer defensorie, to a rebuke. Apologia, ae.
Defensio, onis. Excusatio, onis. Apologismus, mi. Apology. Answer greatly
made. Antismos, antismus. * Answers of Idols or spirits. Sorts. Les oracles
and responses des dieux. Answeren, or make answer. Respondeo, es. Responso,
as. Responsito. Subeo, is. Subijcio, cis. Suspicio, is. * Respondre. Answer an
a^^^n, or plaint. Dicere causam, Restipulor, aris. Restipuler. Ante, or
pismier. Formica, ae. Et formicula, ae. Dimi. angl. A little pismier. Fourmi.
Antes, that heap and gather graynes of corn. Frugilegae formicae. Qui
recueillent and amassent les grains de ble. That parteineth to Antes or
pismiers. Formicinus, a, um. De fourmi.

Antes pace. Gradus formicinus. Pas de fourmi. That is full of Antes, emetes,
or pismyers. Formicosus, sa, sum. Plein de fourmis.

Antems, whose author was Ionasius, archebyshop of Antiochia. Anno Christi.
109. Antiphonae, aru^. Anticlea, the name of Ulysses mother. Anticlea, eae.
Anticlus, one of the Greeks, which were enclosed in the horse, whereby Troy
was betrayed. Anticlus, cli. Anticyra, an Isle in Asia, where the herb
Eleborus grows, which purges Melancholy. Whereof this proverb grew,
spoken to a melancholic person. Nauiga ad Anticyras. Go sail to Anticyra. As
much as to say, pourge your Melancholy.

Antidicomaritae, a sect of heretics, whose author was Heluidius, which
affirmed that Mary had certain children by Joseph. Anno. 406. Antiochia. a
city in Siria. Antipodes, are those people which inhabit the other part of
the earth right against and under us. As Macrobius and Pliny witness. And yet
S. Augustine in the.9. chapter of his.16. book De ciuitate dei. And Lactantius
in the.24. chapter of his third book of Divine institutions, affirm such
fables to be fained and untrue, and to these does Lucretius agree in these
verses. Lib. i. Illi cum videant solemn, nos sydera noctis
cernere, and alternis nobiscum tempora caeli
Diuidere, and noctes pariles agitare diebus:
Sed vanus stolidis haec omnia parturit error.
When they do see the Sun, we may perceive the stars of night,
And even with us in course they have the heavenly times aright.
Eke equal nights with those do pass, when here the days be bright:
But error vain brought al these things, to blind the foolish sight.
Antipus, Antipodis vel Antipodos etc. Antipodes, Antipodum. Qui cheminent a
l'opposite de nous, leurs plant^s coutre les plants de noliz^ieds. Antiquiti^
Anteritas, it is. Antiquitas, tatis. Anciennete.
A. ANTE. P.
APayre, to diminishe, make less, thinner, sle^derer, weaker or worse.
Attenuo, as, are. At^enuer, amoindrir, amenuiser, attenurir, appeti^e^. The
number of the soldiers apayred, worn, ab^ted, or diminished by scirmishes.
Attenuatae praelijs legiones. Diminuees.

Apayred, weakened, diminished, made thinner and leaner. Attenuatus, ta, tum.
Amoindri, amenuise. Apayring, or rather abating. Attenuatio, onis. Diminution.
Apayre, or make in worse state. Labefacto, as. Attenue^. Apart^, a^yde,
separate, a sunder. Also namely, specially. Seorsum, Seorsus, Seperatim,
Separate, Seperatius, Seperatissime. A part, a l'escart, separeement* en
particulier. I give you all hearty thanks, and namely, chiefly or specially to
you Demea. Omnibus habeo gratiam, and seorsum tibi praete^ea Demea.
Principalenunt.

I am of an other opinion then you are. Seorsum a tesenrio. Ie suis d' autre
opinion que tu n'es.

Aparteyne. Pertineo, es. Specto, as. Attineo, es. Appartenir. Apparteyneth, or
it belongs. Pertinet, impersonale. Il appartient. This malice or evil,
pertayneth rather to men, then to women. Magis haec malitia pertinet ad viros
quam ad mulieres. C'est plus par la malice des hommes* que des femmes.

Who is to be suspected of this naughty fact, or the suspicion hereof may
appertain to him. Ad que^ suspitio maleficij pertineat. Sur qui chet le
souspecon, qui est souspeconne de ceste meschancete.

Apertayneth, or it belongs to the matter. Pertinet ad rem. Cela appartient a
l'affaire, est pertinent a l'affaire. Apartayneth, or it belongs to the
common wealth. Pe^tinet ad Rempub. Cela appartient a la republiqne, concern
l'utilite public. Apartaineth, it belongs, touches, avails, is
convenient or besemeth. Pertinet, Attinet impersonale. Il appartient. What
avails it us to know. Quid attinet nos scire. Qu'auons nous a fair de le
scauoir.

Apartayneth not, or it is not needful to speak of the agreement or accord.
Nihil attinet de assensione omnino loqui. Il n'est point de besoing. Ape.
Pithecos, Simia, ae. Simius, ij. (?) Simiolius, li. Dimenit. ang. A little ape.
Vnde Mart. ^t postea. Babion. Apeache, or apeale one of felony, or treason.
Agere furti, Alligare aliquem furto, Capitis arcessere, Defer aliquem furti,
Prodere co^scios, vel reos, Repetere poenas homicidij. Vide Accuse. Apeache a
man of any crime, to the intent to have the fourth part of his goods.
Quadruplo, as. Quadruplor, aris. Et quadruplatores vel trices. ^e they which
do so apeache, or accuse. Un accuseur qui accuse qu'elqu' vng d' aucun crime,
pour auoir la quarte party de sa confiscation. Apeare. Apareo, es, rui.
Clareo, es. Pareo, es. Pateo, es. Se presenter. Apeare before a judge in a
court. Adesse ad iuditiu^, Praesto esse, Respondeo, es. Sisto, stis. Estre
present. Apeare far of. Promineo* es. Apparoir. Apeare when one is called.
Respo^deo, es. Respondre. Apeare through on both sides. Transpareo, es, rere.
Apere before one. Offerre se alicui, Obuiam alicui obsistere, Subire vultum
alicui. Se presenter deuant quelque un. Apease. Delinio, is, iui. Lenio, iui.
Mollio, lis. Mulceo, es. Paco, as. Pe^^ulceo, es. Perpaco, cas. Placo, as*
Propitio ^s. Propitior. aris. Reduco, cis. Remollesco, scis* Reprimo, is.
Resedo, as. Sedo, as. Transigo, is, egi. Appaiser, mitiguer. Apeased.
Propitius, a, um. Et omnia preterita verborum in Apease. Mitigatus, ta, tum.
Apease ones displeasure. Reconciliare and mitigare sibi aliquem. Mitiguer.
Discord, or variaunce, is appeased. Mitescunt discordiae. S'appaisent.

Appelles, a certain heretic, which denied Christ as God. Anno. 170. And
there was another Appelles, ye most excellent paynter that ever was. Apertly.
Private, priuatim. Apart. Apointe. Addico, cis, xi. Appono, is. Condico, is,
xi. Constituo, is. Destino, as. Indico, cis, xi. Lego, as. Limito, as. Nomino,
as. Praefigo, is, xi. Praefinio, is. iui. Praescribo* is. Praesto, as. Statuo,
is. Assigner. Apointe before. Praestituo, is, ere. Praefigo, is. Praefinio, is.
Idem. Apoynte a day of marriage. Diem dicere nuptijs vel operi. Arrester iour
pour fair nopces. Appointed. Indictiuus, a, um. Limitatus, a, um. Status, a,
um. Statutus, a, um. Assign. Apostume or brasting out. Rumentum, ti.
Appearance. Species, ei. Appearance, ou semblant. Appara^te of truth.
Probabilitas. Appearance de verite. Apparent or plain. Conspicuus, a, um.
Euidens, it is. Manifestus, a, um. Patens, it is. Planus, a, um. Evident. Apparent
to be. Clareo, es. Exsto, as, stiti. Pateo, es. Estre ouuert. Apparent it is.
Lique^, bat. Impers. Il appert. Apparent to make* Manifesto, as. Manifester.
Apparente to make, to show, open, or declare. Reuelare, Enuntiare, Indicare,
Patefacere, Aperire palam facere. Reueler. Apparently. Clare, Euidenter,
Liquido, Probabiliter. Euidement. Apparel. Apparatus, us. Cultus, us. Habitus,
us. Induuiae, arum. Numen, inis. Ornamentum, ti. Ornatus, us. Vestis, it is.
Vestitus, tus. Vesture. Apparel of players. Choragium, ij. Ornement and
appariel des farceurs de comedits. Et choragus. ang. The keeper of such
apparel, the chief interpretour of plays, he that leads the dau^ce. Qui
fournissoit de ^el appareil and equipage le principal, entrepreneur des ieus,
celuy qui meine la daunse. Apparel for maidens. Parnacides, dis. A maidens
peticote. Also Parnacidus, parnacida, pernacidu^, nomen adiectiuum. Apparel
for the head properly of women. Redinicula, orum. Look Attiring. Apparel for
whores. Succe^to, onis. Mollicina, Chirodata. Rica, ae. They were certain
vestures yt harlottes used in old time. Yet Hadrianus Iunius says, that Rica,
Ricae, Ricula, lae. and Plagula, lae. Be all of one signification, that is, a
veil that women were on their headdes. Apparelled. Ornatus, a, um. Velatus, a,
um. Vestitus, a, um. Couuert, orne, pare. Apparelled in black, as in a
mourning gown, or il apparelled. Pullatus, ta, tum. Vestu de rob de dueil,
mal habille. Vide plus Garment and vesture. Apparel, chothing, ornament or
vesture. Ornatus, tus. Comptus, tus. Cultus, tus. Exornatio, onis. Ornamentum,
ti. Ornemente. Apparelled ill, vnhadsome, rude, foul, and uncomely. Incomptus,
Inornatus, Ineligans, Impolitus, Incultus. Quin' est point orne. Appareled
handsomely. Ornatus, Cultus, Politus, Comptus, Eligans. Orne. But Ornatus has
the signification of endued, as endued with virtues. Ornatus virtutibus. Orne
de vertuz.

Apparelled galantly. Redimitus, a, um. Orne. Apparelled, or clad poorly.
Pannosus, a, um. Male vestitus. Mal vestu. Apparelled in purple. Purpuratus, a,
u^. Vestu, d' habillemens de couleur de pourpre. Apparelled in sylkes.
Sericatus, a, um. Vestu de soye. Apparelled sluttishely, or vylely. Sordidatus,
a, um. Qui est pouerment habille. Apparelled, or trimmed on the head.
Redimitus, a, um. Orne. Apparelled trimly. Concinnatus, a, um. Redimitus, a,
um. idem. Apparellen. Orno, as. Vestio, is, iui. Vestir. Apparellen, or amend
wine in sackes. Saccellare. act. p. c. * Apparellen galantly, or gorgiously.
Redimio, is. Como, is, mpsi. Colo, is. Orner. Apparellen, or trymme. Adorno,
as. Apparo, as. Como, is. Paro, as. Velo, as. Vestio, is. Orner. Apparelling,
decking or trimming. Apparatus. Appareil. Vide plus Clothe. Appeal, or
appealing. Appellatio, onis. Appellation. Appeal to a higher court. Appello,
as. and exigit accus. Defero, rs. Prouoco, as. Appeller. Appeal or accuse.
Insimulo, as. Vnde Tor trix, tio. Accuser, blasmer. Appealed, or appeached, or
accused. Infimulatus, a, u^. Appealer. Qui est appelant. Appealing. Vide
Appellation. nomen sub. Appealing, or accusing. Insimulatio, onis. Accusation,
blasme. Appease one in anger, or assuage ones wrath. Pacare, Complacare,
Lenire, Mitigare, Pacificare, Propitiare, and propitiari, Sedare, Resedare,
Tranquillare, Mulcere aliquem, Aliquem propitium facere, Consiliatum animum
alicuius reddere, Sedatum afferre, Incensum restinguere, Transquilla^ ex irato
facere. Appaiser and addoulcir aucun. Appease his wrath. Desaeuire,
Remollescere, Requiescere, Iracundiam reprimere, Remittere iracundiam, Iras
mollire, v^l minuere, Contundere Iras. S'appaiser. Appease an ennemy, or to
mittigate his anger. Placare hostem. Appaiser l'ennemi. Appease a sedition, or
to extinguishe an uproar. Co^primere seditionem. Appaiser vne sedition. Appease
your anger, leave your Ire, oppress your choler. Iracundiam reprime, Omit
iracu^diam. Appaise toy. When his anger was past, or wha^ his ire was gone. Cum
irae resedissent, quum tumor animi resedisset. Quand il fut appaise.

Appellant, or appealer. Insimulator, oris, vel trix. Prouocator, oris, vel
trix. Celuy qui est appelant. Appellatio^, appeal, or appealing to a higher
judge as Paul did to Caesar. Act. 25. Appellatio, onis. Prouocatio, onis. Ad
tribunal Caesaris sto, vbi Oportet, etc. Appellation. Appetite. Appetitus, us.
Libido, inis. Orexis, Studiu^, dij. L'appetit. Appitente, or very desirous.
Appetens, it is. Nomen ex participio. Vnde appetentior, and appetentissimus.
Conuoiteux, and qui tache a auoir quelque chose. Covetous of other men's goods.
Alieni appetens. Couuoiteux du bien d'autruy.

Appetite, desire of meat, lust inordinate. Appetentia, ae. Appetit. Appetite,
or lust inordinate. Effraenata appetentia. Appetit desordonne. This herb
geues an appetite of meats. Appetentiam ciborum praestat haec herba. Done
appetit de manger.

Letice geues appetice, or prouokes a man's appetite to meat. Cibi appetentiam
faciunt Lactucae. Font ou donnent appetit.

Appetite to meat, or desire in covetousness. Appetitio, onis. Appetit de
manger, le desir and couuoitise. Apple. Malum, li. Pomum, mi. And it is the
general latin for all fruit. Toute sort de fruict. Appe called a bitter
sweet. Amarimellum, li. Apple called a Costerd. Pomum decumanum vel praegrande.
Pomme grande. Apple of summer fruit. Pomum praecox, vel Praecoquum. Pomme de
hastiuean, fruit d' este. Apple of a little bigness. Pomum nanum. Fruit menu, ou
petit. Apples called a. C. shillinges. Pulmonia. Apple of winter fruit. Pomum
^erotinum. Pomme tardiue, fruit d' hyuer. Apple or fruit that keeps not. Pomu^
fugax. Pomme qui ne est point de guard. Apple oulde and soft. Pomum vietum.
Fruit flestri. Apple rotten. Pomum putre. Pomme pourrie. Apple fallin of from
the tree, a wyndfale. Pomum caducum, vel cadiuum. Pomme qui cheoit ayseement
and de luy mesme. Apple worm eaten. Pomum vermiculosum, vel vermiculans. Fruit
vermieux. Apple stony and hard in the eating. Pomum lapidosum, vel
calculosum. Pomme pierreuse. Apple ripe, or ready to eat. Pomum mature vel
mite. Fruit meure. Apple grene, unripe, sower, and not ready to be eaten. Pomum
immite, Crudum, Immaturum. Po^me aigre, verde, crew, point meure. Apple. Pomum.
Pomme. Apple wythered or shriuilled. Malum pannucium quod celeriter rugis
crispatur. Pomme ridee. Apple very round. Malum orbiculatum, Epiroticu^. Pomme
de francetur. Apple, called apple John, or Saint John's apple, or a sweting, or
an apple of paradise. Malum musteum, Melimelum, quod minimum durat celeriterque
mitescit. Pomme de paradis. Apples called puffines. Mala pulmonea. Appels in
form of a woman's breast. Mala orthomastica. Apples which I suppose, are
called Pipins, Mala petisia, non magna gratissimique saporis. Pommes de
courpendu, capendu. Apples named winter gouldinges. Mala scandiana, pendent ad
matrem in hiemem vsque. Apples which we call summer gouldinges, or queen
apples. Mala sanguinea vel rubelliana, vel rubella and purpurea. Pommes de
rouueau. Apples called pomeperes, which be like to pears in form. Melapia,
Pyrimala. Pommepoires. Apples of an herb called Ma^dragge. Mala canini. Apples
of no worth, which we call wyldinges, or other that are not in estimation.
Gregalia poma. Fruicts communs, and desquels on ne tient pas gand co^pte.
Apples like unto quinces. Appiana poma. Apples called pome royal. Apionia
mala. Apples conserved in honey. Melomeli, orum. Apple of love, Malum insanum.
Pomme d' amor. Apple coare. Volua, pomi medium, in quo ceu loculo latent
semina. Apples bearing. Pomiferus, a, um. vt arbor pomifera. Arbre fruictier.
Apple keeper. Pomo, onis. Apple moyse. Pomacium, cij. Applemonger. Pomilium,
lij, vel lia, ae. Pomilio, onis. Idem. Vendeur de fruicts, fruictier. Apple
loft, or soller, to keep apples or fruit in. Pomarium, rij. Vne pommeraye
Apple yard. Pomarium, rii. Viridarium, rii. Graeci, Paradisum appella^t. Un
lieu pla^te d'arbres fruictiers. Apple seller, and applemonger. Idem. Apple
tree. Malus, li. foem. g. and pomus.i. Un pommier. Apple, or ball of the eye.
Pupilla, ae. Pupula, ae. La prunelle de l'oeil. Apply. Accommodo, as, aui.
Adiungo, is, nxi. Animum adiungere. Appello, lis, puli. Applico, as, caui, vel
cui. Deseruire litteris. Studeo, es. Vaco, as. Appliquer. Apply to get
renown. Assignare famae. Apply or give his mind to some thing. Appellere
animum ad aliquid. Mettre, ou appliquer, ou addonner son esprit a quelque
chose. Apply the mind to philosophy. Appellere animu^ ad philosophiam.
Addonner son esprit, etc. Applying, or bending the mind. Applicatio, onis, vt
applicatio animi. Application. Applied. Accommodatus, a, um. Applicatus, a, um.
Applique. Apprehende. Apprehendo, dis. Teneo, es. Apprehender, prendre.
Apprehende, or take some thing with the hand, or to catch with the hand.
Apprehendere manu aliquid. Prendre quelque chose. Apprehende, or to take hold
with the tethe. Apprehendere morsu. Apprehender. etc. Apprehende, get, or to
carry away the victory. Apprehendere palmam. Emporter la victoire. Apprehende
one unawares. Intercipio, is. Approbation. Electio, onis. Approbatio, onis.
Approbation. Approbated and approved. Approbatus, ta, tum. Approuue. Appropre.
Accommodo, as, Apto, tas. Approprier. Appropred to one which has no property
therein, as one man fathereth an other man's child, Subdititius, a, um.
Suppositius, a, um. vt proles Subdititia. Qui est mis in la place d' un autre.
Approve. Approbo, as. Assero, ris, rui. Probo, as. Ratifico, cas, Ratum habere.
Specto, as. Approuuer. Approved. Ratus, a, um. Spectatus, a, um. Approuue. And
all the participles of the preter. of the verbes in approve.

Apprentise. Seruus, ui. Serf, seruiteur. April month. Aprilis, Xanthicus,
aliqui Xandicus. Auril. Approach, or draw nighe. Accedo, is. Appello, is.
puli. Appropinquo, as. Proximo, as. Succedo, is, ssi. Approcher. I will approach
to (or nere) him. Ad hominem accedam. IN iray verse luy.

Approach to ones ear, to tell him some thing in secret. Alicui ad aurem
accedere. S'approcher de son or^ille, pour luy dire quelque chose de secret.
Approach nere, or come hither. Huc accede. Approach toy d'ici. Approach or to
come near. Appropinquare and venire. Approcher. Winter approached. Hyems
appropinquabat. L'yuer approchoit.

When the time appointed began to approach. Appropinquante definita die.
Approchant le iour prefix and determine.

Which were now almost approached or come to the highest degrees, or to the
first ranckes. Qui iam primis ordinibus appropinquarent. Approchoyent d'estre
au plus hault degree.

Approaches or he comes nighe, that he may see. Appropinquat vt videat. Il
approach d'auoir veue, de veoir cler. Approaching or drawyng nighe unto.
Appropinquatio, Properantia, Properatio. Approchement. Apron. Gremiale, lis.
Ventrale, lis. Un deuantier Apt, agreeable, convenient, mete, necessary, or
prone. Acco^modus, a, um. Aptus, a, u^. Dexter, ra, um. Idoneus, a, u^.
Oportunus, a, um. Pronus, a, u^. Apt, bien sortable. Apt, composition of
members. Apta co^positio me^brorum. Members bien proportionnez. Aptely agreing
within themselves. Apta inter se and cohaerentia. Qui se rapportent bien l'vna
l'autre. Apt boy to all graces. Puer bonae indolis. Qui port la mine d'estre
de bonne nature. Apt to every thing, or active. Gnauus, a, um. Habile, apt.
Apt to learning, or to be taught. Disciplinosus, a, u^. Docibilis, le. Docile,
doctrinable. Apt for profit. Commodus, a, um. Profitable. Apt for the
wars. Bellarius, a, um. Bellot. Aptly. Commode, Rotunde, Dextere. Proprement.
Aptnes of capacity to all virtuous graces. Indoles, lis. Apparoissance and
sign de virtue. Aptnes to learning. Docilitas, it is. Docilite. Apuleius the
name of a philosopher, borne in Afrike which wrote diverse books in latin, of
which we have one in our English tongue, named the Goulden Ass. Apuleius,
Apuleij. Apulia, a part of Italy, bordering on the sea Adriaticum. Apulia,
Apuliae.
A. ANTE. Q.
AQuila, ae. mas. genesis The name of him that translated the Bible the second
time out of the Hebrew into Greek. Aquitaine or Guyan, accounted to be the
third part of France. Aquitania, iae. Aquitaine, ou Guienne.
A. ANTE R.
ARabia is a great part of Asia, between Judea and Egypt: and it is divided
into three parts, whereof the first is called happy, the second stony, and
the third deserte. Arabia pars Asiae, inter Iudaeam and Aegiptum, est autem
triplex, vna foelix, altera petraea, tertia, deserta. Arabie, est un grand pais
d'Asie le maieur situe enter Iudee and Egypt. Ceste Arabie est deuisee en trois
parties, dond la premiere est dicte heureuse, la second pierreuse, and la
tierce deserte. Arabian, one that dwells in Arabia. Arabs, Arabis. Arabe, ou
qui est d'Arabie. Et Arabicus, ca, cu^. Of Arabia. Arachne, the name of a
woman, which first invented spinning of lynnen, and making of nets, which
as the Poets feign, was (for co^tending with Pallas) transformed into a
spider. Ouidius. 6. Met. Aracynthus, a mountain in Boetia in Greece, also in
Athens, in Arcadie or Acarnanie, As Verg. Canto, quae solitus, si qua^do
arme^ta vocabat.
Amphion Dircaeus in Actaeo Aracyntho.
If ever he his heard did call,
So use I for to sing:
As erste on Aracynthus side
Did Amphion Thaeban king.
Aram, yerbum Hebraicum. Abraham his brother. Arbiter, or friendly equal Judge
among friends, on one that in cases of controversy will deal uprightly, or is
thought to be such a one as will do for the contentation of both parties as
far as equity and right requires. Disceptator domesticus, Arbiter ex
co^promisso, Co^promissarius. Sequester. Arbitre esleu par les parties, and
amiable compositeur. To take an Arbiter or Judge in any controversy. Sumere
Iudicem de re aliqua, Arbitrum capere, sieve adhibere. Prendre un Arbitre.

Submit him self, or his cause, to Arbiters or to judgment. Arbitrium
defer, Far iudicem, Causam arbitris permittere, non recusare. Offrir que le
process se vuide par arbitres.

Two Arbiters are so chosen, that if the case so require, they may adioyne,
take or choose the third to them. Arbitri, duo ita lecti, vt si ita res tulerit,
tertium sibi cooptent. Deux arbitres accordez auec puissance d'en prendre un
tiers, S'il y eschet.

Arbitrament or sentence of the Arbiter. Arbitrium, ii. La sentence de
l'Arbitre. Arbiter or Judge, in mean matters, or in things of no great value.
Arbiter, tri. m. g. Arbitre. Arbitrable, that is to be judged by an Arbiter.
Arbitrarius, ia, ium. Chose qui est subject a l'arbitrage de l'Arbitre.
Arbitrate, deem, judge, to give sentence, to suppose. Arbitror, traris, vel
trare, tus, sum. Arbitratum, Arbitrari. Arbitrer, donner sentence d'vng
Arbitrage, penser, Iuger, estimer. Arbitre or to judge. Discepto, as. Arbitrer.
Arbitrament or judgment. Arbitratus, us, ui. Arbitrium, ij. Disceptatio, onis.
Praefatura. ae. Arbitrage. Arboure or place made with quick springes, the
boughs or rather laid over to grow, under the which men do walk. Scaena,
ae. Viretum, ti. Viridarium, ij. Viridum, di. Lieu plein de verdure. Archadie,
a country in Greece. Arcadia, ae. Arcadie. Archaungel or dead nettle herb.
Anonium, ii. Galiopsis. Ortie morte. Archbishop. Pontifex, cis.
Archiepiscopus, pi. Archiuesque. Archedeaco^. Archidiaconus, Diaconus summus,
Curio maximus. Archidiacre. etc. Arche or vaulte. Fornix, icis. L'arc d'vne
voulte. Archer. Arquites, Sagittarius. Archier. Archer or shoter on horse
back. Hippotoxota. Arches over rouffes, made like wings. Pteromata, tum.
Alae, alarm. Ardente. Acer, cra, crum. Ardens, it is. Ardant. Ardently.
Ardenter, Efflictim, Auide, Feruide, Sitienter. Ardamment. Ardently to love.
Efflictim amare, Vri. Aimer ardamment. Argue or to reason. Argumentor, aris.
Amener raisons and conjectures pour prouuer quelque chose. Argument or reason.
Argumentum, ti. Hypothesis. Argument, raison. Argument of a commody, tragedy,
or such like. Embolium, lii. Argument. Argument to the contrary of an
objection, called a refutation or replication. Refutatio, nis. Confutation.
Argument, full of deceit and subtlety. Stropha, Strophae. Finesse, ou subtle
moyen, ruze. Argument, which on every side taunteth him to whom it is
objected. Dilemma, it is, vel per quosdam authors Dylema, it is. a Dya Graece, duo
latin, and lema, Vorago, quasi duplex Vorago. Est enim quaedam argumentatio a
quibusdam dicta complexio: que vndique co^plectitur and vorat aduersarium, and
dicitur etiam cornutus Syllogismus. Argument of cauilation, a cauile, a
sophistical argument, or a sophisime. Sophisma, it is. n. g. Argument
cauillatoire. Arguments colored, arguments that are painted with fine talk,
and have only the apparau^ce of truth, arguments of deceit. Argumenta
fucata, inani specie tantum veritatis fallentia. Argumens coulourez. Argument
or theme purposed, to be disputed of. Thema, it is. Le theme l'argument.
Arguments which can not be resolved. Ceratinae. Vne maniere d'argument
sophistique. Arise. Surgo, is, rexi. Se lever. Arise together. Consurgo, is.
Quand plusieurs se lieue^t. Arise up. Exurgo, is. Se lever. Vide Rise.
Aristarchus, a gramarian of Alexandria, instructour to Ptholomeus son, called
Philometor. Aristolochia, Hartewort, or Birthworte, an herb of two or three
kinds, in latin it is named Aristolochia rotunda, Aristolochia longa, vel
Aristolochia clematitis. Sarrasine. Stephanus says, there are four sorts
hereof, and calls it in latin Malum terrae, and Aristolochia. And in French
he names it, Aristolochie. Aristotiles or Aristotle, an excellent philosopher,
son of Nichomachus a physician, borne in Stagira in Greece, was scholar to
Plato.xx. years continually, he was low of stature, crookebacked, ill shapen,
and stut^id, and yet was his wit so sharp, study great, and knowledge so
profounde (in ye works of nature) that he excelled al which wrote before him,
and is had in praise with all philosophers, which wrote since his time, he
taught Alexander the great. His followers were called Peripatetici,
Aristotiles, lis. m. g. Arithmeticke, or the art to number and cast
accomptes. Arithmetica, cae. Arithmetice, ces. Numeralis scientia. L'art de
nombrer and de compter. Arm. Brachium, ii. Vlna, ae. Le bras. Arm hoole.
Acella, ae. Asella, and. Axilla, ae. L'aisselle. Arm of a tree or vine.
Duramen, inis. Duramentu^, ti. Le bras and le sep de la vigne. Armed or
harnessed man. Armatus, a, um. Arm. Armed with a buckler, shylde, or targat.
Scutatus, a, um. Garni de bouclier. Armed or fensed in all parts.
Cataphractus. Arm de pied en cap. Armed with many darts. Pilatus, a, um.
Armen, or to arm. Armo, mas. Armer. Arms. Ilia, orum. And the feats of
arms. Ars duellica. Arms or badges of Gentlemen. Insignia, orum. Gentilitae
imagines. Armoiries. Arms or scowchen cast in a mould or hewn, and set over a
gate. Antefixa, orum. n. g. Armyd, ready to fight, prepared to enter in
battle, or in the field ready to incou^ter with the enemy. In armis esse.
Estre en arms. Armid in the camp, abiding for battle. In acie stare. Estre
en arms au camp prests tout les iours de combatre. Arm weapons with poison,
to the intent the wonded may be incurable. Armare ferrum veneno. Armer un fer
de venim. Arm him self, or to put on armore. Arma induere, Arma capere.
S'armer. Arm him self against his country, make rebellion, or to trouble the
sacred peace of his contry with the rage of cruel war, or to bear armor
with the enemy against his own country. Arma contra patriam far, Accipere,
Induere, Capere, vel portare. S'armer a l'encontre de son pais. Armyd, and to
tarry for the battle. In armis stare and morari. Se tenir tous armez. Armyd
in complete harness, men that are armed from top to toe. Milites cataphracti.
Gens de guerre armez de toutes pieces, ou de pied en cap. Army marching
forward. Agmen, enis. Exercitus ambulans iterque faciens. Armee qui march.
Army of men. Copia, Exercitus, Acies. Armee. Army of footmen. Pedestris
exercitus. Vne armee de gens de pied. Army right or just. Iustus exercitus.
Vne droicte armee. Army of eight thousand foot men. Phalanx. Vne armee de
huit mill hommes de pied. Army of.xvi. thousand footmen. Phalangitae, taru^.
vne armee de seize mill hommes de pied. Army in order ready to fight. Acies,
ei. Vne armee en order priest a combatre. They which are of an army of eight
thousand footmen. Phalangarij, iorum. m. g. Qui estoyent de l'armee de huit
mill hommes de pied.

Armies more obeysante or obediente. Exercitus parentiores. Armies plus
obeissantes. Army of the Romans. Res Romana. L'armee des Romans. He is at
the camp, or amongst the army, or in the army. Est apud exercitum. Il est
en l'armee.

Army when it marches or goes forward. Agmen, enis. Vne armee quand elle
march. Army, or a band of men vncomplete or not furnished. Mutilatus
exercitus. Vne armee qui n'est pas fournie de gens. Army disordred, spread
abroad or dispersed, by violence of the enemy. Disiecti milites. Quand vne
armee est esparse, and n'est point assemblee. To assemble an army, to muster
and set in order the soldiers, or to place all his soldiers in the army, in
order to fight, and encounter with the enemies, Exercitum conflare, Exercitum
facere, Contrahere exercitum, Conficere exercitum. Assembler vne armee, lever
ou dresser vne armee.

Army assembled or gathered together. Contractus exercitus. Armee assemblee.
Army of men. Castra, orum. Stratia. Armee. Arming of a net. Epidromes. Arming
coarde of a net. Plaga, ae. File ou retz de chasse. Armony or melody.
Harmonia. ae. Melodia, ae. Melos dis, Numerus, ri. Symphonia, ae. Modulatio,
onis. Accord. Armory or place for ordinance. Armamentarium. Armarium.
Armaire. Armoure. Armatura, ae. Armatus, tus. Armure. Aron, or cookowpint, an
herb that is plenty in spring time, and is hot and dry in the third
degree, of the nature of the herb called dragone, it is named in latin, Arum,
ab aliis Pes vituli, and Serpentaria minor vel Aron, ri. n. g. Vit de chein.
Arrabians, or people of Arabia. Ascitae, arum. Arras clothe. Peristromata.
Tapisseries. Arrere, to be behind with account or reckening. Reliquor, aris.
Reliqua contrahere. S'endepter. Vnde reliquator, and Trix. Arrerages of an
account. Reliquae. Relics. Et Reliquatores, Be they which be in arrerage,
or have any part of account in arrerage. Qui est en rest de quelque sum.
Areste one. Rapere in Ius. Le mener par force deuant le Judge. Arrest money in a
court which is paid upon judgment. Resignare, aes. * Aryue. Appello, is,
puli. Recipere, vel trahere in portum, vel agere. Petere portum. Venira port.
Arrogancy, or presumption. Arrogantia, ae. Ebrietas panaria. Elatio, is.
Insolentia, ae. Superbia, ae. Arrogance. Arrogante or presumptuous. Arrogans,
it is. Elatus, a, um. Insolens, it is. Superbus, a, um. Arrogante. Arrogant, or
proud form of speaking, or writing. Cothurnus. Arrogantly. Arroganter,
Insolenter, Superbe. Arrogamment. Arrowe. Catapulta, ae. Sagitta, ae. Spiculum,
li. Calamus, mi. Arundo, inis. Arma volatica dixit (Panegerista) pro sagittis.
Fleiche. Arrowe head. Spiculum, li. Cuspis, pidis. Arrows which cast fire.
Pyroboly. Fusees. Et Pyrobolarii. Be they which do cast or shote those
arrows. Arsse. Anus, ni. Podex, icis. Le cul. Arssewyspe. Anitergium. Some
there were yt described this verse as an ordinary to that office. Si desit
stramen, Digito tunc terge foramen.
To the which verse this answer was made.
Foetidus es nebulo, charta est plus co^moda culo.
Arssmerte, or culerage, is a very hot herb, and has the name of this,
because that if you rub it between your hands, and then touch any bare
place therewith, it will burn and smerte grievously, it grows in diches and
moist places, it is good to kill flees, it is named in latin, Persicaria.
Curaige. Arsnicke herb. Arsenicum, ci. Arsenic. Art. Ars, it is. Art. Look
science. Art magike. Athracia ars, Nicroma^tia. vide. magike. Art of
portrature. Graphis, idis. L'art de tailler. etc. Art of music. Ars musica.
Art de music. Art of Arithmaticke, or the art of numbering. Numeralis
scientia, Arithmetica, Arithmeticae. L'art de nombrer and de compter. Art of
Gra^mer, which teachethe the order of speaking and writing. Grammatica, cae.
and Grammaticae, ces. L'art qui enseigne de bien escrire and parler. Article.
Articulus, li. Article. Articles of account. Nomina, um. Les articles.
Articulatly, sounding every syllable, and staying at every point. Articulate,
Articulatim. De poinct en poinct, distinctement. Artificer. Technides. Artifex,
Opifex. Artisan. Artificer which works by fire. Banausus, si. Proprie
dicitur Artifex, qui circa caminos and fornaces exercetur, quique opera sua
igni conficit. Ca. Artificers, which do work sitting. Sellurarii, oru^. Qui
gaigne sa vie assis. Artificial or inuentiue. Technicus, a, um. Artificial.
Artificialis, le. Faict d'arte. Artificier, or an Artiste, one which has some
art or science. Artifex, cis. Opifex, ficis. Artisan ou artiste. Artillarie,
or preparation for the wars. Apparatus, us. Machina bellica. Artillery.
Artois, a country in France. Atrabes, bis. Artesia, ae. Artois. Artichock, an
herb. Cinera, ae. Scolymos. Artichault.
A. ANTE. S.
AS. Ac, Ceu, Ita, Vt, Atque, Quam, Qua^tum, Quasi, Sicut, Sicuti, Tam,
Tanquam, Velut, veluti, Vtpote, Vtputa. Comme. vide Often. As concerning or
touching. Quantum. Selon que. As, even as, or as it were. Ceu. Comme. Vide
Even. As far as. Qantum. Quant au regard. As if. Quasi. Comme. Vide If. As it
were. Tanquam. Comme. As long. Donec, Quamdiu, Quoad. Combien long te^ps. As
many. Quotcu^que, Quotquot, Tot, Totidem. Au tant, tout autant. Vide Many. As
much, and half as much more. Sesqui, vt Sesqui libra. angl. A pound and a
half. Liver and demie. As much as he, or as I may. Quoad eius. Iusques a ce
que, tant que. Vide May and can. As much as may be, or in all haste or speed.
Quantum, Vt quantum potes, Quantumcu^que, Quantumlibet, Quamuis, aduerb. Autant
qu'il, etc. Vide Much. As often. Quotiescu^que. Toutes, and quantes fois. As
sone. Quam mox, Quamprimum, Simul ac, Simul atque, vt. Incontinent que. As
well. Cum, Et, Tam, Vt, Vtpote, Vtputa. Autant, tant. Vide Well. As who says.
Quasi, Scilicet, Videlicet. Comme si. Asa, a name which signifies as much, as
a healer of sicknesses, or a Phisitio^. It was also the name of one of the
kings of Judah, which honored God and destroyed Idols: he was the fifth king,
and reigned. 41. years before the birthe of our redemer. 973. years. Asa, ae.
m. g. Asce^d or go up. Asce^do, is. Sca^do, is. Subeo, is. Mo^ter. Ascend or
mount up. Abambulo, as. Monter. Ascend up into some place. Ascendere, Facere
asce^sionem ad aliquem locum. Monter. Ascend or to go up into the pulpit to
preach or speak to the people. Ascendere in concionem. Monter en chair pour
parler au peuple. Ascend to the top of the wall. Muro subire. Monter emmont
le mur. Ascend to an higher step, grade, or degree. Asce^dere ad altiorem
gradu^. Monter en plus hault degree. Ascendent, part of the firmament, or
properly every thing wherein hours be marked. Horoscopus, a, um. Ascendens,
it is. Horoscope. Ascribe. Addico, cis. Allego, is. xi, ere. Imputo, as. Refero,
rs. Destiner a quelque chose. Ascribed. Addictus, a, um. Destine. Ashamed of an
act. Poenitendus, a, um. Pudibundus, a, um. Verecundus, a, um. Honteux.
Ashamed to be. Erubesco, scis. Poenitet, ebat. Pudefio, fis. Pudeo, es. Pudet,
bat. Impers. Verecu^dia teneri, Verecundor, aris. Subijt verecundia. Estre
honteux, auoir honte. Ashame, dishoneste, or defame one, to his utter rebuke
and reproach. Dedecorare, Maculam alicui imprimere. Aeternas maculas alicui
inurere, Infamiam alicui inurere. Honnir and dishonourer. I am ashamed of us
both we are so apparelled. Poenitet ambarum ornatae vt sumus. I'ay honte de
nous veoir ainsi habillees comme nous sommes.

I am ashamed of him, Poenitet me hominis. IN ay honte de l'homme.

Art not thou ashamed of these things? Non te haec pudent? N'as tu point de
honte de ceci?

He which is nothing ashamed. Longissime a pudore remotus, Inuerecundus,
Impudens. Qui n'ha aucune honte.

Ashamedly, or bashefully. Verecunde, Pudenter. Auec honte. Ash. Bumelia, ae.
Fraxinus, ni. Fresne. Ash, called a wild ash with great leaves. Ornus, ni.
Vng fresne sauuage. Ash colored, like ashes. Cineracius, a, um. Cinereus, a,
um. De cendres, cendreux. Ashen, or of ash tree. Fraxineus, a, um. De fresne.
Ashen, or of ashes. Subcineritius, a, um. De cendres. Ashes. Cinis, eris. Lix,
cis. Cendre. Asia, the third part of the world, divided from Europa by the
sea, called Bosphorus Thracius, and the great river of Tanais, and it is
separated from Affricke by the famous river Nylus, and it is supposed to be as
great as both Europa and Affricke. Asia minor, is a part of this Asia. Asia is
also a mere, fenne, or marishe, nere to the river Caystrus, but when it
signifies the Region above named, the first syllable is short, and when it is
a marishe, it is long. Asia, ae. f. g. Ask, or require. Apologo, as. Exigo,
is. Interpello, as. Interrogo, as. Peto, it is. Posco, cis. Postulo, as. Procio,
cis. Quaero, is. Rogito, as. Rogo, as. Demander, interroguer, enquerir. Ask
again. Condico, is, xi. Repeto, it is. Reposco, scis. Redemander. Vide inquire.
Ask counsel or consulte. Refer ad alique^. Vide Refer. Ask craftily, or
privily. Suppeto, it is, tij. Ask debt. Nomina exigere. Exiger and demander ses
debtes. Ask duty. Reposco, scis. poposci. Redemander ce qu'on nous doibt.
Ask eftsoons. Repeto, it is. Repostulo, as. Redemander. Ask forgeuenes, or
mercy of God. Sacrifico, cas. Sacrifier. Ask forgeuenes or pardon. Deprecari
veniant, Exorare veniam. Demander pardon, merci. Ask in form of begging.
Emendico, as. Mendier. Ask importunatly. Flagito, as. Perpetio, it is, tij,
tere. Demander quelque chose importuneement. Ask instantly. Exposco, scis.
Demander instament. Ask malapertly, or shamefully. Proco, as. Procor, aris.
Demander. S. Ask more. Apposco, scis. Requerir par dessus. Ask or name. Axare
pro nominare. Non est in vsu. Ask often. Repeto, it is, tij, tere. Redemander.
Ask often, as they do which will not be said nay. Procito, as. Demander
importuneement. Ask one good turn for an other. Reposcere mutuu^ vel vicem.
Demander qu'on nous rende la pareille. Ask an sue for an office, that another
does the same Competo, it is, tij, tere. Demander la mesme chose qu'vng autre
demand. Ask the commons consent in the parliament house. Vide Demand, etc.
Ask leave to speak and to declare his mind. Dicendi vel agendae causae locum
and potestatem petere. Demander audience. Ask and desire instantly to have
justice. Iusticiae fidem iurisque implorare. Instamment demander justice. Ask,
or desire justice of some forfayture by th'aduersary his breach of some leage,
covenant, custom, or agreement. Exposcere poenas iniuriae, aut vis illatae,
poenas expetere. Demander justice de quelque forfaiture. Ask or to inquire
others council of the judgment. De iudicio in consilium ire, Sententias
sigillatim rogare. Demander les opinions. Ask till one be hoorse. Ad rauim
poscere. Asked. Interpellatus, a, um. Interrogo^us, a, um. And all the
participles of the verb, etc. Asker. Petitor, ris. Postulator, ris. Rogator,
ris, vel Trix. Demandeur. Askyng. Petitio, Postulatio, Rogamen, Rogatio,
Rogatus. Demand and request. Asonder, or seperatly. Separate, separatim,
Seiuncte, Disiuncte, Disperse, Distinct, Discrete, Abinuicem, Segrega^im.
Separement. Vide Separate. Aspasia, a woman so called, queen to Pericles,
which was the occasion of much unhappiness. Aspe is a tree, otherwise called a
Popler, of which there be three kinds, that is to wit, the white, the
black, and that of Lybia, Populus alba, Populus nigra, Populus Lybica. Vng
abre nomme Peuplier. Asparagus, an herb called Sperage, of this herb are two
sorts, the first is called Aspa altilis, Asparagus alone, and this is the
common Sperage, the other kind is called in latin Corruda, or Asparagus
syluestris, Orminium, ij. In English Pricky spetage, in French it is named.
Esperage, Asparge, ou Asperge, Asparge sauuage. Aspect, sight, beholding, or a
regard, also an amiable, friendly, favorable, beautiful, or loving
countenance, the radiations also of the planetes, are called aspectes, as a
sextile, quadrat, trine or opposite aspecte between one and other. Aspectus,
huius aspectus. m. g. ab aspicio. Veu, regard, aspect. Aspire, or to come to
some thing. Aspiro, as, aui, are, atum. Aspirer. Aspire, or to come to attain
some thing. Aspirare ad rem aliquam. Aspirer and tascher. de peruenir a quelque
chose. Aspire, or get up into the Senate house. Aspirare in curiam. Tascher de
peruenir en court. They can not aspire, come or attain, to ye praise. Ad eam
laudem aspirare non possunt. Ils ne peuuent paruenir a tells louanges.

Aspiration, or drawyng of brethe. Aspiratio onis. f. g. Aspiration,
soufflemen^. Aspire, or to blow. Aspiro, as. Venture, souffler. Assaye or
prove. Appetio, is. Experior, ris. Tento, as. Facere periculum, Innitor, eris,
ixus sum. Pergo, is, xi. Periclitor, aris. Praetento, as Probo, as. Tendo, is.
Essayer. Assaye first, to take the first or former taste. Praegusto, as.
Tendo, is. T^ster. Assaye, experience, or proof. Experientia, Periclitatio.
Tentamentum, ti. Tentatio, onis. Experience. Assay, or proof in exercise, as
when a man will shote a shafte, he will say: I will first shote assaye, and
then a best. Progymnasma. Assay, or to taste wine if it be good or no.
Censuram vini facere. Fair l'essay du vin. Assaye, proof, or a trial.
Proludium, dij. Praeludiu^, dij. Tentamentum, ti. n. g. Essay. Assay, or to
try, or prove oxen. Probare boues. Essayer les beufs. Assaye, or try the
hasarde of the combat or bickering. Certamen experiri. Assayer le hasard de la
guerre. Assayed or proved. Expertus, a, um. Periclitatus, a, u^. Tentatus, a,
um. Esproue. Assail an host on every side. Carpere agmen. Assaillir de toutes
pars. Assail one unawares, or otherwise. Aggredior, eris, ssus, sum. Peto, it is,
tij, Posco, scis. Assaillir aucun. Assail one with a violent rage. Afferre vim
alicui. Grassor, aris. Impeto, is, tiui. Oppugno, as. Assaillir aucun auec
grande violence. Assail one, or to set on one, with all power, openly or
privily. Adoriri, Appetere, Inuadere alique^, in aliquem inuadere, Te^tare,
Atte^tare, Ingruere. Assaillir aucun. Assail one on all parts. Carpere agmen.
Assaillir de toutes pars. Assail one by deceates, or crafty means. Incessere
aliquem dolis. Assaillir aucun par tromperies. Assail an enemy. Gradum cum
host confer. Assaillir l'enemi. Assail the enemies in their fortes, castles
or ca^pes. Perrumpere castra and agmen inimicorum, In castra hostium irrumpere.
Assaillir les ennemies en leur fort. Assault, as when the two armies mete in
field. Aggressio, Congressus, Impressio, Impetus, Insultus, Assultus.
L'assault and assemblement de deux armees. Assault of a town, fortress, or
city. Oppugnatio, onis. f. g. Assault qu'on baille contre vne ville. The
assault dured till mydnight. Oppugnatio ad mediam noctem producta est. Le
siege and assault dura iusques a la minuict.

Assault. Impetus, tus. Impressio, onis. Insultus, tus. Pugna, ae. Assault.
Assault to make, and assail. Idem. Assemble, or gather together. Aggregare,
Copulare, Coadunare, Cogere, Committere, Concire, Co^gerere, Contrahere,
Coagmentare. Assembler. Assemble, or gather together. Coaduno, as. Coeo, is,
iui. Conuenio, is. Conuoco, as. Recolligo, is. Assembler, conuoquer. Assemble a
number of people. Celebrare coetum. Assemble out of diverse countries. Confluo,
is, xi. S'assembler de plusieurs lieux en vng. Assemble. Coetus, tus. Coitio,
onis. Frequentatio, onis. Synodus. Turba, ae. Vne assemblee. Assemb^e of a
company at a banquet or feast. Syssithia. Assemble at drynking. Symposium, ij.
Conuiuium. ij. Conuiue, banquet. Assemble of people upon commandment.
Conue^tus, us. Un assemblee de gens faict par authorite du magistrate pour
expedier les plaids. Assembling, or a calling together a convocation or
general meeting. Conuocatio, onis. Appelement and assemblement. Assembling
place, whereunto the multitude of people does resort, as fair, feast,
market, mart, sessions, and such like. Panegyris, ris. f. g. Foire public.
Panegyrica oration, vel panegyricu^ carmen. ang. The oration made at such
assemble, be it prose or verse. Assente. Assensus, us, ui. Consensus, us.
Consentement. Assenten. Acquiesco, scis. Alibesco, scis. Assentio, it is.
Assentior, iris. Concedo, dis. Consentio, it is. S' accorder and estre d'vne
oppinion. Vide Give credence. Assentingly, accordingly, or by agreement.
Concorditer. Tout d'vng accord. Assertion, or affirmation. Assertio, onis. f.
genesis Affirmation. Assesse costs, and damages in an action. Litem aestimare.
Taxo, as. Taxer despens. Assesse a fine or penalty. Arrogare multam. Multam
vel Multuram dicere. Multo, as. Multor, aris. Punir, multer. Multo, as. Est
Sabinum vocabulum, and regit genesis vel ablat. Assesse a subsydie, tax, or
tribute. Indico, is, xi. Semondre. Assessed person, or he the which is
assessed or taxed. Census, si. m. g. Ass. Asinus, ni. vel Asina, ae. Asne. Et
Asinellus vel a, diminit. angl. A little or young ass. Le petit d' un Asne.
Ass which is wild. Onager, gri. Un Asne sauuage. Ass, without any proper
feate or quality, which can neither wrestle, nor do any other actiuitie.
Apalaestris. Homo hebes and rudis. Un Asne. Assehead, without any learning or
wit. Vappa. Un homme de lourd esprit. Asseherde, or keeper of Asses.
Asinarius. Asnier. Assign or appointe. Allego, is, exi, ere. Assigno, as.
Attribuo, is. Designo, as. Praefinio, is, ire. Praescribo, is. Praesto, as.
Statuo, is. Assigner. Assign dowry. Dicere dotem. Assigner en do. Assign,
or consigne a letter. Subscribo, is. Signer de sa main. Assign some charge to
one, or commit a province to some man's tuitio^. Constituere prouinciam
alicui. Assigner charge a quelqu'vn. Assign or appointe a day. Diem finire
vel dicere. Assigner iour. Assign, or appointe the day of ones death.
Destinare diem necis alicui. Assigner iour pour tuer aucu^. Assign the day of
apperaunce in judgment. Vadimonium constituere, diem dicere iuris. Assign, or
appointe a time to talk. Tempus colloquio dare. Assigner iour pour
parlementer. Assign, or appointe a place to some thing. Assignare locum alicui
rei. Assigner lieu a quelque chose. Assign, or appointe the time. Tempus
constituere. Assigner temps. Assignation, or a distribution. Assignatio, onis.
Assignation. Assigned. Dissignatus, a, um. Praescriptus, a, um. Status, a, um.
Assign. And all the participles. etc. Assiste, or defend. Assisto, as, stiti.
Assister. Assistence. Aduocatio. L'assistence and assemble de gens d'authorite.
Associate in authority, one put in joint commission. Assessor, oris. m. g.
Assesseur. Associate to be in commission. Adesse iudici. Estre Assesseur.
Associate, or take one into his company. Aliquem assumere in societate^. Coire
cum aliquo. Conflare societatem, vel societatem accipere cum aliquo. S'associer
auec autruy. Associate him self to thieves and robbers. Componere societatem
cum praedonibus. S'associer auec des larrons. Assoyle a vow or promise.
Resecro, as. Assoyle a question. Dissoluere interrogationem. Respondre.
Assoyle. Absoluo, is. Absouldre. Assoyled. Absolutus, a, um. Absouls.
Assurance made of any thing bought and sold. Mancipatio. Vente. Et Mancipio
dare, To make assurance. Mancipio accipere, To take assurance. Assure. Firmo,
as. Ponere pro certo, Securum reddere. Asseurer. Assurance. Confidentia.
Asseurance. Assurance by liuerie and possession. Mancipatio, onis. Vente.
Assurance to make by liuerie. Mancipio, as. Manciper, vendre. Et manceps, pis.
Is he that takes such assurance, and Mancipia been all such things whereof
he is assured. Assured. Confidens, it is. Firmus, a, um. Securus, a, um. Ferme.
Assuredly. Confidenter, Firm, Firmiter, Secure. Fermement. Assurednes.
Confirmitas, it is. Securitas. Asseurance. Assuage. Compesco, scis. Hostio, it is.
Paco, as. Permulceo, es. Placo, as. Remolesco, scis. Sedo, as. Appaiser.
Assuage swelling. Deturgeo, es. Se desenfler. Astonney, or to fear one.
Terrere, Conterrere, Exterrere, Offerre metum, Terrefacere, Terrorem alicui
afferre, Inijcere, Incutere, Facere, Infer. Perterrere, Perterrefacere,
Perpauefacere, Animos consternare. Espouenter. Astonished, or amassed to be.
Obstupeo, es. Obstupesco, scis. Stupefio, is. Stupeo, es. Stupesco, scis.
Torpeo, es. Estre tout estonne. Astonished, abashed, or amassed to make.
Obstupefacio, cis. Stupefacio, cis. Torporo, as. Espouanter. Astonished to wax,
or begin to be abashed. etc. Obstupesco, cis. Stupesco, cis. Torpesco, cis.
Espouante. Astonished, abashed, or amassed. Obst^pidus, a, um. Stupefactus, a, um.
Stupidus, a, um. Estonne. Astrolabie, or instrumente for Astronomy.
Astrolabium, ij. n. g. Instrumentum Astronomicum. Astrology, or speculation,
and reasoning of heavenly influences. Astrologia. Astrology. Astrologian.
Astrologus. Astrologue ou Astrologien. Astronomer. Astrologus, Astronomus,
Genethliacus. Astronome, ou Astronomien. Astronomers rod or table. Abax,
Pinax. Astronomy. Astronomia, Mathema, Mathesis. Astronomy. Asure. Glaucus
color, Lasurio^, aut caeruleum. Asur, couleur d'asur. Of Asure and vermillio^.
Silaceum and miniaceu^. D'asur and vermillon.

Of the color of Asure. Color caeruleus. Asurine couleur.

Asur, or to color any thing blue. Caeruleo pingere, aut inficere. Asurer
quelque chose.
A. ANTE. T.
AT. Penes, Per, vt per noctem, Propter, Sub, vt, Sub aduentum, vel sub
aduentu. At any time. Vnquam. Quelque temps. Atalanta, the name of a maiden
(daughter to Iasias, a prince of Arcadie) which came with diverse noble men of
Greece into Etolia, to slay a great boar, that destroyed the country, and
she amongst all the rest, first wounded the boar, which afterward was
slain by Meleager, son of the king of Etolia, who loved Atalanta, and took
her to his wife. An other Atalanta was the daughter of Caeneus, king of th'ile
Scyrus, she contendid always in renning with them that wowed her. And when she
had vanquished, and put many to death therefore (for that was the reward, if
they could not outrunne her) at the last a young man called Hippomenes
(whilst they were running) threw three apples of gold (at sundry times)
from him, which she staying to take up, was ouercomme. Atalanta, ae. f. g. At
a point. Ad vnguem. Parfaict. At the beginning. Primo, Primum, Principio, Ad
carceres, Ad initium. A prime face. At adventure. Forte, Fortuito. D'aduenture.
At hand. Numerato, Praesto, Pro^pte, Prope. Present. At hand, or ready to be.
Praestolor, aris. Appetit vespera, Instat, quoties est verbum neutral.
Attendre. At leisure. Per otium, Vacuo animo. Tout aloisir. At the last. Ad
extremum, Ad posterum, Imposteru^, Tandem, Tumdemum. A la parfin. At the least
way. At, Dumtaxat, Saltem, Salutem, Tande^, Vel coniunct. aduers. Amoins, a
tout le moins. At length, or a long time and space. Tractim. Tout d'vne tire.
At length. Prolixe, Promine^ter, Promise, Tandem. A la par fin. At the most.
Ad summum, Summum. Tout au plus. At no time. Nequando. Que quelque fois, ou
quelque temps. At once, or one time. Semel. Vne fois, tout a vng coup. At that
price, or for so much. Tantidem. Tout autant. At this present. Ad presens,
Inpresentiarum. Pour le present. At that time. Tum, Tunc, Tunc temporis. Lors,
alors, adonc. At or with. Apud. And sometime, apud signifies in. Vt apud
Orcum, in hell. In whose company, Apud quem, sometime out, as Apud se no^ est.
He is out of his mind, sometime by, as Apud focu^, by the fire, sometime
among, Vt apud omnes. etc. sometime with, as apud amicos. etc. Aupres, ches,
auec, deuant, en, enuers. Athalia, was the daughter of the cursed queen
Iesabel, and mother unto king Achab. Athalia. ae. f. g. Athanasius, a bishop of
Alexandria, the year of our Lord.348. He was a man of excellent great
learning and virtue, he confuted the errors of the Arrians in the council of
Nycene (with strong arguments) and therefore was persecuted very much by
them, for they stirred welnyghe all the world against him. After that he
suffered great tribulation for the truth of Christ his religion, and died in
the year of our redemption.379. Athanasius, ij. m. g. Athens, a famous city
in Greece, and a nourice of all good learning, and virtuous exercise. Athenae,
arum. in plurali. f. g. Athenodorus, a philosopher, which gave Octauian the
Emperor this lesson, when he departed from him: Noble prince, when you are
angry, neither say nor do any thing until you have perused the four and
twenty Greek letters, and remember the order of their places where they
stand, that the passion of choler (by withdrawing your mind) may languishe
and vanishe away. Athenodorus, ri, m. g. Of his mind was Cato in that verse
against rash or hasty judgment. Impedit ira animum, ne possit cernere verum.
Anger lettes the mind so that,
It cannot see the truth.
Atlas, the name of a king, there were three of that name, one was king of
Italy, and father of Electra, an other of Arcadia, father of Maia, the third
was king of Mauritania, called the greatest, the brother of Prometheus, who as
the Greeks suppose, did first find out the course of the stars by an
excellent imagination, the Poets feign that he sustained heaven on his
shoulders. It is also the name of a mountain in Mauritania. Atlas, lantis. m.
g. Atreus, was he that first found out the Eclipse of the Sun, he dyed
about the year before Christ. 1258. Atreus. i. m. g. Atonement or truce.
Foedus, eris. Pactio, onis. Transactio, onis. Vnitas, it is. Induciae, arum.
Appoinctement and traictie de paix. Atonemente to make. Componere lites,
Transigere rixas. Appaiser. Attache. Apprehendo, is. Rapere in Ius. Quod and
trahere and vocare dicitur. Le contraindre de venir en Justice. S. Attached
with process. Raptus ad iudicem. Attached with sickness. Implicitus morbo.
Estre enterprins de malady. Attachement. Clarigatio, Manum iniectio. Mettre la
main sur aucu^, le pre^dre au corpse, l'arrester en sa person Attaindre.
Proscriptio, onis. Proscripturio, is. To conspire in cases. etc. * Attainted.
Captus, a, um. Prins. Attalus, a king in Asia the less, marvelous rich, of
whom all magnificke and stately things are called Attalica, Attalus, li. m.
g. To one Attalus Martial, the Poet wrate this Epigramme. Declamas belle,
causas agis Attale belle.
Historias bellas, carmina bella facis.
Componis belle mimos, epigrammata belle
Bellus Grammaticus, bellus es astrologus,
Et belle cantas, and saltas Attale belle.
Bellus es art lyrae, bellus es art pilae.
Nil been cum facias, facis attamen omnia belle
Vis dicam qui sis? magnus es Ardelio.
Friend Attalus thou declamste well,
Thou pleadest causes well.
The histories do pass thou makste,
Thy verses do excel.
Thou make merry poemes, and
Thy Epigrammes are fine:
In Grammar, and the course of stars,
Thy knowledge is divine.
Both well thou singest Attalus,
And dauncest light withal:
Thy art does pass to play on harp,
Or toss the tennisse balle.
When naught thou doste is well, yet all
Thou do thou think right.
Will thou I tell what one thou art?
Ardelio, Thraso like.
Attain or come unto. Attingo, is. Venir iusques a quelque chose. Attigo, gis.
secundum veteres, Attingere aetatem plenam. To come to full age. Atteine or
get. Acquito, ris. Contracto, as. Gaudeo, es. Peto, it is, tij. Acquerir,
venir. Atteyne or grow to honor by crafty dissimulatio^. Obrepere ad
honores. Venir a quelque dignite par abus, fiction and hypocrisy. Atteyne a
purpose by concealing or hyding somewhat which should have been spoken.
Obripiois. Se color tout doulcement. etc. Attain rypenes. Ingruo, is.
Attaining, or atchieuing to honor craftily. Obreptio, onis. Quand par subtils
moyens on vient a quelque chose. Attempt. Adeo, is, iui. Aggredior, eris.
Attento, as. Tento, as. Attenter. Attempted. Expertus, a, um. Esproue. And all
the participles of the verb attempt. Attend or take heed. Attendo, is. Curo,
as. Inuigilo, as. Ponere operam. Estre attentif. Attend or wait. Seruio, is,
ire. Seruir. Attentive, as he that hears diligently. Attentus, a, um.
Attentif. Attend or wait diligently. Diligenter attendere. Entendre
diligement. Attend or wait to some thing. Attendere alicui rei. Vaquer a
quelque chose. Attend or give ear what one says or does. Attendere alicui.
Estre attentif a ce que quelqu' un fait, ou dit. Attend with good will.
Attendere animo equo. Entendre patiemment. Attiringes that gentlewome^ wear on
their heads. Redimicula, orum. Redimiculum, li. Ornement de test de femme.
Attorney. Vindex, icis. Caussae, vel Negotij Susceptor. Qui defend and met en
seurete. Attorney for the defendant. Patronus. And for the playntife. Actor,
oris. Qui defend. Attorney, or proctour in the law. Aduocatus, Accionarius,
Cognitor, oris. Procurator. Aduocat. Attribute. Ascribo, is. Attribuo, is.
Attribuer. Attributed. Ascriptus, a, u^. Attributus, a, um. Assign.
Attribution or assignation. Attributio, onis. f. g. Assignation.
A. ANTE. V.
AVayle, or submit. Subsido, is. S'aualler. Avarice. Auaricia, Philargyria.
Avarice. To burn with avarice or covetousness. Auaritia ardere. Brusler
d'auarice.

Great avarice. Profunda auaritia. Vne avarice merueilleuse.

Give great occasion of avarice. Patefacere viam illustrem atque latam
auaritiae. Donner grande occasion d' avarice.

All suspicion of avarice put aside. Absit omnis suspicio auaritiae. Qu'il n'y
ait souspecon d' avarice.

I accuse thy avarice. Auaritiam tuam in crimen and in iudicium voco. IN accuse
ton avarice. Of Auarus comes Auare, Auariter. Couetously. Auarement.

Auarouse or covetous. Auarus, a, um. Cupidus, a, u^. Philargyrus. Auaritieux.
Auaunce. Aucto, as. Attollo, lis. Vide Advance. Auaunce courage. Arrigere
animos. Auaunce to honor. Adorno, as. Enricher. Auaunced. Adornatus, a, um.
Auctus, a, um. Orne. Auaunten. Profiteor, eris. Vendito, as. Vanter quelque
chose. Auaunting. Venditatio, onis. Vanterie. Auctentical, or of authority.
Auctenticus, a, um. * Authenticus, ca, cum. Authentic. Aucthorise, or put in
authority. Praeficio, cis. Commettre aucu^ sur quelque affair. Authority.
Authoritas, it is. Iurisdictio, onis. Ius, ris. Nomen, inis. Potestas, it is.
Praefectura, ae. Prouincia, ae. Authorite. Authority to areste one,
Clarigatio, onis. Permission generale a vng chascun de pouuoir prendre and
emmener quelque vng prisonnier. Authority of the church. Sacro sancta
potestas. L'authorite d'eglise. Authority of a king. Maiestas, it is.
L'authorite du roy Authority to exercise, or to bear or have authority or
office. Obire prouinciam, Potestatem gerere, Praesidio, es. Esire en authorite.
Audience. Auditio, onis. Audition, l'ouye. Auditoure. Psephopecta, Rationarius,
ij. Tabellarius. Auditor, oris. Auditeur. Auditors of the Escheker.
Logographi. Auditors clarke. Scriptuarius, rij. Escriuain. Auenes, the name of
an herb called in latin, Geu^, Sanamunda and benedicta. Galiot, salmonde.
Avenge. Vindico, as. Vlciscor, eris. Venger. Avenged to be. Repetere poenas,
Vltionem far. Venger. Augmente or multiply. Aucto, as. Augeo, es. Amplifico,
cas. Cumulo, as. Augmenter. Augmentation. Accessio, onis. Additamentum, ti.
Amplificatio, onis. Augmentatio, onis. f. g. and Augmentum, ti. Augmentation.
Augmented or increased. Auctus, a, um. and omnia partici. vt supra. etc.
Augmente. Augmenting, or augmentacion, or increasing, or enhauncing. Augmentum,
ti. Et Magmentum, ti. Apud veteres, Magnum augme^tum. Ang. A great increase.
Cumulatio, onis. Augmentation. Augustinus, the famous doctor in Chistes* borne
in Afrike, in a town caled Gathensis, was of such excellent wit, that in his
chyldhode he learned all the seven liberal sciences without an instructor: he
was wonderfully learned, specially in the doctrine of Plato, whereby he was the
rather induced to embrace the Christian faith. He favored the errors of the
Manichees: but by the continual prayer of his good mother Monica, and the
persuasion of saint Ambrose, he was at last converted to the true faith, so
that they both (replenished with the holy ghost) did singe together the Psalm
Te deum, aunswering mutually the one to the other. Afterward in prayer,
writing, and preaching, he so much profited, that he was had in great
reverence of all men, and wrote more books than ever did any in the church of
the latins. He lived. 76. years, and was bishop forty years, and died in
the year of our lord, 437. Augustinus, ni. m. g. Augustus the second
Emperor of Rome, son of Octauius a Senator, and nephewe to Julius Caesar (
whom he succeeded) this man was wise, courteous, liberal, and of much
moderation and clemency. In the four and twenty year of this Emperors
reign, was our Savior Christ borne, when that Augustus had confirmed a
general peace in all the world. Augustus, ti, m. g. August month. Augustus,
ti. Sebastus, ti. Sextilis. Le mois appele a oust. Auinion, a city in
Prouaunce. Auenniorum Colonia. Auignon. Auncetoure. Aui, orum, Maiores, rum.
Les ancestres. Auncestrie. Parentela, ae. Progenies. Parente. Aunciency. Aetas
grandis, Antiquitas, it is. Grauitas, it is. Vestutas, it is. Anciennete. Ancient.
Altus, a, um. Grandis, e. Natu gra^dis. Priscus, a, um. Pristinus, a, um.
Veter, ris. Veteraneus, a, um. Veteranus, a, um. Vetus, ris. Vetustus, a, um.
Ancien. Et vetulus, a, um. diminitiu^. ang. Somewhat ancient. Ancient father.
Auus, ui. Grauastellus. Pere grand. Ancient or old, sometime for noble or
worshipful. Antiquus, a, um. Ancien. Ancient or of old time or antique.
Altus, a, um. Antiquus, a, um. Fort ancien. Ancient writer or seker of
antiquities. Antiquarius, ij. m. g. Que est curieuxd' uoir chooses antiques.
Ancient to be, or wax. Veterasco, scis. Veteresco, scis. Inuieiller.
Aunciently. Antique, Vetuste. Antiquement. Angels food. Manna. De la manne.
Angel, good or bad, which is proper to a man. Manes, ium, ibus. m. ge. Les
esprits ou ames des trespassez And some time taken for deuels or evil
spirits, as Profundi manes, the devils in hell. etc. Avoid a blame. Res^lire
crimen. Se recule a blasme. Avoid danger or peril. Sentino, as. Vito, as.
Euiter. Avoid or make empty. Vacuefacio, cis. Vacuo, as. Vuider, euacuer.
Auoutrer. Taurus alius, secundum horat. Adultere. Auoutrie. Adulterium,
Stuprum. Vide plus Adultrie and Aduoutrie. Adultere. Aduoutrie properly in
bed. Concubinatus, us. Co^cubinage. Aduoutrie to commit. Adultero, as.
Adulteror, aris. Commettre adultere. Authority. Authoritas, tatis. Authorite.
By mine authority, or of mine authority. De meo iure, Pro meo iure. De mon
authorite.

Despise, or little regard, or abolyshe ones authority. Authoritatem alicuius
abijcere. Peu priser l'authorite d'autruy.

Receive authority to do some thing. Potestatem accipere. Receuoir authorite
de fair quelque chose.

Ones authority rejected. Repudiata alicuius authoritas. L'authorite de
quelqu' un reiectee and desprisee.

To obey ones authority. Confer se ad authoritatem alicuius, Authoritatem
alicuius sequi. Svyure l'authorite d'aucun. Vide plus Authority.

Authoure. Author, oris. Autheur. Author allowed in all sayings. Assiduus
scriptor. Author approuue. Awarde, deame, or judge. Arbitror, aris. Arbitrer.
Awarde process. Decernere questionem. Ordonner ou decerner qu'on face le
procez. etc. Aule, a Shomakers instrument. Subula. ae. Alesne de cordouannier.
Aunte by my fathers side, or my fathers sister. Amita, ae. La tante du cost du
pere. Aunte on my mothers side, which is my mothers sister. Materna,
Matertera, ae. La seur de ma mere.
A. ANTE. X.
AXe, that carpenters hew timber with. Securis, ris. f. g. Vne coignee. Axe
helue or handell. Securis manubrium. Le manche d'vne coignee. Axe that
shippemen use, called a shipaxe. Ascia, ae. f. g. Vne coignee, hache grande. H.
Axe, called a chip axe. Dolabra, brae. f. g. Doloir Axe with a short helue,
called a hatchet. Securicula, lae. f. g. Dolobella, ae. f g. Dolatorium, ij. n.
g. Doloir, rabot. H.
A. ANTE. Y.
Look in A. ante I. for in our English tongue there is small diuerstrie
between these two letters in sound, and they are commonly written one for
the other.
A. ANTE. Z.
AZarias, a name in the Bible, and it signifies Auxilium domini, the help of
the Lord, of this name were diverse, one mentioned in the fourth book of the
kings. 14. and. 15. chapter. An other was a Prophet, as. 1. Paral. 15. chap.
An other was one of the three children, that praised God in the hot burning
furnace of fire, and not hurt, but saved by the Angel of God, as in Daniel.
3. Azarias, ae. m. g.
B. ANTE. A.
B A letter among the mutes, boroweth his sound of the letter E. The Greecians
do call B. Vita the which has his nature meanly between P. and Ph. And
that which they write with P. and Ph. is traduced in the Latin in B. And
again contrariwyse, what in Greek is written with Ph. in the Latin is
converted in B. And this is done Ob literarum affinitatem. In compositions B.
is tra^suerted into these letters. C. F. G. P. V. And that. Differentiae vel
Euphoniae caussa. Babylon, a great city in Chaldie, and signifies confusion,
or translation, where was a tower builded by Nemroth, in height. 5174. pases.
Afterward being enlarged by Semiramis, it contained in compass. 60. miles.
The wales were in heighte 300. foot, in thickenesse. 75. foot, and had a
hundredth brazen gates, through the middle of this city ran the famous river
Euphrates. Babylon, Babylonis. f. g. Baby, or little child. Paruulus, li.
Puellus, li. Petit enfant. Baby, or puppet for children. Pupa, ae. Pupus, pi.
Vne poupee. Babion, or monkaye beast. Caebus, by. Cercopithecus, Sphinx. Vng
marmot. Vnde Mart. Callidus enixas eludere Simius hastas,
Si mihi cauda foret, Cercopithecus eram.
I crafty Ape deceive, the darts are cast at me,
and if I had a tail, a Monckey should I be.
Babble. Garrio, is, ire. Babiller. Babble much or oftem. Blatero, as.
Loquacito, as. Iaser. Babble rebukefully. Deblatero, as. Babiller. Babbler.
Blatero, onis. Inaniloquus, Linguax, cis. Loquax, cis. Babillard, Iaseur.
Babbler, or babbling person. Garrulus, a, um. Verbosus, a, um. Babillard,
caqueteur. Babbler to him self alone. Soliloquus. Babbler. Garrulus, Gerro,
Linguax, Loquax, Loquaculus, Locutuleius, Blatero, onis. Babillard. Babblyng.
Garrulitas, Loquacitas, it is. Verbositas, it is. Iasemnent, caquet. Babblyng to
him self, and no body present. Soliloquium. Bachiler, or one unmarried, or
having no wife. Agamus, mi. Ephebus, by. Vesticeps. Iuuenis, nis. Qui pass
quatorze ans. Ieun homme. Bachilers, young men, they that have passed the tender
time of chyldhoode. Qui e tyronibus excesserunt, qui tyrocinium fecerunt,
Tyrones bimi, vel honoratini. Bacheliers. Bacchus, called also Liber Dionysius,
Osiris, Priapus, Lenoeus, Bromius, and Brotinus, was the son of Jupiter. He
first invented yoking of Oxen in the plough, and did set vines, and made wine,
he was named God of wine amongst the Panims. Bacchus, chi. m. g. Bacchus.
Bacchanalia, were feasts and solemnities, dedicated in the honor of Bacchus.
Bacchanalia, orum. n. g. in plurali. Bacchanales. Back. Colles. Dorsum, si.
Tergum, gi. Le dos. Et Do^suarius, a, um. Angl. That which bears or carries
any thing upon the back. Back, or Reremouse, which flies in the dark.
Vespertilio, onis. foe. genesis Chauue souris. quasi caluus mus. Backebyte.
Obloquor, eris. Rodo, is. Vitiligo, as. Detracter mesdire d'aucun. Vnde Tor,
Trix* Tio. Vide Detracte. Backebiter. Obloquutor, Obtrectator, Vernaculus, vel,
la. Vitiligator. vel Trix. Mesdisant. Backebiting. Obloquutio. Vitiligatio,
onis. f. g. Detraction. Backebone. Spondile, lis. Spina, nae. L'eschine d'vng
homme ou d'vne best. Et Spineus, a, um. angl. Of the backebone. Backedore or
posterne, and which by circumlocution, signifies the Arsse, or al things
that is behind us, as Antica, be all things before us. Posticum, Posticus.
L'huis de derriere d'vne maison Horat. Postico fall clientem. Backesyde of a
thing. Auersa pars. La derriere. Backewarde. Recuruus, a, um. Retrorsus, a,
um. En reculant. Backwardly, or backward. Pessum, adu. Recurue, Retrorsum,
Rursum, Rursus. En tirant arriere. Backewardly, or on the backehalfe. Auersus.
Backewardly bowed. Recuruus, a, um. Courbe. Look in bowed. Backewarde to go or
turn. Tergiuersor, aris. Reculer. Bacon. Lardum, di. Laridum, di. Bacon, lard.
Bacon flytche. Petaso, onis. and Perna, ae. The gamonde of bacon. Vng Iambon.
Badge. Insigne, is. Signum, ni. n. g. Enseigne. Badger, barrowe, brocke, or
gray beast. Gruemus, i. Meles, it is. Taxo, onis. Melis, lis. m. g. Vng taisson,
un blairea^. Badgers or Brockes grease. Axungia.* Bag. Ascopera, ae. Mantica,
ae. Sacculus, li. Aluta, ae. Scenoma, Sparteum. Un sac, vne gibbeciere. Bag
and baggage. Sarcinae, arum. Vasa, plural. Bag to put meat in. Pera, ae.
Reticulum, li. Sitharchia, ae. Et Perula, ae. dimi. ang. a little bag. Vne
besace. Baggage, lumbor, or trumperie, sold for necessity. Scruta, orum.
Baggage, vieulx fers. Bags for money, or sachelles. Fisci, scorum. Fiscina,
ae. Farcellae, arum. f. g. Vng sac a mettre argent. Baggepype. Vtriculus, vel
Vtricularis tibia, vel Ascaula. Bagpyper. Ascaules, Vtricularius, Pithaules.
Cornemuseur. H. Bahal, the Idol of Tire. Bay color. Badius color. Balius, a,
um. Bay. Baye horse. Balius Un cheual couleur bay. Bay tree, or Laurel tree.
Laurus, ri. vel Laurus, rus. Laurier, un Laurier. Bail, or mainpryse.
Vadimonium, ij. Tributio, onis Triditio, onis. f. g. Baillement. Bayled, or
let to bail upon recognisau^ce, or mainprysed Vadimonio obstrictus,
Praebitus, Tributus, Attributus, Erogatus. Baille and done. Et Vadimonio
obire. ang. To save him and his bail. Baylife, Catchpole* or Sergeaunt, to
attache men, Satelles, itis. Stator, oris. Baillie, sergeant. Baylife of
hunbandrie. Villico, nis. Villicus, ci. Gouerner d'vne metairie, metais,
metayer, censier. Bayne. Lauacrum, cri. Bain. Bayne or bathe. Balinaeum, i.
Balneum, i. Bain. Bayne house. Tepidarium, ij. Balnearium, ij. Le lieu en la
maison ou sont bains and estuues. The master of the bayne or hot house
Balneator, toris. m. g. Maistre des bains ou estuues.

Of the bayne, or hot house. Balnearius, a, um. Appartenant a bains.

Bayned to be or wette. Madefio, is. Se mouiller. Baynen or to wash.
Madefacio, cis. Mouiller. Bayte, or bayting in journey. Diuerticulum.
Hostellerie and logis passant. Bayte or take Inn. Diuerto, it is, ti, sum, tere.
Se retirer and loger en quelque lieu. Vide plus Lodge. Bayte, or to go to lodge
at some place. Diuertor, teris, vel tere, diuersus sum, diuerti. Verbum
deponens idem quod diuerto. Se retirer. etc. Baked. Coctilis, le. Pistus, a,
um. Cuict. Baked under the ashes. Cinericius, a, um. Subcinericius, a, um.
Baked in an oven. Furnaceus, a, um. Cuict au four. Bakehouse. Pistrinum, ni.
Pistrina, ae. Furnaria, ae. Ouuroir de bolengier. Bake pan. Artepta, Testus,
us. Poille a tarteaus. H. Baker. Artocopus, pi. Panifex, icis. Pinsor, ris.
Pistor, ris, vel trix. Polintor, oris. Boulengier, panettier. Bakewyfe, or a
woman baker. Arropta, Furnaria, Pistrix. Boulengiere. Bakers craft. Furnaria,
Panificium. Boulengerie. Et Pistoricus, a, um. ang. Perteining to bakers
craft. Baking. Pistura, ae. That which belongs to that mystery.
Pistoricus, ca, cum. Pistorius, ia, iu^. De boullengier. Bakyng day.
Fornacalia, ae. Balaam, the name of a Southsayer, or it signifies the
destruction, or devouring of people, or the age of them. He was the son of
Beor in Pethor. Number. 22.23. But in the Hebrew it is written Bileam. Balaunce.
Lanx, cis. Libra, ae. Statera, ae. Trutina, ae. Balance. Et Librile, lis. angl.
The equale beam of the balaunce. Balaunce, tower, or place where the beam
ha^geth. Agina, ae. Equilance. Balche or belke. Eructo, as. Router souuent.
Balde. Alopisiosus, a, um. Caluus, a, um. Phalacron. Sed melius Alopecus.
Chaulue. Balde before. Acaluaster, Praecaluus, Recaluaster, Recaluus. Chaulue
par deuant. Balde to be. Calueo, es. Estre chaulue. Balde to be again.
Recalueo, es. Balde man. Caluus, ui. Glabrio, onis. Chaulue. Balde man with a
bushe. Caluus comatus. Balde the one half, or being half balde. Caluaster.
Chaulue. Balde very much. Praecaluus, a, um. Fort chaulue. Baldenes. Alopetia,
aliqui Alopicia, Caluities, Caluitium. Chauluete. Baldare, an herb called
Flower gentill. Amaranthus, thy. Herb nommee Pass velours. Ballesse or
lastage for ships. Saburra. ae. Saburre. Balessed. Saburratus, a, um. Charge
de ceste gross arene. Balassen. Saburro, as. Bailler, contrepois. Balke, or
chief beam or pillar in a house. Templu^, Trabes, bis. Trabs, bis. Vng tref,
ou poultre de maison. Et Trabalis, le. ang. Pertaining to a balke. etc. Qui
sert a poultres. Balke end which appears under the eaues of a house.
Proceres, rum, p. La test and bout des poultres qui passent oultre le mur.
Balke in a plowed land. Porca, ae. Scamnum, ni. Vng banc. Balke land in
ploughing. Imporco, as. Ball, or apple of the eye. Pupilla, ae. La prunelle de
l'oeil. Ball. Pila, ae. Trigon, onis. Et Pilula, ae. dimi. angl. A little ball.
Un pile, ou plotte, ou esteuf a iouer. Ball, bigger then a tennise ball.
Phennida, ae. Vng esteuf. Ball, ^ylled or puffed only with wind. Vtris.
Balsamine, an herb called in latin Charantia, Balsamina, Mamordica, Pomum
Hierosolymitanum, Pomum mirabile. Merueille. Balls or cl^bbes of lead,
wherewith men do fight. Plumbatae. Est^uf de plomb. Ballocke of man or beast.
Genitale, lis. Testiculus, li. Le membre d'vng m^sle. Bancke of a hill. Rupes,
pis. vel Ripa, ae. f. g. Tumulus, li. Bank, or a water side. Ripa, ae. Littus.
Riuage. Ripa tamen fluminis, littus maris. Riparius, a, um. ang. That which
abides in banckes. Qui se tient es riuages. Bancke of the sea. Littus, oris.
La board and riuage de la mer. Banckes defensive against subundation called
seabanckes, or seadickes or pyles. Chomata, tum. Chelae, arum. Piles. H.
Banckroute, one that deceaueth his creditours by fraud, couine, ryote, or
guyle. Decoctor, toris. Barathro, onis. Gurges and vorago patrimonij. Nepos,
Lurco, Asotus, Euersor, Heluo, Conturbator macelli, Popino, Prodigus.
Banquerouptier. Banckroute, or to become a banckeroute. Foro cedere,
Dequoquere. Fair banqueroute. Banckerouten, or make banckeroute, or
banckerupte, as to forsake their own country. Solum vertere. Fair
banqueroute. Band or company of men. Grex hominum, Caterua, atque conuentus.
Band d'hommes. Band of men of war. Copia and copiae. Band de gens de
guerre. Band, to tie a thing withal. Copula, lae. Cestus, Lorum, ri. Ligamen,
Ligamentum, Vinctus, huius vinctus, Ligatura, ae. Vinculum, li. Un lien. Band
or a prison. Vinculum, li. Un lien, prison. Band or lace of a cap or hatte.
Spira, ae. Un quarqua^. Ban, or to curse. Deuoueo, es. Maledico, is. Mesdire
d'aucun. Baneer, pendaunt, or standard. Signa, orum. Estandart and enseigne de
guerre. Vexillum, li. Diminut. de, Velum. Bannars, pendauntes, or standers,
splayed in battle. Signa infesta. Les enseignes and estandars. Spleade,
displaie, or to spread ye insignes or ba^ners in the field. Attolere signa.
Desployer les enseignes aux champs.

Banner bearer. Antesignanus, Imaginarius, Signifer, Vexillarius. Port'
enseignes. Banyshe, or expelle, or exile one out of his country. Exilio
afficere, In exilium agere, Relegare, Ci^ itatem alicui adimere, Redigere
aliquem ad vel in peregrinitatem, Proscribere, In exilium depellere and agere,
In exilium aliquem inijcere, Exigere in exilium, Pellere in exilium. In exilium
aliquem proijcere. Imperare exilium alicui. Banir ou bannir. Banishe by sound
of trumpet, or by open proclamation. Praeconio promulgare and proscribere.
Banir a son de trompette. Banyshe any one, and deprive him from the presence of
the Council or Senate. Eripere alicui conspectum senatus. Banir quelqu'vn, and
le priuer de la presence du senate. Banishe him self, or of free will to go
forth of his country. Exilium suscipere, In exilium abire, In voluntarium
exilium concedere. Se banir soymesme, and de son bon gre. Banished to be.
Exulare, Ire in exilium, Nome exulis subire, Ciuitatem amittere. Estre bani.
Banished from the court. Excuriari, Curia excludi. Estre bani de la court.
Banished, and his goods confiscate. Proscriptus, Bonaque eius adnotata. Bani,
and ses biens declarez confisquez. Banished for ever. Aetate^ exulare, Perpetuo
exilio mulctatum esse. Estre bani a tousiours. Banished man. Apolis, Extorris,
Exul, Proscriptus. Un bani. Come to have the name of an exull or banyshed man.
Nomen exulis subire. Venir a auoir le nom de bani.

Banished from his own house. Exulare domo. Banyshed. Ablegatus, a, um.
Ademptus, a, um. Deportatus, a, um. Exterminatus, a, u^. Profugus, Proscriptus,
a, um. Relegatus, a, um. Banni. Banished to be, or to be a banished man. Exulo,
as. Subire exilium, vel nomen exulis. Bani. Bannyshe, Ablego, as. Deporto, as.
Exrermino. as. Bannir. Banishement. Eiectio, Exilium, Relegatio, Ademptio
ciuitatis, Proscriptio. Bannissement. Banishement of citezins, Expulsio ciuium.
Bannissement de citoyen. Bancke of exchange. Argentaria, iae. f. g. La
boutique and banc des argentiers. Banqueter, or he that keeps a bancke of
money, of whom people do borrowe money upon gain, called exchange.
Argentarius, Collybistes, Collybistae, Mensarius, Nummarius, ij. Banquier.
Banquet. Compotatio, onis. Conuiuium, ij. Epulae, arum. Obsonium, ij.
Symposium, ij. Banquet. Et Epularis, re. Perteining to a banquet. Et
Epulatorius, a, um. Apt to be eaten at a banquet De banquet, appartenant a
banquet. Banquet before supper. Antecoenium. Le reciner. Banquet, called a rere
banquet or drynking. Repotium, tij. Pocoenium, ij. Petit banquet. Banquet of
five sundry dishes. Pentapharmacum conuiuium. Banquet sumptuous and
magnificent. Coena pollucibilis, Dapalis coena, Epulae, arum. Lautissimu^
conuiuium, Polluctum, Opipare apparatum co^uiuium, Pontificum, Adijcialis
coena. Un banquet somptueux and magnifique. Banquet given to a friend at a
departing, or coming home. Viatica Coena. La bien venue. H. Banquet, whereunto
every geste brings his propre portion of vittayles, after a measure.
Phiditia. Ba^quet or a feast, where none come but they which are of kynne.
Charistia, ae. Conuiuium solenne, cui praeter cognatos and affines interponitur
nemo. Table ronde. H. Banquet maker. Obsonator, Obsonatrix, Symposiastes,
Conuiuator. Qui faict le banquet. Banquetes without wine. Nephalia, Prandium
caninum, Abstemium. Le diner de chien. Banquet, or make good cheer. Agitare
conuiuium, Celebrare conuiuium, vel Epulas, Commessor, aris. Conuiuari. Fair
grand banquet. Banqueten, properly to eat a rere supper. Obsonito, as.
Obsonor, aris. Fair souuent banquets. Banqueter or reueler. Coepulonus.
Banqueter. Banqueting chamber. Conclaue, Conclauium, ij. Vide Parloure. etc.
Banqueting dishes. Bellaria, mensae secundae, Tragemata. Dessert de table. H.
Banqueting one with an other. Concoenatio, Co^messatio, Obsonatio, Syndipnium,
Verius sindipnum, ni. Banqueterie, collation. Bansticle. Trachida, Trachina,
Trachurus. Baptize, or to Christen. Baptisare, Baptizare, Purifico rore
perfundere. Baptizer. Baptized or Christened. In lustrali piscina mersus,
Baptizatus vel intinctus, Aqua and spiritu interpolis. Baptize. Baptized to be.
Per aquam and spiritum adoptari. Estre baptize. Baptism. Baptisma, it is.
Baptismum, mi. Baptism. Barbarous or rude. Barbarus, a, um. Barbarius, a, u^.
Rude en son parler, barbare. Barbarous, or vicious form of speaking without
congruitie. Stribligo, ginis. Barbarously or rudely. Barbare, Georgice,
Inco^pte. Rudement, Barbarement. Barberie tree. Pyxacantha, Pyxacanthos, Spina
acuta vel acetosa, Oxyacantha, ae. Espine vinette. Barble fyshe. Barbo, onis.
Barbus, by. Tragopogus. Poisson qu' on appelle roussette, ou iau. Barboure.
Rasor, oris. Tonsor, oris, vel trix. Barbier, Tondeur. Et Tonstricula, vel
Tonstrix. Tonderesse Barbiere. Ang. A woman harbor. Et Tonstriculus, li. Ang.
A young harbor, which is not perfect in the occupation. Shave or to poole, or
cut ones hear or bearde. Tondere, Radere, Abradere, Demere barbam. Barbeer, ou
fair la harbe, ou fair rongner ses cheueuls.

Barbours shop. Tonstrina, ae. f. g. La boutique d'vn barbier. Barded horse.
Caballus phaleratus. Vng cheual barde. Barded or trimmed with bardes.
Phaleratus. a, um. Barde. Bardes for horse trappers. Phalerae, arum. Bardes des
cheuauxl. Bare. Nudus, a, um. Nud. Bare footed. Planipes, dis. Qui chemin les
pieds nuds. Bareid halfwaye, or half naked. Seminudus, a, um. A demi nud. Bare
to make. Nudo, as, are. Denudo, as. Fair nude, desuestir. Bare, or lean to
make. Macero, as. Tenuo, as. Fair maigre. Bare or lean. Macer, a, um. Maigre.
Bared, or made bare or naked. Nudatus, a, u^. Discouuert. Barely, or nakedly.
Nude. Nudement. I. Barely, or poorly, or weakly. Tenuiter. Pourement.
Barenes. Nuditas, it is. Pourete. Barenes, or leannes of the body. Macies,
Tenuitas. Tenurete. Bargayne. Contractus, us. Emptio, onis. Sponsio, onis.
Sponsus, us. Venditio. Paction, pact. Emptio ex part ementis. Achet. Venditio
ex part Vendentis. Vendition. Bargayne by cheuisaunce or exchange. Licitatio,
onis. f. g. Bargayne properly by writing. Co^tractus. Pactio^. I. Bargain, or
promise to perform a thing required. Stipulatio, onis. Stipulatus, us.
Stipulation. Bargayne to make. Contraho, is. Paciscor, eris. pactus sum vel
fui. Fair quelque march ou contract auec aucun. Bargain to make by
cheuisaunce, or exchau^ge. Licitor, aris. Priser, mettre enchere. Bargayne or
promise to make, to do and perform effectually the thing bargained or
promised. Stipulor, aris. Stipuler. Verb. Com. and tunc Iungitur abl. Et
Stipulatio, onis. f. g. Stipulation. Is such bargain. Vide Stipulation, and
also properly the promise made by nude words. Bargayned. Contractus, a, u^.
Sponsus, a, um. Contract. Bargained, or promised to be performed. Stipulatus,
a, um. Vide Stipulation. Bargainer, or bargain maker, or he that takes the
bargayne. Licitator, Reus stipulando, Sponsor, oris. Qui meten^here. Barge or
boat. Nauicula, ae. Petite nauire. Barge covered. Emphracta. Vide plus Ship.
Barge with fiftene oores. Quindeceremis. Bark. Baubor, aris. Latro, as. Ringo,
is, xi. Latro, as, exig. accus. Abbayer. Bark against one. Oblatro, as. Vnde
Tor, Trix, Tio. Abbayer. Bark or howl like a Dog or Fox. Gannio, is, iui.
Clappir and iappir a la facon d' vng chien and d'vng regnard. Bark or little
ship. Lembus, by. Nauigiolum, li. Petite nauire. Barcke or rynde of a tree.
Cortex, icis. Escorce. Barked or rynded. Corticatus, a, um. Qui ha escorce.
Barken trees. Desquamare arbores. Decortico, as. Delibro, as. Escorcer. Barking
of trees. Decorticatio, onis, f. g. verbale. Escorcememt. Barking or howling.
Gannitus, us. Latratus, us, ui. Vlulatus, us. Glappissement, Iappement.
Gannitus propria vox vulpium. etc. Et Latratus est ipsa vox Canum, ac Vlulatus
est foeminaru^, and luporum, vt dicitur fletus and moeror. * Barley. Hordeum,
dei. vel sine aspiratione, Ordeu^, ei. n. g. Orge. Et Hordeaceus, a, um. vel
Ordeaceus, a, um. Ang. Of barley. Et Hordearius, a, um. vel Ordearius, a, um.
Ang. Pertaining to barley. Vide Wheat. Barley bygge. Vide Beercorne and
Wheat. Barley bunne gentleman, which is by circumlocution meaned by such
rich nigardes as live with barley bread, or otherwise hardley. Hordiarius, ij.
m. g. Qui vit d'orge. Barley meal. Alpheta. Barme or este. Spuma ceruisiae.
Barn or lathe. Horreum, ij. Vng grenier. Barn keeper. Horrearius, rij. Custos
horrij. Barnacle birds. Chenalopeces. Barnacles or burnacles, to put on a
horses nose to make him to stand. Postomis, idis, f. g. Vne braye ou museliere
a cheuaulx. Baron, or like person of nobility, which been esteemed among the
people as an half God, for their travail about the public weal. Heroes,
ois. m. g. Un homme ayant quelque chose de virtue plus que de l'homme. Barons
of the Escheker court. Quaestorii Iudices. Quaestor, oris. Vng judge des
matiers criminelles. Bar of a door, or bolte, of any thing that goes to and
fro. Obex, icis. Patibulum, li. Pessulus, li. Repages, Repagulum. Vne bar, un
verrouil, un courreau. S. Bar an accion. Eximere actione^. Fair a aucun
perdre ou perir son action, a fault de l'auoir ententee dedens le temps
prefix. Bar or leauer. Vectis, it is. Leuier. a Vehendo. Barrayne. Segnis, ne.
Sterilis, le. Sterilus, a, um. Sterinon graece. Sterile de nature. Barayne
cow. Taura. ae. f. g. Barrayne dales or plain. Vide Downs. Barren woman.
Effoeta. Qui ne port plus. Barren soil. Fistulosa terra. Sterile. Barren to
be or wax. Sterilesco, scis. Deuenir sterile. Barren to make. Defrugo, as.
Fair sterile. Barren heyfar or young cow. Iuuenca sterilis, Vacca sterilis.
Brehaigne, Sterile, qui ne port point. Barren or chaste man. Vir sterilis,
Castus, Debilis. Chastre, qui ne peult engendrer. Barren ground, or country.
Terra ieiuna. Terre Sterile. Barrenness of nature. Natalis and ingenita
sterilitas. Vne sterilite naturelle. Barrenness. Sterilia, Sterilitas.
Sterilite. Barrenly. Steriliter. Effoete. Barretoure or common brawler, or
fighter, or stryuer. Pugnax, cis. Pugnator, toris. m. g. Combat^^r. Barrowe for
to carry out dunge or filthe. Coenouectorium, ii. Plaustrum, i. Plostrum, i. n.
genesis Tumbereau. H. Barrowe or little hill. Cippus, pi. Tumulus, li. Vne petite
mont. Barter one thing for an other. Muto, as. Changer. Barton court, or place
enclosed where husbandry is used, or pultrie kept. Cohors, it is. Cors, it is. f.
g. La court d'vn metairie. Barwycke, a town in England. Tuesis. Base of
blood or estimation. Humilis, le. Obscuri natales. Bas, de bas esiat. Base or
low. Humilis, le. Submissus, a, um. Summissus, a, um. Bas. Base people, as not
of the best sort. Infimates. De basse estat. Quasi Infimi, and minores. Base
men, men of the lowest estate or degree. Infimi homines. De basse condition ou
estat. Base by birth, of a low, and base, or poor stock, birth, or
parentage. Infimo loco natus. Des poures parents, de bas and pour lieu. Base
of a pyller. Spira. ae. Un soubassement de colomne. Base in musske. Imus sonus,
vel Tonus. Son. Base synger. Succentor, oris. Bassus, si. m. g. Et Succento,
as. and Succino, as. Ang. To sing the base. Baseness. Humilitas, it is. Bas
estat, basseur. Baseness of blood, or ignobilitie, as comen of no gentle
house. Obscuritas, tatis. Obscurite. Basiliske, a beast full of poison, which
some men do think to be a Cokeatrice. Catoblepas, pae. f. g. Basiliscus, ci.
Un serpent nomme basilic. Bassil, a city in Almayne. Augusta Rauricum.
Basilea, ae. f. g. Basle, ville D'alemaigne. Basyll herb. Ocymum, Ozimum. Du
baselic basilie. Basyn to wash hands in. Malluuiae, arum. Malluuium, ii.
Pollubrum, ri. Un bassin a lauer les mains. Basyn to wash feet in. Peluis,
Peluium, ii. Pelluuium, ii. Vng bassin a lauer les pieds. Basyn to receive
ordure or urine. Scaphium, ii. Pot a pisser. Basin that a barber uses, a
barbers basin. Concha, vel peluis tonsoria. Bassin a barbier. Basket. Calathus,
thy. Canistrum, tri, Carthallum, li. Cista, ae. Coix, icis. Cophinus, ni.
Corbis, bis. Fiscina, ae. Sirpiculum, li. Sporta, ae. Sirpiculus, li. Panier ou
corbeille faicte d'osier. Et corbula, ae. and Sportula, ae. diminit. Ang.
Little basket. Petite panier. Basket or coffin made of the bark of a tree,
bulle ryshes, or wickers. Tibin. Basket or hamper for bread. Panarium. ij.
Panier ou corbeille a porter ou garder pain. Baskette wherein gentle women do
lay their silk. Qualus. li. m. g. Le panier ou les femmes mettent leur fill,
leurs forces and leur cousture. Basket out of the which new pressed wine
runs. Qualus, li. Corbis vimineus, per quem liquatur vinum calcatis vuis.
Basket to carry players cotes or raiment in. Soracus, ci. Basket made of rishes,
or pretty basket. Scripiculu^. li. n. g. Un petit panier faict de jones. Basse
or to kiss. Basio, as. Dare oscula. Osculor, aris. Suauio, as. Suauior, aris.
Suauium facere, vel sumere. Baiser quelqu'vn. Vide plus Kiss. Basse, kiss, or
bassing. Basium, Osculum, li. Suauium. Vng baiser. Basser or kysser. Basiator,
Osculator. Baiseur. Bassyng. Basiatio, onis. f. g. Baisement. Bashefull or
amassed. Attonitus, a, um. Esbahi. Bashefull for shame, or full of shamefastnes.
Pudibundus, a, um. Pudens, it is. Honteux. Bashefully or in a mase. Attonite.
Esbahissement. Bashefully or with shamefastness. Pudibunde, Pudenter.
Aduerbium, idem. Bastard. Filius populi, Nothus, thy, Vulgo conceptus. vel ex
incestu natus. Bastard. Bastard begotten between base and gentle, or between
coniugate and single. Spurius, rij. Bastard. Nothus, Adulterinus. Bastard.
Bastard, or two handed sword. Spatha, ae. Vne espe^. Bastard hand, letter,
or writing. Litera adulterina. Vne lettre bastard. Bastardly, as not after the
right sort begotten. Spurius, a, um. Qui est ne d'vne femme public. Bathe,
the name of a town in Somerset shere here in England. It has the name
because of the bathes that are therein, which are of great virtue to soften
the senewes, to scour the skin, to cure the morphewe whit, and black, for
lepre, scabbes, scurfes, old sores and botches, for humors fallen into the
joints, for a hardened milte or the cake in the left side, for a hardened
liver, or mother, for all kinds of palseyes, for the Sciatica, and for all
kinds of itches. Bathonia, ae. f. g. Aquae calidae. Bath. Lauacrum, cri. Bain.
Bathes of hot water. Thermae, arum. Des estuues. Bathing vessel, to bathe or
wash in. Baptisterium, rij. Labrum, bri. Vne baignoire a se baigner. Batte or
staff. Baculus, li. Baston. Batte or staff, crooked at the end. Vncinus,
Vncus. Un croc, ou crochet. Battle. Arma, orum, Bellum, li. Co^gressus, us.
Dimicatio, onis, Mars, per Metonymiam* Praelium, lij. Militia, ae. Pugna, ae.
Conflictus, tus. La battaille and combat. Bellum, Is also the time of battle
or war. Et Praeliaris, re. Angl. Pertayninge to battle. etc. The ends of
battle are uncertain. Exitus Praeliorum sunt incerti.

Hardy in battle. Audax praeliis. Hardi a se combattre, ou a combat. S.

To join battle, or to fight. Conserere praelia. Combatre.

To end the battle. Dirimere praelia. S.

Battle arraye. Laxatio Manipulorum. And of noble men. Principia. Look
Army. Battle arraye, or in form or order of battle. Turmatim. Par
bands. Battle between two cha^pions, or of two men only. Duellum,
Monomachia. singular certamen. Combat d'homme a homme. Battle set, a
standing battle, that will fight to the vttermoste and last man. Bellum
constans, Pugna stataria. Battaille ferme. Battle feigned upon pleasure, to
delight the lookers on. As is commonly in triumphs, Comedies and tragedies.
Pugna imaginaria, Simulacrum pugnae ad spectatorum oblectationem praebitum.
Bataille contrefait, faulsse, and de ieu. The beginning of the battle.
Praeludiu^ pugnae, Praelusio, Principiu^ pugnae. L'essay du co^bat. H.

Battle before a city or town. Antarium bellum. Battle done or made by
them that be light harnised. Velitaris pugna. Escarmouche. Battle for the
sauegarde of honor. Dimicatio capitis. Combat quand il est question de la vie
d'la honeur. Battle upon the water, or place where water is. Naumachia.
Guerre sur la mer. Et Naumachiarius, a, um. Ang. Pertaining to such form of
battle. Et Naumachiarii, orum. They which do make battle on the water.
Battle or combat, worthy memory. Clara pugna. Combat fameux. Battle to
make. Praelior, aris. Profligare bellum. Combatre, battailler. Battlementes of
walls. Minae, arum, f. g. Les creneaulx d'vne muraille. Bauine or fagote of
wode, to lay on the fire. Fascis, is. m. g. Vnbouree. P. un faggot. A bauine of
dry wood. Fascis cocularius. Vne bouree. S.

Bawd. Lena, ae. Leno, nis. Maquerelle. Et Leniculus vel Lenulus. diminit.
Angl. Pertaininge to bawdes. Bawdie house. Lupanaria domus, Lupanarium. ii.
Lupanar, aris. n. genesis Palestra, ae. Vnbordeau. Bawdie house, or house of
bawdrie without or with in the walls of a town. Summoeniu^, ii. Ganea,
ganeum, Prostibulum, Lustrum, Fornix, Praesepe. Le bordeau. Bawdines or
filthynes upon clothes or other thing. Squalido, inis. Squaliditas, Squalor,
ris. mas. ge. Crasse and amas d'ordure sur quelque chose. Bawdkyn or Tynsell
clothe. Intertectus, Picturata vestis. Habillement ouure a l'esguille ou de
broderie. Bawdrie. Lenocinum, ii. Lupanar. Maquerelage. Bawdrye to exercise, or
play the bawd. Lenocinor, aris. Exercer le faict d' un maquereau. Bawlme
herb. Apiastrum, stri. Citrago, ginis. Melissa, ae. Melisse. Bawlme ointment.
Balsamum, mi. Du bausme. Et Balsaminus, a, um, Angl. Of bawlme. Faict de
bausme.
B. ANTE E.
BE. Sum, es, fui. Eras. dat Este pro estote. Be you. Sum, I am. Ie suis. Es,
Thou art. Tu es. Est, He is. Il est. Esse, To be. Estre. Be esteemed. Pondus
habere. Estre estime. Be esteemed as a God. Deorum numero esse alicui. Estre
estime and repute un dieu. Be nothing esteemed, to be out of credit.
Authoritate egere, Non optime audiri, Opinione laborare, Nihil dignitati, atque
opinioni alicuius tribuere. N'estre pas bien estime., N'auoir pas bon credit.
Be in high authority with the king. Esse magno apud regem Estre fort esteem
du roy. Be in honor, favor, or estimation. Esse in aliquo numero atque
honor, Estimatione florere, Obtinere admirationem, Summam opinionem obtinere,
Haberi magnae authoritatis, Esse maximo pretio, vel in maximo pretio. Estre
fort estime. Be absent, away, distaunt, or far of. Absum, es, fui. Estre
absent. Be before. Praesum, es, fui. Estre deuant. Be at commandment, or one
of his. Contribuere se alicui. Dedo, is. Se mettre, render and donner a aucu^.
Be it done away or God forbid. Absit. Be astonnied. Torpere, Stupere,
Stupescere, Stupefieri. Estre tout estonne. Be in a place, or be at a place. In
aliquo loco adesse. Estre in quelque lieu. Be in some thing. Inesse. Estre in
quelque chose. Be it as thou will, or you will. Esto, Sane vt vis. Age porro.
Soit ainsi. Be ofen in one place. Versor, aris. Hanter, estre souuent en vng
lieu. Beak, byll, or nebbe of a foul. Rostru^, tri. Vng bec. Et Rostellum,
li. Angl. A little beak or byll. diminit. Vng petit bec. Beaken or beacon, to
set on fire when enemies do arrive. Specula, lae. Beffroy ou eschauguette.
Belly. Abdomen. Alueus, Aluus, Epigastrium. Venture, tris. Vter, teri. Vterus,
ri. Ventre. Aluus, Is properly of any thing that has no life. Le ventre ou
sont les boyaux. Ventriculus. diminit. de venture, ac. Vterculus. diminit. de
Vterus. Ang. A little or small belly. Petit ventre. Belly ache. Hysterralgia,
Tormen, inis. Tormina, u^. p. n. Maladif du ventre. Et Aluinus, a, um. Angl.
Diseased with belly ache, or freating in the belly. Maladif du ventre. Belly
hard. Dura aluus. Un ventre dur. Belly laxatiue or lewse. Aluus cita. Un
ventre lasche and desuoye. Belly lewse that has the Flux. Liquidus venture. Le
flux de ventre. Belly great, he that has a big belly. Ventriosus, Ventrosus.
Qui ha grand ventre, ventru. Belly cries, or my belly cries with wind.
Crepitat mihi venture, Mihi intestina murmurant. Le ventre me bruit. Belly to
ease, or to ease the body. Aluum soluere, Elicere aluum, Aluum ciere, Soluere
ventrem, and ventris onus, Aluum mouere. Lascher le ventre. Stinte or stay the
belly. Aluum sistere, Continere, Firmare, Inhibere, Contrahere. Reserrere le
ventre.

Belly of woman. Vulga. ae. Ventre d' vne femme. Belly of a swyne stuffed with
meal. Sartutillis, Farcimen, enis. n. genesis Boudin, saucisse, ou andouille.
Beam. Lacus, Lacunar, ris. Trabes, bis. and Trabs, bis. Vng tref. Beam of a
balaunce. Iugum, gi. Scapus bilancis, de quo lances vtrinque pendent. Phalanx,
gis, Statera. Iugum, Is also the side beam of a ship. Beam with two
balaunces. Bilanx, is. Beam of a house. Trabes, bis. Trabs, bis. Vng tref. Et
Trabalis, le. Ang. That which perteyneth, or perteyning to a beam. Qui sert a
poultres. Beam of a plough, or wagon, or carte, containing the yoke. Temo,
onis. m. g. Le timon d' vng chariot. Beam or a rouffe, not being inbowed or
fretted. Laquear, Laqueare, Laquearium, rij. Le planchier de vne maison. Beam
of a ship. Iugum, gi. Rates, it is. Tref. etc. Beam of the Sun or other
bright star. Radius, ii. m. g. Rayon de soleil. Beam of timber, whereupon
Embroderers and Weauers do roll their work. Iugum. i. n. ge.* Bean. Faba,
ae. f. g. Vne febue. Et Fabarius, a, u^. Pertaining to a bean. Fabalis, e.
Adiectiuum. De febues. And Conchis, is any kind of meat made of beans.
Potage de febues. Beans stalk. Fabale, lis. n. g. Substantiuum. Vng fauat de
febues. Bean butter. Conchis, is. f. g. Beurre de febues. Bean of Egypt.
Colocasia, ae. Cyamos. Febue Egyptiaque. Beans called French beans. Eruilia,
Pois. Bean cake. Fabacia. Gasteau faict de febues. S. Bean meal. Lomentum,
ti. Farine de febues. Bear. Baiulo, as. Fero, is. Gero, is, ssi. Gesto, as.
Porto, as. Tolero, as. Port. Bear about. Circumfero, is. Porter de ca and de
la. Bear before. Praetendo, is. Porter deuant. Verg. Bear away a tale.
Sublego, is. Bear or to carry. Portare, Far, Gerere, Supportare, Defer,
Gestare, Ingerere. Porter. Bear blame. Caussam sustinere. Porter tout le
blasme. Bear a child. Tollo, is. Sustuli. Bear before or up. Prouehere.
Porter auant. Bear charges and costs in journey. Viaticor, aris. * Bear
closely, pryuely, or secretly. Supporto, as. Porter. Bear crafty and false
lies and tales about. Sycophantisso, as. Sycophantor, aris. Accuser faulsement.
Bear favor or good will. Suffragor, aris. Fauoriser and porter faueur. Bear
or have leaves. Frondeo, es. Frondesco, scis. Produire fueilles. Bear in
mind. Complecti cogitatione. Bear often. Gestito, as. Porter. etc. Bear out.
Effero, rs. Egero, ris, ssi. Exporto, as. Porter horse. Bear properly on the
neck and shoulders. Succollo, as. Charger sur son col. Bear on a leauer, or
porter. Palango, as. Bear together. Cornportare, Contollere. Porter ensemble.
Bear in. Infer, Introferre, Inuehere. Importare. Porter dedens ou apporter.
Bear tale or tidinges. Rumifero, as. Rumigero. Bear out of one place, into an
other. Auehere, Deuehere. Porter d'vn lieu en autre. Bear water. Aquo, as.
Aquor, aris. Bear up. Sustento, as. Sustineo, es. Soustenir. Bear wytnes.
Antestor, aris. Perhibere testimoniu^ Pro testimonio dicere. Estre tesmoing,
and recors d' vng adiournement, ou autre act iudiciaire. Bearer or a porter.
Lator, oris. Portitor, ris. mas. ge. Porteur. Bearer of fase lies and tales,
between party and party. Sycophanta, tae. Faulx accusateur. Bearer of tales
or tydinges abroad. Rumigerulus, vel la, ae. idem. Bearer of trifles, lies, or
tales about. Nugigerulus, li. Vaniloquus. qui parle chooses veins. Bearing.
Gestatio, onis. Gestatus, tus. Portement. Bearing abundantly of many things.
Multifer, fera, ferum. Qui port and produit diuerses chooses. Bearing gold.
Aurifer, ra, rum. Portant or. Beasome. Look browme. Beast. Bestia, ae. Pecus,
idis. Vne best. Beast or cattle. Pecu. Indecl. plur. Pecua, cuum. * Beast
cruel and great. Bellua, ae. Grande and terrible best. Beast which flies.
Vapo, onis. * Beast that lives only on the earth. Terrestre animal. Best qui
vit sur terre. Beast that lives on the earth, and on the water. Amphibium.
Best viuant en terre and en l'eaue. Beast that labors. Operariu^ pecus.
Bestes de quoy on se sert a labourer. Beast killed in sacrifice. Victima, ae.
f. g. Sacrifice. Beast for draughte or burden. Iumentu^, ti. Best. etc. Beast
or monster, half a man, half an ass. Onocentaurus, ri. m. g. Monstrosum
animal, de quo apud Esaiam. Beast which is both a male and female.
Arsenothelia. As it is said that an hare is, which is one year male, and an
other female. Beasts or cattle yoked together. Biiugi. Accoupler a costd'vng
de l'autre. Beasts being engendered between a wild beast and a tame, as
between a dog and a wolf. Semifera animalia. Demi sauuage. Beasts brute.
Bruta animalia. Bestes brutes. Beasts brute and savage, Fera. ae. f. g. Best
sauuage. Beasts which do serve for burden, as asses, horses, oxen, Mules.
etc. Veterinus, na, number. Toute bestes qui seruent a porter sommes. Et
Veterinarius, a, um. Angl. Perteining to, or that keeps such beasts. Qui ha
la charge de tells bestes. Beasts tamed. Domita and condocefacta animalia.
Bestes qui sont appriuoisees. Beast having but one horn and very long main.
or a buffle. Bison, it is. m. g. Un sort de beufs. Beasts called Panthers of
diverse colors. Varae, arum. Panthres. Beasts meat. Vide Forage. Beasts
that strike with horns. Cornupeta. Beastly. Beluinus, a, um. De best,
bestial. Beastly fury, or madness. Beluina rabies. Immanis feritas. Bestiale
cruaute. Beastlines, filthiness, sluttishenesse, or uncleanness. Paedor, ris.
Bestialitas, tatis. f. g. Bestialite. To water the cattle. Adaquare. Abbreuer
les bestes.

Chase or course wild beasts. Agitare feras. Couurir les bestes sauuages and
chasser.

Beat. Accipere verberibus. Afficio, cis. vt virgis affectus. Batuo, is.
Caedo, is, ere. Praecido, is, di. Verbero, as. Batre, frapper. Beat black and
blewe. Suggillo, as. Frapper aucun sur la chair tellement qu'il y vienne des
taches noires. Beat with a clubbe or staff. Fustigo, as. Et Fustuarium, ^i.
n. g. beating with a staff. Vne bastonnade. Beat, or to beat. Verberare,
Verberibus accipere, Conuerberare, Diuerberare, Euerberare, Cudere, Percutere,
Pulsare. Batre. Beat down. Aequare solo, Proru^o, is. Percutio, cutis.
Frapper, batre. Beaten with the fiste. Alapizo, as. Occilo, as. * Beat or
knock at a door. Pulsare fores, Pulso, sas. Heurter. Beat, knock, or strike
a thing, whereby to make it lesser or thynner. Procudo, is. Batre. Beat much.
Deuerbero, as. Batre a force. Beat one till death, or kill one with beatinge.
Ad mortem vsque multare. Batre iusques a la morte. Beat one with rods to
death. Caedere aliquem virgis ad necem. Batre de verges iusques a la mort.
Beat often. Verberito, as. Beat often, as a stockfyshe is beaten. Retundo,
dis. Refouler. Beat one with his own rod. Flagitiis, vel Plagis afficere,
Scelere verberare. Beaten by his master. Pendere poenas magistro. Estre batu
de maistre. Beat, rappe, or strike any thing by way of affection, but not
correction. Pulso, as. vt Pulsare Lyram. Iouer de la harp. Beat or stamp.
Exciso, as. Subigo, is, egi. Trito, tas. Broyer, piler. Beat or stamp out.
Extero, ris. Froisser and briser. Beat a thing upon an anuill. Accudo, is,
ire. Forger and marteler. Beaten to be. Dare poenas, Expendere poenas, Luere
poenas, Pendere poenas vel verbera, Subire poenas vel verbera, Vapulo, as.
Estre batu. Beaten. Vapularis, re. Verberatus, a, um. Qui est batu. Et Verbero,
onis. Angl. A person worthy to be beaten. Ac verberabilis, le. and Verbereus,
a, u^. Angl. Worthy to be beaten. Digne d'estre batu. Beaten black and blewe.
Suggillatus, a, um. Beaten down with thonder or lightenining. Percussus de
coelo, Tactus de coelo. Beaten together or stopped hard. Stipatus, a, um.
Batu. Beaten with haylestones. Excussi Grandine, Grandinatus, a, um. Batuz de
la gresle. Beaten to pieces with stripes and laying on. Tribax cis. Tribaces,
Viri attriti flagris. Beaten to poulder. Tritus, ta, tum. Tritatus, a, um. Batu
en un mortier. Beaten with rods. Affectus virgis. Beaten with whippes.
Affectus loris, Flagellatus, a, um. Estre fouuette. Beaten under. Suppressus,
a, um. Beating back of the sea. Repercussus maris. Le batement ou rebatement
de la mer. Beater with rods. Virgator, vel trix. Fesseur. Beaten. Verberatus,
Incussus. Qui est batu. Beating one thing against an other. Conflictatio.
Frottement de deux chooses l'vne contre l'autre. Beating stock. Subiculum
flagri. Beauty. Forma, ae. Venustas, tatis, Pulchritudo, dinis, Species, ei.
Specimen, inis. Beaulte. Beauty properly in women. Venustas it is. f. g. Beauty
de femme. Beauty, principal of a woman. Venus, eris. f. g. Beauty singuliere
princepalement de femme. The beauty of a person. Species, iei. f. g. La
beaulte d'vne person.

Beauty, clearenesse, or brightness of the day. Hilaritas diei. La beauty du
iour. Beauty exquisite. Forma expectanda. Beaulte fort exquise. Beauti
excellent. Summa forma. Excellent beaulte. Beauty merueilous. Eximia
pulchritudo. Merueiueilleuse beaulte. Beauties vulgar, common, or of mean
sort. Formae vulgares, Formae quotidianae. Beaultez communes qu'on voit tous
les iours, qui ne sont point singuliers. Beautify or to polyshe. Condecoro,
as. Decoro, as. Orno, as. Venusto, as. Orner, decorer. Beautified. Belliatus,
a, um. Condecoratus, a, um. Orne, accoustre. Beautiful. Decoratus, a, um.
Ornatus, a, um. Pulcher, ra, rum. Speciosus, sa, sum. Venustus, a, um. Beau,
orne. Vide Fair. Beautiful somedeale, or somewhat. Venustulus, a, u^.
Beautifully. Decore, Ornate, Pulchre, Venuste. Orneement. Beche tree. Fagus,
gi. Phagus, gi. f. g. Vng arbre nomme fau ou fouteau. Et Fagineus, a, um. vel
Phagineus, a, um Et Faginus, a, um. Angl. Of beche. Qui est de fau. Beck or
sign, which is made with the eyes or head. Nutus, us. m. g. Le sign qu'vn
fait des yeulx on de la test. Et inde Nutu, and renutu. Angl. With a beck
fromwarde or toward. Becken with the finger or head. Abnuo, is. Abnuto, as.
Innuo, is. Nuto, as. Fair sign de la test. Becking with the head. Nutatio,
onis. f. g. Brausleme^t. Become bounden or subject. Dedo, is. Addonner. Become
merciful or pitiful. Prolabi in misericordiam. Bed. Accubitum, ti. Cubile,
lis. Lectus, ti. Stratum, ti. Torus, ri. Vng lict ou autre lieu a se coucher.
and Lectulus, li. ac Toriolus, li. diminit. Ang. A little bed. Bed of
feathers, a fetherbedde. Culcitra plumea. Lict de plume. H. Bed of course
wolle or a matteresse, or bed of flocks. Culcitra lanea, vel Tomentitia.
Lict remplie de bourre, materaz. H. Bed clothes, as shete or whatsoever they
be. Lodix, icis. Stragula, ae. Toral, lis. Toralium, lij. Toralia. Lodier and
couuerture de ^ict. Bed of herbs in a garden. Areola, Puluinus. Un petit
quareau de iardin. Bed maker. Lectisterniator, vel Trix. Bed pan, or a
warming pa^ne, to heat the bed withal. Battillus cubicularius, Instrumentum
aeneum, in quod coniectis prunis caudentibus excalefiunt lecti. Ignitabulum,
li. neut. g. Un echauffoir de lict. Bed of Roses, or Rose bed. Rosarium,
Rosatu^. Rosier. Bed side. Sponda ae. f. g. Vng chaslit, ou les costez du
chaslict. Bedstedes. Fulcra, vel potius Fulcrum, ri. n. genesis Le bois d'vn lict
un chaslit. Bed time, or the first part of the night. Conticinium, ij. Le
temps de la nuict ou toutes chooses se taisent. Bedlem body. Lymphaticus, ci.
Lymphatus, ti. Mente captus and insanus, Ceritus, Laruatus, velut Laruarum
incursione animo vexatus. Furieux, horse du sens. Bedle or officer. Ceryx, icis.
Praeco, onis. Viator, Stator. Sergeant, messagier, ou appariteur. Be. Apes,
is. Apis, is. Bugones, um. Mousche a miel. Bees delight, or that whereupon bees
feed. Apianus, a, um. Be, called a Waspe. Vespa, ae. f. g. Mousche guesp ou
Bourdon. Be, called a Dorre, that has no stinge. Fucus, ci. m. g. Vne sort
de mousche sans aguillon. Bees lose no day but still they travail to obtain
honey. Nullus otio perit dies apibus. Les mousches a miel ne perdent point vne
iournee qu'elles ne trauaille^t. Bees meat, or huuy sucle. Cerinthe, these. f.
g. herb nomme Paquette. Erithace, vel Erythace, es. f. g. Bear to carry a dead
corpse to burial. Capulum, li. Capulus, li. Libitina, ae. Loculus. Orcamana,
Pheretrum, tri. vel potius feretrum, tri. Orciniana sponda. Sarcueil bierre.
Before. Ante. Parauant, deuant. Antea, Antequam, Ad, vt ad iudicem, Coram, Ob.
Prae, Praeter, Prius, Pro, vt pro Curia. Prae in co^p. augmenteth. Before and
behind. A front, and a tergo. Par deuant, and par derriere. Before day
light, or an hour, or little before day. Anteluco, Anteluculo, adu. Deuant le
iour. Before one. Ante aliquem. Deuant quelqu'vn. Before my face, or in my
presence, or in my sight. Ante oculos, Coram. Deuant moy. Before day light,
or day rising. Antelucanus, a, u^. Qui est faict deuant le iour. Before the
trompet was sounded. Ante tubam. Deuant que la trompette son. S. He did this
before me, or in my presence. Ante me hoc fecit, Coram me, Me praesente, Coram
oculis meis. Auant moy.

Before the day appointed. Ante diem certam. Before his eyes. Viuus,
Vidensque. Deuant ses yeulx. Before the judge. Ad vel apud iudicem. Deuant le
Judge. Go before, or mete them. Abi illis obuiam. Va au deuant d'elles.

Go before, I will follow. I prae, sequar. Va deua^t ie te suyuray.

Before the end or term. Ante terminum. Ante finem. Before all men, openly,
in the face of the world. Palam, In propatulo, Vulgo, In publico, Propalam.
Publiquement deuant tout le monde. Before the Senate, or before the Council.
Coram Senatu. Deuant le Senate. Before hands. Prae manibus, Prae manu. Auant la
main. Before that, Priusquam, Prius quam. Auant. Before that, or this time.
Abhinc, Antehac. Par ci deuant, deuant ce temps ci. Before us being, or all
that is before us. Antica. Before all things, chiefly first of all. In primis.
Deuant toutes chooses. Before noone, which is done before noone.
Antemeridianus, a, um, Qui est, ou est faict deuant le midi. Beg, or to ask
for Gods sake. Mendicare, Eme^dicare, Manum ad stipem porrigere. Mendier.
Beggar. Mendicus, ci. Petitor, oris, vel trix, Proseucha, Rogator, vel trix.
Mendiant. Beggary. Mendicimonium, nij. Mendicitas, it is. Mendicite. Beggarly
apparelled or cladde. Obsitus pannis. Begging. Mendicans, it is. Adiectiuum.
Mendiant. Beget children. Generare, Ingenerare, Gignere, Progignere, Procreare,
Progenerare, Marem seminare. Engendrer. Begetter of children. Genitor, toris,
Procreator, toris. m. g. Qui engendre. Begyle with falsehod. Deludificor, aris.
Fallo, lis. Frauder. Begyled. Deceptus, a, um. Fraudatus, a, um. Seductus, a,
um. Fraud. Begyling, or a deceit. Fraudatio, onis. f. g. Fraudatio^. Begiler
or who is full of deceit. Fraudulosus, a, u^. Fraudulentus, ta, tum.
Cauteleux, plein de tromperie. Begyler or crafty body, which has used the
crime long. Veterator, vel trix. Fraudator. Fraudeur, fraudateur. Begle hounde.
Catellus, vel la. Un petit chien. Begin. Adordior, iris, orsus sum. Aggredior,
eris. Auspicor, caris. Coepio, is. Coepto, as. Exordior, iris. Incipio, is.
Inchoo, as. Ineo, is, iui. Instituo, is. Obordior, iris. Orior, riris, vel
rire. Pedem ponere. Subordior, iris. Commencer. Begin to do some thing.
Adoriri aliquid facere, Aggredi aliquid, Auspicari, Exordium a re aliqua ducere
vel capere. Exordiri, Inchoare, Initiu^ ducere, vel facere, Instituere,
Occipere, Ordiri, Prin cipium a re aliqua sumere, Prooemiari, Incipere.
Commencer a fair quelque chose. Begin before, or first. Adorior, iris.
Praepeto, it is. tij.* Commencer a fair quelque chose. Begin an action a fresh.
Retractare actionem. Les reueoir and rescrire. Begin again a fresh.
Integro, as. Redintegro, as. Redordior, iris. Redorior, iris. Repeto, it is, tij.
Recommencer. Begin to arise, or spryng as the Sun. Suborior, iris. Se
lever, sourdre. Begin any business or purpose. Auspicor, aris. Telam exordiri.
Commencer quelque chose ou besongne. Begin battle eftsoon. Pugnam
restituere. Recommencer le combat comme deuant. Begin to grow in age of
adolescencie. Adoleo, es. Deuenir grand. Vnde adolescens. Et Adultus nondum
attingens. 21. Annum. Begin the battle. Co^mittere pugnam. Commencer la
bataile. Begin often or many times. Incoepto, as. Encommencer. Begin to
speak. Ordior, iris. Praeloquor, eris. Parler le premier. Begin to spring
or come forth. Oborior, iris. Se lever. Begin to wax bright, day light, or
light. Lucesco, scis. * Beginner. Incoeptor, Initor, oris. Qui commence
quelque chose. Beginning. Accessio, vt Accessio morbi, Caput, Exordium,
Primordium, Principium, Initium, tij. Origo, ginis. Coeptum, ti. Exorsus, sus.
Orsus, sus. Commencement. Beginning of a communication, oration, sentence, or
speech. Praeloquium, Proloquium, Proemiu^. Proesme, preface, commencement.
Beginning of a matter. Frons caussae. Le commenceme^t de la cause. Beginning of
learning, or that which children be first taught. Rudimentum, ti. n. g.
Commencement. Begone. Coeptus, a, um. Incoeptus, a, um. Initus, a, um. Obortus,
a, um. Subortus, a, um. Commence. Begotte before, or first. Praegenitus, a,
um. Primogenitus, ta, tum. Premier ne, laisne. Begotten. Procreatus, a, um.
Progenitus, a, um. Prognatus, a, um. Satus, a, um. Qui est ne, engendre.
Begotten before, or first. Praegenitus, a, um. Protogenus, a, um. Premier ne
ou engendre. Begotten on the earth. Terrigenus, a, um. Engendre de la terre.
Behave honestly. Abstinere incommoditate. Probe se gerere. Behauioure. Gestus,
us. Vultus, us. Le geste and maintien. Beheaded. Vide Headed. Beheaded to be.
Capite diminui, vel plecti. Truncor, caris. Auoir la test trenchee. Behind.
Pessum, Pone, Post, Retro, Seorsum. Derriere. Behind the camps. Pone castra.
Behind to be with account or reckening. Reliquor, aris. S'endebter. Behind
and before. A tergo, and a front. Par derriere and par de vant. Thou hydest
thee behind the sieges. Tu post carecta latebas.

Behold. Aspecto, as. Aspicio, xi. Cerno, is, reui. Conspicio, cis. Oculis
concipere, Conspico, Co^spicor, aris. Inspicio, cis. Intueor, eris. Petere
oculis, vel Visu, Prouiso, is. Specto, as, are. Tueor, eris. Video, es.
Regarder souuent. Behold or to look on some thing. Aspicere, Cernere, Tueri,
Intueri, Videre, Inspicere, Respicere, Capessere aliquid oculis, vel vsurpare.
Regarder. Behold often. Aspectare, Respectare. Souuent regarder. Behold many,
or many to behold one. Conspicere. Quand vne regard plusieurs, ou plusieurs
regarda^t un. Behold one with pity, compassion, or loving goodwyll. Aliquem
respicere. Regarder quelque un en pity. God beholds us, as when he has
pity on us, and does aid us. Respicit nos deus. Dieu nous regard quand il ha
pity de nous and nous aid.

Behold above or look up. Suspecto, as. Freq. Suspicio, cis. Regarder souuent
en hault. Behold advisedly, attentifely, or steadfastly. Animaduerto, it is.
Inspecto, as. Intueor, eris. Obtueor, eris. Oculos intendere. Regarder dedens.
Behold or eye a woman wantonly. Proco, as. Procor, aris. Behold one with
disdain. Contemnere. Regarder par desdain. Behold one firmly, and earnestly.
Oculis intentis contemplari, Obtueri, Obtui, Spectare, Inspectare. Regarder
fermement., and attentiuement. Behold one earnestly, or with gredy affection.
Lynceis oculis contemplari. Regarder fort, and aguement. Behold nighly and
earnestly, without twinclinge or closing the eyes. Oculos intendere,
Inconniue^tibus oculis aspicere. Regarder attentiuement sans cligner les yeulx.
Behold and look into al costs, and parts. Lustrare, Collustrare,
Perlustrare, Obire oculis, Circu^spicere, Despicere, Circumspectare,
Circumaspicere, Circunspicere, Perspectare. Regard de tous costez de toutes
pars, ca and la. Behold al about, or round. Collustro, as. Lustro, as.
Perlustro, as. Regarder de tous costez. Behold intentiuely, or with a goodly
and sincere affection. Contemplo, as. Contemplor, aris. Regarder attentiuement.
Vnde Tor, Trix, Tio. Behold or look on thy self. Tecum habita. Regard toy
mesme. Behold or mark me. Vide me, Me huc aspice. Regard moy, or regard a
moy. Behold or to look down on the earth. Despicere ad terram. Regarder par
terre. Behold a far of, or to epsy. Prospicio, cis, spexi, ctum, icere.
Speculor, aris, vel are. speculatus sum, lari. etc. Regarder de loing, Espier.
Beholden. Spectatus, a, u^. Visus, a, um. Qui a este veu. Beholden about., or
seen on all parts. Circumspicuus, a, um. Perspectus, a, um. Idem. Beholder
Spectator, vel trix. Speculator. Regardeur. Beholder of high things.
Meteoroscopus. Beholding. Aspectus, us. Conspectus, Inspectio, Speculatio.
Regardement. Behoueable. Oportunus, a, um. Qui vient bien a point. Behooves, or
it must. Oportet, bat. Impers. Il fault. Being. Ens, it is. Existens, it is.
Beyond. Cis, Porro, Super. Vltra. Oultre. De Vls deriuatur Vltra. Et Vlrerior,
ius. Ang. More beyond. Vltra cum sit praepositio, regit accusa. and cum
aduerbium, nullum casum. Beyond the sea, coming or going, or that which
comes or is done from beyond the sea. Transmarinus, a, u^. Qui est d'oultre
mer, qu'on aport d'oultre mer. Beer. Ceruisia, Zithum, i. neut. ge. De la
biere. Look more beer. Beer being new. Mustum, ti. Belief. Fides, ei. Foy,
credit. Believe. Credo, is, didi. Fidem habere, Fido, is. Croire. Believe and
say, or to affirm according to his mind. Autumare. Croire and dire. Believe
easily. Se credulum praebere. Croire facileme^t. Believe of a suertie. Pro haud
dubio habere. Croire pour tout certain. Believe or to credit one. Credere
alicui. Croire aucun. Believe one, or to credit him. Fidem alicui habere.
Fidere illi. Croire aucun, and se fire a luy. Believe an others words of his
faith and promise. Fidem alicui adhibere, Fide^ alicuius sequi. Croire a la
parole d'aucun, a sa foy and promise. If you will believe me. Si tu me audies.
Si tu me veulx croire.

Believe me. Creed mihi. Croy moy. I believe thee. Ego cre do tibi. Ie t'en croy.

Believed to be, or win, or to get credit. Fidem impetrare, Audiri, Fidem
accipere, credi. Estre creu. Belke, or bolke, or break wind upward. Eructo,
as. Ructo, as. Ructor, aris. Rugo, is, xi. Router. Vide plus Balche. Belching
body, he that belcheth. Ructator, toris. m. g. Celuy qui route. She that
belcheth. Ructatrix, tricis. f. g. Celle qui route. Belke often. Ructito, as.
Router souuent. Belkyng, or bolkyng, or breakyng wind upward. Ructuatio,
onis. Ructus, us. Rutatio, Rutus, us. Vne route de gorge. Bell, such one as is
used, to be ronge to service. Aeramentum, Campanum aes. Ex aere fusum opus.
Campana vulgo Cloche. Bell, properly called a handbell or little bell.
Tintinabulum, li. Nola, ae. f. g. Sonette, sonaille. Belman of a town Praeco
ferialis, qui funus praeuia nola edicit. Belwether sheep. Sectarius veruex, dux
gregis. Mouton a la sonnette. S. Bellowe or wave of water. Vide Wave. Bellowe,
or roar like a cow or ox. Bouinor, aris. Mugio, is. Bugler, ou murler.
Bellowyng or roaring of neat. Bouinatio, nis. Mugitus, us. Buglement. Bellows
for to blow the fire. Follis, is. Vng soufflet a souffler le feu. Belong
unto. Consto, as. Pertineo, es. Specto, as. Appartenir. Vide plus Pertain.
Belt or sword gyrdle. Baltheus, Baltheum. and Balteus, baltei, and balteum,
tei, dicimus, licet in singulari magis sit in vsu balteus, in plurali vero
baltea. Vne estraincte baudrier, ceincture d'espee. Militare cingulum,
Hadriano. Benche. Scamnum. Banc. Benchclothe, or carpet cloth. Tapes, it is.
Tapete, Tapetum. Vng tapis, tapisserie. Benches in a barge, bote, or ship.
Iuga. Transtra, Remigum sedilia, quasi transuersim strata. Les banes des
gastheurs, ou rameurs. H. Benches for Judges, or for the Senate. Subsellia,
orum. Bancs qui sont. etc. Benches under higher benches. Subsellia, orum. Bancs
qui sont bas. Bend or bow. Curuo, as. Flecto, is. Flexo, is. Inte^do, is.
Tendo, is. Flecher. Bend backwarde. Recuruo, as. Reflecto, as. Repando, dis.
Reflecher, replier. Bend of men commonly of ten soldiers. Manipulus. Vne
chambree de dix hommes de guerre. Bend, fillet, or kerchiefe. Amiculum, li.
Redimiculum, li. Taenia. Vinculum quo vittae nodantur, Fascia crinalis, T^enia
vittae. Bend^au. H. Bending or bowyng. Curuamen, Curuatio, Curuatura, Flexura.
Pliement, tortuement. Bending wise. Accliue. Bendly, or by bands or ha^dfuls.
Manipulatim. Par bands. Beneth. Inferius, Infra, Subter, Subtus. En bas.
Beneth or low under the ground. Inferne. Benedict or Benet, the name of a
man. Benedictus, ti. m. g. Benoict. Benediction. Bona praecatio, Eulogia, ae.
f. g. Benisson. Benefice or spiritual promotion. Sacerdotium, ij. Benefice,
prebende. Beneficial or lyberall. Beneficus, a, um. Liberal. Beneficial to
be. Praesto, as, stiti, stare. Benefit. Gratia, ae. Officium, cij. Meritum,
ti. Bien, grace and plaisir. Benefit or good turn. Benefactum, Beneficium,
Impensum. Vng bien faict, plaisir, grace, gratuite. Benet herb. Caryophyllata,
Geum, Benedicta, ae. f. g. Herb benoite, galiot, salmonde. H. Beneuolent as
loving other. Beneuolens, it is. Bien voulant, bien vueillant. Benevolence,
favor, or good will. Beneuolentia, iae. f. g. Benevolence. Allure ones
benevolence or good will. Allicere beneuolentiam alicuius. Attraire.

Bent or bowed. Curuatus, a, u^. Recuruus, a, um. Repandus, a, um. Tendu. Bente
like a bow. Arcatus, a, um. Arcuatus, a, um. Tentus, a, um. Tensus, a, um.
Tendu, estendu. Bently like a bow. Arcuatim. En facon d'arc. Benumbed to be,
or to be taken in the limbs as lame. Syderor, aris, ri. Estre nielle and
gaste. Benumbed person, taken in limbs or lame. Syderatus, a, um. Nielle and
gaste du temps. Benumming or taken, which is a sickness that suddenly takes
away the sinnowes, and thereupon they be dry and lame without felyng.
Syderatio, nis. f. g. Niellement. Beafe. Bubula, Bouina caro. Chair de boeuf.
Beafe, when it is called or said the lively beafe it self. Bouillus, Bubulus,
li. com. g. Bos, uis. co^. ge. Boeuf. Bequeth. Lego, as. Laisser quelque chose
a aucun par testament. Vnde Tor, Trix. Tio. Bequeathed. Legatus, a, um.
Bequeather or testator. Legator, ris. Testateur. Et Legatarius, rij. Legataire.
Angl. The person to whom a bequest is made. Bequeste or legacy. Legatum, ti.
Ce qu'on laisse a aucu^ par testament. Et Legatinus, a, um. Angl. Pertaining to
bequestes or legacies. Berde. Barba, ae. Barbitium, tij. n. g. Barbe. Et
Barbula, ae. diminit. Angl. A little, short, or thin bearde. Petite barbe.
Bearde of a Goat. Aru^cus, Spirillu^. Barbe de choure. Bearde which is moysye
or young. Puber, ris. Pubes, ris. Barbe petit. Bearde or ear of corn. Arista,
ae. La barbe de l'espi de ble. Bearded. Barbatus, a, um. Barbu. Berden, or
begin to have a berde. Pubeo, es. praeteritum nullum, ere. Pubesco, scis.
Inch. Commencer a auoir barbe, and a deuenir homme. Beardles, or having no
bearde. Galbrio, onis. Imberbis, bis. Bear beast. Vrsus, vel vrsa. Vng ours,
vne ourse. Et Vrsellus, vel la. Vng vrson. Et Vrsulus vel la, diminut. Angl. A
little or young bear. Et Vrsinus, a, um. Ang. Of a bear. Beres flesh. Caro
vrsina. Chair. etc. Berefote herb. Acantha, Acanthus. Elleborus niger.
Marmaritis, Paederos. Branche vrsine. Beer corn, barley bygge, or moncorne.
Achilleias, sieve Achilleus. Hordei genus. Beer. Potus lupatus, vel lupulatus.
Zythum, thy. n. g. De la biere. S. Beer brewer. Cereuisiarius, Ceruisiae
coctor, Zythepsa, sae. Qui zythum coquit. Brasseur. H. Bery. Bacca. Minu fruict
d'arbres. Et Baccula. dimi. Angl. A little bery. Peti minu fruict. Bery, called
a black bery. Morum, ri. Vne meure. Bery of white thorn. Zura, ae. f. g.
Beryll. Glessum, ssi. Glastum, ti. Ambre. H. Bereue or take away. Aufero, rs.
abstuli. Oster. Beseme, or it besemeth, or it is convenient. Attinet, bat.
Decet, bat. Impers. Il est bien conuenant. Beseamed. Accommodatus, a, um.
Approprie. Beseaming. Condecentia. ae. Proprete. Beseech. Adoro, as. Obsecro,
as. Obtestor, aris. Quaeso, sumus. Ver. def. vel Desideratiuum. Rogo, as.
Supplico, as. Prier affectueusement. Beseech humbly. Deprecor, aris. Obsecro,
as. Obtestor, aris. Fort prier and requerir de grande affection. Besecher.
Obsecrator, oris, vel trix. Supplex, cis. Beseech or to pray, Petere, Orare,
Rogare, Preces far, Precari, Comprecari, Facere precationes. Prier. Beseech
or pray a long time. Extendere preces. Prier plus longuement. Beseech
earnestly to obtain. Erogitare, Exorare, Praerogare, Derogare, Deprecari. Fort
prier. Beseech, or I pray you. Sodes, Quaeso. Ie te pry. Beseech, or to
desire God, Deum precibus salutare, Orare deum, Precari ad deum, Petere
precibus a deo, Appellare deum. Prier dieu. Beseech, or I pray God it be so.
Opto, Faxit deus vt ita sit, Vtinam sic sit. Ie pry a dieu qu'ainsi soit.
Besecher, one that prays to obtain some thing. Rogator, toris. m. g. Qui
pry qu'on luy baille quelque chose. Besecher, one that prays for an other.
Precator, toris. m. g. Qui pry pour un autre. Vide plus Pray. Beseching.
Obsecratio, Supplicatio. nom. Priere affectueuse. Beseching. Obsecrans, it is.
Supplica^s, it is. Part. Priant. Besides. Praeter. Except, fors que, aupres.
Besides that. Praeterea, Praeterquam, adu. Oultre ce. Besiege a fortress or
town. Circumsedeo, es. Insideo, es. Obsideo, es. Obsido, is. Oppugno, as.
Assieger, Tenir le siege deuant vne ville, Enuironner. Besiege, or the assiege
laid to a town or castle, Obsessio, onis f. g. Obsidio, onis. f. genesis
Obsidiu^, ij. n. g. Assiegement, le siege de ville. Besiege laier. Obsessor,
oris. Oppugnator, oris. Qui assiege vne ville. Besieged. Obsessus, Oppugnatus,
a, um. Assiege. Best of all. Optimus, a, um. Praestantissimus, a, um.
Potissimus, a, u^. Primus, a, u^. Rectissimus, a, u^. Tresbon. Best.
Potissime, Potissimum, Rectissime. aduer. Tresbien. Best part, or place.
Primae parts. Primier lieu. Bestow labor. Impendo, is. Ponere operam.
Mettre peine. Bestow money or other thing. Conijcio, cis. vt Co^ijcere
pecunia^. Defero, is. Sumo, is, mpsi. Employer. and mettre argent. etc.
Betayne, an herb. Betonica, ae. Cestrum, Serratula, Vetonica, ae. Betoine.
Bethlehem vel Bethleem, signifiyng the house of bread, a city so called, in
which the prophet David was borne and died. And our redeamer Jesus Christ was
likewise borne in this city, there died Rachael the wife of Jacob the
Patriarche. It was assigned to the tribe of Judah, being distaunt from
Jerusalem six miles, and was first called Euphrata. Et Bethleematicus, vel
Bethlehematicus, a, um. Of Bethlehem. Bethink. Vide, Conjecture, and Trow.
Betle or malle for Calkers. Malleus stuparius. Maillet. Betle headed fellow.
Tuditanus, vel Tudito, onis. Betle or a mallet. Tudes, it is. Mateola, lae.
Maillet. Bettill or bittill vermin. Scarabaeus. Vng escharbot. Betes herb.
Betha, ae. Erythios. Des betes. Betoken or signify. Significo, as. Signifier.
Betokens or signifies. Significat, bat, Imp. Betokening or signifiyng.
Significatio, Signum. Demonstrance. Betraye or to accuse. Prodo, is. Traduco,
is, xi. Tor, Trix, Tio. Trahir. Betrayed. Proditus, a, um. Traductus, a, um.
Trahi. Betrayer of his own country, or kyller of his father. Paricida,
Patricida, ae. c. g. Qui a tue son pere. Betrayer, bewrayer, or traitor.
Proditor, Traductor, toris. m. g. Traistre. Betraying. Prodimentum, Proditio,
onis. foem. genesis Trahison. Betrouthe or to make sure a maid or a woman, to
some man. Sponso, sas. aui, are, atum. Fiancer vne fille, ou vne femme.
Betrouthed or promised in marriage. Sponsus, sa, su^. Promis en marriage.
Betrouthed, he that is promised, or made sure to mary. Sponsus, si. m. g. Le
fiance. Betrouthed, she that is assured to mary. Sponsa, sae. foe. g. Virgo
desponsa. L'espouse, vne vierge vouee a quelcun ou promise, vne fiancee.
Betrouthing, or plighting of trougth between man and wife. Vide Affiance.
Better. Melior, ius. Potior, ius. Satior, ius. nom. Meilleur. Better. Melius,
Potius, Praesentius, Praestabilius, Rectius, Satius, co^par. de satis adu.
qua^t. Plus excellent. Better bargeine. Potior conditio. Better then all the
rest. Quod est potissimum. Qui est le principal and le meilleur and le plus
fort. Better or the greatest work in price. Potissimum opus. Qui est le
meilleur de toutes les autres. There was no man better then Aphrican, nor of
more worthier or higher renown. Nec melior vir fuit Aphricano quisquam, nec
clarior. Il n'y eut iamais homme meilleur que Aphricain, ne qui fust plus
renomme.

Better a little. Meliusculus. En peu meilleur. Better part. Pars bona, vel
magna. Meilleur part. Better right or ^itle. Caussa superior. Meilleur droict.
Better to wax, or to becomme better. Meliorescere. Deuenir meilleur. Better to
be, or to be more excellent. Praestare. Estre meilleur, ou plus excellent.
Interpret, or to construe a thing in the better part. Meliorem in partem
interpretari. Interpreter en meilleure part.

In better estate, place, or degree. Loco meliore. En meilleur poinct, en
meilleur estat.

Better to be or w^xe, or be, or wax better and better. Melioresco, scis.
Praeualeo, es. Deuenir meilleur. Better to be, or more worthy. Praeualeo, es.
Idem. Better it is. Praestat. bat. Imp. Il vault mieulx. Between. Inter. Enter.
And sometime for other voices or significatio^s, as for In, vt Inter agendum,
pro in agendo. Sometime for together. Vt inter nos amamus. Sometime for one. Vt
inter viam. Between the one and the other, or on the one party. Altrinsecus. De
l'autre cost. Bewail. Fleo, es. Lamentor, aris. Gemo, is. Gemir. Bewail
much. Ingemo, is. Ingemisco, scis. Vide Wayle. Beware. Caueo, es. Praesto, as.
Praeuideo, es. Prouiuides, es. Vito, as. Caueo exigit aliquoties accus. and
aliquando datiuum, vel ablat. Donner caution. Bewitche. Fascino, as. Efascino
as. Ensorceler. Vt Verg. Nescio quis teneros oculus mihi fascin^t agnos.
I know not what unlucky eye,
Bewitched my tender lambs.
Bewitched. Fascinatus, a, um. Efascinatus, a, um. Bewitching. Fascinatio.
Fascinum, i. Fascinus, ris. Ensorcellement. Bewray counsel. Prodo, is.
Rumpere consilium. Traduco, is, xi. Encuser. Et Mystagogus, Is he that does
bewraye or show secrets. Princeps sacrorum. Cic. * Bewrayed. Proditus, a, um.
Traductus, a, um. Reuele, trahi. Bewrayer. Proditor, Traductor, vel trix.
Traistre. Bewraying. Prodimentum, Proditio. Trahison. Beuer beast, or a graye.
Castor, Fiber, Lytra, Lutra, ae. Vng Bieure. Beuer, drinking, or potacion.
Potatio, onis. f. genesis Buuerie. Bey. Search in Bei before.
B. ANTE I.
BY. E, Prepo. Penes, Per, Par. Pro, vt pro meo Iure. Sub, vt sub lucem. Per,
Joined in co^paration, signifies increase or perfection. Vt perpulchrum. By my
means, or by my labor or diligence. Opera mea. Par moy, ou par mon moyen. S.
By and by. In continenti, Actutum, Confestim, Co^tinuo, Illico, Illicet,
Immediate, Mox, Quamprimum, Protinus, Repent, Derepente, Ex continenti,
Subito, Statim, Oppido, Extemplo. Incontinent. S. By any experience, proof, or
reason. Probabiliter. Auec couleur de verite. By any manner, or some means.
Quoquomodo, Quoquo pacto. Comment que ce soit. Because that. Vt pote. Pour tant
que. By me you may know it. Noscere ex me potes. Tu le peux scauoir par moy.
By my means or instigatio^, he did not these things Me impulsore haec non
fecit. Il n'a point faict cela de par moy. By thy impulsion or persuasion.
Impulsu tuo, Te impulsore, Tuo suasu. De par toy. By you. Per vos. De par vous.
By us. Per nos. De par nous. To be deceived by his servant. Falli per seruum
Estre trompe par son seruiteur.

By Scipio ouercommed or vanquished. A Scipione victus. Vaincu par Scipion. By
chance. Casu, Forte, Fortuito. D'aduenture. By heart. Meditate, Memoriter. Par
cueur. By hook, or by crook. Per fas aut Nefas. By my faye, truly or in good
south. Ecastor, adu. Per Castorem and Pollucem. By or nyghe. Apud, Iuxta, Per,
Prope, Secundum, Secus. Pres, aupres. Bypathes, bywaye, or sydewaye, out of the
high way. Gregaria via, Diuerticula, Semita, tae. Bywaye, lane or pathe,
going by the hyge way. Diuerticulum, li. n. g. Diuortium, tij. n. g. Destour,
destorse. H. By rule, justly, exactly. Ad amussim, Examussim aliquid facere.
Fair vne chose qu'il n'y ait que redire. By deceyte. Per dolum. Par tromperie.
By delays. Per dilationes. Par dilais, en delayant. By a line or right thread.
Per directum. A droict fill. By favor. Per gratiam. Par faueur. By injury. Per
iniuriam. A tort, and par force, contre droict and raison. By sport and play,
or in Ieste. Per ludum and Iocu^. En iouant, par esbat, par ieu. By occasion
offered. Per occasionem. L'occasion sy offrant. By leisure. Per otium. Tout a
loiser. By his own means. Per se. Par son moyen. By turns or courses, one
after an other. Per vices. Chascun sa fois, par tourees. By turns of years.
Per vices annorum. Chascun son aunee. By force or violence. Per vim. Par force
and violence. By wine, or through to much drink. Per vinum. Par trop boire.
By reason whereof. Quo, vnde. Que pourquoy. By sum manner means or reason.
Aliqualiter, Aliquatenus. Iuques a certain mesure. By some place. Aliqua. Par
aucun lieu. By the way. Obiter. En passant. By what manner means or reason.
Qui, Quomodo, adu. En quelle maniere. By what means, reason, or sort so ever
it be. Quomodocunque, Quomodolibet. Comment que ce soit. By what place or way.
Qua. Par ou. Bybber or often drynker. Bibaculus, Bibax, Bibosus, bibulus. Bon
biberon, Grand buueur. Bibbing. Bibesia, ae. and Bibacitas, tatis. Bibisia, ae.
Buuerie excessive. Bickering, conflicte or contention. Certamen. Combat. Bid
or command. Admoneo, es. Iubeo, es. Mando, as. Praecipio, is. Voco, as.
Commander. Bid, or call one to supper. Coenam indicere alicui, Ad coenam
vocare, Ad coenam inuitare, Coenam dicere alicui. Semondre quelqu' un a souper.
S. Bid or desire to come to a weddinge. Ad nuptias vocare. Semondre au
nopces. S. Bid geste to a bancquet or feast, as to inuit a friend to
dynner. Inuito, as. Inuiter. Bidden or commanded. Admonitus, a, um. Iussus, a,
um. Mandatus, a, um. Praeceptus, a, um. A qui on a command. Bidden to a feast,
or invited, Inuitatus, a, um. Inuit, incite. Bye. Emo, is. Mercor, aris.
Redimo, is. Acheter. Bye before hand. Praemercor, aris. Look Forstale. Bye
dearer, or at the last hand. Licitatione vincere. Mettre la derniere enchere.
Bye for cheap, to the intent to sell dearer by retale. Promercor, aris. Bye
together. Commercari, Coemere. Acheter ensemble. Bye well. Been emere. Acheter
a bon march, a bon co^pte a pris raisonnable. Bye dear. Care emere. A^h^ter
cher. Bye ill, dear, or to ouerbye. Male emere. Acheter trop cher, ou
suracheter. Bye for nothing. Vili emere. Acheter a ville pris. Bye with ready
money. Mercari pretio, Praesenti pecunia emere. Acheter a deniers comptans. Bye
under the price or value. Ademo, is. Bye and sell. Emo, is. Licitor, aris.
Nundinor, aris. Venundo, as, are. Fair merchandise, acheter, mettre en vente.
Bye and sell often, or to use the same exercise. Empto, as. Emptito, tas.
Acheter souuent. Bye and sell with warrantie. Mancipio dare. * Bying and
selling. Licitatio, Mercatus, Nundinatio, Venundatio, onis. f. g. Vente, ou
achet. Bying and selling with warrantie. Ma^cipatio, onis. f. g. Mancipatus,
tus. Vente. Or before record, or by the deliuerau^ce of the thing boughte,
whether it be cattle or land. Byer and seller. Licitator, Mercator. Merchant.
Nundinator, Venundator, vel trix. Merchant qui hante les foires. Byer. Emptor,
oris. Manceps. Acheteur. Byer of forfaited goods, as he which takes profit
by the condemnation of other. Sector, toris. m. g. Qui achete le confiscatio^
d' aucun pour y regaigner. Bygge corn. Look bear corn. Bygge. Grandis, de.
Magnus, a, um. Grande. Grandis tamen non ad corpus: sed aetatem refertur, and
nu^quam ad res inanimatas. etc. Bygge with child. Grauida, foeta grauis,
praegnans. Femme gross d'enfant. Bygge with child by thee. Ex tuo compressu
grauida. Gross de ton faict. Bygge with young, as a cow with calfe, etc.
Grauis foetu. Pleine de petits. Bygge to be, or wax of stature like a man.
Masculesco, scis. Deuenir masle. Bygge to make or strong. Corroboro, as.
Fortifier, enforcir. Bygger part or side. Bona pars. Pars magna. La plus part.
Bylders herb, like Alisandre. Lauer. Herb appelle de la b^rle. Byle, botche,
or powche. Carbunculus, Tuber, Vlcus, eris. Vlcere, vng anthrac. Vide plus In
botche, blister, and powshe. Byles, botches, blisters, and powshes, to cause or
make, or to break out by exulceration. Vlcero, as. Blesser and entamer la
peau, vlcerer. Byll of covenant or debt. Syngraphus, Syngrapha, vel
Syngraphum. Cedule, obligation. Byll of complaint. Accusatorius liber, Libellus
iniuriarum, Postulatio. Complaincte qu'on fait a aucun d'vng autre. Byll
obligatorie. Anticopa. Byll or hook. Falx, cis. f. g. Vne faulx ou faucille,
vne serpe. Pertaining to a byl. Falcarius, a, um. Byll called a forest byll, or
bushsithe. Runcina, ae. Sarele. H. Bylman, or a mower. Falcarius, ij. m. g. Qui
use d'vng baston courbe qu'on appelle Rancon, ou vng falcheur. Billet. Cala,
ae. f. g. Scinde calam, vt caleas. Call. Byllet of wood. Truncus ligni. Un
billot de bois. Bind. Alligo, as. Astringo, xi. Colligo, as. Co^necto, it is.
Concatheno, as. Ligo, as. Obligo, as. Necto, is, x^i. Subnecto, is. Vieo, es,
ere. Attacher, nouer, lier. Bind again. Religo, as. Restringo, xi. Reuincio,
cis. Restraindre, fort lier. Bind backewarde. Religo, as. Restringo, is.
Reuincio, cis, ire. Restraindre. Bind by covenant, oath, or promise. Adigo,
is. Astringo, is. Authoro, as. Obiuro, as. Obligo, as. Obtrigo, as. Serer,
estraindre, obliger. Bind with an earnest penny. Obaero, as. I suppose, Obligo
and Authoro, as. be of this signification because, Obligatio, is a bond, and
Authoramentu^ a bond, obligation, earnest money, priest money, or a hire, and
Obaeratus, ta, tum. That is bond with an earnest penny. etc. Bind fast,
hard, surely. Coerceo, es, ere. Constringo, is. Destringo, is. Deuincio, cis.
Perligo, as. Perplector, eris. Religo, as. Lier fort. (...) Blame, or to speak
in the deprauation of some man. Maledicere, Dignitati alterius derogare,
Conuitiari, Laedere and imminuere famam. Blasmer. Blamen. Accuso, as. Culpo,
as. Inculco, as. Verberare conuicio, Reprehendo, Arguo, guis. Blasmer. Blame
often. Culpito, as. Increpito, as. Increpo, as, pui, and aui. Blasmer. Blame
one to his great reproach, or to reprove or condemn one. Criminari,
Concriminari, Crime^ in aliquem intendere, Culpare, Damnare alique^, Dicere
inclementer in aliquem, Dicere unjust alteri, Improbare, Increpare,
Subaccusare, Taxare, Vertere stultitiae aut vitio, Vitio aut culpae dare,
Vituperare, Blasphemare, Despuere in mores alicuius. Blasmer aucun and lui
reprocher. S. Blamer. Criminator, Vituperator, vel trix. Blasmeur. Blancket, or
covering of a bed, or a shete. Lodix, dicis. f. g. Stragulum, li. n. genesis
Lodier, couuerture du lict, parement. Blankettes. Lodices, cum. Plagae, arum.
Idem. Blase abroad. Publico, as. Diuulgo, as. Vulgo, as. Famigero, as. Publier
quelque chose. Blaser of brute or fame. Famigerulus. Babillard. Blasyng
star. Cometa, ae. Cometes, Pogonia, ae. Vne Commete. Look Star. Blaspheme
God. Blasphemo, as. Profanare. Sacrilego maledicto se obstringere. Blasphemer.
Blasphemy. Blasphemia, ae. Sacrilegum maledictu^, Probosum in deum diuosque
maledictu^. Blaspheme. Blasphemer, or a wicked speaker. Blasphemus, mi. m. g.
Blasphemateur. Blaste. Afflamen, inis. Afflatus, us. Flatus, us. Flabru^, ri.
Flamen, inis. Soufflement. Blaste which overthrows house and trees.
Proflatus, us. m. g. Vent, esuentement. Blast of wind rising from the earth,
called a hurleblast. Loelaps, Turbo, bonis. Tourbillon de vent. Blasted corn.
Stupida arista, Ieiuna arista. Espi affame, qui n'a point de grains. Blasted as
corn is blasted. Fulguritus, a, um. Rubiginosus, a, um. Fulminatus, ta, tum.
Fouldroye, nielle. Blasted tree. Flamatica arbor. i. Fulmine icta. Blasted to
be. Affiari sidere, Sideror, ris. Vror, eris. Estre nielle and gaste du temps.
Blasten or sear. Fulguro, as. Vro, is. Vlstulo, as. Esclairer, fair esclairs
brusler. Blasting or searing, as of corn, herbs, fruit, and trees. Rubigo,
inis. Sideratio, Siriasis, Vredo, inis. Vstrigo, ginis. Niellement. Blaunche.
Dealbo, as. Deglubo, as. Blanchir. Blaunched Almondes. Amygdala dealbata.
Bleache or make white. Candifacio, is. Blanchir. Bleache in the sun. Insolo,
as. Mettre au soleil. Bleaching. Insolatio, onis. f. g. Seichement. Bleaching
place. Insolatorium, tij. Bleaching of linen clothe. Linteorum dealbatio.
Blanchissage de linge. To wax bleache or white. Albescere, Inalbescere.
Blanchir and deuenir blanc.

Bleache or make a thing white. Candefacere, Candidare, Dealbare. Blanchir
quelque chose. Bleade. Effundere sanguinem, Sanguino, as. Saigner, Iecter sang.
Bleading. Fusio cruoris, vel Sanguinis manatio. Cursus sanguinis, Fluxio
sanguinis. To stop bleading. Profusionem sanguinis, auertere. Diuertir. S.

Bleamishe or spotte. Labes, Macula. Tache, macule. Et Labecula, diminit. Ang.
A little blemyshe. Ac Maculosus, a, um. Ang. Full of blemishes. Plein de
taches. Bleamishe. Labesco, scis. Labescor, sceris. Maculo, as. Maculer,
tacher, souiller. Bleamyshe the sight. Destringere aciem. Bleare eyed. Lippus,
a, um. Qui ha de nature les yeulx pleurans and chassieux. Blearenes of the
eyes. Lippitudo, inis. Ce vice la des yeulx. Bleate like a goat. Capriso, as,
are.* Bleate like a sheep. Balo as. Beeller. Bleate often. Balito, as. freq.
Beeller souuent. Bleating of sheep. Balatus, us. Cri de brebis. Bless.
Benedico, xi. Lustro, as. Benir. Blessed. Benedictus, a, um. Beatus, a, um.
Benict. Blewebottell flower. Cyanus. Aubefoins, beluets. Blewe color.
Caeruleus, a, um. Caerulus, a, um. Cumatilis, le. Venetus color. Coleur bleue.
Blewe color like a Saphir loupe. Cyaneus, Cyanus, a, um. Qui est de couleur
perse ou bleue. Blewe eyed. Caesuliae. Qui ont les yeux pers. Blind. Caecus,
a, um. Exoculatus, a, um. Oculis captus, Orbus, a, um. Aueugle. Blind or
beasom borne. Caecigenus, a, um. Qui est ne aueugle, aueugle ne. Blind
imagination. Caligans animus, Men's caeca. Blind on the one eye, or having but
one eye. Luscus, Monoculus, Cocles. Borgne. Blind, or a dark entree. Aditus
caecus. Enter obscure. Blind chance, or a chance without reason. Caecus
casus. Qui est sans raison. Blind, dark, or obscure dens. Cauernae caecae.
Tenebreuses. Blind letters or wrytinges. Caducae literae, Fugie^tes literae,
Scripta caduca, vel Fugie^tia. Lettres qui blanchissent and s'effacent. Blind
toward the evening, or who that can not se at night. Nyctilopes. Blind
causes. Causae caecae. Incogneues, incertaines. Blind or uncertain hope, or
expectation. Expectatio caeca. Espoir ou on ne voit point d'asseurance. Blind,
or privy back doors. Fores caecae. Huis derriere, huis cache and secret.
Blind or difficill disease to know. Morbus coecus. Difficile a cognoistre,
cache. Blynden or make blind. Exoculo, as. Exoculasso, ssis, ere. Exorbo, as.
Obcaeco, as. Occaeco. as. Offundo, is. Aueugler. Blyndnes. Caecitas, it is.
Aueuglement. Blyndnes of mind. Ablepsia, Allucinatio, Inconsyderantia, ae.
foem. genesis Blister, or a poushe, or a little blayne. Pustula, lae. f. g. Vne
ampoule. Blister or poushe. Vlcus, eris. Look in byle. Blister most properly
in bread, when it is in bakyng. Pusula, lae. f. g. Ceste petite enleueure and
come enfleure qui se lieue sur le pain en cuisant. Blisters, byles, or
poushes, causing or making. Vlcerarius, a, um. Full of sores and blisters.
Vlcerosus, sa, sum. Plein d'vlceres.

A little byle, blister, or sore. Vlculum, li. n. g. dimin. Petit vlcere.

Blobbe cheked. Buccones, Bucculentus, ta, tum. Qui ha grande bouche. Block.
Truncus, ci. m. g. Le tronc d' un arbre. Blotte. Litura, ae. f. g. Effaceure.
Blotted. Deletus, a, um. Complanatus, a, um. Obliteratus, a, um. Raze, ou
efface. Blotten, or make blottes, or put out. Deleo, es. Lituro, as. Oblino,
is. Oblitero, as. Effacer. Blotting. Complanatio, vel Superinductio literaru^.
Litura, ae. Obliteratio. Effacement. Blood. Cruor, oris., Sanguis, nis. mas.
genesis Sang. Blood corrupt, or rank congealed to a matter. Ater sanguis,
Sanies. Huius saniei. f. g. Sang meurtri venant a putrefaction. Blood draught.
Effusio sanguinis. Detractio and missio sanguinis. Saignee. Blood sound, pure
blood. Sanguis intiger. Sang qui n'est point corrompu. Draw out blood,
Sanguinem detrahere. Tirer du sang.

Sheade, spill, or destroy blood. Sanguinem facere. Espandre sang.

To stenche blood. Claudere sanguinem and sistere. Estancher le sange.

Suck ones blood, or seek his destruction. Ebibere sanguinem alicui. Succer
le sanc a aucun.

Bloody. Cruentus, Sanguinole^tus, ta, tum. Sanglant. Bloody somewhat.
Subcruentus, ta, tum. Aucument sanglant. Blood letting, out of a vain.
Phlebotomia, ae. f. g. Saignee de vein. The instrument to let blood, or perce
the vain appointed. Phlebotomum, mi. n. g. La lancette a saigner la vein.
Bloudshotte in the eye, as when the eye is hurt, the blood spreads.
Hyposphagma, Hypochysis, sieve Hypochyma, Sanguinis subter cutem diffusio,
contingens ex ruptura venae, ictu, fuste duroue alio corpore illato. Galenus
sanguinem suffusionem appellat. Blood wherewith puddinges are made, as of a
kydde or swyne, a bludding. Sanguiculus, li. m. g. Sang d' un petit cheureau
prepare and accoustre pour manger. Bloudstone. Alabandina, Haematices. Bloody,
full of blood, or of blood. Cruentus, a, um. Sanguinarius, a, um. Sanguineus,
a, um. Sanguinolentus, a, um. Plein de sang. Bloudles, or without blood.
Exanguis, e. Adiectiuu^. Qui n'ha point de sang. Bloudding, or pudding so
called. Apexabo, onis. Intestinum sanguine plenum, admista aruina: sic dictum
quod in summitate quidda^, quasi in capite apicem habet. Bludwort herb, or
that which stops blood. Myrtopetalum, Poligonon, Sanguinaria herba,
Sanguinalis. Sanguinair. Bloudsucker. Sanguisuga, Hirudo. Vne sansue. Bloody
to make. Cruento, as. Sanguino, as. Ensanglanter. Blow. Afflo, as. Adhalo, as.
Aspiro, as. Flo, as. Spiro, as. Sufflo, as. Souffler. Vnde Tor, Trix, Tio.
verbal. Blow down a thing with wind, or disperse abroad. Difflo, Difflas,
Difflare. Espardre ou abbatre quelque chose par souffler. Blow again, or
contrary. Reflo, as. Souffler a l'encontre. Blow to the assault, battle, or
field, which by circumlocution is to animate or encourage. Bellum canere,
Canere bellicum, vel Classicum, signa canere. Le son de la trompe quand en
guerre on son a l'arme. Esmouoir noise, Inciter a debat. Blow away, forth,
or out. Efflo, as, aui. Souffler aucune chose dehors. Blow full. Sufflo, as.
Souffler. Blow a good cool, or the wind is at will. Ventus operam dat. Le
vent est a gre. Blow a horn Cornicino, is. * Blow a larum. Bellicum canere.
Sonner l'alarme. Blow the Retreat in battle. Receptui canere, Classicum
canere. Sonner la retraicte. Blow a trumpette in wars. Buccino, as. Signa
dare, vel facere militibus. Sonner les trompettes. Blow vehemently or
blusteringly. Perflo, flas. For^ souffler. Blown. Alitus, a, um. Flatus, a,
um. Spiratus, a, um. Sufflatus, a, um. Souffle. Blower. Flator, Suffitor,
Sufflator, vel trix. Souffleur. Blower in a horn. Cornicen, Enis. m. g. Un
corneur. Blower of small trumpettes or flutes. Liticen, nis. Tibicen. Ioueur de
trompette ou fleute. Blowyng Flatus, Spiratio, Sufflatio. Soufflement. Blow or
buffet with the hand. Alapa, ae. Vne bouffee. Blows or buffettes to give.
Alapizo, as. Colaphiso, as. Impingere alapas. Bluncket, light watchet, or sky
color. Coesius, a, um. Scyricus, Venetus color. De couleur du ciel, pers.
Blunte. Retusus, a, um. Rebousche, gros. Blunt man. Hebes, it is. Hebete. Blunt
to be. Hebeo, es. Estre rebouche. Blunt to make which is sharp. Retundo, is.
Rebouscher. Blunt to wax or dull. Hebesco, scis. Deuenir mouce. Blushe.
Erubesco, scis. Rougir de honte. An epistle blusheth not. Epistola non
erubescit.

He blushed. Genis erubuit.

Blustering wind. Perflatus, us. m. genesis Grand soff^ement de vents.
B. ANTE. O.
BOcher. Carnarius, Carnifex, Lanio, onis. Lanius, ij. Lanista, ae. Un boucher.
Et Lanionius, a, um. Angl. Pertaininge to Bouchers, or bouchers craft.
Bouchers shop. Carnaria, Taberna lanij. Bouchers knife, or chopping knife.
Clunaculum, li. n. ge. Culter sanguinarius. Boucherie, or bouchers shambles,
where flesh is sold. Carnarium, ij. Macellum, li. Laniarium, ij. n. g. Un
boucherie. Bodge or botche old clothes. Sarcio, is. Bodge, botche, peer,
repair, or to mende. Resarcire, Reconcinnare, Interpolare, Instaurare.
Radouber. Bodging, mending, botching, repairing or pe^ing. Emendatio, Refectio,
Interpolatio. Radoubement. Bodger, mender, or one that repayreth. Interpolator,
Emendator, Sarcinator, Consarcinator, Refector, toris. m. g. Radoubeur. Bodger,
botcher, mender, or patcher of old garments. Rudiarius, ij. Sarcinator, vel
trix. Veteramentarius, rij. m. g. Radoubeur. Body. Corpus, ris. neut. genesis Vng
corpse. Corpusculu^, diminut. Angl. A little, or small, or pretty body. Petit
corpse. Corporeus, a, um. Ang. Of a body, or that which is bodily substance.
Qui ha corpse. Body that is whole, sound, and well disposed, without sickness
or malady. Corpus integrum, sanu^ salubre. Corpse sain and dispos. H. Body
without a soul. Corpus inane animae. Sans ame. Body that is sound. Corpus
solidum. Corpse qui n'est point corrompu, ne gaste. Body that is sick, or ill
at ease. Corpus mali habitus, Affectum, Morbosum, Morbidum, Aegrum and
Aegrotum. Corpse mal sain. H. Body without a soul, or a dead body. Corpus inane
animae, Spoliatum lumine corpus, Cadauer, Cassum anima corpus. Sans ame, du
quel l'ame est sortie, Corpse mort. S H. Body without a head, Truncus, pro
corpore ponitur cui praesectum est caput. Le tronc du corpse. H. A clear body.
Raru^ corpus. Qui n'est point espez, Cler. S.

A body that is stretched out. Resolutum corpus. Tout estendu. S.

The image of a body. Simulatu^ corpus. L'image de quelque corpse. S.

Body slender, lanck and extenuate. Subductum corpus. Extenue. S. Body little.
Vescum corpus. Petit, minu. S. Body wasted or consumed. Absumptum corpus.
Co^sum^. S. To bury the body. Condere corpus sepulchro. Mettre deden^ le
sepulcher ou tombeau. S.

To bury the bodies. Dare tumulo corpora, Humare vel inhumare corpora. Mettre
dedens le tombeau. S.

Dead bodies. Defuncta corpora vita. Morts. S.

The arrowe pierced his body a little. Destrinxit summum corpus arundo. Ovid.
la fleiche l'a un petit atteint and bless au corpse.

To fashion a body. Formare vel fingere corpus. Former, fair. S.

To recreate or refreshe the body. Leuare corpus. Recreer. S.

Body well compacte, and of a good stature. Quadratum corpus. Bien form and
membru. Body well complexioned. Corpus belle constitu^. Body of a tree. Caudex,
icis. Codex, cis. Corpus arboris. Le corpse d'vn arbre, and ^e trone. Bodies
consumed with sickness. Defecta corpora. Obnoxia morbis corpora. Corpse
maladifs. Bodkyn. Subula,. Alesne. Bodkyn, or fine instrument, that women curle
their hear withal, and it may be called a friseling iron. Calamistrum, tri.
Poinson pour grediller, and friser les cheueus. H. Bodkin, or big nedle to
crest the heirs. Discriminale, Discerniculum, Acus crinalis, Crinale. Poinson
pour fair la creste des cheueus. Bodman, a town in Cornewaile. Voliba, bae.
Boy. Puer, Pusio, Pusus. Garson Et Puerulus, ac Pusillus. diminut. Ang. A
little body. Petit corpse. Boy not atteining the age of.ix. years. Impuber, ris.
Impubes, ris. Garsoneau sans barbe. H. And above that age. Adultus and Pubes.
Ieun homme. Boy with a bushed head. Comatulus. Boy or wenche which is always
beaten about the shoulders. Scapularis. Boy which is full of iestes and
tauntes. Salapusius. Nomen erat Calui, Catulli familiaris tanquam puer, ob
staturam puerilem, plenus salis, and oratoriae mordacitatis. Boyely or boyishe,
or pertaining to a boy. Puerilis, le. D'enfant. Boyely, old lubber, that will
still play the boy, not changing his manners with his years, or a wanton or
boyishe old man. Callipaeda. Boys attending upon an host, to carry baggage.
Calones, number. Calo, onis. Vallet de gensdarmes. Boy which does attend upon
common harlottes, called an appel squire. Aquariolus, li. Macquireau. Boys
games or plays. Popularia. Boyishnes. Puerilitas. Pueritia, ae. foe. genesis
Enfance. Boil or seethe. Coquo, is, xi. Bullio, ire. Decoquo, Discoquo, Elixo,
as. Ferueo, es. Cuire, boullir. Boil or seathe again. Recoquo, is, xi. Cuire
de rechef. Boil much. Percoquo, is. Efferueo, es. Boullir si sort, qu'il se
respa^d. Et Efferuesco, scis. Inch. Ang. To begin to boil. Boil new wine.
Defruto, as. Fair du vin cuict. Boil or to seathe. Bullire, Ebullire,
Feruere, Inferuere, Inferuescere. Boullir. Cause to seathe or boil.
Feruefacere, Inferuefacere. Fair boullir.

Boil till a certain quantity be diminished. Dequoquere. Fair boullir
iusques a certain diminution. Boil often. Coquito, as. Coctito, as. Et
Feruefacio, cis. Ang. To cause to boil. Fair cuire ou boullir. Boiled.
Coctus, a, um. Elixus, a, um. Qui est cuict. Boiled in an earthen pot.
Testuaceus, a, um. Boiled a little. Subferuefactus. Un peu boulli. Boiling.
Ebullitio, tionis. f. g. ^ouillon. Boiled meat. Aulicoqua, Cocta caro. Cuict.
Boiled much, or enough. Percoctus, a, um. Estre fort boullant. Book. Liber, i.
Liver. Et Libellus. diminut. de Libellus. Ang. A pretty little book. Un liuret,
petit liver. Et Librarius, a, um. Ang. Pertaining to books. Qui appartient ou
sert aux livers. Bookecase, or ruled matter in law. Praeiudicium, ij. Vide
plus in Prejudice. Book of a small volume. Libellulus, li. mas. genesis Un
liuret. Book of account. Rationarius, Codex excepti and expensi. Tabulae
accepti and expensi, Commentarius accepti and expensi. Conte de la recept and
depense. Book or great volume. Codex* cis. Volumen, minis. Un volume a part,
grande volume. Book of a mean volume. Codicillus. diminut. de Codex. Petit
liver. Book belonging to the council, of potentates and princes, wherein
their acts been registered. Rationarius, Liber elephantinus. H. Book of
domestical expenses, and necessary daily done. Diarius, Ephemeris, Diariu^.
Registre iournel. Book of expenses or of reckeninges. Aduersaria. Look book
of account. Book wherein old customs, rytes, and vsages been written.
Ritualis, Annals. Annals. Book of medicines. Antidotarius, Liber in quo de
antidotis tractatur. Book of Physic. Iatronice. Book of remembrance or
commentary, wherein expenses are noted, as well in journey as otherwise.
Itinerarium, ij. Vide supra. Book of remembrance or abridgement brieflye
written. Commentarius, rij. Comentarium, ij. n. genesis La sustance de quelque
ocurre. Book of scripture, containing the ten commandments. Decalogus.
December praecepta co^tinens. Book which for hansomnes may be carried in journey
or of iestes and iournies. Hodoeporicum, Itinerarium, Liber aliquod iter
describens. Book to enstructe one. Protrepticus. Books treating of the nature
of fyshes. Halicatica. Dicuntur volumina in quibus tractatur de piscibus.
Books treating of sin. Amaritgenati. Book written on the backside.
Opistographus. Vide Calepinum. Books set forth under false names and titles.
Libri subdititij. Quint. lib. 1. cap. 5. Books, whose authors be unknow.
Apochryphi libri, Nam Apochryphus, a, um. Est quasi Occultus, ta, tum. Chose
occulte. Books of holy scripture. Agiographa, sacra scriptura. Book printer.
Typographus, Librarius etiam dici potest. Libraire, ou Imprimeur. H. Book
bynder. Bibliopegus, gi. Librorum co^pactor. Relieur de livers. Book seller or
Stacioner. Bibliopola, Librarius. Libraire, marchand de livers. Boulde.
Animatus, a, u^. Animosus, a, um. Audax, dacis, Metu vacans. Solers, it is.
Strenuus, a, um. Hardi, aduentureux. Boulde man in fighting. Thrasimacus. Bold
to be. Animo forti esse, Audeo, es, Metu vacare. Oser, ne point craindre
d'faire quelque chose. Boulde speaker. Confidentiloquus, a, um. Bouldly to
speak. Fortiter loqui. Parler de grande audace. Boulde, a man of a singular
audacitie and boldness. Audacia singulari homo, Audax. Moult audacieulx.
Boulde enterprice Audax facinus. Hardy entreprinse. Boulde hope. Spes audax.
Haultaine esperance. Boulden, or to encourage one. Facere audacem. Enhardir,
donner courage. Bouldly to swear. Audacter iurare. Iurer hardiment. Bouldly to
speak, and freely. Audacter and libere dicere. Parler franchement and sans
crainte. Bouldly to speak, or to answer. Loqui audacter aut respondere.
Franchement, hardiment. Bouldely, or with a fresh courage. Animose, Audaciter,
Audacter, Confidenter, Redintegrato animo, Front, vel Vultu. Hardement.
Boulde^ or make bold. Addere animos. Animo, as. Bouldened or made boulde.
Animatus, a, um. Qui ha le vouloir la fantasy and le courage. Bouldenes.
Animatio, Animositas, Audacia, Solertia, Strenuitas. Audace, presomption.
Bouldenes in asking, begging, or craving. Procacitas. Effrontement,
Eshontement. Boly or plummet, which mariners use. Bolis, idis. Vne sonde, vne
poix. Bolimonge, which is a kind of mixture of corn and grain, for horses,
and also of things good and badde. Farrago, inis. Dragee a cheualx. Bolke,
Vide belke. Bolle, or basen to wash hands in. Trulleu^, lij. Genus vasis quo
manus perluuntur. Bolle to drink wine in. Tina, ae. Tinia, ae. Bolle of gold
or silver. Crater, Patera, ae. foe. genesis Vne tasse a boire. Bolling or bubbling
up of water. Vide bubblynge. Bolue or swell. Turgeo, es. Enfler. Bolued or
swollen. Turgidus, a, um. S'enfle. Bolued or swollen somewhat, or little.
Turgidulus, a, um. Aucument enfle. Bolued with fulness, as the teate of a cow
is. Distentus, a, um. Estendu, plein. Bolued to be. Turgeo, es, ere. Estre
enfle. Bolued to wax. Turgesco, scis. Inch. Enfler. Bolster of a bed.
Ceruical, Ceruicale, lis. n. genesis Cheuet, ou trauersin, ou coussin de lict.
Bolsters which bearers of burdens, as porters do wear for freating. Thomices,
Puluilli lana pilisue farti, quibus veterinorum colla muniuntur ne oblaedantur.
H. Bolt of a door, gate, or wyndow. Obex, cis. Pesulus, li. Repages, Repagulum.
Tribulu^, li. Un verrouil. Bolte. Catapultorium pilum: hoc est, sagitta sieve
iaculum quod catapulta emittitur. Bond. Alligatio, onis. Ligamen, inis.
Ligamentum, Nexus, us. Vinculum, li. Vinclum per Syncopen. Un lien, ou liement.
Bonds wherewith thieves hands are bound together. Manicae. Menottes, liens a
lier les mains. H. Bond or thonge to tie a buckler or target. Insertorium,
rij. Bond of matrimony or wedlock. Coniugium, Co^nubium, Iugale vinculum. Le
lien de marriage. Bond properly by writing. Obligatio, onis. foe. ge.
Obligation. Bind one, or take sufficient suerties of him. Satisaccipio, pis,
cepi, ceptum. Satisaccipere. Prendre caution and respondant de quelq'vn.

Bond, whereby a man is bound with suerties. Satisaccipio, onis. Caution
prinse de quelqu' vne. Band or surety laid for the payment of money or
performation of covenant. Satisdatum, ti. n. genesis Bondage. Seruitus, it is. f.
g. Servitude, subjection. Bond man. Colonarius, Mancipium, Seruus,
Suppellecticarius. Because it is a cattle. Villanus, Natiuus. Un esclaue.
serf. Bond man, or bondwoman begotten or borne in the house of the seigneour.
Verna, nae. Qui est ne en nostre maison de nostre serve. Vide borne. etc. Bond
man or a slave. Seruus emptitius. Esclar ou esclaue. Quasi sclauus. Bondsman or
prisoner of war. Ma^cipium, vel Ma^cupium. Un esclaue and prisonnier de
guerre. I becomme your bondsman. Tibi me emancipo. Ie veulx estre ton esclaue.

Bondmen. Serui, orum. Seruitia, orum. Bondmen ingrost or sold. De lapide
empti. Bondwoman. Ancilla, Serua. Chambriere, vne serve. Bonddogge. Lycisca.
Vide Dog. Bone. Os, ssis. Ossum, ssi. Os. Et Ossiculum, li. diminut. Ang. A
little bone. Petit os, osselet. Bone of the buttocke, or thighe. Coxa, ae. f. g.
La euisse. Bone of the left side of a frogge, whose virtue is not to be here
declared. Apo^ynon. Vide Plin. li. 32. cap. 5. Bones that fall under the table
for dogs. Analecta, orum. n. g. Miettes, os, and toutes tells chooses qui
chcent de la table. Bone from bone in pieces, or a sunder. Ossiculatim. Bony,
or of a bone, or full of bones, or made of bones. Osseus, a, um. Qui est d'os.
Boneles, or without bones, or having no bones. Exos, scis, adi. om. g. Qui est
sans oz. Bonen, or pluck out bones. Exosso, as. Rompre les os, ou les oster.
Bonefyre. Epinicium, ij. Pyra, ae. Les feux de joy. It was sometime used as a
ceremony to burn dead men's bones, in manner of an exequie, now it is
otherwise. Bonefyre place or stead. Pyrethia septa. Bonnet, coyfe, or
vndercappe. Galericulu^. Vne coeffe. Boot. Ocrea. ae. f. g. houseaux, botte.
H. To put on boots. Ocreas induere. Houser.

Booted. Ocreatus, a, um. House, botte. Boots for ploughmen called Okers.
Capatinae, narum. Borage, an herb called in latin Lingua bubula, and
Buglossum, Plinio Euphrosynon. Officinis Borago. Bourrouche ou bourrache. Borne
swyne. Aper, ri. Verres, is. Aper siluestris, Ver res domesticus. Porc
sanglier, vng verrat. Borishe or of abore, as of a wild bore. Aprinus, a, u^.
Aprugnus, a, um. Aprurius, a, um. De porc sanglier. And of a tame bore.
Verrinus, a, um. De verrat. Bore a hole. Fodico, as. Foro, as. Penetro, as.
Forer. Bore or pearche a hole throw with an instrument. Exentero, as. Inforo,
as. Perfodio, is. Perforo, as. Persido, is. Terebro, as. Percer tout oultre.
Vide in Perce with, etc. Bored through. Perforatus, a, um. Perfossus, a, um.
Perce tout oultre. Boring with a pearser or wymble. Perforatio, Terebratio.
Percement d'vne tariere. Borne by nature. Genitus, a, um. Natus, ta, tu^. Vide
plus postea In borne. etc. Qui est ne. Borne. Gestus, a, um. Port Borne to be
by nature. Nascor, ceris. Natus, sum, Orior, iris, vel reris. Naistre. Borne to
be again. Renascor, eris. Renaistre. Borne, begotten, or brought forth into
the world by nature. Natus, a, um. Nixus, a, um. Oriundus. a, um. Ortus, a,
um. Procreatus, a, um. Progenitus, a, um. Ne, engendre. Borne in the country.
Rurigenus, a, um. Borne to be. Exoriri, Nasci, Enasci, Innasci, Ingredi, vel
Introire in vitam, Prouenire. Naistre. Borne into the world. Aspicere lucem,
Edi in luce^ nascendo. Naistre en ce monde. Borne between two. Internasci.
Naistre parmi, ou enter deux. Borne with his feet forward. In pedes nasci.
Naistre les pieds deuant. Borne but now, a very little one. Recens a partu
pullus. Un petit qui vient de naistre. Borne after us, our successors.
Posteri, Posteritas, Nepotes. Ceulx qui naistrons apres nous. Borne new.
Recens natus. Nouueau ne. Borne to Jupiter, or Jupiter his son. Editus Iouis
satu. Ne de Jupiter. Borne first. Primogenitus. Premier ne. Borne, or took
his beginning of such a place. Ortus ex eo loco. Ne and natif de ce lieu.
Borne and gotten in our house of a servant or slave. Verna, Vernae. Com.
duorum. Un serf ne en nostre maison, de nostre serve and sclaue. Borne after
the death of his father. Posthumus, mi. n. genesis Qui est ne apres la mort de son
pere. Borne a bastard, of a public or common woman, he that knows not his
own father. Spurius, a, u^. Qui est ne de vne femme public, duquel il est
uncertain qui est son pere. To be borne before the time, or untimely. Aboriri.
Estre ne deuant term.

Borne together. Congenitus. Ne ensemble. Borne of a good stock, or kinrede.
Bono genere natus. Ne de gens de bien. Borne of an ungracious or wicked stock.
Natus in dedecore. Ne and issu de meschant lieu. Borne for him self, and his
own commodities. A nygarde, or a pynchepenny. Natus suis commodis. Ne pour
fair son prouffit. Borne to get praise and commendation. Natus laudi. Ne pour
auoir louange and honeur. Borne together at one birth, twynnes. Gemini,
Fratres gemelli, Didymi, Vno partu nati. Nez d'vne ventre. Borne three at ones.
Trigemini. Trois nez d'vne ve^tre. Borne of ye earth. Terrigenus, a, u^.
Enge^dre de la terre. Borne or bredde in one country, place, or town.
Indigena, ae. foe. genesis Ne and natif, du pais. Borne without nosethrilles.
Hossimus, a, um. Natus sine naribus. Borne to be before natural time, called
abortiue. Aborior, iris, ortus, sum. Estre ne deuant term. Borne first, or
first begotten. Praegenitus, a, um. Protogenus, a, um. Primier ne. Borne up, or
holden up to be. Subnitor, eris. Estre appuye. Borne or brought unto. Alatus,
a, um. Borne, or that which is carried. Gestatus, Latus, Vectatus. Qui est
port. Borne, or carried round about. Circunlatus. Port tout entour. Borne
charges or costs in journey. Viaticae expe^sae. Border, coaste, confine, or
march of a country or place. Confinium, ij. Fines, ium. Ora, ae. Les fines
des terres. Borderer, by dweller, or a neighbor. Accola, lae. Com. genesis Qui
demoure aupres de quelque lieu, voisin. Borowe. Foeneror, aris. Mutuo, as.
Mutuor, aris. Petere mutuum, Mutuum sumere. Rem alienam, vel aes alienum
facere, Sumo, is, psi. Foeneror verbum deponens, exigit ablat. cas. Emprunter.
Borowe of Peter to pay Paul, which is a vulgar speech, properly where as a
man does borowe of one to pay an other. Nomen transfer, Versuram facere,
Soluere, vel vertere. Discouurir saint Pierre pour couurir saint Pol, emprunter
argent a gros interest pour payer vne debte qu'on doibt a moindre interest,
prendre a perte de finance. Borowe or redeem a gage, pawn, or pledge.
Repignero, as. Regager vng gage. Borowe money. Mutuas pecunias sumere.
Emprunter argent. Borowe an other man's name, or to put in an other name. Nomen
alicuius iu re aliqua interponere. Emprunter le nom d'aucun. Borowe pledge,
surety, or warrant. Fideiussor, sorism. g. Pleig ou respondant. Borowe, or
suertie for appearau^ce. Vadimonium, ij. Vadis, is. Vas, dis. Pleige ou
caution. etc. Borrowed. Mutuus, a, um. Emprunte. Borrowed at the will of the
lender until it be required again, or so long as the lender list.
Precarius, a, um. Tout chose empruntee a la charge de la render quand il plaira
au presteur. Borower. Commodatarius. A qui on priest quelque chose. He that
lends upon a gage. Pignerator. Qui prend gage d'aucun. Borower or redeamer of
his gage. Repignerator, vel trix. Qui de gager vng gage. Borowyng. Mutuatio,
Pigneratio, onis. foem. genesis Empruntement. Borowyng of one to pay an other.
Versura, ae. f. genesis Argent emprunte pour payer vne debte. Bosse of a bridle.
Vmbilicus. Le bossette. H. Bosse for the bordes of a book. Vmbilicus, Idem.
Bosse of a buckler or shield. Vmbo, onis. m. g. La bosse d'vn bouclier. H.
Bosom. Sinus, us. m. g. Le sein. Boaste or brag. Glorior, aris. Iacto, as.
Ostento, as. Se vanter. Vnde Tor, Trix, Tio. Boaste often. Iactito, as. Vanter
souuent. Boaster. Blax, cis. Iactator, Oste^tator, vel trix. Thraso, onis. m.
g. Vanteur. Boasting. Bullatae nugae. Iactantia, Iactatio, Ostentatio.
Vanterie, glorieusete. Boasting full, or full of boasting or bragging.
Iactabundus, Gloriabundus, da, dum. Qui se glorify. Boasting, or that does
boaste. Gloriosus, a, um. Glorieux. Boastingly. Gloriose, Iactanter.
Glorieusement. Botche or byle. Bubones, Carbunculus, Vlcus, eris. Vlcere,
antrans. H. Et vlcerarius, a, um. Ang. Causing botche. Botches to cause or
make. Vlcero, as. Vlcerer. Bote. Acatium, tij. Cydarum, ri. Cymba, Phaselus.
Nasselle pescher, ou passer gens. Bote, or barge, or bark, most properly,
wherewith a great vessel is drawn or rowed out of a port. Remulcus, ci.
Boat made of a hollow tree, or a ship boat. Linther, Scapha, ae. foe. genesis
Nasselle, bachot. Boat or wherie, which is very light and swifte of course.
Lembus, by. m. g. Petite nauire and legiere. Boats or ships calked with
towgh. Serilla. Boat man, or a ferry man a passinger. Scaphiarius, rij.
Portitor, toris. Vector, toris. Lintrarius, ij. m. g Peagier, pasfeur. Boat
swain. Proreta, Scaphiarius. Boat for a Fisher. Praea, ae. * Boatemans craft
or science. Nauicularia. L'art and science de gouuerner and conduire vne
nauire. Both. Ambo, Vterque. Tous deux. Both together. Amplexim. adu. Boothe,
the one and the other. Alteruter, Vterque. L'vn and l'autre. Et Alterta pro
Alterutra. Bothwayes. Ambifariam. aduerb. discu. Botreulx or butrese of a
brick wall wrought for a help, or s^aye, or a proppe. Fulcimentu^, Antes.
Adminiculum, Fulcrum, Fultura. Quelque soustenement and app^y. Botel of hay.
Manipulus foeni. Un boteau de foin. H. Bottle. Lagena, ae. Obba, ae. Vter,
tris. Un flaccon. Bottle maker. Ampullarius. Faiseur de phioles ou bouteilles.
Bottom of threade or yarne. Glomicellus, Glomicellum, Glomus, i. Glomus, eris.
Vne peloton de fill. Bottom or kele of a ship. Carina, nae. Le fond de
nauire, la carine. Et inde Carino, as. et Carinatus, a, u^ Bottomless, or pit
having no bottom. Barathrum. Et Vorago, inis. Angl. That which has no
bottom. Go^ffre. Bottes, diseases among cattle. Vermina, um. Verminatio.
Trenches. Bow. Arcus, cus. Arc, arbalestre. To bend a bow. Tendere arcum.
Bender.

Bow that ^s bente. Arcus tensus. Bow case. Corytus. Quarquois a mettre
l'arc. H. Bow stringe. Amentum, Neruus arcus. Cord d'arc ou d'arba^estre. H.
Bow legged, as he that has his legs bowed inward, narrow at the knees.
Valgus, a, u^. Varus, a, um. Qui ha les pieds tournez en dehors, qui ha les
iambes tortues. Bow net or we will. Nassa. ae. Vne nasse. Bow dowe or
incline. Inclinare, Proclinare, Reclinare, Propendere. Encliner. Bowed or
fashioned like a bow. Arcuatus, a, um. Voulte. Bowingly like a bow. Arcuatim.
En facon d'arc. Bow or benden. Curuo, as. Flecto, is. Flexo, is. Incuruesco,
scis. Obstipo, as. Te^do, is. Vieo, es, ere.* Courber, encliner. Bow
backwarde. Recuruo, as. Reflecto, is. Repando, is. Recourber. Bow down.
Deflecto, is. Inclino, as. Oscillo, as. Pa^do, as. Vergo, is, si. vel, rxi.
Encliner. Bow inward. Incuruo, as. Inflecto is. Plier. Bow the knees.
Ingeniculor, aris. Genua flectere. Courber, Flechir, ployer. etc. Bow out of
the way. Detorqueo, es. Destourner. Bowed to be backwarde or downewarde.
Recuruor, aris. Estre recourbe. Bowed to be in the form of a bow. In arcus
curuari. Verg. Bowed contrariwyse. Curuari in diuersum. Plin. Bowed backwarde.
Curuus, a, um. Recourbe. Bowed backwardly. Recurue. Bowed or bente. Curuatus,
a, um. Recuruus, a, um. Repandus, a, um. Simus, a, um. Tortilis, le. Courbe.
Bowyng or bente upward or downewarde, whether it be. Flexilis, le. Funetus, a,
um. Laqueatus, a, um. Recuruus, a, um. Procliuis, ue. Repandus, a, u^. Simus,
a, um. Tortilis, le. Enclin, tortu, Entortille. Bowing or bending. Flexura,
Vietus, us. Look in bending. Bowyng back. Recuruitas, tatis. Repliement.
Bowingly. Procliue, Recurue. Bow unto. Acclino, as S'encliner. Bow about, or
round. Circumflecto, is. Tourner au cost. Bowed about. Circumflectus, a, um.
Recourbe. Bowels within the body. Ablegmina, um. Interanea, Intestina, Viscera,
um. Exta, Extorum. Entrailles, boyaus. Bowell or gutte, or inner part of any
thing in the body. Exta, orum. Viscus, eris. n. g. La fressure. Bowell by
bowell, or by the bowels. Visceratim. Bowell, or to take forth the bowelles or
draw out the guts. Euiscero, as. Oster les entrailles, euenter. Bowget.
Hippopera. Bougette. Bouget of leather. Bulga, bulgae, Sacciperiu^, and
Sacciperio, Vidulum, Hippopera, Cistula. Bougette de cuir. S. Bowge of court,
which was a liuerie of meat and drink. Sortella, Sportula. Look Alms.
Bowghe. Ramus, mi. Rameau. Et Ramulus, li. ac Ramusculus, li. diminut. Ang. A
little bowghe. Branchette. Et Rameus, a, um. ac Ramalis, le. Ang. Of a bowghe.
Qui est d'vne bra^che. Et Ramosus, a, um. Ang. Full of bowghes. Brancheu.
Bowghe which is dead, cut or seared. Ramale, lis. n. genesis Vne branche coupee.
Bowghes of trees or bushes, which do grow straight out, but not right up.
Tabulata. Boughte and sold. Emptus, a, um. Mercatus, ta, tu^. Sponsus, a, um.
Venundatus, a, um. Achete. Et Emptitius, a, u^. Ang. That which is able to be
bought, or that which is bought. Qui est achete. Bought under the price or
value. Ademptiuus, a, u^. Ademptus, a, um. Bowl. Globus, by. Globum, by. n. g.
Vne Boule. Bowl that is small, a little bowl. Globulus, li. m. g. Petite
boule, boulette. Bowlster of ye bed. Ceruical, lis. n. g. Transuersin du
lict, cheuet. Bowlen or to cast bowls. Globos iactare, Voluere globos. Bouler.
Bownce, noise or thumpe. Bombus, Crepitus, us. Craquement. Bowncen or crack.
Crepo, as, pui. Craqueter. Bownc^n often. Crepito, as. Craqueter souent. Bonche
or bundel of garlic, oinions, or such like. Fasciculus, Restis alliorum. Vne
tresse d'aulx. Bownce or bumpe. Gibba, Gibbus, by. mas. genesis Vne bosse.
Bownche, knobbe or knurre in a tree. Bruscum, ci. neut. genesis Un bosse. etc.
Bownche of white glass. Ammonitrum, Massa vitri albi. Bowne or buttell. Fines,
iu^. Limes, it is. Meta, ae. Terminus, ni. Frontiere ou lisiere de pais, vne
borne. Et Limitaneus, a, um. Ang. Pertaining to bounds. Bowne, buttell, or
merestake, or stone. Amiliarius, Cardo, inis. Terminalis lapis, vel meta. Vne
borne. Bownd setter, or he that set buttels between land and land, place and
place, he that measures lands. Finitor, ris. Mensor, ris. m. genesis Mesurer de
terres, borneur. Bownde of land, extending Eastwarde. Prorsus, si. Prorsi
dicuntur limits in agrorum mensuris, qui ad Orientem directi sunt. Ca. Bowndes
of buttels to set, or to measure ground. Limito, as. Metor, aris. Prendres
les mesures de terres. Bownding or butting of three fields, ioynyng together.
Trifinium, nij. n. g. dicitur Trifinium, vbi trium agrorum terminus est.
Bownde. Nexus, a, um. Obstrictus, a, um. Plexus, a, um. Vinctus, a, um. Lie.
Bownde by couenaunte or by promise. Authoratus, a, um. Teneri promisso. Estre
oblige par sa promise. Bound by duty, or for a good turn already impesed or
showed. Deditus, a, um. Deuinctus, a, um. Obnixus, a, um. Lie. Bownde, fastened
or tied. Nexus, Laqueatus, Vinctus, Ligatus. Lie and attache. Bownde together.
Perplexus. Colligatus. Lie ensemble. Bownde one to the other. Astrictus. Quasi
lie l'vn a l'autre. Bownde by earnest money. Obaeratus, a, um. Endebte. S.
Bownde fast, or surely. Religatus, a, um. Attache. Bounden to be. Obligor,
aris. Obstringor, eris. Teneor, eris. Estre lie. Bounde^ to be for to obey, or
rather to serve. Seruio, is. Seruir. Bounden to be with suerties, for payment
of money, or performation of couenaunte. Satisdo, as. Satispraesto, as. Donner
cautien. Vnde Tor, Trix, Tio. Bountuouse. Benignus, a, um. Liberal, beningne.
Bountuousnes. Benignitas, it is. Benignite. Such is your bounty. Ita est vestra
benignitas. Si benings estes vous.

Your bounty has caused me speak the more. Prouexit meam orationem vestra
benignitas. Vostre beningnite a faict qui i'ay este plus long.

Bountuously. Benign, Humane, Humaniter. Beningnement. Bourde, or plauncher.
Contabulare. Planche^r. Bourding or plancking. Contabulatio, onis. Un plancher.
Bourde or shelf, whereupon pottes are set. Vrnarium, ij. n. g. Bourde or table
to eat meat on. Mensa, ae. foe. genesis Table. Bourde cloth, or carpet. Gausape,
Gausapina, Amphitapa. Couuerture, velue. H. Bourded, or made of bourdes, or
plancked. Tabulatus, a, um. Planchee. Bourden, or make of bourdes. Tabulo, as.
Plancheer. Bourden a lofte, or roufe. Compingere axibus. vel Compingere solum
axibus. Plancheer, ou pauer d'ais Bourdes. Asseres, Axes. Vnde Asserculi,
diminut. Ang. Narrow bourdes, short bourdes, or small bourdes, or lathes. Des
lates. Bourding, or joining of bourdes together. Tabulatio, onis. f. g.
Entablement. Bourden, or make merry. Iocor, aris. Railler. Bourder, a merry
jesting fellow that counterfayteth all gestures and continaunces. Mimus, mi^
Qui contrefait toutes gestes and contenances. Bourder, or a jesting woman, that
counterfeiteth al manner of gestures and countenaunces. Mima, mae, Mimula, lae.
f. g. Celle qui contrefait toutes gestes and contenances. Bourding, or
pertaining to such ieste. Mimicus, ca, cum. adiectiuum. Appartenant a tell
contrefaiseur. Bourder or scoffer. Iocator, toris. Raillour. Bourding, or full
of bourding. Iocosus, a, um. Plein de ieu and de raillerie, recreatif en
parolles. Bourding or jesting. Iocatio, onis. f. g. Raillerie. Bourding, or
that iesteth and speaks words of myrthe. Iocans, cantis. particip. Et
Ioculans, lantis. particip. Qui se raille and dit parolles de gaudisserie.
Bourdingly, or in bourde. Iocose, Ioco, Iocaliter. Par ieu, en raillant. Bourde
or sport Iocus, ci. Ieu de parolles. Bourgen or spring. Floreo, es. Floresco,
scis, Effloreo, es. Effloresco, scis. Ge^mas agere, vel dare. Pullesco, scis.
Pullulasco, Pullulo, as. Progemmo, as. Fleurir, bourionner. Bourgen estsones of
a fresh. Refloreo, es. Repullulasco, scis. Repullulo, as, inch. Refleurir.
Bourgening, growing or springing. Pullulatio. Look Hatching. Bournishe or
polishe. Circu^linio, is, ire. Polio, polis, poliui, polire. Polir. Bournished
or polished. Politus, ta, tum. Poli, Orne. Bournishing or polishing. Politura,
rae. f. g. Polissure. Bournishing or polishing. Circumlinitio, onis. foe. g.
verbale. A bournishing or rubbing about. Frottement tout entour. Bouthe, or
tente, in fair or market. Ategea, Velabrum, Velare, ris. Velarium, ij. n. genesis
Pauillon, vne tente, Cauenne. Look Tente. Boothe clothes, or places that been
covered with tents. Velaria, rium. Lieux couuerts de tents. Box. Pyxis, dis.
and Cista, Cistula, Sitella. Boist de bouys. Pyxidicula, Pyxidula, and Pyxidu^,
di. n. g. Angl. A little box. Boistelette. S. Et Pyxidatus, a, um. Made like a
box. Box for almose, or the poor men's box. Cistula pauperum and
mendicorum. La boiste de pauuers. Box bearers, or they which carry the box.
Cistiferi. Qui portent la boiste. Box to put ointment in. Narthecium. La boite
aux unguents. H. Box for delicate iuncketes, as confectes, or such like.
Tragematotheca, cae. f. g. Boite aux co^fitures. H. Box for medicines.
Pyxidicula, ae. Quod e buxo ferme constaret. Boite. H. Box with sweet
oyntmentes. Myrothesium, vel potius Myrothecium. Cic. Vasculum pigmentarium in
quo vnguenta reconduntur, Alabastrum. Boite ou voire ou vaisseau pour y mettre
dedens unguents and senteurs. Box out of the which dice be cast. Orca, ae.
Pygus, gi. Vne petite boiste ou les ioueurs mettoyent les dez pour de la les
reiecter dedens le tablier. S. Boxes or chestes wherein grocers do put their
spices and wares. Nidi, orum. Box tree, or a box. Buxus, buxi. f. g. Bouys,
ou arbre de bouys. A place where box trees grow. Buxetum, ti. n. g. Bocage de
bouys.

Boxie, or of box. Buxeus, buxea, buxeum. De bouys. Full of box, or like to
box. Buxosus, sa, sum. Plein de bouys, Resemblant a bouys.


B. ANTE. R.
BRabande. Brabantia, tiae. f. g. And the people be called Ambiuariti,
Braba^tini, Tongri. Brabanco^s. Bracelet. Armilla, Brachiale, Spinter.
Brasselet and ornement de bras. Bracelet for the right arm. Dextrale,
Dextrocherium, ij. n. g. muliebre brachioru^ ornamentu^. Ca. Bracelets or
gantletes of Iron. Manicae manicaru^, in plur. numero. Brasselets and
ganteletes de fer. Bracing gyrdle. Subcingulum. Ceincture. Brache, or little
hounde. Catellus vel la. Un fort petit chien ou chienne. Brag. Exulto, as.
Glorior, aris. Iacto, as. Ostento, as. Paratragoedio, as. Vanter. Brag often.
Iactito, as. Vanter souuent. Brag stoutly. Paratragoedio, as. Brag or to
vante, that he has done or can do some thing. Sumere sibi aliquid. Se
vanter de pouoir fair quelque chose. Brag, to crack, or to vaunte some
thing of him self. Iactare se de, vel in re aliqua. Se va^ter de quelque
chose. I brag not so much of my self. Non mihi ta^tum sumo. Ie ne me vante
pas de pouoir tant fair.

Be it spoken without ostentation or brag of my self, or I speak it not to
vaunte of my self. Sit hoc a me sine Iactantiae suspitione dictum.

Bragger. Aretalogus, Iactator. Thraso, Ardelio, Ostentator, vel Trix,
Paratragoediator. Vanteur and glorieux. Bragging. Iactantia, Ostentatio.
Vanterie. Bragging, or full of bragges. Actuosus, gloriosus, Iactabundus,
Iactuosus, a, um. Ventosus. Qui se va^te and glorify. Braggingly. Actuose,
Gloriose, Iactanter, Iactuose. Glorieusement. Braye. Rugio, is. Braire. Braye
like an Eliphant. Barrio, r^s, rire. Braire com un Elephant. Braying of an
Elephant. Barritus, tus. m. genesis Le cri d' vng Elephant. Braye out. Irrugio,
is. Bulger. Braye like an Ass. Rudo, is, di, ere. Recaner, C'est quand vng
Asne brait. Braye like a Dear, Elephant or such like. Barrio, is, ire. Braire.
etc. Braye or roar like a lion. Irrugio, is. Rugir. Braye or cry lamentably.
Eiulo, as. Clamo, as. Vociciferor, raris. Queritor, taris. Braire and crier.
Braye in a mortar. Contundo, is. Distero, ris. Intero, is, triui. Pilo, as.
Pindo, is. Pinso, as. Pinso, is, stum. Piso, is, si. Tundo, is. Fort broier.
Braye in a mortar often, or stamp a pace. Pinsito, as. Broyer souuent en un
mortier. Bray, a town in France. Bibrax. * Brayed, broken, or stamped.
Contusus, Intritus, Pistus, a, um. Bateu en un mortier. Braide one with a
benefit or good turn. Exprobro, as. Reprocher. Vnde Tor, Trix, Tio. Brayder
or caster in teeth with a good turn paste. Exprobrator, vel trix. Qui
reproach. Braiding or casting in tethe. Exprobratio, brationis. f. g. Reproach.
Braying of a beast. Rugitus, us. Brayement, bugleme^t. Braying or crying out
with lamentation. Eiulatio. Brayement. Brain of the head. Vitalia capitis,
Cerebrum, bri. n. g. Et Cerebellum, li. diminut. Ceruelle, ou cerueau.
Braynsicke, or wyldbrayned, or full of brains. Cerebrosus, a, um. Testu,
Esceruele. Brayneles body, or mad. Demens, it is. Insanus cerebro. Qui est horse
de son bon sens. Brain or brawne of the leg. Musculus, li. Brake, or
crosbowe. Ballista, ae. Balista chalybea. Brake, or fern herb Filix, icis.
Thelypteris. Feuchiere. Brake, or sharp snaffele for a horse. Pistomis. Look
bridle, or bitte. Brake, for to work dowgh or paest. Mactra, ae. f. ge. Vne
huche a pistrir le pain, un may. H. Brake for flax or hemp. Lini frangibula.
ae.* Brandiron or a triuit, to set a pot on that you will have to seethe on
the fire. Chytropus, ollae sustentaculum. Trepied. H. Brandyshe, or glytter
like a swoorde. Corusco, as. Mico, as, cui. Vibro, as. Reluire par fois,
resplendir. Brandishing, or glittering, or shining. Coruscatio, vibratio. Look
shyning. Bran. Far, ris. Furfur, ris. Du bran and son. Bran of wheat. Canicae.
Le son and bran du froument. S. Branny or course bread. Rubidus panis. Look
bread Branny, or of bran. Furfuraceus, a, um. Furfureus, a, um. Qui est du son.
I. Brass. Aes, ris, Randus. Arain. Brass covered, or mixed with other metal.
Subaeratus, a, um. Couuert d'arain. Brass pot, a chaffer, or kettel. Aenum,
ni. Incoctile, lis. Un coquemart, ou vne chaudiere. Et Aenulum, li. diminut.
Angl. A posnet, or little pot of brass. Brazen, or of brass. Aeneus, a, um.
Aenus, na, number. Qui est d'arain. Randusculus, a, um. Vt Randuscula porta. A
brazen gate. Brazen, or make with brass. Aero, as. Brazen, or to mix with
brass, or other metal. Subaero, as. Brazen, or made of brass or like metal.
Aeratus, a, um. Aereus, ea, eum. Faict d'arain. Brazen tro^pet. Aenea tuba,
Tuba ductilis. Trompette d'arain. Braste. Quasso, as. Rumpo, is. Frageo, ere.
Fragesco, scis. Casser, rompre. Braste, with cracking or be broken. Crepo, as,
pui. Se creuer and rompre. Brast down. Diru^po, is. Diruo, is. Derompre,
abbatre. Brast forth, or out. Erumpo, is. Sortir and saillir horse. Brast in.
Introrumpo, is. Irrumpo, is. Entrer de grande force and grande roideur. Brast
in the mids, or in sundre. Perru^po, is. Praerumpo, is. Rompre. Look break.
Brast open. Refrango, is. Refringo, is. Idem. Brasten. Quassatus, a, um.
Quassus, a, um. Ruptus, a, a, um. Rompu. Brast down, or in pieces. Diruptus, a,
u^. Rompu. Look broken and break. Brasten in the mids. Perruptus, a, um.
Rompu. Brasten open. Refractus, a, um. Brasten beally. Herniosus. Thiasias,
Diruptus, Ramicosus. Qui est rompu. Brasten bowel. Bubonocele, les. f. g.
Rompure, greuure. Brastnes, or rupture of a man. Enterocele, Hernia, Ramex,
cis. Rompure, hergne. Et Ramicosus, a, um. He that is brasten. Qui est rompu.
Braste out, break out, run out, or abroad, as water does. Scateo, es.
Scaturio, is. Bullonner and saillir horse. Brasting out. Scaturies, ei.
Scaturigo. Break out, or braste out, as a man's face does with heat. Scateo,
es. Scaturio, ris. Brawle. Obganio, ire. Ringo, is. Rixor, aris. Velito, as.
Velitor, aris. Noiser, Rioter. Obganire, and ringere canum est. Braule or to
chyde. Iurgo, gas, gaui, gare. Ex iure and ago compositum est, quasi de iure
ago and co^tendo. Noiser and tanser l'vn a l'autre, aueir quelque debat
ensemble pour quelque chose, Es^^iuer, Hutiner. Brawler. Iurgator, Rixator,
Rixosus, Philonicus, Taxator, vel Trix. Qui reprend and blasme autruy. Brawler
or one that is full of strife. Iurgosus, sa, sum. Noisif ou noiseux. Brawling.
Iurgium, ij. Rixa, ae. velitatio, onis. Noise. Et Iurgiosus, ac Rixosus, a, um.
Ang. Full of brawling. Noiseux, rioteux. Look Chyde and brabler. Brawlingly.
Iurgiose, Rixose. Branch. Flagella, orum. Frons, dis. Germen, inis. Ramus,
mi. m. g. Branche. Et Frondarius, a, u^. Ang. Of a branch. Branches that are
without leaves. Nudi rami. Qui n'ont point de fueilles. To lie down under the
bows of a tree. Corpus sub ramis arboris deponere. Se coucher soubs la ramee.

Branch that is small, a little branch. Ramulus, li. m. g. Ramusculus, li.
m. g. diminut. Branchette. Branch being grene of a vine. Pampinus, ni. com.
genesis Pampinarium, rij. Pampe de vigne, la fueille de la vigne. Branch which
grows out of the body of a vine or tree. Pampinarium, rij. La sarment sortant
de la tige and trone de la vigne. Branch or boughe plucked from a tree, with
fruit on it. Palms, Terms. Vne branche d'arbre auec le fruict. Palms vitis,
terms oliuae. Branch or twigge, most properly of a vine. Palms, iris,
Colis. Un reiecton du sarment de la vigne. Braunched or leafed. Frondatus, ta,
tum. Frondeus, a, um. Qui est de fueillies and rameaulx d'arbres. Braunchen, or
have branches. Frondeo, es. Germino, as. Et Frondesco, scis. Incho. Ang. To
begin to have branches, or wax full of branches. Fueiller, produire
fueilles. Branches of an old vine. Dracones, um.* Branch growyng out of the
roots, or stem of trees, otherwise called an Impe. Stolo, nis. m. genesis Un
reiecton qui naist au pied de l'arbre. Brawne. Aprugnum callum. Cooper. Le call
d'un sanglier. S. Brawne, and sinews of th'arme. Lacertus, ti. Tori, torum. Le
muscle. etc. Brawned or well armed, or legged. Torosus, a, um. Lacertosus, sa,
su^. Fort and puissant, qui ha gros muscles. Brawned to be, or hard of flesh,
like a boore. Occalleo, es. S'endurcir de corpse. Brawned to wax, or begin to
be hard of flesh. Occallesco, scis. Idem. Breached hose, or else the breaches
of an hose. Subligar, Subligaculu^, Femoralia, Feminalia, Perizoma, matis. n.
g. Superior brachiarum pars, Pude^da and femora obtegens. Des brayes. H.
Breaches for mariners, mariners sloppes. Caligae follicantes, Laxae brachae.
Chausses larges ou maronieres. H. Breches of linen, which wrastlers use to
wear when they wrestle: also bretches that they wear in the bathes to hyde
the priuities. Campestre, tris. Haute chausse de toil. H. Bread. Panis, nis.
m. genesis Pain. H. Bread called biscuit. Nauticus panis, Bis coctus, Buccellatum,
Frumentum ad vsus diuturnitatem, excoctum buccellatum appellant. Biscuit. H.
Bread called chete bread, raunged bread, or cribell bread. Cibarius panis,
Secundarius panis, Autopyrus, Confusaneus. Pain de menage. H. Bread, the
which is given to poor folk for almose. Panis gradilis. Pain d'aumone. Bread
that is white, white bread. Panis siligineus, Panis primatius. Pain Blanc. H.
Bread that is made of the finest flower of wheat. Panis similagineus,
Simulaceus. Pain de fleur de farine. H. Bread made of bran, course bread. Panis
furfuraceus, Furfurosus, Recrementitius. Pain plain de son, ou de bran. H.
Bread called yomans bread. Domesticus panis. Pain domestique. Bread baken on
hoate coals. Focatius. Bread made of barley, barley bread. Panis hordeaceus. Pain
d'orge. H. Bread baked on the grydyron, or on such like thing of Iron. Panis
escharites, super craticula coctus. Pain roti sur le gril. Bread that is p^^t
up with barme, light bread that is holowely made. Panis spongiosus. Pain
bouffe. Bread colored with saffron. Panis crocatus, croco and oui luteo
infectus atque imbutus. Pain ensafrane. H. Bread, or a cake baked under the
ashes, or imbers. Panis subc^nericeus. Gasteau cuit soubs la cendre. H. Bread
that is leuened. Panis ferme^tatus. Pain leave. H. Bread that is not leuened.
Panis azymus, non fermentatus. Pain sans leuain. H. Bread vinowed or musty.
Panis mucidus. Pain moisy chansi and relant. Bread mouly. Panis situm
resipiens. Pain qui sent la chansissure and moississure. H. Bread crommes, or
the cromme or pethe of a loaffe. Medulla panis. La mie du pain. H. The heauing
in the upper part of the loaffe, which comes by great heat of the oven,
and is like a blister. Hecta vel hetta, tae, f. g. Pusula, lae. f. g. Est
pustula in panis crusto assurgens: vnde manauit prouerbium. Haectae facere, pro
vili pendere. Pet^te vessie du pain. H.

Bread cruste. Crustum vel crustulum. Crouste. H. Bread trenchers, such as are
used in colledgis of the famous universities, and in the houses of many noble
men: a cause whereby the poor have more relief. Panicia mensa, Solum cereale.
Trenchoir du pain. Bread made of new wheat. Sitanius panis. Pain de froument
noueau. S. Bread used to be eaten with oysters, as commonly bread which is
branny, or course. Rubidus panis. Pain brun. Black sour bread. Ostrearius
panis, vel rubidus. Bread basket, hamper, or hutch. Panarium, Mactra, ae. Vne
may ou huche. Breadth, or wydenes. Latitudo, inis. Laxitas, laxitatis. f. g.
Largeur. P. Breadth of a thumb, an inche breadthe. Latitudo pollicaris.
Largeur d'vn poulce. P. Breadth of a finger. Digitum transuersum. La largeur
d'vn doigt. And of.xii. fingers. Dodrans. * Breadth of the house. Laxitas
domus. Grandeur and spatiosite de maison. S. Breadth of the ways. Laxitas
viarum. Rues grandes and spatieuses. S. Breadth, or in breadth, or abroad,
Late, sparsim. Au large. P. Break. Frango, is. Labefacio, cis. Percudo, dis.
Quasso, as. Rumpo, is. Tero, is, riui. Rompre. Break the backebone. Exdorsuo,
as. C. Break battelraye. Ordines conturbare, Aciem turbare. Mettre en
desordre, ou desarroy. S. Break, or braste a sunder with smiting, or striking.
Pertundo, is. Rompre, pertuiser. Break, braye, or stamp in a mortar. Pilo,
as. Tundo, is. B^oyer. Break company. Dissocio, as. Separer, desassembler.
Break a custom. Dissoluere morem. Soluere ritu^. Rompre and abolir, oster vne
coustume. Break down. Defringo, is. Briser. Break faith, oath, or promise.
Amittere fidem, Deferere iusiurandum, Fallere fidem, Soluere fidem. Rompre sa
foy. Break forth, or out. Prorumpo, is. Sortir auec impetuosite. Break the
loins. Praelumbo, as.* Break earthen pottes on ones head. Frangere aulas in
caput alterius. Rompre des pots de terre sur la test d' aucun. S. Break ones
neck. Frangere ceruices alicui. Rompre le col. Break into crommes. Frangere
in micas. Esmier. Break into some house, or other. In vnam aut aliam domum
irrumpere. They have rushed and broken into the camp of their enemies by
force. In castra irruperu^t. Ils sont entrez de force dedens le fort des
enemies.

Break the head of one. Diminuere caputalicui. Ro^pre la test d'aucun. Break
one thing with an another. Affrio, as. Esmier ou briser menu quelque chose
parmi vne autre. Break in pieces. Contundo, is. Dissipo, as. Effringo, is,
Conquasso, as. Infringo, is. Diffringo, is. perfringo, is. Perrumpo, is.
Defringo, is. Conscindo, is. Prorumpo, pis. Rompre en pieces. Break in.
Irrumpo, is. Introrumpo, is. Intrudo, is. Entrer de grande force and de grande
roideur. Break in, by force and arms. Irru^po, is, rupi. Entrer par force.
Break in sondre, or in the mids. Dirumpo, is. Irrumpo, is. Perrumpo, is.
Praerumpo, is. Rescindo, is. Ruo, is. Suffringo, is. Rompre par le milieu.
Break prease, and pass through the guard. Dimouere ac perfringere custodias.
Fendre la press, and passer parmi les gents de la guard d'vn roy. S. Break
small between the fingers. Frio, as. Briser. Break small. Trito, as. freq.
Break a legacy, or testament. Violare testamentu^, vel legata. Break, or to
violate the faith of wedlock. Fidem coniugij violare. Rompre la foy de
marriage. Break, or to separate aliaunce. Foedus violare. Rompre l'alliance.
Break his faith and promise. Fidem violare. Rompre sa foy. Break, or tame a
wild beast, as a horse. etc. Domito, as. and domo, as. Render subject and
obeissant. Break teethe of a beast. Exarmo, as. Desarmer. Break truce.
Foedus fra^gere, Soluere foedus, vel pacem. Rompre l'accord. Break up.
Rescindo, is. Abrumpo, is. Rompre vne chose. Break up a write or letter.
Resigno, as. Crocheter. Ouurir. Breaker of a horse, or other beast brutish.
Domitor, oris. Qui donte, donteur. Breaker of a leage, entrecourse, or truice.
Foedifragus. Qui rompt l'appoinctement. Breaking of horse, or other brutishe
beast. Domitura, rae. Dontement. Breaking out of childrens mouths, called
exulceration. Aphtha, Emphysodes febris. Breakyng out within the mouth,
coming by inflammation. Emphysodes, Febris est quae vehementiam caloris in ore
gignit, and pustulas and inflationes. C. Breaking out of an infant about the
head. Siriasis. Call. Breaking out with scabbes. Rumentum, ti. Breaking of a
ship upon the sea. Naufragium. Naufrage. Break, or to lose his ship.
Facere naufragium. Perdre sa nauire par tempeste. Et per translationem, facere
naufragium. Perdre toute chose qui ce soit. To lose all that one has.
Breakefast. Acratismus, Acratisma, Ientaculu^, Prandiolum, Silatum, ti. Le
desieuner. Breakefast of bruyse. Adipale conuiuium. Breakefast without wine.
Prandium caninum. Le diner de chien. H. Break the fast. Ientaculor, aris.
Iento, tas, tare. Epulari acratisma. Desieuner. Breast. Pestus, oris. Sinus,
us. La poictrine, le sein. Et Pectusculu^, li. dimin. Poictrinette. Ang. A
narrow or small breaste. Et pectoralis, le. An. Pertaining to the breaste. Qui
appartient ou sert a la poictrine. Breasted broad, or great breasted.
Pectorosus, a, u^. Qui ha grande and large poictrine and forte. Breaste of a
woman. Ruma, ae. Vber, eris. Mamelle. Breast plate. Pectorale. Vne sort
d'armure qui se met deuant la poictrine. Bread, or bring forth young, most
commonly as beasts and birds do. Foeto, as. Foetifico, as. Fair ses petis.
Bread tethe. Dentio, is, ire. Quand les dents viennent a quelqu'vn. Bread or
store, or to increase cattle. Pecuariam rem facere. Bread or increase of
cattle. Pecuaria. Le faict and maniere ou science de gouuerner and nourrir le
bestial. Breder of cattle. Pecuarius, ij. mas. genesis Bergier qui s'entend a la
nourriture des bestes. Bredde, or begin to be before. Praegignor, eris.
Breding or full of breading. Foetuosus, a, um. Foetus, ta, tum. Qui est plein
de petis. Breading place for cattle. Pecuaria, ae. f. g. Le lieu ou on
nourrist le bestial. Breading of tethe. Dentio, onis. La venue des dents.
Bremble. Vide Brymble. Bren or set on fire. Vro, ris, vssi, ere, vstum.
Brusler. Vide burn. Brent or burned. Vstus, a, um. Brusle. Brent about.
Ambustus, a, um. Bruste tout a l'entour. P. Brent sacrifice. Holocaustum,
Holocauston, Victma quae detractis extis integra arae imponebatur. Call. Breath.
Anhelitus, us. Halitus, us. Pneuma, it is. Respiratio, spiraculum. Vent,
soufflement halaine, respiratio^. Spiramentum, Spiritus, Spiritale, Spirituale.
Et pneumaticus, a, um. Organa pneumatica. Orgues qui sonnent par vents and
soufflements. An. That wherein breath is used. Spiramentu^. Is the place where
the brethe or wind issues out. Brethen, or put forth wind. Spiro, as.
Haleuer. Brethen, or take breath. Adhalo, as. Halo, as. Halito, as. Respiro, as.
Respirer. P. Brethen quickly and fast. Hippaco, as. Haleter. Brewer of bear or
ale. Cereuisiarius, Ceruisiae coctor, Zythepsa, qui zithum coquit. Brasseur. H.
Bryar. Dumus, mi. Luma, ae. Paliurus, ri. Rubus caninus, Sentis. Buisson and
espinaye. Et Dumosus, a, u^. Full of briars. Plein de buissons and d'espines.
P. Bryary or place where briars grow. Senticetum. Dumetum, ti. Un lieu couuert
d'spines and buissons. Brybe, corrupt, to vitiate, deprave or poule.
Corrumpere, Deprauare, Ingrauare, Intercidere, Oblimare, Violare, Pertuertere.
Corrompre. Brybe, or to corrupt one with gifts. Emere alique^ donis.
Corrumpre par dons. Brybor. Corruptor, toris. Corrompeur. Judge that will be
bribed. Iudex sordidus, vel corruptus Iudex. Le judge qui se laisse corrompre
par argent dons, ou promesses. S.

Bryberie. Latrocinium. Corruption, onis. Corruption. Vide Theft. Brycke or
tyle. Later, ris. Lydoron. Brique, tuile. P. Et Lateritius, a, um. Angl. Made
of brick. Faict de brique. P. Brick former or maker. Plasmator. Laterarius.
Qui faict de briques ou tuilles. H. Brycke kill. Fornax lateraria, Lateraria,
ae. foe. genesis Vne briquetterie, vne tuilerie. P. Bryckle* or easy to be
broken. Dissipalis, le. Fragilis, le. Fresle ou fragile. Vide Brittle.
Brydeale. Nuptus, us. Nuptiae, arum. foem. genesis plu. n. Nopces. P. Brydegrome.
Nuptus, ti. Nymphus, i. Nouueau marie. Bridegroom or master of the feast.
Architriclinus. Symposiastes. Bride, or new married wife. Noua nnpta, Nympha,
Non ita pridem viro coniuncta. La nouuellement mariee. H. Bryde cake.
Summanalia. Cooper. Bryde leader. Pronubus, by. * Bryde maid. Pronuba, ae.*
Bridge. Pons, it is. Pos, it is. Un pont. H. Et Ponticulus, li. diminut. Ang. A
little or narrow bridge. Bridge of wood. Pons sublicius vel roboreus. Pont de
bois. H. Bridge called a fall bridge, or a draw bridge. Pons versatilis. Pont
leuis. H. Brydgemaker. Pontifex, cis. Bridgement, or other book briefly
written. Commentarius, Commentarium, rij. Vide book. Bridle. Fraenum, ni.
Frain, bride. H. Bridle bitte, which is hard and sharp. Lupatum, ti. Luxus,
Murex, Asperimum fraenu^. Mors de bride fort rude. H. Bridle bitte, that part
that is in the horses mouth. Orea, fraenum, quod ori inferitur. Le mors. H.
Bridle reine. Lorum, ri. Habena, nae. Retinaculum, Fraenum quod manu rete^tum
equos regit. La rene d'vne bride. H. Bridle the affections of the mind.
Temperare animis. Moderer ses affections and son courage. Bridle or reyne up.
Fraeno, as. Brider. P. Brydewell or such a like place of punishment.
Ergastulum, li. n. g. Le lieu ou lon enserroit and enchainoit les serfs, pour
les contraindre a besongner. S. Brief or compendious. Concisus, Compendiarius,
a, um. Compendiosus, sa sum. Court and abridge. Brief or short. Breuis, e.
Brief, court. P. Brief rehersall, or repeticion of things treated of before.
Anacephalaeosis, Recapitulatio, onis. foe. g. Brief oration. Snccinctus sermo,
Succincta oration. Breuis sermo. Peu de parolles. Brief in any thing. Modicus in
re aliqua. Qui est brief en quelque chose. S. And that I may be brief. Vt ad
pauca redeam, Ne multa. Pour le fair brief ou court.

Brief sentence. Sententiola, diminut. Petite sentence, petit dicton. P.
Briefly, compendiously, succintly, summarily, or in few words. Concise,
Caesuratim, Press, Semel, Succincte, Su^marie, summate, Su^matim. Briefuement,
sommairement. P. Briefly to speak, or to tell his mind in few words. Breui,
Breuiter, Breuibus aliquid dicere, Breui comprehendete, Paucis, Dicere press,
Modice dicere, Strictim dicere, Anguste exiliter dicere, Breui expedire. Dire
en peu de parolles. S. Briefly. Breue, Breui, Breuiter. En brief. Pl. Brifnes
or shortness of time. Contractio temporis, Temporis breuitas, vel angustia. S.
Brygantine or little bark or ship. Aphracta, Aphractum, Catascopium, Celox,
Nauigium. Vne sort de nauire, qu'on appelle brigantin, barque. P. Brighte.
Dilucidus, a, um. Fulgidus, Lucidus, a, um. Nitidus, a, um. Lucibilis, le.
Sple^didus, a, um. Perlucidus, da, dum. Resplendissant, reluisant. P. Bright
somewhat. Sublucidus, a, um. Un peu luisant. Bright to be, or to shine.
Diluceo, es. Fulgeo, es. Illucesco, scis. Illuceo, es, xi. Reluceo, es. Luire.
P. Bright to make. Nitido, as. Vibro, as. * Nettoyer ou fair reluire. Bright
to shine. Resplendere, Splendere, Ardere, Fulgere, Efulgere, Coruscare,
Explendere, Explendescere. Resplendir. Bright to wax. Lucesco, scis.
Splendesco, scis. Commencer a resplendir and reluire. S. Brightly. Fulgide,
Lucide. Brightness. Ca^dor, ris. Fulgor, oris. Nitor, oris. Sple^dor, oris.
Resplendeur, resplendisseur. S. Brightness of the son, or of any thing that
shines with flame. Iubar, ris. neut. genesis Lampas, dis. Idem. Et vbi hic Iubar,
tunc nomen regis. Brightning, or brandishing. Vibratio, onis. foe. genesis Brimble
or briar. Dumus, i. Frusus, Luma, ae. Buisson and espinaye. Rhibis, Rubus,
Tribulus. Vepres, Sentis. Rhamnus, ni. mas. genesis Burgu'espine, ou neprun.
Amongst the Arabians, Dedegnar. Et Veprecula, ae. diminut. Angl. A little or
young brymble. Et Dumosus, a, um. Ang. Full of brembles. Et Dumetum, ti. neut.
genesis Look bryarie. Brimble that bears the blackebery. Morus, ri. f. g. Look
blackbery. Brymble berry. Morum, ri. Idem. Brymme, or brynke of any thing.
Fibra, ae. Margo, ginis. Ora, ae. La marge. P. Brymme of a ponde or river.
Labrum, ri. neut. genesis Leure bolieure, le board d'vn fleuue, lac fontaine and
semblables. S. Brymme a sow, as when a bore does get pigs. Subo, as.* Vide
Grunte. Brymmed sow. Sus subata. * Brymstone. Aegula, ae. Sulphur, uris. n. g.
Soulfre. P. Et Sulphuria. Ang. The place where brymstone is boiled. Vne
soulfriere ou on fait le soulfre. P. Et Sulphureus, a, um. Angl. Of brymstone.
De soulfre. P. Et Sulphuratus, a, um. Ang. Dressed or mixed with brsmstone.
Ensoulfre, ou il ya du soulfre. Brynke of a river. Labrum. Le hord d'vn fleuue,
lac fontaine. etc. S. Bryne, or mere sauce. Muria, Muries, Salsura. Saulmure,
salure. Bryned, or laid in powdre or salt water. Muriaticus, a, um. Qui a
este long temps en la saulmure. S. Bring. Affero, rs. Pello, is, puli. Porto,
as. Refero, rs. Apporter, Rapporter. Bring, or to carry to a place, or from a
place. Afferre, Subuectare, Deportare, Defer, Apportare. Apporter. Bring
again. Refero, rs. Reporto, as. Reueho, is. Reuoco, as. Rapporter, ou
reporter. P. Bring in by force, or otherwise. Redigo, gis, egi. redactum,
redigere. Mener a force. S. Bring again into bondage or thraldom. Redigere
in seruitutem. Reducere ad vel in seruitutem. Remettre en seruage. S. Thou
bryngest me in such a doubt, I know not what to do. Eo redigis me, vt quid
egerim, egomet nesciam. Tu me mets in tell estat que. etc. S.

Bring into concord, or make them friends. In concordiam redigere. Mettre
d'accord. Bring into th'obeysaunce of the Roman Empire. In deditionem imperij
Romani redigere. Co^traindre de se render a l'empire Romain, Mettre en
l'obeissance des Romans. Bring him into his own jurisdiction, or under his
subjection. In ditionem su^m redigere. Mettre soubs sa seigneurie. Bring into
favor, or to make the^ friends again, set an atonement between, and to agree
them. In gratiam redigere aliquos. Accorder aucuns, fair leur appoinctement,
les appoincter. Bring some under the obeisaunce of the Roman Empire. Sub
Emperium Romanum redigere. Redigere, Reduire. Bring into poverty. Ad inopiam
redigere. Mettre a pourete. Bring, or to reduce it into six books. Ad sex
libros redigere. Reduire a six livers. Bring into old misery again. In
antiqua mala redigere vel reducere. Remettre. Bring, or to call into
remembrance. Ad memoriam redigere. Ramenteuoir, fair souuenir. Bring one into
myserie. Ad miseriam redigere aliquem. Le mettre en misere. Bring in araie, or
to bring into order. In ordine^ redigere. Mettre du rang des autres. Bring an
actio^ against one. Dicam impingere, Formulam alicui intendere, vel proponere.
Le mettre en process. Bring back. Reduco, is. Regero, is. Reporto, as. Reueho,
xi. Remener ou ramener. Bring into the right way. In viam reducere. Remettre
en bon chemin. Bring or to restore friendship again, where it was broken.
Amicitiam errantem reducere. La remettre sus and en estat. Bring, or to reduce
ones mind to pity, compassion and mercy. Animum alicuius ad misericordiam
reducere. L'esmouuoir a pity, le reduire a misericorde. Bring, or to cause
scarres to have their natural color again. Ad colorem reducere cicatrices.
Leur fair reuenir la color, les redduire a. etc. Bring, or to restore them
to concord and love that are fallen out, and to make them lovers and friends
again. In pristinam concordiam distractos reducere. Remettre en paix comme ils
estoynt par auant, les racorder. Bring, or to reduce the example in again.
Exemplu^ reducere. Remettre en auant. Bring into favor. In gratiam reducere.
Remettre en grace. Bring again, and to restore liberty. Libertatem reuocare
ac reducere. Ramener liberte. Bring in, or to reduce a fashion that has been
left a long time. Intermissum iamdiu morem reducere. Raccoustumer. vne chose,
Ramener vne coustume. Bring, or to restore one to health again by medicine. Ad
salutem reducere aliquem medicina. Le guarir and remettre en sante. Bring one
to dinner to his house. Adducere ad pra^dium ad se. Mener pour disner en sa
maison. Bring one in doubt. Adducere in dubitationem. Fair doubter, fair
estre en doubt, mettre en doubt. Bring or to adduce a thing into estimation.
Adducere aliquid in honorem. Mettre en bruit, esteem, honneur. Bring one into
envy, or to cause one to be hated. Adducere aliquem in innidiam. Mettre en
haine, fair blasmer quelqu'vn, mettre en mal grace. Bring or to call a man, or
some matter into the law. Adducere hominem vel rem aliquam, ad vel in ius, sieve
in iudicium. Mettre en process, fair plainte d'vne chose en judgment. Bring
one, or to cause one to come in bondage or servitude. Adducere aliquem ad vel
in seruitute^. Mettre en seruage. Bring one to appointement, or to bring to
agreement. Adducere ad co^ditionem aliquam. Fair venir a quelque accord, ou
appoinctement. Bring, or to persuade one to follow our pleasure, or to do
after our will. Adducere aliquem ad arbitrium nostrum. Le persuader and
l'induire a fair nostre volunte and plaisir, Amener quelqu'vn a nostre raison.
Bring, or to induce one to do some evil thing. Adducere ad facinus. Induire a
fair quelque vilain cas. Bring one to weaping, or cause one to weape. Adducere
ad, vel in fletum. fair plourer, Esmouuoir a pleurs Bring, or to cause the
fevers or agues to come. Adducere febres. Amener, ou fair venir les fiehures.
Bring to life, or to restore to life again. Ad vitam reuocare. Remettre en
vie, resusciter. Bring into doubt. In dubium reuocare. Reuoquer en doubt. S.
Bring those from error, that are fallen into a wrong opinion. Lapsos ab errore
reuocare. What example, do thou bring or allege me: for the defense? Ad quae
exempla me reuocas? Quels exemples m'allegueras tu pour tes defenses?

Bring a thing in use again that was forgotten. In lucem aliquid reuocare.
Remettre en usage vne chose qui estoit decheute. To bring ye matter to be tried
by dinte of sword. Ad manus rem reuocare. Esmouuoir vne chose, tellement qu'on
vienne a sentrebatre. S.

To bring him self to heuinesse and sadness again. Ad moestitiam se reuocare.
Se remettre en tristesse.

To bring in use again that was let pass. Praetermissum reuocare. Remettre en
aua^t, remettre sus. S.

Bring back again, properly, where as one friend goes with another, the one
before departing, will say, I will bring you halfwaye. Reduco, is. Reduire,
Rediger. Bring before, or first. Praeueho, is, xi. Porter and s'en aller
deuant. Bring by force, or cunning. Perduco, is. Redigo, is. Mener ^ force.
Bring by violence before a judge, or into prison. Rapio, is. Rauir, prendre, ou
emmener par force and violence. Bring forth. Adduco, is. Adfero, rs. Educo, is.
Produduco. is. Profero, rs. Proueho, is. Adduire, amener. Bring forth by way
of generation, or nature, as women children, hens eggs, and chickens, and
and beasts their natural young. Gigno, is, nui. Pario, is, peperi. Enfanter,
Se deliurer du fruict de son ventre. Parturio, is. Estre en trauail d'enfant,
trauailler pour enfanter. Pario, is. Is most aptely referred to women. Vt
paribit, vel pariet filium. She shall bring forth a child. And Parturio, is. Is
appropried to beasts. Vt paturiente secula. etc. Bring forth a child. Pario,
is, peperi. Producere filios. Idem. Bring forth, or bear a child abortiuely
before it be perfect. Abortio, is, ire. Aborto, as. Abortor, aris. Vnde
Abortiuum. Abortus, Abortiuus. Auorter. Bring forth a child of right shape.
Recte parere, Producere mature. Bring forth flowers. Floreo, es. Floresco,
scis. Fleurir, deuenir en fleur, verdoyr. Bring forth leaves. Frondeo, es.
Fro^desco, is. Fleurir, Iecter ou produire fueilles. Bring forth wytnes.
Adhibere testes, Constituere testem aliquem in alium, Denu^ciare testimoniu^,
Edere, vel Euocare testes, Testes producere, Testes in aliquem dare. Produire
tesmoings. Bring from one place to an other. Traduco, is. Trasfero, rs. Mener
d'vn lieu en autre. Bring forth. Proueho, is, xi. Porter auant. Bring good
luck in drinking, to begin to one. Propino, as. Boire a quelqu'vn. Bring
home honorably. Deduco, is. Cic. Conuoyer aucun par honneur. Bring ill luck
or chance. Obsceno, as. Call. Bring in. Admitto, is. Capesso, sis. Induco, is.
Infero, rs. Ingero, ris. Introduco, is. Introduire. Bring in an assertion, or
to bring in a doctrine. Introducere, quod and in medium afferre dicitur. Mettre
en auant quelque propos. Bring or to induce ambition first into the Senate.
Introducere ambitionem in Senatum. Amener premierement, Introduire. Bring into
bondage or servitude. Asserere in seruitutem. Maintenir and retraire quelqu'vn
en seruage. etc. Bring in borrowes, pledges, or suerties, as (in my opinion) to
bring in hands in wager of law, or else to save bale. Sistere vadimonium,
Stetisse vadimonio.* Bring into care. Afficere cura. Trauailler de soing and
soulci. S. Bring into custom. Assuefacio, is. Accoustumer. Bring into error.
Implano, as. i. Decipiovt. Cypria. Si quis (inquit) putat se aliquid esse, quum
non sit, seipsum in planat. Bring into fools paradise, or make fools feign.
Animos lactare, Fatuos blandiri, Producere falsa, vel ficta spe. Attirer, ou
attraire aucun par belles parolles, amadouer. Bring in gain or lucre. Stipem
confer, vt Colum. Stipem confert haec res. Fait du gain and prouffit. Bring
into hatred, or evil name, or opinion. Faces inuidiae subijcere, Facere
inuidiam, Inuidiam co^citare homini, Concitare inuidiam alicui. Le mettre en
haine. S. Bring into a little, or narrow rowme, or space. Percoarcto, as.*
Bring into presence. Represento, as. Representer, offrir. Bring in a snare, or
ieoperdie. Lacio, is, ui, and, xi. Co. Bring in use eftsoon. In lucem aliquid
reuocare. Remettre en usage vne chose qui estoit decheute. Bring land in due
tempre, or tilthe, with digging, and labor. Repastino, as. Rehouer, rebiner.
Vnde Tor, Trix, Tio. Verb. Bring a matter, or cause, or any thing to an end,
conclusion, issue, poinct or stay. Ad manus rem reuocare, Componere lites,
Perfero, rs. Perduco, cis. Perficio, is. Profligo, as. Summum fastigium
imponere, Summam manum, vel opem addere, Vmbilicum adducere. Finer. Bring often
forth. Prompto, as. Plaut. Bring over. Traduco, is. Traijcio, is. Transfero,
rs. Transferer, transporter. Bring out. Effero, rs. Porter horse. Bring out of
care and trouble. Securum reddere. Asseurer, mettre en seurete. Bring out of
credence, or favor. Conuellere fauorem, Beneuolentiam, vel gratiam alicuius
convellere. Abbatre la credit. S. Bring out of exile. Reducere exulem. In
libertatem aliquem vocare ac reducere. Bring out of ieopardie. Reducere de
periculis. Subtrahere aliquem periculo. Oster horse du danger. S. Bring out of
good and honest fashion. Turpo, as, are. Souiller, vilener. Bring out of
servitude, bondage, captivity, or exile. In libertatem reducere. Remettre en
liberte. Bring privily or secretly. Supporto, as. Porter. S. Bring something to
nothing, as ye vulgar speech is, to bring pynnock to pannock, a noble to nine
pence, and.ix. pence to nihil. Adnihilo, as. Pessundo, as, are. Tenuo, as. Ad
nihilu^ redigere, Abligurire, Absumere, Consumere, Prodigere. Consumer. S.
Bring tidinges. Nuntio, as. Annuntio, as. Annoncer, Noncer, dire ou porter
nouuelles. Rumifero, as. Et Rumigero, as. non sunt in vsu. Bring to
condemnation. Iudicio perfundere alique^. Luy lauer la test par deuant le
judge. S. Bring to destruction. Profligo, as. Ruiner, destruire. Bring to
effect or to pass. Effectum dare. Efficio, cis. Reddere impitratum. Vmbilicum
adducere, Colophonem addere, dici consueuit, quum summa manus rei cuipiam
imponitur. Eras. Acheuer un ouurage, mettre fin a vne besongne. Bring together.
Conduco, ducis. Compello, is, puli. Amener. Bring to light or knowledge. Edere
luci. Mettre en lumiere. Bring to naught or to empty any thing. Exinanio, is,
iui, ire. Vuider, euacuer. S. Bring to rest or sleep. Sopio, is, iui. Soporo,
as, aui, are. Endormir, assopir. S. Bring unto. Adduco, is. Adfero, rs. Adigo,
is. Apporto, as. Amener, adduire. Bring under obeyisannce or subjection. In
ordinem cogere. Reualler and rebaisser vne person qui sesleuoit trop. S.
Bring up by nourishing. Nutrire, Adnutrire, Enutrire, Innutrire, Cibare,
Educare, Educere, Alere, Exhibere, Tollere, Sustollere, Tolerare, Fouere,
Nutricare. Nourrir. Bringer up of children, or yo^ge folk, by nourishing, or
at schole. Alumnator, vel trix, vel potius Altor, toris. m. g. Qui nourrit,
nourrissant. Et Altrix, icis. foe. genesis Celle qui nourrit. Bringer of tidinges
or tales. Rumigerulus. Call. Brynging abroad. Prolatio, onis. Prolation. P.
Bringing forth. Productio, Prolatio. Idem. Bring forth; or up of chickens.
Pullatio. Couuee de poulsins. P. Bringinge from one place to an other.
Traductio, Translatio, onis. Transportement. P. Bringing together. Collatio,
onis. Apport ensemble. P. Briony or wild vine. Bryonia, ae. Vitis alba.
Couleure Bristowe haven. Venta. Bristle here. Sera, tae. Soye de porceau.
Bores back with bristles set up, as when they go to fight. Terga horre^tia
rigidis setis. Ou les dos d'vn porc sanglier. S. Bristeled beast, any thing
that has bristles on the back. Setiger, a, um. Qui ha de la soy sur les dos.
S. Bristilled, or full of bristles. Setosus, sa, sum. Hispidosus, sa, sum. Qui
ha force soye, soyeux. S. Fort velu. S. Bristled. Hispidus, a, um. Pelu, velu a
gros poil and piquant. Brittayne the most noble I Will, containing England and
Scotland, the true original of the name, (for that is called Albion) as yet
is not known. I leave to treat much hereof, for that I am not able to speak
otherwise then is already spoken of antique historiographers. Therefore who
that desires more, let them resort to the ancient Chronicles and histories.
Britannia, ae. Per geminum. N. Quae and a Poetis dicta alter orbis, Insula est
in Oceano septentrionali, modo Anglia adpellata, olimque a Britone rege
Britannia nominata, cum prius Albion diceretur ab albis rupibus primum
patentibus vt fingitur. Haec porrigitur in longitudine Octinge^tis mill
passibus, in qua colit gens clara, inhospita, and bellicosa, Ibi etiam Lo^dinum
Metropole oppidum celeberimum situatur, negotiatorum, licitatorumque
copiosissimu^. Est Vnita sibi Hibernia paulo minor cum. 40. Insulis quae
Orchades nuncupantur modice terminatis. Apud Britannos longiss. dies in
septenas horas mensuratur in aestate, quando etiam sunt totae noctes
perlucidae. Haec traduxi tum in gratiam, tum in laudem Britanniae nostrae. Inde
plura videris in dictione. England. Brittle, brickle, or brokle. Fragilis, le.
Fragile. P. Britlenes. Fragillitas, it is. foe. genesis Fragilite. P. Brotche or
spitte for to roste meat. Longa cuspis. Veru. Indecl. Broche. H. Verruculum,
li. diminut. Ang. A little brotche. Brochet. H. Broche, or to speate meat*
Figere carnes verubus. Embrocher. S. Embrocher de la chair. P. Brochen a vessel
of wine or such like. Relinere dolium. Percer. S. Et Perforatorium, ij. Is the
instrument wherewith they do broche, some call it a gymlet. Look Auger and
Percer. Brocke, or badger, or graye beast. Taxo, onis. Vide Badger. Broad,
ample, large, wide. Amplus, a, um. Latus, a, um. Spatiosus, a, um. Spacieux and
large. P. Broad above, and sharp benethe. Turbinatus, a, um. Agu and poinctu.
S. Broad brested. Pectorosus, a, u^. Qui a grande and large poictrine. P. Broad
carte way, or a place where many horses may mete, or run together.
Hippodromus. Vne lice and lieu pour fair courrir cheuaulx and bailler
carriere. S. Broad foreheaded man. Fronto, onis. Qui ha grande front. S. Broad
foreheaded being. Frontosus, a, um. Broad high way. Platea, Via militaris,
Via celibris, vel publica, vel regia. Le grand chemin a pied and a cheual,
Chemin passant and fort frequente. Broad horned beast. Patulus bos, and Patuli
boues. Plaut. Qui ont les corns larges and ouuertes. S. Broad, or a spreaded
bechen tree. Patula fagus. Vt Verg. Tytere tu patulae recubans sub tegmine fagi.
O Tyterus thou lyeng under shade,
Of spreaded bechen tree.
Broad leafed. Latifolius, a, u^. Qui ha les fueilles larges. S Broad to make.
Amplifico, as. Amplio, as. Amplier, fair ample. P. Brodenes. Amplitudo,
Latitudo. Largeur and grandeur estendue. P. Broyle. Torrefacio, cis. Torreo,
es. Rostir, brusler. P. Broyled. Carbonatus, a, um.* Tostus, ta, tum. Brusle,
rosti. S. Broyled to be. Torresco, scis. Brusler. Aut meo iudicio Estre brusle.
Broken. Fractus, a, um. Fressus, a, um. Quassatus, a, u^. Quassus, a, um.
Ruptus, Tritus, a, um. Abscissus, a, um. Rompu. Broken all to pieces.
Conquassus, Dissipatus, Perfractus, Praeruptus, a, um. Derompu. Broken before
time. Praefractus, a, um. Rompu. S. Broken bone. Apagina, ae. Cooper. Broken or
cracked. Pertusus, a, um. Rompu. S. Broken meat. Fragmentum, ti. Fragmen,
enis. n. g. Un fragment. S. Broken wynded. Suspiriosus, a, um. Qui ha court
haleine, poulsif. S. Broker, or byer, of marchaundyse and wares, one that
makes agreement or bargain between two. Proxeneta, Licitator, Mediator,
Conciliator, sieve interpres duorum inter se stipulantium, aut spondentium,
aliumue quemuis contractum, conuentumque ineuntium. Call. Un courtier and
moyenneur de quelque chose enter parties. Bronde, or mark made with a whote
Iron. Stigma, it is. Vne marque qu'vn empreint sur aucun d'vn chauld fer. S.
Brondon, or mark with a whote Iron: Dignoro, as. Inuro, ris, ussi. Stigmate
signare, Tudiculo, as. Marquer d'vn fer chauld ou cautere, Impremer quelque
marque. S. Brondiron, or Andiron. Andela, Andena, Hyperpyrgium, ij.* Brouche.
Monile, lis. Bulla, lae. Bague ronde. H. Brouche or small cheine, which
gentlewomen do wear about their necks. Murenula, lae. Catena collaris.
Brouding as hemies does to chickens. Cubatus, us. Accubatio, onis. f. g. *
Brook or river. Amnis, Riuus, ui. Riuiere, Ruisseau. H Et Amnensis, vel
Amnisis, se. Ang. Set nigh unto a brook or river. Vt Amnensis Vrbs. * Et
Riuulus, li. diminut. Ang. A little brook. Ruisseau. H. Et Amnicus, a, um. Of
a brook. De riuiere. P. Broom or besome. Scopa, ae. Spartus, ti. Spartum, ti.
Du genest, un balay, ou ramon. S. Et Sparteus, a, um. Ang. Of a broom. Faict
de geneste. S. Brom hill, or place where broom grows. Spartarium, ij. Un
lieu ou il croist force genest. S. Broom tree. Erica, ae. Genista, ae.
Spartum, ti. Du genist, genestre. S. Broshe of any thing, as the paring of
gardens new trimmed, or the sweapinges of an house, or such. Quisquiliae,
arum. f. g. Pluraliter tantum. Les balieures and net to yeures ou ramonneures
de la maison, copeaux and menus haillons, toutes petites buchettes qui cheent
des arbres, fueilles, ou fleurs, fatras. Broth, or collyse. Pulmentarium, rij.
n. g. Pulmentu^, ti. Et Pulmentaris cibus, quod cum pane editur. Boullie,
potage espes. H. Broth of sodde^ meat. Ius, ris. Iuscum, sci. Iusculum, li.
Bruit, du ius, potage commun. H. Brothel. Meretrix, icis. Lupa, Scortum.
Putain, paillarde. H. Brothelhouse. Lupanar, Lupanarium. Ganea, ae. Ganeum, i.
Palestra, ae. Prostibulu^, li. Bordeau. Et Meretricius, a, um. Appartenant a
paillardes. Et Lupanaris, e. Ang. Pertaining to a brothelhouse. Brothelrie, or
whoredom. Meretricium, ij. neut. ge. Le faict du paillardise and puterie,
bordeler. S. Brothel, or whorelike. Meritricie. Aduerbiu^. A facon d'vne
paillarde. S. Brother. Frater, tris. Germanus, ni. Friar. P. Et Fraterculus.
diminut. Ang. A young or little brother. Brother foster. Collactaneus,
Homogalactus. Friar de laict. S. Brother by father and mother. Germanus frater.
Friar germain. Brother by the mothers side, and not by the fathers. Frater
vterinus, Diuerisis patribus editus, vno tamen ex vtero. Qui est d' vne mesme
mere. Brothers borne both at once, Twins. Fratres gemini, Gemini, Gemelli
fratres. Freres gemeaux. Brother to my great graundfather. Propatruus, i. Grand
oncle. S. Dicitur etiam quasi pater proaui. Brotherhoode, or brotherly love.
Plilodelphia, Fraternitas, tatis. Fraternite. P. Brotherly, or like, or of a
brother. Fraternus, a, um. Vt fraternus amor. Fraternel. P. Brotherly.
Fr^terne, Germane. Fraternellement. P. Brotherne by marying the daughters of
one man, called brothern in law. Congeneres. Brothern, otherwise called sworn
brethren. Conuoti, orum. Soriantes, tum. Conuoti dicebantur ijsdem votis
obligati. Ca. Brothers childrens called cousins. Consanguinei. Fratres
patrueles. Deux cousins germains filz de deux freres. S. Brothers son. Frater
patruelis. De cousin germain. S. Brothers wife. Fratria, ae. Fratris vxor. La
femme de mon friar. H. Brotherslaughter, as where one brother kills another.
Fratricidium. Browe. Supercilium, Palpebra, ae. Le sourcil. S. Browe space, or
space between the brows. Glabella, lae. f. g. Look forehead. Brows broad
and great having, he that has broad and great brows. Silo, onis. Broader
together. Contexo, is. Testre ensemble. Broadered. Contextus, a, um. Tissu.
Broaderer. Limbolarius, Plumarius. P. Phrygio, onis. Bordeur ou autre qui
besongne a l' esguille. S. Brought again. Redactus, a, um. Apporte. Brought
into favor again. Reductus in gratiam. Remis en grace. S. Brought forth.
Alatus, a, um. Productus, a, um. Prolatus, a, um. Apporte. Letters brought from
a strange place. Ablata peregre epistola. Lettres apportees de dehors. S.

Brought forth into the world. Natus, a, um. Nixus, a, um. Ne: qui est ne. P.
Brought to. Actus, a, u^. Ductus, ta, tum. Mean, duict. S. Brought to account,
or reckening. Referri in acceptum, Ad co^putationem duci. Look Count. Brought
to destruction. Profligatus, a, um. Destruict and gaste. S. To be brought to
naught. Ad nihilum redigi. Estre mis ou reduict a neant, Estre annichile.

Brought to an end, poincte, or purpose. Profligatu^. Brought into favor.
Ruductus in gratiam. Remis en grace. Brought together. Collatus, Compulsus, a,
um. Assembe. P. Brought to pass. Explicitus, a, u^. Parfaict, acheue. P.
Brought, or induced to rest or sleep. Sopitus, a, u^. Endormi, assomme,
assopi. S. Brought up in learning. Alumnatus, a, um.* Oh, to what state am I
brought. Hem quo redactus sum. En quel estat suis ie venu*

Brought up like a cockney. Delicatus, a, um. Look Cockneye. Browesse inade
with bread, or fat meat. Adipatum, ti. n. g. Viande grass. S. Browkle,
brikle, or brittle. Fragilis, e. Friabilis, e. Broukelnes, or brikelnes.
Fragilitas. Look britle. Brown color, somewhat dark, called a sad broun.
Subniger, ra, rum. Aucunement noir, Noirastre. S. Brown of color. Fuscus, a,
um. Leucophaeus, a, u^. Rauiscellus, a, u^. Baeticus, a, u^. Nigellus, a, u^.
Subaqueus, a, um. Subaquilus, la, u^. Brunet brun, obscur. S. Brown bread not
ranged. Acerosus panis, Artoptittius, vel Ater panis (Autepyron, * Secu^darius
panis. Look bread. Browse, or meat for beasts in snow time. Vescae, Salicum
fro^des. Tendres and a demi seiches and appestissantes pour les bestes. S.
Bruise. Confringo, is. Detero, ris. Obtero, ris. Subtero, ris. Tero, is, triui.
Batre, briser. S. Bruised. Fressus, a, um. Detritus, ta, tu^. Batu ou broye.
Bruised, or brayed. Intritus, a, um. Idem. Bruit, fame,, noise, or rumor.
Pertinax fama. Rumor, ris. Rumeur. S. Look Fame. Bruyte, or renown. Claritas,
Claritudo, Celebritas. Nobilitas, Fama. Look Renown. Brute of people.
Tumultus, us. Bruit. S. Brute, Savage or wild. Indomitus, a. um. Quion ne
peult donter, vaincre, ne surmonter, indontable. S. Brushe. Peniculus, li.
Peniculum, li. Scopula, lae. Brushe of bristles, made to brushe clothes.
Muscariu^ setaceum, Scopae e setis comparatae ad extergendas vestes. Verge a
nettoyer, vergette. H. Brushe for a paynter, called a pensill. Peniculus,
Penicillus, li. Pinceau. Brutus ( the son of Siluius Posthumus) a captain
of the Troyans in Greece, after the destruction of Troy, a man of excellent
wit and valiant in wars, who after his victory in Greece, for the delivery
of his country men, is said to have sailed into Leogetia, and mynding to seek
some desert country for him and his, he made his peticion to Diana in this
sort. Diua potens nemorum, terror syluestribus apris,
Cui licet anfractus ire per aethereos,
Infernasque domos, terrestria iura resolve:
Et dic quas terras, nos habitare velis.
Dic certam sedem, qua te venerabor in aeuum,
Qua tibi virgineis, templa dicabo choris.
Which I have Englished (though not so well as
I would, yet so nere the sense as is requisite) in this manner followyng.
O Goddess great in woods, that putste
Wild boares in fearful fear,
Which may go all the turning paths
Of every ayrie sphere,
And of infernal houses eke:
Resolve the earthly rightes,
And show what country in to dwell,
Thou giuste me after fightes,
Assign a certain seat, where I
Shall worship the for aye,
And where repleat with virgins, I
Erect thy temples may.
To which peticion, Brutus as he slepte received (by a vision) this answer.
Brute sub occasu solis, trans gallica regna,
Insula in Oceano est, vndique clausa mari,
Insula in Oceano est, habitata gigantibus olim,
Nunc deserta quidem gentibus apta tuis.
Hanc pete, namque tibi seeds erit illa perennis,
Hic fiet natis, altera Troia tuis.
Hic de prole tua reges nascentur, and ipsis
Totius terrae, subditus orbis erit.
Which may be thus Englished.
O Brute far under Phoebus fall,
Beyond of France that ground,
An Island in the Ocean is,
With sea it is compast round,
An Island in the Ocean is,
Where giantes erst did dwell,
And now a desert place that's apt
Will serve thy people well,
To this direct thy race, for there
Shall Be thy seat for aye,
And to thy sons there shall be builte,
An other stately Troy.
Here of thy progeny and stock
Shall mighty kings descend,
And unto them, as subject all
The world shall bow and bend.
After this he awaked, and with great joy took his passage toward Afrike,
then to Hercules pillars, than to Aquitaine, where after diverse conflictes, he
obtained the victory of the Aquitaynes and frenchemen, vitayled his ships and
so departed. And with happy wyndes arrived at Totnesse in Deuonshere, the year
before the birth of our redemer. 1108. And lyking the country well, he named
it Britannia, which before was called Albion. He builded the famous city now
called London, and named it new Troy. He reigned four and twenty years, and
died in the year before the nativity of our savior Christ. 1084. And as some
say was buried at London.


B. ANTE. V.
BVble or to rise up in little belles, and make a noise as water does when it
setheth. Bullio, lis, lire. Ebulio, lis. Boullir. Bullo, las, lare.
Bouillonner, quand sur l'eaue ou vrme se lieuant des bouteilles. Buble or a
little round bosse that stands on water, also a little bosse or studde.
Bulla, lae. Bullula, lae. foe. g. Petite bouteille, ou bouillon, boutellette.
S. Bubling water. Aqua bullans. Bubbling or bibbling in water, as duckes do.
Amphibolus. Vide Bulling. * Bubbling, or bybbling with the byll. Bibulus, a,
um. Bucke or Do. Dorcas, dis. foe. g. Dama. ae. tam mas. quam foem. genesis
Genus caprae syluestris. Un dain. Buckstall, or net. Tendicula, Laqueus quo
cerui capiuntur. H. Bucket to draw up water. Craterra vel Creterra, Haustrum,
Modiolus, Situla, Hydria. Vne seille ou un seau. S. Hauritorium, and Haustrum.
Is properly any thing wherein water is drawn. Vne rou^ ou autre engine a puiser
l'eaue. S. Buckler. Ancyle, Ancylis, Clypeus, Scutum, Pelta, tae. Bouclier. S.
Buckler maker. Scutarius, ij. Qui fait boucliers. Buckler makers shop, or
work house where he makes bucklers. Fabrica scutaria. Ou on fait les
boucliers. S. Buckler wearer. Peltatus, a, u^. Clypiatus, ta, tu^. Scutatus,
ta, tum. Qui est garni d' escut, ou de bouclier. S. Buckle. Ansa, Fibula, ae.
Vne boucle. Buckle or to claspe. Fibulo, as. Infibulo, as. Boucler. Budde.
Gemma, ae. Germen, inis, n. g. Germe and seme^ce des arbres. S. L' oeil. S.
Budde of a tree being young. Oculus, li. Idem. Budded. Gemmatus, a, um. Coop.
Budden, or put forth buddes or blome. Gemmo, as. Germino, as. Germer. S. Et
Gemmasco, scis. inchoat, idem quod Gemmo. Plin. Buffe, Bugle, or wild ox.
Bubalus. Buffle. H. Vrus, ri. Vri sunt boues syluestres, quos vulg^s bubalos
vocat, feri sunt and velocitate excellentes, cornua taurinis sim^lia vt author
est Solinus. Vide Plin. lib. 8. cap. 51. Buffet or blow with the fiste. Alapa,
Colaphus, Colaphum, i. Vne buffe. Buffeten, or give blows or buffetes to one.
Alapa^ dare. Colaphos abstrudere, Colaphos incutere, Depalmare aliquem,
Colaphos alicui infringere, Ducere colaphu^ alicui. Souffleter aucun, buffeter.
S. Buggerer. Paederastes, Paedicator, Pullopremo, vel Pullopremus, Puerarius.
H. Buggery. Paederastia, i. Amor obscoenus in pueros. Buggery to commit.
Paedico, as. Verbu^ obscoenae significationis. Call. Bugle beast. Vide Buffe.
Buglosse or bugle herb. Buglossos, Euphrosinum, Circion. De la buglosse. S.
Build. Aedifico, as. Astruo, is, xi. Condo, is, didi. Construo, is, xi.
Extruo, is. Fabrefacio, cis. Fabrico, as. Fabricor, aris. Praestruo, is. Struo,
is. Inaedifico, cas. Architector, taris. Edifier. S. Build round about.
Circumstruere. Edifier a l'entour. S. Build a ship. Nauem fundare. Edifier
vne nauire. Build costlier or dearer. Pluris aedificare. Plus cher. Buyde a
fortress or tower. Moliri arcem. Edifier bastir. S. Build perfectly.
Exaedifico, as. Bastir. S. Builded. Aedificatus, Constructus, a, um. Conditus,
ta, tum. Fabricatus. Structus, a, um. Fu^datus, a, um. Compose, faicte,
fabrique. S. Builded, or made of diverse things. Structilis le. Fait and basti
de plusieurs pieces. P. Builded with marble. Marmoratus, a, um. Marbre. S.
Buylding or setting up of a house or other thing. Aedificatio, Exaedificatio,
Constructio. Edification. Buylding. Aedificium, Constructio, Opera, rum.
Structura, ae. Architectura. L'edifice que fait le masson and charpentier. S.
Buylding that is profitable. Frugi aedificium. Edifice qui est proffitable. S.
Buylding made like a tower. Pyrgobaris.* Buylding, which has the pyllers
standing thick together. Pycnostylon, Aedificium deambulationi aptum, cinctum
columnis densioribus, modicoque interuallo a se inuicem distantibus. Call.
Buyldinges almost ended, and perfect. Promulgata aedificia. Builder.
Aedificator, toris. Structor, toris. Edificateur Bulk of a man or beast, from
the neck to the middle. Thorax, cis. m. genesis La pectrine, l'estomach. S. Bull.
Taurus, ri. m. g. Toreau. S. Et Taurinus, a, u^. Qui est d'vn toreau. S. Ang.
Of a bull, or bullyshe. Bullasse, or little plo^be. Prunum ni. n. g. Vne prune.
S. Bullase tree. Prunus, Prunellus. Un prumer. S. Bulling, bolling, or bubblyng
of water out of a spring. Ebullitio, Scatebrae, arum. Ebullition, bollonement.
S. Bullock, a stere, heyfer, or young beast. Iuuencus, ci. m. g. Et Iuuenca,
cae, a Iuuando. Vne ieune best de haraz, tant a corn^ qu'a vngle, best
intretenue pour le service. S. Et Iuuencula. Ang. A little or young bullock.
Bulrushe. Iuncus. m. g. Ionc. H. Bulrushy, or made of bulrushes. Iunceus, ea,
eum. Fait de Ionc. P. Bulrushe place, as where many do grow. Iuncetu^, ti. n.
g. Ionsaye, lieu ou croissent les Jones. P. Bulrushy, or full of bulrushes.
Iuncosus, sa, sum, Plein de jones. P. Bult, raunge, or to siefte meal.
Succerno, is, creui. Incerno, nis. Blutter. P. Bluter. S. Bulting servant,
one that boulteth. Pollintor, Bluteur. S. Bultre, or bulting poke for fine
meal. Cribra, Cribrum, Pollinarium, Excussorium, Pollinaria, Subcernicula,
Incerniculum. Un bluteau, ou sas. S. Bulwark. Agger, Murus, ri. Propugnaculu^.
Bastille, bastillon, forteresse. H. Vallum, li. Est munimentum castrorum aut
vrbis e palis. Rampart de bois. H. Et Muralis, le. Ang. Perterteining to a
bulwark Bunne, or manchet of bread, such as they give children. Collyra, rae.
foem. genesis Vne sort de pain pour les enfans. etc. S. Bunche of garlic.
Restis allioru^. Vne tresse d'aulx. Bundell. Sarcina, ae. f. g. Un fardeau.
Vide Fardell. Bunting bird, somewhat bygger then a lark. Terraneola, ae. Auis
alaudae similis, praeterquam quod in capite apicem non habet, sicut alauda.
Dicta terraneola, quod non in arboribus, sed in terra versetur, atque
nidificet. Call. Burden. Aggrauatio, Pondus, Fascis, Gestamen, Onus, eris
Fardeau. S. Et Onerarius, a, um. That which serves for burden, As ships that
serve for burden. Naues onerariae. Batteaulx a porter merchandise and viures.
S. Burden carried between two horses. Vasterna. * Burden of wood, or like
thing, a pack, a bauyn or fardell. Fascis, cis. m. g. Un faisceau de quelque
chose que ce soit lie ensemble, comme de minu bois, un paquet, un bote, un
fardeau. P. Burdened or charged. Aggrauatus, a, um. Grauatus, a, um. Oneratus,
a, um. Qui est charge. S. Burden or charge ones conscience. Religionem
obstringere, vel onerare. Obligare religione vel obstringere. Charger la
conscience d'autruy. Burden or to lade one. Agg^auo, as. Grauo, as. Onero, as.
Sarcino, as. Charger. Vnde Tor, Trix, Tio. Burdens or bundels of straw, or
twigs. Fasces stramentorum vel virgultarum. Boteaux and gluz de fouarre,
Fagots, bourrees. S. Burdener. Onerator, Sarcinator. Qui charge. Bourdenous or
heavy. Onerosus, a, um. Onereux. S. Burdewx in Gascoing. Burdigala. Pt. Burges
of a town corporate. Ciues, Municeps. Citoyen. H. Vide Citizen. Burgonians
people in France. Hedui, orum. Sequani and Sequanici dicti sunt. Call. Bury
one, or to put him into the earth when he is dead. Ad sepulturam dare. Mandare
aliquem humo, Humare, Inhumare, Funerare, Defodere, Infodere, Condere terra,
Sepelire, Humo condere, vel in humo. Enterrer. S. Publishe, or to appointe the
day of ones burial. Funus indicere. Publier l'enterrement d'aucun. S.

Mourn and lament at the burial of the dead. Fletum adhibere in funeribus.
Plourer a l'enterrement des morts. S. Vide Funeral.

Burial day. Ferialis dies. Look Funeral. Burier of dead corpses. Vespae,
arum. Vespillo, nis. Sa^dapilarius. Qui port le corpse mort en terre. Et
Fossarius, Clericus, mortuos sepeliens. The priest which does ceremonial
function of burying. Buried. Humatus, Sepultus, Tumulatus, a, um. Coopertus in
terra, Infossus, Obrutus in terra. Enterre. Bodies not buried. Corpora
inhumata. Non enterrez, Corpse non mis en terre. S.

Buried to be. Sepelior, iris, pultus, sum. Tumulor, aris. Estre enterre. S.
Burying. Inhumatio, Sepultura. Humatio, onis. Enterrement. S. Bustu^, was a
place of burial in old time. Sepulcre. S. Burle cloth. Desquamare pannum,
Desquamare vestes. Regrater. S. Burn. Aduro, is, ssi. Aestuo, as. Ardeo, es,
si. Comburo, is. Conflagro, as. Flagro, as. Ignio, is. Ignifacio, is. Incendo,
is. Succendo, is. Vro, is, vssi, stum. Brusler. P. Burn, or to destroy a
thing with fire. Abolere, Cremare, Co^flragrare, Torrere, Adurere, amburere,
Comburere, Deurere, Exurere. Brusler. S. Burn all about. Amburo, is, ussi.
Brusler tout autour. Burn all up, or every where, or to burn out, or burn
through. Amburo, is. Corrumpere flamma vel igne, vel igni. Perardeo, es.
Peruro, is. Idem. Burn exceadingly, or to be burned. Deflagro, as. Estre ars
and brusle. S. Burn fume, incense, or other sweet things. Adoleo, es, eui.
ultum. Coop. Burn fervently. Exardeo, es. Ardoir, estre fort enfla^be. Burn,
or to sindge of the hear of swyne. Sues glabrare. Brusler le poil aux
porceaulx. S. Burn or to set fire of the Capitole. Faces far in Capitolium.
Brusler le Capitole. S. Burn in lust, or with dishonest means of love.
Libidinibus flagrare. Brusler de paillardise. S. Burn in love. Ferueo, es.
Flagro, as. Ardeo, es. Brusler d'amour. Burned. Adustus, Ambustus, Vstus, a,
um. Brusle. P. Many were burned. Hausit flamma multos. Beaucoup furent bruslez.
S.

Burned all about, or all up. Ambustus, a, um. Brusle tout a l'entour. P.
Burned to ashes Cinifactus, a, um. * Burned at the forepart, or much burned.
Praeustus, a, um. Fort brusl^. S. Burned like to a cole. Carbonatus,
Carbunculatus, a, um. * Burned rostemeate on the spitte. Subuerbusta.* Burned
with the heat of the Sun. Retorridus, a, um. Torridus, a, um. Ari. Qui est
de tout ari. Burned to be. Deflagro, as. Vror, eris. Estre ars and brusle.
Burned, perished, or to be destroyed with the rest. Co^muni incendio
deflagrare. Perir auec les autres. S. Burned to be with the Sun. Retorresco,
scis. Burned to be like a cole. Carbunculo, as. Estre enflambe comme un
charbon. S. He burned with the love of his hostise. Ardebat amore suae
hospitae. Il brusloit d'amour qu' il auoit a son hostess. S.

Burned or brent sacrifice. Holocaustum. Burnet herb. Prunella, ae. aut
Brunella, lae. Burning. Adustio, onis. Combustio, Crematio, Deflagratio, Vstio,
Exustio. Bruslement. S. Burning with, or in the fire. Flammeus, a, um.
Co^burens, it is. De flambe flambant and flammant. Burning ague, or fever.
Aegritudo, vel febris Solsticialis, Pyrethus. Febris ardens. Fiebure chaulde.
S. Burning cole. Anthracia, Pruna, ae. Candens carbo. Charbon vif. S. Burning
Iron, such as thieves be burned in the hand withal, or such a one as they use
to mark horses or other things. Cauteria, ae. Cauteres.* Cauterium, rij. n.
g. Vng cautere, un fer chauld. S. Burning or itche in the skin. Vredo, inis.
Burning pytte, or hell. Phlegeton, it is, fluuius infernalis, flammis
aestuantibus rapidus: a (...) Ardeo. Burnyshe. Look Bournishe. Borrough or
town corporate. Municipium, ij. n. ge. Quoduis oppidum legibus principalibus
vtens. Place ou ville iouissant privileges. H. Burrage herb. Look borage.
Burre. Aparina, Bardana, Lappa mayor, Personacia, Personata. Gloteron, Bardane
petite. H. Burre, which is the great burre. Prosopis, Arcium, Personata.
Gleteron ou glouteron. Do. Bursten or broken. Ramicosus, sa, sum. Qui est
rompu. Bursting. Ramex, icis. m g. Rompure. Bursting. Abruptio, Diruptio,
Fractio, Scissio, onis. foem. genesis Rompement. S. Burte like a ram. Arieto,
as. Heurter de la test and des corns, cottir. S. Vide Rushe. Busy or busied.
Actuosus, a, um. Intentus, a, um. Negotiatus, a, um. Occupatus, a, um.
Solicitus, a, um. Versatus, a, um. Occupe a quelque chose. S. Busy body, which
will have an ore in every boat. Ardelio, onis. Qualis fuit Attalus, vide
Attalus. Busy my self. Ago, is. Solicito, as. Verso, as. Occupo, as. Occuper.
S. Busied much, or full of business, or very busy. Negotiosus, a, um. Qui ha
force affairs, qui est fort empeche, and embesongne, encombre d'affaires. S.
We were busily occupied in our own business or affairs. Negotiosi eramus nos
nostris negotijs. Nous estions empechez a noz affairs. S.

A busy cogitation and doing. Negotiosa cogitatio and actio.

A province full of business and trouble. Negotiosa and molesta prouincia. Ou
il y a beaucoup de peine and de trauail.

Busied to be. Negotior, aris. Satago, is. Solicitor, aris. Versor, aris.
Negotier. Busily. Actuose, Intent, Obnixe. En faisant bien l'empeche and
embesongne. S. Business Negotium, Negotiatio, Occupatio. Pragma, ae, vel it is.
Res, rei. Occupation, negotiation. S. Business of warfare. Occupatio rei
militaris. Business very troublesome. Molestissima occupatio. Business great
and incredible. Magna atque incredibilis occupatio. Full of business, that
has very much to do, greatly troubled with lettes and affairs. Plenus
negotij. Plein d'affaires qui est fort empesche. Encombre d'affaires. S.

What is the business, or for what matter, are you angry with me. Sed quid
negotij, quamobre^ succenses mihi. Mais pour quoy est ce que tu te courrouces a
moy. S.

An excellent business. Lautum negotium. Cic. Id est egregium Excellent. S.

Not without business, trouble and pain, not easily. Non sine negotio. Non
pas sans peine, Mal aiseement. S.

Without business, pain, labor, travail or toil. Nullo negotio.
Facilement, aiseement. Sans difficulte, sans peine. S.

To put one into trouble and business. Exhibere alicui negotium. Luy fair de
la facherie, le molester, le harceler, luy bailler bien des affairs. S.

Which does well exployte or handell his business. Sui negotij been gerens.
Qui fait bien ses besongnes and affairs. S.

Business and trouble rising. Gliscentibus negotijs. I have had much
business, and have traueyled much in it^ Plurimum in eo negotij habui. I'ay
eu fort affair a cela, and y ay fort trauaille. S.

To be incombred and troubled with grievous affairs and businesses. Molestis
operosisque negotijs implicari. Estre encombre d'affaires. S.

To imploye his diligence and industry to the preferrement of other men's
business. Intendere se alienis negotijs.

I marvelled what business thou had here to do. Mirabar quid hic negotij
habebas. Quel affair tu auois. S.

I have business. Est mihi negotium. I'ay a fair. S.

To offer him self to do others businesses, or to meddle with other men's
matters. Offerre se negotijs alienis. Se presenter and offrir ou ingerer de
fair les affairs d'autruy sans mandement. S.

Pompeie has some business with Caesar. Pompeio cum Caesare est negotium.
Pompee ha quelque affair auec Caesar. S.

I stand here talking as though I had no business to do. Sic verba hic
facio, quasi negotij nihil siet. Comme si ie n'auoy que fair. S.

I had an other business or matter in hand, I thought of an other thing. Non
id mihi negotium fuit. I'auoye bien autre chose a penser. S.

To undertake, do and dispatche, a matter or business. Suscipere,
administrare and conficere negotium. Entreprendre, fair and parfaire. S.

Business which is but small or little. Negotiolum, li. diminut. Cic. Bussarde
or kind of hawk, that has three stones. Buteo, onis. m. genesis Oiseau nomme
buissart. Busshe, or a bremble. Rubus, by. m. genesis Vne ronce. Busshie close, or
place where busshes and brembles grow. Rubetum, ti. Un ronssoy, un lieu pour
plant de ronces. Bushe sithe, a bylle to cut bushes, or a whypsawe. Runcina,
nae. foem. genesis Sarcle. H. Busshy places. Vespices, cum. Coop. Bushe here.
Caesaries, Coma, ae. Perruque. S. A head with a thick bushe of here. Densum
caesarie caput. Gross perruque espesse. S.

A goulden bushe of here. Aurea caesaries.

A fair bushe, or head of here. Decora caesaries. Belle perruque. S.

Bushy, or having a great bushe. Caesariatus, ta, tum. Qui ha de grande
perruque, perruquet. S. Busshe headed, or he that has a good busshe of here
well trymmed behind. Comatus, a, um. Relicinus, a, um. Et Comatulus, A boy
having a propre busshe. Et per metaphoram, arborum, and florum folia
elegantissime dicuntur comae. Coop. Busshel. Modius, ij. bossellus, li.
Boisseau. Bushel and a half. Sesquimodius, ij. Vnboisseau and demi. Busshell
containing, as that which contains a busshell. Modialis, le. Qui tient un
boisseau. Three busshell. Trimodium, dij. Trimodia, diae. Qui contient trois
boisseaux.

Two busshell and a half. Culeus. Deux boisseaux and demi.

But. Ast, Atque, Caeterum. Con. Praeterquam, Quin, Sed, Verum, Verumtamen, At.
Mais. S. Sed, est coniuctio aliquando discretiua, quandoque inceptiua. Look
for many letters from us, but do you also send more. Crebras a nobis literas
expecta, ast plures etiam mittito. Mais aussi. S.

But see you? or do you see? Atque vides? Le vois tu pas? But hear thou? or
do thou hear me? Atque audin? Mais ois tu? S. But I speak not of that.
Atque id omitto. Or ne dis ie rien de ce. But a man would say unto me. etc.
Atque aliquis dicat, nihil promoueris. Mais quelqu'vn pourroit dire. etc. But.
Atque vero. Mais. S. But. Atqui, Coniunctio discretiua, significans Sed tamen.
Mais toutessois. But truly, if he touch her with one finger, she will scratche
out his eyes. Atqui si digito illam attigerit vno, oculi illico effodientur.
Certes si. S. Yea but that thing, of all other, or chiefly, separated him from
her. Atqui ea res multo maxim, disiunxit illum ab illa. Ouy, ou voire mais
cela a este cause que, etc. Ou certes cela. etc. S.

But she speaks no word of his exclusion. Caeteru^ de exclusione verbum
nullum. Terent. No man said so but only Cicero. Nemo ita dixit praeterquam
Cicero. Except Cicero, ou fors, ou sinon Cicero. S.

I never go forth so early, nor return home so late, but I see you dig or
delue your ground. Nunquam tam mane egredior, neque tam vesperi domum
reuertor, quin te in fundo conspicer fodere. Qui ie ne te voye au camp. etc.

I doubt not, but that you are of that mind. No^ dubito quin eo sis animo. Ie
ne doubt point, que tu ne sois de tell courage. S.

There is no doubt of this, but that my son will not have a wife. Non dubium
est quin vxore^ nolit filius. Terent.

I cannot choose, but I must needs send to you. Facere non possum quin ad te
mittam. Ie ne me puis garder ou tenir que ie ne te l'enuoye. S.

I cannot choose but cry out. No^ possum quin exclamem.

There is none of us but he has vowed, or made a faithful promise. Nemo
nostrum est quin vota fecerit.

But why are you so sad. Sed quid tu es tristis. But lo I see Pamphilus. Sed
Pamphilum video. Or voy ie Pamphile. S. But hark, stay a while. Hem, sed
mane. Mais, escoute, demeure. S. Yea but. Sed autem. Voire mais. S.

But on the contrary part. Sed contra. Mais au contraire. S. But truly I can
not suffer or endure, but accuse my master. Sed enim nequeo durare quin herum
accusem meum. Certes ou voire mais ie. etc. But truly. Sed enimuero. Certes,
mais certes. S. Not only in doing but also in thinking. Non modo agendo, verum
etiam cogitando. Mais ainsi.

But truly. Verum enimuero. Mais certes, pour certain. But yet. Veruntamen.
Toutesfois. S. But there rests also one scruple or doubt, which troubles
me much. At mihi vnus scrupulus etia^ restat, qui me male habet. Mais. But I
pray you see his impudence. At videte hominis impudentiam. Mais ie vous pry
voyez. etc. But a Gods name what is it. At per deos immortales quid est. Mais
ie vous demand qui est ce. S. But take heed that he pay the whole. At vt omne
reddat. Mais anssi prenes guard qu'il rende tout. S. But truly. At, pro At
vero, At certe. Mais certes. S. But a while agone, or since. Iamdudum, Nuper
Admodum. Il y a fort peu de temps. S. But if. Ni, Nisi, Sin. Mais. S. But if
there be any one amongst many, that passes or excels. Sin aliquis excellit
vnus e multis. Que si aucun se trouue que soit. etc. S. But notwithstanding.
Attamen. Toutesfois, neant moins. But only that. Praeterquam quod. Sinon que.
S. But rather. Quinimo, immo. Mais qui plus est. S. Butte of a land. Iugus,
eris.* Butte or prick to shote at. Meta, ae. Scopus, pi. m. g. Un but a quoy
on tyr, ou on vise. S. Butte, vatte, or great vessel for wine, or other
lycour. Dolium, Orca, ae. Muiz vaisseau. H. Buttell, or bound of land. Meta,
ae. Terminus, ni. Vne borne, limite, mete. S. Butting or bounding of land.
Terminus, ni. La fine de toutes chooses. S. Butter. Butyrum, ri. n. g. Beurre.
S. Buttermilke. Lac serosum, Lac agitatu^. Laict bure. S. Butterfly. Papilio,
onis. m. g. Un papillon. S. Butterfly which haunteth mylles. Myloecos. Co.
Butler, he that has charge of the buttrie. Condus. Oeconomus, Promus,
Suppromus, Victus quotidiani administer, Cellarius. Despensier qui ha la guard
de la viande. S. Buttocke. Clunis, Nates, natium. foe. genesis Les fesses.
Buttresses of a wall. Antes, antium. pl. Buttry or a spense to keep bread,
meat, or drink, and other like things in. Penarium, Cella penaria, Cellaria,
iae. Promptuarium. Vne despense and gardemanger. Buxome. Obediens, it is.
Obseque^s, it is. Plenus officij Obeissant. Buxome to be, or to obey. Teneor,
eris. Obsequor, eris, vel ere. etc. Obeir. S. Buxomnes. Obsequium, ij.
Obsequela, lae. Obeissance
C. ANTE. A.
C, The third of the letters, a consonant, and has the middle sound in
pronunciation between G. and chapter and whylest you pronounce C, you must needs
touch the inner part of your teethe with your tongue, else can you not
express it so plainly, as the sound of the letter requires, diverse regions,
have sondrie languages, and therefore is the pronunciation of the letters
variable, some viter C, as S, other almost like G, and no maruayle at all, for
in our English tongue it is diverse ways taken, and in sundry sorts sounded,
as the words require. In Latin C, is often changed into G, as Quadringe^ti,
pro Quadrincenti. In S, vt Parco, Parsi. In X, Vt Duco, duxi. And in the notes
of antiquity, C. scribitur pro Comitia, Causa, Causat, Con, Centum, Cum,
Condemno, Condemnatio, etiam C. Cornelius, Caius, etc. And C. stands for a
hundredth. Centum. Cent. S. C C. signifies two hundredth. Ducenti, ae, a.
Ducentum. Deux cents. S. Et sic de reliquis. Cabage, or co^leworts, an herb.
Brassica, cae. f. genesis Officinis Caulis. Des choux. Cabage, or cole cabige.
Brassica capitata. Choux cabus, Pommez, potez. S. Caban, or dark lodging.
Gurgustium, ij. Logette bien estroite. S. Caberne or cabin in a ship. Stega,
Teges. Cabinet. Cable of a ship. Rudens, it is. Funis nauticus. Vne chable. S.
Cable that holds the anchore. Funis anchorarius, Prymnesium, Anchorale,
Retinaculum, Funis qui nauim in alto aut vado sistit. Le chable de l'ancre. H.
Cacke or to go to the stool. Cacare, Excernere, Aluum leuare, inanire,
exinanire, Purgare aluum. Chier. P. Caddowe * choughe, or Jack dawe. Cornix,
Monedula, ae. Look dawe. Caermarden, a town in Wales. Marodunum. Cage, to put
pickers, prowlers, hoores, thieves, and beggars in. Catasta, tae, foe. genesis
Cake. Collyrida, Farreum, Popanum, Strues, Subucula. Un gasteau. S. Cakebread
or fretouse. Artolaganus, ni. m. g. Bignet. S Cake made for brydeales or
church goinges. Summanalia, liae. foe. genesis Coop. Cake made with chese, meal,
and water. Semilissula, Semilixula. sunt haec Sabina vocabula. Cor. Cake made
of meal and licoure, sometime divided in sacrifice. Seciuium, ij. n. genesis
Coop. Cake made of sundry spices, and graynes, offered for sacrifice in old
time. Fertum, ti. n. g. Vne maniere de gasteau qu'on offroit es sacrifices
anciens. S. Cake made like a trendle. Spira, ae. Coop. Cake of wheat. Adorea.
ae. Coop. Cakle like a hen. Glocio, is, ire. Glocido, as. Look Clock.
Calamint herb. Calamintha, Nepita, Pulegium. Poliot sauuage. Dod. Calamity,
or general destruction. Calamitas. Calamite, and misere, Chetiuete. S. Full of
calamity or misery. Calamitosus, sa, sum. Plein de calamitez and d' ennuy,
Calamiteux, chetif. S. Vide mysery, wretchedness.

Calculate the course of the stars. Persequi numeris cursus syderum.
Calculer. Calculation, or casting accomptes. Computatio, onis. Calculation. S.
Calculate, or to cast a coumpte. Computare, Calculum imponere cum aliquo,
Ponere calculum, Subducere calculos. Calculer. S. Calculater, or a caster of
accou^ptes. Calculator, calculatoris. m. g. Calculateur. S. Caldron. Lebes,
it is. Cacabus, Caldarium, Ahenum. Chaudron. Cauldron maker. Faber aerarius.
Chaudronnier. S. Calender, or an Almanacke, to know the days of the year
which are holy, which not. Fasti, oru^. Calendarium, ij. Hemerologium, ij.
Calendrier, par lequel on pouoit congnoistre les iours festez and non festez.
Calendes or first day of every month. Calendae, arum. Calendes ou le primier
iour de chascun mois. S. Calendes (or the first day) of January. Iani Calendae.
Le primier iour de Ianuier. S. At the Greek Cale^des, as much as to say Never.
Ad calendas Graecas. Iamais. For the Greeks had no calendas at all.

Calendes of February or after some of March. Intercalares Calendae. Calendes
of March. Foemineae calendae. So called, for that in these they sent presents
to women. La primier iours de Mars, auquel iour la coustome estoit d' enuoyer
des presents aux femmes. S. Calendes of June. Fabariae calendae. Pertaining to
calendes. Calendaris, re. nomen adiectiuum.

Calfe. Vitulus, li. Mosculus, li. Veau. S. Et Vitulinus, a, um. Aug. Of a
calfe. De veau, ou chair de veau. Calfe of a leg. Sura, ae. Le gras and le
mol de la iambe. Calice town. Gessoriacum. Call. Clamo, as. Voco, as. Accerso,
sis. Arcesso, sis. Inclamo, as. Hucher, appeler. Call him in my name, or say
that I bydde him come. Voca illu^ verbis meis. Di luy que ie l'appelle. S.
Call, whoope, or to cry to his company. Vocare, clamore suos. Hucher a haulte
voix. S. Call, or to cry to God. Vocare, clamore deum. Le reclamer,
l'inuoquer. S. To call one by his name. Nomine aliquem vocare. L'appeler par
son nom. S.

Call or to cry to the Gods to help. Deos vocare auxilio. Requerir and
inuoquer ou reclamer dieu a son aid. S. The crow calls for rain. Vocat
pluuium cornix. Elle demand la pluye, ou signify par son cri qu' il pluuera.
S.

Call one to accomptes. Ad calculos aliquem vocare. Requerir qu'il rende conte
des mises and receptes. S. Call one to depose or bear witness. Ad testimoniu^
vocare. Appeler quelqu'vn pour testimoigner. S. To call one to him. Aliquem ad
se accersere. Appeler a soy. S.

To call up, as men do spirits. Arcessere. Appeller les esprits.

So prepare thy self, that if I call, thou may come with a trice. Ita te
para, vt, si inclamaro, aduoles. S.

To call a loud for one. Inclamare aliquem magna voce. Appeler aucun a haulte
voix. S.

To call by name. Inclamare nomine. Hucher par son nom. S.

He calls to the Coriatians to help his brother. Inclamat Curiatijs, vti
opem ferant fratri. S.

Call away. Reuoco, as. Auoco, as. Reuoquer rappeler. S To call or raise dead
men. Defunctos reuocare. Resusciter les morts. S.

To call or bring in doubt. In dubium reuocare. Reuoquer en doubt. S.

To call one back again, that is in his journey. Ex itinere reuocare.
Rappeler du chimin, fair retourner.

To call away from sin, or to withdraw or persuade from sins. Auocare a
peccatis. Retirer de mal fair. S.

To call out of the province. Deuocare de prouincia. Rappeler and fair
retourner.

To call to help him. Deuocare ad auxilium. Appeler a son aid. S.

To call the stars out of heaven. Refixa caelo deuocare sydera. Fair
descendre. S.

He cherefully calls his soldiers down from the hill. Laetus a tumulo suos
deuocat. Appelle and fait descendre. S.

Call a part, a side, or down. Deuoco, as. Seuoco, as. Appeler a part. S. To
call a side before the door. Ante aedes seuocare. Appeler a part. etc.

To call a side into the hill. Seuocare in montem.

Care calls or separateth me from study. Cura me seuocat a studio. Call
back. Retracto, as. Coop. To call back, to vnsaye that is spoken, or to
recant. Dicta retractare. Se desdire, se retracter. S.

Call back, or to revoke that is done. Mutare quod factum est. Reuoquer. S. To
call back the gift. Reuocare donu^ vel munus, Infecta dona facere. Reuoquer
la donation. S.

Call and to ask for one. Aliquem requirere voce vel sermon. Appeler and
hucher aucun, en le cerchant. S. Call or to name. Cieo, cies, ciui, citum,
ciere. This verb has diverse significations, as to provoke or move, to stir
or raise up, to provoke to anger to vex, to irritate, to call or name. And
this last signification (for that it serves this place) will I only here
touch. Appeler. To call one by his name. Nomen alicuius ciere. Appeler
quelqu'vn par son nom.

To call every one by his name. Nomina singulorum ciere. Les appeler chascun
par leur nom. S.

To call upon the Gods for aid. Numina ciere. Inuoquer dieu, appeler a son
aid. S.

Call by name. Indigito, as Nuncupo, as. Nommer. S. Call by nicke (or wrong)
name. Agnomino, as. * Call for help. Aduoco, as. Inuoco, as. Appeler a son
aid. S. To call one to co^sulte, or to do some other thing. Aduocare ad
consultandum, aut ad aliud agendu^. idem quod simplex Vocare. Appeler a fair
quelque chose. S.

To call to the assemble. Aduocare ad concionen. Appeler a l'assemblee. S.

To call or cause ye people come together to speak some thing to them. Aduocare
concionem. Fair assembler le peuple en lieu pour parler a luy.

To call to consultations. Aduocare in consilia. Appeler a la consultation,
pour consulter. S.

To call his fellows unto one assemblee or company. In coetum aduocare
socios. Appeler a l' assemblee. S.

They call upon Juno Lucina in travail. Iunonem Lucinam in pariundo inuoca^t.
As Gliceriu^ in Ter. Juno Lucina fer opem, serua me obsecro. O Juno Luciana, I
beseech the aid and save me.

He calls for help to maintain his liberty. Auxilia libertati inuocat. S.

An other called him softly in his ear. Blandius alia ad aurem inuocabat.
L'appeloit. S.

Call and to cry for aid. Inuocare subsidium. Requerir secours. S. To call
and desire one to aid or help. In auxilium aliquem inuocare. S.

Call from far of. Prouoco, as. Hucher and appele de long. S. Let use call
forth Pamphila to sing. Pamphilam cantatum prouocemus. Ter.

Call in. Introuoco, as. Inuoco, as. Appeler aucun pour entrer. Call like a
Partriche. Cacabo, as. Chanter comme la Perdris. S. Call often. Aduocito, as.
Clamito, as. Vocito, as. Appeler souuent. H. Call or name familiarly. Appelo,
as. Nommer. S. They call thee a wise man. Vnum ^e sapientem appellant.
Appellent, dient. S.

To call every one by his name. Appellare nomi- ne vel nominatim. Appeller ou
hucher quelqu'vn par son nom. S.

To call upon God. Vsurpare and appellare deum. L'inuoquer. S.

To call God to witness. Appellare deum. Appeler dieu testmoing. S.

Call out. Excio, is. Euoco, as. Appeler, hucher. S. Call forth Dauus hither.
Euocate huc Dauum. S. To call one forth of doors. Euocare alique^ for as.

To call one forth in an others name, or at an others request. Euocare aliquem
for as verbis alicuius. S.

Call Sosia to me, yt he may go for Blepharo. Euocate huc Sosiam, accersat
Blepharonem. Appelez moy Sosia, qu'il aille querir Blepharo. S. Called forth of
their country. Euocati e patria. S. Called forth to be by God. Euocari a deo.
S. Call to souper or to bid to souper. Euocare vel inuitare ad coenam. Appeler
a souper. S. Call or cause one to appear at Rome or at some other city.
Euocare aliquem Romam, aut ad aliam vrbem. L'appeler and fair adiourner pour
comparoir en person a Rome deuant quelque magistrate. S. Call out of bed or
sleep. Suscito, as. Susciter. S. Call together. Concio, is. Conuoco as. Vt
supra. Call to memory, or remembrance. Comminiscor, sceris. Recolo, is.
Reco^miniscor, sceris. Reminiscor, sceris. Reduire en memoire. S. To call to
remembrance diligently. Studio recolere. Rememorer soingneusement. S.

Call to your remembrance rather those things that are worthy such a man. Ea
potius reminiscere quae digna tua persona sunt. S. Call to witness. Attestor,
aris. Testor, aris. Appeler a tesmoing. S. I call, or take God to witness of
it. Id testor deos. I'appelle dieu a tesmoing, Ie iure dieu. S.

I call all the Gods and goddesses, to witness. Testor deos deasque
immortales, vestrasque mentes.

Call upon, or to enter an actio^ against an ill debtor. Interpellare
debitorem. Summer un debteur, luy demander vne debte. S. I am called to the
cause. Aduocor causae. Ie suis appele a la cause, ou au process. S.

Called to cure or heal a sick person. Aduocari aegro, hoc est ad aegrum.
Estre appele pour guarir le malade. S. To be called one with vows and prayers.
Votis vocari. Estre inuoque and reclame par veux and prieres. S.

Called. Vocatus, Accitus, Accersitus, Euocatus. Appele, huche. S. Called by a
wrong name. Agnominatus.* Called to be, before the council. Inconsilior, aris.
Caller. Vocator vel trix. L'appelant, Semonneur. S. Calling. Vocatio, onis.
Invocation. Calling again, or back. Reuocatio, onis. foem. genesis Reuocation*
S. Calm, Look in Cawlme. Calsey. Agger, eris. Pauimentum. Chaussee, esleuee
ou haulsee. H. Vide Caucey. To make a causeye or paueme^t. Iacere sieve struere
aggerem. Fair vne chaussee. S.

Caltrap. Hamus, i. Murex, icis. Caltrappes like three Iron pricks so joined,
that being thrown, one always stands vprighte. Murices. Chaussetrappes. S.
Caltrappes, engines of war sown abroad to wind horse and man by the
legs. Spara. secundum Fest.* Camel beast. Camelus, li. Chamelus, li. Un
chameau. Et Camelinus, a, um. Ang. Of a Camel. De chameau. S. Et Blactire. To
cry like a camel.* A driuer or keeper of Camels. Camelarius, rij. Qui Camelos
onustos agit and ducit, Cameliorum agitator and ductor. Un Chamelier. Comme
nous disans un Muletier. S.

Dryuing or keeping of camels. Camelelasia, siae. camelorum agitatio,
exhibitioque and productio. S.

Camomill flower. Hieranthemis. Coop. Camomil herb. Camomilla Anthemis,
Camaemelu^, and cum aspiratione Chamaemelu^, Eranthemum, Leucanthemis.
Camomille. S. Camosed or crooked. Simus, a, um. Look in crooked. Camosed, or
crooked nose. Silus, Simo. Look in crooked nose. Camp, an army lodged, or
pauillions pitched. Castra, orum. pl. Le camp, le fort. S. Camp of the
enemies. Iniqua castra. Le camp des ennemies. S. Camp fortified to tarry in.
Castra statiua. Un fort, ou un camp arreste. S. To ride to the camp. Castris
adequitare. Cheuaucher aupres du camp. S.

To assaute the camp. Adpugnare castra. Assaillir. Et Adsultare castris, Idem.

To keep watch and ward in the camps. In castris stationem agere. Fair le
guet. S.

To trenche the camp round about. Castra cingere vallo. Fossoyer and remparer
le camp. S.

To pitche camp over against the enemies. Co^ferre castra castris. Planter son
camp vis a vis du camp des ennemies. S.

To camp, or to pitche camp. Facere castra, Imponere castra, Locare castra,
Ponere castra. Planter, ou asseoir le camp, parquer, camper. S.

Captain driven from his camp, or chased from his forte. Exutus castris dux.
Dispouille de son fort, Chasse de son fort. S. To be in camp. Habere castra.
Estre camp. S.

To bide in the camps. Insistere castris. Estre dedens le camp. S.

To raise the camp. Mouere castra. S.

To fortify the camp. Munire castra. Fortefier. S.

To enter the camp by force. Perrumpere castra. Forcer, enter dedens par
force. S.

Camphyre, the name of a gum. Camphora, vulgo dicta, Aetio medico Caphur,
Hebraeis Copher. Du camphre. S. Can, or may. Possum, potes. Polleo, es. Queo,
is. Valeo, es. Pouuoir. I can not but cry out. Non possum quin exclamem. S.

Every man is not able, or cannot do all things. Non omnia possumus omnes.
Verg.

It cannot come so to pass. Non sic futurum est, Non potest. Il n'est pas
possible. S.

He can by him self. Potest per se. Il peult de soymesme. S.

I will endeavor as much as I can possibly, to do it out of hand, or
shortly. Quam maxim potero, dabo operam vt breue id faciam. Le plus qu'il me
sera possible. S.

I speak it as loud as I can. Quam possum maxima voce dico. S.

May I not know whence thou came, whose thou art, or wherefore thou come?
Possum scire quo profectus, cuius sis, aut quid veneris? Ne pourroy ie scauoir,
etc. S.

See that thou come hither to me, if thou canste possible. Huc face, vt ad me
venias, siquid poteris. S'il to est possible. S.

I do as much as I can maynteine concord. Sic tueor, vt possum, concordiam.
Cic.

Can thou tell me the truth? Potin es mihi verum dicere? Terent. Can thou
not be still? Potin es vt desinas? Ne te scaurois tu deporter? S. He could not
constrayne thee this day to bring her. Nec te quiuit hodie cogere, illam vt
duceres. Il ne to a peu contraindre. S.

I can not write the residue. Non possum reliqua scribere, vel non queo reliqua
scribere. Ie ne puis. S.

I can not tell whether fear of ill, do naturally more prevail with some,
then hope of the good. Nescio an etiam naturaliter apud plurimos plus valeat
malorum timor, quam spes bonoru^. Quin.

It can do little either to increase or diminishe. Et augendae rei, and
minuendae parum valet. Vault peu. S.

Canappy for a bed. Conopeum, i. and Conopium, ij. Vne tente, voile ou
pauillon courtine, Ceil de lict. S. Cancel or deface. Delere literas, Induco,
is. Lituro, as. Cancellare, Oblitero, as. Rescindo, is. Effacer. S. Canceler.
Cancel a decree, judgment, or sentence, once determined. Acta circumducere.
Cancel, raise or to deface a testament. Cancellare testamentum. Canceler,
rayer, effacer. S. Cancelled to be, Expungor, eris, vnctus. Cancelling, or
defacing of a wrytinge. Litura, ae. Effaceure. S. Candle. Candela, Lucerna,
Lychnus. Chandelle. To make candels of tallowe. Seuo, as, are. Vt Candelas
seuare, legitur and Sebare. Fair chandelles de suif. S.

Candle of wax. Caereus. Chandelle de cire. Ca^del of tallowe. Ca^dela
sebacea. Chandelle de suif. H. Candle beam, such as hangs in gentlemennes
haules, with sockettes to set candels upon. Lacunar, aris. n. ge. Candell weke.
Ellychnium. La meche lumignon. H. Candle bearer. Caero, erarius, ij. m. g.
Candelsnuffer, or instrumente to snuff candelles. Emunctorium, ij. Quo
ellychmum seperuacuum candelae emungitur. Mouchette. Candelsticke.
Caeroferarium, rij. Candelabrum, bri. n. genesis Chandelier. H. Candelsticke,
called a branch. Polymyxo. Coop. Cane or a reed. Arundo, Canna, Calamus.
Can, ou ^roseau. S. H. Of canes or reeds, Canneus, a, um. Cannitius, a, um.
De can ou roseau.

A place where canes and reeds do grow. Cannetum, ti. n. ge. Lieu ou
croissent les roseaux. S.

Cane or reed. Donax, cis. Ferula, ae. Un maniere de gross can. S. Canell
spice, or tree so called. Cinnamum, Cinnamomum. Canelle. S. Canker, Look in
ruste. Canker sore. Cancer, Tumor durus inaequalis, aspectu teter, venis in
ambitu turgentibus, color liuescens, Carcinoma. Le cancre. H. Canker called a
pocke. Phagedaena. Vne espece d'vlcere qui corromps and ma^ge les parties
saines and prochaines. Canker in the nose. Carcinodes. La malady dedens le
nez, appeller Polipus chanereux. S. Canker eating in the upper parts of ye
body. Carcinoma, Carcinomatis. n. g. Un espece de chancre es parties
superieures. S. Canker worm, which creapeth most commonly on colewortes,
some do call them the devils gold ringe, and some the colewort worm. Eruca,
ae. Camp. Chenille. S. Cankred or rusty, or full of canker or ruste.
Aeruginosus, a, um. Aeruginis plenus. Rouille. S. Can or a tankerde. Olla,
ae. Canna, ae. Cantharus. Un vasseau a boire, un hanap. S. Can with two
ears. Amphora.* Cannell for dogs. Latibulum caninum. Cannell or gutter.
Canalis, lis. m. and. foe. g. Calna. S. Cannell bone of the neck. Clauicula,
Iugulus, Co^pages colli cum trunco. L'os du gauion. H. Cannopee of a bed.
Canopeum, ij. n. ge. Courtine au tour d'un lict, pauillon. H. Cantell of bread.
Frustrum praecidanium. Chanteau de pain. Cantell or shief of bread. Offa,
Massa. Mass, gros morceau. H. Canterbury, a town in England, Cantuaria.
Cantorbie, ville d' Angleterre. S. Capacity, or aptnes to take. Capacitas,
Captus, us. m. genesis La capacite and portee d'aucun. S. Captious or subtle.
Captiosus, a, um. Captieux, plein de dol. S. O captiouse, crafty and unworthy
fellowshippe. O societatem captiosam and indignam. S.

A most captious kind or manner of interrogation. Fallax and captiosa
interrogatio. Cic.

Captious form of arguing. Sorites, penul. prod. m. g. Graeci vocant
captiosum and multiplex argumentandi genus. Vulgo voca^t a primo ad vltimu^.
Capers, a fruit made in salets. Capparis, is. foe. ge. Des cappres. Capon.
Capus, i. Capo, onis. Chapon. S. Capon of grease or fat. Altilis capus.
Cappe. Pileus, ei. m. genesis etc. Cappe for a child. Pileolus. Un petit bonnet.
Capricornus, a sign celestial, co^teining.xx. stars, but it is not
Capricornes, for this is a sign terrestrial, and how many stars it
contains, it is uncertain. Therefore I leave it as a quere. Capricornus, ni.
m. g. Capricorn vne sign au ciel de vingt estoilles. P. Captain. Dux, cis.
Ordinis dux. Praefectus. Captain. Captain general, or lieutenant of an
army. Legatus, ti. Strategus, Dux. Le grand captain, ou le chef d'vne armee.
S. Captain of a company in the forewarde, or vantgarde, having under him four
hundredth soldiers. Primipilus, li. m. g. Le captain de la primiere band.
S. Captain in the vantgarde, or he that fights next the standerd.
Primipilaris, ris. Celuy qui a este tell captain. S. Captain of the
forewarde. Spirarchus. quasi primipilaris, aut cohortis praefectus. Call.
Captain of five men. Pentarchus. Qui quinque viris praeest. Call. Captain of
fifty men. Pentacontarchus. Un cinquantenir. S. Captain of a Galley or ship,
which has three order of rowers. Trierarchus, praefectus triremis. Call.
Captain over ten men of arms. Decarchos. Decurio, onis. Un diznier en guerre.
S. Captain over a hundredth men. Centurio, onis. Hecatontarchus. Centenier,
Centurion. S. Et Centuriatus eius officium, Centurio, as. Fungi eius officio.
Captain over two hundredth men. Ducenarius. Captain de deux cents hommes. S.
Captain over a thousand men. Chiliarchus, Tribunus militum. Qui ha charge de
mill hommes. Captain over ten thousand men. Myriarchus and Myriarcha, December
millium praefectus. Captive or prisoner taken in war. Captiuus. Captif. S.
Captivity or thraldom. Captiuitas, Halosis. Captivity. S. Care, thought,
study, diligence, work, labor. Cura, rae. foe. genesis Cure and soing, soulci,
chagrin. S. Care causes men wax old. Cura facit homines senescere. Care for
lack of money. Argentaria cura. Soulci and chagrin de fault d' argent. S.
Worldly cares. Mortales curae. Les soulcis de ce monde. S. Sedatis requierunt
pectora curis.
Stat. When as their cares assuaged were,
their hearts received rest.


Cares that make a man heavy and sad. Tristes curae. Qui rendent l'homme
triste. I take care for your business as much as I may. Toto animo de tuis
commodis, ornamentisque cogito. Tuam vtilitatem assidue specto. Haeret in animo
meo de tuis commodis assidua cogitatio. Si quid e re tua est, id maxim laboro,
Tuae mihi res, tuae fortunae curae vehementer sunt, Si tuae rations quid
postulent, nunquam non attendo. Omnis mihi de te tuisque commodis cogitatio
est, Tuam vtilitatem meae spectant cogitationes omnes. Meas curas ad tuum
commodum omnes contuli. Animus meus in tua vtilitate fixus and locatus est. Ie
n'ay soing que de toy. S.

To bring one into care. Cura aliquem afficere, Curam alicui inijcere,
Solicitudines alicui conficere, In solicitudinem adducere, Solicitudine
afficere, Aliquem solicitum habere. Mettre en soulci.

To ease one of care. Curas adimere, Leuare aliquem cura. Otiosum aliquem
reddere, Securitatem facere, Quietum aliquem reddere. Demere curam and
solicitudinem. Mettre horse de soulci, Ostre le soulci. S.

To sleep without care, to sleep quietly. Otiose dormire. Dormir sans soulci.
S.

To be without care. Animo esse omisso, Otiosum esse. Estre sans soulci. S.

To be careful for some thing. Curam agere. Se soulcie de quelque chose. S.

I care not, I pass not, I recke not, or I way it notheng. Nil mihi curae
est, Omnia nihili facio, Trahuntur per me omnia pedibus, Nihil me afficit,
Nihil me tangit, Nulla re move or, De quauis resusque deque fero. Aeque omnia
contemno, Fastido, Respuo, Nulla res a pud me pondus habet. Nullius momenti
est, In pretio est ne minimi quidem, Non laboro, Ea res modice me tangit.
Isthaec non curo. Ie ne m'en soulcie point. S.

Care thou not, set thy heart at rest, or be thou still. Me vide, Habe quietum
animum, Tace, Otiose consiste, Quiesce, Animo nunc otioso esse impero, Quietus
esto. Ne te soulcie. Philosophy takes away cares. Detrahit solicitudines
philosophia. La philosophy met horse and oste les soulcis. S.

To deliver one from care. Abducere curas alicui. Le deliurer de soulci. S.

To use care and diligence in some thing. Adhibere curam in re aliqua. Cic.

To deliver out of care and thought. Curas adimere. Mettre ou iecter horse de
soulci. S.

To make one careful. Cura aliquem afficere. Mettre en soulci. S.

He is careful. Cura attingit illum. S.

To tell an other his cares. Committere auribus alicuius suas curas. Les dire a
autruy. S.

To set care and study on some thing. Confer curas in rem aliquam. Cic.

To be in great sorrow and cares. Confici cura and curis. Cic.

Care or heuines is assuaged. Co^sedit cura. Est cessee. To lay aside his
sorrow and care. Tristes animo deponere curas. Verg.

I am careful for Tiro. De Tirone mihi curae est. Cic.

Which I am very careful how I may keep. Quos vt ego hodie seruem, cura
maxima est. Desquels ie suis en tresgrand soulci comment ie les pourray
retenir. S.

I am careful for it, I have good regard of it, or I see to it. Curae mihi
est. Ie m' en soulci. S.

Truly I am careful to what end this will come, or how it will fall out in the
end. Sane curae est quorsum euenturum hoc fiet. Certes ie me soulcie qu' il
aduiendra de cela. S.

Care, and to take thought for the year to come. Extendere curas in annum
venientem. Se soulcier du temps aduenir. S. To be careful for one, or for his
affairs. Gerere curam pro aliquo. Se soulcier de la person ou des affairs
d' aucun. S.

Careful to be for any thing. Curae habere rem aliquam. Auoir soing de quelque
chose. S. Careful to be to teach his children. Habere cura^ docendi liberos.
Quintil. To make careful. Curas inijcere. Mettre ensoulci.

His cares increase^ Ingeminant curae. Virg.

To ease the care and grief of the mind, by speech and council. Curam and
angorem animi, sermon and consilio leuare. Cic.

Small cares or griefs complain but the greater are astonished. Curae leaves
loquuntur, Ingentes stupent. Quand la person ha un chagrin ou ennuy legier,
elle en parle, ou s' en complaint, ou demand conseil pour y remedier, mais
quand le chagrin ou ennuy est fort grand and excessif, elle demeure estonnee
and tout esperdue, sans pouuoir parler ne s' en plaindre. S.

Cast from thy mind this care. Mitte hanc de pectore curam. Ne te soulcie plus
de cela. S.

To renew the old care and sorrow of his mind. Renouare veterem curam animi.
Renouueler. S.

Care nippeth the again. Remordet te cura. S. Sleep takes away cares. Somnus
curas soluit. Ovid.

Voluere curarum tristeis in pectore fluctus.
Lucret. To toss and turn the woeful waves of care within the mind.
Care, heaviness, pensiveness, trouble, and vexatio^ of mind. Solicitudo,
dinis. foe. genesis Soulci chagrin, solicitude, esmoy, inquietude d'esprit. S.
Biting and nipping cares. Mordaces solicitudines. Horat.

To withdraw his mind from care and heaviness. Abducere animum a
solicitudine, Abstrahere se a solicitudine.

To bring into care. Adducere in solicitudinem. Look bring.

To enter into care and pensiveness for one. Adire solicitudine^ pro aliquo.
Se chagriner and soulcier pour aucun. S.

We be in double care and heaviness for your sake. Ex te duplex nos afficit
solicitudo, Nous auo^s double soulci pour toy. S.

To bring one into care and heaviness. Co^ficere alicui solicitudines. Le
chagriner and mettre en soulci.

To put away care. Demere solicitudinem. Tacit.

Consumed with care. Exedi solicitudine. Cic.

To be in care and heaviness. Habere solicitudinem. Estre en esmoy and soulci.
S.

To cause one to be full of trouble, care and heaviness. Esse solicitudine
alicui. Luy engendrer chagrin. S.

To be in great care and heaviness. Esse magna solicitudine. Cic.

To be urged with care. Vrgeri solicitudine. Cic.

Careful or full of care, trouble, pensiveness, and business. Solicitus, a,
um. Adiectiuum. Qui est fort chagrin and plein de soulci, soulcie. S. To be in
much care and anguyshe. Solicitu^ esse and angi. Estre en grand soulci and
angoisse. S.

For this the silly woman is in great care. Ex hoc misera solicita est.
Terent. Elle est chagrinee de cela.

Careful by reason of suspicion. Solicitus suspicione. Cic. The soldiers
being in great fear and care for their captain, began to cry on every side.
Clamor vndique ab solicitis vicem imperatoris militibus sublatus. Estans en
grand soulci pour leur captain qui estoit en danger. S.

To keep one careful and solicitous. Tenere aliquem solicitum. Le tenir en
soulci. S.

Actions done with great diligence and care. Actiones accuratae and solicitae.
Faicte soigneusement and auec grande cure and solicitude.

To have a troubled and careful mind. Anxio and solicito animo esse. Estre en
grand soulci. S.

Careful sorrow, Dolor sollicitus. Ovid. Qui rend l' homme chagrin. S. Riches
breading care. Opes sollicitae. Qui engendrent soulci.

A thing full of care. Res solicita. Plein de chagrin

Care, or to have care of some thing. Curam alicui rei imponere, impendere vel
intendere, Curam ponere in re aliqua, Curare, Concurare, Procurare, Curae
habere rem aliquam, In cura aliquid habere, Videre, Diligentiam in re aliqua
habete vel adhibere, Curam alicuius rei gerere. Auoir soing de quelque chose. I
have many cares and troubles. Curas habeo multas, discruciant animum curae.
Haec res innumeris curis animum meum vehementer angit. Aerumnabili curarum
aestu rodor, discrucior. Me mea cura coquit, versatque in pectore fixa.
Aegraque men's varijs sollicitudinibus.


Anxietudine multa afficior. Multis curis sum implicitus, Diuersis negotijs
distringor. Varijs distrahor curis, Du^ in dubio est animus, paulo momento huc
and illuc rapitur, Multitudine negotiorum prohibitus sum hoc facere, Sum curis
ingentibus aeger, Varia curarum fluctuat aestu men's mea, Ingens me cura mordet,
Implicitus sum curis, Districtus, inuolutus negotijs, Intricatus, impeditus,
illigatus, illaqueatus, obuinctus, dispunctus, obseptus, Oneratus curis,
oppressus, oppletus. Negotiorum fluctibus obrutus, Tot me impediu^t curae, quae
animum meum diverse trahunt, Ita alte distringor occupatione, vt neque
interspirandi sit locus, Diuersae vocitant animum in contraria curae,
Negotiorum mole obtuor, Multis studiorum obruor laboribus, Multis negotiorum
vndis in praese^tia iactor, exerceorque. IN ay beaucoup de soulcis.

To take care and charge of some thing. Accurare, Curam sumere aut suscipere.
Prendre soing de quelque chose. S.

To have care to do that we have in charge. Pe^sum accurare. Auoir soing de
fair ce qu' on nous a encharge. S.

Careful and diligent to do some thing. Diligens, Impiger, Industrius, Nauus,
Solicitus. Soigneux and diligent a fair quelque chose. S. Care for a thing.
Inuigilo, as. Studeo, es* Look study Care no more for a thing. Curam, vel
studium relinquere. Vt supra. Care for nothing, or take no thought. Oscito, as.
Pe^si nihil habere, susque deque far, vel habere. Ne se soulcier comment il
aille de quelque chose. S. Careful. Negotiosus, Studiosus, a, um. Soigneux. S.
Careful or studious. Cogitabu^dus, a, u^. Meditabu^dus, a, um. Alpus, a, u^.
Studiosus, a, um. Suspe^sus, a, um. secundum. Plaut. Senec.* Careful, or full
of heaviness, misery, or travail. Aerumnatus, Aerumnosus, Anxius, Suspensus,
a, um. Qui est chagrin, and en grand soing Angoisseux. S. To have a heavy and
careful mind. Anxio animo esse. Estre en grand chagrin and soulcier. Se
soulci fort.

Heavy care. Anxia cura. Qui nous met en chagrin.

Careful old men. Anxij senes. Chagrins. S. Careful for the security of his
nephews. Anxius Securitatis nepotum. hic Anxius a Plinio ponitur cum genitiuo.
Qui se chagrine and soulcie fort du repos de ceulx qui naistront apres luy. S.
In anguishe and care of mind. Anxius mentis. Fort soulcie en son esprit. S.

Careful to get goods. Attentus ad rem, Studiosus, a, um. Studiosus rei
familiaris. Careful to be. Animo laborare, Suspendo, is. vt apud Plaut. and
Vergi. Careful to make. Solicito, as. Chagriner, perturber. P. Carefully,
curiously with great pain and diligence. Anxie, Accurate, Curiose, Diligenter,
Non indilige^ter, Firm, Intent, Industry, Magnopere, Provide, Religiose,
Studiose, Vigilanter, Solicit. Soigneusement. Careless body, or being without
care. Expers doloris. Securus, a, um. Qui ne se soulcie de rien. P. Careless, or
without care. Dissolute. Sans se soulcier. P Caring for nothing. Oscitans, it is.
Qui ne pense, and ne soulcie de rien, negligent. S. Vide Negligence. Card
wolle and such like. Carmino, as. Carpere lanam. Pecto, is, xui. Vt pectere
lanam. Carder la lain. S. Carder, or a picker of wolle. Carminarius,
Carminator. Cardeur de lain. S. And she that cardeth well. Carminatrix,
tricis. foe. genesis Carding of woll. Carminatio, onis. foe. genesis Cards to play
withal. Chartae lusoriae, vel Chartae pictae. Chartes a iouer. Cardinge and
spinning. Lana and Tela. vt Terent. Lana ac Tela victu^ quaeritat. She gets
her living by spinning and carding, or she gets her living by wolle and
web, or by spinning and weauing, or she gets her living by spinning of
wolle and warping or weauing of linen. Elle gaigne sa vie a filer la lain and
ourdir la toille. P. Caret an herb, the root whereof is used to be stewed
with meat. Coros, Caron, vel Carum. Cheruy. H. Caret wild. Carota, tae. foe.
genesis Caret An herb whereof there be three sorts, the first of them is called
wild Carrote, Daucus, the other two be called by this name, Asininum daucum.
Vne sort d' herb don't yen a de trois sorts, l' une s' appelle Carotte
sauuage: les deux autres les herbiers appellent Asininum daucum. S. Carry.
Vecto, as. Veho, is, xi. Mener en un chariot, nauire ou cheu^l voicturer. S.
Carry about. Circumuecto, as. Circumucho, is, xi. Porter tout entour. S. Carry
before. Praeferre. Porter deuant. S. Carry, or to bear together. Comportare,
Controllere. Porter ensemble. S. Heavy to carry. Portatu grave. Malaise a
porter. S.

Carry, or to bear from one place to an other. Auehere, Deuchere. Porter d' un
lieu en autre. S. Carry, or to bring, drive or gather many things into one
place. Confer, Congerere. Porter plusieurs chooses en un lieu. S. Carry, or to
bear a dead body to the grave or earth. Efferre cadauer. Porter un corpse mort
en terre. S. Carry, or to bear a burden by the way. Ire cu^ onere. Porter
quelque chose en chemin. S. He goes and carries nothing. Incedit inanis. Il va
sans rien porter. S.

Carry, or to bear all about. Circumgestare, Circu^ferre. Porter par tout. S.
Carry away. Abduco, is. Asporto, as. Aueho, is. Aufero, rs. Degero, ris.
Deporto, as. Transporter d'vn lieu en autre. S. To carry many of his things, or
much of his stuff away with him. Multa de suis rebus secu^ portare, Cic.

To carry in something into the house. Auferre aliquid intro. Emporter dedans la
maison. S.

Carry and to drive away. Auferre and aducere. Cic. Carried from the ba^quet or
from the table. Auferri de conuiuio. Cic. Estre emporte. S. Carry, or to bear
out of sight. Ab aspectu auferre, Auferre e conspectu. Destourner qu'on nele
voye. S. Carried between men, not able to go him self. Auferri inter manus.
Estre emporte enter les mains. S. Carry, bear or to take away by force. Auferre
per vim. Ostre par force. S. Carry or to convey some thing away craftily.
Auferre ab aliquo quidpiam per fallaciam. Par finesse tirer quelque chose d' un
autre. S. Carry, or to bear something into his house. Auferre aliquid domum
suam. Emporter en sa maison. S. Carry away the meat or to take up the table.
Me^sam auferre. Plaut. Desseruir, oster la table. S. This thing ravished or
carried me away, whether I would or no. Me transuersum abstulit haec res. M'a
mis horse du sens, m' a transporte, m'a raui. S.

To carry or bear away on horses. Deportare iumentis. Cic.

Carry or to bear away with ships. Deportare nauibus. Caesar. Carry away
captives or prisoners to Rome. Deportare captiuos Romam. Mener and charier les
prisonniers a Romme. S. Carry or to bring home his army. Deportare exercitum.
Remener son ost and armee en son pais. S. Carry or to bear away the victory.
Deportare triu^phum. Rapporter la victoire. S. Carry away rubbell or brokell of
old decayed houses. Erudero, as. Vt Eruderare solum. Curer and nettoyer vne
place de toutes ordures, comme de pierres, platras, and autres. S. Carry back.
Reueho, is, xi. Rem^ner par eaue, ou a cheual, ou par charroy. S. Carry one
back, home again. Domum aliquem reuehere. Horat. Carry or bring to a place.
Adueho, is. Apporter par eau a cheual ou par charroy. S. Carry or to conueyghe
over the sea. Aduehere trans mare. Apporter de dela lamer. S. Carry, or to
bear often to a place. Aduecto, tas, taui, tare. frequentatiuum. Apporter
souuent. S. Carye closely, privily, or secretly. Supporto, as. Porter. S. Carry
forth. Effero, rs. Eueho, is. Proueho, is. Profero. rs. Exporto, tas. Porter
horse. Carry from a place. Deueho, is. Porter d' un lieu en autre. S. Carry in, or
carry to. Infer, Introferre, Inuehere, Importare. Porter dedans. S. Carry mudde
and filthe out of a fishepoole or ponde. Efferre emunditias ex piscina. Cato.
Carry, or to bear out wounded men out of the field. Efferre ex acie saucios.
Cic. To be carried forth as a coarse with the feet forward. Efferri pedibus.
Estre port en terre les pieds deuant. S.

Carry shamefastness with him. Verecundiam secum efferre. Emporter. S. To be
carried to burial with a solemn company. Efferri funere, and cu^ funere. Estre
colporte pour estre enterre ou ards auec grand conuoy, Estre port en terre
auec conuoy. S.

Carry or to bear forth on his shoulders. Efferre in humeros. Porter sur ses
espaules. Carry from the ship to land. Efferre in terram de naue. Porter horse
de la nauire sur la terre. S. Carry into the main sea. Euehere in altum. Liu.
Carried up to heaven. In auras aethereas euectus. Esleue. S. Look bring. They
carry the bodies of the dead out of the house. Corpora exportant tectis. Verg.

To carry together from many places. Co^uehere ex diuerso. Porter de diverse
lieux and amasser. S.

Carry often. Vectito, as. Porter souuent. Carry over. Traijcio, cis. Traduco,
is. Transfero, rs. Transueho, is. Porter oultre. Carry tales or tidinges.
Rumifero, as. Rumigero, as. Rumito, as.* Carry through. Praeterueho, is. Porter
oultre ou passer. Carry wood, or to go to puruey wood for the ca^pe. Lignor,
aris. Aller querir du bois pour le camp. S. Cariable, or apt to carry.
Vectorius, a, um. Qui sert a porter. S. Carriage. Gestamen, inis. Vectatio,
Vectura, Vehitura, Velatura, ae. Voicture. S. Look Traffic. Carriage on
horseback. Hippagium, ij. n. g. Carriage upon the sea, or any thing of what
kind so ever it be that is carried upon the sea. Stlatariu^, ij, Nam Stlata,
ae. est genus nauigij latum magis quam altum. An hulke. Carriage for any thing,
or most properly that which serves for to carry, as a carte, chariot, ship,
boat, wayne, and such like. Vehiculum, li. Currus, Vectabulum vel plaustrum
quo quid vehitur. Call. Chariot. S. H. Cariers. Vectores. Look more in carier.
Carier of any thing out of the house. Exagoga, ae. m. g. Vt Exagoga bonorum.
Qui port horse. S. Carier of tales about in markettes, and like common places.
Circumforaneus. Circu^forani, vel Circu^foranei sunt qui crebro versantur circa
fora quales nugatores, impostoresque qui fucis and strophis captant quaestum.
Carried. Vectus, a, u^. Port. Et vectabulu^, li. An. That wherein any thing is,
or may be carried. Chariot. S. Carried about. Circumforaneus, a, um.* Carried
away. Abductus, a, um. Ablatus, a, um. Qui est oste. Carried away. Deportatus,
ta, tum. Port. S. Carried back. Reuectus, ta, tum. Carried forth. Euectus, ta,
tum. Port horse. S. Carried over. Traiectus, a, um. Transporte, pass. Carier.
Vector, oris. Lator, oris. Gerulus, li, Portitor, oris. Porteur. S. Carier of
letters^ Tabellarius, ij, m. g. Porteur de letters missiues. Carier of news
and tales. Famigerulus, Rumigerulus, vel la.* Carier of a present. Dorophorus.
Coop. Carier of dead corpse to burial, or he that has the function or the
office of ye burier. Vespilio, onis. aliqui habent Vespillo, onis. alij.
Vespelio, onis. Autumatur de Spolio, as. and Vestis, vel de Violo, as. and
Sepulchrum. etc. vel Veho, is * Sandapilarius, ij. m. g. Qui port le corpse
mort en terre. H. Carrying. Vectura, Vectio, onis. Portement. P. Carrying to a
place. Aduectio, onis. f. ge. Amenement, apport, amenag. P. Carle of the
country. Rusticanus. Un paisant, ou rural, rustique. Carlishe or churlishe.
Rusticus, a, um. Agrestis, te. Rural, rustique. Carlishenes or churlishenes.
Rusticitas, tatis, foe. g. Rusticite. S. Carlisle city. Caturactorium. Carme, a
tree which the Frenchemen call Carpie. Carpinus, ni. f. g. Vne sort d' arbre
Carmie ou charm. Carnal or of flesh. Carneus, a, um. Qui est de chair. S.
Carnal affection or appetite. Concupiscentia, Epithymia, Libido. Lubido, inis.
Venus, eris. Voluptas. Plaisir and volonte desordonnee, appetit desordonne,
affection desordonnee, paillardise, luxure. S. Et Voluptarius, a, um. Ang. Of a
carnal affection, appetite, or lust being. Look Pleasure. Carpe fyshe.
Burbatus, ti. Cyprinus, vulgo Carpio. Carpe, sort de poisson. S. Carpenter, or
cartwryght. Abiegnarius, ij. Abietarius, Carpentarius, ij. Materiarius,
Lignarius faber, Lignarius, Materiarius faber. Charpentier, ou qui fournit de
bois a fair quelque edifice. S. Carpenter that is chife master of the works.
Achitectus, and Architecton. Maistre charpentier. Et Architectonicus.
Pertaining to the master carpenter. Appartenant a maistre Charpentier. S. A
carpenters rule. Chorobates, Chorobatae, Regula, Norma, Canon. Vne sort de
reigle a charpa^tier

Carpenters line. Linea, ae. foe. genesis Amussis, sis. f, ge. Libra, brae. f. g.
La ligne ou cordeau d' un charpe^tier. S. Carpenters shop. Fabrica, cae. foe.
ge. Un ouuroir de charpentier S. Carpenters axe. Dolabra. Look Axe. Carpet for
a cupborde, benche, pauement, or table. Gausape, Gausapina, Tapes, Tapis,
Tapite, it is. Tapetum, ti. Amphitapa. Couuerture velue. H. Carre, such as they
carry wood, wine, and diverse such things in from place to place within the
city. Carrus, Currus, Plaustru^, Sarracum, Vehiculum, Carruca, Biga, Bijuga,
Curriculum. Char ou chariot. S. Bruette, Charrette. H. Carrayne. Cadauer, ris.
Morticina caro. Charnu, charnure, charongne. S. Carrayne lean. Squallidus, a,
um. Look lean. Carrayne lean, applied properly to beasts. Strigosus, a, um.
Fort maigre, tellement que le corpse semble restreci. S. Iades that be more
carian like, or more lean. Strigosiores equi. Liu.

Carricke or great ship. Buccentaurus, ri. Circerus, nauis Asiana
praegrandis, vt Plautus, Quum perco^tor portitores ecquae nauis venerit ex
Asia, negant venisse. Conspicatus sum interim circeru^, quo maiorem non censeo.
Call. Curaque. Pal. Carte or carre. Carruca, ae. Cisium, Cissium, Currus,
Epirhedium, Iumentum, Plostrum, Plaustrum, Rheda, Vehes, Vehia. Un chariot ou
charrette. Et Carrucarius, a, um. and Plostrarius, a, u^. Ang. That which
pertains to a carte. Qui est d' un chariot. Carte before the horse, where one
thing is set before an other, and that clean out of order. Hysterologia vel
histeron proteron, est figura quum sententia ordine commutatur: vt postquam
altos tetigit fluctus, and ad aequora venit: Nam prius ad aquora venit, quam
tangeret fluctus. Call. Carte covered. Capsus, si. Carruca vndique tecta. Call.
Carte drawght, of three horses. Triga, ae. Trois cheuauls attelez a un harnois
ou chariot. S. Et Trigariu^, rij. Ang. The course of drawyng such carts.
Carte drawn with four horses. Quadriga, ae. Quatre cheuaulx attelez a un
harnois, a cost, l' un de l'autre, il se prent aussi pour le chariot tire a
ces quatre cheuaulx ainsi attelez. S. Carte, or an old facioned wagge^
with.iiii. wheles. Rheda, ae. Vne facon de chariot ancien. S. Carte harneis.
Apparatus vehicularis, Helcium, cij. Un collier ou harnois a cheuaulx. S. Carte
horse, or charet horse. Carpentarius equus, Equus vehicularis, Veredus, di.
Equus iugalis. Chiual de tract ou de charroy. Cart saddle. Dorsuale, lis. I
think Dorsuale, Stratum, and Instratum, Be of one signification that is a
saddel cloth, or such like, to cover a horse withal. Couuerture du cheual. And
that Clitellae, is not only a packesaddle, but also a carte saddle. Sellae
dorsuariae iumentis imponi consuetae ad onera commodius gestanda. Le bast. H.
Carter. Auriga, ae. Cisiarius, ij. Vehicularius, Carrucarius, Plaustrarius,
Veredarius. Chartier. S. Carter that goes with three horses in a carte.
Trigarius. Chartier conduisant ces trois cheuaulx. S. Carter that goes with
four horses in a cart. Quadrigarius, ij. m. g. Qui conduit quatre cheuaulx. S.
Carter that drives a cart with four wheles. Rhedarius. Chartier. S. Carte
wryght. Carpentarius, Rotifex. Charpentier, charrou. Pal. Carrewaye sede or
herb. Caros. Carue in stone, or metal, or timber. Sculpo, is. Tailler and
grauer, entailler, engrauer. Carue or to grave. Sculpere, Scalpere, Caelare.
Grauer. Carved or graven in stone. Scalptus e saxo. Taille en pierre. Carved or
graue^. Sculptilis, le. Sculptus, a, u^. Scalptus, ta, tum, Grave. S. Carved or
graven ill. Infabre Scalptum. Qui ne est point bien grave. Carved with beasts.
Beluatus, a, um. * Caruer or a grauer. Caelator, Scalptor, Sculptor,
Anaglyptes. Graueur. S. Caruing. Caesura, Sculptura. Caelatura, ae. Graueure.
Carue as at a Genlemans table to carue, or break up a peace of meat.
Distrahere, Distribuere, Dissipare. Trencher. Carue, as women do young
cokereles. Castrare, Euirare. Chastrer. S. Case, Casus, us. Res, rei. foe. genesis
Cas. Put the case he be overcome. Pone eum esse victum. Pren la cas qu'il soit
vaincu. S.

Case doubtful. Res dubia, vel Incerta. Uncertain. Case in law, or properly
that ryseth in contention upon the point of the matter, which must be replied
unto, and other confessed, denied, or trauersed. Caussae constitutio, Status,
us. L'estat and condition. S. Case of a nowne. Prosis. Case or the termination
of a nowne. Casus, sus. Cas. Case to put any thing in. Theca. Un estuy de
quelque chose que se soit. S. Case, such as they put pictures in, a case for
an image. Aedicula. L'estuy d'vne image. S. Case to put pinnes in. Acicularium,
Spinularium. Espinglier a mettre les espingles dedans. S. Casement. Transenna.
Casket or forsar. Aporetu^, ti. Cistella, Cistula, Scriniolum, Scrinium.
Coffret, escrin, cabinet. H. Cast. Conijcio, cis, ieci. Iacio, cis, eci. Iacto,
as. Subiacto, as. Subiecto, as. Iecter. S. The wyndes cast or drive the
clouds into other parts. Flabra conijciunt nubila in alias parts. Chassent
and iectent les nuees. etc. S.

To cast his cloak on his neck. In collum palliolum conijcere. Plaut.

To cast stones amongst them. In medium conijcere saxa.

To cast darts, or to shoate. Tela co^ijcere. Liu.

Cast, or to bring one in love. Conijcere aliquem in amorem. Le mettre for
auant en amor. To cast one in prison, to lay in the stocks, or gyues.
Conijcere in catenas, In carcere^, In vincula. Emprisonner. Enferrer,
Enchainer. S.

To cast one into mischief and trouble. In malum conijcere aliquem. Le mettre
en grand ennuy. S.

To be cast into a disease. In morbum conijci. Venir ou tomber en malady. S.

To cast or lay the blame upon one. Conijcere causam in aliquem. Mettre le
tort sur aucun.

To cast on, or upon one. Conijcere super. Verg.

To cast up on high. Iacere in sublime. Plin.

I would rather have cast my self into the sea, then. etc. Iecissem me potius
in profundu^, quam. etc. Cic.

To cast ancker before the port. Iacere anchoras ante portum. Anchrer au port.
S.

They cast anchor out at the forepart of the shipp. Anchora de prora iacitur.
Verg.

To cast rampires on both sides of the haven. Iacere moles ab vtroque portus
cornu. Cic.

They cast an odure from the body. Odorem iaciunt de corpore. Rendent odeur.

To cast the dice, or to play at dice, or to play at h^ckle bones, as
children do. Talos iacere vel iactare. Iouer au dets.

To cast his darte in vain. In falsum tela iacere. En vain sans frapper. S.

To cast his eyes and look round about him. Oculos iactare. Lucret.

To cast and reuolue diverse earnest matters in his mind. Iactare curas
pectore. Penser and repenser en soymesme a diuerses chooses. S.

To cast and humble him self, before ones feet. Ad pedes accedere, vel
accidere alicui, Ad pedes se abijcere. Se iecter au pieds d'vn autre, pour le
supplier.

To cast him self into the fire. Conijcere se in ignem. Se iecter au feu. S.

Cast about. Circumfundo, is.* Cast abroad, here and there. Spargo, is.
Suffundo, dis. Iecter ca and la. Cast account. Calculo, as. Ratiocinor, ris.
Subducere summam. Compter. Cast ancre. Inhibere puppim. vt supra. Cast away.
Abijcio, cis. Reijcio, cis. Reiecter. To cast away weapons and harness for
weariness. Abijcere arma defatigatione. Iecter and quitter les arms. S.

He lay or cast him self down on the grass. Abiecit se in herbam. Il sest
iecte sur l' herb, comme par de sespoir, ou ennuy and fascherie.

They cast themselves (or lay down) on the ground to coal them. Abijciu^t se
humi, refrigerationem quaerentes. Ilz seiectent sur la terre.

Cast him self at ones feet, or to fall prostrate before one to make some
request or to desire some petition of him. Abijcere se alteri ad pedes. Se
iecter a ses pieds pour luy fair quelque request. S. He cast him self down
before Cesars feet. Se ad Caesaris pedes abiecit. Cic.

To cast away all obedience. Obedientiam abijcere. Ne point obeir. S.

To cast away pride. Superbiam abijcere. Plaut.

To cast away goodwill of learning. Voluntatem discendi abijcere. Ne vouloir
plus apprendre. S.

To flynge or cast the darte at his enemy again. Telum in hostem reijcere.
Caes. Reiecter.

To cast something out of the lap. E gremio reijcere aliquid. Ovid.

He cast his garment from his back. Amictum reiecit ex humeris. Verg.

To cast of a garment. Vestem de corpore reijcere. Ovid.

To cast him self upon one leaning to him. Reijcere se in aliquem. Terent.

Cast away sloughe. Amouere segnitia^ vel segnitie^. Cast away wastfully, or in
waste. Consumo, is. Sumo, is. Dissipo. as. Vide Waste and spend. Cast back
or backewarde. Postergo, as. Retorqueo, es. Reiecter. S. Cast between.
Interiacio, cis. Entreiecter. S. To be cast in a matter in the law. Cadere
causa. Perdre sa cause. S.

Cast corn, or sprincle corn to chickens or fowls. Obsipo, as. id est
obijcio, Obsipa pullis esca^. Give the chickens meat. Cast or condemn. Damno,
as. Vide condemn. Cast or condemned to be in judgment. Suppeditor, aris.
Verbum deponens. To cast a darte. Emittere iaculum. Iecter, darder, lancer.

Cast darts or arrows. Contendo, is. Iuculor, aris. and iaculo, as. Darder,
lancer, iecter, ferir d' un dard. S. Iuppiter casts down great showers.
Duros iaculatur Iuppiter imbres. Cic.

Jupiter casts flashes of lightning. Iuppiter iaculatur fulmina. Ovid.

Cast down under feet. Pessundo, as, are. Fouler aux pieds. S. Cast far of,
or out of the doors. Elimino, as. Fair, vuider de l' entree de la maison. Cast
forth. Eijcio, is. Quatio, is, assi. Iecter horse. To cast or shut forth.
Eijcere and excludere, Expellere, Exterminare, Deijcere. Iecter horse.

Cast, or to put forth of the doors. Eijcere for as, vel aedibus. Plaut. Cast
in. Inijcio, is. Iecter ens. Cast, or to throw into the fire. In ignem
inijcere. Terent. To cast him self into the mid^^ of his enemies. Inijcere se
in medios hosts. Cic.

He cast him him self, or rushed into the middle of the army. In agmen medium
se iniecit. Verg.

Cast, or to put one in fear. Formidinem alicui inijcere. Luy bailler
crainte, Intimider. Cast into a basket. Corbito, as. * Cast into prison.
Conijcere in vincula, vel carcere^. Mettre en prison. Cast in the teeth with an
old good turn. Exprobro, as. Reprocher. S. He cast in his tethe his running
away. Fugam exprobrauit illi. Ovid.

Cast licour or water about. Respergo, gis, si, ere. Espandre ca and la quelque
liqueur. Arrouser. Cest lottes, or cross and pyle. In sortem reuocare,
Sortior, tiris. Iecter le sort. S. Cast a mere or furrowe with a ploughe. Vrbo,
as. Vruo, as.* Cast, or to melte metal. Conflo, as, are. Fondre du metail a
force de soufler. S. Cast, or to melte a dishe. Lancem conflare. Marcel. Cast,
or to found Images of silver, and to melte them. Statuas argenteas conflare.
Sueton. Cast, or to found vessels of goulde. Vasa aurea co^flare. Sueton. Cast
metal. Aes conflare. Fondre. S. Cast often. Iactito, as. Vt supra. Cast out.
Abiecto, as. Proijcio, is. Quatio, is. Reijcio, is. Iecter horse. Cast, or to
throw out. Excludere, Emittere, Eijcere Eructare, Praecipitem dare, Progerere.
Iecter horse. Cast out of his place. Elocare. Iecter horse de son lieu. S To cast
one from an high place. Praecipitem dare vel agere. Mittere praecipitem, In
praeceps dare, Praecipitare, Deturbare aliquem de loco. Iecter quelqu' un du
hault en bas. S.

Cast forth ordure or dunge Egestionem facere.* Cast seade in the ground.
Demergere semen, Spargere semen. Vide Sow. Cast a sunder. Disijcio, cis.
Spargo, is. Iecter ca and la par terre. S. Cast or throw down. Deijcio, is.
Obruo, is. Prosterno, is. Suffundo, is. Deiecter. S. To cast down the wales of
some town. Moenia alicuius oppidi deijcere. Ruyer ius.

Cast, or to throw down from the bridge into Tyber. Deijcere de ponte in
Tyberim. Iecter de dessus le pont en la riuiere. S. Cast, or to overthrow one
from his horse. Deijcecere aliquem equo. Abbatre ius de son cheual, desmonter.
S. Cast or to drive out officers out of the temple. Deijcere templo
magistratus. Chasser horse, deiecter. Cast away, or to shake of the yoke of
bondage. Iugum servile a ceruicibus deijcere. Secouer and iecter le iouge de
seruage, deliurer de servitude. S. Cast, or to put away all fear. Deijcere
metum. Chasser toute la crainte. S. He never cast or turned his eyes from this
man. Oculos de isto nusquam deijcit. Il ne distourne point aucunement sa veue
de luy, Il ha tousiours les yeuls sur luy. Il le regard sans cesse. S.

To cast down his continaunce. Vultum deijcere. Baisser le visage^ S.

Cast out by force. Vi deiectus. Deiecte, and despossede par force. Cast unto.
Adijcio, is. Iecter iusques. To cast darts at his enemies. Adijcere tela.
Iecter iusques a son ennemi. S.

To cast an eye at one. Oculos in aliquem adijcere. Iecter la veue ou les yeuls
sur quelq' un. S.

Cast his eye, or to look on a thing without regard, or by chance. Adijcere
oculorum imprudentiam aliquo. Iecter sa veue sur quelque chose sans y penser.
Regarder ou veoir quelque chose non point de propos delibere, mais par cas
fortuit. S. Cast up, as men do corn with a fan. Subiacto, as. Subiecto, as.
Subijcio, is.* Cast gorge or void, as a hawk does her castinge. Refundere
purgamentum. Desgorger. S. They cast out the same again. Refundunt eade^
Regorgent and reiectent. S.

Cast away, abject, or a person forsaken. Abiectus, ta, tum. Abiecte,
deiecte, deboute. S. Cast away. Abiectus, Reiectus, a, um. Idem. Cast between.
Interiectus, a, um. Entreiecte, mis entredeux. S. Cast coat or garment.
Scrutum, ti. vel Scruta, oru^. Horat. Vieulx drappeaulx. S. Cast or condemned
in judgment. Capite damnatus, Suppeditatus decreto. Condamne. Cast down.
Obrutus, a, um. Prostratus, a, um. Suffusus, a, um. Rue par terre, prosterne.
S. Cast forth or out. Eiectus, a, um. Eiectitius, a, u^. Proiectus, a, um.
Reiectus, a, um. Reiecte. Cast or fallen away, as ye head of deares be, which
be yearly cast. Desiduus, a, um.* Cast or throw at the dice. Bolus, li. Coupe
de de. S. Castle or fortress. Castrum, i. n. g. Chasteau. S. A little castle.
Castellum, li. Petit chasteau. S.

To build fortresses, castelles or such like. Ponere castella, Moliri arces.
Edifier and bastir chasteaux.

To fortify or to strengthen a castle. Castrum munire. Fortifier un chasteau.
S.

Castle set upon an hill. Acropolis. Call. Caster of an account. Psephopecta,
Rationator, Calculator. Compteur. S. Caster of a ball. Alipanus.* Casting of
account. Ratiocinatio, Dinumeratio. Comptement. Casting about of lycour, or
other thing. Respargimen. Respersio, onis. foe. g. Respersus, us. mas. genesis
Respandement. P. Casting away, forth, or out. Abiectio, Reiectio, onis.
Reiectement, reiection. Casting down. Prostratio, Dijectio, onis. foem. genesis
Deiectement. S. Casting forth of dounge or ordure. Abluuio, onis. Eiectio.
Eiectement, Iettement dehors. P. Casting for a hawk. Purgamentum, ti. and
purgame^, enis. neut. genesis Purgement. Casting in the teeth with an old
benefit. Exprobratio, onis. foe. genesis Reproach. P. Casting net. Funda, ae.
Reticulum, Rete iaculum, Retis genus quod in orbe^ funditur spargiturque. H.
Casting his darte or darting. Tela manu iaciens. Lanceant., dartant. S. Casting
his hands behind him. Reiectis ad tergum manibus. Ayant les mains derriere le
doz. S. Casting or throwyng of an arrowe, darte, or Iauelin. Iaculatio,
Iaculamen, Iaculamentum. Dardement, Iettement. P. Casting out fire. Igniuomus,
a, um. * Casting out water. Vndiuomus, a, um. * Castor and Pollux, two twins,
begotten by Jupiter one Leda under the form of a Swanne, which are called by
the Poets Tyndaridae, and so is Helena their sister likewise named, these as
soon as they came to years, delivered the Sea from Pirates, and for that were
called Gods of the Sea: Afterward they went to Colchos with Jason and other
noble men, to fetch the golden fleece, in which voyage Pollux slew Amycus
king of Bebrycia, which craftily conspired his death, and at their retourning
besieging the cit-Alphidna, (Thesius absent) They took thence their sister
Helena, which he whilst they were at Colchos had stolen, And at ye lenghth
when Castor died, Pollux ( who was immortal and hatched of the same egg
which Helena was) desired his father that he might imparte his state of
immortallitie with his brother Castor, which thing obtained of Jupiter, it is
said that they live and die by turns or course, this fable is meant by the two
twins called Gemini, for ye one rysinge the other sets. there was an other
Castor, a very ancient Physician, of whom read Plin. lib. 20. Cap. 17.
Castor, oris. mas. genesis Catch, or to graspe. Apprehendere, Inuncare,
Harpagare. Accrocher. Hooks catch fish, or fishes are caught or taken with
hooks. Ab hamis capiu^tur pisces. Les haims ou hamessons prennent les
poissons. S.

Catch. Praeripio, is. Reprehendo, is. Prendre ou accrocher. Catch as it were
with an hoke. Inunco, as. Accrocher. Catch gredely or hastily. Capto, as.
Rapto, as. Pre^dre. Catchpole. Satelles, itis. Stator, ris. Acce^sus, si. m. g.
Sergeant. P. Cathedral church. Basilica, Fanu^, Delubrum, Te^plum, i. n. g.
Temple, H. Eglise Cathedralle. Catholic or universal. Catholicus, a, um.
Vniuersalis, le. Vniuersel and general. P. Catholic or perfect Christian.
Orthodoxus, i. m. g. Qui ha bonne opinion and droicte. Cato a name of merit
among the Romans, and after yt, the surname of diverse noble men, of this
name was one excellent man named Cato Censorius, a Censurae dignitate, he came
first to Rome by the instigation of Valerius Flaccus, where (for his singular
virtues) he obtained all degrees of honor without repulse, he was first
Tribune of the Soldiers in Silica. And after being Praetor he subdued
Sardinia, where (though he were aged) he learned the Greek tongue of Enneus.
Lastely he was created Consul with Flaccus, He went into Spain, where
brynging all things well to pass, he gat great renown. he had two sons, of
which the one, under Paulus Aemilius, in his wars against Persius, fought
with great praise and commendation, the other his father yet living, and being
Praetor, was killed, he wrote diverse worthy books of the Law. This Cato
Censorius lived about the year before the birthe of Christ. 182. Another Cato
was called Vticensis, unto whom the above named Cato was great gra^dfather,
whom he followed in seuerite and virtuous discipline, he sometime used to go
abroad barefoote and in a short gown, using only bashefulnesse, at sight of
dishonest or uncomely things: being Tribune of the Soldiers, he was sent into
Macedonie, where with marvelous gravity, prudence, and paynfulnesse, he made
all that were under him, fearce and hardy against their enemies, gentill to
their fellows, fearful to do injury, and prompt to get praises, and he him
self laboring with the^ using apparel, feading and going like them, contrary
to men's expectations (notwithstanding his severity) wanne the hearts of them,
going on foot and talkyng with every man. And further: such was he of
constancy, whom neither flattery could allure, terror of words fear, nor
power provoke, to grant any thing, which seemed to impair the state of the
weal public, wherefore for grief, and sorrow of heart that he had, seeing
the utter destruction of his country eminent, and that it should (by Caesar)
be brought into seruage and thraldom, he slew him self at Vtica. There was
an other named Valerius Cato a Gramarian at Rome, which taught many noble men
in the time of Silla, whose fame is noted in these two verses of Tranquil.
Cato grammaticus latina Siren,
qui solus legit and facit poetas.
Cato that grammarian is
a latin Siren sure,
Which only has the skill to read and poets bring in ure.
Catoure or purueyoure of vitayles. Opsonator, vel trix, Obsonator. Coquus
nundinalis, qui coemptos e macello cibos coquo tradit ad cocturam. Despensier,
qui achette les viandes. Catte Aelurus, Catus, Felis, Murilegus, Muscio, onis
Un chat. S. Et Catinus, vel Felinus, a, um. Ang. Of a catte. D' vne chat.
Cattes here, otherwise called a felon. Furunculus. Un froncle ou clou qui
vient au corpse humain. P. Cattes tail herb, which some call horse tail.
Cauda equina, Equisetum, Salix equina. Queue de cheual, fallot. Cattle. Pecu.
per omn. casu. plural. Pecua, Pecus, dis. et oris. Toute sort de best qni n'
a point de langage ne form human. S. Pecus, dis. Is all small cattle, as
Goats, Sheep. etc. Et Pecus, oris. Is all great cattle as horse. etc. Et
Pecorinus, a, um. An. Of cattle or rother beasts. Et Pecorarius, a, um. Ang.
Pertaining to cattle or rother beasts. De bestes. Cattle broken in yoke,
two and two. Bijuges. Vide Yoked. Cattle unbroken. Iniuges. To mark
catayle. Signu^ imprimere pecori. Virg. Marquer.

Full of cattayle, where be many cattayle. Pecorosus, sa, sum. Ou il y a grande
abondance de brebis, and autres bestes abondant en bestail. S.

A caucie or a way paued. Agger solidus. Chemin paue de pieres, Chaucee. S.

To make a cauceye. Iacere aggerem. Fair vne chaussee.

Caudell for a sick man. Iusculum, Sorbillum. Un chaudeau. P. Cave or dungeon.
Antru^, Cauea, Cauerna, Spelaeu^, Crypta, Fouea, Latibulum, Sectura, Specus,
Spelunca. Cauerne, creux. H. Et Cauernosus, a, um. Ang. Full of caves. Vide in
Den. Cave of a wild beast. Lustrum, tri. Spelaeum ferarum, Cubile ferae,
lustrum dictum quod parum illustretur. Cauerne de bestes sauuages. S. Caves for
soldiers in winter. Hiberna, Hibernacula, Castra sieve loca in quibus hieme
stant milites. Le lieu ou les gensdarmes se retirent l' yuer, and yuernent.
Cawdron. Cacabus, by. Lebes, it is. Aenum, ni. Ahenu^, Caldarium, quod supra
focum pendet in quo calefiat aqua. Chaudron. H. Caught. Reprehensus, a, um.
Vide Taken. Caught with violence. Raptus, a, um. Raui. S. Cavil, mock, gybe,
scoff, or an hafting question. Cauilla, lae, and Cauillum, li. Petite
moquerie, ioyeuse. Cauillation: A merry taunte: A subtle forged tale, A subtle
turning the catte in the pan or wresting of a false thing to some purpose.
Cauillatio, onis. Ioyeuse menterie. S. Subtle tromperie ou finesse.
Cauillation. Cavil, to ieste, to mock, to reason subtly, or ouerthwartly up
on some words. Cauillor, aris, ari. Se moquer and brocarder d' aucmn. S.
Cavil to mock and to ieste with one. Cauillari cum aliquo and iocari. Gaber.
S. Cauiller, a mocker, a bourder a subtle wrester. Cauillator, toris. Moqueur,
qui fait estat de rencontrer and se mocquer, Gausseur. S. Cawle for the head.
Crobylon, Reticulum, Retiolu^. Capillare quo coma astringitur. Retz de soye, un
coiffe. H. Cawle or sewet, wherein all the bowels are wrapped Omentu^.
Inuolucru^ intestinis obtentu^. La coiffe. H Cawlme. Placidus, a, um. Stratus,
a, um. Tacitus, a, u^. Tranquillus, a, um. Almus, a, um. Vt stratu^ mare.
Tranquillum mare. A calm Sea. Tranquille, paisible, Calm, bonasse. S. Caulme
to be. Placidum stare. Taceo, es. Estre calm. Caulmenes. Tranquillitas,
Intempestas. Paisiblite, tranquilli^e, biau temps and doulx. S. Caulmenes of
the Sea, or water. Tranquillitas maris, Pellacia, Intempestas. Malacia, ae.
Temps calm. Cause. Caussa, ae. Dica, ae. Nomen, inis. Occasio, onis. Ratio,
onis. Res, ei. La cause, la chose. The cause or matter is such. In ea causa
res est. La chose est tell. S.

There is a cause why. Causa est cur. Ci il y a cause pourquoy.

There will be cause, why we may praise the counsel or advise of our elders.
Erit causa, qua consilium maiorum laudare possimus. Il y aura cause pourquoy.
etc.

That there be no cause, which way any person may seek thee. Ne causae quid
sit, quo te quisquam quaeritet. A fin que person n' ait cause de te chercher.

For that cause I will not have thee come in hither. Ea te causa huc introire
nolo. Pour ceste cause.

For these causes and reasons. De his causis. Pour tells raisons. S.

Thou wast cause of his condemnation or casting. In causa damnationis fuisti.
Tu as este cause. etc.

I have no cause to lie, there is no cause why I should say otherwise then the
truth is. Causa nulla est cur mentiar. IN n' ay aucune occasion de mentir. S.

For the very same cause. Ob eam ipsam causam. Pour ceste mesme cause. S.

It was a cause of liberty to the city. Libertatis causa fuit ciuitati. Cause
que la ville sest mise en liberte.

It was cause, or occasion of all his ill. Malorum causa fuit adolescenti.
Cause, ou occasion de tous ses mauls. S.

Thou art cause or occasion of this war. Constat causa belli in tua persona.
Tu es cause de ceste guerre.

Let them consider, for what cause and reason, they do every thing. Videant
qua quidque geratur cum ratione. Lucret.

Thou art cause of all this mischief. Tu horum maloru^ caussa, Tu fons, and
origo. Tu tantas malorum faces ince^disti. Tu horu^ malorum initium attulisti.
Tu haec mala peperisti, haec mala excitasti, Auctor horu^ malorum praeter te
nemo fuit. A te fluxerunt haec mala, haec incommoda, calamitates, acerbitates,
infortunia, damna, detrimenta, pernicies, exitium, reru^ euersio. Horu^ maloru^
culpa^ sustines, horu^ in te maloru^ culpa co^ferenda est omnis, haec tibi su^t
adscribe^da, assigna^da. Has calamitates vni tibi acceptas refer debemus. Tu
es cause.

Should not I come for my very friends cause, against an alien and a
stranger? An ego non ve nirem, contra alienu^ pro familiari and necessario,
and domestico meo? Ne prendroye ie pas la cause de mon ami. etc.

Tell or to show the cause. Rationem reddere. Dire la cause.

Cause of ones pains. Poenam sibi contrahere. Estre cause de la pain qu' on
endure. S. Cause of his own death. Contrahere sibi causam mortis. Estre cause
de sa mort. S. Cause of ones marriage or to cause one to mary. Efficere nuptias
alicui. Estre cause du marriage d' aueun. S. To cause ye others study no longer.
Studia aliorum restinguere. Estre cause que les autres n' estudient plus. S.

I am the cause of this. Ortum est ex me. IN en suis cause. S.

Thou art ye cause. Iniuria tua factu^. Tu en es cause.

He was the cause of going. Author fuit profectionis. il fut cause de l' allee.
S.

For what cause? Quam ob causam? Quam ad finem? Quam ob rem? Qua gratia? Quo
nomine? Pour quelle cause. S.

For this cause. Ex ea causa, hac gratia. Pour ceste cause. S.

For this only cause. Hoc vno nomine. Pour ceste seule cause. S.

For these causes. Pro hisce rebus, Ob hasce res. Pour ces causes. S.

I speak not for that cause, or to that end. Neque haec in eam sente^tiam
dixi, Non hoc eo pertinet. Ie ne l' ay pas dict pour ceste cause. S.

Angry without a cause. De nihilo irasci. Se courrourcer sans cause. S.

Not without a cause. Non sine causa, Non immerito, Non abs re, Non iniuria,
Rite, Merito, Optimo iure, Summis rationibus, Optima de causa. Non sans cause.

Cause, just and true. Sontica caussa. Causen, or to cause. Causo, as, Facio,
is. Fair. Cause one to abide or tarry. Remoror, aris. Demoror, aris. Retarger
aucun. Arrester. Cause ill luck. Oscoeno, as. Cause thyrste. Quaerere sitim. *
Causing. Causatiuus, a, um.* Cautels, or crafty ways to deceive. Offuciae,
aru^. Offucia, ae. Techna, Dolus, Astus, Astutia, Vafritia. Cautelle.
Cautelouse. Subdolus, a, um. Fraudulentus, a, um. Versipellis, le. Cauteleux.
S. Cautelously. Subdole, Fraudule^ter, Vafre, Caute, Peditentim, Astute.
Cautement, Cauteleusement. S.
C. ANTE. E.
CEase, or leave. Cesso, as. Conquiesco, scis. Defino, is. Pono, is. Quiesco,
scis. Remitto, is. Requiesco, scis. Restinguo, is. Supersedeo, es. Et vult tam
dati. quam abl. Cesser. The work goes not forward or the work cease.
Opus cessat. La besongne cesse.

Godliness is laid aside, or it cease. Pietas cessat. Ovid.

He ceased not all this day to rail at me. Nunquam cessauit hodie dicere
contumelias. Il n' a cesse auiourd' huy de dire iniure. S.

Not to leave of, or cease his business. Non cessare in opere and studio. Ne
lascher iamais la besongne, Ne finer ou cesser iamais de fair son affair. S.

He never cease to detracte and speak evil of us. Non cessat de nobis
detrahere. Ne cesse de mesdire de nous. S.

You never ceased in mine affair, till the matter was brought to pass. Nisi
perfecta re, de me non conquiesti. Tu n' as iamais cesse en mon affair, que la
chose n' ait este mise a fin.

In winter all wars cease. Hyeme omnia bella iure gentium conquiescunt.
Cessent.

Cease now the matter is past remedy. Desine, Iam conclamatum est. Deporte toy,
Cesse. The rain ceased. Imbres desierant. La pluye estoit cessee.

The earthquakes cease or stint, when the winds begin. Desinunt tremores,
quum ve^tus emersit. Plin.

The fire ceased. Flamma quieuit. Virg.

The war ceased. Arma quierunt. Sil.

Thou may cease now to do me injury. Remittas iam me onerare iniurijs.
Terent.

In peace he never ceased to gather his power and strength again. Nunquam
remisit animum a colligendis in pace viribus. Iamais ne cessa de. etc.

The showers of rain ceased. Imbres remiserunt. Ont cess^.

To cease to labor, to labor no more so much. Labores remittere. Cesser de
labourer and trauailler. S.

Thou never ceasest or take rest, thou let pass no time. Nullum
remittis tempus, neque te respicis. Tu ne cesses iamais, Tu n'has point de
cesse.

Not to cease for any man's council. Non requiescere consilio cuiusquam. Ne
cesser, and ne se deporter point pour quelque conseil qu' on nous done.
Requiescere, Is red in Vergil with an accusative case, as in this verse. Et
mutata suos requierunt flumina cursus.
And when the ryuers altered were,
they ceast their course to run.


I Ceased to write, contend and speak. etc. Supersedi scribere certare,
loqui. etc. Plin. Iun.

Cease or to leave of. Ferio, vel ferior, aris, feriari, deponens. Cesser. Vt
Cic. Feriari a studijs. Cesser d' estudier. Se reposer. Cease from work.
Vacationem facere vel habere. Cesser de besongner. S. Cease to cry. Parcere
lamentis. Cesser de braire. Cease, or to leave to talk. Sermonem de re aliqua
abstinere. Cesser de parler. Cease, or do thou leave to speak evil of me.
Co^pesse in me unjust loqui, De me mitte male loqui, Remitte iam me iniurijs
onerare. Cesse de dire mal de moy. S. Ceasing of letters or leaving of to
write. Intermissio literarum. Quand on cesse d' escrire lettres. S. Not to
cease marueling. Admirationem non intermittere. Ne cesser de s' esmerueiller. S.

We cease not to exhort. Nos cohortari non intermittimus. Nous ne cesserons de
l' enhorter. S.

To make war without ceasing. Bellum continenter gerere. Sans cesse fair la
guerre. S.

Cease fighting. Deponere pugnam. Cesser la guerre. Cease from giving.
Largitiones retractare. Cease from pain, and sorrow. Dedoleo, es. Finer sa
douleur. S. Cease the tumulte of the people. Impetum populi reprimere. Impetu^
populi comprimere, Continere, Contundere and frangere. S. Cease war.
Opprimere bellum exortu^. Ceased it is. Refrixit. Ceased. Quietus, a, um.
Remissus, a, um. Qui est en repos. S. Ceasing. Cessatio, Concessatio,
Intermissus, Intermissio, Interstitio, Vacatio. Cesse. S. Ceasing from
ministration of laws for a time in places judicial. Sacristitium, quomodo
dicimus Iustitium, Conticinium indictum concionatoribus. Le ces, ou l'
interdict vacation. S. Ceder tree. Cedrus. Un Cedre. Et Cedris, cedridis. The
fruit of Cedre. Le fruict du Cedre. Et Cedrinus, a, um. Of a Cedre tree. Qui
est de Cedre. Pitche or the Iuce of a Cedre tree. Cedrium, ij. neut. genesis Le
Ius du Cedre.

The gum distilling from a Cedre tree. Cedria. La gomme distillante du Cedre.

Anointed with the juice and oil of a Cedre Cedratus, ta, tum. Oingt du suc d'
vne Cedre. S.

Cedre great that grows in Cypris. Cedrelate, foe^ genesis Plin. Vne esp^ce d'
arbre de Cedre qui naist en Cypre. S. Celebrate, or to honor, or worship.
Celebro, as. Celebrer. S. Celestial body, or sign compacte with stars.
Astrum. Graecum vocabulum, quod a Latinis sydus dicitur. Astre, vnsigne au
ciel. S. Celestial or heavenly. Caelestis, te. Celeste, qui est du ciel. S.
Celestial or heavenly saints, heavenly inhabitauntes. Caelites, tum. Qui
caelum habitant, etia^ Caelicolae, arum. idem. Celestes, habitans au ciel. S^
Cellar, or storehouse. Cella, Demeaculum, Penarius, rij. Penarium, rij.
Hypogeon, Cella promtuaria, Cellarium. Lieu soubs terre, comme cave, celier and
semblabies. S. Cellerer, or butler. Pincerna, Promus. vide Butler. Cellerer, or
he that keeps the store house. Cellarius. Qui ha la charge du celier. S.
Celidine, or Celidony the great. Chelidoniu^ maius, Hirundinaria mayor.
Chelidone, and esclayre. S. Cement, or cyme, wherewith stones be joined
together in a lump. Lithocolla, Glutinum quo lapides coniunguntur, fit autem
ex lapide Pario, aut marmore cum taurino glutino. Hermolaus. Censar, or more
aptly prouocatio^ to embrace virtue. Igniculum.* Censor, a high constable,
Judge, or a reformer of manners. Censor, Magister disciplinae and seueritatis,
and Moru^ magister a Cicerone dicitur, Reformator vulgo vocatur. Censeur. To be
Censor. Censorem gerere. Estre Censeur. S.

Punisheme^t given by the Censor. Censio, onis, foem. g. Punition and
condemnation faicte par la Censeur. S.

Centory, an herb. Centaurium, vel Centaurea, orum. Centaure^. S. Centory the
great. Centaurium magnum, Triorches. Un herb qui s'appelle la grande
Centauria. Centory the less. Libadion, Limneum, Limnesion, Centaurea minor,
Fell terrae, Febrifuga. La Centaurea mineur. S. Ceremonies. Caeremoniae, arum.
Ceremonies. S. Certain. Certus, ta, tum. Indubitatus, ta, tum. Certain and
asseure. S. It is certain. Liquet, Certum est, Non est arbitrarium. Il est
certain. S.

Certain others. Alij, certi. plur. Autres. Certainly or truly. Certe, Enimuero,
Nae, Nimiru^, Porro, Proculdubio, Prorsum, Quide^, Certe Siquide^, Vtique,
Explorate, Indubita^ter, Plane. Certainement. S. Certainty or surety.
Certitudo, nis, foe. g. Certificate, a pasporte, or such like writing, as a
letter testimonial for a traueyler by the way. Libellus, Epistola
assertatoria, quam certificationem vocant. Vne instruction, ou certification.
H. Et pass port. S. Certify. Certiorem reddere, Certum facere, Certifico,
cas. Certifier. S. Certified to be. Certisso, as. * Ceruse or white lead.
Psimmythium, Cerussa. De la Ceruse, blanc de plomb, ou blanc d' espaigne. S.
Cesterne. Cisterna, ae. foem. genesis Cisterne. S. Cesterne cock made like a
teate, by the which water runs forth. Mastos. Marmouset faict en facon d'
vne mamelle en un fontaine par lequel l'eau sort.
C. ANTE. H.
CHafe one, or to make one angry. Bilem alicui mouere, vel commouere,
Exacerbare, Obacerbare, Offendere alicuius animum. Courroucer fort aucun. S.
Chafe, or to be angry at some thing. Aspere accipere, Indignari, Irasci. Se
courroucer despiter and marrir de quelque chose. S. Chafe much, or to freate
grievously. Irasci grauiter, Incendi ira, Indulgere irae, Excandescere. Se
courrourcer grandement and asprement. S. Chafe at a thing, or to take it
grievously. Dure aut grauiter aliquid accipere, Animo iniquo far aut pati
aliquid, Non mediocriter far. Se marrir and courroucer de quelqe chose fort
and ferme. S. Chafe warm or to heat. Calefacere, Concalefacere, Excalefacere,
Feruefacere. Eschaufer. He is chafed. Commotus est, Concaluit. Il est eschaufe
and esmeu.

Chafed. Co^motus, Co^calefactus, Fotus. Eschaufe. S. Chafing. Calefactus, tus.
Excalefactio, onis. Eschaufement. S. Chafe. Acus, ceris, vel cus, ui.
Ablenida, ae. Palea, ae. Purgamentum frumenti. Paille. H. Chafe or mylsede.
Acer, ris. * Chafe place, where chafe is laid or kept. Palearium, ij. neut.
genesis Un paillier. S. Chaffed or mixed with chafe. Paleatus, a, um. Empaille.
Chaffie or full of chafe. Acerosus, a, um. Plein de paille. Chaffer,
marcha^dice, or ware. Merces. Merchandise. Chaffer wares, or to bye and sell.
Mercor, aris. Negotior, aris. Nu^dinor, aris. Fair train de merchandise.
Chafferer of wares. Negotiator, Mercans, Mercator. Merchant. S. Chaffering of
wares. Negotiatio, Commercium, Mercatio, Mercatura. Le faict de merchandise. S.
Chafing dishe. Ignitabulum, li. neut. genesis Eschauffette ou chauffette S. Et
batillus mensarius, id est sufferuefactorium. Un rechauffoir. S. Chain.
Catena, ae. Vne chain. S. Et Catenula, ae. diminut. Ang. A little chain.
Chainette. S. Chain of gould. Aurea catena, Hamus aureus. Vne chain d' or.
Chain of gold or silver. Torques. Chain d' or ou d' argent. Chain fastened
to a yoke to draw by, called a teame. Ampron.* Chayned. Torquatus, a, um. Qui
ha un collier ou quarquam au col. S. Chain together. Cateno, as. Enchainer. S.
Chair. Cathedra, ae. Sella, ae. Vehiculu^, li. Vne chair Chair half round.
Hemicyclus. Vne chair a demi ronde. S. Chair made with lose joints, which
may be turned every way. Trochum.* Chayred, or stalled. Cathedratus, a, um.*
Challenge or to vendicate to him self. Vendico, as. Vendiquer a soy. S.
Challenge, or to defy. Prouocare. Defier aueun. S. Challenge for his own.
Dicere suum, Vendicare suum, vel confirmare suum esse. S. Challenge or
chalenging, or crafty and false accusation. Calumnia, Vendicatio.* Prouocatio,
onis. foe. g. Provocation, deffiance. Challenge property or right. Manu
consertum ex iure vocare. It is in law where the plaintiff and defendant
desire to have the controversy tried, where the ground in strife lies, or
else they bring a turfe or sode of the same ground before the Judge and sue for
it, as if it were the whole land in controversy. Challenge openly, or with a
loud voice. Reclamo, as. Prouoco, as. Deffier aucun. S. Chalenger.
Calumniator, Ve^dicator vel trix. Prouocator, oris. m. g. Deffiant, Deffieur,
Prouocateur. S Challenged. Prouocatus, ta, tum. Defy. S. Chalenger at all
games. Pantathlus. Chalengers at a price, or fightinge with weapon.
Marmillones.* Chalenging. Prouocatio, onis. fae. g. Deffiance. Chalice. Calix.
cis. Calice. S. Chalice, or little cup, or pot of earth, which bishops
sometime used in sacrifice, Culullus. Simpulum, Alij Simpuuium, alij Simpullum,
scribunt. Un pot de boire qui estoit de terre duquel on se seruoit es
sacrifices. S. The chalice by the primative institution of the Apostels was of
wood, and afterward devised of glass by Zepherinus, at the last by the
decree of Gratianus, to be of silver or gold, or for lack of them of tynne,

Chalk. Creta. ae. De la Croye, ou Cree. S. Chalked. Cretatus, a, um. Qui est
faict de croye. S. Chalkie or full of chalk. Cretosus, a, um. Vt locus
cretosus. Ou il y a abondance de croye. S. Chamber. Cubiculum, li. Camera, ae.
Chamber. S. Cubiculum dicitur a cuba^do. Chamber a dormir. H. Et cubicularis,
re. Angl. Pertaining to a chamber. De chamber. S. Chamber for the brydegrome
and his wife. Cubiculum nuptiale, Thalamus iugalis. La chamber des nouueauls
mariez. S. Chamber to dyne or suppe in. Triclinariu^, Triclinium. quod and
conclaue Cicero dixit. Chamber pour prendre repas de disner and souper, tenel.
H. Chamber for the husband, and the wife. Coniugalis thorus. * Chamber secret.
Cella. Chamber secrette. S. Chamber far within. Interius cubiculum. L'arriere
chamber. S. Chamber for one bed, and two stools, which is adjoined to an
other chamber all in one. Zeta, zetula, vel zetecula. Call. Chamber in the third
flore, or story of a house. Tristegum.* Tristega, orum. plu. number. As I suppose,
is a house of three stories high. Chamber of presences, where men do abide,
or stand to salute a prince, or noble man at his egression. Salutatorium
cubiculum. La primiere chamber. S. Chamber only for men. Andron, andronitis.
Logis des hommes, la maison aux garcons. H. Chamber separated only to women, in
which they did spynne and weaue. Gynaeceum, cij. neut. ge. Cabinet chamber ou
retraict pour les femmes, la maison des filles. H. Chamber secret or privy
chamber. Coenaculum secretarium. Chamber de conseil. S. Chamber wherein a
sexten of a church or like church keeper does lie. Pastophorium, ij. Call.
Chamber wherein sick men do lie. Valetudinarium. ij. n. g. Vne enfermerie. S.
Chamber with two beds. Biclinium. Lieu ou il y a deux lictes dressez. And
with three beds. Triclinium, ij. n. g. Chambers, or many houses under one
keye. Conclauia.* The chief chamberlyne. Sacri cubiculi praefectus summus and
primus. Le primier chambellan.

The chamberlynes. Admissionales, Cubiculi praepositi. Les chambellans. S.

The great chamberleyne. Decurio cubiculoru^. Grand chambrelain. H.

Chamberlyn. Camerarius, Cosmeta, ae. Cubicularius, Lectisterniator, vel trix,
Famulus cubicularius. Chambrier. S. Et Camerarius, a, um. Angl. Whatsoever
ha^geth over ye sealing of cha^bers. Chamberlin, chamberer, or grome of a
chamber. Camerarius, Cosmeta.* Cubicularius. Chambellan. S. Chamberlyne of a
city, as the chamberlin of London. Quaestor v^banus, vel Quaestor aerarius.
Tresorier. H. Et Tribunus aerarius. Idem. Chamber pot. Matula, Schaphium,
Trulla, Lasanum. Pot a pisser, vaisseau a fair l'eau. H. Chamblet, or a
garment of chamblet. Cymatilis, Thalassicus, Vndulata vestis, Scutulata vestis.
Habillement camelote. S. Champion which fights upon the trial of an others
quarrel. Agonista, Propugnator, Pugil, Pygmachus.* Champion valiant. Fortis
bellator. Vaillant champion. S. Chandeller one that makes candelles.
Candelarius, ij. m. g. Chandelier, ou faiseur de chandelles. Chapter of a
bo^ke. Caput, Capitulum. Un chapitre de liver. S. Chapman. Institor, ris.
Licitator, ris. vel trix. Vendeur, merchant. Et Institorius, a, um. An.
Pertaining to a chapman. Appartinent au faict des merchants. S. Chapel.
Hieron, Hiereon, Sacellum, Aedicula, Sacrarium. Chappelle. H. Chapel within
the house. Sacrarium domesticu^, Sacellum, Lararium. Petite chapelle en la
maison. S. The maistre of the chapel. Praecentor, Choragus. Le maistre de la
chappelle. S.

Chappelen. Capellanus.* Chapplet. Corona, ae. foe. g. Charge. Onus, eris.
Mandatu^, ti. Munus, eris. Negotium, tij. Actus, Ministerium. Vne charge. S. To
give one charge or commission in some affayre or business. Commendare aliquid
alicui, Imponere onus, Mandare, Ma^data dare, Munus iniungere, Defer munus
alicui, Negotium dare, Negotium alteri attribuere, Negotium alicui legare,
Praeponere aliquem negotio, Curam alicui dare, Curationem defer ad alique^,
Parts alicui dare aut imponere, Personam imponere alicui, Prouinciam alicui
tradere. Bailler ou do^ner charge, and commission a aucun de quelque affair. S

To take the charge or commission of some affayre or business. Concipere
curam, Mandata accipere, Munia capescere, Onus aliquod recipere, vel suscipere,
Aliquid subire, Actionem suscipere, Parts suscipere, Prouinciam capere,
accipere, vel suscipere. Prendre la charge, ou commission de quelque affair. S.

Charge or cost. Munus, eris. Sumptus, us. Despense ou charge. Et Sumptuarius,
a, u^. An. That which pertains to charge or cost. Chargen. Onero, as.
Charger. S. Charge or to burden his conscience. Impio facinore se obligare.
Charger sa conscience. S. Charge ones conscience. Obligare religione, vel
obstringere. Charger la conscience d' autruy. Charge him self of felony.
Alligare se furti, Obligare vel astringere se furti. Se render coulpable de
larrecin. S. Charge a tenant, or fermor, or other with reparations of houses
or land. Sarta tecta exigere. Cic. Charge with an oath. Obligare sacramento,
Periculo iusiurandi onerare, Praeire iuramentum. Charger auec un serment.
Chargable. Onerosus, Sumptuosus, a, um. Chargeant, onereux. Charged. Oneratus,
a, um. Pressatus, a, um Charge. S. Charger or great platter. Lanx, cis.
Mazonomiu^. pen. cor. Graeca dictio. Un grand plat. Chariot or waggen.
Bastarna, Carrus, Carpentu^, ti. Couinum, ni. Pampillum, li. Petoritum, ti.
Rheda, ae. Vehiculum cameratum, Pilentum, Pensile vehiculum. Un chariot
Branslant. S. Chariot drawn with three horse. Triga, ae. But Stephanus says
it is three horses fastened to on harness or chareot. Trois cheuauls atteleza
un harnois ou chariot. And the dryuer of three horses in such a chariot.
Trigarius, ij. Chartier conduisant ces trois cheuauls. S. Chariot drawn with
four horse. Quadriga, vel Quadrigae, arum. vel Quadrijugus currus. Chariot
tire a quatre cheuaulx. S. And the dryuer of the chariot. Quadrigarius. Vide
Carter. Chariotes, or lytters covered with bourdes. Camerata vehicula. Chariot
horse. Carpe^tarius equus, Quadriga, Rhedarius, Vehicularis equus. Cheual qui
meine le chariot. S. Chariot man. Essedarius, Rhedarius, Carrucarius, Auriga,
Cisarius. Chartier. S. Charity one of the graces of love. Charitas, Charites.
Tres fuere charites, S. Aglaea, vel aglaia, que loeticia dicitur. Thalia, alias
laus virens. Euphrosina, vel Euphrosyne quasi exultatio. Vide plus Prudens or
Grace. Charity and love among men. Charitas, Communis amor. Charity and amor
enter les hommes. S. Charitable or loving to all men. Qui exercet charitatem in
omnes. Charitable. S. Charm, or enchauntment. Carmen, inis. Incantamentum, ti.
Incantatio. Sacra, orum. Enchantement, Charm. S. Charm to cause a man to
love. Amatoriu^, ij. n. g. Charms or enchauntmentes written in a scrow.
Philetaeria, orum. n. g. * Charm. Excanto, as. Charmer. S. Charm away, or
out. Excanto, as. Descharmer. Et secu^dum Plin. Excanto, tas. Enchanter ou
charmer. To enchaunt or charm. Charmer, one that uses enchauntmentes.
Incantator, toris. m. g. Charmeur. Enchaunters. Maleficorum carminum
occentores. Charmeurs. S. Charmerisse or a witch. Incantatrix, tricis, foe.
ge. Charmeresse. S. Chartre or deed. Charta, Instrumentum. Chartre. Chartre of
a Realm. Instrumentum regni. Les chartres. S. Chartre, or writ of a prince.
Diploma, it is. Vide Letter. Chase at tenyse. Meta, ae. Terminus. Chase de ieu de
paulme. Chase or forest. Lucus, ci. Silua, ae. Forest. Chase or to hunte.
Abigo, is. Agito, as. Sector, aris. Chasser. Chase savage beasts, or to hunte
them. Venari, Peruenari. Chasser aux bestes sauuages. S. Chaser or hunter.
Venator, oris. Vestigator, oris. m. g. Chasseur. S. And she that chaseth.
Venatrix, tricis foe. g. Chasseresse. S. Chaste. Castus, Pius, Pudicus, a, um.
Chaste. Chastity. Castitas, Pudicitia, Castimonia. Chastity. S. To be chaste.
Colere pudicitiam. Estre Chaste. S.

A man cannot to much look to the chastity of his daughter. Non nimis potest
quisquam pudicitia^ suae filiae seruare. Vne person ne peult trop garder la
chastity de sa fille. S.

Chastely. Cast, Pie, Pudice. Chastement. S. Chasteser, one that gives
correction by speech, or stripes. Castigator, toris. m. g. Chastieur. S. Et
Castigabilis and hoc castigabile. Which is worthy to be beaten. Digne d' estre
chastie, chastiable. Chastizen, or to chastise. Castigo, as. Corrigo, is.
Verbero, as. Chastier. S. Chastisement, or correction. Colasis, Censio, onis.
Verber, eris. Punitio, Castigatio. Punition, Chastiement. Et Verbero, onis.
Ang. A person worthy chastisement. Digne d' estre batu and fouette. Chatelles.
Res. * Res Is taken here for a man's substance, as, Augere rem suam: To increase
his goods, substance, or chattell. Chattels personalles. Res personales, aut
praediales.* As are oxen, kyne, money. etc. Chatels real. Reales.* As are
leases. etc. Chatter like a crow. Cornicor, aris. Gazouiler. S. Chaufe or to
heat. Calefacere. Chauffer. S. Chaufe, or make angry. Excandefacio, is. Look
Chafe. Chaufe with words. Prosequi verbis. Idem. Chaufe or make soft. Depso,
is, psi. Vide Knede. Chaufed, or angry to be. Ferueo, es. Stomachor, aris.
Estre fasche and despite. S. Chaufed to be, as wax is. Inter manus versari. Or
to be often handled. Estre souuent many. S. Chaumfery, or a rabbat. Stria, ae.
Chaufrain creuae. Chaumfrey or to make foorowes all a long on a pyller of
stone, to wrynckle. Strio, as, aui, are. Fair and creuser chaufrains ou rays
le long d'vne colomne de pierre, Rider. Chance. Casus, Euentus, Prouentus,
Sors. Cas, fortune, adventure. Chance at dice. * Alea. Le hasarde. Casus
aleae. Chance. Chance, which is daily, or frequent. Vsus, us. m. genesis Cic.
Usage, vsance. Vide. Adventure, Fortune, Use. Chance or happen. Accidit, bat.
Euenio, is. Prouenio, is. Aduenir. If those things which I desire chance,
happen, or come to pass. Si eueniunt quae opto. Si les chooses que ie desire
aduiennent. S.

As it often chances. Vt plerunque euenit. Cic. Comme souuent il aduient. S.

To happen by fortune, chance or at adventure. Casu accidere. Ovid. Aduenir
par fortune par cas d' adventure. S. Accidere pro euenire duntaxat in tertijs
personis: sed proprie de malis dicitur, sicut contingere de bonis. Cic. Si quid
aduersi acciderit. If any evil chance.

If it chance me to live. Si mihi vita contigerit. Plancus Ciceroni. Sil
aduient qui ie viue. S. Et Obtingit, bat, git. pen. cor. obtingere. Non nisi in
tertijs personis legitur. Aduenir. S.

I am glad that this has chanced or happened to you as you desired. Istuc
tibi ex sententia tua obtigisse laetor. Terent. Ie suis ioyeulx que ceci t'est
aduenu comme tu le demandois. S.

Chance or happen by chance or lot. Sortior, ris. Vide Lotte. Chance often.
Vsu venire. Venir souuent. S. Chance well. Perfore.* Chanced, or happened.
Fortuitus, a, um. Aduenu d' adventure. Chanced by fortune or lotte. Sortitus,
a, um. Aduenu par sort. Chauncely, or by chance. Accidenter, Forte, fortuito,
fortuitu. D' adventure. By chance. Sorti vel sortito. Par sort.

Chauncell. Cella, ae. Sacellum.* Delubrum, bri. n. genesis Le cueur d'vne eglise.
S. Chauncell or other secret place of the temple, where none come but priests
sanctified. Adytum, Locus templi secretior. Chauncelour. Archigrammateus,
Antigraphus, Cancellarius, Grammateus. Et secundum Stephanum, Nomophylaciae
praefectus, Nomophylax, vel Nomophylax regni, Oraculi regij antistitio
praefectus. Chancelier. S. Chauncery. Ca^cellaria, Nomophylacium, Officina
diplomatica, Iurisdictio summi iuris emendatrix ex boni aequique sententia.
Oraculum aequitatis, Ara aequitatis and clementiae. La Chancellerie. Change.
Altero, as. Cambio, is, iui. Commuto, as. Verto, is. Changer. Change and to
correct. Commutare and corrigere. Cic. Changer and corriger. S. Change or to
vary his counsel or advice. Commutare vel mutare consilium vel sententiam.
Changer de propos, ou d' aduis. S. Change his name. Nomen mutare.. Plaut.
Changer son nom. S. Change or to put on other apparel. Immutare vestitum.
Changer d'habillement. S. Change or to shifte place. Locum mutare. Cic.
Changer de place. S. To change mind or fantasy. Mentem mutare. Changer de
fantasy. S.

Change continuance. Mutare vultum. Cic. Changer sa visage. Ye have changed
your names. Nomina inter vos permutastis. Plaut. Vous auez prins le nom l'vn de
l'autre, Vous auez change de noms l'vne a l'autre. S

To change opinion. Se^tentiam vertere retro. Vergil. Changer d' opinion. S.

To turn or change out of one form into an other. Transfigurare. Changer
d'vne form en autre.

Change children, or to change, as the two women did before Solomon. 3. Reg.
3. Puerum subdere, vel supponere. And he or she that chau^geth ones children
for an others. Suppostor, Suppostrix. Qui change les enfans les vns pour les
autres. S. Change conditions or manners. Recedere a moribus. Deflectere mores,
Immutare mores, Mutare mores. Terent. Changer de conditions. S. A man
altogether changed, or he which is departed quite from his accustomed
conditions. Homo qui iam plane vel longissime a suis moribus decessit. Homme
qui and tout change. S.

Change custom. Deflectere consuetudinem. Change fashions. Demuto, as Muer,
changer. To change something with one. Mutare aliquid cum aliquo. Fair
quelque change.

Change for a better. Verrunco, as. Non est in vsu. Change habitations or
lodginges. Demigro, as. Changer d' habitation and de logis. S. Change life.
Demigro, as. Vt demigrare de statu suo. Cic. Changer de facon de viure. S.
Change a name. Transnomino, as. Changer le nom. Change one for an other.
Mutare alia re alia^, Pen sare aliquid ex alio. Valor. Max. Eschanger. S.
Change purpose, or to return. Capere versoria^ Plaut. S'en retourner. S.
Change of the Moon, or the very poincte and time of changing.
Intermestrum.* Luna intermestris vel intermenstrua, Interlunium, Lunae
silentium, Luna silens, Lunae coitus, Lunae and solis concursus, Luna tacita,
Intermenstruum, Synodica, Luna noua, Vulgo coniunctio Lunae. Conioinction de la
Lune. H. Chaungeable. Mutabilis, Vertibilis, le. Commutabilis. Versutus, a, um.
Muable, variable. S. Vide Mutable. Chaungeable color. Discolor, Versicolor. De
couleur changeant. S. Chaungeable of color, or being of myxte color.
Discolorius, a, um. Versicolorius, a, um. De diuerses couleurs. S. Chaungeable
in words and deeds, as inconstant without credit. Versipellis, Versutus, a,
um. Variable, fin and cauteleux. S. Changed. Alteratus, Mutatus, a, um.
Change. S. Changed from better to worse. Peioratus, a, um.* A bono in peius
mutatus. Changed out of the natural color. Versicolorius, a, um.* Changing.
Mutatio, Alteratio, Commutatio, Co^mutatus, tus. Immutatio, Permutatio, onis.
Co^uersio, onis. Changement, Mutation. S. Changing of money. Permutatio
pecuniae, Collybus. Change. Chaungeling children. Lamiae, rum, * Pueri
subdititij, Subditi, Subditiui, Suppositi, and Supposititij, vt puer
supposititius. A chaungeling. Enfant suppose. H. Chaunger or a banker.
Telonarius, Argentarius, Nummularius, Collybista, Collybistes, Collybistae,
Trapezita, trapezitae, Mensarius, Argyrognomon. Changeur. S. Vide Letter of
change. Chaunter in a quier, or he that sings the base, or first, or is the
chief singer. Praecentor, ris. Qui commence le chant, l' entoneur. H. Cheek,
or holowenes of the cheek. Bucca, Faux, Gena. Jove's. H. Cheek apple or round
ball under the eye. Gena, Mala. La jove. H. Cheek bone. Maxilla. foe. g. La
maschoire. Cheek tothe. Columellaris dens, Dens maxillaris. Dent mascheliere.
S. Cheap the price, or valewe of a thing. Liceo, es, ui, ere.* Liceor, eris.
Licitor, taris. Merchander. Cheap to be, or of small price. Vileo, es. a quo
vilesco, Vilis fio. Call. Cheap to make. Vilito, as. pen. cor. vile facio. Call.
Cheap to wax. Vilesco, scis, scere. Vile fieri. Hinc Euilesco apud Suetonium.
To become cheap. To sell cheap, or for a small price. Vili vendere, Male
vendere. Vendre a vil pris. S.

Cheap or of no price. Vilis, le. non carus. De vil pris. S. Cheapensse.
Vilitas, tatis. foe. g. Vilete, ou vieute. S. Cheaper of wares. Licitator, vel
trix. Cooper. Cheapely. Viliter, Vilius, Vilissime. Aduerbia. Cheerful to be.
Bono animo esse, Hilaresco, scis. Gaudere, Laetari. Estre ioyeux. S. Cheerful
to make. Laetificare, Afficere laetitia. Fair ioyeux. S. Chearefulnes.
Alacritas, Frons candidus, vel hilaris, Vultus, Hilaritas, Festiuitas.
Ioyeusete. Cherfull. Hilaris, re. Laetus, ta, tum. Ioyeux. S. Cheer made at
departure. Prandium viaticum. Look Banquet, feast and chere. Chease. Caseus,
ei. m. g. Fourmage. H. Chease that is full of eyes, such as our English
proverb is spoken of, that is: if it had as many legs as eyes, there could
no place houlde it. Caseus oculatus, Pumicosus, Fistulosus, Spongiosus.
Fourmage plein de yeux. H. Soft chese, or fresh chese. Lac pressum.
Molfourmage. H.

Chease new or rowen chese. Caseus recens, Mollis, Musteus. Fourmage moust and
fraiz. H. Fourmage mol. S. Chease old. Vetus caseus. Fourmage vieil. S. Chease
made of mares milk. Hippace, es. Equinus caseus. Fourmage de iument. S. Chease
made upon russhes, called a fresshe cheese, or iackeman. Iunculi.* Chease not
worth eating for badnes. Recocta, Recoctam vulgo dicunt qui and secundarius
caseus dicitur. Call. Chease cake. Libum, by. Semilissula, Semilixula.*
Epityrum, ri. n. g. Chease fate. Fiscella, ae. Fiscina, nae. Casearea forma.
Eclisse a fair fourmages, Fiscelle: Caseret. H. Cheeselippe worm, otherwise
called Robingood-fellowe his lowse. Tylus, li. m. g. Call. Check or rebuke.
Pipulum, Opprobrium, Vituperium, Conuitium. Vide Blame, rebuke and Reproach.
Check for ill conditions. Censoria nota. Idem. Rebuke. Check or interupte one
in speaking. Obrogo, as. Corripio, is. Contredire and empescher le propos d'
aucun. Reprendre. S. Check or to taunte. Oblique perstringere. Vide Taunte.
Checked to be. Corripior, eris, pi. Vide Rebuked. You are not in good chere or
merry. Non prae te fers laetitiam. Vous ne faictes point bonne chere. S.

Chere or countenance. Vultus. Chere, Trongue, Mine. S. Good and joyful
chere. Hilaris vultus atque laetus, Hilare ingenium. Bonne and ioyeuse chere. S.

To make merry chere. Se hilarem facere, Obsequi animo suo, Hilarem in modum
epulari. Fair ioyeuse chere. S.

To make great chere, or to make much of him self. Been habere, Been curare
aetatem suam, Curare cutem, Curare se and aetatem suam, Genio carpere dulcia,
Obsequi animo suo, Pergraecari, Indulgere genio, Genialiter viuere. Fair
grande chere. S.

To make one good chere, or to intertayne one friendly. Comiter accipere. Liu.
Fair bonne chere a quelqu'vn.

Cherry. Cerasum, si. n. g. Cerise. H. Cherry called a red cherry. Cerasum
Apronianum. Plin. Quod maxim rubet. H. Cherry black. Cerasum actium. Grinche.
H. Cherry tree. Cerasus, i. foe. g. Un cerisier. S. Cherish. Mulceo, es.
Plurimifacio, is. Cherer on cherir. Cherishe much. Demulceo, es. Affriander. S.
Cherne or to make butter. Butyrum agitare. Batre le beurre. Pal. Cherne for
butter, Inst. of huswyfery. Fidelia, ae. foe. genesis * Beurrette. Pals. Cheruyle
herb. Caerefolium, Chaerephyllon. Gingidium. Cerfueil. Chesse board or tables,
such as they play at chesse on. Albeus, Albeolus, * Alueus lusorius vel
Alueolus, li. m. g. Chesse play, or play of the dammes. Scruporum lusus.
Quintil. To play at chesse or draughtes. Latrunculis, sieve laterunculis
ludere, Praelia latronu^ ludere. Iouer aux eschets. H.

Chesse men. Latrones, Latrunculi sieve Laterunculi, Calculi. Eschetz. H. Chest.
Cista, Capsa, Ploxinum. Vng coffre, Arche, Casse. Cheste for evidence and
wrytinges. Tabularium, ij. n. g. Le lieu ou se guard les lettres and registres
publiques, le thresor des chartres. S. Cheste covered with lether. Riscus.
Coffre c^^uert de peaus. Cheste that is but little. Capsella, Capsula,
Cistella. Layette, boite, petit casse. Chest a dead corpse with spice and sweet
oyntements in a coffyn. Pollincio, is. Lauer and oindre le corpse d' vne
trespass a la facon ancienne. S. Chester of a dead corpse, or he that does
thoffice of annoynting of dead bodies. Pollinctor, oris. m. g. Plaut. Qui
oingt les corpse morts. S. Chesting of a dead body in a close coffin, or the
ministration of baulming. Pollinctura, ae. foe. genesis Tell charge and office.
S. Chestmen or tablemen. Tessarae, arum.* Chestnutte, or chesten. Balanitis,
Castanea, Glans Iouis, vel Glans sacra, Nux castanea, Sardiana glans, Nux
heracleotica. Chastaigne. S. Et Castanetum, ti. The place where chestnuttes
grow. Un lieu plant de chastaigners, Chastaigneraye. S. Chestre, a town in
England. Neomagus, Oxellu^. Chewe meat. Commanduco, as. Mascher. Chewe, or to
chame or chawe meat. Extenuare cibum dentibus, Commanducare, Mandare. Mascher.
S. Chewe the cudde, as neat do. Remando, dis, di, vel diui. Rumigo, as.
Ruminor, aris. Rumino, as. Ruminer. S. Vt Mantuan. Fauste, precor, gelida
qua^do pecus omne sub vmbra ruminat, antiquos paulum recitemus amores.
Friend Faustus, sith our cattle all,
chew cudde in color shade,
I pray the lettes a while resite,
th'auncient loves w'aue had.
Chewed. Manducatus, a, um. Mansus, a, um. Masche. Chewed meat. Cibus
commanducatus. Mansus, si. Du masche comme font les nourrices. S. The meat
which a nource cheweth. Vt mansum in os inserere. To put showed meat in ones
mouth. Luy bailler tout masche. S. Chewyng. Manducatio. Commanducatus, tus. Le
maschement intre les dens. S. Chewyng of the cudde. Rumigatio, Ruminatio.
Ruminement. S. Cheuyn fish. Laccea.* Cheuenne. Cheuysaunce. Licitatio.
Cheuisance. Cheuisaunce to make. Licitor, aris. Mercor, aris. Chybbol. Caepula,
Talia, ae. Ciuol. Pals. Chich peason. Cicer. Cices. H. Chicken. Gallinaceus
pullus, Pullus, li. Poulsin. S. Chicke new hatched, or very young. Pullaster,
Pullicenus.* Chicken keeper. Pullarius, vel ria. Un pouldillier. S. Chickweede
herb. Anagallis, Corchorus, Morsus gallinae. Morgeline. H. Chyde. Commutare
verba, Ingerere dicta, vel opprobria in aliquem, Iurgo, as. Rixor, aris.
Veliro, as. Velitor, aris.* To chyde one. A diurgare aliquem, Obiurgare,
Increpare, Dictis accipere, Aliquem inclamare, Concertare cum aliquo. Tanser
aucun. S.

To chyde with one. Contendere iurgio cum aliquo, Verba cum aliquo commutare.
Tanser a aucun. S.

Chyde or to frette earnestly against one. Veheme^tioribus aliquem verbis
prosequi. Tanser fort and ferme contre aucun. S. Chyder. Increpator,
Obiurgator, Iurgator, vel trix, Rixosus. Obiurgateur, tanseur. Chyding.
Iurgium, ij. Obiurgatio, Rixa, Velitatio. Obiurgation, tansement. S. Et
Rixosus, a, um. Ang. Full of chydinges. Noiseux. S. Chidingly, or after the
manner of chyding. Rixose, Velitatim. Chief or highest. Cardineus, a, um.
Praecipuus, a, um. Primarius, a, um. Primus, a, um. Primores, rum. Protos,
Potissimus, a, um. Selectus, a, um. Summus, a, um. Supremus, a, um. Vltimus, a,
um. Primier, le plus hault de toutes. Chief or principal. Cardinalis, Primas,
Princeps. Coryphaeus, i, m. g. Le primier, le plus excellent. Chief place, the
excellency. Primatus, tus. m. g. Le premier lieu, l'excellence. Chief of all,
or chiefest. Adprimus, Maximus, Su^mus, a, um. Tresgrande. S. Chief
authority, rule or office. Primatus, us. Principatus, tus. m. g. Chief
captain. Auspex, cis. Imperator. Vide captain. Chief city or town in a
Diocese, where as the Archebyshoppes sea is. Metropolis. La ville capitale.
And so th'archebyshop is called Metropolitanus, vel metropolites quasi
pontifex. Vrbis metropol. Ang. Metropolitan, or head bishop. Un pontif. And the
city where other bishops sea is, is called Matrix vrbs. * And the churches
in such sees been called Ecclesiae matres, vel matrices. Ang. Cathedral
churches, or mother churches. Chief city in a realm, as London in England.
Metropolis, Prouinciae caput. Ville capitale. H. Et Metropolitanus. Ang. A
cittisen, or man of the chief city. Chief cook. Archimagirus, ri. m. g. Le
maistre cuisine, le maistre cuisinier. H. Chief counceloure. Prytanis, Intimus
de consilijs. Le grande conseillier. Chief game. Brabium, ij. Brauium, ij. n.
g. Chief Justice, or judge of England. Iudex ordinarius. Un judge. S. Chief
in authority amongst the people. Primas, it is. Praepositus. Vt infra. Chief
Physician. Archiater, Protomedicus. * Archiatrus, tri. m. g. Premier medecin.
Chief priest, or deane. Protomista. vide Bishop. Chief ruler, or rulers.
Primas, it is. Primicerius, tij* Summates, tum. plur. Primates, tum. plur. number.
Proceres, Optimates. Les principaulx d' un populaire. Chief Scribe.
Protonotarius, Scribarum praefectus. Chancelier. H. Chief to be in authority
or office, or to be above, or before other. Praesum, es. Primatum habere,
Primas tenere. Auoire la charge de quelque affair, Estre par dessus. S. To be
chief captain of an army. Exercitui prae esse. Estre chef de guerre, and
principal captain. S.

Chiefly. Apprime, Potissime, Potissimum, Praecipue, Primitus, adu. ordi.
Principaliter. Sum. Vel. Souuerainement. S. Chiefetie, or chief governance,
or supremacy. Primatus. rus. m. g. Principaulte. Chieftie, or principal rule
of holy matters. Hierarchia. penul. prod. latin Sacer principatus dicitur. S.
Child. Proles, Puer, a puritate. Enfant, garson. H. Et Pusio, Pupus. Et
Puellus, vel Puerulus. dimi. Ang. A little or young child, being a man child.
Petit enfant. H. Et Puera, ae. Puella, Pupa, Virgu^cula. Fillette. H. Ang. A
woman child. Et Puerula, ae. dim. Ang. A little wenche. Petite fillette.
Child abortiue or borne before the time. Puer abortiuus, Foetus abortiuus,
Abortus, Extetricinius Festo huius generis est, quasi matre exterrita ante
tempus natus. Auorton, ne auant term. H Child sucking. Puer lactens. Enfant
qui tette. H. Child of one year oulde. Puer anniculus. Varr. Enfant d' un an.
H. Child delivered by incision. Caeso, Plin. e materno vtero caesus. Taille
horse du ventre de sa mere. H. Child borne slowlye, such one as it is long
before the mother be delivered. Cordus, qui tarde nascitur. Ne tard. H. Child
borne at the day break. Lucius, prima luce natus. Ne auecq le soleil leuant.
H. Child borne in the morning. Manius, mane natus. Ne du matin. H. Child
borne with his feet forward. Agrippa. pedibus prius ex vtero editis enatus
puer. H. Child abused against nature by sin. Exoletus, a, um.* Child borne
after the death of the father. Posthumus, a morte patris natus. Posthuma
proles. L'enfant ne apres la mort de son pere. H. Child borne when the father
is far out of the country, or his father being an old man. Proculus, li.
Patre peregre absente editus in lucem: vel patre iam seen and aetate procul
praegresso natus. H. Child cast, or thrown out in the street, whose father
is unknown, and nouryshed of a stranger. Proiectitius, Proiectus, Puer
expositus, vel in publicum proiectus. Enfant expose. H. Child new borne.
Puerperium. Sueton. L'enfant dequoy la femme est accouchee. S. Child that
sucketh long. Mammothreptus, vel ta. Nutritious a nutrice educatus. Child, or
Twynne, where two be conceived, and the one being abortiue, the other comes to
perfect birth. Vopiscus, sci. m. g. Dicitur qui ex duobus co^ceptis, vno ab
ortu excluso, ad partum legitimum ducitur. Child wantonly brought up.
Mammothreptus, vel ta. Vt supra. Child, whose father dies before his
grandfather. Opiter, tris. Puer cui superstes est auus mortuo patre. H. Child
within age. Depuber, ris. Impubes, ris. Impuber, Inuestis, nondum pube
vestitus, qui nondum decimi quarti anni limits attigit. Garsoneau sans barbe.
H. And Depuber, is also a young beast. Children. Liberi, orum. Pignora, rum.
Pueri, oru^. Enfans descendans de nous. Children, fatherles and motherles.
Parentibus orbi, Puerorum solitudo. Vide Orphane. Children of kings and
princes. Reguli, orum. Regij pueri. Liu. Children of noble men, clad in vesture
mixte with purple, until they be xvii. years of age. Praetextati; vel
Praetextatae. Fills ou filles de bonne maison. S. Children of the age of two
years. Bimuli, oru^. S. Children taken with elffes, or Chaungelinges. Lamiae,
arum.* Pueri subditi, subdititij, subditiui, suppositi, supposititij. H.
Chyldehoode. Aetatula, Infantia, Pueritia. Petit ou bas aage. S. Enfance.
Chyldishenes. Puerilitas. Faict d' enfant, puerilite. S. Chyldyshe, or of a
child. Puellaris, re. Puerilis, le. Puerile, Appartenant a enfant. S.
Chyldishe to wax. Puerasco, scis. Chyldishe to wax again. Repuerasco, is.
Chyldishely. Pueriliter. pen. cor. Aduer. A la maniere d' enfants, Puerilement.
S. Chyll, or shake for cold, or to be a cold. Algeo, es. Algo, is Frigeo, es,
gui, ere. Auoir froid. H. That is chill. Alsiosus, sa sum. Frilleux S. Chymney.
Caminus, ni. Cheminee. Et Caminatus, a, um. Ang. Like a chimney, or furnace.
Chymney shanke, or tonell. Fumarij, orum. vel potius Fumarium, rij. n. g.
Chinck, clyft, cranny, or crenes of earth, stone or wood, through the which
a man may look, as the ground chincketh in summer, with drought. Rima, ae. Vne
fente and creuasse ou gersure. S. Et Rimula, ae. Dimin. Ang. A little chyncke
or cranny. Et Rimosus, a, um. Angl. Full of chynckes. etc. Plein de fentes, and
creuasses S. Chyncked, or crannied. Hiulcus, a, um. Rimatus, a, um. Enter
baaille, fendu, Gers^. S. Chincked, clyfted, or crannied to be. Rimas agere. Se
fendre and creuasser, Se gerser. S. Findi, idem. Chyncke or to gape, as ye
ground does with dright. Hiulco, as. Aestus hiulcat agros, Heat of the Sun
chincketh the ground, or causes the ground to gape. Chynebone of man, or
beast, from the head to the haunche. Trachelus, Vertebra, Vertibulum. Os de
l'eschine, du dos. Chyne of the back, which is the lowest next the fundement.
Orropygium, sieve Orrhopygium. Croupion. Crisp. Chynne. Mentum, ti. n. g.
Menton. H. Chippe. Assula, ae. Coupeau. Chyppes that carpenters make. Schidia,
Assulae. Coupeaux que font ces charpentiers. S. Chyp axe. Ascia, ae. Vne
coignee. S. Chyp, or cut with an axe. Ascio, as. Hacher. Chip bread.
Distringere crustam panis. Summas crustas panis destringere. Chapeler du pain.
S. Chyrme, or to chur, as birds do. Gingrio, is, iui, vel ij. S. Chyrpe like a
sparowe. Pipilo, as. Le crier d'vn passereau. S. Chysell. Instr. Scalprum,
pri.* Chyttering, quiuering, or shaking for cold. Quercerus, a, um. and
Querquerus, a, um. Froide auec grand tremblement de tout le corpse. S.
Chytterling. Omasum, si. Endoile. Pals. Chyts in the face or body, like unto
wartes. Lentigo, lentiginis. foe. genesis Lenticula, ae. foem. genesis Petites taches
rousses qui viennent au visag ou corpse in form de lentille. Chytty, or full of
chittes, or wartes. Lentiginosus, a, um. Qui est plein de tells taches,
Lentilleux. Et Lenticularis, re. Ang. Like unto a chytte. Chiualry. Militia,
ae.*Equestris militia, Ius annulorum aureorum. Cheualerie. S. Choke. Praefoco,
as. Suffoco, as. Estouffer. S. To choke one. Praefocare, Suffocare, Extinguere
animum alicui. Estouffer quelqu'vn. S.

Choked. Suffocatus.* Choker, or who that choketh. Suffocator, vel Trix.
Chokyng. Suffocatio, Praefocatio. Estouffement. S. Choler, Biles, sine adiect.
Cholera, ae. Cholere. Choler mixed with blood, or red choler. Bilis rubea, vel
Rubra. Cholere rouge. Choler or melancholy. Bilis atra. Cholere. S. Choler
mixed with fleame. Bilis flaua. De couleur iaune. S. Choler, or anger. Ira.
Bilis, Cholera. Courrouxe, cholere, Ire. S. To disgorge his choler upon one.
Erumpere stomachum in aliquem. Descharger sa cholere sur aucun. S.

Choleric person. Biliosus, a, um. Cholericus, a, u^. Cholerique. S. Qui est
plein de cholere. Cholt headed fellow, whose head is as great as a betle or
mall. Tuditanus. Tudito, onis. m. g. Choose. Allego, is, egi. Desumo, is.
Elego, is. Eligo, is. Opto, as. Sublego, is. Sumere optionem. Lego, is. Eximere
numero. Choiser. S. Choose able men by way of muster. Agere delectu^, Delectum
habere, Facere delectum militum. Choiser gens de guerre. Choose often, or make
many choyses. Electo, as. Ide^ significat quod elicere vt ait Festus. Choose
out the best or chief. Seligo, is, egi, ectum. Eslire and choiser enter
pleusieurs. S. Chosen. Electus, a, um. Esleu enter les autres. S. Chosen
bishop. Electus vel cooptatus in pontificatum, Esleu euesque. S. Chosen
amongst many. Selectus, a, um. Esleu parmi d'autres, ou enter plusieurs Chosen
by way of muster. Delectus, a, u^, Esleu. etc. Chosing. Electio, Selectio.
Election. Choice. Optio, onis. Optatio, Delectio, Electio. Chois. S. To give
one leave to choose, or to give one the choice. Optione^ dare, vel facere,
Optionem eligendi defer, Facultatem dare elegendi. Donner le chois. S.

Choice in a muster of men. Delectus virorum. Choppe and change. Mercor, aris.
Mercimonium facere. Vide Change. Choppe, or to cut of. Trunco, as. Tronquer
and couper, Trencher. Vnde, Tor, Trix, Tio. Choppe or to hacke small.
Co^cidere. Hacher menu. Chopped of. Truncatus, a, um. Truncus, a, um. Qui est
tronque and coupe, trenche. S. Chopper. Truncator, vel Trix. * Chopping and
changing. Mercatus, us. Mercimonium. ij.* Commutatio, onis. Chaungement.
Chopping of. Truncatio.* Chopping knife. Ansorium, rij.* Chowgh or caddow.
Gracculus, Monedula. Chouette. H. Chrismatorie. Lenticula, ae. foe. g. Christ
the son of God, and only redeemer of al mankind. Christus, ti. m. g.
Christ. Vide Jesus. Christian. Christianus. Chrestien. Christendom.
Christianismus. Chrestiente. Christmas day. Natalis Christi. Iour de Noel. H.
Chronicles or historis of acts done. Chronica, orum. Plin. Chroniques. S.
Chronicles or books of the acts of noble men and others, with the computation
of times. Chronici libri, Annals. Livers de chroniques. Annals. H. Church.
Aedes sacra, Templum. Temple. H. Church, or congregation of Christen people.
Ecclesia, ae. foe. genesis Male pro templo vsurpatur in triuialibus scholis cum
sit coetus Christi fideliu^. Vne assemblee, eglise. H. Churcheyard.
Coemeterium, ij. Polyandrium, Sepulcrorum locus, Sepulcretum. Cemitiere,
lattre. H Churcheporch. Absiden.* Propylaeum, Prothyru^. Atrium, ij. Vestibulum
templi. Un auant portail. Pals. Church suspended or polluted. Prophanatum
te^plum. Temple profane. Churl or carle of the country. Petro, onis.
Rusticanus, ni. Rusticus, ci. Illiberalis. Vilain, loudier* S. Churl or
villain regardant. Colonarius, vel Colonaria. Impurus, Agrestis, Turpis.
Vilain and meschant. S. Churlishe. Inurbanus, Rudis, Ingratus, a, um. Rusticus,
a, um. Rustault, ou Rustique. S. Churlishly. Ingrate, Rusticatim,
Illiberaliter. Vilainement. Churlishnes, carlishenes. Illiberalitas, Siccitas.
Vilenie and chichete. S.
C. ANTE. I.
CIcero, the name of a noble man, which was Consul of Rome with Caius
Antonius, whose divine eloquence, abundant learning, sharpenes of wit,
dexterity in acts, and most ardent love toward the common weal of his
country, cannot be sufficiently expressed by no mortal man's tongue or pen.
His ancestors were named Cicerones, because yt Tullius Appius, a noble king
of Volscis, and one of that progeny, had on his nose a mark like a chyche,
which is a kind of pulse called Cicer. He so profited in the eloquence of
Greek and Latin, that not only his companions were in a marvelous
admiration of him, but also Apolonius the most excellent orator at yt time,
in hearing him, was greatly abashed, and keeping silence a long space, said at
the last: Truly, Cicero I praise thee, and marvel at thee, but I lamenc
greatly the fortune of Greece, when I considre, that not only noblenes in
deeds of arms and martial affairs, is taken from us by the valiantness and
puissaunce of the Romans, but also that the great praise and glory of
learning, which was only left unto us, is now by thee translated to Rome.
Which saying was found afterward very true. For look what subtilitie is in
Logike, what commodity and secret knowledge in Philosophy moral and
natural: He knew and declared the same in Latin in most perfect eloquence.
And (which is to be wondered at) not withstanding, that he being a very young
man, came to practyse in Rome, and had studied abundantly the civil laws, and
was marueilously occupied in great and weighty causes, and after that he was
Senator, was continually (as it seemed) most busy about ye weal public:
yet he that does read his works (although we have not the third part of them
which he wrote) shall think that he did never any other thing but read
great authors and write books. and yet did he exployte by his wisdom and
diligence, many great enterpryses, for the commodity and safegarde of his
country, as well in war as in peace. For the which the Senate and people
gave to him first before any other, the name, of Father of his country, For
when as civil wars began to invade the Roman Empire, and when ambition,
was crepte into the bosoms of the Senators, Cicero with many vehement
orations exhorted them to beware of ambition: And therein seemed to have a
certain divine forsighte of things to come, so in his orations against
Cateline, may be seen, with what love, art, diligence, study, instrie,
and singular eloquence, he unfolded, opened and displayed, the whole
interpryce of that lewd conspirator, and delivered his country from peril of
fire and sword: Likewise in his orations against M. Antonius the love of his
country and common weal, is vehemently expressed, and that with wonderful
eloquence, whereby Antonius was proclaimed enemy to his country, this caused
him to bear great ill will to Cicero, in so much yt in treaty of peace
between him and Octauius, he demanded Cicero to do with him at his pleasure,
which was granted of the unkind Octauius, whom Cicero had brought up, and
caused to be made chief governor of the Romans. Wherefore Antonius sent
one Herennius (whom Cicero had saved from death by his eloquence) to slay him,
who pursued him as he fled out of the city, which thing Cicero
perceauinge, abode his coming, lying in a horse litter for weakness, and
prepared his throat to Herennius, who struck of his head, and his right hand,
and brought them to Antonius: who caused them to be set over the place of
civil Judgment in Rome, Cicero, onis. m. g. Cycorie herb, whose flower will
open at the rising of the Sun, and close at the goinge down. Ambubeia,
Chondrilla, Condrillon, Heliotropium, Intybus, Intybum, Seris, Cichoriu^,
Chondrilla mayor, Dod. * Intybum satiuum, Cichorium satiuum, Cicorea domestica.
Cicoree domestique. H. Cycorie savage or wild Cycorie. Intubum, vel Cichorium
siluestre, nonnullis Ambubeia. Cicoree sauuage. H. Cydre a kind of wine or
drink made of apples. Sicera, Vinum e pomis factitium. Sidre. H. Ciphers or
notes of brief writing. Abbreuiatio^s Notae, Silgae. Abbreuiatures. H.
Cymball. Cymbalum, li. n. g. Cymbale. Cymball player. Cymbalista, ae. m. genesis
Qui jove des cymbales. Cyme. Vide Cement. Cynamon or cannell. Cinamomum,
Cinnamomu^. i, n. g. La vraye canelle. H. Cynquefoyle herb, otherwise called
five leaued grass. Pentaphyllon, Quinquefolium. Cinque fueille. H. Cypres of
lynnen. Carbasus. plur. Carbasa. Cypres an herb to set in pottes. Chamaepytis,
vel Chamaepitys. Cypres tree. Cupressus, Cyparissus. Cypres. S. Et Cupressinus,
a, um. Ang. Of Cypres tree. De Cypres. A place planted with Cypres trees.
Cupressetum, ti. n. g. Un lieu plant de Cypres. S.

Cyrcle or compass. Circulus, li. Gyrus, ri. Orbis, Circus. Circle. S. Et
Orbiculus, li. diminut. Ang. A little or narrow circle. Cyrcle about the
Moon. Corona, Halo. Et Circulus siderum, Plin. sed precipue Lunae. Circle
autour de la Lunae. H. Cyrcle being round like a trendle, after the sort as
an Adder lies. Spira, ae. foe. genesis Cyrcle or compass to make. Gyro, as.*
Cyrcleye, or in the form of a circle or compass. Circulatim, Orbiculatim. En
form ronde, par rondeaux. S. Circuit, or to compass about. Circumire,
Circuire Ambire, Circundare, Circunuenire. Circuir. S. Circuit. Ambitus, us.
Circuitus. Un circuit. S. Circuit of a rouffe. Orbile, lis.* Circuit, or
circumference, or vter circle of a whele. Orbile, lis. n. genesis Le tour and
round d' un roue, la cir^o^ference. S. Circuit in words, or conueyaunce in
speakinge. Ambages, Perhiodus. Ambages, Circuit de parolles. Vnde Ambagiosus,
a, um. etc. Ambagieux. Thou have used no circuit of words. Nihil circuitione
vsus es. Terent.

Circuit without the walls of a town. Tyrsis. Circumcise. Circuncidere,
Praeputium amputare. Circoncir. S. Circumcised. Recutitus, a, um. Circuncisus,
a, um. Circoncis. S. Circumcision. Circuncisio, onis, foe. g. Circoncision.
Circumference. Peripheria, Orbile, is. n. genesis Circonference. Circumlocutio^,
as one word expressed by diverse. Periphrasis, Circunlocutio. Circonlocution. S.
Circumspect. Cautus, a, um. Circumspectus, Conspicuus, a, um. Oculatus,
Prouidens, it is. Prospicuus, a, um Prouidus, a, um. Vigilans, it is. Prudent,
diligent. S. Circumspect to be. Caueo, es. Vigilo, as. Sedulus curare. Auoir
cure and soing de quelque chose. Circumspection. Circumspicientia,
Dispicientia, Cura, Prospicientia, Vigilantia. Diligence, la veue and regard
qu' on fait de tous costs. S. Circumspectly. Caute, Cautim, Provide,
Vigilanter. Prudemment auec aduis and esgarde. Cissers to clippe here.
Forficuli, forfices. Ciselets, ciseaux. S. Cytation. Citatio, onis. Libellus,
quo quis citatur aut quo quid denunciatur. Un adiourneme^t, ou vne citation. H.
Citation or citing. In Ius vocatio. Citation. S. Cite, call or to sommo^. Cito,
as. In Ius vocare, Dica^ scribere vel impingere, Diem dicere. Citer, ou
adiourner. Cited, sommoned, or called. Citatus, a, u^. Prouoque. City, or a
town. Ciuitas, is. Vrbs, bis. foe. genesis Conuenticulum hominum. Cite,
burgeoisie. Et Vrbicula, ae. diminut. Ang. A little city. Et Vrbanicus, a,
um. vel Vrbicus, a, um. Ang. Of a city. De la ville. City easy to be
sacked, or taken of enemies. Vrbs hostibus obuia. Obuia vrbs inimicis. Virg.
Aisee a estre prinse des ennemis. S. City or town incorporate, having their
laws and officers. Municipium, Eleutheropolis. i. Libera ciuitas. Place
iouissant privileges. H. City standing upon vaultes. Pensilis vrbs. Citizen.
Ciuis, Oppidanus, Oppidicus. De ville, Bourgeois. S. Et Ciuilis, le. Pertaining
to a city. Et ciuiliter. Like a cittezin, or after the manner of a city.
etc. Ciuilement. S. Et Donare ciuitate. Asciscere aut recipere in ciuitatem,
vel ciuitate recipere, Ascribere in ciuitatem, and ciuitati, Suscipere in
ciuitatem, Largiri ciuitatem. Passer ou fair bourgeois. S. To make a citezin.
Citezin or burges of a city or town corporate. Ciuis, Municeps, sed abusiue.
Citoyen. H. Citezin of a chief city. Metropolitanus.* Citezin that is made
free by some magistrate, and not borne thereunto, or served for the fredome.
Insitus vrbi ciuis. Qui n'est point citoyn naturel. S. Citezin of Rome. Ciuis
Romanus, Ciuitate Romanus. Citoyen Romain, Bourgeois de Rome. S. Citezin
discharged of his fredome, and afterward pays tribute like a stranger.
Aerarius. Qui est suspendu des privileges de la ville. S. Citezin not yet made
free. Improlis, Improlus. Qui nondum in ciuitatem asscriptus est. Ciues herb.
Cepina, ae. foe. genesis Ciuez. Pals. Ciuet beast. Cibeta, ae. * Animal
odoriferu^, Veteribus incognitu^* Ciuetta, alij Zibettu^ voca^t. S. Ciuet a
sweet spice or powder like musk. Zibethum, Oderamentum musco assimile.
Ciuitte. H. Ciuyll, as having courtesy and humanity. Ciuilis, Vrbanus. Civil.
Civil law. Ius civil, Ius proprium, Ius ciuicum. Droict civil. S. Doctors of
the civil law. Iuris enarratores. Docteurs de droict. S.

Civil, or pertaining to a city. Politicus, a, um. Vide Political. Ciuillie.
Vrbanatim, Vrbane, Ciuiliter. Ciuilement, auec bonne grace. S. Civility or
courtesy. Politia, Vrbanitas, tatis. foe. g. Vrbanite. S.
C. ANTE. L.
CLacke, clapper, or ratell that children use to play withal. Crotalum,
Crepitaculu^. Claquette. H. Cladde or clothed. Amictus, a, um. Tunicatus, a,
u^. Vestu, Habille. S. Affuble. Cladde in a cote armure. Paludatus, a, um. *
Vestu d'vn cotte d'armes. Cladde in a cloak. Clamidatus, a, um. vel
Chlamidatus, ta, tum. Vestu d' un manteau ou cappe. S. Cladde in a mantell, or
long robe. Palliatus, a, um. Vestu d' vne robe longue. Cladde in a palle.
Amictus Palliolatim, Palliolatus, a, um.* Cladde in a peticote. Indusiatus, a,
um. * Tunicatus, ta, tum. Vestu d' un hocqueton. S. Cladde in a robe of estate.
Praetextatus, a, um. Vide Robe. Cladde in russet or graye. Leucophaeatus, a,
um. Vestu de gris. S. Cladde in silks. Sericatus, a, um. Vestu de rob de
soye. S. Cladde in wolle. Lanatus, a, um. Qui est vestu de lain. Cladde to be.
Amicior, iris, ictus. Tunicor, ris. Vestior, iris. Estre vestu. Cladde^, or to
cloth. Amicio, ire. Tunico, as. Vestio, is. Vestir, habiller. S. Cladding or
clothing in wolle. Lanitium, ij. n. genesis Claye. Lutum, ti. Argilla, lae. foem.
genesis De l'argille. Tasconium, nij. n. g. Creta Tasconia, Terra alba argillae
similis, e qua aurificum catini, quibus metalla excoquunt, conficiuntur. A
kind of white earth like claye, of which goldsmithes pottes are made,
wherein metal is sodde, some call it white claye. Clayishe, clammy and gluye
like claye. Argillaceus, ea, um. Gluant and prenant comme argille. Clayishe or
full of claye. Argillosus, sa, sum. Plein d' argille. Clayee place. Locus
argillosus. Lieu argilleux. S. To wax, or to become clayee or dirtye. Lutesco,
scis. Se conuertir en boue. S.

Clayen, or dress with claye, or to foul with clay. Deluto, as. Luto, as.
Enduire de boue. Clayinge. Delutamentum, ti. n. genesis Claim or to challenge.
Assero, is. Vendico, cas Attribuer. S. Claim, challenge or to attribute an
other man's surname to him self. Asserere sibi cognomen alterius. S'attribuer
le surnom d' un autre. S. Claim a thing to him self. Vendicare sibi aliquid,
Assumere sibi vel ascissere, Attribuere, Ascribere sibi aliquid. S'attribuer
quelque chose. S. Clayming, claim, or challenge, Cessio, onis.* Clammy or
cleaving. Lentus, a, um.* Viscosus, a, u^. Argillaceus, ea, eum. Gluant.
Clamnes, or cleaving. Viscidum, di. n. g. Clamoure. Clamor, ris. m. g. Clameur,
Cri. S. Clamorous, or full of crying. Clamosus, a, um. Criard, plein de
crierie. S. Clappe hands or feet for joy. Applodo, is. Applaudo, is.
Complodo, is. Plaudo, is. Plodo, is. Replaudo, is. Frapper les mains l' vne
contre l' autre en sign que quelque chose nous plaist. S. Clapping of hands
and feet for joy and mirth. Applausus, us. Plausus, us. m. genesis Ce frappement
des mains. S. Clapper for conies. Viuarium, rij. Est etiam locus in quo, vel
aues, vel pisces, vel ferae continentur: quae ad victum duntaxat pertinent.
etc. Claret wine. Heluolum vinum, Rubellum vinum, Medium inter album and rufum,
Vinum giluum, Vinum subrubrum. Vin clairet. H. Vin cleret. S. Clarestorie
wyndowe. Fenestrenula. * Vide Wyndowe. Clarify. Limpidum facere, Clarificare.
Clarifier. Clarie herb. Hera, ae. foe. g. * Horminum satiuu^, Crista galli.
Toutebonne, orualle. Claspe, join, or to buccle together. Fibulo, as, are.
Conioindre, boucler. S. Claspe. Fibula, ae. Confibula, ae, Retinaculum. Agraffe
ou Agraphe. Claspe of a book. Offendix. * Fermouer. Pals. Claspe or grapeling
iron, to close ships together. Harpa, ae. Harpax, cis. * Harpago, inis. Un
croc. S. Claspen together. Fibulo, as. Infibulo, as. Agrapher, boucler.
Clatter. Loquacito, as. Loquitor, taris. Caqueter. S. Clatterer, or a
clatterfart, which will disclose any light secreate. Loquax, cis. Locutor,
sieve loquutor, Locutuleius. Grand parleur, Iaseur, caqueteur. Clattering.
Loquacitas, tatis. Trop grande abondance de parolles veins and inutiles. S.
Clatteringe without substa^ciall sentence, vain bragges. Bullatae nugae.
Parolles de vanteries. S. Clawe of a byrd or foul. Vngula, ae. Vnguis. Ongle.
Clawe or cratche. Scabio, is. Scalpo, is. Grater. S. Claws of a crefish or
crabbe. Acetabula, Flagella, Brachia, Chelae, Forcipes denticulatae, Cirri,
Forcipata brachia cancrorum. Pincettes des ecreuisses. H. Clawse. Clausula,
Periodus, sieve circuitus. Fin de sentence. S. Clean. Ablutus, a, um. Lautus,
a, um. Lotus, a, um. Mundus, a, um. Nitidus, a, um. Purus, a, um. Tersus, a,
um. Net. S. Cleannes. Puritas, it is. Munditia, vel mundities, Nitor, Synceritas.
Nettite. S. Clean to be. Niteo, es. Nitesco, scis. Estre net. S. Clean to
make. Abstergere, Februare, Eluere, Emaculare, Mundare, Emundare, Munditias
facere, Nitidare, Purgare, Depurgare, Expurgare, Tergere, Verrere, Euerrere.
Nettoyer. S. Clear. Clarus, a, um. Dilucidus, a, um. Illustris, re.
Pellucidus, a, um. Planus, a, um. Perspicuus, a, u^. Splendidus, a, um. Cler.
Clear, manifest and evident. Planum, Perspicuu^, Res clara, prompta vel
manifesta, Confessa res. Cler, manifest, and evident. It is clear manifest
or plain. Certum est, Liquet, Perspicuum est omnibus, No^ eget
interpretatione. Il est cler and manifest. S.

Clear of sight. Oculatissimus, Oculatus, Perspicax. Qui veoit fort cler. S.
Clear as crystal. Diaphanum, dicitur transparens, sicut and cristallum. Call.
Clear day. Serena dies, Sudus dies. Serein iour. S. Clear eyes. Acres oculi.
Vt acer, and acutus oculus, Cic. Subtle, Voyant fort cler. S. Clear and plain
to perceive. Conspicuus, a, um. Qui est fort en veue; ou fort voyable. S.
Clear that one may see and look through. Pellucidus, a, um. Perlucidus, a, um.
Pertranslucidus, a, um. Tralucidus, a, um. Qui est si cler qu' on veoit au
trauers, comme l' eaue. S. Clear without trouble. Vacuus, a, um. Vt a periculo
vacuus. Horse de danger, Sans danger. Clear to be. Clareo, es. Illuceo, es, xi.
Lucesco, scis Claresco, scis. Estre cler. S. Clear to wax. Claresco,
Illucesco, Lucesco, scis. Inclareo, es. Deuinir cler. Clearing. Purgatio, onis,
foe. g. Vide Clensing. Clearly. Ad liquidum, Clare, Dilucide, Enucleate,
Euidenter, Luculente, Pellucide, Plane, Perspicue, Propala^, Manifest,
Manifesto, Aperte, Explicate, Explanate, Illuminate, Enodate, Liquido.
Clerement. P. Cleren, or make clear or pure. Elimo, as. Illustro, Sereno, as.
Fair clair and serein. S. Clearen, or to make bright. Elucido, as. Lucido,
as.* Clearenes. Claritas, Claritudo, Perspicuitas, Sple^dor. Clerte ou clarte.
S. Clearenes, or clear and bright part of the firmament, fair weather. Sudum,
di. n. g. Beau temps. S. Clearenes of light. Iubar, ris. n. g. vide Day star.
Clearenes of the day, air, or wether. Serenitas. Beau temps, Serein.
Serenite. S. Clearke or a notery. Scriba, Actuarius, Grammateus. Greffier. S.
Clearkes of the court. Scribae curiae, Ab actis curiae. Les greffiers de Cour.
S. To be a clearke. Scribam agere. S.

Cleave. Haereo, es. Adhaereo, es. Adherer. S. Cleave fast. Adhaereo, es.
Adhaeresco, scis. S' attacher. S. Cleave in or to. Inhaereo, es. Tenir a
quelque chose. S. Cleaving fast. Adhaesio, Adhaesus, us. m. g. Cleave as we
cleave wood or such like. Findere. Fendre. S. Cleaving or clammy. Lentus, a,
um. Viscosus, a, u^. Look in clammy. Clefted, cleaued, cleuen, or ryued.
Rimatus, a, um. Vide Chincked. Clefte. Scissus, Hiulcus, Fissus. Fendu. S.
Clefte, or easy to cleave. Fissilis, le. Fendu, ou aise a fendre. S. Clefte,
or cleued in two parts. Bifidus, a, um. Fendu en deux. S. Clefte, or the
chinke. Fissura, Fissus, us. Rima, Scissura. Fente. S. Clefte of a quill or
pen. Crena calami, Fissura calami. Taille, coupure ou fent d' vne plume. H.
Clenly. Converse, Polite, Munditer, Nitide. Nettement. S. Clenly person.
Philocalus, dici potest amator boni vel honesti, vel mundus, Politus, Elegans.
Call. Clenlines. Polities, Munditia, Mundities, Nitor, oris. Puritas,
Synceritas. Nettite. S. Cleanse or make clean. Abluo, is. Acero, as. tamen non
est in vsu. Elimo, as. Expurgo, as. Mundifico, as, Mundo, as. Purgo, as. Tergo,
is. Vide Clean to make. Cleansed or made clean. Ablutus, a, um. Tersus, a, u^.
Purgatus, ta, tum. Nettoye, purge. S. Clensing or making clean. Ablutio,
Purgatio, onis. foe. g. Clergy. Clerus. * Ordo sacricolarum. Clerge, le
clerge. Clerk of an office. Scriba. Vide Clearke. Clerk or chief secretorie
always attending. Amanuensis. * A manu vel ad manum seruus. Un clerc qui sert
pour escrire. S. Clerk of a market. Abatis, Episcopus. * Annonae praefectus,
Agoranomus, Aedilis Cerealis. H. And the office of the Clerk of the market.
Annonae praefectura, Aedilitas. And he is clerk of the market. Et is annonae
praefectus est. etc. Clerk of the crown. Sacriscrinius. Call. The master
clerks or high clerks of receates general, as are the auditors clerks.
Scripturarij. Les maistres cleres des recept es generales.

Clerks of the Escheker. Questorij scribae. Aerarij scribae. Cleue. Look in
Gelderlande. Clyent. Cliens, it is. Litigator qui patroni opera indiget and
vtitur. H. Client. S. Clift or a cut. Sissura, ae. Scissio, Scissura,
Scissus. Fente. S. Clyfte. Look in chyncke and clefte. Clyfted. Look in
chinked. Climate and certain division of heaven. Clima, atis. n. g. Ora, rae.
foe. ge. Un climat and certain division du ciel. S. Clymbe a tree or any other
like. Ascendo, is. Conscendo, is. Scando, is. Subeo, is, iui. Monter. S. Clyme
or particion of the firmament. Ora, ae. Vide Climate. Climming. Scansio, onis.
Et Scansilis, le. Ang. Any ny thing that may be climed. Aise a monter. Clippe.
Attondeo, es. Tondeo, es, totondi. Tondre. S. Clippe all over. Retondeo, es.
Retondre. S. Clypped. Tonsus, a, um. Tondu. S. Clipper. To^sor, ris. vel trix.
Tondeur. S. Tonderesse. S. Clypping. Tonsura, ae. Le faict de tondre. S. Et
Tonsorius, a, um. Ang. Pertaining to clippinge. Vt Tonsorius culter, A
raysoure. Rasoir. S. Clipping place. Tonstrina, ae. foe. g. Vide Barber.
Clytemnestra, wife to Agamemnon, a propre example of an adulterice, for she
offended with Agisthus, and conspired the death of her husband Agamemnon, And
after was slain by her son. Orestis. Cliuers or gosling weed, an herb.
Rubea minor. Clock. Horologium, ij. n. g. Horloge. S. Clock like a he^ne.
Glocio, as. Glocio, is, iui. Glosser comme les gelines qui couuent, ou qui ont
des petits. S Clocking hen. Singultiens gallina. Columel. Clossant. S.
Clockyng of a brood hen. Pipatio, onis. Singultus, tus. m. g. Colum.
Clossement. S. Clodde of earth. Glaeba, ae. foe. g. Vne mote de terre. S.
Clodde or to clotte land. Occo, as. Rompre les mottes de la terre. S. Clodding
betyll or malle. Occa, Occatorium.* Clogge. Truncus, ci. Un billot ou tronc d'
vnarbre. Clogged. Truncatus, a, um.* Cloister. Claustrum, tri. n. g. Cloistre.
S. Cloister keeper. Claustrinus, vel, a.* Cloysterer. Claustrarius.* Cloak.
Chlamys, idis. Amiculu^. Un manteau. and Palliu^, vt Tunica Pallio proximior
est, My coat is nearer to me then my gown or cloak is. Eras. Tunica pallio
propior est, quo significatum est, ex amicis nos alijs atque alijs magis esse
deuinctos, neque parem omnium habendam esse rationem. and Penula a cloak, vt
Galba penulam roganti amico respondit, Si non pluet, non opus tibi, si pluet,
ipse vtar. Cloak bag. Penularium, ij. n. g. Cloak to put upon a gown, or to
cast over it in time of rain. Epitogium, ij. n. g. Cloak of cloth of gold.
Patagium, ij. Aurea chlamys. Et Patagiarij, qui huiusmodi vestes conficiunt.
Ang. The craftesmen that make such clokes. Et Patagiatus, ti. Ang. He that
wears such cloakes. Qui patagio indutus est. Cloak for a soldier. Abolla,
ae. Sagu^, gi. Et Chlamys, secundum Had. Vne cape de soudart. H. Sagulum, li.
dim. Ang. A little or short cloak. Cloak hooded like as the spanish clokes
have. Sagum cucullum, Amicula. Vne cappe ou manteau. Cloked. Penulatus, a, um.
Chlamydatus, ta, tum. Emantelle. S. Cloked or colored like a false matter.
Fucilis, cile.* Fucatus, ta, tum. Farde. Cloken or conceile. Pallio, as.
Adumbro, as. Tego, is. Celo, as. Tenir secret. S. Cloak and to cover a vice.
Obuoluere vitium, Tegere and velare. Cacher and couurir quelque vice. Close.
Claudo, is. Tego, is. Vide cover. Close a lettre. Literas comprimere. Obsigno,
as. Sigillo, as. Signo, as. Sceller. S. Et complicare epistolam. Fermer. S.
Close in, as in wars. Circumuenio, is. vel Circunuenio, is. Entourer,
Enuironner. S. Closen in. Interpremo, is. Includo, dis. Enclorre. S. Close or
shut the eyes. Premere oculos alicuius. Vergil. Close up a book. Librum
complicare. Fermer un liver. Close up or together, as a wound. Solidesco,
scis. Se reprendre and consolider ou reioindre. S. Closed about by defense.
Septus, a, um. Stipatus, a, um. Circummunitus, ta, tum. Caesar. Contra hosts
septus and munitus. Cic. Closed in. Septus, a, um. Enuironne. S. Close or
hidden. Personatus, a, um. Personatus dici potest, quisquis foris aliud
oste^dit, and intus aliud sentit and machinatur. Call. Tacitus, a, um. Couuert.
Close wound. Personatum vulnus, id est Caecum and latens vulnus. Close or
closely. Astricte, Tacit. Couuertement. S. Closse matters. Mussanda, orum.*
Closse, or a pasture. Clostru^, Pascuu^. Pasturage ou pasquis, lieu ou les
bestes paissent. S. Closse where bushes grow. Rubetum, ti. Un lieu plant de
ronces. S. Closet. Cubile, Abditorium, Lararium.* Aedicula, Cellula.
Chambrette. S. Clote herb. Boaria, Persolata, Prosopis.* Personacia,
Personata, Arcium, Lappa mayor, Bardana. Glotteron, Bardan petit. H. Cloth,
lynnen or woollen. Pannus, Tela. foe. g. Drap, drapeau, lingerie. H. Et Pannus,
na, number. Of clothe. De drap. Et Panniculus, li. Dimin. Ang. A piece of clothe.
Piece ou morceau de drap. S. Clothe of Arras, tapestrie, or verdure. Tapes,
it is. Tapetum, ti. Tapete, it is. Tapis, is. Secundu^. Sta. lib. i. th. facit
accusa. Graecum Tapetas. Un Tapis, Tapisserie. S. Vide Tapestrie. Cloth or
garment, frysed on both sides. Amphitapa, Amphimallum. Habilement velu des deux
costez. Vide Garment frised. Cloth for a horse. Instratum, Dorsuale, Stratum,
quod equi dorso insternitur. Couuerture du chenal. Clothe of nedle work.
Acubita, vel Acupicta vestis.* Vide Garment. Clothe not wouen, being upon the
lombe, which the huswyues call a warpe or web. Stamen, inis. Tela, ae. foe.
genesis Toil. S. Chain. Pals. Clothe to wype any thing with. Sacconum.
Saccoconia, ae. foe. g. Call. Clothe of gold. Segmentum, ti. Vestis Attalica.
Drap d'or. H. Et Segmentarius, ij. Ang. A worker of clothe of gold.* Clothed.
Amictus, a, um. Vestitus, a, um. Vestu, habille. Clothed in black, or mourning
apparel. Pullatus, a, um. Vestu de rob de dueil. S. Clothed in clothe of
gold. Segmentatus, a, um.* Clothed in purple. Purpuratus, a, um. Accoustre and
vestu d'habillemens de couleur de pourpre. S. Clothed in silks. Sericatus, a,
um. Vestu de rob de soye. S. Clothed in white. Albo panno vestitus. Clothed
to be. Amicior, iris. Vestior, iris. Estre vestu. Clothe^, or to put on
clothes. Amicio, cis, re. Induo, is. Vestio, is, iui, titum, tire. Vestir,
habiller. S. Clothen often. Amicto, as.* Clothes of Arres, tapestry, or
verdure, or like sumptuous hanginges. Peristroma, Tapetia, orum. Vide
Tapestrie. Clothes of a bed. Strata, orum. Stragulae, arum. Toral, is.
Toralium, ij. neut. genesis Lodix, icis. foe. g. Stragulum, li. n. g. Toute sort
de couuerture, comme celle qu' on met sur un lict. S. Clothes to cover bowthes
or tents. Velaria, oru^, Vela capillatia. Vide Tents. Clothes of here.
Capillatia vela. Vide Here or Kilne clothe. Clothes of sylke, which have
round works wrought in the^. Vestes scutulatae. vide Cha^blet. Clothes wouen
with sundry colors. Babilonica. Vide Tapestrie. Clothing. Amictorium, rij.
Amictus, us. Vestimentum, Vestis, Indumentu^. Vestiment, habillement. H.
Clothing in wolle. Lanitium, ij.* Clodde of earth. Gleba, ae. foe. g. G lobus
terrae durior. Motte, glasson. H. Cloud. Nubes, bis. Nubilum, Nebula, ae.
Nephele Graece. Nuee. H. Et Nebecula, ae. diminu. Ang. A little cloud. Petite
nuee. S. Clowdie, or full of clouds. Nubilosus, Nebulolosus, Nubilus,
Obnubilus, a, um. Couuert de nuees Nubileux. S. Clowdie to make. Nubilo, as.
Quand il fait un temps couuert. Cloven footed. Bisulcus, ca, cum. Fourchu. S.
Cloves, spice. Garyophyllon. Garyophyllum. Cloux de giroffle. H. Pals. Cloue
tree. Garyophyllus. Clouer grass herb. Medica, ae. foe. ge. Clubbe. Claua,
Fustis. Vne massue. S. Clauicula. ae. dimin. Ang. A little clubbe. Clubbe
bearer. Clauiger, a, u^. Qui port vne massue. S. Clubbe crooked at the one
end. Vncinus, Vncus, Vngustus.* Clubbe of lead. Plumbata, ae. foe. genesis Clue
of yarne or threade. Glomus, mi. mas. genesis Et Glomus, eris, neu. ge. Un peloton
de fill. S. Cluster of grapes. Botrus, Botrys. Botryon, onis. m. g. Raisin
entier, ou grappe de raisin. S. Racemus, mi, Vua, ae. Et Botytillus. diminut.
Ang. A little cluster. Cly. Vide Cli.
C. ANTE. O.
Coasts, lymetes, borders or the fro^tiers of countries. Limits, Orae, Fines,
Confinia, Regiones. Frontieres, lisieres du pais, fins and limetes des
contrees. S. Coast or region, either of the air, earth or sea. A^ of the air,
East, West, North, and South. etc. Regio, onis. Vne region. The four coasts
and quarters of the world Regiones coeli quatuor. Cic. Les quatre quartie^s ou
parties du monde.

Cobyron, or a rack wherein the brotche lies when it is turned at the fler.
Crateuterium, rij. n. g. H. Cobble shoes. Calceamenta resarcire. Cobbler. Cerdo,
onis. Veteramentarius suitor, Suppactor, oris. Sauetier. S. Cobwebbe. Tela
araneae. Aranea, ae. La toil de l'araignee. S. To swepe or strike down
cobwebbes from the door. Deijcere de foribus araneas. Abbatre. S.

The spider makes cobwebbes. Aranea telas exercet. Ovid.

The spider wenueth her web with her foot, or the spider draws out her
threede with her foot. Filum pede deducit aranea. Ovid.

Cob web spynner, or spyder. Aranea, Araneus. m. g. Vne araigne. Cocowe
bird. Coxis, igis. Vide Cuckowe. Cock. Gallus, vel Gallinaceus. m. g. Coq. S.
Cocks bearde, or the watelles that hang down by his cheke. Palea, quod de
mento gallorum rubens velut barba depe^det. La barbe d' un coq. H. Cocks
comb, or ye creste on the heads of birds. Crista,. Creste. H. Cocks spur.
Calcar. Esperon. H. The cocks clapping his wings. Plangor alarm. Agitatio
sonitum ciens. Plausus laterum. Quand les coqs battent leurs ailes lors qu' ils
veulent chanter. S.

Cock crow, a time in the night very late, or toward the morning very early,
when cocks use to crow. Gallicinium. ij. n. g. Le temps de la nuict que les
coqs chantent. S. Et cantus galli, The cock crow. As, I came about the cock
crow, or a little before the cock crewe. Veni sub galli cantum. Deuant que
les coqs chantent. Cocks crow before day. Cantant ante lucem galli. Cic.
Cocks ouercomme, are still or sylent, but the victors, or they that overcome,
crow. Victi galli silere solent, canere victores. Cic. Cocks crawe, or the
crawe of any bird. Ingluuies, Vesicula gutturis. Le poche d'vn oyseau. H.
Cock or teate of a conduite. Papilla, ae. Un petit bout perce en form de
mamelle qu' on met au bout des tuyaux des fontaines, par lequel l' eaue sort
petit a petit. S. Cocks of conduites, by which the water runs forth
dropping or running. Salientes. Cic. Les bouts des tuyaux des fontaines par
lesquels l'eaue sort. S Look Cesterne. Cockatrice or basilisque, a serpente
with a white spotte on his head like a Diadem. He has a very sharp head, a
red mouth, black eyes and body, of a wonderful venomous nature, with
hissing he puts all serpents to flighte, his breath corrupts the air,
destroys fruit, burns herbs, and breaks stones, and with only sight he
kills man, of which Mantuan writes these two verses. Natus in ardenti
Lybiae basiliscus arena.
Vulnerat aspectu, luminibusque necat.
Borne is in burning Lybie sand. the basiliske to ill.
By sight he wounds, and with his eyes each creature can he kill.
In latin he is called Basiliscus. Regulus serpens, Catoblepas, pae. foe. g.
Basilisque. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 21. Cocatris. Pals. Coquatris. S. Cock of heye.
Meta foeni. Un mulon de foin. S. Cockeboate, or a boat to row in ryuers
withal. Alueus, Nauicula, Scapha. Vne nasselle. S. A little cockeboate to
fyshe in, a fisher boat. Oria, Lenunculus. Nasselle a pescher. S.

Cockle, a wede that grows in corn. Githago, Lolium, Zizania. Yuraye,
yuroie, gasse, leuille. H. Cockeney. Acersa, ae. Vineolus, vel la.* Molliculus,
Ineptus, and Blax, Mollis, Delicatus, Lasciuus, qui nescit res discernere, and
qui se inaniter iactat. Homme delicat, Inepte, sot, badault, badaulde. To play
the cockney. Tricari, Ineptire, Nugari, Nugas agere, Delicias facere. Bauer. S.

Codfyshe. Capito, onis m. g. Un testu. S. Coddefishe, which eats no other
fish. Cestreus.* Codde, of a man or beast. Coleus, ei. Scortes, Scortum, ti.
Testis, is. m. g. Couillon. P. Codde or husk of any thing. Siliqua, Valuulus.
Et Siliquor, aris. Ang. To grow in coddes or husks, as beans do. Venir en
escosse ou en gousse. P. Codde of a Ram, made a purse. Suffiscus.* Codrus, a
king of Athens, which in the Peloponesian wars (for the sauegarde of his
country, in a pore weed) willingly gave him self into the hands of his
enemies to be slain: whereby those wars finished, this man lived. 1088. years
before the birth of our Savior Christ. Codrus, dri. m. g. Coffer, or cheste.
Aporetum, Arca, Capsa, Cista, Loculus, Ploxinum, Orca, ae. Scrinium. Coffer. P.
Scrinium. Is properly where Iuels, records of rolls been laid. Coffret,
escrin, Cabinet. H. Coffre, or a little chiste. Loculus, Loculamentum,
Scrinium, Arcula, Cistula, Cistella, Capsula. Coffret. S. Coffer or a chest to
put clothes in. Arca vestiaria. Coffre ou on resarre les habillemens. S Coffer
covered with leather. Riscus, sci. mas. genesis Teren. Un coffre couuert de peaux.
S. Coffine of paper, such as the Grocers put spice in. Cuculus, Inuolucrum
chartaceum, quo institores and propolae pulueres condunt. Un cornet de papier.
H. Coheyre. Coheres, dis. Particulones. plur. Coheritier ou coheritiere. S.
Coyfe. Galerus, ri. Reticulum, li. Retiolum, li.* Coyfe, such as women or
maidens wear on their heads. Capillare, Reticulum, Crinale, Vitta crinalis.
Vne coeffe. S. Coil or choose out of many. Seligo, is, egi. Vide Choose. Coin
or money curraunt. Moneta, Numisma, matis. Nummus, Numus, Pecunia. Monnoye. H.
Coin counterfaited. Nummus adulterinus. Moneta aduterina vel improba. Monnoye
contrefaicte. Coin or plate, containing in value four drams, which was
sixtene pence Sterling. Nummus, mi. Stater, eris. Et Nu^mulus, li. diminut.
Ang. A little piece of coin or money. Coin or make money. Cudo, is, si.
Nummum percutere, Signare, Monetam cudere vel argentum, Ferire pecuniam. Battre
ou frapper money. H. Coyner. Monetarius, Nummarius. Forgeur de monnoye
Monneyeur. H. Coins or corners of a house or wall. Ancones, u^. Versura, ae.
Prothyrides. Les encoigneures. H. Cocker boat. Lynther, Scapha. Look
cockeboat. Cockermouth a place in the Weast part of Scotland. Nouantum,
Chersonesum. Colander or strayner. Colum, li. n. g. Couloir. H. Cold.
Algiditas, Frigus, oris. n. ge. Froid, froidure. S. Vide Coldness. Cold, the
greatest that we suffer, great cold. Algor, ris. m. genesis Et Algus, gi. vel
Algus, huius Algus. Grand froid que nous endurons. S. Et Algificus, ca, cum.
Which causes great could. Qui faict and cause grand froid. S. Cold.
Algidus, a, um. Egelidus, a, um. Frigidus, a, um, Rigidus, a, um. Froid, fort
froid. S. Egelidus. is sometime taken neither for cold nor hoate. Qui n' est
ne froid ne chauld. S. Cold is taken for pacient. Cold, ache, ague, or fever.
Algenia, ae.* Cold air. Frigus, oris. n. g. vt captare frigus. Verg. Cold
weather began to come, or the weather began to wax cold. Frigus impendebat.
Cic. Le froid venoit, Il commencoit a fair froid. S. Cold as yse. Gelidus, a,
um. Fort froid. S. Cold bath. Frigidarius.* Cold, or very cold, ardent
cold. Rigidus, a, um. Praefrigidus, da, um. Perfrigidus, da, dum. Algidus, da,
dum. Fort froid. S. Cold blastes. Mala frigora. Cold causing or making.
Frigorificus, a, um. Refrigeratorius, a, um. Refrigeratif. S. Cold
exceadingly. Praegelidus, a, um. Fort froid. S. tresfroid. Cold or in cooling.
Tepidus, a, um. Tiede. S. Cold of nature. Algiosus, a, um. Alsiosus, sa, sum.
Subject a froid. Cold relented or slacked. Remissius frigus. Caes. Qui n' est
point si aspre. S. Cold somewhat or half cold. Frigidulus, a, um. Catull.
Froidelet. S. Cold storms. Mala frigora, secundum Ovid. Cold, with a shaking
in all parts of the body, as they that have a fever. Quercerus, ra, ru^.
Querquerus, a, um. Vt febris quercera. Gell. Froid auec grand tremblement de
tout le corpse. S. Cold it is. Frigescit, Refrixit, bat. Impers. Cold to be,
or to wax cold. Frigefio, fis. Deferuesco. Estre froid, deuenir froid. Suffer
great coldness, or to be very cold. Algere. Endurer grande froidure. S.

Cold to be fervently. Rigeo, es. Deferueo, es. Auoir grand froid. Se
refroidir. S. Cold to be or patient. Deferueo, es, bui, and vi, ere, idem.
Cold to make. Refrigero, as. Refroidir. S. Et Refrigeratorius, a, um. Ang.
That which does make cold. Cold to wax. Algesco, scis. Refrigesco, scis.
Deferuesco. Se refroider. S. Cold to become. Frigescere, Defrigescere,
Inalgescere. Deuenir froid. S. Cold to wax fervently. Rigesco, scis. To be
very cold. Rigere, Rigescere, Algere. Auoir grand froid. S.

Cold to wax eftsoon. Refrigesco, scis. Se refroidir. S. To tremble or shake
with cold. Horrere, Frigutire. Trembler de froid. S.

Coldely. Frigide, Rigide, Gelide. Froidement. S. Coldely or pacie^tly.
Aequanimiter. Vide pacie^tly. Coldenes. Algus, oris, and us, ui. Rigor, oris.
Frigiditas, it is. Froid, froidure. S. Coldricke * or full of cold. Algosus, a,
um.* Alsiosus, a, um. vt supra. Cold of nature. Frilleux. Cole. Carbo, nis. m.
g. Charbon esteinct ou allume. Cole called a charcole. Anthracia* Anthrax, cis,
and Graece Anthracos. m. genesis Un charbon. Cole called sea cole, stone cole, or
mine cole. Carbo marinus, Lapis niger, Carbo fossilis. Gesnerus in Appendice
Geographica, de Scotis inquit. Et cum rarae hic siluae, ignem faciunt ex lapide
nigro, quem ex terra effodiunt. In French it is called, Charbon de terre ou de
mer. Cole of fire or burning cole. Pruna, ae. Candens carbo, Viuus carbo, and
carbo. Plin. Charbon embrase, and vif. S. Charbon allume, braise. H. Cole,
called small cole. Carbunculus, li. m. ge. Petit Charbon. Cole rake. Rutabulum,
li. n. g. Un fourgon. S. Colworte herb. Crambe, Cyma, Halmyris, Lapsana,
Maguderis.* Brassica, Brassica satiua, vulgo Caulis. Choux ou Choulx. H.
Coliander herb or seade, or rather (as I think.) Coriander. Coliandrum,
Colianum. * Corianum, Coriandrum. Coriandre. S. Colier. Anthraceus.
Carbonarius. Charbonnier. H. Colision, abiection, contraction, or demption of a
vowel as this, the air, for the air, th'aduice, for the advice. Symphonesis,
Synaloepha, Synaloephe, dici potest Compressio, Caesura, vt magnopere,
Summopere, etc. Collation or drynking between dynner and supper. Antecoenium,
ij, collatio. Merenda. Le reciner. H. Collatio^ or gathering together.
Symbolum. Graece Symbolon. Collatio, Collectio, onis. foem. ge. vel Collecta,
ae. foe. g. H. Collays and brothe. Idem. Collar for a hounde or such like.
Collare, is. n. g. Un collier. S. Collar, Jewel or an ouche, which
gentlewomen use to wear about their necks. Monile, lis. Segmentum, ti. n. g.
Un quarquam de damoiselle a met au col. S. Collar or chain of gold or
silver. Torques, and Torquis, Bulla, Collare, Collaria. Collier, quarquam ou
autre bague pendant au col. S. Collar of lether. Lorum, ri. n. genesis Collar of
lether for a dog or mastiue, with bars and nails, but chiefly such as they
have for hounds and grayhoundes. Millum, vel Millus, Numellae. Un collier qu'
on met aux chiens, principalement de chasse. H. To lead hounds in collers or
with leeces. Numellis ductare canes. Mener des chiens par le collier.

That wears a collar or chain. Torquatus, ta, tum. Qui ha un collier ou
quarquam au col. S.

Collars for horses to draw by, called in some countries Barholmes. Tomices,
cum. foe. ge. Collateral bond. Satisacceptio, Satisdatio, Satisdatum. Tamen
vide differentiam. Satisacceptio, onis. f. g. A taking of good assurance for
payment of money, or debt. Caution prinse de quelqu' un. Satisdatio, onis. foe.
ge. The putting in of sufficient sureties. Donnement de caution. Satisdatum,
ti. n. g. A bond with sufficient sureties. Collation of a subsidy. Exactio,
onis. foe. g. Leuement d' argent. Collection or gathering together. Collectio,
onis. foe. g. Collection. S. Collectoure. Collector, oris. Exactor. Receueur.
H. Collectour of a subsidy or task. Decumanus, Telo, nis. Exactor, Telonarius,
ij. Coactor vocari potest, quem collectorem aut receptorem particularem
dicimus. Receueur. H. Et Telonium, ij. Ang. The place where such collection is
made. College. Collegium. ij. n. g. College. S. College or hospital, or place
appointed to devout persons to live solitarely. Canonium. ij. Collicke a
passion bredde in the gutte, called. Colon, Colica. Ileos. Colicus dolor.
Caeliacus morbus, Colique passion. S. Et Colicus, a, um. Et Ileosus, a, um.
Ang. He that is diseased with the colicke. Qui ha la colique passion. Colling
or dalleing. Complexus, us. mas. genesis Embrassement. S. Collusion.
Praeuaricatio, onis. Sycophantia. Collusio, onis. foe. genesis Collusion. Et
Praeuaricor, aris. Et Colludo, dis. Colluder. S. Angl. To do any thing by
collusion. Vide plus in couyn and preuarication. Colne or frank for fowls.
Viuarium, ij. n. genesis Colne made of rods or wyckers. Scirpea.* Color.
Color, ris. Species, ei. Couleur. Color being all one. Vnicolor, ris.
Adiectiuum. Tout d' vne couleur. S. Color chaungeable, or being diverse.
Versiculor, ris. Discolor, ris. Et Versiculorius, vel Discolorius, a, um. Ang.
Chaungeable color or being of diverse or mixed colors. De diuerses couleurs,
ou de couleur changeant. S. Vt maculae versiculores. Plin. Taches de diuerses
couleurs. Color for painters. Pigmentum, ti. Pigmenta, orum. Plin. Les
couleurs des peinctres. Et Pigmentarius. A seller of such colors. Qui
pigmenta vendit. S. Color like unto the flower of Mallows. Molochinus color.
Coulenr de fleur de maune. S. Et Molochinarius, ij. m. g. Ang. He that dies
that color. Qui teint en tell couleur. S. Color made with yellowe oker.
Sandarachinus color. Festus. Color mixed with black, white, grene, and
yelowe^ Oleacum, ci.* Color natural, as wolle never died. Mutinensis color, a
Mutinensibus lanis, ex quibus natiuo color panni fiunt. Color of like.
Concolor, ris. Adiectiuum. De mesme couleur. Color that may be altered or
transuerted, which in manner be all colors except black. Suasum, si. Color
which is first died or stained, or the which is the ground color, whereupon
the chief colors be set. Sublitio, onis. Call. Color maker. Colorificus, ca,
cum. Quod color facit. Call. Color of Rethorike. Articulus, est cum singula
verba interuallis distinguntur caesa oratione, hoc modo: Acrimonia, voce,
vultu, aduersarios perterruisti. Item Rem, famam, pare^tes, amicos, Deum
amisisti. Poetae Asynditon vocant. Vide Fabium. Colored. Coloratus, a, um.
Fucatus, a, um. Farde. S. Colored or cloked falsely. Fucilis, le. Feincte.
Colored diversely. Discolor, ris. Multicolor, ris. Multicolorius, a, um.
Versicolor, ris. Vt supra. Colored lie. Pigmentum, Mendacium fucatum. Colored
like saffron. Crociatus,* Crocinus, a, u^. Crocatus, ta, tum. Croceus, a, um.
De couleur de saffran, Iaulne, saffranne. S. Colored with read. Rubricatus,
a, um. Rubefactus, ta, tum. Rougi. S. Colouren. Coloro, as. Fuco, cas. Imbuo,
is. Infuco, cas. Couleurer. S. Colouren with read. Rubrico, as.* Colte.
Pullus, li. Equulus, Equuleus, Nouellus equus, Pullus equinus. Poulain H. Et
Pullinus, a, um. Ang. Of a colte. Vt Pullini dentes. Dents de laict, que les
poulains iectent. S. Colte evil. Stranguria, ae. f. g. Difficulte de urine. S.
Colte foot herb. Baechion, Farfara, Tussilago, inis. Patte a cheual. Dod.
Colte of wild Asses. Lalisiones, In sing. Lalisio, onis. m. g. Le petit d'vn
asne sauuage, Asnon sauuage. Coltes teeth, which been the whytest teethe
first cast. Pullini dentes. Dens de laict. S. Coltishe. Pullinus, a, um.*
Combat and to fight. Batuere, Confligere, Conflictare, Depugnare, Dimicare,
Praelium edere, Praeliari, Pugnam capessere, Certamen conserere, Contrahere
certamen, Belli fortunam tentare vel experiri. Combatre and battailler. S.
Combat, or a battle. Pugna. Combat, battaille. H. Combat of two men only.
Monomachia, Duellu^, Singular certamen. Combat d'homme a homme. H. Combat or
battle in the field. Praelium, Conflictus and conflictio. Combat, ou
bataille au champ. Comb. Pecten, inis. Peigne. H. Et Pectinatim. Ang. Of the
fashion of a combs teethe. En facon des dents d'vn peigne. S. Comb or to
kembe. Pectino, as. Et Pecto, it is, xui, vel xi. Peigner. Et Como, is, psi. Vt
comere capillos. Combed or kembed. Ornatus, Comatus, Pectinatus, a, um.
Pectitus, a, um. Peigne, poli, and accoustre. Et Pexus, a, um. Peigne. Vt pexus
capillus. Cheueuls peignez. S. Combe^ or to kembe. Commodare capillos.* Look in
Kembe. Combyne or confederate together. Combino, as. coniungo, is. Conglutino,
as. Combiner. Pals. Conio^ndre. S. Combination, or mutual and natural
operation of things according to their kinds, as water does participate with
air in moystnes, with the earth in coldness. etc. Sympathia, ae. foe. g.
Conuenance, Sympathy. S. Combined. Vnitus, a, um. Vide Conjoined. To come.
Afferre pedem. Venio, is. Venir. S.

To come to great honor. In gloriam summam venire. Paruenir a grand honneur. S.

To come in use or custom. In consuetudinem venire. Venir en usage. S.

To come in obedience. In ius ditionemque venire. Venir en obeissance.

To come in presence. Venire in medium. Venir en auant. S.

To come in to the Senate. Committere se, aut venire in Senatum. Venir au
Senate. S.

To come to nothing. Ad nihilum venire. Venir a rien. S.

Come, to chance, or to happen. Obtingere, Incessere, Euenire, Accidere,
Cadere, Aduenire, Co^tingere. Aduenir. S. Come abroad, or into an open place.
Expato, as, aui. Expatior, aris. Se pourmener. S. Come before or first.
Anteuenio, is. Praeuenio, is. Venir en un lieu deuant un autre. S. Come again.
Recipio, is. Redeo, is, iui, vel dij. Reuenio, is. Secedo, is. Reuenir,
Retourner. Come again by and by, or strayghtwaye. Redito, as. Frequentatiuum a
Redeo, Idem valens quod statim and continuo reuertor. Call. Come again
quickly. Recurro, is. Redambulo, as. Recourir. S. Come again to see. Reuiso,
is, ere. Retourner veoir. S Come against. Obuenio, is, ire. Suruenir. S. Come
and go. Proficiscor, eris. Venir, Aller, partir. S. Come back. Secedo, is.
Recedo, is. Se retirir. S. Tirer arriere. S. Come back again. Regrador, eris.
Regredior, eris. Se reculer, Se en retourner. S. Come before or first.
Anticipo, as. Anteuenio. Praeuenio, is. Preuenir, S. Come before in presence.
Prodeo, is. Ex pro and eo, is, d^interposita. Sortir. Come forth or abroad
into sight. In publicum prodire. Cic. Sortir horse, and se monstrer aux gents.
S. Come before that he be looked for, as preventing time. Antexpecto, as.*
Come behind. Sequor, eris. Suyure. S. Vide Follow. Come by chance. Incido, is.
Aduenir, S. Come by fortune. Accido, is. Incido, is. Vt casu accidere. Ovid.
Aduenir par fortune, par cas d'aduenture Come contrary. Contrauenio, is Venir a
l'encontre. S Come down. Descendo, is. Deuenio, is. Descendre. S Come down or
to light from his horse. Descendere equo and ex equo. Liu. Descendre de dessus
son cheual. S. Come forth or forward. Confer gradum, Procedo, is. Prodeo,
is. Prouenio, is. Sortir horse. Ennius dat prodinunt pro prodiunt. He is come.
Venit.

Come hither. Accede, Adesdum. Vien a moy, S. Come hither to me. Recipe te ad
me. Plautus. Viens verse moy, S. Come I am. Veni. Come in. Ingredior, eris.
Introgredior, eris. Subeo, is. Entrer, S. To come into the presence of the
people. Ingredi in conspectum populi. Se monstrer ou peuple, S.

To come in, or enter into the haue^. Subire portum, Enter dedens le port, S.

Come to the haven or port. Portum capere. Paruenir au port. S. Come late or
tarde. Tardo, as.* Come narrow together. Procumbo, is. Vide Lie down. Come
nyghe. Accedo, is. Aduenio, is. Aduenir, S. Come often. Aduentito, as. Ventito,
as Venir souuent Come out. Exeo, is. Egredior, eris. Sortir horse. S. Come out
of debte. Aere alieno exire. Cic. Se aquicter, payer ses debtes. S. Come out of
the water. Ascendere ab aqua. Come privily or unawarely. Aggredior, eris.
Obrepo, is. Assaillir. S. Come quickly. Aduolo, as. Translatum a volatilibus
ad homines. Venir a grand diligence. S. Come suddenly or unlooked for.
Superuenio, is. Suruenir, S. This word came to my ears. Verbum istud ad
aures meas accessit, vel peruenit, Accidit auribus meis, vel ad aures meas
istud verbum. C^ mot icy est paruenu a mes oreilles, S.

Come to age. Aetatem attingere. Deuenir vieil. S. Come to an end. Peruenio,
is. Paruenir. S. Come to be of the male kind, or man side. Masculesco, scis.
Vide Call. Come to communication. Cadere in deliberationem. Cic. Come together.
Coeo, is, iui. Co^uenio, is. Conuenir. Gome to great age. Attingere senectam,
vel Attingere senectutem. Venir a vieillesse. S. Come to knowledge of men.
Enotesco, scis. Tango, gis. Venir en cognoissance des gens. S. Come to land or
coaste as a ship does. Applico, as. Arriuer, ou fair ariuer and aborder.
Come to mysery and wretchedness. Praecipitem abire. Vide Misery. Come to naught
or nothing. Residere in cassum.* Come to pass. Euenio, is, ire, Redire ad
locum vel rem. Aduenir. S. If those things come to pass which I wish or
desire. Si ever iunt quae opto. Si les chooses que ie desire aduiennent. S.

It is come to pass as I would have it. Euenit ex sententia. Il and aduenu
comme ie vouloye.

Come to remembrance. Memini, isti, it. Obuersor, aris. Occurro, is. Subeo,
is. Vide Remember. Come unto. Aduenio, is. Accedo, is. Aduenir. Come hither.
Accede huc. Approach toy d' icy. Come upon. Superuenio, is. Suruenir. S. Come
up young. Pullulo, as. Pulluler. S. Come well to pass. Perfore, Valde futurum
esse. Call. Comen, or come before loking for. Antexspectatus, a, um. * Comen, or
come of a noble auncestrie. Clarus, vel dives auis. Natalium claritudine
co^spicuus. Claris natalibus ortus. Summo loco nobilique genere ortus.
Splendore natalium conspicabilis. Ingenua de stirpe satus. Ingenuis parentibus
ortus. Illustri ortus familia. Nomine and natalibus suoru^ maioru^ clarus. Non
humili loco natus. Natus e gente non obscura, Non obscuro genere prognatus.
Genere haud ignobili gloriosus. Non infimo loco natus. Apprime nobilis. Clarus
genere atque opibus vir. Generoso sanguine cretus. Suis natalibus nihil est
nobilius. Nihil suo genere illustrius. A multa seculorum memoria maioru^ suorum
honos eum illustrauit. Alto loco natus. Est conditionis haud abiectae. Vir
supremae conditionis. Nobilitatis non despiciendae. Nataliu^ luce splendicat.
Vir splendore generis insignis. Comen, or come of a gentle or honest house,
kynred or stock. Dius, a, um. Ingenuatus, a, um. * Bono genere natus. Ne de
gens de bien. Comen, or come to a place by chance. Aduentitius, a, um. Qui
vient d'aduenture* Et Aduentitius, tij. Ang. He that does come by chance. *
Comedy. Comoedia, ae, foe. ge. Fabula, ae. Comedy. H. Comoedia secundum
Graecos est and priuatae ciuilisque fortunae sine periculo vitae comprehensio,
Comoedia secundum Cic. est imitatio vitae, speculum consuetudinis and imago
veritatis. Comedye or interlude. Scena, nae. Et scenicus, a, u^. Ang.
Pertaining to a comedy. Appartenant aux ieux de comedies ou tragedies. Comedye
or interlude done by vile personages. Tabernaria fabula, vel tabernaria
Comoedia. S. Comedye of Greek. Fabula palliata, vt Badius in prae. Terent.
Comedye of Latin. Fabula togata, sieve praetexrata comoedia. Vide Badium.
Comedye part. Actus, us. In comoedia quinque sunt actus, In primo explicatur
argumentum, In secundo fabula agi incipit and ad finem tendere cupit, In tertio
inseritur perturbatio and impedime^tum and desperatio rei conceptae, In quarto
remedium alicuius interuentu affertur, In quinto autem omnia ad optatum finem
perducuntur. Comedye player. Actor vel trix, scenaticus, scenicus. Ioueur des
comedies. S. Comete or blasing star. Crinita stella, Pogonia, vel Pogonias,
ae. Vne sort de Cometie barbu. S. Comette or blasing star having maynes.
Hippeus, i, de quo lege Plin. lib. 2. cap. 25. Et Velcurione^ in Phis. li. 3.
cap. 8. Comfittes. Hyprotrimmata, Bellaria arida, Cuiusmodi hodie saccharata
sunt in vsu. Confitz, Confiture. H. Comfort. Consolatio, Solamen, Solatium.
Spiritus. Confort. S. Consolation. Comfortfull, or full of comfort, or
comfortinge. Consolabundus, a, um. Agens consulatorem, Consulatoris officio
fungens. Call. Comfortable. Consolabilis, le. Vt dolor vix consolabilis.
Uncomfortable grief. Comforten. Beo, as. Consolor, aris. Exhilero, as. Expleo,
es. Focillo, as. Lenio, is. Refocillo, as. Respiro, as. Solor, aris. Consoler,
Recomforter. S. This thing comfortes me. Consolatur me haec res. Plaut.

To comfort with vain and slender hope. Inani and tenui spe consolari. Cic.

To comfort one in misery and calamity. Consolari miseriam and calamitatem
alicuius. Cic.

Trees are comforted. Exhilerantur arbores. Plin.

I will pacify and comfort all my great longing for you, with sending and
receauinge letters. Omne desiderium literis mittendis, accipiendisque leniam.
Cic.

To comfort the sorrowful with present remedies. Lugentem efficacibus remedijs
refocillare. Senec.

I shall be eased or comforted when I see you. Respiraro si te videro. Cic.

To take comfort after fear. A metu respirare. Cic.

To comfort one with friendly words. Dictis vel verbis amicis solari aliquem.
Ovid.

Comforten eftsoon. Refocillo, as. Refoueo, es. Refociller, Recreer. S.
Comforting. Consolatio, Refocillatio. Consolation, Recomfort. S. Comforting
place, or place of comfort. Refrigerij locus. Comfortour. Consolator, vel
Trix, Paracletus, Refocillator, vel Trix. Solator, toris, m. g. Reconforteur,
Co^forteur, Consoleur. S. Coming. Ascessus, us. Aduentus, us. Aduenement. S
Coming back. Regresus, us. Retour. S. Coming forth. Egressio, Egressus, us.
Sortement, Sortie. S. Coming from beyond sea. Transmarinus, a, um. Qui est d'
oultre mer. S. Coming of beasts to watring. Applausus, us. * Coming together
or with other. Congressio, Co^gressus, us. Assemblement. S. Comely. Decens,
it is. Adiectiuum. Conuenant. S. Comely. Deeenter, Decore, Apt, Congruenter,
Conuenienter. Accommodate. Conuenablement. S Command. Admoneo, es. Iubeo, es.
Impero, as. Mando, as. Praecipio, is. Propetro, as. Volo, is. Commander and
ordonner. S. Command or inioyne to do. Iniungere. Commander a fair. To have
all things at commandment. Omnia habere paratissima. Auoir tout a
commandment. S.

To command upon certain and great pennalties. Imperium inhibere, denunciare
vel indicere mulctam nisi decreto pareatur. Fair commandment sur certaines
and grandes peines.

To do contrary to the commandment of his mother. Minuere imperium matris.
Fair contre le commandment de sa mere. S.

Command or call counsel. Indicere consiliu^. Gel. Commander que le conseil
sassemble. etc. Command in the kings name. Edico, cis. nam Edicere est
proprie magistratum. Ordiner and commander. Command men to be ready in
harneis. Ad arma vocare. Cic. Command silence. Silentium imponere. Sueton.
Imposer silence. S. Command a vacation. Indicere iusticiu^. Cic. Commander
les vacations. S. Commanded. Imperatus, Iussus, a, um. A qui on a command. S.
Commander. Imperator, vel Trix. Imperateur, vel Imperatrice. S. Commandment.
Imperium, Iussa, orum. Mandatum, Praeceptum. Commandment. Commandment in the
kings name. Edictio, Edictum, ti. Imperium, Iussum, Praescriptio. Commandment
and ordonnance. S. Commence action. Instituere actionem. Cic. Commencer un
action. Commend or to praise. Commendo, as. Laudo, as. Suborno, as.
Recommander. I commend, or commit to you all his affairs. Commendo tibi
eius omnia negotia. Cic. Ie te recommande tous ces affairs. S.

Commend one with an acception. Laudare cum exceptione. Cic. Ne lover point
entierement. As to say, he is a good man, but. etc. Vir bonus est, at etc. Il
est homme de bien, mais. etc. Commend or have commendation to an other.
Salutem dicere, vel impertiri. Saluto, as. Persalutare, Salutationem facere,
Salutem alicui dicere. Donner salut, Saluter. S. Commendable. Laudabilis,
Summus, a, um. Digne de louange Commendation. Laudatio, Ornamentum, ti.
Louange. S. Commendation or salutation. Salutem in accus. Salutatio, onis. foe.
g. Salutation. S. To send commendations to one by letters. Salutem alicui
scribere and ascribere, Nunciare salutem. Saluer, and se recommander a aucun
par lettres. S.

I would you should have me commended to Dionyse. Dionysium velim saluere
iubeas, Dionysio verbis meis salutem adscribito. Salve Denis de par moy, and de
ma part. S.

He brought me your commendations. Salutem mihi nunciauit tuis verbis. Il m' a
salve de par toy.

Commended or praised to be. Laudor, aris. Reportare laudem, Laudem far,
Laudem inuenire, Laudibus affici, Ornari laud, Gloriam capere. Estre love. S.
Commended or saluted to be. Salueo, es, ere. Plaut. Salueo dixit pro saluus and
sanus sum. Et Cicero Saluebis (in futuro) dixit ad Atticum lib. 6. vt Saluebis
a Cicerone meo, id est Cicero meus te salutat. My son Cicero commendes him,
or has him commended to you. Cicero mon filz te salve. Et saluebis a tuo
Cornelio. You be commended from your friend Cornelius, or else your friend
Cornelius commends him unto you, or has him commended. etc. Commended or
praised. Laudatus, a, um. Love. S. Commended or saluted. Salutatus, a, um.
Comme^t or a gloss. Commentarius, ij. Comme^tarium, ij. Commentum, ti. Glossa,
ae. Hypomnema, it is. Scholium, ij. n. genesis Comment ou Commenttaire. S. Gloss and
exposition. S. Comment, or to gloss. Commentor, aris.* Commentary, a book of
remembrance. Itinerarium. Vide Book. Comme^tour, or a gloser. Glossematicus*
Glossographus. i. m. g. Commissary. Delegatus, Commissarius. Un Commissaire. S.
Commissaries clarke. Actuarius, Scriba. ae, m. g. Commission. Mandatum, ti.
Curatio, onis. Delegatio, onis. Epistalma. Commission. Commiss^on of Oyer and
terminer. Iudicium datum. Of this read the Abridgement of the statutes in the
title Commission. etc. Commission to grant. Mandatum dare. Vide Charge.
Commission to grant of Oyer and terminer. Iudicium dare. This is where
commission is given both to hear and also to determine matters in
controversy. Commissioner appointed by the Magistrate to hear and judge a
matter. Recuperator, Astynomus, Regionum vrbis praefectus. Le commissaire done
par le Magistrate pour cognoistre and iuger d'vne cause. Commissioner appointed
to enquere of crimes and enormities perpetrated against the law. Quaesitor,
Rem querere iussus, Rebus quaerendis designatus. Celuy qui est commis pour
informer. S. Commissioner or officer among other, seven appointed in
commission. Septemuir. And other commissioners after their number, as Triumuir.
etc. And the office of such commissioner is called Septemuiratus, and
Triu^uiratus. etc. They were offices in Rome. etc. Commissioners assigned in
some private cause or matter. Recuperatores. Commit. Commereo, es. Committo,
is. Lego, as. Mando, as. Permitto, is. Trado, is. Commettre. S. Mando, as. Is
properly referred to the memory. Vt mandare memoriae aliquid, To commit a
thing to memory. Mettre ensa memoire. Commit an offense. Commerere and
peccare. Co^mettre quelque grande fault. S. Commit or to remitte a thing to
ones discretion. Arbitrio alicuius aliquid committere. Remettre a sa discretion
and volunte. S. Commit or to give one any charge. Legare negotium alicu^. I
uy bailler quelque charge. S. Causam committere vel mandare alicui. idem.
Commit him self to one. Permittere se fidei, vel in fidem and potestatem
alicuius. Se render a aucun. Commit or to send to prison. In custodiam
tradere. Mettre en prison. Commit the charge to one. Prouicia^ alicui
tradere. Bailler charge. S. Commit, or to give in charge. Commendo, as, are.
Committre donner en charge. S. Vt. Plautus Co^mendare aliquid alicui. To
commit to one, or to give him the charge of any thing. Donner charge de
quelque chose. S. Commit authority to an other, as to supply his rowme.
Subdelego, as. Surrogo, as. Subrogo, as. Surroger. S. Subrogare collegam Consul
dicebatur. Cic. Commit, betake, or deliver a thing to an others charge, or to
be kept in safety. Credo, is. Transmitto, it is. Vt credere alicui argentum.
Plautus. Bailler en guard. Credere sua consilia alicui. Ter. To commit all
ones counsel to one. Commit determination of a matter to other. Delego, as.
And Delegatus, Is he that has such commission. Commit a thing to one, or to
assign some business to him. Demandare aliquid alicui, Delegare aliquem
alicui negotio, Delegare officium alicui, Designare, Constituere. Commettre
quelque chose a aucun. Commit lechery with an harlot. Lenocinor, aris.
Prostituo, is. Prosto, as. Scortor, aris. Vide Lechery Commit a mischeuous
act. Patrare facinus. In se aliquid committere, Facinus ^onficere, Scelus
edere, Producere, vel admittere. Commettre quelque vilain ou meschant cas. S.
Committed or betaken. Commissus, a, u^. Commis. S. Wars committed to ones
charge. B^lla commissa alicui. Cic. Commisses, baillees en charge. S.

Committed to kinsfolk. Ad agnatos, and gentiles deductus. Committimus. Ius
forensium codicillorum, Ius fori eximium, Ius codicillare. Un committimus. S.
Commodious, apt, and agreeable. Commodus, da, dum. Aptus, ta, tum. Commode,
apt and conuenable. S. Commodity. Commoditas, Commodum, di. Commodite. S.
Common. Catholicus, a, um. Communis, ne. Publicus, a, um. Vulgaris, re.
Vulgatus, ta, tum. Commun. S. Common bayne. Balnea. plur. Et Balneraria. All
things belonging thereunto. Vide Bayne. Common brothell whore, or a common
harlot. idem. Vide Brothell, Hoore. etc. Common, or to talk. Sermocinor, aris.
Parler, deviser. S. Common and to talk together. Confabulari, Sermonem cum
aliquo confer, Colloqui, Sermones serere. Parler and deviser ensemble. S.
Commonely. Commune, Communiter, Public, Triuialiter, Vulgo, Vulgariter.
Communement. S. Commonly known or used. Vulgatus, a, um. Commune. S. Commotion
of people. Tumultuatio, onis. Tumultus, us. Esmeute, bruit. S. Et Tumultuosus,
a, u^. Ang. Full of commotion or sedition. Plein de bruit and de trouble. S. Et
Tumultuose with commotion. Auec esmeute. S. Commotion to cause or make.
Miscere, vel parare tumultum. Communaltie. Commune, nis. n. g. Communis
respublica, Communitas. Sodalitium, Sodalitas, tatis, foe. g. Communaulte.
Commune brothelhouse. Publicum prostibulum. Vide Brothelhouse and stews.
Commune field. Compascuus ager. Cic. Un pasturage commun. Commune gamemaker.
Agonothera.* Commune harlot. Proseda, Prostibula, Prostibulum, Lupa, Meritrix,
Scortum, Diabolare scortu^, Quadrantaria. Putain paillardi. H. Commune haunters
or resorters to a place. Aduentores. * Commune people. Populus, Popularis,
Vulgus. Lacommune peuple. Commune plays and gaye sightes, as be at London on
midsomer night. Munera, rum, Pegmata, tum.* Commune weal or wealth. Bonum
publicum, res publica. Respublica. L'estat commun, la republique, la chose
public. S. Commune w^e^ he which is feeble and weak. Castrata res publica.
Mutations of the commune wealth. Conuersiones rerumpublicarum. Mutations de la
chose public.

Commune harlot to be. Prostituo, uis, ui. S'abbandonner a pallardise,
Prostituer. Commune to be in the act of lechery like beasts. Prosto, as.
Idem. Commume to make. Vulgo, as. Diuulguer. S. To make a thing commune, or to
vulgate any thing. In publicum rem aliquam inducere, Diuulgare rem aliqua^, In
propatulu^ producere, In vulgus adducere, Publicare, Vide publishe.

Communication. Alloquium, Collocutio, Colloquium, Sermo, Sermocinatio.
Parliament. S. Communication, or contemplative talking with God. Soliloquium,
ij. Quod per nos contempla^do loqui solemus. Communication of shepeherdes
together. Aegloga, ae. foe. genesis Communication or talking of beasts, birds,
or trees. Apologus, Apologia. Vide Fable. Communication without filthy talk or
rybaldry. Praetextatus sermo. Parolle chaste, and sans aucune impudicite. S. To
have familiar co^municatio^. Sociare sermonem, Inire colloquium.

Communicate any thing with other. Communico, as. Copiam facere. Agere cum
aliquo. Communiquer. S. Communion or mutual perticipation, it is also the
Lords supper. Communio, onis. Synaxis, Communio sacrosancta. Communion* H.
Commutation, or form of byinge and sellinge. Commercium, ij. n. g. Vide
Bargain and bying. Compacte. Premo, is. Compingo, is, pegi. Serrer. S. Compact
man or strong made. Strigo, onis.* Compacted. Pressus, a, um. Compactus, ta,
tum. Serre. S. Company or felloweshippe. Collegium, Consortium, Societas,
Sodalitas, Sodalitium. Company, societe. S. Company or multitude of people.
Agmen, Caterua, Coetus, Multitudo, Numerus. Company and multitude. S. Et
Cateruarij. Ang. They that do assemble in company. Et Cateruatim, By companies
or multitudes, or by bands. Par bands. Company by company, or by heaps, or
by a great multitude. Cateruatim. Starlinges are said to fly by companies or
flocks. Cateruatim volare dicu^tur sturni. Plin. Company or felloweship of
bachilers, or young me^. Societas, vel Conuentus iuuenum. Company of dauncers or
players. Chorus, ri. m. g. L'assemble de gens que dansent. Company of horsemen
in battle containing. 40. soldiers. Pyrgus, gi. m. g. Company of horsemen
containing.xxx. or as some affirm.xxxii. Turma, mae. foe. g. Et Turmatim
Aduerbium, By bands. Company of men of war. Cohors, it is. Exercitus, tus. Vne
band de gensdarmes. S. Company or feloweship to keep. Socio, as. Accompaigner.
S. Company to keep with a woman dissolutely, or viciously. Scortor, aris.
Subagito, as, vt Subagitare meritriculam. Plaut. Paillarder. S. Company to keep
often with a woman. Subijcito, as. freq. Company gathered to a banquet or
feast. Syssitia, ae, foe. genesis Call. Companion. Assectator. Comes, it is.
Contubernalis, Socius, Sodalis. Comes in itinere, Socius in periculo, Collega
in officio, Consors in praemia, Sodalis in mensa. Comes est aliquando nomen
claritatis, and honoris. Companion to an act. Consors, it is. Adiectiuum.*
Companion at banqueting or drinking. Conuiuio, onis. Sodalis, is. m. g.
Compaignon de table a boire and a manger, and a iouer. S. Companion or fellow
in office. Collega, ae. m. ge. Compaignon en magistrate ou office. S. Companion
in service. Conseruus, and va. Compaignon de seruage. S. Companion in wars.
Commilito, onis, m. genesis Compaignon de guerre, Compaignon d'armes. S. Compare.
or to make comparison. Assimulo, as. Comparo, as. Compono, is. Aequiparo, as.
Confero, rs. Fair comparison. S. Compare the one to the other, for to see the
likeness or difference. Componere alterum cum altero. Confer, Committere,
Componere, and altrinsecus coram sistere. Confronter l'vn a l'autre, pour en
veoir la comparaison. S. Comparison. Aequiparatio, Co^paratio, Collatio,
Parabola. Comparaison. S. Compass or circle* Cyrus, Orbis, bis, m. g. Circle.
Compass or circ^^^* Ambitus, Periegesis, Circuitus. Un circuit. Compass of
the eye. Eon.* Iris, Circulus pupillam ambiens. H. Compass of the firmament or
air, which encloseth all thing. Caelum, li. n. ge. Compass of the year.
Anniuersalis, le. Om. genesis Anni circulus. Call. Compass an instrument.
Circinus, ni. Instrumentu^ fabrile, quo circulos ducunt. Compass. H. Compass or
nedle of a ship to know the coasts. Versoria, ae. foe. genesis Compass about.
Ambigo, is. Ambio, is. Circulo. as. Circumeo, is. vel Circueo. is. Circuo, is.
Circino, as, are. Circumuenio, is. Gyro, as. Enuironner, Circuir. S. Compass
or gyrde about. Cingo, is. Succingo, is. Ceindre, Enuironner, Entourer. S.
Compass or make a round circle. Circino, as. Compasser. S. Compass or
enclose about with a bulwark, dale, trenche, or vale. Vallo, as. Obuallo, as.
Fortifier. S Compass or enclose about with hedges. Sepibus stipare. Sepio, is,
iui, vel sepsi fepitum vel septu^, sepire. Enuironner, Clorre de hayes. S.
Compass or close about with a wall. Obmuro, as.* Cingere muris. Enclorre de
murs. S. Compass or to wale a town or city round about. Vrbem moenibus
cingere, vel vrbem muris cingere. Enclorre de murs ou de murailles. S.
Compassed. Ambitus, a, um. Vallatus, a, um. Cinctus, ta, tum. Circumcessus, sa,
sum. Circundatus, ta, tum. Enuironne. S. Compassed or g^rte with a girdle or
like thing. Succinctus, a, um. Ceinct. S. Compassed four square. Quadratus,
ta, tu^. Quarre Compassed or made round. Circinatus, a, um. Compassed round
about. Stipatus, a, um. Entoure Enuironne. S. Compassed with bulwark, or other
fence. Vallatus, a, um. Idem. Compassed with hedges. Septus, a, um. Enuironne
de hayes. S, Compassed or it is enuironned about with the sea. Circumfunditur
mari. Il est enuironne de la mer. S. Compassing. Circundatio, Circunscriptio
terrae, Stipatio. Enuironnement. S. Compassion or pity. Miseratio,
Misericordia, Co^miseratio. Compassion and pity qu' on ha d' aucun. S. That
has pity and compassion of ones myserie. Misericors, dis. Om. genesis Qui ha
pity and compassion de la misere d' aucun. S. Vide Pity.

Compel. Coerceo, es. Cogo, is, egi. Compello, is. Perpello, is. Contraindre.
Compelle or to constrayne one to leave his anger. Coercere aliquem finire iras.
Le contraindre de sappaiser. S. Compelle or cause to weep. Cogere ad lachrymas.
Plaut. Compelle by force and threatninges. Cogere vi and minis. Cic. Compelle
or to cause one to hang him self. Co^pellere aliquem ad laqueum. Le
contraindre de se pendre. S. Compelle enemies to raise their camp. Castris
exuere hostem. Luy fair quicter son camp. S. Compelle men as well private as
other, to live ordinatly, or after their profession. Redigere in ordinem, vel
religionem. Compelle one by manicles and like torments to confess a thing.
Querere rem tormentis, vel per tormenta. Cic. Compelle one to confess
something by rackinge him, or by other torments. Aliquem cogere tormentis
quippiam confiteri. Cic. Compelle the Seller to receive his wares again.
Redhibeo, es.* Compelled. Adactus, a, um. Coactus, Coercitus, a, um. Compulsus,
a, um. Contrainct. S. Compendious or brief. Succinctus, a, um. Compe^diarius,
a, um. Court and abbrige. S. Compendious or short exposition. Scholium, ij. n.
genesis Vne brieue exposition. S. Compendious or short oration. Sermo
concinnaticius, Oration succincta. Compendious or short form of speaking or
writing. Compendium. ij. n. ge. To show a brief and compendious method of
teaching. Breuia discendi compendia monstrare. Quint. Briefue method. S.

Compendious way to learn any science. Methodus, di, foe. genesis Cicero artem
and rationem vocat: and alibi breue dicendi compendium vertit, quasi breuem
viam, qua quam celerrime ad peritiam euadimus. Compe^diously, briefly, or
succintly. Collecte, Collectim, Numero, Succincte, Summate, Summatim.
Sommairement. S. Compendiously or aptly gathered together. Concinnatitius, a,
um. Quod breuiter collectum apteque situm est. Call. Complain. Conqueror, eris,
stus sum. Expostulo, as. Postulo, as. Vnde Tor, Trix. tio. Se plaindre ou
complaindre. Complain of some thing. Conquiri aliquid. Se plaindre de quelque
chose. S. All nations complain of our covetousness and injuries. Omnia iam
regna de nostris cupiditatibus and iniurijs expostulant. Cic.

Complain or rather to take one up sharply that has done an injury.
Expostulare iniuriam cum aliquo. Terent. Complain or to show his grief.
Quiritari, Queri, Conqueri, Iacere ore querelas. Se complaindre. Complain.
Causificor, aris. Et Causor, aris. idem. Complain wrongfully and falsely.
Sycophantias struere, Sycophantisso, as. Sycophantor, aris. Faulsement accuser
ou tromper. S. Complayner. Expostulator, oris, m. g. vel Expostulatrix.
Co^plaignant. S. Complayner or that does nothing but complain. Querulus, la,
lum. Qui ne fait que se complaindre. S. Complayner which does falsely accuse.
Sycophanta, ae. m. g. Faulx accusateur. Complainte. Expostulatio, Querela,
Querimonia, Questus, Co^questus, tus. Co^questio, onis, foe. g. Complaincte.
Complainte false and surmised. Sycophantia. f. g. Faulse accusation. S.
Complainte secretly made. Delatio, onis. foe. genesis Encusement, Accusation. S.
Complaint maker, complaynaunt, or complayner. Expostulator, vel Trix.
Querimoniarius. vt supra. Complaintfull, or full of complaints. Querulus, a,
um. Qui ne fait que se complaindre. S. Complaintfull woman, which complayneth
to her gossyps on her husband. Mempsigamus, Querula, Garula, Queribunda.
Complaints to hear and determine. Postulationibus vacare. Ouyr and
determiner. Complexion. Constitutio corporis, Crassis Graece. Complexion. S.
Complexion good or well disposed. Aequalis temperies. Vne complexion bien
disposee. S. Complexion of one. Natura and mores alicuius. La complexion d'
aucun. S. It is his complexion. Ita natus est. C' est sa complexion. S.

Complexion strong. Corporis firma constitutio. Forte complexion. S.
Complexioned well, a body in good temperature. Corpus been constitutum. Corpse
bien complexione. S. Complice or a companion in mischief. Socius flagitiorum
and rapinarum. Complice. S Accomplices in any ill deed. Conscij and affines
criminis. Accomplices en quelque mesfaict. S. You are both accomplices or
companions in this fact, or thou art partaker of his offense. Est tibi societas
eius criminis cu^ illo. Vous estes accomplices. S

Compose or to make a book. Libru^ scribere, Co^ponere. Composer quelque
liver. S. Compose and to write verse. Condere carmen, Pangere carmen,
Componere, Contexere, Fingere. Composer and escrire des verse. S. Compose as
printers do, Componere, Colligere atque literas in ordinem redigere ad
exemplaris veritatem. Composer. Composed of two natures. Ex duabus naturis
co^flatus vel constitutus. Faict and compose des deux natures. S. Composed ill.
Inconditus, ta, tum. Mal compose and basti. Composer or maker. Compositor,
toris. m. g. Qui compose and assemble quelque chose. S. Composition or making
of a thing. Compositio, Compositura, foe. g. Composition and confection.
Composition or agreament. Compositio, Decisio. Composition and accord. S.
Composition to make. Compono, is. Composer. S. Compostella, a city in Galacia.
Ianasum, nunc Compostella, Flauium Brigantium. Ptol. Compostelle, ou Saint
Jacques en Compostelle. S. Comprehend all in one book. Colligare vno libro
omnia, Comprehendere. Comprendre, and mettre tout en un liver. S. Comprehend.
Contracto, as. Comprehendo, is. Precipio, is. Capio, pis. Comprendre. S.
Comprehended. Comprehensus, sa, sum. Comprins. S. Comprehensible.
Comprehensibilis, le. Adiect. Qu'^n peult comprendre. S. Understanding and
comprehending. Comprehensio, onis. foe. genesis Intelligence and apprehension. S.

Compte. Computare, Imputare, Reputare, Numerare, Numerum refer, Rationem
subducere, Rationem and calculum ponere. Compter. S. Compte his host.
Dinumerare exercitum. Compter and nombrer son ost. S. Compte together. Confer
rations. Compter ensemble. Compte, or an account. Subductio, Computatio,
Ratio. Un compte. S. Compting table. Mensa, Trapeza, Telonium. Comptoir. etc.
Comptroll. Inspicio, is. Obseruo, as. Contreroller. S. Comptroller.
Antigraphareus, Antigrapheus, Exactor, Inspector, Officij exactor, Custos,
Obseruator, Adnotator. Contrerolleur. S. Comptroller or ouerseer of workmen.
Antistitor, oris. Qui ha la charge de quelque besongne ou affair.
Comptrolement. Inspectio, onis. Obseruatio, onis. foe. g. Inspection. S.
Compulsion. Adactio, onis. Angaria, Coertio, Compulsio, onis. foe. g.
Contraincte. S. Without compulsion, of his own will. Sponte, Sua spo^te,
Voluntate, Vt fert natura, Suapte, vel Suapte natura, Vltro. Sans constraincte.

Compunction or remorce of conscience. Morsus and contractiunculae animi.
Synteresis, Nam a (...) quod est conseruo, deriuatur. Vnde ea pars animae, quae
vitijs aduersatur, and sese semper immaculatam cupit a vitio conseruare, and
perpetrata male continuo arguit, Synteresis dicitur. Compunction ou remors de
conscience. S. Conapie or canappie for a bed. Conopeum. Conceile. Consilium
premere, veltenere, Pallio, as. Couurir, Cacher. S. Conceile trougthe.
Veritate^ palliare, vel premere. Cacher. etc. Conceyled. Palliatus, a, um.
Suppressus, a, um. Vide Hyde and hydden. Conceitfull is he that stands in
his own conceit. Conscius, a, um.* Conceive. Concipio, is. Conceuoir. S.
Conceive in mind. Animo imbibere, Concipere animo. Conceuoir en son esprit. S.
Conceived. Conceptus, a, um. Ce qui est conceu. S. Conception. Conceptio,
Conceptus, us. Conception. S. Conception after conception, conception after an
other. Superfoetatio, onis. f. g. Concern. Concerno, is. It concerns.
Pertinet, bat. Il appartient. S. Conclude. Clausulam imponere, Compono, is,
Co^cludo, is. Co^ferre in pauca. Dico, is. Finio, is, iui. Infero, rs. Perfero,
rs. Pertexo, is. Conclure. S. Conclude or end strife. Componere iurgia.
Conclude wars. Bellum componere. Mettre fin a quelque guerre. S. Concluded.
Finitus, a, um. Compositus, Obitus, a, um. Vide Ended. Concluded. Confectus, a,
um. Mis au fin. S. Conclusion. Conclusio, Epilogus, Coronis, idis, foe. g.
Conclusion. S. Conclusion of an oration. Peroratio, onis. foe. gen La
Conclusion d' vne oraison. S. Conclusions short. Conclusiones praecisae.
Conclusions courts. S. A could conclusion. Epilogus frigidus. Vne froide
conclusion. S.

Conclusion in speaking or writing. Recapitulatio, onis. Vide Recapitulation.
Conclusiuely, or in conclusion. Summate, Summat^. En brief. S. Concord or
agreement. Concordia, Homonoea, Vnanimitas, Vnio, nis. Accord. Est Homonoea,
nomen cuiusdem mulieris Latin interpretatur Concordia. To bring to peace and
concord. Ad concordia^ adducere, In gratiam redigere, vel in concordia^, Pacem
alicui componere, Coagme^tare pacem. Mettre d'accord. S.

I put great hope of victory in your concord. In vestra concordia spem maximam
pono victoriae. Ex vestra concordia victoriam spero, Vestra concordia victoriae
mihi spem affert. Vt spero, pro mea quidem spe, quantum quidem spero, nisi me
spes fallit, vt animus meus auguratur, que^admodum ipse mihi pollicior
victoriam parier, afferet. Vestrae concordiae fructus, nisi mea spes infirma
prorsus est, erit victoria.

Concord in music or tune. Symphonia, Sympsalma, Harmonia. Accord de sons.
S. Concord in music of five tunes and two half tunes. Diapason. Vide
Macrob. in Some. Scip. lib. 2. cap. 1. Concord in music of two tunes and a
half. Diatesseron. Vide Macrob. vt supra. Concord or to agree. Concordo, as.
Vnio, is. Accorder. S. Concord or to agree in music or tune. Symphonio, as.*
Concorporate or make one thing of diverse. Concorporo, as. Encorporer. S.
Concourse, or coming, or running of people from place to place. Concursatio,
Concursio, Concursus, us. Courement ^a and la. Concubine. Amica, ae. Amicula,
Diminut. Ancuba, ae. and Concubina, Henestiore voce qua^ Amica, quod illa extra
criminis notam habebatur: haec meretricio more quaestum corpore faciebat.
Co^cubine. Pellace, is. Pellax, cis. Pellex, cis, foe. g. Concubine of a married
man. Pellex, Succuba, Pallaca. Concubine d'vn homme marie. H. Concupiscence or
carnal desire. Epithymia. Concupiscentia. Conc^piscence. S. Condemnation.
Damnatio, Condemnatio, onis. foe. g. Condemnation. S. Conde^natio^ upon an
exige^t. Proscriptio, onis. foe. g. Condemn. Condemno, as. Damno, as. Iudico,
as. Theta infigere. Condamner. S. To condemn him self. Paercludere sibi
aditu^ misericordiae iudicu^. Se priuer dela misericorde des iuges.

Condemned. Condemnatus, damnatus. Condamne. S Condemned to death. Addictus, a,
um. Capite da^natus, Iudicatus, a, um. Proscriptus, a, um. Vide Judged.
Condemned being absent, and not suffered to speak, or without answer making.
Damnatus causa indicta, Indemnatus, a, um. Damnari causa indicta, Inauditum
damnari. Estre condamne sans auoyr este ouy en ses defenses. S. Condemned in an
action of debt. Debiti iudicatus. Condemned to be of a crime capital. Damnari
rei capitalis. Estre condamne d'vn crime capital. Taken for a condemned
person. Pro damnato esse. Estre tenu pour condamne.

Condemned to be. Reus peragi, Condemnari, Da^nari. Estre condamne. Condescende
and agree to, or with others. Cum alijs, sieve ad aliorum voluntatem descendere.
Co^descendr^. S. Condescende and to agree to some thing. Acclinare.
Condescendre and s'accorder a quelque chose. S. Condescende and to agree to
ones opinion. Accedere alicui. Condescendre a l' opinion d' aucun. S. The
Counsel or Senate has condescendid, agreed or granted to thy petion.
Concessit Senatus petitioni tuae. S.

I condescended, or agreed to this with all my heart. Huc declinabam nec
inuitus. S.

Condition, effect, or purporte of a matter. Conditio, Effectus, Forma, Mos,
Status, Tenor, Vis. Condition. S. To agree to any condition that one will.
Cuilibet conditioni obtemperare. S'accorder a quelque condition qu'on vouldra.
S.

Against his condition or natural disposition. Aduersus ingenium suum. Contra
sa condition. S.

Change conditions. Mutare, Immutare mores, Decedere de more suo. Changer de
conditions. S

Under or upon condition. Sub condition, His legibus, Istac lege, Pactis
legibus. Soubs ou par tell condition. S.

Condition, state, or quality. Res, Status, tus. m. ge. Conditional
possession, or state. Possessio fiduciaria. Conditional. Conditionalis, le.
Vlp. Conditionel, and conditionelle. S. Conditionally. Conditionaliter. Vlp.
Conditionalement. Conducte. Duco, is. Conduco, is. Conduere. S. Conducte, or
conducting of men. Conductio, Ductus, tus. Ducatus, tus. Deductio, Auspicium.
Conduicte. S. Conducter, brynger or chief guide. Dux, Auspex, Ductor, oris. m.
g. Conducteur, ou conduiseur. S. Conducted. Ductus, a, um. Mean, duict.
Confection. Confectio, onis. foe. g. Confection made with quinces and honey.
Diacytoniten, Diacydonium. Confederate. Combino, as. Foedero, as. Socio, as. S'
allier. S. Co^federated or alied together by oath or promise. Adiuratus,
Foederatus, Sociatus, a, um. Foedere iuncti, Foederati. Confederez. S.
Confer. Confero, fers, tuli, far. Fair comparison. Conferer. S. Confer
and to talk together. Confer, Colloqui. Plaut. Conferer ensenble,
parlementer. S. Confer together. Confer inter se. Conferer ensemble. S.
Confer a benefit. Gratificor, aris. Fair plaisur a aucun. S. Conferred.
Collatus, a, um. Conferee. S. Conferred together. Collatitius, a, um.
Conferring together. Collatio, onis. Comparatio, onis. f. g. Comparaison. S.
Confess. Confiteor, ris. Fateor, eris. Prae me fero. Prae te fero, Prae se
fero, Profiteor. Confesser. S. Confess or to grant the debte. Agnoscere
debitum. Confesser la debte. S. Confess a fault or or offense. Obstringere se
sceleri. Crimen aliquod suscipere. Confesser a voir co^mis quelque crime. S.
Confessed. Confessus, a, um. Confess. S. Confession. Confessio, onis. f. g.
Confession. S. Confession openly made. Professio, onis. f. g. Profession
Confessor. Confessor, oris. Qui confess. S. Confidence, or trust.
Confidentia, Fides, Confisio, onis. Fiducia, ae. f. g. Fiance and assurance,
confiance. Confidence to have. Fidem habere. Confier. S. Confine, or bordoure.
Confinium, ij. n. g. Les fins des terres. S. Confirmation. Ratificatio,
Confirmatio, onis. Confirmation. S. Confirm. Confirmo, as. Ratifico, cas.
Rato, as. Ratum habere, Roboro, as. Corroboro, as. Fidem addere, Spem
affirmare. Confirmer. S. Confirmed. Ratus, a, u^. Co^firmatus, ta, tu^.
Confirm. S Co^fiscate, or to forfaite a ma^s goods. Publico, as. Alicuius
bona in publicum addicere, In publicu^ bona redigere, Public bona possidere,
Co^mittere, Confiscare. Confisquer les biens d'aucun. Confiscated, or forfaited
goods. Bona caduca, vel publica. Biens appliquez au Roy S. Confiscation.
Commissum, si. neut. ge. Confiscatio, onis. f. g. Confiscation. S.
Confiscation, or publication of goods forfayted. Publicatio, onis. f. g.
Sectio, onis. f. g. Confiscation, and publication des biens d'aucun ou de
plusieurs. S. It is also the goods confiscate. Les biens confisquez and
public. S. Sectio, publicatio. Conflict, or a bickering. Certamen, nis. n. g.
Combat. Conform him self, and agree to ones mind. Co^formare le ad alicuius
voluntatem. Se conformer and accorder a aucun. S. and Conformatio, onis. foe.
g. Conformation. Conformation. S. Comfortable, or of a co^formitie. Co^formis,
me. o^. g. Confound. Confundo, is. Confundre, mesler ensemble, Confou^de
together. Misceo, es, scui. Mesler ensemble. Confounded. Confusus, sa, sum.
Confus, mesle. S. Confused, or mixed together. Promiscuus, a, u^. Idem.
Confusion and trouble, or misordre. Confusio, onis. f, g. Confusion and trouble
ou desordre. S. Confuse, which is not divided, nor separated. Indistinctus,
Confusus, Commistus. Confus, qui n'est point devise ne separe. S. Co^fusedly.
Promiscue, Indisti^cte, Co^fuse. Co^fuseme^t To speak confusedly. Confuse
loqui. Parler confusement. S.

Confute. Confuto, as. Refuto, tas. Confuter. S. Confutation, or disprouing.
Confutatio. onis. f. g. Congeale, or wax thick. Congelo, as. Coagulo, as.
Congeler. S. Congealed to be. Congelari, Concrescere, Coagulari. Estre congele.
S. Congealed. Concretus, Congelatus, a, um. Gele. S. Congelation. Congelatio,
Concretio, Concretus, tus. Coagulatio. Congelation. S. Conglutinate.
Conglutino, as. Conglutiner. Conglutinated. Concretus, a, um. Conglutinatus, a,
um. Congele. S. Conglutination, or joining together. Conglutinatio, onis. f. g.
Conglutination. S. Congre, a fish. Conger, Congrus, ri. m. g. Congre. S.
Congregation, or assemble. Concio, onis. Congregatio, onis. f. g. Assemble de
peuple. Congregate, or to gather to gether. Congrego, as, are. Congreger. S.
Congregated. Congregatus, ta, tum. Congrege. S. Congregation house, or place,
as is the parliament house. Comitiu^, tij. n. g. Un lieu ou le peuples'
assemble pour consulter. S. Congruence. Conuenientia, ae. foe. g. Conuenance.
S. Congruent. Congruens, it is. part. Accordant. S. Conjecture. Coniectura, ae.
Diuinatio, Praesagium, coniectatio, onis. f. g. Conjecture. S. Conjecture, or
to trow. Praesumere animo, Coniecturare, Conijcere, Co^iectura^ facere.
Coniecturer. As far as I conjecture. Qua^tum animi mei coniectura colligere
possum, Qua^tum conijcio, Quantum suspicor.

A false conjecture. Fallax coniectura.

Coniectured, or which is gathered by conjecture. Coniecturalis, le. Qu'on
scait par coniecteures. S. Conioyne. Vnio, is. Coagmentare, Coniungere,
Glutinare, Conglutinare, Fibulare, Intexere, Sociare, Suere, Connectere.
Conioindre. S. Conjoined. Vnitus, a, u^. Co^iunctus, ta, tu^. Conioinct.
Conioyning. Coniunctio, Conglutinatio, Cohaerentia, Copulatio, Connexio.
Conionction. S. Coniunctly, or together. Coniunctim, Iugiter, Simul, Copulate.
Coniuncte. Conionctement. S. Conjure, or to call spirits. Adiurare,
Exorcizare. Coniurer. S. Coniuration. Coniuratio, Exorcismus. Coniuration.
Coniurer. Adiurator, Exorcista. ae. m. g. Coniurateur. Conye. Cuniculus, li. m.
g. Cunin. H. Counil. S. Conigere, or conygarth, or clapper for conies.
Viuarium, ij. Cunicularium, ij. n. g. Garenne. S. To make a conigere, or
cunigarthe. Instituere cunicularium. Fair vne garenne. S.

Conning, knowledge, or science. Peritia, Scientia, Solertia. Science. Pals.
Vide Knowledge. Conning. Expertus, Peritus, Solers, it is. Ho^m^ expert
Conningly. Docte, Faberrime, Affabre, Literate, Perite, Scie^ter, Site,
Solerter. Par grand artifice. Conningly spoken. Eleganter dictum. Elegamment.
Conningly written. Site pictum. Site and literate scriptae literae.
Doctement. Conquer. Subigo, is. apud Salust, Subiugo, as. Trophae a auferre,
Victoriam reportare, Vinco, cis. and Imperium facere. Conquester. S. Conquer
some country. Adiungere ad imperium regione^ aliquam, Imperij fines propagare,
Imperium dilatare, Conquester quelque pais. S. Conquered. Subi^gatus, Victus,
a, um. Subactus, ta, tum. Vaincu. S. Conqueror. Victor, Propagator finium.
Conqueror, ou conquerant. S. Conquest. Populatio, Subiugium, Finium, Imperij
propagatio vel dilatatio. Vne conquest. S. Consanguinitie. Consanguinitas,
Parentela, ae. f. g. Consanguinite. S. A TABLE OF CONSANGVINITIE.
Maio^^s. 6. Tritauus, Titauia. 5. Adauus, Adauia. 6. Patruus max. Amita max. 4
Abauus. The great grandfathers father. Abauia. 6. Auunculus max. Matertera max.
4.5. Propatruus. The great grandfathers brother. Proamita. The great
grandfathers sister. 3. Proauus. The great grandfather. Bisay^l. Proauia. The
great grandmother. 4.5. Proauunculus. The great grandmothers brother. Promater.
The great grandmothers sister. 4.6. Horum filius and filia. Their son and
daughter. 3.4. Patruus magnus. The great uncle, or gra^dfathers brother. Amita
magna. The grandfathers sister, or great aunt. 2. Auus. The grandfather. Ayeul,
grand ere. Auia. The grandmother. Le grande ^ere. 3.4. Auunculus magnus. The
grandmothers brother, or great uncle. Matertera magna. The grande mothers
sister, or great aunt. 4.6. Horum filius and filia. Their son and daughter.
4.7. Eorundem nepos and neptis. Their nephewe and niece. 3.5. Proprior
sobrinus. The near cousin. Proprior sobrina. The nearer cousin, 2. Patruus.
The uncle, or fathers brother. Amita. The aunt, or fathers sister. 1. Pater,
Per. The father. Matter, Me. The mother. 2. Auunculus. The uncle, or the
mothers brother. Matertera. The aunt, or the mothers sister. 3.5. Propior
sobrinus. The nearer cosen, or great uncles son. Proprior sobrina. The nearer
cosen. 4.7. Eorundem nepos and neptis. Their nephewe or niece. 4.8. Eorum
pronepos and proneptis. Their nephews son and daughter. 3.6. Horum filius
and filia. Their son and daughter. 2. Patruelis. The cosen german.
Patruelis. The cousin german. 1. Frater. The brother. Friar. Propotus.
1. Filius, Fills, The son Filia. Fille. daughter

2. Nepos, Ne^^^^ The nephewe. Neptis, Niece* niece

3. Pronepos, ^^s d^^epuen The nephewe son. Proneptis. The nieces daughter.

4. Abnepos. The nephewe four nephew. ^^e ^^uen de nostre nep^^. Adneptis. ye
niece etc.

^. Adnepos, Adneptis.

^. Trinepos. Trineptis. Mineres

1. Soror. The sister. Seur. 2. Consobrinus. The cosen german. Consobrina. The
cousin german. 3.6. Horum filius, and filia. Their son, and daughter. 4.8.
Eorum pronepos and proneptis. Their nephews (or nieces) son, and daughter.
4.7. Eorundem nepos and neptis. Their nephewe and niece. 3. Horum filius and
filia. Their son and daughter. 2. Fratris filius, vel filia. The brothers
son, or daughter. 2. Sororis filius, vel filia. The sisters son, or
daughter. 3. Horum filius and filia. Their son, and daughter. 4.7. Eorundem
nepos, and neptis. Their nephewe, and niece. 4. Horum nepos and neptis. Their
nephewe and niece. 3. Fratris nepos and neptis. The brothers nephewe and niece.
3. Sororis nepos and neptis The sisters nephewe, and niece. 4. Horum nepos and
neptis. Their nephewe, and niece. 4. Fratris pronepos and proneptis. The
brothers nephews son, and nieces daughter. 4. Sororis pronepos and
proneptis. The sisters nephews son, and nieces daughter. Conscience, or pure
part of the mind. Conscientia, Religio, onis. foe. ge. Conscience. S. To
speak of his conscience. Bona fide dicere. Dire en sa conscience. S.

An example of a right and good conscience. Exemplar antiquae religionis. Vne
exemplaire d'vne droicte and bonne conscience. S.

Charge, or to burden his conscience. Impio facinore se obligare. Charger sa
conscience. S.

Discharge, or to disburden his conscience. Exoluere religione. Descharger sa
conscience. S.

To examine his own conscience. Inquirere in seipsum, Quaestionem de sese
habere. Examiner sa conscience. S.

Examine thine own conscience well. Introspice in mentem tuam, eamque omni
cogitatione pertracta, and percontare ipse te. Cic. Examen ta conscience. S.

To make conscience of any thing, as to stay from doing it, because it
stands against his conscience. Impediri religione, Religiosum habere, In
religionem vertere, Religioni habere rem aliquam, Religionem habere aut
adhibere. Fair conscience de quelque chose. S.

To charge ones conscience. Obligare religione, vel obstringere. Charger la
conscience d'autruy. S.

That makes conscience of nothing. Omni religione solutus. Bud. Qu ne fait
conscience de rien. S.

Scruple of conscience. Scrupulus. Vide scruple.

Conscionable, or having a good conscience. Religiosus, a, um. Consciencieux,
Ho^me de bonne conscience. Conscionablye, or with a good conscience. Religiose.
Consecration. Sacratio, onis. Consecratio. Consecration. S. Consecrate.
Sacrifico, cas. Sacro, as. Sancio, is, nxi. Dico, cas. Consecro, as. Consacrer.
S. Consecrated. Sacratus, Sacrosanctus, a, um. Sacer, a, um. Deo dicatus.
Consacre a Dieu. S. Consecratour. Sacrator, Sacrificus. Consent. Affirmatio,
Allubentia, Allubescentia, Consensus, Consensio, onis. Homologia, Respo^sus,
us. Vnanimis consensus, Vnanimitas, Assensio, Astipulatio, onis. foem. gener.
Consentement and accord. S. Consent in music, or tune. Symphonia, Sympsalma,
Concentus, us, ui. A concino. Accord de voix. Accord de sons. S. Consent of a
commons to a law. Rogatio, nis. Consent of a multitude given with a whole
voice. Suffragatio, Suffragium. Plausus aequabilis. Consentement and accord de
tous. S. Consent, or to give consent. Allibesco, scis. Allubesco, scis.
Alludo, is. Annuo, is. Assentio, is. Assentior, iris. Conscisco, scis. Concedo,
is. Co^sentio, is. Digitum tollere, Indulgeo, es. Abstipulari Consentir. S.
Consent, or to agree in musyke or tune. Symphonio, as.* Consent, or to agree
to one. Assentire, sieve Assentiri, Astipulari alicui, Co^sentire. Consentir a
aucu^. Consent, or to be egall, or like. Consono, as. Quadro, as. Respondeo,
es. Accorder. S. Consenter, or he that consents. Assensor, oris. m. genesis Qui
consent. S. Consenting, that does consent and accord. Consentiens, it is. om.
ge. Consentant, Qui consent and accord. S. Consenting, or of one accord,
mind, and will. Vnanimus, a, um. Vnanimis, e. D'vn mesme courage and vouloir.
S. Consentingly. Affirmative, Consentienter, Libenter, Vnanimiter, Vnanimi
consensu. Consequent. Consequens, it is. Consequent. S. Consequence.
Consequentia, ae. f. g. Consequence. S. Consequently. Porro, Deinceps,
Consequenter. Consequemment. S. Conservation. Conseruatio, onis. f. g.
Conservation. S Conserve, or to keep. Conseruo, as. Conseruer. S. Conserve in
health. Praeseruo, as. Vegeto, as. But Vegeto, tas. Is to give strength, or to
recreate. Donner force. S. Conserve and to keep his right. Ius suum tenere and
obtinere. Bud. Conseruer and garder son droict. S. Conserve of roses. Intrita
rosacea. Conserve de roses. Conserved. Conseruatus, ta, tum. Conserve.
Conseruer. Conseruator, oris. m. genesis Conseruateur. S. and Conseruatrix,
tricis. foe. ge. She that conserueth. Conseruatrice. S. Conseruise* or any
thing which is condite, or conserved, as grapes, barberies, figs, pearls,
etc. Salgama, orum. Confitures. S. Consider. Agito, as. Animaduerto, is.
Attendo, is. Cerno, is. Cognosco, is. Complecti animo, Considero, as. Ducere
animo, Expendo, is. Penso, as. Perago, is. Perpendo, is. Pondero, as. Puto, as.
Reputo, as. Speculor, aris. Verto, it is. Video, es. Considerer quelque chose. S.
and Considerate. Prospicienter, Perspecte. Ang. With good consideration. Auec
grande consideration, Considereement. S. Consider much. Reputo, as. Fort
considerer. Consider a thing diligently. Pensito, as. Expendo, is. Considerer
vne chose diligemment. Consideration. Animaduersio, Consideratio, Notatio,
Perspicacitas, Ratio, onis. Aestimatio, Reputatio. Consideration. S.
Consideratlye. Considerate, Prospicienter, Perspecte. Considereement. S.
Consigne. Signo, as. Consigno, as. Signer. Consigned. Signatus, a, um. Sign.
Consistory, or counsel house. Consistorium. Co^cilium, Conuentus, Consessus,
Synodus, di. foem. genesis Consistoire. S. Consolate, or to give consolation.
Solari, Consolari, Solatia, vel consolationem adhibere. Consoler. S.
Consolation. Consolatio, Solatium, tij. n. ge. Consolation. S. To have
consolation. Vti solatio aliquo. Auoir consolation. S.

There is nothing can give me consolation. etc. Nihil est, quod solatium,
consolationem praebere, afferre, parere, solatio esse, consolatione esse mihi
possit. Nulla res est, quae creare, reficere, leuare, vindicare a dolor,
liberare solicitudine, eximere dolor, abducere a cura, auocare a molestia,
abstrahere, auellere a moerore animum meu^ possit, afflictum a moerore animum,
languente^, iacentem, erigere, excitare, confirmare nulla iam consolatio
potest, affectum dolor animum sanare nulla ratio valet. Laboranti animo,
aegrota^ti, pessime affecto mederi satis nulla ratio valet. Parum apta remedia
reperientur. Inutilis, infirma, inanis, superuacanea prorsus omnis medicina
est. Quis iam homo animo meo virtutem, dolor ereptam, restituere possit? Quis
ea sanare vulnera, ijs vulneribus mederi, medicinam afferre, remedium inuenire,
quae mihi fortuna intulit, imposuit, inflixit? Ita dolor obruor, vt emergere
nulla ratione possim. Ita malis opprimor, prorsus vt respirare non liceat.
Respuit iam animus meus, quasi desperata salute, omnem medicinam, remedia
cuncta, omnia consolationum genera, frustra in me consolando ponitur opera.
Inanem operam sumit, qui ad me consolandum aggreditur. Insitus, infixus in
animo dolor ita penitus est, vt euelli nulla ratione possit, vt nulla vis
rationum possit esse tanta, quae illum possit euellere, extrahere, educere,
eripere. finem facere dolori meo, finem imponere, modum statuere, terminum
statuere, dolorem medicari, neque homo est, neque res vlla, quae possit. Non
est vt possim in dolor mihi te^perare, dolor abstinere, dolorem sedare,
abijcere, Ipse me ad eam hilaritatem, eam iucunditatem, quam dolor ademit,
reuocare: refer me ad pristinam animi aequitatem, in eum statum, vnde me
dolor deiecit, deturbauit, depulit, detrusit, restituere.

He that gives consolation. Paracletus, Consolator, oris. m. g. Consolateur. S.

Consolidate. Solido, as. Consolido, as. Fair solid and massif. S.
Consolidated. Solidatus. Consolidatus, ta, tum. Consonaunt or accordaunt.
Consonans, it is. Consonus, a, um. Consonant and accordant. S. His talk is
consonante to his life. Consonat moribus oration. Sa parolle consone and
saccorde bien a sa vie. S.

Conspyr^. Coniuro, as. Compactorem agere. Conspiro, as. Conspirer. S. Conspire
and to make a conspiration or conspiracy. Conspirationem facere, Coniurationem
facere, Coniurare, Conspirare. Fair conspiration. S. Conspire attendre,
condemnation or outlawry, or proscription against one. Proscripturio, ris, iui,
ire. Conspiracy. Conspiratio. Conspiratus, tus. Conspiration. Conspiration.
Coniuratio, onis. foe. g. idem. Constancy. Constantia, Firmitas,
Perseuerantia, Firmitudo animi, Grauitas, Stabilitas. Constance. I have always
known him constant. etc. Hominem grauem, certum, minime me^dacem, minime
falsum, studiosum veritatis cognoui, expertus sum. Nihil in eo leuitatis, aut
inconstantiae, nihil inane, varium, mutabile, inconstans, nullam animi
infirmitatem, nullam sententiae varietate^, nullam consilij ^tationem
deprehendi. Magna praeditum grauitate semper cognoui. Is mihi semper visus est,
qui sibi optime constet, nihil leave committat, nihil inane cogitet, non facile
discedat a se ipso, aegre discedat a sententia, mutet consilium, susceptam
opinione^ abijciat, sensum deponat, de suo statu demigret, quem nulla res
facile abducat, auellat a sententia. Cuius me^tem huc and illuc, in hanc aut in
illam partem, in quam velis partem, vtram in partem velis, non facile flectas,
aegre traducas, cum labor torqueas, alieno tempore nihil loquitur, nihil agit
inepte, nihil non loco, idem ei vultus in omni re, eadem in omni fortuna men's
est.

Constant. Confidens, it is. Constans, it is. Firmus, a, um. Stabilis, le.
Constant. Constant to be. Pollere constantia, Substare, Obtinere firmitudinem
animi. Estre constant. S. Constantly. Firmiter, Perseueranter, Pertinaciter,
Constanter. Constamment. S. Constantly suffering. Contumax, cis. om. g. *
Constellation or an assemble of stars together in any sign. Sydus, eris. n.
g. Vne constellation and assemblee d' estoiles ensemble en quelque sign.
Constellation and influence of the stars. Syderum affectio. Constellation and
influence des astres. Constitution or decree. Constitutio, Decretum, Lex.
Edictum, Statutum, Praescriptum, Sanctio. Constitution. S. Constitute decrees
or laws. Sancire leges. Cic. Fair aucunes loix and establir. S. Constitute a
Consul over the people. Consulem populo imponere. Constituer aucun consul sur
le peuple. Constitute and to appointe a king to a region. Imponere regem alicui
regioni, Regem populis constituere. Bailler and constituer un roy a vne region.
S. Constituter of a law. Constitutor legis. Constitueur de loy. S. Constrayne.
Coerceo, es. Cogo, is. Perpello, is. Premo, is. Subigo, is. Vrgeo, es.
Constringo, is. Contraindre. S. Constrayne or to compel one. Adigere,
Angariare, Cogere, Co^pellere, Subigere, Vrgere, Imponere necessitudinem,
Necessitatem adhibere, Afferre, Imponere, Iniu^gere, Vim alicui imponere, vel
afferre. Constraindre aucun. S. Constrayne to pay debte. Nomen exigere.
Contraindre a payer vne debte. S. Constrained to be. In angustum venire,
Necesse habere. Cogi. Estre contrainct. S. Without constrainte. Sponte, Sua
sponte, Voluntate, Vt fert natura, Suapte, vel suapte natura. Vltro. Sans
contraincte. S.

Constrained. Coactus, a, um. Coercitus, a, um. Extortus, Subactus. Actus, ta,
tum. Adactus, ta, tum. Contrain^t. S. Constrainte. Coertio, Compulsio, onis. f.
g. Constrainte in haste. Angaria, ae. foe. g. Construe. Construo, is. Ordino,
as. Ordinem facere. Construire, or donner. S. Construction. Constructio, Ordo,
inis. Construction. Consulte or ask counsel, to be advised, or take advise.
Consulto, as. Delibero, as. Consulter, Deliberer. S. Consulte or to take
council. Consulere, Consiliu^ capere, Consilium habere vel sumere. Consulter.
Consulte or to take counsel with one. Consilium cum aliquo inire, Adhibere
consilium, Ad vel in consilium sibi adhibere aliquem. Consulter auec quelqu'
un. S. Consulte together. Confer consilia, Consilia agitare, sieve agere.
Consulter ensemble. S. Consulter, of whom consaile is taken. Consultus, a, um.
Celuy a qui on demand conseil. S. Consultour, or he which takes counsel
or advice in a doubt. Deliberator, oris. m. ge. Consultor, toris. m. g. Qui
demand conseil. Et deliberabundus, a, um. Ang. Who that does consulte and take
advise, or think of a thing. Qui consulte and pense a quelque chose. S.
Consume. Abedo, is. Absumo, is. Abstruo, is. Absorbeo, es. Consumo, is. Sumo,
is. Vasto, as. Prodigo, is. Consumer. Consume by nature. Tabesco, scis.
Consumer. Consume in glotony. Degulo, as. Consume ones goods. Comedere
aliquem. Consumer les biens d'autruy. S. Consume substance in prodigality or
other wise. Profundo, is, si. Abligurio, is. Decoquo, is. Deuorare substantiam,
Obligurio, is. Despendre ou consumer prodigalement. S. Consume time. Tempus
terere, Tempora conterere. Tempus transmittere. Consumer son temps. S.
Consumable, or that which may be consumed or wasted. Consumabilis, le.
Consumed to be with fire. Consumi incendio. Estre consume par feu. S. Consumed,
or eaten up. Adesus, a, um. Consumptus, a, um. Tout mange and consume. Consumed
by nature, as when one is in a co^sumption. Tabidus, a, um. Consumed to be, or
to be in a natural consumption. Marceo, es. Marcesco, scis. Estre flestri ou
consume. Consumption. Consumptio, onis. f. g. Consumption. S Consumption of
kind or nature. Tabes, bis. f. g. Consumption of the body with leannes.
Atrophia. Quand on est enchartre. Vnde Atrophus. Angl. He that is in such
consumption, and that has no good of that which he eats. A qui ne prouffite
point ce qu' il mange. S. Consumption of substance. Look Prodigality.
Contagious. Contagiosus, sa, sum. Contagieux. S. Contagiousnes, infection.
Contages, Contagies, Co^tagio, Contagium. Contagion. S. Contagious to be.
Contagijs comitari. Contaminate, or to defile. Contaminare, Temerare, Foedare.
Contaminer. S. Contaminated. Contaminatus, ta, tum. Contamine. Conteyne.
Contineo, es. Capeo, is. Continer and comprendre. S. Contained. Contentus, a,
um. Contenu. S. Containing. Continens, it is. Qui contient. S. Contemplation,
which is an inward godly behavior. Contemplatio, Theoria, Meditatio,
Speculatio, Contemplatus, tus. Contemplation. S. Contemplative or of
contemplation. Contemplatiuus, a, um. Theoricus, a, um. Contemplatif. S.
Contemplative talking to God. Soliloquium, ij. n. g. Calep. Contemplatiuely.
Theorice. Contemplate and to behold in spirit. Aliquid animo videre,
Co^templari animo, Omni acie ingenij contemplari. Contempler en son esprit. S.
Conte^platiuely, or with contemplation to behold. Contemplor, aris. Contempler.
S. Contemn or despise, albeit contempne is the less crime. Contemno, is.
Fastidio, is. Sperno, is. Te^no, is. Negligo, is. Despicere. Contemner. S.
Contempned. Contemptus, a, um. Spretus, a, um. Contemn. S. Contempt.
Contemptus, us. Fastidium, ij. Neglectio, onis. Contemptio, onis. Contemnement.
S. Contempt of grace and virtue. Impietas, it is. And he that makes such
contempt is. Impius. Un meschant. S. Contention. Rixa, ae. Aduelitatio,
Contentio, Disceptatio, Concertatio. Contention and estrif. S. Contention or
altercation of words. Altercatio, Logomachia, Verborum velitatio and loquax
co^tentio. Noise. Contention to cause. Rixor, aris. Perturbo, as. *
Contentious. Rixosus, Turbulentus, a, um. Conte^tiosus, Controuersus.
Contentieux. S. Contentiously. Contentiose, vt de re aliqua conte^tiose
disceptare. To dispute co^tentiously on any thing. Contentieusement disputer.
S. Contend or strive. Certo, as. Concerto, as. Contendo, is. Controuersor,
aris. Decerno, is. Decerto, as. Discepto, as. Contendre. S. Contend eftsoon.
Reluctor, aris. Vide Resist. Contend or fight valiauntly like a champion or
warrior. Agonizo, as. and Agonizor, aris. Hier. and Cypria. Contend with
words on sundry parts. Altercor, aris. Debatre de parolles. S. Contend with
scoldinges, brawlinges, or chydinges. Rixor, aris. Noiser, rioter. S.
Contending or striving, one with an other. Certatim. A l' envy l' un a l'
autre. S. Content, like, or to please. Arrideo, es. si. Content or satisfy.
Satisfacio, is. Contenter. S. I am very well content. Clementer volo. I'en suis
fort content. S.

I am content, I will not let it. Per me licet. No^ impedio, Esto, Age sane,
Ego vero, Non nolo, Audio, Fiat, Non recuso. Ie suis, ou I'en suis content.

Content with that which one has. Continere se finibus rerum suarum. Estre
content de ce qu'on ha. Contented. Compos, it is. Contentus, a, um. Propitius, a,
um. Solutus, a, um. Satisfactus, a, um. Qui est content. S. Contented to be.
Requiesco, scis. Sat, vel satis habere, Sedeo, es. Estre content. S.
Contentfull. Placabilis, le. Placendus, a, um. Vide Pleased. Contentfully.
Placabiliter, Quieto animo, Placido vultu, Candide. Continency, which is a
Godly virtue or gracious quality, to refuse pleasure, and resist evil,
whereunto contrary, is incontinencie. Continentia, ae. f. g. Continence. S.
Beware thou pass not the bonds of continency. Cave, Vide, Studium adhibe,
Co^silio vtere, Diligenter animaduerte, Aduerte, Atte^de quam diligenter potes:
Ne continentiae terminos tra^sgrediare. Ne longius progrediaris, quam
continentiae ratio praescribit, Ne, quos tibi continentia terminos praescribit,
eos transeas, transilias, traijcias, transgrediare, praetergrediare, iis
excedas, ab ijs excedas.

Continent. Continens, it is. Continent. S. Continently. Continenter.* Continue.
Continuo, as. Duro, as. Perenno, as. Pergo, is. Maneo, es. Perpetuo, as. Teneo,
es. Permaneo, es. Continuer. Continue for one year. Peranno, as. Macrob. lib.
i. Satur. Cap. 8. Continue in hope. Been sperare, Spem alere. Continue long or
ever. Perenno, as. Durer long temps. Continue with a steadfast mind,
constantly, or perseuerantly. Perseuero, as. Perseuerer. S. Continual.
Continuus, a, um. Assiduus, a, um. Co^tinens, it is. Perennis, e. Perpes, it is.
Perpetuus, a, um. Solidus, a, um. Sempiternus, a, um. Continuel. Continual
disease or sickness. Pertinax morbus vel Valetudo, Sonticus morbus.
Continually. Assidue, Assiduo, Continenter, Continue, Iugiter, Perenniter,
Perpetim, Perpetuu^, Perpetuo, Statim, Vsque, Indesine^ter, Perenne.
Continuellement. To keep wars continually. Bellum contine^ter gerere.
Continuellement fair guerre.

Continuation of the parliament. Sessio Curiae instauratiua. Continuation de
parliament. S. Continuance. Assiduitas, Continuatio, Perennitas, Continuitas,
Instantia. Continuation. S. Continuance, or tenor of a matter. Tenor, oris. m.
g. Continuation. S. Continuing. Continens, Durans, Perennis, Perpetuus,
Continuus. Continu. S. Continuing in one thing. Iugis, e, om. g. Continuel.
Continuing snow, which tarieth long. Sedens nix. Contracte. Contractus, us.
Pactio, Pactum, ti, n. g. Contract. S. Contracte by nude parolx, yt is: by bare
words. Spo^sio, Sponsus, us, m. g. Promise S. Contract on condition. Pactum,
ti. n. g. Contract. S. Contracte maker. Sponsor, oris. m. g. Qui promet. S.
Contracted. Pactus, a, um. Sponsus, a, um. Accord. Contracted upon condition.
Pactus, a, um. idem. Contracte, or to make contract. Contraho, is. Spondeo, es.
Paciscor, sceris. Contracter, fair quelque accord and paction. S. Country.
Patria, ae. Terra, ae. Prouincia, Rus. Orbis, Regio, Tractus, Natio. Pais, ou
pays. S. Country where we were borne. Solum natale. Le pais ou nous auons este
nez. S. Country having an hundredth cities. Hecatompolis. Id est centum habens
civitates. Country which takes away the profit of other countries.
Monopolium.* Country with country, as one country with another, throughout
every province. Prouinciatim, per singulas prouincias. Country man.
Conterraneus, Popularis. D'vn mesme pais. S. Contrary. Aduersarius, a, um.
Aduersatus, a, u^. Aduersus, a, um. Contrarius, a, um. Pugnantes inter se.
Seorsus, a, um. Dissimilis, Contrapositus, ta, tum. Contraire. S. Contrary or
against. Aduersum, Aduersus, Contra, Erga, Praeter, Praepos. Contre. S. Vt
contra edictum. Against th'edicte. Contre l' edict. S. Contrary advise.
Abhortatio, onis. foe. g. Contrary, or that which happens not fortunatly,
luckely, or happily, but after a froward and sinister manner. Sinister, ra,
rum. Malheureux, contraire. S. Which word is taken on the worser or contrary
part, as Dexter is taken of the better or right part. Dextre, qui port bon
heur. S. Contrary blaste blowyng, or wind contrary. Reflatio, R^flatus, us.
Vent contraire. Contrary to a man, as to endamage him. Infestus, a, um. Fort
contraire and nuisable. S. Contrary putting or setting. Oppositio, onis. foe.
g. Contrariete. S. Contrary to all right and reason. Deprauate. Contre
droicture and raison. S. Contrary, or contrarious to be one against another.
Aduersor, aris. Discrepo, as. Repugnare inter sese. Impugno, as. Refragor,
aris. Stare contra aliquem. Estre contraire. S. Contrarietye. Aduersio,
Repugnantia, Varietas, Impugnatio, Oppositio, Aduersitas, and contrarietas apud
Macrob. Contrariete. S. Contrarious, or in contrary sort. Aduersus, a, um.
Contrarius, a, um. Repugnax, cis. Seorsus, a, um. Varius, a, um. Contraire. S.
Contrarious witnesses. Testes repugna^tes, Varij, and Vacilentes testes.
Contrary part. Diuersa pars, Pars repugnans. Contrariwyse, or contrariously.
Adverse, Econtra, Repugnanter, Seorsum. On the contrary part. Contra,
Econtrario, Ex contrario, E vel ex diuerso, In contrarium, Rursus, Enimuero,
Vicissim, Contrary. Au contraire.

Contretenor in music. Occentus, us. Chant. S. Contremure, or a wall set
before, or without a wall. Promurale, lis. Murus circum ciuitatis murum ductus,
qui and antemurale dicitui. Call. Contribution. Stipendium, Contributio,
Contribution. Contributary, as paying, aid, or tribute, or any thing by way
of contribution. Stipendiarius, a, um. Tributaire. S. Contricion. Intestinus
plangor, vel planctus, Cordolium, Praeteritae and anteactae vitae acerba
moerensque recordatio. Contrition. S. Controler. Antigraphus, Officij exactor,
Custos, Obseruator, and Adnotator. Contrerolleur. Control or to do the office
of the controler. Custodire, Obseruare. Contreroller. S. Controversy.
Controuersia, Lis, it is. Contentio, Praecertatio. Un different and debate. S. Et
Controuersus, a, am. Full of controversy. Contentieux. S. There is no
controversy in this matter. Hoc non in disquisitionem venit, Controuersia huius
rei nulla est. Cela ne vient point en controversy. S.

Convey craftily. Subduco, is. Conuoyer. Pals. Conueye in pryuely. Submitto,
is. * Convey out of danger or peril. Reduco, cis. Conveyed craftily or
pryuely. Subductus, a, um. Submissus. Deductus, ta, tum. Amene. Conveyed out of
danger. Reductus, ta, tum. Remis. Conuenable, as in due season. Tempestiuus,
a, um. Qui est fait en temps and saison. S. Conuenable season or time.
Tempestiuitas, tatis. foe. genesis Saison. S. Conuenable. Tempestiue. En temps
deu. S. Conueniencie. Concinnitudo, inis. Responsus, Co^uenientia, Consensus,
Decentia, Habilitas, Indifferentia. Conuenance. S. Co^ueniency or proportion,
as properly to confer doubtful to doubtful, to make yt which is uncertain
more plain. Analogia, Proprietas, Similitudo, Proportio, onis. f. g.
Convenient. Conueniens, it is. Conformis, e. Dece^s, it is. Meritus, a, um. Vtilis,
Accomodus, da, dum. Accommodatus, ta, tum. Aptus, ta, tum. Appositus, ta, tum.
Conuenable. S. Convenient for season and time. Tempestiuus, a, um. Opportunus,
na, number. Qui vient bien a point. S Conveniently. Apposite, Decenter, Vtiliter,
Apt, Congruenter, Conuenienter, Accommodate. Conuenablement. Conveniently in
due season. Tempestiue, Opportune. En temps and lieu tout a poinct. S. Convent
or to call one before a judge. In ius vocare, vel conuenire aliquem. Conuenir
en justice. S. Conuented or sued to be. Conueniri, In ius vocari. Estre conuenu
en justice. S. Conuented. Conuentus, a, um. Conuenu. S. Conuenticle, or little
assemble. Conuenticulum, li. n. g. Conuenticle, ou petite assemblee. S.
Conuention or agremete. Pactum, Pactio, Conue^tio, Conuenta, orum. Conuentus,
tus. Conuention. Conversation. Conuersatio, Mos, ris. Vsus, Consuesuetudo.
Conversation and familiarite. S. Conuersaunt to be. Conuersor, aris. Frequento,
as. Vtor, eris. Conuerser auec aucun. S. To be conuersaunt with one.
Consuescere alicui, Versari cum aliquo. Conuerser auec quelqu'vn.

Convert. Conuerto, is. Conuertir. S. Convert or to turn enmities to
frendshippe. Traducere inimicitias in amicitiam. Conuertir inimitiez en amity.
S. Convert any ecclesiastical thing to a temporal use by abuse. Prophano,
as. Prophanum facere. A stranger converted to our form of living.
Proselytus, ti. m. g. Estrangier conuerti a nostre maniere de viure. S.

Converted. Conuersus, sa, sum. Conuerti. Conversion. Conuersio, onis. foe. g.
Conversion. S. Convict by witness. Cedere testibus. Premere testimonio.
Convicted. Conuictus, a, um. Convince or to overcome. Conuincere, reuincere.
Conuaincre. S. Convocation. Synodus, Conuocatio. Convocation. S. Convocation
place for mattters of religion. Calabra curia. Macrob. lib. 1. cap. 25. Cook.
Cocus, coci, Coquus, qui, m. g. Cuisinier. S Et Coquinor, aris. To do the
office of a cook. Cookery. Coquinaria. Coquina, ae. L'arte de fair
decoctions. S. Et coquinarius, a, um. Pertayninge to cookerie, or to the
kitchen. De cuisin. S. Cooks shop. Popina, ae. foe. g. Caberet, cuisine. S.
Cool. Frigero, as. Frigefacio, is. Refroidir. S. Cool eftsoon. Refrigero,
as. idem. Cool shade, which is taken in summer when the Sun is fervent
hoate. Frigus opacum, Vt Virgil. Fortunate senex: hic inter flumina nota,
and fontes sacros, frigus captabis opacum.
O happy aged man, thou shall take cooler shade her bye,
Mongste floodes ar known, and sacred wels that round about the lie.
Cold to wax. Refrigesco, scis. Frigesco, scis. Se refroider. S. Cooled.
Refrigeratus, a, um. Refroidi. S. Cooled it is. Refrixit. Imp. Il est refroidi.
S. Cooling. Refrigeratio, onis, foe. g. Refroidissement. S. Cooling, or making
cool, or which does cool. Refrigeratorius, a, um. Refrigeratif. S. Coote a
kind of bird. Fulica, Fulix. Fuliga, Philacrocarax. Foulgue, diable. S.
Coparceners, or such as ask portion of lands by particion. Agripetae, arum.
Partiarij, orum. Particulones. Copy or an example. Apographum, Exemplar,
Exscriptum, Exemplum, Tabulae. Copy, Double, Extrait. H. Copy of the authors
own hand writing. Autographum, Exemplar auctoris manu scriptum. Escrit de sa
main propre. H. Coporouse a metal. Chalcantu^, vel potius. Chala^thum.
Couperose. S. Copper. Aes caldarium, Aes cyprum, quod proprie cuprum nominatur,
Orichalcum. Aes. Cuyure. H. Coral, of the which there be three kinds: black,
read, and white. Coralium. Coral. Cord, halter, or line. Camus, Funis,
Funiculus, Linea. Restis, Tomex, Chorda. Cord. S. Et Resticula. Diminut. Angl.
A little or small cord. Et Funiculus. Cordelle, ou cordelette. S. Cord
fastened to a yoke to draw by. Amphron, vel Ampron, Funiculus qui per iuga
iumentoru^ tenditur. Call. Cord of a sail. Anquina, ae. Funis nauis quo ad
malum antemna constringitur. Call. Cord of a pully. Ductarius funis. Chorde d'
vne poulie. H. Cords end or piece of a cord, halter, line, rope. etc.
Resticula, ae. Diminut. de restis. vt supra. Cords or great sinnowes of the
body. Tendines, Tendones. H. Cork. Suber, eris. n. g. Du liege. S. Corked shoe
slypper or pantofle. Crepida, ae. Crepis, dis. Sandalium, lij. n. g. Pantoufle.
H. Et Crepidatus, a, um. He that wears a corked shoe or slypper. Cormerant.
Merula. Merle. H. Corn. Frumentum. Adoreum semen, Semen Cereale. Fourment. H.
Corn. Granum, ni. Grain. H. Vide Wheat. Corn kept long in the chafe.
Syris* Corn new reaped. Messis. Le moisson. H. Corn standing vnreaped.
Seges, it is. Fruges cereales nondum demessae. Ble encore de bout. H. Corn
without a bearde, as polled wheat. Mutica spica, vel Mutila spica. H. Corn of
one year. Annona. Et Annonarius, a, um. Ang. A man having much corn of one
years growyng. Corn reaper. Messor, oris. m. g. Moissonneur. S. Corn of
salt. Mica salis, Grumus salis, Salis frustulum seu granum. Miette du sell.
Corns or Kernelles between the toes. Gemursae, arum, Morticini, Gemursa est
tuberculum sub pedum digitis nascens. Corner. Angulus, li. Angle. Et Angulosus,
a, um. Et Latebrosus, a, um. Ang. Full of corners. Qui ha plusieurs coins and
anglettes. S. Corner or coyng of a house. Versura. Vide coins. To crepe into a
corner, or to convey him self into some by place. In angulum aliquo abire. Se
retirer en quelque coing.

Corner of the eye. Canthus, Hirquus, i. m. g. Coing de l'oeil. S. There be
two corners of the eyes. Anguli oculorum bini sunt. Plin.

Corner or lurking place. Latebra, ae. and Latebrosus, a, um. Ang. Full of
such corners, lurking places, or dens. Plein de cachettes. S. Corner of a
wall. Vide Co^ng. Corner stone. Angularis lapis. Cato. Corner that stands out
of the way, an od or blind corner. Deuius angulus. Cornered. Angularis, re. Qui
hae coins and anglettes. Cornered equally or right. Orthogonus, a, um-Vide
Angle. Corners or wyndynges of ryuers. Cornua fluminum. Virgil. Cornerwyse.
Angulatim. Cornet or small shaulme. Miluina tibia, quae in accentus acutissimos
exibat. H. Cornyshe chowghe or crow. Pyracorax.* Coroner. Coronator, Iudex
ordinarius, Questor paricidius. Corporation. Societas, Corpus, Collegium. Vne
corporation. Pals. Corporal. Corporalis, le. Corporel. S. Corporal form,
shape, or state. Habitus, tus. m. g. Le corsage, ou corporance. S. Corporature,
corpulencie, quantity, state, or fashion of the body. Corporatio, Corporatura.
ide^. Corpulente, flesshy, or gross. Corpulentus, a, um. Corporu, charnu, and
fourni. S. Correct, or to chastise, or punysh. Castigo, as. Corrigo, is.
Coerceo, es. In ordinem cogere. Emendo, as. Verbero, as. Corriger. S. Correct,
or to chastise. Adhibere correctione^. Cic. Corriger. S. Correct, or to mende
a fault. Mendum corrigere. Corriger vne fault. S. Corrected. Coercitus, a,
um. Correctus, Emendatus, a, um. Corrigee. S. Correction. Castigatio,
Correctio, Emendatio. Correction. S. Correction, or chastisement of servants
or other offenders. Verber, eris. Et Verbero, nis. Angl. He which is worthy
correction. Digne d' estre batu. S. Correctour. Corrector, ris. Reprehensor,
Emendator, toris. m. g. Correcteur. S. Correcter of manners, as he that has
the governance of children to teach them ciuillitie and good manners. Censor,
oris. mas. ge. Censeur. It was also the name or title of merit among the
Romans, when they were called Censores, as Cato was called M. Cato Censorius,
because he used the gravity or rygour of the correcters office. Correspondent.
Respondens, it is. Correspondent to be. Respondeo, es. Correspondre. S
Corrigible, or able to be corrected. Castigabilis, le. Chastiable. S.
Corroborate. Corroboro, as. Firmo, as. Roboro, as. Corroborer. S. Corroborated.
Corroboratus, Firmus, Roboratus, a, um. Corrobore. S. Corrosife, or corrosiue,
or putrefactiue. Septicus, a, um. Corrosif. S. Corruption. Corruptela. Marcor,
oris. Putredo, inis. Tabes. Vitiositas, Vitium, ij. n. g. Corrumpure. S.
Corruption or violation. Corruption, Violatio. Corruption. S. Corruption
fylthines of water after wasshing, filthiness rubbed from ones body.
Strigmentum, ti, n. g. L'ordure qu'on racle du corpse. S. Corruption of Judges
with gifts and rewards. Dorodocia, ae. foe. genesis Vnde Dodorocos Iudices
Demostines appellat quos nummarios nos appellamus, id est sordidos and
corruptos. Call. Corruption or matter gathered within the skin having a
scabbe. Vlcus, ceris. n. g. Corruption or matter proceading from a sore. Pus,
ris. n. g. La boue. H. Corruption of oil or like. Strigme^tum, ti. n. g.
Corruption causyng, or that which does corrupt. Tabificus, ca, um. Corrupt or
rotte. Corru^po, is. Labefacto, as. Tabefacio, cis. Viola, as. Vitio, as.
Labefacio, is. Deprauo, as. Corrumpre. Corrupt to wax. Fracesco, scis.
Marcesco, scis. Tabesco, scis. Se corrompre. S. Corrupt one with gifts.
Corrumpere vel emere aliquem donis. Corrompre par dons. S. Corrupt. Corruptus,
a, um. Putridus, a, u^. Putris, e. Morticinus, a, u^* Tabefactus, a, um.
Tabidus, Violatus, a, um. Vitiosus, a, um. Pourri and corrompu. S. Corrupt,
rotten, or full of corruption or matter. Purulentus, Putridus, a, um. Putris,
e. idem. Corrupt bloudde and matter mixed together. Sanies, ei. Tabes, is. Vide
Blood. Corrupt form of speakinge or pronouncinge. Barbarismus, mi. m. ge.
Corrupt Judge. Nummatus Iudex, vel Nummarius Iudex. Judge corrompu par argent.
S. Corrupt to be. Marceo, es. Marcesco, cis. Putreo, es. Tabesco, scis, bui.
Estre pourri and corrompu. S. A virgin corrupted. Incesta virgo, Vitiata,
Corrupta. Vierge corrompue. S.

Corruptour, which does corrupt. Corruptor, vel Trix. Corrompeur and
corromperesse ou corruptrice. S. Corse and broad gyrth, wherewith maidens were
wont to be gyrte under their pappes. Perizonium, Praecinctorium, Castula. Call.
Corse gyrdle. Caestus, ti. Cinniligiu^. Vide Girdle. Corse of a chariot or
horse lytter covered with bayles or bordes. Tympanum.* Corsie or fat.
Pinguis, e. Gras. S. Cortayne. Cortina, ae. Peripetasma, it is. * Velum,
Cadurcum, Conopeum. Courtine. S. Cost. Impendium, Sumptus, us. Coustange,
coust, coustage. S. Et Sumptuarius, a, um. Which pertayneth to cost.
Somptueux. S. Cost to make. Sumptifacio, cis. Despe^dere, Erogare, Impensam
facere, Sumptum facere, vel ponere. Despendre. S. Cost, or to cost. Consto,
as. Sto, as. Couster. S. Costs. Expensae, arum. Vide Charges and expenses. To
make great cost. Sumptum admittere, Magnos sumptus facere, Ampliter sumptum
facere. Fair grans despens. S.

Costs and expenses done in journey. Viaticae expensae. Costly, or of cost.
Onerosus, sumptuosus, Pollucibilis, le. Sompteux. S. Costly, or with cost.
Sumptuose, Pollucibiliter. Somptueusement. S. Costly or full of cost.
Sumptuosus, a, um. Vt supra. Costly fare in banqueting. Lautitia, Tragemata,
Mensae secundae, Bellaria. Deserte de table. H. Costly to fare or live. Laute,
vel opipare epulari. Costly supper or dinner. Pollucibilis coena, Opiparum
conuiuium. Vide Banquet. Costmary an herb. Piperitis.* Vide Alecoste.
Costrell, to carry wine in. Oenophorum. Vide custrell and pot. Cote. Tunica,
ae. foe. g. Sagum, gi. n. g. Un say, ou ^ayon. S. Cote armure. Paludamentum,
ti. n. g. Vne cotte d'armes. S. He which is clothed with a cote of arms
Paludatus. Qui est vestu de cotte d'armes. S. Cote of male. Lorica, ae. Thorax
hamis consertus, Lorica hamis apta. Cotte de mailles. S. Et Lorico, ^s. Ang. To
wear, or to put on a coat of maile. Vestir un halcret. S. Cote of sheep
skins. Diphtera.* Cote of sylke. Multitium.* Multitia. Iuuen. Indumentum
subtilibus filis contextum atque operosum. Habillemens ou draps subtilz and
dilicatz. H. Cote without sleues. Collobium, Et secundu^ Had. Tunica, Vestis
sine manicis. Sayon, say sans manches. H. Cotes of bestes skynnes with the
here on. Rhenones, Vestes pelliccae, ex ouium precipue and caprarum pellibus
confectae. Call. Coted. Tunicatus, a, um. Vestu d'vn say. S. Coted or armed
with a cote of maile. Loricatus, a, um. Vestu d'vne harnois. S. Coted or cladde
in a cote armure. Paludatus, a, um. Vestu d'vne cotte d'armes. S. Cottage or
coat. Casa, Gurgustium, Ligellum, li. Stega, Tugurium. Vne lodge. S. Et
Tuguriolum. Diminut. Ang. A little cottage. Logette. S. Cottages, builded round
like an oven. Mapalia, orum. Logettes. S. Cotton. Bambacium, Cotonum,
Gossipium, Leuconium. Xylon. Du cotton. S. Et Xylinus, a, um. Which is made of
cotton. Qui est faicte de cotton. Cotton clothe. Xylinus pannus. Drappe de
cotton. Cotton tree. Gossampinus, Gossapinus, Gossipion.* Xylon. Arbre portant
le cotton. S. Cowarde. Discinctus, Excors, Ignauus, Imbellis, Pusillanimis,
Secors, dis. Vecors, dis. Timidus, Meticulosus. Couard. S. Cowardly. Ignauiter,
Pusillanimiter. Ignaue. Couardement. S. Cowardnes. Ignauia, Imbellia,
Pusillanimitas, Se cordia, Socordia, Vecordia. Couardise. S. Cowche. Grabatum,
ti. Lectus, Cubile. Vne couche. Cowche or little bed. Scimpodium, ij, n. g.
Scimpodion, dij. Grabatum, sieve humilior lectulus. Call. Cowche like a dog.
Procumbo, is. Prosterno, is. Decumbo, is. Cubo, as. Se coucher. S. Cow. Vacca.
ae, foe. g. Vache. H. Et Vaccinus, a, um. Ang. Of a cow. De vache. S. Cow
barrayne or not being with calfe, which goes dry, and seeks not the bull.
Taura, ae. Varro de Re rust. Quae sterilis est vacca, taura appellatur. Cow
great with calfe. Horda, ae. Vacca praegnans nam quae sterilis est taura
appellatur, Varro de Re rust. li. 1. cap. 5. Cow of the first calfe called a
heffar or heckfar. Iuuenca, Vitula. Vide Heffar. Cow which is little and
gives much milk. Ceua, ae. f. g. Col. li. 6. cap. 13. Coweherde. Bubsequa,
ae. Com. g. Bubulcus, ci. m. genesis Bouuier. S. Cow milk. Lac bubulum. Plin.
Laict de vache. S. Cowyshe, or of a cow, or pertaining to a Cow. Bubulus, a,
um. Vaccinus, a, um. De vache. S. Cowgell or short stick or wayster to throw
at one, or to beat one with. Bacillus, Bacillum, Pertica, Fustis. Bastonnet,
vne gaul. S. Cough. Tussedo, inis. Tussis. La toux. S. Tussicula, ae. Diminut.
Ang. A little cough. Un petite toux. S. Coughe, or be disseased with the cough.
Tussio, is, iui. Toussir. S. Coughing. Tussiens, it is. Coughing, or in coughing.
Tussiendo, vel in tussiendo. En toussant. Couenaunte. Conuentio, onis.
Conuentum, ti. Homologia, Pactio, Pactum, Conuentus, tus. Conuention. S.
Covenant, wherein a man takes good assurance. Satisacceptio, onis. foe. ge.
Covenant, and to take such assurance. Satisaccipio, is, cepi, cipere. Prendre
caution. S. Covenant with putting in of caution for the performance of the
same. Satisdatio, onis. foe. g. To covenant with putting in of sureties, or to
put in sureties for performaunce of a bargain. Satisdo, das. Donner caution. S.

Couenantes of marriage. Conuentae.* Pactio matrimonialis. Conuention
matrimoniale. S. Couenaunted. Depactus, a, um. Pactus, a, um. Accord. S.
Couenante, or to covenant. Contraho, is. Conuenio, is. Spondeo, es. Constituo,
is. Depaciscor, sceris. Paciscor, sceris. Pago, is, pepegi. Fair paction,
conuenancer. S. Cover. Adoperio, is. Insterno, is, straui, Obtego, is. Obtendo,
is. Obduco, cis. Operculo, as. Obnubulo, as. Operio, is. Praetexo, is, xui.
Tego, is, xi. Velo, as. Amicio, cis. Cooperio, is. Intego, is. Contego, is.
Obnubo, bis. Couurir. S. Cover a little. Operculo, as. vt Infra. Cover before or
chiefly. Praetego, is. Praeuelo, as. Cover about. Circuntego, is.
Circunuestire. Couurir tout a l'entour. S. Cover ditches. Obcaecare fossos.
Couurir les fosses. S. By translation to hyde a thing that it be not seen.
Cover friendly. Amicio, is, iui. Couurir. S. Cover the body and head. Obnubo,
is, psi. Couurir. S Cover a house with tyle or slate. Imbrico, as. Cover or
hyde with any thing. Obcaeco, as. Vt Ovid. Ether terrificis obcaecat sidera
nimbis. Cover or horse a mare. Comprimere equam. Salire, assilire, Inire,
Incendere. Couurir. Cover with feathers. Plumo, as. Cover with earth, or with
any other thing. Obruo, is. Couurir de terre, ou d'autre chose. S. Cover with a
covering. Operculo, as. Couurir d'vn couuercle. S. Cover properly, as beds or
tables be with clothes. Sterno, is. Compono. Esternir. S. Cover seeds with
earth. Occo, as. Est glebas co^fringere and sata operire. Cover or hyde with
salt. Obruere sale. Cover with wax. Caero, as. Incaero, as. Et Cero, as.
Cirer. S. Cover or a lidde. Operculum, Cooperculum, Integumentum, Orbis, is, m.
ge. Couuercle. Look covering. Coueret. Obrutus, a, um. Opertus, Tectus,
Velatus, a, um. Coopertus, ta, tum. Covert. S. Covered about. Circumtectus, a,
um. Covered before. Praetectus, a, um. Praeuelatus, a, u^. Covered in earth.
Coopertus in terra. Couuert en terre. S. Snow had covered all things, or all
was covered with snow. Nix omnia co^strauerat. Tout estoit couuert de niege. S.

Covered closely. Obcaecatus, a, um. Couuert aueugle. Covered friendly. Amictus,
a, um. Vide clothed. Covered as a bed or table is. Instratus, Stratus, a, um.
Compositus, ta, tum. Couuert, compose, appreste. S. Covered with feathers.
Plumatus, ta, tum. Couuert de plumes. Covered with slate or tyle. Imbricatus,
ta, tum. Covered with wax. Incaeratus, vel Inceratus, ta, tum. Incire. S.
Covering or ye cover of any thing. Aduelamen, Operculum, Operimentum,
Opertorium, Tegumen, Tegimen, Tegmentum, Tegumentum, Tegulum, Sceparnon,
Velamen, Amictus, Obstragulum, Tectum. Couuerture. S. Covering of a bed.
Look in couerlet, Kyuerlet, and Kyuering. Covering of a book. Inuoluerum,
Operculum libri, Sittybus, Membrana aut inuolucrum, quo libri ab iniuria
temporis, and puluerum integri co^seruantur. Enuelopoir, couerture. H. Covering
of a house, or like thing. Tectum, ti. n. g. Le tect and couuer^ure d'vne
maison. S. Covering of a house with tyle or slate. Imbricium cij, n. g.
Covering or rouffe of a house which is round. Petasus, si. m. g. Plin. 36.
cap. 13. Covering of a well or pytte. Puteal, lis.* Covering, horsing, or
leaping of a mare. Initus, tus. Compressus, us. Couerlet for a bed or other
like. Instratum, Obstragulum, Stragulum, Suppellectile, lis. Lodier, couuerture
du lict, parement. Vide Kiuering and Kyuerlet. Couerlet or course blanket, of
some called a hap-harlot, or a matte, or any covering of small value. Teges,
it is. Tegillum. Couerture ou natte faite de Jones. S. Et Tegeticula. Diminut.
Ang. A little couerlet. Couerlettes or clothes of Arras, Tapistrie, or verdure.
Peristroma, Stagulae vestes. Se more of couerlet, in kyueringe. Covertly or
closely. Abscondite, Latenter, Tecte, Tacit. Couuertement. S. To speak
covertly. Obscure loqui. Parler ^ouuertement. S.

Covet. Aueo, es, ere. Cupio, is. Expeto, it is, tiui, vel tij. Inhio, as.
Concupisco, is. Conuoiter. S. Covet fervently. Afficio, is. Ardere cupiditate.
Concupio, is. Concupisco, scis. Glisco, scis. Auide appetere, Percupere,
Recupere. Fort co^uoiter Covet marriage, or to be married. Nupturio, is. Refertur
ad foemi. Coueted. Cupicus, ta, tum. Concupitus, ta, tum, Desyderatus, ta, tum.
Conuoite. S. Coveting. Cupiens, Expetens. Conu^itant. S. Covetous. Auarus, a,
um. Auidus, a, um. Cupidus, Philargyrus, a, um. Trahax, cis. Percupidus, da,
dum. Conuoiteux. S. He is couetouse. etc. Est auarus. Est Philargyros. Est auri
sitientissimus. Lucris and opibus inhiat. Mira diuitiarum fames habet hominem.

Illi nil obstat, dum ne sit ditior alter.
Ferue^ auaritia, miseraque cupidine pectus.
Immoritur lucris, and amore senescit habendi. Est esurientissimus opum. Est
auidissimus lucri. Aurum immodice sitit. Inexplebili auri auiditate, and
hydropisi laborat. Aurum omni voto appetit. Maciem contrahit, fraudat que
genium, vt aurum congerat. Illi nullus satis est thesaurus. Ab ipsis etiam
statuis exigeret farinas. A mortuo tributum extorqueret. Aurum auidssime
esurit. Retia vbique tendit ad nummos. Querendae vndique pecuniae sese dedit.
Sacra fames auri, and illi germana ambitio, suum animu^ inuaserunt. Adeo coepta
est excrescere sua auri habendi cupido, vt suis non contenta finibus, aliena
moliatur inuadere. Auaritia ad iniuriam vsque grassatur. Animum adiunxit ad
congerendas opes ac censum. Ea est homini auaritia, vt cum iam alterum pedem
habuerit in cymba Charontis, nondum suae cupiditati sit praescripturus modum.
Auri virtus ingenitam sui habendi rabiem, vehemensque desiderium cunctis
induxit: ei tamen praeter caeteros. Ante lucana expergiscitur diligentia, auri
cupiditate inflammatus. Nu^mis adeo inhiat, vt sibi non sit amicus. Nullae illi
diuitiae sunt satis. Non Midae, non Croesi, non omnis Persarum copia explere
tartaream habendi ingluuiem potest. Lucri adeo est cupidus, vt ipsum non
aestas, non hyems, non ignis, non mare, non denique ferrum, a lucro dimoueat.
Sibi plaudit, ipse domi simul ac nummos conspexit in arca. Congestis vndique
saccis indormit inhians, and tanquam parcere sacris cogitur, aut pictis tanqua^
gaudere tabellis. Philargyria mentem suam tenet, occupat, illigat. Suum studium
congerendis nummis deuouit. Est studiosior lucri quam par sit. Animu^ habet ad
auaritia^ nimio plus inflexu^.

Covetous byer. Emax, cis. Qui aim fort a acheter. Covetousness or couetise.
Auaritia, Cupiditas, Cupido, Philargyria, Auiditas. Conuoitise. S. Covetousness
is the cause of much mischief. etc. Parit auaritia multa mala. Existunt,
nascuntur, proficiscuntur, proueniu^t, effluunt, emana^t, exoriuntur ex
auaritia multa mala. Multoru^ maloru^ causa, origo, principium, fons. radix
auaritia est. Multorum malorum causa, referenda ad auaritiam, conferenda in
auaritiam, adscribenda, assignanda, tribuenda auaritiae est. Culpam sustinet
auaritia multorum malorum. Covetousness is now a days of great force. etc. His
te^poribus latissime patet auaritia vbique, vbique locoru^, vbiuis, vbiuis
locoru^, nusquam non: est, dominatur, regnat, viget maxim, orb terrarum est
co^plexa, omniu^ animos occupauit, ac tenet, in animos omniu^ irrepsit, infecti
sunt oes auarititiae labe. Plus operae in re quae renda, in opibus congerendis,
in diuitijs colligendis, co^parandis, contrahendis ponitur, consumitur,
locatur, quam deceat. Auaritiae vitio hodie fere nemo non laborat, prope^si
omnes fere sunt ad auaritiam. Ad summu^ peruenit auaritia. Eo processit, eo est
auaritia progressa, quo maxim potuit, quo longius non datur, quo non licet
vlterius. Thou art euel spoken of, for thy covetousness. Auaritiae nomine male
audis: auaritiae flagras infamia, laboras infamia. Auaritiae tibi crime^
obijcitur, exprobratur: in te confertur auaritiae culpa. Tibi auaritiae nota
inuritur. Suspectus in primis es auaritiae nomine. Accusaris, reprehenderis,
exagitaris: vt in auaritiam pronior, ad auaritia^ procliuior, vt homo
diuitiarum nimis appetens, immoderate sitiens, supra modum cupidus, eupidior
quam satis est, auidor quam satis est, nimius in diuitiarum cupiditate.

Covetousness of bying. Emacitas. Le desir and affection de souuent acheter. S.
Covetousness of promotion. Ambitio, onis. Ambities, Ambitiositas, tatis foe. g.
Trop grand, Connoitise d' honneur. S. Couyn. Collusio, Coitio, Colludiu^, ij.
Collusion. Coultre of a plough. Dens arator. Planaratrum.* Vomis and vomer,
Dens vncus, Aratri ferru^ quod liras ducit. Coultre. H. Council, or an
assemble of people. Concilium, lij. n. genesis Concile ou assemble de peuple.
Council general or universal. Concilium oecumenicum. Assemble a council, or
to call a council. Cogere concilium, vel conuocare. Assembler le concile. S

To assemble to ye council. Coire in concilium. S'assembler auconcile. S.

To indicte or proclayme a council. Indicere concilium. Denoncer le concile.

To hold a council. Habere concilium. Tenir concile. S. Counsel general
holden at Nicia in Bethinia. Anno. 320. Antioche in Siria. Anno. 346. Arminium
in Italy. An. 361. Orleaunce in France. An. 813. Basile in Almayne. An. 1345.
Calcedon in Bethinia. An. 453. Carthage in Affricke. An. 419. Constaunce in
Heluetia. An. 1414. Constantinople. An. 869. Ferraria in Italy. An. 1428. Rome
in ye palaice Lateranu^. 1216 Liones in France. An. 1273.
Conciliu^. Nicenum. Antiochenum. Ariminense. Arelatense. Basiliense.
Calcidonense. Carthaginense. Constantiae. Constantinopolitanum. Ferrariense.
Lateranense. Lugdunense.



Counsel. Consilium, ij. n. g. Conseil. S. The great counsel. Senatus
principis peregrinus, vel praetorianus, Senatus castrensis and viatoribus,
Curia consiliaris, Consilium praetorianu^, vel regij comitatus, Curia regis
viatoria, Aulicum consilium. Le grand conseil. S.

Privy counsel. Sanctius interiusque consilium. Conseil estroict ou prive. S.

Chamber of counsel. Secretarium. La chamber du conseil. S.

To ask counsel. Consilium querere. In consilium sibi ^dhibere aliquem,
Consilia in aliqua^, rem sumere. Demander conseil. S

To give counsel. Monere, Consulere, Consilium afferre vel dare. Conseiller.
S.

To take counsel upon any affair, or in any matter. Consilia in aliquam rem
sumere, Assumere aliquem in consilium de re aliqua, Cum aliquo deliberare de re
aliqua. Se conseiller de quelque affair. S.

Counsel bewrayed or disclosed. Consiliu^ proditu^. Counsel, craft or good
policy in war. Stratagema, atis. n. g. Ruse and finesse de guerre. Counsel
or consultation, or the act of counsailing. Consultus, us. Consultatio, onis.
Deliberatio, onis. Consultation. S. Counsel or judgment written or not
written, concerning the state of man. Setentia, ae. foe. genesis Vide Sentence.
Counsel of Judges and great officers assembled. Prytaneia.* Counsel house.
Comitium, tij. Conciliabulum, Consistorium, Prytaneium, Senaculum. Le parloir
des senateurs. S. Counsel, or take counsel. Consilior, aris. Consulo, is.
Consulto, as. Suadeo, es, si. Consulo, aliquando regit Datiuum, vt Consulo
tibi. I counsel thee, or g^ue the counsel. Et aliquando Accusat. Vt consulo
te. I ask counsel of thee. Counsel or advice to find or get. Occupare
consilium. Consulere, Consilium trahere, vel capere. Prendre conseil. S.
Counsel one what to say or do, or to prompte one. Suggero, is. Suggerer. S.
Counsayled or aduiced or co^sulted. Consultus, a, u^. Cou^sailed or warned.
Praemonitus, Persuasus, a, u^. Commonitus, Monitus, Admonitus, Commonefactus,
ta, tum. Admonniste. S. Counsaylour. Consiliarius, and Consultor, tam ex part
dantis quam petentis. Celuy qui done conseil, ou qui demand conseil. S.
Counsayloure, or wise man which geues prudent and good counsel. Symbulus, a
Graecis (...), cuius contrariu^ est (...), Hoc est consilio carens,
inconsultus. Cou^sayler which gives deuelishe cou^seile. Abolus. Cou^saylers
of the privy cou^seile. Apolecti, Senatores Sanctiusque concilium quod ex
delectis co^stat viris qui and decuriones dicuntur, de quibus lege. 6. Liu.
lib. de bell. Maced. Counsaylour of a city. Buleuta, tae. Plin. Junior.
Conseiller de ville. S. Countenance. Frons, it is. Per periphras. Os, oris.
Vultus, us, m. g. Countenance. Pals. Countenance heavy and sad. Nubecula, ae.
Count, book of receites and expenses. Codex accepti and expensi, Tabulae vel
co^mentarius accepti and expe^si, Codex rationarius. Conte de la recepte and
despense. H. Counter or a table to cast a count on. Mensa, Trapeza, and
Teloniu^. Comptoir and table ou anciennement les argentiers comptoyent. S.
Counters for auditors. Abaculi. Vide compte. County or shyre. Satrapia, ae.
Seigneurie. S. County or gouerner of a province. Comes. Comte ou conte. H.
Counting board or table. Abacus. Vide compting. Cou^terfaite or forge.
Adultero, as. Adulteror, aris. Assimulo, as. Fingo, is. Imagino, as. Simulo,
as. Adultero, as. Imitor, aris. Adumbro, as. Effingo, is. Contrefaire. S.
Counterfaite an image or lykenes in karuing or painting. Effigio, as. Effingo,
is. Simulachrum adulterare, Premere personam. Figurer. Counterfaite any man.
Aliquem agere, Commentari aliquem, Hominis mores effingere, Sermones alicuius
exprimere, aut similitudinem. Contrefaire quelqu'^n. S. Countrefaite some
thing. Induere sinulationem alicuius rei. Contrefaire quelque chose.
Counterfayted. Adulterinus, a, um. Fictitius, a, um. Personatus, ta, tum.
Fictus, ta, tum. Effictus, ta, tum. Contrefaicte. S. And Pseudo joined to a
nowne or word, makes it after his own voice vt Pseudopropheta. Faulx
prophet. S. Counterfayted brother. Pseudo adelphus. Counterfayted co^ne.
Nummus adulterinus, Pecunia subdititia, Moneta adulterina, Moneta improba.
Monnoye contrefaicte. S. Counterfaytour. Fictor, ris. Mimus, mi. m. genesis Qui
contrefaict toutes gestes and countinances. S. Countermaunde. Amando, as. *
Countremure to a fortress or camp. Agger, eris. Countrepayne of a deed or
writing. Antapocha, ae. foe. g. Contrece^ule, contre lettre. S. Countrepointe
or couerlet of a bed. Instratum, Stragulum, li, n. g. Countretayle.
Antecopa.* Coupe. Cauea, Ornithoboscion, Viuariu^. Un cage. S. Coupe to feade
duckes in. Nessotrophion, Locus vbi anates clausae aluntur and pascuntur. Col.
lib. 8. Cap. 15. Couper. Vietor, ris. m. g. Tonnelier. Couple together. Copulo,
as. Iugo, as. Reddere iugales, Pango, is. Coupler ou accoupler. S. Couple two
shrewes together. Iungere vulpes. Couple, or a pair. Par, ris. Om. genesis Vne
couple. S. Couple. Copula, lae, foe. genesis Vne accouple. S. Couple, to couple
dogs. Copula. Vne couple a accoupler les chiens. Hinc apud Ouidium, Copulam
detrahere canibus. To uncouple hounds. Descoupler les chiens. Couple or to
yoke together. Copulare, Iugare. Coupler, accoupler. S. Coupled. Copulatus, ta,
tum. Accouple. S. Coupling or joining together. Copulatio, onis. f. genesis
Conioinction, union. Et Copulate. In couples or coniointly. Conioinctement. S.
Courage. Animus, mi. Audacia, Spiritus, us. Fiducia. Courage Quasi cordis
actio. S. Courage, or to make courageous. Addere animu^ vel audacia^, Animo,
as. Spiritus subdere, Animu^ alicui afferre, Alicuius animum arrigere, sieve
erigere, Alicui animum and animos dare, vel facere, Bono animo esse iubere
aliquem, Spiritus facere, Studium alicui inijcere, Animos excitare. Bailler ou
donner courage. S. To take courage. Colligere se, Confirmare animu^, Animos
erigere, Sumere animum. Prendre courage. S.

To leese courage. Elanguere, Despondere animum, Proijcere se, Succumbere,
Contrahere and demittere animum, Abijcere animum, Animo concidere. Perdre
courage. S.

Courageous. Animosus, a, um. Animatus, a, um. Audax, cis. Mactus, a, um.
Plenus animi, Praesta^s animi, Virilis animus. Qui est de grand fort, and
vaillant courage. S. Courageous body, or one of a good courage and heart. Vir,
ri, m. g. Animosus, Ferox, Praeferox, Fortis. Courageux. Coragious or swifte
horse. Acer equus. Courageous to be. Sustollere animos. Courageously. Animose,
Audacter, Audaciter, Ferociter, Fortiter. Courageusement. S. Couragiousnes.
Magnanimitas, tatis. foe. g. Course, which is of runninge or some pastime.
Cursura, Cursus, us. Tra^scursus, us. Course, le course. Course or not fine.
Pinguis, e. Crassus, sa, sum. Gros. S. Course or turn ordinate, or succession
by turn, as I first, and you next. etc. Subalternatio, Vices, Vicissitudo.
Le tour and changement. Et Subalterno, as. Ang. To follow by course and turn.
Course by course, or turn by turn, or coursly. Alternatim, Alternatis, vel
Alternis vicibus, Subalternatim. Par fois. S. Course of age. Aetatis
progressus. Course of the fever. Accessio febris. Course or order of placing.
Ordo, inis. vide Order Course or order of service at the table, as the first
course. Prima mensa. The second. Secunda me^sa. etc. Course bread. Rubidus
panis, Panis secundarius, sieve secundus, Cibarius panis, vel potius Ater panis,
Autopyron, Panis autopyrus, id est ex tota farina confectus sine excretione
furfurum. Gros pain, pain de la fenestre. S. Courser, a horse. Admissarius.
Vide Horse. Courses of waters by pypes and trenches. Ductus aquaticus. Coursly
or badly. Crasse. Grosement. S. Court of parliament. Curia centenaria, Senatus
centumuiralis, Comitia. La court de parliament. S. All the court. Concilium
curiae vniuersum. Toute la court. S.

Court. Atrium, ij. n. g. Court. S. Court royal, or kings court. Basilica,
Aula, Comitatus. La court du prince. S. Court hall. Basilica, Regia Aula.
Maison royale. S. Court Baron. Curia dominicalis. And the sewters to such
courts be calls. Curiales. Court where matters of law be pleaded. Forum, ri.
n. ge. Lieu public ou on tient les plaide. S. Court or backesyde, which
serves for poultry. Chors, vel Cohors. Le court. etc. Courts sovereign,
judging by equity. Officinae iustitiae, ad amussim illae quidem exacta iuditia
promentes, sed equitate tamen condita and temperata. Les course souueraines
iugeans par equite. S. Court yard. Platea, eae. foe. g. Courtier. Aulicus,
ci. m. ge. Curialiste, courtisan. S. Courtely apparel. Aulicus apparatus.
Courtly, or pertaining to ye court. Aulicus, a, um. De court. S. Courtlyke, or
after the manner of the court, or after the sort of a courtier. Aulice. Cousyn.
Affinis, Cognatus, Consanguineus. Prochain and allie. S. Cousyn by ye fathers
side. Agnatus, vel ta. Patruelis. Parent du cost du pere. S. Cousyn german
by ye mother, which is the son or daughter of my mothers sister or brother.
Matruelis. Com. genesis Neueu ou niece. H. Cousines germayne, the sons of two
brothers or of two sisters. Fratres patrueles. Sobrini, Co^sobrini. Cousins
germains filz de deux freres, ou de deux seurs. S. Vide consanguinitye. Coy.
Look in Coi.
C. ANTE. R.
CRabbe fyshe. Cancer, Carcinus, ni. m. genesis Cancres. H. And it is also a sign
celestial. Crabbe, or a woodde apple. Arbutum, ti. Vnedo, onis, f. g. Pomme de
boys. Pal. Crabbe tree. Arbutus, ti. foe. g. Un arbosier. Crabbed body.
Acerbus, Immitis, Proteruus, ua, uum. Proterue. S. Cratche. Dilanio, as. Scabo,
is. Scalpo, is. Grater. S. Cratche out ones eyes. Oculos exculpere. Crack or
to brag foolyshely. Exultare. Se vanter follement. S. Crack or brag of him
self in some thing. Iactare se in, vel de re aliqua. Se vanter de quelque
those. Cracking, bragging, and vanting. Ostentatio, Iactatio, onis, foe. g.
Vanterie. S. Cracker, bragger, or a vaunter. Iactator, Thraso. Un vanteur, and
gloreux. S. Crack, bounce, farte, sound, or a thumpe. Crepitus, us. m. g.
Craquement. Crack or make sound. Crepo, as, pui. Craqueter. S. Cracked or
ryuen, as a vessel is. Pertusus, a, um. Vide chynked. Cradle. Cinabulum,
Cunabulum, Cunae, arum, Incunabula, Cunabula. Berceau. Maillot. Cradle band.
Instita, ae. foe. ge. * Bend ou band de berceau. Pals. Cradle necessaries, or
al ^hinges pertaining to the swadeling of infantes. Incunabula. plu. Craft or
slight. Dolus, Fraus, Dolus malus. Malengin. S. By craft and subtlety. Ex
insidijs. Par cautelle. S

He which is not crafty. Incallidus. Qui n' est point caut. S.

Craft. Ars, it is. Astus, us. Astutia, Dolus, Insidiae, Techna, Vafritia,
Versutia. Astuce, cautelle. Craft, or craftines, or subtlety. Minerua,
Solertia. Vide Subtlety. Craft, mystery, or occupation. Minerua, Techna, ae.
Ars, Artificium. Art. S. Craft to chase or imbosse plate. Anaglyptice, es,
foe. g. sieve Anaglyphice, es, foe. g. Craft musical. Choraula, Ars musica.
Art de music. S. Craft to get favor or goods. Captatio, onis. f. g. Craft
of running, wrestling, or such other feats of actiuitie. Athletica, ae. f. g.
L'art de bien luicter. Craft to work brass, copper, or metal. Aerificium.
ij. n. g.* Craft to ordeyne a banquet or supper. Coenacularia, ae f. ge.*
Craft or mystery of making woollen clothe. Lanificium, ij. Lanifacture. S.
Craft or manner of cramminge stuffinge, feding or fatting of cattle. Fartura,
ae. Farctura, ae. foe. genesis Colum. Crafts man that works with handye
labor. Artifex, icis. Faber, bri. Mechanicus, ci. Opifex, cis. Technides.
Artisan, ou artiste. S. Faber. Is also a general latin to all handycraftes
men, as Faber ferrarius, A smithe. Faber lignarius, A wryght. etc. Crafty or
subtle. Astutus, Callidus, Dolosus, Infidiosus, Pellax. Subdolus. Vafer, ra,
rum. Solers, it is. Versutus, Vulpinus, a, um. Cautus, a, um. Ca^t and fin. S.
Crafty accusation. Sycophantia, ae. foe. genesis Faulse accusation, tromperie. S.
Crafty accusation or challenge. Calumnia, ae. foe. g. Crafty accuser or
chalenger. Calumniator vel trix, Sycophanta, tae, m. g. Calomniateur. S.
Crafty, subtyle and wyly fellow. Veterator, oris. m. g. Caulteleux, fin and
ruze, S. Et Veteratorius, a, um. Subtyle and crafty. Fin, cauteleux. S. Ac
veteratorie. Aduerb. By craftiness. Par ruze and finesse. Crafty or colorable
beginning of an oration. Insinuatio, onis. foe. g. Crafty conueyaunce.
Subductio, onis. foe. g. Crafty conueyer. Subductor, oris. m. genesis Crafty or
deceitful prankes or touches. Offucia, ae. Offuciae, arum. Tromperie and fard.
S. Crafty fellow, which will turn as often as he list. Versipellis, and hoc
versipelle. Crafty, inuentiue or subtyle. Technicus. Crafty inuentour.
Technicus, Technides. Crafty knaves or liars. Tenebriones, Mendaces and dolosi,
qui mendacijs and astutijs suis quasdam quasi tenebras obijciunt. Call. Crafty
lie. Callidum, vel Tenebrosum mendaciu^. Crafty painting or polyshyng of a
thing, to make it saleable. Mangonium, ij. Regratteme^t, and fardement de
vieilles chooses pour les mieulx vendre. S. Et Mangonicus, a, um. Ang.
Pertaininge to that craft. De maquignon ou regratteur. S. Crafty speaker.
Versutiloquus, a, um. Qui parle cauteleusement. S. Crafty or subtyle workyng.
Sutella, ae. Aliqui Sutela, Dolosa astutia. Fest. Crafty to be. Vulpinor, aris.
Var. Craftily. Astute, Astu, Calide, Dolose, Site, Subdole, Insidiose, Vafre,
Versute, Caute. Cautemen^. Craftily to convey. Subduco, cis. Vide convey.
Craftelyke or very workema^ly done. Affabre, Faberrime, Sole^te. Par grand
artifice. S. Craye or gorge of a bird. Ingluuies, ei. Vesicula gutturis. Le
poche d'oyseau. H. Crake, or to brag stoutely. Paratragoedio, id est exaggero
and verborum magnitudine aliquid augeo. Plaut. Craker. Vide Bragger, Cracker.
Cramme or to fylle. Farcio, iui, re. Remplir, farcir. S. Cramme in. Inesco,
scis. Infarcire, Effarcire. Farcir. S Crammed full. Fartim. Aduerb. Cramming or
stuffing. Fartura, ae. Et Farctura, ae. foe. genesis Colum. Crampe, which is a
defecte of the sennowes and muscles, whereby sometime the whole body, and
sometime part thereof is stretched, if it be in part of the body, then it is
thus Englished, crampe: if it be in the entier body (which is rare) the name
thereof in our mouther tongue is not known. Conuulsio, onis, Spasmus. Graece
(...). Conuulsion ou retirement de nerfs, Spasme. S. Crampe of such kind that
the senowes are so stiff, they can not bow. Tetanus, ni. m. ge. Plin. That
has such crampe. Tetanicus, ca, cum. Plinius.

Crane a bird. Grus, is. Palamedaea auis. Grue. H. Cranes which be young,
called vipions. Vipiones. Minores grues, sicut pipiones minores columbi. Plin.
lib. 10. cap. 19. Crane, which is an engine to draw up weightye things.
Ergatum, ti. n. g. Cranny, or creuice in the ground. Vide chynke. Crannied and
broken or clefte. Crenatus, Fimbriatus, Serratus. Crene, and frange. S.
Crannied or chinked to be. Rimas agere. Se creuasser. S. Crashe or to make a
noise. Crepito, as. Crepo, as. Craqueter. S. Crashe with the teeth. Frendeo,
es. Premere dentes. Infrendeo, es. Strido, is. Strideo, es. Grincer les dens de
grand courroux. S. Crates, a Theban and Cynike Philosopher, the disciple of
Diogenes, which reducing all his substance into money, left it with a
banker, on this condition, that if his children should be Philosophers, he
should destribute the money to the nedy citezins, thinking a philosopher to
need nothing: but if they were Idiotes he should give it them, that wanting
virtue, riches might sustain their necessity. others say that he cast his
substance into the sea (that he might more freely adicte his mind to
philosophy) saying: hence with a mischief, you wicked inticeme^ts, I will
drown you, least hereafter you drown me: for he thought he ne could
possess, both riches and virtue together. Crates, is. mas. ge. Crave.
Emendico, as. Proco, as. Rogo, as. Crauer. Mendicus, Petitor, Procus, Rogator,
vel Trix. Homo petax. Coquin S. Craving. Mendicitas, Rogatus. Coquinerie. S.
Craving, or shameful asking. Procacitas, tatis. f. g. Crawe, or the croppe of
a bird. Ingluuies, Vesicula gutturis. Le poche d'vn oyseau. H. Cream. Flos
lactis, Cremor lactis, Pugue lactis. Creme. H. Creape upon ye belly like a
serpent. Repo, is. Repto, tas. Se trainer sur le ventre. S. Creape away by
stelth. Subrepo, is. Idem. Creape forth like a serpent. Proserpo, is. Se
color. S It is spoken of things growyng. Vt proserpit herba. Plin. Creape
forth. Prorepo, is. Sorth and sailler horse. S. Creape in. Irrepo, is. Vt
Irrepit in hominum mentes dissimulatio. Cic. Dissimulation creapes into men's
minds. Creape under. Surrepo, is. subrepo, is. Grauir. S. Creape unto. Adrepo,
is. Se trainer verse quelque chose. Creape into (or to get by little and
little) ones frendshyp. Adrepere ad amicitiam alicuius. Petit a petit acquerir
l'amitie de quelqu'vn. S. Creape like a vine or Iuye, or such like. Erro, as,
are. Creaping beast or worm, and al thing that creapeth naturally. Reptile,
lis. Toute best qui rampe and se train. S. Creaping here and there like a
vine. Errans, it is. Erraticus, a, um. Vide Wandering. Creaping upon the belly.
Reptatus, tus. m. g. Tramement sur le veentre. S. Create, or to make any
thing. Creo, as, aui, are. Creer and donner estre a quelque chose. S. Create a
consul. Consulem creare. Creer un consul. S Created. Creatus, a, um. Creatoure.
Creator, ris. m. g. Createur. S. Creator of the world. Creator, Procreator,
Aedificator, and opifex mundi deus. Sator coelestium. Createur du monde. S.
Creation. Creatio, onis. f. g. Creation. S. Creation of magistrates. Creatio
magistratuum. Cicero. 3. de legi. Creature. Creatura, ae, foe. genesis Credence.
Authoritas, it is. Fides, ei, foe. genesis Credit. Credence lost. Fides labefacta.
Credence almost lost. Fides affecta. S. Credible. Credibilis, le. Credible,
ou creable ou croyable. S. Credit. Gratia, Authoritas, tatis, foe. g. Le
credit and fauueur qu' a aueun. S. Credit. Fides, ei, foe. genesis Le credit.
Credit, that which is owed. Creditum. Aes alienum, Debitum. Debte d'argent
priest. S. vne crea^ce. Aes nostrum. Which is owed to us. To be in credit. In
authoritate esse. Gratia flagrare. Estre en credit. S.

To be in great credit with one. Gratiam alicuius tenere, Apud aliquem
plurimum posse, Priores parts habere apud alique^, Valere gratia apud aliquem,
esse in gratia cum aliquo. Auoir grand credit enuers aucun. S.

To be out of credit. Authoritate egere, Non optime audire, Opinione laborare.
N'auoir pas bon credit. S.

To leese his credit. Fidem consumere, Perdere, Labefacere, Labefactare. Perdre
son credit. S.

He has lost his credit. De gradu potentiae deiectus est. Il a perdu son
credit. S.

They have lost their credit. Fides nuper deficere eos coepit. Il ont perdu
leur credit. S.

To take money upon credit. Mutuas pecunias sumere. Prendre argent a credit. S.

Creditour, which is he to whom I owe money. Creditor, oris, m. g. Un
creancier. S. Creke or or cry like a gose. Strepo, is. vel Glacito, as. Author
Philomelae. Creke or extreme part of an haven. Crepido, inis. foe. genesis
Creple. Claudus, Claudipes. Boisteux. S. Crepple rouffe. Interpensiua, orum. n.
g. Vitruu. Cresses herb. Cardamine, Cardinum, Nasturtiu^, and Cressio.
Cresson. But the water cresse is called Sisymbrium cardamine vel aquaticum.
Cresson d' eaue. Dod. Creste of the heirs, or the sheade in the mydle of ye
forehead, up to the crown: In wome^s heads it is plainly seen when one half
of the hair lies on the one side, and the other on the contrary. Discrimen
capillorum, Aequamentum. La creste de cheueus. H. Creste of a helmet, or salet.
Conus, ni. m. g. Crista, ae, foe. g. Vne creste. Crewet for wine, or other
licour. Amula, ae. Batiochus, Guttus, ti. Simpulum. Burette. Pals. Creues or
cranny. Look in thyncke. Creuice a fyshe. Ca^marus, ri, Gammarus, Astacus.
called in the French tongue. Creauise d'eau doulx. * Escreuisse. H. Cribbe or
maunger. Praesepe, pis. Praesepes, is. Praesepium, pij. In quo pabulum iumentis
apponitur. La creiche, ou mengeoire d' un estable. H. Cry. Clamo, as. Clamito,
as. Vociferor, aris. Crier. Cry alarm. Edere clamorem, Proclamo, as.
Profundere clamorem, Occlamito, as. Tollere clamorem, vel vocem. Crier a haulte
voix. Cry a larges, when a reward is given to workmen. Stipem vociferare.
Cry like a goose or gander. Strepo is. At potius, Glacito, as. C'est un mot
qui ce dit quand les oyes crient. S. Cry like a cow, or a bull. Boo, as, are.
Mugler, Bugler. S. Cry after one. Poscere aliquem clamore, vel vociferatione.
Crier apres aucun. S. Cry before. Proclamo, as. Crier deuant. etc. S. Cry or
to creke. Concrepo, as. Interstrepo, Strepo, is. Crier and craquiter. S. Cry
softelye or easelye. Submisse clamare, Succlamo, as. Cry like a crane. Gruo,
is. Festus. Gruir. S. Cry like a dog or fox. Obgannio, is. Oggannio, is.
Vide Bark. Cry like a child. Vagio, is, ire. Braire comme font les petits
enfans. Cry like a beast. Rudo, is, di. Braire. Cry like a crow or raven.
Crocito, as. Crocio, is. Grailler, croailler. S. Cry like a frogge or toode.
Coaxo, as. Quoaxo, as C' est quand les raines crient. S. Cry like an howl.
Cucubo, as, aui, are. Aucthor Philomelae. Cry out. Exclamo, as. Occlamo, as.
Clamorem efferre, vel tollere, Proclamare, Vociferari. Crier a haulte voix. S.
Cry out against one with rebukeful words. Occento, as. Cry often.
Conclamito, as. Braire ou crier souuent. S. Cry unto. Acclamo, as, Conclamo,
as. Cry of the crier. Praeconium. La criee du crieur. S. Cry or a
proclamation. Praeconium, Edictum, ti. n. genesis Cri public. S. Crier or bedell.
Praeco, nis. Un crieur public. S. Crier out. Exclamator, Vociferator. Brayand,
ou brayard. Crying of a child. Vagitus, us. Brayement qui font les petits
enfans. Crying of an owl. Vlulatus, tus. m. g.* Cricke or disease in the
neck. Opisthotonos, Et Opisthotonicus, a, um. He that has the cricke. Hinard.
S. Crime. Crimen, inis, Culpa, Offensa. Crime. S. Cryminall. Criminalis, le.
Adiectiuum. Crymesyn color. Phaenicius color.*Coccus tinctoria, Cramoisinus
color. Cramoisi. S. Crymesyn silk. Charmesinum. * Sericum coccinium. Veloux
cramoisi. S. Crystal. Crystallus, Crystallu^. Crystal. H. Et Crystallinus, a,
um. Ang. Of cristall. Qui est de crystal. S. Et Zeros Is the cristal spotted
with black. Cristall cups, or vessel of cristall. Crystallina. Cristall
stone. Chrysoberillus.* Cristmas banquete, or feast. Charistia. plur. Cristmas
caroll. Sicinnium, ij. tamen vsurp. Cristmas holy days. Terminalia festa. So
said because they end the year. Vide Christ. Croke like a crow or raven.
Crocito, as. Crocio, is. Grailler. S Croke that is great. Harpago, Hama, Vncus.
Vngrand croc. S. Croke footed. Curuipes, dis. Flexipes, is. Loripes, dis.
Varipes, dis. Qui ha la iambe tortu. Croke toed or anckled, or having crooked
toes or anckles, or that have their toes or anckles swelled that they may
uneath go. Scaurus, vel Scaura. Horat. Crooked staff. Vngustus, Fustis vncus.
Sext. Pom. Crook necked. Obstipus, pa, pum. Torcol. S Crookebacked or
crowchebacked. Varicosus, a, u^. Look in crowche. Crook legged. Valgus, a,
um. Varus, a, um. Crooked. Aduncatus, a, um. Aduncus, Curuatus, Curuus,
Incuruus, Obliquus, Pandus, Recuruus, Tortus, Toruus, Valgustus, a, um, Varus,
Vncinatus, a, um. Vncus, a, um. Tortu, Courbe. Crooked clubbe or staff.
Aerumnula, ae. Vncinus, Vngustus. Vt supra. Crooked elbowed. Ancus, a, um. *
Ancus appellatur, qui aduncum brachium habet, vt exporrigi non possit. Sextus
Pomp. Crooked hand in writing, or crooked line written. Vacillans, vel Vagans
litera. Crooked horned beasts. Camuri boues. Nam Camurus, a, um. idem est ac
inflexus, and curuus. Crooked horse. Tetanicus equus. * Vide crampe. Crooked
nose, or he that has a crooked nose. Resimus, Simus nasus, Simo, onis. Camus.
H. Vide Camosed. Crooked sword used in Persia. Acinacis, is, m. g. Gladius
persicus. Horat. lib. 1. Carm. Crooked to be. Curuesco, scis. Incuruesco, scis.
Recuruor, aris. Estre courbe. S. Crookedly. Recurue, Torue, Toruiter, Torua
Toruum. Crookednes, croking or bowyng. Accliuitas, Curuamen, Obliquitas,
Conuexitas, Curuatio, Flexura, Flexio, Pandatio, Curuatura. Courbement ou
courbure. S. Crooke^, or to make crooked. Adunco, as. Curuo, as. Hamo, as.
Incuruo, as. Sinuo, as. Flecto, is. Conflecto, is. Courber. S. Crookernewell, a
town in Deuonshere. Vxella. Ptolem. in prima Europae tabula. Croking of crows
or ravens. Crocitus, us. Crocitatio, onis. foe. g. Cromme of bread. Mica, ae.
Mye, mioche. Crone or a kebber sheape, not able to be holden or kept forth.
Adaria, Adasia, Reiecula, Reiecula ouis. Crone out old sheep. Adarias
pascere, vel reijcere, Reieculas carpere. Cronicle. Look chronicle. Croppe or
craye of a bird. Ingluuies. Vide craye and crawe. Cross. Crux, cis. foe. genesis
Vne croix. S. Cross or gallows. Patibulum, li. neut. genesis Vide Gallows.
Cross bearer. Crucifer. Cross bow. Balista, Archibalista,* Scorpio manualis,
Arcubalista. Arbaleste. S. Crossebowe shoter. Scorpionarius, Arcubalistarius.
Arbalestrier. S. Cross pere of a ship whereunto the sail is fastened.
Antenna, nae. f. g. Le bois trauersant le mas. H Cross way. Trames, it is.
Chemin a trauers des champs. Crowche or crooked backed. Gibber, Gibbosus,
Gibbus. Bossu. H. Crowches. Grallae, arum. foe. g. Eschasses. S. Et Grallator.
He that goes on crowches. Crow. Cornix, cis. Coruus, Satyria, Cornicula.
Corneille, Graille, Graillat. H. Et Cornicor, caris. Depon. To chatter like a
crow. Gazouiller. S. Crow with a red byll. Pyrocorax. De quo lege Plin.
lib. 10. cap. 48. Crow like a cock. Canto, as. Chanter. Pals. Cucurio, is,
ire. Et coccyssare. To crow like a young cockerell.* Crowefoote herb.
Ranunculus, Secundum Turn. And there are seven diverse kinds hereof, read
Turner in the second volume of his Herbale, fol. 114. Chrysanthemu^, Sillago.
It is also called goldeknappes. Crowyshe, or of a crow. Coracinus, a, um.
Coruinus, a, um. Crown. Corona, ae. foe. g. Couronne. Crown of the head.
Apex, icis. Vertex, cis. Le sum de la test. H. Crowned. Coronatus, a, um.
Couronne. S. To crown. Corono, as. Couronner. S.

Crowner an officer. Questor paricidius. Crouper for a horse. Postela, lae.
Postilena. Croupiere de cheual. S. Crucify. Cruci affigere, Crucibus dare, In
crucem agere, Suffigere cruci, In crucem tollere. Crucifier. S. Crucified.
Crucifixus, a, um. Crucify. S. Cruditie, or lack of good digestion. Apepsia,
Cruditas. Indisgestion. S. Cruditie or rawnes. Cruditas, it is. f. g. Crudite. S.
Cruel. Atrox, cis. Crudelis, le. Cruentus, a, um. Dirus, Durus, Foedus, Ferox,
cis. Ferus, a, um. Inclemens, Inhumanus, a, um. Immanis, ne. Immitis, e.
Malignus, a, um. Proteruus, Rigidus, Sa^guinarius, a, um. Sanguineus,
Sanguinolentus, Seuerus, Saeuus, Teter, ra, rum. Toruus, Truculentus, Trux,
cis. Turpis, Viole^tus, ae, u^. Importunus, a, um. Improbus, ba, bum. Austerus,
a, um. Teter in aliquem, Praeditus crudelitate. Cruel. S. To become cruel.
Deduci de animi lenitate. Venir a estre cruel. S.

More cruel then ever before. Saeuissimus quam qui vnquam. Le plus cruel qui
fut iamais. S.

Cruel or unmerciful governance. Manliana Imperia. Cruel in governance.
Imperiosus, a, um. Vt imperiosa coniux. Ovid. Cruel rebels, or great
babblers. Amorrhaei. An Hebrew word. Reg. 3. Cruel with fury or madness.
Vesanus, a, um. Insense Horse du sens. S. Cruel to be. Dureo, es. Saeuio, is.
Estre cruel. Cruelly. Acriter, Atrociter, Ferociter, Impie, Inclementer,
Rigide, Saeue, Severe, Seueriter, Tyrannice, Violenter, Tetre. Et eius compar.
sunt Tetre, ius, rhyme. Tragice, Truciter, Truculenter, Crudeliter,
Cruciabiliter, Saeuiter, Cruelleme^t. S. Cruelly to do. Maligno, as. Malignor,
aris. To use the cruelty of an other. Crudelitatis alienae fungi ministerio.
Exe^er la cruaulte d'autruy. S.

Cruelty. Acritas, it is. Atrocitas, Austeritas, Acrimonia, Diritas, Feritas,
Immanitas, Impietas, Inclementia, Proteruitas, Saeuitia, Saeuitudo, Tetritudo,
Trucitas, Truculentia, ae. f. g. Tyrannis, dis. Crudelitas, Indignitas,
Importunitas. Cruaulte. S. To use cruelty against one. Crudelitatem in aliquem
adhibere. Vser de cruaulte. S.

Cruelty used at home in ye house. Domestica crudelitas. Cruaulte faicte en la
maison. S. Cruelty well known. Nobilitata crudelitas. Cruaulte cognue par
tout. S. Cruet for wine. Look in crewet. Crumme of bread, or of any thing.
Mica. ae. foe. g. Mie Miette. S. Cruste. Crusta, crustulum, Crustum. Crouste.
H. And it is the over part of meat, broyled, fried, and roasted. Cry. Look in
Cry.
C. ANTE. V.
CVbbe or young Fox. Vulpecula. foem. genesis Regnardeau. S. Cubyte. Vlna, ae.
Cubitus, ti. m. g. Le could ou Coudee de pied and demi. Cuckolde. Vir bonus,
Corniger. * Bonne homme, quocqueu. Pals* Cuckowe bird. Cuculus, Cucullus,
Co^^^, gis. Cocou, Coquu. H. Cuckowes note, by circumlocution, where one can
singe but one tune, or tell one tale. Monologiu^, ij. Et Monologus, Is he that
does so.* Cucumbre herb. Cucumer, Cucumis, Elaterium, Cucumis satiuus.
Concombre. H. Cucumber wild or savage. Cucumis asininus, Erraticus,
Siluestris, Anguinus. Concombre sauuage. H. A Cucumbre garden. Cucumerarius,
vel Cucumerarium. Le lieu ou croissent les concombres. S.

Culinder. Colum, li. n. g. Couloir. H. Cullayse brothe or gruel. Olus, eris.
Pulmentum, Pulmentarium. Vide Brothe. Culle, a little fyshe with a great head,
it breadeth in ryuers of fresh water, and most commonly lies amongst
gravel, and under slattes and stones in sandy places, it is also called a
myllers thombe. Capito, Cephalus fluuialis. Munier eo quod circa moletrinas
versetur. Vilain. Ob victus spurcitiem: Testard, a capitis magnitudine.
Culpable or gylty. Compos culpae, Reus, a, um. Culpabilis, Vituperabilis.
Blasmable, digne d' estre blasme. Culuer. Columbus, vel ba. Peristera, ae.
Tamen peristerae sunt domesticae. Coulon. Et Columbinus, a, um. Columbaris, re.
De pigeon. S. Ang. Of a culuer. Look Dove. Culuer hooles. Cellulae columbarum.
Les bolins d' un columbier. S. Culuer house. Peristereon, Peristerotrophiu^,
Columbarium. ij. n. g. Colombier. H. Cultre for a plough. Vomer, ris. Look
coulter. Culuerine, a piece of artillery used in wars, a kind of great
gunne. Colubrina, Paradinus, and Colubrum vocant. Vne Couleuurine, piece
d'artillerie. S. Cumfrey herb. Symphitum magnu^, Symphiton, Petraeon,
Consolida mayor. La consolida mayor. S. Cummin herb or sede. Cuminum, Cyminum,
Cuminum satiuum. Comin. H. Cundite heads or the houses or vaultes over cu^dite
heads in the fields. Castella. Lieux es champs faicts en facon de petits
chasteaulx, voultez, par dedens lesquels passent tuyaux des fontaines, qui
viennent en vne ville, les clefs des fontaines les regards. Cudite to bring
water to any place. Aquagium, Aquaeductus, Aquarum inductio, Canalis,
Emissarium, Iter aquae, Meatus. Conduict a mener l'eaue en quelque lieu. S.
Cundite pipes. Salientes, Siphones. Cunnyng. Look in conning. Cunningly.
Literate. idem. Country. Patria, rus. Solum, Tractus, us. Orbis, Regio, Natio.
Pais ou pays. Et Patrius, a, um. Ruralis, le. Et Rurestris, tree. Ang. Of the
country. Look in country. Vergil. En vnquam patrios, longo post tempore fines.
Behoulde if after length of time these cuntry coasts I see.
Country or vyllage. Patria, Rus, Villa. Country like. Ruralis, le. Rusticus,
a, um. Rusticanus. Des champs. S. Cupborde or dresser. Abacus, Abax,
Armariolum, Repositorium. Buffet, dressoir. H. Cupbord cloth or carpet. Tapes,
it is, Accus. tem, vel ta, Tapete, Tapetum. Tapis. Pals. Cup. Calix, cis.
Calice. S. Cup or bole of Iuie. Cissybium, ij. n. genesis H. Cup for wine.
Cymbium, ij. Sinus, ni. Sympiniu^, Alij Sympuuium, legunt. H. Cup or maser.
Crater, ris, cratera, ae. foe. ge. Vne coupe, ou tasse. S. Cup or a bowl to
drink in. Calix, Cupa, Cratera, Diatretum. Vne coupe, ou tasse a boire. S.
Cup of gold or silver for wine. Phiala, Oenophagium. Cup with a handle.
Cantharus, ri. mas. genesis It is more properly a tankerd or a judge. Un hanap. S.
Cup with many ears. Charchesia. * Carchesium. Virgil. H. Cup with a border
of gold. Chrysendeta, ae. foe. genesis Mart. Cup wherein wine is alayed. Luter,
ris. Mixtarius. Call. Cup containing the third part of a li. Triens, it is. m.
ge. Nec habet infoelix quem porrigat ore trientem. Iuuen. sat. 3. Cup bearer.
Oenophorus, Pocillator, Propinator. * Curde. Coagulum, li. * Colostra,
Colostrum. I have read Colostrum thus Englyshed. Bestning in a woman's pappe.
Vnde in mea leua opinione fit collostratio lactantium. * Curde and to join
together. Coagulo, as. Fair prendre and conioindre ensemble. S. Curded.
Coagulatus, a, um. Curding. Collostratio, Coagulatio. Tell prinse and
coni^nction. S. Cure or charge. Cura, ae. Et Curo, as. Is to take cure or
chaxge. Cure or a parish. Curionatus, Curia, Paroecia, Sacerdotium
paroeciarum. Vne cure, ou paroice. S. Cureate of a parish. Curio, onis. m. g.
Flamen curialis. Le cure d'vne paroice. S. Cure or to make whole. Medeor, eris.
car. prae. and sup. Medico, as. Medicor, aris. Curo, as. Sano, as. Curer. S.
Curable, or able to be cured. Curabilis, Medicabilis, Medibilis, Sanabilis, le.
Sanable. S. Cured or healed. Curatus, Senatus. Cure. S. Curet, breastplate,
corselet or stomager. Thorax, is. Halecret, corselet, and toute armure du
corpse. S. Et Thoracatus, a, um. Vestu ou arm, d'vn halecret ou corselet. S.
Ang. He that wears a curet. etc. Cureing or healing. Curatio, Sanatio. Cure.
Cureing or healing by ointment. latraleptice. Call. Curiosity or to much
diligence. Affectatio, Curiositas, Morositas. Curiosite. S. Curiosity about
trifling matters. Micrologia. Curious. Curiosus, a, um. Curieux. S. This
English is taken after two sorts, the one well, the other not so well, as
curious, careful, or troubled for matters not achiued to our expectation or
otherwise. And curious in desieringe over much attendaunce, and sometime
having a solemn and sensual countenance, yet both the voices have this
latin.* Curious more then neadeth, which is by translation foolish. Morosus,
a, um.. Mal aise a contenter. Curious form of speaking. Affecta oration.
Curious persons. Coryces.* Curious work. Accuratum opus. Curiously or
exactly. Accurate, solerter. Curiously and scripulously. Affectate, Curiose,
Scrupulose, Ambitiose. Curieusement. S. Curiously or with great pain. Anxie,
Religiose. For curieusement S. Curle headed. Concinnatus, a, um. Crispus,
Subcrispus. Crespe. Curle or to crispe the heeres. Crispare. Fair crespe.
Here curled. Crispati capilli, vel vibrati. Cheueulx crespes. S.

Curre dog. Gregarius canis, Canis villaticus, Domesticus canis.. Chien d'
hostel. H. Currier or dresser of lether. Coriarius, Coriorum concinnator.
Coureur. H Et Alutarius. Couroyeur. S Curry or to tanne or dress skins.
Coria perficere. Cou^oyer des cuirs. S. Curror. Excursor, Hemerodromus. Look
Post. Curse. Abominor, aris. Agere diris malis, Blasphemo, as. Detestor, aris.
Deuoueo, es. Execro, as. Execror, aris. Maledico, cis. Maleloquor, eris.
Obloquor, eris. Prophano, as. Prophanum facere. Mauldire. S. Curse one.
Imprecare alicui, Vae alicui imprecari, Maledicere, Deuouere alique^, Diras
alicui imprecari, Dira precari alicui, Male precari alicui. Mauldire aucun. S.
Curse by the order of the church. Anathematizo, as. Anathematizer. Pals. Curse
by order of law. Excommunico, as. Vide Excommunicate. Cursed. Abominatus,
Deuotus, Execratus, Detestatus, Foedus, a, um. Maledictus, Nefarius, Peruersus,
Sceleratus, Sacer, cra, crum, Scelerosus, Scelestus, a, um. Mauldict. S.
Cursedly. Perverse, Scelerate, Scelerose, Sceleste, Nefarie. Meschamment. S.
Cursednes. Scelus, eris. Mechancete. S. Cursing or curse. Anathema, it is.
Blasphemia, Detestatio, Deuotio, Dirae. plur. Execratio, onis. f. g. Dira
precatio vel deprecatio, Maledicentia, Maledictum, Maledictio. Mauldisson. S
Deuotorius, a, um. Ang. Concerning cursing or a curse. Curtayne. Cortina,
Velarium, Anabathrum, Auleum tragicum, Siparium, Supparium, Supariu^ Scenicum,
Apule. Inquit velum mimicum secu^dum eundem, Scenicum velum. Courtine. Vide
Cortayn^. Curtayne rings. Annuli velares and cortinales. Les anneaus de
courtines. Curtayne about a haule. Auleum, a Graecis peripetasma, and
Peristroma, it is. Aulea, ae. Per Curtiu^. Curtoyse. Benignus, Ciuilis, Humanus,
Suauis. Et Comes, it is. Vrbanus, Modestus. Affabilis, le. Bellus homo, Blandus,
Venerius homo, Comis. Court^is. S. Curtoys resaluting or speaking again.
Resalutatio, onis. foe. genesis Resalutation. Curtesy, civility, or humanity.
Affabilitas, Ciuilitas, Commoditas hominis, Vrbanitas, Benignitas, Comitas,
Humanitas. Courtoisie. S. Courteously. Affabiliter, Benign, Ciuiliter,
Comiter, Affectate, Humaniter, Vrbane, Vrbanatim, Hum^ne. Courtoisement. S.
Courteously to speak again. Blande, vel comiter salutare, Resaluto, as.
Resaluer. S. Cusshin or quysshin. Puluinar, ris. Puluinus, ni. Puluinarium.
Oreillir, Cussine. H. Custarde. Artogala, ae. f. g. Da^^olle, flan. Pals.
Custody or keeping. Custodia, ae. foe. genesis Le guet and la guard qu'on fait sur
aucun. S. Custody or ward of an inf^nte. Tutela, ae. foe. ge. Tutele. S. And
he that has such custody. Tutor, ris. mas. genesis Tuteur. S. Custom.
Assuetudo, Consuetudo. Mos, ris. Praescriptio, Praescriptum, Ritus, Via, Vsus,
Institutum, ti. Vne coustome. S. Et Mosillus, li. Diminut. Ang. An easy, light,
small or late custom.* To keep his custom. Morem agere, sieve retinere,
Institutum vel consuetudinem suam tenere. Entretenir and garder sa coustume. S.

To leave his custom. Ab vsitata consuetudine recedere, Consuetudinem
relinquere. Delaiser sa coustome. S.

According to custom, or by custom. More, Moribus, Pro more and consuetudine,
De more, Ex consuetudine, Ex more, In morem, Secundum consuetudinem. Selon la
coustume, Par coustume. S.

So is the custom. Tralaticum est hoc, Vsitatu^, In more positum, More
confirmatum, and comparatum, Mos obtinuit, vel inualuit, Moris est, Co^suetudo
ita fert, More fit, Consuetudo inualuit, Inueterauit.

Custom, tole, or tribute. Telos, Vectigal, A Veho, is. Tributum, ti. n. g.
Tribut. S. Custom, frayght, or tallage. Portorium, ij. n. genesis Le peage ou
impost qu'on pay aux ports. S. Custom for boat hyre. Naulum, li. n. genesis Le
salaire qu'on baille pour estre pass l'eaue. S. Custom house, where task,
tole, or tribute is paid. Telonium, nij. n. genesis Customer of a haven or port.
Portitor, ris. m. genesis Peagier, guard, ou fermier des ports. S. Customer or
tole gatherer. Telo, nis. Telonarius. Customary law. Constitutum ius. Ius
municipiorum, Ius moribus constitutum. Coustumes. S. Customarely or after the
old sort. Rite Vt supra. Custrell or bottell for wine. Vter, tris.
Oenophorum, ri. n. genesis Toute maniere de pot a vin. S. Custrell or page which
bears his masters buckler, shield, or target. Scutigerulus, a Plauto
sumitur pro armigero, qui scutum domini gerit, qui and scutifer dicitur. Call.
Cut. Caedo, is di. Incido, is. Scindo, dis. Seco, as. Couper. S. Item,
Abscindere, Accidere, Caedere, Deputare, Desecare, Decidere, Discindere,
Execare, Excidere, Exputare, Insecare, Praetruncare, Prosecare, Proscindere,
Recidere, Rescindere. Couper. Alij scribunt. Copper. S. Cut about.
Circumcido, is. Circunseco, as. Amputo, as. Coupier tout a l'entour. S. Cut
again or new. Rescindo, is. Reseco, as. Couper, Resequer. S. Cut again that
thing which was not well cut before. as corn, grass, or any like thing.
Sicilio, is, ire. Refaulcher. S. Cut a body in anathomie. Disseco, as. Cut of
small and superfluous branches of trees, Interputo, tas. Couper les petites
branches superfluous des arbres. Cut a sunder. Artuo, as. Deseco, as.
Intercido, is. Praeseco, as. Proseco, as. Rescindo, is. Transcindo, dis. Couper
en pieces, fendre. S. Cut or to dig away earth from roots of trees.
Ablaqueo, as. Deschauser un arbre. S. Cut away eftsoon. Rescindo, is.
Couper. S. Cut a vine. Detruncare vitem. Cut backewarde. Recido, is. Cut
of ones ears. Auribus minuere. Couper les oreilles. S. Cut behind. Recido,
is. Cut clean away. Abscido, is. Abscindo, is. Amputo, as. Exputo, as.
Premo, is. Rescindo, is. Reseco, as. Trencher, Couper. S. Cut clean or
smothe. Edolo, as. Doler. S. Cut down. Succido, is. Couper par le bas. S.
Cut or gelde. Castro, as. Castrer, tailler. S. Cut in small pieces.
Concido, is. Comminuo, is. Excarnifico, as. Disseco, as. Couper en petites
pieces and morceaulx. S. Cut in even porcions. Decusso, as. Cut in ten
parts or portions. Decusso, as. * Cut in the mids. Interscindo, is.
Intercido, is. Couper par le milieu. S. Cut or to deminishe or impair his
defense with his own talk. Suo gladio suam defensionem conficere. Se couper
soymesme par ses defenses. S. Cut in four parts. Quadriseco, as.* Cut a
little. Subesco, as. Supputare. Un peu couper. S. Cut like a boucher. Lanio,
as. Mettre eu pieces. S. Cut of. Abscido, is. Abscindo, is. Abru^po, is.
Amputo, as. Decido, is. Defalco, as. Discindo, is. Distrunco, as. Imminuo, is.
Mutilo, as. Puto, as. Trunco, as. Vnde Tor, Trix, Tio. Verbal. Cut of ones
head, or to beheade one. Collum alicui desecare, Ferire aliquem securi, Alique^
obtruncare, Alicui caput detruncare, vel decutere, vel ferro demetere, Recidere
caput, Abscindere caput ceruicibus, Auferre caput alicui. Tren^her le col a
quelqu'vn. S. Cut of eftsoon. Reputo, as. Couper diligement. S. Cut on the
outsyde. Execo, as. Couper. S. Cut of the nose. Denaso, as. Esnaser. S. Cut
or pare the nails. Exungulo, as. * Praesecare vel resecare vngues. Cut of ye
which is superfluous. Deruncino, as. Cut out. Proscindo, is. Detrunco, as.
Tailler. S. Cut round. Circumcido, is. Vide Cut about. Cut or cancel
writing. Cancello, as. Vide ca^cell. Cut short. Detrunco, as. Tailler,
Couper. S. Cut sinnewes asunder. Subneruo, as. * Cut or hewn to be, as
woodde, tymbre, and other like, made and talled in fagottes and byllettes.
Talior, aris. Var. Cut with an axe. Ascio, as. Hacher. S. Cut smothe.
Edolo, as. Doler. S. Et Dolo, as. Idem. Cut with a byll or hoke. Falcito, as.
Falco, as. August. in Psalm. Adduxisti me ad vineam vt falcitem illam and
amputem. Cut with a sithe. Dolo, as. Vide Mow. Cut under. Proscindo, is.
Subseco, cas. Succido, dis. Supputo, as. Couper par le bas, ou par dessoubs. S.
Cut. Caesus, Excisus, Incisus, Insectus, Mutilus, Abscissus. Coupe. Cut
away. Abscisus, a, um. Amputatus, a, um. Trenche, coupe. S. Cut eftsoon or
newely. Recisus, a, um. Coupe, rongne. S. Cut, or gelded. Castratus, a, um.
Chastre. S. Cut in four parts. Quadrifidus, a, um. Virg. Cut as a body is
in an Anathomie. Dissecatus, a, um. Decoupe. Cut of. Desectus, a, u^.
Abscisus, Truncatus, Truncus, a, um. Coupe ou trenche. S. Vt ceruix desectta.
Propert. Cut of and made longer. Intercisum and porrectum. A head cut of.
Praecisum caput. Test coupee. S.

Cut out, or drawn in length. Decussatus, a, um. Cut often or many times.
Sectilis, le. Sectiuus, a, um. Qui est coupe. Vt Sectile and sectiuum porrum,
Leeke that is cut. Cut purse. Sector zonarius, Manticularius, Crumeniseca.
Coupebourse, Coupeur de bourses. H. Cut round about. Circumcidaneus, a, um.
Circumcisus, sa, sum. Coupe a l' entour. S. Cut, or incision. Caesura,
Incisura, Scissio, Scissura, Scissus. Sectura, Sectio, Incisio, Incisus.
Coupure. S. Et sectilis, le, vel scissilis, le. That which is able to be
cut, or may be cut. Cutted reason. Praecisus sermo. Cutting. Incisio, onis.
Sectura, ae. Sectio, onis. Scissio, onis. Execatio, Incisura, Praecisio,
Recisio, Desectio. Coupement. S. Cutting down. Desectio, onis. foe. genesis
Cutting of or short. Truncatio, Detruncatio, vt De truncatio ramorum. The
cutting of branches from the trees. Coupement de branches. S. Cutting of above
by the rupture. Apagina. * Cutting of trees. Consectio arborum. Coupement
d'arbres. S. Cutting in the mydle. Itercisio. Coupement par le milieu. S.
Cutting of in gobbettes or pieces. Truncatio, onis. foe. genesis Cutting of
graffes or vynes in the spring of the year. Vernacula putatio. Esmondement
des arbres. Cuttinges of of any thing. Secamenta, Sectiones, Segmenta, Segmina.
Rongneures. Cutting knyfe* Falx, cis. foe. g.* Vide Knife. Cut purse, a
thief. Manticularius, Saccularius, vel ria. Vt supra. Cutle fyshe. Saepia, ae.
vel Sepia. Seche. H. Cutler. Machaeropios, Cultrarius, and Cultellarius. ij. m.
ge. Constelier qui fait les cousteaux. H. Cyrus, son to Cambysis ( as
Justinius writes) translated the Empire of the Medes unto the Persians, and
having won Asia, he subdued all the East unto his power. At last when he made
war with the Scithians, and afflicted them with great calamity: Tomyris
their queen, by polycie brought him into such a straight, that she s^ewe him
and all his army, which was of two hundredth thousand soldiers, so that not
one remained alive. Then caused she the head of Cyrus to be stricken of, and
casting it into a vessel filled with blood, she said. Suffice thy self with
blood which thou haste thristed Cyrus, ri. m. ge.
D. ANTE. A.
D, Is a letter called in Greek Delta, there signifying the number of four,
which in Latin or English letters signifies five, thus written. M. D. lxxi.
which is 1571. Also at Memphis the river Nilus has with his course made a
place after the form of this Greek letter D and to this day it is called
Delta. Dace or dase a fyshe. Aphya, Apua, ae. f. g. Arist. 6. Animal. Dadde or
daddy, as infantes call their fathers. Tata, vel Pappa, (...), id est Pater.
Pere. Likewise they call their mothers or nourises Mammy. Mamma, Which is a
Greek word, (...) Balbutientium puerorum vox, vel (...), id est Auia patris
matrisue matter. And Pappare is to call Dadde or Daddy. Appeller son pere Pappa.
S. And Mammare, To call Mammy. Appeller sa mere Mamma. Daffadyll herb.
Anthericon, Asphodelus, Hastula regia, Albucum. Affodillus. Des asphodilles. H.
Dagger. Cestrum, tri. Gladiolus. Pugio, onis. Clunabulum, vel vt Festus habet
clunaculum, quod ad clunes religetur. Poignard. H. Et sica, ae. Vne dague ou
poignart. S. Et Pugiunculus, li. Diminut. Ang. A little or short dagger. Dagge
swayne. Gausape, is. Gausapina. foe. genesis Day. Dies, ei. Lumen soles. Iour. Et
diurnus, a, um. Of a day. De iour. Sunday. Dies dominicus, vel solis.
Dimenche. H

Monday. Dies lunae. Lundy. H.

Tuesday. Dies martis. Mardy. H.

Wednesday. Dies mercurij. Mercredy. H.

Thursdaye. Dies Iouis. Ieudy. H.

Frydaye. Dies veneris. Vendredy. H.

Saturdaye. Dies saturni, vel Sabbati. Sammedy.

Day after or day followyng. Postera dies, Perendinus dies. Le iour d' apres.
S. Day after to morrow, the day following (the day before rehearsed) or the
next day after. Perindie, Postridie. Apres demain. S. Day before. Pridie. Le
iour de deuant. S. Et Pridianus, a, um. Ang. Of the day before. Du iour de
deuant. S. Day before yesterdaye, as much to say, as two days before or
past. Nudius tertius Deuant hier. Et Nudiusquartus, Nudiusquintus,
Nudiussextus. The fourth, fifthe or sixth day, that is past or before this.
Day by day. Quotidie, Diem de die, In singulos dies, Per omnes dies. De iour
en iour. S. vide daily. Before day. Ante lucem. Deuant le iour. S.

It is broad day. Multa lux est. S.

The day is far spent. Declinat in vesperu^ dies.

The day is far paste, or it is even night. Dies conficitur, Eximitur dies,
It dies, Praeterijt dies. Le iour se pass. S.

Day followyng, or the next day. Die secundo, Lumine secundo vel sequenti,
Alia luce orta. Le iour d' apres. S. Day light under the firmament. Dium, ij.
n. genesis Day next after to morrow. Perendinus dies. Le iour d' apres demain.
S. Day of birth or nativity. Dies natalis, vel genitalis. Natalis, Natale,
and Natalitium. Iour de la natiuite. H. Day of baptism. Dies lustricus quo
lustrabatur infans, nome^que illi creabatur. Le iour du baptism. Day of
death. Emortualis dies, Dies quo quis die^ obit. Iour de la mort. H. Day of
judgment to death. Capitalis dies. Day of return of a write or process. Dies
Iuridicus, vel Legitimus. Day over in law. Comperendinarius dies. Macrob.
Sat. 1. Cap. 16. Comperendinus dies. Day over for emparlaunce, or day over
after emparlaunce. Comperendinarius terminus. Day star. Lucifer, Phosphorus.
Lubar, aris. n. ge. L'estoile du iour. S. Day time or some time in the day.
Diu, Interdiu, De die. De iour, par iour. S. And so is, De nocte, By night. De
nuict. S. Day to wax, or it waxes day, or day light, or it is day.
Diescit, Lucescit. Le iour point. S. Day which makes leap year.
Exhaeresimus.* vel intercalaris dies. Insititius dies. Le iour de bissexte. H.
Day and night. Dies and noctes, vel dies noctesque. Iour and nuict. Holy day.
Festus dies, Dies solemnis, Otiosus dies. Un iour feste. S.

Day to work in, a worky day. Operarius dies, Profestus dies. Iour ouurier.
S. Days appointed. Dies dicti, Stati, Praestituti. Iours arrestez. S. Days
deed. Actus, Opera, Opus, eris. n. g. Days deed and a half of a workman.
Sesquiopera, ae. f. g. Un iournee and demie d' un ouurier. S. Days divided,
which be half holy days, and half workyng days. Intercisi dies. Days of
judgment to be given of increase to succeade. Decretorium tempus, vel Sydus
decretorium. Plin. li. 18. Days hyre. Diurnus.* Diarium, ij. n. g. Iournee. H.
Diurnae operae pretium. Days journey of an host, which was accounted an
hundred and fyfty forlonges, which is. xviii. mile and more. Mansio, onis. foe.
ge. Plin. lib. 12. cap. 14. and lib. 6. cap. 13. And Mansio, onis. The place of
abode, or time of taryeing. Days of heaviness, or of mischaunce. Dies
religiosi. Cicero. Ad At. and Gel. lib. 4. cap. 9. At^i dies, and dies
infoelix, Infamis and Infaustus. Iour malh^ureux. H. Days of prayer or
devotion. Religiosi dies. Days of venereall pastime. Aphrodisia, Veneris
festa. Days or terms ordinary called among our Lawyers. Dies datus in
banco, Or days in bancke, for ye defendau^t, or playntife. Dies legitimus,
Stati dies. Vide supra. days appointed. Days when the Physicians may know
the importance of the sickness, by the apparaunt tokens in the patient.
Decretorij dies, Dies critici. Dies criticus and crisimus apud medicos, quo
exitij aut salutis notae apparent. H. Daily. Assiduus, a, um. Quotidianus, a,
um. Qui est de iour en iour. S. Daily, or day by day, or every day.
Assidue, Indies, Aduerb. In dies singulos, Quotidie. De iour en iour. S.
Daily, of a day, or pertaining to a day. Diurnus, a, um. De iour. S. Daily
geste, or companion at ye table. Conuictor vel Trix. Quotidianus conuiua, and
qui nobiscum viuit familialiter. Ovid. 4. De ponto. Commensal. S. Dale. Vallis,
is. Vallee. H. Et Vallecula. Diminut. Ang. A little dale. Et Vallaris, re.
Pertayninge to a dale. De vallee. Dale or valley compaste round with hills or
mountains. Conuallis. Liu. Vallis vndique collibus aut montibus inclusa.
Vallee enuironnee des monts a tous costs. H. Dallye dissolutely, or with
wanton language. Proco, as.*. Dallye, or to play the fool. Ineptio, is, ire.
Folastrer, Badiner, Bauer. S. Dalliaunce. Paraphronesis. * Ineptia. ae. foem.
genesis Bauerie. S. Damage or adversity. Aduersa aerumna. Damage or hurt.
Detrimentum, Incommodum, Damnum, Iniuria, Maleficentia, Maleficium, Termentum,
Dam, ou damage. S. Vide damage. On my damage or peril. Meo periculo, aut
damno. A mon dam. S.

Damageous, or doing hurt or hurtful. Damnificus, Incommodus, Iniuriosus, a,
um. Damnosus, sa, sum. Dommageable. S. Damask roses. Trachinia. Damask sylke.
Damascena. Damas. S. Et Serica vestis, vel Scutulata vestis. Habillement
damasse. A garment of damask. Dame or maistresse. Domina, nae. foe. genesis Dame
ou maistresse. S. Great dames of high renown. Principes, foeminae. Grandes
dames de grand renom. S.

Damn or to condemn. Damnare, Damer. S. Damned. Damnatus, ta, tum. Damn. S.
Damnation. Damnatio, onis. foe. g. Damnation. S. Damsel. Puella, Iuuencula,
Adolescentula. Damoiselle. S. Damned. Addictus, a, um. Vide Condemned. Damsyn.
Prunum, ni. n. genesis Et Pruna Damascena. Prunes de Damas. S. Damsyn tree.
Prunus, ni. foe. genesis Col. Un prunier. S. Et Prunetum. The place where damsyn
trees grow. Et hortus prunosus. Is an orcharde or gardayne where many damsyn
trees grow. Daniel a Prophet of the tribe of Judah, and is interpreted a man
acknowledging and confessing God, as Judge. Who at the debellation of
Jerusalem by Nabuchadnezer, was taken captive with Ananias, Misael, and
Azarias, amongst other, and educated with other yongelynges captives in the
kings court by Aspheuas the high Steward, which had their lyuinge out of
the kings storehouse, his name was altered by the same Steward and called
Balthazar, that is to say: the most excellent and faithful keeper of
treasure. The names also of the other were there at the self same time
changed, the which I do omit, because they appear more pregnantly in the
history of Daniel. This Daniel Prophesied of the four high Monarchies,
whereof the one stood upon the Chaldees, and eftsoon upon the Babilonians,
both combined at the last in one, which began in Abraham's days, and
continued to the last years of Daniel, even unto the end of the captivity of
the Jews in Babylon, which was the first Monarchy, and stood. 1495. years,
and ended in the year from the Incarnation 3440. And then after began
incontinently the second Monarchy (which was the Empire of the Medes and
Persians) to flourish, and continued an. 191. years, whom Alexander Magnus
conquered. After which conqueste began the third Monarchy, called the Empire
of the Greeks, which stood. 260. years. The fourth Monarchy which began.
47. years before Christ's birth, is called at this time ye Romayne Empire,
which presently stands (as Daniel. capit. ij. did forsaye it) upon feable
feet made of brickle potbacked earth, whereof the legs are iron. etc. Vide
Danielem. cap. ij. At the beginning of this last and fourth Momarchie, the
Romans were puissaunte and strong, so continuing until Mahumet and
Antichriste did translate, divide, scatter, and mynishe the Empire. The which
last and fourth Monarchy has stand these. 1618. years. Julius Caesar first
being Consul, and eftsoon Emperor of Rome, who reigned four years and seven
months, whom Octauius Augustus succeeded, in whose reign. Anno. xlij. Christ
was borne. etc. Daniel, lis. mas. ge. Danger. Vide Danger. Dankyshe or moist.
Vdus, a, um. Moit^, mouille. S. Dankyshe within. Vuidus, a, um. Qui est moite
par dedens. S. Dare. Audeo, es, si, vel sus, sum. Confido, is. Oser. S. Dare
not. Vereor, eris. Vt Vereor dicere. I dare not tell. Ie n' ose dir. S. And all
the latin words of dare with a negative, as Non audeo. etc. Ie n' ose. Dark.
Furnus, a, um. Illuminus, a, um. Latebrosus, a, um. Obnubilus, a, um. Obscurus,
Obsitus tenebris, Tenebricus, ca, cum. Tenebrosus, a, um. Caliginosus, sa, sum.
Tenebricosus, sa, sum. Obscur, T^nebreux. Dark, as when the Moon shyneth not.
Illunis, ne. Vt Nox illunis. La nuict en la quelle la lune ne luit point. S.
Dark color. Pullus, a, um. Subniger color. Noirastre. S. Dark with a
shadow. Obumbratus, a, um. Opacus, a, um. Ombrageux. S. Darken, obscure or to
shadow a thing. Obducere rebus tenebras, Obnubilare, Obscurare, Obumbrare,
Inobumbrare, Praeumbrare, Offundere tenebras, Caliginem inducere, vel obducere.
Obscurcir. S. To lie in the dark, or to live in obscurity. Iacere in
tenebris, Trahere vita^ in tenebris. Virg.

Dark or black to make. Obfusco, as. Fusco, cas. Dark to wax. Caligo, as.
Noctesco, scis. Tenebresco, scis. Et Contenebresco. Vt Aer contenebrescat.
Darken or make dark with a shadow. Interpellere lucem vmbra. Obumbro, as.
Opaco, as. Obscurcir. S. Darkely. Obscure, Tenebrose. Obscurement. S. Darkely,
or in the dark, or in the midst of the dark. In medijs, vel multis
tenebris, Latebrose. Darkness. Latebra, ae. Obscuritas, Tenebrae, arum. Caligo,
ginis foe. g. Obscurite. S. Darkene, or the dark, or hard understanding of
scripture, Anagoge, es. foe. g. Darkness with shadowyng. Obu^bratio, onis, f.
g. Darling, a wanton term used in venerial speech, as be these: honycombe,
pyggisny, sweet heart, true love. Deliciae, arum. Suauium, Sauium. Mignon. S.
Darnel or rye a wede. Era, ae. Lolium, ij. neu. genesis Iuraye. S. Darte, or to
throw a darte. Iaculari, Eiaculari, Tela ingerere. Darder. Darter. Iaculator,
oris. m. g. Dardeur. S. She that casts the darte. Iaculatrix. Darteresse.

Darte. Iaculum, Sparus, ri. Sparum, Spiculum, Telum. Missile dard. S. It is
applied to any weapon that may be lightly thrown. Darte stringe, that which
is tied in the myddle, to hold it by when it is thrown. Amentum, Lorum mediae
hastae obuinctum quo iacitur. Le lien d' un dard. H. Dart with a barbed head.
Tragula, ae. foe. genesis Dart of five foot and a half long. Pilum, li. n. ge.
Un iauilot a darder. S. Dart that is short and sharp. Verutum, ti. n. ge. Un
dard court and agu. Dart which is of a length. Veruina, Veuina. ae. * Dart
wrought with lead. Manobarbulus, li. m. ge. Darts with wild fire. Pyroboli.
Fusees. H. Et Pyrobolarij. Be they that cast those darts. Dart bearers.
Manobarbuli, orum. m. g. Dashe, or stryke with a pen. Litura, ae. foem. genesis
Effassure. S. Dashe, or to give a stryke with a pen, as where a strike is
made through a line, at length or other wise to deface the writing. Lituro, as.
Oblitero, as. Effacer. S. Dasye herb. Herba paralysis, Bellis. The common
dasie that grows in the field (as it semes by Dodoneus description) is
called of the Herbarees. Consolida minor, Herba Margarita, and Primula veris.
Marguerites, ou pasquettes. Dod. Dasill the eyes. Perstringo, is. Esblouir. Vt
Perstringere oculos, Offundere caligine^ oculis. To dasill or blind ones eyes.
Dastard. Excors, Pusillanimis, e. Secors, coris, dis. Meticulosus, Timidus.
Craintif. Dastardly, or like a dastarde. Pusilanimiter, Timide, Meticulose.
Craintiuement. S. Dastardnes. Secordia, Socordia, Pusillanimitas, Formido,
Formidatio, Metus, Timor, Timiditas. Crainte. S. Date. Caryota, ae. Caryotis,
Dactylus, li. Scandalides, dum, Thebaice, Thebaides, Palmula. Dactes, figues
royales. H. Est etiam Dactylus, Pes in metro constans ex vna longa sillaba, and
duabus breuibus vt Tityre. Date with the branches newly plucked from the tree.
Spadix, icis. m. g. Gel. li. 2. Date tree. Adipsos, Plin. li. 12. ca. 22.
Palma, ae. Arbre des dat^es. H. Et Palmetum. The place where date trees grow.
Et Palmula, ae. Dimin. Angl. A little or young date tree. Dates small and white.
Margarides, Plin. li. 13. ca. 4. Dawe or crow. Cornix, cis. Acredula, ae. Et
Tame^ secundum Cice. Auis matutinos modulans cantus. Vide Crow. Dawbe. Rudero,
as. Deluto, as. Massonner. Pals. To dawbe against the wall. Parieti affigere.
Plaquer contre vne paroy. S.

Dawbe with claye or mudde. Oblimo, as. Plaquer. Et Gypsare. To dawbe or
plaster. Plastrer. S. Dawbed. Delutatus, Oblimatus. Ruderatus, a, um. Massonne,
plaque. Dawber. Caementarius, Oblimator. Plaqueur. Pals. Dawbing. Oblimatio,
onis. foe. g. Danger. Discrimen, inis. Periculum, Pretium, tij. Casus, Flamma,
Incommoditas, Noxa. Danger. S. Et Discrimine versari, ac Periclitor, aris.
Angl. To be in danger. Estre en danger. S. Danger of death. Periculum
capitale. Danger de mort. S. Danger of the Sea. Maris alea. Danger de la mer.
S With danger. Cum periculo. Auec danger. S.

Without danger. Impune, Tuto. Sans danger. S.

To bring one into danger. Aliquem in discrimen vocare, In periculum
deducere, In discrime^ perducere, In fraudem agere, Afferre alicui periculum,
Periculum conflare, Facessere periculum, Infer periculum, Periculo subijcere,
In discrimen, vel in periculum vocare. Mettre quelqu' un en danger. S.

To put his life in danger. Securi ceruices subijcere, Prouehere vitam suam in
periculu^. Mettre sa vie en danger. S.

To put one in danger of his life. Perdere aliquem, Arcessere aliquem in
summum periculu^ capitis, Periculum mortis alicui subijcere. Mettre quelqu'vn
en danger de sa vie. S.

To put him self in danger. Accedere ad periculum, Adire discrime^ vel
periculum, Committere se in discrimen, Periculum contrahere, vel inire, aut
subire, Tempestates subire, Casum suscipere. Se mettre en danger. S.

To be in danger. Periclitari, Venire in discrimen, In discrimine esse, In
periculo esse, In praecipiti esse, Casum habere. Estre en danger. S.

Dangerous. Incommodus, a, um. Periculosus, a, um. Dangereux. S. It is
dangerous to sail. Inco^modum est nauigare. Il est dangereux de nauiger. S.

Dangerous, or full of mischief. Perniciosus, a, um. Vide Peril. Dangerous
country to pass. Infaesta patria. Dangerous seming, or which seems to be
dangerous where no danger is. Ventaneus, a, u^. * Daungerously. Incommode,
Perniciter, Periculose,. Dangereuseme^^ S. Dawning of the day. ^iluculum,
Prima lux, Sublucanum tempus. L' aube and point du iour. S. Dance. Emico, as.
In numerum ludere. Verg. Salto, as. Desalto, as. Motus dare, Tripudiare.
Danser. Dance after the stroke or tune. Ad modos tibicinis saltare. Dance
before or to lead the dance. Praesultare, Ducere choros aut choreas. Mener la
danse. S. Dance first. Praesulto, as. * Dance for joy and gladness.
Praegestio, is, ire. Saulter de joy qu'on ha. S. Dance ye measure. Ludere in
numerum. Danser le mesure. S. Dance often. Saltito, as. freq. idem quod salto,
inquit Steph. ex Macrob. Dance with mutual gesture and semblable
countenance. Ampiruo, as. Sextus Pomp. Which was first invented by priests.
Dance. Chorea, ae. Saltatio, Saltatus, tu^. Staticulus. Danse. Dance leader.
Praesultor, vel Trix. Qui meine la danse. S. Dauncer. Ludius, Saltator,
Choreutes. Danseur. S. Dauncer that daunceth well, a fine dauncer. Concinnus
saltator, Elegans saltator. Un beau danseur. A woman dauncer. Saltatrix, icis.
f. g. Danseresse. S And she that does naught else but dance. Saltatricula, lae.
foe. g. Saulterelle, danserelle. S.

Dauncer which daunceth first. Praesul, is. Dauncers called Moris dauncers,
or common dauncers. Tlimelici.* Pyrricharij. Dancing. Saltatio, Saltus, us.
Saltatus, us. Terripauium, Terripudium, Tripudium. Dansement. S. Et
Saltabundus, a, um. Ang. Full of dauncinge, or he which daunceth. Et
saltatorius, a, um. Angl. Pertaining to dancing. Dancing in harne is.
Pyrricha, ae. vel. Pyrriche, es. This as I suppose, may be named ye Moryce, for
their apparel does somewhat resemble the form of harness. It is called
Pyrricha, for it was first invented by Pyrrhus. Vne sort de danse and de
morisque qui Pyrrhus inuenta. S. Bellicrepa, genus veteris saltationis a Romulo
institutae. Ca. Dancing schole. Ludus saltatorius. L' escole des da^ses.
Dancing with singing. Sicinnium, ij. n. g. Daunsing with a wanton trick used
among. Staticulum, vel potius Staticulus. Cato. Et Staticulum dare vel edere.
To dance a dance. Danser vne danse. S. Daunsing wenche. Saltatricula, Ludia,
ae. Saltatrix, Saltria, Gesticularia, ae. Danserelle. Day, Vide Dai.
D. ANTE. E.
DEacon or Minister. Diaconus, Minister. Diacre. Dead. Cassus lumine,
Defunctus, Exanimus, a, um. Exanimis, e. Exanimatus, a, um. Morbo solutus.
Obitus, a, um* Mortuus, a, um. Praeteritus, a, um. Superbus, a, um. Vita
functus, vel orbus. Demortuus, a, um. Perfunctus fato. Qui est mort. S. Et
Mortualis, le. Ang. Pertaining to the head. Plautus in Asin. Dead body or
corpse. Cadauer, Funus, eris. Cassum anima corpus. Corpse mort. Et Funerius, a,
um. An. Pertaining to a dead body. Dead bough or seared branch. Ramale, is.
n. g. Dead or death day. Emortualis dies. Vide day. Half dead. Intermortuus,
ua, uum. Prope exanguis, Exanimatus, ta, tum. Semianimis, e. Semiuiuus, a, um.
Semimortuus, a, um. A demi mort. S.

Dead for a season. Intermortuus, a, um. Dead sleep. Cataphora, Sopor, ris.
mas. ge. Altus sopor. Verg. Dead, pale, or vinewed to be, as wine which has
lost his verdure. Muceo, es, cui, ere. Mucesco, scis. Estre moisi. S. Dead or
pale wine. Mucidum vinum. Vide wine. Deadly. Capitaliter, Lethaliter,
Mortifere. Mo^tellement. Deadly. Exitiabilis, le. Exitialis, Fatalis, le.
Ferialis, le. Lethalis, le. Letifer, a, rum. Mortifer, a, um. Perniciabilis,
Perniciosus. Qui est cause de destruction, ou de mort. S. Deaffe. Surdus, a,
um. Sourd. S. Et Surdaster. Is he that is half deaffe, or somewhat thick of
hearing. Sourdault, quelque peu sourd. S. Deaffe or doted, as that which has
no sauoure. Surdus, a, um. Deaffe Judge. Iudex surdus. Cicero. To speak to a
deaffe man, or in vain. Surdis auribus canere. Parler a un sourd. S.

To make deaffe. Auditum auferre, Exurdare. Render sourd. S.

Deaffe ears. Aures surdae. Ovid. The belles have made me deaffe. Obsurduiprae
strepitu tintinnabulorum. Tintinnabula mihi aures obtunderunt. Ces cloches me
ont tout assourdi.

Deaffe to be. Surdeo, es, ui, surdus sum. Estre sourd. Deaffe to be on both
sides. Obsurdeo.* Deaffe to make. Exurdo, as. Surdo, as. Surdum facere. Render
sourd. Deaffe to wax. Surdesco, scis. Inch. Obsurdesco, scis. Ang. To wax
stark deaffe on every side. Deuenir sourd. S. Deafly. Surde. Sourdement. S.
Deafnes. Surditas, tatis. foe. g. Sourdesse, sourdete. S. Deame, or to judge or
think. Arbitror, aris. Censeo, es. Computo, as. Iudico, as. Puto, as.
Autumare, Cogitare, Deputare, Opinari, Reri, Versare, Aut secum in animo
versare, In cord versare, Existimare. Penser. S. Deamed. Iudicatus, a, um.
Judge. S. Deaming. Arbitrium, Iudicatus, us. Iudicium. Judgment. S. Deape.
Altus, a, um. Profundus, a, um. Profond. S. Et Praealtus, a, um. Ang. Very
deape. Fort profond. S. Deape, and able to bear a ship or vessel.
Nauigabilis, le. Nauiger, a, rum.* Deape or sound sleep. Somnus altus. Un
sum profond. S. Deape endebted. Aere alieno demersus, Deape read color.
Burrum, ri. n. g. Deapely. Alte, Alto, Profunde. Profondement. S. Deapenes.
Altitudo, Profunditas. Profondeur ou profondite. S. Deapenes without bottom.
Abyssus, Barathrum. Abisme. Pals. Deapenes of a watery place. Abyssus, si.
foem. genesis Abysme. S. Deapest dongeon in hell, or under the ground. Herebus,
Profunditas inferorum, vel Erebus. Vergil. 6. Aeneid. est Fluuius inferorum.
Deapest part, or swallowe of water. Gurges, it is. m. g. Vne fosse and creux d'
vne riuiere. S. Dear. Carus, ra, rum. Chere. S. To sell very dear. Quam
plurimo vendere, Luculente ve^dere. Vendre le plus cher qu'on peult.

To be soulde very dear. Quam plurimo vaenire, Care vaenire. Estre vendu fort
cher. S.

To bye dear. Emere magno, Grandi pecunia mercari, Mercari aliquid magno
pretio. Acheter bien cher. S.

Dearly, or at great price. Care. Cher, Cherement. S. Dearth, or scarcity.
Caritas, itatis. fine aspir. Cherte. Dearth of corn or vittayle. Annonae
caritas. Cherte de viures. S. Death. Mors, Excessus, Interitus, Lethum, Nex,
necis, Obitus, Occasus. La mort. S. And that which is subject to death or
mortal. Mortalis, le. Mortel ou subject a la mort. S. Cicero took the death
of his daughter grievously. Doloris plurimum Cicero hausit, Accepit, Coepit,
Tulit ex morte, Ex obitu, Ex interitu filiae: Grauiter est affectus, Magna
sollicitudine affectus est, Vexatus est, Oppressus est. Ita doluit, vt nemo
magis. Tam doluit, quam qui maxim. Obitum filiae tulit acerbissime, Sic, vt
iucunditatem omnem penitus amiserit. Summum attulit dolorem Ciceroni, dedit,
peperit, obitus filiae. Summam Cicero sensit acerbitatem extincta filia.

Death or murrayne. Atra lues, Dira lues, Saeua lues, Pestifera lues. Death or
slaughter. Caedes, is. Clades, dis. Meurtre. Tuerie. S. Death brynger, or that
which brings or causes death. Fatifer, Letificus, a, um. Mortifer, ra, rum.
Lethifer, a, um. Lethalis, le. Mortalis, le. Peremptorius, a, um. Mortel. S.
Death day. Emortualis dies. Vide day. Debate. Adiurgium, Certatio,
Concertatio, Certamen, Contentio, Iurgium, Lis, it is. Litigium, Altercatio,
Decertatio, Controuersia, Vilitatio. Debat. S. To fall into debate or
contention. Incidere in contentionem. In co^tentionem venire, and Vocari in
controuersiam dicitur res aliqua. Venir ou tomber en debat. S.

To be at debate or contention about some matter. Contendere de re aliqua,
Habere quaestione^ de re aliqua, and Versari in co^trouersia dicitur res
aliqua. Estre en debat. S.

The matter is in debate. In discrimine res est, In disputationem venit, Habet
haec res aliquid quaestionis, Versatur haec res in controuersia, De hac re
habetur quaestio. La chose est en debat. S.

Debated in reasoning. Concertatus, a, um. Qui est debatu. S. Debatefull, or
full of debate. Litigiosus, a, um. Noiseux. S. Debate a matter in law. Actito,
as. Vt Cic. Multas causas actitauit. Debate or to reason a matter. Concerto,
as. Arguo, is. Contentionem alicuius rei facere, Disputare. Debatre quelque
chose par parolles. S. Debating or reasoning. Argutatio, Concertatio,
Actitatio, onis. foe. g. Debbyll or setting stick. Pastinum, ni. n. ge. It is
that which gardyners set herbs with. Debillitation of lust or mind. Torpor,
oris. m. g. Debilitatio, onis. f. g. Debilitation. S. Debilitate, or feeble, or
without synnowes. Eueruis, e. Eneruus, a, um. Debilis, Imbecillis,
Perimbecillis, Imbellis, Infirmus. Debile and foible. S. Debilitate, or to make
feeble. Delumbo, as. Eneruo, as. Vires carpere. Debilitare, Infirmare. Debiliter
Debilitie. Impotentia. Syntexis, Debilitas, Imbecillitas, Infirmitas. Debilite.
Debilitie, or want of strength. Virium infirmitas. Debilite de force. S.
Debonayre. Modestus, a, um. Humanus, na, number. Mitis, te. Bonnaire. S.
Debonairly. Modeste, Candide. Bonnairement. S. Debte which one owes us.
Debitum, ti. Debte qu'on nous doibt. S. Debte which I owe. Aes alienum meum.
Ce que ie doy. S. Debte which thou owe, or thy debt. Aes alienum tuum. Ta
debte. S. For Aes alienum, Is as well that we owe as that which is owed to us.
And so is Nomen, enis, n. g. To pay his debtes. Aes alienum agnoscere,
Dissoluere, Exoluere, Minuere, Sustollere, Se aere alieno leuare, vel liberare,
Expedire nomen. Payer ses debtes. S.

To forgive one his debte. Donare aes alienum, Condonare aliquem pecuniam,
Creditas pecunias debitoribus condonare, Debitum remittere. Remettre vne debte
a quelqu'vn.

Debtes that are good and sure. Nomina expedita and explicata atque
praesentanea. Bonnes debtes and seures. S. Debted to no man. In aere alieno
nullo esse. Ne debuoir a nulli. S. Debte upon an account. Reliqua, orum.
Cicero ad Attic. lib. 16. Debte that is owed us, (...) that we owe to other.
Nomen, is. n. g. Debte. H. Debted. Obnoxious debito, Alieno aere strictus.
Debted to be. Opprimi aere alieno. Estre fort grieve de debtes. S. Debtes to
discharge and pay. Debita satisfacere, Nomina explicare, vel expungere,
Resoluo, is. vt supra. Debtes that are old. Nomina impedita. Liuius. Vi^illes
debtes. H. Debtour. Debtor, ris. m. g. Un debteur. S. Debtours upon the
arrerages of any account or reckening. Reliquatores, vel trices. Reliquator is
est qui integrum non soluit. Debtours which ben sure and trusty. Nomina
idonia, and nomina optima. Debtour which will not be sued for hasty payment,
and be desperate. Reliquator, vel Trix.* Decay. Casura, Detrimentum,
Termentum, Excidium, Ruina, ae. f. g. Ruin. Decay, fall down, or wax worse.
Decresco, scis. Delabor, eris. Dilabor, eris. Cado, dis. Facere casura^.
Labesco, scis. Labescor, sceris. Obsoleo, es. Obsolesco, scis. Pereo, is.
Sublabor, eris. Dechoir. Great things decay by discord. Dilabuntur discordia
res maximae. Grandes chooses decheent, and se perdent par discord. S.

Decay as houses do. Cado, is. Pereo, is. vt peri^ aedes. Decay, or to make
worse, or to waste. Casuram, vel detrimentum lacere. Decay between this and
that, after the vulgar speech, between two stoles the arse goes to the
ground. Intercido, is. Compos. Ab inter and cado. Decayed out of use.
Obsoletus, a, um. Horse d' usage. Decayed by falling. Caducus, a, um. Ruineux.
S. Decayed by the one moytie. Semirutus, a, um. A demi abbatu and r^ine.
Decayed eftsoon. Recidiuus, a, um. Decaying things. Caduca. Decease of one.
Abitio, Decessus, us. Decessio, onis. foe. g. Vide departing. Decease, or to
depart. Abeo, is. Decedo, is. Idem. Decease or die. Morior, iris. Vide Die.
Deceased or departed. Decessus, a, um. Deceased or dead. Vide Dead. Deceyte.
Captus, us. Circumductio, Dolus, li. Error, Fallacia, Falcimonia, Fraus,
Frustratio, Fucus, ci. Pellacia, Versutia, Captio, Blanditia. Deceuance ou
deception. S. Deceyte in selling false wares for good. Impostura, ae. foe. g.
Tromperie. S. Deceyte in trimming or polishinge old wares to make them sale
able. Fraus mangonica. Deceitful.. Dolosus, a, um. Fallax, cis. Fraudulentus,
a, um. Pellax, cis. Fraudolosus, Subdolus, a, um. Versutus, Vulpinus, a, um.
Plein de deception. S Deceatfull, crafty, or a guilefull woman. Mulier dolosa.
Horat. Deceatfull men. Fallaces homines. Deceatfull, or fraudule^^ and lying
men of Catthage. Fraudulenti and mendaces Carthaginenses. Cic. Deceitful or
subtle sentence. Sophisma, it is. n. genesis It is rather an argument of
cauilation, a conclusion sophistical, or a sophisme. Argument cauillatoire,
conclusion sophistique, Sophisme. S. Deceitful speaking of words. Pigmentum.
Cic. Deceitfully. Dolose, Fallaciter, Fraudule^ter, Fraudulose, Subdole,
Versute. Par tromperie. S. Deceive. Caluo, is. Circumuenio, is. Contechnor,
aris. Circumscribo, is. Dare insidias, Decipio, is. Dare verba, Decollo, as.
Deludo, is. Defraudo, as. Eludo, is. Fallo, is. Fraudo, as. Frustro, as.
Frustror, aris. Illudo, is. Implano, as. Impono, is. Et tunc postul dati.
Inesco, scas. Ludo, is. Nectere dolum, Offundere errorem alicui, Seduco, is.
Subduco, cis. vt subducere alicui, Subtendo, is. Fucum facere. Deceuoir. S. To
deceive in talk. Fallere, Verba dare alicui. Deceuoir de parolles. S.

Deceived. Circunscriptus, a, um. Circunuentus, a, um. Deceptus, a, um.
Illusus, a, um. Proditus, a, u^. Defraudatus. Inductus, ta, tum. Ludificatus,
ta, tum. Captus and fraudatus. Trompe and deceu. S. Deceived in a plain
matter. Caligatus in sole. Deceived to be. Ruo, is. vt Emptorem pati ruere.
Cic. To suffer the byer to be deceived. Deceived to be in opinion. Allucinor,
aris. Se abuser and se tromper. S. Deceauing. Circumscriptio, onis. foe. g.
Tromperie and deception. S. Deceauour. Circunscriptor, Fraudator, Deceptor,
Pellax, Pellicator, Ludificator, Lusor, Frustrator, Impostor, Dolosus, Fallax.
Trompeur, ou un deceueur. S. Deceauour in bying and selling by promise.
Impostor, oris. m. g. Deceauer of people in the market. Saccularius, ij. m. g.
Vide Cutpurse. Decembre the name of a month. December, genialis mensis.
Decembre. H. Decent or convenient. Decens, it is. Decent and conuenable. S.
Decent to be. Decet, bat. Imper. It is decent. Il est decent. S. Decently.
Decenter. Decentement. S. Decerne or decree a sentence. Computo, as. Scisco,
scis.*Decernere. Decerner. S. Decerne or judge. Iudico, as. Opinor, aris. Vide
Judge. Decide or discuse a matter. Decido, is. Decider. S. Decide upon some
matter. De aliquo negotio decidere. Decider de quelque affair. S. Decide and
to determine a question. Quaestionem decidere. Decider and determiner vne
question. S. Decided. Decisus, sa, sum. Decise. S. Deck or ye forpart of a
ship. Prora, ae. foe. ge. Le deuant de la nauire. S. Et Proreta. He that has
the rule of the deck. Deck or dress courtly. Redimio, is, iui. Orner. S.
Deck or trymme. Adorno, as. Exorno, as. Orno, as. Polio, is. Como, is. Excolo.
Orner. Decked or dressed courtly. Redimitus, a, um. Orne. S Decked or dressed.
Ornatus, a, um. Politus, a, um. Cultus, ta, tum. Comptus, ta, tum. Orne. S.
Decked trymmely. Splendidus, a, um.* Peronatus, ta, tum. Percultus, ta, tum.
Perpolitus, ta, tum. Fort orne. S. Decked with diverse colors. Variegatus, a,
u^. Call. Decking. Ornatus, us. Comptus, tus. Cultus, tus. Exornatio, onis.
Ornamentum. Ornement. Deckinge of doors or houses with bowghes or flowers.
Toral, Toralium, ij. n. g. Declamer. Declamator, oris. m. g. Declamateur. S.
Declamation. Declamatio, onis. f. g. Declamation. S. Declamatorie.
Declamatorius, a, ium. Declamatoire. Declamation often heard, and tedious to
the hearers. Crambes repetita, accusa. Cramben. Declame or to exercise a feigned
argument in pleading, used among Lawyers called mootinge. Declamo, as.
Declamer. Et Declamitare, To declame often. Declamer souuent. S. Declaration of
a consent or favor. Suffragatio, onis. foe. g.* Declaration of fables in a
moral sense. Epimythion, Affabulatio, vel fabulae expositio. Call. Declaration
of fables, lies, or tales. Mythologia. Fabulae explicatio. Call. Declaration of
any thing. Declaratio, Monstratio, Narratio, Eriodatio, Explanatio, Explicatus,
Explicatio, Expositio, Interpretatio, Lumen, Patefactio. Declaration and
exposition. Declaration or a plee in law of any accion. Libellus, li. mas.
genesis Declaration or prognostication. Apotelesma.* Declare and to expound.
Declaro, as. Dico, is. Digero, is. Edico, is. Edicto, as. Edissero, ris, rui.
Exprimo, is. Indico, is. Patefacio, is. Planum facere, Monstro, as. Narro, as.
Aperire, Dilucidare, Enodare, Explanare, Explicare, Exponere, Interpretari,
Diluere, Enudare, Dubia perspicuis illustrare. Declarer and exposer. Declare a
message. Annuntio, as. Edere mandata. Annoncer. S. Declare by gesture or deed.
Praemefero, rs. Praetefero, rs. Praesefero, rs. Call. Declare, or make a thing
clear, perfect, and plain. Dilucido, as. Declarer and exposer. S. Declare in
presence. Repraesento, as. Vt iram deorum repraesentare. To declare the wrath
of the Gods. Declare his mind or courage. Ostendere animu^ suum. Declarer son
courage. S. Declare him self. Aperire se. Se declarer. Declare openly, or
publyshe to the people. Pronuncio, as. Promulgo, as. Prouulgo, as. Vulgo, as.
Publico, as. Publir. S. Declare plainly. Explico, as. Vt supra. Declare
wars. Arma canere, Bellum indicere. Declared. Indictiuus, Indictus, a, um.*
Interpretatus, ta, tum. Explanatus, ta, tum. Declaratus, ta, tum. Declare, and
explique. S. Declared, diuulgate, or publyshed to be. Patefio, is. Permano, as.
Permanesco, scis.* Declared to be. Explanari, Declarari. Estre declare. S.
Declarer of holy scripture. Sacrarum literarum interpres, Explanator,
Explicator, toris. m. g. Declination. Declinatio, onis. f. g. Declination. S.
Decline. Vergo, is, si, vel xi. Flecto, is. Declino, as. Decliner. S.
Decoction, or broth made with certain herbs or such like boiled. Decoctus,
Decoctum, Decoctura, Vulgus pharmacopolarum Decoctionem vocat. Decoction. S.
Decree. Decretum, ti. Lex, gis. Constitutio, Psephisma, it is. Scitum, ti.
Decret. Decre or judgment. Sententia, ae. foe. genesis La sentence du Judge. S.
Decre and sentence given and promulgate. Finale decretum, Sententia lata,
Authoritas publica. Un decret. S. Decre stablished. Sanctio, Sanctio sancta.
Cic. li. 3. ad Attic. Decre. Decerno, is. Decerner. S. I have decreed to do
this. Apud me hoc facere decretum est, Deliberatum est, Certu^ est, Visum est,
In animo habeo, Est sententia, Est consiliu^, Est mei consilij, Placet,
Placitum est, In hanc descendo sententiam, Statui in animo, M^cum statui,
Constitui, Est in animo, Est in animo fixu^, immotumque. Mor.

Decreed. Statutus, a, um. Decretus, ta, tum. Decer^e. Deed. Actus, us. Actum,
ti. Eactus, us. Factum, ti. n. g. Act and faict. S. Deed or act justly done.
Catorthoma.* Deed sealed and delivered. Syngrapha, Syngraphus, and Syngraphum,
i. n. g. Deed or other writing made and written with a man's own hand.
Perscriptio, Perscriptu^. Cic. Deed subscribed. Subscriptio, vel tum.*
Dedication, or consecration. Apotheosis, Consecratio, sieve deificatio. Herod.
li. 4. Dedication or feast of the church. Encaenia, cum ae dipth. Innouatio,
August. Dedicate. Celebro, as. Consecro, as. Dedico, as. Dico, as. Sacro, as.
Dedier. S. Dedicate and to consecrate something to God. Dedicare aliquid Deo,
Sacrare, Deuouere. Dedier and consacrer quelque chose a Dieu. S. Dedicate, or
to consecrate a place. Locum inaugurare. Dedier quelque lieu. S. Dedicated to
God. Sacer, ra, rum. Diuus, a, um.* Dedicatus, Dicatus, Deuotus, Consecratus,
ta, tum. Dedie. S. Dedicated to serve God, or who that has a spiritual
religion or vow for a time. Nazareus.* Dedication. Dedicatio, Consecratio,
Inauguratio. Dedication. S. Dedictated to one opinion, as of one sect.
Consecraneus, Consectaneus, a, um. Deducte charges. Subduco, is. Deduire. S.
Deduct a sum. Deduco, cis. Subduco, is. Deduire and rebattre d' vne sum. S.
Deducted or abated. Deductus, Subductus, a, um. Deduict. S. Deduction in
account, Deductio, Subductio. Deduction. S. Deface a writing or instrument.
Lituro, as. Scripta delere, vel refigere, Auferre, Delinire, Obliterare,
Expungere, Deluere, and Deformare forma^, vel faciem alicuius scripturae vel
instrumenti. Effacer quelque escripture. etc. Deface or bring out of
estimation the act of others. Co^tundere mores alienos, delere merita. Deface
or to raze a letter. Exterere literam. Effacer Vne lettre. S. Defacing.
Obliteratio, Deletio. Effacement. S. Defalke or minishe. Defalco, cas.
Defalcare, significat Tollere and amputare, quasi falce abscindere* Defalke a
decre, law, or statute. Refigere decreta, vel leges, vel sanctiones, Tabulas
delere, vel refigere. Defalke the authority of others. Imminuere Ius. Defalte,
or defaute, or lack. Defectio, Defectus, us, Deliquiu^, ij. n. g. Defaillance
de quelque chose. S. Defaulte in appearaunce. Aeremodicium, ij. n. g. Desertion
de cause, default. S. Defaulte to make in appearau^ce. Non respondere. To
signify a defaulte. Eremodicium denunciare. Signifier un default. S.

Defaulte to make in wager of law. Vadimonium deserere, Ad vadimonium non
venire, Missum facere vadimonium, Cedere foro iudiciali. Causam deserere.
Defatigate. Defatigo, as. Lasser. S. Defatigated. Defatigatus, ta, tum. Vide
Weary. Defeat. Induco, cis, uxi. Defection, properly where as an army does
forsake their own captain, and rebelling takes the contrary part.
Defectio, onis. foe. g. Defaillance, delaissement. S. Vide Lack and want.
Defective. Defectus, a, um. Sometime defective is phrased for decayed. Defense
against the enemies. Propugnatio, Tutamentum, Munimentum, Praesidium, defensio.
Defense contre les ennemis. S. Defense of the defendour. Exceptio,
Praescriptio, Recusantis ratio, Actio prima rei, Antigraphe. La defense du
defendeur. S. Defense. Praesidium, ij. neu. ge. Protectio, onis. f. g. Tutela,
ae. foe. genesis Defense. Defense or answer to a rebuke. Apologia, ae. Defensio
seu excusatio, onis. foe. g. Defense made and wrought by Bees at the entry of
the hyue, to defend them from cold. Propolis. Lege Plin. li. 11. cap. 7.
Defend. Adesse alicui, Contueor, eris. Defendo, is. Munio, is, ire. Praesideo,
es. Tego, is. Tueor, ris. Tuto, as. Tutor, aris. Vindico, as. Protego, is.
Defendre. S. To defend with all his power. Pro verili part aliquid defendere.
Cic.

To defend him self by th'excusation of his youth. Excusatione adolescentiae
se defendere. Cic.

To defend his masters life. Caput domini defendere. Cic.

To save or defend from could. Munire a frigore. Columel.

Defend diversely. Munito, as. freq.* Defend from wrong. Asserere ab iniuria.
Defend often. Defenso, as. Defensito, as. Munito, as. Defendre so^uent.
Defend right and title. Prosequi ius. Defend them which be faultles, or
falsely accused, or poor. Patrocinor, aris. Defendre aucun, and soubtiner son
droit and querelle. And such defense or aid is. Patrocinium. ij. n. g.
Defendaunt to an action. Pars quae relata vel rea.* Is vnde petitur, Defensor,
Reus. Le defendeur. S. Defendid. Defensus, sa, sum. Defendu. S. The cause being
defended with many strong arguments. Causa pluribus argumentis defensa
viriliter. Cic.

Defended. Munitus, Protectus, Tutus, a, um. Defendour. Praeses, dis.
Propugnator, Protector, Tutor, Vindex, cis. Defenseur. S. Defensive.
Defensarius, a, um. Praesidiarius, a, um. Defer. Differo, rs. Elongo, as.
Prolongo, as. Promoueo, es. Protraho, is. Tollo, lis, sustuli, Traho, is.
Tracto, as. Differer. S. Vide Delay. Defer from day to day. Crastino, as.
Extrahere diem, Procrastino, as. Prolato, as. Ducere diem. Differer de iour en
iour. S. Deferrer. Cunctator vel Trix. Qui targe a fair quelque chose. S.
Deferring of time. Procrastinatio, Tractio temporis. Delay. S. Defiaunce in
battle or quarrel. Prouocatio, onis. foe. genesis Defiance. S. Defy one in a
quarrel. Prouoco, as. Defier aucun. S. Defied. Prouocatus, ta, tum. Defy. S.
Defier. Prouocator, oris. m. g. Defiant. S. Defile. Attamino, as. Cloaco, as.
Collutulo, as. Co^spurco, as. Contamino, as. Dedecoro, as. Foedo, as. Impedio,
is. Impio, as. Prophano, as. Inquino, as. Polluo, is. Scelero, as. Spurco, as.
Temero, as. Tetro, as. Turpo, as. Vileo, es. Vilesco, scis. Violo, as. Vitio,
as. Contaminer. S. Defile all over. Permerdo, as. Defyle, or to make foul or
imbrewe. Oblino, is, ere, litum. Enduire. S. Defyle a woman. Vide Defloure.
Defiled, co^taminated, dishonested, spotted, or violated. Contaminatus,
Corruptus, Dedecoratus, Oblitus, Pollutus, Squallidus, Squallus, Vitiatus,
Violatus. Contamine. S. Violabilis, le. Ang. Able or apt to be defiled.*
Defiling. Pollutio, onis. foe. g. Define. Definio, is. Definir. S. Vide
Diffine. Deflouration of a maid or woman. Compressus, us. Stuprum. Defloure a
maid or woman. Comprimo, is. Depudico, as. Deuirgino, as. Imminuere
pudicitia^, Rapio, is. Stupro, as. Stuprum offerre virgini. Vitio, as. Vitium
offerre, Addere vitium virgini vel pudicitiae. Desflourer vne vierge, ou
despuceler. S. Defloured. Vitiatus, a, um. Compressus, a, um. Raptus, a, um.
Corr^mpu. Deflouring, or rauishing. Raptus, us. Stuprum, Vitiatio. Corruption
de femme ou fille. Deforme or defourme. Deformo, as. Vitio, as. Desfigurer. S.
Deformed or defiled. Foedus, a, um. Deformed or ill fashioned. Deformis, e.
Foedus, a, um. Disforme. S. Deformed, misshapen or uncomely. Informis, e.
Adiect. vt Virgil. Necsum adeo informis, nuper me in littore vidi,
Cum placidum ventis staret mare. etc.
Nor yet I Am so deformed much,
I saw my self but late
In water shore, when Sea from wynds
did stand and stable state.
Deformed or ill favored woman. Pithecium. Plaut. in Mili. Deformed
pers^nages. Maniae, arum. Personae deformes. Authore Festo. Deforming.
Deformatio, onis. f. g. Deformity. Deformitas, Turpitudo. Disformite. S.
Deformity or ill habit of ye body. Cachexia. Call. Defraude, or beguyle.
Defraudo, as. Defrauder. S. Defrauder, or a beguyler. Defraudator, Fraudator,
oris. m. g. Defraudateur. Degree. Gradus, us. Degree, ou March. S. Degree of
blood, consanguinitie, or kyndred. Gradus affinitatis. My author puttes
Stemma, in this place, of which read Plin. li. 35. cap. 2. Degree of
knighthode. Ordo militaris. Degree or state of men. Ordo, inis. m. g. Vt ordo
Senatorius. L'estat des senateurs. S. Deidamia, the name of her that was
concubine to Achilles, of whom he begat Pyrrhus. Vide Statium in Achilleid.
Deinty or licorous body. Eruditum palatum, Cupes, Liguritor, Catillo, onis. Un
friand, Friolet, frigalet. S. Deinty. Opiparus, a, um. Vide Costly. Deinty or
nete. Lautus, a, u^. Vt lautus cibus, Deintie meat. Deintie dyshe of meat.
Pulpamentum delicatum. Morceau friand. S. Deintie meats. Cupedia, Cupedula,
Delitiae popinales. Friandise. S. Deintely to fare. Laute, vel Opipare epulari.
Ligurio, is. Catillare. Friander, S. Deintines of meats at a banquet.
Lautitia, ae. f. g. Delay. Comperendinatio, Dilatio, Procrastinatio,
Prorogatio, Mora, ae. Remora, ae, Tardatio, Sustentatio. Delay, delayement.
Delay taken for three days. Comperendinatio, onis. foem. genesis Delays
ordinary, as in the vacation time or between the terms. Dies legitimi
dilationu^, Dilationes legitimae, Dies stati dilationum, Dies legitimi ordinis
iudicialis, vel curriculi causaru^. Les delais ordinaires. S. Delay. Duco, is.
Prorogo, as. Tardo, as. Traho, is. Delayer. Delay or continue judgment.
Amplio, as. Delay or to diferre the time. Differ, Comperendinare,
Intercalare, Moram creare, vel interponere, Agitare moras, Prolatare, Proferre,
Protrahere, Promouere, Suste^tare, Tollere. Delayer and differer. S. Delay
from day to day. Procrastino, as. Diem de die differ. Differer de iour en
iour. S. Delay for a longer time. Comperendino, as. Prorogo, as. Differer,
delayer, proroger. S. Delayed. Comperendinatus, Procrastinatus, Prorogatus,
Tardatus, ta, tum. Delaying and delay. Extractio, Protractio. Delayement. S.
Delectable. Amoenus, a, um. Blandus, a, um. Glucidatus, a, um. Iucundus, a, um.
Venustus, a, um. Volupis, pe. Delectable and doulx. S. Delectable place. Locus
amoenus. Delectable pronunciation of speech. Venustas, it is. foe genesis
Delectably. Amoeniter, Blande, Musice, Venuste. Delectation or delight in
worldly things. Delectatio, onis. Libentia, Volup, Voluptas, it is.
Delectamentum, Oblectatio. Delectation and plaisir. and Voluptarius, a, um. vel
Voluptuarius, a, um. Angl. Given to delectation or worldly pleasure, or of
delectation. Addonne a ses plaisirs mondains. S. To give delectation, or to
delight. Delectare, Delectatione afficere, Oblectare, Afferre delectationem.
Donner delectation. S.

Deliberation. Deliberatio, Deliberatu^. Deliberatio^. Deliberation. Ruminatio,
onis. Per Metaph. Deliberate or take advice or counsel. Cosulto, as.
Delibero, as. Deliberer. S. Deliberatly or advisedly. Consulto, Deliberate,
Consulte. Delibere, aduiseement. S. Delicate. Blax, cis. Lautus, a, um.
Molliculus, Opiparus, a, um. Delicatus, ta, tum. Delicat. Delicate banquettes,
or feasts. Dapes, ium. vt Superbae dapes. Mart. And the seruers in at such
banquettes, be called. Dapiferi, orum. Call. Delicate banquet. Delicatum
conuiuium. Banquet friant and delicat. S. Delicate or delicious meat wrapped
in paste. Scriblita, ae. foe. g. A tarte. Vne tartre. S. Delicate or wanton.
Viniolus, la, lum. Qui molliter se gerit and effoeminate. Delicate or wanton
living. Sybaris.* Delicate person. Trossulus, Delicatus, Mollis homo,
Liberaliter genitus. Homme delicat. Delicate or pleasant wenche. Trossula, ae.
* Delicata, Mollis. Delicatte. Pals. Delicate meats. Cupediae, Cupedula,
Dapes, Scitamenta, Mattya vel Mattea. Friandise, Friand lopinet, morceau
friand. H. Delicately. Laute, Molliter, Muliebriter, Opipare. Delicatement. S.
To live delicately. Molliter se curare, Delicate and molliter viuere. Viure
delicatement. S.

Delicatenes. Mollicia, Mollicies, Muliebritas. Delicatete, ou delicatesse. S.
Delight. Carpere voluptatem, Gestio, is. Inuito, as. Delecto, as. Oblecto, as.
Oblector, aris. Et Iuuat Impersonale. Delecter. S. To delight or give
d^lectation. Delectatione afficere, Afferre delec^ationem. Donner delectation.

Delight that one takes of any thing. Delectamentum, Delectatio, Oblectamentum.
Delectation ou plaisir qu'on pr^nd a quelque chose. S. Delight of worldl^
things, or carnal delectation. Volup. Voluptas, tatis. foe. genesis Volupte. S.
That which is of such carnal delight, or is given to delight in carnal
delectation. Voluptarius, a, um. Addonne a ses plaisirs mondains. S. Deliver.
Extrico, as. Libero, as. Recipio, is. Soluo, is. Expedire, Expeditu^^facere.
Deliurer. S. Deliver a thing to one to carry to an other. Admando, as. Plaut. in
Poen. Deliver any thing which is asked or called for. Subministro, as.
Soubministrer. S. Deliver or bring forth by way of generation. Pareo, is,
peperi. Se deliurer d'enfant, and accoucher. S. Deliver into bondage or
servitude. In seruitutem redigere. Addicere in feruitutem. Deliver out of
danger or peril. Eripio, Vt a morte aliquem eripere. To deliver one from
death. Reduco, Vindico, cas. Vide Bring. Deliver or to save from death. Ab
interitu vindicare. Plin. Junior. To deliver from evil. A malis abstrahere.
Deliurer des maulx. S.

Deliver, or to set the city at liberty. Iugum deijcere a ceruicibus
ciuitatis. Deliurer des ennemis. S. Deliver or to give from one to an other.
Per manus tradere. Caes. Deliver over to an other. Trado, is. Transcribo, bis.
In manus alicui tradere aliquem. To deliver one into the hands of an other.
Deliver possession, livery, state, or seisin. Mancipo, as. Mancipio dare.
Possessionem alicui tradere. Deliver a prisoner or convict to prison. Iudicatum
subingerere.* Deliver a sheape to a slaughter man. Subingerere ouem. Vide
Festum. Deliver upon trust. Concredo, is. Vt concredere aliquem in custodiam
alterius. Plaut. To deliver, or commit one to an other man's custody.
Deliverance. Deliberatio, Liberatio, onis. foe. ge. Deliurance. S.
Deliverance of a woman great with child. Enixus, us. mas. genesis Partus, tus.
m. g. Partio, onis. foe. ge. Deliverance de femme gross d'enfant. S.
Deliverance out of bondage, or servitude. Manumissio, onis. foe. genesis
Deliverance de seruage. S. Deliverance of prisoners, as at the coming in of
princes. Abolitio criminum publica vel priuata. Deliurance des prisonniers.
etc. S. Delivered. Expeditus, a, tum. Liberatus, Solutus, a, um. Traditus, a,
um. Delivered of child. Enixus, a, u^. Vt mulier enixa. sex partus. A woman
which has been delivered of six children. Qui a enfante six enfants. S. To
cause money to be delivered to one out of the bank. Nummus alicui scribere.
Plaut.

Women delivered of the fruit of their womb. Enixae foeminae foetae. Femmes
deliurees du fruict de leur ventre. S.

Delivered out of tribulation. Exire aerumna. Estre deliure de tribulation. S.
To be delivered by an other. Salutem accipere ab aliquo. Estre deliure par
aucun S.

Delivered by the death of the Counsull. Defunctus Consulis fato. Deliure par
la mort du Consul. S. Delivered from a fever. Perfunctus a febri. Deliure de la
fiebure. S. Delivered from labors. Perfunctus laboribus. Deliure de ses
labeurs. Delivered out of bondage, danger, or ieopardye. Reductus, a, um.
Vacuus a periculis, Vindicatus, a, um. Deliure. Deliverer. Liberator, vel Trix.
Seruator, toris. m. genesis Qui deliure, deliureur. Deliverer of a thing called
for. Subministrator, oris. m. genesis An under servant. Deliverer out of bondage,
danger, peril, or wrong. Vindex, icis. Com. ge. Delude, or to mock, or
deceive some body. Deludo, is, si. Abuser aucun, mocquer, tromper. S. Et
Delusus, sa, sum. Mocked or deluded. Delusion wrought by enchauntement, iugling
cast or legierdemayne. Praestigium, ij. vel Praestigiae, arum, Incantationes,
Delusiones. Delue or to dig the earth. Fodere, Defodere. Fouir la terre. S.
Delue or to dig round about. Circumfodere, Exarare. Fouir a l'entour. S.
Delue or to dig a ditche. Scrobem subigere. Fouir vne fosse. S. Deluer, or
digger of a pit. Putearius, ij. mas. genesis Qui fouit les puis. S. Deluer, a
digger, or a ditcher. Subarator, oris. m. g. Fossor, oris. m. g. Fouisseur. S.
Deluing, or a digging. Fossura, Fossio, onis. foe. ge. Fouissement. Deluing or
a digging round about. Circunfossura, ae. foe. g. Fouissement tout entour.
Demand. Adeo, is, ire. Exigo, is. Quaero, is. Rogo, as. Requiro, is. Expeto,
is. Interpello, as. Interrogo, as. Percunctor, aris. Peto, is. Deposco, is.
Scitor, aris. Sciscitor, aris. Demander. S. To demand that is just, honest,
and convenient. Postulare, Poscere. Demander chose just, honneste and
conuenante. S.

Demand and desire instantly. Exposcere. Demander instamment. S. Demand
importunatly. Flagitare, Efflagitare. Demander a toute force. S. Demand and
to require audience. Dicendi vel agendae causae locum and potestatem petere.
Demander audience. Demand duty, or his own again. Reposco, scis.
Redemander. S. Demand often. Rogito, as. Quaerito, as. Demander souuent.
Demand the commons consent in the parliament house. Rogare plaebem, And the
demand it self is, Rogatio, onis. f. g. Interrogation. S. Demand with a
loud voice. Clarigo, as. Lege Call. Demaundaunt. Petens, Quaerens. Demandant.
S. Demand. Erotema, it is. Rogamen, Rogatus, us. Petitus, Postulatus,
Postulatio, Petitioonis. f. g. Vne de mande. S. A demand that is foolish.
Insulsa efflagitatio. Vne sotte demand.

Thy demand is reasonable. Ius bonum dicis, oras, petis. Ta demand est
raisonnable. S.

Demanded. Interpellatus, Interrogatus, Requisitus, Rogatus, a, um. Petitus,
ta, tum. Demand. S. Demanded it is, or it was. Requisitum est. Demaunder.
Petitor, Rogator, Actor. Le demandeur en matiere de Justice. Demeanure. Gestus,
us. Status, tus. Habitus, tus. Maintien. S. Demonstration or evidence.
Apodixis, Indicium, Monstratio, Significatus, tus. Significatio, onis.
Demonstratio, onis. Declaratio, onis. foe. g. Demonstrance. He which does make
demonstration, or show a thing. Demonstrator, oris. m. g. Demonstrateur.

Demonstrate. Indico, as. Monstro, as. Demonstro, as. Declaro, as. Demonstrer.
S. Demonstratiue. Epidicticon, Demonstratiuus, a, um. Demonstratif. S. Demure.
Modestus, a, um. Modeste. S. Demurely. Modeste. Modestement. S. Demurr in law,
or dwell in law, called among our lawyers. Moratur in Lege, Consistere
iudicium, vel opinionem, And when the Judge determines the state of the
matter, then must be said. Constituere statum caussae. Demurre, for so is it
spoken short of the common people. As they will say, our matter is brought to
a demurre. Destitutum est incoeptum nostrum. Nostre cas est demeure. S. It is
derived from the latin word Demorari, To abide, stay, or tarry. Or of the
French. Demourer. Ou demeurer. Den, or cave. Antrum, Cauerna, Fouea,
Latibulum, Specus, us. vel coris. Spelaeum, Spelunca. Cauerne. S. Den or cave
wherein wild beasts lie. Lustrum, tri. Et Lustrum ferarum, Spelaeum ferarum.
Cubile ferae, Lustrum dictum quod parum illustretur. Cauerne de bestes
sauuages. H. Dens of harlottes, whores, knaves, or thieves. Lustrum, tri. n.
ge. Den for thieves. Spelunca latronum. Denmark region. Chersonesus,
Cymbrica, Dania, nunc etiam Danomarchia, quod Danis subiecta sit dicitur.
Danemar^. S. Deny. Diffiteor, eris. Inficias ire. Nego, as. Abnuo, is. Refuto,
as. Inficior, aris. Recuso, as. Denego, as. Denier quelque chose, nier. S. They
deny any to be a good man; saving him that is wise. Negant quenquam virum
bonum esse nisi sapientem. Ils meant qu'il y ait un homme de bien, ^'il n'est
sage. S.

Deny by an oath falsely. Abiuro, as. Renier auec serment. S. Deny often.
Negito, as. Plaut. in Bacchid. Vix quidem negito. Deny or forsake. Relinquo,
is. Delaisser. S. Deny partly, or make half denial. Subnego, as. Aucunement
nier, presque nier. S. Deny stiffly or utterly. Abnego, as. Renier. S. Deny
with beck or countenance. Abnuo, is. Aliquid alicui abnuere. Cic. Deny with
an oath. Adiuro, as.* Deny with a loud voice. Reclamo, as. Crier a l'enconore
and ne vouloir consenter. S. Denial or denying. Apophasis, Renutus, us,
Detrectatio, Inficiatio, Negatio, Denegatio. Nieme^t Denyer. Inficiator,
Negatiuus, Negator, Detrectator. Qui nie. S. Inficiator, oris. m. g. He which
denies debte. Qui nie vne debte. S. Denizens, or strangers made free. Recepti
in protectionem regiam. Dented. Crenatus, a, um. Dentes about a leaf like a
saw. Crenae, arum. Denomination. Vocabulum. * Denominatio, Nominatio, onis.
foe. g. Nomination. S. Denominate. Denomino, as. Nommer. S. Denounce. Denuncio,
as. Indico, cis, xi. Denencer. S. Denounced. Denunciatus, Indictus, a, um.
Denonce, command and publie. S. Denouncing. Denunciatio, Indictio*
Denonciation* S Depaint or describe. Depingo, is. Peindre. S. Depart. Abeo,
is, ire. Absisto, is. Abscedo, is. Co^cedo, is. Vt concede hinc. Decedo, is.
Discedo, is. Degredior, eris. Facesso, is. Proficiscor, eris. Recedo, is.
Secedo, is. S' en aller. S' en partir. S Depart a sunder. Dirimo, is. Separer.
S. Depart from one place to an other. Transmigro, as. Vide Change. Depart
not. Asta, Imp. de Asto, as. Vide Stand. Depart or die. Vide Die. To depart,
or to go from one. Desistere ab aliquo. Se departir de quelqu' un. S.

Depart or to go from some place. Emigro, as. Mouere se loco, vel ex loco,
Facessere, Proficisci de loco, Abire, Concedere, Abcedere, Discedere, Recedere,
Digredi, Excedere. Se departir de quelque lieu. S. Partir. etc. Departed or
dead. Vide Dead. Departing or departure. Decessio, nis. Digressio, Secessio,
Secessus, Abitio. Abitus, us. Discessus, us. Discessio, Profectio, Recessus,
us. Departement. Depeache. Absoluo, Remitto. To dispatche. Despecher.
Depeaching. Absolutio, onis. foe. ge. Vide Absolve. Depend, or hang down.
Dependeo, es. Pendeo, es. Dependre. S. All thy hope depends or hangs on
fortune. Spes omnis tua pendet ex fortuna. Cic.

Our health depends on yours. Pendet and a vestra nostra salute salus. Nostre
salut depend du vostre. S.

Depopulation or conqueste, desolation or destruction. Depopulatio, onis. f. g.
Destruction. S. Depopulate a country. Depopulor, aris. To destroy. Destruire.
S. Depose, or deprive. Dare successorem, Depono, is. Exautoro, as. Exonero, as.
Exuo, is. Deposer. S. Depose, or deprive one out of his office. Potestatem vel
magistratum abrogare alicui, Submouere potestate, vel a potestate. Deposer
aucun de son office. S. Deposed. Abactus, a, um. Depositus, Depulsus,
Exautoratus, Exonoratus, a, um. Prive. S. Deposition. Depositio, Exoneratio,
onis. f. g. Deposition of witnesses. Testimonium, Testatio. onis. f. g.
Deposition de tesmoings. S. Deprave, pervert, or make ill. Deprauo, as.
Peruerto, it is Profano, as. Desprauer, corrumpre and gaster. Deprave, or say
ill. Obtrecto, as. Detracto, as. Detracter, mesdire d'aucun. S. Depraved.
Deprauatus, ta, tum. Deprave. S. Deprauing or making ill. Deprauatio,
Peruersio, Profanatio, onis. f. g. Deprauation. Deprauing, or saying ill.
Detractio, Obtrectatio. Detraction. Depryue. Deijcere de gradu, Depono, is.
Exuo, is. Orbo, as. Priuo, as. Viduo, as. Spolio, as. Priuer. S. Deprive, or to
depose one from his estate and office. Abrogare alicui imperium, Magistratum
alicui abigere, eripere, vel detrahere, Exigere atque eximere aliquem
honoribus. Priuer aucun de son estat and office. S. Deprive or to put one from
his office for ever. Abrogare alicui magistratum in perpetuum. Priuer quelqu'
un de son office a tousiours. S. Depryue or take away light. Elucifico, as.
Laberius includes Elucifico Where as the covetous man mistrustinge the
prodigality of his heir, wysheth him self the same pain that Democritus did
to him self: that is, rather to have his eyes plucked out, then to see the
wasting of his goods done by his son, his covetous affection is such. Est
verbum inusitatum. Deprived. Abactus, a, um. Deiectus de gradu, Exautoratus, a,
um. Orbus, a, um. Priuatus, a, um. Viduus, a, um. Spoliatus, ta, tum. Prive. S.
Deprivation. Priuatio, onis. f. g. Depriuatio, onis. foe. genesis Privation.
Deputation. Substitutio, Surrogatio. Substituting or putting in the place of
other. Substitutio^. Depute. Addico, is. Allego, as. Surrogo, as. Delego, gas.
Substituer, Surroger. S. Deputed. Addictus, Substitutus, Deputatus, a, um.
Deputy. Deputatus, Subsortitius, Surrogatus, Vicarius, rij. m. g. Qui tient la
place d'vn autre. Dear a beast. Dama, ae. m. and f. ge. Un daim. S. Dear
called rain dear. Tarandus. Plin. li. 8. cap. 38. Dear heart, or my sweet
heart, a veneriall term. Amicula, vel Amicule, in Vocat. cas. Anime mi, Vocat.
cas. Derision. Illusio, Irrisio, Derisus, sus. Deridiculu^. li. n. ge.
Derision. S. Deriuate, as to take from one, and to lay it to an other. Deriuo,
as. Deriuer. vt Istud verbum deriuatur ab alio. This word is derived of an
other. Le mot est derive d' un autre. S. Derke. Ater, a, um. Caliginosus, a,
um. Vide Dark Derogate or minishe. Derogo, as. Deroger. S. Derogate the kings
majesty. Laedere maiestate^. Derogate one law with an other. Obrogare legem.
Festus. Derogation. Derogatio, onis. foe. g. Derogation. Desce^de, or to come,
or go down. Descendo, is. Descentiones facere, Sidere. Descendre. S. Descend,
or come down from dignity. Honorem amittere. Descend, or come of an ancient
family or stock. Orior, riris, vel reris, ortus sum, oriri. vt Satu deorum
ortus. Descended from the Gods. Descended, or come of an old house or lynnage.
Oriundus. Vt Oriundus ab Vlysse. Descended, or come of Ulysses. Des descendans
d' Vlysse. Lege Laur. Vall. li. 3. cap. 57. Descended of the blood royal.
Originem a rege trahere. Estre descendu de la lignee royale. S. Descente.
Descensus, us. m. g. Descente. S. Descension, or going down. Descensio, onis.
foe. g. Descendement. S. Describe. Circunscribo, is. Depingo, is. Describo,
bis. Descrire quelque chose. S. Described. Circu^scriptus, Depictus,
Descriptus. a, u^. Description. Descriptio, Iconismus. Senec. lib. 15. Epist.
ait esse verbum Publicanorum. Description. S Description of the earth.
Geographia, ae. foe. g. Description de la terre. Description of the whole
world. Cosmographia, ae. foe. genesis La description du monde. S. Lege Call. in
dictione Cosmographiae. Description, or picture made of any thing. Charta, ae.
foe. genesis Description of the compass of a region by it self. Chorographia,
ae. foe. g. Regionis alicuius particularis descriptio. Description of a place.
Topographia. ae. foe. g. Loci descriptio. Cicer. ad Attic. lib. 15. Geographus,
Is he that makes description of the earth. Vt Claudius Ptol.

Cosmographus, Is he that describes the whole world, of the difference
between the Cosmographer and Geographer. Read Call. Cosmo.

Chorographus, Is the describer of the compass of a country. Regionis
alicuius descriptor.

Topographus, Is the describer of a place.

Deserte, or wyldernes, where no body dwells. Eremus, Loca deserta,
Solitudo, inis. Desertum. Desert. S. Desert places where none frequent.
Desertae solitudines. Lieux desers ou null ne frequente. To fly into a deserte
to save his life. Mandare vitam suam fugae and solitudini. S' enfuir en quelque
desert pour sauuer sa vie.

Desert, deserving, or merit. Meritum, Promeritum, Virtus, tutis^ foe. g.
Merit, deserte. S. It is my desert. Meritum est meum. Ie l' ay deserve and
merit. S.

According to ones deserts. Pro merito. Terent. Selon qu' on a deserui. S.

Deserve. Commereo, es. Demereo, es, Demereor, eris. Mereo, es, rui, ritus sum.
Mereor, eris. Promereo, es. Promereor, eris. Meriter, and deseruir quelque
chose. S. He has well deserved. Been promeruit. Teren. Il l' ha bien deserui.
S.

Deserve to the vttermoste. Emereor, eris. It is also to serve for wages.
Meriter, seruir pour la soulde Deserve thank and favor of one. Been demereor.
Meriter enuers aucun. S. Deserved. Meritus, a, um. Deserui. S. With this
aduerbe Been, if you will. I know she has deserved, that thou remember her.
Scio hanc esse meritam vt memor sis sui. Terent. in And.

Deserving a reward. Promerens, it is. Plaut. Deserving death. Capitalis, le. Vt
capitale crimen. Deseruingly. Merito. A bonne cause, and a bon droict. S. I
love thee for thy truth, or for thy deserts. Merito te amo. Terent.

Desierable, or worthy to be desired. Optabilis, le. Votiuus, a, um.
Desyderabilis, le. Desirable. S. Desines of the head, which is a passion
whereby the pacient turns round, or else thinks every thing to go about.
Vertigo, inis. foe. ge. Tournement de test. S. Desire. Ambio, is. Ardeo, es.
Comprecor, aris. Cupio, is. Peto, is. Posco, scis. Postulo, as. Opto, as. Oro,
as. Studeo, es. Volo, is, lui. verb. neut. and anomalum. Desirer. I desire
greatly to see thee. Ardeo te videre. Ie desire fort de te veoir.

He desires to see thee. Cupit te videre. Il a grand desir de te veoir. S.

I humbly desire you. Supplex te peto. Vergil.

To desire aid, help, or sucour. Opem poscere, Horat.

I desire you, that you restore me that servant again. Postulo abs te, vt
mihi illum reddas scruum. Plaut.

To desire aid, or help. Opem orare. Ovid.

You all desire one thing. Omnes vnum studetis. Cic. Vous desirez touts vne
mesme chose. S.

I desire your favor, or to be in your favor. Volo tuam gratiam. Plaut. Ie
desire de estre en ta grace. S.

Desire devoutly. Supplico, as. Supplier. S. Desire earnestly. Discupio, is,
iui. Fort desirer. S. Desire eftsoon. Erogito, as. Resecro, as. Vt obsecro te
resecroque. Ie vous pry and reprie. Plaut. Desire fervently. Concupio, is.
Suspiro, as. Conuoiter ou desirer fort. Desire for Gods sake. Obtestor, aris.
Prier. etc. Desire good will and favor. Velle gratia^. Vt supra. Desire
earnestly. Teneri magno desyderio, Praeoptare, Discupere, Angi desyderio. Fort
desirer. S. To have great desire of his country. Angi desyderio patriae,
Teneri desyderio, Desyderio patriae moueri, aut flagrare. Auoir grand desir de
son pais. S.

Desire hertely Exoro, as. Obsecro, as. Prier fort affectueusement. S. Desire
humbly. Obtestor, aris. Vide Pray. Desire importunately. Efflagito, as. Proco,
as. Demander a toute force. S. Desire inordinatly. Flagro, as. Vide Burn.
Desire instantly. Derogito, as. Exposco, scis. Dema^der ou prier fort and
instament. S. Desire lamentably. Imploro, as. Implorer. S. Desire once again.
Erogito, as. Resecro, as. Reprier. Desire pardon of death. Deprecari mortem.
Ovid. Desire release for debte. Debitum deprecari. Desire to read. Lecturio,
is. Legere cupio. Desire to do. Facturio, is. Of these verbes read beneathe
after Desirously. Desire to go to stole or siege. Cacaturio, is. Martial. Vall.
lib. 1. cap. 24. Desire or request. Desyderatio, Desyderium, Obsecratio,
Rogamen, Rogatus, Optatio, Votum, ti, n. ge. Desir. S. I have a great desire to
see the city. Sum in vrbis desyderio, Desyderio vrbs me afficit, Desyderium
me tenet vrbis, Vrbis cupiditate flagro, Vrbis desyderio flagro, Animus meus
est in vrbe, vrbem spectat, aestuat vrbis desyderio, est in vrbis desyderio.
Desyderio afficit me haec vrbs. IN ay grand desir de veoir ceste ville. S.

Desire or study. Studium, ij. neu. g. Vt studium bonarum literarum. Desire of
honor inordinatly. Ambitio, onis. foe. g. Ambition. S. Desire or lust to
women. Amor mulierum, secundu^ Cic. Mulierositas, tatis, f. g. 3. Tusca.
quaestio. Desire, or request humblye made. Obtestatio, onis. foe. genesis
Desired. Cupitus, a, um. Expectatus, a, um. Optabilis, Obtatus, a, um. Desire.
S. Desired eftsoon. Deoratus, a, um. Desired fervently. Cupitus, ta, tum.
Concupitus, a, um. Expetitus, ta, tum. Desyderatus, ta, tum. Fort desire. S.
Desiring. Cupiens, it is. Desirant. S. Vide Desirous. Desiring devoutly kneling,
or prostrate. Supplex, cis. Adiectiuum. Desiring many things, or much.
Multiuolus, a, um. Catul. ad Mallium, Multiuola est mulier. Desirous, or
desiring. Appetens, it is. Auidus, a, um. Affectuosus. Cupidus, a, um. Desireux.
S. Desirous. Studiosus, a, um. Vt laudis studiosus. Desirous of praise.
Desirous of honor, and promotion. Ambitiosus, a, um. Ambitieux. S. Desirously,
or with desire, or desiringly. Cupide, Cupienter, Optato, Studiose. Auec grand
desir. S. It is to be noted that all verbes ending in vrio, As Cacaturio,
Coenaturio, Dicturio. etc. Be verbes desyderatiue, desiring or entendinge to
perform the act of their significations, as Facturio. I desire to do.
Lecturio, I desire to read. They are formed of the latter supine, by putting
to rio, Vt Esu, Esurio. They are of the fourth conjugation, verbes neuters, and
lack their preterfecte tense and supines, only two excepted. Parturio and
Esurio, vt Li^ius. Praeteritum fugiunt, Meditatiua omnia, praeter parturio,
esurrio, quae praeteritum duo formant. And that they lack the supines.
Quicquid praeterito caruit datur absque supinis. If you couit to know more of
the nature of these verbes, read Laur. Vall. li. 1. cap. 24. But this may
suffrse.

Deske to write on. Pluteus, ei. mas. genesis Poulpitre sur quoy on escript. S.
Desolation, or deuastation of a country. Depopulatio, onis. foe. g. Degast,
pillement, destruction. S. Desolate, or to make sole and without company.
Desolo, as. Solum and desertum facio. Desoler. Desolated. Desolatus, ta, tum.
vt Plin. Deserta and desoluta loca. Places deserte and desolated or left.
Deserts and desolez. S. Desolated. Depopulatus, Deuastatus, a, um. Vide
Destroyed. Desolate, or to destroy. Depopulor, aris. Deuasto. as. Destruire
and despeupler. S. Despair. Despero, as. Spem abijcere. Spem perdere,
Peruenire ad desperationem. Desesperer, venir iusques a se desesperer. S.
Desperate. Desperatus, a, um. Sine spe, Vacuus fide, Depositus, a, um.
Desespere. S. Desperate debt. Debitum inopinatum, vel relictu^. Desperate to
be, or in despair. Ad restim redire. Desperate mind. Iacens animus. A heart
out of courage. Desperation, or despair. Desperatio, Spei abiectio. Desespoir,
desesperance. S. Which is in great despair. Desperatione magna affectus. Qui
est en grand desespoir. S.

To bring in desperation. Desperationem afferre. Mettre en desespoir. S.

Deperately. Desperanter, Insolabiliter. Desespereement. S. Despise. Abijcio,
is. Aspernor, aris. Contemno, is. Despicio, cis. Negligo, is. Renuo, is.
Respuo, is. Sperno, is, spreui. Temno, is, empsi. Contemner. S. Despriser. S.
Despise any sacred thing. Profano, as. Profanum facere.* Despise, or to set
nothing by a thing. Despicor, caris. Verbum deponens. Despriser. S. Despisable,
or worthy to be despised. Aspernabilis, Contemptibilis. Contemnendus, da, dum.
Contemptible. S. Despised. Aspernatus, a, um. Contemptus, a, um. Despicatus, a,
um. Neglectus, a, um. Fastiditus, ta, tum. Spretus, ta, tum. Desprise. S.
Despectus, ta, tum. Vt Vergil. Despectus tibi sum, nec quis sim quaeris Alexi,
Quam dives niuei pecoris quam lactis abundans.
Mill meae Siculis errant in montibus agnae.
Of the Alexis I Am despysde
Thou naught inquyrst of me,
How rich of snow white sheep I am
What store of milk for thee,
A thousand wander of my lambs
In mountes of Sicilie.
Despised of every man. Despicabilis.* Despite, or despising. Contemptus,
Despectus, us. Despicatus, Contemptio, Despicatio, Despectio, Opprobrium,
Fastidium, ij. Neglectio, Neglectus, tus, Despris, ou desprisement. S.
Despitefully. Contemptim, Opprobriose. Par mespris. S. By contempt. Despoyle.
Spolio, as, Dispolio, as. Despolio, as. Expolio, as. Exuo, is. Despouiller. S.
Despoyle a man of his goods. Depeculor, aris. Despouiller aucun de son bien.
S. Despoyle. Spolium, Tropheum, Exuuiae, arum. Despoyle, or place where
mischief or robbery is done. Spoliarium. ij. neu. ge. Despoyled, or robbed.
Spoliatus, ta, tum. Exutus, ta, tum. Despouille. S. Despoyler, or a pyller, or
robber. Spoliator, oris. m. genesis Verbale. Pilleur, And she that spoyleth.
Spoliatrix, tricis. foe. g. Celle qui pille and dispouille. S Despoyling.
Despoliatio, Spoliatio, onis. foe. genesis Pillerie. S. Desse, or lecturne to lay
a book on. Ambonus, ni.* Pluteus, tei. m. g. Vide Deske. Desteny. Fatum, ti.
Fortuna, Sors, it is. Parcae, arum. Plur. Destin, fatale destenee. S. Desteny
teller, that tells things to come, a south sayer. Fatidicus, ca, cum. Qui
dit les chooses aduenir. Fatiloquus, qua, quum. Idem. and Deuin. Destinate, to
appointe, or purpose. Destino, as. Destiner, assigner, purposer. By my desteny.
Meo fato. Par ma destinee.

Destitute or left. Destitutus, a, um. Delaisse. S. Destitute to make. Orbo,
as. Priuer de quelque chose. Vide Deprive. Destitute. Destituo, is. Destituer.
S. Destitute, or to leave a thing begone. Destituere rem inchoatam. Destituer
and delaisser vne chose commencee. Destitution, or leaving of a thing.
Destitutio, onis. foe. g. Destitution and delaissement. S. Destroy. Conficio,
cis. Consumo, is. Corrumpo, is. Deformo, as. Deleo, es. Excido, is. Labefacio,
is. Peruerto, is. Premo, is. Destruire. S. To destroy. Destruere, Profligare,
Delibare, Interuertere, Euastare, Perpopulari, Depopulari, Conterere, Ad
exitium and vastitatem vocare. Destruire. S.

To destroy a city. Exidionem facere oppido, Vrbem delere, vel excidere
vrbem, Extinguere vrbem aliquam. Destruire vne ville. S.

Destroy a child. Iugulare infantem, vel corrumpere puerum. Destroy a
country. Depopulor, aris. Populor, aris. Vt supra. Destruire. S. Destroy, or
to undo a law. Abrogare legem, Refigere tabulas. Destroyable, or able to be
destroyed. Destructilis, le. Lact. lib. De ira dei. Destructilia sunt omnia
quae manu fiunt. Destroyed. Desolatus, Destructus, Euersus, Profligatus, a, um.
Prostratus, ta, tum. Destruict and gaste. Destroyed by conquest, or muas^^n.
Depopulatus, a, um. Destroyed to be. Vatisco, scis. neut. tertiae coniuga.
Destroyer. Corruptor, oris. m. g. Corrompeur, gasteur. Et Asmodeus, Which is
also the name of a Devil. Destroyer, conqueror, or waster of a country.
Depopulator, Populator. m. g. Gasteur, destructeur Destroier of a city.
Euersor ciuitatis, Vastator, Destructor. Destruiseur. S. Destruction.
Calamitas, Clades, Euersio, Excidiu^, Exitium, Pernicies, Vastatio, Destruction,
Vastitas, Vastitudo, Vastities, iei. foe. genesis Destruction, gast, gastement. S.
Destruction or conquest. Depopulatio, Populatio, onis. foe. g. Destruction. S.
Destruction of the country. Patriae interitus. La destruction du pais. S.
Destrucion of manners. Morum populatio. Destruction de meurs. S. Destruction by
slaughter. Caedes, caedis. foe. genesis Tuerie. S. Destruction of man by
slaughter. Homicidium, ij. neu. genesis Vide Slaughter. Detayne, or to withhold.
Detineo, es. Implico, cas. Occupo, as. Moror, aris. Teneo, es. Detenir. S.
Detecte open, or to disclose. Detego, is, exi. Descouurir. S. Detected.
Detectus, ta, tum. Descouuert. S. Vide Disclosed. Detention, or withholding.
Detentio, onis. foe. genesis Detention, ou detenue. S. Determine. Censeo, es.
Constituo, is. Decerno, is. Dijudico, as. Determino, as. Praescribo, is.
Statuo, is. Concludo, is. Definio, is. Determiner. S. Determine before.
Praestituo, is. Ordonner and arester. Determine, or to judge after conscience.
Statuere ex aequo, and bono. Determine in mind. Apud animum statuere.
Determyne upon a demurre in law. Constituere statum caussae. Determination of
practitioners of the law. Pragmatica sanctio. Determination of a possession in
debate made by the magistrate, an iniunction. Interdictum, ti. n. genesis
Interdict. S. Determination of any variaunce. Quaerelae compositio.
Determination done and paste. Lis sopita. Srife ended. Determinatly. Praecise,
Determinate. Determineement. S. Determined. Dijudicatus, Iudicatus, Actus, a,
um. Compositus, ta, tum. Termine par sentence S. Determined conscionably, or
equaly. Statutum ex aequo, and bono. Deteste. Abominor, aris. Detestor, aris.
Detester. S. Detestable. Abominabilis, le. Detestabilis, le. Detestable and
abominable. S. Detestable vice. Nefas. n. g. Indeclinabile. Detested.
Abominatus, a, um. Deteste. S. Detract. Detraho, is. Maledico, is. Mordeo, es.
Suggillo, as. Obloquor, eris. Vitiligo, as. Detracter. S. Detract, or to speak
ill of one. Allatrare aliquem, Defama alicuius detrahere, Detrahere alicui,
Insectari aliquem maledictis, Lacerare optimum virum incesto ore, Maledicere
alicui, Male loqui alicui, Obloqui, Obtrectare laudibus alicuius, Premere
aliquem, Sinistris sermonibus carpere aliquem, Vellicare. Mesdire and detracter
de quelqu' un. S. Non ego mordaci destrinxi carmine que^qua^. Ovid.
Nor I with biting verse have yet,
detracted any man.
Ie n' ay mesdict de person par mes carmes.
Detracted. Detractus, Rosus, Suggillatus, a, um. Mesdict. Detraction.
Detractio, Obloquium, Maledicentia, Obloquutio, Suggillatio, Maledictio, onis.
foe. g. Obtrectatio, onis. foe. g. Detraction. S. Detractor, backebyter, ill
reporter, or sclaunderer. Obtrectator, Detractator, Maledicus, Obloquutor,
Susurro, onis. Sycophanta, Vernaculus, Vitiligator, vel Trix. Mordax homo.
Detracteur. Detriment, damage, hurt, or loss. Detrimentum, Iactura, Nequale,
lis. plur. lia. Detrement. S. Et Detrimentosus, sa, sum. Ang. That which is the
cause or occasion of detrime^t. Qui port dommage. Divide. Diduco, is.
Dimembro, as. Discrimino, as. Disparo, as. Dispartior, iris. Distraho, is.
Diuido, is. Parts, vel diuisiones facere, Partior, iris. Secerno, is. Separo,
as. Scindo, is. Distinguo, is, inxi. Diuiser. S. Divide an army or host.
Carpere exercitum in multas parts. id est deuidere vel seperare. Liu. Divide
by chapiters or tytles. Capitulo, as. Capitulum appono, vel per capita
distinguo. Call. Divide into two parts. Bipartior, iris. Vel Bipertior, iris.
Partir en deux. S. Divide in three parts. Tripartior, iris. Partir en trois.
S. Divide in four parts. Quadripartior, iris. Divide in five parts.
Quinquepartior, iris. and sic de reliquis. etc. Divide land. Erciscere.*
Ercisceor, eris. To be parted and divided. Estre parti and devise. S. Divide
one place from an other. Distermino, as. Deviser and separer. S. Divide
realms, or divide into shyres. Contribuere in regna. Deviser en royaumes. S.
Divide spoil. Trophea contribuere. Divided. Distractus, a, u^. Distinctus,
Diuisus, Partitus, Sectus, a, um. Seorsus, Separatus. Devise. S. Divided euenly
in parts or portions. Partitus, a, um. Parti and devise. S. Et Partite. Ang.
Equally, or euenly divided, or in parts, destinctly. En parties,
destinctement. Divided into two parts. Bifidus, a, um. Bipartitus, ta, tum.
Dimidiatus, ta, tum. Divided into three parts. Trifidus, a, um. Tripartitus,
ta, tum. Parti en trois. S. Sieve Tripertitus, ta, tum. Divided into four
parts. Quadrifidus, Quadripartitus. Et Quadripertitus, ta, tum. Devise en
quatre parties. Divided into five parts. Quinquepartitus, a, um. Parti en
cinq. S. Divided into many parts. Multipartitus, a, um. Parti en plusieurs
pars. Divided into sundry places. Loculatus, ta, tum. Divided to be.
Dispartior, iris. Diuidor, eris. Estre devise. Not divided. Indiuisus, sa, sum.
Indiscretus, ta, tum. Indistinctus, ta, tum. Qui n' est point divise.

Devil. Belial, Which is interpreted Apostata, without yoke. Behemoth, which
Signifies also a beast. Diabolus, Albeit in Greek it signifies a false
accuser, Leuiathan, Behemoth, Belial, Diabolus, Demon, Cacodaemon, onis. m.
ge. Diable. S. Devil which tempted Christ's humanity, or adversary to
Christ. Satanas. Read the first of Mark, 4. of Math. and. 4. of Luke.
Deuelyshe, or of the devil. Daemonicus, a, um. Vt Daemonicae frauds, Lactant.
Et Diabolicus, ca, cum. Vt Diabolica superstitio. Deuelyshe invocation.
Deuotio, onis. f. g. Sueton. Invocation and mots diaboliques pour fair quelque
do^mage a aucun. S. Devise. Cogito, as. Commentor, aris. Fingo, is. Diuiser. S.
Devise building. Architector, aris. Deviser un edifice. Devise craftily.
Machinor, aris. Machiner quelque finesse. S. Devise false tales and lies.
Sycophantisso, as. Sycophantor, aris.* Devise or inuente. Molior, iris. Pingo,
is. Machiner, deviser. S. Devise in memory, or thought. Meditor, aris.
Penser. S. Devise or purpose. Verso, as. Penser. Vt Dolos versare. Verg. To
deuyse deceites. Device. Commentum, ti, Designatio, onis. foe genesis Invention,
de^is. S. Devised. Cogitatus, Commentatus, a, um, Designatus, a, um. Deuisee.
Devised in thought, or purposed precisely. Meditatus, a, um. Pense. S.
Deuisible, or divided. Diuiduus, a, um. Divise. S. Devising. Meditatio, onis.
foe. genesis Pensement. S. Et Meditabundus, a, um. Full of deuisinge, or always
devising. Division among spiritual men, called a Scisme. Schisma, matis. n. g.
Division. S. Division, or partition. Deuisio, onis. Distractio, Partitio,
Sectio, Separatio, onis. foe. genesis Division and separation. S. Division, or
partitio^ of a pray or spoil in war. Sectio, onis. foe. genesis Deuisour of a
buylding, or master of a work. Architector, ris. Architectus, ti. m. ge. Et
Architecton, onis m. ge. Qui s' entend a deviser edefices. S. Et
Architectonicus, a, um. Angl. Pertaining to the devising of a buylding. Deuoir,
duty, or office. Officium, ij. n. genesis Le debuoir. Vide Duty. Deuenshyre.
Deuonia, ae. foe. g. Ptolem. Deuenshyre people. Domnonij, orum. Devour. Deuoro,
as. Gurgito, as. Voro, as. Deuorer. Devour gluttonously. Ingurgito, as.
Devour flesh. Carniuoro^as.* Devour patrimony, or substance. Profundere
substantiam. Paterna bona abligurire. Terent. Devour sweet, or deintie
meats. Ligurio, is. Friander. S. Deuourer. Edax, Vorax, cis. Pamphagus. Vide
Gloton. Deuourer, or great eater. Edax, cis. Edo, nis. Lurco, onis. Secundum
Lucil, Edite lurcones. etc. Phago, nis. Gulosus, Heluo, Ingluuiosus, Mando,
Manduco, onis. m. g. Gourmand. S. Deuourer of patrimony, or substance
prodigally or vnthriftely. Barathro, qui in gulae barathrum absumit
patrimonium, Gurges and vorago patrimonij, Decoctor, Nepos, Lurco, Asotus,
Euersor, quod euertat and delapidet patrimoniu^, Heluo, Conturbator macelli,
Popino, Prodigus, gi, m. g. Prodigue. H. Et Comedo, onis. m. genesis Un goulu. S.
Devouring. Voracitas, tatis. foe. g. Voratio, onis. f. genesis Deuourement. S.
Devouring or great eating. Ingluuies, ei. Heluatio, Popinatio, Edacitas, tatis.
foe. g. Gourmandise. Deuouringly. Voraciter, Gulose. Gloutement. S. Dew. Ros,
ris. m. ge. Rosee. S. Et Rorulentus, a, um. Ang. Covert and full of dew.
Couuert and plien de rosee. S. Dew, or drop like dew. Roro, ras. Fair
rosee. S. Dewed, or wet with dew. Roratus, Ro^idus, a, um. Plein de rosee. S.
Dew lapp, or paunche of a rother beast. Palearium, rij. Rumen, inis. n. ge.
Le fanon d' un boeuf. S. Dexterity. Agilitas, Dexteritas, Habilitas, tatis.
foe. ge. Dexterite. S. Natural dexterity to do all things. Ad omnia
naturalis ingenij dexteritas. Vne dexterite naturelle a toutes chooses.


D. ANTE. I.
Diadem or cappe, whereupon the king wears his crown. Diadema, it is. n.
genesis Diadem. S. And he which wears a Diadem on his head. Diadematus, ta,
tum. Qui ha un diadem en la test. Et Diadema, atis. Is also sometime taken
for the crown it self. Dial. Horologium, Sciatericum, Solarium. Un quadran
ou horologe a soleil. H. Dial set upon a chymney or wall, to know what it is a
clock by the Sun. Sciatericon. Idem. Dialogue, the speech between those
which talk or dispute. Dialogus, Sermo inter colloquentes disputantesque
personas. Dialogue enter deux ou plusieurs. H. Diamonde, a kind of precious
stone, which is said to be so hard that it can not be broken, but this is not
always found true, it is soonest dissolved in warm Goats blood. Vti Rhennius
quidam Poeta cecinit. Quem minime valeat ferrum superare nec ignis,
Frangitur hircino maceratus sanguine tantum.
Whom neither fire nor iron strong,
can burn or break with stroke,
Delayde or stepte in blood of goats
thereby is only broke.
There are of this stone four kinds. As one of India, an other of Arabia, the
third of Macedonia, and the fourth of Cyprus. But that of Inde is most
precious, of the nature of this and the like, Lege Albertu^ Magnum De
mineralibus. Et Plin. li. 37. cap. 4. Et Dioscor. li. 4. cap. 69. Et Iul.
Solin. cap. 64. Adamas, antis. mas. ge. Un Diamant. Adamantaeus, a, um. Et
Adamantinus, a, um. Invincible, made of diamant, or as hard as diamant.
Invincible, faict de diamant, ou ausi dur que diamant. S. Dianira, Hercules
wife. Deianira, ae. foe. ge. Dice, or die. Alea, ae. Talus, li. Astragalus,
Tessera. Un det a iouer. Aleatorius, and Talarius, a, um. Ang. Pertaining to
the play of hasard. Qui appartient au ieu hasard. S. Dice which be heavy, some
call them grome porporters. Vultorij.* Dice which be small. Taxilli, orum.
Call. Dice box. Fimum, mi. Fritillum, vel Fritillus, li. m genesis Vide Box.
Dicer, or dice player. Aleator, vel Trix. Aleo, onis. m. g. Un ioueur aux dets.
S. Dicing and carding, or playing at dice. Alea, ae. Ludas talarius, vel
Tesserarius. Le ieu des dets. Dicing house. Aleatorium, and secundum Sueton.
Aleatorium forum. Ditche. Fossa, ae. Lacuna, ae. Scrobs, bis. Fouea, ae. Un
fosse. S. Et fossula, ae. Ac Scrobula, ae. Diminu. Ang. A little or narrow
ditche. Et Lacusculus, li. m. genesis Fossette. S. Ditched. Fossus, a, um. Et
fossilis, le. Ang. Able to be ditched. Et Fossitius, a, um. That which is, or
may be ditched. Ditche, or to make a ditche. Fodio, is.* Fossam ducere,
Percutere fossam, Scrobem subigere. Fair ou fouir un fosse. Ditcher. Fossor,
oris. fossarius, ij. m. g. Fossoyeur. Ditching. Fossio, onis. Fossura, ae. f.
ge. Fouissement. S. Die. Cado, is. Concedere fato, Decedo, is. Decubo, as.
Demigrare de vita. Denascor, sceris. Edere animam, Emigro, as. Exequi fatum,
vel mortem, Expuo, as. Intereo, is. Migro, as. Obdormio, is. Occido, is. Obire
mortem, Obio, is. Labor, eris. Peragere fatum, vel mortem, Motior, iris, rire,
Naturae cedere, vel satisfacere, Oppeto, it is. Relinquere animam, vel vitam,
Reddere spiritum, Subire mortem, Agere animam, Transmigrare ab hac luce, Pereo,
is, iui, vel rij. secundum analogiam. * Abire e vita, Animam exhalare, A vita
discedere, A vita recedere, vel ab oculis recedere, Decedere de vita, Demori,
Diem extremu^ morte conficere, Ducere horas extremas, Edere vitam, Effundere
extremum spiritum, Emigrare e vita, Emori, E vita discedere, Excedere de medio,
Exequi mortem, Morte obsumi, Naturae satisfacere, Occumbere, Oppetere mortem,
Peragere mortem, Vitam perdere, sieve amittere, E vita migrare. Mourir S. Die
for hunger. Bulimia perire, Fame laborare, Absumi fame, Enecari fame. Mourir de
faim. S. Die for the love of a woman. Perire foeminam. Perire mulierem, vel
deperire. Die in great debte. Relinquere debitum, vel Aes alienum. Die
together. Commorior, iris, vel rire. Mourir ensemble. S. Die utterly. Emorior,
iris. vt supra. Die or dice. Vide Dice. Die colors. Imbuo, is. Inficio, is.
Officio, is. Tingo, is. Fuco, as. Infuco, as. Inquino, as. Teindre. S. Die with
read color. Minio, as. Plin. Die a violet color. Violor, aris.* Die house.
Baphia, ae. Officina tingentiu^. Teinturie. Died or stained. Infectus, Tinctus,
a, um. Fucatus, ta, tum. Infucatus, ta, tum. Teinct. S. Died, or which may be
died. Tinctilis, le. Dieng, or lying at the point of death. Moribundus, a, um.
Qui s' en va tout mourant. S. Diyng of color. Tinctura, ae. Infectus, us.
Tinctus, tus. Le faicte de teincture. S. Et Baphicus, a, u^. Pertaining to
dying. Diyng vate, or dyers fat. Baptisterium, ij. n. genesis Cortina, ae. foe.
genesis Dier. Tinctor, oris. Crocotularius, Infector, Offector, oris. m. g.
Teincturier. S. Diers fat. Vide Dying vatte. Diet, and ordering of a man's
fare. Diaeta, tae. f. ge. Diete and regime de viure. S. Dietarie, or a medicine
of diet. Diaetetica, cae. foe. g. Medicine de diete. S. Diffame. Coinquino, as.
Nomen inurere, Perstringere famam, Diffamare, Infamare, Sugillare, Facere
infamem aliquem, Fama^ alicui inquinare, Attingere aliquem infamia. Diffamer
quelqu' un. S To be diffamed for ever. Infamiam sempiternam* subire. Estre
diffame a iama^s. S.

To be diffamed. Notari ignominia. Estre diffame

Diffamation. Sugillatio, onis. foe. g. Diffamation. S. Difference. Diaphora,
Differentia, Discrepantia, Discrimen, inis. n. genesis Difference ou
disaccordance. Differ, or to delay. Differ, Comperendinare, Ducere,
Intercalare, Moram creare, vel interponere, Agitare moras, Prolatare, Proferre,
Protrahere, Promouere, Sustentare, Tollere. Differer and delayer. S. Differ, or
continue judgment concerning a man's life, or to repryue one that is condemned
to death. Amplo, as. Extrahere iudicium, vel sententiam. Differ, or be
distaunt. Vide Distant to be. Differred, or repried. Ampliatus, a, um. Vide
Repried. Differring, or repryinge of a man condemned to death. Ampliatio, onis.
foe. g. Difficult. Tristis, te. Vide Diffuse. Difficult reason. Obscura ratio,
Obscurum argumentum. Difficulty. Difficultas, it is. Moles, lis. foe. g.
Obscuritas, Scrupulus, li. m. g. Difficulte. S. Hardly with great difficulty.
Morose, Laboriosissime, Operosissime, Difficile, Difficulter, Difficiliter.
Difficilement. S.

Diffine, or to discuss. Definio, is, iui, re. Diffinio, is, iui. Definir. S.
Diffinition. Definitio, Diffinitio, Finitio, onis. f. ge. Definition. S.
Diffuse, or difficult. Obscurus, a, um. Grauis, e, Difficilis, le. Difficile.
S. Diffusely. Diffuse. Esparsement. S. Digeste meat. Coquere cibum, Concoquere
vel cibum peragere, Vincere, aut perficere. Digerer. S Digestion. Concoctio,
onis. foe. ge. Confectio escarum. Digestion. S. To aid, or to help digestion.
Concoctionem adiuuare. Aider a la digestion. S.

Dig. Fodio, is. Pastino, as. Premere fossura^. Percutere fossa^^, Subigo,
is. Subruo, is. Fouir. S. Dig down deep, or to the bottom. Diffodio, is.
Perfodio, is. Fouir fort auant. S. Dig or delue to bring eftsone in tempre.
Repastino, as. Rehouer. S. Dig over, or through. Transfodio, is. Fouir tout
oultre. Dig out. Effodio, is. Exfodio, is. Deterrer. S. Dig under.
Suffodio, is. Et Subarare. Fouir par dessoubs. Dig able, or which may be
dug. Fossilis, le. Fossitius, a, um. Dug. Fossitius, a, um. Fossus, a,
u^. Vt Arena fossitia. Plin. lib. 36. cap. 23. Dug, or brought again in
tempre. Repastinatus, a, um. Houe. S. Dug to the bottom, or deapest part.
Perfossus, a, um. Dug over, or through. Transfossus, a, um. Dug or delued
to be, to be brought in temper. Repastinor, aris. Estre rehoue. S. Digger.
Fossarius, Fossor, oris. m. g. Fossoyeur. S. Digger of a pit, or well.
Putearius. ij. m. ge. Qui fouit les puis, un puitier. S. Digging. Fossio, onis.
Fossura, ae. foe. g. Fouissement. S Digging and deluing of a ground, to bring
it eftsoon in temper. Repastinatio, onis. foem. genesis Rehouement. S. Digest.
Cibum vincere, Concoquo, is. Digero, is. Peragere cibum. Fair concoction,
digerer. S. Digest perfectly. Decoquo, is. Vt supra. Digeste a volume, or any
thing commented or written. Scripta peragere, vel perlegere. Digestion.
Concoctio, Decoctio, Digeries, ei. f. ge. Digestion. S. Dight, or dress. Orno,
as. Polio, is. Paro, as. Orner. S Dighting, or dressing. Ornatus, us. Comptus,
tus. Cultus, tus. Exornatio, onis. Ornamentum, ti. n. genesis Ornament. S.
Dighting, force, or endeavor to an act or doing. Molimen, Molimentu^,
Molitio. vide Endeavor Dignity. Dignatio, Dignitas, Honor, Titulus. Dignite.
S. Et honorarius, a, um. Ang. Pertaining to dignity. Dignity of a Bishop, or
Prelate. Praesulatus, tus. m. ge. Prelature. S. Dignity of a Prince.
Principatus, us. m. genesis Principaulte and seigneurie. S. Dignity of a
Senator. Laticlauium, Latusclauus. m. genesis Plin. and Ovid. Dignity royal.
Maiestas, tatis. foe. g. Majesty. S. Digress, or go a little out of the way.
Digredior, eris. Fair vne digression. S. Digression. Digressus, us.
Transgressio, Digressio, onis. foe. genesis Digression. Et Digressio a proposito,
Digressus a proposito, Excursus. A digression from the matter. Vne digression.
S. Digression in speaking. Excursio, onis. f. g. Digression, where the
principal matter is left for a time. Ecbasis, Est figura, quae latin dici
potest excursus. Dike and diche. Idem. Dilate, stretche forth, or to spread
abroad. Dilatare, Contendere, Dispandere, Distendere, Erugare, Explicare,
Exporrigere, Extendere, Intendere, Pertendere, Porrigere, Propagare,
Protendere, Promouere, Producere. Dilater and estendre. Dilated. Dilatatus, ta,
tum. Dilate. S. Dilate, enlarge, or to make greater. Profero, re. Dilating of a
matter by an interpretation. Paradiastole.* Diligence. Acritas, it is. Accuratio.
Conatus, Cura, Diligentia, Industria, Instantia, Obsequela, Opera, Sedulitas,
Solertia, Studium, Vigilantia, ae. foe. g. Diligence. S. Diligence to give.
Curo, as. Operam dare, Studeo, es. Diligentiam adhibere. Mettre diligence. S.
Diligente. Accuratus, a, um. Classiarius, a, um. Diligens, it is. Dexter, ra,
rum. Feruidus, Impiger, a, um. Peruigil, lis. Sedulus, Studiosus, Vigilans,
Intentus, Officiosus, Obsequibilis, le. Obsequiosus, a, um. Diligent. S. I
would have thee use more diligence in writing. Velim te plus diligentiae,
curae, operae, industriae, studij in scribendo ponere, Locare, Collocare,
Consumere. Plus diligentiae ad scribendum co^ferri a te velim, Operam nauare
studio maiore in scribendo cuperem, Tuis in scriptis diligentiam desidero,
Requiro, Maiorem postulo, Non scribis accurate, non diligenter, non studiose,
non ea, qua opus esset, quam res postulat diligentia, minus quam. oporteat
diligenter, Impiger in scribendo non admodu^ es.

He was of al men, most dillige^t in his affairs. Erat in omni genere officij
maxim omnium dilige^tissimus, omnis officij diligentissimus, Vincebat,
superabat, anteibat, antecedebat omnes, excellebat omnes, antecellebat omnibus
diligentia, Par illi, aequalis, similis, cum illo comparandus, aequandus,
conferendus, componendus, in diligentia nemo fuit.

Diligent consideration. Dispicientia, ae. foem. genesis Soingneux pensement. S.
Diligent in duty or office. Officiosus, sa, sum. Diligent to labor or work.
Operosus, a, um. Vide Labor. Diligent in seking. Quaeritabundus, a, um. *
Dilligent to be. Satago, is. Studeo, es. Vigilo, as. Estre diligent. S.
Diligently. Curate, Diligenter, Enixe, Enixum, Exact, Gnauiter, Impigre,
Integre, Nauiter, Officiose, Proverb, Sedulo, Studiose, Vsque, Vigilanter,
Industry, Intent, Provide, Strenue, Superstitiose, Circumspecte. Diligemment.
S. Diligently done. Curatus, a, um. Perfunctus, a, um. Dille herb. Anethum,
thy. n. g. Anet. H. Ou Aneth. S. Dimilaunce. Lanceola, ae. foe. genesis
Dimilauncer, or bearer of a dimilaunce. Lancearius, Lancefer, ri. m. genesis Qui
port lance ou pique, un picquer. S. Diminishe or take away. Adimo, is.
Dirimo, is. Minuo, is. Diminuo, is. Imminuo, is. Extenuo, as. Diminuer. S. To
diminishe the outrage and cruelty of a deed or offense. Leuare attrocitatem
alicuius facti, Crimen extenuare. Diminuer l' outrage and cruaute de quelque
cas. S.

Diminished. Diminutus, ta, tum. Imminutus, ta, tu^. Extenuatus, ta, tum.
Diminue. S. Diminished. Ademptus, a, um. Oste. S. Diminishing. Ademptio, onis.
foe. genesis Ostement. S. Diminutio^. Diminutio, onis. Imminutio, onis.
Extenuatio, onis. foe. g. Diminution. S. Dimission, or leave to depart.
Dimissio, onis. foe. genesis Vide Leave. Dimitte. Dimitto, is. Laiser aler. S.
Dimitte, or grant to ferme. Loco, as. Dim of sight. Lippus, a, um.
Caligatus. Vide Dymnes. Dymme of sight to be, or have. etc. Lippio, iui, re.
Caeculto, as. Caecutio, it is, tiui. Ne voir pas fort. S. Dimming or dimnesse of
the sight. Caligatio, onis. f. g. Caligo oculorum. Scotomia. Esblouissement, ou
esblouisson. S. Dimnes of the eyes, or sight. Amaurosis, Luscio, onis. Aliqui
dicunt Luscitio, Scotoma, Scotomia. Esblouissement. S. Et Lusciosus, vel
Luscitiosus, a, um. He that has a dim sight. Qui ha court veue. S. Et
Luscitus, a, um. He that sees better in the dark then in the light. Dine.
Prandeo, es. Disner. S. Et Pransor, ris. m. g. He that does dyne. Qui disne. S.
Dine at noone. Meridio, as. Meridior, aris. Disner. S. Dine in the morning, or
before dynner. Ientaculor, aris. Iento, as. Vide Break the fast. Dine often.
Pransito, as. Frequentatiuum. Dinne, noise, or rumoure. Rumor, ris. Tumultus,
us. m. g. Bruit. S. Et Tumultuosus, a, u^. Ang. Full of dynne. Plein de bruit.
S. Dinner. Prandium, ij. Mensa, ae. Le disner. H. Et Pra^sor, ris. Ang. He that
is at dynner. A dynner, such as one eats in haste, and standing. Prandium
statarium, quod sumitur raptim and quasi in pedes stando. Manger de bout, ou en
pied.

Dinner without wine. Prandium caninu^, vel Abstemium. Le disner de chien. H. A
small dynner (or pretty pittance) such as she made that dyned with a pestle of
a lark. Prandium passerinum, quantum passer absumat. Un petit morceau, un
disner de mouche. H.

Dinner called the after dynner, or rere dynner. Secunda mensa. Dinner given at
a departing. Conuiuiu^ Viaticu^. To give one a dinner. Prandium alicui dare,
vel praebere, Aliquem in prandio accipere. Bailler ou donner a disner a quelqu'
un. S.

Dinner which is of light cost, or a short dynner or scant dynner.
Prandiolum, li. n. g. Diminut. Dinner whereat been five sundry dyshes of meat.
Pentapharmacum conuiuium, vel Prandium. Diocese, governance, or jurisdiction.
Dioecesis, sios, vel sis. foe. g. Territorium, ij, n. g. Diocese. H. Dippe any
thing in liquour. Demergo, is. Immergo, is. Mergo, is. Tingo, is. Plonger en l'
eaue. Dippe often in water. Mersare. Plonger souuent. S. Dipped. Immersus,
Tinctus, Submersus, sa, sum. Plonge. S. Dipping. Immersio, onis. foe. g.
Dipping under. Submersio. foe. g. Dipthongue, which is where two vowelles come
together, and are either in sound or form, or else both, joined in one. Of
which are 5. ae Vt Musae. au Vt Audio, oe Vt Coelum, ei Vt Hei, eu Vt Euge.
Diphthongus, gi. foem. genesis Direct. Dirigo, is. Regulo, as. Dirriger. S.
Direction of reason according to truth. Coniectus, us.*. Direct, even or
straight. Directus, ta, tum. Direct, droict. S. Directly. Direct, Directo,
Rite. Directement. S. Dirt. Coenum, ni. Lutum, ti. n. g. Bourbe. S. Dirtie.
Coenosus, a, um. Lutosus, a, um. Bourbeux. S. Disable. Vide Disprayse.
Disagree. Dissentio, is. Dissentior, Discrepo, as. Disconuenio, is. Dissono,
as. Discordo, as. Desaccorder, Disconuenir. S. Disagreing. Dissentaneus, a, um.
Repugnant. S. Et dissonus, a, um. Desaccordant. S. Disapoint, or deceive.
Caluo, is. Decollare, Frustror, aris. Spem fallere, Perimere conatus. Caluor,
eris. Decipio, is. Desapoincter. S. Disapointed. Frustratus, ta, tum. Disard in
an interlude. Pantominus, ni. Samnio, onis, mas. genesis Disburden, or discharge.
Idem. Disburse money. Depono, is. Expensas alienas submouere. * Nummos e
loculis emittere, Effundere nummos, vel educere. Desbourser. S. Disburse money
to poor folk. Erogare pauperibus Discence of an hill where no stopping may be
had. Abruptum, ti. n. genesis It is the steep fale of an hill, where it is
almost impossible to go without falling. Discende. Vide Descend. Discente of
blood, or lynnage. Prosapia. foe. genesis Vide Decent or Come. Discern, or judge
one thing from an other, as good from ill. Dispicio, cis. Dignosco, scis.
Discerno, is. Existimo, as. Dilectum adhibere. Discerner enter vne chose and
autre. S. Discharge. Abiugo, as. Deonero, as. Exonero, as. Extra culpam ponere,
Redabsoluo, is. Soluo, is. Submoueo, es. Despecher, Descharger. S. Discharge an
army. Deponere exercitum. Discharge conscience. Exoluere religione^, vel
exoluere religione. Liu. Descharger sa conscience. S. Discharge debte. Aes
alienum exonerare, Resoluo, is. Exoluere aes alienum. Vide Debte. Discharge a
recognisaunce. Vadimonium missum facere. Discharge suerties. Repignero, as.
Vadimonium soluere. Discharge upon an accounte, as where one has out his
quietus est. Eximere ex aerarijs. Discharged. Deoneratus, Exoneratus, Solutus,
a, um. Descharge. S. Discharged of an office or rule. Defunctus officio.
Discharged from wars. Ab acie missus, Rude donatus. Discharged to be.
Deoneror, Exoneror. Estre discharge. S. Discharged to be of an office, or rule.
Defungor, eris. Vt defungi officio. Discharged to be of an attendaunce.
Obsequio defungi, vel donari. Discharged to be of an attendaunce in wars.
Rude donari. Discharged to be out of all bonds. Nexu solui. Discharging of
borowes, suerties, or pledges. Repigneratio, onis. foe. g. Discharging of a
soldier from the host. Causaria missio. H. Disciple or a scholar.
Discipulus, li. m. g. Auditor, oris. m. g. Disciple. S. To be Socrates
disciple. Audire Socratem. Estre disciple de Socrates. S.

Disclose. Aperio, is. Detego, is. Defero, rs. Confiteor, eris. Patefacio, cis.
Retego, is. Reuelo, as. Indico, as. Traduco, is. Connudare, Denudare, Nudare.
Descouurir. S. Disclose counsel, or secrets. Consilium rumpere, Prodere
dogma. Disclose, or to open his council to one. Conscium facere aliquem,
Arcanum prodere, Animi secreta detegere, Consilia sua alicui committere.
Descouurir son secret a quelqu' un. S. Disclosed, and discovered. Apertus, ta,
tum. Euidens, Detectus, Retectus, ta, tum. Descouuert. Disclosed to be.
Permano, as. Permanesco, scis, Patefio, is. Estre discouert. Disclosing, or
discovering. Reuelatio, Indicium, ij. neut. genesis Disclosing of an offense or
conspiracy, by one that was of the same confederacy. Indicium. ij. neut. genesis
Sal. Discomfite. Fundo, is. Formido, as. Disconfire. S. To discomfite an army
of men. Exercitum delere. Desconfire un exercite. S.

Discomfite and to kill wild beasts. Feras subsistere, and co^ficere.
Desconfire and tuer bestes sauuages. S. Discomfited. Effusus, a, um. Fusus, a,
um. Formidatus, ta, tum. Desconfit. S. Discomfiture. Effugium, ij. neu. ge.
Discomfiture in battle, where many be slain. Clades, Strages, is. foe. g.
Desconfiture de guerre. Discomfort him self, to despair, or be sad. Moereo,
es, ui, vel moestus sum, moerere. Se desconforter and desoler. S.
Discomforture, sadness, or heaviness. Moeror, oris. m. g. Moestitia, ae. f. g.
Desconfort. S. Discomforted, sad, and heavy. Moestus, ta, tum. Desconforte.
Discontente. Vide Displease. Et Molestus, a, um. Ang. That which does
discontent. Vide Grievous. Discontent to be. Censeo, es. * Succensio, es. Se
marrir. Discontinue, or to leave of for a time. Cessare, Intermittere,
Interrumpere. Discontinuer. S. Discontinue a coustome. Consuetudinem
intermittere. Discontinuer vne hantise. S. Discontinued, delayed, or left of
for a time. Intermissus, sa, sum. Interruptus, ta, tum. Discontinue. S. A
coustome long time discontinued and left of. Lo^gis interuallis temporum
interrupta consuetudo. Cic. Coustume long temps delaissee and discontinuee.

Discontinuation. Intermissio, Intermissus, us. Interruptio, onis. foe. g.
Discontinuation. S. Et Interrupte. By discontinuation. Par discontinuation. S.
Discordant. Discors, dis. Adiect. Discordant. S. Discord, dissension, or
division among people. Diaphonia, Discordia, Dissidium, Diuidia, Seditio, onis.
Dissensio, onis. Dissensus, sus. Dissidentia, ae. f. g. Discord ou dissension.
S. Et Dissidiosus, a, um. ac Seditiosus, a, um. Ang. Full of discord. Tit.
Liui. recites (which is worthy to be noted) that division did offend the
public state of ye Romans, by these three points: Iuuenile consilium,
Latens odium, Singular co^modum. As to the first point, the old Senators
and the young could not agree, for there was division and parts taking, for
the old thinking their ways very laudable, the young on the other part
esteamed theirs more acceptable. And concerning the second point, pryuie
hatred and malice crept in amongst them, that the old hated the young, and
the young disdayned the old, and so remained as men without charity. As
touching the third, and last point, every man mynding chiefly his private
lucre, did little regard the publicque state, and thus by division the state
of ye public wealth did decay. Discord in speech, tune, or voice.
Dissonantia, ae. foem. genesis To discord. Discordo, as. Discrepo, as. Dissideo,
es. Disconuenio, is. Discorder. S.

There is great discord among them. Grauiter dissentiunt inter se. Il y a
grand discord enter eux. S

To bring into discord. Inconciliate. Seditione^ concitare. Mettre en discord.
S.

Discorden in speech, tune, or voice. Dissono, as. Vide Disagree. Discover.
Detego, is. Deuelo, as. Retego, is. Reuelo, as. Traduco, is. Denudo, as.
Connudo, as. Nudo, as. Descouurir. S. Vide Disclose. Discovered. Detectus, a,
um. Apertus, ta, tum. Euidens, it is. Illustratus, ta, tum. Retectus, ta, tum.
Descouuert. S. Discovering. Reuelatio, onis. foe. genesis Discourage. Dehortor,
ris. Frangere animum, vel audaciam. Et frangere vel infringere alicuius animum.
Descourager quelqu' un. S. Discouraged. Dehortatus, a, um. Fractus animo, vel
audacia. Infractus, ta, tum. Abiectus, ta, tum. Descourage. Discouraging.
Dehortatio, onis. foe. genesis Infractio, onis. foe. genesis Discraised. Aegrotus, a,
u^. Male habens, Valetudinarius, a, um. Subject a malady. S. Discraised to be.
Male habere. Estre malade. S. Discrete. Discretus, Disertus, Modestus, Sobrius,
a, um. Prudens, it is. Discret. S. Discretly. Discrete, Diserte, Modeste, Sobrie,
Prudenter. Discretement. S. Discuss. Decerno, is. Discutio, is. Determino, as.
Puto, as. Debatre vne question. S. Discussed. Decretus, a, um. Determinatus, a,
um. Statutus, a, um.* Discussing. Constitutio caussae, Determinatio, onis. foe.
genesis Disdain. Abominatio, onis. foe. genesis Dedignatio, onis. foe. genesis
Neglectus, Stomachus. Auersatio, onis. foe. genesis Desdain. S. Disdain, or
contempne. Abominor, aris. Auertor, eris. Contemno, is. Fastidio, is. Dedignor,
aris^ Prosequi odio. Sperno, is. Alicui decedere. Auersari aliquem. Desdaigner
quelqu' un. S. Disdayned. Abominatus, Contemptus, Fastiditus, Spretus, a, um.
Dedignatus, ta, tum. Desdaigne. Disdaynefull, or disdainous. Fastidiosus, sa,
sum. Fastosus, sa, sum. Desdaigneux. S. Disdainfully. Contemptim, Vultuose,
Malign, Fastidiose. Par desdain and malueillance. S. Disease, or sickness of
the body. Morbus, Aegritudo, Aegrotatio, Inualetudo, inis. foe. g. Malady. S.
Diseased. Aeger, Morbidus, da, dum. Inualidus, da, dum. Aegrotus, ta, tum.
Malade. S. Diseased to be, or sick. Morbo retineri, Morbo affici, In morbo
esse, Valetudine vti minus commoda, Laborare, Indolere, sieve Indolescere,
Aegrotare. Estre malade. S. What disease have you? Quem habes morbu^? Quid tibi
morbi est? Quod morbi genus te cepit? Quis te morbus habet? Quo morbo teneris?
Quid habes mo^bi? Quis te tenet morbus. Vide Sickness.

Disfigure. Auferre formam, Deformo, as. Forma^ extinguere, Formam adimere.
Defigurer. S. Disfiguring. Dehonestamentum, ti. n. g. * Deformatio, onis. f. g.
Defigurement. S. Disgorge any thing received in. Resorbeo, es. * Euomo, is.
Desgorger. S. Disgrade a knighte, or any graduate. Exauctoro, as. Resecrare,
Exuere, vel exaugurare aliquem. Degrader. S. Degradation. Exauthoratio, onis.
foe. g. Exauguratio, onis. foe. g. Degradation. S. Disguise, or to disfigure,
or alter. Altero, as. Disguiser. S. Disguise, or to turn him self into an
other form. Capere formam alterius, Mutare se in formam, aut vertere se in
faciem alicuius, Alienam far personam, vel induere, Dissimulare. Se
desguiser. Dishe. Aristophorum, Catinus, Discus, Lanx, cis, Orbis, Patina,
Scutella, ae. Paropsis, aut Parapsis, idis. foe. g. Plat, escuelle. H. But yet
is there a difference in these words, for Lanx, cis. foe. g. Discus, sci. m.
g. Et Magis, idis. foe. g. Is a large plater or dishe. Grand plat, Plat ou
escuelle large. H. Et Patina, ae. foe. g. a patendo. Idem. The other are
lesser. etc. Dishe with ears. Pultarium auritum, Auritus catillus, Aurita
scutella. Escuelle a oreillons. S. Dishe, or a platters brime. Crepedo lancis
aut catini, Extremus margo. Le board d' un plat. H. Dishe bearer. Dapifer, vel
ra. Dishe caster, or who that casts or throws a dishe. Discobolus, li.*
Dishe with meat. Ferculum, li. n. g. Mets de viande. Disherite. Exhaeredo, as.
Desheriter, S. Vide Dispossess. Disherited. Exhaereditatus, a, um. Desherite
and prive de la succession, S. Dishereting. Exhaeredatio, onis, f. g.
Desheritement. S Dishonest. Dehonestus, a, um. Inhonestus, a, um. Impudens,
it is. Opicus, a, um. Praetextatus, a, um. Turpis, e. Spurcus, ca, cu^. Ab
honestate relictus. Deshoneste. S. Dishonest matter, or any thing cloaked with
fair words. Subturpis, e. Or rather, somewhat dishonest or foul. Aucunement
laid. S. Dishoneste, or to make dishonest. Collutilo, as. Co^tamino, as.
Dedecoro, as. Dehonesto, as. Impio, as. Turpo, as. Auiler, deshonester. Pals.
Dishonest, or defile a woman. Depudico, as. Vide Defloure. Dishonested.
Dedecoratus, a, um. Dehonestatus. Dishonested to be. Dehonestari, Subire
infamiam, Traducor, eris. Dishonestie. Dedecus, coris. Dehonestamentum,
Improbitas, it is. Propudium, ij. neut. genesis * Probrum, Illiberalitas, Turpitudo,
Indignitas, Spurcitia. Deshonestite. S. Dishonestly. Inhoneste, Impudenter,
Stupre, Turpe, Turpiter, Petulante^ Spurce, Indigne, Illiberaliter, Indecore.
Deshonestement. S. Dishonor. Dedecus, oris. Macula. Deshonneur. S. Dishonored
to be. Dedecoror, aris. Infamia^ subire. Dishonor, or to defame. Dedecorare,
Traducere, Matula afficere, Foedare aliquem appellatione, Diffamare, Infamare.
Deshonorer. S. Dishonor, or to dishoneste him self. Turpitudine^ sib
infligere, Aliquid turpe in sese admittere. Se deshonorer. S. Disloyal.
Perfidus, a, um. Infidus, da, dum. Desloyal. Full of disloyalty. Perfidiosus,
sa, sum. Plein de desloyaute.

Disloyal to be. Nulla fide esse. Estre desloyal. S. Disloyally. Perfide.
Disloyally, or traitorously. Perfidiose. Desloyaleme^t. Disloyalty. Perfidia,
ae. Infidelitas, tatis. foem. genesis Desloyaute. Dismayed. Stupidus, a, u^. vide
Abashed or astonished. Dismayed to be. Stupeo, es. Stupesco, scis. Idem. Dismayed
to cause to be or make. Stupefacio, cis. Vide Astonished. etc. Dismayed to wax.
Stupesco, scis. Inch. Deuenir tout Estonne. S. Dismal days. Atri dies, Dies
Aegiptiaci, vel co^munes.* Dismembre. Deartuo, as. Lacero, as. Membratim
discerpere. Desmembrer. S. Dismembered, or lackinge some limbs. Artubus, vel
corpore vitiati. Lacer, and Lacerus, a, um. Desmembre. S. Dismembring.
Laniena.* Laceratio, onis. foe. genesis Desmembrement. Dismissed. Vide Discharged.
Disobedience. Contumacia, Inobedientia, ae. foe. g. Desobeisance. S.
Disobedient. Contumax, cis. Imparens, it is. Inobediens, it is. Inobsequens, it is.
Desobeissant. S. Disobey, or not to obey his master. Authoritatem praeceptoris
defugere, Repugnare praeceptori, Non gerere morem praeceptori, Non obedire, Non
parere. Desobeir a son maistre. S. Disobediently. Contumaciter. Dispatche.
Expedio, is. Redabsoluo, is. Despecher. S. Et festinationem adhibere,
Festinare. Fair bonne despeche and se haster. To make dispatche and to haste.
Dispatched. Expeditus, a, um. Dispatching. Vide Expedition. To dispende.
Dispendere, Erogare, Impensam facere, Sumptum facere, vel ponere. Despendre. S.

Dispende, waste, and to consume goods, or patrimony* Argentum absum^re, Rem
conficere, aut Corru^p^re, Diuexare, Fudi^^re, Lacerare, Oblimare, Patrimonium
conficere, vel effundere, Patrias opes haurire, Dilapidare. Despendre,
dissiper, gaster and consumer ses biens ou son patrimoine. S. Dispende, and to
eat up an other man's goods. Comedere bona alicuius, Argentum alicuius
conficere, Exedere aliquem. Despendre and manger le bien d' autruy. S.
^^spence. Erogatio, Expensum, Expensa, Sumptus. Despense. S. Great dispense.
Effusio, Effusus sumptus. Grande despence. S.

Dispenser, or steward of a house, which expendeth money upon domestical
affairs. Dispensator, oris. mas. genesis Despensier. S. Vide Steward. Dispences.
Expensae, arum. Disperse. Disijcio, cis. Dispergo, is. Dissipo, as. Dissiper.
S. Dispersed. Abactus, a, um.* Dissipatus, ta, tu^. Dispersus, sa, sum* Espars.
S. Displaye a standarde in wars. Attollere signa, Replico, as. Displease.
Afferre molestiam, Displiceo, ces. Incesso, is. Molesto, as. Offendo, is.
Commoueo, es. Displaire. S. I altogether displease (or mislike) my self. Totus
displiceo mihi. Ie me desplay totalement.

It greueth me very much. Displicer vehementer. Il me desplaist grandement. S.

Let it not displease you if I say it. Tua pace, vel pace tua dixerim, aut
bona tua venia dixerim. Ne te displaise si ie le di. S.

Displease little, or somewhat. Suboffendo, is. Displease mutually one an
other. Repungo, is, pupugi. It is rather, to prick again, or to resist.
Displeasauntly. Grauate, Grauatim, Moleste, Repugnanter. Displeased. Infensus,
a, u^. Pertaesus, a, u^. Est particip. sine verbi origin, and aliquando genit.
aliquando accus. iungitur. Qui est fort courrouce contre aucun. S Displeased to
be. Alieno animo esse. Commoueor, eris. Moleste far aliquid. Estre
desplaisant. S. Displeasing, or which does displease. Molestus, a, um.
Maleficus, ca, cum. Qui ennuye and fasche. S. Displeasing woman. Displicina,
ae.*. Displeasure. Aegritudo, Aegrum, Maleficentia, Maleficium, Offensa,
Offendo, nis. Offensus, us, Molestia. * Incommodum, Damnum, Iniuria, Offensio,
onis. foe. genesis Desplaisir. S. Et Offensiuncula. Diminut. Ang. A little or small
displeasure. Offensa Active. Offensio plerumque pass. sumitur. To do one a
displeasure. Incommodo afficere, Male de aliquo mereri. Offensionem afferre,
Iniuriam iniungere, vel facere, Dare damnu^. Fair desplaisir. S.

Dispoyle, or pull of by violence. Dispolio, as. Exuo, is. Despoliare,
Expoliare, Spoliare. Despouiller. S. Dispoyle one of his armure. Dearmare,
Exarmare, Inarmare. Despouiller aucun de ses arms. S. Dispoyled. Exutus, ta,
tum. Spoliatus, ta, tum. Despouille. S. Dispoyle, or that which is taken away
from the enemies. Spolium, Exuuiae. La despouille des ennemis. S. Dispoylinge,
or the spoiling. Spoliatio, Dispoliatio, Expoliatio, Despoliatio, onis. foe. g.
Despouillement. S. Dispose. Animum appellere. Dispono, is. Metor, aris.
Disposer. S. Dispose a thing. Compono, is. Ordino, as. Sortior, ris. Ordonner,
disposer. S. Disposed. Dispositus, a, um. Deditus, a, um. Dispose. Disposed to
mischief. Accommodatus ad flagitia. Disposed to vomitte. Nausea bundus, da,
dum. Disposition. Animus, Dispositio, onis. Dispositus, tus. m. ge.
Disposition. S. Disposition to build sumptuous things. Magnificentia, ae.
foe. genesis Disposition to sleep, or wake. Cataphora.* Dispossess, or to put
forth of possession. Deijcere aliquem de possessione, vel dimouere. Deposseder
aueun and le mettre horse de son heritage. S. Disprayse. Despicio, is. Despicor,
aris. Ducere contumelia, vel Probro, Obiecto, as. Peruello, is. Vitio dare, vel
vertere, Improbare, Vituperare. Despriser. S. Disprayse, or dispraysing.
Despectio, Despicatio. Vituperatio, onis. foe. ge. Desprisement. Dispraysed.
Despectus, Despicatus, Obtrectatus, Fastiditus, ta, tum. Spretus, ta, tum.
Co^temptus, ta, tum. Desprise. S. Dispraysing. Vide Dispraise. Disprove.
Impugno, as. Improbo. as. Reprouer. S. Disprove, or confute by argument.
Confuto, as. Confuter. S. Dispurueyed. Improuisus, a, um.* Dispurueyed of
friends. Inops amicorum vel ab amicis. Dispute. Discepto, as. Disputo, as.
Dissero, is. Disserto, as. Disputer. S. Et disputationem habere. Disputation.
Concertatio, Dialexis, Disceptatio, Disputatio, Dissertatio, onis, foe. g.
Disputation. S. Vnde Dissertabundus, a, um. Ang. Full of disputation.
Disputation properly between the master and the scholar. Scholae, arum. foe.
ge. Cic. Disquiet. Perturbo, as. Inquieto, as. Infesto, as. Molesto, as.
Inquieter. S. Disquieted. Perturbatus, a, um. Inquiete. S. Disquieted to be.
Discrutiari animo. Disquietnes. Perturbatio, Inquietudo, Inquies, etis.
Inquietude. S. Disquietnes of ye mind. Pathe quae a Cic. Dicu^tur animi
aegritudines, Perturbationes. Lact. Nunc affectus, nunc vitia. Aug. Passiones
asserit, qualia sunt Aegritudo, Cupiditas, Dolor, Gaudium, Ira, Metus,
Tristitia. Quos animi motus, Platonici and Aristotelici dicunt etiam in
sapientem cadere, sed moderatos rationique subiectos, Stoici vero negan^ in
sapientem cadere. Disaffirme. Inficior, aris. Vide Deny. Disaffirmed.
Inficiatus, Negatus. ta, tum. Disseasse out of possession. Deijcio, cis. Vt
Deijcecere and dimouere de possessione. Cic. Disseissing, or castinge out of
possession. Deiectio, Deiectus, us. m. g. Disseised. Deiectus, a, um.
Dissemble. Insimulo, as. Dissimulo, as. Simulo, as. Fingo, is. Dissimuler. S.
Dissembled. Dissimulatus, Fictitius, Fictus, Insimulatus, a, um. Simulatus, a,
um. Dissimule. S. Vt amor dissimulatus. Ovid. Dissembled love. Dissembled
countenance. Assimulatio, Dissimulatio, onis. f. g. Dissimulation. Dissembler,
or feigned friend. Dissimulator, Fictor, Fictitius amicus, Simulator, vel Trix.
Dissimulateur. S. Dissemblingly. Dissimulanter, Dissimulatim. Dissimuleement.
S. Dissembling. Dissimulatio, onis. foe. g. Dissembling in form, gesture, or
visage. Dissimilitudo, inis. foe. ge. A diversity or difference. Diversity,
difference. S. Dissension, or division. Repugnantia, ae. Dissensio, onis. foe.
genesis Dissension. S. Dissension properly between man and wife, not extending to
deuorce, but may be called more properly foolyshenesse between man and wife.
Friuiculum, li. Frigusculum, li. n. g. Disseuer, or divide a sunder. Abgrego,
as. Dijugo, gas, Diuido, is. Separo, as. Separer. S. Disseuer, or draw sheep.
Abgrego, as. Separer du troupeau. S. Disseuered, or parted. Abgregatus, a, um.
Diuisus, Separatus. Separe. S. Dissimulation. Dissimulantia, Dissimulatio,
Insimulatio, Simulatio, onis. foe. g. Veritas fucata. Dissimulation. S.
Dissolve. Dirimo, is. Dissoluo, is. Egelidor, aris. Retexo, is. Soluo, is.
Dissouldre. S. Dissolve a decree. Refigere statutum. Dissolve a law. Tabulas,
vel legem refigere. Dissolve a counsel. Consilium, vel Synodum remittere.
Dissolve, or to break up for a time, as at ye term. Iustitium facere.
Dissolve humors. Diaphoresim soluere. Dissoluing, or lowsing. Dissolutio,
onis. foem. genesis Dissolution. S. Dissoluing humors, or that which does
dissolve and send forth humors and vapors. Diaphoreticus, a, um. Dissolute.
Discinctus, Dissolutus, a, um. Dissolu. S. Dissolute persons, without
counsel, reason, or wit. Scopae, arum. It is spoken prouerbially. vt
Dissolutae scopae, Dicuntur homines nihili, nulliusque prorsus consilij. Vide
Eras. in Adagi js. Dissolutely. Discincte, Dissolute, Solute. Lascheme^t.
Dissuade, or give contrary advice, or turn one from an opinion. Abhortor,
aris. Dissuadeo, es. Desconseiller. S. Dissuaded. Abhortatus, a, um. Dissuasus,
sa, sum. Desconseille. S. Disswader, or he that does dissuade. Dissuasor, oris.
m. g. Desenhorteur. S. Disswasion. Abhortatio. Dissuasio, onis, foem. genesis
Desenhortement. S. Distaffe. Colus, li. foe. genesis vel Colus, lus. foem. genesis
Vne quenouille. S. Distaunce. Distantia, Interstitium, ij. neut. gener.
Distance. Distantia locorum, Interstitium temporis est. Distaunce long of place
and time. Longinquitas, tatis, f. g. Longue distance des lieux. etc. Distance,
or space. Interuallum, li. n. genesis Distance, espace. Distaunt, or set far of.
Dissitus, a, um. Distans, it is. Distant. S. Distant to be. Disto, as. Estre
loing. S. Distayne honesty. Impio, as. Vide Dishonest. Distill. Distillo, as.
Extillo. as. Distiller. S. Distilled waters. Aquae distillatae, vel extillatae.
Eaues distillees. S. Distillation, or destilling. Distillatio, onis. foe. genesis
Distillement. S. Distillations of humors, the caterre or rewme in the head.
Catarrhus, rhi. m. genesis Distillations d' bumeurs. S. Distinct. Discriminatus,
a, um. Distinctus, ta, tum. Distinct and separe. S. Distinction, or point in a
sentence. Diastole, Distinctio, onis. foe. g. Distinction. S. Distinctly.
Discriminatim, distinct. Distinguishe, or to separate truth from falshode.
Distinguere vera a falsis. Distinguer enter le vray and le faulx, les separer.
Distract, or pull away, or asunder. Distraho, is. Distraire. S. Distraction,
or separation, or pulling away, or a sunder. Distractio, onis. foe. genesis
Distraction. S. Distraine, or take distress. Pignora auferre, vel capere. Bud.
Pigneror, aris. Distreining, or taking distress. Pignoratio, onis. foe. genesis
Pignoris captio. Distribute. Distribuo, is. Distribuer. S. Distribute, and to
depart money to every man. Nummos viris vel in viros diuidere. Distribuer and
partir argent a chascun homme. S. Distribute flesh, or meat. Visceror, aris.
Distribute money. Erogo, as. Distribuer. S. Distributed. Distributus, Erogatus,
a, um. Distribue. Distribution. Distributio, Egestio, Erogatio, onis. foe. genesis
Distribution. S. Distribution in way of aid. Erogatio, onis. foe. g.
Distribution of flesh. Visceratio, onis. f. ge. Distroye. Aboleo, es, leui,
vel lui, litum vel letum. Vide Destroy. Destroyed, or put out of mind.
Abolitus, a, um. Dittaine, called false dittayne, an herb. Condris, ris. f.
genesis vel potius Chondris, quam Pseudodictamum vel Pseudodictamnum vocant. Wild
dittany. Plin. lib. 25. cap. 8. Condris. etc. Dittany of the gardine. Dictamus,
dictamum, vel dictamnum. Pulegium Martis, Hortense gingiber, Diptamus. Dictam,
ou gingembre de iardin. H. Dittie (as some do call) of a song, or that which
is played or song, at the beginning of a song or balade. Praecentio, onis. f.
g. Dittie singer, or he that bears the foot of the song. Praesentor, oris.
mas. genesis Qui commence la chanson. S. Disuse, or bring out of custom.
Desuesco, scis. Desaccoustumer. S. Et Desuefacio, is. Ang. To make out of use.
Idem. Disusage, or disuse. Desuetudo, inis. foe. genesis Desaccoustumance. S.
Ditche. Vide. Diche. Diue, or ducke under the water. Vrino, as. Vrinor, aris.
Inurino, as. Se plonger tout dedens l'eaue. Diuer, a bird. Vrinula, ae. foe.
genesis Mergus, gi. m. g. Un oiseau nomme Plongeon. S. Diuer, or ducker. Vrinator,
toris. m. g. Plongeon. S. Diuing, or ducking under the water. Vrinatio, onis.
foem. genesis Diverse, or not agreeable. Alienus, a, um. Diuersus, a, um.
Multijugus, a, um. Multiplex, icis. Variabilis, le. Varius, a, um. Dissimilis,
le. Du tout diverse. S Diverse of color, as that which is mixte with other
colors, whereby the right color is altered. Versicolorius, a, um. De
diuerses couleurs. S. Diverse, or mixte color. Versicolor, ris. Idem. Diverse
men, or women of one surname. Cognomines, number. Com. ge. in sing. vt Cognominis,
is. Plaut. Illa mea cognominis fuit. Diverse to make. Vario, as. Bigarrer. S.
Diversity. Discrimen, Distinctio, Diuersitas, Varietas, Variantia, ae.
Variatio, onis. f. g. Diversity. S Diuesitie of form, or likeness.
Dissimilitudo, inis. f. g. Diversity and difference. S. Diversity of opinion
among Judges. Iudiciaria controuersia. Cic. Diversely. Distinct, Diverse,
Multiformiter, Multipliciter, Vary, Variatim. Diuersement. S. Diversely
colored, or of diverse colors. Multicoloreus, a, um. Versicolorius, a, um. De
diuerses couleurs. S. Diversely fashioned, or diverse fashions. Multifarius, a,
um. Vt Gellius. lib. 5. cap. 6. Multifariae sunt militares coronae. Divide.
Vide Divide. Divide, and to separate. Discerno, Diuido, Distinguo, is. Diuiser
and separer. S. To divide ye matter proposed in diverse parts. Discerpere rem
propositam in membra. Diuiser un propos en diuerses parties. S.

Divine, or to conjecture. Auguro, as. Et Auguror, aris. Diuiner, coniecturer.
S. Divine, or to give a certain conjecture of any thing. Angurari, Coniectare,
Coniecturam facere, Diuinare, Hariolari, Praesagire, Praesumere animo,
Vaticinari. Deuiner quelque chose. S. The art to divine. Haruspicina, ae. f.
genesis L' art de deuiner. S.

Divination, or southsaying. Haruspicium, Augurium, Diuinatio, Mantice, ces.
Praesagitio, Praesagium, Auspicium, Effata. Divination. S. Et Auguralis, le.
Angl. Pertaining to the diuiners. Qui appartient aux deuins. S. Divination by
fler. Pyromantia, ae. f. ge. Genus diuinationis quae fit per ignem. Diuinatiom
by lottes, verses, or scroll. Sortilegium, ij. neut. genesis Divination by water.
Hydromantia, ae. f. ge. Diuinatio quae fit per aquam. Divination by the air.
Aeromantia, ae. foem. genesis Diuinatio ex aere. Divine, or Godly. Diuinus, a, um.
Divine. S. Divine, or immortal. Nectareus, a, um.* Divine, southsaye, or to
tell what shall chance or happen. Diuinor, aris. Praesagio, is. Deuiner. vt
sup. Divining. Coniectatio, Diuinatio, Praediuinatio, Hariolatio, Vaticinatio,
Augurium, Vaticiniu^, ij. n. g. Deuinement. S. Divinity. Theologia, Prima
Philosophiae pars quae versatur circa dei and rerum diuinarum contemplationem.
Diuinour, or southsayer. Aruspex, Augur, Diuinator, Erimantus, Haruspex, cis,
Mantes, it is. Praesagus, Hariolus, Fatiloquus, Vates. Un deuin. S. Diuinour, or
writer of holy scripture. Agiographus. Vide Holy scripture. Diuisely. Seorsum,
Seorsus, Separatim. Vide Seperatly. Division. Diuisio, Diuisura, Diuisus, us.
Separatio, onis. foe. g. Division. S. Division of people in sundry opinions.
Factio, onis. f. g. Un faction. S. Divorce, or separation of man and wife.
Diuortiu^, ij. n. g. Divorce, ou separation du mari and de la femme.
Diuorcement, a separation of marriage. Repudiu^, ij. n. g. Divorce, Separation
de marriage. To divorce him self from his wife, or to put away his wife.
Exigere vxorem, Diuortium facere cum vxore. Fair divorce auec vne femme. S. Et
matrimonium dimittere, Abire ex matrimonio. To divorce him self. Se desmarier.
S.

Divorced. Repudiatus, a, um. Divorced to be. Exigi matrimonio, Nuntium vxori
mittere, Repudium remittere.* Diuulgate, or to open a secret. Far rem vulgo,
vel palam, Rem vulgar, Euulgare, Diuulgare. Diuulguer quelque secret. S.
Diuulgate to be. Permanesco, scis. Permano, as. Dispalesco, is. Estre diuulgue.
S. Which is diuulgated or spread a broad. Peruagatum, Diuulgatum. Qui est
diuulgue and seem par tout. S.


D. ANTE. O.
DOblet. Diplois, dis. f. ge. Thorax, is. mas. ge. Pourpoinct. Docilitie.
Docilitas, tatis. f. g. Docilite. S. Docke herb. Rumex, icis. mas. genesis
Parelle. Read Turner. lib. 2. fol. 121. Docke herb, which grows in the
water. Hydrolaphaton. Docke where ships be laid up and made. Nauale, lis. n.
g. Un haure. H. Doctrine. Doctrina, Disciplina, Eruditio. Doctrine. S. Doctrina
est praeceptoris, Disciplina discipuli. Doctor. Doctor, oris. m. g. Docteur. He
is a doctor of divinity. Est theologiae doctor, Est doctor theologicus. Il est
docteur en theology. Est medicinae doctor, vel medicus doctor. Atque ita de
reliquis disciplinis. Cor.

Doctrinall, or book to instruct the unlearned. Protrepticus.* Document.
Syntagma, it is. n. g. Documentum, ti. n. genesis Document. S. Doer. Actor, Factor,
Patrator, vel Trix. Effector, oris. m. genesis Qui fait quelque chose. S. Doer, or
geuer of great things with dignity and honor. Megaloprepes.* Qui
magnificentia aut munificentia vtitur, Magnificu^ quida^ appellant. Doer of a
shrewd turn, which after runs away. Tropeus.* Dog. Canis. Graece Cynos.
Chien. H. Et Caninus, a, um. Ang. Of a dog. De chien. S. If you desire to
read the wonderful sagacitie, love, nature and property of dogs, read the
25. of Iul. Solin. and Cic. 2. De not. de.

Dog days. Dies caniculares, vel caprificiales, Feriae canariae. Les iours
caniculiers. H. Doggefenel herb. Amariscus, Fenellum caninu^.* Stataria herba,
Pinastellum, Peucedanum, Foeniculus porcinus. Queue de porc. H. Dog fish.
Boce, ces. Boces, cis. Canis marinus. Dog fly. Cynomyia, ae. foe. g. Musca
canina, quae sanguinem ab animalibus exugit. Haec praecipue canu^ aures
infestat, vnde nomen est sortita. Call. Dog lean. Squallidus, a, um.
Strigosus, a, um. Fort maigre. S. Dog properly a bandogge. Lycisca, Or it is
a dog engendered between a bitche and a wolf. I think it a mungerel or a
shepeherdes curre, some think it is taken in the third Aeglog of Virgil, For
the proper name of a dog, let us therefore show what Menalcas says. Quid
domini facient: audent cum talia fures?
Non ego te vidi Damonis pessime caprum,
Accipere insidijs: multum latrante lycisca?
Et cum clamarem quo nunc se proripit ille,
Tityre coge pecus: tu post carecta latebas.
What more shall masters do when thieves
Presume such things to say?
Did not I see the noughtie knave
Filtche Damones goat away?
His dog much barking, and when as
where creepes he now I cryde,
O Tityrus keep thy cattle in:
In segges thou did the hyde.
Dog of Iron to claspe a house from fleeting. Retinaculum, li. Trabalis
clauus, vel hamus.* Dog, such as gentlewomen use to have, a pretty one of a
very small bigness. Catellus melitaeus. Petit chien de damoyselles H. Canis
melitaeus. Plin. Dog tyke or louse. Ricinus, Varro de Re rustica. lib. 2.
cap. 9. Dogs collar. Mellium, lij. n. g. Vide Collar. Dogs gotten between a
bitche and a wolf. Alopecidae, arum. Dogs teethe. Dentes canini. Dogs
teethe which do grow in their latter age. Cynodontae, arum. Cynodontes, Lege
Plin. 11. cap. 37. Which says, these teethe once lost never grow again.
Doggishe or of a dog. Caninus, a, um. De chien ou de chienne. S. Doggishe, or
pertaining to a dog. Canarius, a, u^. Doggly, or like a dog, or after the
manner of a dog. Canatim. Nonius. Doing. Actus, us. Factum, Gestum, Factio,
onis. Actio, onis. foe. g. Action and besongne. S. Vide Act deed. etc. Doing
away. Ablatio. Et Ablatiuus, a, um. That which does away.* Dolphyn.
Delphinus, ni. Et Delphin, inis. m. genesis Of the wonderful nature of the
Dolphin., read Julius Solinus. cap. 22. Un Daulphin. S. Damage, hurt, or
expense. Dispendium, Inco^modum, Noxa, Damnum, Detrimentum, Captio. Dommage. S.
To receive damage. Detrimentum accipere vel recipere, Incommodum subire vel
capere, Damnum accipere vel co^trahere, facere damnum, vel detrimentum, Pati
iacturas, Capere vel accipere calamitatem. Receuoir dommage. S.

To bring damage or to hurt. Apportare damnum, Iacturam dare vel afferre,
Detrimentum afferre vel infer, Incommodare, Iniuriam facere, Damno esse,
Nocere, Detrimentum iniungere, Fraudem far, Fraudi vel captioni esse, Male
mereri de aliquo, Afficere aliquem damnis, Dare incommodum vel damnum, Mactare
malo vel damno. Porter dommage. S.

Domageable, or hurtful. Damnosus, Detrimentosus, Maleficus, Perniciosus,
Improbus, Calamitosus, Damnificus, ca, cum. Dommageable. S. Dombe. Elinguis, e.
Mutus, a, um. Muet. S. Dombe folk that will hear all, and speak little them
selves. Acustici, orum. Dombe to be. Muteo, es, tui. Obmutesco, scis. Estre
muet. Dombe to wax. Mutesco, scis. Immutesco, is. Deuenir muet. S. To make
dombe. Elingue^ reddere. Render muet.

Dembely. Mute. Dome, or judgment. Iudicatus, us. Iudicium, Arbitrium, ij. n.
g. Judgment. S. Domes man, arbitrour, or judge. Praefectus, tus. Iudex, icis.
Com. g. Judge. S. Vide Judge. Domestical. Ephestius, Domesticus, ca, cum.
Familiaris, re. Domestique. S. Dominion, or to have power or authority.
Dominor, aris. verb. dep. Dominer. S. Dominion that bears, or that bears
rule. Dominans, it is. Part. Qui domine. S. Dominion, or authority. Dominatus,
tus. mas. ge. Domination. S. Et Dominator, oris. m. ge. A ruler or one that
has dominion. Dominateur. S. Et dominatrix, tricis. foe. g. A woman that has
dominion. Celle qui domine. Dominion. Cratos, Ditio, onis. Dominium, Imperium.
Dominatio, onis. f. g. Domination. S. Done. Actus, a, um. Factus, Gestus, a,
um. Faict. S. Done away. Ablatus. Et Ablatiuus, a, um. That which does away.*
Done and dasshed, and all things perfect. Acta, transacta omnia, Factum, and
transfactum. Done and dispatched. Perfectum, Transactu^. Faict. Done by
stealth, that no man knows the author. Surreptitius, a, um. Qui est faict en
cachette. S. Done conditionally, or upon condition. Pactitius, a, um. Faict
anec accord and conuention. S. Done curiously, diligently, exactly, perfectly,
advisedly. Accuratus, a, um. Faict soingneusement. S. He has done his duty.
Suo functus est officio, Suum fecit officium. Suum munus obiuit. Il a faict son
deuoir. Cor.

He has done like an honest, or good man. Officio viri boni functus est. Fecit
vt virum bonum decet. Il a faict en homme de bien. Cor.

He has done all his duty toward me. Omni officio mihi satisfecit, Omne
officium mihi praestitit, Nullum erga me officium praetermisit. Ila faict tout
son deuoir enuers moy.

Done first, or before any other. Praeuersus, a, um. Faict deuant toutes
autres. S. Thou have done it for the nonce. Sciens fecisti, Fecisti de
industria, Ex industria, Data opera, Consilio, Consulto, Dedita opera. Tu l' as
faict de bon gre. Cor.

Done in haste, rashely, or without advise. Temerarius, a, um. Tumultuarius, a,
um. Faict a la haste. S. Done lightly, or in short time or space. Momentarius,
a, um. Quod fit in momento. Call. Done next day. Procrastinatus, a, um.* Done
ye next day after to morrow. Perendinatus, a, um. Perendinus, a, um.* Done for
a facion to dispatche and rid it out of the way. Perfunctorius, a, um. Qu'
on fait par maniere d' acquit. S. Done lightly, or slackely. Perfunctorie,
Aduerbiu^. Lachement. etc. Done the day before. Pridianus, a, u^. De iour
deua^t. S Done the day after. Postridianus, a, um. Done two sundry ways.
Biuius, a, um.* Done three sundry ways. Triuius, a, um.* Done sundry ways.
Multifarius, a, um.* Done with heart and will. Spontaneus, a, um. Et spontalis,
le. Voluntaire. S. Done without study. Extemporalis, le. Extemporaneus, a, um.
Faict soubdain and sans auoir pense parauant. S. Done to be against all good
order, ouerthwartly, or preposterously, as when the people command the
governor, the servant, the master, or a fool, the wise. Praepostere fieri.
Et Praeposterus mos. Is such preposterous and ouerthwarte fashion. Vide
Overthwart. Done to be without study. Ex tempore fieri. Faict sans y penser.
S. Dony an herb. Personata, ae. foe. g. A burre. Do. Ago, is. Facio, is.
Perpetro, as. Praesto, as. Fair. Do after ye country fashion. Ruro, ras, et
Ruror, aris. Depon. But it is more properly to dwell in the country, or to
bide in the country. Do after the old fashion. Redire ad ingenium. Do
against duty or office. Peruertere, vel prodere officium. Do a good turn.
Afficio, is. Gratificor, aris. Profundere in aliquem, Promereo, es, and or,
eris. Officium promereri, Promerere de aliquo. Recte alicui facere, Augere
commodis aliquem. Bien fair a aucun. S. Do an office dutefully. Officium
retinere. Do and undo. Retexere telam, Figere and refigere, Claudere, and
recludere. Penelopes telam retexere. Fair le faict and le desfaict. Do a
thing at an other man's will, or to obey, or to please. Obsecundo, as.
Obsequor, eris. Fair au gre d' aucun, obeir, Complaire. S. Do, or to think
carefully on a thing. Accuro, as. Soingneusement fair ou penser de quelque
chose. S. Do a thing by measure or number. Modulor, aris. Fair ou composer
par mesure. S. Do a thing by treason. Agere ex insidijs. Do a thing by course
or turn. Alterno, as. Fair puis l' vnpuis l' autre. S. Do a thing
frustratlye, or in vain. Frustro, as. Frustror, raris. Vide Frustrate. Do a
thing gladly. Alubesco, scis. Lubens facio. Do a thing hastily, or quickly.
Maturo, as. Propero, as. Vide Haste. To do one a pleasure, or good turn.
Afficere aliquem beneficio, Beneficium collocare, Complecti aliquem beneficio,
Beneficium in alique^ confer, Dare vel confer beneficium, Facere
beneficium, Tribuere beneficium, Ponere beneficium apud aliquem. Fair
vnplaisir a quelqu' un. S

Do a thing so subtely as can be. Locum subtilitati nullum relinquere. I would
never have to do with thee. Nihil vnquam velim tecum contrahere, Nollem tecum
rationem habere, Nolim tecum quicqua^ co^miscere. Ie ne vouldroye iamais a voir
a fair a toy. Cor.

Do a thing royally. Regaliter vel basilice aliquid facere. Do a thing slyly,
or craftily. Manticulor, aris. It is also to pick a purse. Do away, or to
take away. Abrogo, as. Oster. S. Do away. Semoueo, es. Idem atque Abrogo, as.
To take away. Oster. S. To do as he says. Verba ad rem refer.

Do a thing three fold. Triplico, as. Tripler. S. Et Tertio, as. To do the
third time. Tiercer. S. Do a thing double or two fold. Duplico, cas. Doubler.
S. Do a thing four fold, or four times. Quadruplico, cas. Quadrupler. S.
Do a thing the third time. Tertio, as. Tiercer. S. Do before or first.
Praeuerto, is. Anteuerto, is. Adeuancer. S. Do contrary to alegiaunce. Prodere
fidem. Do dissolutely without reason or wit. Scopas dissipare. Thou do
more then thou have thanks for, or you have more labor then thanks. Plus
equo officiosus es, Tu nimis obsequeris, Officium simulas, Nimium prae tefers
obsequium. Tu fais du bon varlet.

Do folyshly, or rashely. Temero, as. Temerare negotium, Inepte facere. Do
eftsoon, or again. Reitero, as. Redintegro, as. Refaire. S. Do for one all
pleasure that may be. Profundere in aliquem, Promereo, es. Promereor, eris.
Promerere de aliquo. I will do it whether thou wylt or no, I will do it in thy
despite, or to anger thee. Odio tui faciam illud, Illud te inuito faciam,
quamlibet resistas, faciam tamen, id est quantumlibet. Qua^tumuis repugnes,
nihilominus id faciam, Velis nolis id faciam, Hoc vel te inuito faciam, Etiam
si maxim nolis, tamen faciam. Ie le feray en despit de toy. Cor.

Do ill. Aedere facinus. Do much with an other man. Valere apud alique^. Do
often. Actito, as. Acto, as. Agito, as. Factito, as. Souuent fair vne chose.
S. Do one thing before an other. Anteuerto, is. Vt supra. Do that he woteth
not what. Perplector, eris. * Do well. Benefacio, cis. Fair bien. S. Thou
ought, or it becomes thee to take in good part, that which I have done
well, or with good will. Quod been feci, boni vt consulas decet, Non debes ex
animo quod feci in malam partem accipere. Tu ne dois pas prendre en mal, ce que
i ay faict pour bien. Cor.

Doing. Agens, it is. Faciens, it is. Faisant. S. Doing good pleasure, or service.
Promerens, it is. Qui fait quelque bien a un autre. That does one a good turn.
Do a beast. Dama, Dorcas, dis. f. g. Un daim. S. Dorchester, a town in
Dorceste shire. Couinum, ij. neut. gen.* Door. Fores, rium. Ianua, Ostium. ij.
Foris, is, foe. g. L' huis, S. Et Ostiatim. Ang. From door to door. D' huis en
huis. S. Door bar. Repagulum, li. neut. genesis Repages, is. Bar, barriere. H.
Bar the doors. Occludite aedes repagulis. Pl.

Boulte of a door. Pessulus, Clostrum, tri. neut. g. Un verrouil.

To boulte the door. Obdere pessulum ostio. Verrouiller l' huis. S.

Door or wyndowe, or any thing that opens and shuts. Repages, is.
Repagulum, li. n. g.* Door or wyndowe, or any thing that is shut and sparred
on both sides. Valuae, arum. foem. genesis Vide Gate. Door, place, or stead.
Hypothyrides. * Dormouse beast. Glis, ris. Sorex. Vne souris. H. Dorre, or
be, which makes a great humminge. Oestrum, tri. n. g. Latini Asilum vocant.
Dorre, a Be without a stinge. Fucus, ci. mas* genesis Bourdon. S. Dortoure, or
dormitorie, or place to sleep in. Dormitorium, r. j. Et dormitoriu^ cubiculu^.
Dortoir. S. Dosen, or twelve. Duodecim. Indeclinabile nome^. Douz. S. A dosen
of bread. Duodecim panes. Vne douzaine de pains. S.

Dote. Deliro, as. Insanio, is. Desipio, is. Radoter. S. Dotage, or folly.
Deliratio, Deliramentum, ti. Insania, ae. f. g. Radotement. S. Doter, or
follower of women. Mulierarius. Et Mulierosus, a, um. * Dotard, or old fool,
of whom all men be weary. Senex silicernius, Taedulus, a, um. Delirans senex,
Desipiens. Vieillard qui radote. S. Doting. Delirans, antis. Insaniens, it is.
Desipie^s, it is. Doting fool. Delirus, Insanus. Et Delirabundus, a, um. Ang.
Full of dotinge. Dove, or house culuer. Columba, Peristera, ae. Columbus. m.
genesis Pigion, Coulon. H. Columbaris, re. Et Columbinus, a, um. Of a dove or
pigeon. De pigeon. Ac Columbulus, li. m. g. A young pygeon. Pigeonneau. S. Vnde
Marti. Ne violes teneras praeduro dente columbas:
Nam Gnydiae volucris dicitur esse deae.
Crashe not the tender dove
With grasping gredy toothe,
For she is said to be
The foul that Venus louthe.
Dove house, or culuer house, Columbaria, Columbarium. ij. neut. genesis
Peresterotrophium, ij. n. ge. Un columbier. S. Dove keeper, he that has the
charge of doves. Columbarius, ij. m. ge. Qui ha la charge and le soing des
coulons. S. Double. Alterplex, secundum Prisc. Non est in vsu. Duplex, cis.
Duplaris, re. Duplus, a, um. Geminus, a, um. Double. S. Double part, or twyse
so much. Dupla pars, Duplio, onis. m. genesis Le double, deux fois autant. S. Et
Duplum, pli. n. g. Le double. The double. Double bodied. Bicorpor, oris. Om.
ge. Qui ha deux corpse. S. Double edged. Anceps, it is. Adiect. Double edged
sword. Anceps ferrum, vel mucro. Double forked. Bifurcatus, a, um. Double
footed. Bipes, dis. Adiect. Qui ha deux pieds. Double harp, called a root.
Barbitos. m. g. * Double headed, or that has two heads. Biceps, itis.
Adiect. a Bis and caput co^p. Qui ha deux testes. Double horned. Bicornium,
Bicorniger, ra, rum. Double horn. Bicornu. Double price. Duplex pretium.
Double pris. S. Doubled stroke. Geminus ictus. Un coup double. S. Double
minded, or of many wits. Altriplex. Vide Inconstant. He is a man that deals
doublye, that speaks that he thynkes not, or that speaks one thing and
thinks another. Solet aliud sentire and aliud loqui, Homo est bilinguis, Est
homo duplex, Aliud in ore promptum aliud in pectore clausum habet, Eius animo
lingua solet esse dissimilis, Solet aliud sentire and loqui. Cest un homme a
deux visaiges. Cor.

Double named, or having two names. Binominis, ne. Binomius, a, um. Qui ha deux
noms. S. Double payment. Conduplicatio, onis. foe. genesis Dowble so much. Dupli.
genesis cas. To be condemned to pay double. Condemnari dubli. Estre condamne a
render le double. S.

Dowble speech. Ambages, Ambago, inis. Ambiloquium, ij. n. g.* Dowble thief.
Bifur, ris. m. g. Dowble tongued. Ambiloquus, a, um. Ambiguosus, a, um.
Bilinguis, e. Languart. S. Dowble wynged. Bipennis, ne. Adiect. Ayant deux
ailes. S. To double any thing. Adduplico, as. Duplico, as. Gemino, as.
Ingemino, as. Doubler. S.

Dowble again, or often. Reduplico, as. Redoubler. Dowble a thing four times
as much. Quadruplico, as. Quadrupler. S. Dowble ten times. Decuplo, as.
Dowbler. Duplicator, vel Trix. Dowbling. Dublicatio, Duplicatus, us. mas. genesis
Duplication. S. Doubt. Ambiguum, Amphibolum, Dubium, Dubitatio. Haestitatio,
onis. Offendiculum, Scrupulus, Suspicio, Suspectio, Timiditas, tatis. foe. genesis
Doubt. Subdubitatio, onis, f. g. An. A little doubt. Doubt, or to be in
doubt. Addubito, as. Cuncto, as. Cunctor, aris. Dubito, as. Fluctuo, as.
Haereo, es. Haesito, as. Pendere, Percipere opinione, Nuto, as. Subdubito, as,
aui, are. In ambiguo, aut in dubio esse. Estre en doubt. S. I am in doubt
what to do. Ancipiti cura distrahor, iactor, versor, animi pendeo, incertus
animi sum, pendet animus, inclinat huc illuc, fluctuat, iactatur, incertus est,
quid consilij capiam. Vtram in partem me them ignoro. explicare consilium,
expedire me ex hac deliberatione, exitu^ meae cogitationis inuenire non possum,
distrahunt me diuersa consilia, in vtramque partem ita multa succurrunt, vt
difficilis admodum sit, minime expedita, minime explicata, minime explorata,
minime certa, perobscura, haud satis aperta deliberatio.

Doubtful. Anceps, it is. Creperus, Dubious, Incertus, Perplexus, Scrupulosus,
Suspensus, a, um. Ambiguus, ua, uum. Doubteux. S. It is doubtful to what end
the wars will come. Dubium est, dubitandum est, dubitari potest, in dubio
est, est cur dubitetur, dubitationem res habet, ambiguum est, in dubio
versatur, in dubio positum est, in ambiguo, in ancipiti, plane non constat, non
patet, non liquet, apertum non est, perspicuum, dilucidum, dilucide non patet,
qui sit belli exitus futurus, de belli euentu potest ambigi, certo diuinare,
conijcere, augurare, affirmare non licet, exploratum non est, certa coniectura
non est, in dubium vocari potest euentus belli, in dubium venire, in
dubitationem adduci, potest in vtranque partem iudicari de belli eue^tu, anceps
de belli exitu, ambigua, dubia, incerta, difficilis admodum, obscura, quae
obscuritatis and erroris habeat multum, non simplex, non aperta, non perspicua,
parum certa diuinatio, coniectura, opinio est. coniecturam facere de belli
exitu cui licet? quid in bello casurum sit, vtram in partem inclinatura
victoria, nemo dispicit, videt, intelligit, nouit, exitum belli certa ratio non
oste^dit, non promittit.

Doubtful, or uncertain to make. Incerto, as. * Doubtful sentence.
Amphibologia, ae. f. g. Doubtful speech. Ambages, Ambiloquiu^, ij. n. g.
Doubtful speaking. Ambigua, and anceps oration. Without doubt. Sine
controuersia, Sine dubio, Sine dubitatione, Haud dubie, Nec, aut Non dubie,
Indubitanter, Nimirum, Proculdubio. Sans doubt. S.

Doubtfully. Ambigue, Dubie, Dubitanter, Dubitatim, Fluctuatim, Perplexe,
Perplexibiliter, Perplexim, Religiose, Scrupulatim, Suspensa manu, vel
opinione. Auec doubt. Doubtfulnes, or flitting of the mind. Aestus, us.
Ambiguitas, tatis. foe. g. Ambignite. S. Dowche mile. Rasta. ae. f. g.*
Daughter. Filia, ae. Nata, ae. Puer, ri, genesis com. secu^dum prisc. Et Puera,
ae. Secundum Linacrum. Fille. H. Vide Chastity. Daughter in law. Nurus, ri.
Priuigna filia, vel gnata. Ma bru, la femme de mon fills. Daughter in the fourth
descent. Abneptis, it is. foe. g. Daughters daughter. Neptis, it is. foe. genesis La
fille de ma fille. S. Daughters son. Nepos, it is. m. ge. Nepueu, c' est a
dire, le filz de ma fille. S. Daughters husband. Gener, ri. m. genesis Filiae
maritus. Gendre. H. Down feathers. Lanugo, ginis. f. g. Plumulae molliores,
Plumae subalares. Duuet. S. Down of a goose feathers. Lana anserina. Du duuet.
Down right. Deorsum versum. Down right directly. Perpendicularis, re. penul.
prod. Adiect. Qui pend droictement a quelque chose. That hanges down right
from some thing. Down right place or stepe, dangerous for falling.
Praecipitium, ij. n. g. Dangereux a cheoir. S. Down, dale or barrayne plain,
which bears neither corn nor grass. Caluetum, ti. n. g. Glabretum, ti. n.
g. Colum. Downewarde. Praeceps, itis. Pronus, a, um. Qui penche sur le deuant.
Which stoupeth dounward. Downewarde. Deorsum. Contre bas. S. Right down.
Pessum, Aduerb. Droict en bas. S.

Dowre, or dowrye. Donatio propter nuptias. Dos, it is. foe. ge. Do, ou
douaire. H. Et Dotalis, le. Ang. which pertains to a dowrye. De douaire. et
Res vel Bona dotalia, Be goods given in marriage. Et fundus, Is land given in
marriage. To give dowry, or to indowe. Doto, tas. Donner. Et Dotem dare, To give
a dowrye. Donner do.

To pay the dowrye. Exoluere dotem. Payer le do. S.

Women that have great dowres. Dotatae mulieres. Femmes qui ont grand do. S.

Woman that has no dowrye. Indotata mulier. Femme qui n' ha null do. S.


D. ANTE. R.
DRradde, dreadful, or to be feared. Terribilis, le. Vide Dreadful. Dradde,
or feared to be. Metuendus, Timendus, Verendus, a, um. Pauendus, a, um. Qui
est a craindre. S. Dragge. Tragula, ae. f. g. I think it may be taken for
such as they take a bucket with forth of the well, it is also a dragge net.
Un traineau. S. Dragge, or instrument of husbandrye with iron teethe to break
cloddes, some do call it an Harrowe. Occa, ae. foem. genesis Crates occatoria. Vne
hearse. S. Dragge net. Tragum, gi. Verriculum, li. Rete piscatorium ita dictum
quod per aquam verratur, id est, trahatur, idem et Euerriculum dicitur. Call.
Dragging, or breakyng of cloddes with a dragge or harrowe. Occatio, onis. foe.
g. Hersement. S. Dragon. Draco, onis. m. g. Un dragon. Of the dragon his
quantity and his fight with the Elephant, Read the.38. and.43. chap. of Iul.
Soli. Dragon which is the female. Dracaena. ae. f. g. Call. Dragons herb.
Serpentaria. foe. g. Dracontium. ij. neut. g. Herb nommee Serpentine. S. Dray,
or sleade, which goes without wheles. Traha, ae. vel Trahea, foe. g.
Traineau. H. Drayne. Sulcus, Fluuialis fossa. Rayon, vne lo^gue fosse. Drayne
water. Delibo, as.* Drake. Anas. Canard. H. Dram, or scruple, containing six
parts of an ounce. Sextula, ae. f. g. La sixiesme party d'vne once. Dram.
Dram, ae. f. g. Drame ou dragme. S. Drane, or dorre, which is the
unprofitable Be having no stynge. Cephenes, Fucus, ci. mas. genesis Bourdon. S.
Some take it to be a waspe, or drone be, or humble be. Draper. Pannicularius,
Pannarius, ij. mas. genesis Drapier. S. Draperie. Pannaria. Draperie. S. Draperie
work, cylerie, a kind of caruinge or paynting, so called. Voluta, tae. foe.
genesis Draw. Adduco, cis, Haurio, is. Traho, is. Verto, it is. Tirer. S. Vergil.
-- Trahit sua quenque voluptas.
Each one is drawn by deep desire
To love what lykes his eye.
Draw a furrowe with a plowe about a place. Vruo, as. Id est aratro definio.
Call. Draw a great bark or ship with a lesser vessel. Naues sub ducere,
Remulco, as. Est proprie remigando e scapha grandiore^ nauim trahere. Call.
Draw a line. Ducere, vel pingere lineam. Draw as a painter does before he
lay on color. Delinio, as. Tirer les primiers traicts. S. Draw a sword.
Ducere mucronem, Explicare ensem, Ducere ensem, Exuere ensem, Liberare ensem
vagina, Stringere ensem, Retegere ensem. Desgainer. S. Draw a thing by
perspectiue. Diliniare calamo. Draw away enemies. Anteuertere hosts.* Draw
back. Retracto, as. Retraho, is. Reuoco, as. Subduco, cis. Retirer. Traicter
derechef. S. Draw breath. Anhelo, as. Halener. S. Draw drink. Suppromo, is.
Promo, is. Expromo, is. Mettre ou tirer horse. S. Draw easily. Remulco, as.
Draw in breath. Inhalo, as.* Draw lottes or cuttes. Sorts trahere. Tirer
horse les sors. S. Draw, or to bowell fish. Exenterare piscem. Euentrer le
poisson. S. Draw milk out of a breast or vder. Mulgere, Immulgere. Pressare
hubera palmis. Tirer le laict d' vne mamelle. S. Draw nygh. Appeto, ris, tij.
vt Dies appetit, Accedo, is. Proximo, as. Se tirer pres, s' approcher. S. Draw
often. Elicito, as. Draw, or disseuer sheep from other beasts. Abgrego, as.
Vide Disseuer. Draw out Educo, cis. Egurgito, as. Elicio, is. Extraho, is.
Attraire horse. S. Draw out clean. Exanclo, as. vel Exantlo, as. Verbum
graecum idem significans quod Exhaurio. Prisc. Draw out a word. Elicio, cis.
Exero, is. Exhaurio, is. Draw out of a vessel or any close thing, as to
draw drink, wine, oil. etc. Depromo, is. Promo, is. Tirer horse. Draw
pleasauntly by flickering entisement. Allicio, cis. Allicefacio, is. Illecto,
as. Illiceo, ces. Attraire, allicher. S. Draw thy purse, or give me thy money,
let us see your money. Excute crumenam, Exolue marsupium, Prome pecuniam,
Exprome argentu^, Expedi nummos, id est Prome, De prome, Profer. Tirez a
cheurotin, e' est a dire. Tirez a la burse, bailez argent. Cor. Draw to.
Attraho, is. Adhereo, es. Excepto, as. Prolicio, is, ixi. Retraho, is. Attirer,
Attraire. S. Draw together. Coco, is, ij, vel iui. tam act. quam neut.
Contorqueo, es. Contraho, is. Amasse^^, Assembler, Attirer. S. Draw to
quietness, or rest. Subtrahere se. Draw to with force. Pertraho, is. Tirer a
force. S. Draw water. Anclo, as. Antlo, as. Exhaureo, is. Haurio, is. Vt
haurire aquam. Tirer de l' eaue. S. The engyne to draw water with, having a
great payse at the end. Tollenon, onis. masc. genesis Festus. Let us two draw
water. Hauriamus aquam vna. Tirons de l'eaue nous deux. Cor.

Draw violently. Rapio, is. Rapto, as. Attirer par Force. Draw up. Haurio,
is. Vt supra. Drawn. Adductus, a, um.* Tractus, ta, tum. Versus, sa, sum.
Tire. S. Drawn swords. Districti, vel exerti enses. Desgainez. S. Et Ensis
strictus. A drawn sword. Le espee traict. S. Drawn. Haustus, ta, tum. Puise,
Tire. S. Drawght cattle, as horse, mules, neat, and al other that do draw.
Hypozygia, Dicta sunt animalia quae iugum subeunt, quasi subiugalia. Call. A
drawghte of water. Haustus aquae. Un traict d' eaue. S.

He has drunk ye whole gobletful at a draught. Vnico haustu totum calicem
epota^uit. Il a beu tout plein le gobelet en un traict. Col.

He has dronke a pynt of wine at three draughts. Tribus haustibus vini pintam
epotauit. Il a beu vne pint de vin en trois coups. Cor.

Drawght hounde. Canis Gallicus, Canis sagax, Canis odorus vel odorisequus.
Quem plaudum vocant nonnulli, auribus flaccidis ac pendulis. Braque. H.
Drawhte, a privy or a Iakes. Latrina, ae. foe. genesis Retraect, prive. H. And
the common pryuie. Forica, cae. foe. genesis Retraict public. H. Drawght of ye
form of any instrument or writing first drawn, and not as yet exemplified or
engrossed. Protocollu^, vel Protocolon, aut Protocolum, li. n. genesis Drawght of
three horses. Trigarium, ij. n. g. Drawght of four horses. Quadrigarium, rij.
n. g. Drawght to draw up water, after the sort of a gybet with a paise at the
one end. Telo, onis. m. genesis Tollenon, onis. m. g. Festus. Drawyng. Haustus,
us. Tractus, us. Tractio, onis. foe. ge. Tirement. S. Drawyng a ship on shore
to be set on stock. Subductio, onis. foe. genesis Caesar. Drawyng, or taking
back again, as if I mete with one and do take him back again. Receptio,
onis. foe. gen.* Dread, or fear. Formido, inis. Formidatio, onis. foe. genesis
Horror, ris. Metus, us. Pauor, ris. Terror, ris. Timor, ris. Timiditas, it is. f.
g. Crainte. S. Dread, or to fear. Formido, as. Horreo, es. Metuo. is. Paueo,
es. Terreo, es. Timeo, es. Trepido, as. Vercor, eris. In timore esse,
Extimescere. Craindre. S. Dread, or to fear much. Extimeo, es. Extimesco,
scis. Afformido, as. Pertimesco, is. Praeformido, as. Reformido, as. Fort
craindre. S. Dreadefull. Timidus, a, um. Meticulosus, sa, sum. Craintif. S.
Dreadful to be. Verecundor, aris.* Dreadful to wax. Horresco, scis. Timesco,
scis. Dreadful to wax very much. Extimesco, scis. Dreadful, or which is to
be feared or dradde. Formidabilis, le. Horridus, a, um. Terribilis, le.
Verendus, a, um. Pauendus, a, um. Metuendus, a, um. Timendus, a, um. Qui est a
craindre and a redoubter. S. Dreading, or fearing. Metuens, Verens, Timens.
Craignant. S. Dream. Somnium, ij. Visio, onis. Visum, i. neut. ge. Song. S.
Sunt quinque somniandi species. Somnium, Visio, Oraculum, Insomnium, and
Fantasma, De quibus lege August. li. De spiritu and anima. cap. 25. and Macro.
In some. Scipionis. li. 1. ca. 3. To dream of things pleasant, or to have
delectable dreams. Vti somnijs Iucundissimis. Songer chooses plaisantes. S.

Dream causing, or that which induces or provoke dreams. Somnificus, ca,
cu^. Quod somnium inducit. Plin. Dream. Consomnio, as. Somnio, as. Songer. S.
Dreamefull, or full of dreaming. Somniculosus, a, um.* Somniosus, sa, sum.. Qui
song souuent. S. Dreamer. Somniator, vel Trix.* Dreams whereby men take
fantasies. Phanici, little.* Dreaming fellow. Somniculosus, Oscitabundus, a,
um. Qui est tout endormi. S. Dreaming speech. Tardiloquentia, ae. foe. ge.
Dreaming speaker. Tardiloquus, a, um. Tardif a parler. S. Dreamingly,
slouggishly, or negligently. Oscitabunde, Oscitanter, Somniculose. Negligement.
S. Dregs of oil. Amarica, Amurca, ae. foe. ge. La lie de l' huile. S.
Dregs of oil. Magma, massa vnguentorum, Recrementum, Vnguentorum faex,
Lutum, Crassamentum, Sedimentum, ti. m. g. La marc. H. Dregs, or lies. Faex,
cis. Floces, cum. Retrimentum, ti. Sanies, Crassamen. Lie. H. Dreggefull, or
full of dregs. Amaricosus, a, um.* Amurcosus, sa, sum. Drenche, or drink for
horse or other beast. Saluiatum, alij legunt Saliuatum. Ocymum, i. n. ge. De la
dragee aux cheuaulx. S. Dress. Orno, as. Como, is. Orner. S. Dress a dead
corpse with flowers, or to wash and anoynte the body of the dead, after the
ancient coustome. Pollincio, is. Lauer and oindre le corpse d' un trepasse a la
facon ancienne. S. Dress curiously. Excuro, as. Exorno, as. Orner. S. Dress
with brass or copper. Aero, as. Dress with wax. Cero, as. Cirer. S. Dressed
curiously. Excuratus, a, u^.* Exornatus, ta, tum. Orne, pare. S. Dressed with
brass or copper. Aeratus, a, um. Vide Brass. Dressed with wax. Ceratus, a,
um. Dressing, or garnishing of doors with mydsomer flowers. Toral, Toralium,
ij. n. g.* Dressing with wax. Ceratura, ae. foemin. gener. Cirement. S.
Dressing. Ornamentum, Ornatus, tus. m. g. Orname^t Accoustrement. S. Dressoure,
or bourde whereupon the cook sets forth his dyshes in order. Abax, cis.
foe. g. Abacus, ci. m. g. Un dressoir. S. Dry, or to make dry. Siccare,
Desiccare, Exiccare, Torrere, Torrefacere, Vaporare, Arefacere. Seicher, ou
Secher. S. Dry, or to become dry. Assiccescere, Exarere, Exarefieri,
Arescere, Inarescere, Serescere, Siccescere. Se seicher. Dry. Aridus, a, um.
Xeron Graece. Siccus, a, u^. Torridus, da, dum. Sec. S. Dry all about, or all
over. Obaridus, a, um. Dry bayne. Laconicum, ici. n. g. Estuues. Pl. Dry
fellow, whom some call a pelt or pinchbecke. Aridus homo. Eating of dry
meats. Xerophagia, Est enim Xerophagium, Comestio siccorum ciboru^. Call.

Dry of nature. Siccaneus, a, um. Sec de nature. S. Dry playsters. Xeria.*
Dry stones. Assae, arum.* Dry things. Petilara.* Dry without juice.
Exuccus, a, um. Sec, Sans suc. S. Dry wood which smoketh not. Acapna, orum.
neut. ge. Bois qui ne fument point. S. Dry against the fire or Sun.
Torrefacio, is. Seicher. S. Dry all about. Obaresco, scis. Circumquaque
aresco. Call. Dry away. Siccesco, scis. Sicco, as. Dry in the smoke. Infumo,
as. Seicher a la fumee. S. Dry in the Sun. Insolo, as. Seicher au soliel. S.
Dry to wax. Aresco, scis. Vide Dried to be. Dried up very sore. Perareo, es.
Peraresco, scis. Se seicher du tout, deuenir tout aride. To become very dry.
Dried, or dry. Aridus, a, um. Siccus, a, um. Torridus, a, um. Sec. S. Dried
away. Siccatus, a, u^. Vt fontes siccati. Ovid. Fontaines or wells dried up.
Seichez. S. Dried in the smoke. Infumatus, a, um. Seiche a la fumee. S. Dried
in the Sun. Insolatus, a, um. Seiche au soleil. S. Et Insolatio, onis. f. g.
Seichement au soleil. S. Drying in the Sun. Dried to be, or to wax dry.
Exareo, es. Exaresco, Seresco, Siccesco, Subareo, es. Subaresco, scis. Se
seicher. S. Dried up to be, as a cow or yewe, that goes and gives no milk.
Subducor, eris.* Drying. Siccatio, onis. Desiccatio, onis. Exiccatio, onis.
Vaporatio, onis. foe. g. Seichement. S. Drynes, or dryth. Ariditas, Aritudo,
Siccitas, Siccitudo, inis. foe. g. Seicheur. S. Drifte of sheep, or beasts to
water. Adpulsio, onis. foe. g. Adpulsus, us. m. g. Drifte, betle, or malle, to
drive pyles or stakes. Fistuca, ae. f. g. It is called a rammer. Un piloti. S.
Drink. Potus, us. m. g. La boire, la boisson. S. Drink charmed, which causes
madness for loves sake. Philtrum, tri. Cic. Amatorium poculum appellat. Et Ovid.
2. de Art. Nec data profuerint pallentia philtra puellis:
Philtra nocent animis, vimque furoris habent.
Nor yet those potions pale will help
Are given to virgins small:
Such drinckes do hurt the mind, and have
Of furies force with all.
Drink for a beast or horse. Vide Drench. Drink made of sodden barley.
Zythus, thy. Zithu^, thy. n. g. Plin. lib. 22. cap. vltimo. Drink made of
honye, called meade. Apomel, Apomeli.* Drink of any sort, that makes one
drunk. Sicera, ae. f. g. Omnis potio apud Hebraeos, quae inebriare potest.
Call. Drink, potion, or a medicine. Potio, onis. foe. genesis Le boire, la
boisson, bruuage de medecin. S. Drink. Bibo, is. Haustum facere. Poto, as,
tam Active quam Pass. Boire. S. Drink at fill, or as much as a man may
drink, or to drink all. Perbibo, is. Boire tout. S. Drink all day
continually till one be dronken. Perpoto, as. Ne fair que d' yurongner. S.
Drink all out. Ebibo, is. Boire tout sans rien laisser. S. Drink all up.
Interbibo, is. Obbibo, is. Perbibo, is. Boire tour. S. Drink a suppe, or a
little. Subbibo, is. Call. Drink before. Praepoto, as.* To give to drink, or to
serve one of drink. Misceo, es, cui, ere. Bailler a boire. S.

Drink first. Praebibo, is. Drink in. Inbibo, is. Drink much. Adbibo, is.
Drink often. Potito, as. frequent. Plaut. Drink one to an other. Co^poto,
as.* Graeco more bibere. Boire l' un a l' autre. S. Drink or to quaffe one to
an other, as when the one says, I drink to you, the other answers, I pledge
you. Praepoto, as. Poscere maioribus vel prioribus poculis, Propino, as.
Poculis alique^ inuitare. Boire l' un a l' autre a grans traicts. To give
drink to an other. Potatum dare. Poto, as. Actiu. tantum.

Drink to heat or warm. Thormopoto, as. * Drinker. Bibax, cis, Potator, vel
Trix. Potor, oris. m. genesis Buueur. Bibax, is more properly a great drinker.
Acer potor. Grand ou fort buueur. S. Drinker of much wine. Meribibulus,
Morobiba. Vinosus, Tricongius, ij. m. genesis Qui boit beaucoup de vin.
Tricongius, Was the name of one which drank at once three measures of wine,
called Congij, Containing every one of them a gallon and a pynte. Drinker of no
wine. Abstemius, vel a. Un homme qui ne boit iamais de vin. My mother never
drinks wine. Matter mea est abstemia. Ma mere ne boit iamais de vin. Cor.

Drinks of any kind made for sick folks, and ministered. Praebia, orum.*
Drinking between dinner and supper, called beauer. Merenda, ae. f. g.
Antecoenium. n. g. Le reciner. Drinking glass or cup. Ampulla potoria. Mart.
Drinking house. Coenatiuncula, ae. f. g. Drinking made by the brydegrome, the
day after the feast of spousales. Repotium, ij, n. ge. Repotia, orum. n. genesis
Plin. Les banquets qu' on fait le lendemain des nopces. S. Drinking place,
where men after bayning took refection, and made good chere. Repopina.* Drippe,
or a drop. Gutta, ae. f. g. Vne gout. S. To drippe. Fundere guttas.

Drippinges of roste. Caducae guttae. Drithe. Ariditas, Siccitas, tatis. foe.
g. Aritudo, inis. foe. g. Seicheur, ou seicheresse. S. To drive before him.
Ago, is, egi, agere. Mener ou chasser deuant soy. S.

To drive a heard of beasts before him. Armentum prae se agere. Chasser
deuant soy un troupeau de bestes. S.

Drive a carte, or such like. Aurigo, as. Charier, ou mener and gouuerner un
charette. S. Drive a nail, or like thing. Defigo, is, xi. Figere clauum.
Horat. Drive a ship to land. Impingere nauim. Quint. Drive away, or remove.
Arceo, es. Aspello, is. Fugo, as. Profligo, as. Protelo, as. Propello, is.
Propulso, as. Pello, is. Expello, is. Exigo, is. Chasser. S. Drive or to chasse
hogs a field. Sues pastum exigere. Chasser paistre les porceaulx. S. Drive
away any thing that is evil or noisome. Abigo, is. Chasser. S. Drive away
enemies. Auertere hosts. Drive back. Reijcio, is. Chasser arriere. S. Drive
beasts from, or out of pasture. Dispesco, scis, Ramener les bestes de la
pasture. S. Drive cattle. Depesco, scis.* Drive cattle together on a flock.
Compello, is. puli. Chasser and amasser en un troupeau. S. Drive down. Proruo,
is. It is rather to cast down to the ground. Iecter par terre. S. Drive down
with a blaste. Proflo, as.* Drive far of. Propello, is. Chasser. S. To drive
away the enemies. Inimicos propellere. Chasser les ennemies. S.

Drive in. Pango, is, panxi, and pigi. Ficher. S. Drive one to do a thing.
Perpello, is. Induire and poulser aucun a fair quelque chose. S. Drive over.
Transigo, is.* To drive out of the corn. Abigere de frumento. Chasser horse du
ble. S.

To drive one out of the Realm. Expellere aliquem regno. Chasser horse du
royaume. S.

Drive ^ut. Extermino, as. Protelo, as. Submoueo, es. Chasser horse. S. Drive
out of the house. Exigo, is. Chasser horse. I will drive thee out of this house.
Exigam te hac domo. Ie te chasseray horse de ceste maison. S.

Drive out with clapping of hands, noyce, or other rebuke. Explodo, is, si.
Chasser and mettre horse en claquetant des mains. S. Drive under. Subigo, is.
Driven. Agitatus, a, um. Agite. S. Driven away. Abactus, a, um. Profligatus,
Propulsus, a, um. Chasse. Driven back. Reiectus, a, um. Driven forth.
Expulsus, a, um. Eiectus, ta, tum. Exactus, ta, tum. Chasse and Iecte horse.
Driven out. Submotus, ta, tum. Driven out of the company of his friends.
Dimismissus e cohorte amicorum. Chasse de la compaigne des amiss. S. Driven, or
that is banyshed out of his country. Extorris, is. Com: genesis Banni horse de son
pais. S. To be driven out of his country. Excuti patria. Estre chasse horse de
son pais. S.

Driven, or banyshed forth of the court. Interdicti aula, Eiecti curia.
Chassez de Cour* S. Driven out of a Realm. Relegatus, a, um. Bani, Chasse
loing. S. Driven to. Illisus, a, um.* Driven under. Subactus, a, um. Driuyll,
or slauer of the mouth. Spuma, Oris pituita. Baue ou escume de bouche. S.
Driuill, or to slauer. Stillare pituitam ex ore. Bauer. Driuill, or slave.
Mediastinus, ni. m. g. Un souillon. S. Driuiling harlot, or queen. Scraptia,
ae. foe. genesis Driuer. Agitator, vel Trix. Propulsator vel Trix. Driuer of
Cameles. Camelarius, ij. m. ge. Qui camelos onustos agit and ducit, Camelorum
agitator and ductor. Meneur and conducteur de chameauls. S Driuer of a ploughe,
or wayne of oxen. Iugarius, ij. mas. genesis Colum. Driving away. Abstractio,
Abstractus, us. Agitatio, Propulsatio, onis. foe. g. Chassement. S. Drodaygh a
town in Irelande. Vindeuij fluuij ostia. Dromedary, a beast not unlike a
Camel, he has also two bounches on his back and is very swyfte, and can
abstain from drynkinge three days when he works. Dromas, adis. m. ge. Plin.
Un Chameau, ou dromadaire. S. Drunk or dronken. Appotus, a, um. Crapulosus,
Ebrius, a, um. Ebriatus, Plenus vini, No^ sobrius, Poculentus, Potatus, Potus,
a, um. Temulentus, ta, tum, Probe appotus. Yure. S. Et Ebriolus, a, u^. Angl.
Somewhat dronken, or half drunk. Yurongnet. S. Drunk often, as who is never
sober. Ebriosus, a, um. Vinosus, Vinolentus, Temulentus, ta, tum. Un yurongne.
S. Dronkard. Potator, Potor, vel Trix. Asotus, idem. Dronkardes dance.
Thyasus, si. m. genesis Saltatio and chorea dicitur, quae Baccho exhibebatur. Vt
Virgil. Instituit Daphnis thyasos inducere Baccho.
Those daunces unto Bacchus first did Daphnis institute.
Dronken and drunk. Idem. Dronke^ drabbes which wander about ye streates.
Ambubeiae, arum. foe. genesis Dronken knave. Madulsa, Potator, Potor, oris. m. g.
Yurongne. S. Dronken sow. Thyas, per periphra.* Dronken, or which has
droncke. Potus, a, um. Qui a bien beu. S. Dronken with wine. Plenus vini.
Temulentus, Vinarius, Vinosus, a, um. Yurongne. S. To make dronken. Inebrio,
as. Enyurer. S.

Dronken to be. Exercere bacchanal. Inebrior, aris. Poto, as. verb. neut.
Dronkennes. Crapula, Ebrietas, Perpotatio, Temulentia, Ebriositas, Bacchatio,
Vinolentia, Popinatio, onis. foe. genesis Yurongnerie. S. By dronkenesse. Vitio
vini. Par yurongnerie. S.

Senica in his.83. Epistle, affirms dronkenesse to be nothing else but
voluntary madness. Resite (says he) the example of Alexander king of
Macedonie which when he was drunk, slew his dear and faithful friend
Clitus, and after the offense known, he would have dyed for shame and
grief. Senica Epistola.83. affirmat nihil aliud esse ebrietatem, quam
voluntariam insaniam. Refer (inquit) Alexandri Macedonis exemplum qui Clitum
charissimum sibi, ac, fide liss. inter epulas transfodit, and intellecto
facinore mori voluit.

Drop. Gutta, Psecas, dis. Stilla, ae. foe. genesis Vne goutte. S. Et Guttula.
ae. foem. genesis Vne goutelette. A little drop. S. Drop of yse called an
isikle, which hangs on a house eaues or pentisse. Stiria. ae. f. ge. Drop.
Stillo, as, Distillo, as. Degoutter. S. Drop out. Extillo, as. Idem. To
drop in, or upon any thing. Instillo, as, aui. Degoutter dedens ou dessus
quelque chose. S.

That droppeth. Guttans, it is. Adiect, Qui degoutte

Drops, or drippinges of meat. vide Dripping. Dropping. Stillatio, onis.
Distillatio, onis. Instillatio, onis. foe. genesis Degoutement. S. Dropping of a
gutter or house eaues. Stillicidiu^. Stiricidium. ij. neut. gener. Un esgout
qui chet de hault. S. Dropping of the eyes. Epiphora, morbus oculoru^ quem
vulgo Lachrymam vocant. Droppingly or by drops. Guttatim. Aduerb. Goutte a
goutte. S. Dropsy, which is a water running between the flesh and the
skin. Ascytes. * Hydrops, pis. Veternus, ni. Aqua intercus, Aquosus humor,
Aquosus languor. L' hydropesie. H. Et Veternosus, a, um. Ang. Diseased with the
dropsy, or full of dropsy. Dropsy called the white dropsy. Leucophlegmatia,
Hyposarcha. Vide Celsum lib. 3. cap. 21. Drown. Demergo, is. Immergo, is.
Mergo, is. Merso, as. Proluo is. Submergo, is. Noyer en l' eaue. S. Drown a
ship. Nauim vel puppim deprimere. To be drowned in debtes. Mergi, vel obrui
aere alieno. Estre noye en debtes. S.

Drowned. Demersus, a, um. Immersus, a, um. Mersus, Submersus, Suppressus, a,
u^. Obrutus aquis. Noye. S. Drowned in idleness. Diffluxus otio. Drowning,
Demersio, Immersio, Submersio, onis. foe. g. Noyement en l' eaue.* Drudge, or
drugge, or vile servant in a house which does all the vile service.
Mediastinus. Un souillon. Call. Drudge in a ship. Misonauta.* Drum, tabber
or a drumslade. Tympanum, ni. n. ge. Tabourin, Bedon. Call. Et Tympanizo, as.
Ang. To play on the drumslade, drum or tabber. Iouer du tab^urin, Sonner d'
un bedon. Call. Drum player, or a drumslade player. Symphoniacus seruus,
Tympanista, Tympanotriba, ae. m. g. Ioueur de tabourin, Taborineur. Dry. Look
Dri.
D. ANTE. V.
DWale, an herb having a red berry within a bladder like a chery. Alkakengi,
Halicacabus, Solanum, Vesicaria. Turner in ye second part of his herball fol.
140. calls this herb night shade or petemorell, and Halicacabus vel
Phissalis, is an other kind of Solanum, called in English winter cheries, If
you covet to know the virtues and difference, read the place and leaf above
recited, Vel Plin. lib. 21. cap. 31. Dwarffe. Corpusillus, Nanus, Pomilio,
onis. Pomilius, Pumilis, Pumilio, onis. Pumilus, li. Monogrammus, Semihomo,
Homunculus, Homu^cio, Homulus, Pumilius. Un nain ou naintre. S. Dubbe a knight.
Decurio, as, * Insignio, is. Cingere equitem, vel Exornare equestri militia,
vel equestri dignitate. Fair cheualier. S. Dubbed. Decuriatus, Insignitus, a,
um.* Dubbing knights, or making captains. Decuratio, onis, foe. genesis *
Duccate, or royal, coin of gold. Ducatus aureus.* Duche men. Theutones,
Theutonici. Duchye. Ducatus, tus. m. g. Duche. S. Ducke. Anas, atis. f. ge.
Cane ou canart. Et anatinus, a, um. De cane ou canart. Call. Et Anaticula, ae.
f. ge. Petite cane, ou petit canart. Call. A duckeling. Ducke that is tame. Anas
cicur. Cane domestique. H. Ducke that is wild, a wild ducke. Anas fera vel
siluestris. Cane sauuage. H. Ducke under the water. Vide Diue. Duckes meat,
which is a kind of weades houering above the water in pondes or stangues.
Lens palustris. Duckeling. Anaticula, ae. f. ge. Dimin. vt supra. Due or dwe.
Debitus, a, um. Iustus, a, um. Deu. Call. Due honors. Iusti honores. To pay
debte that is due to one, or to pay one money that is due. Debitam alicui
pecunia^ soluere. Payer l'argent. S.

In due time. Suo tempore. En temps deu. S.

Due in time, measure, and season. Opportunus, a, um. Opportun, conuenable,
propre. Call. Due time or season. Tempestiuitas, it is. Opportunitas, tatis. f. g.
Opportunite. Call. Duly, or in due season. Tempestiue, Opportune. En temps and
lieu. Call. Et Debite, Recte, Commode. Deuement. S. Dwell. Colo, is. Habito, as.
Inhabito, as. Maneo, es. Seruo, as. Moror, aris. Demeurer, ou demourer. S. To
dwell in some place. Locum aliquem habitare, Incolere, vel tenere, Manner in
aliquo loco. Demourer, ou demeurer en quelque lieu. S.

To dwell in a city or town. Colere vrbem. Demeurer en vne ville.

Dwell by, or nyghe. Accolo, is. Adhabito, as. Demourer aupres. S. To dwell
round about some place. Circuncolo, is, iii. Demourer es enuirons de quelque
lieu. S.

To change his dwelling. Transmigro, as, are. Changer le demeure. S.

Dwell in a place for a time. Commoror, aris. Demeurer en quelque lieu pour
quelque temps. S. Dwell in a solitary place. Dego, is, vt In solitudine vitam
degere. Dwell in a strange country, or place. Incolo, is.* Dwell, or to
inhabit in any place. Habito, as, are. Demeurer and habiter en quelque lieu.
S. To dwell in low cotages. Casas habitare humiles. Verg.

Dwell in the country. Ruro, as. Rusticor, aris. Se tenir ou demeurer aux
champs. S. Dwell, or be in a place during the summer. Aestiuo, as. Dweller by,
or a neighbor. Accola, ae. Com. genesis Proximus, Vicinus, ni. m. g. Qui demoure
aupres de quelque lieu, voisin. S. Dweller in a foreste, park, or wood.
Syluicola, ae. Com. g. Qui syluam incolit. Qui habit es forets. Dweller in an
other man's house. Inquilinus, ni. m. genesis Locatif, louager. Dweller in the
suburbs of a city, or town. Exopolis, Qui extra muros habitat, Quasi
extramuranus. Call. Dweller on the land, or in the land. Terricola, ae. Com.
genesis Qui terram habitat. Qui habit en la terre. Call. Dweller on the water.
Vndicola, ae. Com. genesis Dwelling. Habitatio, onis. foe. ge. Habitaculum, li.
neut. g. Habitation, demourance. Call. Dwelling house or place. Aedes, Domus,
Seeds, is. foe. ge. Maison a demourer. Call. Dwelling in a strange place, other
then his native country. Incolatus, us. m. ge. Est Incolatus ipsa habitatio in
aliena patria. etc. Call. Dwelling place, or resting place for good folks, as
poets feign. Elysij campi, Elysium, ij. Campus Elysius. Virg. 5. Aen. and. 2.
Georg. Dugge, or a teate. Mammilla, ae. foe. ge. Mamelle. S. Dugge or pappe
head. Papilla, ae. foe. g. Le petit bout de de la mamelle. S. Dugge or woman's
breaste, which is also applied to beasts. Ma^ma, ae. Ruma, ae. Rumis, is.
Vber, ris. n. g. Mamelle, tetin. Call. Et Mammo, as. Angl. To give the breast,
dugge, or teate to ye child. Duke. Dux, cis. Com. genesis Duc, nom de dignite. S.
To make a Duke. Ducem appellare, Ducis nomine afficere, Ducem salutare. Eriger
en duche. S.

To make an Earl a Duke. Comitem ducis appellatione augere. Eriger un conte en
duche. S.

Dukedom or a duchye. Ducatus, tus, mas. gener. Duche. Dulcimers, or a double
harp, called a root. Barbitos, Sambuca, ae. foe. g. Sambyca, sieve Sambyx, Et
Sambucina, vel Sambucistria, ae. foe. ge. Ang. A woman that plays on the
dulcimers. Dullarde, or a fool, not able to be taught. Indocilis, le. Om. genesis
Qui penitus doceri non potest. Indocile. Call. Dulle. Hebes, it is. Obtusus, a,
um. Remissus, a, um. Hebetatus, ta, tum. Retusus, Segnis, e. Hebete. Rebouche.
S. Dulle fool, or asseheade. Caudex, cis. m. g. Stipes, Asinus, Plumbeus.
Terent. in Hecyr. Dulle in hearing. Aures hebetes habens. Surdus, da, dum.
Sourd. Dulle, or gross witted like a beast. Brutus, a, um. Duro ingenio
praeditus. Insense. Call. Dulle sighted or poreblynd. Rauos oculos habens. Dulle
wit. Crassa minerua, Ingenium durum, Contusum ingenium, Indocile, Hebes and
obtusum ingenium. Dulle to be. Hebeo, es. Estre rebouche. Call. Dulle to make.
Obtundo, is. Retundo, is. Reboucher, Refouler. Call. Dulle, or slow to be.
Obtorpeo, es. Vide Slow. Dulle, or slow to wax. Obtorpesco, scis. Dulle to
wax. Hebesco, scis. Se reboucher. S. Dulle to wax of sight. Hebetasco, scis.
Hebetesco. vtrumque refertur ad visum.* Dullness, or dulling. Hebetatio, onis.
foe. ge. Hebetudo, inis. foe. g. Rebouchement. S. Dumb. Vide Dombe. Dumbar in
Scotland. Varar. Dunge color. Raucus color.* Dunge. Fimus, mi. Laetamen,
inis. Mynthos, Retrimentum, Stercus, coris. neut. genesis Fiens. Et Stercorarius,
a, um. Ang. Pertaining to dunge. De Fiente. Dunge to dunge the earth with.
Laetamen, enis. n. genesis Fiens a fumer la terre. To nourishe the Olyue trees
with dunge. Pabulare oleas fimo. Nourrir de fiens des olives. S.

Dunge that is liquid, or thin. Foria, orum. n. genesis Foire. S. Dunge of
Goats, or Sheep called ti^dles. Rudus, eris. neut. gen.* Dunge of a hare.
Fimus leporis. Fiente de lieure. Dunge of swyne. Succerda, ae. f. g. Fiens de
porceau. S. Dunge, or ordure of man. Oletum, ti. n. ge. La fiente de l' homme.
S. Dunge carte, or a dungepotte, to carry du^ge a field with. Vehiculu^
stercorarium. Chariot a fiant. Pals. Dunged, or mucked. Stercoratus, a, um.
Fume. S. Dunged, or rotten. Cariosus, a, u^. Pourri and corrompu. Dunge,
compass, or to mucke. Stercoro, as. Fumer. S. Dungeon in a prison. Tullianum,
ni. n. g. Dungehyl, mixen, or muckhyl. Fimetum, ti. Saperda, ae. Sterquilinium,
ij. n. ge. Fumier. S. Dure, or to last. Duro, as, are. Durer. S. Dure, or to
last long time. Far annos and vetustatem, Inueterascere and corroborari,
Pertinacissime durare. Durer long temps. S. Dure, or to last ever. Aeuis
durare. In aeternum durare. Durer tousiours. S. Durable. Durabilis, le.
Durable. S. Durham town. Dunum, ni. neut. ge. During. Durans, it is. Particip.
During always. Perennis, e. Perpetuus, a, um. Se^piternus, a, um. Perpetualis,
le. Qui dure a iamais. During but a while or short space. Momentaneus, a, um.
Quod est caducum and facile mutatur and deficit. Call. During one year.
Annualis, le. Annuus, a, um. Vide Year. Duskyshe, or dymme. Hebes, it is.
Adiect. Duskyshe to be. Hebeo, es. Estre mouce. Duskyshenes. Hebetudo, inis.
foe. ge. Duste. Puluis, eris. Com. genesis Pouldre. S. Et Puluisculus, vel
Puluisculum. Petite and minue pouldre. Small powder or duste. Duste box, or a
sandboxe to spread duste on the letters when you have written. Theca
pulueraria, vel arenaria. Boiste de pouldre. H. Duste of corn, metal, or
any other thing that comes of with filing and clensing. Peripsema, it is.
neut. genesis Duste, or sweapinges of a house. Quisquiliae, aru^. foe. genesis Les
baliures de la maison. S. Duste to cast upon wrytinges. Puluero, as. Puluerare
literas. Pouldrer. S. Dustie, or of duste. Puluereus, a, um. Pouldreux de
pouldre. S. Dustie to wax. Pulueresco, scis. * Duty, or dewtie. Debitum, ti.
Officium, Munus, eris. Parts, tium. foe. ge. Le debuoir. S. Against duty.
Co^tra officium. Contre son debuoir.

To do his duty well. Officium suum colere, Efficere, Implere, Sequi,
Retinere, Debito officio fungi, In officio esse, Bonam operam nauare. Fair
bien son debuoir. S.

To do his duty to one. Satisfacere alicui, Praestare officium alicui.
Officio erga aliquem in re aliqua satisfacere. Fair son debuoir enuers aucun.
S.

To leave of to do his duty. Ab officio discedere, vel recedere, Decedere
officio, vel de officio, Intermittere officiu^. Ne fair plus son debuoir.

Dutiful, or dewtifull. Officiosus, Obsequiosus, a, um. Qui fai^ du tout son
debuoir. Dutifully, or doing his duty. Officiose. En faisant son debuoir. S.
E. AMTE. A.
EAle, a fish. Anguilla, ae. foem. genesis Anguille. S. In the great river of
Ganges, are eales of thirty foot long, as Iul. Solin. Cap. 65. writes, and
Plin. lib. 9. cap. 3. nature. Hist. Ear. Auris, is. f. g. Oreille. Et
Auricularius, a, um. Of the ears, or pertaining to the ears. ac Auritus, ta,
tum. He that has great ears, or he that hears well. Ear lap, or nether
part of the ear. Auricula, Auricula infima, Ansa auriculae. Le tendron de l'
oreille. H. Ear lidde, or over part of the ear, Pinnula, ae. f. g. Ear of
corn. Spicum, ci. neut. ge. Et Spicus. m. g.* Spica, cae. foe. g. Espi de ble.
Call. Ear of corn not berded, called a polled ear. Spica mantica.* Mutila vel
mutica spica. Espi sans barbe. Call. Ear, or handle of a cup or pot. Ansa,
ae. foe. ge. Vne anse. Et Ansatus, a, u^. Having an ear or handle. Ear pick.
Auriscalpium, Specillum, li. neut. genesis Courioreille. S. Ear wax.
Gypselos*Cerumen, Aurium marmoratum, L'ordure des oreilles. Ear, or tylle
land. Aro, as. Colo, is. Fundum vel Agros aptare, Inaro, as. Campos exercere.
Terram moliri. Labourer la terre. Ear, or till land well. Exaro, as. Subigo,
is. Idem. Eared as corn is, or that has ears like corn. Spicatus, ta, tum.
Qui ha des espiz. S. That which is of ears, or made of ears of corn.
Spiceus, a, um. D' espis, fait d' espis. Call, Et Spicifer, a, um. That bears
ears. Qui port espis. Call.

Ear, or to shoot out ears as corn does. Spico, cas. Spicas emittere.
Getter horse les espis. Call. Ears hanging down. Demissae aures. Earing of
land, or laboring or tilling of land. Cultus agrorum, Agricultura, Aratio,
Agricolatio, onis. foe. g. Labor, ou labourage. S. Earl. Vide Earl. Earnest.
Vide Erneste* Earth. Tellus, ris. Terra, ae. foe. genesis Terre. S. Et Terreus, a,
um. Of the earth. De terre. S. Early. Vide Erlye. Earth being moiste. Humus,
mi. f. ge. La terre. S. Earth cast up to any purpose. Regestum, ti. n. ge.
Earthnutte. Bulbocastanum, ni. n. g. Earth, or earing of land. Sulcus, ci. m.
genesis As the first earth, that is the first plowyng or styrring. Primus sulcus.
For commonly to winter corn, the land is falowed and stirred four times, and
sown in the fifth, the first earth or tylth is said. Primus sulcus, The
second, Secundus sulcus, and sic de reliquis. Earthen cup or pot. Testa,
ae. Vas terreum. Pot de terre. Earthen, or of earth. Fictilis, le. Aiect. Qui
est fait de terre. S. Earthen vessel serving for all purposes. Fidelia, ae.
foe. ge. Vaisseau de terre. Call. Earthen pot, to sethe or boil meat in.
Olla, Aula, Olla fictilis. Pot de terre. H. Earthing of herbs, trees, or
vines. Pulueratio, onis. foe. genesis Earthly, or begotten or borne of the earth.
Terrigenus, a, um. Engendre de la terre. Call. Earthly, or of the earth.
Terrestris, tree. Terreus, a, um. De terre. Call. Tamen lege Terrestre animal,
Terrena area, Vas terreum, Domus Terracea. Ease. Leuo, as. Aiser. S. To ease
ones labor. Leuare labore^ alicui, Leuamento esse, Colleuare, Subleuare.
Soulager. S.

To live well and easily. Been and facile viuere. viure a son aise. S.

Thou art at thine ease. Been tibi est. Tu es a ton aise. S.

Ease. Leuamen, Leuamentum, Alleuamentum, Alleuatio, onis. foe. g. Soulagement.
Easy. Facilis, le. Lentus, a, um. Candidus, a, u^. Aise. Easy to be boiled.
Coctiuus, a, um. Qui est cuist facilement. S. Easy to be done. Procliuis, e.
Facilis, le. Facilis factu. Aise a fair. It is easy. Procliue est, In procliui
est, Nihil est negotij. Il est facile and aise. S.

Easy to be heard, seen, or understand. Perspicuus, a, um. Easy to be
overcome, or vanquished. Vincibilis, le. Aise a vaincre, Vincible. S. Easy to
be pleased. Mollis, le. Placabilis, le. Aise a appaiser. Easy to be sold.
Vendibilis, le. Vendible ou vendable. Easy to louse. Dissolubilis, le. Aise a
deslier. S. Easy to be spoken. Loquibilis. * Facile dictu. Easily. E facili,
Facile, Gracile, Lent, Molliter, Nullo negotio, Procliuiter, Candide,
Expedite, haud difficulter. Aiseement. S. Easily lying. Lentus, a, um. Virgil.
Easines. Facilitas, Perspicuitas, Procliuitas, Quies, Quietudo, Facultas,
Commoditas. Aisance. S. East. Eous, Oriens, it is. m. g. L' orient. S. East,
northeast wind. Caecias, ae. foe. g. Eastwynde. Subsolanus, ni. m. ge. Le vent
de Leuant. Easter. Pascha, ae. n. g. Natalis rediuiuae humanitatis, Natalis
instaurati generis humani, Cerealia Christiana, tunc enim omnes vescimur
sacrosancto pane, Pascha nomen Haebreu^ est: quod transitum signare vult.
Haebraice dictum phase, non a passione vt dormitant plerique: sed a tra^situ
denominatum. Pasque. S. Et Paschalis, le. Ang. Pertaining to Easter. Eat.
Carpere cibum, Comedo, is. Edo, is, di. Epulor, ris. Manduco, as. Mando, is.
Vescor, sceris. Esito, as. Cibum capere. Manger. Eat about, or gnawe a thing
about. Ambedo, is. Obedo, is. Manger tout entour. S. Eat after an other body.
Superedo, is. Ma^ger apres. To eat with one. Cibum capere cum aliquo. Manger
auec aucun.

Eat all about, or consume by eating. Obedo, dis. Vt supra. Eat as a canker
sore, or a worm does. Exedo, dis. Manger tout. Consumer. Call. Eat before
dynner. Iento, as. Desieuner. Call. Eat, drink, and make good cheer.
Congraecor, aris. Et Congraeco, as. Verbum neurum. To give to eat, In escam
dare, Esui dare, Cibu^ dare, Victum dare, Obescare. Bailler a manger. S.

Eat gredily, or rauenously. Heluor, aris. Obligurio, is. Voro, as.
Gourmander, deuorer gloutement. Eat licorously. Ligurio, is. Licharder. Call.
Eat like a glotton. Catillo, as. Lurco, as. Praerodo, is. Manger auidement.
Call. Eat meat at noone. Meridio, as. Et Meridior, aris. Eat often. Esito,
as. Manger souuent. Pra^sito, as. To dyne often. Disner souuent. Call. Eat up.
Exedo, is. Manger tout. Call. Eateable, or every thing that may be eaten.
Vescus, a, um. Edulis, le. Edilis, le. Qui est b^nne a manger. S. Any thing, or
all thing that is eaten. Edulium, lij. neut. genesis Toute chose qu'on mange. S.

Eater of daynty, delicate, or licorous meats. Ligurio, onis. Liguritor, oris.
m. g. Eater of much meat, or great eater, or always eating. Edax, cis.
Lurco, nis. Mando, nis. Manduco, nis. Manducus, ci. Vorax, cis. Tempestas
barathrumque macelli. Grand mascheur ou mangeur. H. Et Ambrionus. Is he that
eats his meat gaping like a churl or slouen.* He is a great eater. Est
adolesce^s escae maximae. Il est grand mangeur. S.

Eaters of raw flesh. Omophagi, Qui cruda carne vescu^tur, quales perhibe^tur
esse Aetoli. Thucid. Eawe sheep. Adasia. ae. foe. ge. Eawe which lately had a
lamb. Adaria, Adasia, ae. foem. genesis
E. ANTE. B.
EBbing of the Sea. Fluctrum, Fluxus. * Refluxus vel Recessus maris,
Reciprocatio maris, Refusio maris, Refugum mare, vel refluum. Le flot de la mer
qui va. H. Ebrietie. Ebrietas, tatis. foem. genesis Ebriete. S. Vide Dronkennes.
E. ANTE. C.
ECho, a sound or resonation of a voice. Iocosa imago. Horat. Echo, us. foe.
ge. Echo. Call. Echo to make, or to resounde. Resono, as. Resonner. Call. Each
other. Mutuo, Vicissim, Alterne. vide Every. Eclipse of the Sun. Defectus
Solis, Deliquium Solis. Eclipse de soleil. S. Eclipse of the Moon. Defectus,
vel Eclipsis Lunae, Deliquium Lunae, Silens Luna. Eclipse de lune. S.
E. ANTE. D.
EDenburth castle, or the castle of maidens, which is the chiefest fortress
in Scotland. Alata castra, Castrum puellarum. Ptol. in tabul. 1. Europ. cap. 3.
secund. lib. Geograph. Edge of a knyfe or other tole. Acies, ei. foem. ge. La
trenchant ou taillant d' un ferrement. S. Aciem trahere. To set an edge. Edge
of a phillet or roll, or of any thing which serves to such use. Taenea, ae.
foe. genesis Edge ones teethe, or astonnie them with biting or eating any thing
that is very sower. Dentes hebetare vel stupefacere. Acher ou agacer les dens
quand on mange quelque chose trop sure. Edge or brimme of any thing. Ora, ae.
f. g. Le board de quelque chose. Edged, or cutting on both sides. Anceps, it is.
Adiect. Trencheant de deux bouts, ou costez. S. Edgeling, or with an edge.
Caesim. Aduerbium. De taille. S. Edifle or to build. Aedificare, Inaedificare,
Architectari, Condere, Construere, Extruerere. Edifier. S. Edifieng or
buylding. Aedificatio, onis. foe. g. Exaedificatio, onis. foe. genesis
Constructio, onis. foe. genesis Edification. S. Edifier, or a buylder.
Aedificator, oris. m. ge. Structor, oris. m. ge. Edificateur. S. Educate.
Educc, cas. Educo, cis. Traduco, is. Nourir. Educate a child. Sustollere
puerum. Sustulit, Is referred to ye father, as Peperit to the mother. Education
or brynging up. Educatio, onis. foe. genesis Education. S.
E. ANTE. E.
Eele. Anguilla, a^. foe. ge. Anguille. H.
E. ANTE. F.
Effect. Effectus, tus. m. g. and Effectum, ti. n. ge. Efficientia, Vis, uis.
f. ge. Effect. S. The effect of amity is in mutual consent of the minds. Vis
amicitiae est in mutua animorum consensione.

They shall obtain, or have the same effect. Effectum eundem habebunt. Plin.
Junior.

To bring to effect. Efficio, is. Mettre en effect. S.

Effect, or chief point of the matter. Cardo rei. Cic. Le poinct. S.
Effectual. Efficax, cis. Om. genesis Efficace, qui a fore and virtue a fair
quelque chose. Effectually. Summate, Summatim, Sum.* Effeminate. Galbinus, a,
um. Mol, delicat. Call. Effeminate or womanly person. Batulus, a, um. * Mollis,
le. Galbinus, na, number. Lasciuus, a, um. Effoeminatus, ta, tum. Mol delicat,
lasciu. Call. Effeminate or to make delicate, tender, and apt to no hardines.
Effoemino, as. Emollire hominem. Effeminer. S. Effeminate, or to make like a
woman. Muliero, ras. Effoemine, as. Effeminer, debiliter. Call. Efficacy.
Efficacia, ae. foe. g. Efficacitas, tatis. foe. ge. Efficace. With efficacy.
Efficaciter. Efficacement. S.

Efficient causes* Efficie^tes causae. Les causes efficie^tes. Effusion.
Effusio, onis. foe. genesis Effusion. S. Effusion, or pouring forth of water.
Effusio aquae. Effusion d' eaue. S. Eftsoon, from the beginning. De integro.
Eftsoon, or in the same wise. Identidem. Eftsoon, or yet again. Abintegro,
Confestim, Denuo, Iterum, Rursum, Rursus, Secundo. Eftsoon, or often. Non
raro, Frequenter, Saepe, Saepius. Souuent.
E. ANTE. G.
EGale. Aequalis, le. Om. gener. Egual. S. Vide Equale. Egernesse. Acritudo,
inis. foe. genesis Acor, oris. mas. genesis Acrimonia, ae. foe. genesis Aigreur. Egerly.
Acriter, Acerrime, Acerbe. Aigrement. S. Egg. Ouum, ui. n. g. Oeuf. H. Egg
shell. Oui testa, Putamen, Cortex. Coquille. H. White of an egg. Oui albumen,
Oui albor, Oui candidum. Aubin. H.

Egg with two yoekes, or yolks. Ouum geminu^. Oeuf a deux moyaux. Egg,
called a wind egg. Ouum irritum, Subuentaneum, Hypenemium, Zephyrium vento
conceptum, e quo gigni nihil potest. Oeuf rempli de vent. H. Egg that is
addell. Ouum vrinum, Cynosurum ouum. Oeuf qui n' a point de germe. An egg
hatching. Ouum pullescens. Oeuf couue.

The strain of an egg. Vmbilicus oui. H.

Yolke of an egg. Oui luteum, Vitellus. Moyeu d' un oeuf. H.

Egg that is new laid. Ouum recens. Oeuf fraiz. Egg that is old laid.
Ouum requietum, non recens. Oeuf vieil. H. Soft egg. Ouum tremulum, molle,
sorbile. Oeuf en l' escaille H.

Egg that is rear. Ouum edurum, Non durum. Oeuf a demi dur and a demi mollet.
H. Egg fried. Ouum frixum. Oeuf poche. H. Egypt, or Ethiopia. Aegyptus,
Zigarum, ri. Et Aegyptius, a, um. vel Aegyptiacus, a, um. Ang. Of Egypt, or
Ethiopia. Egiptions. Aegyptij, Pharij, Zigarij. Egysthus. The proper name of a
cuckolde maker. Aegisthus, thy. m. g. vtitur per trans. Eglantyne. Cynorrhodos,
Rubus caninus* Eglantine or sweet brier. Cynosbaton, ti. n. genesis Egle. Aquila,
ae. foe. genesis Aigle. H. Egret, which is of the kind of a herne. Asterias.
Plin. lib. 10. cap. 60. Egregious, or excellent. Egregius, a, um. Excelle^s,
Eminens and praestans. Excellent. Call. Egregiously. Egregie, Aduerb.
Excellenter, Excellement. Call. Egrimonie herb. Eupatorium, ij. neut. ge.
Hepatitis, vel Hepatorium, ij. n. g. Aigremoine. S.
E. ANTE. I.
EYe. Oculus, li. m. g. L'oeil. Call. Et Ocellus. Diminut. Ang. A little eye.
Oeillet, petit oeil. Call. Et Oculatus, a, um. vel Oculeus, a, um. Ang. Full of
eyes, or having good and perfect eyes. Plein d' yeux, qui a bonne veue. Call.
Eye hole, the place where the eye lies, or the holowe of the eye. Sinus, Oculi
peluis, Cauum oculi. Le creux de l' oeil. H. Eye lidde. Cilium, lij. Gena, ae.
foem. ge. La peau qui couure les yeux. etc. Call. Eye very sharp, or quick of
sight. Oculus lynceus, Aquilinus oculus, Miluinus oculus. Veue tres aigue. H.
Eied like an hare, or whose eye liddes do not move. Logophthalmos.* Eied, or
having eyes, or holes like to eyes, or that has many little eyes. Ocellatus,
a, um. Qui a plufieurs petis yeux. Call. Eyes always moving and rolling. Arguti
oculi. Eyes never moving. Rigentes oculi. Eyes curious, and inquisitiue. Oculi
emissitij, qui huc atque illuc excurrunt, omnia curiose obseruantes. Yeus
regardans en tous endrois. H. Eyes which be, or look narrow. Contuosi oculi.
Festus. Eigh, or well. Eia, Interi. Eight. Octo. Adiect. indeclin. Plu. number.
Huit. S. Diatesseron. Of eight. Eight cornered. Octangulus, a, um. Res vel
figura dicitur octo angulos habens. Call. Eighty, or four score times.
Octogies, Aduerb. number. Quatre vingts fois. S. Eight and twenty. Duodetriginta,
Octouiginti. Eight feet having. Octopes, dis. De huit pieds. Call. Eight
hundred. Octingenti, Octingeni, Octingenteni, ae, a. pl. number. Huit cens. S.
Eight hundred fold. Octingentuplus.* Eight hundred in number. Octingenarius,
a, um. De huit cens. Call. Eight hundred times. Octingenties. Eight times.
Octies. Aduerb. numer. Huit fois. S. Eight times doubled. Octuplicatus, a, um.
Redouble huit fois. S. Eightene. Octodecim, Duodeuiginti. Indec. adiect. plu.
number. Dixhuict. S. Eight. Octauus, a, um. Octonarius, a, um. Octonus, a, um.
Huitieme. S. Eight hundred. Octingentesimus, a, um. Huit centiesme. Call.
Eighty, or four score. Octoginta, Octogenus, a, u^. Octantiesme. Call. Eyger.
Acer, cris, cre, vel cra, crum. Acerbus, a, um. Acetosus, a, um. Aigrie, sur.
Eiger somewhat. Subacidus, a, um. Aigret. S. Eiger to be. Aceo, es, cui. Estre
aigre. S. Eiger to make. Acido, as.* Eiger to wax. Acesco, scis. S' aigrir,
deuenir aigre. S. Eigerly. Acerbe, Acriter, Acerrime. Aigrement. S. Eigernes,
or tartenes. Acerbitas, it is. Acor, ris. m. g. Acrimonia, ae. f. g. Aigreur. S.
Eisell. Acetum, ti. n. g. Vinaigre. Call. Either. Seu, Ve, Vel. Ou. S.
E. ANTE. L.
ELbowe. Cubitus, ti. m. g. Cubitum, ti. neu. ge. Ancon, onis. mas. gener. Le
could, ou coubde, ou coubdee. S. Elder in age. Natu mayor, Primaeuus, a, um.
Veterior, ius. Senior, et hoc senius. Plus vieil. S. Elders, or forefathers.
Aui, orum. Maiores, rum. Veteres, rum. Ancestres. Eldest. Veterimus, a, um.
Maximus natu. Liu. Tresuieil. Elder berry. Acteon. Elder tree. Act, es, foe.
g. Sabucus, ci. Sambucus, ci. m. g. Sureau. S. Et Sambuceus, a, um. Ang. Of an
Elder tree. De sureau. S. Ele. Anguilla, ae, f. g. Poison nomme anguille.
Elect. Eligo, is, egi. Optionem facere, Optare, Adoptare, Delectum facere, vel
habere. Eslire. S. Elect or appoint an heir, as by way of adoption. Adopto,
as. Adopter. Call. Election or chose. Co^ditio, Electio, onis. f. g. Election.
Election or choice of things. Rerum delectus, Electio, onis. foe. g. Election.
Election of good from from evil. Discretio, onis. f. g. The election of
pretours. Praetoriana comitia. L'election des preteurs.

Election to take. Sumere optionem. Free election. Soluta optio eligedi.
Election libre.

Electuary, which the apothecaries call otherwise Lochet. Ecligma, atis, vel
Eclegma, atis. n. g. Electuaire que les apothicaires appellent autreme^t
Lochot. Elegancy. Elegantia, ae. foe. genesis Elegance. S. Elegant. Elegans, it is.
Lautus, a, um. Elegant. S. Elegant person. Philocalus.* Elegantly. Eleganter,
Rotunde, Laute. Elegamment. To speak without eligancy. Horride dicere, sieve
inculte. Parler sans elegance. S.

To speak eligantly. Laute loqui, vel eliganter. Parler elegamment. S.

He writes eligantly. Scribit eleganti structura, Scripta sua sunt piperata,
Oratorum facundiae cohaerentissima. Scribit terse, nitide, and expolite.
Scripta sua sunt miro verborum cultu expolita. Nihil scribit, nisi ingenio
perfectum, and industria elaboratum. Scriptis suis nihil potest esse, neque
doctius, neque sapidius. Scriptorum suoru^ Genio delectantur omneis, tam lepida
sunt. Scripta sua diuite quadam sententiarum atque verborum copia, aurei
fluminis instar exuberant. Spirante Minerua hoc elucubratum est. Scripta sua
sunt eloquentiae pigmentis adeo venustata, vt in ijs eloquij lumen sple^descat.
In suis scriptis velut quoddam eloquij Latialis lumen splendeat. Scriptis suis
inest concinna facilitas, and facilis concinnitas. Nemo est, quem festiuitas
sui styli no^ protinus pelliceat. Beatissima in scriptis eius rerum and
verborum copia. Multum ei inest eruditae facilitatis. Homo est verborum delectu
religiosus, and proprietate perspicuus. Vir est verborum supellectile dives,
Compositione expeditus, Veneribus oratorijs gratissimus. In scribendo videtur
esse Gratiarum choro stipatus. Eius stylus placidus, sedatus, ineffectatus.
Stylus est sui vndique similis, apertus, simplex, modestiae plenus, doctus,
eruditus, petpolitus, nihil vsquam habens scabri, contorti, conturbati. Quem
non (obsecro) suauitas illa suorum scriptorum, tanta elegantia tam dives tot
sales, tot aculei argutiae, tanta eruditio, tanta varietas, tantaeque vbique
Veneres and gratiae delectant? Scripta sua sunt et venustate promiscua, and
perspicuitate clara, munditi^que verboru^m perornata sunt lepidis and venustis
vocum modulis vincta, sunt Demosthenio lepore exculta, miro verborum lenocinio
phalerata, multijugis sermonis oratorij phaleris redimita, elega^ti ac absoluta
verborum cultura elaborata, non sunt a Romani eloquij puritate aliena, sunt
venustissimis delectisque verbis, ac sententijs plena. Literae suae sunt non
solum eruditae, (quod illis perpetuum est) verumetiam gratijs, leporibus,
salibus, sic vndique scaren^es, vt nemo sit tam plane agelastos, quin his
legendis plane hilarescat. Illi perpetuu^ est, peculiare, and proprium quam
eruditissime scribere. Quae scribit, complere apes floribus, and nectare
videntur. Quae scribit, abunde lectorem reficiunt, tam grata sunt and
elegantia. Mirum est, quantum scriptis suis sit humanitatis and venustatis,
quam arguta, quam dulcia, quam nitida sunt, dictu mirum est. Nihil non elegans,
pensiculate and enucleate scribit. Lepide and venuste scribit sic, vt prorsus
melius fieri posse nihil censeas. Scripta sua sunt multo venustatum color
depicta and variata. Sua scripta eximiam dicendi facultatem referu^t. Scripta
sua sunt ita ad amussim perfecta, atque ad summum absoluta, vt ne ab liuore
quidem aut Momo valiant reprehendi. Suis pereruditis scriptis summam verborum
elegantiam, summum nitorem, splendorem, candorem adiu^git. Scripta sua sunt
omni elegantiarum genere ornatissima. Scriptis suis nihil est doctius,
candidius, politiusque. Illud suum scribendi genus minime triuiale est, immo,
cultum, subactumque sparsum denique optimarum lectionum fruge. Compositissima
sunt sua scripta, and quam fieri potest elaborata. Scriptis suis haud parum
lucis and splendoris inest. Musae omnes certatim ei scribenti aspirant. Nihil
non crudite and ornate, nihil non destincte, and ad amussim scribit. Sua
scripta adeo fluunt, vt secum rapiant lectores. Sua scripta multam variamque
recipient lectionem. Suis scriptis verborum mundities nunquam non accedit. In
suis scriptis nihil videas, nisi politie^ verborum, beatamque rerum and
sententiarum copiam. Scriptis suis accedit Romanae proprietatis peritia, sum
admiranda. Scripta sua sunt omni Venere chariora, longeque cultiora, sunt ad
Aristophanis lucernam elucubrata. Oleum, lucernamque, sua scripta resipiunt.
Demosthenis aut Epicteti lucernam olent. Varijs Rhetorum schematis lasciuiunt.
Innumera Latini sermonis vbertate, in star laeti graminis luxuriant. Est
festiuus in suis scriptis nitor and gratissima latinarum vocum exuberantia.

Elements or principles, whereof al things have their beginning, which be
four, Air, Earth, Fire, and Water. Elementa, orum. n. g. Elemens,
Commencemens de toutes chooses. Call. Elements, or principles of Grammar.
Grammatices elementa. Elements, whereof lettres be made sillables. Litterarum
elementa. And the self letters be called, Litterae elementariae, vel
Primitiuae. Elephant a beast (in Mauritania) of wonderful strength, the
greatest among all beasts, and comes nearest to humane sense: Of the nature
of the Elephant, read Plin. lib. 8. and Iul. Solin. cap. 38. and Munster. in
Ind. Hist. Eliphas, antis. m. g. Elephantus, ti. m. g. Barrus, ri. m. g. Un
El^phant. To braye like an Eliphant. Barrio, is. Braire comme un Eliphant. S.

The braying of an Eliphant. Barritus, tus. Le cri d' un Eliphant. S. Et
Elephantinus, a, um. Of an Elephant. D' elephant.

The long snoute of the Eliphante, hanginge down to the ground, wherewith he
fyghteth or defends him self in fighting with the Dragon, as Solinus cap. 38.
writes. Proboscis, idis. foe. genesis

Elephantes louse, or a tree called Pediculum Elephantis, Anacardus, vel dum.*
Eleven. Vndecim. Ind. Vndeni, ae a, plu. number. Onze. Eleventh. Vndecimus,
Vndenus, a, um. Onzieme. S. Eleven times. Vndecies. Aduerb. O^ze fois. S.
Elfes, or Fayres. Lamiae, arum. foem. genesis Ab antiquis mulieres esse
putaba^tur, sieve verius daemonu^ quaedam phantasmata, quae formosarum mulierum
specie assumpta, pueros pariter ac iuuenes blanditijs allectos deuoraba^t. Call.
Vide Faires. Elfe, or a little Dwarf. Pomilio vel Pomilius. Nanus, Semihomo,
Homuncio, Homunculus, Homulus, Pumilus, li. m. g. Un nain, ou naintre. S. Elfes
or Faires haunting waters. Naides, dum. Nymphae fontium. Elfes haunting woods.
Napae ae, arum, Syluarum deae, quae and dryades dicuntur. Call. Elicampana, an
herb. Inula campana, Nectarea herba, Helenium, Enule. S. Et Nectareus, a, um.
Ang. Potion made with that herb.* Elle, or an elne. Vlna, ae. f. g. Vne aulne.
S. Elm tree. Atinia, ae. Vlmus, mi. f. g. Orme. S. Elmye, or of an elm.
Vlmeus, a, um. D' orme. Elm grove, or where elmes grow. Vlmarium, ij. neut.
ge. Vne ormaye. S. Eloquence. Copia, Eloquentia, Facundia, Grandiloquentia, ae,
f. g. Eloquence. S. Eloquent. Eloquens, Facundus, Grandiloquus, a, um.
Rhetoricus, a, um. Eloquent S. Very eloquent. Pereloquens, Consultus
eloquentiae. Fort eloquent. S.

He is eloquent. Est Romana facundia nobilitatus, Latina eloquentia
spectabilis, Eloquij Latialis nitore conspicuus. Homo ornatioris eloquij. Homo
ornatissimae facu^diae. Cultus and eloquens. Facunda ac nitida elocutione
vtitur. Loquitur omni barbary procul repulsa. Singularis eloquij suauitas ore
suo dimanat. Est velut quida^ eloquij Romani Deus. Cum summa verborum elegantia
sermonisque venustate, atque gratia declamat. Ciceronis elegantiam atque
iucunditatem in dicendo, egregie exprimit. Qui eloquentiam (quae in eo est
singularis) maiorem desideret, is mihi suauitatem in melle desiderare vide.
tur. Tantum cultus and nitoris inest suae linguae, vt ad solam audientium
delectationem genitus videatur. Suaui ioco et lepore valet. Rhetorissat, and
Musas Latias studiose colit. Hic Demosthenem, Tulliumque vincit, linguae
praecipuos, ducesque summos. Est latina facundia celebratus. Vir cultissima
facu^dia praecellens. Orator est haud hercle ignobilis. Est inter Romanae
linguae Quirites eloquentissimus. In suo ore purissima residet Latinae linguae
proprietas. Sessitat in labris Suada diserta suis.
In labris Pitho stat reuerenda suis.
Suis labris persuadendi deam (quae a Graecis Pitho, a nobis Suada and Suadela
dicitur) sessitasse nemo nescit. Orationis and eloquij suauitate clarus. Est
Latinae linguae delicium. Romano splendore suum venustat eloquium. Ter se,
nitide, ac press loquitur. Mira inest verbis suis elegantia. Loquitur summa
verborum munditie atque luce. Nihil suo eloquio politius, excultius, eruditius.
Intelligunt omnes hunc tantum facundiori eloquio caeteris praestare, quantum
eruditione singulari. Tam facundus existimatur, vt si ipse Hermes coelo
descenderet, nec elegantiore, nec beatiore facundia vsurus videatur. Latin
loquax. Homo omnium facundissimus, que^ optimo iure Suadae medullam quis
dixerit. Quae cunque eloquitur incredibili verborum suauitate dulcescu^t.
Incredibili quadam suauitate verborum vtitur. Ei eloquenti illa Homerici senis
mella profluere videntur. Nihil non erudite, and ornate, nihil no^ destincte,
and ad amussim loquitur. Oration sua pura est, aperta and facilis. Dulcis sermo,
proprius tersus, exquisitus, and grauis. Eum dicas vberrimu^ quoddam
eloquentiae horreum. Musam quandam, non hominem loqui contenderes. Illi
rhetorica subseruit, and ad vnguem nota est. Illi domestica sunt, and
familiaria rhetorices praecepta. Dum loquitur, iurares esse Demosthenem, aut si
quis Demosthene superior esse potest. Exactissima dice^di facultate valet. Suo
ex ore fluit oration melle suauior. Sua oration adeo fluit, vt secum rapiat
auditorem. Hunc praeter summam eruditionem dos eloquentiae co^mendat. Mellita
quaedam suauitas suo ori insidet. Tam expolite loquitur, vt ne Cicero quidem
politius. Nihil suo sermon suauius, mellitius, nitidius. Est quaeda^ medulla
Suadae. Flexanimam quandam Suadelam in dicendo refert. Sui sermones e ditissimo
quodam pectore in morem lepidissimi fontis scaturiunt. Pure, integreque
loquitur. Sincere, candide, nitideque eloquitur. Incorruptus est illi sermo,
nemo enim tam ferreus, quem suus ille purus, syncerusque sermo non protinus
demulceat. Est etenim praestantissimus cum omni genere eruditionis, tum vel
maxim linguae Latialis gloria. Linguae Latialis gloria insignis. Nullus est
dicendi ca^dore eo superior. Vir in narrando mirae iucunditatis, and clarissimi
candoris. Tanta est eloquentia praeditus, vt omnes alios quoscunque putes aut
ranas Seriphias, aut Acanthias cicadas. Tanta venustas illius sermonibus inest,
and polities, and Sappho (dixerim) plusquam Attica, vt nihil suo eloquio sit
venustius. Vir dicendi maiestate, and orandi praestantia clarissimus. Hoc
homine facu^dius quicquam dicere mihi religio est. Nihil suo eloquio tersius,
cultius, castigatius, emaculatiusue audiri potest. Hic vnicus omnes dicendi
Veneres amplexatur. Musarum blanditiae and illecebrae ei sane quam frequentes
sunt. Est supra quam dici queat eloquentissimus. Est typus atque simulachrum
totiusque Latialis politiei effigies. Huius viri facundia plerisque videtur ad
formandam eloque^tiam sola sufficere. Rhetoru^ flosculis venustatus veteribus,
oratorijs lenocinijs, coloribus, pigmentis, cerussis, myrothecijs, apparatu,
luxu, diuitijs, opibus, blanditijs, illecebris, venustate, luce, munditia,
mundo, lepore, concinnitate, artificio, dexteritate, polity, ornamento, iocis,
salibus, varietatte, splendore, decore, honestamento, ornatu, stylo, gratia,
elegantia, eloquio, co^dimento, aculeis, melle, candore, festiuitate, nitore,
gemmis, cultu, delectu, eminentia, facundia, amoenitate, praestantia,
iucunditate, hilaritate, modestia, modulis, modulamine, harmonia, acrimonia,
acutia, concentu, solertia, suauitate, suauiloquio, suaueolentia, vrbanitate,
comitate, gratiaque verborum excomptus, comis, placidus, argutus, gratiosus. Ex
Ciceronis ludo, tanquam ex equo Troiano innumeri Oratoriae disciplinae heroes
fortissimi prodierunt, in quoru^ albo haud absurd annumerandus est. Huic est
eloquentia, and insignis oration, acuminis and solertiae plena. Suae orationi
inest ornatus, cum summa perspicuitate. Orationi suorum verborum inest
facilitas, and facilitati inuentionum non deest ornatus. In hoc homine reginam
rerum eloquentiam inuenias: in quo sunt Catonis grauitas, Caelij lenitas,
Gracchi impetus, Caesaris calor, Hortensijque distributio, and Ciceronis
opulentia.

Elequently. Eloquenter, Facunde, Rhetorice. Else where. Alias, Adu. Alibi,
Aliubi. Ailleurs, en autre part, and lieu. Call.
E. ANTE. M.
Ambassador. Apostolus, li, m. g. Legatus, ti. m. genesis Orator, oris. m. g.
Embassadeur. S. Et Legatio, onis. foe. g. The office of Embassage. L' office d'
embassade. S. Embrace. Amplector, Praehenso, as. Brachijs amplecti, Quasi
imbrachiare, Amplexari, Amplexus dare, Tenere aliquem complexu, In complexum
alicuius venire. Embrasser. S. Embrace an others accion, or title. Litem
propria^, vel suam facere. Embrace round about. Circumplector, eris. Embrasser
tout entour. S. Embrace, or to houlde an opinion. Comprehe^sam animo sententiam
aliquam habere. Tenir and embrasser vne opinion. S. Embracing. Amplexus, us.
Symplegma, it is. n. genesis Complexus, us. m. g. Embrassement. Embring days.
Feriae esuriales. Embrodered garments. Picturatae vestes, vel acupictae
vestes. Embroderer, or an embrotherer of clothes or such like, with nedle
work. Phrygio, Limbolarius, Plumarius, Acupictor, oris. mas. genesis Brodeur,
Bordeur. S. Embroder. Plumo, as. Brother ou Border. Emerade stone. Smaragdus,
di. mas. genesis Vne esmeraude. Call. Mira sunt, quae Smaragdo Marbodaeus tribuit
his versib. Co^modus iste lapis, s^utantibus abdita fertur:
Cum praescire volunt, aut deuinare futura.
Auget opes idem, sese reuerenter haben^i
Omnibus in causis dans persuasoria verba,
Tanquam facundi vis sit sermonis in illo. etc.
De Smaragdo lege, Iul. Sol. cap. 25.
Of an Emeraude or Smaragde. Smaragdinus, a, um. Qui est d' esmeraude. S.

Emeraudes or piles, a disease in the fundement like teats or wartes.
Haemorrhois, hidis. foe. ge. Hemorrhoides, Caquesangue. Eminency, or
excellency. Eminentia, ae. f. g. Emine^ce. Eminent, or toward. Eminens, it is.
Eminulus, la, lum. Eminent and surpassant les autres S. Eminent to be. Emineo,
es. Se monstrer. S. Emolument. Commodum, di. Emolumentum, ti. neut. genesis
Emolument prouffit. S. Emotte, aute, and pismier. Formica, cae. foem. genesis
Formie. H. Empayre. Detero, is, triui. Deterius facere, Ingrauare, Affligere.
Empirer. S. Empeache. Occupo, as. Empescher. S. Emperor. Imperator,
Induperator, toris. ma. ge. Empereur. S. Emperous palaice, or pauilion.
Augustale, lis, n. g. Emperesse. Imperatrix, tricis. f. g. Emperiere, ou
Emperatrice. S. Empire, or rule. Imperium, ij. n. g. Empire. S. To be under ye
Roman empire. Imperio Romano teneri. Estre subs l' empire Romain. S.

Employe. Impendo, is. Imployer. S. Employe labor. Consumere operam. Employe,
or to spend much time. Ponere multos dies. Employ all ones power and wit,
to compass a thing. Profundere vires animi, atque ingenij. Contendere, vel
extendere omnes neruos, sieve vires in re aliqua. Employer toute sa force a
fair quelque chose. S. Emploie study. Confer studiu^. Employer son estude.
Employe vainly, or in vain. Frustro, as. Frustror, aris. Frustrer. S.
Employed. Impensus, a, um. Addictus, a, u^. Employe. Empty. Ina^s, e. Vacuus,
a, um. Vanus, a, um. Obinanis, e. vuyde. S. Empty any thing. Anclo, as. Antlo,
as. Exantlo, as. Exinanio, is. Vacuefacio, cis. Vacuo, as. Inanio, is. Euacuo,
as. Vuyder. Emptye cups, or pottes. Decapulo, as. Empty to make. Inanio, is.
Depleo, es. Desemplir. S. Emptied, or made void. Euacuatus, ra, tum. Inanitus,
ta, tum. Exinanitus, ta, tum. vuyde. S. Emptynes. Inanitas, Vacuitas, Vanitudo,
inis. f. ge. vuydete. S. Emulation. Emulatio, onis. foe, g. Emulation. S.
Emulator, or he that does envy an other. Aemulator, toris. m. g. Emulateur,
qui ha envy sur aucun. S.
E. ANTE. N.
ENamell, vernyshe, or any other such thing wrought with fire. Encaustum, ti.
neut. genesis Esmail. S. Enamell, or to lay on, or dress with enamell. Encausto
pingere. Esmailler. S. Enameled. Encaustus, ta, tum. Esmaille. S. Enameller.
Encaustes, tae. m. g. Esmailleur. Enamelling. Encaustica pictura, Encaustice,
es. f. g. Esmaillure. Enarration, or telling forth of a tale plainly.
Enarratio, onis. foe. ge. Enchaunte, or to work sorcerie. Fascino, as. Canto,
as. Incanto, as. Excanto, as. Enchanter. To enchaunte one, and to turn away
his mind or senses by magical arts. Auertere sensus magicis artibus.
Enchanter aucun. S.

Enchaunter. Incantator, toris. m. g. Charmeur. S. Enchauntment, or sorcerie.
Aruspicium, Fascinatio, Fascinum, ni. Haruspitium, Praestigiu^.* Incantatio,
onis. foe. g. Carmen, enis. n. ge. Enchantement. Et Incantamentum, ti. n. g.
Idem. Enclination. Vide Inclination. Incline. Acclino, as. Accomodo, as.
Inclino, as. Proclino, as. Reclino, as. Propendeo, es. Encliner. S. Inclined.
Accliuis, e. Accomodatus, Procliuis, e. Inclinatus, ta, tum. Enclin. Enclose,
or to shut in. Claudere, Concludere, Includere. Enclorre. S. Enclose, or to
shut in with walls, or hedges. Consepire, Intersepire. Enclorre and ensermer
de hayes. S. To enclose a garden with hedges that beasts come not in. Hortum
ab incursu pecudum munire. Enclorre un Iardin de hayes que le bestial n' y
enter. S.

Enclosed, or shut in. Clausus, sa, sum. Conclusus, sa, sum. Inclusus, sa, sum.
Enclos. S. Encombre, or to ouercharge one with businesses. Obruere aliquem
negotijs. Encombrer un homme d' affairs. S. To be encombred with affairs.
Obrui negotijs, Molestis operosisque negotijs implicari. Estre encombre d'
affairs. S.

Encomberaunces. Offensiones, Infortuniae, Res aduersae. Encombriers. S.
Encourage. Animo, as. Animos facere, Accendere animos, Animos addere, vel dare.
Encourager. S. Vide Courage. Increase, or to become bigger, or more.
Adolescere, Accres^ere, Adaugescere, Augescere incrementis, Crescere,
Excrescere, Gliscere, Ingrandescere, Inolescere, Prouenire, Increme^tum
recipere, vel accipere, Surgere. Croistre. Increase. Incrementum, ti. n. g.
Croissance. S. Increase great ryuers of little brokes. Corriuor, aris.
Corriuo, as. Call. Increase of cattle, which bredeth yearly. Restibilis
foecunditas, Co^tinua, and no^ intermissa foecu^ditas. Increase riches.
Accumulare opes. Encroche. Intercipio, is. Intercludo, is. Protermino, as.
Prendre par surprinse. S. Encroche the kings high way. Intercipere, vel
Intercludere vestigia publica. Encroche a footepathe, or to stop up a foot
way. Intercludere gregariam semitam, vel via^. Endamage. Damnifico, as. Obsum,
es. Damnum alicui agere, Circumscribere aliquem re aliqua. Endommager. S.
Endamagement, damage, or hurt. It is called damage Quasi damnum agere, vel
damni actio, Dispendium, Incommodum, Noxa, Damnum, Detrimentum, Captio, Fraus.
Dommage. Picardis, Damage. S^ See that Curious have no endamagement or hurt.
Marcum Curium sartum and rectum (vt aiunt) ab omni incommodo, detrimento,
molestia, syncerum, integrumque conserues. Guard Que Curious n' ait aucun
dommage.

To receive endamagement, hurt or damage. Detrimentum accipere, vel recipere,
Incommodum subire vel capere, Damnum accipere, vel contrahere, Facere damnum
vel detrimentum, Pati iacturas, Capere vel accipere calamitatem. Receuoir
dommage. S.

To bring endamagement, hurt, or damage. Apportare damnum, Iacturam dare vel
afferre, Detrimentum afferre vel infer, Incommodare, Iniuriam facere, Damno
esse, Nocere, Detrime^tum iniungere, Fraudem far, Fraudi vel captioni esse,
Male mereri de aliquo, Afficere aliquem damnis, Dare incommodum vel damnu^,
Mactare malo vel damno. Porter dommage. S.

Without the endamagement of any person. Sine cuiusquam iniuria. Sans le
dommage de person.

That which brynges endamagement or hurt. Dispendiosus, Detrimentosus, sa,
sum. Qui port dommage. S.

Endamagable, or hurtefull. Damnosus, Detrime^tosus. Maleficus, a, um.
Pernicialis, le. Perniciosus, Improbus, Calamitosus, Damnificus, a, um.
Dommageable. S. End. Finis, Modus, Terma, Terminus, ni. m. genesis La fin de
toutes chooses. Call. End or conclusion of a matter. Co^clusio, Fastigiu^, ij.
Finis, Successus, sus. m. g. Fin and Conclusion. S. End of a place, or
streate. Vltimus locus, vel Vltima platea. End, or to finishe. Finio, is.
Perficio, cis. Termino, as. Desinere, Finem facere, Concludere, Finem imponere.
Finer. S. End a strife, or variaunce. Componere lites. End, or to finishe
life by famyne. Finire vitam inedia. Finer sa vie par faim. S. Ended. Finitus,
a, um. Perfectus, a, um. Profligatus, a, um. Fine. S. Endewed. Imbutus,
Praeditus, Suffusus, a, um. Indutus, ta, tum. Ornatus, ta, tum. Orne.
Endeavor. Conatus. Nisus, us. Obsequela, lae. Molitio, onis. foem. ge. L'
effort qu' on met a fair quelque chose. S. Endeavor, and to travail to do a
thing. Conor, aris. Nitor, eris. Adnitor, eris. Connitor, eris. Enitor, eris.
Neruos and vires in re aliqua adhibere, Intendere neruos. S' efforcer and
trauailler a fair quelque chose. S. With great endeavor. Magno nisu,
vehementer. Efforcement. S.

I will endeavor to do this thing. etc. Totis adnitar neruis. Totis viribus
agam. Sudabo huic rei. Incumbam in hanc rem. Ad hoc inuigilabo. Animo connitar,
and labor contendam. Velis and remis eo contendam. Velis remisque eo
festinabo. Sudabo vehementer in hac re vt fiat. Labor summo, nixu ingenti,
summa open, summa vi adnitar. Adlaborabo pro virili part. Labor vigilanti ad
hoc enitar. Pro virili part, totoque molimine conabor. Toto contendam conatu.
Destinabo huc omnes meos conatus. Manibus pedibusque connitar. Totis neruis
adlaborabo. Totos conatus huc inflectam.

Endite. Defero, rs. Postulo in iudicio. Enditer, ou Endicter. S. To endite
one. Defer, Nomen alicuius indicare. Enditer. S.

Endite to the praise of other. Pango, is, pigi, vel anxi. Compono, is.
Composer. Endite, or to make a book. Librum scribere, Conscribere, Componere.
Composer quelque liver. S. Endite, compose, or to write verses. Condere carmen,
Pangere carmen, Componere, Co^texere, Fingere. Composer and escrire des verse.
S. Endited, or forbidden. Interdictus, a, u^. Interdit. Call. Enditers, or false
accusers. Excursores, Emissarij, Quadruplatores, Sycophantae, Dilatores.
Endicteurs and faulx accusateurs. S. Enditement. Delatio, onis. foe. ge.
Endictement. S. Enditing, or forbidding. Interdictum, ti. n. genesis Endyue, an
herb. Intybus, Seris. Intybum, Intibus satiuus, vel hortensis. Intubu^
satiuum, Latifoliu^, vulgo Endiuia. Scariola. Scariole. H. Endive. Pals.
Endeles, or without end. Perpes, it is. Perennis, e. Perpetuus, a, um.
Perpetuel. Call. Endowe. Doto, tas, tare. Dover. Endowed. Dotatus, a, um.
Praeditus, a, um. Dove. Endowementes, which be of two kinds, the one of the
Soul, called Animi dotes. The other of the body, called the gifts of nature:
as beauty, health, riches, strength. Dotes corporales. Endure. Duro, as.
Perpetior, eris, ti. Tolero, as, verb. male patientis. Sto, as. Subeo, is.
Supersum, es. Sufferre, Pati, Perferre, Far, Sustinere. Endurer and souffrir
quelque chose. S. Endure all summer. Peraestuo, as. Endure all winter.
Perhyemo, as. Endure, or suffer patiently. Perfero, rs. Tolero, as. Aequo animo
pati. Endurer patiemment. S. Endure pain. Pati laborem. Endure to an end.
Pertolero, as. Perfero, rs. Endurer iusques a la fin. S. Enduring, or
sufferaunce. Perpessio, Toleratio, Tolerantia, ae. f. g. Endurement. S.
Enduring, or sufferinge. Patiens, it is. Perpetiens, Tolerans. Endurant. S.
Enemy. Aduersarius, hostis, Inimicus, Iniquus, Saeuus, Ennemi. S. Et hostilis,
le. Ang. Of an ennemy, or enemies. D' ennemi, ou d' ennemis. S. The enemies do
fly for fear. Pauor retro aduehit hosts. Les ennemis senfuyent de paour. S.

Enemy to all men, a common enemy. Communis hostis. L' ennemi commun de tous.
S. Enemy ancient. Hostis veteranus. Ancien ennemi. S. Enemy that has war
with us. Perduellis, lis. m. genesis Nostre ennemi qui ha guerre contre nous.
Enemy that is hard and violente. Aduersarius acerrimus. Un dur ennemi and
violent. S. To declare him self an enemy. Inimicitias indicere, vel
demintiare. Se declairer ennemi. S.

To esteem as an enemy. Pro host habere, vel in numero hostium habere. Estimer
ennemi S.

Enemy, deadly or mortal. Infestus. Aduersarius capitalis, Inimicus
acerbissimus. Ennemi mortel. S. To render him self to his enemies. Dedere se
hostibus, In ditione^ venire. Se render aux ennemis.

To kill his enemies. Offerre mortem hostibus. Tuer fes ennemis. S.

To be an enemy. Inimico, as. Inimicor, caris. Depon. Estre ennemi.

In manner or facion of an enemy. Hostiliter, Inimice. Ensacon d' ennemi. S.

Enemitie. Inimicitia, ae. f. g. Inimitie. S. Enforce. Nitor, eris, ixus sum.
Vrgeo, es. Conor, aris. S' ^si^ertuer, ou s' euertuer. S. Vide Endeavor.
Enfourme. Informo, as. Former. Call. Enfraunchise. Emancipo, as. Immunem
reddere, Emanciper, nettre horse de sa puissance. Call. Enfraunchise a servant,
and to set him at liberty. Manumittere seruu^, Emancipate, liberare, liberate
donare, Asserere manu, Asserere. Affra^chir un seruiteur, and buy donner
liberte. S. To be en^^ afichised. Immunitate^ habere. Estre affranchi.

Enfraunchysed. Emancipatus, Immunis, e. Exemptus, a, um. Emancipe. S. Eximius,
a, um. Affranchi. Enfranchiser, or he that makes one free. Liberator, oris, m.
g. Affranchisseur. S. Enfraunchised person, which is made free from bondage,
servitude, or villenage, he that is made a free man. Libertinus, Libertus, ti.
m. g. Affranchi and mis en liberte. Call. Enfraunchising of a bondeman.
Vindicta. tae. f. ge. Vindicta potius dicitur virgula praetoris inter dicenda
verba solemnia serui capiti manumittendi imponenda * Immunitas, Liberatio,
onis. f. g. Affranchissement. S. Engine of a door. Vertebra, ae. foe. g. *
Engyn, or crafty invention. Machina, ae. foe. ge. Ma. chine, subtle invention.
Call. Engine. Telum, li. neut. genesis England. Anglia, ae. Britannia, Albion ab
albis montibus, Alter orbis. Britannia mayor. Angleterre. quasi Anglia terra.
S. Et Anglicanus, a, um. vel Anglicus, a, um. Ang. Of England. D' angleterre.
Anglia, quae Britannia ab eruditis dicitur, Insula est insignis in Oceano, quae
vndique a circumfuso pelago complexa est, nusquam iuncta co^tinenti: Sed ab
omni orb penitus diuisa. Quae quondam ab albis rupibus, quas mare vndique
abluit, Albion dicebatur. Hanc primum Troes incoluerunt, qui strata Troia
fugerunt excisam patriam, Paladisque oraculo class in hanc insulam appulerunt,
atque Gigantes tunc insulam colentes multis deuictos praelijs expugnauerunt.
Hanc postmodum lo^go temporis tractu Saxones (qui sunt illustres Alemaniae
populi) subiecere. Ea debellata, Angela imperatrix agros, fundu^, opes, atque
trophaea inter legatos Saxonicos contribuit. Nec non vt tum gentis, tum linguae
memoria semper maneret, Angela cuius ductu populata est, Angliam tellurem illam
denominauit: quanquam plaerique Angliam veluti orbis nostri Angulum praedicent
dictam. Sita est (inquit Plinius. lib. 4. cap. 16.) ex aduerso Galliae,
Germaniae, atque etiam Hispaniae, licet longiore interuallo. Agrippa
longitudinem eius prodidit esse. DCCC.M. passuum, latitudinem vero. CCC. M.
Call. and circuitus omnis insulae non amplius octies decies centenis millibus
passuum, atque sic minus ducentis milliarijs, quam Caesar supputarat. Pol.
Virg. Haec vero de recentioribus authoribus bona venia traducenda putaui.
Britannia insularu^ in Europa co^tinens maxima, a meridie in septentrionem
protenditur forma triquetra. A promontorio enim quod Vecte^ Insulam ad meridiem
prospicit, vsque Cathanesiam vltimam Scotiae partem, quae ab Orchadibus insulis
pelago non admodum latebroso, aut magno dirimitur, milliaria continentur. 600.
A Douero autem extrema Cantij fine, quae a Gallia non vltra. 30. distat mill.
in vltimum Cornubiae promontorium, quod Aermoricum respicit, Milliaria
habentur. 320. A quo rursus per Hibernicum mare ad septentrionem progrediens,
ad Cathanesiam integrae illius insulae partem supremam inueniuntur. 800. mill
passus. Ambitus insulae. 1800. continet milliaria, licet Caesar computauerit.
2000. Haec in imperia duo partitur. Pars australior Anglia dicta est, and
fertilior, and vrbibus frequentior, and Moribus ciuilior. Quae aute^
septentrionalior pars est, Scotia nu^cupatur, non montibus inaspera, atque
intentiss. frigoribus sterilissima. Anglia a Scotia ad Orie^tem Tueda, ad
occidentem Solueo fluuio dirimitur, mediterranea mons Cheuiota discriminat.
Obiacent Scotiae ad Occidentem in Hibernico mare insulae Hebrides, sieve Eboniae
numero. 43. Quarum prima and episcopali sede, and antiquiss. Druidum memoria
Mona erat, nostro oeuo anglo paret. Ad Septentrionem sunt. 31. Orcades insulae,
and secundum Pomponium. 30. Insulae Oceani septentrionalis vltra Britanniam,
and Hyberniam non nimium inter sese distantes, hordeo, piscibus, cuniculisque
locupletissimae, inter quas tenet principatu^ Pamonia, tu^ magnitudine alijs
excellens, tum sede episcopali, regio quoque castro pollita. Vltima omniu^ in
Scoti ditione est Thule, polo gaudens eleuato gradibus. 63. in qua cum Phoebus
Cancrum teneat (quod fit in Iunio mense) sunt sublustres noctes, and perbreues,
aut tenebrae nullae. Idiomata, vermaculique aut vulgares, quibus vtuntur
incolae, sermones sunt quinque. Videlicet Cornubicum, quo Cornubiens.
VVallicum, quo VVallici: Anglicum, quo Angli, parsque Scotiae bona: Hybernicum,
quo Hebrides insulae, and septentrionalis Scotiae finis: Gothicum, quo solae
orcades vtuntur. Episcopatus Anglia habet. xxij. aliquot praesulatus per
He^ricum praeteritu^ Angliae recolendissimae memoriae Regem conditi e numero
hoc dimittantur. Quoru^ octodecim primati Cantuariensi metropoliti
Subijciuntut, duoque Eborac. archipraesuli parent. gemina item gymnasia ibi
sunt, Scilicet Oxoniu^, and Ca^tabrigia, Academiae celebres, atque famosae.
Satrapias, quas comitatus, conuentusue appellant. 39. habet. Scotia vero. 13.
episcopatibus gaudet, quorum. 9. archiepiscopo primati. S. Andreae, caeteri
quoque Archipraesuli Glascuensi ac caeteris subsunt. Comitatus insunt. 22.
Opulescit haec Aere, Argento, Auro, Ferro, Lana puta, Mollicina, Pecude,
Pecore, Frume^to, cum omni granoru^ genere. Cum quibus materijs haec qua^ sit
dapsilis, nemo no^ nouit. Abu^dat illa lana subhespida, pecore hirsutulo,
Bouibus pumilibus, and piscibus. Lupos non habet Altera, Altera quam plurimos.
In treis quasi regiones diuidunt Angliam Tamesis, Sabrina, Humbrus, tria
Latebrosa flumina, atque ingentia. Scotiam item tria, Nempe Clauda, Forthea,
Tau^. Metropolis Angliae est Londinum, Scotiae regia Edinburgus, quem aliqui
Alata castra dicunt. Sanctionibus and municipalibus fruuntur Angli legibus:
ciuilibus Scoti subiuguntur. Accolae licet sint: gens tame^ genti omnifariam
aliena, and repugnax, Vbi vna amoena, ciuilis, et per omnia fida: altera denuo
ingrata, perfida, atque vulpina, omni authoritate, fideque omnium gentium orba.
Cum praepositi magnates omnino tenebriones maneant: Sunt etiam vulgares, and
populates paratragoediatores, ac rixatores. At Angloru^ genti in bello
austeritas, Scotorum est impietas. Arcubus isti praeualent, cum sint arquites,
and sagittarij validissimi: illi lanceolis semper cedunt, cum lancearij
plaerique existant in praelio. Inter hos rariss. foedus, dum isti de titulo
regali manuconsertum ex iure vocare conantur: illi seorsum propagare, and
renuere subtendunt, and meditantur. Haec Huloetus.

English. Anglicanus, Anglicus, a, um. Britannicus, a, um. Vernaculus, a, um.
D' angleterre. Vernaculus, Is all thing that takes beginning in the own
native country or place, as Vernacula lingua, The country language, or
English tongue, or the speech peculier and proper to one country or house.
English man. Anglus, li. Anglicus, Britannus, Brutigena, Britannicus, ci. m.
ge. Anglois. S. English, or vulgar given by a master to scholars to be made
in latin, called expositions, declarations, or interpretations to be written.
Dictata, orum. neut. g. English people. Anglica, vel Britannica gens,
Britanni, Brutigenae, Angli. Engrosse a letter, or writing. Tabulas conficere,
Infer in tabulas. Grossoyer vne lettre. S. Engrossing all things into one
man's hands. Monopolium, ij. n. g. Enhaunce, lift up, or to extolle. Eleuare,
In altitudinem trahere, Efferre, Erigere, Excellere, Subrigere, Tollere, In
sublime tollere, Esleuer. S. Enhaunce one to honor. Adornare aliquem,
prouehere, Collocare aliquem in aliquo gradu. Esleuer en honeur. S. Enhaunce.
Extollo, is. Exalto, as. Eleuo, as. Esleuer. S Enhaunce a price. Pretium
augere, Extollere, vel augmentare, Pretium amplificare. Enhauncer. Emphyteuta,
vel Emphyteutes, is dicitur qui fundum agrumue ea lege a domino accipit, vt eum
conserat, melioremque efficiat. * Auctor, oris. mas. ge. Enhauncing of price.
Emphyteosis, and Emphyteoticus, a, um. Ang. Belonging to the enhauncing of
price or value.* Enheritaunce, or succession of the dead. Haereditas, tatis.
foe. g. Heredite. S. Enheritaunce. Res, Praedium, Possessio, onis. f. ge.
Haeredium, ij. n. g. Un heritage. S. A little enheritaunce. Possessiuncula, lae.
foe. genesis Haerediolum, li. neut. genesis Un petit heritage. S.

Enjoy or possess. Fruor, eris. Gaudeo, es. Possideo, es. Potior, iris. Iouer
de quelque chose. S. Enjoy by chance, fortune or lotte. Sortior, iris.
Sortito capio, vel Sort consequor. Call. Enlarge, or to make broader.
Collatare, Dilatare, Distendere. Eslargir ou Elargir. S. Enlarge, amplify, or
to make bigger. Augere, Ampliare, Amplificare, Amplier, Amplifier, Eslargir and
aggrandir. S. Pompeius enlarged the Roman Empire very much. Valde Pompeius
auxit, amplificauit imriu^ Romanu^: protulit, produxit, prote^dit imperij
Romani terminos: multum addidit, adiunxit ad imperium Romanum: multas regiones
in populi Romani potestatem redegit, populo Romano subegit, ad populi Romani
ditionem adiunxit. Magna per ^^mpeiu^ ad imperij Romani vires, ad opes populi
Romani accessio facta est.

To enlarge his house. Accessionem adiungere aedibus, Aedes suas facere
gra^diores vel laxiores. Aggrandir sa maison. S.

Enlarged. Auctus, Ampliatus, Amplificatus, ta, tu^. Amply and augmente. S.
Ennoynted. Litus, a, um. Vide Anointed. Enpouerishe. Offerre mendicitatem,
Paupero, ras. Depaupero, as. Pauperem facere. Fair pour ou chetif.
Enpouerishe one with suite. Obruere iudicio. Enpouerished. Depaupertatus, a,
um. Enpryson. Conijcere in vincula, vel carcerem. Mettre en prison. S.
Enqueste. Inquisitio, onis. Percontatio, onis. foe. ge. Enqueste. S. To make
enqueste. Inquisitionem agere, Anquirere. Fair enqueste. S.

Inquire. Quaero, ris. Interrogo, as. Enquerir. Enquire diligently. Contor,
aris. Quaero, is. Inquiro, is siui, Percontor, aris. Sciscitor, aris. Demander
and s'enquester soigneusement de quelque chose. S. Enquire often. Quaerito, as.
Enquirer souuent. S. Enriche. Collocuplero, as. Dito, as. Opule^tare, Diuitijs
aliquem augere. Enrichir. S. Enriched. Ditatus, a, um. Enrichi. Enrolle,
engrosse, or register court rolls, or other wrytinges. Perscribo, is.
Conscribo, is. Enroller, ou enrotuler. S. Enrolled. Conscriptus, Perscriptus,
Ascriptus, ta, tum. Enrolle ou enrotule. S. Enrolement, or engrosement.
Conscriptio, Perscriptio, onis. foe. g. Enrollement. Ensample, or an example.
Exemplum, pli. neut. ge. Exemple. S. Enstore. Instauro, as. Entende, or to give
attendaunce to some thing. Intendo, is, di. Entendre a quelque chose. S. Intent
and purpose. Propositum, ti. neut. genesis Intention, propos. Call. Ententiue.
Intentus, ta, tum. Ententif. S. Ententiuely. Intent, Intentius, Intentissime,
Aduerb. Ententiuement. S. Enter, or to go in. Immiare, Ingredi, Intrare,
Introire, Introitum facere, Subire, Inire, Introgredi. Entrer. S. To enter in
hastily. Corripere sese intro, Improperare, Hastiuement entrer dedens. S.

To enter by force. Irrumpere, Perrumpere, Grassari in possessionem. Entrer par
force. S.

To enter into the temple or church. In templu^ infer se, Ingredi templum.
Enter dedens le temple.

To cause to enter, or come in. Inducere, Introuocare, Intromittere. Fair
entrer. S. Vide Enter.

Enterchaungeably. Subalternatim. Vide Coursly by turn. Enterlyne, or to
deface. Interlino, is. Effacer. Enterlincacion. Interlinea.* Interlude.
Comoedia, ae. Ludicrum, cri. neut. genesis Vide Comedy. Interlude, or Comedy
wherein are base personages. Tabernaria fabula, vel comoedia. Interlude maker.
Comicus, ci. m. g. Poet Comique. Interlude player. Ludio, onis. Ludius, ij m.
g. Interlude wherein is persons of high dignity. Praetextata comoedia.
Enterprice. Coeptum, Incoeptum, Susceptio, onis. foe. ge. Entreprinse. S. A
lofty or bold interprise. Audax facinus. Haulte entreprinse. S.

To discover his enterprise to one. In conscientiam assumere aliquem, Promere
alicui consilia, vel aperire. Descouurir a quelqu' un son entreprinse. S.

To leave of his enterprise. Incoepto disistere, Incoepto abire, Consilium
ponere, Deponere onus, Abrumpere rem inchoatam, Consilium abijcere, Omittere
rationem incoeptam. Laisser son entreprinse. S.

To turn one from his entrepryse. A consilio alterum reuocare, vel Retardare
animos, Ab instituto cursu reuocare, Aliquem de statu suo deterrere, Conatum
alicuius refutare vel reprimere, aut disturbare, Consilium dirimere, Perimere
consilium, Alicuius spem destituere, Conatus infringere, Frangere consilia
alicuius. Destourner aucun de fair son entreprinse.

Enterteine. Accipio, is. Complector, eris. Entretenir. Enterteine
acquain^aunce or friends. Curare familiares. Enterteyne one friendly. Complecti
homine^, Omnibus officijs aliquem amplecti. Entretenir quelqu' un. S.
Enterteyne ones friendship. Gratiam alicuius retinere. Entretenir l' amity d'
aucun. S. Enterteine a friend willingly into his house. Hospitem accipere,
Hospitor, aris. Receuoir aucun en son logis. S. Enterteyned. Acceptus, a, um.
Complexus, a, um. Amplexus, a, um. Entretenu. S. Enterteyned to be. Accipior,
eris. Complector, eris. Estre entretenu. S. Enterteining. Acceptio, onis. f. g.
Enterteining, or willing receauinge of a friend, stranger, or guest.
Hospitalitas, tatis. foem. ge. Ceste courtoisie and liberalite de recueiller
les estrangiers en sa maison. S. Entier or whole. Integer, ra, rum. Solidus, a,
um. Incorruptus, ta, tum. Illibatus, ta, tum. Inuiolatus, ta, tum. Entier. S.
Entiernesse, or soundness. Integritudo, Synceritas, tatis. f. g. Entierite. S.
Entierly. Integre, Solid. Omnino, Penitus, Plene, Sarte, Sincere, Synceriter,
Inuiolate. Entiereme^t. Entise. Allecto, as. Allicio, cis. Illicio, cis.
Perlicio, cis. Prolecto, tas. Inuito, as. Allicher. S. Entised. Allectus, a,
um. Particip. Entisement, or which draws and allureth the mind to favor.
Illicium, Illecebra, Illectus, Lenocinium, Pellacia, Inuitamentum, Allectatio,
onis. foe. ge. Allichement. S. Entreatable, or yt may be entreated, or is sone
entreated. Suadibilis, Suasibilis, le.* Entreat. Interuenio, is. Intercedo,
is. Orare pro aquo and precari. Interceder pour aucun. Entreat with fair
words. Suadeo, es. Enhorter. Entreat or to write of a thing. Tractare
aliquam rem, Scribere de re aliqua. Traicter and descrire quelque chose. S.
Entreat, talk, or to debate on a matter. Exagitare rem aliquem, Rem aliquam
sermonibus agitare, Rem aliquam pertractare. Traicter quelque matiere and la
debatre. S. Entreat or to handell. Tracto, tas. Contrecto, tas. Traicter and
manier. S. Entreating. Interuentus, us. m. g. Entrecourse, or liberty to carry
marchandyse. Co^mercium. ij. n. g. Traffic. S. Entrecourse, or truce. Foedus,
eris. n. g. Entrelace communication with them which be already talking. In
alienum sermonem insinuare, Interfari, Interloqui, Interpellare. Entreparler.
S. Entremeddle. Intromitto, is. Conserere, Inserere, Intermiscere, Interserere.
Entremesler. Entremedle light talk amongst grave matters. In re seuera
conuiuio dignum aut delicatum infer sermonem. Entremesler parolles legieres
parmi chooses graves. S. Thou shall do more wisely, if thou entremedle not thy
self in this concord. Sapientius facies, si te in istam pacificationem no^
interpones.

Entremedled. Perplexus, a, um. Immistus, ta, tum. Intermistus, ta, tum.
Entremesle. S. Entremitte, or to myngle him self in some affair. Admiscere se
alicui negotio, Interponere se. Se mesler, and s'entremettre de quelque
affair. S. Entremitte, or to leave of a work for a time. Opus intermittere.
Entremettre la besongne. S. Entrepryse. Vide Enterprise. Enter. Ingredior,
eris. Intro, as. Penetro, as. Subeo is. Succedo, is. Entrer. Enter an action.
Dicam scribere alicui. Enter into displeasure. Adire inimicitias. Enter into
inheritance. Haereditatem adire. Entrey of the house. Ianua, Limen, Atrium,
ij. n. ge. Entree de maison. S. Entrye, or a coming to a place. Introitus,
Ingressio, Ingressus, Aditus, tus. m. genesis Entree. S. Entrye privy.
Familiarior aditus. Entree priuee. S. Entry, or mouth of the haven. Aditus
atque os portus. L'entree du port. S. Entry between a hall and a parloure.
Mesaulus, li. mas. gener. Call. Entry of a haven or port. Os portus, Ostia,
orum. neut. genesis Entering in. Ingrediens, Introgrediens. Envy, or emulation.
Aemulatio, Inuidentia, Inuidia, Liuor, Malignitas, Zelus, li. mascu. genesis
Envy. S. Ancient envy. Inueterata inuidia. Ancienne envy. S.

Condemned through envy. Condemnatus ex inuidia. Condamne par envy. S.

To leave his envy. Ponere inuidiam. Laisser son envy. S.

Envy, or obseruaunce amongst wooers. Riualitas, tatis. foe. genesis Envy without
malice, to follow or study to be equal, or like an other. Aemulor, aris, Zelo,
as. Zelor, aris. Envy an others wealth. Aemulor, aris, Inuideo, es. Liueo, es.
Maligno, as. Liuesco, scis. Auoir envy. S. Non equide^ inuideo miror magis
vndique totis
Vsque adeo turbatur agris. etc.
Virg. In faith I envy not thy luck
I rather marvel how,
It comes to pass in all our fleldes
We are so troubled now.
Envy to bear in stomach. Malignor, aris.* Envied, or not charitably
favored. Inuidiosus, a, um. Qui est envy. S. To be envied and hated. In
inuidia vel odio esse apud aliquem, Laborare ex inuidia, Flagrare inuidia.
Estre envy and hay. S.

Enuier. Aemulator, Aemulus, li. m. ge. Enuier of him that is learned. Zoilus,
li. m. ge. Envious. Inuidiosus, Inuidus, Infestus, Hosticus, Liuidus, da, dum.
Enuieux. S. Envious person. Ibis, bis. Zelotes, it is. m. g. Ibis Is such an
enemy whose name he which is displeased will not detecte. Enuiously.
Inuidiose, Malign. Enuieusement. S. Enuiron, enclose, or fortify.
Circummunio, is. Obuallo, as. Succingo, is. Enuironner. S. Enuiron or compass
about. Circundo, as, are. Ambire, Cingere, Circulare, Circunstare, Circundare,
Circu^uenire, Intersepire, Obire, Obsidere, Redimere, Circunfundere,
Circunsistere. Enuironner. S. Enuiron about with a ditche or trenche, and to
besiege a town. Circumuallare, Obuallare, Circunsedere. Enuiro^ner de rempars
and assieger vne ville. Enuiron with fence, or strength for safegarde. Stipo,
as. Enuironner and se tenir autour de quelque un pour le defendre. S. Environed
with men for safegarde round about, as a prince is with his guard. Stipatus,
a, um. Accompagne de sorce gens tout autour. Call. Enuironned. Ambitus, ta, tum.
Cinctus, ta, tu^. Circumsessus, sa, sum. Circundatus, ta, tum. Stipatus, ta,
tum. Obuallatus, ta, tum. Enuironne. S. It is enuironned with the sea.
Circunfunditur mari. Il est enuironne de la mer. S.

Enuironning. Circundatio, Circunscriptio terrae, Stipatio, onis. foe. g.
Enuironnement. S.
E. ANTE. P.
EPigra^me, or superscription. Epigramma, it is. Epigram matum, ti. neut. g.
Epigramme ou vne inscription. S. Et Epigrammatarius, vel Epigrammatista. Ang. A
maker of Epigrammes, or superscriptions.* Epilogue, or a conclusion. Epilogus,
gi. m. ge. Conclusio, onis. foe. ge. Epilogue, Conclusion. S. Epiphanie, or
twelfe day. Epiphania, Regalia, Dies epiphainae. Epiphanie, le iour des rois.
S. Epistle, or lettre missiue. Codicilli, orum. Epistola, Epistolium, Libellus,
Literae, arum. Tabellae, arum. foe. g. Epistre and lettre missiue. S. Epitaphe
of a grave or tomb. Epitaphium, ij. neu. genesis Inscriptio sepulchri. Epitaphe.
S. Epitomee, or a brief sum of a thing. Epitome, es, foem. ge. Epitome. S.
E. ANTE. Q.
EQual. Aequabilis, Aequalis, Coaequalis, Co^par, ris. Iustus. Par, ris.
Parilis, le. Egual. S. Equal deuisio^ of a thing. Aequatio, onis. f. g. Equal
of age. Aequalis, le. Aequaeuus, a, um. D' un mesure aage. Call. Equal
punishment or pain for an offense, as for a hand, a hand: a ioynte for a
ioynte: one limme for an other. Talio, onis. Poena talionis. Equal value.
Aequiualentia. and Aequipollentia, ae. foem. ge. Perot. Equal to be in
estimation or value. Aequipolleo, es. Aequiualeo, es. Valoir autant. Call.
Equal to make. Exaequo, as. Apto. as. Ad aequalitatem redigere. Reduire a
equalite. To make equal or like. Paria facere. Aequiparare, Coaequare,
Aequare, Exaequare. Equalizer, fair equal and pareil. S.

To be made equal to one. Exaequari alteri, Cu^ liquo aequari. Estre faict
equal.

Equally. Aeque. Equally in even portions. Aequabiliter, In commune, Pariter,
Partite, Aequaliter. Egualement. S. Equally divided. Partitus, a, um. Vide
Divided equally. Equality. Aequalitas, Parilitas, it is. foe. g. Equalite. S.
Equality in estimation or value. Aequipolientia, ae. f. g. Aequiualentia, ae.
f. g. Perot. Equalities of laws, where they be in all degrees indifferent.
Isonomia, ae. f. g. Iuris aequalitas. Equinoctial line, which deuideth
heaven. Equator, ris. mas. ge. Equinoctial time, when the days and nights
be all of one length. Aequidiale, lis. Aequidium, dij. Aequinoctium, ij. neut.
genesis L'equinoxe. Call. Vnde aequinoctialis, le. Ang. Of the equinoctial time.
Equinoctial. Call. Equity which omitteth partly the rigor of the law,
written with a conformity of justice and less detriment. Epijcia, Epijciae.
foem. genesis Bud. called also Aequum, and bonum. Equity or right. Aequitas, it is.
foe. ge. Equite. Call. Equity and right. Aequum and bonum. La bonne and vraye
equite. S. Thou speak against equity and right. Non aequum dicis. Tu parles
contre l' equite. S.

To speak against equity, or the right. Oppugnare verbis aequitatem. Parler
contre l' equite. S.

To judge by equity. Aequi and boni momenta cum iure summo expendere,
Exquisitam iuris interpretationem and limatam iuris subtilitatem aequo and bono
posthabere. Iuger par equite. S.

Equiualente to be, or like in value or estimation. Aequiualeo, es. Valoir
autant. Call. Equiualente. Quasi aeque valens. Equivalent. S. Equivocation, or
making diverse significations to one word. Aequiuocatio, onis. f. ge. Vnde
aequiuoce. Aduerb. Ang. Diversely signifying. Et Aequiuocu^, A word having many
significations. Vt Aries, An instrument of war, a sign celestial, and a
Ram.
E. ANTE. R.
ERect or set up. Erigo, is. Eriger. S. Erected. Erectus, ta, tum. Esleue. S.
Earl. Comes, it is. Satrapa, vel Satrapes, ae. m. genesis Conte. Pals. Erecte, or to
make an Earl a Duke. Comite^ Ducis appellatione augere. Eriger un Conte en
Duche. Erecte, or to make a Barone an Earl. Baronem Comitis nomine ac dignitate
afficere. Eriger un Baron en Conte. S. Erledome. Satrapia, ae. f. ge. Erly in
the morning. Mane, Prima luce. Au matin. S. Erly, or betyme in the morning.
Diluculo, Multo mane. Fort matin. S. Ermin, or field mouse. Scytala. ae.
Scytale, es. foem. ge. Mus araneus. Done in ernest. Serius, a, u^. Fait a bon
escient. Call.

In good ernest. Bona fide, Extra iocum, Iudicato, Re ipsa, Serio, Sedulo, Ex
animo. A bon escient.

Speak thou in erneste? Ita ne vero? Dis tu a bon escient? S.

Ernest money, hyre, or wages. Arrha, ae, Arrhabo, onis. mas. ge. Authoramentum,
ti. neut. genesis Arres, denier a dieu. Call. Ernest, or earnest words. Seria,
orum. n. g. Ernestly. Extra iocu^, Remoto ioco, Serio. vt supra. Ernestly, or
in game pastime, or sport? Serio an ioco? Ereable, or rather arable land.
Terra arabilis. Errande. Negotium, ij. n. g.* Nuntius, ij. mas. genesis Nuntium,
ij. n. g. Message. S. To do an errande or message, from one to an other.
Defer mandata alicuius ad alterum. Fair un message. S.

Err, or a fault. Culpa, Menda, Vitium, Delictu^, Erratum, Mendum, Noxia,
Noxa, Offensa, Peccatum, Praeuaricatio, onis, f. g. Fault. Err, to be in a
false or ill opinion. Erro, as. Allucinor, aris. Errer. S. Err, or go out of
the way, or wander. Erro, ras. Deerro, as. Inerro, as. Errer. S. Err, or lie,
or say falsely. Erro, as. Mentior, iris. Vide Lie. Erring, going out of the
way, lying, or wandering. Errans, it is. particip. Erroneous, or full of errors
or false opinions. Vitiosus, a, u^.* Errans, it is. vt Erra^tes opiniones.
Error. Erratum, ti. Error, ris. mas. genesis Vitium, tij. neut. genesis Erreur. S.
To approve, or maintain an others error. Calculum album adijcere errori
alterius.

To bring into error. Errore mentis afficere, Incutere errorem. Mettre en
erreur. S.

To be brought into error. Deferri in errorem, In errorem rapi. Estre mis en
erreur. S.

Erudition. Eruditio, onis. foe. g. Scauour, Erudition. Erudition, or
instruction of good arts. Paedia, ae. Doctrina, ae. foe. ge. Erudition.
Erwhyle, or even now, or lately. Iamdudum, Iamiam, Iampridem, Nuper, Modo,
Iam, Nunc iam, In ipso tempore, In praesentia, Nunc nuper. A ceste heure. S.
E. ANTE. S.
EScape. Effugio, is. Euado, is. Euolo, as. Exeo, is. Fugio, is. Elabor, eris.
Subterduco, is. Subterfugio, is. Aufugere. Eschapper. S. Escape a danger or
ieopardie. Transmittere discrimen aliquod. Eschapper un danger. S. Escape out
of ye nets. Exire tela. Eschapper des retz. Escape out of the flame or fire.
Euolare ex flamma. Eschapper de la flamme. S. Escape out of great dangers.
Profugere ex tempestatum periculis. Eschapper des gran. dangers. Escaped.
Elapsus, a, um. Euasus, a, um. Saluus, ua, uum. Eschappe. S. Escaping. Euasio,
onis. foe. gen.* Eschecker. Fiscum, sci. Quaestorium, ij. n. g. Escheited to
be. Confiscari. Estre confisque. Escheites, or goods escheited. Bona caduca,
confiscata, publicata. Vide Confisque. Eschew. Declino, as. Deuito, as.
Diuito, as. Euito, as. Fugio, is. Defugere, Effugere, Subterfugere, Vitare,
Exire. Euiter. S. Eschew envy, or malice. Subtrahere inuidiae. Eschew
reproach. Detestari liuorem. Eschewing of damage or hurt. Indempnitas, it is.
foe. ge. Fuga vel vitatio damni. Call. Espiall place, or corner to spy out of.
Episcopium, ij. n. g.* Specula. ae. f. genesis Epsy, or to watch one. Dispicio,
is. Immineo, es. Obsideo, es. Speculor, aris. Subtento, as. Facere insidias,
Subsidere, Insidiari, Insidere, Obseruare, Dare insidias alicui, Moliri
insidias, Tendere insidias. Espier and guetter. Epsy, or wait a time.
Aucupari tempus. Espier le temps. S. Epsy how to kyl one. Petere insidijs
aliquem, vel vitam alicuius insidijs petere. Espier de tuer aucun. Epsy, or
espier. Emissarius, Episcopus,*Explorator, Speculator, toris. m. ge. Vne epsy,
ou un espion. Et Episcopius, a, um. * Speculatorius, a, um. Ang. Pertaining to
an epsy, or espiall. Apartenant a Espier. Call. Espying a thing quickly.
Oculatus, a, um. Esquier, an instrument that carpenters use. Norma. ae. foe. g.
Vne esquirre. S. Et Normalis, le, vel Normatus, ta, tum. Made right by the
squier. Faicte a l' esquierre. S. Esquier. Armiger, ri. mas. genesis Esquyrie.
Equitium, ij. neut. genesis * Essentie, or substance compacted of matter and
shape. Vsia, Essentia, Substantia, ae. f. g. Substance. Essoyne. Caussa, vel
Idonea absentiae causa. Essoyne. Caussor, aris. Differ vadimonia, vel (vt
dicu^t) Exoniare, id est, iureiura^do excusare eum qui iudicio non adest, aut
euocatus praesto non est. Exomnier. S. Essoyned to be. Caussatum haberi,
Differ vadimonium. Essoyned sewters. Causarij. Essoynez. Establyshe. Decerno,
is. Stabilio, is. Establir. Call. Establishe and to appointe a king. Constituere
regem. Establir un roy. S. A city establyshed with laws. Fundata legibus
ciuitas. Ville establie par loix. S.

Establyshed. Decretorius, a, um. Constitutus, ta, tu^. Establishement.
Constitutio, onis. f. g. Establisheme^t. Estate. Status, tus. m. g. Estat. S.
Estate or condition of men. Conditio humana. L' estat and condition des hommes.
S. Estate of the body. Habitudo, inis. foe. ge. L' estat du corpse. S. Estate of
Senators. Ordo Senatorius. L' estat des Senateurs. S. Esteem. Aestimo, as.
Aestimatione^ facere. Estimer. S. Esteame one above others. Primas dare, Primas
ad aliquem refer, vel defer. Estimer aucun plus de tous les autres. S.
Esteame as honest, or for an honest personage. Reponere inter probos, Numerare
in bonis. Estimer bon. S. Esteame or to praise, regard or allow. Commendare,
Dignare, Dignari, In honor habere, Pendere, Putare. Estimer, priser, and
lover. S. Esteame as an enemy. Pro host habere. Estemer ennemi. S. Esteame
ones pains nothing. Operam alicuius deputare parui pretij. To esteame much,
or greatly. Multifacere, magni and magno aestimare, Magnipendere, Magni putare.
Estimer fort. S.

I do not so much esteem or think of my self. Tanti me non facio, Hoc mihi
non sumo, non assumo, non arrogo, non adscisco. Ad hunc me sapientiae grac^um
peruenisse non puto. Eam mihi sapientiam contigisse non sentio. Fateor eo me
sapientiae non peruenisse, ea me sapientia non esse, non vsque adeo me sapere,
non ita mihi placeo. Non ita mihi assentior, non eam de me opinionem suscepi,
non ita me effero, non mihi tantum tribuo, non in me tantum statuo, pono, loco,
non ipse mihi tanti sum, non ita valde me amo, non ipse me tanti facio,
aestimo, pendo, puto reputo, duco.

To esteame a thing little or nothing. Naucifacere, Pro nihilo putare, Nullo
loco numerare rem aliquam, Pro nihilo ducere, Ductare pro nihilo, Nihili
facere. N' estimer rien quelque chose. S.

To esteame little. Paruifacere. Peu estimer. S.

Which one ought to esteame little. Poenitendus, da, dum. Qui on doibt peu
estimer. S.

Esteamed. Reputatus, a, um. To be greatly esteamed of the king. Esse magno
loco apud regem. Estre fort estime du roy.

To be little esteamed. Authoritate egere, Non optime audire, Opinione laborare.
N' estre pas bien estime. S.

To be somewhat esteamed. Esse in aliquo numero atque honor. Estre aucunement
estime. S.

To be greatly esteamed. Existimatione florere, Obtinere admirationem, Summam
opinionem obtinere, haberi magnae authoritatis, Esse maximo pretio, vel in
maximo pretio. Estre fort estime.

This bird is greatly esteamed in banquettes. In honor mensarum est haec
auis, Maxim co^mendatur haec auis. Cest oiseau est fort estime en banquets. S.

Esteamed little or nothing. Paruipensus, sa, sum. Esteamed well. Gratiosus, a,
um. Qui est estime. S. Esteamed to be. Censeor, eris. Cic. Estimable, or which
may be ^steamed or valued. Aestimabilis, le. Chose qu' on peult estimer. S.
Estimation. Census, us. Indicatio, Indicatura, Indicatus, us.* Momentu^, ti.
Opinio, onis. foem. genesis Aestimatio, onis. Existimatio, onis. foem. gener.
Estimation. S. Estimation, familiarity, or favor amongst noble men.
Dignatio, onis, foe. ge. Reputation. Call. Estimation, or value of a gentleman.
Census equestris. Estraunge, alien, or to put away. Alieno, as. Abalieno, as.
Estranger. S. Estraunged, aliened, or put away. Alienatus, a, u^. Abalienatus,
ta, tum. Alienus, na, number. Estrange. S.
E. ANTE. T.
Eternal. Aeternus, a, um. Perennis, e. Perpetuus, a, um. Sempiternus, a, um.
Eternel. S. Eternal time. Aeuum, ui. neut. ge. Eternally. Aeterne, In
aeternum, In aeuum, Perenniter, Perpetuo, Perpetuum. Eternellement. S.
Eternity. Aeternitas, Perennitas, Perpetuitas, it is. foe. g. Eternite. S.
Ethnicke. Ethnicus, a, um.* Ethiopia, or Egipte. Aethiopia. ae. f. g. Ethiopie.
S. Ethiopian. Aethiopicus, Aethiops, is. mas. gener. Ethiopien. S. Ethiopisse,
or a woman of Ethiope. Aethiopissa, ae. foe. genesis Ethiopienne. S.
E. ANTE. V.
EVa, the name of the first woman that ever was, created by God in paradise,
(a place replenished withal pleasure) of the rybbe of our forefather Adam, and
after for transgression driven thence with her husband. Read the first and
second chapter of the first book of Genesis. Eua, ae. foe. genesis Euangeliste,
or a brynger of good news or tydinges, as were the holy Evangelists which
wrote the testimony of Jesus Christ. Euangelista, Euangelus, li. m. genesis
Euangeliste, ou porteur de bonne nouuelle. Et Euangelium, lij. neut. g. The
Gospel or good news or tidinges. Euangile, c' est a dire Bonne nouuelle.
Euaporation. Euaporatio, onis. foe. g. Euaporation. S. Even. Coaequus, a, um.
Par, ris. Parilis, le. Aequus, a, um. Egual. S. Even against it. Ex-aduersum,
vel Ex-aduerso. Al' opposite. Call. Even as. Atque, Aeque, Perinde, Quasi,
Quemadmodum, Velut, Veluti. Comme. The place is as handsome as I wyshed it.
Locus est bellus, atque optabam. Plaut.

Even as well as thou. Aeque been atque tu. Plaut. Aeque mecum, Aeque tecum,
Aeque secum. Even as well as I, thou, or he. I know it even as well as thou.
Noui aeque omnia tecum, id est, pariter ac tu. Ie le scay aussi bien que toy.
Cor.

This is even as if I should say. etc. Hoc perinde est, tanquam si ego dicam,
etc. C' est tout un comme si ie disoye. etc. S.

Even as you were wont, or as you ar accoustomed. Quemadmodum soles. Comme tu as
de coustume. S. Even as few. Atque pauci.* Aeque pauci. Caesar. Even as it
should be. Rite. Even as she had been her daughter. Ita vt si esset filia. Tout
un comme si elle estoit sa fille. S. Even as many, or even so many. Totidem.
Tout autant. S. Even handed. Aequimanus, a, um.* Even in the doing. Inter
agendum, Inter opus. En besongnant. S. Even judgments. Aequales calculi.
Even, level, plain, or straighte. Planus, a, um. Aequus, a, um. Plain and
vni. S. Even like. Compar, ris. Adiect. Egual. Even like. Perinde. aduerb. Even
now. Iam iam, Nunc iam. Nunc primum, In praesentia, Nu^c nuper, Iam. Toute a
ceste heure. Even of largenes. Aequilatatio, tionis. foem. genesis Vit. lib. 2.
cap. 8. Even of one bygnes, or greatness. Aeque ambo pares. Even of poyse or
weighte. Aequilibris, e. Om. genesis D'vn mesme poix. Call. Even or odd. Par
impar. A game much used now a days among children. In times past it was a
disporte or recreation amongst Elders, as Suetonius writes of Augustus to his
daughter thus. Misi tibi nummos ducentos quinquaginta, quot singulis conuiuis
dederam, si vellent inter se post coenam vel talis, vel par impar ludere: etc.
Even to make, or to make plain. Aequare, Complanare, Exaequare, Allaeuare,
Delaeuare, Inaequare, Laeuigare. Applanir, and fair fort vni. Pt. Even he.
Nempe ille, Ipse ille. Luymesme. S. Even so. Item, Taliter. Tellement. Pl. Even
so much. Tantundem, genesis Tantidem. neut. genesis Tout autant. Pl. Even there.
Inibi. En ce lieu la mesme. S. Eue^ly. Pariter, Aequaliter, Aequabiliter.
Egualeme^t Euenes, or equity. Aequitas, it is. f. g. Equite. S. Euenes in
speech. Analogia, Proprietas, Proportio. Conuenientia, Similitudo. Analogy,
proportion, conuenance. Call. Euenes of poisse or wayght. Aequilibriu^,
Aequipondium, ij. n. g. Pareil poix. Call. Evening. Vespera, ae. Vesper, ris.
Vesperugo, inis. f. ge. La vespre. Pl. Et Vesper, a, um. ac Vespertinus, a, um.
Ang. Of the evening. Du soir, du vespre. Evening star. Vesper, Vesperugo,
Vesperus, Hesperus, Hesperugo, Lucifer, Venus, eris. foe. genesis L' estoille qui
se lieue la premiere apres soleil couche. Evening late. Sero, Vesperi, Adu. Au
soir. Call. Evening prayers, or euensong. Vespertinae preces. Vespres. S.
Evening to be or wax. Vespero, as. Venir sur le vespre, ou sur le soir. Call.
Et Vesperascit, quod in tertijs personis tantum legitur. It waxes night. Il
vient sur le vespre. S. Evening tide, or even tide. Serum, ri. Vespera, ae.
Vesper, Tempus vespertinum, sieve serotenum. Le soir. S. Et Serotinus, a, um.
Ang. That which is done late, or of the evening. Du soir. S. Ever. Omnino,
Semper, Vnquam. Tousiours. S. For ever. Ad infinitum, In aeternum, In
perpetuum, Aeternum, Perpetuum, Perpetuo. A iamais. S. Omne ad tempus, In
aeuum, In modu^ perpetuum. A tousiours. For ever.

Every. Cunctus, a, um. Omnis, e. Quilibet. Tout ensemble. Every deal. Totus,
a, um. Tout. S. Eueryche one. Populatim, Ad vnum. Tous. Every one is of that
mind. Omnes ad vnum ide^ sentiunt. Touts generalement iusques a un. S. Every
man. Quilibet, Quisque, Quisquis, Quicunque, Quiuis, Vnusquisque. Un chascun.
S. Every one. Singulus, a, um. Quilibet, Quisque. Idem Every thing. Quidlibet,
Quodlibet. Every thing by it self. Singulatim, Singillatim, Sigillatim.
Chascun a part. S. Every where. Late, Nusquam non, Passim, Quoquouersum,
Vbique, Vbique gentium, Vbique loci, Vbicumque, Vbicubi, Vndique, Vsque quaque,
Vtrobique, Vulgo. Par tout. S. Every whyt. Totus, a, um. Tout. S^ Every year.
Annuatim, Quotannis, Omnibus annis. Toutes les ans. S. Everlasting. Aeternus,
a, um. Perennis, e. Perpes, it is. Perpetuus, a, um. Sempiternus, a, um. Eternel.
Sempiternus dicitur, quasi semper aeternus: Aeternus autem quasi aeuiternus.
Nam aeuum proprie aeternitatem significat. Cor. He has gotten him self
everlasting fame by his worthy acts. Rebus praeclare gestis aeternam sibi
famam peperit.

If you do this, you shall get everlasting praise. Hoc si faceris, sempiternae
laudi tibi futurum erit, immortalem tibi gloriam co^parabis, Paries, acquires,
assequeris, consequeris.

Everlasting continuance. Aeuitas, Perpetuitas, Sempiternitas, Perennitas,
tatis. foe. ge. Sunt ista fere omnia antiqua and raro in vsu habentur.
Eternite. S. Everlasting time. Aeternitas, tatis. f. ge. Aeuum, i. neut. genesis
in sing. number. tantum. Temps qui dure tousiours. S. Everlastingly. Aeterne,
Perenniter, Perpetim, Perpetuum, Perpetuo, Sempiterne, In aeuum.
Aeternellement. Eues of a house. Subgrunda, vel Suggrunda, ae. f. g.
Subgrundia, orum. neut. genesis La semeronde du tout d' un edifice. S. Euesing, or
eues setting or trimming. Subgrundatio, Suggrundatio, onis. foe. genesis Euet or
lizarde, which is a grene beast or worm. Lacertus, ti. Lacerta, ae. f. g.
Lisarde. Pals. Evidence or wrytinges. Chartae, arum. foe. g. Evident. Apertus,
a, um. Euidens, it is. Manifestus, a, um. Patens, it is. Planus, a, um. Evident. S.
Evident to be. Pateo, es. Patesco, cis. Estre manifest ou evident. S.
Evidently. Ad liquidum, Aperte, Dilucide, Euide^ter, Manifest, Notabiliter,
Liquido, Insigniter, Perspicue, Plane, Palam. Euidemment. S. Et Liquide,
Liquidius, Liquidissime. Evil. Malus, a, um. Prauus, Peruersus, Malignus,
Nocens. Mauuais. S. We ought not to use the company, or familiarity of evil
disposed persons. No^ est cum improbis hominibus iungenda societas. Coire nos
societatem, coire in societatem, inire societatem cum perditis hominibus, dare
se in societatem perditorum, confer se, adiungere se, applicare se ad homines
perditos, coniungere se, vinculo se societatis obstringere cum perditis
hominibus, Vtilitatis vel maxima spe proposita, vel si spes vtilitatis maxima
ostenditur, Non decet, turpe est, minime debemus. Qui se socium ad perditos
homines adiungit, cum perditis hominibus coit, perditos sequitur, comitem se
praebet improbis, facit turpiter, contra quam decet, minime laudabiliter.

Evil and wicked persons ought to be punished. Animaduertendum est in homines
nocentes. Iusta est in homines improbos animaduersio. Animaduersione vti
aduersus improbos oportet. Improbi afficiendi sunt poena, vindicandi, punie^di,
plectendi, vlciscendi, castigandi, male multandi. Sumendum est de improbis
supplicium. Capere poenas de improbis aequum est. Luant improbi poenas factis
dignas. Debitum supplicium nefarij homines persoluant. Digna eorum factis
animaduersione improbi plectantur. Euilnes. Malignitas, it is. Prauitas, it is.
Malitia, ae. f. ge. Mauuaistie. S. Euilly. Male, Praue, Perverse. Mauuaisement.
S. Evil sounding. Absonus, a, um. Desaccordant. S. Eupatorie, an herb.
Hydropiper. * I think it be Agrimonie, for that the English has some
affinity with the Latin and French name thereof. Vt Eupatoria, vel
Eupatorium, ij. neut. gener. Epatoire. S. Aigremoine. Euphrates, is a river so
called, which comes out of Paradise, and runs through Babylon, whose
course was returned by Cyrus, when Babylon was besieged by him and Darius.
Euphrates, it is. mas. genesis It was also the name of a Philosopher, which in the
time of Adrianus poisoned him self with the herb called Cicuta, which is
like hembloke. Ewre, to wash the hands withal. Futis, Guttus, Gutturnium,
Aqualis, Vas angusti oris, vnde guttatim aqua manibus affunditur. Goutteron,
esguire. H.
E. AMTE. X.
Exact, or to demand a thing. Exigere, Exprimere, Exculpere, Extundere.
Exiger, ou demander. S. Exacted. Exactus, a, um. Exaction, or polling of the
people. Exactio, onis. foe. genesis Exaction. S. Exactly done, or well performed.
Exactus, a, um. Consomme. Exactly, or very diligently. Exact, Ad vnguem, Ad
amussim, Accurate. Exactement. S. Exaggerate. Repono, is.* Exaggero, as.
Exaggerer. Exaggerated. Repositus, a, u^.* Exaggeratus, ta. tu^. Exalte, or to
extolle. Magnificare, Exaltare. Exalter. Exalte one to heaven. Extollere in
coelum quempiam. Exalter iusques au ciel. Examen. Discutio, is. Dispu^go, is.
Examino, as. Perpendo, is. Perquiro, is. Perscrutor, aris. Quaero, is. Scrutor,
aris. Trutino, as. Expungo, is. Pondero, as. Examiner quelque chose. Examen an
accounte. Dispungere rationem, Subduce^re calculum, Expungere rations.
Examiner un compte. S. Examen diligently. Percontor, aris. Examen witness after
a diverse sort. Versare testes. Testes rogare, Iterare, and cum reis componere.
Examiner, Recoler and confronter testmoings. S. Examination. Dispunctio,
Examen, Quaesitio, onis. foe. genesis Examination. S. Examined. Examinatus, a, um.
Pensus, a, um. Examiner. Examinator, Quaestionarius, Conquisitor. m. g.
Examinateur. Example. Antigraphum, Exe^plar, Exemplum, Paradigma, it is.
Specimen, Typus, pi. mas. genesis Type, primiere form de quelque chose, Example.
S. Caussa, Gratia, vt Verbi caussa, vel gratia. Example of a good and straight
conscience. Exemplar antiquae religionis. To allege an example. Ponere
exemplum, vel proferre, Exemplum praebere, Exemplis agere. Alleguer un example.
S.

Example and patron of innocence. Specimen innocentiae. L' example and patron
d'innocence. S. Example full of faults. Exemplum me^dosum, vel Exemplare
mendosum. To take example by other. Facere periculum ex alijs, Exemplum sumere,
Exemplum capere de aliquo. Prendre exemple. S.

To give an example to a scholar. Praeformare literas infanti. Donner ou
escrire matiere ou exemple a son escolier. H.

Exanimate, or to trouble greatly. Exanimo, as. Troubler grandement. S.
Exanimate or feared. Exanimatus, ta, tu^. Espouante. Exasperate. Vlcero, as.
Exaspero, as. Exasperer. S. Excede. Excedo, is. Exupero, as. Praepolleo, es.
Profundo, is. Superfluo, is. Transcendo, is. Transgredior, eris. Exceder. S. To
exceade the bounds. Vltra praescriptum agere. Exceder les terms.

Exceading. Hyperbolicus, a, um. Excessiuus, a, um. Exceading liberal.
Profusus, a, um.* Exceading liberal man. Lurco, onis. Nepos, it is. Homo
Prodigus, Profusus, Supra modu^ sumptuosus, Abundans. Exceadingly. Efflictim,
Effuse, Impensius, Su^mopere, Superflue, Superfluo, Profuse. En grand
abondance. Call. To excel, or to be more excellent. Antecedo, is. Antecello,
is. Antesto, as. Emineo, es. Excello, is. Praecello, is. Praepolleo, es.
Praemineo, es. Praesto, as. Primas far, Principatum habere. Estre plus
excellent. S.

Excellency. Elegantia, Praestantia, Excellentia, Claritas, Exuperantia,
Splendour, oris. mas. g. Excellence. S. Excellent. Altus, a, um. Egregius, a,
um. Elegans, it is. Excellens, it is. Eximius, a, um. Insignis, e. Mactus, a, um.
Praestabilis, le. Praestans, it is. Summus, a, um. Insignis sumitur tam in bonam,
quam malam partem, vt Insignis vir. Insignis latro.* Exquisitus, ta, tum.
Singularis, re. Splendidus, da, dum. Clarus, a, um. Praeclarus, a, um.
Excellent. S. He excels in diverse disciplines. Grammaticorum laboriosos
canones excussit, Rhetorum flosculis abundat, Dialecticorum argutias callet,
Physices arcana peruestigauit, Supramundanae sapientiae ardua superauit,
Theologorum abdita perspexit, Poetarum omnium omneis fabulas mire tenet.

The most excellent. Praecipuus, Long princeps, Praesignis, Insignis,
Praecellens. Le plus excellent.

Excellent good cheer. Dapsile conuiuium. Excellent good bed. Dapsilis
lectus. * Excellently. Egregie, Eleganter, Eximie, Singulariter, Sum.
Excellently, singularly, passing well. etc. Sum, vehementer, valde,
magnopere, etiam atque etia^, maxim, mire, mirifice, incredibiliter,
singulariter, vnice, egregie, infigniter, cum primis, in primis, praecipue,
apprime, admodum, maiorem in modum, mirum in modum, mirandum in modu^, supra
modum, extra modum, oppido, eximie, maximopere, non vulgariter, no^
mediocriter, no^ minime, non ad aliorum exemplum, non ex co^muni consuetudine,
non vt solet, non vt mos est, non more, non ordine, no^ aliorum exemplo, extra
morem, extra ordinem, praeter exemplum: sic, vt nihil magis, nihil supra, nihil
vltra, nihil tale, nihil ad aliud, vt conferri nihil possit: simile, par,
aequale, eiusmodi, eius generis nihil sit. Except. Demo, is. Excipio, is.
Eximo, is. Recipio, pis. Excepter. S. Except. Ni, Nisi, Praeter. Sinon,
Except. S. No man shall part her from me, but death, or except death. Hanc
nisi mors, mihi adimet nemo. Terent.

Except even now. Nisi nunc. Sinon a ceste heure. S. No man said so except
Cicero. Nemo ita dixit praeterquam Cicero. Person ne l' a dict, except
Cicero. S.

Except the only. Praeter te vnum, vel extra te vnu^. Except toy seul. S. To
except and reserve some thing when a man sells his heritage, land, or house.
Recipio, is. Excepter, and reseruer quelque chose quand on vend quelque
heritage, terre ou maison. S.

Excepted. Demptus, a, um. Exceptus, a, um. Receptus, a, um. Oste. Taken away.
Excepted from labor or wars, by reason of age, or lamenes, which can serve
no more. Emeritus, ta, tum. Qui ne peult plus seruir. S. Exception. Exceptio,
onis. f. g. Exception. S. Excess of carnalitie, as apparel, building, fare.
etc. Luxuria, Luxuries, Luxus, us. m. g. Intemperantia, ae. foe. ge. Excez. S.
Excess in aduauncing, or depressing of the truth or falshode, as truer then
God, falser then the Devil, An hyperboly. Hyperbole, es. foem. genesis Est etiam
quaedam figura vel dictio fidem excedens, augendi minuendiue caussa. Augendi:
vt pluma mollior, Littore surdior, Minuendi, vt volantis te folij sonitus
terrent, and dicitur ab yper quod est super, and bole sententia. Excess of
meat and drink. Caros, Crapularis redundantia. Call. Excessive banqueting, or
reueling. Profusae epulae. Excessive. Insolens, Immodicus, ca, cum. Profusus,
sa, sum. Excessif. S. Excessive, or riotous spending or wasting of substance.
Prodigalitas, tatis. f. ge. Profusio, Prodigentia, ae. foe. ge. Excessiuely.
Prodige, Profuse, Superflue, Superfluo, Immodice, Nimis, Praeter modum.
Excessiuement. S. Exceter, a town in Deuenshire. Isca, cae. foe. ge.
Exchange. Commuto, as. Permuto, as. Immuto, as. Demuto, as. Changer. S.
Exchange, or exchaunging. Commutatio, Permutatio, Mutatio, Immutatio,
Conuersio, onis. foe. ge. Changement. S. Exchange, where as gain or lucre is
gotten at the second hand Promercium, ij. n. genesis * Exchaungeour. Permutator.
m. ge. Exchaunger of money. Campsor, * Telonarius, ij. Collibistes, ae.
Trapezita, ae. Mensarius, ij. Argirognomon, onis. m. g. Changeur. Exclamation.
Epiphonema, atis. neu. ge. Exclamatio, onis. foe. g. Exclamation. S.
Exclamation to make. Exclamo, as. Vocifero, as. Clamorem tollo. S' escrier,
Exclamer. S. Exclude or to shut forth. Excludo, is, si. Mettre horse. Exclude an
heir from his enheritaunce, or possession, which is properly applied to
ungrateful parents. Abdico, as, are. Renoncer pour enfant. Quod verbum cum suo
substantiuo (Abdicatio) refertur ad ingratitudinem paternam versus haeredem.
Excludid, or shut forth. Exclusus, sa, sum. Exclus. Iecte horse. S.
Excomunicate. A coetu piorum concilioque abigere. A sancta matre abdicare,
Programmate diro and execrabili configere. Excommunier. S. Excuse, or a
defense. Abologia, ae. foem. genesis Excuse ou defense. H. Excusable, or worthy to
be excused. Excusabilis, le. Excusable, digne d' estre excuse. S. Excuse.
Excuso, as. Eximere ex culpa. Excuser. S. Excuse a matter. Caussam accipere,
vel nectere, vel opponere. Excuse him self. Causari, Expurgationem habere,
Opponere causam, Satisfacere. S' excuser. S. Excuse to find. Rimam inuenire.
Excuse him self by reason of the time. Causam confer in tempus. S' excuser
sur le temps. S. Excuse, or an excusation.. Excusatio, Purgatio, onis. foe.
genesis Causa, ae. Latebra, ae. f. g. Un excuse. S. To have an excuse, or
excusation. Excusationem habere. Auoir excuse. S.

To search excuses. Causas colligere. Cercher excuses. S

Excused. Excusatus, a, um. With good excuse. Excusate. Auec bonne excuse. S

Execrable, or detestable. Sacer, Execrabilis, Deuotus, ta, tum. Execrable, and
detestable. S. Execration, or cursing. Detestatio, Blasphemia, ae. foe. genesis
Execration. Execute. Exequor, eris. Executer. S. Execute an other man's office.
Vicariam operam impendere. Execute an office. Curare officium. Execute the law.
Lege agere, Exequi rem iudicata^. Execution, or charge of an office, or
ministration of an office. Cura, ae. Onus, eris. Pensum, Pensi. n. g. Vide
Charge. Execution. Poena, ae. Supplicium, cij. n. g. Execution. S Execution to
do. Lege agere. Proceder par execution. S. Executours of the deaddes will.
Executores mandatorum supremorum, Arbitri testamentarij, Curatores
testamentorum, Executores, and funeratores. Executeurs de testamens. Executour
of an areste, decree, or sentence. Transactor sententiae and iudicati,
Iudicatae rei peractor, Exequi rem iudicatam iussus, Exequendae rei iudicatae
disceptator. L' executeur d' un arreste ou sentence. S. Exemplify. Ascribo,
is. Exscribo, is. Transcribo, bis. Exemplifier. Pals. Exemplication of a
record. Transumptum, ti. n. g.* Exemplefier, or he that follows the example
of others. Exscriptor, ris m. ge. Exempt. Immunis, e. Adiect. Exempt de fair
aucune charge. S. Exempte from labor, or wars for age, or lamenes, as old
men be. Emeriti, orum. m. ge. Exempte, or priueleged by the kings charter.
Exemptus, a, um. Exempt. S. To exempte. Rudem donare, Eximere turbae, Dare
vacationem rerum omnium, Dare immunitatem. Exempter. S.

Exempted from the war. Vacationem militiae habere. Exempted to be. Rude
donari, Rude^ accipere. Habere immunitatem, Legibus solutum esse. Estre exempt.
S. Exemption, fraunchise, or liberty. Immunitas, it is. foe. ge. Exemption. S.
Exercise. Agitatio, Exercitatio. Studium, ij. Vsus, us. Subactio, onis. f. g.
Exercitium, ij. n. g. Exercice. No small exercise. Non parua exercitatio. Grand
exercice.

Exercise of marchaundise. Negotiatio, onis. foe. ge. Trafique. Call. Exercise
in all marcial deades, or feats of arms, for defense of the body. Ludus
gladiatorius. Exercise in corporal acts, or feats of actiuitie. Ludi
Gymnici. Call. Exercise of a weighty matter, or office, or the execution of a
charge or office. Functio, onis. foe. ge. L' execution de quelque charge ou
office. To exercise. Exerceo, es. Fungor, eris, nctus sum, and exigit ablat.
Tracto, as, aui. Exercer. S.

To exercise some art. Artem aliquam tractare, vel exercere. Exercer. S.

To exercise him self. Exercitatione^ suscipere, Exercere se. S' exercer. S.

To exercise to write. Stylum exercere. S' exerciter a escrire. S.

Exercise authorite, office, or rule. Potestatem agere, Officia obire. Exercer
son office. S. and Honores gerere. Idem. Exercise a vile occupation. Mereo, es.
Labourer. S. Exercised. Accitus, a, u^.*Exercitatus, ta, tu^. Exercite. A man
exercised to some thing, or in some thing, Vir exercitatus ad rem aliquam, vel
in re aliqua. Homme exercite a quelque chose. S.

To be exercised to the war. Habere vsum belli. Estre exercite a la guerre. S.

Exerciser of any of these five games, casting of the ball, or trendle,
leaping, running, throwyng of the darte, wrestlyng. Pentathlus, Quinquertio,
onis. m. g. Call. Exercises, or studies. Placita, orum. n. g. Exheredate.
Abhominor, aris.* Exhaeredo, as. Exhereder, ou disheriter. Exheredation.
Abominatio, Exhaeredatio, onis. foe. genesis Exheredation. S. Exhibit, or show
forth. Exhibeo, es. Praesto, as. Exhiber. S. Exhibition. Exhibitio, onis. f.
ge. Munus, eris. neut. genesis Subsidium, ij. n. g. Exhibition. S. Exhort.
Adhortor, aris. Admoneo, es. Cohortor, aris. Hortor, aris. Moneo, es. Prouoco,
as. Voco, as. Suadeo, es. Exhortor, taris, Vti hortatione. Exhorter. S.
Exhortation. Hortatus, us. Suasio, onis, Adhortatio, onis. Cohortatio,
Exhortatio, onis. f. g. Enhort ou enhortement. S. Exhortour. Suasor, ris.
Consuasor, Adhortator, Exhortator, oris. m. g. Enhorteur. S. Exile. Exilium,
lij. Relegatio, Proscriptio. Eiectio, Ademptio ciuitatis. Exile, banissement.
S. Exiled. Deportatus, Relegatus, Proscriptus, a, um. Bani. S. To exile.
Proscribo, is. Relego, as. Exilio afficere, In exilium agere, Ciuitatem alicui
adimere, Redigere ad vel in peregrinitatem. Enuoyer en exil. Banir, bannir. S.

Exiled, or banished to be. Exulare, Ire in exilium, Nomen exulis subire,
Ciuitatem amittere. Estre bani. S. Exiled, or banished person, an exul.
Apolis, Extorris, Exul, Proscriptus. Un bani. S. Expectation. Expectario, onis.
f. g. Expectation. S. Expectation to have. Expecto, as. Attendre. Expedient or
necessary it is, or it is come to pass. Expedit. Imp. Expeditum est, Oporter,
bat. Il est expedient. S. It is expedient for me to put away this fear. Mihi
expedit hunc metum abstergere. Il est expedient que ie oste crainte. S.

Expedition, dispatching, deliverance, or furniture. Expeditio, onis. foem.
genesis Confectio, onis. foem. gener. Expedition. S. Expel. Ago, is. vt venena
membris agit. Exigo, is. Expello, is. Eiectione^ facere. Iecter horse par force.
S Expelled. Exactus, a, um. Expulsus, a, um. Chasse. S. Expend, or lay out
money. Expendo, is. Expensum facere, vel far. Dispendere, Erogare, Impensam
facere, Sumptum facere, vel ponere. Despendre. S. Expenses. Expensae, arum.
Impendium, dij. Impensa, ae. Sumptus, us. Expensum, si. Erogatio, onis. f. ge.
Despense. S. Et sumptuarius, a, um. Ang. Pertaining to expenses. Appartenant a
la despense. S. Expenses in voluptuousnes. Hedonius.* Expenses of a journey.
Viaticae expensae. Expenses for vittayle. Annonariae expensae. Viget. To
provide expe^ses, necessaries, or vittailes in a iournay. Viaticor, aris.
Parare viaticum. Plaut.

Experience. Experientia, Periclitatio, Periculum, Res, Documentum,
Experimentum, ti, neut. ge. Experience. S. Et Expers, it is. Lacking experience.
Qui est sans experience. Experience is the maistres of all things, or
experience teaches us many things. Multa discuntur, percipiuntur ab
experientia. Multarum rerum scientia, cognitio, intelligentia, doctrina
capitur, sumitur, hauritur ab experientia and vsu. Multa cognoscuntur
experientia duce. Multarum rerum magister est vsus, multa docet, ostendit,
patefacit, viam aperit vsus ad multarum reru^ scientiam. Erudimur valde,
instituimur, expolimur. Ex ignorantiae tenebris educimur, ad scientiam multarum
rerum experientia duce peruenimus. Multarum rerum scientiam co^sequimur,
eperientiam secuti, experientia docti, experientia magistra. Experience, or
proof to make. Experior, iris. Periclitor, aris. Experimentum capere, Facere
periculum, Experimenta agere, Tentare. Experimenter. S. Expert, or of
experience. Expertus, a, um. Prudens, it is. Experiens, peritus. Solers, it is.
Homme expert. Thou art not expert, thou art inexperte, or thou art a rude
fellow. Rudis es, imperitus, nullius experientiae, vsu minime doctus, vsus
expers, rudis in rebus, nouus tanquam hospes, plane peregrinus, ab vsu rerum
imperitus, parum versatus in rebus, rerum inscie^s, ignarus, expers.
Peregrinaris in rebus. Res non tractasti, experientia vacas, vsum non habes.

Expertly. Expert, Prudenter. Prudemment. S. Expire, or end. Expiro, as.
Expirer. S. The time is expired. Abijt tempus. Le temps est expire. S.

Explayne. Explico, as. Delico, as. Edissero, is, rui. Explano, as.
Interpretor, taris. Expliquer. Explicate, or declare. Conficio, is. Explico,
as. Interpretor, aris. Declaro, as. Idem. Explicated, or declared. Explicatus,
ta, tum. Interpretatus, ta, tum. Explique. S. Exployt, or to do a thing.
Administro, as. vide Do Exploye study. Confer studium. Exposition.
Commentarium, Commentum, ti, Commentarius, Hypomnema, it is. Interpretamentum,
Interpretatio, Explanatio, onis. foe. g. Expositio, onis. f. g. Exposition.
Exposition brief, compendious, or short. Scholiu^, ij. n. g. Vne gloss, vne
brieue interpretation. Exposition of fables. Mythologia, Fabulae explicatio.
Call. Expositoure. Commentarius, ij. Commentarius aliquando commentator dicitur.
Seruius super primo Georg. Superfluam mouent quaestionem commentarij. haec Call.
Expound a thing to children. Aperio, is. Comme^tor, aris. Expono, is.
Interpretor, aris. Memoro, as. Praelego, is. Explano, as. Exposer quelque chose
aux enfans. S. Express. Exprimo, is. Exprimer. Express in words. Consequor,
eris. Exprimo, is. Refero, rs. Express by wrytinge. Exigere stylo, Exprimere
scriptis. Exprimer par escript. S. Express much in brief sense. Rotundo ore
loqui. Express, or to porture a thing grossly with a cole or such like.
Adumbro, as. Pourtraire quelque chose auec le charbon. S. Express plainly the
pythe of the matter. Medullo, as.* Expressly. Definite, Nominatim, Private.
Expresseement. S. Expulsed. Expulsus, sa, sum. Iecte horse. S. Extend. Extendo,
is. Protendo, is. Pertineo, es. Promico, as. Promineo, es. Tendo, is. Contendo,
is. Dilato, as. Pertendo, is. Porrigo, is. Propago, as. Explico, as. Exporrigo,
is. Intendo, is. Dispa^do, is. Distendo, is. Erugo, as. Produco, is. Promoueo,
es. Estendre. S. Extend in bredthe and length. Porrigo, is. Este^dre. Extend
forth at length. Promineo, es. Propendeo, es. Extended in breadth or length.
Porrectus, Distentus, ta, tum. Extendu. S. Extending forth at length.
Prominentia* Prolatio, Distensio, Porrectio, Proiectio, Intensio, sieve
Intentio, onis. Estendement. S. Exterior, or outward part of any thing.
Superficies, iei. f. ge. Le dessus de toutes chooses. S. Extinguishe. Extinguo,
is. Restinguo, is. Coerceo, es. vt Coercere ignes. Esteindre. S. Extinguished.
Extinctus, a, um. Esteinct. S. Extinguishe or to put out fire. Incendium
compescere. Esteindre un feu. S. Extinguishemente. Extinctio, onis. Restinctio,
onis. foe. ge. Esteignement. S. Extol. Amplifico, as. Extollo, is. Fero, rs.
Magnifico, cas. Eleuare, In altitudinem trahere, Efferre, Erigere, Excellere,
Subrigere, In sublime tollere. Esleuer. S. To extolle one to honor. Adornare
aliquem, prouehere, Collocare aliquem in aliquo gradu. Esleuer en honneur. S.

Extol with boasting. Glorior, aris. Iacto, as. Efferre se, Spiritus sibi
sumere, and arrogantiam. S' esleuer, glorifier. S. Extorrion. Exactio, onis.
foe. g. Leuement de deniers. S. Etorcioner. Grassator, ris. Expilator,
Spoliator, Direptor, Praedator, Populator, Depeculator, ris. mas. ge. Pilleur.
S. Exactor, ris. m. genesis Qui lieue and contraind de payer aucuns deniers. S.
Extorcioner, or a poaler. Accipiter pecuniaru^. Pla. Extortion of captains
taking from the poor soldiers any part of their wages. Stellatura. ae. f.
ge. Lampridius in Alexandro. Annonas (inquit) militum diligenter inspexit:
Tribunos, qui per stellaturas militibus aliquid abstulissent, capitali poena
affecit. Extort. Abstorqueo, es. Compilo, as. Expilo, as. Pillar. S. Extorted.
Compilatus, a, um. Grassatus, a, um. Expilatus, a, um. Qui este pille. S.
Extree of a Carte. Axis, is. mas. ge. Un esseau. S. Extreme. Summus, a, um. Le
plus hault. S. Extreme age. Decrepita senectus, Summa senectus. Grande
vieilesse. S. Extreme part, or extremity, or end, or furthermoste part of a
thing. Terma, it is. n. g. Terminus, Finis, Extremum, Meta, tae. foem. ge. Le fin
de toutes chooses. Extremely. Perdite, Sum. Supra modum, Extra modum.
Extremement. S. Extremity of the law. Summum ius. vt Summum ius, summa
iniuria. Extreme law, extreme wrong. Exull. Vide Exile. Exulcerate.
Exulcero, as. Exulcerer. S. Exulceratorie, or that makes exulceration.
Exulceratorius, a, um. Exulceratoire. vt Exulceratoriu^ medicamentum. A
medicine exulceratorie. Medicament exulceratoire. S. Exulceration. Exulceratio,
onis. foe. g. Exulceration. Exulcerated, or broken in the flesh. Exulceratus,
ta, tum. Exulcere. S.
F. ANTE. A.
F, A letter by Priscian nombred among the mutes, of others among the half
vowelles, because it begins with a vowel and ends in it self. This letter
also by another name is called Diga^ma Aeolicum, which in figure or form
does represent g g, It has the same sound with us that PH has among the
Grecians, whereby it happens that certain Greek words received among the
Latins, are written with F, which they write with PH As Fan^a, Fanu^. etc.
The ancient writers used this letter F as an aspiration, for they said
Fordium, Trafo, Vefo, For Hordium, Trah^, Veho. There were besides amongst them
which did use B, in stead of F, As Bruges, For that which we rather name
Fruges. To this lettre gave C. Caesar the force of a consonant, which to this
day remains in certain old wrytenges and monuments: Notwithstanding his
opinion in this point was never of all men allowed. It sounds more sharper
then V consonant, and the sound thereof rises and falls according to the
quality of his place, and the letter following. In the notes of antiquity F
was written for Fecit, Fuit, Foelix, Familia, Fit, Figura, Fides, Filius,
Fuluius, Februarius, Fur: Faustum quoque declarabat diem. Fable, or a tale.
Fabula, ae. f. g. Apologus, gi. m. genesis Vne fable. Fable, or to tell fables.
Fabulor, aris. Fabloyer. S. Fabler, or a teller of fables. Fabulator, oris, m.
ge. Un conteur de contes and fables. S. Fabulous, or faulse. Fabulosus, sa,
sum. Fabularis, re. Fabuleux. S. The moralization, or interpretation of a
fable. Mythologia, ae. foe. g. Affabulatio, vel fabulae explicatio. Call.

Fabulositie, or fabling. Fabulositas, tatis. foe. ge. Et Fabulose. Fabulously,
or lyingly. Face. Facies, ei. Vultus, us. m. genesis Face. H. Aliquando pro
integro corpore sumitur, and tunc per synecdochen. A strange face, or
countenance. Peregrina facies. Un face d' estraunge sort. H.

At the first face, at the first sight. Prima front, Primo aspectu, Prima
specie, Prima inspectione. De prime face. S.

Face deadly, or fearful countenance. Facies cadauerosa. Un regard
espouentable. H. Face to face. Aduersus, Eregione. Face to face, as whereof the
foreparts ar seen. Aduersus, a, um. Viz a viz. S. And whereof the hinder part
is seen, that is. Auersus, a, um. Destourne. S. Facility, easines, or an
inclination. Procliuitas, tatis, foe. ge. Facilite, aisance, ou inclination. S.
Et facilitas, tatis. Idem. Facile, or easy. Facilis, le. Facile, aise. S.
Facily, or easyly. Procliuiter, facile, Expedite. Facilement, aiseement. S.
Fact. Actus, tus. m. g. Factum, ti. n. g. Un faict^ S. Factoure. Actor,
Factor, Negotioru^ curator, Procurator. m. g. Qui fait quelque chose. Et
Procuratorius, a, um. Ang. Pertaining to a factour. Apartinant a procureur.
Call. Procureur. Call. Faculty. Facultas, it is. foe. g. Faculte. S. Fade, or to
fall as flowers do. Defloreo, es. Defloresco, scis. Se deflourer, perdre sa
fleur. S. Fading or falling away as leaves of a tree. Deciduus, a, um. And
after Plinius. Sometime subject to falling, as the heads of deares, which be
yearly cast. Subject a choir. S. Fadome. Vlna, ae. foe. g. Vne brassee. S.
Faggot. Fascis, is. m. g. Un faggot. S. Faggot, or a bauin of dry wood. Fascis
cocularius. Vne bouree. S. Fail, be feable of courage, or to be sick.
Aegroto, as. Estre malade. S. To fail, err, or to do amiss. Delinquere,
Corruere, Errare, Deerrare, Labi, Offendere, Pererrare, Culpam admittere, Noxam
comittere. Failler. S.

Fail, or forsake. Deficio, cis. Labasco, scis. Labascor, eris. Labor, eris.
Faillir. S. To fail of promise. Fallere promissum, fallere fidem, Non stare
promissis, Distituere condictu^, Non praestare promissum, Fidem suam
labefactare. Faillir de promise. S.

Fail for faintness. Succumbo, is. To fail in courage. Animos submittere,
Deficere animis. Defaillir de courage, perdre courage. S.

Feign. Vide Feign. Faynte. Languidus, a, um. Remissus, Sublestus, a, u^. Qui
languit. S. Fainte and imperfect color. Dilutus color. Fainte hearted.
Micropsichus, Pusillanimis, e. Pusillanimus, a, um. Timidus, da, dum.
Pusillanime, Craintif. Call. Fainte, or feeble to be, or wax. Elanguesco, scis.
La^gueo, es. Languesco, Deficere. Defailler. S. Faintely. Remiss. Faintness,
or want of courage. Remissio, vel Dissolutio animi, Abiectio animi, Animi
demissio. Defaillance de courage. S. Fair. Almus, a, um. Bellus, a, um.
Honestus, ta tu^. Decorus, a, um. Venustus, Pulcher, chra, chrum. Speciosus, a,
um. Formosus, a, um. Beau. S. Vt Virgil. Quamuis ille niger, qua^uis tu
ca^didus esses:
O formose puer, nimium ne creed colori.
Although that he be swarthy black,
though thou be passing white:
Fair boy, let not thy fading form
thee over much delighte.
Is she so fair as they say she is? Est ne vt fertur forma? Est elle si belle
qu'on dit? S.

It is a fair or very beutifull virgin. Virgo est haud deformis, Facie venusta
virgo, Virgo electae pulchritudinis. Lectae venustatis virgo nobilissima.
Dotibus formae, pueritiaeque cunctis praeclara, Formae dotibus infignita, Virgo
insignis spectabilisque formae, Mulier decora facie, Liberali, and insigni
vultu, In ea est formae pulchritudo, and corporis proceritas pulchritudine
conspicua, Eximiae formae and aetatis adultae, Forma and aetate florens,
Aetatis flore, and formae veneratione inter reliquas insignis. Est decora, and
egregia forma, Virgo facili, and non incelebri vultu, Nihil ea ipsa formosius,
venustius, pulchrius, speciosius, Virgo insignitae pulchritudinis, Mira specie,
Pulchritudine eximia, Egregia forma, atque aetate integra, Elegantia formae
praedita, Exuperanti forma.

Very fair. Perpulcher, chra, chru^. Perdecorus, a, um. Fort beau. S.

A fair little one. Pulchellus, la, lum. Assez beau. S.

Fair and clear without clouds. Serenus, a, um, Sudus, a, um. Tranquillus,
a, um. Clair and serain, sans nuees. S. Fair and easily, fair and softely.
Suspenso gradu, Tacit, Tacito, Tacito pede. Sans bruit. S. Fair weather. Aer
tranquillus, Dies serena, vel tersa, Bona tempestas, Serena tempestas,
Liquidissima coeli tempestas, Coelum serenum. Beau temps. S. Fair, or fairly.
Pulchre. Aduerb. Fair somewhat. Bellulus, a, um.* Fair speech or flattery.
Blanditiae, arum. Blanditia, ae. foe. g. Blandissemement, flaterie. S. Fair
speaker. Blandidicus, a, um. Blandus, a, um. Placidus and comis in sermon.
Doulx en parler. Fair to the eye. Nisaeus, a, um. vt Nisaeus equus. A fair
and goodly horse, grounded upon Nisaea, a certain place in the region of
Media, where as good breed of horses is. I saw him sitting on a fair horse.
Vidi illum in equo praestantissimo, Vidi illum equo insigni insidentem, Pulcher
equus latin dicitur: verum illud loquendi genus est rusticum. Ie l' ay veu sur
un bean cheual. Cor.

Fair woman. Luculenta foemina, Pulchra, Speciosa. Vne femme fort belle. S.
Fair and clear to make. Sereno, as. Clarifico, as. Tranquillo, as. Fair
claire, and serain. Call. Sereno Refertur ad sydera. Fair and dry to be, or
wax. Seresco, scis. Deuenir sec. Call. Fair, market, or mart place. Emporium,
rij. n. g. Forum nundinarium, Mercatus, us. m. g. Nundinae, arum. foe. g. La
foire, March. S. Fairenes, or beauty. Pulchritudo, Species, Forma,
Formositas, Elegantia, Honor, oris. m. g. Beaulte. Fairenes of wether.
Serenitas, tatis. foe. genesis Serain, beau temps. S. Fairer. Pulchrior, ris. Plus
beau. S. Fayres, or Elfes. Lamiae, Empusae, Laruae, Lemures, um. m. g. Les
fees. Fayres, or Elfes of the wells. Naides, sieve Naiades, dum. foe. genesis
Fayres, or Elfes of the woods. Napaeae, sieve Dryades, dum. foe. genesis Fayres,
or Elfes of the hills. Oreades, um. f. ge. Fayres, or Nymphs of the Sea, the
daughters of Nereus and Doris, having the form of women, their names are
Nesaee Cymothoe. etc. Lege Hesiod. in Theogon. Nereides, dum. foe. g. Fairest.
Pulcherimus, a, um. Venustissimus, a, um. Tresbeau, ou tresbel. S. Faith.
Fides, ei. foe. ge. Foy. S. Thy faith will be doubted of, mistrusted, or come
in suspicion. Venies in suspicionem infidelitatis, parum bonae, sincerae,
rectae fidei. Tua fides in suspicionem adducetur, in dubium veniet, in dubium
vocabitur, erit, cur de tua fide non been homines existiment, suspectus eris
nomine infidelitatis, causam afferes de tua fide secus existimandi.

Faithful. Fidelis, le. Fidus, a, um. Fidele. S. To be faithful. Fidem
colere, Fidelem esse. Estre fidele. S.

Faithful wytnes. Antipas.*Locuples testis, Grauis testis. Tesmoing veritable,
and digne de foy. S. Faithful to be. Praestare fidem. Estre fidele. S.
Faithfully. Fideliter, Ex fide, Religiose. Fidelement. Faithfulness. Fidelitas,
it is. foe. genesis Fidelite. S. Faithfulness of old time, or old faith. Cana
fides. Vne foy entie^e du temps pass. S. Fallible, or crafty. Subdolus, la,
lum. Cauteleux, fin. S Fallible speech, or craftiness. Stropha, ae. foe. genesis
Versutia, ae* foe. g. Finesse. S. Fallibly. Subdole, Caute, and fraudulenter.
Cauteleusement, finement. S. Fall. Casura, ae. Lapsio, onis. Lapsus, us. Casus,
sus. m. g. Cheute. S. Fall, or falling of the hears. Defluuium vel profluuium
capillorum, Comarum defluuiu^. Cheute de cheueulx. S. Fall. Cado, is. Labor,
eris. Ruo, is. Accido, is. Concido, Excido, is. Incido, is. Intercido, is.
Occido, Collabor, eris. Corruo, is. Delabor, eris. Cheoir. S. Collabasco, scis.
To be apt to fall. Estre pressed a cheoir. S. Fall again. Recido, is. Rechoir.
Et Relabor, eris. ide^ Fall down. Dilabor, eris. Deruo, is. Occido, is.
Prolabor, eris. Subsido, is. Decido, is. Pessum ire. Cheoir en bas. S. Fall
down flat, or prostrate. Procido, is. Humi procumbere. Cheoir tout plat. S.
Fall down grievously. Corruo, is. * Cheoir. S. Fall down headlong. Praecipitem
dari, vel ferri. * Fall down in doing reverence. Accido, is. vt Accidere ad
pedes alicuius. Fall down suddenly. Abire praeceps, Labo, as Cheoir subitement.
S. Fall down together. Concido, is. Corruo, is. Cheoir ensemble. Fall first.
Praelabor, eris. Cheoir deuant. Fall from. Excido, is. Cheoir de quelque lieu.
Call. Fall into some thing by chance. Incido, is. Tomber d'aduenture en quelque
chose. S. Fall in decay, or worse state. Ruino, as. * Fall often. Caso, as.
Lapso, as. Cheoir souuent. S. Fall out. Excido, is. Vt supra. Fall out of
memory, or remembrance. Excidere, vel refugere e memoria. Fall sick.
Morbesco, scis. * Aegroto, as. Estre malade. To be sick. Fall sick again.
Remorbesco, scis.* Fall suddenly. Incido, is. Fall upon. Supercido, is.
Superincido, is. Cheoir dessus. Call. Fallen. Caducus, a, um. Qui chet. S. Et
Succiduus, a, um. Nutans, tantis. Nutabundus, da, dum. Angl. Ready to fall
down. Qui chet presque. S. Fallen again. Recidiuus, a, um. Fallen, and
scattered here and there. Dilapsa. and Diffluxa. Fallen down. Occiduus, a, um.
Fallen from prosperity to misery. Ebeatus, a, um, Deiectus de gradu
foelicitatis. Fallen in age. Decliuis Aetate, vel Senio.* Fallen in decay.
Ruinosus, a, um. Ruineux. S. Fallen of, as the heads of dear which be yearly
cast. Deciduus, a, um. Subject a cheoir. Call. That falls by it self.
Cadiuus, a, um. Defluus, a, um. Qui chet de soymesme. S.

Falling. Cadens, it is. partic. Labens, Procidens, Ruens, entis. Cheant ou
tombant. Falling, and coming to nothing. Defluus, a, um. Vt supra. Falling
evil, or foul evil a sickness. Epilepsia, Morbus caducus, Morbus comitialis,
Morbus Herculeus, Labor caducus, Sacer morbus, Morbus sonticus, Mayor morbus,
Lues deifica vel sacra. Epilepsie, mal caduque. S. Et Caduarius, Herculanus, a,
um. Ang. He or she that is diseased with the falling evil. Falling from, or
out of the proper place. Procide^s, it is. Cheant. Et Procidentia, ae. Is the
act of such falling. Cheute* S. Falling in decay. Ruina, ae Excidium, ij.
neut. genesis Ruin. S. Falling often, or ever falling. Cassabundus, a, um. Crebro
cadens. Sext. Pom. Falling of the here, or the here castinge, or the mowting
of birds and beasts. Defluuium, ij. Defluxus, us. m. g. Decoulement. S.
Fallowe dear. Dama, ae. Dub. g. Un daim. H. Fallowe field. Aruum, ui. vel
Aruus, i. m. g. Champ, ou terre labourable. S. Fallowe land, which is trimmed
for corn. Seges, it is. foe. ge. Vne terre labouree. S. Fallowe, or land
trimmed for winter corn. Ager vel fundus sulcatus, Praedium sulcatum. Fallowe,
or to till land. Aro, as. Sulco, as. Couper, ou labourer la terre par rayons.
S. Fallowe, or tylled land, called the somer fallowe or tylthe. Vernactum, ti.
neut. ge. vel veruactum, Ager noualis, Nouale, Virg. Requietus ager. Iachere.
S. Fallowes or straikes of a carte. Vietus, us. Vietus, ti. secun. Calep.
False. Falsus, a, um. Vanus, a, um. Faulx. S. Pseudos Is of the same
signification, if it be joined to a nowne: as thus, Pseudopropheta, tae. mas.
genesis A faulse prophet. Fauls prophet. S. And every word whose beginning is
with Pseudo, has the signification of untrue, or false. What so ever thou
say is false. Quicquid dicis, falsum est, minime verum, alienum a veritate,
a veritate seiunctum, abest a vero, aduersatur veritati, mendacium est, falsa
est omnis oration tua, quicquid loqueris, falso loqueris.

False accusation, complaynt, or report. Criminatio, Sycophantia. Faulse
accusation. S. False accuser, complayner, or reporter. Sycophanta, tae. mas.
gen Calomniateur. S. False brother. Pseudodelphus, i. m. ge. Falsus frater, vel
subdolus frater. False coyner. Adulterator monetae. Fauls monnoyeur. False
color in speaking. Pigmentum, ti. n. genesis False lie, suggestion, or tale.
Pigmentum, Subreptio, onis. foem. genesis Mendacium, cij. n. g. Menterie.
Mensonge. S. False fellow, or which tells false things. Falsidicus, ca,
cum. Falsiloquus, a, um. Qui dit chooses faulses. S* False lies and tales to
carry between man and man. Sycophantisso, as. Sycophantor, aris. Sycophantias
struere. Accuser faulsement. Call. False lying queen. Pseudolia, ae. f. g. *
False messenger. Pseudoangelus, Mendax nuntius. Fauls messagier. False measure.
Adulterina mensura. Faulse mesure. S. False, or counterfayte money. Adulterina
moneta. Faulse monoye. False of promise. Perfidus, a, um. Faulseur de foy. S.
False opinion. Adumbrata opinio, Ficta, Falsa vel vana opinio. False, or feigned
friend. Simulator, oris. mas. genesis False posterne, or back door. Pseudothyrum,
i. n. genesis Faulse port. S. False prophet. Pseudopropheta, ae. mas. genesis Fauls
Prophet. S. False roufe of a chamber, house, seller, or vaulte. Camera, ae.
foe. ge. Vaulte. S. False servant. Pseudolus, li. m. g. vel Pseudulus, li. m
g. Falsus seruus. False speaking or writing. Stribligo, inis. vel Scribligo,
inis. foe. ge.*Soloecismus, mi. mas. genesis A nostris Imparilitas dicitur. Call.
False tale carier. Sycophanta, ae. foe. g. False wytnes. Pseudomartyr. Testis
ab religione alienus, falsus testis. Falsehode, or falsenes. Falsitas, tatis.
f. ge. Falsimonium. ij. n. ge. Faulsite. S. Falsehode against promise.
Perfidia, ae. foem. genesis Deloyaulte. S. Falsehode, or a deceit covered. Fucus,
ci. mas. ge. Tromperie couuerte. S. Falsify. Falsifico, cas. * Falso, as.
Fair faulx. Call. Falsyfie lettres. Falsare, Adulterare vel corrumpere literas.
Faulser des lettres.. S. Falsify faith or promise. Prodere fidem, religionem
violare, Fidem fallere, Periurare vel peierare, Decedere fide. Faulser sa foy.
S. Falsifier, or forger of deeds or wrytynges. Falsarius, ij. Subiector, oris.
mas. genesis Faulsaire. Call. Falsely. False, Falso, Inique, Subdole, Vane,
Fallaciter, Perperam. Faulsement. S. Falsenes. Falsitas, tatis. f. g. Faulsite.
Falsenes of heart. Demissio, onis. f. g. vt Demissio, vel timor, vel Infractio
animi. Falsenes of the tongue. Vanitas, it is. f. g. Menterie. S. Fame. Fama, ae.
Opinio, onis. f. g. Bruit. Call. Fame or brute which lasts ever. Pertinax
fama. Constans fama, vel rumor, Firmus rumor. If thou fynishe thy work, thy
fame shall be immortal. Si tua scripta ad exitum perduces, perficies, conficies,
absolues, si tuis scriptis finem impones, extremam manum impones: perpetua
erit, aeterna, immortalis tua fama, nunquam deficiet, consenescet, peribit,
obscurabitur, extinguetur, delebitur, nulla dies tuam famam terminabit, nullum
temporis spatium circumscribet, nulla vetustas corrumpet, vigebit in omnes
annos tua fama, omnis te posteritas cognoscet, tuas lauds excipiet ac
tuebitur, nomen tuum immortalitati commendabis, immortalitate donabis,
immortalitatis praemium consequeris, non simul cum corpore mors tuum nome^
extinguet, delebit, auferet, tuum nomen ab interitu vindicabis, in hominu^
memoria tenebis, aeterna laud illustrabis, decorabis, afficies, ornabis, de te
posteritas omnis audiet, ac loquetur.

Fame is, or the fame goes, or it is reported. Affertur fama, Loquitur fama,
Rumor est, Rumor ait, Aiunt. Le bruit est. S. Fame that is little, or an inkling
of a thing. Rumor clemens, Rumusculus, Auditio tenuis aut leuis. Bruit petit
and legier. S. Good fame. Fama bona, Claritas, Claritudo, Nomen, Splendour,
oris. m. g. Bon bruit. S.

Which is of no fame. Ignobilis, Inhonorus, Ignominis. Qui n' ha null bruit. S.

Fame spreader. Famiger, Famigerator, Famigerulus, a, um.* Family, or
household. Familia, ae. f. g. La family. S. Family, or kyndred. Familia,
Locus, ci. Prosapia, Tribus, Stirps, Gens, it is. f. g. Famille and race. S.
Familier, or of ye family or house, or of ye household. Domesticus, a, um.
Familiaris, re. Domestique. Familier, or of familiarity. Familiaris, re.
Popularis, re. Familier. S. Familier, or trusty friend. Familiaris,
Co^iunctus, a, um. Perfamiliaris, re. Fort familier. S. Familier to be.
Amicitia vti, Vti aliquo valde familiariter. He is my very familier friend.
Multos annos vtor eo valde familiariter, magna mihi cum illo familiaritas,
vsus, familiaris consuetudo intercedit, mihi est familiaritate coniunctissimus,
nihil est nostra familiaritate coniunctius, eo sic vtor, vt nec familiarius
vllo, nec libentius, quotidiana mihi cum eo consuetudo est, ita mihi familiaris
est, vt nihil esse possit coniuctius, magno mihi familiaritatis vsu coniuctus
est, obstrictus est, amicitia nostra summa^ ad familiaritate^ peruenit.

Familiarity. Consuetudo, Conuersatio, Familiaritas, Societas, Sodalitas,
Sodalitium, tij. neut. g. Familiarite. S. Familiarly. Familiariter.
Familierement. S. Famine. Bulimia, ae. foe. genesis Fames, is. foe. ge. Famine ou
faim. S. Famished. Effractus fame. Famous. Famige rabilis, le.* Clarus, a, um.
Famosus, sa, sum. Illustris, Inclytus, a, um. Luculentus, Nobilis, le. Famae
comme^datioris homo, Splendidus, da, dum. Summa claritate conspicuus. Qui ha
grand bruit and est bien renomme. Famous physician. Archiatrus, tri. Primier
medicin. A chief physician. S. To make famous. Illustro, as. Rem aliquam
splendidam and lucida^ facere, Rei lucem and splendorem afferre, Rem nobilitate
claram and celebrem reddere.

Fan to fan corn. Ventilabrum, bri. n. ge. Flabellum, li. n. g. Pala, lae.
foe. ge. Vne pelle. Call. But Flabellum, Is that which in summer is carried in
the hand to fan wind with all. vt Ovid. Mouere ventos tenui flabello, To
gather or move wind with a little fan. Et Door cape hoc flabellum and
ventulum huic sic facito, dum lauamur. Dorus take this fan, and fan wind
on the virgin thus, till we are washed. Fanning. Ventilatio, onis. f. g.
Esuentement. Call. Fantasy. Phantasia, ae. Visio, Visum, si. n. g. Fantasy.
Phantasiae, Be certain fantasies which be thus defined. Some say they be
affections which is none other but the memory wrapped, or corruption of
understanding. Other affirm the same to be an operation of the power
fantastical, that is to say: a moving from the carnal sense. Certain other
also take them to be of the substance or power animal, keeper of the primative
figures or forms in their natural se^ce. Of this may you read more at large
in the.4. book of Vel^ur. cap. 9. Fantasy, will, or mind of any man.
Intentio, Se^tentia, Sensus, Arbitratus, tus. m. g. Fantasy and volunte d' vne
person. S. To, or according to my mind. Ad meum sensum, Ad arbitrium, Meo
arbitratu. Quomodo mihi persuadeo, Meis auspicijs. A, ou selon ma fantasy. S.
Mea sententia, Quantum ego opinione auguror.

Fantasied, or fantasyinge, or having mind to a thing. Animatus, a, um.*
Fantastical. Phanicus, a, u^ *. Fanaticus, ca, cum. vt Homo fanaticus. A man
beside him self, or fantastical, or mad. Homme qui est horse de soy. A man
that is fantastical. Phantasticus, Imaginatiuus. Fantastique.

Fardell. Sarcina, ae. f. g. Onus, eris. n. ge. Fascis, scis. m. g. Un fard^au.
S. Heavy fardell, or burden. Grave pondus. Pesant fardeau. S.

To carry a fardell. Onus accipere, vel portare. Porter fardeau. S.

Fare curiously, or daintely. Ligurio, is. Licharder. S. Et Liguritor, vel
Trix. An. He or she that loves to fare curiously or daintely. Fare ill, or ill
to fare. Male valere. Fare well, or to fare well. Been valere, Recte valere. Se
porter bien. S. Fare well. Vale, leto, te, tote, re. verb def. A dieu. S. Fare
well he. Valeat. Et Valiant, Fare well they. I bade him fare well. Iussi
hominem valere. Ie luy di a dieu. S.

Fare well you. Valeas. Fare well ye. Valeatis. Faries. Vide Elfes and Fayres.
Far. Long, Procul. Loing. S. He is far of from me. Long a me abest. Il
est loing de moy. S.

He is very far of. Long gentium abest. Il est fort loing. S.

Far fetched and dear boughte, is good for ladies. Difficilia sunt pulchra,
Quae rara, sunt chara. Alexander. Far gone, or ru^ne in age or time.
Prouectus aeuo. Far of. A long, E longinquo, Eminus, Procul, Protenus,
Protinus, De procul. De loing. S. Far from the city. Procul vrbem, Procul
ab vrbe. Loing de la ville. S. Far from the wall. Procul muro, Procul murum
vel Procul a muro. Loing du mur. S. Far, or far of, or far from.
Longinquus, qua, quum. Loingtain. S. Places far of, or distant far.
Distantes loci, Longinqui loci. Lieux loingtains. S.

Farrenes. Longitudo, inis. Distantia, ae. foe. g. Longinquitas, it is. f. g.
Loingtainete. S. Farsie, or fassie, which is a sore upon a beast or horse.
Petimen, enis. n. g. Farce, fill full, or to stuff. Farcio, is. Infarcio, is.
Farcir. S. Farte. Crepitus, tus. mas. ge. Un p^^. Farte against one. Oppedo,
is. Farte, or let a farte. Fundere crepitum, Pedo, is. pepedi, ere. Crepitum
reddere, facere vel fundere. Peter. S. Farthest. Longissime. Tresloing. S.
Farthing. Semiobulus, Quadrans, it is. m. g. Fashion, form, manner, or shape.
Forma, ae. Modus, di. M^s, ris. Typus, Figura, ae. f. g. Facon. S. After the
fashion or manner of a friend. In modu^ amici. A la facon d' un ami. S.

Of a new fashion. Nouo modo, Nouo genere. D' vne nouuelle facon.

Fashion of the body. Lineamentum, ti. neut. gener. Lineament. Call. Fashion of
the face. Ductus oris. Figura oris. Facon de visage. S. Fashion, or gesture of
the hands in dancing or caruing of meat. Chironomia, ae. f. g. Science de
fair gestes des mains. Call. Et Chironomus, mi. n. g. Ang. He that is of such
fashion, or gesture. Fashion, or to shape. Formo, as. Figuro, as. Faconner.
Fashioned, or formed, or shaped. Formatus, a, um. Form. Fashioned like a pype.
Canaliculatus, a, um. Faite in facon de canal. Call. Fashioned, or figured
diversely, or after diverse forms. Multiformis, e. De diuerses manieres and
facons. Call. Fast. Firmus, a, um. Stabilis, Constans, it is. Firm. Fast a
sleep, or being in a dead sleep. Soporatus, a, um. Ensomme. Call. Fast bound,
or tied. Religatus, a, um. Fast for a boat or ship. Primesius. ij.* Fast
holder, or that which does hold or keep fast. Tenax, cis. Om. ge. Qui tient
fort. Fast speech. Tolutiloquentia, Volubilis sermo, Nonius. Fast writer.
Exceptor, oris. Impiger scriba, Viuidus calamo. Fasten, bind, or to make fast
or sure. Adigo, is. Affigo, is. Figo, is. Ligo, as. Pango, is. Refigo, is.
Alligo, as. Adalligo, as. Deligo, as. Necto, is. Praeligo, as. Scirpo, as.
Vincio, is. Configo, is. Defigo, is. Suffigo, is. Lier ou ficher. S. Faste^
unto. Affigo, is. Alligo, as. Ficher a quelque chose. Fasting. Ieiunium, ij. n.
g. Le ieun ou la ieune. Fasting days. Feriae esuriales. To ordain fasting.
Instituere ieiunium. Ordonner vne ieune. S.

To fast. Ieiuno, as, ar^. Ieuner, ou iuner. S.

To be sick of fasting. Laborare ieiunio. Estre malade de ieuner. S.

Fasting or abstaining. Ieiunus, a, u^. Qui est a ieun. Fastened. Fixus, a, um.
Fiche. Fastened unto. Affixus, a, um. Fiche a quelque chose. Fastened upon.
Suffixus, a, um. Fastened under. Subfixus, a, um. Fastnes. Tenacitas,
Firmitudo, Firmitas, tatis. f. g. Fermete. Call. Fate. Fatum, ti. n. g.
Destinee. Call. Fatal, or pertaining to desteny. Fatalis, le. Fatal, fee. Vide
Ladies fatal. Father. Genitor, Pater. Pere. H. Et paternus, a, um. Patritus,
a, um. and Patrius, a, um. Ang. Of a father, or pertaining to a father.
Paternal. Call. Et Patrizo, as, vel Patrisso, as. Ang. To be like a father, or
to play the father. Resembler a son pere, fair comme son pere. Call. Thou
ought to reverence thy father above all men. Debes patrem tuum color ante
omnes homines, est cur patri tuo praecipuum quendam honorem praestes, tui
muneris, tui officij, tuarum partium est, tuum munus, tuum officium, tuae
parts sunt, hoc in te conuenit, ad te pertinet, a te postulatur, hoc tibi
omnis ratio suadet, proponit, vt patrem tuum praecipuo quodam honor colas,
observes, tuearis, afficias.

Father in law. Vitricus, ci. m. g. Matris meae maritus. Le parastre ou beau
pere. Call. Father in law by the wife. Socer, Vxoris pater. Le pere de ma
femme. H. Father to my great grandfather. Abauus, i. mas. ge. Proaui pater. Le
pere de bisayeul. S. Fatherles child. Pupillus, vel la, Orphanus, Orbus patre,
Orbus. Pupille. H. Fatherly, or like a father, or of a father. Paternus,
Patrius, a, um. Paternel. Call. Fatherly. Pattern, Patrie. Fathers brother.
Patruus, Frater patris. Le friar de mon pere. Fathers uncle. Patruus magnus. L'
oncle de mon pere. Fathers great uncle. Abpatruus, ui. m. genesis Frater abaui.
Fathom, which is a measure of six foot, or else it is as much, as a man may
meet with his arms spread. Hexapeda, ae. Vlna, ae. foem. gener. Vne brassee.
Fatigate, or make weary. Defatigo, as. Fatigo, as. Lasso, as. Fatiguer. S.
Fatigated. Defatigatus, Fatigatus, a, um. Lassus, a, um. Fatigue. S.
Fatigation. Defatigatio, Fatigatio, onis. foem. genesis Fatigation. S. Fat, or
fatness. Adeps, Pingue, Pinguedo, Pinguitudo, inis. foe. g. Graisse. S. Fat
by feading, as in a frank, pen, or coupe nourished to fat. Altilis, le.
om. ge. Nourri pour engraisser. Call. Fat eater, or lover of fat things.
Pinguinarius, ij. m. g. Qui aim chooses graisses. Call. Fat fed, as poultrie
and swyne be. Saginatus, a, um. Engraisse. Call. Fat body. Pingue corpus.
Fat fingers. Digiti pingues. Fat, or fertile fields. Agri pingues. Lucret.
Fat venayson. Ferina pinguis. Grass venaisson. S. Fat horses. Pingues
equi. Gras and en bon poinct. S. Fat, or fertile gardens. Horti pingues.
Fertiles. The boy handled the pot with his fatty fistes. Puer vnctis tractauit
calicem manibus. Horat.

Fat of a hog, or swyne. Lardum, di. neut. gener. Du lard. S. Fat, or
fatty. Crassus, a, um. Obesus, a, um. Opimus, a, um. Pinguis, e. Gras. S.
Fat, or grease. Sagina, ae. Vnguen, inis. neut. genesis Quoduis pingue. Fat
and lusty to feade. Obesco, cas. Farcire, Huberare, Obesare, Opimare,
Pinguefacere. Engraisser. S. Fat to wax. Crassesco, scis. Glisco, scis.
Pinguesco, scis. Deuenir gras. S. Fatted, or dressed with fat. Adipatus, a,
um. * Linitus vel vnctus adipe. Fatten, or to make fat. Crasso, as. Farcio,
is. Impinguo, as. Opimo, as. Pinguefacio, cis. Sagino, as. Engraisser. S.
Fatting, or feading of cattle. Saginatio, onis. foe. g. Fartura, ae. foe. g.
Engraissement des bestes. S. Fatnes, or fat of the body. Aletudo, Crassitudo,
Crassities, Pinguedo, Pinguitudo, inis. foem. ge. Graisse. S. Faulcon. Falco,
onis. Haliaeetus, vel Halioetus, ti. mas. g. Faulcon. H. Faulconer.
Accipitrarius. ij. m. ge. Falconarius, ij. mas. genesis Faulconnier. S.
Faulconarie, or th'arte of a Faulconer. Falconaria, ae. foe. g. Accipitraria,
ae. foe. g. Faulconnerie. S. Fault, crime, or an offense. Culpa, ae. Delictum,
ti. Erratum, ti. Mendum, di. Menda, dae. Noxa, ae. Noxia, ae. Offensa, sae.
Peccatum, ti. Praeuaricatio, onis. foe. g. Fault. S. I am not in fault. In me
conferenda causa non est, culpa vaco, culpam ego non sustineo, expers culpae
sum, affinis culpae non sum, purus a culpa sum, culpam ignoro, longissime absum
a culpa, long remotus a culpa sum, tam absum a culpa, quam qui maxim, culpae
mihi non sum co^scius, extra culpam sum, in culpa non sum.

To pardon a fault. Noxam remittere. Pardonner vne fault. S.

To punish a fault. Peccatum in altero vindicare. Punir vne fault. S.

It is my fault. Mea culpa est. C' est ma propre fault.

It is not my fault, or I am not in fault. Abest a me culpa, Noxia careo. Ce
n'est point ma fault.

It is thy fault. Flagitium tuum est, a te peccatum est, Penes te culpa est,
Residet eius rei in te culpa, In te haeret omnis haec culpa. C'est ta fault.

If it be our fault. Si est nostrum peccatum. Si c' est nostre fault. S.

Faulty to be, or to be in fault. Esse in noxia, Teneri culpa. Estre en
fault. S. Not to be in fault. Noxijs vacuum esse, culpa vacare, vitio carere,
Extra culpam esse. N' estre point in fault. S.

To do, or commit a fault. Commereri culpam vel noxiam, Noxiam admittere,
Offendere, Culpam in se admittere, Culpam contrahere. Fair quelque fault. S.

To lay the fault on an other. Culpam confer in alterum, Auertere culpa^ in
alterum. Causam in aliquem confer, Culpam in alteru^ traijcere, vel
transfer. Reiecter la fault sur autruy. S

Fault, being a little or small fault. Mendaculum, li. n. g. diminut. Vne
petite fault. S. Fault in Ortographie, or writing. Menda, dae. f. g. Vne
fault. S. Fault, or offense, which is acknowledged and confessed, or the
state of persons which are arraigned or accused. Reatus, tus. m. g. La
condition and l' estate de ceux qui sont accuses. Call. Fault of stealing away
men's children. Plagium, ij. n. g. And he that steals a man's children,
Plagiarius, ij. m. g. Faults in battle. Offensiones Martiales. Faulty.
Obnoxious, Reus culpae. Qui a deserui d' estre puni pour quelque fault. S.
Faulty, or full of faults. Mendosus, a, um. Vitiosus, a, um. Plein de faults.
S. Faune calfe. Hinnulus, li. Hinnuleus. Faon. H. Favorable. Beneuolus, a, um.
Dexter, ra, ru^. Fauorabilis, Propitius, a, um. Favorable bien voulant.
Favorable to make. Propitio, as. Propitior, aris. Appaiser. S. Favorably.
Indulge, Beneuole. D' un bon voloir. S. Favor, or beauty. Species, ei.
Forma, ae. Formositas, atis. Elega^tia, ae. Pulchritudo, dinis. Honor, ris. m.
ge. Beauty. S. Et speciosus, a, u^. Ang. Full of favor or beauty. Beau. S.
Favor, or beauty inciting carnal desire. Venus, eris. foem. genesis Favor
tendered toward ye cominaltie, or people. Popularitas, Studium and cultus
populi. Amity and humanite enuers le peuple. Call. Favor. Allubesco, scis.
Aspiro, as. Colo, is. Comprehendo, is. Faueo, es. Studeo, es. Suffragor, aris.
Fauoriser. S. Favor a cause, matter, or suite. Subscribo, is. Fauoriser. S.
If God favor my petition, or vow. Si voto Deus subscripserit.

Favored. Amicitia vel fauore complexus. Favor. Amicitia, Beneuolentia,
Gratia, Studiu^, ij. n. g. Favor, oris. m. g. Faueur. S. Favor of the people.
Aura, ae. Faueur de peuple. S. Thou have lost the favor of the people, not by
thine own offense, but by thy friends. etc. Factu^ est non tua, sed tuorum
culpa, vitio tuorum, non tuo contigit: vt populi studium, gratiam,
beneuolentiam amiseris, perdideris, vt e studio, gratia, beneuolentia populi
excideris, vt populus no^ amplius tibi faueat, studeat, suffragetur, tui
studiosus, tibi amicus, been in te sit animatus, Studium populi, gratiam,
beneuolentiam non tua, sed tuorum iniuria tibi eripuit, ademit, abstulit, non
per te, sed per tuos, non a te, sed a tuis, non tuo, sed tuorum merito, iniuria
tuorum potius, quam tua, effectum est, commissum est: vt populum tui studiosum,
been in te animatum, tibi amicum iam non habeas, vt gratiosus apud populu^,
charus populo, in populi gratia minime sis, vt nullum populi studium, nullam
gratiam, aut beneuolentia^ teneas, obtineas, possideas, vt fauente populo,
suffragante, benigno, tibi amico, been erga te animato, tui studioso non
vtaris, gratiam tuam apud populum non tua, sed tuorum culpa exstinxit, ex amore
populi effluxisti.

Favored among the common people, or of the common sort. Gratiosus, a, um.
Popularis, re. Fauori ou fauourise. S. To much favored. Nimium gratiosus.
Trop supporte and fauorise. S.

Favored of many. Fauorabilis, le. Fauori, fauorise. S. Favorer of the
people, or of the common wealth. Publicola, ae. Qui populu^ colit and obseruat.
Call. Fauorer of causes judicial by way of corruption. Venalis ascriptor and
proscriptor. Cic. Favoring others, or tendering favor to other. Studiosus,
a, um. Fauorisant. S.
F. ANTE. E.
FEable. Effoetus, a, um. Imbecillis, e. Infirmus, a, um. Tenuis, e. Debilis,
le. Impotens, te^tis. Foible. S. Feable courage. Pusillanimitas, tatis. foe. g.
Feable of courage, or fearful. Pusillanimis, e. Pusillanime, Craintif. Call.
Feable in the loins, or shanckes, which can not stand for weakness. Elumbis,
e. Elumbus, a, u^. Errene. Call. Feable or fainte. Elanguidus, a, um. Foible.
Feable, or weak. Effoetus, a, um. Flaccidus, a, um. Imbecillis, e. Imbecillus,
a, um. Infirmus, a, um. Inualidus, a, um. Tenuis, e. Debilis, le. Foible. S.
Feable old age. Aetas effoeta. Lucret. Et Effoetum corpus, vel infirmum. A
feable body. A feable wit. Imbecille, Imbecillum, Infirmum, Inualidum, Tenue
vel debile ingenium.

Feable, or weak common wealth. Castrata respublica. Feabled for lack of
meat. Bulimia strictus, Effractus fame. To make feable. Eneruo, as. Infirmo,
as. Labefacto, as. Tenuo, as. Fra^go, is. Debilito, tas. Affoiblir. Feable, or
faynte to wax. Elanguesco, scis. Flaccesco, scis. Elangueo, es. S' affoiblir
and deuenir debile. S Feabled, or made weak. Detrimento fractus, Debilitatus,
Infirmatus, ta, tum. Affoibli. S. Feablenes. Imbecillitas, Infirmitas,
Inualetudo, Debilitatio, onis. Debilitas, tatis. f. g. Foiblesse. S. Feablenes
of the loins. Lumbago, inis. f. ge. Vitiu^ and debilitas lumborum. Feablenes
of the mind, or of the spirit to any act, Torpor, oris, m. g.*Animi
debilitas, Imbecillitas vel infirmitas animi. Feably. Imbecilliter, Infirm,
Tenue, Tenuiter. Foiblement. S. Feade. Alo, is. Cibo, as. Depasco, scis.
Depascor, sceris. Farcio, is. Pasco, scis, paui. Susteneo, es. Vescor, eris.
Paistre. S. Feade as a beast does. Pabulor, aris.* Pasco, scis. Pascor,
sceris. Carpere herbam. Paistre. Et Pastu^ capessere. Pasturer. S. Feade
excessiuely, or hastily. Commessor, aris. Ligurio, is. Lurco, as. Gourmander,
ou manger auidement. Call. Feade in a francke. Farcio, cis. Vide Fat. Feade
often. Pascito, as. freq. Repaistre, ou paistre souuent. S. Feade, or keape
cattle. Compasco, scis, aui. Paistre les bestes. S. Feade with milk, or to
give suck. Lacto, as. Allaicter. S. Feade with money. Suppeditare aere, vel
precio, vel sumptu. Feade with words, or to deceive. Dare verba. Pastre aucun
de parolles. S. Feader af cattle. Compastor, Depastor, oris. m. g. Feading
beastly, or unreasonable ingurgitation. Alogia. vt Aug. ad Casul. Atte^dite
(inquit) que^admodum Dominicae diei non paruo prandio reficiatur, sed alogia
delectetur. Feading of cattle. Depastio, onis. Pastus, us. m. ge. Le paissage
ou paissement de bestes. S. Feading pasture for cattle. Pascuum, i. n. g. Et
Pascua, orum. n. g. in plu. number. Pasturage ou pastis. Feale, or to handle.
Petere tactu, Attrecto, as. Tractare, Contrectare. Manier. S. Feale, or to
handle preately with delectation. Palpo, as. Palpor, aris. Manier doulcement.
S. Feale, or to perceive. Sentio, it is, si. Sentir. S. Feale, or perceive
before. Praesentio, is. Praesentisco, scis. Sentir premier. S. Feale pain, or
grief. Doleo, es. verb. neut. Auoir douleur. S. Fealer. Palpator, oris. m. g.
A flaterer. Flateur. S. Fealing. Tactus, us. Vide Touching. Fealty. Fidelitas,
tatis. Fides, ei. f. g. Feaulte. S. Fealty to do. Verba iurare. With feaultie.
Fideliter. Fealement. S.

Fear. Contractio, onis. Formido, inis. Frigus, oris. Metus, us. Pauor, ris.
Terror, ris. Timiditas, Timor, ris. Timos, ris. Tremor, oris. m. g. Crainte. S.
Fear causing, or making fearful. Terrificus, a, um. Qui done frayeur. S.
Fear coming suddenly. Panicum, ci. n. genesis Vne soubdaine paour. Fear in
speakinge, as where the speaker fearing much, uneath can utter his tale for
fear. Tertiatio sermonis. Et tertiatia verba, Be ye words or tales so
pronounced fearfully, and not perfectly uttered. Fear of a thing to come.
Praemolestia, ae. Cic. Fear of mind to do any thing repugnant to the law of
God. Religio, onis. f. g. Vide Religion. A mind that fears God nothing.
Intactus religione animus.

Fear away, or drive away with fear. Absterreo, es. Espouanter. S. Fear,
or to dread much. Metuo, is. Timeo, es. Afformido, as. Extimesco, scis.
Pertimesco, scis. Praeformido, as. Reformido, as. Fort craindre. S. To deliver,
or to put one out of fear. Excutere metum de cord alicuius, Aliquem metu
leuare, Liberare aliquem metu, Adimere metum alicui. Deliurer ou mettre quelqu'
un horse de crainte.

Fear, or to make afraid. Conterreo, es. Exanimo, as. Exterreo, es. Extimeo,
es. Terrefacio, cis. Terreo, es. Trepido, as. Offerre metum, Terrorem alicui
afferre, inijcere, incutere, facere, Terrore infer, Perterrere,
Perterrefacere, Perpauefacere, Animos consternare. Espouenter. S. Afficere
aliquem timore, vel formidine, formidinem opponere idem. Feared, or made a
fearde. Absterritus, ta, tum. Deterritus, ta, tum. Exanimatus, ta, tum.
Attonitus, ta, tum. Espouente. S. Fearful. Exanguis, e. Exanimis, e.
Exanimus, a, um. Exanimatus, a, tum. Formidabilis, le. Formidolosus, a, um.
Meticulosus, a, um. Pauidus, a, u^, Suspensus, a, um. Territus, a, um^ Timidus,
a, um. Tremebundus, a, um. Craintif. S. Fearful, terrible, or to be feared,
or able to fear any man, or worthy to be feared. Terribilis, le. Horrens it is.
Horribilis, le. Espouentable. S. Fearful to be. Afformido, as. Paueo, es.
Pauesco, scis. Suspendo, is. Timeo, es. Vereor, eris. Formido, as. Metuo, is.
Tremo, is. In timore esse, extimescere. Craindre. S. Timere seruorum est:
Vereri liberorum. Fearful to be much, or to be sore afraid, or to tremble
for fear. Horresco, scis. Pauesco, scis. Verb. inch. Horreo, es. Craindre,
trembler de paour. Fearefullye. Formidolose, Obnoxie, Pauide, Religiose,
Suspensa manu, Timide, Trepidanter, Trepide, Meticulose. Craintiuement. S.
Fearinge. Metuens, it is. Pauens, it is. Timens, it is. Verens, entis. Particip.
Craignant. S. Fearinge nothing, or nothing afearde. Confidens, Impauidus, a,
um. Intrepidus, da, dum. Fidus, da, du^. Qui ne craint rien. S. Fearinge to
transgress the law of God. Religiosus, a, um. That loves and fears God.
Qui aim and craind dieu. S. Feast. Conuiuium, Prandium, Symposium, Epulum li.
n. genesis Festin, banquet. H. Et Conuiualis, le. Ang. Pertayninge to a feast or
banquet. De banquet. S. Et Epularis, re. Appertenant au banquet. S. Feast
gueste, which is invited to ye ba^quet or feast. Conuiualis, Conuiua, ae.
Epulo, onis. mas. genesis Qui est conuie ou inuit au banquet. S. Feast made at a
burial, moledaye, or enterrement only. Silicernium, funebre conuiuium. Call.
Feast made at the natiuitye or birth of children. Repotia, Epulae, quae
aeditis in lucem liberis adornantur. Le banquet qu'on fait es natiuities des
enfans. H. Feast or a banquet made after supper. Pocoenium. Harmolaus Bar. non
inelegante vocabulo Comessationem a coena dixit. Petit banquet apres auoir
soupe. S. Feast made at a burial. Epulum ferale, Epulae ferales, Epulum
funebre, Parentalia, orum, n. genesis Cic. Conuiue de funerailles. H. Feast
magnifique, su^ptuous, or made with great cost and charges. Genialis Coena,
Dapalis, Opipara, Opima, Adipalis, Dubia, vbi tu dubites quid sumas potissimum.
Saliaris, Persicus apparatus. Un banquet magnifique. S. Beggars feast, a poor
scamblinge as we say in our english proverb: Pick rise and go. Coena
paupertina, Hecales coena. Conuiue de mendiant. H.

To make a great feast or banquet. Celebrare conuiuium, vel epulas, Conuiuari,
Agere conuiuium. Fair grand banquet. S.

To feast or to banquet. Agitare conuiuium, Comessari, Compotare, Epulari.
Banqueter. S.

Feast or to banquet with the costliest dishes that may be gotten. Saliarem in
modu^ epulari. Cic. Mensas conquisitissimis epulis extruere. Banqueter
magnifiquement and richement. H. Feast or banquet having five sundry dishes.
Pentapharmacum conuiuium.* Feaster, or banqueter, or feast maker. Conuiuator,
Obsonator, vel trix. Symposiastes, ae. m. genesis Qui fait banquet ou un faiseur
de banquets. S. Feasts or dinners, where is no wine. Nephalia, orum. n. g.
Caninum conuiuium. Gellius lib. 13. Notat Caninum prandiu^, velut Abstemium,
and vino vacuu^, nam canis nihil vini curat, aut cupit. Disner de chien. S.
Feasts or holy days. Solemnia, orum. n. g. Feriae, arum. Festi dies. Festes.
S. To celebrate a feast, or holy day. Festum diem agere, sieve agitare,
Celibrare festum. Celebrer vne feste. S.

Feast of S. Peter, S. Paul. Petrea, Paulea, oru^, n. g. La feste saint
Pierre, S. Paul. Cic. enim in Ver. sic festos dies vocat, Marcellea, Verrea.
etc. Feasts that priests are wont to make. Coena aditialis sacerdotij, quam
dabant capessentes sacerdotium. H. Feast whereunto only men do come. Andronae.
* Epula vel Epulae virorum. Feasts whereunto only women do come, which may
be called the gosseps feast. Conuiuia vel compotationes mulierum. Feastinge or
banquetinge. Epulatio, onis. foe. genesis Comessatio, onis. foe. genesis Accubatio
epularis. Vide Banquetinge. Festival or pertayninge to holy days. Festus,
ta, tum. Festiuus, a, um. Feriatus, ta, tu^. Feste, celebre. Feate, neat, or
proper. Scitus, a, um. Venustus, ta, tum, Elegans, it is. Mignon ou mignonne.
Pals. Featnesse, Lenocinium, Elegantia, ae. f. genesis Co^cinnitas, tatis. foe. g.
Mignonnette. S. Feate of actiuitye or of arms, or the first price that is
done. Tyrocinium, ij. n. genesis Et Tyrunculus, li. m. g. Ang. A young doer of
feats. Feate of arms. Ars duellica. Arma, orum, n. genesis Faicts d'arms. S.
Featlye. Site, Dextere, Venuste, Eleganter. Mignonnement. S. Very featelye
done. Site factum and venuste. Faict bien mignonnement. S.

Februarye the first month. Februarius, Intercalaris me^sis. Feurier. S.
Fed. Pastus, Alitus, a, tum. Altus, a, tum. Repeu. S. Fed fat. Saginatus,
ta, tum. Graisse. Call. Fed fat in a francke or pen. Altilis, le. Adiect.
Vide Fat. Fed full. Saburratus, a, um. Satur, a, um. Saoul. S. Fed swyne.
Caluinarius porcus. * Porcus saginatus. Propert. Feign, couloure, or to
dissemble. Adumbro, as. Fingo, is. Mentior, tiris. Simulo, las. Induere
simulationem, ementiri. Faindre. S. Feign matters or make excuses dilatorie.
Caussas nectere. To feign or inuente some thing. Affingere, Confingere,
Comminisci. Faindre and controuuer quelque chose. S.

To feign himself to be one that he is not. Fingere se alique^ esse. Faindre
d'estre celuy qu'on n'est pas. S.

Feyned matter or leasinge. Commentum, ti. Figmentum, ti. n. genesis Chose faint
and controuuee. S. Feyned or devised. Commentitius, a, um. Fictitius, Fictus,
a, u^. Co^mentus, ta, tum. Co^mentatus, ta, tum. Controuue and faint. Call.
Feyned or false frendshippe. Fucata amicitia. Feyned or false title.
Subdititium Ius. Feynedlye. Ficte, Simulate. Par faintise. S. Feyner. Fictor,
Simulator, toris. m. g. Qui faint, simulateur. S. Feyninge. Insimulatio,
Simulatio, onis. foe. genesis Simulation, faintise. S. Without feyning, Ex animo,
Simpliciter, Vere. Sans faintise. S.

Feigninglye. Fabulose, Ficte. Faintment. S. Feyninge. Pigmentum, ti. n. g.
Feynte. Look in fainte. Field. Campus, Ager, ri, m. g. Un champ. Et Agellus,
li. Ang. A little field. Diminut. Petit champ. S. Feel. Attrecto, as. Manier.
Call. Feel or taste. Sapio, is, iui. Sentir. Call. Felicitye. Foelicitas, it is.
Prosperitas, it is. Beatitudo, inis. foe. ge. Bonheur, felicite. S. Fell, or
cruel. Saeuus, a, um. Dirus, a, um. Durus, a, rum. Horridus, da, du^.
Crudelis, le. Cruel. Call. Fell or cruel to be. Saeuio, is. Vide Cruel. Fell,
or cut down, or to shragge. Succido, is. To cut be low. Couper par le bas. S.
Et succiduus, a, u^. Ang. Able or ready to be felled or shragged. Felon sore.
Furunculns, Tagax, cis. m. g. Felon or a thief. Fur, Latro, Trium literarum
homo. Larron. S. Felonye in stealinge cattle. Abigeatus, us. m. g. Felonye to
commit. Obligare se furti. Co^mettre cas de larrecin. S. Confess, or to render
himself culpable of felonye or theft. Obligare vel astringere se furti. Se
render culpable de larrecin. S.

Felonious or giltye. Furti reus. Fellow, companion, or mate. Comes, it is.
Co^sors, it is. Socius, ij. Sodalis Com. genesis Compaignon. S. To take a fellow.
Assumere in societatem. In societate^ accipere. Adiungere sibi socium. Prendre
a compaignon. S.

Fellow at schole, or schole fellow. Condiscipulus, li. m. genesis Compaignon
d'escole. S. I will be thy fellow and companion so long as thou will.
Assiduum, perpetuu^, vsque dum volueris, quoad volueris, comitem me habebis, me
tibi comitem praebebo, haerebo tibi vsque, tibi affixus ero, dum tua voluntas
feret, nunquam a te, nunquam a tuo latere, nisi te volente, lubente,
concedente, permittente, discedam, nulla me res, nisi tua voluntas auellet abs
te, amouebit, seiunget, diiunget, abiunger.

Fellow in war. Commilito, onis, m. g. Compaignon de guerre. S. Fellows in
the house. Domestici.* Fellowshippe. Comitatus, us. Consortio, onis.
Consortium, ij. Contubernium, Societas, Collegium, ij. n. genesis Compaignie. S.
Fellowship, co^munalty, brotherhoode, or fraternity. Sodalitas, Sodalitium, ij.
n. ge. Comunalte. S. To keep the fellowshippe or company of thieves. Componere
societatem cum praedonibus. S'associer auec des larrons. S.

Fellowshippe in war. Commilitium, ij. n. genesis Societe en la guerre. Call.
Fellowshippe, brethren or company, which be all of one brotherhoode,
corporation, fraternitye, guilde, or misterye. Sodales, ium. Com. g.
Fellowshippe to keep, or to join in fellowshippe. Socio, as. Associo, as.
Consocio, as. Associer. S. Female or a woman. Foemina, Foemella, Mulier, is.
foe. g. Femme, Femelle. H. Female, of the feminine sort. Foemininus, a, um. De
femelle ou de femme. Call. Female Dragon. Dracaena, ae. Vide Dragon. Fence or
fensure. Vallum, li. Munitio, Munimentu^, Agger, is. m. g. Munition, defense.
Call. To fence, or to enuironne or enclose about with hedges or such like.
Obsepire, Sepire, Intersepire. Enuirronnir d'hayes. S.

Fence before a wall. Antemurale, lis.* Fenced about with hedges. Septus, a,
um. Enuironne de hayes. S. Fenced with any kind of fence, as buckler, shield,
or target. Scutatus, ta, tum. Garni ou arm de bouclier. Call. Fence, or to
defend. Defendo, is. Protego, is. Vide Defend. I have defended you, or taken
your part against your enemies. Ego pro te contra hosts steti: te ab aliorum
calumnijs defendi: pro te, vt pro aris and focis, pugnaui: tuas parts acerrime
defendi.

Fenel herb. Foeniculus, li. Foeniculu^, li. Marathru^, thri. n. genesis Du
fenoil. S. Fenell wild. Foeniculum syluestre, Mysincum, ci. n. genesis
Hippomarathrum, n. g. Fenouil sauuage. S. Fenell of the sea. Crithmon. Fenouil
marin. S. Fenne or marishe. Palus, udis. foe. genesis Un marez. S. Fenne or mire
in hell where Charon keeps his boat. Stygiae paludes, Poeticum figmentu^.
Fenugreke herb. Foenum graecum, Silicula, Silicia, ae. foe. g. Fenegrec. H.
Fennye, or of the fenne, or pertayninge to ye fenne. Paluster, ra, ru^.
Paluster, ris, re. Qui est de marez. S. Feofement. Possessio, onis. foe. genesis *
The Laweyers call it. Feoffamentum, ti. n. genesis * Feoffement. Rast. Feofement
executed upon condition, or where a man grants his possession, or right to
one man for the use and behoof of another. Fiduciaria possessio. Feofemente of
trust. Fidei commissum, Possessio fiduciaria. *. Feofemente to grant or make.
Possessionem dare. Feofee. Emancipatus, ti. m. g. * Le feffee. Lit. Feofee of
trust. Fidei commissarius, Possessor fiduciarius. Feofed. Emancipatus, ta,
tum.* Feofer. Emancipator, oris. m. g. * Le feffour. Lit. Ferye boat to carye,
or pass over ryuers with. Cymba, bae. foe. genesis Nasselle a passer les gens. S.
Ferye boat to carye horses over the water. Hippago, inis. foe. g. Hippagoga,
ae. foe. genesis Liu. Ferme. Praedium, ij. n. g. Villa, lae. Colonia, ae. foe.
genesis Vne ferme. S. A little ferme. Praediolum, li. n. gen.* Haeredium, ij. n.
genesis Haerediolum, li. n. genesis Vne petite ferme. S.

Ferme in the country. Fundus, di.* Villa rustica. Ferme which stands nighe
the cittye. Anteurbanum praedium. Ferme without the walls of a Cittye or
town. Suburbanum praedium, Villa suburbana. Fermer which hyreth lands.
Redemptor, Publicanus, ni. m. g. Fermiere. S. Fermerye or place for sick
folk. Valitudinariu^, ij. n. g. Fern called she fern. Thelypteris, is. foe.
g. Plini. li. 27. Cap. 9. Fern or brake. Filix, cis. f. g. Feuchiere, ou
fougiere. Fern called Polipodye. Filicula, lae. foe. g. Herb appelle
polipode. S. Fernye ground, or place where fern grows. Filictum, ti. n. g.
Lieu plein de feuchiere. S. Ferret. Furunculus, li. Viuerra, ae, foe. g. Furet.
H. Ferroure, horseleche, or smythe which cures horses. Veterinarius medicus.
Medicin de Cheuaulx. Fertile or fruitful. Fertilis, le. Ferax, cis. Foecu^dus,
da, dum. Huber, is. Fertile. S. Fertile, or fruitful to be. Abundo, as. Estre
fertile. Place fertile or fruitful. Locus fructuosissimus. Lieu fertile. S.

Fertile gardins. Foelices horti. Iardins fertile. S. Fertile ground. Solum
laetum. Terre fertile. S. To make fertile. Huberare, Foecundare, Foetifico, as.
Render fertile. S.

Fertile woman, Mulier foecunda. Femme fertile. H. Fertilitye. Fertilitas,
Saturitas, Feracitas. Foecunditas, tatis. foe. g. Foelicitas terrae. Fertilite.
S. Fertilly. Fertiliter, Foecunde. Fertilement. S. Fervent. Aestuosus, Ardens,
it is. Feruidus, a, um. Fervent. S. Fervent, carnal, or fleshly desire of love.
Concupiscentia, Cupido, inis. foe. g. Fervent cold. Malum frigus. Acerbum
frigus. Intolerabile frigus. Fervent lover. Acer amator. Qui aim forte. S.
Fervent to be. Ardeo, es. Feruentlye. Ardenter, Feruide. Feruement. S. Fesaunt.
Phasianus. Phasidis auis. Faisant. H. Fesaunt keeper. Phasianarius, ij. m. g. Un
faissannier. Young or little fesauntes. Pulli phasiani. Faisanneaux. S.

Festival. Festiuus, a, um. Solemnis, ne. Feste. S. Fetch. Adfero, rs,
Affero, rs. Aller querir. Pals. Fetch a compass in speakinge. Ambagio, is,
ire. Ambagibus vti vel circuitione. Fetch by calling, or to go call one.
Accerso, sis. Vt aliquem accersere. Aller querir aucun. S. Fetch breath or
wind. Prospiro, as. Recipere anhelitum, spiritum ducere. Animu^ recipere,
Respirare. Reprendre son haleine. S. Fetch or to furnishe one with water.
Aquor, aris. Fournir d'aue. Call. Vnde Tor, Trix, Tio. Fetcher of water.
Aquator, oris. m. g. Porteur d'eaue Fechinge of water. Aquatio, onis. foe. genesis
Aport d'aue. Call. Fether. Penna, Pluma, ae. Pen, gross plume. H. Et pennula,
ae. Dimin. and Plumula, ae. Dimin. Ang. The little or small fether. Plumette.
S. Et Plumarius, a, u^. Vel pumeus, a, um. Ang. Of fether. De plume. S. Fether
worker. Plumarius, ij. m. genesis Fether which is fastened to the wynge of a
hawk, that has broken any of her feathers: this exercise among Fauconers is
called stoppinge. Plectrum, tri. n. gen.* Fetherbedde. Puluinus, ni. m. g.*
Culcitra plumaria. Un lict de plume. Fethered. Pennatus, a, um. Plumosus, a,
um. Plumatus, a, um. Empenne. Call. Fethered, or full of feathers. Plumosus, a,
um. Plumeux, ou plein de plumes. S. Fethered, or made of feathers. Plumatilis,
le. Faict de plumes. S. Fetherlesse, or which has few feathers or none. De
plumis, e. Implumis, e. Qui est sans plumes. To begin to have feathers. Plumo,
as. Plumesco, scis. Commencer a auoir des plumes. S.

Feathers bearing. Penniger, ra, rum. Plumiger, ra, rum. Qui a plumes. Feathers
growinge right up in the top of a birds head, as of a Capon, Heron, Lark,
or Pecocke. Cirri, orum. m. genesis Feathers or hear about the feet of chickins
or pigeons, which do let them to go, and by translation all things that let the
goinge. Tricae, arum. foe. genesis Fetter, or to put on fetters or gyues, or to
bind ye feet. Compedio, is, ire. Lier les pieds. S. Fettered or bound, by
the feet. Compeditus, a, u^. Lie par les pieds. Fetters or gyues. Boiae, arum.
Compedes, dum. Copulae, arum. Neruus, ui. Podicae. Fers de pides des esclaues,
ou d'autres malfaicteurs. H. Few. Aliquot, paucus, a, um. Peu. S. Pauculus, a,
um. Ang. Very few. Fort peu. Few men. Perpauci homines. Fort peu de gens. S.
In a few days after. Paucis interpositis diebus. Peu de iours apres. S.

To harken in few words. Ascultare paucis.

Fewest of all. Paucissimus, a, um. Trespeu. S. Fewnes in nombre. Paucitas,
tatis. foe. genesis Petite nombre. S. Fever. Febris, is, f. genesis Fiebure. S. Et
Febricula, diminut. Ang. An easy or short fever. Fieburette ou petite fiebure.
S. Et Febrilis, le. Angl. Pertayninge to the fever. De fiebure. S. Fever
called a burninge fever, properlye happeninge about the Caniculer days.
Solstitialis aegritudo, vel febris. Febris ardens. Fiebure Chaulde. S. Fever
continual. Febris continua. co^tinuata, Perpetua, assidua, continens. Fiebure
continue. S. Fever quotidian which comes of fleame. Amphimerina febris.
Quotidiane. S. Fever of one day. Diaria febris. Ephemera febris. Fieure d'un
iour. H. Fever tertian. Febris tertiana. Fiebure tierce. S. Fever quartan.
Quartana febris. Fiebure quarte. S. Fever that consumes, called a consuminge
fever, or mortal fever. Hectica febris, Marasmus. Fiebure etique. H. Fever
which comes by course or fittes, being a tercian, or quartan. Periodica
febris. Call. Fever which is a burninge, or hot fever. Pyretus. Fever which is
a tertian and a half, some call it half a tertian, and it vexes in his
course. 36. hours. Semitritaeon, Hemitritaeon.*. Perot. Fever to have, or to
be feuerous, or sick of the fever. Febrio, is. Febricito, as. Pati febrim.
Auoir la fiebure. S. The fever goes away. Decedit febris, Decrescit febris,
Inclinat se febris, Remittit febris. La fiebure sen va. S.

To drive away the fever. Depellere febrem, Discutere febrem, Liberare aliquem
febre, Soluere febrem, Submouere, To^lere. Chassar ou oster la fiebure. S.

The fever comes again, at his day or time. Accedit febris, Redit febris,
Recurrit, Repetit, Reuertitur febris. La fiebure return son iour. S.

Fit, or the recourse of the fever. Paroxysmus, Accessio, Accessus sebris.
Accez de fiebure. S.

Feuerous or full of the fever. Febriculosus, a, um. Fiebureux. S. The heart
never feels the fever. Febrium morbos non sentit ceruus. Plin.

To seek remedy for the fever. Remediu^ quaerere febri. Plin.

I have the fever no more, or the fever has left me. Febris ex toto quieuit.
Ie n'ay plus de fieure.

Sweatinge drives away the fever. Febrem finiunt sudores. Celsus.

Feuerfewe herb. Parthenium, Solis oculus, Officin. Matricaria, Amaracus.
Matricaire, Matrone, Cotula foetida. H. Of the nature of this herb, read the.
79. leaf of the second volume of master Turner his Herball.
F. ANTE. I.
Fie. Vah, Phy. Aucto. Erasm. in exorcismo, sieve spectro. Fie. Pals. Fie, it
will not be this night. Apage, non placet me hoc noctis esse. Plaut. Fie, fie,
am I so fearful? Appagesis, ego formidolosus? Fidelitye, or faythfulnes.
Fidelitas, tatis. foe. g. Fidelite. S. Fidle, or a rebique. Pandura, ae. foe.
genesis Rebec, rebecquin. H. Et fidicula, lae. foe. genesis Idem. Fiddler. Amphion,
Rasor, oris. Fidicen, is. m. g. Rebiqueur. Pals. Field. Campus, pi. m. genesis
Ager, ri. m. genesis Un champ. S. Look Calapin in this word Praedium, for the
difference of these words. Ager, Campus, Fundus, Praedium.

Field common, or a common pasture. Ager compascuus. Cic. Iacherre pasturage
commun. H. Field, or pasture to hyre. Ager scriptuarius. Fest. Ager publicus,
in quo pecora certo aere pascuntur. Pasturage ou pastis qu'on prend a louage.
H. Field for the tithe, or the tythinge field. Ager decumanus. Champ subject a
dimes. H. Field that is sowed every other year. Ager noualis, veruactum.
Nouale, is. n. genesis Requietus ager. Iacherre terre qu'on laisse reposer en
friche. H. Field sown every year. Ager restibilis, Aruum restibile. Terre
qu' on seem tous les ans. H. Field where much rubbishe lies. Ager ruderatus.
Plin. Champ remply de moillon. H. Field spent, or barrayne with tilling. Ager
effoetus, Effoetum solum, Defatigatum solum, continua firtilitate lassatum and
exhaustum. Champ qui ne port plus. H. Field or a pasture. Pascuum, ui. n. g.
Pasturage ou pastis. H. Field or medowe to be mowne. Pratum, ti. n. genesis Pre.
H. Field plowed, and redye to be sown. Aruum, ui. n. g. Terre labouree priest
a semer. H. Field tilled and sown. Seges, itis, foe. genesis Terre labouree and
semee. H. Field full of brembles. Ager stans sentibus. Field great and large.
Latifundium.* Field lyinge within the bounds, or jurisdiction of a cittye.
Territorium, ij. n. genesis Territoire. Call. Field mouse. Scytala, ae. Sorex,
icis. m. genesis Scytale. es. foe. genesis Et Mus rusticus, secundum Politi. Mus
agrestis, Nitedula Seru. Nitella, ae, f. g. Plin. Souris de champ. P. Field
mouse which sleapeth all winter, called a dormouse. Glis, ris. Gleron, rat
gleron. H. Vnde Certare cu^ gliribus. An adage applied to him who is a great
sleaper. Field out of tylth. Desertus ager. Vt supra. Fields, which be in the
extreme parts of a country. Limetanei agri. Fiere. Focus, ci. Flamma, Ignis,
is. m. genesis Feu. S. Fiere that dureth a long time. Lentus ignis. Feu qui dure
long temps. S. Fiere burninge a house, or some such thing. Incendium, ij. n.
genesis Un grand feu bruslant vne maison, ou autre chose. S. To ask fiere, or to
fetch fiere. Ignem quaerere. Demaunder du feu. S.

To fiere, or burn any thing. Incendere, Offerre incendium, Inflammare,
Flammare. Mettre le feu a quelque chose. S.

Fiere spark. Scintilla, quae e silice, aut ignario emicat. Estincelle. S. Vt
Virg. Ac primum silicis scintillam excudit Achates:
Suscepitque ignem folijs, atque arida circum
Nutrimenta dedit: rapuitque in fomite flamma^.
And first Achates out of flinte
the sparkles made to fly:
He took the fiere with leaves, and laid
about it sticks were dry:
And causde at length the parched wodde
to cast a flame on hye.
Fiere covered with ashes, or any thing. Ignis sopitus, vel clausus. Feu
couuert and qui ne luist point. Fiere flaminge. Flamma, ae. foe. genesis Flamb.
Fierce. Atrox, cis. Ferox, cis. Rigidus, a, um. Vehemens, it is. Asper, a, um.
Crudelis, le. Cruel. Call. Fierce or cruel with pride. Proteruus, a, um. Fire
and arrogant. S. Fierce to be, or to be cruel. Ferocio, cis, ire. Saeuio, is.
Estre fire and cruel. Call. Fiercelye. Atrociter, Ferociter, Rigide.
Vehementer, Fastidiose, Insolenter, Contumaciter, Superbe, Arroganter.
Fierement. S. Fiercenes. Atrocitas, Ferocitas, Rigor, Vehementia. Proteruia,
Contumacia, Ferocia, Proteruitas, Superbia, ae. foe. genesis Fierete. S. Fieste,
or a little farte. Flatus ventris. Vne vesse. S. To fieste. Flatum ventris
emittere. Vessir. S.

Fiest, or to let a fiest. Pedo, is, pepedi.* Fiftene. Quindecim. Plu. number.
Quinze. S. Fiftene times. Quindecies. Aduer. Quinze fois. S. Fiftene times
double, or so much. Quindecuplus, a, um.* Fiftenthe. Quindenus, a, um. Quinze.
Call. Fifthe. Quintus, a, tum. Cinquieme. S. Fiftye. Quinquaginta, Adiect.
Indicin, Plu. number. Cinquante. S. Et quinquagenus, a, um. Ang. Fifty or of the
number of fiftye. Fiftye times. Quinquagies, Quinquagesies. Cinquant fois. S.
Fiftye years old. Quinquagenarius, a, um. Or contayninge fiftye. Contenant
cinquante. S. Fiftieth in computation. Quinquagesimus, a, um. Le cinquantieme.
S. Fig. Ficus, cus. foe. genesis Mart. Et ficus, ci. foe. genesis Horat. Figue. S.
Nam ficus, ci. m. g. Est morbi genus. Vt Martial. ad Caecilianum. Cum dixi
ficus, rides quasi barbara verba,
Et dici ficos Caeciliane iubes.
Dicemus ficus, quas scimus in arbore nasci:
Dicemus ficos Caeciliane tuos.
Caecilian when I Ficus said,
thou floutedst me therefore:
And badste me rather Ficos say,
and Ficus use no more.
We will to call them Ficus which,
we know on trees to spring,
And thy disseases Ficos name:
for likeness of the thing.
Fig green, gross, or not ripe. Grossus, Immaturus ficus fructus. Figue
savage, figue qui n'est pas encore meure. H. Fig timelye or soon ripe. Ficus
praecox. Figue hastiue. H. Fig of a latter fruit, or that endures longer.
Ficus serotina, Duricoria. Figue tardiue. H. Fig that is full ripe. Ficus
matura. Figue meure. Fig dried in the Sun. Ficus Liuiana, Liuia, Pompeia.
Plin. Siccata sole in annuum vsum. H. Fig called a blewe fig. Chelidonia
ficus, Purpuria, Columel. Fig that is unsavory. Marisca, Ficus insipida. Vne
figue folle. H. Fig leaf. Ficulnum folium. Fueille de figuier. H. Fig
dote. Busicon, Marisca, cae. foe. genesis Figue fool. Fig dry. Carica, ae.
Ficus passa. Figue seiche. S. Fig gatherer. Ficitor, oris. m. gen.* Fig
lover. Ficitor. m. g. Qui aim les figues. Call. Figs being small. Cottona,
ae. foe. genesis Figs black. Leptoludiae.*. Figs broad and white with a
small stalk. Albiceratae ficus. Araciae ficus. Of the nature of these figs,
read Plini lib. 15. Cap. 18. Figs green. Grossi, orum. Dub. g. Figs
young. Grossuli, orum. m. genesis Figs sweet. Onae, arum. foe. genesis Onae also
is, read in Plin. lib. 15. Cap. 18. Fig tartes. Palatha.* Fig tree. Ficus,
us. foe. g. Et ficus, ci. foe. genesis Un figuier. S. Et ficarius, a, um. Et
ficulneus, a, u^. Ang. Of a fig tree. Et ficulnus, na, u^. D'un figuier. S.
Fig tree drove, or grove, or place where fig trees grow. Ficetum, ti. n.
genesis Ficaria, ae. foe. g. Un lieu plant de figuiers. S. Figueraye. Call. Fig
tree stafe, or stalk. Ficolea, ae. foe. genesis Palus ficulinus. Fight.. Certo,
as. Dimico, as. Edere praelium, vel pugnam, Licitor, aris. Pugno, as. Batuo,
is. Confligo, is. Conflicto, as. Depugno, as. Praelior, aris. Pugnam capesso,
Certamen conserere, Contrahere certamen, Belli fortunam tentare, vel Experiri.
Se combatre, and batailler. S. Fight against one. Impugnare, Propugnare
aliquem, infer certamen alicui. Oppugno, as. Combatre contre aucun. S. Fight
as men do in battle. Confligo, is. Bello, as. Debatre, ou combatre. S. Fight
by the locks. Inuolare in capillos. Fight against. Propugno, as. Combatre a l'
encontre. S Fight hand to hand. Censerere manus, Collato pede praeliari,
Confligere manu cum host, Decertare manu. Combatre maine a main. S. Fight in
battle. Praelior, aris. Batailler. S. Fight in the vantgarde of an host.
Prodire in aciem.* They did fight together. Compugnaueru^t, pugna concertarunt,
mutua pugna tumultuati sunt, no^ modo verbis, sed reipsa co^tenderunt, mutuis
ictibus sese contuderunt, se inuicem ceciderunt.

Fight often. Conflicto, as. Combatre souuent. S. Fight on horseback. Ex equo
pugnare. Fight, or to be troubled or vexed. Conflictor, aris. Estre afflige
vex. S. Fight out a battle. Bellum profligare. Fight together Concerto, as.
Decerto, as. Fight valiantlye. Agonizo, as. Depugno, as. Edere certame^,
Propugno, Agonizor, aris. verb. De. Fight within battle. Duello, as.
Guerroyer, combatre. S. Fight with swords. Digladior, aris. Proprie est
gladijs certare. Call. Fighter. Consertor, Depugnans, Duellator, Propugnator. m.
ge. Pugnator, Pugnax, nacis. Om. genesis Combateur. S. Fighter in iustinge
harneyes. Clibanarius, ij. m. genesis Qui been ferro, and armis munitus certamen
init. Fighter which is called a daily fighter. Pugnax, cis. om. genesis Fighter
with a bill. Falcarius, i. m. ge. * Fighter with a sword, or a fenser or sword
player. Gladiator, oris. m. genesis Ioueur d' espee. Call. Fighter with hands and
feet. Pantacratiasta. mas. gen.* Fighter with darts. Pilanus, i. m. genesis Qui
vsoit de iauelot en la guerre. S. Fighting. Pugna, Praelium, Certamen, inis. n.
genesis Combat. S. Fighting with swords. Gladiatura, ae. foe. ge. Gladiature,
Escrimerie. S. Vnde gladiatorius, a, u^. Ang. Pertaining to such fighting, or
sword play. Servant au ieu d' espee. Call. The master did take them fightinge
together. Praeceptor illos mutuo concertantes, inter se compugna^tes, Pugna
co^tendentes deprehendit.

Figurative. Tropicus, a, um. Figuratiuus, a, um. Figurative speaking.
Tropologia, ae. foe. g. Figuratively. Tropice, Typice. Figuratively done, or
feigned. Imaginarius, a, um. Imaginaire, contrefait, feint. S. Figure, or trope.
Character, Figura, Schema, it is. n. g. Schematum, ti. Species, ei. Tropus, pi,
Typus, pi. m. g. Figure. S. Figure having four corners, or of the form of
four corners. Quadrangulus, a, um. Quadrangulaire. S. Figure having seven
corners, or of the form of seven corners. Septangulus, a, um.* Figure of man,
or woman. Simulacrum, Effigies, Imago, inis. foe. g. Image, and semblance d'
aueun. S. Figured like an Image. Imaginatus, a, u^. Imagine. Filberd nutte.
Auellana, Corylus, Mollusca, Pontica nux, Praenestina, Heracleotica. Auelline.
H. Filberd grove. Coryletum, ti. n. g. Un couldray. S. Filberd tree. Corylus,
li. foe. g. Auelaignier. S. File. Lima, ae. f. g. Vne lime. S. File, or to
shave of from any metal. Delimo, as. Limo, as. Limer. S. Filed. Limatus, a,
um. Lime, poli. S. Et Limatulus, a, um. Ang. Somewhat filed. Lime, poli. Filer.
Delimator, Limator, toris. m. g.* Filing. Limatura, ae. foe. g. Limure. S.
Limatura. Is also the dust that comes of filing. Lemaille. S. Fill. Impleo,
es. Farcio, cis. Repleo, es. Adimpleo, es. Compleo, es. Oppleo, es. Emplir. S.
Fill again. Refercio, cis. Repleo, es. Expleo, es. Suppleo, es. Remplir. S.
Fill as a bottell or vessel is filled. Distendo, is. Emplir. Fill with any
thing. Infarcio, cis. Remplir de quelque chose que ce soit. S. To fill with
some thing, what ever it be. Offercio, is. Infercio, is. Remplir de quelque
chose que ce soit.

To fill with joy. Perfundere hominem voluptate, vel laetitia. Remplir de
joy. S.

Fille, or to suffice with meat or such like. Satio, as. Saturo, as. Saouler.
Call. Fill the ears with noise. Perstringere aures. Fill up, or make good a
thing wanting in measure or otherwise. Suppleo, es. Supplier, and amender ce
qu' il de fault. Fill up to the brimme, or fill full. Compleo, es. Expleo,
Oppleo, es. Suppleo, es. Emplir. S. Filled. Impletus, a, um. Oppletus, a, um.
Offertus, a, um. Empli. S. Filled as they fill to make measure. Suppletus, a,
um. Rempli. S. Filled full. Distentus, a, um. Completus, Expletus, ta, tum.
Offertus, ta, tum. Empli. S. Filled to be with milk. Lactesco, scis. Fillet.
Taenea, ae. Vitta, ae. f. g. Fascia, ae. foem. g. Vne band ou ruben de test.
Call. Filling. Implementum, ti. n. g. Expletio, onis. foe. g. Repletio, onis. f.
g. Remplissement. Filling of the bealy. Ventris saburra. Filling up, or making
full measure. Supplementu^, ti. n. g. Complementum, ti. n. g. Remplage. S.
Fillippe. Talitrum, i, n. g. Chiquenaude. S. To fillippe one with the finger on
the forehead. Digito in frontem alicuius concrepare, Vngue^ argutum infligere.
Bailler vne chiquenaude. S.

Filthe, fime, or dunge. Fimus, Minthos, Putredo, inis. Rancor, oris. Sordes,
Alluuies, Alluuio, Illuuies, Obscoenitas, Retrimentum, Scabritia, Scabrities,
ei, foe. g. Fiens, fiente. S. Filthe of a stinking ditche, by reason of
moisture. Eluuies, Situs, us. m. g. Plin. Ordure, mosissure. S. Filthe of any
thing that is washed. Proluuies, ei. f. g. Proluuium, ij. n. g. Immunditia
cuiuscunque rei sordidae. Filthe of ye nose or sneeuell. Mucus, ci, Pus, ris.
Myxa, ae. f. genesis Morue. S. Filthy corrupted blood coming to putrefaction.
Sanies, ei. f. g. Sang meurtri venant a putrefaction. S. Filthely rayed with
corrupted blood. Saniosus, a, um. Saigneux gaste de sang meurtri. S. Filthe,
or refuse of any tried mettell. Scoria, ae. f. g. L' escume and ordure du
metal. S. Filthe which comes of any thing cleansed. Purgamen, Purgamentu^,
ti. n. g. Immondice, and ordure. Filth, or a sluttish queen. Spurca.* Filthy.
Foedus, a, um. Obscoenus, a, u^. Mucidus, a, u^. Scaber, ra, rum. Spurcus, a,
u^. Vilain, ord, and sale. S. Filthy, or unclean, causing or making.
Spurcificus, a, um. Qui fait vne chose orde, and vilaine. S. Filthy to be.
Obsordeo, es. Sordeo, es. Squalleo, es. Estre ord, and sale. S. Filthy to be,
or vinewed, dead, or pale, as wine is which has lost his verdure. Muceo, es.
Mucesco, scis. Estre moisi. S. Filthy to make. Sordido, as. Spurco, as. Ordir,
gaster. Filthy to wax. Sordesco, scis. Deuenir ord, and sale. Filthily. Forde,
Obscoene, Sordide, Spurce, Turpiter. Ordement, and salemement. S. Filthiness.
Alluuies, Alluuio, onis. Obscoenitas, Retrimentum, Scabriti^, ^^^brities,
Sorditudo, Spurcitia, Spurcities, Squalor, Squaliditas, Turpitudo, dinis. fe.
g. Fetetdise, laideur. Filthiness of the body or hands with washinge.
Strigmentum, ti. n. g. L' ordure qu' on racle d' vne corpse, raclure. S. Fin, or
the end of any thing. Meta, ae. Finis, is. Terminus, i. m. g. La fin de quelque
chose que ce soit. S. Final. Finalis, le. om. g. Finally, or in conclusion. Ad
extremum, Ad summum, In summa, Porro, Postremo, Tum demu^, ad postrernu^, ad
vltimu^, demu^ aliquando, nu^c ia^, nouissime, tum demu^, tame^. En fin,
finablement. S. Finche, or ye bird called a goldfinche. Carduelis, is.
Carduellus, i. Acanthis, idis. f. g. Un Chardomeret. S Find. Comperior, iris.
Inuenio, is. Reperio, is. Na^ciscor, sceris. Trouuer. S. Find a ready excuse
or shifte. Rimam inuenire. Trouuer quelque trou pour eschapper. S. Find by
chance. Offendo, is. Reperio, is. Trouuer d'aduenture. Find by se^kinge or
searching. Inuestigo, as. Peruestigo, as. Trouuer a la trace. S. Find crafty
means. Contexere dolos. Find eftsoon. Reperio, ris. Trouuer. S. Find out by
study. Excudo, is, si, vel di. Find suerties. Vador, aris. Find matter, or
bring for excuse. Causor, aris. S' excuser. S. Finder. Inuentor, oris.
Repertor, oris. Architectus, i. m. g. Inuenteur. S. Fine. Purus, a, u^. Mundus,
a, u^. Nitidus, a, um. Net. S Fine clothe. Mollicina, ae. foe. genesis Pannus
optimus. Fine drap. S. Fine duste or sand. Arenula, ae. f. g. Menue arene. S.
Fine linen clothe. Sindon, is. Un linge fort delie. S. Fine or pure gold.
Auru^ purum, putumque. Fin or. S. Fine, or penalty taxed. Multa, ae. foe. g.
Amend. S. Condemnation to pay a certain fine. Multatio, onis. foe. g.
Condemnation d' amend. S.

Condemned to pay a fine. Multatus, a, um. Condamne a l' amend. S.

That which is gotten by taxing, or fining. Multatitius, a, u^. Qui vient des
amends. S. Vt multatitia pecunia. Money gotten by taxes and fines.

To fine, or punish by the purse. Multo, as, aui. Et multor, aris. Depon.
Condamner a l' amend. S.

Let him have this fine, or penalty, yt he drink no wine these twenty days.
Haec multa ei esto, vt vino viginti dies careat.

Fine, or settle, as wine does or licoure. Sido, is, di. Fine, or draw from
the dregs, or lies. Defoeco, as, aui. Oster la lie. S. Fined or drayned from
dregs, lies, or other corruption. Defoecatus, a, um. Finely. Pure, Puriter.
Munde, Nitide. Nettemente Cicero dwelte very finely and pleasantly. Domo Cicero
vtebatur cum primis lauta, and pereleganti, habitabat Cicero lautissime, and
iucundissime, eae Ciceronis aedes erant, in quibus neque lautitiam, neque
elegantiam desiderares, erat in Ciceronis aedibus lautitiae multu^, atque
elega^tiae.

Finger. Digitus, ti. m. g. Un doigt. S. Finger breadth. Digitum transuersum.
Finger, called the forefinger. Index, cis. com. genesis Digitus index, Salutaris,
Demonstratorius. Finger, called the middle finger. Infamis digitus, Digitus
medius, Impudicus digitus, verpus, famosus. Le plus long doigt. H. Finger,
called the ringe finger. Medicus, Annularis digitus. Le doigt ou on met l'
anneau. S. Finger which is ye little finger. Digitulus, li. m. g. Digitus
auricularis, minimus digitus. Petit doigt. Fingers ends. Primores digituli.
Coryphe. Le bout du doigt. S. Finger stale, or thimble. Digitale, lis. n. g.
doigtier. S Fingered, or he that has fingers. Digitatus, a, um. Qui ha des
doigts. S. Finger thickenesse, or the breadth of a finger. Crassitudo
digitalis. Espesseur d' un doigt. Finishe, end, or to make perfect. Compleo,
es. Concludo, is. Consummo, as. Finio, is. Insummo, as. Pertexo, is. Perficio,
is. Termino, as, aui. Desino, is. Finem facere, In pauca confer. Finer. S.
Finishe a thing perfectly. Summam manum addere, Summum fastigium imponere. I
hope to finishe, or end this matter according to my mind. Puto fore, vt rem
ex sententia geram, foeliciter expediam, conficiam, ad eum, que^ volo, exitum
perducam, foelici exitu concludam, efficiam, opinor, vt res optime succedat, vt
exitu^ res habe at qualem optamus, ne res, contra quam volumus succedat, ne
quid aduersi contingat in re, ne sit infaustus, aduersus, alienus a nostris
voluntatibus, alius atque volumus, exitus rei, eue^tus rei, rei finis ac
terminus, spero futurum, vt in hac re meis optatis fortuna respondeat, cum
animo meo fortuna consentiat, ab animo meo fortuna minime dissentiat, nihil
aduersi fortuna obijciat, nequaquam fortuna repugnet, resistat, obsistat,
aduersetur, sese opponat, suam vim obijciat, impedimentum vllum inijciat,
occurrat, obuiam eat, futurum existimo, vt in hoc secunda, facili, prospera,
propitia, perbenigna fortuna vtamur.

Finishe or end an altrication, or contention. Rixas, Litem, vel iurgia
componere, Receptui canere. To finishe or end any thing. Exitum alicui rei
imponere, Decidere, Determinare, Telam detexere, Diffinire, Terminare modum
alicuius rei. Mettre fin a quelque chose.

To finishe, or end any battle. Componere bellum. Mettre fin a quelque
guerre. S.

To finishe, or end any busynes. Negotiu^ transigere. Mettre fin a quelque
affair^. S.

Finished. Finitus, a, um. Perfectus, a, um. Terminatus, a, um. Fine. S.
Finishing of a thing. Catalexis, Co^clusio, Co^summatio, Peroratio, onis.
Cumulus, i. mas. genesis Conclusion. Call. Finnes of a fyshe. Pinnae, arum. f. g.
Les petites ailes de quoy les poissons nagent. S. Finnes having, or finned.
Pinnatus, a, um. Fyoll, or water pot. Amula, ae. foe. g. Fire. Flamma, Focus,
Ignis, Pruna, Vulcanus, any. m. g. Le feu. S. Et Igniculus, li. Dimin. inde.
Ang. A little fire. Petit feu. S. Fire bronde. Fax, cis. Torris, ris. m. g. Un
tison. S. Fire covered with ashes, or hilled with any thing. Ignis sopitus. Feu
covert and qui ne luist point. S. Fire foming or spitting, or that which fometh
fire. Igniuomus, a, um. Qui vomit le feu. Call. Fire forcke. Furca igniaria.
Fourche a feu. Pal. Fire Iron, or any thing out of the which fire may be
stricken, a tynder box. Igniarium, rij. neut. g. Un fusil. S. Fire pan.
Batillu^, Focaria, Foculus, li. Ignitabulum, li. n. g. Vne Pallette a feu, ou
reschault. H. Fire properly for dead bodies. Rogus, gi. m. g. Fire stone.
Igniarius lapis, Pyrites, it is. m. genesis Pierre a feu. Pal. Fire which is
always burning. Actuosus ignis. Saint Anthonies fire, a disease so called.
Ignis sacer, Erysipelas, Ignis, nis. mas. genesis Le feu saint Antonie. H.

Wild fire, a kind of the aforesaid disease. Phlyctaena, ae. Pusula, ae. f.
g. Feu sauuage. H.

To light or kindle the fire. Facere ignem. Allumer le feu. S.

To stryke fire. Excudere, vel excuter^ scintilla^, vel ignem e silice. Fair
sortir du feu d' vne pierre. S.

Fired to be, or to be made fire. Ignesco, scis. Igneo, es. S' enflamber. S.
Fire, or to set any thing on fire. Flammo, as Incendo, is. Ignifacio, cis.
Inflammo, as. Em^raser. S. Firmament, or sky. Ether, ris, vel ra. Coelum, li.
Firmamentum, ti. n. g. Le ciel. S. Et Aethereus, a, um. Ang. Of the firmament,
or which appertains to the firmament. Qui appartient au ciel. S. Firm, or
stable. Continens, it is. Firmus, a, um. Obstinatus, a, um. Stabilis, le. Status,
a, um. Firm. S. Firm consent in an opinion. Placitu^, ti. n. g. Consensio,
onis. Consensus, us. mas. g. Consentement, ou accord. S. Firm, or stable to
make. Fundo, as. Sancio, is, anxi. Stabilio, is. Statuo, is. Confermer. S.
Firmly. Continenter, Firm, Obnixe, Obstinate, Sancte, Offirmate, Firmiter,
Constanter. F^rmement. S. Firmness, or steadfastness. Firmitas, tatis.
Firmitudo, dinis. Firmamentum, ti. Stabilitas, tatis. f. genesis Fermete. S.
Firmness of mind, or constancy. Firmitudo animi, Constantia. Fermete de
cueur. S. Fur tree. Abies, etis. Sapin. Et Abiegnus, a, u^. Ang. Any thing of
fyrre. Chose de Sapin. S. First. Primus, a, um. Primulus, a, um. First in
danger. Princeps in bello. Premier au danger. S. First borne. Primigenus, a,
um. Primogenitus, a, um. Prior natu. Primier ne. S. To be first, or chief.
Primas far, Primario loco esse, Locum primum tenere, vel obtinere. Estre le
premier. S.

First created, fashioned, fourmed, or made, as was Adam. Protoplastus,
Epitheton Adami. Call. First croppe. Praemetiu^, tij. Praemeslum, ssi. n. g.
First example, or pattern. Archetypus, Prototypus, pi. m. g. L'examplaire
primier. First exercise, or feate in any thing. Tyrocinium, nij. n. g.
Apprentissage. S. First feate, or point of actiuitie, or arms. Tyrocinium,
nij. n. g. And he that does such first feats. Tyrunculus, li. m. g. Nouueau
soldat. Call. First made or wrought. Protopagus.* First martyr, or wytnes.
Protomartyr, Primus testis. First of all. Primitus, Iam primum, Omniu^
principio, Cum primis, In primis, Primiter, Primo, Primum. Tout premierement.
First of the kindred, or of the first family, house, or kyndred Protogenes.*
At the first sight. Primo, Prima front, Prima facie, Primo aspectu. De prime
face.

First speech, or entry into communication. Prolocutio, Prologium, Prologus,
Proloquium, ij. n. g. Vide Preface. Fish. Piscis, is. m. g. Poisson. H. Et
Pisciculus, li. Diminut. Ang. A little fish. Poissonnet. H. Fish of the river.
Piscis fluuialis, vel fluuiatilis. Poisson de riuiere. H. Fish nourisher.
Piscinarius, ij. m. genesis Qui nourri les poissons. H. Fish ponde, or stewe.
Icthyotrophium, * Lacuna, Piscina. Ichthyotrophium, ij. Un v^uier ou estang a
poisson. S. Fish streate. Foru^ piscarium, Ichthyopolium, Piscaria, Platea
piscaria. Poissonnerie. S. Fish out, or seek for fysh. Piscor, aris.
Expiscor, aris. Pescher. S. Fisher. Piscator, Ichthylobalus, li. m. g.
Pescheur. Fisher with an angle. Hamiota, ae. m. genesis Pescheur a la ligne. Call.
Fisher boat. Horia, ae. vel Oria, ae. f. g. Lenunculus, li. m. g. Cymba, bae.
f. g. Nasselle a pescher. Et Horiola, Diminut. Ang. A little boat. Petite
nasselle. Fishes being flarte, and not round. Plani pisces. Fishie, or full of
fish, or of fish. Piscosus, a, um. Pisculentus, a, um. Plein de poisson. S.
Fishing net, called a dragge. Euerriculum, li. n. g. Verueil. Call. Fishing
rod. Calamus, mi. m. genesis And the line. Piscatoria linea. Vne ligne a
pescher. S. Fishing. Piscatio, Piscatus, us. m. g. Peschement. Et Piscarius, a,
um.. Ang. Pertaining to fishing. Qui sert a pescher. S. Fishemonger, or fish
taker. Cetarius, Ichthyopola. Vendeur de poisson. S. Piscarius, ij.
Poissonnier, S. Et Piscatorius, a, um. Ang. Pertaining to a fyshe^monger. De
pescheur. S. Fishmongers craft. Piscatoria ars. Fish hook. Hamus piscarius.
Un haim a pescher. S. Fisnomie, or similitude of man or beast. Effigies, ei.
Simulachrum, chri. n. ge. Effigy. S. Fissebuttocke sow. Tarda mulier. Fiste.
Pugnus, ni. m. g. Le poing. S. Fistula, which is a running disease. Agilops,
Fistula, lae. foe. g. Fistule, S. Fistula in the eye. Fistula, Aegilops
oculorum. Fitche, or tare, or vytche. Lolium, lij. n. genesis Herb nommee iuraye.
S. Fittle, or running witted. Futilis, le. om. g. Five. Quinque, Quinus, a, um.
Cinq. S. Et Diape^te. Of five, or of five times. Five cornered. Quinquangulus,
a, um. Qui ha cinq angles. Five double. Quincuplex, cis. om. genesis Qui ha cinq
doubles. S. Five hundredth. Quincentum, Quingentum, Quingeni, ae, a. Quingenti.
Cinq cents. Call. Et Quinge^tarius, a, um. Ang. Of five hundredth. Five hundredth
in full computation, or of five hundred. Quingentenus, a, um. Quingentesimus,
a, um. Cinqcentiesme, ou de cinq cent. Call. Five hundredth pound of weight, or
weying five hundred pound. Quingenarius, a, um. Poisant cinq cents li^ res.
Call. Five hundredth times. Quingenties. Cinq cent fois. S. Five hundredth times
as much, or double. Quingentuplus. Five in number, or the number of five, or
of five. Quinquinarius, a, um. Five leaued grass, an herb. Pentaphyllon,
Quinquefolium, lij. n. g. Cinque fueille. H. Five months space.
Quinquemestrum, tri. Et Quinquemestris, e. An. Of five months space. De cinq
mois. Call. Five of the clock. Hora quinta. Five pounds weight. Quinarium
pondus. Five square. Quinquangulus, a, um. Vt supra. Five sundry crafts, or
occupatio^s having. Quinquertiones. Et Quinquertium, ij. Ang. The exercise of
five occupations. * Vide Exerciser. Five times. Quinquies. Cinq fois. Call. Five
times as much. Quincuplus, a, um. Five ounces. Quincuns, it is. Cinq onces. Call.
Et Quincuntialis, le. Ang. Of five ounces. Five years space. Quinquennium, ij.
n. g. L'espace de cinq ans. S. That has five years. Quinquennis. ne. Qui ha
cinq ans.

Five years space. Quinquennium, ij. n. g. Espace de cinqans. Ang. Of five
years space. Et quinque^nalis, le. Ang. That which happens, or is done every
fifth year. De cinq ans. Call. Five years space, which was a manner of the
Greeks account, as we do the year of our Lord, for that they have no
calendes. Olympias, adis. foe. g. Fix the mind or purpose. Intendere animum,
Propono, is, sui. Ficher, ou afficher son esprit. Fixed. Intentus, a, um.
Fixus, a, um. Affixus, a, um. Fiche, ou affiche. S.
F. ANTE. L.
FLable, or fan. Flabellum, li. Esuentoir. S. Flagging, or hanging
downewarde. Flaccidus, a, um. Lasche. S. Flagging, or hanging ears. Flaccidae
aures. Oreilles lasches, and pendantes. S. Flaggon, or a bottell. Ampulla,
Phiala, ae. Lepista, ae. f. g. Phiole, ou botteil. Flayle. Tribula, ae,
Tribulum, li. n. g. Fleau. S. Flayne. Excoriatus, a, um. Eschorche. S. Vide
Fley. Flame. Flamma, ae. f. g. Flambe. S. Flaming, or of flame. Flammeus, a,
um. Flammiuomus, a, um. Flamboiant, ou de flambe. Call. Flanckes, or the parts
between the thyghe and the body. Ilia, ium. n. genesis Les flanes. Call. Et Inguen,
enis. n. g. Idem. Flappe for sues. Muscarium, ij. n. g. Flat, or plain
above. Planus, na, number. Plat and bien vni par dessus. S. Flat fyshes. Plani
pisces. Plin. Qui sont plats. S. To throw one flat on the ground.
Prosternere vel affligere. Iecter auc^n tout plat a terre. S.

Flat bowl to drink wine in. Ecpetala, Crater, is, m. g. Et Cratera, ae, f.
g. Flat nosed man. Simo, onis. Simus nasus. Camus. S Flat roufe of a house.
Doma, it is. n. g. Flatter. Adulor, aris. Assentor, aris. Blandior, iris. Palpo,
as. Palpor, aris. Pellicio, cis, xi. Petere blanditijs, Subblandior, iris.
Palpum alicui obtrudere, Auribus alicuius seruire, Auribus alicuius aliquid
dare. Flater aucun. S. To flatter the common people. Blandimenta plebi dare.
Flater le commun peuple. S.

To flatter him self, or to stand in his own conceit. Blandiri sibi, Sibi
plaudere. Se flater soymesme.

Thou flatterest me. Palpo me percutis. Tu me flates. S.

Think not that I go about to flatter you. Noli putare, me hoc auribus tuis
dare, gratiam tua^ aucupari, hoc me loqui ad voluntatem, me velle tuis auribus
inseruire, me esse blandum, assentatione vti, assentationis artificio tuam
gratiam quaerere, ne me putes ficte loqui ad colligendam beneuolentiam tuam, vt
gratiam a te ineam, te mihi vt adiungam, tuam in amicitiam vt me penitus
insinuem.

Flatter, or play the flatterers part, in upholding and sothe saying an
other man's tale at the table for a dynner or supper, or for a meal. Parasitor,
aris. Plaut. Parasitum agere. Flatterer. Adulator, vel Trix, Blandidicus, ca,
cum. Colax, Palpator, Parasitus, Pellax, Pellicator, Adulator, oris. m. g.
Flateur. S. Flatterer for goods, or to be an heir. Haeredipeta, tae. m. g.
Flatterer for meat and drink. Parasitus, ti. m. ge. A smelfeaste. Qui suit
les lopins. Flattery. Adulatio, Assentatio, Blanditiae, Obsequium, Palpatio,
Pellatia. Flaterie. S. To be overcome, or taken with flattery. Capi
assentatione. Estre prins par flaterie. S.

Flattering. Blandus, a, um. Flattering, or ye feate of flattering. Ars
parasitica. Flattering knave. Parasitus, Gnatonicus, Gnato, onis. m. g.
Flattering queen. Adulatrix, Parasita, tae. foe. genesis Flateresse. S.
Flattering tale. Assentatiuncula, ae. foem. genesis Petite flaterie. S.
Flatteringly. Blande, Assentatorie. Par flaterie. S. Flaunders. Flandria, ae.
foe. g. Flax. Pensum, si. n. ge. Filace. S. It is also the distaffe, or rock.
Flax wild. Osyris, vel Osciris. Lin iaune sauuage. S. Flea. Pulex, cis. m. g.
Vne poulce. H. Et Puliceus, vel pulicinus, a, um. Of a flea. Et Pulicosus, a,
um. Ang. Full of fleas. Plein de poulces. S. Flea called a water flea, a little
round and black one, somewhat bigger then a flea, that upon standing waters
most swiftely ronneth, and is rare or never quiet, but moving still. Pulex
aquaticus, Animalculum rotundum, nigrum, Pulice paulo maius, quod supra stantes
aquas velocissimo motu cietur, raro quietum. H. Flea biting. Pulicina signa.
Fleese. Vellus, eris. n. g. Toison. S. Fley of the hyde, or skin of a beast.
Excotio, as Glubo, is. Deglubo, is. Pellem detrahere. Escorcher. S. Fleyed or
flayne, or having the skin cut of. Excoriatus, a, um. Escorche. Fleying of
the skin or hyde. Detractio pellis. Escorchement. S. Fleame. Flegma, it is.
Phlegma, it is. Pituita, ae. foe. ge. Phlegm, fleume. H. Fleame in the eyes.
Gramiae, arum. La chassie des yeux. S. Fleame, or reaume, descending from the
head. Pituita, ae. foe. g. Phlegm. S. Fleammatike. Flegmaticus, Phlegmaticus,
Pituitosus, a, um. Flegmatique. S. Flemminges, or dutchemen. Te^tonici,
Teutones, number. mas. genesis Flesh. Caro, nis. Carnem proprie dici volunt animalis
mortui, quasi carentem vita. Chair^* Flesh of the gu^mes of the teathe.
Epulis, idis. f. ge. Flesh salted piece meal. Succidia, ae. foe. genesis Chair
salee piece a piece. S. Which lives of flesh. Carniuorus, a, um. Qui vit de
chair. S.

Which takes delight in eating flesh, a ^oucher. Carnarius, ij. m. g. Qui
prend plaisir a manger chair, un boucher. S.

I love the flesh and not the fat. Carnarius sum, Pinguiarius non sum. Mart.
IN aim bien la chair, mais ie n' aim point la gresse. S.

Full of flesh, or very fleshye. Lacertosus, sa, sum. Torosus, sa, sum. Fort
charnu. S.

Fleshfull. Carnosus, a, um. Charnu. S. Et Carnulentus, ta, tum. Idem. Solin.
Flesh hook. Fuscinula, ae. Creagra, ae. Creacentrum. Un croc, vne lardoire ou
fourchette. H. Fleshly, or fat. Crassus, a, um. Gras. S. Fleshly desire, or
lust. Concupiscentia, Venus, eris. foe. g. Concupiscence. S. Fleshlike, or of
flesh, or pertaining to flesh. Carneus, a, um. Qui est de chair. S.
Fleshlines, or abundance of flesh, called carnositie. Carnositas, it is. foe.
g.* Flesh shambles, or shop where flesh is sold. Laniena, Macellum, li. n.
g. Carnarium, ij. n. ge. Taberna carnaria. La boucherie. H. Flewe, or not
deape, but as one may wade. Breuia, ium neut. gen.* Fly. Fugio, gis. Niti
alis. Volo, as. Voler. S. Fly a little. Subuolo, as. Voler quelque peu. S.
Fly, or to run away. Fugam agere, Capere, Facere, Petere, Se in fugam
conuertere, dare, inclinare: Se fugae dare, mandare, commendare: Iter ad fugam
conuertere: Se in pedes confer, conijcere, dare: Aufugere, Suffugere,
Transfugere. S' enfuir. S. Fly about. Circumuolo, as. Voler tout entour. S.
Fly against. Obuolo, as. Aduolo. Voler a ou verse quelque chose. Fly away.
Abuolo, as, Euolo, as. Prouolo, Subuolo, as. S' enuoler. S. Fly, or to run
away privily. Subterfugere. S' enfuir par cachette. S. Fly back. Reuolo, as.
Reuoler. S. Fly before. Praeuolo, as. Voler deuant. S. Fly far. Profugio,
is S' enfuir loing. S. Fly from place to place. Transfugio, is.* Fly, or to
run away from ones sight. Conspectum alicuius fugere, Fugitare alicuius
oculos. S' enfuir de deuant aucun. S. Fly from his own captain to the
contrary part. Transfugio, is. S' enfuir and se render aux ennemis. S. Et
Transfuga. He that does fly from his own captain or people, to the contrary
part. Quis' enfuit aux ennemis. S. Fly hither and thither. Diffugio, is. Fuir
ca and la. S. Fly in battle. Vertere terga. Fly into some place.. Inuolo,
as. Voler en quelque lieu. Fly lightly. Peruolo, as. Voler legi^rement. S.
Fly often. Volito, as. Voleter. S. Fly over. Transuolo, as. Voler oultre. S.
Fly out. Euolo, as. Voler horse. Call. Fly to one for succoure. Perfugio, is.
Fuir verse aucun pour auoir secours. S. Fly unto, or to a place. Aduolo, as.
Voler a ou verse quelque lieu. Fly. Musca, ae. foe. g. Mousche. H. Et Muscula,
ae. Diminut. Ang. A little fly. Et Muscinus, a, um. Ang. Of a fly. Et
Muscarius, a, um. Ang. Pertaining to a fly. De mousche. S. Fly flappe.
Muscaria, ae. Muscarium, ij. n. genesis Vne esuentoire a chasser les mousches. S.
Fly having four wings, called a breese. Tabanus, ni. m. g. Tabon. S. Fly
that destroys corn, of some called a breese, or a kind of locuste. Locusta,
Bruchus, chi. m. g. Fly which flies about a candle. Blatta, tae. foe. g.
Teigue. H. Fly which shines in the night. Cicindula. Cicindela, ae. foe. g.
Lampyris, idis. foe. g. Quam etia^ noctilucam vocant. Mousche luisante de
nuict. S. Fly which in the heat of Summer pricketh most sharply.
Solipunga. ae. f. g. Flyghte. fuga, ae. f. g. Fuite. S. Dishoneste flighte.
Turpis fuga. Fuite deshonneste.

To put to flighte. Fugare, In fugam conijcere, Auertere, In fugam agere, Fugam
inimicis suis inijcere. Mettre en fuite. S.

To take flighte, or to fly, or run away. Capere vel capessere fugam.
Prendre la fuite. S.

Flight, or disconfiture. Effugium, ij. n. g. Fuite. S. Flight, or the act of
flying. Volatura, ae. Volatus, us. m. g. Le vol des oiseaulx. S. Flighty.
Pernix, cis. om. genesis Flying or flight, referred aptly to birds. Volatura.
Volatus, us. m. g. Volement. S. Et Volatile, Volucer, cris, cre. Ang. Any
thing that flies with wings. Qui vole. S. Flying away, or inconstant, that
which does fly or pass away suddenly. Volaticus, a, um. Volage, Inconstant.
S. Flying from light, and delighting in darkness, that flies or shunneth the
light. Lucifugus, a, um. Qui fuit la lumiere. Call. Flying, and yelding to
enemies. Transfugium, ij. n. ge. Fuite quand on se rend aux ennemis. S. Flynge,
or to kick. Calcitro, as. Regimber. S. Vide Kick. Flinging, or kicking often,
or full of flinging. Calcitrosus, a, um. Qui est coustumier de regimber. S.
Flint stone, or a fire stone. Amechon, Amiathon,* Chalyx, ycis. Pyrites, Silex,
icis. m. g. S. Lapis aerarius, Marchasita hodie, Lapis luminis. Caillou, pierre
a feu. H. Et Silicatus, a, u^. Ang. Made with flynte stones. Flynt, or of
flynte. Siliccus, a, um. De caillou. S. Flytche of bacon. Succidia, iae. foe.
g. Cost de lard. H. fliche de lard. S. Flyte, or houer above the water.
Fluito, as. Flotter* nager sur l' eaue. S. To swim above the water. Flitting.
Fugitiuus, a, um. Volaticus, a, um. Fugitif, volage. S. Flixe. Profluuium, ij.
n. g. Fluxio, onis. foe. genesis Flux ou fluxion. S. Flyxe, laxe, or a lewsenesse
of the belly. Alui profluuium, Aluus non co^sistens, Lienteria, Diarrhaea,
Pantices, Tormina, Fluxiones alui, Alui resolutio, Cita aluus. Flux de ventre.
S. Flyxe of blood. Sanguinis reiectio, Fluxiones sanguinis. Flux de sang. S.
To stay the flixe of the belly. Sistere aluum, Citam aluum compescere,
Cohibere aluum, Inhibere aluum, Comprimere, Reprimere, Supprimere. Restraindre
le flux de ventre. S.

To stay the flixe of blood. Profluuium sanguinis inhibere, Sistere
sanguinem, Cohibere. Arrester un flux de sang. S.

Flock of beasts. Grex, egis. mas. genesis Troupeau de Bestes. S. Flock, or a
company, or multitude of people. Turba, ae. f. g. Vne troop ou multitude de
gens. S. Great flocks. Graves greges. Grans troupeaux. S.

Flock of five hundredth cattle. Grex quinquagenarius. Un troupeau de
cinquante bestes. S. To drive together in one flock. In gregem compellere.
Amasser en un troupeau. S.

To separate from the flock. Segrego, as. Separo, as. Abgrego, as. Mettre horse
and separer de troupeau. S.

Which is of the flock, or herd, or pertaining to the flock. Gregalis, le.
Om. genesis Qui est du troupeau. S.

Flockebedde, or a materesse. Anaclinterium, ij. n. genesis Culcitra, ae. foem. g.
Stibadium, ij. neut. genesis Lict de bourre. S. Flocks of wolle. Tomentum, ti. n.
g. Bourre. S. To stuff in flocks. Infarcire tomentum. Embourrer. S.

Flocks made of the leaf of certain herbs. Gnaphatan, Alij legu^t Gnaphalon.
Fullers flocks. Flocks small. Flocculus, li. m. g. Un flocquet. S. Flock
together. Aggrego, as. Assembler. S. Flocked in a bushement, or gathered in a
heap or multitude. Confertus, a, um. Amoncele. S. Flockely, or in a bushement.
Confertim. Aduerb. Floor borded, or plaunched. Contabulatio, Tabulatio,
Contignatio, onis. foe. g. Planchier. Floor, or to dress with boordes, or
planches. Tabulo, as. Contabulo, as. Asso, as. Plancheer. S. Floored, or
dressed with boordes. Contabulatus, Tabulatus, a, um. Assatus, ta, tum.
Contignatus, ta, tum. Planchee. S. Florishe. Vide Flourishe. Floude. Fluctus,
us. Flumen, inis. Fluuius, ij. Amnis, is. dub. ge. Fleuue ou riuiere. S. Et
fluuialis, le. Ang. Of a floude. De riuiere. S. Floude, or stream by
abundaunce of rain, descended from hills into valleys. Torrens, it is. subst.
m. g. Torrent. S. Floude that is small, a ragiousnesse of waters. Alluuies,
iei. f. g. Alluuio, onis. f. g. Alluuium, ij. n. g. Petit deluge, Rauine, ou
ragaz d' eaue. S. Floude outrageous, or a flowinge over of water. Inundatio,
onis. f. g. Inundation. S. Floude, or deluge of waters. Cataclysmus, mi. m. g.
Diluuium and inundatio. Deluge d'eaue. Call. Flow as water does. Fluere,
Profluere, Manare. Color. S. Flow abroad, as diverse streams out of one
spring. Dimano, as. Permano, as. Color and descendre. S. Flow about.
Circunfluo, is. Color entour. S. Flow again. Refluo, is. Recouler. S. Flow
between. Interfluo, is, xi. Interluo, is. Intermeo, as. Color entredeux. S.
Flow by. Allabor, laberis. Color aupres. S. Flow continually. Fluito, as.
Flow down like an ebb. Defluo, is. S' escouler, decouler. S. Flow eftsoon.
Refluo, is. Recouler. S. Flow like the Sea. Aestuo, as. Fluctuo, as. Flow
nighe unto. Alluo, is, ere. Color aupres. S. Flow often. Fluito, as. Color
souuent. Flow out. Effluo, is. Emano, as. Profluo, is. Color horse. S. Flow
over. Exundo, as. Inundo, as. Profluo, is. Superfluo, is. Supermeo, as. Color
par dessus. S. Flow out on all parts. Diffluo, is. Perfluo, is. Color de
toutes pars. S. Flow softly. Lambo, bis. Horat. Flow together. Confluo, is.
Color ensemble. S. Flow under, or run under, as water does a bridge.
Subterfluo, is. Color par dessoubs. S. Flow unto. Affluo, is. Color verse
quelque lieu. S. Flower of meal that is boulted from the branne. Flos, Pollen,
enis. n. g. La fleur de la farine. H. Et Pollis, linis. m. g. Idem. Flowyng.
Fluidus, a, um. Profluens, it is. Coulant. S. Flowing about. Circumfluus, a, um.
Qui va and coule tout a l'entour. S. Flowing of the Sea. Accessio maris.
Accessus maris. Flot de mer. S. Flowyng over. Profluus, a, um. Superfluus, a,
um. Flowyng out. Profluens, it is. Partic. Decoulant. Call. Flowing with a violent
stream, or outrageous sweep. Torrens, it is. om. genesis Flower. Flos, ris. m.
genesis Fleur. S. Et Flosculus. dimi. Ang. A little flower. Fleurette. S. Et
Floreus, a, u^ Ang. Made of flowers, or of flowers. Qui est de fleurs. S. Et
floridus, a, um. Ang. Flourishing, full of flowers. Florissant, plien de fleurs.
S. Flower de luce, herb. Iris, idis. foe. genesis Guayeul. S. Flower of youth.
Aetas integra. Fleur d'aage. S. Flower, or meal of corn most fine. Similago,
ginis. Simila, ae. f. g. La pure farine de froument. S. Flowers bearing, or
that which bears flowers. Florigerus, a, um. Florifer, a, um. Portant
fleurs. S. Flowers of wild pomegranardes. Balaustium, ij. n. g. La fleur d'vn
grenadier. Call. Flowers, or herbs which serve for garlandes. Stephanonia, vel
Stephanoma. Call. Flowers, or herbs wherewith houses be decked and made
pleasant. Verbenae, arum. foe. ge. Flourishe. Floreo, es. Floresco, scis.
Verno, as. Flores producere. Fleurir. Call. Flourishe, as a master of fence
does with weapon, or a musician in singing. Proludo, is. Praeludo, is, si.
Fair le coup d' essay. Flourish, or the play that is used at the beginning of
games. Proludium, ij. n. g. Praeludium, ij. n. g. Prolusio, vel Praelusio,
onis. f. g. Le coup d'essay. Flourishe forth like flowers. Effloreo, es,
Effloresco, scis. Fleurir, produire sa fleur. S. Flourishing. Floridus, a, um.
Florissant, ou fleurissant. Fludde Vide Floude. Flux. Pantices. Vide Flixe.
F. ANTE. O.
FOe. Hostis, is. Inimicus, Iniquus, Saeuus. Ennemi. You are to much our foe,
or ennemy. Aduersarium nimis grauem, nimis acrem, infensum, acerbum,
vehementem, crudelem te habemus, nimis acerbus, nimis aduersus, nimium grauis
atque infe^sus nobis es, oppugnas nos quam potes acerrime, and grauissime,
nullam aduersus nos iniuria^ praetermittis. Nulla nos iniuria, nulla re non
lacessis, tuis contra nos viribus vteris, tua^ in nos vim confers, omnia
conaris, nihil non agis, moves, tentas, experiris, machinaris ad perniciem
nostra^, aduersario te vtimur nimis acerbo, nimis infenso: agis contra nos,
pugnas aduersus nos, irruis in nos, quo potes impetu, impetu quam potes maximo,
eo impetu, qui potest esse maximus.

Foyne, or to give a foyne, or to prick. Pungo, is, pupugi. Compungo, is.
Lancinare. Poindre. S. A sword, which by it self can give no prick or foyne.
Gladius, qui per se pungere non potest. Cicero.

Foyne, or a prick. Punctus, tus. m. g. Et Punctiuncula, lae. diminut. A little
prick. Foyning, or a prickinge. Punctio, onis. foem. genesis Poignement. S.
Foyning, or pricking. Pungens, it is. part. Poignant. S. Foyning, or with a
foyne. Pu^ctim. En poignant. Call. Foist, called a great or light ship. Corbita,
Liburna, Liburnica, Liburnum, ni. n. g. Fuste. Pals. To be foysty, as not
sweet. Muceo, es. Estre moisi.

To wax foisty or musty. Mucesco, scis. Deuenir moisi. S.

Foistied, mustied, or vinoed. Mucidus, da, dum. Moisi. S. Fold for sheep.
Ouile, lis. L'estable des brebis. S. Parc de brebis. Pals. Et Septum, ti. n. g.
Et Caula, lae. f. g. Idem. Fold, or wrappe together. Complico, as. Plico, as.
Plier. S. Et Conuoluo, is. Inuoluo, is. Obuoluo, is. Circumplico, as. Implico,
as. Enueloper. S. Fold a thing thryse, or in three course. Triplico, as. And
twyse, or two fold. Duplico, as. And four times. Quadruplico, as. Vide
Double. Fold ten times double. Decuplo, as.* Folden in. Implexus, a, um.
Plicatus, a, um. Enuelope. Plicabilis, le. Aise a plier. Call. Ang. That which
may be folden. Folden together. Implicitus, a, um. Plexus, a, um. Rugatus, a,
um. Conuolutus, ta, tum. Inuolutus, ta, tum, Obuolutus, ta, tum. Enuolupe. S.
Folder. Rugator, oris. m. g.* Folding, or fold. Ruga, ae. f. g. Plis. S. Et
Sinuosus, a, um. ac Rugosus, a, um. Angl. Full of foldes. Plein de plis. Call.
Folding, or wrapping. Plicatura, ae. foe. g. Implicatio, onis. Plicatio, onis.
f. g. Enuelopement. S. Fool, or young colte. Pullus, li. Equulus, li. m. genesis
Equuleus, lei. Pullus equinus. Cheualet. Call. Et Pullinus, a, um. Ang. Of a
fool. Fool of an ass. Hyppotela. * Pullus asininus. Le petit d' un asne. S.
Fool which comes between a horse and an ass mare. Hinnulus, li. m. g. Call.
Folly, which is a general vice. Amentia, ae. Fatuitas, it is. Inertia, Infantia,
Moria graece. Proteruitas, it is. Stoliditas, Vanitas, it is. Insipientia, ae. f.
ge. Folly. S. Vide Foolish. Folk or cominune people. Plebs, bis. Vulgus, gi.
m. and. n. ge. Le commun peuple. S. Et plebeius, a, um. Vulgaris, re. Ang. Of
the folk or people, or perteining to them. Commun, vulgaire. S. Follow.
Assequor, eris. Imitor, aris. Produco, is. Sector, aris. Sequor, eris.
Co^sequor, eris. Suyure. Follow after. Prosequor, eris. Suyure and aller apres.
S Follow after hand, or forthwith immediately. Co^sequor, eris. Subsequor, eris.
Follow, or to pursue in diligence. Sector, aris. Co^sector, taris. Suyure ou
poursuyure en diligence. S. Follow, or to immitate Cicero. Authorem Ciceronem
habere. Ensuyure Cicero. S. Follow by course, or turn ordinately. Alterno, as.
Subalterno, as. Alterner. S. Follow counsel. Tenere consilium. Follow examples
manners or trade of other. Aemulor, aris. Imitor, aris. Et Respondeo, es. (cum
datiuo, vt Respo^det patri. He folowes his father.) Zelo, as. Zelor, aris.
Imiter. S. Et Zelotes, He that assayeth to follow the steps of other. If you
intend to follow your ancestors, it is necessary that you apply your study
to virtue. Si tuorum maiorum laudibus respondere vis, si maiores tuos refer
vis, cupis imitari, si te dignum maioribus tuis praebere studes: vt ad
virtutem, in virtutem incumbas, ad virtutem studia tua conferas, opus est,
nauari a te opera^ virtuti oportet, debes virtutem colere, tui muneris, tui
officij, tuarum partium est, non potes no^ virtuti operam dare, non licet tibi
virtutem negligere, hoc ad te pertinet, in te co^uenit, a te postulatur, atque
adeo, tanquam debita res exigitur.

Follow one to slay him. Petere iugulum. Follow the foot, or steps of one.
Prosequi vestigijs, Persequi vestigia alicuius, Consequi vestigijs. Suyure le
train ou la trace. Follower. Sectator, oris. m. g. Sectateur. S. Follower, which
follows and searches. Consectator, oris. m. g. Qui ensuit and cerche. S. Et
Consectatrix, tricis. f. g. She that follows. etc. Follower of one sect.
Consectaneus.* Following, or that which follows. Sequax, cis. om. ge. Qui
suit. S. Following hereafter, or which comes afterward. Sequens, Insequens,
it is. Subsequens, it is. Consequens, it is. Ensuyuant. S. The year following, or the
next year. Anno subsequenti. L'annee ensuyuant.

An earnest and diligent following of a thing. Consectatio, onis. foe. ge.
Poursuite and diligence de fair quelque chose. S.

Following, or the consequent. Consequentia. ae. f. g. La suite and consequence.
Foam, or frothe of any thing that is liquid. Spuma, ae. f. g. Escume. S. Foam
of lead. Molybditis, it is. f. g. Escume de plomb. Foam, or mother of all oils.
Amurca, ae. foem. ge. Vide Dregs. Foam, or spume of the sea. Alcyonium, ij.
n. genesis L' escume de la mer. Foam, or give froth. Spumo, as. Render escume.
Spumas agere. S. Fomy or frothy, or of foam, or that whereof foam or frothe
comes. Spumeus, a, u^. D'escume. Call. Fomye, or full of foam. Spumosus, a,
um. Qui rend force escume, Escumeux. S. Foming boore. Aper spumans. Sanglier
escumant. Fomitation, which is a form to mitigate pain or grief. Fomentum,
Fotus, tus. Fomentatio, onis, foe. genesis Fomentation. S. Fond, or foolish
speaking. Stultiloquium, ij. n. g. Fool parolle. S. Font. Baptisterium, Fons,
it is. mas. genesis Lustralis piscina. Les fons a baptizer. Food, living, or
sustinaunce, or general meat for all living creatures. Alimentum, Alimonium,
ij. Alimonia, ae. Alitura, ae. Nutricatio, onis. Cibarium, Cibatus, tus.
Nutritus, tus. Nutrimentu^, ti. n. ge. Pastus, us. Pulmentarium, Pulmentum, ti.
n. g. Victus, us. m. ge. Nourriture. S. Et Alimentarius, a, um. Escarius, a,
um. Cibarius, a, um. Appartenant a nourriture. S. Angl. Pertaininge to food.
Et Esculentus, a, um. Any thing that is taken for food, or is good to eat.
Qui est bon a manger. S. Food for one month. Demensum, si. neut. ge.
Provision d'un mois. S. Fool, or foolyshe. Bardus, Excors, dis. Fatuus, Morio,
onis, Moros, Vappa, ae. Stultus, ta, tum. Fol. S. Fool in behauoure,
countenance, or gesture, a fool in a play. Sannio, onis. m. g. Le fol d'vn
ieu. To play the fool, to do foolishely. Ineptio, it is, Stulte agere. Folier.

Fool hardy. Proiectus ad aude^dum, Temerarius, a, um. Temeraire. S. Fool
hardiness. Proiecta audacia. Temeritas, Temeritudo, inis. foe. ge. Temerite.
S. Fool speaking, he can not tell what. Morologus, gi. m. g. Qui parle
follement and sottement. Call. Fools holiday, which (as I read) was kept in
times paste, in the month of February. Stultorum feriae. Foolish. Fatuus, a,
um. Imprudens, it is. Ignauus, a, um. Ineptus, Iners, it is. Insipiens, it is.
Infrunitus, a, um. Stolidus, Stultus, Vanus, a, um. Fol. Call. Foolyshe babbler,
or talker. Stultiloquus, Morologus. Vt supra. Foolyshe babbling, or prating.
Stultiloque^tia, Stultiloquium, ij. neut. ge. Fol parrolle. Foolyshe by madness,
or out of his wit. Amens, it is, Demens, it is. Adiect. Horse du sens. S. Foolish
to make. Infatuo, as. Fair deuenir fol. Call. Foolishely. Fatue, Imprudenter,
Ignaue, Inepte, Insipienter, Stolide, Stulte. Folement, sottement. Foolishely
without aduisement. Superbe, Temere, Temeriter. Temereement. S. Foolyshenes, or
folly. Infantia, Stoliditas, Stultitia, ae. f. g. Imprudentia, ae. f. g. Folly,
sottie ou sottise. I cannot easily suffer, or I cannot abide the foolyshenesse
of some men. Nonnullorum Stultitiam non facile fero, aegre sustineo, haud satis
aequo animo fero: adduci non possum, inducere animum minime possum, a me ipso
no^ queo impetrare, dementias nonnullorum vt animo non iniquo feram.

Foot. Pes, dis. m. g. Le pied. S. Et Pediolus, li. m. ge. Pediculus, li. mas.
ge. Un petit pied. S. Ang. A little or short foot. Et Pedalis, le. Ang. Of a
foot. Vt Pedale spatium. Espace d'vn pied. S. Et Pedaneus, a, um. Ang. The
quantity of a foot in breadth or distaunce, D'vn pied. S. And every xii.
inches by circumlocution is called Pes, because a foot contains so much.
Also among the old writers, the foot contained syxtene fyngers breadth. Foot
and a half. Sesquipes, dis. m. g. Pied and demi. Et Sesquipedalis, le, Adiect.
D'vn pied and demi S. Half a foot. Semipes, dis. m. g. Demi pied. S. Et
Semipedalis, le. Adiect. Of half a foot. De demi pied. S.

Foot ball. Pila pedalis. Foot by foot. Pedatim. Pas a pas. Call. To fall at
ones feet. Proijcere se ad pedes alicuius, Prouoluere se ad pedes and genua
alicuius, Ad genua alicuius procumbere, sieve accidere. Se iecter aux pieds
d'aucun pour le supplier. S.

Foot man. Pedes, it is. Pedester, Pedestris, tree. Qui va a pied Call. Footeman,
or a lackey. A pedibus, A pedibus seruus, Ad pedes, Cursor, Stator tabularius.
Un lacquay. S. Et circumpedes, dum. Cicer. Footmen, or lackies. Foot of an
hill. Radices montis. Le pied de la montaigne. S. Foot of a pyller. Basis, is.
foe. genesis Un soubassiment de colomne. S. Foot of a dittie, or verse, which is
often repeted. Versus intercalaris. Refrainctes de balades. S. Foot pace,
easily or softely. Pedepressim, Pedetetim. Tout doulcement. S. Footepathe, or
way. Gregaria via, Semita, ae. foe. genesis Vne sent. S. Foot prynte, or the
printe of the foot. Peda, ae. foe. gen Vestige. Call. Footesteppe. Vestigium.
ij. n. g. Idem. Foot stool. Hypopodion, Scabellum, Suppedaneum. n. g.
Scabelle, ou petit banc. S. Foot which is round like a Sparrowe foot.
Struthopus.* Foot with the toes, or plant or sole of the foot. Planta, ae.
foe. g. La plant des pieds. S. Et Plantaris, re. Ang. Any thing pertaining to
the sole of the foot. Qui est de la plant des pieds. S. Footed with broad
and large feet. Pansus, sa, sum. Qui ont les pieds larges. S. Footed round
like a Sparrowe. Struthopes, dis. * Footed flat, or which has flat or
plain feet. Palmipes, vel Planipes, edis. Qui ha les pieds plats. For.
Etenim, Nam, Na^que, Nempe, Ob, Per, vt per aetatem, Prae, Pro, Propter, Quia,
Secundum. Vt secundum rempub. Super, Vt super laudem. Pour ou car. S. Namque
est coniunct. Casual. and semper ponitur in principio sententiae. For he is
chief of the city. Etenim est primus ciuitatis. Cicer. What means this
naughty knave? for if there be any mischief he is the author, setter on, or
ring leader. Quidnam hic vult veterator sibi? nam si hic mali est quicquam,
hem illic est huic rei caput. Terent.

For that which you can not, no man shall be able to do. Namque quod tu non
poteris, nemo poterit. Cicero. For the nonce. Ob industriam, De industria,
Dedita opera. Tout de gre. S. For fear. Prae formidine. Plaut. De grand paour.
S. This trouble is for your love. Turba haec propter te est facta. Pour l'
amor de toy. etc.

I gave twenty pound for them both. Viginti minas pro ambobus dedi. Terent.

For an other cause, or matter then that. Praeter propter.* Ob aliam causam vel
rem. For my part. Pro mea part. Pour ma part. S. For a suertie. Pro comperto,
Pro explorato. Pour certainte. S. For as much as. Cum, Eo, Inquantum, Proin,
Quandoquidem, Quatenus, Quatinus, Quia, Quippe, Quoniam, Quia enim, Quod,
Propterea quod, Quippe quia, Quoniam quidem, Vtpote. Pourtant que. S. For a
truth. Reuera, Pro certo. Pour certain. S. For because. Nempe quia, Siquidem.
Car. S. For ever. Perpetuo, Perpetuum, In aeuum, Ad infinitum, In aeternum, In
perpetuum, Aeternum, Omne ad tempus, In modum perpetuum. A iamais, a tousiours.
S. For how much, or for what price or value. Qua^ti. De quelle valeur. S. For
my self. Pro me ipso. For so much, or for that price or value. Tanti. Autant.
S. For that price, or value. Tanti, Tantidem. Idem. For that time. I am tum.
Even then. For that matter, or purpose. Ob eam rem. For this, therefore, or for
this cause. Idcirco, Ideo, Ob id, Ex hoc, Propter hanc causam. Propterea.
Pource S. For what cause, consideration, occasion, or purpose? Qamobrem?
Quapropter? Qua de re? Vt quid? Quid ita? Cur? Pourquoy? S. Forage, or to waste
a country. Populor, aris. Vide destroy. Forage, or meat for beasts in
winter. Pabulum, li. neut. ge. Fourge. S. Forage, foare. H. Et Pabularis, re.
Ang. Pertaining to forage. De fourrage. Forage, or to serve cattle, or to
feade as cattle does. Pabulor, aris. Fourager, paistre. S. Forager of beasts.
Pabulator, Frumentator, Frumentarius* ij. m. g. Fourrageur. S. Forager, or a
waster of a country. Populator, oris. m. g. Pilleur. S. Foraging, population,
or wasting of a country. Populatio, onis. f. g.* Pillement. S. Foraging of
cattle in winter. Pabulatio, onis. f. g. Fourragement. S. Forbear. Parco,
cis. Praeterio, is, iui, vel ij. Sustineo, es. Tolero, as. Fero, fers, Patior,
eris. Perpetior, ris. Endurer, souffrir. S. Forbear, or suffer one in anger.
Te^perare alicui. Forbear to speak. Refugere a dicendo. Forbid. Aberceo,
es. Cohibeo, es. Inhibeo, es. Abnuo, is. Interdico, cis. Prohibeo, es. Veto,
as, tui. Prohiber, defenare. S. I forbid thee my house. Interdico tibi domo
mea. Ie te defens ma maison. S.

Forbidden. Vetitus, a, um. Prohibitus, ta, tum. Inhibitus, ta, tum. Prohibe,
defenda. S. Forbidding. Vetatio, onis. Inhibitio, onis. foe. genesis Prohibition.
S. Forecaste. Accuratum habere. Force. Vigor, oris. m. genesis Force and vigueur.
S. Force, power, strength, or virtue. Vis, Neruositas, Fortitudo, Virtus,
tutis. f. g. Force. S. To throw out by force. Proturbare, Exturbare,
Expellere. Iecter horce par force. S.

To take force. Accipere vires, Inualere, Irroborare, Sumere robor corporibus,
Vires concipere. Prendre force. S.

To resist force by force. Vim vi repellere. Resister par force a force. S.

I cannot warrant or defend you from all force, violence, or invasion. Ego tibi
a vi nihil praestare possum, vim tibi nullam factum iri, illatum iri, allatum
iri, oblatum iri, pro certo non polliceor, plane non affirmo, tutum a vi te
futurum, ne pro certo existimes. nullam fore vim, explorate, asseueranter,
certo promittere non audeo. ea te cura prorsus non libero, non eximo, eam tibi
curam plane non eximo, non adimo, non aufero: ne quando tibi vis inferatur
vlla, ne quam aliqua^do vim feras, sustineas, patiare, sentias, experiaris, ne
quid aliquando per vim patiaris.

With all my force or power. Pro virili, Pro virili part, Totis viribus,
Obnixe. De toute ma force Equis and velis, manibus pedibusque, toto conatu, vel
nisu. A toute force. With all force, and power.

Force, or care little or nothing. Susquedeque far, vel habere. Forcibly. Vi,
Violenter. A force. S. Forcke. Furca, ae. f. g. Vne fourche. Et Furcula. dimi.
Ang. A little or short forcke. Petite fourchette. S. Forcke for hay. Furcilla,
lae. f. g. Idem. Forcke for a vine, or other like. Capreolus, li. m. g. Forde,
or shalowe place in water not deep, where a man, or beast may wade over.
Vadus, di. Vadum, di. n. g. Un gue. S. Aquarium, ij. n. ge. Un abbreuoir. S. Et
Vadosus, a, um. Ang. Full of fordes. Qui ha beaucoup de guez. S. Fordoe.
Abrogo, as. Ab^lir, oster, ou mettre a neant. S. Fordone. Abrogatus, a, um.
Oste. S.* Forefathers. Aui, orum. Maiores, Veteres, rum. Ancestres. S.
Forefinger. Digitus salutaris, Index, Demonstratorius. H. Foreknowledge.
Praescientia, ae. foe. ge. Futurorum notitia. Call. Foreman of an enquest, or
Jury, which is first sworn. Praeiurator, toris. m. g. Foremilche cow which
is dried up. Subducta vacca. Foremoste part of the skull. Craniu^, ij. n. g.
Le test. Forepart of the head. Sinciput, itis. Le deuant de la test. H. Fore
part of the lips. Labra primoria. Fore part of a ship. Prora, ae. f. g.
Le deuant de la nauire. S. Forerider, or renner in battle. Praecursor, oris.
m. g. Auantcoureur. Call. Fore renning. Praecursus, sus. masc. genesis
Auantcourement. S. Foresleaue. Cubitale, lis. neu. gener. Ornamentum cubiti.
Call. Fore speaker, or he that speaks first, the prologue. Prologus, gi. m.
g. Forespeaking, or forespeache. Anteloquiu^, uij. n. g. Forest. Lucus, ci.
Sylua, ae. Theriotrophion. Vne forest. S. Et Syluicula, vel Syluula diminut.
foe. genesis Petite forest. S. A little forest. Et Syluaticu^, a, um. Et Syluester,
ris, re. Ang. Of a foreste, or pertaining to a foreste. De forest. S. Et
Syluicola, ae. A dweller in a forest. Qui habit es forets. Call. Fore teathe.
Dentes primores, Incisores, Tomici. Les dens de deuant. H. Forfayte, penaultie,
fine, or amercement. Multa, tae. f. g. Amend, forfaict. Pals. To forfayte a
pain. Committere multam, vel poenam, facere multam. Forfaire. S.

Forfayte or to confiscate. Publico, as. Vide Confiscate. Forfeyted, or
confiscate goods. Res publicae.* Forge, or a stithy, a smythes forge. Fabrica
ferrea, Ferraria officina. Vne forge a fer. S. Forge, or to hammer a thing, to
work with the hammer. Cudere, Accudere, Fabricare, Conflare. Forger and
marteler. S. Forge. Adultero, as. Adulteror, aris. Fabrico, cas. Fabricor,
aris. Falso, as. Forger. S. Forge a leasing, or lie. Mendatium struere.
Composer vne menterie. S. Forge coin. Nummos adulterari. Forge deades, seals,
or wrytinges. Falfifico, cas. Subijcio, is. Vt subijcere testamenta. To bring
in faulse testamentes. To forge deceates. Procudere dolos. Forger quelque
tromperie. S.

Forge lies and tales, or to inuente any false accusation or matter.
Sycophantor, aris. Sycophantias struere, Sycophantisso, as. Forge, or falsify
a wrytinge, as chartre, deed, or testament. Chartas, vel Scripta subijcere.
Forged coin, or money. Nummus adulterinus. Faulse monnoye. S. Forged to be.
Conflari. Estre forge. S. Forger, or a maker of a thing. Fabricator, oris. m.
genesis Forgeur. S. Forger of words. Architectus verborum. Forgeur de mots. S.
Forger of deeds, or wrytinges. Falsarius, ij. m. g. Faussaire. Call. Forger of
false lies and tales. Sycophanta, ae. m. g. Vide Faulse accuser. Forger of
fables, or light tales to make pastime. Aretalogus. li. m. g. Forging.
Fabricatio, onis. f. g. Forgement. S. Forging of false accusations, lies, or
tales. Sycophantia, ae. foe. g. Faulse accusation. S. Forget. Dedisco, scis.
Lethen gustare, Negligo, is. Obliuioni dare, Obliuiscor, sceris. Praetermitto,
is. Falli memoria, Ex memoria deponere. Oublier Thou should lead a more
joyful, quiet, and pleasant life, if thou could forgette thy misfortunes.
Laetior tibi vita esset, iucundior, tranquillior, tranquillius ageres: si tuos
casus obliuiscereris, ex animo tuo, me^te, memoria deleres, euelleres: si
memoriam tuorum temporum omitteres, deponeres, abijceres, ex animo deleres: si
tua pristina mala, tuos casus, tuorum temporum varietatem obliuione voluntaria
contereres, apud te deleret obliuio.

Forget a good turn. Comedere beneficia. Cicero. Forget a man's name. Deuorare
nomen. Plaut. Forget mysery. Aerumnas, vel miserias expuere. Forget old
displeasure. Offensionem obliterare. Forgetful. Incogitabilis, le. Immemor,
Lethargicus, a, um. Obliuiosus, a, um. Oubliant. S. Forgetfulness. Obliuio,
onis. Obliuium, ij. neut. genesis Oubli. S. Forgotten, or brought in obliuio^, or
forgetfulness. Obliuione extingui, In obliuionem adduci, In obliuione iacere,
In obliuionem venire. Esire mis en oubli. S. Forgetfunesse of things passed.
Amnestia, Lethargia, Lethargus. m. g. Oubliance. Call. Vide Boetiu^. lib. 1. De
consol. etc. Forgetting, or leaving out of a thing. Praetermissio, onis. foe.
g. Delaissement. S. Forgive. Dare veniam, Dimitto, is. Parco, is. Remitto, is.
Ignoscere, Tribuere veniam alicui, Alicui remittere, Facere gratiam dilicti,
Poenam praetermittere, Peccatum condonare, Noxiam remittere. Pardonner. S.
Forgive me this one fault. Vnam ha^c noxiam mitte. Pardonne moy ceste fault.
S. Forgive, or pardone him I pray you. Omit quaeso hunc. Pardonne luy ie te
pry. S. Forgive debte. Remittere debitorem, Donare aes alienum, Condonare
alicui pecuniam, Creditas pecunias debitoribus condonare. Remettre vne debte a
quelqu'vn. S. Forgiven. Condonatus, Remissus, a, um. Remis. S. Forgiveness.
Remissio, Venia, ae. Pax, Gratia, Ignoscentia, ae. f. g. Pardon. S. Forgiving
of a debte. Condonatio aeris alieni, vel debiti. Forgotten. Lapsus e memoria,
Oblitus, a, um. Remotus e memoria. Foreheade or browe. Frons, it is. foe. g. Le
front. H. Forehead bent, or louring countenance. Frons nubila, matutina,
Obducta frons. Un regard forte aspre, and obscur. H. Foreheade bawlde. Frons
reclina, Refugo capillo nuda. La front chauue. Foreheade without wrynkles.
Frons erugata, Explicata, Exporrecta. Front sans rides. H. Foreheade that is
full of wrinkles, roughe and forrewed. Frons rugosa, Corrugata, Caperata,
Contracta, Striata. Front ride, plein de rides. H. Forehead wrinkles, or the
chines and wrynkles of the forehead. Rugae frontis. Les rides. H. Forehead
large and high without hear, such a one as most commonly women have.
Relicina frons. Un front large and descouuert, ou disnue de cheuaulx. S.
Foriner. Externus, na, number. Exterus, a, um. Forain. S Former, or late, or after
the first or old fashion. Pristinus, a, um. Furnace. Fornax, cis. f. g. Vne
fournaise. S. Furnace that is little. Fornacula, ae. foem. genesis Petite
fournaise. S. Made in facion of a furnace. Fornaceus, a, um. Faict en facon de
fournaise. S.

Fornicate, or commit fornication, or lechery. Fornicor, aris. Scortor, taris.
Meretricor, aris. Libidinor, aris. Rebus venerijs vti. Paillarder. S.
Fornicate, or offend in fornication with a kinswoman. Stuprum infer.
Fornication. Fornicatio, Aulterium, ij. n. ge. Fornication. S. Et fornicatus,
a, um. Pertaining etc. Fornication, or whoredom properly in bed. Concubinatus,
us. m. g. Concubinage. S. Fornicatour. Fornicator, toris. m. g. Fornicateur. S.
Forprise. Demo, is, empsi.* Forprysed. Demptus, a, um.* Forsake, or to leave.
Destituo, is. Derelinquo, is. Desero, is. Linquo, is. Refugio, is. Relinquo,
is. Renuncio, as. Renuo, is. Respuo, is. Omitto, is. Laisser. S. Forsake an
office. Deponere officium, vel magistratum. Caesar. Forsake, as a man does
forsake his wife. Repudio, as. Demittere vxorem. Laisser sa femme. S. Forsake
craft. Remouere se art sua. Forsake for ever. Derelinquo, is. Abnego, as.
Abnuo, is. Laisser a tousiours.* Forsake unthrifty company. Demigrare ab
improbis. Laisser la compaignie des meschants. S. Forsaken. Abuegatus,
Derelictus, Desertus, Destirutus, Recusatus, Relictus, a, um. Delaisse. S.
Forsaking, or a denying. Negatio, onis. Recusatio, Refutatio, onis. foe. g.
Niement. S. Forsee. Praecipio, is. Praeuideo, es. Prouideo, es. Prospicio, cis.
Animo colligere, Cord conspicere, Animo prospicere, Animo videre, Cernere
animo. Preuoir. S. Forseing. Prouidens, it is. parti. Forsighte. Prouidentia, ae.
f. g. Providence. S. Forsooth. Aedepol, Quide^, Profecto, Enim, Enimuero,
Hercle, Immo, Medius fidius, Hercle, Ne^pe, Mehercle, Porro, Pol. Equidem,
Sane, Proculdubio, Quidem certe, Plane. Certes, Certainement. S. Aedepol was an
oath ornatly spoken among the Gentiles, signifying by Pollux house, which oath
was never made but in solemn causes. I wyshe there were no other oaths
amongst us Christians, then should not the divine precept by Math. cap. 5. be
so communely transgressed. Forestalle the market, to go and by a thing out of
an other man's hand. Praemercor, caris, vel care, mercatus sum, mercatum,
mercari. Venir sur le march d' vng autre, and l' emporter auant qu'il y ait
peu mettre son denier. S. Forestaller of a market. Praemercator. * Dardanarius,
ij m. ge. Annonae flagellator. H. Forswear. Peiero, as. Periuro, as.
Obstringere se periurio. Se periurer. S. Forswearer. Peierator, vel trix.*
Forswearing. Peieratio, Periurium, ij. n. g. Periurement. S. Forsworn.
Peiuratus, Periurus, a, um. Periuriosus, sa, sum. Pariure. S. Forth, go to, on.
Perge, Pergito. Poursuis. S. Forthwith, by and by, out of hand. Confestim,
E-uestigio, Repent, De-repente, Repentino, Festinanter, Festinato, Iamiam,
Oppido, Iam, Protinus, Mox, Subinde. Subit, Subitement. S. Forty. Quadraginta,
Quadrageni, ae, a. Quarante. S. Et Quadragenarius, a, um. Ang. Of forty. Forty
hundredth. Quadragies centena. Quara^te cens. Forty thousand. Quadragies
millena, Quadragena millia. Quarante mill. Forty times. Quadragies, Quatuor
decies. Quarante fois. S. Forty years old. Quadragenarius, a, um. Qui ha
quarante ans. S. Fortieth. Quadragesimus, a, um. Quarantieme. S. Fortification
of a castle or town. Munimen, inis. Munimentum, ti. n. g. Fortification. S.
Fortification, or aid. Praesidium, ij. n. g. Aid. S. Fortify. Astruo, is.
Fortifico, as. Munio, is. Roboro, as. Vallo, as. Confirmo, as. Corroboro, as.
Emunio, is. Firmo, as. Fortifier. S. Fortify a place before the ennemy come.
Praemunio, is. Praefulcio, is. Fortifier vne place primier que l' ennemi
vienne. S. Fortified. Firmus, a, u^. Munitus, a, um. Fortify, muni. Fortifier.
Munitor, toris. m. g. Qui fortify and garnist and munist. S. Fortitude,
magnanimity and valiantness of courage. Fortitudo, inis. f. g. Animi
magnitudo, Vis animi, Inuicta animi potentia. Force, bon courage, Vaillantise.
Call. Vide Valiant. They are not oftentimes the wysest, which excel in
fortitude. Saepe, qui magnitudine animi praestant, prudentia minus valent.
saepe contingit, euenit, vsu venit, accidit, fieri videmus, non raro fit,
nonparum saepe fit: vt animi magnitudinem comitetur imprudentia, vt in
nonnullis magno animo praeditis, animo praestantibus, prudentia requiratur,
desideretur.

Fortress. Arx, cis. Propugnaculum, Vallus, Vallu^, li. n. g. Fortress. S.
Fortunate. Beatus, Candidus, Foelix, Fortunatus, Prosper, ra, rum. Prosperus,
a, um. Secundus, a, um. Bien fortune. S. There is no man more fortunate then
you, or you are fortunate. Tuas fortunas nemo superat. aequas omnium fortunas.
prospere tecum agitur, sic, vt inuidere nemini possis. foelicitate conferri
tecum fortasse multi, praeferri tibi, anteferri, praeponi, anteponi, certe nemo
potest. ea fortuna vteris, quae potest esse maxima, tam beatus es, quam qui
maxim. ita beatus es, vt nemo magis. ijs vel ornamentis, vel praesidijs
redundas, quibus maiora esse nulla possunt. nihil non optabile consecutus es.
nihil ad foelicitatem tibi deest. ea possides, ac tenes, quae beatam vitam
efficiant, quae sunt in vita expetenda, quae qui possidet, fortunam accusare
nullo pacto possit, nullius fortunam sibi exoptare debeat. nemo est paratior ab
ijs rebus, in quibus sita foelicitas est. rebus omnibus affluis. non est, quod
quidquam desideres. optimus est rerum tuarum status. tibi satis est vel
ingenij, vel fortunae ad been beateque viuendum. animi, and fortunae bona sic
in te sunt, vt in nullo magis.

Fortunate, or happy to make. Fortuno, as. Reddere foelicem. Bien fortuner. S.
Fortunately. Auspicato, Beat, Foeliciter, Fortunate, Secundis auibus.
Fortuneement. S. Fortune. Conditio, onis. Euentus, us. Fortuna, ae. Sors, it is.
Fors, it is. Nemesis. Fortune. S. I exhort, persuade, or council you, to give
as little credit as you can to fortune. Te hortor, tibi suadeo, author tibi sum,
ne fortunae fidem habeas, confidas, credas. ne te fortunae committas, credas,
tribuas. ne fortunae potestati te committas, ne multum in fortuna ponas. ne
fidam, stabilem, firmam, constantem, certam fortunam ducas. vt a fortuna
caueas, caute agas cum fortuna. minimum tibi de fortuna pollicearis, spem in
fortuna nullam reponas, constituas. vt fortunae instabilitatem, leuitatem,
inconstantiam, varietatem, mutationem, varios casus, vicissitudinem extimescas.

Forward. Antrorsum. Forward and backward. Aduersus, and Auersus. Foster.
Saltuarius, rij. m. g. Custos nemoris. Un forestier, ou guard de forest. S.
Foster brother, which is where as two do suck on one nurse. Collactaneus,
Collacteus. Friar de ^aict. Call. Fowe, or cleanse, or make clean. Erudero, as.
Purgo, as. Mondifier. S. Curer. Foughten valiauntly. Depugnatus, a, um.
Foughten. Pugnatus, a, um. Foul. Maculosus, a, um. Teter, a, u^. Turpis, e.
Immundus, da, dum. Impurus, a, u^. Inhonestus, Sordidus, Spurcus, ca, cum. Ord
and sale. S. Laid and ord. Foul corn, being full of weeds. Squallidae segetes
Foul evil, or the falling evil. Comitialis morbus, Caducus morbus, Mayor
morbus, Herculeus morbus, Epilepsia, Lues deifica, vel sacra, Sonticus morbus.
Le mal caduque. H. Foul evil favored whore. Strigtinella.* Strictinella.
Foul, or filthy to be. Sordeo, es. Estre ord and sale. S. Foul, or fylthy to
make. Maculo, as. Vitio, as. Sordido, as. Foedo, as. Contamino, as. Ordir and
salir quelque chose. Foul, or filthy to wax. Sordesco, scis. Vilesco, scis.
Deuenir ord and sale. S. Foul woman. Nigra, Tetra. Foetida, vel sordida
mulier. Fowled. Maculatus, Sordidatus, Sordidus, Foedatus, a, um. Ord and sale
ou laid. S. Fowled to be. Sordeo, es, ui. Vt supra. Foul, or to make foul,
defile or imbrew. Attamino, as. Deuenusto, as. Maculo, as. Oblino, is. Tetro,
as. Vitio, as. Inquino, as. Sordido. Spurco, as. Conspurco, as. Foedo, as.
Deturpo, as. Ordir, ou ordoyer. S. Foul, or bird. Volucris, cris. foe. ge.
Toute chose qui vole. S. Fowler, or byrder. Auceps, pis. com. ge. Oiseleur. S.
Fowly, or filthily. Sordide, Turpiter, Foede, Inquinate, Spurce, Squalide.
Ordement. S. Fowling, or byrdyng. Aucupatio, Aucupium, ij. n. g. Oiselerie. S.
Fowling, or defiling. Vitiatio, onis. foe. g.* Fowlenes or fylthines.
Sorditudo, Turp^tudo, inis. foe. g. Sordes, is. f. g. Spurcitia, ae. f. g.
Inquiname^tum, ti. n. g. Ordure, salere. S. Fowlenes of the body, having
spots of sundry colors. Vitiligo, inis. f. g. Fowlenes, or evil
fauourdnes. Turpitudo, inis. Deformitas, tatis. f. g. Difformite. S.
Foundation. Fundamen, Fundamentum, Heana, ae. f. g. Basis, is. f. g. Un
fondement. S. Foundation made in a maryshe ground, with pyles of tymbre or
wood. Palatio, onis. foem. genesis Pillottis. S. Found. Adeptus, a, um.
Repertus, a, um. Repertitius, a, um. Qui a este trouue. S. Found gylty of
felony. Compertus furti. Found, or to build. Fundo, as. Fonder. S. Found, or
to build a college. Instituere collegium. Fonder un college. S. Founder, or
first buylder. Creator, Fundator, Institutor, oris. m. g. Fondateur. S.
Founder, or first maker of a city. Conditor ciuitatis, Creator vrbis.
Fondateur d'vne ville. Fountain. Fons, it is. m. g. Font ou fontaine. S. Et
Fontanus, na, number. Fontalis, le. De fontaine. Of a fou^tayne. Et Fonticulus,
li. m. ge. Petite fontaine, fontenelle. S. A little fountain. Four. Quatuor,
Quatre. S. Et Quaternarius, a, um. Ang. Of the number of four. Quaternaire. S.
Four beasts yoked together. Quadriiugi, Quadrijuges. Four children at a
birth. Quatergemini, oru^.* Four cornered figure, or having four corners.
Quadrangulus, Tetragonus, a, um. Qui ha quatre angles. Four days agone, or
past. Nudiusquartus, Quatriduo hinc. Ab hinc quatriduum. Four days
continuance. Quatridianus, a, um. Four days space. Quatriduum, Spatium
quatuor dierum. L'espace de quatre iours. S. Four double. Quadruplex, cis.
Quadruplus, a, um. Quadruple. S. Four feet having. Quadrupes, dis. Qui ha
quatre pieds. S. Four fyngers thick. Quadrantalis crassitudo. Four fold.
Quadrupliciter. Four hand breadth. Tetradoron. De quatre paulmes. Call. Four
horns having. Quadricornius, a, um.* Four hundredth. Quadringenti, ae, a.
Quadringeni, ae, a. Quadringenta. Indeclin. Quatre cents. Call. Four hundredth
times. Quadringenties. Quatre cents fois. Call. Four hundredth times double, or
as much. Quadringentuplum. Four manner of parts, or ways. Quadrifariam. En
quatre parts ou sorts. Call. Four nights space. Quadrinoctium. Tempus
quatuor noctium. Four parts, or squarelyke. Quadripartito. Et Quadripartitus,
a, um. Ang. Divided in four parts. Devise en quatre parties. A streate having
four paths, or ways meting together. Quadriuium, ij. n. g. Un quarrefour
ayent quatre chemins. Call.

Four pound weight, or of four pound weight. Quadrilibris, e. De quatre
livers. Call. Four quarters of the year. Annui termini, vel quatuor anni
termini. Four quarter terms of the Law. Conuentus Iuridici. Four seasons,
or times of the year, as Ver, Le printemps. S. Which is the spring time.
Aestas, L'este. S. Which is Summer. Autumnus, Automne. S. Which is harvest
when all things be ripe, and Hyems, Yuer. S. Which is winter, and the last
part. Cardines temporum. Plin. Four syllables, or a word of four syllables,
as Im pe ra tor, Tetrasillabon, Tetrasillabum. De quatre syllabes. Call. Four
score. Octoginta, Octogeni, ae, a. Quatre vingts. Et Octogenarius, a, u^. Ang.
Of four score. Four score and ten. Nonaginta. Nonante. S. Et inde
Nonagesimus, a, um. Ang. The four score and tenth. Le nonantieme. S. Four
score and ten double. Nonagecuplex, Nonagecuplus. Nouante fois autant. S. Four
score and ten times. Nonagies. Nouant fois. S. Four score and ten times
more. Nonagecuplus, a, um. Vt supra. Four score and ten years old. No
nagenarius, a, um. Qui ha nonante ans. Four score even, or iumpe. Octogesimus,
a, um. Octantieme. S. Four score times. Octogies Quatre vingt-fois. S. Four
score year old. Octogenarius, a, um. Four square. Quadrangulus, a, um.
Quadrangle. S. Four square fashion. Quadrum, dri. Tessera. Et Quadriformis, e.
Ang. That which is four square, or is of four sundry or diverse fashions or
fourmes. Four square in fashion, or like. Quadriformiter.* Four square in
making, or made four square. Quadriformatus, a, um. Quadriformis, e. *
Fouretene. Quatuordecim. Bis septem. Quatorze. S Fourtene times. Quaterdecies,
vel quatuordecies. Quatorze fois. S. Fourtene times as much. Quaterdecuplus, a,
um. Fouretenth. Quartusdecimus, Quaternus denus, a, u^ Four times. Quater.
Aduerb. number. Quatre fois. Fouretimes greater, or more. Quadruplo mayor. Four
years space. Quadriennium, ij. n. g. L'espace de quatre ans. Fourth. Quartus,
a, um. Quaternus, a, un. Quadrinus, a, um. Quaternarius, a, um. Le quatriesme.
S. Fourth hundredth. Quadringentenus, Quadringe^tesimus, a, um. Quatrecentiesme.
Call. Fourth part of any thing. Quadrans, it is. m. ge. La quatriesme party de
quelque chose. S. Fourth part of an ounce, which contains in poyse or
weight two drammes. Sicilicus, Sicilicum, lici. n. g. Deux drames. H. Forth
part of a li. Quadrans, it is. m. g. Trois onees. Fourth time. Quartum, Quarto.
The form of a commone wealth, where a city or a country is only governed
by the magistrates and chiefest persons of the same, as at this day the
common wealth of Venice is governed by ye Senators. Aristocratia, ae. f. g.

Form, or to fashion. Formo, as, Conformo, Fingo, is. Former. S. Form,
figure, proportion, or shape of any thing. Forma, Effigies, Ratio, Simulachrum,
Species, Typus, pi. m. g. La form de quelque chose. Form, order, or rule.
Praescriptum, ti. Ritus, us. m. g. Ordonnance, ou reign. S. Form to sit
upon, benche, or settle. Classis, Scamnum ni. neut. genesis Sella, lae. foe. ge.
Vne form ou longue selle. S. Form, or seat for three men. Trisellium, ij.
n. g. Form, or seat for two men. Bisellium. ij. n. genesis Vne selle pour deux.
Call. Fourmed. Formatus, a, u^. Figuratus, ta, tu^. Formee. Fourmed as an Image.
Imaginatus, a, um. Call. Fourmed, or made of claye or earth. Plasmatus, ta, tum.
* Fourmed, or painted lively, or like a lively body. Iconicus, a, um. Tire au
vif. Call. Form, or to shape any thing of earth. Plasmo, as. Fair quelque
chose de terre. Form, shape, or to make ye ^^^namie of anything. Deformo, as.
Formo, as. Figuro, as. Fingo, gis. Former, figurer. S. Fourming. Figuratio,
Formatio, Formatura, ae. foem. genesis Faconnement. Call. Fourming, or casting of
Images with f^er. Encaustice, es. foe. g. Fourmoure. Figurator, Formator, oris.
mas. genesis Formeur. Call. Fourmoure, or maker of any thing of claye. Plasmator. *
Plastes, tae. m. g. Qui fait quelque chose de terre. Fourmoure, or maker of
Images with fire. Encaustes, ae. m. g. Fox. Vulpes, is. foe. g. Regnard. H. Et
Vulpecula, lae. Dimin. Ang. A little, or young fox. Regnardeau. S. Fox tail,
herb. Alopecurus. Queue de Regnard. S. Foxie, or of a fox, or as wyly as a
fox. Vulpinus, a, um. De regnard. S.
F. ANTE. R.
FRagment gatherer. Analectes, ae. m. g. Qui recuelit les miettes and autres
relics. Fragmentes, or cast meats, or pieces of any broken thing. Analecta,
toru^. Fragme^, inis. Fragmentum, ti. n. g. Fragment. S. Frayed. Exanimatus,
Exanimis, e. Exanimus, a, u^. Vide Fearful. Frayght, or tole paid for
passage over a water, or for shipping. Naulum, Portorium, Velatura. rae. f. g.
Le sailare qu'on baille pour estre pass l'eaue. S. Freight a ship. Implere
nauim, Nauiculariam facere. Freter vne nauire. S. Fraighted. Velatus, a, um. *
Oneratus, a, u^. Onustus, a, um. Charge. S. A ship fraighted with corn.
Nauis frumento onusta.

Frail or brickell. Fragilis, le. om. ge. Fragile. S. Frayletie. Fragilitas,
tatis, foe. g. Fragilite. S. Frame, or to join together. Coniungo, is.
Coagmento, as. Glutino, as. Conglutino, as. Connecto, it is. Intexo, is.
Conioindre. S. Frame for a vine, or such syke. Characote. * Framed after rule,
and squire. Normatus, a, um. Normalis, le. om. ge. Faict a l' esquiere. S.
Framed out of course, or square. Enormis, e. Qui est sa^s mesure. S. Framing or
joining. Conclutinatio, onis. Cohaerentia, ae. Copulatio, onis. Coniunctio,
onis. Co^nexio, onis. f. g. Conionction. S. Francke and free. Liber, ra, rum.
Franc, and liberal. S. To francke, or feed. Farcio, cis* Sagino, as. Hubero,
as. Obeso, as. Opimo, as. Pinguefacio, cis. Engrasser. S.

Fra^cke, cowpe, or place wherein any thing is fed to be fat. Sagin arium,
rij. Viuarium, rij. n. genesis La mue. S. Francked to be, or made (...). Al^ilis,
le. Saginatus, a, um. Engraiss^. Call. Vt porcus saginatus. A fra^cked, or
fatted hog. Francking, or fatting of beasts. Saginatio, onis. Fartura, rae.
f. g. Engraiss^ment de bestes. S. Franckely. Ingenue, Libere, A^dacter. ^ment,
and sans crainte. S. To promise franckely, and freely. Liberaliter polliceri.
Promettre franchement. S.

To do a thing franckely, and freely. Suo iure aliquid agere. Fair quelque
chose franchement. S.

Frankencence. Orobia, Libanos, Sterrhogonia. Thus, ris. Tus, ris. n. g.
Encens. Call. Et Thusculum, li. Diminut. Ang. A little or small morsel of
franckencence. Un petit morc^au d'encens. Call. Et Thuriceus, a, um. Of
frankencence. D' encens. S. Fransy. Vecordia, diae. foe. g. Troublement d'
esprit. Frantic. Furibundus, Furiosus, a, um. Vecors, dis. om. g. Insense,
qui n' ha point bon sens. S. Frantic fool. Vacerra, rae. m. g. Insense. S.
Fraternity, brotherhode, corporation, guilde, or mystery. Sodalitas,
Sodalitium. n. g. Fraternite. S. Fraudulent, or deceitful. Dolosus, a, um.
Fraudulentus, a, um. Fallax, acis. om. genesis Plein de tromperie, cauteleux. S.
Frudulent person, which works by couin. Collusor, ris. Fraudator, oris. m.
g. Trompeur. S. France, realm. Gallia, liae. f. g. France. S. France on this
side the Mountains called the Alps. Transalpina Gallia. A frencheman borne.
Genitus Celtis, Celta, Francus. Ne de france, Francois. S.

Franchising, or making a bondsman free. Vindicta, ae. foe. g. Affranchissement.
S. Libertatem donandi tres fuere species, vt oste^dit* Cicero in Top. quaru^
vna erat, siquis aut consentiente populo, aut iube^te domino nome^ in censum
detulisset, vnde and ciuis* Romanus fiebat, and seruitutis vinculo soluebatur
altera, quum Praetor manumittendi seruicapiti virgam imponens, eundam in
libertatem vindicabat: Tertia, siquis suprema voluntate in testamenti serie
seruum liberum scripserit. Call. Frease, or to be frosen. Congelo, as. Gelo, as.
Gelasco, scis. Geler, ou estre gele. S. Freased. Gelatus, a, um. Congelatus, a,
um. G^l^. S. Freasing, or frost. Gelatio, o^is. Congelatio, onis. foe. ge.
Gelure, gelement. S. Freate, or to rub. Pertero, ^is. Frico, cas. Defrico,
cas, Infrico, cas. Frotter. S. Freate, or to rub hard. Petfrico, cas.
Confrico, cas. Frotter fort. S. Vide Rub. Freating of the bealy, bowels, or
guts. Iliacus dolo^, ^^iaca passio, Laganon, Strophos, Tormina, number.
Torsiones ^^oniach^, Vetmina, verminorum. Ve^minatio, onis. f. g. L^^
trenchees. S. Freating, or ga^leing. Inter^igo, ginis. Attritus, Paratrimm^,
atis. n. g. Entre^^illeure. Call. Free. Ele^ius, a, um. Imm^^is, o^ Liber, ra,
rum. Fran^. S. Free cities. Immunes, and liberae ci^itates. Villes frai^. S. To
keep, or maintain his freedom. Libertate^ (...)* Garden sa franchise. S.

Freeborne. ^ngenu^s, a, um. D^ franche condition. S. Free courage. Liberale
ingenium. Freedom. Eleutheria. Immunitas, Ingenuitas, Libertas, tatis. foe. g.
Franchise. S. Free from all danger. Vacuus a periculis. Sans danger. S. Free
of expense. Largus, a, um. Franc, ou large. S. Free will. Liberum arbitrium.
Franc arbitre. S. Thou haste set my mind free from all fear. Animu^ meum a
metu liberasti, Abstersisti mihi omnem metum, omnem mihi metum exemisti, omni
me liberasti metu, effecisti, vt omnem timorem deponerem, vt auderem, forti
animo vt essem, vt animo vigerem, ne quid timere^, vt metu vacarem, animum meum
confirmasti, ad fortitudinem reuc casti, afflictum excitasti, factum a te est,
vt animus meus, qui iacebat, exsurgeret, excitaretur, erigeretur, effecisti, vt
animus meus sese colligeret atque confirmaret, roborisque multum reciperet,
languebat antea meus animus, tu, vt valeret ac vigeret, effecisti.

Freely. Ingenue, Libere. Sans crainte. S. Freely, or of his own will. Sponte.
Vouloir. S. And that which is freely done, or by his own accord. Spontaneus,
a, um. De son bon gre. Freely, or largely after the vulgar saying, while the
purse is open. Soluto sinu, Affatim, Ampliter, Benign, Large, Liberaliter,
Munifice, Oppipere. Largement. S. Freely, and largely to promise. Prolixe
promittere. Promettre largement. S. Freken, mole, or spotte in the body or
face. Naeuus, ui. m. g. Marque, ou ^^che naturelle. S. French, or of france.
Gallicanus, a, um. Gallicus, a, um. Gallus, a, um. Gaul. Pals. French cloak,
or like garment. Reciniu^, nij. n. g. French hoode, or velvet bonet.
Redimiculu^, li. n. g. French man. Celta, ae. Gallus, li. Capus, pi. (Vocabu.
ex voce ambigua fictum) m. g. Francois. Pal. French pockes. Morbus gallicus,
Lues venerea, Siphylis. Le mal Francois. French roses. Trachinia.* Friend.
Amicus, ci. Necessarius, rij. Coamicus, ci. m. g. Ami. We are very familiar
friends, or he is my very friend. Summus mihi cum eo intercedit vsus, summa
familiaritas. arctissima necessitate coniuncti sumus. vinculis arctissumae
familiaritatis adstricti summ^ vtor eo, isque me vicissim, valde familiariter.
nihil est nostra familiaritate coniunctius, alt^r alteri familiaris admodum
sumus. mutua est internos, eaque summa familiaritas.

Friend most special and trusty. Intimus, vel Intrarius, vel summus amicus.
Le plus grand ami. S. Friend, or indifferent body, with whom money is left.
Sequester, fae, tris, neut, tree: aut Sequester, ra, rum. Seq^estre. S. Friend
to have, or make. Amico, as. Concilio, as. Propitium reddo. Fair ami. Call. In
prosperity thou shall have friends enough, but if thou be ones in adversity,
there will all forsake thee. In prospera, secunda, co^moda, optima fortuna,
florentissimi^, prosperis, optimis rebus tuis, si tibi fortuna suffragabitur,
fauebit, facilis erit, facilem se tibi, ac benignam praebebit, si tibi optime
cum fortuna conueniet, si fortuna vteris prospera, secunda, facili, benigna, si
tibi erit optime, si commode tecum agetur, tranquillus erit rerum tuarum
status, res tibi ad voluntatem fluent, commodis abundabis: amicorum copia
florebis, amicorum multitudinem non desiderabis: sin ages infoeliciter, fortuna
vteris aduersa, tuis commodis, atque optatis aduersabitur fortuna, inimicam
fortunam experieris, tuis optatis fortuna non respondebit, male tibi cum
fortuna conueniet, male tecum agetur, incommode tibi erit, casus aliquis rerum
tuarum tranquillitatem perturbabit, perculsus fortunae vi iacebis, languebis,
iacebit fortuna tua, iacebunt res tuae, commodorum inopia laborabis, aliqua te
premet, vrgebit difficultas, infesta fortuna vteris, infensa, iniqua, aduersa,
difficili, dura, acerba, parum prospera, parum secunda, parum facili, parum
benigna: tum amicos requires, amicorum inopia laborabis, omnes te destituent,
deserent, a te desciscent, discedent, recedent.

Frendles, or without friends. Amicorum vacuus. Friendly. Amicabiliter, Amice,
Humane, Officiose. Amiciter, Mite, Placide, cum bona gratia. Amiablement. S. Et
sic compar. Amiciter. Friendly. Amicius, More friendly. Amicissime, Most
friendly, or most like a friend. Friendly, amiable, or done as a friend.
Amicabilis, Humanus, Officiosus, a, um. Amiable faict par amite. S. Friendship,
or amity. Amicitia, Amicabilitas, Limen, Necessitudo, Officium, Popularitas,
Coniunctio, onis. Consuetudo, dinis. foe. ge. Amity. S. Societas, Sodalitas,
Sodalitiu^. Are sometime taken for friendship. Friendship showed in hospitality.
Hospitiu^, ij. n. g. Friendship which sone quaileth. Repudiosa amicitia.
Frensy. Morosis, Phrenisis, Phrenitis, Continua dementia. Frenaisie. H.
Frentike person which has no stable wit, but vain visious. Phanaticus,
Phreneticus, Ceritus, ti. m. g. Frenetique. S. Frequente. Creber, a, um.
Frequens, it is. Om. genesis Frequent. S. Frequent, haunte, or use often. Frequento,
as. Versor, aris. Frequenter, ou hanter. S. Frequently, or often. Crebro,
Freque^ter, Subinde, Identidem, Plerunque, Saepe. Sounent. S. Fresh. Crudus,
a, um. Nouus, a, um. Recens, it is. om. genesis Frez. S. Fresh apparel, or
raiment. Comptus, us. m. g. Fresh, flourishing, or lusty. Floridus, a, u^.
Florissant. S Fresh, gaye, or galaunt. Opiparus, Politus, a, um. Poli. S.
Freyshely, or gayly. Pilite. Poliement. S. Freshely, or newely. Recenter.
Nouuellement. S. Frye. Frigo, is, ixi, and frigui. Frire, ou fricasser. Call.
Frye much. Defrigo, is. Fort frire. S. Call. Fried. Frictus, Frixus, a, um. Vt
ouum frictum, A fried egg. Fried meat. Caro frixa vel potius fricta.
Fricassee, Fritee. H. Frying. Frixura, Frictura, ae. foe. g. Friture. S. Frying
pan. Frixorium, Sartago, ginis. Frictorium, ij. n. g. Poille a frire, ou a
fricasser. H. Fringe of Arras, or Tapistrie that hangs by ye ground.
Fratilli. Fringe. Fimbria, Lacinia, ae. foe. g. Frange. A garment fringed.
Laciniata vestis, vel vestis fimbriata.

Frisell, to curle, or to tufte the heirs with a bodkin, or frisling iron.
Calamistro crispare coma^, Comam in gradus frangere, Vibrare ferro crines,
Vstulare crines candente ferro. Gredillier ou friser les cheueus. H. Friselling
iron, or an instrument to curle ye hears. Calamistrum, Acus mayor qua
crispatur in annulos capillitium, Acus. Poison pour grediller and friser les
cheueus. H. Fritus, or sritters, or pancakes. Lagana, orum. n. ge. Globuli
crispi, Frictae. foe. g. Bignets. S. Fro, or from. Ex, Ab, A. De, ou Des. S.
Frogge. Agredula. Rana, ae. f. g. Rain, grenouille. P. Et Ranunculus, li. Ang.
A little, or young frogge. Rainette. S. Frogs green, and little. Calamitae,
arum. Ranae virides. H. Frogs having yelowe spots on their bealyes.
Carchoquios, ij. Frogs which be always crokyng. Ololygones. Call. Froyes, or
pancake. Fritilla, lae. foe. g. Fritier, ou Bignet. Pal. From. Abs, A, Ab illo,
Abs quiuis homine, A te. She came from the I Will of Andrus to this our
neighbourhode. Ex Andro commigrauit huic viciniae. Terent.

From my chyldehode. Ab adolescentia, vel ab adolescentulo. De le commencemeut
de ma ieunesse. S. He is not yet come from Caesar. A Caesare nondum redijt. Il
n'est point encore reuenu d' auec Caesar.

From above. Desuper, Deorsum. Dessus. S. From an other place. Aliunde. D'autre
lieu, and part. From country to country. Prouinciatim. De province en
province. S. From door to door. Ostiatim. D'huis en huis. S. From far.
Procul. De loing. S. From hence. Hinc, Inde. D'ici, ou de ceci. S. From
henceforth. Amodo, De hinc, Dein, Deinde, Deinceps, Igitur, Posthac. D'ici en
auant. S. From joint to joint. Articulatim. Par les ioinctures. From man to
man. Viritim. D'homme a homme. S. From one place to an other. Huc and illuc. Ca
and la. S From one to an other. Vltro citroque. Ca, and la, d' un cost and
d'autre, d'vne part and d'autre. S. From some place. Alicunde. De quelque lieu.
S. From thence. Illinc, Indidem, Inde, Ininde. De la. S From thence forth.
Deinceps, Exin, Exinde, Inde En apres, consequement. S. From this place. Hinc.
D'ici ou ie suis. S. From whence. Vnde. D' ou S. From whence soever, or from
what place soever. Vndecunque, Vndeunde. De tous costez. S. From whence thou will. Vndelibet. Auth. ad Herennium. Front. Frons, it is. foe. g. Le front. S.
Front of an army, or host. Acies, ei. f. g. Frontayle for a woman's head, some
call it a frontelet. Frontale, lis. n. g. Un fronteau. S. Frosen it is, or
congealed. Congelatur, Gelascit. Il est gele. S. Frosen, or congealed.
Congelatus, a, um. Gele. S. Et Gelabilis, le. That which may be frosen, or that
freseth easily. Qui se gele facilement. S. Frosen to be. Glacior, aris. Estre
gele. S. Frosen to wax, or begin to be a frost, or frese. Gelasco, scis. Se
geler. S. Frost. Gelu, Pruina, Gelicidium, dij. n. g. Gelee. S. Frost, or little
frogge. Agredula, Ranunculus, li. m. genesis Rainette. S. Frosty, or subject to
the froste. Pruinosus, a, um. Subject a la gelee. S. Froth, or foam. Spuma. ae,
foe. g. Escume. S. Frothy, or that yeldeth much foam. Spumosus, a, um. Qui
rend force escume. S. Froward. Peruersus, a, um. Sinister, a, um. Qui fait
tout au rebours. S. Froward, or rude fellow. Aduersus gratiae homo, Contumax,
cis. Insanus, a, um. Froward understanding, or th'understanding of a word,
or sentence by the contrary, as when we say. Parcae, quod minime parcant:
Manes, quia non sunt boni: bellum, quoniam minime bonum sit. Antiphrasis. Call.
Frowardly. Contumaciter, Perverse, Pertinaciter, Obstinate. Opiniastrement. S.
Frowardnes. Contumacia, Insania, ae. Pertinacia, ae. Obstinatio, onis. f. g.
Opiniastrete, ou opiniastrise. S Frown. Capero, as. Contrahere frontem, Ducere
vultum, Frontem obducere, Corrugare, Rugas cogere. Se refrongner. S. Frowning.
Superciliosus, Vultuosus, a, um.* Frowning countenance. Astricta frons,
Astrictus vultus Contractio frontis, vel vultus. Visage refrogne. S. Frowning
forehead. Adducta frons. Frowning woman. Dira mulier. Frowningly. Diro vultu,
Vultuose.* A frugall, thrifty, or an honest man. Homo frugi, Dominus assiduus,
vel bonae frugi, Prudens rei familiaris. Bon mesnagier. S.

Frugally, or sparingly. Frugaliter, Parce, Sobrie. En bon mesnagier. S.
Frugalitie, or moderation in living. Frugalitas, Parcitas, Sobrietas, tatis.
foem. genesis Contentement de peu, Sobriety. S. Frugalitte is graffed in thy race,
or family, even naturally. Ingenerata familiae tuae frugalitas. Les gens de ta
race sont bons mesnagiers, and gens attrempes de nature. S. Fruit, as well of
beasts as trees. Foetus, Fructus. Fruit. H. Fruit bearing. Fructifer, ra,
rum. Rapportant fruict. Fruit lofte, or place to lay fruit in, or to keep
fruit. Oporotheca, cae. foe. ge. Le lieu ou on guard les fruictes. S. Fruit
of the body gotten by carnal copulation. Foetus, Proles, lis. f. g.
Generation. S. Fruit of the earth, as apples, corn, nuttes, etc. Fruges, is.
foe. genesis Frux, gis. Verbum antiquum, cuius obliqui casus in vsu sunt, vt
Frugis, gi, gem. etc. Toute sort de fruict. S. Fruit, or berrie of a ceder
tree. Cedris, dis. foe. ge. Le fruict de cedre. S. Fruit, or profit. Vsus,
us. Commodum, di. Vtilitas, atis. Commoditas, atis. f. g. Vtilite. S. Fruit,
or profit taken of cattle, or goods. Vsusfructus, ctus. m. g. Vsu fruict. S.
Fruit seller. Fructuarius, ij. m. g. Fruit time, when fruit is ripe.
Vindemia, ae. Vide Grape. Fruits, all such as grow on the earth. Fruges,
Cereales fructus. Toute sort de fruit. H. Fruits not yet ripe. Cruda poma.
Fruits with a hard shale, as nuttes, pomegranades. etc. Acrodrya, Nux, cis.
f. g. Tout fruict qui ha l' escorse dure. S. Fruitful. Foecundus, a, um.
Ferax, cis. Fertilis, le. Fructificus, a, um. Fructuosus, Vber, ra, rum.
Pinguis, e. Fructueux. Fruitful to make. Fructifico, as. Vbero, as. Foecundo,
as. Fair fertile. S. Fruitefulnes. Foecunditas, Fertilitas, Saturitas,
Vbertas, tatis. foe. ge. Fertilite. S. Frumentie. Frumentum.* Alica, Polenta,
vel Pulticula triticea, Pulticula, vel pulls frumentac^a. Froumentee. S.
Frumentie made of barley. Ptisana, nae. foem. genesis Ptisanne, ou orgemonde. S.
Frunt Vide Front. Frustration, or vain act, or making void. Frustratio,
onis. f. g. Frustration. S. Frustrate ye law. Prodere legem. Frustrer
l'intention de la loy. S. Frustrate, vain, or void. Frustratus, Irritus, a,
um. Frustre. S. Frustrate, or do a thing in vain, or by deceyte, or make
frustrate, vain, or void. Frustro, as, Frustror, aris. Frustrer. S.
F. ANTE. V.
FVgitiue. Fugitiuus, a, um. Fugitif. S. Fulfill. Impleo, es, eui. Adimplere,
Complere, Opplere. Emplir. S. Fulfill, or fill full, or full to the brimme.
Compleo, es, eui. Idem. Fulfill, or to perform. Obseruo, as. Perimpleo, es.
Ago, is. Compleo, es. Absoluo, is. Perago, is. Perficio, is. Efficio, is.
Facesso, is. Patro, as, Perducere ad exitum. Accomplir. S. Fulfilling.
Obseruatio, Peractio, Effectus, Perfectio, Complementum, Absolutio, onis. foe.
genesis Accomplissement. S. Full. Confertus, a, um. Distentus, a, um. Plenus, a,
um. Plein. S. Full age. Aetas adulta. Lucret. Full bealy, as he ye has eaten
enough. Saturio, onis. Full bealy, or he that has eaten more then enough.
Ligurio, onis. Lurco, nis. m. g. Gourmand. S. Full by the one half, or half
full. Semiplenus, a, um. A demi plein. S. Full fed. Saburratus, Satur, a, um.
Saoul. S. Full grown. Maturus, a, um. Meur. S. Full grown in age. Adultus, a,
um. Full Moon. Plenilunium, Luna plena. Plein lune. Full of banqueting, or
riotte. Comessabundus, a, um. Qui indulget comessationibus. Call. Full of
corners. Angulosus, a, um. Latebrosus, a, u^. Qui ha plusieurs coins and
anglettes. Full of counsel, or ready to give counsel. Co^siliabundus.* Full
of courage. Animatus, Animosus, a, um. Audax, Strenuus, a, um. Ferox,
Praeferox, Fortis, te. Courageux. S. Full of dregs, or lees. Faeculentus, a,
u^. Plein de lie. Full of heaviness and sorrow. Sera omnia. Virgil. Tristes. S.
Full of heaviness and tears. Moestus, Lachrymarum plenus. Plein de pleurs. S.
Full of juice, or lycoure. Iurulentus, a, um. Qui ha beaucoup de ius. S. Full
of kernels. Acinaceus, a, um, Acinosus, a, um. Plein de grains. S. Full, or
perfect. Perfectus, Plenus, a, um. Plein ou parfaict. S. Full of riches or
substance. Dives, Locuples, it is. Adiect. Rich. S. Full of tokens, as of
myrthe and pastime. Gestuosus, a, um. Qui fait beaucoup de gestes. Call. Full of
worms or vermin. Verminosus, sa, sum. Plein de verse. S. Full of wonders.
Admirabundus, a, um.* Full of words. Verbosus, sa, sum. Plein de parolles.
Full sea, or tide. Flustrum, tri. n. g. Full to be. Satior, aris. Estre plein.
Full to make. Satio, as. Saturo, as. Saouler. Call. Full, or perfect to be.
Perfici. Full, or perfect to make. Perficio, is. Parfaire. S. Full of vermin
to be. Vermiculor, aris. Se vermoulir. S. It is here to be noted, that where
as many words begin with full, as full of corners, full of malice, full of
words and such like, other then be here specified, therefore ye shall seek
for them in the principal word, as for Malicius, seek Malice, and so of the
rest.

Fuller of clothe. Nacae, arum.* Fullo, onis. m. genesis Foulon. S. Fullers
craft. Ars fullonia. L' art de foulon. Fullers shop. Fullonica, cae. foe. g.
L'ouuroir d' un foulon. S. Fullers teasell, an herb. Struthium, ij. n. g.
Radicula, lae. f. g. L' herb a foulon. S. Fullers earhe, such as they wash
their clothes with, it is called also fullers cleye. Terra Cimolia, Cretosa
Cimoli, a Cimolo Insula, Cimolia creta, Terra fullonum. Terre a lauer. H.
Fully, at the full, or perfectly. Ad plenum, Plene. Amplement. S. Fulness.
Plenitudo, Satietas, Satias, Saties, Saturitas, tatis. f. g. Plenitude. S.
Fulsome. Squalidus, da, dum. Crasseaux. S. Fumigation, or perfume. Suffimentum,
Suffimen, Thymiama, atis. n. g. Perfums. S. Fumitory herb. Capnon, Capnos,
Fumaria herba, Marmaritis, Pes gallinaceus, Fumus terrae. Fumeterre. Function,
or an execution of an office. Functio, onis. f. g. L'execution de quelque
charge ou office. S. Fundation. Vide Foundation. Fundement. Colos. Culus, Anus,
ni. m. g. Le cul. Funeral. Funus, eris. n. g. Funerailles. Funeral, or of
burial. Funebris, e. Et Funeralis, le. Funereus, a, um. De funerailles.
Funerals, burials, exequies, or obsequies of dead bodies. Exequiae, arum.
Iusta, Parentalia, orum. Funerailles. S. Funerals of young children.
Suggrundaria.* Funerals to execute. Ducere exequias, Parentare, Celebrare
exequias. Fair les funerailles. S. Fury. Insania, Oestrum, Vecordia, Vesania,
Furor, Rabies, ei. f. g. Fureur. S. Furies, according to the opinon of Cicero,
they be three passions of the mind, which carye men headlong to all
wickedness, he calls the first Ire, which desires reuengement: The next
covetousness, a continual serching for riches: and the third lust, which
always coueteth delectaton and pleasure. Euripides in Oreste, says that in
heaven they are called Dirae, In earth Furiae: And in hell Eumenides. The
poets feign them the daughters of Nox and Acheron, and name them Alecto,
Megaera, Tisiphone. Furious to wax, or to become furious. Furere, Furore
ingrauescere, Furorem co^cipere ex maleficio. Deuenir furieux. S. Furious, or
full of fury. Furibundus, a, um. Plein de rage. Furious, or mad. Furiosus,
Vesanus, a, um. Rabidus, da, du^. Saeuus, a, um. Furialis, le. Captus furore.
Furieux. S. He became so furious and mad, that he never recovered his right
wits again. Vi doloris ita insaniuit, vt mente^, rectu^ animi sensum,
rationem nunqua^ receperit, in perpetuum amiserit, ad sanitate^ nunquam
redierit. insaniae morbo ita est affectus, in morbu^ insaniae ita incidit, vt
nunquam postea conualuerit, vt furore^ nunquam deposuerit, vt bonam mente^
nunquam reuocauerit, vt a furo^e, a dementia nunquam se ad sanitatem retulerit.
ita discessit a mente, ita mentem perdidit, vt illum nemo postea ratione
praeditum viderit.

Furiously. Furiose, Furialiter, Furenter. Aduerb. Furieusement. S. Furlong
containing with us. cxxv. paces, which is the eight part of a mile, whose
inue^tour was Hercules, for he ran that space with one breath or wind, and
stinting, called the same thus. Stadium, ij. n. g. Mesure de cent vingt and
cinq pas. S. Furlong of land. Iugerum, ri. n. g.* Furnishe. Administro, as.
Instruo, is. Paro, as. Subministrare, Suggerere, Suppeditare, praebere. Fournir
de quelque chose. S. Furnished, or brought to pass. Administratus, ta, tum.
Furnished, or polished Ornatus, a, um. Orne. Furnishing. Suppeditatio, onis. f.
g. Fournissement. Furnishing. Ornatus, us. Ornement. Adorning. Furre. Pellis,
Pelles, ium. f. g. Fourreure. S. Furred. Pellitus, a, um. Pelliculatus, ta,
tu^. Fourrree. A garment furred. Pelliculata vestis, Vestis pellita. Rob
fouree. S.

Furrier. Pellitor, Penulator, * Pellio, onis. Pelliculator, toris. m. g.
Fourreur. S. Furring. Penulatio, onis. f. g.* Furrowe, by the which water is
drayned. Aquarius sulcus, Elix, cis. Lira, ae. pri. pro. Scrobs, bis, Sulcus,
ci. m. g. Le rayon. S. Et Scrobulus. diminut. Ang. A little furrowe, or ditche.
Fossette. S. Furrowe by furrowe, or by furrows. Sulcatim. Aduerb. Par rayons.
S. To cut or ploughe the land by furrows. Liro, as, Sulco, cas. Couper ou
labourer la terre par rayons.

Furrowe, or rabbat made with an instrument. Stria, ae. f. g. Furrows to
convey water to wash thowres of gold or other metal. Corrugi. Call. Furrows
to make. Sulco, as. Vt supra. Further. Porro, Vlterius. Plus oultre. S.
Further. Vlterior, ius, Cuius posit. Vltra, and superl. Vltimus. Further in.
Prodius.* Interius. Plus dedens. Furthermore. Ad hoc. ad caetera, aduerb,
Insuper, Porro, Praeterea, Super haec, Ad haec, Porro autem, Praeter haec.
Oultre plus. S. Au surplus. Furthermoste part of the firmament that man's sight
can determine. Orizon, Horizo^, ontis. f. g. Finitor, vel terminator latin
dicitur. L' horizon. Further out. Exterius, adu. comp. Extereur. Call. Furthest.
Finitimus. Vltimus, Extremus, a, um. Le dernier. Call. Furthest end, or part.
Terma, it is. Extremu^, Terminus, Finis, Meta, ae. foe. ge. Term, la fin de
toutes chooses. Call. Fie, look in Fi.
G. ANTE. A.
G, A letter in the number of the mutes, which often in the preterfect te^ce of
verbes is changed into ct, as Legor, lectus, Agor, actus: Sometime into S, as
Spargo, sparsi, Mergo, mersi: Not seldom into X, vt Rego, rexi. Pingo, pinxi:
And certain Greek words written in that tongue with (...), when they are
changed into latin are written with G, vt (...), latin Cygnus, In the notes
of antiquity G signified Gaudium, Gens, Genius, Gellius, Gaius, and Gratia.
Also Ga, Grauis. etc. Gable of a ship, or anchor. Funis anchorarius,
Prymnesium, ^^etinaculum, Anchorale, Funis nauticus. Le chable de l' ancre. H.
Gabriell th'archaungell, signifying the might and puissaunce of God. Gabriel,
elis. m. g. Gadde* goade, or rod, with a prick at the end to drive oxen.
Stirnulus, li. m. g. Esguillon. S. Gadde, or rod to measure ground. Gruma,
Chorobates* ae. Vitr. Gadde or whippe. Flagellu^, li. n. g. Fouet, ou escourgee
Gadde, or go a gadding. Peregrinor, aris. Vago, as. Vagor, aris. Ito, as.
Tracasser, ou alle^ ca and la. S. Gadder about. Vagabundus, a, um. Vagus, a,
um. Vagabond. S. Gadding. Peregrinatio, onis. foe. g. Gaddingly, as they that
went on pilgrimage. Peregre, Vage. Ca et la, par ci par la. S. Gage, pledge, or
to lay to gage, or to wage. Ponere pignori, Pignora dare, Pignerare, Dare
pignori, Opponere pignori, Oppignerare, Dare in pignus. Bailler engage,
Engager. S. To redeame a gage. Repignero, as. Desgager un gage. S.

To lay his cloak to gage. Ponere vel deponere pallium pignori. Mettre en
gage son manteau.

He that takes gage of one. Pignerator, toris. m. g. Qui prena gage d' aucun.
S.

To take a gage. Pignus capere. Prendre gage. S.

Gaged. Vide Gauged. Gaggle like a goose. Glacito, as. Author Philom. Strepo,
is, ui. vt Virgil. Nam neque Vario videor nec dicere Cinna
Digna: sed argutos inter strepere anser olores.
For neither yet with Varius verse
Nor Cinna-s mine compare:
I seem a gagglyng goose mong ^u annes
Of heavenly tunes that are.
Gaye, or fresh. Nitidus, Opiparus, Politus, Superbus, Vernus, a, um.
Venustus, a, um. Bien poli. S. Gaye, or galaunt speech. Phaleratus sermo,
Phalerata dicta. Belles parolles. S. Gaye to make. Polio, is. Nitido, as.
Nettoyer. S. Gaily, or freshly. Nitide, Opipare, Polite. Netteme^t. Gayness.
Nitor, Polities, munditia, ae. f. g. Nettete. S. Gayle, or a prison. Carcer,
eris. Ergastulu^, Custodia, Phylaca, cae. f. g. Prison. S. Gayler.
Commentariensis, Ergastularius, Ergastulus, Carceris ianitor, Phylocista, ae.
m. g. Geolier. S Gain, advantage, or lucre. Lucru^, cri. Quaestus, tus.
Compendium, ij. n. g. Gain. S. Many come into the court for gain and lucre
sake. In forum multi veniunt, vt lucri plurimum faciant: vt lucre^tur plurimu^,
vt quaestus maximos facia^t, lucri cupiditate adducti, lucri dulcedine illecti,
lucrum spectantes, lucru^ secuti, lucro vel lucri spe co^moti. multos in foru^
lucri cupiditas adducit, ad agendas causas impellit, facit auge^dae rei
cupiditas, ditandi spes, congerendaru^ opum, comparandaru^ diuitiaru^, pecuniae
colligendae, vt in forum se conferant, vocem in quaestum conferant, vt agendis
causis se dent, vt industriam suam in agendis causis exerceant.

Gain, advantage, or wynning of six in every.x. S^missis vsura. Gain of the
whole, and half so much more, as in four shillinges to get six shillinges.
Hemiola, lae. foem. genesis Gain, or to win. Aucto, as. Facere quaestu^,
Lucror, aris. Merito, as. Rem facere, Consequi quaestum, Lucrifacio, is. Facere
lucrum, B^ne rem suam gerere, Frugem facere, Demereo, es. Gaigner, fair gain.
He gained, or gat great riches by euel means. Quaestus maximos, sed
turpissimos fecit, rem fecit turpissime, diuitias quaesiuit malis artibus.
multum ille quide^, sed inhoneste, sordide, parum laudabiliter, cu^ dedecore
lucratus est: cu^ infamia lucru^ secutus est. tanti lucru^ fecit, ea cupiditate
ad lucru^ incubuit, vt expetendu^ sibi vel cu^ dedecore, cum infamia, turpi cu^
fama existimauerit.

Gayner. Vide Wynner. Gayner inordinate, or without conscience. Lucreo, onis. *
Lucriones sunt qui vndique lucrum aucupantur. Qui gaignent de tous costs. Call.
Gaynesaye, or deny. Nego, as. Abnuo, is. Diffiteor, Inficior, Recuso, sas. Ire
inficias. Nier. S. Gainsay always, or often. Negito, as. Nier son^e^t.
Gaynesaide. Negatus, a, um. Nie. S. Gaynesaying. Negatio, onis. f. g. Niement.
S. Gaynesaying, or ye denies. Negatiuus, a, u^. Qui nie. Gainestende, or
resist. Obsto, as. Obsisto, stis. Resisto, stis. Resto, as. Repugno, as.
Renitor, eris. Interdico, cis. Resister. S. To gainsta^de, or resist firmly.
Instito, as. Obnitor, ris. Obluctor, aris. Resister fort and serme. S.

To gainstande, or resist against the force of enemies. Impitum hostium
sustinere. Resister co^tre les ennemis. S.

Gaynestanding, or resisting. Obstaculum, Resiste^tia, ae. Impugnatio, onis. f.
g. Resistance. Galage, or paten. Solea, ae. f. g. Galaunte. Bellulus, a, um.
Comptus, a, um. Politus, Redimitus, Superbus, a, um. Venustus, Eligans, it is.
Bien poli, and orne. S. Galaunt apparel. Comptus, us. m. g. Galaunt fellow.
Excuratus homo. Plaut. Scitus homo. Gallant homme. S. Galaunt, or gaye speech,
or speaking. Phaleratus sermo. Galaunt to dress, deck, or make. Polio, is.
Allaeuo, as. Colo, is. Depolio, lis. Perpolio, lis. Laeuigo, as. Interrado,
dis. Pecto, it is. Polir. S. Galaunt wenche. Bellula puella. Galauntly. Belle,
Polite. Poliement, and orneement. S. Galauntnes. Polities, ei. Eligantia, ae.
Ornatus, tus. m. g. Elegance. S. Galding, or freating the flesh, or skin by
rubbing, or ryding. Interrigo, ginis.* Galey pot. Culullus, li. Vrceolus, li.
m. g Call. Galery. Dea^bulatorium, Paradromis, Procestriu^, rij. n. g. Xistus,
ti. Ambulacrum, cri. n. g. Gallerie. Galery, or building made outward in
prospecte. Menianum aedificium. Galery, or soller set in a sunny place.
Heliocaminus, ni. m. g. Call. Galery without a rouffe. Hypaethra, sieve
Hypaethria. Call. Galiard rutterkyn. Excuratus homo.* Galice, a realm in
Spain. Gallecia, ae. foe. ge. Galye, or little ship. Phacellus, li. Nauis
actuaria. Gallion S. Nauis longa. Gallee. S. Galie, having three course of
seats for rowers. Trieres, eris. f. ge. Gallee de trois rames pour banc. S.
Galie having three orders of oores. Triremis, is. foem. genesis Idem. Galye with
five rows, or oores. Quinqueremis, is. foe. g. Gallee de cinq rames pour banc.
S. Galingale herb. Acorus, ri, Cyperus Babylonicus, vel Cyperus Babylonius.
Galingal. H. Galingale spyce. Galanga, ae. foe. g. Gall of any living thing.
Fell, Fellis. neut. genesis De fiel, l' amer S. Gallye, of gall, or as bitter as
gall. Felleus, a, um. De fiel, Amer comme fiel. S. Galle nutte, such as is put
into ink. Galla, lae. Noix de galle. S. Gallope a horse. or to cause him
run. Admittere equum, Immitere equum. Galoper. Gallope, or to ride against
one, or to spur horse. Concitare equum contra aliquem. Venir contre quelqu'
un a course de cheual, ou ferir des esperons. S. Gallows, or gallowe tree.
Crux, Furcilla, Gabalus, Iugum, Patibulu^, Arbot infoelix. Gibet, Croix. Galon
pot, or measure containing a galon. Vrna.* Congius, gij. m. g. Un gallon.
Pals. Galte, or young hog or sow. Porcetra, ae. f, g. Porca, quae semel
tantum peperit. Gambalde. Crurum in sublime iactatio. Gambade. To fetch
gambaldes. Crura in sublime iactare. Gambader, Iecter gambades. S.

Gambalding horses, being full of gambaldinge and praunsinges. Excussores
equi. Gambaldes, praunses, or skippings. Saltus, Ludi, orum. m. g. Public or
common plays. Ieux publiques. S. Game. Iocus, ci. Ludus, di. m. g. Ieu. S.
Game at tables. Astragalus, Canis.* Game place. Proscenium, ij. n. g. * Game
players. Ludij, orum. Ludiones, um. mas. ge. Ioueurs. Call. Game, or to pastime.
Iocor, aris. Ludo, is. Iouer. S. Gaming, or full of game. Iocosus, a, um.
Ioieux. S. Gamond of bacon. Perna, ae. Petaso, nis. Petasio, onis. m. g.
Iambon. H. Gamonde of a bore, or swyne. Glandium, ij. n. genesis It signifies
properly the ketnell of the hog. Vne glande de porceau. S. Gander. Anser,
ris. g. promis. Iars. Pals. Anser mas. Iar. S. Anserulus, li. diminut. inde
Ang. A little or young gander. Et Anserinus, a, um. Of a gander. D' un iar ou
iars. Ganges, a River in Italy, which deuideth all India, and draws with it
golden sands. The Grecians call it Physon, and the scriptures countteh it
among those which flow forth of Paradise. Some say the heads or springes
thereof be uncertain, and that it flows as the river Nilus: other say, it
takes beginning in the mountains of Scythia, and that thyrtye ryuers flow or
come to it. The narrowyst place thereof is eight miles broad, and the broadest
twenty: where it is shallowest it is an hundred foot deep. it was first named
Ganges of Ganges an Ethiopian king. Of this read the. 65. chapter of Julius
Solinus, where he (besides other things) reports that in this river are
Eales of thyrty foot long. Ganges, is, vel itis. masc. genesis Gape. Dehisco,
scis. Hio, as. Hiasco, scis. Oscito, as. Oscitor, aris. Pandiculor, ris.
Baailler. Gape much. Inhio, as. Oscito, as. Fort baailler. S. Gape often.
Hiato, as. Baailler souuent. S. Gape, or chincke as the earth does. Hiulco, as.
Desido, is. Fendre, Entr' ouure. S. Gape, or cranny as a bourde does. Rimor,
aris. Rimas agere. Se fendre. S. Gape for a pray. Cornicor, aris. Gape, or
yawne for lack of sleep, or after sleep, or for sluggyshenes. Hisco, scis,
scere. Oscito, as. Oscitor, aris. Baailler de sommeil. S. Gape wide. Fatisco,
scis. S' ouurir. Call. Gaper. Hiator, toris. m. g.* Gaping. Hiatus, us.
Oscitatio, Pandiculatio, onis. foe. g. Ouuerture, baaillement. S. That has a
gaping mouth. Macticus, a, um. Qui habet os patens quasi malactieus. Festus.

Gaping, or chinckd with drought. Hiulcus, a, um. Rimatus, a, um. Et Rimosus,
a, um. Ang. Full of gaping, or chinckes. Plem de fentes and creuasses. Gaping
of timber, or wodde. Rima, ae. foe. ge. Fente. Call. A chincke. Gappe of a
hedge. Diruptio, vel sepis ruina. Gappe, or the brea^che in a wall.
Labefactatio muri. Ruina muri. Breche en un mur. S. Garbage. Viscus, er^s. n.
g. Guard of a garment. Limbus, by. Segmentum, Segmen, inis. Lacinia, ae. f. g.
Bordure ou brodure d' habillement. Segmentu^ aliqua^do pro vest ponitur. Vt
Ovid. Quid de vest loquar? non iam segme^ta requiro,
Nec quae de Tyri^ murice lana rubet.
What shall I speak of garments here?
No guarded robes I crave,
Nor yet what woolle of Tyrie land
With purple shines brave.
Guard, purle, or trayle of any garment, or it may be said any bourders or
trayles fynely wrought with small pieces fastened thereto be it metal or
timber. Or it may be esteamed that sort of guard or welte which besides the
guard is edged with a small lace, flat or round upon the guard. Segmentum,
And that which is so guarded, purfled, trayled, dressed, edged, or trimmed, is
said, Segmentatus, a, um. * One of the Guard. Satelles, Stipator, Praetorianus
miles. Archer de la guard. H.

The guard of a prince. Regij satellites. Liu.

Guard, or waiting on the body or person. Satellitium, ij. n. g. Guarded.
Laciniosus, a, um. Laciniatus, ta, tum. Gardeuians, or wallet for a soldier to
put meat in. Corycium, ij. n. g. Besace. Call. Gardayne. Hortus, ti. m. g.
Iardin a herbs and arbres. S. Et hortensis, se. Pertaining to a gardayne, or
of a gardayne, or that grows in gardines. Qui croist es iardins. S. Gardayne
for pleasure, or paradise. Paradisus, si. Dub. genesis Gardaine for pot herbs.
Hortus olitorius. Et Olitorius, a, um. Ang. Pertaining to a gardaine or herbs.
Apartinant a herbs. S. Gardaine made in a gutter, penthouse, or top of a
house. Pensilis hortus. Plin. lib. 36. cap. 14. Gardayne of roses. Rhodonia,
Rosarium, Rosetu^, ti. n. g. Rosier. Call. Gardayne of short pleasure. Hortus
Adonidis. Prouerbialy spoken of things pleasant, yet vain, and profitable
for nothing. Gardayne wherein salet herbs do grow. Acetarium.* Gardayne
pot. Seria olearea, Varro. lib. 3. De re rustic. cap. 2. Gardyner. Ceporus,
Olitor, Hortulanus, ni. m. ge. Iardinier. S. Garden. Custos, Tutor, ris. Qui
ius and potestatem habet, ad tutandum eum, qui se per aetatem nondum tueri
potest. Of this read the fourth chap. in the second book of Littelton. Et
Tutorius, a, um. Ang. Pertaining to a garden. Garden in socage. Curator, oris.
mas. ge. Littelton. lib. 2. cap. 5. Garder of garments. Limbolarius, rij.
masc. genesis Bordeur ou brodeur. Garder of the body, or person. Satelles, it is. vt
supra. Garding of the body. Satellitium. ij. n. g. Idem. Gargle, or gullet of
the throat. Frumen, inis. Gurgulio, onis. Epiglottis, Sublinguium. La luette. H
Gargle, or to wash the mouth or throat. Gargarizo, as. Fauces colluo.
Gargarizer. H. Gargeling. Gargarizatio, onis. foe. genesis Gargarizatus, tus. m.
g. Garg^uillement. S. Garlande. Corolla, Corona, Pancarpiae, Sertum, Stemma,
it is. Strophium, ij. n. ge. Un chapeau de Fleurs. S. Et Strophiolum. diminut.
Ang. A little garlande. Un petit chapeau. Garlande of cloutes. Cesticillus. Vide
Wreathe. Garlande made of ears of corn. Corona spicea. Un chapeau faict d'
espis de ble. S. Garlande of oken leaves. Corona ciuica. Garlande of Iuie.
Corolla hederacea. Guirland fait d' hierre. S. Garlandes which priests were
wont to wear. Strophia, orum. Plin. lib. 21. cap. 2. Garlande maker.
Stephanoplocus. Strophiarius, Coronarius. Qui fait chapeaulx de fleur.
Garlycke. Allium, ij. n. g. Aulx, ail. H. Garlic being great. Vlpicum, ci.
neut. genesis Genus est allij grandius, quod a nonnullis, Punicum allium dicitur.
Call. Et Alliatus ta, tu^. That which smells of Garlic. Qui sent les aulx.
Garlic bed. Allectum, ti. n. g.* Garlic sauce. Alliatum condimentum.
Garment, or apparel. Amictus, Apparatus, us. Indumentum, Vestimentum, Vestis,
Vestitus, us. Vestiment, habillement. Garment all of sylke. Holoserica vestis.
Garments being old, casten and worn. Scruta, orum. n. g. Vieils drappeaux.
Garment birled, or powldred with spangles. Clauus, est vestimenti genus, quasi
quibusdam clauis aureis distinctum. Call. Garment close round about as a
cassocke is. Cataclista, cataclistae. foem. gener. Vestis vndique clausa.
Garment furred with Fox furre, or such like. Vestis pellita, Vestis pellicea.
Vestement fourree de peau de Regnard, ou d' autre best. H. Garment freased.
Gausapina, ae. foem. ge. Gausape. indeclina. Garments frysed only on the one
side. Heteromaschala, and Heteromalla, orum. n. g. Garments made of fine
sylke, or fine threade. Multitia, orum. neut. genesis Indumenta dicebantur
minutissimis filis contexta, vnde nomen sortiebantur. Garment made of nedle
work or imbroderie. Vestis acu picta, Phrygia, Phrygiana. Habillement ouure a
l' esguille ou de broderie. H. Garments made of threade of diverse colors.
Polymita, orum. n. g. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 48. Garment of the color of violet.
Vestis amethystina. Habillement violet. H. Garment made of vndied woolle.
Coloria vestis, Vestis quae ex lana non tincta, hoc est, natiuo color facta
sit. Vall. lib. 6. cap. 53. Garment of cloth of gold. Attalica vestis,
Segme^tata vestis. Drap d' or. H. Garment of course cloth. Amictus pinguis.*
Vestis pexa. Habillement d' un drap espes. H. Garment of sylke. Vestis serica,
vel bombycina. Habillement de soye. H. Garment of fine silk. Cois, Coa, orum.
n. g. Genus est vestis adeo subtilissime ex bombyce confectum, vt corpus
pellucere potest. Garment of lynnen clothe, which is just and straight.
Poderis. * Garment of sylke having round marks therein. Vestis scutulata.
Vide Chamblet. Garment of a senator, or Lord of the parliament. Latus clauus,
Laticlauium, ij. n. g. Garment of the color of wax. Cerinum vestimentum.
Garment of purple, hemmed or purfled. Rica, ae. foe. ge. Et Ricinus, Ricinum,
vel Recinum, ni. n. genesis Varr. Garment of purple, or crimosin. Vestis purpurea,
Ostrina, Tyria, Conchyliata, Sarrana, Perfusa Ostro, Ardens murice. Habillement
de pourpre ou de cramoisin. Garment, or a robe of scarlet. Coccinum, Coccina
vestis, Quisquiliata vestis. Habit d' escarlate. H. Garment, or vesture mixte
with purple sylke for noble men's children to wear, until they come to
seuentene years of age. Praetexta, ae. foem. g. Et Proetextati Be the children
having such garments. Garment wrought on both sides, or frysed. Amphitapa,
Amphimallu^, li. n. g. Habit velu de deux costs. Garment sent to be sold.
Vestis promercalis. Vestiment mis en vente, a vendre. H. Garment to mourn in,
a mourning wede. Vestis pulla, Lugubris, Funebre vestimentum, Amiculum
nigellum. Rob de dueil. H. Garment torn, or owlde. Vestis lacera, Pannosa.
Vestiment deschire. S. Garment turned and dressed on the wrong side. Translata
vestis, Vestis interpolis, Vestimentum interpolum. Habilement raboube, fripe
and regratte. Garment of velvet. Vestis Holoserica, Serica heteromalla.
Vestiment de velour. H. Garment of woolle. Vestis lanea. Habilleme^t de lain.
Garment which covers the shoulders only. Scapularis vestis. Garment which is
made of canuase. Canabina vestis. Habit de canifas. H. Garment which is worn
ungirt. Orthostadios. Garment which lies, or is worn above or vppermoste.
Stragula, ae. Stragulum, li. n. g. Vlpian. Garment with long sleaues.
Marcrochaera, ae. foem. genesis Alias Macrochira, ae. f. g. August. Garment with
sleaues. Manicata vestis. Garment without sleaues. Exomis, idis. foem. ge.
Rob sans manches. Call. Garment unsown from the shoulders. Aclassis, sis.
foe. ge. Festus. Garment worn above a gown. Epitogium. ij. n. g. Garment
worn under, or a garment of course cloth. Trama, ae. f. g. It is also Woufe in
weauinge. Garments iagged and cut. Lacides, dum*Laciniosae, vel segmentatae
vestes. Garments, or baggage, or old things whatsoever they be, set forth to
be sold. Scruta, orum. Vieils drappeau, ou autres chooses. Garments rent, and
torn, and iagged. Lacides.* Lacerae and vary dissectae vestes. Garments to
suppe in, or to wear in supper time. Recidipna, Triclinaria.* Vestis
coenatoria, Coenatorium. ij. n. ge. Rob qu' on pr^noit pour souper. S Garner,
lofte, or garrete. Granarium, Pen^^le horreum, Solarium, ij. n. g. Grenier. S.
Garner for wheat. Cella penuaria. Grenier a ble. S. Garnishe. Adorno, as.
Excolo, is. Exorno, as. Instruo, is. Inuestio, is. Orno, Pingo, is. Polio, is.
Vestio, is. Garnir. S. Garnish galauntly. Depingo, is. Exorno, as. Polio, is.
Expolio, is. Garnir, ou polir bien and nettement* S. Garnishe with gold.
Caelare auro. Garnir d'or. S. Garnishe him self with eloquence. Armare se
eloquentia. Se garnir d' eloquence. S. Garnished. Adornatus, Exornatus,
Ornatus, Pictus, Superbus, ba, bum. Garni. S. Garnished galauntly. Perornatus,
ta, tum, Percultus, ta, tum. Perpolitus, ta, tum. Exornatus, Sple^didus,
Redimitus, Superbus, ba, bum. Perelegans, it is. Fort poli and orne. S. Garnished
with pearl. Baccatus, a, um. Orne de perles. S. Garnished with studdes and
tablettes. Bullatus, a, um. Qui est pare and orne de bagues au col. S.
Garnished richely. Splendidus, a, um. Splendide. S. Garnished with diverse and
sundry colors. Variegatus, a, um. Varijs picturis distinctus, ornatusque.
Garnishing. Ornatus, us. Comptus, tus. Cultus, tus. Exornatio, onis,
Ornamentum, ti. n. g. Ornement. Garnishing of doors with boughs, and flowers
as they do at midsomer. Toralium, ij, n. ge. Toral, lis. n. g.* Garnishing of
porches with stone, tymbre work, or painting. Antipagmenta, vel Antepagmenta,
orum. n. g. Cato de re rust. Garret, or an over lofte. Solarium, ij. n. g.
Superior locus in domo, Superius solarium, vel tecto proximum. Grenier.
Garrison which is put in a town for defense. Praesidiu^, ij. n. g. La
garnison qu' on met en vne ville. S To be in gariso^. Praesidiu^ agitare. Estre
en garnison

To place a garrison. Praesidium collocare, Imponere praesidium. Mettre garnison.

Garrison of soldiers. Exercitus, Agmen, nis. n. ge. An army. Garse, or
cut. Inc^sura, ae. f. g. Coupure. S. Garter. Subligare, ris.* Periscelis,
idis. f. ge. Fascia politaria. Le Iartier, ou Iartiere. S. Knights of the
noble order of the garter. Cohors periscelide insignis. Les cheualiers de la
Iartier. S. This was instituted first in England, by that noble prince of
renomed memory Edward the third: About the year of our redemption. 1343. S.

Gasp. Hio, as. Vide gape. Gasping. Hiatus, us. m. g. Baaillement. S. Gate.
Ostium, ij. Porta, ae. f. g. Ianua, ae. f. g. vne port. To wait or watch for
one at the gate. Ad portam expectare. Attendre a la port. S.

Gate that shuts with two leaves or parts. Valuae, arum. f. g. Port a deux
batans. S. To keep the gate. Tutelam ianuae gerere, Ianuam obseruare. Garder la
port. S.

Gate keeper, or a porter. Atriensis, Ianitor, Ad limina custos, Custos ianuae.
Portier. S. Gather. Lego, is. Meto, is. Demeto, is. Colligo, is. Cueillir. S.
Gather flowers. Demetere flores. Cueillir fleurs. S. Gather, or to assemble
together. Aggrego, as. Copulo, as. Coaduno, as. Cogo, is. Committo, is. Concio,
is. Congero, is. Co^traho, is. Coagmento, as. Assembler. S. Gather, or to
assemble together in one place. Capita confer, Conuenire, Coire, Congredi,
Confluere. S' assembler ensemble en un lieu. S. Gather by stealthe, as a thief
does his pack against his departure. Conuaso, as. Fair son paquet. Call.
Gather bones. Ossilego, is.* Gather corn. Frumentor, aris. Frumentum colligo.
Aller au fourage de ble. Call. Gather eftsoon. Recolligo, is. Sublego, is.
Recueillir Gather grapes, honey, sydre, or other fruit. Vindemio, as.
Vendanger. Call. Gather goods, or treasure. Conseruo, as. Thesaurizo, as.
Thesaurum colligo, vel Repono. Thesaurizer. Call. Gather in one. Aduno, as.
Congrego, as. Assembler en un. Call. Gather into courde, or cream. Coagulo, as.
Fair prendre and conio^ndre ensemble. S. Gather into a round bottom. Globo,
as. Glomero, as. Fair en round. S. Gather money. Conciliare argentum,
Construere pecuniam, Conciliare pecuniam, Conuertere pecuniam ad s^um commodum,
Cogere pecuniam. Amasserargent. S. Gather on heaps. Accumulo, as. Aceruo, as.
Coaceruo, as. Coalesco, scis. Congero, is. Aggero, ris. Accumuler. S. Gather,
or heap together. Adaggero, is. Idem. Gather with the hand. Stringo, gis.
Cueillir a la main. S. Gather out, or part such things as be chief among
many, as to take the best and culle she worse. Seligo, is. Seorsum colligo,
Secerno, is. Eslire, and mettre a part. Call. Gather round on heaps. Globo,
as. Glomero, as. Assembler en round. S. Gather the best of any thing. Excerpo,
is, psi. Gather wind, or to fan. Ventilo, as. Vanner. Gather up the foldes,
or pleates of a garment. Sinuo, as.* Gathered. Collecta, ae. fae. g. Collectio,
onis. Lectio, onis. foe. g. Cueillette. Gathered. Collectus, Collectitius,
Lectus, ta, tum. Assemble, Amasse, Cueilli. S. Gathered about. Circumfusus, a,
um. vt Multitudo circumfusa duci, Lucan. Gathered and brought together.
Collatitius, a, um. Ramasse. S. Gathered on a heap. Accumulatus, Aggregatus,
Congestus, a, um. Amasse. S. Gatherer. Collector, oris. Gatherer of bones.
Ossilegus, gi. m. g. Ossium collector. Call. Gatherer of subsidies, tallages,
taskes, toll, or tribute. Canonarius, Telon, nis. Telonarius, rij. Gathering.
Carptura, Coactura, Collectio, Lectio, onis. f. g. Le cueillement. S. Gathering
of Bones. Ossilegium, ij. n. g. Ossium collectio. Gathering of people to wonder
at an offense. Designatio, onis. fae. g. * Gathering of rentes, or revenues.
Logion.* Gathering, or gleming of grapes, or other fruit after the clusters,
or best be taken. Racematio, Vindemia, ae. foe. g. Collectio vuarum. Vendange.
Et Vindemialis, le.* Vindemiatorius, a, u^. Ang. Pertaining to gathering of
fruit and grapes. De vendange. Call. Gathering place, or table where money is
paid to a collector. Telonium, ij. n. g. Vide Count. Gathering time, or
season, when ripe fruit or grapes are gathered. Vindemia, ae. f. g. Vendange
Gauge battle, or war. Denunciare bellum. Gauge, or lay to pledge. Depono,
is. Oppignero, as. Oppono, is. Pignero, as. Pigneror, aris. Bailler en gage. S.
Vide Pledge and gage. Gauge in money. Sacramentum, ti. n. g. Varr. Gauge, or
pledge. Pignus, ris. Depositum, ti. n. genesis Depost, ce qu' on bail en guard.
S. Gauged, laid to pledge, or pawned. Pigneratus, Depositus, a, um. Et
Pigneratitius, a, um. Ang. That thing which is gauged. Engage. Call. Gauging,
or pledging. Pigneratio, onis. f. g. Gauntlettes. M^nicae, arum. Maniculae
militares. Gantelez de fer. S.
G. ANTE. E.
GEane, a city in Italy. Genua. ae. f. g. Gelde. Castro, as. Emasculo, as.
Euiro, as. Chastrer. S. Gelde a man. Eunucho, as* Eunuchiso, as. Idem. Gelded.
Castratus, a, um. Euiratus, ta, tum. Chastre. Gelded man, or imperfect man.
Semimas, ris. m. g. Semiuir, ri. m. g. Demi homme. Call. Eunuchus was also the
proper name of a man that was chamberlayne to the queen of Candace. Act. 10.
and. 8. Gelded priests, which always served Diana* Megabizi, orum. mas. ge.
Gelder. Castrator, toris. m. g. Chastereur. Pals. Gelderlande people, or the
people of Gelderlande and Cleave. Menapij, orum. mas. g. And thereupon Lady Anne
of Cleave may be called. Heroida menapia. Gelding, or the act of making
chaste. Castratio, onis. f. g. Chastrement. S. Gelding, or a horse that is
gelded. Canterius, quasi Carentarius, quod semine careat, Varrone test, Spado
vel equus castratus. Cheual chastre, Cheual hongre. H. Gelly to eat. Glaciata
vel coagulata mucillago pedum vitulinorum. Gelee qu'on mange. S. Gelouer.
Leucoion. Giroflee. S. Vide Tur. li. 2. fo. 163 Gemoll or a gemmow. Stalagnium,
nij. neut. ge. It is such as the Egiptians use to hang at their ears.
Gemoll, or a little ring to wear on the finger. Annellus, li. m. g. Annelet
qu' on met au doigt. S. Genalogie. Genealogia, ae. foe. g. Stemma, it is. n. ge.
Genealogy. S. Gender, or to bring forth little ones. Foeto, tas. Foetifico,
cas. Fair ses petits. S. Gendring together. Generatio, Genimen, nis. n. g.
Generation. Generation, line, race, or stock. Genesis, Genime^, Propages,
Propago, inis. f. g. Propagies, iei. foe. g. Sanguis, inis. Soboles, Proles,
lis. Stirps, pis. Genus, eris. n. g. Race, lignee. Prosapia, Senten, inis.
Progenies, iei. fae. g. Generation. Call. General. Generalis, Catholicus,
Oecumenicus, Vniuersalis, Vniuersus, sa, sum. General. S. General counsel.
Synodus. Vide Counsel general. General captain of an army. Strategus, gi.
m. ge. Chef and captain d'vn armee. Call. Generally, or in general.
Generaliter, Generatim, In vniuersum. En general. S. Generally. Generaliter,
Universe, Vno verbo. Generalement. S. General^i^. Vniuersitas, ta^is. f. ge. L'
universe, le tou^ ensemble. Call. Generat^, or do the act of generation. Fumo*
^is, ^ui. Genero, as. Gigno foetum. Procreo, as. Ingenero, as. Gigno, nis.
Engendrer. S. Generated. Generatus, Genitus, a, um. Engendre. S. Generati^e
humor. Virus, ri. n. g. Plin. li. 28. cap. 11 G^^e^ of Spain, or Spanysh
horse. Asturequus, Astureo, nis. m. g. Genet. Pals. Genitall, or privy
members. Genitale, lis. Strutheus, Tentum, ti. n. g. Genitoire. Call. Genitours
of beasts. Nebrundes. Gentian herb. Gentiana, ae. f. g. De lagentienne. S.
Gentiles, a word used of the writers of scripture for those which others call
Ethnickes, or worshippers of Idols. Gentiles, ium. Com. genesis Gentilitie.
Gentilitas.*. Gentle. Eutrapelus, a, um. Philanthropos.* Generosus, a, um.
Humanus, a, um. Lenis, e. Lentus, a, um. Mitis, e. Mollis, e. Pius, a, um.
Placidus, Suauis, Vrbanus, a, um. Benignus, na, number. Facilis, le. Gentil,
doulx. S. Gentle and courtoyse. Suauis, e. Courtois. Call. Gentle and full of
humanity. Comis, is. com. genesis Humain. Call. Gentle demeanor, or behauour.
Lepor, ris. Lepos, ris. Humanitas, Comitas, Morum suauitas. Courtoisie. Gentle
entreteignement. Prothymia.* Gentle entreating, handling, or vsinge. Mulcedo,
inis. Permulsio, onis. foe. g. Adoulcissement. Call. Gentle made, or made gentle
and meke. Mansuefactus, a, um. Domitus, ta, tum. Donte. S. Gentle of
countenance, or gesture. Vrbanus, na, number. Vt supra. Gentle, or easy to be
spoken unto. Affabilis, e, Suauis, Vrbanus, na, number. Affable. Gentle speech.
Suadela, lae. foe. g. Enhortement. S. Gentle to make, or to tame. Mansuefacio,
is. Domo, as. Mansuetum reddo. Donter. S. Gentle to wax. Mansuesco, scis.
Mitesco, scis. Deuenir doulx. Call. Gentil man. Generosus, Ingenuus. Un gentil
homme. Gentleman of the first head, Ironice applied to such a one, as would
be esteamed a gentleman, having no point of a gentle man, either by quality or
birth. Filius terrae. Et trium literarum homo. But this was used among the
Romain gentiles, as a title of worship or honor, for they wrote their names with
three letters, as M. T. C. for Marcus Tullius Cicero. etc. It is said that
Vir^trium literarum, is a thief, because it is written with three letters, F.
u. r. Gentlemen. Primores viri. Gentle men of the kings house. Regia turma.
Les gentilz hommes de la maison du roy. Gentlemen of the kings chamber. Regia
cohors. Les gentilz hommes de la chamber. S. Gentleness. Benignitas, Facilitas,
Generositas, Humanitas, Lenitas, Lenitudo, Mansuetudo, Mollitudo, Vrbanitas,
tatis. foe. ge. Gentilesse benignite, and vrbanite. Pals. I never knew man of
more gentlynesse and frendlynesse then he is. Qui plus habeat, possideat,
ostendat humanitatis, in quo plus humanitatis, plus officij sit, qui sit illi
humanitate praeferendus, magis ad humanitatem propendeat, humanitatis laud sit
illo praestantior, humanitate magis abundet, illum humanitate vincat, ei
praest^r, antecellat humanitate, hactenus cognoui nemine^. nemo est illo
maioris officij, humaniore sensu, officij studiosior, in officio diligentior.

Gentleness in sufferaunce. Indulgentia, ae. foem. ge. Vide Suffraunce.
Gentlewomen. Primores foeminae. Gently. Affabiliter, Benign, Blande, Ca^dide,
Clementer, Comiter, Comoedice, Dulce, Dulciter, Humaniter, Leniter Lepide,
Luculenter, Mansuete, Molliter, Pie, Placide, Suauiter, Affatim, Vrbane.
Courto^sement, Humainement. S. Geometry. Geometria, ae. f. g. Geometry. Call.
He is expert and very conning in Geometry. Geometricis literis perfect
eruditus penitus cognouit Geometriam, tenet omnino geometriam: callet omnino
geometricam scientiam. excellit in geometria. perfectam, absolutam, singularem,
eximiam geometriae scientiam possidet. ita processit in geometria, vt ad summum
peruenerit. prorsus geometriam cognouit. vincit omnes, praestat omnibus,
antecellit omnibus, nemini secundus est, parem habet neminem, superior omnib^s
est in geometrica scientia.

Geometrical description. Geometrica descriptio. Geometrition, Geometres, ae.
Geometra, ae. com. g. Geometre. Call. Germander, herb. Chamaedrys. Serrata,
Trissago, Quercula, Serratula, lae. f. g. Garmandree. H. Germany. Germania,
ae. f. g. German, or of Germany. Germanus, a, um. Germanicus, ca, cum. Gest.
Conuictor, Conuiua, Epulo, nis. Hospes, it is. Qui est conuie ou inuit au
banquet. S. Gest bidden to dynner. Pransor, oris. m. g. Qui est inuit a
disner. S. Gest chamber. Triclinium, ij. n. g.* Geste unbidden, or smell
feast. A symbolus, li. m. g. It is also be that pays nothing but goes
scotfree. Franc d' escot, qui ne pay rien. S. Gestes, or company at a banquet,
or at table. Syssitia, orum. n. genesis Gesture. Gestus, us. m. g. Geste. S. Est
motus corporis, actio quae da^, and quasi corporis pronuntiatio. Gesture, or
declare any thing by the utter motions of the body. Gestio, it is, tiui, vel tij.
Fair gestes and mines du corpse. S. Science to gesture with the hands.
Chironomia, iae. foe. g. Science de fair gestes des mains. Call.

Get. Concilio, as. Acquerir. S. To get ones good will. Voluntatem alicuius
conciliare sibi. Cic. Acquirir son bon vouloir. S.

To get him self favor by some thing. Conciliare sibi gratiam per rem
aliqua^. Cic. Acquerir. S

Get a broken head, or a shrewde turn. Suere aliquid capiti. Get a child.
Creo, as, Gigno, is. Pario, is. Quaerere liberos, Suscipere, vel tollere
liberos. Engendrer. Get again. Recipiscor, ris. Renanciscor, sceris, actus
sum.* Get a living. Victum quaerere. Gaigner sa^^ie. Get a thing desired, or by
desire or petition. Precario aliquid obtinere. Get before an other, as have in
primarie possession. Occupo, as. Occuper, usurper. Call. Get by chance, or
fortune. Sortior, iris.* Get by craft, or to seek to get. Venor, aris. Per
trans. vt Venari laudem, and gloriam. etc. To seek to get praise and glory.
etc. Get by generation. Gigno, is. Vt supra. Get brute, fame, glory, renown,
or worship. Assequi nomen, Aucupari famam, Recupera^e gloriam. Acquerir bruit.
S. Get goods. Contrahere bona, Rem facere. Acquester du bien. S. Get goods by
conquest, or victory. Ampla trophaea contrahere, vel far.* Get money, or to
gather money. Conciliare argentum, Construere pecuniam. Amasser argent. S. Get
money of one by craft, or falshode. Circumducere aliquem aere, vel argento. Par
finesse tirer l' argent d' aucun. S. Get money craftily, or by false promise.
Aerusco, scas.* Pecunias vndique fallacijs colligere. Quester auec tromperies.
Get, or acquere. Adquiro, Acquiro, is, Quaero, is. Paro, as. Acquerir. Get, or
obtain. Adipiscor, ris. Consequor, ris. Obtineo, es. Nanciscor, ris. Paro, as.
Quaero, ris. Acquerir, obtenir. S. Get syckenes. Co^trahere valetudinem, vel
morbu^. Get the hence. Apagesis, Apage te, Abi, Abito. Oste toy de la, ou d'
icy. S. Get victory. Apprehendere palmam. Get with child. Facere grauidam, vel
deprehendere, Grauido, as. Foeminam implere, Praegnantem facere. Engrossir and
emplir vne femme. S. Getting, or apprehending. Captura, ae. f. g. Priuse.
Getting. Adquisitio, Vendicatio, Acquisitio, onis. foe. ge. Acquisition. S.
G. ANTE. H.
Ghost, or the spirit. Spiritus, tus. man. genesis L' esprit. S. To give up the
ghost, and die. E^^l^re extremum spiritum. Render l' esprit, and (...). S.
Vide Dye.

Ghostes of the dead. Man^s, ium. Vmbrae* arum. foe. genesis Les espris des
trespasses. S.
G. ANTE. I.
GIaunt. Gigas, ntis. m. g. Geant. S. Of a gyaunt. Giganteus, ea, eu^. De (...).

Giantes are said to be far bygger then other men. etc. Maximi inter
caeteros homin^^ ^^runtur esse gigantes, extraordinaria, musit^ta, immensa
magnitudine, magnitudinis immensae. vastissima funt gigantum ^orpora, horribi^^
magnitudine. non sunt gigantes cum caeteris hominibus corporis magnitudine
conferendi. (...) nostrum est, qui gigantes magnitudine ad^^qua^t, qui gigantum
magnitudinem aequet, assequatur, qui gigantibus par fit. excellunt gigantes
magnitudine inter homines reliquos, caeteris hominibus praestant, antecellunt,
gigantis magnitude ^aret exemplo, (...) est, praetor (...) morem, vastior est,
quam mos naturae ferat. Gibet. Crux, Gabalus, Patibulum, li. n. g. Gibbet. S.
Gift. Donarium, Donatiuum, Donum, Munus, eris. n. ge. Don. Gift given to him
that tells glad tidinges. Euangelia, orum. n. g. plur. Call. Euangelium, ij.
n. ge. Quod laeta nuntianti datur. Salaire pour bonne nouuelle. H. Gift given
to a friend, or geaste. Apophoretum, Xenium, ij. neut. ge. Present qu'on fait a
ses amiss qui viennent a veoir. Call. Apophoreta, quae dantur in fine conuiuij
cui placeat: Xenia, sunt munuscula hospitibus, aut amicis data. Gift given by
the prince to his subjects. Congiarium, ij. n. genesis Le don que faict un
Seigneur a ses subjects. H. Gift in francke marriage. Dotale prioris natu.*
Gift of small value, or little gift. Munusculum, Xeniolum, li. n. g. Petit
don. To give one a gift. Donare cuiquam, dona dare, largiri, munus offerre
cuiquam, donis quenquam afficere, donare quenquam munere, dona in quenquam
confer, munera confer, liberalis in quenquam esse, liberalitate vti,
liberalitatem exercere, vel muneribus afficere.

Gifts, or alms of Princes. Sportella, Sportula, ae. foem. genesis Gift given
to a legate, or ambassadoure. Legatiuum, ui. n. g. La pay d' un ambassadeur.
S. Gift well bestowed. Munus been positum. Gylde, or a brotherhode. Phratria,
Phiasus, Sodalitas, Sodalitium, ij. n. g. Confrairie. S. Gylde. Look gilte.
Gylder. Vide Gilter. Gilles of a fyshe. Branchiae, arum. foem. genesis L'^uye des
poissons. S. Gilouer, or cloue gillouer. Altilis betonica, Betonica coronaria,
Garyophillus, Garyophillea, Ca^tabrica, cae. foe. g. Oeilletz. Dod. Gilouer
gentle, or flower gentle. Amarantus purpureus, Vulgo Flos amoris. Passeuelours.
H. Gilt. Auro, as. Deauro, as. Inauro, as. Dorer. S. Gilted, or gilded.
Auratus, Aureus, Inauratus, ta, tum. Door. S. Gilter. Aurarius, Aurator,
Deaurator, Inaurator, toris. m. g. Doradeur, endoreur. H. Gilting. Deauratio.*
Auratura, ae. f. g. Dorure. S. Gilthead, or goldney fish which cheweth like a
beast. Aurata marina, Scarus, ri, Orata. Brame de mer. H. Guilty. Obnoxious, a,
u^. Noxius, Reus, Sons, it is. Nocens, it is. om. ge. Compos culpae. Culpable. S.
Gilty of death. Affinis rei capitalis. Gilty of trespace. Affinis sceleris.
Gilty to be of some case. In noxia esse, vel In noxa esse. Estre coulpable
d'aucun cas. S. Gilty to be of some thing. Conscius, a, um. Noxius, a, um.
Coulpable de quelque cas. S. Gilty to be of felony. Tenere furti. Gilty to be
of treason. Teneri crimine lesae maiestatis. Gylty to be of trespace. Teneri
iniuriarum. Giltles, or without fault. Innocens, it is. Remotus a noxia.
Innoxius, ia, ium. Insons, it is. om. genesis Qui n' est coulpable. S. Giltles to
be. Vacare culpa, Extra culpam, noxam, vel extra noxiam esse, Abesse a crimine.
N' estre point coulpable. S. Gimow, or a little ring to wear on the finger.
Annellus, li. m. g. Annelet qu' on met au doight. S. Gimmow, or ring to hang
at ones ear as the Egyptians have. Stalognium, Inauris, ris. foe. g.
Ornamentum quod pendet ab aure. Gimmow of a door. Vertebra, Vertibulum.*
Cardo, inis. dub. genesis Le gond d' un huis ou port. Call Ginger. Gingiber,
Zinziber. Gingembre. H. Ginger color, after a white russet. Melinus, a, u^.
Girde a horse. Quadrupedem constringere. Cengler un cheual. S. Girde. Accingo,
is. Cingo, is. Percingo, is. Praecingo, is. Succingo, is. Ceindre. S. Girde a
sword to his side. Accomodare ensem lateri, Ensem lateri subligare, Cingere se
gladio. Teindre a son cost son espee. S. Girdle. Cingulus, Fascia, ae. Zona,
ae. Cingulum, li. Cinctus, tus. Incinctus, tus. m. g. Ceinct, ou ceincture.
Girdle compass, or in the compass, or with the compass of a gyrdle. Zotim.*
Girdle for a sword. Succingulum, li. n. g. Vne ceincture a pendre l'espee. S.
Girdle full of studdes. Cestus, ti. foe. ge. and m. g. Zona virginea. Girdle
which priests ware in the old time. Abanec, Cingulum sacerdotale. Hieron.
Girdle with a purse therein, for a soldier to put money in. Zona, ae. f. g.*
Girdeler, or a maker of gyrdles. Zonarius, ij. m. ge. Ceincturier, ou faiseur
de ceinctures. H. Girl, modder, or wenche. Pupa, pae. Puella, lae. Virguncula,
lae. foe. g. Fillette. H. Girt, or girded. Accinctus, Succinctus, a, um.
Cinctus, ta, tum. Ceincte. S. Girth. Cingula. Lora, orum. Cengle de cheual. S.
Girthes. Hypozomata ephippiorum. Les cengles. S. Gitterne, or rebecke.
Fidicula, ae. f. g. Give. Condono, as. Contribuo, is. Do, as. Dono, as.
Perhibeo, es. Praebeo, es. Praesto, as. Refero, rs. Tribuo, is. Pertribuo, is.
Donner. S. I give you this counsel, or by mine assent you shall do this. Hoc
tibi consilij do, tua de laud si laboras, tua si tibi laus curae est, cordi
est. te hortor, adhortor, cohortor, suadeo, author tibi sum. hoc est meum
consilium. mei consilij hoc est. mea haec est sententia, opinio, meus sensus,
meu^ iudicium, ita censeo, ita mihi videtur, placet, probatur. si me audies,
hoc facies. si meum consilium sequer^s, mea tibi sententia si probabitur, me
approban^e facies* de mea sententia, meo consilio, meo suas^^me authore. si me
putas quidquam sapere, non esse prorsus insipientem, aliquid videre. si meum
consilium habet aliquid apud te ponderis: hoc facies, ages, aggredieris,
suscipies, faciundum tibi iudicabis.

Give a child the breast, or suck. Rumo, as. Mammo, as. Mammas ad sugendum
praebere. Lacto, tas. Mammam dare. Allaicter. S. Give a day longer in a matter
of recognisaunce. Differ vadimonium.* Give a day over in law. Differ
vadimoniu^, Ducere vadimonium.* To give or appointe one a day. Diem alicui
dicere. Bailler iour. S.

Give a blow on the care, or on the cheek. Colaphum incutere, vel infligere,
vel infringere, Ducere colaphum alicui. Bailler un soufflet en la jove. S Give
a delicate d^she. Dapino, as.* Give again. Reddo, is. Redono, as. Restituo,
is. Restituer, Redonner, Rebailler. Call. Give a horse ye bridle, or reine.
Permittere equum. Give aid. Aspiro, as. Vide Aid. Give a largess, or reward
to workmen. Stipem spargere. Give alms. Erogo, as. Eslargir. Call. Give and
grant. Contribuo, is. Give answer out of hand. In numerato habere
responsum. Ex tempore respondere. Donner responce sur le champ. S. Give assent.
Accredo, is. Assentio, Assentior, tiris. Ad sententiam accedo. Assentir. S.
Give authority, or rule. Praeficio, is. Facere authoritatem. Donner authorite.
S. Give away. Abijcio, cis* Abalieno, as. Aliener. S. Give before. Praerogo,
as. Give by measure. Metior, iris. Vide Measure. Give, or to leave by
testament. Do, Lego, as. Testamento relinquere, Legare alicui. Donner and
laisser par testament. S. Give by way of service. Ministro, as. Impendo, is.*
Give blows, or buffettes. Vt supra. Give comfort, or take comfort. Consolor,
aris. Consoler. Call. Give counsel. Consulo, is. Consulto, as. Et Consultus,
us, ac Consultum, ti. Ang. The thing consulted, or th'acte of counsel. Vide
Counsel. Give counsel in vain. Surdo canere. Give courage. Animo, as. Vide
Courage. Give credence. Fido, is. Fidem dare. Se fire and eroire a quelqu' un.
Call. Give election. Calculum permittere, vel porrigere. Give for ever up, or
utterly, or to yield. Dedo, dis. In perpetuum dare. Give for Gods sake, or in
the honor of God. Religare bona religionibus, Pias pecunias erogare. Give
freely. Dono, as. Donner. Call. Give from one to an other. Transcribo, is. vt
Fundum alicui transcribere. To give one a piece of land. Give good ear or
head. Ausculto, as. Attendo, is. Aures arrigere. Ouir. Escouter. Call. Give
hasty and light credence. Credulum se praebere. Give in charge, or
commandment. Mando, as. Prouinciam tradere. Vide Charge. Give information, or
put in a byll against one for bryberie, or extortion. De pecunijs repetundis
quaeri. Give judgment. Calculum permittere, vel porrigere, dicere iudicium,
Edere iudicium, Pronuntio, as. Sententiam facere, Far, vel promulgare. Donner
judgment. S. Give knowledge, notice, or warning. Significo, cas. Notum facere,
Adsignifico, cas. Documentum dare. Donner a cognoistre. Give liberally.
Largior, iris. Donner liberallement. S. Give license, or leave. Copiam dare,
Permittere, Potestatem dare, vel facere. Copia^ facere, Gratiam facere,
Facultatem facere, vel dare, Defer potestatem. Donner ou bailler pouoir and
conge. Give me water to wash my hands. Cedo aquam manibus. Baille de l' eaue
pour lauer les mains. S. Give occasion. Copiam dare. * Causam alicui afferre,
Materiam praebere, Dare vel afferre occasionem, Dare ansam. Donner occasion.
Give, or bestow a son, or daughter in marriage. Locare gnatum, vel filiam.
Give, or minister a corsey. Vrere hominem. Give, or sell any thing with
warrantie, or before wytnes, by putting the byer in possession. Dare mancipio,
vel mancupio. Vide Giving or selling any thing. etc. Give part to an other.
Impart^o, it is. Impartior, iris. Participem facio. Impartir. S. Give place.
Cedo, is, ssi. Donner lieu. S. Give power. Copiam, vel potestatem dare. Donner
pouoir. S. Give reasonable expenses, or to give some thing to one. Suppedito,
as. Bailler and fournir a aucun de quelque chose. S. Give reverence to elders.
Cano capiti surgere. Give sentence. Calculum permittere, vel porrigere. Vide
Give judgment. Give small credence. Derogare fiduciam, Derogare fidem, vel de
fide, Paruam alicui fidem habere. Terent. Give suck, or to suckle. Adlacto,
as. Lacto, as. Rumo, as. Allaicter. S. Give thanks. Agere gratias, Habere
gratias, Persoluere grates, Gratiam alicui de re aliqua facere, Habere grates.
Remercier. S. Give to much, or to attribute to much to him self. Arrogo, as.
S'attribuer trop. S. Give to one. Addo, is. Attribuo, is. Attribuer. Give
willingly. Offero, rs. Give unto. Attribuo, is. Ascribo, is. Attribuer. S. Give
with an other. Contribuo, is. Contribuer. Call. Give up for ever. Dedo, is. In
perpetuum do. Give up, or cast over, as forsaken. Relinquo, is. Reijcio, is.
Recuso, as. Renuo, is. Delaisser, laisser. S Give, or gieue, or fetter, or
manacle. Neruus, ui, Pedica, ae. foe. g. Vide Fetter. Given. Concessus,
Contributus, Praestitus, a, um. Praebitus, ta, tum. Tributus, ta, tu^. Datus,
ta, tu^. Erogatus, ta, tum. Baille and done. S. Given again. Restitutus, ta,
tum. Redditus, Redonatus, a, um. Redonne. Given altogether to worldly
delectation and pleasure. Voluptarius, a, um. Voluptuarius, a, um. Addonne a
voluptez. S. Given in charge, or commandment. Mandatus, a, um. Praeceptus, a,
um. Done en charge. S. Given, or yielded. Deditus, a, um. Addonne. S. Given the
first day of January. Datum Calendis Ianuarij. Done le premier de Ianuier. S.
Given up at large. Relictus, a, um.* Given unto. Donatus, ta, tum. Done. S.
Giver. Donator, Dator, oris. masc. genesis Qui done, donneur. S. Giver, or he
that is able to give. Donatiuus, a, um. Giving. Datio, Donatio, onis. foe. g.
Donnation, donnement. S. Giving again. Redonatio, onis. f. g. Redonnement. S.
Giving of alms. Erogatio, onis. foem. ge. Donnaison largess. S. Giving, or
employing things after an honorable fashion, which beseameth a man of great
courage. Megaloprepeia, Munificentia, ae. foe. g. Magnificentia, ae. f. g.
Magnificence. Call. Giving of thanks. Gratiarum actio, Gratulatio, onis. foe.
g^. Remerciement, Action de graces. S. Giving, or throwyng one at an other, as
at the tossing ball. Datatim. vt Datatim ludere. En baillant de l'vn a l'autre.
S. Giving, or selling any thing before record, or with warrantyse, or by like
lawefull means, whereby the byer is put in full possession, and has a
lawefull assurance. Mancipatio, onis. foe. genesis Et Mancipium, ij. Is the thing
so given, bought or sold. Mancipi, Is the interest, or right of the thing.
Mancupi, Is the solemn form of such giving, bying, and selling, as well
before wytnes, as by livery, seisin, or possession. * Mancipio accipere, Is to
take deliverance, livery, and seisin, or possession of the thing. Mancipio
dare, Is to deliver the possession. etc. Mancipio accipere, To bie a thing that
the seller promises to warrant. Acheter vne chose que le vendeur promet de
garantir. S. Mancipio dare, To deliver, give, or sell a thing with warrantie,
Vendre auec promise de garantir. S. Mancupes, pium, vel Ma^cipes, p^um. m. ge.
Be they that make such gifts, or sales with wara^tie, or undertake to
perform any thing with warantie.
G. ANTE. L.
GLad. Festus, a, um. Iucundus, a, um. Laetus, a, um. Laetabilis, le. Hilaris,
re. Ioyeux. Glad, or very glad. Perlaetus, ta, tum. Fort ioyeux. S. Et
Hilarulus, la, lum. A little, or somewhat glad. Un peu ioyeux. S. Glad to be.
Gaudeo, es. Iucundor, aris. Laetor, aris. Sumere obsequium animo, Vitulor,
aris. Laetificor, caris. Estre ioyeux. S. Vide Rejoice. Glad, or to make one
merry. Laetifico, as. Laetitiam alicui afferre, vel dare. Donner liesse. S. Et
Afficere laetitia. Fair ioyeux. S. This late news brought of your dignity,
made your father very glad and joyful. Patrem tuum recens hic de tua d^tate
nuntius allatus extulit laetitia, affecit laetitia^ perfudit laetitia, laetitia
compleuit, laetitia cumulauit. pater tuus laetitiam coepit, sumpsit, hausit,
laetitia est affectus, laetatus est, gauisus est, delectatus est, recreatus
est, gaudium coepit, iucunditatem hausit.

To cry out for gladness. Iubilo, as. S' escrier de joy. S.

Glad being, or rejoicing. Gaudens, Ouans, it is. part. Qui se esiouit, S'
esiouissant. S. Glad being, or wyllyng to do any thing. Libens, Lubens, it is.
om. g. Qui fait quelque chose volunteers. Gladen herb. Gladiolus, Xyphium,
Xyris. Gladiolus segetalis, and lingua ceruina. Glaieu. Dod. Gladly. Alacre,
Alacriter, Iucundum, Libe^ter, Lubenter, Lubenti animo. Non grauate, Lubens,
Aequo gratoque animo. Volunteers. S. Lietement. Gladly, or with all my heart.
Libentissime, Lubentissimo animo, Cupidissime. Tresuoluntiers. S. Gladly, or
ioyously, or with joy. Cum laetitia, Festiue, Hilare, Laete. Ioyeusement, auec
joy. S. Very gladly and joyfully. Laetissime, Hilarissime. Tresioyeusement. S.

Crying out for gladness. Iubilum, li. neut. genesis Escri de joy. Call.

Gladness. Gaudium, Laetitia, Laetitudo, Festiuitas, tatis. Hilaritas, tatis.
foe. ge. Ioyeusete. S. Gladness to do a thing. Allubentia, Allubescentia, ae.
foem. genesis Glaye, or look a skoye. Transuertere hirquos. Glasier. Hyalurgus,
Vitriarius, Vitrarius, ij. m. genesis Voirrier. Call. Glass. Hyalus, Vitrum, tri.
n. g. Voarre. S. Et Vitriolum. diminut. Ang. A small, or little glass. * Glass
to look in. Speculum, li. Instrumentum ex vitro, chalybe, stanno, argentoue,
intuentum imaginem repraesentans, cuius inuentionem Aesculapio assignant.
Miroir. Call. Glass which is pure black. Obsidianum vitrum. Glass worm, or
grene worm, which shyneth like gold. Cantharis, dis. Cantharida, ae. foem.
genesis Vne cantharide. S. Glassye, or of glass. Hyalinus, a, um. Vitrinus, a,
u^. Vitreus, a, um. De voarre. H. Vitrosus, a, um. Ang. Full of glass. *
Gleame corn. Spicilegium facere, Spicas legere. Glaner. Sunt qui hoc verbum
Glaner, a Glande ducunt, quasi glanare vel glandere, id est Glandes legere, vt
enim nos frume^to, ita veteres gla^de victitabant. Gleamer of corn.
Spicilegus. * Glaneur. Gleaming of corn. Spicilegium, ij. n. ge. Collectio
spicarum. Gleaming of grapes. Racematio, onis. foe. ge. Collectio racemorum.
Grappage, Recueil des grapes que les vendangeurs laissant. Call. Glewe. Colla,
ae. Ferrumen, inis. Gluten, inis. Glutinum, ni. n. g. Glu. Colle. H. Glutinum
ferunt Daedalum inuenisse. Glewe made of fish skins, mouth glue.
Ichthyocolla. Colle faitte de peau de poisson, Colle de bouche. Glewe together.
Conglutino, as. Glutino, as. Adglutino, as. Gluer, Collar. S. Glewer, which
gleweth papers, parchementes, or other thing. Glutinator, toris. m. ge.
Colleur, qui colle papiers ensemble, ou parchemins, ou autre chose. S. Glewyng,
or glewy, clammy, or cleaving. Glutinosus, sa, sum. Gluant, Collement. S.
Glewing together. Conglutinatio, onis. foe. gen.* Glewyshe matter.
Conglutinamentum, Glutinamentum, ti. n. g. Gluement. S. Glyster, or glitter
like the stars. Stello, as. Luire comme les estoilles. Call. Glister, to
glitter, or to shine. Ardere, Nitere,, Enitere, Renitere, Fulgere, Effulgere,
Confulgere, Splendere, Resplendere, Lucere, Collucere, Elucere, Relucere,
Perlucere. Reluire. S. Glitter, or glister. Corusco, scas. Vibro, as. neut.
Resplendir. S. Glittering, or glistering. Coruscatio, Vibratio, onis. foe. genesis
* Globerde, or gloworme. Lampyris, idis. f. g. Vermiculus noctu lucens,
nonnulli Noctilucam, Alij Nitedulam vocant. Plin. lib. 11. cap. 28. and lib.
18. cap. 26. Vne petite mouche, ou petit ver qui reluit de nuit, luserne. Call.
Glory. Doxa, Gloria, Praeconium, ij. n. g. Gloire. Thy great glory. Numerosa
tua gloria. Ta gra^de gloire. S.

Glory that is vain, or vain glory. Gloria ventosissima, Inanis gloria. Vain
gloire. S. Which loves no vain glory. Ab inani laud remotus. Qui n'aime
point vain gloire. S.

To attain, or to get glory. Gloriam consequi. Acquerir gloire. S.

Couuetouse of glory. Gloriae seruire. Estre conuoiteux de gloire. S.

To lose his glory, or honor. Facere iacturam gloriae. Perdre sa gloire. S.

Glory that is small. Gloriola, lae. foem. genesis Cic. Gloriette. S. Glorify.
Glorifico.*. Glorify, and to brag of him self. Glorior, aris. Exulto, tas.
Se glorifier and vanter. S. Which does glorify him self. Gloriabundus. Qui
se glorifier. S.

Glorious. Altus, a, um. Gloriosus, Inclytus, a, um. Plein de gloire. S.
Glorious altogether. Amphidoxus, a, um.* Glorious. Gloriosus, sa, sum.
Glorieux. S. To be glorious, lofty, proud, or high minded. Mirari se, Sibi
placere. Estre glorieux. S.

Very glorious. Plenus gloriarum. Fort glorieux. S.

Gloss, and lie. Mentior, iris. Mentir. Vide Lie. Gloss, or exposition of a
text. Glossa, Commentum, Glossema, atis. neut. ge. Gloss. S. The gloses often
corrupt the text. Attexta glossemata saepe contextum corrumpunt. Les gloses
gastent le text. S.

Gloss, or to flatter. Adulor, aris. Flater. S. Gloser, or a flatterer.
Adulator, Assentator, Palpator, toris. m. g. Flateur. S. Gloser, or lier.
Mendax, Vanus, Futilis, le. Menteur. Glosing, or flattering. Adulatio,
Blanditia, Assentatio, Palpatio, onis. f. g. Flaterie. Et adulatorius, a, um.
Tacit. Ang. Pertaining to, or full of flatteringe. Gloton. Lurco, nis. Ganeo,
onis. Gluto, nis. Gulosus, Heluo, nis. Laemargus, Parasitus, Vorax, Ma^ducus,
ci. Mando, donis. Edax, cis. Tempestas, barathrumque macelli. Glouton. H.
Glotonie. Gastrimargia, Laemargia. Ingluuies, ei. Gula, lae. foe. ge.
Gloutonnie. S. Glotonous. Genauius, a, um.* Gulosus, a, um. Ingluuiosus, sa,
sum. Glout, Goulu. Call. Glotonously, or like a glotton. Edaciter, Voraciter,
Gulose. Gloutement. S. Glove. Chirotheca, Manica, cae. foe. ge. Gant. H. Glowe
worm, which shines in the night. Nitedula. Vide Globerde. Glumme, or be
sour of cou^tenau^ce. Vide Frown Glumming, or sour of countenance.
Superciliosus, a, um.*
G. ANTE. N.
GNashe, or grind with the teathe for anger or pain. Frendeo, es, di, vel
dui. Infrendeo, es. Stridere vel Stridere dentibus. Grincer les dens de grand
courroux. S. Gnatte. Culex, cis. m. g. Mouscheron. Call. and. S. Cincelle,
singalle. Pals. Gnatte with long legs. Buccentes, Cynips, phis. Mousche de
chien. A dog fly. Gnaw. Rodo, is, si. Decerpo, is. (vt Decerpere germina.
Plin.) Arrodo, is. Corrodo, is. Derodo, is. Erodo, is. Praerodo, is. Ronger. S.
Gnaw about. Ambedo, is. Obrodo, is. Circunrodo, is. Obedo, dis. Ronger tout a
l'entour. Gnawe through, or out. Praerodo, is. Perrodo, is. Ronger tout a
faict. S. Gnawen. Rosus, a, um. Ronge. S. Gnawen about. Ambestus*Ambesus, a,
um. Obrosus. Ronge tout a l'entour. S. Gnawen away. Abesus, a, um. Abrosus,
sa, sum. Ronge, mange and consume. Gnawyng. Rosio, nis. f. g. Rongement. S.
G. ANTE. O.
Goat. Capra, ae. foe. ge. Cheure. S. Goat, which is the he, or bucke
goat. Caper, pri. m. genesis Hircus, ci. vel Hirquus, qui. m. g. Un bouc. Et
Hircinus, a, um. Of a buck. De bouc. S. Et Hircosus, sa, sum. That smells
buckishe rammishe or goatishe. Qui sent le bouquin. S. But Caper, pri. m. g. Is
often taken for the bucke goat gelded. Un bouc chastre. S. Goat being wild.
Pygargus, Rupicapra, Caprea. Cheureul ou Cheureau sauu^ge. H. Goat heard, or
keeper of goats. Aegonomus, Caprarius. Cheurier. S. Heard, or a company of
goats. Caprinus grex. Troupeau de cheures.

Goat stable, or fold. Caprile, lis. Le lieu ou les cheures logent. Goats
bearde. Spirillum, Aruncus, ci. m. ge. Barbe de cheure. S. Goatesberde herb.
Come, Tragopogon, Hirci barba. Vne herb appellee barbe de bouc. S. Goats
dunge, or tirdles. Rudus, eris. * Goatishe, or of a goat, or of the kind of a
goat. Caprinus, a, um. Caprilis, le. Caprilus, a, u^. Hircinus, a, um. De
cheure. S. Goatyshe, or stinking like a goat. Hircosus, a, um. Vt supra.
Goatishe, or which is of the kind of goats. Caprigenus, a, um. Qui est de
genre du cheures. S. Go. Confero, rs. Vt contuli me ad patrem. Eo, is. Meo, as.
Pergo, is. Proficiscor, sceris. Aller. S. Go a byrding, or fowling. Aucupor,
aris. Chasser aux oiseaux. S. Go above. Supergredior, eris. Marcher par dessus.
S. Go about. Circumeo, is, iui. Circuo, is. Obeo, is. Ambio, bis. Aller a l'
entour. S. Go about the bushe. Agere ambages. Go about a matter, or entende a
purpose. Nitor, eris.* Go about a thing suddenly. Adorior, iris. Vide Invade.
Go about the watch. Fraxo, as. Vigilias circumeo, quod eo labor homo
frangitur. Fest. Go about to do. Facesso, ssis. Aller fair. S. Go about.
Molior, ris. vt Muros vrbis moliri. Virg. To go about to build the walls of
the city. Go about to love. Amaturio, is. Go abroad in the air, or Sun.
Apricor, ris. To bide in the Sun. Se tenir au soleil. S. Go abroad, or at
large. Prodire in publicum. In propatulum venire. Go after. Sequor, eris.
Suyure. S. Go a gadding. Peregrinor, aris. Vagor, aris. Aller ca and la,
vaguer. S. Go again, or eftsoon. Remeo, as. Retourner. Call. Go against one,
as to mete. Obuiam ire, vel prodire. Vide Go to mete. Go and come quickly.
Recurro, is. Recourir hastiuement. Call. Go and come vaynely, or in vain.
Terere iter. Go and yield to enemies. Transfugere ad hosts. Go a pace.
Accelero, as. Accelerare gradum, Festinare vestigia, Festino, as. Propero, as.
Volo, as. Decurro, is. Aller hastiuement. S. Et Volaticus, a, um. He that does
go a pace.* Go a perigrination or journey. Suscipere profectionem. Aller en
quelque peregrination. Go asawte, blossomyng, horsynge, or rudderinge, which
is the desire between the male kind, and the female kind. Catulio, is, iui.
Demander le masle. Call. Go way. Abeo, is, iui, vel abij. Abscedo, is. Cedo,
is. Fa cesso, ssis, Recedo, is. Vado, is. Secedo, is. Semoueo, es. Discedo,
dis. Digredior, eris. Auferre se. S' en aller. S. Go away pryuely out of some
place. Subduco, is. Proripio, is. Recipere se ex loco aliquo. S'en aller d'vn
lieu. S. Go away sodaynely. Corripere se repent. Go back, or to recoyle.
Regrador, Regradior, ris. Remeo, as. Retrocedo, is. Recedo, dis. Iter retro
vertere, Gradum refer, Retro cedere, Pedem refer, Pedem reuocare. Se
reculer. S. Go back again, or to ebb. Reciproco, as. Reciproquer. S. Go
back again in doing any thing, as to do it eftsoon. Itero, as. Fair ou
dire de rechef, reiterer. S. Go backewarde. Tergiuersor, aris. Reculer. Call. Go
before. Antecedo, is. Anteco, is. Praecedo, is. Praeco, is. Praegredior, eris.
Ire prae. Aller deuant. Go before. I prae, Abi prae. Va deuant. S. Go before,
if thou have more haste. I sane, siquid festinas magis. Va deuant, si tu as
plus de hafte. S. Go between. Intercedo, is. Aller entredeux. Go beyond.
Praetereo, is. Praetergredior, ris. Transgredior, ris. Passer oultre. S. Go
beyond, or to excelle, as in equality. Antecello, is. Praecello, is. Estre
plus excellent, Oultre passer. As he goes beyond me in learning. Antecellit
me literis. Go or to pass by. Pertranseo, Transeo, is, iui. Praetereo, is.
Aller ou passer aupres. Go by steps. Gradior, eris, ssus, sum. Marcher. Go by
water. Ire nauigio. Aller par eaue. S. Go deep down. Descendere in altum. Go
down. Descendo, is. Descendre. S. Go down, as the Sun, Moon, or Stars do.
Occido* is, Descendo, dis. Declino, as. Inclino, as, vt Inclinat se Sol. The
Sun goes down. Le soleil se baisse. S. Go easily, or softly. Repto, as.* Go
far into a strange country to dwelll, out of his native country.
Profugio, is. Vide Fly far. Et Profugus, a, um. He that goes out of his
native country to dwell in a strange country. Go fast, or quickly, or
hastily. Accelero, as. Aller hastiuement. S. Go first. Praeeo, is. Vt supra.
Go forth. Egredior, eris. Exeo, is. Prodeo, is. Progredior, ris. Migrare e
loco. Pedem efferre, Procedere for as, In publicum procedere. Sortir and saillir
horse. S. Go forth, or out with power and violence. Prorumpo, is. Sortir auec
impetuosite. S. Let us go forth, or go we forth, Eamus for as, Exeamus for as,
Egrediamur. Sortons dehors. Cord.

Go forth, or further. Pede^ efferre, Prodeo, is. Progredior, ris. Sortir horse.
S. Go forth, or out to mete one. Obuiam procedere, vel prodire, Egredi obuiam.
Sortir horse au deuant de quelqu' un. S. Go forward. Gradum confer, vel
tollere. Go forward on a journey, or voyage. Proficiscor, ris.* Go from a
woman, or to put her away. Diuertere a muliere. Go from one place to dwell in
an other. Migro, as. Emigro, Vertere solum. Aller demourer d' un lieu en
aultre. Call. Go further to dwell. Transmigro, as. Idem. Go hastily. Propero,
as. Festino, as. Accelero, as. Decurro, is. Aller hastiuement. S. Go hence.
Abeo, is. Confero, rs. vt Co^feras te hinc. Secedo, is. Vide Go away. Go
hence, or get the hence. Abi, Conferas te hinc, Secede. Go hence with a
mischief. Abi hinc in malam re^. Go hither and thither. Commeo, as. Errare,
Inerrare, Oberrare, Pererrare, Vagari, Commeare vltro citroque. Aller ca and
la, de cost and d'autre. S. Go home. Recipere se domum. Go in. Ineo, is.
Introeo, is. Intro, as. Ingredior, ris. Subeo, is. Immeo, as. Aller dedens. S.
Go in Embassage. Obire legationem, vel legationes. Aller en embassade. S. Go in
a circuit, or compass. Gyro, as. * Go into a forayne, or strange country.
Peregrinor, aris. Peregre vadere, vel Proficisci. Aller sur le champs en pais
loingtain and estrange. S. Go lurking a way, or by stealth. Proripio, is. Se
sustraire. Call. Go mete with one. Obuiam ire, vel prodire. Vide Go to mete. Go
naked. Nudum agere. Go often. Adito, tas. Ito, as. Aller souuent. S. Go often
to a place. Locum aliquem celebrare. Aller souuent en quelque lieu. S. Go on a
journey. Itineror, aris. Proficiscor, sceris. Voyager. S. Go on a message.
Obire nuncium. Go on four feet. Quadrupedo, as. Aller a quatre pies. Call. Go
on pylgrimage. Peregrinor, aris.* Go on the pasternes. Talipedo, as. Pedibus
vacillo, and quasi super talos insisto. Fest. Go, or to pass over. Praetereo,
is. Transcendo, is. Transeo, is. Transgredior, Transmitto, is. Passer oultre.
S. Go over all. Peruado, is. Idem. Go out. Egredior, eris. Exeo, is.
Progredior, ris. Prodeo, is. Vide Go forth. Go out of company. Secedo, is. Se
retirer a part. Call. Go out of remembrance. Abscio, scis. Labi memoria.* Go
out of the way. Deuio, as. Erro, as. Deflectere e recta regione. Aller horse du
chemin. S. Go out of the way, and properly to go out of the furrowe, making a
balke as ploughemen do, which by circumlocutio^, is as much to say, to dote,
or to rave. Deliro, as. Failler and n' aller pas droict, Radoter, Resuer. S. Go
out of the tracke, rightway, or course. Exorbito, as. Deflectere e recta
semita, Declinare de via. Aller horse du chemin. S. Go quickly. Aduolo, as.
Deuolo, as. Propero, as. Volo, as. Peruolo, las. Aller legierement. S. Et
Volaticus, a, um. Ang. He that goes quickly. Go slowely. Repto, as. freq, de
repo. Grauir. S. Go slowely like a snayle, which by translation is to go
nothing chearefully, or a pace. Reptito, as. freq. de repto.* Go softly a foot
pace, or fair and easelye. Placide ire. Go softely, or slowely. Repto, as. Go
softly, or with much pain. Perrepto, as. vt apud Terent. Totum perreptaui
opidum. Go stately. Incedo, is. vt magnifice incedit. He goes stately like a
lord. Go sunderly, here and there scatered. Palor, aris. Passim vagor. Aller
auant par ci par la par mi les champs. Call. Go through. Penetro, as. Perambulo,
as. Peruado, dis. Aller ou passer a trauers. Call. Go to an other place to
dwell. Commigro, as. Immigro, as. Semigro, as. Aller demourer ou habiter en un
autre lieu. S. Go to. Age, Perge. Or sus, or auant. S. Go to yet. Agedum. Or
auant. S. Go to hardly, play the man. Perge in virum. Tu vero perge. Go to,
say on. Perge, Perge ad caetera. Poursuis au rest. S. Go to, or with an
other. Co^meo, as. To go and come. Aller and venir. S. Go to mete one. Exire
obuiam alicui, Ire alicui obuiam, Obsistere alicui obuiam, Obuiam accedere,
Obuiare, Occurrere, Proficisci obuiam, Progredi obuiam, Sese obuiam alicui
far, Prouisere, Venire alicui aduersu^, Aduersum ire, Adire contra. Aller au
deuant de quelqu' un. S. Go to se. Prouiso, is. Viso, is. Aller veoir. S. Go to
soupe with one. Recipere se ad coenam ad aliquem. Plaut. Aller soupper chez
luy. S. Go to stole, or siege. Deijcere aluum, Exonerare aluum, Cacare, Aluum
exinanire, Aluum leuare, Purgare, Reddere. Aller a la selle. S. Go to the
bottom. Pessum ire, Pessum abire, Sidere. Aller ou fond. S. Go to the effect,
or pithe of a matter. Redire ad re^. Go to the question in ye Parliament house,
that is to say: to demand the commons whether they will consent or not.
Rogare plebem.* Go waggynge, wauerynge, or wrynginge with the arms, head, or
any part of the body. Pitylisso, as.* To go with me. Ire vna mecum. With
thee. Vna tecum. With him. Vna secum.

Go under. Subeo, is. Aller dessoubs. Call. Go underneath. Subtergredior, ris.*
Go unto. Adeo, is, iui. Accedo, is. Aggredior, ris. Appeto, it is. Obeo, is.
Aller a ou verse. Call. Go up. Ascendo, is. Scando, is. Monter. S. Gobet.
Frustum, Recisamentum, ti. n. g. Morceau. S. Et Frustellum vel Frustulum, li.
diminut. Ang. A little or small gobet. Morcelet. S. Et Frustillatim. By little
gobettes. Par petis morcelets. S. Gobet, or piece of any thing broken. Fragmen,
Fragmentum, Frustum, ti. n. g. Vne piece and morceau de quelque chose rompu. S.
Gobetly, or in pieces. Frustatim, Incisim. Par morceaux. S. Goblet. Cyrnea,
Phiala, Calix, icis. m. ge. Acetabulum, li. n. g. Gobelet. S. Acetabula sunt
etiam praestigiatorum vascula. Senic. The boxes or goblets wherein iugglers make
their co^ueiau^ce in. He has dronken the whole goblet full at one draught. Vno
haustu totum calicem epotauit. Il a beu tout plein le gobelet en un traict. S.

God. Deus, Numen diuinum tergeminum, Nome^ qui Sabathis habet, Ioua, Dominus,
ni. mas. genesis Dieu. Call. As God shall help me. Ita me seruet deus. Ainsi me
vveille dieu aider. S.

O good God. O bone deus. O bon dieu. S.

To swear by God. Deum testem adhibere. Iurer dieu. S.

To take God to witness. Deum testificari, Deum testem adhibere. Prendre dieu
a tesmoing. S.

God almighty. Coelipotens, Heloy, Omnipotens, tentis. Om. g.* Praepote^s deus.
Dieu trespuissant. God and all hallowes, or all saints. Dij Deaeque. God be
with you. Aue, Aueto, Vale, Valeto. A dieu. God be with him. Valeat quo viuat.
God forbid. Absit, Dij prohibiant, Dij auertant. God make him a good man.
Praecor vt fiat vir bonus, and probus. God speed you well. Been tibi vertat
deus. Godfathers, and godmothers. Mancipes and praedes initiales, Initiales
parents, Proditores and proditrices nominis in genitura spirituali, Lustrici
parents, Lustrici nuncupatores, Proditores nominis initiali die, Alterius
geniturae parents, Immotalis geniturae parents mystici, Initiationis arbitri,
Mystici pare^tes. Parrins and marrins, Comperes and commeres. S. Godfathers, or
goshippes. Onomastae initiales, Nuncupatores, susceptores. Comperes. S.
Godmothers, or goshippes. Onomastriae, Susceptrices. Commeres. S. I was prayed
to be a godfather. Vocatus eram ad officium lustrale vel initiale, erat mihi
condictum ad initiale officium. IN estoye pry d' estre compere. S.

Godhead. Deitas, Diuinitas, Nume^, inis. n. g. Deite. Godly joy. Eudoxia.
Godly, or holy. Diuus, a, um. Dius, a, um. Pius, a, u^. Divine. Call. Godly, or
of God. Diuinitus. Diuinement, de dieu. Godly, or pertaining to God. Diuinus,
a, um. De dieu, Apartenant a dieu. Call. Gods power or will. Numen, inis. n. g.
La volonte and puissance de dieu. Call. Gods wrath, anger, or malison. Sacra
fulmina, Theomenia. Here shall thou have (gentle reader) a table, or (as mine
author terms it) a Pantheon of Gods and Goddesses: because their names are
found often in profane authoures, I thought not unmeet for the purpose to
leave the^ in place, with some additio^s, that young gra^marians reading such
authors, may the sooner find for their purpose.

Jupiter, the father or king of Gods, or God of hospitality. Jupiter,
Opitulus, Papaeus, Pheretrius, Vedius, Diespater, Aegiochus, Chaonius pater,
Dictaeus rex, Tonans panomphaeus, Agenoreus iuuencus, Ammon. Jupiter. S. Whom
the Greeks honored as a God, calling him father and king of Gods, albeit they
knew him a very mortal man, he was witty, valeaunt, and very desierous of women
and maidens, and was had in such estimation among the Gentiles, that they
attributed to him souerainetie, and did ascribe to him the rule of
hospitality, as the peculiar God thereof. Unto whom according to the
diversity of their peticio^s, they gave diverse and sundry names: As for
breach of amity among the^ of the house, they called for vengeance to Jupiter
philius: For league or truce broken, they called him Jupiter Enhorcius: for any
domestical offenses done by the good man of the house, or his geste, they
called him Jupiter Xenius, for consanguinitie or kyndred, they called on
Jupiter Homoginus: And finally, for the traiterous bewraying of secret
counsel had between ^aythfull companions they called him Jupiter Heterius.

God of Battle. Mars, Mauors, Bellator deus, Pater Quirinus, Gradiuus,
Marspiter, Sithonius dux. Mars. S. Bying and sellinge, or that has the
governance of men's minds. Vertu^nus, ni. m. g. Bowndes and buttinges of
land. Terminus deus. Eloquence, or messenger of Gods. Mercurius, Trismegistus,
Hermes, Cyllenia proles, Genitus Maia, Nepos Atla^tis, Atlantiades, Caducifer,
Interpres deoru^. Mercure. S. Excess, prodigality, or superfluity. Comos,
Comus. Fire. Mulciber, Vulcanus, Lemnius, Iunonigena, Faber Aetnaeus. Flies.
Myagrus, Myodes. Gardaynes. Mutunus, Priapus, Lampsacides, Lampsacenus,
Hellespo^tiacus deus. Hell. Pluto, Quietalis, Orcus, Summanus, Vragus, Dis,
Runsor, Lethaeus tyra^nus, Saturnius dux, Rex vmbrarum, Erebi, Noctis.
Hylrigges. Iugantinus deus. Mischief. Veiouis. Panyms, or father to Jupiter.
Cronos, Saturnus, Vitisator, Leucadius, Falcifer, Falce potens deus,
Sterculius. Preservation of corn from blasting. Robigus, Arungus.
Reprehension. Momus, mi. Riches. Dis, Plutus. Riot. Comos, Comus. Sea.
Neptunus, Nereus, Palaemon, Emosigeus, Saturnus domitor maris, Potens deus
maris, Arbiter pelagi. Shepeherdes, or rusticall God. Inuus, Pan, is, vel os,
Rusticum numen, Pastorum deus. The North, or Lord of the North. Beelsephon.*
Turning away all evil. Auerruncus. Wine. Euchius, Euhyus, Bacchus, Eleus,
Quasi pius pater, Oreus, Phaneta, Maenoles,* Liber, Lenaeus pater, Nysaeus,
Semeleius, Thyoneus, Bassareus, Eua^, Iacchus, Semeleia proles, Bicorniger,
Euhius, Nyctileus, Lyaeus. Wisdom, Music, Poetry, and Physic. Apollo,
Myrmus, Smyntheus, Pythius, Poeon, Phoebus, Liber, Nomius, Latoides, Cynthius,
Thymbraeus. Woods. Paniscus, sci.
Gods Called household Gods. Lares, Penates, tium. plur. Saving men. Anculi. Of
woods. Syluani, Fauni.
Goddess of Battle. Bellona, Pallas, Enyo, Martis soror, Tritonia, Minerua.
Birth, and wife to Jupiter. Hera, Juno, Lucina, Opigena, Sacra dea, Pronuba,
Coniuga, Socigena, Iouis soror and con^ux. Corn. Ceres, ris. Specifera,
Eleusina matter, Frugum genitrix, Diua potens frugum, Ennaea dea, Thesmophora,
Triticea dea.
Goddess of Deceipte. Lauerna, Penia. Doctrine. Minerua, Pallas, Tritonia.
Doing. Agenosa dea. Earth, or ye good goddess. Bona dea, Fauna, Opis, Ops,
Fatua dea, Senta. Eloquence, or delectable speech. Pitho, Suado, Suadela,
Suasio. Flowers, or goddess of Rome, a famous strompet. Flora, Larentia.
Fortune. Fortuna, Nemesis, Caeca dea, Rhamnusia, Sors, Tiche. Fruit. Pomona,
Dea pomorum. Funeral necessaries. Libitina, Alijs Venus, Alijs Proserpina
dicitur. Gods, or mother of gods. Cybele, Megalesia dea, Rhea, Turrita,
Berecynthia, Pales, Dindymene, Matter deum, Idaea matter. Harm doing, or having
power to do harm. Intemperiae dea. Honey. Melonia, Mellona, Dea mellis.
Hunting, or chastity. Diana, Latonia, Triuia, Luna, Delia, Dictynna, Nemorum
custos, Cultrix, Dea syluaru^, Dea consors Phoebi, Thoantaea, Eilithyia, Virgo
potens nemorum, Latonigena. Love. Libentina, Murcia, Venus, Acidalia, Astarte,
vel potius Syriorum numen.* Aphrodite, Amathusia, Amathuntis and Amathuntia,
Cytheris, Cythereis, Cytheraea, Cypris, Cypria, Cyprigena, Idalia, Idalis,
Paphia, Dione, Dionaea, Genitrix Aeneia, vel Aeneadum, Dea spumigena, Orta
salo, Gnidia dea. Lottes or chance. Tenita, Tamen abusiue.* Morning, or spryng
of the day. Aurora, Matuta, Mennonis matter, Eos, Leucothoe, Tithonia coniux,
Palantias, Palantis, Thaumantias. Physike. Meditrina, ae. foe ge. Pleasure.
Angerona, Volupia. Poverty. Penia. Power. Pollentia, iae. foe. g. Preservation
of corn for blasting. Robigo. * Quietness after travel. Vacuna, ae. f. ge.
Shepeheardes, or pasture. Pales, Pastorum vel pabuli dea. Slouthe. Murcia, ae.
foe. ge. Thieves. Lauerna, nae. foe. ge. Waters. Salacia. Salica. Vengeance.
Rhamnusia, Nemesis. Victory, or joy. Vitula.* Wisdom. Minerua, Pallas,
Tritonia. Women's breasts or suckyng. Rumia, ae. foe. genesis Of woods. Napaea,
ae.
Goddesses Of lottes. Tenitae, arum. Sauinge women. Anculae, arum.
Goer barefote, or without shoes. Planipes, dis. Nudipes, dis. Goer by the
country, or high way. Viator, toris. mas. ge. Voyageur. Call. Goer on a
cord, or rope. Funambulus, Schoenobates, Funirepus. m. g. Qui march sur vne
cord. Call. Goer out of his native country, into a forayne or strange
country to dwell. Profugus, ga, gum. Goer to supper unbidden, and one that
uses the trade of a parasite. Coenipeta, Qui ambit alienas coenas, and
parasiti saepe personam induit. Gogeon, or googeon fyshe. Gobio, nis, Gobius,
bij. m. ge. Un poisson nomme Gouion. S. Gogle eye. Hirquus.* Gogle eyed man.
Strabo, onis. m. genesis Qui est louche and bigle. Going. Gressus, Itio, Itus,
Transitio, Transitus, us. Profectio, onis. foe. g. Allee. S. Going about.
Ambitus, Lustratio, Peragratio. Voyagement, Allee par la pais. Call. Going
about, or which does go about. Lustralis, le.* Going and coming by course,
as a fever does, or a tide. Periodicus, a, um. vt Periodica febris. Going and
coming. Itus and reditus. Allee and venue. Going a pace, fast, or quick, as
though he seemed to fly. Volaticus, a, um.* Going a saute, brimming, horsyng,
or to rudder, as the lust is of the male to the female. Catuliatio, onis. f.
g. Apetit du masle. Call. Going away. Abscessus, us. Abscessio, Decessus,
Decessio, Recessus, Recessio, onis. foe. g. Departement d' un lieu. Call. Going
back. Recessus, us. mas. ge. Reculement. S. Going back, or backwarde again.
Reciprocatio, onis. foe. genesis Going backewarde. Tergiuersatio, onis. foem. genesis
Reculement. Going backewarde, or back, or after the manner of goinge back or
backewarde. Regradatim, Recessim.* Going before, or leading the way. Praeuius,
a, um. Progrediens, entis. om. ge. Allant en auant. S. Going beyond, or
passing beyond. Praeteriens, entis, part. Passant oultre. S. Going down.
Descentio, Descensus, us. m. g. Descendement, descente. S. Going down or
downewarde. Occiduus, a, um. Going down of the Sun or Moon. Occasus, sus.
m. g. Occidens, it is. m. g. L'occident. Call. Going forward on voyage.
Profectio, onis. foe ge. Allee. S. Going of of the skin from the nails.
Reduuia, ae. foem. ge. Going or coming. Decessio vel accessio. Going and
walking about the town, as the like was used in Rogation week. Amburbiale,
lis. Amburbium, ij. n. g. Going over. Transitio, Trasitus, Transmissio, onis.
foe. ge. Passement oultre. Call. Going out of the way. Erratio, onis. f. g.
Aberratio, onis. f. g. Fouruoyement. S. Going wagging and wavering with the
arms, body, head, shoulders, or any other member. Pitylisma. matis. neut. genesis
Gold. Aurum, ri. n. g. Or. S. Gold beaten, or beaten gold. Interrasile
aurum. Or batu. S. Gold unpolished. Aurum impolitum. Or mat. S. Gold
burnished. Aurum politum. Or bruni. S. Gold dug in pittes. Canalitium
aurum. Gold finer. Aurifex. Affineur d' or. S. Gold fined, or pure. Aurum
Obrizum, Obrizum, zi. n. g. Fin or. S. Gold for crowns, called crown gold.
Aurum coronarium. Goldemine. Auraria, Fodina, Aurifodina, Aurariu^ metallum.
Plin. Mine d'or, miniere d'or. H. Gold not pure or fine. Aurum imitatitium,
vel Subaeratum. Gold which is either exchaunged or sold for such lucre,
that the owner has great advantage besides the just value. Promercale aurum.
Sueton. Golden, or of gold. Auratus. Door. Call. Golden, or made of gold.
Aureus, ea, um. D' or, fait d' or. Call. Golden here. Chrysocoma.*. Golden
heered, or having golden here or locks. Chrysocomus, Comas aureas habens.
Goldfinche, a bird. Auriuittis. H. Gold wayghts, or the balla^ce to way gold
with. Trutina, ae. Libella, lae. f. g. Un trebuchet a peser or. Gold knappe,
or crow foot herb. Batrachion, Batrachium, Ranunculus, Strumea, Sardonia
herba, Scelerata, Officin. Pes corui. Bacinet. H. Goldney fish. Aurata, Orata,
tae. f. g. Brame de mer. H Golias, or Goliath a Philistian of an exceadinge
stature, which was as the story rehearses, six cubits and a hand breadth
high, and had an helmet of brass on his head, and a coat of mayle about him,
ye weight of his coat of mayle was 5000. sicles of brass, and he ware boots
of brass, and a shield of brass upon his shoulders. The shafte of his spear
was like a weauers beam, and his spear head weyed six hundred sicles of
iron. Whom David a child did vanquishe in battle, as you shall read more
largely in the Bible. 1. Reg. cap. 17. Gomme. Vide Gum. Gone about or over.
Peragratus, Lustratus, a, um. vt Propter disce^di cupiditatem videmus vltimas
terras esse peragratas, Cic. We see yt for love of learning the farthest
parts of the earth are gone and trauayled over. Gone away. Refugus, a, u^.
vt Refugi capilli. Here gone away, or flying back. Gonge, draft, or siege,
privy, or Jacques. Forica, Oletum, ti. n. g. Latrina, ae. f. g. Retraict, prive.
H. Good. Bellus, a, um. (vt Bellus homo,) Bonus, a, u^. Praeclarus, a, um.
Probus, a, um. Rectus, a, um. Bon. S. Good and fair. Pulcher. Vide Fair.
Good, or very good. Perbonus, na, number. Perbellus, la, lum. Fort bon. S. Good
beauty, or co^plexio^. Egregia forma. Teren. Good beginning, and a good and
merry ending. Tragicum principium, Comicus finis. Goodd chance. Fors fortuna.
Terent. Bonne adventure. S. Good chance, fortune, luck, prosperity, or
success. Res secundae. Prosperity. S. Good cheap. Vilitas, tatis. foem. genesis
Bon march vilete. S. Good cheap being, or not dear, or of a small price.
vilis, le. De peau valeure, vile, de vile price. S. Good cheap to be. Vileo,
es. Estre vile. S. Good citezin. Bonus ciuis. Bon citoyen. See that thou play
the good citezin, or endeavor to behave thy self like a good citezin. Da
operam, enitere, vt bonum te ciuem praebeas, praestes, vt boni ciuis parts
tucare, sustineas, agas, exequare* vt boni ciuis officio satisfacias. vt ea
praestes, quae bonum ciuem decent, quae expectantur ab eo, qui boni ciuis nomen
aucupatur. noli co^mittere, cave ne boni ciuis in officio reprehendaris. ne
boni ciuis officium praetermittas. ne quid a te fiat, ne quid committatur bono
ciue minus dignum, indecorum bono ciui, ne ciuis eius, qui ciuitate dignus
haberi velit, parts in te requirantur, officium in te desideretur. obcunda
tibi sunt, praestanda sunt, non indiligenter, aut languide munera boni ciuis.

Good counselour. Eubulus, Prudens, Consultus. Good courage. Praesens animus.
Good fame or renown. Eudoxia, Claritas nominis, Laus, Existimatio, and bona
fama. Bonne renomee. Call. Good friday. Parasceue, es.* Soteria, Parasceues
dies. Le vendredy saint. H. Good health. Recta valetudo, Incolumitas, Sanitas,
tatis. f. g. Sante. Call. Et b^na vel prospera valetudo. Bonne sante. S. Good
health to have. Recte valere, Vti firma valetudine, Belle habere. Se porter
bien. S. Good man. Agathus, Philocalus, Probus, Bonus, Vir bonus. Good man of a
house. Paterfamilias, Patrisfamilias, vel iae. m. ge. Pere de famille. Call.
Good man's son of the house. Filius familias. * Good manners. Eutrapelia,
Vrbanitas, tatis. foe. genesis Bon entregent, Ciuilite. S. Good mind and a
willing. Propensus animus. Good morrow. Salve, Salueto. And in the Greek
tongue. Cha^re. Bon iour. Good renown. Euxdoxia. Vt supra. Good fame. Good
sound, accord, harmony. Euphonia, ae. f. g. Bon accord, harmony. Call. Good
tidings. Euangelium, ij. n. g. Laetum nuntiu^. Bonne nouuelle. Call. Good to be.
Purum, Bonum, Syncerum vel probum esse. Good turn. Beneficium, Meritum,
Promeritum, Bonum, ni. n. ge. Benefactum, ti. n. g. Benefaict. S. I will count
this a great good turn. Hoc ego summi beneficij loco ponam, numerabo, inter
maxima beneficia refera^. hoc apud me non exigui beneficij, non vulgaris
gratiae locum obtinebit. ita credam, tulisse me beneficium singular, gratiam
tantam, quanta potest esse maxima.

Good wife of a house. Materfamilias* Good will. Beneuolentia, Gratitudo,
Propensus animus. Good wine. Nouum mustum. Vide Wine. Good wind. Secundus
flatus, vel Ventus. Bon vent, vent a gre, ou a propos. S. Goods. Bona,
Fortunae, arum, Res, Substa^tia, Res familiaris, Pecuniae, arum. foem. ge. Bien
ou les biens. S. Goods coming by enheritaunce. Bona haereditaria, Aduentitia
atque Haereditaria res. Cic. Goods decayed and lost. Res profligatae. Goods
escheated. Bona confiscata, Bona caduca. Biens appliquez au Roy. S. Goods
given in marriage. Bona dotalia, Res dotales. Goods gotten by conqueste, or
victory. Bona contracta. Goodly, gallauntly. Perbelle, Eleganter.
Gaillardement, Ellegamment. S. Goodly, or gaye. Ornatus, a, um. Vide Gaye and
gorgeous. Goodness. Bonitas, Probitas, tatis. foe. ge. Bonte. S. Natural
goodness. Bonitas ingenij, Generositas, tatis. foe. ge. Naturelle bonte. S.

Singular goodness. Praecipua bonitas. Singuliere bonte. S.

Goose. Anser, ris. g. promisc. Ocha, ae. f. g. Oye. H. Et Anserculus, li. m.
g. diminut. Ang A little, or young goose. Et Anserinus, a, um. Ang. Of a goose.
D'vn oye. The goose cries or creaketh. Strepit anser Virg.

Goose bery tree. Grossularia, ae. f. g. Un groselier. S. The goose is a better
watcher then the dog. Solertiorem custodiam praebet anser, quam canis. L' oye
est de meilleure guet que le chien. S.

Geese fatted, sedde, or stubble geese. Fartiles, Farti vel saginati anseres.
Oyes graces. S.

Goose fether. Penna anserina. Goose foot. Chenopus, Anseris pes. There is
also an herb of the same name. Goose giblettes. Acrocolia anseris., Tru^culi.
Cells. Goose pen, or coupe, or francke to feade geese in. Chenoboscion, Locus
vbi aluntur anseres. Goose quill. Calamus anserinus. Goose grassed, or unfed.
Herbilis anser. Gorbealy. Ve^triosus, a, um. Qui magnum habet ve^trem. Ventru,
Qui a grand ventre. Call. Gorbealied glotton. Doliaris heluo. Gorge, or craye of
a bird. Ingluuies. Vide Crawe. Gorge or upper part of the throat, wherein the
meat enters. Fauces, Frumen, summa pars gulae. La gorge. H. Gorgious.
Elegans, Nitidus, Ornatus, Politus, Superbus, ba, bum. Gorrier ou Gorriere. S.
Gorgious apparel. Ornamenta redimentia. Which is gorgiously apparailed.
Vestitus delicate. Qui est fort gorrier. S.

Gorgious to make. Orno, as. Polio, is. Orner, polir. Gorgiously. Eleganter,
Nitide, Ornate, Polite. Gorrierement. S. To be gorgiously apparayled. Vestiri
delicate. Estre habille Gorrierement. S.

Gorgiously apparayled, decked, or trimmed. Politus, Redimitus, a, um. Orne,
poli. Call. Gorgiousnes. Elegantia, Nitor, ris. Ornatus, tus. Splendour, oris, m.
g. Ornement. S. Gormaunder, or great eater. Mando, nis. Manduco, nis. Manducus,
ci. Mansutius, ij. Vide Eater, Deuourer, and Gloton. Gospel. Euangelium, ij.
n. g. Euangile. Call. Goshippe at the wine. Sympotria, Compotrix, tricis. foe.
g. Compagne a boire. Call. Gosships at a Christening. Initiales susceptores
Mancipes, and praedes initiales, Initiales parents, Spirituales propinqui,
Proditores, vel Proditrices nominis in genitura spirituali. Comperes and
commeres. S. I was desired to be a gosshippe, or to help to Christen a child.
Vocatus eram ad officium lustrale, vel initiale, Erat mihi condictum ad
initiale officium. IN estoye pry d' estre compere. S.

Gosshipbread, or gathering of gosshippes at the wine. Syssitia, aliqui
Syssetia.* Gosshishippe at a Christening. Lustrica cognatio, Initialis
necessitudo, In lustrali piscina propinquitas contracta, Spiritualis
necessitudo. Comperage and Commerage. S. Gostingweede an herb. Rueba minor.
Aparine, es. Philantropos. Rieble ou grateron. Dod. Gotten. Adeptus, a, um.
Contractus, a, um. Adquisitus, Nactus, a, um. Quaesitus, ta, tum. Partus, ta,
tum. Acquis. S. Which has gotten blame or reproach. Adeptus crimen. Ovid. Qui
a acquis blasme ou vitupere.

Gotten by collusion, craft, or falshode. Subreptitius, a, um. Vide Stolen.
Gotten by conqueste, or victory. Contractus, a, u^.* Gotten by fortune, or
chance. Sortitus, a, um.* Gotten with child. Grauida deprehe^sa, vel facta.
Gotten with labor, or study. Partus, a, um. Acquis. Govern. Aurigo, as. Duco,
cis. Guberno, as. Imperito, as. Modero, as. Moderor, aris. Rego, is. Tracto,
as. Ago, gis. Agito, tas. Magistro, tras. Tempero, as. Gouuerner. S. Govern a
country. Procurare prouinciam. Govern a ship. Nauiculor, aris. Naui prae
esse. Gouuerner vne nauire. S. Governance, or government. Dynastea, Regimen,
Regnum, Gubernatio, Magisterium, Moderatio, Rectio, onis. foe. ge.
Gouuernement. S. Governance of a common wealth, by the nobles, or senators.
Aristocratia, ae. Optimatum principatus. Governance, or rule of one country.
Toparchia. ae. foem. gen.* Governance, protection, or rule of an Empire or
realm, during the minority of a king, or for lack of a king, or between ye
death of one king and the creation of an other. Interregimen, inis. n. g.
Gouuerneme^t enter le trespass d' un roy and la creation d'vn nouueau. Call. Et
Interregnu^, ni. Is the time of such governance. Le temps etc. Governance,
regiment, or rule, of the fourth part of a realm. Tetrarchia. ae. foe. gen.*
Governed. Gubernatus, Moderatus, Rectus, a, um. Gouuerne, Regi. S. Governed to
be. Regor, eris. Estre gouuerne. Gouernoure. Dynastes, Gubernator, Moderator,
Rector, toris. m. g. Gouuerneur. S. Optimas, Primas, Praefectus. Et Rex, gis.
m. g. Idem. Gouernoure of a ship. Nauiculator, oris. Nauarchus, chi.
Nauclerus, ri. Nauicularius, ij. mas. ge. Pilote and patron de nauire. Call.
Gouernoure, or ruler of one country. Toparcha, chae, m. gen.* Gouernoure, or
ruler of the fourth part of a realm. Tetracha, chae. m. ge. Le seigneur ou
gouuerneur d'vn quartier d' vne province. Call. Gouernoure, protector, or ruler
of a realm, during the nonage of a king, Kaysar, or other potentate, or during
the vacation. Interrex, gis. m. ge. Un regent qui govern pendant qu' il n'y a
point de Roy. S. Gowle, or wild nyrtell. Acaron, ri. neut. genesis Buis picquant.
S. Gowle, or mark. Meta, ae. foe. g. Vide Mark. Gown. Toga, ae. foe. g.
Rob. S. Gown for a woman. Palla, ae. Stola, ae. foem. ge. La rob d'vne
femme. S. Gown of course clothe. Pinguis toga. Vne rob d'vn gros drap and
espez. S. Gown train. Syrma, it is. n. g. Gowned, or clad in a gown, or
wearing a gown. Togatus, a, um. Vestu d'vne rob longue. S. Gourde.
Cucurbita, ae. foe. ge. Vne courge. S. Et Cucurbitula, lae. f. g. A little
gourde. Petite courge. S. Et Cucurbitariu^. Ang. A place where gourdes grow.
Gourde lover, or setter of gourdes. Cucurbitarius, Amator Cucurbitarum. Gourde
of water which comes of rain. Aquilegium, ij. n. g. Gourde wild, or
savage. Colocynthis, idis. Courge sauuage. S. Gowte, or iointe sickness.
Arthritica passio, Articularis morbus, Chiragra, Podagra, Arthritis, idis. f.
g. La goutte. H. Gowte crampe. Spasmus, mi. Spasma, atis. neut. ge. Goutte
crampe. S. To have the gowte. Habere dolores articulorum. Auoir les gouttes aux
pieds. S.

To have the gowte in the feet. Laborare ex pedibus. Auoir la goutte aux pieds.

Gowte in the fingers, or hands. Chiragra, ae. f. ge. Goutte aux mains. Call.
Gowte in the feet. Podagra, ae. foe. genesis La goutte es pieds. S. Gowte
scyatique. Ischias, sieve Ischiachus vel Ischiadicus dolor. Vne goutte
sciatique. S. Gowty, or full of gowte. Articularius, a, um. Arthriticus, ca,
cum. Goutteux. Call. Gowtie in the fyngers. Chiragricus, a, um. Gowtie in the
legs, or feet. Podagricus, a, u^. Podagrosus, sa, sum. Qui ha la goutte es
pieds. S.
G. ANTE. R.
GRace and delectablenes that one has in gesture and speech. Lepor, oris.
Lepos, ris. Venustas, tatis. Vrbanitas, tatis. foe. ge. La bonne grace and
bienscance qu' ha aucun en parler. S. Grace that a body has when that which
he says or does, becomes him well. Decor, coris. m. g. La grace qu' ha vne
person, quand ce qu' elle dit ou fait luy sied bien. S. To give grace.
Decoro, as. Bailler grace. S.

With grace. Decore. Auec grace. S. Cum gratia.

Grace, or favor. Gratia, ae. foe. g. Grace. S. Graceles, or with out
delectation. Illepidus, a, um. Infacundus, Inconcinnus, na, number. Qui ha
mauuaise grace. S. Graces. Gratiae, arum. f. g. These are feigned three, Aglaia,
Thalia, Euphrosine, The daughters (as Hesiodus writes) either of Jupiter and
Eurymone, or else of Bacchus and Venus: Whom antiquity did painte naked,
because friendship and good will among friends ought to be naked, simple and
void of couine and deceit: They were three in number, for that the one gives
the other receives, and the third requiteth: they seemed young, because the
memory of a benefit, ought never to cease or wax old: cherefull and smyling,
for that a benefit should be bestowed cherefully: Two of them looked toward
the beholders, and the third turned her back, whereby is signified that a
benefit ought to be requited, with greater good will: They were knitte
together, showing thereby the knott of friendship, should be indissoluble.
Gracious. Vrbanus, a, um, Gratiosus, sa, sum. Gratieux. Call. Graciously, or
with good grace. Benign, Blande, Vrbanatim, Vrbane, Facunde, Eleganter. De
bonne grace. S. Gradation. Climax, Gradatio, onis. foe. g. Degree. Graffe.
Insero, ris, seui. Pango, is. Planto, as. Sero, is, seui, satum. Emplastro,
tras. Admitto, it is. Enter les arbres. S. Graffe between the rind and the
wood. Inoculo, as. Enter en escusson. S. Graffe, or a plant. Insitium,
*Pla^tarium, Calamus, mi. Clabula, lae. Clauola, lae. Insitum, ti. neut. ge.
Greffe de quoy on ente, vne ente. S. Graffed. Insitus, ta, tum. Ente. S. Which
is graffed and not natural. Insitiuus, ua, uum. vel Insititius, a, um. Qui est
ente, and non point naturel. S.

Graffer. Insitor, toris. m. g. Enteur. S. Graffer which graffeth in the
rynde. Inoculator, toris. m. g. Qui ente en escusson. S. Graffing. Insitio,
Plantatio, Emplastratio, onis. Insitus, tus. m. g. Entement, ou enture.
Graffing between the bark and the wood. Inoculatio, onis. foe. ge. Entement
faict en escusson. S. Graffing knife. Falx, cis. Scalprum, pri. n. g. Graffing
stock. Insitium, Talea, ae. f. g. Un plantal. S Graye eyed. Caesius, a, um.*
Graye of color. Caesius, a, u^. Glaucus, a, um. Leucophaeus, a, um. Gris. S.
Clothed in graye, or russet. Leucophaeatus, ta, tum. Vestu de gris. S.

Graye or hoare. Canus, a, um. Gris. S. Graye or hoare Decembre. Canus
December. Decembre qui est gris. S. Graye, bagger, brocke, a beast. Melis,
Taxo, onis. Un taisson un blareau. S Graye eyed woman. Glaucopis, idis. foe.
ge. Habens oculos caesios. Cael. lib. 8. cap. 18. Grayehounde. Canis venaticus,
Canis Gallicus. Leurier, Chien de chasse, ou de venerie. H. Grain. Granum, ni.
Frumentum, ti. n. g. Grain. H. Grain of a tree. Pecten, inis. Furca, cae. f.
g. Grain, with which they make, or dye scarlet. Coccum, ci. n. g. Grain de
quoy on fait l'escarlate. S. Died in grain. Coccineus, a, u^. Coccinus, a,
nu^. Teinct en grain. S.

Clothed with a garment died in grain. Coccinatus, ta, tum. Vestu d' vne rob
teincte en grain. S.

Grain of grapes, or other like. Acinus, ni, and Acinum, ni. n. ge. Grain de
raisin, ou semblables. S. Et Acinum vinaceum, vel Acinus vinaceus. Graynes, or
a spice of that kind. Cardomomum, Cordumenum.* Gra^marian, or one that
teaches grammar. Grammaticus, ci. m. g. Grammarien, qui enseigne la grammaire.
S. And a mean or young grammarrian, or a smatterer of grammar. Grammatista,
tae. m. ge. Aucunement grammarien, Gra^marien tell quel. Gra^mer, the art which
teaches to write and speak well and congrue. Grammatica, cae. foe. g.
Grammatice, ces. f. g. Ars gra^matica. L' art qui enseigne de bien escrire and
parler. S. Et Grammaticus, a, um. Ang. Pertaining to grammar. According to the
art of grammar. Grammatice, Aduerb. Selon l'art de grammaire. S.

Gramercy to thee, which is a manner of thanks giving among the vulgares.
Ago gratias, vel grates, Do gratias, vel grates, Gratiae tibi, Habeo gratia^,
Refero gratias, Gratias tibi ago, Est tibi gratia. Ie te remercie. S. Granarie.
Granarium, ij. n. g. Grenier. Call. Grandam, or grandmother. Auia, ae. foe. ge.
La m^re grand. S. Grandfather and grandsire. Auus, ui. m. ge. Ayeul, pere
grand. S. Grandfather to my wife. Prosocer, ceri. m. ge. Le pere du beau pere.
Call. Grandfathers grandfather. Tritauus, ui. m. genesis Le bisayeul du bisayeul.
Grandmother to my wife. Prosocra.* Grandmothers grandmother. Tritauia, ae. f.
ge. Grape. Racemus, Vua, ae. f. g. Raisin, grappe de raisin. Et Vueus, a, um.
Of a grape, or pertaining to a grape. Moust. Call. Et Racemosus, a, um. Full of
grapes. Plein de grappes. Et Racematus, a, um. Ang. Having grapes. Qui ha des
grappes. Call. Grape cluster, or cluster of grapes. Botrum, Racemus^ Botryon,
nis. Botrus, tri. Grappe de raisin. S. Raisin entier. S. Grape kernelles or the
graynes in grapes. Acini vinacei, vel Acina vinacea. Grains de raisin. S. Grape
scant ripe. Omphax, cis. Vua acerba, Immatura vua. Raisin qui n' est point
asses meure. H. Grape time, or season when grapes are ripe. Vindemia. ae. f. g.
Vendange. S. Grapes after ye wine is pressed out. Scopi, orum.* Scopus vuae.
The stalk of a bunshe of grapes. Grapes sweet, called grapes of muscadell.
Vuae Apianae, Apiariae, quas muscatellas vulgus Italicum nominat. Du raisin
muscatel. H. Grape ripe. Vua matura, Vua edulis. Grappe de raisin meure. H.
Grapes being read. Rubellae, arum.* Grapes conserved in pottes. Ollares, rium.
Vuae ollares, quae in fictilibus ollis condiuntur. Raisins qui se gardent en
potz. H. Grapes ripe and ready to be eaten. Toximi, orum. vuae edules. Grapes
with a thick skin. Duracinae vuae. Vuae, quae duram and firmam corticem
habent, a duritie vel a duris acinis dictae. Grapple of a ship, to claspe
ships together when they fight. Harpago, inis. Manus, us. foe. ge. Ferrea
harpago pluribus vncis diuisa, qua naues in conflictu nauali colligantur. Croc,
pour accrocher nauires. H. Grasing of clothes, which is setting the ground
color. Sublitio, onis. foe. g. Grasing, or feading of cattle. Pastio, onis.
foe. genesis La pasture des bestes, ou le passage. S. Et Pastoritius, a, um. Ang.
Of grasing, or feading of cattle. De pastur, de pasture. Call. Grass. Gramen,
inis. Herba. All kind of herbs are called Gramen, inis. n. ge. Toute sort de
herb. Mowed grass Desectum gramen. Ovid.

The grass now springs again. Redeunt iam gramina campis. Horat.

Batle, high, or long grass. Laetu^ gramen. Virg.

Grassy, or full of grass. Gramminosus, Herbosus, a, um. Plein d' herbs,
Herbu. S. Grassy, or grene, or as fresh as grass, or of grass. Gramineus, a,
um. Herbaceus, Herbidus, a, um. D' herbs. S. Grassehopper. Cicada, dae. f. g.
Cigalle. S. vt Virg. At mecum raucis tua dum vestigia lustro:
Sole sub ardenti resonant arbusta cicadis.
But while that I thy footesteps seek
The grassehoppes hoarce with me,
In parching son, make shrubs resounde
These mourning tunes for thee.
Grate made with bars. Clatrus, Clatrum, Clathrus, thri. m. g. Clathrum,
thri. n. ge. Trilis. Pals. Treille. S. Grate to grate bread on. Tyrocnestis,
Radula, lae. foe. ge. Un racloir. H. Grate small. Affrio, as. To croume small.
Esmier. S. Grate, or cover with grates. Cratio, it is, tiui.* Couurir de clayes.
S. It is rather, to cover with hirdles. Grate of iron, or wood. Crates. Claye de
fer, ou de bois. S. Gratify, or to do a pleasure to some body. Gratificor,
caris. Rem gratam alicui facete. Fair plaisir a aucun. Grave. Caelo, as.
Incido, dis. Insculpo, is. Scalpo, is. Sculpo, is. Grauer, buriner. S. Grave
and severe. Grauis, Tristis, te. Seuerus, a, u^. Grave and severe. S. Grave
judge. Seuerus Iudex. To show him self very grave. Magnam prae se far
grauitatem. Se monstrer fort grave. S.

Grave of gesture, or importance. Serius, a, um. Chose grave and de
consequence. S. Grave or to intaile Images. Exculpo, is. Vt supra. Grave or
pit. Sepulchrum, Sarcophagus, gi. m. g. Un sepulcher. Et Suggrundaria, Be
graves of infantes.* Grave or a sepulcher. Monumentum, Tumulus, Bustum.
Sepulcre. S. Grave stone. Cippus, Lapis sepulchro qui imponitur, and sepulti
memoria^ testatur. Cornutus simpliciter sepulchri lapidem exponit. La pierre du
sepulcre. S. Grave speech. Grauiloquentia. ae. f. g.* Gravely. Grave, Severe,
Triste, Grauiter. Grauement. S. Gravely speaking. Grauiloquus, a, um. Grauiter
loquens. Call. Gravel. Arena, Glarea, Sabulu^, li. Grauois, Grauier. Gravel
pytte. Sabuletum, ti. n. ge. Sablonniere. S. Gravel stone, which happens
into the shoe and hurts the foot or heal. Scrupus, pi. m. ge. Vne petite
pierrette, comme sont celles qui entrent es souliers ^n cheminant. S. Et
Scrupulus, diminur. Ang. A little gravel stone. Grauelled. Glareatus, a, um.*
Arenatus, ta, tum. Quod arena mistum est. Grauelled horse, which is hurt with
a gravel stone. Equus scrupulatus. Grauelly, or full of gravel, or stony.
Calculosus, Glareosus, Sabulosus, a, um. Plein de grauois. S. Graven. Caelatus,
a, um. Insculptus, Sculptilis, le. Scalpturatus, ta, tum. Sculptus, a, um.
Scalptus, ta, tum. Grave, taille, engraue, encise. Call. Graven vessels.
Aucaesa.* Vasa caelata. Grauer. Caelator, ris. Sculptor, Statuarius, Toreutes,
it is. m. g. Scalptor, toris. m. ge. Tailleur, ou graueur. Call. Grauer in stones.
Lithoglyphus, phi. m. g. Sculptor Lapidum. Tailleur, esculpteur. Call. Grauer of
images. Hermoglyphos, phi. m. g. Tailleur d' images. Call. Et Statuarius, ij. m.
g. Idem. Grauing, caruing. Toreutice, ces. foe. g. Caelatura, Scalptura,
Sculptura, ae. foe. g. Taillure, ou grauure. Grauing, or the art to grave
images. Statuaria, iae. foe. ge. L'art de tailler images. Call. Grauing iron
Scalpellum,* Scalprum, pri. neut. g. Scalper, pri. m. g. Caelum, li. n. g. Un
burin. S. Grauing on a cou^ter, which is an Italian work. Emblema, it is. n. g.
Gravity. Canities, Supercilium, Tristicia, Grauitas, tatis. foe. g. Grauite.
S. Gravity in a judge. Seueritas, tatis. f. g. Grauitas, tatis. foe. g.
Seuerite. Call. Graunge, or ma^our place without the walls of a city.
Suburbanum. Vide Ferme. Graunge, or a little thorpe. Viculus, li. m. g. Un
Hameau. S. Graunge, where husbandry is exercised. Colonia, ae. foe. g. Ferme,
vne metairie. S. Petit village. Pals. Grant. Concessus, us. Admissum, ssi.
Concessio, onis. foe. g. Octroy. S. To grant. Concedo, is. Largior, iris.
Annuo, is. Affirmo, Cedo, Praesto, Indulgeo, es. Remitto, is. Octroyer. S.

Grant a placard, or to dispense. Soluere legibus. Grant, or to consent,
with holding up the finger, or nodding the head. Innuo, is. To grant to ones
prayers. Precibus alterius indulgere. Octroyer la priere d'aucun. S.

Grant me this one thing. Sine te hoc exorem. Octroye moy cela. S. Grant unto
a request gently. Rogatui se facilem praebere. Granted. Concessus, a, um.
Co^tributus. Admissus, Praestitus, a, um. Octroye. S. The Senate has granted
thy request, or petition. Concessit Senatus petitioni tuae. Le Senate to a
octroye ce que tu demandois. S.

Granted to be. Largior, iris. Verb com. Grease, fat, or any thing being
fatty, wherewith a thing is anointed. Vnguen, inis. n. g. Onguent. Grease
molten. Liquamen, menis. n. g. Graisse ou sain fondu. S. Grease of a swyne.
Vnctum, ti. n. g. Sain de porceau. Grease, or tallowe. Pingue, is. Adeps,
Pinguedo, Pinguetudo, inis. foe. g. Graisse. S. Greased, or dressed with grease
or fat, full of grease. Adipatus, ta, tum. Gras, Remply de grass. Call. Greased,
or anointed with grease. Vnctus, a, um. Oinct, gras. Call. Greasy, or arrayed, or
spotted with grease, or like filthe. Squalidus, a, um. Squalus, a, um.
Crasseux, Ord and sale. Call. Greasines, or spots of grease, or fylthines.
Squalor, oris. m. ge. Cras and Amas d'ordure. Call. Great. Eximius, a, um.
Grandis, e. Grauis, e. Grossus, a, um. Immanis, ne. Immodicus, a, um. Inge^s,
it is. Magnus, a, um. Vastus, a, um. Vehemens, it is. Grand. S. Great, and very
big. Immensus, sa, sum. Ingens, Praegrandis, de. Permagnus, na, number. Fort
grand. S Great and huge, out of measure. Immanis, ne. Enormis, me. Grand
oultre mesure. S. Great, and ill favored. Vegrandis. D' vne grandeur mal
faconee. Call. Great and stout bragges, or words. Sesquipedalia verba. Great
as a tun. Doliaris, re. Grand comme un tonneau. S. Great birds which are
fed. Alites. Great blood, or nobility. Nomen. Vide Nobility. Great dowries.
Dapsiles dotes. Grans dosts. S. Great eared. Auritus, a, um. Qui a grandes
oreilles. Great eater. Edax, Polyphagus, Vorax, cis. Vide Gloton. Great
goodneess, or the chiefest good. Bonum vltimum. Le plus grand bien. Great
grandfather. Proauus, ui. m. g. Bisayeul. S. Great grandmother. Proauia, iae,
foe. g. Great grandfathers father. Abauus, ui. mas. genesis Le pere du bisayeul.
S. Great grandfathers mother, or the great grandmothers mother. Abauia, ae. f.
g. La mere de nostre pere grand, ou mere grand. S. Great grounds enclosed.
Diffusiora consepta. Great gulf. Altus gurges. Virg. Grand gouffre. S. Great
gutte. Colon. Vide Gutte. Great headed, or which has a great head. Capito,
tonis, m. g. Capitosus, sa, sum. Qui magnum caput habet. Qui lia gross test.
S. Great in multitude, or number. Numerosus, a, um. Qui est en grand nombre. S.
Great laysure. Altum otium. Grand loisir. S. Great laughter. Solutus risus.
Virg. Un ris desmesure. S. Great Lord, potentate, or ruler. Heroes, ois. m. ge.
It is a great matter. Multum est, magnum est. C' est si grand' chose.

Great sort. Quamplures, Plures, Complures, Crebri, quam multi. Plusieurs. S.
Great speaker, or talker. Philologus, Studiosus, sieve amator sermonis. Great,
somewhat great. Grandiculus, la, lum. Gra^diusculus, la, lum. Maiusculus, la,
lum. Subgrandis, de. Gradelet. S. Great toe. Allux, Hallux, Magnus vel primus
pedalis digitus, vel primus pedis digitus. Le gros orteil. Great toe, lying
over the ^ext toe. Hallus, li. Hallux, lucis, m. g. Fest. Great to be in
authority. Authoritate valere. Great to make. Grandio, is. Aggrandir. S. Great
to wax. Grandesco, scis. Ingrandesco, scis. Deuenir grand. S. Great way
hence. Procul, Protenus. De loing. S. Great vessel. Caprunculum, li. n. ge.
Vas fictile, sic dictum quod capax sit. Festus. vel Capedo, inis. Vas amplum
and capax. Un grand vaisseau. Call. Great with yonglinges, or which has the
belly filled of young ones. Grauidus, a, um. Foetus, a, um, Qui ha le ventre
plein de petis. S. A woman great with child. Grauis mulier, grauida,
Praegnans. Femme gross d'enfant. S.

She is great with child by thee. Ex tuo compressu grauida. Gross de ton
faict. S.

The being great with child, or young ones. Praegnatio, Grauiditas, atis. f.
g. Grossesse de femme.

Great with child to be. Prole grauescere, Vterum gerere, Gestare in aluo,
Partum far, Partum gerere, Ventre^ far. Estre gross. Great without
measure. Enormis, e. Immensus, a, u^. Immanis, ne. Vastus, ta, tu^. Grand
oultre mesure. Greater. Auctior, ius. Mayor, ius. Grandior, ius. Plus grand. Et
grandiusculus, a, um. Ang. A little, or somewhat greater. Greater part or side.
Magna pars, Pars bona. Vne grande party. S. A great part. Greater part of
the day. Melior pars diei. La plus grande party du iour. Greatest of all.
Maximus, Summus, Supremus, a, um. Grandissimus, ma, mum. Tresgrande. Greatest
and most fervent poison. Praesentissimu^ venenum. Greatest part of all. Multo
maxima pars. Toute la plus grande party. S. Greatly. Adprime, Immense,
Impense, Magnopere, Multopere, Valde, Impendio, Mirabiliter, Mire, Multis
modis, Sum, Veheme^ter. Grandement. S. Greatness. Immanitas, Magnitudo,
Vastitas, Vehementia, Vastitudo, Vastities, Vastitas, tatis. f. ge. Granditas,
tatis. f. g. Grandeur. Call. Greatness of body. Corporatura. ae. f. g. Corsage.
Call. Greatness of power, or majesty. Amplitudo authoritatis vel maiestatis.
Greaues, or leg harneys. Tibialia, lium. n. g. Armures de iambes. Call.
Gredyron, such as they broyle meat on. Craticula, lae. foe. g. Crates ferrea.
Le gril. H. Greece. Graecia, ae. f. g. Greece. S. Et Graecanicus, a, um. Ang.
Come out of Greece. It is called diversely by aucthours, for yt there were in
Greece 18. Regions, and every of them had his several dominatour, until they
were brought into subjection of the infidels, where as they now remain, and
be thus named. Acarnania, Achaia, Aetolia, Argos, Attica, Boeotia, Doris,
Phthiotis, Epirus, Laconia, Locris, Macedonia, Magnesia, Megaris, Messenia,
Phocis, Thessalia, Thracia. All which be now barbarous, and as vile
handmaydes in the servitude of the most cruel ennemy to Christian religion,
the great Turk, which before were the mother or well of eloquence, and of all
learning, the more is to be lamented. Greecian, or Greek. Graecus, a, um.
Grec. S. Greedy, or covetous. Auidus, a, um. Auarus, Cupidus, a, u^.
Auaricieux. S. Greedy eater. Vorax, cis. Ingluuiosus, a, um. Goulu. S Greedely.
Auare, Auide, Voraciter. Auaricieuseme^t. Greediness of eating. Voracitas,
tatis. f. g. Edacitas, tatis. f. g. Inexplebilis edendi cupiditas. Greedines,
or coueteousnes. Auaritia, Auiditas, Avarice. S. Greese, grice, step, or
staire. Gradus, Scamnum, ni. n. g. Degres, ou un pas. S. Grene. Viretus, a, um.
Viridis, e. Viridicatus, a, um. Gramineus, a, um. Herbeus, a, um. Herbidus, a,
um. Verd. S. Grene being. Viridans, it is. om. g. Verdoyant. S. Grene branch of
a vine. Pampinus, ni. dub. genesis Pampre. S. Grene color, being a sad grene.
Orobitis, it is. foem. genesis Grene like leekes. Prasinus, a, um. vt Color
prasinus. Mart. Grenenes, Viriditas, Viror, ris. n. ge. Verdeur. S. Grene
place. Viretum, ti. n. g. Lieu plein de verdure. S. Grene place, or garden for
pleasure. Viridarium, rij. n. g. Iardin de plaisance. S. Grene place, or grove
set with trees. Viridium, dij. n. gen.*. Grene stone. Pransius, ij. m. g. Vide
Plin. li. 37. ca. 8. Grene to be. Vireo, es, rui. Estre verd. S. Grene to make.
Virido, as, aui.* Grene to wax. Viresco, scis. Euiresco, scis. De venir verd.
S. Greshopper, or grashop. Cercope, Cicada, ae. Auenaria cicada. Acheta, ae.
Cigale. S. Greshops which be small. Tettigoniae, arum. f. ge. Minores cicadae.
Lege apud Plin. lib. 11. cap. 26. Greshops matrice, or place where they are
engendered and bread. Tettigometra, Matrix cicadaru^, Author Plin. lib. 11. cap.
26. Great, or salute. Saluto, as. Salutem dare, vel dicere. Saluer. S. Greting.
Salutatio, onis. foe. ge. Salutation. S. Grieve. Grauo, as. Molesto, as.
Afficio, is. Offendo, is. Opprimo, is. Greuer. S. Dolor afficio. idem. Grieve
much. Praegrauo, as. Praestringo, is. Grieved. Grauatus, a, um. Grieve. S.
Grieved to be. Grauor, aris. Estre grieve. Call. Grieved to be with sickness.
Laboro, as. Vide Sick. Greuing, or that which does grieve. Molestus, a, um. Qui
ennuye and fasche. S. Grievous. Molestus, a, um. Asper, ra, rum. Grauis, e.
Acerbus, ba, bum. Fascheux and ennuy^ux. S. Grievous sickness. Acer morbus.
Plaut. Greuouser, or more grievously. Impensius, Aegrius, Grauius. Grievously,
heauely, or with great pain and difficulty. Aegre, Grauate, Grauatim, Grave,
Grauiter, Moleste, Impense, Dolorose. Griefuement, Grauement. Call. Grievously,
or heynously to take. Grauor, aris. Aegre aliquid far. Greuousnes of taste.
Virus, Indeclin. Ill sent. Mauuaise senteur. S. Grewell. Olus, eris. *
Pulmentum, ti. Zomos, mi. m. g. Ius, ris. n. genesis Brouet, potage. Grewell,
forcet, or stewed broth. Offella, ae. Offula, lae. foe. g.* Grief. Algor, ris.
Dolentia, Dolor. Grauedo, Languor, Molestia, Passio, Scoria, Vulnus, Acerbitas,
atis. foem. genesis Douleur. Et Dolorosus, a, um. Full of grief. To ease ones
grief. Leuare dolorem alicuius. Mitigare, Mollire, Lenire. Appaiser la douleur
d'aucun. S.

The grief ceasseth. Quiescit dolor, Remittit se dolor. La doleur s' appaise.
S.

Grief of mind, or sorrow. Aegritudo, Passio, Animi perturbatio. Affectio,
onis. foe. genesis Affectus, tus. m. g. La passion. Call. Grief of the stomach,
abhorring all meats. Malacia, ciae. foe. g. Deprauatus stomachi appetitus,
Plin. lib. 18. cap. 7. Grief, or sorrow of heart. Cordolium, lij. neut. g.
Dolaeur au coeur. Grief to have. Doleo, es, ui. Auoir douleur. S. Griefles, or
soroweles. Quietus, a, um. Sanus, a, u^. Sans douleur. Griffin, or a grype.
Gryps, Gryphus. Griffon, Griphon. H. Grimme. Toruus, a, um. Tragicus, a, um.
Atrox, Importunus, na, number. Felon. S. Grimmely. Toruo, Torue, Toruiter, Toruum,
Tragice. Felonnement. S. Grimmely to look. Tragice tueri. Grind, or to make
sharp. Acuere, Exacuere. Aguiser. S. To grind, or whet a knife. In cote
cultrum subigere. Aguiser un cousteau. S.

Grynde as with a mill. Extero, ris. Molo, is. Commolo, lis. Contero, is.
Mouldre. S. Grind, or braye in a mortar. Pinsito, as. Pinso, as. Pinso, is,
Piso, is. Contundo, dis. Elido, dis. Mouldre and escacher. S. Grind the teethe
together. Frendeo, es, ui. Grincer les deus. S. Et Dentes comprimere. Plaut.
Idem. Grinded, or grounded. Pistus, a, um. Tritus, ta, tum. Contusus, sa, sum.
Moulu. S. Grinder. Molitor, toris. m. g. Meusnier. Call. Grinding house.
Pistrina, Pistrinum. Vide Mill. Grindstone. Mola.* Cos aquarius. Meule
aguiser. Grinne like a dog. Ringo, is. Rechigner. Call. Et Hirrio, is. To
grinne like a mad dog. Grinning. Rictum, ti. Rictus, us. m. g.* Grinning
dog. Ringens canis. Grinning, or showing the tethe. Nidor, ris. m. genesis
Horat. 2. Sermo. 7. Satyr. Grype bird. Gryphus, Gryps, phis, vel Gryphus, phi.
m. g. Un Griffon, ou Griphon. S. Gripe of a hand, or handful. Dragma, atis.
n. ge. Quod nos manipulum dicimus. hoc est, quantu^ vna manu comprehendere
possumus. Call. To grype, or hold a thing close in the hand. Clauso pugno rem
aliquam tenere, Comprimere, Constringere, vel Comprehendere.

Gripe or handful. Manipulus, li. m. g. Vne Iauelle, vne poignee. S. Gripe or
handful of ears of corn. Merges, itis. foe. g. Vne poignee de espis de ble.
S. Gristle, or groyne. Cartilago, inis. f. g. Cartilage, tendron ou tendrillon.
Call. Gristle of the neck of a cock, or the cocks watle that is red under his
chin. Palea, ae. f. g. Colum. lib. 8. cap. 2. Gristly, or full of gristles.
Cartilaginosus, a, um. Plin. lib. 12. cap. 25. Cartilagineux. S. Gristly, or of
the gristle. Cartilagineus, a, um. De cartilage. Call. Gritte of stones,
wherewith metal is scoured. Scobs, bis. foe. ge. Grocers, they which sell by
great. Solidarij venditores. Grossier, qui vendent en gros. S. Groine of a
swyne. Rostrum suis. Groin de porceau. S. Grome of the chamber. Cubicularius,
Super somnum seruus. Varlet de chamber. S. Gromes of the kitchen. Discipuli
coquorum. Varlets de cuisiniers. S. The chife grome of the chamber. Decurio
cubiculariorum. Bud. ex Suet. Le primier varlet de chamber. S.

Groan. Gemo, is. Gemisco, scis, id est prae animi angustia in sonum prorumpo.
Gemir, Geindre. S. Groaning. Gemens, it is. part. Gemissant. Groaning, or painful
uttering of the voice. Gemitus, tus. m. g. Gemissement. S. Groaning woman.
Singultie^s mulier, vel puerpera.* Grope. Palpo, as. vel Palpor, paris.
Attrecto, tas. Contrecto, tas. Taster. S. To go gropinge, or to grope, as one
goes to prove the way. Praetentare iter manibus. Aller tastonant, ou a
tastons.

Grope. Subagito, tas. Groper. Palpator, oris. m. ge. Groping. Palpatio, onis.
foe. g. Tastonnement. S. Gross to wax, or to becomme gross. Grassesco, scis.
Grossir, ou deuenir gros. S. Gross in body or fleshye. Corpulentus, Crassus,
Grossus, Tardus, a, um. Gros. S. Gross witted like a beast. Brutus, a, um.
Grossly. Crassa minerua, Pingui minerua. vt Crassa vel Pingui minerua aliquid
facere. To do a thing grosely. Grossement. Crassiore musa. To live grossly
without any delights. Inculte atque horride viuere. Viure grossement, sans
aucunes delices. S.

To sound grossly. Grauiter sonare. Sonner grossement. S.

Grossenes. Crassities, Crassitudo, Plenitudo, inis. foe. genesis Grosseur. Grove
or thick wood, dedicated to some religious use. Lucus, ci. m. ge. Petit bois
espois, consacre a quelque religion. S. Grove of Alders. Alnetum, ti. n. g. Un
aunoye. S. Grove of Ash trees. Fraxinetum, ti. neut. genesis Grove of Elmes.
Vlmetum, Vlmarium, ij. neut. ge. Vne ormaye. Call. Grove of Oaks. Quercetum, ti.
n. ge. Chesnaye. Grove of Salowes. Salictum, ti. n. g. Un saulsaye. Grow or to
wax big, or increase. Adolesco, scis. Cresco, scis. Glisco, scis. Olesco,
scis. Nascor, eris. Orior, iris. Prouenio, is. Pubeo, es. Surgo, gis.
Ingrandesco, scis. Accresco, scis. Adaugesco, scis, Excresco, scis. Inolesco,
scis. Augescere incrementis, Incrementum recipere, vel accipere. Croistre. S.
Grow about. Circumnascor, sceris. Croistre tout a l' enuiron. S. Grow
abroad, or in breadth, or out. Scaturio, is. Iecter sources. To spring. S.
Grow as flowers, or herbs do. Floresco, scis. Obherbesco, scis. Deuenir en
fleur, fleurir. S. Grow eftsoon, or again. Recresco, scis. Renascor, sceris.
Recroistre. S. This herb grows again. Recrescit, Resurgit haec herba. Ceste
herb recroist. S.

Grow fat. Alesco, scis. They grow in height. Prosiliunt in altitudine^.
Croissent en haulteur. S.

Grow to the height of a tree. Assurgere in arborem. Croistre a la haulteur d'
un arbre. S. Grow three cubits high. Adolescere in tria cubita. Croistre
trois couldees de hault. S. Grow little and little. Succresco, scis. Croistre
and aller en croissant. S. Grow more and more. Incresco, scis. Excresco, scis.
Croistre de plus en plus. S. Grow no more, or leaving growinge. Exolesco,
scis. Ne croistre plus. Et exoletus, a, um. Paste growyng. Grow to. Accresco,
scis, eui. Incroistre. Adnascor, sceris. Idem. Grow to a stalk. Caulesco,
scis. Decaulesco, scis. Croistre en tige. S. Grow toward man's state, or to
wax great. Pubesco, scis. Adolesco, scis. Croistre, deuenir grand. S. Grow
with a codde, or husk, as beans do. Siliquor, aris. Venir en escosse ou
engousse. S. Grow with a great stalk or stem, or to bring forth many
stalks and little bows. Fruticesco, scis. Frutico, as. Fruticor, aris. Iecter
and produre force reiectous and petites branches. S. Grow under. Succresco,
scis.* Grown, and that is past grouthe. Adultus, ta, tu^. Qui est parcru and
horse de croissance. S. Grown with grass, or herbs. Graminosus, a, um. Vide
Grass. Growyng Crescens, it is. part. Croissant. S. Ground. Fundus, di. Humus,
mi. Solum, li. Terra, ae. Tellus, ris. foe. g. Terre. S. Ground, which is the
mother of all things. Omniparens terra. La terre qui est la mere de toutes
chooses. S. Ground containing an hundred acres. Centuria, ae. f. g. Et
Centuriatim. Ang. By an hundred acres together. Ground containing an hundred
foot in breadth, and as much in length. Modius agri. Varr. Vne terre ou
champ, qui ha de largeur cent pieds, and autant de longueur. S. Ground
color, or fiirste color of any color that is died, or stained, called
grasing. Sublitio, onis. foe. ge. * To dig the ground. Fodere terram. Fouer
la terre.

Ground fertile, or lusty. Benigna, vel Frugifera terra. Grauis terra, Solum
laetum. Terre fertile. S. Ground full of sand, or gravel. Arenacea terra.
Terre sablonneuse. S. The ground drinks up the water. Terra absorbet aquam.
La terre boit l' eaue. S.

To sow the ground. Mandare terrae semina, Seminare, Sementum facere, Semen
solo ingerere, Spargere semen, Committere semen solo. Semer la terre. S.

Ground Iuie. Asclepias, Chamaecissos, Hedera terrestris. Liarre terrestre. S.
Ground level and plain. Planities, tiei. foem. ge. Vne plain. S. Ground
marked out to set a buylding upon. Area plana. Vitruu. Ground or land being
ouergrowen, and out of tylthe. Squalidus ager. Ground sowed. Seges, Pro terra
subacta and sata. Varr. Terre semee. H. Ground, where Brimbles and Thorns do
grow, or that is covered with them. Dumetum, ti. n. g. Un lieu couuert d'
espines and buissons. S. Ground pin, vnderpinne, or to lay the foundation
of a house. Substruo, is. Fair le fondemens d' un edifice. S. Groundsell of
the door, some call it the threshould. Hypothyrum, Limen, is. n. g. Le sueil de
l'huis. H. Groundselle a house. Substruo, is. Groundselling of a house.
Substructio. Groundswell herb. Erigeron, Pappus, pi. Senecio, onis. Senecon.
S. Grudge. Adrumo, as. Admurmuro, as. Murmuro, as. Murmurer. S. Grudge the
conscience. Trahere in religionem. Grudging. Murmuratio, Murmur, ris. n. g.
Murmurement ou murmuration. S. Grummell herb. Lythospermon, Milium solis.
Gremel. S. Grunte as swyne do. Grundire, Grunnire, Mutire, Mussare. Grongner
comme font les porceaulx. S. Grunte as the sow does when she desires her
kind. Subo, bas. Le bruit que font les truyes quand else sont chaul des.
Grunte like a boar. Quiritare. Author Philom. Grunting. Grunnitus, tus. m. g.
Grongnement. S.
G. ANTE. V.
GVeste, or one that is bidden to a banquet. Epulo, onis. Conuiua, ae. com. ge.
Qui est co^uie ou inuit au banquet. S. Vide Geste. Guide. Duco, cis. Guider.
S. Guide, or to bring or conducte one to some place. Prosequi vsque ad locum
aliquem, Deducere. Conduire iusques a quelque lieu. S. Guide, or one that does
conduicte men to some place. Dux, Auspex, Ductor, roris. m. ge. Conducteur, ou
conduiseur. Un guide que meine autruy. S. Guiding, conduicting, or trayning.
Ductus, Deductio, Auspicium, ij. n. g. Conduicte. S. Guyen in France.
Aquitania. ae. f. g. Guienne. S. Guyse, manner, or fashion. Modus, di. m. genesis
Forma, mae. foe. g. Mos, ris. m. g. Guise, mode ou facon. S. To live after an
other his guise. Alieno more viuere. Viure a la mode ou guise d' autruy. S.

After a strange guise or fashion. In peregrinu^ modum. En estrange facon. S.

The old guise, or fashion. Ratio antiqua. La mode ancienne. S.

Gulf or swallowe. Gurges, it is. Vorago, inis. foe. g. Gouffre. S. Gulfye, or
full of gulfes. Voraginosus, sa, sum. Plein de'gouffres. S. Gulle sea foul.
Gauia, ae. foe. ge. Plin. li. 10. cap. 32. Gullet, gully, or gargle of the
throat. Vide Gargle Gum. Gu^mi. (Indec) Resina, ae. Gummis, is. f. g. Gomme.
S. Gum called Beniemyn. Ammoniacum, Gutta ammoniaca.* Gum. or Iawe wherein
the teethe grow. Gingiua, uae. f. g. Genciue. H. Gum sweet smelling.
Bodellium, lij. n. ge. Plin. lib. 12. cap. 9. Gum trees. Gummatae arbores.
Gummye, or which brings forth gum. Gummatus, a, um. Qui produit de la
gum. Call. Gummy, full of gum. Gummosus, sa, sum. Plein de la gomme. S.
Gunne. Tormentum, ti. n. g. Bombarda barbaris a bombo dicitur. Piece
d'artillerie. H. Gu^ne called an arquebut. Scorpio, onis. Scorpius, ij. Sclopus
sieve Stlopus. Hacquebute, Arquebuse. Gurnarde fish. Hycca, ae. foe. g.
Gournault. S. Gutte. Intestinum, ni. n. g. Boyau. S. Gutte called the
arsegutte. Hila, ae. foe. ge. Gutte, called the first gutte. Intestinum
primum. Gutte, called the narrow gutte. Intestinum tenue Gutte of the
fundament. Ieiunum, vel ieiunum intestinum. Le boyau culier, S. Gutte, called
the long gutte. Intestinum rectum, Longanon, Ileos. Le long boyau. S. Gutte
where the colike lies. Intestinum colon. H. Guts. Ilia, orum. Intestina,
orum. neut. genesis Les boyaulx. S. Gutter, or sink. Cloaca, ae. Latrina, ae.
foe. g. Colluuiarium, rij. n. g. Gouttiere, ou esuier. S. Gutter between two
walls. Andron, onos. m. ge. Gutter of a house. Compluuium, uij. n. g. Columel.
Gutters. Colliquiae, arum, Colliciae, arum. foe. genesis Gouttieres. S. G. Ante Y.
Look G. Ante. I.
H. ANTE. A.
H, An asperation, or note of asperation, composed of the two Greek
aspirations, which are figured in this sort ' ' we call it in our tongue
ach, others call it Ha, some Asche, and so diverse diversely, according to the
variety of their tongues. It was used of late that H in these two words
Nihil and Mihi, was pronounced ch, as Nichil Michi, but it is now (and that
worthily) rejected. The like fault had they in pronouncing the vowels with
asperations, and this is used by some yet: but they are justly reprehended in
these verses of Catul. against Arrius. Chommoda dicebat, si qua^do co^moda
vellet
dicere, and hinsidias Arrius insidias.
Arri' often spak cho^moda, when say co^moda would he,
Also for Insidias uttered Hinsidias.
Or thus.
Arrius said Chommoda, when
Commoda sound he would,
Eke Hinsidias used when
Insidias he should.
H, is never written in the end of a word, saving in these interiections,
ah, vah, oh, from the which some think A to be cut of, either by the figure
Syncope, or else by the imperfectnes of the sound. You shall beside find him
joined with all the vowels, and with these consona^tes, C, as Chremes, P, as
Philip, R, as Pyrrhus, T, as Thraso: And this adding of h, to the consonantes
was not used before Cicero his time, as he in his book De Oratore declares,
by these words. Quin ego ipse (inquit) cum scirem ita maiores loquutos esse,
vt nusquam nisi in vocali, asperatione vterentur, loquebar sic, vt pulcros and
cetegos, Triumpos and Cartaginem dicerem: aliquando, idque sero, conuitio
aurium cum mihi extorta veritas esset, vsum loque^di populo concessi, scientiam
mihi reseruaui. Also A. Gellius reports that in time past, they used not to
put their aspirations among their letters, as we do now, but to set them over
the letters as in the Greek tongue, which form of writing by chance he
found in a piece of work (as he thought) of Virgils own hand writing. In
the notes of Antiquity H, signifies Honestas, Hic, Hoc, Haeres, Haeredes,
Haec, Homo, Honestus, Habet, Huius, Hora, Honor, Honori, H, b, Haeres bonorum.
etc. Haberdasher, or he that sells all manner of wares. Minutarius.*
Tabernarius, rij. m. g. Mercier, ou autre qui vend en petites leges.
Haubergion, or coat of male. Lorica, ae, foe. ge. Un Haubergeon, ou cotte de
maille. S. To put on a haubergeon, or coat of maile. Lorico, as, aui. Vestir
un halecret. S.

Armed with an haubergeon. Loricatus, a, um. Vestu d'un harnois. S.

Ability. Valentia, Potentia, ae. Fortitudo, inis. Firmitas, tatis, f. g.
Vaillance. Call. Habit. Habitus, us. m. g. Habit. S. Habit for a Senator, or
Lord of the parliament. Abolla, lae. foe. ge. Vestis Senatoria, quasi abulla,
quod vndique sit bullata. Call. Habit of a Senator. Forentia, Vestes forenses,
Togae forenses. Columel. lib. 12. cap. 45. Hijs in foro praecipue vtuntur.
Habitation. Habitatio, Habitaculum, li. neut. genesis Habit^ S. Habitation under
the ground. Apogaeum.* Hable. Habilis, le. Potens, it is. Valens, it is. Firmus,
a, um. Fortis, te. Om. g. Vaillant, and puissant. S. Habraham, the first
Patriarch, interpreted the great, or ancient father, whom God restrained from
things visible, that he might see, and understand things invisible, thou shall
not (says God) be called Abram, but Abraham for I have appointed thee the
father of many nations. Abraham according to God his commandment, left his
parents and country, and went from thence, accompanied with his cousin Loath
into ye land of Canaa^. Genesis cap. 12. Abraha^us, mi. m. g. Hackney. Asturco,
Gradarius equus, Sonipes, dis. Haquenee. S. Hacke, or to choppe small. Concido,
dis. Hacher minu. S. Had, or that has been had. Habitus, a, um. Q' on a
eu. S. Haddocke fish. Asellus minor, Asellus, Callarias. Plin. Banchus, chi.
m. g. Egrefin. S. Hay. Foenum, ni. n. g. Du foin. S. Hay bottels to make.
Foenum in manipulos colligare. Botteler du foin. S. Hay cock. Foeni meta.
Mulon de foin. Pal. Hay forcke. Furca, Furcula, ae. Et furcilla, lae. foe. g.
diminut. Ang. A little forcke. Petite fourchette. S. Hay harvest. Foenisecium,
cij. n. g. Messis foeni. Hay house, or lofte. Foenile, lis. n. g. Vne fenil.
S. Hay a net. Cassis, Tendicula, ae. foe. genesis Bourcettes a chasser. Pal.
Hay, or to hay for conies. Cassio, as, aui.* Hayle, or hayle stones. Grando,
nis. foe. ge. Gresle. S. Et Grandinatus, a, um. Ang. Beaten with hail, or hurt
with hayle. Hayle, or to hayle. Grandino, as, aui. Gresler. S. Hayle, or
subject to hayle. Grandinosus, a, um. Subject a gresle. S. Halbard. Securis
Romana, Amazonia securis, Bipennis, nis. foe. g. Halabarde. S. Hale in sails.
Vela contrahere, vel demittere. Caler and abbaisser les voiles. S. Half.
Dimidius, a, u^. Semis, vel semi, indecli. Demi. Half a dance. Hemichorium,
rij. n. ge.* Half a foot. Semipes, dis. m. g. Demi pied. S. Half a foot in
height, or quantity, or of the height or quantity of half a foot.
Semipedalis, le. Semipedaneus, a, um. De demi pied. S. Half a God. Semideus.
Adiect. Demi dieu. S. Half a husband, or carle of the country.
Semigeorgicus, a, um. Semipaganus, a, um. Semirusticus, a, um. Demi paisant. S.
Half a live. Semiuiuus, a, u^. Qui n' ha que demi vie. S Half a man.
Semihomo, Semiuir, ri. mas. genesis Demi homme. S. Half a man, gelded, or not
fit for generation. Semimas, ris. Semiuir, ri. Spado, onis. Eunuchus, chi.
mas. ge. Chastre. S. Half a measure. Semetra.* Half an hour. Semi hora, ae.
f. g. Demi heure. S. Half an ounce. Semiuncia. Demie once. Et semiuncialis,
le. Ang. Of half an ounce. De demi once. Call. Half a pound. Selibra, brae.
f. g. Demie liver. S. Half ashamed, or to have some shame. Suppudet, bat.
Auoir quelque peu de honte. Call. I am half ashamed of that matter. Suppudet me
illius rei. Cic.

Half a sleep. Semisomnis, e. Semisomnus, a, um. A demi endormi. S. Half as
much more. Sesqui, Verbum in appositione inuentum. Autant and la moitie
d'aduantage. Half barrel, or kylderkyn. Semicadium. Half blind. Semicaecus,
a, um. Half burned. Semiustus, a, um. A demi brusle. Call. Half a bushel.
Semodius, dij. m. g. Un demi boisseau. Half circle. Hemiclus, Semicirculus,
li. m. ge. Demi cercle. Call. Half consumed and wasted. Semico^sumptus, a, u^.
Half cubite. Semissis, ssis. m. g. Half decayed. Semirutus, a, um. A demi
ruin. S. Half dead. Semianimis, e. Semimortuus, a, um. A demi mort. S. Half
deal, or portion of the whole. Aequilanium, nij, n. g. Dimidium ex toto. Call.
Half eaten. Semesus, a, um. Semicomestus, a, um. A Demi mange. S. Half empty.
Semiuacuus, a, um. Half full. Semiplenus, a, um. A demi plein. S. Half full
in eating and drinking. Semisatur, a, um. Half gown. Hemitoginm, gij. neut.
genesis Dimidia toga. Call. Half less. Dimidio minus. La moitie moins. S. Half
more. Dimidio plus. Cic. Half naked. Seminudus, a, um. A demi nud. S. Half
parted, or in two equal parts divided. Dimidiatus, a, um. Parti en deux. Call.
Half old. Semisenex, nis. A demi vieil. S. Half. Dimidius, a, um. Demi. S.
Half penny. Obulus, li. m. g. Maille. Pal. Half pound weight. Semissis, ssis,
m. g. Half quick. Sem^animus, a, um. Semiuiuus, a, um. A demi vif. S. Half
roasted. Semisatus, a, um. A demi rosti. S. Half sleaping. Semisomnis,
semisomnius, a, um. A demi endormi. S. Half sleaping, half waking.
Semisopitus, Semisoporatus, a, um. A demi endormi. S. Half sodden. Semicoctus,
a, um. A demi cuict. S. Half sword. Semispathium, thij. n. g. Demi espee.
Half verse. Hemistichium, chij. n. g. Demi verse. Call. Half wete. Semimadidus,
a, um. A demi moiste. Call. Half wild, half tame. Semifer, a, um. A demi
sauuage. S. For as much, as there be many mo words which begin with
half, then be here expressed, therefore note that the word whereunto you
add Semi, signifies but the moytie or half of that, which the word it
self signifies: As Semihora, Half an hour. Demie heure. S.

And also note, that this word Sesqui, joined to an other word, signifies
the extente or quantity of the word, and half as much more, as Sesquihora,
An hour and an half. Sesquiopera, A days journey in tillage and an half,
Sesquilustrum. etc.

Halibut fish. Vmbra, ae. Vmbrina, nae. foe. g. Halle. Aula, ae. Scena,
Tabernaculum, li, Atrium, ij. neut. genesis Vne sale. S. Halowe, or make holy.
Sacro, as. Sanctifico, as. Inauguro* as, aui. Consacrer. S. Hallowed,
consecrated, or dedicated to God. Sacer, ra, rum. Sacratus, Sacrosanctus, a,
um. Sanctificatus, a, um. Consecratus, ta, tum. Consacre, Saint, ou consacre a
dieu. S. Hallowed, or consecrated place. Sacrarium, Sanctuarium, rij. n. g. Un
lieu saint. S. Halowing. Sacratio, Sanctificatio, onis. Consecratio, onis.
foe. genesis Consecration. Half, or embrace. Amplector, eris. Complector,
Amplexor, aris. Amplexus dare, Tenere alique^ complexu. In complexum alicuius
venire. Embrasser. S. Lacertis collum complecti, Amplexu collum petere,
Inijcere brachia collo. Accoller. (quod ex Ad and Collu^ venire dicitur) To
half about the neck as children do their parents. Half, or a loving, or
amorous embracing. Amplexus mollis. Vne accollade, ou accollee doulce and
amoureuse. S. Halsing, or embracing. Amplexus, Complexus, us. m. g.
Embrassement. S. Halte. Claudico, as. Boister. S. Halter. Claudicator, oris. m.
g.* Halting. Clauditas, tatis. Claudicatio, onis, foe. genesis Boistement. Halter.
Capistrum, Laqueus, Restis, it is. dub. genesis Cheuastre. S. Haltred. Laqueatus, a,
u^. Capistratus, Capistro implicitus vel indutus. Encheuestre. S. Halter, or to
put on an halter. Capistro, as. Capistrum induere. Encheuestrer. S. Halter, or
to halter him self. Capistrare, Capistro se implicare, Capistru^ se induere.
S'encheuestrer. S Halter, or tie, or bind with a halter. Incapistro, as.
Encheuestrer. S. Halters end, or piece of a halter. Resticula, ae. Hamme.
Poples, it is. m. g. Le iarret. S. Hammer. Malleus, ei. Marculus, li. m. g.
Marteau. S. Et Malleolus. diminut. Ang. A little hammer. Martclet. S. Et Malleo,
as. Ang. To knock or work with a hammer. Hammer for a Calker. Stuparius
malleus. Hammer for a smythe. Pyrabola, ae. * Malleus, ei. and Tudes, itis. m.
g. Vt supra. Hammer headed knave. Tuditanus, Festus. Hammered. Malleatus, a,
um. Martele. S. Hammere, or to work with a hammer. Cudo, dis. Accudo, dis.
Malleo, as. Marteler. S. Hammere, or to work a thing eftsoon new with a
hammer. Recudo, is. Reforger. Hamper, or a basked of Osiers. Fiscus, fiscina,
Qualus, Calathus, Vimineum textum, Corbis, bis. f. g. vel secundum Lil. dub.
genesis Cophin, ou panier d' osier. S. Hand. Manus, us. f. ge. Main. S. Et
Manciola. * ac Manula, ae. f. g. Parua manus. Petite main. Call. A little or
small hand. The right hand. Dextera, vel dextra. La main dextre. S.

The left hand. Laeua, Sinistra. La main senestre.

Hands bloody. Respersae manus sanguine, Sanguinolentae manus, Cruentae, vel
Cruentatae manus. Mains ensanglantees. S. Handbreadth. Palmus, Palma, ae. foe.
ge. La mesure d' vne palm. S. Hereof be two kinds, the one is Palmus mayor,
containing twelve fingers. The other Palmus minor, containing four fingers.
Handbreadth space. Palmarium spatium. Col. Handcraft. Mechanica ars. Tout art
qui se fait d' esprit de la main. S. To give the hand. Dextram tendere.
Bailler la main. S.

To give into an others hands. Manibus alterius aliquid dare, In manum dare.
Bailler enter les mains d'autruy. S.

To fall into ones hands. Cadere in potestate^ alicuius. In manus alicuius
incidere. Cheoir enter les mains d'aucun. S.

To fight hand to hand. Manibus praelium facere. Combatre main a main. S.

To lay hands on one. Manus alicui intentare, Manus in aliquem inijcere.
Iecter les mains sur quelqu'vn. S.

Handcrafts man. Mechanicus, ci. m. g. Mechanique. Handful. Fasciculus
manualis, quem vulgus medicotum manipulum vocitat. Poignee. H. Handful.
Dragma, Manipulus, li. m. g. Vne poignee. Et Manupulatim. By handfuls.
Handkerchiefe. Caesitium, Ricula, ae. Sudariu^, Sudariolum, li. n. g.
Muccinium, ij. Strophiolum, li. n. g. Mouchoir. H. Handle. Tracto, as. vt Manu
tractare, Attrectare, Contrectare. Manier. S. Handle, ear, or hold of a
thing: as the ear of a pot, tankarde. etc. Ansa, ae. foe. genesis Anse. Et
Ansatus, ta, tum. That has a handle, or of handles. Qui ha vne anse ou des
anses. S. Handle of any tool, or weapon. Manubrium, brij. neut. ge. Capulus,
li. m. g. Le manche de quelque outil que ce soit. S. Handled to be. Tractor,
aris. Estre many. Handled to be often, or chaffed. Inter manus versari. Estre
souuent many. S. Handlesse, or which has but one hand. Mancus, a, um. Qui n'
ha qu'vne main. S. Handling. Contrectatio, Pertractatio, onis. Tractatus, tus.
m. g. Maniement. S. Handmayde. Ancilla. Ministratrix, Famula, Pedisequa, quae.
foe. g. Chambriere. S. Et Ancillula. Famulula, lae. foe. ge. Chambrillon. S. A
little handmaide. To do the office of an handmayde. Ancillor, laris. Fair
l'office de chambriere. S. Et Ancillaris, re. Pertaining to an handmayde.
Appartenant a chambriere. S.

Handmaydes office. Officium ancillare. L' office de chambriere. S. Handsawe.
Serrula, ae. f. g. Vne sciette, ou petite scie. S. Sie a main. Pals. Handsome.
Commodus, a, um. Decens, it is. Bien aduenant. S. Very handsome. Percommodus, da,
dum. Fort aduenant. S.

Handsome man. Co^modus homo. Dexter. Homme bien aduenant. S. Handsome weapon.
Enchiridion, ab En in, and Chir manus, aliquando non aspiratur. Eras. Rotorod.
Entitled his book Enchiridion Christ. milit. The handsome weapon for a
Christian knight, by translation, a wholesome book for a true Christian to carry
in his bosom.* Handsomely. Accommodate, Rotunde, Sub manus. Venuste, Concinne.
Aduenamment. S. Hand to hand. Cominus. vt Cominus gladijs rem gerebant. They
fought hand to hand. Ils combattoyent main a main. S. Hand towell. Mantile,
mantilium, lij. n. ge. Touaille a mains. S. Handworme, such as breadeth in
men's hands. Acarus, ri. m. ge. Un ciron. S. Hang, or to be hanged. Pendeo,
es. Suspendo, is. Pendre, ou estre pendu. Hang a far of. Promineo, es.
Propendeo, es.* Hang before. Praependeo, es. Pendre par deuant. S. Hang by,
nyghe, or to some thing. Appendo, dis. Appendeo, es. Pendre a quelque chose. S.
Hang him self. Vitam suspendio finire, Se in laqueum dare. Se pendre and
estrangler. S. Hang houering. Libro, as.* Hang nyghe. Appendeo, es. Vt supra.
Hang one thing by an other Nectere aliud ex alio. Hang over. Immineo, es.
Impendeo, es. Promineo, es. Pancher sur aucune chose. S. Go hang thy self, or
hence with a mischief. Abi in malam pestem, malumque cruciatum, Abi in malam
rem, Abi and suspende te. Va te pendre. S.

Hang up a lofte. Propendeo, es. Superpendeo, es. Pendre en hault. S. Hanged.
Suspensus, a, um. Appensus, sa, sum. Pendens, it is. Pendu, S. Et Suspendiosus,
sa, sum. That is hanged. Un pendu. S. Hanged to be. Pendeo, es, pependi. Estre
pendu. S. Hanged to be alofte or over. Suspendeo, es. Estre pendu en hault. S.
Hanged to be first. Praependeo, es. Estre pendu par deuant. S. Hanger, or
short sword. Semispathiu^, Sica, ae. Harp, es. f. g. Ensis falcatus.
Braquemar. S. Hanging. Suspendium, Suspensio, onis. foem. genesis Pendement. S.
Hanging a lofte or high, or that which hangs a lofte in the air, or high.
Pensilis, le. Qui est pendu en l' air. S. Hanging by, nighe, to, or upon.
Appendix, icis. f. ge. Appendicula. diminut. Hanginges of a house, which be of
Arras, Tapipistrie, or such like. Peripetasma, it is. Tapetum, ti. Aulea, orum.
Plagae, Plagula, Tapes, Tapete, Textilis pictura. Tapis, ou tapisserie. S. Et
Camerarius, a, um. Whatsoever hangs over pearches, or sealing of houses.
Hanging, or that which does hang. Pendens, Pe^silis, le. Pendulus, a, um.
Pendant. S. Hanging over. Prominentia, ae. foe. g. Imminentia, ae. foem. genesis
Hanging over, as that which does hang over. Prominens, it is. Imminens, it is.
Superimpendens, it is. Catul. Surpendant. S. Hangeman, or he that supplieth the
office. Carnifex, cis. Securis, Vindex rerum capitalium. Tortor, toris. m g.
Tollart, ou Bourreau. S. Truncator, Is the hang man that headeth men. Hang
man's act, or office. Carnificium. Et Carnificina, ae. f. g. L'office de
bourreau. S. Et Carnificinus, a, um. Ang. Pertaining to the hangemans act, or
office. Et Carnificina, ae. Ang. The place where evil doers are executed by
justice. Le lieu ou les malfaictures sont executez par justice. S. Hansell, or
a new years gift. Strena, ae. foem. genesis Estrayne. Pals. Hanuell knave.
Semissis homo.* Hap, which is good or evil fortune. Omen, Sors, it is.
Fortuna, ae. f. g. Chance, fortune. S. Hap harlot, couerlet so called. Matta,
Teges, it is. That brynges good hap. Dexter, Auspicatus, ta, tum, Prosper, a,
um. Qui port bon heur. S.

Happen. Accidit, bat. Cado, is. Euenio, is. Obuenio, is. Obtingo, is.
Praeuenio, is. Incesso, is. Aduenio, Co^tingo, is. Aduenir. S. As it happened.
Ita vt fit. I know not what will happen. Quid casurum sit, euenturum sit, quid
cadere, quid co^sequi possit, ignoro, non dispicio. quid tempus laturum sit,
exploratum non habeo. latent me quae nasci possunt. futura me fugiunt. non
assequor ea, non assequor coniectura, diuinare non possum, aut me^te
praecipere, quae far, parere, patefacere dies ipsa potest. futuri casus
aperti mihi no^ sunt, mihi non patent, me fugiunt, praetereunt, latent.

What is happened, or chanced? Quid est factum? Quid accidit? Qu' est il
aduenu? S.

Happen contrary. Contrauenire. Aduenir au contraire. S. Happen in, or fall in.
Incido, is. Vide Fall. Happen often. Vsuuenire. Aduenir souuent. S. Happen, or
succeed well. Commode cadere. Happened by chance. Fortuitus, a, um. Aduenu d'
adventure. S. Happened, gotten, or had by chance. Sortitus, a, u^. It
happens not as I wyshed it, or contrary to my desire. Non cecidit, vt
optabam. praeter meam voluntatem, contra voluntatem, contra quam volebam, secus
ac volebam, euenit. exitum res habuit alienum a voluntate, minime cum voluntate
congruentem, aduersum voluntati. exitus rei, euentus rei voluntati non
respondit. optatum exitum consecuta res non est, ad exitum non peruenit. res
pro voluntate non successit. cupiditatem fortuna frustrata est, fefellit,
delusit, irritam fecit. summa cupiditas, res plane nulla fuit. speratum euentum
sortita res non est, nacta non est, adepta non est.

Happy. Auspicatus, Beatus, Foelix, cis. Fortunatus, Ominosus, Prosper, ra,
rum. Prosperus, ra, um Faustus, ta, tum. Heureux. S. To be more happy or
fortunate. In meliore causa esse. Estre plus heureux. S.

Happily, by chance, lotte, or fortune. Accidenter, Forte, Fortuito, Sortito,
Sorti. Par sort. Call. Happily, or with good luck. Auspicato, Fortunatim,
Ominose. * Fortunate, Foeliciter, Beat fauste, Prospere. Heureusement. S.
Happiness. Beatitas, Beatitudo, Foelicitas, tatis. f. g. Heurete, heureusete.
S. Harbingers that appointe lodginges for the train of princes. Epistathmi,
Designatores cretarij, vel Mancionarij designatores. Bud. To harborowe,
fallowe, or read dear. Stabulari damas, aut ceruos. Heberger. S.

Harborowe, or to receive one into lodging. Hospitio accipere, vel excipere.
Esberger aucun. S. Harboring, or lodging of dear. Stabulatio, onis. f. genesis
Establage, hebergement. S. Harbourles, or lacking lodging, or having none.
Inhospes, it is.* Inhospitus, ta, tum. Hard. Durus, a, um. Dur. S. Hard and
obstinate. Pertinax, acis. om. g. Obstine. S Hard and unflexible, rather apt
to break then bow, rigorous and hard. Praefractus, a, um. Rigoreux, and dur.
S. Hard as a bone. Osseus, a, um. Hard as Oak. Robustus, ta, tum. Robuste. S.
Hard by, or nighe. Sub.* Apud, Circa, Iuxta, Propter, Secundum, Secus, Prope,
Ad. Aupres. S. Hard by the gate. Proxime ianuam. Tout aupres de la port. S.
Hard fare. Aridus victus. Hard for lack of moystnes. Rigidus, a, um. Dur. S.
Hard iron. Aciale, lis.* Hard man. Homo rigidus, Inclemens, Acerbus. Homme dur
and rude. S. It is an hard matter to bring to pass. Difficilis res est,
laboriosa, non facillima, minime facilis, difficultatis haber, negotij, laboris
plurimu^. non ea res est, quae facile, paruo negotio, leui labor, non magno
studio possit effici. magnae difficultatis, multi laboris, non parui negotij,
non operis exigui, laboriosa, operosa, grauissima^ res est. in qua sudandum
sit, sustinendi labores, multum operae ponendum, vigilandum, excubandu^ animo
sit, non leuiter laborandum, studij multu^, industriae plurimum sit adhibendum.

Hard nigarde, or straight person. Restrictus, Parcus, Tenax. Vide Nigarde.
Hard, or difficulte to achieue. Arduus, a, um. Difficilis, le. Difficil and mal
aise d' atteindre. S. Hard oration. Scythica concio. Hard reason, or sense.
Praecisa oration. Hard somewhat. Duriusculus, a, um. diminut. Dedurus, a, um. Un
peu dur. Call. Duret. S. Hard, stiff, or toughe to be. Rigeo, es. Estre roide
and dur. S. Hard, stiff, or toughe to wax. Rigesco, scis. S' endurcir. S.
Hard to become. Dureo, es. Obdureo, es. Obduresco, scis. Deuenir dur. S. Hard
to be, as brawne and such like. Calleo, es. Concalleo, Occalleo, es. Hard to
wax as horn. Cornesco, scis. Deuenir dur comme corn. S. Hard to wax.
Duresco, scis. Obduresco, scis. S'endurcir. S. Et Callescere, Concallere,
Indurescere, Obdurere, Rigescere, Induere duritiem. Idem. Hard to wax, as
brawne and such like. Occalesco, scis. Idem. Hard wine. Vinum asperum. Vin
rude, degouteux. H. Hard winter, or very cold. Saeuissima hyems. Hardly, or
scantly. Vix, Vix dum. Vide Scant. Harden, or make hard. Duro, as. Obduro, as.
Eduro, as. Induro, as. Obducere callum. Endurcir. S. Harden much, or make very
hard. Eduro, ras. Praeduro, as. Fort endurcir. S. Hardes of flax, hemp, or
towe. Stupa, ae. foem. ge. Estoupe de chanure ou de lin. S. Hardy. Audax, cis.
Audaculus, Audens, it is. Praeditus audacia. Hardi. S. Hardy and valiant. Audax
viribus. Hardi and vaillant. To be very hardy. Audacia abundare. Estre fort
hardi. S.

Hardely, or boldly. Confidenter, Audacter, Fidenter, Audenter, Intrepide, Non
dubitanter, Libere. Hardiment. To speak hardely, and without fear. Dicere
animo praesenti, Porrectiore front, Audacter. Dire hardiment and sans crainte.
S.

Hardly. Difficile, Dure, Duriter, Acerbe, Austere. Durement. S. Hardened.
Duratus, Obduratus, a, um. Indurci. S. Hardness. Duritia, Durities, Duritas,
tatis. foe. genesis Dure^e. S. Hardness in sparing expenses. Tenacia, Tenacitas,
tatis. foe. g. Chicete. S. Hardness of heart, or stomach. Rigor, oris. m. g.
Immisericordia, ae. f. g. Durete de cueur. S. Hardness of the hands, or feet.
Callus, li. m. genesis Callum, li. n. g. Un call. S. Hare. Lepus, oris. m. genesis
Lieure. H. Young hare, or a liueret. Lepusculus, li. mas. ge. Un leurault. S.

Hares milk. Leporinum lac. Du laict de lieure. S. Hare, or conny. Dasypus,
podis. Un lieure ou counin. S. Hare fish. Lagois. Horat. Harefoote herb.
Lagopus, Leporinus pes, Leporis cuminum. Pied de lieure. Dod. Hare pype snare.
Laqueus, Tendicula, ae. foe. genesis Harishe, or of a hare. Leporinus, a, um. De
lieure. S. Harken, or to give ear. Adhibere aures, Arrigere aures, Audio, is.
Praebere, vel Surrigere aures, Auscultare, Aurem praebere, Operam ausculta^do
dare, Aliquid in aures suas summa attentione recipere vel concipere. Sermoni
alicuius dare operam vel vacare. Escouter. S. Harken secretly and privily what
is said. Subausculto, tas. Escouter secrettement and en cachette quelque chose
qu' on dit. S. Harken what one says, to take advantage. Aucupari sermonem.
Harlot. Alicaria, Ignis, Lupa, Meretrix, Proseda, Scortum, Trica. Putain. H.
Vide Hoar and Whore. Harlot, or concubine. Amica, cae. foe. g. Concubine. H.
Harlot, or concubyne to a wedded man. Pellex, cis. Succuba, Pallaca. Concubine
d' un homme marie. H. Harlot, whom we call a driueling queen, a stynking
harlot, or a filthy queen. Scraptia, Scurpea, Meretrix sordida, and deformis
dicitur. Call. Harlots apparel. Succento, nis. vt Nonius. Succe^tonem quoque
legimus meretriciae vestis genus apud veteres fuisse. Harlots which dress
them with stinking oyntementes. Scoeniculae.* Harlots used in the stead of
wives. Summaenianae vxores. Harm, or loss. Dispendium, ij. Maleficium,
Maleficentia, Noxa, Noxitudo. Amissio, onis. Damnum, ni. Detrimentum, ti.
Perditio, onis. foe. ge. Perte. S. Vide Damage and Endamagement. Harm doer, or
hurtefull. Maleficus, a, um. Noxius, a, um. Malfaisant. S. Harm, or to do
harm. Laedo, is, si. Noceo, es. Noxam facere, Pulso, as. Incommodo, as.
Officio, cis. Obesse, Operam mala^ dare. Nuire. S Harmefull, or hurtefull.
Dispendiosus, a, um. Nocuus, a, um. Noxius, a, um. Nocens, it is. om. genesis
Nuisant, ou dommageable. Call. Harmfully. Malefice, Noxie, Noce^ter. Auec
nuisa^c. Harneis. Arma, orum. n. g. Harnoys. Pals. Harneis for horse, or mule,
or trapper for them. Phalera, ae. Stragula, oru^. n. g. Strata, oru^. Ephippia,
orum. n. g. Harnoys a cheual. S. Harnays for legs. Ocreae, arum. foe. ge.
Armure de iambes. S. Harnaysed horses. Ephippiati, vel phalerati equi. Et
Ephippiati equites, Be they which ride such barded, or harnyshed horses.
Harnaysed. Armatus, a, um. Arm. S. Harnaysed about the legs. Ocreatus, a,
um. Arm par les iambes. Call. Harnaysed man. Armatus, ti. * Homo armatus,
Armiger, ra, rum. Armigere. S. Harp. Chelys, Cithara, Lyra, ae. f. g. Vne
harp. S. Harp, or to play on the harp. Citharizo, as, Pulsare lyram. Canere
fidibus. Harper. Harper. Citharista, Fidicen, Lyricen, Citharoedus, di.
Citharistes, ae. Lyristes, ae. m. g. Harpeur. And the woman harper,
Citharistria, Fidicina, ae. f. g. Femme qui jove de la harp. S. Harrowe.
Ircipes, Occa, cae. f. g. Cratis occatoria. Vne hearse. Harrowe corn, or land.
Deocco, as. Occo, as. Inocco, as. Herser. S. Harrowe corn when it is in
grass, called back harrowe, to purge away the weeds. Pectino, as. Sarrio,
is. Sarculis fodio, vel purgo, quod fit cu^ segetes leuiter Scalpendo rastris a
noxijs herbis purgamus. Harrowe sled. Traha, ae. foe. ge. Harowed. Occatus, a,
um. Hearse. S. Harrowed after the manner of back harrowyng. Pectitus, a, um.
Sarritus, vel Sartus. * Harrower. Occator, oris. m. g. Herseur. Harrower, when
it is back harrowed, or weeder. Sarritor, Sartor, oris.* Bineur. S. Harrowyng.
Occatio, onis. foe. g. Hersement. Et Occatorius, a, um. Belonging to harrowyng.
Servant a herser. S. Heart. Cor, dis. n. g. Cueur, ou Coeur. S. Heart and
courage. Animus, Pectus, toris, neut. ge. Cueur and courage. S. An hearty
friend. Amicus ex animo. Ami de cueur.

Do a thing with good heart and will. Ex animo facere, Libenti animo. Fair
quelque chose de bon cueur. S.

My pretty sweet heart. Meum corculum, Anime mi. Mon petit cueur. S.

To expou^de by heart. Memoriter, ex memoria exponere. Par cueur. S.

To learn, or get by heart. Prosequi memoria, Aliquid memoriae mandare,
Ediscere, vel memoriter ediscere. Apprendre par cueur. S.

To say by heart. Recitare, Pronuntiare, Reddere aliquid sine scripto, vel
abiecto libro. Dire par cueur. S.

To discover the secrets of his heart to one. Credere suum animum alicui, Animum
alicui aperire. Descourir son cueur a aucun. S.

To move the hearts. Animos afficere, Motum animis afferre, Commouere animos.
Esmouuoir les cueurs. S.

A man of great heart and courage. Magnanimus, Animosus, Armatus homo. Homme de
grand cueur and courage. S.

Grief or pain, or disease of the heart. Cardiacus morbus. Mal de cueur. S.

Faintness of heart. Syntexis, Defectio animi, Deliquium, ^. n. g. Defaillance
de cueur. S.

I am evil at my heart. Animo male est, Dolet mihi cor. Le cueur me fait mal.
S.

Heart beast. Ceruus, ui. m. g. Cerf. Et Ceruinus, a, um. Of a heart. De cerf.
S. Heart having no sharp branches, or tynes in his horns. Subulo, onis. m.
g. It is called a spitter. Plin. lib. 11. cap. 17. Heart of Oak. Robur, oris.
Robor, oris. Quercus, cus. foe. g. Un chesne. S. Heart stringes, or the parts
about the heart. Praecordia, orum. n. g. Les parties autour du cueur. S. Hearts
ease, or the quietness of mind. Quietus animi status, Animi tranquillitas, Men's
omnibus affectibus immunis, ac libera. Euthymia, ae. foe. g. Tranquilite d'
esprit. Call. Hartesease herb, which is the yelowe violet. Caltha, Leucoion.
Viola flammea, Viola ga^ae, Herba clauillata, Herba trinitatis. Pensees. H.
This word Leucoion, Is also the general latin to all kind of violettes.
Hartestonge, an herb. Hemionium, nij. Asplenum, ni. Hemionitis, Phillitis,
Pyrgitis, Scolopendria, Lingua ceruina. Langue de cerf. H. Hearty of courage.
Animatus, a, um. Vide Courageous. Hearty, not being sick. Sanus, Valens in
corpore, recte valens. Hartles. Exanimis, e. Exanimus, a, u^. Sans ame. Call.
Harvest. Autumnus, ni. Messis. Le temps d' automne. S Le temps de moisson, la
moisson. S. Et Autumnalis, le. Of harvest, or pertaining to harvest. D'automne.
Harvest man. Messor, ris. mas. ge. Moissonneur. S. Et Messorius, a, um. Of an
harvest man. De moissonneur. S. Hasarde, or chance. Sors, Cleros, Clerus, ri.
m. ge. Hasard. S. Hasarde. Alea, ae. f. g. Hasard. S. Hasarder. Aleator, Aleo,
onis. m. g. Hasardeur. S. Hasarding house. Alearium, Aleatorium, Forum
aleatorium. Sueto. Haste a pace, or to make speed. Accelero, as. Appropero, as.
Celero, as. Contendo, is. Depropero, as. Festino, as. Pergo, is. Propero, as.
Remouere mora^, Rumpere moras. Ardeo, es. Maturo, as. Haster. S. Haste a pace,
to go before it be time. Praefestino, as. Ante tempus festino. Se haster auant
qu' il en soit temps. Call. Haste for fear. Trepido, as. Haste forth. Vrgeo,
es, si. Virgil. Haster. S. Haste much. Praefestino, as. Fort haster. S. Haste
maker. Accelerator, Properans, it is. Festina^s, it is. Qui se haste. S. Haste,
hasting, or making speed, or hastiness. Acceleratio, Properatio, Festinatio,
Propera^tia, Rapiditas, tatis. f. g. Hastiuete. S. Hasty. Citus, a, um.
Festinus, a, um. Impetuosus, a, u^. Properus, a, um. Praeceps, itis, Hastif. S.
Hasty for fear. Trepidus, a, um.* Hasty much, or very hasty. Praeproperus, a,
um. Fort hastif. S. Hasty to anger. Praeceps in iram. Hasty, or vehement in
doing. Ardens, it is. Vehement. Hasty, or rash. Praeceps, it is. Temerarius, a,
um. Temeraire. S. Hasty, or wylfull person, full of words. Rabula, ae. mas.
genesis Hasty pears. Praecocia pyra, Ocyssima pyra. Poyres hastiues, ou de
hastiueau. S. Hasty to be in doing. Ardeo, es, si. Virg. Haster. S. Hastily.
Festinanter, Festinato, Mature, Propere, Properatim, Propera^ter, Raptim,
Trepide. Curriculo, Cursim, In praeceps. Hastiuement. S. Hastily done without
aduisement. Tumultuarius, a, um. Faict a la haste, sans aduisement. S. Hastily
for fear. Trepide, Trepida^ter. Vide Fear. Hastily, or fumishely. In
praeceps, Praecipitanter. Hastiuement sans aduis. S. Hastily, or rashely. In
praeceps, Praecipitanter, Temere, Tumultuario. Idem. Hastily, or very hastily.
Praefestine, Praefestinatim. Fort hastiuement. S. Hastiness, or rashenesse.
Praecipitatio, Praecipitantia, ae. f. g. Precipitation. S. Vide Haste. Vt
supra. Hastiness of judgment, or to great haste to judge. Praepropera
iudicandi cupiditas. Precipitation de iugment, trop grand haste de iuger. S.
Hatche eggs. Excludo, is. Excudo, is. vt Excudere, vel Excludere oua. Esclorre
des oeufs. S. Hatche of a door. Antica.* Hatche of a ship where they walk.
Pergula, ae. f. genesis Le tillac. H. Hatched, as birds, or chickens be.
Effoetus, a, um. Fotus, ta, tum. Couue. S. Hatches of a ship. Fori, orum.
masc. genesis Le tillac, le besle. S. Hatchet. Securicula, lae. f. g. Vne
hachette. S. Hatching of chickens. Pullatio, onis. foem. ge. Conuee de
poulsins. S. Hate, disdain, or to despise. Abhominor, aris. Abhorreo, es. Odi,
sti, it, isse. Prosequi odio. Odio habere, Odium in aliquem habere. Hair. S.
Hate with disdain. Fastidio, is. Hair auec desdaing. S Hate privily in the
heart. Simultates suscipere. Hate the state of marriage. Ab re vxoria abhorrere.
Hair l' estat de marriage. S. To get him self hate, or envy. Incendere in se
odia. Inuidiam and odium suscipere, Cumulare sibi inuidiam. Se fair hair.

We hate him not. Non alienum animum ab eo habemus. Nous ne le hayons point. S.

Hated. Fastiditus, a, um. Inuidiosus. Inuisus, a, um. Odiosus, a, um.
Abhominatus, ta, tum. Hay. S. Hated of God, and men. Deo hominibusque inuisus.
Hay de dieu and de hommes. S. To be hated. Esse odio, Odium far, In odio
esse, Incurrere in odia, Suscipere odium alicuius. Estre hay. S.

Hated to be of the enemies. Odio apud hosts laborare. Estre hay des ennemis.
S. To be very much hated. Peruenire in maxima^ inuidiam, flagrare inuidia, vel
conflagrare, Opprimi inuidia, Inuidia aestuare. Estre fort hay. S.

Hated extremely. Perosus, a, um. vt Germani Romany perosi sunt. The Germans
are hated of the Romans. So is Perosus passive with a dative case: and active
with an Accusative: vt foemineum genus perosi. Hating women. Hater. Exosus,
Osor, oris. m. ge. Haineur. S. Hater of man's company. Misanthropos, Osor
hominum, Qui odit homines, Qui fugit hominum congressus. Qui hait les hommes.
Call. Hater of women, or women's company. Misogynes. Hatred. Fastidium,
Inuidentia, Inuidia, Odium, Offensio, Stomachus, chi. m. g. Haine. S.
Particular, or private hatred. Priuatum odium. Particuliere haine. S.

Hatred hidden and dissembled. Compressum atque tacitum odium, Occlusum odium.
Vne haine cachee and dissimulee. S. Hatred couuert or hidden. Simultas, tatis.
foe. genesis Vne haine couuerte. S. Hatred rooted in. Inustum odium, Insitum
penitus odium. Vne haine enracinee. S. Hatred mortal. Intestinum odium, Odium
acerbissimum, vel Internecinum. Haine mortelle. S. Hatred immortal. Odium
infinitum, Immortale odium. Vne haine immortelle. S. Obstinate hatred. Odium
inexpiabile, Inexorabile, Pertinax. Haine obstinee. S.

Old, or inueterate hatred. Inueteratum odium, vel vetus. Haine inueteree. S.

To get hatred. Odium re aliqua conciliare. Acquerir haine. S.

To be hated, or in hatred of all the world. In odio esse omnibus, Odio esse
apud omnes, venire in odium omnibus. Estre en la haine de tout le monde. S.

To bring one into hatred. In inuidiam aliquem adducere, Concitare inuidiam
alicui, vel conflare. Mettre en haine. S.

Hatred privy. Latens odium, Dissimulatum odium. Haine couuerte. Call.
Hateful. Odiosus, a, um, Inuidiosus, Stomachosus, a, um. Hayneux, odieux. S.
Hatefully. Inuidiose, Odiose, Stomachose. Auec ennuy. S. Hating God and man.
Impius, a, um.* Hatte. Galerus, ri. Galeru^, ri. Petasus, si. Vmbella, Causia,
Pileus viatorius solemn defendens. Chapeline, chapeau. H. But Petasus, and
Causia, Signify a great hatte. Un grand chapeau. S. Hatte, after the manner
that priests did wear in old time. Albogalerus. Festus. Hatte band. Spira,
ae. Cord, ou bendeau entortille. H. Hatted. Petasatus, a, um. Sueton. Have.
Habeo, es. Auoir. S. Have a dymme sight. Caeculto, as.* Have a good hope. Auram
captare. Have a good name. Audire been. Have an ill name. Audire male. Have, or
take away. Aufero, rs. Oster. S. Apage. Dictio comica. Have by chance,
fortune, or lotte. Sortior, iris. Auoir par sort. S. Have compassion. Misereor,
eris. Commiseresco, scis. Miseresco, scis. Auoir pity d' aucun. S. Have
familiar communication with one. Sociare sermonem, Confer sermonem cum
aliquo. S. Have great loss. Calamitatem subire. Have in estimation, or
reverence. Colo, is. Veneror, raris. Adoro, as. Auoir en reverence. Have in
memory, mind, or remembrance. Memini, isti. Recordor, aris. Reminiscor,
sceris. Teneo, es. Vide remember. Have in primarie possession. Occupo, as.
Occuper, usurper. Have leave. Accipere potestate^, copiam vel gratia^. Have
like estimation or power, or to be of like calling. Aequipolleo, es. Parem
potestatem habere. Have much misery. Aerumnas subire. Have regard, or
respect. Respicio, is. Regarder. Have small affiau^ce in one. Derogare fiducia^
alicui. Have small credit. Authoritate egere, Non optime audire, Opinione
laborare, Nihil dignitati atque opinioni alicuius tribuere. N' auoir pas bon
credit. S. Haven or port. Ostium, ij. Portus, us. m. g. Un port. S. Portuosus,
a, um. Full of havens. vt Portuosus locus. The place where are many havens. Le
lieu ou il y ha plusieurs ports. S. I am in the haven, port, or sauegarde. In
portu sum. Ie suis a port. S.

To fly into the haue^. In portu^ confugere. Se iecter dedens le port. S.

The edge, or corner of the haven. Cornu portus. Le coing du port.

Having. Habens, Gaudens, Possidens, Tenens, it is. Part. Ayant. S. Having his,
or their own desire, or wyshe. Voti compos. Having power of divine things.
Diuinipotens, it is. Qui in diuinis potestatem habet. Call. Hawe in the eye.
Vnguis, guis. m. genesis Membranula oculi sub angulo oriens, quae ita augescit
quandoque vt pupillam operiat. Paille. Pals. Hawk. Accipiter, tris. m. g.
Oiseau de proye. S. Hawk, called a busharde. Buteo, onis. m. ge. Oiseau nomme
Buisart, ou Buzart. S. Hawk, called a hoby. Accipiter palumbarius. H. Hawk,
called a kesterell. Tinnunculus. Quercelle, ou cercelle. H. Hawk, called a
Marlion. Alietus, ti. Aesalo. Esmerillon. H. Hawk, called a Ryngtayle.
Pygargus, gi.* Hawk, called a Sakre. Accipiter hierax.* Hawk, called a
Sparhauke. Nisus, si. * Accipiter fringillarius. Espreuier. H. Hawk, or to
hunte for birds. Aucupor, aris. Chaser aux oiseaux. S. Hauker. Auceps, pis.
Vide Faulconer. Hauking or birding. Aucupatio, Aucupium, ij. n. g. Oiselerie.
S. Haunce of a door, or other like. Limen, inis. Supercilium, lij. n. g. Limen
superum. Le linteau. S. Haunce, or transumpt. Hyperthyron.* Haunche. Clunis,
nis. Coxa, ae. f. g. La hanche. S. Haunche of venison. Clunis ferina. Haunte.
Colo, is. Frequento, as. Celebro, as. Versor, aris. Conuersor, aris. Hanter.
Haunte, or to keep company with harlots. Scortor, aris. Paillarder. S. Haunted,
or yt is much used. Celebratus, a, um. Frequens, it is. om. g. Hante. S. vt
Locus frequens. Un lieu fort han^e. S. A place very much hanted. Haunter of
bawdy houses. Ganeo, onis. mas. ge. Un haunteur de tauuernes bordelieres. S.
Haunter of other men's tables, as an unbidden gueste. Parasitus, ti. m. genesis Un
parasite patelin, ou iaquet. S. Haunter of whores, or one given to lechery.
Libidinosus, a, um. Addonne a paillardise, Impudique. S. Hawte minded, or
having an elated or surprysed heart. Ambitiosus, a, um. Insolens, it is.
Sublatus, a, um. Superbus, Turgidus, a, um. Elatus, a, um. Fastosus, a, um.
Haltain. S. Hawtely. Sublate, Elate. Haultainement. S. Hawtines of mind.
Fastus, Spiritus, Elatio, sieve Excelsitas, aut sublatio animi. Haultainete. S.
Hawthorne beries. Zura.* Aphrorum lingua seme^ paliuri vocatur conrra
Scorpiones efficacissimum. Plin. lib. 24. cap. 11. Call. Hawthorne tree. Spina
alba. Espine blanch. Pal. Aubespin. S.
H. ANTE. E.
HE. Ille, Ipse. Celuy. S. He him self. Ipse ille, Ille ipse. Cestuy. S. vt
Ille ipse diuinationis author Chrysippus. Cestuy la Crisip, qui. etc.
Chrysippus him self was the author. etc. Head. Caput, Cephale, Cephalis. La
test. Et Capitellum. diminut. Ang. A little or small head. Testelette, petite
test. Call. Head cut of. Amputatum vel praecisum caput. Test coupee. S. Great
head. Turpe caput. Virg. Grande test. S.

To uncover his head. Caput aperire. Descouurir sa test. S.

To put his head up above the water. Efferre caput vndis. Mettre la test horse
de l' eaue. S.

Head, being piked and sharp above like a sugar lofe. Argutum caput. Head
band, or head fillet. Vitta, ae. f. g. Un bend ou ruben de test. S. Head of
a conduite. Diuidiculum, li. n. g. Head of a darte, iauelin or spear.
Sicilices, Spiculum, li. n. g. Le fer d' vne lance. S. Head of a dear. Cornua.
Vide Heads. Head of an arrowe, or shafte. Spiculum, li. Aculeus sagittae. La
poincte du fer d' vne fleiche. S. Head of a great nail. Bulla, ae. f. g. Test
de gros clous esleue en bossette. H. Head of a ponde, or stagne. Obthuramentum
stagni. Plin. La bond d' un estang. S. Head, or chapter of a pillar.
Epystilium, ij. neut. g. Le chapeteau d' vne colomne, ou pilier. Head, or
captain of rebels, or seditious folk or other mischievous persons, or of
the act it self. Factionum princeps, Malorum caput. To head, or beheade one.
Auferre caput alicui, Abscindere caput ceruicibus, Decutere caput alicui,
Demetere caput ferro, Recidere caput, Minuere capite. Bud. Descapiter quelqu'vn.

Headed to be. Lucre capite, Plecti capite. Auoir la test trenchee. Headed, or
chopped of. Truncatus, a, um. Tronque, ou coupe. S. Headed with iron or steal,
as an arrowe, darte, or Iauelyn. Praepilatus, a, um. Far. S. Heady, or having
a great head. Capito, nis. mas. ge. Qui ha gross test. S. Heady, or obstinate
in opinion. Capito, onis. Cic. Headyng, or chopping of, or clipping of any
thing. Tru^catio, onis. f. g. Troncation. S. Headles, or without a head.
Acephalus, a, um. Sans Test. S. Acephali. Were heretics having no guide.
Headling, or which does without advise, hasty. Praeceps, pitis. Qui fait sans
aduis, hastif. S. Headling. Praecipitanter. Inconsiderate, hastiueme^t,
inconsidereement. Call. Headman of a city, town, or country. Optimas, it is.
Proceres, rum. Primas, it is. com. genesis Vide Chief ruler. Headman of a Jury.
Praeiurator, oris. m. g. Headmans office, rule, condition, or state. Optimatus,
us. Primatus, us. m. g. Headmans oath. Praeiuramentum, ti. n. g.* Heads of
dear. Cornua, nuum. n. g. Testes de cerfs. Head stall for a bridle. Aurea, ae.
Frontale, lis. n. ge. Reticulum scorteum, quo caput equi induitur, Habena
verticaria. La testiere d' un cheual. S. Heal, cure, or to remedy. Curo, as.
Medeor, eris. (verb. depo. car. praet. and supin.) Medico, as. Medicor, aris.
Sano, as. Superstito, as. Consano, as. Emendo, as. Sanitatem restituere, Sanum
facere, Medicinam facere, Medicina^ adhibere, Remedium facere. Guarir,
mediciner, ou remedier. S. Heal perfectly, or sou^dly. Percuro, as. Guarir du
tout Health. Integritas corporis, Salubritas, Sanitas, Salus, Valentia,
Valetudo, nis. f. g. Sante. S. Health causing, or that delivers from peril.
Sospitalis, le. om. g. Qui deliure de peril. S. Health giver, or that saves
and warranteth from peril. Sospes, it is. com. ge. Qui sauue, and garantit d' un
danger. S. Healthful, or in health to keep, preserve, or save. Sospito, as.
Vegeto, as. Garder sain and sauue. Healthful to be. Sanesco, scis. Valeo, es.
Valesco, Vegeo, es. Sanus fio. Estre sain. Call. Healthful to wax. Sanesco,
Valesco, scis. Conualeo, es. Inualeo, es. Emergere ex incommoda valetudine, Ad
vitam transire, Se recolligere, Sanum fieri. Se guarir. S. Healthfully, or in
heathe, or like a whole and perfect man. Salutariter, Salubriter, Saniter.
Sainement. Healthy, or healthful. Incolumis, Saluber, ris, re. Salutifer, ra,
rum. Salutaris, re. Sanus, a, um. Sospitalis, le. Valens, it is. Sain, and
Salutaire. S. Heap. Aceruus, ui. Agger, ris. Cumulus, Congeries, Sagma, ae. f.
g. Monceau. S. Heap of any thing in the form of an hill. Mons, it is. m. genesis
Monceau de quelque chose. S. Heap of stones. Agger, eris. Lythologema.*
Congeries lapidum. Monceau de pierres. Heap, or tufte of grene branches, or
ympes. Pa^pinarium, rij. neut. genesis Congeries virentium ramusculorum. Call. Et
Pampinarius, a, um. Pertaining to a heap or tuft. Heap together. Exaggero,
as. Entasser, mettre en un tas. Call. Heap up. Aggero, as. Accumulo, as.
Agglomero, as. Coaceruo, as. Congero, ris. Exaggero, as. Aceruo, as, aui.
Amasser en un monceau. Accumuler. S. Heap upon heap, or lay one heap upon
an other. Accumulo, as. Exaggero, as. Repono, nis. Congero, is. Amasser l' un
sur l' autre. S. Heaped, the one on the other. Aggestus, a, um. Co^gestus,
Exaggeratus, a, um. Accumulatus, a, um. Entasse, Amasse l' un sur l' autre.
Call. Heaped up, or cast on heaps. Congestitiuus, a, u^. Congestus, a, um.
Amasse. Heapy, or full of heaps. Aceruosus, a, um. Heapyng together. Aggestus,
us. Exaggeratio, Accumulatio, onis. f. g. Amassement. Heapely, or by heaps,
without order. Aceruatim, Aggestim, Accumulate. Par monceaux. Call. Hear.
Audio, is. Arrigere aures, Petere auribus, Recipere in aures, Accipio, is.
Ouir. S. To hear attentively, or diligently. Arrigere aures, Curam auribus
accommodare. Ouir attentiuement, ou diligemment.

To hear willingly. Aequo animo attendere. Ouir volunteers. S.

To hear the people willingly. Se facilem praebere in hominibus audiendis.
Ouir volunteers les gens. S.

To hear say. Audire, Inaudire, Intelligere, Accipere, Venire ad aures. Ouir
dire. S.

To speak by hear say. Audito nuntiare, Auditione, vel ex auditu. Dire
quelque nouuelle par ouir dire. S.

To know by hearesaye. Accipere auditione, and fama, Rumorem authorem habere,
Nihil praeter audiu^ habere. Scauoir par ouir dire, and par le bruit

A judge, that will not hear the parties speak. Iudex, qui adeundi sui
potestatem no^ facit, Copiam sui adeuntibus inuidet, Non patitur secum agi. Un
judge qui ne veu^t point ouir parler les parties.

I must hear what this man means or thinks. Audire habeo quid hic sentiat.
IN ay a ouir que cestuy sent. S.

You hear all the matter. Habes rem omnem. Tu ois tout l' affair. S.

To hear the master. Dare operam praeceptori. Ouir un maistre. S.

Hear deafely, or little, or somewhat. Subaudio, is. Subausculto, as. Ouir un
peu. Call. Hear dilege^tly. Ausculto, as. Vigilo, as. Aure^ praebere, Operam
auscultando dare, Aliquid in aures suas immittere, Sermoni alicuius operam
dare, vel vacare. Escouter. S. Hear hardly, or unwillingly. Obaudio, dis. *
Ide^ olim, quod obedio, significabat. Fest. Nest. Hear indifferently, or
equally. Accipere aequis auribus. Hear. Capillus, Crinis, Cinnus, Pilus,
Villus, Coma, Capillitium, Caesaries. Cheueul perruque, cheuelure, poil. H.
Hear band, or hear lace. Crinale, lis. Vitta crinalis, Redimiculum, li.
Taenia, ae. Fascia crinalis. Bendeau. H. Hear brayded, trymmed, or curled.
Cincinnus, ni. Intortus capillus, Anulus, Coma depicta. Cirrus, ri. m. ge.
Cheueul entortille, passefillon. H. He which has his hears trimmed, or
crisped. Cincinnatus, a, um. Cirratus, a, um. Qui ha les cheueuls regrillez. S.
Hear of the head. Capillitium, Capillamentum, Coma. Cheueul, ou poil, ou
parruque de la test. H. Hear, or hayerclothe. Capillatium velum, Cilicium,
cij.. n. genesis Vne here. Hear that is borrowed, as is the hear of such brydes
whose hear is not long, or is evil colored. Coma adoptiua, Adscititia,
Galericulu^, Sutile capillamentum. Faulse cheuelure, ou perruque. Hear, or to
make hear, or heary. Capillo, las. Capillos facere Fair cheueulx, produere
cheuelux. Call Heareles, or without hear, or having no hear Depilis, le, om.
genesis Sans poil. S. Hears of women, laid out over their foreheads. Antiae,
arum. f. g. Capronae, Anteuentuli, Prope^duli crines. Cheueulx de femmes
passans sur les fro^t en pass sillon. S. Hears hanging down. Cedentes
capilli, Rectae Comae, Passi capilli. Hears in the arm holes. Grandebalae,
arum. Pili subalares. Le poil desubs l'esceille. H. Hears in the nose.
Vibrissae, aru^. Vibrissi, Narium pili. Le poil du nez. H. Hears of a young
bearde not fully grown, called moys^nes, or soft hears. Iuli, orum, per
metaphoram. Call. Hears that grow on the eye liddes. Palpebra, ae. foe. ge. La
paupiere des yeulx. S. Heary. Capillatus, a, um. Crinitus, a, um. Pilosus, a,
um. Sentus, a, um. Hirtus, a, um. Hirsutus, a, u^. Cheuelu. S. Heary men.
Hircipili, Dicuntur homines, qui pilos duros habent, quemadmodu^ hirci. Fest.
Heary, or made of hear. Cilicinus, a, um. Qui est faict d' estamine. S. Heary
to grow. Pilo, las, aui. Pilos emittere. Produere du poil. Call. Hearing a
fish. Vide herring Hearing. Auditio, onis. Auditus, us. masculin. gener.
L'ouir. Call. Hearing all men, or all voices or words. Panomphaeus. Iouis
epitheton dicitur, quod omnia audit. Heat of the weather, or Sun. Calor,
ris. Caliditas, Cauma, it is. Feruor, ris. m. g. Aestus, us. m. g. Chaleur. S. vt
Virgil. Thestylis and rapido fessis messoribus aestu
Allia serpyllumque herbas contundit olentes.
And Thestylis for reapers that
are cloyde with burning heat,
Both garlike and the wylder time
strong smelling herbs does beat.
Heat, or to warm. Calefacio, cis. Calfacio, cis. Callidum reddere.
Eschauser. S. Heat, or to warm meanly, but as luke warm. Tepifacio, cis.
Fair tiede. S. Heaven. Coelum, li. (Plur. li, vel la.) Olympus, pi. Templum,
^i. n. g. Le ciel. S. The starry heaven. Coelum stelliferum, Coelu^ stellatu^.
Ciel plein d' estoilles, ou qui port les estoilles.

Heavenly creatures, or which inhabit heaven. Coelites, tum, Habitans au
ciel. Call. Heavenly, or of heaven. Coelestis, e. Coelicus, a, um. Olympius, a,
um. Du ciel. Call. Heavenly saints, or the saints of paradise. Coelites,
Superi, Coelicolae. Les saints de paradis. H. Hebrecian, or of Hebrew.
Hebraicus, a, u^. vt Hebraica lingua. Call. Hebrew, or in Hebrew. Hebraice.*
Hedge. Sepes, pis. Sepimentum, ti. n. genesis Seps, pis. Un hay. S. Hedge about,
enuironne, or to enclose round about as it were with a hedge. Praesepio, is.
Praetendere sepe^, Septo includere, Circu^munio, nis. Enuironner, ou clorre
tout entour comme de vne hay. S. Hedge before. Praesepio, is. Clorre par
deuant. Call. Hedge, or place full of briars and brymbles, and because they
grow in hedges, it may be said a quick hedge. Senticetum, Septa, orum.
neut. genesis Un lieu ou croissant force espines. Call. Septa is also the general
latin to all places enclosed, or hedged.* Hedge made with briars, or thorns.
Bruseum, sei. neut. genesis Hay faicte d' espines. S. Et Hirtae sepes. Hedges
made of thorns. Hayes faictes d' espines. Hedge, or to pale in. Sepio, is.
Obsepio, is. Intersepio, Palo, as. Enuirronner, and enclorre de hayes. S.
Hedged, or compassed about.. Septus, a, um. Circu^septus, a, um. Enuironne. S.
Hedge hog, or yrchen. Chirogylius, Echinus, Erinaceus, Heritius, Herinatius.
Herisson. H. Echinus, Is also the general latin for every thing that is
rough and sharp. Hedge sparrowe. Troglodites passer. H. Hedging byll.
Frondatorum falx, Falx arboraria, vel syluatica. Heel. Calcaneus, Calcaneum,
Calx, cis. dub. genesis Talus, li. m. g. Le talon. S. Heffort, or young cow of
the first calfe. Bucula, ae. Iunix, cis. Iuuenca, Iuuencula, Vitula. Ienice,
genisse, ieune vacche. H. Hegges, night furies, or wytches, which (as Lucan
supposes) suck the blood of children in the night. Striges, gum. foe. ge.
Vide Shriche owl. Heyda, or hey. Euax. vt Euax iurgio tandem vxore^ abegi.
Plaut. Heyda, I have driven away my wife at length with chyding, or
scouldinge. Heyghe. Altus, a, um. Celsus, a, um. Excelsus, a, um. Editus, a,
um. Profundus, a, um. Hault. S. Heyghe in the insteppe, lofty. Fastosus, a, um.
Altus, a, um. Elatus, a, um. Haultain. S. Height, or heightnes. Altitudo,
Celsitudo, Fastigium, Sublimitas, Summitas, Excelsitas, it is. f. ge. Haulteur.
Heignesse of courage, hautines of mind, loftines. Fastus, Spiritus, Elatio,
sieve excelsitas animi, aut sublatio animi. Haultainete. S. Height, or depenes.
Altitudo, inis. foe. ge. Haulteur, profondeur. S. Heir. Haeres, dis.
Cleronomus, mi. m.. g. Hoir. S. Heir in remander. Haeres secundus. Cic.
^eritier substitu, cu substitue. S. Heir made by adoption. Haeres adoptatus,
Filius adoptionis. Hoir adopte. H. Heir made by testamente. Haeres scriptus,
vel tabulatus. To appointe, or make an heir by writing, and testament.
Scribere aliquem haeredem. Fair heritier par testament, and par escript. S.

Heye ricke, or a cock of hey. Meta foeni. Un mulon de foin. S Look more,
Hay. Helicampana herb. Enula campana, Helenium Inula, Terminaliu^, lij. n. g.
Enule campane, Aulnee. Hell. Gehenna, ae. foe. genesis Orcus, ci. Profundi manes
(secundum Eurip.) Styx, gis. Tartarus, ri. m. g. Enfer, ou enfers. S. They
shall suffer punishment in hell for their murdre. Ad inferos parricidij poenas
luent. Ils seront punis de lour mourtre es enfers. S.

Hell hounde, or the dog of hell. Cerberus, Tricerberus, Canis inferus,
Triceps, Trifaux, Tergeminus, Lachrymosae ianitor aulae, Tartareus custos,
Ianitor orci, Triforme monstrum, custos plutonius, monstrum Maedusaeum,
multiceps belua, Ianitor atrae Impauidus Lethes. Hellishe, or of hell.
Tartareus, a, um. Infernus, a, um. D' enfers. S. Hellishe souls, or spirits.
Vmbrae infernae. Les ames estans es enfers. S. Helmet. Cassis, dis. Galea, ae.
Cassida, ae. foem. genesis Un heaulme. S. Helmeted. Galeatus, a, um. Heaume. S.
Help. Adiumentum, Adiutorium, Adiuuame^, Adminiculum, Auxilium, Iuuamen,
Iuuamentum, Iuuatio, Opis, em, pe. Suppetiae, arum. Subsidium, Suffragia,
Virtus, tutis. f. g. Aid. S. Help. Adesse alicui, Adferre auxilium, vel open.
Adiuuo, as. Adminiculor, aris. Annitor, teris, nixus sum. Auxilior, aris.
Auxiliu^, vel opem far, Co^modare operam, Iuuo, as. Opitulor, aris. Praesto
esse. Respicio, cis. Sustento, as. Subuenio, is. Succurro, is. Suffragor, ris.
Adiuto, as. Adiume^to esse, Adiumentu^ dare, Adiumentu^ afferre, Adiumenta
importare, Auxiliu^ portare, Opera^ alicui dare Opera^ praebere, Opem refer,
Suppetias far, Ire opitulatu^, Saluti esse alicui, Comministrare, Commodare
alicui in re aliqua, Alicui auxilio venire. Aider. S. He did help, or aid me
in my greatest misery. Opem mihi attulit in extremis temporibus. Il m'a aid en
la plus grande necessite. S.

To help, or maintain the study of an other with some stipende, or exhibition.
Tributu^ studio alterius infer, Co^ferre stipendiu^ studio alterius. Aider
les estudes d'aucun d'aucune sum d'argent. S.

To help one an other. Mutuas operas tradere. S'aider l'vn l'autre. S.

As God shall help me. Ita me deus been amet, Ita me dij iuue^t, Ita viua^,
Medius fidius, Ita mihi deu^ propitiu^ esse velim. Ainsi me vueille dieu aider.

He can not help him self. Iners est membris, Captus est membris. Il ne
s'aide point de ses me^bres.

To crave, or desire help, and soucour of another. Implorare fide^ alterius.
Demander aid, and secours.

To obtain help, or aid. Auferre opem ab aliquo. Impetrer aid, and secours.
S.

Help me, or aid me poor wretch. Da dextram misero. Aid moy. S. To help,
or aid according to promise. Opera^ pro missam dare. Aider comme on a promis.
S.

Ye have helped me often times. Mihi freque^tem opera^ dedistis. Vous m' auez
souuent aid. S.

Help often. Adiuto, as, aui. Aider souuent. S. Help to horseback, or to
horse. In equum subijcere. Help with good report or sayings. Ornare
suffragijs. Plin. Iuni. Help up. Subleuo, as, aui. Soubleuer. S. Helper.
Adiutor, oris. Administer. ri. m. g. Celuy qui aid. S. Helper of the stallion
to the mare. Peroriga, ae. m. ge. C^luy qui fait saillir vne iument a un
cheual. Call. Vide apud Varr. lib. 2. cap. 7. de re rustica. Helping.
Adiutorius, a, um.* Helping. Adiutans, it is. om. g. Aidant. S. Helpeles, lacking
help, or poor. Inops, pis. (Quasi sine terra, quae ops dicitur, vnde Inops,)
pauper (cui suae res non sufficient) eris, com. g. Pour. S. Hemme, a note of
blaming, disdaininge, maruayling, showing, or of taciturnitie. Hem, Interiect.
vt non hercle intelligo. S. non? Hem. Teren. Hemme. Fimbria, Lacinia, Ora.
Peniculamentum, ti. n. g. Board. S. Hemeroydes, or pyles in the fundament.
Marisca, cae. foe. genesis Fic. Tuberculum in ano ad similitudinem fici. Hemp.
Cannabis, is. f. g. Canabis bis. Chanure. Hempen cord, or a cord made of
hemp. Tomice, ces. Tomix, icix. f. g. Chorde faitte de chanure. Call. Hempen,
or of hemp. Canabaceus, a, um. Canabinus, a, um. De chanure. Call. Henbane,
herb. Hyoscyamos, Hyoscyamus, Symphonia, Symphoniaca, Appollinaris, Fabulum,
Altercu^, Iouis faba, Faba suilla, Herba calicularis, Faba lupina, Mania,
Iusquiamus. Hannebane, Endormie, febue de porc. H. Hence. Hinc. D' ici. Vt,
Hinc a nobis profecti in caelum reperientur. D' ici d'anec nous. etc. Hence
away. Apage, vt, Apage te. Terent. Oste toy. S Hen. Gallina, nae. foe. g.
Geline, ou poulle. S. Gallinaceus, a, um. Of a hen. D'vne poulle. S. Hen
that is young, called a pullet. Gallinula. ae. Pullastra, ae. foe. g. Vne
gelinete. S. The hen has laid an egg. Gallina ouum peperit. Cic.

To set hens a browde. Supponere oua gallinis.

Hen fed or francked, or a fat hen. Altilis gallina. Mart. Hen that
feadeth at large, and is not francked. Chortalis gallina.* Hen which
breadeth chickens. Ouifera gallina. Hens of Afrike. Meliagrides. Gelines d'
Afrique. S Heraulde of arms. Fecialis, lis. Verbenarius, rij. Pater patratus.
Un herault. S. Que^ penes est belli, Pacisque denuntiandae potestas. Call.
Herb. Herba, ae. Herb. H. Et herbaceus, a, um. Ang. Of herbs. D' herbs.
Call. Et Herbarius, a, um. Ang. Pertaining to herbs. Apertina^t aux herbs. Et
Herbosus, a, um. Herbidus, a, um. Ang. Full of herbs. Plein d' herbs. Et
Herbula, ae. diminut. Ang. A little herb, or young herb. Herbette. S. Herb
for the pot, or any kind of herb sown to eat, as those of ye gardine.
Lachanum, ni. Olus, ris. n. g. Toute sort d' herb semee pour manger, comme
celle de iardins. S. Olus is taken also for poor or simple fare. Vt fastidire
olus. Mart. To abhor simple fare. Herb gatherer. Herbarius, rij. m. g. Un
herbier. S. Herb grace, or Rewe. Ruta, ae. f. g. Rue. H. Herb having but one
stalk, or stem. Vnicaulis, le. om. genesis Qui n'a qu' vne tige. Call. Herb
having three leaves. Trifoile, or three leaued grass. Trifolium, lij. n. g.
Treffle. H. Herb knower, which can discern the virtues of them. Herbarius,
rij. m. genesis Un herbier, expert aux simples, a les cueiller. Call. Herb market.
Lachanopolium, lij. n. g. Forum olitorium, Locus vendendis oleribus destinatus.
Herb potage. Herbacea olera. Herb seller. Lachanopolos, Olitor, ris. Venditor
olerum, Lachanopola, ae. m. ge. Vendeur d' herbs bonnes a manger. Call. Herb
that grows by the own accord, not sowed or set. Herba voluntaria quae
sponte citra sementem nascitur, cui satiua opponitur. Herb qui croist de par
soy sans estre semee, ou plantee. H. Herb to be, or to grow like an herb.
Herbesco, scis. Herbasco, scis. Deuenir en herb. S. Herbs hastily gathered,
or suddenly plucked up. Verbenae, arum. f. g. Sagmina, number. n. genesis Plin.
gramina ex arce cum sua terra euulsa, quibus legati semper vtibantur, quum ad
hosts claricatu^ mitterentur. Call. Herbs having juice like milk, as spurge,
and such like. Lactariae herbae. Plin. Herbs to bring forth. Herbo, as, aui.*
Herby, or full of herbs, or having herbs. Herbidus. Herbosus, a, um. Plein d'
herbs. S. Herby, or pertaining to herbs. Herbarius, a, um. Apertenant aux
herbs. S. Herboure. Bruseum, Viretum, ti. Viridarium, rij. n. genesis Un verger.
Call. Herbour, or drinking place made in a garden, with banks or beds of
herbs. Stibadium, dij. n. g. Dicitur autem a stibadibus herbis ad discumbe^dum
idonijs. Call. Herdeman. Bubulcus, Bucolus. Pastor pecorarius. Bergier ou
pasteur. S. Et Pastoralis, le. ac Pastorius, a, um. Pertaining to a herd man.
De pasteur. Et Bubulcitari. Plaut. To play the herdeman. Herd of neat.
Bucerum armentum. Bucolicon.* Grex armentorum, Armentum, ti. n. g. Troupeau de
gros bestial. S. Et Bucolicus, a, u^. Qui est de troupeau. S. Pertaining to a
herd of neat, or keeping of neat. Here. Hic, abuerb. Ici. S. vt Vbi est pater
tuus? Hic Where is thy father? Here. Ou est ton pere? icy. Here and there. Hic
Illic, Hinc Illinc, Passim, Seorsum. D'ici dela. S. Heresy. Haeresis, sis.
Lesae religionis culpa, Crimen laesae fidei. Impia fraus. Heresy. S. Heretic.
Haereticus Heretic. S. Et Haeresiarcha, ae. m. g. Haereticorum princeps. Call.
An archeheretike, or head heretic. To be an heretic. Impia fraud se
obligare, Impiam fraudem admittere. Estre heretic. S.

Heritage. Cleronomia. Haereditas, it is. f. g. Heredite. Heritage, or
possession. Res, Praedium, Possessio, onis. f. g. Heritage. S. Heritage yt is
small. Possessiuncula, lae. f. ge. Un petit heritage. To cast one forth of
heritage, or possession. Deijcere aliquem de possessione. Mettre horse quelqu'
un de son heritage. S.

Heritage, or possessiom which may be sold lawefully. Allodium, dij.
Haereditas dicitur, qua^ vendere, vel donare possum. Call. Heritage, wherein a
man has an estate of fee simple. Allodium, dij. Res libera, and propria
alicuius, ex qua praestetur tributum. Call. Herimite. Anachoreta, Eremita, tae.
m. ge. Hermit ou Ermite. S. Heron bird. Ardea, Auis Diomedaea. Heron. H.
Heron sew. Ardeola, lae. f. g.* Herring a fish. Halec. icis. f. and n. g. vel
Halex, icis. foe. g. Harang ou hareng. H. Herring in pickle, or pickle herring.
Halex conditanea. Hareng sale. H. Herring called a red herring. Halex
infumata, vel passa, vel fumo durata. Harang sore. H. Hearse for a dead corpse.
Cenotaphium, ij. Tumulus inanis. est enim vt capsa quae ponibatur in templo in
exequijs mortuorum. Inane scpulchrum, vel vt apud Sueton. Honorarius tumulus.
Call. Hew clean, and smoothe. Edolo, as. Dolor. S. Hew with an axe. Dolo, as.
Idem. S. Hew, or to hacke small. Concido, dis. Hacher minu. Heavy of weighte.
Onerosus, Ponderosus, sa, sum. Grauis, e. Qui poise and charge beaucoupe,
pesant. S. Heavy or sad. Tristis, e. Moestus, ta, tum. Triste. S. Heavy, or
slow. Stlembus, a, u^. * Grauis and Tardus. Heavy or slothful. Piger, ra,
rum. Tardus, Segnis, Fugitans laboris. Paresseux. To become heavy, or sad.
Tristitiam contrahere. Deuenir triste. S.

Heavy, or sad to be. Moereo, es. Estre triste and dolent. To become heavy in
weight. Grauescere, Ingrauescere. Deuenir pesant. S.

Heuely. Grave, Grauiter. Vide Grievously. Heuely, or vnlustely. Pigre.
Tardement. S. Heuines, or sadness. Aerumna, nae. Moeror, ris. Moles, Molestia,
Taedium. Tristitia, Contractio animi. Tristesse ou tristeur. S. Vide Care,
Grief, sorrow. Heuinesse or great sadness. Summus moeror. Aegrimonia, ae. f.
g. Grande tristesse. S. To bring one into heuinesse, sadness, and sorrow.
Vocare aliquem in luctum. Moestitiam infer, vel offerre moerorem alicui.
Donner trestesse, ou mettre en trestesse, and doleur. S.

Heuines. or weight. Grauitas, tatis. Ponderositas, tatis. foe. genesis Pesanteur.
S. Heuines of the head. Capitis grauitas, aut grauedo. Pesanteur de test. S.
Which causes and engenders heuinesse of the head, or which is subject to
the heaviness of the head. Grauidinosus, sa, sum. Qui cause and engendre
pesanteur de test, ou qui est soubiect d'auoir pesanteur de test. S.


H. ANTE. I.
HIdden to be. Abdor, eris, vel ere, passiuum. Estre cache. S^ Et Latere, In
tenebris iacere, Carere publico. Idem. Hide. Abscondo, is, di. Abstrudo, is.
Celo, as, Condo, is. Occulo, is. Occulto, as. Operio, is, Pallio, as. Recondo,
is. Remouere ab oculis. Tego, is. Abdo, dis. Supprimo, is. Velo, Obscuro, as.
Cacher. S. Hide a fault. Contego, is. Pallio, as. Obuoluere vitium. Cacher
quelque vice. Hide before. Praeuelo, as. Couurir par deuant. Call. Hyde first.
Praetego, is, xi. Praeuelo, as. Idem. Hide heaviness, or thought. Premere
dolorem. To hide him self behind one. Obtegere se corpore alicuius. Se cacher
derriere aucun. S.

To hyde and dissemble a thing. Far obscure aliquid. Cacher quelque chose and
dissimuler.

To hyde his children in the wood. Deponere in siluas liberos. Cacher les
enfans es bois. S.

To hide his folly. Abdere stultitia^. Cacher sa folly.

To hide him self from his master. Ex conspectu heri abdere se. Se cacher du
maistre. S.

Hide in corners, or in a secret place. Illatebro, as. Cacher and coler en
lieu secret. Call. Hide in the ground. Inhumo, as. Humo, as. Enterre It is
rather to bury. Hyde or skin of a beast. Byrsa, ae. Exuuiae, arum. Pellis,
Scortum, Tergum, gi, Tergus, oris. Corium, ij. n. g. Cordouan, du cuir. Et
Pellicula, diminut. Ang. A little or thin skin or hyde. Petite peaue. Call.
Hid. Absconditus, a, um. Absco^sus, Abstrusus, Celatus, a, um. Obscurus, a,
um. Occultus, a, um. Repositus, a, um. Secretus, a, um. Suppressus, Tectus, a,
um. Couditus, ta, tum. Reconditus, ta, tu^. Delitens, it is. Abditus, ta, tum.
Cache. Hid, counceled, or not known. Apocryphus, a, um. Celatus, a, um.
Cache, cele. S. Hid to be. Lateo, es. verb. neut. Oblitesco, scis. Estre
cache, Se cacher. Call. Hideouse. Horridus, a, um. Sentus, a, um. Perhorridus,
da, dum. Hideux. S. Hideouse, and horrible to see. Aspectu horridus, Hispidus.
Hideux and horrible a veoir. S. Hideously. Horride, Torue. Hideusement. Hidie,
or of a hyde, or skin. Pelliceus, a, u^. * Terginus, na, number. De cuir. Call.
Hiding. Absconsio, onis. Occultatio, onis. f. g. Cachement, ou reconseme^t. Hie
a pace, a term spoken for speed to be made. Accurro, is. Remouere moram. Vide
Haste. Jerusalem. Hierosolyma, ae. and Hierosolyma, oru^. and Hierosolymae,
arum. Vrbs Indaeae, totius Orientis clarissima, quae and Jerusalem vocabatur.
High. Altus, a, um. Aerius, a, um. Celsus, a, um. Excelsus, a, u^. Profundus,
a, um. Sublimis, e. Sublatus, a, um. Turritus, a, um. Editus, ta, tum. Hault.
S. High above, or being alofte. Supernus, a, um. High alofte. Alte, Excelse,
Sublime, Sublimiter, Sublate. Haultement. Call. High and difficulte, or hard
to come to. Arduus, a, um. Hault and mal aise a attaindre. Call. High
foreheade. Relicina frons. Vide Forehead. High hill, or place to look about,
to spy things far of, or a prospecte or beakon. Specula, lae. f. g. Beffroy
ou eschauguette. S. High minded. Elatus, a, um. Turgidus, a, um. Fastosus, sa,
sum. Animus altissimus. Haultain. S. High, or deep. Altus, a, um. Hault, ou
profond. Call. High, or talle. Procerus, a, um. Fort hault. Call. High place,
and broken. Verruca, cae. foe. ge. Un lieu hault and derompu. S. High place,
uneasy and perilous for falling. Praecipitium, ij. n. g. Un lieu hault mal
aise and dangereux a cheoir. S. High price Grave pretium. High stomaked.
Elatus, a, um. Sublatus, Superbus, Turgidus, a, um. Vt supra. High treasurer.
Aerarij praefectus, Arcarius summus, Arcarius parsimoniarum, vel Sanctioris
aerarij. Thresorier de l' espargue. S. High way. Militaris via, Platea, Via
publica, Celibris via, Via trita, Iter tritum. Le grand chemin. S Higher.
Altior, ius. Sublimior, ius. Superior, ius. Plus hault. S. Highest of all.
Summus, a, um. Altissimus, a, um. Supremus, a, un. Treshault. S. Highest
office. Amplissimus magistratus. Highest, or at the most height. Sum,
Supreme, Altissime. Treshaultement. S. Highly. Alte. Haultement. S. Highness.
Altitudo, Summitas, Summitudo. Vide Height. Hill. Collis, Mons, it is. Rupes,
pis. foe. genesis Un mont ou vne montaigne. S. Hill being cragged and broken, that
a man uneath may ascend it. Praeruptus mons, vel Abruptus, Praeruptior collis.
Mons inaccessus. Montaigne inaccessible. Hill full of stones, or a ragged
rock. Cautes, it is. f. g. Un rocher ou vne roche. Call. Hill of a huge height
between Britain and Irelande, called our ladies hill, it is a promontorie
called. Salanga.* Hills or mountains grown with woods. Syluigeri montes.
Montaignes ou les bois croissent. S. Hills being bare and plain, without
woods. Tonsi colles. Hills called chiuet hills, which be promontories, or
hills deuidinge England and Scotland. Ordo luci. Hilly, or full of hills.
Montosus, a, um. Plein de montaignes. S. Hilly, or of a hill. Montaneus, a, um.
De montaigne. S. Hillocke, or little hill. Collis, Monticulus. Colliculus, li.
Grumus, mi. Tuber, Tumulus, li. m. ge. Un tertre. S. Vne montaignette. S. A
place full of little hillockes. Locus tumulosus. Lieu plein de petis tertres. S.

Hilte of a dagger or sword. Capulus, Capulum, li. Manubrium, ij. n. g. Un
manche. S. Himpe. Varicor, aris. Vide Halte. Hympne, psalm, or praise in a
song. Hymnus, ni. m. g. Hymn. Pals. Hympne to singe. Psallo, as. Chanter.
Call. Hind. Cerua, ae. foe. g. Biche. S. Et Ceruinus, a, um. Of a hynde.*
Hindecalfe. Hinnulus, li. m. ge. Bicheteau. S. Hinder, or to let one from
doing of a thing. Arcere, Impugnare, Inhibere, Obstare, Occupare, Praepedire,
Cauere aliquem facere aliquid, Obesse, Intercedere. Empescher de fair quelque
chose. S Hinder, let, or to disturb one. Disturbare, Interturbare,
Interpellare. Empescher and destourber. S. Hinder, and to let that a thing
come not to pass. Moram alicui rei offerre, Rem aliquam distrahere, vel
Impedire, In mora esse, Moram alicui rei facere. Empescher and retarder que
quelque chose ne se face. S. Hinder the execution of a sentence. Sententiae
executionem interpellare. Empescher l' execution d' vne sentence. Not to hinder
the execution. Non aduersari quo minus lege agatur, Moram rei exequendae nulla^
facere, Exequenti mandatum moram non afferre. Ne point empescher l' execution.
S.

Hinder feet. Pedes posteri, vel posteriores. Hinder that comes after, or
the last. Posterior, rius. Posterus, a, um. Qui vient apres, le dernier. S.
Hinder part of the head. Occiput, it is. Occipitiu^. Le dernier de la test. H.
Hinder part of the neck. Ceruex, Posterior colli pars. Chignon, la nucque
ducol. H. Hinder part, or deck of a ship. Puppes, Puppis, is. f. g. Le
derriere de la nauire, la pouppe. S. Hindera^ce, or let. difficultas,
Impeditio, onis. Impedimentum, Intercessio, Obstaculum, Occupatio,
Praepedimentum. Empeschement. S. Hinderer. Oppugnator, Interpellator, toris. m.
ge. Destourbe^r. Call. Hindered, bus^ed, or let. Occupatus, ta, tum. Empesche.
S. To be hindered. Habere negotium, Pati impedimentum. Estre empesche. S.

Hinge of a door. Cardo, inis. m. g. Le gond d' un huis. Hipocrasse, a kind
of wine made with spices. Vinum aromatites, vel vinum aromaticum. Hippocras. H.
etiam Vinum saccatum, Plinio. Idem. Et Aromatites, tae. m. g. Vin hypocras. S.
Hypocrisy, false dissimulation, or feyned sanctity toward God. Hypocrisis,
Virtus adumbrata, Assimulata virtus. Hypocrisy. S. Hipocrite. Hypocrita, tae.
m. g. Hypocrite. S. Hire. Conduco, is. Loco, as. Lover. S. Hire a house.
Conducere domum. Lover vne maison. To hire forth his grounds. Locare, vel
locitare agros. Bailler ses terres a louage. S.

Hire of a chamber, house, or lodging. Locarium, rij. neut. gen.* Hire of a
stalion that has covered a mare. Equimentum, ti. n. ge. Le salaire d'vn
estalon qui a sailli vne iument. Call. Hire, or hiring. Conductio, Locatio,
onis. foem. ge. Louage. S. Hyre, or money paid for carriage. Vectigal, lis.
Vectura, ae. f. g. Louier. Pals. Hire, wages, or salary. Salarium, ij.
Stipendium, ij. n. g. Praemium, Pretium, Meritum, ti. n. g. Loyer. S Hired.
Conductus, a, um. Mercenarius, a, um. Qui est love. S. Et Conductitius, a, um.
Ang. That which may be hired, or is used to be let to hyre. Hired, or pressed
soldier. Authoratus, ti. m. ge. Authoramento obligatus. Hired, or reteigned
often. Stipendiosus, a, um.* Hired servant. Mercenarius, rij. m. g.
Mercenaire. Hired to be. Stipendior, aris. Locor, aris. Estre love. S. Hirer of
one to do a thing. Conductor, toris. mas. g. Qui love aucun pour fair quelque
chose. S. Et Locator, toris. m. g. He that puttes forth any thing to hyre.
Loeur, qui baille a loage. Call. Hirer of land for rentes. Redemptor, toris. m.
ge. Fermier, S. A fermer. His, or his own. Suus, a, um. Sien. S. Hiss like a
serpent. Sibilo, as. Siffler. Hiss at one. Exibilo, as. Siffler contre quelqu'
un. Call. Hissing. Sibilus, li. m. g. Sifflement. Hister, a famous river.
Adubanus.* History. Historia, ae. f. g. Histoire. S. Histories, or acts
yearly done. Annals, lium. m. g. L' histoire des chooses qui sont faictes d'
an en an. S. Historiographer. Historiographus, Historicus, ci. m. g.
Historiarum scriptor. Historien. S. Historiographer of yearly acts. Annaliu^
co^ditor. Hither. Huc, Icy. vt Adsis huc. Come hither. Viens icy. Pil. Hither
and thither. Sursum deorsum, Vltro citreque Ca and la. S. To run hither and
thither. Hac illac circuncursare. Courir ca and la. S.

Hitherto. Hactenus, Hucusque. Iusques ici. S. Hitherto, or yet. Adhuc, Etiam
nunc, Vsque adhuc. Iusques a present. S. Hitherwarde. Huc, Horsum, Versus hunc
locum. Verse ce lieu ci, verse ceste part. Hit. Offendo, is. Plango, is. Heurter,
frapper. S. Hit against a thing, taking hurt thereby. Elido, is. Allido, is.
Illido, is. Compulso, sas. Heurter contre quelque chose. S. Hit by throwing.
Impingo, is, egi.* Hit, or to knock his head against the door. Allidere vel
impingere caput ostio, vel ad ostium. Heurter sa test contre l' huis. S. Hit
at. Offenso, as. Heurter. S. Hit, or throw down. Arieto, tas. Heurter and
iecter par terre. S. Or it may be to butte, as a Ram does with his head.
Hit, or to strike. Ico, cis. Ferio, is. Appeto, it is. Ferir. S Vide Stricke. Hit
the mark. Ferire iugulum, vel metam tangere. Hit the nail upon the head.
Acum, vel rem tangere. Rem acu attingere, vel tangere. Hiue for bees. Alueus,
Aluus, ui. foe. ge. Vne ruche de mousches a miel. S. Apiarium, ij. n. g. A
place where bees are set. Un lieu des mousches a miel. S. Hiue where the bees
make their honey, or the place where the hyues be. Aluear, sieve Alueare, and
Aluearium, ij. n. ge. Vne ruche ou les mouches font leur miel, ou le lieu ou
sont les ruches. S. Hiue made after the shape of a ship. Naustibulu^, Alueus
ad similitudinem nauis factus. Call. Hiue maker. Aluearius.*
H. ANTE. O.
HO, ho, a voice of wondering or disdayning. Hui. vt Terent. Hui, Tam cito? Hoe,
so quickly. Hoho si tossed? S. Hoarsse. Raucus, a, um. Rauus, a, um. Enroue. S.
Hoarse to be. Rauceo, es. Raucesco, scis. Estre enroue. Hoarse to wax.
Raucesco, scis. Deuenir enroue. S. Hoarsly. Rauce. Enroueement. S. Hoarsenes.
Raucitas, tatis. Rauis, is. f. g. Enrouement. Hoby an hawk. Accipiter
palumbarius. Hobreau. H. Hoby, a kind of Irishe horse. Asturco, Equus
tolitarius. Hobin. S. Hochpot, which some do call a pudding. Insitium, ab
insectione dictum, Pulmenti genus ex insectis and minutatim tritis carnibus
confectum. Hochpot is also a manner of partition at the common law, of lands
given in franck marriage. see more in Litleton tenures. Lib. 3. ca. 2. Hog.
Porcus, ci. m. g. Un porceau. S. Hog called a barrowe hog or gilt. Maialis,
verres exsectus vel castratus. Porc chastre. H. Hog engendered between a wild
bore and a tame some. Hybris, dis. vel Hybrida, ae. Call. Hog feader, or one
that fatteth hogs. Porculator, is. m. g. Qui engraisse porceaulx. S. Hog
feading, or the making of a hog fat. Porculatio, onis. f. g. Nouriture de
porceaulx. S. Hog having bristles in the neck divided. Disulcus.* Festus.
Hoggehearde. Subulcus, ci. m. g. Porcher. Call. Hog roasted whole with other
things in his bellye. Porcus troianus. Macrob. in Saturn. Hog that is fed
wallowyng in the mire. Colluuiaris porcus. Festus. Hog vngelt. Verres, ris.
m. g. Porcus no^ castratus. Un verrat. Call. Hoggishe, or of a hog. Porcarius,
a, um. Porcinus, a, um. Qui est de porceau. S. Hoggeshead. Dolium, lij. n. g.
Un muy. S. Hoyse ancres. Anchoras tollere, Anchoras vellere, aut soluere. Lever
les ancres, ou oster. S. Hold. Obtineo, es. Teneo, es. Tenir. S. Hold a
convocation. Agere Synodum. Hold again. Retineo, es. Retenir. S. Hold a
parliament. Agere conuentus, vel comitia. Hold back. Detineo, es. Retineo,
es. Retenir. S. Hold back, as not to be hasty, or swifte. Pigro, as.*
Cohibeo, es. Tardo, as. Demoror, aris. C^ctor, taris. Moras agitare, Moram
interpouere. Targer, ou tarder. S. Hold breath, or wind. Animam comprimere,
Anhelitum premere, vel interpellere. Retenir son haleine. S. Hold for a
certainty. Persuasissimum habere. Tenir pour tout certain. S. Hold the
hand. Abstinere manum. Hold his peace. Premere linguam, Reticeo, es.
Segregare sermonem, Sileo, es. Subticeo, ces. Subticesco, scis. Taceo, es.
Conticeo, es. Conticesco, cis. Obticeo, ces, Facere finem sermoni, Silentiu^
facere, Silentiu^ dare, In silentiu^ discendere, Immutesco, cis. Obmutesco, is.
Vocem premere, Consileo, es. Comprimere vocem. Se taire. S. Hold one in a
fools paradise. Producere ficta spe. Specula tractare. Hold, or take any
thing. Adhaereo, es. Adhaeresco, scis. Tenir a quelque chose. S. Hold
possession. Retinere Ius. Cic. Hold primarie possession. Occupo, as, aui. Vide
get Hold strayt. Complector, eris. vt Arctius puellam complecti. Cic. To
hold, or embrace a maiden hard. Hold the better part. Bonam partem habere,
Primas tenere. Hold thy peace. Desinas, Tace, St, vocabulum apud Terent. and
Erasmum saepius vsurpatum. Hold water, or to keep water. Continere, vel
conseruare aquam. Hold violently, or take by force. Occupo, as, aui. Prendre
par force. S. Hold under by correction, or subjection. Subiugo, as, aui.
Vinco, cis. Subiugum ducere, vel mittere, Subigo, is. Depello, is. Imperio
subijcere. Subiuguer. S. Hold up, or to sustain. Retineo, es. Sustento, as.
Tollo, lis, sustuli, Fulcio, cis. Sustineo, es. Soustenir. S. Hold your peace,
or keep silence. Conticete, Tacete. Silentium tenete, vel praebete, Comprimite
ora. Verg. Conticuere omnes. They all held their peace, and made no noise.
Vide Hushe. Hold, or the handle of any thing, whereby hold is taken. Ansa, ae.
f. g. Vne anse. S. Hold, ear, or handle having. Ansatus, a, um. Qui ha vne
anse. S. Hold, or holding, or ye force of holding any thing. Tenacitas, atis.
foe. ge. Firmitas, and perseuerantia aliquid retinendi. Un force de retenir
quelque chose. Holden. Tentus, a, um. Tenu. S. Holden to be. Teneor, eris.
Estre tenu. S. Holding, or which does hold. Tenax, cis. om. genesis Tenant. S.
Holding surely, or fast. Pertinax, acis. om. ge. Qui tient fort. S. Hole,
cauerne, or hollow place. Cauus, ui. mas. genesis Cauum, ui. n. g. Taniere,
Cauerne, un creux. S. Hole. Foramen, inis. n. ge. Un trou and pertuis. S. Hole
and sound. Vide Whole. etc. Hole in a pair of bellows. Gula follis. Le trou
d' un soufflet. S. Hole in the earth with many turninges, or ways having no
end, or the end being uncertain. Angiportus, us, vel ti. m. g. Hole in the
ground, grave, pit, or the hollowenes of the ground. Tumba, bae. foe. ge.
Locus concauus sub terra. To bore a hole with a wymble or percer. Terebro,
bras. Trouer d' vne tariere. S.

To bore, or make a hole in a thing. Foro, as. Perforo, as. Inforo, as.
Trouer. S.

Hole together, or all together, or al whole. Integer, ra, rum. Sain. S. Vide
Whole. Holes for culuers or doves, the holes of a culuer house. Cellulae
columbarum. Les bolins d' un columbier. S. Holes of the eyes. Orbs. Statius.
Holes which be in the top of a mast. Liae, arum. Holy, or full of little holes,
as the pumice stone is. Pumicosus, sa, sum. vel Pumiceus, ea, eum. Qui ha force
peris trous comme la pierre ponce. S. Holy, or all whole. Integre, In omni
part, omnino. Holy, or full of holes. Fistulosus, a, um. Multicauus, a, um.
Multicauatus, a, um. Multiforis, re. Qui ha beaucoup de trous. S. Holy. Almus,
a, um. Diuus, a, um. Sacer, ra, ru^. Sanctus, a, um. Sacrosanctus, a, um.
Saint. S. Holy days. Festi dies, Feriae, arum. Solemnia, oru^. Les festes. et
Festiuus, a, um. Festus, a, um. Solemnis, ne. Ang. Pertaining to holy days, or
festival days. Holy fish, a kind of sea fish. Anthias, Sacer piscis. Vide
apud Plin. lib. 9. cap* 59. Holy hoke, or great malowe. Althea, Maluauiscus,
Bismalua, Hibiscus, ci. Hibiscum, sci. neut. genesis Guimauues. S. Holyly. Alme,
Diue, Pie, Pio cultu, Sacre, Sancte. Sainctement. S. Holiness. Pietas,
Sanctimonia, Sanctitudo, Sanctitas, atis. foe. g. Sainctete. S. Holy scripture.
Agiographa, oru^. n. g. Sancta scripta Holy scripture writer, or diuinor.
Agiographus.* Et Agiographia, * Is the wrytinge of holy scripture. Holland, a
country in low germany. Batauia Inferior, Hollandia, ae. foe. g. Hollande. S.
Hollandre, or man of holland. Batauus, a, um. Hollandus, a, um. Hollandois. S.
Holly, or huluer bery. Acylo^, Acylos. Pli. li. 16. ca. 6. Holly, holme, or
huluer tree. Ilex, cis. Aquifolia, ae. foe. genesis Yeuse. S. Et Iliceus, a, um.
Of holly tree. De yeuse. Call. Hollow. Cauus, a, um. Concauus, a, u^. Deuexus,
a, um. Laqueatus, a, um. Cave. S. Hollow to make. Cauo, as. Sinuo, as. Tumulo,
as. Incauo, as. Cauer. Hollow place, den, or cave. Cauus, ui. Fouea, ae.
Cauerna, ae. Spelunca, cae. Antrum, tri. n. genesis Un creux, ou cauerne. S.
Hollow place, wherein any thing is holden, or kept. Conceptaculum, li. n. ge.
Le lieu ou quelque chose est conceue, ou guard. S. Hollowenes. Cauitas, tatis.
foe. ge. * Concauite. Pal. Hollowenes of foot, or hand. Subtal, Vola, ae. f.
g. Caua pars manus, vel pedis. Call. Hollowenes of the eyes. Conchos.
Hollowenes, or hollow part of a ring, where the stone is set. Pala annuli.
Cic. Holme, or huluer. Vt supra. Wholesome. Medicinalis, le. Saluber, ris, re.
Salutifer, ra, rum. Salutaris, re. Sanus, a, um. Salutaire. S. Wholesome, or
profitable. Amicus (Si nectatur rebus non animatis,) a, um. Salutaire,
profitable. S. Holsomely. Salubriter, Salutariter, Sane. Sainement.
Holsomenes. Salubritas, Sanitas, tatis. f. g. Salubrite. Home. Domus, i, vel
us. f. g. Vne maison. S. He stays for you at home. Te expectat domi. Il to
entend en la maison. S.

He is not far from home. Non long est ab aedibus. Il n' est pas fort loing
de la maison.

With me at home. Ad me domi, Apud me domi. Chez moy en ma maison. S.

I said I would be at home. Dixeram me domi praesto fore. I'auoye dict que ie
seroye en la maison

To return home. Se domum recipere. S'en retourner, ou se retirer en la
maison. S.

To go, or depart from home. Domo progredi, Recipere se domo. Sortir de la
maison. S.

Home supper. Domicoenium, nij. n. g. Mart. Homely, rusticall, or rude.
Agrestis, e. Inconditus, a, um. Rudis, e. Rusticus. Triuialis, le. om. ge.
Rustique, Rude. S. Homely after the vulgar sort. Popularis, re. Vulgaris, re.
Vulgaire. S. Homely, after the manner of the common people. Populariter,
Vulgariter. Vulgairement. S. Homely, unlearnedly, or rudely. Inculte,
Incondite, Pingi minerua, Triuialiter, Indocte. Indoctement. S. Homely style,
in speaking, or writing. Stylus gracilis, vel tenuis. Tenue filum orationis.
Homere, an excellent Greek poet, borne nere to the river Meles, of which he
was first named Melesigenes, and afterward because of his blindnenes he was
called Homerus, which in Greek signifies blind. He flourished before the
buyldinge of Rome, about an hundred and three score years, and wrote two
worthy works one of the Trojan wars, which is called Ilias: and an other of
the wanderinges of Ulysses, named Odyssea, whom Virgil prince of the latin
poets has so imitated, that in some part (by the judgment of Macrob. Sat.
5. cap. 11.) he seems to pass his patren. But of Homere Cicero in the fifth
of his Tusculans questions, has these words. It is said that Homer was
blind, but that may they say that see his picture and not his poetry. For
what Regio^, what coaste, what place of Greece, what shape of beauty, what
battle, what army, what motions of me^ or beasts, is not expressed by him in
such wise? That those things which he him self saw not, yet he has made us
to see who never beheld the same. Homerus, ri. m. g. Et Homericus, ca, cum. Of
Homere. Homecide. Homicidium, ij. n. g. Homicide. S. Homily, or ghostly
teaching, preaching, or sermon. Homilia, ae. Concio, onis. Oration ad populum.
Sermon, preschement. Honest. Honestus, a, um. Probus, Pudicus, a, um. Honneste.
S. Honest altogether, or very honest. Approbus, a, u^. Fort bon. S. Honest
conditions. Praetextati mores. A very honest man. Homo cum primis honestus.
Fort honneste. S.

An honest and courteouse man. Bellus homo, Vrbanus, Ciuilis. Honneste homme
and courtois. S.

Honest man. Integer homo. Honest, or to make honest, or to worship.
Condecoro, as. Honesto, as. Honestate prosequi. Fair honneur.* Honesty.
Honestas, it is. Probitas, Pudicitia, Venustas, it is. f. g. Honnestete. S. Honesty
without corruption, pureness. Integritas. it is. f. g. Purete. S. Honestly.
Concinne, Condign, Honest, Probe, Pudice, Digne, Lepide, Speciose.
Honnestement. S. Honey. Mel, lis. n. g. Miel. S. Melleus, a, um. Angl. Of honey.
De miel. Call. Honey comb. Fauus. Un burnal. S. Et Fauillus, diminu^. Ang. A
little honey comb.* Honey dew. Drosomeli, Mel roscidum vel roreum, Mel aerium,
Melliginem quidam vocant. Ruellius saliuam syderum vocat. H. Honey gathered, and
made of two sorts of thyme. Bithymum. Miel faict par les mousches a miel de
la fleur des deux sorts de thyms. S. Honey gathering, or the time of gathering
honey. Vindemia mellis, Mellatio, onis. f. g. La cueillette de miel. Honey maker,
or he which has the gouernemente of honey. Meliturgus, gi. Mellarius, rij. m.
ge. Qui ha le gouuernement du miel. S. Honey making, or th'arte to make honey.
Mellificatio, Mellificium, cij. n. g. L'arte de fair miel. S. Honey moon, a
term prouerbially applied to such as be new married, which will not fall out
at the first, but the one loves the other at the beginning exceadingly, the
likelyhode of their exceading love, appearing to aswage, which time the vulgar
people call the honey moon. Aphrodisia, Feriae hymenaeae.* Honey soppe. Offa
melle saporata, sic enim apud Virgil. legendum est libro. 6. Pro vitiosa voce
soporata, Nimirum melle delibuta. Soupe de miel. Honey suckle, or woodbinde, an
herb. Cerinthe, Periclymenus. Caprifolium, lij. Syluae matter, Volucrum maius,
Lilium inter spinas, Matrisilua. Cheurefueille, vincibosse. H. Honey to make.
Mellifico, cas, aui. Fair du miel. S. Honor, dignity, or estate of honor.
Claritas, Claritudo, Gradus, us. Honos, oris. Honor, ris. Nome^, Orname^tu^.
Sple^dor, oris. m, g. Honneur, dignite, ou estat de honneur. Et honorarius, a,
u^. Ang. Pertaining to honor. Apartenant a honneur. S. Et Venerabundus, a, um.
Full of doing honor, or he which does honor, or reverence. Qui faict
reverence. Call. These things are against your honor. Haec honori tuo, tuae
dignitati, tuae laudi aduersantur. aduersa sunt, nocent, officiunt, labem
inferunt, maculas inijciunt, tenebras offundunt, damno sunt, detrimento sunt,
iacturam afferunt, de honor tuo detrahunt, adimunt, auferunt, laedunt honorem
tuum imminuunt, turpi labe inficiu^t, quasi tenebris circumiectis, circumfusis,
offusis obscurant.

Honor doing. Honorificus, a, um. Faisant honneur. S. Honor dew only to God.
Latria, ae. foe. g. Cultus diuinus. Vall. Honor, majesty, or dignity, in the
person of princes. Maiestas, tatis, f. ge. Majesty ou dignity en la person
des Rois. S. Desirous of honor. Laudis auarus. Couuoiteux d' honneur. S.

For the honor of God. Per deos immortales. Pour l' honneur de dieu. S.

In what honor were you. Quo numero fuisti. En quel honneur as tu este. S.

Honor saved, or saving your honor. Dignitate tuta. A term spoken absolute
in a point of reverence, as the vulgar saying is, saving your reverence.
Reuerentia salua, honestate salua. To say, saving your honor. Praefari
honore^. Dire sauf vostre honneur. S.

A place of honor. Locus ad agendum amplissimus. Lieu d'honneur. S.

Honorable. Admirabilis, le. Celebris, e. Clarus, a, um. Honorus, a, um.
Ornatissimus, Splendidus, Stolatus, Venerabilis, Honorabilis, le. Magnificus,
a, um. Honorificus, a, um. Honorable. S. Honorably. Admirabiliter, Celebriter,
Honorifice Clare, Ornatissime, Splendide, Venera^ter, Honorate, Magnifice.
Honorablement, and orneement. S. Honorably enterprysed. Auspicatus, a, um.*
Honor, or to reverence, or worship. Honorifico, cas. Honoro, as. Obseruo,
as. Prosequi honor, Suspicio, cis. Veneror, aris. Honesto, as. Cohonesto, as.
Honorem tribuere, Aliquem honoribus impertire. Honorer. S. To exalte one to
honor. Adornare, vel ornare aliquem, Inaurare aliquem. Esleuer. S.

To be in great honor. Esse summo honor. Estre en grand honneur. S.

To do honor unto one. Decorare, Decus dare, Honestare, Ornamento esse,
Habere honore^ alicui, Habere in honor aliquem, Honorem afferre alicui. Fair
honneur a quelqu' un. S.

To see unto his honor. Pudori consulere, Tueri dignitatem. Garder son
honneur. S.

To come to great honor. In gloriam summam peruenire. Paruenir a grand
honneur. S.

To lease his honor gotten. Facere naufragiu^ gloriae, De gradu dignitatis
dimoueri. Pardre son honneur acquis. S.

To bear honor. Perhibere honorem, Obseruare aliquem, Honorem alicui habere.
Porter honneur. S.

To recover his honor again. Extinguere sua^ infamiam re aliqua, Eleuare
ignominiam. Recouurer son honneur. S.

Not to account of honor. Auersari honorem. Ne tenir compte d' honneur. S.

To come into honor, and reputation. Inclarere, Inclarescere. Venir en
honneur, and reputation. S.

Honor like a God. Reponere aliquem in deos. Honors, or dignities, yt endure
but a while. Caduci tituli. Hoode. Capitium, ij. Cucullus, li. m. g. Chaperon.
Hoode for a woman. Caliendrum, dri. n. g. Chaperon de femme. S. Hoode to carry
on the shoulder. Humerale, Humerale gestamen. Chaperon qu' on port sur l'
espaule. S Hoode furred. Humerale pelliculatum, Insigne humerale. Chaperon
fourre. S. Hoode of a graduate. Epitogium, ij. n. g.* Hooded. Cucullatus, a,
um. Hoodemanblinde, a kind of sport that children use. Myinda. H. Hook.
Hamus, Lupus, Vncus, ci. Harpago, inis. f. g. Croc. S. Hook bearer. Falcifer,
ra, rum. Qui port vne serpe. Hook to catch fish. Hamus piscatorius. Un haim
a pescher, hamesson. S. Hook that is small. Hamulus, li. m. g. Petit haim. S.
Little hook, or crook. Capreolus, Hamulus, Vncinus. Un crochet. S.

Hook for brushe, or to cut any^ing. Falx, cis. f. g. Vne serpe. Call. Et
Falcula. diminut. Ang. A little brushe hook. Vne serpillon ou crochette. Call.
Hooked. ^alcatus, a, um. Hamatus, a, um. Vncinatus, a, um. Vncus, a, um.
Aduncus, ca, cum. Crochu. Hooks, or hedging bills, hooks to dress vynes.
Falces arborariae, Syluaticae, Vineaticae. Cato. Hooks to reap with. Falces,
vel Stramentariae falces, Falces messoriae. Hooky, or full of hooks. Hamosus,
a, um.* Hooky, or of a hook, or pertaining to a hook. Hamatilis, le. D'
hamesson. Call. Hoore. Lupa, ae. Meretrix, Proseda, Scortum, Trica, ae.
Prostibulum, Diobolare scortum, Quadrantaria. Putain, paillarde. H. Et Lupor,
aris. Meretricor, aris. Scortor, aris. Libidinor, aris. Rebus venereis vti.
Paillarder. S. To haunte, or use hoores, to meddle with hoores, or play the
hoore. Hooremonger, or whooremonger. Concubitor, Lastaurus, Libidinarius.
Impudicus scortator. Paillard. S. Et Ganeo, onis. m. g. Putier. S. Hoore, or
concubine to a wedded man. Pellex, Succuba, bae. Pallaca, cae. Concubine d'vn
homme marie. Hooredome. Meretricium. ij. n. ge. Le faict de paillardise and
puterie. Hoores dressed with stinking oyntmentes. Scoeniculae.* Hoores of the
stews, or such common women, pe^ny ware. Diabolares meretrices. Paillardes qui
^' abandonnent pour deux oboles. S. Hoores used in place of men's wives.
Su^menianae vxores. I think they may be rather called hoores of the bancke, or
hedge birds. Hoorish, or of a hoore, or pertaining to hoores. Meretricius, a,
um. Appartenant a paillarde. S. Hoorishely, or after the manner of a hoore.
Meretricie. A la facon d' vne paillarde. S. Hope. Confidentia, Fidentia, Fides,
Fiducia, Opinio, Spes, ei. f. g. Espera^ce. S. Et Specula, lae. foe. ge. Spes
exigua, Spes tenuis. Petite esperance. S. Little or small hope. To give hope.
Afferre spem, Dare, Facere, Subijcere, Infer, Obijcere, Praebere, Offerre,
Pro ponere spem. Donner esperance. S.

To put in hope. Erigere ad spem, vel in Spem vertere, Ostendere vel Ostentare
spem alicuius rei, Expectationem dare. Mettre en esperance.

I see not why thou should hope. Non video, cur speres, quare, quamobrem,
qua causa, qua de causa, quam ob causam, qua ratione adductus, qua commotus
causa, quo impulsus argumento: quae te ratio, quid rationis in hanc spem
adduxit, impulit? cum in hanc spem venisti, quam rationem secutus es, quae te
duxit, aut hortata spes est? quid effecit, vt sperares? tuae spei causam
ignorare me confiteor. spei tuae causa me latet, praeterit, fugit, mihi quidem
aperta, perspicua, manifesta, satis clara non est. perobscura apud me est,
explorata mihi non est, obscuritatis apud me habet plurimum.

To hope. Habere fidem, Ponere spem, Spem alere, Spero, as. Teneri spe, In spe
esse. Auoir esperance.

Hope no longer. Relinquere spem, Deserere spem. Delaisser son espera^ce. S. To
put out of all hope. Eripere spem, Adimere spem, Spem auferre, Praecidere vel
incidere spe^ alicui. Oster toute esperance. S.

Out of hope. Spe deiectus. Frustre de son espoir. horse d' esperance.

Hope well. Reponere in optima spe, Bono animo esse, Animo confidere, Spem
optimam habere. Auoir bonne esperance. S. Hopeles, or without hope. Expes, pis.
Insperans, Sine spe. Qui n' ha point d' esperance. S. Hoppe and skippe.
Subsilire, Exilire, Subsaltare. Saulteler. S. Hoppe, skippe, leap, or to
dance for joy. Praesultare, Gestire, Exultare, Exilire gaudio. Saulter de
grande joy qu'on ha. S. Hoppe yard. Arbustum, ri. n. g.* Hopper of a mill.
Infundibulum, li. n. ge. La tremie, ou tremuye d' un moulin. S. Hoppes. Lupus
salictarius, Lupulus, li. Houblon. H. Hopping, or skipping. Saltatio, Saltus,
us. Horde house. Abditorium, rij. n. g.* Horde up, or gather together.
Accumulare, Cogere, Conglobare, Contrahere, Colligere, Corradere summam.
Amasser. S. Horde up much goods. Peculium grande conficere, Parare magnas
fortunas and copiam, Opes struere. Amasser force biens. S. Horde, or to heap
up together. Aceruare, Coaceruare, Confarcire, Componere, Construere,
Exaggerare, Extruere in Aceruum. Entasser. S. Horder of treasure. Abditor, vel
Trix.* Hoar, or graye for old age. Canus, a, um. Blanc de viellesse. S.
Horehounde, herb. Marubium, alij Marrubium. Prassium, ij. n. g. Marrubin, and
Marochemin. Dod. Horison, the space of the firmament so far as one can
descerne round about him. Horizon, it is. Finitor, and terminator latin dicitur.
L'horizon. Call. Horn. Cornu. Indecl. n. g. Cornus, nus. m. g. Corn. S. Hard
as horn. Corneolus, la, lum. Dur quasi comme corn. S.

To wax as hard as horn. Cornesco, scis. Deuenir dur comme corn. S.

Which is of horn, or of the color like horn. Corneus, a, um. Qui est de
corn ou de couleur semblable a corn. S.

Blower of a horn. Cornicen, cinis. mas. genesis Un corneur. S.

A little horn. Corniculum, li. n. g. Petite corn. S.

Horned, or having horns. Corniger, a, rum. Cornu. Et Cornigenus, a, u^. Of
the kind of that which bears horns. Hornebecke fish. Bellis, Bellium, lij.
* Acus, ci. m. g. Aculeatus. Plin. Eguille, Orphie. H. Horrell, or whoremonger.
Concubitor, Libidinarius. Vide Hoore monger. Horrible. Immanis, e. Horribilis,
le. Horridus, a, u^. Horrificus, a, um. Nefandus, a, um. Saeuus, a, um. Teter,
ra, rum. Trux, cis. Tartareus, a, um. Horrible, espouuentable. Call. Horrible
sound, or voice. Horrisonus, ni. Horrible sound, or that gives an horrible,
or a fearful sound. Horrisonus, a, um. Qui rend son Effragant. Call. Horse.
Equus, qui. m. g. Caballus, li. m. ge. Cheual. H. Et Equulus, li. diminut. Ang.
A little or young horse. Et Equinus, a, um. Caballinus, na, number. Qui est d' un
cheu^l. S. Which is of an horse. Et Veterinarius, a, um. Ang. Pertaining to a
horse. A little horse. Mannulus, Equulus, Equuleus. Petit cheual, Cheualet.

Horse barded. Cataphractus equus, Loricatus equus. Cheual barde. S. Horse that
ambles, an hackeney. Equus tolutarius, vel tolutaris, Gradarius, Asturco, onis.
mas. genesis Cheual qui va les ambles, hacquenee. H. Horse being light and swifte.
Sonipes, dis. m. g. Horse breaker. Equiso, nis. Hippodamus, Mansuetarius. Un
donteur de cheuaulx. S. Horse cloth. Instratum, Dorsuale, Stratum, ti. n. ge.
Couuerture du cheual. H. Horse colt. Pullus, Equuleus, lei. mas. ge. Cheualet,
ou Poulain. Horse comb. Strigilis, lis, f. g. Vne estrille. S. Et
Strigilecula. diminut. Ang. A little horse comb. Petite estrille. Call.
Horsecorser. Hippocomus.* Mango, gonis. com. g. Horsecorser, which lets
horses to hyre. Viterinarius, ij. mas. genesis Horse feader. Hippobotos, vel
potius Hippophorbos, equorum pastor. Horse fearful. Equus pauidus, Equus
praetrepidus, Meticulosus, omnia circumspectans, Suspicax, vndique
consternabilis. Bud. Cheual paourreux, ou ombrageux. S. Horse fly. Asilus, li.
m. g. Tahon. S. Horse for wars. Bellator equus. Cheual d' arms. Cheual de
guerre. S. Horse galantly trapped, or barded horse. Phaleratus equus. Liu.
Horse harnays, trappours, or apparel. Instratum, Stratum, ti.* Phalerae,
rarum. foe. genesis Bardes de cheuaulx. S. Horse herd. Hipponomus.* Vide Horse
feader. Horse hyre. Equimentum, ti, n. g. Horse keeper, or muletour. Agaso,
onis. Equiso, nis. Hipponomus. Mulio, onis. Equinarius, ij. m. ge. Parefr^nier.
S. Horse lean. Equus strigosus, vel male habitus. Cheual fort maigre. H. Male
curatus equus. Idem. Horseleche, or bloudsucker, a worm. Hirudo, inis.
sanguisuga. Un sansue. Horseleche, or ferrour. Equarius medicus, Hippiatrus,
Veterinarius medicus. Medicin de cheuaulx. S. Marischal. H. Horse litre, or
chariot. Arcera, Essedum, Gestatorium, rij n. g. Vne lictiere. S. Horse main.
Iuba, bae. Les crins d' un cheual qui luy pendent sur le col. Horse mayned, or
an horse that has a mayn. Iubatus equus. Chiual qui ha crins. S. Horseman.
Eques, it is. com. g. Un cheuaucheur, qui est a cheual. S. Also Eques, is some
time taken for a knighte, sometime for a gentleman, or man of arms. Cheualier,
ou homme d'armes. S. And Equester, tris, re. Adiect. Pertaining to the degree,
or state of a gentleman, as Ordo equestris, The dignity, or state of a
gentleman. Equestres copiae, The company, or number of gentlemen or horsemen.
Et Equestria, Were places for gentlemen, and gentlewomen, to see sole^pne
sightes in. Horse mares. Salire, Assilire, Inire, Incendere. Couurir. etc.
Horse sadled. Ephippiatus equus. Cheual selle. H. Horsemen in the right wynge
of a battle. Dextimi.* Equites dextri agminis cornu. Horsemen in the wynge of
a battle. Alarij milites. Horsemen, which be the light horsemen. Celeres,
vel desultorij equites, Desultores. Horsemynte, herb. Sysimbrium. * Horse
seller. Hippoplanus, Hippocomus. Horse shoe. Solea, ae. Vestigium equi. Fer de
cheual. S To shoe an horse. Soleas iumento induere. Equum calceare, Calceum
ferreum equi vngulae inducere. Ferrer le cheual. H.

Horse stalion, or caple horse. Admissarius, vel Emissarius equus. Estallon. H.
Horse stealer. Hippolegus.*. Horsetaile herb. Equisetum, ti. n. g. Queue de
cheual. Et Anabasis, sis. f. g. Herb nommee presle, ou asprele. Horse that
trotteth. Equus succussator, Succussarius, Succussor, Tortor, Crucia^s.
Trotier, qui va le trot. Horses to hyre. Equi vectigales, Co^ductitij vel
meritorij. Cheuaulx de louage. S. Horse which flingeth and kicketh. Calcitro,
Equus Calcitrosus, Qui calce ferit. Regimbeur, Rueur. H. Horse which ploungeth
and praunceth. Sternax equus. Cheual retif. H. Horse which is crooked or stark.
Tetanicus equus.* Horse with a wall eye. Glauciolus, li. m. g. Call. Horse up
one, or help to horseback. In equum subijcere. vt Regem in equum subiecit. He
help the king to horse. Il a iecte le Roy sur le cheual. S. Horses coupled, or
yoked in a teame. Dextrarij caballi. Horses for light horsemen. Desultorij
caballi, Desultorij equi. Les cheuaulx sur les quels les cheuaucheurs
sailloyent legierement. S. Horsly, or pertaining to a horse. Equarius, a, u^.
Veterinarius, a, um. Vide Horse. Hose. Caliga, ae. f. g. Chause. Hose garters.
Fasciae crurules, vel crurales. Vlpian. Tyrrhena vincula. Iarrettier. H. Hose
for mariners. Caligae follicantes, Laxae brachae. Chausses larges ou
maronieres. H. Hosed. Caligatus, a, um. Chausse. S. Hosier. Caligarius, ij. m.
g. Chaussetier. S. Hospitality. Philopenia, ae. Hospitalitas, tatis. f. g.
Hospitalite. S. Hospitality keeper, or he who keeps a good house of meat and
drink, a lover of strangers. Philoxenus, Hospitalis, Amans peregrinorum.
Hospitality keeping. Larem fouens.* Hospital. Hospitium, Xenodochiu^, ij. n.
g. Hospital. S Hospital for beggars. Ptocodochium, ij. n. ge. Locus vbi
recipiuntur mendici and inopes. Hospitalles for children to be brought up in.
Brephotrophia, Paruulorum hospitalia. Call. Hospitalles wherein poor folks
were kept. Ptochotrophia. Hospitaulx. Call. Hospital for sick folk.
Nosocomium, Valetudinarium, ij. n. g. Infirmarium vulgo dicitur. L' en
fermerie. H. Et Noscomus. The master of the hospital. Host. Acies, Agmen,
Exercitus, tus, Copia, ae. f. ge. Vne armee. S. Assemble, levy or to prepare
an host or army of men. Exercitum conflare, Exercitum facere, Contrahere
exercitum, Conficere exercitum. Aciem struere. Assembler vne armee, lever ou
dresser vne armee. S.

Host assembled. Contractus exercitus. Armee assemblee. S. Host of an
hundredth men. Centuria, ae. f. g. Centeine. Host of foot men. Peditatus, us.
Phalanx, gis.* Pedestris exercitus. Vne armee de gens de pied. S. Host of
horsemen. Equitatus, us. m. ge. Les gents de cheual. S. Host, or the good man
of an Inn or vitaylinge house. Hospes, itis. com. g. Un host. Hosteler.
Hospes, petis, com. g. Stabularius, rij. m. g. Hostelier. S. Hostess, or the
good wife of an Inn. etc. Hospita, tae. foe. g. Hostess. S. Hot. Aestuosus,
a, um. Calidus, da, dum. Chauld. S. Hot, and angry words. Verba
efferuescentia vel Incandescentia. Hot house, or stewe. Hypocaustum, Laconicu^,
Sudatorium, Vaporarium, rij. n. g. Estuue. S. Hot in anger, or fumishe.
Praeceps in iram. To become very hot. Calescere, Concalescere, Incalescere.
Deuenir fort chauld.

To be very hot. Feruere, Referuere. Estre fort chauld. S.

Hot, or luke warm. Tepidus, a, um. Tiede. S. Hot, or luke warm to be.
Tepeo, es. Tepesco, is. Estre tiede. Hot, or luke warm to make. Tepefacio,
cis. Fair tiede. Hot, or luke warm to wax. Tepesco, scis, pui. Inch.
Deuenir tiede. S. Hot breath, or vapoure issewynge out of the pores. Vapor,
Vapos, ris. m. g. Chaleur. S. Hot to be. Ardeo, es. Exardeo, es. Caleo, es.
Estre chault. S. Hot to make. Calefacio, cis. Calidum reddere. Eschaufer. S.
Hot to wax. Ardesco, scis. Exardesco. Deuenir fort chauld. Hot to wax with
anger. Incandesco, scis. S'eschauffer. Hotly. Ardenter. Arde^ment. S. Hotly, or
fumishely. In praeceps, Praecipitanter. Hotspote, or hotchepot, meat sodden
all to fitters, consumed in the broth. Caro iussulenta, vel Iurulenta.
Fourboully.*H. How. Eho. interiect. Heus. aduerb. Voc. Oh. How come hither.
Ehodum. Heus, Ad. vocant. He, venez ca. S. How syrra. Eho bone vir, Eho tu.
How. Qualiter, Quam, Qui, Quomodo, Vt, Come, Combien. S. Comment. How is it
possible. Qui pote, Qui id fieri potest. How late since. Quamdudum. How
lately since? Quampridem? Plaut. How long is it since thou did eat? Quam
pridem non edisti? Combien de temps ya il que tu n' as mange? How little?
Quantillum? Quantulum? aduerb. Combien peu? S. How little, or small?
Quantillus, a, um. Quantulus, a, um? Combien petit? S. How little so ever.
Quantulumcunque. How little so ever it be. Quantuluscunque, lacunque,
lumcunque. Quelque petit qu' il soit. S. How long. Quamdiu, Quantisper,
Quousque, Vsquequo. Combien longiement. S. How long yet, or till what time.
Quousque tandem. Iusques a quand. S. How many. Quotenus, a, um. Quotquot,
Quot, Quam plures, Quotus, a, um. Quotusquisque. Combien. S. How many sorts.
Quotuplex, cis. Quotuplus, a, um. De combien de sorts. Call. How great so ever.
Quantuscunque, Quantuslibet, Quantusquantus. Tant grand qu' il soit. S. How
many times. Quoties. Combie^ de fois. S. How much. Quantu^, Qua^to. O how much
more beawtifull semeste thou unto me now then of late? Quanto nunc formosior
videre mihi quam dudum? O de co^bien tu me semble plus beau que. etc. How
much, or how great. Quantus, a, um. Combien grand. S. For how much will thou
play? Quanti vis ludere? Quanti vis contendere? Quanti vis certare? Combien
veuls tu iouer. S.

For how much shall we play? Quanti ludemus, vel certabimus? Pour combien
iourons nous?

How much more. Quantuplus, a, um. How much more did the field give or
restore again. Quantuplum reddit ager. Call. How often. Quoties. Vt supra. Ho,
how often must I speak? Hem, quoties dicendum est, Repetendum, Iterandum,
Inculcandum? Cord.

How often soever. Quotiescunque. Toutes and quantes fois. S. How often yet.
Quoties tandem. How old, or what age are you? Quot annos natus es? Quem annum
agis? How small a portion. Quota portio. How small value. Quantillum praetium.
Howsoever it be. Quomodocunque, Quomodolibet Vtcunque, Vtut, Quocunque modo. En
quelque sort que ce soit. S. Houel, stable, or stall for oxen, horses, or
other beasts. Mandra, ae. f. g. Iuuen. Estable a boeufs, cheuaulx, ou autres
bestes. Call. Houer a loft, or hang over some thing. Immineo, es. Impendeo, es.
libro, as, aui. Pancher sur aucune Chose. S. Houfe of a beast. Vngula, ae. f.
ge. La corn du pied d' vne best. S. Houfe shouldred. Dimissis humeris.
Terent. Houkester. Caupo, nis. Propola, ae. m. g. Tauernier. S. Cauponor, aris.
To sell as they do. Tauerner vne chose. etc. S. Houksters craft. Cauponaria,
ae. foe. genesis Ars cauponand^. Call. Houle. Vlulo, as. Heurler. S. Houling.
Vlulatus, us. m. g. Heurlement. S. Hounde. Canis venaticus, Sectarius canis,
Venatorius. Chien de venerie. H. Hounde made to the suite, called a
bloudehounde. Odorator, Odoriferus, Sagax, Odorus vel Odorisequus, Plaudus
canis. Braque. H. Hounde which will hounte alone by him self. Vertagus, gi.
m. g. Chien qui de sa nature chasse. S. Houpe. Vietus, us.* To houpe vessels.
Circulis vasa cingere. Plin. Cercellier. Pals.

Houped vessels. Vasa circulis cincta. Plin. Houper. Vietor, oris. m. g.
Tonnelier. S. Houpes of brass, or Iron. Circites, Circuli ex aere facti. Fest.
Hour. Hora, ae. f. g. Henre. Call. Et Horula, ae. dimin. Ang. A short hour.*
Half an hour. Dimidiata hora. Demie heute. S.

Which endures the space of an hour. Horarius, a, um. Qui dure l' espace d'
vne hour. S.

An hour passed, or was spent, while he spoke these things. Dum haec dicit,
abijt hora. L' heure s' est passee ce pendant qu' il disoit ceci. S.

About the hour or time of the battle, or combat. Sub horam pugnae. Al'
heure de combat. S.

In a good hour, or luckely. Bonis auibus, Auspicato. A la bonne heute. S.

Two hours were passed. Duae horae fuerunt. Deux heures sont passees. S.

To change every hour. In horas commutare. Changer d' heure en heure. S.

Hour and a half. Sesquihora, ae. Plin. Vne heure and demie. S. Hours space.
Horarium, rij. neut. genesis L' espace d' vne heure. S. House. Aedes, dium. plur.
Domus, mi. and us. Lar, ris. Seeds, Tectum, ti. neut. genesis Maison. S. Et
Domicula, ae. diminut. Ang. A little house.* House by house, or from house to
house. Domesticatim. De maison en maison. Call. House builded upon an other man's
ground, for the which the owner pays quiterent. Superficiariae aedes. Cai.
Et Superficiarius. He that buyldeth such house, and pays quitere^t. Vlp.
House builded for all storms and wyndes. Aedificium procellis subductum. House
builded like a tower. Pyrgobaris, Domus in modum turris aedificata. House
builded, with the pyllers standinge thick together. Pycnostylon. Call. House,
family, kyndred, or stock. Familia, Locus, Prosapia, ae. f. g. Maison, vu
race. S. Descended of a noble house, lineage, or race. Loco summo natus. Liu. De
grande, ou haulte lignee, maison, ou race. S.

House for a common counsel, as convocation, or parliament. Senatus, us. m.
ge. Habendi senatus locus. Cic. House for a king, or prince. Regia, Regia
aula, Aula basilica. Maison royale. House, cotage, or lodging. Tugurium. Vne
loge. S. Et Tuguriolum. diminut. Angl. A little cottage, or beasts house.
Logette. S. House for to preserve corn from rain. Nubilariu^, rij. n. g.
Colum. lib. 1. cap. 6. House Gods. Lares, Penates, tium. m. g. Dij domestici
dicti sunt. Vt inquit Cic. lib. 2. De natura deorum. Et Lararium ac Penarium,
ij. Sacrariu^ domesticum. Calip. Ang. A place to lay house Gods in, or to
worship them in. House keeping. Larem fouens. House not costly, or sumptuous.
Frugi aedificium. House of Baudry. Lupanarium, Lustrum, Prostibulum, Lupanar,
aris. n. g. Un bordeau. S. House of disputation, or place where learned men
assemble to make argument, a college, or schole. Musaeum, saei. n. g. Un
escole, ou college. S. House or place, where water fowls be kept.
Chenotrophia, ae. f. g. Nantium volucrum auiarium. House set upon a weak
foundation. Abaso.* House to lay tackling of ships in. Casteria, ae. f. g.
House to receive fre^des, or geastes, an Inn. Hospitium, tij. n. ge.
Diuersorium, rij. n. ge. Meritorium, rij. n. g. Hostellerie. S. Houses
garnished to be sold. Ablectae aedes. Plaut. Houses harbourles, or without
lodginges, or wherein no man may lodge. Inhospita tecta. Ovid. Houses let to
hyre. Meritoria, orum. Iuu. Meritoriae tabernae. Houses let to ferme with
charges of reparation. Sarcta tecta. Cic. Houses standing all alone in the
broad streate, and having none other house nere. Insulae, arum, f. g. Domus in
vrbe ab alijs separatae dicuntur. Call. Householde. Familia, liae. foe. g. La
mesgnie. S. Household affairs, or busynes. Res domesticae vel familiares.
Household keeping. Familiam fouens, Larem fouens. Vt supra. Household
necessaries, or forniture, as dishes, plate. vessel. etc. Instrumentum, ti. n.
g. Equippage, Instrument. H. Household servants. Domestici famuli. Household
orderer, governor or master. Oeconomus, mi. m. g. Maistre d' hostel. Call. Et
Oeconomicus, a, um.* Pertaining to a household orderer, or ordering. Household
ordering, or governance. Oeconomia, ae. f. g. Economie. S. Household stuff.
Supellex, lis. f. g. Le mesnage. H. Household stuff, partable among many by
diverse portions. Erciscundae familiae. Cic. Houseleke herb. Sedum maius.
Vitalis, Iouis caulis, Semper viuum, Hypogesson, Sesuuium, Barba Iouis.
Ioubarbe. H. Lege Tur. lib. 2. fol. 131.
H. ANTE. V.
HUcklebone, thigh, or hippe.. Ischia, ae. f. ge. Coxendix, cis. f. g. La
cuisse. Huge, great, or large, beyond measure. Vastus, a, um. Ingens, it is. om.
g. Grand, ou large oultre mesure. S. Hugenes, or greatness passing measure.
Vastitas, atis. foe. g. Vastitudo, nis. Vastities, ei. foe. g. Grandeur passant
mesure. S. Hucster which sells by retayle. Caupo, onis. m. g. Propola, ae.
m. g. Tauernier. S. Hulcke, or broad ship. Stlata, ae. f. g. Heurque. Hulcke
maker. Stlatarius, rij. m. g. Human, as of man. Humanus, a, um. Humain, d'
homme. Call. Humanity. Humanitas, tatis. f. g. Humanite. Humble. Demissus, a,
um. Submissus, a, u^. Supplex, cis. om. ge. Humble. S. Humble, or to submit.
Demitto, is. Exinanio, is. Humilio, as. Submitto, is, Subijcio, cis. Subdo, is.
Suppono, is. Soubmettre. S. Exinaniuit semet serui specie. He made him self as
no body, or of no reputation taking upon him the shape of a bo^dman. Philip. 2.
Humbly. Suppliciter, Demisse, Submisse, Humiliter. Humblement. S. Humbly
beseched, or prayed. Veneratus, a, um. vt, Ceres venerata. Hor. Ceres Humbly
beseched or prayed. Humbre a river. Abi, Albus fluuius. Humiditie, or moisture.
Humiditas.* Humor, oris, m. g. Humeur. S. Humiditie of the ground, or natural
moisture. Vligo, inis. f. g. Naturelle humidite. Call. Et Vliginosus, a, um.
Always moist and wette. Tousiours moiste, and humide. Call. Humility, or
humbleness. Humilitas, atis. foem. g. Basseur. S. Speusipp. Does thus define
it, It is a gentleness of the mind, or a gentle patience without all anger or
wrath. Humlocke herb. Cicuta, tae. foe. g. Cigne. H. Humme, or to murmur as a
be does. Bombilo, as. bo^bu^ edere. Bourdo^ner, come font les mouches a miel.
Humme like one that is du^me, or dare not speak, to mutter. Emutio, it is.
Mutio, it is. Grumeler. S. Humming of bees. Bombus apum. Le bourdon des mouches a
miel. S. Humor. Humor, ris. m. g. Humeur. S. Humor of generation. Virus,
indecl. Humor, or moistnes of any thing that is liquid. Succus, ci. masc.
genesis Suc. Call. Hundredth. Centum, Inde. Cent. S. Hundredth. Centesimus, a, um.
Centiesme. S. Hundredth fold. Centuplex, cis. om. genesis Centuple. S. Hundredth
hands having. Centimanus, a, um. Qui lia cent mains. S. Hundredth times.
Centies. Cent fois. S. Hungarians, people of Hungary. Vnni, noru^. m. g.
Hunger. Esuries, Fames, Inedia, ae. foe. ge. Esuritio, onis, foe. g. Faim, ou
famine. S. Hungersterue. Cibum alicui subducere, Stringere bulimia, vel fame.
Hungersterued. Bulimia strictus, Necatus fame, Confectus fame. Hungre, where
even famine follows, or great hunger. Bulimia, ae. f. g. Grand faim. Call.
Hungry. Famelicus, a, um. Cibi auidus. Qui ha faim. Hungry desire of meat.
Peredia, ae. foe. genesis Edendi cupiditas. Call. Hungry fellow, called a hungry
gutte. Esurio, onis. m. g. Qui ha grand faim. S. Hungry often. Famelicosus, a,
um. Fameilleux. S. Hungry sickness. Caninus morbus, caninus appetitus. Hungry to
be, Esurio, is. Auoir faim. S. Hungry to wax. Famesco, scis.* Hunt. Venor,
aris. Agito, as. Vener. S. Hunte bucke, or dear. Sector, aris, vel, sectare. As
to hunte, or chase hearts. Sectari Ceruos. Chasser aux cerfs. S. Hunte or to
chasse wild beasts. Peruenor, aris. Chasser aux bestes sauuages. Call. It is
also to hunt all over, or every where. Hunte the fox, or fox in the hole, a
play that children use, it is when he that plaieth the fox hoppeth on one
leg, and he whom he strikes first is taken as fox, and so kept till he
take an other. Ascoliasmus, Empusae ludus. H. Hunter. Venator, toris. m. g.
Veneur. Call. Hunter of wolves. Luparius, ij. m. g. Chasseur de loups. Hunters
staff. Venabulum, li. n. g. Mart. Hunting. Venatio, Venatus, us. m. g. Chasse.
S. Et Venaticus, a, um. Venatorius, a, um. Pertaining to hunting. De chasse.
Call. Hunting nagge. Veredus, di. Venator equus. Cheual de chasse. S. Hurl
battes. Adides.* Hurl, or to cast. Iacto, as. Iacio, cis. Ago, is. Iacter. S
Hurt, or displeasure. Detrimentum, Offensio, Offensum, Offensa, Maleficentia,
Laesio, Maleficiu^, Noxa, Noxitudo. Detriment, l' offense. S. Offensa, is the
hurt done, and Offensum, is the hurt taken. Offensa agentis, Offensum
patientis. Hurt. Allido, is. Elido, is. Laedo, dis. Incommodo, Operam malam
dare, Oblaedo, dis. Plagam facere, Saucio, as. Consaucio, as. Facere vulnera,
Vulnero, as. Conuulnero, as. Noceo, es. Obsum, es. Oblido, is. Officio, cis.
Pulso, as. Rado, is. Blesser, Nuire. S. Hurt by jesting and playing, or to
mock. Illudo, dis. Se mo^quer. Call. Hurt often* Offenso, as. Frequent. Hurt,
or harmed. Pulsatus, a, um. Laesus, a, um. Offensus, a, um. Saucius, a, um.
Sauciatus, a, um. Bless. Offense. S. Hurt sone with cold. Alsiosus, a, um.
Frilleux, subiet a froid. Call. Hurt sore. Oblaedo, is, si. Hurt with biting,
or gnawing. Mordeo, es. Mordico, as. Mordre. Call. Hurt, or to trouble ones head
with many words. Ob^undo, is, di, tusum. Lay rompre la test de trop de
parolles. S. Hurtful, as to hyndraunce. Incommodus, a, um. Nuisant,
dommageable. S. Hurtful. Nociuus, Nocuus, a, um. Nonius, a, um. Qui port
dommage. S. Hurtfully. Nociue, Noxie, Nocenter. Auec nuisance. S. Hurtfully
against profit. Incommode. Incommodement, mal a point. S. Hurting, or
displeasing. Laesio, onis. foem. genesis Blessure, Offense. S. Hurtinge.
Offensans, it is. Nocens, it is. Om. gener. Nuisant. S. Hurtlebery. Morum, ri.
neut. gen.* Hurtlebery tree. Morus, ri.* Husband. Coniunx, gis. Maritus,
Nuptus, Vir, ri. m. genesis Mari. S. A maid that has not an husband. Puella
ignara mariti. Hor.

Husband and wives bed. Coniugalis torus. Husband of my daughters daughter,
or sons daughter. Progener, ri. masc. genesis Le mari de ma niepse. S. Husband
of one wife, or which has had but one wife. Monogamus, mi. mas. genesis Qui a
este marie un fois. Call. Which has been mared once. Husband that has had
two wives. Bigamus, i. Digamus, i. m. g. Qui a eu deux femmes. S. Husband
that has had three wives. Trigamus, mi. m. g. Qui tres duxit vxores. Call.
Husband to my nowrice. Nutritious, tij. m. g. Husband to my sister. Sororius
maritus. Husbands brother. Leuir, ri. mas. genesis Le mari du friar. S. Husbands
sister. Glos, it is: Mariti soror. Seur de mon mari. H. Husbandman. Agricola,
Agricolator. Colonus, Ruricola. Laboureur* S. Et Agricultura peritus. Is he
that is a cunning husbandeman, or well seen in husbandry. Husbandman, or man of
the country or vyllage. Paganus, Rusticus, ci. m. g. Villageois. Call.
Husbandrye. Agricultura, Agricolatio, tionis. foe. g. Labourage. S. Et
colonicus, a, um. Pertaining to husbandry. Husbandrye or profit. Vtilitas,
tatis. foem. gener. Prouffit. S. Husbandry to exercise, or to occupy, or have
rule of husbandry. Colo, is. Rusticor, aris. Villico, as. Villicor, aris.
Labourer, and cultiuer. S. Husher of a hall. Atriensis, sis. m. g. Huissier de
sale. S. Husher of a schole. Hypodidascalus, li. Subpraeceptor, is. m. g.
Huissier d' escole. S. Husher of the chamber. Admissionalis, mas. gener.
Huissier. S. Hushers rod. Commentaculum.* Hushed, or to keep silence. Reticeo,
es. Sileo, es. Taceo, es. Conticeo, ces. Conticesco, cis. Obriceo, ces. Facere
finem sermoni, Silentium facere, Silentium dare, In silentium discendere,
Immutesco, cis. Obmutesco, scis. Vocem premere, Consileo, es. Comprimere vocem.
Se taire. S. To hushed, or keep secret any matter, and not to speak a word.
Mussitare, Praetermittere silentio rem aliquam, Reticere, Agere silentium de re
aliqua. Se taire d' aucune chose, and n' ^n dire mot

Hushed, or hold thy peace. Desine, Desinas, Quiesce, Quiescas, Nos missos face,
Tace. Tais toy. S. Husk or codde of beans, pease, and such like. Siliqua,
quae. f. g. L'escosse ou gousse de feue^, pois and semblables. S. Et Siliquor,
aris. To grow into husks or coddes. Deuenir en escosse, ou en gousse. S.
Husk of fruit, and properly of grapes. Scapus. Husk of whente. Gluma, ae. La
paille qui couure le grain. H. Husk, or hose of corn. Folliculus grani seu
inuolucrum seminum in frugibus, Vtriculus. Plin. Husk, or the pill, hull, or
husk, wherein the seades lie. Pericarpiu^, Folliculus, Siliqua, Theca and
inuolucrum seminis quodcunque. L' estuy ou gousse des grains. H. Husk that
encloseth straw, or read. Stipula, lae. f. g. Tuyau. S. Husks of barley.
Clumae, arum. f. g. Folliculi hordei. Fest. Husky, or full of husks.
Siliquosus, a, um. Huswyfe. Materfamilias. foe. g. Mere de famille. Call.
Huswyfe which bears all the rule or swing at a brydall. Pronuba, bae. f. g.
Quae Prae est nuptijs. Huswyfery. Lana and tela. Hutch, or cofer, called in the
North country an arc. Cardopos, Foruli, Scrinium, nij. neut. genesis * Mactra,
trae. foe. genesis Vne huche, ou coffre. S. Hy. Vide Hi.
I. ANTE. A.
I, A letter which is as well a co^sonant as a vowell. And being a word, is
in English a pronowne. As I, Ego. Ie. And in Latin a verb. As, I. Ito, Go
thou. And albeit that both in the Greek, and Latin tongues, there be
diversities between the figure I, which the Greeks call Iota, And Y, yet
nevertheless the one often represents the other. And in English nothing
material whether of them be taken, except that I, being the first person, you
can not say Y, And this word You the second person, may not be written Iou.
Finally, I placed in the middle of a word between two vowels obtains the
force, and valewe of a double co^sonant. Vt. Maius, Peius, Pompeius. I. Ego,
mei. Ie ou moy. S. I am. Sum, es, fui. Ie suis. S. I my self. Ego ipse,
Egome^. Moymesme. S. Iacint stone. Hyacinthus, thy. m. g. Hyacinthe. S. Jack,
or coat of fence. Cento, onis. m. g. Jack sauce. Proteruus, Os impudens.
Iacket. Tunica, ae. Sagum, gi. n. g. Vne say, ou sayon. Et Tunico, cas. To put
on a iacket. Vestir, and couurir d' un say. S. Iacket with sleeves. Manicata
tunica. Iacket without sleeves. Colobium, bij. neut. genesis Hocqueton. Pals.
Iacketed, or which has on a Iacket. Tunicatus, a, um. Sagatus, a, um. Qui ha
un say vestu. S. Iagge of a garment. Lacinia, ae, f. ge. Chicqueture. Iagged.
Laciniosus, a, um. Chicquetteux. Pal. Iaye bird. Gracus, Graculus, li. m. g.
Vne gay. S. Iakes, or commune draught. Forica, Oletum, ti. n. g. Un retraict
public. S. Iambes of a door, or gate. Parastates, Antae, aru^. foe. ge. Les
iambes d' vne huis. S. James. Iacobus, by. m. g. Jacques. S. Iangler, or prater.
Locutor, Rabula, lae. Locuruleius, leij. m. g. Caqueteur. S. January month.
Ianuarius, rij. m. g. Ianuier. Pals. Iape, or ieste. Vide Jest. Iapes, and
trifles. Deliramenta, orum. Lirae, aru^. foe. ge. Nugae, arum. f. g. Baueries.
S. Jar, or to discord. Discrepo, as. Dissono, as. Desaccorder. S. Iarring, or
discording. Discrepans, it is. Dissonus, a, um. Desaccordant. Call. Jasper stone.
Boreae, ae. Iaspis, dis. Boria, ae. foem. g. Iaspe. S. Iawe. Gingiua, ae. foe.
ge. Gentiue. H. Iawe bone. Mandibula, ae. Maxilla, ae. foem. genesis La maschoire.
S. Iauelin. Caulis, is. Framea, ae. Lancea, ae. Materis. Iaueline. S. Et
Lanceatus, a, u^. Ang. Armed with a iauelyn. Arm de lance, ou iaueline. Call.
Iauelyn bearer. Lancearius, Lancifer. Qui pot iaueline. S. Iauelin head.
Sicilices. Fest. Iauelin with a ba^bed head. Tragula, lae. foe. ge. Iaulin with
a string. Verutum, ti. n. ge. Veruina, ae. foe. ge. It is rather a short darte
like a broche. Dard court comme vne broche. H. Iaundise sickness. Arquatus
morbus, Icteros, Morbus arcuatus, Aurigo, Morbus regius. La iaulnisse. S. Et
Ictericus, a, um. Diseased with that sickness, or which has the iaundis. Qui a
la iaulnisse. Call.
I. ANTE. D.
IDes which are in every month just eighte, and not increasing, or
wantinge, as the Calendes, and Nones, whereof thou may read more in their
places. The Romans in respect of our account reduce them backewarde: as in
saying the twelfthe, the eleventh, the tenthe, the ninthe, etc. Of January,
they begin in this sort. Idibus ( Which is always read in the oblatiue
case for their first day) Ianuarij, Pridie, Tertio, Quarto, Quinto, etc. Iduum
Ian. Idus, uum plur. tantum. foe. ge. Idiot or fool. Fatuus, Idiota, Idiotes,
ae. com. genesis Idiot. S. Idle. Desidiosus, a, um. Inanis, Iners, it is. Languidus,
a, um. Lentus, Secors, dis. Socors, dis. Supinus, a, um. Otiosus, a, um.
Feriatus, a, um. Laboris expers, Reses, sidis, om. ge. Oiseux, Oisif. S. To
beidle. Desideo, es. Cessare, Compressis manibus sedere, Languere, Otiari,
Otiosum esse, Otia agere. Estre Oiseux. S.

To be very idle. Abundare otio. Estre fort oisif. S.

An idle household. Feriata familia. Famille oisiue.

Idle knave. Mirgizo, onis. Idle to wax, or to wax slothful. Languesco,
scis. Deuenir paresseux. S. Idleness. Desidia, Inertia, Secordia, Socordia,
Torpor, ris. Otium, tij. n. g. Oisiuete. S. Given to great idleness. Ad otium
summum accommodati. Addonnez a oisiuete. S.

Idolatry. Idolatria, ae. f. g. Idolatry. S. Idol. Idolum, li. n. ge. Vne
Idol. Et Idolium, lij. * Ang. A little Idol. Et Idolatra. Ang. A worshipper of
Idols. Idolatre. S. Et Idolothysia, ae. f. ge. Oblation or offering to Idols.
Et Idolothytu^. The thing offered, and given to Idols. Ce qui est immole, and
dedie aux idols. S. Idol set up in the place of espiall. Beelsephon.
I. ANTE. E.
IEate stone. Gagates, it is. m. ge. Agathe. H. Iegot, or pudding made with eggs
and flesh, chopped and mynced. Insicium, cij. Isicium, cij. n. g. It is rather
a saucsage. Sauciss^. H. Ielye. Iusculum coctum. Gelatine. H. Jealous.
Zelotypus, a, um. Ialoux. S. Jealous body. Zelotes, is. m. g. Ialoux. S.
Jealous to be. Zelor, aris. Zelo, as. Estre ialoux. S. Ielosye. Zelotypia, ae.
f. g. Ialousie. S. Ienet beast, of the color black. Genocha, vel Genochia.*
Ieoparde, or to prove. Facere periculum, vel rem, Periclitor, aris. Esprouuer.
S. Ieopard life. Prodere vitam. Ieopardy, danger, or peril. Discrimen,
Periculu^, li. n. g. Danger, ou peril. S. Et Periclitor, aris. Versari
discrimine. Ang. To be in ieopardy, or danger. Estre en danger. S. Discrimen
viarum, Periculum locorum dicitur. Ieopardous, or full of ieopardie.
Discriminosus, a, um. Periculosus, a, um. Perilleux. S. Ieopardously, or
perillously. Periculose. Perilleusement. S. Ierkin, or Iacket. Succintorium,
rij. n. g. Colobiu^, bij. n. g. Et Colobium scorteum. A lether ierkin. Cuirace.
H. Iesses for hawks. Lemnisci, orum. m. g. Getz. Pal. Jest or to scoff one.
Comoedior, aris. locor, caris. Railler and se gauder d'aucun. S. Iester.
Facetosus, Iocosus, Salsus homo. Un railleur ou raillart. S. Iester, or a
scoffer, a vice in a play. Morosophus, phi. m. g. Un sage fol. S. Jesting.
Sales, Scomma, it is. Iocus, Ludus, Iocatio, Deridiculum, li. n. ge. Raillerie.
S. Jesting bitingly, or bitter jesting. Sarcasmus, mi. Iocus cum amaritudine.
Jew. Iudaeus, ei. m. g. Iuif. S. Jewel. Iocale, lis. Monile, lis. Ornamenta,
orum. n. g. Ioyaux. S. Jewel house. Cimeliarchium, chij. n. ge. Locus vbi
reponitur thesaurus. Ieweller which sells rings. Annularius.* Jews that
keep the Sabbath. Iudaei Sabbatharij. Iuifz qui gardent les Sabbaths. S.
Iewishe. Iudaicus, a, um. De Iuif. Iewry. Iudaea, Palestina, Israel, Isacidum
domus, Chananaea, Terra sancta. La terre de Iudee. Iude^.
I. ANTE. F.
IF. Si. Si. S. A conjunction taken in diverse manners. Scil. Adprobatiue,
Casualiter, Causaliter, Conditionaliter, Dubitatiue, Negative, Optatiue,
Rationaliter. If his father were come back again. Si redijsset pater. Si son
pere estoit return. S. If he say he will, give it him. Si est vt dicat velle
se, read. S' il dit qu' il le veult, ren luy. If I be not deceived. Nisi ego
fallor, Ni me meus animus fallit, Ni mea sit falsa sententia, Ni mea me
fefellit opinio. Si ie ne m' abuse. S. If I feared not the master. Ni metuerem
ludimagistrum. Si n' estoit que ie crains le maistre. S. If you may justly
chyde me, it follows not that you should therefore beat me. Non si just
potes obiurgare, ideo me verberare iustum est. Si vous aues just cause de
tenser, vous n' auez pou^t droit de me battre. Pil. If the Sun shine, it is
day. Si sol lucet, dies est. Si le soliel luit, il est iour. Pil. Si si non
esset, perfectum quodlibet esset.
If if in things no rule did bear,
Then every thing right perfect were.
If from any place, or any where. Necunde.* If not. Sin, Sin minus. Sinon. S.
If you will. Sultis, pro Si vultis.
I. ANTE. G.
Ignominy, infamy or reproach. Ignominia, ae. f. genesis Ignominy. Ignominious.
Ignominiosus, sa, su^. Ignomineux. Ignominiously. Ignominiose, Cum ignominia
and dedecore. Auec infamy. Call. Ignorance. Error, Ignorantia, Inscientia,
Inscitia. Errans opinio, Ignoratio, Imperitia, ae. foem. ge. Ignorance. S.
Ignorant. Ignarus, a, um, Inscius, Nescius, a, um. Rudis, de. Ignorans, it is.
Imperitus, ta, tum. Ignorant. S. I am not ignorant, or I know well. Non
ignoro, haud mihi sum falsus, Non me latet, Fugit, Praeterit, Non clam me est,
Non sum inscius, Non sum nescius. Ie n' ignore point, Ie scay bien. S.

Ignorant of nothing. Nulla in re peregrinus, atque hospes. Qui n' est ignorant
de rien. S. Ignorant to be. Ignoro, as. Ignosco, scis. Nescio, scis. Ignorer.
S. Ignorantly. Ignare, Inscienter. Ignorament. S.
I. ANTE. L.
ILchester, a town in Somerset shyre. Ischalis. Ill. Malum, li. neut. g. Mal.
S. And for the difference between Malum, when it signifies ill, and when it is
an apple, let these two verses suffice. Si mihi dent aliquod, dent longum
numina malum. Si mihi dent aliquod, dent breue fata malum. Ill at case, or
sick. Laborare, Habere malu^. Auoir mal. S. To endure, or suffer ill. Subire
malum. Endurer du mal. S.

To do some ill. Obijcere malum, Malum alicui dare, Malum facere. Fair
quelque mal. S.

To pronounce ill. Perperam pronunciare. Mal pronouncer.

Ill form of speaking without good sound. Cacophaton, Durior orationis sonus.
Ill Imitatour, or follower. Cacozelus, Ineptus imitator. Ill, or defourmed
composition. Cacosyntheton, Mala sieve deformis compositio. Ill speech.
Cacologia, Maledictio, onis. f. g. Ill speaker. Cacologus, Maledicus, ci. m. g.
Ill writer. Cacographus, phi. m. g. Ill writing. Cacographia. ae. f. g. Note
that Cacos Greece, is Malus, Ill, And as Theo. Gaz. 5. Iliados affirms, some
time it signifies deformed, sometime timorous, there be many mo words then
these which begin with ill, thererfore they add unto them Cacos, Caca, or
Cacon, as the ge^der requires, as thus Ill custom. Cacoethes. Il realm or
Empire. Cacobasilia. Ill spirit. Cacodaemon. Esprit maling. etc.

Illigitimate, or not lawefull. Non legitimus. Illigitime. S. Illuminate, or to
make light. Illustrare, Illuminare. Illuminer. S. Illusion. Visum, Phantasma,
it is. n. g. Illusion. S. Illusion, or mocking. Illusio, onis. Irrisio, onis. f.
g. Illusion, derision, mocquerie. S.
I. ANTE. M.
IMage. Effigies, Imago, Simulachrum, Statua, Sculptile signum, Icon. Image. H.
Image, or prynte of coin. Numisma, it is. n. g.* Image whereunto men ran for
sanctuary. Asylus, Statua ad quam confugientibus ius erat Asyliae. Images
carried about in pageauntes with great chekes and wide mouths. Manduces.*
Images to make. Imagino, as. Imagines facere. Fair images. Call. Imagine.
Imaginor, aris. Meditor, aris. Cogito, as. Verso, as. Imaginer. S. Imagine to
see one. Aliquem mente conspicere. Imaginer veoir aucun. S. To think and
imagine in his mind, the form, or semblitude of any thing. Depingere
cogitatione, Animo fingere. Penser and imaginer en son esprit la form and
semblance de quelque chose. S.

To imagine in his mind what the Gods be. Informare deos coniectura. Imaginer
en son esprit quelz sont les dieux. S.

Imagine craftily. Machinor, aris. Machiner. S. Imagination. Cogitatio,
Cogitatus, us. Meditatio, Imaginatio, onis. f. g. Imagination. S. Et
cogitabu^dus, Meditabundus, a, um. Ang. Full of imagination. Imagination crafty
and subtyle. Machina, ae. f. ge. Imagination subtle. Call. Imbattlementes of a
wall. Pinnae, arum. Liu. Creneau de mur. Call. Imbecille and weak. Imbecillis,
le, vel Imbecillus, la, lum. Infirmus, ma, mum. Debilis, le. Imbecille and
debile. Imbecillitee and feblenesse or debilitee. Imbecillitas, Infirmitas,
tatis. foe. genesis Imbecillite and foiblesse, ou debilite. S. Et Imbecilliter
With imbecillitie, or weakness. Imbecillement.. S. Imboced work in metal,
or stone, plate chased or ingraued. Toreuma, atis. n. g. Et Toreumatum, ti.
neut. genesis Imboced of all parts. Conuexus, a, um. Courbe de toutes pars. S.
Imbocer, or chaser of plate. Toreutes, it is. mas. ge. Imbocing. Conuexitas,
tatis. foe. g. Courbement. S. Embrace. Amplector, eris. Circumplector, eris.
Co^plector, eris. Brachijs amplecti, Amplexari, Amplexus dare, Tenere aliquem
complexu, In co^plexum alicuius venire. Emb^asser. S. Embrace and to hold an
opinion. Comprehensam animo sententiam aliquam habere. Embrasser and tenir vne
opinion. S. Embracing. Amplexus, Co^plexus, us. m. g. Embrassement. Imbrayde,
or cast in the teeth. Exprobro, as. Impropero, as. Reprocher. S. Imbrayder, or
caster in teethe with an old benefit. Exprobrator, toris. m. g.* Imbrayding,
or casting in teeth. Exprobratio, Improperium, ij. n. g. Reproach. S. Imbrue.
Oblino, is. Lino, is. Induco, cis. Induo, is. Enduire. S. Imbrued. Oblinitus,
a, um. Imbutus, ta, tum. Imbu. Imbroder. Texo, is, xui. Praetexo, is. Border
and couurir le board. S. Imbrodered. Acupictus, a, um. Textilis, le. Phrygianus,
a, u^. vt Phrygianae vestes. Faictes de broderie. Imbrodered works. Acupicta,
torum.* Imbroderer. Acupictor, vel Trix, Phrygio, onis. Limbolarius, Plumarius,
ij. m. g. Bordeur. S. Imitate, or to follow the example of other. Imitor, taris.
Sequi aliorum exempla. Imiter, contrefaire, Resembler. Call. Imitation.
Imitatio, onis. f. g. Imitation. Call. Imitater, follower, or one that does
imitate. Imitator, toris. m. g. Assectator alicuius. Imitateur. And she that
does imitate. Imitatrix, tricis. f. g. Imitatrice. And that may be imitated, or
followed. Imitabilis, le. om g. Imitable. S. Immaculate. Syncerus, a, um. Purus,
a, um. Immaculatus, a, um. Intemeratus, ta, tum. Expers maculae. Immacule. S.
Immemorable, or unworthy remembrance. Immemorabilis, le. Indigne de qui on
face memoire. Imminent, or at hand. Imminens, it is. om. genesis vt Imminens malum.
Imminent euel. Imminent, or at hand, or ready to fall. Immineo, es. Iusto,
stas. Pencher dessus, Estre pres de tomber dessus. Call. Imminent, or at hand
to be or come upon, as age, battle, tempest. etc. Ingruo, is. Assailir auec
impetuosite. Call. Immoderate. Proteruus, a, um. * Intemperatus, ta, tum.
Intemperans, ntis. Immoderatus, ta, tum. Immodicus, ca, cum. Immodere. S.
Immoderatly. Immodice, Proterue, Proteruiter, Immoderate, Intemperanter.
Immoderement. S. Immodeste. Immodestus, ta, tum. Immodeste. S. Immodestie.
Immodestia, ae. foe. g. Immodestie. S. Immodestly. Immodeste Immode stement. S.
Immolate, or to offer. Immolare. Immoler. Immolator, or one that does offer.
Immolator, toris. m. genesis Immolateur. S. Immolation, or offering. Immolatio,
nis. foem. ge. Immolation. S. Immortal. Immortalis, le. Aeternus, na, number.
Immortel. S. To make immortal. Mandare aeternitati, vel immortalitati, Donare
immortalitate. Fair ou render immortel. Immortaliser. S.

Immortality, or perpetual life. Immortalitas, tatis. foe. g. Immortalite. S.
Immortally. Immortalliter. Immortellement. S. Immutable, unchangeable, or
never changing. Immutabilis, le. Indeflexus, a, um. Immuable. S. Impart, or to
give to an other part of any thing. Impartio, is. Impartior, ris. Et Impertio,
it is, vel Impertior, ti^is. Departtir, donner. S. Impe, or young set, or
slip of a tree. Surculus, li. m. g. Vng iecton d'vn arbre. S. Imped, or
graffed. Insertus, a, um. Vide Graffed. Impediment, or let. Impedimentum,
Obstaculu^, Offendiculum, li. Difficultas, Impeditio, onis. Occupatio, onis.
Intercessio, onis. Praepedimentum, ti. neut. genesis Empechement. S. Imperfect.
Imperfectus, a, um. Imparfaict. Imperfected. Infectus. i. non factus, aut non
perfectus. Qui n' est point fait. S. Imperfection. Vitium, tij. n. ge.
Imperfection and corruption. S. Imperfectnes, or lack of knowledge. Imperitia,
ae. f. g. Fault d' experience. S. Impier, or vmpier, a judge or mediatoure
taken to deame a matter debated. Sequester, ris, re. Arbiter, tri. m. g. Un
arbitre. S. Impiety. Impietas, tatis foe. g. Impiete. S. Implementes of
household. Vtensilia, orum. n. ge. Vtensiles. H. Importance, or meaning, or
signification of words. Vis, Huius vis. foe. ge. Importance, or wayght, or
gravity. Grauitas, tatis. foe, ge Grauite. S. Importunate, or of great
importance. Grauis, ue. om. ge. et Res momentosa, A matter of importance.
Chose d' importance. S. Importunate, or out of season. Importunus, a, um.
Importun. Call. Importunity, or inconvenience of place and time. Importunitas.
f. g. Importunite. S. Imposthumation, or running of a sore. Suppuratio, Vlcus,
ceris. Abscessus, us. Cells. mas. ge. Apostume. S. Et Suppuratus, a, um. That
mattereth, or runs. Apostume. Call. Suppuratorius, a, um. That makes a sore
to matter, or run. Qui fait apostumer, ou meurir vne apostume. Call.
Imposthume. Apostema, it is. n. g. Apostume. S. Imposthume, or botche having no
grief. Oedema, atis. n. g. Est tumor praeter naturam rarus, and indolens. Call.
Impostume, or running sore. Suppuratio, Vlcus, Vomica, ae. foe. ge. Vt supra.
Imposthume, or to breed an imposthume. Suppuro, as, aui. Apostumer. S.
Imposthumes to cause, or make. Redulcero, ras. Vlcerosum facio. Call.
Impouerishe, or make poor. Depaupero, as. Paupero, as. Co^sumo, is. Facere
paupere^. Fair pour. Impouerished. Demissus homo, Depauperatus, a, um.
Pauperatus, ta, tum.* Imprysone, or to cast into prysone. Conijcere, vel
Detrudere in carcerem, Dare in custodiam, In custodiam tradere, Condere in
carcerem, Mandare vinculis. Mettre in prison. Imprisoned. In carcerem detrusus,
Incarceratus, Custodia clausus, Captiuus. Prisonnier. S. Imprisoned to be.
Conijci in vincula, Detrudi in carcerem, In vinculis esse. Estre en prison. S.
Improper. Improprius, a, um. Abusiuus, a, um. Impr^^re. Call. Improperly, or
without properietie. Improprie, Abusiue. Improprement. Imprudence. Imprudentia,
ae. f. g. Imprudence. Call. Imprudent. Imprudens, it is. (postul. gen.) om. g.
Ignarus, a, um. Inscius, a, um. Imprudent. Call. Imprudently. Imprudenter.
Imprudemment. Call. Impudent. Impudens, it is. om. g. Impudent. S. Impudency.
Impudentia, ae. f. ge. Impudence, and effrontement. S. Impudently. Impudenter.
Impudemment. S. Impugn. Impugno, as. Velitor, aris. Aduersor, aris. Impugner.
S. Impute. Arguo, is. Ascribo, is. Obiecto, as. Refero, ^s. Imputo, as. Mettre
sus a aucun qu' il est cause de quelque chose, Imputer. S. To impute any thing
to one for folly, or blame. Vertere stultitiae, aut vitio aliquid alicui.
Imputer quelque those a aucun a folly, ou a blasme. S.

Imputed. Obiectus, a, um.
I. ANTE. N.
IN. In. En. S. vt, In hoc, In this. En ce. S. Penes: vt Non penes me est. It
lies not in my power Il n' est point en moy. S. Per: vt Per te stetit. It lay
in thee. Terent. Per tempus salices legere. To gather willowes in due time, and
season. En temps, and saison. S. Pro: vt Pro tribunali. Plin. Iun. In the
judgment place. Sub: vt Subdiu. Plaut. In the day time. De iour. S. Tenus: vt
Tenus titulo Consul, hoc est, Solo titulo, non re. Call. In all countries.
Vbique gentium. In all places. Vbique, Vbique loci, Vbicunque, Vbicubi. En
quelque lieu que ce soit. S. In all places about. Cis vndique. Plaut. In any
manner of wise. Quoquomodo, Quoquo pacto, Vsquam. In as much that. Inquantum.
Autant que. S. In deed. Quia ne, * Re ipsa, Re vera. A la verite. S. In every
man's mouth. In ori omni populo, Vulgo. Tout le peuple en bruit. S. In hand.
Prae manibus. In many sundry fashions. Multifarie, Multifariam. En diuerses
manieres, and facons. S. In no condition. Neutiquam, Adu. neg. Nullement. S. In
no place. Necubi. En null lieu. S. In no wise. Neutiquam, Nullatenus. Vt supra.
In some place or stead. Vspiam, Vsquam gentium. En quelque lieu. S. In some
other stead. Alibi, Aliubi. In so much. Eousque, Vsque eo. Iusques autant. S.
In that wise. Eatenus, Eo modo, Eo pacto, Ad eu^ modum. In the day time.
Interdiu. De iour, par iour. S. In the mean time, space, season, or while.
Interea, Interim. Interea loci, Obiter. Ce temps pendant. S. In the sight of
all me^. Palam, Vulgo. Vide Openly. In the one place and the other, or in both
sides. Vtrobique. In tous les deux costez. In time convenient. Per tempus. Into
what place. Quonam, Aduerb. En quel lieu. S. Into some place. Quopiam. En
quelque lieu. S. In very troth. Re ipsa, Re vera. A la verite. S. In what
manner. Qui, Quomodo. Vtcunque, Vtut. Vide How. In what manner so ever.
Quomodocunque. En quelle maniere que ce soit. In words without effect.
Titulo tenus. Incense. Thus, ris. n. g. Encens. Call. Et Thurinus, a, u^. Of
incense. D' encens. Incensed. Fumificatus, a, um.* Fumigatus, ta, tu^. Incensed
with an evil spirit. Proseritus.* Incensen. Fumifico, as. Fumigo, as, aui.
Encenser. S. Inceptours, or regent masters in the universities. Candidati.
Incertaine. Anceps, Incertus, Dubious, a, um. Uncertain. S. To make incertayne.
Incertum facere. Render uncertain. S.

Very incertaine. Perincertus, ta, tu^. Fort uncertain.

The matter is incertayne. In incerto res est. La ^ chose est incertaine. S.

Incertainely. Dubie. Incertainement. To answer incertainely, and
ambiguouslye. Respondere suspensa and ambigua, and vtroque flexibilia. Bud.
Respondre incertainement, and a deux ententes. S.

Incessantly. Ex ordine, Incessanter. * Ad infinitu^, Indesinenter, Assidue.
Incessamment. S. Inchauntement. Carmen, Sacra magica, Incantatio, onis. f. g.
Enchantement. S. To Inchaunt, or bewitche one. Auertere sensus malis artibus.
Enchanter aucun. S.

To Inchau^te. Cantare, Incantare, Excantare. Enchanter. S.

Incident. Incidens, it is. om. ge. Qui chet. S. Incidently. Obiter. Incidemment.
S. Incision, or cutting. Incisio, onis. Deuisura, rae. Anatomia, ae. Incisura,
ae. f. g. Incision. S. Incision, or cutting about. Circuncisura, ae. foe. ge.
Incision faicte a l'entour. S. To make incision. Vulnus imprimere. Fair vne
incision. S.

Incision, or cutting of cords. Anchyle.* Incite, or to move one to do some
thing. Accendere, Commouere, Incitare, Proritare, Extimulare, Hortari,
Inuitare, Allectare, Ardorem inijcere, Acuere, Igniculos iacere, Aliquem ad
aliquid faciendum agere, Instigare. Inciter aucun a fair quelque chose. S.
Incite, or to move to anger. Incitare, Mouere alicui bilem aut stomachum.
Inciter a courroux. S. Incited, or stired up to do a thing. Impulsus,
Instinctus, Incitatus, ta, tum. Incite. S. Inclination, procliuitie, or
promptness. Procliuitas, tatis. Propensio, onis. Inclinatio, onis. f. genesis
Inclination. S. Incline. Inclino, as. Incliner. S. Inclined. Inclinatus,
Procliuis, e. Pronus, Propensus, a, um. Incline, ou enclin. P. Inclined to
lechery. Procliuis ad libidinem. Enclose, to shut, or compass in. Concludo,
is. Includo, dis. Enclorre. S. Enclose a way or pathe, that no man may pass.
Intercipere iter, vel viam. Enclose round. Circuncludo, is. Enclorre,
Entourer. Enclose with hedges. Consepio, is. Obsepio, is. Sepio, is. Enclorre
de hayes. P. Enclosed. Inclusus, a, um. Conseptus, a, um. Septus, a, um.
Enclos. P. Enclosure. Conseptum, ti. n. g. Enclosture. P. Enclosure called a
barton to feade fowls in. Chors, it is.* Include. Includo, is. Vide Enclose.
Included. Inclusus, a, um. Idem. Inconstancy. Inconstantia, Leuitas,
Instabilitas, tatis. foe. ge. Inconstance. P. Inconstant. Inconstans,
Vacillans, Versutus, Fallens, Leuis, Mobilis, Instabilis. Qui n' est point
constant. S. Inconstantly. Inconstanter. Inconstamment. P. Inconstant to be.
Vacillo, as. N' estre constant. Call. Incontinency. Asotia, ae. Incontinentia,
ae. Intemperantia, ae. f. g. Incontinence. Call. Incontinent. Iam, Illicet,
Simul ac, Simul atque, Statim. Incontinent. Vide By and by. Incontinent after.
Iam inde. Incontinent, or vicious. Solutus, a, um. Asotus, a, um, Incontinens,
it is. Intemperans, it is. om. genesis Incontinent. Call. Incontinently, or
intemperatly. Incontinenter, Intemperanter, Sine continentia. Incontinentement.
Inconvenience. Inconuenientia. ae. f. g. Inconvenience, or misfortune.
Infortunium, Casus aduersi. Inconvenient. P. Inconvenient. Importunus, a, um.
Inconueniens, it is. om. g. Mal conuenant. S. Inconvenient time, out of time and
season. Inte^pestas, tatis. f. g. Horse heure, temps, ou saison. Call.
Inconueniently, or out of due time. Intempestiue, Importune, Idem. Encourage.
Excito, as. Animo, as. Animos facere, Accendere animos, Animos addere vel dare.
Encourager. S. Vide Courage. Increase, or to wax bigger, or more. Adolescere,
Accrescere, Adaugescere, Augescere incrementis, Crescere, Excrescere, Gliscere,
Ingrandescere, Inolescere, Prouenire, Incrementum recipere, vel accipere.
Surgere. Croistre. Increase children, or people. Sobolesco, scis. * Increase
much. Exaugeo, es. Call. Increase of cattle. Foetura, ae. foe. ge. Virg.
Foetura pecuaria. Increase of setting and sowyng. Seminium, nij. n. ge.
Increase or to augment. Adaucto, as. Adaugeo, es. Adijcio, cis. Augeo, es.
Augmento, as. Coalesco, scis. Cresco, scis. Accroistre. S. Increase, or
increasing. Accrementum, Accretio, Accumulatio, Auctio, Auctus, us.
Incrementum, Prouentus, us. Coagmentatio, Augmentum, ti. Augmen, nis. Adiectio,
onis. f. g. Accroissement. S. Accroissance. Increased. Auctus, a, um. Accru. S.
Increated. Increatus, a, um. Non creatus. Qui n' a pas este cree. Call.
Indamage. Damno, as. Damnifico, cas. Vide Endamage. Indamaged by trespace, or
other offense. Damno auctus. Indamaged to be. Subire incommoda. Endeavor to do
a thing. Innitor, eris. Nitor, eris. Adnitor, teris. Connitor, teris. Enitor,
teris. Neruos vel vires in re aliqua adhibere. S' efforcer and trauailler a
fair quelque chose. S. An endeavor to do a thing. Conatus, tus. Nisus, sus.
Molitio, onis. foe. g. Molimen, nis. n. ge. L'effect qu'on fait a fair quelque
chose. S.

Indebted. Aeratus, a, um. Contractus aere alieno, Obnoxious, a, um. Vide debt.
Indebted to be. Aes alienum afferre, Cogere, Conflare, Contrahere, vel habere.
Inde. Gangetica tellus, India. ae. foe. g. Indempned. Indemnis, e. * Without
damage or exempte from harm. Exempt de dommage. Call. Indempnitie. Indempnitas,
tatis. Exemption from harm. Exemption de dommage. Call. Indemnite. S.
Indenture. Authorame^tum, ti. n. g. Vnes indenturez. Or it is any bond or
wrytinge in the law, whereby one is bounden to an other.* Inde^ture or writing
sealed and deliuerid. Profacto,*Syngraphus, phi, Syngraphu^, phi, n. g.
Syngrapha, ae. foe. ge. It is rather an obligation, or an acquittaunce.
Indiction, which is the space of fiftene years, and used after the church of
Rome. Indictio Romana. Indifferency or equality. Aequamentum, Rectitudo,
inis. foe. g. Aequalitas, tatis. foe. ge. Egalite. Indifferente. Adiaphoron,
Propensior in neutram partem, Rectus, a, um. Sequester, ris, re. Iustus, a, um.
Indifferens, it is. Indifferent. S. Indifferent in condition. Aequanimis, e.
Aequanimus, ma, mum. Qui est aequi animi, Qui nec prosperis extollitur, nec
aduersis frangitur. Indifferently. Indiscriminatim, Recto, Remoto delectu.
Indifferenter. Indifferemment. S. Indignation. Stomachus, Aemulatio. *
Indignatio, onis. f. g. Indignation. S. Indignation to have. Stomachor, aris.
Aemulor, aris. Vide Envy. Indivisible, or not partable. Indiuiduus, a, um.
Indistinctus, ta, tum. Indistinct. S. Indiuisibly. Indiuidue, Indistincte.
Indistinctement. Induce. Induco, is. Prolicio, is. Adduco, is. Induire. Induce,
or to bring one to any thing. Inclinare, Ad aliquid faciendum agere,
Co^suadere, Adducere ad rem aliquam, Inducere. Induire aucun a quelque chose.
S. Induce by force. Perpello, is. Vide Compelle. Induce one to do any thing,
or his will. Ad vel In voluntatem suam aliquem adducere. Induire aucun a fair
ce qu' on veult. S. Induce from opinion. Suadeo, es. Et Suadibilis, le. vel
Suasib^lis, le. That which is able, or may be induced from opinion. Induced.
Inductus, a, um. Adductus, ta, tum. Perductus, ta, tum. Induict. S. Induction.
Inductio, Inductus, tus. Suasio, onis. f. g. Induction. S. Industry, which is
a grace of diligence and study. Industria, ae. f. g. Industry. S.
Industrious. Peruigil. Et Industrius, a, um. vt Industrius homo. Homme
industrieux. S. Infame, or to defame. Infamo, as. Ignominia afficere. Insamer.
S. Infamed. Infamis, e. Paraclytus, Suggillatus, a, um. Infamatus,
Ignominiosus, sa, sum. Infame. S. Infamy. Infa mia, Ignominia, Macula,
Probrum, Stigma, it is. Nota, tae. Dedecus, coris. Infamy. S. Thou indeuoureste
to bring me to infamy, or to defame me. etc. Vehementer studes de mea fama
detrahere, meam famam laedere, detrimento afficere, obesse, nocere, officere
meae famae. id agis, vt aeternas mihi infamiae notas inuras, vt ijs meum nomen
sordibus, ijs maculis afficias, inficias, inquines, inspergas. eas meo nomini
sordes, eas maculas inijcias, inspergas, inferas, quas nulla dies, nulla deinde
res possit eluere, abstergere, auferre, delere. tuum co^silium, tuum studium
illud est, vt me in omne tempus, in omnes annos, in omnes meae vitae dies, in
perpetuum infamem reddas, infamia notes, infamiae tradas. id spectas, vt
perpetuo male audiam, perpetuam in infamia^ adducar, aeterna vt infamia
flagrem, laborem, vt in sordious infamiae nunquam no^ iaceam, vt perpetua
verser in infamia.

In^ant. Infans, it is. Puerulus, li, vel la. Et Infantulus, li. diminut. Petit
enfant. H. Ang. A young infant. Et infantilis, le. Pertaining to an infant.
Infant is also taken for every thing that is young. Infans, de brutis and
auibus. Les petits.* Infant of the age of two years. Bimulus. And of the age of
three years. Trimulus, vel la. And so forth.* Infancy. Infantia, ae. foe. g.
Enfance. S. Infarce, or stuff. Infarcio, is. Remplir. S. Infarced, stuffed, or
filled. Fartus, ta, tum. Refertus, ta, tum. Rempli. S. Infeable. Infirmo, as.
Debiliter. Call. Infeabled. Infirmatus, Infirmus, a, um. Vide Weakened. Infect.
Inficio, cis. Infecter. S. Infected. Infectus, a, um. Infect ou infecte.
Infection, or a contagious sickness. Contages, Co^tagio, Contagium, gij. neut.
gener. Malady contagieuse. Contagion. S. Infelicitie, vnluckenes, misery.
Aerumna, Miseria, ae. Infoelicitas, tatis* foe. g. Malh^ur, misere. S.
Infeoffe. Fideicommitto, it is. Infeoffed to be. Accipere fiduciam. Infernal, or
of hell. Infernalis, le. om. ge. Infernus, a, um. D'enferne. S. Infertile, or
unfruitful. Infoecundus, a, um. Infoelix, li^is. om. g. Infertile. S.
Infertilitie, or unfruitfulness. Infoecunditas, tatis. foe. g. Infertilite. S.
Infidele. Atheos, Infidelis, le. om. ge. Infidele. S. Infinite. Infinitus, a,
um. Infini. S. Infinitnes. Infinitas, tatis. f. g. Infinite. S. Infinitely.
Infinite, ad infinitum, Infinito. Infinement. Infirm, or weak. Infirmus, a,
um. Contractus infirmitate. Debile. S. Infirmity, or weakness. Infirmitas,
tatis. foem. ge. Debilite. S. Infirmly, or weakly. Infirm. Foiblement.
Infixe, or to fasten. Infigo, is, xi. Ficher dedens. S. Infixed, or fastened
in. Impetritus, a, um. Infixus, a, um. Defixus, a, um. Insitus, a, um. Inustus,
a, um. Haerens in alieno, Penitus insidens, neque vllo modo euelli possit. Cic.
Fiche dedens. S. Inflammation, or hot imposthume of blood. Infla^matio, onis.
f. g. Infla^mation, Emflambement. Call. Inflame. Concalfacio, cis. Ignio, is.
Incendo, is. Inflammo, as. Succendo, is, Adoleo, es. Accendo, is. Succendo, is.
Enflamber. To inflame, or encourage any. Ardorem inijcere alicui, Incendere
aliquem, Studium alicui inijcere. Enflamber aucun. S.

To inflame, or to move one to anger. Incendere aliquem, Animum alicuius
inflammare. Enflamber, and esmouuir quelqu' vne a courroux. S.

To inflame any, or to provoke more and more to anger. Augere iracundiam
alicuius. Enflamber aucun, and inciter de plus en plus. S.

Inflamed. Ignitus, Incensus, Inflammatus, Succensus, a, um. Enflambe. S.
Inflamed to be. Exardeo, es. Flammesco, seis. Inflammari, Ardeo, es. Estre
enflambe. S. Inflamed to be, or angry. Ardere cupiditate. Inflamed to be, or on
fire. Conflagro, ras, aui. Estre en feu. Call. Influens of stars. Aspiratio
stellarum, Syderum affectio. Influence, and constellation des astres. S.
Enforce, or to constraigne one. Impello, lis. Commoueo, es. Impulso, as. Adigo,
is. Angario, as. Cogo, is. Compello, lis. Subigo, is. Vrgeo, es. Imponere
necessitudinem, Necessitatem adhibere, Afferre, Iniu^gere, Vim alicui imponere,
Afferre Contraindre aucun. S. To be enforced, or constrained by necessity.
Co^stringi, Astringi, vel cogi necessitate. Estre constrainct per necessite. S.

To enforce, or compelle one to battle. Eripere pacem alicui. Contraindre
aucun de fair le guerre. S.

To enforce, or constrain by justice, or law. Lege agere. Contraindre par
justice. S.

He could not enforce, or constrain thee to day, that thou should marye
her. Non te quiuit hodie cogere, illam vt duceres. Il ne to a peu contraindre,
de. etc.

Information. Quaestio, nis. f. g. Inquisitio, nis. f. ge. Information. S.
Information to give. Inquirere in delatos, and testibus maleficij testimonium
denunciare. Informer. Information to give against brybery, and extortion. De
rebus repetundis quaerere. Inform, or to instruct by teaching. Edoceo, es.
Informo, as. Instruo, is. Condoceo, es. Monstro, as. Commonstro, as. Erudio,
is. Praecipio, is. Trado, is. Artibus pueros inficere, vel imbuere, Discipulos
instruere. Enseigner. S. Informer, which informs, and enquireth of any
thing. Inquisitor, oris, m. g. Informateur, qui s'enqueste de quelque chose. S.
Rebus quaerendis designatus, Rem quaerere iussus, Quesitor, Idem. To inform,
or teach so so. Subdocere. Enseigner tellement quellement. S.

Unfortunate, or unlucky. Infortunatus, a, um. Infoelix, cis. om. g.
Malheureux. S. Infortunately, or vnluckely. Unfortunate, Infoeliciter, Misere,
Calamitose. Malheureusement. S. Unfortunate days to begin any business.
Co^tracti religione dies. Infringe, refell, or to refute. Infringo, is.
Redarguo, is. Redarguer. S. To infringe, or break a custom. Soluere morem,
Dissoluere ritum. Rompre, and abolir, oster vne custom. S.

Infringe a law. Legem refigere, vel rumpere, vel violare. Ingendre. Genero,
ras. Gigno, is. Seuo, uis, satum, Ingenero, as. Progigno, is. Procreo, as.
Progenero, as. Marem seminare. Engendrer. S. Ingendre again. Regenero, as,
aui. Regenerer. Call. Ingendre diseases. Efficere morbos. Ingendrable, or able
to engendre. Genitiuus, a, u^. Qui a force d' engendrer. Call. Engendered.
Generatus, Genitus, Innatus, a, um. Engendre. Call. Engendered to be. Innascor,
sceris. Estre engendre. Ingendrer, or a begetter. Genitor, oris. Generator,
ris. Procreator, ris. m. g. Engendreur. S. Ingendring. Generatio, onis. f. g.
Generation. Call. Et Generositas, it is. Aptnes to engendring.* Ingendring
eftsoon. Regeneratio, onis. Ingraue. Insculpo, is, psi. Engrauer. S. Ingraued.
Incisus, a, um. Entaille. S. Ingrauer. Vide Grauer. Ingrauing. Vide Grauing.
Ingurgitation of meat and drink, or beastely feading. Alogia, ae. Immoderatum
conuiuium. Inhabit. Colo, is. Inhabito, as. Ago, is, gi. Stabulo, as. Habiter.
S. Inhabitation. Inhabitatio, Habitaculum, Habitatio, onis. f. g. Habitation.
S. Inhabitaunt in heaven. Coelicola, ae. com. g. Habitator coeli. Inhabitau^tes
of a little walled town. Castelli, oru^. Inhabitauntes of the frunt, or marches
of a country, called borderers. Antermini, orum. Qui cir cum terminos
prouinciae habitant. Fest. Inhabiters coming from far countries to dwell
here. Coloni, orum. Cic. Inhaunce. Extollo, lis, tuli. Inhaunce price, or
valewe. Arrogare pretium rei, Horac. Accroistre le pris, and valeur. S.
Inherit. Vide Herite. Inheritance. Haereditas, Patrimonium. Heredite. Et
Haerediolum, li. Possessiuncula, ae, f. g. Un petit heritage. A small
inheritance. Et haereditarius, a, um. Pertaining to inheritance, or of
inheritance. D' heredite. S. Inheritance excheated for lack of heir
general, or special. Haereditas caduca, vel confiscata, Terrae confiscatae.
Cic. Inheritance new fallen. Deuoluta haereditas. Inhibite. Inhibeo, es,
hibui. Veto, as, tui. Inhiber. S Inhibition. Inhibitio, onis. f. g. Inhibition.
S. Inioyne, or command. Iniungo, is. Demando, as. Impono, is. Praecipio, is.
Commander. Call. Iniquity. Iniquitas, atis. foe. g. Iniquite. To do, or
commit iniquity. Inquitatem suscipere. Fair iniquite. S.

Iniunction, or commandment. Mandatum, ti. n. genesis Inionction. S. Iniunction
to appear. Denuntiatio testimonij. Injury. Iniuria, ae. Maledictum, ti.
Probrum, bri. n. genesis Iniure. S. Injury in word. Conuitium, tij. Maledictum,
ti. n. g. Iniure. S. Not to revenge an injury. Concedere iniuriae. Ne vanger
point vne iniure.

No injury has moved me. Nulla iniuria meipsum pepulit. Nulle iniure m'a
esmeu. S.

To take for injury. Accipere ad contumeliam, In co^tumeliam vertere. Prendre
a iniure. S.

To revenge injury. Soluere iniuriam. Vanger vne iniure. S.

To do injury. Iniuriam facere, Iniungere iniuriam. Fair iniure.

To endure, or sustain injury. Sustinere iniuriam. Endurer iniure. S.

To enter an action of injury. Actionem iniuriaru^ intendere, Dicam scribere
iniuriarum, Arcessere hominem iniuriaru^. Intenter process in matiere d'
iniures. S.

To injury one. Iniuriam in aliquem immittere, male accipere aliquem verbis,
Laedere aliquem iniuria, Dicta in aliquem ingerere, Dicere conuitium, vel
facere, Iniurijs alique^ afficere, Grauiore verbo aliquem appellare,
Maledicere. Iniurier aucun. S.

To be injured. Clamore conuitioque iactari, Contumeliam accipere, Sordes ab
aliquo accipere. Estre injury. S.

Injurious. Contumeliosus, a, um. Iniuriosus, a, u^. Iniurieux. S. Injuriously.
Co^tumeliose, Iniuriose. Iniurieuseme^t. Ink to write with all. Atramentum
scriptorium, vel librarium. Encre. Ink that the printers use in prynting.
Atramentum fuligineum, quo typographi in imprimendis libris vtuatur. Le noir ou
l' encre des imprimeurs. Incke horn. Atramentarium, ij. n. g. Cornet a encre.
Inn. Diuersorium, Pandochium, Stabulum, Taberna meritoria. Vne hostellirie. S.
Et diuersorius, a, um. Of an Inn. D' hostellirie. Inueholder. Pandocheus,
Stabularius, rij. m. genesis Hostilier. S. Inner court. Atrium, trij. n. g. Inner,
or more within. Interior, ius. om. ge. Qui est plus dedens. Call. Innner part of
an house. Penetrale, lis. n. g. Le dedens, le plus secret de la maison. S.
Inner part of a tergat, or buckler. Cano^, onis. m. g. Inner part of the
elbow. Ancon, onos. m. g. It is rather the elbowe Le could. Inner part of the
thigh. Femen, inis. n. g. Le dedens de la c^isse. S. Inner skin. Cutis, it is.
f. g. Innerly or more within. Interius. Aduerb. Innoce^cie. Innoce^tia,
Integritas, atis. f. g. Innocence. Innocent. Innocens, it is. Miser, ra, rum.
Insons, it is. om. ge. Innocent. S. Thou accusest an innocent. Accusas, culpas
immerentem, expertem culpae, vacuum a culpa, remotum a culpa damnas, in
iudicium vocas, reum facis, persequeris. vitio tribuis, vitio vertis, fraudi
das immerenti, ei, qui culpam no^ commisit, culpae sibi conscius non est.
confers culpam in expertem criminis, insontem, immerentem, innoxium. exagitas
illum, in culpam vocas, in infamia^ vocas, adducis unjust, sine causa,
iniuria, immerito, contra quam ius est.

To be innocent of any thing. Abesse a culpa. Estre innocent de quelque chose.

Innocently, not hurtfully. Innocenter. Innocemme^t. Inordinate appetite.
Appetentia, Appetitio, onis. Appetit desordonne. S. Inordinate, and impacient
love. Amor foemineus, Coecus amor, Effraenus, Impotens, Insanus, Vesanus,
Perditus, Impatiens. Amor desordonne and impatient. S. To love inordinatly.
Impatienter amare. Desordonneement aimer. S.

Inordinatly. Indigeste, Inordinate, Incomposite. Confuseement. Call. Enough.
Sat, Satis. Assez. S. Enough to be, or to suffice. Sufficere. Suffire. S.
Inquire. Inquiro, is, siui. Interrogo, as, aui. Enquerir, ou enquerre. S. To
inquire diligently. Anquiro, is. Examino, as. Exquiro, ris. Enquerir
diligemment. S.

To make inquiry. Scitor, aris. Sciscitor, aris. Contor, aris. Quaero, ris.
Inquiro, is. S' enquester. S

To inquire the manners, or behavior of any. Exquirere mores alicuius. S'
enquerir meurs d'aucu^.

Inquire, or demand often. Rogito, as. S' enquerir souuent. S. Inquisition,
or inquiry. Quaesitio, Examen, inis. Inquisitio, onis. foe. ge. Inquisition.
S. Inquisitour. Quaesitor, ris. m. g. Enquesteur. Call. Inrolle, or to registre.
In literas publicas refer, vel perscribere, Regerere in co^mentarium, In
commentarios refer. Enregistrer. Enrolled, or registered. Ascriptus, a, um.
Ascriptitius, vel Ascriptiuus, Perscriptus, ta, tum. Enregistre. S. Properly,
where one is registered among other, or put in the checker roll. Insaciable.
Insaciabilis, le. Insaturabilis, le. Inexplebilis, le. Insatiable. S.
Insaciable avarice. Profunda auaritia, vel cupido. Insatiable reader of books.
Heluo librorum. Insaciablye. Insatiabiliter, Insaturabiliter. Insatiablement.
S. Inscribe. Inscribo, is. Intitulo, as. Scribo, is. Noto, as. Inscrire. S.
Inscription. Inscriptio, Scriptio, Titulus, li. Epigramma, matis. n. g. Vne
inscription. S. Inscription graven in stone. Stemma, it is.* Inscription of a
monument, toumbe, or other work, done for a memory. Titulus, li. Elogium, ij.
Epitaphium, ij. n. g. L'inscription d' vne monument. Insensible. Insensibilis,
Sensu cassus, Sensus expers. Insensible. Inserche. Excipio, is. Exquiro. Vide
Search. Inserche curiously. Exterebro, ras. Perquiro, is. Perscrutor, taris.
Idem. Insolent, arrogant, and proud. Insolens, Superbus, ba, bum. Arrogans,
it is. Insolent, arrogant. Insolency, arrogancy, or pride. Insolentia,
Arrogantia, Superbia, ae. f. g. Insolence, Arrogance. Insolently. Insolenter,
Aduerb. Arrogament. Call. Inspiration. Afflatus, Inspiratio, onis. Instinctus,
tus. m. g. Inspiration. S. Inspire. Inspiro, as. Lumina praeferre.* To be
inspired with the holy ghost. Afflari diuino spiritu. Estre inspire de l'
esprit divine. S.

Instable. Instabilis, le. Instable. S. Instabilitie. Instabilitas, tatis. f.
g. Instabilite. S. Instante, or a moment. Momentum, ti. n. ge. Un instant. vt
Momento, vel puncto temporis. En un instant. S. In an instant, or moment.
Instant. Imminens, it is. Instans, it is. Qui est pres. Call. Instant age. Ingruens
aetas. Instant to be, or to approach, or draw nere. Immineo, es. Insto, as. S'
approcher. S. Instant to be, as age, battle, sycknes. etc. Ingruo, is. *
Instantly. Instanter. Instamment. S. Instigation, a provoking, or mouinge
forward. Instigatio, Instigatus, tus. Instinctus, tus. Impulsus, sus. m. g.
Instigation. S. By thine instigation. Impulsu tuo, Tuo instinctu. Par ton
instigation. S.

Instigate, to move, or to impelle. Instigo, as. Impello, lis. Instiguer and
stimuler. S. Instigater, mouer, or one that impelleth, or provoke to do a
thing. Instigator, toris. m. g. Impulsor, soris. m. g. Instigateur. S.
Institute. Instituo, is. Constituo, is. Instituer. S. Institution. Institutio,
onis. foe. g. Instruction. Instruct. Catechizo, as, aui. Instruo, is. Instituo,
is. Praecipio, is. Doceo, ces. Instruire. S. Instruct and to teach young
infantes. Aetatem puerile^ artibus ad humanitatem informare, Adolescentes
instruere vel erudire. Instruire and enseigner les ieunes enfans. S.
Instructed. Instructus, Ornatus, a, um. Instruict, enseigne. S. Instructed in
good manners. Moratus, a, um.* Instructed in sciences. Artitus, a, um.
Instruction. Instructio, Institutio. Catechesis, Praeceptum, ti. n. g.
Instruction. S. To take instruction. Disciplinam ab aliquo accipere. Prendre
instruction. S.

Instructions that are first given to rude persons that know yet nothing.
Rudimentum, ti. n. ge. Les primiers enseignemens qu' on baille a gens rudes and
qui ne scauent encore rien. S. Instructions of Grammar, or Grammar rules.
Grammatices rudimenta. Instrument to do any thing withal, what it be.
Instrumentum, ti. n. ge. Instrument a fair quelque chose, que ce soit. S.
Instrument in writing. Formula, ae. f. g. Instrument of craft and falsehode.
Armille, lis. n. genesis Apul. lib. 6. Instrument, tool, or weapon, having two
teathe. Bidens. And having three teethe. Tridens, it is. Instrument wherewith
high things be met. Altimeter. m. g. Call. Instrument with ten stringes.
Decachordum, di. n. ge. Instrumentum musicum december chordas habens. Call.
Instrument wherewith they polyshe stones. Hypagogeus, Instrumentu^ quo lapides
expoliu^tur. Instruments, or tools of all manner of sorts. Arma, orum. neut.
genesis Toutes sorts d' instrumens and o^tils. S. Instruments of music.
Organa, orum. Tous instruments de music. Et Organarij, orum. Makers of
instruments. Faiseur d' instrumens. S. Instruments, or common wrytinges, as
deeds, Indentures, obligations. etc. Tabulae, arum. f. g. Instrumens,
obligations. etc. S. Et Tabularium, rij. The place where such instruments be
laid. Intayle land. Addicere haeredes. Intayle, or to grave. Exculpo, is.
Insculpo, is. Incido, is. Entailler, and grauer. S. Integrity. Integritas,
tatis. foe. ge. Integrite. S. Integrity, or true meaning. Innocentia, ae. f.
g. Intelligence. Intelligentia, ae. foe. g. Intellectus, tus. m. g.
Intelligence. S. Intemperance. Intemperantia, ae. f. g. Intemperance.
Intemperance of the air. Caeli grauitas, Intemperies caeli, Intempestas caeli.
Intemperance de l' air. S Intemperatly. Intemperanter, Intemperate, Immoderate.
Intempereement. S. Intend, or to be attentive to some thing. Animum aduertere,
Attendere animum, Attendere aliquid, Aures arrigere, In oculis habere aliquid,
Adesse animo. Estre attentif a quelque chose. S. To be an intentive auditer. Se
attentum praebere auditorem, Auditioni occupatum sedere in scholis,
Attentissime audire. Estre atte^tif auditeur.

Inte^de, or to purpose. Propono, is. Subte^do, is. Nitor, eris. Vide Purpose.
Intend, or wait. Seruio, is. To serve. Seruir. S. Intend to do. Facturio,
is. Intend to suppe. Coenaturio, is. Intent, mind, or the will of any body.
Intentio, onis. Propositum, ti. Men's, it is. foe. ge. L' intention, fantasy and
volunte d' vne person. S. Intentive. Attentus, a, um. Attentif. S. Et
Intentus, ta, tum. Ententif. S. Intentiuely, diligently, or with a fixed mind.
Attente. Attentiuement. S. Intercepte, or to take before, or by the way.
Intercipio, is. Surprendre. S. vt Literas intercipere. To intercepte, or take
up ones lettres by the way. Surprendre lettres sur le chemin. S. Intercession.
Intercessio, onis. foe. ge. Intercession. S. Intercession to make. Intercedo,
is. Interceder. S. To make intercession for one. Orare pro aliquo, vel precari.
Interceder pour aucun. S.

Interest, or exchange. Versura, rae. foem. genesis Bud. Interest. S. To take
money at interest. Versura^ facere. Pre^dre a interest. S.

Money taken at intereste. Circumforaneum aes. Argent prins a interest. S.

Thou haste intereste or title to it. Ad te attinet and tua refert. Tu y as
interest. S.

Interest. Mancipi, indecl. Interesse, Ius, ris.* Interlude. Comoedia, Fabula.
Vide Interlude. Interpret, expound, or to open. Interpretor, aris. Explico,
cas. Explano, nas, Expono, is. Interpreter. Interpretation. Interpretamentum,
Interpretatio, onis. f. g. Interpretation. S. Interpretour. Interpres, it is.
com. genesis Interpret ou interpreteur. S. Interpretour of dreams. Somniorum
interpres. Interrupt. Interpello, as. Interrumpo, pis. Interompre. S.
Interpeller. S. Interrupted. Interpellatus, ta, tum. Interruptour.
Interpellator, toris. masc. genesis Interpellateur. S. Intise. Illecto, as. Vide
Allu^e, and Entise. Intised. Illectus, a, um. Idem. Intiser of a man's servant
to depart, or run from his master. Plagiarius, ij. m. g. Plagiator, toris.
Idem. Intisement, or allurement. Illecebra, Illectus, Lenocinium, ij. n. g.
Allichement. S. Intysement by words. Blanditia, ae. f. g. Entitle. Inscribo,
is. Titulo, as. Intituler. S. Entitled. Inscriptus, ta, tum. Intractable.
Immansuetus, ta, tum. Intractabilis, le. Adiect. Intraictable. S. Entreat,
pray, or to desire. Petere, Orare, Rogare, Preces far, Precari, Comprecari,
Facere precationes, Exigere. Prier. S. Entreat and to handell. Contrecto, tas.
Traicter and manier. S. Entreat. Exoro, as. Impetro, as. Impetrer. S.
Intreatable. Exorabilis, Impetrabilis, Tractabilis, Facilis, le. Traictable. S.
Entreaty. Deprecatio, onis. f. g. Vne request. etc. S. Intreatour or an
excuser of some body. Deprecator, toris. m. g. Un excuseur qui excuse quelqu'
un. S. Intricate, or doubtful. Perplexus, a, um. Vide Doubtful. Intricately.
Perplexe, perplexim, xibiliter, Implicit. Intrinqueement. S. Introduction.
Isagoge, Introductio, onis. foem. ge. Eruditionis principium. Introduction.
Call. Introductory. Isagogicon. Call. Invade. Aggredior, eris. Exorior, iris.
Impeto, it is. Ingruo, is. Inuado, is. Inuader. S. Invade, or to assail on all
parts. Circu^uado, is. Adorior, iris. Enuahir, Assailir. S. Invasion. Impetus,
us. Incursio, Incursus, sus. m. ge. Hostilis incursus. Inward. Internus, a,
um. Et Interior. More inward. Qui est plus dedens. Call. Inward, or inwardly.
Interius, Penitus. Aduerb. Introrsus, vel Introrsum. En dedens, verse le dedens.
S Inward part. Penetrale, lis. neut. gener. Le dedens. S. Inward parts of
the body. Exta, Interanea, Intestina, Penetralia, Viscera, Praecordia, orum. n.
genesis Entralles. S. Inuegle, or craftily to intyse away. Illicio, cis. Inuegled
to be. Retractare religionem.* Invent. Adinuenio, is. Excogito, as. Fabrico,
cas. Inuenio, is, ni. Fabricor, ris. Molior, iris. Machinor, aris. Architector,
aris. Inuenter. S. Inuente craftily. Machinor, aris. Machiner and songer
quelque finesse. S. Invent politiquely. Contechnor, aris. Invention.
Adinuentus, Constitutio, Excogitatio, Inuentus, tus. Inuentio, onis.
Machinatio, onis. foe. genesis Invention. S. Invention, or sophistical oration,
seaminge to be true, when it is false. Sophisma, it is. n. g. Inuentiue, subtle,
or wytty. Technicus, a, um. Cautelleux. Inuentory. Apophasis, Inuentarium,
Repertoriu^, Apographa, Index, Liber, bri. masc. genesis Cic. In verrem. Un
inuentaire. H. S. Inuentour, author, or first founder. Author, Patronus,
Inuentor, toris. Architectus, ti. m. ge. Inuenteur. S. Inuentour of false
accusations, and tales. Sycophanta, tae. masc. genesis Inuersion of words.
Allegoria. Est quaedam figura quae a Quintil. dicitur Inuersio, quum aliud
verbis aliud sensu ostenditur. vt Virgil. Claudite iam riuos pueri sat prata
biberunt.
Leave of to sing put up your pypes,
Now have we heard our fill.
Which rather seems thus.
O children now shut ryuers up,
The meades have drunk at will.
Inuestigation, or search of diverse things. Disquisitio, Inuestigatio, onis.
foem. genesis Cerchement. Vide Search, or Seek. Invincible or that can not be
ouercommed. Adamantinus, na, number. Adamantaeus, a, um. Invincible. S. Et
Inuictus, ta, tum. Idem. Inuit. Inuito, as. Prouoco, as. Inuiter. S. Inuit,
or bydde one to supper. Mouere aliquem vt veniat ad coenam, Vocare ad coenam,
Condicere alicui coenam, vel ad coenam. Inuiter a soupper. S. Inuiting, or a
bydding. Inuitatus, tus. Inuitatio, onis. foe. ge. Inuitement. S. Invoke, or
call upon. Inuoco, as. Inuoquer. S. Vide Call. Invoke, or to call upon God
for help. Deum appellare. Inuoquer dieu a sonaide. S. Invocation. Inuocatio,
onis. foe. ge. Invocation to God. Letania, vel Litania, Supplicatio dicitur.
Call. Inuocations, or words of invocation. Carmina deuotoria, Deuotiones. Mots
d'inuocation. S. Inuocations, enchauntementes. Carmina. Vide Enchauntmentes.
I. ANTE. O.
IOcunde. Glaphirus, a, u^. Iucundus, a, um. Gay. S. Vt Iucunda accidunt. Cic.
Iocunde and pleasant things happen, et Paupertas iucunda, Iocunde or
pleasant poverty. Iocunde to be. Iucundor, aris. Voluptate, and delectatione
afficior. Call. Iocunditie. Iucunditas, atis. foe. ge. John. Johannes, nis.
masc. genesis Iean. Which is an Hebrewe word, and is as much to say (if ye
will interpret it) the grace of God. Of the which name there were two, the
one was John Baptiste, son to Zacharias, and Elizabeth, whom the Euangeliste
calls Praecursor domini. Of his food, attyere, conversation, and trade of
life, you shall read in Math. cap. 3. Luke. 3. Marc. 1. The other was John the
Euangeliste, an Apostle to Christ, which was the son of Zebedeus a fysher
man, and brother to James. Math. 4.10.20, Marc. 1. Luke. 5. He treats most
of the Deuinitie in his Gospel, who also did write the Revelations. There were
many mo of this name, both Princes and worthy writers, as the histories tell.
Joy. Gaudium, dij, Laetitia, ae. Laetitudo, Exultatio, onis. foe. genesis Joy.
S. I take as great joy and pleasure in your affairs as in mine own.
Laetitiam ex rebus tuis eandem, quam ex meis, nihilo minorem, quam ex meis,
capio, accipio, percipio, suscipio, sumo, haurio. laetitia me afficiunt res
tuae aeque ac meae, pariter ac meae, non minus quam meae, non secus quam meae,
haud aliter ac meae. tuae me res efferunt laetitia, gaudium mihi afferunt,
pariunt, praebent, voluptate me perfundunt itide^ vt meae. tuis rebus, vti
meis, afficior. quae meis e rebus, eadem mihi e tuis oritur iucu^ditas,
voluptas, delectatio, laetitia, gaudium. tuis rebus ita laetor, vt meis.

Great and excessive joy. Hilaritas profusa, Hilaritas effusa, Laetitia
luxuriosa. Vne joy fort grande, and excessive. S.

What means, or signifies this joy? Quid istud gaudij est? Que signify
ceste joy. S.

I know not where I am for joy. Prae gaudio vbi sim, nescio. Ie ne scay ou ie
suis de grand joy que in ay. S.

He could not keep his joy secret. Tacitum co^tinere gaudiu^ non potetat. Il
ne pouoit celer sa joy.

To give joy and mirthe. Gaudium and laetitiam agitare, Laetitiam far,
Laetitia^ dare. Donner joy, and liesse. S.

To fill with joy. Gaudio delibutum reddere. Remplir de joy. S.

Joy of the heart, or an out cry, bearing a signification of joy. Iubilum,
li. n. g. Un escri portant signification de joy. S. Joy, or mirth made by
exterior gesture, or clapping of hands in sign of joy. Applausus, Plausus,
us. m. g. Frappement des maiens l' vne contre l'autre en sign de joy. S. Joy
or mirthe to make by outward signs, as by clapping the hands, or stamping
with the feet, in token of joy. Applaudo, is. Plaudo, is, si. Frapper les
pieds, ou les maiens l'vne contre l'autre en sign de joy. S. Joyful
inwardly, which the tongue can not express. Iubilus, a, um.* Joyful thing
most estimable. Operaepretiu^, tij. n. g. Joyful to be inwardly, or to shoute
for joy. Iubilo, as. S' escrier de joy. S. Ioyly, lusty, pretty, lively.
Bullatus, a, um. Concinnus, a, um. Elegans, it is. Festiuus, a, um. Lautus, a,
um, Mundulus, a, um. Scitus, a, um. Ioli. S. Joyous, or joyful, or full of joy
and mirthe. Festiuus, a, um. Glaphirus, a, um. Hilaris, re. Hilarus, a, um.
Laetus, a, um. Ouans, it is. om. g. Ioyeux. S. Very joyful. Perlaetus, a, um.
Fort ioyeux. S.

Somewhat joyful. Hilarulus, a, u^. Un peu ioyeux.

Joyous, or joyful to be. Gratulor, aris. cum datiuo Iucundor, ris. Laetor,
aris. Ouo, as, aui. Gaudeo, es. Estre ioyeux. S. To be joyful all his life.
Iucunditatem perpetuam vitae tenere. Estre ioyeux tout le te^ps de sa vie.

To joy beyond measure. Efferre se laetitia. Estre io^ieux oultre mesure. S.

Ioyouse to make, or to make glad, and merry. Hilaro, as. Beo, as. Laetifico,
as. Afficere laetitia. ^alre ioyeux. S. Thou haste made me very joyful. Beasti
me. Tu m'as fait bien ioyeux. S.

Ioyously. Hilare, Laete, Ouanter, Festiue, Cum laetitia. Ioyeusement. S.
Join. Iungo, is. Pango, is, anxi. Compono, is. Vnio, is. Apto, as. Addo, is.
Copulo, as. Applico, as. Ioindre^ S. Join bourdes. Tabulo, as, aui. Join
hard unto, or to touch some other thing. Pertingo, is. Touch iusques a
quelque chose. S. Join house to house. Astruo, is, xi. Bastir, and edifier
ioingnant autruy. S. Join joint to joint. Articulo, as.* Join to. Adapto, as.
Adhaereo, es. Addo, is. Adhaeresco, scis. Adigo, is. Adiungo, is. Adglutino,
as. Applico, as. Aequo, as. Adiouster. Join together. Adglutino, as. Committo,
is. Coniungo, is. Compagino, as, aui. Coagmento, as, aui. Contexo, is.
Subiungo, is, nxi. Compono, is. Iniungo, is. Ioindre ensemble. S. Joined.
Iunctus, a, um. Vnitus, a, um. Applicitus, a, um. Copulatus, a, um. Ioinct. S.
Joined to. Adaptus, Adiunctus, Adunatus, a, um. Adglutinatus, a, um. Adioinct,
adiouste. Call. Joined together. Coniunctus, Contextus, Subiunctus, a, um.
Coagmentatus, a, um. Conioinct. S. Joined together, or congealed as things
liquid. Concretus, a, um. Gele. S. Ioyner. Faber intestini operis. Un
menuisier. Pals. Joining work. Intestinum opus. Menuiserie. S. That which is
joining, or near unto. Accubans, Continens, Contiguum, Attigguum, Appositum,
ac. Propinquum. Qui est ioignant and aupres. S.

Joining or framynge of bourdes. Tabulatio, onis. foem. genesis Tabularum
coniuctio, vel textura. Entablement. Joining together. Coniunctio, Coniunctura,
Vnitio, onis. Compago, inis. Iunctura, ae. Iunctio, onis. foe. ge. Ioincture.
S. Joint. Articulus, Compago, Internodium, dij. Compages, gis. Iunctura, ae.
Nodus, di. mas. genesis Ioincture. S. Full of joints. Articulosus, a, um. Plein
de ioinctures, and de neudes. S.

Appertaining to ioynctes. Articularis, re. om. g. Appartenant aux ioinctures.
S.

Ioynte by ioynte, or by joints. Articulatim. Aduerbium. Par les ioinctures.
S. Ioynte, or knotte of the back bone, whereof be four and twentye, which
are thus distributed, Seven to the neck: Twelve to the chyne, and five to the
loins. Spondylus, li. Sphondylus, li. masc. genesis Spondile le neud de l'
eschine du dos. Call. Iointe of a staske or strewe, of corn, or herb.
Geniculum, li. n. g. Le neud d' vne chaulme, ou festu de ble, ou d' herb. S.
Joint office of two men. Duumuiratus, us. mas. genesis It may be taken for
the office, or Sherifeship of the two Shiriffes in a city. L' esc^euinage. S.
Joint officer. Duumuir, ri. masc. genesis Vt duumuiri, Caes. The two Shiriffes of
any city. Les deux escheuins de chascune ville. S. Jointly. Conlunctim,
Iunctim. Conioinctement. Call. Jointly, or by joints, as the knottes of wheat
straw. Geniculatim. De neud en' neud. Call. Iointure, or reward of dowre, or
gift added to dowre. Parapherna, orum. n. g. Vlp. Joyce. Vide Juice. Ioysse,
whereupon a great vessel is couched or set. Incitega. Festus. Iournay. Iter,
ne ris. n. g. Iournee. Pals. A days journey and an half. Sesquiopera, rae.
foe. ge. Vne iournee, and demie. S.

Journey, or to go, or ride a journey. Itineror, aris. Voyager. Call. Take not
journey except you be well at ease. Iter ne suscipias, ne te viae committas,
ne te in viam des, ne ad iter aggrediaris, ne viam ineas, itineris co^silium
abijce, omit, dimitte: nisi recte vales, nisi optima vteris valetudine, nisi
corpore been firmo.

To take journey. Iter ingredi. Dare se in viam, Viae se committere. Se mettre
en chemin. S.

To journey, walk, or to go. Ambulare, Obambulare, Ince^ere, Ingredi, Iter
facere, Iter, sieve viam carpe^e, Viam venire. Cheminer. S.

Iournall, a book wherein a man does note all things that he does in his
journey. Diarium, rij. Ephemeris, dis. f. g. Registre iournal. H.
I. ANTE. R.
IRehin, or an hedgehogge. Herinaceus. Echinus, ni. Herisson. S. Ire, or
wrath. Ira, rae. f. g. Ire. S. For great ire. Prae ira. De grande ire. S.

Thou mouest me to ire, which by nature am nothing given thereto. Stomachum
mihi facis. bilem commoues, inducis me, impellis, incitas ad iram, facis vt
irascar, vt ira commouear, afficiar, corripiar, vt excandescam, vt exardeam, vt
ira flagrem etsi nequaquam iracu^dus homo natura sum, non procliuis, pronus,
propensus, inclinatus ad iram, non irae deditus, non is, qui ad iram facile
labar. sum alienus, long remotus ab ira. quamquam iuris in me parum habet ira,
minime mihi dominatur ira, non admodum ad iram propendeo, inclino, ab ira long
absum.

He knows not how to bridle his ire, or wrath. Fraenare nescit iras. Il ne
scait refre^er, ou refraindre, ou retenir son ire. S.

Full of ire. Iracundus, da, dum. Ireux. S.

Irefully, or angerly, or with ire. Iracunde. Ireusement, auec ire. S. Irishe.
Hibernicus, a, um. Irelande. Hibernia, Iuuerna, Iuernia, ae. foe. genesis Irlande.
S. Irke, or to werie. Taedium afferre, Afficere molestia. Attedier and ennuyer
ou fascher. S. It irketh me to hear one thing so often. Taedit iam audi^e
eadem millies. Iem' attedie d' ouyr ta^t de fois vne mesme chose. S.

Irkesomenesse, or werenesse. Taedium, dij. n. ge. Ennuy and fascherie. S.
Iron. Ferrum, ri. n. g. Fer. S. Of iron, as hard as iron. Ferreus, rea, reum.
De fer, dur comme fer. S.

Iron smythe. Ferrarius faber. Forgeron, marshall. S. Pertaining to iron.
Ferrarius, a, um. Appartenant a fer. S.

Iron mine. Ferraria, iae. f. g. Vne mine de fer. S. Water wherein hot iron is
quenshed. Ferraria aqua. L' eaue dedens la quel on esteind le fer tout rouge. S.

Ironed, or dressed with iron. Ferratus, ta, tum. Far. S. Iron work, or that
is of iron. Ferramentum, ti. neut. genesis Ferrement. S. Irregular, or without
rule. Abnormis, e. om. genesis Irregulier, sans reigle. S.
I. ANTE. S.
IS, or it is. Est. Il est. S. Ise. Glacies, iei. f. g. Glace. S. Vide Frosen.
Isle. Insula, lae. f. g. Un Isle. S. Islande full of Cedre trees. Insula cedri
genere syluosa,* Isle plein de cedre. S. Pertaining to an Islande. Insularis,
re. Adiect. Appartenant a vne Isle. S.

Isope herb. Hyssopus, p^. f. g. Hyssopum, pi. neut. g. Hyssope. Call. Issew by
generation. Proles, Soboles, lis. foe. genesis Issew forth, as water does.
Profluo, is. Issewe, or to come forth. Exeo, is. Prodeo, is. Emano, as.
Egredior, ris. Issir horse, ou sortir horse. S. The issewe, or final end of any
thing. Euentus, us. m. g. L' issue de quelque chose. S.

The good or happy issue of any thing. Successus, Prosper exitus. La boune
issue de quelque chose. S

Not to have a good issewe. Frustra esse. N'auoir point bonne issue. S.

The issewe has declared it. Docuit post exitus. L' issue l' a monstre. S.

To give a good and happy issewe, or end. Successus prosperos dare, Fortunare.
Donner bonne issue. S.

I can not find the issewe, or end of the matter. Non possum euoluere exitum
rei. Ie ne puis trouuer l' issue de l' affair. S.

Issewing of blood out of the mouth, nose, or veins. Reictio sanguinis.
I. ANTE. T.
IT is. Est. Il est. S. Italy. Ausonia, ae. Hesperia, ae. Italia, ae. foe. ge.
Vnde Ausones. Th'auncient kings of Italy. Et Ausonius, a, um. Italus, a, um.
Italicus, ca, cu^. Of Italy, or an Italian. Itche. Prurio, ris. Demanger. S.
Itching. Pruritus, tus. Prurigo, ginis. foem. genesis Demangement. S. Itenerarie,
a book wherein is contained the description of such things as chance in
iournaye, Hodoeporicum, ci. n. genesis Itinerarium pro eodem a nonnullis
vsurpatur. Vide Iournall. Note that all verbes beginning with this sign it be
verbes impersonals.


I. ANTE. V.
IVdge. Iudex, cis. com. genesis Un judge. S. There is Iudex ordinarius, and, Iudex
delegatus. The one is he that has authority of a peculiar jurisdiction, to
sit in judgment without commission, as the chief Justice of England, a Maire
or head officer of a Borogh, city, or town corporate, a coroner. etc. The
other is a commissioner, or justice which sits by virtue of commission
only. etc. Judge named on the one party. Edititius iudex. Qui est nomme par vne
des parties seulement. S. Judge, which being the inferior judge, goes on
foot. Pedaneus iudex. A judge, or magistrate condemned for bribery, or money
taking to judge. Damnatus sordium iudex, aut magistratus. Judge, ou magistrate
condamne pour auoir prins argent pour iuger? S

A judge which regards to please the parties, and to favor them, or a
partial judge. Obnoxious gratiae iudex. Judge qui regard a complaire aux
parties, and porteur faueur. S.

When the judge turns the profit of the cause to him self. Litem in rem
suam vertere. Quand le judge turn le prouffit de la cause a soy. S.

To be in the judge his favor. In animum iudicis admitti. Estre en la grace du
judge. S.

To do the office of a judge. Induere personam iudicis. Fair l' office
duniuge. S.

A rightful judge, a good judge. Iudex integer, and innocens, Iudex aequus. Un
judge droicturier, un bon judge. S.

Judge, which is the puigne, or inferior judge. Tertius a censore. Judge
which reformeth manners. Censor, Censitor. m. g. Censeur. S. Et Censorius, a,
um. Pertaining to such a judge. Et Ce^sura, ae. Is his office. Judge in games
of actiuite, as wrestling. etc. Athlothera, Brabenta, Brabentes, ae. m. g.
Judges in causes of death. Capitales triumuiri. Judges of the common place.
Censores. Judges of the cheker. Quaestorij iudices. Judges of the kings bench.
Quaestores parricidij. So called, for that their offices extend to murdre and
treason. Judges corrupted, or bribed with money. Numarij iudices. Iuges
corrumpux par argent. S. Judges, or masters of the court of requests.
Libellorum praefecti. Judge, Cerno, is. Iudico, as. Iudicium habere. Ius
dicere, Pronu^tio, as. Promulgare decretum, Repenso, as. Sentio, it is. Statuo,
is. Iuger. S. To judge by equity. Aequi, and boni momenta cum iure summo
expe^dere, Exquisitam iuris interpretationem, and limatam iuris subtilitatem
aequo, et bono posthabere. Iuger par equite. S.

To judge of one. Facere iudicium de aliquo. Fair judgment de aucun. S.

Judge according to conscience and equite. Statuere ex aequo, and bono. To
judge, and esteem. Arbitror, aris. Autumo, as. Computo, as. Decerno, is.
Dijudico, as. Interpretor, aris. Iudico, as. Opinor, aris. Puto, as. Iuger, and
estimer. S.

Judge after the examples of matters before decised, and determined.
Praeiudico, as. Judge before, or first. Praeiudico, as. Auant iuger. To judge
ill of things. Secus interpretari. Iuger mal des chooses. S.

To judge for the profit of an other. Decernere secundum aliquem. Iuger au
prouffit d' aucun. S.

Judge: or hear a matter, as to have the hearing and endinge. Cognosco, scis.
vt Cognoscere causas. Cic. To judge, or decide causes. Iuger des causes. S.
Judge spiritual matters, or causes belonging to the ecclesiastical law.
Cognoscere de re ecclesiastica. Judged. Iudicatus, a, um. I^ge. Call. The thing
judged. Iudicatum, ti. Res iudicata. Chose iugee. S.

Which is not judged. Iniudicatus, a, um. Qui n' est point Judge. S.

Judged, or c^ndemned for treason. Maiestatis laesae damnatus. Cic. Judged from
one to an other. Abiudicatus, a, um. Judged to be, or condemned. Reum peragi,
Condemnari, Damnari. Estre condamne. S. Easy to be judged. Existimatu facile.
Facile a iuger, ou penser. S.

Judged to be for treason. Iudicium habere maiestatis imminutae, vel de crimine
laesae maiestatis. Yet consulte the difference, for the one is more heynouse
then the other. Salua semper optima opinione. I take that Damnari de maiestate
imminuta, Is to be condemned for petit treason. Judgment. Authoritas,
Cognitio, Dica, Iudicatus, us. Iudicium, Opinio, Sententia, Sors, Trutina,
Arbi^rium, rij. n. g. Judgment. S. I am not fully dissolved whether judgment
may come by the gift of nature or benefit of learning. Nondum plane
constitui, nondum satis habeo co^stitutum, deliberatum, exploratum, explicatum,
certum* naturae n^ munere, an disciplinae beneficio iudicium contingat. iudicij
praestantia, excellentia, vis, subtilitas vtrum a natura, an ab art, ac
disciplina proficiscatur, contingat, man^^. naturae ne priuilegio concedatur,
an sit ab art, ac disciplina petendum. vtrum is, qui recte iudicat, qui optime
iudicio vtitur, qui iudicio valet, praestat, excellit, facultatem habet optime
iudicandi, iudicio abundat, naturae debeat, an arti, bonum illud acceperit a
natura, an hauserit a studio, a barte, a disciplina. natural ne bonum sit
iudicium, an potius in studio, art, disciplina, doctrina, ratione situm,
eiusmodi, quod doctrina tradatur, a praeceptis ducatur, discatur a magistris.

The judgment of any thing. Inspectio alicuius rei. Le judgment d' aucune
chose. S.

Judgment of Sauors. Intellectus saporum. Judgment de sauers. S. A great, and
lively judgment. Peracre iudiciu^. Un grand judgment, and vif. S.

A mean judgment. Modicum iudicium. Moyen judgment. S.

By the judgment of all. Opinione omnium. Au judgment de tous. S.

According to my judgment. Meo quidem animo, Mea sententia, vt Opinio mea
fert. Solon mon judgment. S.

To receive wrong, or to be injured in judgment. In iure iniuria affici, E
iure iniuriam nasci. Receuoir vne iniure, ou estre injury en judgment. S.

To sit in judgment. Palam de loco superiore pro imperio, and potestate
decernere, Sedere pro tribunali. Seoir en judgment. S.

Judgment according to law written. Iudicia legitima. Judgment given by
judges certain, as judges of both benches. Iudicia publica. Judgment in
causes criminal, or capital. Iudicium capitis. Judgment in games. Athletica
authoritas. Judgment place. Forum, ri. n. g. Fore, ou for. S. Judgment
respected, or reuersed. Ampliatio, Se^tentia ampliata, Decretum, vel iudicium
rescisu^. Judicial. Decretorius, a, um. Iudiciel. S. Judge, pot, or tankard.
Cantharus, Scyphus, phi. m. g. Un hanap. S. Iuggle. Praestringo, is. vt
Praestringere aciem oculorum. To dasyll the eyes, or to iuggle. Iouir de pass
repasse. H. Iuggler. Planus, ni. Circulator, Praestigiator, oris. m. g. Ioueur
de pass pass. S. Et Praestigiatrix. Angl. A woman iuggler. Ioueresse de pass
pass. S Iuggling castes. Praestigiae. arum. foem. genesis Ieux de pass pass.
Juice. Ius* Saliua, Succus, ci. m. g. Suc. S. Juice of barley. Cremor, ris. m.
g. Juice of nuttes. Caryopon, pi. Plin. Juice of sloes. Acatia. Iuycye, or full
of juice. Suceidus, a, um. Succi plenus. Succulentus, a, um. Succosus, sa, sum.
Plein de sue. S. Iuye, Chamaepitys, tyos. Edera, ae. Helix, cis. Hedera, ae. f.
g. Lierre. H. Et Hederaceus, a, um. Of Iuy De lierre. A vessel of Iuie.
Hederaceum vas. Vais^au faict de lierre. S.

Iuye called ground Iuie. Chamaecissos, Hedera terrestris. Lierre terrestre.
S. July month. Mensis quintilis, Julius, lij. mas. gen^ Iuillet. Pals. Iumpe
or a leap. Subsultus, us. m. ge. Iumpe by iumpe, or by iumpes. Subsultim. En
saultelant. S. To iumpe. Subsulto, as. Saulteler. S.

June month. Iunius, ij. m. g. Iuing. Pals. A Iunioribus putatur dici, vt
Maius a maioribus. Ovid. lib. 6. Fast. Iunckettes, a certain kind of meat.
Iunculi, orum. mas. genesis Iunkers, or lepes made of wickers to take eales.
Caudecae, arum. f. g. Fest. Iunckettes or fine bankettinge dyshes, served in
after dinner, or soupper. Tragemata, Mensae secundae, Bellaria. Dessert de
table. H. Jurisdiction. Iurisdictio, onis. f. g. Jurisdiction. Call.
Jurisdiction, or authority of a reformor of manners. Censura, ae. f. g.
Jurisdiction of a head officer, having ministration of laws. Nomarchia.
Iurour, or questman. Forensis. Iussell, a meat made of chopped herbs. Minutal
lis. neut. genesis Mart. Just. Iustus, a, u^. Aequus, a, um. Rectus, a, um.
Verus, a, um. Just. S. Just, and according to law. Legitimus, a, um. ^^ste,
and selon la loy. S. He denies, that it is just, and reasonable. Negat verum
esse. Il nie qu'il soit just, and raisonnable.

More just, and reasonable. Verius. Plus just, and raisonnable. S.

To compelle, or constrayne by justice. Lege agere. Contraindre par iustire. S.

That can not have justice or right. Ius suum obtinere non posse. Ne pouoir
auoir justice. S.

To overthrow by way of justice. Opprimere iudicio. Destruire par voye de
justice. S.

To do justice continually. Iusticiam agitare. Fair continuellement justice.
S.

To show, or declare his justice. Exhibere iusticiam. Monstrer sa justice. S.

To go, or contend by way of justice. Iure certare. Aller par voye de
justice. S.

To do justice. Iusticiae, aequitatisque sacris operari. Fair justice. S.

Just cause, or quarrel. Sontica causa. Tibul. Just prince. Dicaearchus, chi.
Just to the hear. Capillo tenus. Just, or to make tournement. Decurro, ris.
Tournoyer, ou Tournayer, iouster la lance. S. Iustes, or iustinges, as at the
randon or tilt. Decursio, Hippomachia, Decursus, Decursio ludicra, Troiae
lusus. Ioustes, tournois. H. Iusteing place. Trigarium, rij. neut. genesis
Justice. Aequitas, Astraea, Iustitia, tiae. f. g. Justice. S Only justice
contains all virtues, or al other virtues are co^prehe^ded in justice. Omnes
insu^t in vna iustitia virtutes. iustitia co^tine^tur, comprehenduntur,
continet iustitia, comprehendit, complectitur omnes virtutes. omnes ad vnam
iustitiam virtutes referuntur, ab vna iustitia pendent, in vna iustitia
includu^tur. qui iustitiam tenet, non est vt virtutem vllam praeterea
desideret, requirat, expetat. nulla virtute iustus caret. nulla virtus abest a
iusto. coniunctae sunt, colligatae, connexae cum iustitia virtutes omnes.

Justice of jail delivery. Latrunculator. Vlp. Justice of oyer, and terminer.
Quaestor, ris. m. ge. Justice of peace. Irenarcha, Irenarches, chae. m. g.
Justice, or commissioner appointed to enquire of abuses, crimes, and
enormities. Quaesitor, oris. m. g. Cic. Justices of quorum. Parici, orum.
Justices for treasons, or murders. Quaestores paricidij. Justification.
Iustificatio, onis. f. ge.* Iustinges. Vide Iustes. To justify, or clear him
self of any case that we lay against him. Purgare crimen. Se iustifier, se
lauer d' aucun cas qu'on nous met a sus. S.

Justly. Just, Aeque. Iustement. S. Justly by measure. Examussim. Gell.
K. ANTE. A.
K, A Greek letter, called of them Cappa, never used among the Latins, but in
words borrowed of the Greek, and for necessities sake converted into a Latin
form. Wherefore Priscianus thought K among the Latin letters to be
superfluous: from whom Quintil. not much dissenting, affirms that the lettre
C added to a vowell, does fully set forth the whole force, and value thereof.
Also Hugo, and Papias, think those that begin with K, mere Greek, and no
Latin words at all. In the notes of antiquity, K signified Calendae, Caput,
Charissimus, Cardo, Castra, Charissima, Celius: Kar, Carthago: K Ap, Calendis
Aprilis: Kal. Ianua. Calendis Ianuarij: K Aug. Calendis Augusti: K T. Capite
tonsus, cum multis alijs. Calendar, by the which one may know both the holy
days and workyng days. Fasti, orum. Calendarium, rij. Hemerologium, gij. n.
ge. Calendrier, par le quel on pouoit congnoistre les iours festez, and non
festez. S. To put out of the calendar. Eximere dies de fastis. Cic. Oster du
^alendrier. S.

Kalendes, the first day of every month. Calendae, arum. f. g. It is derived
of the Greek word (...) which signifies Voco, for that upon this day did
the Ethnicke priests assemble ye people together, to the end they might declare
how many days were to ye Nones of the same month, and then the people
repaired again to the city, to understand what was (both in spiritual and
temporal affairs) necessary to be done that month. But now that those
which desire and can not account the nombre of the days of each month by
the Kalendes, Nones, and Ides, may with more facility attain to the same. I
have thought it nothing unfit to put down these verses following. Triginta
Aprilis, Iuni, Septemque, Nouemque:
Vno plus alij: viginti Februus octo,
At si bissextus fuerit, superadditur vnus,
Et tunc bissexto Marti conscribe Calendas.
Which is.
Thirty days has November
April June and September,
All the rest have one and thirty:
Save eight and twenty February,
And nine and twenty have he shall
If that a leap year chance to fall,
Eke then the over leap years day
To Marches kalendes ad you may.
Sex Maius Nonas, October, Julius and Mars.
Quatuor at reliqui, dabit Idus quilibet octo.
Six Nones in March, October, May, and July has no mo.
The rest have four, In every monthe eight Ides there are also.
Now sith every month is divided into Kalendes Nones and Ides, and that the
verses above tell certainly how many days are in every month, you may
work in this sort. If a letter be dated in any of the Kalendes, Nones or
Ides, of a month, do no more but count how many days are in that month
which is easily known by the verses above, then by the next verses you may
know how many Nones are also in that month, for the Ides of every month are
just eyghte. The Nones and Ides known, the nombre that remains is of the
Kalendes. As for example, January has 31. days, whereof.4. are Nones.8.
Ides, and 19. Kalendes, but you must count the^ always backwardes in respect
of our count, for all the Kalendes of one month, saving the first are in the
other month that went before it. As a lettre dated Calendis Ianuarij, is
writtten the first of January, but if it be written Pridie Calendas, vel Pridie
calendarum Ianuarij (because the kalendes of one month are counted backward
into the next month going before) then was it dated the last of December, for
the last of that month is Pridie calendas Ianuarij, and tertio calendarum
Ianuarij, Is the.xxx. day of Dece^ber, but if you will write the second day of
January, you must say. Quarto nonaru^, vel quarto nonas. Ianuarij, For January
has but.4. Nones, as by the verses above it appears. If you will write the
fifth of January, you must date it thus, Nonis Ianuarij. And so if you write
the thirtenth day of January, you must write Idibus Ianuarij, for so is ye
first of the Nones, Ides, or Kalendes, always used ^n the ablative case. Thus
much have I in this place said the more, because young scholars may hereby
(as I deem) sooner attain to ye understanding the date of those Epistles which
they read. Karue, Sculpo, is. Scalpo, is. Coelo, as. Entailler. S. Karuer, a
crafts man. Coelator, ris. Sculptor, ris, Anagliptes, ae. m. g. Menuisier.
Pals. Karuer at a table. Structor, ris. m. g. Karuer, or yetter of Images.
Statuarius, rij. m. ge. Tailleur d' images. S. Karuing. Caesura, ae. Sculptura,
ae. f. g. Seek these words and the like in C. ante A. Where we judge their
propre places to be.
K. ANTE. E.
KEbbers, or croned sheep. Reijculae oues. Keelerne or keele vat, for ale,
wine, or beer. Labrum, bri. n. g. Keye. Clauis, uis. f. g. Clef. S. Keye
bearer. Clauicularius, rij. Clauiger, ri. Qui port la clef. S. Kembe, or to
comb. Pecto, is. Depecto, is. Pectino, as. Peigner. S. Kembe, or to comb
down right. Propecto, is. Peigner droict en bas. S. Kembed, or combed.
Depexus, a, um. Pectitus, a, u^. Peigne. S. Kempe, or small eale. Anguilla,
lae. foe. g. * Kendle. Accendo, is. Incendo, is. Inflammo, as. Succendo, is.
Allumer. S. To kendle the fire more and more. Ignem adiuuare. Allumer le feu de
plus en plus. S.

Kendled. Accensus, a, um. Allume. S. Kendle, or to move to anger. Irrito, as,
aui. Atteiner, ou inciter a courroax. S. Keep back, or to withholde. Contineo,
es. Reseruo, as. Retineo, es. Teneo, es. Retenir. S. Keep bawdrie, or
whoredom. Lenocinium facere, Lenocinor, aris. Vide Bawdry, hooredome, and
Whoredom. To keep beasts in the field. Pasco, cis, aui. Garder les bestes es
champs. S.

To keep his order, or rank. Obtinere ordinem suum. Garder son order, and son
rank. S.

To keep house. Sedere domi. Garder la maison. S.

Keep company, or to accompany. Assector, aris. Fair compaignie. S. Keep
couenaunte, or promise. Curare fidem, Efficere pollicita, Fide^ liberare, vel
praestare, Pacto stare. Garder l'accord, and conuention. S. Keep diligently.
Asseruo, as. Curo, as. Keep down. Supprimo, is. Supprimer. S. Keep from meat.
Victum subducere. To keep him self from doing any thing. Temperare animis,
Sustinere se. Se garder de quelque chose. S.

To keep him self from sleaping. Somnum tenere. Se garder de dormir. S.

To keep him self from doing evil. A vitio recedere. Se garder de fair mal.
S.

To keep him self from striking. Manibus temperare. Se garder de frapper. S.

To keep him self from evil speaking. Temperare maledicere. Se garder de
mesdire. S.

Keep holy days. Festiuo, as.* Keep measure. Modum retinere, Temporo, ras. Re^
suo ordine, ac mensura administrate. Temperer. S. Keep no term, or court, or
to command a vacation. Indicere iusticium. Commander les vacatio^s. Keep one
from dri^king. Potu prohibere, vel potione. Keep one in a dotinge, or fools
paradise. Producere falsa spe. Keep, or to take heed of some thing. Obseruo,
as, aui. Obseruer. Call. Prendre guard a quelque chose. S To keep from evil.
Cauere malo. Garder d' auoir mal. S.

To keep from coming to near. Arcere. Garder d' approcher. S.

For to keep his possession. Vsurpandi iuris gratia. Pour garder sa possession.
S.

To keep any from falling, or erring. Continere aliquem ab omni lapsu. Gardir
aucun de faillir. S.

To keep from letting, or hurting. Repellere ab impediendo, and laedendo.
Garder d' empecher, and de nuire. S.

Keep possession. Retinere ius, vel titulum. Keep sawfely. Tuto, as. Tutor,
aris. Keep secret. Obscuro, as. Supprimo, is. Tego, is. Cacher. S. Keep
silence, or to hold his peace. Musso, as. Fauere linguis. Ne mi sonare, Sileo,
es. Reticeo, es. Supprimo, is. Taceo, es. Verba premere, vel vocem. Conticeo,
ces. Conticesco, cis. Obticeo, ces. Facere finem sermoni, Silentium facere,
Silentium dare, In silentium descendere, Immutesco, cis. Obmutesco, cis.
Consileo, les. Comprimere vocem. Se taire. S. Ne misonare, is a proverb. Vide
Eras. chil. Keep silence no longer. Consilium, vel silentium rumpere. Ne se
plus taire. S. Keep tacke, or hold touch. Insta praebere. To keep any thing
whole, or sound without appairing. Sartum tectum hahere aliquid. Bud.

Keep watch. Agitare vigilias. Keep under. Suppremo is. Supprimer. Call. Keep
up by cherishing, or to nourishe. Alo, is. Foueo, es. Educo, cas. Nutrio, is.
Nourir. S. Keep up by maintenance. Sustento, as. Keeper. Custos, dis. Com. g.
Gardien, ou gardienne. S. Keeper of an army, called sometime Esquier del
esquirie. Armentarius, rij. m. ge.* Keeper of apparel. Capsarius, Vestispicus,
ci. m. ge. Celuy qui guard les habits ou habillimens. Call. Keeper or master of
baynes. Balneator, oris. m. ge. Maistre de bains. S. Keeper of a dry larder, or
store house. Promus, mi. masc. genesis Keeper of cattle. Pastor, ris. masc. genesis
Gardeur de bestial. S. Keeper of any thing. Fiduciarius. Gardien d' aucune
chose. S. Keeper of chestes. Capsarius. rij. m. g. Keeper of duckes. Anatarius.
Qui anates custodit, pascitue. Call. Keeper of fields, or heiwarde. Camparius,
rij. m. g. Keeper of fowls. Auiarius, rij. m. g. Keeper of letters, or records,
concerning ye crown, or books of great affairs. Sacriscrinius, nij. m. g.
Keeper, sauer, or he which saves or delivers. Saluator, Seruator, ris. m. g.
Qui sauue, and deliure. S. Keeper of secret letters. Scrinarius, rij. m. g.
Keeper of woods. Saltuarius, rij. m. g. Guard de forest Keeping. Custodia, ae.
foe. g. La guard. S. Keeping back, or a part. Reseruatio, Retentio, onis. f.
g. Retention. S. Keeping or holding fast. Retinens, it is. om. gener. Gardant. S.
Kept. Custoditus, a, um. Kept diligently, or done with care. Curatus, a, um.
Faict auec cure. S. Kept fast. Tentus, a, um. Guard. Pals. Kept in counsel,
secret, or hidden. Obscuratus, a, um. Suppressus, Tectus, a, um. Cache. S.
Kerchiefe. Peplus, Peplum, Rica, ae. foem. genesis Couurechef. S. Kerchiefe,
wherewith a wrestler wypeth his body. Strigilis, lis. foe. ge. Kerchief worn
with a paste, or roll. Taenia, ae. f. g. Kerchiefe worn upon the head,
chekes, or ears. Focale, lis. n. g. Quint. Kernel. Granum, ni. Grain. S. Vt
punica grana. The kernelles of a pomegranate. Les grains d' vne granade. S. Et
Granellum. Ang. A little kernel. Kernel growing in the neck, called a waxing
kernel. Glans, dis. foe. ge. Glander. Pals. Kernel in the grine, or share, or
behind the ear. Panus, ni. Plin. Kernel of a nutte, or of any like thing.
Nucleus, ei. m. g. Un cerneau de noix, Noyau. S. Kernel, or fruit of a pine
apple. Strobilus, li. Le noyau de la pomme du pin. S. Kernelles in fruit.
Acini, orum. Grana, orum. neu. genesis Grains. S. Kernelles in the root of the
tongue. Parithmia, Tonsillae, arum. foe. genesis Kernels of grapes. Vinacea, orum.
n. g. Col.
K. ANTE. I.
Kick. Caedere calcibus, Calcitro, as. Recalcitro, as. Calces iactare. Calce
petere. Ruer des pieds, Regimber. S. Kicking, or wynsing. Calcitratus, us. m.
ge. Regimbement. S. To keep the mule from kickinge, or winsing. Calcitratus
mulae inhibere. Engarder vne mule de regimber. S.

Kicker, or a wynsing horse. Calcitro, onis. Regimbeur. S. Kidde. Capreolus,
Haedus, di. m. g. Un chereau. S. Et Haedulus. diminut. inde Ang. A young kidde.
Petite chereau. S. Kiddishe, or of a kidde. Haedinus, a, um. De chereau.
Kidney. Ren, nis. n. g. Le rien. Kylderkin. Semicadium, dij. n. g. Cacque.
Pals. Kill, or to kill one. Animam adimere, vel extinguere, Caedo, is, cidi.
Elido, is. Exanimo, as. Ferire iugulum, Interficio, Interimo, is. Macto, as.
Neco, as, cui. Occido, dis. Perimo, is. Petere iugulum, Soluere vita, Vitam
adimere. Superare aliquem ferro, Aliquem caedere, Abneco, as. Eneco, as.
Obtrunco, as. Animam vel vitam alicui adimere, Mortem infer, Sanguinem
facere, Perdere aliquem capitis, Vim corpori facere, Aliquem caede afficere,
Expellere aliquem vita, Aliquem interficere, vel vita interficere, Supplicio,
vel morte mactare, morte multare, Priuare vita, Priuare comuni luce, Tollere
ferro, aut veneno aliquem, De medio alique^ tollere, Ex reru^ natura aliquem
tollere, Dedere aliquem morti. Auferre spiritum alicui, Vsuram lucis eripere
alicui. Tuer, ou tuer aucun. S. Kill wylfully. Co^sciscere mortem, vel necem.
To kill him self. A vita deficere, Manus sibi afferre, Sibi vitam exhaurire,
Mortem sibi consciscere. Se tuer. S.

To seek one to kill him. Quaerere aliquem ad necem. Chercher quelqu' un pour
le tuer. S.

To kill his infantes, or children. Paricidio maculare partus suos. Tuer ses
infans. S.

To kill the citezins. Viduare ciuibus vrbem. Tuer les citoyens. S.

To be killed, or slain. Exturbari ex numero viuorum, Ferro vitam reddere,
Occidi, Interfici, Morte ab aliquo affici, Perire ab aliquo. Estre tue.

Killed. Interfectus, Iugulatus, Interemptus, Occisus, Peremptus, a, um. Tue.
S. Killed first. Praecidaneus, a, um. Varr. Killer of a tyrant. Tyrannicida,
ae. mas. genesis Quia tue un tyrant. S. Killer of his father, or which has killed
his father. Patricida, ae. m. g. Qui a tue son pere. S. Killer of his mother,
or which has killed his mother. Matricida, ae. m. g. Qui a tue sa mere. S.
Killer of myse, and rattes. Myophnos. Killer of people, or murderer.
Interfector, oris. Homicida, ae. m. g. Tueur de gens. S. Killing, or sleying.
Interemptio, onis. Homicidium, dij. Occisio, onis. Interfectio, onis. Caedes,
is. Tuement. S. Killing, or the fact of killing a tyrant. Tyrannicidium,, ij.
Le faict de tuer un tyrant. S. Kilne clothe, or a here. Cilicium. Cic. Textum
e pilis hircorum and caprarum tonsilibus, quo in castris aduersus ignium
alimenta vtibantur. qui vsus nunc durat apud ceruisiarios coctores: quod
Belgica lingua and Anglicana a pilis nominant, Even hair, A here, ac etiam
Gal. Vne hair. Kind. Genus, ris. Origo, Propages, Popago, ginis. Species, ei.
f. ge. Genre. S. Et Heterogenius, a, um. Of an other kind, or kyndred. Kind
and gentle. Gratus, a, um. Philanthropos, Benignus, a, um. Clemens, Suauis,
Dulcis, Comis, Mitis, Praedulcis. Doulz. S. Kind natural of every thing, or
seed. Semen, nis. n. g. Semense. S. Kind of male, or female. Sexus, us. m. g.
Sex. S. As Sexus virilis. Mankind, or malekynde, Sexus foemineus, Womankynde,
or the female kind. Kindly, or gently. Grate, Clementer, Leniter, Placide,
Suau^ter, Dulce, Mite. Doulcement. S. Kindle, to light or inflame. Accendo, is,
di. Allumer, enflamber. S. Kindled, or being lighted, or inflamed. Accensus,
sa, sum. Parti. Allume, enflambe. S. Kindly, or by kind. Naturaliter, A
natura, vel secundum naturam. Naturellement. Call. King. Rex, gis. m. g. Roy.
S. Et Regius, a, um. Of a king. Et Regalis, le. Pertaining to a king.
Appartenant a un roy. S. Kingdom, or Realm, or reign. Regnum, ni. n. g.
Royaume, Regne. S. King by your leave, a play that children have, where one
sytting blyndefolde in the middle, bydeth so till the rest have hydden them
selves, and then he going to seek them, if any get his place in the mean
space, that same is king in his room. Apodidrascinda. H. Kingly, or royally.
Ample, magnifice. Magnifiquement. S. Kingly, or, royally. Regie, Regaliter,
Basilice. Royalement. S. Kings decrees, laws, or ordinances. Basilicae
edictiones. Kings evil, a disease in the throat with swelling. Struma, ae. f.
g. Escrouelles. S. Et Strumosus, a, um. He that has such disease. Qui ha
tell malady. S. Kings high way. Via militaris. Kings house, or palace.
Regia, ae. f. ge. Basilica, cae. foem. genesis Regia tecta, Aula, lae. foem. genesis
Le palais ou ma^son royal. S. Kings robe. Regilla, ae. Regillum.* Regale
vestimentum. Kings son. Regulus. li. mas. ge. Vide Prince. Kindred.
Affinitas, Cognatio, Consanguinitas, Familia, Gens, Genus, Locus, Necessitas,
Parentela, Prosapia, Progenies, Propinquitas, Tribus, Proximitas, tatis. f. ge.
Parente. S. Et Affinitiuus, a, um. Nighe of kyndrede. Kinsman. Cognatus,
Affinis, Consanguineus, Necessarius, Propinquus. Parent. S. Kinsman in the
third decente, lineally from my childs child. Trinepos, it is. m. g. Kinsman
of the fathers side. Agnatus, Confanguineus. Parent du cost du pere. Kinsman
of the name and stock that I come of. Gentilis, Tribulis, lis. m. genesis D' un
mesme tribu and lignee. Call. Kinswoman. Affinis, Cognata, Consanguinea,
Propinqua.* Kinswoman of the fathers side. Agnata, tae. f. g.* Kinswoman,
which descends in the third degree from my childs child. Trineptis, it is.
Vide Consanguinitie. Kirtill. Subminia, ae. f. ge. * Tunica muliebris. Surcot,
Cotelle. Pals. Kirtill of a king worn under the mantill of estate. Trabea,
eae. foe. g. Vir. Kirtilles, or peticoates for maidens. Encombomata, tum. neut.
genesis Kiss. Basium, Osculum, Philema, Suauium, ij. n. g. Un baiser. S. Kiss,
or to kiss one. Basio, as. Petere basijs, Dare basia, Suauium dare, vel
facere, vel sumere, Affigere osculum, Impertire aliquem osculo, Osculum dare,
far, aut pangere, Osculor, laris. Baiser quelqu' un. S. Kiss a deadbody, or
one that lies in dying. Extremum spiritum alicuius excipere. Baiser quelqu' un
en rendant l'ame. S. Kiss at departing. Dimittere osculo. Plaut. Kiss for
joy. Suauior, aris. Kiss, or to be kissed. Osculor, laris. Exosculor, laris.
Baiser, ou estre baise. S. Kiss swetely. Dissuauior, aris. Suauior, aris.
Baiser doulcement. S. Kisse^the earth. Contingere terram osculo. Baiser la
terre. S. Kisser. Osculator, Basiator, toris. masculin. generis. Baiseur. S.
Kissing. Basiatio, Osculatio, onis. foe. g. Et Exosculatio, onis. foe. ge.
Baisement. S. Kissing swetely. Dissuauiatio, Suauiatio, nis. f. g. Kitchen.
Colena, Culina, Coquina, ae. f. g. Cuisine. S. Et Culina, vel Edulia culinata.
Be all kinds of meat dressed in the kitchen. Et Culinor, aris. Is to do any
office, or service in the kitchen. Kitchen bourde, or instruments pertayninge
to the kitchen. Magidae, arum. Kyte. Miluus, Miluius. Milan, Escorfle. H.
Kitling, or a little katte. Catulus, li. m. g. Chatton. Kitte, or fyddle.
Fidicula, lae. foe. ge. Kiuer. Tego, is. Vestio, is. Vide Cover. Kiuered
ships. Cataphractae naues. Kiuering. Tegmen, nis. n. g. Kiuering of a bed.
Obstragulum, li. neu. genesis Couuerture du lict. Kiuering of books. Foruli.*
Vide Covering. Kiueried, or couerlet quilted, or of ^ynnen clothe. Cadurcum,
ci. n. ge.* Where as most commonly words beginning with the sound of this
letter K, and yet are rather for true Ortographie placed in C; If there be any
such whereof you double, and find the^ not here, seek C.


K. ANTE. L.
KLee. Vide Clawe. Klees of a Crabbe, Creues, or Scorpion. Chelae, arum. foe.
genesis Look more C, Ante. L.
K. ANTE. N.
KNacke a nutte. Concidere nucleum. Knagge, knurre, knobe, bunche, or knotte
which is in Dugen, Box, or any other tree. Bruscum, sci. n. g. Vide Knotte,
Knobbe. etc. Knagge. Scopulus. li. m. g.*. Knaggy, or full of knagges.
Scopulosus, a, um. Knappe of a hill, or hyllocke. Verruca, cae. f. g.
Verrucula, ae. fae. g. diminut. Ang. A little knappe. Vide Hillocke. Knappy, or
full of knappes. Verrucosus, a, um. Knave. Nebulo, onis. Semissis homo,
Secundus homo, Tenebrio, onis. Quisquiliae, Nihili homo, Lucifuga, Homo
trioboli. Pendare, fourage des corbeaux, coquin. H. Knave seller, or he that
sells servants, or slaves. Venalitiarius, rij. m. genesis Vendeur ou miquignon
de serfs ou esclaues. Call. Knave that speaks to his master with his cappe on
his head. Pileatus seruus. Knave worthy punishment, or whipping. Mastigeus,
Mastigophorus, Mastigia, ae. f. ge. Dici potest verbero, Hoc est verberibus
dignus. Digne d' auoir du fouet, batable. Call. Knauishe. Proteruus, a, um. Vt
lingua proterua; A knauishe tongue. Knauishely. Proterue. Vtsatis proterue
agere. To do knauishly, frowardly, proudely, or saucily. To knede paste or
doughe. Farinam depsere vel subigere. Pestrir and amollir la paste. H.

Kneded. Pistus, Subactus, a, um. Depfiticus, ca, cu^. Paistri, amolli auec les
mains. C. Kneder. Pinsor, Pistor, totis. m. g. Pestrisseur. S. Knee. Genu. per
om. cas. plur. Genua, uum. Genouil. S Knele. Astare in genua. Congenulo, as.
Genuflecto. Accidere, Genu submittere. S' aggenouiller. S. Knele unto.
Adgeniculo, as.* Kneling. Genuslexio.* Knyfe. Cultellus, Culter, tri. masc. ge.
Un cousteau. S. But Cultellus, Is a little knyfe. Coustelet. S. Knife called a
turpurse, or which a cutpurse carries about in his sleue, S^ca, ae, foe. g.*
Knife to cut vines, or a graffing knife. Scalprum, pri. neut. genesis Knife to
make pens. Scalper, pri. Scalprum, pri. Scalpellus, li. Scalpellum, li. n. g.
Un trencheplume: Knight. Miles, it is. Eques, it is. com. ge. Un cheualier. S. Et
Militaris, re. Pertaining to a knight. vel Equester, tris, tree. De cheuaulier.
S. To make a knighte. Cingere equitem, vel exornare equestri militia, vel
equestri dignitate. Fair cheualier. S.

Knight new dubbed or made. Neoptholemus,* Knights having shildes of gold.
Chrysoaspides. Knights of the order. Torquati equites. Cheuaullers de l'
order. S. Knigtes or soldiers, having double alowaunce. Duplares, Dupliciarij.
Viget. Knighthode, or cheualrie. Militia, Ordo militaris.* Equestris militia,
Ius annulorum aureorum. Chenalerie. S. Knitche, or a burden of wood. Fascis,
cis. m. genesis Knytte bind, tie, or make fast. Ligare, Alligare, Adalligare,
Capistrare, Deligare, Nectere, Praeligate. Scirpare, Velare, Vincire. Lier.
Knitte a knotte. Nodo, as. Nouer. Call. Knitte fast and sure. Obnecto, is.
Fest. Knitte to. Adnecto, it is. Atacher, ou lier a quelque chose. Call. Knitte
together all in one. Annecto, is. Vnio, is. Ide^ Knitte under. Subnecto, is.
Subnodo, as. Nouer and lier par dessoubs. Call. Knitable, or any thing that may
be knitte. Nexilis. Texilis, le. Knitte, or bounden to. Nexus, xa, xum. Noue,
lie and attache. S. Knitte all in one, or knitte to. Annectus, a, um. Vnitus,
a, um. Attache. S. Knitted fast and surely. Obnexus, a, um.* Knitted with the
lombe, or nedle. Textilis, le. Vide Weaue. Knitting. Textura, ae. f. g. Idem.
Knitting fast, and surely. Obnexio, onis. f. g. * Knitting of bones in the
body, where they be compacted with skiowes, as joints be. Vertebra. brae. foe.
ge. Knitting under. Subnexio, onis. foe. ge. Liement par dessoubs. S. Knobe, or
a bounche in any part of the body. Gibbus, by. m. ge. Vne bosse en quelque
party du corpse. S. Knock. Ictus, us. Percussura, ae. f. g. Un coup. S. To
knock. Ferio, is, Percussi in praet. Percutio, is. Frapper. S.

Knock at the door. Percutere fores, Pulso, as. Pulsare ostium, Pulsare
ianua^. Frapper a la port. S. To knock his head against the door. Allidere,
vel impigere caput ostio, vel ad ostiu^. Heurter sa test contre l' hais. S.

To knock his heels against the gate. Insultare fores calcibus. Frapper des
talons a la port.

Knock, or beat together. Collido, is. Vide Beat. Knokell. Vide Knuckle.
Knocker. Percussor, Pulsator, toris. m. g. Bateur* frappeur. Call. Knotte.
Nexus, us. Nodus, di. m. g. Un neud. Call. Knotgrasse herb. Polygonum,
Polygonon, Proserpinaca, Sanguinalis, Sanguinaria, Vulgo* Centinodia,
Corrigiola, Corrigiole. Renouee. H. Read Turner, volum. 2. Fol. 97. Where he
describes two kinds thereof. Knotte of a cappe band, or hatbande, or lace.
Offendimentum, Offendix, dicis. Nodus quo apex aut galerus retinetur, aut
remittitur, spirae iniectus, sic dict^ quod Mentum, vbi eo ventum est offendat.
Le neud, ou bouton. H. Knotte of love. Acidilus, vel Acidulus. It was a knotte
in Venus girdle. Knotte or ioynte of the back bone. Spondilus, li. vel
Sphondylus, li. m. g. Vide Joint or. etc. Knotte which runs to, called a
tyding knotte. Capulum, li. n. g. Capulus, li. m. g.* Knotted. Nodatus, a, um.
Noue. S. The knottes of a vine. Articuli sarmentorum. Les neudes de la vigne. S.

Knotty, or full of knottes. Nodosus, a, um. Articulosus, sa, sum. Noueux. Call.
Knotles, or without knottes. Enodis, e. Sans neuds. Know. Cognosco, scis.
Compertum habere, Nosco, scis. Scio, scis. Teneo, es. Cerno, nis. Noscito, tas.
Notum habere. Cognoistre. S. Know before. Praenosco, Praescio. scis. Scauoir
parauant. S. Know afterward. Rescio, scis. Rescisco, scis. Scauoir puis
apres. Call. Know among, as to know one thing among many. Internosco, scis.
Entrecognoistre, Cognoistre enter autres. Call. Know a woman carnally.
Subagito, as.* Know, or to knowledge again. Agnosco, scis, oui. Recognoistre.
S. Know before. Praecognosco, Praescio, cis. Praenosco, scis. Cognoistre
auant. S. Know before what shall come after. Praesagio, is. Preuoir les chooses
auenir. Call. Know hid, privy, or secret things. Rescio, scis. Rescisco,
scis.* Know not, or nothing. Descio, scis. Ignoro, as. Nescio, is. Ne scauoir
point. S. Latet. Joined with a pronowne, as Me latet, I can not tell. Ie ne scay.
Te, vel Se latet. etc. Know of other. Comperio, is. Vide Find. Know often.
Noscito, as. Cognoistre souuent. Know perfectly. Percalleo, es. Pernosco,
scis. Perspicio, cis. Recognosco, scis. Agnosco, scis. Dignosco, scis.
Discerno, nis. Internosco, scis. Cognoistre parfaictement. S. Know surely.
Agnosco, scis. Ascio, scis. Certum habere. Exploro, as. Manifestum habere, pro
certo habere. Exploratum habere. I know it well. Memini, Haud mihi sum falsus,
Non aedipol clam me est, Non sum nescius. Ie le scay bie^. S.

Known Cognitus, a, um. Notus, a, u^. Cogn^^, Sceu. S Known again. Agnitus,
a, um. Recogneu. S. Known before, or first. Praecognitus, a, um. Known
commonly, or openly, or in every man's mouth. Peruulgatus, a, um. Testatus, a,
um. Vulg^tu^, ta, tum. Pulchre notus, Fort cogneu. Known evidently, plainly,
perfectly, or surely. Perspectus, a, um. Cogneu manifestement. S. Known
surely* Exploratus, ta, tum. Known to be. Notesco, scis. Permano, as.
Permanesco, scis.* In cognitionem venire. Estre cogneu. Known to be of all
men. Inclareo, es. Inclare^c^* scis. Innotesco, scis.* To come to a name, or to
be known. Venir en bruit ou a estre cogneu. S. Knower of many things.
Polyhistor, ris. m. g. Fort scauant. S. S. Knowing. Prudens, it is. Scius, a,
um. Sciens, it is. Qui scait. S. Knowing before what shall follow. Praescius, a,
u^. Et fruitur genitiuo. That knows things to come. Venturi praescius. Qui
cognoit les chooses aue^ir. Call. Knowing much, or that knows much.
Multiscius, a, um. Qui scait beaucoup. Call. Knowing not* or nothing. Ignarus,
Nescius, a, um. Insciens, it is. Inscius, a, um. Qui ne scait qu^ c'est de
quelque chose. S. Knowledge. Agnitio, Cognitio, Notio, onis. Notitia,
Recognitio, Scientia, Intelligentia, Intellectus, Perceptio animi, Sapientia.
Cognoissance. S. Knowledge. Agnosco, scis. Vide Acknowledge. That has
knowledge and learning. Literatus, Praeditus doctrina, Doctus, Eruditus, vel
Eruditus literis. Scaua^t. S.

Knowledge and understanding before what shall follow. Praescientia,
Prognosis. Fu^urorum notitia. To give knowledge, or understanding of a matter.
Significo, cas. Indico, Notum facio, Demonstro, Ostendo, dis. Signifier,
monstrer, donner a cognoistre. Call.

To give knowledge, or warning. Moneo, es. Admonnester. Call.

To give knowledge, or warni^g before. Praemoneo, es. Praedico, cis.
Admnonester and aduertir parauant. Call.

Knowledge perfect. Perspicientia, ae. foe. genesis Claire cognoissance. Call.
Knowledge receipt of any thing. Acceptum far. Acceptum refer, Accepto
far, Accepto facere, Acceptum facere, vel Facere acceptum. and habere
acceptum, interrogatiue. Tenir pour receu, quicter, confesser auoir receu. Se
tenir pour content. S. Knowenable, or able to be known. Scibilis, bile.*
Knuckle, or ioynte. Articulus, Iunctura, Nodus, di. masc. genesis Ioincture. S.
Knurre, or knobe of a tree. Clauus, ui. m. g. Plin.
L. ANTE. A.
L, A letter counted among the half vowelles, and also a liquid, the Greeks
call it Lamda, In latin following a mute in ye same word, it makes the sylable
going before, if it be short, commune: in our tongue it is used so dyuersly
that it needs a longer discourse, then is here necessary. For in diverse
words we write the double and pronounce ye single, as in All, Wall. etc. But
time will take these away, as she daily reatcheth at the rests. L. in nombre is
written for. 50. Quinquaginta. Cinquante. Call. Labor. Cura, Industria, Labor,
Labos, Opera. Opus, eris. n. g. Labeut, trauail and besongne. S. Et Opusculum,
li. diminut. Ang. A little, short, or small labor. Besongnette. S. Et
Operarius, a, u^. Ang. Of labor, or pertaining to labor. Servant a l' ouure,
S. Labor lost. Abusio operae, Caducus labor. Labor or to work. Ago, is.
Laboro, as. Opus facere, Moliri, Operari. Labourer. S. To take great labor,
and travail to do some thing. Elaboro, as. Summo labor, and diligentia
eniti, Conari. Prendre grand labeur and trauail a fair quelque chose. S.

Labor for an office. Prenso, as. Praehenso, as. * Petere magistratum.
Labor in vain, or to lease labor. Frustrare, vel irritare operam, Sumere
operam frustra. Laterem lauare, Laborem serere, Aquam in mortario tundere,
Aquam pestillo tundere, Frustra currere, Mortuo mederi, Senis mutare linguam,
Senem admonere, Penelopes telam texere, Oleu^ et operam perdere, Arare littus.
Nihil agere, Cribro aqua^ haurire, Isthmu^ perfodere, In aqua scribere, Nebulas
diuerberare, Littori loqui, Ae^hiopem lauare, vel dealbare, Sumere opera^,
Operam perdere vel ludere. Trauailler en vain. S. Labor of child. Nitor,
eris, nixus s^m. Trauailler d'enfant. Pals. She is in travail, or labor with
child. Laborat e dolor. Elle est en trauail d'enfant. S.

Labor, or travail of a woman with child. Nixus, us. m. g. Le trauail d' vne
femme pour enfanter. S. Labor, or endeavor to do a thing. Nitor, eris. Vt
supra. Labor, or solicitie for the voice of ye contrary. Praehenso, as.
Prenso, as.* Labor, or toil for aduau^tage or living. Tudito, as. Fest.
Laborare, Opus facere. Trauailler. S. Labor painful, or heaviness of mind.
Aerumna, nae. f. g. Vide Misery. Labor the earth, or ground. Humum
resoluere, vel vincere. Terram moliri, Colere. Labourer la terre. S. Labor
hard, or till he sweat. Sudo, as. Conuexo, as. Trauailler grandement.
Labourer. Operarius, rij. m. g. Ouurier. S. Laboring. Agens, it is. Laborans,
it is. Laborious, or full of labor. Laboriosus, Operosus, sa, sum. Qui trauaille
fort and prend grande peine. S Lace. Fibula, Laqueus. * Lace of a cappe, or
hatte. Spira, ae. foem. genesis Cord ou bendeau entortille. H. Lack. Defectus,
Deliquium, Indigentia, Viduitas, tatis. foe. g. Fault de quelque chose. S.
Lack. Careo, es. Desum, es. Indigeo, es. Deficio, cis. Auoire fault de ce
qu'on vouldroit auoir. S. I lack that I love. Id quod amo careo. IN ay fault
de ce que i'aime. S.

He lackes talk, he lacks vtteraunce. Verbis est inops. Il ha fault de
parolles. S.

He lackes wit. Deficit illum prudentia. Il ha fault de prudence. S.

Lack or loss of any thing, which a man loves affectuously. Orbitas,
tatis. f. g. Privation ou perte de quelque chose qu'on amoit fort. S. Lack of
craft, or science. Inertia, tiae. f. g. Lack of courage. Demissio animi,
Infractio animi. Rauallement and abbaissement de courage. S. Lack of
foresight. Imprudentia, ae. foem. genesis Vide Foolishenesse. Lack of fruit.
Acarpia. Sterilitas, sieve instructuositas. Aut. Neb. Lack of good digestion.
Apepsia, Cruditas, sieve Indigestio, onis. f. g. Lack of grief, or pain.
Indolentia, Iudoloria, ae. ae. f. ge. Abse^ce de douleur. Call. Doloris
absentia. The a^sence of pain. Lack of knowledge. Ignorantia. ae. f. g.
Ignoratio, onis. foe. ge. Fault de cognoissance. S. Lack of money. Argentaria
inopia, Argenti inopia, Nummorum caritas, Inopia rei argentariae, Difficultas
nummaria. Fault d'argent. S. Lack of shame. Impudentia, tiae. foe. g.
Inuerecundia, ae. f. g. Impudence. Call. Lack of strength. Imbecillitas,
tatis. Debilitas, Infirmitas, tatis. f. g. Imbecillite, foiblesse. Call. Lack
of use. Desuetudo, dinis. f. g. Lack, or fault. Vitium, tij. n. g. Vide
Fault. Lacking a hand. Mancus, a, um. Manchot. S. Any thing which lacks
any necessaries is said Mancus. Lacking color, or being ill colored.
Decoloratus, Decolorus, a, um.* Lacking honor. Inhonoratus, a, um. Which is
not honored. Qui n' est point honor. Call. Lacking lodging, or lodging no man,
or having no lodging, or harbourles. Inhospes, it is. om. ge.* Lacking mirth, or
pleasure, sad. Illaetabilis, Iniucundus, da, dum. Tristis, te. Triste, mal
plaisant. Call. Lacking, or destitute, as the child lackinge parents, the
parents children, the husband his wife. etc. Orbus, a, um. Et postul. ablat.
Which has lost his sight, or any thing that he loves well. Qui a perdu la
veu, ou quelque chose qu' il aimoit fort. S. Lacking or nedye. Egens, it is.
Indigus, a, um. Indegent. Call. Lacking some part, or membre. Mancus, a, um.
Mutilus, la, lum. Mutile, qui n'est point entier. Call. Ladde. Adolescentulus,
Puer, ri. mas. g. Garcon. S. Ladde, or boy of the age of fourtene years.
Pubens, Puber, ris. Pubes, ris. Ephebus, by. mas. ge. Adolescent. S. Ladder.
Climax, cis. Scala, ae. vel Scalae, larum. Vne eschele. S. To scale the wales
with ladders. Inuadere ad muros, Scalas muris admouere, Scalis muros
conscendere. Escheler les murs. S.

Ladder of the top castle of a ship. Epibatra. * vel Epibathra. Scalae
nauticae, quibus in nauim conscenditur. Call. Ship ladders. Lade. Suffarcino,
as. Sarcino, nas.* Onero, as. Grauo, as. Charger. S. Lade a ship. Implere
nauim. Laded. Suffarcinatus, a, um. * Grauatus, ta, tum. Oneratus, ta, tum.
Onustus, ta, tum. Charge. S. Laded or stuffed. Suffarcinatus, ta, tum. Laden to
be. Grauesco, scis. Lady. Domina, nae. f. g. Dame. S. Lady, or president of
eloquence. Pytho, vel Pitho, Dea qua^ E^nius Suadam: Quintilianus persuadendi
deam dicit. Neb. Ladies of Destenie, or Life, called by the Poets Fatal
ladies, of which there are three, Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos, the daughters
of Erebus and Nox. They are called Parcaeper contrarium a Parco, because they
spare no man. The first is imagined to hold a dish^staffe: The second
draws forth the threede, and the third cuttes it of. That which is on the
dishstaffe, signifies the time to come: The threede now in hand, betokens
time present, and that which is wound on the spyndle, figureth the time
paste. So that by a similitude their spinning is compared to the beginning,
continuance, and end of a man's life. Parcae, carum. foem. gener. Parques, les
trois Parques. S. Et Deae fatalia nentes stamina, Deae fatales, Lanificae
sorores, Lanificae puellae. vt Martial. lib. 1. Epigram. Lanificas nulli tres
exorare puellas
contigit, obseruant quem statuere diem.
Was never man such favor could
of fatal ladies find,
To cause them length or short the day
which they to him asynde.
Ladies of the court. Heroinae, arum. Principes foeminae. Grandes dames, de
grand renom. Ladle. Tudicula, ae. Ferula, ae. Grand cullier. Lagge. Vide Last.
Lay. Loco, cas. Mettre en quelque lieu. S. Lay against. Obijcio, is. Oppono,
is. Mettre a l' encontre. S. Lay a part. Sepono, is. Mettre a part. S. Lay a
pledge, gauge, or pawn. Vide Pledge. Lay a stumbling block in ones way.
Subtendo, is. * Offendiculum subijcere alicui. Lay away all malice. Deponere
inimicitias, vel offensiones. Lay before. Praescribo, is. Lay between.
Interijcio, cis.* Interpono, nis. Mettre entredeux, Interposer. S. Lay by
line, or rule, or to direct. Degrummor, aris. Festus.* Lay blame, or fault
in other. Auertere culpam in alterum, Crimen culpae in alium transfer, Omnem
culpam in alium inclinare, Vertere inuidiam alicuius rei in alterum. Mettre les
blame sur un autre. S. Lay bourdes. Asso, as. Plancher. S. Lay burden on his
neck. Subcollo, as. Charger sur son col. Call.. Lay a feigned thing in the
stead of a true thing. Suppono, is. Mettre vne chose faulse au lieu d' vne
vraye. S. Et Suppositus partus, Is where the quick child is taken away, and
a dead laid in the rowme, also you may say, Suppositum testamentum. etc. A
forged will, or testament. Lay diuisely, or sunderly. Secerno, is. Mettre a
part Lay down. Demitto, it is. Depono, is. Mettre bas. S. Lay eggs. Edere,
vel ponere oua, Oua parire, vel parere, Emittere, Eniti. Pondre. S. Lay for a
thing or it come. Praetendo, is. Mettre ou tender au deuant. S. Lay
foundation. Ponere fundamenta. Lay in. Immitto, is. Mettre dedens. S. Lay in
borrowes or suerties. Vador, aris. Lay matter to one. Praeuaricationem
obijcere. Lay nets, or to pytche hayes. Concinnare retia, vel praetendere,
Plagas tendere. Cicer. Tender les filets. S. Lay on old pieces of stones, or
rubble. Rudero, as, aui. Vitruu. Lay on a heap, or to carry to one heap.
Aggero, is, gessi. Porter a un tas. S. Lay ordinance to a thing. Agere
vineas.* Lay, or set to. Applico, cas, caui, vel cui. Appliquer. S Lay over,
or before. Obduco, is. Mener au deuant. S. Lay out, or to bestow charges.
Impendo, is. Dispenso, as. Dispendo, is. Impensam facere, Sumptum facere, vel
ponere. Despendre. S. Lay snares, or to go about to deceive some man. Moliri,
vel praetendere insidias, vel laqueos, Dolos tendere alicui, Insidias tendere
alicui, Tender a aucun pour. le deceuoir. S. Lay, sprede or straw under.
Substerno, is. Estendre dessoubs. S. Lay, or cover the table. Sterno, is,
straui. Esterner, ou couurir la table. S. Lay to ones charge. Impono, Obijcio,
Praeuaricatione^ obijcere. Obijcer, mettre sur aucun quelque cas. S. Lay
wait, watch, or to spy. Moliri insidias, Peto, is. Subsideo, es. Sustendere
insidias. Tendo, is. Facere insidias, Dare insidias, In insidijs esse, Obseruo,
as. Speculor, aris. Ex insidijs aucupari. Guetter, and espier. Lay hand on
one. Inijcere manus alicui, Inuolo, as. Intendere manus alicui. Mettre la main
s^r aucun. S. Lay up in any place. Loco, as. Repono, is. Mettre en quelque
lieu. S. Lay up, or to hyde. Recondo, is, Cacher. Laid up, or hydden.
Reconditus, a, um. Cache. S. Laid against. Obiectus, Oppositus, a, um. Oppose.
S Laid aparte. Sepositus, a, um. Mis a part. S. Laid at ease, or rest.
Lentus, a, um. Virg. Laid down. Depositus, a, um. Deposite. S. Laid in, or
let in, as a balke of a house, or such like. Immissus, a, um. Laid up in
any place. Repositus, a, um. Repostus, a, um. Mis en quelque lieu. S. Laid
with mortar, rubbell, or stones. Ruderatus, a, um. Layer out of money, or
Steward. Dispensator, oris. m. ge. Un Argentier. S. Laying before the face, or
eyes. Obiectus, us. m. ge. Objection. S. Laying in of a beam, or dormo^t.
Immissura, ae. f. g. Laying in of gauge, or suertie to answer an action.
Restipulatio, onis. f. g. Restipula^ion. S. Laying out, or the charge, and
using of an others money. Dispensatio, onis. f. g. La charge, and maniement des
deniers d' aueun. S. Lay land, or oye land. Rudetum, ti. n. g. Cat. Lay man,
or of the laity. Laicus, Profanus, a, um. Popularis, re. Qui n'est point
clear. Call. Lakaye, or a footeman. Circumpedes, du^. Seruus a pedibus, vulgo
nunc Cursor appellatur, Ad pedes, Pedissequus. Laquet, laquay. Lake. Lacus, ci.
Lacus, cus. m. g. Un lac. S. Lamb. Agnus, ni m. g. Agneau. Call. Et Agna, nae*
foe. ge. A she lamb. Agneau fe^^lle. S. Agnellus, and Agniculus, diminut.
Ang. A little lamb, or young lamb. Agnellet. S. Agni^^^a, u^. Pertaining to,
or of a lamb. D'^^^^eau. S. Et Polyarna. He that has many la^be^. Lamb
lately fallen, or newely yeaned. Auilla quasi ouilla, Agnus recentis partus.
Festus. Lamb that sucketh. Subrumus, mi. Var. Lambs coming afterward, or
latewarde. Cordi agni. Plin. Qui naissent sur l' arriere saison. S. Lame.
Claudus, a, um. Boisteux. S. Lame for age. Decrepitus, a, um. Lame, numbe, or
taken. Stupens, it is. Stupidus, a, um. Perculsus, sa, sum. Membris captus.
Perclus. S. Lame on one hand. Mancus, a, um. Manchot. S. Lame to be, or to
halte. Claudico, cas. Boister, Clocher. S. To make lame, or to cause to halt.
Afferre claudicationem. Colum. Fair clocher. S.

Lamenes, or halting. Clauditas, it is. Claudicatio, onis. foe. genesis Boistement.
S. Lamenes of ye lymmes, for lack of natural blood, called numbnes, or taking.
Stupiditas, it is. Stupor, ris. m. g.* Lament. Defleo, es. Deploro, as. Fleo, es.
Gemo, is, Lamentor, aris. Lugeo, es. Opploro, as. Queror, eris. Lamenter. S. He
lamenceth, or bewayleth the death of his father. Parentem vita functum deflet,
Defunctum pat^em deplo^^t, Mortuum patrem lamentatur.

Lament much. Ingemo, is, Ingemesco, scis. Gemir. S. Lamentable. Feralis, e.
Flebilis, e. Lamentabilis, Luctuosus, a, um. Miserabilis, e. Queribundus, a,
um. Lamentable. S. Lamentable, or full of lamentation. Gemibundus, Luctuosus,
a, um. Plein de dueil. S. Lamentable song, or verse. Epiodium, Epicedium,
Epiedium canticum, Monodia, Naenia, ae, Carmen lugubr^, Elegia vel Elegeia, ae.
foem. gener. Moestum Poema. Un chant de dueil. H. Lamentation. Fletus, us.
Lamentatio. Querimonia, ae. Questus, us. Lamentum, ti. Comploratus, tus. m. g.
Lamen ou lamentation. S. Lamentation causyng. Lamentarius, a, um. Pleureux, qui
esmeut a lamenter. Call. Lamentation for dead folcke, or at burialles. Threnos.
* Threnodia, Cantus lugubris. Vt supra. Lamp. Lampas, dis. foe. ge. Lamp. H.
Lamp with two lights. Limyxos.* Lamp with three lights.. Trimyxos, Lucerna
ex tribus lucens ellychnijs. Lampreye. Fluta ae. Lampetra. Hermol. Barbar. In
quadam epistola ad Paulum Cortesium, La^pretam vocat quasi a lambendis petris,
dicitur etiam Muraena fluuiatilis, Plota, tae. Mustula, lae. foe. ge. Lamproye.
S. Lampurne. Gallaria. * Lampreta paruula. Lamproyon, ou lamprillon. S. Land.
Ager, Fundus, Praedium. Terra, ae. foem. ge. Terres. Pals. Land given in fee
simple, or wherein the donee has state of inheritance. Hae^edium, Praediu^,
ij. neut. genesis An heritage. Un Heritage. S. Great landed man. Locuples, Dives
agris, Ditissimus agri, Tellure multa dives. Un homme qui est grand terrien. S.
Land given in francke marriage. Fundus dotalis. Praedium dotale, Tellus
dotalis, Ager Dotalis. Ovid. Land given to be holden of the donor by some
service. Beneficiarius fundus. Land hyrer. Redemptor, toris. m. g. Land
sowed. Seges, itis. Terre semee. H. Land that has lain lay. Veruactum, ri.
neut. ge. Terre qu' on a laisse reposer, Iachere. S. Land sown, or tylled
every year once. Noualis ager, vel Fundus, Noualis, lis. foem. genesis vel
Nouale, lis. neut. gener. Terre qu' on seem de deux ans l' un. S. Land which
a man may give, and sell. Allodiu^, Praedium. Et Praediatorius, a, um.
Pertayninge to such lands. Land unhusbanded, or untilled. Incultus, a, um.
Ager nulla ex part cultus. Cic. Land, or a country. Orbis, Regio, Tractus,
Ora, ae. foe. ge. Pais and contree. S. Land deserte, and not inhabited.
Derelicta regio, vel deserta. Contree deserte and enhabite. S. Landed man, a
man of fair lands. Homo egregie praediatus. Homme bien rent. S. Land lord.
Dominus fundi, agri, praedij, vel terrae. Rentier. Pals. Lane. Viculus, li. m.
g. Vne ruelle. S. Lane narrow and straight, with many turnings. Angiportus,
us. Angiportum, ti. n. g. Vne petite ruelle ou rue. S. Lang du beaffe, herb.
Anchusa, Onoclea, and Calyx, Officinae hallucinantes Buglossam voca^t. Langue
de beuf. Dod. Langnete of amber, like a long beade stone. Langurium, rij. n.
g. It is rather a kind of Amber. Vne espece d' ambre. S. Language. Idioma,
it is. Lingua, ae. Sermo, nis. m. ge. Language. S. Languering in care, sorrow, or
thought. Languidus, a, um. Affectus, a, um. Languissant. To languishe.
Langueo, es. Oblangueo, es. Languir. S.

Languishe extremely, or to wax weak. Relanguere, sieve Relanguescere. Fort
languir and defaillir de force. S. Launguishing for love. Aeger amore.
Languissant d' amor. S. Languour. Languor, ris. m. g. Langueur. S. Languorous,
or which does languishe. Languidus, da, dum. Lango^reux, qui languit. S.
Languorous a little. Languidulus, la, lum. Un peu langoreux. Call. Lantern.
Laterna, Lucerna, ae. Cornu. Lantern. H Lap, or skyrte. Sinus, us.*Gremium,
ij. neut. ge. Le giron. S. Lap of the ear. Lobus, by. * Ima auricula. Vide
Ear. Lappes. Fibra^, aru^. vt Fibrae iecoris. The lappes of the liver. Et
Fibrae pulmonis. The lappes of the lights, or lunges. Lap about. Voluo, is.
Conuoluere, Circumplicare, Implicare, Obuoluere. Enueloper. S. Lap as dogs
do. Lambo, bis. Lapper comme font les chiens. S. Lap in with craft, or
fair promyses. Irretio, is. per transl. Lap up. Plico, as. Plier. Lap up
again. Replico, as. Vide Foulde. Lapped, or wrapped up. Conuolutus, ta, tum.
Inuolutus, ta, tum. Obuolutus, ta, tum. Enuelope. S. Plicatilis, le. That
which may be lapped or folded. Lapwincke bird. Vpupa, ae. Hupe. S. Larde.
Succidia, Lardum, di. n. g. Du lard. S. Succidia continet pernam, petasonem,
and lardum. Larde. Lardo, as.* Larde, or to dress with larde, as the cooks
use to dress a hare. Lardo transfigere. Larder. S. Larde, or fat of a hog.
Lardum, Laridum, di. n. genesis Vr supra. Larded, or basted. Adipatus, a, um.
Adipatus lardo. Larderhouse. Lardarium.* Carnarium, ij. n. ge. Un saloir ou un
lieu ou on pend la chair pour la garder. S. Large. Largus, a, um. Latus, ta,
tum. Large. S. Large, abundant, or plentiful. Affluens, it is. Prolixus, a, um.
Fluxus, a, um. Idem. To set at large. Laxo, as. Mettre au large. S. Et Laxe,
Aduerb. At large. Au large. S.

Large, or of great breadth. Amplus, pla, plum. Laxus, a, um. Large, de grande
estendue. S. Large, or wide. Amplus, a, um. Spatiosus, a, u^. Ide^. Large, or
plentiful, or abundant to be. Affluo, is. Abonder. S. Largely. Ample,
Ampliter, Large, Plene, Plena manu, Prolixe, Soluto sinu. Abundanter.
Amplement. S. Largely, or plentifully. Affluenter, Copiose, Affatim, Ampliter,
Benign, Large, Liberaliter, Munifice, Opipare. Largement. S. Largely, or wide.
Ample, Spatiose. Largement. S. Largenes. Amplitudo, Largitas, atis. f. g.
Largeur. Largenes, or abundance. Affluentia, Abundantia, ae. f. g. Abondance.
Call. Largess, or reward given to laborers or workmen. Stips, pis. Stipis,
is. Condonatio, Munifice^tia, Largitio, Largitas, tatis. f. g. Largess. Et
stipe^ vociferare. To cry a larges. Larges to give. Stipem erogare, vel
spergere. Lark. Alauda, ae. Cassita, Corydalus, li. Galerita. Alouette, ou
Cocheuis, alouette huppee. S. Lark called a wood lark. Acredula.*
Lasciuiouse, or lecherouse. Lasciuus, a, um. Paillard, impudique.
Lasciviousness, or lechery. Lasciuia, ae. foem. genesis Paillardise. S. Lashe.
Plaga, ae. f. g. Coup de fouet. Pals. Lashe out, to waste, or spend out of
measure. Prodigo, is. Profundo, dis. Despendre oultre mesure. S. Laske, or
laxe, or the flixe of the belly. Alui profluuium, Aluus non consistens,
Lienteria, Diarrhoea, Pantices, Tormina. Flux de ventre. S. Vide Flixe. Last
for shoes. Galla, Formula, ae. Mustricola, ae. Mustricula, ae. Modulus, Forma.
La form du solier Last. Finalis, e. Extremus, a, um. Extimus, a. um. No
uissimus, a, um. Nuperimus, a, um. Postremus, a, um, Supremus, Vltimus, a, um.
Le dernier, S. Last but two. Antepenultimus, a, um. Last day, or the day
last passed. Superiori die, Superioribus diebus. Le iour de deuant. S. Last of
all. Postremo, Sum. En fin. Vide Lastly. Last, or next to us. Citimus, a, um.
Vide Next. etc. Last. Duro, as. Permaneo, es. Vide Dure. Last ever. Perenno,
as. Idem. Lastage, or balase for ships. Saburra, ae. foe m. ge. Lestage.
Pals. Lastaged or balased. Saburratus, a, um. Lasting ever, and aye. Pere^nis,
ne. Vide Ever and Eternal. Lastly, finally, or last of all. Ad extremum, Demu^
aliquando, Nunc iam, Nouissime, Denique, Tu^ demum, Tamen, Tandem, Postremo.
Finallement ou finalement. S. Latche of a door. Vertebra, Vertibulum,
Cadanafeus, Pessulus, li.* Latchet of a shoe. Amentum, Ansa, Corrigia
caleamenti, Ligula calceorum. La courroye d' un soulier. Late, or that which
is late. Serus, ra, rum. Serotinus, na, number. Tardif, du soir. Call. Late, or to
be lagge, or to come late. Tarde venire. Late done, or happened of late.
Nuperus, a, u^. Recens, it is. Quod recens, Quod nuper fuit. Recent, nouueau. S.
Late, or in the evening. Sero, Vesperi. Aduer. Tempore vespertino. Au soir, sur
le vespre. Call. I never go forth so early, nor come home so late. etc.
Nunquam tam mane egredior, neque tam vesperi domum reuertor. etc. Terent.

Late in the night. Ad multa^ noctem, Multa nocte, Sub multam noctem. Late or
new. Recens, it is. Vt supra. Late done. Late, or out of dew time. Tarde.
Tardiuement. S. Late to be. Vespero, as. Vesperascit. Auesprir. Call. Late to
wax. Vesperasco, scis.* Lately, or of late. Dudum, Iamdudu^, Nouiter, Nuper,
Pridem, Recenter. N'agueres, Il n'y a pas long temps. S. Nuperime,
Recentissime. Very lately. Dernierement. S. Later, or latter. Posterius,
Serius. Aduer. Trop tard. Lately, or slackely. Lent, Pigre, Spisse atque vix,
Perspisso, Tarde. Tardiuement. S. Later, or latter. Posterior, rius. Plus tard.
Latest of all. Recentissimus, Nuperimus, a, um. Latewarde fruit. Poma
serotina, and autumnalia, and Equinoctialia. Pommes tardiues. S. Latewarde
hay. Cordum foenum, vel Serotinum. Latewarde, or which comes afterward or
late, as well by bearing, springing, or otherwise. etc. Cordus, a, um.
Serotinus, a, um. Tardus, a, um. Tardif. S. Lathe, berne, or graunge. Horreum,
rij. n. g. Grange. Lathe without the walls of a city. Suburbanum, ni. n. g.*
Lathes. Asserculi, Assiculi, orum. Des lates. H. Assula, lae. Asserculus, li.
m. g. A lathe. Vne late. S. Latin. Latinus, a, um. Latin. S. Latin. In latin,
or in the form of latyne. Latinement, ou en latin. S. Turn, or to translate
into latin. In latinam linguam, vel in latinum sermonem vertere, Latin
reddere. Traduire, ou tourner en latin. S.

Latin speech. Latinitas, it is. Latinus sermo, Latialis sermo, Lingua lati^,
Latina lingua. Language Latin. S. Latin to speak. Latin loqui. Parler latin.
S. Latitude, breadth, or largeness. Latitudo, dinis. f. g. Latitude ou
largeur. S. Latten, a metal. Aescoronarium, Aurichalcum, Orichalcum. ci. n. g.
Laiton ou leton. S. Latter age. Summa aetas. Lattise. Cancelli, orum. m. ge.
Plur. number. Treillis, cleres voyes. S. et Clathrus, thri. Clathrum, thri. n.
genesis Idem. Window with a lattise, or a lattise wyndowe. Fenestra clathrata.
Plaut.

Lattise, or to close in with lattyses. Clathrare, Clathris claudere. Colum.
Traillisser. S. Lattyse wise. Cancellatim. Aduerb. En facon de treillis. S.
Lauander, an herb, whereof be two kinds as Turner, in his third book. fol.
39. writes, Lauenda, Lauanda, vel Lauendula, vel Lauandula, lae, f. g. a
Laua^do sic dicta. But other call it Spica Germanica. Other Spica Italica,
Other Spica, vel Spica Nardi. Some Hirculus, And some Saliunca Plinij. Lauande.
H. Lauatory. Vide Lauer. Lauatory with two spoutes. Dichila.* Lauatory with
three spoutes. Trichila, Est vas aquarium apud Col. Laud, praise, and to give
thanks to God. Lauds and grates agere Deo, Benedicere Deo. Lover and
remercier Dieu. S. Laud, or to praise one. Astruere laudem alicui, Benedicere
alicui, Laudare, Collaudare, Concedere laudem alicui, Prosequi laudibus, Laude^
alicui dare, Laudibus tollere, Laudibus far, Habere lauds de aliquo. Lover
quelqu' un. S. Laud and to praise one loftely. Canere aliquem aut lauds
alicuius, Cantare aliquem. Cumulare aliquem multis laudibus apud alios,
Decantare, Dilaudare, Extollere verbis, Far ad vel in caelum, Far in astra,
In prima commendatione ponere aliquem, Onerare laudibus, Sonare lauds
alicuius. Lover fort and haultement aucun. S. Laud, praise, and commendation.
Comme^datio, Laudatio, Collaudatio, Gloriatio, Hymnus, Laus, dis. f. g.
Louange. S. Laudable, or praise worthy. Laudabilis, le. Digne de louange. S.
Laue, or to wash, or make clean. Abluo, is. Colluo, is. Eluo, is. Baptizo,
as. Lauo, as. Lauer and nettoyer. Laued, or washed. Ablutus, ta, tum. Laue. S.
Lauender cotton, herb. Santonicum, *Chamae cyparissus, si. f. g. Lauer.
Gutturinum, Guttus, Aqualis, lis. masc. ge. Gouteron. H. Law. Lex, gis.
Sanctio, Scitum. Ius, ris. n. g. Loy. S. Law gentle, or an easy law. Lex
mollis. Vne loy doulce. S. Law of nature. Ius natural. Vne loy and ordonnance
descendant de nature, la loy de nature. Law of the gentylles. Ius gentium. Loy
commune enter toutes les hommes, venant de la raison naturelle. S. Law civil.
Ius civil, Ius proprium, Ius ciuicum. Les loix and coustumes qui sont propres
and particulieres a un chascun peuple, droict civil. S. Law day. Iuridicus
dies. Law geuer, or maker. Legifer, Legislator, ris. m. g. dicitur autem
legumlator, ris. Et seperatim Lator legum, vel Lator legis. Legislateur qui
fait loy ou ordonnance. Call. Et Sanctor legum, Constitutor legis. Law, league,
or intercourse between two princes, for redeliuerau^ce, or restitutio^ to be
made. Recipera^tia, Reciperatio, Recuperatio, onis. f. g. Law peculier, for
every city or town. Lex municipalis, Municipale ius. Les coustumes
particulieres de chasque ville and cite. S. Law of custom, or prescription.
Ius moribus co^stitutum. Iulianus. Droict coustumier. S. Law of prescription.
Praescriptio, Praescriptum, ti. neut. ge. Prescription. Call. Law, or a
statute. Senatusconsultum, ti. n. g. To give law. Dare legem. Donner loy. S.

To make, and ratify a law. Sancire legem, Legem conscribere. Fair vne loy.
S.

To make one law, to abrogate or put away an other. Obrogare legem. Fair vne
loy abrogatiue d'vne autre. S.

To dispense with the law. Veniam legis dare, Gratiam sanctionis facere.
Dispenser d'vne loy. S.

Law laid in stepe for money. Leges opibus demersae. Cic. Laws made in
assemblies, concerning peculiar customs. Leges curiatae. Cic. Lawer, or man
of law. Caussidicus, Formularius leguleius, Iurisperitus, ti. Iurisconsultus,
ti. Consultus iuris. Iurisce, Iurisconsulte. S. Lawful. Legitimus, a, um. Qui
est selon le loy. S. Lawefully before God. Fas. Tantum in nominatiuo,
accusatiuo, and vocatiuo reperitur. Qui n'est point desplaisant a dieu.
Lawefull cause, or quarrel. Sontica causa. Tibul. Lawefull it is. Licet. Il est
licite. S. Lawefull, or of the law, or pertaining to the law. Iuridicus, a,
um. Iuridique. S. Laweles, or without the law. Illex, gis. om. genesis Qui sine
lege viuit. Sans loy. Call. Laughe. Edere risus. Rideo, es. Rire. S. Risum
captare vel concitare. Ang. To cause men to laugh. Fair rire les gens. S.
Laughe far of. Prorideo, es.* Laughe immoderatly. Cachinno, as. Et Cachinnor,
naris. Rire fort and desmesureement. S. Laughe heartily. Perrideo, es.* Laughe
mockingly, to mock, deryde, floute, or ieste at, or to laugh to scorn.
Cachinnor, aris. Derideo, es. Obrideo, es. Irrideo, es. Pro ridiculo habere,
vel putare, Subsanno, as. Se mocquer, Mocquer. Laughe privily. Subrideo, es. Se
subrire, S. Laughe, whereby to cause other to laughe. Perrisio, sere.*. Laughe
vnmeasurably. Cachinnum sustollere, vel tollere. Rire desmesureement. S. That
men do laughe at. Ridiculus, la, lum. De qui on se rit. S.

Laugher, or a mocquer. Risor, ris. Irrisor, soris. m. genesis Rieur, mocqueur.
Call. Laugher, or scoffer. Gelasinus, ni. m. g. Plaut. Laughing. Cachinnatio,
Risus, us. Risio, onis. f. ge. Risee. S. Ridicularius, a, um. Pertaining to
laughing. Laughing stock. Ridiculum, li. n. ge. vt Ridiculo esse. To be a
laughing stock. Laughing, or able to laughe, or which can laugh. Risibilis,
le. om. genesis Laughing unmeasurable. Cachinnus, ni. mas. genesis Ris desmesure. S.
Laughing which lasts long, or where one dies with laughing. Sardonicus
risus, quoddam adag. Chil. Eras. Laughter. Risio, onis. Risus, sus. m. g. Ris.
S. They took up a laughter. Risus factus est. Cic. Et Tollere risum. To take
up a laughter. Rire a haulte voix. S.

To move a laughter. Mouere risum. Cic. Fair rire les gents.

Lauing, or washing. Ablutio, nis. Baptismum, mi. Baptismus, mi. Lauatio, onis.
Lotura, ae. foe. genesis Lauement. S. Lance, or spear. Lancea, ae. foe. g. Vne
lance. S. Lanceola. diminut. Ang. A little lance. Petite lance. Launceknightes,
or men bearing shieldes of silver. Argyraspides, masc. ge. Qui argente^ scuta
ferunt. Call. Lance, or launche open a soar. Scarifico, cas, aui. Scarifier.
S. Launche to shore. Appellere ad ripam. Launde or very fine lynnen clothe.
Sindon, nis. f. g. Un linge fort delie. S. Crespe. Pal. Launder, or woman
washer. Lotrix, cis. foem. genesis Lauendiere. Pal. Lauor, or washer. Lotor, oris.
m. ge. Laueur. S. Laurie, or lorell. Daphnoides, Laureola, ae. foe. genesis Ruell.
Laureole. S. Laurel leaf. Laurea, ae. foe. g. Fueille de Laurier. S. Laurel
tree. Daphnis, dis. Laurus, ri. foem. genesis Un Laurier. Et Laureus, a, um. Ang.
Of Laurel or Baye. Qui est de Laurier. S. Et Lauretum, ti. The place where
laurel does grow. Un lieu plant de lauriers. S. Laureola, ae. foe. genesis A
garlande of Baye. Chapelet de laurier. S. Laurifer, ra, rum. Lauriger, ra, rum.
He that bears laurel, or wears a garlande of laurel. Qui port laurier.
S. Et Laureo, as. To put on a garlande, or crown of Laurel.* Lawssois in
Burgoin, a country in France. Alexia. It is also Arras in ye country of
Artois. Laxe, or flixe. Diarrhoea, Fluxus, profluuium, Fluor, oris. Fluxio
ventris. Plin. Flux. S. Laxatiue, or which has a laske, or squirte. Foriolus,
li. m. g. Lab. Foireux. S. Laxatiue to make, or to loose the belly. Aluum
soluere. Lascher le ventre. S Lazar. Leprosus, a, um. Lazerhouse. Hierocomion,
Locus, in quo leprosi aluntur. Call. Lazary, or leprie. Lepra, ae. foe. ge.
Lepre, Ladrerie. S.
L. ANTE. E.
LEad, a mettale. Plumbum, by. neutri. genesis Plomb. S. Which has much lead
mingled through out. Plumbosus, a, um. Qui ha beucoup de plomb mesle parmi. S.

Which is of lead. Plu^beus, a, u^. Qui est de plomb.

To be leady colored. Liueo, es. Estre de la couleur de plomb. S.

Color of lead. Plu^beus color. Couleur de plomb.

A pellet of lead. Glans plumbea. vne plombee. S.

Lead called litharge, or white lead. Lithargyrium, rij. Lythargyros. Plin.
Lead foam, or spume. Molybditis, it is. foe. g. Plin. Lead, or to souldre with
lead. Plumbo, as, aui. Soulder de plomb. S. Lead. Ago, is. Duco, is. Traho,
is, Ducto, as. Mener. To lead one to prison. Aliquem in carcerem deducere.
Mener quelqu'vn en prison. S.

To lead dogs by the collar. Numellis ductare canes. Mener les chiens par le
collier. S.

To lead right to the gate. Ad portam far. Mener droict a la port. S.

To lead to perdition. Ad exitium, and vastitatem vocare, Ad interritum
redigere. Mener a perdition.

To lead with him. Co^ducere, Secum trahere. Mener auec soy. S.

Lead about. Circumago, is. Circumduco, is. Mener a l' entour. S. Lead about
often. Ductito, as. Mener souuent. S. Lead a dance. Ductare choream, vel
restim, Praesulto, as. Restim ducere. Mener la danse. S. Lead a side. Seduco,
cis. Mener a part. S. Lead away by force. Abduco, cis. Emmener par force.
Lead before. Praeduco, cis. Mener douant. S. Lead by force. Perduco, cis.
Mener par force. S. Lead forth again, or to bring again. Reduco, cis.
Remener, ou ramener. S. Lead forth. Produco, cis. Educo, cis. Mener horse. S.
Lead from one place to an other. Deduco, cis. Traduco, cis. Mener d' un lieu
en l' autre. S. Lead in. Induco, Introduco, cis. Mener dedens. S. Lead over.
Traduco, cis. Traijcio, cis. Mener oultre. Lead the way. Secare viam. Virg.
Lead unto. Adduco, cis. Mener iusques. S. Leader, or guide. Dux, cis. com. g.
Vne guide. S. Leader away. Abductor, oris. m. g. Leader of a dance.
Praesultor, oris. m. ge. Qui saltantium choream ducit. Cic. He that leads the
way, or that goes before. Praeuius, a, um. Qui va deuant. S.

Leading away. Abductio, onis. f. g. Leading in. Inductio, onis. f. g.
Induction. S. Leadoux, a country in France. Alduasdubis. Leaf. Coma, Folium,
Petalum, li. n. g. Vne fueille. S. To put out leaf. Exire in folia. Iecter
fueilles. S.

The leaves open the^ selfs against the Sun. Oscitant folia ad solemn. S'
ouurent. S.

Thick leaf. Folium carnosum. Fueille espesse. S.

Iagged leaves. Laciniosa folia. Fueilles deschiquetees. S.

Leaf, or branch of a tree. Frons, dis. f. g. La fueille ou rainseau
d'arbre. S. Leaf of any thing, which grows nearest the ground. Loba, bae.
foe. ge. Plin. Leaf or shete of paper. Scheda, ae. Philyra, Philura, Membrana
papyri. Vne fueille de papier ou de parchemin. Leaffe, or fat of a swyne.
Vnctum, ti.* Leaffed, or bearing, or having leaves. Foliatus, a, um.*
Frondifer, a, rum. Portant fueilles. S. Leaffelike, or like leaves. Foliaceus,
a, um. Semblable a fueilles. S. League. Foedus, ris. Symmachia, ae. f. g.
Alliance. S. League broken. Laesum foedus, Temeratum foedus. Alliance rompue.
S. To be comprysed in the league, and treaty. Foederi ascribi. Estre comprins
en l' alliance, and au traicte

To trouble a league.. Confundere foedus. Troubler l' alliance. S.

League, or intercourse between princes, for deliverance of any thing taken.
Reciperantia, Reciperatio, Recuperatio.* League breaker. Foedifragus, gi. m.
genesis Qui rompt l' alliance. Call. To dissolve, or break leaves. Soluere
foedera. Dissouldre, rompre. S.

League to make. Percutere foedus, Ferire foedus. Fair alliance. S. Leame, or
flame of fire. Lampas, dis. (facit acc. them vel da.) f. ge. Un flambeau. S.
Leame of lightning which the thunder makes. Fulgetrum, tri. n. g. L' escler
qui fait le tonnare. S. Lean. Argutus, a, um. Emaciatus, a, u^.* Gracilis, e.
Gracilentus, Macer, a, rum. Macilentus, Strigosus. Tenuis, e. om. g. Maigre. S.
Et Tenuiculus, a, um. Vesculus, a, um. Ang. Very lean. Fort maigre Lean
goats. Capellae graciles. Ovid. A lean bulle. Taurus macer. Virg.

Lean cheeks. Macilentae malae. Plaut. Lean, thin, or a slender
countenance. Macilentum os. Plaut. Lean jade Strigosus equus. Lean lamb.
Curiosus agnus. Plaut. in Aul. and Apul. A contrario dicit, Incuriosus agnus.
Lean, or maigre, with business and care. Cura, and labor macilentus. Lean to
be. Maceo, ces. Macreo, es. Estre maigre. S. Lean to be extremely. Tabesco,
scis. Estre fort maigre. S. Lean to make. Emacio, as. Macero, as. Macio, as.
Emacror, aris. Tenuo, as. Fair maigre. S. Amaigrir. Lean to wax. Gracilesco,
Macesco, Macresco, scis. Inch. Deuenir maigre. S. S'amaigrir. Call. Leanes.
Gracilitas. Macror, sieve Macor, Macies, Macritudo, inis. f. g. Maigretie, ou
maigreur. S. Lean, or to hold to some thing. Haereo, es. Adhaereo, es.
Cohaereo, es. Inhaereo, res. Obhaereo, es. Tenir a quelque chose, ou contre
quelque chose. S. Lean to. Adnitor, eris. vt Adniti ad aliquid. To lean, or
stay to some thing. Se tenir, ou appuyer a quelque chose. S. Lean to with
favor, or to favor. Astipulor, aris. Fauourisser. S. Leaned to. Adnixus, a,
um. Adnisus, a, um. Leaning fast to. Adnixus, a, um. Adnisus, a, um. Leaning to
a tree. Arbori accliuis. Plin. Leap, or a iompe. Saltus, us. m. g. Un sault.
S. Leap. Emico, as. Salio, iui, vel lij. Salto, as. Saillir. S. To leap
without fetchinge his race, or fees. Nullo procursu salire. Saillir sans
prendre sa course.

Leap against a thing. Assilio, is. Saillir a l' encontre de quelque chose. S.
Leap away. Absilio, is. S' en aller en saultant. S. Leap back. Resilio, is.
Resulto, as. Resaillir. S. Leap down. Desilio, is. Saillir de hault en bas.
S. Leap before. Praesilio, is. Praesulto. as. Saillir deuant. Leap eftsoon
back. Resulto, as. Resaillir souuent. S. Leap for joy. Praegestio, is.
Saulter de joy. S. Leap hither and thither. Dissilio, is. Saillir ca and la.
Leap often. Saltito, as. Saillir souuent. S. Leap over. Transilio, is.
Transulto, as. Saillir par dessus. S. Leap out. Exilio, is. Saulter horse. S.
Leap out with violence. Prorumpo, is. Erumpo, is. Prosilio, lis. Saillir horse
auec violence. S. Leap upon some thing. Insilio, is. Saillir sur quelque
chose. S. Leap, or a basket. Sporta, ae. foe. genesis Un panier. S. Vide Basket.
Leaping. Saltans, it is. part. om. g. Saultant. S. Leaping. Saltatio, onis. f. g.
Saultement. S. Leaping in, or upon. Insultura, rae. f. g. Plaut. Leapingly, by
leapes, and leap by leap. Assultim. En saultelant. S. Learn. Disco. cis.
Condisco, cis. Addisco, cis. Comprehendo, is. Apprendre. S. To learn by heart.
Animo adipisci, Ediscere. Apprendre par cueur. S.

To learn of one. Disciplina^ ab aliquo accipere. Apprendre d'aucun. S.

To learn an art. Percipere artem. Apprendre l' art. S.

Learn before. Praedisco, scis. Apprendre par auant. Learn, or to teach.
Doceo, ces. Condoceo, ces. Monstro, as. Commonstro, as. Erudio, is. Instituo,
is. Praecipio, is. Trado, is. Artibus pueros inficere, vel Imbuere, Discipulos
instruere, Edoceo, ces. Enseigner. S. Vide Teach. Learned. Doctus, a, um.
Literatus, Praeditus, a, um. (cum Ablat.) Scauant. S. Learned indifferently,
meanly, or so so. Semidoctus, a, um. A demi scauant. S. Learned in good
manners. Moratus, a, u^. Morigine Learned in the seven arts liberal.
Heptatechnus. Learned nothing at all, or unlettered. Agrammatus, a, um.
Illiteratus, a, um. Call. Learnedly, or like a learned man. Literate, Docte.
Scauamment. S. Learning. Documentum, Doctrina, Literatura, ae. foe. ge.
Discipline. S. Learning, or teaching. Conformatio, onis. Disciplina, ae.
Documentum, ti. Institutio, onis. Monstratio, onis. Praeceptum, ti. Traditio,
onis. foe. ge. Enseignement. S. Leasing. Vide Lie. Leasyng to make, or to lie.
Co^mentor, aris. Fingo, is. Mentior, ris. Mentir. S. Leave. Intermitto, is.
Mitto, is. Praeterio, Praetermitto, is. Relinquo, is. Relinquer. S. Leave or a
license. Co^meatus, tus. Copia, ae. Dimissio, onis. Permissus, us. Permissio,
onis. Venia, ae. Abeundi venia. Conge. S. Without my leave. Iniussu meo. Sans
mon conge. S.

To give leave. Copiam facere, Faculratem facere, vel dare, Gratiam facere,
Potestatem facere, vel dare, Defer potestatem. Donner conge. S.

To give children leave to play. Pueris licentiam ludendi dare, vel potestatem
facere. Donner conge aux enfans de iouer. S.

Leave alone. Viduo, as. Lasseuler. Pals. Leave all business to apply study.
Asserere se studijs. S' addonner du tout a l' estude, abandonnant ses autres
affairs. S. Leave all malice. Deponere inimicitias. Leave all unhappiness.
Refugere a sceleribus. Leave anger, or fume, or not to be angry. Reprimere
iracundiam. Terent. Leave a thing in writing. Scriptu^ relinquere. Cic. Laisser
par escript. S. Leave a thing unspoken of. Praeteruehere aliquid silentio,
Praeterire silentio. Passer quelque chose sans en dire mot. S. Leave chiding.
Auferre iurgium. Leave entente, or to cease from doing any thing. Abire
incepto, Supercedeo, es. Exigit. Dat. and Ablat. Cesser, and se deporter de
fair quelque chose. Leave the perpetual memory of a thing. Memoriam rei
relinquere. Fair chose done il soit perpetuelle memoire. S. Leave, forsak, or
to put away. Repudio, as. Repudier. Leave for them that come after, as our
sequel, posterity, or succession. Prodere posteris. Cic. Leave from o^e to an
other. Tradere per manus. Leave his custom. Consuetudinem relinquere.
Delaisser sa coustume. S. Leave in doubt. In medio relinquere. Laisser en
doubt. S. Leave in poverty. In egestate relinquere. Delaisser en pourete. S.
Leave mourning. Elugeo, es. Cesser de pleurer. S. Leave of, or to make an end.
Desisto, is. Finem facere, Desino, is. Absisto, is. Desister. S. Leave office.
Deponere officium, Remouere se officio. Se demettre de son office. S. Leave
old wont, or custom, Desuesco, scis. Laisser sa* coustume. Call. To leave
one. Deserere aliquem, aut destituere. Abandonner aucun. S.

To leave one without aid. Aliquem relinquere. Delaisser aucunsans aid. S.

Leave out. Praetermit^o, is. Leave playing. Eludo, is. Leave relinquish, or to
cease. Desisto, Linquo, Omitto, Pono, Quiesco, scis. Relinquo, is. Reliquu^,
vel reliquos facere, Requiesco, Remitto, is. Laisser, relinquer, ou cesser. S.
Leave scoolding. Auferre rixas. Leave suite. Desistere litibus. Terent. Leave
to our children. Prodere liberis. Leave undone. Praetermitto, is. Obmettre. S.
Leave untouched. Praetermitto, is. Leave upon a gauge, or pledge. Arrhaboni
relinquere. Laisser pour les arres. S. He leaves, or ceasseth not to speak
evil of us. Non cessat de nobis detrahere. Ne cesse de mesdire de nous. S.

Leaving of, or ceasing to treat of. Praetermissio, onis. foem. ge.
Delaissement. S. Leauinges, or the remnante of a dinner, or supper. Reliquiae,
arum. foem. gener. Le relief du disner, ou du souper. S. Leauinges, or scrappes
of meat, or bread that fales from the table. Analecta, torum. neut. genesis
Reliefs, miettes. H. Lechery. Fornicatio, onis. Libido, inis. Venus, eris.
Impudicitia, ae. Obscoenitas, atis. Salacitas, atis. foe. ge. Paillardise. S.
Lechery, most abominable. Propudium, dij. n. g. Lechery to commit. Moechor,
aris. Meretricor, aris. Scortor, aris. Libidinor, aris. Rebus venereis vti.
Paillarder. Lechery, or carnal copulatio^ committed with the^ that are of our
kindrede, and alliance. Incestus, tus. Incestum, ti. n. g. Assemblement
charnel illicite faict auec parente, and alli^e. S. Lecherouse, or given to
lechery. Incestuosus, a, u^. Libidinosus, a, um. Pellicatus, a, um. Salax,
cis. Venereus, a, um. Adonne a paillardise. S. Lecherouse child, or moved to
lechery after the age of fourtene years. Hirquitalus, li. m. ge.* Lecherous
house. Lustrum, tri. Lupanar, aris. Ganea, ae, f. g. Lupanarium, rij. n. g. Un
bordeau. S. Lecherous person, or whorehunter. Moechus, chi. Cinaedus, Ganeo,
onis. Agapeta, ae. Lenocinator, oris Agapetes, tae. Scortator impudicus.
Lecherous to be, or to enter into lechery after the age of fourtene years.
Hirquitallio, is, ire. Au. thor. Censorin. Lecture, or a reading. Lectio, onis.
foe. ge. Lecture. S. Lecture, or a reading in schools, called ye king his
lecture, or a public lecture. Professio, onis. f. genesis Lecture public. Et
Professor, oris. m. genesis He that reads such lecture, a public reader.
Public lecteur. S. Lecturne, or deske. Pluteus, tei. m. g. Poulpitre a mettre
livers. S. Ou pulpitre sur quoy on ecrit. S. Ledd. Ductus, a, um. Mean. S. Ledd
about. Ambactus, a, u^. Seruius. vt Seruus circumactus. Leeke, herb. Porrum,
ri. n. g. Un porreau. S. Leeke called an unset leeke. Sectiuum porrum. Leeky,
or of leekes. Porraceus, a, um. De porreau. S. Leese, or to loose. Amitto, is.
Perdo, is. Perdre. S. Vide Loose. Left. Derelictus, a, um. Omissus, Relictus,
Remissus, a, um. Laisse, delaisse. S. Left alone. Viduatus, a, um. Left
behind. Praetermissus, a, um. Delaisse derriere. Left hand. Laeua, uae. Leua
manus. Scaeua, Sinistra, ae. f. g. La main senestre, ou gauche. S. Left handed
men. Scaeuae. m. g. Vlp. Left it is, or it remains. Restat, bat. Cic. Left,
or lefthanded. Laeuus, a, um. Sinister, ra, rum. Senestre, gauchier. S. Lefull.
Vide Lawful. Legacy, that which is left, or bequethed to some man in, or by
testament. Legatum, ti. n. genesis Ce qu'on laisse a aucun par testament. S. Et
Legatarius, a, um. To whom legacy is made. Legataire. S. Et Legator, which
makes the legacy. Testateur. Legatory conditionale, or he to whom the goods
of the testator is left upon condition. Euerriator, oris. m. g. Leg. Tibia,
ae. f. g. Iambe. S. Leg of moton. Coxa veruecina, Clunis, Femur. Esclanche de
mouton. S. Legged crokedly and ill favored. Vatrax, cis. Vatricosus, a, u^.
Varus, a, um. Qui hi les iambes tortues. Leg harneys. Caliga, Tibialia, ium.
n. g. Armures de iambes. S. Legion, it is a company of soldiers, to the nombre
of.vi.M. footmen, and of horsemen.vii.C.xxxii. as Vigetius writes, but by
Liuie it is evident that a legion is uncertain, now more, now less,. Legio,
onis. f. g. Legion. Call. Et Legionarius, a, um. Ang. Pertaining to a legion.
Apartenant a legion. Call. Legier du mane. Praestigia, ae. Praestigium, gij.*
Vaframentum, Praestigiae, arum. f. g. et Circulatores, Be called such as do
play legier du mane, but rather they be popet players, and tomblers. etc.*
Leisure. Mora, ae. Pausa, ae. * Otium, ij. Spatium, tij. n. g. Vacuum tempus.
Loisir. S. If you be at leisure. Si es animo vacuo, Si commodum est, Si tibi
est otium, Si vacat, Si vacas. Si tu as le loisir and l' opportunite. S.

To be at leisure to do a thing. Otium ad aliquid faciendum habere, Spatium
habere, Vacuu^ tempus habere. Auoir loisir de fair quelque chose. S.

To have great leisure. Abundare otio. Auoir grand loisir. S.

I have no leisure to teach. Nullum habeo docendi locum. ^e n' ay null loisir
d' enseigner. S.

Leisure to take. Otior, aris. Moram trahere, Moror, aris. Paulo, as. Seponere
sibi tempus. Prendre loisir. S. Leysurely, or at leisure. Otiose, Vacatim,
Ductim, Cunctanter, Tractim. Tout a loisir. S. Leman. Concubina, ae. Pallaca,
ae. Palace, ces. foe. g. Concubine. S. Lemans, fruit like an oringe. Limones,
number. f. g. Lemon, or a C^^trone. Malum Hesperium, Medicum, Assyrium, Citreum.
Limon and citron. H. Lend. Accommodo, as. Commodo, as. Dare mutuo, Mutuo, as.
Mutuor, aris. Mutuo appendere, Praesto, as. Vtendum dare. Prester. S. To lend
his house to some man for his marriage. Cominodare aedes suas alicui ad nuptias.
Prester sa maison a aucun pour fair les nopces. S.

Lend for gain, or usury. Foenero, as. Occupare pecuniam alicui, vel apud
aliquem foenore. Bailler a usure. S. Lend money. Copiam facere argenti, Mutuum
argentum dare. Prester argent. S. Lend money for gain. Pecuniam in quaestu
relinquere. Cic. Lender. Accommodator, Commodator.* Lender of money for gain,
changer, or banker. Campsor, oris. Collybistes, ae. Me^sarius, rij.
Me^sularius, rij. Trapezita, ae. m. g. Banquier. S. Lending. Accommodatio,
Commodatio.* Lending for gain, or usury. Foeneratio, Foeneratus, us. m. ge.
Usure. S. Length. Longitudo, nis. Prolixitas, Prolixitudo, nis. Proceritas,
atis. foe. ge. Longueur. S. And at length, or in length. Prolixe. Producte.
The shortness of the day, and length of the night. Diei breuitas, Noctis
longitudo. Cic.

Length without breadth. Gramme.* Lengthned, or beaten out at length.
Productilis, le. om. gener. Lengthening, or prolonging of any thing. Productio,
onis. f^e. ge. Prolongement. S. Lent. Accominodatus, a, um. Lepre.
Elephantiacus, Leprosus, a, um. Lepreux. S. Lepry. Elephantia, Elephantiasis,
Lepra, ae. foe. genesis Lepre. S. Leprouse color. Haphe. Leskarde, a town in
Cornwall. Legio, onis. foem. gener. Less. Minus. Aduerb. quant. Moins. S.
Less, or lesser. Minor, us. adiect. Moindre. S. Less by the half. Dimidio
minus. La moitie moiens. Lessen or to make less. Extenuo, as. Minuo, is.
Diminuo, is. Attenuo, as Imminuo, is. Amoindrir. S. Lessen or to wax less.
Decresco, scis. Descroistre. S. Lesson. Lectio, onis. foe. ge. Lecon. S.
Lessoure, or ferme letter. Locatarius, Locator, oris. foe. ge. Loueur. S. At
the least. Minime, Minimum. Aduerb. Tant so^^ peu. S.

Lest at any time. Nequando. Que quelque fois, ou quelque temps. S. Lest not.
Vt. Cic. Lest of all. Minimus, a, um. Trespetit. S. Lest or not. Ne. Adu.
Prohib. Sometime. Interrogand. Somewhy^e. ^ationandi, Neue. Take heed, not one
word of the marriage, lest this also increase her grief. Verbum vnum cave de
nuptijs ne ad morbum hoc etiam. Terent.

Take heed lest thou cast away thy se^^e. Vide ne pereas. Guard que tu ne
perisse. S.

Do not fear. Ne metuas. Ne cra^ns point. S.

Is she married to Pamphilus to day? Daturne illa hodie Panphilo nuptum? La
baille on auiourdhuy en marriage a Pamphiles S.

Nether this, nor that. Neue hoc, Neue illud. Ne ceci, ne c^ld. S.

Let. Interpellatio, Impedimentum, Obex, icis. Offendiculum, Tricae, arum.
Difficultas, a^is. Impeditio, onis. Intercessio, onis. Obstaculum, li.
Occupatio, onis. Praepedimentum, ti. neut. genesis E^peschement. S. Let. Cohibeo,
es. Interpello, as. Obsto, as. Parco, cis. Offenso, as. Reprimo, is. Retineo,
es. Impedio, is. Aduersor, aris. Arceo, ces. Impugno, nas. Inhibeo, es. Obsto,
as. Occupo, as. Praepedio, is. Obsum, es. Intercedo, is. Empescher. S. Let, or
to distourbe. Disturbo, as. Interturbo, as. Interpello, as. Empescher, and
destourber. S. Let be, get the hence. Apage* Oste toy. S. Let blood. Dimittere
sangumem, vel repellere. Emittere sangumem, Minuere sangumem. S^igner aucun* S.
Let, delay, or to cause to tarry. Moror, aris. Tardo, as. Retarder, ou detenir.
S. Let down. Dimitto, is, si. Remitto, is. Let in. Admitto, is. Intromitto,
is. Laisser entrer. S. Let one in coming, or going. Reditum alicui perimere.
Cic. Let one to do his business. Aliquem de suo negotio detinere. Empescher de
fair sa besongne. S. Not to let the execution. Non aduersari, quo minus lege
agatur, Mora^ rei exequendae nullam facere, Exequenti mandatum mora^ non
afferre. Ne point empescher l'executi^n. S.

To let one another. Obstrepere inuicem. Empescher l' un l'autre. S.

Let, or forbid passage. Vestigijs interdicere, Via^ alicui perimere. Let, or
to hinder one. Impedire aliquem, Intricare, In tricas conijcere, Praepedire.
Empes^^er quelqu' un. S. Let, or to hinder a tale. Obacero, as. Festus. Let, or
to hinder, or slack a matter, that it be not done. Moram alicui rei afferre,
Rem aliquam distrahere, vel impedire, In mora esse, Moram alicui rei facere.
Empescher, and retarder que quelque chose ne se face. S. Let, or suffer.
Potestate^ dare, vel facere, Sino, nis. Permettre. S. Let, or to suffer a thing
to grow in length. Promitto, is. vt Promittere herbam. Plin. To let the herb
grow long. Laisser croistre sa herb. S. Let, or to suffer the growing or
waxing of a thing. Submitto* vt Barbam submittere. Senec. To let the bearde
grow. Laisser croistre la barbe. S. Let pass. Amitto, is. Mitto, is.
Praeterio, is. Praetermitto, is. Omitto, is. Delaisser. S. Let to bail, or
mainprice. Vadimonio obstringere. To be let, or to have a let, or business.
Negotium habere, Pati impedimentum. Estre empesche. S.

To be greatly let. Distringi. Estre fort empesche. S.

Let to ferme, or to rent out. Locito, as. Loco, as. Bailler a louage. S. Let,
or let. Interpellatus, Impeditus, a, um. Occupatus, a, um. Empesche. S. Let,
or hyndered with much business. Ampliter negotiatus, Multis praepeditus
negotijs, vel rebus. Which is greatly let, or occupied. Negotiosus,
Distentissimus, a, um. Negotij plenus. Qui est fort empesche. S.

Greatly let, so that he knows not what to do. Districtus, a, um. Fort
empesche, tellement qu' il ne scait que fair. S.

To be let nothing, or to be nothing busied. Vacuos dies habere, Ab re aliqua
otium habere. N'estre point empesche. S.

Letanie, invocation, or prayer in commune. Litania, (non letania.)
Interpretatur rogatio. Neb. Let, or lawdaie. Iuridicus dies. Lether. Aluta,
ae. Corium, rij. n. g. Cuir. S. Aluta, Is properly tawed leather. Lether bag,
or purse. Ascopera, ae, foe. genesis Suet. Bource de cuir. S. Letheren thonge, or
any thing that is made of lether. Alutamen, inis. Corrigia, ae. foe. ge.
Courroye de cuir. S. Lethery, or of lether. Coreaceus, a, um. Scorteus, a, um.
De cuir. Call. Letten to ferme. Locatus, a, um. Letter of house or land, a
lessor. Coenacularius, Locatarius, rij. Locator, oris. m. g. Loueur. S. Letten
for most aduau^tage, or gain. Meritorius, a, um. Meritoire. S. Letter of
horse, or mule to hyre. Veterinarius, rij. masc. genesis Call. Letter, or
disturber. Interpellator, Turbator, oris. m. g. Destourbeur. S. Lettice an
herb Vide Lettuce infra. Lettice bonnet, or cappe for a gentle woman.
Redimicula, oru^. n. g. It is the general latin for all tiringes pertaining to
the head. * Letting, or taking to hyre. Locatio, onis. foem. genesis Louage, bail
a louage. S. Letting of blood. Detractio sanguinis. Sanguinis missio. Cells.
Saignee. S. Letting, or hyndring. Offensans, it is. om. ge. Letting, or putting
of. Depulsio, onis. f. g. Letting pass. Praetermissio, onis. foem. gener.
Pretermission. S. Lettre. Charecter, ris. Litera, ae. Elementum. Vne lettre. H.
Literosus, a, um. Full of letters. Literarius, a, um. Perteining to letters.
Apartenant aux lettres. Call. Lettre carier. Libellio, onis. Tabellarius, ij.
mas. ge. Porteur de lettres missiues. S. Lettre of change. Nummaria tef^era.
Lettre de change S. Lettre of excuse. Epistola excusatoria. Lettre, or Epistle.
Epistola, ae. Literae, arum, foe. ge. Lettres missiues. Lettre written in
haste, or without study. Sylua, ae. foe. ge. Quint. lib. 10. cap. 3. Lettres
being blind. Caducae, vel fugientes literae. Exolescentes literae. Lettres qui
s'efface. H. Lettres crokedly written, and out of line, or order. Vacillantes
literae. Cic. Lettres missiue. Codicilli, Literae, Tabellae, Epistola. Lettres
missiues, epistre. H. Lettres of a king. Rescriptum, ti. n. genesis Lettres d'vn
prince, lettres royaulx, rescription. S. Lettres patentes. Codicilli,
Dimissoriae litterae.* Diploma, atis n. g. Cic. Principum literae. Lettres
patentes de quelque prince ou seigneur. S. Lettres of victory, Literae
laureatae, Victrices, Victoriae indices, quales lauro victoriae test inuolutas
ad senatum mittebat exercitus Imperator profligato host aut expugnata vrbe. H.
Lettres of dignity, or honor. Literae honorariae, Sacrae, quibus honores
alicui deferuntur. Lettres d' honeurs. H. A bundell of lettres. Epistolaru^
fasciculus. Cic. Un paquet de lettres. H.

Lettres stolen out by suggestion. Surreptitiae literae. Lettred, or learned.
Literatus, Literosus, a, u^. Lettre, docte. S. Lettuce, an herb. Lactuca, ae.
f. g. Vne laictue. S. Of ye which Martial* speaks thus. Claudere cum coenas
lactuca solebat auorum,
Dic mihi, cur nostras inchoat illa dapes?
Sith that in elder time they used
their lettuce after meat,
Tell me why now we ever use
it first of all to eat?
Lettuce wild. Picris, cris. f. g. Plin. Lewd, or naughty. Improbus, a, u^.
Perperus, Prauus, Nequam, Flagitiosus, a, um. Impius, a, um. Improbus, a, um.
Impurus, a, um. Perditus, a, um. Scelestus, a, um. Teter, a, um. Meschant. S.
Lewd, or naughty both of condition and tongue. Vernaculus, a, um. Senec.
Lewdely, or naughtely. Improbe, Perperam, Praue, Flagiriose, Illiberaliter,
Imbrobe, Impure, Indigne, Nequiter, Perdete, Scelerate, Sceleste. Meschamment.
S. Lewdenes, or naughtenes. Improbitas, Prauitas, tatis. Facinus illiberale.
Improbitas cordis humani, Impuritas, it is. Indignitas, it is. Nequitia, ae.
Scelus, eris. Vitium, tij. Flagitium, tij. neut. g. Meschancete. S. Great
lewdenes, or wickedness. Perdita nequitia. Grande meschancete. S.

Brought to lewdenes, or naughtenes. Accommodatus ad flagitia. Duict a
meschancete. S.

I have kept me altogether from committinge any lewdenes, and wickedness.
Sartum, ac tectu^ ab omni piaculo conseruaui animum meum. Ie me suis guard
ent^erement de fair aucune meschancete.

To entice, or bring one to lewdnes, or naughtenes. Adducere ad facinus,
Adducere ad nequitiam, Perdere aliquem. Inciter, and induire quelqu'vn a
meschancete. S.

Leave cul, a French phraes, as much to say in English, remove your bomme,
and may be thus latined. Leua culum. It is a kind of gaminge at the tables
coursly at many hands, that where as one has lost a game, an other
enterpriseth by turn, and so every man in his turn. Leuel to make, or to make
eue^. Aequo, as, aui. Vnir. To level, or shoot with the bow. Tela dirigere
arcu. Tirer droict d' un arc. S.

To level, or cast darts. Spicula dirigere dextra. Ovid.

Level, or plumme line, of a carpenter or mason. Perpendiculum, li. n. genesis Le
plonb d'vn masson, ou charpentier. S. Leven, or sour doughe. Fermentum, ti. n.
g. Leuain. Leven to make. Fermento, as. Mettre du leuain. S. Lever, bar, or
porter to lift timber, or any other weighty thing. Palanga, Phalanga, Vectis,
it is. m. g. Leuier. S. Leueret, or leuret, or young hare. Lepusculus, li. m.
genesis Diminut. Un leurault. S.
L. ANTE. I.
LIbarde. Leopardus, Pardus, di. masc. gener. Un Leopard. S. Libell of
defamation. Libellus famosus, qui maledictis sauceat ac suggillat alicuius
famam. Brocard, parole ignominieuse, libel fameus. H. Et Famosum epigramma,
Programma famosum. Libelle diffamat^ire. S. Liberal. Dapsilis, Genialis,
Liberalis, le. Munificus, a, um. Liberal. S. Liberal and courteous. Benignus,
a, um. Animus prolixus. Liberal and courtois. S. Liberal expense. Largitio,
onis. f. g. Liberal giving. Erogatio, Largitio. onis. foem. ge. Largess de
dons. S. Liberal in giving. Largus, Munificus, Nimius in dando. Large, and
liberal a donner. S. Liberal of expense. Largus, a, um. Large. S. Very
liberal. Perliberalis, le. om. g. Fort liberal.

Liberal sciences, or the sciences of a free man. Liberales arts, Ingenuae
arts. Arts liberaulx. S. Liberaller, or more liberal. Munificentior, us. om.
ge. Plus liberal. S. Liberalles^, or most liberal. Munificentissimus, a, um.
Tresliberal. S. Liberally. Liberaliter, Large, Libere, Plena manu, Prolixe,
Soluto finu. Liberalement. No man gives more liberally then he. Nemo dat
largius. Il n' y a homme qui done plus liberalement que luy. S.

To promise liberally. Porolixe promittere. Pro mettre liberalement. S.

Very liberally. Perliberaliter. Fort liberalement.

Liberality. Beneficentia, Largitas, Liberalitas, atis, Effusio in aliquem.
Liberalite. S. Liberality in giving rewards. Munificentia, ae. foe. genesis
Largess. S. Liberty. Libertas, Laxitas, Pileus, lei. m. g. Liberte. Liberty
immoderate, or unlawful. Licentia, ae. foe. ge. License. Call. Et Licentiosus,
a, um. Full of such liberty, or using unlawful liberty, very licentious.
Trop licentieux. S. Liberty without correction or punishment. Impunitas,
atis. foe. ge. Impunite. S. Library. Bibliotheca, Libraria, ae. Librairie. S.
License. Copia, Licentia, Permissus, us. Potestas, atis. foe. ge. License. S.
Vide Leave. License general, pasport, or safeconduct. Publica fides. Salust.
License to depart. Missio, onis. f. g. Conge. S. Licenced, or permitted.
Permissus, a, um. Permis. S. License, or to give license. Dare copiam, vel
potestatem, Mitto, is. Permitto, Potestatem, vel licentiam facere. Donner
conge. S. Lick. Lambo, is. Lingo, is. Delingo, is. Licher. S. Lick about.
Circunlambo, is. Licher tout entour. S. Lick daintely. Catillo, as. Ligurio,
ris. Licharder. S. Lick dishes. Catillones. Lecheurs de plas. S. Licked.
Linctus, a, um. Nebr. liche. Licker. Linctor, oris. m. g. Lecheur. S. Licking.
Linctus, us. m. g. Lichement. S. Licorise. Scythica, Radix dulcis, Glycyrrhiza,
ae. foe. ge. Liquirice. H. Licorous, or delicious. Lautus, a, um. Friant. Pals.
Licorous person. Liguritor, oris. m. genesis Un friand, friolet. S. Licorousnes.
Lautitia, ae. f. g. Friandise. Pals. Licoure. Ius, Latex, cis. Liquor, ris. m.
ge. Liqueur. S. Lidde, or cover of a pot, or tankerd. Operculum, Operimentum,
ti. Opertorium, rij. Cooperculu^, li. Integumentum, ti. Orbis, bis. m. g.
Couuercle. S. Lie. Cubito, as. Cubo, as. Iaceo, es. Gesir S. His wife lies in
childbedde. Cubat eius vxor, Iacet puerpera. Sa femme gist. S.

The danger lies in that. In ea re vertitur discrimen. Le danger gist en
cela. S.

The victory lies in this. In hoc victoria consistit. La victoire gist en
cela. S.

My life lies, and consists in that. Salus mea in eo vertitur. Ma vie gist,
and consiste en cela. S.

Lie about. Obiaceo, es. Gesir autour. Call. Lie aparte. Secubo, as, ui. Coucher
a part. S. Lie out of his own house all night. Pernocto, as. Lie at ease, or
rest. Recubo, as. Virg. Lie by. Adiaceo, ces. Accubo, as. Accumbo, is. Gesir,
ou estre couche aupres. S. Lie down. Cubo, as, aui, vel bui. Decubo, as, atum,
vel bitum. Decumbo, is. Sterno, is. Se coucher. S. Lie down to sleep.
Discubo, as. Se coucher pour dormir. S. Lie flat, or groueling. Procumbo, is.
Lie hid, or to be hidden. Deliteo, es. Delitesco, scis. Lateo, es. In
tenebris iacere, Carere publico. Estre cache. S. Lie in wait to betraye, or
trape one. Insidior, aris. Moliri insidias. Obsidior, aris. Subsideo, es. Vide
Lay wait. Lie in extreme panges of death. Ducere horas extremas, Diuerbia
fatalia exhalare. Tirer a la fin. S. Lie, or to say false. Affingere aliquid
alicui, Co^me^tor, aris. Mentior, iris. Fingo, is. Dicere falsum, Dicere
mendacium, Ementior, iris. Sycophantor, taris. Sycophantizo, as. Mentir. S. To
tell a lie. Proloqui mendacium, Mentiri, Dicere mendacium. Dire vne menterie. S.

To forge a lie. Conflare mendacium. Forger vne menterie. S.

To maintain a lie against the truth. Stare a mendacio contra verum.
Soustenir vne menterie co^tre la verite. S.

To take one in a lie. Tenere aliquem manifestu^ mendacij. Surprendre quelqu'vn
en menterie. S.

To imagen, and forge a lie. Mendacium struere. Songer, and dresser vne
menterie. S.

To lie wittinglie. Vanitatem orationis adhibere. Mentir a son escient. S.

It is not my propriety to lie. Non est mentiri meum. Ce n' est pas mon
naturel de mentir. S.

They do nothing but lie. Nullus mentiendi modus est. On ne fait, que mentir.
S.

Without lyinge. Non dicam dolo, Bona fide. Sans mentir. S.

Lie prostrate. Procumbo, is. Lie together. Concumbo, is. Lie together, or to
accompany together in the act of generation. Concubo, as. Concumbo, is.
Coucher ensemble. Call. Lie with an other man's wife, or to commit aduoutrie.
Adultero, as. Adulteror, aris. Commettre adultere. S. Lie under. Subiaceo, es.
Succubo, as. Succumbo, is. Estre couche dessoubs. S. Lie upon some thing.
Incubo, as. Estre couche sur quelque chose. S. Lie, or leasing, or false tale.
Commentum, ti. Figmentum, ti. Mendacium, Vanitas, Inuentum, ti. Commentum, ti.
neut. genesis Sycophantia, ae. Mentitio, onis. foe. ge. Menterie. S. Et
Mendaciunculu^, Diminut. Ang. A little lie. Petite menterie. S. A loud, or
manifest lie. Manifestu^ mendaciu^.

Attainted, and convicted of a lie, or naughtines. Manifestus mendacij, aut
sceler^s. Attainct, and conuaincu d' vne menterie, ou de meschancete. S.

Full of lies, and false. Fabulosus, a. um. Mensongier, and faulx. S.

Lie teller, or lying knave. Mendaciloquus, a, um. Mendax, acis. Vanus, a, um.
Sycophanta, ae. m. ge. Menteur. S. Lie to bucke or wash with, made of ashes.
Lixiuium, uij. Lixiuia, ae. f. g. Lexiue. S. Liege man, or subject. Subditus,
a, um. Subject. S. Lying. Cubatio, onis. Cubatus, tus. Cubitus, tus. m. g.
Couchement. S. Lying at ease and rest. Lentus, a, um. Recubans, it is. om. g.
Virg. Lying at ease. Recubitus, us. m. g. Lying in child bed. Accubatio,
Accubitus, us. m. g. A couchement. Pals. Lying by. Accubatio, onis. f. g.
Gesine. Lying upright, or upon the back. Cubitus supinus. Couchement sur le
dos. S. Lyingly, or with lies. Vane, Fabulose. Par mensonge Liar, or leasing
maker. Falcidicus, Falsiloquus, Mendax, cis. Perperus, Vanidicus, Vaniloquus,
Vanus. Sycophanta, tae. m. g. Menteur. S. Lier that lies for the whetstone, a
notable lyinge knave. Halophanta, vel Holophanta, tae. com. g. Lies of oil.
Fraces olei, Amurca, cae. f. ge. La lie de l' huile qui est par dessus. S. Et
Magma, atis. Idem. Lies, grounds, or dregs of any manner of thing. Faex, cis.
f. g. La lie, bourbe, and limon de quelque chose que ce soit. S. Et
Faeculentus, ta, tum. Full of lies, dregs, and grounds. Plein de lie, de
bourbe, ou de limon. S. Lies of wine. Floces vini, Faex vini. Lie de vin. Call.
Lieutenaunt, or grand captain of an army. Legatus, ti. m. g. Un Lieutenant. S.
Lieutenaunt, or viceroye, or vicegerent under a prince. Praeses, dis.
Lieutenant pour le Roy en vne province. S. Lieutenauntes of provinces. Legati,
Subpraefecti, Subiuridici. Lieutenans de provinces. S. To make Cassius his
lieutenaunt. Cassium sibi legare. Fair Cassius son Lieutenant. S.

Life. Anima, Spiritus, Vita, ae. f. g. La vie. I fear my life. Metuo de vita.
Ie crain de ma vie.

To save ones life. Seruare aliquem, Salutem alicui dare. Sauuer la vie a
aucun. S.

They disprayse the life of others. Illis aliorum vitae poenitentia est. Ils
desprisent la vie d'autruy.

To detracte, or to speak evil of the life of an other. Conijcere maledicta
in vitam alicuius, Detrahere alteri. Mesdire de la vie d'autruy. S.

To put his life in danger. Vitam prodere, Offerre caput vilitati and
periculis. Mettre sa vie endanger. S.

To prolonge his life. Ampliare aetatis spatium. Prolonger sa vie. S.

Life chaungeable, as this day poor, to morrow rytche, some time whole, some
time sick. It is also a life led in robbery, and breaking of houses.
Vecticularia vita. Et Vecticulariam vita^ agere. To live by breaking of houses,
and robbery, or to live a chaungeable and variable life. Lifeles, or without
life. Exanimis, e. Exanimalis, le. Mort. Vide Dead. Lift up. Alleuo, as.
Attollo, is. Extollo, is. Exalto, as. Exero, ris. Erigo, is. Eleuo, as. Leuo,
as. Subigo, is. Subleuo, as. Sustollo, is. Surrigo, gis. Tendo, is. Lever. S.
Lift up alofte, or on high. Attollo, lis. Eleuo, as. Sustollo, lis. Surripio,
is. Lever en hault. L. Lift with leuers. Phalango, as. Lifted up. Sublatus, a,
um. Alleuatus, a, um. Leave. S. Lifter with a lever. Phalangarius, rij. Lifting.
Sublatio, Erectio, onis. f. g. Lifting, or raising up of the arteries, brain,
heart. etc. Dyastole. Light. Lumen, inis. Lux. cis. f. ge. Lumiere. S.
Luculentus, a, um. Luminosus, a. um. Plein de lumiere. S. The light of the
day. Lux, cis. foe. ge. La lumiere de iour. S.

Very great light. Lux larga. Lumiere fort grande.

A hurtful light. Laeuum lume^. Lumiere nuisant.

An obscure light. Maligna lux. Lumiere obscure. S.

To be able to behold the light. Lucem far. Endurer de veoir la lumiere. S.

Which flies the light. Lucifugus, a, um. Qui fuit la lumiere. S.

Which gives light. Lucens, it is. om. genesis Qui rend la lumiere, et clarte. S.

Without light. Obscurus, a, u^. Sans lumiere. S.

Light belief, credulity, or lightness to believe some thing. Credulitas, atis.
foe. ge. Credulite, legierite a croire quelque chose. S. Light beleuer, or that
believes lightly. Credulus, a, u^. Qui cro^t de legier. S. Light feet. Calidi
pedes. Varr. Light footed. Acupedius, a, um. Aeripes, dis. om. g. Aerios habens
pedes. i. leaves. Virg. Light harnised, or a soldier that wears light
harneis. Veles, it is. m. ge. Homme de guerre arm a la legiere. S. Light horse,
or nagge. Veredus, di. m. g. Light horse men. Desultores. Vide Horsemen. Light
of it self. Lucibilis, le.* Light, or easy. Facilis, le. Laeuis, e. Leuis, e.
Sublestus, a, um. Citus, a, u^. Ocyor, Pernix, nicis. Properus, a, um. Velox,
ocis. om. g. Legier. S. Light or soft. Mollis, le. om. ge. As light
commandments, not greatly to be regarded. Iussa mollia. Virg. Legiers, and
desquels on doibt tenir peu de compte. S. Light, or swifte. Hic volucer, haec
volucris, hoc volucre. Adiect. Legier ou viste. S. Light, or nimble. Agilis,
le. om. ge. Alaigre. S. Light, or soft pace in going. Suspe^sus gradus. Ter.
Light pair of heales. Calidi pedes. Light stopping, or taking away.
Ablucinatio, onis. Light to bear before, or to give light to some body, as
with a lantern, ca^dle, torch, or such like. Praeluceo, ces. Esclerer a aucun.
S. Light to show, or to shine. Luceo, es. Luire. S. Light upon, chance, or to
happen. Cado, is. Obtingo, is. Incesso, is. Euenio, is. Accido, is. Aduenio,
is. Contingo, is. Aduenir. S. Light or to give light. Accendo, is. Lumino, as.*
Illumino, as. Allumer ou donner clarte, and lumiere. S. Light, or to make
clear. Illustro, as, aui. Esclercir. S Lighten, or to make easy. Leuo, as.
Alleger. S. Lights, or lunges. Pulmo, nis. m. g. Le poulmon. S. Lighting up
and down of an horse, called vaunting. Desultura, ae. f. g. Lightly. Facile,
Leuiter, Perfacile, Agiliter. V^^stement. S. Lightly gotten. Adepticus, a, um.*
Lightly, nembly, or quickly. Agiliter. Alaigrement. Lighten, or to cast
lightning. Fulgurio, is. Fulmino, as. Fulguro, as. Esclairer. S. Lightness, or
inconstancy. Leuitas, atis. Vanitas, atis. foe. ge. Legierete, ou inconstance.
S. Lightness of color. Virus. Indecl. Plin. Lightning. Fulmen, inis. Fulgur,
ris. n. ge. Escler. S. It is some time taken for Gods wrath after many Poets.
Also Fulmen is ascribed to Jupiter: Arcus, to Cupido: Hasta, to Pallas:
Tride^s, to Neptunus. Lightning in the clouds. Fulguratio, onis. f. g. Se^.
Lightning sender, or causer. Fulgurator, oris. masc. genesis Cicero. Lightning
burning, and consuming suddenly. Obrutania fulmina.* Lightninges, which do
put away the tokens of other lightninges. Peremptalia. Festus. Like. Instar.
Indeclinab. Comme. S. Like. Assimilis, le. Coaequus, a, um. Par, ris. Similis,
le. Verisimilis, le. Parilis, le. Compar, aris. Aequalis, le. Coaequalis, le.
om. ge. Semblable, Pareil. Very like. Assimilis, Persimilis, Vicinus illi. Fort
semblable. S.

Altogether like to the Stoickes. Germanissimus Stoicis. Tout semblable aux
Stoiques. S.

Like figure. Concors figura. Semblable figure. S. A thing like, and near to
an other. Cognata res alteri. Chose semblable, and voisine a un autre. S.

One like unto me. Alter ego. Un semblable a moy.

A beast like unto those of the sea. Aemula marinis bestia. Best semblable a
celles de la mer. S.

I seek a man like unto this. Ad istam faciem hominem quaero. Ie cerche un
homme semblable a cestuy. S.

Other like. Alia eiusdem generis. Autres semblables. S.

It is more like the truth. Similius very, aut vero est. Il est plus vray
semblable. S.

It is like to this. Ad hoc exemplum est. Il est semblable a cestuy. S.

Of like kind. Eius, vel eiusdem generis. De semblable genre. S.

Noe one man like an other. Nemo est alteri similis. Null n' est semblable a
l'autre. S.

Like a bosse, or sow. Suatim, Nonius. Like a ducke. Anatinus, a, um. Like a
mother to be. Matresco, scis. Estre fait semblable sa mere. Call. Et Patrisso,
as. To be like the father, or to do like his father. Fair comme son pere.
Call. Patrizo, as. Idem. Like an Ox. Bouatim Nigid. figul. Like as. Quasi,
Quemadmodu^, Sicut, Sicuti, Ta^quam, Velut, Veluti, Vt, Vtique Comme, Comment,
Ainsi. S. Like as if. Perinde atque. Vide Even. Like, content, or to please.
Placeo, es. Plaire. S. It likes me. Placet mihi, Placitu^ est mihi. Il me
plaist. Like for like. Par pari. vt Par pari refer. To do like for like.
Render la pareille. S. Et Paria facere, Hostire, operam reddere, Par refer,
Gratiam reddere, Vice^ reddere, vices rependere, Assequi merita alicuius. Like
in all things. Consimilis, le. Du tout semblable. Like in nothing. Dissimilis,
le. Varius, a, u^. Dissemblable Like no man. Nullorum hominum homo. Like of
fashion. Aequalis, le. Semblable. S. Like of substance in the Godhead.
Homousios. Like to be, or to resemble. Praesentare, Simulare, Similitudinem
far, Refer and habere, Specie^ alicuius rei habere. Resembler. S. Et
Similare, Esse similem. Estre semblable. S. Like to like quoth ye devil when he
daunced with ye collier. Similis simile^ sibi quaerit, Similes habent labra
lactucas, Se^per graculus assider graculo. Eras. To be very like to any thing.
Accedere quam maxim ad rem aliquam. Estre fort semblable a quelque chose.

To live like his father. Vita^ parris exprimere, patrem refer, vel
regenerare. Estre de semblable vie que son pere. S.

Likely. Simile, Similiter, Verisimile, Verisimiliter. Vray semblablement. S.
Likeness, or lykelyhod. Effigies, Similitudo, Simulachru^, Species, ciei. f. g.
Semblance. S. Likeness in quality, or quantity. Parilitas, it is. f. g.
Egualite. Likeness in speech. Analogia, ae. foe. ge. * Likewise, in like sort,
or also. Item, Itemque, Similiter, Quoque, Perinde, Prout, Iuxta, Atque,
Itidem, Tum vero. Pareillement. S. Likewise. Similiter, Assimiliter, Aeque,
Peraeque. Semblablement. S. Lilly. Lilium, lij. n. g. Et Rosa Iunonis. Du lys.
Turn. Et Lilietum. A lilly bed, or place where lilies grow. Le lieu ou
croissent les lis. S. Lilly called a water lilly. Nenuphar, Nymphaea, Clauus
veneris, Et papauer palustre. There are of this. 2. kinds, the one white, and
the other yelow. The white is named in French Blancd'eau. The yelowe in latin
Nymphaea altera vel lutea. Offi. Nenuphar citrinum. Ieulnet d' eau. Lis d'
estang. S. Lilly read. Crinon, Lilium purpuroum, aut rufum. Lys iaulne. Dod.
Lilly wild. Ephimeron.* Hemerocallis and Liliu^ syluestre. Lys sauuage. Dod.
Lime for birds. Vide Byrdlyme. Lyme for walls. Bitumen, inis. Cal^, cis.
foem. ge. De la chaulx. S. But Bitumen. Is properly such Lyme (as it is said)
which grows in Babilonia, Apollonia, Iudaea, Phoenice, Sicilia, Sidonia,
Whereof there be two kinds. The one dry, the other liquid, and is more
vehement then our lime. Strab. Plin. With this Semiramis caused the walls of
Babylon to be builte. Lime burner. Calcarius, rij. m. ge. Chaufournier. S. Lime
fyngered, which will touch and take, or carye away any thing they handle,
Limax, cis. masc. and foem. genesis * It is applied to such as will find a thing
or it be lost. Lime kylne, or pytte. Calcaria fornax. Calcatoriu^, ij. n. g.
Calcaria, ae. f. g. Fournaise a chaux Chaufour. Lime twigges. Aucupatorij
calami viscati. Call. Lymed with bird lyme, or taken with bird lime. Viscatus,
a, um. Englue. S. Limed, whyted, or parcheted over. Decalcatus, a, um. Calce
litum. Limy, or clammy. Viscidus, a, u^. * Viscosus, a, um. Quod est tenax and
glutinosu^. Visqueux and tenace. Limite, bound, or butting. Limes, it is. Et
Fines, ium. The limetes or bonds of a ground, land or country. Les limetes
and bornes d'vne terre and pais. Limite, or to set bounds between one
ground and an other. Definire, Determinare, Limito, tas. Limiter. Call.
Limited, or bounded. Determinatus, ta, tu^. Limite. Limits, or bounds toward
the East. Prorsi, Limits in agrorum mensuris ad Oriente^ directi. Limmer
dog, or mungrell, being half a curre, and half a hounde, or Spaniell.
Hybrida, Canis Hybris vel Hybrida, ex venatico and gregario natus. Vne lice. H.
Limned books having letters of diverse colors Miniati libri. Lineage, ofspringe
or kinrede. Genus, Propago, Sanguis, Soboles. Lignage, lignee. S. Borne of
great lineage or kynred. Summo loco natus, Summo genere prognatus, Amplissima
familia, vel amplissimo loco natus. De Grand lignage and parente. S.

Limpe, or to haulte. Claudico, cas. Boister, S. And which does lympe. Claudus,
a, um. Boisteux. S. Limping, or haulting. Claudicatio, onis. foem. genesis
Boistement. S. Lincoln, city. Lindum, di. n. g. Ptol. Lincke, or little
torche. Facula, ae. foe. ge. Vne torche. Line. Linea, ae. foem. genesis Vne ligne.
S. Et Linearis, re. Pertaining to lines, or of lines. Appartenant a lignes, de
lignes. S. Line called a plombe line. Perpendiculum, li. n. ge. Libra, brae.
foe. ge. Niuella, lae. foe. ge. Un niueau, un plomet. Call. Line crokedly
written, and out of rule. Vacillans linea, Litera, vel scriptum. Line dividing
a figure equally in two portions. Diameter, vel Diametrus, tri. m. ge. La
ligne partissant quelque figure par les endroits. Lines in the palms of the
hands, and feet. Incisurae, arum. Plin. Lines or circles, whereby the
Cosmographers divide the whole world into particulers. Segmen^a mundi, quae
nostri circulos appellauere, Graeci Parallelos. Plin. Line for a carpenter, or
mason. Libella, ae. Linea, ae. foe. ge. La ligne ou cordeau du charpentier. S.
Line, or to double a garment. Duplico, cas. Adduplico, cas. Doubler. S. vt
Duplicata toga. A lined gown. Robe doublee. Pals. Lingell, or thonge. Lingula,
lae. foe. genesis Vide Shoe threde. Lintwort herb, whose root is sneesinge
powder. Elleborus albus. Ellebore blanc. Fusch. Linen. Linamentum, Linum,
Linteum, tei. neut. genesis Toil. S. Linen cloth. Carbasus. plur. Carbasa, orum.
n. genesis Toil du lin. S. Linen, or of fine linen, or made of fine linen.
Carbaseus, a, um. Carbasinus, na, number. Carbasineus, a, um. Faict de fin lin. S.
Linen cloth very fine, or laund. Sindon, nis. foe. ge. Un linge fort delie. S.
Linen clothe, wherewith maids trusse up their dugges. Castula. ae. foe. ge.
Linen fine, or flax that is fine. Byssus, si. foe. genesis Fin lin, crespe. S.
Et Byssinus, na, number. Which is of such linen. Qui est de tell lin. S. Linen
cloth which the body wears, or that is worn with the body. Termentarium,
ij. neut. g. Linteum quod corpore teritur. A terendo. Var. Linen draper.
Lintearius, ij. m. g. Qui vend du linge. Linen rail. Amictorium, ij. n. g.*
Linen weauer. Linteo, onis. Serui. 7. Aeneid. Ne. Linen worker. Linarius,
rij. m. genesis Linen yarne, or the wouffe of cloth. Arachne, It is the name of
her that first invented spynning. Linnet bird. A canthis, dis. Carduelis, lis.
f. ge. Ligurinus, Spinus, Alijs quibus haec non placent Linaria vocatur, a lini
semine, su^t etia^ qui Aegithum vocant. Linotte. S. Some use of these words
for a goldfinche, it is also called in French Chardonneret. S. A linnet.
Linte. Linteum, ei. n. g. Lintell, or cross post over the head of ye door.
Hyperthyrum, superliminare. Le linteau de sus l'huis. Lintell, or mark in the
face like a wart, or a kind of pulse. Lens, it is. foe. ge. Lentille. S. Lion.
Alcaea, ae. Leo, onis. m. g. Un lion. Et leoninus, na, number. De ^ion. Leonin. S.
Lion cruel. Leo rigidus. Lion cruel, S. Lion roaring. Leo rugiens. Lion
ruissant. S. Resmbling, or like a lion. Leonina species. Resemblant a un lion.
S.

Lion rampaunt, or devouring. Agalula, ae.* Lioness. Lea, eae. Leaena, ae. f.
ge. Vne lione. Lions whelpe. Scymnus, ni. Un lionceau, le petit faon d' vne
lione. Call. Lip. Labrum, Labium, Labrum superius, Labium inferius. Leure. H.
Baulieure. Call. Lip. S. Et Labeo, onis. A person having great lips.
Labellum, A little lip. Petite leure. Call. Liples, or without lips. Achilus,
la, lum. Liquid. Liquidus, a, um. Liquide. S. Liquid to be. Liqueo, es, ere.
Liquesco, scis. Estre liquide. Liquid to wax. Liquesco, scis. Deliquere,
Liquescere, Liquefieri. Deuenir en liqueur. S. Liquoure. Liquor, oris. m. g.
Liqueur. S. Lisarde, or an euet, or efte. Lacertus, vel Lacerta. Lysarde. H.
Lispe, or to speak so that. S. X. and. R. be never plainly pronounced in any
word, as to say thixthe for six, and thoe for Roe. etc. Dentiloquor, eris.*
Lisper. Dentiloquus. Plaut. List, or the border of any thing. Ora, rae. foem.
genesis Lisiere. S. Listen, or to harken. Auscultare, Aurem praebere, Operam
auscultando dare, Aliquid in aures suas immittere, Sermoni alicuius dare
operam, vel vacare. Escouter. Listener, or one that geues ear. Auscultator,
toris. m. g. Escouteur. S. Listening or harkening. Auscultatio, onis. f. g.
Escoutement. S. Litharge. Lithargiros, vel Lithargyrium, ij. n. genesis Litharge.
S. Lithye, or that boweth easily, slack, slow, lither, or Idle. Lentus, ta,
tum. Qui se plie aiseement, lent and tardif, oisif. S. Litigious, or full of
strife. Controuersus, Litigiosus, a, um. Controuersiosus, sa, sum. Litigieux.
S. Little, or that is little. Exiguus, a, um. Paruus, a, um. Pusillus, a, um.
Tenuis, e. Vescus, a, um. Modicus, ca, cum. Paruulus, la, lum. Minutus, ta,
tum. Curtus, ta, tum. Petit. S. Et Pauxillus, a, um. Paruulus, a, um.
Tenunculus, a, um. Tantillus, la, lum. Perexiguus, a, u^. Fort petit. S. That
is very little. Little. Exigue, Paulum, Parum. Aduerb. Modice, Parce.
Petitement. S. Et Exigue, Paulu^. Ang. Very little. Little after. Post
aliquanto, Paulo post, vel post paulo. Un peu apres. S. Little and little, or
by little and little. Gradatim, Minutatim, Minutim, Paulatim, Paululum,
Parumper, Pedetentim. Ductim, Otiose, Sensim, Pauxillatim, Perticulatim. Petit
a petit. Little at once. Minutatim, Minutim. Idem. Little before. Paulo ante,
Paulo prius. Un peu deuant Little bird. Auicula, ae. foe. g. Oiselet. Little
carte. Arcirna, ae. foe. ge. Little cheke. Buccula, ae. It is also the crene of
a helmet, or a little mouth. Petite bo^che. S. Little coffer, or casket.
Arcella, lae. foe. genesis Coffret. Cassetin. S. Little entry. Aditiculus, li. m.
ge. Little ground. Breuissima terra. Little inner court. Atriolum, li. n. g. I
think it be a little porche, or a portall at a door. Little less. Paulo
minus. Un peu moins. S. Little more. Plusculum. Aduerb. Little more, or
somewhat more. Plusculus, a, um. Un peu plus. S. Little nagge. Veredus, di. m.
g. Little old woman. Anicula, ae. f. ge. Vieillotte, petite vieille. S.
Little, or low in stature. Pumilis, le. Pumilus, la, lum. Neb. Little, or low
man. Vide Dwarffe. Little, or nothing, or very little. Pauxillus, a, u^.
Exiguus, Tantillus, a, um. Fort petit. S. Litte, or poor wenche. Ancillula,
ae. foe. genesis Petite chambriere. S. Little or small portion, or quantity.
Ramentum. ti. neut. genesis Little or small substance. Curta suppellex. Little
piece of flesh. Caruncula, ae. foem. genesis Petit morceau de chair. S. Little
pot of earth. Ollula, lae. f. g. Petit pot de terre. S Little ring. Annellus,
li. m. g. Annelet. S. Little sentence. Clausula, ae.* Little short man.
Breuiculus. Vide Dwarf. Little spyder. Araneolus, li. m. g. Virg. in. Cul.
Little to make. Extenuo, as. Minuere, Diminuere, Imminuere, Tenuare.
Appetisser. S. Little while. Aliquantulum, Aliquantisper, Aliquanto, Diecula,
Paulisper, Parumper. Un peu de temps. S. Little while after. Post pusillum.
Vide Little after. Little while paste, or sense. Iam pridem.* Many mo words
begin with little, which be left out, because they be as diminutiues, and be
set commonly with their chief words, therefore look for them in their
places..

Litter, to carry sick folks, or other in. Gestatoriu^, Arcera, Pensile
vehiculum. Vne lictiere. S. Litter wherein great men are carried by their
servants. Lectica, cae. foe. g. Vne lictiere ou les grans seigneurs se
faissoyent porter par leurs seruiteurs. S. Litter borne by five men.
Pentaphorum, ri. n. ge. Litter borne by six servants. Hexophorum, ri. n. g.
Vne lictiere a bras que six seruiteurs portoyent. S. Litter borne by eight
servants. Octophorum, ri. n. g. Vne lictiere qu'on portoit a huit seruite^rs.
S. Litter borne by ten men. Decaphorum, ri. n. g. Litter bearer, or he
which helps to bear the litter. Lecticarius, rij. masc. gener. Qui aidoit a
porter la lictiere. S. Litter, or the burden of two hor^ V^rna, nae. foem.
genesis Vehiculum sieve po^ (...) ^orum equorum. Nebris. Litter, or straw for
horse, or other beasts. Stramen, inis. Stramentum, ti. Et Substramen, nis. n.
g. Lictiere qu'on faict aux cheuaulx and autres bestes Live. Agere aetatem,
Aura aetherea vesci, Auras vitales carpere, Colere vitam, Exigere, vel exercere
aetatem, Victito, as. Vigeo, es. Ducere animam, vel vitam, Fungi vita, Spiritus
ducere, vel trahere, Spiritu communi frui, Spiro, as. Supersum, es. Tollere
vitam. Viuere, Peruiuere, Aetatem degere, Animam ^rahere, In vita esse, Vita^
agere, Agitare, Incolere, Degere, Tolerare, Inter homines agere, Frui vita.
Viure. S. Live at pleasure. Libere viuere. Terent. Live by eating. Victito, as,
aui. They live by tillage of the ground. Vitam tolerant agros exercendo. Ils
viuent de labor. S.

To live, or get her living by spinning. Tolerare vitam colo. Gaigner sa vie a
filer. S.

To live by milk. Tolerare victum lacte. Viure de laict. S.

Live hardely. Aride viuere. Live idely. Terere otium. Liu. Live in carefulnes.
Agere vitam in solicitudine. Viure en solicitude. S. Live in exile, or to be in
exile. Exulo, as, aui. Estre en exil. S.* In Exilio vitam agere. Live in hope.
Anima^ in spe trahere, Viuere in spe. Viure en esperance. S. Live in peace.
Pacem agitare. Viure en paix. S. They live in peace. Congruunt inter se
concorditer. Ils ^^iuent en paix. S.

Live in quictnes, and without trouble. Tranquillum, and otiosum spiritum
ducere. Viure en repos, and san^ fascherie. S. Live in penury. Aporior, aris.
Ab antiquo noui testamenti interpret vsurpatur. Call. Live in pleasure. Potiri
voluptatum. Cic. Live long. Diurno, as. Peruiuo, is. Viure longueme^t. S Live
nigardly and wretchedly. Lapsana viuere, Se parce habere, Sicce viuere. Viure
chichement. S. Live, or to endure over one year. Peranno, as. Durer un an. S.
Live solitarily. Degere aetatem, vel vitam. Cic. Live together or with some
body. Conuiuo, is. Viure auec aucun. S. Live without necessary provision, or
store. Viuere diem. Live yet. Aduiuo, is Plin. Quasi adhuc viuo. Call. Lively
Viuaciter. Aduerb.* Lively, lusty, and full of force. Viuidus, a, um. Viuax,
acis. Viuus, a, um. Animalis, le. Spi^abilis, le. Spiritua^^s, le. Vigens, it is.
om. genesis Vif, and plein de vigueur. S. Lively to be. Vegeo, es. Verbum
antiquum. Call. Lively to make, or to strengthen. Vegeto, as. Renforcir. S.
Liver. Iecur, coris. neut. ge. Le foye. Pals. Iecusculu^, A little liver. Petit
foye. Liueraye. Insigne gestamen, Centuriale discrime^, Nota centurialis, vel
turmalis. Liuree. Livery and seisine. Mancipium, pij. n. ge. Et Mancipio, as.
To give livery, etc. Livery, or bowge of meat and drink. Sportella, Sportula,
ae. f. g. Leuree. S. Liuerwort herb. Hepatica, Lichen, enis. Hepatique Living.
Animans, it is. Animatus, a, um. Superstes, stis. Vitalis, le. Viuus, a, um. Vif,
viuant. Pil. Living at ease, and without labor. Vmbraticus, a, um. Plaut. in
Curcul. Living at one table, or in one house. Conuictus, us. masc. genesis Living
gotten by carriage. Vellatura, ae. foe. g. Nam vellaturam facere, dicuntur qui
vecturis viuunt. Varr. lib. 1. De re rust. Living long. Longaeuus, a, um.
Viuax, cis. om. genesis Qui vit long temps. Call. Living longest. Superstes, it is.
om. ge. Suruiuant. S. Living, or food. Victus, us. m. g. La vie. S. Lizarde,
or eue^ a worm. Lacertus, vel Lacerta, tae. f. g. Un laisard, ou vne laisarde.
S. Whose Epitheton is. Viridis, e. vt Virgil. Nunc virides etiam ocultant
spineta lacertos.
And also now the thorny shrubes
do hyde the lizardes grene.

L. ANTE. O.
LO. Ecce, En. Voy le ci, voy le la, voy ci, voy la. S. Vt Ecce me. Terent. Lo
here am I. Et En hic ille est. Cic. Lo here he is. Papae. Vox and admirantis,
and Indignantis est. Lo now. Eccere.* Lo he is here. Ecce illum, Eccum. vt
Eccum Jupiter. Lo here is Jupiter.. Lo here he comes. Eccum ipsum. Plaut. Lo
her. Eccam, Ecce illam. Lo they be here. Ecce illos, Eccos. Lo these women.
Eccas, Ecce illas. Lo when. Ecquando. When. Quand. S. Lobster, a fish.
Locusta, tae. foe. g. Langouste. H. Lock. Patibulus, Sera, ae. Claustrum
ferreum. Serrure, closture. H. Lock a door. Obsero, as. Sero, as. Claudo, is.
Enfermer. S. Which thing I have under keye, or lockte up. Quod ego sub claui
habeo. La quelle chose in ay enferme a la clef. S.

To be locte up, or under keye. Sub claui esse. Estre enferme a la clef. S.

Lock of woulle. Tomentum, Floccus, ci. m. ge. Un lopin de lain. S. Et
Flocculus, li. m. g. A little lock of woulle. Lopinet de lain. S. Locker, or
case made with bourdes. Loculamentum, ti. n. g. Lockesmith. Claustrarius, Faber
ferrarius. Serreur. S Lodge, or to harber. Excipere hospitio, Et Hospitio
accipere, Hospitari, Stabulare, Stabulari. Loger. S. An host, he that lodges,
or he that is lodged. Hospes, pitis. com. ge. Un host, celuy qui lodge, ou qui
est lodge. S. Et Hospitalis, le. om. ge. Pertaining to lodging. Appartena^t a
loger. S. Et Inhospitus, ta, tu^. Which is not mete, or sure to lodge in. Qui
n' est ne bon ne seur pour y loger. S. Et Inhospitalis, le. Where no man can
lodge, hau^t or dwell. Ou on ne scauroit. etc.

Lodge an army. Castrametor, aris. Castra loco, sieve pono. Lodging for a camp.
Castra, orum. plu. number. Lodging for gestes. Hospitium, Diuersorium,
Diuerticulum, Taberna diuersoria. Un logis pour les passans. S. Lodging or
inn. Diuersorium, Hospitium. Idem. Lodging for children or servants.
Paedagogiu^, gij. Call. Lodge with one all night. Pernocto, as. Loger auec
aucun tout la nuict. Lofe of bread. Collyra, Panis, nis. m. g. Pain, S. Et
Collyrides, Be small loves like manchets. Lofe of bread cut square. Quadra,
ae. foe. g.* Logitian. Dialecticus, ci* m. g. Dialecticien. S. Logike, one of
the seven liberal sciences, teaching the art to dispute of any thing with
probability, and to try by reason the truth from falsehoode. Dialectica,
cae. vel Dialectice, ces. foe. ge. Dialectique. S. Loyal. Fidelis, le. Fidus,
da, dum. Loyal. S. To be loyal in amity. Fidem in amicitia retinere, Seruare
fidem. Estre loyal en amite. S.

Not to be loyal and faithful. Male seruare fidem, Fidem fluxam gerere.
N'estre point loyal. S.

To show him self loyal in the affairs of one. Praestare fidem suam negotijs
alicuius. Se monstrer loyal es affairs d'aucun. S.

Loyally, or faithfully. Fideliter, Cum fide. Loyalement. S. Loyalty.
Fidelitas, it is. Fides, ei. Loyaulte. S. Loyne. Lumbus, by. m. g. Le rabble. S.
Lumbago, ginis. Feebleness of the loins. Doleur du Rabble. S. Loytre. Moror,
aris. Trahere moras, vel negligenter agere, Oscitor, taris. Cunctor, taris.
Targer, Truander. Pals. Loytring. Mora, rae. foe. ge. Cunctatio, onis. foe.
genesis Targement. S. Lolarde. Fidei laesae reus. Lolardy. Laesae religionis
culpa. Lolling, flaggeringe, or hanginge downewarde. Flaccidus, da, dum.
Flaccus, ca, cum. vt Flaccidae aures. Lolling, flagging, or hanging ears.
Oreilles lasches and pendantes. S. Lombardes. Cenomani, Insubres, Longobardi.
Lombardy. Citerior gallia, Longobardia, Bianora, Felsina, Doria, Gallia togata,
Gallia Cisalpina, Cispadana, Aurelia, Aemilia, Insubria. Neb. Lompe. Frustulum,
Massa, sae. f. g. Vne Mass, ou morceau. Frustrum, ti. neut. ge. Idem. Lomp, a
fyshe. Faber, Zeus, ei. m. g. Plin. Lompishe. Masseus, a, um. Stupidus, a, um.
Per Eraf. Piger, gra, grum. Paresseux. Lompishe knave. Grauedinosus.* London, a
noble city, which (as the Cronicles report) was builded by Brute, about the
year before the incarnation of our Savior Christ. 1090. Londinum, Londinium,
and Londinia, Londonium, ij. n. g. Londres. Neb. Lone. Mutuo, as. Mutuo
appendere. Vide Lend. Loned. Mutuus, a, um. Vide Le^te. Loning, or lone.
Mutuum. i. Vide Lending. Long. Longus, a, um. Prolixus, a, um, Promissus, a,
um. Oblongus, a, um. Productus, ta, tum. Long. S. Long, or very long.
Perlongus, ga, gum. Praelongus, ga, gum. Fort long. Long after. Multo post.
Long temps apres. S. Long ago. Dudum, Iam diu, Olim, Pridem, Iampridem. Il y a
ia long temps. S. Long, and continual sickness. Longa and pertinax valetudo.
Plin. Iun. Longue and continuelle malady. Long, and round. Teres, it is.
Adiect. Round en long. Long, and side down to the heels. Talaris, re. Long
iusques aux talons. S. Long before. Multo ante. Long temps deuant. S. Long
continuing. Diutinus, a, um. Diuturnus, Pertinax, cis. Perdiuturnus, na, number.
Longinquus, qua, quum. Patiens vetustatis. Qui dure fort long temps. S. Long
coat. Tunica demissa. Long footed. Longipes, dis. com. Qui a longs pies. Long
heared. Acrocomus, a, um. Longas comas habens. Long lived. Longaeuus, a, um.
Superstes, it is. De longue vie. Call. Long made, or set out at length.
Productilis, le. Productus, a, um. A long. S. Long, or at length, or in
length. Fuse, Prolixe, Promise, aduerb. Quant. Longuement. S. Long, or long
time. Aeuum, aduerb. Ad aetatem, Diu, Long, Longu^, Multu^, Longa dies, Longum
spatium, Longum, vel longinquum tempus. Long temps. S. Long, or of height.
Procerus, a, u^. Altus, a, u^. Hault. Long, or of height. Proceriter. Aduerb.*
Long, or tale. Procerus, a, um. Fort long and hault. S. Long peper. Piper
longum. Plin. Long poll. Longurius, rij. m. g. Longue perch. S. Long proved
wit. Prouectum ingenium. Long rest. Altum otium. plin. Long space of time.
Diuturnitas, tatis. foe. g. Longue espace du temps. Call. Long tale, or sermon.
Monologium, gij. n. g.* Long tale, with superfluous pattering of words.
Battalogia. And he that tells such long, and superfluous tales. Battalogus.
Long to be. Longisco, scis.* Long to wax. Longisco, scis. Deuenir long. Call.
Long words. Spissa verba. Plaut. To make long. Elongo, as. Produco, cis.
Protraho, is. Differo, rs. Alonger. Call.

Longer. Longior, ius. Plus long. S. Longer liver. Superstes, it is. om. ge.
Suruiuant. Call. Longer time. Longius, Diutius. Aduerb. Longis, or a long
slymme. Longurio, onis. m. genesis Homo praelongus. Un grand longis. S. Look, to
see, to behold, or to epsy. Videre, Cernere, Intui, Intueri, Aspicere,
Despicere, Prospicere, Conspicari, Vsurpare oculis. Veoir. S. Et Tueri,
Respicere, Capescere aliquid oculis, vel vsurpare. Regarder. S. Look about.
Circumspicio, cis. Perspecto, as. Speculor, aris. Torquere oculos. Veoir
dilige^ment, and soigneusement. S. Look alofte, or to be proud. Animos
efferre, Look a skew. Limis hirquis cernere, Limis oculis aspicere. Terent.
Look back. Respicio, cis. Regarder. S. Look before. Praespeculor, aris.
Praeuideo, es. Veoir parauant. S. Look far of. Speculor, aris. Speculer. S.
* Aspicere e longinquo, Prospicere. Regarder de loing. S. Look for. Expecto,
as. Praestolor, aris. Look from above down. Suspicere ex alto, Despicere.
Regarder d'en hault en bas. S. Look here and there gasing. Obire oculis. Vide
Look round. Look in. Inspicio, cis. Introspicio, spicis. Regarder dedens. S.
Look merely. Frontem explicare, vel expergere. Look, or have respect.
Respecto, as. Respicio, cis. Regarder, auoir regard. S. Look out at a narrow
hole, or place. Per transennam videre. Look round about, on every side,
hither and thither. Lustrare, Collustrare, Perlustrare, Obire oculis,
Circumspicere, Dispicere, Circumaspicere, Circumspectare, Perspectare. Regarder
de tous costez, de toutes pars, ca and la. S. Look sowrely, or frowningly.
Frontem, vel vultu^ contrahere. Look through. Transpicio, cis. Veoir a trauers
quelque chose. Call. Look up. Suspicio, cis. Sursum aspicio. Regarder en hault.
Call. Look up often. Suspecto, as. Regarder souue^t en hault. Look upon a
thing far of, narrowely, or ouerly. Per transennam inspicere.* Looked for.
Expectatus, a, um. Desire. S. Worthy to be looked upon. Spectabilis, le. Digne
d'estre regard. S.

Looking about. Speculatio, onis. foe. g. Speculatus, tus. m. g. Espiement. S.
Looking place, to see about in. Theatrum, tri. n. ge. Theater. S. Looking, or
respect. Respectus, us. m. g. Regard. S. Looking upon, or a beholding.
Spectatio, onis. f. g. Regard. S. Et Spectator, toris. m. g. A looker upon-
Regardeur. Et Spectatrix, tricis. foe. genesis She that looks upon. Celle qui
regard. S. Loose, or to leese. Perdo, dis. Disperdo, dis. Amitto, it is. Perdre.
S. Loose an accion. Excidere formula, Litem perdere, Causa cadere, Naufragium
in foro facere. Loose a knot, or to unbind, or unknit. Renodo, as. Abnodo, as.
Resoluere nodos. Desnouer. S. Loose a verse, or any thing in making. Disperdo,
dis. Perdre and gaster. Call. Loose any thing fastened, or glewed. Deglutino,
as. Dissoluere, quod glutinatum erat. Descoller, desgluer. Call. Loose credence.
Consumere fidem. Loose labor. Conterere curam, vel laborem, Ludere, vel
perdere operam. Vide Labor. Loose, or forgive. Absoluo, is. Laxo, as. Relaxo,
as. Vide Forgive. Loose or to unbind. Dissoluo, is. Laxo, as. Religo, as.
Remitto, is. Resoluo, is. Retexo, is. Soluo, is. Exoluo, uis. Deslier. S.
Loose, or undo. Laxo, as. Laxum facere, vel remittere. Relascher. Call. Loose,
or to leese something, or to receive damage. Facere iacturam, Allidi in re
aliqua, Detrimentum accipere, Far damnum. Receuoir perte and dommage. S.
Loose time. Conterere tempora, Diem lacerare, Nihil agere, Actum agere. Perdre
temps. S. Loose utterly, and to spyll. Disperdo, is. Consumo, is. modis omnibus
perdere. Perdre and gaster. Loosed, or untied. Dissolutus, a, um, Laxatus, a,
um. Laxus, a, um. Resolutus, ta, tum. Remissus, a, um. Solutus, a, um. Deslie.
S. Loosed lightly, or quickly. Solubilis, le. Dissolubilis, le. Easy to be
loosed. Aise a deslier. S. Loosse bealy. Cita aluus. Loosse to be in the body,
as resolved. Putreo, es. Vide Rotte. Loossely. Solute. Aduerb. A deliure. S.
Loossenes. Laxitas, Laxamentum, ti. n. ge. Loossenes of the skin of the
fingers ends from the nails. Recliuia, Recliuium, Reduuia, ae. Recluuia, ae.
foem. genesis Vne malady quand la peau se despard de^ ongies. Call. Loosing, or a
lewsing. Solutio, onis. f. g. Destiement. Loosing, or leesing. Amissio, onis.
Perditio, onis. Disperditio, onis. foe. g. Perdition. S. Loppe trees. Exputo,
as. Detrunco, as. Puto, as. Collucare, Delucare, Sublucare, Interlucare,
Interputare. Esbrancher un arbre. S. Lopper, or shragger. Arborator, Frondator,
oris. m. g. Qui coupe les branches des arbres. S. vt Virgil. Hinc alta sub rupe
canet frondator ad auras.
Hence lopper on the hautie hill.
shall sing with voice on high.
Lopping. De truncatio, Frondatio, onis. foe. g. Coupement des branches. S.
Lopster of the sea, which is a fish like a creues. Astacus, Carabus, Caramus,
Gammarus, Locusta marina.* Locusta, tae. f. g. Langouste. S. Lord. Dominus,
Herus, ri. m. g. Seigneur. S. Lord Chamberlayne of England. Decurio, onis. m.
g. Lord chief judge of ye common bench. Decurio, onis. m. g. Lord chief Baron
of the eschequer. Decurio, onis. m. g. And Decuria, ae. Is the degree,
dignity, company, office, order. etc. of those lords. Lord chief justice of
England. Selectus iudex, Summus totius Angliae iudex. Lord great master of
the kings house, named lord grand master du hostel le Roy. Praefectus
praetorij. Praefectus praetorio. Magister officiorum in prae^orio, Maximus
aulae dispensator, Maximus aulici ministerij magister. Bud. Lord of a great
power. Dynasta, ae. Dynastes, tae. m. g. Grand and puissant seigneur. S. Lord,
or ruler of a little region. Regulus, li. m. g. Lord, or seignour. Dominus, ni.
m. g. Seigneur. S. Lord treasurer of England. Praefectus aerarius, Praefectus
fisci, Arcarius su^mus, Arcarius parsimoniaru^, vel sanctioris aerarij.
Thresorier de l'espargne. Lords, or piers of a realm. Proceres, rum. m. g.
Lordship. Dominatus, us. Dominium, Ditio, onis. Imperium, ij. Principatus, tus.
Potentatus, tus. m. g. Seigneurie, and maistrise. S. Lordship, or manor.
Praedium, dij. n, ge. Vne seigneurie. S. Et Praediolum, li. diminut. Ang. A
little lordship or manor. Lorell tree. Vide Laurel and Baye. Lose. Amitto,
is. Perdo, is. Perdre. S. Lose action. Causa cadere. Vt supra. Loose Lose
gauge. Deserere pignus. Lose expenses and costs. Deterere sumptus. Lose
marchaundise, or ship on the sea by tempeste. Naufragium facere. Loss.
Clades, dis. Detrimentum, Amissio, onis. Damnum, ni. Perditio, onis. f. g.
Perte. S. Loss of the right hand. Clades dexterae manus. Perte de la main
dextre. S. The loss that you have received by fortune, will be restored by
virtue. Quod a fortuna damnum accepisti, tulisti, resarciet, compensabit
virtus, med^bitur ijs malis virtus. quo te fortuna coniecit, quibus te aflixit
fortuna, quibus te calamitatibus implicauit fortuna, ijs te virtus expediet. vt
acerbam fortunam sensisti, ita dulcem, ac suaue^ virtutem experieris. quantum
detrimenti, inco^modi, calamitatis, malorum a fortuna tulisti: ta^tos a
virtute, atque adeo maiores fructus capies, percipies, feres, colliges.

Loss by negligence. Dispendium, ij. n. g. Pert. S. Loss by reason of
wearing, or occupying. Intertrimentum, ti. n. g. Loss of generation.
Blapsigonia, Prolis detrimentu^. Lost. Amissus, a, um. Perditus, a, um. Perdu.
S. Lost to be, or undone. Occido, is. Pereo, is, riui, vel rij. Estre perdu.
S. I am lost or undone. Sepultus sum. Occidi, Perij, Absumptus sum. Ie suis
perdu, c' est faict de moy.

It is lost. Actum est. Il est perdu. S.

Lost to be utterly. Depereo, is. Perir du tout.. I have lost all that I have,
or all my goods. Naufragium feci rei familiaris. perijt mea res domestica.
actum est de fortunis meis. prorsus euersae sunt opes meae. perdidi omnia bona.
ever tit me bonis omnibus fortuna. mearum opum nihil mihi reliquum fortuna
fecit. afflictae sunt, profligatae, ac perditae, extinctae, euersae meae res ac
fortunae omnes.

Loathe one. Abominor, aris. Detestor, aris. Detester, Auoir en horreur. S.
Lothesome, wertsome, or odious. Odiosus, sa, sum. Incommodus, da, dum. Grauis,
ue. Morosus, sa, sum. Acerbus, ba, bum. Fascheux, and ennuieux. S.
Lothesomenesse, or werinesse. Aegrum, gri. Aegrimonia, ae. Diuidia, iae.
Molestia, iae. Odium, dij. Offensiuncula, lae. Offensio, onis. Incommoditas,
Satietas, tatis. foe. ge. Taedium, ij. neut. genesis Fascherie. S. Lot, or
chance. Sors, it is. Clerus. Sort, hasard. S. L^ttes to cast, or make. Sortior,
iris. Iecter le sort, fair sort. S. Let us cast lottes which of us must fetch
water. Sortiamur, quis eat aquam petitum, Quis eat aquatum, Quis aquam petat.

Louage herb. Smyrnium, nij. n. g. Liuesche. Fusch. Love. Amor, ris. Dilectio,
onis. Studium, Ignis, nis, Venus, eris. foem. ge. Amor. S. Et Amorosus, a, u^.
Full of love. Love being sone hot, sone cold. Repudiosa cupido. Love. Amo,
as. Colo, is. Confer amorem. Diligo, is. Prosequi amore, Respecto, as.
Respicio, cis. Vti amore, Adamo, as. Opera^ dare amori, Charum aliquem habere.
Aimer. S. I love the chiefly, only, or with all my heart. Sum, vehementer,
valde, magnopere, maximopere, maxim, etiam atque etiam, mire, mirifice,
incredibiliter, vnice, singulariter, egregie, insigniter, ex animo, ex intimo
sensu, cumprimis, in primis, apprime, praecipue, admodum, oppido, maiorem in
modum, mirum in modu^, minime vulgariter, non mediocriter te diligo, in te
amando nemini concedo. qui te vehementius diligat, co^cedo nemini. beneuolentia
in te mea ad summu^ peruenit. amor in te meus is est, ita accumulatus est, vt
addi nihil possit. amorem in te meum verbis exprimere qui possum, quem
cogitatione vix amplector? cuius magnitudinem vix mente co^prehendo? amorem in
te meum cogitatione fortasse consequi, complectique possum, verbis quidem
exprimere, explicare, expromere profecto non possum. aeque, similiter, pariter
ac meipsum, non aliter ac meipsum, non secus ac meipsum, itidem vt me ipsum, te
diligo, sic te diligo, vt neminem magis, ne meipsum quidem. cum te multi
diligant, omnes tamen in amore vinco. principatum appeto, primas parts mihi
vendico, praecipuu^ locum obtineo. fero te in oculis. mihi es in amoribus.
nihil mihi est te charius. secundum Deum, post Deum, excepto Deo. cum a Deo
discessi, nemo mihi este charior. ego te vt oculos meos, aut si quid oculis est
charius diligo. singulari erga te animo sum. vt pater in filium, ita ego in te
sum animatus. habeo te filij loco. amor in te meus tantus est, quantus potest
esse maximus. haeres mihi in animo, in medullis, in intimis sensibus. singulari
sum in te beneuolentia. primum amore Deum, te habeo proximum.

Love again, or to love him that loves us. Redamo* as. Aimer celuy qui nous
aim. S. Love fondly. Adamo, as. Aimer folement. S. To love one beyond measure.
Ardere, sieve deperire aliquem. Aimer aucun oultre mesure. S.

To love one, and to receive him into his frendshippe. In amicitiam recipere.
Aimer aucun, and le receuoir en son amor. S.

To get the love of very many. Multos amicitia comprehe^dere. Se fair aimer
par beaucoup de gens.

Love mordinatly. Misere amare. Impatie^ter amare. Desordonnement aimer. S.
Love mutually. Redamo, as. Amore mutuo complecti. Love secretly. Vti amore
surreptitio. Aimer secretement. S. Love very well, or earnestly some body.
Complecti aliquem, Familiariter aliquem diligere, Arcte complecti aliquem,
Adamare, Examare, Deamare, Peramare. Fort aimer quelqu'vn. S. To love from the
heart without fayning. Cord, vel animo amare. Aimer du bon cueur sans saint.
S

They love thee well. Sunt tui studiosi. Ils to aiment fort. S.

To love one greatly. Aliquem in sinu gestare. Aimer grandement quelqu'vn. S.

I ought to love this man well. Huic omnia meritissimo volo, and debeo. Ie doibs
bien aimer cestuy ci.

Lover. Amans, Amator, oris. m. g. Aiment. Lover of children buggerly, or
dissolutely. Paederastes, Lasciuus puerorum amator. Lover of goodness.
Philagathus. Amator probitatis Lover of infantes. Philopaes, Infantium amator.
Lover of mankind. Philanthropos, Hominu^ amans. Lover of money. Philargyrus,
Auarus. Lover of new fangles, and trifles. Elucus, Amator nugarum. Lover of no
wine, or he that drynketh no wine. Abstemius, a, um. Qui ne boit point de vin.
Call. Lover of study. Philologus, Amator studij. Lover of tales, or talk.
Philologus, Amator sermonis. Lover of victory. Philonicus, Amans victoriae.
Lover of wine, or given to wine. Vinosus, a, um. Adonne au vin. S. Louerlike,
or like a lover. Amatorie. En amoreux. Lovers of one wenche, or woman.
Corriuales, Riuales, lium. m. g. Corriuaulx, Qui aiment vne mesme fille, ou
femme. Call. Loving. Amans, Diligens, Colens, it is. Aimant. S. Loving of women.
Mulierositas, tatis. f. g. Cic. Loving, or th'acte of love. Amamen, inis.
Amame^tum, Amatus, tus.* Lovingly. Amanter, Amice. Amiablement. S. Lourdeine,
or a dulhead. Bardus, a, um. Estourdi. S. Loud, or which makes a great
noise. Canorus, a, um. Querulus, a, um. Sonorus, a, um. Vocalis, le. om. genesis
Qui rend, ou fait grand bruit. S. Sonnore^x. Pals. Loud cry. Clarus clamor.
Plaut. Loud, on high, or out aloude. Canore, Sonore.* Lowdenesse. Sonoritas,
it is. f. g. Prisc. Haultesse. Pals. Low. Depressus, a, um. Humilis, e.
Infer^us, a, um. Submissus, Succiduus, a, um. Bas. S. A maid which has low
shoulders. Demissis humeris virgo. Qui ha les espaules basses. S.

To speak with a low voice. Demissa oratione, vel voce loqui. Parler bas. S.

Low by the ground. Humi. aduerb. lo. Low places. Demissa loca: Caes. Lieux
bas. S. Low, or of low stature. Pumilis, le. Pumilus, la, lum. De pet^te, and
basse stature. Call. Low, or beneth. Inferne. D'embas. Call. Low, or of hell.
Infernus, a, um. Inferus, a, um. D'enfer. S. Low to bring. Humilio, as.
Infimo, as, aui. Abbaisser. S. Lower. Inferior, ius. om. genesis Plus bas. S. A
lower place. Depressior locus. Lieu plus bas. S.

Lower banks. Demissiores ripae. Riuages plus bas. S Lowest. Imus, a, um.
Infimus, a, um. Toute les plus bas, infime. S. Lowly, Demisse, Humiliter.
Bassement. Call. Lowly, or gentle. Humilis, le. Plenus officij. Humble. S.
Lowlynes, or gentleness. Humilitas, atis. foem. genesis Humilte, Basseur. S. Lowpe
to look out at. Transenna, ae. f. g. Creneau. Lowre, or to skowle. Capero, as,
Contrahere fronte^, Vultu^ ducere, Fronte^ obducere, Corrugare, Contrahere,
Trahere vultum, Rugas cogere. Se refrongner. S. Lowering. Superciliosus, a, um.
Caperatus, a, um. Refrongne. S. A lowering, or skoulding visage. Astricta frons,
caperata, vel corrugata. Visage refronge. S.

Lowering, or skoulding. Contractio frontis, vel caperatio. Refrongnement. S. To
do a thing with lowering, or skoulding. Caperata front aliquid facere. Fair
quelque chose auec refrongnement. S.

Lowse. Pediculus, Pes, dis. mas. genesis Poul^. H. Lowsy, or full of lyce.
Pedicosus, Pediculosus, a, u^. Pouilleux, plein de poulx. S. Lowsy sickness,
a disease where the body is very full of ly^e. Phthiriasis, Pedicularis morbus.
Vne malady quand le corpse est fort plein de poulx. S. Lowte, humble and
submit. Conquinisco, scis. Inclino, Obstipo, as.* Lowte, lowber, or lourdine.
Bardus, Imperitus, Plumbeus homo, Rusticus, Tardus, Vastus, atque agrestis,
Idiota. Lourdault. S. Lowtishely, or like a lowber. Absurd, Crasse, Obtuse,
Pingui, seu crassa Minerua, Rustice, Socorditer. Lourdement. S.
L. ANTE. V.
LVbber, drudge, or slave. Mediastinus, ni. m. g. Un souillon. S. Lubberlike,
unhandsome, or lowtishe. Secors, dis. Socors, dis, Tardus, a, um. Lourd. S.
Luck. Fortuna, ae. Omen, inis. n. g. Heur. S. Good luck. Foelicitas, atis.
foe g. Bon heur. S.

Of good luck, Forte fortuna. De bon heur. S.

Which brings good luck. Dexter, a, um. Auspicatus, a, um. Prosper, a, u^.
Qui port bon heur.

Lucky. Foelix, cis. Ominosus, a, um. Prosper, ra, ru^. Prosperus, a, um.
Secundus, a, um. Fortunatus, a, um. Faustus, a, um. Beatus, a, um. Heureux. S.
Lucky person. Phanio, onis. August. Diffineth him such a body, who with his
coming brings good luck. Luckely. Ominose, Prospere, Secunde, Fortunate,
Foeliciter, Beat, Fauste, Prospere. Heureuseme^t. Luckenes, or happenes.
Foelicitas, atis. foem. genesis Heurete. S. Lucre, or gain. Lucrum, cri.
Quaestus, tus. Compendium, dij. neut. g. Gain S. Et Quaesticulus, li. Captura,
rae. foe. ge. A little lucre, or gain. Un petit gain. S. Luke, one of the
four Evangelists, a Physician of Antioche. Lucas, cae. m. g. Luc. S. Luke
warm. Tepidus, a, um. Tiede. S. Luke warm to make. Tepefacio, cis. Fair
tiede. S. Luke warm to be. Tepeo, es, ui. Estre tiede. S. Luke warm to wax.
Tepesco, cis. Se tiedir. S. Luke warmnes. Tepor, ris. m. g. Tiedeur. S.
Lumbour. Vide Baggage. Lump. Frustum, ti. n. g. As a lump of bread. Frustum
praecidaneum. Chanteau de pain. S. Lumpish Vide Heavy. Lunatike. Lunaticus, a,
um. Lunatique. S. Lunge, or lights. Pulmo, nis. m. g. Le poulmon. S. Lunge
sick, or which has a disease, or feels grief in the lights, or lunges.
Pulmonarius, a. um. Qui a mal, ou sent douleur aux poulmons* Call. Lungewort,
herb. Pulmonaria, Verbascum, ci. n. g. Herb aux pulmons. Fusch. Lurk. Lateo,
es. Latito, as. Se cacher. S. Lurker. Emansor, ris. m. g. Lurker, or wayghter
of high ways, a robber. Grassator, oris. m. g. Guetteur de chemins, briguer.
S. Lust. Libido, inis. Venus, Voluptas, atis. f. g. Appetit desordonne. S.
Lust, or desire to eat. Orexis, is. foem. gener. Appetit de manger. S. Lust,
or desire to the stool often, without doing any thing, with a bloudye, and
burninge siege. Tenasmus, mi. m. g. Appetit and desire grand d' aller a selle
S. Lusty. Floridus, a, um. Integer, ra, rum. Vegetus, a, u^. Vigens, it is.
Gnauus, a, u^. Strenuus, a, u^. Habile. Lusty age. Aetas integra. Terent. Lusty
courage. Acer animus. Virg. Lusty of age. Aeui integer. Virg. Lusty of courage.
Alacer, cris, cre. Alaigre. S. Lusty, or pleasant. Amoenus, a, um. Plaisant.
S. Lusty, and strong to make. Vegeto, as, aui. Donner force. S. Lusty to be, or
to rejoice. Oblecto, as. Oblector, aris. Voluptatem habere. Resiouir. S. Lusty
to be in force, or strength. Vigeo, es, ui. Estre en sa force, and vigueur. S.
Lustily. Animose, Gnauiter, Alacriter, Agiliter. Alaigrement. S. Lustines,
pleasau^tnes, or nimblenes. Amoenitas, atis. Alacritas, atis. Agilitas, atis.
f. g. Alaigrete. S. Lute. Lyra, Fides, fidis, Testudo. Un luc. P. Luter, or
player of the lute. Fidicen, inis. m. genesis Ioueur de luc. S. A seat, or comely
player of the lute. Bellus art lyrae. Gentil ioueur de luc. S.

To teach one to play of the lute. Docere aliquem fidibus. Enseigner a iouer
du luc. S.

Ly, Vide Li.
M. ANTE. A.
M, Written by him self, signifies with us a thousand, and where as in our
language M, is fully pronounced, yet in the Latin tongue, if it be placed in
the end of a word with a vowell following in the beginning of the next, the
Poets use by their figure Ecthlipsis to cut him of, for that (as some
affirm) his sound is so bellowing, and intolerable. Beside M, in
Compositione and Deriuatione, coming before, D, T, C, or, Q, Is often changed
into N, as in these words, Tantum, Tantundem, Eorum, eorundem. Idem,
Identidem. Number, nuncubi: Number, nunquis, Quicunque, Nunquam Circunquaque, Nanque,
Tanquam. Likewise, Am, the preposition set before, F, C, or Q, Is turned into
N, as Anfractus, etc. In the notes of antiquity M, signified Marcus, Martius,
Mutius, Monumentum, Mulier, Miles, Meum, Meam, Mihi, Molestus, Modo, Mors,
Munus, Ma, Macuuius, Mag, Magistratus. M, D, O, Mihi dare oportet. etc. Mace,
or kings scepter. Sceptrum, tri. neut. ge. Un Scepter royal. S. It was
Neptunus Mace. Mace bearer. Sceptrifer, a, um. Qui port scepter. Maces a
spice. Macer, Macis. Macis. H. Mache. Vide Match. Mackerell, a fish.
Scombrus, bri. m. g. Maquereau. Made. Conditus, a, um. Creatus, a, um. Factus,
a, um. Faict. S. Made again, or a fresh, or eftesones. Redintegratus, a, um.
Rediuiuus, a, um. Refectus, a, um. Refait. Call. Made all one. Adunatus, a, um.
Made by rule. Emussitatus, a, um. Ad amussim factus. Fest. Made or of form
like the Moon. Lunatus, a, um. Qui ha la form de la Lune. S. Made moist.
Madefactus, a, um. Vide Moiste. Made of many pieces, as a house is made of
clay, stone, timber. etc. Structilis, le. om. g. Qui est faict, and basti de
plusiers pieces. S. Made out of use. Desuefactus, a, um. Desaccoustume. Made
ready, or fit. Procinctus, a, um. Made without labor. Illaboratus, a, um.
Qui ne est point elaboure. Call. Mad. Amens, it is. Captus mente. Deme^s, it is.
Fanaticus, a, u^. Furibundus, Furiosus, Insanus, Lymphaticus, Maniacus,
Percitus insania, Phanaticus, Proceritus, a, u^. Rabidus, a, um. Vecors, dis.
Vesanus, Alienatus me^te. Forcene ou enrage. S. Et Rabiosulus, a, u^. diminut.
Ang. A little, or somewhat mad. Quelque peu enrage. Call. Mad angry.
Rabiosus, a, um. Saeuus, a, u^. Enrage. Mad at certain Moons, lunatike.
Lunaticus, a, um. Lunatique. S. Mad fool. Euapelus.* Mad person Vacerra,
ae. mas. genesis Fest. Ceritus, ti. m. ge. Plaut. Mad priests. Corybantes,
Cybeles sacerdotes. They were certain priests of Idols, who using fury and
madness, incited the blind people to follow the same. Mad to be. Demento,
as. Furio, ris, insaniui, Gallo, as. Insanio, is. Rabio, is. Dementio, is.
Bacchor, aris. Estre insense. S. Mad to make. Externo, as. Furio, as. Fair
deuenit furieux. S. To wax mad. Furere, Furore ingrauescere, Furorem
concipere ex maleficio. Deuenir furieux.

Madder, herb. Aparine, Rubia tinctorum, Rubia, Erythrodanum, ni. n. g.
Garance. S. Madly. Dementer, Furiose. Furieusement. S. Madness. Furor, ris.
Insania, ae. Insanitas, Mania, ae. Melancholia, ae. Oestrum, tri. Rabies, ei.
Vecordia, Vesania, ae. Splendida bilis. Forcenerie. S. Furibundus. Full of
madness. Plein de rage. S. Madness of a dog. Rabies, ei. f. g. Fureur de chien.
Maffle in the mouth, or to stammer. Balbutio, is. Balbucinor, aris. Begueyer.
S. Magike. Magia, ae. Magice, magices. f ge. Magie. S. This art the
Philosophers divide into natural mag^^e, which consists only in the
perfect knowledge of natural things: And Theurgie, which teaches by
inuocations of spirits, and wicked inchauntementes. It contains these
kinds, or forms. Axiomantie, which is wrought by hachettes, pike axes, and
other like tools: Hydromatie, by water: Lecanoma^tie, by b^sins filled with
water: Catoptromantie, by a glass: Pyromantie, by fire: Geomantie, by the
earth: Chiromantie, by the lintame^ts of the hands: Nicromantie, by calling
up of spirits, and talk had with deuilles: Capnomantie, by the smoke of the
altar, or sacrifice: Coscinomantie, by a sie^e, which is (as some report) at
this day much used of the French women, for the finding out of things taken
away by stealth, or such like means. Magistrate, or ruler. Magistratus, tus.
masc. gener. Magistrate. S. Magistrate, which brings the law to the people.
Rogator comitiorum. Magistrate, qui apportoit la loy au peuple. S. A kind of
magistrates, which have like power, and authority for the time, as the
consulles. Tribuni militares. Vne espece de magistrate, qui eut pour v^ temps
semblable puissance, and authorite que les consulz. S.

A magistrate, which did enquire of causes criminals. Quaesitor, ris. m. g. Un
magistrate, qui ha la cognoisance des causes criminelles. S.

An ancient magistrate in the province, which leaves his place to new
successors. Decessor, oris. m. g. Le vieil magistrate estant en la province qui
fait place aux nouueaulx successeurs. S.

The office of magistrate. Magistratus, tus. m. ge. L' office d'vn magistrate. S.

Magitiane, or enchantour. Magus, gi. m. ge. Magicien, Enchanteur. S.
Magnanimity, couragiousnes, or valiauntnes. Magnanimitas, it is. f. g.
Magnanimite. S. Magnificence, or greatness of might, or power. Magnificentia,
ae. f. g. Magnificence. S. Magnificke. Superbus, a, um. Magnificus, a, um.
Magnifique. S. Magnify. Extollo, is. Magnifico, as. Magnifier. S. Magot.
Terms, is. m. g. Ver de chair. Pals. May, or can. Polleo, es. Possum, potes,
verb. sub. Queo, is. Valeo, es. Pouoir. S. Antiqui habent potestur, pro potest.
May not, or can not. Nequeo, is. Ne pouoir. S. Antiqui vsurpant nequinunt, pro
nequiunt. They may not. Maid, or maiden. Virgo, inis. Puella, lae. foe. genesis
Vierge, pucelle. H. Virguncula, lae. f. ge. Petite vierge, petite pucelle. S.
Of a maid, or pertaininge to a maid. Virgineus, a, um. Virginalis, le. om.
genesis De vierge, ou virginal. S. Puella aetatem: Virgo pudicitiam spectat.
Maiden able to be married. Viripotens, it is. Virgo nubilis, Tempestiua, Matura
viro, Matura thoro. Fille mariable, priest a marier. H. Maiden asked in
marriage. Sperata virgo. Maiden bearing a basket, or coffer on her head.
Canephora, rae. foe. ge. Cic. Maiden having nothing to her marriage. Cassa dote
virgo. Plaut. Qui n' ha rien en marriage. S. Maiden hyd, or secret. Alma, Apud
Haebraeos significat virginem absconditam. Call. Maiden servant. Ancilla, lae.
f. g. Chambriere. et Ancillula, ae. diminut. Ang. A little, or poor maid
servant. Petite chambriere. S. Et Ancillaris, re. om. gener. Which pertains
to maiden servants. Appartenaunt a chambriere. S. Maiden that keeps a
child. Gerula.* Maiden which keeps, or lays up her maistres apparel.
Vestispica, cae. foem. genesis Celle qui guard les habits. Call. Maiden ready to be
married. Matura virgo. Horac. Priest a marier. S. Maiden which never had
child. Charta. Quae nunquam peperit. Call. Maidens breasts, or dugges, being
round and hard. Sororiantes mammillae. Maidens breasts, or dugges. Sororiae.
Et Sororior, aris. Ang. To swell, or be enboced, and round like maidens
breasts. Maidens not yet married. Iugatae nondum thalimis virgins. Qui ne sont
encore mariees. S. Maidens raiment, or apparel. Parnassidae vestes.*
Maydenhead. Virginitas, it is. f. g. Virginite. S. He has my maydenhead, he has
deflowred me. Ille meae spolium virginitatis habet. Il m' a oste ma virginite,
Il m'a despucele. S.

My maiden head is at Phoebus his commandment. Patet virginitas mea Phoebo.
Ma virginite est au commandment de Phoebus. S.

Maidenheare, herb. Adiantum, Callitrichon, Capillus veneris, Politrichon,
Trichomanes, Cincinnalis, Terrae supercilium. Capil venere. S. Maydenlike, or
of a maiden. Puellaris, re. Virginalis, le. om. ge. Virginal. S. May month.
Maius, ij. Scirophorion. Le may. S. Et Maius, a, u^. Of may. De may. S.
Amaioribus dictus, vt Iunius a Iunioribus. Majesty, or dignity royal.
Maiestas, atis. foe. genesis Majesty. S. To abase his majesty, and make him self
contemptible. Soluere maiestatem. Abbaisser sa majesty, and se render
comtemptible. S.

Maigre. Vide Lean. Maihem. Mutilatio, onis. f. ge. Maihemed. Mancus, a, um.
Mutilus, a, um. Mutilatus, a, um. Mutile, Manchot. S. Maiheme, or to main, as
to cut of an arm, or a leg. Admutilo, as. Ad mortem vsque multare, mutilo,
as Mutiler. S. Mayle of a habergion. Hamus, mi. m. g. Maille. S. Mayle, or
lowpe. Macula, ae.* Main of a horse. Iuba, ae. f. ge. Les crins d'vn cheual
qui luy pendent sur le col. S. Main of a horse forehead. Capronae, arum, foe.
ge. Mayneprise. Vadimonio obstringere. Maynprised. Vadimonio obstrictus.
Mainteyne. Suffulcio, cis. Suppedito, as. Suffragor, aris. Fulcio, cis.
Adminiculo, as. Sustineo, es. Soustenir. S. To maintain justice. Iustitiam
retinere. Maintenir justice. S.

To maintain virtue. Virtutem retinere. Maintenir virtue. S.

To maintain, and keep his dignity. Obtinere dignitatem. Maintenir, and
garder sa dignite. S.

To maintain, or defend any thing upon a certain pain. Sponsionem de re
aliqua facere. Maintenir quelque chose sur certain peine. S.

To maintain the right, and quarrel of an other. Pratrocinari alicui.
Soustenir le droict d' aucun, and sa quarelle.

To maintain, or defend an other his part. Niti pro aliquo. Soustenir le
party d' aucun. S.

To maintain, or defend some part, and quarrel against an other. Stare contra
aliquem. Soustenir quelque parti, and quarelle contre aucun. S.

Maintain idleness. Otium tenere. Cic. Maintain title. Retinere ius. Cic.
Maintain wars. Alere bella. Planc. Maintained. Suffultus, Suppeditatus, a,
um. Maintenu. S. Mainteining, or supporting. Suffragatio, onis. f. g. Support.
S. Mainteinour, or he which supporteth. Suffragator, ris. m. g. Qui supporte.
S. Mayor of a city, or chief of a city, or town. Nomarcha, Optimas, atis.
Praefectus, ti. Praetor, ris.* Mayor, ris. m. g. Maire, maieur. S. Et
Praetorianus, a, um. Ang. He that is attendau^t upon ye mayor. Maioraltie.
Nomus, Nomarchia, Praetura, ae. f. ge. Majors deputy. Propraetor, ris. m. g.
Majors haule, house, or pauilio^. Praetoriu^, ij. n. g. Maioram gentle, an
herb. Amaracus, ci. Maiorana, ae. Sampsuchum, chi. Sampsycus, ci. Samsucus,
ci. Sansucus, ci. f. g. Mariolaine, marone. H. Et Sampsuchinus, a, um.
Sansucynus, a, um. Of Maioram. De mariolaine ou marone. S. Mayweed, or as some
call it. Ox his eye. Buphthalmos, Buphtalmum, Cotyla, vel cotula faetida.
Oculus bouis. Oeil de beuf. S. Master. Dominus, Praeceptor, Herus, ri.
Magister, m. g. Maistre. S. Et Herilis, le. Ang. Of a master, or pertaining to
a master. Vt Herilis filius. The masters son. Le filz du maistre. S.
Master of a jewel house. Cimeliarchus.* Master of a ship. Praefectus
nauis, Nauarchus, chi. m. g. H. Master of art. Magister artium. Maistre es
ars. He is his crafts master. Est magister artis suae. Il est maistre de son
mestier. Cord.

Such master such man, or like master like man. Dignus domino seruus,
Domino similis seruus. Tell maistre tell varlet. S.

Master of a ship with three tops. Triarchus.* Interpretatur trium
princeps a Nebris. Master of fence. Lanista, ae. m. g. Maistre escrimeur.
Master of Grammar. Literator, ris. Praeceptor, oris. Doctor grammatices,
Doctor grammaticus, vel doctor grammaticae. Regent en grammaire. Master of
posthorses, or muletes to be sent post. Curiosus. lib. 12. Codic. Master of
th'artillarie. Praefectus machinarioru^, vel rei machinariae. B. Maistre de l'
artillery. Master of the chapel. Praecentor, Choragus. Le maistre de la
chappelle. S. Master of the robes. Vestiarius, ij.*Rei vestiariae praefectus.
Master of the roles. Chartophylax, cis. Magister scriniorum, Praefectus
libellorum, vel scrinioru^. Master, or chief of players. Archimimus, mi. m. g.
Princeps histrionum. Tranquil. Master thief. Autolicus, ci. mas. genesis Colum.
Un maistre larron, fin larron. Master of a schole. Ludimagister, Scholiarcha,
ae. m. ge. Maistre d' escole. S. Master or to rule. Imperium exhibere,
Dominari, Magistrari. Maistrier, ou maistriser. Maisterly, or as a master.
Imperiosus, a, um. Imperieux. S. Master of requests under princes, receiuinge
bills of complaints. Praefectus libellorum, A libellis, Libelloru^ magister.
La mastre des requests Maistership. Dominatio, Dominatus, us. Magisterium,
rij. n. g. Maistrise. S. Magistratus, us. Is sometime taken collectiue, as it
shall appear before in magistrate, and sometime verbale. Maistres. Domina,
Hera, ae. Magistra. Maisteress. Maistrie. Magisterium, ij. n. g. Maistrise. S.
Make. Condo, is. Creo, as. Facio, cis. Texo, is. Molior, ris. Fair. S. To make
any thing with osiers. Detexere aliquid viminibus. Fair quelque chose d'osier.
S.

To make money. Conficere pecuniam. Fair argent. S.

To make fast and massife. Consolido, as, aui. Fair solid, and massif.

To make a great slaughter of people. Stragem dare. Fair grande tuerie de
gens. S.

Make a bed. Sternere lectum, Componere lectu^. Fair un lict. Pals. Make a
cloak, or excuse. Praetexo, is. Fair couuerture, ou excuse. S. Make a fresh,
or new course at running. Recurrere pede recentiori. Make again. Restauro,
as. Reficio, cis. Restituo, is. Refaire. S. Make a glaide in a thick wood.
Colluco, as. Cat. Make all one. Aduno, nas. Vnir. S. Make alliance, or
friendship. Coire in foedera. Vir. Fair alliance. S. Make amends. Compenso,
as. Reponere talum. Recompenser. S. Make angry. Bilem alicui mouere, vel
co^mouere, Exacerbo, as. Obacerbo, as. Offendere alicuius animu^. Courroucer
aucun. S. Vide Anger to make. Make an end. Compono, is. Finio, is. Desino,
nis. Finem facere, In pauca confer. Fair fin. S. I will make an end in one
word. Vno verbo absoluam. Ie feray fin en un mot. S.

Make an end shortly with a word. Verbo absoluete. Make a vaulte, false roof,
or soller, to siele. Camero, ras. Voulter. S. Make answer to a matter in
law. Restipulor, aris. Restipuler. S. Make a pen. Aptare calamum. Make a
plee formal. Componere, vel constituere disceptationem. Cic. Make apt, fytte,
or propre. Concinno, as. Reconcinno, as. Parer, and accoustrer. S. Make a rod
for his own ars. Officio Perilli fungi. A proverb properly applied to such
as inuente punishment for others, and feel the same them selves, risen of one
Perillus, which made a brazen Bulle, ordained for torment, and gave it to
Phalaris, wherein Perillus him self was first tormented, to try the
experience. Make assault. Adeo, is, iui, vel ij. Assailir. Vide Assault. Make
plain, or evident. Enucleo, as, aui. Descouurir, and mettre en evidence. S.
Make a su^ptuous ba^quet. Fercula luxuriose struere. Make a thing by candle
light, or by the glymmering of a candle. Lucubro, as, aui. Besongner a la
Chandelle. Call. Make atoneme^t, or peace. Bellu^, vel lites co^ponere Make
balde. Caluo, as. Caluum facio. Call. Make bitter. Amarico, as, aui. August.
Make brief, or short in speaking. Compendifacio, cis. Compendium facere.
Parler breuement. Make citezins. Donare ciuitate. Cic. Make clean, or pure.
Purgo, as. Purifico, cas. Puro, as. Mundo, as. Purifier. S. Make cruel.
Effero, as, aui. Fair cruel. S. Make cursy, or curtosye. Ingeniculor, aris.
Flectere genua. S' aggenouiller. Call. Make defaulte in court, as not to
warrant essoyne, or wager law, or such like. Deserere vadimonium. Fair
default. S. Make dry. Arefacio, cis. Sicco, as. Desicco, as. Exicco, as.
Torreo, es. Torrefacio, cis. Vaporo, as. Seicher, ou secher. S. To be made
dry. Assiccesco, cis. Exareo, es. Exarefio, fis. Aresco, cis. Inaresco, cis.
Seresco, cis. Siccesco, cis. Se seicher. S.

Make equal. Adaequo, as. Aequo, as. Coaequo, as. Exaequo, as. Esgaler. S.
Make even, or plain. Aequo, as. Applanir. S. Make fast. Refigo, is. Virg.
Make fell. Effero, as. Vt supra. Make firm, or stable. Solido, as. Fair
solid. S. Make fit, or ready. Procingo, is. Accommodo, as. Accommoder. S.
Make folk laughe. Commouere cachinnos. Make foul. Co^spurco, cas. Commaculo,
as. Ordir. Make good that lacks. Refundo, is. Suppleo, es. Supplier and
amender ce qu' il de fault. S. Make happy. Beo, as. Fair souuerain bien. S.
Make heir by adoption. Adopto, as. Arrogo, as. Vide Adoption. Make honorable.
Claro, as.* Make in poulder. Dispuluero, as. In puluere^ reddo. Make
intercession. Intercedo, is. Interceder. S. Make intercession with plaints and
weaping. Endeploro, as* aui. Cum questu rogo. Fest. Make laws. Edere, vel
condere, vel sancire leges. Fair aucunes loix. S. Make laws, and undo the^.
Figere, and refigere leges. Constituer des loix, and les abolir, fair, and
disfaire. S. Make league, or truce. Percutere, vel ferire foedus. Fair
alliance. S. Make meats delectable in taste. Condio, is, iui, vel ij.
Add^ul^ir. S. Make merry, or to delight. Amoeno, as. Delecter. S. Make myrthe, or
joy by exterior act, or gesture, as to clappe the hands one against an
other, in token that some thing does please us. Applaudo, dis. Plaudo, dis.
Frapper les mains l' un contre l' autre, en sign que quelque chose nous
plaist. S. Make much of. Magni facio, cis. Multi facio, cis. Plurimi facio,
cis. Fort estimer. S. Make more, or to enlarge. Amplio, as. Augeo, es.
Augmenter. Call. Make mortar. Concinnare lutum. Plaut. Make new. Nouo, as.
Reconcinno, as. Innouer, fair quelque chose de nouueau. Call. Make new again.
Reficio, cis. Renouo, uas. Renouueler. S. Make new again properly with
hammerynge. Recudo, is. Reforger. Call. Make perpetual. Aeterno, as. Perpetuum
facio Eternizer. Call. Make ready. Paro, as. Procingo, is. Apto, as. Accoustrer.
S. Make ready dynner. Accurare prandiu^. Apprester. S Make restitution. Talum
reponere. Make rumoure. Adrumo, as. Tumultuo, as. Tumultuor, aris. Tumultuer,
fair bruit and tumulte. Make short. Abbreuio, as. Abbrezer. Call. Make sick.
Adferre morbum. Plaut. Make strife. Concire lites, vel concitare. Plaut. Make
the body soluble, or loose. Aluum ciere, vel elicere. Columel. Make thin.
Tenuo, as, aui. Attenuer. S. Make tyle. Ducere lateres, vel plasmare. Make to
glowe like a burning cole. Ca^difacio, cis. Make void, or empty. Vacuo, as.
Vacuefacio, cis. Vuider. S. Make void, or to abolishe. Antiquo, as, aui.
Aboleo, es. Abolir. Mettre a neant. S. Make wood as a beast. Effero, as, aui.
Render feroce and cruel comme vne best. Call. You shall find many words
which begin with make in the places of the principal words, as thus:
Angry to make, seek there fore make angry, Apt to make, look there to make
apt: Manifest, there shall you find, make manifest. and ce.

Maker. Conditor, ris. Factor, ris, m. g. Faiseur. Call. Maker, or author of
Comedies, Enterludes, and plays. Comicus, ci. L' autheur d' vne comedy. Maker
of crowns, or garlandes. Coronarius, rij. m. g. Qui fait chapeaux de fleurs.
Call. Maker of matrimonial contractes. Pronubus, by.* Pronuba, ae. f. ge. Maker
of noyce on heighte. Altisonus, a, um. Qui son, au fait bruit de hault. S.
Makerell a fish. Scombrus, bri. m. g. Maquereau. H. Making. Factura, rae.
Factio, onis. f. g. Facteur. S. Making captains. Decuriatio, nis. f. g. Making
good of a thing. Approbatio, onis. foe. ge. Approbation. Pals. Making, or
creation. Creatio, onis. f. g. Creation. S. Making, or forming. Figurationis,
Facture, ae. Factus, tus. Facon. S. Making ready, or preparation. Apparatus,
tus. Apparatio, onis. Ornatus, tus. Instauratio, onis. Parasceue, es.
Praemunitio, onis. f. g. Apprest. S. Making, or building. Structura, rae. f. g.
Bastiment. S. Mal engine. Dolus malus. Terent. Mal engine. S. Male, or ye
masculine kind. Mas, Masculus. Male. Male to carry behind one on a horse, or a
bowgette to carry at his sadle bow. Hippopera. Bulga. Male, malette, bougette,
pouchette. H. Malaperte, or saucye. Procax, cis. Proteruus, a, u^. Malapert.
Pals. Malapert to be or saucy. Proteruio, is. Malapertly. Procaciter, Proterue,
Proteruiter. Malapertnes, or saucines. Procacitas, atis. Proteruitas, atis.
Proteruia, ae. foe. g. Cic. Malarde. Anas, it is. Dub. g. Canart. S. Malice.
Maleuolentia, Malitia, Malignitas, Rancor, Stomachus, Zelus, li. m. g. Malice.
S. Malice continual. Blumbea ira. Plaut. Malice, or hatred bearing. Infensus,
a, um. Malice, or a privy hatred with a friendly gesture. Simultas, it is. f. g.
Vne haine couuerte. S. Malice prepensed. Accurata malicia. Plaut. Malice, or to
beat hatred, or malice. Maligno, as. Malignor, aris. Zelo, as. Zelor, aris.
Odi, sti. Inuideo, es. Auoir en haine. Malice to bear privily. Simulto, as.*
Malicer, or an envious body. Zelotes, ae. Aemulator, oris. m. g. Enuieux. S.
Malicious. Maleuolus, a, um. Malignus, a, um. Maliciosus, a, um. Perniciosus,
a, um. Peruersus, a, u^. Malicieux. Pals. Malicious mind. Infestus animus.
Maliciously. Maleuole, Malign, Malitiose, Perverse, Perniciose.
Malicieusement. Call. Malignity, a vice contrary to benignitye. Malignitas, it is.
f. g. Malignite. S. Malle, mallette, or bitle. Malleus, lei. m. g. Un marteau.
S. Et tudes, it is. Idem. Call. Mallowe. Malua, ae. f. g. Malue. S. And the great
or garden mallowe. Malua mayor, vel hortensis. Moloche. Malue de iardins. H.
Mallowe, called marish Mallowe. Althea, Hibiscus, Bismalua, Maluauiscus.
Guimauues. H. Mallowe, called ye wyld mallowe. Alcea, Bismalua syluestris,
Herba Simeonis. Guimauue sauuage. Malte. Brasium, ij.* Byne, es. f. g. Orge
paree. Palf. Malte mylle, or handmille. Trusatilis mola. Car. Malting.
Brasitura, ae.* Malueseye, or maumsey, a wine. Vinum Aruisium, Creticum, Chium,
Monembasites. Maluisie. H. Man. Vir, ri. Homo, nis. m. g. Ab humo dictus. Un
homme. H. Et homulucus, ac homunculus. diminut. inde, and Homuncio, onis. Ang.
A little or low man. Petit homme. H. It is also the general latin to man,
woman, or child. Of Vir comes Semiuir, Whose English is half a man, or an
imperfect man: Duumuir, a man having joint office with an other: Triumuir,
joint officer with two me^, where as three be in office: Quinqueuir, where as
five be in joint office: Septemuir, where as seven be in like office: Decemuir,
where ten be in like office, but more properly a man having the office or
dignity of Decemuiratus, in whose authority was Dece^uirale Ius: Centumuir,
one of the Judges, called Centumuiri, when the people of Rome were divided
into.xxxv. trybes, as Budaeus writes: Leuir a man who is brother to the wives
husband, or brother in law to the wife. Masculinus, a, um. Virilis, le. Ang.
Of a man. D' homme. Call. Man come up of naught, whose kynred is unknown.
Terrae filius. Cic. Man desirous of the peoples favor. Aurae popularis homo,
Homo popularis. Cic. Man for man. Viritim. As to fight man for man. Viritim
pugnare. Curt. Homme a homme. S. Man having members of both kinds, being both
man and woman. Androginos. Qui vtrunque habet sexum, and maris, and foeminae.
Call. Of this kind is in Asia. Man kyller, or queller. Angerspartarius, *
Homicida, ae. m. g. Homicide, tueur de gens. Call. Man lately commen to honor,
or worship. Nouus homo. Cic. Man never laughing. Agelastes, Agelastus. Qui ne
rit iamais. Call. Man not perfect, lacking members, or being gelded. Semimas,
ris. Semiuir, ri. m. ge. Chastre, demi homme. Call. Man of a little stature.
Homulus, Homuncio, onis. Homunculus, li. m. g. Petit homme, hommelet. Call. Man
of base estate, or condition. Vnus de multis, Infimus homo, Homo vltimae
professionis, Homo infimi ordinis. Un homme de basse estate ou condition. S.
Man of arms. Bellipotens, it is. Armipote^s, tentis. Puissant en arms. Call. Man
of arms, being young or imperfecte, a fresh water soldier. Tyro, nis. m. g.
Bachelier aux arms, nouueau soldat. S. Man of great estimation, or nobility.
Magnas, it is. Magnatus, ti.* Man of highest authority. Maximas, it is.* Man of
law. Legislator, ris. m. g. Actor, oris. m. ge. Plaideur. S. Man of
occupation, or a handy crafts man. Mechanicus, ci. m. ge. Mechanique. Call. Man
of small reputation. Homulus, Homuncio, onis. Homunculus, li. m. ge. Cic. Homme
de neant. Man of war. Stratiotes, it is. m. g. Homme de guerre. Man of war
upon the sea. Classiarius, rij. mas. g. Man, or husband. Maritus, ti. Vir, ri.
m. g. Un mari. Man, or husband of two wives. Bigamus, Bimaritus, Digamus, mi.
masc. genesis Vide Husband that has had. etc. Man receiving benefit of an other.
Beneficiarius, rij. m. g. Qui a receu plaisir, ou bien faict d' aut^uy. S. Man
unlearned, or not lettered. Illiteratus, a, um^ Profanus, a, um. Non lettre,
sans lettres. Call. Per allegor. Quia homines profani merito sunt doctis exosi.
Man upon horse back. Equisessor, ris. m. g. Manfully, or manly. Viriliter,
Fortiter, Magno animo. Viriliment. S. Manhood, or valiauntise. Virtus, it is.
Bellicositas, it is. Fortitudo, nis. Strenuitas, atis. f. ge. Vaillance,
vallantise. S. Mankind. Mas, ris. m. genesis Masle. S. Manly. or of a man.
Masculinus, a, um. Virilis, e. om. ge. Viril, ou d' homme. Call. Manly to be.
Masculesco, scis. Masculum fieri. Call. Manly to make. Masculo, as. Fair masle.
Call. Manly to wax. Masculesco. Deuenir masle. Call. Manlike. Virilis, le. om.
ge. Viril. Manlines. Virilitas, tatis. f. g. Mannishe woman, or she that does
the feats of a man. Virago, nis. foe. ge. Femme qui fait acts d'vn homme.
Call. Manslaughter. Homicidium, dij. n. genesis Homicide, meurtre. Call. Man's
quality, or stature. Persona, ae. f. g. Manace. Intento, as. Interminor, aris.
Minor, aris. Tollere minas. Eminor, aris. Minas iactare, Minas proponere,
Minitor, aris. Menacer. S. To manace, or threaten upon a pain. Poenas
interponere. Menacer sur peine. S.

He manaced that he would go from her. Ab hac minatur sese abire. Il la menace
de la delaisser. S.

To manace, or threaten stoutly. Comminari. Interminari. Fort menacer. S.

To manace, or threaten one to beat him. Vim denunciare licui. Menacer quelqu'
un de battre. S.

To manace, or threaten one, if he do not that that we demand. Opponere
nomen alicuius ad rem aliquam faciendam. Menacer d'aucun si on ne fait ce que
nous demandons. S.

To manace, or threaten to kill one. Minari alicui mortem, Interminari vitam,
Minitari ferru^ and flammam, Intentare mortem. Menacer de tuer aucun. S.

To manace, to send one to prison. Comprehensionem corporis inhibere. Menacer
d'enuoyer en prison. S.

To manace one in crying after him. Clamore, ac minis aliquem insequi. Menacer
aucun en criant apres aucun. S.

Manacing. Denunciatio, onis. foe. genesis Mina, nae. Comminatio, onis. Eminatio,
onis. Interdictum ti. neut. genesis Menace ou menacement. S. Manacles. Manicae,
arum. foe. ge. Menotes, liens a lier les mains, fers a enferrer les mains. H.
Manchet, or white bread. Colyrides, Panis adoreus, Primarius panis, Siligineus
panis, Candidus, Niueus. Pain blanc. H. Mandrake herb. Mandragora,
Ma^dragoras. Mandegloire, mandragore. H. Whereof is both male and female. Lege
Turn. lib. 2. fol. 46. Manner, or custom. Mos, ris. m. g. Coustume. S. Manner,
or fashion, or proporcion. Modus, Ratio, onis. f. g. Moyen, facon. S. Manner, or
quality. Qualitas, atis. foe. genesis Maniere, qualite. S. Manner, or quality of
the world. Natura, ae. foe. ge. Manered. Morigerus, a, um. Moriger, ra, rum.
Been dispositus, Moribus quam optimis imbutus. Manered to be. Morigeror, aris.
* Imbui bonis moribus. Manerly, or bearing, or having good manners. Moriger,
Morigerus, a, um. * Vt supra. Manners. Mores, rum. plural. m. g. Conditions. S.
Many. Complures, Complusculi, Plaerique, Plures, Aliqua^ multi. Plusieur^. S.
Et Quamplures, Quamplurimi. Very many. Many ways, or in many fashions.
Multifariam, Plurifariam, Multifarie. En diuerses manieres and facons. S.
Manifest. Apertus, a, um. Manifestus, a, u^. Promptus, a, um. Planus, a, um.
Manifest. S. The deceipte, or fraud is manifest. Detecta est fraus. La
tromperie est manifest. S.

The matter is manifest, and known. Res palam est. La chose est manifestee, and
cogneue. S.

Manifest token. Auspicium liquidum. Plaut. Manifestation. Epiphania, ae. f.
g. Manifestatio sieve apparitio dicitur. Call. Manifest. Indico, as. Manifesto,
as. Publiquo, as. Vulgo, as. Aperio, ris. Manifester. S. To manifest, or show
forth the crime. Aperire scelus, Detegere insidias. Manifester un crime.

To manifest, or show abroad war. Ostendere bellum. Manifester la guerre.
S.

Manifestly. Aperte, Manifest, Manifesto, Palam, Public, Vulgo.
Manifestement. S. Manifestly known. Publicus, a, u^. Pate^s, it is. om. g.
Manifold, or of many sorts. Multiiugus, a, um. Multiplex, cis. om. g. De
plusieurs and diuerses sorts. Manifoldly. Multipliciter. En diuerses sorts.
S. Manly. Vide Antea. Manoraine, or Marone, an herb. Amaracus, ci. m. ge.
Amaracum, ci. n. g. Mariolaine, ou maronne. S. Manoure, or lordshippe.
Praedium, Domicilium, Habitatio, onis. foe. g. Manoir. S. Et Praediolum, li.
neut. genesis dimin. Ang. A little manoure. Et Praediatorius, a, um. Pertaining to
a manoure. Manoure, or farm nighe unto a city, or without the walls of a
city. Anteurbanum praedium, Suburbanum, Villa, lae. foe. genesis Metairie. S.
Manoures of great revenues. Opima praedia. Mansion or dwelling. Mansio, onis.
f. g. Demeure, and arrest qu' on fait en quelque lieu. S. Mansion place, or
habitation. Domicilium, Mansio, Seeds, dis. f. ge. Le lieu de la demeure, ou
habitation, domicile. Call. Mantle. Bracha, chae, f. ge. Paliastrium, Pallium,
ij. n. ge. Manteau, mantel, ou vne robe longue. Call. Palliolum. diminut. inde.
Ang. A short mantell or little mantle. Palliastrium, Is a mantle very roughe
or course. Mantle that is heary. Gausapina, ae. f. g. Gausape. indec. n. g. Un
mante velue. S. Mantle maker. Braccarius, rij. m. g. Mantle tree of a chimney.
Superliminare camini, Camini supercilium, Per trans. Manteau de cheminee. S.
Mantled, or cladde in a mantle. Palliatus, Braccatus, a, um. vel Brachatus, ta,
tum.* Manual. Manualis, le. om. ge. Manuell, or book which may be holden, or
carried in the hand. Enchiridium, dij. n. ge. Manuel, ou liver qui se peut
tenir, ou porter en la main. H. Manumyse, or fraunchise. Assero, is. Emitto,
is. Manumitto, is. Emanciper. S. Franchir. Call. Vnde Assertor. Ang. He that
does enfraunchise. Affranchisseur. S. Vide Enfraunchise. Manumised. Manumissus,
a, um. Emancipe. S. Franchi. Vide Enfraunchised. Manumission. Manumissio, onis.
foem. genesis Vindicta. ae. f. ge. Manumission. S. Franchise. Call. Manure ground.
Repastino, as. Manured to be. Repastinor, aris. Manuring of ground, to bring
it eftsoon in temper. Repastinatio, onis. f. g. Maple tree. Acer, ris. n. ge.
Some think it Dougion, and call it in French. Erable. Which other think is
maple. Et Acernus, a, um. made of maple, or Dougion. Faict d'erable. Vt Acerna
mensa. Mart. Marble. Marmor, oris. n. ge. Marbre. H. Et Marmoreus, a, um. Of
marble. De marbre. Et Marmoratio, onis. foe. ge. Ang. Building, or making with
marble. Et Marmoratus, a, u^. Builded, or made of marble, or wrought with
marble. Marbre. S. Marble read. Porphyrites. Marmor porphyreticum. Suet.
Marbre rougeatre. H. Et Prophyreticus, a, um. Of read marble. Marble white.
Lychnites.* Leucostictos, Porphyrites vocatur, candidis interuenientibus
punctis distinctus. March forth to go forward. Progredior, eris. Tollere
gradum. Aller ou marcher auant. S. Ambulare, Gradi, Gradum facere, Pergere,
Vestigium facere, Viam inuadere. Viam facere. Marcher. S. March, or smallage.
Elioselinon, Apium palustre, Paludapium, Apium rusticum. Ache. Dod. March
month. Adar, Vasan. prout in Dan. cap. x. Martius, a Martis tutela. Mars. S.
Marchaundise. Mercimonium, Merx, cis. foem. ge. La merchandise. S. Marchaundise
of bags, or sackes. Saccaria, ae. foe. ge. Apul. Merchandise de sacs. S.
Marchaundise set forth to be sold, or any thing that is to be sold.
Promercalis, le. Adiect. Toute chose qui est a vendre. S. The feate, or trade
of marchaundise. Commercium, Mercatio, Mercatura, Negotiatio, onis. f. genesis Le
faict de merchandise. S.

Marchaundise, or to make sale of small things. Aginor, naris.* To use
marchau^dise, or to play the merchant. Mercor, caris. Nundinor, naris.
Commercor, caris. Marchander. S.

Merchant. Mercator, oris. Negotiator. Mercans, it is. Merchant. S. Et,
Negotialis, le. Pertaining to a merchant, or marchaundise. Merchant of sylke.
Sericarius, rij. m. g. Merchant de soye. S. Merchant, using much the trade of
marchaundise. Magnarius, rij. m. g.* Merchants which make many prices of
their wares or they can conclude. Cutiones, nu^. Call. Marches, or borders of a
country, or realm. Fines, nium. Limits, Orae, Limina, Margines imperij. Les
marches d'vn Royaume. S. Marching forth. Ingressus, sus. Progressus, sus.
Incessus, sus. m. g. Marchure. S. Marching near the end, or borders.
Finitimus, a, um. Prochain. S. Marchpane, or tarte. Chanona.* Marchpane made
with almondes and sugar. Marcipanes, Dulciarius panis, Panis saccharites. Maree
pain. H. Mare. Equa, ae. f. g. Vne iument. S. Et Equula, dimin. inde. Ang. A
little mare.* Margarite, the propre name of a woman. Margaris, it is. Margarita,
tae. f. g. Marguerite. S. Margarite a stone. Bacca, Margarita, Margarites,
Margaritum, ti. n. ge. Vne perle. Call. Margeline an herb. Asyla, ae. foe. g.
Margeline. S. Margent of a book. Margo, ginis. Paginae crepedo and extremitas.
La marge. H. Mary the proper name of the mother of Jesus. Maria. But Valla will
Mariam, in the Nominative case, as Abraham, for that, that Maria is the
feminine of Marius. etc. Mariable. Nubilis, le. Vir potens, it is. Mariable. S.
Marriage. Coneugium, Nuptus, us. Matrimonium, Nuptiae, arum. Connubium, bij.
Maritale coniugium. Marriage. S. Marriage maker. Pronubus, by.* Marriage of the
daughter. Collocatio filiae. Marriage de fille. S. To have in marriage. Habere in
matrimonio. Auoir en marriage. S.

To love for marriage sake. In matrimonium amare. Aimer pour auoir en marriage. S.

To give his daughter in marriage. Committere gnatam suam vxorem alicui, Nuptui
collocare. In matrimonium dare, Collocare nuptum. Collocare in matrimonium,
Filiam suam alicui collocare, Locare filiam. Filiam nuptum dare. Bailler sa
fille en marriage. S.

Marriage sole^pnised by the bishop. Conferreatio, onis. foem. genesis Marriage sone
broken, divorced, or dissolved. Repudiosae nuptiae. Mary, or to take a wife.
Connubere, Coniungere sibi foeminam matrimonio, Vxorem sibi adiungere, Vxorem
ducere, Denubere. Se marier. S. Marie together. Co^nubo, is, psi. Se marier
ensemble. Married. Coniugatus, Nuptus, a, um. Marie. S. Married to be. Nubo, bis.
Espouser mary. S. On the woman's part only. A new married man. Nuptus, Nouus
nuptus, Recens nuptus. Nouueau marie. S.

Married wife. Nupta, Marita, Nympha, phae. foe. g. Mariee. S. Marigolde, or
ruddes herb. Calendula, ae. Heliocrisos, Heliotropium, Leontopodium,
Lysimachium, Scorpiuros, Solsequium. Quasi Solemn sequens. Mariner, or water
guide. Conuector, Nauta, tae. m. g. Mari^ier. S. Mark. Nota, Signum, ni.
Macula, lae. f. g. Marque. Mark made of stone, or timber for a memory of
victory, where a field was won, or such like. Trophaeum, phaei. neut. genesis
Trophee, Enseigne ou marque de victoire. Call. Mark, or bronde made with a
hoate Iron upon some body. Stigma, it is. n. g. Vne marque qu' on empreint sur
aucun d'vn fer chauld and cautere. S Mark or note in writing like a star,
after this sort. * Asteriscus, sci. m. g. Petite estoile. S. Mark, or prick
to shoot at. Meta, ae. Scopulus, li. Scopus, pi. m. g. Un but de quoy on vise.
S. Mark, or the end whereto ones purpose tends. Scopus, pi. m. g. Le fin
and le but a quoy tend le propos d'aucun. S. Mark, or to note a thing whereby
to know it. Noto, tas. Annoto, tas. Signo, nas. Designo, nas. Insignio, nis.
Noram alicui rei imponere. Marquer. Mark, or to brond with a hoate iron. Inuro,
is. Marquer d' un fer chauld. S. Mark wisely. Subnoto, as. Marked. Compunctus,
a, um. Notatus, a, um. Signatus, a, um. Marque S. Marked, or bronded.
Cauteriarius, Inustus, a, um. Compunctus notis. Stigmaticus, ca, cu^. Et
Stigmosus, sa, sum. Plin. Iun. Marque comme d' un fer chauld. S. Market. Forum,
Mercatus, us. Emporium, Forum nundinarium. March. S. He is at the market. Apud
forum est. Il est an march. S.

Market for cattle. Boarium forum. Le march aux Boeuffz. S. Market for fish.
Forum piscarium, vel Forum piscatorium. Le march au poisson. S. Market for
herbs of the gardoen. Forum olitorium. March aux herbs de iardins. S. Market
for oxen. Forum boarium. Vt supra. Market that has all the sale of one ware
proper to it self. Monopolium, ij. n. g. Plin. Market man, or haunter of
markets. Agoraeus, aei. masc. genesis Market woman. Foratia, ae. foem. genesis
Marking. Notatio, onis. foe. ge. Marking iron. Cauteres, ris. Cauteria, *
Tudicu la, ae. foeminin. genesis Marking iron, such as they burn prisoners, or
slaves withal. Cauterium, Ferramentum quo cande^te scelerosos inuru^t.
Chautere, ou fer chauld. Marle, or chaulky claye. Tasconium.* Marga, Terra
candida, cretae instar, Stercorandis agris seruiens, Cretafossitia. Marne. H.
Marlyn hawk. Alietus, ti. Aesalon. Esmerillon. H. Marmayde. Siren, nis. sieve
Syrena, ae. foe. ge. Vel vt alij (quorum mayor est authoritas) scribunt Siren,
nis. foe. genesis Serene. S. Marmaset. Cercopithecus vel Caudata simia. Marmoset.
H. Vide Babion. Marquis. Praeses limitaneus, qui limitibus sinibusque
prouinciae praeest, quem marchionem vulgus nominat. Marquis. H. Et comes
marcae, hoc est limitis. Conte de la march. S. Mar. Perdo, is. Disperdo, is.
Gaster. S. Marred. Disperditus, Perditus, a, um. Gaste. S. Marred with over
much liberty. Indulgentia deprauatus. Marrowe which is within the bones.
Medulla, ae. foe, ge. Mouelle. H. La mo^lle qui est dedens les ^s. S. Marrowe
of a company, or fellowship, as burgeses and citezins. Municeps, pis. om. genesis
Marrowe, or a companion. Vide Companion. Marshall. Designator, toris. m. genesis
vt Mansionarij designatores hospitiorum, and ductores commitatus, Epistathmi,
qui commitatu^ apud hosts collocant. Mareschaulx de logis. S. Marshall, or he
that chooses the place to camp in. Metator castrorum. Qui choisist le lieu
pour asseoir le camp en temps de guerre, marshall du camp. S. Marshall of an
army. Tribunus militum, per Budaeum, Praefectus castrorum. Epistathmus, mi. m.
g. Marshall du camp. S. Marshals rod. Commentaculum. li. n. g.* Marshalsye.
Ergastulum piratarum vel piraticum, carcer in quo piratae clauduntur. Marshes
of the salt water, or meeres. Aestuaria, orum. n. g. Martes or faires.
Nundinae, arum. f. g. Foires. S. Martinet, the second kind of swalowes. Apus,
Apodus. foe. ge. Et Cypsellus, auis est quae plurimum volat, quia caret vsu
pedum, Hirundinum species. Martinet. S. Martyr. Martyr, ris. com. ge. Martyr.
S. Martyrdom. Martyriu^, Tormentu^, ti. n. g. Martyr. Martlemasse biefe.
Bubula infumata. Bresil. S. Brezil. Pals. Maser, or broad piece to drink in.
Patera, ae. f. g. Vne tasse a boire. S. Mashe of a net. Macula, lae. foe. g.
Le trou d'vne ret^. Masker, or mask player. Larua, ae. Laruatus, Personatus.
Qui ha un faulx visage ou masque. S. Et Laruatus, a, um. Masked. Masque. S.
Mask, or masking. Persona, Larua, ae. foem. ge. Vne masque. S. Masking
apparel. Personatae vestes. Masking visoure. Larua, ae. f. g. Horat. Mason.
Lapicida, Latomus, mi. Caementarius, rij. m. g. Un maisson. S. Masons rule.
Amussis, Chorobates, tae. Vne sort de ruille a masson. S. Masons work house,
or quarie. Lithotomia. et Latomia, ae. f. ge. vel Latumiae, aru^. f. g. A
quarie or prison in the ground. Massy. Solidus, a, um. Massif. S. Massiuenes.
Soliditas, it is. f. g. Massiuite. S. Mast of a ship. Malus, li. m. g. Arbor
nauis. Le mas ou l'arbre de la nauire. H. Maste, or akorne. Glans, dis. foe.
ge. Fruges roburneae. Gland. S. Et Calyx glandis, Putamen glandis, Capula
offic. The shell of the akorne. That bears maste or akornes. Glandifer, ra,
rum. Qui port glande. S.

Maste which grows upon beache, whereupon swine be fed in chases and
forestes. Glans fagea. Virgil. Mastiue dog. Molossus, si. Canis villaticus.
Col. Canis molossus. Matin, chien, dogue. H. Match, equal, or the like.
Parilis, le. Similis, le. Aequalis, le. Compar, ris. Coaequalis, le. Pareil,
egual. S. Match of a lamp. Ellychnium, nij. Match of brimstone. Sulphuratum,
ti. neut. genesis Vne alumette. Match of a candle. Ellychnium, nij. neut. genesis La
meche, lumignon. H. Match, or to make equal. Exaequo, as. Aequiparo, as.
Aequare. Fair equal and pareil. S. Material. Materialis, le. Adiect.
Materiel. S. Mathematique, an art under which name are contained those arts
which are certain by demonstration, as Arithmeticke, Geometry, Astrology,
and Music. Mathesis, sis. Mathema, it is. n. g. Mathematique. S. Mathematician,
or one that studieth the mathematiques. Mathematicus, ci. m. g. Mathematicie^.
Matrice. Matrix, cis. Vulua, Vterus. La matrice. S. Matrimony. Connubium, ij.
Matrimonium, ij. n. ge. Marriage. Matrimonial. Matrimonialis, le. De marriage.
Matrimonial ceremony. Far teatio, onis. f. g. Call. Matrone. Matrona, ae. foe.
ge. Matrone. S. Matte. Culmea, ae.* Matta, ae. Storea, ae. Teges, it is. foe. ge.
Natle. H. Matte, or hap harlote. Teges, it is. foe. ge. Natte ou couuerture
fait de jones. S. Matter. Negotium, tij. Ratio, onis. Res ei. foem. ge. Chose.
S. Et Negotiolum, li. n. g. diminut. Ang. A little, small, or trifling matter.
It is no small matter. Est tanti. Bud. ex Cic. Res non est parua. C' est grande
chose. S.

A known matter. Res peruagata, Peruulgata, Nulli non nota, Notissima. Chose
notoire. S.

A contentious matter. Quod inter parts controuersum est, and de quo
ambigitur, Res iudicio controuersa, Qua de re co^trouersia est. Quod in
iudicium deductum est. Chose contentieuse.

Matter in deed, or matter it self. Res ipsa. Le faict mesme. S. Matter in
law. Res forensis. Matter, or principal substance, of which any thing is
made. Materia, vel materies, iei. foe. ge. Toute sort de matiere de quoy on
fait aucune chose. S. Matter, or corruption of a sore or wound. Pus, ris.
Sanies, ei. La boue. etc. S. Matterie or full of matter. Purulentus, a, um.
Plein de boue. etc. Mattering of a sore. Suppurantia, Supuratio, Vlcus, ceris.
n. g. Apostume. S. Et Suppuratorius, a, u^. Causing mattering, or pertaining to
mattering. Qui fait apostumer. S. Mattering, or running sore, or impostume.
Vomica, ae. foe. ge. Apostume. S. Matters begone. Coepta, orum. n. g.
Mattocke. Biplaium, Marra, ae. Rutrum. tri. n. genesis Un hoyau, ou pique. Pals.
Rutellum, li. diminut. Ang. A little mattocke.* Mattocke, or turnespade. Ligo,
nis. m. g. Un Hoyau. Mattresse. Anaclinterium. Culcitra, ae. Matta, tae. f. ge.
Materas a coucher. S. Et culcitrula, lae. foe. genesis diminut. Ang. A little or
short mattresse. Maugre of ones teethe, as in despite of his nose. Inuitus, a,
u^. Maulgre. S. As maulgre their nose, or in despyte of all their teethe he was
absolved, or set at liberty. Inuitis omnibus fuit absolutus. Maulgre tous il a
este absoulz. S. Maulgre their hearts, or in despite of their nose. Velint
nolint. Maulgre eulx. S. Maulgre my teethe, or in despite of my nose. Iratus,
Ingratis. Maulgre que in en aye. S. Maulgre your teethe, or in despite of your
nose. Tuis ingratijs. Maulgre que tu en ayes. S. Mauyshe, or trush bird.
Turdus, di. Vide Thrush Maunde, or basket. Calathus, thy. Scirpiculum, li.
Sporta, ae. foe. ge. Un panier, ou corbeille. S. Et Sportula. diminut. Ang. A
little basket. Petit panier. Maunger, or cribbe. Praesepe, pis. Praesepes, pis.
Praesepium, ij. n. g. Auge, ou la creiche d'vne estable. Maxim, or commune
place. Axioma, it is. neut. genesis Vne maxim. S. May. Vide May.
M. ANTE. E.
ME. Me. The accusative case of Ego. Me vel moy. Pil. Me thinks. Videor,
eris. Videtur mihi. Il me semble. S. Me think I see at this present that day.
Videre videor iam diem illum. Il me semble que ie voy ia ce iours la. S. Me
think I remember that it was done. Meminisse videor fieri. Il me semble que in
ay memoire qu' il a este faict. S. Meal, or flower. Far, ris. Pollen, inis.
Pollis, nis. m. g. Farine, ou la fleur de la farine. S. Meal being very fine,
or finely grinded. Simila, ae. Similago, inis. Farina, ae. Farine. Meal of
barley dried at the fire, and fried. Alphiton, Polenta, ae. foe. ge. Farine d'
orge seichee au feu, and fritte. S. Meal of beans. Lomentum, Farina fabacea.
Farine de febues. H. Meal, or banquet, where one eats hongerly. Peredia, ae,
foe. ge. Plaut. Meal, or repast. Pastus, us. Refectus, tus. Refectio, onis.
foe. ge. Repas. S. Meal with one kind of meat. Monophagia, ae. foe. ge.
Victus ex vna re. Mealeman, or mealeseller. Suffaraneus, a, u^. adiect.
Mealesister. Pollintor, oris. m. g. Cato. Sasseur. S. Mealy, or of meal.
Farinaceus, a, um. De farine. S. Mean, or indifferent. Mediocris, e.
Indifferens, it is. om. ge. Moyens, indifferent. S. Mean between much and
little. Modicus, a, um. Mediocre. Call. Mean, manner, or way. Modus, di. Ratio,
onis. foe. g. Mediocrite, moyen, maniere. S. Mean, or in the mids.
Medioximus, a, um. Medius, a, u^. Medioxumus, a, um. Qui est au milieu. S
Mean, or measure. Mediocritas, atis. foem. ge. Mediocrite. S. To keep a mean
in any thing. Ad mediocritatem reuocare modum alicuius rei. Garder mediocrite
en quelque chose. S.

Mean, or mediator. Mediator, oris. masc. gener. Moyeneur. H. Meanly.
Mediocriter, Modice. Moyenement. S. Mease of meat. Ferculu^, li. n. ge. Un
mets de viande. Mease of potage. Iuscum, Iusculum, li. neut. ge. It is rather a
little broathe. Un petit brouet. S. Mease of hering. Alestirgium. But rather
hering sauce.* Measlis, a sickness so called. Boa, ae. f. g. Rougeolle. S.
Measurable. Mediocris, cre. Modicus, a, um. Mediocre. Call. Measurably.
Mediocriter, Modice. Mediocrement. S. Measure. Mensura, ae. Mensus, us.
Permensus, Mensio, onis. Permensus, sus. Proportio, onis. Moderatio, onis.
Modulus, li. Numerus, ri. Modus, di. mas. genesis Mesure. S. Measure, or to give
measure. Moderare, vel moderari. Praemoderari. Donner mesure. S. Measure
containing two ounces and a half. Acetabulum, li. n. ge. Plin. Measure
containing four gallons and an half. Vrna, ae. f. g. Colum. Measure
containing three bushels. Ephi. Measure containing four Roman bushels.
Demensum, si. n. ge. Donat. Measure of ground, containing two furlonges.
Diaulus, li. m. g. Measure of ground, containing an hundred feet. Plethrum,
thri. n. ge. Sed iuxta Vall. Idem quod iugerum. Measure of two palms and
eight fingers. Dichas. Measure, or weight of nine ounces. Nonuncium, cij.
Dodrans hoc est pondus vel mensura nouem vnciarum. Call. Neuf onces. H. Measure,
or mean. Mediocritas, Modus, Temperamentum, ti. n. g. Mesure. S. To keep a
measure, or a mean. Custo dire modum, Modum seruare. Garder mesure. S.

To pass measure. Prodire extra modum, Excedere modum. Finem and modum
transire. Passer mesure. S.

To take the measure of any thing. Modulari, Metiri. Prendre la mesure de
quelque chose. S.

Beyond measure. Praeter modum, Effuse, Intemperanter, In immensum, Supra
modum, Extra modum, Immodeste. Oultre mesure. S.

By measure. Definite, Concluse, Modeste, Modulate, Composite, Numerose. Par
mesure. S.

Measure to meat ground. Chorobates. In some places called a gadde containing
eighte feet by standarde, which laid every way makes a roode, and that is
the fourth part of an acre, as some hold opinion, albeit I will not verify
it. Calipine says it is a rule of.xx. foot long. Measure, or to meat.
Dimetior, iris. Mensuro, as. Emetior, tiris. Metior, iris. Modero, as. Moderor,
aris. Modificor, aris. Permetior, tiris. Modulor, aris. Admetior, iris, vel
ire. Mesurer. S. Measure or meat, diligently, or truly. Demetior, iris, vel
Dimetior, tiris. Mesurer dilige^ment. S. Measure, or meat land. Metor, aris.
Measured. Demensus, a, um. Dimensus, a, um. Me^suratus, a, um. Qui est mesure.
S. Et Dimetiens, it is. That wherewith a thing is measured. Mesurant. S. Measured
by temperaunce. Temperatus, a, um. Moderatus, a, um. Tempere and modere. S.
Measurer. Dimensor, oris. m. g. Mesureur. S. It is also a bone setter. Measurer
of ground. Agri mensor, Finitor, toris. Mensor, soris. m. g. Mesureur and
cordeur de terres. S. Measuring. Dimensio, Moderatio, onis. foem. genesis
Mesurement. S. Meat. Cibarium, ij. Cibus, by. Edulium, ij. Epulae, arum. Et
Cibaria, orum. n. g. Viande. S. Et Obsonium, Edulium, lij. n. ge. Toute viande
oultre le pain and le vin. S. All kind of meat upon a table, except bread
and wine. To take meat. Cibum capere, vel capessere. Prendre la viande. S.

To disgeste his meat. Cibos conficere, Peragere cibum. Digerer la viande. S.

Meat indigeste. Cibus imperfectus. Viande indigeste. To take away the meat.
Deducere aut subtrahere cibum. Soubtraire la viande. S.

Meat burned in rosting, or to the spit. Subuerbusta, tae. foe. ge. Plaut.
Meat chewed. Mansum, si. The like is when a nource cheweth ye childs meat.
Vide Chewed. Meat dressed three days past, or being three days old. Pridianus
cibus. Viande de iour de deuant. S. Meat made of beans. Conchis, chis. foe.
ge. Edulium ex fabis. Meat or food that feadeth any thing fat. Sagina, nae.
foe. ge. Cibus, quo quis pinguis efficitur. Meat stewed upon a chafindishe.
Patinarium.* Except thou abstain from meat thou will be very gross. Nisi
cibo parcas, a cibo abstineas, cibum minuas, de cibo detrahas* tibi temperes,
modereris in cibis, nisi cibo parcius vtare, pinguior euades, quam satis est,
nimium pinguesces, nimiam pinguetudinem indues, lenior fies, obesior fies,
nimia pinguedine laborabis.

Meats made of meal. Farraca, Cibaria ex far. Meats made of milk.
Lactaria.* Meats made with honey. Melipecta, Cibaria mellita. Call. Meats of
good juice. Euchyla, orum. n. g. Meats pleasant. Scitamenta, torum. neut.
genesis Edulia sciti, egregij and praecellentis saporis. Call. Meats preserved,
seasoned, or well sauced. Conditanea edulia. Mede, a kind of drink made of
water and honey. Promulsis, dis.* Hydromeli, Aqua mulfa, Melicratum, Volunt
autem hoc esse discriminis, quod melicratum sit recens mistura aquae cum melle
repentino vsui parata: Hydromeli vero vetusta and ad vsus recondita. Bruuage d'
eau and de miel. H. Mediator. Medius. * Proxeneta, Mediator, Pacarius,
Conciliator in contractibus. Moyenneur. H Mediatoure in contracte between man
and woman. Paranymphus, Pronuba, ae. Paranymphus, is for the man, and the other
is for the woman. Medicine, or to heal or cure a sick body. Medicare v^l
Medicari, Mederi, Medicinam facere, Medicinam adhibere. Mediciner. S. Medicine.
Medicina, ae. Remedium, ij. Medicame^, inis. Medicamentum, Medela, ae. f. g.
Medicine. S. Medicamentarius, a, um. Pertaining to medicines. Et Medicinalis,
le. Medicinable. Medicinal. S. Et Medicamentosus, sa, sum. Idem. A present,
perfect, sure, singular and sovereign medicine. Medicamentum praesens,
Praesentaneum, Remedium efficax, Remedium singular, Medicamen praesens,
Praesens medicina. Souuerain remede. H.

Medicine against poison. Alexipharmacon, Antidotus, vel Antidotum, ti.
Remedium sieve medicamentu^ quod contra venena datur. Contrepoison. Medicine
causing vomitatio^ of fleame. Apophlegmatismus, mi. I think it that which is
called commonly a gargarisme. Medicine which will white teethe. Dentifricium,
cij. n. ge. Medicamentum, quo dentes fricantur vt fiant candidi. Medicines
which be burning and hoate. Caustica medicamenta. Sunt quae habent vim
caustica^, id est, vstiuam. Call. Medicines which do bind, or restraigne.
Stiptica medicame^ta, vel Styptica medicame^ta. Plin. Mediocritie, or the
mean. Mediocritas, tatis. foe. g. Mediocrite. S. Vide Mean. Meditation.
Meditatio, onis. foe. genesis Meditation. S. Meditatorius, a, um. Pertaining to
meditation. Et Meditabundus, a, um. Full of meditation. Et Meditor, aris. To be
in meditation. Mediter. S. Meddle, or to have to do with one in some affair,
or business. Commercium cum aliquo habere, Rem cum aliquo habere, Commiscere
aliquid cum aliquo, Aliquem in vsu habere. Auoir quelque affair auec aucun. S.
Meddle with a matter vncunningly. Perplector, eris.* Meddle with an other man's
wife. Attrecto, as. Subagito, as. Subigo, is. Rem cum aliqua habere, vel
inhoneste agere. Meddle with harlottes, commonly or often. Subicito, as. Subigo,
is.* Scortari. Meretricari, Libidinari, Rebus venerijs vti. Paillarder. S.
Meddle with nothing. Vacare ab omni re. Meddle with no man's goods. Abstinere ab
alieno Meddle with no public or common affairs. Remouere se a publicis rebus,
vel negotijs publicis se abstinere. Medler. Ardelio, onis. m. g. Fretillon,
tant d'affaire, qui de tout se mesle. H. Medler fruit. Mespilum, li. n. g.
Neffle. S. Medler having three stones. Epimelis, idis. Gal. Medler having five
stones. Amemelides.* Medler tree. Mespilus, li. foe. ge. Un nefflier. S.
Medowe. Pascuum, ui. Pratum, ti. n. g. Un pre. S. Et Pratiolum. diminut. Preau
ou petit pre. S. Ang. A little medowe. Et Pratensis, se. Ang. Of a meadow De pre.
S. Vt, flores pratenses. Mede flowers. Fleurs de pre. S. Medowe sweet, an
herb named also medowe, worte, medesweete, or mede worte. Barba capri. vel
Regina prati. Roynette and barbe de chieure. Meede. Meritum, ti. n. g. Merit.
Vide Merit, and Deserte. Meek and gentle. Intemeratus, a, um. Lenis, e
Mansuetus, a, um. Mitis, e. Placidus, a, um. Benignus, na, number. Clemens, it is.
Suauis, e. Dulcis, ce. Doulz. S. Meek to make, or to mitigate, or meeken.
Paco, as. Pl^co, as* Placidu^ reddere. Humilio, as. Mansuefacio, cis.
Complacare, Demitigare, Emollire, Edulcare, Lenire, Mitificare, Mitigare,
Mulcere, Tranqui^lare. Addoulcir. S. Meek to wax. Mitesco, scis. Mansuesco,
scis. Deuenir doulx. Call. Meekely, or gentely. Humiliter, Leniter, Mansuete,
Placide, Dulce, Mite. Doulcement. S. Meekenes. Humilitas, Lenitas, Lenitudo,
Mansuetudo, inis. Comitas, tatis. Dulcedo, inis. Doulceur. Mere. Meta, ae.
Limes, it is. Dunsa, ae. Terminus, ni. m. ge. Frontier ou lesiere. H. Mere
stake, or stone. Terminalis lapis, Qui in agrorum finibus ponitur. Borne. H.
Mere filled with salt water, or salt marishe, or like place, which the sea
by ebbing and flowing drowneth. Aestuarium, ij. n. g. Vide March. Mere, or
pure. Merus, a, um. Pur. S. vt Spes mera. Terent. Mere hope. Mere sauce or
brine. Salsura, ae. f. g. Salsamentum, ti. neut. genesis Merely. Mere. Aduerb.
Plaut. Meet, or to go to meet one. Obeo, is. Obuiam ire. Obuius esse, Obuiam
fio, Obuiam dare, Obuenio is. Exire obuiam alicui, Ire alicui obuiam, Obsistere
alicui obuiam, Obuia^ accedere, Obuiare, Occurrere, Proficisci obuiam, Progredi
obuiam, Sese obuiam alicui far, Prouisere, Venire alicui aduersum, Aduersum
ire, Adire contra. Aller au deuant de quelqu'vn. S. Meet often. Occurso, as.
Meet, equal, or like. Par, ris. Adiect. Pareil. S. Meet, or apt to make.
Apto, as. Reconcinno, as. Adiaucer. Call. Meeting one, or that does meet.
Obuius, a, u^. Qui on recontre. S. Meeting together of many streams. Confluum,
Confluxus, us. Quo multi riui simul fluunt. Call. Melancholy, one of the four
complexions of ma^s body. Bilis atra, Atra bilis, vel Melancholia, ae. f. genesis
Melancholy. H. Melancholy, or fury, a kind of madness. Melancholia, Furorem
Cicero vocat Melancholy. H. Est mentis alienatio ex atra bile nata, cum
moestitia, metuque coniuncta. Melancholicke. Melancholicus, a, um.
Mela^colique. Melilote herb. Melilotos, Sertula ca^pana. Melilotus officin.
Corona regia, Pratellu^, li. neut. genesis Melilot. H.. Melody. Canor, oris.
Harmonia, ae. Melodia, ae. Melos, Inde^. n. g. Melody. S. Melodious, or full
of melody. Canorus, a, um. Harmonicus, a, um. Harmoneux. Call. Melodious
singer. Melodes, m. g. Melte, or to cast metal, or such like. Fundo, dis.
Eliquo, as. Liquefacio, cis. Fondre. S. Vide Cast. Melte, or to become liquor
as the mettalle doothe when it is cast. Liqui, Liquere, Liquescere,
Colliquescere, Eliquescere. Se fondre. S. Melte as ise^doth, or snow. Regelo,
as. Desgeler. Melte metal. Aes ducere.* Melter. Fusor, oris. m. g. Fondeur. S.
Melting Liquefactio, onis. Fusio, onis. foem. gener. Fondement. S. Fusorius, a,
um. Pertaining, or serving to a melter or founder. Appartenant ou servant au
fondeur. Melting house. Fusura, rae. f. ge. Font. S. Member. A^tus, us.
Membrum, bri. n. ge. Membre. H. Et Membranulum. diminut. Ang. A little membre.
Et Membrosus, a, um. Full of members, or having great members. Members gross.
Me^bra opimiora. Me^bres plus gras. Memberly, or by members. Me^bratim. Par
members. S Members being de^d or numbe. Membra stupentia. vel stupida. Members
generatiue, or pryuy members. Genitalia, Virilia, Pudenda, Membra pudica,
Verenda. Les parties h^nteuses H. Members superfluous, as where one has three
hands, or three legs. Agnascentia membra, Et Agnata membra. Membring, or
fourming of members. Membratura, ae. f. g. Est membrorum positura. Call. Mem^ry.
Memoria, ae. foe. ge. Memoire. S. Et Memoriosus, a, um. Full of memory, or
having a good memory. To have in memory, mind, or to remember. In memoria
habere, Memoria tenere rem aliqua^, Meminisse, Recordari. Auoire memoire. S.

To commit to memory. Mandare animis and mentibus, aut memoriae, Commendare
memoriae, Tradere aliquid memoriae, Compraehendere memoria. Mettre en memoire.
S.

To reduce, or bring again into memory. Ponere ante oculos, Ruminari, Memoriam
facere, Repetere memoria, Reminisci, Recomminisci, Subijcere, Recolere,
Recognoscere, In memoriam reducere. Reduire en memoire. S.

To refreshe the memory. Recolere memoriam, Renouare memoriam. Refreschir la
memoire. S.

For a perpetual memory. In memoriam sempiternam, Ad memoriam aeternitatis.
Pour perpetuelle memoire. S.

To renew, and refreshe the memory. Redintegrare memoria^, Renouare, Recolere.
Renouueler.

Memorable, or worthy memory. Memorabilis, le. Memora^dus, da, du^. Digne de
memoire, memoirable. Memorandum, or a short note written for a remembrance.
Libellus, Libellus memorialis, Scriptum quod memoriae nouandae gratia
subijcitur. Un memorial. H. Et liber memorialis. Sueto. Men. Homines, number. com.
g. Les hommes. S. Men bearinge shyldes of silver, called launce-knightes.
Argyraspidae, arum. m. ge. Men fighting with swerdes. Gladiatores, um. m. g.
Gladiateurs. S. Men fightinge with swerdes blyndfield, or wynkyng. Andabatae,
arum. Eras. Doubts whether it were such men, or a kind of play, and I
think (If it be any) it is Hoodeman blind, a play that children use, and
strike one an other blindfolde, or rather that play, called Falshode in
feloweship, or such like. Men of arms on horseback. Cataphracti equites. Men
of diverse languages. Meropes, Diuersarum linguarum homines. Call. Men of great
authority. Magnates, tum. masc. ge. Les grands. Call. Men of greatest
authority. Maximates, tum.* Men of nobility. Magnates, tum. m. g. Les nobles.
Men of old time. Veteres, rum. Les anciens. S. Men of the old fashion.
Antiqu^ homines. Idem. Men of war sworn. Sacramenta. Iuuenal. Men of war,
supplying the rowmes of them that are slain. Adscriptitij, Adscriptiui.* Me^
which can live hardly, and wretchedly. Apocroti. Meniuer cappe for a
gentlewoman. Redimiculu^, li. neut. gen.* Menowe fyshe. Girulus, li. Mena, ae.
f. ge. Meunler. Mercer. Mercator, ris. m. g. Grossier, Mercier. Pals. Mercerie.
Mercatura, ae. Mercatus, us. masc. gener. Mercerie. Pals. Mercerie, or ware to
sell. Merx, cis. Mercimoniu^, nij. n. g. Mercerie. S. Mercy. Clementia,
Indulgentia, Teneritas,* Miseratio, onis. foe. genesis Misericordia, ae. foem.
gener. Misericorde. S. To move one to mercy. Ad misericordiam adducere.
Esmouuoir a misericorde.

Mercy to have. Misereor, eris. Miseresco, scis. Misericordiam tribuere. Fair
misericorde. S. Merciful. Clemens, it is. Humanus, a, um. Misericors, dis. Pius,
Propiciabilis, le. Propicialis, le. Propicius, a, um. Tener, ra, rum.
Misericordieux. S But some of these rather signify inclined, or bowed
mercifully to peticions, or moved with mercy. Merciful to be, or to have
pity on one. Miseresco, scis. Misereor, eris. Auoir pity d'aucun. S.
Merciful to wax. Miseresco, scis. Mercifully. Clementer, Misericorditer, Pie.
Miserieusement. Mercury herb. Hermupoa, Linozostis, Mercurialis. Mercuriale.
H. Merry. Alacer, cris, e. Amoenus, a, um. Face^us, a, u^. Hilaris, re. Hilarus,
a, um. Iocosus, Iucundus, Laetus, a, um. Ioyeux. S. Merry beginning and a sad
ending. Co^icum principium, tragicus finis. Merry companion. Congerio, nis. m.
g. Compaigno^ a caqueter et plaisanter. S. Merry demeanoure, talk, or speech.
Facetiae, aru^. foe. ge. Railleries. S. Merry in talkyng. Dicaculus, a, um. Merry
of countenance, or gesture. Vultuosus, a, u^.* Merry, or pleasant in talk.
Facetus, a, um. Qui (...) mots pour rire, Recreatif en parolles. S. Merry
quipes, or tauntes. Dicteria, orum. neut. ge. Merry scoffing boy. Salapusius,
sij.* Merry song. Canticum, ci. n. g. Un chanson. S. Merry talker. Dicaculus, li.
vel la, ae.* Merry talk. Iocus, ci. m. g. plur. Hi loci, and haec Ioca.
Raillerie, gaudisserie. Call. Merry tales without dishonestie. Facetiae, arum. f.
genesis Vt supra. Merry to be. Hilaresco, scis. Iucundor, aris. Voluptate and
delectatione affici. Se recreer, Se resiouir. Merry to make. Amoeno, as. Hilaro,
as. Delectatione afficio. Laetifico, ca^. Kesiouir. S. Merry to wax. Hilaresco,
scis. Deuenir ioyeux. Merely. Amoene, Facere, Hilare, Iucunde, Remiss,
Festiue, Laete, Cum laetitia. Ioyeusement. S. Merit, or to deserve. Mereri,
Co^merere vel Co^mereri, Emereri. Meriter. S. To merit, or well deserve a
thing. Promerior, reris. Meriter and deseruit quelque chose.

Merit, or deserve credit. Fidem mereri. Meriter d' estre creu. S. Merit, or
deserte. Meritum, Virtus, it is. Gratia, ae. foe. ge. Merit. S. Meritorious.
Meritorius, a, um. Meritoire. Call. Merlan, or a dace. Apua, ae. foe. ge.
Merlan. S. Merlyn hawke. Melenetus. * Alietus, Aesalo. Esmerillon. S. Merlyng
fyshe. Merula, ae. foe. ge. Un merle. S. Merueiling, or a wondering. Admiratio,
Amirabilitas. Miraculum, li. n genesis Merueille. S. It is no marvel. Minime
mirum, Nec miru^. Ce n' est point de merueille. S.

To marvel. Miror, raris. Admiror, raris. Affici admiratione, Ponere aliquid
in admiratione. S'esmerueiller. S.

Marvel, as dismayed, or to be astonished. Stupeo, es. Stupesco, scis. Estre
fort estonne and esperdu. S. Et Stupefacio, cis. To cause one to marvel. To
merueile greatly. Demirari, Admirari vehementer. S'esmerueller fort. S.

Meruaylous, or that is worthy of admiration. Mirabilis, Admirandus,
Admirabilis, Mirus, a, um. Mirificus, ca, cum. Merueilleux, ou merueillable. S.
Meruaylous, or causing meruaylous or wonderful tokens, or full of such
meruayles. Prodigiosus, a, um. Admirandus, a, dum. Merueilleux. S. Merueilous,
or wonderful sign or token. Porte^tum, Prodigium, gij. neut. genesis Chose
esmerueillable. S. Et Prodigialis, le. Perteining to such merueile and signs,
or to the occasion of them. Merueylously, or after a merueilous sort. Mirum in
modum, Mirabiliter, Admirabiliter, Mirabilem in modum, Mirum in modum, Mire,
Mirifice. Merueilleusement S. Mesiles disease. Variolae, arum. f. g. Mess of
mea^. Missus, vel ferculum. Mets de viande. Message. Missio, onis. Nuntium,
tij. Nuntius, tij. m. g. Un message. S. Messe^ger. Apostolus, li. Mandatarius,
rij. Nuncius, vel cia, Ambulus, li. Tabellarius, rij. Lator literarum,
Libellio, Stator, Angelus, li. masc. genesis Messagier. S. Messenger between
party, and party. Internuntius, tij. m. g. Qui fait les messages enter deux
parties. Messenger brynging the first tidinges, or the first messenger.
Praenuntius, tij. m. g. Messenger commune for every man. Liburnus. Messenger
that rydeth post. Veredarius, Pegasus, Cursor, soris. m. g. Post. H. Method,
or a brief way to the attaynement of any art. Methodus, di. foe. ge.
Methridatum, a confection like treacle, good against the plague, and poison.
Methridaticum antidocum. Methridat. S. Metal. Metallum, li. n. g. Metal. H.
Metal mixte, whereof two parts is lead, and the other tynne. Tertiatum.*
Metal wrought upon brass. Subaeratus, a, um. Adiect. Persius. Metal sone
molten. Aes ductile. Metal of gold, with the fifte part silver. Electrum,
tri. n. g. Plin. lib. 32. cap. 4.
M. ANTE. I.
MY, Meus, a, um. Mien. S. For my own cause, or mine own sake. Meap^e causa. A
cause du moymesme. S.

Not of my own nature. Non meopte ingenio. Non pas ma propre nature. S.

Lettres of my own hand. Mea manu literae. Cic. Escriptes de ma main. S.

My self. Memet. Moym^sme. S. Midde, or midst. Medium, dij. n. g. Le milieu.
S. Midde place, from the which four ways go. Gruma, ae. f. g. Nonius.
Mids. Medius, a, um. Medioximus, a, um. Moyen. Mids of a city, or town.
Sinus vrbis. Salust. Le milieu de la ville. S. Mids, or paulme of the hand.
Vola, ae. foe. genesis La paulme de la main. S. Mids, or middell part of any
thing. Vmbilicus, ci. m. ge. Le milieu de quelque chose, que ce soit. S.
Middle. Meditullum, i. n. g. Cic. Le milieu de quelque chose que ce soit. Et
Centralis, le. That which is set in the very mids. Middle bridge of the nose.
Interfinium, nij. Isthmus, mi. Intersepime^tum, vel discrimen narium, Imbrex
narium. La taille des narines. H. Middle finger. Digitus medius, Infamis,
Impudicus, Verpus, Famosus. Le plus long doigt. H. Middle, or being in the
mids. Medianus, a, um. Medioximus, a, um. Vt supra. Middle part of the sail
of a ship. Trachelum, li. neut. genesis Midnight. Mesonochion, Mesonoctium,
Intempesta nox, Media nox. La minuict. S. After midnight. A media nocte. De
puis minuict.

Even upon midnight. Nocte super media. Oultre minuict. S.

About midnighte. De media nocte missus equitatus. Sur la minuict. S.

Middrife within the body, deuidinge the bowels from ye vmbles. Phrenes, Septum
transuersum, Disseptum, Diaphragma, atis. n. ge. Vne peau separant les parties
interieures. H. Midwyfe. Obstetrix, cis. La sage femme. Et Obstetrico, cas.
Obstetricor, aris. To do ye midwiues office, or part. Fair l'office de sage
femme. Call. Might, or power. Dinastia, Potentia, Valentia, Validitas,
Vehementia, Vis. Potestas, atis. Puissance, and pouoir. S. Mighty, or
puissaunt. Herculeus, a, um. Potens, it is. Saeuus, a, um. Torosus, a, um.
Valens, it is. Validus, a, um. Robustus, a, um. Fortis, te. Praeualidus, a, um.
Vehemens, it is. om. genesis Fort and puissant. S. Mighty power. Potentia, ae. f. g.
Puissance. S. Mighty to be, or to be able. Valeo, es. Possum, es. Pouoir. S. To
be mighty in body. Corpore valere. Estre fort. S.

To be mighty, and stiff. Bonis lateribus esse. Estre fort and roide. S.

To be so mighty, or strong as an other. Vires alicuius habere. Estre aussi
fort qu'vn autre. S.

Mighty to wax. Valesco, scis. Deuenir fort. S. Mightily. Perfortiter,
Potenter, Valide, Veheme^ter. Puissamment. S. Migrimme, or grief on the one
side of the head. Hemicrania. Douleur de test d'vn cost. H. Milchecowe.
Forda, ae. f. g. Ovid. Milche herted. Lemosus, a, um.* Mild, or gentle.
Intemeratus, a, um. Mitis, e. Benignus, a, um. Clemens, it is. Suauis, ue.
Dulcis, ce. Comis, e. Praedulcis, ce. Lenis, ne. om. g. Doulx. S. Vide Meek,
Gentle. Mild to wax. Exaeuio, is. Mitesco, scis. Mansuesco, cis. Deuenir
doulx. S. Mile. Lapis, Milliarium, Millepassus, us. L'espace de mill pas, vne
demi lieue. Dicitur a mill. etc. quasi spa^ium millepassuum, vel melle
equitum, and sic dictum ceu millenarium. Mensuras viarum nos dicimus milliaria,
Graeci stadia, Galli leugas. Milk. Lac, it is. n. g. Du laict. S. Et Lacteus, a,
um. Of milk, or like milk. De laict. S. A little milk. Exiguitas lactis. Peu
de laict. S.

To live by milk. Victum lacte tolerare. Viure de laict. S.

Butter milk. Lac e quo butyrum sit expressum. Laict esburre. S.

Turning of milk into a crudde. Lactis coagulatio. Caillement du laict. S.

Made of milk, or that brings forth milk. Lactarius, a, um. Qui rend du
lait. Call.

Milk drinker. Galactopota, ae. m. g. Colu. Milk eater. Galactophagus.* Milk
of a cow. Vaccinum lac, vel bubulum. Laict de vache. S. Milk of a camile.
Camelinu^ lac. Laict de chamea^. Milk of a goat. Caprinum lac. Laict de
che^re. S. Milk of a mare. Equinum lac. Laict de i^ment. S. Milk of an ass.
Asininum lac. Laict d'asnesse. S. Milk of an ewe. Ouillum lac. Laict de
brebis. S. Milk of a sow. Suillum lac. Laict de truye. S. Milk of a woman.
Humanum lac, Lac muliebre. Laict de femme. S. Milk payle. Mulctra, ae.
Mulctrum, tri. Mulctrale, lis. n. g. Un traior. S. Milk sower. Oxygala, ae.
Oxygalum, li. n. ge. Laict aigre. S. Milk warm. Tepidu^ lac. Laict qui est
encore chauld Milk turned into curdes. Shiston. * Lac coagulatum. Laict
caille. S. Milken or to milk. Mulgeo, es. Immulgeo, es. Tirer la laict d'vne
mamille. Call. Milk meats, or white meats made of milk. Lacticinia, orum.
Lactantia, tium. n. ge. Laictages, ou toute viande de laict. S. Et Lactarius,
rij. mas. ge. He that makes such meats. Milking. Mulctra, ae. Mulctus, us.
m. genesis Le tirement de laict. S. Mill. Molendinum, ni. * Mola, Pistrilla, ae.
Pistrinum, ni. n. ge. Moulin. H. Et Molaris, re. Molarius, a, um. Et
Molendinarius, a, um. Ang. Pertaining to a mylle, or of a mylle. De moulin. S.
A wind mylle. Mola alata, Pneumatica. Moulin a vent. H.

A hand mylle. Mola trusatilis, versatilis, manuaria. Moulin a main ou a bras.
H.

A water mylle. Hydromyla. Moulin a eau. H.

A horse mylle. Mola asinaria, Machinaria. Moulin a cheuaus. H.

Mill, a certain grain so called. Milium, lij. n. g. Millet. H. Mill for
oil. Trapetes, it is. Trapetum, ti. Mola olearia. Moulin a huile. H. Mill dew,
which blasteth corn and fruit. Rubigo, ginis. Robigo, inis. f. g. Nieble.
Pals. Mill dewed. Rubiginosus, a, um. Vide Blasted. Miller. Molitor, oris. m.
g. Mensnier. S. Milfoyle herb. Supercilium veneris, Achilleon, Millefolia,
Millefolium, Myriophillum, Scopa regia, Stratiotes, Achillea, ae. f. g.
Millefueilles. S. Mill horse. Molarius equus. Mill stone. Mola, ae. f. g. Vne
meule de moulin. S. Mill stone, which is the runner. Catillus, tilli,
Catillum. n. g. Le dessus de moulin. H. Mine, or my. Meus, a, um. Mien. S.
Minced meat. Protrimenta, orum. n. g. Edulia minutim trita, and concisa. Call.
Mind. Animus, Men's, it is. Pensee, entendeme^t. Pals. After the diffinitio^ of
Philosophers, the mind is the chiefest and highest part of the Soul or
spirit of man. Mind pure, and unspotted. Syncera men's. Pensee pure, and
net. S. The mind, or thought of the people. Populi sensus. La pensee du
peuple. S.

Mind fixed. Attentio, onis. f. g. Attention. S. To mind a matter, or to
think again, and again upon some thing. Recogito, as. Penser, and repenser a
quelque chose. S.

To apply his mind, and thought to some thing. Adijcere animum rei alicui,
vel ad rem aliqua^. Appliquer sa pensee, and son coeur a quelque chose. S.

To open his mind, or thought. Aperire se. Descouurir sa pensee. S.

That came into my mind, by and by. Aduolauit ad pectus mihi ea res. Cela me
vient en pensee tout incontinent. S.

To weye in his mind. Peragere omnia secum animo, Cogitare animo secum,
Lustrare animo, Animo ducere, Putare, Cum animo cogitare, Commentari. Penser en
son esprit, en son coeur, and en soy mesme. S.

Mindful. Cogitabundus. Memor, ris. com. gener. Memoratif. Call Mine. Fodina,
ae. f. g. Vne mine. S. Mine of gold. Aurifodina, Aurarium metallum. Mine d'
or, miniere d' or. H. Mine of silver. Argenti fodina, Argentarium metallum.
Miniere d'argent. H. Mine of vermilion, or senople. Miniaria, ae. foe. genesis Vne
mine de vermillon. S. Et miniarius, a, um. Of vermilion, or senople. De
vermillon. S. Miners. Metallici, little. Metallarij, orum. m. g. Tueurs de
metaux. S. Mingle, or to myxte. Misceo, es. Turbo, as. Mesler. S. To mingle
water with wine. Miscere aquam vino. Mesler de l'aue par mi la vin. S.

To mingle the art of Oratorie with the Civil law. Assumere copiam dicendi
cum iure civilly. Mesler l'arte d'oratorie auec le droict civil. S.

To mingle one among an other. Admiscere, Confundere, Commiscere, Immiscere,
Intercalare, Intermiscere, Permiscere. Mesler l' un parmi l' autre. S.

To mingle among others. Inter alios interijcere. Mesler parmi les autres. S.

Mingle, mangle. Promiscuus, a, um. Pesle mesle. Mingle spice with wine.
Concinnare vinum. Plin. Mingle with chafe. Acero, as. Paleis inficere. Call.
Mingled, or mixed. Mistus, a, u^. Mixtus, a, um. Admistus, a, um. Mesle. S.
Mingled of diverse things. Miscellus, a, um. Miscellaneus, a, um. Mesle de
diuerses chooses. S. Mingled among others. Dilutus, a, um. Mesle parmi d'autres.
S. Mingled among sweet water. Permistus dulci aqua. Mesle parmi de l'eaue
doulce. S. Mingling. Admistio, onis. Permistio, onis. Mistura, ae. Temperatio,
onis. f. g. Meslange. S. A mingling of many things. Cinnus, Farrago,
Miscellanea, orum. n. g. Vne meslange de beaucoup de chooses. S.

Minion, trymme, or feate. Bellus, a, um. Co^cinnus, a, um. Mignon. S. Minishe.
Contrunco, as. Decedo, is. Delibo, as. Diminuo, is. Extenuo, as. Eleuo, as.
Leuo, as. Minuo, is. Mutilo, as. Attenuo, as. Diminuo, is. Imminuo, is.
Amoindrir. S. To minishe ye riches or goods of every citezin. Extenuare ce^sus
cuiusque ciuis. Amoindrir la cheuance de chasque citeyen. S.

To minishe the tributes. Vectigalia temperare. Amoindrir les tributes. S.

Minishe, or to abate the price of vytayles. Leuare annonam. Liu, Fair
abbaisser le pris des viures. S. Minished. Minutus, a, um. Amoindri. Call.
Minishing. Diminutio, onis. Extenuatio, onis. Imminutio, onis. Attenuatio,
onis. foe. genesis Amoindrissement. S. Minister. Minister, tri. mas. g. Ministre.
Call. Minister attending upon a captain. Optio, onis. mas. genesis Quem decurio,
vel centurio optat sibi rerum priuatarum ministrum, quo facilius obeat officia
publica. Fest. Ministry. Ministerium, rij. n. ge. Ministere. Call. Ministers in
churches, or temples. Hieroduli, orum. mas. genesis Sacrorum ministri. Call.
Ministration. Ministratio, onis. foe. ge. To minister. Ministro, as. Sufficio,
cis. Suggero, is. Ministrer. S.

Minister medicines. Potiono, as. Sueton. Potionem praebeo. Call. Minister an
oath. Praeire iuramentu^, Obligare sacramento, Periculo iusiurandi onerare.
Charger auec un serment. S. Minister punishemente, or torments. Adhibere
quaestionem. Cic. Minister, or to give some thing to one. Suppedito, as, aui.
Fournir, and bailler a aucun de quelque chose. S. Minority, or nonage.
Pupillaris aetas. Minster. Monasterium, rij. n. g. Monstier. Pals. Minstrell.
Auloedus, di. Choraulis, Choraula, Choraules. lae. m. g. Tibicen, inis.
Auletes, tae. m. genesis Menestrier. S. Minstrell woman. Tibicina, ae. foe. ge.
Mint an herb. Menta, ae. f. g. Meant. H. Mentastru^, Is the wild mynte. Mente
sauuage. H. Minute, or q, which is half a farthing. Minutum, ti. neut. genesis
Minute to write a letter by. Dictatum, ti. n. ge.* Miracle. Miraculum, Signum,
Thauma, it is. neut. g. Miracle. Call. Mircke. Obscurus, a, um. Tenebrosus, a, um.
Vide Dark. Mire, or dyrte. Coenum, ni. n. ge. Bourbier. S. Mire drumell.
Anactoculus. li.* Miery, dyrty, or full of miere, or dyrte. Coenosus, sa, sum.
Plein de bourbe. S. Mirie place. Ablutes, Ablutum. * Mirre. Myrrha, ae. foe.
ge. Mirrhe. Call. Myrrheus, a, um. Mirrhinus, a, um. Of myrre. De mirrhe. Call.
Mirroure, or glass. Speculum, li. n. g. Miroir. Call. Mirthe, or joy.
Amoenitas. Festiuitas, Gaudium, Hilaritas, Iocus, Iucunditas, Laetitia,
Lubentia, ae. Sal, lis. m. g. Gayete, ou ioyeusete. S. Mirthe to make. Vide
Merry to make. Myrtle tree. Myrtus. Cato makes three kinds of myrtle. Myrtus
Candida, Myrtus nigra, and Myrtus coniugalis. Murte. S. Myrteus, a, um. and
Myrtinus, na, number. Of myrte. Du mart. S. Mischaunce. Infortunium, nij. neut.
g. Malencontre. Mischaunce, or to chance vnluckelye. Male euenire, Male
accidere. Male cadere, vel cedere. Mescheoir. S. Mischief, or a mischievous
deed. Exitium, Flagitium, tij. Malu^, li. Pernicies, ei. Scelus, eris.
Flagitium, tij. Iniquitas, atis. Nefas. Meschief. Pals. Mischief being close,
or secret. Vlcus, ceris. n. ge. Mischief light upon thee. Vae, Vaeh.
Interiect. Mischievous. Facinorosus, a, um. Exitialis, le. Flagitiosus, a, um.
Impius, a, um. Iniquus, a, um. Malus, a, um. Maleficus, a, um. Nefandus,
Nefarius, a, um. Perniciosus, a, u^. Perniciabilis, le. Peruersus, a, um.
Profanus, a, um. Sceleratus, Scelerosus, Scelestus, a, um. Improbus, a, um.
Impurus, a, um. Nequam, Perditus, a, u^. Teter, a, u^. Meschant. Mischievous
act. Maleficium, Malefice^tia, ae. Facinus, oris, n. ge. As to excuse a
mischievous, or wicked deed. Leuare facinus alicuius. Excuser quelque meschant
faict. S. A very mischievous fellow. Deterrimus homo. Fort meschant. S.

More mischievous then all the rest. Scelere ante alios immanior omnes. Plus
meschant que tous les autres. S.

A mischievous case. Scelestum facinus, Indignum facinus. Un meschant cas. S.

To commit a mischievous deed. Facinus inse suscipere, Partrare facinus.
Commettre quelque meschant faict. S.

Mischieuously. Impie, Inique, Male, Malefice, Perniciter, Perverse, Scelerate,
Scelerose, Sceleste, Nequiter, Flagitiose, Illiberaliter, Improbe, Impure,
Indigne, Perdite. Meschamment. S. Mischieuousnes. Facinus illiberale,
Improbitas cordis humani, Impuritas, Indignitas, Nequitia, Scelus, Vitium,
Flagitium, tij. n. g. Meschancete. S. This is thy mischieuousnes, and vilanye.
Flagitium tuum est. C' est ta meschancete, and vilenie. S.

Great mischieuousnes. Perdita nequitia. Grande meschancete. S.

Miscreante, or infidele. Atheos, they. m. ge. Infidus, a, um. Miscreant,
Infidele. S. Misdoubte. Vide Mistruste. Miselden or miselto, which grows
upon trees. Viscum, Viscum quercinum. Guy. H. Miser, or wretched man. Miser,
ra, rum. Malheureux. Miserable, or full of misery. Calamitosus, a, um.
Indignus, a, um. Miserandus, a, um. Aerumnosus, a, um. Miserabilis, le. Miser,
a, um. Miserable. S. So miserable as I. Miser aeque atque ego. Aussi miserable
que moy. S.

Is there any man in the world so miserable? An quisquam gentium est aeque
miser? ^a il homme du monde aussi miserable? S.

A miserable, and an unlucky thing. Miserum, Rem miseram. Chose miserable, and
malheureuse. S.

Miserably. Calamitose, Misere, Miseriter, Miserabiliter. Miserablement. S.
They died myserabely. Indignissime interierunt. Ils moururent miserablement. S.

He loves her miserabely. Eam misere amat. L' aim miserablement. S.

Misery. Miseria, ae. Miseritudo, Aerumna, ae. foe. ge. Misere. S. It is a
great mysery to be very beautiful. Nimia est miseria pulchrum esse hominem
nimis. C'est grande misere d'estre trop heau. S.

To deliver him self out of mysery. Eripere se a miseria. Se deliurer de
misere. S.

To bring one to misery. Aliquem ad miseriam redigere. Mettre aucun en misere.
S.

To be in misery. Miseria^ capere. Estre en misere. S

Misfashioned, or which has no form or fashion. Ineffigiatus, a, um. Qui n'
a nulle form ou sembla^ce. Misfortune. Vide Mischaunce. Mishappe. Infortunium,
ij. n. g. Mal' encontre. S. Mishappen. Vide Mischaunce. Misheare. Obaudio, is.
Mislyken in the body. Atrophia laborare, vel tabe laborare. Misliking in the
body, or a sickness, whereby a body does wear away. Tabes, is. foe. g. Vne
malady par la quelle vne person deuient enchartre. S. Dat tabo in sexto casu,
secundu^ Seruiu^, et Virg. Et Tabidus, a, um. He that is in a mislyke, or that
which is corrupted. Corrumpu. S. Misname. Agnomino, as.* Misproporcioned.
Ineffigiatus, a, um. Vt supra. To misreporte of an other. Aspergere maculis
vitam alicuius. Cic. Mesdire de la vie d'autrui. S.

Mist, or fogge. Brumae, arum. Nebulae, arum. Caligines, number. f. g. Brouillers,
and brouer d'hyuer. S. Mistake an opinion. Detorquere opinionem. Mistaught,
rude, or rusticall. Rusticus. a, u^. Inurbanus, a, u^. Rudis, de. Agrestis, te.
Rustault. S. Mystery. Mysterium, rij. n. g. Mystere. Pals. Mystical.
Mysticus, a, um. Typicus, a, um. Mistique. Mistically. Typice. Mistrusted.
Diffisus, a, um. Cic. To mistrust. Diffido, is. Se desfier. S.

To mistrust his soldiers. Rebus suis diffidere. Se desfier de ses gens de
guerre. S.

Mistrusting. Diffidentia, ae. foe. g. Desfiance, ou diffidence. S.
Mistrusting, or which does mistruste, and despair. Diffidens, it is. om. genesis
Qui se desfie, and desespere. S. Mistrusting his right, or knowing that he has
a wrongful, and naughty cause. Infirmitatis sui iuris co^scius. Se desfiant de
son droict, scaschant auoir tort, and mauuaise cause. S. Mistrusting of mind.
Zelotypus. m. g. Vide Ielous. Mistrusting person. Zelotes, it is. m. ge.
Mistrustingly, or with mistruste. Diffidenter, Dubitanter. Auec desfiance. S.
Misuse. Abutor, eris. Abuser. S. To misuse a thing. Abuti re aliqua. Abuser de
quelque chose. S.

To misuse, disceaue, or beguile one. Fallere aliquem, Falsum habere aliquem,
Verba dare alicui, Fucum alicui facere, Frustrari aliquem, Imponere alicui,
Offundere errorem alicui, Frustrare aliquem, Frustrationem in aliquem inijcere,
Frustrationes alicui dare. Abuser aucun, and le tromper.

To abuse one, and to mock him. Aliquem prodere, Deludere, Eludere. Abuser
aucun, and se mocquer de luy. S.

Misused. Abusiuus, a, um. Abusus, a, um. Abuse. S. Misusing. Abusio, onis.
Abusus, us. m. g. Abus. Call. Miter. Apex, cis. Mitra, ae. f. g. Mitre. S. And a
little mitre. Mitella, ae. f. g. Vne petite mitre. S. Miterd, or having on a
mitre. Mitrophorus, a, um. Mitellatus, a, um. Mitre. S. Mite, or wyuel, a little
worm which eatethe corn. Curculio, onis. m. g. Calande, chare^son,
chattepeleuse. Mitigate, or to appease. Compesco, scis. Leuo, as. Mitigo, as.
Mulceo, es, si. Placo, as. Permulceo, es. Paco, as. Remolesco, scis. Sedo, as.
Appaiser. S. To mitigate, pacify, or quiet one. Pacare, Complacare, Lenire,
Mitigare, Pacificare, Placare, Propitiare, Propitiari, Sedare, Resedare,
Tranquillare, Mulcere alique^, Propitiu^ alique^ facere, Conciliatum alicuius
animu^ reddere, Sedatum afferre, Incensum restinguere, Tranquillu^ ex irato
facere. Appaiser, and addoulcir aucun. S.

To mitigate, and pacify the wrath of God. Ad auerruncanda^ iram dei. Ad iram
dei placandam. Pour appaiser l'ire de dieu.

Mitigated, or appeased. Placabilis, le. Pacatus, a, um. Pacificatus, a, um.
Sedatus, a, um. Appaise. S. They are mitigated, or appeased toward me.
Placatis hijs vtor. Ils sont appaisez enuers moy. S.

Mitigatour, or an appeasour. Pacator, ris. Pacificator, oris. m. genesis
Appaiseur. S. Mitigating, or an appeasing. Sedatio, onis. Placatio, onis.
Pacificatio, onis. f. g. Appaisement. S. Mitigating, or an appeasing of the
wrath of God by sacrifice, or otherwise. Procuratio, onis. Expiatio, onis.
Placamentum, ti. n. g. Appaisement de l' ire de dieu par sacrifice, ou
autrement. S. Mittens, or long gloves. Manicae hybernae, Chirothecae hybernae.
Mitaines. S. Mixell, or dungehyll. Fimetum, ti. Sterquilinium, nij. n. g.
Fumier. S. Mixed, or to mingle. Admisceo, sces. Commisceo, es. Immisceo, es.
Ingero, ris. Misceo, es. Promisceo, sces. Mesler. S. Vide Mingle. Mixed
altogether, or one with an other. Permisceo, es. Mesler l'vn parmi l'autre. S.
Mixed or mixted. Admistus, a, um. Permistus, a, um. Mistus, a, um. Mixtus, a,
um. Mesle. S. To mixte familiarity with gravity. Comitatem seueritate
aspergere, Aspergere grauitati comitatem. Cic.

Mixed spice with wine. Concinnare vinum. Plin. Mixed of color, or chaungeable.
Versicolorius, a, u^. Versicolor, oris. om. genesis De diuerses couleurs, de
couleur changeant. S. Mixed, or covered with brass. Aeratus, a, um. Couuert
d'arain S. Mixed, or made of honey. Mellitus, a, um. Mulsus, a, u^. Fait de miel.
S. Mixed with straw, chafe, or hay, as mortar is. Acero, as. Paleis inficere.
Call. Mixte with brass vnderneeth. Subaero, as. Mixte, or made of wax.
Cerosus, a, um. Fait de cire. Call. Mixted. Admistus, a, um. Promiscuus, a, um.
Vt supra. Mixting. Admistio, onis. Admistura, ae. Permistio, onis. Mistura, ae.
Temperatio, onis. foem. gener. Meslange. S. Mixtly, or myngly. Admiste,
Promiscue. Pesle, mesle. Call. Mixture of many and diverse things. Miscellanea,
orum. Farrago, nis. Cinnus, ni. m. g. Meslange de plusieurs chooses. Call.
M. ANTE. O.
MO. Plures, ria, ra, om. ge. vt Animalia plura sunt volatilia, quam reptilia.
H. Mo living creatures fly, then creep. Mobilitie, or inconstancy.
Mobilitas, tatis. foe. genesis Inconstantia, tiae. foe. ge. Mobilite. S. Mocion,
or persuasion. Suasio, onis. f. g. Suasion. Mock. Deridiculum, li. Cauilla,
ae. Cauillum, li. Derisus, us. Ludibrium, brij. Obrisio, onis. Ridiculum, li.
Sanna, ae. Suggillatio, nis. Irrisio, onis. Irrisus, sus. Nasus, si. m. g.
Mocquerie. S. Mock. Cauillo, as. Deludo, is. Derideo, es. Aedere ludibriu^,
Illudo, is. Ludo, is, si. Obrideo, es. Subsanno, as. Suggillo, as. Cauillor,
aris. Deridere alique^, Ludibrio habere, Ludibrio laedere, Frustra aliquem
habere, Ludificor, aris. Ludos aliquem facere, Naso suspendere aliquem, Tangere
aliquem. Ridere. Se mocquer de quelqu'vn. S. To mock, and beguile one. Os
alicui sublinire. Se mocquer d'aucun, and le tromper. S.

They mock us. Nos fabulae sumus, In ridiculo sumus. On se mocque de nous. S.

Every one mockes him. Est derisui omnibus. Chascun se mocque de luy.

I cannot abide, or suffer, either to be mocked, or beaten. Neque ridiculus
esse, neque plagas pati possum. Ie ne puis endurer qu'on se mocque de moy, ne
qu'on me batte. S.

Mock or trifle. Agere nugas. Mock with the mouth by mowyng. Os distorquere,
vel ducere. Ovid. Mocked. Derisus, a, um. Illusus, a, um. (vt sibi illusum
fuisse) Subsannatus, a, um. Suggillatus, a, u^. Mocque. S. Mocked to be, or
slouted. Caudam trahere, Irrisui esse. In ridiculo haberi, Ludibrio esse
alicui, In vrbanitatem facetosam hominum incurrere. Estre mocque. S. Mocker.
Derisor, ris. Nasutus, Planus, Subsannator, Suggillator, Irrisor, oris.
Cauillator, oris. m. g. Mocqueur. S. Mocking. Ironia, Subsannatio, onis. foe.
ge. Mocking stock. Ludibrium, ij. Ridiculum, li. n. g. Mocking stock, or
whom every body laugheth at or mocketh. Ridiculus, a, um. Ridiculosus, a, u^.
De qui on se rit, de qui on se mocque. S. Mockingly, or by mocking. Ironice,
Nasute, Ridicule, Ridiculose, Subridiculose, Subridicule. Par mocquerie. S.
Modder wenche, or gyrle. Pupa, ae. f. g. Vne fillette. S. Moderate. Mediocris,
e. Moderatus, Modicus, a, u^. Temperans, it is. om. ge. Modere. S. To moderate.
Moderor, aris. Tempero, as. Modero, as. Moderer. S.

To moderate the tributes. Vectigalia temperare. Moderer les tributz. S.

To moderate the affections. Temperare animis. Moderer les affectious. S.

To moderate him self. Cohibere se. Se moderer.

To be very moderate, and constant. Pollere moderatione, and co^stantia. Estre
fort modere, and constant.

To be moderate in his love. In amore temperare. Estre modere en ses amors. S.

Moderation. Temperamentum, Modus, Moderatio, onis. Temperantia, ae. foe. g.
Moderation. S. Moderation of living, or contentation with a little. Frugalitas,
it is. foe. ge. Contentement de peu. S. Moderation in expense, or sparing.
Persimonia, ae. foe. g. Espargne. S. Moderately. Aequanimiter, Frugaliter,
Leniter, Modice, Modeste, Temperate, Temperanter, Moderate. Modereement. S. To
bear, or suffer moderatly. Modice far dolorem. Porter modereement. S.

Moderator, or one that doothe moderate. Moderator, toris. mas. genesis
Moderateur. S. Et Moderatrix, tricis. foem. gener. She that keeps a mean, or
does moderate. Moderatrice. S. Modest. Modestus, a, um. Modeste. S. Very
modest. Permodestus, a, um. Fort modeste. S.

Modestly. Modeste. Modestement. S. Modesty. Modestia, ae. foe. ge. Modesty.
Call. Modulation, or measure of music. Modulamen, inis. Modulatio, onis. foe.
ge. Mesure de music. Modwall a bird which destroys bees. Apiastra, ae,
foe. g. Mezenge. S. Moist. Humidus, a, u^. Madidus, a, um. Succidus, a, u^.
Vdus, a, u^. Vuidus, a, u^. Humectus, a, u^. Humide. S. Moist continually, as
with steeping in water. Vliginosus, a, um. Tousiours moite, and humide. S.
Which is moiste within. Vuidus, a, um. Qui est moite and humide par dedens. S.

A moiste, and mustie place. Humectus locus. Lieu moite, and relant.

Moist with watering. Irriguus, a, um. Arrouse. S. Moist, or to make moist.
Humecto, as. Madefacio, cis. Madido, as. Madifico, as. Ramoitir. S. Moist to
be. Humeo, es. Madefio, Madesco, scis. Madeo, es. Estre moite, and humide. S.
Moist to be much. Permadesco, scis. Vide Weat. Moist to wax. Humesco,
Madesco, cis. Humeo, es. Deuenir humide. S. Moistnes. Humor, ris. Succus, ci.
Mador, oris. m. g. Moiteur. S. Moistnes of dunge, or dunge hill. Fratellum.*
Moisture natural of the ground. Vligo, inis. f. g. Naturelle moiteur de la
terre. S. Moitie, or half part. Coaequa pars, Media pars, Medietas, tatis.
foe. genesis La moitie. S. Molday, or terement day. Silicernium, nij. n. ge. It is
rather the feast of a burial or funeral. Funebre conuiuium, quod senibus
exhibetur. Non. Molein herb. Blattaria. Plin. Moleste, or to trouble. Infesto,
as. Molesto, as. Inquieto, as. Molestiam exhibere, Vrgeo, es. Negotium
facessere. Molester. Call. Molet fyshe. Vide Mullet. Molin, or lungwort herb.
Verbascum, Lucumbra, Lucernalis herba, Candela regia, Candelaria, Tapsus
barbatus. Bouillon. H. Molle. Talpa, ae. Taulpe. H. Molletaker. Talpicidus.*
Mollify. Vide Mitigate. Molten. Fusus, a, um. Fondu. S. Molte, or to melte.
Eliquo, as. Fundo, is. Liquefacio, cis. Fondre. S. To melte, or melte away, to
consume. Liqui, Liquere, Liquescere, Colliquescere, Eliquescere. Se fondre. S.
Vide Melte.

Molteable, or that which is molten. Fusilis, le. om. genesis Qui est fondu. S.
Moment. Articulus, li. m. genesis Momen, inis. neu. genesis Momentum, ti. neut. genesis
Un moment. S. Et Momentaneus, ea, eum. Of a momentes space, or during but a
moment, or short time. Et Momentarius, a, um. Done or made in a moment, or
short time. Ce qui se fait en un moment. Call. A moment is the. 60. part of an
hour, or the least part of time, the smalest or vilest portion or value of
any thing, uneath able to be said or spoken. Monarche, or prince ruling sole,
or over all. Monarcha, ae. m. g. Monarque. S. Monarchy, or rule of a monarche.
Monarchia, ae. f. ge. Monarchy. S. Monastery, or place, where men live in
commune. Coenobium, bij. Monasterium, rij. n. ge. Monastere ou vne comunaute de
vie. S. Moncke corn, or big barley. Trimestre hordeu^. Month. Mensis, is. m.
g. Mois. S. And of the space of a month, pertaining to a month, or duringe
one month. Menstruus, a, um. D'vn mois. S. That which is done every month.
Menstrualis, le. om. ge. Qui se fait par chascun mois. S. Month and a half.
Sesquimensis, sis. m. g. Un mois and demi. S. Monthly. Mensurnus, a, um.
Author. ad Her. Mongrell, or limmer a dog. Hybryda, Hybris, dis. foe. ge.
Plin. Monckey. Cercopithecus. Marmot. H. Money. Aes, ris. Aeruga, ae. (Aput
Horat. and Iuuenal.) Moneta, ae. Numisma, it is. Nummus, mi. Pecunia, ae. Numus.
Monnoye. H. Et Monetalis, le. Numarius, a, um. Pertaining to money, or of
money. De monnoye. Call. Et Numulus, li. diminut. Ang. A little coin of money.
Petite monnoye. Ca. Et Numosus, a, um. Pecuniosus, a, um. Full of money.
Pecunieux. S. Money bag. Sparteum, i. n. genesis Spartea dicuntur receptacula
numorum, quae varijs nominibus appellata fuere, vt Sacci, Sacculi, Saccelli,
Crumenae, Manticae, and Marsupia. Call. Money board, or table. Trapeza, ae, f. g.
Comptoir. etc. Money borrowed. Aes alienum. Cic. Money borrowed in gaming. Aes
circumforaneu^.* Clipped money. Moneta accisa, arrosa. Monnoye rongnee. H.

Money, or coin of gold, or silver. Stips, pis. Stipes, pis. f. g. Monnoye
d'or, ou d'argent. S. Money, called pressed money. Optio, onis. m. g.*. Money
carried over sea. Traiectitia pecunia. Money coined. Conflata pecunia. Money
counterfayted, or that is not lawefull, and current. Moneta adulterina,
improba. Monnoye contrefaicte, de mauuais alloy, faulse piece d'or, ou
d'argent. H. Money current, or good and lawefull money. Moneta proba. Monney,
ou argent and or de bon alloy H. Money delivered to one, to be paid to an
other. Attributa pecunia. Cic. Money taken upon intereste, or usury. Conducta
pecunia, Aes circumforaneum. Argent prius a interest ou usure. H. Money
exchaunged in banque. Collibus.* Money gathered, or made. Coacta pecunia. Plin.
Argent faict. S. Money given to beggars, crauers, or workmen. Stips, is.
Stipes, pis. f. g. Pecunia, quae mendicis porrigebatur ad vitae sustentationem.
Call. Money having in custody, or great richesse, and abondance of money.
Numatio, onis. foe. g. Richesse d'argent, abondance d'argent, and deniers. Call.
Money keeper, or one given to money. Numarius, rij. m. g. Adonne a l'argent.
Call. Money maker. Monetarius, rij. m. g. Un monnoyeur. S To forge, or coin
money. Argentum signare, Ferite pecunias. Monnoyer, ou forger monnoyes. S.

Money coined. Argentum signatum. Arge^t mo^noye. Money new coined. Asper
nummus. Argent monnoye nouuellement. Money numbered. Era, ae. f. ge. Plin.
Sometime it signifeth ye note, or mark in money, whereby the value is known:
Sometime an Image in metalle. Money or debt, which an other man owes to me,
called a credebt. Aes nostrum, Creditum ti. n g. Vne debte qui nous est deue,
vne creance. S. Money paid for carriage, or hyre of any thing. Vectura, ae. foe.
ge. Caesar. Money, or salarie paid for fery, or fraighte over a water. Naulum,
li. n. g. Le salaire qu'on baille pour estre pass l'eaue. S. Money ready, or
present money. Aes, vel argentum praesentaneum, Praesentarium argentum, Pecunia
numerata Argent comptant. S. Money tellers. Pecuniae, vel argenti numeratores.
Monied man, or penny father. Pecuniosus, a, um. Praemiosus, a, um. Pecunieux. S.
Mongerell, a curre. Canis hybris, vel Hybryda, ex venatico and gregario natus.
H. Monyshe, or to warn. Moneo, es. Admoneo, es. Commoneo, es. Commonefacio,
cis. Emoneo, es. Praecipio, is. Admonnester. S. Monyshe before, or first.
Praemoneo, es. Admonnester deuant. S. Monishe somewhat, or to warn a little.
Submoneo, es. Admonnester aucunement. S. Monished, or warned. Monitus, a, um.
Commonitus, a, um. Admonitus, a, um. Commonefactus, a, um. Admonneste. S.
Monition, or warning. Monitum, ti. Monitio, onis. Admonitio, onis. foe. ge.
Admonition. S. He that gives monition, or warning. Monitor, oris. Admonitor,
is. m. g. Admonnesteur. S.

Monster. Bellua, ae. Monstrum, Portentum, tenti. Ostentum, ti. n. g. Un
monstre. S. Monstrous. Monstrificus, a, um. Monstruosus, a, um. Belluosus, a,
um. Portentosus, a, um. Monstrueux. S. Monstrous, or wonderful sign or
token, signifying either good or ill. Portentum, ti. Prodigium, ij. n. g. Un
sign de quelque bone heur, ou mal heur, chose esmerueillable. S. Et
Portentosus, a, um. Prodigiosus, a, um. Full of such wonderful signs, and
tokens, which signifies any mischaunce to come, meruaylous. Qui signify
quelque malencontre aduenir, merueilleux. S. Monument of ye dead, a sepulcher,
grave, or tomb. Cenotaphium, Monume^tum, Titulus, li. Sepulchrum, chri.
Sepultura, rae. Tumulus, li. Bustum, ti. neut. ge. Sepulcher. H. Monumentum, Is
also a remembrance of any notable act. Moole, or freeken in the face. Naeuus,
ui. Macula, ae. foe. g. Tache, marque, macule. H. Moon. Diana, Luna, Phoebe,
es. f. g. La lune. S. Moon when she changes, or new moon, or before she
does appear. Neomenia, Luna intermestris, vel intermenstrua, Interlunium,
Lunae silentium, Luna silens, Lunae coitus, Lunae and solis concursus, Luna
tacita, Intermenstruum, Synodica, Luna noua, Coniunctio lunae. Conionction de
la lune. H. Moon when she is full, or the full moon. Luna plena, Plenilunium,
nij. Panselenon. Pleine lune. Moore, fenne, or marishe. Palustrum, Palus, dis.
f. g. Un marez, ou marescage. S. That is of a moore or maris. Paluster, haec
palustris, and hoc palustre. Qui est de marez, ou marescage

Me thought that I saw so many moors, or fennes. Occurrebant oculis tot
paludes. Il me sembloit que ie voyoye tant de marescages. S.

A moorishe, or fenny place. Locus palustris. Lieu marescageux. S.

Moors. Mauri, orum. m. g. Moote, or to exercise him self in pleading feigned
causes. Declamo, as. Declamer, ou s'exerciter a plaider causes fainctes a
plaisir. S. Moote, or a mooting. Declamatio, onis. foem. genesis Declamation. S.
Mooter. Declamator, ris. m. g. Declamateur. S. Moote hall. Aula declamatoria.
Mooting, or proposing arguments. Declamatio, onis. foe. g. Declamation. S. Et
Declamatorius, a, u^. Of mooting. De declamation. S. Declamatio est argumentum
fictum quod exercendae dictionis gratia tractatur in vtranque partem,
aliquoties cum ficto themate. Moral. Ethicus, a, um. Moral. S. The moral
sense of a fable. Epimythium, thij. n. g. Le sens moral d' vne fable. S.

Moral, or pertaining to manners. Moralis, le. om. genesis Moral. Appartenant aux
meurs. S. More. Plus, ris. n. g. Plus. S. Somewhat more. Plusculus, a, um. Un
peu plus. S

Let us come more near. Propius accedamus. Approchons plus pres. S.

So much that there could be no more. Vt nihil possit vltra. Tellement qu'il
n'est possible de plus. S.

What will thou more? Quid vis amplius? Que veux tu plus, ou d'auantage? S.

What demand ye more? Quid amplius vultis? Que demandezvous plus?

More. Magis, Plus, Vltra, Amplius. Plus. S. Much more. Multo magis. Beaucoup
plus. S.

I love him more then my self. Ante me illum diligo. Ie l'aime plus que moy.

More then all the rest. Singulariter, Praeter alios. Plus que tous les
autres. S. More, and more. Magis magisque, Magis ac magis. De plus en plus. S.
More authority. Plus authoritatis. More largely. Amplius. Aduerb. Plus
largement. More, or less. Plus aut minus. Plus ou moins. S. More over. Porro
autem, Praeter haec, Quinetiam, Secundo loco. Adeo, Adhaec, Amplius, Dehinc,
Dein, Etiam, Insuper, Praeterea, Praeterquam, Quin, Scilicer, Super haec,
Vltra. En oultre, oultre plus. S. More part of the people. Pars bona, Magna
pars. La plus party de gens. S. More part of my life. Plurimum aetatis. More
then enough. Superfluus, a, um. Superuacaneus, a, um. Superuacuus, a, um.
Superflu. Call. More then enough. Satis superque. Aduerb. Assez and plus qu'
assez. S. More, is the sign of the comparatiue degree, which fourmed
according to the rules of comparison, may be more easily tried out then written
here, as thus, Black, whose comparatiue is Blacker, or More black White,
whyter, or More white. etc. Niger, Nigrior, Albus, Albior.

Morgage, or to lay to gage. Oppignerare, Pignerare, Pignori dare, Ponere,
obligare, Opponere. Engager, bailler en gage. S. To hold any land, or
enheritage by morgage. Fiduciaria fundi possessio. Tenir quelque heritage par
engagement. S.

Heritage holden by morgage. Fiducia. Bud. Heritage tenu par engagement. S.

Morice dance. Pyrricha saltatio. H. Pyrricha, ae. Pyrriche, es. Vne sort de
danse de morisque, que Pyrrhus inuenta. S. Morice dauncer. Pyrricharius, ij.
Qui pyrricham saltat. Danseur de morisque ou enter les espees. H. Morice pyke.
Contus, ti. Lancea, ae. Hasta, ae. foe. g. Pique. Pals. Morning. Aurora, ae.
Matutina, ae. Tempus matutinum, Mane, Matutinum, ni. n. g. Le Matin. S.
Matutinus, a, um. Of the morning. Du matin, matineux. S. Morning early. Mane.
Le matin, au matin. S. Morrow, or of to morrow. Crastinus, a, um. De demain. S.
To morrow. Cras, Crastino. Aduerb. Demain. S.

If I find the here to morrow. Si te secundo lumine hic offendero. Si ie te
rencontre demain ici. S

The next day after to morrow. Pere^dinus dies, Perendino die, In pere^dinum,
Perendie. Le iour d'apres de main. S.

Morphie, a staininge of the skin with spots. Alphos, Vtiligo, inis.
Morphea, ae. f. ge. Vne tache sur le corpse, visage, ou autre part. Call.
Morsel. Bolus, li. Buccea, ae. Offa, ae. Morceau. H. Et Buccella, ae. Offella,
ae. dimin. inde Ang. A little or small morsel. Petit morceau. Call. Morsel by
morsel, or in morselles. Offatim. aduer. Morsel, or a bitte, or mouthfull.
Buccea, Buccella. Morceau, bouchee. H. Mortal. Capitalis, le, Fatalis, le.
Feralis, le. Lethalis, Mortalis, Funestus, a, um. Peremptorius, a, u^. Mortel,
subject a la mort. S. A mortal grief, or disease. Morbus capitalis. Malady
mortelle. S.

Mortal hatred. Capitale odium. Haine mortelle. S. Fleashly desire, or carnal
appetie, is a mortal plague. Capitalis pestis voluptas corporis. Peste
mortelle. S.

Mortal enemy. Acerrimus inimicus, Capitalis aduersarius. Cic. Ennimi mortel.
S. Mortal men. Mortales, lium. Mas. genesis Les hommes mortels. S. We are all
mortal. Multa humanitus accidu^t. Nous sommes tous mortels. S.

Mortal war. Superbum bellum. Bellum internecinum. Liu. Guerre mortelle. S.
Mortally. Capitaliter, Lethaliter, Mortifere. Mortellement. S. Mortality, or
death of many people. Atra lues, Strages, is. foe. ge. Multitude de gens tuez.
S. Mortar black, or white. Caementum, ti. Bocaille. Et Caementitius, a, um.
Ang. Made of mortar Fait de bocaille. S. Wall made of mortar. Murus
caementitius. Mur faict de bocaille. S.

Mortar, or claye, myxte with hay or chafe. Aceratum, ti. neutr. ge. Mortar
maker, or dawber. Caementarius, rij. m. g. Mortar to braye, or grind in.
Moletrina, ae. Mortarium, ij. Mortariolum, li. Pila, ae. f. g. Mortier. H.
Mortar, wherein barley is brayded. Ptisanarium. rij. neut. genesis Mortgauge.
Fiduciaria mancipatio, aut venditio. Mortgauge land. Fundum pignori dare,
Deponere, vel ponere. Engager. S. Vide Morgage. Mortify. Mortifico, as.
Nebriss. Mortifier. Pals. Mortify the flesh. Spurcam suppeditare libidine^.
Mortise. Cumphus, phi. Incastratura, ae.* Cauum, ui. n. g. La mortaise. H.
Mortised. Impetritus, a, um. Plaut. Mosell for cattle that gnawe spring.
Fiscella, ae. foem. genesis Colum. Mosye young hears that grow about the privy
parts, in men at fourtene, in women at twelve years. Pubes, bis. Le poil qui
vient es parties honteuses, aux masles a quatorze ans, aux femelles a douze.
Mosye to be. Pubeo, es. Pupesco, scis. Mosines of the face or visage, which is
with yo^ge hear, or the first bearde. Lanugo, inis. Iulus, li. Primiere barbe.
S. Mosines of ye outwart part of fruit. Iulus, li. Lanugo, ginis. foe. ge. La
mousse des fruicts. Moss of trees. Muscus, sci. Bryon. La mousse des arbres.
S. Moss growing upon rocks. Vide Slawke. To pluck of, or take away the
moss from a tree. Emusco, as, aui. Oster la mousse a un arbre. S.

Thou will never thrive, our English proverb is, the rolling stone never
gathers moss. Nu^quam rem facies. Iamais tu ne cueilleras mousse. S.

To beat, or fell down the moss from the branches, or bows of the trees.
Depectere frondium canitiem. Abbatre and fair cheoir la mousse des branches
des arbres. S.

Mossie, or full of moss. Muscosus, a, um. Plein de mousse. S. Mossy to be.
Muscor, ris. Musco tegi. Call. Most, or chiefly. Praecipue. Aduerb.
Principalement. Most easy. Facillimus, a, um. Expeditissimus, a, u^.
Tresfacile. S. Most easily. Facillime, Expeditissime. Tresfacilliment. S.
Most faithful. Fidelissimus, a, um. Tresfidele. S. Most faithfully.
Fidelssime. Tresfideliment. S. Most firm, or sure. Firmissimus, a, um.
Tresferme. Most firmly. Firmissime. Tresfirmement. S. Most honorable.
Celeberrimus, a, um. Honoratissimus, a, um. Honorificentissimus, a, um.
Treshonorable. S. Most wicked, or worste. Pessimus, a, um. Deterrimus, a, um.
Tresmauuais. S. Most wickedly, or naughtely. Pessime. Tresmauuaisement. S.
Most swifte. Leuissimus, a, um. Ocyssimus, a, um. Velocissimus, a, um.
Treslegier. S. Most swiftly. Ocyssime, Leuissime, Celerrime, Velocissime.
Treslegieriment. S. Because ye Most is the sign of ye superlatiue you shall
form the word after the degree of comparison, and then take the superlatiue
degree to your purpose, as I have showed you before in the co^paratiue degree
More, even so do no we in the superlatiue Most.

Mote, or a thing so small, that it can not be divided. Atomus, mi. foe. ge.
Chose tant petite qu' on ne la scauroit partir. S. Mote or straw. Festuca,
cae. f. g. Festu. H. Mote or ditche. Fossa, ae. foe. g. Fosse. H. Moted about.
Peninsulatus, a, um.* Circumfossus, a, um. Moting, or ditching about.
Circumfossura, rae. f. ge. Fouissement tout entour. S. Moth fly. Hepiolus,
Tinea, ae. Blatta. Teigne. H. Tinea, Is the fly with long legs that flies
about a candell. Mothy, or full of mothes. Tineosus, a, um. Plein de Teignes.
S. Mother. Genitrix, Matter, tris. Parens, it is. com. genesis La mere. S. Matresco,
scis. To be like ye mother. Estre fait semblable sa mere. Call. Mother in law,
or the mother of my wife. Hecyra, Socrus, us. foe. g. La mere de ma femme, ma
belle mere. S. Mother of Gods. Pessinuntia, Berecynthia, Rhea, Vesta, Ops,
Terra, Cibele, les. foe. ge. Mother, or matrice in women. Vter, and Vterus, ri.
Matrix, cis. foe. ge. Matrice. H. Mother to my great grandfather. Tritauia, ae.
foe. genesis Nebriss. Mother tongue, or language. Sermo genuinus, Lingua
vernacula. La langue maternelle. S. Motherly, like a mother, or of ye mother.
Maternus, a, number. Maternel, ou qui est de la mere. S. Motherwort, an herb.
Parthenium, Solis oculus, Amaracus, Matricaria, ae, f. g. Matricaire. H.
Motton. Caro ouilla, vel veruecina. Chair de mouton. Move. Commoueo, es.
Concio, cis. Molior, iris. Moueo, es. Tango, is. Cieo, es. Cio, is. Acuo, is.
Coagito, as. Concieo, es. Excito, as. Exacuo, is. Impetum dare, Incito, as.
Instigo, as. Peragito, as. Admouere alicui stimulos, Ardore^ inijcere, Agito,
as. Tempester ou Esmouuoir. S. Move a case, or question. Quaestione^ afferre.
Mouuoir vne question. S. To move, or provoke one to do some thing. Instigare.
Esmouuoir, and inciter aucun a fair quelque chose. S.

To move from one place to an other. Dimouere. Mouuoir d'vne place en autre. S.

To move one very much. Accendere, Concitare, Permouere. Fort esmouuoir. S.

To move, or provoke to battle. Coire bellu^, pugnam, praelium, Eijcere
hostem, Excire hoste^ ad demicandum, Hoste^ prouocare ad certamen. Esmouuoir,
and inciter a se combatre. S.

Move a man to any thing. Adducere hominem in rem aliquam. Esmouuoir un homme a
quelque chose. To move the auditors. Relinquere aculeos in animis audientium.
Esmouuoir les auditeurs. S.

To move to weep. Fletum excitare, Excire lachrymas alicui. Esmouuoir a pleur.
S.

To move one to some thing. Aliquem commouere. Esmouuoir aucun a quelque chose.
S.

To move, or stir to anger. Mouere alicui stomachum, Incendere aliquem.
Esmouuoir, and irriter aucun a coutroux. S.

To move great hatred, and rancoure against one. Concitare magnum odium in
aliquem. Esmouuoir vne grande haine, and rancune contre aucun. S.

To move to pity, or mercy. Ad misericordiam inducere. Esmouuoir a
misericorde. S.

Move affection (or disposition) to good, or ill. Animos afficere, Motum animis
afferre, Commouere animos. Esmouuoir les cueurs. S. Move away, or to take
away. Semoueo, es. Oster. Move by force, or compulsion. Perpello, is, puli.
Poulser, and induire a fair. Call. Move, or to bring from one place to an
other. Deduco, cis. Mener d'vn lieu en autre. S. Move strief. Concire, vel
concitare lites. Plaut. Move often. Moto, as. Remuer souuent. S. Move
pleasauntly by entisement. Pellicio, cis, exi. Vide Entice.. Move to. Adduco,
cis. Admoueo, es. Approcher ap^. Move upon rollers, or with rolling. Phalango,
as. Mouable. Mobilis, le. Mobile, muable. S. Moved. Motus, a, um. Commotus, a,
um. Esmeu. S. Moved by entisement. Pellectus, a, um. Moved or angry with one.
Infensus, a, um. Qui est fort courrouce contre aucun. S. Moved to be. Moueor,
eris. Cic. vt Moueri sermonibus. To be moved by talk. Moved to be with
affection. Afficior, ris. Moved to be with mercy or pity. Miseresco, scis.
Misereor, eris. Auoir pity d'aucun. S. Moving. Agitatio. Motus, us. Motio,
onis. foem. ge. Mouuement. S. Moving away, or any thing that may be moved.
Mobilis, le. Motiuus, a, um. Muable. S. Moulde or form, wherein any thing is
fourmed or printed. Proplastice, ces.* Typus, pi. Forma, mae. foe. ge. Modelle,
patron. H. Un moule. S. Proplastice. Is rather the craft or science to make
mouldes, and Protypon, Is the form or image whereon mouldes be made. Moldy.
Mucidus, a, um. Rancidus, a, um. Fracidus, da, dum. Ra^ci, moisi. Relant.
Rancidulus. diminut. Ang. A little or somewhat moldy. Un peu moisi. Moldy to
be. Muceo, es. Mucesco, scis. Ranceo, ces. Estre moisi, Se moisir. Call. Moldy
to wax. Mucesco, scis. Deuenir moisi. Moulding, or mouling. Mucor, oris.
Caries, Situs, tus. m. g. Moisissure. S. Moule, or a want Talpa, pae. masc.
and foem. gener. Vne taulpe. S. Mount, or mountain. Mons, it is. m. ge. Un mount
ou montaigne. S. Mount called S. Michaels mount in Cornewayle. Ocrinum
promontorium. Ptol^ Mount, or promontorie, or little mountain appearing in the
sea. Promontorium, rij. n. ge. Vne petite montaigne apparente ^n la mer. S.
Mountain. Mons, it is. Rupes, is. f. g. Vne montaigne. Et Monticulus, li. m. g.
Collis, lis. m. ge. A little mountain or hill. Vne montaignete, ou tertre. S.
Et montanus, na, number. Of a mountain. De moutaigne. S. Mount, or to ascend up
to some place. Asce^dere, Facere ascensionem ad locum aliquem. Monter. Mount,
or to ascend to an higher degree. Ascendere ad altiorem gradum. Mo^ter plus
hault degree. Mounted alofte, or on high. Sublatus, a, um. Esleue en hault. S.
Mourn. Gemo, is. Lugeo, es. Ingemesco, scis. Lamentor, taris. Se guermenter,
lamenter, Gemir, S. Mourn exceadingly or long time. Prolugeo, es. Pleurer and
porter le dueil un fort long temps. Call. Mourn no more. Elugeo, es. Acheuer
son dueil. S. Mourner after a corpse. Funereus, vel a.* Mourner cladde in
black. Atratus, Pullatus, Pulla vest indutus, hoc est lugubrem habitu^ ferens
ex pare^tum morte, vel alia quauis ratione. Vestu de noir. S. Mourning. Luctus,
us. Planctus, us. Gemitus, tus. m ge. Gemissement. S. Et Lugubris, e.
Pertaining to mourning. Apartenant a dueil. Call. Mourning garment, or apparel.
Ferialis cultus, Vestis lugubris, Vestis authracina, Vestis pulla, Funebre
vestimentum, Amiculu^ nigellum. Rob de dueil. H* Mourning song for the dead.
Epicedium, Epiaedium canticum, Epiodium, Monodia, Naenia, ae. Naenia, orum,
Threnodia, ae. Vide Lamentable song. And Praefica ( as Neuius says) is the
woman that sings such songs, to cause the company to mourn. Mourning
women, that lament the death of their husbands. Funereae mulieres. Mouse. Mus,
ris. m. g. Souris. H. Et Musculus, li. m. g. dimin. Ang. A little or young
mouse. Petite souris. Mouse called a ra^ney, blindmouse, or field mouse. Mu^
areneus, Mygale, es. foe. genesis Musaraigne. S. Whose nature is supposed to have
ill fortune, for if it run over a beast, the same beast will be lame in the
chyne, and if it byte any thing, then the thing bitten will swell and dye.

Mouse dunge. Muscerda, ae. f. g. La fiente d' vne souris Mouse kyller.
Muricidus, a, um.* Mouse trappe, a trappe to catch myse. Muscip^^a, qua mures
capiuntur. Souriciere, ratiere. H. Mouse ear, herb. Alsine minor.* Pilosella.
Matheol. Pilosella mayor. Fusch. Pilosella minor, Auricula muris. Oreille de
souris. Mouth. Os, oris. n. g. Bouche. H. Faux faerarum: Rictus canum: Rostrum
auium: Os humanum. Et Oscillum, Osculum. dimin. Ang. A little mouth. Petite
bouche, bouchette. Call. To stop ones mouth with money. Astringere linguam
mercede. Clorre la bouche d'aucun en luy baillant argent pour ne dire mot. S.

Mouthfull, or a morsel. Bolus, li. masc. ge. Bouchee, ou morseau. S. Mouth
of a beast. Faux, cis. f. ge. Mouth of a bottell, or pot. Lura, ae. Festus.
Mouth of a furnace, or oven. Praefurnium, ij. n. g. La g^e^le d'vn four ou
fournaise. S. Mouth of any thing. Orificium, ij. n. g. Orifice. Call. Mouthles
beasts. Inora, Dicuntur animalia sine, ore. Such are spoken of by Plin. in
his seventh book toward the end of the second chapter People as (he says)
that live only by the smell of roots, herbs, flowers, and such like, which
they carry with them always in iourneye. Mow, or a mock with the mouth.
Rictus porrectio. Move, ou more. S. Mow, or to make a mow. It seems a word
derived of the thing, for we cannot pronounce this word* Mow but we make
almost a mow. Rictum porrigere, videtur esse nomen factum ab re ipsa. Fair
la move, on ne scauroit prononcer ce mot Move, sans fair la move. S. Mow.
Deseco, as. Falco, as. vel Tondere prata. Faucher, S Mower. Desector, ris.
Falcator, toris. m. g. Faucheur. Mower of hay. Foenisex, Falcarius. Un
faucheur de prez. S. Mowghe, or to make a mowghe. Aceruo, as. Amonceler. S.
Mowghe, or an heap. Aceruus, ui. mas. genesis Un tas, monceau. S. By mowghes, or
heaps. Aceruatim. Par tas, par monceaux. S.

Mowghing, or heaping. Aceruatio, onis. foe. genesis Entassement. S. Mowing.
Desectio, Falcatio, onis. f. g. Fauchement. S
M. ANTE. V.
MVche. Multum, Multopere, Opido, Plurimum, Magnopere, Haud paru^. Beaucoup. P
Much less. Plus minus, Multo minus. Beaucoup moins. Pl. Much. Multus, a, um.
Beaucoup. S. Much in quantity. Immodicus, a, um. Much like, or very like.
Verisimilis, e. Vray semblable. Call. Much more. Perplus, ris. om. g. Beaucoup
plus. Call. Much more. Demagis, Perplus. adu. Beaucoup plus. Much unlike.
Absimilis, le. om. g. Dissemblable. Muckehill. Saperda, ae. Fimetum, ti.
Sterquiliniu^, ij. neut. ge. Fumier. S. Mudde. Limus, mi. m. g. Vase. Pals.
Fange. S. Mudde wall. Maceria, riae. f. g. Maceries, iei. f. ge.* It is rather
a wall made with stones only, and no mortar. Vide Mortar. Muddy, or full of
mudde. Limosus, a, um. Pleine de fange. S. Muet, or dumme. Mutus, a, um. Muet.
S. Muet, or dumme to be. Muteo, es. Mutesco, scis. Estre muet. To make muet.
Elinguem reddere. Render muet.

Muet to stand. Subticeo, es. Subticesco, scis. Muet to wax. Mutesco, scis.
Immutesco, scis. Deuenir muet. S. Mugworth an herb. Artemisia, ae. f. g.
Armoise. Mulbery. Morum, ri. neut. g. Vne meure. S. Mulberie tree. Sycaminus,
Morus, ri. f. g. Vne meurier. Mule. Mulus, li. vel Mula, lae. foem. genesis Vne
mule, un mulet. S. Et Mularis, re. Pertaining to mules. Appartenant ou servant
a mulets. S. Mule begotten between an ass and a horse. Burdo, onis. Hinnus,
ni. m. g. Mulet ne d'vn cheual and d'vne asne. Call. Et Hinnulus, li. m. g. A
little mule or the coult of an horse and ass. Mule engendered between a mare and
a he ass. Hinnus, ni. m. g. Varr. Et Hinnulus, dimin. inde. Ang. A little or
young mule. Muletour. Mulio, onis. m. ge. Un mulitier. S. Muletour, taking the
fourth part of gaynes or wages. Quartarius. Mullet a fish. Mullus, Trigla,
ae. mas. genesis Un mulet un mullet. S. Yet Had. Iun. says, Mullus and Barbus,
signify a barbel. And that Mugil and Capito, is a mullet, but I scarce believe
it, use therefore what seems best for thy purpose. Multiply, or to increase.
Multiplicor, caris. Augeo, es. Aucto, tas. Propago, gas. Multiplier. S. The
ennemies multiply, or increase daily. Accessionem faciunt hosts, vel crescunt
in dies singulos. Les ennemies se multiplient de iour en iour. S.

Multiplying. Multiplicatio, Auctio, Accessio, Propagatio, onis. f. g.
Multiplication. S. Multitude, and assemble of people. Multitudo, Agmen, Turba,
ae. foe. ge. Multitude and assemblee de gens. S. Multitude of beasts or
cattle. Pecuaria, oru^. n. g. Multitude of people assembled at plays and
sightes. Theatrum, tri. n. ge. Les spectateurs. S. Mu^chau^ce, or silente. Ne
gry, vulgo vsurpatur, nam est quo^dam adagium, in chil. Eras. Murder, or to
kill one. Hominem conficere, Trucidare. Meurtrir quelqu'vn. S. Murder.
Homicidium, Caedes, is. foe. g. Internecio, Parricidium, Trucidatio, onis. f.
g. Meurtre. S. To commit any murder. Parricidium suscipere, Perpetrare
caedem. Commettre quelque meurtre. S.

To do a murder. Caedem edere. Fair meurtre. S

Murder of kinsfolks and parents. Parricidium, Patricidium, cidij. n. g.
Parentis vel cognati occisio. Parricide, meurtre ou homicide de pere ou mere,
ou autre parente. Call. Murdrer. Carnifex, Homicida, Percussor, Sicarius, Plenus
sanguinis. Meurtrier. Murderer of his father, mother, kinsfolks, or parents.
Parricida, ae. com. genesis Quia tue son pere ou sa mere, ou aucun de ses parens.
S. Murmr, or grudge. Murmur, ris. Murmuratio, Admurmuratio, onis. f. g.
Murmr. S. Et Murmurabundus, a, um. Full of murmr. Murmr, or to grudge.
Muginor, aris. Murmuro, as. Susurro, as. Admurmuro, as. Murmurer. S. Murmr
between the teethe, or to muttre, as they do that are beaten. Gannire, Mutire,
Mussare. Grommeler enter ses dens and se plaindre comme font ceulx qu'on bat.
S. Murmurer. Murmurator, oris. m. g.* Murmuring. Admurmuratio, onis. f. g.
Murmuratio, onis. foe. g. Murmurement. S. Murmuring, or little noise of any
thing, as the sound of bees, trees. etc. Susurratio, Susurrus, ri. Susurrum,
ri. n. g. Murre, or reume in the head. Grauedo, inis. foe. ge. Distillation du
cerueau. S. Vide Rewme. Murraye. Xerampelinus, a, um. vt Xerampelinae vestes,
Garments of a murreye color. Murraye color. Ferrugo, ginis. foe. g.
Murrayne among beasts, or cattle. Lues, Morbus fluens, Morbus coeli. H.
Muscadell, a sweet wine. Vinum apianum, Vinum falernum. Vin moscatel. H. Muse,
or to study of a thing. Cogito, tas. Cogiter. Musing. Cogitatio, onis. foe. ge.
Cogitation. S. Muses. Musae, Camaenae, Heliconiades, Pierides, Nymphae, Deae,
Diuae comites. Chorus, Coetus Aganippidum, Heliconis alumnae, Thespiades,
Hippocrinisatae. Text. Mushronie, or todes stool. Fungus, gi. Tuber, ris. n.
g. Pezita, Boletus, ti. m. g. Pottero^, ou mousseron. Musical, or pertaining
to music. Musicus, a, um. De music. S. Musician. Melicus, Musicus, ca, cum.
Musicien. S. Music. Canor, ris. Symphonia, ae. Musica, Musice, ces. foe. ge.
Music. S. Et Canorosus, a, um. Full of music. Musice, After good or true
music, and the place where music is exercised. Odaea, * Odeum, ei. n. ge.
Call. Music discordant, or disagreing. Discordes modi, Symphonia discors, vel
discordans. Music desaccordant. Music used in comedies, and plays. Dorica.*
Musk. Moschum, Muschum. *Moschus, Muscus. Musc. H. Mask catte. Muschus, * Mus
odoratus, vel Peregrinus. H. Muskle, a fish. Concha, chae* foem. ge. Musculus,
li. m. g. Moule. H. Concha, Is any shell fyshe. And Concha, chae. f. g. The
shell of a muskle. etc. Muskle man. Conchyta, tae. m. g. * Must. Oportet, bat.
Impers. Il fault. S. Mustarde. Sinapium, pij. n. g. Moustarde. S. Mustard
querne. Mola sinapina. Mustard seed. Sinapi, Sinapis, pis. f. g. Seneue. Call.
Must, a kind of new wine. Mustum, ti. neut. ge. Du moust. S. Must boiled to
the third part. Hepsema, Siraea, Sapa, pae. f. g. Plin. lib. 14. cap. 9.
Mustie, or dressed with must, or full of must. Mustulentus, a, um. Neb. Musty,
or sweet as must. Musteus, a, um. Mustulentus, ta, tum. Doulx comme moust.
Call. Mute, or to change. Mutare, Commutare, Demutare, Permutare, Immutare.
Muer. Plaut. Mutabilitie. Mutabilitas, tatis. foe. g. Inconstantia, ae. f. g.
Mutabilite. S. Mutable. Mutabilis, le. Instabilis, le, Des^lto^ius, a, um.
Muable. Plaut. Mutable, and inconstant man. Mobilis homo, Leuis, Inconstans,
it is. Homme muable. H. Mutable of color. Versicolorius, a, um. * Versicolor,
ris. om. genesis De couleur changeant. Call. Mutation. Mutatio, onis. f. ge.
Commutatio, onis. Permutatio, onis. f. g. Mutation. S. Mutilate, or to mayme.
Mutilo, as. Admutilo, las. Mutiler. S. Mutilate, or lacking a member, or
maimed. Mutilatus, Demutilatus, ta, tum. Mutile. S. Mutten. Caro ouilla,
Veruecina. Chair de mouton. H Mutter. Mutio, is. Muginor, aris. Susurro, ras.
Vide Murmr. Mutter, reproving a thing past. Admurmuro, as. Murmurer. S.
Muttrer. Susurro, onis. m. g. Muttring. Susurratio, Susurrus, Susurrum, ri. n.
ge. Murmurement. S. Mutual, as one for an other. Mutuus, a, u^. Mutuel.
Mutually. Mutuo. Mutuellement. S. My, Vide Mi.
N. ANTE. A.
N, A lettre, and one of the half vowels in elder time counted among the the
liquids, which if it take the first place in a word, some time takes G
before it, as Natus, Gnatus, Narus, Gnarus. etc. And sometime in composition,
where the letter C, follows N, C is turned into G, as Quadringenti pro
quadrincenti, and Quingenti pro quincenti. But in those words where N is not,
C is reserved, as Ducenti. etc. In the notes of antiquity, N was written for
Non, vel Nec, Number, Nomen, Nepos, Nonius, Noster, Numisma, Numorum, Nascitur,
Nisi, Numerator, Nostri, Nostrum, and Nau. Nauicula, vel Naues, vel Nauibus. Et
No. Nobis, Nbl. Nobilis, Nc. Nunc, N. C. Non certe, vel N. C. Nero Claudius.
N.C.S.N. Co. S.D.E. Notis ciuibus Senatus consulti suffragium datu^ est.
N.C.N.P. Non clam nec praecario. Et N.C.C. Non Calumniae causa. etc.
Nabuchodonosor, the fourth king of Babylon, and the third king of the
Chaldees, whom Berosus also names Nabugodrosus, and of the Hebrews
Nabuchadnazar. It is written that Nabuchodonosor, king of Babylon, caused a
golden Image to be made, which was forty cubits high, and six cubits
thick, and caused all the people to fall down and worship it, which
Idolatry, because Sidrach, Misach, and Abednago, would not do, he commanded
them to be cast bound into an hot burning oven, but they were preserved by
the almighty power of God, and they which cast them in, consumed with the
flambe. Read the.3. chap. of Daniel. Nagge. Equulus, Mannus, Equus pumulus.
Cheualet. H. Nay. Vide No. Nay sayer. Negatiuus. Negans, it is. om. genesis Niant
Qui nie. Nay saying. Negatio, onis. foe. g. Niement. Nay to say. Nego, as.
Vide Deny. Nail. Clauus, ui. n. g. Un clou. S. Et Clauulus, Clauiculus, li.
Ang. A little or small nail. Clouet. S. Nail of a balke, or beam. Trabalis
clauus. Nail of brass. Clauus aeneus. To nail a thing. Clauo aliquid figere.
Clouer quelque chose.

Nail of the fingers, or toes. Vnguis, is. m. g. Ongle. Et Vnguiculus, li. m.
g. A little or soft nail. Onglet. S. Vngulatus, a, um. Having foul great
nails. Qui magnos vngues habet. Call. Nailed. Clauatus, a, um. Cloue. S. But
rather trimmed with nails. Garni de clous. S. Nailed up. Suffixus, a, um.
Particip. Naked. Nudus, a, um. Nud. S. Half naked. Seminudus, da, dum. A demi
nud. S.

Nakedness. Nuditas, it is. foe. ge. Nudite. S. Naken, or to make naked. Nudo, as.
Denudo, as. Mettre nud. S. Naken, or to discover the breasts, or pappes.
Expapillo, as. Descouurir la poictrine. S. Name. Nomen, inis. n. ge. Le nom. S.
Name by name. Nominatim. vt Appellare nominatim aliquem. Appeler aucun par son
nom. S. To name or call one by his name. Name of no estimation, an obscure
name. Nomen obscurum, Nome^ ignobile. Un nom qui n'est point prise. S. The true
and propre name. Germanum nome^, Nomen solidum. Vray and propre nom. S.

Name, or to give one a name. Nominare, Dicere nomen, Nomen facere, Imponere
nomen alicui, Aliquem vocare, Nomen alicui indere. Bailler nom a aucun. Name a
thing, or to give name to any thing. Denominare, Nomen alicui rei dare, Notare
res nominibus nouis. Bailler nom a quelque chose. S. To change his name. Nomen
sibi adoptare, Nomen commutare, Transnominare. Changer son nom. S.

Tell me thy name. Loquere mihi nomen tuum. Nomen tuum memora mihi. Die moy ton
nom. S.

Name one at the font. Prodere nomen eius qui baptizatur. In lustrali lauacro
nuncupare, vel nomine donare. Nomer quelqu' un sur les fons. S. Name, or to
call, or give the sir name. Cognomino, as. Cognomen addere, Dicere cognomine.
Surnommer. S. Name, which we call the sir name. Cognomen, inis. n. g.
Cognomentum, ti. n. g. Surnom. S. Name called the Christian name, or the first
or propre name. Praenomen, inis. n. g. Le nom propre. Named. Adpellatus,
Nominatus, Nuncupatus, ta, tum. Nomme. S. Named again. Repetitus, a, um.*
Named to be again. Repetor, eris.* Namely, or by name. Seorsum. Nommeement. S.
Vt seorsum te saluto. Namen, or to name. Adpello, as. Indigito, as. Nomino, as.
Nuncupo, as. Allego, as. Nommer. S. Namen again. Repeto, is.* Names which be
so difficulte that uneath they may be pronounced or spoken. Contortuplicata
nomina, Hoc est adeo dura and quasi confragosa vt vix efferri possint. Call.
Naming. Nominatio, Adpellatio, Appellatio, onis. Nomenclatura, ae. foem. genesis
Appellance nomination. S. Napkyn. Caesitium, Noegaeum, Sacconia, Muccinium,
dicitur Arnobio apto vocabulo, quod minus apposite vocamus Sudarium. Eras.
Strophiolum vocat. Mouch^ir. H. Noegaeum, Is a white napkyn. Narowe. Iniquus,
a, um, Angustus, a, um. Strictus, a, um. Arctus, a, um. Serre. S. Narowe valeis
between two hills. Echi.* Narowe way. Angiportus, us. Angiportum, ti. n. g.
Narowe to make. Angusto, as. Arcto, as. Serrer. S. Narowely. Anguste, Stricte,
Arcte. Serreement. S. Narre like a dog which is mad. Hirrio, ris. Call.
Narratione. Narratio, onis. f. ge. Narration. S. Narratiuncula. diminut. Ang. A
little or short tale, or narration. Petit recit ou narration. Call. Nation.
Genus, eris. Natio, onis. f. g. Vne nation. S. Native. Natalis, le. Natiuus, a,
um. Genuinus, a, u^. Natif. Germanus, a, um. Naif. S. Native country. Natale
solum. Nativity. Natiuitas, Ortus, us. Partus, us. mas. ge. Natiuite. S. Day
of the nativity of any one. Natalis, Natale, Natalitium, ij. Dies natalitius,
Dies natalis. Le iour de la natiuite d' un chascun. S.

Nature. Genius, ij. Minerua, ae. Natura, ae. foe. genesis Ingenium, ij. n. g.
Nature. S. Good nature. Bonitas ingenij, Bonum ingeniu^. Bonne nature. S.

Nature of metal. Natura metallica. Nature de metal. S. Nature of the
ground. Ingenium soli. La nature de la terre. S. Nature of the country.
Conditio regionis. La nature du pais. S. To return to his nature, to come to
him self again, and use his old manners. Ad ingenium redire, vel ad se
redire, Ad se and mores suos redire. Retourner a sa nature. S.

To do a thing against his nature, and inclination. Aduersante natura quicquam
facere, Inuita Minerua facere. Fair quelque chose contra sa nature and
inclination. S.

Against nature. Monstrose, Prodigiose, Praeter naturam. Contre nature. S.

Natural. Genuinus, a, um. Ingenuus, a, um. Natiuus, a, um. Naturalis, Viuus,
a, um. Naturel. Call. Natural delectation. Genius, ij. Mart. Natural power or
virtue, or the power of nature. Virus, indecli. n. g. Nonius e Lucret. lib. 2.
Natural, or peculiar. Genuinus, a, um. Peculiaris, and natiuus. Propre and
naturel. Call. Natural speech. Sermo genuinus. Natural strength. Viuacitas,
tatis. f. g. Viuacite. Naturally. Natura, ablat. Sponte naturae, Naturaliter.
Naturellement. S. Naue of a carte whele. Apsis.*Modiolus, li. m. ge. Est
modiolus in rota, cui affixi sunt radij. Plin. Le moyeu d'vne roue. S. Nauewe
herb, having but three leave. Lapsana, Lapsanapus. It is a kind of rapes.
Naughty, naught, or hurteful. Malus, la, lum. Prauus, a, um. Malignus, na,
nu^. Nocens, it is. Mau^ais. Naughty, and vile persons. Quisquiliae, aru^. Cic.
Vide Naught. Navy. Classis, sis. foe. ge. Armee de mer. S. Navy trimmed to
fight. Procincta classis, ad pugna^ parata. Vne armee preparee a la guerre. H.
Nauill. Vmbilicus, ci. m. ge. Nombril. H. Et Vmbilicatus, a, um. Made like a
nauill. Fait en la facon de nombril. Call. Vmbilicatim. Of the fashion of a
nauill. Nauntes in France. Condiuicnum, ni. n. g. Ptol. Nay, Vide Nai.
N. ANTE. E.
NEase, or to snease. Sternutare, Sternuere. Esternuer. S. To make to nease.
Euocare sternutamenta. Cells. Fair esternuer. S.

Medecin that causes to nease. Sternutamentum, ti. n. g. Plin. Medicament qui
faict esternuer. S.

Neasing. Sternutatio, onis, foe. ge. Sternutamentu^, ti. n. g. Esternuement.
Neat. Bos, uis. com. ge. Beuf ou vache. S. Neat beasts. Armenta, orum.
Properly a heard of great cattle. Troupeau de gros bestail. S. Neat house.
Tugurium, ij.*Stabulum, li. neut. ge. Estable. S. Nece. Neptis, is. foe. ge.
Niepce. S. Necessary. Necessarius, a, um. Requisitus, a, u^. Necesse, Necessum.
Necessaire. S. Very necessary. Pernecessarius, a, um. Fort necessaire.

Necessary for journey, or for the way faringe, as bread, drink, meat,
money, or any other thing. Viaticum, ci. n. g. Tout ce qu' on port auec soy
pour passer le chemin, soit viande ou arge^t. S. Et Vinticor, aris. To provide,
prepare, or make provision necessary for iourneying. Necessary for to be used.
Vtensilis, le. Neb. Necessary thing. Operaepretium, tij. neut. ge. Chose
necessaire. S. Necessaries apt to pastime, or play. Adluditurae, arum.*
Necessary matter, or cause. Grauis causa. Chose necessaire. S. Necessaries of
household. Vtensilia, orum. neut. g. Vtensiles. S. Necessary it is. Necesse
est, oportet, Opus est, Requisitum est. Necessarium est. Il est necessaire. S.
It is very necessary. Peropus est, Pernecessariu^ est. Il est fort necessaire.
S.

Necessarely. Necessario, Necessary. Necessairement. Necessity. Aporia, ae.
Egestas, it is. Indigentia, ae. Incitas, it is. Inopia, ae. Necesse, Necessum,
Necessitas, Necessitudo, inis. foe. g. Necessite. S. Thou have brought, or
cast thy self into this necessity. Hos tu tibi ipse cancellos necessitatis
circundedisti. Teipsum compegisti in has angustias. Tu t'es mis e^ ceste
necessite. S.

Necessity of nature. Requisita naturae. Neck. Collus, Collum, Ceruix, cis.
Col. H. Neckerchiefe. Strophium, phij. n. genesis Un gorgias ou collet de femmes.
S. Needful, or need. Opus, Adiect. indeclin. Besoing. It is needful, or
behooves him that is weary to rest him. Opus est fessum quiescere. Il est
besoing qui celuy qui est las, se repose. S.

When it is need, or needful. Vbi opus poscit. In loco. Quand il en est
besoing. S.

I will send thee the rest when need requires. Caetera apposite tibi
mandabo, vel suo tempore. Ie te manderay le rest quand il en sera besoing. S.

What need I speak of the multitude of fishes? Quid multitudinem piscium
dicam? Qu'est il besoing de parler de l'abondance des poissons. S.

What need I declare how great the love of brute beasts is, in bringinge up
those which they have engendered. Quid dicam qua^tus amor sit bestiarum in
educandis quae procreauerunt? Que est il besoing que ie parle de la grand amor
que les bestes ont a nourrir ce qu'elles ont engendre. S.

Need, lack, or to want. Egeo, es. Indigeo, es. Deficio, cis. Careo, es.
Auoire fault de ce qu' on vouldroit auoire. S. Need to have. Necesse, vel opus
habere. Needful. Necessarius, a, um. Vtilis, le. Necessaire. S. Nedefully.
Necessario, Vtile, Necessary. Vt supra. Necessarily. Nedy. Egenus, a, um.
Indigens, it is. Inops, pis. Indigus, a, um. Egens, it is. Necessiteux. S. Et
Egestuosus, a, um, Inopiosus, a, um. Ang. Very nedy.* Nedle. Acus, cus. foe. g.
Aguille. S. Nedle of a dial. Versoria, ae. foe. g. Nedle of a shipmans
compass. Versoria, ae. foe. ge. Esguille. Pals. Nedle, or tongue of a
balaunce, or beam. Examen, inis. n. g. Languette d'vne balance. S. Negation,
or a denying. Negatio, onis. foem. genesis Negation. S. Negative, or that denies.
Negatorius, a, um. Inficialis, le. Negatif. S. Vide Deny. Neglecte. Negligo,
is. Omitto, is. Posthabeo, es. Postpono, is. Negliger. S. Neglected. Neglectus,
Omissus, Posthabitus, Postpositus, a, um. Neglige. S. Neglecting, or little
regard, or negligence. Neglectus, us. m. g. Negligence. S. Negligence.
Incuria, ae. Negligentia, Acedia, ae. f. g. Indiligentia, Inertia, Segnities,
vel Segnitia, Oscitantia, Otiositas, tatis. f. g. Negligence. S. Negligence and
slougishenesse in dressing, and adorning any thing. Impolitia, ae. f. g.
Negligence and paresse d'accoustrer and orner quelque chose. S. Negligent.
Discinctus, a, um. Incuriosus, Neglige^s, Indiligens, Oscitans, Somniculosus,
sa, sum. Negligent. S. Negligently. Discincte, Negligenter, Oscitabu^de,
Oscitanter, Otiose, Indiligenter, Segniter, Some niculose. Negligemment. S.
Neighe like a horse. Adhinnio, is. Hinnio, is, ire. Hennir. S. Neighing.
Hinnitus, tus. Et Adhinnitus, tus. m. ge. Hennissement. S. Neighbor.
Propinquus, Proximus, Vicinus, ni. m. ge. Accola, ae. com. ge. Voisin. S.
Neighbourhead. Conuicinium, Propinquitas, tatis. foe. g. Proximitas, Vicinetum,
Vicinia, ae. Vicinitas, tatis. foe. ge. Voisinage. S. Neither coife, neither
breach. This was a kind of breaches that men ware in the cold weather under
their long coats in old time, and were called nether coifes, or nether
breatches. Subligar, Subligaculum, Femoralia, Feminalia, Superior bracharum
pars, Pudenda and femora obtegens. Brayes. H. Neither part. Subterior pars, *
Pars inferior vel infima. Nephew, or neuiew. Nepos, it is. m. g. Nepueu. S.
Neppe, or cattes mynte, an herb. Calaminta, Nepeta, tae. Et Officin. Nepita.
Herb au chat. H. Nere. Propinquus, a, um. Proximus, a, um. Prochain. Nere.
Propinque, Proxime, Prope, Ad, Secundum, Iuxta. Pres ou aupres. S. Nere by.
Prope, Proxime, Qua^ proxime. Tout pres. Nere hand. Prope. Pres. S. Nere of
kynne. Propinquus, a, um. Parent. S. Nerer. Citerior, ius. Propinquior, ius.
Proprior, Proximior, ius. Plus pres. S. Nerer. Citerius, Propinquius, Propius,
Aduerb. Plus pres. Call. Nernes. Propinquitas, Proximitas, tatis. foem. genesis
Propinquite, Proximite. S. Neste. Nidus, di. m. g. Un nid d'oiseau. S. Et
Nidulus, li. m. g. A little neste. Petit nid. S. Neste of birds. Domus auium,
vt Virgil. Antiquas domos auium diruit. He destroyed, or cast down the old
birds nestes. Nestle, or build nestes. Nidifico, as. Nidulor, aris. Fair un
nid, nicher. Call. Nestor, the name of a Grecian, which lived three men's
ages. Nestor, toris. m. ge. Pylius senex, senex ter aeuo functus, Neleius,
Nelides, a patre Neleo, and rex Pylius. vt Iuuenal. Rex Pylius (magno si
quicquam credis Homero)
Exemplum vitae fuit a cornice secundae.
Foelix heu nimium, qui tot per saecula mortem
Distulit, atque suos iam dextra computat annos.
King Nestor (if thou credit ought
To Homer great do give,)
Example was of blissed life
Nighe long as crow to live.
O to to bliste that drove of death
So many ages oulde,
And yet at last of all his years
Observe account that could.
Nete. Lepidus, a, um. Net. S. Nete, clean, or trim. Mundus, a, um. Nitidus,
da, dum. Net, Pur S. Very nete. Permundus, da, dum. Fort net. S.

Nete, or deintie. Lautus, a, um. Opiparus, a, um. Nete to make, or to make
clean. Abstergere, Februare, Eluere, Emaculare, Mundare, Emundare, Munditias
facere, Nitidare, Purgare, Depurgare, Expurgare, Tergere, Verrere, Euerrere.
Nettoyer. S. Nete to be. Niteo, es. Nitesco, scis. Estre poli and net. S
Netely, cleanely, finely. Munditer, Nitide, Polite. Nettement. S. Netenesse,
cleanlynesse. Munditia, vel mundities, Nitor, Puritas, Synceritas, tatis. f. g.
Nettete. S. Netenes in fare. Lautitia, ae. foe. ge. Netenes in gesture and
words. Lepor, oris. Lepos, oris. mas. ge. Nether. Neu, Neue, Adu. Ne l'vn ne
l'autre. S. vt Caesar. Neu se, neu Pompeium. Neither he nor Pompeye. Ne luy,
ne Pompee. S. Nether dead, nor alive. Neue viuus, neue mortuus. Ne mort, ne
vif. S. Nether this, nor that. Neue hoc, neue illud. Ne ceci ne cela. S. Nether
the one, nor the other, Neutre. Neuter, tra, trum. Ne l'vn, ne l'autre, neutre.
Nether, loves other. Neuter alterum diligit. Ils ne s'aiment point l'vn
l'autre. S. Nether hurtes other. Neuter alteri officit. L'vn ne nuit point a
l'autre. S. Nettle. Vrtica, ae. foe. ge. Orti^. S. Nettle called a blind
nettle, archaungell, or dead nettle. Vrtica labeo, Lamium, Vrtica mortua, vel
iners. Ortie morte. H. Net. Cassis, is. Macula, ae. Rete, it is. n. g. Sinus,
us. Vne retz. Et Cassiculus, li. Reticulus, li. mas. genesis diminut. Ang. A
little net. Vne petite retz. S. Net being little, or half a net.
Semiplagium, gij. n. g. Rete paruum. Call. Net called a dragge. Tragum,
Verriculum. Vide Dragge. Net called a swepe net. Panagron. Retis genus quod
omnia capit. Call. Net for great fyshe. Sagena, ae. Idem quod verriculum apud
latinos. Call. Net for to trusse up a woman's head. Reticulu^. li. n. g. Vne
coeffe. Call. Net with great holes, or that is wide knytte. Rete rarum, Rete
grandi macula. Vne retz qui ha grands trous. S. Net caster, or layer.
Retiarius, ij. By translation he that trappeth his enemy. Net or snare where
with dear is taken. Te^dicula, lae. f. g. Laqueus quo cerui capiuntur. H.
Net like, or fashioned like a net. Reticulatus, a, um. Faict en facon de
retz. S. Nets of the chasse. Plagae, arum. f. ge. Rariora retia. File, ou
retz de chasse. H. To make, knitte, or weaue nets. Texere plagas, sinus,
retia, vel maculas. Fair les retz. S.

Never. Ad calendas Graecas, Nunquam. Iamais. S. I never saw him after.
Nunquam post illa vidi. Iamais depuis ie ne le vei. S.

I never hard this man before to day. Istunc hominem nunquam audiueram ante
hunc die^. Iamais ie ne l'auoye ouy deuant ce iour. S.

I am so afflicted as never was man. Ita sum afflictus, vt nemo vnquam. Ie suis
si afflige, que iamais person ne le fut plus. S.

Never a man, or never a one. Nullus, la, lum. Nemo, inis. com. ge. Null homme.
S. Never so little. Paululum modo, Quicquid pauxillum. Vide Little.
Nevertheless. Attamen, Eo secius, Interea, Tamen, Tametsi, Veruntamen, Verum.
Toutesfois. S. And yet nevertheless he taught many. Neceo secius plurimos
docuit. Suet.

Never to thrive. Frugem non facere, Nunquam rem facere. Neuers in France.
Augustonemetum, ti. n. ge. Neuiew Nepos, it is. m. g. Nepue^. S. Vide
Consanguinitie the table. Neuiewes son. Pronepos, it is. mas. genesis Fills de mon
nepueau. S. New. Nouus, a, um. Nouellus, a, um. Recens, it is. Nouueau. S. New
begone. Nouitius, a, um. Tout nouueau. S. New castle town. Orrea, ae. foe.
g. Ptol. After a new fashion. Nouo modo. Plaut. A la nouuelle mode. S.

New found gentleman. Nouus homo. Salust. New made. Refectus, Nouatus,
Reconcinnatus. Interpolus, la, lum. Innoue, renouelle. Call. New made eftsoon.
Rediuiuus, a, u^. Made young again, or lively. New made to be. Reficior,
ceris. New Moon. Intermestris luna, Nouilunium, Noua luna. Cic. Lune nouelle.
S. Vide Moon and Change. New officer. Suffectus, ti.* New wine. Mustum, ti.
n. g. Vide Must. New years gift. Apophoretu^, Strena, ae. Estreine. New to
make. Instauro, as. Nouo, as. Reconcinno' as. Recudo, dis, Renouo, as. Reparo,
as. Nouello' as. Innouare, Renouellare, Integrare, Redintegrare. Innouer, fair
nouueau. New to make again. Renouo, as. Renouello, as. Renouueler. S. Newly.
Nouiter, Nuper, Noue, Recenter, Recens. Nouuellement. S. News. Nuntius,
Nuntium, tij. n. g. Nouuelle. S. Good news. Euangelium, Bonus nuntius. Bonne
nouuelle. S.

You bring me good news. Been hercle denu^tias. Vous me dites bonnes
nouuelles. S.

Plesaunt news. Lepidum nuntium. Nouuelles plaisantes. S.

To receive news. Nuntium accipere. Receuoir nouuelles. S.

Ill news. Aduersi nuntij, Tristes nuntij. Mauuaises nouuelles.

Bearer of ill news. Obnuntiator, toris. Bud. Porteur, ou rapporteur de
mauuaises nouuelles. S.

Bringer of good news. Euangelus, li. m. g. Qui apporte bonne nouuelle. S.

Bringer, or inuenter of false news. Pseudangelus, Vanus nuntius. Reporteur de
mauuaises nouuelles. S.

A maker, or forger of news. Famigerator, toris. m. g. Bud. Faiseur de
nouuelles. S.

Oulde news, stale news. Obsoleti nu^tij. Bud. Vielles nouuelles. S.

To bring, or bear news. Nuntiare, Perferre nuntium, Defer nuntium. Porter
nouuelles. S.

To tell news. Nuntiare, Renuntiare. Dire nouuelles. S.

Haste thou hard any news out of the country? Ecquid habes a patria noui?
Ecquid nouarum rerum a nostraribus accipisti? An scis a nostris quidquam noui,
a nostris: id est a nostratibus. Nam nostri and vestri, pro nostrates and
vestrates probati authotes saepe dicunt. Scais tu point quelques nouuelles du
pais. Cord.

Thou tellest me good news. Been nuntias, Iucundum mihi adfers nuncium, Magnam
nuncias voluptatem. Tu me dis bonnes nouuelles. Cord.

Next, Proximus, a, u^. Secundus, a, u^. nom. Prochain. Next, or next by.
Iuxta, Penes, Proxime, Secundum Secus. adu. Prochainement, Tout aupres. S. Next
adjoining. Contiguus, a, um. Propinquus, a, um. Proximus, a, u^. Ioignant,
touchant contre. Call. Next after by succession. Succellaneus, a, um. Successor,
oris. m. g. Successeur. Call. Next day. Proximo vel altera die, Secundo die, Or
the day after. Vide Day. Next neighbor. Propinquus, Proximus, a, um.
Prochain. S. My next neighbor. Vicinus e proximo. Plaut. Mon prochain voisin.
S.

Next to us. Citimus, ma, mum. Tresprochaine en ca. S Ney. Vide Nei.
N. ANTE. I.
NIcromancer. Nicromantes, Nicromanticus. Nigromantien. S. Nicromancers stone.
Synochitis. Plin. Nicromantie. Necromantia, ae. f. g. Nicromance. Nigarde.
Auarus, Parcus, Restrictus, Tenax, cis. Chiche. S. A great nigarde. Praeparcus,
ca, cum. Triparcus, ca, cum. Fort chiche. S.

Nigarde out of measure. Parce parcus. Chiche oultre mesure. S. Nigardly.
Auare, Parce, Parciter, Restricte. Chicheme^t. et Perparce. Very nigardly. Fort
chicheme^t Nigardshippe, or nigardnesse. Auaritia, Parcitas, Parsimonia,
Tenacia, Tenacitas, Illiberalitas, Malignitas, tatis. foe. ge. Chichete. S.
Nighe. Attiguus, a, um. Finitimus, Propinquus, Proximus, Secundus, a, um.
Voisin. S. Nyghe. Circa, Fere, Iuxta, Prope, Propinque, Proxime, Secundum,
Secus, Ad. Aupres. S. Nyghe at hand. Pronus, a, um.* Nighe joining. Finitimus,
a, um. Ioignant. S. Nighe, or well nighe. Fere. Presque. S. Nighe to. Iuxtim,
Prope. Pres, aupres, Ioignant. S. Nighe to, or by. Iuxta. praepos. Pres. vt
Iuxta genitorem astat virgo. The maid stands nighe, or by her father. Nighe
unto a city, or which stands before, or nighe a town. Anteurbanus, a, um.
Quod est vrbi propinquum. Fest. Nighe to be, or at hand. Insto, as. Adsum, es.
Immineo, es. Praesto sum. Assisto, it is. Estre pres. S. Nigher. Propinquior,
Propior, ius. Citerior, Proxi mior, nom. Plus pres. S. Nigher. Propinquius,
Propius. adu. De plus pres. S. Nighnes. Affinitas, Propinquitas, Proximitas,
tatis. foe. ge. Prochainete, voisinete. Call. Referred also to kynred. Night.
Nox, ctis. foe. ge. Nuict. Et Nocturnus, a, um. Pertaining to the night, or of
the night. De la nuict. S. Et Pernox, ctis. Nox perpes. During the night time.
Vt nocte^ perpetem dormire. Plaut. To sleep all night long. Dormir toute la
nuict entiere. S. Et Concubia, vel intempesta, vel multa nox. The dead or deep
part of the night. Nightcappe. Nocturnus pileus, Nocturnum pileum. Un bonnet de
nuict. Cord. Thou have neade of a nightcappe. Opus est tibi nocturno pileo. Il
te fault un bonnet de nuict. S.

In the night, or by night. De nocte, Per nocte^, Noctu. De nuict, ou par
nuict. S.

Night crow. Cicina. ae. Nycticorax, Coruus nocturnus. Cresserelle. Pals.
Night, dark somewhat. Sublustris nox. Night shade herb. Faba inuersa, vel
lunaria, Solanum somnificum, Soporificum, vel somniferum. Vua lupina, Vua
vulpis. Officin. Solatrum vel Morella. Morelle. Dod. Night wandrer. Noctiuagus,
gi. m. ge. Qui nocte vagatur. Errant and vagant de nuict. Call. Et Solifugus,
Lucifugus, Nycterobus, Bud. Qui ne va qui de nuict. S. A night walker. Night
watcher. Tenebrio, onis. m. g. Idem. Nightwitche. Ama, ae. f. g. Strix vel
forte vespertilio. Night to be almost, or well toward. Aduesperascit,
Imperson. Et vesperascit. It grows toward night. Il vient sur la vespre. S.
Nightingale. Aedon, Lucinia, Philomela, Acredula, Lucinia. Rossignol,
Roussignol. H. Nill, a small ash that flies forth of the furnais where
brass is melting, and sticks commonly in ye top of the furnais, or vaulte of
the house where such metal is wrought and tried, It is very good for the eyes.
Pompholyx, lygis. Officin. Nil albu^ Tuceam Arabes vocant, cuius species est
spodos. Plin. sieve spodiu^ vulgar. Lege. Plin. li. 34. ca. 13. Nimble. Agilis,
le. om. ge. Habile du corpse, Alaigre. S. Nimblenes. Agilitas, tatis. f. g.
Alaigrete. S. Nimbly. Agiliter. Abuerb. Ligierement, Alaigreme^t. Nymphe.
Nympha, phae. foe. ge. Nymphe. S. Nine. Noue^. Neuf. S. Et Nouenarius, a, u^.
Of nine, or the nynthe. Neufiesme. S. Nine days space. Nouendium, Nouem dierum
spatium Espace de neuf iours. Call. Nine hundredth. Nongenti, tae, ta. Neuf cens
S. Nine ounces. Dodrans, it is. Nouuncium, Pondus vel mensura nouem vnciarum.
Neuf onces. S. Nine years space. Nouennium, nij. n. g. Ninetine. Noue^decem,
Vndeuiginti, Viginti minus vno. Dixneuf, Vingt moins un. Call. Ninetenth.
Vndeuigesimus, vel vndeuicesimus, ma, mu^. Decimus nonus. Dixneufuiesme. Call.
Ninthe. Nonus, a, um. Nouenus, a, um. Neufiesme. S. Ninth day after the
burial day, called the terment day. Sacrum nouendiale.* Nintie, or fourscore
and ten.90. or.lxxxx. Nonaginta, Adiect. Nonante, ou quatre vingts and dix. S.
Nintithe, or the four score and ninth. Nonagesimus, a, um. Le nouantiesme. S.
Ninty years oulde. Nonagena^ius, a, um. Qui ha quatre vingts and dix ans. S.
Ninty fold, or nyntye times. Nonagies. Abuerb. Nonante fois. S. Nippe or to
pinche. Premo, is. Stringo, is. * Su^mis digitis comprimere, vel premere.
Pincer. S. Nippe roots, whereby they may grow freshlier. Delumbare radices.
Nippes or nippinges. Compressiones, number. f. ge. Nitte. Lens, dis. foe. ge.
Lend. H. Nitty, or full of nittes. Lendiginosus, a, um.*
N. ANTE. O.
NO. Haud, No^, Nequaqua^, Minime. Ne, no^. It could come no better way to
pass. Haud potuit melius fieri. Il ne se pouoit mieulx fair. S.

Which is of no great price. Haud magni pretij. Plaut. Qui n' est pas de grand
pris. S.

No doubt, without doubt, or certainly. Non dubie. Sans doubt, certainement.
S. No body was at home. Solitudo ante hostiu^, Ter. No, in no wise. Nequaquam,
Minime gentiu^, Minime omnium. Nullement. S. No man. Nemo, Nullus, la, lum.
Nulle homme. S. No man at this present, or until this day. Nemo dum.* No man
is ignorant of this, all ye world knows this. Nemo hoc nescit. Cic. Person
ne l'ignore, Tout le monde le scait. S. No where. Nullibi, Necubi, Nusquam. E^
null lieu. No where at all. Nusqua^ gentiu^. Nusqua^ omnino. No whether.
Nusquam, vt Te nusquam mittam. I will send thee no whether. No where at all.
Nusquam gentium. Vt supra. Nobility. Claritas, Claritudo, Generositas,
Ingenuitas, Nobilitas, Splendour, ris. m. g. Noblesse. S. Noble. Augustus, a,
um. Clarus, a, um. Eximius, Generosus, a, um. Ingenuus, a, u^. Heroicus,
Illustris, Nobilis, le. Splendidus, Stolatus, a, um. Superbus, a, um. Antiquus,
a, um. Noble. S. Augustus Is applied to such to whom we say your grace, your
majesty. Noble, a piece of gold called an Edward. Eduardus nobilis,
Eduardeus. Bud. Un noble Eduard. S. Noble called a Rose noble., Rosatus,
Nobilis rosatus. Bud. Un noble a la rose. S. Noble country. Antiqua terra.
Noble terre. S. Noble man. Magnas, it is. Magnatus, ti. Heroes, ois. Vir nobilis
and illustris. Homme noble and vertueux. Et nobilis, Vt agit se pro nobili.
Bud. He says he is noble. Il se dit noble. S. Et primores viri, Heroes,
Nobiles and illustres viri, Noble men. The nobles, or nobility. Noble of
blood, or of a noble house. Clarus genere, Natalibus clarus, Clarus and
nobilis. Noble. Noble women. Heroinae, Heroides, Primores foeminae,
Praecellentes foeminae, Principes foeminae, Illustriores foeminae. Femmes par
excellence nobles and vertueuses. S. Noble to make. Nobilito, as. Nobilem
facio, Dignitatem addo. Anoblir. S. Nobles of the realm. Megistanes, Proceres.
Vt supra. Noble man. etc. Nobly. Clare, Nobiliter, Splendide. Noblement. S.
Nobly with grace, or majesty. Auguste. Aduerb. Nock of an arrowe, bow,
spindle. etc. Crena, Incisura sagittae, quae neruu^ admittit, Incisura etia^
arcus cui neruus inseritur du^ te^ditur arcus. Le cren. Et Tenus, nus. m. g.
Also the nocke of the bow. Nodde. Nutus, us. m. g. Le sign qu'on fait de la
test. S Nodde with the head. Innuo, is. Nuto, tas. Fair sign de la test. S.
Noddle, or the hinder part of the head. Occiput, it is. Occipitium, tij. n. g.
Le derriere de la test. S. Noe the Patriarcke, signifying rest, called also
Ianus, and Vortumnus, son of Lamech, who by divine commandment, made the
Arcke before the great floudde, and therein was preserved with his wife, three
sons, and both kinds of all creatures. The age of this Noe read in Genesis,
and the entier story of him, the description of ye Arcke, S. Augustine shows
at large. Noye, or to hurt. Noceo, ces. Obsum, es. Officio, cis. Nuire. S.
Noyfull, noisome, or hurtful. Nociuus, a, um. Nocuus, a, um. Sonticus, a, u^.
Tepidus, a, u^. Nuissant. Noynte. Lino, is. Illino, is. Vngo, is. Exungo, is.
Inungo, is. Perungo, is. Oindre. S. Anoint about. Circunlino, is. Oblino, is.
Oindre tout entour. S. To noynte under. Superinu^gere. Oindre par dessus

To anoint, or chafe very much with any liquour. Perlinere, Perlinire. Fort
oindre, and frotter de quelque liqueur. S.

Nointed. Vnctus, a, um. Delibutus, a, um. Illitus, a, um. Oinct. S. Which is
nointed with sweet smelles and odours. Nimbatus, a, um. Qui est oinct
d'odeurs, and senteurs. S.

Nointing, or anointing. Vnctio, onis. Inunctio, onis. Perunctio, onis. f. g.
Unction. S. Noise. Rumor, ris. Sonitus, us, Sonus, i. Sonor, ris. Strepitus,
us. Tumultus, us. m. genesis Noise son. Call. Rumusculus. dimi. Ang. A little noise.
But Sonor, is more aptly a great noise. Un son fort. Call. Et Tumultuosus, a,
u^. Full of noise. Plein de bruit. Noise made in heaviness, or wayling with
cryinge out. Plangor, oris. Eiulatio, onis. Eiulatus, tus. Planctus, tus. m. g.
Plorement en criant. S. Noise, or clapping of hands, or feet. Plausus, us.
Strepitus, us. m. g. Frappement des maiens l'vne contre l'autre en sign de
joy. S. A great noise. Fremitus, tus. m. g. Grand bruit. S.

Noise of the hands, or feet. Strepitus, tus. mas. g. Bruit qu'on fait des
pieds, ou des maiens. S. Noise made with the mouth, the lips fastened
together, the usage whereof is most commonly where one speaks to a horse.
Poppysmus, mi. Poppysma, atis. n. ge. Un son de bouche. Call. Inuenal. Affirms
that it is also the noise with the hands in like case. Noise maker alofte.
Altisonus, a, u^. Qui son haute clair, ou d'en laut. Call. Noise of Bees.
Bombitatio, onis. Bombus, by. m. g. Bourdonnement de mouches a miel. Call. Noise
of any thing. Murmur, ris. neut. genesis Bruit, murmr, S. Et Murmurillum, li.
neut. ge. dimin. A little noise. Petit Bruit. S. Noise to make, or to sound.
Crepo, as, pui. Increpo, as. Sono, as. Concrepo, as. Instrepo, is. Constrepo,
is. Edere tumultum, Sonitum praebere, Voces habere. Strepo, is. Tumultuo, as.
Tono, as. Detono, as. Edere strepitum, Fremo, is. Mu^muro, as. Persono, as.
Bruire, sonner. S. To make a great noise, and sound. Displodo, is. Fair grand
bruit, and grand son. S.

To make a soft noise. Susurrare. Fair un bruit bas

To make a great noise with the feet or other wise. Strepere, Strepitare.
Adstrepere, Obstrepere, Prostrepere. Fair grand bruit des pieds, ouautrement.
S.

To make a noise all about. Circumstrepere. Fair bruit tout a l'entour. S.

To make a noise with others. Interstrepere. Fair bruit auec d'autres. S.

Noise to make often. Strepito, as. Fair bruit plusieurs fois, and souuent. S.
Noise to make with clapping hands, one against another. Plaudo, is. Plodo, is.
Replaudo, is. Frapper les maiens l'vn contre l'autre Noise to make with the
feet. Supplodo, is. Frapper du pied contre la terre. S. Noise to make with
wailing, and weeping. Eiulo, as. Braire. S. Nombe to be, or a sleep, as hand
or foot is. Obtorpeo, es. Obtorpesco, cis. Cic. The hand was a sleep, or
benommed. Manus obtorpuit. Cic. Number. Numerus, ri. m. g. No^bre. S. Et
numeralis, le. Pertaining to number. Appartenant a nombre. To fill the nombre.
Numerum explere. Acco^plir le nombre. S.

To put out of the no^bre of citezins. A, vel e numero ciuiu^ segregare.
Debouter du no^bre des citoye^s.

To wax, or come into a small nombre. Rarescere. Deuenir en petit nombre. S.

You were not of the nombre. Non eras in eo albo. Tu n'estois pas du nombre. S.

We were a great no^bre, almost two hundred. Frequentes fuimus ad ducentos.
Nous auons este en grand nombre, iusques a deux cens. S.

To be more in nombre. Vincere numero. Estre plus en nombre. S.

Of which nombre I am. Quo in numero ego sum. De nombre desquels ie suis. S.

To put, or place him in the no^bre of the Gods. Describere in deos, In deoru^
numero collocare, Refer in deos. Mettre au nombre des dieux. S.

Out of nombre, or which one can not nombre. Supra numerum. Qu'on ne scauroit
nombrer. S.

The art of no^bring, called Arithmetike. Arithmetice, ces. foe. ge. L'art de
nombrer. S.

Number of a thousand. Chilias, adis. Gell. Numerus qui mill continet. Call.
Nombre of two. Binarius numerus. No^bre of 7. referred to time, as to days or
years, Hebdomada, ae. Hebdomas, dis. It is also a week. Septimana, ae. f. g.
Sepmaine. S. By the prophecy of John, Hebdomas, is seven years.* Nombre of
eight on the dice, sice deux, two quaters, sincque trois. Stesichorites. Poll.
Nombred. Numeratus, a, u^. Recensitus, a, u^. No^bre. Nombre, or to reckon.
Numero, as. Recenseo, es. Annumero, as. Dinumero, as. Enumero, as. Numerum
inire, vel refer, Co^prehendere aliquid numero. Nombrer. S. Number to, or
add to in number. Annumero, as. aui. Annombrer, Adiouster. S. Nombrer.
Numerarius, Numerator, ris. Nombring. Numeratio, Recensio, onis. Recensus, m.
g. Nombrement. S. Nombring of names, and surnames. Nomenclatio, Nomenclatura,
rae. foe. ge. Un denombrement de noms, and surnoms, de plusieurs chooses. S.
Nombring of people. Census, us. m. ge. As to cesse or nombre. Habere censum.
Nominate. Nomino, as. Nommer. S. Vide Name. Nominative case. Rectus sieve
nominatiuus casus, est prima vox, qua rem aliquam nominamus, vt crebrius in
rudimentis gramatices reperitur. Nonable. Impotens, it is. om. gen Impotent. Call.
Nonabilitie, or inability. Impotentia, ae. f. ge. Impuissance. Call. Nonage, a
term of the commune law, signifying not of full age. Alienior aetate,
Pupillaris aetas, vel annus. Non suit in the law. Tergiuersatio, onis. f. ge.
Non suit to be in action. Cadere causa, vel formula, Tergiuersor, aris. Causam
amittere, Lite^ perdere vel amittere, Lite cadere. Perdre son process. S. Non
usage. Desuetudo, inis. f. g. Desaueustomance. S. None. Nullus, a, um. Nemo.
Null. S. None at all. Nemo homo, Pro nemo hominum. None else, or besides that.
Praeterea. Aduerb. Oultre ce. S. None of them. Neuter, ra, rum. Ne l'vn ne
l'autre. S. Noone. Meridies, ei. m. g. Midi. S. Meridianus, a, u^. Perteining
to noone, or of noone. De midi. S. Nooning, noone rest, or sleaping on the day
time. Meridiatio, onis. foe. ge. Le dormir sur iour. S. Nophice, or one newly
entered into any profession. Neophitus. Nor. Nec, Neu, Non. Ne. S. Neither
alive, nor dead. Neue viuus, Neue mortuus. Cic. Ne vif, ne mort. S.

Neither this, nor that. Neue hoc, Neue illud Ne ceci, ne cela. S.

Neither has there been a more better man, then Aphricane, nor a more worthier,
and renoumed. Nec melior vir fuit Africano quispiam, nec clarior. Il n' y eut
iamais homme meilleur que Africain, ne qui fust plus reno^me. S.

Nor yet. Nedum, Neue. North, or the north part of the world, right against
the South. Boreas, ae. Septentrio, onis. f. ge. Septentrion, ou la party
septentreonale a l'opposite du midi. S. A place in the north. Boreus,
Septentrionalis locus. Lieu Septentrional. S.

Northwynde. Boreas, reae. Aquilo, onis. mas. ge. Le vent de ^ise, North, ou
vent de North. H. Et Borealis, le. Boreus, a, um. Aquilonaris, re. Aquilonius,
a, um. Of the North. De bise. S. Northeastwynde. Caurus, Corus, Argestes,
Iapyx. Northest, vent de gale^ne. H. North part of Scotland. Orcas, dis. Et
sunt orchades appellatae. 40. insulae de quibus supra, In Britayne and
England: Tame^ secundu^ Pompo. sunt insulae Oceani septentrionalis. 30. numero
vltra Britanniam, and Hiberniam paru^ inter se distantes. Northstarre, called
the lode star. Boreus polus. Northwest wind. Caecias, ae. m. genesis
Northeuest. H. But Ptol. Places it in his tables for the East Northeast wind,
and calls the Northweast wind Chorus. Northen men, or people of the north.
Brigantes, Alauorsi, Alanorsi. Ptol. Nose. Nasus, si. masc^ genesis Nez. H. Nose
bridge, or the particion which stands between the two nosethrylles.
Interfinium, Isthmus, Intersepimentum, vel discrimen narium, Imbrex narium. La
taille des narines. H. Nose turning upward like an apes nose with open
nosethrelles. Nasus resimus. Nez recrochu, camuz. Nose like an eagle, or an
hawks bill. Nasus aquilinus vel aquilus. Nez aquilin. H. Nose tippe, or the
ball of the nose. Nasi orbiculus, Pirula, a piri forma. Le bout du nez. H. Nose
blede herb. Millefolium. Stratiotes, Supercilium veneris. Millefueille. H.
Nose gaye. Fasciculus, li. m. genesis Cic. Un bouquet de fleurs, ou senteurs. S.
Nose of a ship end, extreme part, top, or such like. Coronis, dis. f. g.
Mart. Nosethrylles. Alae, arum. Nares, riu^. Nasi foramina, sieve fenestrae
nasi. Les narines. H. Nosed flat. Camurus, Simus, Resimus nasus, Simo, onis.
Camus. H. A nose as flat as a cake. Naris sima. Mart.

Not. Haud, Minime, Non, Nequaqua^, Ne, Neutiquam. Non. S. Not before the new
Moon. Non ante lunam nouam. Non point deuant la nouelle lune. S.

Not without a cause. Non iniuria, Non ab^ re. Non sans cause. S.

Not long ago. Non ita pridem. Cic. Il n'y a pas fort long temps. S. Not
necessary. Superuacuus, a, um. Superuacaneus, a, um. Ne servant de rien,
superflu. S. Not one foot further. Nusquam pedem. Terent. Not one man. Nemo
vnus. Liu. Point un seul. S. Not only. Non duntaxat, Non modo, Nec modo,
Nedum, Non solum, Non tantum. Non seuleme^t. Not only the wars of our own
country, but also those of foraine countries. Non domestica solum, sed etiam
externa bella. Non seulement les guerres de nostre pais, mais aussi celles des
estranges. Not sauory, or without savor. Infatuatus, a, um. Insulsus, a, um.
Sans saueur. S. Notwithstanding. Attamen, Tamen, Tandem, Veruntamen.
Toutesfoys. S. Not yet. Nihil dum, Non dum. Non encore, non point encore. S.
Notable. Insignis, ne. Notabilis, le. Signatus, a, um. Notable. S. Notable
signs. Insignia, orum. n. g. Virg. Notable to make. Insignio, is. Notably.
Insignite, Insigniter, Notabiliter. Notablement. S. Notary public. Actuarius,
Scriba, Tabellio, onis. m. g. Greffier. S Notary which writes under an other
instruments or plees. Notarius, rij. m. genesis Escriuain qui escript soubs aucun.
S. Notaries which take stipulations. Rogatarij. Note, or mark made in a
book. Annotatio, onis. Nota, ae. f. ge. Vne note ou marque qu' on fait en un
liver. S. Note made in a book. Alopius,* Asteriscus, ci. m. g. Signum est ad
paruae stellae similitudinem, quo in scribendo saepius vtimur, quum variant
exemplaria. etc. Call. Note. Annoto, as. Praescribo. Adnoto, as. Insignio, nis.
Noter. S. Note diligently. Animaduerto, is. Ausculto, as. Note, or mark
secretly. Subnoto, as. Noter, and marquer tacitement. S. Nothing. Hilum, li.
Nihil, Nihilum, Nil, Recte. Rien. S. Donat. Inquit, Nunquid velis? rogo, recte
ait, ipse abeo. I asked him whether he would any thing, he answered, nothing.
Rogo nunquid velit, Recte inquit. Terent. Rien. S.

Nothing exceadinge superfluous, or nothing to much. Nequid nimis, Adagium,
quod ab alijs in hunc modum profertur, Ne quid nimis, ne quid minus, aurea
mediocritas. Nothing worth. Nauci, indeclin. Titiuilitium, tij. n. g. Chose de
nulle valeur. Notice, or knowledge. Notitia, ae. Cognitio, onis. f. ge. Notice,
cognoissance. Call. Notify. Notifico, as. Notum facere, Innotesco, scis.
Notifier. S. Notingam castle in England. Rage. Noting, entituling, or marking
for remembrance. Annotatio, onis. f. g. Note, marque. S. Notorious, manifest,
or evident. Notorius, a, um. Manifestus, Publicus, Manifestarius, a, um.
Manifest, ou evident. Call. Notorious to make, to diuulgate, or make manifest.
Manifesto, as. Publico, as. Diuulgo, as. Diuulguer, ou manifester. S.
Notoriously, or manifestly. Manifest, Manifesto, Notorie, Public, Vulgo.
Manifestement. Call. Now. Iam, Ad praesens, Modo, Nunc. A ceste heure. Now a
days. Hoc aeuo, Nunc temporis, Hijs te^poribus, Hoc aetatis. En cest aage. S.
Now, and then, sometime. Quandoque. Aucunesfois. Now every day. Iam indies,
Prope diem. Now go to. Age, Agite. Aduerb. Temp, or aua^t. S. Now late, or a
pretty while since. Iamdudum, Modo, Olim. Il y a asses long temps. S. Now one,
and then another, by turn, or which is made one after an other. Alternus, a,
um. Qui se fait l'vne apres l'autre. S. Now one, now another. Alternis.
Aduerb. Alternis vicibus, Alterne, Alterna vice, Per vices, Vicissatim,
Vicissim, Alternatim. L'vn apres l'autre. Naught, or naught. Hilum, li. n. g.
Vide Nothing. Noughty, or ungracious. Improbus, Peruersus, Prauus, a, um.
Malignus, a, um. Nocens, it is. om. genesis Mauuais. S. Naught and wicked. Deter,
sieve Deterus, a, um. Mauuais, and meschant. S. Thou bendest neither the one way,
nor the other, but art even iumpi^ stark naught. Nec dependes, nec propendes,
quin malus, nequamque sis. Tu es droictement mauuais. S.

To make naught. Deprauare. Fair mauuais. S.

Noughtines, or wickedness. Malignitas, atis. Prauitas, atis. Malitia, ae. f. g.
Mauuaistie. S. Noughtines covered, and hyde. Inuoluta integumentis nequitia.
Mauuaistie couuerte, and cachee. S Noughtly. Improbe, Perverse, Praue, Male,
Mauuaisement. S. Nourice. Nutrix, cis. Alumna, ae. * La nourice. H. Nutricula,
ae. dimi. Ang. A little or young nource. Petite nourrice. Call. Et Nutritious, a,
um. Perteyning to nourishing, Appartenant a nourrir. Call. Nources husband.
Nutritious, tij. Nourrissier. H. Nourisherie. Gynaeceum, cei. n. g. Nourishe.
Alo, is, lui, litum, vel altum. Alumno, * Alumnor, aris. Focillo, as. Foculo,
as. Foueo, es. Enutrio, is. Innutrio, is. Cibo, as. Educo, as. Educo, cis.
Ephibeo, es. Sustollo, is. Tolero, as. Nutrico, as. Pasco, scis. Tollo, is,
sustuli, Nutrio, is. Adnutrio, is, iui. Nourrir. S. Nourishe, or cherishe
again, to restore to his nature, strength, and estate. Refoueo, es. Renutrio,
is. Remettre en nature, en vigueur, and estat. S. Nourishe or bring up his
child from the birth. Attollere partum. Nourrir son enfant. S. Nourished.
Alitus, Pastus, Nutritus, a, um. Altus, a, um. Qui est nourri. S. Nourisher.
Altor, oris. Alitor, oris. Educator, oris. Nutritor, oris. m. g. Nourisseur,
qui nourrist. S. Nourisher of Bees, or he which has the charge, and
government of bees. Apiarius, rij. masc. ge. Celuy qui a la charge, and
gouernemeut des mouches a miel. Call. Nourishing. Educatio, onis. Nutritus, tus.
Nutricatio, onis. Nutricatus. m. g. Nourrissement. S. Nourishing meats. Focula
ventris. Colum. Nourrissements, viandes. S. Nourishing naturally, or by kind,
as the earth does. Almus, a, um. Alibilis, le. om. g. Nourrissant. Sometime
the earth it self is said Alma, because we have our sustenau^ce thereof, as
Alma tellus. The earth which nourishes us. Qui nous nourrist. S.
Nouryshement. Alimentum, Alimonia, Alimoniu^, nij. Alitura, ae. Cibarium, rij.
Cibatus, tus. Nutritus, tus. Nutrimentum, ti. n. g. Nourriture. S.
Nourishementes. Focula, orum. Nutrimenta, oru^. neut. genesis Nourrissements. Call.
Nouriture. Nutricatus, us. m. g. Nourriture. S. Nourture, or good manners.
Mores, oru^. m. g. Iuue.
N. ANTE. V.
NVmbde, or taken. Syderatus, a, um. Stupidus, a, um. Torpidus, a, um.
Engourdi. S. Which is numbde, or benommed with cold. Torpidus frigore. Qui
est tout engourdi de froid. S.

Members numbde, or benommed. Membra stupida. Members engourdiz. S.

To be numbde, or benommed. Torpere, Torpescere. Estre engourdi. S.

Nu^bdnes, or taking of ye lymmes. Syderatio, Stupor, ris. Stupiditas, atis.
Torpor, oris. mas. ge. Engourdissement. S. Number. Vide Nombre. Numerable.
Numerabilis, le. om. gene. Qui se peut nombrer. Call. Nun. Sanctimonialis,
Sacra virgo, vel consecrata, Monacha, chae. f. g. Vne nonnain. S. Nurse. Vide
Nourice. Nursegardens, as seeds, settes for garde^s, slips, springes, or young
settes. Semina, inum. Surculi, orum. m. g. Semences, iectons, ou bourgeons. S.
Et Surculosus, a, um. That has many slippes. Qui ha force iectons, ou
bourgeons. S. and Surcularius, a, u^. Pertaining to slippes. Appartenant a
iectons. S. Nutte. Nux, cis. Noix. H. Et Nucula, dim. Ang. A little nutte.
Petite noix. noissille. Call. Et Nuceus, a, um. Of a nutte. De noix. Call. Nutte
called a chestnutte. Castanea, Sardiana gla^s. Chastaigne. H. Nutte called a
fylbearde. Nux auellana. Auelline. H Nutte called a walnutte. Basilica nux, Nux
regia, Iuglan^, dis. f. g. Vne noix. S. Nutte cracker. Nucifrangibulum, li. n.
g. Plaut. Nuttemigge. Carrion, Myristicon, Mosthocarion, Nux muscata, Myristica
nux vel odorata, Nux vnguentaria. Noix muscade ou muguette. H. Nutte shale.
Putamen, inis. n. g. Escaille de noix. S. Nutte kernel. Nucleus. Noyau. H. The
pill or thin husk of the kernel of a nut. Nuclei tunica. H.

Nutte of a crosbowe. Astragalus arcubalistae, in cuius cana^iculo spiculum
locatur. Noix d'arbaleste. Nuttes with very thin shales. Apinae, arum. f. g.
N. Ante. Y. Vide N. Ante. I.
O. ANTE. B.
O, Is the name of a vowel, which has diverse significations, and is found
either an aduerbe of calling, as, O Syrus, where is Aeschinus? o Sire,
Aeschinus vbi est? Terent: or an Interiection of sorrow, as, O wretch that I
am. O me perditum. O me afflictum. O moy homme perdu. S: Of disdayning, as, O
what boldness. O audaciam. O la hardiesse. S: Of mirthe, as, O happy chance. O
factum been. O que c' est bien faict. S. etc. H joined unto him, makes him of
more vehemency: as, Oh, I am an honest man. Oh, Probus homo sum. Plaut. Also
in the notes of antiquity, O A Q signified Omnes aliquos. O good child. Euan.
Obedience. Allubescentia, Obsequium, ij. Obedie^tia, ae. Morigeratio, onis.
Auscultatio, onis. Obsequela, lae. f. g. Obedience. Obedient. Audiens dicto.
Moriger, ra, rum. Morigeratus, a, um. Obediens, it is. Obseque^s, it is. om. ge.
Obeissant. S. Obedient to his father. Proindulgens in patrem, Obediens patri,
Morigerus, a, um. Obeissant a son pere. S. An obedient heart. Animus subiectus.
Un cueur obeissant. S.

To be obedient to his father and mother. Colere pietate^. Estre obeissant a
son pere, and a sa mere. S.

To make obedient. Cogere ad obsequium. Render obeissant. S.

Obedient to be at an others commandment. In potestate aliena esse.
Obediently. Obedienter, Obsequenter. Obedie^ment. Obey. Allubesco, scis.
Ausculto, as. Cedo, is. Imperata facere, Accipere imperium, Cedere alicui, In
authoritate alicuius esse, Obsequor, eris. Sequi amicum, Secundo, as. Deseruio,
is. Morem gero, ris. Morigeror, aris. Obaudio, is. Obsecundo, as. Obedio, is.
Obtempero, as. Pareo, es, ui. Obeir. S. To obeie the sentence of the Judge.
Iudicata re stare. Obeir a la sentence du judge. S.

To obey the ordinance of the senate. Stare decreto Senatus. Obeir a
l'ordonnance. S.

I will obey your will. etc. Parebo tuis mandatis, exequar tua mandata,
effectum dabo, quod mandasti, tuae voluntati parebo, morem geram, obsequar,
obtemperabo. sequar voluntatem tua^. meam voluntatem ad tuam aggregabo, cum tua
comiungam. tuae voluntati mea voluntas seruiet. tua mihi voluntas lex erit,
atque norma.

To obey the laws. Legibus credere. Obeir aux loix. S.

Not to obey. Imperium respuere, Detrectare imperia, Abnuere imperium. Ne
vouloir obeir. S.

To make to obey. Cogere ad obsequium, Ad obsequium redigere. Fair obeir. S.

He has given answer that he will obey the court. In potestate se curiae,
vel imperij iudicialis futurum respondit, vel curiae dicto audientem futurum.
Il a respondu qu'il obeira a la Cour. S.

Willingly to obey the sentence, or judgment. Iudicatum vltro facere.
Voluntairement obeir a la sentence. S.

Obey judgment. Stare arbitrio. Obeying. Obediens, it is. Parens, it is.
Obsequens, it is. Morigerus, a, um. Audiens dicto. Obeissant. S. Obeysaunce.
Obauditio, onis. Auscultatio, onis. Morigeratio, onis. Obedientia, ae.
Obsequela, lae. Obtemperatio, onis. f. g. Obeissance. S. To deny obeissaunce,
and will not obey. Respuere imperium, Aspernari imperium, and abnuere,
Detrectare, vel recusare imperium. Refuser obeissance, and ne vouloir obeir. S.

Object. Obiecto, as. Obijcio, cis. Obiecter, ou obijcer. S To obiecte in
reproach. Obijcere aliquid crimini, vel in loco criminis, aut vt probrum,
Opprobrare, Vitio vertere. Obijcer pour reproach. S.

Objected. Obiectus, a, um. Iecte, and mis au deuant. S. Obiecting. Obiectus,
us. Obiectio, onis. Obiectatio, onis. f. g. Objection. S. Objection. Idem.
Objection by way of reproach. Opprobrium, rij. n. g. Opprobre, reproach. S. Et
Opprobriosus, a, um. He that is full of such objections.* Oblation. Oblatio,
onis. Donarium, rij. Oblatum, Libatio, onis. Libamen, nis. n. g. Oblation. S.
Obligation. Chirographus, Chirographum. Nexus, us. Obligatio, Syngrapha, ae.
Syngraphus, i. Antipocha, Syngraphum, i. Cedule, obligation. H. Obliuious.
Obliuiosus, a, u^. Oubliant. Call. Obliuieux Obloquie. Obloquium, ij. Vocula,
ae.* Obscure. Obscurus, a, um. Tenebrosus, a, u^. Tenebricus, a, um.
Tenebricosus, a, um. Obscur. S. Somewhat obscure. Subobscurus, a, um.
Aucunement, ou quelque peu obscur. S.

Very obscure. Perobscurus, a, um. Fort obscur. S.

An obscure light. Lux maligna. Lumiere obscure. S

Obscure, or to darken. Obducere rebus tenebras, Obnubilo, as. Obscuro, as.
Praeumbro, as. Offundere tenebras, Caliginem inducere, vel obducere. Obscurcir.
S. To speak obscurely, and covertly. Abscondito loqui. Parler obscurement, and
couuertement. S.

Obscurely, or darkely. Obscure. Obscurement. S. Observation. Obseruatio, onis.
f. g. Observation. S. Obscurity, or darkness. Caligo, inis. f. g. Obscurite.
Tenebrosite. S. Obseruaunce. Obseruatio, onis. Obseruantia, uantiae. f. g.
Observance. S. Observe. Expecto, as. Obseruo, as. Asseruo. Obseruer. Obstacle.
Obstaculum, Offendiculu^, li. Obex, icis. Obiectaculum, li. n. g. Obstacle. S.
Obstinacy. Obstinatio, Pertinacia, Peruicacia, ciae. f. g. Obstination, and
fermete de propos opiniastrise. S. Obstinate. Obfirmatus, Obstinatus, Pertinax,
cis. Peruicax, cis. Refractarius, a, um. Obstine. S. Obstinate person. Capito,
onis. Pertinax, Tricipitinus, Opinator vehemens. Opiniastre. S. Obstinate to
be, or to stand stiffly against all men. Obfirmare viam* Obfirmare animu^,
Obfirmare se, Obstinare. S' obstiner a l' encontre de tous. S. Be not so
obstinate, be not so stiff. Ne tam obfirma te. Ne to obstines pas si fort. S.

Obstinately. Obfirmate, Obstinate, Perfracte, Pertinaciter, Peruicaciter,
Praefracte. Obstine^ment. S. Obtain. Adipiscor, eris. Assequor, eris.
Nanciscor, ris. Obtineo, es. Potior, iris. Consequor, eris. Obtenir. S. Let me
obtain this one thing at thy hands. Sine te hoc exore^. Pren que ie obtienne
ce la de toy.

He has obtained that he hoped. Assequutus est quod sperabat. Il a obtenu ce
qu' il esperoit. S. Est voti compos.

Obtain a matter. Tenere causam. Suet. Obtain by chance, or fortune.
Sortior, iris. Sortito capio, vel Sort consequor. Call. Obtain by craft,
dissimulation, or falshode. Obrepo, pis. vt Obrepere ad magistratus. Obtain by
desire, or request. Impetro, as. Consequi, Obtinere. Obtenir et impetrer ce
qu'on dema^doi^ Obtain by desire. Lito, as. Fest.* Obtain favor before an
other, or first. Praeuertere animum alicuius. Obtain eftsoon. Renanciscor,
ris. Neb. Obtain a matter in judgment. Caussam tenere apud iudices. Cic.
Obtain pardon. Parere gratiam. Obtained. Adeptus, a, um. Nactus, a, um.
Consequutus, ta, tum. Obtenu. S. Obtained by craft, or falshode. Obreptitius,
a, u^. Obtained by desire, peticion, or request. Impetratus, ta, tum. Impetre.
S. Obtaining. Adeptio, onis* f. g. Obtenne. S. Obtaining, or getting by
collusion, or craft. Obreptio, onis. f. g. Vlpian. Obtestation. Obtestatio,
onis. f. ge. Cic. It is properly where one takes God to wytnes. and Obtestor,
aris. To take God to wytnes.
O. ANTE. C.
OCcasion. Ansa, ae. Locus, ci. Occasio, onis. f. ge. Occasion. S. and
Occasiuncula, ae. diminut. Ang. A little, slender, or small occasion. Petite
occasion. Call. Soubdayne occasion. Breuis occasio. Soubdaine occasion. S.

Occasion was offered. Facultas accidit. L' occasion se presenta. S. To have
occasion, and cause. Causam habere. Auoir occasion, and cause. S.

To give one occasion to offend. Locum pecca^di praebere. Bailler occasion de
pecher. S.

To give occasion of death. Causam mortis afferre. Donner occasion de mort. S.

To leese occasion. De esse occasioni. Perdre l'occasion. S.

To take occasion. Capere causam, Arripere causam, Capere, vel Captare
occasionem. Prendre occasion. S.

By occasion. Per occasionem. Occasionellement. S.

Occasion present. Oste^tata occasio. Occasion presentee. Occasion one to say
evil. Locum vituperandi relinquere, Sermonem dare alicui. Bailler occasion a
aucu de mesdire. S. Occasion to give. Causam alicui afferre, Materiam praebere,
Dare vel offerre occasionem, Dare ansam. Donner occasion. S. Occasion to sin,
given by an other. Scandalum, li. neut. genesis Occident or the west part of the
world. Occidens, it is. Occident. S. Occidentall. Occidentalis, le. om. ge.
Occidental. S. Occupation. Ars, it is. Artificium, cij. n. ge. Mestier. S.
Negotialis, le. Ang. Pertaining to occupation. An occupation little esteamed.
Ars humilis. Mestier de peu d'estime. S.

Men of occupation. Opifices and tabernarij. Cic. Gens de mestier. S.

To leave his occupation. Se art sua remouere. Delaisser son mestier. S.

Occupation, or deprehension, a figure in Rethorike. Catalepsis, Occupatio,
onis, f. g. Occupation. S Occupation by continual, or long possession.
Vsucaptio, onis. Capio, onis. f. g. Vlpian. Occupation, craft, or mystery.
Techna, ae. Ars, it is. foe. g. Mestier. S. Technicus, a, um. Having an
occupation. Technides, dis. A man of occupation. Vide supra. Occupation of
husbandry, or tillage. Villicatio, onis. foe. genesis Colum. Occupation, or
usage. Vsus, us. m. g. Usage. S. Occupy or to use. Occupo, as. Vtor, eris.
Fruor, eris. Vser. S. To occupy him self for a certain time in any thing.
Tempus alicui rei tribuere, Occupare in re aliqua animum. S'occuper quelque
temps a quelque chose. S.

To occupy, or exercise him self. Exercitationem suscipere, Exercere se.
S'exercer. S.

Occupy before, or first. Praeoccupo, as. Occupy husbandry. Villico, as.
Villicor, aris. Labourer les terres. S. Occupied or bussed about any thing.
Occupatus, a, u^. Applicatus, a, u^. Occupe. S. Which is not occupied in
matters public. Feriatus a negotijs publicis. Qui n'est point occupe aux
affairs publiques. S.

To be occupied, or exercised in war. Habere vsum belli. Estre exercite a la
guerre. S.

Occupied to be busely in any thing. Summam in re aliqua operam ponere, Noctes
dicsque rei alicui studere. H. Occupier in husbandry, or tillage. Villico,
nis. Vil licus, ci. Vide Husbandman. Ocean sea. Oceanus, any. m. ge. La grande
mer. S. Per Seruium, and Solinum, Oceanu^, ni. n. g. Per Caperum, and Prob.
Aliquando appellatiuum est, vt cu^ parts, and aliquando proprium, vt cum mare
ipsum significet. Ocean or of the ocean. Oceanus, a, u^. vel Oceanius, a, u^.
D'ocean. S. Ocker. Ochra, ae. f. g. De l'ocre. October, month. October, bris.
masc. gener. Le mois d'octobre. S.
O. ANTE. D.
Odd, or not even. Impar, ris. om. g. Qui n'est point pareil. S. Odious.
Inuidiosus, Inuidus, a, um. Inuisus, Odiosus, a, um. Stolidus, a, um. Odieux.
S. Odoriferous, or which gives a good odor. Aromaticus, Odoratus, Odorifer,
ra, rum. Spirans, it is, om. ge. Qui rend bonne odeur. S. Odor, or sauoure.
Odor, oris. m. g. Odeur. S A delicate odor, or savor. Odor mollissimus. Odeur
delicate. S.

A strong odor, or smell. Odor acer. Fort odeur. S

A naughty odor, or savor. Foedus odor, vel insuauis, Graueolentia, Grauis
odor, vel malus. Mauuaise odeur. S.

A great odor, or smell. Eximius odor, aut vehemens. Grande odeur. S.

An odor somewhat strong. Subgrauis odor. Odeur un peu forte. S.

Rose of small odor, or savor. Angusti odoris rosa. Rose de petite odeur. S.

A very strong, and mighty odor, or sauoure. Odor potentissimus. Odeur
tresforte, and puissante.

To give a good odor. Odorare, Odore^ iactare, Redolere, Spirare. Render bonne
odeur. S.

To recover his odor, or smell. Odorem rursus capere. Recouurer son odeur. S.

To cast an odor or savor. Odorem trahere. Iecter odeur. S.

To give a great, and strong odor, or sauoure. Grauiter spirare. Render vne
grande, and forte odeur.


O. ANTE. F.
OF. A,, Ab, Abs, De, Ex. De. S. Of a long time, space, or season. Per multas
aetates. Liu. Long temps durant. S. Of all kind, or of every sort.
Omnifarius, a, um. Omnigenus, a, um. De toutes sorts. S. Of al kind, or of
every kind. Omnifaria^. aduerb. Of all the people. Populatim. Aduerb. Caecil.
If of any place. Sicunde. Adu. Si de quelque lieu.

Of an other fashion, or manner. Aliusmodi. Caes. D' autre sort and maniere. S.
Of every kind. Omnigenus, a, um. Vt supra. Of every man. Viritim. Aduerb. Of
every one. Singillatim. Aduerb. Of his own accord, nature, or will. Suapte na
tura, Sponte, Vltro. De son bon gre, and franc vouloir. Et Spontaneus, a, um.
That which is done of his own accord. Quod est voluntarium. Call. Of one
time. Syncronos, Comtemporaneus. Of one voice. Vniuocus, a, um. and Vniuoce.
Aduer. Of what country. Cuias, it is. om. g. De quel pais. Of what country is
he? Cuias est? De quel pais est il? S. Of, or from what place. Vnde. Aduerb.
Don't, don. S. Of, or from what place soever. Vndecunque, Vndeunde. De quelque
lieu que ce soit. Call. Of whence. Cuias, it is. om. ge. Vt supra. Offall of any
thing. Excretum, ti. n. g. Columel. Offall of beans. Fabalia, ium. n. ge. It
is rather the stalks of beans. Un fauat de feues. Call. Offense, or fault.
Admissum, Crimen, Culpa, Delictum, Lapsus, us. Noxa, ae. Offensa, Peccatum.
Erratum, ti. Mendum, di. Menda, ae. Noxia, ae. Praeuaricatio, onis. Vitium,
tij. n. ge. Laesio, onis. f. g. Offense, ou fault. S. Et Offensiuncula, ae.
dimi. inde. Ang. A little or small offense. Petite offense. To commit any
offense, or fault. Commereri culpam, aut noxiam, Noxiam admittere, Offendere,
Culpam in se admittere, Culpam contrahere. Fair quelque fault. S.

Offense great and heinous. Piaculum, li. n. g. Virg. Offense punished by
death. Capitale facinus, Quod poena luitur. Fest. Offense which makes gilty.
Reatus, tus. mas. ge. Paulus iuriscons. Offense worthy death. Capitalis noxa.
Offend. Admitto, is. Committo, is. Delinquo, is. Hostio, is. Molesto, as.
Offendo, is. Pecco, as. Ra do, is, si. Offenser. S. et Molestus, a, u^. Angl.
That which does offend. To offend one. Commereri aliquid erga alterum,
Offendere aliquem, Laedere. Offencer aucun.

Offend little, or somewhat. Suboffendo, is. Offencer aucunement. S. Offend
the law. Discedere a Iure. Cic. Offend statutes. Violare sanctiones.
Offending. Offensans, it is. om. ge. Office. Munus, eris. Officium, Pars, it is. f.
g. Office. S. Praetura, ae. Et Officialis, le. Pertaining to an office. Quod ad
officium pertinet. Call. Praetura, Is the office properly of him that is
Praetor. Preture, office de Preteur. Call. The noble office of a Judge. Officium
iudicis honorarium. Le noble office du judge. S.

A seditious office. Tribunatus turbule^tus. Office seditieux. S.

To do the office of a consul. Obire munus co^sulis, Munus consulare
sustinere. Fair l' office de consul. S.

To do well the office of an Emperor. Implere vices imperatoris. Fair bien
l' office d' empereur. S.

To do the office of a judge. Iudicis officiu^ promere. Fair l'office d'vn
judge. S.

To put one from his office for ever. Abrogare alicui magistratum in perpetuum.
Priuer quelqu'vn de son office a tousiours. S.

Office of a baylife, catchepole, or such like. Apparitura, ae. foe. ge. Suet.
Office of a court, where as writtes and such like are taken forth. Exhedra
scribarum, Officium, Cella actuaria, Scribarum officium, Promptuarium litium,
Tabulariu^, Officiu^ actoru^ Curiae and scribaru^, Armame^tarium causarum. Le
greffe. Office, or authority, wherein five be associate. Quinqueuiratus, us.
m. g. Cic. As the number of the officers be, so must you take the latin, as if
two men be in ioynte office. Duumuiratus, If three men, Triumuiratus. Office,
or commen duty. Munia, orum. n. g. Colum. As, to do the charge, and office of
a king. Obire regis munia. Fair la charge, and office du roy. S. Office within
a princes court, or palayce. Palatinum officium. Officer, or magistrate.
Magistratus, tus. m. ge. Officier, ou magistrate. S. Officer, bayliefe,
cathpole, sargeaunt, or summer. Conquisitor, Stator, ris. Apparitor, oris. m.
genesis Huissier, sergeant, ou appariteur. S. Officer, being associate with other
four, as where five be in office. Quinqueuir, ri. m. g. Cic. Le nom d'vn
magistrate a Rome. S. Officer, being one of three in one office. Triumuir. ri.
m. g. Cic. And the office is, Triu^uiratus, tus. m. g. Et Triumuiralis, le.
Pertaining. etc. Officer, being one of seven in one office. Septemuir, ri. m.
ge. Cic. And the office is, Septemuiratus, tus. m. ge. Officer which deals
spoil, or the kings gift among soldiers. Clauarius, rij. m. g. Corn. Ta.
Officers constrained to resign, or to surrender. Abacti magistratu. Fest.
Officers not rightly co^stitute, or made. Vitiosi magistratus. Cic. Officer of
the receipt, as chamberlaynes, and tollers be. Quaestores aerarij. Tacit.
Officers to see good rule kept. Circitores. Officers, which have charge to
put in writing, and to note those things which happen, or chance. Ab
accidentibus. Qui ha charge de mettre en escript and d' aduertir des chooses qui
suruiennent. S. Officers of the kings house. Aulicum ministeriu^. Les
officiers de la maison du roy. S. Official. Officialis, lis. Apul. Official.
Pals. Offer. Offero, rs. Porrigo, is. Conditionem far, Repraesento, as, aui.
Offrir. S. To offer him self of his own accord to do any thing. Largiri se
vltro, Offerre se. S' offrir de soymesme a fair quelque chose. S.

To offer him self to do all playsure. Offerre beneficium. S' offrir a fair
tout plaisir. S.

To offer him self to die. Dare iugulum. S'offrir a la mort. S.

To offer him self to die for the life of an other. Ostentare iugulum pro
capite alterius. S'offrir a mourrir pour la vie d'autruy. S.

All the world does offer it self to him. Omnes se illi venditant. Tout le
monde s' offer a luy. S.

To offer his service to any. Venditare se alicui per omnia obsequia. Offrir
son service a quelqu'vn.

To make an offer. Offerre conditionem. Fair vne offer. S.

Offer his head to be chopped of. Ceruicem praebere. Cic. Presenter le col. S.
Offer in sacrifice. Immolo, as. Sacrifier. S. Offer, or to present him self.
Occurro, is. Se presenter and offrir. S. Offer salutations to a friend.
Obsaluto, as. Fest. Offer, which one has made to any. Oblatum, ti. Conditio,
onis. foe. ge. Offer qu' on a faict a aucun. S An offer unjust, and
unreasonable. Conditio iniqua. Vne offer unjust, and irraisonnable. S.

To make a great offer. Conditionem far luculentam. Fair vne grande offer. S.

Offers made on both parties. Vltro citroque conditiones latae. Offres faictes
d' vne part, and d'autre. S. To take, and accept an offer. Conditionem capere,
vel accipere. Prendre, and accepter vne offer. S.

Offered. Oblatus, a, um. Offert, present. S. Offering. Oblatio, onis. f. g.
Oblation. S. Offering, which one makes unto God. Libatio, onis. f. g. Offrande
qu' on fait a dieu. S. Often. Assiduus, a, um. Creber, ra, rum. Frequens, it is.
om. ge. Frequent. S. Often. Assidue, Assiduo, Crebro, Frequenter, Plerunque,
Saepe, Saepenumero, Subinde. aduerb. Souuent, ou souuentes fois. S. Often
handled. Inter manus versatus. Often handled to be. Inter manus versati. Often
times. Vide Often. Oftenes. Crebritas, it is. f. g. Cic.
O. ANTE. H.
OH, a voice of an exceading disdeining, rejoicing, or sorrowyng. Oh, Pro,
interiect. OH, oh, thou art my little pigges nigh. Oh oh, ocellus es meus.
Plaut. Oh caytife that I am. O me miserum, O me infoelicem. O moy homme perdu.
S. Oh the faith of God and man. Pro deum, atque hominum fidem. Mon dieu. etc.
S. Ohe, a voice signifyinge sacietye or wearines. Ohe, As, ho ho it is enough.
Ohe iam satis est, Ohe libelle. Mart. Hola, hola c' est assez. S.
O. ANTE. I.
Oil. Oleum, lei. n. g. Huille. H. Oil beries. Colimbades, du^. Drupae, aru^.
Vide Olives. Oil celler. Olearia cella. Cic. Celier a garder l'huile. Oil
dregs. Amurca, ae. Sanies oleia. Lie d'huille. Et Amurcosus, a, um.* Full of
oil dregs. Oil de baye, or lorel. Laurinum oleum. Plin. Huile Laurin. S.
Oil in the woull of a sheep flank. Oesypum, pi. n. g. Plin. Oil mylle.
Trapetes, it is. m. g. Trapetum, ti. n. genesis moulin a huile. H. Oil of almondes.
Metopion. Plin. lib. 15. cap. 7. Oil of narde. Oleum nardinum. Huile de nard.
Oil of Narcissus, a certain herb. Narcissinum oleum. Huile de Narcisse.
Oil olyue. Oliuum. Huille d'oliue. H. Oil olyue made of unripe fruit.
Omphacinum oleum. Plin. Huile faict d'oliues qui ne sont point encore meures.
S. Oil pot. Lecythus, thy. Ampulla in balneis. Cic. Pot a huile. S. A kind
of small vessel, wherein they did put oil in the bains. Rhinoceros, otis.
mas. ge. Plin. Vne sort de petir vaisseau ou on mettoit de l' huile es bains.
S.

Oyler, or oil maker. Olearius, rij. m. ge. Huillier, ou qui fait l'huile.
Call. Oily, of oil, or pertaining to oil. Olearius, a, u^. Olearis, re. om.
ge. Apartenant a huile. Call. Which is made of oil. Oleatus, a, um. Quod est
ex oleo factum. Call.

Ointment. Vnguentum, ti. Vnguen, inis. n. g. Vnge^tum, ti. n. g. Onguent. S.
Ointment sweet and delicious. Megaliu^, lij. n. g. Ointment which harlots use.
Stibium, ij. n. ge.* Or a stone medicinable.. Ointment that harlots, maids,
and women do painte their faces with. Pigmentum, ti. n. g. Pli. Du fard. S.
Ointment maker, or seller. Vnguentarius, rij. m. g. Qui fait, and vend onguens.
S. And the art of making oyntmentes. Vnguentaria, ae. f. ge. L' art de fair
onguens. S. Oynted, Delibutus, a, um. Vnctus, a, um. Illitus, a, um. Oinct. S.
Oysier. Coix, cis. Vimen, inis. n. g. Osier. S. Vimineus, a, um. Of oysier. D'
osier. Call. A plate of Oyster trees. Viminalis locus. Vne Oseraye. S.

A short Oyster. Vimen breue. Osier court. S.

Oyster, which boweth easily. Lentum vimen. Osier qui se plie aiseement. S.
Oyster. Ostrea, ae. Ostreum, rei. ne. ge. Huitre. S. Et Ostrearius, a, um.
Pertaining to oisters. Apartenant a huistres. Call. The hard white, like a
sinewe, or gristle under the fish of oysters. Spondylus ostreorum.

Oysters whereof one may make three morselles. Tridacna. Plin. Oyster man.
Conchyta, ae. mas. ge. Plaut. Oyster scalph, shelfe, or place where oysters
grow. Ostrearea, ae. f. g. Le lieu ou croisse^t les huistres. S.
O. ANTE. K.
Oak. Quaercus, cus, cui. Robor, oris. Robur, oris. n. ge. Un chesne. S. Et
Quercus, a, um. Querceus, a, um. Quercicus, a, um. Querneus, a, um. Roboreus,
a, um. Roburneus, a, um. Robusteus, a, um. Ang. Of an oak, or oken, or of heart
of oak. De chesne. Call. The lesser oak, or germandre, an herb. Chamaedrys. f.
g. Petit chesne. S.

An oak cast down to the ground. Euersa vi tempestatis quercus. Chesne iecte
par terre. S.

Straight oaks. Quercus rigidae. Chesnes droicts. S

A grove, or foreste of oaks. Quercetum, ti. n. ge. Vne chesnaye, vne forest de
chesnes. S.

Oak apple. Cacris.* Oak corn. Glans, dis, foe. ge. Gland. S. Oken leaves.
Querna folia. Oker which painters use. Ochra, ae. f. ge. De l'ocre.
O. ANTE. L.
Old. Annosus, a, um. Antiquus, a, um. Anilis, le. Cascus, a, um. Exoletus, a,
um. Gra^daeuus, a, um. Natu grandis, Obsoletus, Priscus, a, um. Veter, ris.
Senectus, a, um. Veteranus, a, um. Vetus, eris. Vetustus, a, um. Vieil. S. Et
vetulus. dimin. Ang. Half or somewhat old. Old age. Aetas affecta,
Grandaeuitas, it is. Aetas ingrauescens, anilis, praecipitans, praecipitata.
Senectus, Senecta, Vetustas, Senium, nij. n. g. Vieillesse. Et Summa senectus.
Grande vieillesse. S. Old crafty drabbe. Veteratrix, Foemina in astutijs and
fraud exercitatissima. Call. Old crafty knave. Veterator, toris. m. g.
Subdolus impostor, and astutia vetere extritus. Vieil routier fin, caulteleux.
H. Old enheritaunce. Auitus ager, Fundus auitus. Old fool, or doting old
man. Delirans senex, Defipiens, it is. Vieilard qui radote. S. Old knave,
shrewe, or unthrift. Inueteratus, ta, tum. Old man. Canus, Decrepitus, Senex,
Vetulus, Annosus. Vieillart. S. Old man, or a creple at deaths door.
Decrepitus, Capularis senex, Capulare cadauer, Acheronticus senex, Senex
recoctus. Le viellard qui est sur le board de sa fosse. H. Old man playing the
boy, or woman. Callipaeda, ae. Vide Boyely old. etc. Old market place.
Cassinum, ni. n. g.* Foru^ vetus. Old men. Veteres, rum. Vt supra. Old men
exempted from wars or Iuries. etc. for age. Emeriti senes. Valor. Old said
saw, or proverb. Prouerbium, Paroemia, Adagium, Verbum vetus, Adagium vetus,
Oration vulgo in vsu habita aligorice aliquid innuens. Proverb dict commun ou
vulgaire. H. Old soldier. Veteranus miles. Cic. Old time. Priora tempora.
Les temps par ci deua^t. S Old wytche. Vetula, lae. f. ge.* Old woman, or
wife. Anus, us. Vetula, Senex. Vieille femme. H. Old wives tales. Fabulae
aniles. Quintil. Old to wax. Obsolesco, Veterasco, scis. Vetero, as.
Vetustesco, Senesco, Inueterasco, scis. Seneo, es. Senex fio. Deuenir vieil. S.
Oldely. Vetuste, Antique. Ancie^neme^t, Antiquement. Olyphante. Barrus,
Elephas, ntis. Elephantus, ti. m. ge. Un elephant. S. et Elephantinus, na, nu^.
Of an oliphant. D'vn elephant. Elephantin. Call. Olyphantes, which have towers
of woodde on them. Turriti elephanti. Elephans qui ont tours de bois sur eulx.
S. Oliuar, or Oliver, the propre name of a man. Oliuarius, rij. m. g. Oliuier,
nom pr^pre d'homme. S. Olive, a fruit eaten with meat. Olea, Oliua, ae. foe.
ge. Vne olive. S. Olive not ripe. Drupa, Oliua immatura. H. Olyue bryned, or
laid in pickle to keep. Oliua co^ditane^, Colymbas. Olive confite. H. Olive
leaves. Folia oleacea. Fu^illes d'oliue. S. Olive stone. Samsa, sansa, Os
oleae, Ossiculu^ oliuae. Olive tree. Olea, ae. Oliua, uae. f. ge. Un oliuier.
S. Et Oleaginus, a, um. vel oliagineus, ea, eum. D' un oliuier. Of an olive
tree. Et Oliuarius, a, u^. Pertaining to olive trees. Servant aux olives. S.
Place planted with olives. Oletum, ti. Oliuetum, ti. n. g. Laeu plant
d'oliues. S.

A wild olyue tree. Oleaster, tri. masc. genesis Oliuier sauuage. S.

Olives gathered with the hand. Strictiuae oleae. Olives qu'on cueille a la
main. S. To gather olives. Oliuo, as. Cueillir les olives S.

The time to gather olives. Oliuitas, tatis. Oleitas, tatis, f. g. Le temps
qu'on cueille les olives. S.


O. ANTE. M.
OMely, or sermon. Homilia, ae. Vide Homely. Omit. Linquo, is. Missum facere.
Omitto, is. Reliquum facere, Supersedeo, seeds Praetermittere. Omettre quelque
chose. S. Omitted. Omissus, a, um. Praetermissus, sa, sum. De laisse. S.
Omitting, or letting pass. Praetermissio, onis. Desertio, onis. Omissio, onis.
Derelictio, onis. f. ge. Delaissement. S.
O. ANTE. N.
ON, or upon. Super. Sur. S. To sit on, or upon some thing. Super liquid
assidere. Estre assiz sur quelque chose.

On the other side. Altrinsecus, Aduerb. De l' autre cost. S. On both sides.
Circunsecus, Vtroque versum, Vtraaue, Vtrinque, Vtrinsecus. D'vne part and
d'autre, de deux costez. S. On both parts. Vltro citroque, Vtrinque, In
vtra^que partem. Hinc and hinc. De, ou d' un cost and d' autre. S. On every
side. Hinc and illinc, Hinc inde, Quaqua, Vndique, Passim, Omnibus partibus,
Quoquouersum, vel Quoquouersus, Late longeque. De tous costez. S. On foot.
Pedes, Pedibus. aduerb. On Gods name. Dijs volentibus, Si dijs placet. On
high. Altus, a, um. Sublimis, e. Nomen. Vide High. On high. Alte, Sublime,
Sublimiter. De haulte. S. On live, or living. Viuus, a, um. Vide Live. On that
side. Illac. Par la. S. On the contrary part, or on the other side.
Altrinsecus, Ediuerso, Ex aduerso. De l' autre cost. S. On the lift hand,
part, or side. Sinistrorsum. Du cost senestre. Call. On the one side, and on
the other. Vtriusque, Vtrobique. D'vne cost and d'autre. S. On the other side.
Altrouersum, Eregione, Exaduersum, Inaduersum, Vicissatim, Rursum, Rursus. De
l'autre cost. S. On this side. Cis. Citra. De ca. Call. One. Quidam*
Singularis, re.* Vnus, na, nu^. Un. S. One another, mutually. Inuicem, Mutuo.
L' un a l'autre. S. One accord. Vnanimitas, it is. foe. ge. One after an other.
Deinceps, Sigillatim, Singillatim, Alterne, Alternatim, Inuice^, Mutuo,
Vicissim. L'vn apres l'autre. S. One among many. Vnus ex multis, omnibus, vel
pluribus. One to one. Singulatim, Singillatim. Un a un. S. One and twenty.
Alter and vicesimus. One day added in four years, called the Bissextile.
Bissextus, vel Bisextus, ti. m. g. Bisexte. Vnde Bissextilis, le. Of the
Bisextile or leap year. One directly, even or straight against the other.
E-regione. Cic. Vis a vis, au regard. S. One eyed man. Defioculus, Cocles, it is.
Monoculus, Vnioculus, and Vnoculus. Qui n'a qu'vn oeil. Call. One for an other.
Mutuus, a, um. Vide Mutual. One for an other. Alter pro altero. L'vn pour
l'autre. One footed man. Vnipes, dis.* One from an other. Abinuicem,
Segregatim, Separate, Separatim, Seiuncte, Disiuncte, Disperse, Distinct,
Discrete. Separement. S. One good turn for an other. Antipelargesis,
Beneficium promiscuum. One letter for another. Antithesis. fig. vt olli pro
illi One now, and then an other. Vnus and alter. Un and deux. S. One of a late
time. Neotericus, ea, cum. Noueau. One of the number, or company. Alter eorum.
One of us is deceauid. Alter nostrum fallitur. L'vn de nous s'abuse. S. One
only child. Vnigenitus, ti. m. ge. Seul filz, filz unique. S. One single.
Simplus, a, um. Singularis, re. Solus, a, um. Vnicus, a, um. Vnus ex pluribus.
Unique, seul. One stalk having. Vnicalamus, a, um.*Vnicaulis, le. Quod vnum
caule^ habet. Qui n' a qu'vne tige. One time, or at once, or one time. Semel.
Vne fois. S One way or other, as by hoke or croke. Per fas, aut nefas. Clam
aut precario. One whole consent, or agreement. Vnanimis, Consensus. Vnanimitas,
tatis. foe. genesis Vnanimite. S. Et Vnanimis, e, and Vnanimus, a, um. Of one
consent Vnanime. S. One voice having, or signifying. Vniuocus, a, um. Vox vnam
significationem habens. Once. Olim, Quo^dam, Semel, Vnica vice. Vne fois.
Onion. Cepe, Cepa, ae. f. g. Cepitium, Vnio, Crommyum, yi. n. g. Oignon. S. Et
Cepeus, ea, cum. Like to an onyon. Semblable a un oignon. S. Onion bed, or
platte of onions. Cepetum, ti. n. g. Cepitium, tij. Oignonniere. S. Onion
bed, or place planted with onions, also sleues. Cepina, nae. Vne oignonniere,
un lieu plant d'oignons. S. Onion blade. Talia, ae. f. g. Folliculum ceparum.
Onion with almost no head, and a long root, as unset leekes are. Pallacana,
vel Gethyum, Getyon. Plin. lib. 19. cap. 6. Onion called a scallion. Ascalonia,
ae. f. g. vel Aschalonia, ae. f. g. Eschalote. S. Only. Duntaxat, Demum,
Omnino, Solummodo, Singulariter, Ta^tum, Vnice, Modo, Solum, Ta^tummodo.
Seulement. S.
O. ANTE. O.
OOre to row with. Remu^, mi. m. g. Palma, ae. Tonsa, ae. f. ge. Auir^n,
gasche, Rame. H. The broad end of the oore. Palmula, lae. Tonsa, sae. foe.
ge. Le bout large d'vne rame. H.

The handle of an oore. Remi manubrium. Le manche de l' auiron. H.

To row with oore, or oores. Remum agere, Remis incumbere, Impellere remum.
Ramer. S.

Oore of silver, and lead. Plumbago, Galena, Molybdaena. Miniere de plomb and
d'argent. H.
O. ANTE. P.
OPen. Adaperio, is. Aperio, is. Diduco, is. Pando, is, di. Recludo, is.
Resero, as. Discludo, dis. Laxo, as. Patefacio, cis. Resoluo, uis. Ouurir. S.
Open as a bean does, or any like husk when it springs. Nauscio, scis. Fest.
Open a thing sealed. Resigno, as. Onurir. S. Open by mouth, as to declare.
Patefacio, cis. Ouurir, fair cognoistre fair ouuerture. S. Open veins.
Soluere venas. Open which is stopped. Relino, is, eui. vt Releui omnia dolia.
Terent. Open the mouth to speak. Hisco, scis. Ouurir la bouche. S. Open to be.
Patefio, is. Pateo, es. Patesco, scis. Estre ouuert. S. Open, or to publyshe
abroad. Palam aliquid facere, Peruulgare, Promulgare, Praedicare, Indicere, In
apertum proferre, Edere, Vulgar, Vulgo ostendere, Euulgare, Percelebrare,
Far pala^, Diuulgare. Publier. S. Open, commune, or plain. Publicus, a, um.
Propatulus, la, lum. Public. S. Open confession. Professio, onis. foem. ge.
Profession public. S. Open in ye face of ye whole world. Publicitus, a, um.*
Open on both sides, or having two openinges. Bipatens, it is. Ayant deux
ouuertures. Call. Open, or being opened. Patens, it is. Ouuert. Call. Open, or
evident. Liquidus, a, um. Manifestarius, a, um. Manifestus, a, um. Apertus, a,
um. Ouuer^. S. Open reader, or a public reader in the schools. Professor,
soris. m. g. Public lecteur, S. Open lecture, or reading. Professio, onis.
foem. genesis Lecture public. S. Open sale. Auctio, onis. f. g. Subhastation. S.
Open that may be passed through. Peruius, a, um. P^^ ou on pass aiseement. S.
Open war. Co^missum bellum. Liu. Guerre ouuert. Opened, open, or which is
open. Adapertilis, Apertilis, le. Fenestratus, a, um. Reclusus, a, um.
Patefactus, ta, tum. Passus, sa, sum. Qui est ouuert, desploye, ouuert. S.
Opening. Apertio, onis, Aditus, tus. Patefactio, onis. f. g. Ouuerture. S.
Opening of bowels. Visceratio, onis. f. g.* Opening, or disclosing. Reuelatio,
onis. f. g. Openly. Aperte, Coram, Liquide, Manifest, Manifesto, Palam,
Public, Propalam. Apertement, clerement, ouuertement. S. Opinion. Censio, nis.
Doxa, ae. Fama, ae. Ratio, onis Studium, ij.* Opinio, onis. f. g. Opinion. S.
Et Opinabilis, le. Which may be had in opinion. Against the opinion of all men.
Contra, vel Praeter opinionem omnium. Contre l'opinion de tous. S.

This opinion has dured long. Inueterauit haec opinio. Ceste opinion a
tousiour^ dure. S.

Opinions contrary and repugnant one against an other. Pugnantes sententiae,
and tendentes in diuersu^ sente^tiae. Opinions co^traires les vnes aux autres.
To change his opinion. Calculum reducere, Decedere, vel discedere de
sente^tia, Mutare sententiam, vel vertere sententiam retro. Changer son
opinion. S.

To demand, or ask ones opinion. Rogare aliquem sententiam. Demander a
quelqu' un son opinion. S.

To bide by his opinion. Manner in sententia, vel proposito. Demourer en son
opinion. S.

To turn one from his opinion. Alique^ de sententia deducere, vel Mouere a
sententia. Destourner aucun and deuertir de son opinion. S.

When I shall tell you mine opinion. Vbi sente^tiam meam vobis peregero. Apres
que ie vous auray dict mon opinion. S.

To be of an opinion. Habere opinionem, Sentire. Estre d'opinion. S.

They be all of one opinion. Omnes ad vnum idem sentiunt. Eade^ omnes stant
sententia. Tous sont d'vne opinion. S.

To persevere in his opinion, or to continue in his opinion. Iudicium suum
retinere, In eadem sententia stare. In sententia constare. Persevere en son
opinion. S.

To hold an opinion. Sententiam aliquam tenere. Tenir quelque opinion. S.

According to mine opinion. Emeo quidem animo, Vt mea fert opinio, Mea
sententia. S^lon mon opinion. S.

Opinion mistaken. Detorta opinio. Opinion to have. Opinor, aris. Opiner. S.
Oportunate. Oportunus, a, um. Tempestiuus, a, u^. Commodus, da, dum. Opportun.
S. Oportunatly. In tempore, Oportune, Tempestiue, Commode. Opportuneement. S.
Opportunity. Oportunitas, Tempestiuitas, tatis. Commoditas, tatis. foem. ge^er.
Opportunite. S. To take opportunity and time. Tempus capere vel accipere.
Prendre l'opportunite and la salson. S.

Oppose. Oppono, is. Obijcere. Opposer. S. Opposed. Oppositus, a, um. Obiectus,
ta, tum. Oppose. S. Opposition. Oppositio, onis. Intercessio, onis. Oppositus,
tus. m. g. Opposition. S. Oppress. Circunuenio, is Opprimo, is. Suppedito, as.
Vigeo, e^s. Premo, is. Oppresser, ou opprimer. S. Oppressed. Circunuentus, a,
um. Oppressus, Pressatus, a, um. Oppress, opprime. S. Oppressed with usury.
Foenore circunuentus. Oppression. Oppressio, onis. Pressum, ae. Pressus, us. m.
g. Oppression. Call. Oppressor. Oppressor, oris. mascul. gener. Oppresseur.
Call. Oppugn to resist, or withstand. Oppugno, nas. Oppugner. S. Oppugnation
withstanding, or resisting. Oppugnatio, onis. foem. ge. Oppugnation. S. And he
that does oppugn, or withstand. Oppugnator, toris. m. ge. Oppugnateur. S.
Opulente, or rich. Opulentus, ta, tum. Opulent. S. Et Opulentia. ae. foem. ge.
Opulence, or riches. Opulence. S. Vide Rich.
O. ANTE. R.
OR. Aut, Seu, Ve, Vel. Ou. S. Either let him drink, or let him go. Aut bibat,
aut abeat. Qu' il boiue, ou qu' il s'en all. S.

Whether they began to do well or ill. Seu recte, seu perperam facere
coeperunt. Cic.

He had sent letters twyse, or thryse. Bis terue literas miserat. Deux ou trois
fois. S.

See that thou get her me, either by force or stelthe, or entreaty. Ha^c tu
mihi vel vi vel clam, vel praecario, fac tradas. Terent.

Or at the least. Aut certe, seu saltem. Or else. Alioqui, Alias, Caetero, Sin,
Ve, Vel, Seu. Autrement. S. Or not. Neene. Ou non. S. Oracle, or answer,
such as the Panimes received at Idols. Oraculu^, Sorts, Responsum, Effata.
Oracle. H. volunt Oraculu^ esse, quod carmine reddatur, Vaticiniu^ vero quod
soluta oratione. Orage, or Arage herb. Atriplex, Chrysolachanon, Atreplexum,
xi. n. g. Arroches. S. Oration. Oration, onis. f. ge. Oraison. Oration abridged
and cut short. Circuncisa and breuis oration, Praecisa oration. Oraison abbregee
and accourcie. S. Oration temperate. Oration temperata. Oraison attrempee. S.
Oration short and brief. Conscissa oration. Oraison court and briefue. S.
Oration very long. Oration been longa. Oraison fort longue. S. Oration to long.
Oration immodica. Oraison trop lo^gue. He had an oration, or pronounced an
oration of an other man's writing. Orationem habuit scripto alieno. Bud.

His oration came to this point, or this was the effect of his oration, that I
should forgive him. Hanc summam habuit orationis, vt sibi ignoscerem. Son
oraison venoit toute la, qui ie luy pardonnasse. S.

A rude and cragged, or ill polished oration. Spinosa oration. Oraison rud and
mal polie. S.

Oration, getting indignation or pity. Pathetica oration, Ita dict^ quod tota
constet affectibus. Oration made without study. Exte^poralis, vel Extemporanea
oration. Oration, or sentence, going in a certain measure. Oration
circunscripta. Cic. Oraison constante de certain mesure. S. Oratory, or a
chapel. Aedicula, Sacellum, li. n. g. Cella precatoria. Un oratoire ou ^^oer.
S. Oratoure. Concionalis, is. Concionator, Rhetoricus.* Orator, toris. m. g.
Orateur. S. Et Oratorius, a, um. Pertaining to an orator. Apartinant a
orateur. Call. Et Oratorie, id est oratoris more, hoc est ornate, and eleganter.
Like an oratoure. Oratoirement. S. Et Concionor, aris. vel Concione^ habere*
Orare vel orationem habere. To make an oration. Orer. S. To be called an
oratoure. In numerum oratorum venire. Estre dict and appele orateur. S.

To receive an orator. Dare locum alicui oratori. Receuoir un orateur. S.

Orchanette, or wild buglosse. Anchusa, ae. foe. genesis Orchanette. S. Orcharde,
or place planted with fruitful trees. Arbustum, ti. n. ge. Pomarium. rij. n.
ge. Un lieu pla^te d'arbres fruictiers. S. Orchard of damysins and plombes.
Prunetum, ti. neut. ge. Locus prunis consitus. Call. Ordeyne. Compono, is.
Condico, cis. Apparo, as. Comparo, as. Constituo, is. Instituo, is. Ordino, as,
Praeparo, as. Statuo, is. Dispono, is. Instruo, is. Metor, taris. Ordonner. S.
Ordeyne a banquet. Comparare conuiuium, and parare conuiuium. Virgil. Ordeyne
before. Praeordino, as. Praestruo, is. Praeparo, as. S. Ordeine, and to
command. Edicere, Iubere. Ordonner and commander. S. Ordeine first, and to
make. Praetexo, is. Ordonner premierement and composer. S. Ordeyne, or to
decree of any matter. Statuere and decernere de re aliqua, Praestituere,
Seiscere. Ordonner and arrester de quelque chose. S. To create, and ordeine a
magistrate. Creare magistratum. Creer and ordonner un magistrate. S.

To ordeyne, and cause to publishe. Edicere, Decernere. Bud. Ordonner and fair
publier. S.

Ordeine, or enacte by parliament. Per curiam vniuersam ordinare, vel
authoritate vniuersae vel su^mmae curiae sancire, and figere. Ordeine, or to
make. Co^pono, is. Condico, is. Construo, Creo, as. Ordonner ou fair. S.
Ordained. Comparatus, Constitutus, Institutus, Status, a, um. Ordonne. S.
Order, called the order of knights. Torquis conchulatus. Bud. L'ordre. S. The
knights of the order. Torquati proceres, vel equites, Cohors torquata, Sodales
torquati, Thyasotae cochleati. Thyasus chocleatoru^. Bud. Les cheualiers del'
order. S.

Order. Modus, di. Ordo, inis. m. g. Order. S. To put in order. Ordinare, In
ordinem adducere, sieve ponere, Struere. Mettre en order. S.

To place by order, to ordeyne and dispose. Degerere, Metari, Ordinare, In
ordinem redigere. Mettre par order, ordonner and disposer. S.

Order, continuance, or tenor. Tenor, ris. m. genesis Order, suitte,
continuation. Call. Order in battle. Acies, ei. f. g. An army in order ready
to fight. Armee en order, pressed a comba^re. S. Order in rules of grammar.
Syntaxis, dici potest, Constructio and series. Call. Order of ABC. Alphabetum,
ti. Vnde Alphabetarij, orum. Children, or other which learn ye ABC. or the
order of letters. Order of battle array of nobles. Pri^cipia, oru^. Vnde post
principia esse, est esse in tuto, citraque periculum, Sumptum a bellis in
quibus tutissimus locus est post principia. Order of letters. Ductus literarum.
Order of syllables. Numerus vel ordo syllabarum. Order on a row. Series, ordo,
and quasi rerum continuatio. Call. Order or custom. Mos, ris. Praescriptio,
Praescriptum. Order. S. Order, or dispose. Dispono, is. Sortior, iris. vt supra
Orderly, or by order, as one after other. Deinceps, Gradatim, Ordinatim,
Ordinate, Composite, Ex ordine, In ordine, Per ordinem. Par order. S. Without
order. Aceruatim, Incomposite, Indigeste, Incuriofe, Sine ordine. Sans order. S.

Ordination. Ordinatio, Designatio, onis. Digestio, onis. Dispositio, onis.
Metatio, onis. Ordinatio, onis. f. g. Ordonnance and order. S. Ordination made
before, or first. Praeordinatio, onis. foe. ge.* Praeordinator, He that makes
ordination first. Praeordino, as. Ang. To make ordination before, or first.*
Ordinary. Ordinarius, ij.* Curio summus. Ordinary. Ordinarius, a, um.
Statarius, a, um. Ordinaire. Call. and Solemnis, ne. Vsitatus, ta, tum.
Ordinaire and accoustume. Ordinary and accustumed. Ordinatly. Disposite, Ex
disposito, Ordinatim, Ordinate. Par order. Call. Ordinance, and constitution.
Constitutio, Institutio, Ordinatio, Placitum, Edictio, Edictum, Praescriptu^,
Scitu^, ti. n. g. Ordonnance and constitatio^. Ordinance for supper.
Coenaticus appara^us. Ordinance for the wars. Instrumentu^ bellicu^.
Ordinance, or law made by the Senate, or in the common counsel house, which
is our proclamation or statute. Senatus^onsultum, ti. Edictu^, ti. neut. genesis
Ordinances made by the people. Scita, torum.* Ordure, dunge, or fylthe.
Mynthos, Retrimentum, Sordes, Inquinamentum, ti. Spurcitia, ae. foe. ge.
Ordure. S. Ordure of a ship drawn out at the pomp. Nautea, ae. Sordes
putidae, quae in sentina sunt. L'ordure de la nauire. H. To raye with ordure,
or to file or defile. Inquinare, Sordidare, Spurcare, Conspurcare, Foedare,
Deturpare. Ord^r, ou o^doyer. S.

Ordure of washinges. Proluuies, vel proluuium, ij. neut. genesis Orange. Aureum
malum, Cedrium malum, Cedromaelum, Citreum, Malum medicum, Aurantiu^. Orange.
H. Orange tree. Citrea malus, Malus assyria, vel medica, Malus Citria.
Orengier. H. Organes of ye church. Organa, oru^. Organa pneu^matica, Organa
sacrifica. Bud. Org^^s d'eglise. S. Organ pypes. Canthes.* Organum, and organie
herb. Origanum, Origanus, Quia gaudet montibus. Origan. S. Orient. Oriens,
it is. m. ge. L'orient. S. Orient pearls. Exaluminati. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 35.
Oriental, or of the Orient. Orientalis, l^^ Exortiuus, a, um. Oriental. Call.
Original. Originalis, le. Adiect. Original. S. Original, first example or
patron. Archetypus, pi. m. g. L'original. S. Et Archetypum, pi. n. g. Ide^.
Orleaunce, a city in France. Arelate, Aurelia, Vulgo Aurelianu^. Orleans,
ville episcopale en France. Ornament. Compositio, Ornamentum, Ornatus, tus.
Comptus, tus. Cultus, tus. Exornatio, onis. f. ge. Ornament. S. Ornament
properly in speech. Schema, it is. Schematum, ti. n. g. Ornament, figure, form.
Call. Ornament, or elegantie of speech. Elegantia sermonis. Ornement de
langage. S. Ornaments for wome^s heads, as bonet, cap, etc. Redimicula, orum.
n. g. Ornament de test de femme. Ornate. Ornatus, a, um. Superbus, a, um.
Orne. S. Ornate, or to adorn, or garnishe. Comere, Excolere, Ornare, Exornare,
Redimire. Orner. S. Orphan, or fatherles child. Orphanus, Orbus patre, Orbus.
Pupille. H. Orpin an herb. Telephium, Crassula mayor. Orpin, herb. S.
Ortographie, or manner of true writing. Ortographia, ae. foem. ge. Recta
scriptura, Recte scribendi scientia. Quint. Orte^ent, or Orpin. Auripigmentum,
ti. neut. genesis Orpin. S.
O. ANTE. S.
OSier. Vimen, nis. neut. genesis Osier. S. Osier that is short. Vime^ breue.
Osier court. Osier easy to bow, or bend. Lentum vimen. Osier qui se plie
aiseement. S. A place full of Osiers. Viminalis locus. Vne Oseraye. S

Osmonde an herb. Osmunda, Filicastrum, tri. n. g. Osmonde royal. Dryopteris,
Vulgo Osmunda regalis. S. Ostentation, bragging, or vaunterie. Ostentatio,
onis. foe. ge. Ostentation. S. To use ostentation, or to vaunte. Ostento, tas.
Ostenter, vanter. S.

One that uses ostentation, a vaunter. Ostentator, toris. m. ge. Ostentateur,
vanteur. S.

Ostriche. Struthiocamelus, Struthio, Auis Afra. Austruche, Autruche. H.
O. ANTE. T.
OTe, Auena, ae. foe. ge. Auoine. H. Et Auenaceus, a, um. Otye, or of otes.
D'auoi^^. Call. Oath. Iuramentum, Iusiurandum, Iuratio, sacramentum, ti. n. ge.
Iurement. S. Et Praeire iuramentum. To give or minister an oath, or give charge
by virtue of oath. To take oath, or to swear. Iurare, Fidem dare. Iurer. S.

Take oath, or to swear in witness of some thing. Iusiurandum ad alicuius rei
testimonium acco^modare. Iurer en tesmoignage de quelque chose. S.

To take oath, or swear to keep the ordinances, constitutions, or statutes.
Fidem mandatis, religionemque verbis suis obstringere iureiurando, Iurare in
leges and constitutiones. Bud. Iurer de garder les ordonnances. S.

Swear, and to promise with an oath. Iusiura^dum dare. Iurer and promet^re
auec iurement. S.

Oath, being a deep or solemn oath. Deiurium, ij. n. g. Sanctum iusiurandum.
Iurement, serment. Call. Oath of a foreman of an enquest, or of him that is
first charged or sworn. Praeiuratio, onis. foe. ge. Et Praeiurator. He that
takes first oath, or that gives the oath to others, and pronounces the
circumstaunce. Other. Alius, a, ud. Un autre que ce soit. S. No other thing.
Aliud nihil. Rien autre chose. S.

Thou answerest me an other thing then I ask thee: or I ask thee one thing
and thou tellest me another. Aliud mihi respondes ac rogo. Tu me respondes
autre chose, que ie ne te demand.

Other. Alter, a, um. Autre. S. Lo an other. Ecce alterum. Voicy l'autre^. S.

There is none other. Non est alter quisquam. Il n'y a null autre. S.

Otherwhyles. Aliquando, Nonnunquam. Aucu^^s^ois. S Otherwise. Aliter, Alio
modo, vel more, vel pacto, Praeter, Secus. Autrement. S. Otherwise I will never
hold my peace. Nunqua^ tacebo alio pacto. Iamais ie ne me tairay autrement.
Otherwise then. Aliorsum, Aliter ac, Aliter atque, Aliter quam, Praeter quam.
Autrement que. S. He speaks otherwise then he thinks. Aliud agnoscit atque
sentit. Il d^t autrement qu' il ne pense.

Otherwise then I would. Aliter vel secus ac volui. Autrement que ie ne
vouloye. S. Otherwise then I spoke. Secus atque dix eram, vel aliter atque
dixeram. Autreme^t que ie n'auoye dict. Otherwise then the Stoikes. Aliter ac
Stoici. Autrement que les Stoiciens. S.
O. ANTE. V.
OWe. Debeo, es. Debuoir quelque chose. S. Vt debeo tibi. I owe thee. Ie te
doy. S. Owe much money. Aere alieno obrui. Cic. Owe more then he is worth.
Animam debere. Debuoir plus qu'il n'ha vaillant. S. That which I owe. Aes
alienu^ meu^. Ce que ie doy

To owe no man a groat, to owe nothing to any man. In aere alieno nullo esse.
Ne debuoir a nulli. S

Owyng, or the act of owyng. Debitio, onis. f. ge. Oven. Clibanus, Furnus, ni.
m. g. Un four. S. Ouens mouth. Praefurnium, nij. neut. ge. La gu^ule d'vn four.
^. Over. Super, Supra. Desuper. dessus. S. Over, above, alofte, or on high.
Supernus, a, um. Qui est en haulte. S. Over all. Vniuersalis, le. Vniuersus, a,
um. Vniuersel. Over all. Passim, Vbique, Vndique, Vtrobique. Adue. Over and
above this, or beside this. Praeter haec, Praeterea, Ad hoc, Super hoc,
Insuper, Oultre ce. S. Over, and under. Sus deorsum, Super subterque. Dessus
and dessoubs. S. Over much. Nimius, a, um. Superfluus, a, um. Superuacuus, a,
um. Overmuch. Nimie, Nimio, Nimium, Nimis, Praenimis, Superflue, Superfluo.
Trop. S. Ouersone, to sone, or before due time. Praemature. Trop tossed, deuant
le temps. Et Praematurus, a, um. That which is done ouersone, or ouersone
ripe. M^ur auant la saison. Call. Over that. Interea, Vltra. Oultre. S. Ouerbye,
or bye to dear. Nimio plus emere, Emere nimis care, vel carius aequo.
Suracheter. S. Ouercast. Traijcio, cis. Obduco, cis. Iect^r oultre. S.
Ouercharge. Ingrauesco, scis.*. Supra vires onerare, Nimis onerare, vel nimio
plus, vel plus aequo, vel plus quam par sit. Surcharger. S. Ouercharge with
debt. Aere alieno obruere. Overcome. Praecello, is. Supero, as. Supedito, as.
Triumpho, as. Vinco, is. Deuinco, cis. Euinco, cis. Peruinco, cis. Vaincre. S.
Overcome with wisdom. Opprimere consilio. Overcome to be, or vanquyshed.
Suppeditor, ^ris. Vincor, eris. Iaceo, es. Estre ^aincu. S. Overcome to be with
feebleness, famines, or to yield him self ouercommed. Succumbo, bis. Se render
vaineu. S. Ouercommed. Victus, a, um. Impugnatus, ta, tum. Subactus, ta, tum.
Domitus, ta, tum. Vaincu and surmonte. S. Ouerflowe. Affluo, is. Profluo, is.
Inundo, as. Redu^do, as. Exundo, d^s. Ref^ag^^, nas. Effundor, eris. Se
desborder. S. Et Profusus, sa, sum. Effusus, s^, su^. Ouerflowed. Desborde. Et
Inundatio, onis. Exu^datio, onis. foe. ge. Flowyng over of water. Desbordement
de ca^e. S. Ouerflowyng. Profluens, it is. Particip. Ouergoe. Anteuertere,
Praeuertere, Aliquem transire. Passer aucun en cheminant. S. Ouergrowe.
Supercresco, scis. Enascor, eris. Subnascor, sceris. Surcroistre. S.
Ouerincreasing. Accessio, onis. f. g. Surcroist. S. Over lay. Opptimo, is.
Opprimer. S. Ouerlayed with thieves. Oppressus a praedonibus. Ouerlye.
Supercubo, as. Coucher sus ou dessus. Call. Ouerlyue. Supersum, es. Supero, as.
Suruiure. S. Over liver. Superstes, it is. com. ge. Suruiuant. S. Over measure.
Corolarium, Additamentum, Auct^rlum, iij. n. g. Le surplus ou surcroist qu' on
baille d' auantage oultre la mesure. S. Over look. Recognosco, scis.
Reuisiter. S. Ouermoste, or highest, or that which is high. Supernus, a, um.
Superus, a, um. Qui est en hault. Ouermoste part of any thing. Superficies,
iei. foe. g. Superior pars cuiusque rei. Superfice, le dessu^ and comme la face
de toutes chooses. Call. Ouermoste skin. Membrana, ae. Me^branula. ae. f. g.
Ouermounte. Transcendo, is. Passer oultre. Call. Ouerpasse. Transcurro, is.
Idem. Ouerpassing. Transcursus, us. m. g. Plin. Overplus, or surplusage, which
in given beside the weight, number, or measure. Auctarium, rij. n. ge. Le
surcroist. Over ride. Anteuerto, it is. Sal. Over run. Praecurso, as.
Transcu^^o, is. Transuolo, as. Courir and passer oultre. Call. Over sell. Nimis
care vendere, Plus aequo vendere, vel quam par sit. Suruendre. S. Ouersee.
Inspicio, cis. Repe^so, as. Cur^, as. Regarder. Ouerseer. Inspector, oris.
masc. gener. (...) regard un ouurage. etc. S. Ouerseer of husbandrye. Villico,
on^^. Villicus, lici. mas. genesis Oversight. Inspectio, onis. f. ge. Regard,
regardement. Ouerskippe. Tra^suolo, as. Tra^scurro, ris. Trespasser. Overtake,
to attain, or come to. Assequor, ris. Atteindre, peruenir iusques. S.
Overthrow. Consterno, is. Diruo, is. Obruo, is. Percello, is, culi. Porrigo,
is. Profligo, as. Praesterno, is. Sterno, is. Supplanto, as. Ruo, is. Subuerto,
it is. Euerto, it is. Subuertir. S. Overthrown with a blaste. Proflatus, a, um.*
Overthwart, or ungracious. Per^icax, cis. Prauus, a, um. Praeposterus, a, um.
Qui est tout au rebours de ce qu'il doibt estre. S. Ouerthwarte. Transuersus,
sa, sum. Trauers. S. Ouerthwarting. Peruicatia, Prauitas, tatis. f. g.
Ouerthwartly. Perperam, Perverse, Peruicacit^r, Praue, Praepostere. A rebours.
S. Ouerthwartly. Ex tra^suerso, In obliquum, Oblique. De trauers. S. Over
weyghe. Superpondero, as.* Over weight. Superpondium, ij. n. g. S^rpois. Call.
Owl. Bubo, Noctua, Vlula, lae. foe. genesis Un hibou. S. Chouette. H. Ownce.
Vncia, ae. f. g. Once. H. Vnciola, ae. Dim. Ang. A little or scante ownce.
Petite once. Call. Et Vnciarius, a, um. Pertaining to an ownce, or of an ounce.
D'once. Call. Et Vncialis, le. Idem. Ownce and an half. Sescunx, cis.
Sescuncia, ae. f. ge. Vne once and demie. H. Et Sescuncialis, le. Of an ounce
and half. Ownce by ownce. Vnciatim. Once a once, par onces. Own. Proprius, a,
um. Priuatus, a, u^. Propre and particulier a un chascun. That is propre or
particular to any man. S. Own accord, mind, pleasure, or will. Spontaneus,
a, um. Call. Own hand writing. Antigraphum. * A copy of the authors own
hand writing. Autographum, Exemplar authoris manu scriptum. Escrit de sa main
propre. S. Own proper, native, peculier or particular. Genuinus, a, um.
Peculiaris, re. Proprius, a, um. Propre, nayf, peculier. S. Owner. Dominus,
Possessor, oris. m. g. Possesseur. S. Our. Noster, ra, rum. Nostre. S. She is
not like the maidens of our city or country. Haud similis virgo est nostrarum
virginum. Terent. Ce n' est point vierge semblable aux vierges de nostre cite
ou pays. S.

Our country man. Nostras, it is. Adiect. Qui est de nostre pais. S. Our, or of
our family. Noster, Nostras, it is. De nostre famille. S. Ower to row with.
Remus, mi. m. g. Vide Oore. Ower, or oore of brass. Cadmia.* Ower of lead, or
silver. Molybdaena, Plumbago, inis. f. g. Miniere de plomb and d'argent. H.
Owsyl, or black macke a bird. Merula, ae. foe. ge. Merle. H. Out. E, Extra.
Horse. S. Out of danger. Extra periculum. Cicer. Horse du dangier. S. Out alas.
Vae, Vaeh. A word spoken when we have some thing in horroure. Un mot qu' on
dit, quand on ha quelque chose en horreur. S. Out upon you. Vae, Vaeh.* Out of
authority, or office. Exautoratus, a, um. * Priuatus, ta, tum. Qui n' a aucun
office ne estat. S. Out of commission. Expunctus, a, um.* Out of doubt, or
undoubtedly. Proculdubio, sine co^trouersia, Sine dubio, Sine dubitatione, Haud
dubie, Nec aut Non dubie, Indubitanter, Nimirum. Sans doubt. S. Out of
fashion. Inconditus, a, um. Informis, e. Qui est sans fa^on. S. Out of
fellowship. Exors, it is.* To put out of ioynte, a^ an arm, leg, rybbe, and
such like. Luxo, as. Desmettre de son lieu, desnouer, comme un bras, vne
iambe, vne cost. S.

Out of ioynte. Luxa^^^, a, um. Desmis de son lieu and desnoue. S. Out of
mind, or mad. Alienatus mente, Ame^s, it is. om. g. Horse du sens, horse du soy.
S. And the passion is, Amentia, ae. foe. ge. Out of the country. Pregre. Horse
du pai^s. S. Out of the way. Deuius, a, u^. Qui est horse de la voye. Out of
time. Dissonus, a, um. Absonus, a, um. Out of wages. Etasi.* Out of use.
Absoletus, a, um. Desitus, a, um. Exoletus. Obsoletus, a, um. Abolitus, ta,
tum. Qui est horse d' usage. S. Out of use to be, to become stale, or out of
use. Absoleo, es. Absolesco, scis. Aller horse d' usage. S. Out c^st, or thrown
out a far. Proiectitius, a, u^. Proiectus, ta, tum. Iecte au loing. S. Out
law. Exul, is. Apolis, Extorris, Proscriptus. Un bany. S. Outlawe, or to
banyshe, or exile. Exilio afficere, In exilium agere, Relegare, Ciuitatem
alicui adimere, Redigere ad vel in peregrinitatem, Proscribere. Banir, ou
bannir ou exiler. S. To be outlawed or banyshed. Exulare, Ire in exilium, Nomen
exulis subire, Ciuitatem amittere. Estre bani. S.

Outlawed. Abalienatus iure regni, vel imperij. De portatus, a, um. Exlex, gis.
Exulatus, a, um. Proscriptus, Profugus, a, um. Relegatus, a, um. Bani. S
Outlawery. Exilium, Proscriptio, Relegatio, Eiectio, Ademptio ciuitatis.
Bannissement. S. Outrage and speech of disprayse. Contumelia, Inuectio, onis.
foe. g. Oultrage and parolle de desprise. Outrage and cruelty. Atrocitas,
tatis. Importunitas, tatis. foe. ge. Oultrage and cruaulte. S. To speak
outrage to one, that is to abuse one in words, or to speak evil of him.
Alicui insultare, Verbis male accipere, Confer omnia maledicta in aliquem,
Contumelia afficere, Co^tumeliam dicere, Verborum contumelijs aliquem lacerare.
Dire a quelqu'^n oultrage. S.

Outrage at one, or to revile him. Contumeliam facere, Voce aliquem violare,
Inuehi in alique^, Dicere contumeliam. Oultrager aucun. S. Outrage of water.
Alluuies, Alluuio, onis. Diluuium, ij. n. g. Rauine, ou ragaz d' eaue. S.
Outrageous. Atrox, cis. Importunus, na, number. Oultrageux. S. Outrageous in
talk. Contumeliosus, sa, sum. Oultrageux en parolles. S. Which is outrageous
in no point. Remotissimus ab iniurijs. Qui n' est nullement oultrageux. S.

Outrageous expense. Prodigalitas, Prodigentia, ae. foe. ge. Prodigalite. Call.
Outrageous expender. Prodigus. Vide Prodigal, and Prodigality. Outrageous in
expense. Prodigus, a. um. Prodigue. Outragiousnes, or outraging of words.
Opprobratio, onis. Violatio, onis. Contumelia, ae. f. g. Oultragement de
parolles. S. Outragiously. Contumeliosee. Oultrageusement. S. Outragiously, or
prodigally. Prodige, Profuse. Prodigalement. Call. Outward part, or skin of
any thing. Me^brania, ae. Superficies. iei. foe. ge. Superior pars cuiusque
rei, and facies quae exterius oculis cernitur. Superfice, le dessus and comme
la face de toutes chooses. Et Me^branula. diminut. Outward part, or roundes of
a hollow thing. Conuexum, i. n. g. Courbe. Call. Outwardly. Extrinsecus.
Aduerb. Par de horse. S.
O. ANTE. X.
Ox. Bos, uis. Taurus, ri.*Bos castratus* Boeuf. Bos, Is also any kind of
rother beast. Et Bouinus, a, um. Of an ox. Ox fair, or market. Boarium
foru^. vide Market. Ox for the plough, or draught ox. Trio, onis.* Iugatorius
bos. Qui tire and labor au ioug. S. Ox house. Bostar, is. Bubile, lis. n. g.
Tect and estable a boeufs. S. Ox shoe. Solea, ae. foe. genesis Ox Stalle.
Bouile, lis. Vt supra. Bouile, est vox parum latina. Ox with broad horns.
Patulus bos. Plaut. Ox eye an herb. Bupthalmus, mi. f. g. Oiel de beuf.
called of the Apothecaries. Cotula foetida. Ox like, or like an ox. Bouatim.
Ad similitudine^ bouis. Call. Oxen with crooked horns. Camuri boues. Oxforde, a
town of England, and ancient university, the nourice of all good learning
and knowledge. Caleua, vel Calena. Oxonia, vel Oxonium, ij. n. ge. Oxenfort,
ville and university en Engleterre. S. Oximell. Acetum mulsum, Secaniabin.*
O. ANTE. Y.
OYer and terminer, a phrase in the common law, signifying to hear and
determine. Audire, and determinare, vel decidere. Ouir and terminer. S. Oyes,
is a French phrase, and is as much to say, hark ye, or hear you: Which
is used in common proclamation, to cause the people to harker diligently what
shall be done or said. It seems to come of the second person of the verb
Audio, Which is, Audis? Hears thou? Oy^^tu? Pil.
P. ANTE. A.
P, A letter compted among the mutes, and never written with any aspiration
after him, except it be in Greek words, as Phaeton, Epiphania, and such like.
Also in translating Greek words into a Latin form, P is often changed
into B, as (...) in Latin is written Buxus. In the notes of antiquity, P
signified Pupillus, Posuit, vel Pes, vel Passus, vel Publius. Pace, which
contains three foot, whereof a thousand make an English mile. Passus, us.
masc. genesis Un pas. Call. Patience. Clementia, ae. Patientia, ae. Tolerantia,
tiae. foe. ge. Patience. Patience herb. Bulapathu^, Hippolapathon,
Hippolapathum. Lapathum, Rumex satiuus, Lapatium, Rhabarbarum monachorum.
Patience. H. Patient. Clemens, it is. Patiens, it is. Placidus, a, um. Patient. S.
Pacient, or sick body. Aeger, a, um. Aegrotus, a, um. Pacient. Pals. Patient
to be. Deferueo, es. Deferuesco, scis. Estre patient. S. Patient to wax.
Deferuesco, scis. Deuenir patient. S. Patiently. Clementer, Patienter, Placide,
Toleranter. Patiemment. S. To bear, or suffer patiently. Recte far, Humane,
and placate far, Patienter far, Fortiter pati, Lent far, Leuiter far,
Pati, and non moleste far, Pati aequo animo, Molliter far, Aequo animo
far, Far moderate, Placide far, Sustentare. Porter patiemment. S.

Pacify. Delenio, is, iui. Lenio, is. Mitifico, cas. Mollio, is. Mulceo, es.
Pacifico, as. Paco, as. Placo, as. Sedo, as. Pacifier. S. Pacify Gods anger.
Auerruncare iram dei, Iram dei placare. Appaiser l' ire de dieu. S. Pacified.
Delinitus, a, um. Pacatus, a, um. Sedatus, a, um. Pacificatus, a, um. Pacify,
apaise. Call. Pacified to be. Mollesco, scis. Mollis, aut placatus fio. S'
emollir. S. Pacifier. Placator, ris. Pacator, oris. Pacificator, oris. m. genesis
Apaiseur. Call. Pacifyng, or which does pacify. Pacificatorius, a, um. Cic.
Pack. Sarcina, ae. foe. ge. Un packet. S. Pack dryuer. Sarcinarioru^
iume^toru^ agitator. H. Packehorse, or a mule which carries his packes, or
burdens ordinarely. Clitellarius equus, vel mulus. Un mulet a bast portant
charges ordinaireme^t. Sarcinaria Iumenta. Caes. Be pack horses, or beasts
apt to burden. Pack saddle. Clitella, ae. Sagma, ae. Sagma, atis. n. ge. Un
bas qu' on met sur vne best. S. To stuff a packesadle. Clitellas tomento
infarcire, vel refercire. Rembourrer un bast. S.

Pack up. Suffarcino, as. Plaut. Packed up. Suffarcinatus, a, um. Terent.
Page. Assecla, ae. Page. S. Vide Lackey The kings pages. Praetextati regis
asseclae. Les pages de roy. S.

Page of honor. Praetextatus assecla. Vne page d' honneur. S. Page, or slave
for a soldier. Cacula, ae. mas. genesis Un gouiat d' homme de guerre. S.
Pageaunt. Ferculum, li. Ludi, orum. m. g. Mistere. Pay. Luo, is. Dependo, is,
di. Pendo, is. Pensito, as. Reddo, is. Soluo, is. Annumero, as. Payer. S. To
pay, or restore the money spente in warfare. Praestare quod tactum est impensae
in bellum, Refundere. Rembourser les deneirs despensez en la guerre. S.

To pay the vttermoste penny. Cum fide persoluere. Payer iusques au dernier
denier. S.

To pay his part of the expense. In partem expensae venire. Payer sa part de
la despense. S.

You are paid, I have satisfied you according to your demand. Habeo tibi
res solutas. Tu es pay, Ie to ay satisfaict a ta demand. S.

He shall pay me for that which I shall do. Quod faciam, pretium exoluet
mihi. Il me payera de ce que ie feray. S.

Pay all, fully, or wholly. Persoluo, is. Perfect, and to tum soluo, and aere
alieno me libero. Call. Pay at a day. Respondere ad diem. To pay his welcome
home. Isagogicon dependere, Aduentitiam coenam condicere. Payer sa bien venue.
S.

To pay his farewell. Propter viam coenam co^dicere, Coenam profectitiam dare.
Payer sa bien allee. S.

Pay costs, or damages. Sarcito, as.* Pay debtes. Aes alienum dissoluere,
vel expedire, vel soluere, Dimittere creditores, Dissoluere aes alienum,
Reluere, Resoluere, Liberare creditorem, Minuere aes alienum, Nomen expedire,
vel soluere, Luere aes alienum. Payer les debtes. S. Pay home again money.
Refundo, dis. Vlpian. Render, and restituer ou refonder les deniers. S. Pay
money. Denumero, as. Cic. As to pay money out of hand. Dinumerare pecuniam.
Payer argent comptant. S. Pay money again. Renumero, as. Resoluo, is. Pay
money in hand. Repraesentare pretiu^. Cic. Pay wages to the soldiers.
Afficere stipe^dio. Bailler soulde aux gensdarmes. S. Payemaisters in war.
Diribitores, rum. m. genesis Les payeurs. S. Paid. Solutus, a, um. Pay. S.
Payers of pension, rent, revenue, or tribute. Vectigales viri. Payle. Gaulus,
li. Mulctra, ae. Mulctrale, is. Situla, ae. Acratopheron, Modiolus, li.
Cratera, rae. foe. ge. Un seau. S. Paile that is little. Acratophorum, ri.
neut. genesis V^ petit seau. S. Payment. Solutio, onis. Pensio, onis. Numeratio,
onis. foe. ge. Payement. S. Pain. Poena, Supplicium, plicij. Opera, ae. foe.
ge. Peine. S. Pain of mind. Angustia, ae. Pain, or valuetion set.
Aestimatio, onis. Poena aestimata. Bud. Payned or taxed. Aestimatus, a, um.
Payned, or punished to be. Supplicia haurire, vel subire, Dare poenas,
Supplicium far, Poenam vel poenas subire, Sceleris poenas persoluere, Pe^dere
poenas, Puniri, Plecti, Lucre poenas. Estre puni. S. Pain, or to punyshe.
Afficere poena, Poenas petere, vel sumere, Poenam capere ab aliquo, Punire,
Sumere poenas de aliquo, Poenam irrogare, Poenas ab aliquo agere, Castigare,
Mulctare, Plectere, Sumere supplitium, Supplicio afficere, Exigere supplicium
ab aliquo, Vindicare, Animaduertere in aliquem, Sancire. Punir. Paynfull.
Aerumnatus, a, um. Aerumnalis, le. Aerumnosus, a, um. Aerumnis plenus. Call. To
take pain to labor, and travail. Sum re operam, Labores subire, Laborem
capere, Laborare, Suscipere laborem, Laborem sumere. Prendre peine. S.

To take pain to teach one. Dare se alicui ad docendum. Prendre la peine
d'enseigner aucun. S.

To take great pain, and to travel earnestly to do any thing. Elaborare,
Exantlare, vel exhaurire labores in re aliqua, Labores magnos capere, sieve
excipere. Prendre grande peine, and fort trauailler a fair quelque chose. S.

Painful, or laborious. Laboriosus, a, um. Industrius, a, um. Laborieux. S.
Paynefull service. Pistrinum, ni. neut. genesis Laboriosum seruitium. Call. Per
transl. sic dictu^, quia antiqui solebant delinquentes in pistrinum
praecipitare. Paynefully, or laboriously. Laboriose. Laborieusement. S. Paynim.
Paganus, ni. Gentilis, is. * Payen. Pals. Painte. Pingo, is. Scribo, is.
Depingo, is. Expingo, is. Peindre. S. To painte, and discribe any thing.
Describere aliquid. Peindre, and descrire quelque chose. S.

To paynte and write upon tables of wax. Exarare. Peindre, and escrire sur des
tablettes de cire. S.

To paynte as well as an other. Picturam alicuius aequare. Peindre aussi bien
qu'vn autre. S.

Paynte, or polishe a thing, to make it saleable. Mangonizo, as. Plin. Paynte
the face ruddy, as harlottes do. Purpurisso, as. Plaut. Thou painteste now a
man, and by and by a God. Soles nunc hominem pingere, nunc deum. Tu peints
maintenant un homme, maintenant un dieu.

Painted. Fucatus, a, um. Pictus, a, um. Peinct. S. Painted faces as whores
have. Fucatae facies. Painted Image. Pictura, ae. f. g. A lively picture. Icon,
onis. foe. ge. Peincture faicte sur le vif. S.

Painted Images in silinges and tables. Anaglypha, orum. n. g. Plin. Painted
vessel. Ancella, orum. Ancaesa, oru^. Call. Captains, or noble personages
paincted, and lively drawn. Duces Iconici. Duces peincts, and pourtraicts. au
vif. S.

Painted white, or with white lead. Cerussatus, a, um. Vt cerussatae muli^res.
Mart. Women painted with white lead. Painted with diverse colors. Variegatus,
a, um. Varijs picturis distinctus, exornatusque. Call. Painted with the Images
of beasts. Belluatus, a, um. Beluarum figuris pictus, intextusque. Call.
Painted trim. Depictus, a, um. Quint. Painter. Pictor, oris. Peinctre. S.
Painters, or polyshers of old wares, to cause them to seem new. Mangones,
number. m. g. Qui merces poliunt, vt pluris vendant. Call. Painter which painteth
with Iuory. Elephantezographus, phi. m. g. Plut. Qui ebore pingit. Painting.
Pigmentum, ti. Fucus, ci. Pictura, rae. Graphice, ces. foe. ge. Peincture. S.
Painting color. Pigmentum, ti. Fard, peincture. Et Pigmentarius. A maker, or
a seller of such colors. ^aseur, ou vendeur de fard. Call. Painting, or
polyshing of old things, to make to seem new or fresh. Mangonium, ij.
Fardement de vielles chooses pour le mieux vendre. S. Et Mangonicus, a, um.
Pertaining to the painter, or setter out of such things. A partenant a
fardeur. Call. Pair. Par, ris. n. g. Vne pair. S. Pair of spectacles.
Conspicilia, Specilla ocularia. Lunettes. S. Pair of stocks. Cippus, pi.
Numella, ae. f. g. Cep. S. Pair of tables. Alueus lusorius, Magis, Abacus, ci.
m. ge. Tablier a iouer. H. Paiste. Massa, ae. foe. g. Paste. Call. To leaven the
paist, or doughe. Fermentare. Fair lever la paste. S.

Paistler, or maker of fine paist. Dulciarius pistor. Pistor fartilium. Un
pasticier. S. Paistrer. Ceragius, gij.* Paistrie. Pistrina placentarij,
Pistrina dulciaria, Popina pistoria. Ouuroier de pasticier. S. Paistry work.
Opus pistorium, Dulcia. Bud. Pasticerie. S. Palaice of a king, or prince. Aula,
ae. Palatium, ij. Praetorium, Regia, ae. foe. genesis Le palais, ou la maison
royale. S. Pale. Albus, a, um. Exanguis, e. Luridus, a, um. Pallidus, a, um.
Palle. S. Somewhat pale. Subpallidus, a, um. Aucunement palle. S.

Pale to be. Expalleo, es. Palleo, es. Estre palle. S. Pale to wax. Pallesco,
scis. Capere pallorem, Expalleo, es. Pallorem trahere, Exalbeseo cis. Se
pallir, deuenir palle. S. Paled wine, dead, vinewed, and that has lost his
verdure. Mucidum vinum. Mart. Palenes. Pallor, ris. m. g. Palleur. S. Pale, or
enclosure. Palus, li. Vallus, li. Statumen, inis. n. g. Pal, pali, ou pieu. S.
Pales fastened upright in the ground. Statuti pali. Paliz debout fichez en
terre. S. Pale in, or enclose. Palo, as. Garuir de pieux. S. Paled about, or
in. Roboratus, a, um.* Palm of the hand. Palma, ae. Vola, ae. foem. gener. La
paulme. H. Palm, a tree. Palma, ae. f. g. Palm. S. et Palmeus, a, u^. Of
palm. De palm. S. Palm bearyng. Palmifer, ra, rum. Palmiger, ra, ru^.
Palmer. Peregrinus, a, um. Adiect. Varr. Palmer to rappe one in the hand.
Ferula, ae. f. g. Palmer, a worm with many feet. Camp, Centipeda, ae. Eruca,
ae. f. g. Chemille. H. Palmestrie, a certain divination of things, only
gathered by the lines, and marks of the hands. Chiromantia, ae. f. g.
Chiromantie. S. He that is seen in palmestrie. Chiromantes, ae. m. g.
Chiromantien. S.

Palmus christi, an herb. Croton, Ricinus, ni. m. g. Palma christi. S. Palsy.
Paralysis, Resolutio neruorum, Neruoru^ syderatio. Paralysie. H. Et
Paralyticus, a, um. He yt has the palsy. Paralytique. Call. Palte. Pala, ae.*
Pane of a wall. Corium, ij. Pan de mur. S. Panell of a horse. Dorsuale, lis.
Panges of death. Libamitia mortis. Panier. Fiscus, ci. Corbis, Sporta, tae.
Fiscina, nae. f. genesis Panier d'os^er. Pan. Patella, ae. f. g. Vne paelle. S.
A fire pan. Batillus focarius, Batillum, li. n. g. Vne paelle de fer a porter
du feu. S.

A frying pan. Sartago, inis. f. g. Paelle a frire. S.

Pan for coals. Larcus, ci.* Pan, under which things are baken. Testus,
us. mas. genesis Cato. Pannecake. Fritilla, ae. Laganum, ni. n. genesis Bignet, ou
crepe^. Call. Pantell, fetter, or snare. Pedica, ae. f. g.* Panther, a beast.
Panthera, ae. Panther, ris. mas. ge. Panthere. S. Variae, ru^. Be said to be
Panthers, Propter varios colores. Pantheres. S. Pantrer. Structor panarius,
Artocopus, pi. mas. ge. Panetier. S. Pantry. Panariu^, ij. Artocopion, pij. n.
g. Paneterie. S Paper. Charta, ae. Papyrus, ri. Papier, Carte. H. Et chartula,
ae. diminut. Ang. Little or thin paper. Et Chartaceus, a, um. Papyratus, a,
u^. Of paper, or made of paper. Fait de carte. S. Paper fine. Charta augusta.
Plin. Nimia tenuitate epistolis dicata, ab Augusto nomen sortita. Papier fin
and delie. H. Paper that will not bear ink. Charta bibula transmittens
literas. Papier qui pass. H. Paper riall, or royal paper. Charta Claudiana,
Regia, Imperialis, Macrocolon. Plin. A staturae cubitalis magnitudine. Papier
royal, Imperial. H. Paper white, not written on. Charta pura. Vlpian. Non
descripta. Papier blanc. H. Paper wherein grocers and haberdashers wrapp their
wares. Emporetica charta, Emporeutica. Papier brouillard. H. Paper milles.
Chartariae officinae. Molins a papier. Pappe. Huber, ris. Vber, ris. Mamma, ae.
Rumen, inis. n. g. Ma^melle. S. Mammilla, ae. diminut. Ang. A little pappe or
dugge. Mammula, ae. f. g. Mammelette. S. To give the child the pappe or
breast. Mammo, as. Mammas ad suge^dum praebeo. Call. The nipple of a pappe.
Papilla, ae. f. g. Le petit bout de la mammelle. S.

Pappe, a meat for children. Pappa, ae. f. g. Boulie de petits enfans. S.
Pappes, or breasts of a maid. Sororiae. Pappe, or pyle, in the fundament of a
man. Anates, it is.* Parable, or dark saying. Parabola, ae. f. g. Parable.
Paradise. Paradisus, si. f. g. Paradis. S. Paradoxes, or matters contrary to
the opinion of all men. Paradoxa, orum. n. g. Paradoxes. Paragraffe, or sense
in law written, or opinion written before a sentence in law. Paragraphus,
Paragraphe, es. foe. ge. Paragraphe. S. Paralipomenon, a certain book in the
Bible, in which those things are contained, that are either left out, or
sle^derly touched in the books of the kings. Liber Paralipomenon. i.
derelictorum, vel praetermissorum. Call. Paramoure, or lover. Amasius, ij. mas.
genesis Un ami par amors. Paraphrase, or exposition of a thing in many words.
Paraphrasis, sis. foe. ge. Paraphrase. S. He which makes such paraphrase,
or exposition. Paraphrastes, ae. m. g.

Parasite, or flatterer. Parasitus, ti. m. g. Parasite. S. Parboyle. Perbullio,
is. Semibullio, is.* Parbo uyllyr. Pals. Parbreake. Reijcio, cis. Vomo, mis.
Amouere crapulam, Nauseam facere. Vomir. S. To parbreake often. Reuomere. Vomir
souuent.

Desire, or will to parbreake. Stomachi redundatio, Nausea, ae. f. g. Faim de
vomir. S.

To have desire or will to parbreake. Nauseare. Auoir faim de vomir. S.

The desire, or will to parbreake is ceased. Nausea abijt. La faim de vomir est
cessee. S.

To make one to parbreake. Vomitum alicui excutere. Fair vomir aucun. S.

The herbs provoke to parbreake. Moue^t herbae stomachum. Les herbs
prouoquent a vomir. S.

Parbreaking. Vomitio, onis. Vomitus, us. Dissolutio stomachi, Reiectus, tus.
Reiectio, onis. foe. ge. Vomissement. S. Parbreakynges, are contrary, and
hurtefull to the eyes. Inimicae oculi^ vomitiones. Vomisseme^s contraires, and
nuisans aux yeulx. S. Parcel, or small portion. Particula, lae. f. g.
Parcelle. By parcelles. Particulatim, Carptim. Par parcelles. S.

To divide an oration into little parcelles. Carpere orationem membris
minutioribus. Diuiser vne oraison par petites parcelles. S.

To speak by parcelles. Caesim dicere. Parler par parcelles. S.

Parched. Torridus, a, um. Ari. S. Parched all dry. Retorridus, a, um. Qui est
du tout ari. S. Parchment. Membrana, ae. Membranula, Pergamena charta.
Parchemin. H. Membraneus, a, um. Of parchement. De parchemin. Call. Et
Membranaceus, a, um. Like to parchement. Semblable a parchemin. S. Parchement
dressed, rased, or trimmed with a pomise. Palimpsestus, ti. Cic. Parciall.
Iniquus, a, um. As a parciall judge. Iudex iniquus. Ovid. Parciallitie.
Iniquitas, atis. foe. g. Pardon. Remissio, nis, Venia, ae. Pax, cis. Gratia,
ae. foe. ge. Pardon. S. Pardon of punishment. Impunitas, it is. foem: genesis
Impunite. Call. Pardon, or to forgive. Condono, as. Laxo, as. Mulctam remittere,
Offensionem obliterare, Parco, cis. Remitto, is. Veniam dare, Ignosco, cis.
Alicui suas inimicitias concedere, Tribuere venia^ alicui, Facere gratiam
delicti, Poenam praetermittere, Peccatum condonare, Noxiam remittere.
Pardonner. S. To pardon for the time passed. Aliquem venia in praeteritum
donare, Veniam in anteactu^ dare. Pardonner pour le temps pass. S.

Pardon, or forgive me this fault. Vnam hanc noxiam mitte. Pardonne moy ceste
fault. S. Pardon him I pray you. Omit quaeso hunc. Pardonne luy ie te pry.
S. Pardon them for my sake. Sinc exorem te illis ha^c veniam. Pardonne leur
pour l'amour de moy. S. Pardoned. Condonatus, a, um. Remissus, a, um. Pardonne.
S. Pardoner. Quaestor, ris. masc. genesis Pare, or to clippe. Praeseco, as.
Reseco, as. Rescindo, is. Aliquid circumscindere. Rogner. S. To pare, or clippe
from any thing. Demutilare. Rogner de quelque chose. S.

Pare, or cut about. Amputo, as, aui. Ronguer; ou couper tout autour. S. Pare
nails. Demere vngues. Plaut. Pare, or scrape away. Abrado, is. Racler. Call.
Pare to the quick. Resecare ad viuum. Columel. Resequer iusques a vif. S.
Paring of ones nails. Praesegmen vnguium, Resegmen. La tailleure des ongles.
H. Pared, or clipped. Mutilus, a, um. Mutilatus, a, um. Resectus, a, um.
Rongne. S. Parent, which is either father, or mother, or any friend of the
ascendent degree. Parens, it is. com^ genesis Le pere, ou la mere. S. Parents
worthy to be wyshed dead, or whose death is looked for. Expectati parents.
Terent. Desquels on ne desire que la mort. S. Parfect, Vide Perfect. Parforce.
Violenter, Vi, Per vim. Parforce. S. Parfume, Vide Perfume. Parget. Trullisso,
as. Gypsum induco. Call. Parget of a wall. Albarium, ij, Caementum, ti. n. g.
Blanchisseure. S. Pargeted. Albatus, ta, tum. Trullissatus, ta, tum. Pargeted
with lyme and sand. Calcatus, a, um. Vt calcata domus, A pargeted house.
Pargeting. Tectorium opus, Trullissatio, onis, f. g. et Tectorius, a, um.
Pertaining to pargeting. Pargetour. Caementarius, Crustarius, ij. Tector, ris.
m. g. Varr. Parill Vide Peril. Paring of any thing. Peripsema, it is. n. genesis
Paring away the bark of trees. Caprificatio, onis. foe. ge. Plin. Paring of ye
nails. Praesegmen vnguium, Resegmen. La taillure des ongles. S. Paring of
fruit. Putamen fructuum. Pellure. Pals Paring, or clipping. Amputatio, onis.
Resectio, onis. foe. ge. Rongnement. S. Paring, or cutting about. Amputatio,
onis. foe. ge. Rongnement. S. Paring shouell, or instrument to pare flores.
Valgium. ij. n. ge. Paryshe. Paroecia, ae. f. g. Curia, ae. Paroice. S.
Parishioners. Paroeci, orum. Paroeciani, anorum, Curiales, lium. Les
paroiciens. S. Paryshe priest. Curatus, Curio, nis. Parochus, chi. Aedis
sacrae moderator. Cure pasteur. S. Et Curionatus, us. Is the office, or
dignity of a paryshe priest. Curionis dignitas. Call. Park. Septum, ti.
Theriotrophium, phij. Leporarium, Viuarium, ij. Un parc a nouurir bestes
sauuages Park of hares. Lagotrophia. Park leaves, a tree like willowes.
Agnos, Agnus castus, Amerina, Salix, Vitex. Parliament. Gerusia, ae. Comitia,
orum. Conuentus maximus. Parliament. Pals. Parliament house. Comitium, ij. n. g.
Parloure. Coenaculum, li. Exedra, ae. Triclinium, Triclinarium, Aulula, lae.
Caenatio, onis. f. ge. Vne sallette. S. Et Tricliniaris, re. Pertaininge to a
parloure. Parloure for six geastes. Hexaclinum, ni. n. g. Parloure for winter.
Tablinum, ni. n. ge. Plin. Parloure, or bancqueting house under the ground.
Cryptoporticus, cus. foe. ge. Plin. Parloure servant, or trymmer.
Triclinarius, vel ria.* Parret, or popiniaye. Psittacus, ci. m. g. Perroquet,
Papegaye. S. Parsley. Apium, ij. Selinon. Persil. S. Parsnyppe herb.
Pastinaca, cae. Cara radix. Pastenade H. Parsneppe wild. Staphilinus,
Pastinaca erratica. Pastenade sauuage. H. Person of any body, or personage.
Persona, ae. f. g. Personnage. S. Parsone, curate, or pastor of a church.
Curio, onis. m. g. Cure, pasteur. H. Vide supra. Parson of a church which
serves the cure. Aedituus, Aeditimus, mi. m. genesis Varr. It is also the chief
priest or prelate of the temple. Parsone worthy punishment. Verbero, nis, m.
ge. Parsonage. Vide parson. Part, or portion. Pars, it is. f. g. Part, ou
portion. S. To have a part, or portion. In societatem venire. Auoir part, and
portion. S.

A great part. Pars magna, Bona pars. Vne grande party. S.

The greatest part. Multo maxima pars. Toute la plus grande party. S.

The greater part of ye day. Melior pars diei. La plus grande party du iour. S.

A great part of people. Pars multa. Vne grande party de gens. S.

In the over part. In superna part. En la party de dessus. S.

The parts of the world. Segmenta mundi. Les parties du monde. S.

I have my part therein. Est aliqua mea pars virilis. Ie y ay ma part. S.

Gods part. Praemetium, tij. n. g. La part de dieu.

Part. Partio, is, iui. (Et format futurum partiam, and partibo,) Partior,
iris. Diuiduum facere, Parts facere, Diuido, is. Seco, as. Partir. S. Part a
sunder. Dispertio, is. Partior, iris. Abiungo, is. Separer, disionder. S. Part
about the privy members. Pecten, inis. Part of people divided into three
parts. Tribus, us. foe. ge. Tribu. S. Part in three. Tripartior, iris. In tres
parts diuido. Part in two. Bipartio, is. Bipartior, ris. Partir en deux. S.
To part in two, or more parts. Dispartiri. Partir en deux, ou plusieurs
parties. S.

Part or to divide. Dispertio, is. Departir. S. Part taker. Consors, it is.
Socius, cij. Particeps, pis. om. g. Participant, qui a part. Call. He is
partaker of my griefs, and perilles. Socius est doloris. Il est participant de
mes doleurs, and perilz. S.

To be part taker, or to make part taker. Participare. Estre participant, ou
fair participant. S.

To make part taker of his praise. Communicare laudem cum altero. Fair
participant d^ sa louange. S.

Parted or divided. Diuisus, a, um. Sectus, a, um. Parti, ou divise. S. Parted
into sundry portions. Viritaneus, a, um.* Parted into many parts.
Multipartitus, a, u^. Parti en plusieurs pars. S. Parted, or divided in three.
Trifidus, a, um. Tripartitus, a, um. Divise en trois parties. S. Divided into
four parts. Quadripartitus, a. u^^ Divise en quatre parties. S.

Parteine. Attineo, es. Pertineo, es. Specto, as. Appartenir. S. It partaines
nothing to me. Nihil ad me attinet, Nil mea refert.

It does pertayne to the common wealth. Pertinet ad rempublicam. Cela
appartient a la republique. S

Partaining to some other, or that is not his, whose it is thought to be, but
an others. Subdititius, a, um. Subditiuus, a, um. Plaut. Partition.
Distributio, Partitio, onis. Diuisio, onis. Division, and partissement. S.
Particion, as in a walnutte or like thing, which is parted. Dissepementum, ti.
n. g. Fest. Particion of enheritaunce or land. Dissertio, nis. foem. gen.*
Partition to make. Vide To part. Partion to make, as between coheires.
Ercisceor, ris. Hercisceor, sceris. Cic. Diuiser. Call. Participate. Impertio,
is. Impertior, iris. Participo, as. Participer. Call. Particular. Particularis,
Proprius, Specificus, a, u^. Particulier, and propre. Call. Particular recepte.
Coactio, onis. f. g. Particulerly. Distinct, Specifice, Proprie, Speciatim,
Specialiter. Particulierement. S. Particulerly, and specially. Definite,
Distinct, Perticulariter, Perticulatim. Particulierement, and specialement. S.
Partlet. Strophium, phij. n. g. Cic. Et Strophiolu^, li. Plin. diminut. Ang. A
little partlet. Partly. Ex part, In part, Partim, Part, Partite. En party.
S. Partner. Partiarius, rij. m. ge. Colonus, sieve alius quis cum quo aliquid
commune habemus, aut partimur. Call. Partner, or complyce. Complex, icis.
Partriche. Perdix, cis. foe. ge. Plin. Perdris. H. Auis a perdendo dicta. Haec
est immunda, Fallax, and doli plena secundum Ambros. ad Iren. Immunda, Vbi
masculus masculum premat, and praeceps libido sexum obliuiscatur: Fallax, ac
fraudulen^a cum alteri perdici oua dir^mit, alat, fructu^que perdit. Nam pulli
effoeti, and exclusi mentitum parentem deserunt ad naturalem redeuntes, vt
scribit Hiero. ad Praesid. dolosa^ hanc etiam pingit, quae calleat, noueritque
arts venatoris, insidias lubrica art decipiendi. Passage. Parodus, Traiectio,
Traiectus, us. Metabasis, Meatus, Comeatus, tus. m. g. Tra^situs. m. g.
Passage. S. The passage is made. Iactus est gradus, and aditus ad caetera. Le
passage est faict. S.

A straighte, and narrow passage between two seas. Isthmus, mi. m. genesis Un
passage estroict enter deux mers. S.

The passage of the Alps. Alpium transitus. Le passage des Alps. S.

To grant, or give passage. Transitum alicui facere, vel dare, Apetire iter
alicui in aliquam regionem, Dare iter, Dare viam alicui per fun^u^. Donner, ou
bailler passage. S.

To shut up, or stop passage. Obsepire iter, Includere viam. Bouscher, ou
estouper la passage. S.

To let, or hinder the passage. Prohibere itinere. Empescher le passage. S.

Passage, or journey. Profectio, onis. foe. ge. Chemin, Allee. S. Passage over
sea. Transfretatio, onis. foe. ge. Passaw in Almayne. Boeodurum, Patauia.
Pass. Praetereo, is. Tra^seo, is. Meo, as. Passer. S. Pass beyond.
Transcurro, ris. Praeterlabor, ris. Transgredior, ris. Praetergredior, ris.
Passer oultre. Pass by. Lego, is. Praetergredior, eris. Praetereo, is. Passer
aupres. S. Pass boys age. Ex ephebis, vel pueris excedere. Pass bonds, or
to exceade. Excedo, is. Exceder. S. Pass forth. Progredior, eris. Plaut. Pass
forth, go to, tell on. Perge. Imp. mod. As go to the rest. Perge ad caetera.
Poursuis au rest. Pass forth the day, or time. Agitare diem, Exigere
tempus. Plaut. Passer le iour, and le tempi. S. Pass, or to excelle. Antecedo,
is, di. Passer. S. To pass any in any thing, and to be more excellent.
Prestare, Anteuenire, Antestare, Antecellere, Antecedere, Praeterire, Anteire,
Superare, Vincere. Passer aucun en quelque chose, and estre plus excellent. S.

Pass over. Metior, iris. Praetereo, is. Progredior, eris. Transgredior, eris.
Transeo, is. Transcurro, is. Transmitto, is. Passer oultre. S. To pass over
the mount Atlas. Penetrare Atlantem. Passer oultre le mont d' Atlas. S.

If they would pass on, or forward. Si porro ire pergant. S'ils veulent
passer oultre. S.

To pass away, or to dye. Peragere mortem. Passer oultre, mourir. S.

To pass over any thing without speaking a word. Praeterire aliquid,
Praeteruchere aliquid silentio, Transcurrere, Transilire, Transire aliquid, vel
transite quippiam sile^tio. Passer quelque chose sans en dire mot. S.

Pass over, or to leave to say, or do a thing. Praetermitto, is. La passer,
laisser quelque chose a dire, ou a fair. S. Pass over negligently. Varico,
as. Varicor, aris. Pass over quickly. Carpo, is, psi. Virg. Passer
legierement. S. Pass over sea. Permetiri aequor. Transfreto, as. Transmittere
mare. Passer la mer. S. To pass out of this world, or to dye. Migrare de, vel
ex hac vita. Cic.

Pass the time away. Transmittere tempus, Trahere tempus, Traducere tempus.
Passer le temps, vser le temps. S. To pass the time of his life, or
mortality. Tra^figere vitam, Vitam exigere, vel traducere. Passer le temps de
sa uie. S.

Pass through. Transcendo, is. Pertranseo, is. Permeo, as. Peruado, is.
Transmeo, as. Praetereo, is. Praegredior, ris. Praetergredior, ris. Transigo,
is. Transgredior, ris. Transmitto, is. Transmittere cursu, Trai^cio, cis.
Passer tout oultre. S. Pass through hastily, or quickly. Transuolo, as.
Passer vistement. S. Pass time in study. Otium studio Suppeditare. Author ad
Heren. Passed. Praeteritus, a, um. Transactus, a, um. Transitus, a, um. Pass.
S. Affecta aestas. Summer nigh passed and gone. The day is passed. Transijt
dies. Le iour est pass.

Pass flowers, or rose persely. Anemone, nes. foe. g. Passefleurs. S. Passer
by the way. Viator, oris. m. g. Un passant qui pass son chemin. S. Passing
bonds. Excursus, us. m. g. Plin. Iun. Passing forth, or a going forwards.
Progressus, us. m. g. Auancement. S. Passing of time, Temporis traductio.
Passement de temps. S. Passing, or removing in journey. Migratio, onis. foem.
genesis Cic. Passing over. Transgressus, us. Transitio, nis. Transitus, us.
Transcursus, Pascha, Phase, Transgressio, onis. f. g. Traiectus, tus. m. g.
Passement. S. Passing over lightly. Perfunctorie. aduerb. Vlpia. and
perfunctorius, a, um. That which does pass lightly. Passing shortly, or
transitory. Transitorius, a, um. Vt domus transitoria. Suet. A house passing
shortly, or transitory. Passion. Passio, onis. Affectus, us. m. g. Passion. S.
Passions of the mind. Pathe, Animi passiones, Animi motus, Perturbationes, and
aegritudines animi. Cic. Passive, or betokening grief, or passion. Passiuus,
a, um. Qui significe passion. S. Passeporte, or salfeconduicte. Publica fides,
Causaria missio, Libellus, li. f. ge. Un passeporte. S. And they that have
passeporte. Caussarij milites. A passeporte, or certification. Liber
assertorius rerum inuectarum. Passeporte, ou certification. S.

Past. Vide Passed. Past it is. Abijt, Praeterijt. Terent. Past remedy it is.
Conclamatum est. Terent. Il n'y a plus de remede. S. Pasterne bone of a horse.
Talus, li. m. ge. La cheuille du pied. S. Pastye or a flesh pie. Artocrea,
creae. Artocreas, atis. n. ge. Paste de chair. H. Pastime, and recreation of
children. Lusus, sus. m. genesis Esbat and recreation d'enfans. S. Pastimes, and
pleasures. Facetiae, aru^. f. g. Esbats. S To pastime or sport with some
other. Dare alicui operam ludo, Animum remittere, Voluptatem cu^ aliquo capere.
S'esbatre auec quelqu'^n. S

To take his pastyme or sport. Voluptatem capere, Obsequi animo suo. Preudre
ses esbats. S.

In pastime. Per iocum, Ioco, Per ludu^. Par esbat.

Pastiming or sporting. Oblectatio, onis. Lusus, sus. Esbatement. S. Pastor,
one that has the charge, and keapinge of beasts. Opilio, onis. Custos ouium,
Pastor, oris. m. ge. Pasteur, pastre, ou pastoureau. S. And pertaining to a
pastor, or of a pastor. Pastoralis, le. Pastorius, a. um Pastoritius, a, u^.
Pastoral. S. They love pastors always. Retinent charitatem in pastores. Its
aiment tousiours les pasteurs. S.

A pastors life. Vita pastoritia. Vie pastorale. S.

Pasture, or feeding for cattle. Pastus, us. Pabulatio, Pastio, onis. f. g.
Pasturage. Pasture ground, or place where beasts do feed, or pasture.
Pascuum, cui. n. genesis Pasquis, lieu ou les bestes paissent. S. A commune
pasture. Compascuus ager. Un pasturage commun. S.

Pasture cattle. Pasco, scis, paui. Pascor, eris. Pastu^ capessere. Pasturer.
S. Pasture sheep. Versare oues. Virg. Paistre. S. Pastured. Pastus, a, um.
Repen. S. Pasturing. Pastio, onis. foe. ge. Le paissage. S. Patche, cloute, or
to mende. Reconcinno, as. Reficio, cis. Interpolo, as. Resarcio, cis. Frusta
assuere. Rapiecer. S. Pattern of any thing. Archetypus, vel Archetypu^,
Exemplar, Exemplum, Specimen, Prima adu^bratio, Le patron de quelque chose. S.
To make paternes of any thing. Adumbrare aliquid. Fair les patrons de quelque
chose. S.

To follow his pattern. Imitari praescriptu^ adumbratum. Suyure son patron. S.

To take a pattern. Sumere simile, Capere specimen, Ducere similitudinem ex
aliquo, Imitari exemplum alicuius, Pingere exemplum. Prendre le patron. S.

To fail in following a pattern. Decidere ab archetypo. Faillir a suyure un
patron. S.

Pattern like. Ectypum, pi. n. g. Pathe. Semita, ae. Trames, it is. m. g. Vne
sent ou sentier. S. Semitatus, a, u^. Divided into many paths. To make a
pathe. Semito, as. Semitam facere. Fair un sentier. S.

Pathe much used, or a beaten pathe. Callis, lis. m. ge. Chemin frye. S.
Patriarch. Patriarcha, chae. m. ge. Patriarche. S. Et Patriarchatus, us. m. ge.
The office or dignity of a patriarch. It is taken for the chief or prince of
fathers. Also it has been the title of ye four archebishops of Alexandria,
Antiochia, Jerusalem, and Rome. Patrimony. Patrimonium, ij. n. g. Patrimoine.
S. Patron. Patronus, ni. Mecaenas, it is. m. ge. Patron. S. Patten. Calopodium,
ij. Solea, ae. Calopus, odis. Crepida lignea. Gallicae, ru^. Gallochus.
Galloches. Patten maker. Solearius, rij. m. g. Patinier. S. Paue. Paueme^to,
as. Consterno, is. Stratumino, as. Sternere locum saxis. Aream consternere
silicibus. Pauer. S. Little small pieces of stones, which are squared to paue
with. Tesserulae. Cicer. Petites menues pieces de pierres, qui sont quarrees
pour pauer. S.

Paued. Constratus, a, um. Cic. Pauement of a place. Pauimentum, ti. n. g. Le
paue d' vne place. S. Pauement made of little stones cut and graued.
Pauimentum scalpturatum. Un paue faict de petites pierres taillees, and
grauees. S. Pauement made of little pieces of stones, marble or such like.
Lithostratos, and Lithostratum. Un paue faict de petites pieces de pierres,
marbre ou semblables. S. Pauilion, or tente. Scena, ae. Papilio, onis.
Conopeum, Tabernaculum, li. neut. gener. Pauillon, ou tente. S. Pauilion, or
tente of the prince. Augustale, lis. n. g. Pauillon, ou la tente du prince. S.
Pauing. Pauimentatio, onis. foe. ge. Pauement. S. Pauing betle, to trim
pauement. Pauicula, ae. f. ge. Un bato^r, vne bate. S. Pauing tyle with
pictures eneyled. Asarotum, ti. neut. genesis Stat. Paul one of the Apostles,
elected by revelation from a persecutour to be a chosen vessel of God, and
named before Saulus, is now called Paulus, which is (if you will interpret it)
Champion against Gods enemies, conuentour, marvelous, mouth, or voice of a
trompet. He was of the trybe of Benjamin, borne in Iudaea, in a town called
Giscalis, who lived after the passion of Christ twenty years or more, in the
time of Nero, under whom he suffered. Of this name Paulus, there were diverse,
some noble and gracious, as were Aemilius, Lucius Paulus, some were ignoble,
ungracious, and also Heretics, as Paulus Samosatenus. etc. Paulus, li. mas.
genesis Paul. S. Paunche. Rumen, inis. Venture, tris. Aqualiculus, li. m. g.
Pance. S. Pawnche, or gorre belly. Ventriosus, a, um. Ventrosus, a, um. Panssu,
panssard. S. A great paunche, or bellye. Venture collatiuus, Abdomen
insaturabile. Gros ventre. H.

Pawn, gauge, or pledge. Pignus, oris. Depositum, ti. Le gage, depost. S.
Pawn, or gage of battle. Sponsio singularis certaminis, Pignus
digladiaturae, vel singularis certaminis, vel Demicationis extremae, and
capitalis. Gage de battaille. S. Pawn keeper. Depositarius, a, um. Vlpian. Le
garden d' un depost. S. Pawn, or to gauge. Depono, is. Oppignero, ras. Oppono,
is. Engager, mettre en gage. S. To pawn, or gauge. Ponere pignori, Pignora
dare, Pignerare, Dare pignori. Bailler en gage. S.

To pawn, or gauge his cloak. Ponere, vel de ponere pallium. Mettre en gage
son manteau. S.

To conte^d for a pawn. Certare pignore. Virg.

Pawse, leisure, or space. Intercapedo, inis. Pausa, ae. foem. genesis Pose. S.
Pawse. Pauso, as. Interuallum facere, Spatium interponere. Fair Pose. S.
Pawsie. Vide Palsy. Pay. Vide Pai.
P. ANTE. E.
PEace. Quies, it is. Quietudo, inis. Toga, ae. foe. ge. Pax, cis. f. g. Paix. S.
vt Ovid. Fast. 1. Sub iuga bos veniat, sub terras semen aratas,
Pax Cererem nutrit, pacis alu^na Ceres.
Let ox receive the painful yoke,
And tylled ground the seed,
For peace does Ceres sweet maintain,
On peace does Ceres feed.
Peace certain, and sure. Explorata pax, Pax constituta, and firmata. Paix
certain, and asseuree. S. Peace accorded. Pax conuenta, vel sequestra. Virg.
To confirm, or establishe peace. Pacem confirmare. Confirmer la paix. S.

To make peace. Pacem agere, vel conciliare, aut facere. Fair la paix. S.

To make peace with any people, or nation. Pa^gere pacem cum populo aliquo.
Fair la paix auec quelque peuple. S.

To live in peace. Agitare pacem. Viure en paix. S.

To mainteyne peace. Pacem retinere. Entretenir la paix. S.

To seek, or purchase peace. Solicitare pace^. Pourchaser la paix. S.

Which loves peace. Amator pacis. Qui aim paix. S.

Peace brynger. Pacifer, a, um. Qui port paix. S. Peace maker. Placator,
Pacificator, ris. m. genesis Qui fait la paix. Call. Peace, not a word. Tace,
Mussa. Terent. Peace, or keep silence. Tace, Taceto, Sileto, Imp. St. Desinas.
Tay toy. Peace, or to keep silence. Co^ticeo, es. Conticesco, scis. Se taire.
S. Peace, or let be, get thee hence. Comprime, Imper. mod. Tais toy, deporte
toy. S. Peace to make. Pacifico, as. Controuersias componere. Pacem facere.
Pacifier, fair paix. Call. Peace was agreed. Pax conuenit. La paix est
accordee. S. Peache a fruit. Persicu^ pomum, Malum persicu^, vel Duracinum,
Nux mollusca, and Nucipersica. Un pesche. vt Mart. Vilia fueramus maternis
praecoqua ramis,
Nunc in adoptiuis persica cara sumus.
Upon our native boughs to ripe,
And out of price we were,
Now peaches on adoptiue plants,
We are accounted dear.
Peale, or noise of belles, trumpet, or such like. Classicum, ci. n. ge. Virg.
Pear. Pirum, ri. Pyrum, ri. Poire. H. Pear called Saint Thomas pear, a pear
that hangs longest on the tree, and dureth longest. Pirum amerinum. Plin.
Serissimum omnium, maximeque durans. H. Pear called Venus pear. Pirum
venereum, Coloratum dicunt. H. Pear of a great bigness. Volemum, mi. Pirum
volemu^, quod volam manus impleat, Seme^tinum, Musteum. H. Pears called
Catherine pears. Fauoniana, Pyra rubra. Plin. 15. cap. 15. Pears delicate,
which may be eaten vnpared. Curmundula. Pears read on the one side.
Crustumina pyra, Gratissima, and ex part rubent. H. Pears sauouring like
musk. Moschatula, Pyra dicuntur a moschi odore. Call. Pears that be sour.
Acidula, orum. Postautumalia pira. H. Pear tree. Pyrus, ri. f. g. Un poirier.
S. Pearl. Bacca, ae. Conchus. chi. Vnio, onis. Margarita, ae. Margaritum, ti.
n. g. Vne perle. S. Margaritefer, a, um. Which brings forth pearls.
Produisant perles. Call. Decked with pearls. Baccatus, a, um. Orne de perles. S.

Pearl seller. Margaritarius, ij. m. g. Qui vend perles. Peasable. Pacificus,
a, um. Placidus, Quietus, a, u^. Propitius, a, um. Tranquillus, a, um.
Paisible. S. Peasable to make. Paco, as. Placo, as. Appaiser. S. Peasablye.
Sedate, Tranquille, Pacifice, Placide, Placate. Paisiblement. S. Pease. Pisum,
si. n. g. Un pois. S. Pease, or to weye. Appendo, is, di. Peser. S. Peased, or
wayed. Appensus, a, um. Pese. S. Peble stone. Calculus, li. Vmbilicus, ci. m.
ge. Grauois, grauelle. S. Pecke, which is a measure containing the fourth part
of a bushel. Satum, ti. n. g. Pecocke. Pauo, nis. Pauus, ui. Iunonia auis.
Paon. H. Oculi, oru^. Be the trim spots in a pecocks tail. Peculiar and
propre. Genuinus, a, um. Peculiaris, re. Priuatus, a, um. Priuus, a, um.
Specialis, le. Praecipuus, a, um. Peculier, and propre. S. Peculiar to a city,
or town. Municipalis, le. om. g. Peculiarly, or properly. Speciatim, Proprie,
Peculiariter. Proprement. S. Pedelion herb. Leontopodion, Pes leonis. Pied de
lion. Dod. Pedegre. Genealogia, ae. Stemma, atis. neut. ge. Genealogy. S.
Peddler. Circumforaneus, Circuitor, oris. Circitor, oris. mas. ge. Portpainier,
mercier. H. Peers, or noble me^ of a realm. Megistanes, Proceres, rum. m. g.
Grands personnages. S. Peine. Poena, ae. f. g. Peine. S. Vide Pain. Pellet.
Glans, is, Globulus, li. Plumbata. ae. mas. ge. Vne plumbee. S. Pellettes of
bread or paist. Turundae, arum. foe. ge. Varr. S. Pellitorie herb. Astericum,
ci. Helxine, Muralis herba, Parietaria, Perdiciu^, Vrceolaris, Vitrearia. De la
parietoire. S. There be two kinds, the one of Spain, and the other of the
wall. Pelter, pynche penny, one wythered with covetousness. Aridus homo. Terent.
See d' avarice. S. Penal. Penalis, e. om. ge. Plin. Penalty. Multa, ae. f. g.
Amend. S. Penalty to set. Multam dicere, vel irrogare, Multare, Multam
facere. Condamner a l' amend. S. Pendante, banner, or standarde. Signum, ni.
Vexillum, li. n. g. Enseigne and estendart. S. Pendante, or banner bearer.
Signifer, a, um. Vexillarius, rij. mas. ge. Port' enseignes. S. Penetrable, as
which may enter, or may be entered. Penetrabilis, le. Peruius, a, um.
Penetratif. S Penance. Piamentum, ti. n. g. Le penitence. S. Penny. Denarius,
ij. m. g. Denier. S. To gather pence, or money together. Construere pecuniam
and coaceruare. Amasser deniers. S.

Penny called a Gods penny, or earnest penny. Arrha, ae. f. g. Arrhabo, onis. m.
g. Le denier a dieu and arres. Penny royal herb. Origanum, Pulegium, ij. n.
ge. Pouliot. Dod. Penny royal, or puliell royal ye wild. Calamintha, thae.
foe. ge. Pouliot sauuage. S. Penitent, or he which repents. Poenitens,
tentis. Qui se repent. S. Penitent to be for doing some thing, to be
repentaunte. Poenitere, Poenitentiam agere, Pigere. Soy repenter d' auoyr faict
quelque chose. S. Penner. Graphiaria, Theca calamaria. Calamariu^, ij.
Graphiarium. Pennarium, Theca pennaria. Un estuy d' escript^ire. H. Pen.
Calamus, mi. Penna, ae. Calamus scriptorius. Vne plume a escrire. H. Pen
knyfe. Scalpellum, li. Scriptorius cultellus, Graphiarius gladiolus, Scalprum
librarium. Un caniuet, ou trenche plume. S. Penned. Pennatus, a, um. Plumatus,
a, um. Empenne. Penned, or franked. Altilis, le. om. g. Engraisse. Call. vt
Altilis cygnus. A franked swane. Penned to be, or fethered, or to wax penned,
or fethered. Plumesco, scis. Co^mencer a auoir des plumes. Pensife.
Cogitatiuus, a, um* Pensatiuus, a, um. Cogitabundus, a, um. Pensif. S.
Pensifenes, care, or heuines. Solicitudo, inis. Cura, ae. Scrupulus, li.
Anxitas, atis. f. g. Soulci. S. To be in great pensifenes, or heaviness. Animo
laborare. Estre en grand soulci. S.

Pensile or style to write on a table with. Graphiu^, ij. Stylum, li. Stylus,
li. m. genesis La touch. H. Pensile for a painter. Penicillus, li. Penicillum,
li. Peniculum, Peniculus, li. m. g. Pinceau. H. Pensile case. Graphiarium, ij.
n. g. Mart. Pension. Vectigal, lis. Pensio, onis. Telos. Pension. S Et
Pensiuncula, lae. f. g. diminut. Petite pension. S. A small pension. Pension
for one month. Menstruum, ui. neu. genesis Pension pour un mois. S. An annuale
pension. Annuum. Pension annuelle. S

Pensioner, or a gentleman that always wayteth on the prince with his spear.
Doryphorus. Pencor. Plin. He is the kings pensioner. Annua congiaria a
rationario publico habet. Il ha pension de l' estat du Roy. S.

Pension paid by way of exemptio^, as for to live out of commune affairs or
busynes. Solarium, ij. n. genesis Cic. Pensionary. Pensionarius, ij.* Penthouse.
Proiectura, ae. Corona, ae. Supercilium, vel Prominentia parietum ad arcenda
inde stillicidia. Saillies, larmiers, entablemens. H. Penury. Penuria, ae. f.
g. Penury, ou indigence. S. People, or nation. Gens, it is. Populus, li. mas.
ge. Un peuple, ou nation. S. Populus, Is all kind of people except the chief
gouernoure. Et popularis, re. Pertaining to the people. Populaire, du peuple.
Call. All the people gainsaye it. Theatra tota reclamant. Tout le peuple
contredit. S.

All the people speak of it. In ore est omni populo. Tout le peuple en perle,
and bruit. S.

Which seeks the favor of the people. Aurae popularis homo. Qui cherche la
faueur du peuple. S.

To make a declaration, or an oration before the people. Public dicere. Fair
harangue deuant le people. S.

To seek, or labor to be praised of the people. Ventum popularem quaerere in
re aliqua. Chercher d' estre love du peuple. S.

People, or properly the comminaltie, or commune people of a town. Plebs, bis.
foe. ge. Le menu, and commun peuple d'vne ville. S. Et Plebeus, a, um, vel
Plebeius, a, u^. Ang. Of people, or of the vulgar sort. De menu peuple. S.
People of the further part of the North. Alauorsi. Pepon. Pepon, Pepo, onis.
mas. ge. Pompon, melon. H Pepper. Piper, ris. n. g. Poyure. H. Pepper new, and
fresh. Piper musterum. Poyure nouucau, and frais. S. To pepper, or straw with
pepper. Polline piperis conspergere, Piperare. Poyurer de poyure puluerize. S.

Peppered. Piperatus, a, um. Poyure. Pepper querne. Mola piperaria. Gregoyr a
poyure. Peradventure. Forsan, Forsitan, Fortasse, Fortassis. Paraduenture. S.
Peradventure ye would ask of me. etc. Forsitan quae ratis, qui iste terror
sit. Paraduenture vous me demanderez. etc. S.

Perforce. Violenter, vi. Violentement, perforce. Call. Perce. Fodio, is. Foro,
as. Penetro, as. Fodico, cas. Efforo, as. Inforo, as. Perforo, as. Pertundo,
is. Percer. S. Perce through. Exterebro, as. Perfodio, is. Perforo, as.
Traijcio, cis. Transfodio, is. Transfigo, is. Transuerbero, as. Transsuo, is.
Configo, is. Suffodio, is. Percer tout oultre. S. Perce unto the bottom.
Persido, is. Virg. To perce with an awger. Terebare. Percer d'vne tariere. S.

To perce the walls. Perfodere parietes. Percer les parois. S.

To perce round about. Circunforare. Percer tout entour. S.

To perce vessels. Dolia relinere. Percer des muiz

Perce with an ale, or bodkyn. Desubulo, as. Varr. Perceable, or penetrable, or
which may be perced. Penetrabilis, e. om. ge. Penet: atif. Call. Perced. Fossus,
a, um. Perce. S. Perced, and wyndowed. Fenestratus, a, um. Perce and fenestre.
S. Perced through. Perfoss^s, a, um. Transfossus, a, u^. Confixus, a, um.
Traiectus, a, um. Transfixus, a, u^. Perce tout oultre. S. Percer. Terebellum,
li. n. g. Vibrequin, villebriquin. S. Perceive. Aduerto, is. Calleo, es. Cerno,
is. Noto, as. Odoror, aris. Percipio, is. Perspicio, cis. Sentio, is. Video,
es. Co^spicor, aris. Aspicio, cis. Animaduerto, it is. Apperceuoir, S. Perceive
quickly, or sharply. Sagio, is, iui. Cic. To perceive some thing.
Persentiscere. Apperceuoir de quelque chose. Call.

To perceive somewhat. Sentire, Subsentire, Praesentiscere, Subolere, Odorari,
Olfacere. Sentir aucunement. S.

Perceive somewhat. Subaudio, is.* Perceived. Perspectus, a, um. Cic. Apperceu.
S. Perceived to be of all men. Patere omnibus. Perch a fish. Perca, ae. Vng
poisson appelle perch. H. Perch, which some call a roffe. Molonurus, ri, Col.
Perch for bacon, or onions, or such like. Petiolus, li.* Perch. Pertica,
cae. f. g. Perch. H. The hawks are at perch. Accipitres sedent in pertica.
Les oyseaux de proye sont a la perch, ou son perchez. S.

Perch for poultry to sit on, or rouste. Petauru^, ri. neut. genesis Mart.
Perch, gadde, or pole ten foot long. Decempeda, ae. f. g. Perch a
carpentier and mesurer de dix pies de long. Call. Et Decempedator, ris. He that
measures land with such a perch. Mesureur de terre. Percing. Foratio, onis.
Perforatio, onis. foem. genesis Percement. S. Percing with an awger. Terebratio,
onis. foe. genesis Percement de tariere. S. Perclose of timber, or woodde.
Vacerra, ae. Perfect. Absolutus, a, um. Perfectus, a, u^. Parfaict. Perfect at
all points. Numeris omnibus absolutus. Parfaict de tous poincts. S. Perfect of
memory. Memoriosus, a, um. Perfect, or at a point. Consu^matus, a, um.
Perfaict, ou accompli. S. Perfect, or sound. Integer, ra, rum. Parfaict, and
entier. S. Perfect, or to make perfect. Perago, is. Perficio, cis. Absoluo, is.
Conficio, cis. Efficio, cis. Co^summo, as. Fastigium imponere operi. Perpetro,
as. Manum extremam vel summa^ imponere. Parfaire. S To make a book perfect.
Librum imperfectu^ supplere. Parfaire un liver. S.

Perfection, or holiness. Sanctimonia, ae. Sanctitas, Sanctitudo, inis. foe. ge.
Saintete. S. Perfectly. Absolute, Ad vnguem, Ad amussim, Clare, Exact,
Amussim, Examussim, In vngue^, Mature, Perfect, Solid. Parfaictement. S.
Perfectly done. Exactus, a, um. Faict en tout diligence and perfection. S. Done
with all diligence and perfection. Perfectly, or at the fingers end by heart,
or without ye book. Memoriter, Ex memoria. Par cueur Perfectly to know, or
understand. Pernoscere, Percognoscere. Parfaictement cognoistre. S. Perfect to
make. Vide Perfect. Perforate, boar, or make a hole in any thing. Inforo,
as. Percer, fair un trou en quelque chose, sorer. S. Perform, finishe, or to
accomplish. Compleo, es. Consummo, as. Inchoo, as. Perago, is. Perficio, cis,
Efficio, cis. Exequor, eris. Perducere ad exitum. Patro, tras. Persequor, eris.
Persoluo, is. Praesto, as. Transigo, is. Absoluo, is. Parfaire, paracheuer,
parfournir accomplir. S. Perform promise. Liberare fidem, Repraesentare diem
promissorum, Soluere votum. Vide Promise. Perfourmaunce, accomplishement, or
finishinge. Peractio, Effectus, tus. Perfectio, onis. foem. genesis
Accomplissement. S. Performed, accomplyshed, finished. Actus, a, um.
Completus, a, um. Consummatus, a, u^. Peractus, a, um. Accompli. S. Perfume.
Odoramen, inis. Odoramentum, Suffimen, Suffimentum, ti. Suffitio, onis.
Suffitus, us, ui. Thymiama, it is. neut. ge. Parfum. H. Parfums ou perfums. S. To
perfume. Suffio, is, iui. Vaporo, as. Fumigo, gas. Fumifico, as. Perfumer. S.

Perfumed. Odoratus, a, um. Suffitus, a, u^. Perfume. S Perfumer. Suffitor,
toris. m. g. Perfumeur. S. Perfuming. Suffitus, tus. vel Suffitio, onis. foem.
ge. Perfumement. S. Peril. Periculum, li. Discrimen, nis. Peril. S. To be in
peril. Periclitari, venire, vel adduci in discrimen. Periller. S.

Perilous, or dangerous. Periculosus, a, um. Perilieux. S. Perillously.
Periculose. Perilleusement. S. Perish. Obruo, is. Occido, is. Pereo, is, riui,
vel, rij. Dispereo, is. Perir and estre gaste. S. Peryshe between one thing,
and other. Intercido, is. Perir, entrecheoir. S. To perish with the rest.
Deflagrare communi incendio. Perir auec les autres. S.

To peryshe by fire. Conflagro, as. Perir par feu. S.

Peryshed. Obrutus, a, um. Perditus, a, um. Peri. S. Peryshed to be with fall,
or weight of any thing. Opprimi casu, vel ruina. Periure, or to forswear him
self. Deiuro, as. Periuro, as. Deiero, as. Peiero, as. Obstringere se
periurio. Se pariurer. S. Perjured. Periurus, a, u^. Periurijs delibutus.
Pariure. Perjury. Peieratio, Periurium, ij. n. g. Pariureme^t. Periwincle, a
fish. Cochlea. Limacon de mer. H. Perle. Vnio, nis. Margarita, tae. vel
Margaritum, ti. n. g. Bacca. Vne perle. S. Permanent. Permanens, it is. Certus,
a, u^. Permanent. To be permanent, to bide, or tarry to the end. Permaneo, es.
Vsque ad finem maneo. Demourir iusques a la fin. S.

Permission, leave or license. Permissus, sus. Permissio, onis. Concessus, sus.
masc. genesis Permission and conge. S. To give permission. Potestatem vel ius
facere. Copiam vel facultatem dare, vel facere. Donner permission. S.

Permit, or to suffer, or to give leave. Permittere, Copiam dare, Dare and
facere facultatem, Gratiam facere and potestatem, Dimittere, Sinere. Permettre.
S. Permitted. Permissus, a, um. Admissus, a, um. Licitus, ta, tum. Concessus,
sa, sum. Permis. S. Permutation. Permutatio, onis. f. g. Permutation. S.
Permute. Permuto, as. Commuto, tas. Permuter. S. Permuter. Permutator, ris.
Vide Chaunger. Pernicious. Perniciabilis, le. Perniciosus, a, um. Pernicialis,
le. Pestifer, ra, rum. Pernicieux. S. Perniciously. Pestifere, Perniciose.
Pernicieusement. Pernour of profits of any thing possessed. Vsuarius. *
Peroration, or last part of an oration. Peroratio, onis. foe. ge. La fin ou
conclusion d'vne oration. Call. To make his peroration, or end of his tale.
Perorare, Finire orationem, and epilogum imponere. Fair fin a son oraison. Call.

Perpetrate, or to commit a murder. Perpetrare caedem. Perpetrer ou commettre
un meurtre. S. Perpetrated. Perpetratus, a, um. Perpetre. S. Perpetual.
Immortalis, e. Perennis, e. Perpes, it is. Perpetuus, a, um. Aeternus, na, number.
Proprius, a, um. vt Voluptates deorum propriae sunt, Sempiternus, na, number.
Perpetualis, le. Perpetuel. S. To make perpetual. Mandare aeternitati,
Perpetuare. Perpetuer. S.

Perpetually. Immortaliter, Pere^niter, Perpetim, Perpetuo, Perpetuum.
Perpetuellement. S. Perpetuity. Perennitas, it is. Perpetuitas, it is. foe. ge.
Perpetuite. S. Perplexity. Angustia, ae. foe. ge. Destresse. S. and
Perplexitas, tatis. foe. g. Perplexite. S. Persecute. Agito, as. Persequor,
eris. Vexare, Affligere. Persecuter. S. Persecuted. Persequutus, a, um.
Vexatus, Afflictus, a, um. Persecute. S. Persecution. Persequutio, onis.
Vexatio, onis. Afflictio, onis. f. g. Persecution. S. Persevere, or abide
firmly in opinion. Perseuero, as. Persisto, is. Retinere iuditium, Pergere,
Permanere. Perseuerer. S. Persevere, or dwell in a wylfull opinion, or purpose.
Obstino, as. Offirmo. S' opinestrer. Call. Perseueraunce. Peruicatia, ae.
Tenacitas, it is. Tenacitudo, inis. * Pertinacia, Perseuerantia, Permansio, onis.
f. g. Perseverance. S. Perseueraunt. Perseuerans, it is. Pertinax, cis. Peruicax,
cis. Tenax, cis. Perseuerant. S. Persist. Consto, as, stiti. Maneo, es, ansi.
Persister. S. Persiste wilfully in opinion, purpose, or sentence. Obstino, as.
Offirmo, as. Vt supra. To persiste, or abide always in his opinion. Sibi
consentire, Sibi constare. Persister tousiours en son opinion. S.

Persisting. Constans, it is Manens, it is. Part. Persley herb. Petroselinum, ni.
Apium. Persil. H. Perspectiue, or pertaining to sight. Opticus, a, u^.
Perspectiuus, a, um. Visiuus, a, um. De prospectiue, chose apartenant a veoir.
Call. Perspectiuely. Optice. Persuade. Adduco, cis. Induco, cis. Persuadeo, es.
Suadeo, es, si. Persuader. S. Persuade instauntly. Impello, is, puli. Cic.
Persuaded. Impulsus, a, um. Persuasus, a, um. Persuade. S. Et Persuadibilis, e.
vel Persuasibilis, e. Able to be persuaded. Persuasible. S. Persuasorius, a,
um. That whereby one may be persuaded. et Persuasibile, Persuasibiliter. In
manner of persuading, perswasibly. Persuasiblement. S. Perswader. Persuasor,
oris. m. g. Persuadeur. S. Perswadingly. Persuasibiliter. Persuasiblement. S.
Persuasion. Persuasio, onis. Suasio, onis. foem. ge. Persuasion. S. Perte in
making answer. Argutus, a, um. Agu. S. Et Argutulus, a, um. diminut. Ang.
Somewhat perte, or quick of answer. Perturbation. Perturbatio, onis.
Commotio animi. Perturbation. S. To perturbe one. Perturbo, as. Commouere
aliquem, Solicitare. Perturber aucun. S.

Perturbed. Perturbatus, aum. Commotus, ta, tum. Perturbe. S. Perverse.
Peruersus, a, um. Peruers. S. Peruersly. Perverse, Perperam. Peruersement. S.
Peruersitie, or perverseness. Peruersitas, tatis. f. ge. Peruersite. S.
Peruerte. Peruerto, is. Peruertir. S. Perwinke an herb. Chamaedaphne. Vinca,
cae. aut Vincaperuinca, Clematis, tidis. Daphnoides, Clematis Aegyptia.
Peruenche. S. Peruse. Verso, as. vt Authors versare. Hor. To peruse and read
authors. Pesant, or rustican of the country. Rusticus. Un paisant ou paysant.
S. Pestle for a mortar. Pilus, li. Pilum, li. Pistillum, li. Tribulum, li.
Pilon. H. Pestell of porke. Pema, ae. foe. ge.* Iambon. Pals. Pestiferous, or
pestilent. Pestifer, ra, rum. Perniciosus, sa, sum. Vt bellum pestiferum, id
est Perniciosum. Cic. Pestilence. Lues, is. Pestis, is. Pestile^tia, Morbus
pestilens. Exitialis morbus. Peste. S. and Atra lues. A great, or sore
pestilence, morayn, or mortality. Pestilence mortal. Atra lues, Morbus
grassus. Pestilent, or pestiferous. Pestifer, ra, rum. Pestile^s, it is. om. ge.
Pestilencieux. Call. Et Pestifere, Pestilently. Pernicieusement. Call. Petent or
demau^da^t in an action. Petens, it is. Petitor, oris. Qui petit and litem
intendit. Demandeur. Peticote of woollen clothe. Indusium, Subucula, lae. foem.
genesis Chemisole de lain ou de coton. H. Peticote that maidens wear in summer.
Parnacides, dis. foe. ge. Theristrum. Un cotillon d' este. H. Peticote maker.
Indusiarius, rij. m. genesis Petigrewe, petigree, or geneologie. Stemma,
Geuealogia, ae. foe. ge. Genealogy. S. Petishe. Impetuosus, a, um. Petit.
Paruus, a, um. Vide Little. Petit brybar. Furunculus, Latrunculus, li. Petit
laron, larronneau, brigandereau. S. Petit bribary. Latrociniu^, ij.
Latrocinatio, onis. f. g. Petit traitor. Proditorculus. Un trasteau. S. Petit
treason. Crimen maiestatis imminutae, Maiestas imminuta. Petite trahison.
Petition. Petitio, onis. f. g. Petition. S. Pettrell of an horse. Auerta, ae.
foem. genesis Le poictral d' un cheual. S. Vide Pewtrell. Peuyshe. Insanus, a, um.
Insense. S. Peuyshe to be. Insanio, is. Estre insense. S. To be peuyshe, or to
dote. Delirare, desipere. Radoter. S.

Peuishenesse, or doting. Delirium, Deliratio, Deliramentum, ti. Mentis error.
Resuerie, Radotement. Peevishness, madness, or folly. Insania, Insipientia,
Aegritudo animi, Valetudo mentis, Mentis alienatio, Impotentia mentis. Folly.
H. Peuter, or tynne. Plumbum candidum, Plumbum argentarium. Estain. H. But I
think Plumbum cinereum, To be pewter: Stannum, Tin: and Plumbum argentarium
vel candidum. Fine tin, the next in likeness to silver. Pewtrer. Stannarius,
rij. m. g. Estaingnier. H. Pewtrell for a horse. Antela, ae. Antilena, ae.
Auerta, ae. Vt supra. Pettrell. Pey Vide Pei.
P. ANTE. H.
PHarysey. Phariseus, sei. m. g. The Phariseis were a sect of Jews, living
(as they feyned) more Godly and straightly, then ye common sort did. Read of
ye Phariseis in Math. 5.23.15.16. Luke ye. 7.16.18. In Mark. 12.3. In John
the. 1.6.11.12.15.18.23. cha* Where you shall see what is spoken of them* and
what they were. Philadelphus, a king of Egipte surnamed Ptolomaeus whose
daughter Bernix was given in marriage to one Antiochus Theos, the king of
Siria, albeit Mala fide, for Antiochus had a wife called Laodice (mother to
Seleucus Gallinicus, and Antiochus Hierax) whom he put away, but what was the
end of this adulterer, any other but mischief and murder, as is imminent to
all aduoutry and whoredom? For Seleucus Gallinicus did slay Bernix his fathers
concubyne and her bastard, and Laodice did poison Antiochus her husband. After
that Ptolomaeus Euergetes brother to Bernix, chased Gallinicus out of his
realm. This Philadelphus was the first that erected a library in Alexandria,
in the which were fifty thousand books, wherein were also the five books of
Moses, which he caused to be translated out of Hebrew into Greek, by.lxxii.
interpretours, excellent clerks, hired for that purpose. Philasarie or keeper
of records in ye high courts at Westminster. Monophilax.* Philippe a propre
name. Philippus, pi. m. ge. Eras. or some other pleasauntly disposed, made
these verses of this name. Phy nota foetoris, lippus malus omnibus horis:
Phy malus, and lippus, totus malus ergo Philippus.
Of this name were diverse, both kings and nobles, whereof one was father to
Alexander Magnus of Macedonia. This story is notable, as well for the wit,
prowes, and gravity of the prince, as also for his wisdom and severity in
judgment. Philosopher. Philosophus, i. m. g. Philosophe. S. Et Philosophaster,
tri. m. g. Ang. He that does cou^terfay^e a philosopher, or would be taken for
one. Qui fait du Philosophe. Et Philosophicus, a, u^. Of a philosopher, or
pertaining to a philosopher. Appart^nant a philosophe. S. Philosophor, aris. To
study phylosophie. Philosopher. S. Philosophy. Philosophia, ae. f. g.
Philosophy. S. Philosophical. Philosophicus, a, um. Cic. Physician. Medicus,
ci. m. g. Medicin. H. Asa. A healer of diseases.* He is a physician. Medicinam
profitetur, Est medicus. Il est medicin. Cord.

A good physician ought to know not only the disease of his pacient, but also
the complexion. Medico diligenti non solum morbus aegroti, sed etiam natura,
valetudo, vel constitutio corporis cognoscenda est. Un bon medicine doit
congnoistre non seulement la malady du patient, mais aussi la complexion. Cord.

What physician has he? what physician cures him: Quis medicus illum curat, A
quo curatur medico. Quel medicine le pense. Cord.

Physic. Ars medicinae, Medicina, nae. foem. genesis Medicine. S. Doctor of
physic. Medicinae doctor, vel doctor medicus. Docteur. etc.

Physiognomie, an art whereby the nature, or disposition of man is known,
both by body and countenance. Phisiognomia, ae. foe. ge. Ars qua natura
hominum ex corpore, vultuque cognoscitur. Physiognomer. Phisiognomon, onis. m.
g. Physiognomus, mi. m. g. Qui a totius corporis filo atque habitu, de ingenio
cuiusque pronunciat. H. Physnomie. Effigies, ei. Imago, nis. Vultus, us. m. ge.
Phisonomie. Pals. Phrase. Phrasis, is. f. g. Est eloquentiae corpus and dicendi
modus. Call. Phrase, or plain exposition of a sense, or text written.
Paraphrasis, sis. foe. ge.* Phy Vide Phi.
P. ANTE. I.
PIckeax, or matocke. Ligo, onis. masc. genesis Un hoyau. S. Picq ou pique de fer.
Pals. To pick a purse. Manticulor, aris. Ex crumena alicuius pecuniam furari,
Pecuniam e crumena alicuius furtim surripere.

Pick craftily. Mantiscinor, aris.* Pickepurse, or a cutpurse. Manticularius,
ij. Zonarius sector, Crumenisseca nonnullis qui in co^ferta turba marsupijs
manum inijcit, and aut secat aut inanit. Coupebourse, coupeur de boursis. H.
Picker of quarrelles. Discordiosus. Noisi^ and quareleux. S. Picker, or thief
that steals small things. Psicharpax, Fur micarius, Fur minutarius. Bud.
^ar^^n de petites chooses. S. Pickerell, or a little pyke. Luciolus, li. masc.
genesis Brocheton. S. Pickers, or thieves yt go up into chambers, making as
though they sought some thing. Diaetarij. Vlpian. Larrons qui montent iusques
^ux chambres, faisant semblant de cercher quelque chose. S. Picke^^uce.
Oxyporum, Oxygarum. Saupicquet. H. Pickethanke. Sycophanta, ae. Parasitus, ti.
m. ge* Et Sycophantia, ae. Is the offense, or quality of a pickethancke. Et
Parasitor, taris. Sycophantor, aris. Sycophantisso, as. Is to play the
pickethanke. Pickle for fyshe. Tharia, ae.* Pickle, bryne, or such salt
lyquour made to keep meat in. Muria, Salsugo, vel Salsilago. inis f. g.
Saulmure. H. Pickle that is very strong, or bryne that will bear an egg. Muria
dura. Celso. Pickeled hearing. Muriaticum halec, Halex conditonea. Hareng sale.
H. Vide Pikled. Picture, or lively image of a thing. Effigies, Expressa imago,
Icon, nis. f. g. Image, ou resemblance and pourtraict faict sur le vif. S.
Picture drawn with a line. Monogrammus, mi. Picture of beasts. Zographia,
ae.* To picture, painte, or to make a pycture. Pingore, Depingere. Expingere.
Peindre. S.

The pourtraict of a picture. Graphis, dis. foe. g. Project de peincture. S.

Pictures made in bourdes and sylinges carved. Anaglypha, orum. n. ge. The
science of making pictures, or painting. Graphice, ces. foe. g. Pictura, rae.
foem. ge. L'art de peincture. S.

Pictures, or images attached on plate with vices to take of and on at
pleasure. Emblemata, tu^. n. g. A maker of pictures, or painter. Pictor, oris.
m. ge. Plin. Peinctre. S.

Pie bird. Citta, ae. Pica, ae. f. g. Whose Epitheton is Garrula, Loquax. as A
chattering pie. Garrula pica. Pie, or pastie. Artocrea, ae. f. g. Paste. H.
Vide pasty. Piece, or a morsel cut from some thing. Segmen, nis. Segmentum, ti.
n. g. Piece au morceau qu'on a coupe de quelque chose. S. A little piece, or
morsel of any thing what ever it be. Frustu^, ti. Frustulu^, li. n. g. Vne
petite piece and morceau de quelque chose que ce soit. S.

Piece of any thing broken. Fragmen, nis. Fragme^tum, ti. n. g. Un piece de
quelque chose rompue. S. Piece meal, or by pieces. Frustillatim, Articulatim,
Assulatim, Concise, Frustratim, Particulatim, Membratim. En pieces and
morceaux, ou par pieces. S. Piece of a stone. Scrupus, pi. m. ge. Piece of a
tree body cut of, or of timber. Truncus, ci. m. g. Piece of gold. Aureus,
ei. m. g. Plin. Piece of lynnen cloth. Linteolum, li. n. ge. Petit drapeau, ou
drapelet. S. Piece, or gobbet. Frustu^, ti. Frustillu^, li, vel frustulum, li.
diminut. Ang. A little piece or gobbet. Piece of fine tried gold. Palacra,
crae. foe. ge. It is called a mass of gold. Vne mass d'or. S. Piecely, or in
pieces. Concise. Frustatim. Vide Piecemeale. Piele to set bread into the oven
with. Pala, lae. Infurnibulum, Instrumentum quo pistor furno panem immittit.
Pale. H. Et Patella, lae. foe. g. Paelle a mettre le pain au four. S. Piep like
a chicken, crane, or fawcon. Pipio, is, iui. Pi^uler, ou pioler. S. and
Pipiones, Be they that do piep, some call them pigions. Piers, or nobles of
the realm. Magistanes, Purpurati. Vide Princes. Pigeon, or a dove. Colu^bus,
by. m. g. Pigeon ou coulon. A young pigeon. Pullus colu^binus, Colu^bulus, li.
Pipio, onis. m. g. Pigeonneau, ou un ieune pigeon.

Pigeon house. Columbarium, rij. and Columbaria. ae. foe. g. Pigeonnier, ou
columbier. S. Pigeons egg. Ouum columbinum. Oeuf de pigeon. Pigeons dunge.
Columbare stercus, Columbinu^ stercus. Fiente de pigeon. S. Pigge that sucketh,
or a sucking pigge. Porculus sieve porcellus subrumus, Lactens. Porcelet
te^^ant, cochon de laict. H. Pygge weyned. Nefrens, dis. com. genesis Quasi qui
frendere fabam nondum possit. Cochon, porcelet. H. Pyke, a fyshe. Lupus, pi.
Variolus, li. Lucius, cij. m. genesis Brochet. S. Piked head, which is sharp
about like a sugar lofe. Argutum caput. Vide Head. Pikle, or bryne, or salt
water made. Muria, ae. Muries, ei. Aqua salsa. Saulmure. S. Salsugo, vel
Salsilago. Saumure. Vide Pickle. Pikle, or sauce spiced. Conditura, ae.
Condimentum, ti. n. g. Saulse, confiture. S. Pykled, or bryned. Muriaticus, a,
um. Qui a este long temps en la saulmure. S. Pilche for a saddle. Instratum,
ti. n. g.* Pilcharde fyshe like a hering. Gerres, ris. Halecula, lae. foe. ge.
Sardine. Pals.* Pyle of clothes, or other things. Strues, Moles, lis. foe. ge.
Vne pile de draps, ou d'autres chooses. S. Pyle driven into the ground for a
bridge. Sublica, ae. foe. ge. Et Sublicium, cij. neut. genesis Pieu, ou Pilotis.
S. Pile of woodde. Strues, is. f. g. Lignier, vne pile de bois. Pile, or pappe
in the fundament, a disease called also the Emorroides. Haemorrhois, idis. foe.
ge. Hemorrhoides. H. Pilgryme. Peregrinus, ni, Viator, oris. Peregrinator,
toris. m. g. Pellerin. Pals. Pilgrimage. Peregrinatio, onis. foe. g. Et
Peregre. on pylgrimage. Pilgrimage to go. Peregre vado. Peregrinor, aris. To go
on a voyage. Voyager. S. Pille medicinable. Cancris, is. * Catapotium, tij.
Pilula, ae. foe. ge. Pillule. H. Pill, or to waste and spoil all. Populare,
vel Populari, Depopulari, Perpopulari, Spoliare, Despoliare, Diripere,
Depeculari, Peculatum facere, Praedam facere, Praedari, Expopulari, Suppilare,
Compilare. Depraedari. Gaster and pillar tout, and fair degast. S. Pille, or
to bark trees. Decorticare, Glubere, De glubere. Oster l' escorse. S. Which
has been pylled, or spoiled. Compilatus, Spoliatus, Expilatus, ta, tum.
Populatus, ta, tum. Qui a este pille. S.

Pillar. Columna, nae. Domiporta, ae. Pila, ae. Stela, lae. foe. ge. Un
pillier. S. Et Columnatus, a, um. Garni de piliers. S. Garnished or set with
pyllers. Et columnium, ij. A place set about with pillars. Pyller by pillar.
Pilatim. Vitru. Pillar, poller, or a spoyler. Expilator, Spoliator, Direptor,
Praedator, Populator, Depeculator, toris. mas. ge. Pilleur. S. Pillar, robber,
or pyrate on the sea. Praedo, nis. Pirata, tae. m. ge. Pilleur and escumeur de
mer. S. Pillery and rapine. Rapacitas, Raptio, Direptio, Spoliatio, onis. f. g.
Pillerie and rauissement. S. Pillars, or posts set without, to sustain a
frame or house. Antes, tium. plur. m. g. Pilling, or pollyng. Compilatio,
Expilatio, onis. foe. ge. Pillement. S. Pillory. Collistrigium, gij. Columbar,
aris. neut. g. Numellae versatiles. Le pilori. S. Vide Reproach openly. etc. Et
Catamidio, as. Ang. To set on the pyllory. Et Numellis publicis insertus. Bud.
Mis au pillory. S. set on the pillory. Set up on ye pylory. Numellis
versatilibus collo inserto a carnifice conspicue in foro venalium rotatus,
Numellis a carnifice insertus and versatus, Numellis publicis insertus. Mis ou
turn au pillori. S.

Setting on the pyllory. Traductio stigmatica. Piloriement. S.

Pylory knighte, a term of reproach to an infamed person. Stigmaticus, and
Stigmosus. Flatre, diffame. Pillowe. Puluinar, ris. Puluinus, ni. Puluillus,
Puluinarium, rij. n. g. Oreillir, orillier. H. Pilot or master of a ship.
Nauclerus, Nauicularius, Nauarchus, Nauiculator, quem vocant Patronum nauis,
Magister nauis. Pilot, ou pilote and patron d'vne nauire. H. Pimpernell an
herb. Bipenella, ae. Pampinella, ae. Pampinula, ae. Teucrium, ij. n. g.
Pimpernelle. S. Pincers. Volsella, sieve vulsella, lae. f. g. Forceps, pis. foe.
g. and. m. g. vel dubij, genesis Pinces ou pincettes. S. Pincers to draw teethe
with. Forfex, cis. foe. genesis Odontagra, Dentiducum, Dentarpaga, gae. f. ge.
Pincette ou tenaile pour tirer vne dent. H. Pinche, or to nippe. Summis digitis
comprimere, vel premere. Pincer. S. Pinche. Vellico, as. Idem. Pinche penny, or
a nyppe cruste. Parcus, Auarus, Restrictus, Tenax, cis. Chiche. S. Et homo
sordidus. Idem. Un pincemaille. S. Pine apple. Coccalus, li. Nux pinea,
Strobilus, li. Cybeles pomum. Pomme de pin. H. Pine apple tree. Conus per
metaph. Pinea, ae. Pinus, ni. m. g. Un pin. S. And the female pyne apple tree.
Conois, dis. Et Pinaster, ri. m. g. The wild pyne tree. Un pin sauuage. S.
Pinetum, ti. neut. genesis The place where pyne apple trees grow, or place
planted with pynes. Un lieu plant^ de pins. S Et Pineus, a, um. Of a pyne apple
tree. Qui est de pin. S. A kind of wild pyne tree. Strobulus, li. mas. g. Vne
sort de pin sauuage. S.

Pine apple kernel. Nucleus pineus. Le noyau de la pomme de pin. H. Pine, or
to languishe away. Languere, Oblanguere, Languescere, Oblanguescere. Languir.
S. Pinnacle. Pinnaculum, li. n. g. Un pinnacle. S. Pin. Acicula, ae. Spinula,
lae. f. ge. Espingle. S. Pyncase to put pynnes in. Acicularium, rij.
Spinularium, rij. n. ge. Espinglier a mettre les espingles dedans. S. Pin
duste. Peripsema, it is. Psegma, it is.* Puluis scriptorius. Pin of a halke, or
beam. Trabalis clauus. Pynne of Iuory, or woodde, wherewith women trymme their
hears. C^lamistrum, tri. Discerniculu^, li. Discriminale, lis. n. g. vide
Frisling iro^ Pynne a house under the gru^dsyle. Substruo, is, xi. Pynne of
timber. Asser, eris. Impago, ginis. * Impages, Clauus ligneus. Cheuille. S.
Pynne cattle. Includo, is. Pynner, or a pounder of cattle. Inclusor, ris. m.
g. Pynner that makes pynnes. Acicularius, Spinularius. m. g. Espinglier, qui
fait les espingles. S. Pinnage of cattle, or powndage. Inclusio, onis. f. g.
Pynning of houses. Substructio, onis. f. g. Pynnion of a foul. Armus, mi.
Pennula, ae. * Pynnion of a shoulder of a beast. Ala, ae. f. g. Pynnioned,
Armatus, a, um. Penulatus, a, um.* Pynson, or a shoe. Calceamen, inis.
Calceamentu^, ti. Calcearium, rij. n. g. Caffignon, ou soulier. Pals. Pynte
measure, the eight part of a gallon. Cheopina, nae. f. g. Bud. Chopine. Et
Pinta, tae. f. g. Pint Piony, herb. Paeonia, ae. Pionia, ae. Ideus dactilus.
Piuoine, peuoene. S. Pype. Calamus, mi. Tibia, ae. Fistula, lae. foe. ge. Vne
fleute. S. Fistula, Is the general latin for any thing that is hollow, and
of the shape of a pipe, or whereof a pype may be made, as an Oote straw or
other straw, or reed. etc. vt Virgil. Est mihi disparibus septem compacta
cicutis,
Fistula: Damoetas dono mihi qua^ dedit olim.
Et dixit morien^: te nunc habet ista secu^dum.
With seven unequal spaces I
a pype that's joined have,
Which whilom for a gift to me
my friend Dametas gave,
And dieng said: thou art second now
this pype could ever have.
Pype, called a recorder. Syrinx.* Pype of a conduyte. Canalis, is. Fistula,
ae. Salientes, tum. plur. Tubus, by. Tubulus, li. m. ge. Tuyau de fontaine. S.
Et Canaliculus, li. vella, ae. dimin. Ang. A little pype of a conduite. Pype, a
vessel so called. Cadus, di. m. g. Cacque. S. Piper. Auletes, it is. Fistulator,
toris. masc. gene. Un fleuteur. S. Piping. Fistulatio, onis. f. g. Piping, or
pieping of birds, or fowls. Pipilatus, us. Et Pipio, is, iui. Is to pype as
chyckens, yo^g cranes, and other fowls do. Vide piepe. Pippe, a disease among
chickens and fowls. Pituita, ae. foe. ge. La pepie. H. Pipped nutte. Cassa
nux. Pippine. Malum curtupendulum. Capendu. S. Pipple stone. Calculus, li.
Vmbilicus, ci. m. ge. Grauois, Grauelle. S. Pyrate, rouer, or robber on the
seas. Pirata, tae. m. ge. Praedo, donis. m. g. Pirate. S. Piracy, or practyse
of a pyrate. Piratica, cae. foe. ge. L' art d' escumeur de mer. S. Of a pyrate,
or robber of the sea. Piraticus, ca, cum. D' escumeur de mer. S.

Pirwycke. Galerus, ri: Galerum, ri. n. g.* Pismier, ante, or emot. Myrmerium,
ij. Salpiga, ae. Sepes, dis. Salpiga, Is not the commen pismier. Formica, cae.
foe. ge. Fourmi. S. Et Formicinus, na, number. Of a pismier. D' un fourmi. Et
Formicosus, sa, sum. Full of pismiers. Plein de fourmis. S. Formicarium, ij.
Formicetum, ti. A pismier hill. Piss. Lotium, ij. Vrina, ae. Urine, pissat. H.
Piss. Reddere vrinam, Meio, is. Mingo, is, xi. Edere vrinam, Fundere vrinam,
Humorem reddere. Pisser. S. Micturio, is. Ang. To have desire to pysse. To
cause to pysse. Vrinam concitare, vel ciere vel pellere. Fair pisser. S.

Pissepotte. Lasanum, ni. Matella, ae. Matula, ae. Scaphium, ij. Trulla, lae.
f. g. Pot a pisser. Et Matellio, onis, diminut. inde, Ang. A little pissepotte.
Pissing place. Oletum, ti.* Pitche. Pix, cis. foe. g. De la poix. S. Pitche of
an old ship, which being eftsoon mingled, or tempered with salt and
wax, is of more effect then new. Zopissa, pissae. f. g. Pitche tree. Apinus,
ni. Picea, ae. f. g. Pinasse. S. Pitched, or dressed with pitche. Picatus, a,
u^. Poisse, enduict de poix. S. Vessels pitched within. Picata dolia.
Vaisseaux poissez. S.

Wine which tastes of pitche. Vinum picatum. Vin qui sent la poix. S.

Pitche, or to array, or dress with pitche. Pico, cas. Oppico, cas. Poisser.
S. Pitchie, or of pitche. Piceus, a, um. Qui est de poix. S. Pitche of a hill.
Cliuus, ui. Cliuum, ui. n. ge. La descente d' vne montaigne. S. Pitche nets.
Tendere retia, vel plagas. Tender les filets. S. Pitche a pauilion, or tente.
Tendo, dis. Adplicare castra. Pitcheforke. Merga, ae. Furca qua frugum manipuli
eleuantur. Iauelier. H. Pitcher, pot, to carry water in. Lagena, ae.
Mancisterna.* Vrceolus, li. Vrceus, i. Vrna, ae. Hydria; ae. f. g. Cruche a
porter eaue. S. Et Laguncula, ae. Vrnula, ae. diminut. Ang. A little or small
pitcher. Petite cruche. S. Pithe of a tree. Matrix, cis. Medulla arboris. La
moelle. H. Pity. Misericordia, ae. Miseratio, onis. Pietas, is. Commiseratio,
onis. foe. ge. Pity and compassion qu' on ha de la misere d'aucun. S. One of
the spiritual graces which is the reverend love, and dutiful honor to God,
and the charitable, sincere, true mind and zeal toward our Christian
brother. To move one to pity. Animum alicuius ad misericordiam adducere, vel
reducere, Commouere miserationem, Misericordiam alicui commouere. Esmouuoir
aucun a pity. S.

Pity, or to have compassion. Miserior, eris. Respicio, cis. Misericordiam
capere, Miserere, Miserari, Commiserari, Miserescere alicuius. Auoir pity and
compassion d'aucun. S. Miseret, bat. It does pytie. Cum genit. vt Miseret me
tui. Pitied to be, or which moves pity, or is miserable. Misera^dus, a, u^.
Miserabilis, le. Qui es^^ut a pity, miserable. S. Pitiful. Pius, a, um.
Misericors, dis. Clemens, it is. Qui ^a pity d'aucun. S. Pitiful man.
Miserator, oris.** Pitifully. Misericorditer, Pi^. Misericordi^usement.
Pitious. Miser, ra, rum. Pitieux. S. Pit. Puteus, i. Fouca, Fossa, Scrobs,
bis. Dub. ge. Vne fosse. S. Putealis, e. Puteanus, a, u^. Of a pit. D'vne
fosse. S. Pytte, or seller made in the ground to keep corn very long in.
Sirrus, ri. vel Syrus, ri. m. g. Vne fosse a tenir froument. Call. Pit where
potters claye is dug. Argilletum, ti. neut. gen.* Pit where sand is
had. Arenarium, ij. n. g.* Pytfall. Decipula, ae. Tendicula, ae. Decipulum,
li. n. g. Un trebuchet. H.
P. ANTE. L.
PLacardes. Codicilli, orum. Dimissoriae literae. Plaquars. S. Placarde to
grant, as where the king dispenses with his laws. Soluere legibus.
Placarde, or breast plate. Thorax, cis. Thorax ^erreus, Pectorale* Varr. Armure
de la poictrine. H. Place. Locus, ci. plur^l. Hijloci, vel haec loca; nom.
Hethroclitum. Lieu. S. Et Localus, li. diminut. Ang. A little place. Petit
lieu. S. Place almost enuironned with water on every side. Peninsula, lae.
foe. ge. Un lieu enuironne d'eaue presque de tous costez. S. Place by a bayne,
where they lay their garments. Apodyterium, ij. Spoliatorium, rij. n. g.
Place by place, or by every place. Regionatim.* Place for the assembly of
merchants. Area. ae. f. g. Place for bees. Apiarium, rij. n. g. Le lieu de
mousches a ^iel. S. Place in a camp, where the pauilions of the chief captain
be pyghted. Principia, orum. Vide Order of. etc. Place neglected, or
unoccupied. Locus absoletus. Place of assemble, as of convocation or
parliament. Comitium, ij. n. ge. A place in Rome where the people assembled to
consulte. Un lieu a Rome ou s'assembloit le peuple pour consulter. S. Place of
beholding, or looking about. Spectaculu^, li. n. g. Liu. Place of comfort, or
suertie. Receptaculum. li. n g. Place of devotion, or meditation to God.
Delubrum religiosum. Cic. Un lieu au quel ou ha grande devotion. S. Place of
execution. Capitalis locus, Carnificina, ae. f. g. Le lieu ou les malfaicteures
sont executez par justice. Place of herkening, or for to hear. Auditorium, ij.
n. g. Le lieu ou on oit. S. Place, or seat of judgment. Tribunal, lis. neut.
ge. Siege judicial. S. Place of pleasure, or solace. Voluptarius locus, Amoena,
orum. neut. genesis Place of receipt. Receptaculum, li. n. g. Le lieu ou on recire
quelque chose. S. Place of refuge or succor, which may be called the
priuileged place, where abiured persons abide. Persugium, gij. Profugium, ij.
Receptaculum, li. Refugium, gij. Li^u de refuge en temps d'aduersite, refuge.
S. Place of rest and quietness. Tranquillus locus. Le lieu ou on est a recoy.
S. Place of succor. Refugium, ij. n. g. Vide supra. Place only for women.
Gynaecoruites. Place, or stead, or rowme. Vicis, vicem, ce, ces, cibus. f. g.
Au lieu. S. Vices gerere. To be in, or to occupy an others room. Place,
seat, or throne of estate. Solium, ij. neut. ge. Siege royal. S. Place set
against the sun. Apricus locus. Vlpian. Lieu expose ou soleil. S. Place set
with pillars. Circumcolumnium. nij. n. g. Place to keep beasts, birds, fyshe,
or fowls in. Viuarium, ij. n. g. Plin. Place to keep, or preserve spices and
medicines. Narthecium, ij. n. g. Mart. Place to sit in for recreation, closse
behind, and open before. Praestega, ae. f. g. Plaut. Place to suppe in.
Coenaculum, li. neut. genesis Le lieu ou on soupoit. S. Place to walk in.
Ambulacrum, cri. Deambulatorium, rij. Pourmenoi^. S. Places under the ground.
Hypogea, orum. neu. g. Lieux soubs ^erre. S. Place where they burned dead
bodies. Bustum, ti. n. g. Le lieu ou l'on brusloit les morts. Call. Place where
horses run for wagers. Catadromus, mi. m. g. Tranquil. Place wherein be
Images of Gods. Delubrum, bri. n. g. Plin. Place wherein water is cast.
Aquaricola, colae.* Place where two streams meet. Confluens, it is. m. g. Un
conflant ou deux riuieres s'assemblent. S. A place ordained, or appointed for
singers, or minstrelles to singe in. Odeum, dei. n. genesis Lieu depute aux
chantres, ou menestriers pour chanter. Call.

Place where men live in commune. Coenobium, ij. n. g. Lieu ou on vit en
commun. Call. Place where Nicromancie is exercised. Psychomantium, tij. n. g.
Cic. Place where records, or wrytings be laid. Gra^matophylatium, ij. neut.
genesis Le lieu ou on guard les lettres, ou registres publiques, le tresor des
chartres. Place whereunto no bird may come. Aornos.* Place where three ways
mete. Triuium, ij. n. genesis Un lieu auquel se rendent and rencontrent trois
rues. S. A place to set young plants in, a noursery. Seminarium, rij. n. g.
Vne bardiere, ou pepinerie. S.

A place in the house, where seats, or fourmes are orderly disposed on every
side. Sellaria, ae. f. g. Un lieu en la maison ou sont sieges arrangez de touts
costez. S.

Place, or to put in some place. Loco, as. Pono, nis. Constituo, is. Mettre en
quelque lieu. S. Places broken, where one can neither goo up nor down. Abrupta
loca, Abscissa loca, Praerupta loca. Lieux derompuz, ou on ne peult mo^ter, ne
descendre. S. Places covered with tents. Velaria, orum. n. genesis Lieux couuers
de tents. S. Places for assembly of the commen people, or co^minaltie.
Popularia, rium. n. g. Suet. Places for gentlemen, and gentlewomen to behold
solemn sightes. Equestria, Orchestra, ae. foem. genesis Cic. Places where the
wyndes blow of every side. Conflages. Lieux ou les vens ventent de tous
costez. S Dark places. Obsita tenebris loca. Lieux pleins de tenebres. S.

Dry places. Loci sitientes, Siticulosa loca. Lieux sects. S.

Roughe places. Fragosa loca, Confragosa loca, and aspera. Lieux aspres. S.

Low places, and full of fennes. Demissa, and Palustria loca. Lieux bas, and
pleins de marescages. S.

Places where many ryuers do flow. Confluges. Loca sunt, in quibus riui
diuersi defluunt. Call. Plague, or pestilence. Pestilentia, ae. Pestis, is. foe.
g. La peste, ou pestilence. S. A deadly plague, or pestilence. Pestis
capitalis. Peste mortelle. S.

To bring the plague. Pestilentiam afferre. Amener la peste. S.

To engendre the plague. Pestilentiam facere. Engendrer la peste. S.

The plague is gone, and is ceased. Abijt pestilentia. La pest s'en est allee,
and est cessee. S.

Plagued, or which has the plague. Correptus peste. Pestifere, qui ha la
peste. S. Play. Ludus, di. Ludicrum, eri. Lusus, us. m. ge. Ieu. Ludibundus,
a, um. Full of play. Plein de ieu. S. Lusorius, a, um. Perteining to play.
Appartenant a ieu. S. It is but a play, and sport to learn those things.
Ludus est illa perdiscere. Cen'est que ieu and esbat d'apprendre cela. S.

To trouble the play. Ludum dirumpere. Troubler un ieu. S.

To make common plays, or games. Ludos facere, Exhibere spectaculu^. Fair des
ieux publiques.

Play, or game at dice, or tables. Astragalus, li. f. g. Et Canis signu^ ludi
talaris est quod vnicu^ pu^ctu^ continet, ideoque da^nosu^. A cast at dice
lesing all. To play at even, or odd. Ludere par impar. Iouer a pair ou noir.
S.

To play at balle, or tennis. Ludere pila palmaria. Iouer a la paulme. S.

To play to one. Alludere. Se lover a quelqu'vn. S.

To play a crafty pageaunt. Facere technam.

A play called riffelinge. Plistobolinda. Poll. Plus de poinct. H.

A play called draughtes. Scruporum duodecim lufus. Leu ieu aux dames. H.

A play called chestes. Scruporu^, latrunculoru^ latronumue lusus.. Le ieu des
eschez. S. vt Mart. Insidiosorum si ludis bella latronum,
Gemmeus iste tibi miles and hostis erit.
And if thou play the subtle game
Or warlyke sport of chesse,
This shining knight both friend to thee,
And foe will him profess.


To play at chestes. Laterunculis, sieve latrunculis ludere, Praelia latronu^
ludere. Iouer aux eschets.

Play called cards. Chartulae lusoriae. Ieu acartes. Play called even, or
odd. Par impar. Suet. Vne sort de ieu qu' on dit Par ou non. S. vt Horat.
Ludere par impar, equitare in arundine longa.
To play at even and odd, and ride upon a rod.
Play called hunte the fox. Ascoliasmus, Empusae ludus. H.

A play called son and mon. Diolcystinda. H.

Play a part in a comedy. Agere fabulam. Cic. Play at dice, or tables.
Astragalizo, as. Iouer au dez. He has gotten us leave to play. Impetrauit
nobis ludendi veniam, Ludi copiam nobis exorauit, Ille nobis impetrauit
remissionem. Il'nous a faict donner conge de iouer.

I will play against thee. Respondebo tibi in hoc certamine, Hoc in ludo me
tibi audacter opponam, Non dubito inire tecum hoc certamen, Paratus sum in
arenam tecum descendere. Ie ioueray contre toy. S.

To play in earnest. Ludere serio. Iouer pour bon.

To play under cord. Infra transennam ludere. Iouer soubz la cord. S.

Play often. Lusito, as. Iouer souuent. Call. Play on an instrument. Cano, is.
Praemoderor, aris. Pulso, as. Cic. Iouer d'instrument. S. Play on the harp.
Canere fidibus. Iouer de la harp. Play the boy. Adolescenturio, is.
Laberius. Play the cockeney. Delicias facere. Plaut. I have begone the play.
Prior calculum promoui. IN ay commence le ieu. S.

To enter into play. Pila^ excipere. Entrer en ieu. S

Play in sport. Intra rubrica^ ludere. Iouer en ieu. S. Play the dronkarde.
Debacchor, aris. Terent. Will thou play at tennis? Vis mecum certare pila? Vis
palmaria pila mecum ludere? Placetne pila mihi colludere? Visne pila colludere?
veuls tu iouer a la paulme? S.

I am so weary with playing at tennis, that I ca^ scarce fetch my breath. Ludo
pilae ita sum fatigatus, vt totus anhele^, vt toto anhelem pulmone, vt prorsus
anhelus sim. Ie suis si las de iouer a la paulme, que ie ne puis auoir mon
haleine. S.

For what will ye play? Quanti vultis ludere? Quanti vultis certare? Quodnam
victoribus erit praemium? Quae praemia feret victor? Que voulez vous iouer. S.

For how much shall we play? Quanti ludemus? Pour combien iourons nous?

Play the friends part. Agere amicum. Plin. Fair en bon ami. S. Play the
fool, or to trifle. Ineptio, is. Bauer. S. Play the herdes man, or to do the
dutte of a herdes man. Bubulcitor, aris. Fair officier bouuier. Call. Play the
man. Pergere in virum. Plaut. Play the man, have a good heart. Perge in viru^.
Monstre toy vaillant, enhardis toy. S.

Play the tyrant. Saeuio, is. Liu. Play the wanton. Delicias facere. Plaut.
Play together. Colludo, is. Se iouer ensemble. Call. Play upon an instrument
swetely. Meditor, ris. Play fellow. Collusor, ris. m. g. Qui se jove auec un
autre. S. Player. Lusor, it is. m. g. Ioueur. S. Player with puppets. Ludio,
onis. Ludius, ij. m. ge. Ioueur de souplesses. Call. Player of commodies,
tragedies, and enterludes. Scenicus, Actor Comoediae, Comoedus, di. Tragoedus,
di. Planipes, dis. Histrio, onis. m. g. Ioueur de comedies, tragedies, and de
farces. S. Player of a price, or master of fence. Ludio gladiatorius. Player
on a flute, or like instrument. Mesochorus, ri. Auloedus, di. m. g. Ioueur de
fleute. S. Player with both hands. Ambidexter, Qui aeque prompte laeua, ac
dextra vtitur. Call. Players apparel, or coats. Vestes personatae. Sword
players. Bustuarij, Gladiatores. Ioueurs d'espee. S.

Players of plays, or interludes. Mimorum actores. Ioueurs de farces. S.
Players of liegierdemaine, Iugglers. Ventilatores, Praestigiatores. Ioueurs de
pass pass. S. Plays exercised naked. Gymnici ludi, dicti sunt, in quibus se
nudi, and vncti exercebant palaestritae. Plays exercised upon scaffoldes.
Amphitheatrales ludi. Plin. Plays for young men. Iuuenilia, ilium. n. g. Erant
ludi, qui pro salute iuuenum celebrabantur. Call. Plays public, which are
made for pastyme, and for the recreation of the people. Ludi, orum. mas. genesis
Cic. Ieux publiques qui se faisoyent pour l' esbatement, and recreation du
peuple. Playght or wrynkle. Ruga, ae. f. g. Plis. S. Rogosus, a, um.
Laciniosus, a, um. Plein de plis. S. Plaightes of garments, or robes. Rugae
vestium, Sinus aut lacinia, Striae. Plis de robbes. S. A garment, which has
plaightes. Laciniata uestis, Striata praecinctura, Vestis striatim praecincta.
Habillement qui ha des plis. S.

A garment plaighted. Laciniata vestis, Collecta in sinus, Striata. Vne rob
plissee. S.

Playghte, or to fold. Plico, as. Complico, as. Deflecto, is. Inflecto, is.
Torqueo, es. Flecto, is. Plier. Plaighting, or folding. Flexus, us. Flexura,
ae. Inflexio, onis. Deflexus, us. m. g. Pliement. S. Playing, or full of play.
Ludibundus, a, um. Iocosus, a, um. Plein de ieu. S. Playing place, or
scauffold, where enterludes and games be made. Scena, ae. f. g. Un escauffault.
S. Plain, and smothe. Planus, a, um. Aequus, a, um. Plain, and vni. S. The
plain of the field. Aequu^ campi, Aequor campi. La plain d' un champ. S.

A plain. Planities, ei. f. g. Vne plain. S.

The plain is of great breadth. Panditur planities. La plain est de grand
estendue. S.

Plain, manifest, or evident. Apertus, a, um. Manifestus, a, um. Clarus, a,
um. Planus, a, um. Manifest, ou evident. S. The cause is plain, manifest, and
evident. In promptu causa est. La cause est euidente.

Plain countries. Campestria loca. Caes. Campester, ris, re. Of the plain
country. Champestre. S. Plain declaration, or exposition. Enarratio,
Expositio, onis. foe. genesis Exposition, ou declaration. S. Plain sense. Crassa
musa. Plain, simple, or sincere. Simplex, icis. om. genesis Simple. S. Plain,
clear, and manifest. Conspicuus, a, u^. Perspicuus, a, um. Cler, and
manifest. S. Plain without roughnes, smothe. Laeuis, ue. Lenis, ne. om. ge.
Qui n'est point rude. S. Plain, an instrument for a ioyner. Planula, ae. f. g.
Plain, or to smoothe. Plano, as. Explano, as. Deplano, as. Sterno, is. Lenio,
is. Laeuo, as. Laeuigo, as. Aequo, as. Complano, as. Exaequo, as. Allaeuo, as.
Delaeuo, as. Inaequo, as. Applanir, planir. S. Which is neither plain nor
smoothe. Inexplanatus, a, um Scaber, a, um. Qui n' est point applani, ne vni. S.

Playning, or smothing. Aequatio, onis. Exaequatio, onis. Complanatio, onis.
foem. genesis Applanissement. S. Plain bourdes, timber, or woodde. Exasceo, as,
aui. Budaeus. Plain declaration, or exposition to make. Enarro, as. Expono,
is. Declarer, exposer. S. Playnes. La^uitas, it is. Planities, ei. f. g. Cic.
Playnes without dissimulation. Simplicitas, it is. foe. ge. Simplicite,
Simplesse. Call. Plainly, or manifestly. Ad liquidum, Aperte, Liquido,
Liquidum, Manifest, Manifesto, No^ obscure, Plane. Manifestement. S. Plainly
known. Percursum animo. Cic. Plainly, and simplely. Simpliciter. Aduerb.
Simplement. Call. Playneteffe. Accusator, oris. m. g. Plaintiff. S. Playse, a
fish. Passer, ris, Psitta, ae. Plye, quarrelet. H. Plaster. Plasma, it is.
Emplastrum, ri. n. g. Emplastre. Plaster for a burning fever. Pyriasis.
Plaster made of marishe mallowe leaves. Anadendromache. Plaster made with
gum, rosin, and wax. Ceratum, ti. Cerotum, ti. Plin. Cerot. H. Plaster made
with herbs and suet. Cataplasma, it is. n. g. Plin. Plaster mollifyeng, or
ryping. Malagma, it is. n. ge. Emplastre remollitif. S. Plaster of clothe, or
lether. Splenium, ij. n. g. Plin. Plaster of soft drawing. Lipara, ae. f. g.
Celsus. Plaster of parice, or any other plaster for floores and walls.
Crusta, ae. Gypsum, si. n. g. Plastre. S To plaster. Gypso, as. Plastrer. S.

Plaisterer. Tector, ris. Crustarius, Gypsarius, rij. m genesis Plastrier. S.
Plaistering, or dawbing. Tectorium, rij. Cic. Tectorius, a, um. Ang. Pertaining
to plaisteringe, dawbing, or pargeting. Plancke, or to join planckes, or
bourdes. Coasso, as. Ioindre des ais ensemble. S. To pla^cke, or to floor with
bourdes. Affare, Tabulare, Contabulare. Planchier, ou pauer d'ais. S

A planke, or bourde. Planca, cae. Asser, ris. Tabula, ae. Vne planche. S.

Plancking, or laying of bourdes together. Coassatio, onis. f. g. Entablement
assemblage d'ais. S. Plane a tree. Platanus, ni. f. ge. Plane, ou plain. Call.
Platanetum, ti. The place where plane trees grow. Et Plantaninus, a, um. Of a
plane tree. Planet. Planeta, ae. m. g. Planette. S. Plant. Planta, ae.
Plantarium, rij. n. g. Vne plant. S. The plant does hold, and has taken
root. Tenet planta. La plant tient, and a prins racine. S.

A plant, and young vine, or the twigge of a vine. Malleolus, Nouelletum, ti.
n. g. Vne plant and vigne nouuelle, ou marquotte. S.

Plant, or sole of the foot. Imus pes, Planta, ae. Solum, li. Vestigium, gij.
n. g. La plant des pieds. S. Plantaine herb. Arnoglossa, Heptapleuron,
Plantago, inis. f. g. Polyneuron, Arnaglossum, si. n. ge. Du plantain. S. Water
plantayne. Alisma, Damasonium, Plantago aquatica. Plantin aquatic. S.

Plant, or to set. Planto, as. Sero, is. Consero, ris. Insero, is. Pango,
is. Repango, is. Pono, is. Depono, is. Depango, is. Planter. S. To plant round
about. Circu^serere, Obserere. Planter tout entour. S.

Planted. Satus, a, um. Plantatus, a, um. Plantarius, a, um. Plant. S.
Planter. Sator, ris. Plantator, oris. m. g. Planteur. S. Planting. Plantatio,
onis. Consitura, ae. Satus, us. Satio, onis. f. g. Plantement S. Planting
stick, or debyll. Pastinu^, ni. n. g. Houe. H. Plate, or vessel. Vasa, orum.
n. g. Vaisselle. S. Plate, or vessel of silver. Argentum, ti. n. g. Vaisselle
d'argent. S. Plate, or vessels to put meat in. Vasa escaria. Vaisselle a
mettre la viande. S. Platte for a building. Ortographia, ae. f. g. Vitruu.
Platted. Pactilis, e. om. g. Plin. Platter, or dishe. Catinus, ni. Lanx, cis.
Paropsis, Discus, ci. m. g. Plat ou escuelle. S. A great platter, or charger.
Mazonomum, mi. n. g. Un grand plat. S.

A little platter, or dishe. Catillus, li. m. g. Un petit plat, ou escuelle. S.

Plead. Actito, as. Agere, vel dicere, vel orare caussam, Inforo, as. Oro, as.
Dictitare causam, Litigo, as. Discepto, as. Ambigo, is. Sequi lites, Causam
agere. Plaider. S. To plead against one. Perorare in aliquem, Dicere contra
aliquem. Plaider contre aucun. S.

To plead stoutely, or boldly. Causam animo praesenti agere. Plaider
asseurement. S.

To plead first. Priore loco causam dicere. Plaider le primier. S.

To plead for one, or to defend him. Dicere pro aliquo. Plaider pour aucun,
and le defendre. S.

To plead for the accuser. Obtinere parts accusatoris. Plaider pour
l'accusateur. S.

To teach to plead. Viam litigandi tradere. Enseigner a plaider. S.

They plead one against an other. Certa^t inter se, aut litigant. Ils plaident
les vns contre les autres. S.

To plead no more. Desistere litibus. ne plaider plus.

To plead well. Causas agere industry, and altercari. Bien plaider. S.

To begin to plead. Inire certamen forense, Causaru^ age^daru^ facere
tyrociniu^, Actio^es causaru^ and altercatio^es co^mittere. Co^mencer a plaider.

To be ready to plead. In procinctu stare, Certaminique imminere. Estre pressed
a plaider. S.

To plead in the court. De superiore loco dicere. Plaider en la court. S.

He durst not plead. Ne certamen quidem altercandi tentauit. Il n' a ose
plaider. S.S.

To plead, to p^rpleade, or make precise aunsweare. Contestari litem. Cic. And
such pleading is, Litis contestatio, Before the which it is said that no
costs shall be adwarded.*

Plead together by couen. Colludo, is. Est quu^ actor, and reus litem inter se
simulant. Call. Pleader. Actor, oris. Litigator, oris. masc. genesis Un plaideur.
S. Pleasaunce. Amoenitas, atis. f. g. Plaisance. S. Pleasant* Amoenus, a, um.
Bellus, a, u^. Blandus, a, um. Dulcis, ce. Glaphyrus, a, um. Gratus, a, um.
Iucundus, a, um. Lepidus, a, um. Mollis, e. Venustus, a, um. Plaisant. S. A
pleasant fellow. Festiuum caput, Festiuum acroama. Plaisant homme. S.

A very pleasant fellow, and merry. Perfacetus, a, um. Homme fort plaisant,
and recreatif.

Pleasant and joyful. Festiuus, a, u^. Plaisant and ioyeulx A pleasant matter.
Res voluptuosa. Chose plaisant.

Pleasant, or delicate meats. Scitamenta, oru^. Cupediae, arum. foe. g.
Friandise, friand lopinet, morceau friand. S. Pleasant pronunciation of
speech. Venustas, it is. foem. genesis Cic. Pleasant sauoure. Aroma, it is. n. g.
Pleasant song. Canticum, ci. n. g. Est elegans, and lasciuus cantus. Quint.
Pleasant speech, or mocion. Blanditia, ae. Facundia, ae. f. g. Faconde. Call.
Which is very pleasant, and has a very good grace. Perlepidus, a, u^. Qui
est fort plaisant, and ha sort bonne grace. S.

A pleasant place. Locus hilaris, vel delicatus, aut voluptuarius. Lieu
plaisant. S.

Pleasant thing made in pastrie. Placenta, tae. f. g. It is properly a cake.
Un gasteau, ou torteau. S. Pleasant wench. Mulier commoda and faceta. Ter.
Pleasant, and merry. Facetus, a, um. Plaisant and recreatif. S. Pleasant
wit. Amoenum ingenium, Iucundum, and elegans ingenium. Quint. Pleasauntly.
Amoene, Comoedice, Facete, Iucunde, Vrbane, Festiue, Perfacete, Lepide,
Venuste, Blande. Mignardement, plaisamment. S. Please. Placeo, es. Complaceo,
es. Adlubesco, cis. Plaire. S. This house does please us. Arrident hae aedes.
Ceste maison nous plait. S.

If it please the court. Bonae curiae venia. S' il plaist a la court. S.

It pleases me. Cordi est mihi. Il me plaist. S.

As it shall please you. Secuudum arbitrium tuu^* Comme il te plaire. S.

If it had pleased God. Si deus annuisset. S' il eust pleu a dieu. S.

I please not my master. Ex sententia non sum hero, Displiceo hero. Ie ne play
point a mon maistre.

Please God with satisfaction. Libo, as. Virg. Pleased, or sone contented,
pacified, or satisfied. Propitius, a, um. Propice, apaise. Call. Pleasing, or
pacifying. Placamen, nis. Placamentum, ti. n. g. Apaisement. Call. Pleasure.
Amoenitas, it is. Iucunditas, it is. Libentia, ae. Libido, inis. foe. g. Plaisir.
S. Libido, Is as well good as ill, lawefull as unlawful. As Spurca libido,
Filthy, or disordinate pleasure. Plaisir de sordonne. S. Pleasures pass sone,
or quickly. Effugiunt praeteritae voluptates. Plaisirs passent legierement. S.
For pleasure, for my pleasure. Animi causa. Pour plaisir, pour mon plaisir. S.

According to my pleasure, or will. Ex sententia. Ex animi mei sententia. A mon
plaisir. S.

Pleasure carnal. Voluptas, it is. foem. genesis Plaisir charnel. S. et
Voluptarius, a, u^. Cic. Given wholly to carnal pleasures, or affections.
Pleasure, or good turn done. Meritum, ti. Promeritum, ti. Officium,
Beneficium, cij. n. g. Plaisir. S. A pleasure done in ye presence of all me^.
Posita in oculis gratia. Un plaisir faict en presence de tous.

Honorable pleasure. Ornamentum, ti. neut. genesis Plaisir honorable. S.

Pleasures done, or bestowed upon unthankful persons. Male locata beneficia.
Plaisirs faictez a gens ingras. S. To heap pleasure upon pleasure. Cumulare
benefacta. Amasser plaisir sur plaisir. S,

To esteame and hold for a great pleasure. In beneficij loco ponere. Estimer,
and tenir a grand plaisir.

Pleasure to do to any. Beneficio complecti, Beneficium dare, Beneficia
collocare, Merita dare, Been mereri de aliquo, Mereri, Officium alicui
tribuere, Commodare, Gratia^ gratificari, Prosequi aliquem beneficijs,
Gratificari, Beneficiu^ dare alicui, vel confer, Beneficijs afficere,
Promereri, Officium adhibere erga aliquem. Fair plaisir a aucun. S. To
pleasure often. Commoditare. Fair souuent plaisir. S.

To pleasure so much as is possible. Omnibus officijs, Omnibus beneficijs
hominem co^plecti. Faires tous les plaisirs qu'il est possible. S.

Pleasure to have, and delectation. Habere delectationes in occupatione aliqua.
Auoir plaisir, and esbat. S. He is in perpetual pleasure. Semper est in
voluptate. Il est en perpetuel plaisir. S.

To be deprived of all pleasure. Commodis carere omnibus. Estre prive de tous
plaisirs. S.

To give pleasure, or delectation. Delectatione^ afferre, Voluptatem inijcere.
Donner plaisir. S.

To take great pleasure, and delectation in any thing. Voluptati aliquid
habere, Teneri studio rei alicuius, Gratissimum habere. Prendre grande plaisir,
and esbat a quelque chose. S.

To do any thing for his pleasure. Studio habere aliquid. Fair quelque chose
pour son plaisir. S.

To take great pleasure to read. Cum voluptate legere. Prendre grand plaisir a
lire. S.

Pleasure to take in game, or play. Teneri ludo. Pleasures mutually done.
Officia mutua. Plaisirs qu'on fait les vns aux autres. S. Pledge. Hypotheca,
ae. Pignus, oris. n. g. Gage. S. Pledge for a book only. Antibiblium.*
Pledge, or hostage. Obses, dis. com. g. Baille en ostage Pledge, or warrante.
Fideiussor, oris. Sponsor, oris. m. g. Pleige, ou respondant. S. A pledge, and
suertie. Appromissor, oris. mas. ge. Pleige, and caution. S.

A pleage, and suertie in matter criminal. Vas, dis. m. g. Pleige, and caution
en matiere capitale. S.

Pledge keeper* Depositarius, ij. masc. ge. Vlpian. Depositaire. Call. Pledge
taker. Pignerator, is. m. genesis Qui prend gage d'aucun. S. Pledge to take.
Pigneror, aris. Pignus capere. Prendre gage. S. Pledged, or which is laid to
pledge. Pigneratitius, a, um. Engage, baille en gage. Call. Pledge, or to ^aye
to gauge. Oppignero, as. Oppono, is. Pignero, as. Pigneror, aris. Pignori
ponere, Pignore firmare, Pignora dare, Dare pignori. Bailler en gage. S. To
pledge, pawn, or gauge against an other. Dare pignus cum aliquo, Pignore
certare, Spo^sionem facere cum aliquo. Gager contre aucun. S.

Pledges, or joint suerties. Compraedes, dium. Eiusdem rei sponsores. Festus.
Pledging. Pigneratio, onis. foe. ge. Caius. Pleight, or to fold a garment.
Sinuo, as. Plico, as. Complico, as. Deflecto, is. Inflecto, is. Flecto, is.
Torqueo, es. Plier. S. Pleight, or fold. Ruga, ae. Sinus, us. Lacinia, ae.
Stria, ae. f. g. Plis, S. and Rugosus, a, u^. Sinuosus, a, u^. Full of
pleightes. Plein de plis. Vide Plaight. Plenty. Abundantia, ae. Copia, ae.
Foecunditas, it is. Hubertas, it is. Saturitas, it is. Vbertas, it is. Vis, uis.
Affluentia, ae. Feracitas, atis. Fertilitas, atis. Profluentia, ae. foe. g.
Plente, abondance. S. Great plenty of any thing. Cornucopiae. indecl. Grande
abondance de toutes chooses. S.

Plenty of milk. Hubertas mammarum. Abundance de laict. G. Plenty to be, or
inoughe, or more then suffiseth. Superesse. Surabonder. S. Plentiful, or
plentuous. Abundans, it is. Copiosus, a, um. Foecundus, a, um. Huber, a, um.
Hubertus, a, um. Opimus, a, um. Opulentus, a, um. Satur, a, um. Affluens, it is.
Profusus, a, um. Vber, a, um. Abondant, plantere. S. Very plentiful.
Percopiosus, a, u^. Fort abondant.

Plentifulnes. Copia, ae. f. g. Vt supra. Plentuous to be. Abundo, as. Affluo,
is. Scateo, es. Praescateo, es. Exhubero, as. Profluo, is. Estre abondant, abon
der. S. Plenteous to make. Foecundo, as. Hubero, as. Opulento, as. fair
fertile. Call. Plentuously, or plentifully. Affatim, Abundanter, Copiose,
Hubertim, Opipare, Opule^ter, Vbertim, Abunde, Affluenter, Benign, Cumulate,
Effuse, Foecunde, Large, Liberaliter, Munifice, Opime, Profluenter, Plena manu,
Sine parfimonia. Abondamment. S. More plentifully expounded, or declared.
Huberius explicata. Plus abondam^ ^^t exposez. S.

Plentuousnes. Vide Plenty. Plewresie, or sickness in the sides. Pleuritis,
dis. f. ge. Pleurisy. Call. Et Pleuriticus, ci. He that has such sickness.
Pleuritique. S. Plie, or to apply. Accommodo, as. Applico, as. Appliquer. S.
To plye, or apply his mind to any thing. Appellere animum ad aliquid, Animum
alicui rei intendere, Animum adiungere, vel confer ad aliquod studiu^.
Appliquer son esprit a quelque chose.

To plie him self to writing. Appellere animu^ ad scribendum. S' appliquer a
escrire. S.

Plying, or applying. Admotus, tus. Applicatio, onis. Appositus, tus. Admotio,
onis. f. g. Application. Plight faith and trought in matrimony. Sponso, as.
Despondeo, es. Fiancer. S. To plighte, or promise in marriage. Spondere puellam.
Promettre en marriage. S.

Plighting faith in matrimony. Sponsalia, um. n. g. Fiancailles. S. Plouer.
Pardalus. Pluuier. H. Plouer called a bastard plouer, or black plouer. Vpupa,
ae. f. g. Vne hupe. S. Ploughe. Aratrum, tri. n. g. Un araire. Ploughe beam.
Bura, ae. Buris, is. foe. ge. Virg. Ploughe dryuer. Iugarius, ij. m. g. Qui
boues iugo associat, and stimulis agit. H. Ploughe man. Agricola, ae. Arator,
oris. Ruricula, ae. Agricultor, Colonus, ni. m. g. Laboureur. S. Of an orator
made a ploughe man. Factus ex oratore arator. D'orateur faict laboreur. S.

Ploughe neat, or oxen. Triones, number. m. ge. Boeufs de labor. Call. Ploughe
ox. Arator, ris. m. g. Plin. Ploughmens holidays, as wakes and such idle
banqueting. Paganalia, orum. n. ge. Rusticorum festa. Call. Ploughe rifte. Bura,
ae. Buris, is. f. g. Ploughe staff, or acre staff. Rallum, li. Rulla, ae. f.
g. Un instrument du quel les laboureurs curent le soc de leurs charrues. Call.
Ploughe starte, which the tylman holds. Stiua, ae. foe. ge. La manche. S.
Ploughe wryght. Aratri faber. Ploughe. Exaro, as. Inaro, as. Ca^pos exercere,
Terram moliri, Colo, is. Aro, as. Aratro, as. Labourer la terre, arer. Call. To
give him self to plough the ground. Co^uertere animos ad agrum colendum,
Culturae seruire, Glebas sieve terra^ subigere. S'addonner a labourer la terre.
S.

To ploughe about. Circumarare, Obarare. Labourer a l'enuiron. S.

To ploughe the fields. Obire munus rusticu^. Labourer aux champs. S.

To ploughe the field the second time. Nouare agrum. Labourer un champ pour la
second fois. S.

To ploughe the third time. Terram tertiare. Labourer un champ pour la
troisieme fois. S.

Ploughing, or tilling the ground. Agricolatio, onis. f g. Labourage, ou
labor. S. Ploughe, or cast a mere between land and land for seueraltie of
two lordships. Vrbo, as. Nebriss. Plounge. Mergo, is. Immergo, is. Demergo, is.
Plonger. S. To plounge often. Mersare. Plonger souuent. S.

Pluck. Carpo, is, psi. Vello, is, si. Tirer. S. To pluck, or take away by
force any thing from his brother. Auellere rem aliqua^ a fratre. Arracher, and
oster par force. S.

To pluck out of the hands. Eripere. Arracher des mains. S.

To pluck with great pain. Abradere. Arracher auec grand peine. S.

Pluck again. Reuello, is, ulsi. Colum. Pluck away. Auello, is. Detraho,
is. Deuello, is. Distraho, is. Puto, as. Reuello, is. Arracher. S. Pluck, or
take away parforce. Extorqueo, es. Oster par force. S. Pluck back. Recello,
is. Refraeno, as. Reduco, cis. Reprehendo, is. Retraho, is. Retirer. S. Pluck
by pluck. Vellicatim. Nonius. Pluck eftsoon. Vellico, as. Freque^ter vello.
Call. Pluck feathers from birds. Deplumo, as.* Plumas auibus deuellere.
Desplumer. Pals. Pluck first, or before. Praeuello, is. Ante vello. Pluck
in. Irripio, is. Intus rapio. Call. Pluck in sunder. Distraho, is. Tirer en
diuerses parties, detirer. Call. Pluck of bark, or rynde of trees. Decortico,
as. Glubo, is. Deglubo, is. Escorcer. S. Pluck of hears. Depilo, as.
Deglabro, as. Pilos detraho. Peler. Call. Pluck of horns. Cornua detrahere,
vel deuellere. Pluck of shoes. Deponere calceos, vel demere, Laisser, ou oster
ses souliers. S. Pluck out. Extraho, is. Tirer horse. Call. Pluck out eyes.
Exoculo, as. Oster les yeux. Call. Pluck out teethe. Edento, as. Edenter. Call.
Pluck rings from the fingers. Despoliare digitos. Plaut. Oster les anneaulx
des doigts. S. Pluck together. Adduco, cis. Cic. Pluck up. Abrumpo, is. Rado,
is. Liu. Pluck up by the root. Eradico, as. Extirpo, as. Radicitus euellere,
Auello, is. Conuello, is. Peruello, is. Deuello, is. Diuello, is. Euello, is.
Reuello, is. Erunco, as. Exradico, as. Arracher. S. Pluck up herbs, or weades
Exherbo, as. Arracher and oster les herb^s de quelque lieu. S. Pluck up among
others. Interuello, is. Arracher d'entre les autres. Call. Pluck up plants.
Explanto, as. Plantas euello. Desplanter. Call. Plucked up. Abrasus, a, um.
Auulsus, a, um. Ereptus, a, um. Abreptus, a, um. Arrache. S. Plucked back.
Reductus, a, um. Repulsus, a, um. Reprehensus, a, um. Retractus, a, um. Retire
en arriere. Call. Plucked in sunder. Distractus, a, um. Plin. Iun. Plucker up of
any thing. Auulsor, oris. masc. genesis A^racheur. S. Plucking up. Auulsio,
Detractio, onis. foe. ge. Vulsura, ae. Euulsio, onis. Reuulsio, onis. foe. ge.
Arrachement. S. Plucking up of trees. Auulsio arborum. Arrachement d'arbres. S.
Plucking, or drawyng out of teethe. Euulsio dentium. Arrachement de dens. S.
Plumbe. Prunum, ni. n. g. Vne prune. S. A white horse plumbe. Prunum cerinu^,
Cereu^.

A white plumbe. Prunum hordearium. Plin.

Plumbe tree. Prunus, ni. f. g. Prunier. S. Prunetum, ti. n. g. Locus prunis
consitus. Call. A place set about with plumbe trees. Plume. Pluma, ae. foe.
ge. Plume. S. Et Plumula, ae. diminut. Ang. A little fether. Plumette. S.
Plummelyne. Perpendiculum, li. Libella, ae. foe. ge. Niueau. H. Plummer.
Plumbarius, rij. mas. ge. Plomber, soulder de plomb. S. Plumme right down.
Perpendicularis, e. om. ge. Plummet for a carpenter, or mason. Libella, lae.
foem. genesis Vt supra. Plummettes of lead. Halteres, Quibus vtraque manu se
librabant, qui saltu certabant, vt certius assilirent. Call. Plummet, or line
wherewith Mariners do gauge or sound for bottom. Bolis, dis. Cataprorates,
Linea, ae. f. g. Vne sonde. H. Plunge. Mergo, is. Vide Plounge. Plunging horse.
Sternax equus. Rueur, Cheual retif. Ply Vide Pli.
P. ANTE. O.
POares, or the little invisible holes in the skin of any body, whereby
sweat and such excrementes have issue. Cuticulares meatus, Pori, Inuisibilia
foramina, Caulae. Les petits p^rtuis de la peau. H. Pocke. Phagedaena, ae. f.
g. Plin. Bouton. Pals. The French pocke. Morbus gallicus. Lues venerea,
Siphylis. Le mal Francois, ou le mal de Naples, La gross verole. H.

The small pockes. Postulae, arum. f. g. Exanthemata. Verole, ou rougeole. S.

Pocke hole, or scarre. Adbedo, nis.* Pock, or scabbe among sheep. Mentigo,
ginis. Col. Poding. Botellus, li. Farcimen, inis. n. g. Boudin. S. Podle, or
slow. Coenum, ni. Lutum, ti. Cloaca, cae. Limus, mi. m. g. Bourbe, ou
bourbier. S. Poesy or balade, reprehending vice without respect of person.
Satyra, ae. f. g. Vne satyr, ou poiesie reprenant aigrement les vices. S. Et
Satyricus, Satyrographus, That makes such poesies, or Balades. Poet
Satyrique. S. Poem, or that which a Poet has composed. Poema, atis. n. g.
Poem, ce que le poet a compose. S. Poet. Poeta, ae. Vates, is. com. genesis
Poet, faiseur de verse. Call. Et Poetria, ae. A woman poet. Femme qui scait
fair, and composer verse. Call. Poetor, aris. to play the poet. Poetam ago.
Call. Poetical. Poeticus, a, um. Poetique. Call. Poetically. Poetice.
Poetiquement. Call. Poetry, or poet his art. Poetice, es. Poetria, ae. f. g.
Poesy, ou l'art des poets. S. Poetry, poem, or that which a poet has
made. Poesis, sis. Musae, ru^. Poema, it is. n. g. Poem, ce que le poet a
compose. S. Poetry to exercise, or to play the poet. Poetor, aris, In
poetica me exerceo, sieve poetam ago. Point. Ligula, ae. Vne esguillette. S.
Points of cheuerill, or young goats skin. Ligulae hoedinae. Esguillettes de
cheurotin. S.

Point being in the mids of any thing. Centru^, tri. m. g. Center, le poinct
du milieu de toutes chooses. S. Centralis, le. Plin. That which is pointed, or
set in the mids. Point of a knyfe, swearde, or of any kind of weapon.
Cuspis, dis. Mucro, nis. Spiculum, li. Acies, ei. f. g. La poincte d'vn
couteau, ou glaiue. S. Point, or article. Verricula, ae.* Point or title.
Punctus, ti. Punctum, ti. neut. genesis Un poinct. S. Point termining a sentence,
called incision. Co^ma, it is. n. g. Incision. S. Pointed, or having a point.
Cuspidatus, a, u^. Mucronatus, a, um. Pointu, alant vne poincte. Call. Poynted,
or tied with points. Ligulatus, a, um.* Point, or to make points, or
tittles. Notis, and punctis distinguere, Punctare. Poynter. Pals. Point with
the finger. Indigito, as. Mons^rer au doit. Call. Pointwyse. Cuspidatim. Par la
point. S. Point, or to make a point of any thing. Spiculo, as. Fair la
point a quelque chose. Call. Poyse, or wayghte. Pondus, eris. n. g. Le poix. S.
Poyse equal. Libramentum, ti. n. g. Contrepoix. Call. Poyse of a ponde, or a
ponde weighte. As, assis. Assipondium, ij. Pondo, Libra, ae. f. ge. Le poix d'
vne liver. S. Poyse of an hundred pound. Ducenaria pondera. Le poix de deux
cens livers. S. A great, and marvelous poyse. Centumpondium. Un poix grand,
and merueilleux. S.

Poyse little. Pondusculum, li. n. g. Petit poix. S. Poyse of three ounces.
Teruncius, ij. Trois onces. S. Poyse of seven ounces. Septunx, cis. m. g. Sept
onces. Poyse of eight ounces. Bes, ssis. m. g. Le poix de huict onces. S.
Poyse, or to weyghe. Libro, as. Pondero, as. Pendo, is. Penso, as. Expendo, is.
Trutinor, aris. Peser. S. Poison. Aconitum, ti. Toxicum, ci. Venenum, ni. Virus
indecl. Poison. S. Venenosus, a, um. Virule^tus, a, um. Full of poison.
Poisonneux. S. Poison seller. Venenarius, ij. m. g. Suet. To poison. Petere
veneno, Veneno, as. Inficere veneno, Spargere venena, Veneno necare.
Empoisonner. S.

To go about, or to endeavor to poison some body. Venenum alicui quaerere,
Tentare veneno aliquem occidere. Tascher a empoisonner quelqu'vn.

To poysone one in his meat. Ponere venenum cum cibo. Empoisoner aucun en sa
viande. S.

To give poison to an other, and to kill him. Facere malum venenu^, Venenum
alicui infundere, Tollere veneno. Donner poison a autruy and le tuer. S.

Poison a place with cartayne. Funesto, as. Cic. Poisoned. Infectus, a, um.
Toxicatus, a, um. Venenatus, a, um. Empoisonne. Call. Poisoned by his wife.
Potionatus ab vxore. Empoisonne par sa femme. S. Poisoned with carrayne, or
with dead bodies. Funestus, a, um. Plin. Iun. Poysoner. Venificus, ci. m. g.
Empoisonneur. S. Poisoning, or the act thereof. Veneficium, ficij. n. g.
Empoisonnement. S. Poke, or poket. Funda, ae. Sacculus, li. mas. genesis Vne
poche, ou pochette. S. Poke pudding. M^za, ae. Farrata, ae.* Polder. Vide
poulder. Pole. Pertica, cae. f. g. Vne perch. S. Pole artike, or the North
pole. Axis, is. Pars septe^trionalis. Polus arcticus. Le pol arctique. S. Pole
antarticke. Polus antarcticus. Pol antarctique. Pole having a hoke of iron.
Harpax, gis. m. g. Plin. Pole ten foot long. Decempeda, ae. foe. genesis Perch
de dix pies de long. S. Poley an herb. Polium, ij. n. g. Polye, or plummet
wherewith shippemen gauge water. Bolis, dis. Cataprorates, Linea, ae. foe. genesis
Vne sonde. S. Polye, or whele wherein the cord runs, with the which any
thing is weighed up. Trochlea, ae. Titiuillitium, tij. Flocculus, li. m. g. Vne
poulie. The cord of a poly. Ductarius funis. La cord d' vne poulie. S.

A little polye. Orbiculus, li. m. ge. Poulion, ou petite poulie. S.

Policy, the act, and government of one public weal. Politia, ae. foe. ge.
Police, le faict and government d'vne republique. S. Policy in wars.
Stratagema, atis. n. g. Cic. Polyshe. Condecoro, as, Interpolo, as. Laeuigo,
as. Limo, as. Mulceo, es. Oblimo, as. Polio, is. Allaeuo, as. Colo, is.
Depolio, is. Perpolio, is. Interrado, is. Pecto, is. Polir. S. To polyshe fine,
and trimmely. Expolire. Polir bien, and nettement. S.

To polishe with a pumice stone. Pumicare, Repumicare. Polir auec vne pierre
ponce. S.

Polyshe, or to trym wares, to cause them to seem new or sale able.
Mangonizo, as. Regratter. S. Polyshed. Politus, a, um. Pectitus, a, um.
Percultus, a, um. Depolitus, a, um. Poli. S. Which is nether polished, nor
trymmed. Inelegans, it is. Impolitus, a, um. Qui n' est point poli ne orne. S.

To be polyshed, and trimmed. Enit^re. Estre poli, and orne. S.

Polyshed with sundry colors. Variegatus, a, um. Polysher of old wares to
seem salable or new. Mango, nis. m. ge. Regratteur. Call. Polishing. Politio,
onis. Expolitio, onis. foem. genesis Polissement. S. Polishing done with a pumice
stone. Pumicatio, onis, foe. genesis Pollissement faict auec vne pierre ponce.
Polishing, or trimming of wares. Mangonium, ij. neut. genesis Regrattement. Call.
Et Mangonicus, a, u^. Pertaining to such polyshing, or trimminge. Appartenant
a regratteur. Call. Polyte. Elegans, it is. Lepidus, a, um. Poli and orne. S.
Political or civil, or pertaining to civility, or to a city or rule.
Politicus, a, um. Politic, civil. Politic governance, or rule. Politia,
ae. foe. ge. Vt supra. Polle, or to clippe. Tondeo, es. Deto^deo, es. To^dre.
To polle on, or with a comb. Per pectinem at tondere. Tond^e sur le peigne. S.

They did clyppe their fathers bearde, and polle his head. Tondebant barbam,
and capillum patris. Ils faiso yet la barbe, and les cheuaulx a leur pere

Polle, brybe, or extort. Abradere de rebus, Compilo, as. Exigo, is. Pillar. S.
Extorcioner. Pals. Polled, or brybed. Compilatus, a, um. Exactus, a, u^.
Spoliatus, a, um. Expilatus, a, um. Populatus, a, um. Qui a este pille. S.
Polled, or shorn. Tonsus, a, um. Tondu. S. A man polled, or clipped. Homo
tonsus. Tondu.

Poller, or pillar. Exactor, oris. Expilator, oris. Spoliator, oris. Direptor,
oris. Praedator, oris. Populator, oris. Depeculator, oris. mas. genesis Exacteur,
pilleur. S. Polling, or pilling. Exactio, onis. foe. ge. Compilatio, onis.
Expilatio, onis. f. g. Exaction, Pillement. S. Polling, or rounding. Tonsura,
ae. foe. ge. Tonsure, ou tonsture. S. Pollute. Cloaco, as. Foedo, as. Incesto,
as. Coinquino, as. Inquino, as. Polluo, is. Scelero, as. Tetro, as. Temero, as.
Violo, as. Funesto, as. Polluer. S. Polute promise. Prodere fidem datam.
Salust. Pollute religion, as against God, or pare^tes. Impio, as. Plaut.
Polluted. Incestus, a, um. Inquinatus, a, um. Pollutus, a, um. Pollu. S.
Chapples polluted. Foedata turpitudine sacella. Chapelles pollues. S.

To be polluted with wicked deeds. Cruentari sceleribus. Estre pollu de
meschans faicts. S.

Pomaise for parchement. Pumex, cis. Pierre ponce. Pumicosus, a, um. Like
pomayse stones. Qui resemble aux pierres ponces. Call. Pomayse, or to trim
parchement. Pumico, cas. Poncer, polir auec pierre ponce. Call. Pomaysed.
Pumicatus, a, um. Pumice politus. Pomaising, or trimming with pomaise.
Pumicatio, onis. foe. g. Nebriss. Pomaundre, musk bale, or sweet perfume.
Diapa^ma, atis. Orbiculus, li. Pastillus, li. masc. genesis Pomendier. Pals.
Pomecitron. Malus Assiria, Medica, Citrus, Malus citria. Citronnier. S.
Pomegranate. Apyrina. plur. Malum punicu^, Malum granatum. Pomme de granade. H.
The pomegranate rynde which covers it about. Malicorium, Corium cortexue
punici mali. L'escoree d'vn granad. ye flower. Citinus, Flos mali satiuae
punicae, and Balaustium, siluestris punicae flos. Le fleur d' un granadier. the
grain. Acinus, vel semen. Le grain de la pomme granade. ye little skin
wherein the grain is closed. Tunica acini, vel folliculus. La cote du grain.
the Kernells. Acinoru^ nuclei, Semina, Vinacea. Les pepins. And ye small skin
that deuideth the grains in the pomegranate. Cicus, vel cicum, vel ciccum,
Membrana tenuis acinos in malo punico discriminans. H.

Pomell of a sword. Manubrium, ij.* Pomp, or solemn sight. Pompa, ae. foe.
ge. Pomp, and appareil solennel. S. To renounce the pomp of the world.
Eiurare mundi fastum. Renoncer aux pompes du monde. S.

He goes pompiously. Magnifice incedit. Il se march pompeusement. S.

Pompous, magnificall. Magnificus, a, um. Pompeux. Pompone, or pepone, a kind
of melons. Pepo, nis. Melo, onis. f. g. Pompon, ou pepon. S. Ponde. Stagnum,
ni. n. g. Estang. Call. Ponde for fyshe. Piscina, ae. Viuarium, rij. neut. ge.
Piscine, viuier. H. Ponde to wash sheep in. Probatica piscina. Ponder, or to
wayghe a thing diligently. Expendo, is. Pendo, is. Pondero, as. Perpendo, is.
Trutino, as. Peser, and considerer dilige^ment quelque chose. To ponder, and
consider with him self. Rationem secum putare. Plaut. Considerer, and penser
en soymesme. S.

Ponder eftsoon. Repenso, as. Columel. Pondrer, or he that weygheth what is
said or spoken. Pensitator, ris. m. g. Gellius. Ponent, or west. Occidens,
it is. m. g. Occiant. S. Ponyshe. Vide Punyshe. Poole. Stagum, ni. n. g. Vt
supra. Poor. Egenus, a, um. Humilis, e. Inops, is. Pauper, ris. Tenuis, e.
Inanis, ne. Plebeus, a, u^. Plebeius, a, um. Pour^. S. Very poor. Perpauper,
eris. com ge. Fort pour.

A poor man which lives of his labor. Pauper cui opera est vita. Un pour
qui vit de son labeur. S.

Which is of poor parents. Infimo loco natus, Natus parentibus pauperrimis.
Qui est de poures parens.

The poorest of the town. Infima fortuna homines. Les plus poures d'vne ville.
S.

Poor by casualtie and loss upon the sea. Naufragus, a, um. Cic. Poor
comminaltie, or sort of people. Plebecula, ae. f. g. Commun peuple. Call. Poor
folk. Hebiones, number. com. genesis A veteribus pauperes dicuntur. Call. Poor maid
servant. Ancillula, ae. foem. genesis Seruante. Call* Poor man. Pauper, ris. com.
genesis Horat. Pauperculus, li. diminut. A very poor man. Terent. Pouret. S.
Poor, or nothing having of his own. Expeculiatus, a, um. * Poor woman.
Paupercula, ae. f. g. Terent. Poor to make, or to impouerishe. Depaupero, as.
Pauperem facere, Fortunis euertere. Appourir, fair pour. S. Poorly. Paupere.
Tenuiter. Pourement. S. To live poorly. Male viuere. Viure pourement. S.

Poorly cladde. Pannosus, a, um. Pullatus, a, um. Poorness, or poverty.
Paupertas, Inopia, Pauperies, Egestas, Tenuitas, Nuditas, Indige^tia,
Humilitas, tatis. f. g. Pourete. S. Vide Pouerte. Popingay a bird. Psittacus,
ci. Papegay. H. Poplar tree. Populu^, li. foem. genesis Un arbre nomme Peuplier.
S. Et Populeus, a, um. Populnus, a, um. Populneus, a, um. Of a poplar tree. De
peuplier. S Popletum, ti. The place where poplars grow. Un lieu plant de
peupliers. S. Et Populosus, a, um. Full of poplars.* Poppet, or baby for a
child. Pupa, ae. foem. gener. Vne poupee. S. Poppy a weade. Meco^, Papauer,
ris. n. g. Du pauot. S Papaueratus, a, um. Of poppy. De pauot. S. Poppit.
Oscillum, li. n. g.* Poppit player. Circulator, ris. Gesticulator, is.
Circulatorius, a, um. Pertaining to popyn players. Popular, or of the people,
or pertayninge to the people. Popularis, re. Populaire. Call. Populate, co^quer,
or to waste. Populo, las. Degaster. Populated or wasted. Populatus, a, um.
Degaste. S. Populous, or full of people. Populosus, sa, sum. Habitatoribus
frequens. Populeux. S. Porche. Porticus, cus. foem. ge. Prothyrum, Propylaeum,
Vestibulum, li. neut. ge. Un auant portal. H. Porche. Call. Et Porticula, lae.
f. g. A little porche. Petite porche. Call. Porche of a church. Absiden,
Propylaeum, aei. n.g. Porche, or place where men sytte and talk for
recreation. Praestega, ae. foe. ge. Porke. Caro suilla, Porcina caro, Chair de
porceau. H. Porkepine. Histrix. Porcepic. Portion, or part. Portio, onis. vel
pars, it is. foe. genesis Portion. S. According to the part, and portion. Pro rata
part, Pro rata portione. Selon la part and portion. S.

To divide in parts, or portio^s. Parts vel portiones facere. Portionner. S.

Portion, being little or small. Portiuncula, ae. f. ge. Vne petite portion.
Call. Portion of enheritaunce allotted. Sors, it is. f. g. * Portion or a clyme of
the fyrmament, between the South and the north. Clima, it is. n. g. Pores of the
body, whereat humors issue, the little holes in the skin. Cuticulares meatus,
Pori, Inuisibilia foramina, Caulae. Les petis pertuis de peau. H. Porkin,
porcatte, or young swyne. Porcellus, li. Porculus, li. m. g. Un porcelet. S.
Porkupin, a beast having pricks on his back. Histrix, cis. foe. ge. Porc
espi. S. Porc espin. Pals. Porposse a fyshe, or perposse or purpos. Tursio,
Phocaena, Tyrsio. Marsouin. id est Sus marinus. S. Portall. Atrium, trij. n. g.
Portail. S. Portar. Ianitor, oris. Ostiarius, ij. Atriensis, Ad limina custos.
Portier. S. and Ianitrix, Ianuae custos. Portiere. S. Portar, or bearer of
burdens. Baiulus, Gerulus, li. Portitor, ris. Lator, oris. Vector, toris. masc.
genesis Porteur. S. Portars which mete corn. Modi paratores. Portculles.
Catarrhacta, ae. Cataracta, ae. f. g. Et Cataractes, vel Catarrhactes. m. g. La
hearse ou le gril d'vne port de la ville. H. Port or bauen. Portus, tus. m. g.
Un port. S. Portsale of goods confiscated, or spoil. Auctio hastae, Hasta,
tae. Auctio, onis. f. g. Subhastation. S. To sell by portsale, to sell to him
that offers most. Auctionari, Auctionem facere, Auctione vendere, Auctionem
vendere, Constituere auctionem, Subhaester. Vendre au plus offrant. S.

Which pertayneth to port sale. Auctionarius, a, um. Qui sert a la
subhastation. S.

Portingall a realm. Lusitania, ae. f. ge. Portugal. S. Pose, a sickness in
the head distilling like water, called a catarre* or reaume. Distillatio, onis.
f. g. Catarrhus. Catarhe. H. Posnette, or little pot. Chytra, trae. foe. genesis
Possess. Occupo, as. Possideo, es, di. Potior, iris. Teneo, es. Posseder. S.
Possess before, or by prevention. Praeoccupo, pas. Preoccuper. Call. To
possess by use, or prescription. Vsucapio, pis. Id est rem aliquam
continuatione vsus, vel possessionis mihi attribuo, vendico, and in meum vsum
conuerto. Fair sien par prescription and possession de long temps. Call.

Possessed with an ill spirit. Demoniacus, a, um. Demoniosus, a, um.
Ergumenus. Demoniaque. S. Possession. Occupatio, Possessio, onis. f. g.
Possession. Possession, and heritage that is great. Latifundiu^, dij. n. g. Vne
grande possession and heritage. S. Possession empty, or void. Vacua praedia.
Possession vuide and vacue. S. Possession, or ground of any man. Dominatus,
tus. m. g. La possession and terre d'aucun. S. Possession of long time, or by
prescription or time. Vsucapio, Vsucapcio, onis. f. g. Possession of time out
of mind, or by prescriptio^. Possessio secularis, Possessio memoriam excedene,
Possessio memoria antiquior. Possession immemo^iale. S. Possession holden three
years peaseablye. Triennio continuo citra controuersiam possedisse, Triennium
continuum sine negotio possedisse. Triennale possession paisable. S. Possession
or heritage, which the heir may sell, or has see simple in. Allodium, ij.
n. ge. Possession, or liuelode. Ager, gri. m. ge. Agrarius, a, um. Pertaining
to such possession. To put in possession, and seisine. Mittere in possionem.
Mettre en possession and saisine. S.

To put one forth of possession, to dispossess one. Deijcere, Deponere vel
dimouere de possessione. Le deiecter de sa possession, Le desposseder, le
mettre h^rs de son heritage. S.

Possession to an others use. Fiduciaria possessio. Possession to take of
enheritaunce. Obire haereditatem. Ius vsurpare. Prendre possession. S.
Possession to take of land, or any cattle boughte and sold. Mancipio
accipere. Possessoure. Possessor, ris. m. g. Possesseur. S. Possible.
Possibilis, le. Possible. S. As far as it is possible. Quoad potest. Autant
qu'il est possible. S.

If thou can possible, if it be possible for thee. Si quid poteris. S' il
t'est possible.

It is not possible to aid them so easily. Non tam facile ijs opitulari est.
Il u' est pas possible de leur aider si facillement. S.

Post. Palus, li. Postis, is. m. g. Post ou posteau. Pals. Post, or stake
whereunto the cable of a ship is fasted. Prymnesium, sij. n. g. Tonsilla,
lae. foe. ge. Post, he that rydeth with all speed possible on a message.
Veredarius, Pegasus, Cursor, soris, m. g. Post. S. Charge, duty or necessity
to find horses for posts. Angaria, ae. foe. gen* La charge, redeuoir, and
necessite de fourmir de cheuaulx pour la post. S.

Post horse. Veredus, Equus viatorius, qui publica via ibat, a vehenda rheda
dictus, qualem nunc Postum vocamus, quasi equum depositum cum Suetonio. Cheual
de postillon. H. Post whereunto vines are bound. Vallum, li. n. ge. * Vallus,
li. masc. genesis Firmior palus cui vitis alligatur. Post whereupon the door
hangs. Postis, it is. m. g. Posteau, au quel l' huis est atache. S. Posterity
or sequel. Posteritas, it is. foe. ge. Et Posteri, orum. Be they that succeed us
in blood and posterity. Posterite. S. Posterne. Postica, ae. Posticum, stici.
n. g. Posterne^ Posts, currours, or speady messengers. Angarij, orum,
Statores, Veredarij, orum. Alipedes nuntij, Pegasidae. Les posts. S. Posts or
iambes on euey side of a door. Antae, aru^. f. g. Ostiorum latera. Posts or
pyllers set without to sustain a frame or house. Antes, tium. m. g. Potage.
Olera, rum. Ius, Iusculum. Bruet, du ius, potage commun. H. Potage, or gruell
that is thick. Pulls, Pulmentu^, Pulmentarium, and pulmentaris cibus, quod cum
pane editur, vt Bud. exponit. Boulle, potage espis. H. Potage for poor folks.
Mictyris. Nonius. Potage eater, or great eater of potage, or gruell.
Pultiphagus, gi. Pultiphagonis, dis.* Grand potager, ou mangeur de potage. S.
Potager. Catillus, li. Gabata, ae. Pultariu^, rij. Scutella, Catinus, Paropsis,
Scutula, lae. f. g. Escuelle. S. Potager with ears. Pultarium auritum, Auritus
catillus, Aurita scutella. Bud. Escuelle a oreillons. S. Poticary. Aromacopola,
ae. Pharmacopola, ae. m. g. and Medicamentarius. Plin. Apothecaire. S. Pot to
sethe meat in. Chytra, trae. Cacabus, by. Lebes, it is. m. ge. Vne marmite. S.
Un pot. Pals. Pot of earth. Olla, Aula, Olla fictilis, Samium, Fidella, iae.
f. g. Pot de terre. S. Et Ollula, lae. foe. g. A little earthen pot. Un petit
pot de terre. Call. Pot for wine. Oenophorum, ti. n. g. Pot a vin. S. Pot,
or judge. Cantharus, ri. m. g. Un hanap. S. Pot to boil in. Coculum, li. n.
g. Plaut. Pot to put in lottes. Sitella, ae. Situla, lae. foe. g. Pot for
oil. Guttus, Ampulla, lae. f. g. Pot a huile. Pot with a great bealy. Hanus
barbatus, Hanum barbatum. I take it to be of the sorts of pottes with antique
faces.* Pot with a narrow mouth. Orca, ae. f. ge. Pers. Pot with feet.
Chytra, ae. f. g. A pot with three feet. Pot a trois pieds. Call. Pot
wherein water is fetched, called a pitcher. Vrceus, i. Vrceolus, li. m. g.
Cruche. S. Pot with two ears. Amphora, ae.* Potherbes. Olus, eris. n. g.
Potsharde. Testa, ae. foe. ge. Taiz de pots de terre. S. Potsticke. Ferula, ae.
Rudicula, ae. f. g. Batton. Pals. Potter. Figulus, li. Plasmator, Vascularius,
ij. Plastes, Fictor, ris. m. g. Potier de terre. H. Potters claye, or earth.
Argilla, ae. f. g. De l'argille. S. Potters chalk, or white earth. Figlina,
vel Figularis creta. Croy de quoy vsent les potiers S. Potters craft. Figlina,
ae. vel Figulina, ae. foe. genesis L'ari de poterie. S. Potters occupation, or
work. Plasma, it is. Opus figlinum. Ouurage de potier. S. Potters workehouse.
Figlina, ae. Figulina, nae. f. ge. Vne poter. ^. Potters wheel. Figularis
rota. La roue d'vn potier. S To make pottes of earth. Vasa ex luto ducere, vel
finge^e. Fair des pots de terre. S.

Powche, a purse, or money bag. Loculus, Mantica, Marsupium, Ascopera, Theca
nu^maria, Crumena, nae. f. g. Gibbeciere. S. Power. Conatus, us. Copia, ae.
Iurisdictio, Ius, ris. Pollentia, ae. Potentia, ae. Potestas, it is. Valentia,
Virtus, it is. Vis, uis. foe. genesis Pouoir force and puissance. S. Power, or
virtue of nature. Virus. n. g. Indeclinab. Non. ex Lucre. Power and authority,
or seigneurie. Authoritas, Potestas, Potentia, ae. foe. ge. Pouoir and
authorite, ou seigneurie. S. To have power, and puisaunce. Habere potestatem.
Auoir pouoir and puissance. S.

To endeavor with all his power. Omni opere anniti, vel omni open, atque opera
eniti, Summa open niti vel eniti. S' efforcer de tout son pouoir. S.

To give power, and authority to do some thing. Facere potestatem,
Permittere. Donner pouoir and puissance de fair quelque chose. S.

Every one according to his power. Pro se quisque, Pro virili part, Pro sua
quisque part. Chascun selon son pouoir. S.

By virtue of the power given, and committed to him. Pro imperio sibi mandato,
Pro jurisdiction sibi mandata. Bud. Par virtue du pouoir a soy done and
commis. S.

To give all power. Libera mandata dare. Donner tout pouoir. S.

We give power. Permittimus. Cic. Nous donnons pouoir. S.

Which has great power. Pollens, Praepotens, it is. Qui a grand pouoir. S.

With all my force, or power. Pro virili, Pro virili part, Totis viribus,
Obnixe. De toute ma force.

With all their power, force, and strength. Toto corpore, atque omnibus
vngulis. De toute leur force and puissance. S.

To have sovereign power, or puissaunce. Su^mo in imperio esse, Potestatatem
habere summam, Summam imperij tenere. Auoire souueraine puissance. S.

Power royal. Maiestas, it is. f. g. Majesty. S. Power to do or say. Copia,
ae. Facultas, it is. foe. g. Pouoir de fair ou dire. S. Power to have. Polleo,
es, ere. vt supra. Powerles, or lacking power. Impos, it is. Impote^s, it is. Qui
n' ha pouoir ou puissance. S. Poverty. Egestas, it is. Inopia, ae. Tenuitas,
it is. Paupertas, it is. Pauperies, ei. Nuditas, tatis. Indigentia, ae. f. g.
Humilitas, tatis. f. g. Pourete. S. Poverty grievous to bear. Grauis
pauperies. Pourete griefue a porter. S. Extreme poverty. Inopia vltima,
Extrema paupertas. Extreme pourete. S.

To leave in poverty. In egestate, vel paupertate relinquere. Delaisser en
pourete. S.

To aid, and succoure one in poverty, and necessity. Leuare paupertatem
alicui, Tenuitatem alicuius sustentare. Aider and subuenir a la pourete and
necessite d' aucun. S.

To lead, or bring to poverty. Redigere ad inopiam, Afferre egestatem, In
pauperie^ infer, Offerre mendicitatem. Mener ou mettre a pourete.

Poulder. Puluis, eris. Com. genesis Pouldre. S. Et Puluisculus, li. diminut. Ang.
Fine, or small poulder. Pouldrette. S. Et Puluereus, a, um. Of poulder. De
pouldre. S. Et Pulueresco, scis. To be turned into pouldre. Et Puluerulentus,
a, um. vel Puluereus, a, u^. Full of pouldre. Pouldreux. S. and Pulueratio,
onis. f. g. Pouldring. Pouldrement. S. Poulder, or dust that comes of the
filinge or shauing of metal. Psegma, Peripsema, it is. n. g. Poulder of spices,
as of ginger, pepper, and such other. Alephanginae species.* Poulder meat, or
to lay it in salt. Condio, is, iui. vel dij. Salio, is, iui. Sallo, is,
Saler* Call. Poulder to make, or to make in poulder. Resoluere, Puluerare,
Dispuluerare, Tundere. Casser and mettre en pouldre. S. Poulder with salt, or
to cover, or hyde with salt. Sale contingere, Perfricare sale minuto, Sale
superspergere, Inspergere sale, Obruere sale. Pouldrer de sell. S. Pouldred.
Salitus, a, um. Muricatus, a, um. Pouldre, Sale. S. Pouldred fleashe, or meat.
Caro conditanea, salita, muriatica. Chair salee, ou saulpouldree. H. Et
praesulsa caro. Chair pouldree de sell. S. Meat pouldred with salt. Pouldred
meats. Condititia cibaria, Succidia, orum.* Meat which is not pouldred with
salt. Insulsa caro. Cha^ qui n' est pouldree de sell. S.

Pouldring. Salitura, ae. Salsura, rae. f. g. Salure. S. Poulter. Auiarius,
Pullarius. Un poulaillier. S. Poumpe of a ship. Sentina, ae. foem. genesis
Losse^. S. L'ossec. H. Vide Pumpe. Poumpe up water. Sentino, as. Verbum apud
Festum and Caecilium, pro satagere atque eniti exinanire nauis sentinam. Vuyder
l'eau. H. Pounce. Vide Grave. Pownde. As, ssis. Libra, ae. foe. ge. Liver. S.
Et Selibra, ae. f. ge. Half a pound. Demie liver. S. Pownde and a half.
Sesquilibra, ae, foe. ge. Vn^ liver and demie. S. Pownde of money numbered,
containing.xx. shyllinges of our coygne. Librae, arum. Minae, arum. foe. ge.
Liver. Pals. Pownde weight. Assipondium, Pondo. Ind. As, sis. Libra, brae. foe.
ge. Le pois d'vne liver. S. Librarius, a, um. Et Libralis, le. Wayghing a
pound, or that weigeth a pound. Qui poise vne liver. S. How many pound
think thou that thou weighest naked? or how much think thou thou
weyghest naked? Quot pondo te esse censes nudum? Plaut. Combien penses tu que
tu peses tout nud? S.

A chain of gold of two pounds weighte. Torquis, aureus duo pondo. Pesant
deux livers. S.

Pour. Fundo, dis, di. Espandre, fondre. S. Pour about. Offundo, is. Affundo,
dis. Idem. Pour down. Defundo, is. Suffundo, is. Pour in. Infundo, is.
Verser dedens.. S. To pour into other vessels. Traijcere in alia vasa, vel
transfundere, aut elutriare, Decapulare. Verser en autres vaisseaux, suruuider,
Fralater. S.

Pour often. Fundito, as. Frequent. Pour out. Abijcio, cis. Effundo, is.
Fundo, is. Perfundo, is. Verser horse. S. Pour out aboundauntly. Profundo, is.
Effundo, dis. Refundo, dis. Espandre a grand' abondance. S. Pour out eftsoon.
Refundo, is. Refondre. S. Pour out of one thing into an other. Detrullo, as.
Elutrio, as. Transfundo, is. Vide Pour in. etc. Pour out often. Fundito, as.
Fondre souuent. S. Pour upon. Superfundo, is. Perfundo, dis. Verser sur
quelque chose. S. Pour water into the mouhe of man or beasts. Offoco, cas.
Offuco, as. Aquam in fauces do ad sorbendum. Gargarizer. Call. Poured. Infusus,
sa, sum. Diffusus, sa, sum. Verse. S. Poured out. Effusus, a, um. Profusus, sa,
sum. Sparsus, sa, sum. Espandu. S. Poured out sone. Futilis, e. Pouring out, or
a sheading. Effusio, onis. Resparsus, sus. Resparsio, onis. Suffusio, onis.
foem. genesis Espandement. S. Powshe. Atheroma, it is. Epinyctides, Exa^thema, it is.
Pustula, ae. Tubercula, ae. f. g. Vne ampoule. S. Powshe out water. Egerere
aquam. Plin.
P. ANTE. R.
PRactyse. Practica, ae. foe. ge. * Practice of a craft, or occupation.
Artificiu^, Vide Occupation. Practice. Ago, is. Adduco, is. Practiquer.
Practice craft, or deceipte. Tragulam inijcere. Practice friendship. Amicitiam
gerere. Cic. Practice hostility, or enemitie. Inimicor, aris. Vide Enemy.
Practice in matters of the law. Actito, as. Plaider. Practiser of law.
Formularius, Pragmaticus, ci. m. g. Un practicien qui scait son formulaire
comme il fault fair demandes and defenses. S. Practiser of physic.
Empiricus, ci. m. g. Practisers, or practicens of the law. Natio alumna fori,
Conceptores, Astipulatores, Artifices forenses, Cautores, Formularij,
Formularum conceptores, Homines circu^foranei, Basilicani, Iudiciorum alumni,
Multitudo circu^foranea, Stipulatores, Turba comes assectaque fori iudicialis.
Turba fori proxenetria. Bud. Les pacticiens. S. Good practicio^s. Cautores,
Perscriptores. Bud. Bons practiciens. S.

A good practician, cautie and subtle. Cautor callidus atque formularius,
Versutus and solers pragmaticus, Vsu and disciplina fori pollens. Institutorum
forensium peritissimus, Iuris formularij consultissimus, Ludi forensis peritus,
and in exercendis controuersijs solers and versabilis inuentionis. Bud. Un bon
practicien cault and subtle. S.

A very good practicioner. Homo formularum ac forensis vsus callentissimus. Un
tresbon practicien. S.

Pray, or spoil gotten in war. Castrense peculium. Manubiae, arum. Praeda,
ae. Sectio, onis. f. g. Proye. S. Et Praedabundus, a, um. Full of prays.
Praedaceus, a, um. Praedatiuus, a, um. Of a pray. De pillage. Praedor, aris. To
get a pray or spoil. To pyll, or rob. Pillar. S. Sectio, Is properlye any
thing gotten at a besiege, or sackinge of a town. Vide Spoil. Pray getter,
or seeker. Praedator, ris. m. g. Pilleur. S. Pray, or spoils gotten without
labor. Salmacia, Spolia sine labor parta. Pray. Obsecro, as. Oro, as.
Precor, aris. Rogo, as. Preces far, Precationes facere, Comprecari, Peto,
it is. Prier. S. To pray earnestly. Erogitare, Exorare, Praerogare, Derogitare,
Deprecari. Fort prier. S.

Pray eftsoon. Resecro, as. Reprier. S. Pray for other. Intercedo, is. Pray
hertely. Derogito, as. Vt supra. Pray to God. Testor, aris. Deum precibus
salutare, Orare deum, Precari ad deum, Petere precibus a deo, Appellare deum.
Prier dieu. S. I pray God it be so. Opto, Faxit deus vt ita sit, Vtinam sic
sit. Ie pry a dieu qu'ainsi soit. S.

Pray to God at the beginning of an enterpryce. Praefari diuos. Pray
together. Comprecor, aris. Prier ensemble. S. Prayer. Meditatio, Oration, nis.
Preces, cium. Supplicatio, Comprecatio, onis. Rogatus, tus. masc. g. Priere. S.
Prayer for the appeasing of Gods wrath. Propitiatio, onis. f. g. Prayer, or
praying to God. Proseuche, vel Proseucha, ae. foe. genesis Prayers ambitious, or
affectuous. Preces ambitiosae, Obsecratio, onis. f. g. Prieres affectueuses. S.
Prayers lost, or unprofitable. Infructuosae preces, Irritae preces. Prieres
perdues. S. To refuse, or despise the prayers of one. Preces alicuius auersari,
Obsecrationem alicuius repudiare and aspernari. Refuser la priere d'aucun. S.

To hold no count of ones prayers. Deserere preces alicuius, Aures obscrare
ad preces alicuius. Ne tenir count des priers de quelqu'vn. S.

Praying. Obsecratio, Precatio, Oratus, tus. m. genesis Priement. S. Praise.
Eulogium, ij. Laudatio, onis. Laus, dis. Ornamentum, Praeconium, ij.
Commendatio, onis. Collaudatio, onis. Hymnus, ni. m. ge. Gloria, ae. foe. ge.
Louange. S. Praise gotten of victory. Adorea, ae. foe. g. Gloire and triomphe
de victoire. Call. Praise worthy. Laudabilis, e. Digne de louange. S. To praise
one. Adorno, as. Benedico, is. Commendo, as. Extollo, is. Laudo, as. Orno, as.
Probo, as. Suborno, as. Suborior, iris. Astruere laudem alicui, Benedicere
alicui, Collaudare, Co^cedere laudem alicui, Prosequi laudibus, Laude^ alicui
dare, Laudibus tollere, Laudibus far, Habere lauds de aliquo. Lover
quelqu'vn. S.

To praise, or laud one highly. Canere aliquem aut lauds alicuius, Cantare
aliquem, Cumulare aliquem multis laudibus apud aliquos, Decantare, Dilaudare,
Extollere verbis, Far ad, vel in coelum, Far in astra, In prima
commendatione ponere aliquem, Onerare laudibus, Sonare laude^ alicuius. Lover
fort and haultement aucun.

Praise by value. Aestimo, as. Estimer, priser. S. Praise ye the lord.
Alleluyah, Laudate dominum. Praise together, or with other. Collaudo, as.
Collauder. S. To be praised, and commended. Laude^ far, Laudem inuenire,
Laudibus affici, Ornari laud, Gloriam capere. Estre love. S.

Praised. Compos laudis. Praised, or valued. Aestimatus, a, um. Prise. S.
Praised to be. Reportare decus, vel laude^. vt supra. Prane a fyshe. Carides,
dis. Saige cocque. Pals. Prate, or to babble, and clatter. Fabulari, Nugari,
Garrire, Nugas dicere. Iaser. S. Prater, pratler, or a babbler. Argutator,
oris. m. ge. Nugator, toris. Garrulus. Iaseur. S. Prate, or to chatte pertely.
Argutor, aris. Iaser, Caqueter. S. Prating, or babbling. Garulitas, tatis. f. g.
Iasement. S. Praunce. Sterno, is.* Pourboundir. Pals. Praunsing horses.
Excussores equi, Sternaces equi. Virg. Preach. Concionor, aris. Praedico, cas.
Prescher. S. Preacher. Concionator, ris. Ecclesiastes, tae. m. ge. Praedicator,
toris. m. g. Prescheur qui fait sermon a vne assemblee. S. Preaching, or
telling openly. Praedicatio, onis. f. g. Concio, onis. f. g. Predication. S.
Preaty, or fit. Elegans, it is. Lepidus, a, um. Mignon. Preaty little one.
Paruulus, a, um. Paruus, ua, uum. Modicus, ca, cum. Exiguus, a, uum. Minutus,
ta, tum. Pusillus, la, lum. Petit. S. Very preaty, or little. Tantillus, la,
lum. Perexiguus, ua, uum. Paruulus, la, lum. Fort petit. S.

Preaty taunte, or quippe. Argutiola, lae. foe. ge. Preately. Lepide. Preceade,
or to go before. Anteeo, is, iui. Praecedo, dis. Praeco, is. Antecedo, dis.
Preceder. S. Precepte. Mandatum, ti. Praeceptum, ti. Praescriptu^, ti. n. g.
Precepte. S. Precious. Preciosus, a, um. Pretiosus, a, u^. Pretieux. To be more
precious. Pretio antecedere. Estre plus pretieux. S.

Precious stone. Gemma, ae. Lapillus, li. Margarita, ae. f. g. Pierre
precieuse. S. Et Gemmarius, ij. Lapidarius, rij. A setter of precious stones,
or a lapipidarie. Un lapidaire. S. Et Gemmo^s, a, u^. Full of precious stones.
Precious stone found in an Egles neaste. Aetides, vel Aetites, it is. m. g.
Plin. Lib. 36. cap. 23. Et lib. 37. cap. 11. and Iul. Sol. cap. 50. Whose
virtue is wonderful, as well for a woman with child, as for the trial of a
thief. Read Diosc. lib. 5. Precisely. Praecise. Preciseement. Call.
Predecessor. Qui ante nos decessit, sieve mortuus est. Predecesseur. Our
predecessors, or ancestors. Maiores nostri. Nous predecesseurs ou ancestres.
S.

To predestinate. Praedestino, as. Destino, nas. Predestiner. S.

Predestinate by God. A deo designatum and constitutum. Predestine de Dieu. S.
Things predestinate. A deo designata and constituta. Bud. ex Cic. Chooses
predestinees. S.

Predestinacion. Praedestinatio, onis. foem. ge. Predestination. S Predicate.
Praedico, is. Predire. S. Predication. Praedicatio, onis. f. ge. Predication.
S. Preeminence. Praefectura, ae. Praerogatiua, ae. foe. ge. Preeminence. S.
Preeminence in rule. Imperiu^, rij. n. g. Seigneurie. S. Preeminence to have.
Primas tenere, Principatum tenere. Estre le principale. S. Preface, or prologue
of a book. etc. Prologus, gi. Exordium, dij. n. g. Praefatio, onis. f. ge.
Preface ou prologue d' un liver. S. Prefer. Praeferro, rs. Antefero, rs,
tuli. Antepono, is. Praepono, nis. Preferrer, and plus estimer. S.
Preferrement. Honoris gradus. Prefixe, or to prescribe before hand. Praefinio,
is. Praescribo, is. Prefinir. Call. Prefire. S. Prefixed. Praefinitus, a, um.
Praefixus, a, um. Time constituted, and prefixed. Constitum and praefixum
tempus.

Pregnante. Praegnans, it is. om. ge. Empraignant. Pals. A pregnant, or sharp
wit. Acre, vel acutu^ ingenium.

Pregnane token. Auspicium liquidum.* Prejudice. Praeiudicium, ij. n. g.
Prejudice. S. Which is contrary to the law. It may be also taken for a
sentence once decided and determined, which remains afterward for a general
rule and example to determine and discuss semblablye: Or else it may be as the
ruled cases and matters of the law be called Bookecases, recited in the
years, which be as precidentes. To prejudice, or to hurt one. Praeiudicare
alicui, Da^no esse vel detrime^to. Preiudicier a aucun.

This would be prejudicial, or hurtful to me. Hoc mihi damno esset, vel
detrime^to. Hoc mihi damn osum esset vel detrimentosum, Hoc esset mihi
captiosum. Ce la me seroit preiudiciable. S.

Prelacie. Antistitium, ij. Praesulatus, us, ui. Primatus, tus. m. g.
Prelature. S. Prelate. Antistes, stitis. Praesul, sulis. Prelat. S.
Premeditate, or to think before of a thing. Praemeditor, taris* Premediter. S.
Premeditation, or thinkinge before of any thing. Praemeditatio, onis. foe. g.
Premeditation. S. Premonishe, or to warn before. Praemoneo, es. Admonester and
aduertir parauant. Call. Premonished, or warned before. Praemonitus, ta, tum.
Admonneste parauant. Call. Et Praemonitus, tus. m. g. Premonitio^, or
admonition. Admonition. Preoccupation. Praeoccupatio, onis. Occupatio, onis. f.
g. Preoccupation. S. It is also a certain figure in rethorike, or a dark
speaking, as when we will say, I will not tell or speak of his cruelty,
roberie, theft, usury, or murder, and yet thereby couertlye the matter is
detected, or made more suspicious. Prepare. Adorno, as. Apparo, as. Comparo,
as. Instruo, is. Orno, as. Paro, as. Praeparo, as. Procingo, is. Accuro, as.
Praesterno, nas. Preparer. S. Prepare a navy. Moliri classem. Virg. To prepare
a place. Moliri locu^. Preparer un lieu.

Prepare for war. Bellum instruere, vel moliri. Prepare necessaries for
journey. Viaticor, aris. Viaticum parare. Plaut. Prepare often. Parito, as.
freq. Plaut. Prepare often for vitayles. Obsonito, as. Opsonito, tas. frequent.
Prepare to speak. Dicturio, is. verb. Meditatiuum caret supinis. Note that all
verbes ending in Turio, as. Amaturio, Cacaturio, Coenaturio, Dicturio, And
such other be as verbes preparatiues, having desire and entente to do that
that their voices and significations mean.

Prepare vitayles. Obsono, as. Opsono, as. Opsonor, aris. Fair provision de
viandes. Call. Prepare war. Bellum moliri. Colum. Preparation. Praeparatio,
onis. f. g. Praeparatus, tus. m. genesis Preparation. S. Preparation for journey,
as money, vitayles. etc. Viaticum, ci. n. g. Et Viaticus, a, um. That which is
prepared for journey. Vide provision, for. etc. Preparation for vitayles.
Obsonatus, us. Opsonatus, us. m. ge. And the thing prepared is. Obsonium, ij.
Opsonium, ij. Which is all kind of vitayle except bread, and drink. Vide
provision. To do a thing with preparation. Praeparato facere. Fair quelque
chose auec preparation. S.

Prepared. Procinctus, a, um. Paratus, ta, tu^. Prepare. Prepe^ce, or to
forecast curiously. Accuratu^ habere Preposterous, out of order. Praeposterus,
a, um. Prepostere. Et Praeposteri homines, Be such parsons as do all things
out of order. Prerogative and advantage. Praerogatiua, ae. f. g. Prerogative
and auantage. S. Prescience, or knowledge before what shall happen Prognosis,
is. foe. genesis Prescribe. Praescribo, is. Praestituo, is. Prescrire. S.
Prescription. Mos, ris. Praescriptio, nis. Praescriptu^, ti, Ritus, us. Vsus et
authoritas. Bud. Prescription. Prescription of an hundredth years. Praescriptio
temporis memoriam excedentis, vel secularis. Prescription de cent ans. S. Prese
of people. Caterua, ae. Co^pressio populi. Corona, nae. foe^ ge. Frequentia,
iae. f. g. Press, soulle, To prese. Premo, is. Presser. S.

Presence. Praesentia, ae. f. g. Presence. S. To hyde him self from the
presence of his master. Ex conspectu heri abdere se. Se cacher, and euiter la
presence du maistre. S.

In my presence. Ante oculos, Coram me, Sub oculis. E^ ma presence. S.

Present. Praesens, it is. Instans, it is. Qui est present. S. Present occasion.
Ostentata occasio. Present, or a gift. Apophoretum, ti. Strena, ae. Xenium,
ij. Munus, Oblatum, Donum, ni. n. g. Un present. S. Et Munusculum, li.
Xeniolu^, li. Corolla rium, rij. n. ge. Petit present. S. A little present.
Very great and rich presents. Dona amplissima. Fort grans and fort riches
presens. S.

Present, that a town geues to a prince, or magistrate. Honorarium, rij. n.
genesis Un present de ville faict a un prince ou magistrate. S. To give presents
to a prince. Principem donis colere. Fair presens a un prince. S.

Prese^tes, or gifts. Auxilia fere^taria. Presens, dons. S A party yt gives
prese^ts to judges. Aduersarius fere^tarius. Un party qui fait des presens aux
iuges. S

Present to be. Adsu^, es. Adesse praesens, vel coram, Intersum, es.
Repraesentare se, Praesto esse. Estre present. Present or to show him self
before one. Apparco, es, ui. Offerre se alicui, Obuiam alicui obsistere, Vultu^
alicuius subire. Se presenter deua^t quelqu'vn. To present before one.
Praesentare, Offerre, Sistere, In conspectum dare. Presenter. S.

To present him self. Apud acta nomen dare, In officio actuario nomen inter
prouocatores, aut prouocatos edere vel profiteri. Bud. Se presenter. S

To present him self to the people. In conspectu^ populi se committere. Se
presenter au peuple. S.

Present to be amongst others. Interuenio, is.* Present to be before the eyes.
Obuersor, aris. vt Obuersari oculis, vel ante oculos. To be present before the
eyes. Presently, or at this present. Ad praesens, In praesentia,
Impraesentiarum, Pour le present. S. Preservation. Praeseruatio, onis. foe. ge.
Perot. Preservative, or that which keeps, and maintains health. Amuletum,
ti, n. g. Preseruatis. S. Et Antidotum, ti. n. g. Idem. But Amuletum, Is a
preservative to hang about the neck against poison, And Antidotum, is to be
eaten as treacle. etc. Preserve. Praeseruo, as. Conseruo, as. Tueor, ris.
Seruo, as. Preserver. S. Preserve, or to keep in health. Sospito, as. Garder
sain. Call. Preserve meats in good season, sauoure, or taste. Condio, is. Vide
powder. To be preserved. Defensum esse, Conseruatum esse. Estre preserve. S.

Preserved. Praeseruatus, a, um.* Preserved in health. Sospes, it is. Saved from
danger. Sauue d' un danger. Call. Preserver. Seruator, ris. m. g. Qui sauue and
deliure. And she that saves, preserves, or delivers. Seruatrix, cis. foe.
ge. Celle qui. etc. Preserving. Seruatio, onis. f. g.* Preserving in health.
Sospitalis, e. om. g. Salutaire. President. Praeses, idis. com. ge. President.
S. President of a counsel. Prytanis, Erat Prytanis summus Athenis
magistratus, Et princeps consilij. Rogator sententiarum. B. Le president, Celuy
qui demand les opinions. S. President of a province. Eparcus, Prouinciae
praeses President, or chief to be. Praesideo, es. Presider. S. Press. Prelu^,
i. Torcular, ris. Torculare, ris. Torculum, li. n. ge. Press ou pressoire. S.
Et Torculus, la, lum.* vel Torcularius, a, um. Pertaining to a press. Prelum,
li. Is as well for cappers as for printers. Torcular, Is for crabbes, grapes.
etc. Press for clothes, or garments. Vestiarium, ij. n. ge. Casse, ou arche a
garder habilleme^s. H. Press. Pals. To press. Comprimo, is. Premo, is, ssi.
Prelo premere. Presser. S.

To press a soldier. Auctorare militem, Sacramento obligare, Stipendio
obligare. Obliger par gages. S.

Press down. Deprimo, is. Supprimo, is. Abbaisser. Press hard together.
Stringo, is, xi. Apprimo, is. Press out. Exprimo, is. Pressoirer. S Press
together. Coarcto, as. Presso, as. Stringo, gis. Enserrer. S. Pressed. Pressus,
a, um. Press. S. Pressed down. Suppressus, a, um. Depressus, a, um. Abbaisse.
S. Pressed to be, with a fall of a thing or a wayghte. Opprimi casu, vel
ruina. Pressing. Pressura, ae. Pressus, us. m. g. Pressement. S. Pressed and
ready. Promptus, ta, tum. Explicatus, ta, tum. Expeditus, ta, tum. Pressed and
appareille. S. To be priest and ready. In expedito esse. Estre pressed and
appareille. S.

To be priest and ready to his master in every place. Hero omnibus in locis
praesto esse. Estre pressed a son master en tout lieu. S.

I am ready priest. Paratus, vel apparatus sum. Ie suis tout pressed. S.

He is priest, or ready to defend the cause. Ad defendendam causam adest. Il
est pressed. etc. S.

We are priest or ready. Nulla est in nobis mora. Nous sommes prests. S.

Pressed money. Optio, onis. m. ge. Authoramentum, ti. neut. genesis Presume.
Adscisco, scis* Arrogo, as. Audeo, es. Praesumo, is. Vsurpo, as. Presumer. S.
To presume of him self. Arrogare sibi. Nimium sibi tribuere. Presumer de soy.
S.

Presumption. Arrogantia, ae. Insolentia, ae. Praesumptio, onis. Audacia, ae.
f. g. Vsurpatio, onis. foe. ge. Presomption. S. Presumptions, or conjectures.
Suspiciones praesumptae, Iudicia anticipata, Opiniones praesu^ptae.
Suspiciones. Presomtio^s, Conjectures. S. Presumptuous. Arrogans, it is.
Insolens, it is. Presomptueux. S. Presumptuously. Arroganter, Insolenter.
Presomptueusement. S. Presuppose, or to feign in mind. Fingo, gis.
Presupposer. S. Presuppose it be so. Pone vel fac ita esse, Finge ita esse.
Presuppose qu'ainsi soit. S. Pretense, or color of a thing. Obtentus, tus. m.
ge. Pretexte. S. Under the pretense of this name Philosophy, they follow
vain study, and obscurity of tongue and living. Obtentu philosophiae
nominis, inutile otium, and linguae vitaeque tenebras sequuntur. Soubz ombre
and pretexte ou couleur de la philosophy.

Pretend. Praetendo, is. Obtendo, dis. Tendo, dis. Intendo, dis. Pretendre. S.
Two pretend, or require one debte. Duo praetendunt vnum debitum. Ils sont
deux qui pretendent vne mesme debte.

Pretermitte, or to omit or pass over. Praetermitto, it is. Omitto, it is.
Pretermettre, ou omettre. S. Pretermission, pretermitting, or omitting.
Praetermissio, onis. Omissio, onis. foe. ge. Pretermission ou omission. S.
Prevail. Praeualeo, es. Preualoir. S. Preuarication. Praeuaricatio, onis. f.
g. Preuaricatio^. It is a collusion done in law, albeit against the equity
of the law, whereby the one party suffers the other to obtain his suite, to
the intent to hurt or endomage some other, or else it is a swaruing from the
true and right way leaving ye vnspoke^ which should be said, or it is a brief
and light touching of a matter, which ought to be deliberatly, summarily, and
plainly spoken of. Prevent. Antecapio, is. Anteuenio, is. Anteuerto, is.
Anticipo, as. Exuerto, is. Intercipio, is. Obuia^ ire. Occupo, as. Praecipio,
is. Praeripio, is. Praesumo, is. Praeuenio, is. Surripio, is. Praeoccupo, as.
Preuenir S. Prevent judgment. Repraesentare decretum. Prevented. Praeuentus,
ta, tum. Occupatus, ta, tum. Anticipatus, ta, tum. Preuenu. S. Preventing.
Occupans, it is. Praeueniens, it is. om. g. Preuenant. S. Prevention. Praeuentio,
onis. Occupatio, onis. Antecipatio, onis. f. g. Prevention. S. Price or value.
Censio, onis. Precium, ij. Pretium, tij. Valor, ris. m. g. Pris ou valeur. S.
The price increases. Plurimum pretio accidit. Crescit pretium. Le pris
accroist. S.

The price is abated. Pretium retro abijt. Le pris est reuale. S.

To be of an higher price. Pretio antecedere. Estre a plus hault pris. S.

To bye at a less price. Breuiori summa emere, vel minori pretio. Acheter a
moindre pris. S.

To sell at, or for a small price. Ve^dere paruo vel vili pretio. Vendre a vil
pris. S.

To bear away the price, and victory. Palmam adipisci, Palmam possidere,
Accipere palmam, Palmam far, Auferre gloriam. Emporterle pris and la
victoire. S.

Pryced. Licitatus, a, um. Taxatus, a, um. Prise. S. Et Aestimatus, a, um.
Indicatus, a, um. Idem. Pryced to be. Liceo, es. Neut. Indicor, caris. Estre
mis a pris, Estre prise. S. Pride, or to set price. Liceor, eris. Taxo, as.
Licitor, aris. Imponere pretiu^, Pecunia aestimare. Mettre pris, priser. S.
Pr^ser, or he that settes price. Aestimator, toris. m. ge. Priseur. S. Pryces
extreme, or unreasonable. Prodigiosa pretia. Prysing, or setting price.
Licitatio, onis. Indicatio, onis. Indicatus, tus. Aestimatio, onis. foem. genesis
La prisee. S. Prick. Aculeus, i. Stimulus, li. m g. Aguillon. S. Prick, or
mark. Meta, ae. f. g. Marque. Pals. Prick, or to move forward, or to
provoke. Agito, as. Compungo, is. Pungo, is, pupugi. Stimulo, as. Admouere
alicui stimulos, Stimulos subdere. Extimulo, as. Instigo, as. Aguillonner,
piquer. S. Prick eftsoon. Repungo, is. Idem. Prick wrytinges with a pen to
deface them, or put out words. Dispungo, is. Effacer. S. Pricked, or stinged.
Aculeatus, a, um. Stimulatus, a, um. Stimule. S. Pricker, or stinger.
Stimulator, ris. m. g. Stimuleur, Stimulateur. S. Stimuleus, a, u^. Any thing
pricked. Pricker, stirer, or prouoker to an act. Stimulator, ris. Instinctor,
toris. Extimulator, toris. Instigator, toris. m. g. Aguillonneur, Stimulateur.
S. Pricking. Stimulatio, onis. Incitamentum, ti. Instinctus, tus. m. g.
Aguillonnement. S. Pricking in the body, as with worms. Vermina, number. n. g.
Plin. Verminatio, Is the self passion, but most kyndly in beasts. Pride.
Ambitio, onis. Elatio, onis. Fastus, us. Insolentia, ae. Pompa, ae. Proteruia,
ae. Proteruitas, it is. Superbia, ae. Supercilium, ij. Ferocitas, it is. Sublatio
animi. Argueil. S. Pride to abate and lay away. Supercilium ponere, vel
deponere. Prydes fyshe. Lumbrici, orum, m. g.* Prye, or to watch or spy.
Speculor, aris. Guetter, Espier. S. Pryer, or loker after some, or that
watches. Speculator, toris. m. ge. Un epsy and guet. S. Priest. Presbyter,
ri. Sacerdos, it is. Com. ge. Sacrificus, Sacricola, Flamen, Mysta, vel Mystes,
Sacris operatus. Pres^tre. S. Prestre. Call. Prebstre. Priesthode.
Presbyteratus, us. * Sacerdotium, ij. n. g. Prebstrisse. Call. Priestly.
Sacerdotaliter, More sacerdotis. Priestly, or pertaining to a priest.
Sacerdotalis, le. om. ge. Apartenant a sacrificateur ou presbtre. Call. Prying
knaves. Limaces viri, per Plaut. in Bac. Primacy. Primatus, us. m. g. Primace.
S. Primate, or chief. Primas, it is. m. g. Un primat. S. Pryme time, or spring
time. Ver, ris. Annus renascens. Printemps. S. Primerose. Arthritica, ae.
Primula veris, Primulus flos, Verbascum, and Verbasculum minus. Dod. Herba
paralysis. Offic. Primitive. Primatiuus, a, um. Primitif. S. Prince, or a
princess. Princeps, pis. Com. ge. Prince ou princess. S. Prince, or head
ruler. Dynasta, ae. Dynastes. Puissant seigneur. H. Prince, or head ruler of a
little region. Regulus, li. m. ge. Prince. H. Princely house. Palatium, ij. n.
g. Vide Palayce. Princely, or pertaining to a prince. Principalis, le.
Appartenant a prince. S. Princes, or chief governors of a realm. Megistanes,
Purpurati, Magnates, quorum est magna potentia and authoritas. Princes, ou
premiers gouuerneurs d'vn royaulme. H. Principal. Potissimus, a, u^.
Praecipuus, a, um. Principalis, e. Summus, a, um. Principal. S. To be
principal and chief. Primas parts in re aliqua agere, Principatum tenere.
Estre le principal and plus excellent. S.

The principal point of a matter. Summa quaestio. Le principal point d'vne
matiere. S.

Principal of a college. Scholarcha, Gymnasiarcha. Principal de college. S.
The principal, or chief of an action. Summa causae, Actionis caput, Quaestio
summa, Inte^tio, Controuersia princeps. Bud. Le principal. S.

To get the principal without dispense. Sententiam rei petitae auferre, sed
sine solemni corollario. Bud. Gaigner le principal sans despens. S.

The principal part. Signifer controuersiae, and cuius auspicijs summa causae
regitur. La principale party. S.

Leaf not only the principal, but also fruits and despenses. Non modo in
rem controuersam offendere, sed etia^ in omnes litis accessiones. Bud. Perdre
le principal, fruicts and despens. S.

Principally. Apprime, Potissime, Potissimu^, Praecipue, Principaliter, Sum,
Maxim, Praesertim, Cu^ primis, Primu^, In primis. Principalement.
Principality. Principatus, us. Primatus, us. mas. g. Principalite. Pals.
Printe or mark. Impressio, onis. foe. genesis Empreinte and marque. S. Printe of
the foot. Vestigium, ij. n. genesis La marque du pied. S. Printe, or bronde of a
hoate iron. Stigma, it is. n. ge. Printe. Imprimo, is. Excudo, is. Imprimer. S.
Printe eftsoon, or new again. Recudo, dis.* It is rather to work again, or
new forge. Reforger. S. To printe in the mind. Affigere animo, Inculcare.
Imprimer en l' entendement. S.

Prynte, or bronde with a hoate iron. Tudiculo, las. Printer. Chalcographus, i.
Excusor, oris. Librarius, rij. Typographus, phi, and Impressor, oris. m. genesis
Sic enim loquutus est Hermolaus, sic docti omnes nostri seculi. Imprimeur. S.
Printing. Chalcographia, ae. Typographia, ae, foe. g. Imprimerie. S. Printing
iron. Tudicula, lae. f. g. Pryse, pray, or spoil gotten in war. Castrense
peculium. Prison. Carcer, ris. Custodia, ae. Ergastulum, li. Vinclum, Vinculum,
Phylaca, cae. f. g. Prison. S. To be in prison. In vinculis esse. Estre en
prison. S.

To cause to die in prison. Reatu diuturno inter custodias enecare. Bud. Fair
mourir en prison. S.

To deliver out of prison. Aliquem ex custodia eripere. Deliurer de prison. S.

To put in prison. Dare in custodiam, In custodiam tradere, Condere in
carcerem, Mandare vinculis. Mettre en prison. S.

To hold, or keep in prison. In vinculis vel custodia habere. Tenir en prison.
S.

To open the prysons. Ergastula soluere. Ouurir les prisons. S.

Prisoner. Vinctus, a, um. Carceratus, Incarceratus, Custodia clausus,
Captiuus. Prisonnier. S. Prisoner, or captive in wars. Captiuus, a, um.
Dedititius, a, um, Captif. S. Prisoners for debtes. Iudicati pecuniae,
Custodiae non criminis insimulati, Pecuniae damnati. Bud. Prisoniers pour
debts. S. Private. Priuatus, a, um. Prive, apartina^t a un chascun. Private
bayne, Balneum, i. n. g. Bain. S. Balneolum, li. neut. genesis Iuuen. diminut. A
little bayne. Private letters. Idiographae literae. Private person. Priuatus,
a, um. Idiota, ae. com. ge. Vne person priuee. S. Private writing.
Idiographum. Privation. Steresis.*Priuatio, Viduitas, atis. foe. g. Privation.
S. Privation of members, or senses. Stupor, ris. m. g. Stupentia, vel stupida
membra. Members that suffer privation or numbnes, or be numbed. Vide Numbed.
Privy, or secret. Clandestinus, a, um. Occultus, a, um. Secretus, a, um.
Arcanus, a, um. Secret. S. Privy counseilour. Intimus de consilijs, A
secretis, Symmista, ae. Vide Secretary. Privy hatred. Latens odium, Simultas,
it is. foe. ge. Vne haine couuerte. S. Privy judgment. Iudiciu^ repositum, vel
repostu^. Privy membre, both of man and woman. Genitale, Pudendum, Verendum,
di. neut. ge. Les parties honteuses. H. Privy membre of a man. Penis, nis.
Muto, onis. Coals, lis. Veretrum, tri. Fascinus virilis, Caulis, lis. Neruus,
ui. Tentum, ti. Verpus, pi. Virile, lis. Virile membrum, Mentula, lae. Virga,
ae. Priapus, pi. m. ge. Verge, vit. H. Privy membre of a woman. Natura, ae.
Muliebria, Cunnus, ni. Interfemineum, nei. Volua, uae. Vulua, uae. foe. ge. Le
con. H. Privy place. Latebra, ae. f. ge. Vne cachette. S. Latebrosus, a, um.
Full of privy places. Plein de cachettes. S. Privy token, or watch word.
Tessera, ae. foe. ge. Mot du guet. S. Privilege. Priuilegium, gij. Vacatio,
onis. foe. genesis Privilege. S. Priuileged place, or refuge. Perfugium, gij. n.
genesis Refuge. Call. To do any thing privily, or secretly. Occulte aliquid
facere. Fair quelque chose secrettement. S.

Privily. Clam, Celatim, Clandestino, Occulte, Priuatim, Latebrose, Furtim,
Secreto, Tacit, Clanculum, Latenter, In priuato. Secrettement, en cachette. S.
Privileged, or which has a privilege. Priuilegiarius, a, u^. Priuilegie, ou
qui ha quelque privilege. Not to be privileged. Iure communi esse, and
translatitio. N' estre point priuilegie. S.

Priuitie. Mysterium. rij. n. ge. Mystere. S. Proceade, or to go forward.
Pergo, is, perrexi. Procedo, is. Proceder, and aller auant. S. The matter does
neither proceade, nor go forward. Res non procedit. La chose ne proceed
point, and ne va point en auant. S.

It is needful to proceade warely. Cauto est opus. Il fault proceder
cautement. S.

To proceade against all order, and form of pleading. Dissoluere mores,
Instituta, and formulas vsusque iudiciorum. Proceder contre tout order, et
form de plaidoirie. S.

Process. Processus, us. m. g. Cic. Process, or strife in law. Controuersia,
ae. Lis, it is. Dica, cae. f. g. Process. S. Process verbale. Renuntiatio, ouis.
foe. ge. Un process verbal. S. To have process against any. Litigare. Auoir
process contr^ aucun. S.

To get process for some man. Litem alicui intendere. Dresser un process a
aucun. S.

To put in process, or suite. Formulam intendere, Dicam alicui impingere,
Adducere hominem in ius, Dicam scribere, Litem alicui intendere. Mettre en
process. S.

To lease his process. Causam amittere, Litem perdere, vel amittere, Lite
cadere, Causa cadere. Perdre son process. S.

Process criminal. Capitis, vel capitale iudicium. Process criminel. S.
Proclamation. Proclamatio, onis. f. g. Proclamation. And he that publishes
proclamations. Praeco, nis. mas. genesis Proclamation for the trussing up of
bag, and baggage to remove the camp. Conclamata vasa. Caesar. To publishe,
or set abroad proclamations. Edicta in populu^ iacere. Fair and publier des
edicts.

Proclaim. Proclamo, as. Proclamer. S. To proclaim to trus bag, and baggage
for the removing of the camp. Conclamare vasa. Sonner pour lever son camp. H.

Proclaim a just, or turney. Decursionem indicere. Proclaim an exigent.
Proscribere exilium.* Proclaim sale of any thing. Proscribo, is. Cic. Proclaimed
to be. Renuncior, aris. Procreate, or to get. Procreo, as. Procreer. S.
Procreated. Prodreatus, a, um. Cic. Procreation. Procreatio, onis. foe. ge.
Procreation. S. Procreatour. Procreator, oris. m. g. Procreateur. S.
Procreatresse. Procreatrix, cis. f. g. Procreatrice. S. Procture. Negotiorum
curator, Procurator, ris. m. ge. Procureur. S. Procuratorius, a, u^. Pertaining
to a proctoure. Apartenant a procureur. Call. Proctoure in law. Accionarius,
ij.*Vindex, icis. Cognitor causae. Le procureur en la cause. S. Procuration.
Epitrope, Procuratio, onis. foe. genesis Procuration. S. Procure. Adigo, is.
Excito, as. Procuro, as. Solicito, as. Procurer. S. To procure peace.
Solicitare pacem. Procurer la paix. S.

To procure evil to him self. Suere aliquid capiti suo. Se procurer quelque
mal. S.

Prodigal. In da^do nimius, Prodigus, a, u^. Asotus, a, u^. Damnosus, a, u^.
Nepos, it is. m. g. Prodigue. Prodigal in gifts. Largitor, ris. masc. genesis
Prodigue en dons. S. Prodigally. Prodige. Prodigalement. S. To spend his
goods prodigally. Prodigo, is. Prodiguer ses biens. S.

Prodigallitie. ^ssusio, onis. Prodigalitas, it is. Proluuium, ij. Prodigentia,
ae. f. g. Prodigalite. S. Prodigality of g^^tes. Largitio, onis. f. g.
Prodigalite de dons. S. Prodigious. Prodigiosus, a, um. Prodigialis, le. om.
ge. Prodigieux. S. Prodigiously. Prodigiose, Prodigialiter. Prodigieusement. S.
Proffer made to one. Conditio, onis. Oblatum, ti. n. ge. Offer qu'on a faict a
aucun. S. Vide Offer. Proffer. Exhibeo, es. Offero, rs. Repraesento, as.
conditionem far. Offrir. S. Proffer to speak. Hisco, scis. Inch. Cic.
Profess. Profiteor, eris. Fair profession. S. To profess some thing. Aliquid
profiteri. Fair profession de quelque chose. S.

Professed. Professus, a, um. Ovid. Professed newely, or lately entered into
profession. Neophytus. Profession. Professio, onis, f. g. Profession. S.
Profession of religion. Hierodulia. Bud. Profession de religion. To profess
religion. Verba sese deuouentis effari, Verba solemnia sese sacris peristylijs
deuonentium effari praeeunte hetaeriarcha, vel adige^te antistite, In manum
conuenire antistitis, In mancipio antistitis esse coepisse, Sacramento
sodalitio dicere, Sacramentum sacrae sodalitatis inire. Fair profession de
religion. S.

Proof. Experientia, ae. Periclitatio, Periculu^, Probatio, Specimen,
Tentamentum, Tentame^, inis, Tentatio, nis. Experimentum, ti. n. ge. Preuue. S.
The reason, and proof of any doubtful matter. Argumentum, ti. n. g. Raison,
and preuue de quelque chose doubteuse. S.

Proof by writing. Memoria tabularia, and consignata, Literarum memoria. Preuue
par escript. S. Proof by witnesses. Memoria hominum. Preuue par tesmoings. S.
Proof, or assaye in exercise, as in casting the bar, and such like.
Progymnasma, atis. n. ge. Proof, or trial of money. Spectatio pecuniae. Cic.
Profit. Commodum, di. Emolumentum, ti. Fructus, us. Profectus, us. Res, i.
Vsus, us. Vtilitas, it is. Quaestus, us. Lucrum, cri. n. g. Prouffit. S. Little
profit and gain. Lucellum, li. n. ge. Petit prouffit and gain. S.

The profit of labor. Operaepretium, tij. n. g. Le prouffit du labeur. S.

It is our profit. Ex vsu nostro est, In rem nostram est, Interest nostra,
Nostra refert. Ex re nostra est. C' est nostre prouffit. S.

It is thy profit, or for thy profit. Ex vsu tuo est, Tua istuc refert, Ex re
tua est. C'est ton prouffit ou pour to^ prouffit. S.

Tell him that it is for his profit. Ita rem illi esse dicito. Die luy que
c'est pour son prouffiit. S.

To receive profit. Co^modum consequi, Fructum ex aliquo capere, vel far,
Vtilitates ex re aliqua accipere, Vtilem aliquem habere, Commodum capere ex re
aliqua. Receuoir prouffit.

Profit taken of other men's goods. Vsusfructus, us. Et sic diffinitur ab
Vlpi. Iuriscons. Est ius alienis rebus vtendi, fruendique salua rerum
substantia. Profit. Conduco, cis. Proficio, is. Promereor, eris. Promoueo,
ues. Promereo, es. Profectum facere. Frugem facere. Prouffiter. S. To go
forward, and profit greatly in s^udy. Facere in studijs progressum, Procedere
studijs. S' aduancer en l' estude, and fort prouffiter. S.

He has written that he has profited much in Greek. Scripfit se in literis
graecis magnu^ progressum habere. Il a escript qu'il auoit ia fort prouffite en
Grec. S.

To profit an other. Prodesse alteri, Adiumentum a far, Adiumento esse.
Prouffiter a autruy.

To profit the common wealth some thing. Afferre aliquid ad rempublicam.
Prouffiter quelque chose au commun. S.

To profit some body. Esse lucro, Fructum vtilitatis alicui praebere, Magnum
fructu^ far. Porter prouffit a quelqu'vn. S.

Profitable. Commodus, a, um. Compendiosus, a, u^. Conducibilis, e. Frugi,
indecl. Verus, a, um. Vtilis, e. Fructuosus, a, um. Profitable, and vtile. S.
Very profitable. Perutilis, le, om. ge. Fort vtile. S.

It is profitable, and necessary. Conducit, Confert, Expedit, Vtile est. Il est
vtile, and profitable.

This is profitable. Habet vtilitatem haec res, Compendio est. Cecy est
profitable. S.

Profitable, and trusty servant. Frugi seruus. Profitable thing.
Operaeprecium, tij. neut. gener. Chose vtile. Profitable to be. Prosum, des,
fui, desse. Terent. Profitablenes. Frugalitas, Vtilitas, it is. Commodu^, di,
Commoditas, atis. foe. ge. Vtilite. S. Profitably. Commode, Frugaliter,
Vtiliter, Efficaciter. Prouffitablement. S. To judge more profoundely. Arcanius
aliquid iudicare. Iuger plus profondement. S.

Profunditie, or depenesse. Altitudo, nis. Profunditas, atis. f. g. Profundite.
S. Profunditie. Abyssus, ssi. foe. ge. Progeny. Progenies, ei. Prosapia, ae.
foe. genesis Vide Lineage and race. Progenitoure. Auus, ui. Maiores, rum.
Progenitor, oris. m. g. Progeniteur. S. Progress. Progressus, us. m. g. Cic.
Prohem. Prooemium, ij. Praefatio, onis. foem. genesis Proesme. S. Prohibition.
Interdictum, ti. Vetatio, onis. Inhibitio, onis. f. g. Prohibition. S.
Prohibit. Absterreo, es. Adimere ius, Interdico, cis. Parco, cis. Prohibeo, es.
Veto, tas. Inhibeo, es. Prohiber. S. Prohibited. Vetitus, a, um. Prohibitus, a,
um. Inhibitus, a, um. Prohibe. S. Prolixe. Prolixus, a, um. Prolixe. S.
Prolixly. Prolixe. Prolixement. S. Prologe of an interlude, or play. Prologus,
gi. Pro oemium, mij. Praefatio, onis. f. g. Prologue. S. He which in Comedies
recites ye prologue. Prologus, gi. mas. ge. Celuy qui es comedies recite le
prologue. S.

Prolonge. Extendo, is. Extollo, is. Produco, cis. Protollo, is. Protraho, is.
Prolongo, as. Prorogo, as. Tollo, is. Duco, cis. Propago, as. Prolonger. S. To
prolonge the battle, or war. Bellu^ trahere. Prolonger la guerre. S.

To prolong until the coming of the prince. In aduentum principis trahere.
Prolonger iusques a la venue du prince. S.

To prolonge life. Vitam extendere, vel pertrahere, sieve protrahere, aut
proferre. Prolo^ger la vie.

To prolonge any affair, or business. Rem producere. Prolonger quelque affair.
S.

Prolonge, or to differ from day to day. Ducere diem de die, Procrastino, as.
Diem de die trahere. Differer de iour en iour Call. Prolonge time. Cunctor,
aris. Duco, cis. Moram facere, vel trahere, Propagare tempus. Prolonger le
temps. S. Prolonged. Promotus, a, um. Prolongatus, a, um. Propagatus, a, um.
Productus, a, um. Protractus, a, um. Prolonge. S. Prolonging. Cunctatio,
Procrastinatio, Prorogatio, onis. foe. g. Prolongatio. onis. Prolatio, onis.
Productio, onis. Protractio, onis. Propagatio, onis. Pertractio, onis.
Productio, onis. foem. genesis Prolongement, ou prolongation. S. Prolonging of
time. Temporis propagatio. Prolo^gement de temp^. S. Promise. Condictum, ti.
Pollicitatio, onis. Promissum, ssi. Sponsio, onis. Sponsus, us. Pollicitum, ti.
Promissio, onis. f. g. Promise. S. Promise which one does make unto God.
Sponsio ^oti, Votum, ti. neut. genesis La pr^messe qu'on fait a dieu. S. To
accomplish, or perform his promise. Perficere promissa. Persoluere
promissum, Co^plere. Implere. Accomplir sa promise. S.

Not to keep promise with any. Fidem fluxam gerere, Cum altero fidem mutare.
Destituere aliquem, Fallere fidem. Ne tenir point sa promise a aucun. S.

To make great promises. Benignissime polliceri, Prolixe promittere. Fair
grandes promesses. S.

To satisfy his promise. Fidem liberare. Satisfaire a sa promise. S.

To fail of promise. Destituere, Destituere co^dictum, No^ praestare
promissum. Non stare promissis, Fidem suam labefactare. Faill^r de promise.

Promise made by faith, or writing. Cautio, onis. Stipulatio, onis.
Stipulatus, us. masc. genesis Vide Stipulation. To promise. Astri^gere fide^,
Co^dico, cis. Depaciscor, sceris. Dare fidem, vel Obstringere, Offero, r^.
Polliceor, ris. Praestare fidem, Promitto, is. Recipio, is. Spo^deo, es.
Suscipere fide^. Promettre.

To promise often. Pollicitor, aris. Promettre souuent. S.

To promise mountains and vallays, mountains of gold, or great things.
Montes aureos polliceti. Promettre mons and veulx. S.

Promise faith and truth in hand. Dextram dextrae committere. Promise
faithfully. Stipulor, aris. Stipuler. S. To promise to come. Constituere alicui
se venturum. Promettre de ve^ir. S.

To promise with an oath. Dare iusiurandum. Promettre auec serment. S.

Promise gift, price, or reward. Propono, nis. Promise mutually. Conspondeo,
es. Promettre l'vn a l'autre. S. To do that one has promised. Promissum
absoluere, Patrare promissa, Stare promissis. Fair ce qu'on a promis. S.

Thou do promise enough. Been promittis. Tu promez assez. S.

Promise, or undertake for an other. Expromitto, is. Vlpian. Promise to pay
money due before time. Constituere pecuniam. Vlpian. To promise in marriage.
Spondere puellam. Promettre en marriage. S.

Promised. Pollicitus, a, um. Promissus, a, u^. Promis. Promised in marriage.
Desponsatus, a, u^. Desponsus, a, um. Sponsus, a, um. Promis en marriage. S.
Promyser. Promissor, oris. Sponsor, ris. Pollicitator, toris. mas. ge.
Prometteur. S. A great promyser. Largiloquus pollicitator. Grand prometteur. S.

Promote. Promoueo, ues. Proueho, is, xi. Promouuoir. S. Promote to dignity,
or renoume. Nobilito, tas. Nobilem facio, Dignitatem addo. Anoblir. Call. To
promote any to some estate, or dignity. Pro uehere aliquem ad dignitatem,
Imponere alicui dignationem. Promouuoir aucun a quelque estate and dignite. S.

Promote matter in law. Promello, is. Verbu^ antiquum, quod litem promouere
interpretatur. Promoted. Promotus, a, um. Prouectus, a, um. Promeu. S. Promoted
to estate, or dignity. Promotus ad dignitates, Honoribus auctus. Promeu aux
estats. S. Promotion. Promotio, onis. f. g. Nebriss. Promotoure. Promotor, ris.
m. g. Prompte, at hand, or ready. Alacer, cris, cre. Pro^ptus, a, um. Agilis,
le. om. genesis Prompt. S. Prompte, or to tell an other what to say. Suggero,
ris. Plaut. A prompt Rhetoritian. Extemporalis Rhetor. Prompt Rhetoricien. S.

A prompte courage, and disposed to battayl. Animus alacer ad bellum
suscipiendum. Un courage prompt, and dispose a la guerre. S.

Promptitude. Prothymia, ae. f. g. Promptitude. S. Promptly. Alacriter,
Prompte, Ex tempore, Pro^ptissime. Promptement. S. Promptnes. Promptitudo,
inis. foe. ge. Est facilitas ingenij ad quaeuis ex te^pore expromenda. Call. To
answer promptly. Memoriter respondere. Respondre promptement. S.

To defend promptly, and without demau^ding any delay. In vestigio eodem
actoris intention respondere. Defendre promptement, and sans demander aucun
delay. S.

Prone, or inclined. Pronus, a, um. Inclinatus, a, um. procliuis, ue.
Propensus, a, um. Enclin. S. A mind, or disposition prone to carnal desire.
Ad libidinem procliue ingenium. Un entendement enclin a plaisir charnel. S.

Pronostication. Prognosticon, Diagramma chaldaicum, Prognosis, Praedictio,
onis. foem. gener. Prognostication. S. Pronosticate. Praedico, cis.
Prognostiquer. S. Pronosticatoure. Prognostes, ae. masc. genesis Prognostiqueur.
S. Pronounce. Nuncupo, as. Profero, rs. Pronuntio, as. Prononcer. S. To
pronounce certain words, the which an other repeteth after us. Praeire
verba. Prononcer certaines parolles lesquelles un autre redit apres nous. S.

Pronounce in singing. Procino, is. Pronounce letters. Appellare literas. Cic.
To pronounce a thing in reading. Dicere de scripto, Recitare. Prononcer vne
chose en la lisant. S.

Pronounce often. Edicto, as. Plaut. Pronounce an oration. Agere oratione^.
Prononcer vne oraison. S. Pronounce perfectly and right. Accento, tas.*
Pronouncing. Prolatio, Pronunciatio, onis. foe. g. Prononciation. Call.
Pronouncing in the bottom of the mouth. Coeolstomia. Pronowne. Pronomen,
inis. n. g. Pronom. S. Pronunciation. Vide pronouncing. Pronounciation of
speech pleasauntly made. Venustas, is. foe. ge. Cic. Proper. Peculiaris, e.
Priuatus, a, um. Priuus, a, um. Proprius, a, um. Specialis, e. om. ge. Propre.
S. Proper, and peculier. Praecipuu^. Propre, and peculier. With his own propre
hand. Sua mauu. De sa propre main. S.

Of thine own propre wit. Tuopte ingenio. De ton propre esprit. S.

Proper, feate, and well fashioned. Concinnus, a, u^. Luculentus, a, um.
Scitus, a, um. Elegans, it is. om. genesis Propre, gentil, and bien faconne. S.
Proper man. Graphicus homo. Plaut. Proper owner. Proprietarius, ij. m. g.
Proprietaire. S. Properly. Peculiariter, Proprie, Speciatim, Apt, Accommodate,
Decenter, Condecenter, Apposite. Proprement. S. Properly, or trymme. Concinne,
Dextre, Lucule^ter, Rotunde, Site, Venuste. Proprement, ou gentement. S.
Properly, or well done, made or wrought. Graphicus, a, um. Bien faict. S.
Propernes, or featnes. Co^cinnitas, it is. Habilitas, atis. Condecentia, ae. f.
g. Proprete, and seance. S. Property in goods. Mancipium rei dominiumque.
Bud. La propriete. S. Property of any thing gotten by prescription. Vsus and
authoritas. Propriete de quelque chose acquise par prescription. S. Profane,
or which is not hallowed or adjoined to the temple. Profanus, a, u^. Profane.
S. Profane, or to put holy things to commune uses. Profanum facere, Profano,
as. Profaner. S. To profane the house of a bishop. Religionem e domo
pontificis tollere. Profaner la maison de l' euesque. S.

Profaned. Profanatus, a, um. Profane. S. Profaning. Profanatio, onis. f. g.
Profanation. S. Prophecy, or prophecyeng. Carmen, Prophetia, ae. Vaticinatio,
Vaticinium, Praedictio, onis. foe. ge. Prophetie. S. To prophecy. Cano, is.
Propheto, as. Vaticinor, aris. Profari, Praedicere. Prophetizer.

Prophet, or he which tells of things to come. Propheta, ae. vel Prophets,
tae. Fatidicus, Vates. Qui dit les chooses a aduenir. S. Prophet. Prophetisse.
Prophetissa, ae. Prophetis, idis. Celle qui prophetize. S. Propice or
merciful. Propitius, a, u^. Propice. S. To have judges propice, or merciful.
Propitijs numinibus iudiciorum, and praesentibus vti. Auoir iuges propices. S.

Propitiatory, or for which satisfaction may be made, and God pleased.
Piabilis, le. om. genesis Proportion. Proportio, onis. f. g. Proportion. S.
Proportionally. Proportionaliter. Nebriss. Proportionellement. S. Proporcioned.
Proportionatus, a, um.* Propose. Propono, is. Proposer. S. Proposition.
Protasis, Propositio, onis. f. g. Proposition. S. A proposition is an argument
or matter proposed to be disputed and reasoned upon. Or it is a former
declaration whereof we will treat. A proposition dialectike. Effatum, ti.
Enuntiatu^, ti. n. g. Vne proposition dialectique. S.

Proppe. Ceruus, ui. Pedamen, inis. Fulcimentum, ti. Fultura, ae. Retinaculum,
li. Statume^, inis. Sustentaculum, li. Sublica, ae. Tibicen, inis. Fulcru^,
cri. Adminiculum, li. n g. Un estaye appuy. S. Proppe up. Statumino, as.
Suffulcio, cis. Fulcio, is. Appuyer. S. To proppe up a vine. Pedare, Impedare,
Palare, Statuminare. Eschalasser la vigne. S.

Propped. Fultus, a, um. Nixus, Subnixus, a, um. Appuye. S. Propping up of
vynes. Pedatio, onis. foem. gener. Eschalassement. Call. Proroge. Prorogo, as.
Proroger S. Proroge the parliament. Detrudere comitia. Cic. Proroged.
Prorogatus, a, um. Proroge. Proroging. Prorogatio, onis. f. g. Prorogation. S.
Prose, or any thing not meter, ryme, or verse. Prosa, ae. Prosaica oration,
Soluta oration, Pedestris oration. Prose. S. Proscription, attainder,
condemnation, or outlawerie. Proscriptio, onis. foe. ge. Proscription. S. Et
Proscriptutio, is. Cic. To conspire, or imagen proscription, or to go about the
same. Prospecte. Prospectus, us. mas. genesis Regard. S. Prosper, or to thrive.
Secunda vti fortuna, Vti prospero flatu fortunae. Prosperer. S. To make to
prosper, or to give prosperity. Prosperare, Secundare, Fortunare. Pair
prosperer ou donner prosperity. S.

Prosperity. Prosperitas, tatis. foe. genesis Res secu^dae, Foelicitas, atis.
foe. ge. Prosperity. S. Perfect prosperity. Solida foelicitas. Prosperity
entiere. S.

Prosperous. Dexter, ra, rum. Faustus, a, um. Foelix, cis, Prosper, ra, rum.
Prosperus, a, um. Secundus, a, um. Prospere. Call. Some affirm this distinction
between prosperous and happy, prosperous is properly that which causes or
gives felycitie, happy is yt which receaueth it. Which gives prosperity,
and brings good luck. Prosper, a, u^. Foelix, cis. om. genesis Qui done
prosperity, and port bon heur. S.

Prosperous to make. Secundo, das. Prosperum reddo. Vt supra. Prosperously.
Dextere, Fauste, Prospere, Foeliciter. Prosperement. S. Prostrate to be before
the feet of some body. Iacere alteri ad pedes, Prosterni ad pedes alicuius.
Estre prosterne deuant les pieds de quelqu'vn. S. To prostrate, and to fall
flat upon the ground. Prosternere. Prosterner, and ruer par terre. S.

Proud. Ambitiosus, a, um. Arrogans, it is. Elatus, a, um. Insolens, it is.
Petulans, it is. Proteruus, a, um. Superbus, a, um. Impotens animi. Inflatus, a,
um. Tumidus, a, um. Orgueilleux. S. Proud heart. Animus elatus, vel impote^s.
Terent. Cueur orgueilleux, Superbe. S. Proud speaker. Superbiloquus, a, um.
Nebriss. Proud speaking, hautye, or sturdy speech. Superbiloquentia. foe. ge.
Un superbe parler. S. Proud words. Sesquepedalia verba. Horat. Proud to be.
Ampullor, aris. Attollere superciliu^, Sustollere animos, Superbio, is. Tollere
animos, S' orgueill^r. S. Proud to make. Subdere spiritus. Liu. Proudly.
Arroganter, Ambitiose. Insolenter, Elate, Fastuose, Petulanter, Proterue,
Proteruiter, Superbe. Orgueilleusement. S. Protection. Protectio, onis.*
Tutela, ae. foem. genesis Protection. S. To receive into his protection, and
saufegarde. In fidem suam aliquem recipere. Receuoir en sa protection, and
sauuegarde. S.

Protector. Protector, oris. Hyperaspistes, is, vel, ae. mas. ge. Protecteur.
S. Protest. Protestor, aris. Protester. Pals. Protestation, or an open
declaration of ones mind, or sentence. Protestatio, onis. f. g. Prothonotary,
or chief, or first scribe, or secretary. Protonotarius, rij. m. g. Primus
notarius. Protonotarius and comes palatinus. Do create other notaries.*
Prouable. Probabilis, e. om. ge. Probable. S. Prouably. Probabiliter.
Probablement. S. Proud. Vide supra. After Prostrate where by chance it is put
out of order. Prove. Experior, iris. Facere periculum, Periclitor, aris. Probo,
as. Tento, as. Approbo, as. Prouer. To prove his cause. Iudicibus rem suam
expedire. Prouuer son cas. S.

To prove by reason. Offerre argumentu^. Prouuer par raison. S.

Prove before, or first. Praetento, as. Plin. To prove plainly by wrytinges,
or witnesses. Docere. Bud. Plainement prouner par lettres, ou tesmoings. S.

Prove one false. Refello, is. Cic. Prouuer falsaire. S. It is not easy to
prove. Non est probabile. Il n' est pas aise a prouuer. S.

Proved. Probatus, a, um. Tentatus, a, um. Prouue. S. A proved lie. Manifestum
mendacium.

Proved liar. Manifestus mendacij. Plaut. Proved of all men. Testatus, a, um.
Cic. Proverb. Adagium, ij. Prouerbium, ij. Paroemia, Verbum, by. n. g.
Proverb. H. This is become a proverb. Cessit in prouerbium. Cecy est venu en
proverb. S.

To turn into a proverb which is commonly said in test. In prouerbij
ludicru^ vertere. Tourner en proverb qu' on dit par ieu communeement. S.

Prouffe. Vide Proffe. Provide for any thing. Prospicio, cis. Prouideo, es.
Preuuoir a quelque chose. S. Provide for health. Valitudini seruire. Cic.
Provide for water. Aquor, aris. Virg. Provide, or to forsee or beware of.
Praecaueo, es. Caueo, es. Prouuoir, and se donner guard. S. Providence.
Prospicientia, ae. Prouidentia, ae. f. ge. Providence. S. Providence of God.
Fatum, ti. n. g. Providence divine. Providing for his business. Prouidus, a,
um. Prouidens, it is. om. ge. Prouuoyant a ses affairs. S. Province. Prouincia,
ae. Satrapia, ae. f. ge. Province. S. Prouincialis, e. Of a province. De
province, Prouincial. Call. Prouincialis, is. He that dwells in province. Qui
demeure en vne province. S. A peaceable, or quiet province. Pacatissima
prouincia. Province paisible. S.

To govern carefully the province. Curare prouinciam. Administrer
soigneusement la province. S.

To make a province. In prouinciam redigere. En fair vne province. S.

Proving. Probatio, onis. f. g. Tentatio, onis. foe. ge. Preuue. Call. Vide
proffe. Provision. Cautio, onis. Procinctus, us. Prouisio, onis. f. g.
Prouuoyance. S. Household provision. Penus, us. Penum, ni. n. g. La provision
de la maison. S.

To make provision of money. Argentum comparare. Fair provision d'argent.

To make provision of timber. Lignari, Materiari. Fair provision de marrain. S.

To make provision of vitailes for winter. Prae parare hyemi cibos. Fair
provision de viandes p^^ l' hyuer. S.

Provision for defense of a country, or realm, that is to say: ships,
strong men, treasure. etc. Nerui reipublicae. Cic. Provision for journey,
either vitayles, or other things. Viaticum, ci. n. g. Provision, soit de
viure, ou autres chooses pour passer le chemin, and voyager. S. Provision for
money. Argentarius commeatus. Provision for one day. Diarium, ij. n. g. Mart.
Provision for wars, as gu^nes, harnays, horses, men of arms, money. etc.
Nerui belli. Cic. Provision of vitailes. Obsonatus, us. Opsonatus, mas. genesis
Provision de viandes. S. Obsoniu^, ij. Opsonium, ij. Is the thing that is
provided for, which is all kind of provision except bread and drink. Toute
viande outre le pain, and le vin. Call. Provision to make. Vide Provide.
Provision to make for a journey. Viaticor, aris. Viaticum paro. Call. Provision
to make for vytayles. Obsono, as. Opsono, as. Fair provision de viandes. Call.
Obsonito, as. Et Opsonito, as. verb. freq. Saepe opsono. Call. Ang. To make a
frequent, or often provision for vitayles. Provocation. Concitatio, Illicium,
cij. Incitabulu^, li. Incitamentum, Instigatio, onis, Prouocatio, Suscitabulum
Proritatio, onis. Irritatio, onis. f. ge. Provocation. S. Provocation to
offend, or sin. Scandalum. dali. n. g. Escandale. S. Provoke. Cieo, es. Cio,
is. Concito, as. Excieo, es, ciui. Impello, is. Incito, as. Insisto, is.
Instigo, as. Irrito, as. Moueo, es. Pellicio, is. Posco, scis. Prorito, as.
Prouoco, as. Suscito, as. Vrgeo, es. Lacesso, is. Prouoquer. S. Provoke much,
or often. Impulso, as.* Provoke pleasauntly, or to allure. Illecto, as.
Illiceo, es. Prolecto, as. Prolicio, cis. Alicher. Call. Provoke thirste.
Quaerere sitim. Cic. Provoked. Concitatus, a, um. Impulsus, a, um. Prouocatus,
a, um. Irritatus, a, um. Citus, a, um. Prouoque. S. Provoked with an evil
spirit. Proceritus, a, um. Prouoker. Prouocator, ris. mas. g. Prouequeur. Call.
Provoking. Prouocatio, onis. f. g. Vide prouocatio^ Provoking pleasauntly, or
alluring. Prolectibilis, le, om. ge. Alichant. Call. Prudence. Phronesis,
Prudentia, ae. f. g. Prudence. S. One of the virtues or graces, whom August.
in his book, De libero Arbit. thus defines. Prudentia, est appetendarum, and
vitandarum rerum scientia, Macrob. Prudentiae est, ad rationis normam, quae
agit vniuersa dirigere, and nihil praeter rectu^, and laudabile facere.
Prudentiae insunt Ratio, Intellectus, Circu^spectio, Prouidentia, Docilitas,
Cautio. Et apud Socratem in sola prude^tia omnes virtutes colloce^tur. Aristot.
inquit, Impossible est, quempiam esse prude^tem, nisi sit bonus. Plat. in leg.
prudentia virtutu^ dux. Virtutis merita sunt haec, humilitas eam exornat,
prudentia exornatam decorat, fortitudo decoratam roborat, Iusticia roboratam
laetificat, temperantia laetificatam conducit, fides conductam erigit, spes
erectam dirigit, charitas directa^ coronat. Prudent. Prudens, it is. Callidus, a,
um. Circumspectus, a, um. Prudent. S. Prudent, or wise counsel. Scitum
consilium. Prudent conseil. S. Prudently. Callide, Prudenter, Site, Salse,
Consulte. Prudement. S. A word spoken prudently, and advisedly. Verbum
consyderatissimum. Parolle dicte prudemment and considerement. S.

Prune. Prunum, ni. n. g. Prune. H. Damask prune. Prunum passum, Prunum
damasenum, Prunum rugosum. Prune de Damas. H.

Diverse sorts of prunes. Turba prunorum. Diverse sorts de prunes. S.

Prune, or to cleanse a tree. Putare, Interputare, Interradere, Tangere ferro
arborem, Falce arbore^ alleuare Esmonder un arbre. S. Pruner, or he which
cleanses trees. Putator, oris. mas. g. Qui esmonde les arbres. S. Pruning, or
clensing of trees. Putatio, onis. Expurgatio, onis. f. g. Esmondement d'arbres.
S. Pry, Vide Pri.
P. ANTE. S.
Psalm, praise, or song to God, or of God. Psalmus, mi. m. g. Psalm, ou.
pseaulme. S. And to sing psalms. Psalmos canere. Psalmodier. A singing of
psalms. Psalmorum cantus. Psalmodie. S.

Psalm maker, or singer. Psalmista, ae. Psalter, or book of psalms, or place
written with psalms. Psalterium, rij. n. g. Psaultier. S. And also an
instrument of music like a harp.
P. ANTE. T.
PTolomais, idis. Otherwise called Ache, A city in Phoenicia. Ptolemaide.
Plin. li. 5. ca. 19. Ptolomaeus, The name of diverse men, as well nobles as
others as. 1. Ptolomaeus Lagi gregarij militis filius, a quo Egyptij reges
deinceps Ptolemaei appellati sunt. 2. Ptolom. Philadelphus qui Bibliam in
peregrinas linguas traduci primum instituit. 3. Ptolom. Euergetes. Beronices
frater. 4. Ptolom. Philopater qui vicerit Antiochu^ magnum totus luxuria ob
amorem dissolutu^ in pellicem quandam translatum reginae mortis causam
crudeliter afferre voluit. 5. Ptolom. Epiphanes, cui post pacem conuentam
Antiochi magni filia in vxorem tradita est. 6. Ptolom. Philometor, quem
obsidebat Auunculus Epiphanes. 7. Ptolom. Euergetes, hic reduxit Demetriu^
profugum.* 8. Ptolom. Physco, vel Euergetes, Insignis tyrannus, qui spurca
libidine diffluxus sororem suam duxit vxorem, cui quaesitos liberos tyrannice
locauit obedendos. 9. Ptolomaeus Alexander.* 10. Ptolom. Latyrus. 11. Ptolom.
Auletes. 12. Ptolom. Dionysius, qui Pompeium necauit. 13. Ptolom. Astrologus
insignis, natione Aegyptus, qui floruit. Anno Christi. 163. Cuius Mathematicis
disciplinis, tota Aegyptus polita est.

P. ANTE. V.
PVblicane. Publicanus, ni. mas. ge. Publicain. S. Publicatio^. Diuulgatio,
Editio, Promulgatio, Publicatio, onis. f. g. Publication. S. Publication of
books. Editio librorum. Publication de livers. S. Publication of inquisitio^s.
Editio inquisitionum. Publication d'enquestes. S. Publicque. Publicus, a, um.
Propatulus, a, um. Publie. S. Public weal. Bonum publicum, Res publica.
Republique. S. The public weal is very evil. Aegrota est respublica.
Republique va tresmal. S.

To destroy the public weal utterly. Trahere Rempublicam funditus.
Destruire, ruiner S.

Publyshe. Prouulgo, as. Indico, is. In apertum proferre, Vulgo oste^dere,
Euulgo, as. Edo, is. Diuulgo, as. Edico, cis. Emitto, is. Famigero, as. Mulgo,
as. Palam facio, Percelebro, as. Praedico, as. Promulgo, as. Publico, as.
Vulgo, as. Publier. S. To publyshe a secrette matter. Efferre, Proferre.
Publier vne chose secrette. S.

To ordain, and cause to publyshe. Programmate statuere, Edicere, Decernere.
Ordonner, and fair publier. S.

Publyshe attestations, or depositions. Reuocare testes. Martianus. Publyshed.
Publicatus, a, um. Vulgatus, a, um. Edictus, a, um. Propositus, a, um.
Euulgatus, a, um. Publie. S. To be published, and diuulgated. Per ora hominu^
ferri. Estre publie and diuulgue. S.

The books are published. Exierunt libri. Les livers sont publiez. S.

Published to be, or to be sown abroad. Percrebresco, cis, bui. Estre
diuulgue, and seem par tout. S. Publysher of secrettes. Vulgator, oris.
Euulgator, oris. Enuntiator, oris. mascul. genesis Publieur de secretz. Call.
Publisher of proclamations, decrees, laws, statutes, and such like. Praeco,
onis. m. g. Caesar. Publyshing. Editio, onis. f. g. Vide publication. Pudding.
Apexabo, Botulus, li. Botellus, li. Farcimen, inis. Fartum, ti. n. g. Boudin.
S. Pudding a French mole, but rather a sausage. Lucanica, cae. foe. ge. Mart.
Saucisse. H. Pudding called an ising. Isitium, tij n. g. Pudding called a
liuering. Tomaculum, li. Tomaclum, cli n. g. Iuuen. Saulsisse. H. Pudding
maker. Fartor, oris. m. g Colum. Puff of wind. Flabrum, bri. Flamen, inis. n.
ge. Soufflement. Call. Puff growyng upon the ground, called of some a dead
man's hatte, or toade stole. Fungus, gi. Tuber, ris. n. g. Champignon, potyron.
H. Puff which ryseth upon bread newely baken, or when it baketh. Hecta, ae.
Hetta, ae. foe. ge. Petite vescie du pain. H. Puff, or to blow. Aspiro, as.
Flo, as. Deflo, as. Per flo, as. Souffler. S. To puff, or blow to kyndle the
fire. Sufflo, as. Souffler pour allumer le feu. S.

Puff out. Exhalo, as. Plin. Puff up. Inflo, as. Tumefacio, cis. Enfler. S.
To puff up the cheeks to blow. Sufflare baccas. Enfler sa bouche pour
souffler. S.

Puffed up. Inflatus, a, um. Turgidus, a, um. Enfle. S. Puffing up. Inflatio,
onis. f. g. Enflement. S. Puke color, which is between black and russet.
Pullus, a, um. Virg. Puisaunce. Authoritas, it is. Fortitudo, inis. Opes, ium.
Pollentia, ae. Potentia, ae. Pote^tatus, us. Potestas, it is. Valentia, ae. f. g.
Puissance. S. Puissaunt. Armipotens, it is,. Bellipotens, it is. Fortis, e.
Herculeus, a, um. Multipotens, Pollens, Potens, Valens, Validus, a, um.
Puissant. S. Praeualidus, a, um. Very puissaunt. Fort puissant, qui peult
beaucoup. S. Puissaunt, and strong. Neruosus, a, um. Validus, a, um.
Praepotens, it is. Robustus, a, um. Puissant and fort. S. A puissaunt, and
courageous king. Rex generosus. Roy puissant and courageux. S.

Puissaunt to be. Valeo, es. Plaut. Estre puissant. S. Puissauntly. Fortiter,
Potenter, Valide, Valenter, Neruose. Puissamment. S. Puliol mountain, an
herb. Clinopodium, ij. Zopyron. Pouliot de montaigne. S. Pulle. Vello, is.
Carpo, is. Tirer, ou haler. S. Pulle before. Praeuello, is. Ante vello. Call.
Pulle away. Abduco, cis. Auello, is. Detraho, is. Deuello, is, ulsi. Diuello,
is. Reuello, is. Arracher. Vide pluck. Pulle away violently, or by force.
Extorqueo, es. Oster par force. S. Pulle back. Retraho. Reuello, is. Subduco,
is. Refraeno, as. Reprimo, is. Recello, is. Reprehendo, is. Retirer. S. Pulle
by the ears. Eradicare aures. Pulle by pulle. Vellicatim. Nonius. Pulle down.
Extermino, as. Cic. Tirer embas. Pals. Pulle down from alofte, or dignity.
Praecipitem trahere. * Pulle often. Vellico, as. Frequenter vello. Call. Pulle
eftsoon. Reuello, is. Columel. Pulle at. Peruello, is. Cic. Pulle in. Irripio,
is. Intus rapio. Call. Pulle in pieces. Concerpo, is. Deartuo, as. Lacero, as.
Membratim discerpere. Desmembrer. S. Pulle in sunder. Distraho, is. Tirer en
diuerses parties, detirer. Call. Pulle of. Decerpo, is, psi. Plin. Iun. Pulle of
bark, or rynde of trees. Glubo, is. Decortico, as. Deglubo, is. Escorcer. S.
Pulle of by violence, as a garment or harnays. Tesso, is. Antiqui dicebant pro
eo quod Spolio. Pulle of feathers. Deplumo, as. Plumas auibus deuellere.
Desplumer. Pals. Pulle of heeres. Deglabro, as. Depilo, as. Pilos detraho.
Peler. Call. Pulle of shoes. Demere soleas alicui, Excalceo, as. Deponere, vel
demere calceos. Laisser, ou ostre ses souliers. S. Pulle out. Euello, is.
Extraho, is. Tirer bors. Call. Pulle out a tongue. Elinguo, as. Linguam extraho,
seu lingua priuo. Eslanguer, oster la langue. Call. Pulle out teethe. Edento,
as. Edenter. Call. Pulle rings of from the fyngers. Dispoliare digitos. Oster
les anneaulx des doigts. S. Pulle up. Rado, is, si. Columel. Pulle up by the
roots. Runco, as. Eradico, as. Extirpo, as. Radicitus euellere, Auello, is.
Conuello, is. Peruello, is. Deuello, is. Diuello, is. Euello, is. Reuello, is.
Erunco, as. Exradico, ^s. Arracher. S. Pulled in sunder. Distractus, a, um.*
Pullinge up. Auulsio, Detractio, Deuulsio, onis. Vulsura, ae. Euulsio, onis.
Reuulsio, onis. Arrachement. S. Pullet or young hen. Gallinella, ae. f. g.
Pullastra, ae. foe. genesis Vne pullette. S. Pully to draw up a weight. Trachlea,
ae. Titiuillitium, tij. Flocculus, li. m. g. Vne poulie. S. A little pully.
Orbiculus, li. m. g. Poulion, ou petite poulie. S.

The cord of a pullye. Ductarius funis. La cord d' un poulie. S.

The pegge, or pyn of iron, which goes through the poully. Axiculus, li. m. g.
Le gouion, ou cheuille de fer qui trauerse la poulie. S.

Pulpit. Anabarathrum, Pulpitum, ti. Rostra, oru^. Suggestus, us. Suggestum,
ti. Chair de prescheur, pulpite. H. To go up into the pulpite to preach, or
make a sermon to the people. Ascendere in rostra, Ascendere in concionem.
Monter en chair pour parler au peuple assemble. S.

Pulse, as beans, chittes, lyntels, peason, tares, fytches. Legume^, inis.
Legume^tu^, ti. n. g. Legume. Pulses of the arteries. Pulsatilis venae, Pulsus,
us. Arteria, ae. Vena, ae. foe. g. Artere. H. The pulses leap, or beat.
Arteriae micant. Sautellent, Tressaillent, Battent. S.

Pulter yt keeps pultry. Gallinarius, ij. Pullarius, rij. mas. g. Un
poulaillier qui nourrit de poulles. S. Pultry house, or barton. Gallinarium,
Ornithoboscion, Chers, sieve cohors, it is. foe. ge. Poulaillier, poullier,
gelinier. S. Pumpe of a ship. Sentina, ae. f. g. But yet I rather think,
Antlia, ae. f. g. To be it that we call the pumpe, and Sentina, the sink or
place from whence water is pumped. La pomp. H. L'ossec. S. P^mpe, or to draw
water out of the ship. Sentino, as. Ant^o, las. Exantlo, las. Vuyder l'eau.
H. Punche. Compungo, is, nxi. Impello, is, puli. Pungo, is. Stimulo, as. Trudo,
is. Tundo, is. Poindre. S. Punching, or a pricking. Stimulatio, onis.
Compunctio, onis. f. g. Poincture. S. Punchon instrument. Punctorium, ij.
Stimulus, li. m. g.* Stylus ferreus. Poinson de fer. S. To punish one.
Animaduerto, is. Infligo, is, xi. Mulcto, as, Mulctor, ris. Multo, as. Plecto,
is, xi. Punio, is. Sumere suppliciu^, Vlciscor, sceris. Verbero, as. Afficere
poena, Poenam capere ab aliquo, Sumere poenas de aliquo, Poenam irrogare Poenas
ab aliquo agere, Castigare, Supplicio afficere, Exigere supplicium ab aliquo,
Vindicare, Animaduertere in aliquem, Sancire. Punir. S.

Punish by the purse. Peculio, as. Pecunia multare. Punyshe hastily.
Repraesentare supplicia, vel Verbera. Punir hastiuement. S. Punyshe one to the
example of others. Prodere explu^ in aliquem, vel in aliquo, Exemplum facere
vel statuere in aliquo, vel in aliquem, Edere exempla in aliquem. Punir
tellement aucun que les autres y prennent exemple. S. At London they punish
grievously such as make, or counterfeite false letters. Poena falsarum and
corruptarum literaru^ Londini grauis est. On punit griefuement a Londres ceulx
qui font faulces lettres. S.

Not to punyshe. Concedere impunitatem. Ne punir point. S.

Punish the body with sickness. Affligo, gis. Dolor afficio. Affliger. Call.
Which has been punyshed. Poena affectus, Animaduersus, sa, sum. Qui a este
puni. S.

Punished to be. Pendere poenas, Poenas dare, vel expendere, vel luere, vel
persoluere, vel reddere, Subire poena^, supplicia, vel poenas, Supplicium
haurire, vel subire, Supplicium far, Sceleris poenas persoluere, Puniri,
Plecti. Estre puni. S. Punyshed to be by the purse. Aere poenas luere. Punyshed
according to deserts. Poenam dignam scelere suscipere. Poenas dignas
persoluere. Estre puni selon qu'on l' a merit. S. Punisher, or he which
punishes. Punitor, Exactor supplicij. Punisseur, ou qui punit. S. Punishment.
Mulcta, ae. Supplicium, ij. Verberatio. Veberatus, us, ui. Animaduersio,
Punitio, Coercitio, onis. f. g. Punition. S. Punishment of the body with
sickness. Afflictatio, Afflictio, onis. f. g. Affliction. S. Punishment to
suffer, or to endure the punishment. Luo, is. Sustinere poena^. Endurer la
punition. Pupil, or fatherless child, or being under a tutor for lack of
age, a ward. Pupillus, li. m. genesis Un pupille, ou mineur. S. Et Pupilla, ae.
f. g. A mayde^ or gyrle under age, or a ward. Vne fille pupille. S. Et
Pupillaris, re. Pertayninge to a pupile or ward. Appartement a un pupille. S.
Puppet, or poppet. Pupa, ae. f. ge. Vne poupee. S. Puppet player. Circulator,
Gesticulator, is. m. ge. Purblynde. Lusciosus, a, um. Luscus, a, um. Rauos
oculos habens. Borgne, qui hae cour veue. S. Et Laesus lumine. vt Mart. Crine
niger, ruber ore, breuis pede, lumine laesus,
rem magnam praestas Zoile, si bonus es.
Black head, red beard, short fete, thou have
And eke thou art purblynde,
Thou worckste a wonder Zoile if thou
Haste any good in mind.
Purblynde to be. Oculos rauos habere. Purblynde to make. Elusco, scas.
Esborugner. S. Purchase. Acquiro, ris. Adquiro, ris. Arcesso, is. Comparo, as.
Indipiscor, sceris. Nanciscor, ris. Obtineo, nes. Pourchasser. Pals. Purchase,
or to get the favor, amity, or good will of one. Gratiam alicuius sequi.
Pourchasser l'amitie de quelqu'vn. S. Purchase the death of one. In perniciem
alicuius incumbere. Pourchasser la mort d'aucun. S. To purchase, or get one
hatred. Odium in aliquem struere, Quaerere inuidiam in aliquem. Pourchasser
quelque haine contre aucun. S.

Purchased. Acquisitus, a, um. Adquisitus, a, um. Pourchasse. S. Purchasing, or
purchase. Acquisitio, onis. foem. ge. Pourchas. S. Purchasour. Adquisitor,
oris. m. g. Pure. Liquidus, a, um. Merus, a, um. Purus, a, um. Putus, a, um.
Mundus, da, dum. Pur. S. Pure, and entiere. Syncerus, ra, rum. Pur and entier.
S. Pure to make. Purifico, cas. Purifier. S. Purely. Liquido, Mere, Pure,
Puriter, Sincere, Pute. Purement. S. Pureness. Puritas, tatis. foe. ge. Purete.
S. Pureness, and innocence. Integritas, tatis. foem. ge. Purete and innocence.
S. Pureness, and sincerity. Synceritas, it is. f. g. Purete and entierete. S.
Pureness in speech. Lepor, oris. m. ge. Et Lepidus sermon, He that has a
pure, or trymme speech. Purfle. Effilatu^, ti. Instita, ae. Limbus, by. Segmen,
inis. Segmentum, ti. n. g. Brodure. S. Purfle maker. Limbolarius, ij. m. g. An
embroderer Bordeur. S. Purgation. Expurgatio, onis. foem. genesis Purgatio, nis.
f. g. Purgation. S. Purgation by fire. Catharmos.* Purgation of a fault.
Expiatio, onis. foe. ge. Purgation de fault. S. Purgation made by certain
kinds of sacrifices. Sacrificium lustrale, Lustratio, onis. foe. ge. Purgation
faicte par certains genres de sacrefices. S. Purgation in criminal causes.
Dissolutio criminis, vel criminum. Purgation of souls. Februa, orum. n. g.
Purgation to make. Respondere criminibus, Dissoluere crimen. Purge, or to
cleanse. Purgare, Depurgare, Expurgare, Februare. Purger. To purge a sin, and
offense. Piare, Expiare, Procurare, Lustrare. Purger quelque peche et offense.

Purge, or to cleanse diligently. Repurgare. Purger diligement. S. Purge, or to
make all clean. Perpurgo, as. Purger tout a net. S. To purge, or justify him
self by seven witnesses. Cum septimo cognitore vitae suae rationem approbare,
Cum septima manu sese purgare, Septem laudatores in iudicio excitare. Se purger
ou iustifier par sept tesmoing. S.

To purge him self of any crime. Depurgare crimen vel deluere. Se purger de
quelque crime. S.

To purge him self of any blame. Culpam a se amouere, Demoliri culpam de se.
Se purger de quelque blasme. S.

To excuse, and purge him self to one. Purgare se apud aliquem vel alicui de
re aliqua. S'excuser and purger enuers aucun. S.

Purge souls by prayer, or sacrifice. Februo, as. Purger par sacrifices. Call.
Purge the bealy. Aluum deijcere. Purged. Purgatus, ta, tum. Expurgatus, ta,
tum. Putus, ta, tum. Purge. S. Purging. Purgatio, Expurgatio, Depurgatio, onis.
f. g. Purgement. S. Purify. Purifico, as. Puro, as. Purifier. S. Purifying.
Purificatio, onis. f. ge. Purification. S. Purple. Blatteus, a, um.
Conchyliatus, a, um. Niger, a, um. Purpureus, a, um. Tyrianthinus, a, um.
Purpurin. S. Purple color. Conchyle, es. Co^chylium, ij. neut. genesis Ostrum,
tri. Tyrianthinus color, Purpura, ae. Murex, icis. m. g. Pourpre. S. Purpureus,
a, um. Of a purple color. De pourpre. Vt purpureus color, Purple color.
Couleur de pourpre. S. Et Purpurareus. a, u^, Pertaining to purple. Et Purpuro,
as. Purpurasco, scis. To wax purple, or become purple, or to take purple
color. Prendre couleur de pourpre, Se teindre en pourpre. Call. Co^chylium, Is
also a shelfishe wherewith purple is died. Purple fish, which is a shell
fyshe. Conchylium, lij. n. g. Chonchyle, es. foe. ge. Et Murex, icis. m. g.
Purple garmente, or vesture. Sarrana vestis, Tyrianthina. Tincta murice vestis.
Rob teincte en pourpre. S. Purporte, effect, or order. Tenor, oris. mas.
gener^ Teneur, order. S. Purpose a fish. Tursio, Phocaena, Tyrsio. Marsouin.
Purpose Conatus, us. Destinatio, Men's, it is. Ratio, onis. Propositum, ti. Res,
ei. Studium, ij. neut. ge. Propose. S. This is nothing to our purpose. Hoc a
nostro proposito alienum est, Hoc ad rem non pertinet, Hoc proposito nostro
nihil conducit, Hoc nihil ad nostrum institutum, Sub, facit vel pertinet, Hoc
nihil ad re^ facit, Nihil hoc pertinet ad nostrum negotium, Quod dicis, nihil
huc attinet. Cecy ne sert de rien a nostre propos, Cecy n' est point a nostre
propos. Cor.

You go from the purpose. Digrederis a proposito, Aberras ab incoepto sermon,
Ab instituto sermon deerrat oration tua, Aberras ab instituto, vel a proposito,
Extra ordinem excurris. Vous sortez horse de propos. Cord.

Matters beside the purpose. Egressus, and egressiones, Excursus, and
excursiones, Procursiones. Chooses horse de propos. S.

To break one of his purpose in talk. Interpellere sermonem, Intercipere, vel
Incidere, aut Abru^pere, Interfatione aliqua obturbare. Rompre le propos
d'aucun. S.

Purposed. Conceptus, a, um. Destinatus, a, u^. Propositus, a, um. Propose. S.
Purpose, or to think with him self. Conor, aris. Concipio, is. Decerno, is.
Meditor, aris. Propono, is. Subte^do, is. Destinare animo, Animo proponere.
Proposer en soymesme. S. Purpose before. Praedestino, as. Vide predestinat.
Purpose precisely. Subijcere sensibus, Proponere. Proposer. S. I have purposed,
deliberated and decreed to do so. Certum est facere, Decretum est mihi,
Consilium stat, Sic sententia est. IN ay propose delibere and arreste d' ainsi
fair. S.

Purposeles, or without purpose or reason. Absurd. adu. Inseque^ter, Praeter
propositu^. Sans propos. Purposely. Ex disposito, Composito, Ex composito. Tout
a propos. S. Take pain purposely, or of purpose to do a thing. De industria
aliquid facere, Studio habere aliquid. De propos delibere mettre peine a fair
quelque chose. S.

Purse of lether. Aluta, ae. Crumena, ae. Loculus, li. Manticula, ae.
Marsupium, ij. Ascopera, Funda, Mantica, cae. foem. genesis Theca nummaria. Bourse
de cuir. S. Purse cutter, or a pick purse. Saccularius, rij. m. g. Couppeur ou
fouilleur de bourse. S. Purse bearer, an almoner, a gyuer. Praebitor, toris.
masc. genesis Pursife man. Anhelator, oris. Anhelus, Astmaticus, Pulmonarius,
Suspiriosus, a, um. Poulsif. S. This herb is good for them that are pursise.
Anhelatoribus prodest haec herba. Ceste herb sert a ceulx qui son poulsifs. S.

Pursifenes. Asthma, atis. n. g. Purslane herb. Portulaca, ae. Andrachne,
Pullipes, Peplion. Pourpier, Pourcelaine, and pourchaille. S. Pursenet. Funda,
ae. f. g.* Pursue. Agere aliquem, Insequor, eris Persequor, eris. Sector, ris.
Ago, is. Agito, tas. Poursuyure. S. Pursue a thing already begone. Reliquias
persequi, Persequi incoepta. Poursuyure ce qui est commence. S. Pursue in all
diligence. Insectari, Consectari. Poursuyure en toute diligence. S. Purueyghe.
Prouideo, es. Prospicio, cis. Pouruoir, ou prouuoir. S. Purueyghe for time to
come. In longitudinem co^sulere, In posterum prospicere. Prouuoir pour l'
aduenir. S. Purueyghe corn. Frumentor, aris. Aller au fourrage de ble. S. To
go to purueyghe corn. Purueyghe victuayls. Obsono, as. Opsono, nas. vel
Opsonor, aris. Acheter ou fair provision de viandes. Purueighaunce.
Prouidentia, ae. Cautio, onis. Prouisio, onis. foe. ge. Prouuoyance. S.
Purueighing of corn or grain. Frumentatio, onis. f. g. Fourragement. S.
Purueyour. Prouisor, ris. m. g. Horat. Qui preuoit. S. Purueiour for corn and
grain. Frumentator, toris. m. g. Fourrageur. S. Purueyour for domestical
necessaries. Obsonator, Opsonator, oris. m. g. Un despensier qui achete les
viandes. And such providing of meats. Obsonatus, Opsonatus, us. Obsonatio,
onis. foe. genesis Achet de viandes. S. And the thing purueyed, is Obsonium,
Opsonium, nij. n. g. Purueyour of salt and woodde for embassadoures. Parochos.
Pushe Vide poushe. Put. Pono, is. Mettre. S. Put a false thing in place of a
true. Suppono, is. Mettre vne chose faulse en lieu d'vne vray. S. Put again in
his place. Repono, is. Remettre. S. Put against. Oppono, is. Mettre a
l'encontre. S. Put all at six and seven, or at hasarde. Fortunam subire. Put
all in one, or to join together. Vnio, is, iui. Conioindre. Call. Put aparte.
Separo, as. Sepono, is. Seorsum reponere, Eximere numero, Segrego, as. Secerno,
nis. mettre a part. S. Put asunder. Separo, as. Sepono, is. Idem. Put away, or
to reiecte. Alieno, as. Depono, is. Depello, is. Diluo, is. Emoueo, es.
Expulso, as. Expungo, is. Moueo, es. Reijcio, cis. Remitto, is. Remoueo, es.
Reieicter, Estranger. S. Put away by exchau^ge or sale. Alieno, nas. Aliener.
Put away care, or sorrow. Dolorem abstergere, vel ponere, Obruere dolorem,
Remittere animum. Put away clean. Remouere de animo. To put away his wife.
Repudium vxori remittere, Renuntiare repudium, Vxorem repudiare. Reiecter sa
femme et la repudier. S

Put away a scruple. Scrupulum eximere. Put away suspection. Segregare
suspitionem. Put away, or deuorce him self from his wife. Seponere onus
coniugij. Se descharger de sa femme. Put back. Demoueo, es. Posthabeo, es.
Reijcio, cis. Propello, lis. Repello, is. Retrudo, is, si. Mettre arriere,
Rebouter. S. Put beasts to feading. Impesco, scis. Fest. Put before. Antefero,
rs. Praepono, is. Mettre deua^t. Put between. Intercalo, as. Interiaceo, es.
Interijcio, cis. Interpono, is. Mettre enter deux. S. Put blame in one. Vertere
vitio alicui. Put case it be so. Fac vel finge ita esse. Sit ita sane, Sine sic
habere, Fingamus sic esse: vel Concedamus vt sit ita. Pren le cas qu' il soit
ainsi. Cord. Put down. Depello, is. Depono, is. Pessundo, as. Mettre au bas.
S. Put far of. Propello, is. Bouter ou poulser loing. S. Put the fault or
blame in, or upon one. Crimini dare, Infer labem, Crimen alicui infer,
Causas in aliquem congerere. Obijcere praeuaricationem. Mettre a sus aucun cas
a quelqu'vn. S. Put for example. Exemplum subijcere. Put forth. Elimino, as.
Produco, cis. Protendo, is. Reijcio, cis. Emitto, it is. Excludo, dis. Mettre
horse. Put forward, or to provoke. Concito, tas. Prouoquer. S. Put from
enheritaunces. Auertere haereditatem, Demouere de vel e possessionibus. Mettre
horse de ses heritages. S. Put in. Adindo, is, didi. Insero, is. Indo, is.
Mettre ens. S. Put in, or to bring in. Intromittere, Inducere, Immittere,
Ingerere, Infer. Mettre dedens. S. Put in authority, or office. Praeficio,
cis. Put in a bill of complainte. Offerre crime^ praesidi. Put in borowes,
pledges, or sureties. Constituere vadimonium. Put in danger, or ieopardie.
Opponere corpus, Vocare in discrimen. To put in gage. Opponere, Opponere
pignori, Oppignerare. Mettre en gage. S.

Put in good comfort or hope. Oste^tare, vel subijcere spem. Vide infra. To put
in order. Disponere, Ordinem facere. Mettre par order. S.

Put in possession, either of land. etc. Mancipio dare, Mittere in
possessionem. Mettre en possession. S. To put in prison. In vincula dare vel
conijcere. Mettre en prison. S.

To put in hope. Erigere ad spem, vel in spem, Ad spem, vel in spe^ vertere,
Oste^dere, vel Oste^tare spem alicuius rei, Expectatione^ dare. Mettre en
esperance. S.

Put into the ground. Inhumo, as. Enterre. Call. Put into the mouth. Sublabro,
as. Nonius. Put in writing. Prodo, is, didi. Memoriae tradere, Literis mandare,
Memoriae dare. Mettre par memoire and escrire. S. Put life in danger. Vitam
opponere, vel prodere Put low, to abace, or to put down. Infimo, as. Deprimo,
is. Infimum facio. Abbaisser. Call. Put male to female. Admittere marem
foeminae. Put of for a time. Intermitto, is. To leave of for a time. Laisser
pour quelque temps. S. Put of from day to day. Ducere diem de die,
Procrastinare, Prolongare, Die^ de die t^re, Differ. Defferer de iour en
iour. Call. Put of garments. Depono, is. Exuo, uis. Deuestio, is. Desuestir. S.
Put of shoes. Deponere soleas. Put on a garment. Induo, is. Vestio, it is.
Vestir. S. Put one thing before an other. Praeteruerto, uertis. Cic. Mettre un
chose deuant autre. S. Put one thing in the room, or stead of an other.
Suppono, is. Subdo, is. Supposer. S. Put or hold, or to stretche forth.
Extendo, is. Protendo, is. Estendre. S. Put out. Deleo, es. Demo, is. Expello,
is. Pello, is, populi. Excludo, dis. Emitto, it is. Mettre horse. S. Put out
candle, fire, or such like. Extinguo, is. Restinguo, is. Ignes coercere.
Esteindre. S. Put out of all hope. Praecidere, vel incidere spem alicui,
Eripere spem, Adimere spem, Spem auferre. Oster toute esperance. S. Put out of
doors. Elimino, as. Getter de l' entree. Call Put out of mind. Oblitero, as.
Deleo, es. In obliuionem duco. Put out of his wits. Deturbare de mente,
Exturbare mentem. Mettre horse de son (...) sens. S. To put, or deprive one out
of office (...) ever. Abrogare alicui magistratum in perpetuum. Priuer
quelqu'vn de son office a tousiours. S.

Put out of possession. Mouere haeredem. Dimouere de vel e possessionibus.
Mettre horse de ses heritages. S. Put out of suspection. Absoluere suspicione.
Put out of the breast or stomach, by translation to speak, or utter that which
lies in the stomach. Expectoro, as. Extra pectus eijcio. Getter and mettre
horse de l' estomach, descharger son cueur. Call. Put out, or to make of no
effect. Deleo, es. Demo, is. Oblitero, as. Effacer, Rayer, Annuller. Call. Put
out a writing. Dispungo, is. Expungo, is. Annuller vne escriture. Call. Put
small affiaunce, or trust. Derogare fiduciam alicui. Put to. Admitto, is.
Admoueo, es. Abhibeo, es. Adijcio, cis. Appono, is. Obdo, is. Addo, is.
Adiouster Put to death. Abiudicare a vita, Dare ad mortem, Tollere ferro, aut
veneno alique^, Multare morte, Exanimare. Mettre a mort. S. Put to flight. In
fuga^, vel pedes vertere, Profligo, gas. Fugare, In fuga^ conijcere, Auertere
in fuga^, In fugam agere, Fugam inimicis suis inijcere. Mettre en fuite. S. Put
together. Compono, is. Confero, rs. Committo, it is. Mettre ensemble. S. Put to
the worste. Pessundo, as. Vide put down. Put two shrewes in a sack. Iungere
vulpes, Adag. Verg. Put under. Insimo, as. Submitto, is. Suffero, rs. Subijcio,
cis. Subduco, cis. Suppono, is. Mettre dessoubs. S. Put under the neck, or
shoulders. Succollo, collas. Collum suppono. Put away. Alienatus, a, um.
Impulsus, a, um. Pulsus, a. um. Put away, or forsaken. Repudiatus, a, um.
Terent. Put back. Depulsus, a, um. Propulsus, sa, sum. Repulsus, a, um.
Repoulse arriere. S. Put before other in authority, rule, or place.
Praepositus, a, um. Mis deuant. etc. Put between. Intercalaris, re.
Intercalarius, a, um. Interiectus, a, um. Mis enter deux. Call. Put down.
Depositus, a, um. Depulsus, a, um. Put, or set in place, or stead of an other.
Subdititius, a, um. Subditiuus, a, um. Supposititius, a, um. Mis en la place d'
un autre. S. Put out. Deletus, a, um. Demptus, a, um. Reiectus, a, um. Mis
horse, Oste. S. Put out of office. Exauctoratus, a, um.* Put to. Appositus, a,
um. Mis aupres, Appose. S. Putrefaction. Marcor, oris. Tabes, is. Tabum, by. n.
ge. Putredo, dinis. f. g. Putrefaction. S. Putrifactiue. Septicus, a, um.
Putrefactif. S. To putrify. Fraceo, es. Fracesco, scis. Putresco, scis. Se
putrifier. S.

Putrified. Putridus, a, um. Putrefactus, ta, tum. Putrefie. S. Putrified,
moldy, or unsavory. Rancidus, a, um. Ranci, Relant, chansi, Moisi. S
Rancidulus, a, u^. Diminut. Somewhat putrified. Putrified, or molded to be,
Ranceo, es. Vide Mouldie. Putter away. Expulsor, ris. m. g. He that castes and
puttes forth. Celuy qui get and poulse horse. Call. Putter back. Repulsor,
ris. m. g. Depulsor, ris. m. g. Qui chasse and repoulse. S. Putting. Positio,
onis. Positura, ae. Positus, us, m. g. Putting away, when a man puts away
his wife for some shameful thing committed. Repudium, ij. neut. genesis Le reject
que l' ho^me faisoit de sa femme pour quelque chose honteuse qu' elle auoit
commise. S. Putting away. Repudiatio, onis. f. g. Reiectement. S Putting
back, or repelling Depusio, onis. Repulsio, onis. Repulsus, sus. Propulsatio,
onis. foe. genesis Repoulsemement. S. Putting back. Reiectio, onis. foe. g. Idem.
Putting of male to female. Admissio, onis. f. ge. Putting, or setting a false
thing in the place of a true thing. Suppositio, onis. foem. genesis Putting or
laying in of a cawtion, gauge, pledge, or surety to answer the law.
Restipulatio, onis. f. g. Restipulation. Call. Puttocke. Miluius, ij. Miluus,
ui. m. g. Un escouffle. S. Miluinus, a, u^. Of a puttocke, or like a puttock.
D' un escouffle. S.
Q. ANTE. A.
Q, A mute almost vnneadfull as is K, because ye C, may supply both their
places, and seems to serve none other purpose, than to join the vowell V,
that always follows him, with an other vowel in the same syllable (which
otherwise in one syllable can not be joined) and makes a more oblique and
grosser sound. Q, is changed into C, as Loquor, locutus, etc. In the notes of
ancient writers, Q, was written for Quintus, vel Quintius, Qu. Quartus, Qm.
Quomodo, QVAES, Quaestores. Q. L. Quinti Liberti. Q. V.AE.S. Quaestor. Q.
N.A.N.N. Quandoqu^ neque ais, neque negas. Q. F. Quinti Filius. Q. L. F. Quinti
Lucij filius. Q. vel Quint. Quintilianus. Quir. Quirites. Q. L. Quinti
Libertus. Q. M. Quintus Mutius. etc.
Qu. ANTE. A.
QVadrangle, or four square. Quadrangulus, a, u^. Qui ha quatres angles. S.
Quadrate. Quadratus, a, u^. Adiect. Quarre. Quadrate, or a square. Quadru^,
dri. n. g. Un quarre. Call. Quadrate aspecte of the planettes, or fourth part
of the Zodiac circle, wherein be the.xii. signs celestial. Tetartimorion,
Spatium trium signorum, Quarta Zodiaci pars. Quadripartite, of four parts, or
divided into four parts. Quadripartitus, a, um. In quatuor parts deuisus.
Quadripartitly, or after ye manner of four parts. Quadripartito,
Quadrupliciter. Quaffe, or to drink a vie. Certare mero. Horat. vel Poscere
maioribus poculis. Boire l'vn a l'autre a grans traicts. S. Quaff halfes, all,
or to drink good luck one to an other. Perbibo, is. Propino, as. Vide Drink.
Quaffer or drinker to other. Propinator, oris. m. g. Quayle bird. Coturnyx,
cis. Ortyx, gis. Caille. H. Quake for cold. Frigutio, is, ire. Horreo. es.
Horresco, scis. Trembler de froid. S. Quake for fear. Horreo, es. Horresco,
scis. Inhorreo, es. Inhorresco, scis. Trembler de paour. S. Quaking. Horror,
oris. Tremor, ris. m. g. Tremblement. S. et Tremebundus, a, u^. Full of
quakyng. Tremblant. S. Quaking for cold, or fear. Horridus, a, u^. Quercerus,
a, um. Tremulus, a, um. Vide Trembling. Quality. Qualitas, it is. foe. g.
Qualite. S. Quality, or property conceived by nature, or gotten by exercise.
Habitus, us. m. g. Habit. S. Quantity. Quantitas, it is. f. g. Quantite. S.
Quantity of any thing measured. Numerus, meri. m. g. vt Maximus vini numerus.
A great quantity of wine. Grande quantite de vin. S. Great quantity of corn.
Magna vis frumenti. Grande quantite de froument. S.

Great quantity of gold and silver. Magna vis auri and argenti. Grande
quantite d'or and d'arge^t.

Quantity of food for one month. Demensum, si. neut. ge. Terent. Quarrel.
Controuersia, ae. Co^tentio, onis. Iurgium. ij. Dissentio, onis. Dissidium, ij.
n. g. Un querelle. S Quarrel, or a bolte, or darte. Catapultarium pilum. Hoc
est, Sagitta sieve iaculum quod catapulta emittitur. Plaut. Quarellous, or a
lover of discord. Discordiosus, Contentiosus. Querelleux. S. Quarries of
stones. Latomiae, aru^. Latumiae, arum. Lapidariae latumiae. Lapicidinae, aru^.
Quarrieres. S Quarry, out of the which whetstones are drawn to make sharp, or
to whet on. Cotaria, ae. foe. ge. La quarriere don't on tire les queues a
aguifer. S. Quarrier that cuttes stones out of ye quarries, or that draws
the^ out. Lapicida, Latomus, mi. m. ge. Un quarrier qui coupe les pierres es
quarrieres. etc. Quarte, a measure containing the fourth part of any other, as
a quarte for wine. Quartarius, rij. mas. genesis Vne measure contenant le quarte
party d'vn autre, comme vne quarte a vin. S. Quarte of wine. Quartarius vini.
Vne quarte de vin. Quartaine fever. Quartana, vel Febris quartana. Fiebure
quarte. S. Quarter of a foot. Quadrans pedis. Gell. La quarte party d'vn
pied. S. Quarter of a pound. Quadrans, it is. mas. genesis Quarter of any thing, or
the fourth part. Quadrans, it is. m. g. La quarte party. S. Quarter, or to
divide in parts. Diuiduum facere, Partiri, Parts facere, Diuidere, Secare.
Partir. S Quarter, or to trymme a garden. Deformare area^. Quashe, to make
tremble, to bruise, or to break. Quasso, as. Fair trembler Secouer and hacher,
casser and ro^pre. S. To quauer in singing. Vibrisso, as.*

Quauer, or to shake a darte or any thing to cast it. Vibro, as. Remu^r and
bransler un darde on antre chose pour iecter. S. Quauering. Vibratio, onis. f.
g.*
Qu. ANTE. E.
QVeane, or a drabbe. Improba mulier, Garrula, Vana, Loquax, vel Procax, cis.
o^. g. Quench, or to put out. Extinguo, is. Restinguo, is. Ignes coercere.
Esteindre. S. Quenched, or put out. Extinctus, ta, tum. Esteinct. S. Quencher,
or he that puttes out. Extinctor, toris. m. g. Esteigneur, qui a esteinct. S.
Quenching. Extinctio, onis. foe. g. Esteignement. S. Queen. Imperatrix. cis.
Regina, ae. f. g. Royne. S. Quere of the church. Delubrum, ri. neut. gener.
Cella, lae. foe. ge. Liu. La cueur d' vne eglise. S. Quere of singers. Chorus,
ri. m. g. Querister. Chorista, ae, Symphoniacus puer. Enfant de cueur. Pals.
Querne, or hand mylle. Moletrina, ae. Trusatilis mola, Mola versatilis. Plin.
Mola manuaria. Moulin a main ou a bras. H. Querne for pepper. Mola piperaria.
Gregoyr a poyure. Pals. Queste. Duodena, ae.* Question. Quaestio, onis. foe. g.
Question. S. Et Quaestiuncula, ae. dimin. Ang. A light, simple, or small
question. Questionette. S. Question dark, difficile, or hard. Aenigma, it is.
Obscura inuolucris quaestio, Scrupus, Griphus. Question obscure ou double. H.
To debate a question. Sermonem discutere. Debatre vne question. S.

To move a question and doubt. Quaestionem afferre de re aliqua. Mouuoir vne
question and doubt.

To absolve a question. Persoluere quaestionem, Dissoluere quaestionem. Souldre
vne question. S.

Questions of the law. Iuris controuersia, Iuridicialis controuersia,
Quaestiones iuris and conflictationes iure ac legibus moribusue aut aequo et
bono contendentium. Questions de droict. S. The principal question of a
process. Summae rei discrimen, Summa quaestio, Summa controuersia, Vniuersae
co^trouersiae descrimen. La question principale d' un process. S.


Qu. ANTE. I.
QVier. Chorus, ri. Vt supra. Quere. Quick, swifte, and nimble. Celer, ris.
Citus, ta, tum. Dexter, ra, rum. Festinus, a, um. Impiger, ra, rum. Nauus, a,
um. Properus, ra, ru^. Gnauus, a, u^. Agilis, le. om. g. Legier, Soubdaine,
Viste, agile. S. Quick, or alive. Viuus, a, um. Vif. S. Quick and lively
spirit. Ingenium viuidum, vel acre. Espirit fort vif. S. Quick, or alive
again. Rediuiuus, a, um. Derechef vigoreux. Call. Quick in aunswering, or
somewhat pert. Argutulus, a, um. Cic. Quick of spirit, or wit. Alacer,
cris. Promptus ingenio, Solers, it is. Vegetus, a, um. Argutus, ta, tum.
Ingenieux. S. Quick, or lively. Animatus, a, um. Vegetus, a, um. Viuidus, a,
um. Viuus, a, um. Agilis, le. Alaigre, vif. Call. Quick or sharp sentences.
Sales, Apopthegmata, tum, neut. genesis Quick sands, or shelues. Syrtes. Virg.
Breuia, ium. n. g. Tacit. Lieus secs en mer, Bancs de sable. S. Quick set,
spring, or ympe, albeit the top be feared, so the root be a live.
Viuiradix, icis. foe. g. Col. li. 4. cap. 14. Plant viue. Call. Quick sighted.
Oculatus, a, um. Qui a bonne veue. Quickesyluer. Argentum viuum. Argent vif. S.
Quickesyluer earth. Anthrax, cis. * Quick witted. Conspicuus, a, um. Acutus,
a, um. Sagax, cis. Perspicax, cacis. om. genesis Qui entend bien subtilement. S.
Quicken, or to bolden. Animo, as. Animer, Enhardir. Quickly. Actutu^,
Breuiter, Breue, Celeriter, Cito, Citatim, Curriculo, Festinanter, Festinato,
Maturate, Ocyus, Velociter, Propere, Rapide, Strenue. Soubdainement, vistement,
legierement. S. Quickly, or lively. Viuaciter, Viuide.* Quickly, or subtly.
Acute. Subtilement. S. Quicklier. Ocyus. vt Plaut. Non ocyus quiui. I^ n' ay
sceu fair plus soubdain. S. I knew not how to do it quicklier. Quickened,
or that has spirit and life. Animatus, a, um. Qui ha ame and vie. S.
Quickenes. Agilitas, Celeritas, Velocitas, is. foe. g. Legierete. S. Quickenes
of capacity, or wit. Solertia, ae. foe. g. Ingeniosite d'esprit. S.
Quickenes of sight. Perspicacitas, Perspicacia, ae. Bonne and claire veue. Call.
Good and clear sight. Quickenes, or lyuelynes. Viuacitas* it is. foem. genesis
Viuacite. S. Quiet. Mitis, e. Otiosus, Placidus, a, um. Tranquillus, a, um.
Tacitus, a, um. Qui est en repos, en paix and repos. S. Aequus animus. A quiet
mind. Which is out of quiet. Irrequietus, ta, tum. Inquies, etis. Qui est
sans repos. S.

I was never in quiet for Antony. Nunqua^ per Antonium quietus fui. Iamais
Antoine ne me laissa en repos ne en paix. S.

Quiet, or careless. Securus, a, um. Sans sou^ci. S. You will not think how
quiet. I am in mind. Credibile non est, quam aequo animo sim, quam fruar
quiet, quam sit animus meus omni cura vacuus, ac liber, omni cura vacet, ab
omni cura procul absit, quam sit tranquillus animi mei status, quam tra^quille
seipso fruatur animus meus, aequitatem animi mei vix credas, coniectura vix
assequare, cogitatione haud facile co^prehendas.

Quiet, or calm day. Alma dies. Quiet to be. Sileo, es. Silesco, scis. Taceo,
es. Estre en repos. S. Quiet to make. Mitisico, as. Paco, as. Perpaco. Vide
Please. Quiet to wax. Mitesco, scis. Quiesco, scis. S' addoulcir. S. Quietly,
or in peace and tranquillity. Placide, Tacit, Tacito, Tranquille, Quiere. En
paix and tranquillite. S. Quietly without trouble. Secure, Sedate. Coyement,
Sans trouble. S. Quietness. Requies, ei. Otium, ij. Quies, it is. Quietudo, dinis.
Silentium, Tranquillitas, tatis. foe. ge. Repos. S. Quietness of mind.
Euthymia, ae. foem. genesis Bud. Repos d' esprit. S. Quietness, or being without
care. Securitas, tatis. foe. ge. Asseurance. S. Quill. Calamus, mi. Penna, ae.
Pinna, ae. foe. ge. Vne plume. S. Pinnula, ae. dimin. Ang. A little, small, or
young quill. Quill, with which a Musician uses to play to save his fingers,
or any like thing. Plectrum, tri. Pecten, nis. n. g. Quilt. Cento, onis.
Culcitra, ae. f. g. Coite, ou Coeste. Quilted. Culcitratus, a, um. Quilted
Couerlet. Cadurcum, ci. n. g. Quince. Malum Cydoniu^, Lanatum. Plin. a lanugine
qua vestitur. Canum. Virg. Cotoniu^. Plin. Pomme de coing. H. and S. Quince
tree. Malus Cydonia, vel Cotonea. Coingnier. H. Quinsy, a disease in the
throat. Angina, ae. foem. ge. Squinancie. S. Quitaunce, or an acquittance.
Apocha, Acceptilatio Vlpia. Qua creditor testatur sibi satisfactum a debitore.
Vne quitance. H. Quite one, or to give one a quita^ce. Acceptum refer, Dare
apocham, and chirographo fateri acceptum Bud. Bailer quitance. S. Quite, or to
remitte to his debtour that which he owes. Demittere debitorem, Debitum
remittere. Quiter and remettre a son rebiteur ce qu' il doibt. S. Quite a good
turn which one has done us. Beneficiu^ remittere. Quiter le bien qu'on nous
a faict. Quite, to requite, or do the like. Par refer. Ter. Quiner, or to
tremble. Tremere, Contremere, Intremere. Trembler. S. Quiuering, or shaking for
cold. Quercerus, a, um. Et Querquerus, a, u^. Vide. Quake and tremble. Quyuer.
Pharetra, ae. foe. ge. Vne trousse ou quarquois. de fleiches. H. Et
Pharetratus, ta, tum. Wearing a quyuer. Vt Miles pharetratus. Sil. Quyuers
full. Plenae pharetrae. Ovid. An emp^y quyuer. Exhausta telis pharetra. Oui.


R. ANTE. A.
R, A semivowell and a liquid, which being put after a mute in the same
syllable, makes the syllable going before it (if it be short by nature)
common, as Ovid. makes Pa in this verse. Iam patrem, famulosque patris,
lucemque timebam. In the beginning of Greek words, it receaues an
aspiration: as, Rhadamanthus, Rhea, and the like. sometimes it is changed into
L, as, Intelligo, for Interlego, Pelluceo, for Perluceo, and in words not
compounde, as Niger, Nigellus, Vmbra, Vmbella: Into ss, as, Arbos, for Arbor:
and sometime into ss, as Vro, vssi. Gero, gessi: Into V, consonante, as Sero,
seui. Tero, triui. Persius calls it the dogs lettre, because it is uttered
with a quauering of ye tongue, and seems to imitate the Arring that a dog
makes, being angry. In the end of words it is short, except they be of
one syllable, as Cur, Fur, Lar, Ver, Par, with their compoundes which be long.
etc. In the notes of aunciente monumentes R, C, was Romana ciuitas, and R, D,
Regis domus. R. Is also written for Roma, Respublica, Rex, Regina, Richardus,
Robertus, Reginaldus, Rodulphus, Rogerus, and for diverse other propre names of
men. Rabat, or furrowe made in metals, timber, or stone, with an instrument
called a plough. Runctura, ae. Stria, ae. Vitruu. And yet Philander on the
third book of Vitruu. and.2. chap. And in the fourth book and fourth chap.
says, that Strix, gis. foe. ge. Is the rabat, and Stria, the imbossing out
between the rabates. Un canab. etc. Chaufrain creux. Et Strio, as. To rabate or
make such chaumfreyes in any thing. Fair tells chaufrains. S. Rabat, a plain
that carpenters use. Runcina, ae. f. genesis Rabot. S. Rabet, or young conye.
Cuniculus, li. m. g. Connin. S. Rack, critche, or maunger of a stable.
Praesepe, Praesepium, pij. n. ge. La creiche, ou auge d' un estable. H.
Ratillier. Pals. Rack to lay the brotche in at the fler. Crateuterium, rij.
n. g. H. Rack, or a torture to rack one on, to make him confess the truth.
Tormentum, ti. Fidiculae, arum, Torture, ou gehenne, ou question. Equuleus, ei.
m. g. A kind of rack to rack men on. To rack one, thereby to know the
truth of him. Tormentis quaerere, Quaerere crimen tormentis. Bailler la
gehenne, pour scauoir la verite de quelque cas. S.

To rack his fathers servants, or to examine them by torments, to know who
kylde his father. Mortis paternae habere quaestionem de seruis paternis.
Bailler la question and torture pour scauoir d'vn faict. S.

Confessions made on the rack. Confessiones tormentis expressae. Confessions
faicts en la gihenne.

Rack, or to tormente one. Torqueo, es. Geiner quelqu' un. S. Racker, or he
that does rack. Tortor, toris. mas. g. Qui done la geine and torture. S.
Racket, to play at ball or tennis with. Reticulu^, li. neut. genesis Raquette. H.
Radishe, or rape. Raphanus, vel Raphanis, Radicula, lae. foe. ge. Vne rave, ou
refort. S. Radishe wild. Apios, Armoracia, Raphanus syluestris. Refort
sauuage. S. Radishe long and clear. Raphanus Algidensis. Pli. Radishe seed.
Cortenon.* Rafe, a propre name. Radulphus, phi. m. g. Raftere of an house.
Tignus, ni. vel Tignum, ni. n. g. Capreolus, li. masc. genesis Et Cantheriu^ vel
Canterius, rij. m. g. Un cheuron. S. To rage. Debacchor, ris. Furo, is,
insaniui, Obsaeuio, is. Saeuio, is. Rager.

Rage like a madd^ dog. Rabio, is. Enrager. Call. Raging, or rage, or
madness. Rabies, ei. Furor, ris. m. g. Rage. S. Raging, or being mad.
Rabidus, a, um, Rabiosus, sa, sum. Enrage. S. Ragingly, or with rage or furor.
Rabide, Furiose. Auec rage and fureur. S. Ragge. Panniculus* li. Lacinia, ae.
foe. ge. Drappeau. S. Hallion. Pals. Ragged. Laciniosus, a, um. Lacinosus, a,
um. Obsitus pannis, Pannosus, a, um.* Dechire. Pals. Ragged, or torn.
Laceratus, a, um. Vide Rent. Raggednes of rocks. Lamae, arum. Rupium
fracturae. Call. Raie, cockel, or darnell herb. Lolium, ij. neut. genesis Yuraye,
yuroie. H. Raie in battle. Ordo, nis. m. ge. Un ranc. Ordines seruare. To
keep battle raye. Vide Rank. Raie, or skatefyshe. Raia, ae. prom. genesis
Raye. H. Rayed, or stricked with long rays, or streekes. Virgatus, ta, tum.
Raye. S. Vt vestis virgata. A garment rayed, or stricked wtth rays. Rayeng
sieve Excusorium cribrum. Plin. Reign. Regnum, ni. n. g. Regne. S. To Reign.
Regno, as. Regner. S.

Which reigns. Regnans, it is. Regnator, ris. m. g. Qui regne. S.

Under Venus reign. Sub Veneris regno. Venere regnante. Soubs le regne de
Venus. S.

Rail for a woman. Amictorium, Mammillare, ris. neut. ge. Gorgias. H. Rail,
or perch, to bear up a vine. Cantherius, rij. m. genesis Un eschallas ou perch
a soustenir la vigne. S. Rail, or to speak reprochefully against one.
Co^tumelias dicere, Alicui insultare, Confer omnia maledicta in aliquem,
Contumelia afficere, Contumeliam dicere, Verborum contumelijs aliquem lacerare.
Dire a quelqu'vn oultrage. S. Railer, or rebukefull speaker. Conuitiator,
toris. Scurra, ae. m. g. Qui dit parolle^ oultrageuses a aucun. Rayles, or
bordes to enclose a place. Vacerrae, aru^. Railing, or outrage of speech.
Opprobratio, nis. Violatio, onis. Contumelia, ae. f. ge. Oultragement de
parolles. S. Railing, or scoffing. Scurilitas, it is. foe. g. Plaisanteur.
Railing knave, or scoffer. Scura, ae. mas. ge. Un plaisanteur. Call. Raylingly,
or outragiously. Contumeliose. Oultrageusement. S. Raylingly, scoffingly or
like a scoffer. Scurriliter. En facon d'vn plaisanteur. S. Raiment. Vestis, is.
Vestimentum, ti. Indumentu^, ti. n. ge. Habillement. S. They came apparelled in
white raiment. In tunicis albis veneru^t. Ilz vindrent vestuz d' habilleme^s
blances. S.

Rain. Imber, ris. Pluuia, ae. f. g. Pluye. S. Continual rain. Continens
imber. Vne pluye continuelle. S.

A small rain. Tenuis pluuia. Petite pluye. S.

Rain bow. Iris, dis. Arquus, qui. Arcus caelestis. L'arc du ciel. S.
Raynedere. Tarandus, di. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 34. Rain water used in medicines.
Aqua pluuialis. Rain volte. Compluuius lacus. Rain of a bridle. Habena, ae.
Retinaculum, li. n. g. La re^e d'vne bride. H. To rain. Pluo, is. Depluo, is.
Plouuoir. S.

Rain in. Impluo, is. Plouuoir dedans. Call. Rain in through. Perpluo, is.
Plouuoir a trauers, ou parmi. Call. To rain by. Appluere. Plouuoir aupres. S.

It rayneth stones. Pluit lapides, and lapidibus. Il pleut des pierres. S.

Rain sore. Ruere imbribus. Mart Rainge sieve. Sisacthea. Rayny, or full of
rain. Imbricosus, a, um. Pluuialis, e. Pluuiatilis, e. Pluuiosus, Pluuius, a,
u^. Pluuieux. Call. Raise a siege. Soluere obsidionem. Liu. To raise from death
to life. Reuocare ad vita^, Resuscitare, Ab inferis, a morte, a limine mortis
reuocare. Resusciter. S.

Raise from sleep. Dormientem excitare, Euigilare, Excire somno, Excitare ex
somno, Expergifacere, Expergere, Suscitare, Exuscitare. Esuieiller. Raise in
height. Fastigio, as. Plin. Raise up. Suscito, as. Erigo, is. Susciter. S. To
raise up, or bring a thing to light. Suscitare rem aliqua^. Susciter et mettre
en auant quelque chose.

To raise an accusation capitale against one. Periculum creare alicui. Susciter
a aucun vne accusation capitale. S.

Raysin. Vua, Racemus, Botryo. Raisin, grappe de raisin. H. Raysin or grape,
having the middle taste between sweet and sower. Vua miscella, quae mistum
habet saporem inter dulcem and austerum. Meslier. H Raysyn in confection.
Astaphis, Vua passa. Nebriss. Raising, or going up of a hill. Accliuitas, it is.
f. ge. Le mo^ant d' un tertre. S. Rake. Rastrum, tri. Sarculum, li. n. ge. Un
rasteau. S. Et Rastellum, li. diminut. inde Angl. A little or short rake. Petit
rasteau. S. Rake for an oven. Rutabulum, li. n. g. Fourgeon. H. Rake with iron
teethe. Irpices, cu^. Vne sort de rasteau de fer. S. Rake, or to rake.
Sarculo, as. Abrado, is. Racler. S. To rake hay. Foenum rastellis erodere.
Racler le foin auec le rasteau. S.

Raked. Abrasus, sa, sum. Racle. S. Rakyng. Rastura, ae.* Ram. Aries, it is. m.
g. Belier, Ram. H. Arietinus, a, u^. Of a ram, like a ram. De belier. Call.
Arieto, as. To butte like a ram. Heurter des corns. Aries. Is also a piece
of ordinance, or engyne of war. Ram, or to stampte down. Fistuco, as.
Fistuca addigere. Hier. S. Rammed, or sta^ped down. Fistucatus, a, u^. Qui est
hie Rammer to drive, or ram stakes, or pyles. Fistuca, ae. Trudes, dis. foe.
ge. Vne hie. S. Ram without horns. Aries mutilis. Mouton sans corns. H.
Ramming of ground. Fistucatio, onis. f. g. Hieme^t. Rammyshe like a goat.
Hircosus, a, um. Qui sent le bouquin. S. Ramper or a defense. Munitio, onis.
Munime^tum, ti. Vallum, li. n genesis Rempar. S. To inuiron about with Rampers.
Circunuallo, as. Enuironner des Rempars. S.

To ramper a Cittye round about. Vallare, Crcunuallare, Oppidum vallo and
fossa cingere, Vrbem ducto vallo claudere. Remparer vne Ville.

Rank, or raye. Ordo, inis. m. g. Rang. S. Go in rank, or raye. Incede
ordine, In seriem te coge. Va de rang. S.

To come into rank, or raye. Incurrere in ordinem. Venir en rang. S.

Ranckeled. Rancidus, a, um. Ranci. S. Somewhat ranckled. Rancidulus, a, um. Un
pen ranci. S.

Ranckellye. Rancide. Gell. Rancling. Rancor, oris. m. g. Rancissure. S.
Rancour, or pryuie hatred. Odium, ij. Simultas, atis. foe. ge. Rancoeur, ou
rancune. S. To bear rancoure against one. Odium gerere. Auoir rancune contre
aucun. S.

To run at randon, or in haste. Effuse, vel profuse fugere. S'enfuir a grand
randon. S.

Which ronneth at randon, or in haste. Effusus cursu. Qui court a grand
randon. S.

Range meal through a syue. Succerno, is, creui. Cribler and sasser. S.
Rangyng syue. Subcerniculum. Vide Renginge. Ransom. Lytrum, tri. n. g. Renson.
H. To pay his ransom. Luere. Payer sa rencon. S.

The paying of ransom. Luitio, onis. foe. g. Payement de rancon. S.

Rape. Compressus, us. Stuprum, pri. neut. genesis Vide Rauishing. Rape an herb.
Rapa, ae. Rapu^, i. n. g. Rabe, rave. Call. Et Rapulum, li. diminut. Ang. A
little or young rape. Petite rave. Call. Rape, or radyshe, round of limosyn.
Bunias, adis. f. ge. Rave ronde de limosin. S. Rape leaves. Rapicia, vel
rapacia, orum. n. genesis Les fueilles de la rave. S. Rape, or to rauishe. Vitio,
as. Rapio, is. Rauir. S. Vide Rauishe. Rappe, or blow. Ictus, us. mas. g. Un
coup. S. A rappe or blow on the ear. Colaphus, phi. m. ge. Un soufflet, ou
iouee. S.

Rappe, or to knock. Caedo, is. Contingere quenquam, Cudo, is. Diuerbero, as.
Ferio, is. Ico, cis. Percutio, is. Peto, is. Plango, is, Pulso, as. Tundo is.
Verbero, as. Frapper. S. Rapine, or robbery. Rapina, ae. foe. ge. Rapine. S.
Rare, or not often. Rarus, a, um. Rare. Call. Rare to make. Raro, as. Verbum
inusitatum. Call. Rarely. Raro, Rare. Rarement, peu souuent. Call. Raze,
cancelle, or to cross out. Cancello, as. Abrado, is. Erado, dis. Aboleo, es.
Deleo, es. Rayer, canceller, effacer. S. Rased. Abolitus, a, um. Abrasus, a,
um. Cancellatus, a, um. Circumscriptus, Erasus, a, um. Raye. S. Rased to be.
Expungor, ris. Rash. Effraenus, a, um. Inconsyderatus, a, um. Imprudens, it is.
Licentiosus, a, u^. Praeceps, pitis. Temerarius, a, um. Tumultuarius, a, u^.
Audax, acis. om. genesis Temeraire. S. A man marvelous rash. Audacia, vel
temeritate singulari homo. Homme merueilleuseme^t temeraire.

Rash, or folyshe soldiers. Tumultuarij milites. Rashely. Inconsyderate,
Imprudenter, In praeceps, Licenter, Praecipitanter, Temere, Audacter.
Temerairement. Rashenes. Temeritas, Temeritudo, Audacia, ae. f. g. Temerite. S.
Raising. Abolitio, onis. Abrasio, onis.* Rascal, or sylly poor people.
Popellus, li. m. genesis Petit peuple. Call. Rasour for a harbor. Nouacula, ae.
Culter tonsorius. Raisoir. H. Rather. Potius, Citius. Plustost. Call. Who^^
negligence he desires rather to follow, then the obscure diligence of these
men. Quoru^ aemulari exoptat neglige^tiam potius, quam istorum obscura^
diligentia^. Terent. Plus tossed qui. etc.

Ratification. Ratificatio, onis. Ratify. Ratifico, as. Ratum habere, Approbo,
as. Ratifier. S. Ratified. Ratus, a, um. Conferme. Call. Ratte. Mus, ris. Sorex,
cis. Mus mayor. Un rat. H. Soriceus, a, um. Of a ratte. Appartenant a souri, ou
rat. S. And a water ratte, is properly called Mus aquaticus. Ratte killer.
Muricidus.* Muricida, ae. m. g. Nebr. Ratler in the throat, who does not aptly
pronounce. Traulus, li. mas. ge. Antiquum verbum. Lucret. Rave. Deliro, as. Per
transl. Deliramenta loqui, Ineptio, is. Aliena loqui. Resuer. S. To make to
rave, Incutere errorem, Insomnia facere. Fair resuer. S.

Rauing. Deliratio, onis. Ineptia, ae. f. g. Resuerie. S. Rauer. Delirus, a,
um. Resueur. S. Raven. Coruus, ui. m. genesis Corbeau. H. A ravenous byrd, called
a geyre. Vultur, is. m. g. Un veaultour. Call. Et Vulturinus, a, um. Of a Geyre.
De veaultour. Call.

Raueninge, rape, or inordinate getting. Rapacitas, it is. foe. genesis Rauissement,
and pillerie. Call. Rauenour, or brybour. Raptor, oris. m. g. Rapteur. Rauenour
of delicate meat. Heluo, onis. Barathro, onis. m. g. Gourmand. H. Ravenous.
Rapax, cis. om. ge. Rauissant. S. Ravenous eater. Heluo, onis. Lurco, nis. mas.
genesis Gourmand. Vt supra. Ravenous or a greedy wolf. Rapax lupus Colu.
Rauenously. Rapaciter. Rauenously to live. Rapto viuere. Ovid. Viure de rapine.
S. Rauyshe. Rapio, is, pui. Abripio, is. Diripio, is. Eripio, is. Praeripio,
is. Surripio, is. Extorqueo, es. Rauir. S. To be rauyshed with love. Differri
amore. Estre raui d'amour. S.

Rauishe, or to defloure a maide^. Opprimo, is. Stupro, as. Vitio, as. Vitium
afferre, Vim afferre, Pudicitiam imminuere, Contemero, as. Violer vne fille. S.
Ravished. Vitiatus, a, um. Violatus, a, um. Viole. S. Rauisher of a maiden.
Violator, oris. masc. gener. Violat^ur. S. Rauisher, or taker away by force.
Raptor, oris. Direptor, oris. Ereptor, oris. Miluinus pullus. Rauisseur. S.
Rauishing. Raptus, us. Raptio, onis. Direptio, onis. Ereptio, onis. Raptura,
rae. f. g. Rauissement. S. Rauishing of a maiden. Vitiatio, Violatio, onis. f.
g. Violation. S. Raw. Crudus, a, um. Incoctus, a, um. Cru. S. Half raw.
Semicrudus, a, um. A demi cru. S.

Very raw. Praecrudus, a, um. Fort cru. S.

Raw to be. Crudum fieri, Crudum esse. Estre cru. S. Raw to wax. Crudesco,
scis. Virg. Raufter of a house. Tignus, ni. Tignum, ni. neut. ge. Un cheuron.
S. To raufter a house. Contigno, as. Plin.

Rawenes of stomach. Cruditas, it is. foe. ge. C^^dite d' estomach. S. Rawnsome.
Lytrum, tri. n. g. Rancon. Vide Ra^some. T^ redeem, or ransom with the
weighte of goolde. Rependere aurum pro capite alicuius, Rependere auro caput.
Racheter au poix de l'or. S.

Rawnsomed. Redemptus, a, um. Virg. Rawnsoming, or paying of ransom.
Redemptio, onis. Luitio, tionis. foe. ge. Rachat, ou payement de sa rancon. S.
R. ANTE. E.
Reach. Porrigo, is, exi. Tender. S. To reach any thing with his hand. Manu
praetendere aliquid. Tender quelque chose auec sa main. S.

To give, or reach his hand to one. In alique^ manum intentare. Bailler, ou
tender la main a aucu^.

Read. Lego, is. Lire. S. Lecturio, is. To desire to read, or to remember to
read. To read any thing to children. Praelegere. Lire quelque chose aux
enfans. S.

To read a thing over sleightely, or to run it over. Sublegere. Lire quelque
chose come en passant.

Read again. Relego, is. Relire. Call. To read in common schools, to read
and teach openly. Profiteor, eris. Lire, and enseigner publiquement. Call.

Read aloude. Recito, as. Plaut. Lire tout hault quelque chose. S. Read
often. Lectito, as. Lire souuent. S. Read often over authors. Versare
authors Lire souuent les autheurs. S. Read on, read futther. Recita
vlterius, Lege amplius. Perge legere, Lege vlterius. Lis encore, Lis plus
oultre. Cord. Read over. Perlego, is. Translego, is. Parlire, lire tout. Call.
To read poets. Euoluere poetas. Lire les poets.

Read perfectly, plainly, or right. Accento, as.* Which reads loud and
with a shryll voice. Recitator, oris. om. g. Qui lit a haulte, and clerevoix.

Which reads without ceasing. Gulosus lector. Qui lit sans cesse.

Reader. Lector, is m. g. Lecteur. S. Reader in open schools, or public
reader. Professor, ris. m. g. Lecteur public. S. Reading. Lectio, onis. foe.
ge. Lecture. S. Reading openly. Professio, onis. f. g. Lecture public.
Reading perfectly, plainly, or right. Accentus, tus. masc. genesis Accent. S.
Reagall an herb. Aconitum, ti. n. g. Reagal. S. Real. Realis, e. om. genesis An
action reale. Actio in rem. Action reelle. S.

Realm. Regnum, ni. n. g. Royaume. S. To ^^ste, or drive one out of his
realm. Detrudere, sieve deducere aliquem ex regno, Exigere. Iecter ou poulser
quelqu' un horse de son Royaume. S.

To put or bring into his realm. Regem in regnum inducere. Mettre en son
royaulme.

Realm without a king, or governor. Anarchia. Reap. Meto, it is, ssui. Demeto,
is. Emeto, is. Messe^ facere. Segetes succidere. Moissonner. S. Reaper. Messor,
ris. Moissonneur. S. Et Messus, sa, sum. Reaped or mowed. Reaping. Messio, nis.
foe. g. Moissonnement. Call. Messorius, a, um. Cic. Pertaining to reaping.
Reason. Potestas, it is. Ratio, onis. Aequum, qui, n. g. La raison. S.
Ratiuncula, ae. Dimin. Ang. Little or small reason. Raisonnette. Call. All
right, and reason. Ius and fas omne. Tout droict and raison. S.

Good reason, and equite. Bonum and aequum. Bonne raison, equite. S.

Natural reason. Lex non scripta, sed nata. Raison naturelle. S.

To go to reason. Aequum bonum dicere. Aller a raison. S.

To tell the reason. Argumenta rei alicui dicere. Dire la raison. S.

To give a reason. Afferre ratione^. Donner raison.

To allege reason, why, or wherefore. Causam afferre, vel infer. S.

Reasonable. Rationalis, le. om. ge. Raisonable, qui use de rayson. S.
Reasonable man. Commodus vir. Plaut. Thy demand, or request is reasonable.
Ius bonu^ dicis, oras, petis. Ta demand est raisonnable.

That which is reasonable. Aequum, qui. Aequitas, atis. foe. ge. Ce qui est
raisonnable. S.

To find a man reasonable. Aequo homine vti. Trouuer vnhomme raisonnable. S.

That is not reasonably done of thee. Non aequu^ facis. Ce n'est pas faict
raisonnablement a toy. S.

To reasone. Argumentor, aris. Ratiocinor, aris. Raisonner. S.

Reason a matter perfectly, or to a point. Peroro, as. Cic. Reasoning.
Ratiocinatio, onis f. g. Raisonnement. S. Reasoning, or debating. Argutatio,
onis. f. g. Catull. Rebecke, or gytterne. Fidicula, ae. f. g. Rebec. S. Rebel.
Apostata, ae. Defector, ris. Rebellator, ris. m genesis Celuy qui rebelle. S. Et
Rebellatrix, cis. foe. ge. She which rebelleth. Celle qui rebelle. S. Et
Rebellis, le. Contumax, cis. om. ge. Pertaining to a rebel, or which
rebelleth. Rebelle. S. To rebelle. Descisco, is. Rebello, as. Rebellione^
facere. R^beller. S.

Rebellion. Apostasia, ae. Rebellio, onis. Rebellium, lij. Contumacia, ae. f.
g. Rebellion. S. Rebownde. Resulto, as. Resilio, is. Rebondir. S. Rebownde, or
rebownding of a tennis ball. Resultus, tus. m. g. Le rebond, ou rebondissement
d'vn esteuf. Rebuke, blame, or reproach. Contumelia, ae. Conuitium, tij. Nota,
ae. Opprobrium, brij. Vituperatio, Compellatio, Criminatio, Culpatio,
Incusatio, Offensa, Vitium. Blasme, Reproach, S. Vitupere. Rebuke or check for
manners. Censoria nota. Rebuked. Adiurgatus, a, um. Increpitus, a, um. Increpe.
S. Rebuked, or reprehended of any fault. Argutus, a, um. Redargutus, a, um.
Coargutus, a, um. Captus, a, um. Reprehe^sus, a, um. Reprins de quelque fault.
S.

To be rebuked of diverse. In varias reprehensiones incurrere. Estre rep^ins de
diverse. S.

Rebuked shamefully, or sharply. Suggillatus, a, u^. Tanse, and reprins
aigrement. S. Rebuke, chide, or to reprove. Adiurgo, as. Criminor, ris.
^ucrepo, as. Inuehor, ris. Obiurgo, as. Opprobro, as. Probro, as. Proiectare
aliquem probris. Reprehendo, is. Vellico, as. Verberare conuitio, Vitupero, as.
Taxo, as. Arguo, is. Redarguo, is. Reprendre, increper, redarguer. S. To rebuke
one. Adiurgare aliquem, Obiurgare, Increpare, Dictis accipere, Aliquem
inclamare, Concertare cum aliquo. Tans^raucun. S.

To rebuke any vice. Notare vitium aliquod. Reprendre quelque vice. S.

Rebuke most shamefully. Theonino dente rodere. Rebuke often. Increpito, as.
Increper souuent. Call. Rebuke sharply. Reprehenso, as. Proscindo, is. Inuehor,
ris. Suggillo, as. Tanser, and reprendre aigrement. S. Rebuker. Obiurgator,
Vituperator, is. masc. gener. Repreneur. S. Rebuker with much fear and shame.
Terricrepus. Rebukefull. Contumeliosus, a, um. Criminosus, a, um.
Obiurgatorius, Probrosus, a, um. Cic. Laidengeux. Pals. Rebukefull, or
sclaunderous in words. Contumeliosus, a, um. Quint. Rebukefully.
Contumeliose, Criminose. Cic. Rebuking. Reprehensio, onis. Opprobratio,
Vituperatio, onis. f. ge. Vitupere, ou vituperation, Reprehension. S. A sharp
rebuke for any fault committed. Obiurgatio, onis. foem. genesis Aigre
reprehension d'aucun fault faict. S.

Recant, or retracte. Palinodiam canere, Adagium apud Eras. quod in eos
proferri solet, qui diuersum ab hijs, quae prius dixere, sentiunt, atque in
contrarium sententiam vertunt. Recanting, or retraction. Palinodia,
Retractatio, onis. Reuocation, de^it. H. Recapitulation. Anacepholaeosis,
Recapitulatio, Epilogus, Enumeratio, Conclusio, Peroratio. Recapitulation. S.
Receipt. Acceptum, ti. n. g. La recepte. S. The account of the receipte. Ratio
accepti. La compte de la recepte. S.

To make receipte. Rationibus refer. Fair recepte. S.

Receipt, or place where officers receive. Quaestorum, rij. neut. genesis Liu.
Receive. Capesso, ssis. Capio, is. Percipio, is. Recipio, is. Excipio, is.
Accipio, is. Receuoir. S. To receive dommage, or loss. Detrimentum, aut damnu^
capere, Pati iacturam. Facere iacturam. Receuoir quelque dommage. S.

To receive a reward of some man. Auferre praemium ab aliquo. Receuoir loyer
d'aucun. S.

Receive heritage by descent. Cernere haereditate^. To receive the reward of
his folly. Pretium ob stultitia^ suam far. Receuoir loyer pour sa folly. S

To receive great fruit. Amplissimum fructu^ consequi. Receuoir grand fruict.
S.

To receive grief. Percipere dolores. Receuoir douleurs. S.

Receive monition, and warning. Admonitionibus locum relinquere. Cic. Receuoir
les admonitions. S. Receive often. Recepto, as. Receuoir souuent. S. Receive
one as judge. Retinere iudicem. Cic. Le receuoir pour judge. S. Receive strokes
of darts. Subire tela. Cic. Receuoir coups de dards. S. To receive into
frendshippe. In amicitiam accipere. Receuoir en amite. S.

Receive wares, or any thing sold by warenty of the seller, or by the
deliuerye of him before record. Mancipio accipere. Varr. To receive into the
number of his friends and familiars. Recipere aliquem in necessitudinem.
Receuoir aucun au nombre de ses amiss and familiers. S.

Received. Receptus, a, um. Receu. S. To be received of some man. Aditum ad
alique^ habere, Admitti ad aliquem. Estre receu d'aucun. S

To be received by the Gods into their nombre. Ad deos recipi. Estre receu par
les dieux en leur no^bre.

Not to be received. Excludi. N'estre point receu. S.

Received, or enterteigned. Acceptus, a, um. Receiving. Receptio, onis. f. g.
Plaut. Receiving of usury. Anatocismus, mi. m. g. Cic. Receauour. Receptor,
ris. m. ge. Un receueur. S. Receauour particular. Coactor, oris. masc. genesis Un
receueur particulier. S. Receauour of th'amerceme^tes of the court. Quaestor
aerarius curiae, Mulctaru^ exactor, and coactor. Le receueur des amends de la
cour. S. Receauours. Fis^aliu^ praestationu^ exactores. Receueurs. S.
Receauours general. Tribuni aerarij. Receueurs generauls. S. Receauours of the
kings demeanes. Rationales, and procuratores regis. Receueurs du demaine de
roy. Rechelesse, careless. Indiligens, it is. Iners, it is. Negligens, it is.
Oscitans, it is. Ignauus, a, um. Piger, a, um. Nonchalant. S. Rechelesly.
Indiligenter, Oscitanter, Segniter. Nonchalamment. S. Rechelesnes.
Indiligentia, ae. Negligentia, ae. Segnities, ei. Acedia, ae. f. g.
Nonchalance. S. Recite. Memoro, as. Nuncupo, as. Recito, as. Narro, as, Enarro,
as. Expono, is. Reciter, raconter. S. Recite again. Repono, is. Reciter de
rechef. S. Reciting, or declaration. Narratio, onis. Expositio, onis.
Recitatio, onis. f. g. Recit. S. Recitour. Recitator, oris. m. g. Recitateur S.
I recke not, I care not. Susque deque fero. Gel. Ie ne m'en chault, Ie n'emay
cure. Pals.

Reckon, or to compte. Percenseo, es. Ratiocinor, ris. Recenseo, es. Computo,
as. Imputo, as. Reputo, as. Numero, as. Numerum refer, Rationem subducere,
Ratione^ and calculu^ ponere. Compter. To reckon, or nombre his hoaste.
Dinumerare exercitum. Compter and nombrer son ost. S.

To recke^ together, or to come to reckening. Co^ferre rations. Compter en
ensemble, and venir a co^pte.

To reckon upon his fingers. Dimetiri digitis peccata. Compter s^r ses doigts.
S.

To regester the receipt, and to keep ye reckening. Acceptu^ refer.
Enregistrer ce qu' on a receu, and en tenir compte. S.

Reckened. Recensitus, a, um. Recensus, a, u^. Compte. Reckener. Calculator,
oris. m. g. Compteur. S. Reckening. Ratio, onis. Recensio, onis. Recensus, us.
Computatio, onis. Dinumeratio, onis. foe. ge. Subductio, onis. Un compte,
comptement. S. Reckening of a baylife, or other officer. Scriptura, ae. foe.
ge. Cic. Reckening to make. Reddere calculum, vel rationem, Computare,
Enumerare, Calculum imponere, Rationem supputare, Rationem dictare, Rationem
inire, Rations colligere. Fair co^pte. Reclaim. Reclamo, as. Reclamito, as.
Reclamer. S. Reclaim, or to tame. Mansuefacio, cis. Donter. S. Reclaimed, or
denied with open voice. Reclamatus, a, u^. Reclaimed, or tamed. Mansuefactus, a,
um. Donte. S. Recognisaunce. Recognitio, onis. f. g. Agnitio, onis. foe. ge.
Recognoissance, S. Recognize, or to acknowledge. Agnosco, cis. Recognosco, cis.
Cognosco, cis. Noscito, as. Recognoistre. Recomfort. Refocillo, as. Afferre
pace^ animis, Solor, aris. Focillo, as. Reconforter. S. Recommende. Commendo,
as. Salutem dicere, vel impartiri. Recommander, S. To recommende him self to
God. Deum salutare. Se recommander a dieu, S.

To reco^mende him to some man. Salutem alicui nuntiare, vel annu^tiare. Se
recomma^der a quelqu'vn,

To recommende him by message. Missili salute donare vel impertire aliquem. Se
recommander per message. S.

Recommendation. Salus, it is. Commendatio, onis. foe. ge. Recommandation. S. He
recommendes him heartily to thee. Impertit tibi multum salutis, vel plurimam
salutem. Il se recommande fort a toy. S.

A brief recommendation. Breuis commendatio. Brieue recommandation. S.

Letters of recommendation. Commendatitiae literae. Lettres de recommendation,
S.

Recompense. Hostimentum, Compensatio, Pensitatio, Pensatio, onis. Remuneratio,
onis. Repensatio, onis. Recompense. Call. Such hier, and recompense as
apperteineth to so great a labor. Dignum solumque par pretium tanti laboris.
Loyer and recompense tell qu' il appartient a si grand labeur, S.

I demand the no recompense. Nihil hac gratia paciscor. Ie ne to en demand
point de recompense.

Without recompense. Gratuito, Gratis. Sans recompense, S.

Recompensed, or given in recompense. Repensus, a, um. Done en recompense,
Call. To recompense. Co^penso, as. Exoluo, is. Hostio, is. Pensito, as. Redimo,
is. Remunero, as. Repe^do, is. Remuneror, aris. Retribuo, is. Soluo, is.
Refero, is. Penso, as. Repenso, as. Paria facere. Recompenser, S.

Recompense damages, or harms. Damna praestare, sarcire, vel resarcire.
Recompenser les damages, To recompense evil deeds. Pen^are maleficia.
Recompenser les malfaicts, S.

Recompensation, or recompensing. Remuneratio, onis, Pensatio, onis.
Pensitatio, onis. foem. genesis Recompensement, S. Recompensation, or requiting of
like for like, as an eye for an eye. etc. Talio, onis. f. ge. Autant pour
autant, la pareille, Call. There was among the Romans a law much after this
sort, called Lex talionis. Reconcile. Reconcilio, as, Reduco, cis.
Reconcilier. S. To reconcile him self with some body. In gratiam cum aliquo
redire, Reco^ciliare sibi animu^ alicuius. Se reconcilier auec aucun, S.

To reconcile one, and bring him again into favor. In gratiam reducere,
Animum alicuius recolligere alteri. Reconcilier aucun, and remettre en grace, S.

Reconciled. Reductus, a, um. Reconcilie, Call. Reconciled to be. Reconcilior,
aris. Estre reconcilie. S. Reconciling. Reconciliatio, onis. f. g.
Reconciliation. Record, or to witness. Testor, aris. Attestor, aris.
Tesmoigner, S. To call any to record. Ad testimonium vocare. Appeller
quelqu'vn pour tesmoigner, S.

Record, or witness. Testis, is. com. ge. Un tesmoing. A true record, or
witness, and worthy of credit. Locuples testis, Grauis testis. Tesmoing
veritable, and digne de foy, S.

Thou art a good record, or witness. Tu es optimus testis. Tu en es bon
tesmoing, S

To have records, or witnesses. Testes ad aliquam rem habere. Auoir tesmoings.
S.

To bring forth records, or witnesses. Testes in aliquem dare, sieve edere.
Produire tesmongs. S.

Recorder. A memoria, Magister memoriae. H. Recorder, or pype so called.
Syrinx, gis. foem. genesis Fleute a neuf trous. Pals. Recover. Recupero, as.
Redipiscor, sceris. Redimo, is. Recouurer. S. To recover his good. Suum
seruare. Recouurer son bien. S.

To recover the loss. Detrimentum sarcire. Recouurer la perte. S.

To recover his honor. Ad delendam priorem ignominiam. Pour recouurer son
honneur, S.

To recover life. Reuiuescere. Recouurer la vie. S.

To recover health. Valere a morbo, Reualescere, Recipere sanitatem. Recouurer
sante. S.

He will never recover it. Nunquam pol indipiscet postea. Il ne le recouurera
iamais. S.

To recover money by some means for one. Efficere arge^tum alicui. Recouurer
par quelque moyen argent a aucun. S.

Recover in suit. Tenere caussam. Suet. Recovered. Recuperatus, a, u^.
Redemptus, a, u^. Receptus, a, um. Recouure. S. Recovery. Recuperatio, onis.
Reparatio, onis. foe. g. Recouurement., ou recouurance, S. Recourse. Recursus,
us. m. g. Recourse, S. To have recourse to some man for aid, and succoure.
Fide and praesidio alicuius vti. Auoir recours a l' aid d' aucun, and a son
secours.

To have his recourse, and refuge to the Senate. Deuenire ad Senatum. Auoir son
recours, and refuge au Senate. S.

Recoyle. Demouere gradu^, Inclinare acies, Pedem refer, vel reuocare.
Recedo, is. Iter retro vertere. Refer gradum, Retro cedere. Regredior, eris.
Se reculer. S. To make to recoyle. Gradu mouere, Submouere. Fair reculer. S.

Recoyle ye. Ite cessim. Reculez vous. S. To be recoyled, or driven back.
Dimoueri gradu. Estre recule, and repoulce. S.

Recoyling. Recessus, us. Amotio, nis. Abalienatio, nis. foe. ge. Reculement.
Recoylynglye. Cessim, Retrorsus, Retrorsum, Recessim. Areculons, ou en
reculant. S. Recreation. Auocamentum, ti. Deliciae, arum. Delicium, ij.
Oblectamen, inis. Oblectamentum, ti. Oblectatio, Refrigerium, rij. Recreatio,
onis. Refocillatio, Refectio, onis. Remissio, onis. Laxamentum, ti. n. g.
Recreation. S. Recreation of children. Lusus, sus. m. genesis Recreation d'
enfans. S. Recreation which one gives to an other. Iucunditas, it is. foem.
genesis Recreation q^' un done a un autre. S. To take recreation. Voluptatem
capere. Prendre recreation. S.

Take thy recreation in me. Oblectes te in me. Pren ta recreation en moy. S.

Recreante, he yt yeldeth him self in trial of arms. Dedititius, a, um.
Victus in duello. Recreate. Auocare animum, Compono, is. Refrigero, as.
Reficio, cis. Refocillo, as. Recreo, as. Solor, aris. Vegeto, as. Oblecto, as.
Animum suum ducere, Remittere animum. Recreer. S. To recreate him self. Dare
iucu^ditati, Relaxare. Se recreer. S,

Sometimes they recreate them selves. Interdu^ relaxantur. Aucunesfois ils se
recreent. S.

That recreateth the spirits with sight. Illud animos visu recreat. Cela
recree les espritz a le veoir.

Recreated to be. Reficior, ceris. Recreatiue, or pleasant. Amoenus, a, um.
Recreatif, ou plaisant. S. Read. Punicus, a, um. Ruber, a, um. Rubeus, a, um.
Rubens, it is. Rufus, a, um. Rouge. S. Very read. Rubicundus, a, um. Fort rouge.
S.

To becomme read. Colorem rubicundum trahere. Deuenir rouge. S.

To make read. Dare in ruborem. Fair deuenir rouge. S.

Read bearded man. Aenobarbus, vel Ahenobarbus, by. m. g. Barbe rouge. S. It
was also the name of a Romayne, which had a red bearde. Read, called a
swart read. Rubidus, a, um. Plaut. Read, called a bright read, shining as
fire. Rutilus, a, um. Igneus, a, um. Rouge comme feu, reluisante
resplendissante. H. Read chaulke, or redyn. Rubrica, ae. foe. ge. Croye ou
terre rouge. H. Read color, called a deep read. Burrum, ri. n. g. Read
grape. Rubella, ae. f. g. Read led, or Synople. Minium Sinopicu^. Rubrica
Sinopica, Sinopis, dis. f. g. Sinople. S. Read oker, or painting, wherewith
harlottes do painte their faces. Purpurissum, ssi. n. genesis Factitius color,
quo genas fucant mulieres. H. Read sea. Erythraeum mare. Red wax. Miniatula
cera, vel rubra. Cire ruge. S. Read to be. Rubeo, es. Rubesco, scis. Estre
rouge. S. Read to be made. Rubefio, is. Estre fait rouge. Call. Read to make.
Rufo, as. Rubefacio, is. Rougir, fair rouge. Call. Read to wax. Rufeo, es.
Rubesco, scis. Deuenir rouge. Call. Read gownde, sickness of young children.
Strophulus. Read shanke, a bird. Haematopus. H. Reddyn. Vide Read chaulke.
Read, or a cane. Arundo, Canna, Calamus. Can, Roseau. H. Vide Reed. Redned,
ruddled. or colored with read. Rubricatus, a, um. Teint de terre rouge. Call.
Rednes. Rubor, ris. m. g. Rougeur. S. Full of rednes. Rubicundus, a, um. Plein
de rougeur. S.

Reddishe, or clarret read. Rubidus, a, um. Subrubicundus, a, um. Rougeastre. S.

Redeliuer. Rescribo, is. Reddo, is. Redono, as. Rebailler. S. Redeem. Redimo,
is. Redimer. S. Redeem gauge, or paune. Repignero, as. Desgager un gage. Call.
Redemer. Redemptor, ris. m. g. Redempteur. S. Redeming of a gauge, or paune.
Repigneratio. f. g. Redemption. Redemptio, onis. f. g. Redemption. S. Ready.
Paratus, a, um. Procinctus, Promptus, a, um. Pronus, a, um. Expeditus, a, um.
Explicatus, a, u^. Pressed and appareille. S. I am altogether ready. Paratus, vel
apparatus sum. Ie suis tout pressed. S.

He is ready. Ad defendendam causam adest. Il est pressed. S.

We are ready. Nulla est in nobis mora. Nous sommes prests. S.

A man ready to do all that one will have him. Vir in quo vis loco paratus,
Omnium horarum homo. Homme pressed a fair tout ce qu' on veult. S.

Ready at commandment. Obsequibilis, le. Obsequiosus, a, um. Officiosus, a,
um. Seruiable. S. Ready, or wyllyng. Alacer, cris, cre. om. ge. Alaigro. Ready
money. Numeratum aes. Praesentaneum argentum, Numerata pecunia, Argentum
praesentarium. Argent comptant. H. To pay ready money. Representare pretium rei
emptae. Payer argent comptant. S.

To have all ready. In numerato habere. Auoir tout comptant, and tout pressed. S.

Ready, redily, or at hand. Ad manus, In numerato, In promptu, Parate, Prae
manibus, Praesto, Sub manu, Prompte. Tout pressed. Call. Ready to be sold.
Vendibilis, e. om. g. Vendibile. S. Ready to fall. Procliuis, Succiduus, a, um.
Qui cheoit presque. S. Ready to please. Plenus officij. Pressed a fair plaisir.
S. Ready wit. Exprompta memoria. Terent. Ready to be, or to begin to fall.
Collabasco, scis. Estre pressed ou commencer de cheoir. Call. Ready, or in a
redynes it is. Suppetit, bat. in pro^ptu est. Call. Ready to be, and at hand.
Adsum, es. Sub manu esse, Ad manum esse. Estre pressed and a main. S. To have
messengers redye, and at hand. Sub manu tabellarios habere. Auoir messagiers
prests, and a main. S.

To ready to plead. In procinctu stare, Certaminique imminere. Estre pressed de
plaider. S.

Ready to be delued, dug, planted, plowed, set, or sown. Restio, is, iui.
Ready to have. Praesento, as. Quintil. Ready to make. Praeparo, as. Procingo, is.
Praesterno, is. Adorno, as, aui. Appareiller, preparer. S. Ready to make an
host of men. Procingere aciem, vel exercitum. Redely. Parate, Promptissime.
Prestement. S. Redines to pleasure, and service. Obsequium, ij. n. ge. Plaisir
and service. S. Redines of wit. Promptitudo, inis. foem. genesis Ingeniosite.
Pals. The readiness and state of an army. Procinctus, tus. m. g. L'apprest and
estate de l'armee. S.

Redynes of an army to give battle. Procincta classis. Gellius. Redownde.
Redundo, as. Redonder. S. My grief shall redownd upon the. Incursabit in te
dolor meus. Ma doleur redondera sur t^y. S.

Redress, correct, or to amend. Corrigo, is. Emendo, as. Recognosco, cis.
Retracto, as. Corriger, eme^der, redresser. S. If thou promise to redress, or
correct it. Si reciperes te correcturum. Si tu promettois de le corriger. S.

Redressed, or amended. Emendatus, a, um. Correctus, a, um. Emende. S.
Redressing, or mending. Correctio, onis. Emendatio, onis. f. g. Emendation,
correction. S. Redressour, or mendour. Emendator, oris. Corrector, oris. m. ge.
Emendateur, correcteur. S. Reduce. Reduco, cis. Reduire. S. To reduce to
nothing. Consumere, Ad nihilum redigere. Reduire a neant. S.

To reduce into poulder. Cogere in cineres. Reduire en pouldre. S.

To reduce any thing to memory. Ruminare, vel ruminari, Memoria repetere,
Memorare. Reduire quelque chose a sa memoire. S.

Reduce to the first, or old state. Antiquo, as. Cic. Reed. Arundo, inis.
Calamus, mi. Canna, ae. Ferula, ae. Tubulus, li. m. g. Roseau. S. Et Cannitius,
a, u^. Arundineus, a, um. Of reed. De roseau. S. Et Aru^dinaceus, a, u^.
Semblable a roseaux. Like to reeds. Reed doole, or place where reeds grow.
Arundinetum, ti. Cannetum, ti. n. ge. Lieu ou croissent les roseaux. S. Reed,
or wheet straw. Calamus, mi. m. ge. Roseau, ou tuyau de ble. S. Reedifie, or
repair. Instauro, as. Restauro, as. Reficio, is. Restituo, is. Restaurer. S.
Reedifying. Instauratio, onis. f. g. Restoration. S. Refection. Refectus, tus.
Refectio ciboru^. Refection. Refer. Refero, rs. Referer. S. Referred to some
thing, or having relation to a thing going before. Relatiuus, a, um. Reflowe,
or flow again, or backwarde. Redundo, as. Refluo, is. Recouler. S.
Reformation. Reformatio, nis. foe. g. Censura, Subscriptio censoria.
Reformation. S. Reformations. Emendatrices iurisdictionis solutae
constitutiones. Reformations. S. Reformer. Reformator, ris. m. g. Reformateur.
S. Reformer of manners, and of the governance of a commune wealth. Censor,
oris. mas. ge. Un reformateur de meurs and de la police. S.

Reform. Reformo, as. Vertere in meliorem statum. Reformer. S. To refourme
justice. Iuris dicendi rationem in meliorem statum vertere. Reformer la
justice. S.

Reform a negligence with a better diligence. Talum reponere. Refrain.
Cohibeo, es. Comprimo, is. Contineo, es. Reprimo, is. Sustineo, es. Refraeno,
as. Refreindre. S. To refrain, and moderate him self. Cohibere se. Se
refreindre, and moderer. S.

To refrain his anger, and wrath. Iras cohibere, vel comprimere, Iram
reprimere, Irae moderari, Iram fraenare, Iracundiam cohibere, vel co^tinere.
Refreindre son ire and courroux. S.

Refrain from anger. Temperare irae. Refrain from brybery. Abstinere manus
alieno. Refrain from ill speech. Compescere linguam, Linguae temperare.
Garder sa langue de dire quelque mal. S. Refrayned. Cohibitus, a, um. Refreshe.
Redintegro, as. Refrigero, as. Reficio, is. Refocillo, as. Refreschir. S. To
refreshe the memory. Memoriam reficere, vel renouare. Refreschir la memoire. S.

Refresh, or to renew. Integro, as. Nouo, as. Innouo, as. Renouo, as.
Renouello, as. Regenero, as. Refrico, as. Renouueler. S. Refreshe, or renew
any old thing. Interpolo, as. Renouueler quelque chose vieille. S. Refreshed,
or renewed. Interpolis, e. Interpolus, a, um. Renouuele. S. Refreshing.
Recreatio. Vide Recreation. Refreshing, or renewing. Renouatio, onis.
Redintegratio, onis. f. g. Renouellement. S. Refreshing, or renewing of old
things. Interpolatio, onis. foe. ge. Renouuellement de vieilles chooses. S.
Refuge. Diffugium, ij. Perfugium, ij. Profugium, ij. Refugium, ij. Subsidium,
dij. n. g. Refuge. S. To have the Senate for his refuge. Deuenire ad senatum.
Auoir son refuge au senate. S.

Thy camp was a refuge, and place of sauftie for all the world. Fugae portus
erat in tuis castris, and subsidium salutis in tuo exercitu. Ton camp estoit le
refuge and lieu de sauuete a tout le monde. S.

Refusable, or worthy to be refused. Recusabilis, le. Aspernabilis, le. om. ge.
Refusable, S. Refusal. Detectatio, Recusario, Renutus, us. Repulsa, ae. foe.
ge. Refuz. S. Refuse. Auersor, it is. Recuso, as. Renuntio, as. Repudio, as.
Respuo, is. Abnego, as. Aspernor, aris. Refuser. To refuse to do any thing.
Fastidire, Diffugere, Refugere, Negare. Refuser a fair quelque chose.

To refuse to take, or deliver. Abnuere. Refuser a prendre, ou a bailler. S.

To refuse, and deny with making a sign, or nodde with the head. Renuere.
Refuser and nier en faisant sign de la test. S.

Refuse a Judge. In iudicem non consentire, Iudicem non retinere, vel reijcere.
Cic. Refuse a woman for lawefull causes. Repudio, as. Repudier. Call. Refuse, or
to renounce for his child, as the father does the son. Abdico, as. Renoncer
pour enfant. S. Not to refuse the offer. Condition vti, Conditionem accipere.
Ne refuser point l'offre. S.

To refuse an oath offered. Oblatum iusiurandu^ recusare, and respuere. Refuser
un serment defere. S.

Refuse office. Deponere magistratum. Caesar. Refuse, or repugne. Aduersor,
aris. Repugner. S. Refuse, or sifting of corn. Excretum, ti. neut. genesis
Criblure. S. Refuse of a house new swept. Quisquiliae, arum. f. genesis Les
baliures de la maison. S. Refuse or dust of sawed wodde. Scobs, bis. foe. ge.
Siceure, limure, limaille. H. Refuse, and dross of tried metal. Scoria, ae.
foe. ge. L'escumee and l'ordure du metal. H. Refuse of wax. Metys, Purgamentum
cerae. Call. Refused. Spr^^us, a, um. Refuse. S. To be refused. Far, vel
refer repulsam, pati, vel accipere repulsam. Estre refuse. S.

He that flies and refuses to do any thing. Detrectator, oris. mas. genesis Qui
fuit and refuse de fair quelque chose. S.

Refuse often. Abnuto, as, aui. Refuser souuent. S. Refusing. Aspernatio, onis.
Recusatio, nis. foem. ge. Refus. S. Refutation. Refutatio, onis. Confutatio,
onis. f. ge. Refutation. S. Refute. Refuto, as. Confutare, Eleuare authoritatem
alicuius. Refuter. S. Regard, or to mark. Aspicio, is. Cerno, is. Tueor,
eris, Intueor, eris. Respicio, cis. Video, es. Capessere aliquid oculis, vel
vsurpare. Regarder. S. To regard any thing little. Paruipendere. Tenir peu de
compte de quelque chose. S.

To regard one. Aliquem respicere. Fair compte d'aucun. S.

Not to regard one. Abijcere aliquem, Nihili facere. Ne tenir compte d'aucun.
S.

Not to regard the law. Legem transire. Ne tenir compte de la loy. S.

Not to regard him self. Abijcere se, atque prosternere. Ne tenir compte de
soy. S.

Not to regard a thing. Nihili facere, Respuere, Nullo loco numerare. Ne
tenir compte de quelque chose. S.

Regard before what shall follow. Praecaueo, es. Regarder deuant. Regard
earnestly. Contueor, eris. Aspecto, tas. ReRegarder firm and fichiement. S.
Regard firmly, and attentively. Oculis intentis contemplari, Obtueri, Obtui,
Spectare, Inspectare. Regarder fermement* and attentiuement. S. Regard
nothing. Pe^si nihil habere, Vacare nihilo. Regard, or to esteame. Liceo, es.
Vide Esteem. Regard, head, or respect. Cura, ae. Obtuitus, us. Obtutus, us.
Pensum, si. Ratio, onis. Respectus, us. Aspectus, us. Conspectus, tus.
Despectus, tus. Prospectus, tus. Contuitus, tus. Intuitus, tus. m. ge. Regard
ou regardure. S. Regarded to be, or had in estimation. Cenceri. Regarding no
vain glory. Remotus inani laud. Regeneration. Regeneratio, onis. f. g.*. To
regenerate. Regenero, as. Regenerer. Call.

Regenerated. Regeneratus, a, um. Regiment of a public wealth. Gubernatio,
onis. Magisterium, ij. Moderatio, onis. Rectio, onis. Regimen, inis. n. g.
Regime, ou gouuernement. S. Region. Regio, onis. Orbis, is. Ora, ae. Tractus,
tus. Terra, ae. f. g. Region. S. Region very wyndy, or full of wind. Ventosa
regio. Region plein de vent. S. Regions not inhabited. Cultu vacantes regiones,
Inhabitabiles regiones. Regions qui ne sont point habitees. S. Region by
region, or by every region, or coast. Regionatim. Par regions. Call. Registrary.
Comme^tarius, ij. Registrarius.*Scriptuarius, rij. m. g. Qui tient le registre.
S. Register. Liber, Librarium, Breuiarium, Codex rationarius, Ephemeris,
Commentarius vel Co^mentarium, rij. n. g. Un registre. S. Registre of sale of
things. Tabulae auctionariae. Cic. Le registre de la ve^dition, la tablette du
vendeur. Register of an appointement made between the parties or their
proctours. Syngrapha edicti. Le registre d' un appoinctement, faict enter les
parties ou leurs procureurs. S. Register of the jail. Ratio carceris vel
custodiarum. Bud. Le registre de geole. S. Registers, or papers iournall.
Tabulae, Perscriptiones, Regesta, Breuia, Calendaria, Rations. Registres,
papiers iournaulx. S. Registres of plees, acts, and expeditions of the court.
Libri actorum curiae, Ephemeris Curiae, Acta diurna Curiae, and Annals,
Actorum curiae libri. Bud. Les registres des plaidoyez, acts and expeditions
de la cour. S. Registre, or to enrolle. Ascribo, is. Conscribo, Perscribo. * In
literas publicas refer, vel perscribere, Regerere, In commentarios vel in
co^mentarium refer. Enregistrer. S. Registered, or enrolled. Ascriptus, a, u^.
Ascriptitius, a, um. Perscriptus, ta, tum. Enregistre. S. Regratour. Propola,
ae. m. g. Regratier. H Regular, or under rule. Regularis, e. Canonicus, ca,
cum. Regulier. S. Rehersall. Repetitio, onis. Iteratio, onis. foe. ge.
Repetition de quelque chose. S. Rehearse. Edissero, ris. Memoro, as. Subijcio,
cis. Vide. Recite, and Repeat. Rehearse again. Repeto, it is. Repot^r. S.
Rehearse deposition of witness. Re^ocare testes. Rehearse, or to repeat one thing
often. Inculcare, Canere sieve cantare aliquid alicui. Repeter and redire
souuent vn^ mesme chose. S. Rehearsed again. Repetitus, a, um. Repete. S.
Rehersing. Vide Rehersall. Reiecte. Explodo, is. Reijcio, cis. Respuo, is.
Supplodo, is. Aspernor, Excludo, dis. Reiecter. S. To reiecte ones opinion.
Sententiam alicuius expellere. Reiecter l'opinion d'aucun. S.

To reiecte a thing by disdain, or contemning. Fastidire, Naufeare, Respuere.
Reiecter quelque chose par desdain ou contemnement. S.

Rejected. Explosus, a, um. Reiectus, a, um. Exclusus, sa, sum. Reiecte. S.
Reiection Reiectio, onis. f. g. Reiectement. S. Reike, or smoke. Fumus, mi. m.
g. Fumee. S. Reike or vapoures of the earth. Vapor, ris. mas. ge. Fumee de
terre. S. Reike, or stacke of corn, or haie. Meta, ae. foem. genesis Monceau de
ble ou de foin. S. Un tas de ble. Pals. Rejoice. Gaudeo, es, uisus, sum.
Laetor, aris. Dare se iucunditati, Exhilerare se, Hilerascere, Exhilerastere,
Laetitia se afficere. S'esioui^. S. Rejoice after victory Triumpho, as.
Te^empher. S. To rejoice of some thing. Laetitiam ex re aliqua capere.
S'esiouir de quelque chose. S.

To rejoice by him self. Gaudere in sinu. S'esiouir a par soy. S.

To rejoice at an others ill. Voluptatem malis alienis capere. S'esiouir du mal
d'autruy. S.

Rejoice of the hap and prosperity chanced to one, or to our selves.
Gratulor, aris. Grator, taris. S'esiouir du bien and prosperity aduenue a
aucun, ou a no^^ mesmes. S. Rejoice with countenance, or gesture. Plaudo, is.
Rejoice with other for good fortune. Congratulor, aris. Congratuler. S.
Rejoice, and to singe for joy. Ouo, as. S' esiouir and chanter de joy. S.
Rejoice very much. Exulto, as. Praegestio, is. Or to leap for joy. Saulter
de joy. Call. Rejoicing. Gratulatio, onis. f. g. Esiouissance. S. Rejoicing.
Gaude^s, it is. Ouans, it is. part. S'esiouissant. Rejoicing with other for good
fortune. Congratulatio, onis. foe. ge. Congratulation. Call. Reise. Vide Raise.
Reiteration. Redintegratio, onis. f. g. Iteratio, onis. Reiteratio, onis. f. g.
Reiteration. S. Reiterate. Redintegro, as. Integro, as. Itero, as. Reitero, as.
Reiterer. Call. Recommencer. S. Reke wede of the sea, brought up with the
flowde. Vlua, ae. foe. ge. Relation. Relatio, onis. f. g. Relation. S.
Relative, or which has relation to a thing preceading. Relatiuus, a, um.
Rele, instrument of huswyfry. Alabrum, bri. Girgillus, li. R^^mbus Rouet a
filer, deuydoir. H. To rele yarne. Filum traducere.

Rele, or to stagger, as dronken me^, or sick folks do. Ti^ub^, a^.
Chanceler. S. Release, or a releasing. Laxamentum, ti. Laxatio, onis. Remissio,
onis. f. g. Relasche. S. To release. Dimitto, is. Laxo, as. Relaxo, as.
Remitto, is. Relascher. S.

Release his right, interest, or title. Ius alteri remittere, De suo
remittere, Concedere de iure suo. Relascher de son droict. S. Relente, or to
wax gentle and tractable. Se ad lenitatem dare. Se render doulx and tractable.
S. Relente, and to yield him self into the safeguard and power of an other.
Contribuere se alicui, Concedere in ditionem alicuius, In fidem ditionemque se
suaque tradere, Permittere se fidei, vel in fidem and potestatem alicuius,
Permittere se in ditionem alicuius. Se render a aucun and mettre en sa
sauuegarde and puissance. S. Relente, or to melte as wax and such like does.
Liqui, Liquere, Liquescere, Colliquescere, Eliquescere. Se fondre. S. Relented.
Fluidus, a, um. Reling, or s^aggering. Titubatio, onis. Titubantia, ae. foe.
ge. Chancellement. S. Releafe, or broken meat. Fragmen, inis. Fragmentum, ti.
neut. ge. Reliefes, or that remaynes of supper, or dinner. Reliquiae coenae vel
prandij. Le reliefs, ou demourant du souper ou disner. S. Relief, succor, or
aid. Suppetiae, and suppetias in Accusatiuo. Relief, secours, aid. Call.
Relieve, or to succor. Suppetior, ris. Vide succor. Religion. Religio, onis.
f. ge. Religion. Pals. Religion, or profession of religion. Hierodulia, ae.
foe. ge. Bud. Religion, profession de religion. S. Diverse religions. Aliae
atque aliae religiones. Diuerses religions. S.

Religiouse. Pius, a, um. Religiosus, a, um. Religieux. Religiously. Pi^,
Religiose. Religieusement. Call. Relinquyshe. Relinquo, is. Remitto, it is.
Relinquer. S. Relinquyshed or left. Relictus, a, um. Laisse. Call. Relicques.
Reliquiae, arum. foe. ge. Relics. S. Remain, or to be overplus. Reliquum
esse, Resto, as. Supersum, es. Rester. S. Remain, or to bide behind.
Remanere, Subsidere. Demeurer deriere. S. Remaining, or bydeing. Remansio,
onis. foem. genesis Demeure. Call. Remedy. Remedium, ij. Salus, it is. Medicina, ae.
f. g. Remede. S. Remedy against any il. Absolutorium alicuius mali. Remede
contre quelque mal. S. Remedy against vices. Cautio vitiorum. Remede co^tre les
vices. S. Remedy against poison. Amuletum, ti. n. g. Remedy, or a medicine.
Medela, ae. foem. genesis Medicina, ae. foem. genesis Medicine. Call. To remedy.
Remedium vel medicinam adhibere, Remedium facere, Mederi, Medicari. Remedier. S.

Remedies for sick folk. Praebia, orum. Varr. lib. 6. De ling. latin.
Remedies that put away grief. Anodma. Call. Remembrance, or memory of the
mind. Memoria, ae. Recordatio, onis. foe. ge. Souuenaunce. S. The remembrance
of him perceth my heart. Effodit illius memoria pectus meum. La souuenance de
luy me creue le cueur. S.

The remembrance of him goes never out of my mind. Nunquam ex animo meo
discedit illius memoria. Iamais i^ ne pers l^ souuenance de luy. S.

Remembrance of a thing. Memoratus, us. Memoratio, onis. foem. genesis Memoire.
Call. Et Monitio, onis. Monitus, us. Putting in remembrance. Ammonition. Call.
Admonition. Remembrance of a thing forgotten, or ye calling a thing into
mind. Reminisce^tia, ae. foe. g. Reuocatio alicuius rei in mentem.
Remembrance perfect and sure. Tenacissima memoria. Remembrance worthy.
Memorabilis, e. Digne de memoire. Call. Remembrauncer. Monitor, oris. m. g.
Amonnesteur. To remember. Commeminere, Co^meminisse, Commemoro, as. Memini,
sti. Memoro, as. Recognosco, scis. Recolo, is. Reminiscor, sceris.
Recomminiscor, sceris. Recogito, as. Recordor, aris. Repeto, it is. Retinere
memoria, Subire animum, In memoriam regredi, vel redire. Memoria repetere,
Memoria tenere. Se souuenir. S.

Remember ye. In memoriam redite, repetite, Animis ac memoria tenetote, Veniat
vobis in me^tem. Souuienne vous. S. I remember. Redit animo, Subit animum, vel
mentem, Animum memoria subit, Subit memoria, vel recordatio, Habeo in memoria,
Venit in me^tem, Memoria memini, Memoria est, Succurrit mihi, Recordor. Il me
souuient. S.

To put in remembrance. Memoriam afferre, Subijcere, Reducere in memoriam, In
memoriam redigere. Fair souuenir. S.

The one makes me to remember the other. Occurrit mihi aliud ex alio. L'vn me
fait souuenir de l'autre. S.

I remember that. Illud mihi occurrit. Il me souuient de cela. S.

I remember very well. Probe memini. Il me souuient fort bien. S.

Which remembers. Recordans, it is. Memor, ris. om. ge. A qui il souuient. S.

Remission. Remissio, onis. f. g. Remission. S. Remission of any evil deed.
Impunitas, atis. foe. g. Remission de quelque malfaict. S. He demands
remission, or forgiveness. Supplicatum venit, auxilium capiti and fortunis
suis petens. Il demand remission. S.

To obtain remission. Assequi impunitatem. Obtenir remission. S.

Remit. Remitto, is. Remettre. S. To remitte the pain. Concedere impunitate^.
Remettre la peine. S.

To remitte, and pardone. Eximere noxae, and gratiam ^eatus facere. Remettre
and pardonner. S.

I remitte, or forgive him for your sake. Meam animaduersionem, and supplicium
quo vsurus era^ in eum quem cepissem, remitto tibi and co^dono. Ie luy remes
pour l'amour de toy. S.

Remitted. Remissus, a, um. Remis. Call. Remnant of any thing. Reliquiae, arum.
Residuum, Quod super est. Le remanent de quelque chose, le demourant. S.
Remorse of conscience. Morsus and contractiunculae animi. Remors de conscience.
S. Remove. Amoueo, es. Depello, is. Dimoueo, es. Discutio, is. Moueo, es.
Relego, as. Remoueo, es Resoluo, is. Reuoluo, is. Commoueo, es. Remuer,
remouuoir. S. To remove an army from one place to an other. Declinare agmen
aliquo, Transmouere. Remuer vne armee d'vn lieu en autre. S.

To remove it self continually, and swiftely. Palpitare. Se remuer
continuellement, and vistement. S.

Remove a camp, or siege. Soluere obsidione. Plin. Remove far of. Elongo,
as. Submoueo, es. Esloingner. S. Remove from one place to an other. Demigro,
as. Migro, as. Tra^smoueo, es. Remuer d'vnlieu en autre Remove with much
pain. Amolior, iris. Remuer auec grande peine. S. Removed. Remotus, a, um.
Remue. S. Removed from one place to an other. Transmotus, a, um. Remue d'vn
lieu en autre. S. Land removed. Emota terra. Terre remuee. S.

Which is not removed. Immotus, a, um. Qui n'est point remue. S.

Removing. Commotio, onis. Motio, onis. Demotio, onis. f. g. Remuement. S.
Render. Reddo, is. Redono, as. Retribuo, is. Restituo, is. Render. S. To
render, or yield him self to some man. Contribuere se alicui, Concedere in
deditionem alicuius, In fidem deditionemque se suaque tradere, Permittere se
fidei, vel in fidem and potestatem alicuius, Permittere se in deditionem
alicuius. Se render a aucun. S.

To render, or requite the like. Par refer, Paria facere, Parem gratiam
refer, Par pari refer. Render la pareille. S.

To render a reason why. Rationem subijcere. Render raison pourquoy. S.

To render, or yield the fortress to the enemies. Prodere arcem hostibus.
Render la fortress aux ennemis. S.

To render him self as vanquished. Palmam dare. Se render comme vaincu. S.

To render thanks* Gratias agere, Habere grates. Render graces. S.

Render thanks, Gratulor, aris. Render grace, remercier. S. To render, or
yield to the enemy. Facere deditionem ad hostem, Subire deditionem. Se render
a l'enne^i. S.

Rendered. Redditus, a, um. Redonatus, a, um. Rend. Rendering. Redonatio, onis.
Redditio, onis* foe. genesis Rendem^^t. S. Rendered, or yielded. Deditus, a, um.
Liu. Which is rendered, or yielded to the mercy of an other. Dedititius, a, um.
Qui s' est r^ndu a la merci d'vne autre. Call.

Rendering of thanckes. Gratiarum actio, Gratulatio, Eucharistia. Re^erciement,
action de graces. S. Rendryng, or yelding of him self to some body. Deditio,
onis. f. g. Qu^nd on se rend a aucun. S. Renew. Interpolo, as. Integro, as.
Instauro, as. Redintegro, as. Reficio, cis. Refero, rs. Renouo, as. Reparo, as.
Restauro, as. Restituo, is. Nouo, as. Innouo, as. Renouello, as. Regenero, as.
Refrico, as. Ren^uueller. S. To renew, or refreshe a grief, wound, or sore,
Vulnus refricare, vel redulcerare. Renouueler, ou refreschir vne play. S.

To wax new. Recrudesco, cis, dui. Se renouueler. S.

This euel waxes new. Hoc malum integrascit. Ce mal se renouelle. S.

To renew an accusation. Rem repetere. Renouueller vne accusation. S.

To renew, or take in hand again an old process. Litem intermissam longo
inueruallo repetere. Renouueler, ou reprendre un vieil process. S.

Renewed. Interpolis, e. Interpolus, a, um. Renouuele* Renewed to be.
Integrasco, scis. Reficior, eris. Estre renouuele. S. Renewing. Instauratio,
onis. Renouatio, onis. Redintegratio, onis. f. g. Renouuellement. S. Renewing
of old things. Interpolatio, onis. f. g. Renouuellement de vieilles chooses.
S. Renging sieve. Excussorium vel raru^ cribru^, Incerniculu^, li. n. g. Sas a
sasser la gross farine. S. Renown. Celebritas, it is. Claritas, it is. Fama, ae.
Gloria, ae. Nomen, inis. Claritudo, inis. Opinio, onis. f. g. Renom, ou
renoumee. S. A man of renown. Luculentus homo. Un ho^me de renom. S.

To get renown. Assequi nome^. Acquerir renom.

Which is renowned. Clarus, a, um. Famosus, a, um. Famigeratus, a, um.
Gloriosus, a, um. Inclytus, a, um. Nominatus, a, um. Celeber, a, um. Nobilis,
le. om. ge. Qui est renomme. S.

A renowned advocate. Causidicus in patrocinijs, atque in officijs forensibus
celeberrimus. Un aduocat renomme. S.

Renowned to be, or of great brute, or fame. Celebresco, scis. Celebris fio.
Estre renomme. Call. Renowmles, or without renown. Ignominis, e. Ignominiosus,
a, um. Ignobilis, le. Inglorius, a, um. Qui est sans renommee. S. Renounce.
Abijcio, cis. Abrenuntio, as. Eiu^o, as. Renuntio, as. Renoncer. S. To
renounce, or refuse one for his child. Abdico, as, aui. Renoncer pour enfant.
S.

To renounce, or forsake his son in law. Generum abdicare. Renoncer aucun a
gendre. S.

To renounce, or forsake the friendship of some body. Amicitiam alicui
renuntiare. Renoncer a l' amity l'aucun. S.

To renounce the pomp of the world. Eiurare mund fastum. Renoncer aux pompes
du monde. S.

Renouncing. Eiuratio, onis. Abdicatio, onis. foe. ge. Renoncement. Rent, or
yearly pension. Vectigal, lis. Pensitatio annua, Exagoga, ae. f. g. Rent. S.
Et Vectigalis, le. om. ge. Which owes rent. Qui d^it rent. Call. To sease
rentes upon lands, or enheritage. Praedia oppignerare annua peusitatura.
Constituer rentes sur les heritages. S.

A house which owes rent. Vectigalis domus. Maison qui doibt rent. S.

To live by his rentes. Subsidijs patrimonij se sustentare. Viure de ses
rentes. S.

A man very rich in rentes. Homo egregie praediatus. Homme bien rent. S.

Rent, and to tear in pieces. Dilacero, as. Dilanio, as. Excarnifico, cas.
Lacero, ras. Rado, is. Vellico, as. Concerpo, is. Discerpo, is. Scindo, is.
Abscindo, is. Descirer, and mettre en pieces. S. Rent with the teathe. Lancino,
as. Plin. Rent, or torn. Dilaceratus, Dilaniatus, Lacerus, a, um. Ruptus, a,
um. Scissus, a, um. Abscissus, a, u^. Laceratus, a, um. Dilaceratus, a, um.
Descire. S. Rent, or torn clothes. Lacides, dum.* Rent with teathe.
Lancinatus, a, um. Renting, or tearing. Laniatus, tus. Laceratio, onis. foe.
ge. Descirement. S. Repaye. Resoluo, is. Repayer. S. Repayment. Resolutio,
onis. f. ge. Repayement. S. Repair, access or a going to a place. Accessus,
us. Aditio, onis. foe. ge. Plaut. Accez. S. Repair, or to amend. Instauro,
as. Reparo, as. Resarcio, cis. Restituo, is. Sarcio, cis. Reficio, cis.
Reconcinno, as. Reparer. S. To repair a house. Domum restituere, Reco^cinnare,
Aedes reficere, Instaurare, Resarcire. Raccoustrer vne maison. S.

Repair to a place. Diuersor, aris. Cic. Repairer, or a mender of a thing.
Reparator, toris. Refector, toris. m. g. Reparateur. S. Reparation.
Instauratio, onis. f. g. Reparatio, onis. foe. ge. Reparation. S. Reparation of
houses, or other places. Sartum tectum, vt Sarta tecta tueri. Mart. To keep in
reparations. Reparations of the temples. Sarta tecta templorum. Les
reparations. S. Reparing. Illustramentum, ti. n. g. Reparement. S. Repe.
Demeto, it is Meto, is, tij, vel ssui. Vide reap. Reper. Messor, ris. m. g.
Moissonneur. S. Reping. Messio, onis. f. g. Moissonnement. S. Messorius, a, um.
Pertaining to reaping. Reping time, or harvest. Messis, sis. Vide Harvest.
Repeal. Antiquo, as. Repello, is, puli. Rescindo, is. Abolir, mettre a neant.
S. Repeal, or dissolve a law. Abrogo, as. Refigere legem, vel statuta.
Abolir. S. Repealing of a custom, or law. Abrogatio, onis. foe. ge.
Abolissement. S. Repeat. Recolo, is. Renarro, as. Repeto, it is. Retracto, as.
Repeter. S. To repeat, and say one thing often. Inculcare, Canere sieve
cantare aliquid alicui. Repeter and redire souuent vne mesme chose. S.

Repeat old sorrows. Ruminare actos dolores, vel praeteritas aegritudines,
vel lapsas molestias. Repeated. Repetitus, ta, tum. Repete. S. Repetition of
any thing. Repetitio, onis. foe. ge. Repetiton de quelque chose. S. Repetition.
Anacephalaeosis. Quint. lib. 6. cap. 1. Repel, or to put back. Repello, lis.
Repoulser. S. Vide Repulse. Repent. Poeniteo, es. Poenitentiam agere, Pigere.
Soy repentir d' auoir faict quelque chose. S. He repents. Eum poenitet. Il se
repent. S.

Repentance. Poenitentia, ae. foe. ge. Repent^nce. S. Replenishe. Repleo, es.
Expleo, es. Suppleo, es. Remplir. S. Replenishe, or to fill the spirits with
pleasures. Perfundere animos suauitate. Remplir les espris de doulceurs. S.
Replenyshe, or to fill with joy. Perfundere hominem voluptate, vel laetitia.
Remplir de joy. S. Replenished. Praeditus, a, um. Repletus, a, u^. Rempli.
Replenished with joy. Gaudio delibutus. Replenishing, or filling. Expletio,
onis. foe. ge. Remplissement. S. Repleuy, or to redeem cattle, or distress.
Repignero, as. Desgager. S. And he that does repleuy cattle. Repignerator,
ris. m. g. Repleueing, or redeming of a gage or pledge. Repigneratio, onis. f.
g. et Formula repigneratitia. The action of a repleuy. Replication. Refutatio,
Replicatio, onis. foe. g. Replique. S. A reply. Replication, or unfolding of a
thing. Replicatio, onis. foem. genesis Repli. S. Reply. Refuto, as. Replico, cas,
cui. Refero, fers. Repliquer. S. Report. Nunciatio, Relatio, Renunciatio,
onis. Reportatio, nis. f. g. Rapport. To report. Reporto, as. Nuntio, as.
Refero, rs. Renuntio, as. Affero, ers. Rapporter. S.

Report, and to tell to one. Afferre ad alique^. Rapporter and dire a aucun.
S. Report, or to tell vain things to some man. Far vana ad aliquem.
Rapporter chooses veins a quelqu' un. S. Report him self to one. Ad arbitrium
alicuius refer. Se rapporter a aucun. S. I report me to you. Vestrum est iam
consiliu^, Vos videritis. Ie m'en rapporte a vous. S.

I report me to him. Ipse viderit. Ie m' en rapporte a luy. S.

I report me to the judgment of others. Aliorum sit iudicium. Ie m' en
rapporte au judgment des autres. S.

I report me to any man. Cedo quemuis arbitrum. Terent.

To report him self to the court. Rem totam curiae permittere, Dicere se in
authoritate curiae futurum, si quid constituere velit. Se rapporter a la court.
S.

Report ill. Infamo, as. Obloquor, eris. Obtrecto, as. Mesdire d'aucun. S.
Report much in few words. Strictim refer. Reporter of lies. Falsidicus,
ca, cu^. Falsiloquus, a, u^. A faulse reporter. Criminator, toris. m. ge. Faulx
rapporteur. S.

Reporter of ill news. Obnuntiator, toris. mas. genesis Rapporteur de mauuaises
nouuelles. An ill reporter, or detracter. Obloquutor, oris. m. g. Mesdisant. S.

Reporters of news. Rumorum exceptores. Bud. Rapporteurs de nouuelles. S.
Repose, or rest. Quies, Requies, iei. foe. ge. Repos. S. Repose, or to rest
him self. Quiescere, Conquiescere, Acquiescere, Requiescere, Otiari, Otio se
dare, In otio considere, Feriari, Vacuum tempus laboris dare sibi, Frui quiet,
Capere quietem. Se reposer. S. Repose. Repono, is. Vt spem suam in aliquo
reponere. Liu. To repose or put his trust in one. Repository, or place to lay
up things in. Theca, Repositorium, rij. n. g. Repositoire. S. Repositorye for
instruments, and wrytings. Tabularium, rij. n. ge. Repository for medicines, or
spyces. Narthecium, cij. Cic. Reprehende. Reprehendo, is. Accuso, as.
Reprendre. S Reprehende one of, or for a fault. Arguere, Coarguere, Capere,
Redarguere, Improbare, Increpitare, Incusare, Reprehendere. Reprendre aucun de
quelque fault. S. To reprehende a vice. Notare vitium aliquod. Reprendre
quelque vice. S.

Reprehende one earnestly, and sharply. Adiurgare, Increpare, Aliquem
inclamare, Obiurgare, Reprehenfare, Verbis vehementioribus aliquem prosequi.
Reprendre fort aucun, and asprement. S. Reprehende, or to take a fugitive.
Fugitiuum reprehendere. Reprendre aucun qui s' en fuit. S. Reprehended, or
taken again. Receptus, ta, tum. Resumptus, ta, tum. Reprins. S. Reprehended of
some fault. Argutus, ta, tum. Redargutus, ta, tum. Coargutus, ta, tum. Captus,
ta, tum. Reprehe^sus, sa, sum. Reprins de quelque fault. Reprehender, or one
that does reprehende. Captor, toris. Reprehensor, oris. m. g. Repreneur. S.
Reprehension, pulling back, reproach, or reproffe. Reprehensio, onis. f. g.
Reprehension. S. Represent, or to be like. Praesto, as, stiti. Repraesento, as.
Exhibere, Imaginem reddere, Formam alicuius gerere, Imaginem alicuius far,
Effigie^ alicuius gerere. Representer. S. Represente the office of a Judge.
Induere vices iudicis. Representation. Representatio, onis. foem. genesis
Representation. S. Reprie, or to delay execution. Amplio, as. vt Ampliare
reum. Cicer. Repried. Ampliatus, a, um. Reprying. Ampliatio, onis. f. g.
Reproach, reproffe, or blame. Contumelia, ae. Criminatio, Conuitium, Dedecus,
coris. Exprobratio, Ignominia, ae. Iniuria, ae. Macula, ae. Nota, ae.
Opprobrium, Probrum, bri. Reprehensio, onis. Obiectatio, onis. Compellatio,
onis. Reproach. S. A knight without reproach, or rebuke. Eques sine exceptione
laudatus. Cheualier sans reproach. S.

To say a thing to one by, or in reproach. Ponere alicui aliquid loco
maledicti and contumeliae Dire quelque chose a quelqu'vn par reproach. S.

To obiecte for, or in reproach. Obijcere aliquid crimini, vel in loco
criminis, Obijcere vt probrum. Obijcer pour reproach. S.

Reproach of a civil personage drowned in prodigality. Catillatio, onis. foe.
genesis It was the rebuke of such gentlemen as robbed the countries alied to Rome
and had riotously wasted ye goods. Reproach openly, objected, or done, as
setting on pillory, and such like Stigma, it is. neu. ge. Suet. Stigmatici. Be
such persons* which be set on pillory, or wear papers, or be nailed to
the pillory, called infamed persons, or knights of the pillory. Reproach or
contention in words. Aduelitatio, onis. foem. genesis Which is without
reproach, or without any blame. Irreprehe^sus, sa, sum. Inculpatus, ta, tum.
Inculpatae vitae homo. Qui est sans reproach and sans aucun blasme. S.

Reproach, or to reprove, or blame. Criminor, aris. Dedecoro, as. Exprobro,
ras. Opprobro, as. Reprobo, as. Ponere vice contumeliae, Probro, as. Suggillo,
as. Taxo, as. Obiurgo, as. Imputo, tas. Obijcere aliquid alteri, Impropero, as.
Reprocher. Reproach most villanously. Theonino dente rodere. Reproach, or to
blame witnesses. Signatores and testes infamare, Refellere, Refutare,
Incessere, Insectari, Laedere, Destruere. Bud. Reprocher blasmer Vide Reprove.
Reprochefull. Contumeliosus, a, um. Criminosus, a, um. Petulans, it is.
Probrosus, a, um. Satyricus, a, um. Reprochable. S. Reprochefully. Satyrice,
Acriter, Cum conuitio. Reproching. Opprobratio, onis. f. g. Reprochement.
Reprove. Arguo, is. Carpo, is. Incilo, as. Impropero, as. Noto, as. Refello,
is. Redarguo, is. Reprehendo, is. Reprobo, as. Suggillo, as. Taxo, as. Vitio
dare, Imp^obo, as. Reprouuer. S. Reprove dignity, honesty, honor, or
worship. Dedecoro, as. Vide Defame. Reprove maliciously. Carpere maledico
dente. Reprove, or to reproach witnesses. Testibus exprobrare crimen vel
infamiam, Infamare testes, Arguere ignominiae aut cuiusuis criminis, Coarguere,
Testes refutare, Refellere, Fidem testiu^ incessere, eleuare, insectari,
infirmare, Testes reprehendere, Carpere ac labefactare fide^ testium. Bud.
Reprocher tesmoings. S. Reproved. Argutus, a, um. Damnatus, a, um. Reprehensus,
a, um. Reprobus, a, u^. Reprins. S. Reprouue. Reproved to be. Noxia, esse.
Reproufe. Repraehensio, onis. foe. ge. Vide Reprehension. Reprouer.
Reprehensor, oris. m. g. Repreueur. S. Repudiate, or to put away his wife.
Demittere vxorem, Repudiare, Repudium remittere, Nu^tium vxori remittere.
Repudier sa femme. S. Repugnancie. Antiparthia, Discrepantia, Contrarietas,
Repugnantia, ae. Aduersitas, is. foem. genesis Repugnance and contrariete. S.
Repugne. Aduersor, aris. Obnitor, eris. Renitor, eris. Pugno, as. Repugno, as.
Tendere aduersus. Repugner. S. Repugnant. Repugnans, it is. part. Repugnant. S.
Repulse, or to withstand, or put back. Aspellere, Depellere, Impellere,
Propulsare, Propellere, Repellere, Gradu mouere, Retrudere. Repoulser Repulse
or to drive back the enemy from the gates. Auertere hostem a portis. Repoulser
l'ennemy des ports. S. Repulsed. Repulsus, a, um. Depulsus, sa, sum.
Propulsus, sa, sum. Repoulse. S. Repulsed back in suing for an office.
Praeteritus, a, um. Cic. Repulsing, or putting back. Depulsio, onis. Repulsio,
onis. Repulsus, us. m. g. Propulsatio, onis. f. g. Repoulsement. S. Reputation,
or good reputation. Dignitas bona vel praeclara existimatio. Bonne reputation.
Evil reputation. Indignitas, Infamia, Turpis existimatio. Mauuaise reputation.
S.

To abase his reputation. Derogare sibi. Abbaiser sa reputation. S.

To be of some reputation. Aliquem esse. Estre de quelque reputation. S.

Repute a thing to folly. Vertere stultitiae. He is counted, and reputed, or
they repute him a learned man. Habetur and putatur doctissimus. On le repute
tresscauant. S.

Request. Optio, onis. Rogamen, inis. Supplicatio, onis. Postulatus, tus.
Postulatio, onis. Imploratio, onis. Petitus, tus. Petitio, onis. f. g.
Request. S. His request is reasonable. Ius postulat. Sa request est
raisonnable. S.

Request reasonable. Ius bonum. Request made in judgment. Postulatio, onis.
f. g. Request faicte en judgment. S. Request answered. Subscriptus libellus.
Bud. Request respondue. Makers of requests, or supplications. Libelliones.
Bud. Faiseurs de requests. S.

Requests written. Libelli, aut libelli supplices. Requests escriptes. S. To
make request to one. Expostulare, Petere, Supplicare. Fair request a aucun.
S.

To make request for an other. Pro aliquo postulare. Fair request pour
autruy. S

To be master of requests. Libellos agere. Estre maistre des requests. S.

The masters of requests. Libellorum magistri. Bud. Le maistres des
requests. S.

To do the office of a master of requests. Fu^gi magisterio libellorum and
postulationu^. Bud. Fair l'office d'vn maistre des requests. S.

Require. Deposco, scis. Exigo, is. Interpello, as. Peto, is. Posco, scis.
Postulo, as. Requiro, is. Rogo, as. Imploro, as. Depostulo, las. Flagito, tas.
Requerir. S. Require a thing earnestlye. Depostulo, as. Vehementer postulo.
Require to his aid. In vota vocare, Appellare aliquem, Opem alicuius
implorare, Expetere ab aliquo auxilium. Requerir a son aid. S. Require a thing
that is just and honest. Exposco, scis. Requerir vne chose just and honest.
S. Require, or demand that informations be made, and the punition of some
case. Postulare quaestionem. Liu. Require instauntly. Insto, as. Requerir
instamment. S. Need requires. Exigit necessitas. La necessite le requiert. S.

When the matter requires. Vbi res poscit. Ou la chose le requiert. S.

Require his own again. Reposco, scis. Redema^der. Require one to do a
thing. Stipulor, aris. Verb. com. Stipuler. S. Require reasonably, or a thing
reasonable. Postulare ius. Required. Requisitus, a, um. part. Required to be to
do a thing. Stipulor, aris. vt Stipulor abs te. I am required of thee, or I
require thee. Both actiuely and passiuely. Requirer. Postulator, Rogator,
toris. masc. genesis Requireur. Pals. Requite, as ticke for tacke. Par refer,
Paria facere, Refero, ris. Refundo, is. Rependo, is. Repono, is. Par pari
refer, Gratiam reddere, Vicem reddere, Vices repe^dere, Operam reddere,
Hostire, Assequi merita alicuius. Render la pareille. S. Reremowse, or back,
which flies in the dark. Nycteris, Vespertilio, onis. m. g. Chauue souris.
S. Resalutation. Resalutatio, onis. f. ge.* Resalute. Resaluto, as. Salutem
alicui refer. Resaluer. S. Rescript, or letters of a prince aunswering to the
letters of others. Rescriptum, ti. n. ge. Le rescript ou rescription and
lettres d'vn roy. S. Resemble. Refero, rs. Similo, as. Praesento, tas.
Similitudinem far, refer and habere, Speciem alicuius rei habere.
Resembler. S. Resemble a person, as to be like another. Reddere aliquem, vel
refer alique^. Resembler a aucun. Resemble, or to be like his father.
Paternam specie^ gerere, Exhibere faciem parentis. Resembler a son pere. S. To
resemble his father very much. Exscribere patrem similitudine. Resembler fort
a son pere. S.

Resemble, or to be like his father in manners. Mores patris refer. Resembler
a son pere de meurs. S. To resemble the image, or similitude of God. Dei
effigiem in se ostendere. Resembler a dieu. S.

It resembles the leaf of the Laurel. Effigiem folij lauri habet. Il
resemble a vne fu^ille de laurier.

Resembling much. Assimilis, le. Persimilis, le. Moult resemblant. S.
Resembling, or similitude. Similitudo, inis. foe. genesis Resemblement. S.
Reservation. Reseruatio, onis. foe. g. Reserve. Reseruo, as. Seruo, as.
Reseruer. S. Reserve, or to keep til his return, or for an other time.
Seruare ad reditum, vel ad alia tempora. Reseruer iusques au retour, ou pour un
autre temps. S. Reserve a thing for the time to come. In vetustate^ aliquid
reponere. Reseruer quelque chose pour le temps aduenir. S. This is expressly
reserved, and excepted. Hoc nominatim cautum and exceptum. Cela est
expressement reseru^. S.

Reserve a thing to his own use in bargayne, or sale of an heritage, land or
house, or otherwise. Recipio, is. Reseruo, as. Excepter and se reseruer quelque
chose quand on vend quelque heritage, terre ou maison. S. Reserved and
excepted, that which is excepted in selling a thing and reserved. Receptitius,
a, um. Reserve, except, Ce qu'on a except en vendant quelque chose and se la
on reserve. S. Reserved. Reseruatus, ta, tum. Resident to be, or to bide long
in a place. Resideo, es. Resider. S. To give leave of non residence, or to
despence for none residence. Sedulitatis lege soluere and assiduitatis. Bud.
Donner conge de non resider, dispenser de non residence. S.

Residence. Assiduitas, tatis. foe. genesis Cui desyderium opponitur. Bud. ex Cic.
Residence. S. Residente, or that keeps residence. Assiduus sacerdos. Bud. Qui
faict residence. S. To obtain non residence: Redimere assiduum obsequium, vel
ministerium vel functionem, Impetrare gratiam, vel veniam assidui ministerij.
Obtiner non residence. S.

To be despensid with of non residence. Solui lege vt absentis ratio habeatur.
Estre despense de non residence. S.

Residewe, or remnaunt, as which remains. Reliquu^, qui. Residuu^, ui. Quod
superest. Le residu. S Residewe, or rest to be. Superesse. Estre de rest. S.
Resign, renounce, or to give over his office. Eiurare magistratum, Magistratu
sponte sese abdicare, Personam praetextatam in curia deponere. Resigner,
renoncer and quicter son office. S. I resign, give over, and leave all. Cuncta
resigno. Ie resign, quicte, and laisse tout. S.

To ask leave to resign. Petere ius vel veniam exuendi ordinis vel muneris.
Tacit. Demander conge de resigner. S.

Resignation. Renunciatio, Resignatio, onis. foe. ge. Resignation. S.
Resignation of an office. Eiuratio, onis. foem. genesis Resignation. S. To
resist. Obstare, Restare, Obsistere, Resistere, Repugnare, Reniti,
Interdicere. Resister. S.

Resist against. Subsistere, Refragari. Resister a l' encontre. S. Resist
force with force. Repellere vim vi. To resist one. Impugnare aliquem,
Resistere alicui. Resister a aucun. S.

To resist against the enemies. Impetum hostiu^ sustinere. Resister contre les
ennemis. S.

He resisted against me. Astitit mihi contra. Il m' a resist. S.

Resist, or to repugne. Reluctor, aris. Resister, repugner. S. Resistance.
Contentio, Renixus, us. Repugnantia, ae. Impugnatio, onis. Resistentia, ae. f.
g. Resistance. Resister. Propulsator, toris. m. g. Resolution. Resolutio, onis.
Resolve, to break, or to melte. Resoluo, is. Soluo, is. Resouldre. S. I am
resolved herein, or I have decreed thus with my self. Hoc mihi constitutum
est, Sic deliberatum est mihi, Omnino ita decreui, Istud plane in animum
induxi. Ie suis resolu a cela. S.

Resolved. Fluidus, a, um. Resolutus, a, um. Resolu. S. Resort, or to come to
one. Accedo, dis. Resorter. Pals. vt Accede ad me cras. Resort, or come to me
to morrow. Resort often, or to haunte, or frequent. Celebrare, Frequentare,
Versari, Conuersari. Hanter. S. He resorteth much to him. Frequens est cum eo.
Il le hante fort. S.

To resort. Diuersor, aris. Hanter.

Resorting, or resort, or haunte of people. Congressus, sus. m. g. Hantement de
gens. S. Resounde, or to sound again. Assono, as. Resono, as, aui. Consono,
as. Resonner. S. Resounding, resonant, or giving sound. Argutus, a, um.
Resonans, it is. om. g. Resonus, a, u^. Resonant. Respect that one has to do a
thing. Respectus, tus. Circumspectio, onis. Obseruatio, onis. Ratio, onis f. g.
Esgard qu'on ha de fair quelque chose. S To have respect to one. Spectare
aliquem, Rationem alicuius ducere, vel habere.

To have respect, or regard to his profit. Rationem commodi ducere, Habere
rationem co^modi. Auoir esgard a son prouffit. S.

To have respect, or regard to his health. Valetudini aliquid tribuere,
Parcere valetudini, Seruire valetudini, Respicere se, Valetudini indulgere.
Auoir esgard a sa sante. S.

To have a respect, or regard to the time. Te^pori consulere. Auoir esgard au
temps.

Without any respect. Delectu remoto. Sans aucun esgard. S.

Rest. Accubitus, us, ui. Otium, tij. Quies, it is. Requies, ei. Tranquillitas,
it is. foe. ge. R^pos. S. Rest, and quietness of mind. Euthymia. Bud. Repos d'
esprit. S. To take rest. Quietem capere. Prendre repos. S.

To mainteyne rest, and peace. Tenere otium. Maintenir le repos and la paix. S.

Rest in a so^g, which is a point of taciturnitie. Numerus, ri. m. g. Rest,
remnant, or residewe. Reliquiae, arum. Residuum, ui. Reliquum, qui. Ce qui est
demeure de rest To rest. Accubo, as, bui, bitu^. Otior, aris. Quiesco, scis.
Requiesco, scis. Resideo, es. Acquesco, cis. Otio se dare, In otio considere,
Conquiescere, Vacuum tempus laboris dare sibi, Frui quiet, Capere quietem. Se
reposer. S.

Rest after going. Remorari gradum, In loco aliquo subsidere, Gradum sistere,
Resistere. S' arrester. S. Rest, or tarry all night. Pernocto, as. Demourer
toute la nuict. Call. Rest in song. Remittere numeros in cantu. Rest, or to be
residew. Superesse, Reliquum esse, Restare. Rester. S. Rest, or setle, as
drink, water, or such like, when it is thick. Sido, is. Plin. Sidere in ima
vasis. To setle to the botome of the vessel. Rest, or tarry. Resideo, es.
Resider. S. Restfull, or that is in rest. Quietus, a, um. Qui est en repos. S.
Resting place for men of war, or ships. Statio, onis. f. g. Et Statiuncula,
ae. foe. ge. A little restyng place. Resting places for an army. Castra, orum.
Stationes, number. Restiturion. Redhibitio, onis. Restitutio, onis. f. g.
Restitution. S. Restore. Reddo, is. Reficio, cis. Recreo, as. Redigo, is.
Reparo, as. Repono, is. Restauro, as. Restituo, is. Restit^er. S. Restaurer. S.
Restore borrowed ware. Reluo, is. Plaut. Restore into former state. Redintegro,
as. Refoueo, es. Restituere in integrum, id est integrum facere, vt prius erat.
Restore one into his place. In suum locum restituere Restituer aucun en son
lieu. S. Restore to favor, or grace. Reconcilio, as. Vide Reconcile. Restored.
Refectus, a, um. Redactus, a, um. Redhibitus, a, um. Restituee. S. Restored to
grace, or reconciled. Reconciliatus, a, um. Reconcilie. S. Restored to be.
Reficior, ceris. Restituor, eris. Restorer, or he that settes one in his first
place. Restitutor, toris. m. g. Restituteur. S. Restoring. Recreatio,
Reparatio, onis. Reparame^tum, ti. Restitutio, onis. f. g. Restitution. S.
Restrain. Coerceo, es. Cohibeo, es. Detineo, es. Fraeno, as. Premo, is.
Retineo, es. Restringo, gis. Reprimo, is. Restraindre. To restrain a law.
Legem coangustare. Restraindre vne loy. S.

To restrain the vices. Modum vitijs apponere. Restraindre les vices S.

To restrain, or lessen his despences. Minuere sumptus domesticos, Minuere
rations impendiorum. Bud. Restraindre sa despense. S.

To restrain a prisoner. Reum arctius compingere. Bud. Restraindre un
prisonnier. S.

Restrain, or mitigate ire or wrath. Sedo, as. Restrain the mind or
pleasures. Fraeno, as. Fraenos adhibere. Restrained. Coercitus, a, um.
Cohibitus, a, um. Repressus, fa, sum. Astrictus, a, um. Restrainct. S. Resume.
Resumo, is. Resumer. S. Resumed. Resumptus, a, um. Resume. Resurrection.
Resurrectio, onis. foe. ge.* Retayler, or he that sells by retayle. Propola,
lae. m. ge. Un reuendeur and regrateur. S. Retche out, properly by fuines.
Distendo, is. Estendre. S. Vide Reach, and Stretche. Reteigne. Retineo, es.
Detineo, es. Retenir. S. Reteigne, or to keep in mind. Mandare animis and
me^tibus, Memoriae ma^dare. Retenir en sa memoire. I retain Tullia with me.
Tulliam mecum teneo. Ie retien Tullie auec moy. S.

Reteigne often. Retento, as. Retenir souuent. S. Reteigne or to keep back,
properly in going. Sisto, is. Retenit and arrester. S. Reteigne, or to keep
still. Detineo, nes. Obtineo, vt supra. Retained. Retentus, ta, tum. Retenu. S.
Reteigned, or hired often for a soldier. Stipendiosus, a, um. Viget. Reteigned
to be, or hired. Stipendior, aris. Reteigning, or the force to retain some
thing. Tenacitas, it is. f. genesis Vne force de retenir quelque chose. Reteigning,
or keeping. Retinens, it is. part. Retenant. Retire, or to draw back. Retrahere,
Semouere, Auocare. Retirer en arriere. S. To retire back into his house.
Secedere. Se retirer en sa maison. S.

To retire him self a part, or aside. Abscedere, Abiungere se, Pedem refer,
Auferre se, Cedere, Colligere se. Se retirer a part. S.

To retire him self back. Cedere retro, Retro cedere. Se retirer arriere. S.

To retire, or withdraw him self from ones company in secret. Subterducere
se alicui, Subducere se de vel ex societate alicuius. Se retirer de la
compagnie d'aucun en cachette. S.

Retire, or to withdraw him self from vices. Reprimere ac reuocare se a
vitijs. Se retirer des vices. Retire, or to go away. Abscedo, is, ssi. Se
retirer. Retired or drawn back. Retractus, ta, tum. Retire en arriere. S.
Return. Reditus, us. Regressio, Regressus, us. Reuersio, onis. f. g. Retour.
S. To return. Recipio, is. Reda^bulo, as. Redeo, is. Refero, rs. Reuerto, is.
Reuertor, eris. Remeare, Pedem refer, Reuersionem facere, Viam redire,
Reuenire. Retourner. S.

Return back from whence he came. Reciproco, as. Retour don't on est parti.
S. Return backewarde. Redundo, as. * Retrorsum redire. Retourner en arriere.
S. Return to amendment, grace, or better understanding, or to his good mind
again. Resipisco, scis. Retourner a son bon sens. S. To return to the house.
Conuertere se domu^. Retourner en la maison. S.

Return to see. Reuiso, is. Retourner veoir. S. Returned. Reuersus, a, um.
part. Returned to be. Redeor, iris. Retourning back. Reuersio, onis.
Reuersus, sus. Recursus, sus. Reditio, onis. Reditus, tus. mas. ge. Retour. S.
Retourning backewarde from whence he came. Reciprocatio, onis. foe. genesis Retour
au lieu don't on est sorti. S. To retracte that which one has said, or to
vnsaye. Dicta retractare, Recantare, Palinodiam canere. Retracter ce qu'on a
dict, Se retracter and desdire. S.

Retractation, retracting, or unsaying. Retractatio, onis. foe. ge.
Retractation. S. Vt Sine vlla retractatione. Without retractation, without
retracting or unsaying that which is said. Sans retractation, sans retracter
and desdire ce qu'on a dict. S. Retreit in battle. Receptus, us. Reductio,
onis. Recursus, sus. Reuersio, onis. foem. genesis Retraicte. Et Signum receptui
dare, Receptui canere. Sonner a la retraicte. S. To sound the retreite.
Retreyte, or go back. Pedem refer, Refugio, is. Retirer en arriere. S.
Retribute, or to give a thing back to one. Retribuo, is. Retribuer. S. Reave.
Praepositus, ti. m. g.* Reveal, or to open. Pala^ facere, Reuelo, as.
Patefacere, Indicare, Enuntiare, Aperio, ris. Reueler. S. Revealing, opening,
or a revelation. Reuelatio, onis. f. g. Revelation. S. Reuelar, or riotour.
Coepulonus, ni. Helluo, onis* mas. ge. Vide Rioter. Revenue, or rent. Exagoga,
ae. f. g. Reuenu. S. Revenue, or rent of any man. Reditus, Prouentus, Vectigal.
Le reuenu d' aucun. S. Revenue of one year. Annua. Le reuenu d' vne annee.
Revenues of fermes, or rentes. Canon, Census, us. Fructus, us. Obuentio,
Praediorum merces, Prouentus, us. Redditus, us. Vectigal, lis. Le reuenu des
rentes. Reuenewe of a kings demaine. Fiscus, sci. Le reuenu du d^maine d'vn
roy. S. Revenge. Persequi iniurias, vel poenas, Vindico, cas. Vlciscor, eris.
Venger. S. Reuengeaunce. Vindicta, ae. Vltio, onis. Vindicatio, onis. foe. ge.
Vengeance. S. Revenged to be, or to take revenge. Persequi poenas, Vindicare.
Prendre vengeance. S. Revenger. Vindex, icis. com. ge. Vltor, toris. mas. g.
Vengeur. S. Et Vindex, Vltrix, cis. foe. g. She that reuengeth. Celle que se
venge. S. Reuer, or a robber. Spoliator, ris. m. ge. Pilleur. Reuerberate.
Repercutio, it is. Reuerbero, ras. Reuerberer. S. Reverence. Honor, ris. Honos,
ris. Obseruantia, ae. Veneratio, onis. Reuerentia, ae. foe. g. Reverence. S. vt
Salua reuerentia. Mart. Saving honor and reverence. Sauf l'honneur and
reverence. S. Honor praefari. Is where one speaks of a vile thing in the
presence of a personage honorable, worshipful. etc. to say saving your
honor, or reverence. Dire, sauf voustre honneur. S. For reverence sake.
Honoris causa. Pour la reverence. S.

Reverence with bowyng the body. Adoratio, onis. foe. ge. Adoration. S. To have
in reverence. Veneror, raris. Vereor, reris. Obseruare aliquem, Colere,
Admirari. Auoir en reverence. S.

Reverence, or to have the husband in reverence. Praestare reuerentiam marito,
Reuereri marit^. Reuerer ou auoir en reverence le mari. S. Reverence to do
with ^owyng the body. Adoro, as. Adueneror, aris. Adorer. S. Which does, or
makes reverence. Venerabu^dus, da, dum. Qui fait la reverence. S.

Worthy of reverence, and honor. Venerabilis, le. Venerandus, da, dum. Digne
qu'on luy face reverence, and qu'on l'honore. S.

Reverenced. Veneratus, a, um. Venere. S. Reverend. Reuerendus, a, um.
Augustus, ta, tum. Venerandus, da, dum. Reverend. S. Reverently. Reuerenter,
Veneranter. Reueremenent. Reuerse judgment. Iudicium, vel sententiam
rescindere. Reuersion. Reuersio, onis. f. g. Retour. S. Reuerte, or to
return. Reuertor, eris. Redeo, is. Reuertir. S. Reuyle, or miscall one.
Foedare aliquem appellatione, Verbo violare. Vilener aucun de parolle. S.
Revived. Rediuiuus, a, um. Sil. Revived to be. Reuiuisco, scis. Reuiure. S.
Reuocation. Reuocatio, onis. f. g. Reuocation. S. Reuocate. Reuoco, cas.
Reuoquer. S. Revoke, or to call back. Reuoco, as. Retracto, as. Idem. Revoke,
or to call back that is done. Mutare quod factum est, Infectum facere quod
factum est. Reuoquer. S. Revoke, or to call back the gift. Infecta dona
facere. Reuoquer la donation. S. Revoke a sentence. Calculum reducere. Revolt.
Deficio, cis. Reuolter. S. To reuolte, and take part with the enemies. Ire in
defectionem, Rebellionem facere, Transitionem facere, Ad aduersarios transire,
Desciscere. Se reuolter' and render du parti des ennemis. S.

Reuolting, or a reuolte, as when a town, country, or army, goes to the
contrary party. etc. Defectio, onis. Ad hosts transitio. Reuoltement, ou
reuolte. S. Reuolue. Agito, as. Duco, cis. Iacto, as. Repeto, is. Reputo, as.
Reuoluo, is. Voluto, as. Reuoluer. S. To reuolue a thing in mind. Animo
agitare aliquid. Liu.

Revolution. Reuolutio, onis. foe. ge. Revolution. S. Revolution of the Sun.
Solis conuersio, Solis decursus, Recursus, sus. m. g. Revolution de soleil. S.
Rewe, or herb grace. Peganon, Ruta, ae. foe. ge. De la rue. S. Rutaceus, a,
um. Of rue, or pertaining to rue. Appartenant a la rue. S. Rutatus, a, um. Made
of rue. Faict de rue. S. Et Polemonium. The wyld rue. Reward. Gratia, ae.
Merces, dis. Praemium, ij. Praetium, tij. Remuneratio, onis. Munus, eris. neut.
g. Guerdon. S. Reward given by scholars to their master. Minerual, lis.
Miueruale, lis. n. g. Reward in gaming, commonly called the game. Brabium, ij.
n. g. Certaminis praemium. Reward of, or for victory. Agonisma, Niceteriu^,
ij. Praemium victoriae. Reward well bestowed. Munus been positum. To give a
reward. Praemio afficere. Donner guerdon. S. and Remunerare. To reward.
Guerdonner. S.

To reward every one according to his merits. Exoluere poenas praemiaque
omnibus pro cuiusque merito. Guerdonner chascun selon ses merits. S.

To reward one. Praemijs aliquem donare. Cic.

To be rewarded. Praemium far. Estre guerdo^ne.

Rewarded. Donatus, a, um. Guerdonne. S. Rewarding. Remuneratio, onis. f. g.
Guerdonnement. Rewardles, as for thanks only, or vnhiered. Gratuitus, a, um.
Gratuit. S. Rewme, or catar, disease in ye head. Bra^chos, Rheuma, atis. n. g.
and Rheumatismus, mi. m. genesis Rume, reume ou rheum. S. Reumatique.
Rheumaticus, ca, cum. Rumatique. S.
R. ANTE. H.
RHetorician, or teacher of rethoricke. Rhetor, is. m. g. Qui enseigne la
rhetorique, Rethoricien. S. Rethoricke. Rhetorica, cae. Rhetorice, ces. foem.
ge. Rhetorique. S. and Rhetoricus, ca, cum. Of rethorick. vt Ars rhetorica. The
art of rhetoric. and Rhetorice, Rhetorically. Rhetoriquement. S. Rhewme, or
catere. Vide Rewme. Rhodes in France. Segodunum, ni. n. g. Rhodes. S. Rhone a
river in France. Rhodanus, ni. Le Rhosne.
R. ANTE. I.
RIall, or a rose noble. Rosatus, Nobilis rosatus Bud. Un noble a la rose. S.
and Pals. Riall, or an Edward noble. Eduardus, Nobilis, Eduardeus. Bud.. Un
noble Edouard. S. Ribaude. Impudicus scortaror. Paillard, Ribauld. S. Ribaudry.
Obscoenitas, it is. Impudicitia, ae. Salacitas, tatis. V^nus, eris. Paillardise,
S. Ribauldrie. Pals. Ribbe. Costa, ae. f. g. Vne cost. S. and Costatus, ta,
tum. vt Costatum corpus. Which has great ribs. Qui ha grandes costs. S.
Rice, a grain that is white whereof potage is made. Oryza, ae. f. g. Du riz*
S. Ptisane, or potage of ryce. Ptisanarium oryzae. Tisanne de riz, ou potage de
riz. S.

Rich. Abundans, it is. om. ge. Dives, it is. Lautus, a, u^. Locuples, it is.
Opulentus, a, um. Peculiosus, a, u^. Pecuniosus, a, um. Superbus, a, um. Rich.
S. Very rich. Grauis diuitijs, Auctus re fortunisque, Opiparus, Perdiues, Homo
abu^dans, Praediues, Praepotens, Largus opum. Fort rich. S.

Rich of money. Nummatus, a, um. Pecuniosus, a, u^. Praemiosus, a, u^.
Nummosus, a, u^. Rich d'argent. Rich with brybing and polling. Auctus praeda,
vel spolio. Qui c'est faict rich par pillerie. S. Rich to be. Diuito, as.
Valere opibus, Abundare, Multa habere. Estre rich. S. He is so rich, he
knows not what he has. Adeo rebus omnibus abundat, vt sua ipse nesciat bona,
Est Craeso ditior, Crasso est opulentior, Circunfluit omnibus copijs, vel
omnium rerum copia. Il est s^riche, qu' il ne scait qu' il ha. Cord.

O why am not I so rich as thou? Me miseru^, cur non est mihi ista tua
fortuna? Cur non sum perinde ac tu dives, vel fortunatus? Cur te non aequo
diuitijs? Cur aeque, ac tu, dives non sum? O que ie ne suis aussi rich que
toy. S.

If I be once rich I will live at my pleasure. Siquando abundare coepero, Meo
more viuam, Si vnquam dives ero, meo modo, meo more vel arbitrio vitam agam. Si
ie suis vne fois rich, ie viuray a mon plaisir. S.

Thou will never be rich, thou wylt never thrive, or thou will never be
worth a groate. Nunqua^ re^ facies. Terent. Iamais tu ne seras rich.

Rich to make. Dito, as. Inauro, as. Locupleto, as. Opulento, as. Fair rich.
S. Rich to wax. Ditesco, scis, Venire in diuitias. Deuenir rich. S. Richely.
Opule^ter, Splendide, Opipare, Pretiose Richement. S. Riches* Abundantia, ae.
Diuitiae, arum. Facultates, tum. Fortunae, arum. Opes, pum. Opulentia,
Peculium, ij. Res, rum. Fortuna, ae. f. g. Richesse. S. Riches permanent.
Certae opes. Great riches. Luculentae diuitiae, Largae opes, Opes validae,
Laxae opes, Gaza, ae. foe. ge. Grandes richesses. S.

Riches of money. Nummositas, tatis. foe. ge. Richesse d'argent. Small riches.
Tenues opes. Petites richesses. S.

To heap and gather riches. Acquirere diuitias, Opes co^quirere. Amasser
richesses et acquerir.

Rid, to dispatche, or make haste. Festinationem adhibere* Festinare.
Despecher. S. Riddle, a captious, or insoluble question. Gryphus, phi. Aenigma,
it is. n. g. Vne question insoluble. S. Riddle which husbandmen use to dress or
trim corn with, to get out the loly or darnell. Cribrum loliarium.
Incerniculum, li. n. g. Un crible ^ sasser de l'yuroye. S. Ride. Equito, as.
Facere iter. Cheuaucher. S. Ride about. Obequito, as. Circumequito, tas.
Cheuaucher entour de quelque chose. S. Ride about, or through the country or
field. Perambulo, as. Pererro, as.* Ride a journey. Facere iter. Ride between,
or in the middle of any nombre of people. Interequito, as. Cheuaucher parmi
quelque troop de gens. S. Rider, or one that rydeth. Eques, it is. com. genesis Un
cheuaucheur. S. Rider on Camels. Camelarius, ij. m. g. A keeper of Camelles.
Riding. Equitatio, onis. Equitatus, us. mas. genesis Cheuauchement. S. Riding
cappe. Galericulum, li. n. ge. Ridge bone of man, or beast. Spina, nae. foem.
genesis L'eschine d' un homme ou d'vne best. S. Ridge of a bank, or hill. Iugum,
gi. n. g. Le sonnet ou coupet d' vne montaigne. S. Ridge of an house.
Fastigium, gij. n. g. Culmen, nis. n. g. Le feste d' vne maison. S. and Culme^
tecti. Ovid. and Fastigia summi tecti. Virg. Idem. Ridge of land. Lira, ae.
Porea, ae. Striga, ae. Regestu^, ti, vel Regesta terra, Scamnum, ni. Merges,
itis. foe. ge. Un seillon. S. Ridge, or to make ridges in a land. Imporcare
terram, Ducere sulcos, Liro, as. Fair des seillons en vne terre. S. Ridged, as
land is trimmed for wheat. Iugosus, a, um. Strigatus, ta, tum. Ridgingly, or
after the manner of rydges, or ridge by rydge. Liratim. Par seillons. S. Rye.
Typha cerealis, Secale, lis. n. g. Du seigle. S. Rye bread. Panis secalinus.
Pain de seigle. S. Rifte, or chinke. Rima, ae. Fente ou creuasse. and Rimula,
ae. diminut. A little or narrow rifte. Petite fente ou creuasse. S. Rimosus,
a, um. Full of riftes and chinckes. Plein de fentes and creuasses. S. Rifte,
chincke, fent, clefte, or a creuise in any thing. Fissura, ae. Fissus, sus.
Rima, ae. Scissura, ae. foe. ge. Fente, descirure. S. Right, and reason. Ius,
ris. n. ge. Ius and aequum. Droict and raison. S. vt Iure vel iniuria. By right
or wrong. A droict ou a torte. S. Right, even forth, or straight. Rectus, a,
um. Droict Right order. Rectus, vel directus o^do. Order bien droict. S. Right
down. Pessum, Deorsu^ vers^^. Droict en bas. Right up. Sursum versum. Droit en
hault. S. Of, or by good right. Iure, Merito, Optimo iu re. A bon droict. S.

To leave his right to any one. Ius alicui remittere. Quicter son droict a
quelqu'vn. S.

Right hand. Dextera, ae. Dextra, ae. foem. g. Le main dextre. S. Right, or of
good right, or with good reason. Recte. adu. Tout droict. S. Right, or wrong.
Fas, aut nefas. Right well. Perbelle. Fort bien. S. Rightly, euenly, directly.
Direct. Droictement. S. Rightwyse. Iustus, a, um. Qui vit selon droict and
raison and Just, Rightly. Iustement, droictement. S. Rightwysnes. Iustitia,
ae. foe. g. Justice. Pals. Rigor. Duritia, ae. Durities, ei. Rigor, ris.
Seueritas, tatis. Seueritudo, inis. Asperitas, it is. foem. ge. Rigueur, S. To
use rygoure. Adhibere seueritatem. Vser de rigueur. S.

Rigor of the law. Summum ius. Toute rigueur de droict. S. and Rigor iuris.
Idem. Rigorous. Durus, a, um. Imperiosus, a, um. Inclemens, it is. Praefractus,
ta, tum. Seuerus, a, um. Rigoreux. S. Rigorous person. Duri oris vir. Homme
rigoreux. S. Rigorously. Acute, Acerbe, Acriter, Acerrime, Duriter,
Inclementer, Praefracte, Severe, Seueriter. Rigorousement. S. Ryme, or a
falling myste. Substillum, li. n. g. Ryme, or meter. Metrum, tri. Rhythmos, mi.
m. ge. Rhyme. S. and Rhythmicus. That makes ryme. Qui compose en rhyme. S. Rymme
of the head, wherein the brain lies. Meninges, Omentum, ti. n. ge. Barb. piam
and duram matrem appellant. Les couertures de la ceruelle. S. Rince. Vide
Rinse. Rinche pytcher. Lagenarius, ij.* Rind, or a bark. Cortex, cis. dub.
ge. Escorce. S. Rind of a pome granate. Ciccum, ci. Vide Pomegranate. Ring.
Condylus, li. Vngulum, li. Annulus, li. m. ge. Lunula, lae. foe. ge. Un anneau.
S. Annularis, re. Of a ring. D' un anneau. S. and Annulatus, ta, tum. Rynged.
Ringe to seal with, or a signet. Annulus sigillaris vel signatorius. Anneau a
cachet ou a signer. S. H. Ringe without a stone. Annulus purus, Lunula. Anneau
sans pierre. S. The wedding ring. Annulus pronubus. Anneau de foy. H.

The besill, or head of a ring. Pala annuli. Chatou, Test d'vn anneau. S.

Ringe dove. Torquatus, ti. Palumbes, Palumbus. Ramier, Mansart. H. Ringe
finger. Annularis digitus. Le doigt ou on met L'anneau. S. A little ringe.
Annellus, li. m. ge. Annelet. S.

Image printed with a ringe. Impressa ex annulo imago. Image imprimee auec un
anneau. S.

To put a ringe on his finger. Annulum digito Induere. Mettre un anneau en son
doigt. S.

Ringe maker, or seller. Annularius, rij. mas. ge. Qui faict des anneaux. S.
Ringe of a door. Cornix, cis. foem. ge. Annulus quo pulsantur fores. L' anneau
d'vn huis. H. Ob figura^ vel garrulitatem Cornix dicitur. Ringetayle hawk.
Pygargus, gi. m. ge. Ringe with a seal, or signet. Signatorius annulus. Vt
supra. Ringe worm. Impetigo, inis. Lichen, enis. m. genesis vel Lichene, es. foe.
ge. Feu volage. S. Ringe, or like thing to hang at ones ear. Inauris, is.
foe. ge. Anneau pendu au tendron de l'oreille. To ring. Pulso, as. Sonner.
Pals.

Ringe like a bell. Tintino, as. Tinnio, is. Tinter and resonner. S. The belles
ringe. Sonant tintinnabula. Les cloches sonnent. S.

Ringed, that bears ringes on his fingers, or ears. Annulatus, a, um. Qui
port anneaulx e^ ses doigts ou oreilles. S. That ringeth, or makes a sound.
Tinnulus, la, lum. Tintant, and resonant. S.

Ringing. Pulsatio, onis. foe. ge. Ringing, or tinging of metal. Tinnitus,
tus. m. ge. Tintement. S. Ringing in the ears, or sound. Tinnimentum, ti.
neut. ge. Idem. Rinse, or to wash out clothes. Colluo, is. Elauo, as. Eluo, is.
Proluo, is. Reinser. S. Riot, superfluity, and excess. Asotia, ae. Luxus, us.
Luxuria, ae. Luxuries, iei. f. g. Dissolution, superfluite and exces. S. To
give him self to all riot, excess, or superfluity. Luxurio, as. and
Luxurior, aris. depon. S' abandonner a toutes superfluitez, delices, and
voluptez. S.

Riot, or to bib and haunt cookeries. Popinor, aris. Depon. Gourma^der and
yurongner, hanter les cabarets Riot, or to play the gloton, unthrift, or
spendegood. Comessor, aris. Graecor, aris. Nepotor, aris. Pergraecor, aris.
Congraecari, Popinari, Heluari. Gourmander. S. Rioting in glotony and
unthriftiness. Ingluuies, iei. Heluatio, onis. f. g. Gourmandise. S. Riotous
person, a gloto^, a spend good. Comedo, nis. Nepos, otis. Comessans, it is.
Comessor, ris. Asotus, ti. Barathro, nis. Gurges and vorago patrimonij,
Decoctor, ris. Lurco, nis. Heluo, onis. Co^turbator macelli, Popino, onis.
Prodigus. Prodigue, fol despendeur de biens, Gourmand. S. Ripe. Maturus, a, um.
Mollis, e. Maturatus, a, um. Meur. S. Ripe sone, or to tymely. Praecox, cis.
Praecoquus, a, um. Praematurus, a, um. Meur deuant le saison. S. Ripe, or to
become, or wax ripe. Maturescere, Ematurescere, Deuenire ad maturitatem,
Maturitatem capere, Mitescere. Se meurir. S. Ripe to be, or begin to ripe, or
ripe to wax. Maturesco, scis. Mitesco, scis. Deuenir meur. S. Ripe to make.
Maturo, as. Maturum facere. Meurir. Rypely. Mature. Meurement. Call. Rypenes.
Maturitas, tatis. foe. ge. Meurete. S. Rippe a coat, or seame. Dilorico, as.
Resuo, is. Dissuo, is. Quod sutum erat dissoluere. Descouldre. S. Ripped, or
ripte. Resutus, ta, tum. Dissutus, ta, tum. Descousu. S. Rise, or to lift up
him self. Surgo, gis. Assurgo, is. Exurgo, is. Se lever. S. Rise above the
water. Emergo, is, si. Rise again. Resurgo, is. Se releuer. S. Rise before.
Praesurgo, is. Ante surgo. Perot. Rise before day. Anteluco, cas. and
Antelucor, aris.* Rise from his bed. Cubitu surgere. Se lever du lict. To
rise from the earth. Attollere se a terra. Se lever de terre. S.

To rise from sickness. Assurgere ex morbo, Conualescere ex morbo. Releuer de
malady. S.

Rise in sourgis and waves, or to make waves. Undo, as. Fair des ondes and
vagues. S. Rise like the Sun. Exorior, iris. Orior, iris. Se lever. S. Rise
up. Resurgo, is. Vt supra. Rise up out of ye water. Emergo, is, si. Sourdre
horse l' eaue. S. Rising. Surrectio, onis. foe. ge. Perot. Rising again.
Resurrectio, onis. f. g. Releuement. Rising of the Sun. Exortus solis. Le
leuement du soliel. S. Rising up of water in a spring. Scatebra* brae. f. ge.
Rising upward to a narrow or small top. Accliuis, e. Accliuus, a, um.
Esleue en montant agu par haulte. Call. Rising of a hill, or any thing in
height, or of any high thing. Accliuitas, it is. foe. g. La montant d' un
tertre. S. Riue in pieces. Discerpo, is. Concerpo, is. Lacero, as. Descirer and
mettre en pieces. S. Riue or to chyncke. Rimor, aris. Virgil. Scindere and
quasi in rimas agere. Call. Riue with a wedge. Discuneo, as.* Riuen, or torn.
Scissus, sa, sum. Abscissus, sa, sum. Laceratus, ta, tum. Dilaceratus, ta, tum.
Descire. S. River. Amnis, is. Fluentum, ti. Flumen, inis. Fluuius, ij. Riuus,
ui. m. g. Vne riuiere. S. and Amnicus, a, um. Flumineus, a, um. Fluuialis, e.
Fluuiatilis, le. Of a river. De riuiere. S. Fluminosus, a. u^. Full of ryuers.
Plein de riuieres. Call. Riuulus, li. Dimi. Ang. A little river. * Riuet in
harnayes. Clauus, ui. m. g. Riuet, or to make fast a nail on the other side.
Affigere clauum, vel ex altera part stricte figere. River un clou. S. Ryuel,
or wrincke in the face of old folks. Ruga, gae. foe. ge. Ride qui vient au
visage des vieilles gens, plis. S. Riuele, or to wrinckle. Rugo, gas. Strio,
as. Rider. S. Riuelid, or full of wrynckles. Rugosus, sa, sum. Plein de rides.
S. Riuing, or tearing. Laniatus, tus. Laceratio, onis. f. ge. Descirement. S.
R. ANTE. O.
ROan, the chief city of Normandy. Rothomagus, gi. Rouen, ville capitale de
Normdie. S. And the people be called, Aulerici, little, Rothomagenses. Rob.
Depeculor, aris. Expilo, as. Latrocinior, aris. Spolio, as. Furor, raris.
Subripere, Furtum facere, Auferre, Peculatum facere, Rem aliquam auertere,
Suffurari, Amouere, Subtrahere aliquid alicui. Desrobber, destrousser. S. Rob
a country. Depraedor, aris. Praedor, aris. Pillar. Call. Rob a king, hallowed
place, prince, publyke wealth, or common treasure. Depeculor, aris. Peculor,
aris.*. Rob by the high way. Grassor, aris. Latrocinor, aris. Brigander H
destrousser. S. Rob one of his cloak, coat. etc. Expallio, as, Auferre
pallium. Oster la robe, desrobber S. Robbed. Spoliatus, ta. tum. Pille,
desrobbe. S. Robber. Depeculator, ris. Expilator, ris. Latro, nis. Praedator,
ris. Praedo, onis. mas. genesis Defrobeur and pilleur. S. Robber by the high
way. Grassator, Hodoedocus, ci. Praedo, onis. Latro, nis. com. genesis B^igueur,
Larron. S. Robber of a chapel, church, or holy place, stealer of sacred
things. Sacrilegus, gi. mas. ge. Larron des chooses sacrees. H. Robber of the
common treasure of a prince. Peculator, ris. Depeculator, toris. m. g. Qui a
desrobbe l' argent du Roy. S. Robber on the sea. Pirata, ae. Vide Pyrate.
Robbery. Latrocinium, ij. Rapina, ae. Furacitas, tatis. Furtum, ti. n. ge.
Desrobbement. S. To keep him self from robbery. Furto abstinere, Manum alieno
abstinere, Manum vel manus comprimere. Se garder de desrobber. S.

Robbery of the princes money, or common treasure. Peculatus, tus. mas. ge.
Larrecin de l'argent du prince ou public. S. Robbing of me^. Grassatio, onis.
Latrocinatio, onis. foem. genesis Destroussement de gens, briganderie, ou
brigandage. S. Robbing of a chapel, or church. Sacrilegium, ij. neut. genesis
Sacrilege. S. Robe of estate for a king, or prince. Praetexta toga, Praetexta,
ae. Regilla, ae. Vestis regia, quae and Basilica, and Trabea dicitur. Vne rob
ancienne de quoy vsoient les rois. Call. Praetextatus, a, u^. Cladde in a robe,
or he that wears such a ro^e. Vest^ de tell rob. S. Vestiarius, ij. The
master or yoman of the robes. Robe of scarlette. Toga purpurea. Bud. Rob d'
escarlatte. S. Robe that is long. Pallium, ij. n. g. Toga, ae. f. g. Vne rob
longue. S. and Togatus, ta, tum. and Palliatus, ta, tum. Vestu d'vne rob
longue. S. Clothed in a long robe. Robes, or habit of a judge. Forensia
vestimenta. Herb Robert. Geranium, ij. neut. genesis Gruina, ae. Vehinastrum,
Gruinaria, Rostrum ciconiae, and Acus pastoris. Herb robert. H.

Robyn read breast a bird. Erythacus, ci. Siluia, Rubecula, Rubellio. Gorge
rouge, rubeline. H. Rocat herb. Eruca, ae. f. g. Roquette. H. Roche a fyshe of
the ryue^. Gardo, onis. Leuciscus fluuiatilis. Gardon, vne rosse. Alij putant
piscem quendam abramidi simillimum paulo tame^ minore^ ac viliore^, atque
Abramidis spuriu^ esse autumant. Bell. Guerdon. Pals. at Gesnerus Phoxinum
sqamosum maiorem Rhondeletij, and Rutilum vocat. Rose, Roce ou rosse. Rochet
fyshe. Rubellio, onis. Erythrinus, ni. Un paget. Bell. Un rouget. Pals. Rochet,
or surplese. Hypothicos, Amiculum linteum, Vestis linea, religiosaque, Lineus
amictus. Bud. Un rochet. S. and Pals. Rock, or distaffe. Colus, li. vel Colus,
lus. Vne quenouille. Rock of stones. Rupes, is. Saxum, xi. Scopulus, li. m. g.
Petra, ae. f. g. Roch, ou roche, ou rochier. S. Saxulum, li. diminut. Ang. A
little rock of. etc. Petite Roche. S. Rock that is high, roughe, and uneasy
to clyme. Praeruptum saxum. Un hault rochier roide and malaise a monter. S.
Rocks, or hills broken, or dygged. Abrupta loca. Rocky, or full of rocks, or
of a rock. Saxeus, a, u^. Saxosus, a, um. Scopulosus, a, um. Plein de rochiers
Rocky place, which is full of rocks and stones. Saxetum, ti, neut. genesis Locus
saxosus. Vne lieu pierreux. Call. Rod. Virga, ae. foe. ge. Virgula, ae.
diminut. Ang. A little rod. Vergette. Virgeus, a, um. Of a rod. D'vne
verge. S. Virgultum, ti. The place where rods grow. Lieu plant de verges.
Rod of an Astronomer. Radius astronomicus. Rod, or gadde to measure
ground. Chorobates, Pertica, ae. and Radius, dij. mas. genesis Vne verge de quoy
vsent les mesureurs de terre. S. A rod that measurers of ground used. Rod,
whereby fredome, or liberty is granted. Vindicta, ae. Vide Enfraunchesing.
Roder, or stern of a ship. Clauus, ui. Gubernaculum, li. neut. genesis Le
gouuernail de la nauire. H. Roffes, or roughes of fyshe, the spawne. Oua
piscium. L'oeuff du poisson. H. Royal. Basilicus, a, um. Regalis, e. Regius,
a, um. Royal. S. vt Regale conuiuium. A royal banquette. Un banquet royal. S.
Royal authority, or power. Imperium, ij. neut. ge. Empire. S. Royally.
Basilice, Regaliter, Ample, Regie. Royalement. S. Roll. Rotula, ae. Matricula,
ae. * Catalogus, gi. m. ge. Roll. S. Roll, or wrethe for a woman's head.
Arculus, li. Taenia, ae. f. g. Roll, or regester of names. Catalogus,
Matricula and elenchus propriorum nominum. La roll ou registre des noms. H.
Roll, or strykle, to stryke a bushel, or other measure even. Hostorium, ij.
n. g. Vide Strykle. Roll of the court. Volumen causarum, Volumina causarum,
Catalogi nominum, Causarum albu^, Codex vel volumen, Causarum nomenclaturae,
Causaru^ sortitiones, Catalogus causarum, Volumen curiale. Le roole des causes.
S. To call the roll. Causarum nomina citare, Nomina voluminis citare. Appeler
du roole. S.

Roll of absentes in the grammar schole. Tabella del atoria. Ro^let. Cord.
Thou art put into the roll. Tu relatus es in tabellam delatoriam, Notatus es
in tabella delatoria. On to as misau roulet. S.

Roll from some place. Euoluo, is. Rouler de quelque lieu Roll, or to turn or
tumble a thing. Voluo, is, Peruoluo, is. Roto, tas. Rouler. S. Roll, or to
tumble before him. Prouoluo, uis. Rouler deuant soy. S. Roll, or to tomble
toward a place. Aduoluere. Rouler verse quelque lieu. S. Roll upon. Inuoluo,
is. Superuoluo, is. Rouler sus. S Roll or to smooth land with a roller.
Deocco, as. Roller for barley lands, which is an instrument of husbandry.
Cylindrus, dri. m. g. vel Volgiolus, li. vel Voluolus, li. m. g. Plin. lib. 17.
Cap. 10. Had. Cylindraceus, a, um. Like a roller. Rollers whereon great
weighty pieces, or ships are removed. Phalangae, arum. vel Palangae, aru^.
foem. genesis Rouleaux. S. Rolls, or like places, where monumentes or records be
kept, as the rolls or offices in the Chauncery. Chartophylacium, ij.
Scrinium, ij. n. ge. And the keeper or master of the rolls, or such like
place. Chartophylax, cis. Custos vel magister scriniorum. Rolls written on
both sides. Hopistographi. Romayne. Quiris, it is. Romanus, a, um. Romain. S.
Rome, a city. Roma, ae. foe. ge. Rome. S. Septicollis dicta quia septem
colles adjacent, Videlicet Col lis Palatinus in quo primo reges, deinde
consules, postremo imperatores sedem habuere, inde dicti Palatini, qui and sunt
Pala^tes, vel a Palantia Latini coniuge: collis Quirinalis, quasi prope Quirini
sacellu^: collis Auentinus, ab Auentino rege ibide^ extincto and humato, vel ab
adue^tu hominum Latinorum adpellatus: collis Caelius, a Caelio Vibeno nobiliss.
duce Thusco dictus: collis Viminalis quod ibi vimina sylua fuit: collis
Exquiliae, ab excubijs regis, vel quod excultae fuere a Tullo rege: Ianiculum
septimus collis quod and oppidum fertur non procul a Roma: dictum quia per cum
Po. To. transire inchoauerit in agrum Hetruscum, vel quia Ianus illud
condiderit. Rongen. Pulsatus, a, um.* Roo, or roobucke. Capreolus, li. m. ge.
Caprea, ae. f. Cheureau, Cheureul sauuage. Root. Radix, cis. f. g. Racine. S.
and Radicula, lae. f. g. A little root. Racinette. and Radicitus. By the
root. Radicalement. and Radicosus, sa, sum. That has many roots. Qui ha
beaucoup de racines. S. Root or stem of a tree, or herb. Stirps, pis. mas.
and foem. ge. Racine d'arbre ou d' herb^. S. To root out, or to pluck up by
the roots. Extirpo, pas. Eradico, cas. Radices euellere. Arracher les racines.
S.

To take root. Radico, cas. and Radicor, aris. Radicem capere, Radices agere.
Cic. Prendre racine.

Rooted, or that has root, or taken root. Radicatus, ta, tum. Qui a prins
racine. S. Roots very small that are about the bigger. Fibrae, Capillamenta,
Minutissimae and extremae radiculae. Filets des racines. H. Rope. Funis, is.
Restis, is. foe. genesis Vne cord. S. Funiculus, li. Resticula, ae. diminut. Ang.
A little or small rope. Cordelle ou cordelette. S. To make a rope, or cord.
Funem torquere, vel Texere. Cordeler, ou corder. S.

Rope stretched out, made snare fashion, to take beasts or birds. Transenna,
nae. foe. genesis Plaut. Vne cord tendus pour prendre les bestes ou oiseaulx. S.
Rope of onions. Restis vnionum, vel caeparum. Vne cord d' oignons. S. Roper.
Restio, onis. mas. ge. Cordier. Call. and Restio, onis. Plaut. Is he that
hangs him self. Roperype, or ungracious waghalter. Nequa^. Adiect. indeclin.
Meschant. S. Ropers ball an instrument wherewith ropes are made. Medipontus,
ti. vel Mediopontus. Nebris. Ropy, as ale, or licoure is. Viscosus, a, um.
Rore. Fremo, is. Rugio, is. Rugir. S. The Leon roreth, and cries. Leo rugit
and fremit. Le lion rougit ou ruit. S.

Roaring. Fremitus, us. Rugitus, us. mas. ge. Rugement Rugissement. S.
Fremibundus, a, um. Full of roaring. Roaring like a beast. Rugiens, it is.
Freme^s, it is. om. genesis Rugissant. S. Roaring like the sea, or water. Vndisonus,
a, um. vt Aequor vndisonum. Virg. The roaring sea. Rose. Rosa, ae. foe. ge.
Rose. S. Rosaceus, a, um. Roseus, a, um. Of a rose, or of color of a rose. De
rose. S. Rose bed. Rosarium, ij. neut. ge. Rosier. S. Rose campin an herb.
Lychnis coronaria, Sunt qui Iouis florem vocant. Rose gardayne. Rosetu^, ti. n.
g. Lieu plant de rosiers. S. Rose garlandes. Rosalia, ium.* Rosemary an herb.
Libanotis, dis, vel dos. Rosmarinus, ni. Libanotis coronaria, Rosmarinu^, ni.
n. g. Herba salutaris. Rosmarin. H. Rose vinegre. Acetum rosaceum. Vinaigre
rosat. S. Rose water. Aqua rosacea. Eaue rose. Pals. Roses called damask, or
French roses. Trachinia. Rosin. Resina, ae. f. g. Resine. S. Resinosus, a, um.
Full of rosyn. Resineux. S. Resinatius, a, um. Like, or of rosyn. Resemblant a
resine. S. Rosined, or dressed with rosyn. Resinatus, a, um Frotte de resine.
S. Roste. Aduro, is, ssi, stum. Asso, as. Rostir. S. Roste, or to broyle.
Torrere, Torrefacere, Assare. Rostir ou cuire a la braise. S. To roste on the
broche. Torrere in veru. Rostir en la broche. S.

Roasted. Assus, a, um. Tostus, a, um. Adustus, a, um. Brusle, Rosti.. S. Roasted
bieffe. Assa bubula. Plaut. Beuf rosti. S. Roasted either with heat, or Sun.
Torridus, da, dum. Rosti. S. Roasted meat. Caro assa. Du rosti. S. Rosting.
Adustio, onis. Bruslement. S. Rother beast. Iuuencus, ci. m. g. Rother, or
stern of a ship. Clauus, ui. Gubernaculum, li. n. g. Le gouuernail de la
nauire. S. Rotte. Exputresco, scis. Corrumpo, is. Computresco, scis.
Imputresco, scis. Cariem trahere, vel induere, Marcescere, Immarcescere. Se
pourrir. S. Rotten. Corruptus, a, u^. Fracidus, a, um. Marcidus, a, um.
Putridus, a, um. Putris, e. Tabidus, da, dum. Cariosus, sa, sum. Pourri. S.
Tabificus, a, u^. Which does cause to rotte, or be rotten. Rotten post.
Improbus postis. Rotten sore. Vomica, ae. foem. genesis An empostume. Apostume. S.
Rotten to be. Putreo, es. Putresco, scis. Estre pourri. Rotten to wax.
Tabesco, scis. Putresco, scis. Trahere carlem. Vide Rotte. Rottenes. Putredo,
inis. Tabes, bis. Caries, ei. Marcor, coris. m. g. Pourriture, ou pourrissure.
S. Row, or rewe of any thing laid, put, or set orderly. Striga, ae. Series,
ei. Ordo, inis. m. g. Rang. S. Vide Rank. Row with an ore. Remigo, as.
Subremigo, gas. Ramer, tirer a l'auiron. Sascher. S. Row against the stream.
Aduerso flumine nauigare. Row barge, galey, or swift ship which is rowed.
Actuaria nauis. Liu. Rowed with ores. Remigatus, a, um. Remis actus. Rowed to
be. Remigor, aris. Rower. Remex, gis. m. g. Qui remos agit. Rameur. S. Rowing.
Remigatio, Remigium, ij. n. g. Gascheme^t. Rowell of a spur. Stimulus, li. m.
g. Molette d'vn esperon, roelle. Pals. Roufe and top of an house, made like an
ass back, or in form and manner of the back of an ass. Culmen, nis. n. g. Le
feste and sommet d'vn maison, faict en dos d'asne. etc. S. Roufe, and covering
of a house. Contignatio, onis. Tectu^, ti. n. g. Le tect and couuerture d' vne
maison. H. Contigno, as. To set on a roufe of a house, or to rafter a house.
Roufe being freeted, or imbowed. Laquear, ris. Laqueare, ris. Laquearium, ij.
n. g. Vide Seeling. Rowfe called a false rofe. Camera, ae. foem. genesis A vaulte.
Voulte. S. Roufe of the mouth. Palatum, ti. Caelum, li. n. ge. Le palais de la
bouche. H. Roufe tree, or rawfter of a house, bearing up the roufe. Tignus, ni.
Tignum, ni. Capreolus, li. m. g. Un cheuron. S. and Tigillus, li. Tigillum, li.
diminut. A little or small rowfetree, or rafter. Petit cheuron. S. Roufe
vaulted, or hollow in parts. Testudineatum tectum. Colum. Testudo, inis. f. g.
Viget. Roughe. Confragosus, a, um. Sentus, a, um. Scabrosus, a, um. Confragus,
a, um. Asper, a, um. Scaber, ra, rum. Rude and aspre. S. Roughe and full of
pricks. Echinatus, a, um. Roughe bread. Rubidus panis.* Roughe countenance.
Toruus vultus. Quint. A roughe fellow. Acer, Austerus, Seuerus. Un homme aspre.
S.

Roughe heared. Hispidus, a, um. Hirsutus, ta, tum. Hirtus, ta, tum. Couuert
d'vn poil rude and picquant. Roughe mason. Caementarius, ij. m. g. Masson. S.
Roughe speached. Confragosus, a, u^. Per translat. Roughe wine. Asperum vinum,
Vinum toruu^. Pli. Vine rude and aspre. S. Roughe to make. Exaspero, as.
Aspero, as, aui. Fair aspre. S. Roughnes. Scabritia, ae. Scabrities, ei. foe.
g. Asprete and rudesse. S. Roughnes of the skin. Scabredo, inis. Scabrum, ri.
n. ge. Idem. Roughnes of the eye lyddes within. Trachoma, it is. n. ge.
Scabrities palpebrarum interior. Call. Rowing. Remigatio, onis. f. g.
Gaschement. S. Rowme, or a place, or stead. Locus, ci. m. g. Lieu. S. That has
great rowme. Spatiosus, sa, sum. Qui ha grande espace. S.

Round. Rotundus, a, um. Orbiculatus, ta, tu^. Rond. Round and long like an
egg, spear, and such like. Teres, it is. om. g. Rond en long. S. Long and
round, in form of a top, and fashion of a pear. Turbinatus, ta, tum. Long
and rond en form de sabot en facon de poire. Call.

Round circle like a trendel. Spira, ae. f. g. Round figure such as spyders
make, and it is properly round works in silk and precious clothes. Scutula,
lae. f. g. Forma rotunda, Qualis aranea contexit. Round heap, or round thing
like a bowl. Globus, by. m. g. Vne chose ronde comme vne boule. S. Round like
a boule. Globosus, a, um. Rond comme vne boule. S. Round like an egg. Ouatus,
a, um. Qui est de la form and figure d'vn oeuf. Call. Round made. Orbiculatus,
a, u^. Qui est fait en rond. Round root like an onion, or turnep. Bulbus, by.
m. g. Tout racin^ ronde. Bulbosus, a, um. Full of little heads in the roots,
or having round roots. etc. Pleine de petites testes en la racine. S. Round
to make. Globo, bas. Fair en rond. S. Round table. Cilliba, ae. Cillibe, es.
vel potius Cibilla, lae. foe. ge. Table ronde. Call. Round table, a kind of
banquet to which none came but those that were of kin, Charistia. Table
ronde. H. Roundell instrument to make a thing round. Teretrum, tri. n. g.*
Round, or to make round. Rotundo, as. Fair rond. Round, or clippe. Tondeo,
es. Tondre. S. Round, or clyppe before. Praetondeo, es.* Round wrought, or
having any round circle, or work contexted therein. Scutulatus, a, um. Faict
en rondeaux. etc. Round, or in a round form. Orbiculatim, Rotunde. En form
ronde. S. Roundly. Rotunde. Rondement. Call. Roundenes. Rotunditas, tatis. f. g.
Rondeur. Call. Roundenesse of a bale. Orbis pilae. Le rondeur d' vne pile. S.
Roundnes of a staff, or spear, or egg. Teritudo, inis. foe. ge.* Roundnes of
bones, in ye anckles, elbowes, knees, and knuckles. Co^dylus, li. m. g. La
tuberosite des os Rowste, or perch, where pultrie sit in the night. Petaurum,
ri. n. g. Un ieussouer. Pals.* Gallinariu^, rij. neut. genesis Sedile auium,
Pertica gallinaria. Iucheoir. S. Rowte in sleep. Rhonchisso, as. Proflare
pectore, Somnum stertere. Ronfler. Rowting in sleep. Rhonchus, chi. m. ge.
Ronflement. Roy, or a king. Rex, gis. m. ge. Un Roy. S. Royal. Regalis, le.
Royal. Vide Roi.
R. ANTE. V.
RVbarbe an herb. Rheon, Rha, Rha siniticum, vel sinicum, Rha Indicum,
Rhecoma, Rha ponticum. Officin. Rhabarbarum. Had. Rub. Frico, as. Defrico,
cas. Infrico, cas. Frotter. S. Rub against a thing. Affrico, cas, cui, caui.
Se frotter contre quelque chose. S. To rub a horse. Terga equi subigere.
Frotter un cheual. S.

Rub hard. Perfricare, Confricare. Frotter fort. S Rub of. Defrico, as,
cui. Defrotter. Call. Rub on the galde. Tangere vlcus. Rub, or fre^e.
Pertero, is. Colum. Rub softly with some ointment. Linire, Illinire,
Delinire, Perlinire. Frotter doulcement de quelque oincture. S. Rub with some
liquoure. Linere. Allin ere, Collinere, Illinere, Oblinere, Perlinere. Frotter
de quelque liqueur. S. Rub the one against the other. Attero, is. Frotter
l'vn contre l'autre. S. Rubbell, or little stones. Caementa. orum. n. ge.
Bocaille, ou bloccage. S. Rubbell, or rubbyshe of old houses. Rudus, eris. n.
ge. Vetus rudus. Rubbing. Attritus, us. Fricatio, onis. Frictio, onis. Frictus,
us. Affrictus, us. m. ge. Perfrictio, onis. f. ge. Frottement. S. Rubbyshe, or
brockell of old houses, or walls. Rudus, eris. n. g. Ruddes or marigolds, an
herb. Caltha, Heliotropium, Solaris herba, Calendulam vocant officinae.
Soulsie, soulsi ou solsie. S. Ruddy, or ruddishe. Rubidus, a, u^.
Subrubicundus, da, dum. Rougeastre. S. Ruddy. Rubicundus, a, um. Fort rouge. S.
Ruddy somewhat. Rufulus, la, lum. Rousselet, S. Ruddy in face. Rufus, fa, fum.
Roux. Call. Ruddy to wax. Rufeo, es. Colorem rubicundum trahere. Deuenir rouge.
S. Ruddocke bird. Erythacus, ci. Rubecula, lae. Rouge gorge. S. Rude,
rusticall, or clounishe. Ag restis, e. Barbarus, a, um. Inconditus, ta, tum.
Pullatus, a, um. Inhumanus, a, um. Inurbanus, a, um. Rudis, de. Rusticus, ca,
cum. Rustique. S. Rude of language. Confragosus, a, um. Barbarus, a, um. Rud en
son parler. S. Rudely, or rustically. Barbare, Inco^dite, Crassa, vel pingui
minerua, Rustice. Rustiquement. S. Rudenes, roughnes, or hardenes. Asperitas,
Duritia, ae. Durities, ei. Ruditas, it is. foe. ge. Rudesse. S. Rudeness, or
rusticalitie. Rusticitas, tatis. foem. ge. Barbaries, ei. f. g. Barbaria, ae.
foe. genesis Rusticite. S. Rudementes, or rules. Rudimenta, orum. Ruff fish.
Porculus, Porcellus. H. Aspredo, inis. Ruff of a garment. Sinus, us. m. g.
Ruff, or to gather a shirte. Rugare, Striare indusium. Fronser vne chemise. S.
Ruffian, or a haunter of brothelhouses. Ganeo, onis. Scortator, ris. m. genesis Un
haunteur de tauernes bordelieres. S. Leno, nis. Un ruffien. S. To play the
ruffian. Lenocinari, Lenoniam facere. Ruffienner. S.

Ruffle, or to wrynkle, or to make to ruffle, or to wrynkle. Rugo, as. Irrugo,
gas. Rider, fair rider. S. Ruffle, snarle, or to enta^gle. Illaqueo, as.
Enlacer. S. Rugged heery or covered with roughe, and pricking heeres as swyne
be. Hirsutus, ta, tum. Hirtus, ta, tum. Hispidus, da, dum. Velu, couuerte d' un
poil rude and picquant. S. Rugged, or rough to handle. Scaber, ra, rum.
Scabrosus, sa, sum. Rude and aspre a manier. S. Ruggedly. Hirsute Scabre.
Ruggedness, or roughnes that is felt in handling of some thing. Scabrities,
iei. Scabritia, ae. Scabredo, nis. Scabrum, ri. n. g. Asprete and rudesse qu'
on sent en maniant quelque chose. S. Ruin and decay. Ruina, nae. Excidium,
ij. neut. g. Ruin. S. Ruin of a city. Casus vrbis. La ruin d' vne ville. S.
To procure the ruin of some man. Creare periculum alicui^ Procurer la ruin
d'aucun. S.

Ruin, and to destroy. In praeceps dare, Peruertere, Euertere. Ruiner and
destruire. S. Ruynouse. Ruinosus, a, um. Caducus, a, u^. Ruineux. Rule to rule
by. Norma, ae. Canon, nis. Regula, ae. f. g. Reigle. S. Normula, ae. diminut.
Ang. A little or short rule. Regularis, e. Made or done by rule. Faict a la
reigle. S. Rule for a carpenter. Amussis, sis. f. g. Fest. Norma, ae. f. g. Vne
reigle. S. Rule of living. Modus viuendi, Norma, Formula, Lex, Praescriptio,
Praescriptum, ti. Ratio, nis. f. g. Reigle de viure. S. A general rule.
Catholicum theorema. Bud. ex Cic. Vne reigle generale. S.

To make a general rule. Pronunciare in vniuersum. Fair reigle generale. S.

Rule, or custom. Mos, ris. Praescriptio, onis. foe. ge. Reigle. S. Rule, or
dominion. Dynasteia, Dominium, ij. Imperium, rij. Potentia, ae. Praefectura,
ae. Prouincia, ae. Regimen, inis. n. g. Reigle ou domination. S. Rule of the
fourth part of a realm. Tetrarchia, ae. f. g. Quartae partis regionis
cuiuspiam imperiu^. Rule, or governance without pity. Manliana imperia, dura,
seuera and crudelia. Rule, or oversight of husbandry. Villicatio, onis. foem.
genesis Rule, or squire. Norma, ae. f. g. Vne reigle ou esquierre. Normula, ae.
diminut. inde. Ang. A little rule or squire. Normalis, le. Made even or right
with the rule, or squire. Fait a l' esquierre. Call. Rule, or to govern.
Dominor, aris. Imperito, as. Moderor, aris. Modero, as. Moliri habenas,
Praesideo, es, Potestatem gerere, Procuro, as. Rego, is. Ago, gis. Agito, tas.
Guberno, nas. Reigler ou Gouuerner. S. To rule a naughty merchant. Co^primere
Improbu^ negotiatorem. Reigler un mauuais marcha^t.

To give a rule. Modum statuere, sieve praescribere. Donner reigle. S.

Rule by moderation, or temperaunce. Tempero, as. Gouuerner, moderer. S. Rule
or to govern his life according to reason. Vitam suam derigere ad normam
rationis. Cic. Reigler sa vie selon raison. S. Rule paper. Chartam lineare,
Lineas ad regulam ducere. Reigler du papier. S. Rule with read. Rubrica, vel
purpurisso lineare, Rubras lineas ducere. Reigler de rouge. S. Rule the
parties. Iudicium vel litem constituere, Disceptationem co^stituere, Litem
ordinare, Litis personas recte ordineque constituere. Bud. Reigler les parties.
S. Ruled, or governed. Rectus, a, um. Regi, Gouuerne. S. Parchement ruled with
lead. Membrana directa plumbo. Catul. Parchemin reigle de plomb. S.

Ruled to be. Regor, eris. vt Remo reguntur rates. Ruler, or governor.
Gubernator, oris. Moderator, Rector, oris. m. g. Gouuerneur. S. Ruler of one
country. Toparcha. * Praetor, toris. m. g. Le gouuerneur d' un pais. S. Ruler
of the people. Demarchus, Dynasta, ae. Dynastes, ae. Praefectus, tus. m. ge.
Princep^ populi, Tribunus plebis. Ruler of the fourth part of a region.
Tetrarcha, ae. m. g. Le seigneur, ou gouuerneur d' un quartier d' vne Province.
Call. Ruler over sword players. Lanista, ae. m. ge. Praefectus ludi
gladiatorij. Call. Ruler, or the rule of some thing what ever it be. Gnomon,
nis. neut. genesis La reigle de quelque chose que ce soit. S. Ruling, or the
drawyng of lines by a ruler. Linearum ductus ad regulam. Reiglement, ou
reiglure. S. Rumble, or to make a noise. Tonare, Detonare, Edere strepitum,
Fremere, Murmurare, Sonare, Personare, Bruire, S. My belly rumbleth with
fasting so long. Mihi inanitate iam-dudum intestina murmurant.

Rumblyng. Fremitus, us. Murmuratio, onis. foe. g. bruiment. S. Rumblyng with
the feet. Supplosio, onis. foe. ge. Rumbling to make with the feet. Supplodo,
dis.* Vide Stamp. Rumor. Rumor, ris. Fama, ae. f. g. Rumeur, bruit. S. Small
rumor, or brute. Rumor clemens, Rumusculus, li. Auditio tenuis aut leuis.
Bruit petit and legier. S.

The rumor goes, it is reported, or men say. Affertur fama, vel rumor,
Loquitur fama, Rumor est, Rumor ait, Aiunt. Le bruit est. S.

As the rumor goes. Vt hominum fama est. Selon que le bruit est enter les gens.
S.

Rumor spread or sowed through che city. Sermo datus per ciuitatem. Un bruit
seem par la ville. S. Sow and to spread abroad a rumor every where.
Disseminare, Famam vulgar, Famam far, Differ rumorem, Voces in vulgum
spargere. Semer un bruit par tout and espandre. S.

Rumpe. Cauda, ae. Caulis caudae. Plin. Offa penita. Fest. A rumpe cut of with
some flesh. Runchball herb, or wild rapes. Campestre rapistrum.* Rapum
syluestre, Rapuntulus, li. m. ge. Raponce. Rundelet, or little pot. Orcula, ae.
f. g. Runnagate, or a vagabunde. Refuga, ae. Com. ge. Erro, nis. m. ge. Homo
sine lare, sine fide, Vagus, Fugitiuus, Vagabundus. Vagabond. S. Runnegate or
rebel, which forsakes allegiau^ce, or profession. Apostata, ae. m. g.
Apostat, Rebelle. Run. Curro, is, cucurri. Courir. S. Run abroad, or
slow. Scaturio, is.* Run after one, or to follow one often. Sector, aris.
Suiure souuent. Call. Run again. Recurro, is. Recourir. S. Run against.
Incurro, is. Occurro, is. Occurso, as. Returro, is. Currere alicui obuiam.
Courir au (...) Sacrifices done for the dead. Inferiae, arum. foe. g.
Sacrifices pour les morts. Call. Sacrifice, or to make sacrifice. Sacrificare,
Immolare, Adolere. Sacrifier. S. Sacrilege, or stealing of any sacred thing,
or stealing out of a church. Sacrilegium, gij. neut. ge. Sacrilege. S. And he
that commits sacrilege is. Sacrilegus, gi. m. g. Sacrilege, larron des
chooses sacrees. S. Sad. Moestus, a, um. Tristis, e. Triste. S. Somewhat
sad. Tristiculus, la, lum. Subtristis, te. Aucunement triste. S.

Sad blewe. Ferrugo, inis. foe. ge. Virg. Sad color. Austerus color,
Pullus, a, um. Raucus, vel Rauus color.* Sad to make. Contristo, as, Tristo,
as. Contrister. To becomme sad. Tristitiam contrahere. Deuenir triste. S.

To be sad and sorowefull. Moerere, Tristari, and dolor affici. Estre triste
and dolent. Call.

Sadly. Moeste. Tristement. S. Sadness. Moestitia, Tristitia, ae. f. g.
Contractio animi. Tristesse. S. Sadness, and grief of heart. Moeror, ris.
mas. genesis Trestesse and doleur de eueur. S. Saddle. Ephippium, ij. n. g. Sella
equi. Selle. S. Sadle for a packehorse. Clitellae, arum. foem. genesis Le bast. H.
Sadle cloth. Instratum, ti. Dorsuale, Stratum, ti. n. genesis Couuerture du
cheual. H. Sadell, or to put on the saddle of an horse. Ephippium equo
imponere. Enseller un cheual. S. and Stern ere equum. Idem. Sadled shorses.
Equi strati. Calep. Ital. Sadler, or a maker of sadles. Ephippiarius, rij. m.
ge.* Sellir. Pals. Saffron. Crocus, ci. Crocum, ci. n. g. Saffran. S. To
saffron, to yelowe, or to color a thing with saffron. Croco tingere, vel
imbuere. Ensaffranner.

Of saffron, or of the color of saffron. Crocinus, a, u^. Croceus, a, um. De
saffran, ou de couleur de saffran. Call.

Saffroned. Croceatus, ta, tum. Croco tinctus, vel infectus. Ensaffranne. Call.
Saffron wild, bastard saffron, or saffron of the Gardine. Crocus Saracenicus,
Carthamus, mi. Cnicus, ci. vel Cnecus, ci. Crocus hortensis. Saffron bastard.
Sage an herb. Saluia, ae. f. g. Sauge. Pin. Wine made of sage. Vinum
saluiatu^. Vin saulge.

Sage or wise. Sapiens, it is. Sage. S. Very sage or wise. Persapiens, it is. Fort
sage. S.

To play the sage. Imponere sibi personam sapientis. Fair le sage. S.

To be sage, or wise. Sapere. Estre sage. S.

To be reputed sage or wise. Obtinere nomen sapientis. Estre repute sage. S.

A very sage and wise man. Alta mente praeditus homo. Homme de grande sagesse.
S.

Sagely, or wisely. Sapienter, Caute, Consulte, Sobrie, Cordate, Consyderate,
Prudenter, Sagaciter. Sagement. S. Sagenesse wisdom, or knowledge. Sapientia,
ae. Sal, lis. Sagacitas, tatis. foem. genesis Sagesse and cognoissance. S. Say.
Addico, cis. Dico, cis. Perhibeo, es. Pronuncio, as. Eloquor, eris. Enuncio,
as. Dire. S. Say again which was said before. Repeto, is. Repeter. S. Say
against. Contradico, cis. Repugno, as. Murmuro, as, Obmurmuro, as. Obloquor,
eris. Obsisto, it is. Obstrigillo, as. Refragor, aris. Reclamo, as. Occino, is.
Contredire. Call. Say before. Praedico, cis. Predire. S. Say contrary.
Abnuere, Ire inficias, Obloqui, Contradicere, Repugnare, Oppugnare. Dire le
contraire. S. They say. Accipio, is. Praedicant, Traditur, vel traditum est,
Sermo est, Fertur. On dit. S.

As they say. Vt fama est, Vt aiunt, Vt perhibe^t. Comme on dit. S.

Say nay. Negito, as. Nego, as. Abnuo, is. Recuso, as. Nier, dire que non. S.
Say nothing. Reticeo, es, cui. N' en dire mot. S. Say on. Age, Perge. Or
auant. S. Say troth, or to hitte the nail on the head. Rem ipsam tangere, Rem
acu tangere. Say well of one. Benedico, is. Bien dire d'aucun. S. Sail.
Nauigo, as. Velifico, cas. Velificor, caris. Nauiculor, aris. Ire nauigio.
Nauiger. S. To sail over into Italye. Traijcere class in Italiam. Plini. Iun

Sail beyond, or by. Praeternauigo, as. Praenauigo, gas. Nauiger oultre, ou
aupres. S. Sail to a place. Annauigo, as. Adnauigo, as. Nauiger iusques a
quelque lieu. S. That may be sailed over, or is nauigable. Nauigabilis, le.
Nauigable. S.

Sail clothe, or sail of a ship. Carbasus, si. Linteum, ei. Sinus, us.
Velum, li. Carbasa, oru^. Carbaseus sinus. Le voile. H. and Acatium, tij.
Achateo^, Artemon, nis. mas. genesis The main sail. Le plus grand voile. H. And
the third sail which is behind. Epidromum, mi. vel Epidromus, mi. m. g.
Velum apud puppim. H. Sail called a trincket. Dolon, nis. m. ge. Sailing.
Nauigatio, onis. foe. ge. Navigations. S. Sailing, or which goes with a sail,
or is occupied with sails. Veliuolus, a, um. vt Naues vel rates veliuolae,
Mare veliuolum. Virg. Saint. Diuus, Sanctus. Saint. S. Saint Anthonies fire,
a sickness so called, which is an infla^mation, or burning in the body. Sacer
ignis, Erysipelas, Ignis. Le feu saint Antoine. Saint Dauides in Wales, a
town so called. Octapitarum promontorium. Ptol. Saint John's wort herb.
Hypericon, Perforata, Ascyrum, Fuga daemonum. Millepertuys. Dod. Saints of
paradise. Coelites, tu^. co^. ge. Les saints de paradis. S. Sanctuary.
Profugium, ij. Perfugium, ij. Sanctuarium, ij. Asylum, li. n. g. Lieu de
franchise. H. Saying. Dictio, onis. Dictum, ti. n. g. La diction, vne parolle.
S. Vide Talk, or speaking. It is an old saying. Vetus est dictum, Vetus est
prouerbium, adagium, vel verbum.

Salamander, a beast like a Lysard full of spots, being in the fire it
quenches it, and is not burned. Salamandra, drae. foe. ge. Salamandre. H.
Salary, stipende and wages. Salarium, rij. Merces, dis. foe. ge. Salaire. S. To
pay the salarie, or wages. Soluere mercedem. Payer le salaire. S.

Double salaries. Duplices mercedes. Doubles salaires. S.

Sale. Alienatio, Venditio, onis. Venundatio, onis. Nundinatio, onis. foe. ge.
Vente. S. To put any thing to sale. Addicere, Instituere mercatum, Nundinari,
Aliquid venale proponere, Venditare. Mettre en vente quelque chose. S.

Saleable, or easy to be sold. Vendibilis, e. Chose de bonne vente. S. Sale
maker. Venditor, toris. m. g. Vendeur. S. Sale of goods confiscated, called
portsale, or open sale. Auctio hastae. Auctio, onis. Hasta, tae. foe. ge.
Subhastation. S. and Auctionarius, rij. Is the sale maker. Auctionor, aris.
Auctionem facere. To make such sale, or to sele to the^ that offer most.
Vendre a plus offrant. S. Salet or scull. Galea, ae. foe. ge. Vne salade. S.
Salet wearer, or that has a salet, or helmet on his head. Galeatus, a, um. Qui
ha vne salade ou heaume en sa test. S. Salettes of herbs, or of other
things. Quasi dicas Salata, vel sale condita, Acetaria, orum. n. ge. Coenae
caput est acetariu^ concisum, sale aspersum, irrotatum oleo olluarum ex gutto
aceto etiam infuso. Salades d'herbes ou d'autres chooses. S. Salfe. Securus, a,
um. Tutus, a, um. Sauue. S. Salfe and sound. Saluber, ris, re. Saluus, a, um.
Sanus, a, um. Securus, a, u^. Solidus, Valens, it is. Sauue and sain. S. Salfe to
be, or out of danger. In portu nauigare, vt In portu sum, vel in portu nauigo.
I am salfe, or in salfegarde. Ie suis a sauuete. S. Salfe conduicte, or license
to depart. Commeatus, us. Pactum transitionis. Publica fides, Fides publica
interposita. Saufconduict. S. With salfe conduicte. Fide publica interposita.
Auec saufconduict. S.

Lettre of salfeconduicte. Disploma tuti and liberi ac pacati commeatus. Bud.
idem ex Aristotele vocat Symbolum, li. n. g, Lettre de saufconduict. S.

To go home under salfeconduicte. Abire domu^ regia vel publica fide accepta.
Bud. S'en aller soubs saufconduict. S.

To give salfe conduicte. Recipere aliquem in fidem publicam. Bud. Donner
saufconduict. S.

Salfeconduicte of the court. Commeatus tutus and liber fide Curiae datus.
Saufconduict de la cour. S To demand, or require to be put in salfeconduicte
of the court. Implorare fidem Curiae aut iudicialem, vt ire and commeare
publica fide and regia liceat. Bud. Demander ou requerir estre mis au
saufconduict de la cour. S.

To take into salfe conduicte, or to put one in salfe conduicte. Saluum fore
recipere, In fidem suam recipere. Tutum commeatum esse iubere pro imperio. Bud.
Mettre au saufconduict. S.

To signify or declare a salfeconduicte of the court. A vi and iniuria
hominem prohibere, verbis Curiae. Bud. Signifier un saufconduict de la cour.

Salfegarde by friendship. Clientela, ae. Tutela, lae. foe. ge. Sauuegarde. S.
To put him self into the salfegarde of an other. Dare se alicui, Dare se in
alicuius clientelam, Commendare se alteri in tutelam vel in clientelam, In
custodiam alterius se tradere, Confer se in fidem and clientelam alicuius. Se
mettre en la sauuegarde d'aucun. S.

Salfly, or in salfegarde, or surety. Sane, Secure, Tuto. A seurete. S.
Salfnes. Sanitas, Sanitudo, Securitas, Valentia, ae. Incolumitas, tatis. f. g.
Sauuete. S. Salftie. Portus, us. Securitas, tatis. f. g. Idem. Salamon, or
Solomon, son of David by Barsabe, and is interpreted Peasable, he was king
of ye Jews: read of him in Reg. x. where you shall see of what wisdom and
divine knoweledge he was, yet not withstanding by women's doting he did offend,
and was brought to Idolatry. Solomon, nis, m. ge. and Salomonius, a, um. Of
Solomon. Salmonde a fish. Salmo, nis. m. g. Saulmond. H. Salmonde that is
young and little. Salmo exilis. Salmoneau. H. Salowe tree. Salix, cis. Siler,
eris. n. g. Saulx, S. Salt. Sal, lis. m. and n. g. Du sell. S. Salarius, a, um.
Ang. Pertaining to salt. Salt that is dug out of the ground. Sal fossilis,
vel fossitius, qui e terrae visceribus effoditur. Sell qu' on fouist de terre.
H. Salt common. Sal popularis. Sal vulgaris. Sell commun ou vulgaire. H. Salt
that will quickly melte. Sal fusilis. Sell qui se fond. H. Salt white and
pure. Salis flos, Sal purus. Sell blanc. H Salt seller for a table. Salillum,
li. Salinum, ni. n. ge. Saliere. H. Salt cote, or place where salt is made.
Salinum, ni. Salina, ae. foe. ge. It is rather called a salt pit. Vne saline.
S. Salt foam. Adarca, (...). Adarcha, Adarces, Adarchio^, Adarcos. Salt licour.
Salsilago, ginis. Salsugo, ginis. foem. ge. Vne liqueur salee. S. Salt
marshes. Aestuaria, orum. Salt meat, fish or flesh that is salted.
Salsame^tum. Pisces carnesue muria sieve Salsilagine conditi. Poisson ou chair
sale. H. Salt, or which is salted. Salsus, sa, su^. Qui est sale. Salt very
much, or very salt. Praesalsus, sa, sum. Persalsus, sa, sum. Fort sale. S.
Salt petre. Nitrum, tri, Niter, Sal niter,* Sal petrosus, Sal lucidus, Sal
alexandrinus, Halonitru^, Aphronitrum, tri. n. ge. H. Salpestre. S. Salted.
Salitus, a, um. vel Sallitus, ta, tum, Sale. S. Salted meat or pouldred.
Praesulsa caro. Chair salee Salt, or to dress with salt, or to pouldre.
Salio, is, ire. Salto, is. Saler. S. Salter, or seller of salt. Salarius, ij.
m. g. Qui vend du sell. S. Salting. Salitura, ae. Salsura, ae. f. g. Salure. S.
Saltnes. Salsedo, dinis. Salsitudo, dinis. foem. genesis Saline. Pals. Salvation.
Saluatio, Salus, it is. foe. ge. Salut. S. Salve. Emplastrum, tri. neut. g.
Medicamentum in massam coactum, quod praemolitum igni vulneribus imponitur.
Emplastre. H. Salve for every sore. Panchrestum, ti. n. ge. Cic. and Plin. lib.
32. Cap. 7. and lib. 36. Cap. 20. Salues or oyntmentes which will make
emposthumes ripe. Peptica.* Salutation. Salutatio, onis. foe. genesis Salutation.
S. Salute. Dicere salutem, Propinare salutem, Saluto, as. Persaluto, tas.
Salutationem facere, Dare salutem, Far salutem alicui, Salute^ impertire.
Saluer aucun. S. Saluto, Is as well at meting, as at parting. Salute, or to
recommende him self to one by lettres. Salutem alicui scribere and ascribere.
Nuntiare salutem. Saluer and se recommander a aucun par lettres. S. Salute
again. Resaluto, as. Resaluer. S. Salute one an other. Consalutare inter sc.
Se saluer l'vn l'autre. S. Salute one in my name. Verbis meis salutare, Salutem
dicere. Saluted to be. Salutor, taris. Estre salve. S. Saluted to be, or
commended. Salueo, es. vt Saluebis a meo hero. My master commends him to
you. Vide Commend. Saluter. Salutator, ris. m. g. Salueur. S. Samcloth, or
vesture from the bealy downward. Limus, mi. m. g.* Samond a fyshe. Salmo,
onis. Saulmon. H. Sampier an herb. Crithmum, mi. Crithamus, mi. Foeniculum
marinum. Offic. Creta marina, Baticula. Batis, it is. f g. Fenoil marin, bacille,
senpierre. H Sanctity. Sanctitas, it is. Sanctitudo, inis. Sa^ctimonia, ae. f.
g. Sanctete. S. Sanctuary. Asylum, li. n. g. Lieu de franchise. S. Sanctuary
privilege. Asylia, ae, f. g. Droict, and vz de franchiz. S. Sand. Arena, ae. f.
g.* Sabulum, li. Sabulo, nis. m. g. Du sablon. S. and Sabulosus, sa, sum. Full
of sand. Sablonneux. S. Sandblynde. Lusciosus, a, um. Luscus, a, um. Qui ha
court ueue. S. Sand blind to be. Lippio, iui, ire. Vide Purblind Sandblindnes.
Luscio, onis. apud quosdam. Sandboxe, or a duste box, to spread dust on
writing. Theca puluinaria vel arenaria e qua puluisculus scriptis aspergitur.
Boiste de pouldre. H. Sand pit. Arenarium, ij.* Sabuletum, ti. neut. g.
Sablonniere. S. Sandy, or full of sand. Arenosus, a, um. Vt supra. Sand.
Sandy, or of sand. Arenaceus, a, um. Areneux, que est d' arene. S. Sa^dwiche a
haue^ in Kent. Rutupiae, Sandicus portus. Sanduich. Nebris. and Rutupinus, na,
um. Of Sandwiche. vt Rutupinum promontorium. The elbow, or goore about
Sandwiche, extending to the sea. Sanguine. Sanguineus, a, um. Sanguin. S. vt
Sa^guineus color. Sanguine color. Couleur sanguine. S. Sanguinarie stone.
Haematites, it is. m. g. Plin. lib. 36. Cap. 22. Sape, or Juice. Succus, ci. m.
g. Suc. S. vt Succus arboris. The sape of a tree. Saphir a precious stone.
Syrtites, Sapphirus, ri. f. genesis Sapphir. H. Sapy. Succosus, sa, sum. Plein de
suc. S. Sapience. Sapientia, ae, f. g. Sagesse. S. Sapient. Sapiens, it is. om.
ge. Sage. Sapient to be. Sapio, is, ire. Estre sage. S. Sapines, or natural
humor or moisture of the earth. Vligo, ginis. foe. genesis Naturelle moitur de
la terre. S. Sap, or the white and soft part of the wood. Alburnum, ni. n.
ge. Plin. Alij Adipem ligni appellant. Anbier, Aubour. H. To take away the
sap of a tree. Exalburno, nas. Oster l' aubier d' un arbre. S. and Alburnum
amputare, idem secund. Plin.

Saracines. Ismaelitae, Agareni. Sarrasins. Pals. Sarce, or a sleue. Cribrum,
ri. Incerniculum, li. n. g. Un sas. S. To sarce. Cibro, ras. Cerno, is.
Incerno, nis. Excerno, nis. Sasser. S.

Sardine a fish. Trichias, vel Trichis, idis. Sardinia, ae. Sardina, nae.
Sarda, ae. Sardelle ou Sardine. S. Satiate, or to fille, or satisfy. Saturare,
Exaturare, Satiare, Explere, Farcire, Sacietatem afferre. Saouler. S.
Satisfaction. Compensatio, onis. Expiamentum, ti. Satisfactio, onis. f. g.
Satisfaction. S. Satisfaction to make. Soluo, is, Vide Satisfy. Satisfy, or
to fill. Saturare, Exaturare, Satiare, Explere, Farcire, Satietatem afferre.
Saouler. S. Satisfy, and to pay. Respondeo, es. Satisfacio, cis. Soluo, is.
Satisfaire. S. Not to satisfy the will of his friend. Deesse voluntati amici.
Ne satisfaire point a la volunte de son ami. S.

Satisfied. Contentus, a, um. Satisfactus, a, um. Satisfied. Requiescere, Satis
habere. Saturate, or to fill with meat and drink. Saturo, as. Saturum reddere,
Satio, as. Cibo potuque repleo. Saouler. Call. Saturitie or fullness. Saturitas,
tatis. f. g. Saoulete. S. Savage. Ferus, a, um. Indomitus, a, um. Syluester,
tris, tree. Sauuage. S. Savage people. Deuia and syluestris gens. Gent sauuage.
S. To become savage. Degenerare in feritatem. Deuenir sauuage. S.

To make and render very savage. Effe^are. Fair and render tout sauuage. S.

Savage herb. Erratica herba. Herb sauuage. S. Sauagely, or brutishely.
Ferino more. Sauuageme^t. Half savage, or somewhat brutishe. Semiferus, ra,
rum. Demi sauuage. S.

Save, or to keep safe. Saluo, as. Saluu^ facio. Sauluer. Save, or to bring
health or sauegarde. Dare salutem, Salutem afferre, Seruare. Sauuer. S. Save,
keep, or to preserve. Seruare, Conseruare, Parcere. Contregarder. S. Save, or
to keep him self. Custodire se, Corpore vacare, Parcere sibi, Respicere se,
Vires conseruare. Se contregarder. S. Save, or to keep whole and sound.
Sospito, tas. Garder sain and sauue. S. and Sospitalis, le. That saves or
delivers from peril. Qui deliure de peril. S. ac Sospes, it is. com. ge. He or
she that saves or is saved from danger. Celuy ou celle qui est sauue ou qui
sauue d'vn danger. S. Sauery, an herb. Cunila capitata, Cimilago, ginis.*
Satureia* ae. Thymbra, Cunila, ae. f. ge. Sauoree, and Sarriette. Pin. Sauge.
Saluia, ae. f. g. De la saulge. S. Sauge aquatique, or corneole. Acesis, sis.
f. g. Corneole ou solcie aquatique. S. Sauine a shrube, Sabina, nae. f. g.
Sauinier. Pin. Saving my right, or my tittle saved. Sine fraud mea. Sauf mon
droict. S. Saving the right of amity. Saluo iure amicitiae. Sauf le droict de
amity. S. To say saving your honor, reverence, or worship. Praefari honorem,
Reuerentiam, Honestatem. Dire Sauf vostre honneur. S. Or else you may speak
it. Absolute, Saluo honor, Salua reuerentia, Salua honestate.

Saving, or sparing. Compendium, ij. n. g. vt Compendium operae est. It is the
saving of so much labor. I did this for sauinge, sparinge, or gettinge of
time. Hoc egi compendium temporis sequens. Colum. IN ay faict cecy pour gaigner
le temps. S.

Savior. Saluator, ris. Seruator, Soter, teris. m. g. Sauneur. S. Savor.
Nidor, oris. Odor, ris. Sapor, oris. mas. ge. Saueur. S. Savor, or sweet
smell. Odoramen, inis. Odoramentum, Odor, ris. m. g. Odeur, Senteur. S. Savor
venomous, or full of poison, or an il sent. Virus, per omnes casus. Mauuaise
senteur. S. Every wine has his savor. Sua cuique vino saliua. Chasque vin ha
sa saueur. S.

A savor medicinable. Sapor medicatus. Saueur medicinale. S.

It has the savor and taste of the sea. Sapit mare. Il ha la saueur and goust
de la mer. S.

They have the same sauoure. Sapore sorores sunt. Else sont mesme saueur. S.

It has a very good sauoure. Iucundissime sapit. Il ha fort bonne saueur. S.

Without sauoure. Insipidus, da, dum. Fatuus, a, um. Sans saueur. S.

Without salt, or sauoure. Insulsus, sa, sum. Sans sell ou saueur. S.

To have a sauoure or taste. Sapio, is. Auoir saueur, ou goust. S.

Sauoure, or to have a sauoure, or give a smell. Oleo, es, eui, and olui.
Sentir and render odeur. S. Sauoure a little or somewhat. Suboleo, es. Sentir
un peu. Call. Sauoure eftsoon, or to cast a good smell. Redoleo, es. Rosentir.
S. Savor of drink. Ructare crapulam.* Savor, or to smell. Odoror, aris.
Redoleo, es, cui. Sentir and flairer. S. Sauouring ill, or that has a great
or strong sauoure. Virosus, a, um. Olidus, da, dum. Qui sent fort and puant. S.
Sauouring swe^e. Fragrans, it is. Odoratus, a, u^. Odorifer, ra, rum. Odorus, a,
um. Rempli d' odeurs, odoriferant. S. And sauouring of spice. Aromaticus, a,
um. Sauourlesse, or without sauoure. Inodorus, a, um. Vt supra. Without
sauoure. Sauourly. Sapide.* Sauourly, or well seasoned, or which is of good
taste.. Sapidus, da, dum. Qui est de bon goust. S. Sause. Condimentum, ti.
Embamma, it is. Conditio, onis. f. ge. Intinctum, ti. Intinctus, tus. mas. g.
Saulse. S. Sauce. H. Sause well seasoned. Condimentum sapidissimu^, vel
scitissimum Saulse bien assaisonnee. S. Sause made of fish livers. Alec, cis.
vel Halec, cis. foe. and n. ge. Hor. Sause made of salted fish. Garum, ri. n.
ge. Saulse faicte de poissons sallez. S. All sause made of vinagre. Oxyporum,
ri. n. ge. Toutes saulse de vinaigre. S.

Sause made with salt. Salitura, rae. foe. genesis Saulse faicte auec du sell. S.
Sause meat. Condio, is, ire. Intingo, gis. Saulser. S. Sause trimmed with
spice, Conditura, ae. foe. genesis Saused. Conditus, ta, tum. Sauser, or vessel
for sause. Scutella, ae. Oxybaphum, phi. Acetabulum, li, n. g. Saulcier. Pals.
Sausy. Procax, cis. Proteruus, a, um. nomen adiect. Inuerecundus, da, dum.
Impudens, it is. Os duru^. Eshonte. S. He is sausy, or impudent. Perijt illi
pudor, Perijt illi frons. Il est eshonte. S.

Sausely. Procaciter, Proterue, Proteruiter. aduer. Saw, an instrument to saw
with. Serra, ae. foe. g. Vne sie ou scie. S. Serrula, ae. dim. An. A little
saw. Petite scie. S. Saw called a whyppe saw. Runcina, ae. foem. ge. Vne
scie a scieur d' ais. S. Sawdust. Lanugo, nis. Scobs, bis. Sarrago, inis. f. g.
De la scieure. S. Saw bourde or timber. Runcino, as. Serro, ras. Seco, cas.
Sier ou scier. S. Sawed. Runcinatus, a, u^. Serratus, a, um. Sectus, ta, tum.
Sie. S. Sawen bourd. Assis, is. Asser, is. m. g. Un ais de sciage. Sawyng.
Serratura, ae. Serratio, onis. foem. genesis Siement auec la sie. S. Saunders.
Sandalus, li. Santalum, li. Ruel. Sawlge herb. Saluia, ae. Vide Sage and
sauge. Sawlge wild. Ambrosia, ae. Phileteria, ae. Idem. Sawsage. Lucanica, ae.
Farcimen, inis. Botulus, li. Botellus, li. Allas huius Allantos. m. g.
Andouille ou Endouille. S. Sawsage. Isicium, vel vt alij Incisium, quod miculis
insectis carnium, ijsque cum aruina fartis constat. Saucisse. H. and Tomaculum,
li. n. g. A sausage, or liuering. Saulsisse, Saulsissen. H. Sawsage seller, one
that sells sawsages. Allantopola, ae. Vendeur d' andouilles and sanlsisses.
S. Sawte, as a bitche when she desires the company of the male. Catulire canis
dicitur, qua^do in Venerem prurit. Demander le male. H.
S. ANTE. C.
SCabbarde. Theca, ae. Vagina, ae. foem. ge. Fourreau, gain. H. and Vaginula,
ae. diminut. Ang. A little scabbarde or sheath. Scabbe. Scabies, ei. foe. ge.
Galle. S. Scabbe among the shiepe, called the pockes. Mentigo, ginis. Ostigo,
ginis. foe. g. Scabbed. Scabiosus, a, um. Galleux, Grateleux, Scabieux. S. He
is all scabbed. Scabiosus est, Scabie totus scatet, Abundat scabie, Scaber est
toto corpore. Il est tout gra^eleux. S.

Scabbednes. Psora, ae. Scabies, ei. foe. ge. Scabiouse an herb. Psora, ae.
Scabiosa, ae. foe. ge. Scabieuse. Pin. Scaffolde. Co^tabulatio, nis. f. g.
Machina, nae. Tabulatu^, ti. n. g. Eschafault. S. But Machina, is properly ye
place above ye scaffold whence some god, angel, lightning or thu^der, is
feigned to come. Scaffolde whereon the players stand to play their par^es.
Scena, nae. Frons theatri. L'eschauffault. H. Scaffolde where they are which
see the play. Fori, orum. Spectaculum, li. Theatrum, tri. n. ge. un eschafault
ou sont ceulx qui regardent iouer. S. Scalde, or to boil, or parboyle.
Bullire, Ebullire, Feruere, Inferuere. Bouillir. S. To scalde hogs. Glabrare
sues. Oster le poil aux porceaux auec l' eaue chaulde. S.

To scalde any thing. Calida perfundere. Eschaulder quelque chose. S.

Scalding, or that burns, or is very hoate. Feruens, it is. Feruidus, da, dum.
Bouillant, fort chauld. S vt Aqua feruentissima. Colu. Scalding water. Scale
the walls. Ascendere vel scandere muros, Inuadere ad muros, Scalas muris
admouere, Scalis muros conscendere. Escheler les murs. S. Scale of a fyshe.
Squama, ae. foe, ge. Escaille du poisson. H. ^uamatim. After the fascion of
scales. En facon d'escailles. S. To scale fyshe, as the cooks do, er they
sees it. Piscem desquamare. Escailler le poisson. H.

Scalferne, or fingerferne, Citterarche. Asplenum, ni. n. g. Coterac, ou
citerac. S. Scaly, or full of scales. Squamosus, a, um. Squameus, a, um. Plein
d'escailles. S. Scalion herb. Ascalonia, ae. f. g. Eschallottes. S. Scalle, or
a scabbe. Scabies, iei. Porrigo, ginis. f. ge. Teigne. S. and Scabiosus, sa,
sum. Full of scalles. Teigneux. S. Scallop fyshe. Pecte^, nis. m. g. Coquille
de S. Jacques. and Pectunculus, li. m. g. A little scallope. Scalping iron for
(...) Surgeon. Scalpellum, li. Scalprum, ri. n. genesis and Scalprum
chirurgicum. A little knife that Chirurgians use. Un lancette de chirurgien. S.
Scant, or scantly. No^ fere, Haud firm, Aegre, Difficulter, Vix. A grande
peine. He scant loves any man. Non fere que^quam amat. A peine aim il aucun. S.

You shall scant find a man faithful to women. Fidelem haud firm mulieri
inuenias virum. A grande peine trouuerez vous un homme fidele aux femmes. S.

They scante ever come to good. Haud temere vnquam perueniunt ad frugem. A
grande peine viennent ilz a bien. S.

Scante. Rarus, a, um. Scant to make. Rarefacio, cis. Raro, as. * Vide Rare.
Scantnes. Raritas, it is. Raritudo, inis. Vide Rareness. Scarce, or sparing.
Parcus, ca, cum. Eschars. S. Scarcely. Parce, Auare. Escharsement. S. To live
scarcely, barely, hardly and poorly. Continenter viuere, Auare, Cultu
tenuissimo, Perparce, Exigue sumptum facere, Parce ac duriter viuere. Viure
escharcement. S.

Scarceness, or the lack or want of a thing. Indigentia, ae. f. g. Fault
de quelque chose. S. Scarceness, want, or lack of money. Argenti inopia,
Inopia argentaria, Nummoru^ caritas, Inopia rei argentariae, Difficulas
nummaria. Fault d'argent. S. Scarf, such as they wear about their necks.
Mitella, lae. foe. ge. Bud. ex Celso. Escharpe. S. The arm in a scarf.
Brachium mitella inuolutum. Bud. ex Celso. Bras en escharpe. S.

To walk with his arm in a scarf. Mitellato brachio incedere. Bud. Ayant le
bras en escharpe. S.

Scarlet color. Coccus, ci. Spadix, cis. m. ge. Escarlatte. S. and Coccinus,
a, um. Of scarlet color. D'escarlatte. S. Coccinatus, a, um. Wearing
scarlette. Vestu de rob escarlatte. S. Scarlet vesture. Coccina vestis. Rob
d'escarlatte. S. Coccinatus, a, um. Cladde in scarlet apparel, or he that
wears such vesture. Vt supra. Grain of which scarlet color is made.
Coccum, ci,. n. g. La grain de quey on fait l'escarlatte. S.

Scarre. Cicatrix, cis. f. g. Cicatrice, S. To strike one, to make him have
scarres. Cicatrico, cas. Frapper aucun and luy fair des cicatrices. S.

Scarry, or full of scarres. Cicatricosus, a, um. Plein de cicatrices. S. Scate
a fyshe. Squatina, (...). Ange ou angelot de mer. Scathe, hurt, or damage.
Nocumentum, Noxa, ae. Vide Damage, Hurt, and Endamegement. Scathe to do.
Officio, cis. Nuire. S. Scathefull. Nociuus, a, um. Noxius, a, um. Vide vt
supra. Scatter. Diffundo, is, di, sum. Dispalo, as. Dissipo, as. Fundo, is.
Perfundo, is. Spargo, is, arsi, sum. Espardre. S. Scatter money, as is used in
great triumphs to break preafe. Stipem spargere. Plin. Scatter, or break
battil raye. Ordines co^turbare. Scatter, or to sparkle all about. Conspergo,
is. Espardre tout a l' eu^our. S. Scattered. Diffusus, a, um. Dispalatus, a,
um. Effusus, a, un. Fusus, a, um. Sparsus, a, um. Dispersus, sa, sum. Espars.
S. People scattered here and there. Lacerae gentes. Gens esparses ca and la. S.

Scatteringly, here and there. Diffuse. Esparsement ca and la. S. Scedule, or
little leaf, or little scrowe of paper. Schedula, ae. foe. ge. Scedule. S.
Scepter Royal, or kings scepter. Sceptrum, tri. neut. genesis Scepter royal. S.
Scholasticall. Scolasticus, a, um. Scholastique. Call. Schole. Ludus, di.
Schola, ae. foe. g. Ludus literarius. Vne escole, ou eschole. S. Scholefellowe.
Condiscipulus, li. m. ge. Compagnon d' escole. Call. Schole for daunsing. Ludus
saltatorius. Macrob. L' eschole des danses. S. Schole house, or place of all
exercise. Gymnasium, sij. n. g. Escole, ou lieu de toute exercice. S. Schole
master. Ludimagister, tri. m. g. Praeceptor, Doctor, ris. Magister, tri.. m.
g. Maistre d' escole. H. and Gymnasiarcha, chae. Gymnasiarchus, chi. m. g. A
chief schole master, or master, or the Rector of a college. Schole master
which does always beat his scholars. Orbilius literator, Plagosus secundu^ Hor.
Schole of exercise, or any kind of schole. Ludus, di. m. g. Toute sort d'
escole. S. To begin to keep schole. Ludum aperire. Commencer a tenir escole.
S.

Schole of fence. Ludus gladiatorius. Sueton. A gramer schole. Ludus
grammarices. Cic.

Scholar. Discipulus, li. Scholasticus, i. Puer scholasticus. Un escolier. S.
Scholar, or child brought up at schole in humanity, or learning. Alumnus, ni.
m. g. et Alu^nor, aris. Ang. To bring up a child, or scholar in humanity,
learning or at schole. Science. Scientia, ae. Doctrina, nae. f. g. Science. S.
To communicate, or utter his science. Copiam scientiae suae facere. Communiquer
sa science. S.

Science, or knowledge of the law. Iuris prudentia. La science du droict. S.
Science of numbering. Arithmetica, cae. and Arithmetice, ces. foe. ge. L' art de
nombrer. S. Whose inuentures were Samius Pythagoras, Pallas, Algus, and
Abraham, But who was the first inuentour, is not certain. Science of the
perspectiues. Optice, ces. f. ge. Perspectiua scientia. Neb. Sciences called
the liberal sciences, which are seven in number. Grammatica, Dialectica,
Rhetorica, Musica, Arithmetica, Geometria, et Astronomia. Liberales scientiae,
Arts liberales vel ingenuae. Cic. Arts ou sciences liberalux. S. Schism, or
division. Schisma, it is, n. g. Schism ou division. S. Schismatike.
Schismaticus, ca, cum. Schismatique. Sclaundre, or diffamation. Ignominia,
Indignitas, Infamia, Macula, Nota, Obtrectatio, onis. Sugillatio, onis. foem.
ge. Esclandre, ou diffamation. Sclaunder, or to diffame one. Diffamare,
Infamare, Coinquinare, Sugillare, Facere infamem aliquem, Famam alicuius
inquinare, Attingere aliquem infamia. Esclandir aucun, le diffamer. S.
Sclaunder, or to detracte, or speak ill of one. Allatrate aliquem, De fama
alicuius detrahere, Detrahere alicui, Insectari aliquem maledictis, Lacerare
optimum virum incesto ore, Maledicere alicui, Male loqui alicui, Obloqui,
Obtrectare laudibus alicuius, Premere aliquem, Sinistris sermonibus carpere
alique^, Vellicare. Mesdire and detracter de quelqu' un. S. Sclaunder, or
detracte the life of an other. Aspergere maculis vitam alicuius. Conijcere
maledicta in vitam alicuius. Mesdire de la vie d'autruy. S. Sclaunderer, or an
ill speaker. Qui de altero obloquitur, Detractor, toris. Obtrectator, toris. m.
genesis Maledicus, Obloquutor, toris. mas. ge. Mesdisant. S. Sclaundring, ill
report, sclaunder, or ill speech. Obtrectatio, Obtrectatu^, tus.
Maledicentia, ae. Maledictum, ti. n. g. Mesdison. S. Scoff, or to ieste.
Scurrari, Scurram agere. Risum captare factis vel dictis. Plaisanter. S. A
biting taunte or scoff. Sarcasmos.

Scoff, or a ieste, mock, or floute. Scomma, it is. n. ge. Un brocard and
lardon. S. Scoffer. Scurra, ae. m. g. Un plaisanteur. S. and Scurrilis, le. Of
a scoffer. De plaisanteur. S Scoffing. Dicacitas, it is. Scurrilitas, it is. foem.
gener. Mestier de plaisanter, Plaisantirie. S, and Scurrilis, e. Ang.
Pertaining to scoffing. Vt supra. Scoffingly. Ironice, Scurriliter, En
plaisanteur. S. Scolde, braule, and to chyde with one. Altercari, Certare,
Concertare, Rixari, Digladiari, Contendere. Debatre de parolles auec aucun and
noiser. S. Scolde, or to chyde with one. Contendere iurgio cum aliquo, Verba
cum aliquo commutare. Tanser a aucun. S. Scolde with one like a dronken man.
Debacchor, aris. Tanser a aucun en la facon d' un yurongne. S. Scolde, or to
chide one at another. Altercor, caris. Iurgor, aris. Tanser l' un a l' autre.
S. To scolde hard at one. Verbis vehementioribus aliquem prosequi. Tanser fort
and ferme contre aucun. S.

Scolding, chiding, or brawling. Altercatio, onis. Concertatio, Contentio,
onis. Dissidium, dij. Iurgium, gij. Lis, it is. Adiurgiu^, gij. Litigium, gij,
Praecertatio, onis. Rixa, ae. Velitatio, onis. f. g. Noise. S. and Iurgiosus,
a, u^. and Rixosus, a, u^. Full of scolding. Noiseux. Scoldingly. Rixose.*
Scomme, foam, or froth of any thing. Spuma, ae. f. ge. Escume. Call. Scomme of
molten gold. Chrysitis.* Sconse, or lantern. Laterna, ae. f. g. Lantern, S.
Scorn, a scorning, or a mock. Cachinnus, ni. Ludibrium, ij. Obrisio, onis.
Ridiculum, li. Sanna, nae. Subsannatio, onis. foe. ge. Irrisio, onis. Irrisus,
sus. Derisus, sus. Deridiculu^, li. Illusio, oni^. Nasus, si. m. g. Mocquerie.
S. Scorn, mock, or to floute one. Cauillari, Deridere aliquem, Ludibrio
habere, Ludibrio laedere, Frustra aliquem habere, Ludere, Ludificari, Ludos
aliquem facere, Naso suspendere aliquem, Tangere aliquem. Se mocquer de
quelqu'vn. S. To be scorned, or mocked. Caudam trahere, Irrisui esse, In
ridiculo haberi, Ludibrio esse alicui, In v^ banitatem facetosam hominum
incurrere. Estre mocque. S.

Scorned. Illusus, a, um. Sugillatus, a, um. Irrisus, sa, sum. Derisus, sa,
sum. Mocque. S. Scornful. Fastidiosus, a, um. Desdaigneux. S. Scornefully, or
in mockage. Ridicule, Subridicule. Par mocquerie. S. Scornefully, or in
disdain, or contempt. Contemptim. Par mespris, en mesprisant. S. Scorner, or
a mocker. Subsannator, ris. Derisor, Irrisor, Nasutus, Planus, Cauillator,
toris. m. g. Mocqueur. S. Scorpion. Nepa, ae. Nepes, pis. Scorpio, onis.
Scorpius, ij. m. g. Un scorpio^. H. Nepa. Is a venomous beast which
flattereth with her foreparte, and strikes with her tail. Scot, or
scottisheman. Scotus. Escossois. S. Scotfree, or he that pays nothing.
Asymbolus, li. m. g. Franc d' escot, qui ne pay rien. S. Scotland. Scotia,
ae. f. g. Escosse. S. Vide England. Scotle. Scutella, ae. f. g. Scourge.
Flagellum, li. Scutica, ae. Flagrum, gri. Mastix, ticis. m. g. Fouet ou
escourgee. S. Scourge made of neates leather. Tauria, riae. f. g. Escourgee de
cuir de toreau. S. The sound of the ierke, of a scourge or whipp. Tax. neut.
ge. Plaut. Le son du coup du fouet. S.

Scourge, or to whippe. Flagellare, Flagris caedere. Fouetter. S. Scourged to
be, or to be whipped. Virgis multari, Plagas dare. Estre fouette. S. Scourged,
whipped, or beaten. Flageliatus, ta, tu^. Fouette. S. Scowle, or to froune.
Capero, as. Vultum contrahere, Vultum ducere, Caperare fro^tem, vel Corrugare
vel striare. Se rider and refro^gner. S. Scowre, or to cle^se. Purgo, as.
Depurgo, as. Purger Any thing that scoureth, and cleanses. Smegma, it is, n. g.
Toute chose qui purge and nettoye ou abst^rge. and Smegmaticus, ca, cum. Which
has virtue to scowre, purge, and cleanse. Qui ha virtue de purger and nett^yer.
S.

Scowring, clensing, or purging. Purgatio, onis. Expurgatio, onis. Depurgatio,
onis. foe. genesis Purgement. S. Scowte watches. Subsessae, arum.* Primae
excubiae. Escoutes ou sentinelles. S. Scraite, which is both male and female.
Androgynus, qui vtrunque habet sexum, and maris and foeminae. Call. Scrape.
Corrado, dis, rasi. Scalpo, pis. Rado, dis. Abrado, dis. Derado, dis. Erado,
dis. Interrado, dis. Praerado, dis. Racler. S. Scrape, as a hen does for
meat. Ruspor, aris. Scalpurio, is. vt Vngulis terra^ scalpurire. Plaut. Scrape
away, or to take of with scraping. Auerrunco, cas. Erado, dis. Oste^en
raclant, racler. Call. Scrape any thing above. Distringere, Superradere. Racler
quelque chose par dessus. S. To take out, and scrape a letter out of a word.
Exterere litera^. Oster and racler vne lettre d' un mot.

Scrape round about. Circunradere. Racler tout entour. S. Scrape, or to blotte
out. Oblitero, as. Effacer. S. and Delere, Expungere. To put out. Effacer.
Scraped of, or out. Erasus, a, u^. Rasus, sa, su^. Racle. Scraped out, or
defaced. Obliteratus, a, um. Scraper, or scraping iron. Scalprum, pri. n. ge.
Radula, lae. foe. ge. Un racloire, un ratissoire. S. Scraping out, blotting,
defacing, or putting out. Deletio, onis. Obliteratio, onis. foe. g. Effacement.
Scrappes and relics that are left or fall from the table. Analecta, torum. n.
genesis plu. nu. Relief, miettes. H. and Lipsana, orum. Idem. Scratche. Scabio,
is, ire. Scalpo, is. Grater. The raven scratcheth, or scrapeth the ground.
Radit coruus terram. Le corbeau grate la terre. S.

He ever scratcheth. Semper scabit, Semper scalpir, Assidue scalpurit. Il se
grate tousiours. S.

Scribe Scriba, ae. m. g. Greffier. S. Scribe. Pals. Scrippe, bag, or poke.
Pera, ae. Vulga, ae. foe. ge. Vne besace. S. Vne malette. Pals. Perula, ae.
foe. genesis Angl. A little scrippe. Petite besace. S. Scriuener. Librarius, ij.
Notarius, ij. Scriba, ae. Scriptor, ris. m. g. Escriuain. S. Scriuener that
wrytes false. Mendosus scriptor, vel librarius. Escriuain qui escripe
incorrect. S. Scrowe, or shedule of paper. Scheda, dae. foe. ge. and Schedula,
lae. f. g. A little s^rowe of paper. Un roulet, ou vne roll. Pals. Scrow,
paper, or tables, wherein the ten precepts be written. Philetaeria. Such a
scrow did the Phariseis use to wear.* Scrowe wherein lottes are written.
Sorticula, lae. foe. ge. It is also a lotte. Un lot. S. Scruple, or certain
weighte, whereof three make a dram. Scrupulus, li. sieve Scrupulum, li. n. g.
Scrupule. S. Scruple of conscience. Religio, onis. Scrupulus, li. Scrupule de
conscience. S. A mind without scruple. Animus religione liber. Bud. Esprit
sans scrupule. S.

To make a scruple. In religionem trahere vel vertere. Fair scruple. S.

He makes a scruple of this matter. In religione^ venit illi haec res. Il faict
scruple de cecy. S.

To put one in scruple, and fear of conscience. Afferre religionem alteri,
Religione^ incutere, vel inijcere vel obijcere, vel afferre, In religionem
inducere, Obstringere religione, Perfundere animu^ religione. Mettre quelque un
en scrupule and crainte de conscience. S.

To put out of scruple. Eximere religionem alicui, Exoluere religione aliquem.
Mettre horse de scrupule. S.

Scrupulouse. Religiosus, a, um. Scrupulosus, a, u^. Scrupuleux. S. Scrupulouse
to be. Perfundere animu^ religione. Estre scrupuleux. S. Scrupulous to make.
Infundere religionem. Scrupulously. Religiose, Scrupulose. Scrupuleusement. S.
Sculle. Calua, ae. Caluaria, Cranium, ij. neut. genesis Le tez de la test. H.
Sculle, or salet to put on ones head, a steel cappe. Galea exploratoria. Bonet
de fer, Testiere. H. Scull of fishes, that is a hole frye or company together.
Examen piscium. Plin. Sculle wearer. Galeatus, a, um. Scullion. Lixa, ae. m. g.
Un souillon. Pals. Scurfe of a scabbe. Crusta, ae. foe. ge. Which has a
scurfe, cruste, or hard covering. Crustatus, ta, tum. Qui ha vne crouste ou
dure couuerture. S.

Scuruy hedded, or pylled hedded. Alopecus. Scutchin or a buckler. Scutum, ti.
n. g. Escusson. S. Scuttell. Scutella, lae. foe. genesis Sc. and Sk. been very
likely used, and therefore you shall find many words in S. ante K. the
which you want here.


S. ANTE. E.
SEa. Aequor, oris. Fretum, ti. Mare, ris. Pelagus, gi. Pontus, ti. Salum, li.
n. genesis La mer. Aequoreus, a, um. Marinus, a, um. Maritimus, a, um. Pelagicus,
a, um. Angl. Of the sea, that is or dwells nigh the sea. De la mer, qui est
ou demeure aupres de la mer. S. Velis, equisque, Both by sea and by land. Sea
bancke, or land butting upon the sea. Littus, oris. and Litus, toris, n. ge.
per simplext, extra carmen. Le board de la mer. H. Littus maris est, Ripa
fluminis. Sea breme a fyshe. Melanurus, ri. Oculata, tae. Opthalmia, ae.
Nigroil. H. and Ges. Sea calfe, or a seal. Vitulus marinus, Phoca, cae. f.
genesis Veau de mer. Ges. Sea cole, or smythes cole, or stone cole. Carbo
fossilis. Vide. Cole. Sea cole an herb, otherwise named sea folefoote.
Brassica marina. Offic. Saldanella. Chou de mer. Sea holy, or sea huluer.
Eryngium marinum, falso Crocodilium dictum. Pin. Sea mawe bird. Alcedo, inis.*
Sea mewe. Larus cinereus, Gauia cinerea. Mouette. H. and Ges. Sea moss, or
coralline an herb. Muscus marinus, sieve Corallina. Coralline. Pin. Sea onyon.
Scilla, lae. Squilla, lae. Oignon marin. Pin. Sea owl a fish, also caled a
lump. Orbis britannicus, Batus rotundus. Ges. Sea side. Littus, oris. Ora
maritima. Vt supra. sea bancke. Littoreus, a, um. Of the sea side. Sea snayle,
or sea tortyse. Chelydros. Tortue de mer. Call. Hanc Eliotae interpretatione^
non probat Gesnetus, cuius verba haec su^t. Eliotae Anglo Chelydrus est, A sea
snayle, hoc est marinus serpens, non probo (inquit) melius A water adder.
Gesnerus deceptus fortasse nomine A sea snayle pro a sea snake Intelligit. Call.
Chelydros Testudinem marinam (id est) A sea tortise Interpretatur, ab etymol.
nominis. Sea porcellan. Cepaea. Plin. Sea tode, a fish. Rana, Rana piscatrix,
vel Rana marina. Gesn. Baudroy. Rondol. Sea wormewoode. Absinthium marinum.
sieve Seriphium, phij. n. g. Petit fort. Pin. Sea wrack, or as the dutchemen
call it, sea grass. Alga. gae. foe. ge. Algne. H. Seal. Sigillum, li.
Signaculum, li. Symbolu^, li. n. g. Signum, ni. n. ge. Un signet, seau, seel.
S. Is the seal whole? Saluum signu^ est? Le seau est il entier? S.

Seal counterfeyte. Signum adulterinum. Seau contrefaict. S. To seal.
Imprimo, is, ssi. Obsigno, nas. Sigillo, las. Signo, as. Consignare. Seeler. S.

Seal fast and surely. Resigno, as. Fermer. S. To seal any thing what it be.
Obsignare, Consignare. Seeler toute chose que ce soit. S.

To sign and seal. Subscribere and obsignare, vel subsignare. Signer and
seeler. S.

Seal, or signet, a ringe. Signatorius anulus. Vide Ring. Sealed. Signatus, a,
um. Seele. S. Sealer, which puts to his seal or sign to a deed,
instrumente, or lettre. Obsignator, ris. m. ge. Seele^r. S. Seame. Sarcimen,
inis. Sutura, ae. f. g. Cousture. S. Seame, or fat of a hog, clarified and
tried. Vnctum, ti. n. g. Sain de porceau. S. Seame, or sweet tallowe. Aruina,
nae. foe. genesis Sain doulx. S. Seame rent, or to rippe. Resuo, is. Dissuo, is.
Discoudre. S. Seame rent, or that is ripte. Dissutus, ta, tum. Resutus, ta,
tum. Descousu. S. Seamerent cote. Pertusa vestis.* Dissuta vestis. Seamester.
Sarcinatrix, cis. f. g. Cousturiere. S. Seane, convocation, or counseyle.
Synodus, di. f. g.* Search. Conquiro, is. Exploro, as. Exquiro, is, siui,
situm. Indago, as. Peruestigo, as. Rimor, aris. Perquiro, ris. Inquiro, ris.
Peruenor, aris. Vestigo, as. Circunspecto, tas. Cercher. S. Search all about
diligently. Omnibus vestigijs disquirere, vel indagare. Cercher par tout
diligeme^t. Search out for fish, or to seek diligently where fishes are.
Expiscor, caris. Cercher diligement ou sont les poissons. S. Search by crafty
means. Aucupor, aris. Expiscor, aris. per metaph. Cic. Search diligently.
Disquiro, is. Percontor, aris. Percunctor, aris. Perquiro, ris. Perscrutor,
aris. Peruestigo, as. Quaerito, as. Rimor, ris. Vide Seek diligently. Search
often. Quaerito, as. freq. Requiro, is. Cercher souuent. S. Search, or to
trace out, as a hounde does. Indago, as. Cercher a la trace. S. Search out.
Exquiro, is. Inuestigo, as. Lustror, aris. Vide Search and seek. Searcher.
Conquisitor, oris. Explorator, oris. Peruestigator, oris. Vestigator, oris.
Indagator, toris. m. g. Cercheur. S. Searcher of antiquities, or reader of old
works. Antiquarius, rij. m. g. Searcher for water, or he that conueygeth
water. Aquilex, gis.* Searching. Indago, inis. Quaesitum, ti. Spectatio, onis.
Conquisitio, onis. Indagatio, onis. Inquisitio, onis. Quaestio, onis. foe. ge.
Cerchement. S. Searching much, or full of searching. Vestigabu^dus, a, um.
Sear away, or to blaste, as the wyndes do corn. Vro, is, ssi. Vstulo, as.
Brusler. S. To sear clothe, or stikes. Cero, as. Cirer. Call.

Seared. Vstus, a, um. Brusle. S. Seared, blasted, or burned with the su^ne.
Retorridus, a, um. Colum. Seared cloth. Ceratu^, ti. n. g. Cerotum, ti. n. g.
Cerot. Seared, or blasted corn. Stupida arista. Seared, or a dead bowghe.
Ramale, is. n. g. Seared to be. Vror, eris, stus sum. Searing, or blasting of
corn, or fruit. Vredo, dinis. foe. genesis Seicheresse and bruslure. etc.
Searing, or blasting of corn about the canicular days, by drought or heat.
Siriasis, sis. foe. genesis Sease. Manum inijcere. Saisir. S. To sease him self
on a thing before an other. Occupare, Anteoccupare, Praeoccupare. Se saisir
auant autruy de quelque chose. S.

To sease him self of a region. Regionem aliquam apprehendere. Se saisir de
quelque region. S.

Sease a forfayte, to sease forth king. Manum regiam vel regis inijcere. Bud.
Saisir and mettre en la main du Roy. S. Seized goods. Bona confiscata. Bona
public possessa. Bud. Biens saisis, regiz and gouuernez soubs la main du Roy.
S. Seasin, or possession. Possessio, onis. f. ge. Saisine. To put one in seasin
and possession. Inducere in possessionem. Mettre aucun en possession and
saisine. S

To take possession, and seasin. Venire in possessionem. Prendre possession. S.

Seasing of a thing, or laying hand thereon to take it. Manus iniectio. Bud. ex
Quintil. Saisissement. S Season. Tempestas, it is. f. g. Saison S. Season
convenient, or dew time to do a thing in. Tempestiuitas, it is. Tempus, poris.
n. ge. Saison and temps propre a fair quelque chose. S. Season meat. Condo,
is, iui, ire. Assaisonner. S. Seasonable, or done in due season. Tempestiuus,
a, um. Qui est faict en temps and saison. S. Seasonably, or in due season.
Tempestiue. De saison Seasoned. Conditus, ta, tum. Assaisonne. S. Potage ill
seasoned. Ius male conditum. Potage mal assaisonne. S.

Seasoned well. Sapidus, a, um. Seasoning of a mare or other beast, or the
time of generation of beasts. Admissura, ae. f. g. Colum. Seasoning of meat.
Condimentum, ti. Conditio, onis. Conditura, rae. foe. ge. Assaisonnement S.
Seasure of la^d. Manus iniectio. vide supra, seasing. Seat. Seeds, dis. Abacus,
ci. Sedile, is. n. g. Siege. S. Seat in a porche. Praestega, ae.* Seat of a
judge. Tribunal, lis. n. g. Siege judicial. S. Seat of a great officer, or the
seat of the pretour. Puteal, lis. n. g. Le siege du preteur. Seat of estate
for a king or prince. Solium, ij. n. ge. Siege Royal. S. Seats in a barge,
bote, or ship for rowers. Transtra, orum, Remigum sedilia, quasi transuersim
strata, Iuga, orum. n. genesis Les bancs des gascheurs, ou ^ameurs. H. Seath.
Elixo, as. Lixo, as. Bullio, lis. Coquere, Co^coquere, Discoquere, Incoquere.
Cuire. S. Seathe, or to boil before. Praecoquo, quis. Cuire parauant. S.
Seathe, boil, or play thoroughly. Percoquo, is, xi. Fort cuire. S. Seathe
eftsoon. Recoquo, is, xi. Recuire. Call. Seather. Coctor, ris. mas. genesis
Seathing. Coctio, nis. Coctura, rae. f. g. Cuisson. S. Seclude, or put from, or
out, or to shut a part. Secludo, dis. Enfermer a part. S. Second. Secundus,
a, um. Secundarius, a, u^. Second. The second after the king. Secundus a rege.
Le second apres le roy. S.

The second time consul. Secundum consul, vel iterum. Consul pour la second
fois.

Second a certain drink so called, made of grapes after they be new pressed.
Lorea, ae. Lora, ae. f. g. Second place or time, or for the second time.
Secundo, Aduerb. Pour le second fois. S. Second ward in battle. Principia,
oru^. Colu. Scondary, or the second after the first. Secundarius, a, um.
Second apres le primier. Call. Secondarely. Secundo, Secundo loco, Dehinc,
Iterum. Secondement. S. Secret. Arcanus, a, um. Secretus, Tacitus, a, um.
Secret. S. A secret. Secretum, ti. Arcanum, ni. Un secret. S.

Secret accuser, or complayner. Dilator, ris.* Secret agreament, covenant,
pacte, or promise. Coitio, onis. foe. ge. Secret chamber. Conclaue, is.
Conclauium, ij. Locus secretior in interioribus tectis. Call. Secret fellow.
Homo arcanus, Clandestinus homo. Un homme secret. S. Secret part of a man. Vide
Privy part. etc. Secret parts of a woman. Loci, orum. Vulua, uae. Vide
Privy. etc. To be secret. Clausa habere sua consilia. Estre secret. S.

Secret place. Abditum, ti. Secessus, sus. Locus secretus, Seductus, tus. m. g.
Lieu secret. S. Secret place, to hyde, or lurk in. Latibulum, li. n. ge.
Cachette. S. Secret thing. Arcanum, ni. n. g. Chose secrette. Very secret
things. Occultissimae res. Chooses fort secrets. S.

To make one partaker of his secrets. Participem consilij sui facere.
Communiquer son secret. S.

Which knows all my secrettes. Meorum omnium consilioru^ confcius. Qui scait
tout mes secrets

In secret. Arcano, Secreto, Ex occulto, Clam. En secret. S.

Secretary. Amanuensis, Scriba, Secretarius, ij. Silentiarius, ij. Ad manum
seruus, Scriptor, ris. Librarius, rij. Ab epistolis, A secretis. Un secretaire.
The kings secretary. Librarius principis. Bud. Secretaire du Roy. S.

Secretly. Secreto, Tacit, Tacito, Celatim, Clam, Clanculum, Latenter, In
priuato, Furtim, Abdite. Secretement. S. Sect. Secta, ae. f. g. Factio, onis.
foe. g. Vne sect. S. and Cuias, it is. om. ge. Of what sect. De quelque sect^.
Security or safety. Securitas, it is. foe. g. Sedition. Seditio, onis. f. g.
Sedition. S. To make sedition in a city. Seditionem in ciuitatem inducere.
Fair sedition en vne cite. S.

To move sedition. Seditionem facere, Co^flare, Concitare, Commouere. Esmouuoir
sedition. S.

Seditious. Factiosus, sa, sum. Seditiosus, sa, sum. Seditieux. S. Sedisiously.
Seditiose. Seditieusement. S. Seduce, or to deceive. Seducere, Decipere.
Seduire. Be not thou seduced by the counsel of others. Ne te auferant aliorum
consilia. Guard toy d' estre seduict par le conseil d'autruy. S.

Seducing, or a deceauing. Seductio, onis. foem. ge. Seduction. S. See. Cerno,
nis. Concipere oculis. Tueor, eris. Video, es. Viso, is. Intueor, eris. Intuor,
eris. Aspicio cis. Despicio, cis. Prospicio, cis. Conspicor, caris. Vsurpare
oculis. Veoir. S. See above. Suspicio, is. xi. Vide Look. See before.
Praespicio, cis. xi. Praeuideo, es. Prospicere, Animo colligere, Cord
conspicere, Animo prospicere, Animo videre, Praecipere, Cernere animo. Preuoir.
S. See but a little, or to be half blind. Caecutio, is. Ne veoir pas fort
clair. S. See far of, or from far. Prospecto, as. Prospicio, is. Speculor,
aris. Regarder de long. S. Prospicus. He that sees far of.* See often.
Respecto, as, Visito, as. Regarder souuent. To behold often. See perfectly.
Vti oculis, secundum Morum. See plainly. Perspicio, is, xi. Plainement veoir.
S. See through. Transpicio, cis. xi. Veoir a trauers quelque chose. Call. Et
Translucidus, a, um. Ang. That which may be seen through. See thou. Vide. The
imperative mode of Video, es. Seed. Satus, us, ui. Semen, nis. Sementis, is.
Seminium. Semence. H. Seed of generation. Genitale semen, Genitura, Sperma,
it is. Vrina genitalis. Semence naturele. H. Sperma proprie viroru^, Me^struum
mulieru^ est. Seek. Anquiro, ris, Indago, as. Inuestigo, as. Peto, it is.
Quaero, is. Conquiro, ris. Perquiro, ris. Vestigo, as. Rimor, aris. Inquiro,
is. Cercher. To seek to be praised. Petere laudem. Quaerere vel captare
plausum, Pendere ex laud. Cercher d' estre love. S.

To the end thou should not secke me. Tibi ne quaestioni essem. A fin que
tu ne me cherchasses point. S.

Seek a pray, or spoil. Praedor, aris.* Seek diligently. Disquiro, is.
Quaerito, as. Indagare, Conquirere, Inquirere, Perquirere, Peruenari, Rimari,
Vestigare, Circumspectare. Cercher diligement. S. Seek diligently all about.
Omnibus vestigijs disquirere, vel indagare. Cercher par tout diligement. S To
seek some body. Requiro, ris. Cercher aucun.

Seek for a thing which is toward already, by way of expectation.
Praestolor, aris. Attendre. S. Seek for things by divination. Auspicor,
caris. Seek occasion. Causam quaerere. Seek often. Quaerito, as. Requiro, is.
Cercher souue^t Seek by the trace, or to search diligently. Indago, as.
Cercher a la trace. S. Seek out. Inuestigo, as. Idem. Seek promotion. Ambio,
is. Cic. Seeker, or a searcher. Indagator, Vestigator, toris. mas. genesis
Cercheur. S. Seeking, Inquiry, or the search for a thing. Co^quisitio, onis.
Indago, inis. Indagatio, onis. Inqui sitio, onis. Quaestio, onis. f. g.
Cerchement. S. Seele, or to wanscotte the walls. Vestire parletes tabulis.
Lambrisser. Housen seeled, or wanscotted. Laqueata tecta. Maisons lambrissees.
S.

Seeling or wanscotte work. Materiaria incrustatio. Lambriz. S. Seeling, or
the inbowed work in the rouffes of housen. Laqueare, ris. Laquear, ris.
Laquearium, rij. n. g. Le lambriz d' un planchier. S. Seem. Videor, eris.
Sembl^r. S. Me seemith I hard his voice even now at the door. Audire voce^
visa sum ante aedes modo. Il me semble que ie ay ouy sa voix maintena^t deua^t
la maiso^.

Sure me seemith, or me thinks it is not like to be true, it is unlike, or
me seemith it smelles like a lie. Mihi quidem hercle non fit verisimile.
Certes il ne me semble point vray semblable. S.

It seems so to thee. Tibi ita videtur. Il te semble ainsi. S.

It seems that this fellow serves some poor man. Apparet seruum hu^c esse
domini pauperis. Ter. Il semble a veoir que cestuy soit seruiteur d' un pour
homme. S.

Seemly, meet, decent, or convenient. Habilis, le. Decorus, a, um. Decens,
it is. om. g. Bien aduenant, seant. S. It is seemly, comely, or decente. Decet.
Il est bien seant. S.

It is neither seemly, nor comely. Indecet, Dedecet. Ce n' est pas aduenant,
ne conuenant. S.

A seemly man. Commodus homo, dexter. Ho^me bien aduenant. S.

Very seemly. Percommodus, da, dum. Fort aduenant. S.

Seemly, or seemelely. Venuste, Concinne. Aduenamment. S. Seemelely, or comely.
Decenter, Decore, Condecenter. Apt. seament. S. Seemelines, which becomes
the person. Decor, oris. m. g. Decorum, ri. n. g. Decentia, ae. Co^decentia,
ae. Habilitas, tatis. f. g. Seance. S. Seen. Visus, a, um. Qui a este veu. S.
Visibilis, e. Cade^s sub aspectu, vel sub oculos. Qu'on peult veoire. That may
be seen. Et Visendus, a, um. Ang. To be seen, or worthy to be seen. Digne
d'estre veu. S. Seen to be. Videor, eris. Appareo, es. Conspicior, ceris.
Estre veu. S. Seen to be through. Transpareo, es.* Seethe. Vide Seathe.
Seylle, or sea calfe. Phoca. ae. Vitulus marinus. Veau de mer. Ges. Seeing.
Spectans, it is. Videns, it is. part. Veoyant. S. Seeing most clearly. Oculissimus,
a, um. Plaut. That sees very clearly. Qui voeit fort clair. S. Seeing that, or
sith that. Quandoquidem, Quando. Coniunct. Puis que. S. Seeing that I must
needs mary, I have such a one almost as I would desire. Quandoquidem ducenda
est, egomet habeo propemodum quam volo. Puis qu'il me fault prendre vne en
marriage. etc. Seeing it is so, I. etc. Quum ita sit, ego. etc. Puis qu' ainsi
est, ie. etc. Seeing that I care not for yours, care you as little for mine.
Quando ego non curo tuum, ne cura meum. Terent. Seeing I have taken it in hand,
I will not leave it. Quoniam quidem suscepi, non deero. Cic. Selandine, herb.
Chelidonia. Chelidonium maius. Chelidoine. S. Selde, or that chances not
often. Insuetus, a, um. Rarus, a, um. Qui n' aduient point souuent. S. Seldom.
Rare, Raro. Peusouuent. S. Seldomnes. Raritas, it is. Raritudo, inis. foe. ge.
Seldomnes, or want of usage. Insolentia, ae. foe. g. Fault d'vsage. S.
Seleucus, One of the kings of Siria ye north next Alexander, called
Antiochus, son to Antiochus Theos, and Laodice his wife which was repudiated.
This Seleucus Antiochus, was one of the four wings and four horns of
Alexander, after the prophecy of Daniel, of which names were diverse, as
Seleucus Nicanor, S. Gallinicus, Seleucus Ceraunus, Seleucus Philopater. Vide
Iosephum. Self heal an herb. Prunella, lae. vel potius Brunella, lae. f. g.
Turner. Sell. Vendo, is, didi. Venundo, as. Vendito, tas. Distraho, is. Aere
commutare. Vendre. S. Sell a thing before witness, or by delivering possession
maintenantly to the byer, or with promise of warantie. Mancipio dare, Mancupio
dare, Mancipo, as. Vendre auec promise de garentir. S. Mancipium, Is the thing
it self which is so bought and sold, as a bondema^, chattels, goods, lands.
etc. Mancipatio, Is th'assuraunce of the thing so sold, whether it be by
livery and seysing, possession, or otherwise. Mancipi, Is the interest, or
right of the thing. Mancipes, Been the sale makers of ware. Ma^cupi emptio, Is
ye form and manner of making such sale. And Mancipio accipere, Is to take
possession, or lyuerie and seizing of the thing sold, or to take it before
sufficient witness, or with warrantie of the gyuer or seller. etc. Sell a
thing to him, of whom it was first bought. Remancipo, as. Boeth. Remettre vne
chose vendue enter les mains de celuy qui la vendue, la luy reuendre. Sell at a
high pryse. Luculente vendere. Plaut. Vendre bien cher. S. Sell by port sale.
Auctionor, aris. Vide Sell publicly. Sell often. Vendito, as. Vendre souuent.
To sell publicly, or by port sale, as they sell by the crier, when ones goods
is forfeited for lack of payment, or sold to pay his debtes. Hastae
subijcere, Sub corona vendere, Sub corona vaenire, In propatulo vendere, Hastam
in foro ponere, and bona voce subijcere praeconis, Auctionari. Vendre
publiquement, and a l'encant. H.

To put out to sell, or in sale. Proscribo, bis. Mettre en criee and enuente. S.

To put a byll on his house that he will sell it. Aedes proscribere. Cic.
Exposer en vente. and Proscriptus, ta, tum. Cried, or put out to sell. Mis en
criee, ou expose en vente. S.

To put forth, or offer some thing to sell. Addicere, Instituere mercatum,
Nundinari, Aliquid venale proponere, Ve^ditare. Mettre en vente quelque chose.
S. and Venalis, le. Put forth to sell. Expose en vente. S.

Sell to diverse persons, or to sell here and there, to one and to others.
Diuendo, is, ere. Vendre ca and la aux vns and aux autres. S. Sell vitayles, as
hucksters do. Cauponor, aris. Depon. Vide Tavern. Seller. Vendax, cis.
Venditor, ris. m. g. Vendeur. S. Seller of all manner of vytayles in the
markette. Macellarius, rij. m. g. Var. Qui ve^d au march toutes sorts de
viandes. And the place where such sale is made. Macellum, li. n. g. Seller of
baggage, as old garments, horse shone, and such lumboure and tromperie.
Scrutarius, ij. m. ge. Qui scruta nulliusque pensi merces vendit. Quinqualier.
H. Seller of children to vice. Mango, onis. com. genesis Seller of haberdashe
wares, or tryfles. Minutarius, ij. Nugiuendus, di. Propola, lae. Bud.
Minutarius negotiator. Regatier. H. Seller of false, or unlawful wares.
Impostor, ris. m. ge. Seller of fruit, or a costerde munger. Pomarius, rij.
mas. ge. Fruictier. H. Seller of slaves, or bondmen. Venalitarius, rij. m. genesis
Vlpian. Merchant de serfs and esclaues. S. Seller of spices, or sweet smelles.
Aromacopola, ae. Aromatarius, ij. m. g. Bud. Especier. H. Seller of wares in
gross. Solidarius, vel Solidarius venditor. Grossier. H. Selling, or sale.
Venditio, onis. Venundatio, onis. Nundinatio, onis. f. g. Vente, vendition. S.
Selling place, or market where any thing is sold. Venalitium, tij. n. g.
Selling place, where al sorts of vytayles be sold. Macellum, li. n. g. Le
march ou on vend toutes sorts de viures. S. Selling with warrantie, or the
solemn form of bying and sellyng with warrantise. Mancipatus, tus. m. g.
Mancipatio, onis. f. g. Selling under the sta^derde, or selling by the crier.
Hastarium, ij. Venditio auctionaria. Vente a l'encant. Call. Semblable, or like.
Similis, le. Aequalis, le. Parilis, le. Confinis, Eiusmodi. Semblable and
pareil. S. Semblable counsel. Compar consilium. Conseil semblable. S. Very
semblable, or like. Assimilis, le. Persimilis, le. Vicinus illi. Fort
semblable. S.

Semblable figure. Concors figura. Semblable figure. It is more semblable, or
like. Similius very aut vero est. Il est plus vray semblable. S.

Semblably. Adaeque, Assimiliter, Etenim, Itidem, Pariter, Similiter, Aeque,
Peraeque, Iuxta. Semblablement. S. Semblaunce, or lykelyhode of a thing.
Similitudo, nis. Simulachrum, chri. Effigies, ei. Species, cici. f. g.
Semblance, S. Vide Image. Semble, or be like. Similo, as. Simulo, as. Vide
Resemble. Seem. Videor, eris. Vide Seem. Semely, as in respect of degree or
nature. Decorus, a, um. Vide Seemly. Senate, or common counsel house, as the
convocation or parliament house. Senatus, us. Curia, ae. Ordo amplissimus. Le
senate. S. The senate has ordained, or appointed. Senatus statuit. Le senate a
ordonne. S.

Assemble, or to call the senate. Citare Senatum in forum, Cogere Senatum,
Habere Senatum. Assembler le senate. S.

Deprive and put out of the senate. Mouere Senatu. Ex Senatu reijcere. Priuer
and mettre horse du Senate. S.

Senator. Senator, ris. m. ge. Senateur. Senatorius, a, um. Pertaining to a
Senator. Sense, or to perfume. Thurifico, as. Fumigo, as. Encenser. S. Sense
or franckensence. Thus, ris. vel Tus, turis. n. ge. Encens. Call. Sencer.
Thuribulum, li. n. g. Encensoir. H. Send. Mittere, Amittere, Abmittere,
Dimittere, Immittere, Delegare, Emittere, Missum facere. Enuoyer. S. Send
about. Circu^mitto, is, si, ssum. Enuoyer par tout Send again. Remitto, is.
Renuoyer, remettre. Call. Send away. Ablego, as. Relego, as. Abmitto, is.
L'enuoyer, enuoyer. Send before. Praemitto, is. Enuoyer deuant. S. Send
beyond. Transmitto, is. Transmettre. S. Send by stealthe, or secretly.
Submitto, is. Enuoyer secrettement. S. Send down. Demitto, it is. Deorsum
mitto. Call. Send for. Accerso, is, ire. Accersio, is, iui. Accio, cis. Accieo,
cies. Enuoyer querir, mander. S. Send for to be. Accersor, iris. Terent. Send
forth brightness. Fulguro, as. Fulgur emitto. Esclairer. Call. Send forth with
violence. Prorumpo, is. Virg. Iecter horse. S. Send forth odor, or savor.
Spiro, as. Iecter odeur. Send from one place to an other. Transmitto, it is.
Send in. Immitto, is. Enuoyer dedens. S. Send in Ambassade, or message.
Delego, as. Lego, as. Allego, as. Oratorem dare. Enuoyer en embassade. S. Send
in exile. Relego, as. Agere in exilium, Pellere in exilium. Eijcere in exiliu^.
Enuoyer en exil. Send lettres. Dimittere literas. Enuoyer lettres. S. Send
often. Missiculo, as. Missito, as. freq. Enuoyer souuent. S. Send over.
Tra^smitto, is. Mettre oultre, ou enuoyer. Send privily, or secretly.
Submitto, is. Enuoyer secretement. S. Send to, or deliver a thing to be
brought, or carried to an other. Admando, as.* Sendall cloth, which is a fine
lynnen. Sindon, nis. foe. ge. Sindal. Pals. Send^ng. Missio, onis. Ablegatio,
onis. Dimissio, onis. Enuoy, S. Sending before. Praemissio, onis. foe. ge.
Sending for. Accitus, tus. m. g. Accersitus, tus. m. g. Mandement. S. Sending
further, or over. Transmissio, onis. Sengrene herb. Sedum maius, Sedum magnum,
aut Se^per viuum maius. Grande Ioubarbe, and ouye. Sense, as fealing, meaning,
perceauing, wit, or understanding. Sensus, us. m. g. Sens. S. Sense natural,
or common sense. Sensus communis. Bud. Sens naturel S. His sense fails him.
Deseritur a mente. Le sens luy default. S.

Sense, or understanding to have. Sentio, it is, si, tire. Sentir. S. Sensible,
or which may be felt, hard, meaned or understood. Sensibilis, e. Sensilis,
e. Facile a sentir, sensible. S. Senses of which are five, called exterior or
outward senses, that is to say, Tactus, Visus, Auditus, Gustus, and Olfactus.
Tutching, seeing, hearing, tasting and smelling. Velcur. lib. 4. Cap. 7. There
are three interior or inward senses, to wete. Sensus communis, Phantasia, and
Memoria. The common sense or judgment, fantasy, and memory. Velc. in Phys.
eodem lib. Cap. 9. Sensuality. Libido, inis. foe. g. Lubido, inis. foe. ge.
Sensualite. S. Sensual. Libidinosus, a, um. Lubidinosus, a, um. Sensual.
Se^suall appetite. Libido, inis, Lubido, inis. Appitit desreigle. S. Sensual
to be of opinion. Obstino, as. Offirmo, mas. * Sent. Missus, a, um. Ennoye. S.
Sent about. Circummissus, a, um. Enuoye par tout. S. Sent again. Remissus, a,
um.* Sent for. Accersitus, ta, tum. Sent forth. Emissus, a. um. Enuoye. S. Sent
in. Immissus, a, um. Enuoye dedens. S. Sent, savor, or smelling. Odoratus, us.
Odor, oris. m. g. Senteur. S. Sent, or the sweet smell that flowers give. Odor
qui efflatur e floribus, Suauitas odorum quae afflatur e floribus. La senteur
que rendent les fleurs. S. Ill sent. Ater odor, Virus. Mauuaise senteur. S.

Sent that a dog has by nature. Odor, Canu^ uis Sent, or to give an odor.
Olere, Redolere. Sentir, and render odeur. S. To sent well. Been olere. Sentir
bon. S.

To sent strong. Perolere. Sentir fort. S.

To have an ill sent. Male olere, Foetere. Sentir mauuais. S.

Sentence. Iudicium, ij. Sententia, ae. f. g. Sentence. and Clausula, ae.
Sententiola, ae. diminut. Angl. A brief, little, or short sentence. Sentence
rejected. Explosa sente^tia. Sentence reiectee Sentence, or opinion of one.
Sensus, sus. Sente^tia, Opinio, Iudicium, cij. neut. ge. Sentence and opinion
d'aucun. S. Sentence brief, or succinct. Verbum, by. Vide Proverb. Sentence
crafty and full of deceipte, or subtlety. Sophisma, it is. Vide Sophisme.
Sentence dark, hard, and obscure with a question annexed. Problema, it is. n.
g. Sentence quick, and short. Apophthegma, atis. n. ge. Brieue parolle bien
sententieuse. S. Sentence spoken, and proved. Axioma, it is. neut. g. Vne maxim.
S. Sentence to give. Iudico, as. Promulgo, as. Pronu^tio, as. vel Pronuntiare
sente^tiam. Sententier, bailler sentence. S. Sentuary, or place consecrated, or
hallowed. Sanctuarium, ij. Asylum, li. n. g. Vide Sainctuary. Senuy sede, or
mustard sede. Sinapi, Sinapis, pis. foe. ge. Moustarde. S. Nauette. Pals.
Separation. Disiunctio, onis. Diremptio, onis. Discretio, onis. Distinctio,
onis. Distractio, onis, Separatio, onis. Abalienatio, onis. Diductio, onis.
Secretio, onis. Dissociatio, onis. Discrimen, inis, Dissidium, dij. Dire^ptus,
tus. m. g. Separation. Separate. Disiungo, is, nxi. Dirimo, is. Disparo, as.
Distraho, is, axi. Secerno, is. Separo, as. Segrego, as. Seiungo, is, nxi.
Abalieno, as. Abstraho, is. Diduco, cis. Discerno, nis. Dissocio, as. Abiungo,
gis. Seiugo, gas. Succerno, nis. Discludo, dis. Discrimino, nas. Diuido, is.
Separer. S. Separate from Christen communion, or to curse, or give to the
devil. Anathematizo, as.* Separate the one from the other. Aliquid ab altero
distrahere. Separer l'vn d'auec l'autre. S. They separate the young soldier
from the old. Tyronem a veterano dissociant. Tacit.

Separate out of the flock, to carry or lead away out if the flock. Abgrego,
gas. Segrego, gas. Separer du troupeau, Emmener du troupeau. S. Separated.
Disiunctus, a, um. Sectus, a, um. Separatus, a, um. Abalienatus, ta, tu^.
Abs(...) sum. Diremptus, ta, tum. Seiunctus, ta, tum (...). S. Separated to be.
Disiungor, eris, Abalienor, aris. Estre separe. Separated to be from a wife.
Nuntium vxori remittere. Separatly. Separatim. Separate, Seiuncte, Disiu^cte,
Disperse, Distinct, Discrete. Separement. S. September a month. September,
is. m. g. Septe^bre. Sepulcher. Conditorium, ij. Sarcophagus, gi. Sepulchrum,
chri. Monumentum, ti. Tumulus, li. Bustum, ti. n. g. Sepulcher. S. Stone of a
sepulcher. Cippus, Lapis qui sepulchro imponitur, and sepulti memoriam
restatur, Cornutus simpliciter sepulchri lapidem exponit. Le pierre du
sepulcher. H.

Sepulcher which one has made for him and his heirs. Sepulchrum
haereditarium. Sepulcher hereditaire. H. Sepulture. Sepultura, ae. foe. g.
Sepulture. S. Sequel. Sequela, Consequentia, ae. f. ge. La suite and
consequens. S. Sequestre, as to lay a thing in indifferent custody.
Sequestro, as. * It is where as two be at suit in the law, the one shall be
sequestered by the judge and set indifferently. etc. It is also where a man will
sequestre him that is against me to be with me, or on my side. etc. Sergeant at
arms. Stator, oris. m. g. Sergeant, or like officer. Lictor, oris. Satelles,
it is. Stator, oris. Accensus, si. m. g. S. Un sergeant. S. Lictorius, a, um.
Ang. Perteining to a sergeant. Serious. Serius, a, um. Serieux. Pals. That
speaks seriously, or gravely. Grauiloquus, a, um.

Sermon. Concio, onis. Homilia, ae. Sermo, onis. Oration ad populum. Sermon. S.
To make a sermon, or to preach. Concionari, Concionem habere, Orare ad
populum, Orationem habere ad populum. Sermonner. S.

Sermon maker. Concionator, ris. Ecclesiastes. ae. m. g. Sermonneur. S.
Serpente. Anguis, guis. m. and f. g. Serpens, it is. m. and foe. ge. Serpent. and
Anguiculus, li. m. g. A little serpent. Petite serpent. S. and Anguineus, a,
um. vel Anguinus, a, um. Of a serpent. De serpent. S. Serpent of the water.
Hydrus, Chelydrus, Natrix. Serpent d'eaue. H. and Boa, ae. f. ge. Idem. Yet it
seems by Plin. lib. 8. Cap. 14. Otherwise. But. Ste. Calls it. Un serpent
d'eaue. A water serpent. Serpents skin. Anguis senecta, Vernatio, Exuuiae,
Spolium serpentis, Vestis serpentis quoque dicitur. La dispouuille d'vn
serpent. H. Serpent which lurketh in shadows and woods. Coluber, ri. m. g.
Couleuure. H. A snake. S. Serpentine, or serpentarie, an herb. Dracuntium,
tij. Dracunculus, li. Vulgo Serpentaria. Serpentine, ou serpentaire. S.
Serpents den. Chia.* Servant. Minister, ri. Puer, ri. Seruus, ui.
Ministrator, toris. Famulus, li. m. g. Seruiteur. S. Servant at commandment,
or ready at hand. Ad manus, Stator, oris. m. genesis Servant loyal, which sees
to his masters profit. Famulus bonae frugi. Seruiteur loyal, qui guard le
prouffit de son maistre. S. Servant, maid servant or woman servant.
Ministratrix, tricis. Ministra, trae. Famula, lae. f. g. Seruante. S. Servant
of household. Famulus, li. m. ge. Servant that goes to seek his master,
when he is forth in some place, or a servant that goes to seek his master
in the town. Aduersitor, toris. m g. Varlet qui va au deuant de son maistre le
querir quand il est horse en quelque lieu, seruiteur qui va querir son maistre
en la ville. S. Servant under another man that serves, or servants
servant. Subministrator, toris, m. ge. Servants always attendaunt.
Calatores, rum. Servants out of wages. Exauctorati.* Serve. Administro, as.
Famulor, aris. Merere alicui, Ministro, as. Obsequor, eris. Seruio, is.
Asseruio, is. Deseruio, uis. Inseruio, uis. Subseruio, uis. Seruir. S. Serve a
table. Ponere mensam, vel Apponere me^sam. Seruir la table. S. He served him in
vessayle of silver. Argentum illi purum apposuerat. Cic. Il se seruoit en
vaisselle d'argent. S.

Serve for wages. Stipendium facere. Liu. Serve humbly. Ancillor, aris. Serve
in wars. Latrocinari, Mereo, es. Mereor, reris. Seruir en la guerre. S. Serve
process, or write. Dicam alicui impingere. Serve under an other. Subministro,
as. Subnitor, eris, ixus.* Service. Administratio, nis. Famulatus, us.
Famulitium, ij. Ministerium, ij. Obsequium, ij. Seruitium, ij. n. g. Service.
S. Service, or pleasure done. Promeritum, ti. Vide Pleasure. Service to do.
Merere alicui. Insetuire. Fair service. To present his service to some man.
Defer studium suum and laborem ad aliquem. Presenter son service a aucun. S.

To offer his service to any man. Venditare se alicui per omnia obsequia. Bud.
Offrir son service a quelqu' un. S.

Servile. Vernilis, e. Servile. S. Servile, or pertaining to servants.
Seruilis, e. Appertenant a serfs, servile. S. Seruisable. Attentus, a, um.
Obsequiosus, a, um. Obsequibilis, e. Officiosus, a, um. Seruiable. S.
Seruisable. Officiose. Seruiablement. S. Seruise bery. Sorbum, by. n. g. Corme.
S. Sower seruise beryes. Sorba acria. Cormes aigres.

Seruise tree. Sorbus, by. f. g. Un cormier ou sorbier. S. Sessing, or a setting
of tribute. Confectio tributi. Cic. Imposition de tribute. S. Sessions.
Consessus, us. Conuentus, us. m. g. Assise. To hold sessions, or sises.
Conuentus agere, Celebra^e conuentus. Tenir lesassises. S.

Sessions of the peace. Conuentas minores^ Set. Pono, is, posui. Mettre. S.
Set. Positus, a, um. part. mis. S. Set a battle in order, or to order or put
in battle array. Dirigere aciem, Ordines ponere, Aciem instruere. Cic. Mettre
en order, ordonner sa bataille. S. Set a bone or a member displaced, to put, or
to set him in his pan, or place again. Os in suam sedem reponere, vel in suas
seeds excitare, Ossa in suam sedem compellere, vel in suam sede^ dare,
collocare, Os reponere. Cells. Reneboister un o^ ou un membre disloque, la
mettre en sa boiste ou lieu. S. Set before, or prefer or esteem more.
Praepono, is, Mettre denant, ou preferer and plus estimer. S. Set above, or
before other in authority. Praepositus, a, um. Mis deuant. S. Set, or to lay
about. Circumpono, nis. Mettre entour. S. Set about with plants. Obsero, is,
eui. Planter. S. and Obsitus, ta, tum. Set about with herbs and trees. Set a
false thing in the stead of a true thing. Suppono, is. Mettre vne chose faulse
au lieu d' vne vraye. Set, or to put after. Postfero, rs. Mettre apres. S. Set
a fine or pain. Irrogare mulctam. Dicore mulctam. Liu. Set again in his
place. Repono, is. Restituo, is. Remettre. S. Set a name in writing. Reponere
nomen. Set a price, or to apreciate. Adaero, as, Adenerer. S. Set at liberty.
Libero, as. Reconciliare in libertatem. Mettre en liberte. S. Set at peace and
quietness. Perpaco, as. Appaiser. S. Set a vessel a broache. Relinere dolium.
Terent. Set awry. Distorqueo, es. Tordre. S. To wrythe. Set before, or to put
before. Antefero, rs. Praepono, is. Vide Prefer. Set, or to put between.
Intercalo, as. Interpono, nis. Mettre enter deux. S. and Insero, ris. Idem. Set
forth, or to put forth before me^. Ponere in medio, Opponere, Proferre, vel
vocare aliquid in medium. Mettre au deuant. S. Set forth a book. Edere librum,
Librum publicare, Vulgar librum. Mettre un liver en lumiere. S. Set forward
in journey. Tollere gradum. Plaut. Set eggs under a hen. Oua gallinae
subijcere vel supponere. Mettre conuer. S. Set hands on one. Praehenso, as.
Manus alicui inijcere. Cic. Set in. Insero, is. Mettre dedens. Set in a place
or stead. Colloco, cas. Loco, as. Subdo, is. Mettre en un lieu. S. Set in place
of an other. Substituo, is. Subrogo, gas. Substituer. S. Set in a place.
Colloco, as. Mettre en un lieu. S. Set in order. Accommodo, as. Instruo, is.
Struo, is. Dispono, is. Ordinem facere. Mettre par order. S. Set less by a
thing. Infra se ducere aliquid, Minoris facere, Postponere, Ducere minoris.
Estimer moins un chose. S. Set little by a thing. Parui aestimare, Parui
ducere, Parui pendere, Parui habere, Parui facere. Peu estimer. S. To be set
little by, or to be little esteemed. Authoritate egere, No^ optime audire,
Opinione laborare. N'estre pas bien estime. S.

Set little by man's folly. Deuorare ineptias, and stultitias hominum. Cic. Set
love on a maiden. Animum adijcere ad virginem. Terent. Set much by. Accepto,
as. Magni and magno aestimo, as. Plurimi facio, cis. Tribuo, is. Magnipendo,
dis. Magni putare. Estimer fort. S. To be much set by, or to be greatly
esteemed. Existimatione florere, Obtinere admirationem, Summam opinionem
obtinere. Haberi magnae authoritatis, Esse maximo pretio, vel in maximo pretio.
Estre fort estime. S.

Set more by. Antefero, rs. Pluris aestimare, Praefacio, cis. Praeuerto, is.
Praefero, rs. Vide Prefer. Set naught by any thing. Nauci facere, Parui
facio, cis. Parui aestimare, Parui ducere, Parum habere, Ductare pro nihilo,
Nihili facere, Pro nihilo putare, Nullo loco numerare rem aliquam, Pro nihilo
ducere. N' estimer rien quelque chose. S. Set new vynes. Nouello, las. Planter
vne nouuelle vigne. S. and Nouelletum, ti. n. ge. A new set, or late grown
vine. Vigne nouuelle. S. Set on horseback. In ephippium subijcere. Set on
pillorie, or else where with a paper on his head. Catamidio, as. Vide Pillory.
Set or to plant. Plantare, Serere, Conserere. Inserere, Pangere, Repangere,
Ponere, Deponere. Planter. S. Set or plant eftsoon. Resero, is, eui.
Replanter. S. Set or put between. Intercalaris, e. Intercalarius, a, um.
adiect. Set or trimed with flowers, or herbs. Sertus, a, u^. vt Sertae
coronae. Garlandes set with flowers. Set out of line, or rule. Denormo, as.
Mettre horse de ligne. S. Set out to show. Propono, is. Mettre au deuant. S.
Set people in an uproar. Miscere tumultum. Liu. Set plants, or seeds. Figere
plantas, Pango, is, anxi, vel pepigi, actum. Pastino, as. Pla^to, as. Sementa
facere, Semino, as. Vide Set or to plant, and sow. etc. Set price, or valewe.
Destino, as. Imponere pretium, Pretium perhibere, Statuere pretium, Taxo, as.
Mettre pris. S. Set proppes, or shoores. Pedo, as. Statumino, as. Figere
ceruos. Virg. Eschalasser. S. Set the mind to a thing. Animum alicui rei
adijcere, Animum alicui rei dedere, Accommodare, Appellere, Intendere,
Obfirmare vel Applicare. Appliquer l' esprit. etc. Set to. Appono, is. Mettre,
Apposer, Adiousire. S. Set together in a place. Colloco, as. Set to the breast
or pappe, as a calfe is set under a cow to suck. Submitto, it is. Colum. Set
trees. Defigere arbores. Virg. To set, or pla^t trees to bear up vines in
steed of poles. Arbusto, tas. Planter des arbres pour seruer aux vignes en
lieu d'eschallas. S.

Set a vine. Vite^ instituere, vel ponere. Planter vne vigne. S. Set up, or to
lift up. Erigo, is, xi. Extruo, is, xi. Statuo, is. Tollo, is, sustuli.
Dresser, esleuer. S. Set up a proclamation or statute on a post to be read.
Figere legem. Cic. Set war aside. Ponere bellum. Virg. Set young plants of
springes. Nouello, as. Vide Set new. etc. Setter up, a builder, or a founder.
Positor, toris. m. ge. Fondateur, edificateur. Call. Setter of herbs, plants.
etc. Sator, oris. Plantator, oris. m. g. Planteur. Call. Setting. Positio, onis.
Positura, ae. Positus, us. mas. genesis Position. S. Setting forth, or publishing.
Editio, onis. Publicatio, onis.. f. g. Publication. S. Setting of things in
order. Structura, ae. foe. g. Setting or planting of herbs, or trees.
Plantatio, onis. Consitura, rae. Satus, tus. Satio, onis. foe. ge. Plantement.
S. Setting stick, called a dibbell. Pastinum, ni. neut. genesis Houe. H. Setttng
time, or time to sow seeds in. Sementis, it is. Seminandi tempus. Col. lib. 2.
Settes, ympes, or plants. Semina, number. n. g. Vir. Plants. S. Setle, or a
seat. Sedicula, ae. Sedile, is. Sella, ae. foe. genesis Selle. S. Setle or rest,
as wine or licour does when it fyneth. Sido, is, di. Deualler and aller au
fond. S. Habet praeteritum mutuatum a sedeo. Setle, or to sink to the botome
of the vessel. Sidere ad ima vasis. Plin. Deualler au fond du vaisseau. S.
Setwalle an herb. Phu, Phu magnum, Valeriana mayor, sieve syluestris.
Valerienne. Pin. and Tur. Setwale, a root at the Appoticaries. Zedoaria, ae.
Seven. Septem. and Septenus, a. um. Sept. S. Septempedalis, le. Of seven feet,
or that is seven foot long. Qui ha sept pieds de long. S. Of seven, or
containing seven. Septenarius, a, u^. De sept, contenant sept. S. vt
Septenarius numerus. The number of seven. Nombre de sept. S.

Seven cornered, or having seven corners. Septangulus, a, um. Quod septem
angulos habet. Call. Seven diverse, many, or sundry ways. Septifarius, a, um.
Seven hundredth. Septingenti, tae, ta. Sept cents S. Seven hundredth fold, or
double. Septingentuplus, a, um.*. Seven hundredth times. Septingenties. Aduerb.
Seven manner of fascio^s, or ways. Septifaria^. adu. Seven ounces. Septunx,
cis. m. ge. Sept onces. S. Seven stars, a sign celestial, in English
called Charles wayne. Hyades, Septentriones, Suculae, arum. Virgiliae, arum.
They are called Septentriones. Because they do appear in the coaste called
Septentrio, They arise the twelft kal. of June. Plin. lib. 18. Cap. 28 Seven
times. Septies. Aduerb. temp. Sept fois. S. Seven years, or the space of seven
years. Septe^nium, ij. Sept ans. S. and Septennius, a, um. Of the space of
seven years. That has seven years, or is seven years old. Septennis, ne.
Qui ha sept ans, aage de sept ans.

Seuenten. Septemdecim. Dixsept. S. Seventh. Septimus, a, u^. Septenus, a, um.
Septieme. S Seventh hundredth. Septingentenus, a, um. Septingentesimus, a, um.
Le septcentieme. S. For the seventh time. Septimum. Aduerb. Pour la septieme
fois. S.

Seventy, or three score and ten, thus written.lxx. Septuaginta. Septante, ou
soixsant and dix. S. Seventy. Septuagenus, na, number. Septante. S. Seventy times.
Septuagies. Septante fois. S. Seventy years old. Septuagenarius, a, um.
Several, and divided from other. Discretus, ta, tu^. Secretus, ta, tum.
Separe, and devise d' auec un autre. Severally. Discrete. Vide Separatly.
Sever, or to sondre. Abiungo, is, nxi. Relego, as. Segrego, as. Vide Part,
Divide and separate. Severed. Discretus, a, u^. Disparatus, a, um. Segregatus,
a, um, Separatus, a, um. Separe. S. Seuern, a river in England. Sabrina,
Sabriana. Sewer of the kytchyn. Anteambulo fercularius. Escuyer de cuisine. S.
and Praegustator, toris. m. genesis The sewer which tastes the meat, the
taster. Escuyer qui fait l' essay. S. and Praegusto, as. To sewe or taste
before. Taster and gouster deuant. S. Sewet. Omentum, ti. Seuum, ui. vel Sebum,
by. vel Sepum, pi. n. ge. Suif. H. Plin. lib. 28. Cap. 9. I think these
purified and sweet to be suete: and when they are stale, tallowe, I suppose
also Aruina, ae. f. g. Sweet sewet. Sain ou sein doulx. S. Omentatus, a, um.
Mixte with sewet. Sewet melted. Liquamen. Colum. Pinguedo ad ignem liquata.
Graisse ou sein fondu. H. Sewrtie or stability. Firmamentum, ti. n. g. Firmete.
Vide Surenesse and stabilitie. Sewrtie, Vide Suertie. Sewster, or a seemster.
Sarcinatrix, tricis. foem. ge. Cousturiere. S. Sextine of a church. Aedituus,
i. Sacrista, Aeditimus, mi. m. g. Secretain, Sacristain, Marguillier. S.
Sextry, or vestry in a church. Sacrarium, rij. n. ge. Sexterie. Pals. Sey Vide
Sei.
S. ANTE. H.
SHackles, or fetters of the feet, of slaves or other malefactors. Compedes,
Pedicae, Vincula pedum ferrea. Fers de pies des es^laues ou d' autres
malfaicteurs. H. Shadde a fish. Alausa, sae. Alosa, sae. Thrissa, sae. foe.
genesis Alose. Ges. Shadow. Typus, pi. Vmbra, ae. foe. genesis Ombre. S. and
Vmbella, diminut. Ang. A little shadow. Petite ombre. S. and Vmbratilis, e.
Ang. Pertaining to a shadow, or done in the shadow. Faict en l'ombre. and
Vmbrosus, a, um. Opacus, ca, cum. Full of shadow, or having much shadow as
trees tops. etc. Ombrageux. S. Shadow in summer for man and beast. Aestiua,
ae. foe. genesis Shadow of trees, called vmbrage. Opacitas, it is. Vmbraculum, li.
n. g. Ombrage. S. An unwholesome shadow. Grauis vmbra. Ombre mal saine. S.

Shadow that folowes one. Vmbra aemula. Ombre qui suit. S. Shadow of a wood.
Vmbra nemoralis. L'ombre d' un bois. S. To fear his own shadow. Suam ipsius
vmbram metuere. Craindre son ombre. S.

To shadow, or to make a shadow. Vmbrare, Inumbrare, Opacare, Inopacare.
Ombrager, ou fair vmbre. S.

Shadowed, or in the shadow. Opacus, a, um. Ombrageux. S. Shadowed, or of
shadow. Vmbraticus, a, um. Ombrageux ou d'ombre. Call. Shadowyng, or making
shadow as wood does. vmbrifer, ra, rum. Qui port ombre. Call. Sadowyng place.
Vmbraculum, li. n. g. Ombrage. S. Shaffler with his feet, which sayleth in
going. Atta, ae. m. g. Festus. Boteux. Pals. Shafflinge, or eele of a middle
bigness. Anguilla media. H. Shafte, or an arrowe. Sagitta, tae. Calamus, mi.
Arundo, inis. Spiculum, li. n. g. ^leiche. H. Shaftement, or a shaftlengthe,
the measure from the top of the thumb (set upright and the hand closed) to
the uttermost part of ye palm: which is, of a tale man's measure half a
foot, or six inches by squier. Semipes, dis. m. ge. Demi pie. Shaftling,
sharplinge, stickling, sticklebanke, or banstickle. Aculeatus pisciculus,
Pungitius, Ce^triscus. Espinoche, ou espinarde. Ges. Shake, and to make to
tremble. Concutio, it is. Co^quasso, as, Quatio, is, assi. Succutio, it is. Quasso,
as. Commouere, Discutere, Labefactare. Esbranler and fair trembler. S. and
Quatefacio, is. To cause to shake or move. Shake for cold or fear. Horresco,
scis. Tremesco, scis. Tremo, is. Vide Quake and Tremble. Shake of. Discutio,
it is. Extrico, cas. Agito, tas. Peragito, tas. Quatio, it is. Succutio, it is.
Secouer. S. To shake of the bridle. Excutere vel Concutere habenam vel fraenos.
Secouer la bride. S.

Shake often. Quasso, as. Saepe quatio, Succusso, sas. Secouer souuent. S. To
quauer, or shake a darte, or other thing to cast it. Vibro, ras. Remeuer and
bransler un dard ou autre chose pour iecter S.

Shake, or to tremble with the fever. Tremesco, scis. Tremo, is, mui. Trembler.
S. Shake with trotting. Succutio, is. Shaken. Concussus, a, um. Excussus, a,
um. Quassatus, a, um. Quassus, a, um. Esbranle. S. Shaking. Conquassatio, onis.
foe. g. Commotio, onis. Concussio, onis. Concussus, sus. Quassus, sus. m. genesis
Esbranlement, secouement. S. Quassabundus, a, um. Ang. Full of shaking, or he
that shakes his head.* Shaking for cold, or a tremblyng. Horror, oris.
Tremor, oris. m. g. Trembleme^t. S. and Tremebundus, a, um. Full of such
shaking. Tremblant. S. Shaking for cold, as quiuering. Quercerus, a, u^.
Querquerus, a, um. vt Febris quercera. A cold with a shaking or quiuering of
all the body, a shaking fever. Froide auec grand tremblement de tout le corpse.
S. Shaking for fear, or cold. Horrescens, it is. Stat. Shaking for fear, or
with the fever. Tremulus, a, um. Tremblant. S. Shaking, or trotting of a horse.
Succussatio, onis. Succussutura, ae. Vide Trotting. Shale of a nutte and such
like things. Putamen ligneum. Le noyau d' vne noix and semblables. S. The
shales of dates. Ossa palmularum. Suet. Les noyaux de dactes. S.

Shall, or will, the sign of the future tens. As I shall, or will hear.
Audiam. I'orray. Pil. Which sign is used in ye modes of all verbes in yt tens.
Shallowe place, or foorde, a water that one may pass over on foot. Vadum,
di. n. g. Vne gue, vne ^aue qu' on peult passer a pied. S. and Vadosus, sa,
sum. Full of shallowe places or foordes, that a man may pass over. Qui ha
beaucoup de guez par ou on peult passer a pied. S. To go over a shallowe
water, or foorde. Vado, das. Passer a gue. S.

Shambles, or place where flesh and all kind of vitayles is sold. Macellum,
li. neut. genesis Le march ou on vend toutes sorts de viures. S. Shame, or
bashefulnes. Ignominia, ae. Pudor, oris. Verecundia, ae. f. g. Honte. S. Had it
not been a great shame etc. Nonne esset puditu^ etc. N'eust ce point este vne
grande honte etc.

Shamefaste. Particeps pudoris and verecundiae. Verecundus, a, um. Pudens, it is.
Honteux. S. Shamefast to be. Gerere pudorem, Subpudeo, es. Verecundor, aris.
Pudefieri, Pudorem colere, Verecundia teneri. Estre honteux. S. To make
shamefast. In verecundiam adducere. Fair honteux. S.

Shamefastly. Pudenter, Pudibunde, Verecunde. Auec honte. S. Shamefastnes.
Frons, ntis. Pudor, oris. Verecundia, ae. f. g. Vide shame. Shameful thing.
Foedus, a, um. Pudendus, a, um. Turpis, e. Pudenda res. Chose honteuse. S. It
is a shameful thing to tell. Verecundum est dicere. C'est chose honteuse de le
dire. S.

Shameful flighte. Fuga ignominiosa. Fuite ho^teuse. Shamefully. Foede,
Impudenter, Turpiter. Honteusement. S. To kill a man shamefully. Ignominiose
hominem occidere. Honteusement fair mourir un ho^me. S

Shameless, or without shame. Impudens, it is. Inuerecundus, da, dum. Os durum.
Eshonte. S. Shameless to be. Ponere pudorem, Frontem perfricare. S'eshonter.
S. He is shameless, or without shame. Perijt illi pudor, Perijt illi frons. Il
est eshonte. S.

Shamelessenesse, or rather impudency, or want of shame. Impudentia, ae. foe.
ge. Perfrictio frontis. Eshontement. S. Shanke bone. Parastata, ae. * Tibia,
ae. foe. ge. L' os de la iambe, ou Iambe. S. Shancke of the leg. Crus, ris.
n. g. Iambe. S. Shancke or tonel of a chymney. Fumarium, rij. Infumibulum, li.
Spiraculum per quod fumus exit. Cheminee. Call. Un tuyan. Pals. Shape. Forma,
ae. f. g. Form. S. To have the shape of a man. Humana specie and figura esse.
Auoit la form d'vn homme. S.

Beasts that have the shape of man. Indutae forma hominum belluae. Bestes qui
ont form d' ho^me.

Shape, or to give shape, form and fashion to a thing. Figurare, Confingere.
Bailler form and facon a quelque chose. S. Shape, or to form. Formare,
Conformare, Fingere. Former. S. Shape any thing of claye, or earth. Plasmo,
mas.* Shaped, or formed. Figuratus, ta, tum. Formatus, ta, tum. Form. Call.
Shaped after diverse sorts, or of diverse manners or fashions. Multiformis, me.
De diuerses manieres and facons. Call. Sharde of an earthen pot, or tyle. Testa,
ae. foe. genesis Taiz de pots de terre. S. and Testaceus, a, um. Of a sharde.
Shardes, or pieces of stones broken and scattred. Rudus, eris. n. g. Share of a
man's body. Penis, nis. Virile, Virile membrum. Verge, vit. H. Share of a
plough. Dentale, lis. n. genesis Le coultre d' vne charue. S. Sharp, or well
edged. Acuminatus, ta, tum. Acutus, ta, tum. Exacutus, ta, tum. Agu. S. Very
sharp. Praeacutus, ta, tum. Peracutus, ta, tum. Fort agu. S.

Sharp, and cruel. Rigidus, a, um. Tetricus, a, u^. Sharp as the head of a
darte, or such like. Praepilatus, a, um. Agu par le bout. S. Sharp beneathe
like a pear. Turbinatus, a, um. Qui va en appoinctant par le bas comme vne
poire. S. Sharp head like a sugar lofe. Argutum caput. Sharp man, or an
eagre fellow. Acer, Austerus, Seuerus. Un homme aspre. S. Sharp of nature, or
eagre. Austerus, a, um. Aspre. Sharp, or quick wytted. Sagax, cis. Solers,
it is. Ingeniosus, sa, sum. Argutus, ta, tum. Agu and in genieux. S. Sharp, or
eagre. Acer, ra, rum. Acerbus, a, u^. Acetosus, a, um. hic Acer, haec acris,
hoc acre, Acidus, a, um. Austerus, a, um. Aigre. S. Sharp, or eagre to be.
Aceo, es. Estre algre. S. To be very sharp, or eagre. Peracesco, scis. Estre
fort aigre. S.

To make rough and sharp. Aspero, as. Exaspero, as. Fair rude and aspre. S.

Sharp, or eagre to make. Acerbo, as. L'aigrir. S. Sharp, or eagre to wax.
Acesco, cis. Coacescere. S'aigrir. S. Sharp oracion, apt to confirm, or
reprove. Co^tentio, onis. foe. ge.* Sharp, pythye, or quick sentence.
Apopthegma, it is. neut. genesis Sharp sauce. Oxygarum, Oxyporum, ri. neut. g.
Condimentum acetatum, quod stomacho acue^do conducit. Saupiquet. H. Sharp
sentences, and wyttie. Sales Attico lepore tincti. Mart. Sharp steple.
Pyramid, dis. foe. ge. It is also any thing which is sharp or slendre above,
or upward, and broad or square beneath, or downwarde like a sharp steple.
Sharpen, or to make sharp, whet or grind. Acuere, Exacuere, Procudere.
Aguiser. S. Sharpen, or to grind, or whet a knyfe. In cotem cultrum subigere.
Aguiser un cousteau. S. Sharpen, or to make sharp, or pointed. Acumino, as.
Acuo, is. Exacuo, is. Cacumino, as. Fair poinctu, ou agu. S. Sharpen, or to
make very sharp. Peracuere. Fair fort agu. S. Sharpen at the end. Turbino,
as. Fair poinctu. Sharpen at the point. Spiculo, as. Fair la poinct de
quelque chose. Call. Sharpen before. Propilo, as.* Sharper, or who does sharpen.
Acutor, oris.* Sharpening, or a making sharp. Exacutio, onis. foe. ge.
Aguisement. S. Sharpening beneathe. Turbinatio, onis. f. g. Aguisement par le
bas. S. Sharply, or cruelly. Severe, Tetre, tetrius, teterrime. Cruellement.
Call. Sharply, or rebukefully. Satyrice, Acriter, cum conuitio. Call. Sharply,
or eagrely. Acerbe, Acriter, Acerrime, Aspere, Austere. Asprement, ou
aigrement. S. Sharpenes. Acumen, inis. n. g. Acuite. S. Sharpnes in speaking.
Acrimonia, ae. foe. ge. Acrimonie, acuite. S. Sharpnes in unripe fruit.
Acritas, it is. Acritudo, inis. Acerbitas, it is. Acor, oris. Asperitas, tatis.
Aspritudo, dinis. Aspredo, inis. Austeritas, tatis. f. g. Asprete. S. Sharpnes
of nature. Austeritas, it is. foem. genesis S^uerite, Austerite. S. Sharpnes of
wit. Sagacitas, it is. Solertia, ae. Acritas ingenij, Acumen ingenij.
Ingeniosite. S. Shave. Derado, is, si. Rado, is. Abrado, is, asi. Adrado, dis.
Attondeo, es. Tondeo, des. Raire, ou Raser. Shave away, or of. Abrado, is.
Derado, is. Erado, is. Idem. Shave less and less. Stringo, is.* One barber
shaueth an other, a proverb signifying one good turn asks an other. Mutuum
muli scabunt, Tonsores radunt alter alterum. Un barbier rait l'autre. S.

Shave often. Rasito, as. freq. Raire souuent. S. Shave or whyttell a thing
small. Inspico, as.* Shave or to scrape. Radere, Abradere. Ratisser. S. Shaven.
Radulanus, a, um. Tonsus, a, um. * Rasus, sa, sum. Raze. S. and Rasilis, le.
Easy to be shaven. Aise a raire. S. Shauer, or a harbor. Rasor, ris. m. ge.
Qui rait. S. Rayeur. Call. Shauer, an instrument. Radula, ae. Un racloir. S.
Shauing. Rasura, ae. f. genesis Rasement. S. and Rasorius, a, um. Pertaining to
shauing. Shauing knife for a shomaker, or curriour. Scalprum, ri. Ansarium,
rij. n. g. Call. Shauing of any thing that is bored, filed, or scraped. Scobs,
bis. foe. ge. She. Ea, Illa, Ipsa. Elle. S. Sheade, or the creste, or division
of the hayres of the head. Discrimen capillorum, Aequamentu^, La creste de
cheueus. H. Sheafe for arrows. Pharetra, ae. Scranteum, i. n. genesis Vne
trousse. Vide Quiver. He that bears or carries such a sheafe. Pharetratus,
qui pharetram fert. Call. Sheaffe of arrows. Fascis sagittarum. Sheaffe of
corn. Fascis spicarum. Garb de ble. S. Sheare. Attondeo, es. Deto^deo, es.
Tondeo, es, totondi. Tondre. S. Sheare often. Detonso, as. Tonso, as. Tondre
souuent. Sheare wheat, or any other kind of corn, to reap. Metere,
Demetere, Emetere, Mess facere, Segites succidere. Moissonner. S. Shearer, or
a clipper. Tonsor, ris. m. ge. Tondeur. S. Shearer of corn, a reaper. Messor,
ris. masc. genesis Moissonneur. S. Sheares to clippe with. Forfex, ficis. f. g.
Forces, S. and Forficula, lae. foe. ge. A little sheares. Forcettes. S.
Shearing. Tonsura, ae. f. g. Le faict de tondre. S. Shearing of corn. Messio,
onis. foe. g. et Messorius, a, u^. Pertaining to shearing of corn. Sheathe.
Theca, ae. Vagina, ae. f. g. Gain. S. Vaginula, ae. diminut. Ang. A little
sheathe. Petite gain. To sheathe a swoorde. Recondere gladium in vaginam.
Engainer. S.

A swoorde sheathed, or in the scaberde. Clausus ensis. Ensis vagina tectus,
Hor. Espee engainee. S.

Shede, or to power out or spill. Diffundere, Expa^dere. Spargere. Espandre. S.
Shed, or poured out. Profusus, sa, sum. Effu^us, sa, sum. Sparsus, sa, sum.
Espandu. S. Sheding, or pouring out. Effusio, onis. Respersus, sus, Respersio,
onis. Suffusio, onis. foem. genesis Espandement. S. Sheep. Ouis, is. Pecus,
cudis. Pecus, coris. neut. g. Brebis. H. Ouicula, ae. diminut. Angl. A little
or small sheep. Brebiette. S. and Ouillus, a, um. Ouinus, a, um. Of sheep. De
brebis. S. Sheep called a pyld sheep. Apica, vel Mina ouis. Vne brebis pelee
soubs le ventre. S. Pilled under the bellye. Sheep croned or cullied out for
age, or other cause. Reijculae oues, Ouis reijcula est quae velaetate vel morbo
grauis est, aut saltem minus idonea. H. Sheep having small bodies and little
wolle. Apicae oues.* Sheep cote, or house. Ouile, is. Praesepe, is. Caula,
lae. f. g. Estable de brebis. S. Sheep croke, or sheep hoke. Pedum, di.
Pastorale incuruum baculum. Houlette. H. Sheep master. Magister pecoris.
Maistre bergier. Sheep of two shere, or having two teethe, called a hog
sheep. Ambidens, it is. Bidens, it is. f. genesis Vne brebis de deux ans. S. Sheep
reave, or head sheepehearde. Aggregarius pastor, Magister pecoris. Maistre
bergier. S. Sheep rotte. Lues ouilis. Sheep sick. Oues vitiosae. Brebis
malades. S. Sheep with roughe wolle like goats hear. Musimones, number. Lege
plin. lib. 8. Cap. 49. Sheep with two teethe, called a sherling. Bide^s, it is.
Duidens, it is. Vt supra. Sheepehearde. Opilio, onis. Pastor, oris. mas. genesis
Custos ouium. Pasteur, pastre, ou pastoureau, Bergier. S. and Pastoralis, e.
Pastorius, a, um. Pastoritius, a, um. De pasteur. S. Of a pastor, or
sheepehearde. Sheepeheardes bodkine an herb called also storkes bill, or pinke
nedle. Geranium primum, Rostrum gruis, Rostrum ciconiae. Bec de cigogne. Pin. A
sheepeheards life. Vita pastoritia. Vie pastorale

Sheepeheardes cloak. Bardocucullus, li. m. g. Sheepeheardes cotage. Casa, ae.
Tuguriu^, ij. Gurgustium, tij. n. genesis Maisonnette a Bergier. S. Sheepeheardes
dog. Aggregarius, * Canis pecuarius. vel pastoralis. Chien de bergier. H.
Sheepeheardes purse an herb. Bursa pastoris^ Bourse a pasteur. Pin. Sheep
dunge, or tyrdles. Fimus ouillus. Pilulae, arum. Plin. Fiente de brebis. H.
Sheep fell, or skin. Mallestra, ae. foe. ge. Pellis ouina. Peau de brebis.
S. Sheep tongue, herb. Agniglossa, Agnilingua. Shepster, or seamster.
Sarcinatrix, cis. foe. genesis Cousturiere. S. Sheet. Caesitium, ij. Lodix, cis.
Linteum, ei. Toral, lis. Toralium, lij. n. g. Lecticaria sindon. Linzeul. H.
Drap ou linceul. Pals. Sheet of paper, or parchement. Philyra, Philura,
Scheda, Membrana papyri. Vne fueille de papier ou de parchemin. H. Shield.
Clypeus, ei. Hysperaspistes, Scutum, ti. n. genesis Escusson. Pals. and Scutulum,
li. dimin. Angl. A little shield. Shield maker. Scutarius, ij. m. g. Qui fait
escussons. Shield of brawne. Glandium, ij. n. g. Shield of a small bigness, a
scutchion, or buckler. Ancile, lis. n. g. Un court escusson, ou bouclier. S.
Shelded, or wearing a shield. Clypeatus, a, um. Scutatus, a, um. Garni ou arm
d' escusson. etc. Shell of a fyshe. Concha, ae. Ostracum, ci. Testa, ae.
Coquille de poisson. H. and Testaceus, a, u^. Of a shell. De coquille. Shell
crabe, or a tortesse. Testudo. Tortue, tortugne. And the shel. Testudinis
operimentum. H. Shell fish. Testacei pisces, Testae, Testacea, Conchae, arum.
Pisces duro operime^to instrati. Poissons a coquilles. H. Shell of a tortouse
fyshe. Chelonium, ij. n. genesis Coquille d'vne tortue. Shelles of a nutte.
Culeola, orum, Putamina nucis. Les coquilles de la noix. S. Shelles of eggs.
Putamina ouorum, Testae ouorum. Les coquilles d'oeufs. S. Shelles which the
beasts have of nature. Natiuae testae, Conchae, arum. Coquilles que les bestes
ont de nature. S. Shelfe or place to set up pottes, dishes, and other
vessels. Abax, cis. m. g. Estuy de pots, escuelles, and autres vas. S.
Shelfe, or heap of sand gathered in the sea. Dorsum in mari. Virg. Shelfes in
the sea. Breuia, uiu^. Tacit. Banes de sable. Show, or the color of a thing.
Species, iei. Praetextus, tus. Obtentus, tus. m. ge. Ombre. S. Under the show
or color of embassage into Asia. Per speciem legationis in Asiam, Praetextu,
etc. Soubz ombre ou couleur d'ambassade. etc. S.

Under the show or color of that surname. Sub eius obtentu cognominis. Soubz
ombre de ce surno^.

Under the show or color of alliance. Sub vmbra foederis. Soubs vmbre
d'alliance. S.

Show, or to declare, or tell. Annuntio, as. Arguo, is. Commonstro, as.
Demonstro, as. Indico, as. Monstro, as. Nuntio, as. Narro, as. Ostendo, is.
Pando, is. Praebeo, es. Praesto, as. Praetendo, is. Propono, nis. Significo,
cas. Monstrer. S. Show abroad. Vulgo, as. Vide Publyshe, or set forth Not to
show him self abroad. Continere sese in occulto, Publico abstinere, Carere
publico. Ne se monstrer point. S.

Show before. Praemonstro, as. Praenarro, as. Praenuntio, as. Annoncer deuant.
S. Show before what shall follow, or come after. Praemonstro, as. vt Ventos
praemonstrat saepe futuros inflatum mare. Cic. The swellyng sea forshewes
oftentimes wyndes to come. Show by his countenance, gesture, word, or other
token. Prae se far, vel prae se gerere. Mo^strer par son visage and par
samine ou contenance. S. as He shows him self angry. Prae se fert
iracundiam. Show by signs, or tokens. Signo, as. Monstrer par signs. S. Show
evidently. Demonstro, tras. Planum facere. Monstrer euidemment. S. Show forth.
Exerto, as. Profero, rs. Monstrer. S. Show him self, or to present him self
in sight. Dare se in conspectum alicuius, Eminere, Existere, Minari, In
conspectum populi se committere, In publicum prodire, In publicum procedere,
Publicare se, Prominere, Proferre se, Repraesentare sese. Se monstrer and
presenter. S. Show often. Ostento, as. Monstrer souuent. S. Show opinion, or
judgment. Sententiam dicere, Censeo, es. Dire son opinion. S. Show our
conceit or fantasy in speakinge, to tell forth what we have in our mind.
Loquor, eris. Dire ce que nous auons sur le ceur. S. Show what he can do.
Edere specimen, Dare specimen sui. Cic. Monstrer ce qu'on scait fair. S. Show
with the finger. Indigito, as. Antiquu^ verbum idem significans quod volo, vel
nomino, Monstrer au doigt. Call. To show with the finger. Digito demonstrare.
Monstrer au doigt. S.

Showed. Demonstratus, ta, tum. Monstratus, ta, tu^. Monstre. S. It shall be
showed. Demo^strabitur. Il sera mo^stre.

Showed abroad. Exertus, a, um.* Showed forth. Prolatus, a, um. Monstre. S. vt
Auro prolato non deest venditor. Luc. Gold showed forth there wants no
seller. Shewer, or one that does show. Monstrator, toris. m. ge. Monstreur. S.
and Demonstrator, toris. m. ge. Which shows planely some thing. Qui mo^stre
euidemment quelque chose. S. Shewer, which shows and teaches what is to be
done. Praemonstrator, toris. m. ge. Qui monstre and enseigne ce qu'est a fair.
S. Showing. Demonstratio, Monstratio, onis. Nuntiatio, onis. foe. ge.
Monstrement. S. Sewing forth. Prolatio, onis. f. g. Shield. Vide Shield.
Shift, or a remedy for a thing. Remedium, dij. n. genesis Remede. S. To find a
shifte or remedy for some thing. Medicinam vel remedium alicui rei inuenire,
vel reperire. Trouuer remede a quelque chose. S.

To use or try the last or vttermoste shifte. Vltima expetiri. Vser du
dernier remede. S

There is no shift, it is past remedy. Conclamatum est, Non est integrum, Nulla
hic iam consultatio, est. Il n' y a plus de remede. S.

They think they can easelye make shifte for corn. Facillime inopiae
frumentariae sese mederi posse existimant. Ils pensent bien remedier. etc.

Shifte or to change lodging.. Demigro, as. Tra^smigro, as. Changer de logis.
S. He has shifted or changed his shirte to day. Hodie mutauit indusium. Il a
prins auioudliuy vne chemise blanch, il a change de chemis. Cord.

Shifte, or to remove. Mouere, Remouere, Co^mouere, Dimouere, Demouere. Remuer.
S. Shifte, or to remove from a place. Amouere, Emouere. Remuer and mouuoir d'vn
lieu. S. Shifte or to remove an army from one place to an other. Declinare
agmen aliquo, Transmouere. Remuer vne armee d'vn lieu en autre. S. Shifte to
make, or to make haste, and dispatche. Festinationem adhibere, Festinare,
Expedire, Maturare, Breuibus agere. Se despescher, se haster. To make shifts,
to deceive the simple by craftye means. Simplices malo dolo fallere, Ductare
aliquem dolis, In laqueum inducere, Fucum alicui facere. Piper. S.

Shifter, or a deceauer. Aeruscator, oris. m. g. Impostor, toris. Planus, ni.
Supplantor simplicitatis. Un pipeur, un abuseur de gens, un affronteur. S.
Shifting. Vide Changing and Removing. Shyll of voice. Argutus, a, um.
Calaster, ra, rum. Crotalus, Querulus, a, um. Sonorus, a, um. Vocalis, e.
Resonant. S. Vide Shirle and shrille. Shilnes, or lowdnes of voice. Canoritas,
Sonoritas,* Vocalitas, it is. f. g. Quint. Shine. Affulgeo, es. Ardeo, es.
Colluceo, es. Eluceo, es. Fulgeo, es. Luceo, es. Mico, as, cui. Niteo, es.
Emico, cas. Radio, as. Refulgeo, es. Renideo, es. Resplendeo, es. Rutilo, as.
Splendeo, es. Luire and resplendir. S. Shine again. Refulgeo, es, si.
Resplendeo, es. Reluire, Resplendir. S. Shine before. Praefulgeo, es.
Praeluceo, es, xi. Luire deuant. S. Shine before others in virtue. Praelucere
alijs virtute. Cic. Shine between. Interluceo, es, xi. Intermico, cas.
Interniteo, tes. Resplendir ou reluire. S. Shine bright, or clear.
Explendesco, scis. Pelluceo, es. Reluceo, es. Resplendeo, es. Splendeo, es.
Ardeo, es. Fulgeo, ges. Effulgeo, es. Corusco, cas. Explendeo, des. Resplendir.
S. Shine in the mids. Interluceo, es. Vide Shine between. Shine like the
stars. Stello, as. Luire comme les estoilles. Call. Shine much. Praefulgeo,
es. Refulgeo, es. Fort resplendir. S. Shine often. Nitesco, scis. Splendesco,
scis. * Shine somewhat. Subluceo, es. Luire quelque peu. Shine through.
Pelluceo, es. Transfulgeo, es. Tra^sniteo, es. Transluceo, ces. Perluceo, ces.
Luire au trauers and d'oultre en oultre. S. Shine together. Colluceo, es.*
Shine very much. Perluceo, ces. Polluceo, ces. Fort luire. S. Shine with
baudines, fylthe, or grease. Squaleo, es.* Shingle to cover houses withal.
Scandula, lae. f. genesis Asser, ris. m. genesis Vne aisselle and bardeau a couurir
maisons. S. Scandulum contectum. Angl. A house covered with shingle. Rome was
said to have been Scandalum contectum, until the battle of Pyrrhus.
Shining. Lucens, it is. Elucens, it is. Luisant. S. Shining bright, or glistering.
Candidus, da, dum. Relucens, it is. Fulgens, it is. Effulgens, it is. Splendidus, da,
dum. Splendens, it is. om. g. Reluisant. S. Shining much, and in such sort
that one may see through. Pertranslucidus, da, dum. Perlucidus, da, dum.
Translucidus, da, dum. Fort luisant, and en tell sort qu'on voye au trauers.
S. Shining very much. Praelucidus, da, dum. Fort luisant. S. Shyning with
bawdines, filthe, or grease. Squallidus, a, um. Shinne bone. Os tibiae, Focile
maius, Canna mayor, Seu domestica cruris, and tibia, ae. foem. genesis L' os de la
iambe. S. Ship. Nauis, is. foe. g. Nauire. H. et Naualis, e. Pertaining to a
ship. Ship being but little. Nauicula, lae. Nauigiolum, li. n. g. Nacelle,
petite nauire. H. Ship being swift, a foiste. Liburna, Liburnica, vel Liburnica
nauis. Fuste legiere. H. Ship baye. Mesonauta, tae. m. g. Un garson de nauire.
Ship bote. Scapha, ae. foe. genesis Alueus, ei. masc. genesis Vne nasselle. S. Ship
called a bark. Aphractum, ti. Aphractus, ti. m. ge. Barque. S. Ship, or a
bark for passage. Nauis actuaria, Nauigium actuarium, Nauis vectoria. Barque
de passage. H. Ship, bark or brigantine of a pirate. Nauis praedatoria,
Piratica nauis. Paro, nis. n. ge. Myoparo, and Piraticus myoparo. Cic. Barque
batteau de coursaire, brigantin. S. Ship drudge, page, or slave. Mesonauta.
Vide Shipboye. Ship for franckensence, which was used in the church, or any
thing to put franckensence in. Acerra, ae. foe. ge. Cassette a l'encens. H.
Ship, having two raunges of oores. Biremi^, is. foe. ge. Nauire a double rangs
d'auirons, ou rames. S. Ship having three oores on a side. Trieres, ris.
Triremis, is. foe. ge. Nauire a trois rames par banc. S. Ship having four
oores on a side. Quadriremis, mis. f. ge. Nauire ayant quatre rames pour banc.
S. Ship having five oores on a side. Quinqueremis, is. Pentiremis, is. f. g.
Nauire ayant cincq rames pour banc. S. Ship, having ten oores on a side.
Deciremis, is. f. g. Vne nauire ayant dix rames pour banc. S. Ship hire or
fare, which one gives for his passage. Naulum, li. neut. g. Le salaire ^^'on
baille pour estre pass l'eau. S. Ship instruments, or tacle. Gubernacula
nauis.* instrumenta nauis. Esquippaiges. Pals. Ship made with bancqueting
places, and chambers all of pleasure. Nauis pompatica, Nauithalmus. Suet. Ship
made of thick planckes. Codicaria nauis. Ship made with great pieces of wood.
Trabica nauis. Vne nauire faicte de grosses pieces de bois. S. Ship master, or
patron of a ship. Nauarchus, Nauclerus, ri. Nauticus, Ratiarius, Gubernator,
oris. m. g. Le patron d'vne nauire. S. Naucleriacus, a, um. Nauclerius, a, um.
Pertaining to a ship master. Apartenant a patron de nauire. Call. Shipman.
Nauta, ae. Nauita, ae. m. g. Marinier. S. Shipboye, drudge, or slave.
Mesonauta, ae. mas. ge. Un garcon de nauire. H. Shipmanship, or the art and
science to guide, and govern a ship. Nauicularia, ae. foe. g. L'arte and
science de conduire, and gouuerner un nauire. Call. Ship of the king, Emperor,
or chief of the army. Nauarchis, dis, Nauis Praetoria. La nauire du Roy,
empereur, ou chef de l'armee. S. Ships of espiall on the sea. Nauigia
speculatoria. Nauires esquelles on fait le guet sur la mer. S. Ships calked
with towgh. Serilla, orum. Sorilla, orum. n. g. Fest. To govern a ship.
Nauiculor, aris. Nauiculariam facere. Gouerner vne nauire. S.

Ship wrack. Naufragium, ij. n. g. Naufrage. S. Ship wryght, or carpentar.
Naupegus, gi. mas. ge. fabricator nauium. Call. Shyre, or county. Satrapia, ae.
f. ge. Conte. Pals. Shirle. Querulus, a, um. Argutus, a, um. Canorus, a, um.
Resonans, it is. Resonus, a, um. Resonnant. S. Shirt. Interula, ae. Indusium, ij.
Subucula, ae. foe. ge. Chemise. S. He has changed his shirte. Mutauit
indusium. Il a change de chemise. Cord.

Shyte. Caco, as. Merdo, as. Onera ciboru^ reddere, Excrementa reddere, Fimum
reddere. Excernere, Aluum leuare, Inanire, Exinanire, Purgare aluum. Chier.
Fair son ordure. S. To have appetite, or desire to shyte. Cacaturire. Auoir
appetit de chier. S.

Shyt. Vide Shut. Shitle of a weauer. Radius, ij. m. g. La nauette d'vn
tisserand. S. Shiue, or a cutting of bread, or such like. Segme^tum, Segmen,
nis. n. g. Piece, party, morceau. H. Shiuer, or to quake for cold, or fear.
Horreo, es. Horresco, cis. Frissonner, Trembler de paour. S. Shiuering, or
quaking for cold. Horror, oris. m. ge. Frisson. S. Shiuering, or quaking of
the body. Horrores corporis. Frisson du corpse. S. To have a shiuering, and
fear. Exhorrescere. Auoir frisson and frayeur. S.

Shocke of corn. Meta fascium spicarum. Un tas des garbes de ble. S. Shodde.
Calceatus, a, um. Chausse. S. Shodde, as horse and neat been. Ferratus,
Soleatus, a, um. Cic. Far. Call. Shoe. Calceame^, nis. Calceame^tu^, ti.
Calceus, cei. Calceariu^, ij. Phaecasius, ij. m. g. Chaussure, Soulier. A
little shoe. Calceolus, li. m. g. Petit soulier. S.

To put of his shoes. Deponere calceos, vel demere. Laisser, ou oster ses
souliers. S.

To shoe mules, and horses. Calceare mulos, and equos. Ferrer mules, and
cheuaulx. S.

To put on a shoe. Induere calceum, Calceo, as. Chausser un soulier. S.

Shoe called a gallage, or pattern. Gallice, rum. Calopus, odis. Crepida
lignea. Galloches. S. Shoe clowte. Penicillus, li. Peniculus, li. Penicillum,
li. Peniculum, li. n. g. Un torchon a torcher les souliers. S. Shoe fascioned
like the moon. Calceus lunatus. Shoe for horses or oxen. Vestigium equi, Solea
fer rea. Fer de cheual. H. Shoe an horse. Ferrare equum. Ferrer un cheual. S.
Shoes made with wings, which the painem God Mercurius, or the lady Fortune is
figured to wear. Talaria, orum. n. g. Virg. Shoe maker. Calceolarius,
Crepidarius, ij. Suitor, ris. m. g. Cordouannier. Sutorius, a, um. Ang.
Pertaining to a shoemaker. Appartenant au cordouannier. S. Shoemakers blache.
Sutorium atramentum. Vide Blache. Shoemakers craft. Sutrina ars, Sutrina, ae.
foe. ge. Cordouannerie, ou l' ouuroir d'vn cordouannier. S. Shoemakers last.
Mustricola, ae. Modulus, Forma. La form du solier. H. Shoemakers shop.
Calccaria officina. Sutrina, ae. foe. ge. La boutique d'vn cordouannier. H.
Shomakers knyfe, Scalprum sutorium, Culter sutorius, Smilium. Trenchet. H.
Shoemakers ale, or aule. Subucula. Alesne, poincte. Shoemakers threde.
Cheleuma. Le fill de cordouannier. H. Shoe threde. Filum sutorium, Filum
subulare, Filu^ picatum. Chegros dond les cordouanniers cousent les soliers. S.
Shoe soole. Solea, ae. Suppagmentum, ti. n. g. Semelle de soulier. S. Shoe with
an iron soole. Tentipelliu^, lij. n. g. Fest. A kind of ancient shoe, having
only a soole underneath, and above small lachettes, and thonges. Crepida,
ae. foe. ge. Vne maniere de chaussure ancienne n' ayant par dessoubs que la
semelle, and par dessus des petites courroyes, and brides. S.

Shoes after the Greeks fashion. Diabathra, ae. f. genesis Fest. High shoes, or
startoppes. Perones, number. Fasciae, arum. foe. genesis Des guestres. S. And he
which wears high shoes. Peronatus, a, um. Guestre, ou qui ha des guestres
chaussees. S.

Shoes of wood. Calones, Calcei ex ligno facti. Shoing horn. Calcipides, dis.
m. g. Chaussepied. S. Should, or full of shallowe places that a man may pass
over on foot. Vadosus, a, um. Qui ha beaucoup de guez par ou on peult passer a
pied. S. Shonne, avoid, or eschew. Defugio, is. Effugio, is. Subterfugio, is.
Vito, as. Deuito, as. Euito, as. Exeo, is. Declino, nas. Euiter. S. Shonning,
or eschewyng. Detestatio, onis Vitatio, onis. Deuitatio, onis. Euitatio, onis.
foem. gener. Euitement. S. Shoot, or science of a tree. Festuca, ae. Pullus,
li. Surculus, li. m. g. Un iecton, ou sion d'arbre. S. And pertaining to
shootes. Surcularius, a, um. Appartenant a iectons. S. The steme or reed, does
shoot out his ears. Spicas edi^ culmus. Le chalumeau iecte horse ses espiz

The vine does shoot abondau^ce of branches. Profundit palmites vinea. La
vigne iecte en abondance ses branches. S.

Trees which shoot about the spring time. Arbores vernantes. Arbres qui
iectent sur le printemps. S. Vide Shote.

Shoot, or young swyne. Porcellus, li. Nefrens, dis. Porculus, li. m. g.
Porcelet. H. Shop. Officina, ae. Taberna, ae. foe. ge. Bouticle ou boutique.
S. A stationer his shop. Libraria taberna, Bibliopolium, lij. n. g. Boutique
de libraire. S.

An Apothecaries shop. Pharmacopoliu^, lij. n. ge. Boutique d' Apoticaire. S.

Shop where sweet oyntmentes been sold. Saplasia, ae. Saplasium, ij.* The
shoppes being shut up. Clausis tabernis. Les boutiques sarrees. S.

Shopman. Tabernarius. rij. m. g. Buticlier. S. Shore, or bank of the sea.
Acta, ae. foe. genesis Le board and riuage de la mer. S. Shore, or proppe. Fultura,
ae. Ceruus, Pedamen, Pedamentum, Sublica, ae. Sustentaculum, Tibicen, inis.
Fulcrum, cri. Adminiculum, li. Retinaculum, li. Fulcimentum, ti. Statumen,
inis. n. g. Appuy, ou estaye. S. Shore, or to proppe up. Figere ceruos vel
fulturas, Pedo, as. Statumino, as. Suffulcio, is. Fulcio, is. Appuyer. S. To
shore, or proppe a vine. Adminiculare vite^. Appuyer la vigne. S.

Shored, or propped up. Fultus, a, um. Nixus, a, um. Subnixus, a, um. Appuye.
S. Shoring. Pedatio, onis. Fulcimentum, ti. neut. genesis Estayement. S. Shorn,
or clipped. Attonsus, a, um. Tonsus, a, um. Tonsilis, le. om. ge. Tondu. S.
Shorn, or clipped round about. Circuntonsus, a, um. Tondu tout entour. S.
Which is not shorn, or clipped. Intonsus, a, u^. Qui n'est point tondu. S.

Short. Breuis, e. Curtus, a, um. Succinctus, a, um. Court. S. A short, and
small foreheade. Frons breuis. Court, and petit front. S.

Short joy. Gaudium breue. Court joy. S. Short sleep. Breuis somnus.
Court sum. S. Short breath, or wind. Angustus spiritus. Court haleine. S.
Short cloak. Amiculum, li. n. genesis Court manteau. S. Amiculatus, a, um. Ang. He
that wears a short cloak. To make short, to dispatche. Breue facere aliquid.
Le fair court, le despecher. S.

Short gown. Semitogium, ij. n. g. Toga breuis. et Semitogatus, a, um. He
that wears a short gown. Short, or little sentence, clause, or opinion.
Sententiola, ae. f. g. Petite sentence. Call. Short, or compendious
interpretation. Scholium, lij. n. ge. Vne brieue interpretation. Call. Short, or
quick sentence. Apophthegma, it is. n. ge. To be made short, or abbriged. In
breue cogi. Estre accourcy, ou abbrege. S.

To make short. Ad summa^. Ne diutius teneam, Omnino, vt ad pauca redeam, Vt in
pauca conferam. Pour le fair court. S.

To hold, or tie his child short. Cohibere filiu^, Refraenare. Tenir de court
son enfant. S.

Short pype. Cingria, ae. f. g. Short remedy. Praesentaneum remedium. Plin.
Short speech, or speaking. Breuiloquium, ij. Breuiloquentia, ae. foe. ge.
Court parler. Call. Short sword. Semispathium, ij. Sica, ae. f. ge. Cic. Vne
court espee. S. Short, or little tale. Fabella, ae. f. g. Petite fable. Call.
Short time, space, or while. Curriculum, li. Exiguum tempus, Breue tempus.
Temps court. S. Short, transitory, or which tarieth but a while. Solsticialis,
e. om. ge. Plaut. Shortwynded. Suspiriosus, a, u^. Qui ha court haleine.
Shorten, or to abreuiate. Abreuio, as. Decurto, as. Breuio, as. Accourcir. S.
To shorte^ his journey. Reprimere iter. Accourcir son chemin. S.

To shorten any matter, and to speak it in few words. Perstringere rem
aliquam, Circuncidere, In compendium confer. Abbreger quelque chose, and la
dire en peu de parolles. S.

To shorten the time. Tempus contrahere. Abbreger le temps. S.

Sortly. Breue, Breuiter, Definite, Praecise, Propediem. Courtement. S. Shortly
after. Breui postea. Cic. Shortened. Abbreuiatus, a, um, Decurtatus, a, um.
Acourcy. Call. Shortness. Breuitas, it is. f. g. Briefuete. Call. Shortness of
speech. Brachylogia, ae. foem. g. Vide Quintil. lib. 9. Cap. 3. Shote.
Sagitto, as, aui. Tirer. Pals. To shote, or lewse an arrowe. Arcu sagittas
emittere, Arcu sagittas expellere, Neruo sagittas impellere. Descocher vne
fleiche. S.

Shote a darte. Conijcere vel Contorquere telum, Iaculo, as. Iaculor, aris.
Iaculum moliri. Darder un dard. S. Shote out in ears, as corn does. Spico,
as. Spicas emittere. Ietter horse les espis. Call. Shot, or a collatio^ of money
to pay a dynner, supper, banquet, or such like. Symbolu^, Collatio, Collecta.
L'escot. H. Shoulder. Armus, i. m. ge. Vide infra. Shoue, or thruste. Trudo,
is. Detrudo, is. Pello, is. Impello, is. Propello, is. Bouter, ou poulser. S.
At one shoue, thruste, or pushe. Vno impulsu, Vno impetu, Vna impressione.
D'vne boutee. S.

Shoued, or thrusted. Actus, a, um. Adactus, a, um. Pulsus, a, um. Impulsus, a,
um. Poulse. S. Shouing, or thrusting. Pulsus, us. m. g. Poulsement. S.
Shouelar, a bird with a broad bill. Pelicanus, ni. melius Pellecan, vel
pelecanus scribitur: Alias platea, a latitudine rostri, and pellecanus. Pale,
truble. Shouell. Pala, ae. f. g. Pelle. Pals. Shouell to pare floores. Valgium,
ij. n. g. Shouldre. Humerus, ri. m. g. L'espaule, S. The great, and flat
bones of the shoulders. Scoptula operta. Les os larges, and plats des espaules.

To bear upon his shoulders. Attollere humeris Baiulare, Efferre in humeris.
porter sur ses espaules.

To break, or put the shouldre out of ioynte. Humerum luxare, vel frangere.
Espauler. S.

Which has broken, or put his shoulder out of ioynte. Cui luxatus est humerus,
vel loco motus vel fractus, Qui fregit humeru^. Qui est espaule. S.,

The breaking, or putting of the shoulder out of ioynte. Humeri luxatio, vel
fractura. Espaulure, ou espaulement. S.

Shouldre blade or bone, or the hyndre part of the shouldre. Scapula, ae. f. g.
Plaut. A hoode to cast on the shouldre. Humerale, lis. n. g. Espaul^ere. S.

Which has high shoulders. Humerosus, a, u^. Qui ha haultes espaules. S.

Which has low shoulders. Demissis humeris homo. Qui ha les espaules basses.
S.

Shouldre of a beast. Armus, mi. m. g. Espaule. H. Shouldre of motton. Armus
veruecinus, vel ouillus. Espaule de mouton. S. Shouldre of veniso^. Armus
ferinus. Espaule de venaiso^. Show, or glorious sight. Pompa, ae. Ostentatio,
onis. foe. ge. Monstre, pomp. S. To make a general show of al his army.
Lustrare, vel rece^sere exercitu^, Turmas equitu^ recognoscere. Fair mo^stre
generale de toute son armee.

Shower Imber, ris, ri. Nimbus, by. m. g. Vne guilee. Showers bringing.
Imbrifer, ra, rum. Nimbifer, a, um. Ferens nimbos. Call. Showry, rainy, or full
of showers. Imbricosus, a, um. Nimbosus, a, um. Pluuieux. S. Showt, or a cry.
Acclamatio, onis. f. g. Escry huee. Showte, or to cry out. Acclamo, as. Edere
strepitum, Perstrepo, pis. Clamo, as. S'escryer, huyer. S. To be showted at,
and injured. Clamore, conuitioque iactari. Estre huye and injury. S.

Showte, or to cry out upon. Bouiuor, aris. Showter, or crier out upon.
Acclamator, Bouinator, oris. mas. g. Showting, or cry of shipmen. Celeusma,
atis. Celeuma, atis. n. ge. Cry des mariniers. Call. Shraftide, or feasting
days called also fastegang. Bacchanalia, Carnispriuium, uij. Dionysia,
Liberalia, iu^. Bacchanalia, oru^. n. g. Quaresmeprenant. Shraftuesdaye. Dies
hilarioru^. Bud. Le mardi gras. S. Shragge, or twigge of a tree cut of.
Sarmentum, ti. n. g. Sarment. S. And that has many shragges. Sarmentosus, a,
um. Qui ha force sarment. S. Sragge trees. Attondere arbores, Castrare arbores.
Tailler les arbres. S. Shragge under, so that the sun may come to the
ground. Subluco, as. Fest. Shreade. Concido, is. Hacher menu. S. To shreade,
or lop a tree. Collucare, Delucare, Interlucare, Interputare. Esbrancher un
arbre. S.

Shreade, or loppe of a tree. Prositium, tij. Consectio arborum. La coupe d'vn
bois. S. Shreading, or cutting of of bows. Detruncatio ramorum. Coupement de
branches. S. Shreading, or lopping of trees. Consectio arboru^. Coupement
d'arbres. S. Shrewe. Perperus, a, um. Prauus, a, um. Mauluais. Shrewmous. Mus
araneus, Mus caecus, Mygale, es, Mygala, ae. f. g. Muserain. Mussette. Gesn.
Shrewd. Improbus, a, um. Nequam, Perperus, a, u^^ Prauus, a, u^. Proteruus, a,
u^. Malus, a, u^. Nocens, it is. Malignus, a, u^. Mauuais. Shrewd knave. Nequa^
vir. Homme mauuais. S. Shrewd wife. Acerrima mulier, Vxor perpera. Ma^uaise
femme. S. Shrewd words. Argutiae, arum. f. g. Shrewdly. Improbe. Nequiter,
Perperam, Praue, Proterue, Proteruiter, Male. Mauuaisement. S. Shrewdnes.
Improbitas, Nequitia, Proteruia, ae. Prauitas, atis. foe. ge. Mauuaistie. S.
Shrewsbery, a town in England. Salopia. Shrich owl. Strix, gis. f. g.
Cheuesche, fresaye, hybou. S Shrike, or to cry out. Clamo, as. Clamorem
tollere, Exclamo, as. S'escrier. S. To shrike, or cry as loud as may be.
Clamorem profundere. S'escrier tant qu'on peult. S.

Shriking, or crying out. Acclamatio, onis. Exclamatio, onis. foe. ge. Escri,
ou escriement. S. Shriefe. Buleuta, ae. Decurio, onis. m. g. Escheuin. S. The
two shriefes, and magistrates of every city. Duumuiti, orum, m. ge. Les deux
escheuins and magistrates de chascune ville. S. And pertaining to the shriefes.
Duumuiralis, le. om. genesis Appartenant aux escheuins. S.

Shrill. Argutus, a, um. Resonans, it is. Canorus, a, u^. Querulus, a, um.
Resonus, a, um. Resonnant. S. More shrill. Consonantius. Plus resonnant. S.

Shrimpe, a fish. Squilla gibba. Saulterelle, cheurette, guernette. H.
Squille. Gesn. Shrincke. Contraho, is. Retraho, is. Retirer. S. To shrincke, or
draw in the neck. Collum co^trahere. Retirer le col. S.

To shrincke, or draw in his legs. Crura contrahere. Retirer ses iambes S.

To shrincke him self round together into a heap. Contrahere se. Se retirer
en un mounceau. S.

Shrincke for cold, or fear. Dirigeo, es. Racroupir. Shrincked. Contractus,
a, um. Retire. Shrincking of synewes. Contractio neruorum. Retirement de nerfs.
S. Shryne. Alipsanum, ni* Ferculum, li. Pharetrum, tri. n. g. Chass^. S.
Shryne, or charnell where dead men's bones be put. Ossuaria, orum. n. g.
Charnier. Call. Shrowde yt a dead body is lapped in. Amiculum feralo, Inuolucru^
lineum cadauerale. Le drap ou est enuelope le corpse mort. H. Shrowde of trees.
Prositiu^, tij. n. g. Vide shreade. Shrubbe. Arbuscula frutex. Arbrisseau. S. A
place where there is shrubbes planted. Frutetum, ti. Frutectum, ti. n. g. Lieu
ou y' a arbrisseaux plantez. S. To shrubbe. Vide Shragge.

Shune, or to avoid. Vito, as. Defugio, is. Effugio, is. Deuito, as. Euito,
as. Declino, as. Euiter. S. Shuning, or avoiding. Detestatio, onis. Vitatio,
onis. Deuitatio, onis. Euitatio, onis. foem. gener. Euitement. S. Shut. Claudo,
is, si. Obsero, as. Obstruo, is. Oppilo, as. Resigno, as. Sero, as. Sigillo,
as. Cludo, is. Occludo, is. Accludo, is. Operio, is. Fermer. S. To shut the
door before some other. Praecludere. Fermer l'huis au deuant de quelqu'vn. S.

To shut the eyes. Claudere, vel premere oculos. Fermer les yeulx. S.

Shut. Clausus, a, um. Obseratus, a, u^. Obstructus, Occlusus, a, um. Ferme. S.
Which shuts easily. Clausilis, le. om. gener. Qui se ferme facilement. S.

To shut a part. Discludere, Secludere. Enfermer a part. S.

Shut in. Includo, is. Intercludo, is. Opprimo, is. Enfermer. S. Shut out.
Discludo, is. Excludo, is. Secludo, is. Enfermer dehors. S. To shut, or put any
in prison. Aliquem in carcerem compingere, vel includere. Enfermer quelqu'vn en
prison. S.

To be shut under keye. Sub claui esse. Estre enferme a la clef. S.

Shut under. Subtercludo, is. Shut up. Obstruo, is. Praefigo, is. Plin.
Shutting up. Clausura, ae. Inclusio, onis. foem. genesis Enfermement. S. Shy. Vide
Shi.
S. ANTE. I.
SIbill. Sibylla, ae. f. g. Sibylle. S. A generale name to certain women, which
prophesied that Christ was incarnated, they were in nombre ten. Sibylla
Persica, Sibylla Libyca, Sibylla Delphica, Sibylla Cumaea, Sibylla Erythrea*
Sibylla Samia, Sibylla Cumana, nomine Almathea, Sibylla Hellespontica, Sibylla
Phrygia, Sibylla Tyburtina. Lactantius. Sice deux, on the dice. Stesichorites.
Sice, or the nombre of six on the dice, or the sice point in tables. Senio,
onis. m. g. Six points en de. Sick. Aeger, ra, rum. Aegrotus, a, um. Infirmus,
a, um. Languidus, a, um. Morbidus, a, um. Morbo retentus. Inualidus, a, um.
Malade. Very sick. Grauiter affectus. Fort malade. S.

Sick in stomach. Stomachichus, a, um. Plin. Qui a mal a l' estomach. Call.
Sick in the liver. Iecinorasus, a, um. Love sick. Aeger amore. Languissant
d'amour. S.

Sick in the lunges. Pneumonicus, a, um. Qui laborat ex pulmone. Call. Sick of
the gowte. Aeger pedibus. Qui ha mal aux pieds. S. Sick of yesterdayes
dryncking. Elucus, a, um. Sick to be. Aegresco, scis. Aegroto, as. Elangueo,
es. Laboro, as. Langueo, es. Languesco, scis. Morbo affici, Morbo laborare, In
morbo esse, Morbo retineri, Male valere, Valetudine vti minu^ co^moda, Indoleo,
es. Indolesco, cis. Estre malade. S. To be very sick. Grauiter aegrotare,
Affici morbo graui, Co^flictari iniqua valetudine. Estre fort malade. S.

To be sick with cold. Frigore, vel a frigore laborare. Estre malade de
froid. S.

To be sick in bed. Cubare, Decumbere. Estre au lict malade. S.

Sick to make. Morbum alicui afferre, Morbum incutere. Fair malade. S. He was
sick. Valetudine incommoda fuit. Il a este malade. S.

Sick to be of a fever, or to be in an ague. Febricito, as. Pati febrem. Estre
en fieure. Call. Sick to fall. In morbum delabi, Cadere in morbum, In morbum
incurrere, Noxam co^trahere. Tomber en malady. S. Sick to wax. Aegresco,
scis. Languesco, scis. Se rengreger. S. Sickle. Denticulata falx, Sirpicula
falx, * Falx, cis. f. g. Vne faulx ou faucille. H. Sickly, or accrased.
Morbosus, a, um. Valetudinarius, rij. m. ge. Maladif. S. Sickness. Aegrotatio,
onis. Aduersa valetudo, Infirmitas, Languor, ris. Morbus, Valetudo, inis.
Vitium, ij. Aegrimonia, ae. Aegritudo, inis. foe. g. Malady. S. Sickness
causinge, or which brings sickness. Morbificus, a, um. Qui port malady. S.
Sickness contagious, and which comes by touching one an other. Contagium, gij.
Contagio, onis. foe. ge. Malady contagieuse, and qui vient de toucher l'vn a
l'autre. S. To engendre sickness. Morbum concipere. Engendrer malady. S.

Sickness long, and continual. Longa, and pertinax valetudo. Longue, and
continuelle malady. S. Very great sickness. Aegritudo auctior. Malady plus
grande. S.

Sickness not apparaunt, or hard to be known. Caecus morbus. Malady difficile
a cognoistre. S. Sickness of infantes, by ouertymely sucking. Collostratio,
onis. f. g. Plin. lib. 11. Cap. 41. Sickness, which endures but six months.
Morbus solstitialis. Malady qui ne dure que six mois. Sickness vehement and
continual. Sonticus morbus, Sontica valetudo. Continuelle malady. S. Sydary,
or napkine to wype a swety face. Sudariu^. ij. n. g. Sudario um, li. n. g.
Mouchoir. S. Side. Latus, eris. n. g. Le cost. S. It behooves to have the
sides more stronger for this. Valentiorum haec laterum sunt. Il fault auoir les
costez plus fors pour ceci. S.

Side beam of a ship. Rates, is.* Side of a bed. Sponda, ae. f. ge. Le
cost d' un lict. S. Sponde. Pals. Side of a leaf in a book. Pagina, ae.
Pagella, ae. f. g. La page d'vn liver. and Paginula, ae. f. g. A little page or
side of a leaf. Petite page. Call. Side, or that is long down to the anckle.
Talaris, re. om. ge. Long iusques aux talons. Call. Of the other side.
Altrinsecus, E-diuerso, Ex aduersum. De l'autre cost. S.

Of every side. Passim, Omnibus partibus, Quoquouersum, Quoquouersus, Late
longeque. De tous costez. S.

Sydeling. Ex obliquo, Ex transuerso. De cost. S. Sydre, a kind of drink
made with apples. Sicera, vox Hebraea, quamuis potione^ quae inebriare possit
complexa, Vinum e pomis factitiu^. Plin. Sidre. H. Siege of a town. Obsessio,
onis. Obsidiu^, ij. Circumsessio, onis. Obsidio, onis. Oppugnatio, onis. f. g.
Assiegement de ville. S. Siege, iacques, bogard, or draught. Latrina, ae,
Forica, ae. f. g. Un prive, ou retraict. S. He can not go to siege, or
iacques. Non potest excernere, Difficillime excernit, Dure cacat. Il ne peult
aller au retraict. S.

Siege to lay to a town. Obsideo, es. Obsido, is. Oppugno, nas. Circumuallo,
as. Obsidium facere, Circumsedeo, Vrbem obsidione cingere. Assieger vne ville.
S. Sieth to mow with. Falx foenaria, Foeniseca, ae. f. ge. Faulx, ou faulce.
Pals. Sifte, or to sarce. Cribro, as. Incerno, is. Cerno, is. Excerno, is.
Cribler, sasser. S. To sifte upon. Supercernere. Cribler par dessus. S.

They sifte. Farinario cribro succernu^t. Ils crible^t.

Sifter of meal. Pollintor, oris. m. g. Sasseur. Call. Sighe. Ducere suspiria,
Suspiro, ras. Souspirer. S. To sigh from the bottom of the heart. Petere alte
suspirium, Ducere suspiria ab imo pectore. Souspirer du profond du cueur. S.

To sighe for love. Calorem arcanum suspirare. Souspirer d'amour. S.

To sighe after his mother. Matrem suspirare. Souspirer apres sa mere. S.

Sigh. Suspiratus, us. Suspirium, ij. neut. g. Souspir. S. Alta suspiria. Deep
sighs, or groans. Sighing. Suspiratio, onis. f. g. Souspirement. S. Sight.
Aspectus, us. Visus, us. Visio, onis. Conspectus, tus. Contuitus, tus.
Prospectus, tus. mas. ge. La veue. S. A very sharp sight. Visus acer. Veue
fort ague. S.

Sight of the eye. Acies, ei. foe. ge. Le noyre de l'^^il. Sightes, or
publiques plays. Ludi, orum. m. genesis Ieux publiques. H. Sign. Nota, ae.
Signum, ni. symbolum, lj. Vestigiu^, ij. n. g. Un sign. S. A sign in heaven.
Astrum, ri. n. g. Un sign au ciel.

Signs, or tokens of love. Notae amoris. Signs d' amors. S. Signs of
health. Signa ad salutem. Signs de guarison. S. Sign manuell. Chirographus,
phi. Chirographu^, phi. n. g. Un singe manuel. S. Sign, mark, or to make a
sign or token. Signo, nas. Signer. S. To make a sign. Edere signum,
Significatione^ facere, Signum dare, Fair sign. S.

To make a sign with the eyes. Signum oculis dare. Fair sign des yeulx. S.

To sign with his hand. Subscribere. Signer de sa main. S.

To sign, and seal. Subscribere, and obsignare, vel subsignare. Signer and
seeler. S.

Sign or make tokens of mirthe, as in daunsing. etc. Gesticulor, aris. Sueton.
This is a great sign. Magnum signum, vel argumentum. C'est grand sign. S.

Sign or token of a hallowed, or a holy thing, a sacrament. Sacramentum, ti.
n. g. Sacrament. S. Signs, or tokens. Insignia, orum, Signa, orum. n. ge.
Enseignes. S. Signet, or seal in a ringe, or sign manuell. Signatorius
annulus, Signum, ni. n. g. Un signet. S. Signification. Significatio, onis.
Consignificatio, onis. foe. ge. Signification. S. Signification of honesty, or
worship. Dignitas vultus. Cic. Signify. Significo, cas. Innotesco, scis.
Notum facere, Indico, as. Consignifico, as. Adsignifico, as, aui. Signifier. S.
What signifies this? Quid sibi vult istud? Que signife ceci? S.

Signified. Significatus, a, um. Consignificatus, ta, um. Signify. S.
Signifying but one thing. Vniuo^um. Silence. Echemythia, Silentium,
Taciturnitas, it is. foe. ge. Silence. S. Very great silence. Silentium acre, and
intentu^. Fort grande silence. S.

To keep silence. Silere, Tacere, Mussare, Silescere, Attacere, Silentium dare,
Conticere, Fauere linguis, Ori fauere. Fair silence. S.

The people kept silence. Silentium tenet populus. Le peuple tient silence. S.

Sylke. Mollicina, ae. Sericum, ci. Mataxa, ae. foe. ge. Soye. Sericatus, a,
u^. Cladde in silk. Vestu de soye. Sylke of chaungeable color. Soricum, ci.
* Soricatus, a, um. Cladde in such silk, or made of such sylke.* Silk
weauer. Sericarius, ij. Sericarius textor. Tisseran de soye. Call. Silk woman.
Sericaria, ae. Silk woman's tauel. Liciatorium, rij. n. g, Hieron. Silk worm.
Bombyx, cis. Blatta, ae. f. g. Ver a soye. And which is made of sylke of
worms. Bo^bycinus, a, um. Qui est faict de soye de verse. S. Silken garment.
Bombycina vestis, Holoserica vestis. Serica vestis. Habillement faict de soye.
S. Silken, or of sylke. Bombycinus, a, um. Sericus, a, um. De soye. S.
Syllable. Syllaba, ae. foe. ge. Vne syllable. S. Syllabicus, a, um. Pertaining
to syllables. Syllable by syllable. Syllabatim. Par les syllables. S.
Sylogisme, or an argument. Syllogismus, mi. Ratiocinatio, onis. foe. ge.
Syllogism. S. Silver. Argentum, ti. n. ge. Argent. S. Argenteus, a, Of silver.
D'argent. S. Silver very pure, and well fined. Argentum pustulatum. Argent
trespure, and bien affine. S. Quickesyluer. Argentum viuum. Vif argent. S.

Mine of silver. Argentaria, ae. Argentifodina, ae. Argentarium metallum. Mine
d'argent. S.

Silver color. Argenteus color. Couleur argentine. Syluered. Argentatus, a,
um. Inargentatus, a, um. Argente. S. Silver vessel, or plate. Argentum, ti. n.
g. Vaisselle d'argent. S. A vessel, or plate of massif silver. Argentum
solidum. Vaisselle d'argent maissif. S.

Silver foam, or spume. Argyritis, it is. foe. ge. Escume d'argent. S. Silver
syckenes, or dumbnes through brybery. Argyranche, es. foe. ge. Call. Symbale, an
instrument. Crotalum, li. Cymbalu^, li. n. g. Cymbale. He which plays on
symbales. Cymbalista, ae. mas. genesis Qui jove des cymbales. S.

Symente. Signinum, ni. n. g. Ciment. S. Similitude. Facies, ei. Homoeosis,
Imago, ginis. Similitudo, nis. foe. ge. Similitude. S. Simony. Simonia, ae.
Scelesta, and sacrilega nundinatio, Incesta licitatio, Nefarius ambitus,
Collatio nummaria sacerdotij, aut cessio, Nundinariumque commercium. Simonie.
S. And he that uses symony. Simoniacus, Sacriuendus nundinator, Institor
rerum quae commertiu^ respuunt, Simoniaque. S. Symnell or cracknell. Spira, ae.
foe. g. Siminiau. S. Simple. Humilis, e. Incallidus, a, um. Mitis, e. Simplex,
cis. Syncerus, a, um. Simple. S. The simple people. Imperita multitudo. Les
simples gens. S.

Simple in estimation. Tenuis, e. om. gener. Plin. and Tenunculus, a, um. Very
simple in estimation. Simple lover. Amatorculus, li. m. genesis Plaut. Simple in
attier. Munditijs simplex mulier. Simple en accoustrements. S. Simple, or of
small value. Simplarius, a, um. Simplicity, or playnes. Simplicitas, it is. foem
gen Simplesse ou simplicite. S. Great simplicity. Tyrocinium animi. Vne gra^de
simplicite. S.

Simply. Simpliciter. Simplement. S. Meanly, or simply attired. Modicus cultu,
vel in cultu. Moyennement, ou simplement habille. S.

Since. Ex quo. Depuis. S. Since the morning. Ab aurora, A mane. Depuis le
matin. S. Since that time. Ex illo, sub. tempore. Depuis ce temps la. S.
Sincere, pure, or incorrupt. Syncerus, a, um. Sincere. S. Sincerely. Sincere.
Syncerement. S. Sincerity. Synceritas, atis. foe. ge. Syncerite. S. Sincke a
ship. Deprimere naues. Enfondrer les nauires. S. To sincke a boat. Mergere
cymbam. Enfondrer la nasselle. S.

To sincke to the bottom. Abire pessum. S'enfonser. S.

Sincke, or gutter. Cloaca, Lauatrina, ae. Latrina, ae. foe. ge. L'esgous^ and
Cloacarium, ij. Is the wages, or scotte for scouring, and clensing such sinckes
in cities and towns. Syndre. Scoria ferri. Singrene, an herb. Barba Iouis,
Semper viuum, Sedum maius, Vitalis, Iouis caulis, Hypogesson, Sesuuium, uij. n.
g. Ioubarbe. H. Sinewe. Neruus, ui. m. g. Nerf. S. Neruulus, li. dim. Ang.
Little or small synewe. Petit nerf. S. Neruiceus, a, um. Of synewes. De nerfs.
Call. Neruosus, a, um. Full of synewes, or having great sinews, Plein de nerfs.
S. Neruicus, ca, cu^. Diseased in the sinews, or who has grief in the
sinews. Qui a doulour de nerfs. Cal^ Sinews in the neck. Carotae, arum.
Carotici tenondes. Sinews shronken, or drawn in. Conuulsi nerui. Nerfs
retirez. S. Sinews of the eyes. Syzigiae, arum. f. g. Sinews of the
genitalles. Cremasteres. Les nerfs ausquels pendent les genitoires. S.
Sinewelesse, or having no sinews, or without synewes. Eneruus, a, um. Eneruis,
ne. om. ge.* Sincque. Quinque. Adiect. indec. Cinque. S. Sincque troys, or sice
deux, or two quaters on the dice. Stesichorites, In talis numerus est
octonarius. Pollux. Sindge of ye here is of hogs. Glabrare sues. Brusler le
poil aux porceaux. S. Singe. Cano, is. Canto, as. Edere cantum, Pango, is,
anxi. Modulor, aris. Psallo, is. Chanter. S. Singe a base. Succino, is.
Succento, as. Grauiter sonare. Sonner bassement. S. And the base. Imus sonus.
Vne basse contre. S. Sing a contretenour. Canere co^tra punctu^. Agrip. Singe
after an other. Recantare. Chanter apres un autre. S. Singe again. Recanere.
Chanter derechef. S. To sing Te deum for joy. Vitulari. Chanter Tedeum pour
joy. S.

Sing against one. Occino, nis, cinui, vel cini. Chantre contre. Call. Sing
alofte. Procino, is, nui. Sing a part, or among others. Accino, is. Chanter
parmi d'autres. Sing a tenor. Ca^tare tenore^. Agrip. Chanterle teneur. Singe a
tryple, properly to feign a small breast. Incino, is. Propert. Sing before, or
to begin the song. Praecino, is. Commencer le chant. S. Singe continually,
or still. Percino, is.* Sing lauds and praises to God. Propheto, as. Singe
often. Cantito, as. Chanter souuent. Call. Sing small. Minurizo, as. Parua voce
canto. Nebr. Sing softly without noise. Succino, is. Hora. Sing swetely.
Meditor, aris. Plaut. and Verno, nas. To singe cherefully, as birds do. To
sing in the throat only. Assa voce cantare. Chanter de la gorge seulement. S.

To singe with others. Concino, is. Chanter auec d'autres. S.

Singer. Cantator, oris. Psaltes, tae. Cantor, oris. m. g. Chantre. S. Those
which singe in the church on both sides the quier. Psalmodi, and antipsalmodi.
Ceuls qui chantent en l'eglise de deux costez. S.

Singer like a shepehearde. Opuncalo, onis.* Singer of a delicate, or wanton
song. Hilaredus, di. m. g. Lasciui carminis cantor. Nebriss. Singing. Cantatio,
onis. f. g. Chantement. S. Singing birds. Oscines aues. Oyseaus chantans. H.
Singing boys. Symphoniaci pueri. Cic. Singing of psalms. Psalmodia, ae.
Psalmorum cantus. Psalmodie. S. And to singe psalms. Psalmos canere.
Psalmodier. S. Singing woman. Psaltria, ae. Cantatrix, cis. Perca^tatrix, cis.
f. g. Chanteresse. S. This singing woman is with you. Isthaec penes vos
psaltria est. Ceste chanteresse est chez vous. S

Single, or not double. Singulus, a, um. Simplus, a, um. Simplex, cis. om. g.
Sengle. S. Single life, or the state of a man or woman unmarried. Caelibatus,
tus. mas. ge. Estat d'homme ou femme non marie. S. Single man, or single woman
which is not married. Coelebs, bis. com. g. Qui n' est point marie. S. Singular.
Singularis, e. om. ge. Singulier. S. A philosopher of singular knowledge.
Exquisita doctrina philosophus. Philosophe d' un singulier scauoir. S.

A singular beauty. Eximia forma, vel egregia. Beauty singuliere. S.

Singularity. Singularitas, atis. foe. ge. Singularite. S Singularly.
Singulariter, Vnice, Praecipue. Singulierement. S. Sinistre, or contrary.
Sinister, a, um. Contraire. S. Sin. Peccatum, ti. n. g. Peche. S. Deadly
sin. Offensa animae capitalis, and exitialis. Peche mortel. S.

To be punished for his sins. Lucre peccata. Estre puni pour ses pechez.

To purge or cleanse his sin. Diluere peccatu^ suum. Se purger de son peche. S.

Sin, or to offend. Pecco, as. Pecher. S. To sin deadly. Capitalem fraude^
animae admittere, Impia fraud animam suam obligare. Pecher mortellement. S.

Sinner. Peccator, oris. mas. ge. Pecheur. S. Sinople, or red lead. Minium, ij.
Sinopis, dis. foe. g. Sinople. S. Sins. Ex quo. Depuis. S. Vide Since. Sion
mount. Segusium, ij. n. g. Sippe or drink a little, or to take a little suppe.
Pitisso, as. Sorbillo, as. Gouster peu a peu. Call. Sir. Dominus, ni. Herus, ri.
mas. ge. Sire, ou sire. S. Sirup. Syrupus, pi. Serapium, pij. n. g. Du sirop.
S. Sirupe of roses. Succus rosaceus ad crassitudinem mellis decoctus. Plin.
Sirop rosat. S. Sirup made with grene grapes, honey and sugar. Omphacomeli.
Diosc. Sirupe made with juice of quinces. Miua, vel succus cydoniorum. Call.
Sirupe made with poppie and water, to make one to sleep. Diacodion, dij. n. g.
Plin. Sise, or syze. Ferrumen, inis. n. g. Plin. Sister. Soror, oris. f. g. La
seur. S. My husbands sister. Glos, ssis. foe. g. La seur de mon mari. S. My
mothers sister. Matruelis, Matertera, ae. foe ge. La seur de ma mere.

Which has killed his sister. Sororicida, ae. m. g. Qui a tue sa seur S.

Sit. Sedeo, es, di. Assideo, es. Se seoir. S. To sit in the court. Assidere in
Senatu. Seoir en la cour. S.

To sit in judgment. Palam de loco superiore pro imperio, and potestate
decernere, Sedere pro tribunali, Pro tribunali pronu^tiare, Iudicem sedere.
Seoir en iugment. S.

To sit at the table. Mensae assidere, Discumbere, Recumbere, Accumbere epulis,
Accubare. S' asseoir a table. S.

To bring to his seat to sit. Deducere sessum. Cic. Mener seoir. S.

Sit bibbing and drincking all day. Potare totos dies. Cic. Sit down. Assido,
is. Assideo, es. Desedeo, es. Resideo, es. Desideo, es. Insideo, es. Sedeo, es.
Consideo, es. S'asseoir. S. To sit down often. Sessitare. S'asseoir souuent. S

To sit down again. Residere. Se r'asseoir. S.

Sit idle. In otio esse. Cic. Sit on eggs. Incubo, as. Incubare ouis vel
pullis dicitur gallina, Sedere in ouis, Oua fouere, Nidulari. Couuer. S. Sit
sunning in the sun. Apricor, aris. Columel. Se tenir au soleil. S. Sit under.
Subsideo, es. Colum. Sit upon the hippe. Incoxo, as. In coxa^ sedeo. Call. Sit
upon cominission for felonye. Exercere quaestionem inter sicarios. Site, or
situation. Situs, us, m. g. Situation. S. Sitter by the fire continually.
Homocapnus, ni. mas. genesis Sitting. Sessio, onis. foe. ge. Assiement. S. Sitting
by. Accubitus, tus. Accubatio, onis. foe. ge. Couchement. S. A sittinge of
friends at the table to eat, and drink. Accubatio epularis amicorum. Assiete
d' amiss a table pour manger, and boire. S.

Sitting of commissioners, or justices. Consessus, ssus. m. genesis Cic. Sitting
on eggs. Incubatio, onis. Incubitus, us. m. g. Couuement. S. Sithe. Falx
foenaria. Foeniseca, ae. foem. genesis Faulx ou faulce. Pals. Sith that thou art
come into this city. Qui adueneris in hanc vrbem. Puis que tu es venu en ceste
ville. S. Sith these things come so to pass. Isthaec quum ita sint. Puis que
les chooses vont ainsi. S. Situation, or s^te of a manoure or other place.
Situs, us. m. ge. Situation. S. Situated, or set by. Adiaceo, es, cui. Estre
assis and situe aupres. S. Sieve, or siffe. Capisterium, rij. Cribru^, bri.
Incerniculum, li. n. g. Un crible, ou saz. S. A winoyng sieve for vetches.
Cribrum viciariu^. Crible qui sert a cribler la vesse. S.

Siues brimme. Telia, Circulus cribri: H. Sieve called a ranging sieve.
Polinarium cribrum, Sisacthea, Cribru^ farinariu^. Un saz a sasser la farine A
sieve to wynowe raye, or darnell. Cribrum loliarium. Un crible a sasser de
l'yuroye.

Sieve to range course meele. Cribrum excussoriu^. Sas a sasser la gross
farine. S. Sifte, or to range. Cernere, Excernere, Incernere. Sasser. S. Six.
Sex, Seni, ae, a. Six. Call. Senarius, a, um. Of ye number of six. De six. Call.
Six years. Seni anni. Six ans. S. The sixth age. Sexta aetas. Le sixieme aage.
S.

Six hundredth. Sexcenus, a, um. Sexce^ti, ae, a. Sexcentum, Sexcentenus, a,
um. Six cens. S. The six hundredth year. Anno vrbis sexcentesimo. L'an six
cens. S.

Six hundredth times. Sexcenties. Six cens fois. S. Six cornered. Hexagonus,
a, um. Sexangulus, a, u^. Qui a six angles. Call. Six months space, or of
six months. Semestris, tree. om. ge. De six mois. Call. Six ownces. Semissis,
sis. m. g. Cic. Six times. Sexies. Six fois. Call. Six verses. Hexastichon,
Hexastichum, chi. m. g. Six inches, or half a foot. Semipes, dis. mas. ge.
D^mi pie. Call. Six years old. Sexennis, ne. omnis genesis Qui ha six ans. S.
Six year space. Sexennium, nij. m ge. Le temps de six ans. S. Sixth. Sextus,
a, um. Senus, a, um. Sixieme. S. Sixte part of an ownce. Sextula, lae. Sexta
vnciae pars. La sixiesme party d'vne once. H. Sixth part of a pound weighte.
Sextans, vel Sestans, it is. m. ge. Deux onces. H. Sixtenne. Sexdecim. om. g.
Seize. Pals. Sixtenth. Senus denus, Sextus denus, Sextus decimus. Sixty.
Sexaginta, Adiect indecli. Soixante. S. Sexagenus, a, um. Of the number of
sixty. Soixante. S. and Sexagies. Sixty times. Soixante fois. S. Size candle.
Caereolus, li. m. g.
S. ANTE. K.
It is to be remembered, that if such words as you shall seek for, be not
here in S. ante K. seek for them in S. ante C.

SKale of a fish. Squama, ae. f. g. Escaille de poisson. Vide Scale. Skalion,
an herb. Ascalonia, niae. foem. genesis Eschallottes* S. Skatches, or croutches.
Grallae, arum. foem. genesis Eschasses. S. and Grallator, toris. mas. genesis He that
goes on croutches, or scatches. Qui va sur les Eschasses. S. Skate fyshe.
Raia, ae.* Squatina, nae. Squatus. Plin. Ange ou angelot de mer. H. Skeppe, or
vessel to keep corn in. Cumera, ae. foe. ge. Vaisseau a garder le frument. H.
Skeppe, or measure, containing the fourth part of a bushel. Quarta pars
modij. Skewe, or that is a skewe or awrye. Limus, a, um. Qui est de trauers. S.
Vt Limis oculis spectare. To look a skewe. Skillful, and expert. Gnarus, ra,
rum. Scauant and Expert. S. Skillful and expert by use and experience. Peritus
vsu. Scauant and expert par experience and usage. S. To be skillful in some
art. In art aliqua valere Disciplinam tenere, Scientiam in art aliqua
habere. Estre scauant en quelque art. S.

Skilfully. Gnare, Perite. Auec scauoir. S. Skilfulnes, and experience.
Gnaritas, tatis. foe. ge. Eruditio, onis. Peritia, ae. foem. genesis Scauoir and
experience. S. Skillet, or little pot. Patella, ae. and Chytrapus, podis.
masc. gener. Un marmite. S. Poillon. Pals. and Pultarium, rij. neut. genesis and
Cucuma, ae. Idem. and Cucumella, ae. foem. genesis Un paellonnet d'araine. A
skillet of brass. Potag^, or broth sodde in a skillet. In patella decoctum
pulmentarium. Plin.

Skimme, or the frothe that ryseth on any thing. Spuma, ae. foem. ge. Es^ume.
S. To cast up a skimme, or froth. Spumare, Spumas agere. Escumer, iecter
escumes. S.

Skimme and filthe of brass. Palea aeris. Escume and ordure d'arain. S. To
skimme, or to take away the skimme. Despumare. Escumer, ou oster l' escume. S.

Full of skimme, or which gives much froth, or skimme. Spumosus, sa, sum.
Escumeux, qui rend force escume. S.

Skimmer to skimme the pot with. Spatha, thae. Rudicula, lae. foe. ge.
Escumoir. H. Skin. Cutis, it is. foe. ge. Peau. S. and Cuticula, ae. foe. ge.
Petit peau. and Pellis, lis. f. g. A skin, pelte, or furre. Peau pann^. and
Pellicula, lae. f. ge. Petite peau. Nam cutis in viuo homine est, Pellis est a
carne iam deducta. et Pelliceus, a, u^. Of skin. De peau. Skin dividing the
interior parts, the midriffe. Septum transuersum, Disseptum, Diaphragma, it is,
Un peau separant les parties interieures. H. Skin of an adder or snake,
which is cast of. Exuuiae, arum. Vernatio, onis. Senium, nij. Senectus,
Anguinae vernationis membrana, Anguis senecta, Spol iu^ serpentis. La
despouille d'vn serpent Skin of a beast. Corium, ij. Scortum, ti. Tergu^,
gi. Tergus, oris. n. g. Pellis, is. Exuuiae, aru^. Peau de quelque best, Cuir.
S. Skin of a goat. Pellis caprina. Peau de theure. H. Skin of a heart.
Pellis ceruina, Nebris. Stat. Peau ou cuir de cerf. H. Skin of a lamb.
Pellis agnina. Peau d'agneau. H Skin of a sheep. Pellis ouina. Peau de
mouton. H. Skin of a sow. Pellis suilla, Pellis suina. Peau ou cuir de
porceau. S. Skin that is about the kernel of a nutte. Nuclei tunica. Plin.
Skin of parchement. Membrana, nae. f. g. Peau de parchemin. S. and
Membranula, lae. foe. g. A little skin of parchement. Petite peau de parchemin.
S. Skin, or the pyl of any fruit. Calyx, cis. m. g. La pedu ou pelure de
quelque fruict. S. Skin, wherein the stones of a ram be. Scrotum, ti. n.
ge. Fest. Skin which covered the head of the priuities. Praeputium, ij. n.
g. Prepuce. H. Skin which grows over the sight of the eyes. Pterygium, gij.
n. g. To cover, or stop with skin. Pelliculo, as. Couurir and estouper
d'vne peau. S.

Skins of dear, fallowe or read. Nebrides. um. Vt supra. Skinned, or cladde
with skin. Pellitus, a, u^. Qui est couuert de peau. S. Skinner. Pellio,
onis. m. g. Peaucier. S. Skippe, or to leap. Salto, tas. Salio, lis. Saulter.
S. Skippe before. Praesulto, as. Vide Dance. Skippe for joy. Praegestio, is,
ire. Resulto, as. Persulto, tas. Exilire gaudio. Saulter de joy. S. Skippe
often. Saltito, as. Saulter souuent. Skippe over. Tra^silio, is, ire.
Tra^sulto, as. Exulto, tas. Saulter oultre. S. Skipper. Saltator, toris. m. g.
Saulteur. S. Skipping, or dancing. Saltus, tus. m. ge. Saltura, rae. Saltatio,
onis. foe. ge. Sault, Saultement. S. Skippingly, or by skippes and leapes.
Saltuatim. En saultant, par saults. S. Skirmishe. Excursio, nis. Velitatio,
Velitatis pugna, Leave praelium, Procursatio, onis. foem. gener. Escarmouche. S.
To skirmishe. Velitari, leuiter pugnare, Leui praelio confligere. Escarmoucher.
S.

To make skirmishes. Leuia serere certamina, Velitari. Fair des escarmouches.
S.

Skirt, edge, or hemme of a garment. Ora, ae. foe. g. Fimbria, ae. foe. g. Le
bort d' un habillement. S. Skirwort. Siser alterum. Cheruys communs. Pin.
Sklaundre. Nota, ae. Infamia, ae. Obtrectatio, onis. Scandalum, li. Sugillatio,
onis. f. g. Esclandre. S. Sklaundred. Sugillatus, a, um. Sklaundren, or to
sclaundre. Notam inurere, Obtrecto, as. Perstringere famam aut nomen, Sugillo,
as. Vitiligo, as. Diffamo, as. Esclandir. S. Sklaundre one behind his back.
Lacesso, is, ssi. Rodo, is. Vide Detracte. Sklaunderer. Obtrectator,
Sugillator, Mordax homo, Maledicus. Detracteur. S. Sklaunderously, or by
detraction. Maledice. Par detraction. S. Sklendre. Vide Slendre. Skonce, or
little lantern. Lucernula, ae. Vide Sconte. Skores which alewyfes and other
unlearned do use, either on walls with chalk, or else on tallyes for
remembrance. Crenae, arum. Vide Tail. Skore for clensing of common drawghtes,
gutters, or sinckes in cities or towns. Cloacariu^, ij. neut. gen.* Skorne.
Cachinnus, ni. Risus, us. Vide Scorn. To skorne. Cachinnor, aris. Decachinnor,
aris. Illudo, is. Rideo, es. Vide Scorn

Skrine to hold in the hand against the heat of the funne or fire. Vmbella,
lae. foe. ge. Un escran. S. Un escrain. Pals. Skrine to set behind one to
save him from the heat of the fire. Dorsuale, is. n. g. Bud. in annota. Un
escrana mettre derriere pour obuier a la chaleur du foeu. S. Note here also,
and remember that you seek for many words that you have not here in S. ante K.
The which you shall find in S. ante C.


S. ANTE. L.
SLabber up potage half cold. Tepidum ligurire ius. Horat. Slack, or to
lewce, or set at liberty. Laxo, as. Lascher, relascher. S. To slack the
cables, or ties of the ship. Immittere rudentes. Lascher les chables des
nauires. S.

Slack. Remissus, a, um. Lasche. S. Slack, idle, or slow fellow. Frigidus
homo, Le^tus, Segnis, Tardus. Homme tardif. S. Slack, or to be slow, or stay
in a matter. Tardare, Demorari, Moras agitare, Moram interponere, Cunctari
Targer ou Tarder. S. Slack of payment to be, or to bid indebted. Reliquor,
aris. Demourer endebte. Call. Slack, or slow. Frigidus, da, dum. Ignauus, a,
um. Segnis, ne. Persegnis, ne. Lasche. S. Slack payers. Reliquatores, um.
Scaeuol. Slackly, or negligently. Cunctanter, Defunctorie, Dissolute, Lent,
Lentissime, Perfunctorie, Remiss. Laschement. S. Slackly, or slowly. Lent,
Pigre, Spisse atque vix, Tarde. Tardiuement. S. Slackenesse, or slownesse.
Lentitudo, dinis. Segnities, ei. Tarditas. it is. Tarditudo, dinis. foem. genesis
Tardiuite. S. Slacknes. Cessatio, onis. foe. g. Slain. Caesus, a, um. Enectus,
a, um. Interfectus, Interemptus, a, um. Necatus, a, um. Occisus, a, u^.
Peremptus, a, um. Tue. S. Slain, and put to flight. Fusi, Fugatique.* Slain
in battle. Peremptus praelio. Slain to be. Occumbo, is. Oppeto, it is, tij.
Exturbari ex numero viuorum, Ferro vitam reddere, Occidi, Interfici, Morte ab
aliquo affici, Perire ab aliquo. Estre tue. S. Slain to be by chance. Casu
perire. Cic. Slain to be with the fall of any thing. Opprimi casu vel ruina.
Cic. Slain without weapon. Neci datus, Morte peremptus. Slake, or to qne^che.
Restinguo, is. Vide Quench. Slane, or slain, a town in Irelande. Bubinda.
Ptol. It is a river in Irelande of that name. Slate, or tyle of a house.
Imbrex, cis. Later, eris. masc. gen.* Slate stone. Ardosia, ae. foe. ge.
Ardoise. S. Slated roof, or a roof slated. Tectum ardosium. Couuerture
ardoisine, ou d'ardoise. S. A quarry of slates. Ardosifodina, Metallu^
ardosium. Vne ardoisiere. S.

Slave, or a drudge. Flagrio, onis. Mediastinus, ni. Seruus, i. Esclau. and
Suppellecticarius. A slave accounted as a chatell. Vlpian. Slave, or bondeman.
De lapide emptus, Seruus emptitius. Esclau. S. Slave, and prisoner of war.
Mancipium, pij. Mancupium, pij. neut. g. Un esclau and prisonnier de guerre. S.
I will be thy slave, that is thy servant. Tibi me emancipo. Bud. ex Plaut. Ie
veulx estre ton esclaue. Id est. Ton serf. S.

Slaves, or boys attending upon an army to carye baggage, fire. etc. Calones,
number. Slawke, or moss growing upon rocks. Bryon marinum, Bryon Thalassion,
Muscus marinus. Coralliner. Pin. Slaughter. Caedes, dis. Occidio, onis.
Occisio, onis Strages, is. foe. ge. Tuerie. S. But Strages, Is properly of men.
Slaughter, such that none escaped. Internecio, onis. Internicio, onis. foe. g.
Tuerie tell qu'il n'en soit null eschappe. S. To make a great slaughter.
Strages edere vel facere, Facere iugulationem magna^. Fair grande tuerie. S.

To keep or hold him self from slaughter. Caedibus temperare. Se tenir de
fair tuerie. S.

Slaughter house. Lanium carnarium.* Slaughter man. Bouicida, ae. Cultrarius,
ij. m. g. Slay, or to kill one. Adimere animam vel vitam alicui, Co^ficio, cis,
ci. Dedere neci, Ferire iugulum, Interficio, cis. Interimo, is. Iugulo, as.
Neco, cas. Obruo, is. Obtrunco, cas. Occido, is. Perdo, is. Perimo, is. Petere
iugulum, Soluere vita, Trucido, as. Aliquem caedere, Exanimare, Abnecare,
Enecare, Extinguere anima^ alicui, Mortem infer, Sanguinem facere, Perdere
alique^ capitis. Vim corpori facere, Aliquem caede afficere, Expellere aliquem
vita, Aliquem interficere, Supplicio vel morte mactare, Morte mulctare, Priuare
vita, Priuare communi luce, Tollere ferro vel veneno aliquem, De medio alique^
tollere, Ex rerum natura aliquem tollere, Dedere aliquem morti, Auferre
spiritu^ alicui, Vsuram lucis eripere alicui. Tuer aucun. S. Slay cruelly.
Trucido, das. Tuer cruellement. S. To threaten to slay and burn. Minitari
ferrum and flammam. Menacer de tuer and de brusler. S.

Slay at one stroke. Morte^ alicui vno ictu afferre. Tuer tout d'vn coup. S.
Slay, or to kill all a company, so that there remain not one alive.
Internecare, Internecione occidere, Occidione occidere. Tuer tout a faict vne
troop, tellement qu'il n'en demeure point un. S. Not to slay one. Lucis vsuram
dare. Ne tuer point aucun. S.

Slay, or to kill him self. A vita deficere, Manus sibi afferre, Sibi vitam
exhaurire, Mortem sibi co^scisciscere. Se tuer. S. Slear. Trucidator, Homicida,
ae. Interfector, toris. m. g. Tueur de gens. S. Slear of parents. Parricida,
ae. com. g. Parricide. S. Slear of a tyrant. Tyrannicida, ae. com. genesis Qui a
tue un tyran. Call. Sleing, or murdering. Interemptio, onis. Homicidium, dij.
Occisio, onis. Interfectio, onis. Caedes, dis. foe. ge. Tuement. S. Sleing of a
tyrant. Tyrannicidium, dij. neut. genesis Tuement de tyran. Call. Sleep, or
sleeping. Quies, etis. Somnus, ni. m. ge. Sum, le dormir. S. Sleep sound,
or a profounde sleep. Altus and arctus somnus. Un sum profond. S. Sleep.
Addormio, is. Addormisco, scis. Capere somnum, Dormio, is. Ducere somnos,
Dormisco, scis. Requiesco, scis. Somnos captare, Somno operam dare. Dormir. S.
Sleep in assurance, or to be at quiet. In aurem vtranuis dormire. Dormir en
asseurance. S. To go to sleep. Ad somnum proficisci, Ire in somnum, Ire
dormitum. Aller dormir. S.

To cause to sleep. Somnum facere, vel somnu^ afferre alicui, Inducere somnum.
Fair dormir. S.

Sleep all night with one. Pernocto, as. Vide Tarry all. etc. Sleep at none.
Meridior, aris. Dormir a midi. Call. Sleep bringing, or causing, or that which
brings, causes, or provoke sleep. Somnifer, ra, rum. Somnificus, a, um.
Soporifer, ra, rum. Soporificus, a, um. Qui fait dormir. Call. Sleep out
dronkenes till he be sober again. Crapulam edormiscere, Obdormire crapula^,
Crapulam exhalare, and edormire. Dormir son vin and reposer. S. Sleep,
properly a dead sleep. Sopor, ris. ma. ge. sleep, or lust to sleep.
Sommeil, faim de dormir. S Soporatus, a, um. Being fast a sleep, or brought a
sleep. Endormi. Call. To have the members a sleep, or benombde. Obtorpeo, pes,
Obtorpesco, scis. Auoir les members endormis and gours. S.

Sleep soundly. Dormito, as. Edormisco, scis. Obdormio, is. * Dormitesco,
scis. To begin to sleep soundlye. et Dormitorius, a, um. Pertaining to dead
sleep. To fall a sleep. Addormiscere, Obdormire, Somnum capere, vel inire,
Dare se somno. S'endormir. S.

Sleep surely. Aure^ in vtranuis dormire. Vt supra Sleaper. Dormitator, toris.
m. g. Sleapy, or disposed to sleep, that is all sleapy. So^nolentus, a, um.
Somniculosus, a, um. Qui est tout endormi. S. That is all sleapy, and heavy.
Veternosus, sa, sum. Qui est endormi and appesanti. S.

Sleapiest season of the night, called the first sleep Conticinium, nij. Prima
pars noctis. Secunda vigilia, Silentium noctis. Le primier somne. H. Sleapiest
season of the night, or midnight. Concubium, Nox concubia. Plin. Nox
intempesta. Minuict. H. Sleaping, or sleep. Quies, it is. Somnus, ni. Sopor,
ris. Le dormir, sum, Sommeil. S. and Sopitus, a, um. Brought to rest, or
sleep. Endormi. S. Sleaping. Dormiens, it is. Particip. Dormant. In sleaping, or
in sleep. In somnis, Per somnum, In quiet, and secundum quietem. En dorma^t.

Sleaping sickness. Lethargus, Veternus. Lethargy. and Catalepsis. A kind of
the same sickness, or much like. L'endormie. H. Sledde, or draye, drawn
without wheels. Traha, vel Trahea, ae. Traineau. ^ Slight, craft, or
subtlety* Techna, nae. Dolus, li. Astus, tus, Astutia, ae. Vafritia, ae. f. g.
Cautelle. S. Sleightie. Vafer, fra, um. Cautus, ta, tum. Astutus, a, um.
Versutus, ta, tu^. Solers, it is. om. g. Cauteleux. Vafellus, a, um. diminut.
inde. Ang. Somewhat sleightie. * Sleightily. Vafre, Astute, Caute. Cautement.
S. Slender. Gracilis, ae. Lentus, a, um. Tenuis, e. Exilis, le. Gresle and
menu. S. and Perexilis, le. Pergracilis, le. Praetenuis, e. Very slendre, or
small. Fort g^^sle and menu. S. Trees more slender and small, or less. Arbores
graciles, Succinctioresque. Arbres plus gresles and menues. S.

Slendre to make, or to make small. Tenuo, as. Attenuo. Minutum facere, vel Ad
minutiam reducere. Admenuiser. S. Slender to wax. Gracilesco, scis. Deuenir
gresle. S. Slenderly. Attenuate, Tenuiter, Exiliter. Tenueme^t ou tenurement.
S. Slendernes. Gracilitas, it is. Tenuitas, it is. foe. g. Exilitas, tatis. foe.
ge. Menuisete, Tenuete. S. Sleep. Vide Sleep. Sleue. Manica, ae. foe. ge. La
manche d'vn habillement. and Manicatus, ta, tum. Sleuid, or having sleues. Qui
ha des manches. S. Sleues of maile. Manicae loricatae. Ma^ches de maille.
Slide, or to slip. Labor, eris. Prolabor, eris. Praelabor, eris. Glisser.
Slide, or to fall by. Allabor, eris. Color aupres, and cheoir. S. Sly, or
crafty fellow. Solers, it is. Vafer, ra, rum. Astutus, a, u^. Versipellis, le.
Subdolus, Callidus, a, um. Versutus, ta, tum. Cautus, ta, tum. Caut and fin,
homme fin. S. Vafellus, a, um. diminut. Angl. Somewhat slye, or crafty. Very
slye, or crafty. Perastutus, ta, tu^. Percautus, ta, tum. Fort fin. S.

Slyelye. Astute, Callide, Caute, Subdole, Vafre, Versute. Finement, Cautement.
S. Slily to do a thing. Manticulor, aris.* Slilines, slynes, or craftines.
Calliditas, Manticulatio, Solertia, Vaframentum, ti. Versutia, ae. Astutia, ae.
Techna, nae. f. g. Finesse. S. Slime, mire, or mud. Limus, mi. m. g. Boue,
fange. S. Slime growing upon oaks. Dryos hyphear. Call. Slimy, or full of mire,
and mudde. Limosus, a, um. Pleine de houe and de fange. S. Slinge. Balista, ae.
Funda, ae. Tortum, ti. Balearis funda. Fond. H. But Balista and Tortum be of
the greater sort. Slyng a stone. Torquere lapidem. Slinger of stones.
Fundibularius, ij. Funditor, ris. Tortor, ris. m. g. Qui use de fond a se
combatre. S. Slincke aside, or steal away out of the company of any.
Subterducere se alicui, Subterducere se de vel ex societate alicuius. Se
retirer de la compagnie d'aucun en cachette. S. Slip. Elabor, eris, lapsus,
sum, by. Labor, eris. Glisser. S. Slip away, or to steal out of some place.
Abire, Elabor, eris. Sublabor, eris. Dilabor, eris. S' escouler and desrobber
de quelque lieu. S. Slip forth, or forward. Prolabor, eris. Glisser horse. S.
Slip, or young branch of a tree. Ramulus, li. m. g. Branchette. S. Slip
or plant, having three joints or buddes. Trigemmis, is. Colum. Slipper, or
slippery. Lubricus, a, um. Glissant. S. Slipper to make. Lubrico, as. Fair
glissant. S. Slipper to wear. Calopodium, dij. Crepida, ae. Sandalium, ij. n.
g. Pantoufle. H. and Pals. and Crepidula, ae. diminut. Ang. A little slipper.
Petite pantoufle. S. Slitte, or to cleave. Findo, dis. Fendre. S. Slitte, or
the clefte, or fisure. Fisura, rae. Fissus, sus. Rima, ae. Scissura, ae. foe.
ge. Fente. S. Slitte, clefte, or cloven. Scissus, a, um. Fissus, a, um. Fendu.
S. Slitte in four parts. Quadrifidus, a, um. Slitted into diverse parts, or
having many slittes or creuises. Multifidus, a, um. Fendu in plusieurs parties.
S. Sl^tting. Fissio, onis. f. g. Fendement. S. Slober, and slory. Vide Slubber.
Sloe, a little berie like a bullesse, but much less. Pruneolum, Prunulum,
Prunum syluestre. Prunelle, Pelouse. H. Sloe trees. Prunelli, lorum. Pruni
syluestres. Pruneliers, fourdriniers. S. Slummering evil, or forgetfulness.
Lithargia, Lethargus, gi. Vide Sleapy sickness. Sloppes, or breaches. Subligar,
Subligaculum, li. Femoralia, Feminalia, Superior bracharu^ pars pudenda and
femora obtegens. Brayes. H. Sloppes which women be wont to wear. Periscelis,
dis. Horat. Slory, or make foul. Sordido, as. Vide Slubber. Slouen. Sordidus,
Squallidus. Un souillon. S. Slouenly appareled. Sordidatus, a, um. Vestu
ordement and salement. Call. Slouenly. Sordide. Slow. Lentus, a, u^. Piger, ra,
rum. Segnis, e. Spissus, a, um. Tardus, a, um. vt Homo frigidus, Lentus,
Segnis, Tardus. A slow, or slack fellow. Homme tardif. and Tardiusculus, a,
um. dimin. Ang. Somewhat slow. Slow doer, or a slack body. Cessator, ris. m.
genesis Mussard. S. Slow in going. Tardigradus, a, um. Cic. Tardif a marcher.
Call. Slow speech. Tardiloquentia, ae. f. g.* Slow speaker, without facility
of speaking. Tardiloquus, a, um. Tardif a parler. Call. Slow to be. Torpesco,
scis. Pigresco, scis. Pigror, aris. Estre paresseux. Slow to wax, or to
become slothful. Pigresco, scis. Deuenir paresseux. Call. Slow worm which
is blind. Caecilia, ae. foe. g. Genus serpentis caeci. Col. lib. 6. Step.
vocat etia^ Amphisbaena, vel Amphisibaena, and Galli^e. Enuoye. Slower.
Posterius, Tardius. Aduerb. Slowely. Cunctanter, Lent, Pigre, Segniter,
Spisse, Tarde, Spisse atque vix. Tardiuement. S. Tardiuscule. Somewhat slowly.
Slownes. Pigritia, ae. Pigrities, ei. Pigritudo, nis. Pigredo, inis. Pigritas,
Pigror, ris. Segnities, ei. Tarditas, it is. Tarditudo, inis. Torpor, ris.
Lentitudo, inis. foe. ge. Tardiuite. S. Slowth, sluggishenes, or a
slothfulness. Desidia, ae. Ignauia, ae. Inertia, ae. Pigritia, ae. Pigrities,
iei. Pigredo, inis. Pigritudo, dinis. Pigritas, tatis. Segnitia, ae. Acedia,
ae. f. g. Paresse. S. Slowthfull, sluggishe, or lazy. Desidiosus, a, um.
Iners, it is. Piger, ra, rum. Veternosus, a, um. Ignauus, a, um. Segnis, ne.
Discinctus, ta, tum. Desidiosus, sa, sum. Lentus, ta, tum. Paresseux. S.
Slowthfull at work. Reses, dis. Deses, dis. om. ge. Paresseux. S. Slowthfull
person. Lapis homo. Paresseux. S. To be slowthfull. Pigrari. Estre paresseux.
S.

Slowthful to wax. Pigresco, scis. Deuenir paresseux Slowhtfully, or slowly.
Ignaue, Lent, Pigre, Segniter, Negligenter, Oscitanter. Paresseussement. S.
Slowthfulnes. Pigritia, Desidia, Inertia, Infractio, Segnitia, Segnities,
Torpedo. Vide Slownes and slowthe. Slubber, or to foul, or raye a thing.
Inquinare, Sordidare, Spurcare, Conspurcare, Foeda^e, Deturpare. Ordir,
ordoyer. S. and Maculare, Commaculare. Bouiller. Idem. Sluggarde, or a
sluggishe, or slowthfull fellow. Somniculosus, Tardus, Ignauus, Somnolentus.
Endormi, Paresseux. S. Vide Slowthfull. Sluggishe. Ignauus, a, um. Secors, dis.
Socors, dis. Somniculosus, a, um. Veternosus, a, um. Vide Slowthfull.
Sluggishnes. Ignauia, ae. Inertia, ae. Infractio, onis. Pigritia, ae. Secordia,
ae. Socordia, ae. Vide sloth Sluysse or conducte to let forth the water, or
keep it in. Emissarium, ij. n. g. Locus qui aquam emittit, sistitue obicibus
vel demissis vel reclusis. Co^duict par ou s'escoule l'eaue. H. and S.
Sluttishe. Impurus, a, um. Sordidus, a, um. Squalidus, a, um. Squalens, it is.
Immundus, da, dum. Inhonestus, ta, tum. Spurcus, ca, cum. Opicus, ca, cum.
Crasseux, ord and sale. S. Sluttishe in apparel. Obsitus squalore vestis.
Sluttishe to be. Obsordeo, es. Sordeo, es. Sordesco, scis. Squaleo, es.
Exordesco, scis. Estre crasseux ord and sale. S. Sluttishe to wax. Obsordesco,
scis. Sordesco. Deuenir ord and sale. S. Sluttishly. Sordide, Squalide.
Ordement. S. Sluttishenes, or filthe. Paedor, ris. Squalor, oris.
Inquinamentum, Sordes, dis. Spurcitia, ae. Spurcities, ei. foe. ge. Ordure and
salete. S. Sly. Vide Sli.
S. ANTE. M.
SMacke, or to taste, or sauoure a thing. Gustare, Sapere. Gouster. S. Smacke,
or the taste of a thing. Sapor, ris. m. ge. Le gouste. Smacke, or to kiss one.
Basiare, Affigere osculum, Aliquem osculo impertire, Osculum dare, aut far,
aut pangere, Osculari, Suauium dare, aut facere, Sumere suauiu^, Suauiari.
Baiser quelqu'vn Smacke, or a kiss. Basium, sij. Osculum, li. Suauiu^, uij* n.
g. Un baiser. S. Small, or yt is little. Paruus, a, u^. Paruulus, a, u^.
Modicus, ca, cum. Exiguus, a, um. Minutus, ta, tum. Curtus, ta, tum. Pusillus,
la, lu^. Petit. S. A bird somewhat smaller then pigions.. Auis paulum infra
columbas magnitudine. Oiseau un peu plus petit que les columbes. S.

Small, and slendre. Argutus, a, um. Leuidensis, e. Tenuis, e. Minutus, ta,
tum. Minutulus, a, u^. Exilis, le. Subtilis, le. Menu, tenure. S. Small gaynes
and proffit. Lucellum, li. neut. genesis Petit gaing and prouffit. S. Small of
estimation, price, or value to be. Vileo, es. Estre de vile and petit pris.
Call. Small of price. Vilis, e. Qu'est de peu de valeur, de petit pris. S. Small
of substance. Tenuis, e. om. ge. Tenure. S. Small leg. Crusculum, li. n. g.
Iambette. S. Small or very little. Tantillus, a, um. Fort petit. S. Small to
make. Tenuo, as. Attenuer. S. Small wine. Villum, li. n. g. Vinot, vinet, petit
vin. H. Smallage, herb. Eleoselinum, Apium, pij. neut. g. Apium palustre,
Paludapium, pij. Asche. Pin. Smalest thing that can be felt, seen, or hard.
Minutia, tiae. foe. ge. Senec. Smalnes. Tenuitas, it is. foe. ge. Minuisete. S.
Smarte, burning heat, or biting pain of a raw sore. Feruor, ris. Aestus,
tus. m. ge. Acerbitas, tatis. foe. ge. Cuisure. Pals. A small wound with
pricking smarteth. Exiguum stimulando vulnus acerbat. Claud.

To Smattre of a thing, having therein little knoweledge, or understanding.
Primoribus labris gustare aliquid.

Smatterer in grammar, one that is but little learned therein. Grammatista,
tae. Grammatiste, tes. masc. genesis Aucunement grammarien, Grammarien tell quel.
S. Smell. Olfacio, cis. Oleo, es. Odoro, as. Odoror, raris. Flairer. S. Smell
ill, or to savor ill. Oleo, es. Sentir. Call. Tame^ addito sibi aduerbio
qualit. mutat vocem, vt Been olere, Male olere. Smell much, or often. Olfacto,
as. Flairer and sentir souuent. S. Smell, or a sweet sauoure. Odoramen, inis.
Odoramentum, ti. n. g. Bonne senteur. Call. Smell out as a hounde does. Nicto,
it is. Paper, oiler. Smell somewhat, or a little. Suboleo, es. Sentir un peu.
Call. Smell sweet, or to give a good odoure. Odoro, as. Odoror, aris. Redoleo,
es. Renideo, es. Flagro, as. Halo, as. Spiro, as. Flairer and render odeur, S.
Smelling. Olfactus, us. Odoratus, us. Odoratio, onis. foem. genesis Flairement. S.
Smelling, or sauouring much, whether it be well or ill. Olidus, a, um. Qui sent
fort, soit bien soit mal. Smelling swetely, or that smells well. Odoratus, a,
um. Odorus, a, um. Qui flaire bon. Call. Smelte, or a white sea gougin. Gobius
albus. For M. Turner thinks it to be a kind of gougion, and if it be any, it
is Gobius albus, or Gobius marinus. But I rather suppose it the first. Some
think it may be called Viola, lae. foe. ge. Because of the sweet smell that it
has, and therefore is it called a smelte in English. Epelan, ou eperlan. Vel
secundum Pals. Un esplang. Smile, or to make countinaunce of laughter, and not
laughe out right. Subrideo, es. Renideo, es. Soubrire. S. Smiling. Subrisio,
onis. foe. ge. Soubriz. S. To show by a smyling that the thing pleases us.
Arrideo, es. Mo^strer par un soubriz que la chose nous plaist. S.

Smite, stryke, or to knock or beat one. Caedere, Contingere quenquam,
Cudere, Diuerberare, Ferire, Icere, Percutere, Petere, Plangere, Pulsare,
Tundere, Verberare. Frapper, Ferir. S. Smite down a man, or to kill him.
Hominem conficere, Trucidare, Mactare. Assommer un ho^me. Smite in pieces, or
to break in pieces. Defringere, Diffringere, Effringere, Infringere,
Perfringere, Perrumpere, Conscindere, Prorumpere. Rompre en pieces. S. Smite
through. Traijcio, cis. Transfigo, is. Transuerbero, as, Tra^sfodio, is.
Tra^sforo, as. Transpercer Smiten, stricken, or beaten. Percitus, ta, tum.
Percussus, sa, sum. Pulsatus, ta, tum. Saucius, a, um. Ictus, ta, tum. Frappe.
S. Smiting, striking, knocking, or beating. Contusio, onis. Planctus, tus,
Percussus, sus. Percussio, onis. Pulsatio, onis. Verberatus, tus. Verberatio,
onis, foe. ge. Frappement. S. Smyth. Faber ferrarius. Plin. Forgeron. H.
Marshall. Smithe which cures horses. Veterinarius, Equarius medicus,
Cteniatrus. Marshall, Medicin de cheuaulx. S. and H. Smythes hamer. Pyrabola.*
Malleus, ei. mas. ge. Un marteau. S. Smock. Supparus, ri. Supparum, ri. neu.
ge. Chemise a femme. Pals. Smoke. Fumus, mi. m. ge. Fumee. S. To smoke. Fumo,
as. Fumer. S.

Smoky, or full of smoke. Fumosus, sa, sum. Fumeux. and Fumeus, ea, eum. Plein
de fumee. S. A gambonde of bacon smoked. Perna fumosa. Hor. Un iambon enfume. S.

Smoky, or yelding much smoke. Fumifer, a, um. Rendant ou faisant fumee. Call.
Smoking fires. Fumiferi ignes. Virg. Feux renda^ts fumee. S. Making, or casting
smoke. Fumificus, ca, cum. Faisant fumee. S.

Smoky house, or place. Fumarium, ij. n. g. Smothe. Glaber, ra, rum. Laeuis, e.
Aequus, a, um. Plain and vni. S. Smothe to make, or to make plain, or very
smothe. Laeuigo, as. Laeuo, as. Lenio, iui, ire. Rado, is. Allaeuo, as.
Explano, as. Exaequo, as. Co^plano, as. Delaeuo, as. Inaequo, as. Applanir and
fair fort vni. S. Smothe without hear. Glaber, ra, rum. Pile, qui n'a point
de poil. Call. Smothing. Rasura, ae. Aequatio, onis. Exaequatio, onis. foe. ge.
Complanatio, onis. foe. genesis Applanissement. S. Smothnes that one feels in
touching any thing. Laeuitas, atis. Laeuor, oris. m. g. Doulceur qu'on sent en
touchant quelque chose. S. Smutche, or to slurry file or grime. Maculare,
Co^maculare, Inquinare. Barbouiller. S. Smutching, or griming. Commaculatio,
onis. f. g. Maculatio, onis. Inquinatio, onis. foem. genesis Barboillement. S.
S ANTE. N.
SNaffle for horse, or the bitte of a bridle very sharp. Camus, mi. Lupatum,
ti. Lupus, pi. Asperrimum fraenum. Mors de bride fort rude. P. Snaffle, or
sharp brake. Postomis, idis. foem. genesis Gourmette. H. Fraenum quod equino
rictui inijcitur ad cohibendam eius duritiam. Non. Snayle. Limax, cis. Cochlea
terrestris, Cochlea, ae. foe. ge. Limacon, ou limasson, escargot on escarcot.
S. Snayle without a shell. Cochlea nuda. Gesn. Snayles use their horns in
steed of eyes. Cochleis oculorum vicem cornicula bina praetentu adimplent. Les
limaces se seruent de leurs corns en lieu d'yeulx. S. To be more slower then a
snayle. Vincere cochleam tarditudine. Estre plus tardif qu'vn limaco^.

Snake. Anguis, uis. tam mas. quam foem. genesis Un couleuure. S. Anguinus, a, um.
and Anguineus, a, um. Of a snake. De couleuure. S. and Anguiculus, li. m. ge. A
little snake. Petite couleuure. S. Snare. Laqueus, ei. Tendicula, ae. Tenus,
ni. Transenna, nae. f. g. Un laqs. S. Snare which is set for birds.
Tendicula, ae. f. ge. Un laqs qu'on tend aux oyseaux. S. Snare to take beasts
by the feet. Pedica, cae. foe. ge. Laqs a prendre les bestes par les pieds. S.
Snare, or to take with snares. Illaqueo, as. Enlacer, ou prendre aux laqs. S.
To cas^ him self into the snares, to snare him self. Se in laqueos induere.
Se iecter dede^s les laqs.

Snared, or taken in a snare. Laqueatus, a, um. Illaqueatus, ta, tum. Captus,
ta, tum. Irretitus, ta, tu^. Tenu en laqs. S. Snatche. Rapio, is. Happer. S.
Snatche pasty. Rapax, cis. om. ge. Rauissant. S. Snatching, or rapacitie.
Rapacitas, tatis. foe. genesis Rapacite. S. Snatching. Rapidus, a, um. Snease.
Sternuo, is. Esternuer. S. To make to snease. Euocare sternutame^ta. Cells.
Fair esternuer. S.

A medicine that makes to snease. Sternutamentum. ti. n. g. Medicament qui fait
esternuer. S.

Snease often. Sternuto, as. Esternuer souuent. S. Sneasing. Sternutamentum,
ti. Sternutatio, onis. foe. ge. Esternuement. S. Sniuell of the nose. Mucus,
ci. Muccus, ci. Myxa, ae. foe. ge. Morue, ou morueau du nes. H. and Mucosus,
sa, sum. Sniuelly, or full of sniuell. Morueux. S. Snype, a bird lesser then
the woodecocke. Gallinago minor, Rusticula minor, Scolopax minor. Becasson,
Becasse petite. S. Snort. Ronchisso, as. Sterto, is, ui. Rhonchisso, sas.
Proflare pectore somnum. Ronfler. S. Snorting. Ronchus, ci. vel Rhonchus, chi.
mas. ge. Le son de celuy qui ronfle. S. Snotte, or snyuell of the nose. Muccus,
vel mucus. Morue ou morueau de nes. H. Snotty. Mucosus, sa, sum. Morueux. S.
Snow. Nix, iuis. foe. ge. Neige. S. Niuosus, a, u^. Full of snow. Neigeux,
abondant en neige. S. Niueus, a, um. Of snow. De neige. S. Niuatus, a, um.
Made cold by snow. and Niueus, a, u^. Blanc comme neige. White as snow.
Niualis, e. Pertaininge to snow. De neige. S. To snow. Ningo, is. Neiger. S.
and Ningo, guis. Vt Interea toto non secius aequore ninguet. Virg. 3. Georgic.
It snoweth. Ningit. Impers.

Snowte. Rostrum, tri. n. g. Un museau. S. and Rostellum, li. n. g. A little
snowte. Un petit museau. S. Snowte of a dog. Rostrum canis, Rictus canis. Le
museau d'vn chien. S. The snowte of an elephant. Proboscis, Manus, Promuscis.
Le museau and trompe d'vn elephant. S.

Snowte of a hog, or the groine. Rostrum suis. Groin de porceau. S. Snucke,
or to vente like a hou^de. Nicto, ctis. Fest. Snuff a candle. Emungo, is.
Mungo, gis. Moucher. Snuff of a candle. Myxus, xi. m. g.* Snuff with the
nose. Follico, as. Renifler. Pals. Snuffer for a ca^dle, or a candle snuffer.
Emunctorium, ij. Quo ellychnium superuacum candelae emungitur. Mouchette. H.
Sny, Vide Sni.
S. ANTE. O.
SOake, or to lay in steep, or to moisten in water. Madefacere, Humectare,
Insuccare. Ramoitir. S. Vide Soke. So. Ita, Item, Perinde, Tam, Aduerb. aff.
Adeo. Ainsi. Si. S. Tam, Is often joined with the positive degree, as Tam
doctus, Tam bonus. So good, so learned. It is so. Ita est, Ita res est, Nempe,
Profecto, Recte scilicet. Il est ainsi. S.

If it be so, that thou wylt she bide with thee. Sin est vt velis illam manner
apud te. S'il est ainsi que tu vueilles qu'elle demeure auee toy. S.

So be it, Amen. Fiat. Ainsi soit il. S. So it must be done. Ita opus est
facto. Il fault qu' ainsi soit faict. S. It is not so. Nunquam factum est, Non
ita est. Il n' est pas ainsi. S.

Be it so. Verum esto, Fac ita esse. Soit ainsi. S.

Is it even so? Is it so in deed? Ita ne est? Ter.

So great. Tantus, a, um. Si grand. S. So greatly. Tantopere, Vsque adeo. Tant
grandement. S. So little. Tantillum, Aduerb. Tantulum. Aduerb. Tant soit peu.
S. So long. Tamdiu, Tantisper, Tantopere, Vsque. Si long temps. S. So many.
Tot. Autant. S. So many iumpe. Totidem. Tout autant. S. So many times. Toties.
Autant de fois. S. So much. Tantus, a, um. Vide So great. So much. Adaeque,
Adeo, Perinde, Tantum. Autant, Tant. S. So much iumpe. Tantundem. Tout autant.
S. So often. Toties. Autant de fois. S. So, or after such sort, or in such
manner. Taliter. Tellement. S. So that. Du^modo, Modo, Quod, Vt. Pourueu que. S
So that thou can do it. Modo vt possis. Pourueu que tu le puisses. S. So
that he help me. Operam vt det, Modo iuuet, aut adiuuet. Pourueu qu'il m'aide.
S So that it be not noisome and grievous to you. Quod sine molestia tua facere
possis. Pourueu que cela ne te soit point ennuyeux and fascheux. S. So
vehemently. Tantopere, * Adeo vehementer, Tam vehementer. De si grande
vehemence. S. Sobbe. Singultio, it is. Sanglouter. Pals. Sobbing. Singultus, us.
Sangloutement. Pals. And her words were broken with sobbinge. Ruptaque
singultu verba loquentis erant. Ovid.

Sobbing, or he that sobbeth. Singultiens, it is. om. g. Sobre. Abstemius, a, um.
Modestus, a, um. Sobrius, a, um. Parcus and contiuens. Sobre. S. Very sobre.
Pulchre sobrius. Fort sobre. S.

Sobre to make. Soluere aebrietatem. Sobrely. Frugaliter, Modeste, Sobrie.
Sobrement. S. Sobrenes. Modestia, ae. Sobrietas, Temperantia, ae. foe. ge.
Sobriety. S. Sobriety, or sobre rule. Frugalitas, it is. foe. g. Idem. Socage, a
kind of service. Socagium, gij. n. g. vel seruitiu^ socae. Vide Littelton.
Lib. 2. C. 5. Socage. Society, or felloweship. Societas, tatis. Consortiu^,
tij. Contubernium, nij. n. g. Societe. S. Society among people of one
country, and between citizens. Societas interior and propior. Societe enter
gens d' un mesme pais and enter citoyens. S. To make society with some body.
Conflare societatem cum aliquo. Fair societe auee aucun. S.

Socke of lynnen. Calceus linteus. Apul. Chausson de toil. H. Socke of woollen,
or a woollen socke. Soccus, Calceus laneus. Chausson. H. Socoure. Adminiculum,
li. Auxilium, ij. Adiuuamen, nis. Adiumentum, ti. neu. genesis Support. Vide
Succoure. To socoure. Adminiculor, aris. Adminiculo, as. Adiuuo, as. Auxilior,
aris. Secourir.

Sodde, or a turffe. Cespes, it is. vel Caespes, pitis. m. genesis Motte ou glasson.
S. A green sodde. Cespes viuus, Gramineus cespes, Cespes viridis. Blette de
terre verde. H.

Sodde, or sodden. Coctilis, e. Coctus, a, um. Elixus, a, um. Cuict, qu'est
cuict. S. Sodde meat. Caro elixa, vel lixa. Bouilly. H. Halffe sodde.
Semicoctus, ta, tu^. Subcrudus, da, dum. A demi cuict. S.

That which is not sodde. Incoctus, ta, tum. Qui n'est pas cuict. S.

Sodden enough. Percoctus, a, um. Fort cuict. S. Sodeyne. Insperatus, a, um.
Improuisus, a, um. Properus, a, um. Repens, it is. Repentinus, a, u^. Subitaneus,
a, um. Subitarius, a, um. Subitus, a, um. Rapidus, da, dum. Soubdain. S.
Sodeinly. Ab insperato, De repent, De subito, Dictum factum, Ex insperato,
Improuise, Improuiso, In praeceps, Pedato, Subito, Qua^ mox, Repent, Raptim,
Rapide, Inopinanter. Soubdainement. S. Sodeinly coming, as unlooked for.
Improuisus, a, um. vt Improuisa, vis lethi. Horat. The sudden force, power,
might or violence of death. Soft. Lentus, Mollis, e. Vietus, a, um. Mol. S.
Soft and fair, or softly. Cunctanter, Parce, Parciter, Pedetentim, Suspenso
gradu, Tacito pede. Tout bellement. S. To go, walk or march soft and fair.
Suspe^so gradu ambulare, Clementer ambulare. Marcher tout bellement. S.

To follow one soft and fair, or softly. Placide aliquem sequi, Otiose
sequi. Suyure aucun tout bellement. S.

Soft here is, as ye beard when it begins to grow, the moss that grows upon
fruits as upon quinces. etc. Lanugo, ginis. f. g. La barbe quand elle commence
a venir, la mousse qui vient sur auc^s fruicts comme sur pommes de coing. S.
Soft noise to make. Succino, is.* Soft pace. Suspensus vel tacitus gradus.
Ovid. Soft voice. Submissa vox, vt Submissa oratione vel voce loqui. Caes. and
Submisse loqui. Quint. Parler bas. To speak soft, or with a low voice. Soft
wind. Aura, ae. f. g. Un petit vent doulx. S. Soft to make. Mollifico, as.
Mollio, is. Remollio, is, ire. Emollio, lis. Amollir. S. To make very soft.
Remollio, lis. Fort amollir. S

Soft to make with lying, or steping in water. Mac^ro, as. Amollir and
attendrir en l'eaue. S. Soft to wax. Liqueo, es. Liquesco, scis. Liquefio,
fis. Mollesco, scis. S'amollir. S. Softly. Leniter, Le^te, Molliter, Suauiter.
Molleme^t. Softly, as if our were a sleep. Oscitanter, Oscitabunde. Softly, or
soft and fair. Cunctanter. Tout belleme^t. Vide Soft and fair. Softly, or not
to loud. Submisse, Summisse. Bassement. S. Softly, or quietly without noise.
Sedate, Tranquille. Tout doulx, sans bruit. S. Softnes. Lenitas, Lenitudo,
Mollities, Mollitia, Mollitudo, inis. f. g. Mollesse ou mollete. S. Soil,
foul, or to defile a thing. Foedare, Deuenustare, Inquinare, Maculare,
Sordidare. Souiller Soil, or land. Fundus, di. Solum, li. n. g. La terre.
Soyled, fowled, or defiled. Maculosus, sa, sum, Co^taminatus, ta, tum. Souille.
S. Soke, or natural moistnes of the ground. Vligo, ginis. f. g. Naturelle
moiteur de la terre. S. Soked, or steped with water. Vliginosus, a, um.
Sokeman. Colonus, i. I take that sokemen whom the common lawers call tenauntes
in ancient demesne been Coloni, because they be said gaynours of the lords
lands. Albeit this my opinion is under correction.* Solace. Delectamentum, ti.
Solatium, ij. n. g. Solas. Solace, or to comfort. Solor, aris. Consoler,
Recomforter. Vide Recreate. Solar, or a garrete. Doma, it is. Solarium, ij. neu.
g. Un solier, ou grenier. S. Sold. Venditus, a, um. Vendu. Call. Sold to be.
Vaeneo, is. Venum ire. Vendor, eris. Venum dari. Estre vendu. Call. It shall be
sold. Venum ibit. Il sera vendu. S.

Sold to be, or set to be sold. Venalis, e. Expose en vent. Call. Sole, or
alone. Solus, a, um. Solitarius, a, um. Seulet. We are sole, and alone, Solae
sumus. Nous sommes seulettes. S.

A sole, or solitary man. Homo solitarius. Cic.

Sole, a fish. Buglossus, vel Buglossum, Citharus asper, Solea, Lingulaca. Vne
sole. H. Solemply. Persancte, Solenniter. Solennellement. S. Solemn. Festus,
a, um. Solennis. om. g. Solennel. Solemn oath, deep, great, or salfe oath.
Deiuriu^, ij. n. g. Grand serment. S. And he that takes such oath, is
Deicrator, oris. mas. genesis Deiero, as. To make a great oath. Fair grand
serment. S. Solempnisation. Celebratio, onis. Concelebratio, onis. f. g.
Solennization. S. Sole^pnise. Celebro, as. Concelebro, as. Solennizer. To
solemnise the day of the nativity of any one. Colere natalem diem.
Solennizer le iour de la nativity d'aucun. S.

Solempnised. Celebratus, a, um. Cic. Solempnitie. Solennitas, it is. f. g.
Solennite. S. Solempnitie about dead bodies. Feralia officia. Solempnities, or
feasts, which they keep every year at a certain time. Solennia, orum. n.
ge. Solennitez, ou festes qu'on guard tous les ans en certain temps. S.
Solitary. Solus, a, um. Solitarius, a, um. Solitaire. S. To seek solitary
places. Solitudines captare Cercher lieux solitaires. S.

A solitary, or desert place. Locus solus. Un desert

Solitary, as of one fascion always. Monotropos, pi. mas. genesis Solitary
person, or monk. Monachus, chi. m. ge. Moine. S. Solitary place. Eremus, mi.
f. g. Lieu solitaire. S. Solitarines. Solitudo, inis. f. g. Solitude. S.
Solitarines, as where no body stirs. Solitudo ante hostium. Terent.
Solicit. Insisto, is. Insto, as. Procuro, as. Solicito, as. Subagito, as.
Soliciter. S. To solicit a man to do some thing. Cum aliquo agere. Soliciter
un homme a fair quelque chose.

To solicit a process for an other. Institoriam operam nauare litigantibus.
Soliciter un procez pour autruy. S.

To solicit, or move a maiden to naughtines. Attentare pudicitiam pucllae.
Soliciter vne fille a meschancete. S.

Solicit, or to labor for. Pre^so, as, Ambio, is. Praehenso, as. Brigner. S.
Soliciting. Solicitatio, onis. f. g. Solicitation. S. Soliciting, or
laboring for some office. Praehensatio, onis. Prensatio, onis. Occursatio,
onis. f. ge. Brigne. S. Sollicitour. Negotiorum curator, Procurator, Sequester.
Un soliciteur. S. A good sollicitour. Astipulator causae, Institor litis,
Custos cognitoris, Exactor operis, Pragmaticus cui causae procuratio
commendata, and instructio, Pragmaticus fidelis, and officiosus. Un bon
soliciteur. S.

Sollicitours of processes. Causarum curatores, and pragmatici, Causae
custodes, Pragmatici, Institores causae, and tanquam argi. Soliciteurs de
procez. Solicitude, or carefulnes. Solicitudo, inis. foe. genesis Solicitude. S. I
am here in great solicitude, or carefulnes. Maximam hic solicitudinem,
curamque sustineo. Ie suis ici en grande solicitude. S.

Solome, or severe. Tetricus, a, um. Triste ou severe. Solome, or severe men.
Tetrici homines. Gens tristes and seueres. S. Solomnes, or seuerenes.
Tetricitas, atis. foem. ge. Tristesse, ou seuerite. S. Soluble, or easy to
lewse. Solutilis, le. om. ge. Aise a deslior. Call. To make the belly soluble, or
lewse. Aluum soluere, Elicere aluum, Aluum ciere, Soluere ventrem, and ventris
onus, Aluum mouere. Lascher le ventre. S.

Some body. Vllus, a, um. Quispiam, Nonnullus, Non nemo, Aliquis. Aucun. S.
Some persons. Plerique. Aucuns. S. And some body will doubt. etc. Et quisquam
dubitabit quid virtute. etc. Et doubtera aucun. S.

Some men are come. Partim hominum venerunt. Aucuns hommes sont venuz. S. Some
other where. Alibi, Aliubi, Ailleurs. S. To seek some other where. Quaerere
foris. Chercher ailleurs. S.

Sent some other where. Alio missus. Ailleurs enuoye. S.

From some other where. Aliunde. D'ailleurs. S.

Sommarie, or an abbridgement. Summarium, rij. Breuiarium, rij. n. g. Sommaire.
S. Sommary, or so^me, and abbbridgement of any thing. Summa, ae. f. ge. Le
sommaire, ou la sum and l' abbrige de quelque chose que ce soit. S. The
sommarie, and argument of the whole matter is this. Scena totius rei haec est.
Le sommaire and argument de tout l'affaire est cestuy. S.

Sommarily. Summatim. Sommairement. S. Sommarily, and briefly to co^prehende
any thing. Carptim, Breuiterque perstringere aliquid. Sommairement and en brief
comprendre quelque chose. S. Sum. Summa, ae. foe. ge. Sum. S. Sum of
money. Summa argenti. Sum d'argent. Sum, or to make perfect. Su^mo, as.
Su^mam facere, vel conficere. Summer. S. To sum altogether. Colligere omnia.
So^mer tout ensemble. S.

Summer. Aestas, it is. foe. ge. L'este. S. And pertaining to summer. Aestiuus,
a, um. Appartenant a l'este. S.

To pass over his summer in some place. Aestate^ consumere in loco aliquo,
Statiua habere, Aestiuare. Passer son este en quelque lieu. S.

The summer passes. Transcurrit aestas. L'este se pass. S.

Every summer. Omnibus aestatibus. Par chascun este. S.

Summer fallowe, or land sowe^ every other year. Noualia, Noualis ager vel
fundus.* Summer parloure made in a garden, called an herbar. Stibadium, ij. n.
g. Plin. Iun. Summer well nighe past. Affecta aestas. L'este presque finy. S.
Summer in carpentrie work. Trabs perpetua. Un sommier en charpenterie S.
Summers framed, or graffed one within another. Trabes compactiles. Sommiers
entez les vns dedens les autres. S. Sommone. Cito, as. Exhibere reum, Diem
alicui dicere, Ex iure manu consertu^ vocare, Denu^tio, as. Iudicium
denuntiare. Summer, adiourner. S. To sommone to appear in propre person.
Vadimonium impingere, Vadari hominem, Euocare, Vadari reum imperio semetipsum
sistendi ad quaestionem, Pignerari hominem vadimonio, Vadimonium denuntiare,
Diem dicere per semetipsum obeundum. Fair adiourner a comparoir (...)
person. S.

Sommon a parliament. Comitia edicere. Cic. Sommon to war. Denun^iare, vel
indicere bellum, Buccinare Martem, Clarigare. Summer la guerre. S. Sommoned by
attachement. Euocatus proscripta atque edicta die. Adiourne par attache. S.
Sommoned without record. Intestato vocatus. Adiourne sans records. S.
Sommoning. Denuntiatio, onis. foem. genesis Sommation, adiournement. Sommoning
duly done, or executed. Denuntiatio candide facta. Sommation deument faicte.
S. Sommoning personale, and taking of the body. Vocatio and prehensio.
Adiournement personel and prise de corpse. S. Sommoning of war. Denuntiatio
belli. Sommation de guerre. S. Sommons. Libellus, li. m. g. Un adiournement. S.
Sompter horse. Sarcinarius equus, Iumentum sarcinarium. Un sommier. S. Sompter
saddle. Sagma, it is. n. g. Some thing. Aliquid, Haud nihil, Quicquam. Aucune
chose. S. Sometime. Plerunque. Interim, Interdum, Nonnunquam, Quandoque,
Aliqua^do, Modo, Alias. Aucunesfois. S. Somewhat. Quodammodo, Quadantenus,
Aliqua ex part. Aucunement. S. Somewhat, or some small thing. Aliquantum,
No^nihil, Quidpiam, Vtcunque. Aucunement ou quelque peu. S. To esteem somewhat.
Nonnihilo aestimare, Ponere in loco aliquo. Aucunement estimer. S.

Somwhere, or in some place. Alicubi, Vspiam. En quelque lieu. S. Son, a river
in France. Arar, vel Araris. Son, ou saone. S. Sunday. Dies dominicus.
Dimenche. S. Sondrinesse, and diversity. Diffimilitudo inis. Diuersitas, atis.
Varietas, atis. foem. genesis Diversity, and difference. S. Sondrely. Vary.
Diuersement. S. Song. Cantio, nis. Cantilena, Cantus, us. Modulus, li. Musa,
ae. Oda, ae. Praecentio, onis. Carmen, inis. Versus, Canticum. Chanson. H.
Song at a brydall, or marriage. Thalassio, onis. Talassio, onis. Epithalamium,
ij. neut. genesis Chant nuptial, chanson nuptiale. S. A pleasant song. Lepida and
suauis cantio. Belle chanson. S.

A rusticall, or fieldishe song. Musa syluestris. Chanson champestre. S.

A little song. Cantiuncula, ae. f. g. Chansonnette. S.

To singe always one song. Cantilena^ eande^ canere. Redire tousiours vne
chanson. S.

Song which the nource sings in dandlyng the child. Lallatio, onis. f. g.*
Pastorale, or shepehardes song. Carmen bucolicum, pastorale. Chant pastoral. H.

A filthy, vile, unchaste, or baudy song. Carmen fescenninum. Chanson sale,
vilane, impudique, ou de paillarde. S.

Son. Filius, ij. Natus, ti. m. g. Filz. S. and Filiolus, li. m. ge. Ang. A
little or young son. Un petit filz. Adoptiue son. Adoptiuus. Filz adoptif.
S.

Thou take my son back with thee. Meum receptas filium ad te. Tu retires
mon filz par deuers toy. S.

A quadrant, or dial for the son. Solarium, rij. n. g. Un quadran ou
horologe au soleil. Call.

A percing, and burning son. Assus sol, Sol acer. Soleil aspre, and bruflant.
S.

A very burning son. Flagrantissimus sol. Soleil fort bruslant. S.

The son is very hoate. Sol feruet. Le soleil est fort ardant.. S.

To set in the son. In solemn proferre, vel ponere, In apricum proferre.
Mettre au soleil. S.

To dry in the son. Insolare. Seicher au soleil. S.

Dried in the son. Insolatus, a, u^. Seiche au soleil.

To walk in the son. Spatiari in aprico. Se pourmener au soleil. S.

A sonny place. Locus soli ostentus, Locus apricus. Lieu expose au soleil. S.

The Eclipse of the son. Deliquiu^ solis. Eclipse de soleil. S.

Sonneburning. Aestus, us. m. ge. Ardeur du soleil. S. Sonneburnte. A sole
perustus, Adustus solibus. Hasle. S. A man altogether sonneburnte. Perustus
homo. Un homme tout hasle. S.

A sonny day. Dies apricus, Dies insolatus. Iour auquel le soleil luist. S.

A fair sonny day. Apricissimus dies. Un iour de beau soleil. S.

Son, one of the seven plannetes. Phoebus, by. Sol, is, Titan, nis. m. g.
Soleil. S. Solaris, e. Of the son. De soleil. Call. Son and Moon, a play
that children and big boys use to play, wherein two companies draw,
the one one way and the other an other, till one part give the other the foil.
Dielcystinda. H. Son beam. Radius, ij. m. g. Rayon de soleil. S. And that
has many beams. Radiosus, a, um. Qui ha force rayons. S. And to cast out his
beams. Radio, as. Iecter ses rayons. S. Son before the father, an herb so
called by Pandecta, because it flowreth twyse, and the last flowers be longer
then the first, the leaves be like rosemary, but brother. Filius ante patrem.
Son in law. Filiaster. Gener, ri. Priuignus, ni. m. g. Gendre. S. Son in
the fourth degree in lineall of discente. Abnepos, it is. m. g. Suet. Son of a
senator. Patricius, cij. m. ge. Patrice. Son rising. Oriens, Exoriens sub.
sol, Ortus solis, Sol nouus. Soleil leuant. S. Since son rising. A primo
sole, Aborto sole. Depuis le soleil leave. S.

The rising of the son. Solis exortus. Le leuement du soleil. S.

Son setting, or son glade. Occide^s sol, Occasus solis. Solei^ couchant.
S. The son was almost set. Sole iam fere occiduo. Le soleil estoit presque
couche. S.

Sons daughter. Neptis, it is. f. g. Niepce. Call. Sons son. Nepos, it is. m.
g. Nepueu. S. Sons wife. Nurus, ri. f. g. La femme de mon fills. Sonning.
Insolatio, onis. f. g. Nebriss. Soole, fish. Lingulaca, ae. Solea, ae.
Citharus asper, Buglossus, vel Buglossum, Sa^dalium. Vne sole. H. Soole of a
shoe. Solea, ae. Suppagmentum, ti. n. ge. Semelle de soulier. S. To soole
shoes. Suppingere soleas. Semeler. S.

Soole of the foot. Planta, ae. Solum, Terma, it is. Vestigium, gij. n. g. La
plant du pied. S. Soon. Cito, Subito, Actutum, Repent, Confestim. Tossed. S.
Soon after. Breui postea, Paulo mox. Bien tossed apres. S. Soon hurt with
cold, or subject to cold. Alsiosus, a, um. Subject a froid. Call. Which was
soon after them. Qui recens ab illorum aetate fuit. Qui fut bien tossed apres
^ulx. S.

It will come sone after. Non multo post haec aderit. Il viendra bien tossed
apres. S.

Do me to understand as soon as thou can. Quantum potes me certiorem face.
Fay moy a scauoir le plus tossed que tu pourras. S.

Soon ouercomed, or vanquished. Vincibilis, e. om. genesis Vincible, aise a
vaincre. S. Sooner. Citius, Ocyus. Maturius. Plus tossed. Sooner the^ thou
think. Prius tua opinione. Plus tossed que tu ne penses. S. Much more sooner.
Multo maturius. Beaucoup plus tossed. S.

Soonest of all. Citissime, Ocyssime. Trestost. S. Soore mullet a fish.
Trigla, ae. f. g. Surmulet. Ges. Soote of a chymney. F^ligo, inis. f. g. S^ye.
S. Soote, or sweet. Suauis, e. om. ge. Doulx. Call. Soote wood. Aloes lignum,
Agallochum, chi. n. g. Lignum aloes. H. Sootnes, or swetenes. Suauitas, it is.
Suauitudo, dinis. f. g. Suauite. Call. Soap. Sapo, onis. Smegma, it is. Ma^^iaca
pila. Sauon. And which has virtue, and force to cleanse, purge, or scour.
Smegmaticus, ^, um. Quia virtue and puissance de nettoyer, purger ou absterger.
Siuet soap, or soap made with musk. Sapo moschatus. Sauon muscat. S.

To wash with soap. Sapone sordes eluere. Sauonner^ S.

Sophisme, a darcke or obscure sentence. Sophisma, it is. n. g. Sophisme. S.
Sophister. Sophista, Sophistes, ae. m. ge. Sophiste. Sophistry. Sophistica,
ae. Sophistice, es. foem. genesis Sophisterie. Pals. Soppe. Panis e iure. Vne
soupe. S. Sorcecer. Veneficus, a, um. Fascinans, it is. om. genesis Sorcier. S. A
sorceresse. Saga, Venefica. Sorciere. S.

A very great sorceresse. Triuenefic^. Vne fort grande sorciere. S.

To work sorcerie. Fascinare. Sorceler. S.

Sorcery. Fascinatio, onis. Veneficium, cij. neut. ge. Sorcelerie. S. Sore.
Vlcus, eris. n. ge. Vlcere. S. And full of sores. Vlcerosus, a, um. Plein
d'ulceres. S. A little sore. Vlcusculum, li. n. g. Petit vlcere. S.

Sores corosiues. Nomae, arum. foem. genesis Vlceres corrosifs. S. Hoate burning
sores. Carbuncularia vlcera. Vlceres enflambez. S.

Sore about the circle of the eyes. Caolma, atis. n. g. The inflammation of a
sore. Inflammatio vlceris. Aestus vlceris. L'inflammation de vlcere. S.

Which has any sore in his mouth. Stomaticus. Qui ha quelque vlcere en la
bouche. S.

Sore charge, or thing hard to be achieued. Dura prouincia. Terent. Sore hard
to be cured. Cacoethes. Plin. Sore in the fondement. Ficus, ci. m. g. Un fic.
S. Sore full of matter, or running sore. Suppuratio, onis. Vomica, ae. f. ge.
Apostume. Call. Sore in the nose. Polypus, pi. masc. genesis Poupe, ou poulpe. Call.
These things bring the sores to the quick flesh. Haec redigunt ad viuum
corpus vlcera. Ces chooses reduissent les vlceres a chair viue. S.

Sore like a honey comb. Caeris. Sore or a cruel battle, where nether party
will yield. Pertinax bellum. Sore, or scabbed to make, or fill full of sores.
Vlcero, as. Vlcerer. S. Sore without pity, or cruel. Austerus, a, um.
Austere. Call. Sorell, herb. Lapathum acutum, Oxylapathon, Oxalis, Rumex
acutus. Pareille, herb aux teigneux. Sorel du boys. Oxys, Trifolium acetosum,
Oxytriphillon, Panis cuculi, Alleluya. Pain a coquu. H Sorry, or sorowefull.
Dolens, it is. Moestus, a, um. Dolent. S. Sorye, or heavy to be. Co^moereo, es.
Doleo, es. Accipere dolorem, Capere dolorem ex aliquo. Estre dolent. S. To be
sorry to have committed or done any thing. Pigeo, es. Estre dolent d'auoir faict
quelque chose. S.

Sorry to make. Solicito, tas. Dolorem afferre. Porter doleur a quelqu'vn. S.
Sorrow. Aegritudo, inis. Angor, oris. Dolor, ris. Moeror, oris. Moestitia, ae.
Tristitia, ae. Acerbitas, atis. f. g. Tristesse, doleur. S. Very great sorrow.
Summus dolor. Tresgrande doleur. S.

Sorrow which one takes for the death of his friend. Luctus, us. m. g. Doleur
qu'on ha de la mort de son ami. S. Sorrow taken for just, and reasonable
cause. Officiosus dolor. Doleur qu'on prend pour just and raisonable cause. S.
To keep secret his sorrow. Continere tacitu^ dolorem. Celer sa doleur. S.

To dissemble his sorrow. Vultu dolorem animi tegere. Dissimuler sa doleur. S.

To leave of his sorrow, and heaviness. Ponere dolorem. Delaisser sa doleur and
tristesse. S.

To feel no sorrow. Carere sensu doloris. Ne sentir autune doleur. S.

My sorrow cesseth not. Dolor me non deficit. Ma doleur ne cesse point. S.

Great sorrow is come to the city. Coepit luctus ciuitatem. Grand dueil est
aduenu a la ville. S.

Sorrow causing. Dolorificus, a, um. Quod dolore^ facit. Call. Sorrow come to
you. Vae, Vaeh, Mart. Sorowefull. Aeger, ra, rum. Dolens, it is. Luctuosus, a,
um. Moestus, a, u^. Tristis, e. Dolent. Vt supra. A sorowefull, or lamentable
song. Cantus flebilis. Chant de dueil. S.

Sorrowful to be. Aegresco, scis. Moereo, es, stus sum. Estre dolent. S.
Sorrowful to make. Moero, as. Nebr. Vide supra. Great sorowyng. Planctus, us.
m. g. Grand duel.

Sort, and manner. Qualitas, atis. foem. genesis Sort and maniere. S. What sort
of men shall be there? Cuiusmodi homines illic erunt? Qu'elle sort de gens
seront la? S.

All of one sort. Vniusmodi, Exemplo vno. Tout d'vne sort. S.

Fishes of an other sort. Alterius notae pisces. Poissons d'autre sort. S.

Men of every sort. Omne genus, and cuiusque modi homines. Hommes de toutes
sorts. S.

Of such sort. Huiusmodi. om. ge. De ceste sort. S

Southe, or truth. Veritas, it is. Verite. S. Sotherne, or of the south part.
Australis, e. om. ge. De midi. S. Sothernwoode. Abrotanum mas. Auronne,
Brotonne. Pin. Sothsaye, or tell by divination any thing. Auguro, as. Auguror,
aris. Auspico, as. Diuino, as. Ominor, aris. Vaticinor, aris. Auspicor, aris.
Co^iecturam facere, Praesagio, is. Praesumere animo, Co^iecto, as. Hariolor,
aris. Deuiner quelque chose. S. Sothsayer. Diuinus, Mantis, Aruspex, cis.
Augur, ris. Fatidicus, Fatiloquus, Hariolus, Praesagus, Vates, it is. com. g.
Divine ou deuin. S. A woman sothsayer. Vates, it is. Haruspica, ae. f. g.
Deuineresse. S.

A book appertayning to sothsayers. Liber vaticinus, sieve vaticinius. Liver
appartenant a deuins. S

Sothsayer by palmestrie. Chiromantes, ae. m. ge. Chiromantien. S. Sothsaying.
Augurium, ij. Auruspicium, ij. Praesagium, ij. Praesagatio, Vaticinatio,
Vaticinium. Coniectatio, onis. Diuinatio, onis. Praediuinatio, Hariolatio,
onis. f. g. Deuinement. S. Sothsaying. Hariolans, it is. om. ge. Deuinant. S. The
art of sothsaying. Haruspicina, ae. foem. genesis L'art de deuiner. S.

Sothsaying by palmestrie. Chiromantia, ae. foe. ge. Chiromantie. S. A
sovereign and excellent remedy against the biting or stinging of serpents.
Ad serpentis ictus, vel contra serpentium morsus praecipuum remedium, vel
eximium, vel supremu^. Souuerain remede and excellent contre la morsure des
serpens. S.

Soueraignitie. Principatus, us. m. g. La souuerainete. The soueraignitie of
the principality of the Empire retourneth unto you. Redit ad te summa imperij.
La souuerainete de la principaulte de l' empire return a toy. S.

Sow with a nedle. Suo, is. Insuo, is. Coudre. S. To sow one to an other.
Assuere, Co^suere. Coudre l'vn a l'autre. S.

To sow any thing abroad among the people. Peruulgare, Vulgar, Diuulgare,
Far palam. Semer quelque chose parmi le peuple. S.

To sow corn, or seed. Deponere semina, Serere, Deserere, Obserere, Spargere
semen, Semen solo ingerere, Sementem facere, Seminare, Sationes facere,
Committere semen solo, Dare semina humo, Iactare semen, Mandare semina terrae,
Proseminare. Semer. S.

Sow again which is seame rent. Resuo, is. Recouldre. S. Sow about, here and
there. Differere, Disseminare. Semer ca and la. S. To sow, or plant
forthwith. Subserere. Semer, ou planter incontinent apres. S.

To sow before. Praeserere. Semer deuant. S.

To sow, or plant all about. Circumserere. Semer ou planter tout entour. S.

Sow corn again. Resero, is, rui. Resemer. Call. To sow betwixt two.
Interserere. Semer enter deux. S.

To sow among trees. Inserere frumentum arboribus. Semer enter les arbres. S.

To sow throughout. Disseminare. Semer par tout

Sow discordes, lies, and sclaunders. Sycophantor, aris. Sycophantisso, as.*
Sow or plant. Obsero, is. Semer ou planter. S. Sow, and scattre money among ye
people. Stipitem spargere. Semer and iecter argent parmi le peuple Sow throwgh
with the nedle. Transsuo, is. En cousant percer tout oultre. Call. Sow to, or
upon an other, to piece. Assuo, is. Coudre a, ou sus un autre, Rapetacer. S.
Sow under, or beneath. Subsuo, is. Coudre par le bas. Call. Sowce, or trippes.
Omasa, orum. Omasum concisum. Des tripes. Sowce seller, or trype man.
Oxyporopola, Omasarius, Allantopola, ae. m. g. Tripier. S. Sowce wife, or trype
wife. Omasaria, Allantopolis, dis. f. g. Tripiere. S. Sowcerie, or place where
trypes are sold. Allantopolium, lij. Thermopolium, lij. n. g. La triperie.
Sowdre. Ferrumen, inis. Plumbatura, ae. foem. genesis Souldure. S. Sowdre for
gold. Chrisocolla, Santerna, ae. foe. g. Souldure d'or. H. Sowdre together.
Ferrumino, as. Plu^bo, as. Soulder Sowdring. Plumbatio, onis. f. g. Sow. Sus,
is. Porca, ae. foe. ge. Truye. H. Porcella, ae. Suilla, ae.* Sucula, ae. f. g.
Petite truye, Truyette. S. Suillus, a, um. Suinus, a, um. Of a sow. De truye.
A sick, or diseased sow. Sus inualida. Truye qui n'est pas saine. S.

Akornes make a sow very fat. Grauissimam suem facit glans querna. Le glande
de chesne fait deuenir la truye fort pesante de graisse. S.

Sow big with pigges, or great with farrowe. Praegnans sus, Scrofa, ae. f.
g. Truye. H. Sow great and fat. Diffusa sus. Truye gross. S. Sow like.
Suatim. En facon de truye. Call. Sow pigge. Sucula, ae. f. g. Petite truye. S.
Sown. Satiuus, a, um. Satus, a, um. Seem. Call. Good to be sown. Sementicus,
a, um. Bon a semer

To be sown abroad, and diuulgated among the people. Emanare in vulgus. Estre
seem and diuulgue par mi le peuple. S.

Who has sown these words abroad? Vnde hoc natum? Qui a seem ces parolles.
S.

A field or land sown every year. Restibilis ager. Vne terre qu'on seem
touts les ans. S.

Sown as a scame is. Sutus, a, um. Sutilis, e. om. g. Cousu. S. Sower, or
sharp. Acidus, a, um. Sur, ou tirant sur l'aigre. S. Somewhat sower, or
sharp. Acidulus, a, um. Suret, aucunement sur. S.

Sower, or sharp fruits. Acidi fructus. Fruicts aigrets. S. To wax sower, or
tarte. Acescere, Coarescere. S'aigrir. S.

To be very sower. Peracescere. Estre fort aigre. S.

To make sower, or tarte. Acorem facere. Fair Aigre. S.

Sowerly, or sharply. Acriter, Acerrime, Acerbe. Aigremement. S. Sowernes, or
tartenes. Acritudo, inis. Acor, oris. Acrimonia, ae. foe. ge. Aigreur. S. Sower
of corn, or seeds. Sator, oris. Seminator, oris. m. g. Semeur. S. Sower of
discord, lies, and sclaunders. Sycophanta. ae.* Sower of seames. Suitor, ris.
m. g. Couseur. Pals. Sowyng of a seame. Sutura, ae. foe. ge. Coustare. S.
Sowyng of corn. Satio, onis. Seminatio, Satus, tus. m. g. Semaille, Semoison.
S. Sowing of vetches. Viciarium, rij. n. g. Colum. Soul. Anima, ae. f. g. Ame.
S. Souls of the dead. Manes, ium. mas. ge. Ames des trespasses. S. The souls
in hell. Vmbrae infernae. Les ames estans es enfers. S.

Sound. Sonitus, us. Sonus, ni. m. g. Son. S. A great sound. Sonor, oris. m.
g. Un fort son. S.

The sound of the feet. Crepidus pedum. Le son des pieds. S.

A rattling sound. Fragor, oris. mas. genesis Un son esclattant. S.

The sound of a trompette. Clangor, oris. m. g. Son de trompet. S.

Which gives diverse soundes. Multisonus, a, um. Qui rend diverse sons. S.

Sound. Sono, as. Sono, is. Recino, is. Sonner. S. To make a sound. Crepare,
Increpare, Edere sonos, Sonum reddere, vel sonitum. Fair son. S.

Sound again. Assono, as. Reboo, as. Resono, as. Resonner. S. Sound alofte.
Detono, as. Fair un son haultain. S. Sound great, or make a great noise.
Tono, nas. Plin. To sound a trompette. Clango, is. Sonner de la trompet. S.

To ringe, and make a clear sound. Tinnio, is. Tinter, and sonner cler. S.

Sound iarringly. Strideo, es. Strido, is.* To sound diversely. Discrepare.
So^ner diuerseme^t.

To go about to hear the sound. Captare sonitum. Tascher d'ouir le son. S.

Sound made with the lips or mouth, when the cheeks are blown. Stlopus,
pi. m. g. Le son q^'on rend quand on enfle les jove's. Sound of strokes.
Coctalus, li.* Crepitus plagarum. Le son des coups. S. To make a string to
sound. Elicere sonu^ neruorum. Fair sonner vne cord. S.

Sound of the lashe of a whippe, or such like. Tax, neut. ge. Le son d'vn coup
de fouet. S. A good and pleasant sound. Vocalitas, atis. f. g. Bon et
plaisant son. S.

Sound of a voice resounding. Echo, us. f. g. Echo. A little sound, or noise.
Murmurillum, li. neu. g. Petit bruit.

Sound often. Sonito, as. Sonner souuent. Call. To make a great sound.
Persono, as. Fair grand son. S.

Sound, or to proclaim battle. Clarigo, as. Denoncer la guerre. S. Sound
ill, or to disagree. Absono, as. Dissono, as. Male sono, as. Desaccorder. Call.
Sound, salfe or whole. Incolumis; e. Saluus, a, um. Sanus, a, um. Integer, a,
u^. Valens, it is. om. g. Sain. I am very glad that thou art come salfe and
sound. Te saluum venisse vehementer gaudeo. Ie suis fort ioyeux que tu es venu
sain and sauue. S.

Sound, or whole. Solidus, a, um. Solid. S. Which is of a sound, and
settled mind, or wit. Compos animi, vel mentis. Qui est de sens rassis. S.

To keep sound and salfe. Sospitare. Garder sain, and sauue. S.

Sound, or in a good point to be. Valeo, es. Valesco, scis. Estre sain and en
bon poinct. S. Sound, salfe, or perfect to make that which was at point of
death. Superstito, as. Sound, salfe, or perfect to wax. Valesco, scis.
Consanesco, cis. Deuenir sain. S. Sounding. Sonans, it is. om. ge. Sonnant. S.
Sounding brass. Tinnula era. Areins sonnant. S. Sounding great, loud, or
shill. Sonorus, a, um. Sonnoreux. S. Sounding iarringly like an ill pype, or
drawn rope. Stridens, it is. Sou^ding ill. Absonus, a, u^. Qui ne son pas
bien. Call. Sounding like waves. Vndisonus, a, um. Virg. Sounding of
instruments. Incentio, onis. f. g. Gel. Sounding sharply as metal does,
when it is beaten, or stricken. Tinnulus, a, um. Tintant and resonnant. S.
Soundynge swetelye. Dulcisonus, a, um. Suauiter sonans. Call. Soundly. Sane.
Horat. Soundnes, or salfenes. Sanitas, atis. foemin. genesis Sante. S. Sour.
Acidus, a, um. hic Acer, haec Acris, hoc Acre. Acerbus, a, um. Acetosus, a, um.
Austerus, a, um. Sur. S. Subacidus, a, um. Subacidulus, a, um. Acedulus, a, um.
Somewhat sour, half, or a little sower. Aigret. S. Sour body, always
unpleasant, Tetricus, a, u^. Aspre. S. Sour countenaunced men, which never
laughe. Tricones, number. m. g. Iul. Capitol. Sour drink. Subacidus potus. Sour
drink, which for age stinketh. Rancidus potus. Sour milk. Oxygalum, li.
Oxygala, lae. foem. ge. Laict aigre. S. A sour man. Austerus, Acer, Seuerus.
Ho^me aspre.

Sour, or grimme. Toruus, a, um. Affreux. S. Souredocke. Vide Sorell. Sour
pear. Acidulum, li. n. g. Sour to be. Aceo, es. Estre aigre. S. Sour to be
of countenance. Superbio, is. Sour to make. Acerbo, as.* Acorem facere. Fair
aigrir. S. Sour to wax. Acesco, scis. Coacesco, is. S'aigrir. S. Sourely.
Acriter, Acerbe, Acerrime. Aigrement. S. Sourely, or grymmely. Torue.
Affreusement. S. To behold, or look upon sourely, or grimmely. Intueri toruo
vultu, vel fero, aut truci. Regarder aucun affreusement. S.

Sourenes. Acerbitas, Acetositas, Acor, ris. Acritas, Acritudo, nis. foem. ge-
Aigreur. S. Sourene^, or grimmnes. Toruitas, atis. foe. gener. Affreusete. S.
Sownyng. Defectio, onis. Deliquium, ij. neut. ge. Pasmoison. S. Sowrge of water
out of a spring. Scatebra, ae. foe genesis Source. S. Sowte, or black dross,
that cleaves to pot sides, or pan sides, called potten. Spondiu^, ij. n. g.*
Sowter, or cobbler. Suitor veteramentarius, Cerdo, Suppactor, oris. m. genesis
Sauetier. S. Sowters blatche. Sutorium atramentum, Coriarium. Vitriol ou
couperouse. S. Sowters shop. Sutrina, ae. Taberna sutrina. Vide Shoemaker.
Sowtherne. Meridianus, a, um. Meridionalis, le. Australis, le. Austrinus, a,
um. Meridional. S. Sowtherne wood an herb. Abrotonum mas. Auronne, Brotonne.
Pin. South pole, or south part of the firmament. Antarcticus polus, Polus
australis. Le pol antarctique. Sowthistle. Cicerbita, Leporis palatum, Sonchus,
Lactucella, ae. f. g. Laitero^, laittesson, palais au lieure. Southwest wind.
Africus, ci. Libs, Libonotus, ti. m. ge. Snouest. H. South wind. Auster, tri.
Notus, ti. m. g. Vent d'auton, vent de midi, vent morin, austre. S.
S. ANTE. P.
SPace. Spatium, ij. Tractus, us. m. g. Espace. S. All space and distaunce.
Interuallum, li. Interstitium, tij. n. g. Toute espace and distance,
interualle. S.

Space or time, or place which is between two. Intercapedo, inis. foe. ge.
Espace de temps, ou de lieu qui est enter deux. S. The space which is left
between the rows. Interordinium, nij. n. ge. L'espace qu'on laisse enter les
rangees. Call.

Space between games and recreations. Diludia, orum. n. g. Horac. A long space
of heaven and earth. Clima, it is. Plaga. ae. f. g. Vne longue espace du ciel,
and de la terre.

Space between pyllers. Intercolumnium, nij. n. g. L' espace qui est enter deux
columns. Call. Space between the brows. Glabella, ae. Glabra, ae. f. g. Espace
enter les sorcils. Call. Space or time between the old Moon and the new.
Interlunium, ij. n. g. Le temps d'entre la vieille and nouuelle lune. Call.
Space between the shoulders. Interscapilium, ij. n. ge. L'entredeux des
espaules. Call. Space of time. Momentum, ti. n. g. Espace de temps. Space of a
thousand passes. Milliarium, rij. n. ge. L'espace de mill pas. The space of
life. Curriculum vitae. L' espace de la vie. S.

A long space of time. Longum interuallum. Longue espace de temps. S.

Space of four days. Quatriduum, i. n. g. L'espace de quatre iours. Call.
Space of ground, containing twelve furlonges. Dolchus, chi. m. g. Suidas.
Space of ground containing.lx. furlonges, which is seven miles and a half.
Scornus, ni.* Space of two days. Biduum, i. n. genesis L'espace de deux iours.
Call. Space between the knottes. Internodium, dij. neut. genesis L'entredeux des
neuds. S.

Space between the rafters. Intertignium, ij. n. ge. L'entredeux des cheurons.
S. Space between the veins in the earth. Interuenium, nij. n. g. L'entredeux
des veins. S. The space between the thightes. Interfemineu^, nei. n. g.
L'entredeux des cuisses. S.

The space between walls. Andron, onos. m. g. Un entredeux de murailles. S.

Space of two years. Biennium, ij. neut. genesis L' espace de deux ans. Call.
Space of three days. Triduum, dui. neut. g. L'space de trois iours. Call. Space
of three years. Triennium, Trieteris, dis. f. ge. L'espace de trois ans. Call.
Space of four years. Quadriennium, ij. neut. ge. Espace de quatre ans. Call.
Space of five years. Lustrum, tri. Quiquennium, nij. n. g. Espace de cinq ans.
Call. et Lustralis, e. Ang. Any thing done in that space, or pertaining to that
space. Space of an hundred years. Seculum, Seclum, cli. n. g. L'espace de cent
ans. Call. Space or distance between the earth and the Moon. Tonus, ni. m. g.
Spatium interiectum inter terra^ and lunam. Call. Spacious, large, or wide.
Spatiosus, a, u^. Spatieus. Spade. Ligo, onis. Pala, ae. f. g. Hoyau. S.
Spain. Hispania, ae. Iberia, ae. f. ge. Espaigne. S. Spangled, pouldred, or
dressed with spangles. Clauatus, a, um.* Spanyardes. Ibres, Iberi. Les
espaignols. Pals. Spaniell. Canis auiarius campestris. Espaignol. S. A water
spanyell. Canis villosus. Un barbet. H.

Spanyshe, or of Spain. Hispanus, a, um. Hispaniensis, se. om. ge. D'espaigne.
Pals. Spanyshe cloak, or a cape. Ricinum, ni. Riciniu^, ij. Pallium
Hispanicum. Cappe Spagnole. S. Spanne, a measure from the thombes end to the
top of the little finger. Dodrans, it is. Spithama, ae. f. g. Espaume. Pals.
Spare. Reparco, cis. Adhibere parsimoniam, Parco, cis. Comparco, cis.
Espargner. S To spare cost. Parcere impensae. Espargner la dispense. S.

To spare no person. Nemini parcere. Ne espargner person. S.

To spare his labor. Operae parcere. Espargner sa peine. S.

To spare his life. Vitae parcere. Espargner sa vie.

They will not spare labor, or pain. Non parcetur labori. On ne respargnera
point la peine. S.

Spare horse, or which carries no person. Equus vacuus. Qui n'ha person sur
soy. S. Spare, or forbear one. Temperare alicui. Respargner aucun. S.
Sparhauke. Accipiter fringillarius, Nisus, si. mas. genesis Esprenier. H. Sparing.
Parcitas, atis. Parsimonia, ae. f. g. Espargne. Sparyng of any thing, as time,
money, labor, and such others. Compendium, dij. n. g. Espargne de quelque
chose que ce soit, comme de temps, d'argent, de peine and autres. S. and
Compendiosus, a, um. Of sparing, or saving. De respargne. S. A sparing, near,
or warye man. Parcus, a, um. Respargnant. S.

Sparingly, or with saving. Parce. Auec respargne. S. Spark of fire. Fauilla,
ae. Igniculus, li. Scintilla, ae. foem. ge. Estincelle. S. Sparks which fly
from burning iron. Stricturae, arum. f. g. Estincelles qui sortent d'vn fer
chauld. S. To sparkle. Scintillo, as. Estinceler. S.

To sparkle, or scattre here and there. Dissipare, Dispergo, is. Espardre ca
and la. S.

Sparkled, or scattered. Sparsus, a, um. Dispersus, a, um. Espars. S.
Sparkling. Scintillatio, onis. foe. ge. Estincellement. Sparkling of the eyes.
Flagrantia oculoru^. Estincellement d'yeulx. S. Sparkling, or scattering,
Dispertio, onis. foe. genesis Espardement. S. Sparre or a rafter. Tignus, ni.
Tignum, ni. Capreolus, li. m. g. Un cheuron. S. Sparrowe. Passer, ris. masc.
genesis Passereau. H. Passerculus, li. diminut. Angl. A little sparrowe. Petit
passere au. The sparrowes chirpe. Pipilant passeres. Les passereaux crient. S.

Spawne, or frye of fyshe. Ouum piscis. L' oeuff du poisson. S. Speech. Logos,
Loquela, ae. Sermo, nis. Oration, onis. f. g. Langage. S. The common, and
vulgar speech. Proletarius, vel plebeius sermo. Un langage commun and
vulgaire. S.

Speech delectable. Venustas, it is. f. g. Terent. Fine, and pleasant speech.
Suauiloquentia, ae. f. g. Beau ou doulx parler. S.

Speech being curious and short. Micrologia, ae. f. g. Rygorouse speech.
Asperitas orationis. Rigoureux parler. S.

Speech natural or mother tongue, as English is propre to us, French to a
French man. Genuinus sermo, Lingua materna, Lingua vernacula. La langue
maternelle. S. Speech, or oration moving to joy, or pity. Flexamina oration.
Cic. Proud, or lofty speech. Superbiloquentia, ae. f. genesis Un fire parler. S.

Courteous, or gentle speech. Blandiloquentia, ae. foe. ge. Un parler
gratieux. S.

Speech, or tale commonly used, or told. Cantilena, ae. f. ge. Cic. Brief
and short speech. Breuiloquentia, ae. f. g. Brief and court parler. S.

Speech pleasant. Eloquium, ij. n. g. Plaut. Speech superfluous, and
tedious. Battologia, ae. foem. genesis Speachefull, or which speaks much.
Multiloquus, a, um. Qui parle beaucoup. Call. Special. Praecipuus, a, um.
Specialis, e. Peculiaris, re. om. ge. Special. S. Specially. Peculiariter
Praecipue, Praesertim, Speciatim, Priuatim, Specialiter. Specialement. S.
Specify. Designo, as. Specifier. S. To specify, and declare by name.
Praecidere. Bud. Specifier and nommeement declarer. S.

Without specifying, either person or time. Sine designatione personarum and
temporum. Sans specifier ne les personn^s ne le temp^. S.

Spectable, or worthy to be seen. Spectabilis, le. om. ge. Digne d'estre
regard. Call. Spectacle, or thing to be looked on, or seen. Spectaculum, li. n.
g. Spectacle. S. A sorowefull spectacle. Miserum spectaculum. Spectacle triste.
S.

A pair of spectacles. Specillum, li. Ocularium specillum, Conspicilium, lij.
n. g. Lunettes. H.

Speed, or haste. Festinatio, onis. Properatio, onis. foe. ge. Haste. S. To
make speed, or haste. Accelerare gradum, Approperare, Celeritatem adhibere,
Festinare, Moras rumpere, Moram remouere, Properare, Praecipitare, Ruere,
Trepidare, Viam corripere. Se haster d'aller. S.

Make speed. Move abs te moram. Haste toy. H.

He makes speed to go to the city. Festinat ad vrbem. Il se haste d'aller a
la ville. S.

To make speed to meet with some body. Conari alicui obuiam. Se haster
d'aller deuant de quelqu'vn. S.

Speedy, or quick. Trepidus, a, um. Praeceps, it is. Festinus, a, um. Hastif and
soubdain. S. Very speedy and quick. Praeproperus, a. u^. Fort hastif and
soubdain. S.

Which makes speed. Festina^s, it is. Properans, it is. om. ge. Qui se haste. S.

Master God speed you. Here salve. Terent.

Spedily, or with all haste. Cursim, Festinanter, Propere, Curriculo, In
praeceps, Mature, Properanter, Quantum potest, Trepide. Hastiuement. S. Spedily
to do a thing. Satago, is. Terent. Spedines, or hastines. Acceleratio, onis.
Festinatio, onis. Properantia, ae. Rapiditas, it is. foem. ge. Hastiuete. S.
Speak. Edere verba, Exequi sermonem, Loquor, eris. Sermocinor, aris. Fari,
Fabulor, aris. Crepo, as. Verba facere, Mittere vocem, Voces facere. Parler. S.
Speak abroad. Profari. Vlpian. Speak against, or contrary. Obloquor, eris.
Co^tradicere, Murmurare, Obmurmurare, Obsistere, Obstrigillare, Repugnare,
Refragari, Reclamare, Occinere. Contredire. S. Speak all languages. Scire
omnes linguas. Parler tous langages. S. To speak very proprely, and
elegantlye. Eloquor, eris. Parler bien proprement, and elegamment. S.

To speak soft, and through the teethe. Musso, as. Mussito, as. Parler bas
and enter ses dens. S.

To speak, or tell, that we have in our mind. Proloquor, eris. Dire ce que
nous auons sur le cueur.

To speak openly, or franckely, and before all the world. Profiteor, ris.
Dire franchement, and denant tout le monde. S.

To speak in any others tale. Interloquor, eris. Parler par mi le propos
d'aucun.

Speak before. Praeloquor, eris. Praefari. Parler auant. Call. To speak any
thing briefly, and succintly. Succincto ore loqui, Strictim loqui, Comprehense
loqui, Dicere press, Leuiter aliquid tangere, Leuiter tra^sire aliquid, Modice
agere, Perstringere rem aliquam, Praecise dicere. Dire brieueme^t quelque
chose. S.

Speak certainly, or precisely. Praecido, is. Budae. To speak spiteful, or
injurious words to any. Opprobro, as. Dire paroles iniurieux a quelqu' un.
Call.

To speak evil and sclaunder any body. Allatrare aliquem, De fama alicuius
detrahere, Detrahere alicui, Insectari aliquem maledictis, Lacerare optimu^
virum incesto ore, Maledicere alicui, Male loqui alicui, Obloqui, Obtrectare
laudibus alicuius, Premere aliquem, Sinistris sermonibus carpere aliquem,
Vellicare. Mesdire and detracter de quelqu'vn. S.

Speak colourably. Praetexo, is. Cic. To speak and entreat long of a matter,
all to one purpose, or end. Contextu longiore loqui. Parler and entretenir
longuement tout d'vne suite. S.

Speak courtuously, and not rigoriously. Optatum loqui. Terent. Speak
doubtfullye. Perplexe loqui, Perplexor, aris. Parler ambiguement. S. Speak
eloquently. Oro, as. Rhetoricor, aris. Ore rotundo loqui, Laute loqui, vel
eleganter. Parler elegamment. S. To speak fair, or flatter one. Blandiri,
Lenocinari. Blan dir a aucun. S.

Speak fast, quick, or thick. Solutim loqui. To speak quick, and at all
adventure. Effutio, is. Parler legierement, and a la volee. S.

Speak first. Praeloquor, eris. Parler le premier. S. Speak generally, or of
all. In plenu^ dicere. Plin. Speak latin well. Commode latin dicere. Latin
scire. Parler bien latin. S. Speak in vain. Surdo canere. Speak lewdely, or
evil of one. Obloquor, eris. Mesdire d'aucun. S. Speak like a man. Vocem
humanam reddere. Parler comme un homme. S. Speak measurably, or in measure
Circumscripte dicere. Cic. Speak merely, or indisporte. Iocor, aris. Vide
Ieste. Speak no word, or to hold ones peace. Segregare sermonem, Taceo, es.
Se taire, ne dire mot. S. Speak now a word, and then an other. Caesim
dicere. Cic. Speak often. Loquitor, aris. Plaut. Speak one thing, and think
an other. Aliud sentire aliud loqui, Aliud in ore promptum, Aliud in pectore
clausum habere. Sal. Speak ordinatly. Verba struere. Cic. Speak our fantasy,
or conceit, or as we think, or to speak that lies on our stomach. Proloquor,
eris. Depromere pectore consilia, Stomachum detegere. Dire ce que nous auons
sur le ceur. S. Speak out. Eloquor, eris. Parler en hault. Speak plainly.
Eloquor, eris. Parler clerement. Speak railingly. Contumelias dicere. Cic.
Speak reason, and right. Ius dicere. Dire droit. S. Speak slanderously.
Contumelior, aris. Contumelias dicere. Vide Sclau^der. Speak sharply, or
shrewdely. Argutor, aris. Plaut. Speak small. Deducere vocem. Pom. To speak
soft. Mutio, is. Parcere voci, Submissa voce loqui. Parler bas.

To speak very soft. Voce suppressa dicere, Parler fort bas. S.

Thou speak well and as a friend. Been atque amice dicis. Tu parle^ bien
and en ami. S.

To speak merrily. Alludo, is. Plin.

Speak the last word at the point of death. Exhalare diuerbia fatalia.
Speak to fast or hastily. Propero, as. Terent. Speak together. Colloquor,
eris. Parler ensemble. Speak troth. Veridico, cis. Veriloquor, eris.* dicere
verum. Hor. Speak unto any. Alloquor, eris. Co^pello, as. Parler a quelqu'vn.
Call. Speak with much difficulty. Traulizo, as. Neb. Speak with one.
Conuenio, is. Parler a aucun. S. Speaker. Loquutor, oris. m. g. Parleur. S. A
fair speaker. Verborum opifex. Un beau Parleur. S.

Speaker in ye parliament. Demiurgus, gi. m. g. Liu Speaker in the teethe.
Dentiloquus, a, um. Plaut. Speaker of two sundry languages. Bilinguis.
Speaker of three sundry languages. Trilinguis. Speaker of truth, or he that
tells truth, or a true tale. Veridicus, Veriloquax. Qui dit verite. Speaker
or babbler full of words. Verbosus, a, um. Linguax, cis. om. ge. Grand
parleur. S. Speaking. Locutio, onis. f. g. Le parler. S. Speaking eloquently,
or in pleasant manner. Elocutio, Eloquium, ij. n. g. Plaut. Speaking
despitefully, rebukefully, or reprochefully. Opprobratio, onis. foe. ge. Gell.
Speaking false, or form of false speaking. Solecismus, mi. m. g. Speaking
much, or bablinge. Verbositas, it is. f. ge. Speaking gently. Blandiloquentia,
Blandiloquiu^, ij, n. g. Parler gratieux. S. Speaki^g in a harmony, nu^bre, or
ryming. Rhythmus. mi. m. g. Quint. Speaking, or showing forth. Prolatio, onis.
foe. g. Speaking openly. Prolatio, onis. f. g. Prolation. S. Speaking swetely,
or that speaks swetely. Dulciloquus, a, um. Qui suauiter loquitur. Speaking
together. Colloquium. ij, Colloquutio, onis. foe. ge. Parliament ensemble. S.
Speaking where the sentence may be taken double, or two manner of ways.
Amphibologia, ae. f. g. vt Vidi statuam auream hastam tene^tem. Speaking unto
an other. Allocutio, onis. foem. ge. Speaking with an other. Allocutio, onis.
foe. genesis Le parler auec un autre. S. Spear. Framea, ae. Hasta, ae. Lancea,
ae. Sarissa, ae. foem. genesis Vne lance. Spear called a french spear, or
iauelin. Materis. Spear head. Cuspis, dis. foe. ge. Spiculum, li. n. ge. Le
fer d'vne lance. S. Speareman. Hastatus, Hastifer, Lancifer, La^cearius,
Doryphorus, ri. m. g. Qui port vne lance. S. Spear wounded, or pierced with a
spear. Lanceatus, a, um. Perce d'vne lance. S. and Lanceatus, a, um. Which
uses a spear, pyke, or iauelin. Qui use de lance, pique, ou iaueline. S.
Spell as children do when they learn to read. Ordinare syllabarum literas,
Coagmentare syllabas. Espeler. S. Spence, butterie, or place to keep victuales
in. Promptuarium, rij. Cella penaria, Promptuaria cella, Armarium, rij. n. g.
Despense, Gardemanger. H Spend. Consumo, is. Impendo, is. Produco, is. Sumo,
is. Dispendo, is. Erogo, as. Impensam facere, vel ponere. Despendre. S. Spend,
and to eat up an others goods. Comedere bona alicuius, Argentum alicuius
co^ficere, Exedere aliquem. Despendre and manger le bien d' autruy. S. To
spend, disperse, waste, and consume his goods, or his patrimony. Argentu^
absumere, Rem conficere, vel co^fringere, aut corrumpere, Diuexare, Funditare,
Lacerare, Oblimare, Patrimonium co^ficere, uel effundere, Patrias opes haurire,
Dilapidare. Despendre, dissiper, gaster and consumer ses biens ou son
patrimoine. S.

Spend labor. Exhaurire labores. Plin. Iun. Spend life for the defense of
his country. Profundere vitam pro patria. Cic. Spend much, or to make great
cost. Sumptum admittere, Magnos sumptus facere, Ampliter sumptum facere. Fair
grans despens. S. Spend, or to consume. Absumo, is. Consumer. S. Spend, or to
waste that which is gained. Quaestum conterere. Despendre ce qu'on a gaigne.
S. Spend out of measure. Profundere. Despendre oultre mesure. S. Spend
licorously all that he has. Abligurio, is. Comessor, aris. Prodigo, is.
Profundo, is. Obligurio, is. Cousumer and despendre tout par friandise. S.
Spend time in vain* Lacerare diem, Tempus conterere frustra. Cic. Spend all,
or waster of his substance, an unthrift. Barathro, nis. Gurges and vorago
patrimonij, Decoctor, toris. Nepos, it is. Lurco, conis. Asotus, ti. Euersor,
oris. Heluo, nis. Conturbator macelli, Popino, nis. Prodigus, a, u^. Prodigue.
H. Spenders of good in riot. Comessatores, rum. Spente. Consumptus, a, u^.
Sumptus, a, u^. Despendu. S Sperage an herb. Asparagus, gi. foe. ge. Asparge.
S. Sperage wild. Corruda, ae. foe. g. Asparge sauuage. Spettill, or spittill
of the mouth. Excrementum oris. Saliua. Saliue. H. and Sputum, ti. n. genesis
Idem. Crachat. S. Vide Spitte. Spewe, or to vomit. Reijcio, is. Vomo, is.
Nausca^ facere. Crapulam amouere. Vomir. S. Spewe often. Vomito, as. Reuomere.
Souue^t vomir. Desire, or a certain lust to spewe. Stomachi redundatio,
Nasea, ae. f. g. Faim de vomir. S.

Spewe out. Euomo, is. Vomir, desgorger. S. Spewe poison. Euomere virus. Cic.
Spewing. Vomitio, onis. Vomitus, us. Dissolutio stomachi, Reiectio, onis.
Reiectus, tus. mas. genesis Vomissement. S. Spewinges contrary and hurtful to ye
eyes. Inimicae oculis vomitiones. Vomissemens contraires and nuisans aux yeulx.
S. Spiall. Vide Spy. Spices. Aroma, it is. Species, erum. f. g. Des espices. H.
To spice meat. Cibum speciebus aspergere, vel cibo species aspergere. Espicer
vne viande. S.

Spice almerie. Marthecium, ij. n. ge.* Spice, or kind. Genus, eris. Species,
ei. foem. genesis Espece. Pals. Spiced sauce, or pikle. Conditura. Vide Sauce.
Spicer, or a seller of spices. Aromatopola, ae. m. g. Aromatarius, rij. m. g.
Especier. H. Spicie, or sauering of spice. Aromaticus, a, um. Spider. Aranea,
ae. foe. g. Araneus, ei. m. g. Araigne. Araneolus, li. diminut. Angl. A little
spider. and Araneosus, a, um. Like a spiders web. Resemblant a la toil de
l'araigne. Spider, which takes flies in his lines. Araneus muscarius.
Araignee qui pre^d les mousches in ses filets Spider which is hearie. Atocius,
cij. Neb. Spyder, whose stinge, or bit is venomous and dangerous. Phalangium,
gij. n. g. Vne sort d'araigne, de la quelle la morsure est venimeuse and
dangereuse. Spy, or a scoutwatche. Speculator, toris. mas. genesis Vne epsy, ou
un espion. S. Spier, or one that watches. Insidiosus, Conspecillo, nis.
Insidiator, toris. m. g. Espieur. S. Spy, and to watch. Facere insidias,
Subsidere, Insidiari, Insidere, Obseruare, Dare insidias alicui, Moliri
insidias. Tendere insidias, Speculari. Espier and guetter. S. Spy before.
Praespeculor, aris.* Spy time to do pleasure, or displeasure. Surripere
tempus, Aucupari tempus. Espier le temps. S. Let us spy what they do.
Aucupemus ex insidijs clanculum quam rem gerant. Espions qu'est ce qu'ils font.
S. Plaut.

Spying. Speculatus, tus. Insidiatio, onis. foem. genesis Espiement. S. Spigot.
Epistomium, ij. n. g. Robinet. S. Spike lauender. Nardus Italica, sieve Nardus
mas. Aspic. Pin. Nardinus, a, um. Of spike. Spikenarde celtike, or french
spikenarde. Nardus Celtica, Spica Celtica. Spikenard. Nardus Indica, Spica
Nardi. Aspic d'outremer. H. Spill, shede, or to pour out. Diffundere,
Expandere, Spargere. Espandre. S. Vide Shede. Spill, or to mar. Conspurcare,
Deprauare, Disperdere, Deterere, Deturpare, Euastare, Foedare, Spurcare,
Deuenustare, Violare. Gaster. S. Spinache an herb. Spinachia, ae. Spinacia,
ae. Spinaceum olus. Espinars ou espinoches. Pin. Spindle. Fusus, si. Fusum, si.
Fuseau. H. Spinne, or to make threede, or yarne. Torquere fusos, Nere, Trahere
pensa. Filer. S. Spinner, or a maker of yarne. Lanipendia, Paul. Iurisc.
Lanifica. Mart. Vne filoire. H. and Lanificus, ca, cum. That spinneth woll. Qui
file de la lain. S Spinning and weauing of woll, the act or art to spinne
wolles, and to dress and work the^. Lanificium, cij. n. g. Laniciu^, cij. n.
ge. Filure and tissure de lain, l' faict ou l'art de filer laines de les
accoustrer and en besongner. S. Spinning and carding. Lana, and Tela. Terent.
Spinning whele. Rhombus, by m. g. Rouet a filer. H. Spirit. Animus, mi.
Pneuma, it is. Spiritus, tus. m. g. Esperit, ou esprit. S. and Spiritualis, le.
Spiritual. Spirituel. S. Spirit and wit that a man has of nature.
Ingenium, nij. neut. ge. L'esprit and entendement que l' homme ha de nature. S.
Dull spirit, or wit. Retusum ingenium, Hebes ingenium. Un lourd esprit. S.

Lively spirit void of sorrow or care. Liber omni cura animus, Omissus animus
uel securus. Esprit sans aucun soulci. S.

Evil spirit. Cacodaemo^, nis. m. g. Esprit maling.

Spirit called a hegge or hobbegoblyn, which me^ say walks in the night.
Larua, ae. Lemur, ris. Esprit qu'on dit aller de nuict. Laruatus, a, u^.
Skered, or feared with those spirits. Spirits of the dead. Manes, nium.
Vmbrae, arum. Les esprits des trepasses. S. Spirits, or devils. Manes, ium. Vt
supra. Spiritual. Spiritualis, e. Spirituel. S. Spiritual benefice, or
promotion. Sacerdotium, tij. n. g. Benefice. H. Spirling, or a sprote. Apua,
ae. foe. ge. Esplene. Pals. Spirting out of small spittle. Pytisma, it is. n. g.
Spite, or dispite. Iracundia, ae. f. g. Stomachus, chi. m. ge. Despit. S.
Spite, or privy and covered hatred. Simultas, tatis. foe. ge. Vne haine
couuerte. S. Spite, or a reproach, or contumely. Contumelia, ae. foe. ge.
Contumely. S. Spite of my teethe, whether I will or no. Ingratis, Ingratus.
Maulgre que i'en aye. S. In spite of their teethes. Velint nolint. Maulgre
eulx. S.

In spite of thee. Tuis ingratis. Maulgre que tu en ayes S.

He was absolved spite of them all. Inuitis omnibus fuit absolutus. Maulgre
tous il a este absoulz.

Spiteful. Contumeliosus, sa, sum. Contumelieux. S. Spitefully. Contumeliose.
Contumelieusement. S. Spittart hart^, a certain kind of dear, a young heart.
Subulo, nis. mas. genesis Ieune cerf qui a les corns simples. H. Spitte. Screo,
as. Spuo, is. Sputo, as. Excreo, as. Despuo, is. Expuo, is. Cracher. S. Spitte
at, or upon one. Conspuo, is. Insputo, tas. Aliquem and alicui inspuere.
Cracher sur aucun. S. He spitteth blood. Excreat sanguine^. Il crache sang

Spitte down, or upon. Despuo, is. Cracher en bas. Spitte often. Sputo, tas.
Cracher souuent. Call. Spitte often at one. Consputo, as. Frequent. Spitte out.
Excreo, as. Expuo, is. Cracher ou iecter horse Spitte out poison. Euomere virus.
Spitte, or a broche. Obelus, li. Veru. ind. Broche. and Veruculu^, li. n. g. A
little spitte, or broch. Brochette. Spitte, or to broche meat. Figere carnes
verubus. Embrocher de la chair. S. Spitter. Sputator, toris. Screator, toris.
masc. genesis Cracheur. S. Spitter upon people. Consputator, toris. mas. genesis
Persputator, toris. m. g. Bud. Qui crache sur les gens Spitting, or the
reaching to spitte. Screatus, tus. m. genesis Crachement. S. Spitting of blood.
Ptysis. Spittle, or spetle. Saliua, ae, Sputum, ti. Excrementum oris. Saliue,
crachet. S. Spittle house, lazerie, or lazer house. Hierocomiu^, mij. n. g.
Locus elephantiacis and leprosis deputatus. La lardrerie, le lazeret. H. Splaye
a bytche. Castrare cane^. Chastrer vne cheine. Splaye footed. Palmipes, dis.
Plancus, ci. m. g. Plin. Qui ha le col du pied bien bas. S. Splenne. Lien,
enis, Splen, is. m. g. La rate. S. Ratte, Rattelle. H. Splensicke. Lienicus, a,
um. Lienosus, a, um. Spleneticus, a, um. Qui a douleur de rate. H. Splente, or
a splinte, such as the Chirurgians use to bind broken legs, or arms with.
Astella, lae. foe. ge. Vigo. Splentes of harnes for the arm. Manicae, arum.
Gardebras. S. and Pals. Spoil, or to rob. Spoliare, Dispoliare, Despoliare,
Expoliare, Exuere. Despouiller. S. So spoil one of his arms. Dearmo, as.
Exarmo, as. Inarmo, as. Despouiller aucun de ses arms. S. Spoil, or pray of
the enemies. Spolium, lij. Exuuiae, arum. foe. g. La despouille des enemies. S.
Spoil and buttie that a man has gotten of his enemies. Manubiae, arum. foe.
genesis La despouille and butin qu'on a gaigne sur les ennemies. S. Manubiae, Is
also the spoil of a captain, or money taken for spoils of the enemies. H.
Rich spoils. Opima spolia. Despouilles riches. S.

Spoiled. Spoliatus, ta, tu^. Exutus, ta, tu^. Despouille. S Spoyler, or a
pyller. Spoliator, toris. m. g. Pilleur. S. And she that pilleth and spoyleth.
Spoliatrix, tricis. f. ge. Celle qui pille and dispouille. S. Spoiling.
Spoliatio, onis. f. g. Despouillement. S. Spoke of a whele. Radius rotae. Rayon
d'vne roue. H Spoken. Dictus, a, um. Locutus, a, um. Qui est dict. S Spokesman,
or advocate. Syndicus, ci. m. g. Syndic. Spone to eat potage, or other like
with. Cochlear, aris. n. ge. vel Cochleare, ris. n. g. Cuilier. S. Spone meat,
or potage. Pulmentu^, ti. n. g. Potage. Sponge. Achilleu^, ij. Peniculum, li.
Peniculus, li.* Spongia, ae. f. g. Esponge. H. Spongiosus, a, u^. Like unto a
sponge, having many little holes as a sponge. Resemblant a l'espo^ge, ayant
force petits trous comme vne esponge. S. Sponge, or to wype clean. Spongio,
as. Hoc verbo vtitur Apicius. pro Spongia extergere. Call. Sponger. Pals. Sport,
and recreation. Lusus, sus. m. ge. Ieu, esbat and recreation. S. and Ludus, di.
m. ge. Idem. Sport, and to play with one. Dare alicui opera^ ludo, Animum
remittere, Voluptatem cum aliquo capere. S'esbatre auec quelqu'vn. S. For his
sport, or pleasure and pastime. Deliciarum causa, Animi causa. Pour son esbat
and pastemps. S.

Sport in words, as when some thing is spoken in sport, and not in
earneste. Iocus, ci. m. ge. Ieu de parolles, quand o^ dit quelque chose par
ieu, and non point a bon e scient. S. Full of sport and jesting. Iocosus, sa,
sum. Plein de ieu and de railerie. S.

Sport, or to play. Iocor, caris. Se iouer. S. In sport. Ioco, Iocose,
Ioculariter, Per iocum, Non serio sed festiuitatis gratia. Par ieu, en ieu.

Sportfull. Iocosus, a, um. Plein de ieu. S. Spotte. Labes, is. Macula, ae.
foe. ge. Vne tache. S. Labecula, ae. diminut. Ang. Little spot. Tachette. S. A
white spotte in the eye. Albugo, inis. foe. g. Vne tache blanch eu l'oeil. S.

Spotte in the eye. Glaucoma, atis. Glaucomatum, ti. n. ge. Glaucoma, ae. foe.
ge. Vne tache en l'oeil. S. Spotte, or mark in the visage made by some stroke.
Suggillatio, onis. foe. ge. This spotte will not away easily. Haec macula non
facile eluetur. Ceste tache ne s' en ira pas facilement. S.

Water to take away spots. Aqua smectica, id est, emaculatoria. Bud. Eau
pour oster les taches.

Spot, or pulse in the visage like a lyntel, black or read. Lentigo, nis. f.
g. Lenticula, lae. foe. g. Tache en la face en form de lentille. S. Spotte
remaining after beating. Vibex, cis. foe. g. Spotte, or to make spots, or to
bespot. Maculo, as. Maculas facere. Tacher. S. Spotted. Gu^tatus, ta, tu^.
Maculosus, a, u^. Tachet^* Spotted, or marked. Compunctus, a, um. Marque.
Spotted, soyled, or stained with filthe. Squalidus, a, um. Crasseux. S. Spotted
to be, or stained with filthe. Squaleo, es. Estre plein and charge d'ordure. S.
Spotted with white. Spatsus albo. Tachete de bla^^. Spots in the face. Vari,
Lenticulae, Lentigines. Taches au visage comme lentilles. S. Spots to make
with beating, as black and blewe. Suggillo, as. Ternir. S. Spotty, or full of
spots. Maculosus, a, um. Plein de taches and macules. S. Spousage, affiaunce,
or betrouthing of man or woman. Sponsalia, orum. Fianceailles. S. Sponsalis, e.
Pertaining to such affiau^ce, or spousage. Spouse, as man and wife before
solemnisation. Spo^sus, i. m. g. Sponsa, ae. Nympha, ae. f. g. L'espoux
espouse. S. Spouse, or make affiaunce, or to betrougthe. Spo^so, sas. Fiancer
vne fille ou vne femme, espouser. S. Spouse, or to marye a wife. Ducere in
matrimonium, vel in vxorem. Espouser vne femme. S. Spouse, or to marrye a
husband. Nubere, Denubere, Enubere. Espouser un homme. S. Spouse, or to marry
her whom one has loved before. Meretricios amores nuptijs conglutinare.
Espouser celle qu'on a aim parauant. S. Spoute of a conduite, or such like.
Epistomium, ij. Papilla, ae. foe. ge. Gouttier. Pals. Spoutes, or gutters, by
which water commes down from the house. Colliquiae, sieve Colliciae, arum.
foem. ge. Gouttiers. S. Spread abroad, or to stretche forth. Co^tendere,
Dilatare, Dispandere, Distendere, Erugare, Explicare, Exporrigere, Exte^dere,
Intendere, Pertendere, Porrigere, Propagare, Prote^dere, Promouere, Producere.
Estendre. S. Spread a table. Sterno, is, raui. Couurir le table. Spread like
a floute. Dehisco, scis. S'espanir. S. Spread, or sprincle abroad. Dispergo,
is. Vide Scatter. Spread out. Expando, is. Estendre. S. Spread wide.
Diuarico, as. It is to open a thing wide one from an other, as when they open a
compass. Ouurir quelque chose ca et la, comme quand on ouure un compass. S.
Spreader, or blaser of fame or prowes. Buccinator, toris. mas. genesis Spreading,
or a stretching out* Distentio, onis. f. g. Porrectio, onis. Proiectio, onis.
Prolatio, onis. Intentio, onis. vel Intensio, onis. f. g. Estendement.
Spreading of branches. Propagatio, onis. foe. ge. Estendement. S. Spredde
abroad, or stretched forth. Distentus, ta, tum. Extentus, ta, tum. Porrectus,
ta, tu^. Estendu. Spredde as a table is. Stratus, a, um. Sprinckle. Spergo, is,
arsi. Aspergo, is. Asperger. S. Sprinckle abroad. Dispergo, is. Dissipo, as.
Perfundo* is. Espandre ca and la. S. Sprinckle about, here and there some
liquoure. Respergo* is. Respandre ca and la quelque lique^r. S. Sprinkled with
water, or liquour. Aspersus, a, u^. Respersus, a, um. Spersus, a, um. Espandu,
Arrouse. Sprinckling of liquoure. Aspergo, ginis. Respergo, ginis. Aspersio,
onis. Aspersus, sus. masc. genesis Aspersi^^ S. Spring. Fons, it is. mas. genesis Vne
fontaine. S. Fonticulus, li. diminut. Ang. A little spring. Petite fontaine.
S. and Fontanus, a, um. Of a spring or fountain. De fontaine. S. A clear
spring, or fountain. Conspicuus fon^, Arge^teus, Perspicuus, Pellucidus.
Clear fontaine.

Spring, or head of a fountain. Origo, inis. Scaturigo, inis. Scatebra, rae.
foe. ge. Caput riuulorum. Source. S. La sourgeon d'vne fontaine. S. To spring.
Nascor, sceris, Orior, iris. Pullulo, as. Surgo, is. Venio, is. Verno, as.
Scaturio, is. Sourdre, bourgeonner. S.

Spring again freshely. Repullulasco, scis. Repullulo, as. Vide. Sproute.
Spring of the day, called the twilighte or break of the day. Crepusculum,
li. Prima lux, Sublucanum tempus, Dubia lux. Iour saillant, enter chien and
loup. H. Spring of the year. Ver, ris. n. g. Le printemps. S. Spring, or to
cast water. Aspergo, is. Asperger. S. Spring, or to flowrish, as flowers do.
Verno, nas. Fleurir, ou bourgeonner. S. Spring or grow as youth does.
Pubesco, scis. Spring or ympe, that comes out of the root of a tree.
Viburnum, ni. n. g. Viorne. S. Or rather Stolo, nis. mas. genesis Soboles, lis.
foe. genesis Colum. Reiecton croissant au pied de l'arbre. H. Spring out.
Enascor, sceris. Exorior, iris. Sourdre horse. Spring time of the year.
Renascens annus. Vt supra. Spring of. etc. Sprote, or a sprate, or spirling.
Apua, ae. foem. genesis Esplenc, Pals. A red sprote. Apua infumata. Ges.

Sproute, or to spring forth. Repullulare, Repullulascere. Reiecter sourgeons.
S. Sproute, or to budde. Germino, as. Egermino, as. Germer. S. Sproute, or to
budde before others. Praegermino, as. Germer deuant les autres. S. Sprouting,
or budding. Germinatio, onis. Germinatus, tus. m. g. Germement. S. Spume, or
skimme. Spuma, ae. foem. genesis Escume. S. Vide Skimme. A kind of spume of
lead. Molybditis. Vne des sorts d'escume de plomb. S.

Spume of silver. Argyritis, Arge^ti spuma. Lythargyriu^, rij. Plin. and
Lithargyros. Escume d argent. H. Spurge, an herb. Cataputia minor, Lathyris.
Espurge. Pin. Spurge, or to pourge. Expurgo, as. Espurger. S. Spur, such as
is worn on the heels when me^ ride, and the spurs of a cock. Calcar,
caris, n. genesis Un esperon, ergots de coq. S. To spur a horse. Agere vel
concitare equum, Equo calcaria addere, Adhibere, Admouere, Subdere, Concitare
calcaribus equum, Calcaribus agitare, Fodere calcaribus. Brocher ou piquer un
cheual des esperons. S.

Spur set on a fighting cock, which wants spurs. Plectrum, tri. n. g.*
S. ANTE. Qu.
SQuamishe, or disdainefull. Fastidiosus, sa, su^. Desdaigneux. S. Square.
Quadratura, ae. foe. ge. Square every way like a dye. Tessera. Square, or to
make square. Quadro, as. Conquadro, as. Esquarrir. Squared, or made square.
Quadratus, ta, tum. Quarre. S. Squarue. Aberro, as. Vide Swerve. Squarue from a
pretensed purpose. Transuersum agere. A proposito degredi. Cic. Squarue from
truth, or to work by collusion. Praeuaricor, aris. Squaruing from truth.
Praeuaricatio, onis. f. g. Squinance, or squina^cie. Synanche, Angina.
Esquinancie ou squinancie. S. Squire or rule. Norma, ae. f, g. Esquierre. S. A
corner right by the squire. Normalis angulus. Coing droict a l'esquierre. S.

To be right by squiere and rule. Ad normam respondere. Estre just a
l'esquierre. S.

Squier, or a gentilman which is not yet knight, which has not yet received
ye order of knighthode. Scutatus nobilis, nondum equestribus insignibus
donatus. Bud. Un escuyer, un gentilhomme qui n'est encore cheualier, qui n'a
encore receu l'ordre de cheualerie. S. Squired or set in rule. Normatus, a, um.
Colum. Squirrell beast. Sciurus, ri. masc. genesis Escurieu, ou Escureau. Gesn.
Squirte, to squirie water with. Syrinx, gis. foe. ge. Siphon, nis. Syringue. S.
and Siphunculus, li. m. ge. Petite syringue. S. A little squirte. Squirte, or
to cast in water or liquour with a squirte. Syringe, vel Siphone, vel
Siphunculo liquorem inijcere. Syringuer. S.
S ANTE. T.
ST, a voice of silence, or taciturnitie, or thus, hushed. St. Terent.
Stabilitie. Stabilitas, tatis. Firmitudo, inis. f. ge. Firmitas, tatis. f. ge.
Stabilite, fermete. S. Stabilitie of mind. Firmitudo animi, Co^stantia, ae.
foe. ge. Fermete de cueur. S. Stable. Caseale, lis. Equile, lis. Praesepe, is.
Stabulum, li. Clausum, si. Estable. S. Stable, firm, and sure. Firmus, a, um.
Inco^cussus, a, um. Stabilis, c. Stable. S. Stable horses, or to put them into
the stable. Stabulare equos. Establer les cheuaulx. S. Stable, or to stat
cattle in a house. Stabulo, as. Establer. S. Stable, or to make sure, or firm.
Firmo, as. Stabilio, is. Statuo, is. Establir. S. Stablenes. Firmitas, it is.
foe. ge. Vide Stabilitie. Stably, or firmly. Firm, Sancte, Offirmate,
Firmiter, Constanter, Obnixe. Firmement. S. Stabling, or stalling of cattle.
Stabulatio, onis. f. genesis Establage. S. Stablyshe, or to make sure.
Constabilio, lis. Ferio, is, percussi, Firmo, as. Roboro, as. Solido, as.
Stabilio, is. Statuo, is. Establir. S. Stablishe, or to establishe a king.
Constituere regem. Establir un roy. S. Stablished. Ratus, a, um. Stabilitus,
ta, tum. Establi. Stacke of corn, or hay. Meta frumenti, vel foeni. Un tas de
ble, ou de foin. S. Stafes acre an herb. Staphis agria, Vua syluestris, Herba
pedicularis, and pituitaria. Stafis agria, ou herb aux poux. Pin. Staff.
Baculus, li. Baculum, li. n. g. Fustis, it is. m. g. Un baston. S. Bacillum. li.
diminut. and Baculus, li. m. g. Bacillus, li. m. g. Bastonnet. S. A little
staff. Staff, or the stay of my old age. Subsidium meae senectutis. Le
baston de ma vieillesse. S. Staff to drive cattle, a herdemans batte, or an
herdes staff wherewith he dryues cattle. Agolum, li. n. ge. Pastoralis baculus
quo pecudes aguntur. Baston de pasteur. S. Staff to walk with, such as old
men have to stay them by when they go. Scipio, onis. m. ge. Un baston a s'
apuyer. Call. Scipio was also the surname of diverse Romans, as well Consules
as other. Stage whereon the players stand to play their parts. Scena, ae.
Frons theatri. L'eschauffault. H. Stage for pageantes. Pegma, it is. n. g.
Sometime they be taken for the self pageantes, as here. Quae parantur in
imperatoris adue^tum pegmata, sunt ciuitati non mediocri sumptui. The pageantes
which are prepared against the coming of the emperor, are no small cost to ye
city. Stage player. Histrio, onis. Ludius, ij. Ludio, onis. m. ge. Ioueur de
farces and d'autres ieux. S. Histrionicus, a, um. Of a player of stage plays
or interludes. D'vn ioueur de farces. S. Stagge, or an heart. Ceruus, ui. m. g.
Cerf. H. Stagger. Titubo, as. Chanceler. S. Staggerer. Titubator, oris. m. g.*
Staggering. Titubantia, ae. Titubatio, onis. foe. ge. Chancellement. S.
Staggeringly. Titubanter. En chancellant. S. Stay, help, or to supporte.
Stabilio, is. Statumino, as. Suffulcio, cis, si, vel siui. Fulcio, cis.
Sustento, as. Adminiculo, as. Adminiculor, aris. Estayer, Apuyer. Stay, or to
tarry in some place. Morari, Manner, Restare. Demourer and s'arrester en
quelque lieu. S. Stay, or to cause to tarry, or to hinder one. Tardare.
Retardare, Demorari, Remorari, Moram afferre and tardiratem alicui, Esse alicui
in mora, Infer moram and impedimentum, Moliri moram, Offerre moram, Obijcere
moram, Morari, Commorari, Detinere, Cunctationem inijcere, Moram interponere.
Retarder, ou retarger. S. Stay, prope, shore, or succoure. Colume^, inis.
Stabilimentum, ti. Statumen, inis. Sublica, ae. Suste^taculum, li. Adminiculum,
li. Fulcrum, cri. neu. ge. Un estanson, vne estaye. S. Stay, or to omit a
journey. Supprimere iter. Staying, or a tarying. Retardatio, Cunctatio, Mora.
Remora, ae. f. g. Retardement. S. Stayne. Decoloro, as. Inficio, cis. Sufficio,
cis. Decoulourer. S. Stained. Infectus, a, um. Decoloratus, ta, tum.
Decouloure. Stained with dishonestie. Infamia aspersus. Stayner. Infector,
oris. Vide Paynter. Stayning. Decoloratio, onis. foe. g. Decoulourement.
Staining with colors. Infectus, us. m. g. Plin. Stayre, or a pair of stayres.
Gradus, us. Scalae, ru^. foe. ge. Degres. H. To hyde him self under the
steps, or stayres of a book sellers shop. Conijcere se sub scalas tabernae
librariae. Cic. Se cacher dessoubz les degrez de la montee ou de la viz. etc.

Stayre which wyndeth, a wynding stayres. Cochlea, Cochlis. Scalae cochlides,
Scalae in gyru^ ascensiles. Viz a monter. H. Stake, or a post. Vallus, Palus,
li. Stipes, it is. Surus, ri. Statumen, inis. Paxillus, li. m. g. Un pieu. S.
Stake burned at the end. Sudes, dis. f. ge. Praeusta sudes. Pieu. H. Stake
sharp at the end, having the point made with iron, set fast by the river
side to tie the ship. Prymnesium, sij. neut. genesis Festus. Tonsilla, lae. f.
ge. Un pieu agu par le bout, ayant le poinct ferree, qui se fiche au board de la
riuiere pour attacher la nauire. S. Stakes for hirdles, of a fold course.
Cerui, oru^. Stalante, a horse kept only to horse mares, Admissarius equus.
Estallon. S. Stale, or oulde. Veteranus, a, um. Vetustus, a, um. Vetus, eris.
om. ge. Vieil. S. This is stale stuff. Obsoleuit iam ista oration. Bud. ex Cic.
Cela est tout vieil. S.

Stale, chamber lie, or pysse. Lotium, ij. n. ge. Vrina, nae. f. ge. Pissat. S.
Picard. Escloy. S. Stale that fowlers use. Incitabulum, Mentita auis. Stale to
be, or to wax old. Veterasco, scis. Enuieillir Stalenes. Vetustas, it is. foe.
ge. Vieilesse. S. Stalk. Caulis, is. Colis, Thyrsus, si. Stipes herbae. La
tige. H. and Cauliculus, li. Coliculus, li. m. ge. A little or small stalk, or
sle^der stalk. vne petite tige. Stalk of any fruit. Pediculus, li. Stylus,
Petiolus, li. Colum. La queue des fruits. H. Stalk or stem of great herbs,
or an herb having a great stalk, as colewortes and such other. Frutex, cis.
m. ge. Arbrisseau. S. A place planted with many such herbs. Frutetum, ti. n.
g. vel Frutectum, ti. n. ge. and Fruticetum, ti. n. ge. Lieu ou il a beaucoup
d'arbrisseaux pla^tez. S. and Frutetosus, vel Frutectosus, sa, sum. Plein
d'arbrisseaux. Full of herbs with great stalks.

Stall, or a house for beasts. Stabulu^, li. Praesepe, is. Mandra, drae. f. g.
Estable. S. Stall, or an ox house or cow house. Bubile, lis. n. g. Estable a
boenfs and vaches. S. Stall, or a cribbe for cattle. Praesepe, pis.
Praesepium, pij. neut. ge. In quo pabulum iumentis apponitur. H. To stall, or
set up cattle. Stabulo, as. Establer.

Stalnette. Semipiagium, ij. n. g. Stalling of cattle. Stabulatio, onis. foe.
g. Establage. Stallion, a horse kept only for store and procreation. Equus
admissarius, Emissarius equus. Estallon. Stamber, or to stutte. Titubo, as.
Lingua Haesitare, Balbutire, Sermon labare. Begueyer, chanceler en parlant. S.
Stambrer. Titubator, Blaesus, a, um. Balbus, a, um. Linguae haesitans. Begue.
S. Stambring. Titubantia oris, Haesitantia, ae. foe. ge. Begueyement. S.
Stammer. Titubo, as. Balbutio, it is. Begueyer. S. Stammeringly. Titubanter. Cic.
Stamp in a mortar. Contundo, is. Intero, is. Pinso, is. Pinso, as. Subigo, is.
Tero, is. Tundo, is. Obtero, is. Subtero, is. Broyer. S. Stamp, form, or
matrice, wherewith the printe of the money is made. Typus and forma, vocatur
etiam Matrix, qua nummi procuduntur. La form de la monnoye, ou la matrice. H.
Stamp under feet. Pessundo, as, dedi, are. Vide Tread. Stamp with the feet
against the ground. Supplodo, is. Frapper des pieds contre terre. S. Stamped.
Contusus, a, um. Intritus, a, um. Tusus, a, um. Broye. S. Stamping with the
foot against ye ground. Supplosio, onis. f. g. Frappement du pied contre
terre. S. Stand. Sto, as, steti, are. Estre debout. S. Stand about.
Circumsto, as. Se tenir au tour. S. Stand against any one. Resisto, it is.
Tenir contre aucun. S. Stand a part, or to be distaunt, or a far of. Disto,
stas. Estre loing, estre distant. S. Stand as water does in a standing mote or
ponde, not running or flowyng. Stagno, as. Stand a sunder, or to be distante.
Disto, as. Estre distant. S. Stand by. Asto, as. Estre pres. S. Stand by one.
Assistere propter aliquem. Se tenir pres de quelqu'vn. S. Stand far of.
Disto, as. Prosto, as. Estre loing. S. Stand firmly, steadfastly, or surely.
Persisto, is. Persto, as. Tenir ou demourer ferme. S. Stand in his own
conceit, or to stand in one opinion, purpose or sentence firmly. Obstino,
as. Se obstiner and tenir firm, s'opiniastrer. S. To retain, and make to
stand still. Sisto, is. Retenir and arrester. S.

Stand to be hired or sold. Prosto, as, Plaut. Stand together. Consto, as.
Estre ensemble. S. Stand upon. Supersto, as. Estre dessus. Call. Standerde, and
ensign. Signum, ni. Vexillum, li. n. genesis Estendart and enseigne. S. Standerd
bearer. Signifer, ri. Vexillarius. Port'enseigne. H. Standing. Stan^, it is. vt
Paludes stantes, Horat. Standing cup with ears or handels. Carchesium, ij.
n. ge. Hanap a boire. H. Standing fast and sure. Stationalis, e. om. genesis
Standing place, or abiding. Statio, onis. foem. genesis Station. S. Standing
water. Stagnum, ni. g. Un Estang. S. Starche. Turbasis, sis. foe. ge. Folle
fleur. Pals. Stark, or crooked horse. Tetanicus equus. Starcke to be for cold.
Obrigeo, es. Rigeo, es. Estre roide de froid. S. Stark to wax. Obrigesco,
scis. Rigesco, cis. Se roidir de froid. Stare, or a starling. Sturnus, ni. m.
g. Estourneau. H. Stare or look abroad upon one. Apertis oculis intueri.
Regarder asprement. Pals. Star. Aster, ri. Astrum, tri. Stella, ae. Sydus,
eris. n. ge. Estoille. S. and Sydereus, a, um. Syderalis, le. om. ge. Of a
star, or of the stars. Des estoilles. Stellatus, a, um. Full of stars.
Plein d' estoilles. Stello, as. To shine like the stars. Luire comme les
estoilles. Call. Sydus Is also a constellation, and gathering together of
stars in some sign. Vne constellation and assemblee d' estoilles ensemble en
quelque sign. S. Star called a blasing star, or comet. Cometa, ae. Stella
crinita. Vne comette. S. Star called Charles wayne. Plaustrum, tri. n. g. Le
chariot. S. Star called the day star. Lucifer, ri. Phosphorus, ri. Iubar,
aris. L'estoille du iour. S. Star called the dog star, which shines
about the canicular days. Procyon, onis. Antecanis, nis. com. ge. Cic. Star
fish. Stella, ae. Aster, tri. Animal marinum. To starte out, or go forth
hastily. Exilire e loco. Sortir horse hastiuement. S.

To starte out of his bed. Stratis exilire.

The horses sprang, or started. Equi exiluerunt.

Starter aside. Erro, nis. mas. genesis Vlpian. Starting away. Fugitiuus, a, um.
Plaut. To starve, or famishe a city. Famem infer ciuitati. Affamer vne
ville. S.

Starued, or famyshed. Famelicus, a, um. Fame enectus. Affame. S. State.
Conditio, onis. Habitus, us. Ordo, inis. Status, us. m. g Estat. S. The state,
and condition of men. Conditio humana. L'estat and condition des hommes. S.

The state of the body. Habitudo, inis. foem. genesis L'estate du corpse. S.

State of a gentleman. Equestris ordo. Cic. The state, and condition of every
thing. Res, ei. foe. ge. L'estate and condition d'vn chascun. S.

The state of a man not married. Caelibatus, us. m. g. Estate d' homme non
marie. S.

The state of the high priest. Pontificatus, us. m. ge. L' estate de pontife.
S.

State of a public wealth, where few be in authority. Oligarchia, ae. f. g.
In the same state. Eodem loci. Au mesme estat. S.

Men of mean state, or degree. Bipedalis moduli homines, Humiles viri,
Tenuis sortis vel co^ditionis homines. Gens de bas estat. S.

To establishe the state of the common wealth. Figere and fundare statum
Reipublicae. Asseurer l'estat d'vne republique.

State of the body. Habitus, us. m. g. Plaut. State of the Moon, not yet come
to the half compass. Amphycirtos. State, possession, or seysin of land taken
by the byer. Mancipatio, onis. foem. genesis And to take state, or possession of
land by livery and seisin. Mancipio accipere. Varr. To deliver state or
possession. Mancipio dare. Plaut. Station. Statio, onis. f. g. Station. S. It
is some time taken for ye resting place of an army. Stately. Imperiosus, a, um.
Superbus, a, um. Fastosus, a, um. Animus altissimus, Elatus, a, um. Haultain.
S. Stately. Imperiose, Superbe, Elate. Haultainement. Stately countenance.
Supercilium, lij. n. ge. Plin. Stately to be, or proud. Superciliu^ attollere,
Superbio, is. Estre haultain. S. Statelines. Superbia, ae. Fastus, us.
Spiritus, us. Elatio, onis. Excelsitas, atis. Sublatio animi. Haultainete. S.
Statelines, or pride to abate. Superciliu^ ponere. Stationer, or book seller.
Bibliopola, ae. mas. genesis Libraire. S. Stature. Statura, ae. foe. ge. Stature.
S. Men of a small stature, or few in nombre. Homines paululi, and graciles.
Hommes de petite stature ou peu en nombre. S.

Statute. Lex, gis. Scitum, ti. Decretum, ti. Un act. Un statut. Pals.
Statute, act, or law of a general counsel, or parliament.
Senatusconsultum, ti. n. g. Cic. Statute against unlawful games. Lex talaria.
* Statute of husbandry. Agraria lex. Cic. Statute of vacabondes, as touching
their whipping. Lex plagiaria. And Plagiarij, Be the beggars or vacabondes
which be whipped. Staunche blood. Claudere sanguine^, Sistere sanguinem.
Estancher le sang. S. Staunching of the blood. Sanguinis clausura. The blood
is staunched. Stetit sanguis. Le sang est estanche. S.

Steal. Abigo, is, egi. Clepo, is, psi. Furor, aris. Lego, is. Subduco, is.
Furtum facere, Auferre, Manticulor, aris. Peculatum facere* Subripio, is. Rem
aliquam auertere, Latrocinor, aris. Suffuror, aris. Euolo, as. Amoueo, es.
Subtrahere aliquid alicui. Desrobber. S. To steal any thing privily.
Sublegere. Desrobber quelque chose en cachette. S.

To steal away out of the company of any man. Surripere se alicui. Se
desrobber de la compaignie d'aucun. S.

To steal away soubdainly. Abripere sese. Desrobber soubdain. S.

To steal, and pille. Compilare. Desrobber and pillar. S.

To steal the money of the prince, or public weal. Peculari, Depeculari.
Desrobber l'argeut du prince, ou de la republique. Call.

To steal in. Obrepo, is. Plaut.

Steal out of a hallowed place. Sacrilego, is.* Steal privily. Suppilo, as.
Suffuror, aris. Desrobber en cachette. Call. Stealer, or thief. Fur, ris.
Latro, onis. Trium literarum homo. Larron. S. A stealer of gold. Aurifur, ris.
m. g. Larron d'or. S.

A stealer of trifles, a picker. Psicharpax, Fur micarius, Fur minutarius.
Larron de petites chooses. S.

Stealer of any hallowed thing, or out of an hallowed place. Sacrilegus, gi.
mas. g. Sacrilege. Larron des chooses saints. Call. Stealer of cattle.
Abactor, oris. Abigeus, ei. mas. g. Larron de bestial. Call. Stealer of the
princess money, or the common wealths. Peculator, oris. Depeculator, oris. m.
genesis Celuy qui desrobbe l' argent du prince, ou de la republique. S. Stealing.
Subreptio, onis. Latrocinatio, onis. foe. g. Larronnerie. S. Stealing out of an
holy place. Sacrilegium, lij. n. ge. Sacrilege, larrecin de chooses sacrees. S.
Stealthe. Furtum, ti. Detractio alieni, Suppressio, onis. Latrocinium, nij. n.
g. Larrecin. S. Stead, great horse, or horse for the wars. Bellator equus. Un
destrier, cheual d'armes. S. Stead, place, or rowme. Locus, ci. Seeds, is.
Vicis, ci, cem, ce. foe. ge. Lieu. S. Instead, or rowme. In vicem, uice. Au
lieu. S.

To do for and instead of an other. Fungi aliena vice. Fair pour and au lieu
d'autruy. S.

To serve instead of some thing. Praestare vicem alicuius rei, Vicem alicuius
rei reddere. Seruir au lieu de quelque chose. S.

He was condemned instead of his companion, or fellow. Pro socio damnatus est.
Il fut condamne au lieu de son compaignon. S.

I will lead thee instead of him. Pro illo te ducam. Ie te meneray en lieu de
luy. S.

Steadfast. Constans, it is. Firmus, a, um. Inconcussus, a, um. Stabilis, e.
Status, a, um. Ferme. S. To be steadfast, and constant. Firmum stare, Pro
firmato stare. Estre ferme and constant. S.

Steadfast of mind. Animo constans. Which is not steadfast. Infirmus, a, um.
Incertus, a, um. Qui n'est point ferme. S.

Steadfast to make. Firmo, as. Stabilio, is. Statuo, is. Confirmo, as. Render
ferme. S. Steadfastly. Constanter, Firmiter, Firm, Obnixe, Offirmate, Sancte.
Fermement. S. To hope more steadfastly, or firmly. In firmiore spe esse. Plus
firmement esperer. S.

Stedfastnes. Constantia, ae. Firmitas, it is. Firmitudo, inis. Firmamentum, ti,
Stabilitas, atis. foe. ge. Fermete. S. Stedfastnes of mind, or heart.
Firmitudo animi, Constantia. Fermete de eueur. S. Stedfastnes of promise.
Constantia promissi. Fermete de promise. S. Steill. Chalybs, bis. m. g. Acier.
S. Stem of a boat, or ship. Rostrum, tri. n. genesis Le bec. H. Stem, or
body of a tree. Stirps, pis. mas. genesis Le tronc d'arbre. S. Stem, or stalk
of an herb. Caulis, is. Stirps. pis. Caudex, cis. Scapus, pi. Thyrsus, si.
mas. genesis La tige d'herbe. S. Cauliculus, li. dimin. Ang. A little or small
stem. Tigette. S. The herb brings forth his ste^me, or stalk. Caulescit
herba. L'herbe produit sa tige. S.

Stepdame. Nouerca, ae. foe. ge. Marastre. Call. Nouercalis, e. Of a stepdame.
De marastre. Call. Nouercor, aris. To do or play like a stepdame. Nouercae
more agere. Call. Stepdaughter. Filiastra, Priuigna, ae. f. g. Belle fille.
Stepfather. Vitricus, ci. m. g. Beau pere. H. Stepmother, Vide stepdame.
Stepsone. Filiaster, tri. Priuignus, ni. masc. gener. Beau fills. S. Stepe in
water, or to soake. Maceresco, scis. Macero, as. Destremper. S. Steple.
Pyramid, dis. foe. ge. Mart. A steple of a church. Campanile, is. Campanarium,
rij. Specula tintinnabularis. Un clocher d' eglise. S.

Step. Gradus, us, Gressus, us. Vestigium, ij. n. ge. Un pas. S. At every
step. Passim. A chasque pas. S.

To step softely. Premere vestigium leuiter. Marcher doulcement. S.

From step to step. Gradatim. Degree a degree.

Step, or to go. Gradior, eris. Ambulo, as. Gradu^ facere, Gradum tollere,
Ingredior, eris. Pergo, is. Vestigium facere, Viam inuadere, Viam facere.
Marcher. S. Step away. Fugio, is. Virg. Come ye, and step ye forth.
Procedite in medium. Venez, and marches auant. S.

Step away quickly. Resilio, is, Lucret. To go, or step forth. Progredi,
Pergere via^. Aller ou marcher auant. S.

Step back. Ref^rre pedem. Caesar. Step, grice, or foot stole. Scamnum,
ni. neut. ge. Un marchepied. S. Step, or round of a ladder. Climacter, ris.
mas. genesis Le degree d'vne eschele. S. Stere. Iuuencus, ci. m. ge. Un ieune
boeuf. S. Steryll, barayne, or fruiteles. Sterilis, e. Infoecundus, a, um.
Sterile. S. Sterill, or barrayne ground. Terra ieiuna. Terre sterile. S.
Sterillitie, or baraynes. Sterilitas, it is. f. g. Sterilite. Sterillitie, or
baraynes of ground. Agrorum segnities. Sterilite des champs. S. Natural
sterillitie. Natalis and ingenita sterilitas. Vne sterilite naturelle. S.

Steringe, plounginge, or praunsinge. Sternax, nacis. om. genesis Virg. As a
stering or plounging horse. Equus sternax. Cheual retif. H. Stern of a ship.
Clauus, ui. Gubernaculum, li. n. ge. Le gouuernaile de la nauire. S. Stewe or
hotehouse. Hypocaustum, ti. Laconicum, Sudatorium, Vaporarium. Estuue. H. Stewe
or ponde for fish. Piscina, ae. foe. ge. Estange ou viuier. H.
Ichthyotrophium, phij. Idem. Steward, or cater. Condus, di. Coquus nundinalis,
Obsonator, oris. Despe^cier qui achette les via^des. Sewarde of an house.
Oeconomus, mi. masc. genesis Maistre d' hostel, despensier. H. Meat stewed in
brothe. Cibus iurulentus. Cells.

Stews, or a house of bawdrie. Ganea and Ganeu^, Prostibulum, Lupanar,
Lustrum, Fornix, Praesepe. Le bordeau. H. Stitche a disease in the side.
Lateralis dolor, vel Laterum dolor. Mal de cost. S. Stiche worte, an herb.
Gramen, inis. n g. Abous. Stick, or wande. Bacillus, li. Bacillum, li. neut.
ge. Bastonnet. S. Stick, or cudgel. Pertica, ae. Fustis, is. masc. gene. Vne
gaul. S. Stick wherewith a man strikes dulcimers, or like instruments.
Plectrum, tri. n. g. Archet, arc. Stick fast, or to set fast. Figo, is.
Configo, is. Defigo, is. Suffigo, is. Pango, is. Ficher. S. To stick, or
fasten in. Infigere. Ficher dedens. S. S

To stick before, Praefigere. Ficher au deuant. S.

To stick in the ground. Depangere, Compingere. Ficher en terre. S.

To stick to some thing, or against some thing. Haerere, Adhaerere, Cohaerere,
Inhaerere, Obhaerere. Tenir a quelque chose, ou contre quelque chose.

To stick, or thruste a sword through the breast of some man. Gladium per
pectus alicuius transfigere. Ficher un glaiue au trauers de la poictrine. S.

The darts are sticked in the scutchio^, or shield. Haere^t in scuto tela. Les
dars sont fichez en l'escusson

Sticked, or fastened to. Affixus, a, um. Fixus, a, um. Fiche, affiche. S.
Sticking, or fastening to. Affixio, onis. foem. genesis Affichement. S. Sticks
dry to be burned. Cocula, orum.* Sticklebancke, or banstickle. Aculeatus
pisciculus, Pungitius, Centriscus. Espinoche ou espinarde. S Stiff. Rigidus,
a, um. Roide. S. Stiff minded, or of courage. Infractus animi. Ob firmatus, a,
um. Pertinax, cis. Peruicax, cis. Obstinatus, a, um. Obstine. S. Obstinate in
his malice, or anger. Implacabilis, le. om. ge. Obstine en sa rancune. S.

Stiff to be. Rigeo, es. Rigesco, scis. Estre roide. S. Stiff to be for
cold. Obrigeo, es. Obrigesco, scis. Estre roide de froid. S. Stiff,
stubburne, or obstinate to be against al me^. Obfirmare viam, Obfirmare animum,
Obfirmare se, Obstinare. S'obstiner a l'encontre de tous. S. Stiff to wax, or
begin to be stiff. Rigesco, scis. Se in firmitatem intendere. Se roidir. S.
Stiff to wax for cold. Obrigesco, scis. Se roidir de froid. S. Stiffely.
Rigide. Roidement. S. Stiffely, or stubburnly. Pertinaciter, Obfirmate,
Obstinate, Perfracte. Obstineement. S. Stiffenes. Rigor, oris. m. g. Roideur.
S. Stiffenes of heart, mind, or opinion, or obstinacy. Obstinatio, onis.
Pertinacia, Peruicacia. ae. foem. genesis Obstination. S. Stiffenes of the coard,
a disease of starkenes in a horse, whereby he stumbleth. Tetanos.* Stiffenes of
sinowes, or cricke in ye neck. Tetanicus morbus, Tetanus, Rigor, oris.
Distentio, onis. Extentio, onis. f. g. Rigeur de col. H. Stickeler in games.
Designator, ris. m. ge. Arbiter certaminis. H. Stickler, or indifferent person
between two that be at variaunce. Internuncius, Interpres, it is. co^. genesis Virg.
Stickling, or sticklebanck, fish. Aculeatus pisciculus, Pungitius, Centriscus.
Espinoche, ou espinarde. Style, or form of writing. Stylus, li. Vena, ae. f.
ge. Style, ou maniere d'escrire. S. A light and pleasant style. Oration tenuis.
Style legier and doulx. S.

Which has no common style. Cui non est publica vena. Qui n'ha pas style
vulgaire. S.

Still, or quiet. Tranquillus, a, um. Sedatus, a, um. Placidus, a, um. Tacitus,
a, u^. Quietus, a, u^. Coy. S. The still or calm sea. Tranquillu^ mare. La mer
calm. S.

Stille, or which speaks little. Taciturnus, a, um. Taciturne, ou qui parle
peu. S. Still, or calm wind. Placidus ventus. Virgil. Vent layn. Pals. Still,
or continual without ceasing. Assidue, Indesinenter, Iugiter, Perenne,
Perpetim, Perpetuum, Perpetuo, Tractim. Continuellement. S. To wage war
still, or continually. Bellu^ continenter gerere. Continuellement fair guerre.
S.

To still, or quiet any body. Pacare, Co^placare, Lenire, Mitigare, Pacificare,
Placare, Propitiare Propitiari, Sedare, Resedare, Tra^quillare, Mulcere
aliquem, Alique^ propitium facere, Conciliatu^ alicuius animu^ reddere, Sedatu^
afferre, Incensum restinguere, Tranquillu^ ex irato facere. Appaisir, and
addoulcir aucun. S.

To still. Distillare, Extillare. Distiller. S.

Stilled waters. Aquae extillatae. Eaues distillees. S. Stilling. Distillatio,
onis. foe. ge. Distillement. S. Still to be, or to hold his peace. Co^ticeo,
es. Obticeo, es. Sileo, es, Taceo, es. Conticesco, cis. Facere finem sermoni,
Silentium facere, Silentiu^ dare, In silentium discendere, Immutesco, cis,
Obmutesco, cis. Vocem premere, Comprimere vocem, Consileo, es. Se taire. S.
Still servant. Abdenago.* Still wind. Ventus placidus, quietus, tra^quillus.
Vt supra. Stilly, or quietly. Sedate, Quiet. Coyement. S. Stilly, or without
words. Tacit. Tacitement. S. Stilnes, or quietness. Quies, etis.
Tranquillitas, atis. foem. genesis Coyte. Stilnes, or taciturnitie. Taciturnitas,
atis. foe. genesis Taciturnite. S. Stillitorie. Clibanus, ni. mas. genesis Chapelle a
destiller eaue rose. S. Water stilled in a stillatory. Aquae in clibano
liquefactae. Eaues distillees en chapelle. S.

Stiltes. Grallae, arum. foe. ge. Eschasses. S. Stiltman, or a goer on stiltes.
Grallator, oris. m. g. Qui va sur des eschasses. S. Stynche, or ill sauoure.
Foetor, oris. Graueolentia, ae. Putor, ris. Odoris foeditas. Puanteur, ou
pua^tise. Stinche of the earth, proceading from waters mingled with brymstone.
Mephitis. Plin. Vne puanteur de terre prouenant d'e^ues ensoulfrees. S.
Stincke. Foeteo, es. Oboleo, es. Obolesco, scis. Oleo, es. Puteo, es. Putesco,
scis. Male spirare. Male olere. Puir. S. It stinketh. Foetorem redolet, Foetet,
Male olet, Putet. Il put. S.

Stinking. Foetidus, a, um. Mephiticus, a, um. Olidus, a, um. Putidus, a, um.
Spurcus, a, um. Rancidus, a, um. Teter, ra, rum. Ater, a, u^. Graueolens, it is.
om. genesis Puant. S. Which is somewhat stinking. Putidulus, a, um. Qui est un peu
puant. S.

Stinking of the mouth. Oze, es. foe. ge. Puanteur de bouche. S. And a sore
in the nose causing such stinche. Ozena, ae. foe. ge. Cells. Stinking
poysonly. Virosus, a, um. Virg. Stinking worm, breading in bedsteades, called
a wall lyse. Cimex, cis. m. g. Punaise. H. Styncking wood. Acopus, pi. foe.
g. Bois puant. S. Stinge, or prick. Aculeus, lei. m. g. Aguillon. S. Stynge
small, or a prick. Aculeolus, li. ma. genesis Petit aguillon. S. Stinge of a be.
Aculeus ei. Spiculum, li. neut. ge. L'aguillon d'vne mousche. S. To stinge.
Aculeo pungere. Picquer, esguillonner.

Stinging, or pricking. Punctio, onis, foem. gener. Ponction. S. Stinte or to
cesse. Cesso, as. Concesso, as. Desino, is, Quiesco, cis. Cesser. S. To stinte
talking. Sermonem de re aliqua abstinere. Cesser de parler. S.

To stinte or leave of. Finem facere, Desinere, Desistere, Absistere. Desister.
S.

To stinte, que^che, or slake the fire. Coercere ignem, Extinguere flammam,
Incendium compescere. Esteindre un feu. S.

Stinted, quenched, or staked. Extinctus, a, u^. Esteinct. Stinting, or
quenching. Extinctio, onis. Restinctio, onis. foe. genesis Esteignement. S.
Styony, a disease growyng within the eye lyddes. Sycosis, is. foe. g. Stype,
pitche, or going down of a hill. Cliuus, ui. m. g. La discente d'vne
montaingne. S. Stypewyse, pitching, or hanging down. Cliuosus, a, um. Pendant,
penchant. S. Stipende, pay, or wages. Stips, pis. Stipendium, ij. n. genesis La
soulte, gage, pay. H. Stipende of an old worn soldier. Emeritum, ti. n.
genesis Modest. To give stipende, or wages to soldiers. Stipendio afficere.
Bailler la soulte aux gensdarmes. S.

Stipende of a parish priest, or curate. Curioniu^, nij. n. g. Festus. To
serve for stipende or wages. Mereri, Emereri. Seruir pour la soulte. S.

Souldiars, which have double stipe^de, or wages. Duplicarij milites. Qui ont
double soulte. S. Stipendary. Stipendarius, a, um. Tributaire. Call.
Stipulation, bond, bargayne, obligation or promise to do, perform and
satisfy that thing for the which such stipulatio^ or bond is made, whether
it be for payment of any sum of money, or other act to be performed.
Stipulatio, onis. Stipulatus, tus. m. g. Stipulation. S. To bind him self by
stipulation, or promise. Repromittere. S'obliger par stipulation. S.

He that byndeth, or is bound by stipulation. Stipulator, oris. mas. ge.
Stipulateur. S.

Stirope, or a stir^pe of a saddle. Stapia, Subex pedaneus, Stapes, Quid si
Pliniana voce etia^ Staticulum dicat quis a stando, in quo pedes firmantur and
quasi stant commodioris vectationis gratia. Estriere. H. Stiropes. Stapedes,
Subices ephippiarij, Fulcra pedum equestria, Subices pedanei. Estriers. S.
Stirope holder, or yeoman of the stirope. Strator, ris. m. g. Eslasier, celuy
qui aid son maistre monter a son cheual. S. Stir, or to provoke. Adigo, is.
Acuo, is. Cieo, es. Concieo, Concito, as. Exacuo, is. Excito, as. Instigo, as.
Moueo, es. Prouoco, as. Suscito, as. Turbo, as. Prorito, as. Irrito, as.
Prouoquer. S. To stir, or provoke any man to writing. Petere aliquem literis.
Prouoquer quelqu'vn a escrire.

Stir, as they do with a ladel. Tudiculo, culas.* To stir up. Incitare,
Excitare. Exciter. S.

Stir forward. Instigo, as. Impello, is. Instiguer. S. To stir, or move any
to do some thing. Accendere, Co^mouere, Extimulare, Inuitare, Allectare,
Hortari, Incitare. Ardorem inijcere, Igniculos iacere, Aliquem ad aliquid
faciendum agere. Inciter aucun a fair quelque chose. S.

Stir pleasantly by alluring, or enticement. Allicio, is. Allecto, as.
Perlicio, is. Perlecto, as. Inuito, as. Illicio, is. Allicher. Call. To stir,
or move to anger. Incitare, Mouere alicui bilem, vel stomachum. Inciter a
couroux. S.

Stir up war. Bellum conflare. Cic. Stirred. Concitatus, a, um. Motus, a,
um. Percitus, a, um. Irritatus, a, um. Impulsus, a, um. Instinctus, a, um.
Citus, a, um. Incitatus, a, um. Prouocatus, a, um. Prouoque, Incite. S.
Stirring, moving, or provoking. Concitatio, onis. Motus, us. Suscitabulum, li.
Incitamentum, ti. Impulsus, us. Irritatio, onis. Irritatus, us. Incitatus, us.
Incitatio, onis. Proritatio, onis. Prouocatio, onis. f. g. Incitation,
provocation. S. Stirring, or troubling. Turbatio, onis. f. ge. Stirring or
moving to wantonness. Illex, cis. com. ge. Alichement. Call. Stith, or an anuill.
Incus, cudis. f. g. Vne enclume. S. To stitche, or sow one to an other.
Consuo, is. Couldre l'vn a l'autre. S.

Stock. Stirps, pis. m. ge. Truncus, ci. masc. genesis Un tronc. S. Caudex, cis.
Idem. Made of the stock of a tree. Caudeus, a, u^. Qui est faict du tronc d'vn
arbre. S.

A little stock. Trunculus, li. mas. ge. Tronchette.

Stock dove. Palumbus torquatus. Liuia, ae. foe. g. Croiseau. H. Stock,
family, house, or kynred. Stemma, it is. Stirps, pis. f. g. Propago, Propages,
Genus, Progenies, Sanguis, is. Soboles, lis. f. g. Lignee. S. Stockefishe.
Asellus arefactus. Stocfiz ou merlus. H. Stock gelouer, or wall rose.
Leucoium, sieve viola alba. H. Stock or heard of cattle. Pecuaria, orum. neu.
g. Troupeau de bestial. Call. Stock or substance saved besides profittes
taken. Vsusfructus, us. m. g. Cic. Stock to graffe on. Talea, ae. f. ge.
Varro. Stocks, of a prison. Cippus, i. Numella, ae. f. g. C^p. Stole. Stola,
ae. foe. ge. Estole. S. Stolen. Subreptitius, a, um. Desrobbe. S. Stomach.
Stomachus, chi. Venture, ris. Ventriculus, li. m. ge. Estomach. S. A languishing
stomach. Marcescens stomachus. Estomach languissant. S.

It is very good for the stomach. Stomacho admodum prodest. Il est fort vtile a
l'estomach. S.

To have a good stomach. Valere stomacho. Auoir bo^ estomach. S.

To comfort the stomach. Stomachum excitare. Comforter l'estomach. S.

Which has an evil stomach. Stomachicus, a, um. Qui a mal a l'estomach. S.

Stomacher. Subuculae thorax laneus. Thorax, cis. m. g. La piece qu'on met
deuant l'estomach. S. Stone. Lapis, dis. Petra, ae. Saxum, i. n. ge. Pierre. S.
Lapillus, li. diminut. Ang. A little pretty, or small stone. Petite pierre.
Call. Lapidarius, a, u^. Pertaining to a stone. Apartena^t a pierre. Call.
Lapideus, a, um. Of a stone. De pierre. Call. A whetstone. Cos, it is. f. ge.
Pierre a aguiser. S.

A pomicestone. Pumex, cis. Bibulus lapis. Pierre ponce. S.

A precious stone. Gemma, ae. Lapillus, li. m. ge. Pierre precieuse. S.

Stone being four square. Abacus, ci. m. g. Plin. Stone a disease within the
body. Calculus, li. Lithiasis, Nephritis, idis. f. g. La pierre. H. The stone
engendered in the body of a man. Humanus calculus. La pierre engendree au corpse
de l' homme. S.

Stone fern an herb. Asplenum, ni. Cetarach. Ceterach. H. Stone that no fire
may damage, or deface. Apyrotos, ti. foe. ge. Plin. A grindstone. Cos aquaria,
Rotaria, and gyratilis, Queue a l'eaue. H.

A touchestone. Lydius lapis, Coticula, ae. Index, cis. Heraclius lapis. Pierre
de touch. S.

The lodstone. Siderites, Heracleos, Magnes, etis, m. g. Aimant. S.

Stone to strike fire. Ignarius lapis, Pyrites, it is. m. g. Lapis aerarius,
Lapis luminis. Pierre a feu. H. Stone wall made without mortar. Maceria, ae.
Maceries, ei. foe. g. Muraille de pierres sans mortier. S Stone wherein a seal
is graven. Sarda, ae. f. g. To cast stones out of the field, and to make it
clean. Elapidare, Agrum lectione lapidu^ expedire. Iecter horse les pierres
d'vn cha^p, and l'en nettoyer.

It rayned stones. Lapidauit. Il a pleu pierres. S.

To stone. Lapido, as. Lapider. S.

A stonning, or hurling of stones. Lapidatio, onis. foe. ge. Lapidation. S.

Stones found in a swallows belly. Chelidonij, orum. m. ge. Plin. Pierres qui
se trouuent au ventre des arundelles. S. Stones of a boore pigge. Polimenta,
orum. neu. g. Testiculi porcorum. Festus. Stones or genitals of man, or beast.
Cliterini, Colei, Testes, ium. com. ge. Couillons, animelles. H. Stones set
on both sides of a door, or gate for strength. Antelapides, Qui vtrunque
latus ostij muniunt. Call. Stony, or full of stones Calculosus, a, um.
Lapidosus, a, um. Petricosus, a, um. Petrosus, a, u^. Saxosus, a, um. Pierreux.
Call. Full of little stones. Scruposus, a, um. Scrupulosus, a, um. Scrupeus, a,
um. Plein de petites pierrettes

Stony, or of a stone. Lapideus, a, um. Saxeus, a, um. Saxatilis, e. De pierre.
S. Stony place, where stones grow. Saxetum, ti. n. g. Un lieu pierreux. Call.
Stool. Seliquastra, ae. Sella, ae. f. g. Vne selle. S. A foot stool.
Scamnum, ni. Scabellu^, li. n. g. Un marchipied. S.

A privy stool, or chair. Familaris sella, Sella pertusa. Vne selle persee
pour aller a la selle. S.

To go to stool. Exonerare ventrem, Aluum euacuare, Exinanire, Inanire,
Purgare. Aller a la selle. S.

Wine makes, or causes to go to stool. Vinu^ mouet aluu^, aut deijcit
aluum. Le vin faict aller a la selle. S.

To cause to go to stool, to lewse the belly. Ciere aluum, Ducere aluum, Aluum
elicere, Aluu^ soluere, Subducere, Trahere. Fair aller a la selle. S.

Stoote, or wysell, a beast or vermin which kylleth rabettes. Furunculus, li.
masc. genesis Mustela syluestris. Stop, or to stay. Retineo, es. Rete^to, as.
Arrester To stop or let. Impedio, is. Arceo, es. Impugno, as. Inhibeo, es.
Obsto, as. Occupo, as. Praepedio, is. Intercedo, is. Empescher. S

I will stop you that you do not this thing Faciam quo minus hoc agas.
I'empescheray que tu ne faces cela. S.

Stop breath, or to stiffle, or smother. Suffoco, as. Praefoco, as.
Extinguere animu^ alicui. Estouffer. Stop, or shut in. Interpremo, is.
Entreserrer.. S. Stop in going. Sisto, is. In loco aliquo subsidere, Gradum
remorari, Resistere. S'arrester. S. Stop light. Obstruere luminibus. Cic. To
stop beasts, or cattle. Feras subsistere. Arrester les bestes. S.

To stop oxen. Boues retardare, vel remorari. Arrester les beufs. S.

To stop those that run away. Fugam sistere. Arrester ceulx qui fuyent. S.

Stop money, or payment for some reasonable cause. Resignare aes. Fest. To
stop the course of the waters. Cursus aquarum fraenare. Estouper le course des
eaues. S.

Stop one in his tale. Opprimere oratione^. Cic. Stop one of his way, or
passage. Perimere iter alicui, Prohibere itinere. Empescher le passage. S.
Stop ones mouth. Os opprimere. Fermer, ou clorrer la bouche. S. Stop, or
bind the belly. Aluum sistere, Aluum continere, Aluum firmare, Aluum inhibere,
Ve^trem contrahere. Reserrer le ventre. S. Stop, or that thing which is
thrown in ones way. Obiectaculum, li. n. ge. Varro. Stop the ears.
Praetendere auribus, Claudere aures. Estouper ses oreilles. S. Stop up
chinckes, or cliftes. Stipo, as. Virg. Stop up. Oppilo, as. Obthuro, as.
Stipo, as. Obstipo, as. Obstruo, is. Estouper, bouscher. S. Stop wages for
vndewtifull service. Resignare aes, vel stipendium. Festus. Stop which
retayneth a wheale from his course. Sufflamen, inis. n. ge. Iuuenalis. Stop,
or to cover with durte or mudde. Oblimo, as. Vir. Couurir de fange. S. Stopped.
Impeditus, a, um. Obstructus, a, um. Occupatus, a, um. Empesche. S. Stoppell.
Obthuramentum, ti. Un estoupillon. S. Stopping, or letting. Obstructio, onis.
Difficultas, atis, Impeditio, onis. Impedimentum, ti. Intercessio, onis.
Obstaculu^, li. Occupatio, onis. Praepedimentum, ti. n. g. Empeschement. S.
Stopping of ye wind. Asthma, it is. n. g. Difficultas spiritus, Difficultas
spirandi. Difficulte de haleine. and Asthmaticus, ci. He that draws his wind
short. Asmatique. S. Stopping of the wind, or smothering. Suffocatio, onis.
Praefocatio, onis. f. g. Estouffement. S. Storehouse. Apotheca, ae. Cellarium,
ij. Penarium, ij. Promptuarium, ij. Repositorium, ij. Cella promptuaria,
Penaria cella. Gardemanger. S. Storehouse for baggage of household. Armarium.
rij. n. ge. Cic. Storehouse, or armorie for ordinances. Armamentarium, rij. n.
ge. Armaire. S. (...) Strength bodily, or natural liuelynes. Viuacitas, it is.
foe. ge. Viuacite. S. and Viuidus, a, um. Full of natural strength, or
liuelines. Plein de vigueur. S. Strengthen, or to make strong. Corroboro, as.
Firmo, as. Roboro, as. Munio, is. Emunio, nis. Fortifico, as. Vallo, as.
Fortifier, enforcir. S. To strengthen, or fortify a castle. Castrum munire.
Fortifier un chasteau. S.

To strengthen all about. Communire, Circummunire. Fortifier tout entour. S.

Strengthened, or made strong. Corroboratus, a, u^. Firmatus, a, um.
Confirmatus, a, um. Fortify. S. Stretche forth, or abroad. Detendo, is.
Dispando, is. Expando, is. Intendo, is. Porrigo, is. Prote^do, is. Dilato, as.
Distendo, is. Erugo, as. Explico, as. Exporrigo, is. Extendo, is. Pertendo, is.
Propago, as. Promoueo, es. Produco, cis. Estendre. S. To stretche abroad upon
some thing. Sternere, Supersternere. Estendre sur quelque chose. S.

Stretched forth, or abroad. Diste^tus, a, um. Porrectus, a, um. Extentus, a,
um. Estendu. S. Stretching forth, or abroad. Distentio, onis. Porrectio, onis.
Proiectio, onis. Prolatio, onis. Inte^sio, onis. Intentio, onis. f. g.
Estendement. S. A stretching forth of the hands. Intentus palmarum.
Estendement de mains. S.

Stritche owl. Strix, gis. foe. g. Vide Shrich owl. To stride. Crura
diuaricare, vel diducere. Esquarquiller les iambes. S.

Strided. Diuaricatus, a, um. Esquarquille. Strife. Concertatio, onis.
Decertatio, onis. Controuersia, ae. Disceptatio, onis. Certamen, inis.
Certatio, Contentio, Digladiatio, Lis, it is. Rixa, ae. Velitatio, onis. foe. g.
Estrif, debat. S. Litigiosus, a, um. Rixosus, a, um. Ang. Full of strife. Plein
d'estrif. S. To happen, or fall into strife. Incidere in conte^tionem, In
contentionem venire. Venir ou tomber en debat. S.

To be in strife concerning any matter. Contendere de re aliqua, Habere
quaestionem de re aliqua. Estre en debat de quelque chose. S.

The matter is in strife. In discrimine res est, In disputationem res venit,
Habet aliquid quaestionis haec res, Versatur in controuersia haec res, De hac
re habetur quaestio. La chose est en debat. S.

Stryke. Verbero, as. Co^uerbero, as. Verberibus caedere, Diuerbero, as.
Euerbero, as. Cudo, is. Co^tingere quenqua^, Pla^gere, Tu^do, is. Appeto, is.
Caedo, is. Compungo, gis. Ferio, is, percussi, Ico, cis. Lancino, as. Obtundo,
is. Pauio, is. Percello, is. Percutio, is. Peto, is. Stringo, is. Batuo, is.
Pulso, as. Batre, Ferir, frapper. S. Stryke again. Referio, is. Repercutio,
is. Reuerbero, as. Refrapper. S. To stryke sails. Vela contrahere. Caler and
abbaisser les voiles. S.

Stryke backwarde with the heel. Recalcitro, tras. Regimber. Call. Stryke
down, or to fell with blows. Affligo, is. Contundo, is. Assommer a grans
coups. S. Stryke fire out of a flynt. Elidere ignem. Plin. Stryke in writing
made in length like a spytte for a note, or diversity, the like is most
commonly used in auditors books. Obelus, li. m. g. Stryke of. Decutio, is.
Praecido, is. Cic. Stryke of gyues, or fetters. Excutere vincula. Stryke of the
head of one, or to cut of ones neck. Amputo, as, Auferre caput, Obtrunco, as.
Trunco, as. Collum alicui desecare, Ferire alique^ securi, Aliquem obtruncare,
Alicui caput detruncare, vel decutere, vel ferro demetere, Recidere caput,
Abscindere caput ceruicibus. Trencher le col a quelqu'vn. S. Stryke of the head
by the neck. Decollo, as. Decoller. Call. Stryke of the top. Decacumino, as.
Decoupeler. Stryke on an anuile, or styth. Cudo, is. Batre. Stryke one and to
make him scarres. Cicatrico, as. Frapper aucun and luy fair des cicatrices. S.
Stryke, or beat a thing whereby to make it thinner, lesser, or weaker.
Percudo, is. Forger. Call. Stryke, or roll, to strike a bushel or measure eue^.
Hostorium, ij. Vide Strikle. Stryke out, as to deface, or blot out. Delere,
Delinere, Obliterare, Expungere, Deformare. Effacer. S. Stryke through.
Perfodio, is. Traijcio, cis. Transfigo, is, xi. Vide Perce through. Stryke to
the heart with sorrow. Percello, is, culi. Percutere animum. vt Perculsit
illico animum. Terent. It stroke me to the very heart. Stryke with the heales,
or to kick. Calcitro, as. Ruer des pieds. S. Stryken. Perculsus, a, um.
Percussus, a, um. Pulsatus, ta, tum. Percitus, ta, tum. Saucius, a, um. Ictus,
a, um. Frappe. S. Truly he is stryken, or taken. Certe captus est, habet. Ter.
Il est frappe, ou attainct. S.

Stryken through. Perfossus, a, um. Transfossus, a, u^. Stryken with lightning.
Percussus fulminis ictu. Stryke^ to be with sorrow. Dolor percuti. Valor.
Stryking, or beating. Contusio, onis. Percussus, sus. Planctus, tus. Percussio,
onis. Pulsatio, onis. Verberatus, tus. Verberatio, onis. f. g. Frappement.
Strikle to strike a measure with when it is full. Radius, dij. Hostorium, rij.
n. g. Rouleau, Racloir. S. Stringe, or a band. Copula, ae. Cestus, ti. Lorum,
ri. Ligamen, nis. Ligamentum, ti. Ligatura, rae. Vinctus, tus. Vinculum, li. n.
g. Un lieu. S. Stringe, or cord. Chorda, ae. foe. ge. Cord. S. Stringe for an
instrument of music. Chorda, ae. Fides, is. Neruus, ui. Cord d' un instrument
de music. S. et Neruuli, orum. Small stringes. String of a bow, or crosbowe.
Neruus arcus. Vir. Cord d'arc, ou d'arbalestre. S. String of a darte. Amentu^,
ti, n. g. Le lien d'vn dard. I have two stringes to my bow. Duabus anchoris
fultus sum. I'ay deux chordes en monarc.

Stringed as a darte is. Amentatus, a, um. vt Hasta amentata. Cic. A darte
stringed, or having a stringe in the midst to cast it with. Stringes, or
pieces of timber laid under to stay massy timber in sawyng. Canterij, orum.
Strype with a rod, staff, or whyppe. Verber, ris. n. g. Plagae, arum. f. ge.
Caesio, onis. f. ge. Ictus. tus. mas. ge. Un coup. S. and Verberabilis, le.
Verbereus, a, um. Worthy of strypes. To give one strypes, or strokes, or to
beat him. Far verbera in aliquem, Multare aliquem verberibus. Cedere aliquem
verberibus. Batre aucu^, Luy porter des coups. S.

To deny, or refuse stripes. Negare se verberibus. Tibul. Ne vouloir endurer
les coups. S,

Endure, or to suffer stripes. Far verbera, Pati verbera. Virg. Pati plagas.
Terent. Endurer les coups. S.

Strippe out of clothes, or raiment. Expallio, as. Spoliare, Dispoliare,
Despoliare, Expoliare, Exuere. Despouiller. S. Stripped, or unclothed. Exutus,
ta, tum. Spoliatus, ta, tum. Despouille. S. Stripping, vnclothing, spoiling, or
vnarayinge. Spoliatio, onis. f. g. Despouillement. S. Stripling, or young man
newely issewed out of chyldhode, and begins to have tokens of a man.
Parectatus, Adolescens, it is. com. gener. Un iouuenceau. S. Strive, or to
contend against one. Velitor, taris. Pugnare aduersus aliquem, Certo, as.
Co^tendo, is. Discepto, as. Litigo, as. Altercor, aris. Debatre ou estriuer
contre quelqu'vn. S. To cause one to strive, or contend. Trahere aliquem in
disceptationem, vel disputatione^. Fair estriuer quelqu'vn. S.

Striuer. Litigator, oris. m. g. Qui ha noise and debat co^tre aucun. S.
Striving. Litigatio, Velitatio. Vide Contention and strife. Striuingly. Rixose,
Velitatim. Stroke, or to milk. Mulgeo, es. Vide Milk. Stroke, or the strype
given to one. Verber, eris. Le coup qu'on a baille a aucun. S. Vide Strype.
Strompet, or common stews. Proseda, ae. Scortum, ti. Vide Hoore. Strong.
Fortis, e. Herculeus, a, um. Potens, it is. Validus, a, um. Valens, Robustus, a,
um. Saeuus, a, u^. Fort. S. et Forticulus, a, um. Somewhat strong. Fortelet.
S. Strong a little, half strong, or somewhat strong. Forticulus, a, um.
Valentulus, a, um. Fortelet. S. Strong, and puisant. Praeualidus, da, dum.
Praepotens, it is. om. ge. Fort and puissante. S. Strong hold. Propugnaculum,
li. n. g. Strong, or good courage. Praesens animus. Strong oxen. Quadrati
boues. Colum. Strong poison, or deadly poison. Praesentissimu^ venenum, Venenum
laetale, Mortiferum, Acre, vel praesentaneum. Poison mortel. H. Strong thief.
Trifur, Trifurcifur. Fort larron, Treslarron. S. Strong to be. Valeo, les. vt
Corpore valere. Estre fort. S. Strong to be, or of great might, and power.
Repolleo, es. Polleo, es. Estre fort and puissant. S. Strong to make, or to
fortify. Corroboco, as. Fortifico, as. Roboro, as. Firmo, as. Co^firmo, as.
Munio, is. Emunio, is. Vallo, as. Fortifier. S. Strong to wax. Eualesco,
scis. Fortesco, scis. Inualesco, scis. Valesco, scis. Praeualesco, scis. Vires
capere, vel facere, Vires aut vim accipere. S'enforcir, deuenir fort. S.
Stronger to be. Praeualeo, es. Estre plus fort. S. Stronger to wax.
Praeualesco, scis. Deuenir plus fort. S. Strongly. Fortiter, Potenter, Valide.
Fort and puissamment. S. Stubble of corn. Stipula, ae. f. g. Estouble. S.
Stubborn. Obfirmatus, a, u^. Pertinax, Peruicax, Obstinatus, a, um. Aheurte,
ou ahurte. S. Stubbornes, and obstinacy. Pertinacia, ae. Peruicacia, ae.
Obstinatio, onis. foe. genesis Aheurtement and obstination. S. Stubbornly, or
obstinatly. Obfirmate, Pertinaciter, Peruicaciter. Obstineement. S. Studdes in
gyrdles. Bullae, arum. foe. ge. Studente. Scholasticus. Un estudiant. S.
Study. Animaduersio, onis. Certatio, onis. Cura, ae. Studium, ij. Meditatio,
onis. f. g. Estudie. S. Study in making comedies, or entreludes, also the
study employed about making meter, or ^yme. Musicum studium. Study of
letters, or learning. Studia, vel literaru^ studia, Aut studia doctrinae.
Estudes de lettres. S. Study of wisdom, or philosophy. Philosophia, iae.
foe. ge. Estudie de sapience. S. Study, or a place to study in. Bibliotheca,
Museolum. Vne estude. S. and Musaeum, ei. neut. ge. Un lieu propre a estudes.
S. To study. Studere, literas attingere, Literis deseruire, Literis operam
dare, Estudier. S.

Study phylosophie, or wisdom. Philosophor, aris. Estudier en philosophy.
Call. Stue, or hot house. Balneum, nei. n. ge. Thermae, arum. Vaporarium, rij.
n. g. Estuues. S. Stuff. Confercio, is. Effarcio, is. Farcio, cis. Infa^cio,
is, Offercio, is. Farcir. S. Stuff of any kind, shut or trussed in chestes,
fardles, or hampers. Sarcinae, arum. Quint. Stuff, or matter to make any thing
of. Materia, ae. foe. ge. vel Mate^ies, iei. foe* genesis Toupe sort de matiere
de quoy on fait quelque chose. S. Stuffed. Fartus, (...)* tum. ^el. Farctus,
ta, tum. Farc^. Stuffing, or that fills any thing. Fartum, ti. n. g. To
stumble. Caespito, as. Offendo, di^. Offenso, sas. Intersisto, it is. Bruncher ou
choper. S.

Stumbler, or he which stumbleth often. Offensator, toris, m. g. Qui chope
souuent and trebouche. S. Stumbling. Caespitatio, onis. foem. genesis Offensio,
(...) Tu es tell que tu estois parauant. S. Such is his nature. Sic est
ingenium. Sa nature est tell. S. Thou art not such a one as I took thee for.
Opinio de te multum me fefellit. Tu n' espas tell que ie t'estimoye. S.

Such as. Qualiscunque, Talis qualis. Tell quel. S. Such as the chief of the
city are, such is the city. Qualescunque summi ciuitatis viri sunt, talis
est ciuitas. Cic. Suck. Sugo, is* Exugo, is. Lingo, gis. Sucer. S. Suck
milk. Lacteo, es. Vbera sugere, Premere mammam. Alimentum maternu^ trahere.
Teter. Sucer du laict de la mamelle. S. To receive her child, or little
infant to suck. Admittere partum ad vbera, Receuoir son petit enfanta teter.
S.

Sucking. Suctus, us. Linctus, tus. m. g. Sucement. S. Sucking lamb. Subrumus,
mi. masc. genesis Agneau qui tete encore. S. Sucking pot for children. Aliphanus.
Call. Suckle, or to cause to suck. Subrumor, aris. Fair teter. Call. Sudary to
wipe the face which sweateth. Sudarium, rij. n. g. Un suaire. S. Sue. Certo,
as. Lege agere, Litigo, as. In iudicium, vel ius vocare, Postulo, as. Formulam
intendere, Dicam alicui impingere, Adducere hominem in ius, Dicam scribere,
Litem alicui intendere. Mettre en process. S. Sue action of covenant. Agere ex
sponso vel ex sponsu, Seruius Sulpit, Agere ex stipulatu. Sue actio^ of debte
upon a byll. Agere ex syngrapha. Sue by wrytt. Dicere diem alicui. Cic. Sue one
in a matter of life, and death. Litem capitis in aliquem infer. Cic. Sue for
debt. Nomina exigere. Cic. Sue in an action of injury, or trespass. Agere
iniuriaru^. Quint. Iniuriarum formulam intendere. Mettre en process en cas de
iniures. S. To sue til condempnation, or judgment be given. Peragere aliquem
reum. La poursuyure iusques a condemnation. S.

Sue wrongfully. Calumnior, aris. Sued to be. Reu^ agi, Reum fieri. Estre mis
en process. Suertie, a pledge and caution. Praes, praedis. m. ge. Appromissor,
soris. m. g. Expromissor, soris. m. g. Caution, un ple^ge and respondant. S. A
citizen suertie. Assiduus fideiussor. Caution bourgeoise. S.

Suertie in matters capitale. Vas, dis. m. g. Caution en matiere capitale. S.
Suertie which byndeth him self with an other. Adpromissor, oris. Consponsor,
soris. m. g. Respondant pleige qui s'oblige auec un autre. S. A sufficient
suertie. Iustus fideiussor. Respondant suffisant S.

Suertie to find, or to give suertie. Satisdo, as. Satispraesto, as. Vador,
aris. Donner caution. S. and Dare vades. To put in suerties. To put in suertie
in a matter of life and death to appear at a day. Dare vadem. Donner caution
en matiere capitale de se representer au iour. S.

To take sufficient suerties of some body. Satisaccipio, pis. Prendre caution
and respondant de quelqu' un. S.

Suertie to take. Satisaccipere, Praedes accipere. Prendre ou receuoir pleiges.
S. Suerties called countresuerties, which be bound to suerties to save them
harmeles. Suppraedes. Suet. Omentum, ti. Seuum, ui. vel Sebum, by. vel Sepum,
pi. n. g. Suif. H. Plin. lib. 28. cap. 9. I think these purified and sweet to
be Suet: and when they are stale, Tallowe, I suppose also Aruina, ae. foe. ge.
Sweet suet. Sain ou sein doulx. S. Omentatus, a, um. Mixed with suet. Suet
melted. Liquamen. Colum. Pinguedo ad ignem liquata. Graisse ou sein fondu. H.
Swear. Iuro, as. Fidem dare. Iurer. S. Swear against one. Coniurare. Iurer
contre quelqu' un. S. To swear by God. Deum testem dare, seu adhibere. Iurer
dieu. S.

To swear and promise with an oath. Iusiurandum dare. Iurer and promettre auec
iurement. S.

Swear deapely. Abiuro, as. Deiero, as. Iurer fort and firm. S. Swear
falsely, or to forswear, or periure him self. Peiero, as. Periuro, as.
Obstringere se periurio. Se periurer. S. Swear first, or before other.
Praeiuro, as. Iurer le primier. Call. To cause to swear. Iureiurando adigere.
Bud. ex liu. Fair iurer. S.

To swear to keep the ordinances, laws, or statutes. Fidem mandatis
religionemque verbis suis obstringere iureiurando, Iurare in leges and
constitutiones. Bud. Iurer de garder les ordonnances.

Swearer. Iurator, toris. m. g. Iureur. S. A great swearer. Homo iusiurandi
consultus and peritus. Bud. Grand iureur. S.

Swearing, or an oath. Iuramentum, ti. Iusiurandum, di. Iurement ou serment. S.
Swearing deapelye, or a great, or solemn oath. Deiurium, rij. n. g. Gell.
Sweat. Mador, oris. Sudor, ris. m. g. Sueur. H. Full of sweat. Sudoris
plenus. Sueu^. S.

To sweat. Madesco, scis. Sudo, as. Consudare, Sudorem emittere. Suer. S.

To sweat round about, or on every side. Circunsudo, as. Suer de toutes pars.

Sweat with labor. Desudasco, scis. Desudo, as. Sudo, as. Suer de traueil.
S. To travail, or labor till he sweat. Exudare laborem. Trauailler iusques a
suer. S.

Sweater, or he that sweateth. Sudator, toris. m. ge. Sueur. S. He sweates, or
he sweateth. Manat sudore, Sudat. Il sue. S.

Sweating of walls. Aspergines parietu^. La sueur and moisteur coulant des
parois. S. Sweating sickness. Sudor Anglicus. Le sutin d' angleterre. S.
Morbus solstitialis. Yet Stephanus calls this a sickness that dureth but a
day, or very little time. Malady qui ne dure qu'vn iour ou fort pe^. S.
Sweep, or to make clean. Verro, is. Conuerro, ris. Deuerro, ris. Euerro, ris.
Balier and nettoyer. S. Sweepstake, or he yt gathreth all up. Panager, ri.*
Sweeper of houses. Scoparius. Balieur de maison. S. Sweepinges of a house.
Nauci, Quisquiliae, aru^. f. genesis Les balieures de la maison. S. Sweept house.
Tersa domus.* Sweet, gentle, loving, and tractable. Suauis, e. Dulcis, e.
Benignus, a, um. Clemens, it is. Comis, e. Mitis, te. Praedulcis, ce. Laenis, e.
Doulx. S. Sweet a little, or somewhat. Dulciculus, la, lum. Doulcet,
doulcelet. S. Sweet as honey. Mulseus, a, um. Mulsus, sa, sum. Doulx comme
miel. S. Sweet bryar, or eglentine. Cynosrhodos, Cynosbaton, ti. n. g. Un
esglantier on arglantier. S. My sweet heart. Meum corculum, Mel meum. Ma
doulceur. S.

Sweet of sauoure, odoriferous, that which gives a good sauoure. Aromaticus,
a, um, Odoratus, ta, tum. Odorifer, ra, rum. Odoriferant, qui rend bonne odeur.
S. Vide Odoure, senture and smell. Sweet perfume. Thymiama, it is. n. g.
Perfuns. S. Sweet song. Musa, ae. foe. ge. Chanson. S. Sweet speech.
Facundia, ae. Suauiloquentia, ae. f. ge. Doulx parler. S. Sweet speaker.
Suauiloquus, a, um. Suauiloque^s, it is, om. ge. Qui parle doulcement. Call.
Sweet to wax, or become sweet. Dulcesco, scis. S'addoulcir, deuenir doulx.
S. Sweeten, or to make sweet. Dulco, as. Edulco, as. Mulceo, es. Fair doulx.
Call. Sweetenes. Dulcedo, inis. Suauitas, tatis. foe. genesis Doulceur. S. Sweetness
of speakinge. Lepor, Lepos, oris. mas. g. Sweetly. Dulce, Dulciter, Suauiter.
Doulcement. S. Swell, or to puff up as sores do. Fermentesco, scis, Tumesco,
scis. Extumeo, es. Extumesco, scis. Intumesco, scis. Turgesco, scis. S'enfler.
S. To make to swell. Tumefacio cis. Fair enfler. S.

To swell, or to be swelled. Tumeo, es. Turgeo, es. Estre enfle. S.

Swell as maidens dugges do. Sororior, aris. Swelled. Turgidus, da, dum.
Inflatus, ta, tum. Enfle. Swelling. Tumor, oris. Inflatio, onis. foe. g.
Enflure. Swelling in any place of the body, a bunche. Tuber, eris. n. g. Bosse.
S. and Tuberculum, li. n. genesis A little swelling. Bossette. S. Swelling of a
maidens, or woman's belly. Molucrum, cri. n. g. Swelling of the eye liddes with
pain and rednes Scleriasis.* Swelling of the gommes. Parulis, Taberculum in
gingiuis. H. Swelling of the legs by reason of much travail. Tama, ae. foe.
g. Fest. Swelling of the rouffe of the mouth, the disease called the Vual.
Vuula, ae. foem. genesis Swelling of the tewell or fundement. Condyloma, it is. n.
g. H. Swelling of the throat. Angina, ae. Vide squina^cie. Suffer. Duro, as.
Fero, rs. Mitto, is. Patior, eris. Permitto, is. Perfero, ers. Potestatem dare,
vel facere, Sino, is. Suffero, rs. Subeo, is. Sustineo, es. Tolero, as.
Souffrir. S. Suffer a thing in lapse or to fall out of memory. Memoriam
remittere. Caesar. Suffer a thing to grow in length. Immitto, is. Suffer and
let pass. Praestare patientiam. Souffrir and laisser fair. S. Suffer death.
Luo, is. Pati supplicium, Poenam pe^dere, vel supplicia, Capite luere, Morte^
capere. Souffrir mort. S. Suffer execution. Poena^ vel supplicia pendere. Ide^.
Suffer loss. Pati iacturam. Colum. Suffer, or to bear pacie^tly. Tolerare,
Aequo animo far, Perferre, Pati aequo animo, Moderate accipere, Co^niuere in
re aliqua, Quieto and aequo far animo. Porter patiement. S. Suffer patiently
checkes, and rebukes. Praebere aures conuitijs. Liu. Suffer punishment. Dare
poenas, Luo, is. Poenam pendere vel supplicia, Sustinere poenam. Souffrir ou
endurer punition. S. Suffer thou. Patitor. Impar. Suffer to grow. Submitto,
is. Laisser croistre. S. Suffer impatiently. Animo iniquo pati, Non mediocriter
far, Turbulenter humana pati. Porter and endurer mal patiement. S.
Sufferable, easy to be borne, or suffered. Patibilis, e. Tolerabilis, le. Aise
a porter and a endurer. S. Sufferaunce, enduring, and patience. Tolerantia, ae.
Toleratio, onis. Perpessio, onis. f. g. Souffrance, endurement and patience. S.
Sufferaunce, or enduring of travail. Fortitudo, dinis. foe. ge. Souffrance de
trauail. S. and Perpessio laborum. Idem. Suffered, or that has endured and
suffered. Passus, sa, sum. Qui a endure and souffre. S. Perpessus, sa, sum.
Idem. Suffering. Patiens, it is. Parpetiens, it is. Tolera^s, it is. Endurant. S.
Sufficient. Assiduus, a, u^. Locuples, etis. Sufficiens, it is. o^. ge.
Suffisant. S. An author sufficient, and worthy of credit. Idoneus author.
Autheur suffisant and digne de foy. S.

I have sufficient of goods. Abunde mihi bona suppetunt. I'ay des biens a
fuffisance. S.

Sufficient it is. Sufficit, Sat est, Satis est. Il suffit. S. Sufficient
suerties. Assidui fideiussores. Bud. Sufficiently. Satis, Sufficienter, Idonee,
abu^de, suffisamment. S. I gaigne sufficiently. Suppetit mihi lucrum. Ie gaigne
suffisamment. S.

(...) At supper. Super coenam, Inter coenam, vel inter coenandum. En soupant.
S.

Supping garment, or rob. Coenatorium, rij. Vestis coenatoria. Rob qu'on
prenoit pour souper. S. Supping, or sowping. Sorbitio, onis. f. g. Humeme^t.
Supping parler, or place where they suppe. Coenatio, onis. Coenaculum, li.
Coena, ae. f. ge. Le lieu ou on soupoit. S. Supping together. Syndipnium.* A
supping, or brothe. Sorbillum, li. Sorbitio, onis. Sorbitiuncula, ae. f. g. Un
humet. S.

Supping, or a brothe for a sick body. Illinctus, Ecligma. Quelque bruet, ou
ius pour hum^r. H. Supplante. Supplanto, as. Supplanter. S. Supple. Lentus, a,
um. Soupple. S. Suppliant. Supplicans, it is. Supplex postulator, Supplicator,
oris. m. ge. Suppliant. S. Supplication. Libellus, li. Postulatio, nis.
Libellus supplex, Suppliciu^, cij. Vne request ou supplication. Supplication
to make. Vota facere. Fair supplication To make supplication, or humbly to
beseech one. Supplicare alicui, Abijcere se alteri ad pedes, Abijcere se
supplicem. Supplier aucun. S.

Supplye, and amend that lacks, or wants. Suppleo, es. Compleo, es.
Supplier and amender ce qu'il de fault. S. Supplying. Complementum, ti.
Supplimentum, ti. neut. ge. Suppliement. S. Suppporte, maintain, and to favor.
Adminiculo, as. Sustineo, es. Sustento, Adminiculor, aris. Suffragor, aris.
Subleuare aliquem. Supporter and fauouriser. S. To supporte, bear, or suffer.
Sufferte, Far, Perferre. Supporter, endurer. S.

To supporte, or bear the charges. Sumptum sustinere, Tolerare. Supporter la
despense. S.

Support, or favor, which one does to any. Favor, oris. Suffragatio, onis.
f. ge. Support qu'on fait a aucun. S. The support, and stay of a lingue, or
race. Columen familiae. Support and appuy d'vne race. S.

The support, and stay of some thing. Adminiculum, li. n. g. Support and appuy
de quelque chose. S.

Greatly supported, and favored. Nimium gratiosus. Trop supporte and fauorize.
S.

Supporter. Suffragator, oris. m. ge. Cic. Suppose, to deem, or judge. Autumo,
Coniecto, as, Existimo, as. Iudico, as. Opinor, aris. Puto, as. Reor, re^is,
ratus sum. Sentio, is. Suspicor, aris. Arbitror, aris. Computo, as. Deputo, as.
Censeo, es. Penser, estimer, ou iuger. S. Supposell, opinion, and judgment.
Existimatio, onis. Opinio, onis. f. g. Opinion and judgment. S. Supposer.
Opinator, oris. m. g. Cic. Supposing. Existimatio, onis. Opinatio, onis. f. g.
Suppositorie. Balanus, ni. m. g. Suppositoire. S. Suppress. Supprimo, is.
Comprimo, is. Supprimer. Suppressed. Suppressus, a, um. Suppress. S.
Suppression. Suppressio, onis. f. g. Suppression. S. Supremacy. Primatus, us.
La primace. S. Surcease, or to leave of. Supersedeo, es. Quiesco, cis. Finem
facere, Defino, is. se deporter. S. I surcease to speak any more of that.
Mitto de illo nunc. Ie me deporte de plus parler de cola. S.

I surcease to speak of kisses. Mitto iam osculari. Ie me deporte de parler
des baisers. S.

Surcharge. Superonero, as. * Supra vires onerare, nimio plus onere, vel plus
aequo, vel plus qua^ par sit, Premere, vel opprimere onere, Nimis onerare.
Surcharger. S. Surcharged to be. Premi onere. Estre trop charge. S. Surcingle,
or girth. Perrzonium, ij.* Lora, orum. Cingula, ae. f. g. Cengle de cheual. S.
Sure. Securus, a, um. Certus, a, um. Fidus, a, u^. Fidelis, le. om. ge. Seur.
S. Sure counsel. Tutum consilium. Conseil seur. S. Sure men, to whom a man
may trust. Certi homines. Gens seurs, a qui on se peult fire. S. To be sure
and certain of some thing. Exploratum habere aliquid. Estre seur and asseur^
de quelque chose. S.

To be very sure, and certain. Persuasissimum habere, Exploratissimum habere.
Estre tout seur and asseure. S.

It is sure. Liquet, bat. impers. Il est certain. S.

In a sure place. In tuto loco. En lieu seur. S.

To put ye prisoners, or captives in surewarde, or keeping. Condere captiuos in
custodia^. Mettre les prisonniers eu seure guard. S.

Sure, or fast holding. Tenacitas, atis. f. ge. Tenacite. Sure, or which
holds fast. Tenax, cis. om. gene. Qui tient fort. S. Sure, or fast memory.
Tenax memoria. Plin. Iun. Sure, or steadfast. Firmus, a, um. Stabilis, e. om.
g. Asseure and ferme. S. To make sure, or steadfast. Confirmare. Render ferme. S.

Sure to be, or in falsegarde. In tuto esse. Estre a seurete. S. The matter is
sure. Res est in vado, In tuto res est. La chose est a seurete. S.

Surely, or certainly. Adeo, Atqui, Certo. Porro, Pro certo. Prorsus, Prorsu^,
Quippe, Sane, Scilicet, Videlicet, Enimuero, Nae, Nimitu^, Proculdubio, Quidem,
Certe, Siquide^, Vtique, Explorate, Indubita^ter, Plane. Asseureement,
certaineme^t. Surely I do so. Ego vero ita facio. Certainement ie le fay
ainsi. S. Surely it is even he. Et certe is est. Certainement ce'st il. S.
Sure it is so. Plane hercle hoc quide^ est, Profecto sic est. Certainement il
est ainfi. S. Surely, without danger, in surety. Tuto. Sans danger, a
seurete. To sail surely, or in suritie. Nauigare in portu. Nauiger a seurete.
S.

Surely, steadfastly, or constantly. Constanter, Statim, Perseueranter, Firm.
Fermement, constamme^t. To hope more surely, or stedfastlye. In firmiore spe
esse. Plus fermement esperer. S.

Surely, or fast in holding. Tenaciter. En tenant fort. Surenes. Firmitas, is.
Firmitudo, inis. Firmamentum, ti. Stabilitas, atis. f. g. Fermete. S. Surety.
Securitas, tatis. f. g. Seurete. S. Take ye such surety of me as ye will. In
hoc fidem quam vultis ipsi accipite. Prenez de moy tell seurete que vous
vouldrez. S.

Surety. Vide Suertie. Surfeit. Crapula, ae. f. g. Exces. Pals. Surgeon.
Chirurgus, gi. Vulnerarius, rij. mas. genesis Cirurgien. Call. Surgery. Chirurgia,
ae. f. g. Cirurgie. Call. Surge, or wave. Vnda, ae. Fluctus, tus. mas. ge. Vne
vague. S. And full of surges, or waves. Fluctuosus, a, um. Plein de vagues. S.
To appease the surges, or waves of ye sea. Fluctus matis mulcere. Appaiser les
vagues de la mer. S

The sea makes surges, and waves. Fluctuat mare, vel aestuat. La mer fait
vagues and ondes. S.

To make great surges. Exaestuare. Fair grandes vagues. S.

Surmise, guess, or to deem. Opinor, aris. Imaginor, aris. Arbitror, aris.
Cogito, as. Secum in animo versare, In cord versare, Computo, as. Penser. S.
To surmise, and imagine in his mind the form, and semblaunce of any thing.
Depingere cogitatio ne, Animo fingere. Peuser and imaginer en son esprit la
form and semblance de quelque chose. S.

To surmise, or inue^te some craft, or guile. Adornare aliquid, Contechnari.
Controuuer ou inuenter quelque finesse. S.

A thing surmised, or invented. Commentum, ti. Commentitia res, Figmentum,
Inuentum, ti. n. genesis Chose controuuee. S.

To surmounte and pass. Excello, is. Anteuenio, is. Praecedo, is.
Transgredior, eris. Exupero, as. Antecello, lis. Anteco, is. Surmo^ter and
surpasser.

To be surmounted, or passed. Anteiri. Estre surmonte, ou surpass. S.

Surmounting. Excellens, it is. om. ge. Surmontant. S. Surmounting, or excelling.
Exuperantia, ae. Excellentia, ae. foe. genesis Surmontement. S. Surname. Cognomen,
inis. Agnomen, inis. Cognomentum, ti. n. ge. Surnom. S. To take surname, and
appellation of some thing. Ducere, vel capere nomen ex re aliqua. Prendre
surnom and appellation de quelque chose. S.

Which has the same surname. Cognominis, nis. com. genesis Qui ha le mesme
surnom. S.

To surname. Agnomino, as.* Cognomino, as. Cognomen addere alicui, Imponere
vocabulu^, vel cognomen facere alicui. Surnommer. S.

Surnamed, or called after the fathers name. Agnominatus, a, u^.* Cognominatus,
a, u^. Surno^me. S. Surplusage, or that which remains. Quod superest,
Superfluum. Le surplus and ce qui rest. S. Surplusage, or overplus which is
given above measure, or weight. Additamentum, ti. Corollarium, rij. Auctarium,
rij. n. g. Le surplus ou surcroist qu' on baille d'auantage oultre la mesure.
S. Surrendre. Resigno, as. Resigner. S. To surrendre, resign, and give over
his office. Eiurare magistratum, Magistratu spo^te sese abdicare, Personam
praetextatam in curia deponere. Resigner, Renoncer and quicter son office. S.

Surrendering, or resignation. Eiuratio, onis. foe. ge. Resignation. S.
Surrunde, or to ouerflowe. Inundo, as. Proluo, is. Exundo, as. Restagno, as.
Effundo, is. Se desborder. Nilus does surrunde, ouerflowe or ru^ne over. Effert
se alueo Nilus. Le Nile se desborde. S.

Surrunded. Profusus, a, um. Effusus, a, u^. Desborde. Surrunding, or
ouerflowing of water. Inundatio, onis. Exundatio, onis. f. g. Desbordement
d'^aue. Survey, or to ouersee. Curo, as. Curer. S. Surueyour. Curator, oris. m.
g. Curateur. S. The office of a surueiour. Curatoria, ae. f. g. Curatelle,
l'office d'vn curateur. S.

Survive. Supersum, es. Suruiure. S. To survive some body. Superstitem esse
alicui, Claudere lumina, Superesse alicui, Viue^do vincere aliquem. Suruiure a
quelqu'vn. S.

To the intent that he may survive thee. Vt vitae tuae superstes suppetat. A
fin qu'il te survive. S.

Which suruiueth and sees the public weal destroyed. Superstes Reipub. Qui
suruit and voit la repub. destruicte. S.

Suruiuour. Superstes, it is. om. ge. Suruiuant. S. Suspect. Suspicor, aris.
Suspicio, cis. Souspeconner. S. To suspecte any body. Suspicionem in aliquem
confer. Souspeconner aucun. S.

To suspecte his wife of naughtines. Ducere aliquid vxori probro. Souspeconner
sa femme de meschancete. S.

Whom thou do suspecte wrongfully. Qui tibi in suspitionem nullo suo
delicto uenit. Lequel tu suspeconne a tort. S.

Suspected. Suspectus, a, um. Souspeconne. S. To be suspected. Cadere in
suspicione^, Suspicionem sustinere, In suspicionem adduci, aut venire. Estre
souspeconne. S.

He is suspected of this case, or matter. Peccatu^ huic haeret, Ad cum pertiner
hoc crimen. Il est souspeconne de ce cas. S.

They ought to be blamed and suspected. In culpa sunt ac suspicione ponendi.
Ils doibuent estre blasmez, and souspeconnez. S.

Suspecting. Suspicans, it is. om. ge. Souspeconnant. To be in suspense and
doubt. Pendere, Haerere. Estre souspend and en doubt. S.

Which is in suspense, or doubt. Suspensus, a, um. Haesitator, oris. mas.
genesis Qui est suspend and en doubt. S.

Suspend. Administratione summouere. Suspendre. To suspende from his office.
Abrogare magistratum. Souspendre de son office. S.

To suspe^de any from his office for two years. Abdicare aliquem magistratu in
biennium. Suspendre quelcun de son office iusques a deux ans. S.

Suspended from his office. Ab administratione summotus, Vetitus quicqua^ pro
magistratu gerere. Sus^endu de son office. S. Suspended from his estate. Ordine
ad te^pus motus. Suspendu de son estat. S.

To be suspe^ded from his office for three years. Vetari sententia quicquam pro
magistratu ad triennium gerere. Estre suspendu de son office iusques a trois
ans. S.

Suspending from office for one year. Abrogatio magistratus annua. Suspension
d' office iusques a un an. S. Suspicion. Suspicio, onis. Opinio, onis. foem.
genesis Souspecon. S. This gave me a suspicion. Percutit animum meum haec res.
Cela me done souspecon. S.

To give suspicion to some body. Suspicionem alicui relinquere, vel afferre.
Donner souspecon a aucun. S.

To put, or bring any in suspicion of some matter. Adducere in opinione^ rem
aliquam, Suspicionem facere, Inijcere, Mouere alicui suspicionem. Mettre en
souspecon quelque chose sur aucun. S.

To put him self out of suspicion. Exoluere se suspicione, Suspicionem a se
segregare. Se mettre horse de souspecon. S.

Suspicious. Suspiciosus, a, um. Suspicax, acis. om. genesis Souspiconneux. S.
More suspicious. Magis suspiciosi. Plus souspeconneux. S.

Suspitiously. Suspiciose. Souspiconneusement. S. Susteigne. Admitto, is. Duro,
as. Fulcio, cis. Pendo, is. Subeo, is. Subleuo, as. Suffero, rs. Suffulcio,
cis. Sustento, as. Sustineo, es. Torqueo, es. Adminiculo, as. Soustenir. S. To
receive, or susteigne damage. Detrimentum facere, Detrimentum accipere, vel
recipere, Incommodum subire, vel capere, Damnum accipere, vel contrahere, Pati
iacturas. Receuoir dommage. S.

Susteigne, or abide constantly. Substo, as. Terent. Susteigned to be.
Subnitor, eris. Cic. Estre soustenu. To be susteigned, and maintained. Cibo
aliquo susteneri. Estre soustenu and sustente. S.

Sustinau^ce, or nourriture. Alimentu^, Alimonia, Victus, us. Alimonium, nij.
Alitura, ae. Cibarium, rij. Cibatus, tus. Nutritus, tus. Nutrimentum, ti. n.
ge. Nourriture. S. And pertaining to sustena^ce, or nourriture. Cibarius, a,
um. Appartenant a nourriture. S. Sustinaunce for one day. Hemerobius.* Suster.
Soror, ris. foe. ge. Seur. S. Sororius, a, um. Of a suster. De seur. S. Susters
child, or a cousine german. Sobrinus, ni. mas. ge. Cousin germain. S. Suster
of my husband. Glos, ris. foem. genesis La seur de mon mari. S.
S Ante Y, vide S Ante I.
T. ANTE. A.
T, A lettre somewhat hard to pronounce, as the rest of the mutes are, whereof
Lucian in his judgment of vowelles pleasauntly makes mention, brynginge in. S
obiectinge against T. that he as it were with certain bands wrappeth in ye
voice of man, and also with violence endeavors to tear, and rent it. Among
the Athenians, and Dorians, T. oftentimes displaced S. Again among the
Romans many words were wont to be written with T. which now in later time
are written with S. as Mertare, Pultare, which we write Mersare, Pulsare.
Besides T. has a certain affinity with D. as Quintil. in his first book,
and fourth chapter shows* for our elders used Alexanter, Cassantra, where as
we now use Alexander, and Cassandra. Tabaro, or chimere. Exomis, dis. f. g.
Tabernacle. Tabernaculum, Aedicula, lae. foem. ge. Le tabernacle. S. Tabernacle
wherein any Images stands. Puluinar, ris. n. g. Cic. Table. Mensa, ae. f. g.
Table. H. A round table. Magis, dis. f. g. Table ronde. S.

A table made croswyse. Sigma, atis. n. g. Vne table faicte en form de
crossant. S.

Table cloth. Mappa, ae. f. g. Nappe. S. He commands the table to be laid.
Mensam poni iubet. Horat.

A folding table. Caudex, cis. m. g. Senec.

Table framed upon one foot or trestle. Monopodium, ij. n. g. Table a un pie.
H. Table whereon pillars do stand. Abacus, ci. m. genesis Vitru. A table, where
bankers do tell, or compte their monye. Trapeza, ae. foe. ge. La table ou les
argentiers comptoyent. S.

The table of a book, or a registre. Elenchus, Continet nuda rerum vocabula,
Syllabus, Index libri. Vne table. H.

Table in writing of the nombre of things. Catalogus, gi. mas. ge. Plaut. A
common table. Epularis mensa. Table a tous venans. S.

To furnishe the tables with much meat. Extruere mensas epulis. Garnir les
tables de beaucoup de mets. S.

To take up the table. Auferre, sieve remouere mensam. Ostre la table. S.

Table, or deske to write on. Pluteus, Tabula qua scribentes vtuntur subiecta.
Un pulpitre sur quoy on escrit. H. An honest, or good table. Victus frugi.
Honest table. S.

Which keeps a good table. Lautus homo. Qui tient bonne table. S.

A niggardly table. Victus sordidus. Chiche table. S

A painted table. Picta tabula. Tableau de peincture

A table wherein were written these words. Incisa tabula hijs literis. Un
tableau ou esioyent ces mots escripts. S.

A table wherein are the names of all the counselors of the court. Album
curiae. Le tableau ou sont les noms de tous les conseiliers de la cour. S.

Dising table. Fritillus, li. m. ge. Un tablier a iouer aux debts. S.

A pair of tables. Tabula lusoria, Alueolus, li. Alueus lusorius. Tablier a a
iouer.

Table with three leaves. Triplex, cis. n. g. Mart. Tables to write on.
Pugillares, Bipatentes pugillares. Tablettes a escrire. H. Tablet which
hangs about the neck. Bulla, ae. Monile, lis. neut. g. Vne bague qui se pend
au col d' vne person. S. Tabour. Tympanum, ni. n. g. Tabourin, bedon. S. To
play with a taboure, or to sound a taboure. Tympanizo, as. Iouer du tabourin,
sonner d'vn bedon

Tabourer. Tympanista, ae. Tympanotriba, ae. m. ge. Tabourineur. S.

Tabouresse. Tympanistria. ae. foe. ge. Tabourineuse. S. Tache or a tatche.
Fibula, ae. Spi^ter, is. n. g. Agraphe. Taciturnitie. Taciturnitas, atis. f. g.
Taciturnite. S. Tacke, or to fasten to some thing. Affigo, is. Ficher a quelque
chose. S. To tacke a law graven in brass to a wall. Lege^ figere. Attacher a
la paroy ou muraille vne loy engrau^^ en arain. S.

Tackeling for a ship. Aplustre, ris, n. ge. Armenta nauis. Les outils de la
nauire. S. Taffeta. Multitium, tij. n. g. Taffetas. S. Tail. Cauda, ae. Penis,
is. m. g. La queue. S. A tail ha^ging down to ye heels. Cauda perfusa vsque
ad calces. Queue penda^te iusques aux talons.

To move, or wagge the tail. Caudam agere. Remuer la queen. S.

Tayled, or having a tail. Caudatus, a, um. Penitus. a, um. Queue, qui ha
queue. S^ Tailor. Vestiarius, rij. Sartor, oris. ma. g. Cousturier. Take.
Accipio, is. Adsumo, is. Apprehendo, is. Assumo, is. Capesso, is. Capio, is.
Percipio, is. Prehendo, is. Recipio, is. Subeo, is. Suscipio, is. Sumo, is.
Accepto, as. Comprehendo, is. Capto, as. Desumo, is. Prendre. S. To take by the
hand. Manu prehendere, vel apprehendere. Prendre par le main. S.

They take one for an other. Erratur nomine. On prend l'vn pour l'autre. S.

To take in ill part. Secus interpretari. Prendre eu mauuaise part. S.

To take upon him some business, or affair. Ad se recipere. Prendre sur soy
quelque affair. S.

To take upon him the debtes of his friends. Aes alienum amicorum suscipere.
Prendre sur soy les debtes de fes amiss. S.

Take breath, or to pause what to do. Recipere animum, Recipere animam,
Recipere anhelatu^. Reprendre son haleine. S. To take advise of that which
ought to be done. Consiliu^ capere. Pre^dre aduis de ce qu'on doit fair.

Take again. Resumo, is. Reprendre. S. Take a kyrnell out of a nute. Enucleo,
as. Oster le cerneau d'vne noix. S. To take up by the way. Intercipio, is.
Surpre^dre.

Take all commodity, pleasure, proffit, or recreation of a thing. Perfruor,
eris, fruitus. Plin. Iun. Take an oath. Praestare iusiurandum. Plin. Iun. Take
an answer to all. Accipe ad omnia. Cic. Take a tale out of ones mouth.
Interloquor, eris. Parler parmi le propos d'aucun. S. Take a thing with
warrantie. Mancipio accipere. Take away. Abrogo, as. Abstraho, is. Adimo, is.
Attollo, is. Aufero, rs. Demo, is, mpsi. Remoueo, es. Tollo, is. Viduo, as.
Eripio, is. Eximo, is. Seruo, as. Priuo, as. Semoueo, es. Detraho, is. Emoueo,
es. Perimo, is. Oster. S. To take away from any some thing by sentence of the
judge. Abiudico, cas. Oster a aucun quelque chose par sentence du judge. S.

To take privily, or in secret. Surripio, is. Prendre en cachette. S.

To take a wife, or to marie. Ducere vxorem, Co^nubere, Coniungere sibi
foeminam matrimonio, Vxore^ sibi adiungere, Denube^e. Se marier. S

To take up the table. Auferre, sieve remouere mensam. Oster la table. S.

Take away by little and little. Delibo, as. Ovid. Take away good name.
Auferre famam. Liu. Take away, or to diminish. Diminuo, is. Diminuer. To take
before, to preuente. Anticipo, as. Antecapio, is. Anteoccupo, as. Occupo, as.
Praeoccupo, as. Anticiper. S.

To take, or have by lot. Sortior, iris. Auoir par sort. To take away by
force. Auferre vi, vel par vim, Eripere. Oster par force. S. Abripere, idem.

Take by robberye, or stealthe. Conuello, is Furor, aris. Furtum facere,
Aufero, ers. Ma^ticulor, aris. Peculatum facere, Rem aliquam auertere,
Suffuror, aris. Euolo, as. Subripio, is. Surripio, is. Desrobber. S. Take by
way of adoption. Adopto, as. Adopter. S. To take the danger, or charge upon
him. Praestare culpam. Prendre le danger, and la charge sur soy de quelque
chose. S.

To take the charge, or commission of some affair, or business. Concipere
curam, Ma^data accipere, Munia capescere, Onus aliquod recipere, vel suscipere,
Aliquid subire, Actionem suscipere, Parts suscipere, Prouinciam capere,
accipere, vel suscipere. Prendre la charge, ou commission de quelque affair. S.

To take feese in leaping, or running. Impitum sumere. Quint.

Take courage. Colligere se, Confirmare animum, Animos erigere, Sumere animu^.
Pre^dre courage. Take earnestly. Praeuertere serio. Plaut. Prendre a bon
escient. S. Take eftsoon. Resumo, is. Accepto, as. Prendre souuent. Take for a
friend. Reponere in suis. Anton. Take fro. Abripio, is. Oster. S. Take from one
to let to an other. Abloco, as. Suet. To take heauely, and to be angrye with
some thing. Durius aut grauiter accipere, Indignari, Succensere, Irasci. Se
marrir, and courroucer de quelque chose. S.

Take gently. Accipere aequo animo. Horac. Take God to witness. Obtestor,
aris. Virg. Take heed. Accuro, as. Aduigilo, as. Animaduerto, is. Animuam
aduertere, Asseruo, as. Attendo, is. Curo, as. Obseruo, as. Respicio, is.
Video, es. Prendre guard. S. To take good heed. Obseruo, as. Pre^dre bien
guard. Take heed to this. Hoc vide. Pren guard a ce. S. To take heed always
to some thing. In oculis habere aliquid. Prendre tousiours guard a quelque
chose. S.

To take heed, or beware of an evil to come. Praecaueo, es. Se donner de
guard du mal a venir. S.

To take heavily, and to be grieved with some thing. Aegre habere, Aegre far,
Dolere, Dolenter far, Grauiter far, Iniquo animo far aut pati, Moleste
aliquid far. Estre marri and dolent de quelqu^ chose. S.

Take hold. Comprehendo, is. Empoigner. S. To take, or catch in nets.
Irretio, is. Enueloper en s^s rets. S.

Take in good part or well. Accipere aequo animo, Aequo animo far, Boni
consulere, recipere, In bonam partem accipere. Prendre en gre. S. Take in good
worth. Aequo animo far. Cic. Take in sport, or pastime. Praeuerti ioco.
Plaut. To take sufficient sureties of some body. Satisaccipio, is. Prendre
caution and respo^dant de quelq'vn

Take journey. Carpere iter, Carpere viam, Pergere viam. Aller chemin. S. Take
monition, or warning. Locum admonitionibus relinquere. Cic. Take mustres.
Delectum habere. Cic. Take new day of payment. Constituere debitu^. Take
occasion. Caussam capere. Prendre occasion. S. Take often. Capto, as. Accepto,
tas. foe. ge. Prendre souuent. S. Take often by violence. Raptito, as. Prendre
souuent par force. S. Take or pluck out, as out of a cheste, cofer, or any
close thing, or place shut. Promo, is, mpsi. Tirer horse. S. Take, or draw
out marrowe. Emedullo, as. Medullo, dullas. Tirer horse la moelle, Esmoeller. S.
Take out, or to culle, and put a part. Seligo, gis. Segrego, as. ^^^re and
mettre a part. S. Take patiently. Accipere moderate. Aequo animo far, Recte
far. Prendre en gre. S. Take pain. Operam impendere, Sumere opera^, Labores
subire, Poenas capere, Laborem capere, Laborare, Suscipere laborem, Laborem
sumere. Prendre peine. S. To take great pain. Elaborare, Exantlare, vel
exhaurire labores in re aliqua, Labores magnos capere, sieve excipere. Prendre
grande peine. S.

Take his pleasure. Animo obsequi, Animo more^ gerere, Delector, aris. Dare se
incunditati, Indulgere genio, Voluptatem capere, vel captare. Prendre son
plaisir and ses esbats. S. Take scurffe from a sore. Emargino, as. Oster la
crouste d'vn vlcere. S. Take suddenly. Opprimo, is. Cic. Take strokes. Subire
verbera. Plin. Take tardy. Deprehendo, is. Plaut. Take thought, or to be
sorrowful. Accipere dolorem, vel grauiter contrahere animum, Pati
solicitudinem, Dare se dolori, Animum moerori dare, Tradere se tristitiae,
Macerari. Se contrister. S Take, or apply to him. Ascisco, is. Assumo, is.
Prendre, ou appliquer a soy. S. To take up any earnestly, and sharply.
Adiurgare, Increpare, Aliquem inclamare, Obiurgare, Reprehensare, Verbis
veheme^tioribus alique^ prosequi. Reprendre fort aucun and asprement. S.

To take breathe. Spirare, Respirare. Reprendre son haleine. S.

Take unawares. Depraehendo, is. Opprimo, is. Surprendre. S. Taken. Acceptus, a,
um. Captus, a, um. Sumptus, a, um. Prensus, a, um. Prehensus, a, um. Prins.
Taken away. Ablatus, a, um. Priuatus, a, um. Viduatus, a, um. Demptus, a, um.
Detractus, a, um. Oste. S. Taken before, or prevented. Anticipatus, a, u^.
Praeoccupatus, a, um. Anteceptus, a, um. Anticipatus, a, um. Praeuentus, a, um.
Anticipe. S. Taken in a snare, or net, or trappe. Irretitus, a, u^. Prins au
file. S. Taken, or numbde. Stupidus, a, u^. Torpidus, a, um. Syderatus, a, um.
Engourdi. S. Taken tardy. Deprehensus, a, um. Surprins. S. To be taken tardy,
or unawares. Teneri manifesto, Opprimi, Deprehendi. Estre surprins. S.

Taken to be, or to be nu^dbe. Percuti sydere, Syderor, aris. Estre engourdi.
S. Taken to be with slouthe. Praeuerti pigritiae. Plaut. Taken with a fever.
Correptus febre. To be taken with some disease. Corripi aliquo dolor. Estre
prins de malady. S.

Taken with theaues. Oppressus a praedonibus, and captus. Cic. Taker. Acceptor,
oris. m. g. Preneur. S. Taker away by force, a snatche pasty. Raptor, oris.
Direptor, oris. Ereptor, oris. Miluinus pullus. Rauisseur. S. Taking. Acceptio,
Assumptio, Captio, Sumptio, onis. Captura, ae. Acceptio, onis. foe. g. Prinse.
Taking away. Ablatio, onis. Ademptio, onis. Exemptio, onis. Detractio, onis.
f. g. Ostemant. S. Taking before, or preventing. Anticipatio, onis. f. ge.
Anticipation ou prevention. S. Taking by violence, or force. Raptio, onis.
Direptio, onis. Ereptio, onis. Raptura, ae. foem. genesis Rauissement. S. Taking
in good part, patiently, or coldly. Acquanimitas, it is. f. g. Plin. Taking of
profits, or revenues. Perceptio fructuum. Cic. Taking of profit, the
property whereof belonges to an other. Vsusfructus, tus. m. g. Cic. Tale.
Fabula, ae. f. g. Fable, Conte. S. Old wives tales. Aniles fabulae. Co^tes de
vi^illes.

A feyned tale. Commentitia fabula. Lact.

Tales told at the table. Conuiuales fabulae. Tacit. Tale bearer, or tale
carier. Delator, oris. Quadruplator, oris. Sycophanta. ae. m. g. Delateur. H.
Tale, or reckening. Rece^sio, onis. Rece^sus, us. m. g. Tale or a score.
Tessera, ae. Talea, ae. Vne taille de bois. Tale teller. Fabulator, oris.
Gerro, onis. Nugator, oris. m. g. Conteur de contes. S. He begins to tell a
tale. Fabulam incoeptat.

Talent, or certain poyse of weight. Talentum, ti. n. ge. Un talent. S.
Talkatiue, or full of talking and prattling. Loquax, cis. Verbosus, a, um. Qui
parle trop. S. Talk. Golloquium, Sermo, nis. Collocutio, onis. foe. ge.
Parliament. S. To break, or interrupte the talk of any. Colloquium dirimere.
Rompre le parliament d'aucun. S.

To break, or interrupte the talk which they have together. Colloquia
interrumpere. Rompre le parliament qu'on ha ensemble. S.

Talk, or to speak. Loquor, eris. Crepo, as. Fabulor, aris. Verba facere,
Mittere vocem, Voces facere, Sermocinor, aris. Parler. S. To talk and deuyse
together. Co^fabulati, Sermonem cum aliquo confer, Colloqui, Sermones serere.
Parler and deviser ensemble. S.

To talk softly, and between the teethe. Mussitare. Parler bas, and enter les
dens. S.

To talk, chat, or pratte. Fabulari. Nugari, Garrire, Nugas dicere. Iaser. S.

Talk not, or prate not. Aufer nugas. Ne iase point. S. To talk with others.
Sermonem cum alijs copulare. Parlementer auec d'autres. S.

Talk gently. Accipere dictis. To talk in vain, or to babble. Blatio, is.
Blatero, as. Babiller. S.

To come to talk with any. Venire in colloquiu^ ad aliquem. Venir pour
parlementer auec aucun. S.

Talk fair unto. Adpellare blande. Plaut. To cause to come to talk.
Contrahere ad colloquium. Fair venir a parlementer. S.

They talked oftentimes together. Crebra inter se colloquia habebant. Ilz
parleme n^oyent souuent ensemble. S.

Talked of, or of whom many tales are told, which are not true. Fabulosus, a,
um. De qui on fait beaucoup de contes, qui ne sont point vraye. S. Talker, or
clatterer. Blatero, onis. Lingulaca, cae. Linguax, cis. Futilis, le.
Locutuleius, leij. mas. ge. Caqueteur, babillard. H. Talker that uses eloquent
words without pith of matter. Logodaedalus. Bud. Talker to him self alone.
Soliloquus, Talking, Vide talk. Talking to him self alone. Soliloquiu^, quij.
Neb. Talking to him self privily. Mussitabundus, a, u^. Tallage, custom, or
imposte. Portorium, rij. Peage ou impost du port. S. Talle. Altus, a, um.
Procerus, a, um. Hault. S. A very talle man. Procerrissimus homo. Un homme fort
hault. S.

Tallenes. Alitudo, nis. Proceritas, atis. Haulteur. S. Tallenes passing
others. Eminens statura. Hauleur oultrepassant les autres. S. Tallowe. Sepum,
pi. Seuum, ui. Sebum, by. neut. g. Suif. S. Tallowe candels. Seuatae candelae,
vel sepatiae. chandelles de suif. S. To make tallowe candles or any thing of
tallow. Seuare, vel sebare candelas. Colum. Fair Chandelles de suif. S.

Tallowe chaundler. Seuator, oris. * Candelarius, rij. mas. ge. Chandelier,
saiseur de chandelles. S. Tallowe molten. Liquamen, inis. n. g. Suif fondu. S.
Tallowed, or of tallowe. Sepatius, a, um. De suif. S. Tallowyshe, or like to
tallowe. Seuosus, a, um. Sebosus, a, um. Resemblant au suif. Call. Talone, or
clawe. Vnguis, uis. m. ge. Ongle. S. and Vnguiculus, li. mas. genesis Onglet. S.
Tame. Mansuetus, a, um. Domesticus, a, um. Cicur, ris. om. ge. Appriuoise. S.
Tame beasts. Cicures, vel mansuetae bestiae. Bestes priuees. S. Tame, or to
make gentle. Cicuro, as. Mansuefacio, cis. Mulceo, es. Appriuoiser S. They tame
wild beasts by talkinge, or speaking to them. Mulcentur alloquijs ferae. On
appruoise les bestes sauuages par parler a else. S.

To become tame. Mansuefieri, Mansuescere, Cicurari. S'appriuoiser. S.

Tame, or to vanquishe. Domo, as. Edomo, as. Perdomo, as. Donter. S. Which can
not tame, or overcome his choler, or anger. Impote^s irae. Qui ne p^ult donter
sa colere.

Tamer. Domitor, oris. mas. ge. Donteur. S. Tamer, or which makes wild
beasts gentle. Mansuerarius, rij. mas. genesis Qui appriuoist les bestes
sauuages. S. Taming. Domitura, ae. Domitus, tus. Domatio, onis. foe. ge.
Dontement. S. Tanckarde. Cantharus, ri. Scyphus, phi. Patera, ae. Crater, ris.
m. ge. Un hanap. S. Tanckarb bearer. Amphora^ius.* Tanckard for water. Vrceus,
i. Vrna. ae, f. g. Cruche. Tannar. Byrseus, Coriarius, rij. m. g. Tanneur.
^^ls. Tansey. Parthenium man, Offic. Athana^^ and tanacetum. Athanasie. H. *
Tt. vj. Taper, or wax candle. Caereus, rei. m. ge. Chandelle de cire. S.
Tapestrie. Aulaea, orum. Plagae, Plagula, Peripetasma, Peristroma, Tapetum,
Tapes, Tapete, Textilis pictura. Tapis ou tapisserie. S. Turkey tapestrie.
Polymita, Phrygia, Attalica peripetasmata. Tapis de Turquie. S.

Tapestrie with beasts. Belluata tapetia. Tapesserie a bestes. S. Tappe.
Epistomium, mii. n. g. Robinet. To tappe vessels. Relinere dolia. Percer des
muiz. S.

Taragon an herb. Tragonia. Tares, a kind of pulse or grain. Eruum, Orobus,
by. mas. ge. Ers. S. Targat. Clypeus, pei. Clypeum, pei. Scutum, ti. n. ge.
Targe, ou targue. S. and ^cutulum, li. dimi. Angl. A little targar, or little
shield. Petite targe. S. et Scutarius, a, um. Pertaining to a targat.
Appartenant a targe. S. A little targat, which the Spanyardes, and those of
Afrique use. Cetra, ae. foe. genesis Vne petite targe de quoy vsoye^s les
Espagnols and ceux d' Afrique. And he yt is garnished with such a targat.
Cetratus, a, um. Qui est garni de tell targe. S.

A little round targate. Parma, ae. f. ge. Vne petite rondelle de guerre. S.
And garnyshed with such a tagate. Parmatus, a, um. Garni d' vne rondelle. S.

Targat wherewith a man fights upon walls. Murmulonicum scutum. A targate
like a half Moon. Pelta, ae. f. g. Vne targe en facon de lune croissante. And
he that uses such a targat. Peltatus, a, u^. Qui use de tell targe. S.

Targats, or shieldes. Albocia scuta. Tariance. Commoratio, onis. foe. ge.
Demeurance, ou demourance. S. Vide Tarying. Tarry. Cesso, as. Cunctor, aris.
Expecto, as. Moram facere, Interiungo, is. Maneo, es. Moliri moram, Moror,
aris. Operior, iris, Persisto, is. Praestolor, aris. Restito, as. Resto, as.
Retardo, as. Sedeo, es. Remoror, aris. Demoror, aris. Moras agitare, ram
interponere, Tardo, as. Attendre, Targer, ou tarder, demeurer. S. To tarry for
some body. Manner aliquem. Attendre quelqu'vn. S.

Follow me in that he tarry not for thee. Sequere me intro ne in mora illi sis.
Suy moy ci dedens, qu'il n'attende apres toy. S.

Tarry al night. Pernocto, as. Demourer taute la nuict. Tarry a while. Siste
parum impar. To tarry, or abide in some place. Locum alique^ habitare, incolere,
vel tenere, Manner in aliquo loco. Demeurer, ou demourer en quelque lieu. S.

To tarry, or abide long in some place. Ponere multum temporis in aliquo loco.
Demeurer longuement en quelque lieu. S.

To stay often. Mansito, as. Demeurer souuent. S.

To tarry behind. Remaneo, es. Demeurer deriere.

Tarry one, or to cause one to tarry. Retardo, as. Retarder, ou retarger. S. To
tarry a while. Habere aliquid morae. Tarder quelque peu. S.

Tarry, tarry. Tene tene, Imparat. plaut. Tarier. Cunctator, oris. Morator,
oris. Retardeur. S. Tarying. Cunctatio, onis. Mora, ae. Remora, ae. Mora
mentum, ti. n. ge. Demeure. S. Morula, ae. dimin. Angl. A little, or short
tarying. Long taryinge. Lenta mora, Diuturna mora. Longue demeure. S.

To make long tarying upon the shore. Cunctari in ripis. Fair longue demeure
sur le riuage. S.

Tarying behind. Remansio, onis. f. g. Cic. Tar. Pix liquida, fluida. H.
Tarte. Scriblita, ae. f. g. Vne tarte. S. A fig tarte. Palatha, ae. f. g. Vne
tarte de figues. S.

Tarte, or somewhat eyger. Subacidus, a, u^. Acidulus, a, u^. Subacidulus, a,
u^. Aigret, tira^t un peusur l'digre. Tarte to be. Aceo, es. Estre aigre. S.
Tarte to wax. Acceso, cis. Coacesco, cis. S'aigrir. Tartnes. Acor, oris.
Acrimonia, ae. Acritudo, inis. f. g. Aigreur. S. Tasyll which Fullers do use.
Gnaphos, Hippophaes, Labrum veneris, Virga pastoris, Lauacrum veneris, Carduus
fullonu^, Dipsacus. Chardon a foullon, chardon a carder, verge a bergier. S.
Tasae. Iusta, orum. Plena opera. La tasche. S. To constraigne to do the task.
Iusta exigere. Contraindre de fair la tasche. S.

To do, or finishe his task. Reddere iusta, Opus iustum vel operas reddere,
Iusta praebere, Peragere laboris pensum, Iusta operum peragere, Pensum
absoluere. Fair ou acheuer sa tasche. S.

I will return again to my task. Me ad meu^ munus pensumque reuocabo. Ie me
retireray a ma tasche. S.

Task, or sessing. Taxatio, onis. Pretium, tij. Indicatio, onis. Indicatura,
ae. Aestimatio, onis. foe. g. Taux, tax, on tauxe. S. Task gatherer. Exactor,
oris. m. g. Caesar. Taste. Gustatus, us. Sapor, ris. m. g. Goust. S. Taste, and
the judgment of savors. Intellectus saporum. Le goust and judgment des
saueurs. S. To taste. Censuram facere, Delibo, as. Gusto, as. Libo, as. Sapio,
is. Gouster. S.

It has a very good taste. Sapit iucundissime. Il ha fort bon goust.

That which has a good taste. Sapidus, da, du^. Qui ha bon goust. S.

Taste before, or first. Prolibo, as. Premier gouster. Taste, and to assaye
before. Praegustare. Taster and gouster deuant. S. To taste the wine. Censuram
vini facere. Taster du vin. S.

Tasted. Libatus, ta, tum. Gouste. Call. Tavern. Taberna, ae. Taberna vinaria,
Taberna meritoria, and Popina, ae. f. g. Caupona, nae. foe. ge. Oenopolium, ij.
n. g. Tavern. S. Tauerner. Oenopola, Tabernarius, Caupo, onis. m. g.
Tauernier. S. Vendeur de vin. H. Cauponius, a, um. Pertaining to tauernes.
Tauerners craft. Cauponaria, ae. foe. genesis Mestier de tauernier. S. Taught.
Doctus, a, um. Eruditus, a, um. Institutus, a, um. Instructus, a, um. Enseigne.
S. Tauill to wind sylke on, which is thrown to and fro in the lombe or
web. Liciatorium, rij. n. g. Tawer, or a dresser of lether, a white tawer.
Alutarius, rij. Plaut. Qui appareille peaux delies. H. Tawny coleur. Color
ceruinus. Couleur tannee. S. A dark tawny. Baeticus color. Tanne obscur. S.

Taunte, or a reprehension. Morsus, us. Pipulum, li. Increpatio, onis. foe. ge.
Reprehensio, onis. foe. g. Reprehension. S. Taunte given properly in scoffing.
Scomma, atis. n. g. Un lardon ou broquart. S. To give one a tau^te, or merry
scoff. Iacere quippiam in aliquem. Bailler un lardon. S.

Taunte, or to check one. Carpo, is. Mordeo, es. Obiurgo, as. Increpo, pas.
Dictis accipere. Tanset aucun, fort reprendre. S. Taunted, or reproved eagerly.
Increpitus, ta, tum. Obiurgatus, ta, tum. Tanse and reprins aigrement. S.
Taunter, or a reprehender, or reprouer. Reprehe^sor, soris. Carptor, toris. m.
g. Repreneur. S. Taxation, or assessement of a tax or subsidy, or of costs in
judgment. Pretium, tij. n. genesis Indicatio, onis. foe. genesis Indicatura, rae.
Aestimatio, onis. foe. ge. Taxatio, onis. f. g. Tax. S. To tax. Taxo, as.
Taxer. S.

To tax expenses in suit. Rations inire expensorum in lites, Rationem
sumptuum litis inire, Dispungere rations expensoru^ in litem. Tauxer ou taxer
despens. S.

Taxed. Census, a, um. Taxatus, ta, tum. Tax. S. Taxed by the pole, or he that
pays head silver. Capite census. Vide Subsidy. Taxer of pryses. Agoranomus,
mi. masc. genesis Vide Clarke of the market. Tay Vide Tai.
T. ANTE. E.
Teach or to instruct. Catechizo, as. Doceo, es. Erudio, is. Instruo, is.
Condoceo, ces. Monstro, as. Instituo, is. Praecipio, is. Tradere artibus,
Pueros inficere vel imbuere, Discipulos instruere, Edoceo, es. Enseigner. S. To
teach so so. Subdoceo, ces. Euseigner telleme^t quellement. S.

To teach perfectly. Perdoceo, ces. Enseigner entierement. S.

Teacher. Doctor, Instructor, Magister, tri. mas. genesis Qui enseigne. S. Teacher
that has an other above him. Hypodidasculus, li. m. ge. Un enseigneur qui en
ha un autre par dassus luy. S. Teaching. Eruditio, Instructio, onis.
Conformatio, onis. Disciplina, ae. Documentum, ti. Institutio, onis.
Monstratio, onis. Praeceptum, ti. Traditio, onis. foe. ge. Enseignement. S.
Teale, foul of the water. Querquedula, ae. Cercelle Teame of a wayne. Temo,
onis. m. g. Le timon, ou limon d'vn chariot. S. To teame horses together.
Dextero, as.

To teame horses to the chariot. Rhedam equis iungere. Atteler les cheuaulx. S.

To teame oxen together. Iugo, as.

Teame of six horses, or oxe^. Seiuges, gum, vel Seiugi, orum. Liu. Tear, or
to rent. Lacero, as. Descirer. S. Tear in pieces. Delacero, as. Dilacero, as.
Dilanio, as. Lacero, as. Co^cerpo, is. Dilorico, cas. Discerpo, is. Scindo,
dis. Abscindo, dis. Descirer and mettre en pieces. S. Tear in weaping.
Lachryma, ae, foe. ge. Vne larme. and Lachrymula, ae. diminut. Ang. A little or
small tear. Larmette. S. and Lachrymosus, sa, sum. Full of tears, or
aboundaunte in tears. Abondant en larmes. S. Feigned tears. Confictae
lachrymae. Larmes fainctes and simulees. S.

To cast forth tears. Lachrymare and lachrymari. Iecter larmes. S.

To sheade tears, and to weape. Flere, Afflere, Lachrymari, Illachrymari,
Plorare. Larmoyer and plourer. S.

Teate, pappe, dugge, or the breaste wherein the milk is. Vber, Rumis, is.
Mamma, ae. Mamilla, lae, f. g. Tetin. H. Mamelle and tette. Teate, or nipple of
a woman's breaste. Papilla, lae. f. ge. Le tetin d' vne mamelle. S. To suck the
teate. Premere mamma^, Lactere, Alimentum maternum trahere, Vbera sugere.
Teter. S.

To receive the child to the teate. Admittere partum ad vbera. Receuoir son
petit enfant a teter.

Teethe. Dentes, ium. m. ge. Dens. S. The over, or upper teethe, Superiores
dentes. Les dens de dessus ou superieures, S.

Teethe called the foreteethe. Gelasini, Dentes primores, Incisores, Tomici.
Les dens de deuant. H. Teethe in the innermoste part of the cheek. Genuini
dentes, Dentes intimi. Dens maschelieres. H. Teethe whereby the age of a horse
is known. Gnomones, number. m. ge. Plin. To rub the teethe. Fricare, Infricare,
Perfricare dentes. Frotter les dens. S.

Stinking, or rotten teethe. Foetidi and cariosi de^tes, Dentes putridi, Scabri
dentes. Dens puantes and pourries. S.

The teethe sheede, or fall out. Cadunt dentes, Decidunt dentes, Excidunt
dentes, Defluunt de^tes. Les dens cheent ou tombent. S.

To fasten the teethe which shake. Motus dentium stabilire, Mobiles dentes
stabilire, vel sistere, Confirmare dentes, Firmare dentes. Raffermir les dens
qui lochent ou branslent. S.

Tedious, or long. Prolixus, a, um. Prolixe. S. Werisome and tedious. Odiosus,
sa, sum. Inconmodus, da, du^. Grauis, e. Morosus, sa, sum. Amarus, ra, rum.
Acerbus, ba, bu^. Fascheux and ennuyeux.

To make te^ious, or to prolo^gue. Ducere, Producere, Prolongare, Rem aliquam
trahere. Prolonger. S.

To be tedious to one, and troublesome. Incommoda far, Molestare, Facessere
negotiu^, Molestiam afferre, vel exhibere. Donner ennuy and fascherie.

Tedious to make by excess. Satio, as. Tediously, or at length. Prolixe.
Prolixement. S. Tediousnes. Diuidia, Satietas, tatis. Taedium, dij. neut. ge.
Ennuy and sascherie. S. Tell. Dico, is. Memoro, as. Recenseo, es. Refero, rs.
Narro, ras. Denarro, ras. Enarro, as. Renarro, as. Commemoro, as. Nuncupo, as.
Percenseo, es. Profero, rs. Raconter. S. Tell, or to declare a fable. Agere
apologum. Plaut. Tell again. Redico, cis. Renarro, as. Raconter, ou redire. S.
Tell a long tale. Proloquor, eris. Plaut. Tell an other privily what to say.
Suggero, is, ssi. Vide Prompte. Tell a sum of money Numero, as. Nombrer. S.
To tell an example. Ponere exemplum. Raconter un exemple. S.

To tell a thing a long, and from the beginning. Alte and a capite repetere rem
aliquam. Raconter vne chose de loing, and des le commencement. S.

Tell before. Praedico, is, xi. Praeloquor, eris. Praemonstro, as. Praenuncio,
as. Praenarro, as. Praescribo, bis. Predire. S. Tell before what shall come
after, or things to come. Portendo, is. Praecino, is. Praedico, is. Futura
praecinere, Vaticinor, aris. Predire les chooses a aduenir. S. Tell eftsoon.
Redico, cis. Renarro, as. Vide Tell again. Tell franckely, or boldly.
Profiteor, eris. Dire franchement. S. To tell how it was done. Narrare vt
factu^ sit. Raconter comment il a este faict. S.

Tell in order. Loco, suo loco, vel certo loco dicere. Dire en son order. S.
Tell me. Narra mihi. Raconte moy. S. Tell often. Dictito, as. Souuent dire and
raconter. S. Tell on, go to, say on. Perge, Age, Dic, dicas, dice, dicito.
Imp. Or auant. S. Tell, or to number. Numero, as. Recenseo, es. Vide Nombre. To
tell strange things, and against nature. Monstra narrare, sieve nuntiare.
Racontre chooses estranges and contre nature. S.

To tell what lies on our stomach, to declare our mind, or what we have to
say. Proloqui, Depromere pectore consilia, Stomachum detegere. Dire ce que
nous auons sur le cueur. S.

Teller. Narrator, toris. Raconteur. S. Teller of fables, and tales. Fabulator,
toris. mas. g. Un conteur de fables and contes. S. Teller of vain things, and
of no proffite. Vanidicus, Vaniloquus, a, um. Qui dit chooses veins and de null
prouffit. Call. Teller of fortune. Ominator, toris. m. ge. Teller of news, or
tydinges. Famigerator, Famigerulus, Rumigerulus. Vide. News. Telling, or a
narration. Narratio, onis. foem. genesis Recit, Narration. S. Telling abroad.
Publicatio. Vide Publication. Telling bourde, or table for a banker to tell
money. Trapeza, zae. foe. ge. Telling, numbryng, or rekening. Numeratio,
Recensio, onis. f. g. Dinumeratio, onis. foe. ge. Nombrement. S. Temerous, or
rash. Temerarius, a, u^. Vide Rash. Temeritie, or rashenes. Temeritas, tatis.
foem. genesis Audacia, ae. foe. ge. Temerite. S. Temperate, or to temper. Tempero,
as. Temperer. S. Temperate, and moderate. Temperatus, ta, tum. Temperans, it is.
Modestus, a, um. Moderatus, a, u^. Tempere and modere. S. Temperatly. Moderate,
Modeste, Temperanter, Temperate. Tempereement. S. Temperatnes. Temperatura,
rae. foe. g. Temperies. iei. foe. ge. Attrempance. S. Temperatnes of summer.
Clementia aestatis. Temperature. Temperatura, ae. f. g. Temperamentum, ti. n.
ge. Temperature. S. To make an egall temperature. Temperamentum aequare. Fair
egale temperature.

Temperaunce, or moderation. Moderatio, Modestia, Temperantia, Temperamentum,
ti. neut. ge. Temperance. S. Where lust bears rule, temperaunce has no
place, or where horedome is, there is no temperaunce. Libidine dominante
temperantiae locus non est. Il n' y a point de temperance ou paillardise est.

Tempeste. Tempestas, tatis, f. g. Tempeste. S. Tempest of the air, or a great
storm. Tempestas, tatis. Coeli tempestas, Vis mayor, Vis diuina. Te^peste du
ciel. S. To appease the tempeste. Lenire tempestatem. Appaiser le tempeste. S.

Tempeste coming of the beginning of winter. Praesideratio, onis. Fest.
Tempestuous. Tempestuosus, a, um. Procellosus, sa, sum. Tempestate turbatus.
Tempesteux, plein de tempeste. S. A tempestuous sea. Mare procellosum, Pelagus
immite. Mere pleine de tempeste. S.

Temple, or church. Aedes, dis. Fanum, ni. Templum, li. n. g. Un temple. S.
Temples of the head. Tempora. Les temples. H. Temporal, or during for a time.
Temporarius, a, um. Temporalis, le. Durant pour un temps. S. Vide Time.
Temporal man. Profanus, a, um. Per allegor. Temporal, or pertaining to the
time. Chronicus, a, u^. Gell. Temporaneus, ea, eu^. Appartena^t a te^ps.
Tempte, assaye, or to prove to do a thing. Tento, as. Pertento, tas. Tenter
and essayer de fair quelque chose. S. Vide Prove. Tempte, or assaye before, or
first. Praetento, tentas. Ibidem. Tempte, or to provoke. Pellicio, is, xi.
Tento, as. Prorito, tas. Irrito, tas. Lacesso, sis. Prouoco, cas. Cieo, es.
Concito, tas. Prouoquer. S. Te^pte, suborne, or to procure by corruption.
Corru^po, is. Suborno, as. Vide Suborne. Temptation. Tentatio, onis.
Tentamentum, ti. n. g. Tentation. S. Temptation of the devil. Impulsus
daemonis. Bud. Tentation du diable. S. Tempted, incited, moved, or provoked.
Citus, a, um. Tentatus, ta, tum. Tente. S. Tempter. Tentator, toris. m. g.
Tenteur. S. Tempteresse, or she that tempts. Tentatrix, tricis. foe. ge.
Tenteresse. S. Tenante, or one that dwelles in an other man's house. Inquilinus,
ni. m. ge. Qui alienam domum incolit, Conductor domus alienae, Louagier. H.
Tenche a fish. Tinca, cae. and Merula lacustris secu^cundum Scaligerum.
Tanche. H. Tend to some conclusion, or end. Specto, tas. Te^do, is. Tender.
S. Our disputations tend to no other end but that. etc. Neque nostrae
disputationes quicquam aliud agunt, nisi vt. etc. Nos disputations ne tendent a
autre chose, sinon que. etc. S.

They tend to one end. In vnu^ exitum specta^t, vel tendunt. Tendant a vne
mesme fin. S.

Tender. Mollis, is. Tener, ra, um. Qui est tender. S. and Molliculus,
Tenellus. diminut. Ang. Somewhat, or a little tender. Tendret, ou tendrelet. S.
Very tender. Praetener, ra, rum. Fort tender. S.

To tender, or favor. Suffragor, aris. Fauoriser. S.

Tender to make, or to make soft. Mollifico, as. Mollio, is. Amollir. S. Tender
to wax. Lentesco, scis. Mollesco, cis. Teneresco, scis. Deuenir tender. S.
Tenderly. Molliter, Tenere. Tendrement. S. Tenderness. Mollities, Teneritas,
Teneritudo, inis. foe. ge. Mollitia, ae. f. g. Tendrete. S. Tendrill of a vine.
Capreolus, li. m. ge. Cincinnus, ni. m. g. Le tendron de la vigne. S. Tenement,
or a house hired for rent. Conducta domus. Maison de louage. S. Ten. December.
Dix. S. and Decenarius, a, um. Denarius, a, um. Conteigning to the nombre of
ten, or of ten. De dix, dizain. S. Ten days space. Decendium, Spacium
december dierum. Call. Ten fold, or ten times the double. Decuplus, pla, plum.
Dix fois le double. Call. Ten ounces. Dextans, it is. Dix onces. S. Ten
thousand. Myrias, dis. Ten times. Decies Dix fois. S. Ten times in a year.
Anno decies. Ten together. Deni, ae, a. Dix. Call. Ten years. Deni anni.
Dix ans. S. Ten years old. Decennis, ne. Qui ha dix ans. S. ou aage de dix
ans. Call. Ten years space. Decennium, nij. n. ge. and Decennalis, e. Of
ten years. De dix ans. Call. Tennyse game, or playing at te^nise.
Spaeromachia, Pilae lusoriae certamen. Le ieu ou l'exercisse de la paulme. S.
Tennise play, or a tennise court. Sphaeristerium, rij n. g. Ieu de paulme.
Call. To play at tennise. Ludere pila palmaria, Certare pila palmaria. Iouer a
la paulme. S.

Tenon of timber, which is put into the mortayse. Cardo, nis. Impago, inis. Le
tenon. S. Tenor, a part in song. Tenor, oris, m. g. Teneur. S. Tenor, or he
yt sings a tenor. Succentor, ris. m. ge. Tenor, effect, order, purporte, or
countenance of a thing. Tenor, ris. m. g. Tente, and pauillion. Tentorium,
rij. n. g. Papilio, onis. m. ge. Tabernaculum, li. n. genesis Vne tente and
pauillon. S. and Castra, orum. n. g. Tents. The princes tente. Angustale, lis.
n. g. La tente du prince. S.

To come, or retire into Caesar's tents. In castra Caesaris deuenire. Se
retirer es tents de Caesar. S.

Tente or bouthe, in a fair, or market. Velabrum, bri. neut. genesis Tente to put
into wounds. Turunda, Linamentu^, ti. Pannus, ni. m. ge. Tente a mettre es
plays. H. A long tente for a wound. Lemniscus, sci. m. ge. Tente longue. H.

Tente that is sharp to put into a wound. Peniculus, Penicillus, li. m. g.
Tente ague. H. Te^te that is made like a wedge. Cun^olus, li. m. g. Tenth.
Decimus, a, um. Dixieme. S. Tenthe time. Decimum. Aduerb. Pour la dixieme fois.
S. Tenthes, or tithes. Decimae, arum. f. g. Decimes. S. To take, or leuy the
tenthe, tithe, or te^the part. Decimo, as. Dismer and lever la decime, ou
disme. S.

Tercian fever. Terciana febris. Fiebure tierce. S. Teremente day, which is
the nynthe day after the burial. Nouendiale sacrum. Liu. Term of the year.
Terminus, ni. m. g. Term. S. In the same terms. Eisdem verbis. En mesme
terms. S.

Termination. Terminatio, onis. f. g. Termination. S. Terrible. Atrox, cis.
Ferus, a, um. Horribilis, e. Horrificus, a, um. Terribilis, e. Terrificus, ca,
cu^. Turbidus, da, dum. Ferox, ocis. om. g. Terrible. S. Terrible sounding, or
making a terrible sound. Horrisonus, a, um. Qui rend un son effrayant. S.
Terribly. Atrociter, Horride. Terriblement. S. Territory, a field or
country, lyinge within the bounds, or jurisdiction of a city. Territorium,
ij. n. g. Cic. Pomoerium, rij. Sacconia, iae. foe. ge. Territoire d'vne ville.
H. Testamente. Testamentum, ti. n. g. Testament. S. Testament, or last will of
any man. Codicillus, Scriptura vltimae voluntatis elogium contine^s, Elogium
Cicero pro testame^to morientis dixit. Testament ou codicille. H. Testament by
word of mouth. Nuncupatum testamentum. Testament noncupatif. S. Testament
feygned or changed, as where the true testament is kept away. Suppositu^
testamentu^. Testament laudable, and wisely made. Testamentum honestum.
Testament louable and faict sagement. Testament, where the father gives from
his son, or child, or his heirs, his land without cause. Inofficiosum
testamentum. Paul. Testamente written, and subscribed with the testatours own
hand. Holographum, phi. n. g.* Testamentary, or of a testament.
Testamentarius, a, um. Testamentaire. S. Executours of testamentes. Curatores
testame^torum, Executores, Arbitri testamentarij. Bud. Executeurs de testamens.
S.

To leave by testament. Testamento relinquere, Legare alicui. Laisser par
testament. S.

To break a testament. Voluntatem mortui rescindere. Rompre un testament. S.

To conterfaite false testamentes. Supponere, aut subijcere testamenta.
Suppose^ faulx testamens. S.

Testatoure. Legator, Testator, toris. masc. genesis Testateur. S. Testify, and
to tell plainly. Testari, Testificari. Testifier and dire apertemeut. S.
Testification. Testificatio, onis. foem. gener. Testification. S. Testification
of him self. Elogium, gij. neu. ge. Le tesmoignage de s^ymesme. S. Testified,
or known. Testatus, a, um. Tesmoigne, ou cogneu. S. Testimonial, or a
certificat. Libellus, Epistola assertoria, quam certificationem vocant. Vne
certification. H. Testimony, or a witness. Testimonium, nij. n. ge.
Tesmoignage. S. Testimony constante and firm. Testimonium constanter dictum,
and iusta fiducia testificantis. Tesmoignage constant and ferme. S. Testimonies
that accord not at all, contrary one to an other. Testimonia sese refellentia,
Inter se collidentia, Sibimet ipsa contradicentia, Testimonia quae inter se
confligunt and colliduntur. Bud. Tesmoignages qui ne s'accordant point,
contraires les vns aux autres. S. Tetter, disease which runs all over and
itcheth. Petigo, ginis. Impetigo, inis. foe. ge. Lichen, nis. m. g. vel
Lichene, es. foe. ge. Dartre. S. Tewesdaye. Dies martis. Mardy. H. Text.
Textus, us. Contextus, tus. mas. ge. Text. S.
T. ANTE. H.
THacke, hawlme, or straw. Stipula, lae. foe. g. Culme^, inis. neut. ge.
Culmus, mi. mas. ge. Chaulme. S. Thacked house, or a thatched roufe. Culmen,
nis. n. g. Virg. Stramineum tectum culmis constratu^. Toict de foare, ou d'
estrain. H. Thacked houses. Cannitiae. Thacker. Tector, ris.* Couureur de
chaulme. Pals. Than, then, or at that time. Tum, tunc, Tunc temporis, Eo
temporis, Lors, alors. S. Than finally. Tum denique. Lors finablement. S. Than,
or even then when it pleased him. Tum quu^ ei placebat. Lors qu'il luy
plaisoit. S. Thank, or to give thanks. Gratias agere, Gratia^ alicui de re
aliqua facere, Gratari, Persoluere grates, Habere grates, vel gratias. Mercier.
S. To give, and render thanks to God. Deo honorem habere. Remercier dieu and
luy render graces.

To thank by letters. Scribere gratias. Remercier par lettres. S.

To thancke greatly, or to give great thanckes. Gratias ingentes, vel maximas
agere, vel meritas, incredibiles, singulares, singularibus verbis and
amplissimis. Remercier grandement.

I thancke thee, or I give thee thanckes. Gratias tibi ago, Est gratia. Ie te
remercie. S.

Thanckes. Grates. foe. genesis plur. and Gratiae, arum. foem. genesis Graces. S.
Thanckefully, or gratefully. Grate, Grato animo. Thanckes giving, or thancking.
Gratiarum actio, Gratulatio, onis. f. g. Actio^ de grace, ou remercieme^t.
That. Hoc, Id, Illud. Ce, cela. S. And that a good while ago. Idque iamdudum.
Et ce des long temps. S.

That same day. Illo ipso die. Ce iour la mesme. S. That same. Idipsum. Ce
mesme. S. That notwithstanding. Nihilo minus, Nihilo secius. Ce non obstant.
That is. Hoc est. C'est, pour ce est. S. That. Quod, Vt, coniunct. Que. S. That
I know. Quod equidem scia^. Que ie scache. S I pray thee, that thou neither
forsake, nor leave her. Te obtestor, ne abs te hanc segreges, neu deseras. Ie
te pry que tu ne la delaisses point. S.

That is to say. Scilicet, Videlicet, Hoc est, Id est, Quippe, Nimirum. C'est
a scauoir, C'est a dire. S. By that way. Illac. Par la. S.

Thawe as yse does. Egelido, as, Regelo, as. Degeler. S. Desgeler. Call. Thawed.
Regelidus, da, dum. Egelidus, da, dum. Desgele. Call. The one, and the other.
Vterque. L'vn, and l'autre. S. The one for the other. Alter pro altero. L'vn
pour l'autre. S. The one, or the other. Alteruter. L'vn ou l'autre. S. The
same. Idem, Eiusmodi, Eiuscemodi. Le mesme. S The self same thing, or all one
thing. Idipsum. Cemesme, tout un S. Theaues, Sheep of two teethe, hogs.
Ambidentes, Bidentes, tum. f. g. Thee. Te. Te. S. With thee. Tecum. Auec toy. S.

Thief. Fur, is. Latro, nis. Trium literarum homo. Larton. S. Latrunculus, li.
mas. genesis A little thief. Larronneau. S. Thief that steals cattle.
Peculator, Abigeus, Abactor, toris. m. g. Larron de bestial. S. Thief that
steals church goods. Sacrilegus, gi. mas. ge. Sacrilege. S. Thief that
steals gold. Aurifur, ris. Aurilegus, Qui furatur aurum. Call. Larron d'or.
S. Theeffishe, or given and bent to steal. Furax, cis. om. genesis Addonne and
enclin a desrobber. S. Theefte. Furtu^, ti. Latrocinium, ij. Subreptio,
Suppressio, onis. Detractio alieni. Larrecin. S. whereof there be two kinds,
the one Manifestum, and the other Non manifestum. Theefte in stealing cattle.
Abigeatus, us. mas. genesis Larrecin ordinaire de bestial. S. Themise, a river
which runs through London bridge. Tamesis. Then. Tunc. Adonc. S. Vide Than.
There in that place. Ibi, Ibidem, Illic, Illuc, Istic. La, en ce lieu la. S.
Therefore. Proin, Ergo, Idcirco, Ideo, Igitur, Itaque* Proinde, Propterea,
Propter hoc, Obid, Ex hoc, Propter hanc vel eam causam. Pour^e. S. Thereupon.
Secundum id, vel ea. Cic. Thessalie, a country. Aemonia, Pharsalia, Aemathia,
Thessalis ora, Driopis, Macedonia, Pyrrhaea, Campi philippici. Thessalie. S.
Thy, or thine. Tuus, a, um. Tien, ou ton. S. One of thy friends. De tuis vnus.
Cic. Un de tes amiss. S.

Thy virtue. Tua virtus. Ta virtue. S. Thy own self. Tute, Tutemet. Toymesme.
S. To thy self. Tibi eidem. A toymesme. S.

Thick. Crassus, a, um. Densus, a, um. Spissus, a, um. Espez. S. Very thick.
Praedensus, sa, sum. Perdensus, sa, sum. Fort espez. S.

Thick as trees be on a heap. Creber, ta, ru^. Densus, a, um. Dru and espez.
S. Thick leaf. Carnofum folium. Plin. Thick root. Carnosa radix. Plin.
Thick skinned. Callosus, a, u^. vt Callosus acinus. Collum. A berry with a
thick skin, or a kernel with a thick shell. Ayant escorce espesse. S.
Thicken, or to make thick. Condenso, as. Denso, as. Spisso, as. Addenso, as.
Cogo, gis. Conspisso, sa^. Expisso, sas. Espessir. S. Thicken, congeale, or to
wax thick. Congelo, as. Spissesco, scis. S'espessir. S. Thickest press, or
thronge. Confertissima turba. Thickly. Crasse, Dense, Spisse. Espessement. S.
Thickenes. Crassamen, inis. Crassamentum, Crassitudo, Crebritas, Densitas,
Spissitas, Spissitudo, inis, foe. ge. Espesseur. S. Thickenes of an inche and a
half. Crassitudo sescuncialis. Espesseur d'vne p^ulce and demi. S. Thickenes
of a finger. Digitalis crassitudo. Espesseur d'vn doigt. S. Thickenes of a
foot and an half. Sesquipedalis crassitudo. Espesseur d'vn pied and demi. S.
Thille of a carte. Temo, onis. mas. genesis Le limon d' un charrette. S. Thiller
of a cart. Veredus, di. m. g. a vehe^da rheda. Thimble to sow with. Digitale,
is. neut. gener. Un doigtier. S. Thyme an herb. Thymus, mi. Thymu^, mi. n. g.
Serpillum Romanum. Du thym. S. Of thyme. Thyminus, a, um. De thym. S.

Wine made of thyme. Thymites. Vin de thym. S.

Think. Agitare mente, Animaduerto, is. Cogito, as. Ducere animo, Meditor,
aris. Penso, as. Puto, as. Versare in cord, Autumare, Computare, Deputare,
Censere, Opinari, Reri, Versare secum, Existimare, Arbitror, aris. Cuider,
penser. S. Think dilygently, and to consider. Pensiculare, Meditari, Pensare,
Commeditari, Excogitare, Etiam atque etiam cogitare. Penser diligement and
considerer. S. To think diverse things with him self. Multa in pectore
collocare, Animum cogitationibus volutare, Secum volutare, Cogitationes
voluere, In animo volutare. Penser diuerses chooses en soymesme. S.

To think again upon a thing. Reputare, Agitare, Pertractare, Recogitare,
Contrectare aliquid mente, Iactare curas pectore. Penser and repenser a quelque
chose. S.

Think again, and again. Etiam atque etiam cogita. Pense and repense. S.
Think in mind, or in heart, or to think with him self. Peragere omnia
secu^ animo, Cogitare animo secum, Lustrare animo, Animo ducere, Putare, Cum
animo cogitare, Co^mentari. Penser en son esprit, en son coeur, and en
soymesme. S. Think privily. Fouere in pectore. Think upon, or to remember.
In memoriam regredi, vel redire, Recordari, Memoria tenere, Memoria repetere,
Memoria retinere, Tenere memotiam alicuius rei, Reminisci. Se souuenir. S.
Think upon me. Memento mei. Thincking. Cogitatio, Meditatio, Deliberatio,
Praemeditatio, Reputatio, onis. foem. genesis Pensement. S. Thine. Tuus, a, um.
Tie^. S. It is thine, or that is thine. Tuum est. Cela est tien. S.

Thing. Res, ei. foe. ge. Chose. S. Thing committed or done. Admissum, si.
neut. genesis Cas commis. S. It is no small thing, it is a great matter. Tanti
est, Res est non parua. Ce n' est pas peu de chose, C'est grand chose. S.

A thing known. Res peruagata, Peruulgata, Nulli non nota, Notissima. Nemini
incognita. Chose notoire. S.

Things, or means to get money by. Argentariae illecebrae. Plaut. Things
pleasant to tell. Lepida memoratu. Chooses plaisantes a raconter. S. Thin,
or slender. Exilis, le. Tenuis, e. Gracilis, le. Delie. S. Very thin, and
slender. Pertenuis, e. Fort delie.

Thin ^owen. Rarus, a, um. Cler seem. S. Thin, and not thick. Rare. Cler
and non pas espez. S. Thin broth, gruell, or potage. Sorbiciuncula, lae. foe.
genesis Thin garment. Ralla, ae. f. g. Plaur. Vestement fort delie and cler. S.
Thin heered, or which has thin heeres. Raripilus, a, um. Colum. Qui a peu
de cheueulx. S. Thin plate of metal. Bractea, ae. foe. ge. Fueille de
metail. Thin wine or small wine. Villum, li. n. ge. Petit vin, vinet. S. To
make thin a thing, which is rank or thick, in gathering or pluckinge up
part of it. Disraro, as. Rarefacio, cis. Esclercir vne chose trop drue ou
espesse en eueillant ou en arrachant vne party. S

Thin or less to make by cuttinge and shauinge. Stringo, is. Tenuo, as.
Attenuo, as. Extenuo, as. Delier and minuyser. S. Thin to wax. Raresco,
scis. S'esclercir. S. Thinnely. Exiliter, Tenuiter. Deliement. S. Third.
Tertius, a, um. Tiers, ou troisieme. S. The third time consul. Tertium
consul, and terconsul. Consul pour la troisieme fois. S.

In the third place. Tertio loco. En tiers lieu. S.

He is the third. Est tertius. Il est le tiers. S.

To do the third time, to ploughe the land the third time. Tertio, as.
Tiercer, lobourer pour la troisieme fois. S and Terra^, vel solum tertiare.
Ide^. Terceer.

For the third time. Tertium. Aduerb. Pour la troisieme fois. S.

The third time, or thirdly. Tertio. Aduerb. La troisieme fois, tiercement. S.

Third part of an ounce. Duella, Tertia pars vnciae. Third part of a pound,
four ounces. Triens, it is. m. g. Quatre onces. Call. Third syllable from the
end of a word. Ante penultima. Thirdly. Tertio. Aduerb. Tiercement. S.
Thirlepole a fish. Physeter, Physalus, Prestis. Peis mular. Ges. A
whyrlepoole. Thirste. Sitis, it is. foe. ge. Soif. S. Great thirste. Auida
sitis. Grand soif. S.

To Thirste, or to be dry. Sitio, is, iui. Auoir soif

I am lost with thirste. Consumor siti. Ie suis perdu de soif. S.

To endure thirste. Sitim far, Differ, Tol^rare. Endurer la soif. S.

To staunche thirste by drink. Depellere vel restinguere sitim potione.
Estancher la soif par boire.

Thirsting, or being a thirste. Sitiens, it is. Particip. Thirsty always, or
ever dry. Siticulosus, a, um. Qui ha grand soif. S. Thirsty, or full of
thirste. Sitibundus, a, um. Thirtene. Tredecim* Treze. S. Thirtene times
Tredecies. Treze fois. S. Thirtenth. Tertiusdecimus, a, um. Trezieme. S.
Thirty. Triginta, Terdeni, Terni deni, Triceni. Trente. S. Thirty times.
Tricies, Trigeties. Trente fois. S. Thirtieth. Tricesimus, Trigesimus.
Trentieme. S. The eight and thirty year. Duodequadragesimus annus. Le
trent'huitieme an. S.

Eight and thirty foot. Duodequadrageni pedes. Trent'huit pieds. S.

Thirty nine. Vndequadraginta. Trente neuf. S. Thirty nine times.
Vndequadragies. Tre^teneuf fois. This body. Hic, haec, hoc. Cestuy ci. S. This
book. Hic liber. Ce liver cy. Pil. This man. Hic homo. Cest homme icy. Pil.
She, or this woman. Haec. Ceste ci. S.

By this place, or way. Hac. Adu. Par ci, par ici. S

Till this present, or till this time, Hactenus. Aduerb. temp. Iusques a
present, Iusques a maintena^t

Thistle. Carduus, dui. m. g. Chardon. S. Thistle, called commonly man's blood.
Acorna, ae. foe. ge. Sang d'homme. S. Thistle square and full of pricks,
called S. Marie thystle, or wild artichocke. Alba spina, Spina regia, Carduus
beatae Mariae. Chardon nostre dame. S. Thistle top, which is like plume, the
flowers of thistles. Puppus, pi. m. g. La fleur des chardons. Thither, or to
that place. Illo, illuc. A ce lieu la, en ce lieu la. S. I have sent my
servant thither, as you prayde, or desired me. Illuc vt rogaras famulu^ misi.
IN ay enuoye la mon seruiteur, comme vous m'auez pry. S.

Thither, and hither. Vltro citroque. Thomas, the propre name of a man. Thomas,
mae. m. ge. Thomas, le nomme propre d'vn homme. Thombe. Pollex, cis. m. g. Le
poulce. S. and Pollicaris, e. Of a thombe. D'vn poulce. S. Thonge of leather.
Corrigia, ae. Lorum, ri. Lorame^tum, ti. Amentum, ti. n. g. Vne courroye. S.
Vne courroye de cuir. Pals. Thonge of dogs skin. Corrigia canina. Vne
courroye de la peau d'vn chien. S. Thonge or string of a darte, or iauelin.
Amentu^, ti. n. g. Vide String. Thornebacke. Trigon, nis. Raia, ae. f. g. Raye.
H. Thorn. Spina, nae. Vepres, prium. foem. ge. Sentis, it is. m. ge. Espine. S.
Thorny, or bushy ground, or place where many thorns grow. Dumetum, meti.
Senticetum, ti. Vepretum, ti. n. g. Un lieu on croissent force espines. S
Thorny, or full of thorns. Dumosus, a, um. Spinosus, a, um. Senticosus, sa,
sum. Espineux, ou plein d' espines. S. Thorny, or made of thorns. Dumeus, a,
um. Spineus, a um. Qui est faict d'espines. S. Through me, or by my mean, or
me. Opera mea. Par moy, ou par mon moyen. S. Through thee. Impulsu tuo, Te
impulsore. De par toy. S. Through, or by you. Per vos. De par uous. S.
Thorowely, or wholly. Funditus, Omnino, Omni modo, Penitus, Plane, Prorsus, In
omnes parts, In totum, Tota via. Totalement. S. Throwly well done. Numeris
omnibus absolutus. Totalement, en toutes sorts and manieres bien faict. S.
Thou. Tu. Tu. S. Thou being my companion. Te socio. Cic. Toy estant mon
compaignon S. Thou thy self. Tute, Tutemet. Toymesme. S. Thought and mind.
Cogitatio, Cogitatu^, ti. Meditatio, onis. Men's, it is. Animus, mi. masc. ge. Vne
pensee. S. Thought, care, and grief. Solicitudo, inis. Cura, rae. Scrupulus,
li. Anxietas, tatis. foem. g. Soulci. S. Vide Care. To take thought, or to care
for one. Pati solicitudinem, vel Solicitum pro aliquo esse. Estre en soulci
d'aucun. S.

To be in great thought and care. Animo laborare. Estre en grand soulci. S.

Thought upon. Pensitatus. a, um. Cogitatus, a, um. Pense. S. Thoughtfull, or
careful. Cogitabu^dus, a, um. Meditabundus, a, um. Solicitus, ta, tum.
Soulcieux. S. Thousand. Mill, Indeclin. adiect. plur. Mill. S. A thousand in
nombre. Mill. Substant. neut. g. Indeclin. Un millier. S.

Nombre contaigning a thousand. Chilias, adis. foe. ge. Un nombre contenant
mill. S.

Thousand times. Millies. Mill fois. S. Five thousand times. Quinquies
millies. Cinq fois mill. S.

Thousand weight. Millepondium, et Milliarius, a, u^. Of a thousand weight. The
thousanth. Millesimus, a, um. La millieme. S.

Thousanth part. Millesima pars. La millieme party. Three. Tres, and haec
tria. plu. number. and Trinus, a, um. Trois. S. Three children at one birthe,
three twynnes. Trigemini, Tres vno partu editi. Trois gemeaulx. Call. Three
cornered figure, that has three corners, or a tryangle. Triquetrum, tri. n. g.
Un triangle. S. Three cornered, or having three corners. Triangularis, e.
Triangulus, a, um. Trigonus, a, um. Triquetrus, a, um. Triangulaire, ou qui a
trois angles. Three cubits conteyninge in measure. Tricubitalis, e.
Tricubitus, a, um.* Three days space. Triduum. L'espace de trois iours.
Triduanus, a, um. Of three days space. Three foot long. Tripedaneus, a, um.
Tripedalis, le. om. ge. De trois pieds. S. Three fingered grass. Trifolium
pratense, Triphyllon. Treffle. H. Threefolde. Triplex, cis. Triplus, a, um.
Triple, double en trois. Call. Three fold. Tripliciter. Aduerb. Three fold in
quantity. Triplicitas, atis. f. g. Neb. Three fold to make, or to do a thing
three fold. Triplico, as. Tripler. Call. Three footed stool. Tripus, odis. m.
g. Three half pence, or worth three half penc. Triobulus, li. m. g. Plaut.
Three half penny man, by circumlocution of small value. Trioboli homo,
Triobularis homo, Plau. Homme de neant, de nulle valeur. S. Which has three
heads. Triceps, it is. om. g. Qui a trois testes. Call.

Three horned, or having three horns. Tricornis, ne. om. ge. Qui a trois
corns. Call. Three hundredth. Tricenteni, ae, a. Trois cents. Call. Three
hundredth fold. Tricentuplus, a, um.* Three hundredth times. Tricenties.
Martial. Three in number. Trinitas, it is. foe. ge. Nebriss. Three leaued grass.
Trifolium pratense, Triphyllon. Treffle. H. Three leaued table. Triplex, cis.
m. g. Mart. Three manner of ways. Trifarius, a, um. Liu. Trifariam. Aduerb.
Ang. In three sorts, or fashio^s. En trois sorts and manieres. Call. Of three
members. Tricolon. De trois members.

Three nights space. Trinoctium, tij. n. g. Espace de trois nuits. Call. Of
three ounces. Triuncis, ce. om. g. De trois onces

Three pointed, or which has three points, or pricks. Trisulcus, a, um.
Trifidus, a, um. Qui a trois points, ou trois aguillons. Call. Three pound.
Tressis, is. f. g. Pers. Three pound weight. Trepondo, * Tripondium, dij. n.
g. Pondus trium assium. Call. Three syllables having. Trisyllabus, a, um.
Adiect. Three score. Sexaginta, Sexagenus, a, um. Soixante. Three score
furlonges space, which conteyneth seven miles and an half. Schoenus, ni. m. g.
Herm. Three score times. Sexagies. Soixante fois. Call. Three score times and
ten. Septuagies. Septante fois. S. Three thousand. Ter mill, Tria millia.
Trois mill. Three thousand times. Ter millies. Troys mill fois. Three times.
Ter. Troys fois. Call. Three times to do a thing, or to do a thing the third
time. Tertio, as. Nebriss. Three tothed instrument. Tridens, it is. mas. genesis
Instrument qui a trois dents. Call. Three ways meting, or a place where three
ways meet together. Triuium, uij. n. ge. Un lieu auquel se rendent, and
rencontrent trois rues. S. Three years space. Trienoium, nij. Trieteris, dis.
foe. ge L'espace de trois ans. S. Trietericus, a, um. Trimus, a, um. Of three
years space. De trois ans. Threaten. In^ento, as. Minito, as. Minor, aris.
Eminitor, aris. Minas iactare, Minas proponere, Tollere minas. Minacer. S. To
threaten any with some thing. Ostendere metum, Iacere terrores, and Denuntiare.
Menacer aucun de quelque chose. S.

To threaten to kill any. Minari alicui mortem, Interminari vitam, Minitari
ferrum, and flamma^, Intentare mortem. Menacer de tuer aucun. S.

Threnten often. Iactare minas. Menacer souuent. S. To threaten upon pain.
Poenas interponere. Menacer sur peine. S.

To threaten sore. Comminari, Interminari. Fort menacer. S.

To threate^ with any, if they do not ye which we demand. Opponere nomen
alicuius ad rem aliquam faciendam. Menacer d'aucun si on ne fait ce que nons
demandons. S.

Threating. Minitans, it is. Minans, it is. om. ge. Menaceant, qui menace. S.
Threatening person. Minax, cis. om. g. Menaceur. S Threatening* Comminatio,
onis. Interdictum, ti. n. ge. Menace. S. Threateninges, or threats. Minae,
arum. Minaciae, arum. foe. ge. Menaces. S. Threatningly. Minaciter. En
menaceant. S. Threade. Filum, li. Linum, ni. n. g. Fill ou filet. S. To draw
out his threade. Deducere fila. Continuer son fill. S.

Thread by threade. Filatim. Filet a filet. S. To threade a neadle. Filum
inserere in acum, Acum filo traijcere. Enfiler vne aguille. S.

To threade pearls, or put them on a threade. Margaritas filo traijcere.
Enfiler des perles. S.

A nedle threaded. Acus filum ducens, vel trahens. Aguille en filee d'vn fill. S.

A nedle threaded with two threades. Acus duo lina ducens. Aguille enfilee de
deux fills. S.

Threades which sylke women do weaue in linceles, lombes or stoles. Licia,
orum. n. g. Plin. To threshe corn. Triturare, Flagellare perticis frumentum.
Batre le ble a perches. S.

Thresher. Areator, oris. m. g. Batteur en granche. Threshing. Tritura, ae.
Trituratio, onis. f. ge. Battement de ble en grange. S. Threshing floor. Area,
ae. L' air d' vne granche. S. Thresholde. Hypothyron, Limen, inis. neut. ge.
Le su^il de l'huis* S. Thrifty. Frugi, Frugalis, le. om. ge. Cic. As a thrifty,
or sparing fellow. Frugi homo. Qui n'est point dispendeur. S. Thrifty to wax.
Rem augere, Opes augere. Prouffiter en biens. S. Thryse. Ter. Trois fois. S.
Twyse, or thryse. Bis terue. Deux ou trois fois. S.

Thryse as evil. Ter tanto peior. Trois fois aussi mauuais. S. Thrive, or to
wax rich. Venire in diuitias, Ditesco, cis. Deuenir rich. S. Thou will never
thrive, thou will never be rich. Nunquam rem facies. Iamais t^ ne setas rich.

Thryue, or go forward in growing. Vigeo, es. Vegeter. S. Throne* Thronus,
ni. m. ge. Throne. S. Thronge of people, or great multitude of people. Turba,
ae. Caterua, ae. f. g. Vne grande multitude de gens, foul. S. The people
throng forth out of the city. Effundunt se homines ex vrbe, vel effundit se
ciuitas. Les gens sortent a grande foul de la ville* S.

Throat. G^ttur, ris. Iugulus* li. Iugulum, li. Gosier, gauion. H. and
Gutrurosus, a, um. Having a great or wide throat. Qui ha gros gosier. S.
Throat, A pype whereby the meat decendeth into the body. Gula, lae. Gueule. H.
Throat bolle. Fauces, cium. Frumen, inis. neut. genesis La gorge. H. Throw.
Iacio, cis. Iacto, as. Iecter, ruer. S. To throw together. Conijcere. Iecter
ensemble. S

To throw on the face. In oculos compingere. Iecter au visage. S.

To throw down headlong. Praecipitem agere, Praecipitem mittere, In praeceps
dare, Praecipitare. Iecter du hault en bas. S.

Throw a darte. Torquere telum. Darder. S. Throw a stone over the house.
Tectu^ lapide transmittere. Plin. Iecter vne pierre par dessus le toict. S. To
throw of. Decutere, Deturbare, Proturbare, Procello, is. Prosterno, is. Ruer
ius. S.

Throw again. Retorqueo, es. Cic. Throw, or to dashe against any thing.
Allido, is. Heurter contre quelque chose. S. Throw down. Demolior, iris.
Destruo, is, Diruo, is. Sterno, is. Demolir. S. Throw in. Inijcio, cis. Iecter
dedens. S. To throw, or set before. Obijcio, cis. Iecter, and mettre au
deuant. S.

Throw, or beat down to the ground. Subuerto, is. Ad terram dare. Affligo,
is. Subruo, is. Percello, is. Iecter par terre. S. Throw meat to chickens.
Obsipo, as. Festus. To throw upon. Superiacio, cis. Iecter par dessus. S.

Throw out. Eiecto, as. Eijcio, cis. Excludo, is. Emitto, is. Eructo, as.
Praecipitem dare, Progero, is. Iecter horse. S. To throw far of. Proijcio,
cis. Eiaculor, aris. Proruo, is. Iecter au loing. S.

Throw out rubbell, as mortar, stone, and such like brockell of old
buyldinges. Erudero, ras. To throw the stones out of the ground, and to make
it clean. Delapidare, Elapidare. Iecter les pierres horse d'vne terre and l'en
purger. S.

Thrown, or set before. Obiectus, a, um. Iecte and mis au deuant. S. Thrown
down. Demolitus, a, u^. Destructus, Dirutus, a, um. Iecte par terre. S.
Thrown out a far. Proiectus, a, u^. Iecte au loing. Thrower of a stone with
a hole therein for exercise. Discobolus, li. m. g. Quint. Throwing. Iactus, us.
Iniectus, tus. Coniectus, us. Proiectus, us. Missus, us. m. g. Iectement. S.
Throwyng upon. Superiectus, tus. mas. ge. Iectement par dessus. S.

Throwyng down. Demolitio, onis. foem. genesis Demolition. S. Thrushe, a bird.
Tu^dus visciuorus, vel mayor. Griue. Ges. Thruste or to pushe. Trudo, is.
Detrudo, is. Pello, is. Impello, is. Propello, is. Bouter, ou poulser. S. To
thruste forth. Prouehere, Protrudere. Poulser en auant. S.

To thruste far of. Propellere. Poulser loing. S.

Thruste against. Obdo, is. Offenso, as. Bouter, ou poulser a l'encontre. S.
Thrust out violently. Expulso, as. Expello, is. Poulser horse par force and
violence. S. Thruste down. Detrudo, is, si. Obtero, is. Obtrudo, is. Premo,
is. Depello, is. Poulser en bas. S. To thruste out of the house. Extrudere
aedibus, vel ex aedibus, For As quatere. Poulser horse de la maison. S.

To thruste before. Obtrudere. Poulser au deuant.

Thrust down headlong. Praecipitem dare, Praecipito, as. Precipiter. S.
Thruste hard. Opprimo, is. Fort poulser. S. Thruste in. Contrudo, is. Poulser
dedans. S. Thrust out. Extrudo, is. Poulser horse. S. Thruste out ones eye.
Exculpere oculum alicui. Pocher l'oeil a quelqu'vn. S. Thruste out strength,
or might. Extentare vires. Thruste, or pearce through. Transfigo, is. Percer
tout oultre. S. Thruste, or enforced. Actus, Adactus, a, um. Pulsus, a, um.
Impulsus, a, um. Poulse. S. Thrust, or pierced through. Transf^ixus, a, u^.
Tra^sfossus, a, um. Perce tout oultre. S. Thrustle, or mauis a bird. Turdus
minor. Mauuis, Griuette. Gesn. Thrusting hard. Oppressio, onis. foe. ge. Cic.
Thumb. Pollex, licis. m. ge. Poulce. H. Thumpe, or bou^se. Crepitus, tus. m.
g. Cic. As the thumping of the feet. Crepitus pedum. Le son des pieds. S. To
thumpe, or knock with the fiste. Caedere pugnis. Bailler des coups de poing. S.

To thumpe some body. Contundere aliquem pugnis. Plaut.

Thunder, or a thundering. Tonitrus, us. Tonitru, Tonitruum, trui. n. g. Le
tonnoirre. S. Thunder. Tono, as. Intono, as. Tonner. S. To thunder down.
Superintono, as. Tonner d'enhault. S.

Thunder bolte. Broncia, ae. f. g. Pierre de tonnoirre. S. Which thundereth
down. Altitonans, it is. om. genesis Qui tonne d'enhault. Call.

Thwite, or to cut. Trunco, as. Abscindo, is. Incido, is. Seco, as. Conseco,
as. Proseco, as. Trencher. Thursdaye. Dies Iouis. Ieudy. H. Thy Vide Thy.
T. ANTE. I.
TIce, or to allure. Allicio, cis. Allecto, as. Illicio, cis. Perlicio, cis.
Prolecto, as. Inuito, as. Allicher. S. Ticement, or allurement. Illecebra, ae.
Illectus, us. Lenocinium, nij. Illicium, cij. Pellacia, ae. Inuitamentum, ti.
Allectatio, onis. f. g. Allichement. S. Tickle. Titillo, as. Chatouiller. S.
Tickling. Titillatus, tus. Titillatio, onis. foem. genesis Chatouillement. S.
Tide, or flowyng of the sea. Aestus, us. m. ge. Le flot de la mer qui vient. S.
Tidinges. Nuntium, ij. Rumor, ris. Nuntius, tij. m. g. Nouuelle. S. Good
tidinges. Euangelium, lij. Bonus nuntius. Bonne nouuelle. S.

You tell me good tidinges. Been hercle denuntias. Vous me dites bonnes
nouuelles. S.

Joyful tidinges. Lepidum nuntium. Nouuelles plaisantes. S.

Tidinges brynger, as he that comes runninge before to tell who comes.
Prodromus, mi. m. g. Tidinges carier. Renuntius, ij. m. g. Plaut. Porteur de
nouuelles. S. Tidinges to bear, bring, or carry. Perfero, rs. Afferre nuntium,
Rumigero, as. Nuntio, as. Perferre nuntium, Defer nuntium. Porter nouuelles.
Tie. Adhamo, as. Ligo, as. Obstringo, is. Vincio, cis. Adalligo, as, aui.
Alligo, as. Capistro, as. Deligo, as. Necto, is. Praeligo, as. Scirpo, as.
Velo, as. Lier. S. Tie to, or to couple. Adiugo, as. Atttacher, accoupler To
tie hard. Religare, Perstringere. Fort lier. S.

To tie together. Iugare, Coniugare, Colligare, Copulare, Connectere,
Innectere. Lier ensemble.

To tie about. Circu^ligare, Circunuincire, Obligare. Lier tout entour. S.

To tie upon. Superalligare, Superilligare. Lier per dessus. S.

To tie under. Subnectere, Subligare. Lier par dessoubz. S.

Tied. Ligatus, a, um. Obstrictus, a, um. Nexus, a, u^. Laqueatus, a, um.
Vinctus, a, um, Ligatus, a, um. Lie. S. Tied together. Perplexus, a, um.
Colligatus, a, um. Lie ensemble. S. Tied under. Subligatus, a, um. Lie par
dessoubz. S. Tying, or bynding. Ligame^tum, ti. Ligatura, ae. Alligatio, onis.
Religatio, onis. foe. ge. Liement. S. Tierce, which is a vessel conteigninge
half a hoggesheade. Hemicadia. Tygre, a beast. Tygris, is, vel dis. foe. ge.
Tigre. S. Tyke. Vide Dog. Tyke worm, like a sheep louse, all be it white,
which sucketh blood. Rediuius, ij, Recinus, cini. mas. ge. Colum^ Tyler.
Scandularius, rij. mas. ge. Couureur de maisons and toicts. H. Tyle or slate.
Imbrex, icis. Later, ris. m. ge. Tegula, ae. Tuille. Call. Laterculus. dimin.
Ang. Little narrow or small tyle. Petite tuille. Call. Lateritius, a, um. Made
of slate, or tyle Fait de tuille. Call. Tyle, or to slate a house. Imbrico, as.
Plin. Tyle maker. Laterarius, rij, m. g. Qui faict de tuilles. Tyles of wood.
Scandulae, arum. f. g. Vide shingle. Tyles on the gable end of a house.
Delitiares ^egulae. Festus. To make tyles. Ducere lateres. Fair des tuiles. S.

Tyles which be laid ouerthwarte among other tyles. Ambrices. Festus.
Tillage. Agricultura, ae. Agricolatio, onis. foem. ge. Labourage. S. Tylle.
Agrum vertere, Exercere tellurem, Subigo, is. Colo, is. Excolo, lis. Cultiuer.
S. Tylle all over, or through. Peraro, as. Ovid. Tyller. Agricola, ae.
Agricultor, ris. Cultor, oris. m. g. Cult^ueur. S. Tilthe, or til^^ng. Cultus,
us. Cultura, ae. Cultio, onis. foe. ge. Cultiuement. S. Tilthe of land, called
summer fallow. Veruactu^, t^ n. ge. Colum. Timber. Materia, ae. foe. ge.
Marrein. S. Timber wherewith they build. Tignus, ni. Tignu^, ni, n. ge. Marrein
de quoy on bastit. S. Timber nail. Impages, is. foe. ge. Vitru. Tymbred, or
made of timber. Materiatus, a, um. Faict de marrein. S. Tymbrell. Crepitaculum,
li. Tympanum, ni. Bedon. Tymbrell player. Tympanista, Tympanotriba. Ioueur de
bedon. Call. and Tympanizo, as. Angl. To play on a tymbrell. Iouer du bedon.
Call. Time. Seculum, Tempus, oris. Tempestas, atis. f. g. Temps. S. Temporaneus,
a, um. Temporalis, e. During for a time. Durant pour un temp. Call. Et
Temperaneus, a, um. Pertaining to time. Appartenant a temps. S. Temporary. For
a time. Pour quelque temps. S. A baren time. Seculum sterile. Temps sterile. S.

A very short time. Perexigua dies. Temps fort brief. S.

An inconvenient time. Inopportunum, vel Importunum tempus, vel Incommodum.
Temps mal conuenant and mal propre. S.

To do as time requires. Tempori seruire, Foro vti, Tempori cedere.
S'accommoder au temps

To implie, or bestow his time evil. Conterrere te^pus frustra. Otio and
literis abuti. Employer mal son temps. S.

Time to come. Olim, Apud posteros, In posterum, In posteritatem, Aeuo
sequenti. Le temps aduenir. Time everlasting. Sempiternitas, atis. Aeuum, ui.
n. ge. Temps qui dure tousiours. S. Time in the night, called the cockecrowe,
which is supposed to be the third part of the night. Gallicinium, nij. n. g.
Quand le cocq chante. H. To pass, or spend the time. Tempus traducere. Otium
vel tempus terere, Ludere otiu^, Eximere tempus Passer le temps. S.

The time is come. Tempus accidit, Adest tempus, Extat te^pus, Nu^c te^pus est.
Le temps est venu.

Time is to short to write my mind. Tempus est contractius scribere. A
dangerous, or hard time. Climactericum ^empus. Plin. Iun.

Long time. Longa dies, Longum spacium, Longum vel longinquum tempus. Long
temps. S.

To ^ye, or tarry long time. Diu, vel d^utine manner, aut Longo tempore.
Demeurer long temps.

Long time before. Multis ante seculis. Long te^ps deuant. S.

Time of birth, or travail of child, or the time while the woman lies in
chyldbed. Puerperiu^, perij, n. g. Le te^ps de la couche and gesine d'vne
femme. Time spared from other necessary business. Succisiuum tempus. Cic. In
our time. Aeuo nostro, vel In aeuo nostro, Nostra aetate, Tempestate nostra. De
nostre te^ps. S

In Alexander his time. Sub Alexandro. Du te^ps d'Alexandre. S.

In the mean time. Obiter, Interea, Interim, Interibi, Inter moras. Ce temps
pendant. S.

In time, and place. Loco, In loco, In tempore, Suo tempore, Opportune. En
temps and lieu. S.

Even to this time. Vsque ad hanc memoriam. Iusques au temps present. S.

Time of the year, when wine is made, or when grapes be ripe. Vindemia, ae.
foe. ge. Vendange. At the same time. Sub idem tempus, Per idem tempus, En ce
mesme temps. S.

Time, or season. Tempestiuitas, it is. f. g. Saison. S. Time passed. Olim,
Quondam. Le temps pass. S. Time vacant. Vacatio, onis. f. g. Vacation. S.
Tymely, or in dew season, as nether to timely nor to late. Mature, Tempestiue.
En temps deu. S. Tymerouse. Exanguis, e. Horridus, a, um. Meticulosus, a, um.
Imbellis, le. Pauidus, a, um. Formidolosus, a, um. Poureux, timide. S.
Tymerously. Suspensa manu, Pauide, Formidolose, Timide. Poureusement,
Timidement. S. Timpane, a disease. Inflatio ventris. Enfleure. S. Tinmouthe an
haven in England. Taua. Tinker, or a founder. Aerarius faber. Dinandier ou
Maigneu. S. Tin. Album plumbum, Stannum, ni. Plumbum candidum, Plumbum
argentarium. Estaim. S. To tin. Incoquere, Stanno linire. Estaimmer. S.

Tinned. Incoctile, Stanno litus. Estaimme. S. Tinnye, or made of tynne.
Stanneus, a, um. Faict d' estaim. S. Tynte, or half part of a bushel.
Semodius, dij. m. ge. Un demi boisseau. Call. Tyranny. Tyrannis, dis. foe. g
Tyranny. S. By, or through tyranny. Tyrannice, Impotenter. Par tyranny. S.

Tyrannously. Tyrannice. Tyranniquement. S. Tyrant. Tyrannus, ni. m. g.
tyrant. S. Et Tyrannicus, a, u^. Of a tyrant. Tyrannique, d'vn tyrant. Call. To
do the fact of a tyrant. Tyrannum praebere. Fair le faict d'vn tyrant. S.

Which has killed a tyrant. Tyrannoctonus, ni. Tyrannicida, ae. m. ge. Qui a
tue un tyrant. S.

To Play ye tyrant, or to do like a tyrant. Tyrannice, vel tyranni more
vexare. Tyrannizer. S.

Tyrdles of sheep. Fimus ouillus, Pilulae, arum. f. g. Fiente de brebis. S.
Ty^e, or burlet for women. Calantica, cae. f. g. Cic. Tysan, or ptysan, a
drink co^fected of water wtth husked barley. Ptisana, nae. foem. ge. De la
tisanne, ptisanne, Orge monde. S. Tithe, or tenthe part. Decimae, arum. foem.
genesis Decime, ou dismes. S. Decimalis, e. Of the tithe, or tenth part.* Fermers
of the tithe. Decumani, orum. mas. ge. Les fermiers des decimes. S.

To take tithe. Decimas accipere. Prendre decimes, ou dismes. S.

To tithe. Decimo, as. Dismer. Call.

Tithe out. Exdecimo, as. Fest. Title. Titulus, li. m. g. Tiltre. S. Title of
the eldest child in enheritaunce. Primigenia. ae. foe. ge. Title, or
enscription of some thing. Epigraphe, Index, Inscriptio, Titulus. Tiltre,
l'inscription. H. To title. Adnoto, as. Titulo, as. Nomino, as. Inscribo, is.
Intituler. S.

Titmouse a bird. Parus. Mesange. H. A big titmouse. Parus mayor.
Fringillago. Mesange. H.

Title or prick in letters. Punctus, ti. Punctum, cti. n. g. Un poinct. S.
T. ANTE. O.
TO. Ad. A. S. as He goes straight to our house. Ad nostras aedes hic quidem
habet rectam viam. Il va droict a nostre maison. S. To an other place. Alio.
Ailleurs. S. as Sent to an other place. Alio missus. Ailleurs enuoye. To day.
Hodie. Huy, auiourdhuy. S. To day in the morning. Hodierno mane. Auiourdhuy
matin. For to day. In hunc diem. Pour auiourdhuy. S.

To every one. Singillatim. Cic. Together. Pariter, Simul, Vna, Cum,
Co^muniter. Ensemble. S. All together. Iunctim, Coniunctim, Permiste. Tout
ensemble. S.

To speak altogether. In commune loqui, vel dicere. Dire tout ensemble. S. To
much. Nimium, Nimis. Trop. S. Which has to much bablyng. Impendio
loquatior. Qui ha trop de babil. S.

This is to much. Nimium est. C'est trop. S.

To morrow. Cras. Demain. S. To morrow in the morning. Crastino die, Crastina
luce, In crastinum. Demain au matin. S. To some place. Aliquo. En quelque lieu.
S. To some other place. Aliorsum. Plaut. To that place. Illuc. En ce lieu la.
S. To the vttermoste farthing. Ad assem. Plaut. To both sides. Vtroque. A tous
les deux costez. S. To to, or to much, or far to much. Praenimis. To what
entente, or purpose. Quorsum. A quelle fin, a quel propos. S. Toad. Bufo, onis.
m. ge. Crapault. S. Toadstoole. Fungus, gi. m. ge. Champions, potirons. H.
Toes. Digiti pedum. Les orteils des pieds. S. The great toe. Hallus, li. m. g.
Le poulce du pied. Toys. Vide Trifles. Toil, or travail. Labor, oris. Opera,
ae, foem. ge. Trauail. S. The toil, and labor which the chief captain
takes. Labor imperatorius. Le trauail and labeur que prend un chef de guerre.
S.

Toil, or to travail. Laboro, as. Opus facere. Trauailler. S. To toil, or
travail in vain. Laborem inanem capere, Operam perdere, vel ludere, Sumere
operam, vel sumere operam frustra. Trauailler en vain. S. Toyling, or
trauaylyng. Labor, oris. Operositas, atis. foe. ge. Trauaillment. S. Token, and
mark. Macula, ae. Tessera, ae. foem. ge. Enseigne and marque. S. I will tell
you the tokens. Argumenta rei dica^. Ie vous diray les enseignes. S.

A token of his love. Pignus amoris. Enseigne de son amor. S.

Tokens given when matrimony is contracted. Arra sponsalititia. H. Token given
to a soldier. Synthema, atis. n. ge. A token, or sign of some evil chance
to come. Prodigium, gij. n. g. Un sign de quelque malencontre aduenir. S.

Token of favor, or kyndnes. Pignus beneuolentiae. Enseigne de benevolence. S.
Tokens of love. Notae amoris. Signs d'amours. S. Tokens of health. Signa ad
salutem. Signs de guarison. S. Token, or note made with a pen. Character,
ris. m. ge. Colum. Told. Dictus, a, um. Dict. S. Told before. Praedictus, a,
um. Deuant dict. S. Which is not told. Indictus, a, um. Qui n' est pas dict.
S.

Told, nombred, or reckened. Numeratus, a, um. Recensitus, a, um. Nombre,
compte. S. Tole, or tallage, that is paid to the ports. Portorium, rij. ne.
ge. Le peage ou impost qu'on pay aux ports. S. Toll for freight, or passage
upon water. Naulum, li. Peage. H. Toll, or tax gatherer. Exactor, ris.
Telonarius. Receueur de taux, ou tauxe. S. Tomb. Sepulchrum, chri. Tumba, ae.
Tymbus, by. Tumulus, li. Bustum, ti. Arca, ae. foe. genesis Tomb ou tombeau. S.
To build a tomb. Monumentum extruere. Esleuer un tombeau.

To put in a tomb. Contumulare. Mettre en un tomb. S.

Tome, a part, or one volume of a book. Tomus, vel volumen. Un volume a part,
vne party d' un liver. S. Tonell, or shancke of a chymney. Fumarium, ij.
Infumibulum, li. n. g. Cheminee. Call. Un tuyau. Pals. Tonell wherewith
vynteners use to fille bottelles Infundibulum, li. n. ge. Un entonnouer. S.
Tongues for fire. Forceps, pis. Patillum, li. Tenaille. Tongue. Lingua, ae*
Glossa, ae. foe. genesis Langue. H. and Linguax, acis. He that has to much
tongue. Languard. S. The latin tongue. Latina lingua. La langue latin.

The mother tongue. Vernacula lingua. La langue maternelle. S.

To cut out ones tongue. Linguam resecare, Elinguare. Couper la langue a aucun.
S.

A little tongue. Lingula, ae. Glottis, dis. foem. ge. Languette. S.

Toode. Bufo, onis. m. g. Crapault. H. Toode stool, or musherom. Fungus, gi.
Boletus, ti. m. ge. Mousseron. Tool. Instrumentum, ti. n. g. Outil. S. All
sorts of tools. Armenta, orum. neut. genesis Toutes sorts d'outilz. S.

Tool, or instrumente having three teethe. Tridens, it is. m. ge. Plin. Top
for children. Trochus, chi. m. g. Un sabot. S. Top to play with. Turbo,
inis. mas. genesis Un sabot a se iouer. S. Top of an house. Fastigium, gij.
neut. genesis Coupet d'vn edifice. S. The top, and very point of any thing.
Coronis, dis. f. ge. Le sommet, and fin bout de quelque chose.

The top of a mountain. Supercilium montis, Cacumen, inis. Iugum, gi.
Summitas, atis. f. ge. Le coupeau, ou coupet d'vne montaigne. S.

Top of any thing. Apex, icis. Cacumen, nis. n. g. Le sommet de quelque
chose. S. Top of a rod, twigge, or wande. Sagitta, ae. f. g. Top, or
head of a pyller. Capitellum, li. n. genesis Un chapiteau. S. Top of hear
bound up with a hear lace. Tutulus, li. Torche. Funalis cereus. Fax, cis.
Funale, is. neut. ge. Torche. S. To carry, or bear a torch before some body.
Praeferre alicui face^. Porter la torche deuant quelqu'vn.

Torche bearer. Facularius.* Funalis. Seruiteur portant vne torche. S. Torde.
Merda, ae. Excrementum alui, Aluus, Stercus. Fiante. H. ou merde. S.
Tormentyll, an herb. Heptaphillon. Septifolia, Tormentilla, ae. foe. ge.
Tormentille. S. Torn. Delaceratus, a, u^. Dilaceratus, a, u^. Scissus, a, um.
Abscissus, a, u^. Laceratus, a, um. Lacer, a, um. Lacerus, a, u^. Ruptus, a,
u^. Mis en pieces, deschire. S. Tortoyse, fyshe. Chelys, lys. foe. ge. Vne
tortue. S. The couerture or shel of a tortyse. Chelonium, nij. n. g. Le
couerture and coquille d'une tortue. S.

Toss. Iacto, as. Agiter. S. Toss in the mind. Voluto, as. Colum. To toss,
or play at the bale. Certare pila, Colludere pila, Ludere pila. Iouer a la
paulme. S.

To be tos^ed from side to side. Iactari fluctibus. Estre agite de cost and
d'autre. S.

Toste. Tostus panis. Vne tostee, vne rostie. S. To toste. Torreo, res. Toster.
Pals.

Tosted. Tostus, a, um. Toste. Pals. Tothe. Barrus, ri. Dens, it is. Dent. H.
Dentatus, a, um. He that has teethe. Dentu, qui a des dens. Call. Dentatim,
Aduerb. Like teethe. Denticulatus, a, um. He that has slendre teethe.
Dentosus, a, u^. Full of teethe, or having many teethe. Tothe broken, and
eaten. Dens mutilatus. Dent rompue, and rongnee. S. Drawyng of a tothe. Euulsio
dentis. Arrachement de dent. S.

To scrape a tothe round about. Circumradere dentem, Circumscalpere dente^.
Ratisser vne dent tout entour. S.

Tothe ache. Dolor vel rabies de^tium. Mal des dens. Tothe break, an
instrument. Dentifrangibulum, li. n. geu. Plaut. To draw a tothe. Citare
dentem, Eruere dentem, Euellere, Eximere, Extrahere, Soluere. Arracher vne
dent. S.

To draw a tothe with the hand. Dentem manu excipere. Arracher vne dent a la
main. S.

Tothe called the check tothe, or gom tothe. Molaris, ris. m. ge. La dent
marcheliere. S. Tothed. Dentatus, a, um. Dentu. Call. Tothelesse. Edentulus, a,
um. Edente. S. Tothepyke. Dentiscalpium, pij. n. g. Vne curedent. S. Tow.
Stupa, ae. foe. ge. Estoupe. S. and Stupeus, a, um. Faict d'estoupe. Made of
tow. Toward. Erga, Versum, Versus. Ad, Verse. S. Toward him. Versum ad eum.
Verse luy. S. Toward the end. Sub finem. Verse la fin. S. Toward the weste.
Ad occidentem versus. Verse occident. S. Toward me. Erga me. Verse moy. S. Look
toward me. Ad me respice. Regard verse moy. S.

Toward Brunduse. Brundusium versus. Verse Brunduse. S. Towardnes, and good
disposition. Indoles, is. foe. ge. Bon naturel. S. Toward an other place.
Aliouersum, Aliorsum. verse autre lieu. S. Toward some place. Aliquorsum. Verse
quelque lieu Toward the left hand. Sinistrorsum. A main gauche. S. Toward
the right hand. Dextrorsum, Dextrorsus. A cost dextre. S. A place toward
the sowthe. Pronus ad meridiem locus. Verse le midi. S.

Touch. Aspiro, as. Contingo, is. Libo, as. Tango, is. Taxo, as. Toucher. S.
To touch some man a little in words, or writing. Perstringere aliquem.
Toucher quelqu'vn aucunement en parolles ou escripts. S.

My talk touches many. Pertinet oration mea ad plures. Mon dire touch
plusieurs. S.

This thing touches me. Haec res me attingit, Hoc ad me attinet. Cela me
touch. S.

Touch a thing quickly in a lettre. Aspergere aliquid in epistolis. To
touch a thing be it never so little. Attingere. Toucher tant soit peu. S.

To touch some thing. Pertingere. Toucher iusques a quelque chose. S.

Touch a thing scantlye. Primoribus labris gustare. Cic. This touches thee
nothing. Nihil ad te, Id tua refert nihil, Nihil tua interest. Cela ne te
touch en rien. S.

Thou have touched the point, or thou have hitte the nail on the head. Rem acu
tetigisti. Tu as touch le poinct. S.

Touch dishonestly, or handle the privy members. Mastrupor, aris. Touch
often. Contrecto, as. Taxo, as. Toucher souuent. S. Touch or to handle often.
Pertracto, as. Toucher and manier souuent. S. Touch, or to speak briefly.
Perstringo, is. Toucher ou dire en brief. S. Touch stone. Lydius lapis,
Coticula, ae. Heraclius lapis, Index, icis. m. ge. Pierre de touch. S. To
touch the quick, by translation the matter in deed. Resecare ad viuum. Colum.

Touched. Tactus, a, um. Touch. S. Touched with the spirit of God. Tactus
spiritu diuino. Touch de l'esprit de dieu. S. Touching. Tactus, us. m. g.
Tactio, onis. foem. genesis Touchement. S. Touching the father. Circa patre^.
Touchant le pere. Towell for the hands. Mantelum, li. Mantile, lis. Mantelium,
lij. n. g. Touaille a mains. S. Toughe. Lentus, a, um. Virg. vt Radix lenta. A
toughe root. A stem tough in breaking. Lentus in frange^do calamus. Plin.

Town. Vrbs, bis. Oppidum, di. n. g. Ville. H. and Oppidulum, li. n. g. Petite
ville. S. A little town. and Vrbicus, a, um. Of a town. De la ville. S. A
town that has many towers. Vrbs turrita. Ville ou il y a beaucoup de tours. S.

From town to town. Oppidatim. De ville en ville. Call.

Town incorporate. Municipium, ij. n. ge. Cic. Municeps, pis. om. ge. Cic. A
burges, or free man of that incorporation. Town near the sea side. Vrbs
maritima, Oppidu^ maritimum. Ville pres la mer. H. Townesman. Oppidanus. Un de
ville. H. Towrde, which is the excrement, or ordure of any living creature.
Merda, ae. Stercus, oris. Excrementum alui. Fiante. H. Tower. Pyrgus, Turris,
ris. Arx, cis. f. ge. Un tour. S. Turricula, ae. diminut. Ang. A little tower.
Petit tour, tourrette. S. Et Turriger, ra, ru^. Bearinge a tower. Qui port
tour. Call. A watch tower. Custodia, ae. Specula, ae. foe. ge. Le tour du guet.
S.

Keeper of a tower. Pyrgophylax, acis. Turriarius, rij. mas. genesis Le tourier. S.

Tower made of tymbre. Fala, ae. foe. ge. Fest. Towred, or which has towers.
Turritus, a, um. Qui a tour, ou tours. S. Towers of Troy. Pergama, orum, n. g.
Towers made for a spectacle, whereat the mariners, or shippeme^ in the sea, or
other by land have a token, or mark of comfort, or surety of their voyage.
Phari, orum. mas. and. foe genesis Tourment. Afflictio, onis. Cruciabilitas, it is.
Cruciatus, us. Poena, ae. Tormentum, ti. Torsio, onis. Crux, cis. Cruciamentum,
ti. n. g. Torment. S. To tourment. Affligo, is. Crucio, as. Effligo, is.
Excrucio, as. Cruciatu accipere, Vexo, as. Co^uexo, as. Diuexo, as. Exerceo,
es. Fligo, is. Infligo, is, xi. Torqueo, es. Ango, is. Tormenter. S. To
tourmente greatly. Percrucio, as. Excrucio, as. Perexcrucio, as. Afflicto, as.
Fort tormenter. S.

To tourmente him self continually. Afflictare sese. Se tourmenter
continuellement. S.

Why do I tourmente my self? Cur me excrucio? Pourquoy me tourmente ie? S.

Tourment me. Da me excruciatum. Tourmente moy. Tourmented. Cruciatus,
Excruciatus. Tormente S. Cruciabilis, e. Excruciabilis, e. Worthy to be
tourmented. Qui merit d'estre tormente. S. Tourmented to be. In tormentis
esse. Estre torme^te. S To be tourmented night and day. Torqueri, vel affligi
dies and noctes. Estre tormente nu^ct and iour. S.

To be greatly tourmented. Discruciari. Estre fort tormente. S. Tourmented with
sickness. Conflictatus, vel afflictatus graui morbo. Tormente de malady. S.
Tourmenting him self. Heautontimerumenon. Tourmentour, or hangeman. Tortor,
oris. mas. ge. Bourreau. S. Tournaying on horseback, or iusting. Hippomachia,
ae. foe. ge. Decursoriu^, rij. n. g. Un tournoy. S. Towting hoole to look out
at in a wall, or wyndowe. Conspicilium, lij. n. g. Plaut. Toy Vide Toi.
T. ANTE. R.
TRace, or step. Vestigium, ij. n. g. La trace. S. To search, or seek out
the trace. Indagare, Vestigare. Cercher a la trace. S.

To wind, or smell out the trace. Odorari vestigijs. Sentir a la trace. S.

To follow the trace. Persequi odore. Suyre a la trace. S.

To trace. Vestigo, as. Inuestigo, as. Indago, as. Tracer. S.

Tracer. Vestigator, oris. m. g. Traceur. S. Tracing. Inquisitio, onis.
Inuestigatio, onis. foe. ge. Tracement. S. To tracte, or entreat of. Tracto,
as. Traicter. S.

To tracte and speak of a thing again. Aliquid retractare. Traicter and parler
d'vne chose derechef. S.

Tracte of time. Propagatio temporis. Prolongeme^t de temps. S. To tracte, or
prolonge the time. Propagare te^pus. Prolonger le temps. S.

Tractable. Hurnanus, a, um. Lenis, e. Mansuetus, a, um. Tractabilis, e.
Commodus, a, dum. Facilis, le. Traictable. S. Tractable man. Commodus homo.
Homme traictable. S. A tractable adversary. Facilis aduersarius. Aduersaire
traictable. S.

A man very tractable. Facillimus homo. Homme fort traictable. S.

Tractable to make. Mansuefacio, cis. Mansuetum reddo. Fair traictable. S.
Tractable to wax. Mansuesco, scis. Mansuetus fio, Mitesco, scis. Deuenir
traictable. S. Tracting of time, or prolonging of time. Propagatio temporis.
Prolongement de temps. S. Trade and traffic that the factours make for their
masters. Actus institorum. Le train and traffic que les faicteurs font pour
leurs maistres. S. To use the trade of marchaundise. Negotiari, Exercere
commercium alicuius rei. Fair train de merchandise. S.

To turn him self to the trade of merchandise. Auertere se in mercaturam. Se
retirer au train de merchandise. S.

Tradition. Traditio, onis. foe. ge. Tradition. S. Traduce, or to turn.
Traduco, cis. Traduire. S. Traduce, or to turn into latin. Mandare literis
latinis, Latinae consuetudini tradere. Traduire en latin. S. Traffike, or trade
of marchaundise. Commerciu^, cij. neut. genesis Traffic de merchandise. S. To
have traffike, or trade with any. Commercium cum aliquo habere. Auoir quelque
traffic auec aucun. S.

Tragedy. Tragoedia, ae. f. g. Tragedy. H. Tragedy player. Tragoedus, di.
mas. genesis Ioueur de tragedies. S. Tragedy writer, or a maker of tragedies.
Tragicus poeta. Poet tragique, faicteur de tragedies. S. Trayl, or purs^e of a
woman's gown. Segme^tum, ti. n. ge. Valor. Max. Trayled, or purfled.
Segmentatus, a, um. Plaut. Train of any prince. Commitatus, tus. m. genesis Le
train d'aucun prince. S. Train and officers which a pretour, or other
magistrate had when he was in the province. Cohors, it is. Le train and officiers
qu'vn preteur ou autre magistrate auoit quand il estoit en le province. S.
Train of a woman's gown. Syrma, it is. neut. genesis La queue trainante H.
Traytoure. Proditor, oris. Perduellio, onis. Perfidus. Traistre and desloyal.
S. Traitor which flies from his captain in battle to the enemies.
Transfuga, gae. mas. gener. Qui s'enfuit aux ennemis. S. Traytorous, or full of
disloyalty. Perfidiosus, a, u^. Plein de desloyaulte. S. Traytorously, or by
treason. Perfidiose, Insidiose, Par insidias. Par trahison. S. Tranquillity.
Tranquillitas, it is. f. ge. Tranquillite. Tranquillity of mind. Animi sedatio,
Tranquillitas animi. Tranquillite d'esprit. S. Transcribe, or to copy out.
Transcribo, is. Describo, bis. Transcrire and copier. S. Transfigure, or to
change from one form to an other. Transfiguro, as. Transfigurer, ou changer.
Transfiguration. Transfiguratio, onis. foem. genesis Trasfiguration. S.
Transformation. Metamorphosis, seos. Transformatio, onis. foe. ge.
Transformation. S. To transform. Induo, is. Transfiguro, as. Transformo, as.
Transformer. S.

Transgress, or to pass beyond. Transgredior, eris. Varico, as. Varicor,
aris. Tra^sgresser and oultrepasser. Transgress ye law. Discedere a iure.
Vide offend. Tra^sgression. Transgressio, onis. f. g. Transgression. S
Transgressour. Transgressor, oris. mas. genesis Transgresseur. S. Transitory, or
during but a while. Momentaneus, a, um. Transitorius, a, u^. Caducus, ca, cum.
Transitoire. S. Translate. Muto, as. Traduco, cis. Transfero, ers. Verto, is.
Translater. S. Vide Traduce. Translate, or interpret. Interpretor, aris. Vide
Interpret. Translated. Translatus, a, u^. Versus, sa, sum. Translate
Translation. Interpretamentum, Interpretatio, Tra^slatio, Versio, onis. foe.
ge. Translation. S. Translation of words. Metaphora, est cum vox a propria ac
genuina significatione ad alienam, sed cognatam, transfertur, vt Video pro
intelligo, Perspicio pro cognitum habeo. etc. Translatour. Interpres, it is.
Translator, toris. m. ge. Translateur. S. Transome that goes ouerwarth a
house. Tra^stra, orum. Trabes transuersae. Vitruu. Transome in a ship,
whereon the hatches lie. Canonia, orum.* Transporte, or to carry over, or into
an other place. Mutare, Transfer, Asportare, Transportare, Alio confer.
Transporter. S. Transporter, he that transporteth, or carries. Tra^slator,
toris. m. ge. Tra^sporteur, qui transporte. S. Transporting, or a carrying from
one place to an other. Transportatio, onis. Asportatio, onis. f. ge. Transport
d'vn lieu en autre. S. Transporting, or the carrying. Translatio, onis.
Asportatio, onis. Gestatus, tus. m. g. Tra^sportement. S Tra^spose from one
place to an other. Differ, Transfer, Transpono, is. Transposer d'vn lieu en
autre. Transposed. Transpositus, ta, tum. Translatus, ta, tum, sieve Tralatus,
ta, tum. Transpose. S. Transposition. Transpositio, onis. foem. genesis
Transposition. S. Transumpt, or an exemplification, or the copy of a record
exemplified. Transumptum, ti. n. ge.* Trappe for myce, or rattes. Muscipula,
ae. foe. genesis Souriciere, Ratiere. H. Trappe, or ginne to take birds.
Decipula, ae. Decipulum, li. n. g. Sunt qui Transennam nomina^t. Un trebuchet.
H. Trapped. Irretitus, a, um. Captus, ta, tum. Trapped, or barded, or dressed
with trappoures. Phaleratus, a, um. Barde. S. Trappe, or to dress with
trappoures. Phalero, as. Barder. S. Trappe, or take in a trappe. Irretio, iui,
ire. Trappours, or bardes for horses. Phalerae, arum. Cataphragma, Lorica
equina. Bardes des cheualx. Travail. Labor, ris. Opera, ae. foe. ge. Trauail.
S. The pain and travail which men take to do some thing. Nisus, sus.
Conatus, tus. mas. genesis La peine and trauail qu'on prend a fair quelque chose.
S.

Great labor and travail passes all. Labor omnia vincit improbus. Le grand
trauail surmo^te tout.

It is a matter of great pain and travail. Multi sudoris est ea res, Multae
operae and laboris res, Plena immensi laboris. C' est vne chose de grande peine
and trauail. S.

To travail. Laboro, as. Opus facere. Trauailler.

Travail, or to labor in vain. Laborem inane^ capere, Operam perdere, vel
ludere, Sumere operam, vel sumere operam frustra. Trauailler en vain. S.
Travail, or to labor for any. Operam sua^ pro aliquo interponere, Niti pro
aliquo. Trauailler pour aucun. S. To give him self to labor and travail by
the way. Dare se labori and itineribus. Se mettre a trauailler and cheminer. S.

Travail with child, as women do in labor. Pario, is. peperi, Parturio,
is. Laborare e dolor, Terent. Trauailler d'enfant. S. Which trauayleth much,
and takes great pain. Laboriosus, Operosus. Qui trauaille fort and prend
grande peine. S.

Trauailer by the way. Viator, toris. m. g. Voyager. Travailing. Operositas,
tatis. Labor, oris. ma. genesis Trauaillement. S. Travailing of child. Partus,
us. m. g. Enfantement. Trance, or a sound. Defectus animi, Defectio animae,
Deliquium animi, Praeceps virium lapsus, Defectus animo. Transi, pasmoison. H.
She was in a trance. Defecerat eam animus. Elle estoit transie. S.

Tread down, or press down. Conculco, as. Calco, as. Opprimo, is. Pessum
premere, Proculco, as. Premo, is. Protero, is. Suppedito, as. Obtero, is.
Fouler. S. Tread out. Exculco, as. Fair sorter horse en foulant. S. To tread
grapes. Calcare vuas. Cato. Fouler la vendenge.

Tread under feet, or to tread with the feet. Co^culco, as. Opprimere
pedibus, Pessundo, as, didi, are. Pessum premere, Suppedito, as. Proculco, cas.
Superculco, cas. Obtero, ris. Fouler aux pieds. Treader of grapes. Lenobates,
Calcator, toris. m. ge. Fouleur. S. Treadinge with ye feet. Conculcatio, onis.
Obtritus, tus. Oppressio, onis. Calcatio, onis. foem. genesis Foulement des pieds.
S. Treason. Maiestatis crimen, Laesae maiestatis crimen, Perduellio, onis.
Proditio, onis. foem. gene. Trahison. S. Treason committed against the native
country. Parricidium, dij. n. ge. Cic. 3. Offic. Parricidiu^ patriae. To
commit high treason. Imminuere, vel minuere maiestatem, Laedere maiestatem.
Commettre crime de lose majesty, leser la majesty. S.

He accused him of treason. De proditione illum appellabat. Il l'accusoit de
trahison. S.

Condemned of high treason. Maiestatis damnatus. Condemn de lose majesty. S.

Treasorer of the common treasure. Quaestor aerarius. Archarius, rij. m. g.
Tresorier. H. The high treasorer. Arcarius summus, Arcarius parsimoniarum, vel
sanctioris aerarij. Bud Thresorier de l'espargne. S.

Treasorer of the wars. Quaestor, ris. m. genesis Un thresorier des guerres. S.
Treasorers which pay soldiers their wages. Aerarij praefectus. Treasory.
Gazophylacium, cij. n. g. Tresorerie, le lieu ou on met le thresor. Call.
Treasory of a co^minaltie, or country. Aerarium, ij. Repositorium publicae
pecuniae. Chamber de monnoyes. H. Treasory of evidences, or chartres. Archiuum,
ui. Grammatophilacium, cij. neut. genesis Le thresor des chartres. S. Treasure.
Thesaurus, ri. m. ge. Thresor. S. Treatable. Tractabilis, e. Commodus, da, dum.
Facilis, le. om. ge. Traictable. S. To become treatable. Mitesco, scis. Deuenir
traictable. S.

Treat, and to handle. Tracto, tas. Contrecto, tas. Traicter. S. Treat, and
to describe, or write some thing. Tractare rem aliquam, Scribere de re aliqua.
Traicter and descrire quelque chose. S. To treat of, and debate some matter.
Exagitare rem aliquam, Rem aliquam sermonibus agitare, Pertractare rem aliquam.
Traicter quelque matiere and la debatre. S.

Treat of a matter in law. Iure versari. Treat of peace. Agere de pace.
Traicter de la paix. S. Treaty of any thing. Dissertatio, onis. Commentatio,
onis. foe. ge. Traictement de quelque matiere. S. Treaty of peace. Foedus,
eris. n. ge. Traite de paix. S. Treaty, or agreament. Pactio, onis. Traite ou
accord. Treatise, and little book. Tractatus, tus. masc. genesis Traicte and
liuret. S. Treble, triple, or three fold. Triplex, cis. no. adiect. Triple. S.
Vide Triple. Treble voyced, or shryll tuned. Acutus, a, um. Tree. Arbor, ris.
foe. ge. Arbre. S. and Arboreus, a, um. Of a tree. D' arbre. S. Tree crooked.
Arbor incurua. Arbre qu'est panche. S. Tree bearing berries. Baccifera arbor.
Tree bearing fruit. Frugifera arbor, Foelix arbor, Arbor pomifera. Arbre
fruictier. S. Tree bearing no fruit. Arbor infoelix. Arbre qui ne port point
de fruict. S. Tree bearing twyse a year. Bifera arbor. Arbre qui port deux
fois l'an. S. To grow up, and becomme a tree. Arboresco, scis. Assurgere in
arborem. Deuenir and croistre en arbre. S.

Treen, wodden, or of wode. Arboreus, a, u^. D'arbre. Treen spones. Duratea
cochlearia.* Trees bringing forth, or bering grasses, plants, or settes.
Plantigerae arbores. Plin. lib. 13. Cap. 8. Arbres qui portent plants. Trees
growyng by ryuers sides, or in rivers. Retae, arum. Gell. lib. 11. Cap. 17.
Tremble, or to shake as an Aspen leaf. Palpito, as. Tremisco, scis. Tremo, is.
Contremo, is. Intremo, is. Trembler. S. To tremble with cold. Horreo, es.
Trembler de froid S.

To tremble for fear. Trepidare, Inhorrere. Tre^bler de peur. S.

To cause to tremble, or shake. Quatere, Concutere, Tremefacere. Fair
trembler. S.

To cause to tremble for fear. Trepidationem facere. Fair trembler de peur. S.

Trembling. Tremor, ris. m. g. Tremblement. S. Trembling, or full of tremblyng.
Tremebundus, da, dus. Tremblant. S. Trembling for fear. Trepidus, a, um.
Trepidans, it is. Tremblant de peur. S. Tremblingly, or in trembling for fear.
Trepidanter. En tremblant de peur. S. Trenche. Caecum vallum, Incile, is.
Lacuna, ae. f. g. Vne trenchee. S. Trenche before a camp to defend them from
artillery. Vallum, li. Vallus, li. m. ge. Un rampart. S. and Vallaris, re.
Pertaining to a trenche. Apartenant a rampar. Call. vt Vallaris corona, Qua
donari solebat qui primus vallum hostium fuisset ingressus. Trenches, or the
ditches that men of war make. Fossae, sarum. foe. ge. Trenchees que les gens
de guerre font. S. To make trenches. Fossas ducere. Fair des trenchees. S.

Trencher for meat. Quadra, ae. Mensa, ae. foem. ge. Un trenchoir. S. Trencher
of bread. Panicia mensa, Solum cereale. Trenchoir de pain. H. Trencher that is
round. Orbis, is. mas. ge. Un trenchoir rond. S. Trespass, or to break the
commandment of God. Fraud impia oblegari. Trespasser le commandment de
Dieu. S. Quasi diceres Transpassare, vltra transire, vel tra^sgredi. Vide
Transgress, offend, and sin. Trespass. Amissum, si. Peccatum, ti.
Transgressio, onis. Commissum, si. Vide Offense. Trestles of the table. Fulcra
me^saria, Subices me^sarij. Tripodes mensarij, Trapezophora, rorum. n. g.
Tresteaux de table. S. Treuet, or a brandiron. Chytropus, Ollae sustentaculum.
Trepied. H. and Chytra, trae. f. g. True. Iustus, a, um. Verus, a, um. Vide
true. Trewage. Tributum, ti. n. ge. Trewell for a mason. Trulla, lae. foem.
genesis Truelle de masson. Call. Trewyce. Induciae, arum. Vacatio militiae, Pax
sequestra. Treues. H. Trewice accorded with the enemy. Foedera conflata vel
percussa, Pactae induciae cum host. Treues accordees auec l'ennemi. S. To make
trewyce. Componere, vel percutere foedus, Inducias facere, Dicere, Inire vel
pangere. Fair treues. S.

To give trewice. Dare inducias. Donner treues. S.

To break trewyce. Inducias tollere. Rompre les treues. S.

Triakle. Theriace, ces. Theriaca, cae. f. g. Thriacle. Trial, or the proof.
Exam^n, inis. n. ge. Tentatio, onis. Periclitatio, onis. f. g. Experimentum,
ti. n. g. Preuue, espreuue. S. Trial of monye. Spectatio pecuniae. Cic.
Espreuue ou l'essay. S. Triangle. Triangulus, li. Triquetra, trae, vel
Triquetrum, tri. n. ge. Triangle. S. Triangled. Triangularis, re. Triquetrus,
a, u^. Triangulaire. S. Tribe. Tribus, us. Vne tribu. S. and Tribuarius, a, um.
Pertaining to the trybe. Appartenant a la tribu. S The people divided by
trybes. Tributim diuisus populus. Le peuple devise par tribus. S.

Tribulation. Aerumna, nae. Afflictio, onis. foe. genesis Tribulation. S.
Tributarie, or paying tribute. Tributarius, a, um. Vectigalis, e.
Stipendiarius, a, um. Tributaire. S. To render a people tributarie.
Stipendiarios, aut vectigales facere. Render un peuple tributaire. S

Tribute. Tributum, Vectigal, lis. n. g. Tribut. S. To set, or put a tribute.
Stipendium imponere, Tributum irrogare. Asseoir ou imposer tribut. S.

Tributour, or a tribute payer. Stipendiarius, ij. Tributarius, Vectigalis, is.
Qui doibt and pay tribut, taille. etc. S. Trick gallaunt and trymme. Cultus,
ta, tum. Eligans, it is. Ornatus, ta, tum. Orne. S. Vide trim. Trick,
gallaunt, or trim wenche. Foemina phalerata.* To trick, or draw grosely
with a coal, as paynters do at the first. Adumbro, as. Pourtraire quelque
chose grossement auec le charbon. S.

Try, or to make proof of a thing. Attentare, Experiri, Experientia tentare,
Facere periculum, Periclitari, Probare. Esprouuer. S. Try an account or
sum. Rations confer. To try and prove what one is. Aliquem inspicere
experimentis. Esprouuer aucun quel il est. S.

Try or prove him in learning. Fac periculum in literis. Esprouue le aux
letters. S. Try as the chief hounde tries the prick of an hare. Sectare
vestigia, Inuestigare. Vide Trace. Try by battle. Disceptare armis. Cic.
Try, and to choose or separate, the one from the other. Legere, Eligere,
Seligere, Deligere, Segregare. Trier and eslire, ou separer l'un d'auec
l'autre. S. Tried. Pensus, a, um. Probatus, a, u^. Periclitatus, ta, tum.
Spectatus, ta, tum. Qui est esprouue. S. That is proved and tried. Expertum
est. Cela est esprouue and experemente. S.

Tried, cleansed, or purged. Purus, a, um. Putus, ta, tum. Purge. S. Tried to be
by the law. Interrogari legibus. Tryer, or a prouer. Probator, ris. m. g.
Esprouueur. S Trier, a city. Augusta Treuerorum. Trier. S. Tryfles. Nugae,
arum. Tricae* carum. foe. genesis Baueries. S. Nugalis, e. Partayninge to tryfles,
or full of tryfles. Plein de baueries. S. Tryfles or toys of (...) valewe.
Abydena, Futilia and nullo prorsum d^^na pretio. Call. To tryfle. Ineptio, it is.
Nugor, aris. Tricor, caris. Nugas agere. Bauer. S.

Trifler. Gerro, nis. Ineptus, Nugator, Nugax, cis. Baueur. S. Et Nugatorius,
a, um. Of tryfles. De bauerie. S. Et Nugatorie. Fondlye and tryflinglye. Par
iaserie and bauerie. S. A seller of tryfles, and gaudes. Nugiuendus, di. m.
genesis Qui vend petis affiquets de nulle ou petite valeur. S.

Tryfling, vain or of no valewe. Nugalis, le. Nugatorius, a, um. Friuolus, a,
um. Friuole. S, Trifoyle, an herb. Trifolium, lij. n. genesis Treffle. Call.
Trying, or taking out the best from the worst. Selectio, onis. foe. genesis
Trymme, to deck, to set out or adorn. Comere, Excolere, Ornare, Exornare,
Redimere, Concinnare, Polire, Adornare. Orner, and parer. S. Trymme. Bellulus,
a, um. Cultus, ta, tum. Comptus, ta, tum. Coint. S. Mignon. Pals. Trymme and
fast writer. Viuidus calamo. Trymme wentche gorgiouslye decked. Phalerata
foemina. Trymmed. Concinnatus, a, um. Depexus, a, u^. Ornatus, Politus, a, um.
Cultus, ta, tum. Comptus, ta, tum. Elegans, it is. Orne. S. Trymmed gallantlye.
Redimitus, a, tum. Splendidus, a, um. Percultus, ta, tum. Perornatus, ta, tu^.
Perpolitus, ta, tum. Fort orne. S. Trymme a garden with beds. Deformare areas.
Parer and orner. S. To trymme gorgeouslye. Redimio, is. Orner. S.

Trymme hears. Dirigere comas, Ornare capillos, Crines componere. Ordonner les
cheueulx. S. Trymmelye. Belle, Co^cinne, Culte, Compte. Cointement. S.
Trymmelye, neatelye. Ornate. Decore, Condecore. Orneement. S. Trymmelye
apparelled. Candide vestitus, Laute vestitus, vel eleganter. Mignonnement
vestu. S. Trymming or deckinge. Ornatus, us. Comptus, tus. Cultus, tus.
Ornatio, onis. Ornamentum, ti. n. genesis Ornement. S. Trymmes. Polities, ei.
Co^cinnitas, tatis. f. genesis Lenocinium, nij. Elegantia, ae. foe. genesis
Mignonnette. S. Tryndle of a mylle. Molucrum, cri. Vel molocru^, cri. n. genesis
Call. Trinitye. Trinitas, it is. foe. genesis Tripartite. Tripartitus, a, um. Parti
en trois. Call. Tripartite, or in three parts. Tripartito, In tres parts. En
trois parties. S. Trypes. Omasa, orum. Omasum concisum. Des tripes. S. A man
that sells trypes. Omasarius, rij. Alla^topola, ae. Bud. Tripier. S.

A trype wife. Omasaria, ae. Allantopolis, idis. Bud. Tripiere. S.

Tryperye, or place where they sell trypes. Allantopolium, Thermopolium. Bud.
Posset etiam dici Omasarium, rij. n. genesis La triperie. Tryple, or three fold.
Triplex, icis. vt Tergemina vel triplex victoria. A tryple victory. Triple
victoire. S. To tryple. Triplico, cas. Tripler. S.

Triuete. Chytropus, dis. Tripus, odis. Trepied. S. Tryumphe. Triumphus, phi.
m. genesis Triomphe. S. Triumphalis, e. Partayninge to tryumphe. Triomphal,
conuenant a triomphe. S. Et triumphatus, ta, tum. Whereof tryumphe is made. De
qui on a triomphe. S. To tryumphe. Triumphare, Triumphum ducere, Triumphum
agere. Triompher. S.

Tryumphant. Triumphans, it is. Ouans, it is. Triomphant. S. Tryumpher.
Triumphator, oris. Qui triomphe. S. A man which has tryumphed. Vir
triumphalis, qui habuit triumphos. Homme qui a triomphe. S.

Tryumphinge. Triumphatus, tus. m. g. Triomphement. S. Tryumphantlye.
Magnifice. Triomphamment. S. Trodden. Calcatus, ta, tum. Foul. S. vt Vuae
calcatae Ovid. Trodden grapes. Vendange foulee. S. Troy. Troia, ae, foe. genesis
Ovid. Troll. Voluo, is, Voluto, as. Vide Tumble. Trone or seat royal.
Thronus, ni. mas. genesis Throne. S. Trone sitter, or he that sytteth in Majesty.
Altitronus.* Trope, an alteration of a sentence, or word from his proper
signifycation. Tropus, pi. ma. g. Trotte. Discurso, as. Cursare assidue.
Troter. S. That horse trotteth. Sucussat equus ille. Ce cheual la trotte. S.

Trotter or beater of the streates. Ambulator, oris. m. g. Un trotieur. S.
Trotting. Succussatio, Succussatura, ae. Succussus, us. mas. g. Trot i will
cheual. S. Trottinge horse. Equus succussator, succussarius, succussor, tortor,
crucians. Trotier, qui va le trot, and galope dur. H. Trow, or to ween.
Arbitror, aris. Existimo, as. Iudico, as. Opinor, aris. Puto, as. Penser, ou
cuider. S. As I trow. Vt puto, Vt opinor, Vt mea fert opinio. Comme ie cuide,
ou ie pense. S.

Trouble. Diuidia, ae. Turbatio, onis. Turba, ae. Trouble. S. Turbella, ae.
Dimi. Ang. A little or small trouble. Un petit trouble. S. Trouble of mind, or
spyrite. Affectio, onis. Afflictio animi. Angor, ris. Morbus animi. Pathos,
Perturbatio animi. Commotio animi. Perturbation d' esprit. S. To trouble.
Acerbo, as. Agito, as. Commoueo, es. Cico, ies. Cio, ciui. Insesto, as.
Conflicto, as. Conturbo, as. Inquieto, as. Perturbo, as. Solicito, as. Turbo,
as. Vexo, as. Afficio, cis. Troubler. S.

To trouble one, which is about any business. Interturbare, Obturbare,
Interpellare. Troubler celuy qui est en quelque affayre. S.

To trouble the quietness, and government of ye public weal. Conuellere Reip.
statu^. Permutare Remp. Troubler la tranquillite and police de la Rep. S.

The wine has troubled his head. Vinum tentauit caput eius. Le vin luy a
trouble la test. S.

Trouble much. Fatigo, as. Fort troubler. S. Trouble with fear. Percello, is,
culi. Troubler de paour. S. To trouble ones mind with fear. Percellere
alicuius pectus pauore. Troubler a quelqu'un l'esprit de paour. S.

Trouble with wars. Bello premere. Cic. Troubled. Affectus, a, um. Commotus,
a, um. Perturbatus. Turbatus, ta, tum. Trouble. S. A troubled mind or spyrite.
Alienata men's. Esprit trouble. S.

A mind troubled with fear. Animus commotus metu. Esprit trouble de paour. S.

Troubled to be. Discrutior, aris. Vt discrutior animi. I am sore troubled in
mind. Ie suis fort trouble en mon esprit. S. Troubled water. Aqua turbida.
Eaue troublee. S.

A troubled man. Homo turbidus, vel turbule^tus, Perturbatus. Homme trouble. S.

Troubling. Turbatio, onis. Conturbatio, onis. f. g. Troublement. S. Troubler.
Turbator, oris. Conturbator, oris, m. g. Troubleur, qui trouble. S.
Troublesome, or full of troublinge, or who troubles much. Vexabundus.
Troubleous, or full of troubles. Fluctuosus, a, u^. Tumultuosus, Turbidus,
Turbulentus. Turbule^t, plein de troubles. S. Troubleous sea. Vndosum mare.
Virg. Troubleous wind. Turbo, inis. m. g. Virg. Troubleouslie, or with
trouble. Tumultuose, Turbide. Auec trouble. S. Trowell for a mason. Trulla, ae.
f. g. Vne truelle. S. Troughe. Aqualiculus, li. Stylobata, Alueus, uei. m. genesis
Un auge. S. A little troughe. Alueolus, li. m. g. Un auget, ou petit auge. S.

Trougthe. Veracitas, atis. Veritas, atis. f. g. Verite. S. Vide Truth.
Trougthe speaker, or which says the truth. Veridicus. Veriloquax, cis.
Veriloquus, a, um. Qui dit verite. S. Trougthe to say. Vero, as. Verum dicere.
Dire vraye. S. Trowing, supposell, and judgment. Existimatio. Opinio, onis. f.
g. Opinion and judgment. S. Trowkle. Artemon, nis. m. g. Iabolenus. Trowte a
fish. Varius, ij. Trocta. Truta, ae. foe. genesis Truite. S. A salmon troute.
Truta salmonata. Truite soulmounee. S.

Troute spear, or pricket. Fuscina, ae. foe. g. Cic. True. Verus, a, um.
Vraye. S. It is as true as the Gospel. Habet omnes in se numeros veritatis. Il
est vray comme l'euangile.

It is true. Verum. Il est vray. S.

Like to be true. Probabilis, le. Verisimilis, le. Similis vero. Vraye
semblable. S.

It is true? it is even so? Ain? Ain'tu tandem? Itane vero? Est il vray? S.

It is very true which they say. Profecto hoc vere dicunt. Il est bien vray ce
qu'on dit. S.

Truly. Prorsum, Reipsa, Vere, Reuera. Vrayement. S. And truly this is even
he. Et certe ipsus est. Et vrayment c' est luy mesme. S.

Trump. Exbalisto, as. *. Trumperye, or old baggage. Scruta, orum. n. g.
Baggage. S. Trumpet. Aes cauum, Buccina, ae. Tuba, ae. f. genesis Trompette. S.
The voice, and sound of a trumpette. Tarata^tara, Clangor, oris. Bombus, by.
mas. genesis La voix and son d' une trompette. S.

Trumpette of brass or copper. Tuba ductilis. Trompette de cuyre. H. To sound
a trumpet. Clangere, Tuba canere, Sonner de la trompette. S.

To sound a trumpette in war. Dare signum militibus, and in militia. Sonner
la trompette en la guerre. S.

Trumpetour. Buccinator, oris, m. g. Tubic^n, inis. m. genesis Un trompetieur S.
Trunchion. Talea, ae. foe. genesis Tronson. Pals. Trusse, or fardle. Sarcina, ae.
foe. g. Fardeau. S. Trusse up. Suffarcino, as. Trousser. S. To trusse up his
carryages, and implements. Vasa, vel sarcinas colligere. Trousser son baggage,
and ses hard^. S

To cry that every one trusse up his implements, and carryage, to depart or
remove. Co^clamare vasa. Crier que chascun trousse ses hardes, and baggage pour
desloger. S.

Trussed. Suffarcinatus, ta, tum. Trousse. S. Trust. Confidentia, ae. Fidentia,
ae. Fides, ei. Fiducia. Spes, ei. Confisio, onis. f. g. Fiance, confiance. S. I
have this trust that he will return safe and sound. Spero illum tibi saluum
affuturum. I'ay cest confiance qu'il retournera sain and sauue. S.

Trust which one has of himself. Fiducia sui. Fiance qu'on ha de soymesme. S.

Folishe trust. Stolida fiducia. Sote fiance.

Trust. Confido, is. Credo, is. Fido, is, sus sum. Ponere fiduciam. Reponere
fidem. Sumere confidentia^. Se confier, se fire. S. To trust to any. Credere
se alicui, Alicui confidere, Fidem habere alicui. Se fire a aucun. S.

To trust altogether in any one. Omnia in aliquo reponere. Se fire du tout en
quelqu'un. S.

To trust any with keepinge another. Credere alicui custodiam alicuius. Se
fire a aucun de garder un autre. S.

To trust greatly to any. Ponere multum in fide alicuius. Se fire fort a
aucun. S.

Trust greatly or much. Perfido, is. Se fire fort. S. Trustye or sure. Certus,
a, tum. Fidelis, e. Fidus, a, um. Perfide lis* e. om. g. Seur, feal. S.
Trustinge. Confisus, a, um. Fretus, a, um. Se confiant. S. Trusting in God. Deo
fretus. Se confiant en Dieu. S. We trusting in your equitye. Nixi aequitate
vestra. Nous confians en vostre equite. S.

Truth. Veritas, atis. foe. genesis Verite. S. Some semblance, or show of the
truth. Veritatis vmbra. Quelque semblance de verite. S.

The truth is on his side. Facit cu^ eo veritas. La verite est pour luy. S.

Try. Vide Tri.
T. ANTE. V.
Twain. Vide two. Twale or a twibill axe. Bipennis, nis. f. g. Besague. S.
Tubbe.. Cupa, ae. foe. genesis Vne cuue. S. A bathing tubbe. Solium, lij
Baptisterium, rij. n. genesis Un cuuier, ou vne cuue a se baigner. S.

Tucke up a garment. Colligere vestem. Trousser la rob. S. Twede, a river
which deuideth England and Scotland. Tuesis. Twelve. Duodicim, bis sex.
Douze. Call. Twelve hundredth thousand sester^ians, Duod^cies sestertium. Douze
cent mill sesterces. S. Twelve times. Duodecies. Douze fois. S. Twelfe
together. Duodeni, ae, a. Nebriss. Twelfth. Duodecimus, a, um. Douziesme. Call.
Twentye. Bis deni. Vicenus, a, um. Vigenti. om. genesis Vingt. S. Twentye eyghte
times. Duodetricies, Duodetriginta. Vingthuit fois. S.

Twentye years. Bis deni anni. Vingt aus. S. Twentye times. Vicies, Vigies.
Vingt fois. S. Twentieth. Vicenarius, Vigesimus, a, um. Vicesimus, a, um.
Vingtieme. S. The twentieth part. Vigesima pars. La vingtieme party. S.
Tuffet, or a tufte. Apex, cis. m. g. La pipette. S. Twigge. Flagellum, li.
Virga, ae. foe. genesis Verge. S. And made of twigges. Virgeus, a, um. Faict de
uerges. S. More lithye, or pliante then the twigges of salowe, or wythie.
Lentior virgis salicis. Ovid.

Twyelighte. Crepusculum, li. n. genesis Enter chien and loup. S Twyne. Vide
Twist. Twinkle or to win^ke often with the eye, as they do that fear, or as
they do that g^ue a sign by winkinge. Nictare, crebro conniuere prae metu,
oculorum motu signum dare, vel claudendo alterum vel vtrunque. Cligner les
yeus. H, Twinkling of an eye. Momentum oculi. Un clin d'oeil. H. Twynne.
Gemellus. Vel geminus foetus. Ovid. Gemeau. S. Twyse. Bis. Deux fois. S. Twyse
in a year. Bis anno. Deux fois l'an. S.

Twyse, and thryse. Bis, terque. Deux and trois fois. S.

Twyse as much. Bis tanto. Deux fois autant. S. He shall have twyse as much.
Altero tanto amplius habebit. Il en aura deux fois autant. S.

Twyst. Contorqueo. es. Retorqueo, es. Torqueo, es. Retordre. S. Twysted or
twyned. Contortus, a, um. Tortus, a, um. Intortus, a, um. Retortus, a, um.
Retort. S. A twisted thread. Filum intortum, Retortum. Fill retort. S.

Twite, or to vpbrayde. Exprobro, as. Obiurgo, as. Imputo, as. Profero, rs.
Obijcere aliquid alteri, Obijcere praeuaricationem, Improbro, as. Reprocher. S.
They one twite another. Vterque alteri obijcit. Ils se reprochent l'un a
l'autre. S.

Tuition or safe keepinge. Tutela, ae. foe. genesis Tutelle. S. And pertayninge to
tuition and safe keepinge. Tutelaris, re. om. genesis Tutelaire, appertenant a la
tutelle. S. To deceive the pupil, which is committed into our tuition or safe
keepinge. Pupillum fraudare, qui in tutelam nostra^ peruenit. Tromper le
pupille qui est mis en nostre tutelle. S.

You may commit your child into his tuition, or safe keepinge. En cui tu tuu^
filium committas. Bailez luy t^n enfant en tutelle. S.

Twitinge or vpbraydinge. Exprobratio, onis. Co^pellatio, onis. Opprobrium,
brij. Obiectatio, onis. f. g. Reproach. S. Tumble or to role. Voluo, is.
Rouler. S. To tumble or role before him. Prouoluere. Rouler deuant soy. S.

Tumble down. Deuoluo, is. Deualler. S. To tumble, or roll again. Reuoluere.
Rouler de rechef. S.

To tumble, or to roll out of any place. Euoluere. Rouler de quelque lieu. S.

Tumble, or to wallowe. Voluto, as. Veautrer. S. Tumbled down. Deuolutus, a,
um. Deualle. S. Tumbler which can dance through a hoope. Petaurista, ae.
Petauristes, ae. m. g. Faiseur de soubresaultes. S. Tumblers hoope or cord, or
any thing that the tumbler plays with. Petaurum, ri. n.g. Mart. Tumbrell
wherein two men be set imprisoned both hand and foot. Numella, ae. Plaut.
Tumbrell, a carte. Plaustrum, tri. Plostrum, tri. Benna, ae. foe. genesis
Tombereau. S. Tumult, Tumultus, us. m. genesis Tumulte. S. To make a tumult.
Tumultuari, Tumultuare. Fair tumulte. S.

Tumultuous, Tumultuosus, a, um. Tumultueux. S. Tumultuouslye. Tumultuose.
Tumultueusement. S. Tune. Phthongus, gi. Tonus, ni. Sonus, ni. Sonitus, tus. m.
genesis Le ton. S. Tunable singinge. Symphonia, ae. Concentus, tus. m. g. Accord
des voix, Melodieux chant and accordant. S. Tunye, a fish. Pelamis, dis.
Thunnus, ni. Thynnus, ni. Orcynus, ni. m. g. Ton, tonnine. H. Tun. Calpar,
ris. Dolium, ij. n. g. Varro. Tonneau. Pals. And partayning to a tun.
Doliaris, re. om. genesis Appartenant a un tonneau. S. A little tun. Doliolum,
li. n. genesis Un tonnelet. S.

Tunnel. Infundibulum, li. n. genesis Un entonnouer. S. To tun, or to pour wine
into vessels. Diffundere vinum in cados, Infundere. Entonner. S.

Two. Duo, ae, o. Deux. S. Which has two foreheades. Bifrons, it is. Qui ha deux
frons. S.

Two days continual. Biduo continenti. Suet. Two days space. Biduum, i. n.
g. L'espace de deux iours. Call. Two foot long or broad. Bipedalis, e.
Bipedaneus. Bipedanus, a, um. De deux piees de long, ou large. Call. In two
manner of ways. Bifariam. En deux sorts ou manieres. S.

Two hundred. Ducentum. Ducenti, ae, a. Deux. cents. Call. Two hundred times.
Ducenties. Deux cent fois. S. Two hundred years. Ducenti anni. Deux cent ans.
S. Two members having. Bimembris, e. om. genesis Qui ha deux members. S. Of two
months. Bimestris, e. om. g. De deux mois. S.

Two pound weight. Dipondium, dij. n. genesis Cic. A sheep of two years old.
Bidens, it is. f. g. Vne brebis de deux ans. S.

Of two colors. Bicolor, oris. De deux couleurs. S.

Which has two horns. Bicornis, ne. Qui ha deux corns. S.

Two quaters on the dyce. Stesichorites. Two verses of one thing. Distichon,
chi. n. genesis Distique. S. Of two years. Bimus, a, um. De deux ans. S.

Two years space. Biennium, ij. n. genesis L'espace de deux ans. S. Turbut.
Chalcis, Rhombus. Turbot. S. Turfe. Cespes, it is. Gleba, ae. foe. genesis Motte, ou
glason. S. A green turfe. Cespes viuus, Gramineus cespes, viridis. Motte de
terre verde. S.

Which is full of turfes. Glebosus, a, um. Qui est plein de mottes. S.

Turffye, or of turffe, Cespitius, a, um. De motte, ou glason. S. Turyne, a
cittye. Augusta taurinorum, Turin. S. Turks. Turcae, arum. Turnay a town.
Tornacum, Neruij. Tournay. S. Turn. Refero, rs. Verto, is. Voluo, is.
Conuerto, it is. Tourner. S. To turn the wrong side forward. Inuertere,
Prouertere. Tourner a l'enuers. S.

To turn the back. Auersari. Tourner le dos. S.

To turn out of one place into another. Inuergere. Tourner d'vn lieu en autre.
S.

Turn about. Circumago, is. Circu^flecto, is. Circumuerto, is. Tourner tout en
tour. S. Turn about, or contrary. Offlecto, is. Plaut. To turn again.
Reuerti, Pedem refer. Remeare, Reuersionem facere, Redire, Redambulare, Viam
redire, Reuenire. Retourner. S.

To turn home again. Conuertere se domum, Reuerti domum. Retourner en la
maison. S.

To turn again hastelye. Recurrere. Retourner hastiuement. S.

Turn another way. Campso, as. Iter flecto. Nebriss. Turn away, Auerto, is.
Declino, as. Destourner. S. Turn back. Reuoluo, is. Reuerto, is. Deuolui
retro, Retrorsum redire. Retourner en arriere. S. To turn back from whence
one came. Reciproco, as. Retourner don't on est parti. S.

To turn between his hands. Ventilare. Tourner enter ses mains. S.

To turn, or to make and fashion round. Torno, as. Tourner, ou fair and
facionner au tour. S.

Turn in. Intorqueo, es. Inuerto, is. Plaut. Turn into another figure or
shape. Transfiguro, as. Transformo, as. Transformer. S. Turn into salt. Abire
in salem. To turn like a wheel. Roto, as. Rouer. S.

To turn his way some whether. Diuerto, is. Tourner son chemin quelque part. S.

Turn often. Voluto, as. Tourner souuent. S. To turn him often. Versare se.
Se tourner souuent. S.

Turn or course. Vicis, ci, cem, ce. foe. genesis Plin. In his turn, or course.
Sua vice. A son tour, a sa route, a sa fois. S.

Every one his turn, or course. Suam cuiusque vicem. Chascun sa fois, ou son
tour, par tournees, chascun sa route. S.

Turn by turn. Vicissim, Subalternatim, Vicibus alternis, Per vices, Vicibus.
Tour a tour. S.

Turn, or to work any thing with a wheel as turners do. Torno, as.
Accoustrer quelque chose au tournoir. S. To turn or wind into many plaites.
Sinuo, as. Tortuer en plusieurs plis. S.

To turn over Chronicles, and to read them. Origines reuoluere, Memoria^
annaliu^ vel temporum replicare. Fueilleter les Chroniques, and les lire. S.

To turn over books. Libros voluere, Euoluere libros, Prouoluere libros,
Peruolutare libros. Fueilleter les livers. S.

Turn out of the high way. De via decedere, Declinare a via, Vel declinare
se extra viam, Loco se mouere, and declinare, Diuertere via, Se destourner du
chemin. S. Turn quickelye from the purpose. Transuersum agere. To turn
toward some thing. Aduerto, is. Tourner verse quelque chose. S.

To turn, or to diswade any. Auertere, Abducere, Deflectere, Abalienare,
Aliquem labefactare, Cauere aliquem aliquid facere, Conuertere. Destourner
aucun. S.

To turn any from his opinion. Aliquem a se^tentia, vel de sententia mouere,
vel dimouere. Destourner quelqu'vn de son opinion. S.

Turn upright or upward. Resupino, as. Renuerser le ventre en hault. S. Turn
vpsyd down. Euerto, is. Inuerto, is. Procello, is. Reuoluo, is. Subuerto, is.
Peruerto, is. Tourner au rebours. S. Turned. Versus, a, um, Conuersus. a, um.
Turn. S. A place turned toward the South. Pronus ad Miridiem locus. Lieu
turn verse le midi. S.

Turned downewarde. Deuersus, a, um. Deorsum versus. Festus. Turned garment
whose wrong side is turned outward. Translata vestis. Turned, or driven about
with the hands as a mustarde querne is. Trusatilis, e. om. g. Cato. Turned, or
fashioned, and made round. Tornatus, a, um. Tornatilis, le. om. genesis Turn ou
faict and faconne au tour. S Turned to be into a stone. Lapidesco, scis.
Deuenir pierre. S. Turned to be into milk. Lactesco, scis. Deuenir en laict.
S. Turned to be into whaye, as when the milk chau^geth. Seresco, scis. In
serum abire. Call. Which is easelye turned hither, and thither. Versatilis, le.
om. genesis Qu'on turn aiscement ca and la. S.

Turninge. Versura, ae. Versatio, nis. foe. g. Tournement. S. Turninge to the
place from whence one is come. Reciprocatio, onis. foe. genesis Retour au lieu
don't on est parti. S. Turning often or mutable. Versutus, a, u^. Variable. S.
Turninge or windinge of a water bancke. Sinus, us. mas. genesis Terent. Sinuosus,
a, um. Full of windinges and turninges. Qui ha beaucoup de destours. S. Turning
or wynding in many ways. Tortuosus, a, um. Liu. Turning out of a common order,
a figure, where the preposition is set after his casual word, as in saying
Italye against, Italiam contra: for against Italye, Contra Italiam. Anastrophe,
es. foe. genesis Turnour. Tornator, oris. m. g. Tourneur. S. Turner of one out of
the right way. Obuaricator, oris. m. g. Turnours pin, or spindle. Mymphur.
Sipont. Turnours wheel or instrument. Tornus, ni. foe. g. Un tour, ou
tournoir. S. Turpentyne. Resina larigna, Laricea, De la tormentine. S. Turret.
Turricula, lae. foe. genesis Tourelle, ou tourette, ou tournelle. S. Turretted, or
made full of turrettes. Turritus, a, um. Toure. S. Turtle dove a bird. Trigon,
nis. Turtur, ris. mas. genesis Vne tourtre, ou tourterelle. S. Tushe or tut. Bat,
Interi. Plaut. Tuskan a country. Thuscia, ae. Hetruria, ae. f. g. Et
Hetruscu^, a, um. Of that country. Some Poets do name ye full moon, Hetrusca
luna. Tuskan tongue, or language. Thuscana lingua. Tuskanes. Thusci. Cic. Tut.
Bat, Interi. Plaut. Tut mouthed. Broncus, a, um. Bronchus, a, um. Brochus, a,
um. Varro. Tutour. Author, ris. Tutor, ris. mas. genesis Tuteur. S. Tutorius, a,
um. Partayninge to a tutour. Apartenant a tuteur. S. To be made a tutour by
testamente. Testamento tutorem institui, vel fieri, aut creari. Estre cree
tuteur par testament. S.

The tutours and overseers of Orphants. Authors pupillorum. Tuteurs and
curateurs des Orphelins. S.

Twy. Vide Twi.
T. Ante. Y.
Vide T. Ante I.

V. ANTE. A.
V, The fifte vowell, which is oftentimes changed either into a s^ngle
consonante, as, Quum tales animos iuuenu^. etc: Or into a double consonante as,
Cupiui, Cupiueram, where I, coming before V. is made long. But V. consonante
sometime is contrarywyse changed into a vowell, by the figure Diaerisis: as,
Debuerant fusos euoluisse suos, for Euoluisse. Also after the opinion of some,
V. followinge these letters, G. Q. S. As Gu, Qu. Sua, is no consonante, and
loses the virtue of a letter. Finallye, V. in nombringe, signifies ^^ue: As
for example in these nombers followinge.v.vi.vii.viii.5.6.7.8. Vacant, or which
has naught to do. Vacans, it is. om. genesis Qui n'ha que fair. S. Vacant time,
or leisure. Otium, tij. n. genesis Loisir. S. To be vacant, or to be at leisure.
Vaco, as. Frui otio. Estre de loisir. S.

Vacation. Vacatio, onis, Vacation. S. Vacation, and cessinge from pleadinge.
Iustitium, tij. n. genesis Vacation and cessation de plaids. S. To command the
vacation. Iustitium indicere. Commander les vacations. S.

Vacations. Feriae solennes. Vacations. S.

To goo abroad during the vacations. Bimestribus abesse, et peregre agere.
Aller dehors durant les vacations. S.

The vacation of the court or parliament. Dies curiae halcyonij, Iustitiu^
curiae, Vacationes curiae, Iustitium curiae anniuersarium. Les vacations du la
cour de parliament. S.

Vagabund. Errabundus. a, um. Vagabundus, a, um, Vagus, a, um. Erraticus, a,
um. Erro, onis. m. genesis Vagabond. S. Vagabundes or malefactors. Homines
malefici, Vagi, Sine lare familiari, sine domicilio certo viuentes. Vagabonds
ou malfaicteurs. S.

Veil. Velum, li. n. g. Un voile. S. Vain. Inanis, e. Irritus, a, um. Vanus,
a, um. Cassus, a, um. Vain. S. Vain glory. Gloria ventosissima, Inanis
gloria. Vain gloire. S. Somewhat vain. Subinanis, ne. om. genesis Aucunement
vain. S.

A stroke geeuen in vain. Vanus ictus. Un coup done en vain. S.

In vain. Incassum, Nequicquam, Frustra. En vain. S.

To pray in vain. Ab re orare, Precibus vanis solicitare al^quem. Prier en
vain. S.

Vain speech or talk. Vaniloquentia, ae. foe. genesis Parolle vain. S. Vain
speaker, or talker. Vanidicus, Vaniloquus, a, um. Inaniloquus, a, um. Qui parle
chooses veins. S. To do in vain. Frustro, as. Caesar.

Vainlye. Vane, Inaniter. Vainement. S. Veins. Vide Veins. Valeria^ an herb.
Pheu, Valeriana, Nardus rustica, Marinella, Genicularis, herba Benedicta.
Valeriane. H. Valiant, or hardye. Strenuus, a, um. Audax viribus, Generosus,
Validus, Fortis vir. Vaillant. S. Valiant in arms, or in war. Armipotens,
Bellicosus. Vaillant aux arms, ou a la guerre. S.

He has sheewed him valiant, or hardy in this. Hac re strenuu^ hominem se
praebuit. Il s'est port vaillant en ce. S.

Valiauntlye. Bellicose, Fortiter, S^renue, Valide. Vaillamment. S. To defend
himself valiantlye. Athletice resistere. Se deffendre vaillamment. S.

Ho valiantly done. Hui perfortiter factum. Voila vaillamment faict. S.

Valiauntnes. Fortitudo, Magnanimitas, Bellicositas, atis. Strenuitas, atis.
foe. g. Vaillance, vaillantise. S. I have tried his valiauntnes. Expertus sum
quanti fuerit. I'ay experimente sa vaillantise. S.

Valley. Vallis, is. foe. genesis Vallee. S. A wide, or broad valleye.
Extentissima vallis. Vallee fort estendue. S.

A little valley. Vallecula, ae. f. genesis Petite vallee. S.

Valleys lying between two hills or mountains. Int^riectae collibus valles.
Vallees qui sont enter des montaignes. S. Value. Pretium, Valor, oris.
Valitura, ae. foe. genesis Valeur ou value. S. A poor pray, and of small value.
Tenuis praeda. Pour proye, and de petite valeur. S.

A thing of little value. Friuolum, Exile. Chose de petite valeur. S.

An instrument of small value. Instrumentum mendicum and exiguum. Instrument de
peu de valeur. S.

Valuation. Aestimatio, onis. Indicatio, Indicatura, ae. Estimation. S.
Valuation of goods. Census, us. m. g. Cic. To value. Aestimo, as. Pendo, is.
Aestimationem facere. Estimer. S.

Valued. Aestimatus. a, um. Estime. S. Vanishe away. Euanesco, scis. Vanesco,
scis. S'esuanouir. S. Vanitye. Vanitas, it is. Vanitudo, inis. f. genesis Vanite. S
Vanitye of any science, craft, or misterye. Mataeotechnia. Vanne. Vannus, ni.
Ventilabrum, bri. Vallum, li. n. genesis Van. S. Vanne, or to fan corn.
Euentilo, as Euanno, as. Vanno, as. Ventilare frumentum. Vanner, Esue^ter. S.
Vanner. Vannator, oris. m. genesis Vanneur. S. Vanning. Vannatio, onis.
Ventilatio, onis. foe. genesis Esuentement. S. Vanquishe. Deuinco, cis. Profligo,
as. Prosterno, is. Supedito, as. Vinco, is. Euinco, cis. Prouinco, cis. Supero,
as. Vaincre. S. To vanquish by force. Eluctari. Vaincre a force. S.

To vanquishe by war. Debellare. Vaincre par guerre. S.

Vanquishe with words. Confuto, as. Plaut. To vanquishe or surmount any in
some thing. Praecurrere aliquem, Excellere, Antecellere. Vaincre and surmonter
aucun en quelque chose. S.

Which one cannot vanquishe. Indomitus, a, u^. Insuperabilis, le.
Ineluctabilis, le. Inuictus, a, u^. Qu'on ne peult vaincre. S.

Vanquished. Debellatus, Deuictus, Superatus, Victus, a, um. Impugnatus, a, um.
Subactus, a, u^, Domitus, a, u^. Vaincu. S. Et Vincibilis, e. Able, or easy to
vanquishe. Aise a vaincre. S. To be vanquished in a good cause. Concidere in
optima causa. Estre vaincu en bonne querelle. S.

To confess him to be vanquished. Herba^ porrigere. Se confesser estre vaincu.
S.

Vanquisher. Bellator, oris. Superior, Victor, oris. m. g. Vainceur. S. To
depart vanquisher. Superiorem discedere. S'en aller vainceur. S.

Vapor. Halitus, us. Vapor, ris. Vapos, ris. Exhalatio, onis. f. g. Vapeur. S.
Vapor of the earth. Halitus vel Aspiratio terrae. Vapeur de la terre. S. To
vapor, or cast out vapoures. Halito, as. Vaporo, as. Iecter des vapeurs. S.

The floude, or river does cast out a vapoure. Amnis anhelat vapore. Le fleuue
iecte vne vapeur. S.

Vary. Differo, rs. Vario, as. Altero, as. Varier. S. Vary, or to strive with
one. Controuersor, aris. Litigo, as. Auoir noise, and debat contre quelqu'vn.
S. Variable. Versutus, a, um. Inconstans, it is. Mobilis, le, Desultorius, a, um.
Variable. S. To be variable and light. Fidem mutare. Estre variable and legier.
S.

Variable friendship. Desultoria amicitia. Amity variable. S. Variance, or
strife. Controuersia, Lis, it is. Dissidiu^, ij. neut. ge. Noise. S. Variety.
Varietas, atis. foe. ge. Variete. S. Variety in form. Dissimilitudo, inis.
foem. genesis Dissimilitude. S. Varying, or changing. Varians, it is. om. g.
Variant ou changeant. S. To show, or declare some thing without varying.
Recta via rem narrare. Raconter quelque chose sans varier. S.

Vat, or fat, a vessel for water, ale, bear, or any lycoure. Labrum, bri. n.
g. Vne cuue. S. Vault. Arcus, us. Crypta, ae. Fornix, cis. Camera, ae. Testudo,
inis, Concameratio, onis. f. g. Voulte. S. To make into a vaulte. Confornicare,
Arcuare. Fair en voulte. S.

Made in a vault, as the shell of a Torteese. Testudineatus, a, um.
Testudineu^, a, um. Faict en voulte, comme la coquille d'vne tortue. S.

Vaulted. Crypticus, a, um. Arcuatus, a, um. Cameratus, a, um. Concameratus, a,
um. Conuexus, a, um. Voulte. S. Vaulted rouffe. Testudineatum tectum. Vitru.
Vaulte, or to make vaultes, or arches. Fornico, cas. Arcuo, as, aui.
Confornico, as. Camero, as. Concamero, as. Voulter. S. Vaulter on a horse.
Desultor, ris. mas. ge. Varro. Vauntage, and that which is over measure.
Corollarium, rij. n. genesis Auentage, and ce qui est oultre la mesure. S. To
vauntage a man. Commodis augere. Auantager un homme. S.

Vaunte, or to booste him. Iactare se, Venditare se. Se vanter. S. To vaunt, or
booste him in some thing. Iactare se de, vel in re aliqua. Se vanter de quelque
chose. S.

To vaunte, or booste that he is able to do some thing. Sumere sibi aliquid. Se
vanter de pouoir fair quelque chose. S.

Vaunting, or boosting. Ostentatio, onis. Iactatio, onis. Iactantia. ae. f. g.
Vanterie. S. Vau^ter, or a boaster. Iactator, oris. Thraso, onis. m. genesis
Vanteur. S.
V. ANTE. D.
Vdder. Vber, ris. Huber, ris. n. g. Tette. S.
V. ANTE. E.
VEale. Caro vitulina. Chair de veau. Vehemence. Impetus, us. Vehementia, ae.
f. ge. Vehemence. S. Vehemence of the heart. Impetus animi. Vehemence de cueur.
S. With great vehemency. Vehementer. Auec grande vehemence. S.

Vehemence in talk. Acrimonia in oratione. Vehemence en oraison. S. Vehement.
Vehemens, it is. Viuus, a, um. Acer, cris, cre. Ardens, it is. om. ge. Vehement.
Vehement, and of mighty power. Torrens, torre^tior, torrentissimus,
Impetuosus. Vehement and impetueux. S. Vehement fury, or rage. Incitatus furor.
Fureur vehemente. S. Vehemently. Vehementer, Acriter. Vehementeme^t. S. Vein.
Vena, ae. f. g. Vein. S. and Venosus, a, um. Full of veins. Veinu, plein de
veins. S. Vein of the liver. Caua vena. La vein du foye. S. Veins of
silver, or lead. Molybdaena. Veins of gold, and silver. Venae auri and
argenti. Venies d'or and d'argent. S. The veins beat. Micant venae, and
saliunt. Les veins batent. S.

Veins of the thiegh and leg, or other places full of melancholy blood.
Varices, cum. masc. genesis Veins de la cuisse, and de la iambe, ou autres lieux
pleines de sang melancholique. S. Velvet gown. Vestis holoserica, Serica
heteromalla. Rob de velour. S. Velvet bonet. Redimiculum, li. n. ge. Iuuenal.
Velume, or parcement. Me^brana, ae. f. g. Parchemin. Vendible, or which may be
bought. Vendibilis, le. om. ge. Vendible. S. Venerable. Venerabilis, le. om.
ge. Venerable. S. Venery, or lechery. Venus, eris. foe. ge. Paillardise. S. and
Venereus, a, um. Of venery, or lechery. De paillardise. S. Venge. Vlciscor,
sceris. Supplicium sumere, Vindico, as. Persequi iniurias. Venger. S. Vide
Revenge. Vengeable, or full of cursednes, mischief, or ungraciousness.
Scelestus, a, um. Plaut. Vengeance. Vindicta, ae. Vltio, onis. Vindicatio,
onis. foe. g. Vengeance. S. To demand vengeance. Expetere poenas. Demander
vengeance. S.

To take vengeance. Vindicare. Prendre vengeance.

Venger. Vindex, cis. Vltor, oris. m. g. Vengeur. S. Venice a city. Venetiae,
arum. f. ge. and Venetus, a, u^. Of Venice. Venecians. Veneti. Venim.
Deleterion, Toxicum, ci. Venenum, ni. Virus malum. Venim. S. Venim which
makes the poisoned black. Atru^ venenum. Venim qui rend noirs les
impoisonnez. S. Venimed. Venenatus, a, um. Empoisonne. S. Venime. Veneno, as.
Empoisonner. S. Venomous, or full of venim. Venenosus, Virulentus, a. um.
Vemmeux. S. Venison. Caro ferma, Ceruina. Venaison. H. Venison of a wild bore.
Aprugna caro. Chair d'vn sanglier. H. Vent or to snucke as a hou^de, or spaniel
does. Nicto, is. Fest. Very gladly, or willingly. Perlibe^ter. Fort volu^tier.
Very fair. Nimis pulcher. Fort beau. S. Very easy. Perfacilis, le. om. ge.
Fort facile. S. Very good. Optimus, a, um. Tresbon. S. Very like. Verisimilis,
e. om. ge. Cic. Very likely. Verisimiliter. Very little. Paululum. Fort peu. S.
They are very few. Sunt oppido pauci. Ils sont fort peu. S.

Very much. Admodum, Oppido, Plurimu^, Qua^plurimum, Valde, Magnopere,
Vehementer, Fort. S. Very much or much more. Praenimis, Multo plus, Nim^o plus.
Beaucoup trop. S. Very well learned. Perdoctus, a, um. Fort scauant. S. Very
learnedly. Perdocte. Fort scauamment. S. Very long. Perdiu. Fort longuement.
S. Very profitable. Quam vtile, Apprime vtile. Fort vtile. S. Very well.
Optime, Egregie, Oppido, Graphice, Perbelle. Fort bien. S. Very happy.
Perbeatus, a, um. Fort heureux. S. Very good. Perbonus, a, um. Fort bon. S.
Verify, and to ratify. Ratu^ facere. Verefier, and ratifier. Verily. Certe,
Certo, Equidem, Porro, Profecto, Vtique, Enimuero, Nae, Nimirum, Proculdubio,
Prorsum, Quidem certe, Siquidem, Explorate, Indubitanter, Plane. Certainement.
S. Verily I do so. Ego vero ita facio. Certainement ie le fay ainsi. S. No
verily. Non sane. Non certes. S.

Veriuice, or sharp sauce. Omphacium, cij. neut. g. Agrest, verdius. H.
Verlet, or a drudge. Mediastenus, ni. m. ge. Seruus, ui. m. ge. Verlet. S.
Vermillion. Minium, nij. neut. g. Du vermeillon. S. and Mineaceus, a, um. Of
vermillion. De vermeillon. S. To painte with vermillion. Minio, as. Peindre de
vermeillon. S.

Vermyn. Vermes, mium. m. ge. vel potius Insecta animalia. Vermin. S. and
Verminosus, a, um. Full of vermin, or worms. Plein de verse. Call. Vermiculor,
aris. Ang. To be full of vermin. Vermino, as. To have vermin. Vide Worm.
Vernyshe. Vernix, icis. Hermolao Barbaro dicitur Vernigo, fit e gummi iuniperi.
Du vernis. S. To vernishe over. Vernice elliuere. Vernisser. S.

Verse. Carmen, inis. Metrum, tri. Versus, us. mas. g. Verse, carme. H. and
Versiculus. diminut. Ang. A little, or short verse. Un verset. Call. Verse
heroical, or of six feet. Versus Heroicus, Hexamiter, Pythyus (quod
interfecto Pythio dracone compositus esse dicatur) Longus, Epicus. Un verse de
six pieds. H. S. Verse of a leven syllables. Hendecasyllabus, qualis ille
Catullianus, Passer deliciae meae puellae. Verse wanting one foot in the end.
Brachycatalecticum carmen. Call. Verse wherein no syllable wanted. Acatalectos,
and Acatalecticus versus, Cui opponitur catalecticus, cui vna syllaba deest.
Call. Verses containing praises, triumph, or victory. Epinicia, orum. Sueton.
Verses elegant, and cunningly made. Ornati, elaboratique versus. To make, and
write verse. Condere carmen, Pangere carmem, Componere, Contexere, Fingere.
Composer and escrire des verse. S.

To make a nombre of verses. Fundere versus. Composer verse en abondance. S.

Versicle, or a little, or short verse. Versiculus, li. m. g. diminut. Un petit
verse. H. Vertingale for a gentle woman. Limus, mi. Vsurp. vocab. Virtue.
Virtus, it is. foe. ge. Virtue. S. Virtue conterfeyted. Virtus assimulata. Virtue
contrefaicte. S. He which has virtue, has al things, He is rich enough
that has virtue. Omnia adsunt ei bona, quem penes est virtus, Omnia bona
adsunt ei, penes quem virtus est, id est qui virtutem habet. Qui ha virtue, il
ha tout. Il est assez rich, qui ha virtue. Cord.

Virtue, or power. Vis, uim, ui. Virtue and force. S. Virtuous. Probus a, um.
Virtuosus, a, um. Compos virtutum. Vertu^ux. S. Veruen, an herb. Hierobotane,
Verbena, Verbenaca, ae. Peristereos, Peristereum, Peristereon, onis. Herba
columbina, columbaris, sagminalis, Sagmen, inis. n. g. Veru^ine. S. Vessel.
Vas, sis. n. g. Vaisseau. S. and Vasculum, li. n. g. A little vessel. Petit
vaisseau. S. Vessel to put must in. Mustarius vrceus. Un vaisseau ou l'on met
du moust. S, Vessel of silver. Argentum, ti. n. g. Vaisselle d'argent Vessel
wrought. Vafa coelata. Vaisselle ouuree. S. Vessel used in old time for wine.
Armillum, li. neut. genesis Varr. Vessels of all sorts, to sail, or row in.
Nauigiu^, gij. neut. ge. Toute sort de nauire. S. Vessels to put honey in. Vasa
mellaria. Vaisseaux a mettre du miel. S. Vessels in which they salt, either
flesh, or fish. Cadi salsamentarij. Vaisseaux esquels on sale de la chair, ou
du poisson. S. Vessels serving for oyntmentes. Vnguentaria vasa. Vaisseaux
seruans a onguens. S. Vessels used about consecration, or other ceremonial
offices. Anclabra. Fest. Vessels used in journey. Viatoria vasa. Vestment, or a
garment. Vestis, it is. Vestimentum, ti. Indumentum, ti. Amictus, tus. m. g.
Vestement. S. Vestment for a priest. Poderis, Casiola, Pallium sacrum.
Cassuble. S. Vestry, or sextrie in a church. Sacrarium, ij. Adytum, ti. n. g.
La sacristie. S. Vesture. Vestis, it is. Vestitus, tus. masc. gener. Vesture. S.
Vesture from the bealy downward. Limus, mi. m. g. Vetche, fetch. Vicia, ae.
foe. ge. De la vesce. S. and Viciarium, rij. n. genesis A place sowed with
vetches. Un lieu seem de vesce. S. Vexation. Vexatio. Afflictio, onis. f. g.
Vexation. S. Vexation of mind. Agonia, ae. foe. ge. Angoisse. S. Vex, or to
tormente, or trouble. Ango, is, nxi. Agito, as. Conflicto, as. Exagito, as.
Molesto, as. Perturbo, as. Premo, is. Vexo, as. Conuexo, as. Diuexo, as. Vrgeo,
es. Turbo, as. Affligo, is, ixi. Vexer and tormenter. S. Vex the mind.
Macero, as. Plaut. Vexed. Perturbatus, a, um. Afflictus, a, um. Afflige, vex.
S. To be vexed, afflicted, or tormented. Conflictor, taris. Estre vex,
afflige, ou tormente. Et Conflictatus, ta, tum. Which is vexed, afflicted, and
tormented. Qui est afflige, vex and tormente. S.

To be vexed and tormented with people of his own house. Hostibus domesticis
laborare. Estre vex and tormente de gens de sa mesme maison. S.

Vexed to be with sickness. Morbo affici, vel te^tari. Vexed with sickness.
Affectus morbo. Vexer, or one that vexes. Vexator, toris. mas. genesis Vexateur.
S.
V. ANTE. G.
VGGly. Sentus, ta, tum. Horridus, da, dum. Perhorridus, da, dum. Hideux. S.
Vide Horrible, Hideous.
V. ANTE. I.
VIage, or a iourneye. Itio, onis. Iter, tineris, n. ge. Peregrinatio, onis.
Profectio, onis. f. g. Voyage. S. Vide Voyage. Vial, or a little glass.
Phiala, lae. f. ge. Vne phiole. S. Vicar. Vicarius. Vicaire. S. It is also he
that supployeth the rowme or stead of an other. Vicarius, a, um. Ang. That
which does supplye the rowme of an other. Qui tient la place d'un autre. S.
Vice. Vitium, tij. n. g. Vice. S. This vice is to be noted for many causes and
reasons. Multis nominibus est hoc vitium nota^dum. Ce vice est a noter pour
beaucoup de causes and raisons. S.

An open and manifest vice. Certissimum and maximum crimen. Vice notoire and
manifest. S.

To fall into vice. Delabi in vitium. Cheoir en quelque vice. S.

They incur the same vice. Idem vitium consequuntur. Ils encourent le mesme
vice. S.

All have that vice. Commune est omnium vitium. Tous ont ce vice. S.

Vices covered, and hid. Vitia infucata, aut tecta. Vices couuers and cachez.
S. Vice, or spindle of a press. Cochlea, ae. foe. genesis La viz de la press. H.
Vicecounte. Procomes, it is. com. genesis Vicecomte, ou vicomte. S. Vicegerent.
Quasi vices gerens alterius, Vicarius. Vicegerent. S. Viceroye, he which is
king in the kings steed when he is absent. Prorex, gis. m. g. Viceroy. H.
Viciat. Corrumpo, is. Vitio, as. Vicier and corrompre. S. Viciated. Corruptus,
a, um. Vitiatus, a, um. Vicie. S. Vicious. Petulans, it is. Solutus, a, um.
Vitiosus, sa, sum. Vitijs laborans, Particeps vitij, Vitijs affectus. Vicieux.
S. Viciously. Petulanter, Solute, Viciose. Vicieuseme^t. Viciousnes.
Vitiositas, tatis. foe. ge. Cic. Vice. Call. Victory. Palma, ae. Trophaeum, i.
Victoria, ae. foe. ge. Victoire. S. Victory dommageable. Nocentissima victoria.
Victoire dommageable. S. To carry away the victory. Palmam accipere,
Adipisci, Apprehendere, Far palmam. Emporter la victoire. S.

The victory is escaped my hands. Excidit e manibus victoria. La victoire
m'est eschapee des mains.

We have the victory. Victoria in manibus est. Nous auons la victoire. S.

He had the victory. Cessit illi victoria. Il a eu la victoire. S.

Victorious. Victor, toris. Compos victoriarum. Victorieux. S. To be
victorious. Victoria^ habere vel reportare. Palmam far, Potiri hostiu^. Estre
victorieux. S

Vigilance. Vigilantia, ae. foe. ge. Veillance. S. Vigilant. Vigilans, it is.
Vigil, lis. com. ge. Veillant. S. Vigilant to be. Vigilo, as. Veiller. S.
Vigilantly. Vigilanter. Vigillament. Call. Vigor, or strength. Vigor, oris. m.
g. Vigueur. S. To be in force and vigor, or in his flower. Estre en sa force
and vigueur, ou en sa fleur. S.

Vigourous, or full of vigor. Viuidus, a, um. Neruosus, sa, sum. Vegetus, ta,
tum. Vigoreux, Plein de vigueur. S. Vile and base. Abiectus, a, um. Humilis, e.
Impurus, a, um. Vil is, e. Vil. S. A thing vile and base. Abiectu^ and humile.
Chose ville and basse. S.

Vile person, that does al vile things for money. Homo sordidus. Qui fait
toutes chooses villes pour argent. S. Vile to make. Vilito, as. Vilem reddo..
Auiller. Vile to wax. Sordesco, scis. Vilesco, scis. Deuenir vile. Call.
Vileness of price, or estimation. Vilitas, tatis. foem. genesis Vilite. S. Vileness,
filthe, or ordure. Sordes, dis. f. ge. Vilete. S. Vilenie and ordure. S. For
the vileness of the person. Propter hominis sordes. Pour la uilete de la
person. S.

A vile and filthy person. Lutulenta persona. Vne person pleine d'ordure and
de vilenie. S.

Vily. Viliter. Vide Villanously. Vily apparailed, or filthilye clad.
Sordidatus, a, u^. Sordidis vestibus indutus. Vestu ordement and salement. S.
Vilage. Pagus, gi. Villa, ae. Vicus ruri, aut Vicus rusticus. Un village. H. Et
viculus, li. m. g. Villula, ae. dimin. Ang. A little village. Petit village. S.
Villaris, e. Villaticus, a, u^. Pertaining to a village, or of a village. De
village. Call. Village by village, or from village to village, or by villages.
Pagatim, Vicatim. Par villages, ou de village en village. S. A villager, or one
that dwelles in a village. Rusticus, Vicanus, Paganus. Un villageois. S.

Villayne, or a naughty fellow. Impurus, Turpis. Vilain and meschant. S.
Villain, or a bondsman. Seruus, ui. Mancupium, pij. n. g. Villein. S. I suppose
these to be villains Regardant (as our law calls them) and Serui ex lapide
empti, vel Serui emptitij. Villaynes in gros. Villeins en gros. Litel. Villainy
in acts. Obscoenitas, it is. Turpitudo, inis. Probrum, bri. Impuritas, tatis.
foe. ge. Vilenie. S. Villanously, or vily. Foede, Impure, Illiberaliter,
Indigne, Spurce, Turpiter. Vilainement. S Villinage. Colonarium.* Vine. Vines,
Vitis, is foe. ge. Vigne. S. and Viticula, ae. diminu. Ang. A little, or young
vine. Petite vigne. and Vineaticus, ca, cum. vel Vitigineus, a, um. Of a vine.
De vigne. S. Vine bastard, or savage. Taminia, * Labrusca, Vitis agrestis,
Vitis erratica. Vigne bastard, ou sauuage. S. Vine base, or low. Vitis
humilis. Basse vigne. S. Vine only planted for the grapes to be eaten. Vitis
ad escam deposita. Colum. lib. 3. Cap. 2. Vigne plantee seulement pour en
manger le raisin. S. Vine being old and cut down to make settes, to plant
again. Propago, ginis. and Propages, is. La prouin de vigne. Call. Vine called
the black vine, whereof the best wine is made. Inerticula. Colum. lib. 3. Cap.
2. Vine cut of, and shragged. Sarpa, Vinea putata, Id est pura facta. Fest.
Vigne pouee and taillee. Call. Vine leaf. Pampinus, ni. m. ge. La fueille de la
vigne. Vine newely grown. Malleolus, Nouelletum, ti. n. ge Vigne nouuelle. S.
Vine ronning on a frame. Pergulana vitis. Vine setter, or a planter of vines.
Vitisator, toris. m. ge. Qui plant vignes. S. To plant a vine. Vitem
instituere vel ponere. Planter vne vigne. S.

To plant a young vine. Nouello, as. Planter vne nouuelle vigne. S.

To proppe the vine. Adminiculare vitem. Appuyr la vigne. S.

To cut the vine. Vites auerruncare, Castrare, Desecare, Detru^care, Putare,
Rescindere. Tailler la vigne. S.

Vineyarde. Vinea, ae. Vinetum, ti. n. g. Vignoble. H. Vines raised up upon
frames and perches. Cantheriatae vineae, Statuminatae vites, Characatae vineae,
vel Pedatae vineae. Vignes eschalasses. S. Vines ought not to be dunged.
Stercus vitibus ingerendum non est, Vites non sunt stercorandae. Vignes ne
doibuent estre fumees. S. Vinegar. Acetum, ti. n. ge. Vinaigre. H. Vinegre and
honey sodden together. Oxymeli, Acetum mulsum. Plin. lib. 14. Cap. 17. Vinegar,
and water sodden together. Oxycratum, Posca, ae. Bruuage d' eau and vinaigre.
H. Vinegrettes, or salades. Acetaria, orum. neut. genesis Vinaigrettes, salades.
S. Viner, or orderer, or trymmer of vines. Vinetor, oris. Pampinator, toris. m.
g. Vigneron. H. Vinewed. Mucidus, a, um. Fracidus, da, dum. Rancidus, da, dum.
Moisi and ranci. S. Very much vinewed. Praerancidus, da, dum. Fort moisi. S.

Vinewed, or a musty, or hoare color. Cano situ obductus color. Couleur moisi.
S. Vinewed to be. Muceo, es. Mucesco, scis. Estre moisi. Vinewed to wax.
Mucesco, scis. Fraceo, es. Situm trahere. Se moisir. S. Vinewing, or moling of
bread or wine, for stalenes, Mucor, oris Caries, ei. Situs, tus. masc. gene.
Moississure. S. Vintage, or the gathering of grapes. Vindimia, ae. foe. genesis
Collectio vuarum. Vendange. S. Vintener, or a seller of wine. Oenopola,
Vinarius, rij. m. g. Tabernarius, rij. m. genesis Vendeur de vin, Tauernier. S.
Vyole, or a little glass. Ampulla, ae. Phiola, lae. foe. genesis Vne phiole. S.
and Ampullaceus, ea, eum. Of a viole. D'vne phiole. S. Vyole maker, or a maker
of bottels. Ampullarius, rij. m. ge. Faiseur de phioles, ou de bouteilles. S.
Violable, or able to be defiled, or apt, or easy to be violated. Violabilis,
le. Violable. S. Violate. Conscelero, as. Conspurco, as. Contamino, as.
Contemero, as. Temero, as. Violo, as. Violer. S. Violate, and to break the
law. Lege^ tollere, Perrumpere legem. Violer and rompre la loy. S. To violate
the law. Violare leges. Violer les loix

Violence. Impetus, us. Violentia, Vis. Violence. S. To do violence to any.
Vim and manus alicui infer, vel afferre, Facere vim alicui. Fair violence a
aucun. S.

Violent. Impetuosus, a, um. Violentus, a, u^. Violent^ Violently. Vi.
Violenter. Auec violence, violemment. Violet. Viola, ae. foe. ge. Violette. S.
Violet color. Lanthinus, na, number. Violaceus, a, u^. De couleur viole^. Call.
and Violarius. He that dies violet. Qui teint en violet. S. A place full of
violettes. Violarium, rij. neut. ge. Violier. S.

Viper, a kind of serpent. Vipera, ae. f. ge. Vipere. H. Virgin, or a pure
maid. Virgo, inis. f. ge. Vierge. S. and Virginalis, le, vel Virgineus, ea,
eum. Of a virgin, or maid. De vierge. S. Virgin, or a maid mariable. Virgo
nubilis, Viripote^s, Tempestiua, Matura viro, Matura thoro. Fille mariable,
pressed a marier. H. Virgin not mariable. Virgo immatura, Acerba. Pucelle
tresieune a marier. H. Virgin, or maid espoused, or made sure to some man.
Virgo desponsa. L'espouse, vne vierge vouee a quelqu' un. H. Virgin old, and
old maid paste the time of conception. Virgo exoleta. Vicille vierge. H.
Virgin, whose breasts begin to plumme, and wax round. Virgo sororians.
Plaut. Ioune fille a qui primierement croissent les tettins. H. Virgin
defloured. Incesta virgo, vitiata, corrupta. Vierge corrompu. S. To defloure a
virgin. Vitium pudicitiae addere, Vitiare virginem, Deuirginare. Despuceler. S.

Virginalles to play on. Clauecymbalum, li. n. ge. vulgo Virginale. Espinette.
H. Virginity. Virginitas, tatis. foe. ge. Virginite. S. Visage. Facies, ei.
Vultus, us. m. g. Le visage. S. O fair visage. O faciem pulchram. O le bean
visage. S.

The form of the visage. Oris species. La form du visage. S.

To change his visage, or countenance. Mutare vultum. Changer de visage. S.

Visarde, or a visou^e to put on a man's face. Larua, ae. Persona, ae. foe. ge.
Un faulx visage. S. He which has a visarde. Laruatus, Personatus. Qui ha un
faulx visage. S.

Visible, or able to be seen. Visibilis, e. Visible. S. Vision. Visio, onis.
Visum, si. Phantasia, ae. foem. ge. Vision. S. A vision from heaven. Oblata
caelestium species. Vne vision du ciel. S.

A vision which one sees sleeping. Insomnium, nij. n. ge. Vision qu'on voit
en dormant. S.

A faulse vision and semblaunce. Phantasma, atis. n. g. Faulce vision and
semblance. S.

Visit, or to go to see. Visere, Conuisere, Inuisere, Visitare. Visiter. S.
To visit his province. Obire prouinciam sua^. Bud. ex Cic. Visiter sa
province. S.

Visit now, and than. Interuiso, is. Visitation. Visitatio, onis. foe. ge.
Visitation. S. Visour for a masker. Larua, ae. Persona, ae. Vide Visarde. Et
Laruarus, a, um. Whose face is covered with a visoure. Vitayler. Macellarius,
Annonarius. Viuandier. S. Vitailers of the court. Annonarij aulae comites. Bud.
Viuandiers de la cour. S. Vitailes, or vitayle. Annona, Cibatus, us. Cibariu^,
rij. n. g. Le viure. S. and Macellum. Is the place where vitayles be sold.
Vitayles of a whole year. Annona, ae. foe. genesis Les viures d'vne annee. S.
Dearthe of vitayles. Caritas annonae, Arctior annona, Acris annona, Annona
cara, Difficultas annonae, Durior annona, Grauitas annonae, Annona grauis,
Incendiu^ annonae. Cherte de viures. S.

Vitayles for an army, or hooste. Commeatus, us. m. ge. Les viures d'vne
armee. S. To keep the ennemies from vitayles, to stop the passages of
vitayles from the ennemies, or to cut the ennemies short of their vitayles.
Intercludere hosts commeatibus, Intercludere inimicis co^meatu^. Coupper les
viures aux ennemis. S.

Vitayling house. Popina, ae. Taberna diuersoria, et Popinalis, e. Pertaining
to a vitayling house. Vitriol, or coperouse. Chalcanthum, thy. neut. genesis
Vitriol. H.
V. ANTE. M.
VMbrage, or shadow of woods, or trees. Vmbraculum, li. n. ge. Opacitas, it is.
foe. ge. Ombrage. S. Vide Shade. The vmbrage, or shade kepes the^ from growth.
Opacitas prohibet incrementum. L' ombrage les guard de croistre. S.

Vmpire, or an arbitter. Arbiter, tri. m. g. Arbitre. S.
V. ANTE. N.
First in this kind of phrase it is to be noted, that every word (for the
most part) beginning with this syllable Un, except verbes, be certain
adjectives, and negatiues to the words of which they be compounded, as for
example. Taught, Untaught, Doctus, Indoctus. Spotted Unspotted. Maculatus,
Immaculatus. Like, Unlike. Similis, Dissimilis. etc. So that untaught,
Indoctus, Is compounded of In, and doctus, Unlike, Dissimilis, Is compounded of
dis and Similis, which makes the contrariety, and so of other, Unable,
inepte, or not sufficient. Inhabilis, le. Inhabile, inepte and non suffisant.
S. Unaccustomed. Dissuetus, a, um. Insolitus, ta, tum. Inusitatus, ta, tum.
Insuetus, ta, tum. Inaccoustume. S. Unadvised. Incogitans, it is. Incogitatus,
ta, tum. Inconsidere. S. Unadvisedly. In praeceps, Praecipitanter, Imprudenter.
Inconsiderement. S. Unarm, or to take away ones armoure. Dearmare, Exarmare,
Armis aliquem exuere, Arma detrahere alicui. Desarmer aucun. S. To unarm him
self. Arma deponere. Se desarmer. S.

Unarmed. Dearmatus, ta, tum. Desarme. S. Unbelieving, or infidelity.
Infidelitas, tatis. foe. genesis Infidelite. S. Vnbende. Remitto, is. Retendo,
dis. Desbender. To vnbende a bow. Arcum detendere, vel Retendere. Desbender un
arc. S.

Vnbending. Remissio, onis. f. g. A bow vnbente. Arcus retentus, Arcus
remissus. Arc desbende. S.

Unbind. Vide Vnlowse. Vnbowell. Exentero, as. Euentrer. Call. Vnbrydle.
Effraeno, as. Fraenos equis detrahere. Desbrider. S. Unbridled. Effraenatus, a,
um. Effrene. Call. Unbuckle. Diffibulare, Refibulare. Desboucler. S. Unburden.
Exonero, as. Onere leuo, Onus detraho. Descharger. Call. To unburden, or unload
one. Aliquem deonerare, Exonerare, vel Deponere onus alicui, Leuare alicui
onus. Discharger aucun. S.

Uncertain, or doubtefull. Anceps, Incertus, ta, tu^. Dubious, a, um.
Uncertain. S. Very uncertain. Perincertus, ta, tum. Fort uncertain S.

Unchangeable. Immutabilis, e. Indeflexus, a, um. Immuable. S. Uncle of my
fathers side. Patruus, ui. Patris frater. L'oncle paternel. H. Uncle of my
mothers side. Auunculus, li. Matris frater. Mon oncle du cost de ma mere. H.
Uncle to my father. Patruus magnus. L'oncle de mon pere. H. Uncle to my
grandfather. Patruus maximus. L'oncle grand de mon pere. Unclean. Impurus, ra,
rum. Immundus, da, dum. Impur, ord and sale. Call. Unclose. Discapidino, as.
Vide Open. Unclothe. Deuestio, is. Exuo, is. Desuestir. S. Vncome, or a fellon.
Furnuculus, li. Bossete dure. H. Incorrupt. Intemeratus, a, um. Inuiolatus,
ta, tu^. Incorruptus, ta, tum. Qui n'est point viole. S. Uncover, or to open.
Aperio, ris, rui. Descouurir. S. Uncovered, or discovered. Apertus, a, u^.
Discouuert. Incredible. Incredibilis, le. Incredible, ou incroyable. Unction,
or annoynting. Vnctio, onis. foe. g. Vnctura, rae. foe. ge. Onction. S.
Vncurtoyse. Illiberalis, e. Vide Ungentle. Uncustomed, or out of use. Disuetus,
a, um. Vide Unaccustomed. Undefiled. Intemeratus, a, um. Impollutus, ta, tum.
Incorruptus, ta, tum. Impollu, qui n'est point viole. Under. Per, Sub, Subter.
Soubz, ou sonb. S. Under the color of the authority of his office. Per
potestatem. Soubz ombre de l'authorite de son office. S. Under their garments.
Sub vestimentis. Soubz leur vestemens. S. To put under. Submittere, Subigere,
Subducere. Mettre dessoubs. S.

To be under. Subesse. Estre dessoubs. S.

To write under, or to subsigne. Subsignare, Subscribere. Escrire au dessoubs,
subsigner. S.

Underfoot. Pessum. Vnderlayed. Suffundatus, a, um. Fond par dessoubs. S
Under ye cope of heaven, abroad, or without doors. Sub dio, Sub diuo, Sub jove,
Sub caelo. A l'air. S. Under the ground, or earth. Subterraneus, a, um. Qui
est soubs terre. Call. Vnderbynde. Subligo, as. Lier par dessoubs. Call.
Vndergyrde. Subligo, as. Idem. Undermine. Agere cuniculos. Miner soubs terre.
Underneath. Subter, Subtus, Infra, Sub. Dessoubs, par dessoubs. S. Underset.
Impedo, as. Suffulcio, cis. Sustineo, es. Soustiner. S. Vide Proppe.
Understand, or to perceive some thing. Cognosco, scis. Intelligo, is. Sentio,
is. Cerno, nis. Teneo, es. Animo comprehendere, Intellectu consequi. Entendre
quelque chose. S. Understand thou well? Incellextin? Entens tu bien?
Understand, or perceauest thou what I say? Tenes quid dicam? Hoccine agis?
Entens tu que ie di? S. I understand not well what he says. Non intelligo
satis quae loquatur. Ie n'entens point bien ce qu' il dit. S.

To the end you understand it. Vit^^is sciens, Ne erres, Ne frustra sis. A fin
que t^ l'entendes S.

Understand Greek, or Latin. Graece, aut latin scire. To understand
nothing. Nolle videre, Non videre.

Understanding* Intellectus, us. Perceptio animi, Sensus, us. Intelligentia,
ae. foe. ge. Entendemens. and Intelligibilis, e. Ang. Which may be
understood. Qui on peut entendre. S. Understanding, or foreknowledge of
things to come. Praescientia, ae. Futurorum notitia. Undertake. Recipio, is.
aliquid aggredi. Entrepre^dre. To undertake a long voyage. Iter longinquum
suscipere. Bud. Entreprendre un loingtaine voyage. S.

He undertakes to much. Hic negotij plures parts suscipit, quam sustinere
possit. Bud. Il entreprend trop. S.

Under to be. Subsum, es, fui. Estre dessoubs. S. Under wood. Caedua sylua. Un
bois tailliz. S. Vnderwoode. Viburnum, ni.* Vndeseruingly. Immerito. Sans
l'auoir deserui. S. Vndyed, or vncoloured. Abaphus, a, um. Non tinctus. Non
teint. Call. Undo a thing, or to break yt which was made. Infectum reddere,
Infectum facere. Desfaire and rompre ce qu'estoit faict. S. Undo a knotte.
Renodo, as.* Enodo, as. Abnodo, as. Nodum soluere, Denodo, as. Apul. Desnouer.
S. They undo the knottes. Resoluunt illi nodos. Ils desnouent les neuds. S.

Undone forever. Perditus, a, um. Perdu. S. I am undone. Sepultus sum, Occidi,
Perij, Absumptus sum. Ie suis perdu. S.

Uneasy to be done. Difficile factu. Malaise a fair. S. Very uneasy, or
very hard to be done. Perarduus, a, um. Malaise a fair. S.

Vneasylye. Difficile, Difficulter. Malaiseement. S. Vneasines. Difficultas,
tatis. foe. ge. Malaisance. S. Unequal. Inaequalis, le. Inegual. Call.
Inequality. Inaequalitas, tatis. foe. ge. Inequalite. S. Unequally.
Inaequaliter, Inaequabiliter. Inegualement. S. Vnethe. Vix, Vix tandem. Vnethe
is taken negatiuely, and for scantlye, as I am vnethe able. Vix valeo, Ne queo,
Non queo. A grande peine. S Unfeignedly. Sine vlla dissimulatione,
Dissimulatione abiecta, Posthabita dissimulantia. Unfaithful. Vide Untrusty.
Unfold, or to vnpleate. Explico, as. Replico, as, caui, vel cui, citum.
Displico, cas. Desplier. S. To unfold, and vnroule. Euoluo, uis. Desplier, and
desrouler. S.

Unfolded. Explicatus, ta, tum. Desplie. S. Unfortunate. Infoelix, cis.
Infortunatus, Sinifter, ra, rum. Male fortunatus, Miser, ra, rum. Malheureux.
S. He was unfortunate in the entree, or beginning. Offendit in prima action,
vel in primo actu. Il a este malheureux d'entree. S.

Unfortunately. Misere, Improspere, Unfortunate, Infoeliciter. Malheureusement.
S. Unfruitful. Infoecundus, da, dum. Sterilis, le. Minime foecundus. Sterile,
non fertile. Call. Ungentle, discourteous. Inhumanus, na, number. Inhumain. S. I am
not so ungentle, or discourteous. Non adeo inhumano ingenio sum. Ie ne suis pas
si inhumain. S.

Ungentle of blood. Obscurus, a, um. Ignobilis, le. De bas estat and
condition. S. Ungently. Inhumane, Inhumaniter Inhumainement. Ungentleness.
Inhumanitas, tatis. foem. genesis I^humanite. S. Ungentleness of blood.
Ignobilitas, it is. Obscuritas, it is. foe. ge. Basse condition. Call. Vngyrde.
Discingo, is. Desceindre. Call. Vngyrdid, or vngirte. Discinctus, ta, tum.
Desceint. Ungracious, and unthrifty. Flagitiosus, a, um, Impius, a, um.
Improbus, ba, bum. Impurus, a, um. Nequam, Perditus, ta, tum. Scelestus, ta,
tum. Teter, ra, rum. Meschant. S. A very very ungracious fellow. Deterrimus
homo. Fort meschant. S.

Much more ungracious then all the rest. Scelere ante alios immanior omnes.
Plus mescha^t que tous les autres. S.

Ungracious men. Postremi homines. Ungraciously, and unthriftily. Flagitiose,
Impie, Illiberaliter, Improbe, Impure, Indigne, Nequiter, Perdite, Scelerate,
Sceleste. Meschamment. and Detertime. Most vngratiously. Ungraciousness, and
unthriftiness. Flagitium, Impietas, facinus illiberale, Improbitas cordis
humani, Impuritas, Indignitas, Nequitia, Scelus, Vitium, tij. n. g.
Meschancete. S. Full of ungraciousness. Facinorosus, Nefarius, Impurus,
Scelerosus, Impius, Cumulatissimus scelerum. Plein de meschancete. S.

Ungrateful, or vntha^keful. Ingratus, ta, tu^. Ingrat. Think thou me so
dull? so ungrateful, ungentle, or beastly: that neither long acquaintance,
nor love, nor shame, may neither move ne warn me to keep my faith? Adeon me
ignauum putas? Adeon porro ingratu^, aut feru^: vt neque me consuetudo, neque
amor, neque pudor commoueat, neque commoneat vt seruem fide^? Tere^t.

Ingratitude, or ungratefulness. Ingratitudo, Non est latinum dicit Politianus.
Immemor beneficij animus^ Ingratitude. S. Ungratefully. Ingrate. Ingratement.
S. Unhappy. Improbus, a, um. Nequam, Prauus, a, u^. Vide ungracious. Impe^se
improbus. Very unhappy. Unhappy, unlucky, or unfortunate. Infoelix, cis.
Infortunatus, ta, tu^. Malheureux. Vide unfortunate. Unwholesome. Insalubris,
bre. Quod est salubri contrarium. Mal sain. S. Unhonest, or dishoneste.
Spurcus, Inhonestus, Dehonestus, Ab omni honestate relictus. Dehonneste. S.
Unhonesty, or dishonestie. Probrum, Illiberalitas, Turpitudo, Indignitas,
Spurcitia, ae. foem. gener. Deshonneste. S. Unhonestly. Petula^ter, Turpiter,
Spurce, Indigne, Illiberaliter, Indecore. Deshonnestement. S. Unhappily.
Improbe, Male, Nequiter, Praue. Vide Vngratiously. Unhappiness. Improbitas,
Nequitas, Prauitas. Vide Ungraciousness. Vnharde. Edurum, Non durum, Quasi extra
duru^. Mol, qui n'est point dur. Call. To vnharden, or to make soft. Mollifico,
cas. and Mollefacio, is. Mollio, lis. Amollir. Call.

Vnharnayes. Exarmo, as. Vide Unarm. Unicorn, a beast with one horn.
Vnicornis, Vnicornius, Monoceros, it is. Ab antiquioribus Asinus vel Onager, vel
Equus Indicus appellatur. Unicorn ou vne licorne. S. Uniform. Vniformis, e.
Vniusmodi. Indec. Non varius. Uniform. S. Vnioyne, and to separate. Disiungo,
is. Seiungo, is. Abiungo, gis. Deiungo, gis. Deioindre and separer. S Vnio^, or
toyning together. Vnio, onis. Vnitas, Copulatio, onis. foe. ge. Union S. Unite,
or to put together. Vno, as. Aduno, as. Vnir. United. Vnitus, a, um. Vni. S.
Unity. Vnitas, it is. Monas, dis. f. g. Unite. S. Universal, and general.
Catholicus, a, um. Occumenicus, a, um. Vniuersalis, e. Vniuersus, a, um.
Generalis, le. Vniuersel and general. S. Universal world. Orbis vniuersus.
L'vniuers. S. Universally. Universe. Vniuersellement. S. University. Academia,
ae. f. ge. Vniuersitas Vulgo. University. S. Unkind. Ingratus, a, um. Vide
Ungrateful. Unkindly. Ingrate. Ingratement. S. Vnknitte a knotte. Renodo, as.
Vide Undo. Unknown. Ignobilis, e. Ignotus, a, um. Incognitus, a, um Incognu.
S. Unlawful. Illicitus, ta, tum. Illicete. S. Unlearned. Illiteratus, ta,
tum. Indoctus, ta, tum. Imperitus, ta, tum. Rudis, qui doctus non est. Indocte.
Call. Unlearned altogether. Amusus, a, um. * Inelega^s, and Indoctus, hoc est a
Musis alienus. Qui est sans lettres. Call. Unlearnedly. Imperite, Indocte.
Indoctement. S. Unlettered. Illiteratus, a, um. Vide Unlearned. Vnleuined, or
without leuens. Azimus, a, um. Sans leuain. Call. Unleavened bread. Azimus panis.
Unlike. Alienus, a, um. Dispar, ris. Dissimilis, e. Absimilis, le. om. ge.
Dissemblable. Unlike, or in diverse fashions. Dissimiliter. En diuerses
manieres. S. Unlikeness. Dissimilitudo, inis. foe. ge. Dissimilitude. Unlooked
for. Abinsperato, Praeter spe^ and opinionem. Horse ou contre esperance. Call.
Vnlowse, or to unbind. Soluere, Dissoluere, Exoluere, Resoluere, Leuare
vincula. Deslier. S. Vnlowsed. Discinctus, a, um. Solutus, ta, tum. Resolutus,
ta, tum. Deslie. S. Unlucky. Vide Unfortunate. Unlucky fortune. Niger calculus,
Nigra vel sinistra fortuna. Vnluckely. Inauspicato, Infoeliciter. Vide
Unfortunately. Unlusty, or slowthfull. Deses, Ignauus, Piger, Reses, Segnis,
Lapis homo, Discinctus, Desidiosus, Lentus. Paresseux. S. Unlusty.
Grauedinosus, a, um. Remissus, a, um. To become unlusty. Pigresco, scis.
De^^nir paresseux. S.

To become unlusty with age. Lauguescere senectute. Deuenir paresseux de force
de vicillesse. S.

Unmarried. Coelebs, bis. com. ge. Vir sine vxore, aut mulier sine marito
viuens. Qui n' est point marie, sans femme. Unmarried life. Coelebs vita,
Coelibatus, us. m. ge. Estat d'vn homme non marie. Call. Unmeet, or unseemly.
Indecens, it is. Indecorus, ra, rum. Messeant. S. It is unmeet, or unseemly.
Indecet, Dedecet. Il messied. Call.

Unmerciful. Immisericors, dis. Immisericordieux. S. Unmercifulness.
Immisericordia, ae. foem. genesis Immisericorde. S. Unnatural, or that which is
made by hand, or by some art. Factitius, a, um. Qui est faict de main non de
nature. Call. and Artificiosus, sa, sum. Idem. Unnatural to parents. Bactri,
Bactriani, and Bactrij, orum. Unnoble. Ignobilis, e. De bas estat and
condition. Call. Unoccupied. Deses, dis. Feriatus, a, um. Nihil age^s. Oiseux.
S. Impatient. Impatiens, it is. Impatient. S. Impatient courage. Animus impotens.
Imperfect. Imperfectus, ta, tum. Ma^cus and inchoatus. Imparfaict. S.
Unpleasant. Illaetabilis, le. Iniucundus, da, dum. Insuauis, e. Mal plaisant.
Call. Vnpollyshed, and not perfectly wrought. Raudus, a, um. Rodus, a, um. vel
Rudus, da, du^. Fest. Mal poli, Imparfait. Call. Unprofitable. Inutilis, le.
Inutile qui n' est point proffitable. S. Unprofitable for all things. Ad omnia
inutilis. Inutile a toutes chooses. S. Unprofitable for his purpose. Alienus
suis rationibus. Unprofitably. Inutiliter. Inutilement. S. Unprofitableness.
Inutilitas, tatis. foe. ge. Inutilite. S. Vnpurueighed. Improuidus, a, um.
Unquiet. Inquietus, a, um. Inquies, it is. om. genesis Qui n' a point de repos. Call.
To unquiet. Inquieto, tas. Infesto, tas. Molesto, tas. Inquieter. S.

Unquietness. Inquietudo, inis. Inquies, it is. foe. genesis Inquietude. S. To
vnrole. Euoluo, uis. Explico, cas. Desrouler. S

Unruly person, which will not be ordered or ruled. Refuga, gae. com. genesis
Vnsadell, or to take of the sadell of a horse. Ephippium equo detrahere.
Desseller un cheua^. S. Unsavory. Insipidus, da, dum. Fatuus, a, um. Quod
iniucundu^ habet saporem, aut quod est fatuu^ and omnis saporis expers. Qui ne
sent rien, stupide. Call. Vnshoe. Discalceo, as. Calceos pedibus adimere.
D^s^hauser. S. Unshod. Discalceatus, a, um. Deschause. S. Vnshoeing.
Discalceatio, onis. foe. ge. Excalceatio, onis. foe. ge. Deschaussement.
Vnsowe. Resuo, is. Dissuo, is. Descouldre. S. Unspeakable. Ineffabilis, e.
Ineffable. S. Unspeakable, or not to be talked of. Tacendus, a, um. particip.
Unstable. Vacillans, it is. Instabilis, le. Instable. S. Unstable, and inconstant
of word and deed. Instabilis, le. Variabilis, le. Inconstans, it is. Variable,
Inconstant. Call. To be unstable, or inconstant. Vacillo, as. N'estre constant.
Call.

Vnswadle, or to unloose a child in swaddling clothes, to vnswathe. Fascijs
infantem soluere, Fascias infanti soluere, Fascias pueriles euoluere.
Desmailloter. S. Vnswadled, or vnswathed. Fascijs euolutus, vel solutus.
Desmaillote. S. Vnswadlyng. Fasciarum euolutio. Desmaillotement. Unsure, or
uncertain. Incertus, ta, tum. Uncertain. Vnstitche. Resuo, is. Vide Vnsowe.
Vntackle a ship. Exarmare nauem. Untasted, which is yet untouched, or whole.
Illibatus, a, um. Qui n'est point entame. S. Vntemperatnes. Intemperantia,
Intemperies, ei. f. g. Intemperance. S. Vntemperatnes of the air. Caeli
grauitas, Intemperies caeli, Inte^pestas caeli. Intemperance de l'air. S
Intemperate. Intemperatus, ta, tum. Immoderatus, ta, tum. Intempere. S.
Vntemperatly. Intemperanter, Intemperate, Immoderate. Intempereement. S.
Unthrift that wastes his goods in riot. Prodigus. Vide Spend all, and
ungracious. Unthriftily. Improbe, Nequiter. Vide Vngratiously. Unthriftiness.
Improbitas, Nequitia. Vide Ungraciousness. Until. Adusque, Eatenus, Donec,
Quoad, Ad. Iusques. S. Until day, or day light. In lucem, Ad lucem. Iusques
au iour. S. Until it were found. Vsque dum inueniretur, Donec, Quoad, Eatenus
quoad. Iusques a ce que la chose fust trouuee. S. Until my coming. Ad meum
aduentum. Iusques a ma venue. S. Until night. Ad extremum tempus diei, In
seru^. Until now. Etiam nunc. Adhuc, Vsque adhuc. Iusques a present. S.
Until than, or until that time. Eatenus, Etiam number. Iusques la. S. Until
that. Eousque. Iusques a ce. S. Until when? Vsquequo? Quandiu? Quem ad finem?
Quousque? Iusques a quand? S. Untimely birth, or abortion. Abortus, us.
Abortio, onis. foe. ge. Auortement. S. Unto. Ad, Tenus. Iusques. S. Unto the
hylte, or handle. Capulo tenus. Iusques au manche. S. Unto the nauill. Vmbilico
tenus. Iusques a nombril. Unto, or until this day. In hunc diem. Iusques au
iourd'huy. S. Untouched. Intactus, a, um. Illibatus, a, um. A qui on n' a point
touch. Call. Intractable. Intractabilis, le. Intractable. Call. Untrusty, or
vnfaithefull. Infidus, da, dum. Perfidus, da, dum. Desloyal. S. Vntrustines, or
unfaithfulness. Perfidia, ae. Infidelitas, tatis. foe. ge. Desloyaulte. S.
Vntwiste, or to untwine. Retexo, is. Etexo, is. Destiltre, desfiler. S.
Unvanquished. Inuictus, a, um. Inuaincu. S. Nnwares. Clam. Sans le sceu. S.
Unwashed. Illotus, ta, tum. Qui n'est point laue. S. Unwashed hands. Communes
manus, Illotae manus. Vnwylling. Inuitus, a, um. Nolens, it is. Qui fait quelque
chose a regret. S. Vnwylling to hear. Auribus aliquem respuens. Unwillingly.
Aegre, Inuit. Caperata front, Ingratis, Grauate. A regret. S. To do some
thing unwillingly. Odiose aliquid facere, Grauari. Fair a regret and enui
quelque chose.

Vnwinoed wheat. Acerosum frumentum. Unwisely. Ignaue, Imprudenter. Vide
Foolyshe. Vnwonte. Dissuetus, a, um. Insolitus. Vide Unaccustomed. Unworthy.
Indignus, na, number. Indigne. S. Unworthily. Indigne. Indignement. S. Unwrought,
as timber, stone, etc. Raudus, da, dum. Rodus, da, dum. Infectus, ta, tum.
Rudus, da. du^. Unyoke. Deiugo, as. Deiungo, is. Abiugo, as. Descoupler. S. To
unyoke oxen. Boues abiugare, Deiugare, Disiungere. Desaccoupler. S.


V. ANTE. O.
Voice. Vox, cis. f. ge. La voix. and Vocula, ae. diminut. Ang. A little or
small voice. Petite voix. Call. An effeminate voice. Mollis vox, Foeminea vox.
Voix effeminee. S.

A voice sent from heaven. Emissa coelo vox. Voix enuoyee du ciel. S.

A cruel voice. Cruenta vox. Voix cruelle. S.

To have a good voice. Bona voce esse. Auoir bonne voix. S.

Voice of a multitude of people assembled to give consent in an election, or
choosing. Suffragium, gij. n. g. Suffrage. voix des eslisans. Call. To give his
voice in an election. Suffragium far. Donner sa voix en quelque election. S.

Voice scantly heard. Raua vox, Fusca vox. Vne voix cassee and de petit son.
S. Void. Inanis, e. Vacuus, a, um. Vuyde. S. Void, as of no effect. Cassus,
a, um. Vacuus, Vanus, na, number. Vuide. S. Void of all prudence. Inanissimus
prude^tiae. Vuyde de toute prudence. S. To void his hands. Amittere e
manibus, vel de manibus. Bud Vuyder ses mains. S.

Void time. Vacatio. Vide vacation. To make void. Inanio, is. Orbo, as.
Vacuefacio, cis. Exinanio, is. Euacuo, as. Vuider. S.

Void, or to depart. Cedo, is, ssi. Vuyder. S. Make this company to void.
Submoue turba^ istam. Fay vuyder ceste tourbe. S.

To give commandment to void. Summouere pro imperio. Fair commandment de
vuyder.

Voydenes. Inanitas, Vacuitas, tatis. foe. ge. Vuydite. Voyding. Exinanitio,
onis. foe. ge Vuydement. S. Volume. Volumen, inis. n. g. Un volume. S. Volume,
or a part of a book. Volumen, Tomus. Un volume a part. H. Volu^tary.
Spo^taneus, a, u^. Volu^tarius, a, u^. Volu^taire. Voluntarily. Sponte, Vltro,
Voluntary, sieve volu^tario. Voluntairement. S. To do some thing voluntarely.
Voluntate ad aliquid faciendum adduci. Fair voluntairement quelque chose. S.

Voluptuous. Voluptuosus, a, um. Voluptarius, a, u^. Voluptatibus deditus.
Voluptueux. S. Voluptuousnes. Voluptas, tatis. foe. g. Volupte. S. To give him
self to all voluptuousnes. Dedere se delectationi toto animo, Dare se
voluptatibus. S'addonner a toutes voluptez. S.

To esteame voluptuousnes, and pleasure nothing. Voluptatem nullo loco
numerare, Nihil facere voluptates, Voluptates pro nihilo ducere. N'estimer rien
volupte S.

Vomit. Euomo, is. Nauseam facere, Vomo, is. Vomir. S. To vomit often.
Reuomo, is. Vomir souuent. S.

A desire to vomit. Stomachi redundatio, Nausea, ae. Faim de vomir. S.

To have desire to vomit. Nauseare. Auoir faim de vomir. S.

To cause one to vomit. Vomitum alicui excutere. Fair vomir aucun. S.

A root that moves to vomit. Radix nauseosa. Racine qui induit and prouoque a
vomir. S.

To vomit his dronkennes. Exhalare crapula^, Refundere crapulam, Amouere
crapulam.

Vomiting. Vomitus, tus. Dissolutio stomachi, Vomitio, onis. Reiectio, onis.
Reiectus, tus. mas. ge. Vomissement. S. Vomiting, or casting out water.
Vndiuomus, a, u^.* Vow. Votum, ti. Sponsio voti. Veu, ou voeu. S. To
accomplish, or render his vows. Reddere vota, Soluere vota, Persoluere, vel
exoluere vota. Accomplir, ou render ses veux. S.

To vow. Suscipere vota, Voto, as. Voueo, es. Vouer. S.

To vow often. Votito, as. Vouer souuent. S.

Vowed. Votus, ta, tum Voue. S. Which is vowed. Votinus, a, um. Qui est voue. S

Vowell, whereof be five. A, e, i, o, v, and y. which is a Greek letter.
Vocales, Literae vocales.
V. ANTE. P.
UP, or upward. Sursum. Contremont. S. To clyme up. Scandere in aduersum.
Monter droict contremont. S.

Up and down. Sursum, Deorsum. Hault and bas. S. Up by the roots. Stirpitus.
Adu. Radicitus. Adu. Up to the nauill. Vmbilico tenus. Iusques au no^bril. Up
to the hyltes. Capulo tenus. Iusques au manche. S Up to the mouth. Ore tenus.
Vplandishe, rusticall, or without civility. Georgicus, a, um. Inconditus, a,
um. Rusticus, a, um. Vide Rusticall. Upon. Super. Sur. S. To sit upon some
thing. Super aliquid assidere. Estre assiz sur quelque chose. S.

Vprighte. Arrectus, ta, tum. Debout, droict. S. Upright lying on the back, and
the bealy upward. Supinus, a, um. Resupinus, na, nu^. Renuerse le ventre en
hault. S. Upright, or indifferent. Rectus, a, um. Vide Right. Uproar. Tumultus,
us. m. g. Tumulte. S. To make an uproar, or tumulte. Tumultuo, as. Tumultuor,
aris. Tumultuer, fair tumulte. S.

Upward. Sursum, Sursum versum. Upward, as properly the bealy upward.
Resupinus, a, um. Supinus, na, number. Vide upright.
V. ANTE. R.
VRbanitie. Vrbanitas, it is. f. ge. Vrbanite. S. and Vrbanus, a, um. He that
has vrbanitie, ciuilite, or gentleness. Vrchin, or an hedgehogge, or Irtchin.
Herinaceus Echinus, Herix, Hericius, cij. Herisson. S. Urge, or to constrayne.
Vrgeo, es. Contraindre. S. Urgent. Vehemens, it is. Vrgens, it is. Urgent. S.
Vrinall. Matella, ae. Matula, ae. Matellio, onis. Vrinarium, rij. Vrinale, lis.
n. g. Un vrinal. S. Urine, or pysse. Vrina, ae. Lotium, ij. Urine, pissat. H.
Vide Piss.
V. ANTE. S.
Use. Vsus, us m. ge. Vsura, rae. foe. ge. Usage. S. Use of an other man's
goods by the leave of the owner. Vsusfructu^, tus. masc. gene. Vsufruict. S.
That which is out of use. Abolitus, ta, tu^. Exoletus, ta, tum. Obsoletus, ta,
tum. Que est horse de usage. S.

Use, and exercise. Assuetudo, Exercitatio, Exercitium, tij. n. g. Usage and
duisson, ou exercitation. S. To come in use. In vsum venire. Venir en usage. S.

To come in commune use. In promiscuu^ vsum venire. Venir en common usage. S.

To have the same use. Proximum vel eundem vsum habere. Auoir un mesme usage. S.

Use. Assuefacio, cis. Exerceo, es. Fruor, eris, Fretus sum. Percipere vsum.
Ttacto, as. Vtor, eris, Vsus, sum. Vser. S. To use deceyte or craft. Dolum,
vel fraudem adhibere. Vser de cautelle, ou de finesse. S.

To use counsel. Vti consilio. Vser de conseil. S.

To use force. Vi agere. Vser de force. S.

To use reason. Vti ratione. Vser de raison. S.

Use a sacred thing irreverently. Profano, as. Profanum reddere. Vide Profane.
To use by prescriptio^, or time out of memory. Vsucapio, is. Vide Prescription.

Use dishonestly, or contrary to kind. Abutor, eris. Vide Misuse. Use often.
Versor, aris. Vsito, as. freq. Vsurpo, as. Vser souuent. S. Used, or which is
in use. Vsitatus, ta, tum. Qui est en usage. S. Used much. Vulgaris, e.
Vulgatus, a, u^. vide vulgar. Usher, or a sergeant. Accensus, Admissionalis,
Apparitor, Ad limina custos, Ianitor, Inclamator, toris. m. ge. Bud. Huissier,
ou sergeant. S. Usher of a schole, or under scholemaister. Hypodidascalus, li.
m. ge. Subpraeceptor, toris. mas. genesis Huissier d'escole. S. Vshers of the
chamber. Admissionales. Vide Husher. Vshers of the court. Decuria apparitorum,
Apparitores, Anteambulones praesidum and curiae, Praecones curiales vel
palatini, Viatores curiae. Bud. Les huissiers de la cour. S. Usurer. Danista,
Foenerator, Dardanarius. Vsurier. Usury. Vsura, ae. Foenus, oris. Foeneratio,
onis. f. ge. Usure. S. and Foenusculum, li. neut. g. Little usury. Petite
usure. Et Foeneratitius, a, um. Pertaining to usury. Appartinant a usure. S.
and Vsurarius, a, um. Of vsurye. vt Vsuraria pecunia, Money taken, or given in
usury. Argent vsuraire, prins ou baille a usure. S. Vsura, Is after diverse
sorts, as Vsura vncialis, Is one in every c: Vsura sextantaria, is 2. in
eueryr: Vsura trientalis 3. in every c: Vsura quadrantalis 4. in every c: Vsura
quincuntialis, is 5. in the c: Vsura semissis, is 6. for the lone of one c:
Vsura bessalis, is 8. in the c: Vsura dodrantalis, is 9. in the c: Vsura
dextentaria, is 10. in the c: Vsura centesima, which is equal with the
principal sum within certain months. With usury. Foenerato. Auec usure. S.

To seek money upon usury. Quaerere argentu^ in foenus. Cercher argent a
usure. S.

To give in usury, or to put forth to usury. In foenus dai^, Foenerari
aliquid, Locare argentum foeno^i. Bailler ou donner a usure. S.

To lend money to usury. Credere foenus arge^ti, Foenore dare argentum.
Proster argent a usure.

To take upon usury. Foenore accipere, Foenerari. Prendre a usure. S.

To usurp. Indipisco, scis. Indipiscor, sceris.* Vsurpo, as. Usurper. S.

Usurp, and to take the name, and title of a king. Asciscere sibi nomen
regium. Usurper and prendre le nom and tiltre de Roy. S. Usurper. Vsurpator,
toris. m. ge. Vsurpateur. S. Usurping, or usurpation. Vsurpatio, onis. foe.
genesis Usurpation. S.
V. ANTE. T.
VTensile, or that is necessary to be used. Vte^silis, e. Vtensile. S. Vtile
and profitable. Vtilis, le. Compe^diosus, sa, sum. Conducibilis, le.
Fructuosus, sa, sum. Frugifer, ra, rum. Commodus, da, dum. Vtile and
profitable. S. Utility. Vtilitas, tatis. Commodum, di. Commoditas, tatis.
foe. ge. Vtilite. S. Utter. Vide Declare, Speak, Show, and Tell. To utter
conning. Specimen edere.

Utter fancy, or which lies on the stomach. Narrare stomachum. To utter
speech, or words formally* Pronuntio, as. Declarer, prononcer. S.

Vtteraunce of speech. Pronunciatio, onis. foe. genesis Pronontiation. S.
Uttering, or selling of things. Venditio, onis. Venundatio, onis. foe. ge.
Vente. S. Utterly. Fu^ditus, Penitus, Prorsus, Prorsum. Adu. Plane, Omni modo.
Totalement, du tout. S. To undo one utterly. Perdere aliquem funditus. Plaut.

I am utterly undone. Pereo funditus. Terent.

Utterly, or from the foundation. Funditus. Adu.
V. ANTE. V.
Wall, or falling, or swelling of the pallet of the mouth. Vuula, ae. f. g.
Vule, ou le luette. S Vulgar and common. Vulgaris, re, Triuialis, le. Vulgaire,
and common. S. Vulgar, or much used. Vulgatus, a, um. Vulgaris, re. Vulgaire.
S. Vulgar people. Vulgus, gi. m. and n. ge. Le vulgaire. S. Vulgarly.
Vulgariter, Vulgo, Triuialiter. Vulgairement. S.
VV. ANTE. A.
WAche. Vide Watch. Wachet color. Scutulatus color, Palladius. To wade
through a foorde. Vado, as. Passer a gue. S.

Wafre, such as they give to young children. Crustulum, li. neut. genesis
Oublie, gauffre. H. Wage law. Agere lege. Wages. Merces, dis. Salarium, ij.
Stipendiu^, Stips, pis. Stipis, pis. foe. ge. Praemium, mij. n. g. Gage. S. Et
Stipendialis, e. Pertaining to wages. To give wages, or hyre. Prosequi praemio,
Dare mercedem. Bailler gages, ou loyer. S.

To pay wages. Praemia benemeritis tribuere. Payer les gages. S.

Wages called double wages, given to horse men for having two horses. Pararium
aes. To pay the soldiers their wages. Persoluere stipendium. Payer les gages
aux gens de guerre. S.

To withholde the soldiers wages. Fraudare stipendium militum, Fraudare
stipe^dio milites. Retenir les gages de^ gensdarmes. S.

Wages stopped, or kept back for negligent service in wars. Aes resignatum.
Festus. To earne wages. Mereo, es. Mereor, eris. Gaigner loyer. S.

Wagge, or to waver. Vacillo, as. Vaciller. S. Wagge his tail. Agere caudam.
Remuer la queue. S Wagon. Cantherium, Carpentum, Epi^hedium, Essedum,
Petoritum, Pilentum, ti. Vehiculum, li. n. ge. Chariot. S. Wagon drawn with
two horses. Biga, ae. foe. g. Chariot tire ^ deux cheuaulx. S. Wagon drawn
with three horses. Triga, ae. foe. g. Chariot tire a trois cheuaulx. S. A
wagon horse. Carpentarius equus, Carrucarius equus. Cheual qui meine le
chariot. S.

Waggonner. Auriga, ae. Carrucarius, rij. Cisiarius, rij. Gubernator equorum,
Rhedarius, rij. mas. g. Chartier. S. Wagtayle a bird. Cauda tremula.
Motacilla, ae. Guignequeue, battemare. H. Way. Via, ae. Aditus, us. Iter,
neris. ne. genesis La voye, chemin. S. Way where many ways do meet. Compitum,
ti. n. ge. Virg. and Compitalis, le. om. ge. Of such way where many ways do
meet. A forked way. Biuium, uij. n. ge. Voye fourchee. S

To make way. Dare viam Fair voye. S.

To make him self way. Comparare sibi aditu^, Sibi viam facere, vel sternere.
Se fair voye* S.

An easy way. Facilis and plana via. Aise chemin. S.

Wayfairing man. Viator, ris. n. g. Voyageur. S. Way in a ship. Agea, ae. foe.
ge. Way not used, or haunted. Deuium iter. Chemin peu hante. S. Lacking a
way, or without a way. Inuius, a, u^. Sans voye. S.

Way, or manner. Modus, di. m. ge. Moyen. S. Wayle. Eiu^o, as. Gemo, is.
Lame^tor, aris. Plango, is, anxi. Ingemo, is. Ingemesco, scis Gemir. S.
Wayling. Enilatio, Gemitus, us. Luctus, us. Lame^tatio, onis. Planctus, us. m.
g. Gemissement. S. Wayling, full of roaring, and crying. Lamentabilis gemitus.
Un gemissement plein de brairie and criement. S. Wayne, or a carte. Plaustrum,
tri. n. g. Un chariot. S. Wayne dryuer. Iugarius, rij. m. ge. Charottier. Pals.
Wayne of the Moon. Declinatio lunae, Decrescens luna. Varro. Le decours de la
lune. S. Wait, or to look for. Demoror, aris. Operior, iris. Expecto, as.
Praestolor, aris. Attendre. S. To wait, or tarry for some body. Manner
aliquem. Attendre quelqu'vn. S.

To lie in wait. Subsidere, Dare insidias alicui. In insidijs esse, Obseruare,
Speculari, Ex insidijs aucupari, Insidere. Guetter. S.

Wait on one. Inspecto, as. Assector, ris. Conuoyer. S. Wait on the cup. Ad
cyathos stare. Sueton. Wayter which wayteth always on his master.
Pedissequus, qui. m. g. Colum. Wayters at the table. Diaetarij. Vlpian. Waiting
man. Assecla, ae. m. g. Suyuant. S. Waywarde. Morosus, a, um. Ma laise a
contenter. S. Waywardly. Morose. aduerb. Waywardnes. Morositas, atis. foe. ge.
Malaifance a contenter. S. Wake. Vigilo, as. Veiller. S. To wake, or watch
long at night. Ad multam noctem vigilare, De multa nocte vigilare. Veiller bien
auant en la nuict. S.

To wake all night. Agitare vigilias. Veiller toute nuict. S.

To wake diligently. Inuigilo, as. Veiller soingneusement. S.

To wake. Expergisci, Edormire. S' esueiller. S.

Wake robyn, an herb. Serpentaria minor, Arum, Pes vituli* Barba Aaron,
Sacerdotis virile. Vit de chien, pied de veau, vit de prebstre. H. To wake^, or
raise one from sleep. Dormientem excitare, Euigilare, Excire so^no, Excitare
ex so^no, Expergefacere, Expergere, Suscitare, Exuscitare. Esueiller. S.

Wakened. Expergefactus, a, um. Experrectus, a, u^. Esueille. S. To be wakened.
Expergefieri. Estre esueille. S.

Waking. Vigilans, it is. Vigil, is. com. ge. Veillant. S. Waking, or watching.
Vigilatio, onis. Peruigilatio, onis. foe. ge. Veillement. S. Great wakyng.
Peruigilium, lij. neu. ge. Grande veille. S.

Wakingly. Vigilanter. Vigilament. Call. Walk. Ambulo, as. Gradior, eris.
Incedo, is. Deambulare, Inambulare, Conficere ambulatione^, Spatiari,
Expatiari. Sepourmener. To go to walk. Abire deambulatum. S'en ^ller
pourmener. S.

Walk against another. Obambulo, as. Plaut. Walk forth. Prodeambulo, as.
Terent. Sepourmener* horse la maison. Call. Walk all night. Pernocto, as. Pomp.
Walker. Ambulator, oris. mas. ge. Qui aim ase pourmener. Call. Walking.
Ambulatio, o^is. Inambulatio, onis. Deambulatio, onis. Prodeambulatio, onis.
foe. genesis Pourmenement. S. Walking which is done at after noone. Ambulatio
pomeridiana. Pourmenement qui se fait apres le midi. S. Walking, or which does
walk. Ambulus, a, um.* Walking place. Ambulatio, onis. Deambulatoriu^,
Ambulacrum, cri. Porticus, cus. f. g. Pourmenoir. S Walking place, to walk out
of ye rain, or son. Xystus, ti. m. ge. Vitruu. Walki^g places uncovered.
Subdiales ina^bulatio^es Wall. Murus, ri. Paries, etis. f. g. Mur. S. Et
Muralis, e. Pertaining to a wall. Appartenant a mur. S An old wall.
Parietina, nae. f. g. Vieil mur. S.

A little wall, or wall of dry stones. Maceria, ae. Maceries, ei. foe. ge.
Un petit mur, ou muraille de pierres seiches. S.

Wall made with flynte stones. Silicatus murus. To wall a town. Cingere
muris. Murer vne ville. S.

An hundred walls one against an other. Murus centuplex. Cent murailles l'vne
contre l'autre. S.

Walled. Muratus, a, um. Mure. S. Walls made with lathes, splentes, or
studdes, or which are splented, and pargeted to divide cha^bres. Arrectarij
parietes, vel concratitij. Vitru. To write upon the walls. Parietes
conscribere. Escrire contre les murailles. S.

To go forward to set up the walls. Ducere muros. Continuer a hausser les
murailles. S.

Walls of a castle, or town. Moenia, orum. neu. g. Les murs d'vne ville. S.
To bater the walls. Moenia quatere. Batre les murailles. S.

To scale the walls. Euadere ad muros, vel in muros. Escheler les murs. S.

Wallet. Mantica, ae. f. ge. Vne besace. S. Wall nutte. Basilica nux, Iuglans,
dis. Nux regia. Noix. H. Walnutte tree. Iuglans, dis. f. g. Un noyer. S.
Wallowe. Voluto, as. Veautrer. S. Wallowed. Volutatus, a, um. Veautre. S.
Wallowing. Volutatio, onis. f. g. Volutatus, tus. m. ge. Veautrement. S.
Wallowing, or full of waltring. Volutabu^dus, a, u^. Wallowyng place, or a place
where beasts wallowe. Volutabrum, bri. n. ge. Le lieu ou les bestes se
veaultrent. Call. Wallowyngly. Volutatim. Plaut. Walworte, an herb. Ebulus, li.
Chamaeacte, Ebulum, li. n. ge. Hyeble. H. Waltre. Vide Wallowe. To wamble in
the stomach. Nauseo, as. Allecter.

Wambling of ye stomach, disposition, or will to vomitte. Nausea, ae. foe. ge.
Appetit de vomir. S. Wande, or stick. Bacillus, li. Bacillum, li. neut. ge.
Basto^net. S. Wande or rod, wherewith freedom is granted. Vindicta, ae.
foe. ge. Liu. Wander. Discurro, is. Erro, as. Vagor, aris. Aberro, as. S'
esgarer. S. To wander here, and there. Oberro, as. Aller ea and la. S.

The child is wandered from his father. D^eirauit a patre puer. L'ensant s' est
esgare d'auec son pere. S.

To wander out of the way. Errare, Deerrare, Declinare de via. Se fouruoyer. S.

He wandered out of his way. Decessit via errabundus. Il s' est fouruoye. S.

Wandrer, loytrer, or vagabonde. Erro, nis. Vagabundus, a, um. Vagus, a, um.
Erraticus, a, um. Vagabond. S. Wandering, or running hither and thither.
Discursus, us. m. ge. Course deca and dela. S. Wandering. Discurrens, it is.
Errans, it is. om. genesis S' esgarant. Call. Wandering alone. Soliuagus, a, um. Qui
va ca and la tout seul. Call. Wandryng among hills, and mountains. Montiuagus,
a, um. Qui vague par les montaignes. Call. Wandering in floudes, or waters.
Fluctiuagus, a, um. Qui vague par les ondes. Call. Wandering much. Errabundus, a,
um. Multiuagus, a, um. Qui multum vagatur. Call. Wandering wit. Vacillans
animus. Wanne, or pale. Luridus, a, um. Subpallidus, a, um. Dilutus color.
Blaffard. S. Wanne, or pale to be. Palleo, es. Estre palle. S. Wanne, or pale
to wax. Pallesco, scis. Deuenir palle. Want. Careo, es. Deficio, cis. Desum,
es. fui. Indigeo, es. Auoir fault de ce qu'on vouldroit auoir. S. I want that
I love. Id quod amo careo. IN ay fault de ce que l'aime. S.

He wants words. Verbis est inops. Il ha fault de parolles. S.

He wants wisdom. Deficit illum prudentia. Il ha fault de prudence. S.

There wants. Defit, Deest. Il y a fault. S.

Want of any thing. Indigentia, ae. foe. genesis Fault de quelque chose. S.
Want of money. Argenti inopia, Inopia argentaria, Nummorum caritas, Inopia rei
argentariae, Difficultas nummaria. Fault d'argent. S. Want of knowledge.
Inscientia, ae. foe. genesis Fault de scauoir. S. Want, or lack. Defectus, us.
m. g. Default. S. Want, or molle. Talpa, ae. m. and foe. ge. Vne taulpe. S.
Wanton. Blax, cis. Galbinus, a, um. Illex, gis. Lasciuus, a, um. Leuiaculus, a,
um. Petulans, it is. Petulcus, a, um. Sybariticus, a, um. Molliculus, a, um.
Safre. S. Wanton child, or cockeney. Deliciae, arum. foe. ge. Wanton, or
malaperte in asking. Procax, cacis. om. genesis Terent. Wanton to be. Lasciuio,
is. Estre safre. S. Wanton to make. Mollio, is. Cic. Wantonness. Lasciuia,
Petula^tia. f. g. Lasciuite. Call. Wanton toys myxte in Enterludes, meter, or
verse. Exodia, orum. n. ge. Wantonly. Petulanter. Cic. Ward. Custodia, ae. f.
g. La guard. S. To ward, or keep. Asseruare, Co^seruare, Custodire, Tueri,
Protegere, Garder. S.

To commit to ward, to put in prysone. Dare in custodiam, In custodiam
tradere, Condere in carcerem, Mandare vinculis. Mettre in prison. S.

To be kept in ward, or prison. Custodijs retineri, atque seruari. Estre
detenu en prison. S.

Ward which is in custody of a gardayne in chivalry, or socage, not able to
aun^were as yet for his service to the lord. Pupillus, li. m. g. Mintur qui
est en tutelle. Pals. Wardeyne. Custos, dis. com. genesis Gardien. S. Wardeyn of
ye ports. Limenarcha, ae. m. g. Paulus. Wardons. Voloma, orum. n. g. Virg.
Poires de calieu, poires de guard, poires de calion. Pals. Wardrope.
Vestiarium, rij. n. g. Garderobbe. S. Yoman of the wardrope. Vestiarius, ij. m.
g. Vlp.

Ware, or marchaundise. Merx, cis, foem. gener. La merchandise. S. Unlawful
ware, or marchaundise. Improba merx. Merchandise qui n'est pas loyale. S.

Vendible ware, and of quick dispatche. Merx vendibibilis. Merchandise
vendible and de bonne despesche. S.

Ware set out to be sold, properly by retayle. Promercalis merx. To prise his
ware. Indicare. Mettre a pris sa merchandise. S.

Warehouse. Taberna, ae. foe. genesis Vne monstre a merchandise. S. Warye. Cautus,
a, um. Cault. S. Warily. Caute, Cautim. Cautement. S. Warines, or taking heed.
Cautio, onis. f. g. Cic. Warm, or hoate. Calidus, a, um. Tepidus, a, um.
Chault. Pals. Warm place to sit in. Vaporarium, rij. n. ge. Cic. To drink
hot, or warm dri^ke. Thermopoto, as. Warm, or hot to be. Caleo, es. Tepeo.
Estre chault Warm to make. Tepifacio, cis. Calefacio, cis. Concalefacio, cis.
Excalefacio, cis. Feruefacio, cis. Eschaufer. S. To make very warm. Calore
accendere. Fort eschaufer. S.

Warm to wax. Calesco, cis. Incalesco, cis. S' escaufer. S. To wax very
warm. Concalere. S' eschaufer fort. S.

To wax warm again. Recalesco, cis. S' escaufer derechef. S.

To wax somewhat warm. Tepescere. S'eschaufer un peu. S.

Warmed. Concalefactus, a, um. Fotus, a, u^. Eschaufe. Warm to be.
Concalefieri. Estre eschaufe. S. Somewhat warmed. Teporatus, a, um. Un peu
eschaufe. S.

Warmenes, or heat. Calor, oris. m. g, Chaleur. S. Warming, or heating.
Calefactus, us. Excalfactio, onis. foe. ge. Eschaufement. S. Warn. Admoneo,
es. Commonefacio. Moneo, es. Commoneo, nes. Emoneo, es. Praecipio, pis.
Admonester. S. To warn somewhat, to give a by warninge. Submoneo, es.
Admonester aucunement. S.

Warn before, or first. Praemoneo, es. Admonester deuant. S. Warned. Monitus,
a, um. Commonitus, a, um. Admonitus, a, um. Commonefactus, a, u^. Admoneste. S.
Warner, or admonisher. Monitor, oris, Admonitor, oris. mas. ge. Admonesteur. S.
Warning. Monitio, onis. f. g. Monitum, ti, Admonitio, onis. f. g. Admonition,
Admonestement. S. To receive the warninges, or admonitions which one gives
us. Locum admonitionibus relinquere. Receuoir les admonitions qu'on nous fait.

Warning, or giving warning. Monitorius, a, um. Quod monet. Call. Warrante.
Vindex litis, Author, oris. m. g. Garant. S. To name his warrante. Laudare
authore^. Nommer son garant. S.

To bring forth his warrante. Sistere authore^ laudatum. Amener son garant. S.

To warante. Authoritatem praestare, Sartam ac tectam authoritatem praestare.
Garrantir. S.

To promise to warrante. Recipere, Nexu se obligare. Promettre garrantir. S.

War. Bellum, li. Mars, it is. Militia, ae. Praeliu^, lij. n. ge. Guerre. H.
Sharp, or bitter war. Acre bellu^. Guerre asper.

War assuaged. Bellum restinctum. guerre assopie. War during a long time.
Longinquum bellum. Guerre qui dure long temps. S. War among alies, Sociale
bellum. Vne guerre que les alliez font les vns contre les autres. S. War with
alienes, forayners, or strangers. Bellum externum. Guerre estrangere. H. War
between men of one nation, or country. Bellum civil, Bellum domesticum.
Guerre domestique au pa^s. H. To go a warrefare. Ire in acie^. Aller a la
guerre.

To go a warrefare with a nombre of footeme^. Merere pedibus, Facere stipendia
pedibus. Aller a la guerre au nombre des gens de pied.

Wars in one country between the inhabitau^tes. Bellum intestinum. Sedition.
H. Warrelike, or pertaining to war. Bellicus, a, um. Stratioticus, a, um.
Bellique, servant a guerre. Call. War mortal. Internecinum bellum, exitiale,
exitiosum. Guerre mortelle, battaille fort cruelle. H. War, or to make war.
Belligero, as. Bello, as. Infer arma, Martem moliri, Gerere bellum, Moliri
bellum, Co^ficere bellum, Capere arma. Fair guerre. S. To war with other.
Cum aliquo bellum ducere vel committere, Persequi aliquem bello, Bello cum
aliquo contendere. Fair la guerre a autruy. S.

War well nyghe at a point. Affectum bellum, and pene confectum, Bellum
impulsum. Guerre presque mise a fin. S. War upon the sea. Bellu^ nauale,
Classicu^ bellu^. Praelium nauale, Naumachia, Pugna naualis. Guerre sur la mer.
H. War called civil war, or war within the city. Intestinum bellum.
Sedition, guerre enter burgeois. H. Warrior. Bellator, oris, Belliger,
Duellator, Praeliator. Guerroyeur. S. Bellicose. Like a warrior. Warrior
like. Bellicosus, a, um. Bellique. Call. Warryn of connys. Viuarium,
Cunicularium. Vne garenne. Warrin of hares. Lagotrophia. foe. genesis pl.
Leporarium. Vne garenne des lieures. S. Warryner. Viuarij custos. Garennier.
Pals. Warsse. Nequior, ris. Peior, oris. om. genesis Pire plus mauuais. S. Vide
Worse. Warste of all. Nequissimus, Pessimus, a, um. Tresmauuais. S. Warte.
Verruca, ae. f. ge. Vne verrue. S. Verrucula, ae. dimin. Ang. A little warte.
Petite verrue. S. Verrucosus, a, um. Full of wartes. Plein de verrues. S. Warte
in the eye lydde. Chalazium, zij. n. g. Wash. Lauo, as, ui. Lauer. S. To
wash, and to make clean. Abluere, Colluere, Eluere, Baptizare, Subluere.
Lauer and nettoyer. S.

To wash much. Proluere, Perluere, Elauare. Fort lauer. S.

Wash, as the water does the ground. Alluo, is. Give me to wash. Cedo aquam
manibus. Baille moy a lauer. S.

Wash clean before. Praeluo, is. Lauer deuant. Call. Wash again. Reluo, is.
Lauer derechef. Call. Wash, or rince. Colluo, is. Lauer, ou reinser. S. Wash
ye mouth, or throat, or to gargle. Gargarizo, as. Gargarizer. S. Wash under,
as the water does. Subluo, is. Lauer par dessoubs. Call. Which one cannot
wash. Illutibilis, le. om. ge. Qu'on ne peult lauer. S.

Washed. Lautus, Lauatus, Lotus, a, um. Laue. S. Which is not washed. Illotus,
a, um. Qui n'est point laue. S.

Washer. Lotor, oris. m. g. Loteur. S. Washing. Ablutio, onis. Baptismu^, mi.
Baptismus, mi. Lauatio, onis. Lotura, ae. f. g. Lauement. S. Washing ball.
Magma, it is. n. ge. Plin. Washing of the mouth, or throat. Gargarizatio, onis.
foe. genesis Gargarization. S. Washing purgation. Clysmus, mi. m. g. Scrib. Waspe,
or hornet. Crabro, nis. Ichneumon. Vespa, ae. Mousche guespe. S. Waste. Abusus,
us. m. ge. Degast. S. Waste, and destroying. Disperditio, onis. foem. ge.
Degast and destruction. S. To waste. Abutor, ris. Fair degast. S.

To waste and spoil all in the fields. Depopulari, Propopulari, Vastare,
Deuastare. Fair degast and gaster tout es champs. S.

To make great waste of men, or beasts. Expopulari. Fair grand degast
d'hommes ou de bestes.

To waste, or spylle. Conspurco, as. Deprauo, as. Disperdo, is. Detero, ris.
Deturpo, as. Euasto, as. Foedo, as. Resigno, as. Spurco, as. Deuenusto, as.
Violo, as. Inquino, as. Gaster. S.

To waste the common wealth. Rempub. violare. Gaster la Republique. S.

To waste his goods. Prodigere suum. Gaster son bien. S.

To spend, and waste his goods. Corrumpere rem familiarem. Despendre and
gaster ses biens. S.

Waste of any thing by occupation, and wearing. Intertrimentum, ti. n. g.
Varro. To waste, and spend all in feasting, and banqueting. Abligurio, is.
Commessor, aris. Consumer and despendre tout par friandise. S.

To waste time. Conterere, vel terere tempus, Lacerare diem, Tempus
transmittere. Consumer le temps. S.

Waste treasure. Effundere aerarium. Cic. Wasted. Corruptus, a, um. Consumptus,
a, um. Vastus, a, um. Deuastatus, a, um. Gaste. S. Wasted, or spoiled.
Populatus, Spoliatus, a, u^. Exutus, a, um. Despouille. S. Waster. Vastator,
oris. m. ge. Gasteur. S. Waster of a country. Populator, ris. m. ge. Gasteur
d'vn pais. S. Waster of substance. Commessator, Decoctor, Prodigus, Barathro,
onis. Gurges and vorago patrimonij, Nepos, it is. Lurco, onis. mas. ge.
Despendeur des bien^, Prodigue. H. Wasting. Dissipatio, onis. Vastatio, onis.
foem: ge. Degastement. S. Wasting, or spilling. Conspurcatio, onis. Deprauatio,
onis. Deturpatio, onis. Foedatio, onis. Spurcatio, onis. Inquinatio, onis.
Vastatio, onis. foe. ge. Gastement. S. Wasting of a country, or people, or
full of such wasting. Populabundus, a, um. Liu. Wasting of goods,
prodigallity. Prodigalitas, atis. foe. ge. Proluuium, uij. Effutio, onis.
Prodigentia, ae. foe. ge. Degast de biens, prodigalite. S. Wasting, or
consumptio^ of the body. Tabes, is. f. g. Wastingly, or wastfully. Prodige.
Prodigalement. S. Watch of the night. Excubiae, arum. Vigiliae, arum. foe. ge.
Le guet de nuict. S. Watch, or to wake. Aduigilo, as. Procubo, as. Vigilo, as.
Veiller. S. To watch always. Peruigilo, as. Veiller tousiours. S.

To go to watch. Ire in vigiliam. Aller au guet.

To be in the watch, or to watch. In speculis esse, Excubare, Munus
vigiliarum obire, Obire vigilias, Obsidiari, In insidias esse, Habere excubias.
Estre au guet, ou fair le guet. S.

To watch, or lie in wait for. Subsidere, Dare insidias alicui, In insidijs
esse, Obseruare, Speculari, Ex insidijs aucupari, Insidere. Guetter. S.

Watcher. Insidiator, oris. Insidiosus, a, um. Guetteur. Watching. Vigilantia,
riae. foem. genesis Veillance, vigilance. Call. Watching, or watchefull. Vigilans,
it is. Vigil, is. com. ge. Veillant, qui veille. S. Watchingly. Vigilanter.
Vigilement. Call. Watcheman, or he which watches. Excubitor, oris. masc. ge.
Qui fait le guet. S. Watchemen. Vigiliae, arum. foe. genesis Les gens qui font le
guet. S. Watcheworde. Tessera, ae. Vigiliarum tessera. Le mot du guet. S.
Which gives the watchewoorde. Tesserarius, rij. m. g. Qui baille le mot du
guet. S.

He understands, or knows the watchword. Hic nouit tesseram excubiarum
rogare and reddere. Il entend le mot du guet. S.

Water. Aqua, ae. Latex, cis. Lympha, ae. Vnda, ae. f. ge. Eaue. S. Aquula, ae.
Ang. Little water. Petite eaue. S. Aquaticus, a, um. Aquatilis, e. Of the
water, or which lives in the water. D' eaue, ou viuant en l' eaue. Call.
Aquor, aris. To provide for water. Se fournir d'eaue. Call. Subaqueus, a, um.
Which lies under the water. Sous eaue. Call. Snow water. Niuales vndae. Eaues
de neige. S.

Sea water. Aqua marina. Eaue de mer. S.

Rain water. Caelestes aquae, Pluuia aqua. Eaues de pluyes. S.

Cold water. Frigida, Gelida: sub. aqua. Eaue froide. S.

Running water. Fluens aqua, Manans aqua. Eaue coulante. S.

Spring water. Saliens aqua, Aqua viua. Eaue uiue. S.

To water, or sprincle. Aspergo, is. Adaquo, as. Baptizo, as. Irroro, as. Rigo,
as. Irrigo, as. Respergo, is. Arrouser. S.

To water the roots. Aquam radicibus subministrare, Potum dare radicibus.
Arrouser les racins.

Water and honey sodden together. Hydromeli. indecl. neut. ge. Plin. Water fish
that is salt, to lay fish in water to temper the saltness. Salsamenta
macerare. Destremper and dessaler. H. Water ban^ke. Ripa, ae. foe. ge. Riuage.
Water belle, or bubble. Bulla, ae. Bouteille ou bouillon s'esleuant sur l'eaue.
S. Water betony. Scrophularia mayor, Millemorbia, Ficaria, Ferraria, sieve
Castrangula. Grande scrofulaire. Pin. To water cattle. Adaquo, as. Abbreuer
les bestes.

Water course. Agmen, inis. n. ge. Virg. Watercresses. Sisymbrium aquaticum,
Nasturtiu^ aquaticum. Cresson, crescione. H. Water drynker. Hydropota.
Waterforde, a town in Irelande. Manapia, ae. f. g. Water guide. Conuector,
ris. m. g. Cic. To go by water. Ire nauigio. Aller par eaue. S.

To return by water. Renauigare. Retourner par eaue. S.

A water sercher, or which has knowledge to find out the sprynges of water.
Aquilex, gis. com. genesis Qui ha l'industrie de trouuer les sources d' eaues. S.

A water foul. Auis aquatica. Oiseau aquatique, ou viuant en l'eaue. S.

Water mint. Sisimbrium. Offic. Menta aquatilis, Tymbrea. S. Water of a quick
spring. Salaces aquae. Water of roses. Stillatitius rosarum liquor. Eaue Rose.
S. Water payle. Cadurcum, ci. neut. ge. Un seau a eaue. Water persely. Sium seu
lauer. Berle. Pin. Water plantayne, an herb. Alisma, Damassoniu^, Plantago
aquatica. Plantin aquatic. S. Water pot. Amula, ae. Hydria, ae. V^ceus,
Aqualis, lis, m. ge. Pot a eaue. S. Vrceolus, li. diminut. Ang. A little
waterpotte. Petit pot a eaue. S. Water ratte. Mus aquaticus. Kat d'eau. H.
Water rose, or water lylie. Nymphaea, seu Nenuphar. Lis d'estang, blanc d'eaue,
ou iaune d'eaue. Pin. Water spannel, or dog to ducke with, or to foul by
water. Canis villosus. Un barbet. H. Which is watered, or sprinkled.
Aspersus, a, u^. Rigatus, a, um. Irrigatus, a, um. Qui est arrouse. S.

Watery, or full of water. Aquosus, a, u^. Plein d'eaue. Watering for cattle.
Aquarium, rij. n. g. Abbreuoir. Watring, or sprinkling. Aspersus, us. Aspersio
aquae Aspergo, inis. Baptismus, mi. Rigatio, onis. Irrigatio, onis foe. g.
Arrousement. S. Waterishe. Aquaticus, a, um. Aquatilis, le. om. genesis Aquatil,
ou aquatique. S. A wateryshe humor. Humor aquatilis. Humeur aquatique. S.

Watte, or hare. Lepus, oris. mas. ge. Un lieure. S. Watling of a house, or
wall. Crates, it is. foe. g. Liu. Wave. Fluctus, us. Vnda, ae. Vne vague. S. and
Vndosus, a, um. Fluctuosus, a, um. Full of waves. Plein de vagues. S. The sea
makes waves. Fluctuat mare, vel aestuat. La mer fait vagues. S.

To appease the waves of the sea. Fluctus maris mulcere. Appaiser les vagues de
la mer. S.

To make great waves. Exaestuare. Fair grandes vagues. S.

Like a wave. Vndatim. A la facon d'vne vague. S.

To waver. Vacillo, as. Titubo, as. Vaciller. S.

Wavering. Vacillatio, onis. foe. ge. Vacillation. S. Wax. Caera, ae. Cera,
ae. Cire. H. To wax. Caero, as. Cero, as. Cirer. S.

Wax better. Melioresco. Deuenir meilleur. Call. Wax childishe again.
Puellasco, scis. Var. Wax day light. Diluculo, as. Dilucesco, cis. Se fair
iour. Call. Wax dark, or late night. Aduesperasco. Se fair nuict. S. Wax
dry. Areo, es. Aresco, scis. Se secher. Call. Wax fair weather. Dissereno,
as. Plin. Wax feeble. Elanguesco, scis. Deuenir debile. S. Wax foolyshe.
Desipio, is. Cic. Wax graye, or horeheaded, or be graye, or horeheaded.
Caneo, es. Canesco, scis. Deuenir chenu, and blanc. Call. Wax more great.
Augesco, scis. Deuenir plus grand Wax hard. Calesco, cis. S'endurcir. S. Wax
frail. Exolesco, scis. Deuenir caduque. S. Wax more grievous. Aggrauesco,
scis. Deuenir plus grief. S. Wax out of kind, or not to follow the good
manners of his parents. Degenero, as. Ne suyure point les bonnes meurs de ses
parens. S. Wax rusty. Rubiginem trahere. Wax sour, or tarte. Acesco, scis.
Deuenir aigre. S. Wax to a tree. Arboresco, scis. Deuenir arbre. S. Wax white
as milk. Elactesco, scis. Se blanchir comme laict. S. Waxing hard. Concretio,
onis. foe. ge. Cic. Waxing kernel. Glans, dis. foe. ge. Vne glande. Pals.
Seek all other verbes beginning with wax, (properly called verbes inceptiues,
or inchoatiues) in the principal words, from whence they are derived, as in
White, for to wax whit, In black, for to wax black. etc.


VV. ANTE. E.
Weak. Debilis, e. Delumbis, e. Flaccidus, a, um. Imbecillis, e. Imbellis, e.
Infirmus, a, um. Inualidus, a, um. Laxus, a, um. Vietus, a, um. Imbecillus, a,
um. Foible, debile. S. Very weak. Perimbecillus, a, um. Fort foible. S.

Weak or slender. Tenuis, e. om. g. Gresle and menu. S. Which has a sick,
or weak stomach. Stomachichus, a, um. Plin. Qui a mal a l'estomach. Call.

Weaken, or to make weak. Attenuo, as. Debilito, as, Infirmo, as. Tenuo, as.
Delumbo, as. Eneruo, as. Frango, is. Affoiblir, debiliter. S. To weaken greatly
the defense of any. Premere fauces defensionis alicuius. Grandement debiliter
la defense d'aucun. S.

Weaker title. Caussa inferior. Weakly. Imbecilliter, Infirm. Foiblement. S.
Weakened. Attenuatus, a, um. Debilitatus, Detrimento fractus, Infirmatus, a,
um. Affoibli. S. Weakness. Debilitas, it is. Imbecillitas, Infirmitas,
Inualetudo, inis. Foiblesse, debilite. S. Weakness of strength. Virium
infirmitas. Debilite de force. S. Weakness of health. Valetudinis infirmitas.
Debilite de sante. S. Weakness of heart, or stomach. Debilitatio atque abiectio
animi. Foiblesse de cueur. S. Weakening. Infirmatio, onis. Debilitatio, onis.
Affloiblissement. S. Wealpublike. Respublica. Republique. S. A sick
wealpublike. A^grota respublica. Republique qui va tresmal. S.

Weane. Ablacto, as. Subducere lac, A mamma disiungere, Depellere a matre,
Detrahere alumnum mamma, Auferre vberibus foetum Seurer. S. They weane the
little lambs. Lac subducitur agnis. On seure les petis agneaulx. S.

Weaned. Ablactatus, a, um. Delicus, a, um. Lacte depulsus. Qui est seure. S.
Weaning. Ablactatio, onis. foe. ge. Weapons. Arma, orum* n. g. Arms. S. To
lay hand on, or to take weapons. Capessere arma. Empoigner les arms. S.

Weaponed. Armatus, a, um. Arm. S. Which is not weaponed. Inermis, me. om.
genesis Qui n'est point arm. S.

Wear. Tero, is. Extero, is. Attero, is. Detero, is. Absumo, is. Consumo, is.
Vser. S. To wear the soole of his feet. Obterere vestigia, Calces deterere.
Vser la plant de ses pieds. S.

Wear a hoode. Humerale gestamen gestare. Porter le chaperon. S. Wear, or use
often. Gestito, as. Plaut. Weary. Defessus, a, um. Fatigatus, a, um. Fessus, a,
u^. Lassus, a, um. Less ou las. S. That is very weary of a thing. Pertaesus,
a, um.

Weary of wars. Fractus bello. Virg. Weary to be. Defetiscor, eris.
Elassesco, cis. Lasseo, es. Lassesco, cis. Se lasser, estre less. S. I am
weary to hear. etc. Taedet iam audire eadem millies. Ie m'ennuye d'ouir. etc.
S.

I am weary of my life. Vitae taedet. Ie m' ennuye de viure. S.

Weary to make. Defatigo, as. Delasso, as. Lasso, as. Obtundo, is. Rumpo, is.
Fatigo, as. Lasser, fatiguer. S. I am weary with running. Me rupi currendo. Ie
me suis less de cou^ir. S.

This walking has made me very weary. Me haec deambulatio ad languorem dedit.
Ce pourmenement m'a fort less. S.

Weary to make with words. Conterere alique^ oratione. Plaut. Weary to wax.
Lassesco, cis. Deuenir las. S. Wearied. Defatigatus, a, um. Fatigatus, a, um.
Lassatus, a, um. Fessus, a, um. Less, fatigue. S. Wearines. Defatigatio,
Lassitudo, inis. Taedium, ij. Fatigatio, onis. Languor, oris. masc. genesis
Lassete fatigation. S. Wearines, or fulness. Satietas, atis. foe. ge. Ennuy, ou
saoulement S. Weaue. Detexo, is. Texo, is, xui. Adtexo, is, xui. Tistre. S. To
weaue with an other thing, or to weaue to. Adtexo, is. Tistre auec autre chose.

Weaue perfectly, or to an end. Pertexo is. Acheuer de tistre, parfaire. Call.
Weaue together. Contexo, is. Tistre ensemble. S. To begin to weaue. Ordiri
telam. Commencer a tistre. S.

Weaued. Textus, a, um. Tissu. S. et Textilis, e. Ang. Which is weaued. Qui
est tissu. S. Weaued together. Contextus, a, um, Tissu ensemble. Weauer.
Textor, ris. m. genesis Tissier, ou tisserand. S. and Textrix, icis. foe. genesis A
woman weauer. Vne tisserande. S. Weauer of sylke. Seracarius textor. Tisserand
de soy. Weauers beam, whereon they turn their web at hand. Iugum, gi.
Panus, ni. Rouet. S. Weauers craft. Textrina. L'art de tistre. S. Weauers of
cloth of bawdkin. Barbaricarij, orum. Phrigiones, number. Call. ex Alciat. Weauers
shittle. Liciatorium, ij. Radius, ij. mas. g. La nauette. H. Weauers shop.
Textrina, Textrinum, ni. neu. ge. L'ouuroir d'vn tisserand. S. Weauing.
Textura, ae. Textus, tus, m. ge. Tissure. Web of cloth. Tela, ae. foe. ge.
Toil. S. To unweave, or pluckte the threedes from the web. Detexo, is.
Detistre, ou deffiler la toil. S.

To wedde a husband. Nubere, Innubere. Espouser mari, prendre mari. S.

To wedde a daughter rychely without giving any thing. Dare in nuptias filiam
sine dote. Marier richement vne fille sans rien luy bailler. S.

To wedde him self. Connubere, Coniungere sibi foeminam matrimonio, Vxorem
sibi adiungere, Vxorem ducere, Denubere. Se marier. S.

Web or pearl in the eye. Leucoma, it is. Albugo, inis. foe. ge. Vne taye, and
tache blanch en l' oeil. S. Wechhasel a tree. Opulus, li. f. ge. Wedde, or to
marie. Maritare, Innuptias conijcere, Filiam in matrimonium collocare, Dare
nuptu^. Marier. S. Wedded. Nuptus, a, um. Marie. S. New wedded. Nouus nuptus,
Recens nuptus. Nouueau marie. S.

To desire to be wedded. Cupere nuptias, Nupturire. Auoir faim d' estre marie.
S.

To be wedded. Permisceri matrimonio, Esse maritum. Estre marie. S.

Which is not married. Caelebs, bis. com. gener. Qui n'est point marie. S.

Wedded man. Maritus, ti. m. ge. Mari. S. Wedded man's harlot, or concubine.
Pellex, cis. f. ge. Concubine d'vn homme marie, S. Wedded woman. Marita, ae.
Nupta, ae. f. g. Mariee. S Wedding. Nuptiae, arum. Nopces. S. and Nuptialis, e.
Of a wedding. De nopces. Call. Wedding, or marying. Nuptus, tus. m. g.
Marrieme^t. Wedding chamber. Thalamus, mi. m. g. Ovid. Wedding garment. Vestis
nuptialis. Wedlock. Coniugium, ij. Connubium, Matrimonium, nij. n. g. Marriage.
S. To hate the state of wedlock. Ab re vxoria abhorrere. Hair l'estate de
marriage. S.

To break the faith of wedlock. Fidem coniugij violare. Rompre la foy de
marriage. S.

Wedge. Cuneus, ei. foe. ge. Un coing, S. and Cuneolus, li. m. g. Petit coing.
S. Wedge of gold. Massa auri, Palacra. ae. f. ge. Plin. To drive in as a
wedge. Adigo, is. Cuneo, as. Tundo, is. Coigner. S.

Driven in as a wedge. Adactus, a, um. Coigne. S. To be wedged, or driven in
with force. Per vim cuneari. Es^re coigne a force. S.

Made in form of a wedge. Cuneatus, a, um. Fait en form de coing. S.

We. Nos. Nous. S. We dispute two against two. Bini disputamus. Nous
disputons deux contre deux. S. We go to the fields. Rus abimus, Nous en
allons aux champs. S. We our selves. Nosmet ipsi. Nousmesmes. S. Weed. Herba
erratica. Herb sauuage, S. To weed, Sarculo, as. Sarcler. S.

To weed corn. Sarrio, is. Consarrio, is. Sarcler les bleds.

To weed out the weeds. Exherbo, as. Runco, as* Sarcler, and oster les herbs
meschantes. Call.

Weeder. Sarritor, oris, Sartor, oris. Runcator, oris. mas. genesis Sarcleur. S.
Weeds of the sea, otherwise called reytes. Alga, Vlua, Fucus marinus. Algue H.
Weedehoke. Sarculum, li. n. g. Un sarclet. S. Weeding. Exherbatio, Runcatio,
Sarritio, Sarritura, Sartura, ae. f. ge. Sarclement. S. Ween. Arbitror, aris.
Opinor, ris. Penser, ou cuider. As I ween. Vt puto, Vt opinor, Vt mea fert
opinio. Comme ie cuide, ou ie pense. S.

Weening. Opinio, onis. foe. ge. Opinion and judgment. Weep. Fleo, es.
Lachrymo, as. Ploro, as. Affleo, es. Delachrymo, as. Lachrymor, aris.
Illachrymor, aris. Larmoyer and plourer. S. Weep and to wayle. Eiulo, as.
Plango, is, nxi. Braire. S Weep no more. Mitte lachrymas. Ne pleure plus. S.
To make, or cause to weep. Adducere in fletu^, Lachyrmas elicere, Fletum
mouere. Fair pleurer.

To forbear, or keep him from weeping. Lachrymas tenere vel continere,
Lachrymis imperare, A lachrymis temperare. Se garder de pleurer. S.

Weep together, or with other. Collachrymo, as. Plourer ensemble. S. Weeper.
Plorator, oris. mas. ge. Pleureur. S. Weeping. Lachrymans, it is. Plorans, it is.
om. gener. Pleurant. S. Weeping. Flerus, us. Ploratus, us. Lachrymatio, nis.
foe. ge. Larmoyement. S. and Plorabundus, a, um. Which weepeth much. Qui
pleure fort. S. Weeping, and waylinge. Eiulatio, Planctus, us. m. g. Braiement.
S. Weye. Libro, as. Pondero, as. Trutino, as. Pendo, is. Expendo, is. Penso,
as. Trutinor, aris. Peser. S. Weye, or to consider diligently some thing.
Perpe^do, is. Rationem secum putare, Trutino, as. Peser ou considerer
diligemment quelque chose. S. To weye more of the one side then of the other.
Praegrauare. Plus peser d'vn cost que d'autre. S.

It weyeth ten drammes. Pendetper se drachmas december. Il poise dix drachmes. S.

Weye much, or more. Praepondero, ras. Plus peser. S Weye up ancre. Anchoram
subducere. Weighed. Libratus, Ponderatus, Trutinatus, a, um. Pese. S. Weyer.
Pensator, oris. Ponderator, oris. Pensitator, oris. Libripens, dis. m. ge.
Peseur. S. Weying a pound. Libralis, le. om. gener. Qui poise vne liver. S.
Weying two pound. Bilibris, e. om. genesis Pesant deux livers. S. Weying three
pound. Trilibris, e. om. genesis Pesant trois livers. S. Weying four pound.
Quadrilibris, e. om. genesis Pesant quatre livers. S. Weight to weye some thing.
Pondus, eris. Le poix a peser quelque chose. S. Pondusculum, li. dimin. Ang. A
little or small weight. Petit poix. S. Weight, or heaviness. Grauitas, atis.
Ponderositas, atis. foe. ge. Pesanteur. S. The weighte of any thing. Pondus,
eris. neut. g. La pesanteur de quelque chose. S.

Weight of lead. Halter, ris. mas. ge. Mart. Weight of two pound. Dipondius,
Dipondium, dij. neut. genesis Cic. Weight of three pound. Tripondium, ij. Pondus
trium assium. Call. Weighte of nine pound. Nomissis.* Weight of three ounces.
Teruncius, ij. masc. genesis Poix de troix onces. Call. Weight of seven ounces.
Septunx, cis. mas. ge. Poix de sept onces. Call. Weight of eight ounces. Bes,
ssis. mas. ge. Le poix de huict onces. S. Weight of nine ounces. Nouunciu^,
cij. n. g. Quod est nouem vnciarum. Perott. Weight, or a heavy thing. Moles,
is. f. g. Chose pesante. Weighty. Onerosus, Ponderosus, Grauidus, a, um.
Grauis, ue. om. genesis Pesant. S. Very weighty. Pergrauis, ue. om. g. Fort
pesant. S.

To be as weighty as an other thing. Aequare pondus alicuius rei. Estre aussi
pesant qu' vne autre chose. S.

To wax weighty, or heavy. Grauesco, cis. Ingrauesco, cis. Deuenir pesant. S.

Weighty gyues, or fetters. Crassae co^pedes. Plaut. Weyke of a candle. Myxus,
i. Ellychnium, nij. neu. genesis La mesche, lumignon. H. Weyle to take fish.
Excipulus, li. Nassa, ae. foe. genesis Reseruoir. S. Weke. Hebdomas, dis.
Hebdomada, ae. Septimana, ae. f. ge. Sepmaine. S. Well. Belle, Been, Probe,
Recte, Valde. Bien. S. Not so well. Non aeque been. Non pas si bien. S.

That is well done of you. Been facis, Been agis, C'est bien faict a vous. S.

That is well said, or spoken of thee. Lepide memoras, Been dicis. C'est bien
dict a toy. S.

Well aduysed. Consultus, a, um. Ovid. Well at ease to be. Saluere, Recte
valere. Se porter bien. S. Well beloved. Charus, a, um. Bien aim. S. To
welcome, any. Foelicem aduentum alicui precari, Comiter excipere aliquem.
Byenuienner, ou bienueigner aucun. S.

Welcome, even with all my heart. Optato aduenisti. Terent. Well done. Euge.
Plaut. Well favored. Formosus. Pulcher. Beau. S. Well go to. Age vt lubet.
Terent. Well a gods name let him speak, I am well content. Age dicat, Sin.
Bien de par dieu qu'il die in en suis content. S. Well nyghe. Vsque, Pene,
Prope, Propemodum, Fere, Modo, Ferme, Tantum non, Modo non. Presque. S. He has
well nighe killed me with stripes. Me pugnis vsque occidit. Il m'a presque tue
de coups. S

Well nighe all. Plerique, Fere plerique. Presque tous. Well spoken. Disertus,
a, um. Disert. S. Well, well. Age, age. Terent. Bien, bien. S. Well wrought.
Adfabrum. Cic. Well, or a spring. Fons, it is. m. g. Font ou fontaine. S.
Fonticulus, li. dimin. Ang. A little well. Fontenelle, ou petite fontaine. S.
Well being cold in summer. Derce.* Well mouth. Crepido, inis. f. ge. Colum.
Well, or pit. Puteus, ei. m. g. Un puis. S. And of a well. Putealis, le*
Puteanus, a, um. De puis. Well water. Aqua puteana, vel putealis. Eaue de
puis. H. A well never dry. Iugis puteus. Puis qui ne tarist point. S.

To draw water out of a well. E puteo aquam sumere, Haurire aquam. Puiser de
l'eaue d'vn puis.

Welthe. Res, ei. Fortunae, arum. Oplentia, ae. Diuitiae, aru^. Facultates,
tu^. Opes, um. f. g. Richesse. S. Great welthe, or richesse. Luculentae
diuitiae, Largae opes, Opes validae, Laxae opes, Gaza, ae. foe. ge. Grandes
richesses. S.

Welthe makes friends. Amicos res inuenit. Les richesses font les amiss. S. The
common welthe. Respblica, reipublicae, foe. ge. Republique. S.

Welthy, or rich. Dis, Dives, Pecuniosus, Opulentus, a, um. Rich. S. Very
welthy. Grauis diuitijs, Opiparus, Perdiues, Homo abundans, Praediues,
Praepotens, Largus opum. Fort rich. S.

To wax welthy. Venire in diuitias, Ditescere. Deuenir rich. S.

To be welthy. Abundare, Multa habere, Valere opibus. Estre rich. S.

Welthely, or rychely. Opipare, Opulenter. Pretiose. Richement. S. Wenche.
Puella, ae. Pupa, ae. Puera, ae. Filiola, ae. f. g. Fillette. S. et Puellaris,
e. Of a we^che. De fillette. S. Wenche full of hansome, or merry qualities, a
dau^sing wenche. Ludia, ae. foe. ge. Martial. Wenchelyke, or after the manner of
wenches. Puellariter. A la maniere des fillettes. S. Wenche under the age of
twelve years. Impubes, ris. Impuber, ris. om. ge. Plin. Wenne of a tree.
Molluscum, ci. neut. ge. Plin. Wensdaye. Mercurij dies. Mercredy. S. Werye.
Vide Weary. Weryshe. Inconditus, a, um. Insipidus, da, dum. Qui ne sent rien,
S. Wesant of the throat. Gurculio, onis. m. g. Le gauion. Wesante, or wyndepype
of the lunges. Trachea, cheae. Trachia, ae. foe. ge. Gell. Wesill, Ictis, dis.
Mustela, ae. f. g. Belette. H. Et Mustelinus, a, um. Of a wesill. De belette.
S. West. Occidens, it is. m. g. Occident. S. Et Occidentalis, e. Of the weste.
Occidental. S. Westchestre a town. Vxellum, li. n. g. Ptol. Western wind.
Vide Westwynde. Westminster hall. Basilica aula, * vel Foru^, ri. n. ge. West
star. Hesperus, ri. Hesperugo, inis. foe. ge. Westwynde. Caurus, ri.
Zephirus, Fauonius. Vent d' embas, ouest, vent d'ouest, vent d'aual. H. Wete.
Humidus, a, um. Madidus, Vdus, a, u^. Moite. That is always moiste and wete.
Vliginosus, sa, sum. Tousiours moite and humide. S.

To wete. Irrigo, as. Madefacio, cis. Madido, as. Madifico, as. Madidum facio.
Mouiller, Ramoistir.

Wete in the rain. Implutus, a, um. Pluuia madifactus. Call. Wete to be. Humeo,
es. Madeo, es. Estre moite.. S. Wete to be with dew. Roresco, scis. Estre
arrouse and mouille de rousee. S. Wete to make. Madefacio, cis. Vt supra. Wete
to make al over, or much. Permadefacio, cis. Wete to wax, or to become wete.
Humesco, scis. Madesco, scis. Inch. Deuenir moite. S. Wete with dew. Roscidus,
a, um. Mouille de rousee. Wetenes, or moisture. Humiditas, Humor, oris. Mador,
ris. mas. ge. Mouillure, moiteur. S. Wetenes, or natural moistnes of the
ground. Vligo, ginis. Naturelie moiteur de la terre. S. Wether, or time.
Tempestas, it is. Tempus, oris. Le temps. S. Fair wether. Caelum serenu^, Sudum,
vel apertum caelum, Tempus bonum, Tempestas bona. Beau temps. S.

By fair weather. Sereno, vel Sereno tempore. Par beau temps. S.

Calm wether. Silens caelum. Un temps serein. S.

The wether was calm. Dies erat silentis spiritus vel placidi. Le temps estoit
calm. S.

Close, dark, or cloudy wether. Austrinum caelum, Atrae nubes, Nebulosum
caelum. Temps couuert. S.

When the wether is ouercaste. Impe^dente pluuia. Quand le temps est charge. S.

Ill wether. Tempestas mala. Mauuais temps. S.

Wether, or a gelded sheep, or moto^. Veruex, cis. m. genesis Aries castratus.
Mouton. H. and Veruecinus, na, number. Of a wether. De mouton. S. Wether called ye
belwether sheep. Sectarius veruex. Weuill, or mite, a kind of worms being in
corn. Cis. nom. s. Curculio, onis. Gurgulio, onis. Cala^de
VV. ANTE. H.
WHaye. Serum, ri. Serum lactis. Ser du laict, megue. H. Whale a fyshe. Cete,
is. Cetus, ti. Balaena, ae. foe. genesis Vne balene. S. When, or when. Cum, adu.
Quando, Quando gentium, Quum, Vbi, Vbi loci. Quand. S. Vide when. Wharle to put
on a spyndle to spinne with. Verticulus, li. Verticulum, li. n. g. Peson,
vertoyl, pirouette. What. Quid, Quidnam, Quis, qui, quae, quod. Que, quel. S. I
know what age thou art. Ego scio quid sis aetatis. Ie scay quel aage tu has.
S.

What is this? what is that? Quid hoc rei est? Qu'est cela? What do thou?
Quam rem agis? Quid agis? Que fais tu? What makes Chaeria here? Quidnam Chaeria
hic rerum gerit. Qu'est ce que fait ici Cherea? What else should he have done?
Quid fecisset aliud? Qu'y eust il fait autre chose? S. What else would I have
said? Quid, Quid aliud volui dicere? Que demandoye ie autre chose? S. What art
thou? Quid tu hominis es? Quel homme es tu? S. I know not what man thou art.
Nescio quid tu viri sis, Nescio te ego. Ie ne scay quel ho^me tu es.

What? what is that? Hem, quid est? Quoy qu' est cela? S. What to do? Qua
gratia? Qua de re? Quam ad rem? A quoy fair? S. What a mischief. Quae malum.
What country man, or of what country. Cuias it is. adiect. De quel pays. S.
What fashion, or of what sort. Cuiusmodi. De quelque sort. S. What man? Quis?
Quisnam? Qui vir? Quel ho^me? What man in the world. Quisnam gentium. What
manner. Cuiusmodi. De quelle maniere. S. What manner of man. Qualis, Quis. Quel.
S. What manner of thing. Quale, Quid. Quelle chose. S. What number, or order, or
of what number or order. Quotus, a, um. Quantieme. S. Vt quota hora, Quotus est
a primo. What, or of what quality. Qualis, le. Quel. S. Whatsoever. Quicquid,
Quodcunque. Tout ce que, Quelconque. S. Whatsoever man he be. Qualis qualis,
Qualiscunque. Quel qu'il est. S. Whatsoever thou wylt. Quiduis, Cuiusuis. Tout
ce que tu vouldras. S. What to do, or wherefore. Quamobrem? Vnde? Pourquoy. S.
Whaule eyed. Glauciolus, a, um.* Wheale, or a whelke, or blister. Pustula, lae.
foe. genesis Vne ampoule. S. Wheat. Arista, Frumentum, ti. Triticum, ci. neu. g.
Froument. S. and Triticeus, a, um. Frumentaceus, a, um. Of wheat, or wheaten.
De froument. Call. and Frumentarius, a, u^. Pertaining to wheat. Triticum, Is
properly wheat which is out of the ear, or threshed. Pure wheat. Far
vernaculu^, Ador. nom. Indec. Adoreum far. Pur froument. S.

Wheat being foul, not dressed, or vnwynewed. Acerosum frumentum. Wheat
flower, or flower of meal. Pollen, nis. Fleur de farine. S. Wheat eaten with
wiuels, or mytes. Triticum a curculionibus erosum. Ble calendre. S. Wheat
having but one read, or stalk growing out of the root. Vnicalamum frumentum.
Plin. A kind of small wheat being white. Olyra, ae. Siligo, inis. foem. genesis
Vne sort de froument menu, blanc. S.

Wheat straw Calamus, mi. m. ge. Tuyau de ble. S. Wheaten, or of wheat.
Frumentaceus, a, um. Tri ticeus, a, um. De froument. S. Wheaten plummes, white
or yellowe plummes. Cerea pruna. Virg. De poetrons, ou prunes iaulnes. S
Wheel. Rota, ae. f. g. Vne roue. S. Et Rotula. dimin. Ang. A little or small
wheale. Vne petite roue. S. Wheel barrowe. Arcirma,* Vehiculum trusatile, vel
secundum Agricol. Cisium, sij. neut. genesis Vne brouette. S. and Sarracum non
male dici poterit secundum Had. Bruette. Wheel of a crane wherein men stand
that turn up burdens. Tympanum, ni. Rota, tae. Versatile tympanum. La roue d'
vne grue, de quoy on haulsse les fard^aux. H. Wheel of a wyndles in the which
the rope runs, called the pullaye. Trochlea, ae. foem. genesis Vne poulie. S.
Wheel to turn anythi^g with, a turners wheel. Tornus, ni. m. ge. Tournoir.
H. Wheel tracke or rutte. Orbita, tae. foe. g. Vne orniere. Whelke, or blayne.
Papula, ae. foe. ge. Pustula, lae. foe. genesis Bubo. S. Whelpe. Caniculus, li.
Catulus, li. m. g. Un petit chie^. Whelpe of a Lion. Scymnus, ni. Catulus
leonis. Lionceau, le petit faon d'vne lione. Call. When. Quando, Cum, Vbi.
Quand. S. When shall this be? Quando istuc erit? Quand fera ec? Let him come
when he will. Veniat qua^do volet. Qu'il vienne quand il vouldra. S.

When I think. Quu^ recordor. Quand il me souuient. Come when thou will. Vbi
vis accede. Approach quand il te plai^^. S.

Whence, or from whence. Vnde. D'ou. S. Whence comes she? Vnde haec gentium?
D' ou vient elle. S. Where. Vbi. Ou. S. Where be the other? Cedo alios? Ou sont
les autres? S Where be we? Vbinam gentium sumus? Ou sommes nos? S* Where waste
thou? Vbi terrarum eras? Ou tu estois? Every where. Vbique. aduerb. Par tout. S.

Whereby. Quo, Vnde. Don't. S. Whereby it comes to pass. Ex quo fit, vt. etc.
Don't aduient que. etc. Whereby it is plain that. etc. Ex quo manefestum est.
etc. Don't il appert que. etc. Whereby it is come to pass. Per quod effectum
est. Don't est aduenu. S. Wherefore? why? or for what cause? Cur? Quare?
Quamobrem? Qui? Quid ita? Pourquoy? S. But wherefore I pray you? Quamobrem
ta^dem? Mais pourquoy ie vous pry? S.

But wherefore are you angrye with me? Sed quid negotij quamobrem succenses
mihi? Pour quoy est ce que tu te courrouces a moy. S.

Wherefore, or why not? Quidni, Quid ita non? Pourquoy non? therefore, or why
do thou it not thy self? Qua^obrem id tute non facis? Pourquoy ne fais tu
cela toymesme? Wherefore, therefore, or for that cause. Qua de re, Quamobrem,
Quapropter, Quare, Quocirca, Proin, vel Proinde, Ergo. Parquoy. S. Wherle.
Verticulus, Verticulum. Peson, vertoil. H. Vide Wharle. Whereof. Vnde,
Vndegentium. Wheresoever, or in what place so ever. Quoquo, Vbicunque,
Vbilibet. En quelque lieu que ce soit. S. Whery man. Nauita, Ratiarius,
Nauicularius, Nauiculator, toris. m. ge. Un batelier. S. Whether? An, Vtrum. A
scauoir mon. S. Whether is that your, or our fault? Vtrum ea vestra an nostra
culpa est? A scauoir mon des deux si c'est vostre fault ou la nostre? Est ce
vostre fault, ou la nostre. S. Whether go thou? Quo ambulas tu? Quo abis?
Ou vas tu? S. Whether go thou from hence? Quo hinc te agis? Ou t'en vas
d'ici? S. Whether go thou? C. Whether should I go but home? Quo tu te agis?
C. Quonam nisi domum? Ou t'en vas tu? C. ou iroye i^ si no^ en la maison?
Whether thou will. Quo vis. Ou tu vouldras. S. Whether of the two. Vter, a,
um. Le quel de deux. S. Whether, or no. Number. Whetstone to sharp knyues. Cos,
it is. foem. genesis Un queue a aguiser cousteaux. Call. Coticula, ae. dimin. Ang. A
little whetstone. Whette. Acuo, is. Subigo, igis. Exacuo, is. Procudo, is.
Aguiser. To whette a knife. In cote cultrum subigere. Aguiser un cousteau. S.

Why? Cur? Quid? Quare? Quamobrem? Qui? Quid ita? Pourquoy? S. Why not?
Quidni? Quid ita non? Pourquoy non? Why should I not praise him? Quidni laudem?
Pourquoy ne le loueray ie point? Why should thou accuse others? Quid est
quod tu alios accuses? Pourquoy accuserois tu les autres? S Why art thou so
merry? Quid est quod laetus sis? Pourquoy es tu si ioyeux? S. Vide wherefore.
Which. Quis, cuius. Le quel. S. Which of the two. Vter, a, um. Le quel de
deux. S. Vter, de duobus, Quis de pluribus dicitur. A man cannot judge which
of the two ought to be preferred for his virtue before the other. Dijudicari
no^ potest vter vtri anteferendus virtute videatur. On ne scauroit iuger lequel
des deux doibt estre prefere a l'autre pour sa virtue. S.

Which of the two soever it be. Vtercunque, vel vterlibet. Lequel des deux
qui ce soit. S. Which way? Qua? Par ou? S. Which you will, or please of the
two. Alteruter, Vterlibet, Vteruis, vtrauis, vtrumuis. Lequel que tu veulx de
deux. Call. Whilst, or in the mean while, or space. Interim, Interea,
Tantisper. Pandant cela. S. Whilst I go and come. Dum redeo. Pendant que ie
iray and viendray. S. Whilst there was hope of peace. Dum in spe pax fuit. Ce
temps pendant qu'on esperoit la paix S. Whine like a babe or child. Vagio, is.
Hoigner. Vide Cry. Whinnes or firses. Erice, ces. Erica, cae. sieve Erix, cis.
Des bruyeres. S. Whippe. Flagellum, li. Lorum, ri. Mastix, cis. Flagrum, gri.
n. ge. Fouet, ou escourgee. S. Mastix, Is properly any thing wherewith one is
beaten, or whipped. Whippe with plummettes of lead at the end of the coardes.
Scorpio, onis. Scorpius, ij. Plin. lib. 7. Cap. 16. To whippe. Caedo, is.
Flagello, as. Flagris caedere. Fouetter. S.

To be whipped. Virgis multari, Plagas dare. Estre fouette. S.

Whipper who whippeth beggars and vagabou^des, or others. Plagosus, Lex
plagiaria, Is ye law, or statute for whippinge of beggars, or vacaboundes.
Whippesawe, wherewith timber is sawen. Runcina, nae. foem. ge. Vne scie a
scieur d'ais. Whirle about like a wheel. In orben vel orbiculatim versari,
Gyros agere. Vireuoster, pirouetter. S Whirlebone of ones knee, the patill or
shildelyke bone, the roll and the eye of the knee. Mola and polus. Pallet de
genouil. Pals. Whyrlegigge. Verticulum, li n. g. Pirouette. S. Whyrle, or rage
of a battle. Dimicatio praelij.* Whyrlepole, a water. Vorago, ginis. Vortex,
cis. Vertex cis. m. ge. Vne eaue qui va en tournoyant. S. Whyrlepoole, a fish.
Physeter, ab efflandis aquis. Whyrlewynde. Turbo, inis. Vortex, cis. Vertex,
cis. m. ge. Tourbillon de vent. H. Whyrling about. Vertigo, inis. foe. ge.
Tournoyeme^t. Whyrie boat. Ponto, onis. m. g. Caes. Un bac a passer l'eaue. S.
Vide wherie. Whisper in ones care, or to tell him somethynge softly in his
ear. Insusurro, as. Obgannio, is. Oggannio, is. Leni susurro alicui quicquam
in aurem dicere, Insusurrare alteri, Insusurrare in aurem alterius aliquid.
Cic. Dire tout bas en l'oreille luy souffler quelque chose en l'oreille. S.
Whisperer, or false tale teller. Susurro, nis. m. genesis Whispering. Susurratio,
Susurrum, Susurrus, ri. m. genesis Un bruit sourd. Call. Whistle. Calamus, Fistula.
foe. ge. Un sifflet, Flageol, ou flageolet. S. To whystle. Sibilo, as. S.
Siffler, flageoler. S.

Whistler. Sibilator, toris. * Fistulator, toris. m. ge. Flageoleur. S.
Whistling. Sibilus, li. m. ge. Sifflement. S. Whitblowe. Reduuia, ae. Reduuium,
ij. * Poil de chat. Pals. White. Albus, Candidus. Blanc. S. White as milk.
Lacteus, a, um. vt Colla lactea, Necks white as milk. Cols blanc comme laict.
S. White as snow. Niueus, a, um. vt Niuei dentes. White beam, or briere.
Tamarix, cis. vel Tamarices. foe. ge. Des bruyeres, de la bruyure. S. White
claye. Tasconium, nij. Creta Tasconia. H. White dasie, otherwise called ye
margarite, which the Northen men call banwort. Bellis, seu Belluis. Marguerites
ou pasquettes. S. White heeres. Cani, orum. sub. plur. Blancs cheueux. White
heered. Canus, a, um. Qui a les cheueux blancs. White lead, otherwise called
Cerusse. Cerussa, ae. foe. ge. De la cerusse. Call. White meat, which is made
of milk. Lactarius cibus, Cibus ex lacte confectus. White of an egg. Albor,
oris. Albugo, ginis. Albumen, nis. Vide Egg. White of the eye. Albugo oculi,
Albumen oculi. Le blanc de l'oeil. H. White russe^ color. Melinus, a, um.*
White scall. Porrigo, inis. foe. ge. La tigne. H. White sea mewe, a bird.
Cepphus. H. White somewhat. Albidus, a, um. Subalbidus, da, dum. Subcandidus,
da, dum. Un peu blanc. S. White spotte in the eye. Albugo, ginis. Vide Spot
White thorn. Rhamnus.* Spina alba, Albus spinus. Aubespin. Whyten, or to make
white. Candefacio, cis. Candico, as. Candido, as. Dealbo, as. Fair blanc. Call.
White to be. Albeo, es. Albesco, scis. Estre blanc. S. White to wax. Albesco,
scis. Inch. Albeo, es. Canere, Candorem trahere, I^albesco, scis. Deuenir
blanc. S. Whit vine, or coleure an herb. Bryonia, ae. foe. ge. Vigne blanch,
ou couleure. S. White wine. Album vinum. Vin blanc. S. White with age. Canus,
na, number. Blanc de viellesse. S. Mountains white with snow. Cani montes.
Mantaignes blanches de neiges. S.

Whyted, or painted with white lead. Cerussatus, a, um. Whytnes. Albedo,
Albetudo, Albitudo, Albor, ris, Candor, ris. Album, by. Blanchur. Whytenes of
the here, or head for age. Canities, ei. Albedo capillorum. Blanchissure de
cheueux. Whither? Quo? Quogentium? Quonam? Ou. S. Vide whether. Whither or no?
Nunquid? vt Rogo nunquid velit. Terent. I asked him whether he would send
ought. Ie luy demand sil veult rien mander. S. Whitherwarde. Quorsum, Quorsus.
Verse quel lien. Whither ye please, or to what place thou will. Quouis,
Quouisgentium. Ou tu vouldras. S. Whyting a fish. Merula. ae. Asellus mollis,
Quida^ vocat Albicam, Alij Gemmam maris vocant. Un merlan. Pals. To whitle a
thing small, or sharp like a shafte. Inspico, as. Aguiser. S. Vide Thwyte.

Whitsontide, or the feast of pentecoste. Pe^tecoste, es. foe, g. Pentecouste.
Pals. Who. Quis, Quisnam. Qui. S. Who am I? Quis ego sum? Qui suis ie? S. Who
is that? Quisnam homo est? Qui est cest homme la? S. Who asked for me? or who
seeks me? Quis me vult? Qui est ce qui me demand? S. Who soever. Quisquis,
Quicunque. Quiconque. S Whosoever thou will. Quiuis, cuiusuis. Qui que tu
vouldras. S. Whole and sound. Incolumis, e. Integer, a, um. Incorruptus, ta,
tum. Illibatus, ta, tum. Inuiolatus, ta, tum. Solidus, da, dum. Entier. S.
Whole, and in good liking. Valens, it is. Adiect. Sain and en bon poinct. S. To
keep whole and sou^de, or not hurt. Sartum tectum habere. Cic.

Wholl, or all. Totus, a, um. Vniuersalis, e. Vniuersus, a, um. Tout. S. Whole
of mind, or memory. Mentis compos, Sanus, a, um. Sain. S. To be whole, and in
good health. Valeo, es. Estre sain and en bon poinct. S.

Whole to make. Curo, as. Sano, as. Vide Heal. Whole to make a thing decayed.
Sarcio, cis. Fair entier. S. Whole to make, or as al one. Solido, as. Fair
solid. Whole to wax. Eualesco, Valesco, Sanesco, scis. Se guarrir. S. Whole
to wax, or all one, or all together. Solidesco, scis. Solidus fio, Consolidor,
aris Conglutinor, aris. Deuenir solid. Wholly. Integre, Sarte, Omnino, Penitus,
Plene, Solid, Inuiolate. Entierement. S. Wholly, or all whole, or all together.
Integre, Totaliter, Omnino, Omni modo, Penitus, Plane, Prorsus. Totalemement.
S. Wholenes, or integrity. Integritas, tatis. foem. ge. Entierete. S.
Wholenes, or perfectnes, or as all one. Soliditas, tatis. foe. ge. Solidite.
Call. Whore, or a harlote. Meretrix, Lupa, Scortu^, Prostibulum, Diobolare
scortu^, Quadrantaria, Diobolare prostibulum. Putaine, paillarde. H. Whoredom.
Adulterium, Lenocinium, Impudicitia, Obscoenitas, Salacitas, Venus, Venereae
voluptates. Paillardise. S. To commit whoredom. Scortari, Meretricari,
Libidinari, Rebus venereis vti. Paillardir. S.

Whorle, or wherne for a spindle. Spondilus, Verticulum. Vide wharle. Whose.
Cuius, a, um. De qui. S. Why Vide Why.
VV. ANTE. I.
WIcked. Impius, a, um. Iniquus, a, um. Malignus, a, um. Nequam, Flagitiosus,
sa, sum. Improbus, ba, bum. Impurus, ra, rum. Perditus, ta, tum. Scelestus, ta,
tum. Inique, meschant. S. Vide Unhappy, and Ungracious. Wickedly. Impie,
Inique, Malign, Nequiter, Tetre. Meschamment, Iniquement. S. Wickedly to do,
or say. Malignor, aris. Maligno, as. Wikednes. Impietas, Iniquitas, Malignitas,
Nequi tia, Facinus illiberale, Improbitas cordis humani, Impuritas, Indignitas,
Vitiu^, tij. Scelus, eris. Flagitium, tij. n. g. Meschancete, iniquite. S. To
do wickedness, or iniquity. Iniquitate^ suscipere. Fair iniquite. S.

Widder. Flacceo, es. Flaccesco, scis. Marceo, es. Marcesco, scis. Vide Wyther.
Wide. Amplus, a, um. Fluxus, a, u^. Laxus, a, um. Latus, a, um. Spatiosus, a,
um. Spatieux. S. Wide and large. Amplus, a, um. Vide Large. Wydnes, or breadth.
Latitudo, inis. f. g. Largeur. S. Wydowe. Vidua, ae. foe. ge. Vefue. S. To make
a wydowe. Viduo, as. Render ou fair vefue. Call.

Wydowhod. Viduitas, tatis. foe. ge. Vefuage. S. Wiech tree. Opulus, li. foe.
ge. Wife. Coniunx, vel Coniux, gis. com. ge. Marita, ae. Matrona, ae. Nupta,
ae. Vxor, ris. foe. ge. Femme mariee. S. and Vxorius, a, um. Of a wife. De
femme mariee. Call. Et vxorius dicitur qui vxori nimis inseruit. A man that is
his wives man, that lettes his wife govern him. Qui se laisse gouuerne a sa
femme. Call. Wife new married. Noua nupta. Nympha, ae. foe. g. La nouuellement
mariee. H. Wife of my son. Nurus, us. f. g. Femme de mon fills. S. My brothers
wife. Fratria, ae. foe. ge. La femme de mon friar. S.

Wife of two husbands. Bigama, Digama. Femme deux fois mariee. Call. Wife of
my son, or daughters son. Pronurus, us. foe. g. La femme du nepueu. Call.
Wifes father. Socer, cri. Le beau pere. S. Wifes mother. Socrus, us. Belle
mere. S. Wifes of two brethren. Ianitrices, cum. duorum fratrum vxores. Les
femmes des deux freres. H. Wiker, such as baskettes be made of. Vimen, inis.
neut. g. Tout^ sort de verges molles and aisees a plier. S. Et Vimineus, a,
um. Ang. Of wyker. Wicket, or little door. Festra, ae. Forula, ae. Thyridion,
Portula, Foricula, lae. f. g. Guichet. S. Wild. Agrestis, e. Ferus, a, um.
Indomitus, a, um. Agreste, sauuage. S. Wild areche, and oreche, an herb.
Atriple^ syluestris. Arroches sauuages. Pin. Wild Basil, an herb.
Ocimastrum, Ocimoides. Basilit sauuage. Pin. Wild as a beast. Ferus, a, um.
Sauuage. Call. Wild beasts. Ferae, arum. foem. ge. Bestes sauuages. and
Ferinus, a, um. Of, or pertaining to a wild beast. De best sauuage. Call.
Wild boar. Aper, pri. m. ge. Sanglier, porc sanglier. S. Wild boares flesh.
Caro Aprugna. Chair d'un sanglier. H. Wild carwayes. Cacalia, ae. foe. ge.
Wild fig tree. Caprificus, ci. Figuier sauuage. Call. Wild goordes.
Colocynthis, sieve Cucurbita syluestris. Coloquinte, ou courge sauuage. Pin.
Wild horse. Equiferus, ri. Equus ferus. Cheual sauuage. Call. Wild mynte an
herb. Menthastrum, sieve Mentha syluestris. Pin. Wild polly, or calaminte, an
herb. Calamintha altera seu nepeta. Officin. Calame^tum communis vsus. Pouliot
sauuage, ou calament commun. Pin. Wild ootes. Aegilops, Auena sterilis and
frugum pestis. Auoine folle. S. Wild ootes, called hauerns. Steriles auenae.
Poures auoines. S. Wild people. Savage people. Deuia and syluestris gens. Gent
sauuage. S. Wild saffron. Cnicos, Cnicus, Cnecus, Carthamus. Saffran bastard.
Pin. Wild somewhat, as not half tamed. Semiferus, a, um. Demi sauuage. S.
Wild tansey, an herb. Potentilla, Protentilla, seu Agrimonia syluestris, aut
Tanacetum syluestre. Agrimoine sauuage. Pin. Wild thyme. Serpyllum, li. neut.
ge. Serpollet. Pin. Wild vine. Ampelos agria, Labrusca. Vide Vine. Wilderness.
Eremus, Solitudo, inis. Desertum, ti. n. genesis Desert. S. Wilding apple, or
crabbe. Arbutum, ti. neut. gene. Vnedo, onis. Plin. Arbousse, fruit d'arbosier.
Call. Wilding tree, or crabbe tree. Arbutus, ti. foem. genesis Arbosier. S. Which
is of a wylding tree. Arbuteus, ea, eum. Qui est d'arbosier. Call.

Wildnes. Feritas, atis. foe. ge. Sauuagete. S. Wiles, or crafts. Astutiae,
Insidiae, arum. Finesses. S. Wily. Caurus, a, um. Astutus, Insidiosus, Solers,
it is. Versutus, a, um. Vulpinus, a, um. Subdolus, a, u^. Callidus, da, dum. Fin.
S. Very wilye and crafty. Perasturus, ta, tum. Percautus, ta, tum. Fort fin. S.

Wilily. Caute, Insidiose, Solerter, Versute. Fineme^t. Wilines. Solertia,
Versutia. Vide Craftines. Will. Animus, mi. Voluntas, it is, Men's, Studium, ij.
neut. ge. Le vouloir, volunte. S. My will. Mea voluntas, Meum velle. Mon vueil,
ma volunte. S.

Will, or testament. Codicillus, Scriptura vltimae voluntatis, Elogium, gij.
neut. ge. Testament ou codicille. S. To will. Volo, is. Vouloir. S.

Will not. Nolo, nonuis, nolui, nolle. verbum. defecti. Ne point vouloir. S.
Wilful. Temerarius, a, um. Temeraire. S. Wilful in opinion. Refractarius, a,
um. Opiniastre. S. Willing. Libens, Volens, Voluntarius, a, um. Voluntaire. S.
William a proper name. Guilielmus, mi. mas. genesis Guillaum. Cord. Willing
nothing, or not willing, or against will. Inuitus, a, um. Nolens, it is. om. genesis
Maulgre soy and envy. S. Willinglye. Sponte, Voluntario, Voluntary. Libenter,
Aequo animo, Secundo animo, Vltro, Haud grauate, Lubens, Lubenter, Lube^ti
animo, non inuit. Volunteers, voluntairement. S. To hear willingly. Secu^dis
auribus, vel aequis auribus aliquid accipere. Ouir volunteers. S.

To die willingly. Aequo animo mori. Mourir volunteers and sans regret. S.

To do some thing willingly. Voluntate ad aliquid faciendum adduci. Fair
uoluntairement quelqu^ chose. S.

Willingly done, or of his own mind, swing, or will, without constraint.
Spontaneus, a, um. Vltroneus. Qui volunteers and de son bon gre fait quelque
chose. S. Willingly without reward, or benefit. Gratuito. Gratis sans loyer
and recompense. Call. Willowe. Salix, cis. Siler. Saulx. S. Salignus, a, um.
Saligneus, a, um. Qui est de saulx. S. Of willowe. Willowe grove. Salicetum,
Salictum, ti. neut. genesis Vne saulsaye. S. Wimble. Terebellum, li. Un foret.
Pals. Wincke. Conniueo, es. Nicto, as Cligner les yeulx. S. Which wynketh not.
Inconniuens. Qui ne cligne les yeulx. S.

Wincke at one. Adnicto, as. Festus. Wincke with one eye. Collimo, as. Cic.
Wincking. Conniuentia, ae. Nictatio, onis. foe. genesis Clignement des yeulx. S.
Wind. Ventus, ti. masc. genesis Vent. S. Ventulus, li. diminut. Ang. A little
wind. Petit vent. S. A prosperous wind. Ventus ferens, Secundus. Vent
prospere. H.

A boisterous wind. Irrumpens ventus. Un vent qui enter de grande impetuosite.
S.

The wyndes begin to lie. Cadunt venti. Le vents s' appaisent. S.

The wind has stayed us. Tenuit nos ventus. Le vent nous a detenu. S.

The ships have a good wind. Aura vtuntur naues. Los nauires out bon vent. S.

Wind contrary, or a contrary blaste of wind. Reflatio, onis. Reflatus, us.
m. g. Vent contraire. S. Wind blowing from the southe. Carbas. The southeast
wind. Vulturnus, ni. Euronotus, ti. m. ge. Sues^h, ^^roth. H.

The southweste wind. Africus, ci. Libonotus, ti. m. ge. Suouest. H.

The weste wind. Zephyrus, Fauonius, nij. Vent d'embas, ou d'aual, ouest, vent
d'ouest. H.

The northeast wind. Caurus, ri. Corus, ri. Argestes, ae. Iapyx, cis. m. ge.
Northest, vent de galerne.

The east wind. Eurus, ri. mas. genesis Vent solaire, ou vent d'amont. S.

The north wind. Aquilo, onis. Boreas, ae. m. ge. Vent de bize, vent de north.
H.

The south wind. Lib^, Auster, Notus, ti. m. g. Vent d'auton, vent de midi,
vent morin, pluau, austre, Su, ou sud. H.

Wind contagiouse. Atabulus, li. m ge. Nebriss. Wind, or breath. Spiritus,
us. Pneuma, it is. ne. ge. Vent, ou haleine. S. An eastern wind. Altanus, ni.
m. ge. Plin.

Wyndes blowing from crekes, or waters. Antelucani venti. To wind, or smell
out by the trace. Odorari vestigijs. Sentir a la trace. S.

Winds rising out of the sea. Tropaei venti. Plin. Winds that rise out of the
ground. Apogaei Winds, which blow in somer about the dog days. Etesiae,
arum. foe. ge. Strab. Windebeame of a house. Columen, is. n. ge. Varro. Le
support and appuy du toict. H. Windy, or full of wind. Ventosus, a, um.
Venteux. Windy places. Conflages, gum. f. g. Festus. Windynes. Ventositas, it is.
f. g. To wind into many plaites. Sinuo, as. Tortuer en plusieurs plis. S.

Wind a man in by craft. Lacio, cis, cui, vel exi. Wind again. Retexo, is,
xui. Stat. Wind in. Intorqueo, es. Entortiller. S. Wind on a bottom.
Glomero, as. Agglomero, as. Deuider du fill par pelotons. S. Wind out of
trouble. Euoluere se turba. Terent. Wind pype. Guttur, Animae canalis, Canna
pulmonis, Aspera arteria. Le siflet. H. Winded about many ways, or crooked.
Tortuosus, a, um. Tortu. S. Wynder of wool. Contortuplicator, oris.* Winding
in of a waterbanke. Sinus, us. m. g. Tere^t. Sinuosus, a, um. Full of
wyndinges. Qui ha beaucoup de destours. G. Winding, or turning up of cables.
Spira, ae. foe. ge. Pliement en rond que fait un chable. S. Winding shete.
Ferale amiculum, Inuolucrum lineum cadauerale. Le drap ou est enuelope le corpse
mort. H. Winding, or turning. Anfractus, us. m. g. Un distour. Windlasse, or
poulley. Rechamus, Trochlea, ae. foe. genesis Vne poulie. S. Window. Fenestra,
ae. f. g. Fenestre. S. Fenestella, ae. Ang. A little wyndowe. Petite fenestre.
S. A glass wyndowe. Speculare, ris. m. ge Vne fenestre de voarre. S.

To open a place, and to make a wyndowe. Fenestrare. Ouurir quelque lieu, and y
fair fenestre. S.

Window, or door which does shut, and open. Repagulum, li. n. ge. Cic.
Windows made with bars, or wood with many holes to look out at, a latteis.
Cancelli, orum. m. ge. Treillis. S. Wine. Vinum, ni. n. g. Vin. H. Vinarius, a,
um. Angl. Pertaining to wine. Servant a vin. Call. Vinosus, a, um. Vinolentus,
a, um. Full of wine. Plein de vin. S. Wine called nectar, an excellent wine.
Murina. Plaut. Festus nectar exponit: Varro Passum. Le boisson d'vn Roy. H.
Some call it Hyppocrasse. Wine pure, clear, not myxed. Vinum merum, Meracum.
Cic. Purum, Putum. Vin pur, clair, point mixtione. H. Wine strong. Temetum,
Grave vinum quasi tentans mentem. Vin fort and puissant. H. Wine mingled, or
delayed with water. Vinum delutum, Lymphatum. Vin trempe. H. Wine and honey
sodden together. Mulsum, Oinomeli. Vin mielle. H. Wine as yet in the grape.
Pendens vinum, Cato. Vin qui est encore en la grappe. S. Wine being new.
Mustum, ti. Moust. H. Wine delicate, and pleasant. Vinum nobile, Vinu^
generosum. Vin delicat and friant. H. Wine of the meaner sort, such as they
use at the table with meat. Vinum ignobile, vel cibarium. Vin ordinaire, ou de
table. H. Wine durable. Vinum consistens, Ferens aetatem, Firmum. Vin durable.
H. Wine called rhenishe wine. Rhenense vinum. Wine not durable. Vinu^ fugiens,
Exolescens, Dubium, In vitium inclinans, Aetatem non ferens. Vin altere, and
point durable. H. Wine dead. Vinum acescens, Vappa, Marcidum. Vin pousse and
corrumpu. H. Wine dregs. Fex vinacea. La lie du vin. S. Wine drincker, or
that is given to wine. Vinosus, And he that drynketh no wine. Abstemius, a, u^,
Qui ne boit point de vin. S. Wine hard and sharp. Asperum vinum, Austeru^
vinum. Vin dur and aspre. S. White wine. Vinum album. Vin blane. S.

Claret wine. Rubellum vinum. Vin cleret. S.

Read wine. Atrum vinum, Rubeum vinum. Vin rouge, S. Tincture. H.

A wine called maulmsey. Vinum Aruisiu^, Creticum, Chium, Monembasites.
Maluisie. H.

A wine called muscadle. Vinum Apianum, Falernum. Vin moscatel. H.

Wine growing nighe to Venice. Pucioum vinum. Wine infused. Dilutum vinum,
Lymphatum vinu^. Vin trempe. H. Wine mingled with water. Spurcum vinum. Vin
dedens le quel il y a de l'eaue. S. Wine of Angiew. Andiacium vinum. Wine of
the press. Tortiuum mustum, Vinu^ tortiuum, vel circundaneum. Vin de
pressurage. S. Wine or water offered to deuilles, Idolles, or spirits.
Arforis.* Winepotte. Oenophorum, ri. n, ge. Pot a vin. S. Winepot an herb,
other do call it our ladies gloves. Asdrabacca, Bacchar, ris. Baccharis, ris.
Ca^panula, lae. Les gans de nostre dame. S. She that sells wine by ye pot.
Decupa, ae. f. g.

Wine small and ill. Cibarium vinum. Petit vin. Wine small and thin. Villum,
li. neut. genesis Vinot petit vin. S. Wine sodden with wormewoode. Absynthites
vinum. Vin d' Alume. S. Wine sold out by gallons, quartes, pyntes, or by any
like measure. Decupatum vinum.* Wine seller, or shop. Apotheca, ae. foem. ge.
Cellier a vin. Pals. Wine tavern. Oenopolium, lij. n. g. Tavern. S. Wine that
drynketh of the lies. Faecatum vinum. Wine vessel of earth with handles.
Diota, ae. f. ge. Wine which has continued good, two hundred years.
Opimianum vinum, Opimium.* Wynewe, or to vane. Vanno, as. Ventilo, as. Euanno,
as. Vanner. S. Wynew cloth, or vane. Ventilabrum, Vannus, ni. Vallum, li. n.
ge, Van. S. Wynewer of corn. Ventilator, Vannator, oris. m. g. Vanneur. S.
Wynewyng of corn. Vannatio, Ventilatio, onis. f. genesis Esuentement. S. Wynge.
Ala, ae. Aile d'oyseau. H. Alaris, e. Pertaining to a wynge. Qui est des ailes.
Call. Subalaris, e. which is under the wynge. Qui est sous les ailes. The
wings of an army. Alae, arum. foem. genesis Les ailes d'vne armee. S.

The wings of the vantgarde. Cornua. Les ailes de l'auangarde. S

To clippe, or cut the wings. Detruncare ala^ auibus. Rongner les ailes. S.

To clappe the wings together. Co^cutere alas, Plaudere alis. Ba^re les ailes
ensemble. S.

Wynged. Alatus, a, um. Aliger, ra, rum. Aile, ou qui ha les ailes. S. Win.
Facere lucrum, Lucrifacio, cis. Lucror, aris. Been rem suam gerere, Demereo,
es. Fruge^ facere, Proficio, cis. Quaestum facere. Gaigner. S. To win money.
Facere aliquantum lucri argenti. Gaigner argent. S.

Thou winnest nothing there. Versuram facis. Tu n' y gaignes rien. S.

What do I win to deceive thee? Quid mihi lucri est te fallere.? Que
gaigneray ie de te tromper?

Win by force. Expugno, as. Gaigner de force. S. Win ye city, or town.
Potiri vrbis. Salust. Gaigner la ville. S. Winners of every side. Lucriones,
onum. mas. genesis Qui gaignent de tous costez. S. Wynning. Lucrum, cri. Quaestus,
us. Compendiu^, dij. n genesis Gain. S. Quaestuosus, a, um. Ang. Of much wynning.
Qui gaigne beaucoup. Quaestuariae arts, Crafts or policies to win money.
Great wynning. Bonum lucrum. Grand gain. S.

Small or little winning. Quaesticulus, li. Captura, ae. foe. ge. Un petit
gain. S.

Winter. Bruma, ae. Hyems. Hybernum, sub. tempus. Yuer, ou hyuer. S. Brumalis,
e. Hibernus, a, u^. Pertaining to winter. Appartenant a l'yuer. S. A plesaunt
winter. Clemens hyems. Un doulx yuer, qui n'est point aspre. S.

A very rough winter. Summa hyems, Hyems acris, Teterrima hyems, Saeuissima
hyems. Fort grand yuer, and aspre. S.

A wynters day. Hyemalis dies. Iour d'yuer. S.

To pass the winter in some place. Hybernare, Hyemem tolerare in loco aliquo,
Hyemare. Passer l'yuer en quelque lieu. S.

To stay all winter. Perhyemare. Demeurer tout l'yuer. S.

Winter parlour. Tablynum, ni. n. g. Plin. To winter. Hybernare, Hyemare.
Yuerner. S.

Wype. Mundo, as. Tergo, is. Detergo, is. Extergo, is. Abstergeo, es. Abstergo,
is. Torcher. To wipe diligently. Pertergere. Torcher diligemment. S.

Wype clean with a sponge. Spongio, as. Spongia extergere. Call. Wype the nose.
Emungo, is, nxi. Moucher. S. Wyped. Tersus, a, um. Torche. S. A wiping cloute,
or shoecloute. Penicillus, li. Penicuius, li. Penicillum, li. Peniculum, li. n.
ge. Touillon, ou torchon a torcher les souliers. S.

Wisdom. Prudentia, ae. Sal, is. Sapientia, Sophia, Sagacitas, atis. foe. genesis
Sagesse. A man of great wisdom. Alta mente praeditus homo. Homme de grande
sagesse. S.

Wise. Callens, it is. Callidus, Prouidus, a, um. Cautus, Consultus, Prudens,
it is. Sagax, cis. Sapiens, it is. Scitus, a, um. Sage. S. Very wise. Persapiens,
it is. om. ge. Fort sage. S.

This fellow is nothing wise. Hic plane nihil sapit. Cestuy n'est nullement
sage. S.

Wise man. Sophus, phi. m. ge. Homme sage. S. Wise to be. Sapio, is, iui. Estre
sage. S. If he were wise. Si recta saperet. Si il estoit bien sage. S.

To wax wise again. Resipisco, cis. Terent.

Wisely. Callide, Caute, Cordate, Prudenter, Provide, Sagaciter, Sapie^ter,
Consulte, Sobrie, Co^syderate. Sagement. S. Very wisely. Persapienter. Fort
sagement. S.

He played wisely. Custodite ludebat. Il iouoit sagement. S.

That is wisely spoken of thee. Dixti pulchre. C'est sagement dict a toy. S.

That is wisely done. Scitum est. C' est sagement faict. S.

Wisest. Prudentissimus, Sapientissimus, a, um. Tresage. S. Wish, or a desire.
Votum, ti. Desyderium, rij. Desyderatio, onis. foe. ge. Souhait. S. Which has
his wish. Voti compos. Qui ha son souhait. S.

Wish, or to desire. Aueo, es. Concupisco, cis. Desydero, as. Exopto, as. In
aliquo desyderio esse. Souhaiter. S. To wish or think evil to any.
Grauiter de aliquo sentire. Souhaiter mal a aucun. S.

Wished. Optatus, a, u^. Souhaite, S. Optabilis, e. Ang. Able, apt, easily, or
worthy to be wyshed. Souhaitable. S. Witch. Saga, ae. Venefica, ae. f. g.
Sorciere S. A very great witch. Triuenefica, ae. foe. genesis Vne fort grande
sortiere. S.

To witch. Fascino, as. Effascino, as. Sorceler, ensorceler. S.

Witching. Fascinatio, onis. Effascinatio, onis. foe. g. Ensorcelement,
sorcelement. S. Witchecrafte. Fascinu^, ni. Dardaniae arts.* Goaetia, ae. foe.
ge. Sorciliere. S. With. Cum, Per, Pariter, Simul, Vna. Auec. S. With him.
Secum. Auec soy. S. I will be often with you. Viua^ tecum multum. Ie seray
souuent auec toy. S.

With you in your house. Tecum apud te. Auec toy en ta maison. S. With very
good will. Perlibenter. Fort volunteers. S. With good will. Secundo animo.
Volunteers. S. With me. Mecum, Vna mecum. Auec moy. S. To stay with his
hooste. Ad exercitum manner. Demeurer auec son ost. S.

With great dishonor. Per summa^ iniuriam, Persummum dedecus. Auec grand
deshonneur. S. With much a do Vix. A grande peine. S. To withdraw him self
a part. Cedo, is, ssi. Proripio, Abscedo, is. Abiungere se, Pedem refer,
Auferre se, Colligere se. Se retirer a part. S.

Withdraw from an harlot. Auellere se a meritrice. To withdraw out of the
company of any privily. Subterducere se alicui, Subducere se de, vel ex
societate alicuius. Se retirer de la compaigne d' aucun en cachette. S.

Withdraw the mind. Auocare animum. Sulp. Wither, or to fade. Flacceo, ces.
Se flestrir. S. To wax withered, and faded. Flacceo, ces. Flaccesco, scis.
Deuenir flestri and fane. S.

Withered, faded. Flaccidus, da, dum. Flestri, fane. S. To wither, or wax
dry. Assiccescere, Exarere, Exarefieri, Arescere, Inarescere, Serescere,
Siccescere. Se seicher. S.

Witherid or dry. Siccus, ca, cum, Torridus, da, dum. Aridus, da, dum. Sec. S.
Witheridnes, or drynes. Ariditas, tatis. Aritudo, inis. Siccitas, tatis. foe.
ge. Seicheur. S. Withholde. Detineo, es. Moror, aris. Teneo, nes. Detenir. S.
Withie. Salix, cis. foe. g. Saulx. S. And which is of withie. Salignus, a, um.
Saligneus, a, um. Qui est de saulx. S. Within. Intra, Intro, Intus. Dedens.
Which is all within. Intestinus, a, um. Qui est tout dedens. S.

Within twenty days. Intra viginti dies. Dedens ving^ iours. S. Within small
time. Cis paucos dies. Dedens peu de temps. S. Within the skin.
Intercutaneus, a, um. Quod intra cutem est. Call. Without. Citra, Absque, Sine.
Sans. S. Without thee. Absque te. Sans toy. S. Without cause. Ob nullam noxam.
Sans cause. S. Not without cause. Non ab re. Non sans cause.

Without division. Pro indiuiso. Sans division. Without order. Passim, Nullo
ordine. Sans order. S. Without. Extra, For As. Horse. S. Without any thing, or
void. Vacuus, a, um. V^ide. Without care. Dissolute. Sans se soulcier. S.
Without ciuility, or courtesy. Rusticus, a, u^. Agrestis, e. Rustault. S.
Without cohertion, or constraynte. Sponte, Vltro. Sans contrainte. S. Without
punishment. Impune. Sans estre puni. S. Without danger, or peril. In portu,
Tuto. Sans danger S. Without delay, or tarying. Euestigio, Mox, Protinus. Tout
incontinent. S. Without deserving. Immerito. Sans l'auoir merit. S. Without
noise. Suspenso gradu, Tacito pede, Suspenso strepitu, Tacit, Per silentium.
Sans fair bruit. S. Without dissimultion, or openly. Aperte. Manifestement. S.
Without doubt. Proculdubio. Sans doubt. S. Without end. In infinitum. Sans
fin. S. Without loking for. Ex insperato. Contre esperance. S. Which is
without. Expers, it is. om. genesis Qui est sans, Qui n'ha point. S.

Without passage, or way. Inuius, a, um. Sans chemin, par ou on ne pass
point. S. Without pity, or mercy. Immisericors, dis. Without trouble. Sedate.
Sans trouble. S. Withstand. Resisto, is. Obsto, as. Resto, as. Obsisto, is.
Repugno, as. Renitor, eris. Interdico, cis Resister. S. To withstand any.
Inpugnare aliquem, Resistere alicui. Resister, a aucun. S.

He has withstanded me. Astitit mihi contra. Il m' a resist. S.

Withstanding, or resisting. Resistentia, ae. Impugnatio, onis. foe. ge.
Resistance. S. Withwynde, an herb. Conuoluolus, Vitealis, Volubilis media,
Liliastru^, Liset de l' herb aux cloches. Witness. Martyr, ris. Testis. com.
ge. Tesmoing. S. A credible witness. Locuples testis, Grauis testis. Tesmoing
veritable and digne de foy. S.

An vnco^stant witness. Testis vacillans. Tesmoing qui n'est point ferme. S.

Thou art a good witness. Tu es optimus testis. Tu en es bon tesmoing. S.

A witness of no credit. Testis fidei strictim labefactarae. Tesmoing de
nulle foy. S.

Witnesses which do greatly urge, or charge ye accused, or defendant, and
maintain the case in his bearde. Acerrimi testes. Tesmoings qui pressent fort
un accuse, and qui luy maintiennent en barbe le cas. To suborne witnesses.
Testibus praescribere quid dicturi sint, Testibus rogandis testimoniu^ verbis
praeire, Testimoniu^ dictare. Suboruer tesmoings. S.

Witness bearer. Testificator, oris. Witness, or testimony. Testatio,
Testimonium. Tesmoignage. S. To bear witness, or to depose. Testimonium dicere,
vel pro testimonio. Porter tesmoignage, ou deposer. S.

To bear false witness. Pro testimonio mentiri. Porter faulx tesmoignage. S.

Witness which is brought in by color, subornation, corrupt, and of polluted
credit. Subornatus testis. Tesmoing suborne. S. Witness which saw the thing
which he declares. Oculatus testis. Tesmoing qui a veu ce qu' il raconte. S.
Witnesses of most substantial depositions. Classici testes. To witness.
Attestor, atis. Testificor, aris. Testor, staris. Tesmoigner. S.

To call any to witness. Ad testimoniu^ vocare. Appeler quelqu'vn pour
tesmoigner. S.

Witnessed. Testificatus, a, um. Tesmoigne. Call. Witnessed, and confirmed.
Testatum. Tesmoigne and conferme. S. Witnessing, or the deposition of witness.
Testificatio, onis. foe. ge. Deposition des tesmoings. S. Witnessing.
Attestaris, it is. om. ge. Tesmoignant. S. Witsondaye. Pentecoste, es. f. ge.
Penthecouste. Pals. Wit. Ingenium, ij. Acumen, inis. n, ge. Entendeme^t,
Ingeniosite. S. A blockishe, and hard wit. Plumbeum ingenium. Un lourd and
dur entendement. S.

To sharpen the wit. Ingenium acuere. Aguiser l'entendement. S.

One has a better wit then the other. Praestat ingenio alius alium. L' un ha
meilleur entendement que l'autre. S.

Wit approved, or long tried. Prouectu^ ingeniu^. Witty. Argutus, Callidus,
Cautus, a, um. Ingeniosus, Praeditus ingenio, Sagax, Solers, it is. Cordatus, a,
um. Acer, cris, cre. om. ge. Ingenieux. S. Very witty. Perargutus, a, u^.
Peringeniosus, a, um. Fort ingenieux. S.

A witty, or wise man. Cordatus homo. Homme sage. S.

Wittily. Argute, Callide, Cordate, Provide, Sagaciter, Site, Solerter, Acute.
Ingenieusement. S. Wittily made, and with great cunning, or art. Artificiosum,
Artifex. Faict ingenieusement, and de grand art. S. Wittines, or pregnancie of
wit. Sagacitas, Solertia, ae. foe. genesis Ingeniosite d'esprit. Call. Witting.
Sciens, it is, om. ge. Sachant, scauant. S. Wittingly. Scienter. Scauamment. Call.
Wittelesse, or mad. Insanus, a, um. Male sanus, Vacerra, Vesanus, a, um.
Vecors, dis. Captus cord, Mente captus. Insense. S. To be witless, or out of
his wit. Insanire, Furere, Tenere ins^niam. Estre insense, ou horse de sons
sen^. S.


VV. ANTE. O.
WOE. Dolor, ris. Vide Sorrow, and Grief. Woe be to you, or wo-worth you. Vae,
Vaeh, Inter. vt Vae misero mihi. Terent. Woe be to me wretch that I am. Wode
for diers. Glastum, Isatis. Guede, pastel de languedoc. H. Would, or will.
Volo, is. Vouloir. S. I would gladly know. Peruelim scire. Ie vouldroye fort
scauoir. S.

I would. Non nollem, Vellem. Ie vouldroye bien.

Would to God. O, Vt, Vtinam. O pleust a dieu. S. Would to God that I had not.
etc. Quod vtinam minus vitae cupidus fuissem. Que pleust a dieu que ie n'eusse.
etc. S. Wolf. Lupus, pi. mas. ge. Un loup. S. Lupinus, a, um. Of a wolf. De
loup. Call. A hunter of wolfes. Luparius, rij. m. ge. Chasseur des loups. Call.

To hold ye wolf by ye cares, or to doubt. Auribus lupum tenere. Tenir le
loup per les oreilles. S.

Woluishe, or of a wolf. Lupinus, a, um. De loup. Wolle. Lana, ae. De la
lain. S. Wolle bearing, or having. Lanaris, e. Laniger, ra, ru^ Lanifer, a,
um. Qui port lain. Call. Wolle man, or one which dresseth wolle. Lanarius,
rij. m. ge. Qui appreste les laines. S. Wolle unwashed. Succida lana. Lain
auec le suin. S. Wolled, or which has wolle. Lanatus, a, um. Lanu, ou qui a
lain. S. Wolle worker. Lanificus, a, um. Qui besongne la lain. Woollen, or of
wolle. Laneus, a, um. De lain. S. Woman. Foemina, ae. Homo, Mulier, ris.
Foemella, ae. Vne femme. Foemineus, a, um. Muliebris, e. Of a woman. De femme.
S. A woman maryageable. Viripotens, it is. Virgo nubilis, Tempestiua. Matura
viro, Matura thoro. Fille mariable, priest a marier. H.

A woman that is barayne, or stirill, not apt for procreation. Foemina
sterilis, Infoecunda. Femme sterille. H.

A woman new married. Nympha, Non ita pride^ viro co^iuncta, Noua nupta. La
nouuelleme^t mariee.

A woman as white as snow. Niuei corporis foemina. Blanch comme neige. S.

Woman spoused. Sponsa, ae. foe. ge. L'accordee. S. Woman full of pratles, or
words. Lingulata, ae. foem. genesis Plaut. Woman great with child. Pregnans,
Mulier foeta, Grauida, Vteru^ ferens. Femme gross d'enfant. H Woman having a
man's heart, and shape. Andrago, gis. Virago. Femme vertueuse and qui fait acts
d' homme. H. A very beautiful woman. Luculenta mulier. Vne femme fort belle. S.

Woman having two twynnes an one birth. Gemellipera, ae. foe. ge. Ovid.
Woman honest of tongue. Eulalia, ae. foe. g. Eras. Woman lying in chyldbedde.
Puerpera, ae. foem. ge. Femme accouchee, gisante. H. Woman mournoure at a
buryale. Praefica, ae. f. g. A woman which desires greatly the company of a
man. Mulier virosa. Femme qui appete fort compaignie d'homme. S.

Woman of her first child. Primipera, ae, f. g. Plin. Woman past children.
Sterilis mulier. Femme sterile. Woman piper. Auletris, mulier tibicina est.
Call. Woman saint, or goddess. Dea, ae. f. g. Deesse. S. Woman servant.
Ancilla, ae. foe. genesis Chambriere. S. Ancillula, ae. A poor woman servant.
Petite chambriere. S. Woman that has had two byrthes. Bipara, ae. f. g. Woman
that is concubine but to one man. Concubina, nae. Concubine. H. Woman which is
an atonement maker. Conciliatrix, cis. foe. ge. Moyenneresse. S. Woman which
keeps the cotage, or house. Casaria, ae. foe. ge. Mulier quae casam custodit.
Call. Woman with great breasts, or dugges. Mammeata, ae. foe. genesis Womanly.
Muliebriter. A la maniere de femme. S. To make like a woman. Muliero, as. Varro.

Woman's attire. Mundus, di. mas. genesis Liu. Woman's bonnet, cappe, or hoode.
Calyptra, trae. foem. genesis Festus. Woman's flowers, or their natural
euacuations. Mensium profluuium, Mulierum profluuium. Les fleurs des femmes. H.
Woman's garmente. Vestis muliebris. Vestement de femme. S. Woman's gown with a
train. Cyclas, dis. foe. ge. Women agree best together. Congruit mulier
mulieri magis. Les femmes s'accordent meulx ensemble. S. Women which do painte
their faces. Fucatae mulieres. Femmes fardees. S. Womb. Aluus, ui. Venture,
tris. m. g. Le ventre. S. Womb of a woman. Vterus, ri. masc. genesis Le ventre de
la femme. S. A little womb. Vterculus, li. m. ge. Petit ventre.

Wonder. Admiratio, onis. Admirabilitas, atis. Miraculum, li. n. ge. Merueille.
S. To wonder much. Demirari, Admirari vehementer. S'esmerueiller fort. S.

Wonderful. Admirabilis, e. Admirabundus, a, um. Mirabilis, Mirus, a, um.
Mirificus, a, um. Merueilleux. S. A wonderful thing. Prodigio simile,
Miraculu^. Chose merueilleuse S.

Wonderfully. Mirabiliter, Admirabiliter, Mire, Mirifice, Mirum in modum,
Mirabilem in modum. Merueilleusement. S. Wondering. Miratio, onis. Admiratio,
onis. Admirabilitas, atis. foe. ge. Esmerueillement. S. Wonder. Affici
admiratione, Ponere aliquid in admiratione. Miror, aris. Admiror.
S'esmerueiller. S. Wont, usage, or custom. Assuetudo, nis. foem. genesis
Accustumance. S. To wont, or accustom. Assuesco, scis. Consuesco, scis.
Insuesco, cis. Consuefacio, cis. Adducere aliquem ad consuetudinem, Assuefacio,
cis. Accoustumer. S.

Wonted, or accustomed. Insuetus, a, um. Consuetus, a, um. Insuefactus, a, um.
Assuefactus, a, um Accoustume. S. Wood. Lignum, ni. Bois. S. Ligneus, a, u^.
Of wood. De bois. S. Lignosus, a, um. Hard as wood. Dur comme bois, S. Wood
of Aloes, a very sweet wood. Agallochum, Officinis, Lignum aloes. Lignum
aloes. H. Stinking wood. Acopos, sieve acopus. Bois pua^t.

Wood which never smoketh. Acapna ligna. Bois qui ne fume point. S. To go to
fetch wood for the camp. Lignari. Aller querir du bois pour le camp. S.

Wood being dry for the fire. Causima, ae. Wood bearing maste, or okecornes.
Glandaria sylua. Cato. Woodbynde. Periclymenu^, ni Syluae matter, Volucrum
maius, Matrissylua, ae. Lilium inter spinas, Caprifolium, lij. n. ge.
Cheurefueil. Pin. Woodcocke. Gallinago, Rusticula, Scolopax. Beccasse. H. S.
Wood culuer. Palumbes, ae. Palumbus torquatus. Ramier, mansart. H. Wood.
Sylua, ae. Bois. S. and Syluaticus, a, um. Syluester, ris, e. Ang. Of woods.
De bois. Call. Syluula, ae. diminut. Ang. A little wood. Petit bois. S.
Syluicola, ae. A wood man. Un homme de bois. S. A wood of pleasure. Nemus,
oris. n. ge. Un bois de plaisance. S. and Nemoralis, le. om. g. Of a wood. D'vn
bois. S. Nemorosus, a, um. Full of wood. Plein de bois. S.

A little thick wood. Lucus, ci. mas. ge. Un petit bois espes. S.

Wood keeper, or woodewarde. Saltuarius, rij. m. g. Guard ou sergeant du
forest. S. Woodeknife. Harp, es, Falcatus ensis, Gladius Persicus. Semitaire.
H. Woodepyke, a bird. Picus martius, Turbo. Bechebois. H. Wood pyle. Strues
lignorum, Meta. Lignier, pil de bois. H. Wood stacke. Lignile, is. Vng
buscher. S. Wooden, or of wood. Ligneus, a, um. De bois. S. Woodesowre, an
herb. Trifolium, Acetosus, Alleluya, Panis cuculi. Alleluya, ou pain de cocu.
Pin. Wood, or mad. Furiosus, a, um. Rabidus, a, um. Saeuus, a, um. Furialis,
le. Captus furore. Furieux. S. To wax, or become wood. Furere, Furore
ingrauescere, Furorem concipere ex maleficio. Deuenir furieux. S.

To make any wood. Obijcere furorem alicui. Mettre quelqu'vn en fureur. S.

Woodly. Saeue, Rabide, Furiose, Furialiter, Furenter. Furieusement. S.
Woodnes. Rabies, ei. f. g. Furor, oris. m. g. Fureur. S. To appease the woodnes
of the people. Impetu^ populi reprimere. Appaiser la fureur du peuple. S.

Word. Verbum, by. Vocabulum, li. Dictio, onis. Dictum, ti. Vox, cis. foe.
ge. Parolle. S. Verbosus, a, um. Full of words. Qui ha beaucoup de parolles.
Verbose. With many words. Auec beaucoup de parolles. S. Amorouse words.
Amatoria verba. Parolles amoureuses. S.

To make many words. Multa verba facere. Auoir beaucoup de parolles. S.

To speak words at randon. Fundere verba. Dire parolles a la volee. S.

Word for word. Ad verbum, Verbatim. Word having but one case.
Monoptoton, Quod vnum solum habet casum. Call. Word having diverse, or many
significations, or voices. Aequiuocum. Word not much used. Glossema, it is. n.
genesis Vox minus vsitata, quae scilicet interpretatione eget. Word, or diction
deryued and made of pronouncing or sounding, as of the barking of a dog,
bleting of a sheep, lowing of a cow, hissing of an adder, crowing of a cock
and such like. Onomatopoeia, ae. f. ge. Est quaedam figura, a quibusda^
Nominatio dicta, vel Nominis cuiusque rei fictio, aut immutationis, aut
significationis gratia. Words fearfully spoken, or not well pronounced, or
uttered for fear. Tertiata verba. Convert words. Tecta verba. Parolles
conuertes

Sporting, or pleasant words. Iocosa verba. Parolles ioyeuses. S.

Words finely spoken. Byssina verba, Phalerata uerba, Phalerata dicta.
Terent. Belles parolles. S. Words frankely uttered. Dapsilia verba. Few
words. Breuis sermo. Peu de parolles. S.

To speak in very few words. Praecise dicere. Dire en trop peu de parolles.
S.

Words not derived of other, called primatiues. Primogenia verba. He has
answered me in few words. Respo^dit mihi paucis verbis. Il m' a respondu en
peu de parolles. S.

Work. Cura, ae. Opera, ae. Opus, eris. Opificium, cij. Operatio, onis. foe.
ge. Ouurage. S. Opusculum. diminut. Ang. A little short, or small work.
Petit ouurage. S. An ancient work. Opus antiquum. Ouurage antique. S.

Work of coper, or brass. Aerame^tum, ti. neut. g. Ouurage de cuyure, ou
d'arain. S. Work of earth nealed with fire. Testaceum opus. Ouurage de terre
cuite. S. Work that required long time to be done. Spissum opus and operosum.
Ouurage qui requiert long temps a le fair. S. Work made in haste. Opus
tumultuarium. Ouurage faict a la haste. S. To end a work. Colophonem addere
operi. Acheuer un ouurage. S.

To allow a work. Approbare opus. Approuer un ouurage. S.

To make some work. Opus texere. Fair quelque ouurage. S.

To work. Operor, aris. Operer, ouurer. S.

To publishe some work. In apertum refer aliquod opus, Edere in lucem, vel
publicare aliquod opus. Publier quelque o^uure. S.

To work some thing round. Detornare. Ouurer quelque chose au tour, ou
touret. S.

Work new again. Recudo, is. Reforger. S. To work by collusion, as to
square from right to wrong, or to do an act in law repugnaunt to the mere
equity of the law. Praeuaricor, aris.

Work cunningly. Fabrefacio, cis. Fair par grand art and maistrise. S. To
work in a frame, lombe, or stole to weaue. Texo, is. Tistre. S.

To work, or make some thing with potters claye. Plasmo, as. Fair quelque
chose de terre a potier

Work out his task. Absoluere pensum. Acheuer sa tasche. S. Woorker.
Operarius, rij. Opifex, cis. com. ge. Vide Woorkeman. Woorker, imbocer, or
chaser of plate, or other vessel. Anaglyptes, ae. m. g. Woorker in claye, or
earth. Plasmator, ris. mas. ge. Woorker in a frame, lombe, or stole, a weauer.
Textor, ris. mas. ge. Tisserand, Tissier. S. Woorker of earth, or claye.
Plastes, ae. ma. genesis Qui fait ouurage de terre. Call. Work done at stolen
times from other necessary business. Succisiuae operae. Cic. Woorkehouse.
Ergasterium, Officina, ae. f. ge. L'ououuroir d'vn chascun mestier. S.
Woorkehouses for sylke women, or other huswiues to trim wolle. Occi.*
Woorking. Operatio, onis. foe. ge. Operation, oeure. Natural woorkinges, or
operations. Actiones corporis naturales. Operations naturelles. S.

Woorking day. Profestus dies, Operarius dies. Iour ouurier. S. Woorking in a
frame, lombe, or stole. Textura, ae. foem. genesis Lucret. Woorking in claye, or
earth. Plasmatio, onis. f. g. Woorkeman. Operarius, Opifex, cis. Fabricator,
oris. Artifex, cis. com. ge. Ouurier. S. Our country workmen. Vernaculi
artifices. Ouuriers de nostre pais. S.

Voorkemen which have nothing to do. Operarij vacui. Ouuriers qui n'ont que
fair. S. Woorkeman woorking easily, or scantly, more idle then well occupied.
Parcus opera. Woorkeman which takes work in gross, or to task. Redemptor,
ris. m. g. Cic. Woorkeman which woorketh sitting. Sellularius artifex. Liu.
Woorkemanly. Affabre. Artificieusement. Call. Woorkemanly wrought. Affabrum, pro
Affabre factum dixere veteres. Call. World. Mundus, di. Orbis, is. m. ge. Le
monde. S. The earth is placed, or set in the midst of the world. In medio
mundo terra sita est. Au milieu du monde la terre est situee. S.

The description of the world. Cosmographia, ae. foe. ge. La description du
monde. S,

World hereafter to come. Posteritas, it is. f. g. Cic. Worlds age. Actas
mundi. L'aage du monde. S. All the world knows it. Nemo hoc nescit, Res
palam est. Tout le monde le scait. S.

Since the world began, or since the beginning of the world. Ab aeuo
condito, Ex omnibus seculis, Post hominum memoriam, Ex quo homines meminerunt,
Post homines natos. De puis que le monde est monde. S.

So long as the world shall stand. Dum hominum genus erit. Tant que le monde
sera. S.

It is not in the world. In rerum natura non est. Il n' est point en tout le
monde. S.

Worldly, or of the world, or like to the world. Mundanus, a, um. Du monde.
S. Worldly pleasure. Volup, Voluptas. foe. ge. Plaisir mondain. S.
Voluptabilis, e. That which has worldly pleasure. Qui ha plaisir mo^dain. S.
Voluptuosus, a, um. Full of worldly pleasure, or insaciable of desire. Plein de
plaisir mondain. S. Voluptarius, a, um. which is given to worldly pleasure.
Addonne a plaisir mondain. S. Worldly shames child. Perfrictae frontis homo,
De hoc adagio deducitur, Perfricuit faciem, fro^tem, aut os. He is without all
shame. Il a perdu toute honte. S. Worm. Vermis. Ver. H. Vermiculus. dimin.
Ang. A little worm. Un petit ver. S. Verminosus, a, u^. Full of worms. Plein
de verse. S. Vermiculor, aris. To be full of worms. Estre vermoulu. Call.
Vermino, as. To have worms. Auoir de verse. Verminatio, onis. foem. ge. A
disease of worms properly among cattle, called the botts, and Vermina, orum.
n. ge. Is a disease among men, called the wrynging of the belly with worms.
Worm in a man's belly. Lumbricus, Cells. Ver. H. Worm of the earth. Lumbricus.
Colum. and Plaut. Ver de terre. H. Worm in the hands that itche. Acarus,
Teredo, sieve exiguus vermiculus, qui subter cutim erodit agitque cuniculos in
pruriginosis manibus. Ciron. Worm engendring of the caraine of a dead horse.
Terms, Termus, Vermis qui carnibus ingeneratur. H. Worm in a dogs tail, or
tongue. Lytta, tae. f. g. Worms in the leaves of a peache tree.
Cephalocrustes. Worm that eats the leaves, and buddes of the vine. Voluox,
Volucra, Inuoluulus, Conuoluolus, Vermis qui vites erodit. Lis^t, uer coquin,
Hurbec qui ronge les burions de la vigne. H. Worm that breadeth in beans.
Midas, dae. foe. ge. Ver de feues. H. Worm that breadeth in wax. Acar, ris.
Acarus, ti m. ge. Petit ver qui naist dans la cire. Call. Worm that eats
wood. Teredo, inis. Caries, Terms. Ver de bois. H. Worm which is a canckar,
being red, and found under an old tree, and has a black head, and a great
bealy. Xylophagus, gi. Worm which eats leaves of vines, of some called the
devils goldryng. Volucra, Voluox, Inuoluulus, Conuoluolus, li. m. ge. Liset,
ver coquin. Worms in childrens bealtes. Ascarides, Tineae, vel Tiniae, arum.
foe. ge. Plin. Worm in fishes. Asilus, li m. ge. Virg. Wormwoode. Absinthium,
ij. Absynthium, ij. Absince ou absynthe. H Wormewoode wine. Absinthites. Vin
d'absynthe ou d'aluyne. H. Worn. Attritus, a, um. Tritus, a, um. Detritus, a,
u^. Use. S. Worn out. Obtritus, a, um. Cic. Worn as a garment bare.
Obsoletus, a, um. Cic. Worship. Dignitas, atis. foe. ge. Honneur. Pals.
Worship. Colo, is. Veneror, aris. Adoro, as. Adorer. S. Worshipper. Adorator,
oris. Cultor, oris. masc. genesis Adorateur. S. Worshipful. Venerabilis,
Augustus, a, u^. Venerable. Worshipfully, or reverently. Venera^ter.
Reuera^ment Worshipping. Cultus, us. Veneratio, Adoratio, onis. foem. genesis
Adoration. S. Venerabundus, a, um. Venerandus, a, um. which does worship or
reverence. Qui fait la reverence. S. Worshipping of idols. Idolatria, ae. foem.
genesis Idolatry. S^ Worst. Pessimus, a, um. Deterrimus, a, um. Tresmauuais. S.
Worste time for a public weal. Alienissimum reipublicae tempus. Worth more
to be, or of better value. Praeualeo, es. Estre plus valable. S. Worth nifles,
or nothing. Friuolus, a, um. Friuole. S. A man little worth. Trioboli homo,
Nullo numero homo, Minimi pretij, Nugalis. Homme de nulle valeur. S.

Little worth. Vilis, le. om. ge. De peu de valeur. S.

Worth to be. Valeo, es. Valoir. S. The thing was not worth it. Non fuit
ta^ti, Vix operae pretium erat. La chose ne le valoit pas. S.

Worthy. Dignus, a, um. Digne. S. Worthy hier. Dignus praemio. Digne de loyer.
S. To esteem, or think worthy. Dignare, Dignari. Estimer digne. S.

There is nothing more worthy of love. Dignius nihil est quo ametur. Il n' y a
chose plus digne d' estre aimee. S.

Worthy of praise for some thing. Probabilis re aliqua. Digne de louange pour
quelque chose. S. Worthy blame, or to be blamed. Accusabilis, le. Culpabilis,
e. om. ge. Digne d' estre blasme. S. Worthy honor, or reverence. Venerabilis,
e. om. g. D^gne d'honneur, ou reverence. S. Worthy perpetual memory. Cedro
dignus. Pers. Worthy to be beaten. Vapulandus, Verberalis, Verbereus, a, um.
Digne d'estre batu. S. Worthy to be desired. Expetendus, a, um. Cic. Worthy to
be despised or disdaigned. Co^temptibilis, e. Contemnendus, a, um.
Contemptible. S. Worthy to be observed, or had in reverence. Obseruabilis, le.
om. ge. A quoy on peult ou on doibt prendre guard. S. To be reputed worthy.
Dignari. Estre repute digne. S

Worthy to be seen, or looked upon. Spectabilis, Visendus, a, um. Digne
d'estre regard. S. Worthy victory. Palmarius, a, um. Digne d'importer le
pris. S. Worthily. Condign, Digne. Dignement. S. Worthynes. Dignitas, it is.
foe. ge. Dignite S. Wortes for the pot, or herbs to eat. Lachanu^, ni.
neut. ge. Toute sort d'herbe bonne a manger. S. Lachanopoles, Oleru^ ve^ditor.
A seller of wortes, or herbs. Lachanopolium, Forum olitorium. Call. Is the
markette, or place where they be sold. Wowe. Proco, as. Ambire, vel blanditijs
petere foeminam. Demander and purchasser aucune pour l' auoir a femme. S.
Wower. Procus, ci. Celuy qui demand and pourchasse aucune pour l'auoir a
femme. S. Which woeth, or loves that same woman that an other loves.
Riualis, lis. m. ge. Celuy qui aim celle mesme que un autre aim. S.

The envy between two persons loving both one wenche. Riualitas, atis. foe.
genesis L'enuie qui est enter deux compaignons aimans vne mesme fille. S.

Woufe of cloth, or yarne on the web. Trama, ae. f. ge. Licium, cij. Licia,
orum, n. g. Train, ou trane. S. Wound. Plaga, ae. Vulnus, eris. neut. ge. Un
play. S. and vulnerarius, a, um. Pertaining to a wound. Servant a plays. S.
A cruel wound. Vulnus acerbum. Cruelle play.

To receive wounds. Vulnera accipere, vel excipere. Receuoir les pays. S.

A great wound. Luculenta plaga. Grande play.

Wounded. Saucius, a, um. Vulneratus, a, um. Sauciatus, a, um. Vulneribus
affectus. Naure. S. To be wounded with sorrows, or griefs. Doloribus affici.
Estre naure de doleurs. S.

Wounded to be to death. Occumbo, is. Ovid. Wounded with a Iauelin. Lanceatus,
a, u^. Iul. fir. To wound. Lacero, as. Saucio, as. Vulnero, as. Imponere
vulnus, vel plagam, Co^saucio, as. Naurer, player. S.

Wounded. Tortuosus, a, um. Vide winded. Wounding, or hurting. Vulneratio,
onis. foem. genesis Naurure. S.
VV. ANTE. R.
WRappe up. Implico, as. Inuoluo, is. Conuoluo, is. Obuoluo, is. Circu^plico,
cas. Impedio, is. Enueloper. S. To wrappe up a wound. Vulnus alligare.
Enueloper vne play. S.

To wrappe let and hinder any. In tricas aliquem conijcere. Enueloper and
empestrer aucun. S.

Wrapped. Inuolutus, a, um. Obsitus, a, um. Conuolutus, a, um. Obuolutus, a,
um. Enuelope. S. Wrapped together. Implicitus, a, um. Implicatus, a, um. Cic.
Wrapped to be in bonds. Nexu inire. Liu. Wrapping. Implicatio, onis. foe. ge.
Enuelopement. S. Wrastler. Luctator, oris. Palaestrita, ae. Pycta, ae. Pyctes,
it is. m. ge. Luicteur. S. Like wrestlers. Palaestrice. A la mode des luicteurs

Wrestle. Luctor, aris. Colluctor, aris. Deluctor, aris. Obluctor, aris.
Luicter. S. Wrestling. Lucta, Palaestra, ae. foem. genesis Luicte. S. and
Palaestricus, a, um. Pertaining to wrestling. Appartenant a la luicte. S.
Wrestling. Colluctatio, onis. Luctatio, onis. foe. ge. Luictement. S. Wrestling
place. Palaestra, ae. Xistus, ti. m. g. Vitru. Wrath. Ira, ae. Stomachus, chi.
Indignatio, nis. foe. g. Courroux, Ire. S. Wrath continual, or which dureth
long. Plumbea ira. Courroux qui dure long temps. S. Wrath of God. Fulmina
sacra. Great wrath. Indomitae irae. Grans courroux. S.

To move to wrath. Mouere indignationem vel bilem alicui. Esmouuoir a courroux.
S.

Wrathful, or easy to anger. Iracundus, a, um. Irritabilis, le. Biliosus, a,
um. Stomachus, a, u^. Ireux, aise a courroucer. S. Wreathe, or a garland that
they use to put on their heads to bear a payle, or other burdin on.
Cesticillus, li. m. ge. Festus. Wrecke of the sea. Naufragium, gij. n. g.
Naufrage. S. Naufragus, i. He that escapes with life at such danger. Wreke
anger. Euomere iram. Terent. Wrenne a bird. Regulus, li. Trochilus Rottelet,
petit roy. H. To wrest, or wrie. Torqueo, es. Distorqueo, es. Tordre. S.

Wrestle. Vide wrestle. Wretch. Miser, a, um. Malheureux. S. Wretched. Miser,
ra, rum. Miserabilis, le. Miserandus, a, um. Aerumnosus, a, um. Miserable. S.
As wretched as I. Miser aeque atque ego. Aussi miserable que moy. S.

Wretchedly. Miserabiliter, Misere, Miserandum in modum. Miscrablement. S.
Wretchedness. Miseria, ae. foe. ge. Misere. S That is great wretchedness.
Miserima miseria. C'est grande misere. S.

Wry, or to wreste. Torqueo, es. Contorqueo, es. Distorqueo, es. Intorqueo, es.
Obtorqueo, es. Retorqueo, es. Tordre. S. Wrye mouthed men. Miriones. Wried, or
wrested. Distortus, a, um. Tortus, a, um. Tors ou destors. S. Wrighte. Vide
Carpenter. Wrincle. Ruga, ae. Ride. S. Rugosus, a, um. Full of wrincles. Plein
de rides. S. Wrynckled. Rugatus, a, um. Wrinckled to be. Rugo, as. Se rider. S.
Wring. Stringo, is. Arcto, as. Astringo, is. Co^stringo, is. Interstringo, is.
Estreindre. S. Wringe hard. Perstringo, is. Fort estreindre. S. Write. Scribo,
is. Texo, is. Conscribo, is. Persequi scriptura. Escrire. S. To write often.
Scriptitare. Souuent escrire. S.

To write in some thing. Inscribere. Escrire en quelque chose. S.

To write well. Scribere accurate. Bien escrire. S.

To write in prose. Orationem soluta^ struere. Escrire en prose. S.

Write again. Rescribo, is. Rescrire. S. To write histories in verse.
Attingere res gestas versibus. Escrire histoires en verse. S.

To write against any. Inuehi. Escrire contre aucun.

To write falsely. Mentiri. Escrire faulsement. S.

To write more. Adscribere. Escrire d'auantage. S.

Write commentaries, or books for remembrance. Commentor, aris. Plaut. To
write about. Circu^scribo, is. Escrire a l'entour.

To write between two. Interscribere. Escrire enter deux. S.

To write things contrary. Veteribus orationibus rescribere. Escrire chooses
contraires. S.

Write me in the nombre. Ascribe me in numerum. Escry moy au nombre. S. Write
out. Transcribo, is. Transcrire. S. Write stories, acts, or gestes. Peragere
res gestas. To write all in length, and at large. Escrire tout au long, and au
large. S.

Write underneath. Subscribo, is. Escrire au dessoubs. Write upon some thing.
Inscribo, is. Superscribo, is. Escrire sur quelque chose. S. Writer. Scriptor,
oris. Notarius, rij. Ad manum seruus. Escriuain. S. Writer of books.
Bibliographus. mas. genesis Writer of books of account, as for bailiffes, reues,
heywars. etc. Logographus, Scriptuarius, rij. mas. genesis Festus. Writer of
histories. Annalium conditor, Historicus, ci. mas. genesis Historien. S. Writer of
lamentable verses, or balades. Elegiographus, phi. mas. genesis Writer of wanton,
dissolute, or railinge matters. Mimographus, phi. n. ge. Writer on his knees.
Grammatocyphon. Writer which writes fast, and swifte. Viuidus calamo. An
approved writer. Classicus scriptor. Gell.

Writh. Co^uoluo, is. Inuoluo, is. Intorqueo, es. Obuoluo, is. Entortiller. S.
To writhe round about. Circumuoluere. Entortiller tout entour. S.

Wrythed, or wynded. Tortilis, le. om. ge. Entortille. S Writhed about th'arme.
Intortum circa brachium. Entortille entour le bras. S. Writing. Scriptio, onis.
Scriptura, Literatura, ae. Scriptus, us. Stylus, li. m. ge. Escripture. S.
Scriptorius, a, um. Apt for writing, or pertaining to writing. Servant a
escrire. Call. Scriptum. Is the thing written. Escrit. Call. Writing which they
make upon any thing. Inscriptio, onis. f. ge. Escripture qu'on fait sur quelque
chose. To leave by writing. Scriptum relinquere. Laisser par escript. S.

Writing craftily changed. Suppositum scriptum. Writing false, or the form
of false writing. Scribligo, inis. vel stribligo, inis. foe. ge. Gell. A short
writing, and exposition. Scholium, lij. n. genesis Vne brieue escripture and
exposition. S.

Writing made in haste without study. Sylua, ae. f. genesis Quint. Writing of
books. Bibliographia. ae. f. ge. This is the writing of my secretary. Epistola
librarij manu est. C'est l'escripture de mon secretaire.

Writing, or any deed made, sealed, and delivered by the maker, or sealer,
which the lawers call Pro facto, Syngrapha, Syngraphus, Syngraphu^, phi. n.
ge. Cic. Writing tables. Pugillares. Tablettes a escrire. H. Writings gathered
out of many authoures. Collectanea, orum. n. g. Escriptures amassees de
plusieurs autheurs. S. Writings, or letters cifered, which no man can read but
he to whom they be sent. Furtiuae literae, Furtiua scripta.. Gell. Written.
Scriptus, a, um. Escript. S. This is written in the chronicles. Notarunt hoc
annalus. Ceci est escript es chroniques. S.

They find it written. Prodidit memoria On a trouue par escript. S.

Which is not written. Inscriptus, a, um. Qui n' est point escript. S. Wrong.
Iniuria, ae. foe. ge. Tort, injury. S. By wrong, or by right, by hook, or
by crook. Quo iure, quaque iniuria. A tort ou a droict. S.

To endure and suffer any wrong. Accipere plagam aut vulnus. Endurer and
souffrir quelque tort. S.

Wrong doer. Iniuriosus, a, um. Iniurius, a, um. Qui faict tort. S. Wrong
iawed, or having the nether longer then the upper iawe. Bronchus, Brochus, a,
um. Varro. To do wrong. Facere iniuriam, Iniurior, aris. Abire a iure. Fair
iniure. S.

Wrongful, or which does wrong. Iniuriosus, a, u^. Iniurius, a, um. Qui faict
tort. S. Wrongfully, and without cause. Inique, Perperam, Ob nullam noxiam,
Iniuriose, Iniuria, Immerito, Falso. A tort and sans cause. S. Very wrongfully.
Immeritissimo. A tresgra^d tort

Wroth. Iratus, a, um. Courrouce. S. Wroth to be. Irascor, sceris. Estre
courrouce. S. Wrought, or made. Factus, a, um. Faict. S. Wrought by rule.
Emussitatus, a, um. Festus. Wroghte with small pi^ces of bones, stones, or
wood Tessellatus, ta, tum. Suet.
X.
X, Is a semiuowell, and has the force of a double consonant, for the which
in old wrytinges cs, and gs, was used, As Apecs, Gregs, For Apex, Grex, In
composition of words S, is not written after an X, As the rule is, Post X non
scribitur S, vt Exugo, is. Exupero, as. Of which words the one is compounded
of Ex and Sugo, the other of Ex and Supero, And should be written thus, Exsugo,
Exsupero, Were not the rule and custom of writing otherwise. X, also is
written for the figure of ten, and may be augmented in this manner.x.xx.xxx.
which is, 10.20.30. Ten, twenty, thirty. Or
thus.xi.xij.xiij.xiiij.xv.xvi.xvij.xviij.xix. which is 11.12.13.14.15. etc.
Eleven, twelve, thirtene, fourtene, fiftene, sixtene, seuentene, eightene,
nyntene, and so forth, (of which nombers though not of their forms) have I
spoken before in their places. X ounce, or ten ounces. Dextans, it is. Diz
onces. H. Xantippa, The name of Socrates wife, a woman of wonderful
impatience, and shrewyshe demeanoure, whose curstenes Socrates suffered with
marvelous patience, and being asked of Aleibiades, why he suffered such a
shrewe in his house, therefore (quod he) bide I this at home, that when I come
abroad I may the better bear with the wantonness and injuries of others.
Xantippe, es. foe. genesis Xi ounces. Deunx, cis. Onze onces. H. Or a measure
containing as much as a reasonable man may drink at.xi. times. Xx. Viginti.
Vide Twenty. Xxx. Triginti. Vide Thirty.
Y. ANTE. A.
Y, Is a Greek vowel, and used with us and the French men, even as I, the
vowell is, it has also with use oftentimes the force almost of a consonant,
as in these words you, yard, yarne, which words can not be written with an I,
Also Y, may both begin, and end a word, as the letter I, and other vowels
do. I have declared somewhat hereof in the letter I. Yard, a measure to
measure with. Virga, ae. foe. ge. Vne verge. S. Yard of a man. Coals, is.
Virga virilis. Vide privy. Yard, or a court of a house. Area, ae. foem. genesis
Vne court de maison. S. Yarke of a whippe. Tax. n. g. Le son d'vn coup de
fouet. Yarne, or threde of cloth. Filum, li. n. g. Fill, filet. H. Yarrowe,
milfoile, or nosebleede, an herb. Millefolium, Stratiotes, Millefolium maius.
Millefueille. Yate. Ianua, Porta. Vide Gate. Yaune, or to gape. Hio, as.
Dehisco, scis. Baailler. S. Yaune, or to gape wide. Inhio, as. Oscito, tas.
Fort. baailler. S. To yaune for sleep. Hiscere, Oscitare, Oscitari Baailler de
sommiel. S.

Which yauneth, or is open. Hians, it is. Dehiscens, it is. Qui baaille ou est
ouuert. S.

Yauning for sleep. Oscitans, it is. Baaillant de sommeil. Yauning, or gaping.
Hiatus, tus. Oscitatio, onis. f. g. Baaillement. S.
Y. ANTE. D.
Idle. Feriatus, a, u^. Ociosus, a, um. Oisif, oiseux Idle from working.
Raeses, dis. om. g. Idem. Idle to be. Manum sub chlamyde habere, vel tegere.
Ocior, aris. Otior, aris. Otiosum esse. Estre oiseux. S. Ydlenes. Cessatio,
Ocium, Otium, tij. n. g. Oisiuete. S. Ydely. Ociose, Otiose. Oisiuement. Call.
Ydolatrer, or a worshipper of Idolles. Idololatra. Idolorum cultor. Idolatre,
qui adore vne idol. S. Ydolatrie. Idololatria, ae. foe. g. Idolatry. S.
Ydoll. Idolum, li. n. g. Vne idol. S. Ydols offering, or that which is offered
to Idols. Idolothytum, ti. n. ge. Ce qu'est immole aux idols. S.
Y. ANTE. E.
YEa. Etiam, Immo, Ita, Sane, Sic. Ouy. S. Yea but. Immo, Sed autem. Mais. S.
Yea certainly. Immo certe. Ouy certaynement. Yea, I say so. Ita loquor. Ouy ie
le die. S. Yea, I tell thee. Ita inquam. Ouy te die ie. S. Yea mary. Quid ni.
Vide What. Yea rather. Immo. Mais plustost. S. Yea truly. Quippe. Ouy certes.
S. Yea verily. Ita vero, Ita enimuero. Ouy vrayement. S Year. Vide year. Ye,
or you. Vos Vous. S. Have ye knives? Habetisne cultros? Aues vous des
cousteaux? S.

Your doings are such yt ye seem of a set purpose to do them against your
selves. Quae facitis eiusmodi sint, vt ea dedita opera a vobis contra
vosmetipsos facere videamini. Cic.

Yield. Dedo, is. Trado, is. Se render. S. I yield to thee. Dedo me tibi. Ie me
rens a toy. S.

To yield to the enemy. Tradere se. Se render a son ennemi. S.

They did yield to the consuls mercy. Abiectis armis, in fidem consulis
venerunt. Ils se redirent a la merci du consul. S. Vide Render.

Yield account. Calculum ponere, Dictare ratione^, Rations dare, Reddere, vel
refer rationem. Render un compte. S. Yield, or to render. Reddere,
Retribuere, Restituere. Render. S. Yield forth licour, or moistnes. Exudo, as.
Veluti per sudorem emitto. Render sueur. Call. Yield, or render him self to the
enemies part. Transfugio, is. Se render du parti des enemis. S. Yield to an
other in battle. Dedo, is, Diditionem facere. Vide Render. Yield up. Resigno,
as. Vide Resign. Yield up a castle, or fortress to the ennemies. Prodere
arcem obsidentibus, Arcem prodere hostibus. Render la fortress aux ennemis. S.
Yield up ghost. Edere spiritum. Vide Die. Yielded up. Deditus, a, um. Rendu. S.
Yelding to enemies. Tra^sfugiu^, Defectio ad hosts. Yelding up our selves to
one. Deditio, onis. foe. ge. Quand on se rend a aucun. S. and Dedititius, a,
um. Which has yielded him self to the mercy of an other. Qui se rend a la
mercy d'autruy. S. Yelke of an egg. Luteu^ oui, Vitellus, li. vide Egg. Yell
and rore. Vide Cry, Rore. Yellowe. Flauus, a, um. Luteus, a, um. Rufus, a, um.
Iaulne. S. Yellowe ambre, called Lambre. Sualternicum.* Yellowe earth found in
the mines of gold, or silver. Sil, is. n. ge. Georg. Agric. Yellowe garments
for women of the color of saffron. Crocotulae, arum. foe. ge. Yellowe
iaundise. Aurigo, ginis. f. ge. Regius morbus, Arcuatus morbus, Icterus, ri. m.
g. Iaunisse. S. He that has the yellowe Iaundise. Arquatus, Auriginosus,
Ictericus, ci. m. ge. Qui a la iaulnisse.

Yelowe quinces. Chrysomela, Cotonea inclinata ad auri colorem. H. To yelowe,
or make yelowe. Rufo, as. Iaulnir. S.

To become, or wax yelowe. Rufere, Flauere, Flauescere. Deuenir iaulne. S.

Year. Annus, ni. m. ge. Un an. S. and Hornus, na, number. Hornotinus, na, number. Of
one year, of this year. D'vn an, de c'est an. vt Horni agni. Lambs of one
year. Agneaulx qui ont un an. S. The space of a year. Annua dies, Annale
te^pus. L'espace d'vn an. S.

In the end of the year. Anni extremo, Anni exitu, Anni fine, Sub finem anni.
En la fin de l'an. S.

From year, to year. Annuatim, Quotannis, Per singulos annos. D'^en an. S.

The thirtene year. Alter annus ab vndecimo. Le treziem an.

To be almost two years old. Secundum annum agere. Estre aux deuxieme an de
son aage. S.

To dure ten years. In annum decimum durare. Durer iusques a dix ans. S.

Year and a half. Sesquiannus. Leap year. Bissextus, ti. sieve Bisextus, ti.
mas. ge. Bisexte. S.

Yereling, or of the age of one year. Anniculus, a, um. Annotinus, a, um. Qui
n'a qu'vn an, d'vn an. S. Yearly, or every year. Annua vice, Annuatim,
Quotannis, In singulos annos. Per chascu^ an, to^s les ans. Yearly done.
Annalis, e. Annarius, a, um. om. ge. Anniuersarius, a, um. Qui se fait tout les
ans. Call. Yearly revenues. Redditus, Prouentus. Vide Revenue. S. Yes. Vide
yea. Yester day. Heri, and aliquando Here pro Heri ponitur. Hier. S. and
Hesternus, a, um. Of yesterdaye, or done yesterdaye. De hier. S. Yet. Adhuc.
Encore. S. Yet for all that. Veruntame^. Vide Notwithstanding Yet, or to cast
metal. Fundo, is, udi. Fondre. S. Yew tree. Taxus, i. foe. ge. If, ou if. S.
and Taxeus, a, u^. Of yewe. D' if. S. Yewar. Gurturnium, nij. Aqualis, lis. m.
ge. Guttus, ti. m. ge. Goutteron. Esguierre. S. Yexe, or to have the hikvp.
Singultio, is. Senglouter, Hoqueter. S. Yexing. Singultiens, it is. Particip.
Yexing of a man, or woman. Hecta, ae. Singultus, us. mas. ge. Le senglout. S.
Y. ANTE. F.
IF. Si. Coniunctio. Si. S. If thou do it. Si facias. Si tu le fais. S. If he
say he will, give it him. Si est vt dicat velle se, read. S' il dit qu' il le
veult, ren luy. S.
Y. ANTE. L.
Isle. Insula, ae. foem. ge. Vne Isle. S. Insularis, e. Pertaining to an isle.
Insulatus, a, um. Made to an isle, or ylande. Vide Isle. Isle of man. Mona. Ptol.
Isle of Shepey in Kent. Counos. Ptol. Isle of wight in England. Vectis. Ptol.
Ill. Improbus, a, um. Malus, a, um. Prauus, a, um. Mal. S. Vide Ill and Evil.
Ill, or euelly. Deterrime, Improbe, Male. Malement.
Se more in I. Ante. L.
Of Y. Ante. M. Vide I. Ante. M.
Y. ANTE. N.
YNche. Pollex, cis. Vncia, ae. foe. ge. Latitudo pollicaris. Vne poulcee. S.
and Vnciola, ae. dim. Ang. A little, short, or small ynche. and Pollicaris, e.
Vnciarius, a, um. Of an ynche. D' vne poulcee. S. Ynche by ynche, or by inches.
Vnciatim. Par poulcees Yncke. Atramentu^, Atrame^tum scriptorium. Encre.
Ynckhorne. Atramentarium, rij. n. g. Cornet a encre. S. Enough. Sat, Satis.
Assez. S. It is enough. Sat est, Satis est. C'est assez. S.

There is enough said, I will do it. Sat est, Curabo. C'est assez dict, ie le
feray. S.

There is enough said, or commanded, we will see to it. Nos curabimus, satis
praeceptum. C'est assez command, nous ensoignerons. S.


Y. ANTE. O.
YOke. Iugum, gi. n. ge. Un Ioug, un couple. Call. and Subiugalis, le. Subiugis,
e. Qui est soubs le ioug. S. Which is under yoke. To take the yoke. Iugum
subire. Prendre le ioug. S

To reiecte the yoke. Exuere iugum, vel excutere iugum, Reijcere iugum.
Reiecter le ioug. S.

To shake of the yoke of bondage, or servitude. Deijcere iugum servile a
ceruicibus. Reiecter le ioug de seruage. S.

Yoke of oxen. Iuges. Iugum, gi. Par bou^. Un couple. de boeufs, ou pair de
boeufs. Call. To yoke oxen. Boues iugo subdere, Subiugare. Mettre les boeufs
soubs le ioug. S.

To yoke, or to yoke unto. Iugo, as. Adiugo, as. Accoupler. Call.

Yoked. Iugatus, a, u^. Iugalis, e. Accouple de ioug. Call. Yoked, or used to
the yoke, or under the yoke. Subiugalis, e. Vt supra. Yoman of the guard.
Spiculator, Stipator, Satelles, it is. Latero, onis. m. g. vel Praetorianus
miles. Archier de la guard, balbardier. H. Yoman of the horse, or horsekeeper.
Agaso, onis. m. ge. Escuyer d'escuirie. S. Yoman, or master of the robes.
Vestiarius, rij. m. g. Young. Iuuenilis, e. Iuuenis, ne. Ieune. S. Young crane.
Vipio, Gruis pullus. Ieune ou petite grue Young dove, or pigion. Pipio.
Columbulus, Pullus columbae. Ieune pigeon, pigeonneau. H. Young folk gathered
on a heap. Iuuentus, it is. foe. ge, Pubes, bis. foe. genesis Ieunesse, Assemble de
ieunes gens. S. and Iuuenalis, e. Pertaining to young folk. Young man. Iuuenis,
Adolescentulus, li. masc. gene. Ieun homme. S. Young man paste the age
of.xiiii. years. Puber, is. Young man which begins to have a bearde.
Vesticeps, qui generationi habilis ac maturus est. H. Young man under the age
of.xxi. years. Adolescens, Adultus. Un iouenceau. H. Young souldioure. Tyro,
onis. Tyrunculus. li. m. g. To wax young. Iuuenesco, scis. Plin. Raieunir. S.

Younger. Junior, nius. Minor natu Plus ieune. S. Yongely. Iuueniliter.
Ieunement. S. York city. Eboracum, Eburacum, ci. mas. ge. Ptol, Eboracensis,
e. Of York. You. Tu, Vos. Vous. S. Your. Vester, a, um. Vostre. S. All your
goods. Omnium vestrum bona. Tous voz biens. S.

By your mean. Per vos. Per vostre moyen. S.

Yours, or of your country, lineage, or sect. Vestras, it is. De vostre pais
lignage ou sect. Call. Youth. Aetas prima, Adolescentia, Iuuentus, it is.
Praetextati anni, Tenera aetas, Aetas iuuenilis, Iuuenta, Praetextata aetas.
Ieunesse ou iunesse. S. Vide A.
Y. ANTE. P.
Ypocrasse wine. Vinum aromatites. Hippocras. H.
Y. ANTE. R.
YRchen, or hedgehogge. Herinaceus, Echinus, Herix, Hericius. Herisson. S.
Iron. Ferrum, ri. n. ge. Fer. S. Iron graye color. Glaucus, a, um. Iron mine.
Ferraria, ae. foe. ge. Mine de fer. S. Iron to mark, or prynte vessel with,
or such like. Tudicula, ae. foe. ge. Iron tool, or instrument. Ferrum,
Ferramentum, ti. n. ge. Ferrement. S. Ferrarius, a, um. Pertaining to iron.
Appartenant a fer. S. and Ferreus, a, um. Of iron. De fer. S. and Ferratus, a,
um. Dressed with iron. Far. S. Ferro, as. To dress with iron. Ferrer. S
Y. ANTE. S.
YSe. Gelu, Indeclin. Glacies, ei. Glace, S. and Glacialis, e. Of yse, or where
yse is. Glace. Ysell. Acetum, ti. n. g. Vinaigre. Ysicle, or drops of yse.
Stiria, ae. foe. ge.
Y. ANTE. T.
YTche, or itching. Vredo, inis. Pruritus, tus^ Prurigo, inis. foem. genesis
Demangement, dema^geure, gratelle. H. To ytche. Prurio, is. Demanger. S.


Y. ANTE. V.
YVorye. Ebor, oris. neu. ge. Dens elephant^. Yuoire. H. and Eboreus, a, um.
Eburneus, a, u^. Eburnus, a, um. Of yuorie. D'yuoire. Call. and Eboratus, a, u^.
Covered, or trimmed with yuory Couuert ou enrichy d'yuoire. Call. Yuie. Hedera,
ae. foe. g Du liarre. Pin. Hederaceus, a, um. Of yuie. Qui est de liarre. S.
Ground yuye. Chamaecissos, Hedera terrestria. Liarre terrestre. S.


Z.
Z, A double c^^sonant, it is not used in Latin, but in Greek, and in very
few English words. Zacharias a Prophet, the father of John Baptiste, which
is interpreted just or justified, or the memory of the Lord. Zacharias, ae.
m. ge. Zele. Zelus, li. m. ge. Zele. S. Zele to have, or tender. Zelo, as.
Zeler. S. Zodiac or celestial circle, wherein be the.xii. signs. Zodiacus,
ci. m. g. Zodiaque. S. Zone. Zona, nae. foe. ge. Zone. S.
Soli Deo, Honor, Laus and Gloria.
A table of nombers with the lattin words belonging thereunto.
1
Vnus Primus Semel Singulus Primarius
2
Duo Secundus Bis Binus Binarius
3
Tres Tertius Ter Trinus Ternarius
4
Quatuor Quartus Quater Quaternus Quaternarius
5
Quinque Quintus Quinquies Quinus Quinarius
6
Sex Sextus Sexies Senus Senarius
7
Septem Septimus Septics Septenus Septenarius
8
Octo Octauus Octies Octenus Octonarius
9
Nouem Nonus Nouies Nouenus Nouenarius
10
December Decimus Decies Denus Denarius
11
Vndecim Vndecimus Vndecies Vndenus Vndenarius
12
Duodecim Duodecimus Duodecies Duodenus Duodenarius
13
Tredecim Tredecimus Tredecies Terdenus Terdenarius
14
Quatuordecim Quaterdecimus Quaterdecies Quaterdenus Quaterdenarius
15
Quindecim Quintusdecimus Quintodecies Quintodenus Quindenarius
16
Sexdecim Sextodecimus Sextodecies Sextodenus Sextodenarius
17
Septendecim Septodecimus Septodecies Septodenus Septodenarius
18
Octodecim Octauus decimus Octodecies Octodenus Octodenarius
19
Nouendecim Nonusdecimus Nouemdecies Nouemdenus Nouemdenarius
20
Viginti Vicesimus Vicesies Vicenus Vicenarius
30
Triginta Tricesimus Tricesies Tricenus Tricenarius
40
Quadraginta Quadragesimus Quadragesies Quadragenus Quadragenarius
50
Quinquaginta Quinquagesimus Quinquagesies Quinquagenus Quinquagenarius
60
Sexaginta Sexagesimus Sexagesies Sexagenus Sexagenarius
70
Septuaginta Septuagesimus Septuagesies Septuagenus Septuagenarius
80
Octoginta Octogesimus Octogesies Octogenus Octogenarius
90
Nonaginta Nonagesimus Nonagesies Nonagenus Nonagenarius
100
Centum Centesimus Centesies Centenus Centenarius
200
Ducenti Ducentesimus Ducentesies Ducentenus Ducentenarius
300
Tricenti Tricentesimus Tricentesies Tricentenus Tricentenarius
400
Quadringenti Quadringentesimus Quadringentesies Quadringentenus
Quadringentenarius
500
Quingenti Quingentesimus Quingentesies Quingentenus Quingentenarius
600
Sexcenti Sexcentesimus Sexcentesies Sexcentenus Sexcentenarius
700
Septingenti Septingentesimus Septingentesies Septingentenus Septingentenarius
800
Octingenti Octingentesimus Octingentesies Octingentenus Octingentenarius
900
Nongenti Nongentesimus Nongentesies Nongentenus Nongentenarius
1000
Mill Millesimus Millesies Millenus Millenarius
2000
Duo millia
3000
Tria millia
4000
Quatuor millia
5000
Quinque millia
6000
Sex millia
7000
Septem millia
8000
Octo millia
9000
Nouem millia
10000
December millia
20000
Viginti millia
30000
Triginta millia
40000
Quadringinta millia
50000
Quinquaginta millia
60000
Sexaginta millia
70000
Septuaginta millia
80000
Octoginta millia
90000
Nonaginta millia
100000
Centum millia. etc.
Faults escaped.
Abound. Circumfluo. Abonder. Acuse. Arcessere. Aucun. Alecost. Saluia Romana.
Alms. Eleemosyna. Apease. Tranquillum. etc. Apple of winter fruit. Pomum
serotinum. Apple ripe. Pomum maturum. Apple monger. Pomilius. Augustinus a
famous doctor in Christ's church. etc. Beware. Prouideo. Bewitche. Effascino,
fascinat. Buffe. Vulgus. Cuckowe. Coccyx. Day. Lumen solis. Dead, pertaining to
the dead. Drawght. Epotauit. Elephant. Elephas. Elephant. Emeraude.
Scrutantibus. Increase. Accrescere. Idolatrer. Idololatra. Idololatrie.
Idololatria. Magic. Hydromantie. Tallenes. Altitudo, Tente. Augustale.
Welthe. Respublica.

