A SERMON Preached at Reyfham in the County of Norff. the 22. of September,
An. Do. 1588. And eftsoons at request published by R. H. Minister of Gods
word.

Esaiae. 33.15.16. verses. 15. He that walks in Justice, and speaks
righteous things, refusing gain of oppression, shaking his hands from taking
of gifts, stopping his ears from hearing of blood, and shifting his eyes from
seeing of evil.

16. He shall dwell on high, his defense shall be the munitions of rocks,
bread shall be given him, and his waters shall be sure.

Augustinus in Psalm. 68. Si tu factus es peccati tui defensor, Quomodo erit
Deus liberator? vt ille sit liberator tu esto accusator, tu agnosce vt ille
ignoscat.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf for Edward Aggas. 1589.

To the right reverend father, EDMUND by Gods good providence, Bishop of
Norwich, the days of Heaeuen to be multiplied with joyful increase of grace
and peace from God the Farher through Jesus Christ.
CHrisippus (my good L.) being demanded, why he undertook not some public
office in the common wealth. Si male curarem (quoth he) Dijs displicere. Si
been hominibus. And thus to avoid the horn of the argument (by secret
insynuation) inferred upon the premises: that sibi vinere should be his
suersbie, As the best way to escape from blame in the world. Whose caution in
some sort I could commend, but his conclusion must I needs condemn of foul
absurdity. For as there is no man (except he will be invtile pondus terrae:
and such the Apostle suffers not to eat) but holds his place as tenant at
will by special assignation and limitation from the Lord, whether it be in
the Church or common wealth: So (in truth) this ship willingly admits no
loyterers, nor that body politic, easily retains corruption, but the one
by discipline does exonerate: the other by medicine does evacuate such noisome
burdens as otherwise would infect the body, or afflict the soul.

The consideration whereof (in my guess) moved Plato to affirm, ^ist. 9. ad
^e. terent. diuinane. li. 2.
Non sibi soli; sed patriae, se esse natum: and Cicero to say, Neque vllare
magis prodesse possum patriae, quam si tradam vias optimarum ^^t^um. In
semblable persuasion Divines of every age have painfully enlarged their
labors, not by instance in public and particular exercise of their function
at home alone, but by writing of Cate chismes, penning of Sermons, and putting
their studies into print, have also endeavored to profit such abroad (as happily
with all their hearts) would learn, but lack teachers: have ears to heg^e
(and souls to sane) and yet al as want instruction. Thus by all possible
means to manirest their uttermost good will to the benefit of the Church, and
behoof of posterity. But ex duro vltima ferro est. For this unthankful age
of ours, how unkindly (with playted brows and powting looks) entertaineth it
this service and thanklesse office, embracing the while (with hearty applause)
every odd left or bad toye that fond invention can excogirate. And first of
all, the enemy of Gods truth (if rampant) how yelpeth he: Sicut Cerberus in
stigio. If couchant, how hisseth he, Sicut anguis in herba: and all to confront
and ouerbeare each laudable enterprise which might further the kingdom of God,
or persuade the truth of religion among the sons of men.

Again, the Atheist (ignauum paecus) how disdainfully (with a forked tongue)
discardeth he each mohument of piety? how maliciously (in a preiudicat
opinion) rejects he all censure that checketh his distempered affections? And
who so shall but cross the path of his wicked delights, Iamque faces and saxi
volant furor arma ministrat. Moreover the world affords a giddie headed crewe
(absit tamen verho inuidia) and these men of Arbens, (forsooth) look a squint
at every occurrante that pat^^^^ not their synister fist. For all beir they
scorn the dignities of school, and deride all prorogatine of learning: yet
(like Walthams calfe i^^a peevish choice) they will rather Credere homini
prepter hominem, than hominibus propter veritatem: Who after a while that they
have beard but who me they list, and but where they list, at length they list
to hear none at all, but become malcoutent, fall into scisme and heresy,
lamentably vexing the Church with all their storms, En quo discordia C^^es
perduxit miseros.

And yet the wealthy Citizens of this world, whom the Apostle terms (...):
2. These. 3.6
whose Iron synowes no labor can bow, nor law bind to the good behavior. O
(...) oh, (...)
How stand they at defiance with friendly reprofe? how impatiently bear they
the lore of restraint, enduring with delight the bobbes and precious baulmes of
sugared placentia, leading them unawares (as the fool to the stocks) to plowe
wickedness, to reap in iquitie, Hosea. 10.13.
and to feed upon the frime of lies? But (whom I warn as brethren,) a last
sort there be also, who though in sincerity and zeal they will seem to go
before, some un quiet conceit or other (tho) does so trouble and distract them,
that to speed their fancy, and fixed their palate were not the least amongst
Hercules labors: For one preacher is too formal, another too populer: This
mana time seruer: that writer a man pleaser. One Sermon is too full of Doctors
and distinctions, all sauouring of Art: another lukewarm or kay-cold, deuoid
of all zeal. This brother affects a present Pulpit man without
premeditation: another brings bosom stuff, all smelling of the Candle, and
thus (as he said) Scinditur innertuns studia in contraria vulgus. ^uidius.
So that thalone view of the face of these troublesome seas (enraged through the
iniquity of the time) does questionles hale away very many, otherwise, both
apt and able to lanche into the deep, and drives them back to rest their
boat by the calmer shore, as too too loath to grapple with the multitud
(immanis belua) to whom proffered service seldom comes in season, especially
in the case of controlement.

But what then? posita est sua meta malignis. And as one very well and wise
lie writes: Hieron. O^or. li. z. de gloria.
virtus non in populi opinionem sed in seipsam intuetur, nec leges accipit, fed
potius imponit ab omni malerum impetu semper inuicta.

The second thoughts (which experience holds the best) must therefore better
advise divines, especially, and heart the servants of God (to whom that
celestial Iniunction (...) does especially appertain) manfully to stand to
their tackle, Coll. 3.2.
and cheerely to hoise their sails at all assaies, since never befalls
shipwreck (though many sharp storms) where Christ guides the stern. And if
the world have most unkindly entreated (nay cruelly persecuted) the son of
God, Mat. 10.24.
shall the servant be priuileged above the master? And if the spouse her self
must stoop to let the wicked plowe deep furrows upon her back: who
notwithstanding (as Hillarie says) does vincere cum leditur emergere cum
premitur, Psa. 129.3. De Trinit. lib. 7.
and exaltari cum humiliatur. Shall not Gods soldiers march on (maugre the
malice of men) and proceed with S. Paul by honor and dishonor, 2. Co. 6.8.
by evil report and good report etc. since the dearest Jewels be farthest
fetched: the purest metals have deepest mines, and difficilia quae pulchra. For
as custom (though otherwise often the broker of falshod) has fitly drawn the
Poets verse into a proverb of proof: Commoditus omnis sua fert inco^moda
secum. Even so advisedly and truly said Diodorus (...). Diodorus.
And verily aged is that saw and seasoned with long experience: Quaenocent,
docent: For schola crucis, schola lucis.

S. Augustine writing of the constancy of Martirs in the grievous persecutions
of the church: De Ciuit. dei. li. 22. ca. 6.
Ligabantur, includebantur, caedebantur: (says he) yea, trucidabantur,
torquebantur, lauiebantur. But (quenching all this cruelty in a word)
Multiplicabantur (quoth he) no^ pugnantes pro salute, fed salutem contemnentes
pro seruatore.

The cause standing thus (perdie) the pilgrim that will walk to heauenward
must put on the mind to ouerstride many a stumbling block in the way, and
undertaking his course, nec temere nec timide must heedefullie pass the
straightes, per saxa, per ignes, even through purgatory it self curragiouslie
mainteyning the race from the hour of his first breath, until the last
periode of his mortal life. Where (as one says) Lachrimae prius nobis
deerunt quam causa dolendi. ^encea De ^it. bre.
And no marvel at all: for he that will be crowned must not grudg to be
crossed, since no conflict no conquest, no conquest no victory: nay, the
fiercer the encounter, the more glorious the triumph to him that holds out to
the end. Otherwise to begin with courage and to fail in the course, is to
loose the Bravium the apostle proposes to the runners. And to fight for a while
and faint in the liftes, is to gain the opprobrium wherewith the Romans
vpbroyd the Carthagiman Captain, ^. Cor. 9.24
vincerescis Hanniball, vti victoria nescis. As for me (I assure your good L.)
I never abounded with that humor, nor ever yet lahoured of their disease whore
fingers tickle Prurigine scribendi. For albeit many a time before this day I
have been beset with request of sundry both in profession and vocation of the
best, yet could I never be induced to dinul gate my studies in writing (for
causes needles here to repeat) though otherwise. (Gods Church be my witness) I
never was nice to hide or withhold the dimitalent committed to my trust, when
or wheresoever it might do good. Howbeit, after I had upon special request
preached this sermon, and was eftsoon labored with assiduall entreatie (in
zeal of Gods glory I dare say) to gather and pen the same, that (unworthy
tho) it might become imprinted and imparted with mani. Importunity (at last)
overcame me to condescend and extorted my promise to set it down (which as
memory would serve I have precisely here performed, as the learned of my coat
with the other godly auditors of that presence where it was delivered I think
will auerre.) But yet with condition endorsed, that your L. grave censure first
confirming it to the prefle, or commanding it to silence, I would accordingly
answer expectation with yea or nay. Lo, reverend father how bluntly this my
Rudis indigestaque moles presses now upon your charitable patience, whose
gravity trial assures me) is nothing delighted with the empty soundes of
hollow eloquence, but better contented with the fruitful form of the
wholesome documents: Wherein how soever my iarrie style go lymping lame and
unpleasant, the matter I hope is both profitable and current. And that
suffices me, if the Lord shall sanctify my silly labor to some use or
other, though to serve in the utmost courts of the temple.

For the poor widows mite, where God is made vmpire shall always
ouer-ballance the superfluities of that sort who stand upon their painted shea
the to draw a leaden dagger out of an Iverie scabberd. Mar. 12.44. Luke 21.2.
And good father Latimers New years gift to King Henry the eight (who when
other Bishops sent rare and rich Jewels of gold and plate, presented a fair
new Testament with a Handkarcher wrought about the borders with this
inscription and poesy: Fornicatores and adulteros iudicabit Deus, ^eb. 13.4.
was (for weight and worth) more valued in Gods account, than those other
rufling treasures that abounded in the Court.

To conclude, if in this my discourse (hitherto subject to the ear alone, not
the soundest witness among the senses, but now to be stripped to the eye it
self, the subtilest searcher of all the rest) I have erred in matter, humanum
est errare (my L.) but my amiss once discovered by the kenne of the learned,
Peccaui shall be my plea: for hereticum esse nolo. If otherwise by frivolous
digression I have indiscreetly ranged without the ring of my compass, belike
the man lost his way ere he wist: for that course was far from my purpose,
and never in my custom, as the best acquainted with my fashion can best tell.
But if any thing here in be well or in any measure commen dable, let the
praise he the Lords: the pain the authors: and the profit the Readers, that
God which is all in all, may have all the glory. It only remains then that
your good L. (according to your wonted curresie) would accept this at my
hand, as an infallible pledge of my obsequious mind, and eftsoon vouchsafe
my feeble pilgrim to take up his crutch and to wander as a stranger in the
world under the couerture of your favorable protection, that so he may find
some harbor against the sturdie blastes and scornful spite of malice and
malignitie. The God of mercy and all consolation bless your L. in your godly
cares for the Church, and enlarge his graces upon your heart, chearing up your
aged days with the gladsome presence of his blessed spirit to the advancement
of his glory and the avail of his Zion.

Your L. much bounden, and in the Lord to command Rob. Humston.

A Godly Sermon preached at Reyfham.
Habakkuk. Cap. 3. verse. 3. God comes from Teman, and the holy one from
mount Paran, Selah, His glory covers the Heavens, and the earth is full of
his praise.


THe Lord vouchsafing a long and most loving visitation to the people of Judah
and Jerusalem (men and brethron in the Lord beloved) and therein a frank and
gracious tender of mercy and saving health by the mynisterie of the Prophets.
Such notwithstanding was their ingratitude and stubbornes, that no Caveat
could warn, nor admonition pearse them, no lenity could bend, nor severity
break them. But wretchedly they would enter into opposicion against their God,
and wilfully run headlong upon the pykes of his displeasure: Whereupon he is
constrained to proceed to execution of justice against their rebellion, and to
this end (as an instrument for the nonce) stirs up Nabucadnesser the great
king of Babell, who in rage and fury (with his Caldean army) inuading their
country, most lamentably sacketh and spoileth the land of Judea with fire and
sword, and marching on with his cruel band toward the holy City, when by
length of siege he had filled her families with famine and hunger, and her
streets with howling and wringing of hands at the head of every corner, Ier.
19.9.
at length he razeth her walls, enters the City with a fearful alarm,
fiereth her palaces, spoyleth the temple, makes Jerusalem an heap of stones:
2. Re. 25.7.
and (after sundry presidents of other fearful cruelties) carries away both
Prince and people captives to Babylon. All which desolations (to befall the
Church and to ouerwhelme Gods children) our Habacuk foreseeing in the spirit
of a Prophet (to his no small grief God wot) and observing withal the
flourishing estate and wished success of the Chaldeans (that godless and
cursed nation) thus insulting and triumphing over Gods people (a thing to his
seeming no less wonderful and strange) in this woeful instance of the
unequal lot of the godly and the wicked in this world: Job. 21.7.
the godly commonly languishing in myserie, Ier. 12.1.
the godless contrarily flourishing in felicity: Psa. 73.3.
he goes about to tread the Laberinth, and assayeth by reason to found the
depth of Gods councels in this so hard a case: But when the helps of Nature
will not reach the height of these judgments, at last (as a ^an at his wits
end) he resolves to stand upon his watch, to listen to the Lord alone, Hab.
2.1.
and to hear what he would say to the matter, and eftsoon receiving
answer, that howsoever the works and ways of God (to the level of man's
understanding) seem confused and out of joint, for his ways are not our
ways, nor his thoughts our thoughts: Esai. 55.8.9.
) yet for all that, there is no Judge more just then God, (as Esdras said) nor
any more wise then the most highest. 2. Esd. 7.17.
Who stands not bound to render a reason of his proceedings unto men (for who
has known the Lords mind, To. 11.34.
or who has he made of his counsel. Our Prophet now blushing at his former
blindness: breaks out in this Chapter into a Psalm of praise, with earnest
prayer for his so great oversight, and implying the ignorances of the people
withal, becomes an humble suter in the Churches behalf, that (since
remediless she must into Babylon) the Lord would not yet so forsake her,
but when (in depth of grief and bottom of distress) her De profundis and
prayer should arise, Psa. 130.
and (as the incense) ascend into his presence, that then in wrath he would
remember mercy, even for his own promise and names sake. And grounding
altogether upon grace, he falls to enumeration and reckoning up of the
marvelous works brought to pass in former time in the behalf of this
Nation. And drawing an argument from the free love of God in the wonderful
vocation and preservation of this people, he seems in great confidence to
reason with the Lord, and to frame his demonstration after this manner:

It is unlike (nay impossible) O Lord, that thou (who in mercy have numbered
the hairs of our heads) should once forgeat or forsake that people, Mat.
10.2.
toward whom thy special mercies have been so often manifested of old.

But this Nation of the Jews, is that people, for whose sake thou have wrought
many and marueylons things in time past: Number. 21.34.
stricken many a fierce battle: vanquished many a mighty King: Fed with
Manna from heaven: Joshua. 12.9
Exo. 16.15
Exo. 44.22
Joshua. 1.
Led by wonder through the Sea and brought safe to the land.

Therefore unlike, Oh Lord (nay impossible) it is that thou should now
forget or forsake this people, or suffer them to be swallowed up with sorrows
in Babylon. The Prophet having thus handle this argument before, comes now
to prove the Minor or latter proposition by sound demonstrations drawn from
the several works, wonderfully brought to pass in favor of this Nation. And
(as the worthiest, and for the excellency thereof) he first of all
propounds the giving of the Law in the text which I have taken, which may
be reduced to this form.

That people to whom the Lord vouchsafed ((...)) the giving of the Law, with
an absolute abridgement of his own blessed will, so precisely written with his
own hand, and so solemply promulgate in his own presence, when his glory
covered the heavens, and the earth was full of his praise. The same doubtless is
the chosen inheritance and peculier people of God.

But in favor of this people of the Jews, God comes from Teman, and the
holy one from mount Paran, where in thunder and wonder the Decalogue and Law
of Commandments was first promulgate and delivered.

Therefore doubtless this people is the chosen inheritance and peculier people
of God, whom (by consequent) he will never forget nor forsake in their
afflictions, since in their favor and for this peoples sake God comes from
Teman, and the holy one from mount Paran, etc. Which words (my thought) do
imparte a secret (but very sweet) allusion unto Moses speech, in affection
iumping right, and in phrase somewhat near with our Prophet, when upon his
death bed, and in his last farewell to the people, reisysing in his soul at
the remembrance of Gods mercies so bountifully extended toward this nation
(aiming herein especially at the giving of the Law) says he The Lord came
from Smay and rose up from Seir unto them he appeared clearly from mount Paran
and came with ten thousands of Angels, Deuteronomy. 33.2.
and a fiery law at his right hand.

Where first the occasion of the words (in m^ understanding) offers two
things for our b^^rning in Habacuk his example before we come to handle the
text it self.

The first is his great and tender care for and in the Churches behalf,
expressed by his ardent affection in bemoning her calamity (onus) a burden
upon his heart, Hab. 1.1.
for so he begins his Prophecy, and withal by his earnest entreating for
her relief. The second, his confidence relying in Gods free mercy for her
delivery, manifested also by his assured depending upon Gods favor, the very
life of his hope established upon the strength of the covenant. Of both which I
would speak some what by way of observation, but very briefly, and so pass
to my text.

And first the Prophets sweet affection toward the Church and people of God,
a (special good part always in a good Pastor) teaches mynisters of the
word, whatsoever they bear, not alone to be instant in season and out of
season upon their several charge, 2. Ti. 4.2.
the flock purchased with the blood of the Lamb, as men mindful to avoid
the Apostles Vae and vengeance: Ioh. 1.29.
Woe be to me, if I preach not the Gospel. 1. Co. 9.16.
But withal to bethink them how it is further required in the Stewards, that
they be found faithful, full of affections, pastoral care and zeal, 1. Co.
4.2.
especially toward that people and stock committed to their charge, Ezech.
33.6^
whose blood shall be required at their hands. So Moses preferred the safety
of his people before his own welfare, Exo. 32.32.
when in heat of spirit he cried unto the Lord: Forgive them or raze me out
of the book of life. Ier. 9.1
So Jeremy wished for water to his heart, and a fountain of tears to his
eyes, that day and night he might weep for the slain of the daughters of
Judah. To. 9.3
So Paul desired Anatheman esse, and to be separated from God, if thereby he
might reconcile the Hebrews his kinsmen after the flesh. And verily this is
the graund charge (fuller of affection than repiticion) which the prince of
Pastors urged with vehemency upon Peter: Ioh. 21.15.
Feed, feed, feed. Giving first a dreadful check unto such as sit at ease
in Sion, Amos. 6.1
sleep in the lap of the Church, and pray upon the spoil of souls, and
covertly implying a needful Caveat to all preachers of the word (before
their divinity exercises) diligently and with due reverence to put in practice
all the helps of reading, study, meditation, and conference, making prayer
their keye to open the door of the morning, from prayer to study, from study
to the Pulpit, from the Pulpit to prayer, and thus by a due revolution again
to the study, lest while by ouerspeaking we presume and pretend to avoid
the first, we fall unawares into to a second woe, denounced against all such
as dare take in hand the Lords work negligently: and yet when we have done
what we can, Ier. 48.10
except God give wind to our sails, we shall never run the point aright,
but may say with Peter, We have labored all night and taken just nothing.
Luke 5.5
The Lord make us more careful in our calling, and double his spirit upon
his servants, by whose mynisterie the people are to be reduced to the
obedience of Faith, and increase the number of true laborers: for the harvest
is great. Mat. 9.37


Again, in the course of the Prophet, Maiestrates may also learn to whet
their affectious, to become more zealous and truly religious, careful to
benefit the Church, and to further the course of the Gospel. They may not in
imitation of king Hamon deface the mynisterie, 2 Samuel 10.
nor curtall the livings of the Clergy, the messengers (not of David) but of
David's Lord. They may not stretch the arm with Jeroboam against the Prophet,
I. Re. 13.4
nor yet become like Iulyan the Apostata, as Caterpillars cleaving to the
fruits of the Church, but (putting on the bowels of affection and love) they
must change their cheer with her happy or hard estate, to sorrow when she
mourns, and to sing when she rejoices, Nehem. 2.3
as careful Nouree-fathers and tender Nourses consecrated by the Lord himself
to feed his people in Jacob, To. 12.15.
and his inheritance in Israel. Esai. 49.23
So good King could never take rest, till he had found an habitation for the
God of Jacob, Psa. 78.71
and having first prepared a place for the Arc, Psa. 132 4
most joyfully in sweet consort of Music daunceth before the same. 2. Sa.
6.16 23.
Which the nice and sornful Queen Michol disdayning, is plagued perpetua
sterilitate to her grave. So Josiah reigned religiously, Iehosaphat carefully,
and Ezechias zealously. S. Ambrose graceth Theodosius the Emperor with rare
commendations, in this especially, that upon his deathbed and to his last
breath, his chief care was spent for the peace and good estate of the Church.
Among the worthy virtues of King Edgar (registered to his renown) his godly
care and good affection toward the Church is especially observed in the story
of his deeds, who having resigned his life and cast off his Crown and
princely arraye, a learned man of that time (lest his fame should perish) clad
his body with an honorable Epitath, and fit for the hearse of a King, wherein I
find thus much for the present purpose.

Templa Deo, Templis Monachos, Monachis dedit agros;
Nequitie lapsum, Iusticieque locum.
First, he was a builder of Churches, but so be very few. Secondly, he was a
careful Patron to implant good ministers (call them Monks if ye will) in
these Churches, but so do not many. Thirdly, he was a liberal geuer of lands
and possessions to maintain these ministers, but so do not any. The Tombs of
our time are fair adorned with verses and flags, and ennobled with Arms and
Crest, but a man may seek all the days of his life, and search all the graves
of the dead, and yet fail to find a like president of piety. Well, let all
people (of what sort or sex soever, learn in these so honorable examples to
hallowe their first thoughts, and to dedicate their last care, to the Church,
and for religions sake, as esteeming and setting a dearer price upon heavenly
than earthly, eternal than temporal things. So shall all grubbing Patrons of
benefices, with their sacrilegious brokers whatsoever, learn at last (except
they be shameless and past grace) to reform their griedie affections (wherein
they have swallowed a great part of the Churches patrimony) and begin in time
to yield her (at last) her own again. A thing, in truth, rather to be wished
than expected. Since not the vulgus alone, but men of greatest authority, and
by your leave, men of great sincerity (as they will seem) have their hand in
the spoils, and are found guilty of this trespass. We only strike the ear
with a vanishing voice, it is the Lord that must touch the heart with an
effectual feeling, 2. Cor. 3.6
else we may sit still hopeles in this behalf. For, Cathedram habet in Coelo,
qui corda docet in terra: The heart teacher sits on high.

Concerning the second observation, to wite, the Prophets confidence etc. True
it is, Psa. 34.19
many and manifold be the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers
ouf of all. Where every penitent sinner may learn by our Habacuk in public
or particular affliction to take heart of grace in confidence and boldness: For
Constans contraria spernit, and Faith is like the Palm, the more it is
pressed, Heb. 10.2^
the more it spr^adeth and arises against all temptation. To draw near in
assurance of faith, and to approach the mercy seat, in the alone merit and
mediation of Christ the Messiah, hearted on in the cheerful promises of the
Gospel, and that without all doubt or wavering, for he is faithful that has
promised. His will is stable, and his gyfts without repentance. ^o. 11.29.
In which confident assurance, the ancient Patriarks, the good kings, the holy
Prophets and penitent sinners of every sort, have always derived their comfort
from this free favor of God, the only fountain and cause efficient of all
salvation. Where learn we first to loath and detest Pelaganisme and doctrine
of Popery, set a broche by the merite-mongers (the enemies of the grace of
God) who struggle to erect a Babell, ^en. 11.4
whose top may reach to heaven, and to stop the stream of this most ancient
doctrine, contrary to all course of scripture and example of the Saints, who
in every age and occasion (dealing with God in this case) do wholly abandon the
mention, and smother all thought of merit, a point so well known (or at least)
so often taught, that a man would deny it altogether needeles to speak more
expressly in this behalf. The use and benefit of this lesson (we digested)
will be this much. Luke 18.11
That while our adversaries dare stand up with the Pharesie to brag and
implead works in bar before the Judge, depending (in part) upon desert; and
building (partly) upon their own foundation, and therefore still tottering in
their doctrine of doubtfulnes, ^a. 1.6
and carried, as the waves of the sea, one while up to heaven, and suddenly
down to hell, as inconstant in all their ways. We contrarily acknowledge with
Job, ^ob. 9.30
our uncleanness and with Jeremy our wickedness, Ier. 2.22.
pitching Christ our one and only foundation, Psa. 71.16.
and with the Psalmograph making mention of his righteousness only (Iusticia
omnia exceptione mayor) and made ours by imputation, shall sing care away with
the king. Why art thou so heavy Oh my soul? Psa. 42.11
trust in God etc. and say with S. Paul, therefore justified by faith: We are
at peace with God, through Jesus Christ our Lord etc. yea, it is God that
justifies, and who shall condemn. There is now no condemnation to those that
be ingraffed into Christ etc. In which sweet confidence, we shall attain the
quiet rest and blessed security of Gods saints. The knowledge and assurance
whereof, God for his Christ's sake, daily more and more increase confirm and
seal up upon our consciences to his everlasting glory and our endless
comfort,

Hitherto of the occasion. Now a word or twain of the Phrase, and so to my
text.

God comes from Teman.

Blind Balaam did say, and therefore could say: Nu. 23.19
God is not a man that he should repent etc. Where lest we should fall into
the heresy of the Anthropomorphitae we must learn that the actions of the
body, as to go, to behold, and to come: the passions of the mind, as to
rejoice, to be grieved, to repent and such like, so often in holy scripture
ascribed unto God, are not so to be taken, as though these motions and
perturbations could fall into the godhead (God forbid) but are to be
understood in a figure very apt to help our dulnes, and significant to
express Gods ready mercies always at hand to relieve wretched sinners: too
apt in Moses absence to fall to Idolatry, ^xo. 32.1.
and with the Bethulians in the point of peril to prescribe unto God. ^udith.
7.
Therefore because we are flesh, ^en. 6.3
and the Lord remembering that we are but dust, ^sa. 78.39
it pleases him in great mercy to stoop to our infirmity, and to condescend
to our capacity, speaking as a man unto mortal men, and to make his mercies
palpable, afoording us all the helps of familiar phrases of figures, parables,
and similitudes in holy writ, together with the Sacraments, ceremonies and
rites of holy Church besides, thus by all possible means to establish our
hearts in assurance of his saving health: and, by due consequence, to conduct
us in the course of a holy and Christian life.

Moreover, mark I pray, in the Prophets phrase, the transposition of the
Temple, where speaking of the glorious presence of God in the Mount at the
giving of the Law, which was long and many a day before the time of this
prophecy. Nevertheless, he sets it down here as a thing in esse and fresh
in view before their eyes: God comes. Where I take this to be his drift:
namely, to assertaine this people (right shortly to be plunged in distress)
that God is now as near, and even coming, to releive and release them in
Babylon, as ever in former time, ^xo. 19.20.
he was a God at hand to their fathers in the mount: ^xo. 44.22.
at the read sea: yea, always in time of need, and therefore he would not have
them daunted nor dismaide, nor yet to faint under the burden of their
afflictions: For God comes. Yea, when the spite and rage of the enemy is at
the highest, and the calamity and grief of the godly at the heauiest, then God
comes. A noble lesson, fit for Princes and Ladies, for rich and poor men,
for Maiestrates, ministers and every Christian, since no worldly wight
(conuersing in this vale of tears) can purchase immunitie from thrall and
humane misery. Art thou in poverty, in sickness, in sorrow, in prison, in
danger, yea, in death it self, God comes, at whose presence, sorrow
departs, and dread shall fly back: For he is a God almighty, no power can
let him: a God all merciful, no stay can prevent him. He comes skipping over
the mountains, Cant. 2.8.
and ryding upon the wings of the wind: Genesis 3.8
To Adam with the promise in time of despair: Genesis 22.11
To Abraham with supplye in time of sacrifice: Genesis 26.3.
To Isaac with relief in time of famine: Genesis 39.2.
in time of exile with honor to Joseph: 1 Re. 19.8
in time of persecution, with comfort to Eliah: Iud 1.7.0
in time of battle, with a hand in Gedeons hilt: 2. Re. 19.6.
and in time of invasion, with triumph to Ezechia: Dan. 6.22
to- Daniell among the Lions: Susan. 60
to the children in the furnace: to Susanna at the stake: Act. 16.26
to the Apostle in the jail: Luke 23.4^
to the thief upon the cross in the moment of death: yea, the bands of death
shall break, and the pains of hell shall leave hold: for Veniens, veniet. He
shall come at a pinch. His wrath endures but the twinkling of an eye:
beauines may last for a night, or anoy for an hour, but joy comes in the
morning. Oh therefore, whatsoever be thy case or condition, tarry patiently
the Lords leisure, and he shall make the end happy: Psa. 27.16.
For God comes.

A short but very sweet lesson, and sweeter than the Lute to drive dumps from
the heart, and to abandon in wealth wickedness, in health wantonness, in mirth
forgetfulness, in want distrustfulnes, in loss pensiuenes, and in death
fearfulnes.

Again, God comes. How dare then these (...) proceed in their cruelties?
How dare bloody Antiochus afflict the Church? how dare cruel Iezabel murder
the Prophets how dare proud Sennacherib blaspheme the lining God? ^. Re. 19.2.
how dare wicked Herod behead John the Baptist? how dare churlish Dives
despise the woeful Lazarus? Luke 16.19.
and how dare the wicked world set it self against God? For he comes. and
where will thou hide thyselfe? If thou clyme up to heaven, even there he will
find thee. If thou go down to hell, Amos. 9.2.
his power will prevent thee. If thou make a way with the wings of the morning,
his presence onertakes thee. If thou would smoother sin in the bottom of
thy conscience, there is a worm to gnaw and grind thee. If thou call upon the
hills to fall upon thee, or cry to the mountains to hide and coner thee, it
will be in vain, it cannot preuail thee: for God comes, a consuming fire, a
terrible Judge, a fierce revenger. And now shall the wicked find it as true as
terrible, Deuteronomy. 4.24.
that it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Oh
consider this, ye that forget God, lest he take you away in your wickedness: for
if his wrath be kindled but a little, Blessed are all they that put their trust
in him. And thus at last I come to the Text: which for order and memories sake,
I will dispose to the understanding of the simple: Wherein, observe with me (I
pray) these four circumstaunces naturallye arising out of the words.

The first, of the person: Who comes? God. The second, of the place: from
whence? From Teman, and mount Paran. The third, of the manner how: in glory?
For his glory covers the Heavens. The fourth and last, the end, and why he
comes? That the earth may be full of his praise. Who comes: Whence, How, and
why he comes.

Concerning the first, (to wit, of the person) I mind not to propound Hiero
his question to Simonides: Cicer. de not. deoru^.
For Christians have already learned; that touching the incomprehensible
majesty and essence of the great and eternal God, Man's knowledge is too
shallowe to comprohende the unmeasurable depth. of this hidden mystery. When
Reason therefore would be ouerbolde and busy in this scutanie: let Religion
overrule her: for where reason leaves, religion begins: that religion
propounds, faith apprehends: that faith assures, hope holds: and that
hope enjoys, Love shall accomplish. But the interim: who so shall saucelie
pry with the Bethshamites into the Arc shall assuredly find destruction, 1.
Sa. 6.19
and he that will curiously gaze upon the majesty of the godhead, shall be
oppressed with the glory thereof. A lesson to be looked unto and in time to be
learned of the secreat Arrians of our days, whose proud and insolent spirits
cannot be contained within the limits of this religious compass, till wayward
conceit have carried them headlong into damnable heresies. Whereof we have
daily examples. Epist. ad Leand.
It was a grave speech of Gregory, that the sacred Scriptures are like a deep
foord, where the Lamb may yet safely wade, when the Elephant shall swim. And
right well said Augustine: Humilitas omnia quecunque benefacimus and precedat
and comitetur and consequatur. Epist. 56.
Humility is the entrance, the middle and end of all that is well done. And
thus we may be warned, not ouerbusilie to pursue this point of the Essence and
majesty of God.

A second and safer way to better our knowledge and benefit our selves in this
behalf, is by the names of God, whereby it pleases him to manifest (in some
sort) his existence, all sufficiency and mairstie, as when he says to
Abraham: I am Schad dai, Genesis 17.1
all sufficient to uphold and sustains the creatures in heaven and earth, at
whose almesbaket both King and Kaysar are brinen to beg their daily bread: at
whose hand the eyes of all creatures do expect their food in due time, and at
whose mercy seat all mankind must knock and cry for grace and remission of
sins.

To Moses, I am Jehovah, the essential name of God, Exo. 3.6
to show (as man's capacity may bear it) his essence and being of himself
before all eternity, from whom all things have their breath, moving and
being. Again, he is sometime called Theos of his swiftnes and presence, Act.
17.24
passing through the secret corners and privy places of the heart, and
understanding our thoughts long before. Sometime, the Lord of Hosts, Psa.
46.8 11.
to express his almightines, with Frogs and Flies subduing Kings, and
conquering Nations at his own will. Here he is called Elohah and the holy one,
all very sweet and significant to set forth the power of God, and to
persuade the fear of his most holy name. Where we must be warefull lest we
become sotted with Popish superstitions, or enchanted with Romish sorceries, as
though the wearing or bearing about us these names of God, written in virgin
parchement, with crosses and caracters were of force to cure maladies, to chase
away bugges and cast out devils, which in truth is blasphemously to abuse and
take in vain the holy name of God to our own destruction. But learn we
rather to harbor and carry the power and faith of this name deep in our
hearts: So shall it be to our comforts and victory in all temptation: For this
is our victory that overcomes Satan, sin, and the world, even our faith.
1. Ioh. 5.4
A third and very good way to help yet in this case, is by consideration of
the offices attributed to the persons in the Godhead: as Creation to the
Father, and therein his wonderful wisdom, disposing and transposing all
things to his own will: in the frame of whese providence, all the actions and
accidents among the sons of men are daily wrought, and come to their
appointed end. Redemption to the son, and therein his inspeakable mercy
toward mankind, most willingly affording the dearest drops of his heart
blood for the raunsoming of wretched sinners. Sanctification to the Holy ghost,
and herein the ineruaylous and powerful hand of our God, in changing and
renewing the hearts of men, raising us daily from the death of sin unto the
life of righteousness.

Uerye comfortable be these also to express and manifest the great care and
goodness of our God, Psa. 86.15
by nature merciful, long suffering, slow to wrath, and ready to pardon
wickedness. It is his mercy to take away the burden and wayght of our
sins, but it is his great mercy to renew us with indumentes of grace in this
life, and to crown us with glory in the life to come. And hitherto of the
first circumstance.

And now to the second, to wit, of the place. From Teman and from mount Paran.
Where, whether you take Taeman for that City of Idumaea builded by Teman one
of the Tukes of the sons of Esau, and threatened by Jeremy with utter
extirpation, Genesis 36.1
because the Edomites or Idumaeans, Icr. 49.20
and namely the inhabitants of Taeman did solicit and surge the Babylonians
to war against the Jews, who therefore pray against them: Remember the
children of Edom, O Lord, Psa. 137.9
in the day of Jerusalem etc. Or else, as spoken by way of allusion to the
land of Canaan, which in respect of mount Sinay lay South: For so Tremaellius
translateth it, and others from the Hebrewe phrase, do seem to insinuate. And
as touching Paran, whether you take it as it is described for a wast and large
Wilderness extended from Egypt unto mount Sinay and so toward Canaan, either
else properly for a promontorie and hill in this desert, taking denomination of
the same and adjacent unto Sinay where the Law was given, which by the text
and the place of Moses cited before seems most probable. Or whether you will
thus interpret it: God Elohah, comes from Taeman with a revenging hand,
having inkindled a fire in Teman which shall devour the Palaces of Bosrha,
and God Sanctus comes from mount Paran with a releeuing and holy hand to
deliver a holy Law, and to a holy people. Sancti estote, quoniam sanctus
sum: For holiness best becomes his house and people for ever. How so ever
(I say) you list to understand it. (For I list not to be curious in scanning
of places, or describing their scituations.) This I take to be the Prophets
meaning: namely, to extol the tender mercies of the Lord so mightily
delivering, and so mercifully releeuing his people in their so long and tedious
iourneys through the desert, where he fedd them from heaven, watered them from
the rocks, bare them in his arms as a father does his son: carried them on
Egles wings most swiftly and safely from all peril and danger, and that which
more is, and most excellent above al, vouchsafing them in this place the
Decalogue and Law of Commandments to be their wisdom, direction and
sanctification even all the days of their life. And here of purpose I will
pass by the matter and manner of Gods mercies in the deliverance of this
people. For why should I insist upon the point, which is the very ground of my
song, and foundation of all my building this day, and will take occasion
rather to speak somewhat of the place of Gods presence to his people, of the
place of his worship: of preaching, hearing, praying, and communicating, of
administration of Sacraments, and participation of the rites of holy Church.
Where first of all I must freely confess (and most true it is) that every
Christian has a Temple within him. Every Temple has an Altar. Every Altar
has a Sacrifice. Every place in dedicate to Gods service. Every believer is
a Priest to offer, and for every sort of men lifting up pure hands without
wrath and contention. This is the doctrine of the Holy ghost scattered
throughout Gods book, and herein blessed be God, we are far from Donatisme,
and tying of the worship of God to place or person. And yet for all that, the
holy assemblies and congregatio^s of Christians to preaching, prayer and
public celebracion of the service of God, and that in the Temple sacred and
dedicated to this use, is a thing by so often repetition commanded and
commended of God himself in holy Scripture, as his own ordinance, Leuit. 3.3.
that it may be urged by an argument, a necessitate mandati, Joel. 1.14.
even upon our allegiance. Esaie speaking of the Temple and the use thereof in
the person of God, Esai. 56.7
I will bring them (says he) to my holy mountain, and I will make them glad
in my house of prayer, their burnt offerings will I there accept, and it shall
be called the house of prayer for all men.

Ezechiels oracle fitteth us also in this raze: Eze. 43.7
where (speaking of the presence of Gods grace: not for the Temple, but for the
peoples sake) he calls it the place of Gods throne, and the place of the
soales of his feet, where he will dwell in the midst of his people. And
Michea calls Jerusalem the tower of the flock, where the watchman of Israel
does ward and guard his folk most safely from day to day: Mich. 4.8
So that this point might again be enforced by an argument a praemils. But
what should I speak of the sweet variety and rich plenty of those plants
and flowers in this heavenly Paradize (odor vitae ad vitam) watered by the dew
of Heaven, flowing with streams of comfort to the wounded conscience, Co. 2.16
by means of the worte and Sacraments, where the prayers of the Congregation
are compared by an ancient father Murmuri maris to the violence and noyes of
the Seas, that pearce the ears of Jehovah, and with force burst into his
presence (euer-bearing all impedimentes? Why should I strain my voice to
excite and stir you up to the religious and diligent frequenting of these
heli^ assemblies, where Christ has promised hi^ presence to two or three
gathered in his name. Whither you are daily tolled to holy exercise of piety
and devotion for the better increase of your knowledge and growing up in the
fear and nurture of the Lord. Mat. 18.20
When in this case any shall be silent, and men wax mute, let the Sermon bell
sound shame to the sluggar be with a woe to the crew of worldlings that
wallowe upon their beds of Iuorie, make cheer in bowls, Amos 6.4
and spend their days in vanity, retchlesly neglecting the time of their
visitation.

And here I do reject the frantic and scismaticall opinions of the
Anabaptisticall seet commonly called Brownisses, who have wilfully divided and
rent themselves from our congregations: deny us to have any Church: contempne
our Sacraments, and condemn our Religion as Antichristian. The interim
betaking themselves to private meetings, and seerete conuenticles in corners.
Oh how far be these vermines from King David's spirit and joy. One thing have
I desired, Psa. 17.4
and that (says he) I will require, even that I may dwell in the Lords house
all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to visit
his Temple. Again, Leratus sum in his, Psa. 12^
etc. It did him good at his heart, when they said: Let us go into the house
of the Lord: yea, and again: Quam dilecta etc. Oh how amiable are thy
dwellings thou Lord of hosts: Psa. 84.12
my soul has a longing thereunto.

O how far he these (...) from Theodosius the Emperor his spirit and
sorrow, who (being excommunicate for his of, fence at the great mutanie in
Thessalia by Ambrose Bishop of Millayne, An. Dom. 391
and so by the Churches censure, cut off from the Communion of the faithful)
cease not in brackish tears to bewail his wretched estate, and day by day
to dance attendance in humility and penitencie to crave restitution, till at
last he was again received into the Church. But if neither the joys of a king
can induce them in time to retire, nor an Emperors sorrows yet reduce them to
come hume by weeping cross, 21 Sam 12 13
with open and humble acknowledgement of their offense to return with David in
time, Mat. 27.4
lest Judas Peccaui come too late: Then let the Maiestrate (by whose negligence
this sect monstrously swells with daily increase in diners parts of the
land) Have an eye this way, lest foolish pity, spoil a city, and pester a
common wealth with a people full of blasphemies against God, and not all void of
treasons against the King. Dionisius the Bishop of Alexandria for bare not to
tell Nouatus to his teeth, that the sin is greater to break the unity and
pear of the Church, ^seb. in ^ta Constable.
than to commit Idolatry. And reasoning a paena in the example of Chore, that
quoth he was punished with the sword, but this with the yawning of the earth.
Et non dubitatur scaeleratius esse commissum quod grauius erat vindicatum.
That, says he, was more haynously committed, which was more heavily punished.

And now to the third circumstance, namely the manner of Gods coming in these
words: His glory covers the Heavens. Which as you see are discerned from
the former part of the text, Psa. 3.2.4.8
by this word Selah full often observed in the book of Psalms, Psa. 4.2.4
and serving in the old Church for the singers direction in the change of their
voice or tune. Psa. 9.16.20
But here, Psa. 31.4.
as I take it, Psa. 49.15
standing as an important note to move both attention and affection, Psa. 68.19
and no meruail, for the matter in hand is weighty.

Men have written much of Xerxes fourth coming with his Nauies, Alexander with
his Armies, and Solomon in his royalty, their fame flewe far, and their
puissance was renowned, yet were they but men, whose breath was in their
nostrels, their power was limited, their arm was but flesh, their pomp was
but a flower, soon changed into dust: yea, all was but vanity and lighter
then vanity it self. But when God comes forth, the heavens melted, and the
earth shook (says David) even as Sinay also was moved at the presence of the
God of Jacob. Psa. 68.8
For now the Heavens and firmament by violent fraction and rupture of the
clouds seemed to burst in sunder, and the fearful lightenings and roaring
thunderclaps did rend the bending sides of the sky: the dark and wallowing
clouds skirmishing in the air, did drive away with vehement course, Psa. 77.17
as shunning most fearfully the sight of this presence Yea, the smothering
mount in the rage of the tempest, did cast forth sparckling vapors, and
flashings of fire like another Aetna or an image of hell, and thus God comes
from Teman, and thus came the holy one from mount Paran. Again, the people
stricken with astonishment, stood trembling about the hill, not daring to
aproch, but (quaking) cry unto Moses, Obe thou our spokesman, or else we dye.
The rattling sharme of the Trumpe calling on, and summoning appearance, seemed
to resemble the day of doom, when the heavy sentence (go ye cursed into
everlasting fire) shall be denounced against the wicked, Yea, Mat. 25.4
the Sun was turned into blood, the fowls forsook the light, the beasts of
the field sought succor among the dens of the Lions, and every creature else
that could crall away, sought a place or corner where to hyde his head, and
thus God comes from Teman, and thus came the holy one from mount Paran.
Furthermore, the Law it self (by a Sub paena) enforcing a strict and absolute
obedience in work, word and thought (even under pain of death, ^eu. 28.15
and eftsoon bewraying the privation of original Justice, revealing sin,
discovering the impuritie of nature, and displaying the very frame of man's
heart, ^en. 6.5
altogether out of course, and out of measure wicked. Now she hurleth curses,
and now she heapeth woes. Now she pours out wrath, and now she plungeth
sinners: and consequently dendunceth the heavy sentence of condemnation
against all flesh. And thus God comes from Teman, and thus came the holy one
from mount Paran. The end and use of his thus coming, was to strike the
hearts of this people with a reverend regard and holy fear of his most
glorious name and presence to show what in justice he might challenge at ours
hands, and the impossibility on our part to perform it in the least part,
thus to bring all men to the knowledge of sin, and that thus the Law might
scoole us unto Christ, Gal. 3.24
where (I pray) do not mistake me to lay these imputations to the Law, as
properly the cause of sin (God forbid.) For, as says the Apostle: the Law
is pure, Romans 7.12
the Law is holy, and the Law is good. But in that she increases sin in
that she is the mynister of death, etc. it is per accidens, and in our
default. For even as men deformed in their bodies, and blemished in their
faces, while they be compassed with darkness, are not discerned from others:
but the light once appearing does by and by bewraye their ouglinesse and show
them in their kind, and yet the cause not in the light, but in them selves. So
the Law is our light and glass poincting out our coruptions and deformities
of nature, and yet the cause not in the glass, but in the flesh, not in the
Law, but in our nature. And thus you have heard how God comes from Teman,
and the holy one from mount Paran.

Now, where Moses calls the Law Iugum ferreum, a hard, a heavy and Iron
yoke. Deur. 28.^
Christ calls the Gospel Iugum suaue, a sweet, a light and easy yoke. Mat.
11.3
Where Esaie calls the Law Virgam exactoris, The rod of the oppressor. Esa.
9.4
Michea calls the Gospel Virgam pastoris, Mich. 7.14
the rod of the Shepherd, where under he guydeth his flock in the pastures of
comfort, and conducteth them to the waters of life. Where Jeremy terms the
Law Mallens dissipans petram, Ier. 23.29
The hammer that grindeth the rocks to powder. Psa. 45.6
David calls the Gospel Sceptrum Regni, The Scepter of the kingdom,
wherewith Christ (in all lenity and mildnes) governs in his Church, Esa. 42.3
not once breaking the bruised reed, nor yet quenching the smoking flar. Where
S. Paul calls the Law Ministram mortis, The minister of death. He says, 2.
Cor. 3.^
the Gospel is Ministratio vitae, The administration of life. So that God is
now come to us not from Teman, but from heaven: not from mount Paran, but from
mount Sion: not in the sharme of the trumpe denouncing death, Heb. 12.
but in the sound of the trumpe proclaiming life: not in the shrill voice that
cleaves the mountains, (...), Re. 19.11
but in the still voice that cheareth the conscience. And thus are we come from
Taeman unto Canaan, from Paran unto Sion, from a condemning law to a
reconciling Gospel, from a fearful Judge to a merciful Savior: and thus at
last we are come home from the land and people of Iudaea to the realm and
people of England. Mat. 11.31
And now will I deal with the last circumstance, to wit, the end and use of
Gods coming in these words: The earth is full of his praise. Wherein I will
be short, and conclude with an application of the matter of this my tedious
discourse to the time and state wherein we live, and so will I bequeath you to
the Lord. Where first the point I touched in a word at my entrance (if ye
remember) to wit, the excellency of this work and mercy of God, toward the
Nation and people of the Jews, in gining them the Law, comes now to a
further consideration, and calls us (except we will be like Horse and Moyle
that have no understanding, Psa. 32.9
to a more deep and serious meditation and examination of the inspeakable
mercy of the Lord our God toward our Nation and people of England, in
vouchsafing us the Gospel, and in continuing the same now full thirty years
expired with diligence preached in our coasts. For this Gospels sake blessing
us still (by all this space) above other Nations with happy peace, a blessed
Queen, a renowned government, a reverend mynisterie, a godly maiestracie,
and what not besides to our good? This Gospel has been the fame and renown,
the defense and glory, 2. Re. 2.11
the chariots and horsemen of England to this present day and hour. This
Gospel has posted through city and country without ceasing to teach and to
instruct, to correct and to comfort, 2. Ty. 3.1^
to call sinners unto repentance, to gather the dispersed, to heal the broken
hearted, Esa. 61.1.2
and to preach the acceptable day of the Lord. And all this (my brethren)
has been the time (yea the long and blessed time) of our planting, dressing
and springing, Esa. 5.1
the Lord has long expected (and even to this hour looks) to gather and
reap the grapes of our vine, the fruits of our figg tree, and the harvest of
our so long and pleasant spring. Luke 13 6
The Lord looks for the sheaues of our obedience, Mat. ^.37
repentance, faith, mercy, and the fear of his name, with conscience to walk
before him in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. The end of
all is, Psa. 76.1
that God might be well known in Iudaea, and that his name might be great in
Israel: that his fear might dwell in our land, and says my text) that the
earth may be full of his praise.

But (alas and thrice alas therefore) the Lord has a quarrel (yea a double
quarrel) against our land, the trespass (yea trespass upon trespass) is committed
in City and Countren, and at the corners of each street, the Indictment is
drawn against us, and the declaration put upon the file by the Prophet Hoseah
(as the Lords actuarie) in this sort. Ho. 4.12
There is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land. The
evidence follows and is given by him that will be accuser, witness and Judge
against us, and this it is: Swearing and lying, killing and stealing, and
whooring, Inundauerunt, have broken all woonted bounds, and ouerflowed the
face of the earth, and what more? Sanguis sanguinem tetigit: Blood has touched
blood. One sin ingendreth another. The cruelties committed in the extreme
parts of the land from the East and from the West, from the North and from
the South, have met together, mingled themselves in the bulk and midst of
the land, and Sanguis sanguinem tetigit. A greenous accusation (you will say)
but not fit for this presence. A fearful controversy of the Lords, but not
well applied to this people. Well, if you will pardon me to say as Ambrose
did unto Theodosius: Amb. Epist. ^9. li. 5


Neque Imperiale est, dicendi libertate^ negare, Neque sacerdotale quod sentiat
non dicere. Neither becomes it the Emperor to forbid free speech: Nor
beseems it the preacher to forbear the presence, I shall be content to
ouerpasse the gross enormities whereof the Holy Ghost does fare the
multitude in the words of the Prophet: Which palpable offenses be daily
whipped out of our streets, and commonly condemned at open Bar. And I will
come to lurking and lurching sins, even to trespass of blood, not so easily
discerned, nor so severely punished, and yet (by your leave) more accustoniably
committed, and dailye perpetrated amongst us. For howsoever men can wash with
Pilate and ouerweene to have clean hands and clear hearts from this
accusation of blood, Mat. 27.24
yet must I lay it somewhet nearer the conscience. For it is Gods cause, and
therefore to be handled indifferently without respect of honor or office,
degree or dignity, since sin is the same, and sauoureth of the soil, though
enbalmed with perfumes, though clad upon with velvet or satin, or yet cloaked
with scarlet or purple. Then since plain dealing best pleases God and good
men, enter I pray into your selves, common with your own hearts and be still.
But tell me, tell me, can you be persuaded there be none among us that keep
judgment from the poor, Zeph. 33
make widows their pray, Esai. 10.2
and the fatherles their spoil? Exo. 22.22
Be there but a few (trow ye) that by vsuries cruel trade devour the needy,
Exo. 22.25
and feed upon the flesh of those that fall into their nets? Deu. 23.19
Be there no oppressors of their brethren, Pro. 28.8
that quench their daily thirst with the tears of women and children, Zach.
7.10
making breach of bands better than their lands, and grinding the faces of
such as are taken in their snares? Be there no carry tales that give Ioabs
stabbe with Judas kiss, Leu. 19.16
no biting slaunderers, that make lying their custom, Psalm. 15.3
and delight to dye their tongues in the blood of their brethren (as
Chrysostom speaks. Pro. 26.20
) Be there (think you) no secret lurchers that store up violence in the
counting house, Pro. 22.22
and robb the poor of their contributions for their own advantage? Amos 8.4
I pray God the false witness and the suborner, Deu. 19.19
the corrupt questman and extorcioner be not found with the rest, Mich. 3.11
in our Counties, and at our Sessions, in our Cities, and even at our sermons.
And if they be, God give them ears to hear, and hearts to repent, in time to
judge themselves, lest they be condemned of the Lord: for all these be bloody
sins, and all such persons bloudsuckers, indicted of the blond of Gods people.

Again, Exodus 22 26 27
the poor man's pledge wrongfully withholden, the laborers hire kept back
till the morning, the buildings enlarged by Achabs cruelty, Mat. 26.25
the coffers enriched by Judas frecherie, these be also bloody sins, and in
every of these is trespass of blood. The shops sorted with wares, and the
warehouse with store, the tables with dainties, the Cubbords with plate, the
Wardrobes with suits, and the granaries with corn. Take heed (my good
brethren) lest in these the blood do also cleave unto your singers. I grant,
before men, device may excuse it, custom will smoth it, and (for the time)
silence can conceal it. But when the Lord shall visit Jerusalem with
lanternes, and search your corners with lights, Zeph. 1.12
then blood will burst forth, then blood will appear: For there is nothing so
secret that shall not be disclosed, Mat. 10.26
nor any thing hidden, that shall not be known. O take heed that many fare not
hardly for thy superfluity: that many live not in penury for thy
prodigality: that many go not a begging for thy polling, incroching and
enclosing: that many sit not mourning for thy merry making: that many go not
full bare, Job. 35.9
for thy going so brave. For thus, and infinite ways beside, thou may become
guyltie of blood. Woe (says Zephauie, Zeph 3.1
and woe says Nahum) be to the bloody and robbing city, Nah. 3.1
the one speaking of Jerusalem, the other of Niniue, and why bloody I pray?
she heard not the voice of the poor: the prisoner perished in the dungeon,
and the beggar dyed at the gate for want of relief. And therefore, O bloody
City, guilty of their blood: and why a bloody City? she received not
correction, faith Zephonie, she trusted not in the Lord, she drew not near
unto God, and therefore, O bloody City, and O bloody country, guilty of
thine own blood, and therefore thine own blood be upon thine own head.

Draco his laws were said to be written with blood, they were so forced with
cruelties and heavy impositions. Our laws of England, blessed be God, are
good and renowned, yet is it to be feared, that for want of due execution, they
(sometime) become like Solons cobwebs, and too often, under pretext of justice,
hard injuries be urged against the poor. The Emperor Titus who deemed the day
lost, wherein he did not good,) desired and was invested with the dignity of
Priesthood, to the end to keep him self from oppressions, from cruelties and
shedding of blood. A memorable and right honorable president for Judges,
esperially, and men of authority. Yet is it to be feared, we have few of
Titus mind at this day in the laud.

The Jews made no conscience to shead innocent blood: they monyed Judas to
betray his master, such was their cruelty. But when (with a wounded
conscience) he threw it back upon them; their money might not come in their
treasury: Mat. 27.8
no it was the price of blood: such was their hypocrisy, therefore it came by
no common consent to buy therewith the field for burial: but by special
providence to discern and name it the bloody field, or field of blood even to
this day.

Oh my beloved, it is to be feared, we have many such fields in England.
Bloody fields, bloody vineyardes, bloody cities, bloody houses, bloody
Maiestrates, bloody Ministers, bloody merchants, bloody Lawyers, bloody men
and bloody women, bloody hands and bloody platters, and the price of blood
within our walls. ^ab. 2.11
Lapis de pariete. (says our own Prophet:) a stone shall cry out of the
wall. and the Beam out of the timber shall make answer: Woe be to him that
builds a town with blood, and his house with iniquity. And have we not
just cause, Judge I pray, to fear that the land full (not of the praise of
God) but of cursing and bitterness, of cruelty and blood. shall taste of
fearful judgments for her contempt, and to suspect that the sins of the
land, Ier. 17.1
written with an Iron pen upon the tables of our heart, and graven with a
Dyamond point upon the horns Altar, are grown to the quality and height of
those crying sins, which threaten us with utter destruction.

The Lord of hoastes manaced of late to stretch the line of Samaria over the
Realm of England, and to sound our Cities and measure our families with the
Plummet of the house of Ahab, and not to leave one to make water against a
wall. While the danger was fresh, we were souddeinly daunted, and began to
curse the days spent in vanity and wickedness, Iocl. 1.15
which had brought the day of destruction so near upon our heads. Wherein our
enemies came against us as fierce as the Wolves in the evening, or as the
Eagles gree, Zeph. 33
die of their pray, with purpose, had not the Lord in mercy prevented them,
to have taken away and trampled under feet the glorious Gospel of Christ, and
to have erected superstition and idolatry in all our land, to have bereft us
of our most lawful and loving Sovereign, the Lords anointed Queen, and to
have turned our inheritance to heathenish strangers, to have invaded our
country with Edoms alarm and turned our floods of peace into channels of
blood* to have murdered the honorable counsel our and grave Judge, the
reverend Bishop and venerable maiestrate, Deur. 32.25
the welthie Citizen and painful craftsman, the aged matrone and the chaste
virgin, the infant in the cradle and the cr^ple at the gate* without remorte
or respect of sex degree or age. And for execution of these so heavy
judgments, the Lord threat eneth us with a people and Nation Idolatrous and
uncircumcised as the Philistines, extremely cruel and tyrannous as the
Scithians, at chiuing their exploites not so much by martial prowess, as by
dishonorable practice, not so much by courage of their own, as by corruptng
th'aduerse Captains, a thing whereof we have had tod late experience, of whom
I trust I may speak a troth without scandale: And as one said of the
Macedonian king Phillips soldiers* Proiustie i^, rapinas and caedes pro sobrie
tarmebrie tatem colebant, Theopompus Histor.
veritatem and pactorum fidemsuperbe deridebant periuria and imposturas
ducebant lauds ingenii. Even so say I of these, the trouyes of Pupists
soldiers, the Popes vassales, whether Spanish, Frenth; Italian, or
whencesoeuer: if violation and wilful contempt of ancient laws of Arms, held
so xsacted, yet among the Heathens, if breach of oathe and promise sealed upon
the conscience by Sacraments of holy Church: if profanation of leagues and
truce taken still, salued upon their seared consciences with Fides non est
seruanda cum Hereticis, if weapons yet blundred and glutted in the bowels of
Gods Saints, even then when they deemed themselves most safe under the oath
and warrant of a King: in a word, if trecheries and treasons, massacres and
murders, barbarous designeme^ts and greedy inquisitions for blood be apparent
testimonies of cruelty and infidelity, then Oh heavens (where now the souls
are most happy in the hand of the Lord,) and Oh thou earth, where the bodies
of so many and great states lie now full low, murdered by flagitious
trecheries. O heaven and earth, I say, bear witness of the cruelty and
infidelity of these our enemies (the slaughter-slaues of Antichrist) whom it
were easy to trace in blood to apparent and ruthful instances of most furious
tragedies. But (Oh thou blood thirsty baude, thus foiled in blood, and stained
with indignities, howsoever the Lord shall deal with England for her
transgressions, for surely it is a wicked Nation) yet blood shall be upon thy
head, and blood in thy hands, blood upon thy conscience, and blood in bar
against thee, at the great day when the righteous God shall bring sorrow upon
thy soul in revenge of his servants blood poured upon the face of the earth by
thy tyranny. But Oh, how has the oppressor ceased and the gold thirsty Babell
been infatuate, Esa. 14.4
her rod broken, and the Scepter departed. The Lord our God has been our
general by land, and our Admyralt by Sea. He that makes wars to cease in
all the world, has knapped the spear in sunder: ^sa. 46.9
he has broken the ships of the Sea by the East wind, and covered our head
in the day of battle, and therefore shall every good man sing of his praise
without ceasing. ^sa. 30.13
O thou King of Nations and hope of Israel, ^er. 14.8
a good God have thou been unto England, ^u. 22.17
when Balaam of Rome has cursed, yet have thou blessed us. When Balaac of
Spain has practiced mischief against us, then have thou discovered and
disapointed it. ^. Sam. 17 3
When Achitophell at home has conspired, ^. Re. 1.5 and ^ 17
confusion has caught him. When Adoniah the wily aspirer sought the Shunamite
to wife and the kingdom withal, the edge of Justice cut him short. ^. Re. 11 1
When Athalia the murtheresse went about to raze the line of the blood royal,
thy providence prevented her. Psa. 37.15
Yea, their sword (as David says) has gone through their own heart, their
gyrdles and garters have been their halters, their own hands their own
hangmen, that lay in wait to murder thine anointed, 2. Sam. 21 17
and went about to quench the light in Israel. This O Lord was thy doing, Psa.
121.5
and it was marvelous in our eyes. Thou have been our keeper upon our right
hand, Psa. 118.23
the careful watchman that have not forsaken thy England in the day of
distress: When Prince and people (yea, so many thousands that know not the
right hand from the left) were designed to a black and bloody day of
destruction. Jonas. 4.11
Psa. 45.3
But the most mighty (according to his worship and renown) has gyrt his
sword upon his thigh, and defended his own glory and Gospel against their
spite, Psa. 79 10
that would have said: where is now their God? The Lord has not withholden
his helping hand from his handmaide Elizabeth our good and gracious Queen in
time of trial a sheep to the slaughter: in time of government, a tender
Nurse to the Church, for whose sake he has heaped so many blessings upon our
land. The Lord has not shut his ears at the pitiful moan and cry of so
many widows and desolate Orphans, whose weak and weary lymmes find
relief in our Almeshouses and hospitalles, some monunients of piety yet left
in our land. No, no, howsoever it be, a good God is our God, and loving unto
Israel, Psa. 73.1
even to such as be of a pure heart. And therefore it shall go well with the
godly: as for our enemies, Eccl. 8.12
he that dwells in the Heavens has laughed them to scorn: yea, the Lord
shall have them in derision. Therefore we will not be afraid, though the earth
be moved, Psa. 46.2
and though the foundations of the hills be out of course. For when the Seas
do swell and rage horribly, yet the Lord God is mightier, strong is his hand
and mighty is his arm. He has thrust his hook into the jaws of Sennacherib,
Esai. 37.29
and the Seas have swalowed the troop of Pharaos host. Yea, Moab shall be our
washpot, Exo. 14.27
and Edome shall kneel unto our shoe. Psa. 60.8
Our footesteps shall be dipped in the blood of our enemies, Psa. 68.23
and the tongues of the dogs shall be red with the same: So that a man shall
say, verily there is a reward laid up for the righteous: Psa. 38.11
doubtless, there is a God that judges the earth. But shall we now become
secure and cast away care: shall we say, pax, ^er. 8.11
pax, and all is well, Non veniet super nos malum, Mich. 3.11
The Spanyardes come no more? Will you steal and murder? ^er. 7.9.10
commit adultery, and swear falsely, and yet come and stand before me (says
the Lord) and say, we are delivered though we have committed all these
abominations? Amos 6.3
shall we come before the Lord with bloody hands and gyltie hearts: put far
off the evil day, and approach to the seat of iniquity, and yet think to
escape the judgments of God? O beloved, take heed is a fair thing, and
happy they that be made warefull by the barmes of others: For the mastife is
beaten, that the Lion might couche: It Is plain, but a true and patheticall
distichon: Non vtbs non regio, non aetas vlla seueri, Iuditii, exemplis, non
domus vlla caret.
No town, no land, no age, nor house, that time of grace contemnd:
But heavy judgments fell for payt, and woeful was the end.


When threatenings would not serve, nor the old world could be warned, Genesis 7.21
then came the floode. When dangers were forgotten, Genesis 19.24
and Sodom grew secure, 2. Re. 17
then came fire from heaven. When Israel (the mount of the Lords in heritance)
waxed wilful and despised the Prophets, then came Asshur the rod of Gods
wrath. 2. Re. 25
When Judah (the signet of the Lords right hand) became indurate, and would not
be reclaymed, then came Nabucadnessar with fire and sword. When Jerusalem sored
with the Egle, Lam. 1.1
and made her nest among the stars, Oh sudden was her downfall to sorrow and
desolation. When the Britains would be wantons and derided Gildas warnings,
then came the Romans, and then came their woe: For Propter auaritiam and
rapinam principum, propter iniquitatem and iniustitiam Iudicum, propter
desidiam and dissidium Episcoporum, propter luxuriam and impietatem populi,
patriam perdiderunt Britanni. Will you know what rooted out the ancient
Britains out of this land, and brought a most lamentable face of a common
wealth upon the same? It was the covetousness and oppressions of the Nobles, and
Peers, the injuries and extortions of the Judges and Lawyers, the sloth and
dissension among the Bishops and clergy, the rowte and riot of the people and
commons. These, these (my brethren) be the sins that bring kingdoms to
ruin, and populous cities to desolate heaps of stones, and God is chief
Justice that strikes Nations with destruction, Psa. 107.4^
and powers contempt upon Princes for their disobedience. He has his Angels
above, and his armies below with a storehouse of plagues to discharge upon the
wicked. Hos. 11.6
He can let fall a bloody sword upon the rebellious City. He can pine a
pampered people with penury and scant. He can strip the land of pride to a
hissing and shame. Hos. 2.3
He can smite with the pestilence after the manner of Egypt. Ps. 7.12.13
Surely his how is full bent, and his sword ready whet. He is coming to
execution with the instruments of death. O, it is full time then for us to
turn unto the Lord, Zeph. 2.1.2
to sow in tears that we might reap in joy, Amos. 8.10
to seek the Lord while he may be found, and to gather our selves before the
decree come forth, to turn our feasts into fastes, and our songs into
sighings, to gyrd sorrow about our loins, and to rend our hearts with
mourning: yea, the time is come for prince and subjects (with the King and
people of Niniue) to come forth in sackcloth and ashes, Jonas. 3.6
for the Bride (with Queen Hester to forsake her closet, Hest. 4.15
and the Bridegroom his chamber, For the minister of the Lord to cry between
the porche and the Altar, Iocl. 2.16 17
) spare Oh Lord, spare thine heritage, that we all come forth in mourning
cheer with the tears of repentance, to turn away Gods heavy wrath and
prepared destruction. For his hand is not shortened, but that he can pay us
home, nor his wrath (for all this) so withdrawn, but that he will revenge.
Again, our case is not so desperate, nor we so far fallen from God. Our
wickedness is not of that height, nor our sins of so deep die, but unfeigned
repentance will reconcile us unto God, and blot out all remembrance of former
displeasure out of his sight. If therefore there be any consolation in Christ
Jesus, ^hil. 2.1
any desire or liking of Christian religion. If there be any love or loyalty
toward her sacred majesty, or care in thy heart of thy native country. If
any hope of resurrection to eternal life, any longing or looking for the
kingdom to come: Let thy repentance, thy tears, thy sorrow for sin, thy
covenant to serve the Lord undertaken this day, and (in some good measure of
grace) performed all the days of thy life, be means to sue for thy pardon, to
reconcile thee to the Lord, to turn away his wrathful indignation, and to
continue his wonted mercies toward the realm of England. And here let every
one begin with himself, and seek first a reformation in his own conscience.
And herein God help us and prosper the work of our hands upon us O Lord,
prosper thou our handie work: Psa. 90.17
So Jerusalem shall be builded, Psa. 79.13
and thy Zion never be removed, but stand fast for ever. So we that be thy
people and sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee thanks for ever. So shall our
victory be thy glory: the fall of our foes, the advancement of thy Gospel:
the preservation of our lives, the amendment of our wicked lives hereafter,
that in life and death we may be thine, and glorify thee our rock, our
defense, and only God of trust, even all the days of our life. That after our
short and uncertain course here below spent in thy service and fear: we may
at last depart in peace from this vale of misery to thy kingdom of glory,
there to reign with thee for ever, and to be satiate with the fullness of thy
glory in the heavens for evermore, and that by thy alone merit, and in the
only mediation of Jesus Christ our sole sufficient Saniour, to whom O Father
of lights, together with thee and the Holy Ghost, three distinct in person,
one only true, eternal, and everliving God be immortal praise, glory,
power, dominion, and majesty, both now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
LONDON Printed by John Wolf for Edward Aggas. 1589.


