A BRIEF CHRONOLOGY OF THE HOLY SCRIPTVRES, AS PLAIN AND easy as may be,
according to the extent of the several historical books thereof.

Comprised first in a few Verses to a short view for some help of memory:
and afterward more particularly laid forth and explaned, for a further light to
the course and proceeding of the holy Story.

With a Catalogue of the holy Prophets of God, as touching the times wherein
they prophesied.



LONDON. Printed by John Harison, for Thomas Man. 1600.

To the Reader.
NOt only are the works of God to be reverenced and regarded in themselves,
but also in respect of the most wise and excellent course and order of the
contriuing and disposing of them. God has made all things beautiful in the
time and season thereof. Eccles. 3. 11. And Act. 15. 18. From the beginning of
the world God knows all his works, says the Apostle James. His meaning is
that he knows them so, that according to his foreknowledge he has most
wisely disposed every one of them.

It must needs be acknowledged therefore, that it is the duty of all that
desire to be wise in the Lord, to seek after the knowledge of him, both in his
works, and also in the orderly course of effecting them, according as he
himself has in his holy Scriptures revealed the same.

To this purpose is that which Moses writes Deuteronomy. 4, 32. Inquire now of the
days that are past, which were before thee, since the day that God created man
upon the earth, and ask from the one end of the heaven to the other, if there
came to pass such a great thing as this, or whether any such like thing has
been heard, etc. And that which we read in the 111. Psalm. verse. 2. 3. 4. etc.
The works of the Lord are great, and ought to be sought out of all those that
love them. His work is beautiful and glorious, his righteousness indureth
for ever. He has made his wonderful works to be had in remembrance, etc.

And verily, if we weigh things with a right iudgemen^, we shall find that this
is the very end wherefore God has created time it self, and placed the Sun
and the Moon in the firmament for the distinction of the day and the night, and
that they should be for signs and for seasons, for days and for years, for
summer and for winter, Genesis 1. 14. etc. and chap. 8. 12. For these are but the
Vshers as it were, to point us to the word of God, as to the head master and
teacher of his school* that from thence we might learn not so much what God
has done in making the world for man, as what he has done in the world for
the praise of his glory ever since he has made the same: and chiefly what
course he has taken for the renewing of the world ever since mankind has
corrupted and disordered the same. For want of which observation, our Savior
Christ, the true sun of righteousness, earnestly blames the Jews, for that
they observing the signs of fair and foul weather, etc. altogether neglected
the signs of the time, and season of his coming unto them. Mat. 16. 1. 2. 3.
All the excellent works of God are so chained and linked together, that we
cannot well know the latter without the knowledge of the former. As a help
therefore hereunto, serves this present Chronologising of the holy Scriptures.
Wherein two things have been intended and endeavored: the one plainness, the
other shortness, and in either of them as much certainty as could be attained
unto for the help of the Christian Reader, from the express and entier
direction of the Scriptures themselves. God of his mercy vouchsafe his
blessing upon it to all good ends and uses whereunto it may serve thee, to his
honor and glory, even for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

Thine in the Lord.

R. A.

A brief Chronology of the holy Scriptures. Comprised first in a few verses.
SAcred Genesis first of all,
The Scripture story does contain,
Of years 2 thousands hundreds three
And sixty eight since world began.
The second Book which Moses wrote
Called Exodus, of going out:
One hundred forty adding six,
This is the sum whereto it is brought.
The third, of Leui bearing name,
Shows many things, but ekes the skore
With never a year: but Numery
Has thirty eight, and near one more.
Then Deuteronomie does supply,
All which that year to want we see:
So all five Books to thousands two,
Add hundreds five and fifty three.
Next, Joshua space of 17 years,
Judges two hundreths ninety nine:
The first of Samuel fourscore,
The next has forty, David's reign.
The first of Kings, from Solomon
Has years one hundred and seuenteen
Next, hundreths three, forty and five,
As by due trial may be seen.
This Story reaches to the time,
When captive state to Judah fell:
Yea to the year of forty five,
That they were thr al in strange Babel.
The books of days or Chronicles,
No longer Story do set down:
Save forty five, to Cyrus reign,
They make increase to seventy one.
Then Ezra, Nehem', and Esters book,
Show captive Jews sent home again:
Where they abode 4 hundred years,
Yea ninety more til Christ was slain.
For, thus is Daniel rightly scanned,
I mean the speech of Angel there:
Who thither, from thral seuenties end,
Defines seven times seventy year.
So then, since man was first create,
And likewise since his woeful fall,
Til Christ his death: it is thousa^ds three
Hundreths nine, and sixty six in all.
Whence take we thirty three and then,
There do remain but thousa^ds three:
And hundreths nine, thirty and three,
Til Christ took flesh to make us free.
Now since that time, how many years
Have passed just by yearly count:
He know'th but little, that cannot tell,
The sum whereto they do amount.
But use hereof what should be made,
Most wise may live and still may learn:
Christ taking life, and dying death,
To life does call, from sin does warn.
For as he came in base estate,
And staid no whit, the time once come:
So will he have a glorious Judge,
Of life and death, to give last doom.
Repent therefore, thy sin forsake,
Believe in him who^ God has sent:
Be sorry for all days and times,
Wherein thou have thy life misspent.
Thus times and seasons if thou weigh
The more exact, the better stay:
But if thou do this use neglect,
The greater skill, the worse defect.
Thy friend does friendly wish thee well
Let small defalt not much offend.
One year, yea more may pen escape
But Gods accounts ca^ none amend.
In the year of the everlasting reign of our Lord Jesus Christ 1600. For he
shall reign for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end. Luke. 1. 33.

In the year of the worlds decay 5533. For the heavens and 3933 from the
beginning of the world, to the birth o^ Christ: an^ 1600 to the present yer^
since his birth, they make this total sum of the old age of the world. 5533.
the earth wax old as does a garment, and as a vesture they shall be changed.
Psalm. 102. 26.

And 1. Cor. 7. 31. The fashion of this world goes away.

And 2. Pet. 3. 10. 11 The world and all things therein must be dissolved.

And (...). ep. 4. 7. 8. Now the end of al things is at hand: be ye therefore
sober and watching in prayer. But above all things have seruent love among you.
etc.

A more full opening and explaning of the former verses, for a further light to
the course of the Story, according to the Index of the letters prefixed unto
them, and first concerning GENESIS. 2368. years.
THe long exte^t of the history

Adam, the first man From A^ to the d^ luge were ten generations.
that ever was, lived from the day wherein God created and made him, the space
of 930 years. For so we read it expressly mentioned. Genesis 5. verse. 5. The
which age of Adam reached to the 56. year after that 1. Sheth^ who supp^ eth
the room o^ Abel, wh^ Cain sle^ 2. Enosh. 3. Kenan.
Lamech was borne, Genesis 5. 28. as it is easy to be gathered from the
genealogy thus. Adam was 130 year old, when his son Sheth was borne. From
Sheth to the birth of Enosh, were 105 years. From Enosh to Kenan 90. From
Kenan Mahalaleel. Iered. Henoch Methuah. Lamech Noah. (...). Shem.
to Mahalaleel 70. From Mahalaleel to Iered 65. From Iered to Henoch 162. From
Henoch to Methushelah 65. From Methushelah to Lamech 187. From Lamech to Noah
182. All which, we read Genesis chap. 5. from the 3. verse to the 29 of the same
chapter. So all these nine several numbers, 130 from Adams creation to the
birth of Sheth: 105 to Enosh: 90 to Kenan: 70 to Mahalaleel: 65 to Iered: 162
to Henoch: 65 to Methushelah: 187 to Lamech: these (I say) put all together,
with a further addition of 56 years of Lamech, they do amount to the former
sum of 930 years, which were the years of the whole life of Adam.

Now from the 56 year of Lamech, in the which Adam died, to the birth of Noah,
which was in the 182 year of Lamech, as was mentioned a little before out of
Genesis chap. 5. 28. there is a surplussage of 126 years.

From the birth of Noah to the universal deluge, or drowning of the world,
were 600 years. Genesis chap. 7. 11. That is to say, 502 years to the birth of
Shem: and from Shem to the birth of Arpachshad 100 years: who was borne two
years after the flood. Genesis chap. 11. 10. and chap. 5. 32. compared with Genesis
chap. 10. ver. 21. according as Tremelius and Iunius do rightly translate that
verse thus: To Shem also, who was the father of all the sons of Heber, and
the brother of Iapheth the eldest, there was an offspring borne. Whence it is
evident, that not Shem, but Iapheth was the eldest son of Noah, albeit Shem
is for honors sake first mentioned in that 32 verse of the 5. chap. in so much
as the holy Story was afterward to be continued from Shem, and not from
Iapheth. And note also that in the same respect, Genesis 10. 2. Iapheth has the
first place given to him by an hysterosis or backwardness of order, familiar
to the scriptures: and Ham keeps still the second place as we see in the 6.
verse of the same chapter, though he were the youngest of the three, as we
read in the 24. verse of the 9. chapter.

From the flood to the birth of Abram were From the deluge or drowning of the
world to the birth Isaak, in who^ al t^ nations o^ the earth are blesse^ there
were likewise t^ generatio^s 1. Arpac^ shad. 2. Shelah. 3. Eber. 4. Peleg. 5.
Reu. 6. Serug. 7. Nahor. 8. Terah. 9. Abram. 10. Isaak.
352 years, as may be seen from the account of the Genealogy, Genesis chap. 11.
from the 10. ver. to the 27. in this manner as follows. Arpachshad the son
of Shem was borne two years after the flood, as was said even now. From
Arpachshad to the birth of Shelah were 35 years. From Shelah to Eber 30. From
Eber to Peleg 34. From Peleg to Reu 30. From Reu to Serug 32. From Serug to
Nahor 30. From Nahor to Terah 29. From Terah to Abram 130, as it is evident in
that Terah lived 205. years. Gen 11. 32. and died in Haran when Abram was yet
but 75 years old, Genesis 12. 4. For from the beginning of this 12. chap. it
appears that Abram removed not from Haran till after that Terah his father
was dead. And thus also it is plain that Abram was not the eldest son of
Terah, though, for honors sake, and because the holy Story was to be
continued from him, he is set before Nahor his elder brother, as was observed
before concerning Shem the second son of Noah. Wherefore touching that which
is written cha. 11. 26. (Terah lived 70 years and begat Abram, Nahor and
Haran) it must be understood, that at his seuentith year he began his
generation with Nahor or Haran, after the first whereof, Abram was borne many
years after.

Now all these years, from the flood to the birth of Abram; that is to say,
two years before Arpachshad was borne; then 35 of the life of Arpachshad; and
30 of Shelah; and 34 of Eber; and 30 of Peleg; and 32 of Reu; and 30 of Serug;
and 29 of Nahor; and 130 of Terah; nine several numbers, as before, they arise
to one whole sum of 352 years.

From the birth of Abram to the promise of the Gospel, which God made the
first time unto him, were 75 years, as it is set down Genesis chap. 12. 5. For
this promise was first made to Abram, when he departed out of Haran; and that
was soon after the death of Terah, as is manifest by the process of the
Story from the last verse of the 11. chap.

From this promise of the Gospel to Abram, unto the birth of Isaak, were 25
years, Genesis chapter 21. 5. For add 25. years to the former 75, and they make
100, which was the age of Abram when Isaak was borne.

From the birth of Isaak to the birth of Iaakob Iaakob.
were 60 years Genesis chap. 25. verse. 26.

From the birth of Iaakob, to the time he went down to Egypt for his relief
against the famine, there passed 130 years, Genesis chap. 47. 9 And after this,
Iaakob lived in Egypt 17 years, so that his whole age was 147 years, as it is
recorded in the same 47. chap. verse. 48.

From the death of Iaakob, to the death of Joseph, where with the Story of
Genesis is ended, Joseph.
there were 53 years; as may be proved thus. For in so much as Iaakob died,
when Joseph was 57 year old; (as may plainly be gathered by conference of
these places following: Genesis 41. ver. 46. where it is written that Joseph was
30 year old when he stood before Pharaoh. And verse 53 of the same chapter,
The seven years of plenty were ended. And chap. 45. verse 6. Two years of
the famine were past at the second time of the coming of Iosephes brethren
unto him. And chap. 46. 1. etc. In the third year of the famine Iaakob
himself came down to Egypt. And chap. 47. 28. Iaakob lived in the land of
Egypt 17 years. All which years, to wit, 30, 7, 3, 17, they do make the age of
Joseph at the death of Iaakob to be 57.) And further, seeing Joseph lived 110
years, Genesis 50 22. 26. it cannot be, but he must live 53 years after that
Iaakob was dead. And thus upon the laying together of all the above named
numbers, in this order following; first, 930, which was the age of Adam:
secondly, 126, from the death of Adam to the birth of Noah: thirdly, 600 to the
flood: fourthly 352 to the birth of Abram: fifthly, 75 to the promise first made
to Abram: sixthly, 25 to the birth of Isaak: seventhly, 60 to the birth of
Iaakob: eighthly, 147 the age of Iaakob: ninthly, 53 the time that Joseph
suruiued Iaakob: we have a full declaration that the general sum of years
from the creation of Adam, which was the sixth day after the world began, to the
death of Joseph, where with the whole hrstorie of Genesis is ended, they are 23
68.

EXODUS 146 years.
FRom the death of Joseph, to the birth of Moses Moses.
to the time that God sent him to parlie and treat with Pharaoh, for the
deliverance of his people out of bondage, were 80 years, Exodus 7. 7.

The very next year after this, Israel departed out of Egypt; even on the 14.
day of the Departure ^ut of Egypt.
first month, Exodus chap. 12. and chap. 13. And in the third month of the
same year, the Lord did publish his Law from heaven, descending upon mount
Sinai, Exo. 19. 1. etc. 11. etc. and chapter 20. Giving of ^he law. The Ta^ernable
^rected.


And in the very beginning of the next year after this, the Tabernacle of God
was reared up, Exodus chap. 40. 17. 18.

Thus far reaches the second book of Moses called Exodus: All the years
whereof reckened together; that is to say, 65 from the death of Joseph to the
birth of Moses: 80 to his embassage from God to Pharaoh: 1 to the giving of the
Law, and until the rearing of the Tabernacle: they grow to the number of 146.

But it may here be demanded, what proof we have, that between the death of
Joseph, and the birth of Moses, were just 65 years. We gather that it must
needs be so, because that otherwise there could not be 430 years from the
promise of the Gospel made first to Abraham; unto the giving of the law. Of
which intermediant space of time, we have vndoudted testimony, Exodus 12. 40.
41. and Gal. 3. 17. And therefore the warrantise of this is a sure confirmation
of that.

LEVITICUS, only one month.
Confer that which we read, Exodus chap. The Lord spoke again unto Moses in
the wilderness of Sinai, in the Tabernacle of the congregation, the first day
of the second month, in the second year after that they were come out of the
land of Egypt. etc. Here therefore is the story of never a whole year, but
only of one month.

NVMBERS, 38 years, and 9 months.
COmpare that beginning of this book of And it came to pass in the first day
of the eleventh month in the fortith year that Moses spoke to the children of
Israel, etc. Of these forty years, yield one for the giving of the law, to
the rearing of the Tabernacle, unto Exodus; and one month to Leuiticus; so
there shall remain to Numbers 38 years and 9 months.

DEVTERONOMIE, two months at the least, which make up the 39. year of the
book of Numbers, and reaches to the end of the fortith year that Moses spoke
to Israel.
THis is evident, in that (as was mentioned Moses was one hundredth and twenty
years old when he died: his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated,
etc. So the^ Deuteronomie makes up the 39. year of Numbers: whereunto ad one
year borrowed from Exodus, and we have the whole forty years that Moses spoke
to the children of Israel.

Note here that the forty years wandering of Israel in the wilderness is to
be reckened from their first entrance into it, Exodus 16. 35. Nehem. 9. 21.
Read also Psalm 95. For even three days after their deliverance they begin
to murmr, Exodus 15. 22. Nevertheless it is not pronounced for a curse unto
them till Numbers, 14. 34. This curse ended with the death of Moses.

IOSHVAH, 17 years.
THis is proved, in that there being 480 Joshua.
laid the foundation of the Temple of Jerusalem, which was in the fourth year
of his reign, 1. King. chap 6. verses 1. and 37: there are of this sum of
480, every year recorded in the holy Scriptures (except from the beginning of
Ioshuah his government, to the time of his death) to the number of 463 years,
as will be manifest by the acc^unt following. For (as has been already
declared) from the time that Moses began to speak to Israel, to the time of
his death, was 40 years. The time of the Judges (as will more clearly appear
anon) was 299 years: of Eli 40: of Samuel and Saul 40: of David 40: of
Solomon 4, to the time wherein he began to build the Temple. Wherefore only 17
years are wanting to fufilll that number of 480. And the same must needs be
the years wherein Joshua governed and guided Israel after the death of Moses,
to the time of his own death, Josh. 1. 1. where thus we read: Now after the
death of Moses the servant of the Lord, the Lord spoke unto Joshua the son of
Nun, Moses minister, saying, Moses my servant is dead: now therefore arise
thou, go over this Jorden thou and all this people unto the land which I give
the^. etc. And cha. 24. 29. And after these things Joshua the son of Nun the
servant of the Lord died being 110 years old.

IVDGES, 299 years.
THis was the space of time, wherein the thirteen Judges, chronicled and
renowned in the book of Judges, did as heroical and most

For from the death of Joshua to the death of God stirred up 13 mighty Judges
for the deliverance of Israel, after the death of Ioshuah. (...). Othniel.
Othniel the first of these Judges, were 40 years Judge. 1. 1. etc. After that
Joshua was dead, the children of Israel asked the Lord, saying: Who shall go up
for us against the Caananites, to fight first against them. And chapter 3. ver. 9.
10. 11. When the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, the Lord stirred up a
Savior to the children of Israel, and he saved them; even Othniel the son of
Kenaz, Calebs younger brother, etc. So the land had rest to the fortith year,
when Othniel the son of Kenaz died.

From the death of this Othniel, to the times 2. Ehud. 3. Sha^gar.
wherein Ehud the second Judge, and Shamgar the third, had judged Israel;
there were 80 years chap. 3. 30. 31. For in that account the time of Shamgar
must be reckened with the time of Ehud, or else comprehended in the former part
of the 40 years next following; because otherwise, the time wherein he
executed the judgment of God, should be altogether omited. It is likely that
his time was but short. From those 80 years, to the end of the government of
Deborah, who was the fourth Judge, though a woman; there passed 40 years,
chap. 4. Deborah
5. 31. From this year, to the end of Gideons judgment, 5. Gideon.
who was the fifth Judge; were also 40 years, chap. 8. 28. After Gideon was
Abimelech, 6. Abimelech.
the sixth Judge, who judged Israel 3 years chap. 9. 22. Next Abimelech, arose
Tolah the 7. Tolah.
seventh Judge, who judged Israel 23 years, chap. 10. 1. 2. Then Iaire the
eight Judge, he 8. Iaire. 9. Iphtah.
judged 22 years, chap. 10. 3. Iphtah the ninth, judged 6 years, chap. 12. 7.
And after Iphtah, 10. Ibsan.
Ipsan, who was the tenth Judge: he judged 7 years, chap. 12. 9. Next Ibsan,
rose Elon the eleventh, 11. Elon.
he judged 10 years, chap. 12. 11. And in the same chapter, verse 14. Abdon
has the 12. Abdon.
place of the twelfth Judge, by the space of 8 years. And last of all, Samson
the thirteenth, 13. Samson
who mightily judged and avenged Israel whole 20 years, cha. 16. 31. All
these particular numbers, 40 to the death of Othniel: 80 to the death of
Shamgar: 40 to the end of Deborahs government: 40 to the death of Gideon: 3 of
Abimelech: 23 of Tolah: 22 of Iaire: 6 of Iphtah: 7 of Ibsan: 10 of Elon: 8 of
Abdon: 20 of Samson: they make up one whole sum of 299 years. And so far
extends the book of the Judges. As for that which is written in the
beginning of the thirteenth chapter of this book, concerning that 40 years of
Isreal's oppression, under the hands of the Philistims; as though it had bin
betwixt the time of Abdon and Samson, it is not so to be understood: but we
must recke^ those years beginning so as they must end either at or with the
government of Samson. In the which time of forty years though Israel had
Judges, yet we are thereby given to understand, that they were sundry times
greatly molested by their adversaries, within the compass of the same.

And concerning all that which follows in the rest of the book of the
Judges, from the 17. chapter, to the end of the book: as also touching that
history recorded in the book of Ruth: though the matters therein contained,
be placed after the time already accounted; yet do they belong to some of the
former seasons. And of the history of Ruth, it is expressly afirmed in the
beginning thereof, that it fell out in the time that the Judges ruled: at such
time as there was a dearth in the land of Israel, etc.

1. Book of SAMVEL, 80 years.
THis space of 80 years, was partly the time Eli. Samuel. Saul.
was the time both of Samuels government, and also of the reign of Saul; the
which reckened together, were likewise 40 years. So is that to be understood,
which we read Act. 13. 20. 21. God gave to Israel Judges about 450 years,
unto the time of Samuel the Prophet. The Apostle in that number reckening the
time of Elie his government among the Judges, and also vulgarly reckeneth the
times as they are dated, as well for the oppressions of Israel by their
adversaries (such as were Chusan, by the space of eight years, Eglon 18.
Sisera 20. The Madianites 7 The Amonites 18. The Philistims 40) as for their
deliverances by their Judges and Saviors 299, besides the 40. years of Elie.
And then it follows in the former place of the Acts. So after that, they
desired a King: and God gave unto them Saul, the son of Cis, a man of the
tribe of Benjamin, by the space of forty years. The Apostle here also
reckoning the gouerument of Samuel with the reign of Saul; under the covert
whereof, it is as it were shadowed or concealed.

2. Book of SAMVEL, 40 years.
THe reign of king David, was also the space of 40 years: 2. Sam. 5. 4. 5. In
Hebron he reigned 7 years and six David.
months over Judah: and in Jerusalem he reigned 33 years over all Israel and
Judah. Thus with the end of king David's reign, which was at the end of his
life; this second book of Samuel ends.

1. Book of KINGS, 117 years.
THis 117 years is the time of the reign of five Kings of Judah.

First of Solomon, who reigned 40 years 1. The first ^ooke of Kings con^aineth
the ^istory of 5 ^ings of ^uda. (...). Salomo^. (...). Rehobo^am. (...). Abiiam.


Then Rehoboam, the son of Solomon 17 years, chap. 14. 21.

The third Abijam, whose reign was three years, chap. 15. 2. but not
complete; so that the third year of Abijam was also the first of Asa. For
Jeroboam beginning his reign over Israel, when Rehoboam began to reign over
Judah; it is expressly said, that Abijam began his reign in the eighteenth
year of Jeroboam, chap. 15. 1. And it is likewise said, that Asa began his
reign, in the twentieth year of the same Jeroboam. We have therefore, only two
whole years, betwixt Rehoboam and Asa.

This Asa, the fourth king of Judah; to wit, of 4. Asa.
those mentioned in this first book of Kings: he reigned 41 years, as we
read further in the 15. verse of the same 15. chap.

In the fifth place, the reign of Iehoshaphat, is 5 Ichoshaphat.
numbered to be 25 years: and his death is chronicled in this book.
Nevertheless, the story of this first book of the Kings, reaches but to the
17 year of his reign, chap. 22. ver. 51. 52. So that the history of this
book is but 117 years. For so many and no more are the particular sums; 40
of Solomon: 17 of Rehoboam: 2 of Abijam: 41 of Asa: 17 of Iehoshaphat, if we
number them altogether.

2. Book of KINGS, 345 years.
IN this second Book of the Kings, the holy The second book of Kings
contains the history or 15. kings of Judah, beside queen Athaliah,
chap. 3. 1. to the last; that is to say, unto the 25. year of his reign. Yet
so, as the story runs under the name of Iehoram his son; because from the
former seventeenth year of Iehoshaphat, Iehoram ruled as Viceroy in stead of
his father, chap. 1. 17. And again who makes up the number of 16. 1. Iehoram
2. Ahaziah Athaliah. 3. Iehoash. 4. Amazia. 5. Azariah or Vzziah 6. Iotham. 7.
Ahaz. 8 Hezekiah 9. Manasses. 10. Amon. 11. Josiah 12. Iehoahaz. 13. Iehoiakim.
14. Iehoiachin. 15. Zedekiah.
yet more specially, from the 22 year of his fathers reign, chap. 8. 16. For
Ioram the son of Ahab, beginning his reign in the eighteenth year of
Iehoshapat; the fifth year of this Ioram must be the 22. year of Iehoshaphat.
And from this time, that is, from the fifth year of Ioram, does Iehoram the
son of Iehoshaphat (even four years before the death of his father) begin
his reign of that 8 years, which is mentioned in the 17. verse of the eight
chapter last alleged. For otherwise, how should Iehoram the son of
Iehoshaphat, reign to the twelfth year of Ioram the son of Ahab, whose
first year was the eighteenth of Iehoshaphat, and the second of Iehorams
viceroyship, as has been noted before? So then, we have, beside the remnant of
Iehoshaphats reign (which was four years from the end of his 17. while
Iehoram his son was first viceroy) we have, I say, in the entrance of this
second book of Kings, Iehorams more full reign, for the space of 8 years,
beginning at the 22. year of Iehoshaphat; that is to say, the first four
years by special commission, and thence forth other four in his sole
regencie; to wit, so long as he suruiued his father.

And after this, we have in the rest of this book the reign of 14 kings of
Judah; beside Queen Athaliah, who makes up the number of 16, as is noted
before.

Of the which kings, Ahaziah the first, reigned one year, chap. 8. 26.

Next after him, Athalia, a woman usurper, by the space of six years, chap.
11. 3.

And after her, Iehoash the second king, who reigned 40 years, chap. 12. 1.
Yet so, as from his 38. year, Amaziah his son rule as Viceroy in his room;
as may appear by this, that Ioash king of Israel, beginning his reign over
Israel, at the 37. year of Ioash king of Judah, cha. 13. 10. Amaziah is
afterward said to have begun his reign, in the second year of the same
Ioash, chap. 14. 1. which must be the 38. year of Ioash, king of Judah. And the
same also, two years before Iehoahaz, the father of Ioash king of Israel died;
in so much as the seventeenth year, which was the last of Iehoahaz, touched
the last year of the reign of Ioash king of Judah; seeing he began his reign
in the 23. year of the same Ioash of Judah, and reigned 17 years in Israel,
chap. 13. 1. So then, the son of Iehoahaz was viceroy in Israel, as Amaziah
was in Judah. Three years therefore are to be abated, either of the 40 years
of Iehoash, or of the 29 years of Amaziah; unless we could see sufficient
reason to say, that Amaziah reigned 29 years, beside that time wherein he was
viceroy.

Next unto Amaziah, was Azariah, otherwise called Vzziah 2. Chron. chap. 26.
whose reign continued 52 years. But the beginning of Azariahes reign is not
to be reckoned, till the twelfth year after the death of his father; because
Amaziah (as the Story testifies) lived but 15. years after the death of
Iehoash king of Israel, chapter 14. verse 17. The which his 15 years, could reach
but to the 15. year of the reign of Jeroboam, who began not his reign, till
the 15. year of Amaziah, as we read in the same 14. chapter the 23. verse. And
hereunto add, that it is further expreslie set down, chapter 15. 1. (as has
been alleged before) that Azariah began not his reign, till the 27. year
of Jeroboam, which was 11 years after the death of Amaziah. We are therefore in
this place (for the perfecting of our computation) to interpose eleven years
betwixt the death of Amaziah, and the beginning of the reign of Azariah, who
was but four year old when his father Amaziah dyed. Neither did he begin his
reign, till he was 16 years of age, as it follows in the 2. verse of the
same 15. chapter. Whence also, it will fall out, that as Judah was eleven years
without a king, by reason of the nonage of Azariah, or for what other cause
soever: so was Israel, fifteen years after that vacancie or interregnum of
Judah, for the space of 22 years likewise without a king. That is to say, from
the end of Ieroboams reign, which was at the 15. year of the reign of
Azariah. So that Zachariah the next king which succeeded Jeroboam, and was the
fourth from Iehu, 2. King. chap. 10. 30. he began not his reign, till the 38.
year of Azariah, as we read chapter 15. 8. 12. Some, in their Chronology admit
not these years of vaca^cie, either in Judah or in Israel, and therefore begin
the reign of Azariah 15 years before the death of his father: yea, and for
the same cause also, do make Zachariah immediately to succeed Jeroboam in
Israel, without any interruption of the royal government. But the former
account is to be followed; the rather, because without the former addition, we
shall not find that number of Ezekiels 390 years, figured by so many days,
from the time that Israel fell to idolatry under Jeroboam the son of Nebat,
to the desolation of Jerusalem at the burning of the Temple. Read Ezekiel. chapter 4.
verses 4. 5. 6. etc. But let us have forward.

Ater Azariah, Iotham reigned 16 years, 2. King. 15. 32. 33.

Next to Iotham, was Ahaz, who likewise reigned 16 years, chap. 16. 1. 2.

After Ahaz, reigned Hezekiah 29 years, chap. 18. 1. 2.

Manasses succeeded Hezekiah, and reigned 55 years, chapter 21. 1. The longest
reign of any king either in Judah or Israel.

Then Amon reigned two years, cha. 21. 19.

And after Amon, Josiah; whose reign was 31 years, chap. 22. 1.

Next to Josiah was Iehoahaz; but he reigned only three months, chap. 23. 31.

After Iehoahaz, Iehoiakim reigned eleven years, chap. 23. 36.

Then Iehoiachin, whose reign was but three months and ten days. For so
soon after he began to reign, did the king of Babylon subdue him, and carry
him away captive to Babel, 2. King. chap. 24. 8. etc. and 2. Chron. chap. 36.
9. etc.

Instead of this Iehoiachin, the same king of Babylon placed Zedekiah, who
reigned eleven years, 2. King. 24. 18.

Finally, from thence, to the time that Euilmerodach the next king of Babylon,
succeeding Nebuchadnezzar, restored Iehoiachin to a princely dignity; there
passed 26 years. For he was advanced in the 37. year after that he was carried
away captive, 2. King. chap. 25. verse. 27. From the which if we subtract those
11 years of Zedekiah, the remainder is 26. So all the years of the Story of
this second book of Kings, containing these several numbers: 4 of Iehoshaphat:
8 of Iehoram: 1 of Ahaziah: 6 of Athaliah: 40 of Iehoash or Ioash: 26 of
Amaziah, abating the three years of his viceroyship: 11 years of the vacancie:
52 of Azariah: 16 of Iotha^: 16 of Ahaz: 29 of Hezekiah: 55 of Manasses: 2 of
Amon: 31 of Josiah: 11 of Iehoiakim: 11 of Zedekiah: and from thence 26 to the
advancement of Iehoiachin in Babell: they are in the total sum 345.

THis captivity of Judah began in the fourth The Captivity of Judah begins.
laying siege against Jerusalem, in the third year of Iehoiakim, Dan. chap. 1.
1. he subdued the same Iehoiakim, and carried him away captive the next year,
2. King. 24. 1. and 2. Chron. 36. 5. 6. 7. At the which time also, Daniel and
some other of the children of the Nobles, and such as were of the blood royal
of Judah were led into captivity, as is evident in the same first chapter of
Daniel. And that the captivity of Judah began at this time, (though it was
increased twice after, 2. King. 24. 10, etc. and chap. 25. 1. etc.) Read
Matthew. chap. 1. verse 11. compared with 2. Chron. 36. 9. Where see the note of
Tremelius and Iunius, for the opening of that place, by another like place, 2.
Kin. chap. 16. 2. and also how that which is written 2. Chron. 36. 9. agrees
with 2. King. 24. 8. For by this conference of places, it is manifest, that
Iehoiachin was eight years old, not when he himself, but when Iehoiakim began
to reign. Near upon which time, the Evangelist Matthew, in the place before
cited, begins the captivity, writing thus: Iacim (he means Iehoiakim)
begat Iechonias (that is Iehoiachin) and his brethren, about the time they
were carried away to Babylon.

FOr from the beginning of the fourth year of Years 45 from the beginning of
the captivity, to the end of the second book of Kings.
which was 8 years, 2. King. chap. 23. 36. and chapter 24. 12. (in so much as the
8. year of the reign of the king of Babell was the eleventh year of
Iehoiakim) and add moreover, to these eight years of Iehoiakim, those 37
which followed from the carrying away of Iehoiachin the son of Iehoiakim to
Babell, until Iehoiachin was there advanced, as we saw before (with the
which advancement of Iehoiachin, the second book of Kings is concluded:) and
so we have the story continued till 45 years after that the captivity of
Judah began.

1. Book of CHRONICLES.
THe first book of Chronicles, so called in Greek, after the Hebrew
inscriptio^; which is, the first Book of days or times; it is only

2. Book of CHRONICLES, continues the Story 25 years longer then 2. Kings.
THis second book of Chronicles, beginning at king Salomo^s reign, carries
forth the story of the second book of Kings, no further then to the first
year of Cyrus king of Persia; that is, only 25 years beyond the extent of
that second book of Kings. For the captivity The captivity of Judah ends.
beginning at the first year of Nebuchadnezzar, and continuing all the time of
his reign; yea and also under the reign of Euil-merodach, as was alleged
before; and yet further, unto the death of Belshazzar, Dan. chap. 5. and chap.
7. 1. and chap. 8. 1. and Ier. 25. 26. (where the Prophet prophesies against
this drunken king under the name of Sheshach, which word in the Babylonian
tongue, notes the solemnizing of some feast, as it were to Bacchus. See the
note of Tremelius and Iunius upon that place of Ierimiah) The captivity (I say)
thus beginning at the first year of Nebuchadnezzar, and continuing to the
first year of Cyrus, whereat the second book of Chronicles ends: it is the
space only of 70 years. Read 2. Chron. 36. 21. 22. and Ezra 1. 1. etc. and
Dan. 9. 1. etc. So then, to out former sum of 345 years, contained in the
Story of the second book of Kings; that is, to the 45. year of the
captivity of Judah: we have in this second book of Chronicles, only the
addition of 25 years, to make up the number of 70: which was the end of the
same captivity.

EZRA, NEHEMIAH, and DANIEL, 490 years.
IN the days of Ezra, Nehemiah, and Daniel, many thousands of the Jews, being
by the The return of Judah out of their ^aptiuity.
conduct of Zerubbabel and other Princes, and namely of Sheshbazzar, that
Tirshatha or Commissioner, whom king Cyrus had appointed chief Prince of Judah,
to put them in possession of their land by his authority, Ezra chapter 2. 1. 2.
and verse 36. and chap. 5. 14. 15. 16. (Whether Zerubbabel, or rather one
properly named Sheshbazzar, were that Tirshatha or Commissioner as afterward it
is recorded that Nehemia was for his time Tirshatha or the kings Commissioner,
Nehem. chap. 8. verse 9. and chap. 10. 1.) the Jews (I say) being thus by
thousands returned to their own land, whereunto God of his most gracious
goodness had restored them; they do earnestly endeavor to reedifie the holy
city and temple of Jerusalem, which Nebuchadnezzer had burnt in the 19. year
of his reign, 2. King. 25. 8. 9. 10. they were through the same most gracious
goodness of God, settled to remain and abide therein, from the time of that
their return, to the death of our Savior Christ; that is, by the space of 490
years, Dan. 9. 24. etc. In the which space also, they enjoyed the gracious and
comfortable protection of God, under the reign of the kings of the Medes and
Persians, for the first 100 of those years and more. But let us consider of
this portion of the holy history more particularly. And first concerning the
book of Ezra.

EZRA.
THe book of Ezra, continuing the holy Ezra.
history from the return of Judah out of their captivity, unto the time that
the Temple and city of Jerusalem was built, which was the space of 49 years;
(to wit, from the first year of Cyrus to the twentieth year of Darius the son
of Ahashuerosh, whom it is thought Queen Ester bare unto him: concerning which
space of time unto the building of the Temple finished, read Daniel chap. 9.
25. where the Angel informed Daniel that it should be performed in the first
seven times seven years, that is in 49 years) it reports the Story in this
order. Cyrus King of Persia, proclaimed liberty to the Jews to return to
their land; yea he gave the^ his princely encouragement and furtherance,
toward the building of the Temple and city of Jerusalem, for the worship of
the true God of Israel, Ezra, chap. 1. And this no doubt he did with the
consent of Darius, who was of the seed of the Medes, and was made King of the
Chaldeans. These two kings and their kingdoms being confederate together in
one monarchy, Dan. chap. 5. ver. 28. 31. and chap. 6. 1. 2. 3. 8. etc. and
chap. 9. 1. 2. likewise Ester 1. 3. 19. So the^ the Jews in the second year
of their coming, laid the foundation of the Temple, chap. 3. 8. Nevertheless
shortly after they had done so, they were forthwith hindered from proceeding in
the work of the Lord, by diverse malicious adversaries who labored their
hindrance to the uttermost of that they could any way procure. The work
therefore stayed, even from the third year of Cyrus, that it could not
prosperously go forward, until the second year of Darius the son of
Ahashuerosh, of whom mention was made a little before, Ezra chap. 4. verse. 5.
24. and Zachary, chap. 1. 1. This second year of Darius, was the 32. year
after the Jews return, as may easily be perceived, in so much as the 19. year
of the same Darius (which was the year before Nehemiah came in commission, for
the finishing of the walls and gates of Jerusalem, Nehem. 1. 1.) it was the
49. after their return; according to the speech of the Angel Gabriell to
Daniel, alleged before.

The reason of the hinderance of the Lords building, even so soon after the
gracious commission of Cyrus king of Persia, and Darius of the Medes, it
seems to have been this; that Darius of the Medes dying shortly after, and
Cyrus following his wars abroad; Artashasht the son of Cyrus (called of
Greek writers Cambyses) being king or Viceroy in peace at home, was willing to
hearken to the accusation of the Jews adversaries: and so was Ahashuerosh also
after him. Ezra. chapter 4. 5. 6. 7. And this seems to be the cause of Daniels
great grief, chapter 10. 1. 2. 3. Moreover the Jews were too easily discouraged,
and of themselves over slothful, as may appear by the earnest reproves which
the Lord gives the^ by his holy Prophets. Hag. chap. 1. 1. 2. etc. and Zach.
chapter 1. 1. 2. etc. Nevertheless, so soon as they resumed the work, and at the
instigation of the Prophets, earnestly set upon it; according to that we read
further, Ezra, chap. 5. 1. 2. by the singular mercy of God, they find so
gracious furtherance at the hands of Darius then king of Persia, even in the
second year of his reign, and their labor so prospered, that the house of
God was finished in the sixth year of his reign, Ezra, chap. 6. 1. etc. verse.
15. And in the 7. year of the same Darius (called also Artashasht, king of
Persia) Ezra comes from him, furnished a fresh, as it were with a new supply;
yea with a most large augmentation of the kings favor and bounty, toward the
people and house of God, Ezra 7. verse. 8. 9. etc. to the end of the chapter.

NEHEMIAH.
IN the twentieth year of his reign, the same Darius or Artashasht king of
Persia, grants Nehemi^
Nehemiah a new commission (for he is now Tirshatha or Commissioner from the
king, cha. 8. 9. and chap. 10. 1. as was mentioned before) for the perfecting
of the whole building of the Lord; whatsoever was wanting, concerning any
appurtenances to the Temple, or touching the walls and gates of the whole
city, Nehem. chap. 1. 1, etc. and chap. 2. 1. etc. The which service of
perfecting and finishing the whole work he did through the blessing of God,
perform with all faithfulness, and singular expedition; that is, i^ the space
of 52 days, by the willing and industrious diligence of the thousands of Judah.
Thus wonderfully did the Lord from time to time, prosper his work in the hands
of his servants, when they did earnestly set upon it, contrary to all the
malignant endeavors of the wicked. Read Nehem. 2. 17. and chap. 3. 1. etc. and
chap. 6. 1. etc. 15. 16. And thus was the whole building of Jerusalem perfected
at the end of the first seven weeks of years, as was observed before in Ezra.

Nehemiah having brought the outward buildings to this perfection, he remains
still among the Jews, a gracious Governor and foster-father of Gods Church
and people, by the space of 12 years: that is, from the twentieth year of
Darius king of Persia, to the 32. year of his reign. This Darius was the most
bounteous benefactor which the Jews ever had, among all the heathen Princes,
under whose subjection they were. We may not altogether unfitly, call him for
honors sake, the Jews Constantine. Read Nehem. chapter 5. 14. From the time
(says Nehemiah) that the King gave me charge to be Governor in the land of
Judah, from the twentieth year even to the 32. year of King Artashasht, that is
twelve years: I and my brethren have not eaten the bread of the Governor,
etc. But rather I fortified a portion of the work, etc. Moreover there were at
my table a hundredth and fifty of the Jews and rulers, which came unto us from
among the heathen, etc. Yea and though at the 32. year of Darius, Nehemiah
left the Jews, and returned to the king, who was then by a new style written
king of Babell, Nehem. chap. 13. 6. yet so tender was his care over the people
of God, and so zealous was he of Gods glory; that he entreated leave of the
king to go to them again. Which request also he obtained of him. How long this
was after that he had left them, it is not expressed; neither yet how long he
remained with them, after he was come to them. Only this is specified, that he
renewed a worthy service among the people of God, to the great honor and
glory of God, and to the singular benefit of his people, in reforming the
abuses, both of the house and Offices, and also of the Sabbath of the Lord.
Read chap. 13. 7. etc.

And thus the Jews the people of God, were in prosperous estate, and
graciously protected and blessed of God, under the reign of the Persian kings,
as these books of Ezra and Nehemiah do declare, for the better half of those
hundredth and thirty years, while their Monarchy (combined with the Medes)
did continue. As touching the latter part of their reign, it may probably be
conceived of us, that the kings of Persia which succeeded, were no enemies to
the people and true worship of God, which their predecessors had so graciously
favored and privileged: and the rather because of the troubles which arose
unto them from the Grecians, Dan. chap. 11. 2. 3. etc.

ESTER.
HEre, let us in a few words note by the way, Ester.
concerning the book of Ester, that though it be placed in order after the
book of Nehemiah, yet the notable and very memorable history of the Jews
wonderful deliverance from the intended massacre of Haman described therein,
was by most likelihood fulfilled in the time of the reign of Ahashuerosh
mentioned before in the second chap. of Ezra verse 6. (This Ahashuerosh in the
book of Ester and that Ahashuerosh in the book of Ezra being all one) And the
deliverance was wrought in the twelfth or thirteenth year of the kings reign,
as we read Ester chap. 3. verses 7. 13. In which history, note these special
things: first. that God would by the great danger which fell upon the Jews,
correct the slacknesse of them in returning to their own land, out of those
profane nations: Secondly, that Gods mercy was wonderful, in sparing of
their lives. And last of all, the slacknesse of the people that were already
returned to Jerusalem, may hence be discovered, in that notwithstanding
Mordecay after their deliverance was in high favor with the king, and very
careful for his part, to procure the wealth of his people, Ester chap. 10. 2.
3. they did for all that, greatly foreslowe the building of the house of God,
as we have seen before. Thus much concerning the book of Ester, without
interruptio^ of the former course of the history. Now let us go forward to the
rest of the 490 years, recorded before out of the prophecy of Daniel.

DANIEL.
WE have seen already from the books Daniel.
was the state of the Jews for the former part of these 490 years of Daniel:
and it may also be discerned from Daniel himself. Wherein, though they had
their troubles, yet it was rather prosperous, then adverse and trouble some.
But as touching the middle part of the same 490 years; that is, from the time
that Alexander of Macedonia had subdued the Persians under the Grecians: the
Jews more and more corrupting their ways, and the worship of God (as it is
evident by the prophecy of Malachie the last of the prophets, whom God sent
much about that time, or not long before, vehemently to reprove their most
grievous and enormious sins) they are through the just judgment of God,
because of the hardness and impenitencie of their hearts, heavily afflicted,
oppressed, and spoiled by sundry and diverse heathen kings; specially, by the
divided successors of Alexander, compared to ten horns, Dan. chapter 7. 24. whom
also, in respect of the situation of Judah, he partly calls Southern kings
(namely those five Ptolomies, who successively ruled in Egypt) and partly he
calls them Northern kings: of the which, three bare the name of Seleuchus,
and four were called by the name of Antiochus, with some difference of
Sir-names, who ruled in Syria, according to that which we read Dan. chapter 8. and
chapter 10. and chap. 11. The fulfilling of which prophecy, is plainly and
plentifully testified by the records of very many heathen Historio graphers,
for the space of 149 years (whose writings are extant among us) that is, from
the beginning of the Grecian monarchy by Alexander, to the end of the reign of
that most vile and barbarous persecutor Antiochus Epiphanes; with whom Daniel
ends his prophecy, touching the special afflictions of Judah, chap. 11.
verse 21. etc. to the end of the chapter. Read also the first book of
Machabees, chap. 1. verse. 1. etc. After that Alexander the Macedonian, the son
of Philip, went forth of the land of Chittim, and slew Darius king of the
Persians and Medes, and reigned for him, as he had before in Grecia, he took
great wars in hand, etc. and verses 8. 9. 10. 11. So Alexander had reigned 12
years when he died. And his servants reigned every one in his room. And they
all caused themselves to be crowned after his death, and so did their children
after them many years, and much wickedness increased in the world. For out
of these came the wicked root, even Antiochus Epiphanes the son of K.
Antiochus, which had been an hostage at Rome, and he reigned in the 137. year
of the kingdom of the Greeks. And chap. 6. 16. King Antiochus died in the
149. year.

Now concerning the last part of the 490 years of Daniel; that is to say, from
the miserable end of Antiochus in his reign, to the death of our Savior
Christ, which was the space of 211 years; the greater part was spent in the
weakening and wasting of the Greek monarchy, partly by the ill success of
their wars against Judah, and partly by their wars among themselves, according
to the prophecy of Daniel, chap. 2. 41. 42. 43. 44. but chiefly by the
Romans, who altogether subdued them, according as Ezekiel prophesied that they
should. Read chapter 38. and chap. 39. These prophesies were fulfilled about
threescore years before the seventy seuens of Daniel were expired. For so
many years passed from the utter suppressing of the Grecians broken Monarchy,
and the end of those years. Now therefore, albeit Judah (strengthened of God)
did from the end of vile Antiochus his reign, recover their kingdom and
government, and obtained the free possession of the city of God, by the mighty
valor of Judas Machabaeus (read 1. Machab. chap. 3. 1. 2. 3. 4. etc. In his
acts he was like a Lion, etc. and chapter 6. verse. 58. 59. The heathen finding
themselves to decrease daily, they consent that the Jews should live after
their law as they did before, and they agree of peace. Read also 2. Machab.
chap. 10. 1. 2. 3. etc. Machabaeus and his company through the help of the Lord
wanne the Temple and the city again, etc. and chap. 15. 38. Thus far
concerning Nicanors matters, and from that time the Hebrews had the city in
possession.) And although the Romans after they had gotten the souereigntie,
did nothing against the religion of the Jews; yet their estate, even at the
best, was full of misery, by reason of the manifold corruptions of Gods
worship among themselves, and because of their great wickedness in the course of
their life, specially among their high Priests, leaders and guides. For they
were of diverse sects both Pharisees and Sadduces, as we read in the Gospel,
yea and Essaei also, as other stories make mention. Whereunto the Prophet
Zachary has respect, chap. 11. 8. where the Lord threateneth before hand,
that he would cut off three Shepherds in one month, in so much as his soul
lothed them, etc. Which also came to pass, after they had showed themselves
obstinate and incorrigible, even to the rejecting of our Savior Christ. For
hereby they provoked God in the highest degree; and therefore he sent the
Roman army in his wrath, to take their nation utterly away; as we are
herafter further to observe, concerning the proper time and season thereof.

And thus we are come to the end of the 490 years, comprended in the seventy
seuene of Daniel, chap. 9. 24. etc. Of the which, the first seven times seven
years; that is, 49 years, were spent in the building of the Temple; three
years being reckened till the foundation was laid, and the other 46 before it
could be finished: by reason of the great and often hindrances which the Jews
had, as has been declared before. Read also John 2. 20. Forty and six
years was this Temple a building. From thence were 67 seuens, that is, 434
years. And last of all, the Prophet reckeneth one seven more; of the The
appearing and manifestation of Christ, as also the time of his death.
which the latter half, that is, three years and a half, were appointed by
God, to be the time from the Baptism of our Savior Christ, which was at the
thirtith year of his age, unto his death, which was at the 4. Passover,
following after his baptism. For so we read, Luke chap. 3. verses 21. 22. 23.
At his Baptism (says the Evangelist) he began to be about thirty years of
age. But concerning the Passcouers, in the times whereof, our Savior Christ
went up to Jerusalem to the celebration of them; we have only three expressly
and by name mentioned, the first and third, only by the Evangelist John, chap.
2. 13. The Jews Passover was at hand, therefore Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
And again, chap. 6. 4. Now the Passover a feast of the Jews was near.
Nevertheless, the second Passover is mentioned by the same Evangelist, chap.
5. 1. After that there was a feast of the Jews (says S. John) and Jesus went
up to Jerusalem, etc. This feast, as may be showed by good reason, is most
likely (if not altogether certain) to be the second Passover. Consider of
that which our Savior Christ spoke in the fourth chap. verse 35. There are yet
four months, and then comes harvest. Now at the Passe-ouer began the Jews
barley harvest: read Exodus 9. 31. Leuit. 23. 6. 10. 11. 15. 16. and Deuteronomy. 16.
8. 9. And it seems to be the same feast, mentioned Luke chapter 6. 1. Wherefore,
seeing these words of our Savior Christ, Four months, and then comes
harvest, were spoken after the first Passover, John 2. yea at such time as our
Savior Christ in his returning from Judea into Galile, was now come to
Samaria. John chap. 4. 3. 4. 5. etc. And seeing there is no feast commanded in
the law, whereunto our Savior should go up to Jerusalem, within the space of
four months before harvest, until the Passe-ouer it self should come about;
it secmeth to follow by good reason, that the feast mentioned John 5. 1.
whereunto our Savior Christ went at the celebration thereof in Jerusalem,
should be the Passover at (...) and no other feast. And if the Passover (...)
also it is the second, placed before that cha^ (...) must be the thi^. Read
this point, (...) ^ed and disputed by Chemnitius, i^ (...) chapter of his
Prolegomena before (...) of the Gospel. And as touching the last Passover,
whereunto our Sa^ Christ went up at Jerusalem, all the Eua^gelists make
express mention of it, (...). Mark 14. 1. Luke. 22. 1. John. chap. (...). 55.
and chapter 12. 1. and chap. 13. 1.

From the Creation of man to the death of our Savior (...) years 3966 by the
former account.
FOr all the former numbers laid together; that is to say, 2368 year, which is
the extent

From the birth of our Savior Christ to this present year of the same our
Lord Jesus Christ his reign, are 1600 years.
From this time; that is, since our Savior Christ The time of the casting off
of the Jews.
time of his most clear manifesting of himself: the Jews more and more
corrupting their ways and hardening their hearts to the uttermost against God,
even unto the denial and crucifying of the son of God: they have for the same
their extreme contempt and obstinacy, bin most justly rejected and cast off,
from being a people to the Lord. And for the same cause also, have the city
and Temple of Jerusalem been utterly subverted, and laid altogether waste by
the Romans; that is, by the furious armies of the Emperor Titus, and
Vespasian his son. This was about forty years after the death of our Savior
Christ, agreeable to the prophecy of Daniell, cited before, chap. 9. 26. 27.
Read also Zachary, chap. 14. 1. 2 And according as our Savior himself (he
being yet among the Jews) did forewarne that it should come to pass, Matthew.
chap. 24. verses 15. 16. etc. 34. and Luke chap. 19. 43. 44. and chap. 21. 5.
6. 20. etc. 32. 33. And yet further also, according to their own fear, whereof
we read John 11. 48. The Romans (say the Jews) will come and take away both
our place and the nation. The accomplishment hereof is plentifully recorded in
the history of Josephus; howsoever, as we read Act. chapter 6. 14. the Jews
could not abide to hear that it should fall out so. Nevertheless since the
ascension of our Savior The time of the calling of the Gentiles.
Christ, which was forty days after his resurrection. Act. 1. verse. 1. 2. 3.
And from Pentecost, which was ten days after the same ascension; even
immediately after that the extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost were poured
down upon the Apostles, Act. chapter 2. 1. 2, etc. the Gospel of Christ's
everlasting kingdom and righteousness began to be preached, and did
thenceforth spread it self more and more, from Jerusalem unto all the nations
of the earth, and Christ Jesus was believed on in the world, according to his
own appointment and promise. Act. 1. 4. 8. Thus the Lord destroying the
material Temple of Jerusalem, because of the sin and apostasy of the Jews,
who had profaned and polluted the same; he therewithal began forthwith to
magnify his rich mercy toward the Gentiles, in the erection of his spiritual
Jerusalem among them, Ephesians. 2. 13. etc. and 1. Pet. 2. 4. etc. according to
the former prophesies of David, Psalm. 110. and Isai chap. 2. 1. 2. 3. 4. and
Micah, chap. 4. 1. 2. 3. Yet the Gospel was not so received and believed among
the Gentiles, but that it found great resistance, from the hand and power of
the Roman Emperors, by the space of 300 years, under the reign well near of
40 of them, (a very few excepted) even from bloody Nero, who raised the first
cruel persecution ^rch ^ng (...).
against Christians, to the Emperors Maxentius and Licinius, with whom the
tenth of those grievous and outrageous persecutions of the primitive Church, so
famous in Ecclesiastic all stories, ended. These persecutions our Savior
Christ himself partly foretold to all his Apostles before his death, Matt.
chap. 10. ver. 16. 17. 18. and cha. 24. 9. and Luke chapter 21. 12. 13. But he
revealed the same more fully to his Apostle John, after his ascension up into
heaven, in the time of the reign of the Emperor Domitian, who raised the
second persecution against Christians. In the which persecution, the Apostle
John himself was banished into the I Will Patmos; where he had the same
Revelation showed unto him, for his own comfort, and for the comfort of all
the Churches of Asia in their afflictions. Read the first four chapters of
the Revelation. Read also chap. 6. and chap. 13. 1. 2. etc. 10. These hot
persecutions of the Christians (wherein the Gospel of Christ has been
witnessed by the manifold torments and deaths of many thousands of blessed
martyrs) they continued until the time, that it pleased God to turn the heart
of Constantine first, and then of some other of the Emperors after him, to
believe and embrace the Gospel of Christ: and so to become foster-fathers unto
his Church, according to the prophecy of Isaiah more then six hundredth years
before it came to pass: as we read, chap. 49. the 23. verse.

And yet again, even in those times, wherein The peace of the church mixed
with sundry afflictions.
Christian Emperors favored the Gospel, the Churches were by another manner of
affliction greatly molested; that is to say, by certain very dangerous
heretics and their bold sectaries, the Arrians, and diverse other: whereunto
the Apostle had respect, in that he spoke to the Elders of Ephesus, etc. Act.
20 30. Moreover (says Paul) of your own selves shall men arise; speaking
perverse things to draw disciples after them. And 1. Cor. 11. 19. There must be
heresies even among you. etc.

And here withal also, Antichrist arose; that is to The rising of Antichrist.
say, a succession of ambitious wackedmen, affect^ng superiority, yea aspiring
after a sovereign rule and dominion in the Church, whom our Savior Mat. 24.
24. Luke 21. 8.
calls false Chrisis (even the same which began in the Apostles time, 2.
These. 2. 7. The mystery of iniquity does already w^rke. and 1. Ioh. 2. 18. and
3. op. ver. 9. 10.) This Antichrist; that is, this wicked sort of proud men,
from time to time abusing all that peace and prosperity which God gave to the
Church by the favor of the Christian Emperors; it did grow apace: and now
has attained long since, to the height of that most abominable pride and
presumption whereunto it cunningly climed. So that thenceforth, (that is, from
the time that Pope Boniface gate the supremacy, by the traitorous conspiracy
of Phocas the murderer, and so forth from the time of Gregory the third, that
stout maintainer of images against Leo the Greek Emperor, yea against the
express commandment of God himself) they have sacrilegiously usurped, and to
this day for many hundreths of years, have and do wretchedly abuse, both the
seat of justice, and also the chair of religion; against all Christian kings
and princes, and against all the people of God, yea against the very throne of
God himself, according as the Apostle Paul foretold that they would, 2. These.
2. verse. 3. 4. And the holy Angel to the Apostle John, Revel. chap. 17. and in
other chapters before that, and namely chapter 13. from the 11. verse. So that
the wicked Popes, as they have been more in number then the persecuting
Emperors before them, so have they been more cruel and noisome to all true
Christians then they were, ever since the time they have intruded themselves
into their seats, and challenged a souereign^ie above them.

But blessed be God, who has not only long ago foretold this rising, ^ea
swelling of Antichrist. The fall of Antichrist.
as it were from the bottomless pit, and likewise his fall: but also of his
infinite mercy, le^eth us now living, understand of the beginnings^, yea and
see with our eyes some gracious proceedings of the s^ his fall, by the
faithful preaching of the Gospel: by the which he shall su^ly come to utter
ruin for ever, from the almighty and most glorious arm of the Lord, as it
were from the highest heaven: according to that which we read, 2. These. chap.
2. 8. and Reu^. chapters 17. 18. 19. 20. For our Savior Christ The last
judgment.
shall to the same end at the last day, appear the second time from heaven, in
his divine glory and majesty to judge the whole world.

Nevertheless, so will the Lord proceed in the wasting and overthrowing of
Antichrist, and of the spiritual mystery of iniquity, that all true
Christians must still, even to the end of the world, prepare and arm
themselves to manifold afflictions and trials: which will continually be
incident to the Church of God, partly by the importunity of subtle and
contentious ^retikes, the spiteful brood and fry of Antichrist, and partly
by the cruelty of malicious and violent adversaries. For as there have been in
the Church false Prophets in former times, so there will be false teachers
still, who will privily bring in damnable here^es, 2. Pet. 2. 1. etc. And the
Apostle Paul tells us, that in the last days there shall come perilous
times, 2. Tim. 3. 1. 2. 3. And our Savior himself affirms, that it must of
necessity be, that many offenses and stumbling blocks will be cast before us,
by the devil and his instruments, to the end we might be hindered from making
straight steps in the way of the kingdom of God, so long as the world shall
continue, Matthew. 18. 7. and John 14. 27. and Chap. 15. 18. etc. and chapter 16. 1.
2. 3. 33. But blessed is he (says the same our blessed Savior) that shall not
be offended in me. Luke 7. 23. Let us therefore in the name of our good God,
arm our selves with patience, that we may endure all afflictions necessary,
and ^uerstride all needless offenses, after the example of all good and wise
servants of God; and so constantly hold out without offense, unto the day of
Christ Jesus, who assures us in truth, that he will come quickly, Revel. chap.
22. 20. Read also Matt. 24. 42. 44. and Luke chap. 12. 40. and 1. These. 5. 2.
etc. Heb. 10. 37. and 2. Pet. 3. 8. 9. 10. and Revel. 3. 3. and chap. 16. 15.
Wherefore let us pray in comfortable hope, and from a lively faith, with the
holy Apostle, Even so, come quickly, Amen. Come Lord Jesus in thy due time.

Amen. Amen.
A Catalogue of the holy Prophets of God, as well of those so called, whose
Prophesies are not expressedly recorded, as of the rest: according to the order
and course of the times wherein they prophesied, by a distribution of them into
certain Classes or companies. And first, of the Prophets among the Patriarchs
or chief Fathers before the Flood.
WE may well persuade The first classis or company of Prophets.
ourselves, that Adam the father of al mankind is to be accounted a Prophet;
seeing the Lord God from the beginning, committed to him the publishing of the
promise, and prophecy of the Messiah, the Prince of Prophets, and the very
ground of all prophecy, whatsoever was at any time to be revealed to the
Churches of God. And so also are we justly to account, of many other of the
Patriarchs of the old world; as namely of Sheth, in whom the loss of faithful
Abel was restored: (For God, says Euah, has appointed me another seed for
Abel, because Kain slew him, Genesis 4. 25.) and so we are to think of Enosh the
son of Sheth, in whose age men began in special manner to call upon the name
of the Lord; that is to say, to exercise the duties of Gods true worship more
publicly, and under some course of discipline, for the preserving of the
children of God, the posterity of Sheth, from the children of men, the profane
and licentious offspring of Kain: according to that which we read Genesis chap.
4. 26. compared with chap. 6. verse. 1. etc.

The same judgment are we to conceive of some other, if not of all the rest of
the Patriarchs descended of Sheth. Nevertheless, seeing the present purpose
is to gather together those only, which more principally then the rest, are
expressly noted to be endued with a special gift of prophecy; either for
excellency of doctrine, in opening the mystery of salvation, or moreover and
beside that, have had the grace of foretelling such things to come, which tend
to the same scope and end. We will therefore begin with Henoch, who was the
seventh generation from Adam, borne no longer then 622 years after that the
world was created. This Henoch, though so near the beginning of the world, yet
he prophesied of the last judgment, which shall be at the time of the second
appearance of our Savior Christ in glory, at the end of the world; as we
read, Jude, verses 14, 15. Enoch also (says Jude) the seventh from Adam
prophesied saying: Behold, the Lord comes with thousands of his Saints, to
give judgment upon all men, and to rebuke all the vugodly among them, of all
their wicked deeds.

The second chief Prophet of the old world (I mean as touching those, whose
prophesies are expressed) was Noah, the ninth generation from Adam; one, yea
the principal of those eight persons, who were saved, when the whole world
beside (for the wickedness thereof) was utterly drowned. This Noah, the eighth
person (one of that small number which were saved) a Preacher of
righteousness, as the Apostle Peter calls him, in his second epistle, chap.
2. verse. 5. he prophesied of this first destruction of the world by water an
hundredth and twenty years before it came to pass Genesis chap. 6. verse. 9. etc.
This huge and terrible judgment of God, fell upon the world in the year which
was after the creation thereof 1656. Noah prophesied also that the posterity of
Shem his second son, should be a people peculiar to God, above any other
branch or line of his posterity, until the Messiah should come. The
accomplishment of which prophecy, began about four hundredth years after to
be in singular gracious manner manifested to Abraham, and so forth, in the
generations from him succeeding. He prophesied likewise of the calling of the
Gentiles; that is, of the rest of the nations, which were to descend from his
other two sons, after that Christ should appear: but more specially of those
nations which should come of Iapheth his eldest son: in so much as Ham his
youngest son, was by the spirit of Prophecy accursed of God, according to
that occasion which he himself by his ungracious fact, gave unto his father to
denounce the same, Genesis chap. 9. 25. 26. 27. The posterity of Iapheth were the
Persians and Grecians, and the people of these parts of the world, the which we
our selves and the neighbor nations do inhabit, Romans, Italians, Germans,
etc. Genesis chap. 10. 2. etc. The fulfilling of which prophecy, has continued
from the time of the ascension of our Savior Christ; shortly after the which
time, even within a few days, the Gospel was preached to the foresaid
posterity of Iapheth for the most part, as is evident, Act. 2. 9. 10. 11. to
Parthians and Medes and Elamites, etc. though some of Egypt, etc. (who were of
the posterity of Ham) be rehearsed there. Read Genesis 10. 6. etc. And that of
the posterity of Ham some were to be called also to the faith of the Gospel,
read Psalm. 87. and Isai. chap. 19. verses 18. etc. 23. 24. 25. and Zach. chap.
14. 16.

Prophets, such as were Patriarchs, or chief Fathers of the people of God,
since the flood to the time of the Judges, which was the space of more then 700
years.
ABraham was in his time a Prophet of the The second classis or company of
Prophets.
Lord; for so God himself testifies of him, Genesis 20. 7. where he speaks thus
to Abimelech king of Gerar: Deliver the man his wise again, for he is a
Prophet, and he shall pray for thee, etc.

Isaak prophesied that Esau, though he was his eldest son, should serve
Iaakob the yoonger brother: to the end it might appear, that the interest and
right of the spiritual blessing and inheritance, comes not by nature, but of
free mercy and grace, Genesis chap. 27. 40. compared with Romans 9. verse. 6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

Iaakob prophesied of the several blessings, which he knew that God would a
long time after his death, bestow upon the twelve tribes or kindreds, which
were to be the posterity of the twelve Patriarchs, his children. He
prophesied also, that the Messiah should come of the tribe of Judah. Genesis 49.

Joseph foretold the dearth of seven years, which God would send upon the
world, after seven former years of plenty immediately forerunning: and
therefore he may well stand among the Prophets, as one in that number whereof
the Lord speaks, saying: Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no
harm. Psalm. 105. 15.

Moses was a Prophet, most famous and mighty both in word and in deed, all the
time of his ministry and service to God, touching the deliverance of his
people out of the bondage of Egypt; and also in respect of his government
afterward, Deuteronomy. chapter 18. verse. 18. and chap. 34. 10, 11, 12. and Act. 7. 22.
Read also for a proof of the excellent spirit of prophecy which was in him,
the holy Songs and Psalms which he has left in writing, Exodus chap. 15. and
Deuteronomy. 31. 22 and chapter 32. and Psalm. 90. which according to the title thereof, is
a Psalm which Moses the man of God did indite.

Miriam also the sister of Moses, was a Prophetess in the same time that Moses
lived. Exo. 15. 20.

Moreover, in his days, God gave the spirit of prophecy for a certain
season, to seventy Ancients of Israel, al at one time: of the which number
Eldad and Medad had the same their extraordinary gift continued longer unto
them then had the rest, Numb. chap. 11. ver. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29.

Balaam (though otherwise of a wicked mind, even such a one as loved the wages
of unrighteousness, according to that mark, whereby the Apostle Peter
brandeth him, 2. ep. 2. 15.) yet he was guided by the Spirit of God, to utter a
true and holy prophecy, concerning the happy estate of Israel above all other
people, under the most gracious protection and blessing of God; and namely for
that the Messiah, as it were a most bright star, should arise from among
them, etc. Numb. chap. 23. and chap. 24. Wherefore, (albeit he was a wicked
man) yet in so much as God used him as his instrument, enlightened for the time,
to give forth this so holy a prophecy; we may not altogether unfitly, rehearse
him in this respect among the holy Prophets of God.

Consider here, whether Heman and Ethan the Ezrahites, who wrote the 88. and
the 89. Psalms, were before Moses in time, as their Psalms stand in order of
number before his, in the book of the Psalms. Verily, if it may be affirmed,
as some learned men do judge, and as it is very lik^, that they were the same,
of whom mention is made both 1. King. chap. 4. verse. 30. and also 1. Chron.
chap. 2. verse. 6. that is to say, if they were the sons of Zarah, the near
posterity of Judah by Thamar, of whom we read Genes. chap. 38. verse. 30. then
also it is very likely, that they were before Moses; or at least his equalles
in time, or shortly after him. And so consequently their Psalms specially that
of Ethan, which is the 89. Psalm; it must needs from so ancient a time, be to
be esteemed an admirable prophesy concerning David's anointing to the kingdom
by Samuel, and his prosperous success in obteining of the same 300 years at
the least, before David was born: (like as king Josiah was by name prophesied
of, as touching that which he should do, above 300 years before his birth, as
we are afterward more exactly to observe) and also concerning the afflictions
of the Church bewailed therein, even such afflictions as fell upon it in the
captivity of Babylon, which fell out as long a time after that King David was
dead. But grant that they were that Heman and Ethan which are recorded, 1.
Chron. 6. 33. and verse. 44. likewise chap. 25. ver. 4, 5, 6. concerning Heman,
both which were yet of another tribe (that is of Leui) when those named, cap.
2. are of Judah, as has been already showed: but grant (I say) that they were
those who lived not only in K. David's time, as being his Seets or Prophets
(which yet is only said of Heman, 1. Chron. 25. 5. and that also in respect of
his singing of Prophetical Psalms such as king, David indicted and not because
himself did prophecy.) Grant notwithstanding (I say again) that they lived
not only in king David's time, but also in king Salomons days, yea that they
suruiued him, and saw also (as some think) that miserable havoc, which
Shishak king of Egypt made in the cities of Judah, and in the house of God, the
treasures whereof he carried away, etc. as we read, 2 Chronicles. chapter 12. in the
reign of Rehoboam, after that Solomon was dead. Yet Ethans Psalm must needs
be taken for a prophetical instruction touching a great part of it, as being
fitted to be a monument for the direction of the Church, how to comfort it
self and to bemone the own calamity, in the most doleful and distressed
estate, which the Prophet by the Spirit of God foresaw, that it should
afterward fall into. So then, these two were endued with a notable gift of
prophecy, although it be not granted that they were so ancient, as that they
should be reckoned in this second classis or company of Prophets. Let us
proceed to the third company.

Prophets, such as were in the time of the Judges, and so forth to the
beginning of the reign of the Kings.
DEborah was a Prophetess about 80 years The third classis or company of
Prophets.
after the death of Joshua. Judges, chap. 4. 4. At that time Deborah a
Prophetess, the wife of Lapidoth judged Israel. Read her excellent song as it
follows in the fifth chapter.

In the second chapter of the first book of Samuel, verse. 27. etc. A Prophet is
sent to Eli to prophecy against him, his children, and posterity, which was
partly fulfilled, chap. 4. read also 1. Kin. chap. 2. 27.

All Israel from Dan to Beersheba knew that in the days of Eli, faithful
Samuel was the Lords Prophet. 1. Sam. 3. 20. He prophesied first against the
sons and posterity of Eli, verses 11, 12, 13, etc. according to the prophecy
of the man of God even now mentioned, unless rather we understand that to be
written concerning Samuel himself. See Tremelius and Iunius in their
annotations upon that place. Read also Act. 3. 22.

Neither must Hannah the mother of Samuel, be forgotten, when we speak of such
women, as God graced with his excellent gift of Prophecy: as her prayer and
thanksgiving gives us to understand, from the beginning of the second chapter
of the first book of Samuel. And the rather will we judge so, if we compare her
speech with the thanksgiving of the virgin Marie: for we shall perceive, that
Hannah was enlightened to have a respect unto Christ in her magnificent
description of the most mighty power of God, joined with his most rich and
tender mercy, which also is the argument of the virgin Mary's Magnificat.

In the time that Samuel anointed Saul to be ^ing of Israel, mention is made
of a company of Prophets which prophesied: and that Saul himself a little
while after he was anointed, prophesied among them, 1. Sam. chap. 10. 1, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. This prophesying no doubt, was an excellent kind of
uttering the excellent things of Gods spiritual kingdom, from the inlightening
of the Spirit of God, according to the former grounds and principles of
prophecy, contained in the books of Moses, which were read and studied among
the people of God. Of this kind of prophesying, we read again in the same
first book of Samuel, chap. 19. verses. 18, 19. etc. where it is written, that
at Naioth in Ra^ah there was a company of Prophets prophesying, and Samuel
standing as one appointed over them. And further, that the messengers which
Saul sent to apprehend David, were for the time, so heavenly affected with
that which they hard, that they also brake forth to the magnifying of the name
of God, for the same things which he revealed to the^. This was done thrice by
three several companies of messengers, the one sent after the other. Last of
all, Saul himself went to Rama, with an evil purpose against David; but the
Spirit of God came upon him also, so that he, laying aside his former mind, as
well as his warlike weeds; he prophesied all that day, and all that night.
Here we may see the most gracious and mighty power of the spirit of Prophecy,
to affect and alter the minds of men, and to fill the^ with spiritual joy;
although we cannot recke^ all those for holy Prophets of God, who are thus
suddenly affected with the spirit of Prophecy. Neuerlesse, by occasion hereof,
and specially because Saul for a time, was as a Prophet among the Prophets;
let us come to that company of true Prophets, whereof we are to make
rehearsal, from the beginning of the reign of the kings of Judah and Israel.

Prophets, such as were from the beginning of the reign of the kings of Judah
and Israel, the which we are to consider of, under many companies. But first
concerning some of the Kings themselves.
KIng David, whom the Prophet Samuel, at The fourth Classis o^ ^o^pany of
Prophets.
the commandment of God, anointed to be king over Israel next after Saul; he
was himself a most excellent Prophet of God. So it is testified of him, Act.
2. 30. etc. Seeing he was a Prophet (says the Apostle Peter) and knew before
that God had sworn, etc. he prophesied of the resurrection of Christ, etc.
yea, he prophesied of the whole person and office of our Savior Christ,
touching every degree, both of his humiliation, and also of his exaltation, as
many of his Psalms do plentifully declare. Read Psalm. 2. Psalm. 16. Psalm. 22.
Psalm. 45. Psalm. 68. Psalm. 110. and many other. In K. David's reign was the
Prophet Nathan, 2. Sam. 7. 2. etc. and chapter 12. And the prophet G^d, who was
called David's Seer, 2. Sam. 24. 11. and 2. Chron. 29. 25.

King Solomon was also a holy Prophet, as his books, the Proverbs,
Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Songs do excellently declare. In the thirtith
chap. of his Proverbs, the prophecy of Agur concerning Christ, under the
names of Ithiel and Veal is recorded. It seems that his time was much about
Salomons reign. At the least his doctrine being of like excellency with
Salomons, and of like form of teaching, it was therefore inserted and joined
with his Proverbs. And seeing the next chapter, which is the last of the
Proverbs, contains a like notable doctrine, uttered by queen Bathsheba the
mother of King Solomon; we cannot but account it a royal monument of her
Princely grace, in the roll of Princely Prophets. And so will we go forward,
to overtake the troops of those, which are marched band after band before us.

Prophets, such as God sent specially to Judah, and to the Kings thereof, after
that the ten tribes were departed from them.
IN the reign of Rehoboam, the son of king The fifth Classis or company of
Prophets.
Solomon, was Shemaiah the prophet, and also the prophet Iddo, mentioned 2.
Chron. 12. 15. They wrote certain books of public acts and genealogies.

In the reign of Asa, Azariah the son of Obed prophesied to the encouraging
of king Asa, and of all Judah and Benjamin, to continue faithful to the Lord;
he assuring them, that then the Lord would be with them, to defend them against
all their enemies, 2. Chron. 15. 1. etc. 8. But chap. 16. 7. etc. Hanan^ the
prophet is sent of God, to reprove the same king Asa, for making a covenant of
league and truce with the king of Aram.

In the reign of king Iehoshaphat, prophesied Iehaziel the son of Zechariah,
to encourage Iehoshaphat and the people of Judah, in hope of their victory
against those mighty armies of the Ammonites and Moabites, and of mout Seir,
which came out against the^, 2. Chro. chap. 20. ver. 1, 10, 14, etc. But in the
end of the same twentieth chap. Eliezer the son of Dodeuah, of Maresha, he
prophesied to the reproof of Iehoshaphat, because he had joined himself with
Ahaziah, a wicked king of Israel: the prophet plainly telling Iehoshaphat, that
the Lord would therefore surely break his ships, which he had made and
prepared to go to Tarshish.

In the reign of king Ioash, Zechariah the fonne of Iehoiada the priest, as
also other Prophets of God, prophesied against the declining of the king and
the people, after the death of Iehoiada; but they most outragiously stoned
Zechariah to death, in the court of the Lords house, 2. Chron. 24. 19, 20, 21,
22. and Matthew. chap. 23. 34. 35.

In the reign of king Ahaz, prophesied Oded a prophet of the Lord, to the
reproof of the cruelty of Israel, at that time committed against Judah, 2.
Chron. 28. 9. etc.

The prophet Isaiah prophesied in the reign of many kings; that is to say, in
the days of Vzziah, Iotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah, chap. 1. 1. He
prophesied so plainly of Christ; of his Deity, of his humanity, that he
should be borne of a virgin, etc. finally, that he should die for the sins of
his people, and make a conquest over all their enemies, for their perfect
deliverance, etc. that he may not unfitly be called an Evangelical Prophet. He
continued prophesiing by the space of about threescore years.

About the time that Isaiah began to prophecy, it is supposed that Joel
uttered his prophecy, against Jerusalem and Judah, for the same their great
and grievous sins, against the which Isaiah cries out in the beginning of
his Prophecy, Hear o ye heavens, etc. He foretold the gifts of the holy
Ghost, which our Savior Christ should bestow upon his Church, chap. 2. 28, 29.
The which how it has been fulfilled, read Act. 2. 14, 15, 16, etc. and in many
other places of that book.

The Prophet Jeremiah, prophesied in the reign of king Josiah, from the
thirteenth year of his reign, to the end of the eleventh year of Zedekiah,
in the fifth month of the second captivity, Ier. 1. 2. 3. So he prophesied at
the least 41 years, if not something more. He prophesied of our Savior
Christ, that he should be the righteousness and salvation of his people. He
foretold and constantly affirmed against many false Prophets, the seventy
years captivity of Judah, under the king of Babel for a punishment of their
sins.

Zephaniah also prophesied in the reign of king Josiah; but continued not so
long as Ieremia did, chap. 1. 1. He earnestly calls for the repentance of the
people, and foretells the calling of the Gentiles, which should come to pass
in the days of the Gospel, chap. 3.

Moreover, in the reign of Josiah, was Huldah that excellent Prophetess, to
whom Josiah sent for counsel and comfort: of whom we read 2. King. 22. 14.

The Prophet Ezekiel, prophesied from the fifth year of the first captivity,
which began at the fourth year of Iehoiakim, chap. 1. verse. 1. 2. he had many
notable visions, and labored mightily with the people, both by doctrine and
example; that they might humble themselves under the hand of God, and profit
by so great a visitation and punishment, as their captivity was, which most
justly fell upon them for their grievous sins. He prophesied also many
notable things concerning the kingdom of Christ to come.

In the reign of Iehoiakim also prophesied Urijah, according to the words of
Jeremiah: for the which cause Iehoiakim put him to death. Read Ierem. chap.
26. 20, 21, 22, 23.

Daniel being carried into captivity, with the first, in his young years, was
shortly after endued with a singular gift of prophecy, and prophesied in the
captivity, even to the end of the 70 years thereof, chap. 1. 3. 6. and chap.
9. 1, 2, etc. He interpreted the dreams and visions of Nebuchadnezzar and
Belshazzar. He himself saw many holy visions, according to the which he
foretold the alterations of states and kingdoms, which should fall out in the
world, until the coming of Christ in the flesh. He prophesied also of the
very time of Christ his death, and of that horrible destruction which was to
come upon Jerusalem, by the Romans, as a just vengeance upon the Jews, for
abusing their power, to crucify the Lord of life and glory, which was as the
filling up of the measure of all their other sins, and rebellions against the
Lord their God, Dan. chap. 2. and chap. 4. and chap. 7. etc.

Haggai and Zechariah, two very notable prophets, they prophesied to the
people of Judah, after their return out of captivity, to stir them up to the
building of the Temple, after that it had for too long a time, been
ouer-carelesly neglected of them; while in the mean season, they were
double-diligent in the garnishing of their own houses. Read Ezra chap. 5. 1,
2. and Hag. chapter 1. 1. etc. and Zech. chap. 1. 1. etc.

Ezra himself may worthily be reckened of us, among the excellent and most
holy and wise Prophets of God, as the books of holy Scripture which he wrote,
do evidently declare. And these were the Prophets, which God of his great
mercy and goodness, sent more specially to Judah and the kings thereof, after
that the ten tribes were departed from them.

Prophets which the Lord sent to the ten tribes of Israel, and to the Kings
thereof, after that they were departed from the tribe of Judah.
WE may not unfitly begin this company ^he sixth ^assis or ^pany of ^rophets.
of holy Prophets, with Ahijah the Shilonite, of whom we read, 1. King. chap.
11. 29. etc. He is that Prophet whom the Lord sent to prophecy unto Jeroboam
the son of Nebat, that it was the purpose of God to rend the kingdom out of
the hands of Solomon; and to make him king over ten tribes of Israel. This
was the judgment of God against the sin of Solomon and of the people, in his
latter time, for that they forsook the Lord, and worshipped the idols of the
heathen, as it follows in the same eleventh chapter verse. 33. The
accomplishment of which prophecy, read in the very next chapter, even shortly
after the Prophecy was uttered to Jeroboam, read chap. 12. ver. 15. etc.

In the reign of this Jeroboam, in so much as he, contrary to the will and
commandment of God, set up idolattie to serve his own wicked devise and
policy, for the preventing of the pebples revolt, which he suspitiously
scared: the Lord therefore sent a Prophere out of Judah, unto Bethel in Israel,
the chief place of his new erected idolatry, even at such time as he himself
was dedicating the altar which he had made, chap. 12. 26. etc. 33. And the
Prophet prophesying against his idolatry, tells Jeroboam, standing by his
altar to offer incense, that a child should be borne to the house of David,
Josiah by name, who should break down his altar, and destroy the Priests of
his high places, chapter 13. 1. etc. The accomplishment whereof read 2. King. chapter
23. 15, etc. 20. This Prophecy did the Prophet give forth about three hundredth
and thirty years before king Josiah was borne. This Prophet was he, who
harkening to the lie of that old Prophet of Bethel, was for his transgressing
of Gods commandment, in that he eat and drank in the place, whereof God had
said unto him, Thou shall neither eat nor drink: he was therefore killed in the
way, by a Lion which met him. Nevertheless, as it may seem, for a monument of
Gods mercy in forgiving the sin of this Prophet, he restrained the Lion from
devouring his body; as it is recorded in the same 13. chapter. Read also 2.
King. 23. 17. 18.

In the reign of the same Jeroboam, the ancient Prophet Ahijah of Shilo, who
at the beginning told Jeroboam, that he should be king over the ten tribes of
Israel; he is now afterward, toward the end of his wicked and idolatrous reign
(even then when Ahijah could not see, through the decay of his sight by reason
of age) the minister of God, to prophecy against Jeroboam and his posterity,
1. King. chap. 14. 2. 4. etc. 18. This was fulfilled after that Nadab the son
of Jeroboam had reigned two years. For Baasha conspired against Nadab, and
slew him first, and the^ also he smote all the house of Jeroboam, according to
the word of the Lord, which he spoke by his servant Ahijah the Shilonite. So we
read chap. 15. verse. 27. 29.

In the days of king Baasha, who began his reign over Israel, in the third
year of Asa king of Judah; Iehu the son of Hanani prophesied against Baasha,
like as the former two Prophets had prophesied against Jeroboam, 1. King. 16.
1. etc.

In the days of Ahab, who began his reign over Israel, in the 38. year of
Asa king of Judah, prophesied Elijah that mighty Prophet of the Lord, against
Ahab and his posterity. 1. King. 17. etc. He reduced the people of Israel to
the acknowledgement of the true God of Israel. He prophesied likewise, by
writing against Iehoram the son of Iehoshaphat, who left the good ways wherein
his father had walked, and followed the wicked ways of the kings of Israel.
For as the holy Story says, he had the daughter of Ahab to wife; and he
wrought evil in the eyes of the Lord, and compelled Judah so to do. Wherefore
the Lord by his Prophet Elijah, sent a grievous prophecy, threatening
fearful diseases and a horrible death against him; which also took effect,
as we read 2. Chron. 21.

Michaiah also, the son of Imlah, prophesied against wicked king Ahab, 1.
King. 22. And before him, another Prophet, whose name is not expressed, chap.
20. 41, 42. But verses 13. 14 22. and verses 28, 29. God sent a Prophet to
prophecy unto him his double victory over the great army of the Aramites.

In the reign of Iehoram the son of Ahab. and so forth unto the reign of
Ioash the son of Iehu, prophesied Elisha the prophet, who succeeded Elijah in
Israel, 2. King. chap. 3. etc. and chapter 13. verse. 14. etc. But before Elisha had
received of the Spirit of Elijah; the children of the Prophets, both they of
Bethel, and other which were at Jericho, prophesied that God would in
extraordinary manner take away Elishaes master, that is Eljiah from him. 2.
King. chap. 2. 3. 5.

In the reign of Jeroboam the son of Ioash prophesied Jonah the son of
Amittai, who was of Gath Hepher, 2. King. 14. 25. This was the same Jonah, whom
the Lord sent about the mid dle time of the reign of Jeroboam, to prophecy
against Nineueh: as we shall see further anon.

Prophets, which prophesied more jointly, both concerning Judah, and also
concerning Israel, after their separation: yea, and some of the^, even after
the captiuities of either of them. The se^ classis o^ company Proph^

HOsea prophesied, in the reign of the same kings of Judah, when Isaiah
prophesied; to wit, in the days of Vzziah, Iotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, with
whom also are mentioned, the days of Jeroboam the son of Ioash king of
Israel, chap. 1. 1. of his prophecy; to the end that Israel might the rather
be admonished, that his Prophecy belonged to them, as ^el as it did unto
Judah, for the reproof of their sins, and for the comfort of either of them,
if they would repent, and lay hold of the promises of the gospel, which he by
the spirit of prophecy, published, as belonging to them both.

In the reign of the same Vzziah king of Judah, and in the the reign of
Jeroboam the son of Ioash king of Israel, two years before the earthquake;
which was not long after the beginning of the reign of Vzziah; the Prophet
Amos prophesied, concerning Judah and Israel, though chiefly and for the most
part concerning Israel, chap. 1. 1. etc. He prophesied particularly against
Amaziah, that malignant and proud priest of Bethel, chap. 7. He prophesied also
of the destruction of Jerusalem and of the captivity, and restoring of the
people of Judah and Israel. Finally, he prophesied of the calling both of the
Jews and Gentiles, saying: God will raise up the tabernacle of David, etc. chapter
9. 1, etc. 11. For the performance of which Prophecy, read the testimony of
the Apostle James Act. chap. 15. verses 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Simeon has
declared, how God did first visit the Gentiles, to take of them a people to
his name. And to this agree the words of the Prophet, as it is written: After
this I will return and build again the tabernacle of David, which is fallen
down, etc. that the residue of men might seek after the Lord, and all the
Gentiles upon whom my name is called, says the Lord which does all these
things. And the Apostle adds, From the beginning of the world God knows all
his works.

In the reign of Iotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah kings of Judah, prophesied the
Prophet Micah, the Morashite, concerning Samaria and Jerusalem, chap. 1. 1. He
plainly foretold the place where our Savior Christ should be borne, and that
his kingdom shall be over all and for ever chap. 5. 1, 2, etc.

Malachi, the last of the Prophets of the old testament; he prophesied after
that the Temple and city of Jerusalem were reedified by Zerubbabel and Ieshua,
and by the great help of Ezra and Nehemiah: and after that the people had
exceedingly corrupted, both the worship of God, and also their own lives and
conuersations, as the Prophecy it self does declare. He foretold the coming
of our Savior Christ into his Temple, and of the coming of John Baptist
before him, under the name, and by the mighty Spirit of Elijah, that great
Prophet of God: who (as the Prophet Isaiah had prophesied many years
before, chap. 40. verse 3, etc.) was a crier in the wilderness to call forth
the people to come out to him; but did not go to the Temple, as Malachie
prophesied, that our Savior Christ should. Read the third chapter of his
Prophecy, verses 1, 2, 3, 4. and chap. 4. 1. etc. And that his Prophecy
concerned not only Judah, but also all the rest of the scattered tribes of
Israel, it may appear both by the words of the beginning of his Prophecy, chapter
1. ver^. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and chap. 2. 11. and also the same may be euiden^ from
the conclusion, chapter 4 verses 4, 5, and 6.

Prophets, which prophesied more sp^ially concerning foreign nations.
Jonah was in special manner sent of God to ^e eighth ^is or ^panie (...).
prophecy against Nineueh, that great and chief city of the Assyrians; by
whose Prophecy the city was moved to repentance. The time when he prophesied
was noted before.

The Prophet Nahum also prophesied against Nineueh; but after that time,
wherein Jonah prophesied; and when they had left off to do the works of their
former repentance.

Obadiah prophesied against Edome: yea, and generally against all nations, the
enemies of Gods Church; that they should drink of the cup of Gods wrath.

Habakk^k ^rophesied against the Chaldeans, when their hearts were lifted up,
by their victories against the Assyrians; and when their sins were grown up
near to the full. But he prophesies salvation to all the faithful, whosoever
shall believe in the name of Christ. For the just (as he says) shall live by
his faith, chap. 2. 4. Read also his prophetical prayer in the third chapter.

Prophets of the new Testament.
THe Prophecy of the new Testament, is indeed, The last classis or company of
Prophets.
rather a most clear, lightsome, and full interpretation of all former
Prophesies of the old Testament, then any prediction or foretelling of things
to come, except the rising and fall of Antichrist: yet because even the things
heretofore foretold, are more clearly and fully revealed by the brightness of
the Gospel; therefore in either respect, both of interpretation, and prediction,
the new Testament must be allowed to have the honor of Prophets, as well as
the old.

The Prophets therefore in the new Testament, were first of all, those which
prophesied immediately before, and at the birth of our Savior Christ.
Immediately before, first Elizabeth conceived with John the Baptist, Luke 1. 41,
42, 43, 44, 45. And then the Virgin Marie, conceived with our Savior Christ,
by the holy Ghost: in the same chapter, verses, 46, 47, etc. 55. Thus was the
conception of our Savior honored by the spirit of Prophecy. And it pleased
God to honor women, as it were with the first fruits of this grace of the
Gospel in their hearts, like as it pleased him to use them as his honorable
instruments, to serve for the manifestation of Christ himself, the matter and
argument of the whole mystery of the Gospel. Thirdly Zachary; whom unbelief
bereaved of the honor, to be the first: he prophesied both of the high office
of John, and of the divine person of our Savior Christ at the birth of John,
in the same chap. verse. 67, etc. to the end of the chap.

The Prophets which prophesied at the birth of Christ (that we may omit the
Angels, whom we cannot properly call Prophets, though at this time they did
prophecy; that is, in most excellent wise lay forth the singular causes of
joy, which came to the world, by the birth of a Savior, even Christ the Lord)
let us come to the Shepherds, to whom the Angels appeared, to certify them of
the birth of Christ, whom we may more boldly call by the name of Prophets,
seeing no doubt after they had seen Christ, they were for the time endued with
an excellent spirit of Prophecy, to publish abroad that which was told them of
that child, even to the wonderment of all that heard them. Luke chap. 2. 16,
17, 18. Such were the Prophets more immediately before, and at the birth of our
Savior Christ.

Now secondly, touching those that prophesied somewhat longer after the birth
of our Savior: we will not make any great scruple to lend the name of
Prophets to the Magi or Sages and wise men, which came out of the East, to
worship our Savior, shortly after his birth: For if they had not been
enlightened by the spirit of Prophecy in some measure, they could never have
been sufficiently encouraged by the star, to have gone so great a journey to
seek Christ, as they did; or boldened enough, in a strange nation to inquire
of him so undoubtedly, as they did, in that they asked; Where is the king of
the Jews which is borne? For we have seen his star in the East, and we are
come to worship him, Mat. 2. 2. And much less, after they had found him in
poor and contemptible estate, would they have offered their gifts or presents,
as testimonies of their spiritual homage; if they had not bin confirmed in
their persuasion, by the holy spirit of God. verse. 10. 11. After these Magi,
prophesied Simeon, at the presentation of our Savior Christ in the Temple, Luke
2. 25. etc. 35. And immediately after Simeon, Anna, a very ancient
Prophetess, uttered her prophecy, confessing Christ, so acknowledged of
Simeon, to be in truth the Lord. verses 36, 37, 38. Thus, even at the beginning
of the appearance of our Savior, he was acknowledged by the Spirit of
prophecy.

When the time came that he should be more fully manifested to all Israel,
which was, when he was about thirty years of age. Luke 3. 23: John the
Baptist being a Prophet, yea greater then a Prophet, Luke 7. 26. He did not
only point Christ out personally, when he showed himself; but he preached
assuredly, that he should show himself before he had seen him: and therefore
baptized the people into his name, who should shortly show himself to be the
Savior, among them.

As touching our Savior himself, we know that he was the Prince of Prophets,
most mighty in word and deed, to whom all the Prophets give witness: and whom
God promised to raise up, as one, of whom Moses was but a certain figure and
type, Luke chap. 24. verse 19. and verses 25, 26. 27. Read also Deuteronomy. chap. 18.
15. Act. 3. 22. 23. 24. and chap. 10. 38. 43. He has revealed most clearly
the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, even from the bosom and counsel of
the Father. Isai. chap. 9. 6. John. 1. 18. By his Spirit all the former
Prophets prophesied according to that which is written concerning Noah. 1.
Pet. 3. 18, 19, 20. He foretold the destruction of Jerusalem, which accordingly
came to pass: as also, that many Antichrists should rise up, as since they
have done, and namely in the succession of the Antichrist of Rome: and finally,
that he will come again at the last day, to judge the world: which shall as
certainly be performed in due time by him, as any thing which he has
foretold, is already accomplished, in the season thereof.

Finally, after the ascension of our Savior Christ up into heaven; from the
which time the gifts of the holy Ghost were abundantly poured down upon the
Church: many were furnished with the gift of Prophecy: for so we read Ephesians.
4. 11. He gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, etc. See the proof of
it, Act. chap. 11. 27, 28. In those days came Prophets from Jerusalem to
Antiochia. Of the which, one named Agabus, foretold the great famine, which
came upon all the world under Claudius the Emperor. The same Agabus foretold
the afflictions of Paul, Act. 21. 10. 11. And in the same chapter verse. 8. 9.
Saint Luke reports, that Philip the Evangelist had four daughters which did
prophecy. Read again chap. 19. 6. Paul laid his hands on cercertaine
Disciples of Ephesus, and they spoke with tongues and prophesied.

The Apostle Paul himself, by the spirit of prophecy, foretold the time of
the rising of Antichrist; and that he should fall again, 2. These. chap. 2. So
does the Apostle John in the book of the Revelation, chap. 17. where also, he
notes out the place and seat of Antichrist, by such a descrption of it, as
agrees only to Rome. Yea in that book he describes very lively the
afflictions of the Church, such as should fall upon it, even to the end of the
world. And last of all, how glorious the estate thereof shall be thenceforth,
when Christ shall once have perfected the marriage betwixt himself and it. And
thus the whole Prophecy of the holy Scriptures is with that prophetical book
sealed and shut up. Revel. chap. 22. 18. 19. 20. 21.

The Conclusion.
THis constant spirit of Prophecy, as it were the lode-starre or haruenger of
time; and the certain performance of all things in their proper seasons, even
as they were foretold; as well the more particular, as the more general
Prophesies, and that also concerning all foreign and heathen nations, as well
as concerning Judah and Israel: according as holymen of God spoke, not of
private motion, but as they were moved and guided by the holy Ghost, as the
Apostle Peter testifies, 2. ep. chapter 1. 20, 21. (Inso much as we may say
generally, according to that we read, Amos 3. 7. Surely the Lord has done
nothing but he has revealed his secret to his servants the Prophets.) And
chiefly the constant foretelling and performance of al things concerning Christ
Jesus our Lord, and his kingdom; concerning every part of his humiliation, and
the whole glory which was to follow, according as the Prophets are said to
have searched into these things 1. Pet. 1. 10. 11. This constant and certain
spirit of Prophecy (I say) given to the Church, from time to time, for the
clearing and confirming of that foundation of all prophecy, which God himself
had laid from the beginning, as was said before, and which we read of Genesis 3.
15. etc. in that he has by his own voice published, that the seed of the
woman should break the serpents head: according also to that which is written,
that God is the father of Prophets, and that his Spirit is the Spirit of
prophecy, 1. Sam. 10. 5, 6, 10, 11, 12. and chap. 19. 20. etc. It is an
infallible confirmation of the truth of our Christian religion, and of the
certainty of Gods determinate counsel, and most vigilant providence in the
continual ordering and governing of his Church, and all the holy affairs and
ordinances given unto it, from the beginning to the end; according to that
which the Lord himself says, Isai 46. 9. 10. Remember the former things of
old: for I am God and there is no other God, and there is no king like me. Who
declares the last thing from the beginning: and from of old, the things that
were not done, saying: My counsel shall stand, and I will do whatsoever I
will. And as the Apostle James says, as was alleged before, Act. 15. 18.
From the beginning of the world God knows all his works: that is to say, he
so knows them, that he has a care to accomplish and perform them, every
one in the time and season thereof, according to his own counsel and
appointment with himself.

And now further, let us diligently observe, that the certainty of al things
already accomplished, according to the prophesies formerly given forth of them,
ought to be a like undoubted confirmation of our faith, in the assured
expectation of all things foretold, whatsoever the holy scriptures certify us
to be yet unfulfilled. Such as are the full consumption and abolishment of
Antichrist, by the brightness of the Lords coming 2. These. 2. 8. That the
Lord will from time to time call home his full number, both of the lost Jews,
and also of the Gentiles to the faith and salvation of Christ, even to the end
of the world Romans 11. 25. etc. and Matthew. 24. 31. That there shall be a general
resurrection of the dead; and a general judgment upon all men, either to
perpetual woe and misery, or to eternal happiness and glory, Mat. 25. 31.

The use of which our faith and persuasion, and of the whole ground and
warrantise thereof, ought finally, and for our full conclusion, to be this; that
we being before hand made privy to all these holy secrets of God, and being in
undoubted expectation of the fulfilling of the^, and chiefly of the coming of
our Savior Christ to judgment; should according to the most holy instruction
of the Gospel, both learn and practice more and more to deny all ungodliness
and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, and justly, and godly in this present
world. Tit. 12. 1. 12. etc. God of his infinite mercy vouchsafe us his grace
so to do, even for the same our Lord Jesus Christ's sake.

Amen.
The few errata escaped in some books of this Impression.
To the Reader, lin. 11. In for It.

Page 20. lin. penult. in, is wanting.

Page 36. lin. vlt. adout, for about.

Page 38. Titus and Vespasian, by a misplacing of the words, for Vespasian and
Titus.


