THE ADVICE OF A SON, NOW PROFESSING THE RELIGION ESTABLISHED IN the present
Church of England, to his dear Mother, yet a Roman Catholic.

AC: OX



AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes, Printer to the Vni versitie. 1616.

THE ADVICE OF A SON UNTO HIS MOTHER.
SEeing it has pleased God to appoint you the mean of my being in the world,
by whose holy ordinance you may justly challenge, as of your right from me, all
sincere affection, duty, and observation; and besides the bond of Nature, my
obligacion being much increased by your most loving, and continued care of me,
even from my childhood, it is now my part (and that under peril of a curse, if
I neglect it) by all means I may to yield comforts to your years, and from my
heart and soul to wish, that when your temporary days on earth shall end, you
may by the mercy of God take possession of the eternal joys of heaven. I know
(and have witnesses of this, so many as have known you) that your intentions
have ever aimed at this mark, your life and actions have been a rare pattern
to your sex, always well declaring your devotion and zeal to the service of
God: The which being the principal end of our creation (howsoever the
generality now in this state of corruption, tra^sported with the cares, the
pleasures, and enticements of this life, lay it not to the heart) it is without
question a blessing incomparable (whereof none can judge, but they that feel
it) when God of his mere mercy by his holy Spirit, shall move the heart of a
sinful creature, who before delighted only in the way of his own destruction,
sincerely to seek and serve him: for this we may build upon, as a truth that
must admit no question, that never any shall have their place in heaven, whose
hearts by grace have not been truly moved to this duty here on earth. Since
then the time of this life is the moment whereupon depends etermitie of weal
or woe, it behooveth every Christian that desires salvation, seriously to
consider of the way he walks in; especially seeing we learn from our Lord and
Master Christ himself, that the way is narrow that leads unto eternal life,
and that they are but few that find it. Yet this difficulty of finding the
way to heaven rises from the passengers wilfulness, or want of care: for the
truth is, that of the small company that make profession of Christianity in the
world, the greatest part (howsoever they disguise themselves in acting their
parts on earth with a mask of religion) yet never aiming sincerely at
salvation for their end, wholly neglect the means, and so run the broad way
to hell. Others better weighing the shortness and instability of this present
life, and well foreseeing their future mortality, in a state most blessed, or
no less accursed, desire earnestly the joys of heaven, yet never attending
diligently to attain them by that way, which God has directed for that end;
but relying upon guides, whom they choose themselves at adventure to conduct
them, are carried blindfold at the last thorough uncertain bypath to their
certain ruin. It is true that God has never failed in every age to send
faithful guides into the world, to direct his servants in this earthly
passage; but it is likewise found true by woeful experience, that the Devil
has here his swarms of agents likewise to mislead us, and of those, very
many who have learned the skill of their master, the Prince of darkness, to
transform themselves into the shape of the messengers of light. If we look
to the Church, consisting of the Jews alone before the coming of Christ, we
find it recorded by the holy Prophets of God, that it was in continual danger
by reason of false prophets, and seducing Pastors, that did infest it; who ler.
14.14.
prophesied in the name of God, when he sent them not; so that as the Prophet
Esaias complains, Esaias 9.16.
The leaders of this people caused them to err, and they that were led by
them, were destroyed. When Christ our Savior came into the world, who were
they that most opposed him, but the Scribes, the Pharisees, the high Priests,
who were then esteemed, and took upon them to be the guides and leaders of the
people: nay to discourage their Nation from receiving the doctrine of their
salvation, they thought it enough to press this, question; Ioh. 7.48.
Do any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believe in him? but this people
that know not the Law, etc. In the time of the Gospel we are forewarned of
false teachers, that shall rise up in the Church, who shall come nevertheless
in the name of Christ, taking upon them to be our guides; nay some of them
shall put on so fair a vizard of outward carriage, as that they shall seduce
(if it were possible) Gods chosen children. So that it will concern us no
less then the loss, or salvation of our souls, to be wary in our choice of
the guides we follow, for though it be certain, that the blind, and seducing
teacher, shall for his hire have his portion in hell with his Master, for whom
he labored; yet must the seduced likewise know, that they cannot escape the
judgment of God; and so the one with the other fall at last into the pit of
eternal ruin. But herein to make us the more inexcusable, almighty God, out of
his infinite care of man's salvation, has not only forewarned us of these
noisome weeds, that shall daily spring up in his Church, to the endangering of
the corn; but to make us able to discern between the true Pastors of his
flock, and those impostors that endeavor to delude us, he sends us none to
treat with us in this great affair concerning our salvation, but with
instructions in writing, and those open to our view; requiring us, to whom
these messengers are sent, to have an eye to their commission, Esaias 8.20.
To the Law and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to this rule, it
is because there is no light in them. It is true, that from the first creation
of the world, for diverse ages there was no written Word, but as God himself
was pleased to be the immediate teacher of our first parents, so afterward
from time to time he raised up preachers for his people, whom in diverse manners
he inspired with knowledge, and enabled for this work of instructing others
in his true fear and service. But when once it pleased God in his wisdom to
appoint Moses, that holy man, to be the faithful penman of his everlasting
Law, which he gave for the government and direction of his Church: it is
required as a duty of the people of God, Josh. 1.8.
That this book of the Law depart not out of their mouths: That they meditate
therein day and night, To observe and do according to all that is written
therein. And to restrain us from wandering out of the compass of this written
law, this charge is given, Deuteronomy. 4.2.
That we put nothing to the Word which he commands us, nor take ought
therefrom, that we may keep the Commandments of the Lord our God, which are
commanded. And although the Prophesies were penned after at sundry times by
men undoubtedly directed by the holy Ghost, yet shall we find no new article of
doctrine delivered in them: but they serve many times to explain the law. They
Prophecy of Christ to come, the accomplisher of the law; and generally they
are all Gods Heralds to denounce his judgments, and heavy wrath, against the
transgressors of the law of Moses. But in the fullness of time, when Christ
came into the world, of whom Moses and the Prophets wrote, the Gospel was
published, which was no other but a clear declaration of the prophesies, and
the law; whereof a learned Father aptly gives this note, August. de
Carichisand: Rud.
That in the old testament the New is hidden, and in the new is the
manifestation of the old. And this Gospel was first preached, but after (as
one other of the Ancients observes well) Iren. advers. haeres. l. 3. c. 1.
was by the will of God delivered in the Scriptures, to be the pillar and
foundation of our faith. And in this sacred book is wonderfully set forth
unto us the infinite wisdom of the supreme Lawmaker of the world: for as in
the civil government of earthly Kingdoms, those laws are ever commended
most, that leave least to the discretion of the Judge, and never has any
commonweal had laws so exactly framed, but with time they have bin sound
sensibly defective in this point; so certainly this perfection is peculiar
only to the written laws of the Lord of heaven, so far forth, that for the
ministers of this law to add or alter any one thing, respecting the religious
duty and service we owe to God (though but in offering strange fire before
the Lord, as did Nadab and Abihu the sons of Aaron) makes them liable to his
wrath and malediction, for their presumption. This moved Saint Augustine that
reverend Father (alluding to the words of the blessed Apostle) confidently to
pronounce, Contra Lit. Petilian. lib. 3. cap. 6.
That whether concerning Christ, or concerning the Church of Christ, or
concerning any thing that pertains to our faith and life, we will not say, if
we, but if an Angel from heaven shall preach unto you, but what you have
received in the Scriptures of the Law and the Gospel, accursed be he. The
consideration of this gave me occasion to forsake my communion with the Church
of Rome, in whose bosom I received the first instruction for matter of my
salvation, as you your self (dear Mother) can well remember. But after diverse
years, when by accident this principle had taken impression in me, Romans 10.1^.
That faith comes by hearing of the word of God, and then calling to mind,
that many points of the religion I have embraced, were not to be found within
the volume of Gods sacred book; I began to question with my masters of that
Church (whom I did then reverence and admire as men wholly composed to devotion
and sincerity) by what authority they could approve the^; where after many
paffages (with the relation whereof I think not fit to trouble you) their
resolution was, That a great portion of Gods word was not Little of Gods word
is committed to writing, the greatest part of it is come to us by tradition.
Hosius Confess: Polon: page 383.
contained within the holy Scriptures, but delivered in safe custody, to pass
from hand to hand by tradition: for the truth and certainty whereof, they told
me, I must depend vp^n the credit of their Alphons: 2 Castro advers. haeres. l.
1. c. 5.
Church; the which, after much debate, they resolved at the last into the
bosom of the Matter Ecclesia per os^ summi pontificis loquens. Bellar. Apol.
contra praef: monito: serenissi Reg. Iac. page 78.
Roman Bishop: when I considered this, and perceived in the end the weakness
of the grounds that must warrant the truth of these unwritten verities (as they
style them) I thought it no longer safe-to commit my self for direction to
those guides, my masiers, I mean, of the Church of Rome, of whom in my
conscience we may complain, as the Prophet Jeremy did of the false teachers in
his days, Ierem. 8.9.
They have rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is then in them.
For although it cannot be denied, but they retain and publish some principles
of our Christian profession, according to the truth of Gods holy word; yet even
those truths they recommend unto us, upon as perilous and false a ground, as
if a man should therefore believe Christ Jesus to be the Son of the living
God, because the Devil did confess it. To this purpose (dear Mother) I
beseech you to note, that whereas Gods sacred word is left unto us to be the
rule and foundation of our faith and religion, my masters of Rome intending to
build a new, think it proper first to lay a new foundation, and in place of
the holy Scriptures to be the rule and direction of our faith, they adva^ce
their Church, the which nevertheless being rightly understood, holds no
resembla^ce with the Church in truth. And the rather to invite us to pin our
faith upon this their Church, they tender us some forms of truth, the which
when we have embraced upon their Churches authority, she will not leave us
so; but this Church that teaches us to worship God, by like authority will then
require us to worship Seeing Christ is to be adored with divine worship, his
Image also is to be adored with the same adoration. Tho: Aquin: part: 3. q. 25.
art: 3.
Images. She that teaches us to pray to God, will command us likewise to pray
trourblessed Lady, and the The new Creed published by Pope Pius the fourth.
Saints. She that teaches us, that Christ by one offering of his body, once
made in sacrifice upon the Cross, has purchased remission for our sins,
requires us likewise to beleene that she offers daily unto God the same real
body of Christ in sacrifice (which himself offered upon the Cross) as a I
consesse that in the Mass is offered to God a true, proper and propitiatory
sacrifice for the quick and the dead: ibid.
propitiation for the sins of the quick and the dead. She that teaches us
that Christ has madesatisfaction for his sin by bloodshedding and bitter
passion, will teach us withal, that our selves must make satisfaction for some
sort of our sins, by our works of penance; the which if we neglect, that then
we must satisfy Gods justice for them after this life by suffering pains in
a purgatory fire, unless this holy Mother out of compassion shall free us by
her indulgence, a favor she sometimes affords to her zealous children, if my
masters of Rhem: annot: in Lue: cap. 23. v. 24.
Rhemes be not deceived. She that teaches us to do good works, will make us
believe they are The heaven'y blessedness, which the Scripture calls the
reward of the just, is not give them of God gratis, and freely, but is due to
their works: yet God has set forth heaven to sale for our works. Andraed:
Orthodox: expl:^ lib. 6.
meritorious ex condigno, and so turn our Christian duties into glorious sins.
She that teaches us that Gods written Word is true, will have us believe
withal, That it contains Can: loc. l. 3. c. 3.
not all the doctrine of our salvation, and commands us not to Index libit
proh: Pij quarti, Reg. 4.
read it without her leave, nor understand it but according to the sense No
man may give other exposition of the Scriptures, there such as might agree with
the doctrine of the Church of Rome. Council: Trid: Sess: 4.
she gives us. So that (if we mark it well) she does no more then the enemy
of mankind is observed to do, who many times for a vantage vtters truth, that
after he may find the fairer passage to delude with error. And if the gross
absurdities, now current in the Roman Church, apart from these forms of truth,
were laid open to the view of all men, I am persuaded in my conscience, there
is not so simple a Christian living at this day, that makes any care of his
duty to God, but would abhor them. But herein my masters of Rome declare
themselves ingenious in their craft, who well foreseeing that this coin cannot
pass for current in the light, vent it ever in the dark; so that of many
thousands that receive it, scarce any one does understand it in particular; and
if any Lay-person, more curious then others, come by chance to know it, yet
admitting the principles which he must learn withal, it is no more possible
for him to judge of it, the^ for any man in the dark to discern of colors:
for as the eye of the body is not useful at al, but in the light, no more is
our understanding enabled to distinguish between truth and error in the
doctrine of christianity, but in the glorious light of the holy Scriptures. The
ignorance of these is assigned by Christ our Savior Mat. 22.29.
to be a reason of error, and we are taught by the Prophet David, That the
Psalm: 119. verse. 130.
entrance of Gods word gives light, that it gives understanding to the
simple. With him the blessed Apostle accords, Tim. 3.15.
and tells us, that the holy Scriptures are able to make us wise unto salvation.
This wisdom my masters of Rome approve not in the Laytie: they like best that
scholar, that soonest learnes and contents himself with the Recorded and
commended by Staphylus, Hosius and others.
Colliars Creed, To believe in gross, as does their Church, without being
able to render a reason of any article of the religion he professes. It is
gravely delivered by the Rhemists in their annotations upon Saint Lukes
Gospel, Rhem: annot: on Luk: 12.11.
That if a Catholic man being called before the commission, answer, that he
is a Catholic man, and that he will live and die in that faith, which the
Catholic Church teaches, and that this Church can give them a reason of all the things which they demand of him, he answers enough, and defends himself
sufficiently. Now the better to prepare the Laytie to this sufficiency, they
permit them not to read the Scriptures, but with license, and never but with
this caution, to admit no other sense of what they read in them, but such, as
these my masters under the name of the Catholic Church shall recommend unto
them: By which wily slight, they deprive them of al use of their judgment in
the matter of their salvation, and of the Scriptures, both at once; and in
place thereof leave them furnished only to maintain the doctrine they have
embraced, with the pretended name and authority of the Catholic Church. For
instance in this, give me leave (dear Mother) without your offense to appeal
to your self; if it were demanded of you, by what warrant you hold it lawful
to pray to Saints, to worship Images, to pray for fowls departed, and the
like; your answer I presume would be, that herein you follow the doctrine of
the Catholic Church, which being ever directed by the holy Ghost cannot
deceive us. I must confess, the authority of the Catholic Church rightly
understood, ought much to move us, consisting in a general sense of all that
company which in all ages, and places of the world, have joined in profession
of all the principles of the true religion. But if to challenge to our selves the
name of the Church were of it self enough, without question it would follow,
that God should have as many Churches, as there have bin heresies in the world.
For never have there been any authors of those impieties, but have endeavored
to give them countenance under the shadow and name of the Catholic Church. I
will not enter here into any discussion of the doctrine mainetained at this day
in the Roman Church, which were, but to weed in a field of tares: the
absurdity of it is made visible to the world, by the learned labors of many
reverent and worthy Pastors of our Church: I will only in this place declare,
in what sense my masters of Rome understand the Catholic Church, with the
sound whereof they continually fill your ears, as being the maine supporters
of al they teach you: And first this principle is worthy to be noted well,
which we learn from the most eminent writer of the Papacy at this day,
Bellarm: de effect: sacram: lab. 2. cap. 25.
That the truth of all ancient Councels, and of all points of faith, depends
upon the authority of the present Church; where, if we desire to know, what he
means by the Church, the Cardinals interpreter plainly tells us, Gretser.
defens. Bellarm: com. 1. page 1450. B.
That when they affirm the Church to be judge of al controversies of faith, by
the Church they understand the Bishop of Rome, who for the time governes the
ship of the militant Church, and by lively voice does clearly and expressly
expound his judgment to them that seek to him. To this purpose, another great
Rabbin amongst them delivers plainly, Gregor: de Valent. in Tho. 22. tom. 3.
Disput. 1. punct. 7. q 5.
That the Apostolic Church is therefore faid to be infallible, because he is
over it, who by himself has infallible authority. And if we would know who
that He is, that has this infallible authority, we may learn from the
Jesuit Swares, Suares in 3. Thom. tom. 1. disput. 44. sect. 1. page 677.
That it is the Pope whose determination he affirms to be the truth, and were
it contrary to the saying of all the Saints, yet to be preferred before them,
nay if an Angel of heaven were opposed against him, yet the Popes
determination were to be preferred. This man (the Pope) they style the visible
head of the Church, and affirm to be always so infallibly directed by the
Spirit of God, as that whe^soever either of himself alone, with a purpose to
inform the Church, or affisted with an assembly of the learned, he shall
resolve any question concerning faith, or the service of God, it is The Pope is
the master of our faith, and cannot but attain the truth of faith, nor can be
deceived or err, if as chief Bishop or master of our faith, he set down his
determination. Zumel: disput: Var: tom. 3. page 49.
impossible he should be deceived. If you ask of any one of my masters of
Rome, what he means by the Church, which he proposes to you to be the rule
of your faith, he will mannerly define it at the first to consist of the Pope
with a Council; but if you shall further urge him to confess, what you must
do in case the Pope shall dissent in judgment from the Council, howsoever he
faulter in his speech a while, he must acknowledge at the last, Capistranus de
author. Papae. p. 105.
That if the Council, and the Pope, publish constitutions that be different,
that of the Popes must be preferred, as being of greater authority. Alvar.
Pelag. de Planc: Eccl. lib. 1. Artic. 6.
To whose judgment alone (if we may believe another of that crew) we are
rather bound to stand, then to the judgment of all the world besides: who
himself (as De Christo. lib. 2. cap. 28.
Bellarmine mainetaines) without any Council may decree matter of faith. So
that by this (dear Mother) if you weigh it well, you may plainly see, that
howsoever my masters of Rome dazell your eyes with the Churches name, the Pope
alone bears away the game, in such sort, that the fairest certainety you can
have to secure your conscience in the religion you profess, must wholly depend
upon him: yet is it worthy of your ob^ervation to note, how the learned amongst
the^ descant upon this visible head, and infallible director of their Church.
They will acknowledge, that the Pope may be as wicked a man in life, as any
other in the world, and by experience it has bin found, that sundry of them
hauescarse had matches in this kind, as for instance of one, Pope Alexander the
sixth, whom Guicciardine (though himself a Papist) does thus decypher. His
manners and customs were dishonest, little sincerity in his administrations,
no shame in his face, small truth in his words, little faith in his heart, and
less religion in his opinions: all his actions were defaced with insatiable
covetousness, immoderate ambition, barbarous cruelty: he was not ashamed,
contrary to the custom of former Popes (who to cast some color over their
infamy, were wont to call the^ their nephews) to call his sons his
children; and for such to express them to the world: Guicciards lib. 3.
The brute went, that in the love of his daughter Lucretia, were concurrent
not only his two sons, the Duke of Candy, and the Cardinal of Valence, but him
self also, that was her father: who as soon as he was chosen Pope, took her
from her husband, and married her to the Lord of Pesare, but not able to suffer
her husband to be his corrival, he dissolved that marriage also, and took her
to himself by virtue of Saint Peter's keys Lib. 6.
: It was amongst other graces his natural custom to use poysonings, not only
to be revenged of his enemies, but also to dispoile the wealthy Cardinals of
their riches: And this he spared not to do against his dearest friend, till at
the last, having a purpose at a banquet to poison diverse Cardinals, and for
that end appointed his Cup Bearer to give attendance with wine made ready for
the nonce (who mistaking the bottle, gave the poisoned cup to him) was thus
himself dispatched by the just judgment of God, that purposed to murder his
friends; that he might be their heir Thus far the historian: Now as in life,
so is it not denied by my masters of Rome, but that the Pope may err in his
private opinions; Nay Bosius (though most affectionate to the Sea of Rome)
confesses, Tom. ^. de signis eccles: lib. 28. cap. vlt.
That he may be an Heretic, as was Pope Honorius, whose heresy is condemned
of record by Sinod. 6. act. 4.12.14. Sinod. 7. act. vlt. Sinod. 8. act. 7.
three lawful Councels. Pope John the 23. was condemned in the Council of
Constance, for maintaining the opinions of his master Epieurus, Council:
Constant. Ses. 11.12.
That there was no eternal life, no immortality of the soul, nor resurrection
from the dead. Yet if Pope Alexander the sixth at leisure from his lewdnes, or
Pope John with his fellow, shall from their private follies transform themselves
into public teachers, and pronounce a resolution in any question, that may be
moved of any article of Christian religion, purposely to direct the Church; In
this case, by the doctrine of my masters of Rome, you shall be bound to
believe them no less, the^ if God himself had taught you. To which purpose,
Stapleton the Priest has left this for a principle, Stapleton, praef. princip.
^^d. doctrine.
That the foundation of our religion is of necessity placed upon this man's
teaching, in which we hear God himself speaking. To this fallacy, under the
Churclies name, they add another, whereby they endeavor to delude you, framed
upon a false position, namely this, That all our forefathers have embraced the
same religion in every point, which themselves profess and teach you: from
whence they prepare a question, the which they recommend to their scholars to
oppose adomnia: Shall we think our selves wiser then all our forefathers? If a
professor of Mahomets impieties (which have bewitched a great portion of the
world, for many hundreds of years now past) being persuaded by my masters of
Rome to become a Christian, should question thus, shall I think myself wiser
then my forefathers, for these thousand years now past, have bin? I know their
judgment would serve them to reply, that he must not follow his forefathers,
unless they had been followers of the truth of God: My masters of Rome will
tell you, that this holds no resemblance with them, who dare give you their
words for assurance, that every article of their doctrine is derived from our
Savior Christ and his Apostles. Questionless their art of begging is but a
vagrant fashion, but if it shall please you to see some trial of the truth of
this, I dare presume it shall be made evidently to appear unto you in the
presence of any that would oppose it that their principle concerning the Popes
spirit of infallibility (being the maine supporter of all religion at this day
in the Church of Rome) is not so ancient by many ages in the world, as is the
Alcoran of that accursed Mahomet. If the foundation be proved new, what rule
can they propose to secure your conscience for the antiquity of the building:
their continued Priesthood, their daily sacrifice, their satisfactions for
sin, their works of merit, their real change in the Sacrament, their
adoration of it, their mangled communion, their worship of Images, their
prayers to Saints, their Auricular Confession, their Purgatory fire, with all
that trumperie besides, which they tender under the name, and disguised habit
of Church traditions? Certainly all these are terrae filij: If they seek to
the Scriptures for their original, they will be sent packing with we know you
not: Possibly it may be demanded, what I think of our forefathers, who lived
in the latter ages of the world, while these mists of Popery lay thick upon
the face of the visible Church, in these Western parts: Were they damned all?
God forbid, that any man should be so savage to write or think so: I verily
believe, and have been always taught so, that as well the Church of England,
as other of foreign parts, when the tyranny and corruptions of the Papacy did
most oppress them, were nevertheless portions of Gods universal Church, and
sent many souls to God. For even in these, when they were most obscured with
error and ignorance, yet all essential points of Christian doctrine were to
be learned, touching the invocation and worship of God, touching our
redemption by Christ Jesus crucified, touching our observation of Gods
commandments, and so the rest: so that concerning out forefathers this may
suffice, that as we are bound in Christian charity, to hope the best of their
salvation, that before us embraced the faith of Christ (though possibly diverse
of them might approve in gross some errors of the time wherein they lived,
never apprehending in particular the scope and meaning of them) so yet is it no
way safe for us to make our forefathers our rule of faith. In the Church
consisting of the Jews before Christ's coming into the world, the holy
Prophets of God were so far from making their forefathers a rule to follow,
as that to the contrary we shall find nothing more familiar with them, then to
warn the people of God, That they walk not in the ordinances of their
fathers. Psalm. 78.8.
Not to be as their forefathers, a faithless and stabborne generation: a
generation that set not their heart aright, etc. and to like purpose in sundry
places. But for resolution of this point, it is our part to follow the
direction of Saint Cyprian, that holy Martyr of the Church: Lib. 2. Epist. 3.
If Christ only be to be heard, not to listen what any man before us has
thought fit to be done, but what Christ has done, who is before all, for that
we are not to follow the custom of men, but the truth of God. My masters of
Rome (if there be no remedy) will assent to this position of Saint Cyprian,
marry then you must give them leave to beg and assume this truth of God, to
be the proper inheritance of the Bishop, and Church of Rome; but if you shall
deal so unfriendly with them, as to press them to show their evidence, they
will trouble you with much discourse, but in the end, for your satisfaction,
this answer must content you, or none at all, dixit Ecclesia, themselves will
tell you so. The Pastors of the prosent Church of England, will likewise make
claim of this truth of God, to rest with them; but herein they will deal more
ingeniously with you, then the other, they will desire you to believe them no
farther in this point, then by plain demonstration out of Gods holy word they
shall be able to make good their claim. In this confusion and difference
between our teachers (pretending of either side to have the Church and truth
of God; and yet impossible, but that in so direct a contrariety as rests
between them, of one side they must needs abuse us) possibly (dear Mother)
you will ask, what means are left for us, that are but learners in the
school of Christ, to discern between them? To censure their doctrine by
their lives and actions, were an uncertain way, a reason whereof we learn
from Saint Chrysostom, an ancient Father of the Church: Homil. 49. in Matt.
oper. imperf.
Because whatsoever kind of holiness the servants of God have in truth, the
servants of Satan may have in likeness: for the devil has his that be meek
and humble, that be chaste, and give alms, that fast, and do every good deed,
which God has appointed for the salvation of mankind; and these forms of
godliness has the Devil brought in, to seduce us; that a confusion being made
between good and counterfeit; simple men, which know not the difference
between goodness indeed, and goodness in show, while they seek the good
servants of God, might light upon the Devils seducements. Of this mind are
likewise the learned of the Church of Rome, Part. 6. page ^9.
You know (says Master Harding in his confutation of Bishop Jewels Apology)
it is no good argument to reason from manners to the doctrine: who would not
hiss and trample you out of the schools, if you make this argument: The
Papists lives be faulty, Ergo, their teaching is false. I know that howsoever
my master of Rome like not (as you see) to have their doctrine measured by the
line of their lives and actions, yet themselves will offer crooked measure in
this kind: there is nothing more familiar with them in their public writings,
or private discourse with their scholars, that admire them, then to traduce
and vilify the Pastors of the Church of England, of whom certainly many there
have been, and are of excellent merit and example in the Church, and no doubt
but some in so great a number may be found scandalous in their places, who can
expect no other, but a fearful judgment in the end. But if this were an
argument, we need not seek for proof from any adverse to the Church of Rome,
but from their own records; as for instance in one, I pray you (dear Mother)
note, what Aventine a learned historian of their own discloseth: Annal. lib.
6. in initio.
The Pope sets over the flock of Christ goats, wolves, lustful persons,
adulterers, ravishers of Virgins and Nuns, cooks, muleters, thieues,
bankers, usurers, drones, game hunters, lecherous, perfidious, perjured,
ignorant asses: He commits the sheep to wolves and hypocrites, which only
provide for their own bellies: Nay, he sets boys and wantons to rule the
lambs: I am ashamed to say what manner of Bishops we have: with the revenews
of the poor they feed their hounds, horses, whoores, they quaffe, they love,
the fly learning as infection, etc. thus far the Historian. But my masters of
Rome will tell you, they have an undoubted way to assure you of the doctrine
they teach you, to be the truth of God; which is, by means of the miracles,
they boast to be frequent with them: I will confess (if we may believe them) it
has been as easy and familiar with them to work a wonder, as it has been
with the Pope to make a Saint, and yet I must tell you, some doctors of his
own Canus, loc. l. 5. c. 5. q. 5. Concl. 3. Cajetan likewise.
make doubt, whether al be Saints in heaven, that the Popes have canonized for
such, and thrust into the Roman Calender. But to the miracles, which they can
challenge as proper to their Church, since their Bishops of that Sea have
ascended into the seat of their Universal Soveraignetie, if they were all
true (as for the most part questionless they are but fables and impostures,
such as those of the Legend are observed to be, by men judicious, and learned
among themselves, as Canus, that plainly styles the writer of them Canus, loc.
l. 11. c. 6.
a man of a brazen face, and a leaden heart; Espenceus that affirms, 2. Tim.
4. digr. 25.
No stable to be so full of dongue, as the Legends are full of lies) yet could
this prove no certain mean to assure us of the truth to be with them, seeing
(as Stapleton, one of their Priests confesses) Stapleton. prompt. mor: part:
astiu: in Dominic 24. post Pentecost.
For the more trial of the godly, not only Antichrist himself, and his
forerunners; but all heretics also may do true miracles, by the permission of
God; as the Sorcerers of Pharaoh did. And greater, I presume, my masters of
Rome cannot boast of in these later times, then Baronius the Cardinal has
recorded to be done by Simon Magus, that instrument of the devil, Anno: 63.
number. 22.
That he made Images to walk, and would lie in the fire without hurt, that he
would fly in the air, and make bread of stones, that he could open doors
fast shut, unloose bonds of iron; that he had many shadows following him, as
it had bin men, etc. The like we may read of others of that kind. But for
resolution of this point, I will here set down a discourse of a learned
Father, the which is well worthy of your observation: Chrysostom: oper. imperf:
number. 49.
Since Heresies have gained place in the Church, there can be no proof of
true Christianity, neither refuge for Christians willing to know the truth,
but the holy Scriptures: Hereto fore it was by many means declared which was
the Church of Christ, and which was Gentilisme; but now there is no way for
those that are willing to know which is the true Church of Christ, but by the
Scriptures only: wherefore? because all those things that properly belong to
Christ in truth, Heresies likewise have in schism: they have churches, they
have the holy scriptures they have Bishops and other orders of the Clergy:
they have Baptism, the holy Eucharist, and all other things, yea Christ
himself: whosoever therefore is willing to know which is the true Church of
Christ, how shall he know it in the confusion of so great resemblance, but by
the Scriptures only? Heretofore it was known by miracles, which were true
Christians, which false: by what means? The false, either could not work signs
as the true Christians did, or at least not such as true Christians could: But
now the working of miracles is wholly ceased, and it is observed, that
counterfeit signs are more wrought with them that are false Christians: Nay
Peter in Clement has foreshewed, that Antichrist shall have power given him to
work true miracles. Heretofore by the outward co^versation the Church of Christ
might be known, when the lives of Christians, either all or the most part were
holy, such as it was not with others: but now Christians are become as bad, or
worse, then heretics or Gentiles: nay there is a better outward carriage many
times observed amongst those that are in Schism, then amongst Christians. He
therefore that would know which is the true Church of Christ, how should he
know it, but only by the Scriptures. Our Lord therefore knowing that so great
confusion of things would happen in the last days, commands Christians, that
desire to receive assurance of true faith, to fly to nothing but the holy
Scriptures. If they look to other things they shall be scandalized and perish,
not understanding which is the true Church, and thereby shall light upon the
abomination of desolation, which shall stand in the holy places of the Church,
etc. Thus far St. Chrysostom. My masters of Rome (howsoever they gloss it) like
not the language of this learned Father. To wish the^ to expose their Church
and doctrine, to be judged by the holy Scriptures, were a hard saying, and
with the Capernaites Ioh. 6.60.
in good reason they may tell you, they cannot bear it. But if St. Chrysostom
had dealt so friendly with them, as in place of (only Scriptures) to have
named the word of God, defining that word to consist as well of unwritten
traditions, as the written word; and had withal assigned the Church of Rome,
with her supreme Pastor, to be the trusty treasurer of unwritten verities,
and the only infallible interpreter of the written word, whereof the Cardinals
conclusion might have been made good, Hosius de express. Dei verbo. page 38.
That which pleases the Church is Gods express word; and at the last
resolving this Church into the Pope Under the name of church, we understand her
head, that is to say, the Romans or bishop. Greg. de valent. in Tho. tom. 3.
disput. 1. quaest. 1. punct. 1.
alone, questionless they would have taken it as a kindness at his hands. But
if he will insist upon only Scriptures they will never give over cavelling at
this point: First they will tell him, Canus loc. l. 3. c. 3.
that many things belong to Christian faith, which are contained in the
Scriptures neither openly, nor obscurely: St Chrysostom it seems was of
another mind, who affirms, In Mat. hom. 45.
That whatsoever is required to salvation is all, accomplished in the
Scriptures, neither is any thing wanting there, that is needful for man's
salvation: which mooues another of the ancients to advise, Isidorus Pelusiota
lib. 1. ep. 369.
That we refuse whatsoever is taught, unless it be contained in the volume of
the Bible: a reason whereof, Cyril, a learned Father gives, lib. 72. in Ioh.
haec aute^ scriptasunt, etc
Because such things are written, as the Apostles saw sufficient for our faith
and manners. Possibly, if they be entreated much, in good nature they will
acknowledge at the last, (as Bishop the Seminary does in his Tract against M.
Perkins of Traditions) The scriptures contain not the resolution of
difficulties which the learned must believe, if they will be saved: Bishop the
seminary of traditions against Mr Perkins.
That the doctrine of salvation (at least so much as every simple Christian is
bound to believe under peril of damnation) is contained in the holy
Scriptures; though not so for himself, and his learned brethren: but then will
they tax the Scriptures with obscurity, and discourage you from meddling with
them, under that pretense affirming, that they cannot be comprehended by the
capacity of the vulgar and unlearned reader. To this I oppose the judgment of
S. Austin, who plainly tells us Enarrat. i^ Psalm. 8.
That God has howed down the Scriptures, even to the capacity of babes and
sucklings; That when proud men will not speak to their capacity, yet himself
might. To like purpose S. Chrysostom, Homil. 3. de Lazaro.
That God has penned the Scriptures by the hands of Publicans, Fishermen,
Tentmakers, Shepherds, Neatherds, and unlearned men; that none of the simple
people might have any excuse, to keep them from reading; and that so they might
be easily understood of all men, the Artificer, the Householder, and widows
woman, and him that is most unlearned, etc. thus he. To the resolution of these
learned Fathers, my Masters of Rome will reply with a question; If the doctrine
of salvation be so plainly proposed in the holy Scriptures; how it should come
to pass, that it is so diversely understood? Arrius reads it, and denies the
divinity of Christ; Eutiches reads it, and denies his humanity; the Graecians
read it, and esteem it folly; The Jews read it, and are offended at it. It is
read at this day in the Church of Rome, as likewise in the Church in the
communion whereof we live, and different opinions are collected from it; yet
of either side, it is true, there are men of excellent gifts, both for wit, and
learning. As if my Masters of Rome were ignorant, that wit and learning (if not
guided by the holy Ghost) were so far from being means to further us to a
right understanding of Gods word, as that the more they abound in any man apart
from grace, the more irrecouerable many times they plunge him into error and
delusion: for as the light of the Sun though visible, yet is not discerned by
a blind man, even so, although it be true (which S. Austin teaches) De
doctr. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 9.
That those things which concern our faith, and conversation, yea all things
necessary, are plainly, and manifestly set down, in the holy Scriptures; yet
the doctrine of salvation contained in them, being the object of faith, not of
wit, and humane learning (which faith is the special work of the holy Ghost
in man) and never rightly, and usefully understood, and believed of any, but
such only, as sincerely applying themselves to the outward means of seeking
instruction, by hearing, and reading Gods holy word, obtain withal by hearty
prayer, the direction of Gods blessed spirit: 1. Cor. 2.14.
for the natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God, for they
are discerned spiritually (as the Apostle tells us.) My masters of Rome will
here be carping with a question, whether every reader or hearer of the
scriptures, may assure himself to have the spirit of God? I say not so,
spiritus vhi vult spirat: but this I say, and am assured that I say the truth,
Romans 8.9.
that he that has not the spirit of Christ, the same is none of his: and in an
other place we are plainly taught, Romans 8.14.
That they that are governed by the spirit of God, they are the children of
God: from al which this conclusion will clearly follow, that as it is impossible
for us (unless by hearing, or reading, we acquaint our selves with the
language of the holy scriptures) to distinguish with the sheep of Christ,
between the shepherds voice, and the voice of strangers; so it is our part,
seriously, and from the heart, to seek to God to enlighten our understanding
by the gift of his holy spirit; without which, this everlasting word of life
proves to none, but the savor of death to their eternal destruction My
masters of Rome I presume will be entreated to acknowledge this, that there is
no true servant of God, but has in this life the holy Ghost for a pledge of
his adoption Romans 8.15.16.
which testifies to his spirit that he is the child of God: and shame (I
think) will not suffer them to make it questionable, whether this spirit of
God, that was so powerful with the blessed Apostles, as from unlearned
Fishermen (as diverse of them were) to enable them for teachers of the world,
may likewise be now of power, to prepare the heart of the simplest hearer, or
reader of Gods holy word, truly to apprehend therein the mysteries of his
salvation. But how shall any man (say they) be certain, that he has the
spirit of god? I must confess, the truth of this is felt before it can be
learned: yet as the man that has his bodily sight being demanded how he can
be certain that be has his eyes? could give no other answer, but that by
seeing he is assured that he has his eyes; and by his eyes he is assured that
he sees; even so the spirit of God being the eye whereby the soul discerns
in spiritual things, the inward light of understanding in Gods faithful
servants, apprehending and believing the grounds of faith delivered in the holy
Scriptures, assures them, that they have the spirit of God abiding in them, and
by the same spirit revealing unto them out of Gods holy word (which is
infallible the doctrine of salvation, their consciences are secured, that they
understand and believe the truth. Yet would I not be thought to hold, that
every faithful Christian in this life, did attain to a perfect knowledge of
all the deep mysteries that are to be found within the book of God: I know
there is depth for the Elephant to swim, and safe place for the Lamb to wade
in, and it is most certain, that (since the Apostles, and Evangelists left the
world) the holy Ghost (to hold the children of God in humility, and to move
them the more carefully to attend the subordinate means prescribed for the
gaining of Christian learning, as ferve^t prayer, with diligence in hearing
Gods word preached andtaught by the pastors of his Church, and seeking to them
for their help and instruction upon all occasions of doubt, has tempered
their knowledge with such measure, as that they shall but understand in part;
yet shall they never fail to understand so much as shall suffice to bring them
to a saving faith. But here a question may be moved, seeing it is true (as in
part I have noted) that God by his ordinance has assigned the ministry of the
Church (I mean the instructions of her Pastors, both private and pub-like) to
be one mean, to bring his children to the knowledge of his truth, whether it
be imposed upon us that are of the Laity, and learners in Gods Church, as a
duty, to believe the doctrine our Pastors teach us, without examination? My
masters of Rome, if you shall be pleased to demand of them, whether it may
be lawful for you to examine the doctrine they recommend unto you, their
answer you may see in the annotations of the Rhemish testament, Rhem: Annot.
act. 17.11.
That you must not try, and judge, whether your teachers doctrine be true or
no, neither may you reject that which you find not in the scriptures. If you
shall reply, and demand of them, to what purpose the holy Ghost then forwarned
us of false Prophets, that shall come into the world; of ravenous Wolves, that
shall invade the Church; of seducers, that shall so plausibly carry themselves,
as that they shall deceive (if possible) Gods chosen children: they will full
wisely tell you that all this has no respect to them, who (upon their words we
may believe the^ if we list) are the true pastors of the Catholic church,
which cannot err; whereas (God wot) like petty chapmen they vent no other, but
the deceiptful wares of the great merchant, the Pope of Rome, under the
counterfeit mark and name of the Catholic church. But to the point in hand,
it is the precept of Christ in general to al his servants, Mat. 7.15.
That they beware of false Prophets, to ^. Ioh. 4.1.
try the spirits, not to believe every spirit. Al which of necessity must
presuppose some examination, wherein we are not to follow our own reason,
fancy, or private spirit, but to be guided by that rule, which for this
purpose the body Prophet does direct, Esa. 8.10.
the testimony and the law: from precept if we pass to example, we shall find
it recorded to the perpetual praise of the men of Berea, Sect. 17.11.
that when the Apostle preached Christ unto them out of the law and the
Prophets, they diligently searched in the holy scriptures, whether those things
be delivered were so or no. And was it lawful and commendable in these good
Christians to examine the doctrine. which was taught the by that elected vessel
of God; and will these Lucifugi of Rome make you believe its since for you to
hold the like course with them: It may be my in afters of Rome for once will
bear with these men of Berea, and yet not approve their doing, as a rule to
follow: Possibly they will not stick to tell us, that in the Churches infancy
they were not so well instructed in good manners, as since the scholler^ of the
Romame church have bin: But shall women (say they) shall me^ unlearned be fit and
able to judge of their pastors instruction? I would know of these my masters,
whether Lydia the purple seller, the woman of who^ it is written, Act. 16.14.
That God opened her heart, were then fit and able to judge between the
doctrine of the Pharifies refusing Christ yet advancing the law of Moses; and
the Apostles instruction; the blessed messenger of the Gospel of Christ^ were
Priscilla with her husband Aquila, fit and able to judge of the doctrine of a
worthy Pastor of the Church, Act. 18.26.
Whom, after they had heard, they took privately unto them, and instructed in
the way of God more perfectly? Questionless if any Priscilla should be so
bold at this day with the meanest of my masters of Rome, she should be sent
packing with the scornful phrase of Scripturist, Scripturian, doctoresse,
Apostolesse, or some such foolery: But Wisdom is justified of her children:
we are taught by the, blessed Apostle, 2. Tim. 3.16.
That the Scriptures are able to make us wise unto salvation; and the Kingly
Prophet accords with this and tells us, Psalm. 19.8.
That the testimony of God is faithful, and gives wisdom unto little ones.
This wisdom my masters of Rome have found fatal to them, and therefore,
although for fear of the people, they dare not in plain terms entertain
the holy Scriptures, (when they are encountered with them) with such a greeting,
as Ahab that wicked King gave the Prophet Elias, 1. Kin. 21.20
Have thou found us, o our enemy? Yet is it worthy (dear Mother) of your
obsertatio^, to note by what wily sleights and strains of wit they have
practiced to deprive the world of all use of them. First, they like not to have
them translated into the vulgar tongue of every nation, whereby the unlearned
and common sort might come to know them. To this purpose I pray you mark a
Jesuits language: Azotius. Instit. tom. 1. l. 8. c. 26.
It is demanded (says he) whether the sacred Scriptures may be translated
into the mother tongue of every nation, that every one may the better read and
understand them? I answer that Lutherans and Calvinists are in that heresy,
that they affirm the sacred Scripture ought to be translated into the vulgar
language of all nations, against whom the Council of Trent has made a solemn
decree: and with this Jesuit agrees our countriman Reynolds the Priest.
Calvino-turcismus. p. 825.
It seems to me (says this Seminary) that this profane revealing of the
divine mysteries is odiously contrary to the will of God, and to the nature of
the mysteries themselves. Ibid. p. 831.
The manifold and great mischiefs, which by the translation of the Scripture
have risen against the Majesty of God, against the holiness of the Scripture
it self, against the tranquillity of States, against the faith and good
conversation of men, should have force enough utterly to suppress these
translations, yea albeit they were supported by divine or Apostolical
authority: Thus he, My masters of Rhemes notwithstanding this (wisely taking
into their considerations In their preface to their translation of the new
testament.
the present time, state and condition of our country, unto which diverse
things are either necessary or profitable, and medicinable now, that otherwise
in the peace of the Church were neither much requisite, nor perchance wholly
toller able) have sent us a translation, such as it is, yet durst they not send
it abroad alone, but under safe custody of their peevish Comment, which like a
thief lies lurking by, to steal from the Reader the true sense of this holy
word. Thus you may see, how unwillingly and against their appetite, they have
been brought to translate the Scriptures into our vulgar language: Their next
slight to be noted, is the practice and devise they use to restrain and
discourage us (that are of the Laity) from reading in them: For whereas we
find it to have been familiar with Christ and his Apostles (while they were
conversant on the earth) to direct their scholars with Ioh. 5.36.
search the scriptures, Luc. 10.26.
how read thou, Coloss. 3.16.
Let Gods word dwell plentifully in you, and to such like purpose; Peresius a
Popish Bishop declaimeth thus, De tradit. p. 45.
shall no bounds be set to popular, rude, and carnal men? shall old men before
they have put off the filth of their minds, and young men that yet speak like
children, be admitted to read the Scriptures? I suppose verily (and my opinion
fayles me not) this ordinance under the pretense of piety was invented by the
devil: Another of the same plume, to fear us from reading Gods holy word,
tells a story of certain men, that were possessed of a devil; Thirrac: de
demoniacis, c. 21. th. 157.
because being but husba^dmen, they were able to discourse of the holy
Scriptures. Index lib. prohibi: Pij. 4. Reg. 4.
It is true that by the rule of Pope Pius the fourth, such of the Laity may
read the Scriptures as have license from their lawful Ordinary so to do. Ibid.
But if any Lay person shall presume to look into the holy Scriptures without
such license, he must know his penalty to be no less then to be dented the
pardon of his sins: The late Pope Clement the 8. better belike considering,
how well it went with their triple crown, when they kept the Laity wholly from
searching into the book of God (as in Linwood in constable. t. prove. l. 5. titulo
de Magistris: quin.
times past they endeavored) carpeth at the rule of his predecessor, and
resolves at the last, The observa^^^^s of Pope Clement the 8. (...) the r^le
of Pope P^^^ the 4.
that notwithstanding this constitution of Pope Pius, Bishops have no power at
all to grant any such license to the Laity of reading Gods holy words.
Nevertheless between the enterfiering of these holy Fathers, it passes in
priat by my Masters of Rhemes, In their ^^e^. to their transla^. of the new
Testament.
That such of the Laity may be readers in Gods word, as are permitted by their
Ordinaries upon certificate from their parish Priest or Confessor, that they
be humble, sober, and discreet persons, etc. But I beseech you note the vpshot
of all. First, this discreet Lay reader must admit this for a principle, Hosius
Confess. Polon. p. 385.
That little of Gods word is committed to writing, That the greatest part of it
is come to us by tradition; the which we must receive from ours Catholic
Mother declaring her self by the mouth of our holy father, the Pope of Rome:
The next rule this discreet Lay reader must learn to follow, is, Council.
Trident. Sess. 4.
That no man must give any other exposition of Scripture, then such as might
agree with the doctrine of the Crurch of Rome; a reason whereof Andradius (that
great defendor of the faith of Trent) can give us, because, Defens. sid.
Trident. l. 2.
All power to interpret the Scriptures, and reveal the hidden mysteries of our
religion, is given from heaven to the Popes, and their Counsels. Where, though
the Counsels be placed as a page to attend the Pope, yet the resolution of all
is this (as before I have noted) that if the Council shall dissent in
judgment from the Pope, Sententia Papae praeferenda est sententiae omniu^
aliorum: Turrecremata: sum: de Eccle l. 3. c. 64. concl. ^.
The judgment of the Pope is to be preferred before the judgment of all
others; says the Cardinal Turrecremata. Of whom another writer of the Roman
Church in plain toarmes affirms, Zumel disp: var: tom: 3. page 49:
That he is the master of our faith, and cannot but attain the truth of faith,
nor can be deceived or err, if as chief Bishop, and master of the faith, he
set down his determination. From all which it is evident (if you mark it
well) that although these Paulo 5. Vicedeo. etc. a dedication to the prefet
Pope.
Vicedet of Rome could never compass wholly to suppress the sacred Scriptures
(as with good discretion possibly they might have bin contented, considering
how eagerly this holy word pursues the^ still with hue and cry; which was well
observed by Pope Leo the 10. when in his familiar discourse with his friend the
Cardinal Bembus, he uttered this unsavory speech; Quantum lucri apportavit
nobis and Curiae nostrae fabula ista de Jesus Christo: Baleus de act. Romans
pontif. in Leone. l. 7.
what profit has this fable of Jesus Christ brought to us or our court) yet by
unspeakable sleights and art accompanied in these later ages of the world,
with strange success by Gods permission, they have indevoured, to bring the
sense of the holy scriptures in safe custody to themselves alone; and then
locking it fast with a rabble of gross inventions (styled the Churches
traditions) in the closet of their breasts, of both together they have
ingeniously framed the ladder whereby they have mounted into the throne of their
usurped soveraignety, in spiritual, and earthly dominion; and then taking upon
themselves alone to be the only never-erring oracles of Christian religion,
when their children have come to crave bread of them, in place of that they
have given the^ stones; wherewithal nevertheless for Although the Pope being
negligent of his own and others salvation, draw with him innumerable souls to
hell, there to be tormented for ever; yet may no mortal man repraue him for
it, for that he is to judge all men, and himself to be judged of no man:
did. 40. si Papae.
manners sake their hungry souls must rest contented, although in the mean
time they pine to death for want of the true food of life. Possibly you will
think I write in humor, and misreport them: O that I might be so happy, as
that you would give me leave, to avow the truth of these things before you, in
the presence of any one of my masters of Rome, that would oppose it: They will
tell you, they may not be seen without peril of their lives, as the case stands
with the^ at this day in England; and it is true, that the laws sound out
severity against them, but in execution they find them remiss enough: for my
part I know, from my first acquaintance with them, they can equivocate in
apparel, as well as language; and seem to be any thing, saving what they are;
and for this purpose, I would surrender my judgment to mine eyes, and take
them for such, as their habit should declare the^. God is witness with me I
malice not their persons, I will confess I cannot but condemn their craft,
and pity such as are inchaunted by them. The truth is they are cruel Iaylors,
and mure up your understanding in these things, as their close prisoner; well
knowing, that if once they give you but liberty to hear freely what might be
said against them, they are sure to loose you. I beseech you (dear Mother) for
the love you bear to God, to think maturelie of this great affair. It
concerns your soul, and that for eternity; and your day of preparation, by
the course of nature, is far declining. Certainly the fault of my masters of
Rome (who mislead you) is inexcusable, yet will not their fault prove your
excuse: The account for your soul will be required at your own hands: ignorance
(without question) will prove no answer at the judgment day: It is not only a
fearful sin, when it misleads us from the way of our salvation, but a grievous
punishment that pursues mankind for the first transgression. I know your zeal
to the service of God is great, but zeal without knowledge carries with it in
the holy Scriptures a just reproof: I cannot expect you should upon my saying
aba^don the religion you have so long embraced, this only shall be my humble
request, and that for his love that suffered a bitter and ignominious death, to
bring us to a life of glory and eternity, that you would resolve speedily, to
lend an indifferent ear to some debate of this point, by persons learned of
either side, for which purpose (although the meanenes of my condition may
challenge nothing from this state of merit) yet would I hope to find the
favor, for so charitable a work, as the good of a soul, which a kingdom
cannot redeem, that some learned Priest of the Romish fashion, without peril
of the law might be suffered to have access to you; so that you would be
willing to admit with all the presence of some moderate, grave, and learned man
of the contrary part, between whom, if it might please you to stand but
attentive with a mind free of prejudice, my hope would be, and my unfeigned
prayer should concur with it, that God would be pleased to open your heart,
as he did of Lydia that good woman, and make you able to discern between his
truth delivered in his holy word, and the impostures of the present Church of
Rome. If you should co^sult herein with any one of my masters of Rome, I know
he would dissuade you from this course; he would sing Syrene-like, pretending
this care, that it is not now safe for you to disquiet your conscience with
questions of this kind; whereas in truth his aim only would be, to hold you
still a captive in the bo^ds of error, ignorance and security. But God (I trust)
in his good time will disappoint their drifts, to whom from my heart I will
daily pray (as charity, conscience and duty binds me) that in mercy he will be
pleased to direct your good intention with a true understanding of his will;
that so your commendable desire of salvation; being accompanied with a right
endeavor in the way, may carry you through this pilgrimage of sorrows, into
the place of everlasting joys.

FINIS.

