THE JEWS DELIVERANCE Out of BABYLON, and the MYSTERY OF OUR Redemption;
Plainly demonstrated in ten Sermons, upon the 126. PSALM.

Viz. 1. Sions Salvation. 2. The Saints security. 3. The Free-mans
frankincense. 4. The Atheists acknowledgement. 5. Gods goodness. 6. The
Godlies gladness. 7. The Prisoners Petition. 8. The commodity of the Cross.
9. The Captives case. 10. The Christians comfort.

Preached in Yorkshire, By JOHN HVME, Minister of the Word; and now published
by Authority.

PSALM. 53.6. O that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion when God
brings back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel
shall be glad.

LONDON, Printed by W. Stansby for Michael Spark, and are to besold in
Greene-Arbor at the Sign of the Blue Bible, in the Old-bayley without
Newgate, 1628.

The names of those Commentators, who have Written upon the Book of PSALMS,
from whom are many things borrowed for the adorning of this WORK.
AVgustinus. Chrysostomus. Hieronymus. Hilarious. Basilius. Theodoretus. Gregor.
Mag. in Ps. Poenit. Lyra. Hugo Cardinal. Dionysius Carth. Ludolphus Carth.
Fran. de Puteo Carth. Iacobus de Valentia. Petrus Alliacus in Psalm. Poenit.
Bellarminus. Lorinus. Agellius. Remigius. Pomeranus. Iansonius. Iansenius.
Haymo Episc. Halberst. Osorius. Tittelmannus. Gesnerus. Genebrardus.
Bartholomaeus. Caluinus. Rollocus. Heshusius. Bucerus. Mollerus. Musculus.
Marloratus. Fabritius. Helmichius. Scultetus.
Innius Tremelius.

The Words of the PSALM.
A Song of Degrees.
VERSE I. WHen the Lord brought again the captivity of Sion, we were like
unto them that dream. VERSE II. Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and
our tongue with singing. VERSE III. Then said they among the Heathen, the Lord
has done great things for them. VERSE IIII. The Lord has done great things
for us, whereof we rieoyce. VERSE V. O Lord, bring again our captivity, as
the Riuersin the South. VERSE VI. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy.
VERSE. VII. He that now goes on his way weeping and bears forth good seed,
shall doubtless come again with joy, and bring his sheaues with him.
SIONS SALVATION, OR THE DECLARATION OF THE JEWS deliverance.
THE FIRST SERMON.
PSALM. 126. When the Lord brought again the captivity of Sion.


TO pass over the Title of this Psalm, (...), Sept. consule Lorinu^, Hugonem
cardinalem, Helmichium and Fabritium, de hac inscriptione.
A song of degrees, as not much material, whether it be so called, for the
lifting up of the voice in the tune, as some have coniectured, or, because it
was sung upon the Stairs of the Temple, as others have ghessed; or for the
excelcellency of it, which is most probable, since it contains a Declaration of
the Jews deliverance from the servitude and slavery of the brutish
Babylonians and cruel Chaldaeans: which was a type and figure of our
redemption, Lege Tilem^nu^, Heshusium, in bunc Psalmum.
from the bondage and captivity of sin and Satan: it may be divided into
these three principal parts or main branches, viz.

1. The division of the Psalm.
A commemoration of their deliverance, together with the sequels ensuing
thereupon, from the first Verse unto the fifth, viz. 1. Their coadmiration,
Verse. 1. 2. Their congratulation, Verse. 2. 3. The Heathens confession, Verse. 3.
4. Their own confirmation, Verse. 4.
2. A comprecation, or a supplication to God, for the accomplishing and
perfiting of the same, Verse. 5. 3. A consolation to the captive Jews in
special: but generally to all the faithful that lie under the cross, and
groan under the burden of their sins, Verse. 6, 7.
In the Declaration or Relation of their deliverance, in these words, The first
general part.
When the Lord brought again the captivity of Sion, we may observe: 1. A
Redeemer, The Lord. 2. The party redeemed, Sion. 3. The redemption, in
bringing again their captivity. 4. The circumstance of time noted out in the
particle, When.


Their deliverer was principal, and instrumental; principal God himself.
Their principal deliverer, the Lord.
Isntrumental, Cyrus whom the Lord stirred up to set his people at liberty,
who had now served under the yoke of the King of Babel, no less then three
score and ten years, as it was prophesied above an hundred years before the
birth of Cyrus. Cyrus, thou Isai. 44.23.
art my Shepherd, and shall perform all my desire, saying to Jerusalem, thou
shall be built; and to the Temple, thy foundation shall surely be laid; and
albeit Cyrus may be thought to have been wise and hardy, noble, (...) E^^ip.
Musculus in Psalm. 14.
and expert in marshall policy, yet because that valor avails man nothing,
if he have not the Lord aiding and assisting: the Psalmist does ascribe their
deliverance to the Lord only, Nameius est liber are cuius est in captiuitatem
tradere; for as by the Lords permission they were led into captivity, so only
by his power they were set at liberty. When the Israelites had served in a
strange Land four hundred years, it was not Moses, but Jehovah, that brought
them out of the Land of Egypt, and out of the House of Exodus 10. and Psalm. 106.
boudage. In like manner it was He and not Deborah, that freed them from
Iabin, after they had been vexed twenty years under the Judge. 4.3.
Cananites. It was He and not Gideon, that brought them out of the hands of
the Midianites, after seven years Judge. 5.2.
servitude. It was He and not Ipthab, that delivered them from the Phylistims
and Ammorites, after eighteen years Judge. 11.8.
oppression. Although in all these He did employ Moses and Deborah, Gideon and
Ipthah as instruments for their deliverance; and so it was not Cyrus valor,
but the Lords power, not his policy, but Gods wisdom that overthrowing the
enemy gave to Cyrus the victory, and put it into his heart to set his people
at liberty, for he vp-held his hands to subdue Nations, He did weaken the
loins of Kings, and did open the doors before him, he did go before him, and
made the crooked places straight; and he did break the brazen doors, and
burst the iron Isai. 15.12.
bars. From whence we may see that if the Lord had not enabled Cyrus, he of
himself could have done nothing, and therefore their deliverance is attributed
to God alone, who is here for his power called Jehovah the Lord.

Neither without reason, seeing he was only able to free them from the
servitude of that proud King and savage Nation. Jerusalem was made so
solitary, that notwithstanding her continual lamentation among all her
Loners, she found none to comfort her: Lam. 1.1.2.
all her friends were become her enemies: Mount Sion was so desolate, that
Foxes run upon Lam. 5.18.
it. What thing (says Jeremiah) shall I liken to thee, O daughter of
Jerusalem, what shall I equal to thee, that I may comfort thee, O Virgin,
daughter of Sion? for thy breach is great like the Sea who can heal Lam. 2 13.
thee? for her bruising was incurable, her wounds were dolorous, there was none
to plead her cause, none to apply a plaster; there were no medicines nor
belpe for her; all her Loners had forgotten her, and sought her not, for the
Lord had stricken her with a sharp chastisement, and with the wound of an
Ierem. 30.12, 13, 14. Bern. in Cant.
enemy: and now it only remains, that vnde morbus irrepsit, inde remedium
intret, from whence came the sore, from thence should come the salve, and it is
the Lord that kills and gives Deuteronomy. 32.39.
life: wounds and makes whole, brings down to the grave, and raises 1.
Sam. 2.6.
up: who according to his promise gave health unto her, and healed her of her
I^r. 30.17.
wounds.

This serves for our instruction, whenever we are delivered out of any
trouble or affliction, to impute all the praise to God alone. Iehosaphat, when
the Lord had given him a marvelous victory against his enemies, he returns
to Jerusalem praising God with Viols, Harps and Trumpets, ascribing unto the
Lord all the glory 2. Chron. 20^ 1.6 29. Templum Ora^rium.
thereof. Theodosius being told of the wonderful overthrow of the Usurper,
John his adversary, he and all his followers resorted to the Temple, where
they passed over the day with praise and thanksgiving, acknowledging that God
by his own Arm and power had cast down that Tyrant. And Fl. Heraclius being
delivered from Cosroe the King of the Persians, Socrat. bist. Eccl. lib. 7.
cap. 23.
and having his Kingdom freed from his tyranny, (...)
did in the hight of his triumph at Bizantium, openly praise God for his
delivery, and the more to show his thankfulness, did cause to be stamped upon
his coin with his own Image, these words, Glory be to God in heaven,
because he has broken the iron doors, and has deliue^^d the holy Kingdom of
Heraclius: if then we be freed from persecution, let us confess with David,
Reusu. in Symle is Caes. Romans class 2.
that salvation is of the Psalm. 3.8.
Lord: if we be brought from the jaws of death and the gates of the grave, let
us say with Ezekiah, the Lord was ready to save Isai. 38.20.
me: and if we be brought from the deep of destruction, and the very gulf
of hell; let us acknowledge with Iona, that mercy and salvation is of the Ion.
2.9.
Lord, for the salvation of the righteous is from the Lord: and he is their
strength in the day of Psalm. 37.39.
trouble: and therefore it is said here, that the Lord brought again the
captivity of Sion.

Moreover, here we ought to learn in whom we should put our confidence, and on
whom we should rely in time of trouble, not in man, nor in his strength, for
cursed is the man that puts his trust in man, and makes flesh his arm, and
withdraws his heart from Ier. 17.5.
God: not in riches, nor gold, for they cannot save us in the day of the Lords
anger and wrath, they cannot deliver us in time of vengeance and Pro. 18.11.
Eccles. 5.1. Ezekiel. 7.19.
indignation: not in the multitude of alliance and acquaintance, for they, in
time of adversity, like David's familiars, will flee from us; and like Jobs
friends, will forsake us, not in Idols and works of men's hands, which have eyes
and see not, ears and hear Psalm. 115. Quis tam demens qui arbitretur aliquem
quod ipse non babet ^are alteri posse, Lact^lib. 1. cap. 15. de falls. Relig.
not, and so cannot help us; nor yet in Saints deceased, who neither hear nor
see us, all these like an Egyptian reed, and like a broken staff will fail
us, if we lean unto them; but we must trust in him, whose all-seeing eye does
behold our afflictions; and whose all-hearing ear is ever open to harken to
our lamentations; and whose powerful hand is ever able to help us out of all
our tribulations; in him we must trust, who only can see the servitude of his
Exodus 3.7.
Israelites; in him who can hear the complaint of Psalm. 18.6.
David; in him that can bring Joseph out of prison; Daniel out of the Den; and
Jeremiah out of the Dungeon: in him who can restore sight to blind Bartimeus;
health to sick Ezekias; limbs to lame Aeneas; and life to dead Lazarus; yea,
and blessed are they whose hope is in God, and who trust in, the Lord that
brought again the captivity of Sion.

Their isntrumental and subordinate deliverer was Cyrus, The isntrumental
deliverer, Cyrus.
of whom (though he be not named in this place) it shall not be much
impertinent to the purpose, to speak of some things commended in him, and to
be imitated of us, as

First, Many worthy and commendable parts in Cyrus. First, his thankfulness.
his worthy acknowledgement of Gods gracious goodness toward him, in his
preferment and promotion, for whereas the Lord had given into his hands all the
Nations of the Earth, and had made him as sole Monarch in the East: he did not
take the praise thereof to himself, like Zaneherib, bragging of his own Isa.
36. and 37. chapters.
strength: nor like Nebuchadnezzar, boasting of his own Dan. 4.27.
power; but he acknowledged all to have proceeded from the God of Ez^. 1.2. 1.
Esd. 2.3.
heaven, a memorable president to be imitated and thought upon, by all who are
beyond their expectation placed upon the Stage of preferment, for promotion
comes neither from the East, nor from the Psalm. 75.6.7.
West, but from him who arrayed Joseph with fine lining and gold Genesis 41.42.
rings; Mordecai with the Kings apparel and Crown Esth. 6.8.11.
Royal; Daniel with purple and chains of Din. 5.29.
gold; and who brought Saul from seeking his fathers 1. Sam. 9.
Asses; and David from the Psalm. 78.71.
sheep-cote, to hold the Scepter and wear the Crowns of Princes; for thus
shall it be done to the man whom the King (the King of Kings) will honor.

Secondly, Secondly, his obedience to perform Gods will.
his mindfulnesse of Gods Precepts, whereby it was foretold many years before,
that Jerusalem and the Temple should be reedified and repaired by him, and
withal his willingness and obedience to perform the same; for first, by
public Proclamation he gives the Jews liberty to return to raise the walls
of the City, and to rear the Temple 2. C^ro. 36.23. (...) ^.
again; and besides he restores all the Vessels of gold and silver, to the
number of five thousand and four hundred to Zerubabel the Prince of ludah,
which Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the Temple. A commendable pattern to be
followed of all Peers and higher powers, they ought not with Manasses to
pollute the House of 2. Chron. 33.
God: with Shishake, King of Egypt, to rob 1. King. 14.26
it; or with Antiochus to ransacke 1. Macc. 1.21, 22.
it, but with Ioash to repair 2. Chron. 24.
it; with Josiah to renew 2. Chron. 34.
it; and with Cyrus to rear it and raise it again.

Thirdly, he was benign and bountiful and liberal, Thirdly, his liberality
to the poor Jews.
to all such as were employed in this work, or resorted home to Jerusalem; for
all such as through poverty were not able to return, he caused to be
relieved with silver, gold, substance, cattle, and willing Ezra 1.
offerings, strictly charging and commanding that for the building of Gods
House, the expenses and charges should be raised out of his Ezr. 6.
revenues: if all Christian Princes were as forward as he was, the Foxes durst
not so boldly walk upon Mount Sion, nor the little Cubs destroy her Vines, nor
devour her Grapes. What is the cause that every where we see so many Churches
ruinated, and so many Chapels razed to the ground; the Lords Houses so
defaced, and his Servants so disgraced? but because Naboths Vineyard is
impropriated to be Ahabs 1. King. 21.
Orchard; and Strangers eat Panem sanctisicatum, the hallowed bread which
belonged to Aaron and his Exed. 29.32, 33.
sons: and our great ones like Nebuzaradan, with their unhallowed hands do
rob Gods House of it 2. King 25.
treasure. Hence it is that in many places the estate of the Church is like
unto that of the Jews: The carved work of Gods House is broken down with
Axes and Hammers: the Synagogues of God are burnt up, and the dwelling place of
his Name is even defiled, and pulled down to the Psalm. 74.
ground. Hence it is that so many poor Ministers are dieted with Michaia with
bread and 1. King. 22.27.
water, and are apparelled with David's servants, with garments cut off by the
2. Sam. 10.4.
buttocks, and go like famished Nazarites, with a visage blacker then a Lam.
4.8.
cole, and travel like the Gibeonites with torn clothes and clouted Joshua 9.5.
shoes, but let all Symoniacall and sactilegious persons take heed of the
curse that hangs over them, for spoiling of Gods Church, and pilling of his
Ministers; For you are cursed with a curse, because you have spoiled me (says
the Lord) in Tithes and Mal. 3.8.9.
Offerings.

Fourthly, Fourthly, his wisdom and valor in Martial affairs.
I may observe in Cyrus, wisdom joined with valor, policy with power: the
Prophet sets down, the fierceness and furiousness of the Chaldaeans, by
comparing them for forwardness, to Leopards: and for their fierceness, Hab.
1.8.
to Wolves; beasts so ravenous, that the one for eagerness leapes and jumps;
and the other, with open mouth, for greediness runs upon the prey: by which
comparisons, he manifestly expresses the nature and condition of that savage
Nation; yet the Lord enabled Cyrus to subdue them, and girded him with strength
and power to overcome Isai. 45.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
them; and as be enabled him with power and valor, so he endued him with
wisdom and policy. Vide Di^d. Sicul r^um antiq. l. 3. c. 4. de aedificatione
Babylonis caepit ^rbem Cyrus, quam vel bumano opere extrui ^otuisse, vel bumana
virtute destrui posse, v^runque pene incredile apud mortales erat. Or^sius.
Babylon was immured with strong Walls, so fortified with Rampires and Towers,
so impeopled with thousands of Soldiers, and so fenced with the River
Euphrates, that to the Inhabitants it seemed invinsible; and therefore
Balthazar with his Princes fearing no danger, sits securely, feasting and
drinking in the sacred Cups: but Cyrus diuides the River into so many Channels,
that he with his Soldiers pass through safely, and so comes upon the
Chaldaeans, as Gideon came upon the Amalekites, at unawares; and whilst they
are in the height of their jollitie, the Medes Inuadunt vrbem somno vinoque
sepultam.enter into Babylon, as the Graecians entered Troy, whilst some of them
are drowsy through sleep, and some drunk with wine. Wisdom and valor are
required and expected in Rulers, and specially in a Warrior; he must not be
like Rehoboam, a child and 2. Chro. 13.7.
faint-hearted: nor yet like Ahab, too aduenturesome and 2. Chron. 18.
forward; but like Judith, bold as a Lion, and yet like Dan, wise as a Genesis
49.9. and 17.
Serpent. Iosuah, though he was animated and encouraged by the Lord himself
to fight against all the Kings of Ios. 1.
Canaan; yet warily he sends Spies to view and search the Ios. 2.
Land, and politikely lies in ambush, and takes the City of Ios. 8.
Ai. Judas Macchabaeus was strong and valiant from his 1. Macc. 2.66.
youth; yet privily he assaults his Enemies in the night, comes upon them at
unawares, and burns up their Towns and Cities on a 2. Macc. 8.6, 7. Phil.
Mel. Chro. lib. 2.
sudden.

Now omitting to speak of Cyrus his education, which some have thought to have
been under Daniel in the Palace of Shusan, in the Province of Elam, and other
memorable gifts wherewith God had endued him, lest I should be too prolixe and
tedious; yet in that the Lord uses him as an instrument, to deliver his people
out of the hands of their Enemies: it should animate and encourage all
Christian Princes to sight the Lords battles manfully, in resisting all the
Enemies of the Truth, to Gods glory and the good of his Church. God promised
and purposed to root out the profane inhabitants of Canaan, and yet he
excites Moses and Aaron, Joshua and Caleb, to war against them: the Lord can
with water drown his Enemies, as he did the Exodus 14.
Egyptians: by an Angel destroy them, as he did the Isa. 37.36.
Assyrians: with a noise to affright them, as he did the 2. King 7.6.
Aramites: and fell them with hailestones, as he did the Ios. 10.11.
Ammorites: yet to verify his word, Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man his
blood shall be Genesis 9.
shed: He will use man as an instrument, to punish the cruelty of man. God in
his Decree and just Judgment, has determined to destroy and overthrow this
Western Babylon, and though he might destroy it with fire from Heaven, as he
did Genesis 19.
Sodom; yet will he have the Inhabitants of the earth to be instruments and
agents herein. For the Kings of the earth shall make her desolate and naked,
they shall eat her flesh and burn her with Revel. 17.13.16.
fire. And who knows whether even this be not the time appointed, for the
destruction and desolation of that whorish City and bloody See? For the
deliverance of Gods Saints from all Antichristian and Babylonish bondage, and
for bringing again the captivity of Sion.

But me thinks, I hear how the Adversary insults over the Saints, as if they
had the better of them; nay, the whole victory, and had carried them already
into captivity, It is not for any respect that God has to the wicked, that
he suffers often his children to be oppressed and vexed by them.
boasting and bragging of the equity of their Cause, the truth of their
Profession, and the soundness of their Religion: but I answer them, It was
for no goodness that was in Nebuchadnezzar, that the Lord delivered his people
into his hands, for his Idolatry was great, greater was his cruelty, and
greatest was his pride. As for his Idolatry, it was such, that according to
the custom of other Heathen, when they were about to enterprise any thing,
they were wont to immolate and sacrifice unto their heathenish Gods, and by the
looking into the intrailes of the beast sacrificed (where the Devil gave them
some sign) they coniectured what would be the end and event of their
enterprise; so Nebuchadnezzar, doubting whether he should wage war against
Jerusalem or the Ammonites, did immolate and offer sacrifice unto his Idols and
Gods.

-- Pecudumque reclusis.
Pectoribus, inhians spirantia consulit exta.
He stood at the parting of the way, and did look into the Ezekiel 21.21.
liver. As for his cruelty, he made the whole world as a wilderness, he
destroyed the Cities thereof, and opened not the house of his Isa. 14.61, 17.
prisoners. And as for his pride, the holy Ghost calls him Lucifer, the son
of the morning, who said in his heart, Ibid. verse. 12, 13, 14.
that he would ascend into heaven, and exalt his Throne above the Throne of
God, he would ascend above the height of the clouds, and be like the most
High. Now, I hope, our Adversary will not say, that for any desert in
Nebuchadnezzar, the Lord put his people into his hands; no more is it (may I
say) for their merits or works of supererogation, or for the worth and
worthiness of their Nebuchadnezzar, their high Priest, their Prince, their
God, that the Lord suffered, and in many places as yet does suffer his own to
be under them in captivity: for their breaden God, their wooden Images,
their canonized Saints, etc. paint out their foul Idolatry; their torturing
and tormenting, martyring and massacring of Gods Servants, does sully paint out
their cruelty; and his Holiness assuming unto himself, and their attributing
unto him all power in Heaven, Earth and Hell, does demonstrate their vanity
and ignorance, and his ambition and insolence. But as the Jews transgressions
were the cause of their captivity, Four reasons why the godly are often
overthrown by the wicked.
so our sins are the cause of our afflictions. And if you would be further
satisfied why the Lord did, and does often suffer the wicked to prevail
against the godly: let us to his glory and our own shame confess, first, 1.
Their own sins generally.
that our wickedness is the cause thereof. Why was the children of Israel
delivered into the hands of the Philistimes forty years? because they did
evil in the sight of the Judge. 13.1.
Lord. The case is ours, it is for our sins that the Lord suffers us often to
have the overthrow of our enemies. The wicked flee when no man pursues, but
the righteous are bold as a Prou. 28.1. Leuit. 26.36.
Lion, says Solomon; does not the Lord himself plainly tell us, that if we
harken diligently unto his Voice, and do his Commandments, then we shall be
blessed when we come in, and blessed when we go forth; our enemies shall be
smitten before our face, they shall come out one way against us, and flee seven
ways before us: but if we do not harken to the Voice of the Lord, nor observe
his Statutes, then the Lord will cause us to be smitten before our enemies:
We shall go out one way against them, and flee seven ways Deuteronomy. 28.
before them.

Again, it is to be doubted there be too many cursed Achans amongst us, 2.
The covetous mind of common soldiers.
whose heart is only set upon the accursed thing, I mean, their mind is not
to fight so much for Gods glory and the good of his Church, as it is for the
prey, the accursed Babylonish garment and silver Shekels, this forced the
children of Israel to fly before the men Ios. 7.
of Ai, and this may be the cause why we fly before the face of our Enemy.

Thirdly, 3. Want of devotion amongst our selves.
there is but too little devotion amongst us: we are not so fervent in prayer,
nor so zealous in our supplications to God as we ought: do we not remember
that when Moses hand was lifted up that Israel prevailed, but when his hand
fell down, then Amalek Exodus 17.11.
prevailed: it was not Iosuahs sword, but Moses words: not Iosuahs power, but
Moses his prayer that discomfited Amalek.

Lastly, 4. For the wickeds further condemna^ion, and the godlies trial and
humiliation.
the Lord does often suffer the wicked to have the better hand of the godly,
for the ones humiliation, and for the others destruction. Do we not read in
that lamentable conflict betwixt the children of Benjamin, and the children of
Israel: Israel had the better part, first, in the equity of the cause, for
both the wickedness was committed amongst the Beniamites; and then they
maintained their folly in not harkning unto the good advice of Israel, and
delivering up the offenders the children of Belial, to suffer for their
lewdness and to put away evil from Israel. Secondly, there was great odds in
number, for Israel was almost twenty for one. Lastly, they were permitted and
licensed by the Lords own mouth to go against them, and yet for all these
they were twice discomfited, and forty thousand of Israel slain; but what,
did this work contrition and humiliation in Israel, for they sorrowed and wept
before the Lord, but in the other pride and presumption, for they said among
themselves, they are smitten down before us as at the first; but what followed
in the end, Israel has the victory; the Beniamites are wholly overthrown,
saving a sew that fled to the wilderness unto the rock Indg. 20.
Rinnon; these are the reasons why the Lord does often suffer the godly to have
the overthrow by their Adversary; but if the godly would prevail against
their Enemy, they must not do evil in the sight of the Lord, they must stone
out all accursed Achans forth from amongst them, they must lift up their hands
nay, their hearts unto the Lord, and they must weep and lament before him,
then gird your swords upon your thigh, O you most mighty, according to your
worship and renown: good luck have you with your Honor, ride on because of
the Word of Truth, of Meekness, and of Righteousness, and your right hand
shall teach you terrible Psalm. 45.
things: pull down the walls of Jericho; strew the gates of Sichem with salt;
burn up the City of A^, for blessed is he that rewards Babylon as she
has served us, yea, blessed shall he be that dasheth her children against
the stones, and assure your selves, that as the Lord has decreed, so in his
own time he will bring again the captivity of Sion.

Captivity is twofold, Corporal of the body, and that either imprisonment, as
Joseph in Pharaohs chief Stewards Genesis 40.3.
house; and Jeremy in the house of Ier. 37.15.
Jonathan the Scribe, or else servitude and subjection that one Nation is to
another, as Israel to Egypt, and Judah to Babylon.

Captivity Spiritual of the Soul, is either of the regenerate through the
corruption of nature; for there is a Law in our members rebelling against the
Law of our minds, and leads us captive to the Law of Romans 7.23.
sin: or of the reprobate whose hearts are hardened in their wickedness, for
be that commits sin is the servant of Ioh. 8.34.
sin: and, of whom a man is overcome, of the same he is brought in 1. Pet.
2.19.
bondage: now the latter of these is the cause of the former, as the Prophet
says, The Lord afflicted Judah for the multitude of her transgressions, and
her children are gone into captivity before the Lam. 1.
enemy.

Now, in the bringing again of Sions captivity, we must first observe the
manner, and then the time. The Time is noted out in the particle When, The
manner of their deliverance.
the Manner is here not mentioned, but it was thus, first, The Lord enabled
Cyrus to subdue their Enemy, and then put it into his heart to set them at
liberty: and hence we might gather for our consolation, that God will not
only free his Church and Children out of all their troubles, but also
overthrow all their Oppressors and Disturbers: for as a Father burns the rod
when he has chastised his child; even so deals God with the wicked, whom he
uses as a rod to correct his Children, in his indignation he burns them, and
in his fiery wrath he consumes them.

But is it not injustice in God, Quest.
first, to put his people into the hands of the Heathen, and after to punish
the Heathen for their cause?

No, Answ.
because the ungodly, whenever the Lord does glue his people over into their
hands, they oppress and vex them without all measure or mean injustice.
Summum ius summa iniuria crudeles vocabo quicum puniendi causam habent, modum
non habent, Sen. de Clem. ad Ner.
Now we know that the strictest Law proves greatest wrong; and Seneca calls
all such cruel, who having cause to punish, yet have no measure in punishment;
this cruelty kindled the Lords wrath against the Chaldaeans. I am jealous,
says the Lord of Hosts, over Jerusalem and Sion, with a great zeal, and am
greatly angry against the careless Heathen, for I was angry but a little,
and they helped forward the Zath. 1.14, 15.
affliction.

Again, Answ. 2. Is It us est iniustu^ euadere just, quam iustum punire
unjust, Chrysostom. (...).
the wicked are not content to exercise this cruelty upon delinquents and
offenders; but besides they dare lay violent hands upon the Lords servants,
whereas it agrees better with equity to let the guilty go as innocent, then
to punish the innocent wrongfully, yea, and is is better, faith one, unjustly
to absolve, then wrongfully to condemn; and why? The one is an offense and
iniquity, and the other wickedness and impiety. Now the Babylonians killed the
Prophets, and murdered the Preachers of the Lord, hanged up their Princes,
dishonored their Elders, defiled their Matrons, and deflowred their Lam. 5.
Virgins, and villainously abused them without all distinction of sex, or
exception of 1. Esd. 1.53, 54. 2. Chron. 36.17.
persons: this inhumanitie added unto their former cruelty, did whet the Lords
anger, and did provoke him to wrath against them, as we may see, by his
threatening of them by the mouth of his Prophet. Sit still (says he) and get
thee into darkness, O daughter of the Chaldeans, for thou shall no more be
called the Lady of the Kingdoms. I was wroth with my people, I have polluted
mine inheritance, and given them into thine hand, thou did show them no
mercy: but thou did lay a very heavy yoke upon the Ancient, therefore shall
evil come upon thee, and thou shall not know the morning thereof, destruction
shall come upon thee, which thou shall not be able to put away: destruction
shall come upon thee suddenly ere thou be Isai. 47.5, 6. and 11. verse.
aware.

Let this teach men to take heed, how they vex or molest Gods Saints, for as
David slew the Lion, and killed the Bear, because they meddled with his 1. Sam.
17.34, 35.
Lambs: so shall the Lord smite, wound and slay, such as devour his Lambs, whom
he tenders as the apple of his eye: and as Moses killed the Egyptian, because
he did contend with an Exodus 2.11, 12.
Hebrew, even so the Lord will deal with all that dare enter the lists or
contend with his Servants; for it is a righteous thing with him, to recompense
tribulation to them that trouble 2 Thessalonians 1.6. Insta malis haec, admisso pro
crimine p^ena est, Si que f^cerunt eadem patiantur and ipsi.
them, and therefore he will assuredly require the blood of Abel at the hands
of Cain; he will be avenged on the Egyptians, for oppressing his Israelites;
and he will repay double the cruelty of the Chaldeans, when the Lord brings
again the captivity of Sion.

The time of their deliverance, is noted out in this particle, The time of
their deliverance. Ier. 25.11. Dan. 9.2.
When, and that was not before the threescore and ten years, foreprophesied by
Jeremiah, were expired. But why did the Lord suffer his people to continue so
long in captivity?

The reason is, because they abhorred the Laws of God, they despised his
Ordinances, Quest. Answ.
they did violate his Covenant, and they did not keep his Sabbaths, and
therefore the Lord dealt with them according to his Word: if thou will not obey
me, nor keep all these Commandments, I will scatter you among the Heathen,
and I will draw out a sword after you, and your Land shall be waste, and your
Cities shall be desolate; then shall the Land enjoy her Sabbaths, as long as
it lies Leuit. 26.33, 34.
waste. Where we see that they continued thus long in captivity, First,
because of their sins. Secondly, that the Lords Word might be verified, and
his Threatenings accomplished. Thirdly, that the Land might rest and enjoy her
Sabbaths: now the Land had fulfilled ten Sabbaths in these threescore and ten
years.

Further, Answ. 2.
Daniel alludeth his three score and ten weeks unto these threescore and ten
years; as they were threescore and ten years in captivity, before they were
delivered: so it should be but seventy seuens, four hundred and ninety
years, till our Redemption should be wrought by Christ, by his death to
abolish sin, bring in justice, demolish iniquity, perform every vision and
prophecy, Dan. 9.24.
and to anoint the most Holy.

The observation which I gather from this place, is, as Solomon says, That to
all things there is an appointed time, and a time to every purpose under the
heaven, a time to be borne, and a time to die; a time to seek, and a time to
lose; a time to reap, and a time to sow; a time of war, and a time of
Eccles. 3.1, 2.
peace: a time of bondage, and a time of freedom; a time of captivity, and a
time of liberty; there is a time of four hundred years for Israel to be in
Egypt, a time of twenty years for Jacob to be with Laban, a time of two
years for Joseph to be in prison, and a time of threescore and ten years for
Judah to be in Babylon; yet when these Times are expired, Israel shall come out
of Egypt; Jacob shall part with Laban; Joseph shall be brought out of prison;
and Judah out of Babylon.

This should teach us, to rest contented in abiding the Lords leisure, and not
presumptuously to appoint him, as it were, a time to free us out of affliction;
we must refer that to him: for, when I see convenient time (says the Lord) I
will judge Psalm. 75.2.
righteously. Daniel was patient, until he understood that the three score and
ten years were accomplished, and then in all true humility he powered out his
Prayers and Supplications to the Lord for their enlargement: so let us in time
of affliction call upon God, Non est Deus temporibus alligatus, sed pro l
berrim^ sua voluntate edit opera sua quando ipsi placilum est, Polanus in Dan.
cap. 9.
to be out Deliverer; and yet in the interim, rest contented and wait patiently
for the time appointed of God: for we see that Christ our Mediator will
interceed for us in Zach. 1.12.
due time, and God will both hear us in an acceptable time, and help us in a
day of Isai 49.8.
salvation.

Again, seeing they were not delivered before these three score and ten years
were expired: it puts us in mind that so long as we are in this body, we are
as it were in captivity: for here we have no case, for we are borne to labor;
we have no rest, for our life is a warfare; Per septuagint^ ann^s in quibus
fily Israel captiuitatem sustinuerunt, significatur tempus poenitentiae, viz.
vila nostia in qua Dominus numerat dies quomodo expendimus tempus, Hug. Card.
in Psalm. 90.
we have no home, for we are but sojourners; we may look for no rest, for
the Devil does malign us; and we are sure to have no peace, for the world
does malice us; but when the years of this servile thraldom are accomplished,
we shall be freed from the world; purged from sin, and delivered from Satan,
and yet this is not till the consummation of our life, and the hour of our
death. For the time of our life is three score years and ten, Psalm. 90. verse.
10.

One question further may here be demanded, Quest.
when these three score and ten years did begin, and when they did end?

They did neither begin in the year of the World 3364. Answ.
but before Christ 606. nor ended in the year of our creation 3434. before the
nativity 536. as some have coniectured, for this their opinion will not agree
with Daniels three score and ten weeks [490 yeeres] for they will differ six
and forty years; nor yet are they to be numbered from the beginning of
Iehoiakims reign, as others have thought, for then there should be more then
three score and ten, which is not to be warranted; nor yet are they to be
reckoned from Ieconiahs carrying away, for then there should be seven short,
which is not to be allowed; but we must begin our account at the carrying away
of Daniel, and other Nobles, which was in the first year of Nebuchadnezzars
reign, the fourth year of Iehoiakims reign, and seven years before the
carrying away of Ieconiahs, and these years were ended the first year that
Cyrus won See Dan. 1. Ier. 25. Matthew. 1.11. 2. Chron. 36.9. 2. King. 24.12.
and 25.27. Ezra 1.1. Sequatur quisque bac in part quod videbitur vero maxim
consen: aneu^n, nan vt illa tempora suerunt turbulentissima ita temp rum
suppucatio satis est, impexa. Bullingerus in Dan. homil. 1. cap. 1.
Babylon.

Here we might observe, how truly the Lord observes his promise made unto
his Children. When the four hundred and ninety years of Isreal's being in
Egypt was expired, even the self same day departed all the Hosts of the Lord
out of Exodus 12.41. Gal. 3.17.
Egypt, in the same time that he promised Abraham a son, Sarah conceived and
bare Isaak, at the same season that God told Genesis 18.10. and 21.2. Romans 9.9.
The Jews deliverance and our redemption, compared together. Fac^is discensus
Auerni. sed reuocare gradum, su, crasque euadere ad an^^is hoc o^us, hic labor
est. See Col. 1. Heb. 10. Romans 5.2. Cor. 5.1. Cor. 15.2. Tim 1. Ephesians. 1. Col.
3.
Abraham. And hereafter the three score and ten years are fulfilled, be
brings the Jews out of Babylon, and brings again the captivity of Sion. But
now, before we proceed, let us compare their Deliverance with our Redemption.

First, as they of themselves were not able to free themselves from the bondage
of the Chaldeans, and therefore the Lord sent Cyrus to be their Deliverer; so
man of himself had power to taste malum malum, that cursed apple, which like
the apple of Sodom, was pleasing to the eye, but poison to the tooth, and so
falling mad himself and all his posterity, servants to Sin, and slaves to
Satan; but of himself was unable to recover his fall, and free himself and us
from that slavery: yet the love of God toward Man was such, that he sent his
own Son, coequall and coeternall with himself, who paid the price of our
Redemption, and delivered us from the Devils servile thraldom; for Man having
once offended God, could not again have pacified his wrath, satisfied his
justice, made recompense for the offense, nor reconcild us to his favor: and
therefore Christ our Redeemer has cancelled the Handwriting that was against
us, vanquished death, overcome hell, overthrown sin, and subdued Satan; he
has triumphed over all our Enemies, ascended on high and led captivity
captive; and like a victorious Conqueror has entered into heaven in our
behalf, and purchased for us the hope of a better Inheritance: that as Cyrus
was the Lords anointed, to bring his people out of Isa. 45.1.
Babel, so Christ was anointed with the Oil of gladness above his fellows,
to free us from the Grave and Hell.

As Cyrus was the Lords Isa. 44.28.
Shepherd, to bring his sheep out of the mouth of Daniels Dan. 7.4.
Lion, the King of Babylon; so Christ was the chief Shepherd and Bishop of
our 1. Pet. 2.25.
souls, to bring us out of the jaws of the devil, who goes about like a
roaring Lion seeking whom he may 1. Pet. 5.8.
devour.

As Cyrus relieved the poor and impotent with silver, gold, and Ezra. 1.
substance: so Christ, ascending on high gave gifts unto men, for to every one
of us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of Ephesians 4.7, 8.
Christ.

As by Cyrus, the Temple was replenished and beautified again, with vessels of
gold and silver: so through Christ, the Temple was purged from Pharisaicall
Luke 19.
leaven, and the Church beautified again with the pure and undefiled Word.

And as by Cyrus, the Lord delivered the Jews after Ieremiahs threescore and
ten years were expired: even so, when Daniels threescore and ten weeks, four
hundred and ninety years were Dan. 9.24.
fulfilled, even in the fullness of time God sent his Son, borne of a woman,
and made under the Law, to redeem us which were under the Gal. 4.4.
Law, at what time the Lord brought again the captivity of Sion.

Sion was a Mountain by Jerusalem, The party delivered Sion.
so famous amongst all the Mountains of Iudaea; that not only the Jews,
Jerusalem; nay, nor yet the whole Kingdom of Iudaea, but even the whole
universal Church, consisting both of Jews and Gentiles, are comprehended
under that name, for Mount sion lying Northward, is fair in situation, it is
the joy of the whole Earth, and City of the Psalm. 48.2.
great King; but in this place it is taken for the remnant of the Jews, that
were permitted to return from Babylon to Jerusalem, from Chaldaea to Iudaea,
according as it was showed to Jeremiah in a vision, wherein he saw two baskets
of Figs, the one exceeding good, the other exceeding Ier. 24.
evil; by which was signified, that the profane and rebellious amongst the
people, should be destroyed with the sword, famine and pestilence: but upon
part of the people, God would set his eyes for good, build them and not destroy
them, plant them and not root them out. One part of Ezekiels hairs were cut
with a knife, another burnt with fire, the third scattered in the wind, but a
few in number were bound up in his Ezekiel. 8.1. to the end.
lap. The Prophet saw six men, every one having a weapon ready to destroy;
and yet they that mourned were marked in their Ezekiel. 9.
foreheads. By these figurative comparisons we may see, that it is the godly
who are but few in number (compared to the wicked) that mourn and grieve for
their sins, to whom properly belongs the tender mercy and free love of God;
it is Mount Sion, the Lords Church and Children, whom he tenders as the apple
of his eye, whom he couers under his wings, whose mouth he fills with good
things, whose days he renewes like the Eagles, whose life he redeemeth from
the grave, and whose soul he freeth from corruption.

But thou will say, Quest.
were there none else but the Elect of God only set at liberty, and freed
from this captivity?

Yea truly; Answ. Animalia mitia and immitia.
For I know that in Noah's Arc there was the Lion and the Lamb, blessed Shem
and cursed Cham, who were together delivered from the Deluge, representing the
visible Church, wherein many wicked as well as the godly, are freed from
corporal troubles, and do frequently participate of temporal blessings, as
here no question, but many of the ungodly as well as the Saints of God, did
receive the benefit of this deliverance, but they have no part in our
Redemption, they do not participate of Sions salvation: for Cham may be in
the Arc with Shem, and yet be accursed; and Judas may be in the ship with
Peter, and yet be damned; and herein does their deliverance differ from our
Redemption, A difference betwixt their Deliverance and our Redemption.
although the one was a type of the other. For their deliverance by Cyrus out
of Babylon, was common to the ungodly with the godly, but our Redemption from
hell through Christ, is proper and peculiar to the Elect only.

Let not us therefore, from this their deliverance, conclude a general
Redemption, like the Origenists, who hold an universal salvation of Men and
Devils. God has shut up all under unbelief, Romans 11.32.
that he might have mercy on all, this and such like Texts they wrest and
misse-construe; but we must know that this word is sometimes taken universally,
for all mankind, as in that place, In Adam all die; sometimes more strictly,
for some, viz. the Elect only, as in the words following, 1. Col. 15.22.
In Christ all shall be made aline; sometimes indefinitely, as in that place,
All held John as a Matthew. 21.26. Non de singulis generum, sed de generibus
singulorum.
Prophet, that is, many: for all neither saw, nor acknowledged, nor believed
John, I, thousands never heard of him. Lastly, Augustine himself, who for a
time was much blemished with this error, but after espying the danger thereof,
he mightily confutes this erroneous opinion, and wisely answers such fond
objections. This All, says he, must be understood, not of every man, but of
men of every sort; the Gentile as well as the Jew, the poor as well as the
rich, and contra, for there is no difference betwixt the Jew and the Grecian,
for he that is Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him, and
whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall Romans 10.12, 13. Read the
second Chapter to the Romans. Quest. Answ. The Church compared to Mount Sion,
both for the situation and signification of Sion. First, for situation, in
four respects. 1. Sion, a Hill of great height.
be saved.

Now, why is the Church compared to Mount Sion?

First, for the situation; and secondly, for the signification of it: as for
the situation of it, one says, that it was a Hill, magnae altitudinis,
fortitudinis, plenitudinis, pulchritudinis, of great height, strength,
fruitfulness and pleasure. First, a Hill of great height and sublimitie,
whereon the Temple of Solomon was built, and not below in a Valley. Noah's Arc
did rest on the Mountain Genesis 8.4.
of Ararat, the figure of the Tabernacle was first showed upon Mount Heb. 8.5.
Moriah, the Law was given upon Mount Exodus 20.
Sinai, and Salomons Temple was built upon Mount Sion; all teaching us where
our conversation should be,
not here below in this theeuish Cave of Cacus, in this hellish Den of
Cerberus, in this woeful Valley of Tears, and in this fearful Field of
Blood; but as the Apostle says, Above in Heaven, from whence we look for our
Savior, Phil. 3.20.
the Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly,
she is compared to Sion, to show us, that as a City that is built upon a
Hill, Match. 5.14.
cannot be hid: so she and her members, should not always lurk in
obscurity, nor lie hid through adversity: the Arc must not ever be kept
close in the House of Obededom. Moses Basket must not always be shrouded
among the Bull-rushes: the Prophets cannot be continually hid in the Cave of
Obadia; nor Eliah lurk still in a Cave on Mount Horeb: no, for it shall be in
the last days, that the Mountain of the House of God, shall be prepared on
the top of the Mountains, and shall be exalted above the Hills, and all
Nations shall flow unto it; and many people shall say, come, let us go up to
the Mountain of the Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob, and he will teach
us his ways, Isai. 2.2, 3.
and we will walk in his paths.

Again, 2. Sion, a Hill of great strength.
Sion was a Hill of great strength and security, so the Church of God is so
firmly and steadfastly grounded, that the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it; she is that House of wisdom,
surely, seated upon seven Pro. 9.1.
Pillars; she is that goodly edifice, built upon a Rock, against which, though
the winds blow, the floods flow, and the rain beat, yet can she not be
moved; for the Rock whereon she stands is Christ, how is both the groundstone
that does uphold, and the corner stone that does conioyne the whole Matthew.
21.42, Psalm. 118.22. Isa. 28.16. Acts 4.11. Romans 9.33. 1. Pet. 2.6, 7.
building, so that neither the assaults of Satan, nor the attempts of man, can
overthrow the least stone thereof. For all that trust in the Lord, shall be as
Mount Sion, which cannot be removed, but remains for Psalm. 125.1.
ever.

Thirdly, Mount Sion was not barren through coldness, 3. Sion, a Hill very
fruitful.
like the Hill Caucasus; nor through heat, like the Hill Vesuvius; it is not
cursed, like the Mountains of Gilboah; nor polluted with corruption, like
Golgatha, but it is watered with dew from heaven like Hermon; moystned with the
silver Streams, like the Springs of Lebanon; and stored with all fruitful
Plants, like Mount Ephraim: where by we are taught,
that the Church is replenished with all spiritual blessings and heavenly
graces; she is that Mountain, whereon the Lord does feast all people with
fined wines and fat things: she is that House of wisdom, wherein the Lord
has killed his victuals, drawn his wine, and prepared a Table for his ghests:
she is that Orchard, replenished with all sweet fruits, as Camphyre, and
Saffron, Calamus and Cinnamon: here are the waters of Life, to quensh our
thirst: here is the bread of Life, to stay our hunger: here is the precious
balm of Gilead, and the costly oil of Oliuet, to soften our wounds, and to
cure our sores: here is honey to comfort us, milk to nourish us, and wine to
cheer our hearts; and in a word, the Lord will satisfy us with the fatness
of his House, and will give us drink out of the Rivers of his pleasures; for
with him is the Well of Life, and in his Light shall we see light.

Lastly, Mount Sion above all the Mountains of Iudaea, was most beautiful and
seemly, 4. Sion, a Hill most beautiful.
the situation of it being delectable and amiable. For Mount Sion lying
northward, is fair in situation, it is the joy of the whole Earth, and C^tie
of the great King: whereby mystically was expressed the beauty of the Church;
the Arc of the Covenant was ouer-layed within and without with gold; and all
things in Salomons Temple were covered with gold,
pointing out the glory and the beauty of the mystical Temple, the House of
Christ, the Hill of Holiness, and the Tabernacle of the most High, wherein
must enter no deformed Thersites, no base Abimelek, no crooked Vulcan, no lame
Mephibosheth, no covetous Croesus, no uncharitable Dives, no lascivious Lamea,
no gadding Dinah, and no wanton Dalilah, but such, as with Esther are purified
and clean; such as leave their sins, as the Woman did her pitcher; such as
forgo their iniquity, as the Apostles did their Nets; such as throw their
errors away, as blind Bartymeus did his cloak, even such like, and none else,
The Church called Sion, in regard of the signification.
must stay on this holy Mountain, for none shall dwell in the Lords
Tabernacle, nor rest on his holy Mountain, but such as walk uprightly and
work righteousness.

Now, 1. Heap, tumulus acer, nus.
as for the signification of the word Sion; first, it is translated, a heap,
and that does show us, first, that the Church is a company,
called and collected from all the corners of the Earth, to be one body in Romans
12.5.
Christ; the Jews above all the Nations in the world, were chosento be a
precious people to God; ^ Deuteronomy. 7.
yet the invisible Church was not limited within such narrow bounds: for even
among the Heathen, God had his throughout all Ages: he called Rachab out of
Jericho; Ruth, from Moab; and he had Job in the Land of Vz; and now the
partition wall is broken down, there is but one Sheepherd and one sheepfold.
There is neither Jew nor Grecian, bond nor free, male nor female, but all are
one in Gal. 3.28.
Christ Jesus.

Again,
the Church being compared to a heap, conioynd and gathered together, does
show us what unity and amity, what peace and tranquillity, there should be
within her walls. She should be like Jerusalem, all within her self at union,
and not like the Tower of Babel, full of confusion; like Christ's Coat, all of
one piece; and not like Ieroboams coat, cut into twelve pieces; teaching us
that there ought to be no contention, no division, no confusion, no dissension
amongst her members, but we should all be of one soul and one mind, keeping
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Ephesians. 4.3. 2. A Glass. Speculum.
Spe^ulatio.
peace.

Moreover, Sion signifies as much as a Glass or Speculation, because the Law
which serves for a looking glass, wherein a man may behold his natural Iam.
1.23.
face,
and whereby he may come to know himself, and his corrupt nature, was first
there to be read, there to be had, and there to be understood. For the Law came
forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Isa. 2.3.
Jerusalem. The Women brought their looking glasses, and offered them to the
use of the Exodus 38.8.
Tabernacle, teaching us that if we would apparently perceive the leprous spots
of our ugly sins, to repair to the Tabernacle, to Mount Sion, where the Law
is read, whereby we shall see the spots of our souls, as in a looking glass,
we may see the blots of our skin. For by the Law comes the knowledge of Romans
3.20.
sin.

Lastly, Sion is a Glass,
because whilst we are in this militant Church, we see not perfectly, but as
it were, through a glass, obscurely. Here we see Christ standing behind the
wall, our sins being like a partition betwixt Him and Isa. 59.2.
us: here with Moses, we see only his Exodus 33.23.
backparts: here with the blind man, we discern Mark. 8.24.
nothing thoroughly, but hereafter we shall see face to 1. Ioh. 3.2.
face: here we know but in part, but hereafter we shall know even as we are
1. Cor. 13.14.
known.

Thus far have we spoken of the Jews deliverance; wherein we have touched;
First, the Deliverer, both principal, the Lord; and isntrumental, Cyrus.
Secondly, the manner of their deliverance, which was by the overthrow of their
Enemy. Thirdly, the Time, which was, when the threescore and ten years,
foretold by Jeremiah, was fulfilled: and lastly, we have seen the reasons,
why the Church of God is comprehended under the name of Sion: it follows to
speak of the sequels that followed upon this deliverance, but let this suffice
for this time: and now Let us desire, and in all humility pray the Lord, still
to be favorable to Sion, and still to build up the walls of Psalm. 51.18.
Jerusalem, that the sons of them that have afflicted her, may come and bow
down to her; and all they that have despised her, may fall down at the soles
of her feet, and call her, Isa. 60.14.
City of the Lord; Sion, the holy one of Israel, which the Lord grant for his
only Son, our only Saviors sake. Amen.

THE SAINTS SECVRITIE, OR The first sequel, that followed upon this
deliverance, viz. Their coadmiration.
THE SECOND SERMON.
VERSE. 1. Then were we like unto them that dream.


THese words contain the first thing, that ensued after the first report of
their liberty, viz. their own astonishment, and wondering at this unlooked
for alteration, and unexpected change of their estate, They Erant sicut
somn^antes.
were like unto them that dream.

There be some that translate these words, Sicut consolati, vel ^orroborati.
like unto them that are comforted and chearished, and make this particle,
Sicut. Sicut non similitudinem sed pr^^rie^a^emdeno^at, Aug.
As, not to import any similitude, but rather the truth and more certainty of
their consolation; as when we say, such a man does like an upright man, we
affirm, that such a man is honest and upright. John says, The Word was made
Flesh and dwelt amongst us, and we beheld the glory thereof, as the glory of
the only begotten of the * Father. Where this particle, As, 2 Ioh. 1.14.
does not betoken a likeness, but the truth and propriety of the matter,
that, that glory beseemed and belonged to the only begotten Son of God; so
that the meaning should be this, Non impl^tionem sed imperfection^m. Beati dici
non possunt plene consolati, quia nondum ipsis associati sunt omnes electi, ad
communis gaudy complem^ntum, Lorin.
That they were truly comforted and fully rejoiced, when they were freed from
captivity, and set at liberty. But others think, that As does not insinuate
a fullness, but a want of joy, because they could not fully be comforted,
seeing they were not as yet fully delivered; their joy could not be full, when
their liberty was not in whole, but in part. Neither can the joy of the
faithful be said to be full in this world, because here we sorrow and Romans
8.23.
groan. Here we have the Spirit our Job. 14.16.
comforter: but we look for Romans 8.19.
another. Here we are as sorro wing, and yet 2. Cor. 6.
rejoicing. Here we rejoice in Romans 12.12.
hope: and hope deferred makes a sick Prou. 13.12. Sicut somniantes.
Quantacunque hic sit consolatio est quasi ^mbra, and quaedam tantum simil^tudo
suture consolationis, Remigius in locum.
heart. And therefore it pleases some rather to translate it, like unto them
that dream, confirming their former assertion by this translation: because,
whatsoever comfort we have in this life, especially if it be not spiritual, is
but vain and vanishing, and like a dream, it is but a shade and similitude of
the comfort we shall receive hereafter. Now, to find out the true meaning of
the words, following the latter, the most used, and most accepted translation.
We must briefly touch the several sorts of dreams, which are either natural
or supernatural; supernatural, are diabolical and divine. Divine dreams.
Divine, procured by God himself, whereby he did reveal his Will unto his
Servants, as to Jacob and Joseph. And sometimes he restrained by dreams the
wicked from evil; as Laban, from hurting Jacob; and Abimeleck. from defiling
Sarah. Thus God spoke in dreams and visions of the night, when sleep falls
upon Job 33.14.15.
men.

Diabolical dreams.
Diabolical dreams are such, whereby the Devil deludeth and deceives,
vexes and tormenteth men, as he did Brutus, before his last conflict with
Augustus, appearing to him fearfully in his sleep, and telling him that he
was his evil spirit, and that he should see him at Philippi; where, after he
being overcome, he desperately flue himself. By dreams he does vex and
trouble the wicked, as he did the Egyptians, who besides the manifold plagues
inflicted upon them, the sight of fearful dreams vexed Wisd. 18.17.
them: but in this place, where the Psalmographer does compare the Jews, after
their first hearing of their deliverance, to men that dream: Neither of both
here meant.
no such dreams are to be understood: For all dreams procured of God were
true and certain, and the event and issue, sure and certain: but such, (...)
as proceed from the illusion and deception of the Devil, were obscure and
uncertain, and the event ambiguous and doubtful, and it had been no less
sin to believe the last, then to doubt of the first.

Natural dreams are caused, either through the perturbation of the mind,
when it is charged and disquieted with cares, Natural dreams, from whence
they come.
for dreams come by the multitude of Eccle. 5.3.
business? or from the affections thereof: as the hungry and thirsty dream,
that they are eating and drinking, when they are faint, and their soul Isaiah
29.8.
longs; or they proceed from the constitution of the body: if the party be
flegmatike, his dreams are usually of waters; if cholerike, of wars; if
sanguine, then are they mirthfull; if melancholic, then are they mournful.

Now, The Psalmists meaning.
it seems, the psalmist does compare them, either to such, as by the ardent
affection of the mind, do dream of things they would feign have; or to such,
as are of a sanguine complexion, and so naturally and usually dream of
joyful and pleasant things.

If we follow the former exposition, we may expound the words to their
commendation, 1. Acception of the words.
that they did so vehemently long after, and so earnestly desire their
deliverance, that sleeping and waking, it run in their minds; that as
waking, they wished it; so dreaming, they desired it.

Look how the mind of Man, in the day is exercised, so commonly his brain
and his fantasy in the night is busied. The Lover, dreams of love; the
Covetous, of silver; the Luxurious, of lust; the Gamester, of his sport; and
the Soldier, of his fights; because in the day time their thoughts are
occupied there with: as it is in the proverb, The hungry Dog dreams that he
is eating. Canis panes somnias.
So it seems here, that the Jews having their thoughts daily employed about
their deliverance, they could not choose but dream of it nightly.

By the precurrent signs of the day of Judgment, which for the most part are
already fulfilled, we may conjecture; nay, we may assure our selves of the
nearness and propinquitie of Christ's coming for our redemption: but which of
us with Daniel are casting up the Dan. 9.2.
Times; or with old Simeon, are always waiting for the consolation of Luke
2.25.
Israel. We all live in security, and never mind the Day of the Lord: but
many of us profanely (as the Apostle says) jest at his coming, saying, Where
is the promise of his 2. Pet. 3.4.
coming. And as the Prophet says, we put far away the evil day, and
approach to the seat of Amos 6.3.
iniquity. We never dream of a Judgment: we never think that we must give
an account before the Tribunal of that Judge, that was judged for us. We never
remember, that we must all receive according to our Ier. 22.9. Psalm. 62.12. Job
34.11. Pro. 24.12. Ezekiel. 33.20. Matthew. 16.27. Romans 2.6. 2. Cor. 5.10. 1. Pet.
1.17. Revel. 22.12.
works. We never call to mind, how the wicked must go into eternal fire; and
how the godly shall be received into life everlasting. And with the Jews, we
never think upon our last Lam. 1.9.
end. We live in safety, we sleep in security, like the old World in Noah's
time, and like Sodom in the days of Lot, the one living in security, and the
other lulled in sensuality, till both were destroyed; the one, with fire; and
the other, with the deluge: but if we would either give care unto the
exhortation of Christ, who pointing out the signs that should preceed his
coming; bids us, when these things come to pass, lift up our heads, Luke
21.28.
for our Redemption draws nigh; or if we would consider, that his coming
shall be sudden, like a lightning in the East, shining unto the Matthew. 24.27
West; and unexpected, like a Thief in the 1 Thessalonians. 5.2.
night. How the time is so near, and the hour uncertain: me thinks it
should rowse and raise us out of our dead sleep of security, and make us
monthly, daily, and hourly wake, watch, and wait for the Day of Christ's
revelation, and our redemption: and blessed is that man, whom the Son of Man
shall find so doing at his Matthew. 24.46.
coming; and happy is he that after this kind, is like unto them that dream.

If we refer the people at this their unexpected deliverance, The second
acception of the words.
to such men as are of a sanguine complexion, and so usually in their sleep
dream of pleasant and joyful things, which they think they have when they
have them not: The meaning of the Psalmist must be this, that their deliverance
was so great and wonderful, that when they first heard the first report
thereof, they gave little credit thereunto, and valued it like a dream; and as
men in a sweet sleep, are deluded with a vain hope of a vanishing dream: so
they thought, they had been deceived with an untrue report of a true
deliverance.

Here we may observe, The Saints incredulity.
that God does often send succor and deliverance to the godly, in the time of
their afflictions, E^senon liberari, sed somnium vidisse putant. Musculus.
distress and adversity: that many times they themselves do doubt of the
truth thereof; and think that in very deed they are not delivered, but rather
that they have dreamed. Peter being imprisoned by Herod, when he was delivered
by an Angel, for all the light that did shine in the prison; though the Angel
smote him on the side, and raised him up; though he caused the chains to fall
off his hands; though he spoke to him three several times, Surge, cinge,
circunda; arise quickly, gird thy self, and cast thy garment about thee;
though he conducted him safely by the watches; and though he caused the iron
gates to open willingly: yet for all this he was like unto them that dream.
For he knew not that it was true that was done by the Angel, but thought that
he had seen a Acts 12.6, 7, 8, 9. (...) Chr^shom. 65. in Genesis
vision. When old Jacob was told of his sons, that his son Joseph was
alive, his heart failed and he believed them not; but when he had heard all
that Joseph had said, and when he saw the Charets that Joseph had sent, then,
as it were, raised from a sleep, and awakened from a dream, his spirit
reniued, and rejoicing, he cries out, I have enough, Joseph my son is yet
Genesis 45.28. Debi'a um est cor cius, non credidit, somnium vel sabulam duxit:
quia praconcepta opinio de Iosephi more nimis tenaciter inb^sit, Parcus in Genesis
ca. 45.
alive.

Lorinus seems to excuse this their distrust, because they were so
ouer-rauished with joy, that they misse-doubted the true cause of their joy:
like the Apostles, who having Christ after his Resurrection standing before
them, they were so exceedingly ioyed, that rejoicing they wondered and Luke 24,
41. (...)
doubted; and like the two Mary's, when the Angel told them of our Savior
Christ's Resurrection, they returned from the Sepulcher rejoicing, and yet
withal feating. It may be they feared the truth of so glad news, and doubted
lest they were deceived by some Matthew. 28.8. (...) Somniantes nobis videmur; ra
admiratione, quasi nonvere ist^ agantur, sunt enim maiora capiu nostro postquam
omnia erant desperata, Pomeran.
apparition. Thus as Liuius reports, when the Grecians being vanquished by the
Romans, hearing that their liberty was granted unto them by the Romans, they
did rejoice excessiuely, but yet believed it not fully, and looking one upon
another, wondering at this unlooked for freedom, they suspected themselves to
be but deluded with a vain hope, with an idle dream. So here, the Jews
ouerioyed with the glad tidings of their deliverance, doubt, like the Grecians,
of their freedom, and are mistrustfull, lest they be deceived, like men that
dream.

But the truth is, the incredulity of the Saints is often such, that they
think their deliverance a thing almost impossible to be brought to pass; so
that when they are in effect delivered, beyond their expectation, they are
doubtful and mistrustfull, and think themselves to have but dreamed. When
godly Ezekiah lay si^ke unto death, and in a manner did altogether despair of
his recovery, the Prophet Isaiah comes to him, and tells him from the Lords
own mouth, Quando Iehoua captives Sionicosin patriam reducere c^^pit, pr^
gaudio ince d^bamus, quasi somniantes quod in rel veritate, and magnitudine
somniare videremar, non reveia p^rcipere illud tantum bonum quo fiuebamar,
Scultet.
that the Lord had heard his prayers, seen his tears, and that he would add
unto his days fifteen years: but Ezekiah, as it seems, expecting nothing
but death; and as doubting of his recovery, for his better satisfaction,
requires a sign: yea, and esteeming it but a small matter, a light thing, for
the Sun to go forwards in the Dial of his father Ahaz, ten degrees; he
desired that it might go back so many: till what time; he was like to them
that dream.

Again, their ignorance does often cause this doubtfulnesse and astonishment;
as we may see in the old Israelites, when they were hedged in on either side
with Mountains, Ita sunt attoniti pro carnis sensu fideles vt eximia Dei
Ecclesiam, liberantis opera, pro dignitate operantis satis expendere nequeant,
Mollerus.
when they had the Sea before them, and the Egyptians marching after them, they
despaired of their delivery, and murmured against E^od. 14.11.
Moses. But what was the cause? Because they understood not the wanders that
the Lord wrought for them in Egypt, neither remembered they the multitude of his
mercies, but rebelled at the sea, even at the red Psalm. 106.7.
Sea: and because they were like unto them that dream.

Thirdly, the Saints of God are too often too forgetful of the Lords former
mercies, and care of them. The old Patriarch Jacob, when he heard how his
brother Esau was coming against him, with four hundred men, was mightily
afraid, and doubted of his own and his companies Genesis 32.7. and 11.
safety; and forgets, as it seems, the Lords former kindness, in protecting
him so lately from the rage of his Uncle Genesis 31.
Laban. Neither was this weakness wanting in godly David; who, when he was to
encounter with the Champion of the Philistimes, and enter the duel with Goliath
of Gath; he remembered how the Lord had delivered him both from the jaws of
the Lion, and the paw of the Bear; and the remembrance thereof, assured him of
the victory against this vnci^cumcised 1. Sam. 17.
Heathen. But when Saul hunted after his life, and thirsted after his soul:
David doubts so much of his safety, that he protests unto Jonathan, as the
Lord lived, there was but a step between him and 1. Sam. 20.3.
death; yea, and after a sort forgetting how the Lords hand wonderfully
protected him from the hand of Saul, he says to himself in his own heart,
one day I shall perish by the band of 1. Sam. 27.1.
Saul; and so in this case whilst David doubts of his escape from Saul, and
Jacob fears his safety from the hand of Esau, they were both like unto them
that dream.

These three things, first, the seeming impossibility of the deliverance to
be performed, and man's ignorance of Gods power to effect it; and withal our
forgetfulness of the Lords former mercies so often manifested, do cause this
astonishment and amazement in us: yea, distrust and doubtfulnesse, when beyond
our expectation such things come to pass; as here, the Jews being so long
detayned captives under so fierce and furious a Nation, they thought it a thing
impossible to be set at liberty; withal, being either ignorant of Gods
sufficiency, or forgetful of his former clemency, they expected nothing less
then their delivery; and therefore, when they were indeed delivered, they were
doubtful and amazed, like unto them that dream.

But let not us in our greatest extremities doubt of Gods mercies: and albeit
our case, to our thinking, be never so desperate, yet let us not be
distrustful of the Lords power; for though Ezekiah expect nothing but Isa. 38.
death; though Jonah be weary of his Ion. 4.3.
life; and Eliah in great anguish desire to 1. King. 19.4.
die; yet God is both willing and able to succor and to save them: and albeit,
the Jews deliverance seemed impossible in their own eyes; yet, was it not
impossible in the sight of the Lord of Hosts. For he could bring them again
from the East country, and from the West, and cause them to dwell in the midst
of Zach. 8.6, 7, 9.
Jerusalem, even when they were like unto them that dream.

Let us avoid these two inconveniences, ignorance and incredulity. For Sarah
being ignorant of Gods power, when the Lord promised her a son, Genesis 18.
she laughed, for which she was sharply reproved, and rebuked of the Angel:
and the young Captain being distrustful of Gods sufficiency to succor
hispeople in the great famine, was trodden to death in the Gates of 2. King.
7.22.
Samaria. Wherefore let us not at any time be faithless, but believe: for if
we have faith, all things are Romans 14.
possible, even to those that are like unto them that dream.

Moreover, this their wondering at their unexpected deliverance, should still
put us in mind of our Redemption. Before the coming of our Savior,
all mankind was captiuated, the Gentiles in Idolatry, and the Jews under the
Law and Traditions. But at the coming of Christ, the Gentiles were freed from
Idolatry, Plura apud S^ulretum.
and the Jews from Traditions and the rigor of the Law: yet, even then were
they like unto them that dream. Zacharias gave no credit unto the Angels
words, Luke 1. 20. and Mary her self said, How shall this be? verse. 34. and at
his birth, the Angel did preach his nativity to the Shepherds, and although
they heard a multitude of heavenly Soldiers praising God for it; yet for their
better assurance, they must go and see, Luke 2.15. and when they had scene it,
they published it abroad, and all they that heard it, wondered: but, alas, too
few believed it; they were so sorgetfull, so ignorant, Isai and Jeremiah.
and so incredulous, although the Prophets had set down the certainty, Isa.
7.14. and 9.6. and Daniel had noted out the time, Dan. 9.25, 26, 27. of his
coming, yet were they like unto them that dream.

Now, before I conclude this first sequel, that followed upon their
deliverance, viz. their coadmiration, their wondering, and meruailing at this
their unexpected freedom, which made them like unto men that dream: I
suppose, the curious Obseruer of dreams supposes, that I should observe
somewhat else of the lawfulness, or unlawfulness of the observation of
dreams. I purpose not to weary the godly ear, in relating the curious and
fond conjectures of the idle Expositors of dreams, only this which is not
very dissonant from this place, but rather seems to be employed in the words.
For whilst the Psalmist shows the peoples incredulity, by comparing them to
such as dream: he does covertly tax the vanity and deceitfulness of
dreams. So that I say, we may conclude, The observation of dreams unlawful,
and why.
that it is absolutely unlawful to be too curious an Obseruer of dreams. For
first, they are forbidden; You shall not soothsay, nor observe dreams.
Secondly, they are in themselves vain and idle. Where there are many dreams,
there are many vanities. Thirdly, they are deceitful and erroneous, for
dreams have caused many to err.

But thou will say, Quest.
are not divine dreams lawful and laudable?

Yes truly, they were to be received and believed, Answ.
but now there are none such, or they are not frequent nor usual.

How then (will thou say) do I understand that place of Joel? I will power out
my Spirit upon all flesh, Octiect.
and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy; your old men shall dream
dreams, and your young men shall see Joel 2.28. Solutio prima.
visions.

I understand it as the Apostle expounds it, that by these words are meant the
gifts and graces of Gods Spirit, which under the Gospel should be given to the
Church in greater abundance, then in times past; and whereas in old times they
had dreams and visions; so under Christ, they should have clear revelations;
and this was verified, when on the day of Pentecost, the holy Ghost descended
in the visible form of fiery cloven tongues, and sat upon the Apostles, and
when the House was filled with an audible sound from heaven, as of a mighty
rushing wind: whereupon the Apostles were all filled with the holy Ghost, and
began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them Act. 2.1, 2, 3, 4.
Solutio seeunda.
utterance.

Again, if you take that place of Joel literally, yet was it fulfilled in the
time of the Apostles. When the Lord powered out his Spirit upon all flesh, Man
and Woman, Jew and Grecian: your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, as
did Agabus, and the four daughters of Philip the Evangelist. Your Act. 21.9.10.
young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams: as did old
Peter in his * trance; and the young man Paul, when he was rapt up into the
third 2. Cor. 12.2, 3, 4.
Heaven.

Yet thou will say, Quest.
is there no use at all then to be made of dreams?

I answer, Answ.
as for those dreams that are procured by the Devil, whose end is either to
vex or disquiet the godly: as by Gods permission he did Job, who complayneth,
Job 7.13.14. Non satis habuit Satan Iobum ita grauiter in corpore assligere,
nisi etiam cius animum terrificis somnijs consternaret, Merc. in Job 7.13.14.
that in his Couch where he sought for rest, and in his bed, where he did
hope for comfort, even there and then he was affrighted with dreams, and
astonished with y visions, or else to hinder the good and salvation of man; as
his intent was to hinder man's salvation, by moving Pilates Wise in a dream,
to move her husband not to intermedle with our Savior: knowing, that unless
Christ suffered, Man could not be Matt. 27.19.
saved.

Thirdly, Vide Tertull de somnijs, tom. 2.
if he cannot bew^^ch the heart of Man, yet his end is to defilo the body by
obscene and filthy thoughts; Vide Tho. 22. ^.154.5.
as that pollution of the body which happens to man in the Leuit. 15.16. Qui
nocturno est pollutus som^ie.
night, for which man was accounted unclean until the even, was, and is
certainly procured by dreams, proceeding from the Devil.

Lastly, he strives there by to infect the ignorant with Demon plerunque
somnoijs se immiscet implens super stitione noxia hominum animos eosque non
tantum wary de ludens, sed etiam pernitiose de cipiens, Greg.
superstition, thereby to divert and turn away their hearts from the true
worship and service of God: to such, I say, we ought at no time to give credit,
but abhor them and pray against such dreams.

As for the use of natural dreams, it is only physical; for thereby we
conjecture of the bodies constitution; as he that dreams of black mists,
dark fumes, and cloudie smokes, abounds with melancholy. And he that dreams
of strife and contention, is ouer-charged with choler: or by them we may
guess of the nearness and propinquitie of some disease. As if a man dream of
bathing in hot bathes, it is likely he shall shortly after fall into some hot
Ague. This is the use that Galen, Hippocratas, and Aristotle, do make of
dreams; Consule Aristetelem de in somnijs.
and other I know none, and therefore I conclude with that vulgar Verse.

Somnia ne cures nam fallunt somnia plures. For dreams, regard not any, for
dreams deceive many. And with the advice of the Wiseman, who says, Somnia
fallaci ludunt temeraria nocte. Et pauidas mentes falsa timere iubent, Proper^^
lib. 3.
that Diuinations, Sooth-sayings, and Dreams are vain; and the heart
fancieth, as a Woman's heart in travel: if they be not sent to thee from the
most High; in time of thy visitation, set not thy heart upon them; for dreams
have deceived many, and they have failed that have put trust in Eccl. 34.
them. And now to make an end, our Redemption shall be like unto the Jews
deliverance, on a sudden, and when we least expect it. And as Cyrus came into
Babylon, to set the Jews at liberty, and to be avenged on the Chaldaeans for
their cruelty, before they were aware: even so, Christ the Son of Man, will
come to redeem his Elect, and to judge the wicked at an hour, when ye Luke
12.40.
think not: be not you therefore like the foolish Virgins, sleeping and
slumbring without Oil in your Lamps, when the Bridegroom comes to his Mas.
25.1. to 14.
marriage.

Be not you like unto the evil servant, beating your fellows, and giving
your selves over to gluttony and drunkenness: For the Lord, e Luke 12.45, 46.
of such a servant will come in a day, when he looks not for him, and in an
hour that he is not aware of, and will cut him in sunder, and will appoint
him his portion with unbelievers. But let your loins be girded about, and your
lights burning, and ye your selves like unto men that wait for their Lord,
when he shall return from the Wedding, that when he comes and knocks,
they may open to him Luke. 12.35.36.
immediately. Now the Lord grant us grace (seeing we know not when the Master
of the house comes, at even, or at midnight, or at Cock crowing, or in the
Mark. 13.35.36.
morning) to watch, and pray, lest coming suddenly, he find us sleeping, and
like unto men that dream. Amen.

THE FREE-MANS FRANK-INCENSE: OR The second sequel, that followed upon this
deliverance, viz. Their congratulation.
THE THIRD SERMON.
VERSE. 2. Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing.


Here is the second thing that did follow upon their deliverance: Tandem certo
persuasi vere haec srastari sopulo beneficia, and totam hanc remesse u'xaep,
non ^vaep (vt loquitur Pla^o) boc est, non esse falla^em imaginem in somne
obiectam, sed beneficium qued reuera ipsis nibil tale sperantibus aut
opinansibus e^biberetur, soluti sunt in risum. Mollerus.
to wit, Congratulation, and joy conceived there upon. No sooner did they know
assuredly, that the Lord graciously had set them at liberty: but forthwith
they are glad and rejoice: and sing Psalms of praise and thanksgiving unto the
Lord. In the words we may note two things.

1. Their Ioyfulnesse, Then was our mouth filled with laughter. 2. Their
Thankfulness, And our tongue with singing.
Their mouth was filled with laughter: but not with a vain and carnal, Non
vane, sed vere. The several kinds of laughter.
but with a true and spiritual laughter.

First. 1. Risus nequitiae.
The wicked, when they take delight in sin, are said to laugh: In laughing
the Fool commits Prou. 10.23.
wickedness. but that is a wicked laughter, when their sport is in the
pleasure of Eccles. 27.13.
sin.

Secondly, 2. Risus stultitie.
The light behavior of man is termed a laughter. A fool lifts up his voice
in laughter, but a wise man does scarely Eccles. 21.20.
smile. But that is a foolish laughter: for a man's excessive laughter and going
declares what he Eccles. 19.30.
is.

Thirdly, 3. Risus insaniae.
The pleasures and prosperous estate of man in worldly matters is called a
laughter. They prepare bread for laughter, and wine to comfort the Eccles.
10.19.
living. But that is a mad laughter. I said of laughter, thou art mad: and of
joy, what is this that thou Eccles. 2.2.
do.

Fourthly, The wickeds scoffing and deriding of the godly in time of trouble,
is termed a laughter. O Lord give not thy Scepter unto them that be nothing,
lest they laugh at us in the time of our Esther, 14.11.
misery. But that is a proud and disdainful laughter, and in the end they
shall find that the Lord will laugh at their Psalm. 2.4. Pr. 1.26.
destruction.

Lastly, That joy and gladness of heart, which the Lord g^u^s unto the godly,
may be named a laughter. So Bildad said to Job. Behold Godwill not cast away an
upright Affligeris quidem aliquandiu, sed si aleum redier, is te^ta
prosperabit, vt vebementer gaudeas, and praegoudio in risum so^ naris. Mercerus
in Job. cop. 8.
man: neither will he take the wicked by the hand, till he have filled thy
mouth with laughter, and thy tongue with Job. 8.10.21.
rejoicing. He will not forsake thee if thou be righteous, nor reject thee if
thou be godly, but he will give thee occasion to rejoice.

Here it is taken for the comfort and joy, which the godly conceive from the
testimony of Gods goodness, in relieuing them out of adversity and releasing
them from Vide Mollerum in lecum.
captivity. I, and as great was Gods goodness therein, so great was their
gladness thereof: even so great, that for joy they brake forth into laughing
and Non cessabit Deus benefacere bonis donec perfect faciat beatos, ita vt
prae nimi^ gaudio in risum and gratiarum actionem prorumpant. Occolamp. in Job
8.
thanksgiving.

The obscruation which I gather from this place, is once again to use the
words of Solomon, that to all things there is an appointed time: a time to
weep, and a time to laugh, a time to mourn, and a time to dance. It is
reported of Heraclytus, that he was ever weeping: and of Democritus, that he
was ever laughing. But it is not so with a Christian: there is an intercourse
betwixt these two, the one follows after the other: sometimes he has cause
to sorrow, and sometimes occasion to rejoice. As for example, the Israelites
when they were oppressed with the intolerable cruelty of Pharaoh and the
Taske-masters, they had a time of mourning. But when they were delivered from
his tyranny, and saw their enemies over whelmed horse and horsemen in the sea,
they found a time for Exo. 14.20.21
dancing. David when he washed his bed and watered his couch with tears, he
had a time of Psalm. 6.6.
weeping. When Nathan pronounced the sentence of absolution unto him from the
blood of 2. Sam. 12.
Uriah, which was such a corasiue to Psalm. 51.14.
his conscience, he had a time of laughing. And here the Jews during the time
of their captivity: Lam. 5.22. and 3.48.49.
when they seemed as utterly rejected, of all reproached, of none regarded.
When they wept continually in the night: and when their eyes did drop down
tears, and cast out rivers of water: they had a long and doleful time of
weeping: but now when the Lord has cast down their enemy, set them at
liberty, and brought again their captivity. And whereas now in Jerusalem,
there might be heard again the voice of joy, and the voice of gladness: the
voice of the Bridegroom, and the voice of the Ier. 33.10.11.
Bride. They have a joyful and glad time for laughing. According to this the
Jews Antheme: Then was our mouth filled with laughter:

Again, where as it is said, Our mouth is filled with laughter. A little
sorrow brings to the godly great joy.
We may see how a little sorrow causes to the godly a great deal of joy. A
woman when she is in travel has sorrow, which certainly is most grievous,
and yet short, of some few hours continuance: But as soon as she is delivered
of the clild, she remembers no more the anguish, for joy that a man is borne
into the John 16.21.
world. Truly, even so momentanie sorrows of the righteous bring forth
everlasting joys, which do extirpate and exstinguish all remembrance of
former heaviness. De annis non se luisset, si annos sustinuisset. Orig. lib.
2. Vide chrysostom. bom. 25. ad populum Antio^h. Pinedam Com. in Job. cap. 2.
verse. 8. sect. 12. Number. 4. Oecolamp. and Mer^^n Job. 42.
Iobes grieuances were great, and endured long, yet was it but for the space of
some months, as some have collected from his own words. Job 7.3. for which
short season Job was comforted and rejoiced an hundred an forty Job. 42.16, 17.
years. Old Tobit lost his sight for the space of eight years: but he
enjoyed it for the space of threescore years Tob. 14. The joy of the godly and
ungodly compared together.
after. So that, both Job and Tobit, for a short time of heaviness, were
recompensed with a long space of gladness: and for a little griese, they had
their mouths filled with laughter.

Moreover, in that the joy of the faithful is here called laughter, and in
that they are said to have their mouth filled therewith: we may further
observe that there is no joy, to the joy of the godly: for the joy of the
wicked is no perfect Job. 42.16, 17.
joy: and why?

First, because it is always mixed with griese and horror of conscience: for
even in laughing, their heart is Prou. 14.13.
sorrowful. But when the godly are possessed with true joy and gladness, all
sorrow and mourning flees Isa. 51.11.
away.

Secondly, Thereioycing of the wicked is but shert, and the joy of hypocrites
is but for a Job. 23.51.
moment. But our Savior tells us, that our sorrow shall be turned into joy,
and our joy no man shall take from Job. 16.22.
us.

Thirdly, The joy of the ungodly arises from worldly pleasures and vanities.
Dives soul rejoices in y his riches. Nabals heart is merry in his 1. Sam.
25.37.
drunkenness. Haman is joyful of his Esth. 5.9.
preferment: and foolishness is joy to a Pro. 15.21.
fool. But the godly can not, nor will not fill their mouths with such
laughter: for they know, that all such joy is like Ionahs gourd, green over
night, but withered in the Jonah. 4.6, 7.
morning: and like John's book, sweet in the mouth, but bitter in the Ren. 10.10.
belly. But with Habakuk, they rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of
their Hab. 3.18.
salvation.

Lastly, The wickeds joy does end in sorrow: and all their earthly pleasures
are like the Mannah kept ouernight, full of worms in the Exal. 16.
morning. They are like Nabuchadnezzars Image, with a golded head, but with
feet of Dan. 3.
clay. And though they take the timbrell, and the harp, and rejoice at the
sound of the organs; and though they spend their days in wealth, yet suddenly
they go down into the Job. 21.12.13.
pit. And the end of all their mirth is Pro. 14.13.
heaviness. But the joy of the godly shall more and more increase. For the
hope of the righteous is gladness, but the hope of the wicked shall Prou.
10.28.
perish. Crosses, calamities, troubles, tribulations, diseases, nor yet death
it self, can terminate or end their joy: for, even then shall the faithful
enter into their Masters Mat. 25.
joy: where there is fullness of joy and pleasures for Isal. 16.11.
evermore: which shall fill their mouth with laughter.

Now, me thinks, if we but rightly considered the vanity of these earthly
pleasures, and the vexation that comes by these momentany joys. First, how
that they are not simple, but ever compound and mixed with care and heaviness
of mind: like Babels cup, the outside of gold, but filled within with
abominations and uncleanness. Secondly, how that they are short, and of no
continuance. For, the hope of the ungodly is like dust that is blown away with
the wind, like a thin froth that is driven away with the storm, and like
smoke that is dispersed here and there with a Wis. 5.14.
tempest. Thirdly, how that they arise from things as vain as themselves. As
for example, suppose a man be rich, and rejoice in his sudstance, as Dives did:
yet, if he fall but into any little sickness, his riches afford him no ease.
If a man be honorable, yet fall into poverty, what comfort or relief shall
he have from his honor? Yea, grant that he be rich, honorable, and
healthful: yet will the least misfortune or cross trouble and grieve him, as
if he were of all men most miserable. Haman called his friends, and Zeresh his
wife, and told them of the glory of his riches, and how the King had advanced
him above all his Princes and Servants: yea, and how, he only was admitted
unto the Queens banquet: yet all this auailed him nothing: his health, riches,
honor, and the Kings favor, could not fill his mouth with laughter, when he
remembered how Mordecai did not bow the knee, nor reverenced Esth. 5.
him. And lastly, if we did but think with our selves, how all these earthly
joys are like the Locusts that ascended out of the bottomless pit, with a
goodly visage, but with a stinging Reu. 9.
tail: certainly abhorring and abandoning all such joys, me thinks, we
should with godly David, call unto the Lord, and after this manner entreat him:
Remember me, O Lord, with the favor that thou bear unto thy people: O
visit me with thy salvation: that I may see the good of thy chosen, that I may
rejoice in the gladness of thy nation: that I may glory with thine Psalm.
106.4.5.
inheritance.

But how shall we attain unto this joy: and by what means shall we obtain
it?

First, Four things to be done before we can attain unto the true joy of the
godly.
we must truly humble our selves before we be comforted: and unfeignedly
sorrow before we can rejoice: the prodigali humbled himself before he was
entertained with melody and dancing: wine is only to be given to the
sorrowful of heart, that he may forget his griese, and as light was created
after darkness, so joy comes after heaviness.

Secondly, we must labor for a peaceable conscience. For, a quiet conscience
is a continual Pro. 15.15.
feast: that is, a continual joy: and truly there is no joy unto that, Nil
conscire sibi, nullaque pallescere culpa.

Thirdly, we must delight in the reading of the Word: for as David affirms:
The testimonies of the Lord were the rejoicing of the heart: and therefore they
were his songs in his Psalm. 119.54.111.
pilgrimage.

Lastly, we must earnestly pray for it as Solomon did for wisdom, saying
with the Psalmist, Make me to hear of joy and gladness, that the bones which
thou have broken may Psalm. 51.
rejoice. And again, Rejoice the soul of thy servant, for unto thee (O Lord)
do I lift up my Psalm. 86.4.
soul. If these rules we observe in seeking after this heavenly joy: we
shall find in the end, that the Lord will put gladness into our Psalm. 4.7.
heart, and fill our mouth with laughter.

And our tongue with singing. Garrulares letiti^. Sen.
Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: and if the heart be glad
the tongue is glib. Joy cannot be suppressed in the heart, but it must be
expressed with the tongue. David being in great perplexity, resolved to be
silent: Ex tris^tia cordis sequitur tris^^tia oris. Greg.
and to rule his tongue, as it were with a bridle: but being ouercharged with
griese, out of the bitterness of his soul, his tongue burst out: O Lord, let
me know how long I have to live; let me know mine end, and the number of my
days: for, thou have made them, as it were a span long, and mine age is
nothing in respect of thee: and every man living is altogether Psalm. 39. 3. to
7.
vanuie. Whereas elsewhere, being delivered from great danger, and therewith
greatly ioyed: his tongue explaines, what joy his heart contains. Thou have
turned (says he) my mourning into joy: thou have loosed my sack, and girded
me with gladness; therefore shall my tongue praise thee, and not cease: O
Lord my God, I will give praise unto thee for Psa. 30.11, 72.
ever. The Jews, when they sat by the rivers of Babel weeping, in great
anguish, and sorrow of heart, their fingers would not frame to strike upon
their sweet sounding instruments: their Psalm. 137. Ta^^um sait nostrum gaudium,
vt ipsum caelare cord non potuevinius sed plena etiam facta, sunt ex
abundantia cor^s, ora nostra gaudio siscanticis, and linguis nostris lauds
confessionis and exu'tation^^ cecinimus redemptori nostro Fr. Tit. in lotum.
tongues would not utter any melodious Psalms of mirth, but all their songs
were mournful Elegies, doleful tunes, and woeful lamentations, But now being
permitted to return from Babylon home to Jerusalem, the virgins rejoice in the
dance, they shout for joy among the Gentiles, and their mouth is filled with
laughter, and their tongue, etc.

But what were their Songs, and what was the subject thereof?

They were Cantica Sionis, Songs of Sion: Cantica Salutis, What kind of songs
the godly sung at this deliverance.
Songs of Salvation. Such songs as they were wont to sing in Sion, to the
honor and glory of God. Such Songs as they used to manifest their
thankfulness unto the Lord, for their deliverance and salvation. So from
hence we may learn two things. First, what kind of songs beseemes and befits
the godly. Secondly, the end of the godlyes songs. As for the first, they must
be such as tend to the honor and glory of God: they must be Psalms, Hymns,
and spiritual Ephesians. 5.18, 19.
Songs. Such songs did the sweet Singer of Israel sing. Such songs did his
son Solomon pen. And such songs were appointed to the Singers of the Temple
to 2. Chr. 25.
sing. This is that melody which we must make to God in our hearts: and these
are the songs which we must sing with the spirit and Col. 1.9.
understanding.

I will not here be too prolixe in rebuking the baser sort of people, whose
delight is only in lascivious ballets, Lascivious songs are to be avoided.
and wanton sonnets, to satisfy lust, and content their carnal appetite: only
this they are unlawful, and to be abhord by all regenerate Christians.

First, because they proceed from an unclean and carnal heart, as the
efficient cause. For, as a clear fountain does not send forth muddie
streams, or filthy puddle, no more can the heart be clean from whence comes
these obscoene and filthy songs.

Secondly, they are to be distasted for the material cause: the matter and
subject of them being vain and carnal.

Thirdly, Vide Zanch. in Ephesians. 5.
they are not to be followed, in regard of the formal cause: because the form
and composition of them is carnal, consisting for the most part of words
lascivious, and full of lies. Neither are they to be embraced, but chiefly to
be rejected, because of the final cause, for it is likewise carnal: They tend
not to Gods glory, nor to edification; but their end is either to flirte up
lust, or for gain, or to gain favor, and as (we say) to deceive the Time.
Now I wish us all only to remember that uncleanness, filthiness, and foolish
talking, ought not once to be named amongst Ephesians. 5.3, ^.
Christians; for every idle word we must give account at the day of Matt.
12.36, 37.
Judgment; and therefore our tongue must be employed in spiritual singing.

The end and scope of the godlies Songs and Psalms, The end of the godlies
songs.
should be to show their thankfulness, in praising and lauding the Lord,
whenever they are delivered out of any trouble, or have received any
blessings or benefit of God: as here the Jews did, after the Lord had
compassion on them, and brought again the captivity of Jacobs Tents, and
comforted the desolations of Sion, and made her desert plentiful like Isa.
51.3.
Eden, then joy and gladness, praise, and the voice of singing was amongst
them, and the voice of the joyful and thanksgiving did proceed I^r. 30.18, 19.
from them. Here then, in these words, and our tongue with singing: First, we
see what should be our practice, viz. continually to praise God for all his
mercies, love, and kindness, showed unto us. And next, that it is the tongues
office, to be the instrument to show forth this praise.

As for the first, Thankfulness, first practiced.
it has ever been practiced of all the faithful. After the peoples
deliverance out of Egypt, Moses and Aaron, and all the people sung: Miriam, and
the Women, played upon Tymbrels, songs of praise and thanksgiving unto the
Exodus 15.
Lord. Hannah, when the Lord opened her womb, and enlarged her mouth over her
enemies, so that Peninnah could no longer vpbraid her for her barrenness, she
sings a song of praise to show her 1. Sam. 1. and 2.
thankfulness. We find the like in Deborah, after the overthrow of Sisera: of
the Israelites, at the death of Goliath; and of Judith, when she had slain
Holofernes, all their songs should serve for examples, to stir us up to
thankfulness: for diverse motives there be to move us thereunto.

First, it is commanded: Thou shall call upon me in the day of trouble, and I
will deliver thee, 2. Commanded.
and thou shall glorify Psalm. 50.15.
me. Where the Lord promising to deliver us out of trouble, gives us a twofold
precept: first, to pray unto him for it, and then, after we are delivered to
praise him. 3. Commended.


Secondly, it is commended: Noah, after his deliverance from that universal
Deluge, to show his thankfulness, built an Altar, and offered an burnt
offering thereupon: which is so commended, that the Lord is said to smell a
savor of Genesis 8.
rest; and thereby showed himself appeased, and his anger pacified.

Thirdly, the neglect of this ductie is condemned in the old Israelites, who,
to their great ignominic and shame, are branded with this blot, that they
forgate God their Savior, who had done great things for Psalm. 106.21.
them.

I might add hereunto, 4. Absolutely necessary.
that we have nothing else to give unto God, but only the calves of our Hos.
14.
lips, praise and thanks. Which David knowing full well, does question
himself; What shall I give unto the Lord, for all his benefits bestowed Psalm.
116.12.
upon me. Is there any thing in me but sin? Have I any thing, but what I
have received of him? Is not he the portion of mine Psalm. 16.5.
inheritance? Has not he prepared my Table, anointed my head with Oil, and
made my cup to Psalm. 23.5.
ouerflow? yet will I not be ungrateful, for I will take the cup of salvation,
and call upon the Name of the Lord. I will offer sacrifice of praise, I will
thank him for his benefits, in the presence of all his people, in the Courts
of the Lords House, and in the midst of Psalm. 116.17, 18, 19.
Jerusalem.

Again, ingratitude is a thing so hateful to God, 5. It is benesiciall,
whereas ingratirude is hurtful.
that he will not let it go unpunished. Saul, for his unthankfulness, is
deprived of his Crown: the old Israelites, for their forgetfulness of Gods
goodness, were not suffered to enter into the Land of promise. Nay, he would
not spare good Ezekiah, for his vnmindfulnesse of his great delivery from the
King of Ashur, but strikes him with a deadly disease. Yea, and it withdrawes
Gods blessings bestowed upon them: Quae Deus dat gratis aufert ingratis, Aug.
for what God gives to the thankful, he takes from the ungrateful; as he did
the Crown from Saul, and gave it unto David. Ingratitude is called a parching
wind, Ventus vrens desiccans fontem misericordiae, and Ruenta gratiae, Bern.
sermon. 51. in Cant.
that dryes up the Fountain of Gods love and goodness; whereas thankfulness
does open the Garners of Gods bounty, and mooues the Lord to rain down
innumerable blessings upon us. For as the Master made his servant, who was
faithful in a little, Steward over much: so such as are thankful for a
little, God will bless with much. Gratiarum actio est ad plus dandum
inu^^a^ie. Chrysostom.in Matthew.
For, thanksgiving is the motive of blessing.

To conclude, it is a vice so distasteful, that Gregory says, He is not
worthy to receive, who is not thankful for that he has received. 6.
Ungratefulness abhorred of Infidels.
Nay, it was so abhorred of the very Infidels and Pagans, that the Athenians
would not permit an ungrateful person to bear rule amongst them. And the old
Romans thought them worthy to be severely punished, even with death it self.
And Lycurgus being asked, why amongst all his Laws, he had not made one against
this vice, answered, That he lest it to the gods, esteeming it so heinous a
crime, that it could not be sufficiently punished by man.

Let this teach us, to follow the advice of the Apostle in all things, t 1 Thessalonians 5.
to give thanks. And let us exercise our selves in Psalms, Hymns, and
spiritual Songs, with thanksgiving in our hearts to the Col. 3.16.
Lord. David, when he was freed from all troubles, and delivered out of the
hands of all his enemies, sung a song of praise unto the Psalm. 18. 2 Samuel 22.
Lord. Ezekiah, after he recovered out of his deadly disease, pens song, and
leaves it to posterity, as a monument of his thankful heart for Gods Is.
38.9. to 21.
benefits. And when the Saints in the Primitive Church were let out of prison,
and set at liberty, being before miserably captiuated by Maxentius and
Maximinus, they publicly through the open Streets and Market places, did walk
in troops and assemblies, praising and thanking the Lord in Psalms and Songs.
When blind Bartimeus received his sight, Eusebius hist. Ecc'. lib. 9. cap. 1.
he was so thankful, that he would not part with our Savior, but followed
praising and glorifying Man. 10.46. Luke 18.43.
God. And when Peter restored the lame to his limbs, he went into the
Temple with Peter and John, vvalking, leaping, and praising Acts 3.8.
God. In a word therefore: If we be delivered from the hands of our enemies,
as David was. If we be brought from the gates of the Grave, as Ezekiah was: If
we be brought out of prison, as the Saints were; and out of captivity as the
Jews were: If we have our sight restored to us, as Bartimeus had; our limbs,
as the cripple had; and our health, as AEneas Acts 9.33.
had. Let us offer unto the Lord the sactifice of Praise, and render to him the
calves of our Heb. 13.15.
lips; with Jonah sacrificing unto God, with the voice of Ion. 2.9.
thanksgiving; and with David, sing unto him all our life, and whilst we live
to praise Psalm. 104.33.
him.

But if we remember and think with our selves, how we are redeemed from the
captivity we were in, under Sin and Satan; how we are freed from the
power of Death and Hell, by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: as we have
great cause to rejoice, so have we reason to be thankful to God for the same.
At the birth of our Savior, who was borne for the salvation of Man, the
Angels and whole Armies of heavenly Soldiers, praised God, saying, Glory be
to God in Heaven, in Earth peace, and good will toward Luke 2.13.14.
men. Elizabeth's Salutation, Mary's Hymn, Zacharias Psalm, and old Simeons
Song, are all motives to stir us up to thankfulness, for so invaluable a
blessing. Let every one of us therefore endeavor to show our selves thankful,
in word Nec verbo, etc.
and in work, with heart and hand, Nec verbo tantum vel lingu^ sed opere and
veritate exhib^amus nos gratos quod gratiarum actionem magis quam dictionem a
nobis exigit datur gr^tiarum. Bern. ser. com^^ vitium ingratitudin^s.
awaking our drowsy souls, and reciting them with David, to praise the Lord,
saying, My soul, praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me, praise his
holy Name. My soul, praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefits; who
forgiueth all thine iniquities, and heals all thine infirmities; who
redeemeth thy life from the grave, and crowns thee with mercy and compassion;
who satisfies thy mouth with good things, and renews thy youth like the
Eagles, my soul, praise thou the Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3, 4. The tongue the
instrument to set forth Gods praise.
Lord. For thus should our mouth be filled with laughter, and our tongue with
singing.

The instrument for setting forth and publishing of Gods praise, is the tongue;
for it is the Interpreter of the Mind, and by it we express what before
we conceived in mind. For what the heart thinks, the mouth speaks. David's
heart is meditating some good matter, and his tongue is the pen of a ready
Psa. 45.1.
Writer. For this cause the tongue is called, man's glory. My heart rejoiced
and my tongue, or my glory Psalm. 16.19. Deus dedit bemint linguam ad tria
officia vt eun laudaret Psalm. 71.23, 24. vt proximum adisicaret, Isai. 50.4. vt
so coram Domi^^ accusaret. Job 42.6 Ius^^mest vt lingua nomen babeat, quod
operiipsius ce^^espondeat. Muse.
was glad: because it is the instrument to set forth Gods praise and glo^^e.
For it is right and reason, that it be called by that name, which agrees with
the thing wherein it is employed. We must not then with our tongues blaspheme
God, with Zaneherib. Nor by our tongue seek our own glory, like Herod. Nor
there with lie against the holy Ghost, with Ananias: but with the tongue,
like David, praise the Lord incessantly: like Steven, profess Christ
constantly; and with Peter, preach him boldly. For every knee must how unto the
Lord, and all tongues must confess unto Romans 14.11.
God: and for the better performing of this office, let us observe these Rules.

First, Rules to gou^ine the tongue in praising God truly. Frist, Pray^r to
open ourlips.
because natural corruption does stay our tongue and the Enemy, the Devil
like the Jews adversaries, labors to shut up the mouths of all that praise
Esth. 14.9.
God. Let us earnestly cry unto the Lord with David, to open Psalm. 51.15.
our lips, that our mouth may show forth his praise. The Man in the Gospel, is
said to have been possessed with a dumb Luke 11.
spirit; but he is said to have been dumb, because he stopped his mouth, Quia
mutum fecit a laud Dei. Hug. card.
and stayed his tongue from uttering any thing, which might be to Gods glory
and praise: but God, who gives the mouth to man, must be with Moses his mouth,
and rule his stammering Pro. 4.11.12.
tongue. For it is he that must cast out the Devil, and make the dumb to
speak. For he has the key of David, which shuts, and no man opens, and
opens and no man shuts.

Secondly, 2. Preparation of the heart.
if we would have our tongues to praise God rightly: We must first wash the
inside of the Cup: we must purge and prepare our hearts within. For the tongue
and all the rest of our members and senses, wait upon their heart, as their
Mistress. If it be like the heart of Pharao, hardened Exad. 6.
and immovable. Then like old Tobit, our eyes are blinded. Like the Man in the
Gospel, we are deaf and hear not. Like Jeroboam, our hands are withered.
We are lame in our feet, like Mephibosheth: and we are tongue-tyed, like
Zacharias. Nay, rather possessed with a dumb Devil, that we can neither
hear, see, nor speak any thing to the honor of God; much less walk in the
ways, or work the works of righteousness: but if our hearts be like the
heart of David, Psalm. 108.1.
prepared. Then are our ears like unto Mary's, attentive to hear: our eyes
like unto the Eunuchs, intentive to read: our hands, like the hands of
Cornelius, full of good works; and our tongue like Isaiahs; a tongue of the
learned, to minister a word in season.

Lastly, we ought to follow the advice of Saint Hierome, 3. Serious
premeditation, before we speak. Lingua facile volat ideo facile violat. Bora.
Per limam priusquam per linguam, Greg.
deliberately to consider with our eclues, what we ought to speak, and how
we should set forth his praise. The tongue glides nimbly, and so defiles
quickly, says Saint Bernard. Yet as Gregory has observed, it is enclosed
with a double hedge, the lips, and the teeth, that our words might pass by the
trying file of castigation, before they come by the twatling tongue of
confusion. For it is not enough for man to pray, but he must pray with the
heart and with knowledge: and it is not enough for us to sing with the tongue,
but we must sing with the Spirit, and with understanding also. Wherefore, let
us duly ponder and truly weigh with our selves, what we are about to do,
before we take the Name of God in our mouths, or dare talk of his praise.

If we truly observe these three, Prayer, Premeditation, and Preparation;
twisting them together like Salomons threefold cord; we shall find that the
words of our lips shall be like appels of gold, with pictures of silver: and
that our tongues shall be like the sweet fingers of Israel, a fit instrument
to laud and magnify the Lord. But, O, the perverseness and wickedness of
wretched man! How is his tongue become an Organ of all evil? Lascivious Ammons
songs are of lust and wantonness. Railing Rabshakehs are ever blaspheming the
good God of Israel. Malicions Sheime^s tongue is full of cursing; and
treacherous Ioabs lips are full of guile; and bloody Lamech is ever boasting
of cruelty. Is this the way to praise the Name of God? Is this the way to
magnify the Lord? No, no, uncleanness must not be named amongst us. We must
nor blaspheme God, and cruse his Name to be evil spoken of. We must not
bless God, and curse our Neighbor: and we ought not to talk deceitfully
one unto another. Why the tongue is called Man's gl^rie.
Once again, let us remember that the tongue is called man's glory. First, as
I have said, because therewith we ought to glorify God; and besides, it is
the glory and praise of man,
to govern and rule his tongue. Jobs commendation was, that he did not sin
with his Job. 2.10.
lips: and David's, that he kept his mouth, as it were, with a Psalm. 38.
bridle: and he that sins not in word, ^s a perfect man, says James. But.
alas, the tongue is an unruly evil, a world of wickedness, full of deadly
poison, a little member that no man can tame. What then must we do? What
course shall we take therewith? With the Psalmist we must have our recourse
to God, praying him to set a vvatch before our mouth, and to keep the door of
our Psalm 141.3.
lips, that so they may be close shut, that no evil pass through them; and
yet stand open, that we may still praise him.

Neither is it to be omitted, that Lorinus the Jesuit has observed, viz.
that the Psalmist nominates the mouth and tongue in the singular, not mouths
and tongues in the plural: because all the faithful, and the whole
congregation of the Jews vnivoce, with one voice, with one consent, and as
it were, with one mouth, did praise and glorify the Lord. For our
instruction, if we would but learn it, vnanimiter, vnivoce, with one heart
and one tongue, to praise and magnific God. But to leave the ceremonious
worship of the Jews, and the superstitious service of the Papist: it is to be
admired, and as much to be lamented, the difference amongst our selves, though
not in fundamental points of Religion, yet in the seemly order of serving of
God. Some of us cry out against the Kings supremacy, some rail against the
reverend Priesthood and Prelacie, and too many of us whet our tongues, and
sharpen our pens to speak, and write against the (...) and chaste ceremonies
and discipline of this Church of England; and so we must fill up our Sermons
with (...) inuectiues, exclayming against the (...) forsooth, and withal
falsely reproching the (...) Ecclesiastical, as full of superstition and
Popery. We call every thing in question and raise doubts, where the matter is
as ^^eare and evident, as the light of the Su^^^. By (...) doing, we give our
Adue^saries just cause to (...), in hope of advantage. We cause the Word of
(...) sp^ken of, and bring many of the ignorant sort to wave and wander in
their opinions, stumbling at every straw, and starting aside at every cross;
and is to be seared, erelong, the complant of Chrysostom, in a case not much
different, be not verified amongst us, whilst we are doubtful in questions:
there be but few true Christians: there is but one Faith, one Truth, and one
Baptism: one Law, and one Gospel: and why should there not be one heart and
one soul: one tongue to preach, and one hand to pen the only Truth? these
jarres about light and slight queres, befits not true Christians, there is but
one harmony amongst the Saints in heaven: and there should be but one
harmony amongst the Saints on earth. Christ is of all, with one voice praised
in the Church triumphant, and should be so also in the true Churches militant.
Wherefore let us imitate and follow the Apostles, who with one consent,
continued landing and praising Act. 2.
God.

Now Lord, we beseech thee, to be with our mouth, as thou wast with Moses; to
open our lips, as thou did deft David's; and to touch our tongue, as thou did
dest Ezekiels; and to open to us a door of utterance, as thou did-deft thy
Apostle: that so we may continually pray unto thee, and daily praise thee, so
long as we live upon the face of this earth; that hereafter we may with Quires
of Saints and Angels sing unto thee in the highest Heavens, praise and glory,
wisdom and thanks, honor and power for evermore.

Amen.

THE ATHEISTS ACKNOWLEDGEMENT. OR The third sequel, that followed upon their
deliverance, viz. The Heathens confession.
THE FOVRTH SERMON.
VERSE. 3. Then said they among the Heathen, the Lord has done great things for
them.


IN these words, you have the third sequel that followed upon this
deliverance. viz. The Heathens confession, what God had done for his people.
When the land of Israel was desolate, and when the house of Judah went into
captivity the Ammorites rejoiced at their fall, crying, ha ha, against them:
they clapped their hands, they stamped with their feet, and rejoiced in heart
against the land of Israel. The Moabites insulted over them, the Edomites
molested them; and the Philistimes did revenge themselves for their old hatred
unto them, and all that p^ssed by Jerusalem opened their Theodoretus and
nonnulli, aperite os, pro irridere accipiunt iuxta illud. Psalm. 22.7, and 14
13, 14, and 79.4. Origin and aly ex stimant refer potius m^rem belluae
deuerare cupientes. Psalm. 23.13. Jer. 51.34. Christoph, a costro lib. 5.
comment. ler.
mouth, they Sibilare, and mouere caput signa ioca^tis and per ludib^ium
contemnentis, ita^ccipitur sibilare. Reg. 9. Zoph. 2. similiter mouere caput.
Psalm 21.
hissed, they gnashed their teeth, they wagged their heads, they clapped their
hands, saying, is this the City that men call the perfection of beauty, and
the joy of the whole earth. Come, let us devour it: for, certainly this is
the day we have seen it, and found it. Thus did the profane Heathen insult
over Gods People and Sanctuary. but, now when they see that they have found
favor again with God, and that he has graciously brought again their
captivity; and in his wrath, cast down their enemies, they are confounded for
all their power, and they lay their hands upon their mouth: not daring to bark
or bay any more at them: but amazed and astonished, they are forced to confess
that

The Lord has done great things for them. In the words, The parts of the Text.
we may observe. First, The Confessors: the Heathen. Secondly, the thing
confessed: the Lord has done great things for them. And therein we may note:
First, the Agent, the Lord. Secondly, the Act, has done great things. And
thirdly, the Persons for whom, for them, By whom the godly are reproched, by
the same they are often commended.
viz. the Jews. The parties confessing were the Heathen, even they who before
did deride them, and thought them a people forsaken, and not regarded. So that,
here we may learn, that often, they who laugh at Gods people and children, in
time of their afflictions, and reproach them, * (...) Chrysostom. in Genesis kom. 51.
in time of their misery: even they, in the end are constrained to acknowledge
Gods goodness toward them: and whereas before they opened their mouths
against them, so in the end they are forced to commend them. And herein is both
the power and love of God manifested, when he forces his childrens enemies to
be the trumpets of their praise. And so, whilst the Viper is upon Paul's hand,
the Barbarians abhor him as a murderer: but when he casts it off without
harm they think Acts 28.3, 4, 5
him a God. Whilst Job lies a woeful wretch upon the dunghill, his neighbors
forsake him, his acquaintaince forget him, his wife disdaines him: his servants
him; his wife disdaines him; his servants disobey him; the wicked despise him;
and even vagabonds and villains deride Job 19.
him. But when the Lord brought again the captivity of Job: then they came
all to him, feast and rejoice with Job 42.
him. As David went out of Jerusalem sleeing from Absalom, wicked Shimei
vpbraides him, as a bloody man, and a man of Belial; curses him, and throws
stones at 2. Sam. 16.
him: but as David returned to Jerusalem, he was one of the first that went to
meet him; falls down before him, acknowledges him for his Lord and Sovereign,
confesses his fault, and craves his gracious 2. Sam. 19.
pardon. Our Savior himself, whilst he suffered under and upon the Cross,
was stripped, scoffed at, crowned, and crucified of the Soldiers, and the high
Priest, Scribes and Pharisees mocked him, saying, He trusted in God, let him
deliver him now, if he will have him: Yet, when the veil of the Temple rent
asunder; when the Heavens were darkened; and the Sun obscured: when the
Graves opened, and the Earth quaked: the Centurion and his company were all
stricken with an exceeding fear, and confessed that he was the son of Matthew.
27.43
God. And so the Jews, in their misery and extremity, became an open shame
unto their enemies: a very scorn and derision unto all that were about them.
And the Heathen said, Where is now their Psalm. 79.4. and 10.
God? But now, perceiving how powerful the Lord was, in delivering them: and
how mindful he was of them, they are forced to confess, that the Lord had
done great things for them.

Here we may see, what is the nature and condition of this wretched world: it
Hoc sane mundi est ingenium vt ijs maledi^at, and auersetur, quibus videt D^um
ext^rne maledicere, contra ei benedicat, cui externe a Domino videt benedici.
Cum sueris faelix multos numerabis amicos, tempora si fuerint nubila solus
eris. Nihil ergo mirum quod Job ^b ami^is reu^fa^ur afflictione liberatus, qui
in afflictione ab omnibus suit destitutus. Merc^in Job 42.
blesses, honors, and reuerenceth all such, as they see the Lord to bless
with worldly honors and preferment: and on the other part, they curse, hate,
and abhor all such, whom it pleases the Lord any ways to afflict outwardly:
yea, one and the selfsame man shall be regarded and reproched by the world,
as his case and estate does change and alter in the world: as you have heard
Job for an example: who first, in the time of his prosperity, he was honored
of all, all bowed the knee to him: but in his misery and adversity, they all
fled from him, forsook him; yea, and laughed him to scorn: yet, when the Lord
restered him to his former health, and blessed his estate: his friends, kindred,
and acquaintance, did all flock to him, and feasted with him: yea, of their
own accord, they brought presents to him, and comforted him, when they saw
what great things the Lord had done for him.

Let this bridle the disdainful ambition of all such, as dare reproach any of
Gods servants, in time of their cross and calamity: as if, for their
transcending sins, the Lord had forsaken them, like Iobes friends, who from
the greatness of Iobes torments did conclude, that he had been unthankful,
unmerciful, uncharitable, his wickedness great, and his iniquities Job 22.5,
6, 7, 8.
innumerable: or, with churlish Nabal, because David was in need and want, held
him as a ru^agate, 1. Sam.
and a runaway. And the neighboring nations about Jerusalem, because of her
infinite afflictions, think the Jews to be abiects and cast awayes, and so
rejoice at their fall, and help forward their afflictions. Let us not thus
peruersely judge of the Saints of God. Let us not thus add affliction to the
afflicted. For, Nabal shall sinart for his churlishness to David. Eliphaz and
his companions, shall be sharply reproved for their uncharitable judgment of
Job. And the Heathen shall suffer for the unadvised and wrongful censure of
Gods people. For, the Lord will purchase unto his servants, praise and fame,
throughout all the land of their Isa. 60.14 and 62.12. Z^ph. 3.18, 19, 20.
shame: which shall make their enemies confess, that the Lord has done great
things for them.

The second observation, that offers it self to be considered in these
words, is, that God does not only deliver his Church and Children: The godlies
deliverance is often so miraculous, that is affrights, and astonishes the
wicked.
but he does so deliver them, that the wicked stand amazed and astonished
thereat. When the King of Jericho heard, how the Lord had dried up the waters
of the red Sea before the Israelites: and what a glorious victory he had
given them, of the two Kings of the Ammorites: he and all the inhabitants of
the land were sore amazed, they were greatly affrighted, their heart fainted,
and their courage was Job 2.9, 10.
abated. Proud Nebuchadonosor, at the miraculous deliverance of the three
Children out of the fiery furnace, was so much astonished there at: that he
was constrained to acknowledge, and confess the mighty signs and great Dan.
3.
wonders of God. And when Paul and Sylas being cast into prison, and having
their feet made fast in the stocks: so that in the Iaylors opinion they were
sure enough: at midnight, the foundation of the prison was shaken, the doors
opened, and every man's bonds loosed: the Iaylor awakened, and would have killed
himself, being so suddenly affrighted, and amazed at the sight of those great
things which the Lord had done for Acts 16.
them.

Thus, the Lord will deliver his own children. First, to manifest his power
and glory, that the Gentiles may know, that he is the God of salvation. To
this end, he would have Gideon to encounter with the Amalekites, and
Madianites, with no more then three hundred men, that his power might be the
better known in so Judge. 7.
great a victory. And so, by his wonderful plagues inflicted upon the
Egyptians, and by the miraculous bringing of his people out of Egypt, he did
vindicate to himself, glory and worship: for, the Scripture says unto
Pharaoh, For this same purpose have I exalted thee, that I might show my power
on thee, and that my name might be declared through all the Romans 9.17.
earth. To make the Heathen confess, that the Lord has done great things for
Israel.

Again, to let the wicked see that there is nothing can hinder or let the
liberty, and deliverance of the godly, when God once purposes to redeem and
save them. The Sea shall divide it self; Jordan shall start back, that they
may pass safely: a Pillar of fire shall give them light by night, and a cloud
shall ouer-shadow them by day: the Heavens shall rain down meat, and the
dry Rocks shall power out drink unto them: no power, no might, and no policy
in man can detayne them: for, he makes wars to cease in all the earth, he
breaks the Bow, and knappeth the Spear in sunder, and burns the Chariots
in the Psalm. 45.9.
fire. He breaks the gates of brass, and bursteth the iron Is. 45.
doors: he vnlooseth the capriues bonds: he delivers the prisoners out of
the Psalm. 68.6.
stocks; and brings them out of the Pit wherein there is no Zacb. 9.11.
water; that the Heathen may confess, that the Lord does great things for them.

O, how should this encourage us, whenever we are molested, and oppressed of
the wicked; though they with Zanecherib think, that God is not able to deliver
Ezekiah out of his hands; and with Nebuchadnezzar, do confidently believe,
that it is impossible, that God should preserve Ananiah, Mishael, and Azariah,
from so cruel a death; and with Pharao, blasphemously say, who is the Lord
that I should hear his voice, and let Israel go? yet need we not to fear,
nor be discouraged; but every one of us, with David ought to say, in God is my
trust, and I fear not what man can do unto Psalm. 27.1.
me. It was the saying of Euripides, when the Athenians sought against the
Thebans: Jupiter is my helper, and I do not fear. Now whereas we have the
living Lord, and not a Paynim God for our helper; should any of us distrust, or
be in fear? For our God is not as their god, even our enemies be Deuteronomy 32.32.
judges, that the Heathen may confess, that the Lord has done great things
for us.

O, how should this assuage the tyranny, and abate the cruel insolency of
the wicked over Gods Children, since the Lord, to their own astonishment, can
set them at liberty, and let them see that they are neither able to detayne
them, nor powerful to restrain them, whenever the God of salvation
purposes to deliver them. For albeit, the Philistimes think, they have Samson
safe enough in cords; though the Jailer think, he has Paul sure enough in
the stocks; and although the Quaternions of Soldiers are persuaded, that they
have Peter fast enough in fetters, yet shall they be deceived. For the snares
shall be broken, and we Psalm. 124.8, 9.
delivered. For our help is in the Name of the Lord, which has made Heaven
and Earth; and the Lord of Hosts is with us, and the God of Jacob is our Psalm.
46.11.
refuge: to make the very heathen confess, that the Lord has done great
things for us.

Now, whom do the Heathen acknowledge to be the Jews deliverer? Not
Ashteroth, the god of the Sydoniaus; nor Chemosh, the Idol of the Moabites;
nor Milchom, the abomination of the Ammonites, for all these are but vanities:
but the Lord, whose power is inexplicable, whose wisdom is ineffable, and
whose greatness is incomprehensible. Now they perceive, that these Gods are
but gold and silver, the works of men's hands, they have mouths and speak not;
ears, and hear not; eyes, and see not; hands, and touch not; and feet, and
walk Psalm. 115.3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
not: so that they are not able to do any thing, much less so great things,
as to work the overthrow of Babylon, and bring again the captivity of Sion.
Therefore they are forced to confess, that he, who is great, and Lord above
all Gods, and who works, whatsoever pleases him, in heaven and in earth, in
the Sea, and in all deep places; who brings up the clou^es from the ends of
the earth; and who causes the lightning with the Psalm. 135.5, 6, 7.
rain: that he, I say, and none but he, dealt so graciously with his people,
and did so great things for them.

Thus God by the manifestation of his power, will let the wicked know, By the
wonderful works of God, the Heathen come to some acknowledgement of God.
that he is the God of Gods, and Lord of Lords. When fire descended from
heaven, at the prayer of Eliah, and consumed the burnt offering, the idolatrous
people forsaking Baal and his Priests, fell upon their faces, and cried out,
saying; 1. Kin. 18.39.
The Lord is God, the Lord is God. Darius, who doubted of Gods sufficiency, to
rescue Daniel, from the jaws of the Lions: when he saw Daniel come forth
safe, without hurt or harm, he acknowledged Gods power in his deliverance, and
made a decree throughout all the provinces of his Empire, that men should
tremble and fear before the God of Dan. 6.
Daniel. And the profane heathen, seeing the wonderful power of God
manifested in his fatherly care, in delivering his Saints from the cruelty of
Maxentius and Maximinus, Euseh. hist. Eccl. ^b. 9. cap. 1.
and in changing their woeful captivity into a joyful liberty, were so much
astonished and confounded thereat, that they were forced to confess, that the
God of the Christians, was the only true and omnipotent God.

O, how could this but confound the idolatrous Heathen, if that they had but
duly and truly considered, the omnipotency and power of this great God
Jehovah, who feigned unto themselves so many gods, impotent and weak, to
succor them in adversity, and to do any thing for them. Among all their
gods, Jupiter was in greaterst estimation, as Father and King of Gods, and was
called Jupiter quasi iuuans pater, a helping Father; yet, as the Poets feign,
he wept when he could not set Sarpedon at liberty. Such imbecillitie and such
impotencie, was in these Heathenish Idols and Paynim Gods: but the Lords hand
is never shortened, that it cannot Isa. 50.20.
help: he is ever able to deliver us, and he is always ready to relieve Is.
59.1.2.
us, if our iniquities make not a separation betwixt him and I^r. 5.25.
us, and if our sins hide not his mercies, for amongst the Gods there is none
like unto him (says the Psalmist) there is none that can do like unto his Ps
86.8, 9, 10.
works: all Nations shall come and worship before him, and glorify his Name,
for he is great and does wondrous things, he is God Is. 37.16.
alone, and therefore the Heathen now upon the Jews deliverance, confess,
that he has done great things for them.

O, that the foolish Atheists, who say in their heart, that there is no God,
would but list up their eyes, to behold the daily wonders, and wonderful
miracles, whereby the Lords power and omnipotency is daily showed, that he
might bewail this blindness, and repent them of their ignorance and wilful
error. Fot, as when John's Disciples came to our Savior, and enquired of him,
whether he were the Messiah that should come; Christ bids them go back again
to John, and show him, what things they had seen; how the blind did see; the
deaf did hear; the halt did go; the dead were raised; and the poor,
received the Luke 7.19, 20, 21, 22.
Gospel. By these miracles giving them to understand, that he was the Messiah
indeed. Even so the daily wonders which God does work (besides the great
things that he brings to pass) as the streaming of the Heavens, the shooting
of the Stars, the thundering of the Air, the inundation of Seas, the shaking
of the Earth, and such like, do plainly demonstrate unto the most ignorant
Atheist, that there is a God omnipotent and omniscient, who is the efficient
Causer of these things. For, as the Ie was might have known our Savior by the
miracles he Job. 10.25.
did. Even so, by the works of God, all men may see, that there is a God,
Creator and Conseruer of all. For the heavens declare the glory of God,
Presentemque refert quaelibet berba Deum.
and the firmament shows forth his power; one day tells another, and one
night certifieth another. We read of Archimides, that he was much so^nended
among the He^then, for his skill in contriuing and compacting the motions of
the Sun, Moon, and Planets, with the course of the Heavens and celestial
Spheres in his Horologie. We read like wise of Architus, whose Art was
admired of them, for causing a Dove of wood to hang in the Air. We read of
the two painters, Apelles and Zeuxis, whose cunning was wondered at, the one,
for deceiving the beholders with an artificial Fly; and the other, the Birds,
with lively painted grapes. But if the Atheists would with David consider the
Heavens, the works of Gods fingers, the Moon and the Stars, which he has
Psalm. 8.
made: and with Job, lift up their eyes to contemplate the celestial Spheres:
and with Solomon, observe the nature of the Flies and Pismires. How could they
but admire the wisdom and power, by which all these were created, and still
are governed? And how can they be ignorant, and plead want of knowledge of God?
When the invisible things of God, that is, his eternal Power and Godhead, are
seen by the creation of the World, being considered in his works, to the
intent, that they might be without excuse, and that the Heathen might confess,
that it is the Lord that does great things.

They, Man can observe Gods doings for others, when he will not consider what
he has done for himself.
for whom the Lord had done so great things, and upon whom he had conferred
this great blessing of so gracious a deliverance; were the Jews his own
people, and Sion his own inheritance, as I showed before. But in that here the
Heathen take notice of Gods goodness unto them, we may learn how ready the
wicked are to take notice of Gods favor showed unto others, never minding how
good and gracious he is to themselves. Labans children have an eye to Jacob
and his substance; but they forget how the Lord blessed their Fathers estate,
for Jacobs sake. Ahab thinks Naboth happy of his little Vineyard, and never
calls to mind, how God had bestowed on himself a great Kingdom. And here the
Heathen can see, how good the Lord is to the Jews, not considering how good he
is to themselves. If it were in nothing, but in him they live, move, and have
their being; and in that he causes the rain to fall upon them, as well as
upon his own children; and makes the Sun to shine, as well upon them as
upon the righteous, they are much bound to so provident a God, yet such is
their ignorance that they cannot perceive it: and such is their ingratitude,
that they will not acknowledge it, but still say, who will show us any Psalm.
4.8.6.
good. I pray God that this sin be not too frequent amongst us Christians;
that in many of us, even whilst our eyes stand our with fatness, and when we
have more then our hearts can Psalm. 73.
wish, it be not verified, which was propounded to David in a parable, that
being rich in substance and cattle; we grudge that a poor man by us should
have so much as one Sheep, and so violently perforce bereave him of 2. Sam.
12.1. 10 5.
it, thinking him to be more happy in that one, and more bound to God for it,
then they themselves for their hundreds and thousands. But because I touched
ingratitude before, and shall hereafter have occasion to speak of the like
point. I thus briefly pass it over at this present.

Then said they among the Heathen. The most of the ancient Expositors are of
opinion, This did signify the conversion of the Gentiles.
that these Heathen were such, as upon so wonderful a deliverance of the
Jews, were converted to Iudaisme, and brought to the knowledge and to the
worship of the true God of Israel; and because their deliverance (as I have
often said) was so lively a type of our redemption, I am the more easily
induced to assent unto their opinion. The Prophet Zachary, See Ier. 26.19, 20,
21.
after he had made mention of the peoples return to Jerusalem, speaks of the
great zeal that God would give the Gentiles to come to his Church, and to
join with the Jews in his true Religion. A great people and mighty Nations,
shall come to seek the Lord of Hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray unto the Lord;
and shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a lew, and say, we will go
with you, for we have heard that God is with Zacb. 8.11, 22, 23, 24.
you. And when the Jews were delivered from their utter destruction, plotted
and contrived by Haman: they all greatly rejoiced, and many of the people of
the Land, became Jews, and conformed formed themselves to their Esth. 8.17.
Religion. Both these did but typically, the conjunction and communion of the
Jews and Gentiles under Christ; who was a Savior to both, and suffered for
both.
True it is, that it was written above his head; Rex Iudeorum, The King of the
Jews, because according to his lineall descent, he was their true and right
King: but this Title was written in three several languages, Vt crux Christi
non esset^^ra ^empli sed ara mandi. Leo.
because he was King over Greeks, Romans, Gentiles, Jews, and all: and he
suffered (says one) without the Gates of Jerusalem, that his Cross might not
be the Altar of the Jews only, but of the whole World: Also, to make the
very Heathen confess, that the Lord had done great things for them.


The conversion of the Gentiles was plainly soretold by the Is. 2.2. Mich. 4.1,
2. Psalm 84.4, 5.
Prophets. Their espousing to Christ was shadowed out by Salons taking to wife
the daughter of Psalm 45.
Pharao; and their communion with the Jews, most clearly figured by Ruth the
Moabitish woman, fast cleaving unto Naemie, her Jewish mother in R^th. 1.16,
17. Read the 60. of Isai.
law; and now, blessed be God, there is neither Jew nor Gentile, Bond nor
Free, but all are one in Christ Jesus, which makes them say among the Heathon,
the Lord has done great things for them.

This deliverance was no sooner proclaimed, and the Jews liberty (as it
seems) mentioned, The Gentiles first publish Christ, Natiukic. Tanta suit
gratia lib^rationis Chrisis us c^iam ^rae d^cet^y in Geatibus Pom. in ^ cum.
but even then, without any intermission of time, the Gentiles take notice of
it, the Heathen publish and confess it: even so, out Redemption through Christ
was so great, that even the Gentiles publish it. And at the birth of our
Savior, though the Shepherds had published his Nativity about Luke 2.
Bethlem; the first that took notice of it, and did divulge it at Jerusalem,
were wise men, Gentiles, who had come from the East to worship him; they were
the first that did observe the apparition of the Star; they were they that
first did him homage; they were the first that presented him with costly gifts
of Gold, Frankincense, and Ma^th. 3.
Myrthe. There were many things at our Saviors Natiuit^ie to be admired: but
this not the least, that by the Gentiles he was first acknowledged and
worshipped; wonderful was the Stars apparition; Mirabilis stell^ apparitio,
mirabilis Angel^rum attestatio: sed boc mirabile magis quo^ccrnitur a Mazis.
Bcrn.
wonderful was the Angels attestation, but more wonderful was the Wise-mens
adoration. Yet not to be too curious, let it suffice us to know, that he was
borne a light to the Gentiles, and the glory of his people Luke 2.32.
Israel; that the Heathen might now confess, that the Lord had done great
things for them.

The Propher, speaking of the zeal and forwardness of the Gentiles, to
associate themselves with the Jews, and to come to the Church, makes Gods
goodness and love to the Jews, as a great reason, enducing them thereunto. We
will go with you, says the Gentiles to the Jews: and why? For we have heard
that God is with Zach. 8.23.
you, that he does love and affect you, that he wonderfully preserues you,
and miraculously delivers you, that with his Word he instructs you, and with
his Spirit sanctifies; and briefly, that he is with you. Thus Gods goodness
unto others, is often the means to convert many, Gods goodness to some, is
often a means to convert others.
to strengthen their faith, and to enlarge their mouths, to set forth Gods
praise. When our Savior raised Lazarus to life, many of the Jews believed in
him. When the Gaolor saw what God had done for Paul and Sylas, he fell down
before them, desiring to know what he must do to be Acts 16.
saved. And the woman, who had the issue of blood, beholding what wonderful
cures our Savior did, and how willingly he restored health to all that
believed persuades her self that if she but touched the hemme of his garment,
she should be cured, and therefore thronged fast through the prease, until
she had touched Mark 5.28.
him: and when Christ restored health to the sick of the palsy, all that were
there spectators glorified God. And to conclude this point, here the Heathen
seeing and observing Gods goodness to the Jews, with an inward assurance as
it were, that he would do no less for them; setting apart, as it seems,
their foolish Idols, they affirm him to be Jehovah, confess his power, and
acknowledge his favor to his people, in that he has done great things for
them. Of all sorts but a sew shall by saved. Quia non omnes sed aliqui inter
omnes Lud^l. Car in l^^um. Qu a in aduen i^ Domini Genies vniuersaliter non
crediaerunt sed m^^r Gentes erant ex Gentibus fideles sacti. Fra. de puteo
carth. in cat. cur in locum.


One thing before we conclude this sequel: and that is, that it is to be
observed, that the Psalmist says not, Then said the Heathen, but, they among
the Heathen: because, not all, but some of all sorts shall be saved. Solomon
says, he saw a little City, and a few men in it: and a great King came
against it, and compassed it about, and builded Forts against it: and there was
found therein, a poor wise man, who delivered the City: but none regarded the
poor Eccl. 9.14.15. Salomons allegory of the little City paraphrased.
man. To unfold this Allegory: The Church is this City, so called, because
her members are in love united one unto another, like a City whose edisices
are conjoined and compacted together: for, Jerusalem is builded like a City
that is at unity within Psalm. 122.3.
it self: But she is a little City. For, what is Jerusalem in bigness to
Babylon? The one, but six miles; the other, above threescore in compass. And
what is the Church of Christ in largeness to the Synagogue of Satan? The
inhabitants are but few: for, narrow is the way, and straight is the gate, and
few there be that enter in Matthew. 7.
thereat. The great King that comes against it, is the Devil: the Prince of
darkness; the Prince of this 10.14
world; and the Prince that rules in the E^b. 2.
air. He compasses it: for, he trauerseth the earth to and Job. 1.
fro: and goes about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may 1. Pet. 5.
devour. Infinite ways does he assault, and seeks to overthrow this little
City: but Christ is that poor man, who though he was the King of Kings, and
God of glory, yet in man's ijgnorant judgment, he was thought base and Isa.
52.14.
vile: and who being rich, for our sakes became poor, that we through his
poverty might be made 2. Cor. 8.9.
rich. But Christ is the poor wise man, for he is wisdom Pr. 9.1.
it self: the hidden wisdom of his Father: and was made unto us wisdom and
righteonsnesse, sanctification and 1. Cor. 1.30.
redemption. He saved this little City from the enemy: for, he trod upon
the head of the serpent: he disarmed the strong man and took possession of the
house himself. He put down the great Leuiathan: and loosed all the works of
the 1. John 3.8.
devil. Thus we see that the Church of Christ is but a little City; the
inhabitants few; and the enemy, the devil, both cruel and crafty. Let us
labor therefore to enter in at the strait gate: that we may be of this small
number, and of Christ's little flock: for many are called, but few are chosen.
A few, but of Ezekiels hairs were kept up in his Eze. 5.
lap. The basket of good figs was only Ier. 24.
approved Gods; children were only marked in their Eze. 9.
foreheads. And here but some among the Heathen confess and acknowledge the
Lord. Let us strive to make it appear that we are some of these few hairs,
good figs, and of the number of those who are marked in their foreheads. For,
God will make a short account of all the Romans 9.28.
earth: and, but a few shall be Luke 13.23.
saved: therefore, but a few among the Heathen confess that God had done great
things for Israel.

Now Lord fulfill the number of thy servants, bring in the fullness of the
Gentiles: gather together the dispersed sheep of the house of Israel; that
both they and we, being gathered into one John 10.34.
fold, may both together follow and worship one Savior Christ Jesus, the only
Shepherd and Bishop of our 1. Pet. 2.25.
souls: to whom with thee and thy holy Spirit, we ascribe all praise and
honor, now and for ever.

Amen.

GODS GOODNESS, OR The last sequel, that followed upon this deliverance, viz.
The Jews own confirmation of that which before the Heathen had confessed.
THE FIFTH SERMON.
VERSE. 3. The Lord has done great things for us.


Here the Jews do confirm, what before the heathen did confess: Omnine
vere locuti estis, experti long melius veritatem sententi^ vestre, fa^emur
benef^^^ magnitudinem, superare spem cogitationemque no^ram non modo meritum.
Iorinus in locum.
that God had dealt graciously with them, in doing so great things for them: as
if they said, it is true; yea, truth it self, that you have spoken: and we,
having felt and found the truth thereof, may and will affirm it. We
acknowledge the greatness of the benefit to exceed our thought, and to be
above our expectation: and much more, to excel our desert and merit. In the
words we may consider. First, Gods power, both implied in his name Jehovah,
and set down in the Act, Nonabso^um est ^lieua v^^ sententia vel testimonio,
quamuis by qui priores vsurpant inimici sint. Idem.
in doing great things. Secondly, The Jews approptiating the end of these
works unto themselves, for us. But, by the way, let us observe some general
obsertations, before we follow the parts in particular. As first, seeing they
make use of the Heathens words, repeating the selfsame, without either
addition or diminution, we may gather with Lorinus, that it is not amiss,
sometimes to use the testimony and sayings of others: albeit the first authors
of such phrases, sentences, and assertions, be our enemies; yea, profane and
Heathen, and why?

First, because their own weapon, is of greater force to confute and confound
their erroneous opinions: Magnum and firmum ab aduer. sarys argumentum. Cat.
aure^ in locum. Maiores in eosdem viros babet. Lorin.
as Goliahs sword served to cut off his own head: and therefore the Apostle
Paul, seeing that inscription at Athens to the unknown Act. 17.23, and verse.
28.
God: He took occasion to dispute against their superstition. And in like
manner with the verses of Aratus, and Maenander, and other heathenish Poets,
he condemned them of gluttony, idleness, drunkenness, and lewd behavior.

Again, the necessity of using such Writers, is sometimes such: that without
them, some places of Scripture can not be truly expounded. As for example:
Christ promises ^o him that overcomes, a white R^u. 2.17.
stone. Now, how shall we find out the sense and meaning of that place, unless
we bring it from some heathen Writer: Mos suit antiquis niu^is at^isque
lapillis, ^is damnare re^, illis absolu^re culpa. Ovid, Metam fab 1.
who affirm that amongst them, there was a custom upon any man's arraignement,
if he were found faulty or guil^ie, to give him a black stone, in sign that
he was condemned: but if he were sound innocent, then had he a white stone, in
token of absolution. And so in any single conflict, the vanquished had a black
stone, and the victor a white. In the thirteenth of the Revelation,
the holy Ghost describing the Beast, says, His name is the name of a man,
666. Now, where have we the like example in all the Scriptures else: yet, one
of the Sibils, Monadas octo, (...) octo, heca, on^adas octo.
whose Prophesies agree in many things with John's Revelation: speaking of our
Savior, says, that his name contains the number of 888. and so does the
blessed name Jesus, by this computation. ^ Thus you see then to use the
similitude of the Papist Pintus, that, Vtexvili terrasret osum ourum pro
sword^, sic c. insid^lis homint bona aliquando procedit doctrina, and zt aurum
eligitur and terta relinqustur, sic nos ab iniquis salutarem doct^inam accipere
debemus, deprauatos arum mores detesteri. Hect Pintus in Eze. 31. We must
publicly diuulge Gods goodness toward us.
as out of base earth, precious gold is brought forth: so, God permitting it,
from very Infidels and Heathen men proceeds often sauorie and wholesome
doctrine. And as the gold is accepted, and the earth refused: so we ought (as
we may) take from the wicked any sound doctrine, but yet, abhorring their lewd
life, and absurd manners. But I will not further insist in this point: only I
wish a moderation in the use and quotation of such authors.

The second general observation, is this, seeing they iffirme what the Heathen
did auerre: yea, and publicly profess and confess the same: we learn, that
it is not enough for us to praise God privately for his memorable works, and
for our selves to be mindful of his benefits, but withal, we should publish
and diuulge the same. The Lord himself did enjoin the Israilites to show, the
wonders that he had done for them in Egypt, to their Exo. 13.14.
posterity. David, when he had placed the Arc in the Tabernacle, he appointed
to Asaph and his fellows a Psalm, whereby the people might be put in
remembrance of Gods benefits unto them: as also thereby to be stirred up to
declare abroad his marvelous works, his wonders, and the judgments of his 1.
C^^o. 16.1. to 37.
mouth. And the people of God, at the destruction of Babylon, exhort one
another to go to Sion to praise God, and there to publish the works of the
Lord. Which here the faithful do, in declaring how the Lord had done great
things for them.

The publishing of Gods works serves, first, to strengthen the hearers thereof
in the faith: yea, and so settle their affections in the true worship of God.
When Moses told Iethro his father in law, all that the Lord had done to
Pharaoh, and the Egyptians for Isreal's sake, and how he had delivered them:
Iethro praised God, and affirmed that now he knew that the Lord was greater
then all the Exo. 18.9, 10, 11.
gods. And when the woman of Samaria heard our Savior tell her all things that
ever she did, she runs from the Well, and goes into the City, declaring so
much to the inhabitants; and many of the Samaritans, upon her report, believed
in 10.4.
Christ. For this cause therefore (if there were no other reason to move) we
ought publicly with the Jews to confess, what great things the Lord has
done for us.

Again, it argues that we are not ashamed of our profession, and that we are
not affrighted by the face of man, to set forth Gods praise, and to show our
vocation. For this cause David said: I will declare thy judgments before
Kings, and will not be Psalm. 119.46.
ashamed: For this cause, the Protomartyr Steven repeated unto the Jews, from
the first Covenant that God made with Abraham, unto that present time,
summarily Gods benefits toward them, briefly relating their ingratitude
toward God, by breaking his Covenant, violating his Laws, Act. 7.
murdering his Prophets, and at last, cruelly crucifying our S AVIOVR the
Just: besides, even unto death he boldly reproved them for their hardness of
heart and incredulity, in that they would not remember, and confess, how the
Lord had done so great things for them.

Lastly and chiefly, thereby we give glory unto God, and show our
thankfulness. For this cause, the Man that was borne blind, did both glorify
God and manifest his thankfulness; when so truly he related how he came to
his sight, so constantly stood in defense of Christ's innocence, and so boldly
reprehended the Pharisees for their Job. 9.1. to the end.
incredulity: and for this end our Savior sent back the man, our of whom he
had cast a Legion of Devils, who according to Christ's direction went his way,
Luke 8.39.
and published throughout the whole City, how great things Jesus had done unto
him.

Here then, first, is commended to us our duty, which is, with David to
speak of all Gods marvelous Psalm. 9.1.
works: With the Shepherds to publish them: and with the Apostles to preach
them. The Soldiers, when they saw the earth quake, and the Angel rolling away
the stone from the door of the Sepulcher, with other miracles at our Saviors
Resurrection, they were bribed by the Priests to conceal Matthew. 28.
them. When Christ prayed to his Father to glorify his Name, there came a
voice from heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it
again: which many of the Rulers hearing, did believe in him; but because of
the Pharisees durst not confess 10.12.
him. Yet neither money nor malice, favor nor fear of men, must make us
conceal Gods praise, or be silent from she wing forth his wonderful works.
For if once we believe in our heart, we must confess with our mouth. For with
the heart men believe unto righteousness, and with the mouth they confess
unto salvation.

Moreover, here is condemned the slothful dullness of men, who never enter
into the consideration of Gods works done unto them; nor at any time
acknowledge Gods goodness and kindness toward them. But, as the Prophet
says, The Harp and Viol, the Timbrel and Pipe, are in their feasts, but they
regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands.
And what is the cause of this? Is it not because like the men of Judah, who
went into the Land of Egypt, they attribute all to the Queen of Heaven, and to
their Ier. 44.17, 18, 19.
Idols; or like Epicures, they ascribe all to Chance and Fortune; or with the
Peripatetikes, to Nature and natural Causes; or with the Stoikes, to Fate and
Destiny: if they be enriched with temporal things, as was Nabal; if they be
preferred to honor, as was Haman; if they be adorned with external bodily
favor, as was Absalom; or inwardly endued with worldly wisdom, as was
Achitophel; they think that either by Fortune or by Fate, such things come
unto them: never regarding God, nor minding Gods providence therein. Whereas
the Apostle says, That every good thing, and every perfect gift comes from
above, and comes down from the Father of Lam. 1.17.
lights. But let us shake off this blindness, and with David medicate upon the
wonderful works of God. For they are great and ought to be sought out of all
that love Psalm. 111.2.
him: and if with Jacob we be enriched; with Joseph extold to honor; with
Ezekia delivered from sickness; with Israel freed from bondage and slavery;
and here with the Jews brought out of servitude and woeful captivity. Let us
give the glory to God, acknowledge his goodness before the sons of men,
confessing, that the Lord has done great things for us.

The first thing in particular, that I promised, Gods power employed in his Name.
to observe in these words, was Gods power: and that first employed in his Name,
and set down in his Work. His Name Iehoua, a name which the Hebrews called
Tetragrammaton, because it consists, say they, of four letters, as (...), with
the Grecians; and Deus, with the Latins. They held it ineffable, not because
it could not be pronounced, but because the signification of it could never
fully be conceived. For some of the learned are of opinion, that the
Omnipotency, Wisdom, and Eternity of God, are all employed in this Name; of
all the names of God, it was held in greatest reverence, so that seldom the
Jews did name it, but when the occasion was weighty, and of great importance;
as when the Israelites were delivered out of Egypt, Moses and the people began
their song, The Lord is a man of war, and Jehovah is his Exed. 15.3.
Name. And here in this short Psalm, it is no less then four times
mentioned, the more, as it seems, to set forth the greatness of their
deliverance.

Before our Savior was conceived for our Redemption, he was named of the
Angel, JESUS, in which blessed Name, some observe to be included, the vowels
called Tetragrammaton, with one S of the Hebrews, wherein was a mystical or
hidden signification of his Divinity. But not to be too curious, let us still
compare their deliverance with our redemption, and see the Analogy betwixt
these two names.

First, as the name Jehovah was not known to the Israelites, the Jews
predecessors, before their deliverance out of Egypt was at hand. For before
this Name was not revealed to the Pro. 6.2, 3.
Patriarchs: and now, after their deliverance from Babylon, they acknowledge
that only he, whose Name is Jehovah was their Deliverer, So before our
redemption did approach, and before Christ was to be conceived for our
salvation, his name JESUS was not revealed, but the Prophets named him Is. 7.14.
Emmanuel, and entitled him wonderful Is. 9.6.
Counselor, the mighty God, the Prince of Ier. 23.6.
peace, all which did but explain the true signification of this one Name: and
now must we not expect salvation in any other. For, amongst men there is given
no other Name, whereby we must be saved. Act. 4.12.

Again, as the full signification of the Name Iehoua, cannot be conceived: so
the full signification of this name JESUS, cannot be expressed. For this one
Name contaynes all things, which were foretold by the Prophets, of the Nature
and Office of Christ, the five Letters (says one) that are in the Name JESUS,
signifies as much as that He is, Iucunditas moerentium, aeternitas viuentium,
sua^itas do^entium, vbertas egentium, sanitas languentium.
joy and jocunditie to such as mourn, eternity and life to the living, sweet
comfort of the sorrowful, prosperity and wealth to the needful, soundness
and health to the diseased and sick.

Moreover, as the Name Jehovah, was never used amongst the Hebrews, but with
great fear and reverence, even so, with the like reverence, ought Christians
to use the Name of JESUS. For at this Name every knee must bow, of things in
Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the Pbil. 2.10.
Earth.

In a word therefore, Let us with all reverence take these Names in our
mouths. For holy, fearful, and reverent, is the Name of Psalm. 111.9.
God; holy, and therefore to be sanctified; terrible, and therefore to be
feared.

The Lord has done great things for us. Because the Psalmist was not able to
express all things, Gods power se^ out in his works.
which the Lord did for his people at their deliverance, Magnificauit. i.
magnifica fecit, magnifice fecit, magna nos fecit, sic fere omnes comment.
from their captivity, he includes the overthrow of their Adversary; their
own liberty, the reparation of the Temple, and restoration of Religion, and
all things else, in two words, The Lord has done great things for us. Their
Enemy was proud and powerful, and thought in his heart, that he could not
be humbled. Their liberty and freedom was a thing in their eyes impossible.
The Temple was rased to the ground, and past all hope to be reedified again.
The true Religion was generally decayed, and in their judgment could not
easily be restored. But God, who is Omnipotent and All-sufficient, did for
their sakes bring all these things to pass. If I should here take occasion to
speak of Gods power and sufficiency, and of his wonderful works, I should
deservedly be taxed for presumption, in attempting a thing beyond the
understanding of man. For he does great things and unsearchable, yea marvelous
things and without Job 9.10.
number. But his power here is manifested, chiefly in these three: The
overthrow of Babylon; the delivering of Sion: and in the restoring of pure
Religion.

The Chaldeans were a bitter and furious Nation, terrible and fearful. Their
judgment and dignity proceeded of themselves. Their Horses were swifter then
Leopards; their Horsemen many, and as the Eagle, hasting to the prey; their
faces sharp like an East wind, and they gathered the captivity as the Sand;
they mocked Kings, they scorned Princes, they did deride strong Holds, they were
strong and mighty, their Quiver an open Sepulcher, and without mercy and
compassion they devoured, eat up, and destroyed all before Hab. 1. and Ier.
5.16.
them: but how suddenly are the wicked destroyed? Even now Pride is a chain
unto them, and Cruelty covers them as a garment; they set their mouths
against heaven, and their tongue walks through the earth; but the Lord has
set them on slippery places, and casts them down into desolation, they are
suddenly confounded, perished, and horribly Psalm. 73.
consumed. Babylon, the head City of Chaldea, in their judgment was
invincible, being immured with walls of three hundred feet in height, and
threescore and fifteen in breadth, environed and entrenched with the great
River Euphrates, and enclosed with an hundredth Gates of brass; but she is
suddenly surprised, sacked, ruinated, and rased to the ground. And now Babel,
the glory of the Kingdoms, the beauty and pride of the Chaldeans, is become
like the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, an habitation of Devils, and a cage
of clean Ier. 50.39. and Isa^. 13.19, 20, 21, 22.
spirits.

Their liberty was a thing so far beyond their expectation, Tam admirabilis
quam captiuitas videbatur insolubilu. ^^usc.
that it seemed as impossible, as their captivity seemed insoluble. Their
captivity was such, that all their hope of deliverance was gone; they thought
themselves forsaken and clean cut off; they were like a Bird caught in the
snare of the Fowler; like a Brand burning in the fire; and like dead and
withered bones. Now, as there is small hope of the ensnared Bird, less of a
burning brand, but least of all of withered bones; so there was no great hope
of their delivery: yet, says the Psalmist, Our soul is escaped even as a
Bird out of the snare of the Fowler, the snare is broken, and we are Psalm. 124.
delivered. And the holy Ghost says, that they were like a brand taken out of
the fire: and the Prophet says, that when he prophesied over the bones, the
Lord caused them to come together, bone to bone, sinow to sinow, and they
receined life and breath again: by all these giving them to understand, that
though their delivery was past all hope, and albeit they were detayned in most
strict captivity, burnt up with oppression, and consumed by the wickeds
cruelty; yet in his own time he would break the snares of their captivity,
quench the flames of oppression, and strengthen them and make a mighty Nation
of them again, that they might (as here they do) confess, The Lord has done
great things for us.

The reparation of the Temple, and reformation of true Religion, was no little
blessing wherewith God blessed them. Nebuchadonosor was not content to rob the
house of God of it treasure, and to carry out of it, all the vessels of gold
and silver; but withal, he brake down the wall, and burnt it up with 2. Clro.
36.
fire. And whereas before their last carrying away to Babylon, the Priest and
the chief of the people, polluted the house of the Lord, with all the
abominations of the Heathen: certainly, now when they had been in long
captivity, and great slavery, they did much accommodate themselves to the
custom of the Chaldeans; so that there could not be but a great decay of the
true worship and service of God. And if we cast our eyes to the 74. and 79.
Psalms, we shall see what patheticall lamentations, the godly power out from
the bitterness of their soul, for the insolency of the Heathen over the
Lords Heritage and Sanctuary: we may there behold a woeful spectacle of
desolation: the Temple is defaced; the Synagogues of God destroyed; Gods Saints
disgraced, and pure Religion almost extinguished and utterly decayed. But God,
who is powerful in all things, will chiefly manifest his power in this; in
repayring the Temple, and restoring pure Religion. To what a low ebb was the
service of God come, in the days of Manasse? when the high places that Ezekiah
had pulled down were set up again; and the groves of Ahab were erected
again; when he caused his son to pass through the fire; when he offered to
all the Host of heaven; and when witches, wizards, soothsayers, and inchanters
were 2. Kings 22.
multiplied. Yet, in the time of godly Josiah, the Temple is repaired; the
Idols are put down; the groves are burnt into ashes; the coniurers and
soothsayers are flame, and the Law read unto the 2. Kings 23.
people again, so great things the Lord did for them.

Whilst we consider the great goodness of God here showed unto the Jews in
all these: it should encourage us,
now in these troublesome times, when the Church of Christ is on every side
hedged in with her enemies. And truly if we but observe, how that lamentable
estate of the Church, under the yoke of Babylon, does in all points agree with
the doleful condition of the Church of Christ, under the tyranny of
Antichrist, and cruelty of Rome, this western Babylon; we may safely
affirm, that the one was a lively pattern of the other: and withal,
confidently assure our selves, that as the Lord delivered the Jews his people,
from the slavery and bondage of that eastern Babel: so in his own time, he
will assuredly fully free his Saints and servants from the servitude of this
western Babel: that we may with the Jews confess, the Lord has done great
things for us.

Hector Pintus, Aduertendum eos fundatos qui side muniti sunt, qui iusttiam
colunt and pietatem, qui (...) Ecclesie Romanae Catholic^ ob^diunt: qui
Christum eiusd^m Ecclesiae constitutorem sequuntur. Contra vero cosqui
Babylonem colunt, qui Lutbevanam persidiam tenent, qui se vitys contaminant
fundatos nullo modo esse. Qui fieri ^otest vt sundamenta habean', qui sunt
eiect ab Ecclesia in Christo fundata, qui deficiunt a fide, qui ruunt vento
tentationis, qui seruiunt Nebuchadon^sori, hoc est, d^abolo, in Babyloniae
regno, hoc est, in Lutheranica congregatiou^ hareti^^rum confusione, in
spirituali captiuita^e. In Ez. 37.
2 Papist of no small learning, would make this captivity to prognosticate (as
he calls it) the Lutherane heresy. His words be these, speaking of the
foundation of the Church, and wresting the Scriptures to his own ends. It is
to be noted (says he) that they are firmly founded who are armed and
fortified with faith, who embrace piety and righteousness, who are obedient
to the holy Catholic Roman Church: and who follow Christ the founder of the
same Church. But on the contrary, they are not grounded upon the true
foundation, who worship Babylon, who hold the Lutheran falsehood, and who defile
themselves with vice and uncleanness: for how is it possible, that they should
have any foundation, who are cast out of the Church founded in Christ: who are
apostataes from the Faith, who run headlong with every wind of temptation;
who serve Nebuchadenosor, that is, the devil, in the kingdom of Babel, that
is, in the Lutheranicall congregation, in the confusion of heretics, in
spiritual captivity. Thus far Pintus. But if we compare that eastern
Babylon, with their Sea of Rome; and confer the pride, cruelty and idolatry
of the one with the other: any one who is not wilfully blind, may easily
discern the lively resemblance betwixt them. Babylon was the first Monarchy,
Rome the last. Babylon most grievously afflicted the people of God: Rome most
cruelly does handle the Church of Christ. Babylon subdued and oppressed Israel
with woeful captivity: Rome does vex the Church more then with long and
slavish captivity. Babylon overcame the people of God, and having set
Jerusalem on fire, and broken down the temple, carried Israel away captive: so
Rome, having burnt Jerusalem, and rased the temple to the ground, triumphed
over Israel. Babylon planted, fostered, and defended idolatry, superstition,
and all kind of abomination; yet at length, when she little thought, Gods
people being on a sudden delivered, she utterly perished: and so is Rome the
mother and nurse of all abominations, in which, at length she shall perish,
all true believers in Christ being safely delivered. Babel signifies confusion,
and a woeful confusion, Rome has brought into the Church. Now then let Pintus
and all the rest of them, call her as they list. The Primitive, Holy,
Apostolic and Catholic Church: yet we see that she is Babylon, that great
whore and mother of Reu. 14.
harlotsand abominations of the earth, who sits like a Queen, and says in her
heart, she is no widow, she shall see no sorrow: and in one day, her plagnes
shall come, death, mourning and famine, she shall utterly be burnt with fire,
she shall become the habitation of devils, and a hold of every foul spirit,
and a cage of every unclean and hateful Reu. 18.
bird. Then shall Heaven, the holy Apostles and Prophets, and all the Saints
rejoice over her, when the Lord has avenged the blood of his servants at her
hand: and all the faithful shall confess, the Lord has done great things for
us.

Hecre they acknowledge that God has done these great things for them, and
they assume and appropriate Gods favor therein to themselves, as we may see
more fully and plainly in the 85. We must take special notice of Gods
benefits bestowed upon us.
Psalm, where they acknowledging Gods free mercy to be the cause of their
deliverance, they say; Lord, thou have been favorable unto thy land; thou
have brought again the captivity of Jacob; thou have forgiven the iniquity
of thy people, and covered all their sins. Selah; thou have withdraw^e all
thine anger, and turned back from the fierceness of thy Psalm. 85. 1, 2, 3.
displeasure. Where they make, not only a general acknowledgement, but a
particular confession of Gods free mercy and kindness showed unto them. And
so, from this example we learn, that it is the duty of every one of us to
take notice of Gods singular goodness, and to acknowledge his particular
bounty to wards us. The Church, in the Canticles, takes special notice, and
makes a particular relation of Christ's provident care, love, and dearness
over her. Where she confesses, that under his shadow she took delight, and
his fruit was sweet unto her mouth: his left hand was under her head, and his
right hand did embrace Cant. 2.3, 6.
her: So dear and careful he was of her, both in prou^ding all things for
her, and in protecting of her. The princely Prophet throughout all his
Psalterie, makes not only a general confession of Gods blessings: but taking
a special view of them, makes a particular relation (so far forth as he is
able of them) in the 16. Psalm, he says, that the lot is fallen to him in
pleasant places, and that he has a goodly heritage. In the 23. That the Lord
prepared his table, anointed his head, and made his cup to o^erflow. In other
Psalms, he confesses that God vpheld him when he was ready to have fallen.
In the 30. that he had turned his mourning into joy; that he had loosed his
sackcloth, and girded him with gladness. Thus he confesses Gods special
favor unto him, in changing his poverty into pleutie, his danger into
safety, and his sorrow into gladness of heart. And is this all? No: these were
indeed great things; but yet, the Lord had done greater for him. And therefore
(says he) Come all ye that fear God, and hearken, and I will tell^you what
he has done for my Psa. 66.16.
soul. He has forgiven her iniquities, healed her infirmities, redeemed her
from the grave, and crowned her with mercy and Psalm. 103.
compasion. The like we should all do, but alas, such is our
forgetfulness, that we never enter into any serious consideration with our
selves, what great things God has done for us: and so never acknowledge any
benefits received of him. And this forgetfulness is, either because we
understand not what God has done for us: like the old Israelites, who
remembered not the multitude of his mercies, because they understood not his
wonders in Psa. 106.7.
Egypt. Or, because we misunderstand them, and think all that he has done
for us is nothing, like profane Esau, who esteemed his birthright of no Genesis
25.3^.
worth. And so, from these two it proceeds, that although God has showed his
love unto us, even in all things our hearts have desired: yet, will we say
impudently, Wherein have thou loved Mal. 1.2.
us? Because we cannot discern Gods love manifested therein unto us; or else,
like carnal beasts we still cry out, Who will show us any Psalm. 4.6.
Carnalium mentes bona pensare non zalent nisi qu^^ carnaliter vident. Greg.
good? Thinking nothing good but what our beastly hearts covet: for, the
natural man perceives not these things which are of God. But if we would but
seriously consider with our selves, what God did for us in our creation: how he
made man after his own image, little inferior to Angels, crowned him with
glory and worship, and placed him sole sovereign over all his creatures: how
could we but with admiration cry out with David: O Lord, what is man, that
thou art mindful of him, and the son of man, that thou visitest him?

But if we take a narrow view of his love in our redemption, when he sent his
only son the perfect brightness of his glory, and the engraven form of his
Heb. 1.
person, to become man like unto us; to bear our infirmities, and in his blood
wash away our iniquities: how could we be but amazed thereat? O great
goodness! O wonderful kindness! O unspeakable love of God! The Angels sinned
and were not spared, but were cast down into hell, and were delivered into
chains of darkness to be kept unto 2 Pet. 2.4.
condemnation: and yet albeit man abode not one day in honor, but became like
unto the beasts that Psalm. 48.
perish: yet, God sent his own son, who in no sort took on him the nature
of Angels, but took on him the seed of Abraham: and in all things was like
unto his brethren: that he might be a merciful and faithful high Priest in
things concerning God, to make a reconciliation for Heb. 2.16, 17.
our sins. If these great blessings, these mercies, these great things, were
truly weighed of us, how could we but admire his gracious goodness toward us
the sons of men, and with Abraham acknowledge that he is to us an exceeding
great Gen 15.2.
reward. And with the Jews confess, that he has done great things for us.

Haimo says, Magnificauit Dominus: Discreuit vt nos magnos saceret: Haime
Episc. Halberst in loc. Vel deereuit n^^ magnos facere. Cat. au^ea in locum.
he has done great things for us, in making us great, what were the Jews more
then other people by nature, what worth was in them more then in other nations
that should move the Lord to be so favorable unto them, in preferring them to
all other nations? None at all, for thus says the Lord unto Jerusalem: Thy
birth and thy nativity is of the land Canaan, thy father was an Ammorite, and
thy mother an Hittite: and as for thy nativity in the day that thou wast
borne, thy navel was not cut, neither wast thou washed in water to supply
thee: thou wast not saulted at all, nor swadled at all, none eye pitied thee,
to do any of these unto thee, to have compassion upon thee, etc. Yet even when
she was polluted in her blood, the Lord said unto her, Ezekiel. 16.
live, etc. He made her his vineyard, he planted her in a very fruitful
hill. He fenced it and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it with
the choycest Isa 5.
vine. He did make choice of them for his own people. He brought them out of
darkness, and out of the shadow of death, and brake their bonds Ps. 107.14.
asunder. He did great things for them in Egypt, wondrous works in the land
of Ham, and terrible things by the red Psalm. 106.21, 22.
sea. For their sakes he smote great Kings, and slew famous Kings, and gave
their land for an heritage to Israel. He remembered them in their low estate,
and redeemed them from their Psalm. 136.
enemies. He made them Lords over the Heathen: and Commanders over the Nations.
And what were we Gentiles by nature, a bastard-brood of Ismael; a generation
of vipers; cockatrices eggs; the sons of Belial, witches children; the seed
of the serpent; the chilof wrath; heirs of darkness; dead in sins and
trespasses: but now we are adopted sons in Christ Jesus; heirs of eternal
life; fellow heirs, and of the same body, and partakers of the promise in
Christ by the Gospel. We are of servants made sons; of bondmen become
free; of aliens from the grace of God, strangers without the covenant, and
children of darkness, we are grafted into the good olive; received within the
Covenant, and are become the children of light; even so great things has the
Lord done for us.

And to conclude, if they be great among men, who are rich in possessions,
honor and attendance: then has the Lord done great things for us, in making
us so great, that we have for attendants, Angels; for inheritance, a
celestial king dome; for riches, all are ours; and for honor, we are Kings,
Priests, and Prophets. Reu. 1.5.6.
Now unto him that has done so great things for us, unto him that loved us,
and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and has made us Kings and
Priests unto God his Father: to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever.
Amen.

THE GODLIES GLADNESS: Being An Appendix, that does depend upon this last
sequel, showing the joy they conceived thereupon.
THE SIXTH SERMON.
VERSE. 4. Whereof we rejoice.


WE have heard what the Lord has done for them: now what use they make of it,
we see. They make Gods goodness the ground of their gladness; for the
overthrow of their Enemies, their own liberty, and all other blessings
bestowed upon them; now at their deliverance did afford them occasion to
rejoice.

First, The occasions of the faithfuls joy.
the overthrow of their Adversaries, might, and did give them cause of joy. For
when they were led captives, they did insult and triumph over them, mocking
their Kings, and scoffing their Princes, deriding and laughing all of them to
Hab. 1.10. Psalm. 137.
scorn; opening their mouths against Jerusalem, h^ssing and gnashing their
teeth, saying, Let us devour it, certainly this is the day, we have seen it
and found Lam. 2.15, 16.
it; but now the case is altered; for Bell is bowed down, Nebo is fallen, the
daughter of Babel sits upon the ground, her locks are loosed, her feet are made
naked, her legs uncovered, and her filthiness Is. 46.1. and 47.1, 2, 3.
discovered: her Kings are slain, and her Princes and strong Men, made drunk
with the Cup of the Lords wrath. This is one cause of their joy, foretold by
the Prophet: The meek in the Lord shall receive joy, and the poor man shall
rejoice; for the cruel man shall cease, and the scornful shall be consumed,
and all that hasted to iniquity shall be cut Is. 49.19, 20.
off: whereof the godly may and do rejoice.

But how may we rejoice at the fall of our Enemies, Quest.
since we are commanded to pray for Pro. 17.5. Job 31.29. Pro. 24.17.
them?

If they only seek the particular hurt of our bodies, then we ought to bless
them that curse us, and pray for them that persecute us; Answ.
or if through ignorance they malign and trouble us,
as Saul did persecute the Saints: we ought with our Savior to pray for them,
Si ita gaudeas, vt this affect ^us indulgeas, and aeteris tuas iniurias
vindicari, affectus h^c o^n^o est vitiosus and sugiendiss, sed si animum
refer^^ ad glorian Dei and s^lutem p^^ximi, and te intra has metas contine^^
affectus hic laudandus est. Moll. in Psalm. 137.
because they know not what they do: yea, though contrary to their knowledge
and conscience, they thirst after our blood, yet must we with Steven desire,
that it be not laid unto their charge: that is (as Lyra says) in desiring God
not to punish them eternally, but to give them repentance; but if our enemies
be Gods enemies, and seek not only our shame, but Gods dishonor; not our
particular hurt, but the overthrow of his Church, then we may both pray for
their Psalm. 79.11, 12, 13, 14.
confusion, and rejoice at their Psalm. 58.10. Judge 5.31.
destruction.

Secondly, their own liberty did afford unto them no little comfort:
Captivity is a great misery, and Liberty no less a blessing; the felicity
of the one, may be gathered from the misery of the other. For, in captivity
you may see Manasses in chains, Iehoiakim in fetters, Samson at the mill, and
Hoshea in prison: in time of liberty, you may see Debora and Barak singing,
the M^nstrell playing, Myriam at her Timbrel, and David at his Harp. In
captivity the Land lies waste, our Houses are given to Aliens, and our
Possessions to strangers: but in liberty, we may see Elisha plowing, Isaak
sowing, and Boaz reaping. In captivity, poor bondmen are clothed like David's
servants, with garments cut off by the buttocks; their fare shall be like
Michaiahs, bread and water; their lodging like unto Jacobs, the cold ground for
their bed, and a hard stone for their pillow; and their taskes like the
Israelites, more then they can bear: but in liberty you may see Daniel and
Mordecai clothed richly; Nehemiah and Ezra feasting joyfully; and David resting
on his bed securely: in a word, Plant. Salust. Cicero.
the Heathen themselves, observing the lamentable condition of a captive: they
thought servitude the worst evil that could befall man; and that the most
dangerous liberty was to be preferred before the best and safest captivity:
yea, and death it self to be chosen before bondage. And this made Samson
choose rather to die, then to continue in such Judge. 16.
servitude: and Razis, rather to kill himself, then to yield to 2. Macch. 14.
Nicanor. No marvel then if they were glad and rejoiced, when they were freed
from such bondage, Psalm. 14.7. Psalm 53.6. Magna fuit i^s consolatio redire ad
locum cultus diuini, Lyra.
according to that of the Psalmist, When God turns again the captivity of
his people, Jacob shall rejoice and Israel shall be glad.

Thirdly, it was a great occasion of joy for them to return to Sion, where
they might freely without disturbance, and void of all fear worship and serve
the Lord in his holy Temple. For a Captive has not so much as his conscience
left free: as we may see under Antiochus: the Jews were compelled to
transgress the Law of God, to profane the Temple, to defile the Altar, and to
break the Sabbath; not daring once to confess themselves to be Jews. So in
Babylon they were forced to learn the language of the Chaldeans: and
constrained to worship their Idols and Images. h 2. Macch. 6.1. to 7.
For now the (...), Greg. Naz. Orat. 12.
walls of Jerusalem were pulled down; the City made level with the ground;
the Sanctuary destroyed; Note. The Temple was begun to be built, 2. Cyri, Ezra
3.8. but the building was hindered until the second year of Darius of Persia,
Ezr. 4.24. and was finished the sixth of his reign, Ezr. 6.15. Hagai prophesied
the first day of the sixth month, and Zachary in the eight month, both in the
second year of this Darius, Hag. 1.1. Zach. 1.1. Ezr. 5.1.1. Esdr. 6.1. in the
seventh of his reign, Ezra came to Jerusalem, Ezr. 7.7.8. in the twentieth
year of his reign, N^hem^a came to Jerusalem, Neh. 12.1. and on the seventh
month Ezra expounded the Law unto them, Neh. 7.73. and 8.1. and the month
before, which was the sixth, the wall was finished, Neh. 6.15.
the Prophets were silent; and the Priests were carried captives: but now in
their liberty at their return, they might see Zerubbabel and Ieshua repayring
the Temple, Hagai and Zachary prophesying: the Priests and the Levites
singing: the people building, Nehemiah defending them; and Ezra expounding the
Law unto them: and truly, Psalm 122.1* ^.
all other occasions of joy are not to be compared to this, to go into the
House of the Lord, and to stand in the Gates of Jerusalem. For as David never
danced so joyfully as he did before the A^ke, even so the godly never rejoice
so gladly, as when they may without molestation enter into the Courts of the
Lord, Psalm. 10^.
serve him with gladness, and come before his presence with a song.

Lastly, we might add hereunto, that it was occasion of rejoicing unto them,
to be freed from the society and fellowship of the wicked. How was the
righteous soul of just Lot ^vexed from day to day, with the unlawful deeds of
the wicked Sodomites, whilst he had his conversation amongst 2. Pet. 2.7, 8.
them? How was the peaceable soul of godly David grieved, so long as he abode
with Meshech, and had his habitation amongst the Tents of Kedar, and dwelt with
those that were enemies to Psalm. 120.4, 5.
peace? And how were the sorrowful souls of Gods Saints troubled, whilst
they stayed captives amongst the profane and idolatrous Psalm. 137.
adversaries? Now as Lot could not choose but be glad, when he was brought out
of So dom to Zoar: and David from the Tents of Kedar, to the Courts of the
Lords House. So the faithful amongst the Jews must needs be joyful, when
they were freed from the society of the wicked at Babylon, and brought to the
fellowship of the Saints at Sion. But to leave the occasions of their joy, in
the words we will observe, first, It is both expedient and lawful for the
godly to rejoice.
How it is lawful for the godly to rejoice. Secondly, What is the ground of
their joy. Thirdly, How it is only peculiar and proper for them to rejoice:
and, fourthly, the generality of their joy.

First, from this their example we gather, whenever the Lord does great
things for us, whether it be in removing his Judgments, or blessing us with
some happy deliverance: or conferring some good benefit upon us, it is both
lawful and commendable for us to rejoice and be glad. For we have both
Precepts to command it, and precedents to approve it.

First, we have Precepts for it, Joel 2.21, 23. Zeph. 3.14.15. Rejoice ye
righteous in the Lord, and be joyful all ye true of Psalm. 32.12.
heart, says the Psalmist, and rejoice in the Lord always; again, I say,
Phil. 4.9.
rejoice, says the Apostle.

Secondly, I say, we have precedents for it. Moses and Myriam, with their
several Companies, rejoiced for their deliverance out of Ex^. 15.1, 20.
Egypt. So Deborah and Barak exercised the people for their deliverance from
the Judge. 5.1.
Canaanites: and so rejoiced the Saints for their deliverance, from Hamans
cruel Esth. 8.9.
conspiracy.

This condemns the Stoicall opinion of some, who are so far from rejoicing,
that they abandon all comfort, and repel all occasions of joy; delighting
only to nourish griese, and to entertayne a pensive soul. I may say to them,
as the Prophet says, Quis quaesiuit h^^ de manibus vestris? Who required these
things of Is. 1.12.
you?

But perhaps thou will say, Quest.
does not the Apostle will us to sorrow, to suffer affliction, to weep, to
change our laughter into mourning, and our joy into Ia^. 4.9.
heaviness?

We must consider to whom the Apostle speaks; Answ.
they were profane, wicked, dissolute, double minded; who being puffed up with
worldly prosperity, their hearts rejoiced in voluptuous pleasures: such kind
of people the Apostle bids sorrow, whereas they laughed; and mourn, whereas
they rejoiced: lest, whilst (as Job says) they dance with the Tabret, and the
Harp, and rejoice at the sound of the Organs, spending their days in wealth,
they suddenly go down into the Job 21.11, 12, 13.
pit; into that pit of darkness where there is weeping and gnashing of Mat. 13.
teeth. For unto all such belongs that curse, Woe be unto them that now laugh,
for they shall mourn.

Again, the Apostle Paul says, (...).
there is a sorrow to Godward, and a sorrow to death-ward. A godly sorrow, and
a worldly 2. Cor. 7.
sorrow: the one causes death, but the other repentance unto salvation. Now
the Apostle James, where he wills them to change their laughing into mourning:
his meaning is to change their worldly joy, into a true godly sorrow, leaving
their abominable sins, and returning unto the Lord with fasting, weeping, and
with mourning. Let us therefore cast off and abandon all lumpish deadness, all
dull pensiveness: and let us sing unto the Lord, and heartily rejoice in the
strength of our Psalm. 95.1. Object.
salvation.

But thou will say, thy sorrow and thy pensiveness, is for thy sins: and so
thou may ask me, can a man sin in sorrowing for sin, or transgress in
mourning for his transgressions?

True it is, Answ.
we ought with David ever to have our sins before Psalm. 51.3.
us: and the continual remembrance of them,
should daily draw tears from our dry eyes: yet must we not sorrow for them
as men without 1. These. 4.13.
hope; for then they should bring us to desperation with Cain and Judas, and
this desperation should throw us headlong into eternal damnation: but as the
fearful sight of our sins, with the terrible aspect of Gods justice, should
cast us down with sorrow; so the sweet consideration of Gods mercies, and the
contemplation of Christ's merits should raise us up again with joy. For as the
Apostle says, we must weep, as though we wept 1. Cor. 7.30.
not: and in our sorrowing, be always 2. Cor. 6.10.
rejoicing; lest we be swallowed up with overmuch 2. Cor. 27.
heaviness.

Again, all worldly sorrow, whether it be for loss of commodities and goods,
or through sense and fear of evil, is here condemned. God requires no
sorrow, but sorrow for sin: no fear, but fear to offend: no grief, but
grief because we have grieved him. Prou. 15.13. Prou. 17.22. Prou. 12.25.
Eccl. 30.24. 1. Mac. 6.8.13. Eccl. 30.21, 22, 23.
Many inconveniences follow upon this sorrow: for it darkens our countenance,
it dulls the mind, it impaires our health, it casts down the heart, it brings
on old age, it causes sickness and hastneth death: on the other part, joy and
gladness cleeres the countenance, cheares the heart, procures health, and
prolongs our life, which makes the Lord afford his children matter whereof
they rejoice.

Many, as you have heard, were the occasions of the faithfuls joy. As, First,
The overthrow of their enemies. Secondly, Their own liberty. Thirdly, The
restoration of Religion. Fourthly, Their deliverance from the fellowship of
the wicked, and other great things which the Lord had done for them, whereof
they did rejoice.

From whence we may learn that Gods goodness is the ground of the godlies
gladness. Gods goodness the ground of the Godlies gladness.
Let the natural man rejoice in his health and strength, as Goliath did; the
worldly man in his wealth and substance, as the Lawyer did; the sensual man in
his voluptuousness, as Ammon did; the young man in his pleasures, as the
Prodigal did; the profane man in his wickedness, as Lamech did: yet, the
faithful rejoice only in God and his goodness: David was glad, and his
tongue rejoiced, because the Lord was at his right hand, his preserver and
keeper; the faithful rejoice because of the Gospel; the Apostles are glad
that they are accounted worthy to suffer for the name of Christ; and the
Disciples rejoiced that their names were written in heaven. We must not
therefore rejoice with the wicked, but be glad with the godly, noli laetar^
Israel, rejoice not, O Israel, as other people, qui latantur cum male fecerint,
who rejoice in evil doing: but with the righteous, be glad in the Lord, and
with the Prophet, joy in the God of our salvation.

Now they that rejoice were the Jews themselves, It is only peculiar to the
godly, truly to rejoice.
the Heathen only stand amazed and astonished at these things: but the
Faithful, who had tasted the sweetness and fruit of them, they only are glad
and rejoice in them. So here, we collect that it is only peculiar and proper
to the godly and faithful to rejoice truly in Gods blessings. My servants
(says the Lord) shall eat,
and ye (meaning the wicked) shall be hungry: my servants shall drink, and
ye shall be thirsty: my servants shall rejoice, and ye shall be ashamed: my
servants shall sing for joy of heart, and ye shall cry for sorrow of heart,
and howl for vexation of Isa. 65.13, 14.
mind. Exultate iusti, non iniusti; be glad ye righteous, not ye
unrighteous: laetentur Sancti, and let the Saints be glad, and not, let the
wicked be Psalm. 149.5.
glad, says the Psalmist. And Isa. 40.1.
comfort my people, not, comfort mine enemies, says the Lord.

The godly have only true cause of joy, because they have a good conscience.
Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our 2. Cor. 1.12.
conscience, says the Apostle. Now, the wickeds conscience is ever vexed; for,
even in laughter the heart is sorrowful: so that there is a mixture of
dissembled joy with a desperate grief.

Besides, to the godly is only sent the true Comforter, Ioh. 16.7. Ioh. 14.16,
17. Ioh. 15.26.
the holy Ghost. I will, (says our Savior) pray to the Father and he shall
give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, even the
Spirit of Truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him not,
neither knows him: but ye know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be
in you.

Here then we see that the joy of the wicked, be what it will, is in effect no
joy, but a counterfeit: for, Phil. 4.7. Romans 14.17.
there is no peace, but the peace of conscience; no joy, but the joy of the
holy Ghost; no comfort, but from the Son of consolation. Now the wicked they
have not this peace, non est pax impijs: for, there is no peace to the Is.
57.2^.
wicked. They have not this joy, because they have not the holy Ghost: and they
have not this comfort, because they have no part in Christ the God of comfort.
But the godly are said to be anointed with the oil of joy. Because a joyful
heart makes a cheerful countenance: and clothed with the garment of Is. 65.3.
gladness. Because inwardly they are clothed with the robes of righteousness.

This joy was so great and so general amongst the Saints: that as their
captivity brought unto them an universal sorrow: so their deliverance brings
with it a general joy. And so the Psalmist does express it, whilst he says
indefinitely in the person of them all, whereof we rejoice. From whence we
note, that a common good should work in us a common gladness. A common good
should work in the faithful a common gladness.
Moses and Myriam did not only themselves rejoice: but the whole congregation
with them, the men with Moses, and the women with Myriam: for their deliverance
out of Egypt. Mordecas and Esther rejoiced not alone^, but the whole Church,
for their deliverance from Hamans intended massacre.

For this cause both God has commanded, and the Church have observed cer^aine
days set apart, whereon they might generally feast, rejoice, and be
thankful, in remembrance of Gods mercies manifested in their deliverance from
the hands of their enemies. As for example: the Jews kept the fourteenth day
of the month Adar, with joy and feasting, and to this day it is a joyful day
unto them, in remembrance of the before mentioned Hes^^ 9.19.
deliverance. And Judas Maccabeus did institute the Feast of the dedication, in
remembrance of the purging of the Temple from the prophanations of 1. Mac. 4.
Antiochus: a feast which our Savior seemed to approve by his own Io. 10.22,
23.
presence.

So often as we consider this, it should put us in mind of the public and
general good, both the Church and Commonwealth, received on the fifth of
November: when the Lord by his wonderful providence, revealed the horrible
treasons and damnable plots of these Romish Locusts, who labored, sought
after, and attempted the overthrow of Prince and Subject, Priest and people,
and above all, the extinguishing of the Gospel: As there is none of us, no not
from Solomon himself that sits upon his throne, unto poor Lazarus that hes at
our gates; but they have reapt good and comfort thereby: so let there be none
of us, that will not observe this day as holy unto the Lord. On this day, this
happy day, this blessed fifth of November, which the Lord turned to us from
sorrow to joy, and from mourning into a joyful day. The Lord did wonderful
and great things for us, whereof we rejoice. He subdued those under our feet
that rose up against Ps. 18.39.
us. He broke the snares and delivered Ps 124.7.
us. And whereas the enemy had resolved to shut up the mouths of all that
praised God, to quench the glory of his Temple and of his Esth. 14*9.
Altar: and to open the mouths of the Heathen to praise their idols. The Lord
has shut their Deuteronomy. 18.
mouths, and put his Word into the mouths of his servants: still to speak
unto us all that he commands them. In all these respects and many more, the
Lord has made us this day to rejoice over our 2. Chro. 20.^.7.
enemies: For which great blessings let us sing unto the Lord, let us heartily
rejoice in the strength of our salvation. Let us come before his presence with
thanksgiving, and show our selves glad in him with Psalms. For the Lord is a
great God, and agreat King above all Ps. 95.1, 2, 3, 4.
gods. He has been favorable unto his own Land. He has brought again the
captivity of Jacob. He has forgiven the iniquity of his People, and covered
all their sinner, Psalm. 84.1, 2.
Selah. O this is the day that the Lord has made, let us rejoice and be glad
in Psa^. 118.24.
it.

But how shall we keep such holy days, Quest
and how shall we rejoice at such feastiuall times?

In the eight of Nehemiah we read, Answ.
that presently after the walls of Jerusalem were finished, the people feasted
and rejoiced; but mark what order and decorum they kept. First, Their zeal
was so great to hear the Word of God, that they earnestly require Ezra the
Scribe to read the Law unto them. Secondly, They give diligent attention unto
him whilst he is reading. Thirdly, With all humiliation and reverence they
praise and worship the Lord. Fourthly, When they considered their offenses
against the Law, they sorrowed and wept. All these they did before they feasted
and rejoiced.
A good president for us to begin all our feasts with a holy fear, and all our
festiuals with Divine worship. First, We must worship, fall down and kneel
before the Lord our maker: for he is the Lord our God, and we are the sheep
of his pasture, and the people of his hands. When we have done this, then with
the Jews, We may go eat of the fat, and drink of the sweet, so that we
commit no excess therein, either in drunkenness with Nabal, or in gluttony
with Dives. and besides, in our feasts we must remember the poor, and send
part unto them for whom none is prepared. And then after our feasting we may
rejoice, and make great joy. Yet, our joy must not be like the carnal
Israelites, who sat them down to eat and drink, and rose up again to play.
But we must rejoice as David did, when he danced before the Arc. And as
Myriam did, when she played upon a Timbrell, and sung praises unto the Lord.
Further, the people here made great joy: but why? because they understood the
words that the Levites had taught them. Teaching us to be much more glad for
the Spiritual blessings, then for any temporal benefits we received by the
like deliverance. Many were the blessings the Lord conferred upon us, when he
delivered us from that tragical Conspiracy: but these were the principal,
the Church was not subverted: our gracious Prince the Churches Head under
Christ and his royal Progeny was not destroyed: nor the light of the Gospel
extinguished. And these should give us just occasion to rejoice. First, with
the Jews, We must prefer Jerusalem to our Psalm. 137.
chief joy. Then with Mephibosheth, we ought to prefer our Masters safety,
rejoicing that our Lord the King is come home in peace. And thirdly, Here,
with the Jews, 2. S^^. 19.30.
we should make great joy, that we have the Law and the Levites still amongst
us. Thus must we rejoice: after this sort must we exercise our selves at all
such times: but not give our selves wholly over to delicacie and Music, as
the Israelites did in Amos Amos 6.4, 5, 6
time: nor yet, spend the day in drunkenness and wantonness, as the Jews did
in Isaiahs Is. 5.11.12.
time. For, they had the violl, harp, timbrell, pipe, and wine in their
feasts: but they regarded not the work of the Lord: neither considered the
operation of his hands.

But, may we not at such time use lawful sports, Quest.
and exercise our selves in honest recreations?

Yea; For first these pleasures of the body and mind which are of good report,
are indifferent, if modestly used. Answ.
Secondly, honest exercise does much relieve the debilitie of nature, and does
quicken the dull spirits, which else would be depressed, and ouerladen with
immoderate labor. Yet, in the use of these lawful pleasures, some cautions
must be observed.

First, they must be just and lawful.
Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things
are just, whatsoever things are worthy love, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things are of good report, of there be any virtue, or if there be
any praise, think on Phil. 4.8.
these things, says the Apostle.

Secondly, we must take heed we^ offend not thereby our weak 1. Cor. 8.
brother: though in themselves they be Romans 14.15, 21.
indifferent: yet, must we abstain from the use of things indifferent, if
they give any offense to the weak.

Thirdly, lawful recreations must be at seasonable times. Upon the Sabbath we
must not do our own will, it is the Lords day, and we must consecrate it; as
glorious to the Lord in honoring him, not doing our own ways, nor seeking our
own will, nor speaking a vain Is. 58.13.
word.

Lastly, we must not exceed, but we must keep a moderation in the using of
these lawful pleasures: for, he that rejoices, must be as though he rejoiced
1. Cor. 7.30.
not. We must use them as Jonathan tasted the honey, only for his necessary
1. Sam. 14.27.
refreshment: and as Timothy was to drink wine, only a little to preserve
his health, and to relieve the debilitie 1. Tim. 5.23.
of nature: and like Gideons Soldiers we must only but lap with the Judges
7.6.
tongue, (...)
and not drink a full draught of them: otherwise we prove our selves to be
of the number of those who are called lovers of pleasure, more then lovers of
2. Tim. 3.4.
God.

Now, if we observe the words some what narrowly, it must not be omitted,
Facti sumus laetantes, non laetati sumus. Quisacit beneficium facit and gaud,
um, and qui ^os lib^r^t cosdem laetisicat. Hugo Card. in locum.
that the vulgar Latin has it, We were made glad: and not we rejoiced.
Because, as Hugo says, He that bestows the blessing, gives also grace to
rejoice in the blessing: and he that delivers us, does also cause us rejoice
in our delivery. From whence we gather, that God is the only Author of all
true joy; and he alone does comfort us after all our troubles. It is he that
changes our grief into gladness, our mourning into mirth; and that wipes
away all tears from our eyes, and crowns us with everlasting joy which no man
can take from us. And therefore David being troubled in soul, and grieved in
mind, prays thus unto the Lord: Make me to bear of joy and gladness, that
the bones which thou have broken may rejoice.

But thou will now ask me, Quest.
how thou may know that joy that comes from the Lord, from all other joy?

I answer; First, Answ.
by the antecedent signs: as first, true humiliation, for as God gives grace
to none but to the lowly, so he gives joy to none but to the humble: and as
darkness was before light, so there must be first true contrition, and then
will follow true consolation.

Secondly, it proceeds from a lively hope; for we rejoice under ^om. 12.12.
hope: as the hope that Abraham had of Christ's Incarnation, caused him
exceedingly to rejoice for man's salvation.

Again, it is known by the concomitants: as first, righteousness of life.
For, the kingdom of God is not in meat and drink, but in righteousness and
peace, and joy in the holy Romans 14.17.
Ghost. Then it is always accompanied with these two associats. First, A holy
fear: serve the Lord in fear, (says David) and rejoice before him with Psalm.
2.11.
trembling. Secondly, A quiet conscience: and so the Apostle Paul rejoiced for
the testimony of his conscience, that in simplicity and godly pureness he
had his conversation in the 2. Cor. 1.12.
world.

Thirdly, it may be known by the consequents or effects. First, Patience in
adversity: We rejoice (says Paul) in tribulations, knowing that tribulation
brings forth 2. Cor. 6.10. Romans 5.3.
patience.

Secondly, it causes us to vilipend and undervalue all other joy: God forbid
(says the Apostle) that I should glory or rejoice in any thing, but in the
Cross of Christ.

Now, if the Lord has given thee grace to be truly humbled for thy sins:
and has given thee a lively hope in the death of his Son: and withal, has
endued thee with a holy fear: if thy conscience be at peace with God: if thou
be patient in adversity; and if you contemn all earthly and worldly joy: and
yet inwardly thou art glad and joyful, assure thy selse that that joy, that
gladness proceeds of the Lord: and all such may say here, with the faithful
we are made glad.

To conclude, Lorinus says, We are comforted or made glad, as having
forgotten their former troubles, Quasi ^^iorum obliti ma^rum. Lorin. in locum.
so that the Jews being now as it were ravished, with their present felicity
and jocunditie, Magnificauit, magnificauit. non ^em^e con^^^^ur h^c duplicatin
sed v^ oste^deret magnam quam coeperunt Letitiam. Chrysan locum.
they altogether forget their former woe and misery. Certainly, they were
greatly ioyed, and great was their joy: and therefore Chrysostom say^h, that
the duplication and iteration of the words, the Lord has done great things, is
not rashly set down by the Prophet, but to show the great joy they conceived
at their deliverance. O unspeakable joy that possesses the Saints, that they
do not once remember the woe and misery they have sustained. A woman when
she is in travel has sorrow, Job 16.21.
because her hour is come, but as soon as she is delivered, she remembers
no more the anguish, for joy that a man is borne into the world. Even so it is
with the godly, when they are fully freed from all their woe and misery, they
are so filled with joy and gladness, that they forget all their former
heaviness.
When our Savior questioned the two Disciples that were going to Emmaus, of
their serious communications, and the cause of their sadness: and they
answering by way of interrogation: Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and
have not known these things, Quasi immemor (...). Lorin.
which are come to pass there in these days? Christ replied, Quae? What
things? as having forgotten the infinite injuries offered to him: the
unspeakable torments he suffered, and the grievous passions he endured. Now,
the God of all comfort and consolation, which comfort us in all our
tribulation; comfort your hearts, and give you everlasting consolation, that as
the Apostle says, both your heart and your flesh may rejoice in the living
God, that you may walk in the fear of the Lord, by the comfort of the holy
Ghost. Amen.

THE SECOND GENERAL PART OF THIS PSALM: Viz. The faithfuls comprecation, or
supplication to God, for the accomplishing and perfiting their deliverance,
contained in one Sermon, viz. The Prisoners Petition.
THE SEVENTH SERMON.
VERSE* 5. O Lord, bring again our captivity, as the Rivers in the south.


Cardinal Hugo says, Orat propheta conuersionem captiuitatis in persona iusti
generalis.
that the Prophet in the person of all the faithful, prays for an universal
and full deliverance. But what, are they not as yet delivered? In the former
Verses he makes mention of their liberty: and here he prays for their
enlargement, Et de qua quasi iam sacta laudaue a^, ^unc quasi fu^^^^m ora^.
and that for which as already effected, he had praised God: now for the
same, as not yet accomplished and performed, he prays unto God. True it is,
the Jews had liberty to return,
freely granted them of Cyrus, in the beginning of his reign: yet but a few at
the first returned, P^^^ique metu peric^^orum quae redeunt^^us in Patriam, and
polititiam restauraturis immincre tidebantur ab hos^ibus a^^ ignauia, (...)
voluptatibus suis and delitijs, quas exempt^^ agris, and contracta cum Gentib^^
assini^ate percipiebant, retinebantur, vt omnem cogitationem de reditu
a^^^cerent. Moll^r. and Fabri. in locum.
for some stayed still in Babylon willingly, and with their own consent;
others were stayed violently and by constraint.

As for those, that of their own accord remained behind: some stayed, because
they feared the dangers and troubles which were like to fall out as they
returned, and whilst they should repair the decayed walls of their
commonwealth. Others Plurimi pr^uam babentes mentem in omnibus diuini^ legibus
repugn^^tes regredi naluerunt. Theo: in lec^m. Zach. 8.8. Is. 10.21, 22. A
Primordio institia vim patitur statim v^ ^oli capit D^us i^uidiam (...) est,
qu^ D^^ placurat ^^^iditur, and ^uidim (...).
abode still through idleness and laziness: and not a few tarried behind,
because their worldly pleasures, their goods, their grounds, which they had now
purchased, and for the affinity and friendship which they had contracted with
the Heathen: wherefore the Prophet Zachary affirms, a remnant only, to have
returned; and the Prophet Isaiah foretold, that though the people of Israel
were as the sand of the Sea, yet but a remnant should return; and therefore
the Psalmographer here prays, O Lord, bring again our captivity: that is,
let neither the pleasures of Babylon retain them, but cause them all willingly
and forwardly to return from the land of their captivity.

The same impediments, that did let the Jews from returning from Babylon to
Jerusalem, does hinder many from becoming of a Heathen a true Christian.
First, because they see that the life of a Christian is exposed to infinite
troubles; their whole pilgrimage is but a persecution, and therefore many dare
not profess that profession. True it is, that from the beginning,
Righteousness has suffered violence. As Soon as God began to be worshipped,
so soon began Religion to be envied. He that labors to please God, and unto
whom God has respect, is murdered, and that by his own brother. Yet ought
not this to discourage any, but rather to encourage them. For, whosoever will
save his life, shall lose it; and whosoever will lose his life, shall find it.
Others, through idleness, leading an Epicurean life, in eating, drinking, and
sleeping: and others, because they are besotted with this world, and blinded
with these earthly pleasures. The like we may say, does impede and stay many
from leaving this Western Babylon, the mother of abominations. First, the fire
and faggots does terrify them: but we should cast off this faint-heartednesse,
and shake off this fear; and willingly with Daniel go to the Lions, with Isay
to the saw, with Jeremiah to the stones, with Amos to the rack, with Paul to
the sword, and be content with Antipas that faithful martyr, even to suffer
where Satan's seat Revel 2.13.
is. Others for idleness do loyter and linger, desiring rather to stand idle
in the Market Matthew. 20.
place, then to labor in the Lords Vineyard: and to loyter at home like the
inhabitants of Iabesh Gilead; then with the rest of Israel to go up to Mizpeh
to the Judge. 21.
Lord: and many having drunk of the cup of Babel, and waxed rich Revel. 18.
through the abundance of her delicacies, wallowing themselves in sensual
pleasures, will not forgo her. Oh, how loath are the Israelites to part with
the flesh pots of Egypt? Oh, how unwilling is Lots wife to leave Sodom? And how
backward are many of the Jews to come out of Babylon? And how woe are we to
leave that mother of abominations, and to return to Sion: and therefore, here
with the Prophet we still must pray; O Lord, bring again our captivity.

Again, there were many stayed violently and by constraint. For albeit they
had full freedom granted unto them by Cyrus, to return, and withal a
commandment to repair the walls of Jerusalem, and to reedifie the Temple: yet
Haec letissim^ initia turbata sunt, partim a vicinis Samaritanis, partim
aulicis calumnijs cum enim pater ^yrus bellum aduersus Masa^atas ger^^et, and
Cambyses domi regn^^ et inchoati ^d^fica^io templi, edicto Cambysis prohibita
est. Phil. M^l. Chr. Carianis, lib. 2.
these gladsome beginnings were suddenly changed, this their liberty was
restrained, and all they that were not as yet returned, were detayned. For
Cyrus himself being abroad, employed and busied in the Scythian wars, and
leaving Cambyses his son at Babylon Lieutenant in his stead; who (being
incensed against the Jews by the false accusatorie Letters, sent unto him by
the Adversaries of Judah and Benjamin; who, because they were not accepted with
the Jews, in the building of the Temple, endeavored every way to hinder it: as
also being led away with the persuasions and untrue suggestions of corrupt
counselors, who were hired Ezra 4.5. Ignorante Cyr^, C^m^yses eius filius, qu^
in natura ^rat male^o^us, v^^uit ne in (...) ra proceder etur. Phil. Berg.
su^pl. Chro. lib. 4.
against them; and withal, he himself being of a cruel nature and crabbed
disposition, doubting danger where there was none, and fearing the worst: he
gave a countermand to his father Cyrus former command, strictly charging them
to cease from building, and gave full authority to their adversaries by force
to stay Haec verba duppl^^it^r ^^poni (...): vt precatio concernat vol ill^s
qui adhuc in captiuitate r^n a^serunt, vt and ^psi in patriam reducantur, vel
illos qui Hie^^so ^mam (...) a vicinis infesiabantur, vt sibi in no^o exilio
deg^re viderentur. Scull. in locum.
them: and therefore the Psalmist, after he had made mention of their former
liberty, granted by Cyrus, and considering their woeful restraint under
Cambyses, powers out this prayer unto the Lord, O Lord, bring again our
captivity.

This has ever been, and at this hour is in many places, the lamentable
estate of the Saints; what by the false accusations of their Adversaries, and
the subtle suggestions of corrupt Counselors, and perhaps without any
malicious disposition, or cruel inclination in the Chief under whom they
live. They are still in captivity; Their Adversaries calumniously do lay
against them most false accusations; and many Counselors, who are in Religion
either eagerly opposite, or utterly indifferent, or key-cold, are easily
courted; nay, with bribes corrupted: and Princes that are not soundly grounded
in Religion, are easily seduced.
And to speak the truth, this has been, and is, the practice of our
adversaries the papists, against the Church, Vide Polanum in Danielem, cap^^^.
6.
Saints, and servants of Christ; they take all occasions to accuse to the
Prince his reformed subjects; they profess themselves the defenders of the
Kings authority, and the professors of the Apostolic and Catholic faith.
They lay to their charge (as Darius Princes accused Daniel) that they regard
not their King, nor his Dan. 6.13.
Decrees: as Haman did the Jews, that they kept not the Kings E^^b. 3.8.
laws; and as the Jews did our Savior, that he is not Caesar's Luke 23.2.
friend. Nay, over and besides, like the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin,
they are not only content, contum^liously to reproach them, as rebellious
maintayners of tumults and sedition; but also they hire Counselors against
them: and so, whilst they craftily and subtly circumuent and bewitch unwary
Princes. The servants of God, and members of Christ, are most cruelly used, as
we may even at this instant see in some of our neighboring Nations, where
they are persecuted with fire and sword; but Lord, free thy servants from such
persecution, free thy Saints from their cruelty, and for thy Names sake, O
Lord, bring again their captivity.

Now last of all, Quia quod factum erat in Dei praescienti^, suturum crat in
rerum existentiae Hug. Card.
let us see how the Cardinal answers this question himself. First, he
faith, that the Psalmist here does pray for their enlargement, whereas before
he mentioned their deliverance; because what was already done in Gods
foreknowledge and providence, should be accomplished and effected in its own
time; and so the Psalmist prays, that it may be in the sight of man performed,
what God in his own counsel had purposed, or as In sup ^ioribus propheticae
scientiae suit s^rmo futurorum gaudia tanquam de pr^^terito nunciantis, Hillar.
in loc. In ^arte erat facta (...) part fut^r^. idem.
Saint Hilarie says, that the Psalmist, by a prophetical foreknowledge, did
speak of things to be acted, as if they had been already effected. Again,
partly it was done, and partly to be done: for in that they were delivered
from the tyranny of Babel, when Daniels Lion had his wings plucked Da^^. ^.4.
(...) stati^^ ^otain^^^ cons^mma^a^crat (...) loc.
off, and the Monarchy taken from the Chaldeans; and when by the permission of
Cy^^ 42360. of the Congregation, besides 7337. Maids and Servants, went up to
Jerusalem, who by Cyrus proclamation they were relieved with silver, gold,
substance, cattle, and with willing offerings, carrying with them the vessels
of silver and gold, which Nebuchadonosor had carried Ez^a 1.
from thence, they might seem to be delivered, but it was in part only. For
this their happy estate continued not long, but soon after there arose another
King, who kn^w not Joseph; for Cambyses dashed all; the building of the Temple
was stayed, besides infinite other troubles, the poor Jews sustained under
other Persian Monarchs, and so they were as yet partly captives. The Psalmist
therefore did praise God, Pro facta gaudebat profutura o^a^at. Hug. Orat v^
quod nondum factum est fiat, and quod factum est iose qui secit custodiat. idem.
rejoicing for that liberty they had already obtained, and did pray unto God
to finish what he had begun. Lastly, says Hugo, he prays that what is yet
undone may be done; and that what is done, the Lord, who did it, would conserve
it. From these expositions we might raise many observations.

First, That God in his secret counsel, has decreed and determined to deliver
his Church and Children from afflictions, before they fall into any affliction.
For as a burden is appointed to be taken off, before it be laid on: so our
afflictions, which are our burdens, are appointed to be taken off us, before
they be laid upon us.

Secondly; That God does not always free his Church and Children from all
their troubles at one instant, Quilibet Christ^anus nunquam abomni bo^^e
liberatur, insurgentibus sub^nde aduersus pios nunc ^undo, nunc pecc^^^, nunc
diabolo, at cur Deus permittit? us semper oremus, semper pugnemus. Fide, Spt,
Patientia. Vide Scul. and Gesn. in ^^um.
nor at one time destroy all their Adversaries. Israel had not all his enemies
discomfited at once; there were left some, to be pricks in their sides, and
thorns in their (...). 33.55.
eyes, for to exercise them: and here the Jews are freed from the jaws of
Daniels Lion, and yet they are kept under the paws of Daniels Bear. I mean,
they are delivered from the cruel Chaldeans, and yet much molested by the
peevish Persians.

Thirdly; That nothing in this life is stable and permanent, unless the Lord
do preserve and confirm it: and from these and such like, we may gather good
observations for our selves, touching our redemption through Christ.

First, That as God appointed his people deliverance, before ever they went
into captivity: so before the fall of man; nay, before ever man was created,
God had determined his Son should be the Redeemer of Man: yea, as the Apostle
says, before the foundations of the world.

Again, As they were the first year of Cyrus reign set at liberty, and
after restrained by Cambyses his son: Spiritualis nostra liberatio nunc
quidems inchoatur in hac vita, sed in resurrectione erit integra and consummata
Fabr. Haec libertas (...), sed non quantum ad nos attinet perfecta, quapropter
iugiter orandum convert, etc. Pomer. in loc. Haec liberatio quoad nos
imperfecta, dum sumus in mortali carne sumus adbuc in Babylone. Scult. in locum.
so although by our Savior we be redeemed from the tyranny of Sin and
Satan; yet, still are we molested by the temptations of the one, and polluted
with the dregs of the other. True it is, the price of our redemption is paid,
and the handwriting is cancelled; but the full consummation of our redemption
shall be in the end of the world. For as the Apostle says, we have received
the earnest of our Inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased
liberty, unto the praise of Gods Ephesians. 1.14.
glory.

Lastly, As they could not maintain their own liberty without Gods
assistance: no more can we, being delivered from any grievous sin, continue
from falling thereinto again, or into the like, without the assistance of Gods
Spirit. For when we think 1. Cor. 10.
our selves to stand fastest, we are in danger to fall soonest. Thus we see,
that in all these respects, the Jews had, and we still have reason to pray,

O Lord, bring again our captivity. In this prayer, I pray you observe the
Matter, O Lord, bring again our captivity: and the Manner, as the Rivers in
the South. In the Matter, first, we may note the Psalmists piety, in that he
has recourse to God only, in this time of captivity, by fervent prayer; and
then his pity, in that he prays not for himself alone, but having a
fellow-feeling of the Jews sorrow, he prays compassionately for all,
saying, O Lord, bring again OUR captivity.

If I would largely speak of Prayer: I might show you how; first, there is no
time limited; and then, no place exempted from Prayer: I mean, from a man's
private sacrifice, and not the public service. For that the Temple was the
House of Isai. 36.7. Matthew. 21.13.
Prayer: and the ninth hour was the Act 3.1.
hour of prayer: but for the other; first, there is no time limited. For the
Apostle wills us to pray 1. Th^s. 5.17.
continually. If in the morning, learn of our Mark. 1.35.
Savior; if in the evening, of Genesis 24.63.
Isaak; if at midnight, of Paul and Act. 16.25.
Sylas; if all the night, of San. 15.11.
Samuel: learn, I say, at all times to pray. For so our Savior bids us,
Watch and pray Luke 21.36.
always.

Again, no place exempted. I will, says the Apostle, that men pray every
where, lifting up pure 1. Tim. 2.8.
hands. If thou be in thy house, learn of Act. 10.30.
Cornelius: if in the field, of Genesis 24.
Isaak: if in the Temple, of 1. King. 8.22.
Solomon: if on the Mount, of Exodus 14.
Moses: if in the Garden, of our Job. 18.
Savior: it in thy Chamber, of Dan. 6.
Daniel: if in thy bed, of Is 38.
Ezekiah: if on thy Couch, of Psalm. 6.
David. Learn, I say, to pray.

These and the like general observations, I might touch in Prayer, but I
purpose not to discourse of Prayer common-place-wise, and therefore let us have
recourse unto the words.

O Lord, bring again our captivity. The first thing that offers it self to
be considered, is, the Psalmists Piety, who in this their captivity,
earnestly does pray unto the Lord for their deliverance. From whence we le^rne,
that in all our troubles and afflictions, we ought to flee to God only, by
servant prayer. First, I say, O^ quod (...). G^^g.
in our afflictions, because the mouth which is stopped in time of prosperity,
is open in time of adversity, witness the Israelites, who in their
prosperity and ease forgate God, and did not so much as invoke his Name: but
when through adversity their soul sainted in them, then they cried to the
Lord in their trouble, and he delivered them out of their distress. Ag^^ne; I
say, in trouble we must flee to God. For so he h^th commanded: Thou shall call
upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver Psalm. 50.
thee. And the Prophet says, Lord, in trouble have they visited thee, they
powered out a prayer when thy chastning was upon Is. 26.16.
them. Further, we ought to call upon God alone, for he only can hear our
cry, and cure our sore, that is, he only can hear us. In my trouble, I
called upon the Lord, and complained unto my God: and he heard my voice out of
his holy Temple: and my complaint entered into his Psalm. 18.5, 6.
ears. says David. I have seen the affliction of my people in Egypt, and I
have heard their cry, says the Lord to Moses. And as he can only hear us, so
he can only relieve us. For he without all natural means can cure every
disease: above nature he can stay the woman's running issue: and contrary to
nature he can give sight unto the blind borne: he only can bring Jonah out of
the Whales belly: Daniel out of the Den: and his servants out of the fiery
furnace. (...)
Fourthly, Oranti subsidium D^^ sacrificium. Diabolo flagellum, Aug.
we must flee to God by Prayer, for that is a present help to him that
prays; witness Ezekiah, who in his extreme sickness is restored to his
former heal ^^it is a pleasant sacrifice to God; for like Noah's sacrifice, it
smells so sweetly in the Lords Nostrills, that it diuerts away his wrath, and
it is a sharp scourge unto the Devil, more fearful unto him then Tobias
perfume, to drive him from us. Lastly, we ought in all our troubles to have
recourse so God by faithful and fervent Prayer. For Faith and Zeal are the
supporters of Prayer, like Aaron and Hur, who vpheld Moses hands whilst he
prayed. The ancient Fathers could never sufficiently praise the efficacy of
Prayer, and therefore Saint Augustine calls it the Key of Heaven: and truly
so. Cla^em Coe^i.
For by Prayer Elias opened the Heavens, when he brought both Fire and Water
from thence: Fire, to burn up the sacrifice; and Water, to fructify the
earth. Chrysostom calls it the souls sun, Solemn anime.
because as the Sun does inlighten the World, so Prayer illuminates the mind.
Tabulam naufr^go^um, Paulin.
And others have called it the Seamans Card, which brings us through so many
billows, and so great surges of temptations, unto our quiet H^rbour.

But for all this, thou may ask me, Quest
why GOD does not then hear us always when we call upon him?

First, (...) non exaud untu^: 1 Quando petimus indign^, viz terrena: Mat 6.25.
etc. (...) necessa^^^^ Mat. ^.11, 12. nes^imus quae^ Mat. 20.20, 21, 22. and
D^^ voluntati repugnantia. Deuteronomy. 3.25, 26. 2. Sam. 12.16.2 Quando petimus
indigne, viz. ore tantum: Hos. 7.14. a^sque ^ide: Ma. 21.22. in malum finem.
Iac. 4.2, 3.3 Quando indigni petimus, id est, in p^^^a^is exist^nces: Ioh.
9.31. perse^^antes: Isa. 59.1, 2, 3, etc. and Deo resistentes. Hos. 5.4.15.
I^noc. ^rooem. in Psalm (...). and I^^. de vorag. dom. (...) post. fest^^m
Trinit. ^.^. 3.
it is either because we come unto him, as Mephibosheth came unto David,
vnshauen and 2. Sam. 19.
unwashed: and so our sins, as the Prophet says, does hinder good things from
us.

Secondly, we ask, and receive Iam. 4.3.
not, because we ask amiss: like unto that man, who though he urged King
Agesilaus with his promise: yet was denied what he demanded, because he
desired a thing that was unjust: so we obtain not, because we desire of God
what is not convenient for us. For, else we have an assurance in him, that if
we ask any thing according to his will he hears 1. Job. 5.14.
us.

Thirdly, because we pray not fervently, as Anna did for a son: nor
instantly, as Eliah did for rain: nor faithfully, as the Canaanitish woman for
her child's health: but faintly, fondly, faithlesly; otherwise his eyes are the
righteous, and his ears are ever open to 1 Pet. 3.^2.
their prayers. 2. Kings 1.2.


Here then we see how the wicked of our times are much condemned, who no
sooner are visited with the correcting hand of God, but presently they repair
to the Devil and his Instruments, like Ahaziah, who being sick of a fall,
goes to Baalzebub the god of Eckron: or with Saul, who being afraid of the
Philistims, goes disguised to the Witch 1. Sam. 28.7, 8.
of Endor: or with Balacke, who fearing the Israelites, sends for the Wisard
Numb. 20.
Bal^am: or with Pharaoh, whom no sooner God began to punish for his obstinacy
and hardness of heart, but presently he calls for his Exodus 7.11.
Sorcerers: or with Baltazar, who seeing Gods judgments before his eyes, sends
for his soothsayers, and Dan. 5.7. (...). Bas. ^om. in Ps. 45.
Inchanters: or like Sannacherth, who being wonderfully discomfited by an
Angel, when he besieged Jerusalem, repaired to his temple, and worshipped his
god 2. King 19.37.
Nisroch. Nay, I wish to God, that many amongst us, who seem most forward in
their devotion, were not too much besotted with this error, that when the Lord
does visit them with sickness, or any other affliction, though they do not
directly go to the Devil, like Ahaziah, yet Asa-like they will seek to the
Physicians, 2. Chr. 16.12.
and not to the Lord. Or, if they call upon God, yet they come to him as the
wife of Jeroboam came to Ahijah, 1. Kings 14.
disguised with an hypocritical heart, and counterseit countenance: Is. 31.1.
but yet in heart they look not unto the holy One of Israel: they seek not
unto the Lord; and yet none shall be saved but such as call upon the Name of
the Lord. Joel 2.32.
As here the Psalmist does, saying: O Lord bring again our captivity.

Again, what should we think of the Romish Locusts, who direct not their
prayers to God alone: but to Saints and Angels, making them like unto God
omnipotent, and omniscient. For, in time of famine they call upon Saint Urban;
in tempest, upon Saint Nicholas; in war upon Saint George; and in captivity
upon Saint Leonard. Thus they forsake the Lord, the fountain of living waters,
and dig unto themselves pits that hold no Ier. 2.13.
water. Paul and Barnabas, would not be worshipped Act. 14.
when they were living, and shall we invoke them when they are dead? Peter
would not suffer Cornelius to fall down Ad. 10.26.
before him: and shall we kneel unto his image? The Apostles confessed
themselves to be but men: and shall we now reverence them as gods. Fie upon
such foolish fondness, away with this deuillish doctrine, and let us all that
fear God, flee unto God only in all our afflictions: for, they that wait on
lying vanities, forsake their own mercy, but salvation is of the Iona 2.
Psaltes cos qui adbuc in captiuitate erant pet affectum sibi copulans earum
n^mine exclamat ad De^^ and nos pari affectu ad exc^amandum infirmat convert.
Iac. ^anson. in locum,
Lord. Therefore pray we with the Jews: O Lord bring again our captivity.

The second thing, we observe in this Prayer is the Psalmists pity: for he
prays not for himself alone, bur for all the afflicted members of the
Church, teaching us to do the like for all our fellow members in Christ Jesus,
who are either detained under the Turkish tyranny, or are oppressed under the
Antichristian yoke: let us, as having a fellow-feeling of their grieuances,
compassionate them, and power out our supplications for them here with the
Psalmist: O Lord bring again our captivity.

The duties we owe unto such as are afflicted, are chiefly four. What duties
one Christian owes to another, in time of affliction.
First, To compassionate them. Secondly, To comfort them. Thirdly, To instruct
them. Fourthly, To pray for them. The first two of these we see to have been
intended of Jobs friends. For, when they heard of his misery, they agreed to
go and lament with him, and to comfort Job 1.11, 12.
him. The third, we learn of Isaiah, when he visited Ezekiah in his bed Is.
8.1.
of sickness. And the last is both commanded by the Iam 5.
Apostle, and commended by example.

First, I say, we ought to compassionate them. Nehemiah when Artaxerxes asked
him the cause of his sadness; answered, Why should not my countenance be sad,
when the City, the place of my fathers sepulehres lies waste, and the gates
thereof are consumed with fire? e Neh. 2.2, 3.
Jeremiah did so compassionately lament the destruction of Jerusalem, that his
eyes did fail with tears, his bowels swelled, and his liver was, as it were,
powered out upon the La^. 2.11.
earth. We ought not, with the Priest and Leuite, with a hard heart pass by
the wounded: but, with the good Samaritan, bi^d up his wounds, wash his sores
with wine, and soften them with oil. For, as we rejoice with them that
rejoice, so should we weep with them that weep: as Job did, who wept with
them that were in trouble, and whose soul was in Job 30.25.
heaviness. And especially we ought to compassionate the captiued Saints.
Remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them, and them that suffer
adversity, as being your selves also in the ^^b. 13.3.
body. says the Apostle.

Secondly, we ought to comfort them. When Hannah grieved in her soul, being
daily vpbraided by Peninnah for her barrenness: her husband Elkanah goes and
comforts 1. Sam. 1.
her. When David fled from Saul, and remained in the wilderness, in fear of
his life, Jonathan, Saul's son arose, went to him, and comforted 1. Sam.
23.15, 16, 17.
him. When Bathshebah mourned for the death of her child, David went in unto
her, and comforted 2. Sam. 13.24.
her. And when our Savior was in his bitter agony, sweating drops of blood,
trickling down unto the ground. There appeared an Angel unto him from heaven
comforting Luke 22.42, 43, 44.
him. And in a word, he that is in misery ought to be comforted of his Job
6.14.
neighbor.

Thirdly, we should instruct them that all their afflictions, whether they be
outwardly in body, or inwardly in soul, as they are to the Godly, sufferings,
(...).
so they are instructions. And so with Jeremiah, we should tell them, (...).
that Man suffers for his Lam. 3.
sin: and therefore they are chastisements for his transgressions: and with
Solomon tell them, That the Lord corrects whom he loves, even as a father
his child in whom Pro. 3.11, 12. Flagellum corrigentis non poena dam^^mtis.
August. (...). Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 26.
he delights. And so they are not the scourge of a rigorous Judge, but a
correcting rod of a loving father: yea, signs of his affection. For, As many
as I love I rebuke and chastise, be zealous therefore and amend: says Christ
to the Angel of the Church of Laodicea. And we ought to let the patient know,
that afflictions are the harbengers, that go before death, and therefore they
should daily prepare them for their end: as Isaiah wished Ezekiah to put his
house in order, for he should die Is. 38.1.
and not live.

Lastly, we ought to pray for them. When Myriam was stricken with a fearful
leprosy, Moses prayed for her. When the pestilence was amongst the Israelites,
David mourned, and prayed for 2. Sam. 14.
them. When Peter was captiuated and imprisoned by Herod, prayer was made
without ceasing of the Church unto God for Act. 12.5.
him. When Nehemiah was told of the afflictions and reproaches of his countrymen
the Jews, he weeps, mournes, fasts, and Neb. 1.
prays. And Daniel knowing that the time of their captivity was expired: and
considering the great misery wherein they were detained, he did fervently
call unto God to divert away his wrath from Dan. 9.1. to the 20.
them: as you may see pathetically expressed in the ninth of his Prophecy. And
truly this is a difference betwixt the godly and ungodly: The godly pray both
for themselves and others, as did David and Ezekiah and others. But the wicked
they are so far from praying for others, that they have not so much grace as
to pray for themselves: but like Simon Magus desire Peter, and like Pharaoh
require Moses, and like Jeroboam entreat the young Prophet to pray for them.
But the Psalmist here has both grace to pray for himself, and charity to
pray for the whole Church, and therefore he says:

O Lord bring again our captivity. The substance of this prayer is the
conversion of their captivity. The word Captivity, says Chrysostom, is
simple in pronunciation, Nomen captiuitatis est in prolatione simplex, ^abet
autem multas intelligentias. Chrysostom. and Bas^^ in loc.
and yet it has many significations: but Captivity properly is when one
Nation is made subject unto another: as when the Jews were wholly subdued by
the Babylonians, their Princes, and thousands of them carried to Babel: they
are said, to be carried away captives out of their own Land.

Secondly, the afflictions and troubles of Gods children, are called by the
name of captivity. Because there is no estate so lamentable in the world as is
the estate of a Captive: and therefore the most grievous crosses that can
befall Man, are expressed in one word Captivity. Infinite were the sufferings
of Job, when his goods were taken away by violence, his children suddenly
destroyed, and himself stricken with sore byles, from the sole of his foot to
his crown. Yet all these and many more are included in this one word: for when
the Lord restored him to his former health, doubled his estate, and blessed him
with the goodllest children in the world, he is said, To turn again the
captivity of Job. 42.10.
Job.

In both these respects, the Psalmist here does power out this prayer, O Lord
bring again our captivity: desiring God therein both to enlarge the Churches
liberty, and withal to ease and release them of all their calamities. Which,
whilst we consider it should put us in Sicut hic yeduces pro exulitus apud
Denns intercedunt, isa nos quoque pro fratribus nostris qui vel sub Turcica
tyraunide captius de^inenter, velsub (...) Antichristi misere offliguntur,
(...) remus, convert. Gesner. in loc.
mind, how the Church is not as yet fully freed from the tyranny of this
western Babel: witness the persecution in foreign places, and adjoining
countries, many of Gods servants are grievously afflicted still under
Antichrist, and that mother of Fornications. Some mocked with 2. Kings 2.23.
Elisha, some persecuted with 1. Kings 19.
Eliah, some buffeted with 1. Kings 22.24.
Michaiah, others stocked with f Jeremiah, slain with Ier. 26.23.
Vriah, and thousands murdered with Zacharia: and therefore we must still pray
here with the Jews: O Lord bring again our captivity.

Again, for our selves whatsoever affliction befall us, if any of us be
imprisoned with Joseph, be in fetters with Peter, or in bonds with Paul. If
we be forced to live in exile and banishment, as David in Gath; and to flee
for fear of persecution, as Eliah did from the face of Iezabel into the
wilderness. If we be afflicted in soul as was Hannah; or sick in body
with Ezekiah. If we be brought with Job to sit, full of sore byles on the
ashheape: or be constrained to lie with Lazarus at the gluttous gate full of
sores: here is the only remedy for our malady, to call unto the Lord with
the Jews: O Lord bring again our captivity.

Now, these captuities are but corporal afflictions: but besides there is
spiritual captiuities of the soul and mind. For, first that evil, even sin
that dwells in us, and that corruption that is ever present with us, is to us
a captivity. For it keeps us from doing the good we would, and causes us to
do the evil we would not: this the Apostle affirmed, when he said, I find a
law in my members, Romans 7.23.
rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me captine to the law of
sin. This will prove a dangerous captivity, if we do not take heed of it,
if once we suffer the slesh to get the mastrie: if we do not wrestle against
her, and resist her intisements: at first, like Eve, she will inuit us to the
forbidden apple: with Putiphars wise, she strives to intise us to lustful
pleasures: but in the end, she will serve us as Iahel did Sisara, deceive us
with false love, but in the end kill us: And as Dalila did Samson, flatteringly
let us sleep upon her knees, until she has shaven our locks, bereft us of
all goodness, and then give us over to our enemies the Philistimes, the Devil
and his instruments, who will put out the eyes of our understanding, and chain
us fast with fetters of death. Therefore it behooues us, Cor. 9.27.
with the Apostle Paul, to keep under our body, and to bring it into
subjection; and in this conflict betwixt the Flesh and the Spirit, we must
still pray, O Lord, bring again our captivity.

Again, when by continuance in sin, man is not only intrapt in the snares,
but also fast settered in the chains of Satan, so that he is ruled at his
pleasure, and governed at his will. This is a Grauis quidem est ca^tiuit as cor
poralis, qu^ ^ure liberla^ is a misso v^ct ram (...) nature subditur, (...)
ca^timtas quam ins^^x, etc. Hill^r in ^ c. Is. 46.2. ^ Tim. 2.25, 26.
doleful and woeful captivity, when not only the body, but the soul is thus
captiuated to the Devil. Therefore the Lord means not so much the Babylonish
Idols, as the Babylonians themselves, when he says, They are bowed down, and
their soul is gone into captivity. For this cause the Apostle advises
Timothy, to instruct those that oppose the Truth, that they may recover
themselves out of the snare of the Devil, who are taken captive by him to do
his will. But now, since the regenerate as well as the reprobate, are still
captives to sin. For as the wicked are taken captives by Satan to do his
will, so the godly are led captives to the Law of the sin. They may seem
both to be in the like predicament, and both their cases woeful and desperate.
I answer: It is one thing to be kept captives in the snares of Satan, and
another thing to be carried captive to the Law of sin. The former is meant of
that voluntary bondage, whereby the wicked do willingly mancipate and subject
themselves to Satan, to work all uncleanness even with greediness. Ep^.
4.19. V^c^oriam non (...) obtinet carosed in inuitum: (...) licet a^iqua^do a
lege p^ceati captiuentu^, nunquam tamen sine contra dictione. Romans 3. Paraeus,
in Romans 7.
But the Apostle complaynes that forcibly against his will; yea, he striving
against, he is carried captive to sin: like a captive, who by sorce is haled
by the enemy into servitude: whereas it is not so with the wicked, for they
willingly and of their own accord, run into all kind of villainy, without any
wresiling against it, or resistance. Veloces pedes eorum ad effundendum
sanguinem; Their feet are swifi to shed blood, says Paul. Besides, the godly
have a sight of their errors, secle their insirmities, know their own
weakness, and knowing it, do wrestle and strive against it. But the Devil
blinds the eyes of the wicked, that seeing they do not s^e, so that they
become past seeling, and having their under standing darkened,
they are alienated from the life of God, through the ignoranee that is in
them, because of the blindness of their heart. Ephesians 4.18.
Now, the only way to shun and avoid this captivity, is with our spiritual
armor, to arm our selves, that thereby we may cast down imaginations, and
every thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing
into captivity every thought, to the obedience of Christ. 2. Cor. 10.5.
We must not give our selves to lustful pleasures. For this captivity, says
one, was adumbrated and shadowed out in Samson, for the Philistims had not put
out Samsons eyes,
had he not slept before upon Dalilahs knees. Hector Pintus in Ezekiel. cap. 1^.
So the enemy shall not blind us, nor fast bind us in fetters, v^l^sse we be
besotted in wantonness. And what would (says he) the holy Scripture intim^ e
unto us, by Nobuchadonosors putting out of Zedekiahs eyes, binding him in
chains and carrying him to Babel? but that the Devil does blind all those that
are wholly addicted to voluptuousness, and carries them captives to their
confusion.

Now to conclude this point, whenever we are in captivity, whether it be
of the body to man, or of the mind to sin, whether it proceed as the Jews
did, ex cordis ignorantia, from want of understanding. For my people are gone
into captivity for want of knowledge, says the Lord; or whether it be ex
carnis insolentia, of the unruliness of the flesh, rebelling against the
spirit; or whether it come from the cruel^ie and subtlety of the Devil. Here
is out last refuge, to cry and call unto God with the Psalmist, O Lord, bring
again our captivity.

There is bona and mala captiuitas, a good and an evil captivity, says
Chrysostom. You have heard now the several kinds of the worst captiuities.
Now again on the other part, that subjection of Sin and Satan, purchased to
us by that great Conqueror, our Savior Christ; may be called a captivity.
For he has taken away the captivity of the mighty, and delivered the prey
of the Tyrant, If. 49.25.
and contended with them that contended with us, and saved his Children. The
Devil, like a strong man armed, Luke 11.21, 22. Revel. 13.10.
kept us captives until Christ, that was stronger then he, set us at
liberty: so that as the Devil led into captivity, so he is gone into
captivity. O blessed victory! O happy captivity! That we may now say with
the Apostle. 1. Cor. 15.
O Death, where is thy sting! O Grave, where is thy Victerie! the sting of
death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law, but thanks be unto God,
who has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

But thou will say: How is Satan captiuated? Quest.
when as the Apostle tells us,
that we must still wrestle and combat with him: Epb. 6. 1. Pet. 5.
And the Apostle Peter says, that he still go^th about like a roaring Lion,
seeking whom he may devour.

I answer, Answ.
Christ has trodden under soot his power and might, Christus d^monum destru^it
potentiam interim circumeunt, non us domin^^ vllum in no babentes, sid per
insidizs agentes us nos ad se pertrahant, Zanch. in Ephesians. 4.
and has overthrown his Kingdom; yet he goes about, not as having any
dominion over us, but to ensnare us by his cunning allurements, and draw us to
him by his subtle intisements. For this cause the Apostle aduising Timothy to
labor, to win and convert the opposers of Truth, whom he calls the Devils
captives: he uses not the usual and proper word for a captive, but a word
metaphorically taken, from catching wild beasts by hunting. Whereby is employed,
that the Devils power is destroyed, yet he hunts about to catch us in his
snares: and therefore the holy Ghost, by the Apostles, admonishes us to be
wary and vigilant, and not to suffer our selves to be deceived and circumuented.

Lastly, all the ancient Expositors from these words, he ascended on high, and
led captivity captive, August. Beda, and Anselm. in Ephesians. 4.
infers another Captivity, which is, that wae being freed from the slavery of
sin, and servitude of Satan, are become Christ's servants. And whereas before
we were the Devils bondslaues, now we are Christ's captives: and whereas
before we were under the bondage of Satan, we are now under the yoke of
Christ: and blessed are they that are under this yoke, and are of the number of
such captives. For here is no mourning, no murmuring, but great ioying and
rejoicing. For we are redeemed from the hand of our enemies, to serve him
without fear. Yet in regard of our natural corruption, and the Devils daily
temptations, may we not cease to pray, O Lord, bring again our captivity.

As the Rivers in the South. The manner after which the Psalmist would have
their liberty enlarged, is set down in these words, (...) etc. Ageil, in loc.
as the Rivers in the South. Which of diverse are diversely conceived and
cons^rued. First, an unnamed Greek Author, is cited by Agellius, who would
have this place to have reference to the C^tie Rhinocolura, built (as he
says) in the frontispice of Egypt, by such people as for capital crimes were
exiled, and driven out of the Kingdom by Amasis: whither the Sarazens often
resorted, and by violent invasion and forcible entry, robbed them of their
goods and substance; and after they had thus spoiled the impotent inhabitants,
they returned to their own Tents and Places of abode: but by Gods just
judgment and permission, the River that passed by the Sarazens habitations,
and run toward Rhinocolura, after some tempestuous rain, ouerstowing his
banks, drowned the Sarazens, and with a swift current did carry down their
Tents, goods and substance to Rhinocolura, with all the commodities which they
before had carried from thence; so that the distressed and impouerished
inhabitants of that poor Town, were by the means of this inundation both
revenged of their enemies, and enriched with greater wealth: by this allusion,
the Prophet should desire both a just revenge of their enemies, as also a
recompense for their losses. But to leave this conceited conjecture, and more
conceited construction of this innominate Author; we come to the opinions of
others, who come nearer to the Prophets meaning. First, by these words, some
think that he understands the Rivers, which the Lord caused to slow in the
wilderness, and the waters which he caused to gush out of the stony
E^videtur alludi, quando e pet, a edu^ it torrentem, and fluenta aquarum
Genebr. in loc.
Rock.

Others are of opinion, that indefinitely he means any Waters and Springs
whatsoever, which slowing in any dry ground, does fructify and make fruitful
the same.

Some conjecture by this allusion, that he desires the Lord Captiuos nos^^^s
copiose rec^rrere sa^ tant^^ cum gaudio and s^^ctu quo terra sitiens exc^^ it
fluentes p r came riuulos aq^a plenos. Cornel. Ians^n. in loc.
to cause their fellow-captiues, so copiously, and in such abundance to
return, and with as great joy and prosit, as the thirstic ground drinks in the
streams full of water passing by it.

Others, that he would signify Voluit signisi^ re tam gra^am and almrandem
fore popul^ ex captiuitate liberationem atque esse posit, si hab tan^l^ss
sol^tudines contingerent flumin^. Bucerus in locum.
hereby, that their deliverance out of captivity, would be as acceptable unto
them, as floods of water can be to such as dwell in a dry and barren
wilderness.

And others, that he desires their liberty to be accomplished, with as great
celeritie as a River, being bankfull, does run with a swift current, or as
Genebrardus says, he would have their deliverance effected speedily, more
terrentium cito accrescentium, as Rivers after rain, on a sudden do swell and
rise.

Briefly, Argumentum peti^um vel a potentia Dei vel ab vtili. Vide Scult. in
loc.
it is an Argument taken either from Gods sufficiency to effect it; or from
the utility that would redound to themselves, when it was effected. As for
Gods sufficiency, look with what facility and ease he did formerly bring
water out of the hard Rock, and Rivers out of the dry wilderness for their
forefathers: with the like facility, when it pleased him, he could bring
again their captivity. And upon the assurance of the Lords omnipotency to
effect so much, and much more, when it best liked his gracious goodness for
them: the Prophet now entreats him by fervent prayer, to cool and refresh
their captivity, as the Springs in the South of Arabia, did cool and refresh
the dry and scorched wilderness, at the Israelites departure out of Egypt.

As for the utility they should receive by this their libettie, we may
conceive it, if we consider; first, how the Psalmist in these few words,
desires the Lord to bring home the remnant that remained still in Babylon, and
then to reestablish such as were already returned, to their former estate: as
also look how profitable showers Quemadm^dum largus insb^r aut fluuins
eiusmodi solum recreat, and fruges calore solis adustas, mirifice resicit: it a
liberatio ab exilio vebementer asslictos; and moerore depress^s Israelitarum
animos vicissim criget, and incredibili gaudio perfundet. Gein. in loc.
of rain and cool streams, would be unto the Sunnebeate South: no less
profitable would their deliverance be unto them, being burnt up with the
burning Sun of persecution. The South country is naturally dry and hardened,
and so unfruitful and barren; and therefore when it is moistened and mollified,
besprinkled and bedewed with fresh streams and cool waters, it is made
fertile and fruitful: so here the Prophet does covertly express, how hurtful
and hateful their captivity was unto them, by comparing it to barren ground:
and how pleasant and profitable their deliverance would be, by allusion to
Riucrs in the South. For as where the Sun beats hot, and where the ground is
not moystned with the first and latter rain: the seed rots under the clods,
the corn withers, the grass fades, the slowres are burnt up; the pastures,
plants, and trees, are dried and dead; all which tend to the great hurt and
loss of man: which made Achsab the daughter of Caleb, Joshua 15.18, 19.
so earnestly desire of her father a blessing, which was a portion of ground,
where there was Springs of water: yet they who remain in those barren
climates, were no more wretched and in no greater want or penury, then these
poor distressed Jews were in their captivity. For their Country was
desolate, and Foxes run upon Mount Sion: they were hunger-beat and starued.
Iam. 5.
For they had no water without silver, no wood without money, no bread without
hazard of their lives, no pleasure without pain, no profit without peril, no
delight without danger. Water was no more pleasant to the liraclites, Ps^^ 107.
when their souls fainted in the wilderness of Zim. Rain no more welcome to
Samariah after three years drought: streams of water no greater a blessing
unto Achsah: and fluent Riucrs no more profitable unto the dry and sunne-be at
South, then this their deliverance and liberty would be unto them, when they
might sit under their own Vines, and see the pastures growing green, the
trees bringing forth their fruit, the Pig-t^ee and the Vine giving their force;
their Barnes filled with wheat, and their presses abounding with Oil, and when
they might eat of the fat, and drink of the sweet. Blessed, O thrice blessed
be the Lord, this Kingdom may say, what few other Nations can boast of; that
it has not been subdued, nor ^ath beone made subject unto any foreign Kingdom
these many hundredth years; but with a conquering hand has ouer-run other
potent Countries, and made them tributarie to it self. We have not had our
streets swimming in blood, nor our Towns burnt up, our Children have not been
made fatherless, nor our Wives widows: yet these and many more evils the
poor Jews did suftayne, as we may read in the 79. Psalm. Again, in this
our great peace and tranquillity, we have abounded with all store of plenty,
the Heavens have given us rain in due season, the earth has yielded her
increase, and the trees of the field have brought forth their fruit, our
threshing has reached unto the Vintage, and our Vintage unto the sowing time:
we have eaten our bread in plenteousnesse, and dwelt in our Land safely. But if
we would have these blessings continued; if with David we desire to lie and
rest securely in our beds; with Abraham, sit safely at our own doors; with
Boaz, follow after our own Reapers; with Judah, wash our garments in wine; and
with Job, bathe our paths in butter; let us not provoke the Lord to wrath
against us, by our abominable sins. The Jews infinite transgressions were
the cause of their abominable afflictions: and their iniquity did bring them
unto this woeful captivity: therefore if we would not feel the smart of the
one, let us not delight in the sugared venom of the other.

Yet thou will say, Who can abstain from sin, Quest.
seeing the just man falls seven times a day?

True: yet though with David we fall into adultery,
with Aaron into idolatry, with Noah into intemperancy, Answ.
with Lot into incontinency, with Peter into inconstancy, and with Thomas into
infidelity; by reasonof the slesh rebelling against the spirit, which, leads
us captives unto the Law of sin. Yet let not Sin and Satan overrule us,
let us not voluntarily and willingly become murdering Cains, mocking Chams,
incestuous Ammons, unnatural Absaloms, malicious Achitophels, and unmerciful
Hazaels. O let us Lot captiuate our selves to drunkenness like Nabal, to
gluttony like Dives, to the world with Demas, to covetousness with Ahab, nor
to cruelty with Herod: but let us break off our sins betimes by unfeigned
repentance; and with Ezekiah call for mercy, with the Publican cry for pardon,
and with the prodigal beg remission. Now the Lord grant that our souls may
be refreshed with the Rivers of Life, that the fiery flames of sin may be
quenched, and our hearts replenished with all spiritual graces; that being
fully freed from the captivity of our corruption, we may enjoy the liberty
and freedom of the Kingdom, purchased for us, and promised unto us, by Christ
our Savior: to whom be all praise for ever and ever.

AMEN.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND RELIGIOUS GENTLEWOMAN Mistress ELIZABETH
FOLIAMBE.
Noble and virtuous Mistress,
WHen I called to mind, the great loss many received by the death of that
worthy personage (your noble Aunt, my most honored Lady) in whose hearing
some of these dry Sermons were preached: whose gracious attention, secmed to
give unto them some favorable approbation. And now, being published to the
open view of the world; and withal deprived of her Countenance, from whence
they should have received their true luster: I had once resolved to have let
them pass without a Mistress: yet, whilst I was musing of Salomons
proposition, Prou. 31.10.
Who can find a virtuous Woman? And at last remembering, how you have hitherto
showed your self, not only a Niece, but a Child of hers; no less
affectionate to the Word; no less thirsting after Grace: to use the Apostles
words, 2. Job. 1.4.
I rejoiced greatly that I had found of her Children walking in the truth: and
so, thought myself bound in equity to commend that unto you, which I was
indebted to consecrate to her. Moreover, the great respect I have ever received
from your noble Husband, does oblige me thereunto: yet, am I silent of his
courtesies, lest by verbal thankfulness I should seem to crave new favors.
1. King. 2.
Now he that doubled the Spirit of Eliah upon Elisha, redouble in you these
virtues which were in that Elect LADY, that hereafter it may be said of you,
as it may now be truly affirmed of her, Many daughters have done virtuously,
but she surpassed them all.

Your Worships, and your noble Husbands to command in all Ministerial duties,
JOHN HVME.

THE THIRD GENERAL PART OF THIS PSALM: Viz. A Consolation, not only to the
captive Jews, but generally to all the faithful, that lie under the Cross,
and groan under the burdon of their sins, expounded in three Sermons,
whereof the First is, The commodity of the Cross.
THE EIGHTH SERMON.
VERSE. 6. They that sow in tears shall reap in joy.


NOw we are come to the third general Part of this Psalm, wherein the
Psalmist does consolate and comfort all the distressed Jews, who were not as
yet returned home to Judea, but still detained in Chaldea by some of the
Persian Kings, under whom they endured not a few troubles: yet, the Psalmist
does tell them, that for their afflictions they shall have case, and for their
sorrow they shall reap joy.

Hugo from hence would infer, Three sorts of persons compared to a sower,
first, the charitable man: for four respects. Opera bona in has
vitalachrymosa. Hug. ^^r.
that the godly must sow good works in this valley of tears, and the Jesuits
Bellarmine and Lorinus do nominate Charity and Almesdeeds. Indeed the
charitable man may be compared unto a Sower in many respects.

First, The Sower is diligent and careful, he will lose no time, he will
omit no opportunity: so the Godly in the morning must sow his seed, and not
let his hand rest in the evening: that is, he must not like the wretched
worldling, defer his charity till his last gasp: like the hog that is good
for nothing till he be dead: but, whilst it is time we must do good Eccl.
5.6. Gal 6.10.
unto all.

Secondly, A Sower will sow of his best seed: so, he must not like Cain offer
the worst unto the Heb. 11.4.
Lord; but as Jacobs children carried unto Joseph of the best fruits of the
Genesis 43.11.
Land: so must he honor the Lord with his riches, and with the best fruits of
his Pro. 3.9.
increase.

Thirdly, A sower will sow wisely, discreetly obseruiag the nature of the
soil, whereinto he will cast his seed: so, must he wisely distribute his
charity (as the Apostle says) doing good to all, but especially to such as
are of the household Dabit paupe^i indigenti meliori effect^, paupert innocenti
mel^or^ affictu.
of faith.

Fourthly, As a Sower sows liberally as the ground requires: so must he
bestow upon the poor bountifully as he can spare, and the other needs. What
his hand is able to give, he must give with a cheerful Eccl. 35.10.
eye: remembering that he that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly: and he
that sows liberally, shall also reap 2. Cor. 9.6.7.
liberally.

Now he that thus sows shall not be unrewarded. Shall Abraham's and Lots
hospitality to strangers; Obadiahs care of the Prophets, the Centurions love
to the Saints, Lines bounty, and Jobs benignity to the poor be forgotten of
the Lord? No certainly: for He that gimeth unto the poor, lends unto the
Lord, and the Lord will recompense him that which he has given.

Let this move us all to put on the bowels of compassion, to commiserate the
poor estate of our distressed brother. Let us with Cornelius feed him, with
Doreas cloth him, and with the beloved Gaius, cherish and relieve him. For if
we give unto the poor, we shall not want. And if we cast our bread upon the
waters, after many days we shall find Eccl. 11.1.
it. If we give unto the poor, we offer unto the Lord: and therefore, as
noble Artaxerxes, remunerated poor Sinetas for a handful of cold water; so,
and more bountifully will God reward us: for, Whosoever shall give a cup of
water for Christ's sake, shall not want his Matthew. 10.42. Mar. 9.41. The
penirent man compared to a sowrr, in three respects. Quiopera poenitentie
faciunt, and lachrymas compunctionis effundunt, etc. Dion. Carth. in locum. Is.
28.24, 25.
reward. And whosoever shall thus sow in tears, he shall reap in joy.

Others from these words gather, that they who sorrow and lament for their
sins, shall have their sins freely pardoned, and themselves fully
comforted. Indeed the humbled sinner may be compared unto a Sower, for these
respects.

First, Because as the husbandman, first plowes his ground. Secondly, breaks
the clods. Thirdly, makes it plain: and then sowes his seed. So must every
sorrowful soul that would sow in tears: he must plow up the fallow ground
of Icr. 4.4.
the heart: rend and seauer it in pieces. Rent your bearts, and not your Joel
2.13.
garments. But this is not enough, proscindere, to open it up: but withal, he
must break the clods. Judah shall plow, and Jacob shall break his Hos. 10.11.
clods. Neither is this enough, confringere, to break it; but also he must
sarrire, break it small, and make it plain as with a harrow. Proscindet and
sarriet humum suam, He shall break up and harrow his ground. It is not
therefore sufficient to rend the fallow ground of our hearts, nor yet to break
it up: unless we harrow it, break it small, and make it plain: for it is a
contrite and broken heart that we must have, truly mortified, mollified,
bruised and beat in pieces, if we would sow in tears.

Secondly, to every Sower two things are requisite. First, he must weed out
all the thistles, thorns and briars, or else his ground will be ouergrowen by
Pro. 24.30, 31.
them. So must the faithful soul pull up all the thistles and thorns out of
his heart: he must root out all the tares of vice and wickedness, or else
he labors in vain: for they will choke and ouergrow the good feed of
repentance, so that he cannot sow in tears.

Thirdly, Rain is requisite to the Sower for the moistning and mollifying of
his Is. 30.23.
ground: that hisseed may prosper and grow: so must the dry earth of our
hearts be watered with Jobs snow-water from Job 9.30.
above; with the rain of righteousness; with the heavenly dew of Gods Spirit;
and with waters from below, Seminare in la^brymis est seminare cum lachrymis.
Lorin. in locum.
viz. the vufained tears of a sorrowful soul: else our repentance is to no
end, our hearts are but a little rent and plowed up: like Ababs, Pharaohs and
Judas, which shall never be fertile or fruitful: unless with David and
Ezekiah, Peter and Marie Magdalen, they be truly and duly watered with floods
of tears. If we thus once sow in tears, we shall sow unto our selves in
righteousness, and reap after the measure of Hos. 10.12.
mercy. We shall reap beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, and
the garment of gladness for the spirit of Is. 61.3.
he uinesse.

I dare not pass over this point so slightly, and therefore I will observe;
first, the manifold reasons and occasions the godly have to sorrow and mourn.
Secondly, how needful and behoofefull it is for them to sorrow and lament. And
lastly, what profit and gain they shall reap and gleane in the end thereby.

The occasions of the godlies sorrow are infinite: some sorrow for the present
misery they sustain, whilst they soiourne in this wretched world: as David
did mourn that he dwelt in Mesech, and remained in the tents Ps. 120.
of Kedar: and as Lot whose soul was vexed continually whilst he was in
Sodom: some for the delaying and staying of the happiness they wished for,
which made Simeon desire to depart in peace, and Paul wish to be dissolved.
Some for the sins they themselves have committed, like Mary Magdalen, and the
poor Publican: some for thetransgressions of their brethren; as Daniel and
leremiah for the sins of Jerusalem: some for the paucitie of the godly, as
Eliah and Mic. 7.1, 2.
Michaiah: some for the multitude of the wicked, as did David for the increase
of his foes: and some for the oppression of the faithful, as Habakuk for the
Hab. 1, 2, 3. Quisquis non causas mill doloris babet?
Jews: and in a word, what man living has not a thousand occasions to sow in
tears.

If we take a view of Christ's life, we shall find that he often wept, but
we never read that ever he laughed. First,
as the ancient Writers collect out of the seventh of Wisdom, the third verse,
he wept in his infancy: which did signify the grief we should have for our
present misery: for a Puer quam cite nascitur a ploratu incipit, propheta su^
calamita^^is.
child coming into this world, weeps, prophesying of his own calamity and
woe in this world. Secondly, Christ wept over Job. 11.
Lazarus: which signified our partaking one of another woe. Who is weak and I
am not weak, who is offended and I burn not? says 2. Cor. 11.29.
Paul. Thirdly, he wept over Jerusalem: and that showed us how we should
weep for the iniquity of our time, Is. 22, 1. to 6.
as the Apostle did, of whom it is said that no man could bewail his own
sins more then Paul did the sins of I^r. 9.1, 2, 3. Nullus sic sua defleuit
peccata sicut Paulus aliena, ideo optat anathema esse pro fratribus suis in
carne, vnde accrbius tulit illos non sa^uari quum seipsum perire. Chrysostom.
others. Fourthly, Christ wept upon the Cross, or at least, in the garden in
his bitter agony. For, In the days of his flesh, he offered up prayers and
supplications, with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him
from Heb. 5.6.
death: and this did specify unto us, the sorrow we should have for our own
transgressions, seeing he who was without sin did sorrow so sore for our
sins. These are all motives to move us, and reasons to persuade us to sow
in tears.

Now let us see how needful and behoofefull it is for us, thus to sorrow and
lament. Tears are so acceptable a sacrifice to God, that he gathers them all
into his bottler they quench the violence of his wrath, and they force him to
hear Oration Deum lonit, sed laehryma cogit, haec ungit, illapungit.
us. Tears are the food of our souls, the reviving of our senses, the
cleansing of our sins, the refreshment of our spirits, and the font and
fountain wherein our guilt must be washed ^letus ^st cibus animcrum,
corrob^ratio sensuum, abl^ti^ precatorum, refectio mentium, lauacrum culparum.
Cassio in Psalm. Job. 9.30. Ps. 5.1.
away. The Prophet Isai calls to us, Wash you, make you clean. Isai 1.16. And
Jeremiah cries out, Wash thy heart from wickedness. Ier. 4.14. Here is wash,
and be washed: but alas, how should we wash out selves clean? Job talks
of being washed with Snow-water: and David desires to be washed with
Hysopwater. But tears are the water wherein we must bathe our selves, if we
would be clean from corruption: tears are the red sea, wherein Praraoh and
his host, our immoderate affections, and the whole army of vices, must be over
whelmed. Tears are the river of Paradise, to water the earth of our hearts.
Tears are the poole of Siloam, where the eyes of our souls must be washed. In
a word, if we truly wash our selves in a flood of tears, we shall be
thoroughly purged from our sins, and fully cleansed from our filth. Marie
Magdalen did not so much wash with tears our Saviors spotless feet, as she
did her own leaprous soul: her tears made her crimson sins white as snow;
and her scarlet soul white as wool. Thus we see how necessary and expedient
it is for us all to sow in tears.

Now, as for the commodity and profit we shall reap after this sorrow, We
shall reap in joy, we shall have remission of our sins, and true
consolation, and all out ward content and in ward peace. And for our better
assurance, amougst many presidents, let us cull out one. In the Parable of the
prodigal Child, we see, how that unthrift, when he riotously spent and
wasted his portion, he was brought from being a gallant, to become a
swineheard, and from filling his belly with dainties, to feed upon husks, and
so being almost famished, he resolved to return to his father and
acknowledging his offense, to crave pardon, and to beg his favor to entertayne
him for one of his hired servants: But mark the love and compassion of a
loving father, he sees him a-farre off, falls upon his neck, and kisses him,
not with a natural kiss, as Raguel did his daughter; nor with a treacherous
kiffe, as Judas did our Savior; nor with a holy kiss only, as the Saints
saluted one another, but with a true love kiss, as Jacob did Joseph: then he
calls out his servants, not to murder him, as Absalom charged his men to kill
Ammon, but to embrace and welcome him: next, he commands him to be apparelled,
vestitu Regio, with robes Royal, as Ahashuerosh commanded Mordecai to be
arrayed. Fourthly, he puts a Ring upon his hand, as Pharaoh did his Signet
upon Joseph's finger. Fifthly, he must be feasted, as Abraham enterteyned the
Angels, vitulo optimo and saginato, with the best and fattest Calfe. And
lastly, he must be welcomed with melody and music, that he might forget
his former grief.

We are all prodigal children, we have abused and missespent, and wasted our
goods; but if once with unfeigned tears, we turn home to our loving Father,
he will fall upon our neck, and kiss us more tenderly then ever David did
Absalom: He will charge his Angels to wait and attend vpou Psalm. 34.7. Psalm.
91.11, 12. Heb. 1.14.
us: He will apparel us with broidered work, and shoe us with Badgers Ezekiel.
16.
skins: He will gird us about with sine Reu^l. 19.8.
linen, and cover us with silk: He will deck us with ornaments, put
bracelets upon our hands, and a chain on our neck. Yea, he will clothe us
with the golden robes of Christ Jesus, and of his Spirit: He will kill Prou.
9.2.
victuals, prepare a table for us, and satisfy us with the fatness of his
Psalm. 36.8.
House: He will feast our souls with that blessed Lamb, slain from the
beginning, whose Flesh is meat indeed, and whose Blood is drink indeed.
Lastly, he will receive us into his Ma^th. 25^.
joy, and entertayne us with mirth and melody. For there is great joy in
heaven, in the presence of the Angels of God, for every sinner that Luke
15.7.10.
conuerteth. Who would not grieve thus to be comforted? Who would not sorrow
thus to be ioyed? and who would not sow in tears, thus to reap in joy? Now
therefore, if we either regard our own woeful condition, or our heavenly
fathers tender compassion, or our sweet Saviors dear commiseration, or this
so great remuneration of our griese, and so full consolation after our sorrow:
Let us now with Peter weep bitterly, that we have denied our Master; with
Ezekiah, weep sore for our Isa. 38.1.
unthankfulness; and with David, water our Couch, and wash our Bed with Psalm.
6.6.
tears: that in the end the Lord may wipe away all tears from our Revel. 7.
eyes: and to conclude, since this Verse does immediately follow after the
other, which contained the Prophets prayer for the peoples enlargement: if you
expound it of the charitable man,
learn hence with your piety to your Creator, to join pity toward your
brother: as did Cornelius, to whom the Angel said, Thy prayers and thy
almsdeeds are come up in remembrance before Act. 10.
God. If you follow the latter construction,
then leatne with your prayers to mix tears: as Ezekiah did, witness God
himself, who says to him: I have heard thy prayers, and I have seen thy
tears, I will add unto thy days fifteen s years.

The first of these expositions is not much dissonant from the purpose: and the
second is very consonant with the words: yet there is a third, Consule
Fabritium, in bune locum.
which is the most general and most received construction of this place, that
is, by this figurative phrase, and allegorical kind of speech, is meant, The
afflicted Christian compared to a sower, for three respects.
that all the afflictions, troubles, and tribulations of the godly shall have
an end: and in the appointed time shall be finished. Now our afflictions are
shadowed out by sowing, and the estate of a Christian is resembled to a
Husbandman.

First, For the antiquity of that Calling. Adam himself, our great
grandfather, was of that vocation: so was he the first that suffered
affliction. He was exiled out of Paradise; he got his living with the sweat of
his brows; he did eat his bread with sorrow; he saw his wife bring forth with
pain and grief. Abel murdered, Cain cursed, and Lamech in all villainy,
profane and wicked.

Secondly, For the universality of that Calling, 2.
all sorts of people have been of it. Numa Pompilius was taken from the plow,
and made the second King of the Romans. Lucnllus, Questor and Praetor, was much
delighted in gardning; and Cyrus himself, the great Monarch of the East, was
much addicted to planting. But to leave these: Elisha the Prophet was called
from the Plow: Gideon the judge, brought from the threshing floor; and Saul
the King, from seeking his fathers Asses: so afflictions are common to all
degrees and sorts of men. Eliah the Prophet was persecuted by Iezabel.
Zachariah the Priest murdered betwixt the Temple and the Altar. Samson the
judge had his eyes put out, and was mocked of the Philistimes: and Ezekia the
King, had all his bones broken like a Lion.

Thirdly, For the great commodity and gain that the Husbandman reapes by
that Calling: as for example. 3.
Isaak, who having sowed in the Land of Gerar, within the space of one year,
reapt a hundred Genesis 26.
fold: So the faithful shall reap double for their afflictions, witness Job,
whose afflictions were many, and losses great: yet we see the Lord restored to
him a thousand for five hundred, fourteen for seven, and six for Job 42.
three. Now seeing this latter construction is most generally received, as the
most genuine meaning of this place. In handling this point of afflictions, I
will note out; first, the certainty of them. WE must all sow in tears.
Secondly, the necessity of them, NONE shall reap in joy, but such as HAVE
sown in tears. And thirdly, the utility of them, WHOSOEVER sows in tears,
shall reap in joy.

As the captivity and misery of the Jews in captivity, was many ways
prefigured; y^a, plainly foreshewed; even so throughout all Ages, the
afflictions of the Church have been both figuratively, and in plain terms
foretold.

The troubles of the Jews were figured out by leremiahs girdle,
taken from about his loins, and hid in the clift of a Rock till it was good
for Ier. 19.1. to 13.
nothing. By bonds and yokes sent to Zedekia King of Ier 27.1. to 9.
Judah: by the Brick having upon it the purtray of Jerusalem; against which
the Prophet was commanded to build a Fort, to set a Camp, to cast a Mount, and
to lay Engines of Ez 4.12.
war; by the Prophets eating his bread with trembling, and drinking his water
with Ezekiel. 4.18.
trouble: and how plainly it was foretold, we may Ier. 4.5. to 19. 6.^. to 16.
8.1. to 4. 29.1. to 13. Isai. 22.1. to 6. Ezekiel. 21.9.
see. Now the tribulations of the Church in old times were plainly prefigured
by Noah's Arc, floting on the flowing Genesis 7.18.
floods: by Moses burning E^od. 3.2.
bush: by the Israelites passage through the red E^od 14.29.
Sea: by the taking of the Ark of God, by the uncircumcised 1. Sam. 14.11.
Philistimes: by the three Childrens walking up and down in the fiery Dan. 3.
Furnace. Again, under the Gospel, by John's baptising of the people in Ioh.
3.6.
Jordan: by Peter's ship tossed betwixt wind and Matt. 14.24.
waves: by Paul's boat, tossed to and fro, with the wind Act. 17.
Euroclydon: and by the Dragons persecuting of the Woman into the Revel. 12.
wilderness: all these do plainly show forth the tribulations of the Church,
and afflictions of the godly. For the whole life of man is but a warfare,
To^avita Cl^istiani bominis ^^ux and martyrum c^^.
and every man that is borne of a woman bath but a short time to lius, and is
filled with Ioh 14.1.
miseries. With miseries internal and external, says Saint Bernard: with
afflictions both outward in body, and in ward in soul: as for those of the
body, they are certain and evident: as for them of the soul,
they are either from the sight of man's sins, when the soul of the faithful
is grieved for them, witness David, where he complayneth, that there was
nothing sound in his flesh, because of Gods anger: neither rest in his boues
because of his sins: For his iniquities (as he confesses) were gone over his
bead, and were as a weighty burden, too heavy for Psalm. 38.
him. Witness the Apostle Paul, who taking a narrow view of his natural
corruption, and the continual rebellion of the flesh against the spirit, cries
out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of Romans
7.24.
death: or they proceed from a spiritual desertion. When God withdraws
himself from the godly for a time, for their trial: so that they do not
feel palpably in themselves the virtue, efficacy, and operation of Gods
Spirit, witness the Prophet, who tasting of this spiritual desertion, prays
earnestly unto the Lord, to restore unto him the joy of his salvation, and to
ectablish him with his free Psalm. 51.12.
Spirit. And witness our Savior upon the cross, when his Divinity did for a
season obscure it self from his Humanity, He feeling the weighty burden of
man's sins, his Fathers wrath against sin, and the pangs of death for sin,
cried out, My God, my God, why hact thou forsaken Ma^t. 27.46.
^ee.

You see now how the Saints of God are certain to be exercised, both with
afflictions, internal and external, as the Apostle says, without with
fights, within with 2. Cor. 7.5.
fears. For the godly without are beset, and troubled with want, banishment,
persecution, punishments, but they are vexed and grieved within with more
grievous afflictions, when the soul and spirit does wrestle with Gods anger:
and when the mind is troubled, and the heart conceiues most sad and fearful
thoughts, as if they were forsaken and cast away: and therefore David having
tasted of this desertion, in great sorrow and anguish of soul, powers out this
lamentable complaint, crying unto the Lord: How long will thou forget me Lord,
for ever? How long will thou hide thy face from me? How long shall I take
counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my beart daily? How long shall mine
enemies be exalted over me? consider and hear me, O Lord my God, lighten mine
eyes lect I sleep, the sleep of Psa. 13.1, 2, 3.
death.

Thus far for internal afflictions, now as for out ward tribulations, we may
assure our selves, whilefl we live in this valley of Psalm. 84.6.
tears, that we must sow in tears. Afflictions will come upon us, as the
messengers of evil news to Job, one at the heels of another; and one
tribulation will follow upon another, as the Bear came after the Lion, and
Goliath after the Bear upon David. For all that lute godly in Christ lesw, must
suffer 2. Tim. 3. The reason why God afflicts us.
persecution.

Now if any should demand, why God suffers his Children thus to be afflicted?

I answer, That amongst many reasons we may observe these.

First, 1. Ad prclendum.
To try us and prove us; for as pepper, or any fell spice, does show it
felnesse when it is bruised and beat in a Mortar: even so Gods children, do
most manifestly declare their zeal, when they are bruised or beat in the
Mortar of affliction. Thus it pleased God to try his servants, Joseph and Job.

Secondly, 2. Ad pargandum.
To purge from us the dross and dregs of sin: the silver must be in the
fining pot before it (...). 17.3.
be pure: and the gold must pass through the furnace before it be perfect. So
must the Lord fine and purify us before we be upright: The godly are sometimes
compared unto Seed, Anima fidelis, prougone ind^get (...), ne producat malash
ba.is, and (...) moll^atar ^^ ^iesne (...). Chrysostom. i^ locum.
and sometimes to Trees. Now we know that the Wheat must be fanned before it
be clean; and the Trees must be pruned, if we would have them fruitful, So
the Lord with the fan of afflictions, must blow away from us the chafe of
our sins: before we be clean, and with the shredding knife of tribulation,
prune us before we be fruitful: with afflictions he will plow up the earth of
our hearts, and root out the Weeds and Thistles, that it may bring forth good
seed.

Thirdly, 3. Ad confirmindum.
To strengthen us in the faith, and confirm us in our calling. So long as we
are in prosperity, we are apt to forget God: to neglect our profession, and to
fall into most grievous sins: but when we taste of adversity, we call upon
God, cleave fast to our Calling, and fear to offend. As for example, David
when he was free from troubles, walking securely upon the top of his house,
and wanting nothing which his heart could wish: he falls into one most grievous
sin after another. Bat when the Lord strikes him with his rod, then he falls
to meditate upon his Word, to take heed to his ways, and to walk after his
Laws. Thus much he confesses, before (says he) I was afflicted, I went a
stray; but now, I keep thy Psalm. 119.67, 71.
Laws.

Fourthly, To confirm and make us like unto our Savior. For as he bare his
cross, 4. Ad conforma^dum.
so should we take up our cross and follow Matthew. 16.
him. For he has suffered for us, leaning us an example that we should follow
his 1 Pet. 1.21.
steps. For it is a true saying, if we be dead with him, we shall also ^^ue
with him; and if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with 2. Tim. 2.11.
him.

Finally, They serve to turn us home unto the Lord; for whilst we are in
prosperity, we play our parts like Ioab, who would not come to Absalom before
he had set his corn fields on 2. Sam. 14.30.
fire. And like the prodigal son, who would not return to his father,
until necessity constrained Luk 15.20.
him.

Thus we see that afflictions are not only certain, but necessary. Now the
Use we must make of them, is to follow the Apostles advice, to account it
exceeding joy when we fall into diverse Iam. 1.2, 3.
temptations; knowing that the trying of our faith brings forth patience, and
patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes us not as^amed,
because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost, which
is given unto Romans 5.3, 4, 5.
us. Let us therefore with Isaak carry our faggots upon our shoulders; with our
Savior, our cross upon our back; For the Word of God must be fulfilled, In
the world you shall have Ioh. 16.
^roubles. And certain it is, that through many afflictions we must enter
into the Kingdom of Act. 14.
God. And sure it is, that all the faithful must sow in tears.

The second thing that we must consider in this place, is the necessity of
afflictions. For none shall reap in joy, but they that sow in tears. We
must first labor in Christ's Vineyard before we receive our wages. The Mariner,
first sails and makes his voyage, and abides many a boy sterous blast, and
rough tempest, and after receives the commodity of his travels, and the
benefit of his merchand^se. Every worke-man does toil and labor before he
receives his hire. The husbandman must plow and harrow before he reap: And so
must we sow in tears before we reap in joy. Dives, when he desired the
heat of his tongue to be allayed, with a drop of water from Lazarus finger: it
was answered, That in his life time he had pleasure, and Lazarus pain: so
must he now endure pain whilst Lazarus is in pleasure. If all men should reap
in joy, then of all men were the wicked most happy; if they should both live at
ease in this world, and reap joy in the world to come. No; but there is no
such matter. For woe be unto them that are at ease in Sion: woe be unto them
that are rich, for they have received their consolation: woe be unto them that
are full, for they shall hunger: All these have a Harvest by themselves, and a
Vintage of their own; when the Angel shall thrust in his sickle, and cut them
down, and throw them into that unquenchable flame, where they shall be in
torment for evermore. And therefore I conclude with the Philosopher, there is
none more unhappy then he that has not tasted of adversity.

Now let us see the commodity, that the godly shall reap by their
afflictions. Whosoever sows in tears, shall reap in joy.

The issue of their afflictions, and the commodity of their cross; is, they
shall reap in joy: As the afflictions of the Church were figured out by Noah's
Arc, by Moses bush, etc. so by the same was the salvation and safety of the
Church prefigured.
Noah's Arc was carried alofton the top of the Flood, and not drowned. Moses
bush burned, and was not consumed. The Israelites passed through the red Sea,
and were not over whelmed: The three Children went up and down in the Furnace,
but were not scorched. Daniel was in the Lions den, but not devoured. Peter's
ship was tossed, but not ouer-turned. Paul's boat was carried to and fro, but
not overthrown: and the Woman was persecuted of the Dragon, but not overcome.
All these plainly show, that the persecutions, Vide Fabritium. Lae^a cata^i^o^
be omnis crux vi^tit^r in gaudi^^ sicut patet. Deuteronomy. 32.39. 1. Sam. 2.6. Job
5.18. Esai. 30.26. Matthew. 5.4. Luke 6.21. Ioh. 16.20. 2. Cor 1.7. 1. Pet.
1.6.7. Heb. 12.11.
vexations and troubles of the godly, are not permanent and perpetual. They
shall not succumbe ^or sink in the Sea of afflictions. No; they shall once be
relieved, once released, and once eased of all their grief. They shall not
always eat of the bread of affliction: They shall not ever sup of the bitter
pottage: They shall not continually drink of the waters of Marah. No; the
bitter waters shall be salted; and the deadly pottage swe^tned: the one shall
become wholesome, and the other healthful. Afflictions shall not always be
gnawing upon them, like the Vulture on the heart of Prometheus.: They shall not
always be exercised with troubles, like Syciphus with the continual ^olling
of a stone: nor for ever troubled with tribulation, like Ixion with the turning
of a wheel: The faggot shall once be taken off Isaak^ back; and cross of
Simons shoulders; and the whip from Paul's loins; and the fetters from Peter's.
limbs. For they that sow in tears, shall reap in joy.

The Lord delights not in the death of any, and therefore he chastises his
own Children but in love, and for a short time, till they amend and return to
him. For he will not contend with them for ever, g Is. 57.36.
neither will he be always wroth. Ezekiels Cherubines had the face of a man,
mild and gentle, as well as the visage of a Lion fierce and terrible, showing
that he is as well, yea more merciful to cherish us, then he is wroth in
chastising us: and in the Arc of the covenant was as well a pot of Mannah, as
Aarons rod. For our comfort, that God will as well in mercy nourish us, as in
justice nurture us. For, he is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and of
great E^od 34.6.
goodness: who, though for a little time he do forsa^g us, yet with great
compassion he does gather us; and though for a moment he hide his face from
us, yet with everlasting mercy he has compassion on us.

Moreover, he does make a difference betwixt his own elect and the reprobate:
the one he chastises in wrath, but the other in mercy: the ones punishment
is eternal, but the others temporary. We read that before the old
magistrates in Rome were carried bundles of rods with an axe. Rods for petie
delinquents: but the axe for proud and incorrigible malefactors. So the Lord
chastises the godly with small twigs: but he bruiseth the ungodly with a rod
of iron. He delivers the iuct out of temptation: and reserues the wicked
against the day 2 Pot 2.9.
of judgment.

Is not this to our great comfort that we shall be relieved, our losses
recompensed, our pains released, and our troubles rewarded. And if we sow in
tears, we shall reap in joy.

But thou will say, Quendo, When shall we reap? The Apostle tells us that in
due time we shall (...) Gal. 6.
reap. This life is our seed-time, wherein we must be continually laboring,
plowing and sowing; For man must eat in sorrow all the days of Genesis 3.17.
his life. But our harvest is in the life to come: for, Blessed are they that
die in the Lord, they rect from their labors, and their works follow Reu.
14.13.
them. Then as every man has sown, so shall he reap. They that have sown
dickednesse shall reap the Ioh 4.8.
same. He that has sown sedition and strife, shall reap irrecouerable Pro.
6.12.15.
destruction. They that have sown the wind, shall reap the Hos. 8.7.
whirlwind. They that have sown to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap
corruption, and they that have sown to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap
life Gal. 6.8.
everlasting. They that have sown righteousness, shall reap a sure Pro.
11.18.
reward. And they that have sown in tears, shall reap in joy.

Behold now the end of all your afflictions, though you fall, yet you shall
Mic. 7.8.
rise. If you suffer but tribulation ten days, a short season, and abide
faithful unto death, you shall receive the crown of Reu 2.10.
life. The Lord will not suffer you to fall for Psalm. 55.22.
ever. But when he sees convenient time he will judge Psalm. 75.2.
righteously. Then he will send good after evil, as he created light after
darkness, and he will change justice into mercy, as he did water into wine.

But thou will say, alas the godly have no ease at all in this life: ^hey are
in continual sorrow, in perpetual grief: and he that purposes to live a
godly life, must resolve always to sow in tears.

Truly thou art much deceived: for as there be diverse occasions for the godly
to sorrow: so there be diverse reasons for them to rejoice, in their greatest
afflictions; for albeit, they be here in great trouble and tribulation: yet
they know that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy of the
glory that shall be showed unto Romans 8.18.
them. Although they longed for, and desired happiness be delayed: yet they
rejoice under Romans 12.
hope. Although they mourn for their corruption, yet they rejoice for the
testimony of their 2. C r. 4.
conscience. Though they grieve for the transgressions of their brethren, yet
they rejoice in the Phil. 4.
sinners conversion: and as they sorrow for the oppression of the godly, so
they rejoice in the vengeance of the Psalm. 57.
wicked. If a man would but either consider the dignity of bearing, the
society he has in bearing, and the commodity he shall reap by bearing the
Cross, he would confess, that even in greatest afflictions, he has good
occasion to rejoice.

As for the dignity, is it not a great honor and glory for him, Solamen
mis^^is socios hahuisse dol^ris, ipse tibi vires Deus impluet, ipse candentem,
^riget and t^cum cosus comes ibit in ^^nnet.
to be one of Christ militant soldiers, to bear his colors, to fight under
his ensign, and to be accounted worthy to suffer for his name. As for his
society, he has the blessed company of all the Saints, that have trodden
this path before him: he may say that it is some comfort to have such
fellow-companying in sorrow. Nay, if he be a faithful Christian, he has
Christ himself accompanying him, strengthening him, and comforting him in all
tribulations. And as for the commodity he shall reap thereby: these light
afflictions which are but for a moment, will cause unto him a far more
excellent and ^ternall weight of 2 Cor. 4.7.
glory. Now me thinks, these reasons being duly considered, they should
induce us with patience to run the race that is set before Heb. 12.1.
us, and with patience to bear whatsoever it pleases God to lay upon us,
saying with Jeremiah, It is my sorrow, and I will bear Ier. 10.19.
it. And if a multitude of afflictions come upon us, as a whole host of
Philistims came upon Samson, let us not be faint-hearted or discouraged, but
resolve stoutly to encounter them, saying, with stout Nehemiah, Shall such a
man as I Nehcm. 6.11.
flee? And staying our selves upon Gods protection, let us be as little afraid
of them, as David was of his foes, when he said, I will not be afraid of ten
thousands of people, that have set themselves against me round Es. 3.6. Psalm.
27.3. Object.
about.

But perhaps some will here yet object; Our afflictions are greater then we
can iudure. The Cross is heavier then we can bear. The flesh is stubborn,
and will not undergo it. O quam pauci post te volunt ire domine? conregnare
cupiunt sed compatinolunt. Answ.
The time is long, and the way tedious, we cannot continue. This moved Saint
Bernard to cry out, Oh how few will follow thee O Lord? feign would they
reign with thee, but loath are they to suffer with thee.

For your satisfaction, I refer you to the Gospel, where we read of one
Simon of Cyrene, who carried Christ's Cross.
This Simon was a type of all obedient Christians, who must take up their
Cross and follow Christ, and from his example we may learn, both matter for
our good instruction and great consolation.

First for our instruction, as he was forced and compelled to carry Christ's
Malth. 27.32.
Cross: even so although the flesh be stubborn and froward: yet it must be
constrained and compelled. A sick man must not refuse the Pills, because he
fears their bitterness; no more must the flesh be suffered to refuse the
Cross because of its tartness.

Secondly, Simon bear the Cross after Christ, to show us that we must not
only carry it, but carrying of it, follow Christ. And so our Savior commands
us to take up our Cross and follow him. Where we see it is not enough to
suffer affliction, but we must follow Christ in imitation. Many of us, when
we are in any trouble or adversity: then we wish we were out of this world.
We long for death, and we joy for gladness, when we can find the Job. 3.20,
21, 22. Vaeportantibus crucem and non sequentibus christum.
grave. For then we think we shall find ease and rest: but alas poor
fowls, we are much deceived: for woe be unto them that suffer affliction,
and yet never follow, nor care to imitate Christ in their life and conversation.

Again, a Christian may learn here for his consolation. First, as Simon
carried our Saviors Cross when he fainted and wearied: so the Lord will
always provide for us some Simon, to ease us when we begin to faint, He
will not suffer us to be tempted above that we be able, but will even give
the issue with the temptation, that we may be able to bear 1. Cor. 10.13.
it.

Further, as Simon carried the Cross, but first Christ had borne it, for our
comfort is, that Christ sweetens all our afflictions, before they be lay de
upon us, and like a good Physician, he strowes the Pills thick over with
sugar, before he makes us to swallow them.

Lastly, as Simon carried Christ's Cross no further then Golgatha, a place of
dead men's sculles. So, though all our life time we be in affliction, yet the
time is not long, nor the way endless that we must bear our Cross: it is
but to Golgatha, our grave, a place of dead men's sculles. For blessed are they
that die in the Lord, for they rest from their labors. For which rest the Lord
prepare us, and into his blessed rest, the Lord in the time appointed bring us,
even for Christ's sake. To whom with the Father and the Spirit, let us give hon
our and praise for now and ever. Amen.

THE LAST VERSE OF THIS Psalm divided into two Sermons: the first, The
careful case of a Christian in this world. The second, His blessed estate in
the world to come. The Captives case.
THE NINTH SERMON.
VERSE. 7. He that now goethon his way weeping, and bears forth good seed: he
shall doubtless come again with joy, and bring his sheaues with him.


THis verse is an amplification of the former; For what before the Psalmist
does express briefly, here he explaines most amply. Of the verse there be
two parts.

1. The faithfulls godly progress: He that now goes on his way weeping and
bears forth good seed. 2. Their goodly regresse: He shall doubtless come
again with joy, and bring his sheaues with him.
In these two, we may observe a threefold Antithesis, or opposition: In the
progress, 1. A soiourning: He that now goes on his way 2. A sorrowing:
weeping. 3. A sowing: and bears forth good seed.


In the regresse there are three opposites unto these.

1. A returning: He shall donbtlesse come again. 2. A rejoicing: With joy. 3.
A reaping: And bring his sheaues with him.
If we take the words in order as they lie, we may note. First, The
faithfulls peregrination, he that goes: Secondly, The times prescription, he
that Now goes. Thirdly, Their perseueration, he that now goes O N. Fourthly,
Their direct course, his way. Fifthly, Their cross, weeping. Sixthly, Their
carriage, and bears forth good seed.

Again, in the return we may see. First, The certainty, he shall doubtless
come again. Secondly, The iocun ditie, with joy. Thirdly, The utility, and
bring his sheaues with him.

He that goes. The old Israclites during their abode in the wilderness, did
not dwell in standing houses, but in boothes and tents, still in travel, and
never settled, in remembrance whereof they kept the feast of Tabernacles: to put
them in mind how they had been so long strangers in a strange Leu. 23.34.
Land. The Jews, when they were led captives out of their own Land: they
wandered, palantes and palentes, like weary wights, and poor pilgrims,
through the provinces of Babel. And therefore when Haman plorted their
destruction: he called them a scattered and dispersed Est. 3.8.
people. And the first Feast they observed after their deliverance, was the
Feast of Neh. 8.
Tabernacles: No question but it was in remembrance of their seventy years
soiourning, and sorrowing in the Land of Babel. If we compare either the old
Israelites in Egypt, or the Jews in Babel; with our selves poor Christians in
this world: we shall find our estate to be but a perpetual pilgrimage, a
continual wandering to and fro without any certain place of abode. Abraham the
father of the faithful dwelt in Genesis 22.8.
tents, which might be removed from place to place: and so did Isaak and
Jacob, confessing themselves to have been but strangers and pilgrims upon H^b.
11.9.13.
earth. The body of man is called a 2. Cor. 5.4.
tabernacle. I know the time is at hand that I must lay down this my
tabernacle, says the 2. Pet. 1.14.
Apostle. The life of man was called a pilgrimage: Few and enill have the days
of my life been, and I have not attained unto the years of my fathers, in the
days of their Genesis 47.9.
pilgrimage. Was Jacobs answer to Pharaoh, when he questioned him how old he
was; and man himself is but a stranger upon earth; I am a stranger and
soiourner as all my fathers Ps. 39.12.
were: which was David's acknowledgement. By all these, we see what is our case
in this world, we are all but pilgrims, strangers and soiourners.

And if any would know why the life of man is a perpetual going, a continual
pilgrimage. The Apostle tells us, that here we have no continuing Heb. 13.14.
City: And therefore he says to the Philippians, Our connersation is in Ph.
3.10.
heaven. In this world we are not unlike the Israelites, wandering in the
deserts or wilderness out of the way, finding no City to dwell in, till the
Lord conduct us as he did them, by the right way, that we may go to a City
of Psalm. 107.4, 5, 6, 7.
habitation, which is not in this world, but in the kingdom of heaven
Jerusalem that holy City which is Reu. 21.
above.

Is our life then a pilgrimage? me thinks this should teach us to behave our
selves accordingly, and to walk as Pilgrims and Strangers. Pilgrims they
walk. Nec onerosi, nec otiosi. Neither ouer-loding themselves with trash,
least they should be vvearied; nor yet unprovided, least they should faint. So
must we walk, not ouer-laying our selves, by heaping sin upon sin,
which we shall find heavier in the end, then ever Moses his Man found his
burden of sticks. But we must cast away every thing that presses down, and
sin that hangs so fast Heb. 12.1.
on: yet we must not go idle; but vvemust carry our cross and follow
Christ. The one is a heavy burden: And Christ bids us come to him, and he
will ease us. Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I
will ease you (says he) but this is a light burden. My yoke is easy, and my
burden light, Suscipite iugum christi nolite timere quod su^ue est, festinate
quod leave est. Ambr.
says Christ. And therefore we are exhorted to take upon us Christ's yoke, not
to fear it, for it is sweet; and to hasten to undergo it, for it is light;
and it is good for a man when he bears his yoke from his Lam. 3.
youth.

Further, To a stranger strangely entertained in a strange Country, the
remembrance of his native soil is sweet unto him. So the Jews, In hostili
terra dulcis amor patri^. August.
whilst they sat by the Rivers of Babylon, and remembered Sion the Mountain
of God, and Jerusalem the Town of peace, which the Lord had given them for
their inheritance. When they considered what pleasures they had there, and
what pains they endured where they were, they wept and vvayled: and truly,
Quanto bet amara sentitur tanto fit illa du^cior.
if we but call to mind the joy of Heaven, which is our souls native
Country; and compare the sorrows of this World, with the pleasures of the
World to come: it would make us with the Apostle desire to be dissolved, and
to be with Christ. For the more bitter we feel the one, the more sweet we
shall find the other.

He that Now goes. Some refer this Verse as a consolation to the people, at
their first going into captivity, and translate it, (...) Sept. (...)
Apollinatius.
They went weeping: with whom the Septuagint seems to agree, who has it,
walking they went. Others too strictly refer it, as consolatorie speech, to
the needy husbandman. Of whom the Greek Poet is one, who says, The
husbandmen sorrowed, carrying their seed. But the words are allegorical, for
one thing is expressed, and another understood: and I refer it to the people
that were still in Babylon, molested and vexed by the Persians. But to leave
them and come to our selves: Their case was no worse in Babylon, then ours is
in this In b^c mundo non dolere, non laborare, non periclitariim. possibile.
Aug.
World. For it is impossible for any man to live in this world, and not to be
in sorrow, trouble and danger. This world is like the City of Athens: for as
one said of it, It was a goodly place for a Philosopher to pass through, for
there he should see and hear many things that might better his understanding;
she being the Nurse and Mother of all learning: but it was not good for him to
stay there; because he could hardly live there in any safety. So we may say
of this World, that if a man only pass through it, he may behold many
delectable and wouderfull works of God to better his knowledge: but if he once
take up his place of abode in it, then he is in present ieopardie and danger
of his life. For it is no less dangerous for a Christian to live in it, then
it was for a Prophet to remain in Jerusalem, which stoned all that came to
Luke ^3 33.
her.

Let this instigate every one of us to despise this world, since therein we
find nothing but trouble, sorrow, and vexation of mind. Augustine says, we
have the World for a Sea, Pro mari mundum, ^ronaui Eccle^am, pro gub^rnaculo
crucom. August.
the Church for a Ship, and the Cross for a Rudder, and happy are we, if we
have Christ for our Pilot, then with Peter we may walk safely, with the
Israelites pass through the red Sea securely; otherwise, we shall not only
be with Peter's ship in peril to be drowned, Here suge crudes lis terras suge
l^ttus auarum. Virgil.
but with Phara^hs host altogether ouer-whelmed in Mari rubro, this bloody
Sea. Noble AEneas, Troyes wandering Prince, after his long navigations, when he
landed and thought to have taken up his abode in Thrace (as the Poet fayneth)
he heard a lamentable voice, bid ding him to s^ee from that cruel Land, and to
depart with speed from those cruel Sands: but seeing the World is now, like
as it was before the Deluge, filled with Genesis 6.11.
cruelty: and like the Land of Canaan, whilst it was inhabited with the old
Canaanites, polluted with all kind of iniquity. Let me exhort all faithful
Christians, not with the fabulous speech of the Poet, but with the lively voice
of the Prophet. Arise, and depart, for this is not your rest, because it is
polluted, it shall destroy you with a sore Mic. 2.10.
destruction. And therefore now go on your way weeping.

I have heard some expound these words thus,
That the godly must not defer their repentance, but they must now go
weeping, that is, they must now begin to sorrow and lament for their sins.
True it is, we ought not to procrastinate our returning to God; no more then
the prodigal deferred his returning home to his father, who as soon as he
thought with himself to return, even then he arose, and went, we must not
with some think to amend hereafter, and in the mean time live at liberty,
and let loose the reins to our affections. For as it is true, that true
repentance is never too late: so is it as true, Poenitentia vera nunquam s^ra
that late repentance is seldom true. And if any object, that the Thiese was
saved at the last gasp. Augustine answers, Poenitentia sera, raro seria.
There was one indeed saved to keep us from desperation, and only one to
keep us from presumption. Vnus erat ne despereas, and solus vnus ne presumas.
August.
But because I will not force nor stretch the Text upon the tenters: I conclude
this point with the Apostles ^xhortation. Take heed therefore that you walk
circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time, for the days
are Ephesians. 5.15, 16.
evil: which makes many a one now go on his way weeping.

The faithful among the Jews, for all the troubles they endured in Babylon,
did go on in godliness, and did persevere in their profession. Hannania and
his fellows would not fall down and worship the golden Image, which
Nebuchadonosor had erected, though for the same they were to be thrown in the
fiery Dan. 3.
furnace. Daniel would not leave off praying unto God, albeit for the same he
was to be cast into the Lions Dan. 6.
Den. Mordecai would not bow the knee to Haman, although he was like to bring
not only his own, but the life of his whole Country in Esth. 3.
danger. So must we in this world persevere and prove constant unto the end,
though we are assured that the Devil does persecute us, and the world does
hate us, and infinite troubles are like to Befall us. When the Angels brought
Lot out of Sodom, they enjoined him to escape for his life, not to look behind
him, nor to tarry in the Plain, but to fly to the Mountain, lest he were
destroyed: so we must make no tarrying nor staying, no slipping aside, no
going Genesis 9.
back. For Lots wife, because she looked back to Sodom, was turned into a
pillar of Salt: the Israelites, because they desired to return to the flesh
pots of Egypt, were fearfully Number. 11.33. Psalm. 78 30, 31.
punished: and Saul, because he turned a way from the Lord, the Spirit of the
Lord de parted from him, and an evil spirit came and vexed 1. Sam. 16.
him: and therefore we must not only go, walk as Pilgrims, but we must go
on, we must persevere unto the end.

There be many reasons to move us to perseverance, but we will rest content
with one or two. First, the promise is only made unto such as persevere: he
that en dureth to the end shall be saved, says our Matt. 24.13.
Savior: he promises the Angel of the Church of Smyrna the crown of Life,
but conditionally if he were fruitful unto Revel. 2.10.
death: and the Apostle boasts that there was laid up for him a crown of
Righteousness, but first he had fought his fight, he had finished his 2.
Tim. 4.7, ^.
course. First, he made righteousness, Munimentum militanti, a breast plate
to him as he was a Soldier; and then he found it, ornamentum ouanti, a Crown
to him as he was a Conqueror. So must we keep the Faith, fight out our fight,
finish our course, if we would have the Crown. Otherwise, if we either fall
back or step aside. It had been better for us not to have known the Way of
righteousness, then after we have known it, to turn from the holy
Commandment given unto 2. Pet. 2.21.
us: and therefore it stands us in hand now to go on.

Again, of all sins; Apostasy is most fearful, most hateful to God, and
most hurtful to Man. Hateful to God, for he does tell us plainly, that if
the Righteous turn away from his righteousness and commit iniquity: his
righteousness shall not be mentioned, but he shall die in his Ezekiel. 18.24.
sin. Hurtful it is to man: witness the Man in the Gospel, of whom our
Savior speaks; who being dispossessed of one Devil, yet by a relapse into
sin, was afterward repossessed of the same, and seven worse: so that his
latter end was worse then his beginning. So whosoever they be that have
escaped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, yet after they are entangled therein and overcome, the
latter end is worse with them then the 2 Pet. 2.20.
beginning.

I might add hereunto the similies, which some have gathered from the natural
course of other Creatures, which may somewhat persuade us to perseverance: As,
first, Man is compared to a Tree, planted by the River Psalm. 1.
side. And some have not stuck to call him arborem inuersam, a Tree turned
upwards. Now the nature of the Tree is to extend it self, superius, upwards.
The nature of the Sun is to go, celerius, with a swift course. For he
comes out of his chamber, and rejoices like a Giant to run his race. The
nature of the Eagle is, to soar sublimius, so high till he can behold the
Sun. The nature of the Lion is to go Vlterius, on forward, scorning for any
fear to turn back. All these should serve as motives to persuade us to go
on. With the trees we must grow upwards; with the Sun we should run out our
race. With the Eagle soar alost, till we can behold Christ, who is the Sun
of Mal. 4.2.
righteousness: and we must not be danted, but boldly go on (like a Lion) if
need require, through a whole Army of afflictions.

But if we rightly consider the former two reasons, they will suffice to
forewarne us, to take heed of all kind of Apostacy; and to teach us to beware,
that with Demas we do not forsake the Apostles society, and embrace this
present 2. Tim. 4.10.
World: or with Hymeneus reject pure doctrine, and delight in profane 2. Tim.
2.17.
bablings: or like Judas, first preach Christ, and then betray him: or like
Herod, even now to hear John gladly, and by and by to behead him: or with
Julian, first seem earnest Professors, and in the end prove blasphemous
Persecutors: nor play the part of Nero, in the beginning to do well, and in
the end to thirst after all evil. It is fearful to put the hand to the Plow,
and to look back; but it is damnable with the Dog to return to the vomit;
or with the Sow, to the wallowing in the mire. Wherefore as the Prophet
exhorts, let us go on from strength to strength, until we all appear
before God on Psalm. 84.
Sion: And as the Apostle says, Forgetting what is behind, still end^uour to
that which is Phil. 3.13.
before; because

He that now goes on his WAY. The life of man in this world is called a Way.
The Lord makes my way (that is, my life) upright, says David; And man's
departing out of this world, is called a Way; I go the way of all the Earth,
says Joshua, when he was about to Ios. 23.14.
die. In this life there is via auersi, a way of him that is way ward from
the vvayes of God, and this way is commonly trodden in by all mankind. For all
are gone out of the way, there is none that does good; Psa^. 14.
no, net one. Secondly, there is via peruersi, a way of the obdured, perverse
and obstinate sinner. Woe be unto them, for they have walked in the way of Iud.
11.
Cain. And thirdly, there is via reuersi, a way of the convert and penitent,
and that is only proper to the godly and approved of God. For the Lord knows
the way of the righteous, but the way of the wicked shall Psa^. 1.6.
perish. The first two ways are too well known, and too much vvalkt in: But
this last way is that straight and narrow Way, that leads unto Life, and few
there be that find it. All that will go on in this way, must expose
themselves unto innumerable dangers. For all that will live godly in Christ
Jesus must suffer persecution. The way of man in this life may be compared to
that way which Phoebus prescribed to his son Phaeton, he must pass by the
Bull, P^r tamen aduersi gradieris cornua Tanri. Aemoniosque arcus, vielentique
^a Leonis. Ovid. Met.
for many young Bulls have compassed me, says David, and mighty Bulls of
Basan have closed me Psalm. 22.12.
about. He must pass by the Archer, for the wicked have bent their Bow to cact
down the poor and needy, and to slay such as be upright of Psalm. 37.14.
conversation. And he must pass by the jaws of the Lion. For the ungodly
compass the godly in their steps, like a Lion that is greedy of prey, and as
it were a Lion lurking in secret Ps. 17.11, 12.
places. And as one says, The way of man is the path of bruit beasts; For the
godly are beset by the ungodly on every side, as it were with bru^t beasts.
Yea, Semita bominum callis ^e^^rum. Isid.
this way of the righteous is not unlike the way that Sea-tossed AEneas had
unto Italy. For through many afflictions we must enter into the Kingdom of
God. Per varios easus, per (...) discrimina rerum tendimus in c^lum seeds vbi^
fata quietas ostendunt. Virg. Aen.


Seeing then our way in this life to Life eternal, is so hard and difficult.
Let us with Moses beg at Gods hands, if we have found favor in his sight, to
show us the way that we may know Exo. 33.13.
him.

Now Christ is this Way, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Job. 14.6.
Life. Will we walk directly, he is the Way; would we not be deceived by the
Way, he is the Truth; and his Word which is Truth is a Lantern to our feet,
and a light unto our Psalm. 119.
paths. This is our way to Heaven: He must guide us to our celestial Canaan;
as the Pillar of fire did the Israelites to the Land of Promise; the Scarlet
thread, the two men unto the house of Rahab; and as the Star did guide the
wisemen to Bethlem; else if he be not our Leader and Directer, like the blind
Sodomites, we may weary our selves with groping for Lots door, like the
Israelites, we may wander up and down in the wilderness, but we shall never
reach home. For none can come to the Father, but by him, that is the Way.

He that now goes on his way WEEPING. The Septuagint here use a word, which
carries a double signification: so that we may read the words eitherthus, He
that goes on his way sorrowing: or thus, he that goes on his way suffering.
By the first, may be gathered their grief and godly sorrow for sin. By the
last, their pain and grief sustained for sin: both are very consonant and
agreeing with the matter. If we receive the former, then we may cast our eye
to Daniel, who mourned and prayed: to Jeremiah, whose eyes were like Buckets
dropping down tears: and to Nehemiah, who fasted, grieved, sorrowed, and
prayed: and all of them confessing, that be cause of their sins, such things
came unto them. A worthy example for us al, to sorrow truly, and to weep
bitterly for our sins. Esau indeed wept, and Ahab humbled himself; but the
one was unseasonable, and the other but temporary. These are not pleasing to
God, nor auailable to us. For we must now go on our way weeping. We must
sorrow truly and weep constantly.
One of our late Writers speaking briefly of true repentance and conversion,
has wittily, 1. Cercanseissum.
worthily, ingeniously, and iudiciously observed a threefold heart in man.
First, arent heart, which is like a garment ripped in the seame, that may be
easily sewed up again. 2. Cor conf^actum.
Secondly, a broken heart, which is like a beggars cloak, 3. Cor contritum.
tottered and torn, and yet may be patcht and pieced again. Thirdly, a
contrite heart, which is like a piece of cloth cut all into shreds, that it can
never be joined nor pieced again. And from these we may learn, that it is
not sufficient for us to have our heart like the heart of Foelix trembling,
when we hear Paul disputing of Act. 24.25.
judgment: nor yet like the heart of Pharaoh, acknowledging, we have sinned,
but for a moment: nor like the heart of Ahab, even now a little humbled, but by
and by hardened: nor yet like the heart of Esau, crying bitterly, but as out of
measure, so out of season: but never truly broken hearts, and truly contrite:
as was David's, when ashes was his bread, and tears was his Psalm. 102.9.
drink: as was Ezekias, when he chattered like a Crane and mourned like a Is.
38.14.
Dove: and as was poor Mary's, when she washr our Saviors feet with her
tears, and wipt them with the hairs of her head. But such humbled hearts, and
such contrite souls, must we all have, if we will go on our way weeping.
For as the Prophet Joel, we must turn unto the Lord with fasting, weeping,
and with Joel 2.
mourning.

If by their weeping, we understand the troubles and sufferings they
sustained, then may we well note the difference betwixt the godly and ungodly
in this world. The one are ever in great trouble and perplexity: when the
other are in their jollitie and prosperity. Whilst Ahasuerosh and Haman sit
feasting and drinking, the City of Shusan is in great perplexity. Whilst the
wine that makes merry the heart of Psalm. 104.
man, is given to Artaxerxes the King. Nehemiahs own heart was sorrowful and
his countenance sad. Thus whilst the wicked, like the rich Glutton, are clothed
in purple, and are fed with delicates every Luke 16.19.
day. Like drunken Nabal, pass the time in feasting like a 1. Sam. 25.36.
King. Like the rich wretch in the Gospel, surfeit on their riches: and like
the Israelites, sit them down to eat and drink, and rise up again to play.
The godly with Micaiah, are fed with the bread of affliction. With the
children of the Prophets, they eat of the bitter pottage. And with our Savior
they are a thirst upon the Cross: And all of them must go on their way
weeping. And if we take a narrow view of all the faithful, from the beginning
unto this present, we shall find this to have been the condition of them all.
To omit Adams fall, Noah's troubles, Abraham's temptations, and Isaaks trials:
was not Jacob persecuted of his brother Esau? churlishly entertained of his
uncle Laban: defrauded along time of fair Rachell, was he not glad to take
the cold ground for his bed, and a hard stone for his pillow under his head?
Was he not forced to expose himself in the day to the heat, and in the night
to the frost? Had he not his wages by his Uncle ten times changed? his own
bed unnaturally defiled, and his only daughter deflowred? so that he went on
his way weeping. Job when he was robbed of his goods, bereft of his children,
when he had the devil tormenting him, and his wife tempting him, his friends
forsaking him, and his servants forgetting him, rogues deriding him, and
villains disdaining him: Did not he go on his way weeping. David when he
passed through the jaws of the Lion, the paw of the Bear, the hand of Goliath,
the spear of Saul, the rebellion of Absalom, the treason of Achitophel, the
death of Ammon, the seditious trumpet of Sheba, and the cursed tongue of
Shimei, etc. David exagitatur, Elias fugatur, leremias lapidat^^, Esaias
secatur, Zacharias inter altar and edem trucidatur. Ipse clausula legis and
prophetarum, nec Prophets tantum sed Angelus dictus contumeliosa cade
truncatur, Tert.
Did not he go on his way weeping.

This should animate and encourage us in all our afflictions, our case is not
strange nor singular. For infinite ways has Gods Church and children suffered
before us. Abel was murdered, Isaak flouted, Eliah persecuted, Elisha mocked,
Micaih buffetted, Jeremiah stocked, John the Baptist beheaded, Steven stoned,
James killed, Peter imprisoned, and our sweet Savior crucified. And in the
primitive Church, some were sawen in pieces in Arabia; some of the Saints had
their legs broken in Capodocia; some hung with their heads downward in
Mesopotamia; some maimed of all their joints in Alexandria; some parched and
burnt before the coals in Euseh. Eccl. hist. lib. 8. cap. 12 ^lagris
explorabantur, nudabantur, in vincula conijciebantur, lapidabantur gladis,
moriebantur. Soc. Eccl. hist. lib. 4. cap. 24.
Antiochia: they were scourged, stripped, fettered, stoned, slaughtered. And as
the Apostle says, they were tried by mockings and scourgings, by bonds and
imprisonment, they were stoned, they were hewn asunder, they were tempted,
they were slain with the sword, they wandered up and down in sheepe-skinnes,
being destitute, afflicted and Heb. 11.36, 37, 38.
tormented. And so all of them went on their way weeping.

And bears forth good seed. The Prophets digging through the wall, and
carrying his stuff upon his shoulder, in the sight of the people, was for a
sigue unto them, that as he had done, so should they do when they went into
captivity. But by this carriage is meant not a corporal, but a cordall
burden, not borne on the shoulders of their bodies, but carried in the bowels
of their hearrs, to wit, faith and hope in the truth of Gods promises for their
deliverance. By an allegorical phrase of speech, comparing them that were
waiting for their deliverance, to the needy husbandman, expecting a fruitful
harvest: For as hope of good increase, makes him to cheer himself in his
need Ianes. 5.7, 8.
and poverty: so faith makes us to rejoice in Romans 5.2. to 5.
tribulations. The Analogy and resemblance betwixt seed and faith are these.


First, As seed, though of little quantity, cast into good ground brings
forth thirty, sixty, and an Mat. 13.8.
hundred fold. So if a man have but faith as much as a grain of mustard seed,
it will exceed all other herbs, and out-top Nebuchadonosors tree reaching the
heaven.

Again, As seed first brings forth the blade, then the care, and lastly Mar.
4.
corn: even so faith shows it self by degrees, as in the Eunuch, when he
conferred with Philip, What (says he) does let me from being baptized? There
it did show it self in the blade. Secondly, he makes confession of his faith,
saying, I believe that Jesus is the Son of God. There it was in the ear.
Lastly, when he went away veioycing that he was baptized, become a Christian,
and a member of Christ: there was the seed and corn of Act. 8.
faith. Thus the godly go on from strength to Psalm. 84.7.
strength, and the righteousness of God is revealed from Romans 1.17.
faith to faith.

It is called precious seed: quod rarum est charum est. Seed was accounted
precious, when all Countries came unto Egypt to buy corn of Joseph, s Genesis
47.57.
and truly faith must needs be precious, seeing when Christ comes he shall
hardly find Faith upon the Luke 18.8.
earth.

Lastly, The necessity of faith is such, that therefore it must needs be
precious: for as the material seed is the only isntrumental means to
preserve the life of man. For all the spices, honey, mirth, nuts, and almonds,
gold and silver, that were in Canaan, were not sufficient for Jacob and his
childrens sustenance: but they were forced to repair unto Egypt for corn,
that they might live and not ^ die. Even so without faith the soul is starued:
it is the food of it: For, The just man lives by his Gal. 3.11.
faith. From hence then we see that in going on our way weeping, we must of
necessity carry precious seed: I mean, in all our troubles and afflictions,
we must have a true and lively faith, waiting and expecting from the truth of
Gods promises a gracious deliverance. For by faith Noah was saved from the
deluge: by faith Moses conducted the Israelites out of Egypt: by faith they
passed through the red Sea, as on dry land: by faith Rahab was delivered out
of Jericho: by faith Daniel was safe from the Lions: by faith David escaped the
sword of Goliath: and by faith the three Children quenched the violence of Heb.
11.
the fire: by faith in Christ the blind receive Mar. 10.
sight: by faith the Lepers wore Mat. 9.
cured: by faith the woman was delivered from her issue of Mat. 8.
blood: by faith the Canaanitish woman had her daughter dispossessed: by faith
the widows son was restored unto life: by faith the sick received health,
the lame did walk, all sores were salued, Lumen anime, ostium vitae, and
fundamentum salutis eterna. Chrys^in Syms.
the devils cast out, and the dead revived. O how excellent and precious thing
is faith; It is the light of the soul: for by it, we know God. It is the
door of life: for by it, we have boldness, and entrance with confidence; 1.
Job. 2. 2. Cor. 5.7. Ephesians. 3.12. Ephesians. 2.8. 2. Tim. 3.15. Heb. 11.6. Act. 26.18.
And the ground of our salvation: for by grace we are saved through faith. O
the great virtue and efficacy of faith: without it, it is impossible to please
God: by it we receive the remission of sins, it saves sinners, it
enlightneth the blind, enableth the unable, it cures the penitent, it crowns
the patient. Wherefore let us labor in all things to have this precious seed
of faith: for, all things are possible to him that believes. I know that some
take this Seed, to be understood of the Seed of the Word: and others, for the
Seed of good works: but the most Interpreters do expound it, as I have
already explained it. And now I conclude with Saint Bernards exhortation to
his Sister, Keep, Seruain te rectam fidem, tene sinceram fidem, custedito in
temeratam fidem.
I pray you, an upright, a sincere, and a steadfast faith, that in the end, you
may receive the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls. Amen.

The last Sermon of the third general part of this Psalm, showing the blessed
estate of the faithful in the life to come, entitled. The Christians comfort.
THE TENTH SERMON.
VERSE. 7. He shall doubtless come again with joy, and bring his sheaues with
him.


IT may rain all night, and yet clear up in the dawning, Nocte pluit tota
redcunt spectacula mane.
says the Poet. Sorrow may be in the evening, but joy comes in the Psalm.
30.5.
morning, says the Prophet. In the former part of this Verse we have noted
the sorrow, grief, travels, and troubles of the godly in this world: Now it
follows that in this latter part of this last Verse, I speak of the joy and
comfort that they shall have in the world to come. As for the recompense and
remuneration (if I may say) of the cross and afflictions of the godly, I have
spoken sufficiently in the eighth Sermon: and therefore I shall not need to be
too ^edious in repetition: only this I add, that there is nothing more
certain then this: that all that now go on weeping, sorrowing, and suffering
for their sins, if they carry but a settled and fixed faith in God and his
promises: they shall questionless be eased of their grief, refreshed for
their afflictions, and recompensed for all their losses: and therefore the
Psalmist says, He shall doubtless (that is, without question) return with
joy, and bring his sheaues with him.

He shall doubtless return. The word return or come again,
is diverse ways read in the Scriptures: For, first, there is a returning of
man unto himself. Secondly, a returning of man unto God. Thirdly, a returning
of God unto himself. Fourthly, a returning of God unto man.

Man is said to return to himself, when bethinking himself of his errors,
and considering the woeful case he is in because of his sin, he resolves
with himself to leave his sin, and bewayling his former offenses to become a
new creature. He returns unto God, Greece, (...).
when he puts this resolution into action; and this his purpose into practice,
with a contrite heart, and humbled soul, falling down before the Lord, humbly
deploring his own miseries, and heartily imploring his mercies. Both these we
see in the prodigal Child: first, he considers with himself in what woeful
plight he was in, by reason of his folly: and upon this consideration, he
resolves to return to his father to confess his offense, and to beg pardon.
Then, what he purposed he accordingly performed: he returns to his father,
cries out, Father I have sinned against heaven and before thee, and am no more
worthy to be called thy Luke 15.
son.

God may be said to return to himself, when forgetting his wrath, he
repents himself of the evil he determined to bring upon Ier. 18.8. and
26.3.
man. For God in himself is all mercy, Deus meus misericordiae emea, my God
is Psalm. 59.17.
my mercy. Ipse est and ipsa est misericordiae, he is mercy, even mercy it
self: For, as his greatness is, so is Eccl. 2.21.
his mercy: But in himself he is not properly all wrath, but our sins
provoke him to anger: witness himself, speaking of Jerusalem, he says, She
has provoked me unto Ier. 4.17.
wrath. More clearly in the sixty fifth Chapter of Isaiah, Where he says
thus, I spread out my hands all the day unto arebellious people: a people that
provoked me even to my face. He is never angry but when our sins
constrain him. Now, when he turns from his wrath, for he abides but a
while in his Iona 3.9. Psalm. 30.5.
anger, and remembers his tender mercy, which endures for ever: he turns
from that which he is not, to that which he is: from that which he hates, to
that which he loves: for he retains not his wrath for ever, because mercy
pleases Mic. 7.18.
him.

He returns to man, when he has compassion upon him, subdues his
iniquities, and casts all his sins into the bottom of the sea, and when he
restores him to his former happiness Psalm. 80.14.
and estate. This is plainly seen in the pitiful father of the penitent
prodigal: when he sees him afar off what does he? Is his wrath remembered?
Is his anger kindled? Is his sons offense called to mind? No, no: there is
nothing in the Father but love and affection, mercy and compassion: he runs
and meets him, falls upon his neck and kisses him, receives him into his
favor, restores him into his former, nay blesses him with a more happy
estate then he had before. In the precedent part of this Verse is contained,
the returning of man unto God, by going on his way weeping, by his sorrowing,
and lamenting his sins, and present misery for sin. This latter part
comprehends, the returning of God unto man, in extending his mercy toward
man, in causing him to return with joy, forgiving his sin, and changing his
woeful estate, into a joyful and glad estate. These two must concur
together: Return to me, and I will return to you, says the Lord. For
certain it is, that he that returns to the Lord, by going on his way
weeping: the Lord will return to him, in causing him to return with joy, and
bring his sheaues with him. See Isaiah 55.7.

The words may be taken either topically, for the Jews returning from Babylon
home to Jerusalem; or typically for our migration out of this World, this
earthly Babylon, unto our home the heavenly Jerusalem. In both there are two
things to be observed: The place from whence we come; and the place whither
we go.

The place from whence the Jews returned; was, De terra inimici, from the Land
of their Ier. 31.16.
enemy: a place of confusion, cruelty, and oppression: a place of
wickedness, idolatry and profaneness: a place of ambition, pride and
contention: a place without the fear of God: A Land of graven Images, where
they doted upon their Ier. 50.38.
Idols* a Land, where the Saints of God had no content, but much discontent;
where they were trodden under foot, where they drunk the cup of trembling, and
the dregs of the Lords Is. 51.22.23.
wrath. Where their necks were under persecution, where they were weary and
had no Lam. 5.
rest.

The place whither they were to return, was Jerusalem; the Town of peace, the
City of the great God; the Sanctuary of the most Psalm. 46.4.
High: A City that was at union within it self, whereunto the Tribes, even
the Tribes of the Lord went up, according to the testimony to Israel, to
praise the Name of the Lord; and where there were Thrones set for judgment,
even the Thrones of the House of Psalm. 112.4, 5.
David. A place which the Lord had chosen for himself: a place, where was the
Lords House: and a place, wherein the Name of the Lord was called upon.

The Place, from whence we return, is this World; which is to us, as Babylon
was to the Jews; Egypt, to Israel; and Sodom, to Lot. For here is nothing but
confusion, oppression, and uncleanness: a place of obscurity, ignorance, and
darkness: a place, where we are sure of hatted and Job. 15. and 16.
persecution: a place, where there is nothing but vanity and vexation of Eccl.
2.11.
mind: a place, where the best man that ever lived, could find no content, for
if any man could have found out content in this wretched world, then Solomon
should have atchiued it: For be built him Houses, he planted Vineyards, he made
him Gardens and Orchards with Trees of all fruit;
he got him Servants and Maids, Men-singers and Women-singers, and the
delights of the Sons of men; he had such possessions of Beeues and Ox^n,
such store of Silver and Gold, that he was great above all that were before him
in Jerusalem; and whatsoever his eyes desired, he withheld it not from them.
But what is the end of all? Behold, says he, all is vanity and vexation of
the Eccles 2.4. to 12.
spirit. What then if a man had the sumptuous buildings of Lucullus? The
fruitful Orchards of Alcynous? The innumerable riches of Croesus? The delicate
dainties of Appitius? and the large Dominions of Darius. What if a man was the
chief Monarch upon earth, as was Ezra 1.2.
Cyrus, and might walk with Nebuchadonosor, proudly in his Royal Dan. 4.26,
27.
Palace: and were Princely apparelled with Act. 12.21.
Herod: and were as rich as that covetous Luke 12.
worldling: and fared delicately every day like the Glutton: yea, and if he had
all the pleasures of this world at command, what should he reap in the end by
them? The same (as the Poets feign) that Prometheus had by Pandoras Box,
plagues to tormenthim. What Jason found in Medeas casket, wild fire to burn
him: And what Hercules found in Deianiraes shirt, poysonable venom to rot him.
More plainly what Adam found by eating the forbidden Genesis 3.
apple. What Achan got by the Babylonish Ios. 7.
garment: and what Gehezi did reap by Naamans silver, and two suites of 2.
King. 5.
raiment. For the present he shall have vanity and vexation: and hereafier, if
he do not forgo them, death and destruction. We must not therefore here in
this world, take up our Station; but we must return from Babylon, that we be
not partakers of her sins, and so receive of her Revel. 18.4.
plagues.

The place whither we must return, is to our home, to Mount Sion, to the City
of the living God, the celestial Gal. 4.15. Heb. 12.22.
Jerusalem; whose foundation is garnished with precious stones; whose Gates are
of Pearl, and Streets of pure gold, wherein there is no Temple, for the Lord
God Almighty is the Temple of it: where there is no need of the Sun, nor of
the Moon to shine in it, for the glo^ie of God does inlighten it, and the
Lamb is the light Apoc. 21.
of it: where we shall be in the company of innumerable Angels; of the
Congregation of the first borne; and with the Spirits of just and perfect men;
with God, the Judge of all; and with Icsus, the Mediator of the new Heb. 12.23,
24.
Testament. Gloriosa dicta sunt de te; Most glorious things are spoken of thee,
thou City of God, SELAH. O, who can express; f Psalm 87.3.
nay, who can conceive, ordinem and ornatum, The order and ornament of this
celestial Paradise. (...). Basil. hom. in Psa. 45.
This is the House of Wisdom tightly trimmed, and curiously Pro. 9.1.
carved: This is the Palace of Solomon, the Pillars thereof are filuer, the
pauement gold, the hangings purple, and she is paued with the love of the
Daughters of Cant. 3.9, 10. (...).
Jerusalem: this is that inheritance which the Apostle calls Am a^^us nibil
igne deperdit venificys omnibus resistit. Plin. lib. 36. cap. 19.
undefiled, that withers 1. Pet. 1.4.
not. Where he uses two words: The one, a name of durable precious stone: and
the other, of a pleasant flower whose color fades not. The one showing, quam
permanens; how that it is an everlasting inheritance. The other, quam placens;
how amiable and delectable it is. This is the everlasting Tabernacle our
Savior speaks of: This is that building given us of God, which the Apostle
calls a House, not made with hands but eternal in the 2. Cor. 5.1.
Heavens: and which Saint Peter terms the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus 2. Pet. 1.11.
Christ: and as it is eternal, so are all things therein eternal. The things
which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are 2. Cor.
4.18.
eternal. There we shall have lucem aeternam; eternal light: For there we
shall have no Sun to shine by day; neither shall the brightness of the Moon
shine unto us: for the Lord shall be our everlasting light, and our God our Is.
60.19.
glory. There shall we have vitam aeternam, eternal life. This is that
record (says Saint John) to wit, that God bath given us life eternal, and this
Life is in his 1. Job. 5.11.
Son. There we shall have gloriam aternam, eternal glory. For God has
called us unto everlasting glory in Christ 1. Pet 5.10.
lesus: and there we shall have gaudium aternum, eternal Is. 35.10.
joy. For all that trust in the Lord, shall rejoice and triumph for Psalm. 5.11.
ever.

The other word,
which the Apostle uses, for the setting forth of this celestial
inheritance; Amarantus immareese. bilis, quod non marces. at sed decerptus
assernetur. Plin. l. 21. cap. 8.
is used of Pliny, for the name of a flower, which does not lightly fade, nor
decay; and which for pleasant color and lovely beauty, is called of some
Writers, Flos amoris; in English, Floramour, or flower Gentle. Whereby the
Apostle will let us know, that all things in this celestial Jerusalem, are not
only durable and permanent, but also delectable and pleasant. There is nothing
that can dislike us; and there wants nothing that may delight us. Our ears
shall be delighted with the melodious harmony of that heavenly Revel. 5.4.
and 19.1.
Halleluiah: our smell, with the odoriferous perfume of the golden Censor, The
prayers of the Revel. 8.3.
Saints: our taste, with the pleasant fruit of the Tree of Life, which is in
the midst of the Paradise of Revel. 2.7.
God: and our eyes, in beholding him that made Psalm. 100.3.
us; that saved Phil 3.20.
us; and ^^at glorifies Romans 8.30.
us. The consideration of this, struck David into such an admiration, of this
blessed Cities perfection, that being ravished with the beauty thereof, and
overcome with a longing desire to enjoy these pleasures, he could not but cry
out, O Lord of Hosts, how amiable are thy Dwellings! my soul longs; yea, and
faints for the Courts of the Psalm. 85.1, 2.
Lord.

Consider we now with our selves, from whence we come, and whither we must
return: from servitude and slaueric; thither, where we shall be free and at
liberty. Jerusalem which now is, is in bondage; but Jerusalem which is above,
is Gal 4.25, 26.
free. From a place where we sorrow, grieve, and Romans 8.22, 23.
groan: Thither, where the Lord will wipe away all tears from our eyes; and
where there is no sorrow, neither grief, neither Rouel. 21.4.
crying. From hence, where we can find no rest: thither where our eyes shall
see Jerusalem, a quiet Hahitation, and a Tabernacle that cannot be Is. 33.20.
removed. From hence, where we have no peace: thither, where there shall be
no end of our Is. 9.7.
peace. From hence, where we are in continual danger and jeopardie: thither,
where we shall be in safety and security. For my people shall dwelt in the
Tabernacle of peace, and in sure dwellings and in safe resting Is. 32.18.
places. From hence, where we are vexed with the society of the wicked:
thither, where we shall praise God with our whole heart, in the Assembly and
Congregation of the Psalm. 111.5.
just. From hence, where we are in want and adversity: thither, where we
shall have full facietie and content of all things; where God shall be to us 1.
Cor. 15.
all in all. Hither it was that old Simeon longed to return, when he sung his
Nunc dimittis; Lord, let thy servant depart inpeace. Hither it was that blessed
Steven longed to come, when he said, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Hitheri^
was, that the Apostle desired to be, when he wished to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ. Yea, and hither it was that David thirsted to come, when he chose
rather to be a doore-keeper in the House of God, then to dwell in Kings
Palaces. And hither let me exhort you all to return, as the Prophet did the
Jews, to come out of this Babel, and to flee from the Chaldeans, the wicked
Inhabitants of this world, with a voice of Isa. 48.20.
joy. Go your way, stand not still, but remember the Lord afar off, and let
Jerusalem come into your Ier. 51.50.
mind.

He shall return with joy. He shall not return with sorrow or grief, but
with great gladness and joy. The old Israelites, whilst they were in Egypt,
grieved and groned, being oppressed with their grievous taskes and burdens. But
when they were freed from thence, they marched toward Canaan with the noise of
music, with the sound of Timbrels, dancing and rejoicing. The Jews sitting
by the Rivers of Babel, wept: They could not sing the Songs of the Lord in a
strange Land: their tongue claue unto their Psalm. 137.
jaws; but when the Lord turned again their captivity, they returned with
great gladness, and with the voice of singing. Their mouth was enlarged, and
their tongue untied, to praise the Lord with joyful Songs of praise. Even so
whilst we are captives in this wretched world, we are full of sorrow and
grief; but when we return to Sion, we shall be as full of joy and
gladness. Verily, verily (says our Savior) ye shall weep and lament, and
the world shall rejoice: ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned into
Job. 16.20.
joy.

One contratie does follow upon another, is an Axiom in Philosophy; and here
it may be a true Position in Divinity. Mercy and Judgment, Joy and Grief,
are contraries: and when the one preceeds, the other follows after. So if the
Lord, who is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great Joel 2.13.
kindness: do suffer the wicked in this world to rejoice in their pleasures,
waiting for their amendment: yet in judgment, hereafter their laughter shall
be turned into mourning, and their joy into heaviness, unless they repent
betimes. Witness the rich Clutton, who passed over his life in ease and
prosperity; being clothed costly, and dieted daintily, yet after wards was
tormented with an unquenchable flame. For they that now laugh, shall weep and
Luke 6.25.
wayle. So on the other part, they that now mourn shall be made glad and
joyful: witness. poor Lazarus, afflicted and full of soars, more pitied of
Dogs then dogged Dives, who after his afflictions was carried by Angels into
Abraham's bosom, the place of all happiness, pleasure and comfort. For they
that sow in tears, shall reap in joy.

Is not this a great comfort to us in all our troubles? That he that now goes
on his way weeping, shall doubtless return with joy, cum gaudio interno, with
an inward joy, when their conscience is quiet and their soul rejoices; that
their sins are pardoned, they justified, and shall assuredly be glorified.
Truly, there is no joy in the World to that of a peaceable conscience:
witness Ezekiah, when in his greatest extremity his conscience told him, that
he had walked uprightly before Is. 38.
God: and the Apostle greatly rejoiced, when he knew nothing by himself. He
shall return, cum gaudion exte^no, with an out ward joy, rejoicing, as one
says, in the beauty and glory of all the Creatures. For Christ shall make
all things Isa. 65.17. 2. Pet. 3.13. Revel. 21.1.
new: For even the Heavens shall rejoice, and the Earth shall be glad, and all
Creatures shall be joyful when they are delivered from the bondage of
corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of Rom 8.21.
Gad. He shall return, cum gaudio eterno, with an everlasting joy. The
redeemed of the Lord shall return and come to Sion with praise; and
everlasting joy shall he upon their heads; they shall obtain joy and
gladness, and sorrow and mourning shall sies Isa. 35.10.
away. This is that joy, which the Apostle calls ineffable and 1. Pet. 1.8.
glorious: This is that joy, which the Schoolmen call Intensiuum and
extensiuum, so extended, that it can never be ended, and so intended that is so
great, and so full of joy, as greater and fuller there cannot be. With this joy
Steven was ravished, when he saw the Heavens open, and Christ sit^ing at the
right hand of his heavenly Father. It is such a joy, whereunto being compared,
all pleasure is but pain; all gladness, but grief; all sweet, but sure; and
all favor, but filth. Thrice happy are they that are partakers of this joy.
For blessed is he that now weeps, for he shall laugh.

And bring his sheaues with him. The Jews after their deliverance was
published and proclaimed by Cyrus, their great poverty and penury, v v as
changed into great prosperity and plenty. For they v v ere supplied with
Silver, Gold, Cattle, with precious things, and with willing Exrat.
offerings. In like manner their Progenitors the Israelites, after their great
wants and scarcity of all things in Egypt (for all their fleshpots) they were
brought to a Land that did flow with milk and honey, and abounded in all
things. Both these did but typically point out the great commodity that the
faithful shall reap by the Cross. Our Savior says, we shall receive
double in this world, and much more in the world to come. Abraham after his
long pilgrimage, was seated in a fruitful Land, and found the Lord, an
exceeding great reward. David after his great persecution, and long banishment,
had his lot fallen into a pleasant ground. Jacob after his great servitude, was
greatly enriched. And Job received double for that he lost. Thus our
afflictions are like the herb Moly,
whose root is black, and the blossoms white: like Aarons Rod, which brought
forth buds, blossoms, and ripe Almonds: and like Samsons dead Lion filled with
meat and honey. But what are all these to that which we shall receive
hereafter. The Evangelist Matthew says, we shall receive an hundred Matthew.
19.29.
fold; a number finite, for an infinite: but Luke says, much Luke 18.28.
more; because they are in number infinite, he sets them down indefinite. And
the Apostle says, that neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor the
heart of man can conceive the things, which God has prepared for them that
lone 1. Cer. 2.9.
him.

Should not this with the Apostle, make us esteem the afflictions of this
present time, not worthy of the glory that shall be Rom 5.18.
revealed. Our Savior wills us with joy and gladness to suffer persecution,
for great is our reward in heaven. Our reward (says one) is so manifold, that
it cannot be numbered; so great, that it cannot be valued; so singular, that it
cannot be compared; and so lasting, that it can acuer be ended. (...)
Saint Augustine speaking of the joys and pleasures, which the godly shall
have in heaven, says, that we may more easily tell what is not there, then
what is there. There is no discontent, no g^ese, nomourning, no misery, no
corruption, no death, no penury, no poverty. But what is there? Neither eye
has seen, nor ear has heard: for the natural man perceives not these
things, and yet there are pleasures for evermore: yea, wish what thou will,
Quicquid voles erit, and quicquid noles non crit. August.
and it shall be there; and abhor what thou please, and it shall not be
there.

Further, the consideration of this heavenly reward, these sheaues, these
joys, should make us lightly to esteem this present world: and cause us not to
value these corruptible things at so high a rate. Shall we with the Gadarens
prefer our swine before our salvation? With the Israelites the fleshpots of
Egypt before the heavenly Mannah? With Demas the pelf of this world with the
pleasures of the world to come? No God forbid. This is like Isops cock, to
value a barley grain before a precious gemme: with Plutarchs Grillus to
esteem of Cyrces her swilling tub, better then of Ulysses his dainties. And
Glaucus-like to change coats of gold for brazen armor: or like Dioclesian,
(...)
to prefer a few pot-hearbs before a Crown and Imperial Scepter: and
Esau-like, to sell our birthright for bread and pottage. But let us with the
Apostle account all these things but loss and Heb. 12.16. (...) Plato.
dung: with the Philosopher, nothing and nothing worth: and with the Saints,
let us willingly forgo them: knowing that in heaven we have a better and a
more enduring Heb. 10.34.
substance: for that is meant by the godly, his bringing of his sheaues with
him.

You have heard now whither we shall return, to wit, from Babylon to Sion,
from this wretched world to the Land of promise, to the City of rest
Jerusalem, that is above. You hear how joyfully we shall be received; and
how infinitely we shall be rewarded. Now lest too many should be deceived in
too hastily applying this promise unto themselves;
we must know that diverse have nothing to do with it.

First, all who place their whole happiness in this world: like the rich
glutton farsing and fatting their bellies with delicates and dainties: like
Nabal feasting like a King: they have do part herein for, We be unto them that
are full, for they shall (...).
hunger. Nor yet the rich Cormorants, who Crasus-like delight only in their
substance: Midas-like wish they could change all things into Gold: and like the
worldling in the Gospel, who wished his soul to take rest, for it had sto^e
laid up for many years. They have not to do with this promise: for, Woe be
unto them that ^^rich, for they have received thew (...)
consolation.

Again, no backslider nor reuolter, has interest herein, whether he be a
worldly Apostatate with Demas, or heretical with Hym^neus; or blasphemous like
Julian, or any one that goes not on his way, and perseuereth not unto the end.
For, it bad been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness,
then after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment given unto
1. Pet. 2.21.
them.

Further, all that are plagued for their sins, and so may seem to go
weeping, have no parcel in this promise: for then should Cain and
Nebucadonosor claim interest therein: Nor yet all they that are humbled with
Gods judgments: for then would Pharaoh and Ahab challenge some right herein:
Nor yet they, who too lately weep and confess their errors: for then Esan
and Judas might have some hope herein. But such as suffer for the trial of
faith, as did Joseph and Job: such as grieve and mourn for their sins, as
did the poor Publican, and Marie Magdalen; even unto them it is said, Blessed
are ye that mourn, for ye shall be Matthew. 5.4.
comforted.

Lastly, all that seemingly have faith have no part herein: for the wicked and
the devils themselves have a kind of says, which is only historical, without
any confidence or trust in God. Others have a better faith then this, but it is
momentanie and temporary, it falls and fails when tribulation comes: like
seed sown in stony ground, which being parched with the Sun fades and
withers: for we must not only carry seed, but precious seed; a saving
faith, a lively hope: such a faith, whereof the holy Ghost is the efficient
cause: for, Faith is the gift of Ephesians. 2.
God. The Gospel, the isntrumental cause: for, Faith comes by hearing of
the Romans 10.
Word. And our salvation the final cause: for, The end of our faith is the
salvation of our 1. Pet. 1.9.
souls. To conclude, such as forsake all things, as the Apostles did; and
desire to depart out of this wretched world, as old Simeon did; and constantly
persevere unto death, as Saint Steven did; suffer afflictions patiently, as Job
did; sorrow for their sins penitently, as Peter did; endure constantly, as
Antipas did; and carry a steadfast faith, as Saint Paul did: such I say have
the only right to this promise: they only shall find and feel the sweetness
of this blessing: and they and none else shall reap these sheaues: for in
regard that they have gone on their way weeping, they shall doubtless come
again with joy, and bring their sheaues with them.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page 12. lin. 33. read Rimmon. p. 22 l. 34. who. p. 50. l. 1. exciting. p. 66.
l. 1. typically express the conjunction. p. 66. l. 16. Salomons. p. 67. l. 17.
sanctifies you. page 69. lin. 9. approved: Gods children were. p. 70. l. 32.
observations. p. 136. l. 2. whilst. p. 137. l. 11. conform.

Errata in annot.
Page 5. (...). ibid. (...). p. 14. iustius est. ibid iustum punire unjust. p.
31. d^bilitatum. p 55. cupientis. p. 71. Ovid. Metam. lib. 15 fab. 1. ib.
exinsideli p. 110. (...). ibid. (...). p. 113. (...). page 119. (...). p. 136.
vt eius. p. 142. cadentem. p. 148. (...). ibid. (...). p. 150. heufuge. p. 159.
animae.


