THE MIRROVR OF MINDS, OR, BARCLAYS Icon animorum, Englished by T. M.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN NORTON, for THOMAS WALKLEY, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the sign of the Eagle and Child in Britaines-Burse, 1691.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Richard, Lord Weston, Lord high Treasurer of England,
Knight of the most Nob^e Order, etc.
My Lord,
I MIGHT be fearful, that so great a Master of the learned Languages (as your
Lordship is known to be) having before read this acute discourse in the
Original, and enjoyed the Author in his own strength and elegance, might not
only severely censure my weak translation; but justly neglect the
Presentation of it, as a thing needelesse and improper to your learned self.
But may it please your Lordship to ad^^ i^ my reasons? First, the greater your
abilities are, the more authority will your Name give the work to those that
are mere English Readers, and to whom my pains most properly do belong.

Barclay, the learned Author, having with a sharp^ and penetrating fight
surueyed the difference of humane dispositions, and loath to bound his fame
within the narrow limits of his own Language, clothed his work (and that
most elegantly) in the Roman tongue. I, lest our English Gentlemen (as many of
them as cannot master the Original) should lose the sense of such a work,
have made adventure to ^ene't them, and with the oss^ (perchance) of mine own
fame, to extend the fame of Barclay. The second reason, and the chief, why I
present it to your Lordship, is drawn from that analogy which I conceiu^
between the matter of ^^is book and your mind, ^eing such, as it may be
thought, if the Author himself had lived in this state, he would have chosen
the same Patron; your mind (my Lord) being not only molded for the Muses to
love, but made for public and high employments, has not only occasion to
meet the differences of humane dispositions, but ability of judgment to
discern them; and with a conscious delight may run over the mention of those
things here, which your self have by experience already found, and meet in
some parts of third discourse your own perf^ctions truly charactered.

To you, my Lord, to whose Noble bosom the Muses heretofore have resorted for
delight, they now fly for Patronage and shelter. To your hands I humbly
presons this weak endeavor, beseeching Almighty GOD to bless you with
continuance and increase of temporal Honors, and after, with eternal
Happiness, so prays

Your Lordships most humbly (...) THO: MAY.

The First Chapter. The Four ages of man Childhood, Youth, Midle-age, Old Age.
THe making, or marring of mankind, as of other creatures, is, especially, in
their first age. In ^hees, the sprigs, whilst they ^re tender, will yield with
ease, to the grafters hand, and grow ^y his direction, either straight, ^r
crooked. So, the minds of ^nfants, by their Parents skill, ^o less, then
their bodies, by the ^sidwiues hand, may with ease be moalded into such a
fashion as will be durable in after-ages. The seeds espeicially, and
fundamental parts of virtue, are by an early, and strong persuasion, to be
so engrafted into them, that they need not know, whither nature or praecept
were the teachers of them. To be dutiful to their parents, and obedient to
their counsels; to abhor intemperance, lying, and deceit, as prodigies and
things unusual; to adore especially the power of God, and sometimes by mercy,
sometimes by judgment, to consider of it. These things must be taught them,
without trouble or severity; for what ever we follow for fear of punishment,
from the same things with a sad loathing we use to be auerse, and the hatred
conceived in our youth, I know not by what custom of horror, we often nourish
in our old age. The must daily be seasoned with instructions concerning the
excellency and rewards of vert^^; and vices in a shameful and disdainefull
manner, must be named to them, to make them altogether ignorant, that such
vices are now often in public practiced, and without infamy. Being thus
brought up in such gentle rudiments, they will hate vices, and learn not to
fear virtue as too rigid, and harsh a mistress. They will easily be brought
to these beginnings of right discipline, by the guidance of their parents and
teachers, whose opinions, like divine Oracles, will altogether sway their minds
yet weak, and not troubled with the ambition of judging. Besides this, they
cannot be allured, by the fiattering promises of any vice, whose age as yet, is
not only unexperienced of pleasure, but utterly incapable of it: they will
therefore easily condemn that thing, which in the judgment of their friends,
is dishonest, and commended to themselves, by noe temptation. Nor, would we
here initiate their childhood in any such torment, as superstitious, and
anxious piety; but manly, and wary virtue; for since the minds of men, by an
inbred weight, bend heavily downward to the worst things; we had need to bow
them, while yet they are tender, quite contrary; that by this means when their
natural force shall bring them back, they may yet retain a happy mean
betwixt their nature, and education. But in this discipline of tender youth, as
soon as their minds are sensible of praise, the desire of it is to be
kindled in them, that they may then learn, and accustom themselves to affect
honor; and in all exercises, either in schools, or abroad at play, they may
labor with delight to excel their equals. Besides, when their age increasing,
shall bring them by degrees as it were, out of bondage, so that both the awe
of their parents may not too sensibly decrease in them, and they not wanton it,
through a sudden, and unexpected increase of liberty: we must leave their
childhood to those delights which are proper to that age, least we should seem
to accuse nature, which has ordained that age to be weak and feeble; and
unseasonable sowing of wisdom in them, corrupt their natures, not yet ripe
for such instructions. Let harmless wantonness be freely allowed them; let
them gently be taught learning, rather as a change of recreation then a
loathsome burden; and rather fear, then feel, the correction of their
parents: let them lastly, enjoy that freedom which nature in pity has
bestowed on them; nor be forced to endure the punishment of humane cares,
before they have deserved them; unless we think, it may (...) accounted among
the least of mischiefs, when children altogether restrained from playing, are
(like the wife of that Stolen) terrified at all noise of ^ods; and do exhibit
to themselves, and reuolue wisdom, in the shape of an Hobgoblin, whose sour,
and sharp documents they are not yet capable of.

That sense of misery which is most cruelly exquisite, is most incident to that
age: whilst their tender minds do want ability to govern their fear, and
judge of miseries, which yet they know not, worse then they are. And as men,
whom fortune has broken with great calamities, how large so ever their
capacities are, will fill them all with the sense, and contemplation of their
own miseries: even so in children, when that happens which they fear the
worst, all their ability of fearing, and grieuing is spent upon it. A man,
which by chance had escaped the hands of thieves, who threatened to hang him;
being asked, with what mind he expected death; with the same (quoth he) that,
when I was a boy, I expected whipping. Moreover, the bitterness of perpetual
fear in childrens minds, consumes that moisture, which nature intends to
make abundant, for the spreading of their limbs, and growth of their bodies.
For the stomach we see, does then want his natural vigor, when the heat,
and spirits are called from thence, to aid the di^^ressed brain; nor is the
blood strongly diffused upon promise of joy, being too much consumed with the
interruptions of sadness. Therefore such dispositions in the bondage of severe
custody, the abilities of their minds, either frighted, or wasted, will stand
at so unhappy a stay, that those, who were wise above their Childhood, do
afterward want the ordinary wisdom required at Man's estate. To Colts, and
young Cattle, we freely allow an vncurbed wantonness, least their first
strength, which is then growing, should be hindered by a fearful
apprehension of future bondage; and are we so blinded in mind, that what we
behold in other creatures, we either neglect, or will not understand in our
own children? Neither yet is this age of Infancy to be let loose to an in
finite liberty; let them with moderation be kept in awe, taught to reverence
their parents highly, and be ever ignorant, how much liberty is permitted to
them. For if the nature of a child be too malapert and full of fierceness,
these pracepts of lenity belong not to him; that swelling, which the vice of
nature has engendered in him, and which often the parents too much gentleness
has ripened, and brought to a perfect ulcer, may be easily lanced, and taken
away* whilst yet it is green, and of easy growth. After this manner, their
delighted childhood shall be freely left, both to their own, and their parents
pleasure; and after they have fulfilled the folly of their harmless
concupiscence, age it self will by little and little, change their desires;
and the roots of virtue will spring up in them, which they will love, not so
much by heat of nature, as judgment. Then they will bring to their first youth,
and twilight of wisdom, a mind free, altogether quiet, which by the virtue of
their education, is ille ^sily embrace the beauty of that light.

But as every mean is directly opposed to two extreme vices more contrary to
each other, then to the middle virtue; ^oe those that would call the raw minds
of children to too hasty a ripeness of studies, may well be accus^^s ignorant
of the strength, which nature has bestowed upon that age. For besides, that
some children have rath ripe wits, as Papyrius Childhood was judged worthy of
the Roman Senate. There is also a natural dowry, and wealth bestowed upon
those years, a strength of capacious, and easy memory, which is ever greatest
in the time of their childhood, and with an obstinate felicity able to retain
what ever it has then learned: but as age increases, the memory by little and
little decays; like to a Dew of sovereign Medicine to the body of man, which
in the hot countries falls upon the leaves of Hol^ey; unless it be gathered at
the break of day, it will afterward vanish at the sun-(...) Therefore with
many, and often discourses with much reading of profitable Hi^^otry, let their
minds be filled, that children unwittingly may receive such good things as
will afterward grow up in them, whither they will or not. The variety also of
Languages, which is gotten by us, with much expense of time, will be easily
taught our growing children by often discoursing, and conuersing with them; so
that these things of little labor and noe judgment, will easily be attained
unto, by that age, which is neither strong for labor, nor ripe for judgment.
But if we shall suffer this easy, and most memory, to grow emptily dry; those
very things must be afterward learned with long and wearisome labor, which in
our infancy, had bin better and with less wearisomnes stored up: for what is
more miserable, then to be enforced to spend that time of man's estate, which
nature has or damed a time of wisdom (though too to short for so many Arts
and Sciences) in such things, as our empty childhood, if well nurtured, had
stored up safely in the closets of our memories.

But in the childhood, there are often presages of future virtues, or vices;
nature beginning to build a foundation fit for their following abilities.
Cyrus, that first founded the Persian Monarchy, was then believed to be a
shepherds child, when there appeared in him that great spirit, which afterward
put a yoke upon the necks of the whole Ea^t. when he was a Boy, he played
among Boys of his own age; and being chosen King by the chance of play, he
truly exercised the regal power over his play fellows: those that were
stubborn, with a high and confident (if not too proud) a Majesty he severely
punished. The fathers of those children, whom Cyrus had beaten, complained of
it to King Astyages: the King commanded Cyrus to be brought to him; who was
nothing daunted, nor expressed any childish, or low fear, at sight of the
Throne, and royal Diadem; he said, he was chosen King among the Boys, and
had done nothing but the office of a King. Astyages suspecting from this some
greater matters then the present fortunes of the Boy persuaded, enquired more
narrowly of his birth, and parentage; and at last found him to be his own
grandchilde, his daughters son. That Cato, who was afterward called
Vticensis, from the City of Vtica, where he killed himself; was in his infancy
more then a child. When he La^me Emballadours were come to Rome, as suitors for
the endenization of their country, they went to the house of Liuius Dr^^us,
Catoes uncle, who brought him up: There the Embassado^rs asking the child in
jest, if he would entreat, his uncle for them, he answered not a word, but
looked upon them with a fierce countenance. The Ambassadors wondering at the
stubbornness of so young a boy, began to fiatter, and and afterward to
threaten him but could not extort a word from him, at last, lifting him out, of
the window in a high chamber, they made him believe, they would throw him
down; but he scorning to fear at all, knit his browrs, and looked more
fiercely on them, then he did before; ap^esage, or beginning as it were, of
that awfall severity, which his whole life did afterward express. But they are
often (...), who by the beha^^ of children, will judge too (...) of their
future disposition. For it must be some great (...) which must be brought as an
(...) argument to judge of the inclination of the future, and flexible years.
There is one presage, which seldom, or never deceiuer h^s, the easy shedding
of tears in a child. For those children, which at the first appresion of
grief can truly weep, are of a softer nature, and molded, as it were, for
humanity and love. Some other children you shall see, though they cry aloud,
yet maugre the threatening, or beating of their parents, are dry eyed: those,
when they grow up, are of fierce natures; or else, their dissembling and dark
bosoms, do never entertain, either true affections, or just fears.

At their first entrance into man's estate, the hear of blood, and too great an
apprehension of their own strength, does breed in them a wonderful change,
and carry away their minds, as it were with a tide of inconsiderate
confidence, and vain security. That age, is the first that is s^^ted
entertain delight; and reioyces not more in the taste of pleasures, then in the
firedome and liberty, which they have, to enjoy them. They know not how to be
provident for aftertimes, for their strengths yet raw, cannot consider how
^^oxious they are to the turns (...) fortune; and the many objects of
pleasure, and delight, have so possessed their ^^les, they have left noe
room, nor leisure, to (...) fear wisdom, which at the first view does fear
troublesome. Then indeed, does nature not strongly carry every disposition (not
with a vain, or dissembled desire) to his own sudies, for which especially
(...) was first formed. For then (...), whom an humble fancy does inuit to low
maechanicall trades, do by the guidance of fate, embrace those Arts, which,
were ordained for them: Some are addicted to the discipline of war: others by
the vigor and ability of wit, are carried to the Muses, or public business;
and every kind of humane dispositions, by the conduct of Nature, is thus
adopted into his own tribe. For if Nature do not join certain desire, and
sweetness, to the profit of those labors, which she does prescribe,
certainly youth, which is ^ca^ce governed by any reason, nor apt to entertain
any thing unpleasant, might almost be excused, though it went astray.

Moreover, that natural vigor, and inuitation of industry will show it self,
even in those are less lines, which are altogether sequestered from labor and
business, like the Seeds of grass, which in spite of stones that oppose
their growth, will shoot out their tops, through little cranyes; to show (at
the least) that their growth is killed. For when young men have lost
themselves, either by sloth, ^iot, or a mad desire of too much society, and
wearied with their sports, and pleasures, they retire sometimes to a show of
labor, and slightly busy themselves in it, only to serve them as a change of
delight; they will fall especially upon that business, which Nature had given
them in fit mind and Genius to follow with industry. So that those motions
to certain actions infused by fate into eueryman, can never be wholly
exting^ished or p^^sh.

But as (...) out of strength and plenty of how nourishment do grow too
ra^cly, and spread themselves into unnecessary branches, but when that
r^n^^nesse is better ^^pened, and conco^ted, they prosper with happy fruit:
so, a young man of a hot, and high soul, after his first freedom is
ouerpast, may well take up, in such a moderation, as is fit to entertain the
best wisdom. But i^ from the beginning of his youth, he have always showed
a nature and sober streng^h o^ mind; be will (...) in unprofitable (...)
before his did age. But his specially is a great token of future (...), if
amongst all his pleasures and delights he love with with eagerness any one
thing; and follow that delight (whatsoever it be) with too seemingly vehement
and fierce an appetite. For this hot desire of his, at the least declares, that
he is able to entertain a true and laborious (...) of those studies, which he
^ff^cts; without which disposition no man can truly either follow virtue, or
dedicate himself to glory.

But although the counsels of old age be sometimes distasteful to the freedom
of youth; yet the opinion, which young men have, that their own wisdom will
^et increase, begets in them a high esteem of old men as thinking that they,
which have already traveled through the paths of youth, are able to direct
those, which are now in it. The mind of man, in this age, is wondrously
ambitious of praise, and glory; impatient of disgrace; not long persisting in
the same resolutions; much selfe-admiting not able enough to choose friends,
not to resist that loathing, which may afterward grow. But for any exploit,
which by a sudden strength, and ability of mind, may be invented, or done,
noe age of mortality is fitter, then the heat of youth. So, that we might
judge that the office of Childhood is to learn, and retain by a strong
memory, the deeds, and speeches of their Ancestors: of Youth, to invent, act,
and speak things altogether new; and lastly, of Middle age to moderate it
self by uations from both the former.

The next, is the Middle age of man, equally distant from the dangerous
giddynesse of youth, and the burden of old age: in which, the mind and body
do both so flourish, that then only you would think them to be truly men,
and that all the life which man enioyes, may seem ^o be given him, for this
ages ^^ke. The body, and mind, are ^oth exceedingly changed from what in youth
they were: as their choice of meats, and plea^res, are not the same; so,
their manners, and all their de^es, are much different, and ^^oulded (as it
were a new). The ^inde is strong, enlightened, and ^larged, (as it were from the
^arke mists of youth) it begins (...) censure with much rigor, the trespassed
errors of the same, and wonder at it self, that before, so improudently it
could go astray. From thence, arises a profitable repentance, and diligence,
to repair the ruins, which youth has made.

They are great seekers of wealth, and honor, and so greedily labor to
acquire the ornaments, and supporters of life, as if they thought, their life
were endless. Noe age is more cunning, then this Middle age, in dissembling
friendshipp, and governing their affections. They then begin, to be truly
valiant, moderating, not extinguishing that heat of courage, by which youth
was rash^^ carried upon revenge and fury. The judgment then is sound, and
perfect, nor carried ha^tily by the torrent of youth, nor suffering under the
infirmities of a craz^d body. They are wary in their vices, and love not
virtue, (for the most part) without hope of reward. But, old age by little and
little, like a tide, ouerflowing this happy middle estate of man's life, does
benumme his blood, and afterward his understanding. This age differing in
habit, affections, and manners, does partly increase the virtues of the former
ages, and partly make them degenerate into vices. Fear especially, is the
companion of that age, and disturbeth the mind, a seat otherwise fit, to
contain wisdom. For old men, destitute of that heat of mind, which
inspireth fortitude, and through many courses both of their own, and other
men's dangers, having arrived at that age are usually too much pe^p^exed, in
consideration of those evils, which either themselves have escaped, or others
have been ruined by. From hence it happens, that the strength of counsel, and
wisdom, the greatest endowment of old age, is often corrupted by too much
fear, whilst it looks too watily, even into the safest things, and had
rather have wounds unhappily concealed, then come in other venturous danger of
a cure.

Happy was that delayer, who closely encamped kept off, (as it were with a
shield, or bucklet) the fury of Hanniball, from the wine of Italy, that Fabius,
the chief preserver of the Roman Empire; yet how near was it, that this
Fabius, by too to fearful, and (...) an opinion, had auerted again from
Rome, her felicity, which was then returning. Publius Scipro had laid the
project, of carrying the war into Afric; by that means only, was
Hanniball to be removed, and drawn out of the bowels of Italy, to relieve
the distress of his own country. Fabius Maximan too fearfully weighing all
the dangers of so great an expedit ^on, (when to his own too much delaying
nature, old age was added) had almost interuented this whose some proiest of
so brave a General, and in that, the safety of the Roman Empire. But this
one blemish in old men, their other virtues may well excuse; especially, their
wisdom in coniecturing of things to come. Which wisdom confirmed in them,
by the remembrance of times past, the less it is obged to the organs of the
body, with the greater purity, and consulting, as it were, with heaven it
self,) it fores^eth all things.

How many Cities, and Empires, by their wisdom, have been preserved; how
many benefits private men, which have followed the counsel of the aged, have
reaped thereby; as ancient histories have all recorded, so daily experience
may well instruct us. And from hence, (perhaps) proceeds, that great, and
unwearied desire of talking in old men; as if it were a spur, given by
Nature, for fear it should be wearisome to those men, to teach and instruct,
who of all others are most able to do it.

But many of them in this matter, can seldom observe a moderation, but in an
infinite discourse (when young men apply themselves unto them) relate all
needless passages, and actions whatsoever, of their former lives; and not
contented (which is most (...) blesome) with one vexation, as they light upon
the same young man, they will either find, or make an occasion for the same
discourse; and the m^^e patient, or shamefast the young man is, whom they have
gotten to this torture of hearing, the more cruelly they will be sure to
punish him. Nor, ^oe they love only to be ^^ard; but when their c^unsel^ ^s
asked in any thing or they of their own accords do give counsel, they are
too imperious in enjoying belief, and prescribing every thing, after their
own way; urging men against their wills, and supposing themselves to be then
neglected, when they in all things are not ruled by them: the counsels and a
^^ous of youths, and men, they behold, and censure with great scorn, being
placed, (as it we^e) in the higher seat. Do thou therefore, (i^ thou would
truly deserve, that young men hereafter should excuse the errors of thy old
age) endeavor to please them, and suffer them in an harmless delight, to
applaud themselves. Hear them with gentleness, and seem (at least with a
pleased countenance) joyfully to accept whatsoever they deliver. For what less
reverence can be at any time showed to that great age, which deserves a
fatherly respect and honor, then to seem to like and approve their sayings?
and with a gentle obsequiousness (which cannot disparage us) suffer so
venerable an age as that, ^o enjoy a delight which is proper to it.

But the long experience or worldly affairs, which has followed them to this
age and the sad examples of other men, which have fallen into poverty, does
commonly breed an extreme covetousness in old men. What a strange prodigy,
or mockery of men kind is it, at that time with greatest greediness to a (...)
wealth, when we can neither keep it long, nor enjoy at all the delights of
wealth, by reason of the decay of strength? but this mischeiuous affection is
still fostered in those dry breasts, and Nature decaying, is then most
fearful to fall into poverty, when she is least able, by reason of
weakness, to relieve her self.

But as for those old men, whose wisdom has avoided such rocks, as before we
mentioned; there are none more beneficial to humane society, then they are:
They are happy in government, both of public states, and private families:
they can vanquish those ill affections, which transport younger minds with
vnaduis^d fury: they can advise young men and forgive (...) not forgetting what
themselves once were, and what then they thought: lastly, their grave wisdom
has made them worthy, long to enjoy that old age, and compose the affairs of
the whole world with that excellent philosophy, which experience has taught
them.

The Second Chapter. That every age almost, has a particular Genius different
from the rest; that there is a proper Spirit to every Region, which does in a
manner shape the studies, and manners of the inhabitants, according to it
self. That it is worth the labor, to find out those Spirits.
GReenewich is an ancient seat of the Britain Kings, her situations by the
Thames side, four miles from London. A hill there is, that over tops the
palace, and at a moderate distance of height, takes a fair survey both of the
town, and river. You ascend to the top of it, by other little hills; upon the
summity of the high hill, is a flat of great circuit. In a morning, by chance I
ascended thither; noe man was near me, to disturb the recreation of my
thoughts, which wandered about with delicious freedom. But the wonderful
pleasure of the place had almost sooner ravished my mind, then filled mine
eyes, with the fairest prospect, not only in Britain, (but it may be) in
all Europe. A spacious plain commanding from above the lesser hills, and those
hills enuironing round that lofty plain, did neither suddenly debatre the
prospect, nor suffer the sight to be too much dispersed through the empty
air; the river Thames filling the adjoining fields with a most pleasant
fruitfullnesse: and at the foot of the hill, the waves returning in manner of
a ring, have almost made an Island of it. All along the channel, were ships of
all kinds, both for war and traffic; those, that were near, I might wholly
discern; those that were farther off, or partly hidden, by interposition of
rising banks, appeared to mine eyes by their mast, and fail yards, like a
naked wood in the winter time.

The whole coast is most (...) of pasture has exempted it from tillage; nor
hardly, is there ground any where more abundantly fruitful for grazing of
cattle. The lands of private men, after the manner of their country, were
fenced with ditches, whose banks were adorned with rows of trees: especially
the high ways one each side were planted with poplars, that the whole valleys
to him, that surueyed them, from the top of the hill, appeared like con^inued
gardens, and walks of pleasure. But the greatest delight is, that so fair a
verdancy is almost distinguished into diverse colors; the places, which are
fa^thest distant, shadowed (...) of the sky, do (...) of trees more
thick-leaued are of darker color; the grass on the ground presenting a
thinner, but brighter green: but the most beautiful object, is London it
self, esteemed among the fairest of the Cities of Europe, a City of
innumerable houses, yet scarcely able to contain her people. For at the other
side of the River Thames, it is far extended, and adioyneth it self to the
neighboring towns, so that the buildings are continued for four miles
together. In all this space, not only private houses, but fair Churches of
perspicuous ^eight do every where display their beauty; and the middle of the
City, (like the swelling o^ bo^^e of a buckle^) is raised by the structure of
their g^^atest Temple.

Whilst I was carried (...) with this sudden delight, (...) began to recall
my mind^, and thus to consider with my self: what should it be, that thus
unawares had ravished me? why should this prospe^t see wonderfully please^
wha^ ladden force, or (...), had thus wrought upon my (...) as it the C^ty of
London? the course of the river? the mountains? or the prospect of the fields;
and woods? None of all these; but so fair a variety, and the industry (as it
were) of Nature, displaying her riches.

I began then to think with my self, that there was nothing in the world so
exactly beautiful, but at last would glut. and weary the beholder, unless
after that manner (as this place was) it were beautified with contrarieties,
and charge of endowments, to refresh continualy the wearied beholder with
unexpected novelties. And, because the world was to be framed in perfection of
beau^y, Nature was not forgetful of so great an art. Some countries she has
lifted to the tops of mountains: others, she has thrust down into the
valleys: Some, she has scorched with immoderate heat, others, she condemns
to extremity of winter; the residue, she ordained (though not equally)
temperate.

All lands are not fruitful, nor all barren: nor do either continue so at
all times. Some countries, that heretofore (...), are now deformed, and covered
over with barren (...): others, that of old, were miserably barren are now
grown into that abundant fertility, as to afford means, not only for life,
but for riot and excess. So that in the beauty of the whole world, the parts
are often t^^^sformed into manifold (...), and different appearances. Nor have
the sta^res, though they always keep their constant motions, the same
inf^uences upon inferior bodies, nor breed in the air the same effe^ts: and
therefore, though all years do in equal spaces finish their circuits, yet
does noe year altogether imitate that that went before, nor is the exa^t rule
of the following year.

But man created after the image of the deity, and for whose sake especially,
all other ornaments of the world were framed, is the greatest instance of this
beauty of variety. For men have not only in their bodies a difference of
habits, and proportions; but their minds are fitted for so many things, that
noe picture can with more colors, or lineaments delight the eye of the
beholder, then are drawn by the fates, in the minds of men. What orders, or
ranks of virtues and vices? what excellencies of Arts? what subtleties of wit
has not Nature stored up in this Magazen of wisdom? but there is noe
diversity. which is more worthy of wonder, then this, that men borne to liberty
(for how could they else govern themselves, and by their own endeauours,
deserve praise, or ^^mons punishment) should also some; their ow^e
dispositions, the fate of the times, wherein they live, forcing them as it
were, into certain affections, and rules of living. For every age of the world
has a certain Genius, which ouerruleth the minds of men, and turns them to
some desires: Some ages breath nothing, but martial discipline, and within few
years, all a^e again composed to peace, and quietness; Sometimes
commonwealths, and sometimes Monarchies are affected by the people. Some
Nations, that seemed (as it were) to be borne to barbarism, in process of
time, are brought to perfect ciuility: and in some few ages, are perverted
again to their old barbarism. So the world in general, did often flourish
with great abilities, and after a while, industry slackening has been
covered, (as it were) with a cloud, and lost. When the affairs of Greece did
flourish, what ciuility, what wit, or subtilty, was wanting to that Nation? So
great was the skill of their handy-craftes men, that their carved statues of
men, and beasts, did seem almost to live: so fluent their oratory, so sweet
their poetry, that even the ambition of Rome proposed them to her sons, only
to imitate, not to excel. But fortune remoouing after ward to other Nations,
noe people, more then the Graecians, did sorrowfully sigh at the mention of
their ancestors, from whose ability they were then fallen.

But if we observe the turnings of the Roman Empire, and the passages of
times nearer unto us, we shall more certainly discover the changeable
Geniuses of the ages. Under Augustus, Rome in peace had adorned her greatness,
with all the dresses of true humanity: and among other things, her language was
then in the height of purity. By small things we may guess at the greater.
From whence proceeded so many Poets of happy raptures, and numerous strains
in those times, but from some certain Spirit, which then inspired them? which
had never before been propitious to Italian Poets, and afterward again
forsook them. Those few years, from Nero to Traian had many Poets, and many
that labored in the study of Rhetorike; in whom the declining of the Roman
language did plainly apeare; instead of the native beauty, and majesty of it,
which was then lost, they used obscure, and swelling heights, with forced
sentences instead of natural. At the same time, in the reign of Nero, that
peace was broken, which had long settled the Roman Empire, and all the world
was filled with combustion; nothing, but war was in the minds of all men, in
France, in Germany, and the uttermost parts of the Eastern world. From whence
proceeded it, but from a certain force, which I may almost call ^^^aying the
hearts of men to (...) ends, that are ordained (...) them? in the age that
followed, the elegance of language was wonderfully lost; and because the
soldiers had all power, the manners of the people were turned back to their
old ferity. Yet humanity strove against those mischiefs, until forreyne
Nations invaded the Empire; and what of all things was most miserable, noe
memory almost was left of the lost sciences; those that were borne in these
times, seemed to be borne, though not to a fierce, yet a blind barbarism; and
most of their ancestors, whose writings contained morality, or hi^^^y, while
their books by the ^^^gence of posterity were lost (...) a second and a worse
death.

The other Arts were taught in more ^ude and vnpolish'd wa^es, or e^e were
altogether lo^t. Not long after, man were again grown to the love of
learning; but such was the unhappiness of the times, that b^edd them, that
they might seek learning, but not attain it; it we c^ll that learning, which
is the knowledge of antiquity, and judgment, not only in the
schoole-subtilties, but in the highest and nobest things: and last^y, such a
kind of instruction and ^^erature, as our ancestors did honor in men of their
time.

There was notwithstanding, a kind of learning then used, agreeable to the
dispositions of those times: as with (...) disputation, and eager (...)
(^nstead of explaying) Philosophy and Divinity, to perplexe them more: in the
Law, to extend the sentences of wise men, the decrees of Emperors, and
ordinances of Popes, into mad and immethodicall volumes, to the eternal
vexation of the student: but most of them had gotten this way of writing, that
what argument soever they made choice of, they delivered to their readers, as
their own, the words and sentences of former authors concerning that subject.
So the error of one, was oftentimes as a slippery place for others to fall;
and many from the right opinion of one man, did bo^row wisdom.

And what titles soever they gave their books, they thought it not (...)
dig^esse into never so general discourses. What histories written in those
times, did not begin at the creation of the world? what part of humane
affairs, as often as it was written by those ^ude wits, was not drawn into a
strange confusion? and that you may perceive, that those men were not wanting
to Nature, but Nature herself was straightned and sick, they were very
industrious, and wanted not the signs of sincere wisdom, in handling those
parts of science, which only were allowed by fortune unto that age. Which was
in the Philosophers, a subtle way of disputing in the Lawy^ a skill rather to
(...) of the law, ^^en (...) of the times, (...) forms, and the (...).

Last of all, in this age, that dark mist is vanished away from the minds of
men, which are now composed to all kind of light and subtlety,

Nor is this change only to be observed in the schools of learning, the
affairs of Kingdoms and commonwealths are more cunningly administered; wa^^s
offensive, and defensive, are made with more skill, and d^^^rity; and so great
a curiosity in many trades, that whatsoever is rude and unpolished now, we use
with scorn to censure it, as made, or likely to be made in the dull times of
our ancestors.

Nor can this change proceed from any thing but the Genius as it were of this
age. Whose excellency, when after an appointed time it shall expire, will give
up the world, as it may be feared, unto another, and ruder Genius; and after
the expiration of certain years, return again So that we may distinguish
the difference of the ages, not more perfectly by the motions of the sta^rs
then by the de^^exion of mankind into diverse dispositions, and abilities.

But there is another force, that rauisheth away the minds of men, and makes
them addicted to certain affections. Namely, that spirit which being
appropriate to every region, infuseth into men, as soon as they are borne, the
habit, and affections of their own country. For, as the same meats according
to the various manners of dressing, may be changed in taste, but the inward
quality of nourishing, or hurting, can by noe qualification be altogether lost:
so in every Nation among all the tides of succeeding ages, which alter the
manners and m^d^s of men, one certain (...) never to be shaken often, which the
fates have (...) to every man, according to the condition of the place, wherein
he was borne. (...) hence come those ancien^ v^^s, which still endure, as
proper to the c^imate, which in histo^ies have commended ^rbranded whole
Nations: as here, the people are naturally light, unconstant, and wavering in
their resolutions: there, the grosser and grauer minds, are naturally swelled
with a melancholy pride, under the show of hidden wisdom. Some Nations end^re
not thirst: Some people with extemporary wits, are able to encounter any
sudden alteration, or unexpected business. Some Nations are implacable in
desire of revenge: Some, as it were by right of inheritance, enjoy a perpetuity
of the highest virtues: Some people are naturally plaine-dealing, others
subtle, and many valiant. And s^eing that nothing is more beneficial, then
from the Genius of diverse Nations to be (...) informed, as to know how to
behave our selves in different countries, and what from every place to expect
or fear; it will ^e worth our labor, to define here the especial manners of
some Nations, that from the common disposition of many men, we may find out
the private in particular persons. Nor will there be found so superstitious a
lover of the place of his birth, but will be contented to hear some vices
named in the character of his own country. For if Nature did never form any
mortal man of such accomplished abilities, but that something in him, as the
last hand of the workman, was still wanting: what pride were it in any man to
exempt whole provinces from this public fate? and disdain to be borne in
such a place, as is subject to errors, that is among mankind? far hence be
all wilful partiality to our own, and envious detraction from other
countries. Let us sincerely acknowledge our own vices, and be truly
delighted with the contemplation of virtue in others.

Therefore before that with a serious and sequestered contemplation, we begin
to consider the dispositions of people, let us survey the world, as from a
tower, and look who now are the inhabitants and masters of it. Asia, and
Africa swallowed up by the power of Barbarian^, and the great calamity of
Greece, and Thrace, have thrust, and confined civil humanity to these vtermost
parts of Europe; that we, so often oppressed by the fierce Barbarians, and
guelded, as it were, of our richest countries, might learn truly to account
our own streng^h, or fear the st^eng^h of others. But we insensible of these
evils, and oppressed with a deadly and pestilent slumber, have neither feared
the hand or heaven, nor combined the streng^h of those pro^i^ces, which are yet
left us, against the (...) th^ea^nings of those ba^barous Nations. But on the
contrary, have most impiously wasted, by fa^tious and q^^rre^s, our own
strength, and by (...) divided that, which though combined into one ^ody, ^ad
been searce of s^^ci^^ strength. But at the last, the (...) of these
combustions eythe^ (...) differed in dispos^tions and language, so could they
not be guided by the same Arts, These were the French, Brittain^^, Italians,
and Spaniards, and all that mighty people comprehended under the name of
Germany. The relics also of Pannonia, and as much of Illyrium and Dalmatia,
as is now left us: those Sarmatians and Scythians, which are now called
Polonians and Mosco^ites: the Cimbrians also, and what ever is contained within
the dominions of Denmark and Sw^thland; nor are we so far (oh misery)
removed from the Turks, but that we have occasion to acquaint our selves
with their dispositions and manner of living.

In the manners of these people, we may consider the riches of Nature, with a
delicious and profitable meditation, which in a mixture, resembling the members
of a body, has inuolued the habits and affections of so many different minds.
But to examine all other climats with the same diligence, were more for the
curiosity of pleasure, then the profitable use of commerce or conversation. For
who but Merchants go into Afric, and there upon the shore, or by chance, by
river, somewhat farther into the country, do tra^^ique suddenly, or make
bargains of noe great trast or friendship. The Persians not only by impiety
or superstition, but a great distance of sea and land, are divided from us;
I^dia in like manner is visited by none but Merchants, and Sailers, except the
Lucanians who frequent those places and there settle their plantations; the
people of China do abhorie all fellowship with forreyne Nations. Nor do any
of our people desire at all to commerce with that sordid, and (or the most
part) miserable Nation of the Tartars. America, as fair as it is ciuil^zed at
all, is possessed by the Spaniard only; so that none other besides
th^mse^ues, may with safe^y comme^ce, or (...) there. It is therefore
expedient, or indeed lawful, for ^one but the Spaniard, to know the
dispo^^tions of those people. But those parts of America (...) naked
barba^isme, abho^ed by mankind, is (...) by the (...) people, (...) noe l^wes
nor industry (...); have been diligently observed by some o^ our men, who in
hope or gain have gone thither.

The Natures of those rude people are incapable of our ciuility. They account
all (...) angers, that a^riue on their coasts, as enemies, and ensna^ers of
their liberty; neither a^e those ignorant and savage mind^ destitute of
subtlity to imp^ous a^ts; cruelty and treachery, ins^cad of prudence and true
fortitude, they often exercise.

What profit will it be, to examine farther the manners of these people, who
by a barbarous wildenes have seemed, as it were, to forsake Nature? especially,
seeing they contain themselves within their own shores, and admit noe
forr^iners unless upon compulsion, or some slight occasion of s^ddaine
tra^lique.

But to leave those Nations, which are either unknown to us, or by too great a
distance of sea, and land, too far divided from our acquaintance; to examine
the inhabitants and Genius of our own world; the habit of each country, the
condition of the soil, the temper of the air, or distemper in either kind,
will not be improper to our present discourse.

The Third Chapter. FRANCE.
GAllia, according to the ancient bounds, the greatest almost of all the
Provinces in Europe, (a terror heretofore to the Roman Empire, and renowned
by victories against Greece, and Asia) is now distinguished into diverse
Kingdoms, and different manners Whatsoever is bounded within the Rhene, the
Ocean, the Alps, and Pyre^an mountains, was once comprised under the name of
Gallia. It extended moreover, from the farther side of the Alps, to the river
Rubicon, and lay heavy upon the Roman territories. For the Gauls a valiant
Nation, inuading Italy, sacking and fiting the City of Rome, were so great a
terror to the Roman Senate, that a decree was made, that as often as the
Gauls were up in arms, not the Priests, nor old men, should be exempted from
the duties of war^e. It was afterward subdued by the power of Rome, but then
when in it self it was divided by domesticke factions, nor did they (...),
wholly vn^ted, either know perfectly their ow^e st^ength, or make trial of
(...) against Italy. In process of (...) people out of the (...), called
Franks (...), invaded Gallia, and ^^^ned to red^ce it to a second ^ondage. But
when they were conquerours, they mixed ^hemselues with the conquered Nation,
and seemed not soemuch to have subdued the Gauls, as the Romans which
possess^d Gallia. The country then being (...) among ma^y Princes; that part
only retained the old name, which was possessed by ^he French; a Nation of
great virtue a^ renowned in deeds, and well deserving, that (...) to their
praise, should make use of the vanity of the common fable, to style them the
relics of the Cry of Troy.

This Rea^me of France, the fairest and richest of all Provinces in the
Western world, seems w^thin it self at happy a m^lation betwixt the Genius
and dispositions of the inhabitants, and the riches and temper of the Land it
self.

The country abounds every where with corn and wine; fertile in oil, and
all fruits, which brook not a raw air. Especially, that part which is more
Westerly: or lies necrer to the Alps, or Ligurian seas. There is noe land in
the whole world, for the extent of it, that en^icheth the inhabitants with more
blessings. It abo^ndeth so much wi^h all kind of wealth, that it uses to
tra^lique with for^eyne Nations, for nothing almost, but pleasure only. For
nothing but royt in this wealthy people, did set an high price upon the silks
of Italy, and the cunning work manships of the German Nation. But their
traffic with Britain, does bring them Merchandise, if not altogether
necessary, yet certainly of great profit; which affords them both for use,
and ornament, great abundance of Lead, Tin, and Saffron. But France, beside
her corn, wherewith she relieueth the barrenness of Spain, and wi^es, which
she sends into the neighboring and colder countries, is rich also in hemp
and fiaxe, whereby she supplyeth the want of sails, cordage and such tackling
necessary for, shipping in many Nations. By which merchandise great plenty of
gold is daily brought into that country, though the ground afford noe mines of
it; and those Nations, which with paineful: diligence dig it out of the
bowels of the earth, and with care transport it from the farthest regions, do
seem but servants to labor for the felicity of France.

In so large a country, composed of so m^^y and so great provinces, noe one
part is barren, or negle^ted. o^ Nature, but all enriched by her great favor.
For these vast parts of Aquitaine, which may seem vnfruitful^, are neither
void (...) inhabitants, no^ v^pleasant unto them; that country is s^ored
with^ood enriched with (...) of high price, and abounding with p^enty of
dainty fow^e: that whatsoever it wants in frui^fullnesse of soil, which is
there sandy, as m^^h it ^s indebted to the temper of (...).

France is beg^ted at one side by the Ocean, at the other by the M^diterranean
Sea, which f^oweth from ^he coasts of Spain, and Afric as (...) as Egypt. A
situation so com^^^dions for sea-tr^lihque, that ^ may send out (...) into any
sea o^ note, and arrive at any (...), if the Frenchmen could delight as well in
sailing, as in horsemanship, and en ^ertaine lasting p^oiects, as well as
sudden ones.

The people in general, are lovers of their Prince, and very obedient; their
King does truly reign, and they ccount it a crime to question the greatness
of his pre^ogatiue. They are able in feats of war, especia^ly the horsemen;
free from perfidiousnesse, especially in public counsels; of an vncurbed
strength within themselves but when they invade a forreyne Nation, their heat
and fury is quickly forgotten: by that means they possess not long any
forreyne conquest, and are only powerful to their own destruction. They have
conquered heretofore by often victories, Lombardy, Naples, Sicily, and many
other provinces in the world; but within a while, they have too securely
con^emned their enemies not wholly subdued, or out of an inconsiderate, and
open disposition, too much trusted to their co^nterfeit obedience; or else they
have used their victory with too great a license, and more wantonly insulted
them the nature of those Nations was able to suffer; or last of all, to forget
they wars, and think of the (...) country, whose absence the^ are not long
able to (...). By these vices, the (...) come a pr^y to those Nations over whom
they have triumphed, and their wa^s, which have begun prosperously, have often
ended in dishonor, and loss.

Noe men in the world have a Nature more fitted for manly behavior. A bold
countenance, gesture, and motion, becoming the whole body. And this comely
garb is an ornament to the virtue of brave men; but to weak souls it serves
but as a vizor, or natural co^erture to hide, or qualify their abject m^ndes.
so elegant and graceful is their carriage, that what fashion of attire soever
(among a^l their (...) variety of fashi^^^) they are pleased to take, or (...)
of body in their (...), you will still think (...) could become the^ (...).

But their neighboring Nations dece^^ed with a ridiculous error, and hoping
to attain the behavior of the French, by a (...) of their apparel, and
garbes of ^rindging: not knowing that in gestures of grace, every thing by the
same Genius, is ma^e pleasing in some men; but in others whom Nature ha^h not
enriched with those changeable habit, sa studious imitation of s^chd^lectable
garbes is not only unpleasing, but most ridiculous.

For virtues and vices, and what ever motions are bred in the innermost
lo^gings o^ the soul, may easily be counterfeited, for these affections are
(...) closely hidden, and far from the sight, that noe man can discover
whither they be true or not. So we may easily dissemble humility, hatred,
love, or piety. But those things, which are not only done by the government
of the mind, but by custom, and the outward hability and fitness of the
body, thou can never counterfeit, when Nature does s^^iue against it. As a
comely posture, and carriage of the body, a facility in reasting, a grace in
speaking, are things no^ begotten in the inne^, but the outward man. But these
things being most eminent in the French behavior, can never be attained, nor
imitated by thee, unless thy Genius of his own record have disposed thee for
that way.

But the world can never be (...) thankful to the (...) of France, which
seems to open a temple of h^manity, or sanctuary for (...) of all forreynes
to fl^^ unto. They consider not the country, but the worth of a m^^ and make
not a stranger, o^ new-dweller among them (a^cording to the error of other
Nations) to suffer for the pla^ of birth, which chance allo^e him: so with a
simple and fr^ love of virtue, they admire (...) men (what country m^^ (...))
without any c^^y, a^^ are gl^d to see then (...) reward of the huma^^ty, the^
(...) ^to the French State. Nor need those strangers to put of the (...) of
their own country, and imitate the garb of France, ^e their carriage be free
from ^ride or barba^isme. For the very profession of a foreign fashi^^ will
moon the desires of that curious Nation, who with ^ore simplicity admire
for^eine then their own customs; ^somuch as that some vices of ^fe, and
blemishes of body, have ^eene there in esteem, if ^rought from another
country. For we have seen the eloquence of a forreiner, even for ^he often
errors of his tongue, (...) been more pleasing; and (...) a great opinion of
wisdom, because they were not understood.

The common people are truly respective of the gentry, not out of fear, or
institution only: and again, their greatest nobility are by the same Genius
honored by inferior Gentlemen; but pride, or disdain, they cannot brook; if
thou would seem to domineere, they are ashamed to serve. A courteous
behavior, which by artificial countenances, and gentle glances is expressed
unto them, or by familiarity of discourse with them, will gain to the Princes
more o^^icious servants, then the greatness of (...) power and dignity can
do. All wealth, and life it self i^ of less esteem among them, then honor;
especially, the Spirits of their great Princes do often f^ye out, both to
their own damage, and their countries affliction, because the very experience,
and (...) of poue^ty it s^^fe, can persuade none of them to undertake
Merchandise, or any profitable course of trade. They are pleased with a
preposterous ambition, to a mulate the greatness of their ancestors, and
conceive it a disparagement to noble blood, to live in a calling like the
common people. So the vain name of Nobility, and foolish ostentatation of
magnificent idleness, does arm them with patience against the burden of
their cares, which do never leave them before their death. This loftynesse of
mind, although it please themselves, and seem to be far from all
baseness, is often corrupted by almost necessary wickedness, and raises in
their poor fortunes a turbulent industry, either by secret villainies, or
public commotions to st^^^e to repel the contempt of poverty.

Merchandise is baselier esteemed of there, then befits a thing of so great
vtility, and which first did spread humanity through all the world. Selon the
famous Athenian Lawmaker, and most of the Gracians, which were famed to our
ears, transported their commodities by such tra^fique into foreign countries,
and acquainted their countrymen likewise with the riches of other lands.

Nor does Italy disdain that custom, where the Noblest families by industry
in merchandise, do heap up wealth. Brittnry likewise accounts not her blood
of Gentry any way debased by such a calling.

But in France, not only the ancient Gentry do altogether disdain this way
of thriuing, but the merchants themselves, as if ashamed of their calling, when
they are grown rich, do bring up their sons in some other discipline,
enioyning them, as it were, to look higher then their fathers did.

But the high minds of the French Nation are in nothing more perfectly
discerned, then the eager pursuit of Magistracies, where the shameful sale of
them does exclude the needy, how virtuous soever.

To undo their families, to consume their estates and credits too, is not
thought unfit, to purchase an eminency above their equals, and repair the
ruins of their patrimony, either by a bare dignity, or by corruption and
bribery in their o^^ices. Nor is there any doubt, but that strange itch after
titlts and places, unless of (...) self it do abate, will at last d^file all
o^^ices, gouernements, and iudgment-seates, with men of the basest blood, and
lowest dispositions. For many from the basest trades, do sooner arrive at
great riches, then those who are noted of ancient Nobility, and live according
to the dignity of their birth. By this means of money only, whilst they
contend about the purchase of a government, or place of rastice, they do most
often carry it away, which are of ba^est blood, and least ability in
^derstanding. Besides, the gentlemen of good descent are not so forward toth
ow away their estates upon such dignities, as vpstarts are, who are hasty with
gold, to bring their children out or obscurity, S^ buy for their families that
splendor of Nobility, which the ancient gentlemen, without any cost, do
chal^enge as a part of their inheritance.

So by little and little, these honors may grow to be only in the
possession of the basest men, and ((...) only bought for money) by reason of
their (...), be c^nsured as a token (...) Neither is the po^^cy of the royal
exchequer to ^ce much accused, although it ^ncrease by the money of such
^ficers. For who would not ^hinke it far fitter, that those ^ignities should
at a set rate be ^old by the Prince, who vnder^oes the burden of the State in
^enerall, then secretly to be ^ade a prey to the couetous^esse of the
Noblemen, who ^oe oftentimes thrust officers upon the King, whom they have
^eene bribed to commend, and what they freely obtain from their master, they
sell again unto others? So that the com^onwealth can have noe better ^hoice
of Magistrates by that ^eanes; and it is indifferent to those ambitious
purchasers whither they suffer for their ^mbition from the King, or from
Noblemen; since both ways tend equally to the ruin of their estates.

These things therefore having been first instituted upon reasonable grounds,
are now grown into extremity, by the madness of the buyers, who do now
exclude all virtue of but reasonable wealth, and at the rate of their whole
estates purchase those dignities, whose price their own madness has so much
enhaunsed.

But as wines, the more generous they will afterward grow, the more thick of
lees they will be when they are young; so the young men of this Nation, made
for humanity, and wisdom in old age, are carried away with the greatest
rashness, and wildness of behavior The young men are given to a strange
freedom of bold ^esting, and provoking, both strangers, and their own
acquaintance, and every where affecting tit^es of too great security.
Unconstant, minds, and easily carried away with any rumors; sometimes
impatient of idleness, sometimes of business; a foolish o^entation and
bragging of their lusts, more then by Nature they are inclined to;
inconsiderate, and indiscreet sco^fings, which spare none. Their stirring, and
hot affections impatient of rest, break out into various and troublesome
motions. But some of them in the beginning of all businesses, do put on a
fained noe true wisdom, and therefore expressed with the greater show: as if
they were tempered with mature judgment, they put on a stayed countenance,
expressing subtlety joined with humanity, and utter their words with long
deliberation. To which according to the Nature of it, they have found out a
name, calling it f^^gidity.

But that counterfeiting of virtue, is then altogether unpleasing, nor long can
their cunning hide that leuity, which will show it self in spite of all
disguises. But the middle disposition between these two, which is not wanting
in that Nation of the French, f^owing with cheerfullnesse and capac^ousnesse of
mind, not brid^ed too much with a fained gravity; is a disposition of
transcendent excellency, and exactly framed to the image of wisdom joined with
alacrity.

But one thing in the Natures of the French is very unhappy, that that love and
courtesy, which in their own countries they express even to strangers; abroad
they will hardly show to their own countrymen. Who would believe, that people
of so great humanity, should not agree together in a foreign Land, Birds
brought together into one cage forbear to fight with each other; and beasts
which wander out of the woods together to seek prey, by the ^llowship of their
fate are con^^ in love and amity. Only the F^enchmen, when they converse in
another land, especially if they be poor, and seek relief by the service of
a foreign State, so quarrel among themselves with a most cruel aemulation.

How many secret scoff^s, unseemly enuies, professed quarrels, and ridiculous
contentions, citing each other before forreyne Magistrates, do arise among
them? contending in this manner among themselves, they cast an infamous
aspersion upon their Nation, as if they were a people borne to envy, incapable
of quiet, or of that love, wherewith Nature has secretly combined the Citizens
of one country.

This fault of the Frenchmen in forreyne countries is more cruelly raging in
the bowels of their own land; where in all places, like swordplayers condemned
to the theater, upon sudden and rash quarrels, they violently hazard their
lives in single duells. A most horrid thing ^ a miserable opprobry of these
times! a flight quarrel, arising only out of ambition of argument, or an
innocent jest, or oftentimes only a thirst of fame in turbulent dispositions
does hurry with violence the mad young men into most miserable slaughters, and
utter extinguishing of Noble families. From hence, so often are the purposes
of miserable parents intercepted, and their hopes utterly lost; and peace
almost in vain established in France; as much Noble blood shed (well nigh) in
these private combats, a^ in time of a public war. What madness is this?
after the manner of beasts, not with reason, but choler, to revenge their
ini^^ies, and put the judgment of their greatest matters upon the trial of a
stage art and fortune, which often deceiues the skilfu^est in that art? that
whosoever can most fortunately fight, should make himself the iustest
quarrel? wild Nations, which came among us from barbarism it self did not
long ago infect the world with their brutish manners. They were the first
beginners of a custom, that upon doubtful titles of estate, where the proofs
were obscure on both sides, the cause by a combat should be decided. The
combatants did meet in an open (...), or siage, and he that was vanqui^^ed,
was judged to have the worse cause. From thence the original of this madness
proceeded, which does now infest the age, and going beyond the first bounds, a^
then it was only at the disposing of the Magistrate, it now rages
licentio^sly according to the humors and cholers of private men.

But the pretense for this swordplay, whither more accepted ^or the show, or
profit of it, ^s the furtherance of sk^^l in ^ighting. For who can deny, that
skillfull art of striking with the ^word, or avoiding the blows, which were
aimed at him, ^s a thing appertaining to the military ar^? this the Graecians,
the Romans and every Nation hard^ in arms, have sought afte^, with great
intention.

But now they f^ght, not as e^cl^sed and (...) in the pre^^e of an army (as
war^s are mad^) but as it were in the freedom^ of an open theater; they
trau^^se their gro^nd, ^hey shift their bodies with all ag^lity, and by safe
proffers of the hand, and g^ances of the eye, they deceive (...) her, (...) do
rather (as every man may see) enable their m^^de^ous cruelty upon (...)
hatreds, then instru^t themselves in a pious (...) of th^^r country and ^ow
their rage, ^uen between friends and kindred, ^ul^^leth the height of madness
and all impiety. Kinsmen and most familiar acquaintance upon noe heinous
injuries but vain exceptions at idle words, or almost for nothing, are
engaged in quarrels and embrued in each others blood: and which you may justly
censu^ the highest degree of madness, they fight, not only upon their own
injuries, but wickedly enterpose themselves into the quarrels of others, and
engaged in hat^eds, which belong not unto them, they sac^i^^ce themselves, and
the dearest of their friends. For they freely go, when by these men, which are
to fight, and a^e loath to die alone, they are (...) to th^s mortail play as it
^ere to a supp^^ recreation; and there do (...) doubt to (...) should be near
and dear to man; out of a most foolish desire of fame, that they may be said
with a great contempt of life to have gone into the field; that is, to ^aue
undertaken a most horrid cruelty out of a barbarous ignorance of true valor.

But these evils, and whatsoever else have crept into the dispositions of the
French, may be well excused, for the virtues of those men whom the maturity of
age, or weight of judgment does so temper, as that they are not carried away
with their country-vices. There is in them a wonderful cu^tesie, not feigned,
nor treacherous, to ensnare them whom they court with friendship; they are free
from dec^it, and secret hatre^s; they are free to entertain all, who desire
their acquaintance, and society; and respective of all men according to their
degrees and ranks.

It is enough for a forreiner, which is admitted into their company, to
preserve their friendship, if he keep himself from open villay, and too
absurd fo^y; so that in other places thou had need have a care of other
men dispos^^ons, least they ^urt thee: but among true, and accomplished
Frenchmen, to keep thy self from giving offense. Nor is their any thing more
happy in humane society, then the ma^ly sweet^esse o^ such complete company.

The Fourth Chapter. BRITAIN.
THe greatness of Britain (though it be an Island of large extent, and
exposed to many and different seas) may be rather esteemed by the several and
unlike manners of her inhabitants, then by the names and harbors of so many
shores: As if in the Ocean Brit^a^^e alone were another world all kind of
dispositions are to be found in her inhabitants.

There is not a fayrer Island (...) the whole world. Sicily, Crete, and Cyprus,
though they have all carried the state, and names of Kingdoms, if they were
all joined into one (...) were not able, either in circuit, or wealth, to
equal Britain. Being in former times a valiant Nation, they gave occasion of
many fabulous stories, which by forreyne wits, and languages were commonly
written and read; as if nothing could be fained so strange, but might be
achieved by the people of Britain: it was once divided into nine Kingdoms.
But afterward by continual wars, and frequent leagues, those Monarchies, and
their bounds were often changed; until at the last, the whole Island became
subject to three Princes. The colonyes of Saxony whom we call English, are
gathered together under the felicity of one s^epter: the relics of the old
Britains, which constantly clear to the Cambrian Mountains, and are cal'ed
(...): Thirdly, the Scots, inhabiting the North part of the Island, to whom a
remnaut of the Picts, who were almost ^ooted out, have joined thems^lues. But
Wales in a sho^t time unable in war to resist the strength of all England,
was joined to that scepter. The Scots though despairing ever to be able to
conquer England, yet disdaining to yield unto it, as an argument of lasting
aemulation, contended with the English, not more stiffely by war, then by a
different and auerse Nature from them: until the fates condemning at last this
pe^nicious ^mulation, conjoined them both under one King, by whose spirit, as
it were, the whole Island is now united in one body.

England abounding in rich pastures, and ground fruitful in procreation of
diverse, and different trees, does every where delight the eyes of the
beholders with a most beautiful verdancy: the easy and free increase of
fruit does nourish the sloth of the common people. The fertile, and fat
grounds do every where yield such abundance of pasture for horses, and
bullocks, as suffices the perpetual greediness of those beasts: in other
places, where the ground is dryer, and clothed with short grass, it feeds
innumerable flocks of sheep, excusing the barrenness of the soil with an
incredible profit, which is made of wool; not the sharpnes of winter (unless
perchance it prove harder then usual) does drive their cattle, which are
ever accustomed to the open air, into stalls or houses. They are usually
contented with open sleeps in the cold fields, and such pasture as the
moderate warmth of the winter does nourish. For the winters are not there so
sharp as the climate, and neerenesse of the North would make us imagine, when
in France where it is nearly opposite to the coast of Britain, the winters
are extreme, and much more rigid in the air of Holland.

In so great an indulgence and favor of the air, the grounds of Britain do
with great ease receive, and foster the seeds of all fruit.

They have tall Baytrees, and Rosemary, which is precious in many countries, by
reason of the care in planting and prese^uing of it, is there common, and
growing oftentimes in hedges, as a fence for gardens. The country is able to
foster vines, and bring grapes to full ripeness. For the pleasant and
fruitful mountains o^ Kent, and Hamps^ire, with other places situated to the
South, or East, had heretofore vin^yards, which afterward they omitted to
cherish, by reason of the commodity of (...) there, and the cheapnesse of wine
transported from Aquitance. Wolves also are rooted out of that part of the
country, and do not vex the flocks of Sheep, which freely gra^e, and often
times without the guard of a dog.

For the diligence of their forefathers, when the rage of wolves was exceeding
fierce, and deceived or wearied the care of the shepherds, rooted out by great
industry the whole race of them; so that the hardiness of their cattle,
which are able to endure the open air in all seasons, and the destruction of
wolves, do bring unto the people an inestimable wealth. The inhabitants at
ease, and almost forgetting labor, do grow rich in victuals, hides, and
fleeces, as benefits which the ground of her own bounty does bestow upon them.
They scarce take any pains at all in nourishing of saffron, whereof they have
store, and exceeding good; the herb it self, not in reward of care, and
industry, but of her own accord, opening and offering her treasure to them.
And that nothing might be wanting to so prosperous a fortune, they have felt
noe invasion of forreyne soldiers for many ages: homebred commotions in this
age are very seldom: neither do wars ever long continue in England as in
other Lands. In the compass of eight days, many times are great insurrections
begun and ended. They war with men, not with houses, and goods; and
commotions, but fresh, and newly risen, are suddenly decided in set battles.

By reason of wealth so easily accrewing, the careless, and rich common
people, are not a little puffed up. So that neither (according to the use of
other Nations (do they humbly reverence the dignity of their Nobles, nor are
they industrious, or skillfull in handycrafts by reason of their ease, and
plenty. For those that are bound to any trade, do for the most part finish
their apprentiship in seven years; after which time they are free of the
company, and then, as if themselves were exempted from-labour, they take other
apprentices to be under them: who after a short learning are employed as
iourneymen. They themselves, not only on solemn, and festival days, but
every holy day (who would believe it?) do freely take their ation and
pleasure, if it be fair weather, in the fields adjoining, or, if it be rainy,
are merry in tauernes. Which causes a dull and unskillful trading, trusted to
the knowledge of their apprentices, and the buyers are more peremptorily raised
to greater prices, that the work of the apprentices, and the idleness of the
Masters may be so maintained. But yet notwithstanding, some kinds of
workmanship wrought both with industry and most exact skill, and highly prized
through the whole world, do sufficiently declare, that in that country there
is noe fault in the climate, to dull their wits, but too much abundance to make
them idle. For as for the stirring up of wits, and cherishing of Arts, too
cruel, and rigorous a government is not at all good, too much depressing the
minds of the people, and dulling them with despair; so too plentiful, and
wanton a fortune, which intends labor, but only, as it were, in recreation,
and sport, can never raise the industry and ability of the common people, to an
exact diligence and skill in Arts.

There are noe tributes paid any where in that great Kingdom, nor stations of
Publicans in Cities, or the passages of bridges, except only in those places,
where shipping is set forth into forreyne countries. For they are strictly tied
to make acknowledgement unto those, who are fanners of the Kings customs, of
all Merchandise whatsoever is brought into the Kingdom, or carried out.)

But the pride of the common people is not more bitter, and distasteful toward
strangers, then toward their own gentry, who account themselves equal almost
to the best and ancientest of them. By which pride of the clownes, the
gentlemen do suffer in some, sort for the richness of their country, and are
brought almost into an hatred of that precious cause of their indignation.

They are all in general great honorers of the Nobility, which is confined
within the small number of those whom they call Lords. Those are, Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, and Barons: all the sons of Dukes and Marquesses, and the
eldest sons of Earls; in equal honor with these the piety of their
ancestors has placed Bishops. To these Noblemen it is not thought a
disparagement, for any tostoope to the lowest service; and the Nobles
understand well enough, that the people seated, as it were on the ground, do
behold with admiration their height, nor are those dignities bought by the
common people for money, but descend to their heirs by right of inheritance,
or new Noblemen by the grant of the King, are advanced into those degrees; and
that you may not think it a vain title, many Laws and privileges do
increase the respect of those high names.

For if it happen that a Lord be in debt, and not able to pay, the creditours
can have no law to attach his body; though the bodies of other debtors, even
before judgment, are imprisoned in England. But this is a greater and more
glorious privilege, that Noblemen being accused of the greatest crimes, as
namely treason to their country, are notwithstanding free from the rack; the
ma^^ers of the law would not have it imagined, that truth, if no^ otherwise,
could be forced from them, by racking or torment.

The English for the most part grave, of retired spirits, and fit for counsel;
they admire themselves, and the manne^^, wits, and dispositions of their own
Nation. When they silute, or write letters, they scorn to descend to
complements of feined service, which the flattery of these ages have brought
up, unless it be these, which are infected with forreyne behavior. The people
are studious of sea-businesse; nor is there any stronger defense of that great
Island then the diligence of so many sailors. They are as good soldiers by
land as by sea, especially when they are accustomed to another air, and have
tasted of forreyne diet, which whilst it is nouelty to them, they affect with
too much greediness

For those inconveniences of gurmundizing, have been often the consumption of
a^mies brought from Britain. And when that Navy, which was sent by Queen
Elizabeth, arrived on the shores of Portugal, and had wasted the country, and
defeated their enemies, the immoderate heat, and the sweetness of apples,
and berries, which that climate afforded, destroyed almost the whole army. They
contemn all dangers, and death it self, with more courage, then judgment; and
hence it comes, that they are the best soldiers, when they are governed by
wise captains; but when they go on of their own accord, possessed with the
blindness of that desperate valor, they have reason, after sad defeates to
accuse themselves more then their ill fortune. In the late wars of the
Low Countries, some soldiers of the Spanish party were taken by the
Hollanders, and were to be hanged, in requital of the enemies cruelty, who had
used their prisoners in the like manner. But the Hollanders did not intend to
execute them all. Of four and twenty (for so many were taken prisoners) eight
only were appointed to be hanged, and the rest to escape with life. There
were lots therefore thrown into a helmet, and the prisoners were commanded to
draw their fortunes, whosoever should draw a blanke, was to escape death; but
whosoever should draw a black lot, was to be hanged presently. They were all
possessed with a great apprehension of their present danger: especially one
Spaniard with pitiful wishes, and tears, in some of the standers by, did
move pity, in others laughter: There was besides in that danger, a certain
Englishman, a common so^ldier, who with a careless countenance, expressing noe
fear of death at all, came boldly to the helmet, and drew his lot; chance
favored him; it was a safe lot. Being free himself from danger, he came to
the Spaniard, who was yet timo^ous, and trembled to put his hand into the
fatal helmet; and receiving from him ten crowns, he entreated the Judges (oh
horrid audacityl) that dismissing the Spaniard, they would suffer him again to
try his fortune. The Judges consented to the mad man's request, who valewed his
life at so low a rate; and he again drew a safe lot, a wretch y^worthy nor
only of that double, but ever of a single preser^ation, who so basely had
vndervalewed his life.

The laws, which the English use, were delivered them by the Norman Csnquerors
in the French tongue, but o^solete, and differing from the language which is
now spo^en. They are sew, and very ambiguous. Much depends upon custom, and
the opinions of Judges; so that a great way is left open to con^entions, to an
infinite power of Judges, and the close dispositions of the people, who seem
to retain the fashions, as it were, of their Norman original; do open
themselves in subtleties, which fill the courts with perpetual wranglings.
From whence I think that common^able took first original, that the
Englishmen had long tails.

They endure with so constant a patience all customs and laws, which were
anciently delivered unto them from their ancestors, that they account it a
heinous matter now to alter, or abrogate any law, which was heretofore
established, either by reason of the rarity of delinquents, or innocence of the
Lawmakers. For from what reason, but the unwary goodness of their ancestors,
comes this law to stand in force, that a husband is commanded to father a child
and receive him for his heir, though he were borne a year or more after the
time, that he accompanied with his wife; so it be proved, that he lived that
time within the shores of Britain.

But in Philosophy, and the Mathematics, in Geography, and Astronomy, there is
noe opinion so prodigious and strange, but in that Island was either invented,
or has found many followers, and subtle maintainers, but such as through
taedious disputations cannot plainly state the question, which they would
seem to uphold: That the Earth is moved round, and not the Heavens: that the
Sun, with the Planets, and all the other Stars are not moved in their
globes caelestiall; that there are no such globes at all; and lastly,
whatsoever any doa^ing Philosopher has heretofore broached, some of them do
either ^old, or would seem to do: as if then they were more deeply vile their
common men, when they neglect and slight the ordinary wisdom as poor and low,
and search deeper into the secrets of Nature, which few are able to apprehend.

But as nothing does more deeply work upon the minds of men, then points of
religion; so in noe disparations are they more vehement then in those. In the
worship of God, what religion soever they choose to themselves, they run ever
into ex^remes. In the former ages, their richest men leaving the would, betook
themselves by oath into solitary places, and Hermitages; so that the best part
of the Lands of the Kingdom were bestowed upon such devotion, with too
timorous and dangerous vow, both to the giuers and receivers of those Lands;
for the giuers too much exhausted the commonwealth, and the receivers suffering
themselves (as it were by the fault of fortune) to fall into luxury, did
afterward draw a great envy, not only upon themselves, but the religion which
they professed. This kind of devotion is now publicly banished out of all
England; and many of them are so much turned to the contrary side, that he
farther they tread from the steps of their forefathers, soemuch the nearer they
think themselves to Heaven.

Nor is that the public opinion of the State, nor any way safe for them, if
the Magistrates find it; but of private spirits deluded by superstition,
inuenting to themselves a new religion of their own, and therefore the more
pleasing. Therefore all those, which are once possessed with this pleasing
pride of understanding more then others in religion, are divided into diverse
sects and names; and have diverse Laws and rites established among them,
neither by the authority of the men, nor the number of them, but only by
wilful obstinacy; and th^^ which is most worthy of pity and laughter is this;
that with cruel censures these sects do persecute one another: holding that
they only are the children of God, and all other reprobates. It hapened one
time, that a plain fellow one of the common people (whither you esteem the
common people by the meanness of their estates, or of their wit and education)
and two of his sons were of one faith in a superstition of their own. These
three men (as often times those religions consist of noe greater number) did
make a sest and Church by themselves. At last, disputing too hotly in divinity
among themselves, they fell at discord; the father forsook his sons, not
because he had found out b^tter, but different opinions: and was therefore by
his sonn^ (for so those fools called it) excluded out of their communion of
Saints: in the mean time, they thought, there were noe other Saints in the
world but themselves. But presently after, the two brothers falling at
variance, one of them excommunicated the other; (...) that so little a Church
consisting only of three person^ was at last divided into three Churches. A
most prodigious mischief, and prone to all madness: nor will they slightly
maintain the madness of the^^ own dreams. Many new (...) are every day
cited before (...) Judgment seats, in whom (...) Judges can find nothing
agreeing with each other, but on^^ a wilful obstinacy. They (...) abominable
opinions vnw^^thy of men, and are authors (...) their own superstition, misled
by noe predecessor, they fear noe tortures; but refusing to be governed by
any wisdom or wholesome advise, they will endure the fire, and sacrifice
themselves to their own madness. But strangers that converse with that
Nation, must take heed, that they do not censure the country in general, by
the behavior of a few, and those perchance of the common people; nor is it
casie to lear^e, what behavior is fitting among natures so much differing.
The common people heated either with wine, or choler, are oftentimes forward
to abuse strangers: in such a swelling fury of theirs, ^t were a little more
then, madness to provoke them by the like surlinesse; nor is it then a fit
season, when a tumult is raised, to plead thy excuse with confidence, much
less to express courage in defending thy self. By a gentle speech thou
may better disarme their fierceness they must be base and low entreaties,
which must assuage the fury of their first assault. For this torrent if it be
opposed by noe resistance, will languish in a moment, and become quiet. This
wariness, and timorous wisdom is only to be used in Towns, or public
fields, where a concourse of people to side with them, th^^ did first abuse
thee, is eyther^ gathered already, or presently to be expected. But in priu^^^
places, and where thy (...) would not prove too (...) unequal, then be sure
to express (at least in show) a bo^d spirit not brooking injuries; by which
means, thou will terrify them, which do not insult, out of true valor, but
are as ready to receive, as to offer wrong. The Magistrates and Judges, are
favorable to the complaints of strangers, and forward to punish the people,
which do them wrong; unless it be a multitude that do offend, whom it is
easy to blame, but hard, and for the most part too much cruelty to punish. And
so wondrously hospitable are the sea^es of Justice in that Nation, that if a
stranger offend, he shall find them favorable: or if it happen, that a
stranger, and an Englishmen be both guilty of one fact, which deserves, either
the whip, or the gallows, the stranger many times is no further punished, but
only commanded to depart the Kingdom. The gentlemen are naturally inclined to
a kind entertainment of all strangers, and are worthily ambitious in such
courtesies. So that no man, unless of a froward and ba^barous disposition, and
altogether unworthy of Noble company, can repent himself of traveling into
England.

Among those Noblemen* whose carriage is grave, and their speech and gesture
fit^ed to their dignity, you m^st comply with an answerable gravity, and
aemulation as it were, of m^iesty; least they perchance should vnder^alue you,
from their own gravity, and your speech, which must not be to them in a
soothing manner, like the Italian and French humility; you will otherwise carry
a lower estimation among those men, who accustom not themselves unto affected
humanity, and lying complement.

To the Northern parts of England, Scotland adioyneth, governed by a scepter of
incredible antiquity, compared with other Kingdoms: for the crown of Scotland
above twenty ages has endured in the possession of one Family. An hundred and
twenty Kings have successively reigned from Ferg^^^^ the First, to James that
now (...); who to so anciancient a pedigree, adding the Royalty of England, is
the first, that combined the Kingdoms, and reigns entirely over all
Britain.

The Scots are of dispositions fitted for society; of behavior, and gestures
of the body, excelling other Nations, and like unto the French in all things,
but the riches of their country. For the country Northward (...), in many
places not fit for (...) and full of barren mountains; neither are those
mountains clothed with woods, unless some, which are raised into a sharper
climate, and give a woody and barbarous name to the inhabitants. Yet Nature
has bestowed upon it those hardy people, abundance of v^^tuall in foul, and
(...) besides their flocks, and herds of cattle. It is sight usual, to see
three hundred red Dear, or more in one heard. But the inhabitants can rowze
far greater herds, when the Noblemen are pleased to hunt there. Neither do
they want commodities in their country fit to exchange for forreyne
merchandises, which are transported thither of necessary use. But the scarcity
of money by no art or industry can be redr^ssed, foe that they which in their
own country do live in plenty, and with great attendance, are not able in
^orreine parts to maintain their port. But noe people are more mindful of
their pedigrees then they; that they had rather sometimes disgrace their Family
by their poverty, then conceal the unseasonable expressing of their titles, or
not mention their kindred. For it is necessary in a country more populous, then
fruitful, that some of Noble blood should be borne to extreme poverty. So
that the Scots dispersed into many countries to get their living, (and none are
more faithful and industrious then they) being still eager in publishing their
Nobility, are often laughed at by the hearers, then believed, or pitted.

But the people courageous also against themselves, are divided by many and
fierce enmities, and cruel to each other, beyond an laws of humanity or
hatred. For being divided by Families, and Names, they hold those as Princes of
their factions, which possess the most ancient inheritance of the Family. To
those men they are wonderously obseruant, with a love as great ^^most, as to
their country it self; to them, when they are wronged, they (...) for succor,
using the patronage and strength of their own Family. By this means it has
heppened, that small quarrels betwixt men of obscu^e condition, have been the
causes of great and horrible commotions. For they that have quarrelled,
complaining on both sides to the Princes of their Kindred, have turned their
(...) wrongs into the in^^^es of whole families. Nor are these differences
decided with little blood; for sometimes gathered into troops, and almost into
just armu^^, they fight it out; and these (...) continue to their heirs after
them. They think i^ glorious to reu^^ge ^urder with thunder, and firewith
fire. Nor do they always deal by (...) force, but by s^^res and treacheries.
Nothing can be (...) or ignoble to them, (...) cure their eyes only by the
miseries of their enemies. And this mischief has often been the overthrow of
Noblemen, who have either been slain in fight, or else undone in their
estates, by keeping such multitudes of servants and tenants about them (for so
it was necessary for fear of sudden assaules from their enemies) whilst
their Lands (...) lyen^ntilled, and wast. And some heue thought (...) of wood
in the country, has been caused by these enmities; whilst these cruel people
on both sides have burnt up their enemies woods, and (...) their private
injuries with the deuastation of their country. But these things (...) were
more, to (...) when they were (...) where ri^^; now, since we see it other
wise, we may cherish hereafter better hopes For although heretofore, it lay
not in the power of the Kings, to remedy so great a mischief, when the Nobles
by the faithfulness and number of their clients were more fierce and strong;
yet the now reigning King, James of Britain, has at last bestowed this
benefit upon this country. (...) have encouraged others to the same audacity;
especially, least they should seem to have borne a fearful, and degenerate
anger. He therefore thought it best at once, and for ever, to compound these
deadly (...).

The King therefore took a diligent account of those, whose Familyes were
engaged in such quarrels, and partly in his own person, partly by the me
(...) any more named among them: a great and admirable work of a most wise and
industrious King, yet not performed without much time and wonderful felicity.

Two years after he had thus appealed Scotland, he was called to the
succession of the crown of England; a great happiness for the strengthening
of this amity among the Scots, who now with a fitting, (...) inconsiderate
bounty, and love the fame, more then the possession of riches; or else deceived
by the quality of their own country, when they have attained to such a sum
of money as would make them rich for ever in Scotland, they grow too secure of
future poverty, and do not understand, (...) in every Land; the expenses, and
prices of things, are answerable to the plenty of gold and silver; so that a
great quantity of money can hardly be (...) in any place, but such as is used
to great expenses. What studies soever they incline to, they prosper in them
with wonderful success. None are m^re (...) of (...) duties, (...) none more
vallant in fight, then they nor (...) the Muses ever appear more beautiful,
then when they inspire the bre^sts of Scots. They are capable also of
city-businesse, and can fit their industry to any kind either of life or
fortune.

But those that travel, or (...) and rely upon no other means, then going to
the houses of their countrymen, which are grown rich in other Lands and demand
as it were the tribute of their country are most intolerable in their proud
begger^.

Ireland, by the ancient Latins called Ierna, and now Hybernia, is an, Island
not far from Britain, and subject to the crown of England; a great and (...)
Island, commodious for shipping, by reason of many havens; nor is it to be,
censured by the barbarism and sordid, living of many of the habitants; for the
fruitfullinsse of it inuiteth many (...) of England, and Scotland to (...)
mortal to any venomous creatures. Newets and Toades, if they be brought
thither, will not live. The wood transported from thence noe age nor neglect
will make worme-eaten, no^^hung with spiders (...) although the Irish have
their spiders, but harmless and free from venom The beams rafters, and
boordings of Westminster hall, where the Courts of Justice sit, are made of
that wood; and there (a wonderful things) the walls round about are filled
with spiders, but none of those sordid nets are spread upon (...) wood.

The Irish, which live not in Towns, or civil places, are wonderful hardy in
enduring any air, or diet, by reason of long and accustomed poverty. They can
satisfy their hunger with any victuals gotten on the sudaine; as venison, or
beef halfe-raw. They temper their meat with milk. They build brittle and
weak houses about the height of a man, where themselves and their cattle live
together. But this in those people is a thing to be wondered at the four of
(...) and ease, does soften the courages of other Nations, but makes the Ir^^
valfant in war. For by reason of their sloth, though their fields are
fertile, yet tilling and sowing are things almost unknown to them. They are
content with that grafte, which the ground yields of her own accord for
pasture, for their cattle. They exercise noe (...) dycrafts, for fear of
disparaging that Nobility, which they so highly boast of. So in a sordid, and
filthy idleness, they lead their lives, and had rather cure by patience, then
industry, the discommodities which are daily companions of their barbarous
living; and so far are they from knowing delight, as they feel not want and
misery. In one single garment they endure both wet and cold; by often hunting,
they grow wonderful swift in running, equalling almost the wildbeasts; when
they are weary, or benighted, the ground serves them for a lodging, and covered
with snow, or wet with showers, yet they are sooner raised by satiety of
sleeping, (...) by the (...) of the weather, excellent rudimeats of war and
valor, if they did not proceed from such filthy sloth. This beastlynesse, in
time of peace also, n^yther the fellowship of the English, nor the ^mulation of
the Spanish fashions, can make them to shake off; but they love this life so
full of sordid discommodities, as free from cares, assured by a wicked shadow
of liberty, which in different kinds has foully deceived diverse (...).

They are obstinate in their (...) viees, haters of labor, and foe of all
profit; but very industrious, in theeuing, and, (...), or any (...), which is
like to hunting. And these are the slothful miseries of the common people. The
Noblemen are many of them very faithful, of brave minds, nu^tured in (...)
virtues that befit their dignities.

Those also that live in Cities or the pleasantest parts of the Kingdom, are
adorned with great humanity; and declare by this, that those wild Irish are
barbarous by their own wilfulness, and not borne to that vice, by the fare
of the Island.

The Fifth Chapter. GERMANY.
THe River Rhene arising from the foot of the Alpe^, and flowing along the
borders of the Low Countries does there fall into the Ocean, It was once the
bound of Germany; but now by the changes of (...) and Empires, the limits of
Germany being increased, it may be said to run through it.

Germany is a spacious country, reaching from the Alpe^ and France, as far as
Sarma^^ and Pannonia, divided into many principalities and com^^^^ealths. It
was once full of ^oods and wild inhabitants, but now beautified every where
with fair Towns; the woods which were once great, and orespread the country,
are now reduced to use and Ornament. It nourishes vines in that part, where it
bordereth upon Italy, and where it declineth toward Pannonia, as likewise upon
those hills which ouershadow the Rhene; and some few places besides, where the
ground by favor of some hills, and warmth of the rivers, is fitted for that
purpose. The cold grounds in their mountains (...) with fur trees, and other
woods. Ister, the Prince of rivers in Europe, does cut almost through the midst
of Germany, and rises in a sea-like channel, to the yearly ruin of bridges
there, whose banks are beautiful with famous cities, but to^ few for the
greatness of for noble a river. Rhene, Alb^, and many rivers famous in old
times, do flow through all the breadth of Germany. The country is full of good
^^nes on the side where the Alps bound it, and all along the course of Ister;
in those places (...) where Rhene runs, and M^nis with the Maz^, encre^^ of
so great a river: but the side of the country which ly^ toward the Ocean and
the ^^ner Land, removed from the famous and public rodes, for nasty Innes,
and sordid (...) of living in general, (...) much of that Ge^^^us which
Ancient Writers have ascribed to it. Yet there are cities not unworthy of some:
the marketplaces and streets especially craftly handsome; the houses of lofty
and even structure, the frailer parts of the building covered with printings.

The inner parts of their houses are not with like skill fitted for use; their
beds are placed in the remote, and (for the most part) obscure places of the
house. They do not use lightly any chimneyes at all. They had rather use
certain little stones to expel the cold, which are made in the chamber-walls,
and fire put into them according as the quality of the weather requires. But
this heat is many times troublesome to strangers; for it makes their head;
heavy with unusual vapors, and when they go one from thence, their bodies
being chilly, and the pores opened, are not able to endure the air. Besides,
when the fire begins to be remitted, these kind of hot-houses have ill
savors; especially those, which belong to their dining rooms, where the
confused vapors of so many sorts of meat do fill the air, and so much
wine is drunk, and spilled. And not only in those hot-houses, but in other
chambers and parlours also, are many of the Germans too slouenly, and
careless; insomuch that strangers, when they come thither, can hardly brook
the air of those rooms. That Nation is infected with a wonderful love of
drinking, which now is a confessed vice, and therefore the more freely used.
Nor is this barbarous drunkenness used as a pleasure only, but grown into a
part of their behavior and discipline; the favors of some of their Princes
are purchased only by this base price, when the Princes do seek some
companions in their vices, or purpose to entertain Ambassadors and strangers
with the f^eest hospitality. For the Germans think, there can be noe
entertainment so pleasing to a stranger as a long, and drunken banquet; and
think themselves never truly welcome to another man's house, unless he that
i^^ited them be wondrous forward in making both them and himself drunk. That
is the chiefest vrbanity there, and in nature of a league upon the first
acquaintance.

It hapened on a time, that some Dutch regiments of soldiers were entertained
in France, and commanded by Colonels of their own Nat^on: a Nobleman of France
invited one of these Germane Colonels of supper, knowing how dear a league of
friendship might be made with a Germane in drink: he provoked him therefore
to mirth, with store of wine, and many forms and devices of drinking there
were. At last, the Germane, either to make trial, how freely welcome he was to
the French Lord, or else grieved, that the drinking (...) went so slowly
forward, (...) seeking a glorious victory, he challenges the Frenchman (...)
pledge him, and begins (...) a cup of great measure; the Frenchman nothing
affrighted (to all our wonder) rises up: noble guest (quoth he) that thou
may know thou were invited to a friend, I will not only pledge what thou
have drunk, but in a loving quarrel, challenge thee to pledge me us much
more. With these words, he pledges the Germane Colonel at one draught, and
filling the same cup again for his guests sake, though his belly swelled, be
drank it off to him. The Colonel wonderfully taken with so great an
expression of love, rises up (though he could hardly stand) noble si^ (quoth
he) do not think this love is bestowed upon an unthankful man; you know, I
have noe small regiment of soldiers under my command. Their entertainment for
two whole months shall cost you nothing, since I know your treasury those
hard times is much exh^^sted. After these two months, if it please you, and
that you be well able, they shall take entertainment again. At so great a
requital of one carouse, we were all amazed for the present, but much more,
when the Colonel performed his promise. Among these people plain and open
behavior is most pleasing, and such as first gave to Da^^hu^ the name of
freedom. They hate all kind of hidden subtlety; either because, that they
themselves loosened by drink, cannot firmly keep a secret in; or because
their minds in such bodies know themselves to be dull, and are ever suspicious
of the subtleties of other men as bent against them, and aiming to ouerrea^h
them. The Magistrates of their commonwealths, chosen from among their
fellowcitizens, bring to the Tribunal noe minds adorned with high parts: but
cleave fast to the institutions of their fathers, with an e^^caclous diligence.
The people are very obedient to those that govern them, and will often give
credit to their Magistrates, even in points of religion. And you shall hardly
see any private man what soever, g a n^say any rites of religion, which the
Prince, or common wealth have approved of (...) mischmiefes, which have
troubled England and France for a long time, the (I had almost said) felicity
of this miserable carelessnesse has quite avoided.

Yet I must except Austria, which lies almost out of the Germane ^lirnate, and
has not yet lost her ancient Nature, though she have changed her name (for
Austria in old time. was accounted a part of Pa^^^^a.) And Bohemia also, not in
this age alone, divided in it self by most unhappy conte^tio^s about religion;
but Bohemia, though it he (...) in the bosom of Germany, is divided from the
body of it, in language, in manners, and different Laws. Learning in many
places of Germany does flourish; but she men are more desirous to teach, them
to learn. They write more, then they tend: and value their reputation, by the
number and greatness of the volumes which they publish in print.

Their wits, as they are dark and dull, so are they strong to endure endless
^oyle, so that others may be able to understand better, but they to
understand more. Many of their Noblemen, who contented with their own wealth
and manners have only steeue, and do only admire their native Germany,
though in their own judgments they seem endued with grave wisdom, yet want
much of the humanity of our age. Their words are much of the old stamp, and
their learning wants the dress and colors of later wisdom. They are
desirous of travel, and great counterfeiters, or retainers of forreyne
behavior, until they return home into their own country. It is not usual
for strangers, to dwell long, or rise to preferment in that country; and the
name of a forreyner is almost accounted a word of disgrace among them. Germany
oppressed with these manners, is notwithstanding recompensed again by other
excellent endowments, and manly virtues. Treachery is a thing unknown among
them, yea even in hired soldiers of that Nation. Noe deceitful cunning, or
hatred, burketh under the titles of friendship and the simplicity of that
modest people is altogether unskillful in great villainies. They are little
given to lust, and that in great secret; their youths boast not of it, like
some other Nations, as a pride and sport; for the men of Germany are as far
from that almost, as the accustomed modesty of women. But wisdom, as if
finds not often there subtle and sharp heads to entertain it, by whose
cunning it may be drawn near to deceit: so it many times finds true and
nature judgments to rest upon, who can easily be provident in their own
affairs, and contemn the errors of other men. There are among them lofty
minds, in whom the felicity of a lively and raised spirit, does well temper
their natural gravity; especially if they have long seasoned that ability of
wit with so^eyne arts and manners. The Nations, though valiant beware, can very
well (...) peace. They are not suddenly moved to (...), but being once
raised, they (...) like men, and are not easily ^ppeased. The people are
excellent at working in (...), or iron, and drawing it into curious sculptures.

For the Inuen^tion of Printing and Gunpowder, the world is indebted to the
Germane wits; a benefit, altogether doubtful, whither (...) to the (...), or
behoo^e of mankind. Their minds are full of (...), nor ^^ying, nor car^ing at
the virtues, deede^, or (...) of other men, especially, th^se th^^ are absent:
but extolling them with sincere, and many times immoderate pruises.

But nothing is more magnificent in that Nation, then that the Christian
Empire, and Eagle is seated there; as if Germany had vanquished Rome; and the
lost of the Prounces that bowed to the Roman yoke, it now the only country,
where the name, and relics of the Roman fortune do rest themselves. The
Sacred Majesty of so great a name is eclipsed by noe a mulation of other
Princes, and Kings, though far greater in power, then he, yet willingly give
place to the Imperial Majesty. That highest dignity was heretofore supported
by a power answerable, which by little and little as were in a fatal old age,
did lessen and consume away. For by domesticke wars, and the immoderate power
of Princes of the Empire, and besides, the dignity being elective not
haereditary, the vigor of the Empire falling to ground, has only retained a
venerable name, more by the piety of others, then her own strength. Among other
causes of the decay of this power, this you shall find to be the greatest;
the Princes being of great wealth, and increased by the bounty of former
Emperors, have at last changed those Provinces, which were first deputed unto
them, into absolute Principalities, and to have some privilege about the
Emperor (who owes his estate not to right of inheritance, but their
suffrages) they have made their own dignities, inheritances to their posterity.
By this means the minds of those Nations and People, which are naturally
inclined to honor their Princes, and heretofore only in loyalty to the
Emperor, came by degrees to honor those Princes, as his deputies, and
afterward as their own absolute Lords: which was a nearer way, either to
profit, or danger. See the power of those Princes begun and strengthened, did
exhaust the strength of the whole Empire: and first of all, as much as remained
in France, then Italy, it self, the fountain of the Empire; afterward the
strongest parts of Germany, taken, as it were, out of their own body, did fall
away, and were divided by the variety, and number of Princes, into other
loyalties. But in France, and Britain, which are most true Kingdoms, it was
ordered far otherwise, and those Princes, whose power was too great, and
worthy of suspicion, by the providence of God, and industry of the Kings, were
supp^essed, and rooted out. For what room were left for the Majesty and State
of Kings, if Normandy, Britain, Aquitaine, Burgundy, Auuergne, P^cteirs,
Prouence, and Champaine, were possessed by Dukes, or Earls, as once in the
government of petty Kings? who safe in their own strength would obey the King
upon courtesy, and only not contemn him as inferior to themselves. But what
miseries in the Kingdom of Britain have been caused by the great, and too
formidable power of Dukes, and Count Palatines, endued with regal privileges,
and mighty in faction, and attendance? what bloody rebellions have they often
raised against their Kings? there is noe more certain safety of the Kingdom
at this day, then that the power of those great men and their Families, are
utterly suppressed, and the nerves of the Kingdom guided by one only.

The Emperors therefore should then have prevented this renting of the Empire,
when first the Princes began to grow too great. But now the disease too far
grown, and all affairs too long settled, so that the Empire especially
consists of those Princes: to extort the power out of their hands, were not
only an unseasonable, but a vain enterprise; so many vpholders of those
dignities would join in confedency against him for their common security:
especially seeing at this day, their Principalities do as lawfully belong to
them, as the Empire does to him; their titles accrewing both from the consent
of them that first gave that power into their hands, and also by time and long
possession; whereby all titles of Sovereignty, which for the most part are
weak, or wrongful at the first, are made lawful.

But the last and mortal disease of the expiring Empire was this, that many,
or most of the cities, imitating these Princes, gathered themselves into
Commonwealths, making themselves Laws, and ordaining Magistrates; and to make
it known, that they had renounced their first loyalty, in this sliding from
the Empire, they challenged the name of Free States; entering into leagues
among themselves, to maintain each other against the Sovereignty of the
Emperor.

So that country which in one State, and under one Governor, had been able
to contest with all Europe, puissant in men, and strong cities, and worthy to
receive the translated dignity of the Roman Empire can now find noe Province,
nor scarce any city, that she can deliver to her Emperor in free power and
Sovereignty. For the Commonwealths and Principalities will suffer noe Imperial
garrisons within them nor can that Prince, that bears so great and glorious a
title, find any place among so many cities, where he may h^^e his subjects
leave to dwell. By this sweet, and p^blike error, they have diser^ed the
Majesty of their own country,

The seven Electors, by the custom of the country, are to choose no man
C^s^^, but a great man possessed of a Kingdom, or other great wealth, and
Territoryes of his own already. Virtue and Nobility alone can never carry
those voices. For where should the seat of the Emperor be, unless be had
one already without the Empire? where should that Court be kept, which were
answerable to the title of so great Majesty? they would hardly suffer him to
dwell any where among them, whom they love to honor in his absence. But if the
fate of that valiant Nation would permit, that the whole Province might be
absolutely subject to their Elected Cas^^, then they might easily find among
themsel^^ some, that were fit for that great and puissant honor, and be
forced to seek after nothing in their Elections, but virtue only.

The Emperor then has some power (but limited and straightned) over all the
country. In civil contentions they do often appeal to him. But capital
crimes the Princes and Free States do judge in there own territories. The
Emperor has power to call diots, to proclaim wars, and determine
controversies between the Princes themselves. When wars do threaten Germany,
he commands men and money from the Provinces, if that may be termed by
command, which cannot be obtained without their free consent.

The Free Princes in that spacious country are very many, but the re^enewes
divided among the brothers, or male kindred of a Family, do by that means
grow many times ^^e differences in dividing Provinces or Principalities, and in
parting private estates, and patrimonies. In that manner, the Dukedom of
Saxony was in this age divided among many brothers, and because it was a hard
matter, those that were skillful in the laws and customs of the country were
by their command assembled together. To whom, as they sat in counsel, and the
brothers were contending about their right, a fellow of somewhat a distracted
mind, but such a one, as used to delight the hearers with his harmless and
pleasant madness, came in among them.

The eldest brother of the Saxon Duke looking upon this fellow, (for he had
used his Court, and waited at his table) w^^t thou also (quoth he) give thy
opinion concerning this division of the State? why should I not answered the
fellow? upon which, they were all in expectation to hear some ridiculous and
pleasant jest from the madman, and entreated him earnestly, that his counsel
might not be wanting in so great a matter. But he denied to bear any part in
the consultation, unless they would give him such a gown as the Lawyers used
to wear, saying that with that gown he should put on wisdom. with that a
merrier Genius possessed them all, insomuch that his Lord laughing heartily,
commanded a furrd gown to he brought out of his wardrope, and put upon him.
Which when the fellow had fitted well, he walked twice or th^ice about the
room, and began to ask his Lord, whither that garment became him well or not;
excellent well, answered the Duke; but now it remains, that thy wisdom
should determine the controversies that are between us. He told them, he
would presently be ready for them, but first he must retire a little into the
next chamber; and there he would call some spirits of better wisdom to
counsel with him. When he was retired thither, he shut the door presently,
that noe man might enter to interrupt his witty knavery; and putting off the
gown, with a little sword, which was girded about him, he cut it from the
shoulders to the lowest hemm, into long and slender slashes. Then putting it on
all ragged as it was, he opened the door, and coming out to his Lord asked
him again, how well that gown did now become him: anger had curbed his Lords
laughter, for the gown which was so spoiled, was of great price. Thou wretch
(quoth the Duke) I will have thee whipped, for presuming so madly to spoil thy
Lords gown. The fellow not at all affrighted, answered them thus how
ridiculous is it in you t^ be so extremely angry wit^ me, when your selves are
far more dangerously mad, th^^ gown, which I have put on, is the
representation of your fortunes, and much more foolishly do you go about to
rent, and spoil the Dukedom or Saxony, then I have done this garment. Whilst
it was whole, it become met well, and you laugh at it, now it is thus mangled.

So Saxony united in one body does flourish, and is puissant in arms and
wealth; but when you have rent it into many pieces, noe man can uphold the
ancient dignity.

The wealth of the Germane Princes, besides some taxes and tributes, are, for
the most part, arising out of flocks and herds of cattle; as also out of
the fertilty of the soil, which commonly they exercise with the voluntary, not
hired labor of the Boores. By this means they cannot certainly define their
wealth, and annual reuenew, which is to be valued according to the changeable
price of come. The Nobility have a great and superstitious ca^e of their
pedigree; and think that ancient blood is stained, if it be married into a^
lower or vpstart Family; nor is such a slain washed away in many generations.
For to a clear testimony of Noble birth, are required eight descents of
ancestors in both lines, which have not at all been tainted with this unequal
marriage. In their discourses they have certain titles and forms of speech
fitted to all conditions of man; which they account it almost a sin, either to
neglect, or came lesly confound; nor does any Nation use more set forms,
ouerburdening even the memory of those who from their child-hoods have been
trained in that Art, and superstitious distinction.

In that part of Belgia, which is accounted in Germany, are those Provinces,
which heretofore by war, marriages and successions were incorporated together
under the house of Burgundy; and afterward transferred by marriage to the
Spaniard; and the chief strength of that Nation, if they could as well obey
the harsh command^ of their Prince being absent, as they can honor him present
in person with them. Some of these people in this age complaining of hard
usage, breaking the bonds of concord, by which they were tied both to their
Prince, and among themselves, have risen in so great a storm, as may well
deserve to put all Europe into a fear. In this commotion part of them by arms
have acquired their liberty; the rest either mastered by power, or detained by
loyal reverence of their ancient Lords, continue still in obedience to their
Prince. Those that despising the Sovereignty of the Spaniard, have made
themselves a Free State, inhabit chiefly about the Ocean, and are called by
forreyne Nations Hollanders, which was the chief Nation among them. By a
boldness necessary after their revolt, they have given themselves to
sea-affaires; from whence they are grown to great strength and wealth,
searching all shores, and infesting the Spanish Sea. By this means, their
cities are increased, and their wealth, by daily booties. Auxiliary soldiers
from France and England, have come unto them, by reason of that mutual
benefit, which accrewes, both to the aided, and the aiders.

The other which remain under the Spanish scepter, taking also their name from
one of then Pro^inces, are called through the world Flemmings.

But the people, though thus distinguished into two Gouernements, retain the
same Genius and dispositions. Their wits are candid, but made grosser as it
were by the fault of the climate, which yet they do more depresse by the
distemper of drinking; whither this thirst be kindled in them by the fortune
of their situation, and neighborhood of High- Germany; or by the manner of
educating their, infants. For they give to their infants to ab^te their desire
of milk, whilst yet they hang at their mothers breasts, bottles full of beer,
made after the fashion of a dugge.

That innocent and vncurious age oftentimes listing to the mouth the beer
which comes so slowly, is delighted with the likeness of sucking, and keept
from the wearisomnesse of idleness. Nor is the thing without some profit, if
from their first growth only you esteem it.

For infants so ordered are brought to have strong bodies, and full of
cheerful and wholesome juice. But the perpetual custom of drinking, grows by
so using it into a perpetual pleasure, stirring up the desire of the palate,
which is ever afterward, either ouerflowed, or thirsty. To this may be
added, the quality of that drink, not quenching the thirst after the manner
of wine and water, but in a thick liquor, leaving first that upon the jaws,
which by the next draught would be washed away.

But by this strange delight in drinking their wits (which you would wonder at)
are not drowned, and made slothful, but industrious in all the arts of
merchandise, beyond the diligence of other Nations.

Their strong and accustomed bodies are able to buckle with that vice, and with
a wondrous felicity dissipate again those clouds of drink, which in
banqueting arise in them: so that their drunkenness late at night makes them
not slothful in their business the next morning.

None excel their industry in low arts. Idleness with more then Athenian
severity is punished among them; their boys (if need be, at the public
charge) are trained up in action, and their maids to the spindle; every age is
exercised, and sweat in a fitting calling; and labor familiar to them from
their childhood, banishes, even by custom alone, the love of unknown sloth.
By this frugall discipline their cities are wonderfully enriched with trading,
and few of them sleep in the lethargy of beggary. The wits of the people are
neither capable, nor patient of fraud.

They do easily value others with that trust which they are worthy of; but
the^ simplicity, once deceived, with an irreconcilable hatred a^vides the
perfidiousnesse of those that cozen them.

Among these people there have been in all ages some excellent minds that
have kept up the dignity of learning^ or else admitted to the Privy Counsels
of Princes and States, have with worthy dexterity managed the affairs
committed to them. As in those regions, where commonly, and as it were, by the
privilege of their birth, sharp and elegant wits arise, few are either
careful, or able, to exceed the tenor of their own mediocrity; so Nations,
of a lower fate as it were, and more furnished with the ancient goodness, then
the vain ornaments of subtelty, are sometimes excellent in wit, and grow
nearer to heaven, then they were borne to the earth.

The chief men of Holland have commonly framed their minds and manners
according to the Genius of that Common wealth, which themselves have made;
either by a facility of Nature borne, to that form of Government which now
they have, or else by a subtle and popular garb, ready also to undergo all
offices of mutual servitude, unless when they are commanded to bear ^ule.

But those Noblemen, which are under the Spaniard, are more filled with Court
ambition, and with their Belgic^^ positions han^mixed the manners of that
people that reign over them. Whence it come to pass, that they have, as it
were, a double Nature, and a disposition various, and almost divided between
two most different inclinations. But among all their desires, the desire of
honors is the greatest. They do ambitiously seek, and carefully maintain
those titles and names which the craft of flatterers has invented to
distinguish dignities. Nor can you any way win their affections more, then by
saluting them cunningly with honor. They are courteous to those that f^atter
them, and prodigal in giving respect where they expect greater. So with true
and sincere love they recompense a subtle flattery, unless that they being
moved to love for vain reasons, are often changed by the same rashness; and
perchance by a vain suspicion of contempt, are lost as far as to extreme
hatred. The common people in those Provinces on both sides do more esteem a
show of liberty, and vain tokens of parity, then liberty it self. From hence
proceeded those arts, which so easily catch them: as; not to disdain their
clownish jests, to entertain discourse with them by the way, and to mix thy
self with them (though much their superior) in a kind of humility, which
shall neither be disparaging, nor long-lasting.

William Prince of Orange, a most politic man, by this art, more then by any
warrelike force afflicted the Spaniard.

The Boores of Holland inhabited many Towns by the Ocean-side; the greatest
strength (noe doubt) of Belgia reuolting from the Spaniard: and able to weary
the wealth of both the Iudies: for the Towns guarded both by Nature and
situation, might by no very chargeable fortifications be brought to an
impregnable strength.

Therefore at the beginning of their revolt, William by a new way of popularity
had won all the affections of the people, who thought in how much more happy
a condition they should live under such a Captain, as owed his power and
authority to them, then under the King himself.

For coming slouenly from sea or the plow, they had free access to him, whose
Majesty, and attendance was not great or troublesome. He himself in a deep
subtlety, was glad to have himself saluted by those, that met him or came to
him, by noe high or envied names, but sometimes plain William And very well
knowing by what ways especially the affections of his Nation were to be
gained, he did not proudly look upon the lowest condition of any that saluted
him.

Remarkable was that saying of his, to content those that reproved his toomuch
humanity; That man is well bought, who costs but a salvation.

The Sixth Chapter. ITALY*
ITaly, which was once confined by the small channel of the river Rubicon, is
now bounded, (more suitable far to the intention of Nature,) by the enclosure
of those lofty Alps. A Land owing much to her own commodities, but more
endebted to the favor of fame. Renowned heretofore by the Gracian Colonies in
her Eastern part; afterward by the spirit of her inhabitants, and the
greatness of her spreading Empire, whose state no age could ever parallel.

And lastly, since the nerves of the Roman greatness are quite cut, she
remains even at this day, an example of life and breeding to many Nations; our
people supposing that to be the only p^ace for the polishing of youth, and the
nursery of all humanity.

The very Names of her cities and other places, so celebrated in true and
fabulous stories, driving the ignorant even into amazement, such as give more
true credit to others then to their own knowledge.

By this strange favor of men are the faults of Italy concealed, and her good
things set off with greater luster. Nor is their any doubt, but that at some
places it exceeds the felicity of other regions, there where the r^uer Benacus
with his Mascalinest came sporteth along the side of the mountains, and where
Auer^ns, Puteoli, and Cuma wanton it. As rich and beautiful (being a country
almost level, and well watered) is that which the Lombards took from
possession of the French.

But if we compare the fortune of all Italy with her neighbors, as Germany,
France and that more Northern Britain; then perchance we may justly be
ashamed that Italy, by our preuarication, feeding so much the glory of it,
should eclipse the felicity of our own country.

The Land is rugged in general by the frequency of mountains, or par^^ed with
too great and barren heat. The soil is dry in many places, and where it is
arable, their come, before it be ripe, is corrupted by frequent smuts, or
destroyed by violent hail.

Of pasture-grounds there is noe greatstore, and in those the wool of their
sheep is naught, and their flesh worse. And scarce at any time has the
fruitfullnesse of Italy been able to fustice plenteously her own inhabitants
for three years together; nor muchlesse would it suffice them, did not the
frugality of the men, and the condition of the clime, requiring noe plentiful
diet, accustom them to sparing and sober feasts. Trees of diverse sorts, which
under the moderatenesse of our clime do th^iue happily, are there enf^ebled by
too much heat, bringing forth weak, and unprofitable fruit. Oranges,
Pomegranates, and Figs of diverse races do there abound to temper with their
coolness the excess of heat in the country: which fruits, though not at all
necessary for humane use, yet carried about the world, are grown precious more
by ou^ delicacy then their own value.

For Olives (though there they are counted one of the three great blessings of
mankind, with Corn and Wine,) they have reason to prize out of the condition
of that country, in which by the fault of pasture, their dry cattle do afford
the milkers but little and (...) ^^ders. Their flesh meats ^egenerate from the
sweetn^sse of ours almost into another kind of taste, except only some few,
which do better indute the violence of the sun. So that now those palates of
parasites so frequently filling the Greek, and Roman Comedies with
commendation of fishes, may seem to have been especially suited to that
country.

Their Cities are for the most part fair, and situated in pleasant places.

Their houses built of no slight matter, especially those which they call
Palaces, are commonly more beautiful for the greatness of their structure,
then convenient for the use of the dwellers in them. They glitter with marble
of diverse kinds, and sometimes with gold; their roofes extended with
magnificent work. Old eaten statues are placed upon fair and precious
supporters, which for their gorgeous places are sometimes indebted only to the
lying report of those that fell them. But where their walls do afford space
for windows, there their houses do lose somewhat from the luster of the other
building. For commonly either coorse linen, or oyled paper do cover those
places which are ordained for letting in of light. Which thing as it is
unsightly to the beholders, so it imprisons the eyes of the dwellers within;
the bounds of their Parlour or gallery doors, far from the comeliness of
the French or British manner, where their windows are made of glass,
affording them a free prospect of that which is without, the beams of light
dancing as it were cheerfully upon them. Their temples also (for that is part
of their fame) do not fully answer the expectation of strangers. In images
and f^gures is the greatest luster, and nothing more beautiful then their
altars. Purple and silk are accounted but mean ornaments in respect of the
gold, and gems of price, The panements of different marbles are adorned with
various workmanship, where in suitable colors the figures of flowrs, of birds,
and beasts, are represented. Their pillars of marble are so wonderful large,
as may almost bring that ^^one into allow esteem. But sorich a beauty in their
building, is not brought to the height of comeliness, their roofs being not
enough raised, and the free sun scarcely is admitted into those dark places.
Their windows are shadowed with much iron, and thick pictures wrought upon
them if any temple do chance to receive light either by the rarity of buildings
near, or convenient situation of the doors, then either with spreading
vailes, or interposed walls they banish that benefit which the sun would
g^ue, believing, it should seem, that devotion is raised by the sadness of
night, and by the pleasure of light vanishes again. But whatsoever strangers
do ^eem of their public buildings, they cannot but wonder at and abhor the
sordid meannesse of their private lodgings. For at their l^nes being
entertained with scarcie and slat^ish provisions, their stomakes are divided
between two contraries (...) and hunger; bes^^^ (...) of then chambers, and
ledgings annoyed by gnats and st^nging slies of many kinds, they have grating
Hoasts, and high prices let upon bad e^e^tainement.

But fortune has found out for that country other blandishments to allure the
minds of those which travail thither. For either public error, or a sat
befriending Italy, inuiteth young trauailers to that place from all parts of
Europe; where enjoying mutual content inso great a frequency, that which they
owe to their own society, they impute to the pleasure of that country. For if
you love men of your (...) Nation, there you (...) of forremers, you have fair
choice among multitudes of so many nations: especially the commerce of minds
so far oftentimes oblieging strangers, that to be fellow trauailers, is a
greater enducement to entire friendship then to be fellow citizens.

So from all Provinces they come as it were into one body, and seem to
constitute one common and extemporary home. Besides, those young men that
travail into Italy, are for the most part wealthy, who there visiting change
of Cries, and staying at the chief, trying besides all kinds of delight ml fe
and conuersing, let loose their minds, which are now in the midway between
past childhood and growing wisdom, to a remissness void of curiosity;
especially, when being far removed from their own countries, the face of
domesticke business does not at all trouble them and that tender age does free
(...) from any we ghty cares.

(...) they have there all the delights of youth, the a^e of (...)-man-ship,
music, spectacles, Comedians bo^^ for that purpose, but scarce fit ler
Tragedy. When afterward they return into their own countries, and are
employed (as is fit) in serious aff^^es, what wonder is it if those pleasant
times of recreation do cause a sweere remembrance, and striking the mind with
thought of those delights which are now past, and never to return, it make
them with love to remember that place, where heretofore they en^oy ed so sweet
a felicity?

But great (...), and a soil rich so of en to the rain of it self, has
quite banished from the Nations of Italy those first manners, which we read
the ancients had.

Yet are their minds capable of all affairs. Nor with a rude hear, or
natural instinct, but artificially as it were, and with skill they follow
either virtue or vice. They make large promises of humanity, confirmed not
only by a complete garb of their persons, but words of most exact ciuility,
and when they please, most powerful in persuasion. They can also entertain
long friendship, and where they truly love, esteem no dangers in respect of
that sacred league. But if they once hate (whether by their own inclination,
or some conceined injury) they are so much the more full of danger, in that
hiding their disquiet thoughts, they deeply lay up the memory of their offense
or emulation. Sometimes being offended, they will descend to courtesy, that so
by the privilege of friendship, they may more subtly and safely work their
revenge.

This hatred of theirs will outlast an age, and which is the most mischievous,
their minds are never so easy wounded, as obstinate in bearing the lasting
scarre. Their minds beaten to a sad and serious wisdom, will scarce endure
any jests, and customing themselves to say or do nothing rashly or without
consideration, they weigh all men by their own natures, and examine with too
super^^^ous a subtilty the minds of others by every word and look, so that
their own p^ssions do perpetually punish them with cares and it a ousies.
Besides, the very opinion it self of too great a wisdom is most unwelcome
every where, that even then when they do descend into a free and vnsuspicious
familiarity, they are thought but spies, and censurers of other men's actions.
Their impoysonings and damned lusts I will therefore omit, because they are
vices not proper alone to Italy; seeing it were injustice to impute that
especially to one Nation, which is so rife over all the Eastern and Southern
countries. Seeing besides that those villainies are wrought in secret, and may
not only be denied by those that are guilty, but devised by others
ill-affected to them. But there is a great and public opinion of their
cruelty, such cruelty as robbers in that Country do use to passengers, and
private enemies one against another; nature having so dispensed the affections
of men, that in those Countries where there is generally the greatest show of
humanity, there the ^age of their the^ues is most cruel, and the revenge of
enemies most barbarous. For Italy being most forward, and profuse in
obsequiousness and courtesy, reaches on the contrary the extremity of cruelty
in the dispositions of her thieves, and those that are at enmity. The French
which embrace friendship, not altogether with so much humility of words and
gestures, do renut somewhat also in their entity of the Italian crucity; nor
can they be so easily induced by impious murders, to violate the laws of
nature; at the least they account death the height of their revenge, and make
it not the goal or mark of pleasure, to which by degrees of fortune they
would bring their enemies. Last of all, the English which want somewhat of the
pompous show of the French humanity, do want much more of their barbarous
cruelty. For English thieves are content with the booty only; it is there a
strange and unusual thing for thieves to kill: but with long piked staves they
knock the passengers down, which causes in them only a short amazement, that
neither are they able to defend their goods, nor the thieves enforced to their
slaughter, which often causes a bloody bickering on both sides.

But Italy, though wholly en^^troned by the seas, and the Alps, and joined
together by the community of one language, is notwithstanding divided into many
kinds of fashions and manners, according to the diversity of the spirits that
inhabit it. For having been often conquered, and that piecemeale, and by
diverse kinds of people, her inhabitants are not of one nature. Those stranger
natures she mixing with her own, is, by that means, her self seasoned with
the fates of a foreign Genius. Bsides, the several forms and sorts of
government, into which every part of Italy, after so many changes, has
composed it self, do make much for the forming of several dispositions in
men.

Rome it self by the furious invasion of many people, was long since thrown
down from her wondrous height of wealth and greatness, as if the whole world
had sought from her a restitution of their spokes. Nor ever did Change show so
prodigious a testimony of her power over the mendes of men, as when by sloth
and ba^enesse she mined that great Empire, which so much valor and worth had
raised. The City it self at this time under the Popes jurisdiction, with a
great part of Latium and Vmbria, and some neighboring people, does yet retain
minds fit for so great an Empire, and the Majesty of her Prince is more
preserved through all the world by writing, reverence, and religious awe, then
by the aims and valor of the old Romans. But all that farthest home of Italy,
stert^h'd our into the (...) sea, from Picenum, and (...) both sides (...), and
(...), is under Kings, These (...) of the kingdom is called Naples. No part of
Italy is filled with Nobility of more haughty and proud dispositions. They are
(...) of Arms and Horsemanship, lovers of honor and studious of all
magnificence.

In that other (...), which first (...) Adri^ticke, have the Venetia^s built
then City, (...) deprived of the land-townes, in that waste of Italy, which
Attila made, they were fa^ne to hide themselves in their fens and marshes. In
that City, though the power and government of the Commonwealth do belong to
all the Nobility (...) government, as must needs be, among so many patent
neighbors, and wealthy Citizens of their own, whose riches and greatness
might tend to ambition, if it were not curbed. So their minds by that
discipline are corrected, and not only not trained up in the bravery, and
state of Courts, but want also those delights and ornaments, which all the
Nobility of other Countries do use and enjoy, as Arms, horsemanship, and the
like; besides other elegancies and courtships which the customs of the age do
teach them. (...) also upon diverse s^^or^s of Italy had settled themselves in
the form of Commonwealths, whom the strength of fortune has since deprived of
the luster of that government, which they from foreign seas had brought with
them, and forced them to come under the protection of Kings and Princes.

In those people there are mixed souls, and doubtfully he^ uering between the
desires of glorious liberty, of which they yet retain a shadow, or
representation and the necessary, yet heavy yoke of those Princes, under whose
protection they were forced to put themselves.

But the Lombards both in their minds and bodies have mixed, as it were, the
Image and Genius of France and Italy; their countenances and garbes being
composed to the fashions of the French bravery, but yet retaining the Italian
qualities, and filled on both sides with the virtues and vices of both Nations.

The other regions of Italy are under the command of their own princes; they
are little States, and therefore to be governed with the greater skill, as small
barks in the amidst of a wide Ocean. And seeing that in such small Provinces
the majesty of a Prince cannot be richly supported, but by great tribute and
exactions, long and wholesome custom has taught those people not only to be
industrious in getting of wealth, but also not to deny it to the use of their
Sovereign Princes.

But there is nothing so hard for humane diligence to attain, but the
excellency of an Italian wit will aspire to it. From the meanest ranks of
their common people many daily by happy industry do advance themselves, both
to great name and plentiful estates. No kind of cares, or (if need be) no
condition of humility will they disdain, if it promise wealth; long pains and
long hopes they will undertake and foster: one of which, the pride of
Spaniards, the other the sudden and hot dispositions of the French will not
endure. They have deep and able minds for the governing of Commonwealths, and
fit for any fortune; frugall men, and provident of the future.

Many among them can write Latin, but not speak it so well. That language also
which vulgarly they use, though it be nothing else then a mixture of barbarous
words with corrupted Latin, yet both in speaking, and writing they strive to
alter, as far as they can, from all marks of the original; and to that end
they draw back the words into their throats, so that the roughnes of the
sound, and contraction of words (for scarce do they come wholly to your ears)
may seem to be nothing akin to the old Latin. After that manner has Spain
also at this day infected her language, so that drowning the simplicity of
words, with a confused harshnes, forced as it were from their breasts, they lose
the sweetness of many letters: but the sweetness of learning does not a
little flourish in Italy, especially those parts of learning to which the
lively elegance of nature does inuit them: which is witnessed by that fair
plenty of their native poetry enuy'd by all their neighbour-nations; which has
made sacred the Poets names, burning in so many fained fires of love, to the
renowning of their supposed sufferings. For it is no matter whether they
express themselves in their own language, or in the old learned tongues,
seeing it is the same rapture which leads a pure and rich wit in their own
popular eloquence, as well as in the ancient. For the Grecians wrote those
things which their people understood, and the Romans fitted the Greek
Comedies, and all the pith of Athenian eloquence to the ears of their common
people.

Last of all, what shall we say of Italian Historians, those whose sincere and
faithful wisdom shall eternize their writings? or those that offend by too
much eloquence and partiality? but religion, and heavenly wisdom, as well as
humane learning, with whatsoever is left in the custody of the Muses, was ever
highly indebted to the wits of that Nation. And to conclude, you shall no where
find more true examples of sacred virtues, or abominable vices, then in
Italian minds: so that as one said of Athens, There grows in no place more
venomous hemlocke; nor any where else are the Bee-hiues filled with extraction
of sweeter flowers. *

The seventh Chapter. SPAIN.
THe (...) ^ou^d of Europe, as you trau^^^ to (...) great Oce^n, is Spain,
(...) it, (...), from the name of (...); and lastly by that name, which it now
(...). A spacious Land, ^^^^posed (...) the (...) and Affricke, an Island (...)
way, vn^^sse only there, where the Pyren^^^ mounta^nes are the (...) of it. A
land famous heretofore for her fertility, but at this day by her great
barrenness, derogating (...).

(...) blessed (...) in those places (...), as does almost recompense the
barrenness of the other grounds. You would think it strange, that in some
fields the husbandman receives (...) with increase an hundred fold. Their
towns are (...) many, and in those that are, they want provision to entertain
travelers in such a manner, as France, Britain, or Italy can do. The
inhabitants are constant in keeping still the ancient habits, and the very
Genius of their forefathers. They are able men, and patient of labor, not such
labor as belongs to ^illing of the ground, or handy-crafts, but such
especially, as is suitable to wa^re-like actions; as for example;
Watch-fulnesse, hunger, thirst, and all kind of sufferance that belongs to
military discipline. For their minds being constant in pursuing those hopes
which they once conceive, account it an especial point of virtue, not to be
wearyed with misfortunes and dangers.

From hence in old time, was Saguntus so constant to the Roman party, renowned
for her overthrow, and the courage of their mutual slaughter.

Afterward, Numantia a small City, in respect of the greatness of her fame, a
conqueror first of so many Romans, and lastly of it self. Lusitania also,
under the conduct of Viriatus, with sudden forces easily raised, and disbanded
again: And last of all, all Spain, both in their faith, and manners, fitted
to the discipline of Sertori^s, were able to weary both Metellus and Pompey.

While the Spaniards were yet barbarous, and diu^ded into many and rude
gouernements, they were taught the^r own strength by the Carthagi^^ans and
Romans wa^^ing against each (...).

The (...) their conquerours, that Spain was (...) altogether quiet, but
almost every year provoking the (...) Italy.

Augustus Casar himself also (...) not that war against the Cantabrians to
be an action o^ light import, and therefore comm^tted not the managing of it to
his Lieutenant, but was th^^e in person, as accounting it a d^^ger and
achieuement worthy of his felicity. No^ did the Spaniards in so many wars, and
so much effusion both of their own and others bloods, think at all of forre^^e
conq^ests, but striued only not to be (...) themselves. At last, when they
were accustomed (...), they (...) with the (...) fierce storm of (...)
afterward (...) of (...), which lighted not only upon (...) with the same
shocke (...) upon France, sp^eading (...) strength and violence of those
inuading Saracens. But those Moors beaten out of France, and the neighboring
parts of Spain, seated themselves beyond the rivers B^tis and Iberu^.

The other parts of Spain were divided then into several and (...)
principalities: until (being the first pledge of (...) Spain) Isabella, who
succeeded her brother in the Kingdom of Castile, was married to Ferdinand the
Arragonian King, and by the greatness of her dowry, brought Arragon a
Province, that had ever been more free then befitted a true Monarchy, into due
subjection; afterward with conjoined strength they vanquished the Moors, and
chased them again into Affricke, who almost eight ages had possessed Spain.

Under the felicity of their reign did that Columbus discover America in the
West Indies, and that the affairs of Spain with prosperous fa^es might be
fully exalted on all sides, the Ne^ther-lands also, by the new alliance of
Philip of Austria, were added to the Spanish Empire.

At the same time also, the forces of France being driven out of Apulia, did
Ferdinand make himself m^ster of the the Kingdom of Naples.

Immediately after, did Charles the fifth, honored with the title of Rom^n
Emperor, bring to the growing affairs of Spain, a new reverence, and
ripeness as it were, and by prowess subdued the Duchy of Millane.

There remained now out of Spain only Portugal, disioyned both by name and
affection from it, a Kingdom enriched by their tra^^ique with the East Indies,
to which with bold adventures they sailed along far and dangerous African
shores, and established a Kingdom there by conquest, and plantation of rich
colonyes: but this Province also was by the death of King Sebastian, united
again to the body of Spain, and were brought under the subjection of Philip
the second, the Spanish Monarch.

But by these increases of the Spanish greatness, the manners of the people
are not changed, but excu^ed (...) For there was in them, at the time of their
meanest lowness, a pride be^^^ting the greatness they have now; to which
those people were come by the (...) of their own nature; and that is the
spring of virtues and (...). They have grave minds, and (...), but (...) a
kind of (...), which makes them not ^ashly carried upon (...) things; they
know as well how to use their victories, as to ob^aine them: so being constant
proof against all dange^s, they are not vanquished by time, nor wearied out.
Nor can you (...) from those (...), which it once posse^^^s, this Spanish
gravity, which nature and art together have made. But the words in which they
magnify themselves and their Nation, loathsome to the hearers, and often
traduced by satyricall Comicke-writers, their countenances also, gestures, and
conuersations, suitable to their swelling language, intolerable to all but
flauish and vanquished minds, does add almost a kind of hatred to their
severe Majesty.

The Spanish soldier is better in any army, and especially in their Phalanx,
then in a single encounter. That wealth which patrimony has acquired, and
often denied to the necessity of their temperate-made bodies, they love to
spend upon apparel, and so display it in ostentation; with a confidence of
themselves always great, but most of all among fearful or patient men. They
are wondrous frugall, not only in the heat of their own climate (where
their bodies enfeebled by the excess and violence of Sun, make them desirous
of little food:) but all other places where they eat at their own cost. A
little quantity of bread with herbs and sawces of no great price, will
commonly susfice their Nature so hardly accustomed; but at another man's
charges, none are more free for the mirth of feasting, and then there can be
no courses of rich banqueting, which with their eyes and hands they do not
fully examine but in the most wretched and low estate of por^^ty, a (...)
cannot forsake his saperci^ous p^^de. There was a poor (...) on his deathbed,
who, ^hen his son borne to the (...) came unto him and a (...) in i^ he would
comma^^ (...) him in any thing before his death; with his ^ast (...) br^ath
thus answered his son; Remember (...) that thou keep up thy self in that
port that beseemes the majesty of thy family. But a poor woman of Spain
seemed to me a miracle or pride in this nature. She was clothed, but scarce
covered, with rags and p^ches; and accompanied with three children, by
misreable begging she sustained her hungry life: she lighted by chance upon
French Gentlemen, and one of them moved with compassion of her apparent
misery, said unto her, I will ease thee, woman of part of thy burden; give me
the eldest of thy sons (he was (...) years o^d) he shall attend upon me,
and be p^^onely to easy ser^^ces befitting his age; and, when he grows up,
shall at my charges be bound to any trade that he best likes. The woman
answered, God forbid, Sir, that, although you see me in some wants, I should
condemn my son to follow a baseness, whom neither you nor I can tell to how
high fortunes he may be ordained and by what eminent virtues auailable
hereafter to his country. It were better for him (if so the ^ates will suffer)
to be pined with hunger, then to descend to services a thing abhorred by brave
minds, especially under a foreign master.

But the Spaniards oftentimes coozen the world, with a false shadow of those
great spirits, which naturally, or unadvisedly they make show of. For many of
them contented with a poor and mean fortune, seem not at all to erect their
thoughts to any advancement beseeming their super cilions garb. From hence it
comes to pass, that you shall see them for small pensions grow old in
garrisons (as it were in their own houses) entertayning no cares of that
height that may be suitable to their ambitious language. Which things the
minds of the French can less endure, being always erected to any new
archieuement; nor the diligence of an Italian, watchful always to lay hold
upon a future fortune.

The studies of learning shine not in Spain with that luster, which this age
has restored to the naked and po^^e Muses, when even that sp^^t of crudition,
which ought to tell a^l parts of the se^nces, d^d seem altogether lost and
vanished. For there neither elequence in the Latin tongue, nor the elegance of
Poetry, nor that profitable and solid knowledge of History, and ancient rites
is at all regarded. They keep their old and (almost barbarous) manner of
attaining learning.

Philosophy they study, they love d^uinity, and despise not the knowledge of
the Laws and C^nons but cannot endure that those learning, should be dressed
at all in the Greek or Latin elegancies; as supposing that by those a (...)
(as they think them) he (...) to profess divinity in Spain, became shortly
of low e^teeme there, by that infamy (as it were) of the best learning, and was
constrained earnestly to beg leave of his pa^ions, that he might (...)
books written (...) languge^) So that (...) of warlike (...) on purpose put on
th^s m^sbecomming form of cruelty and neglect toward the Muses.

They have deep and reserved minds, fitted for slow proiects: hence will they
undertake long mines, and unseen, as it were, by the besieged, most wisely
esteeming of war and peace, according to their own occasions.

They frame their minds according to their wealth, and by this invincible art
to triumph over the most valiant Nations. But their most usual matter is, for
procuring of reverence, to use the names of the calestiall powers, and by
pretense of religion, to conceal their ambition from the peoples eyes:
imputing their desires and covetousness to Gods cause, and fighting, as it
were, for him, they conquer subt^lly for themselves. With that preface-like
beginning before all their atempts, they enter, as it were, into a Scene or
Tragedy.

Ferdinandus and Isabella taught to their successors that slight, which is
now grown their country fashion. For they would ever find out in their
enemies some cause of public hatred, that they in all their wars might be
thought executors of the wrath of God.

When they negotiate with Princes of other nations, they choose not their
Ambassadors out of the number of their Dukes or Grandes, but from thesolitude
of some monastery or other. And so, besides the charges abated in the
Embassage, such kind of Agents procure to the business (...). This thing
(...) most worthy of praise, (...) name of the Indies, together with his great
brags, his wary and industrious fraud, can uphold a fame of wealth in his
Excheque^. But that p^mp of (...) language in the Spanish Nation, is therefore
less d^atastfull, because it (...) not at all affected or put on by the^; but
to swell of it self even from the instrict of nature. Of which, every motion,
though declining into vices, I know not by what Genus, does seem becoming.

But that you may not think them unworthy of such a fas^ion (...), as may
seem fit for the p^^sonating of a Tragedy, they are great ha^^^s (at least in
public) of all sordid baseness; they are great lovers, for the atti^e of
the^^ (...), of neatenes^e, and the National (...) in their apparel.

The^ weapons (as the chief ornament of a man) though they want meat, they
will both keep and wear.

They ^aue (...) folly (except one^y thou b^agging) either in (...) or other
con^ersation of life.

Their (...) are subtle, and fit for all things, nor are they so ignorant of
what is in themselves, as desirous to deceive others with a g^^sse of pompous
words.

The beginnings of their dis^ourses and friendships, they do adorn with a
color of the most gentle humanity; and you in those beginnings, may accost
them in the same mild behavior; but when they afterward come to their
supercilious pride, you must encounter them with the like Majesty.

But if thy slender fortune does enforce thee to be a parasite there, then
with a bashful silence and applause thou must feed their minds swelling
about their own, or their Nations greatness. And then also, but that thou
already coozen'st him, think not, that thou have him fast enough; but
remember, that as he feeds thee with mighty promises beyond all credit, so
thou art tied to promise him greater services then ever thou can be able to
perform, supporting thy lies with proportionable boldness. *

The Eighth Chapter. HUNGARY, POLONIA, MOSCOVIA, and the other Northern Nations.
PANNONIA, when the affairs and strength of the Roman Empire were in
declining, was seized by the Longobards and Hunnes, who bestowing their name
upon the Province, called it Hungary.

The bounds of this Kingdom, according to the strength and puissance of their
Monarchs, have been often changed; as fortune has either contracted them, or
extended them upon the neighboring countries. It is watered with the rivers,
Sa^^s, and Tibiscus; Ister augmented from many fountains, does run through
it, and at Taurunam in his wide channel does receive the Sa^^s.

The country from Polonia and Germany extends it self unto the Dacians and
Masia; but at that side, which lies toward Illyricum and Dalmatia, the Alps
do bound it. A soil happy in all increases. It restores Corn in great
abundance. How rich it is in pasture fields, their Cattle which are sold about
the world, do sufficiently declare to other Nations.

A hundred-thousand head of Cattle, or there-abouts are yearly sent from
thence into Germany, and so to the countries bordering upon Germany.

Some parts of Italy also are fed from thence with the like provision.

Their wine is most rich and generous, not much unlike to that which grows in
Spain.

The Climate also is healthful enough, save only that about Autumn a
di^temper of the unconstant air (hourly changing) does breed diseases, but
most cruelly upon strangers. Their nights are chilly with extreme cold, which
hot days succeed, at noone both parching their grounds, and sweltring with
heat the bodies of men. Whom in the evening the cold astringent air again
surprises unawares. The earth in the bowels of it has many metalls both of
different natures and estimations; and gold it self is roled up on the sandy
shores of many of their rivers; and the same rivers most fruitful in breeding
of fish, which are cheap there by reason of the plenty.

The nature of the people is therefore more hardly to be learned, because in
this age they are o'rwhelmed with afflictions and scarce left to their own
dispositions; for they are oppressed on one side by the Barbarians, which have
made themselves masters of a great part of it; on the other side auxiliary
Soldiers levied amongst all the nations of Europe, have by their multitude and
long aboade in that Country, and long aboade in that country infused, in some
measure, their manners and dispositions into the people.

I can suppose it should spring from no other cause, then continuance of war
and calamity among them, that the Country-Boores have quite lost their innocent
simplicity, and are turned so extremely eruell. For without any difference they
lie in wait, both for their own soldiers and the enemies. And if any do
happen by night to stray from their quarters, the Boores are ready to surprise
the prey, and rob (with most unthankful vill^ny) those soldiers, who (...)
all dangers do endeavor the in preservation; and reuerla them but naked, and
in all extremity.

Their Noblemen (as is fit) are of a brauer and better disposition, their
minds and visages framed to magnificence, and their whole garbes composed to a
pleasing Majesty.

They use Gowns and such robes as the Eastern people, but especially purple,
or skie-coloured. And this attire does wonderfully become the men, a short
sword commonly adorning their gowned side.

They are excellent at subtle and great counsels, and of a courage equal to
it; especially if the project lie in sudden, short, and stolen enterprises.

Their chief Nobles are of great wealth, and retaining (though in a Monarchy)
very great mar^es of true liberty.

They are attended, according to their riches, with store of Clients, and those
exceeding faithful in their service to them: And no greater care at all
possesses them, then not to forsake any of th^se prerogatives, which they from
many ages have maintained inviolable. For that reason is their va^our more
constant in fighting against the Turks, who under one Law of seruit^de do
oppress all families, of how great blood or emine^ce soever. Without this, the
inclination of their minds might well be feared, that they would choose Kings
from other places then from Germany. For the German^ and Hungarians (a thing
ordinary in (...) a neighborhood) are at great emulation betwixt themselves.

Their rai^ing at each other in their common discourses at home are very
cruel; and with great curiosity they are both busy in discovering or
inuenting vices in each other.

The Hungarians are lovers of Horses, and have excellent good ones; they are
curious in their arms and attire, even to delight and pomp^.

They had rather fight on horseback then on foot.

They are most greedy of honors, and have a great ambition to be feared by
others.

By imitation of the Italian arts and dispositions, they are thought to have
learned the (...) vices, and to perpe^rate their wicked reue^ges with the same
arts, and the like maliciousness. You would suppose them most easy men to
embrace friendship; but whether it be true or false none can be better Judges
then they themselves which enter into those friendships; s^riously considering
whether they have deserved so to be beloved: or whether that Nation so skillful
in taking of advantages, do pretend friendship, the better to perpetuate some
in^ended mischief.

There is a Magistrate among them of great note, whom they call the Palatine:
he of himself has not power to decree any thing, but may resist the King when
he determines to enact any public matter, which is altogether void if the
Palatine gave his voice against it. To him the most of them give great honor,
as to the supporter of their liberty, and our opposed against the Regal power;
no otherwise then of o^d the Roman Tribanes were ordained as curbers of the
Consuls jurisdiction. From hence might you see that the great and swelling
spirits of that Nation, would (...) brook a hard, and unlimited power over
them: unless they be forced (as it appears in those Hungarian Provinces which
the Turk now possesses) to an awe of their sovereign Lords by so stern a
discipline as does for ever reaue them of any hope of liberty.

The Illyrians and Dalma^ians, whom we call the Istrians and Slaurians, are
seated upon the shores of the Adriaticke (...) Toward the Land they border
upon Pannonia. That Region is unpleasant on the back of the great Mountains,
upon whose ridges cold Winter coth perpetually tyrannize. But that part of the
Country, which is seated in the valleys, is of a milder temper, and well stored
with Villages and Castles.

They are Nations that live under the command of others, and having been long
accustomed to diverse Lords, do for the most part follow their manners and
dispositions. Part of it is subject to the dominion of the Austrian Princes;
much of it that lies by the seashore, the Venecians are masters of; and the
rest is under the Empire of the Turks: from hence it comes that their habits
and manners are partly Germans, partly Italian, and partly barbarous, according
to the several Genius's of their sovereign Lords.

The Region is almost not visited by any, save only that in their havens at
some times they do harbor ships, which are sailing from Venice into the East,
and return from thence again into the Adriaticke.

The other places do not at all inuit strangers.

Those soldiers which are leuyed from thence, are renowned for valor and
great audacity, especially in the Turk^^ (...); and few but they, are ascribed
at Constantinople, into his guard of Ianizaries.

At the North-side of Hungary is Poland, which stretches from thence to the
great Ocean, and bordereth upon Russia. A country, which though wonderful
spacious, yet no where almost has any mountains in it, and from plaineness^
of it, is ^o named; for plain^esse in the Scythian tongue is called Pole.

Their fields lie out in great Champion-plaines, which in the Winter are
coue^ed with deep Snow; but when the Snow is gone, are very fruitful in
Corn, not only for the use of the inhabitants: but their grain transported
by sea to many countries lying along the Baltike seas, does supply the dearths
and ba^^en season of other Nations. Their Winters are raging, and strongly
congeale both their grounds and rivers: because the violence of Northern winds,
wanting the repe^cussion of any Mountains, has, as at sea, a free passage in
the open air, besides their neerenesse to the Northern Pole, where the force
of the Sun is very feeble, especially in Winter-tune.

But Nature, for their assistance, has afforded them great and spacious Woods,
which do not only furnish them with ^yring to expel the cold; but within
their couerts ^oe nourish beasts, whose skins for clothing afford them furs
of greatest price and esteemation. This double assistance have the Polanders
against the tyranny of their winter. But their woods do yield them another
benefit; in which the^e are at many places a wonderful number of swarms of
Bees.

They are wild Bees, hiued, or kept by the care of no man; upon pla^e Oaks, or
trunkes of other trees they ha^g by clusters; there do they build their houses
of wax, and fill them within with most deliciou^ honey. From this alone is the
country exceedingly, and with great ease, enriched. Their wax is merchandise
to other countries, and of the honey they themselves do make a kind of
drink, which they esteem very delicious. Some provinces of Poland are too
full of rivers and ^^rishes, in so much as that in Sommer-time they are scarce
accessible: but in winter, when the waters are frozen, they have S^eds, in
which they pass with speed upon the ice. With those therefore they traue^l the
country, and that is their (...) of (...) with foreign merchants, who come to
buy the^r wax, their furs and whatsoever else is of price and (...) in so
cold a country.

They want stones, for the most part to build them houses; their walls are of
timber, and their houses (...) covered with thatch, except only their chief
Cities, and palaces of Noblemen, which are adorned as curiously as that
country can possibly afford. But the Poles, under a rough clime, live hard
lives, no^ are the dispositions of the people composed to the elegancy of our
age; and from thence also are they of more cruel natures.

Their Innes to receive stangers, are far different from the manner of our
Countries: they are brought into a room altogether unfurnished, and commonly
where the wall is dug through to afford light, and stand open to the
violence of wind and winter. There are no beds for the gu^^ts to lie upon, nor
tables for them to eat on; but the walls are full of tackes, where the guests
in order may hang those burdens, which they have brought with them; and the
ground is strowed with straw, which is intended for bed^ in those Innes.
Therefore whosoever do travel through that country, do accordingly provide
themselves as if they removed their dwellings with them; their meat, and other
provision, together with their beds, they carry in Waines with them; that
being entertained in those naked Innes, they may with their own provision
defend themselves against cold and hunger.

They are a Nation borne to cr^elty and (...), which they call liberty;
insomuch as they can scarce yet be brought to abrogate a ^aw of unspeakable
barbarism which for many ages has continued among them.

By that Law it wae appointed, that whosoever had killed a man, should be
absolved from all fear of justice, (...) did throw upon the carcass of the
dead man a certain sum of money, which in that Law is mentioned. Nor would
they so basely have prized the blood of man, if out of the cruel fiercenes of
their barbarous Genius, they had not judged the murder of man a slight offense.

They do abhor the very name not only of slavery, but of obedience to a
just and lawful Scepter.

Their King by force of arms is compel^^d to observe their Country-lawes.

The Nobility have bestowed upon themselves most mischievous prerogati^es, by
which they may safely abuse and hurt each other; because the King has not
power enough to punish their offenses in that kind. They are wedded strangely
to their own fancies; nor do they take to themselves a greater
licentiousness in manners and uncivil conversation, then in opinions of
religion, and (...) matt^rs; of which, (...) man without any fea^^ (...) both
think and (...) self lists: Which (...) and are ashamed to learn (...)
best wisdom from another man's direction, from hence it is, that their minds
at this day are diu^ded into so many (...) have among (...) fortunes. They are
ap^er to be outrageous, then deceitful to any man, and themselves easyer to
be ruined by f^aud then (...).

(...) Poland, Russia lies, (...) the Prince of the (...) does reign. The
(...) is named from the city (...) which by reason of (...) of inhabitants,
(...) of their Emperor, is (...) of Russia also. It extend^ in a long and
sp^cious tract from the Ocean to the Caspian sea; and borders upon (...) sides
both with the (...) upon other (...) till the Spring be far spent; and then
succeeds a cruel Summer, which striving (as it were) to redeem those delays
which the long Winter had there made, does ripen their fruits with a most
(...) heat, but not so kindly (...) trees in our Countries. (...) almost
beyond belief, (...) should ripen there, (...) among us require not (...) very
hot, but a continued S^^mer. There are many woods in the country, and in them
beasts of most precious Furs. They have store also of (...) and honey, which
(...) the chiefest merchandises of that country: (...) inhabitants, but yet not
answerable to the largeness of the Land which they (...).

They are a Nation borne for servitude, fierce upon any show of liberty, but
quiet, if strictly kept under, and refuse not the (...). They do freely
confess (...) slaves to their Prince, (...) both their estates and (...) at
his disposing; the (...) are not in a more sordid (...) subjection to the
Scep^^ their Ottoman Emprours. (...) esteem also of all other (...), according
to their own Geni^s. Strangers also that either by chance or on purpose do
come into Mosco^^ are condemned to the same (...); and forced to be slaves to
that Prince; (...) they go away, and Be (...) again, they are punished as
fugitives. The great men; although themselves be slaves, are very proud toward
the common people; and they very fearful of the great men's frowaes. The
people are reported to be so ignorant of learning, that few among them (...)
the ordinary prayers of (...) Church unto God, by hea^^. (...) are fitter for
war, then (...) for the most part are in (...) there to repel the invasions
(...) Tartars on one side: or on the other, either to invade or keep off the
Polonians: in this age they have been much busied in civil wars among
themselves. Their batta^lts consist all of horsemen; they use no foot for this
reason, because they place the moment of all their designs in celerity: with
great speed they both assault and fly. When once they begin to fear, they are
brought to utter desperation; so that when they fly from a battle, if the
enemy overtake them, they are far from making of the least resistance, and
do so absolutely yield themselves into the Co^querours hand, that they do not
so much as beg (...) lives. They are remiss in (...) of theft, though seuere^^
(...) execute robbers.

(...) awary Nation, and very (...) in deceiving others; nor (...) ignorant
that Merchants (...) in that kind suspect them; whom that they may get to have
the better opinion of them, in their commerce oftentimes they (...) themselves
to be other countrymen.

They are exceedingly given to drinking, and besides their country drinks,
they have Wines brought them from forreyne parts.

Their Wives live in great bondage, detained strictly at home, worthy also of
greater afflictions.

They are (according to report) of such incredibly servile dispositions, that
they measure the kindness of their husban^^, by the number of the (...) they
give them: and (...) think themselves so well, (...) when they fall upon men
of fierce dispositions. A mean fellow of Germany traveled into Mosco^ia, and
(if in such a tri^ling tale you desire his name) he was called (...). He
continued there, and liking the country, married a wife in it. Whom whilst he
loved dearly and by all kindenesses sought to gain mutual affection from her;
she with a sad dejected countenance did often sigh, and express other tokens
of a sorrowful mind. At last when he demanded the cause of her sadness,
professing that he had been wanting in no office of love to her. Why (quoth
the woman) do you so cunuingly counterfeit affection? do you think I know
not how little you regard me? and withal she began to make great lamentation.
He amazed at this, began to embrace her, and still asked her wherein he had
offended, and if perchance he had done ill, he would hereafter amend the
fault.

To this his wife answered, Where are the^ those stripes by which thou
testifiest thy love? For husbands among us by beating their wives, do express
their love and care of them. When Jordan heard this, amazement a while
suppressed his laughter, but afterward when they does vanished, he thought it
his best course to use his wife as she had prescribed; and not long after, he
took occasion to beat the woman: she appeased with stripes, began then
earnestly to love and observe he: husband. But he could keep no measure, but
grew more cruel then his wretched wife desired: and at last with an unhappy
stroke (they say) broke he thighs and her neck also.

Germany, where it is washed by the Balticke sea, borders upon the Cimbrian
Chersonesus, and through a small distance of sea surueys the other Islands,
which make up the same kingdom of the Cimbrians. It is called at this day
Denmark; from thence is but a short cut to Swethland; to which on the North
side Norway adioyneth. And these are the regions, out of which so great
Nations, famed both for their multitude and victories, rushed like a
whirlewinde over all Europe. From thence came the Cimbrians, Tentones, Goths,
and Vandals; by whom Italy, Libya, Spain, and a part of France were sore
afflicted.

But of later times those Colonies that came from thence, were called Normans
(that is, No^^hrea men.) By these Britain was long possessed; and much of
France wasted with fire and sword; but there atlast, after many dangers, peace
was compounded, and they seated in Neustria, which they afterward called
Normandy, so that nothing in Europe escaped their fury; and being terrible to
all, they were commonly accounted to be invincible. How it should come to
pass that so great a multitude, and a spring (as it were) of Nations should at
this day grow dry, it is uncertain. But fore it is, that now in those
countries, towns are very rate; and they are so far from fending Colonyes
abroad, that when they have war, they are enforced to use foreign
soldiers. I could believe that those barbarous Nations, frugall in old times
in their barraine soil, and ignorant of vices, increased in Children; and
because the unfruitfulness of the soil denied nourishment to so numerous a
people, they did often send out their young men to seek out new plantations:
which then men of all ages did desire. But now by that mad vice of tippling and
surfets they have over whelmed their genitall strength, and can beget
inhabitants for no more then their own countries. They exceed the Germans in
drunkenness. When they awake in the morning they fill their stomachs with a
wonderful hot kind of drink, which by the fire is extracted from Wine it
self. When they are thus refreshed, the fumes of that hot liquor ascending
into their heads, do cause sleep; their rest is but short, and then they
return again to drinking. Then they drink* Wine or Ale, as many a like it.
That time that remains till noone, they bestow in business.

At last they meet at dinner, which by continued discourses they make no bones
many times to prolong till supper time; from thence they are carried to bed,
neither apt to do nor receive wrong.

They break no promises, when their hands are given.

There are among them many footesteps of the German language, but more of their
German manners and behavior.

Norway is but thinly stored with inhabitants: their lives they spend for the
most part in hunting; no country affords Timber more fit for masts orplankes
for ships. It is a rude Nation, and with most men infamous for witchcraft.

They by report can fell winds, which those that fail from thence do buy,
equalling by a true pr^digy, the fable of Vly^^es and Ae^lus.

They have cruel winters, and very dangerous to those that are not aware of
them. A be^^mming air, with little or no feeling, does seize the body; that
before you perish, you can scarce know that you are perishing.

From this plague, by a memorable example, was He delivered, whom God had
ordained to be Monarch of all Britain, James, as then but King of Scotland.

Frederick the second King of Denmar^^ had espoused unto him his daughter
Anne; but she sailing to Scotland, was often cast back upon the coast of
Norway, by the force of chance, and evil spirits that raised up winds at the
command of a witch; who afterward suffered for her offense.

The King being young, and a Lover, impatient of delay, resolved to ^a^le unto
his Wife, and in midst of Winter entered that sea so infamous for (...); after
he had long struggled with weather and tempests, he arrived in Norway. And not
long after, the ship that carried him, as if it had been set upon the land,
hard frozen up with ye remained immuneable.

The thing was told to King James, who had presently a desire of seeing this
unusual sight. For about none of his Britain shores does the sea freeze.

There was (the weather being fair) a haven not far from the Kings lodgings;
he went therefore along, the winds neither blowing, nor the air (as it
seemed) very violently cold; and beholding a while the frozen sea, he returned
into his chamber, suspecting nothing of the danger of the Winter. But when he
drew near to the fire, one of those that stood about him, looking by chance
upon the Kings right hand, perceived that finger that was next the thumb, to
be blue, pale, and bloodlesse; and knowing the condition of that air, cried
out to the King not to come near the fire; the air, s^ (quoth he) has hurt
you, and be^^mmed your finger, being in this case, the fire with an
unseasonable heat will quite undo it. The plague of this cold must be expelled
by another cold. The King wondering at this, denied at first that he was hurt
at all; for he felt no pain: but he shortly perceived, that he was well
advised. For the finger grew stiff and dead, losing all sense and heat of
blood.

When he desired remedy, they told him there was at hand a certain cure,
which with a short, though cruel pain, should restore his health, and that
he must endure it, unless he would rather lose his finger, which was
stricken with th^^ pestilent Winter: then there was suddenly brought him a
vessel full of snow, not melted by the fire, but thawing softly by the heat
of the Chamber. Into that, the King adu^sed by the inhabitants, thrust his
finger: when on a sudden, a cruel p^ine creeping through the joints of his
lately benammed finger, had almost put him out of (...).

His pain was that, which first taught him how sense was restored to the
finger. By this (...) the King was made whole; and being admonished of such an
unlooked for mischief, he could afterward more easily avoid it, or cure it.
For not long after, his right care, as he rid, was taken with the same malady.
*

The ninth Chapter. TVRKES and JEWS.
THe Turks, a barbarous people, borne to the destruction of Cities, Arts, and
Learning, have prospered more by our vices, then their own virtue. This
public calamity of the world, by barbarous violence, multitudes of men, and
obedience to severe discipline has grown great. Their beginning was from
Scythia, which we call Tartaria. From thence they were called as stipendary
aides in the dissentions of Persia, or of their own accord forsook their
barren country, invited by the neighboring regions fertility, and with a
wonderful religious obedience followed the fortune of him whom they made their
captain. To him they gave both themselves and their estates, either never
acquainted with liberty, or now voluntarily throwing it away from them.

Nor are other Nations more constantly obedient to their good and lawful
Princes, then they to that horrid tyranny, to which they have condemned
themselves; unless that now it is thought, the extremity of that reverence is
by degrees abated under Princes unworthy of it: or that the affections of
people being too violent, are never corstant.

They first seized that part of Asia, which heretofore was said to abound with
all delights; and from thence under A^^urath sailing into Europe, with the aid
and shipping of the Ligurians, that famous Greece, the ancient seat of the
Muses, became their prey. But they by the harshnesse of their dispositions
striving against humanity, continued still in the ferity of their ancestors,
that you may know, a civil Climate may herbour (...) people. Whilst they
stuck in Bithynia, or afterward in the shores of Thrace, on either side the
two e^ulous Empires of Greece and (...), which, unless they could vnquish,
would vanquish them, stirred up their barbarous courages, being then in the
heat of their first victories: where (to our shame) they ruined those mighty
enemies, and chose Constantinople taken by Mahomet, the chief seat of their
Monarchy, being delighted with the situation of the City in the borders of
Asia and Europe, as also the conuenience of a most stately haven, and the fame
of that Empire which so many ages had there flourished.

That which remained in the East, was either possessed by the Souldan, who to
his kingdom of Egypt, had io^ned Syria, and the neighboring regions: or was
under the Persians, whose Empire from E^phr^tes extended to India. The Persian
was to the Turk an open enemy, and in continual and cruel war with them
about the bounds of their Empire. They both made league with the Egyptian
Souldan: but Selymus the Turk, thinking that the Souldan did more religiously
observe his league with the Persians, made that an occasion of war against
him. Never in so short a war was there gained a greater victory for spoils,
for men, and Countries; and which is more, a constant possession of them. For
by two set battles, and one tumultuary fight, all the dominions, wealth, and
arms of the Souldan, were by fortune translated to Selymus. From hence, he
grew more terrible to Persia, and began with ascornefull pride to ouerlooke the
wealth of Europe. But returning from Syria in triumph, he ended his life by a
sharp disease in the same place, where once he fought a battle against his
father Baiazethe as if his fathers Manes had claimed a revenge. But presently
Solomon, more furious then his father, invaded Pannonia, and taking Buda, which
is the head of Hungary, he presumed to besiege the Austrian Vienna. But the
pleasures of Constantinople did by degrees mollify the minds of those Princes,
and auert them from our ruins. But we in the mean time weakened with wars
among our selves, and emulation of nations; blush not to expect from the Turks
hands war or peace, daring to offer nothing against them, but contented if
not provoked, we send Ambassadors to those tyrants of Constantinople, to sue
for leagues and purchase peace; whom they either through pride, or hate to our
religion, esteem not worthy of their audience, or scarce their sight; and
think it toomuch below the dignity of their Empire, to send: (for a commerce
of mutual friendship) their own Ambassadors into Christendom. But as the
felic^ty of so many victories has raised, almost beyond humane greatness, the
majesty of the Turkish Emperor; so, (which is wonderful) it has made the
people wretched, by whose hands and strength the Empire was raised. For when
the Ottoman Princes were yet low, and contained within their camp, almost
their whole nation, then surely what prey or dignity they would divide, must
be divided among those soldiers, nor had they any beside those Scythians to
join in friendship with. But their wealth increasing, and they free in choice
whom of their own or conquered nations to prefer to gouernements in the
commonwealth, their greatest honors are never bestowed upon the ancient race
of Turks, the posterity of those soldiers, from whom the Ottoman family
received together with the Empire, a power to be now safely unthankful to
them.

We cannot tell, whether through disdain, or custom which among barbarous
people (is in stead of religion) or through secret policy for security of their
Empire, it come to pass that great gouernements, dignities, and places of
judicature are conferred on none but those which are borne of Christian
parents. From Dalmatia especially and Illyricum, Boys and Girls are taken
from the bosom of their parents, to be cloistered up in Constantinople. There
they change into a mad superstition the religion of their fathers, which they
cannot remember, and being circumcised, are trained up in the religion of
Mahomet. And this company so taken by rapine, are to the Turkish Emperor as a
seminary of Captains and Princes, to whom the guard of his person and the
strength of his Empire is committed. From hence are taken his Eunuchs for
nearest services, and therefore there not contemptible. From hence are his
wives and concubines, and always the mother of that heir that must succeed
in so ^reat an Empire. Out of that band he chooses husbands for his Aunts and
sisters, to beget Cousins and Nephews to him. And so far is it grown
aduantageous not to be borne of the Turkish race, that those chief places in
the Empire, which those that are borne of Christian parents do hold, never
deuolue unto their children. And for no other reason, then that they were borne
to the Laws and Rites of Turkey. This does that Nation suffer, so much
dejected even in their own judgment.

The Turke^ are of a ^usticke and base nature, not worthy of liberty, which
they care not to acquire. The Law of Mahomet forbids them to polish their rude
minds with any humanity of learning, that so being ignorant, they may be drawn
with more case to the madness of that Law which he has prescribed.

Their chiefest care is about their household stuff, their flocks and herds
of cattle. Their buildings are scarce for use, much less for ornament, either
yet mindful of their Scythian original, and that wandering kind of life, or
else because they are but tenants at will, and at the Princes pleasure must
remove not only their dwellings, but their countries. By an inbred affection
they do wonderfully adore their Emperor; they call him the shadow and image
of God.

The cruellest in that Nation, and the greatest haters of Christians, are not
those that are derived by a long pedigree from the old Turkish race, but those
that lately have revolted from us; the other (they say) are of a milder nature,
but far from our dispositions.

There is no where more subtilty in poisoning: and it is scarce credible with
how much art they do extract and temper the strength of venomous things; nor
do they destroy any man that way, but in a wonderful subtle manner, every
man in that country alike viciously studying how to give or avoid death by
poison. Who would believe it? they require not a taste nor touch, a little air
corrupting the vital parts will bring death, and that a quick one. A Bashaw
lately had bought the government of Aleppo, of some that were gracious in the
Court. It is a City not two days journey from the Cilieian sea, enriched by
the frequency of merchants, and traffic from the East; from whence
merchandise is brought, partly by the river Euphrates, and partly by
land-carriages. From whence the Governors get great wealth, and rob the
Province as licenciously as they buy the place dearly. When this man therefore
was sent to his government, another with greater bribes had corrupted the same
courtiers, and was appointed to succ^ede the other, who had scarce as yet
tasted the sweetness of his government. The Governor speedily he^^ing of
this news from his f^^^ds, was (as is likely) sadly stricken with it; having
as yet scarce got any thing to recompense his cost in buying the place. He
therefore calls a counsel of his friends, and among them complains of the
loss of his estate, and the perfidiousnesse of the mercenary Court. He seemed
in doubt, whether he should obey the letters which called him back to
Constantinople, or resist his successor by armed force; and so with a new sum
of money either to obtain pardon for his boldness of the Constantinopol^tan
courtiers, or else not to survive his honor, and estate. Whilst in these
cogitations he was anxious and raging, the faithfullest of his friends called
him aside, and bade him to nothing rashly; he tells him if he resist his
successor, it would be censured rebellion; that in their state there was no
crime so heinous, as not only to (...), but delay obedience. Take (says he)
a safer counseil; meet thy (...) with gifts; and lest he should suspect thy
boun^y, complain to him that thy fortunes by this untimely succession are
almost sunk, yet thou prefer^est nothing before obedience. Entreat him to
receive the Province which he is sent unto, and accept, as a pledge of
frie^dship, those gifts, which thou in hospitality bestowest on him, and that
he shall make th^e (...) for them, if he give th^e his letters to
Constantinople, signifying in them that thou without delay did resign
(according to command) the government, privilege, City, and Province, into his
hands; among thy gift (quoth he) there shall be an handkerchiefe, which I
have, of ^^re workmanship, but anointed with a most mortal poison. If thou
hold this near to his face, as to show him the elegance of the work, that the
least insensible vapor may but come to him, I will promise thee he shall
never govern in Aleppo. The Governor takes the counsel of this sub^^^e
fellow, and with great pomp meeting his successor, brings him into his house.
There, among other blandishments of his treacherous liberality, he shows to
him the fatal handkerchiefe (...) wrought with silk and gold. The other with
(...) in the wretched man was (...) taken with the (...) of so bountiful a
predecessor; and so when the night was well spent, they went to bed. In the
morning the new Governor not able to resist the poisonous air which he had
drawn from the handkerchiefe, lay in his bed a dead man; nor did the cause of
his sudden death appear to any, but to those that contrived it.

When this mischief was done, the murderous Bashaw sends letters to
Constantinople, both those in which his successor had signified his kind
entertainment, and others of his own, to signify the others death,
entreating that now his government and Province might beco^tinued to him; which
he easily obtained, fortune rewarding with felicity so great a wickedness. In
this cruel wickedly wonderful art, you need not more admire their exquisite
study and wretched subtlety in poisons, then the corrupt manners of the Nation,
people sold by magistrates, law and right measured by money, and other
mischiefs of the basest tyranny; there scarce lie any actions against bribery
and oppression: the great magistrates do too cheaply esteem of the injuries
which the common people suffer, and think them not worth revenging, who by
continuance of slavery, and education according, dare not so much as repine at
the misery of so abject a condition.

I wonder at nothing more among the Turks, then that men that so constantly
auerre the immortality of souls (that they may from thence less value their
lives) do give themselves license to act those crimes, which Nature, even
without a Law, would abhor. Yet to relieve the poor and strangers, many of
them are very forward; for these offices of humane compassion, houses every
where are builded, for the sick or weary to abide in, and maintenance, either
from the public charge, or pri^ate men's Wills is given to them; nor are we,
though (...) think us, and call us d^g^, debarred of that humanity and
relief. They do wonderfully reverence their parents; and though at any time
they be injurious to them, yet the remembrance of life received from them,
pre^ailes above the sharpness of the injury. They eat much meat, and are
more careful in adorning their bodies then their minds.

For all those lusts, for which they are infamous, there is less fault in them
then in their filthy prophet Mahomet, who by his Law forbids not such
concupisce^ces too much inbred in mortal men, though restrained by the laws
of God and modesty: so did he think to allure that military people, but yet
(as being Eastern) es^aemi^ate in pleasures. So that, by a wretched ignorance
of virtue, they are exercised in these vices, as being allowed to them. Nor is
cruelty severed from their lust, especially in their Prince, who challenges to
himself, as well the blood, as the wealth of his subjects.

The Turkish Emperor passing through Constantinople to hunt in the adjoining
fields, spyed at a soldiers door a young youth want only glancing his
effeminate eyes. The lust of the wicked Prince was kindled, and he commanded
the Youth to be taken* and carried into his palace. But the soldier that
abused the boy, love ouercomming his allegiance, ventured himself to rescue his
Catamite, and with a drawn sword resisted the Princes ministers. But what could
one do against a multitude? The Emperor that used to be bloodily enraged at
any disobedience of his men, yet censured not so ill this soldiers violence of
love; but gave him a farm in the country as a price for the loss of his boy,
and commanded his stipend to be increased. Immediately the Prince burned in
lust with this Catamite, and kept him not only for his pleasure, but ranked
him highly in his friendship. Which when the soldiers heard* he desired much
to see his once dear love now in such high honor. Therefore by entreaty and
gifts he prevailed with the guard at the door, that when the Emperor dined
in his garden, he closely at their backs might see him and the youth together
(for he was always admitted to banquet with the Emperor.) At the appointed
time he came: the Emperor after that country-fashion sat down on the
carpets, and by him the impute Catamit, proud with too great rewards of his
unchastity.

The soldier by chance unwarily stepped forth from his place, so that the Youth
spied him, who remembering his old service, ran speedily to him, and kissed his
hand. The Emperor, when the Boy returned, starting up, and viewing him with a
^^erne front, and furious eye, asked him whither (false as he was) he had
turned. Sir (quoth he) to my old master; whom I could not choose but salute at
least. Immediately the Emperor mad, that he had a Rival, with a short sword,
which he wore about him, thrust the Boy through. But when he saw him fall, he
fell upon him to the Earth, and with his breast coue^ing the wound, he bewailed
his death. The soldier presently was commanded to die, as being the occasion of
so great sorrow to his Prince; but he breaking through the tumult, escaped by
the favor of the guard, and lurked in concealment till the Emperor was
appeased. So that no ties of friend-ship can be safe from such fell tyrants,
who value not only their own safety, but even their pleasures, above the
lives of their subjects.

But the wars in that Nation are now but moderately followed, and not with
the fierceness of their forefathers, since their Emperors were idle, whose
presence heretofore put greater courage into the soldiers. Their Pratorian
bonds in Constantinople, whom they call ^anizari^s, discontinued from the
exercise of true war, in idleness and city-delights, are grown to a
mutinous, but (...) boldness. Hence the proud soldiers begin to lose their
discipline, as not fit to endure (...) labor or felicity. There were the (...)
that made the Romans there to (...). But those of them, which govern Egypt,
especially the (...) at Great-Ca^re, do with great praise exercise the glory of
their old warfare; for, remoo^ed far from Court, they are exercised to daily
labors, incurbing those troops of robbers, which from the mountaine-tops use
to make rodes into the valleys.

But these soldiers valiant only against a troop of flying thieves, and
yielding enemies, if they should fall upon the streng^h of our armies, would
perhaps use the (...) of their horses, in which they excel, not so much for
battle, as for their own safety by flight.

That use of the bow (the spec^all strength of the Turk) which was once so
formidable to the world, is now neglected; I suppose, because this art cannot
be attained without much (...) and labor of the body; and at this day, the
soldiers spoiled with ^ase, and discipline ceasing, will not buy valor at so
dear a rate. Their bows are short, and cannot be bent but by those that are
skillful; but they discharge their arrows with much more violence then our
(...) do their leaden bullets. We saw indeed (and could scarce credit our own
eyes) a piece of (...), three inches thick, pierced by a little arrow. And no
less wonder was it, that a shall wanting an iron head, shot from a bow, through
the body of an indifferent tree, appeared at both sides. This art was taught to
a man of great account among us (when he was at Constantinople) by an old
soldier of Sclymans; who confessed, that skill by the slothfulness of his
fellows was quite lost, and that there were scar^e three in that vast Empire,
which were careful to preser^e in themselves that fortitude of their
ancestors, he said, the rest had weak bows, and only dangerous to
light-armed men.

If we would make use of the benefit of God* and their vices, what were more
easy then at this time to (...) those wealthy Provinces out of their barbarous
hands, their o^d^ury, which they accounted valor, being now forgotten? This do
those poor Christians, who groan under the yoke of their barbarous tyranny,
expect from us, being a great multitude, but destitute of arms and leaders;
this, ^ur temples and rites of religion which they wickedly have abolished; and
lastly, humanity extinguished, and countries once richly tilled, now rude and
desert, nor ever, unless by our aid, able to regaine their old luster. But if
any be discouraged, to think of so many attempts, and so much wealth
heretofore vainly wasted, whilst our ancestors striued to redeem Syria,
Palestine, and Agypt out of the hands of Saracens, and as often with great
forces taking expeditions against the Turks; let him consider that they were
more vanquished by emulation among themselves, then by those enemies. To let
pass the Grecian Princes who were always ill affected to our Western
soldiers, how often have we by unprofitable hatred wasted our own strength
against our selves? It were not fit to shame this age with late examples, nor
curiously to rehearse old calamities.

The mortal dissensions of the French and English in those wars, shall be
argument enough of grief and caution.

Richard the first King of England surnamed Cor de-lion, led an Army into
Syria, and having revenged the wrongs which Cyprus had done him, he had driven
the Souldan to extreme fears, who was aduising to deliver up Jerusalem, and so
make peace with the Christians; when lo, Philip King of France, surnamed
Augustus, returning himself from Syria, ill affected to King Richard, marched
with his army into Normandy, (Normandy was then under the crown of England)
and assaulting his towns, some he took by force, others by fear, and
faction. So King Richards intent on the public quarrel of Christendom, was
called home into Europe to preserve his own estate; and the Saracens at that
time were by means of the French, delivered from the Christian army; who were
afterward beholding to the English for the like benefit. For scarce an age
after, when Philip of Valois, King of France, with all the strength of his
Kingdom was bent upon this Pious war, there came to join with him the Kings
of Navarre, Arragon, and Bohemia, and many besides, whom either the strength of
their kingdoms, or the holiness of the war had invited.

Their Fleet lay at anchor, which carried forty thousand armed men, and
victual for three years; their army to march by land was 300000. men. But
this so great preparation, and hope of the Christian world, was quite hindered
by Edward the third, King of England, who at that time began to lay claim to
the crown of France, as the inheritance of Isabel his mother. So have we
turned our strength against our own bowels, and vanquished by ourselves, have
given triumphs to Turks and Saracens. These are most sad chances, but great is
the comfort, that we have yet strength enough to destroy that barbarous
Monarchy. Nor need all the Christian Princes so, (...) in this; there are many
of them that are alone sufficient to gain this victory. We need no
innumerable Army, nor a F^eet to ore^pread the wide Ocean. A man of singular
judgment and prowess, and by long experience, well acquainted with the
Turkish affairs, was not afraid to promise to his King, that if he would
give him a Fleet, and an Army of thirty thousand, with pay for two years, and
victual for a year, he would reduce under his dominion Peloponnesus, (...),
and the greater part of Achaia; which unless he performed, he, desired that
that Army which was committed to him, should take punishment of him for
deceiving the King, and by (...) most cruel death revenge the rashness of his
vain promise. The same hope of victory there, and scarce with so much charge,
not long since was given to a great King by a (...) expert Captain, a man ^oth
for dignity, and blood, worthy of the charge of so great an expedition. But
death (...) his great design, and (...) was, whether by poison or no. Both
these Captains grounded their hopes upon the strength and warlike discipline
of our soldiers, the number of Christians there, and their prayers imploring
our arms to their relief; and lastly, the slothfulness of the Turks, who
hold by no other title the fame of ^ortitude, then (...) memory of their
ancestors not yet wholly expired. But it was the advice of those Captains,
that this firebrand must be thrown into the enemies bosom; and not stand to
defend our own bounds, in which, the greatest reward of victory is, to remove
the enemy from our Country, who will afterward return more fierce upon us
But if subdued, our own bondage and our Countries is present; and therefore
they would not have us stay in Hungary, but marching speedily to encampe our
selves in the midst of Greece or in Thrace. This kind of making war, many of
the ancients used; so Hannibal in Italy conquered for Carthage: and Scipio in
Affricke for the Romans; so lastly, the Turks themselves have conquered those
Nations, whom now they govern, by carrying the war into their countries.
Nor did the Franks by a slow removed war, as it were, at the entrance salute
Gallia, nor the Normans Britain, a kingdom stronger then themselves* but
broke into those countries, sharing (as it were) before the victory, the
reward of victory.

Besides many helps which we have to this war, our ancestors wanted: They
sought out the enemy in the farthest East, then swelling in his first (...) of
victory, whom we may now find in the bowels of Hungary, and the shores
against Italy, waxing old as it were in a full, and shortly ^bbing fortune:
which we may know by this, because he does not increase: And we are taught
by the errors of our ancestors, so that those very things, in which they
failed in those expeditions, may be all cautions to us or better discipline.

Now also the enemy vrges near upon us, that we may almost consult only in
this, whether we would vanquish or be vanquished. Young Athmet who is now
their tyrant, thinks of war, and threatens Iransiluania, either wearyed with
his idleness^, or to gain esteem among his subjects, he bends his thoughts
upon this expedition; from thence arises a great danger to us, when military
discipline, languishing among them, may by these incitements be raised up
again, and a Prince hitherto ^lothfull, and voluptuous, fleshed with the taste
of victory, may come on more hotly to our ruin.

They say that Charles, the last Duke of Burgundy, spent the first part of his
age, not only free from warlike Actions, but in a wonderful love of quiet and
repose; afterward, when France was fired with that war, which they called the
public good, his affections were turned so quite contrary, that no part of his
life was afterward free from military action. God forbid that Achmet should be
raised to such resolutions. But who in so great a danger, would not think it
better to take arms, whilst they have not yet sh^ken off their Lethargy; then
to stay (...) they grow expert by use, and swelling with victories, should from
the midst of Italy and Germany (which God forbid) advance their fatal
ensigns, to impose a common slavery upon us all? But if Achmets own lusts do
call him back to his slothful idleness, not extruded by us, nor hearing our
Arms within his Countries, surely we shall owe this (almost shameful) safety
not to our own virtue, but the gift of Fortune.

After the Turks, let us come to the Jews, even in this regard, because they
esteem us below the Turks. We asked a Jew, Of whom he had the better
opinion, Christians or Turks? and could not but wonder at the impudence of the
sellow: for in the place where he was, h^e durst not speak ill of Christians,
yet he could not hide his mind; but certainly (quoth he) the Turks are
content to be circumcised. They are a vagabond au^ scattered people, Lords of
no Province; a nation eager and able in getting wealth, ^renuous in all
merchandise, and thriuing by wicked usury. Wheresoever they are, they serve;
and their minds tamed, that were heretofore so fierce in maintaining their
liberty, do now stoop by custom to this low condition. They have every where
mixed their manners, and to their own disposition, (in which with greatest
ob^^i^acy they continue) they add the Genius of the place where they are
borne. Th^^r minds are obstinate in their own superstition, and scarce can
they how much soever they counterfeit) be truly converted to our pi^ty.

Their bodies are commonly said to stink, and that not without reason, ^or
they use a strange^asty carelessness both in their houses, and apparel, and
some strange, unusual vapor exhales from them. In greatest wealth they never
rise in apperell, either fearing our envy, or loving a pari^y among themselves.
This is a great argument of their servitude, that they are allowed no where to
possess land or arms.

And justly do we take away strength from so hostile a people, who, if they
could prevail, would punish us ^^ne worse.

Now having reckoned up, and called (as it were) to a censure all those people,
whose minds and manners it behooves them to know, that must converse in
public among men; let us come to the several kinds of wits and affections;
which as they do not altogether, or of right possess any one Nation; so,
scattred in all Lands, they abide in many men, and are both the seeds and the
nourishment of virtue and vice. *

FINIS.
The Tenth Chapter. That besides the Spirit of the Country, every man bath a
proper Disposition and affections given him. The chief of them may be found
out, but all of them cannot be written. Of wits that are strong at sudden
jests and Sentences. Of others that flow in a natural and facile Eloquence. Of
men of (...) slow, and deliberate wisdom. That they are most perfect which
are placed betwixt those two. Whither those minds are best which are fittest
for letters, or administration of public business. Delicate wits are not so
fit for centinuall and daily labor, as those of a slow and depressed capacity.
AS under those Climates, which by reason of much cold, and moist air use to
produce people fair and gray eyed, yet some notwithstanding, as if near
neighbors to the Sun, are of duskie visages: and in those Regions, which
being scorched with the Suns violence, set a black and thicker tincture on
the bloods of their inhabitants, the fairness of some men differs from the
usual tawninesse of their Country: So amongst humane people some minds are
rude and r^gged, others partake nothing of their countries barbarism. There
are some gross minds in a clear air, and some clear minds in an obtuse
climate: Nor has any region the in^luence of such happy or malignant stars,
but that she may find a patte^ne of all vices and virtues in her inahbitants.
For Nature has granted, besides the Genius of their native Country, something
proper to every man: and by a great miracle, among so many ages, and names of
people, has sound out for every man his own lineaments, that may distinguish
the habit of his visage and mind from the likeness of other minds and
bodies. From hence can no man sooner by contemplation find out the wonderful
play of nature, varied in the minds and affections of so many men: than a
painter in his tables can include the forms and similitudes of all bodies. Yet
let it be lawful for us to survey, as eminent trees in a thick Wood, the
chief kinds of dispositions and affections, of which men use to be composed,
and by them wholly swayed, and notably distinguished from other men.

Nor shall it be a superfluous meditation to recount, and examine so many
different ranks of men; in which every one may find himself, and see as it
were in a sequestered mirror, what himself would either wish or fear to be.
And since no kind of disposition is so near bordered upon vice, and leaning to
it, but by the raines of prudence may be restrained, and kept in the right way:
and none so near a kin to virtue, but by ill usage may be corrupted; it will
be good to contemplate the affections of men as they are attended with good or
ill, and search out how far they may be hurtful or availeable; lest we be
missed immoderately to praise some; and too unjustly to undervalue others.

As we recount the dispositions of men, those of a sudden and extemporary wit
shall be our first; those, that as often as they list to speak, can in a
sudden facetious discourse run through an argument. These men, if they want
just weight (as many times it is) as neither eloquent by study, nor wise in
counsel; but then only O^ators or Philosophers while they talk, may be
valued at such a rate as those wares which being vain and useless of
themselves, do by an adulterate varnish cosen the beholder. Of them there are
two kinds; some in private and close discourses excel with a short and
stinging wit, ever intent upon the follies of other. The other sort comes
nearer to the dignity of eloquence, and whenever they please publicly or at
home to discourse, their wit is like a torrent, and their memory does
opportunately prompt them with all things that they have either seen or read.
The bravery of both these sorts is admired not only by the ignorant, but
sometimes by those of better learning: when they see many jests and sentences
with great ease and suddenness flow from such men, which themselves not
without much pains and study are able to express.

For whom can we imagine to come nearer to the image of industry and elegance,
than those sudden witted men (to begin with them?) What is more elegant
than to find a pretty sentence for every argument? What more courtly than to
answer all that is done or spoken either with a sudden jest, or such a
wisdom as being easy and at hand, is pleasing for the quickness of it? If
this gracefulness be joined with a fair personage, and a secure (though not
immoderate) boldness, it will be praedominant in all societies, and be
pleasing even to those men which are hit by the jests; nay the noise of it will
drown the true and exact wisdom of a blessed slow men. But this felicity in
speaking is troubled with its proper diseases. Take them from private company,
from sudden and broken sentences, from bandying of wit, to an argument of
longer discourse: then out of doubt thou shall con^emne the barrenness of
their empty minds, not being furnished for true and lasting wisdom. Nay if
those very concise sayings and fine flashes, which thou admirest in them, were
written down; that they do not only come forth by (...) and vanish again,
but be examined by judgment; how idle and foolish would those things seem,
which by a vain praeiudice, and grace of celerity did before (...)? Therefore
in those men there is no deep and ^asting river of wit, but sudden floods of
Nature; for as small waters from high springs, straightened in their passage,
do fall with the greater noise down: so these sparks of wisdom, which
would presently expire, unless they were caught, do fly with a more vigorous
noise out of the custody of these narrow minds, which are only happy in such
a kind of abortive wisdom.

But the other sort, which are copious in longer eloquence, and fitted
continually with an unexhausted store of words and sentences, are famous men
among the people, when they are heard in public assemblies, Churches, or
pleading. They are pleasing also in private society, if they be able to be
sometimes silent. But as all living creatures by a secret instigation love to
be doing of that thing, in which they are most able; so these men especially
delighted in their own eloquence, wherein they excel, can hardly co^taine
themselves within a mean when all occasions of discourse^ are; that you may
justly wonder, that such absurd men should speak so well. When their tedious
discourse is done, and they see those men whom their discourse has wearyed, to
look cheerfully, they do not consider that the other are only glad to be
dismissed from the trouble of their tedious talk, but think them ravished
with a pleasant admiration, and go away resolved to entertain them in that
manner again the next time they meet. These large minds, opened by Nature it
self to the Series almost of all things, are never exact, or thoroughly soaked
in knowledge, but cursorily they taste of all things. And as an Echo can
neither keep in those last words which it receives, nor dive any farther into
the sentence, so these men with a wonderful ease, and before they are aware
(as it were) are guided by Nature to the first glympses of all things and
Sciences, but they are scarce able to do, or (almost) to desire any thing
p^^fectly or exactly in them. I should think it a great argument that it is
only chance and heat, not judgment of the mind, which brings from them so great
a copiosity of things, and undigested elegancies; since whatsoever they chance
to discourse of, they never fail of this pompous plenty of words and
sentences. But whenever their memory, even in the very course of their
speech, prompts them with any thing, they presently divert to that, and anon
to another matter, as it happens; and at last, lost in many subjects, they
remember not the original of their discourse.

They therefore being of wandering minds and settled in nothing, are usually
unable to attain not only to the highest Prudence, but even the common
discretion of other men. Some of them are immoderate pra^sers of themselves;
others not helpefull to their friends nor themselves in those offices, which
diligent and settled industry should be fitted to. They are for the most part
unconstant, and as they waver in actions, so they easily fly from those
opinions, which they seemed strongly addicted to. Yet notwithstanding, as they
carry a great show of a polite disposition, adorned with all kinds of science,
in matter of fame and wealth, they oftentimes possess the rewards which are
due to true wisdom; especially if they do understand their own faults as
well as abilities, and know subtly how to hide, at least from the common
peoples eyes, their spots and imperfestions. This especially is attained, if
they can govern themselves in talking, and not wa^der whither soever their
desires carry them; and, because by eloquence, as the best condiment, all
things are made grateful to the ears, let them by a nice deflection fit
diverse discourses to diverse men, and always of that nature as may be able to
go beyond the hearer; as for example, among Soldiers or men ignorant of
antiquity, let them discourse of divine points, of the rites of the ancients,
of the original of people and Nations, and whatsoever has a show of the most
graceful curiosity in the sciences; among Scholars which have only lived in
study and contemplation, not employment; let them talk of the fates of people
and Rulers, and the Genius of Princes; and lastly contend with no man in his
own Art. Nor is it unple^sing in the mixing of discourse, to fall upon those
things which are strange and unknown to the society; especially since new
things are pleasing, and we conceive^sually a higher, and more reverend opinion
of that which we do not know. These Orators are in least danger when they
converse with men of a low and narrow disposition, who reverence every thing as
sacred and miraculous, which a bold eloquence puts upon them. Therefore they
always take those parts which according to the conditions of the hearers, they
think most advantageous to their fame. Which is therefore easy to them,
because their diffused wits are capable of some instructions in all arts and
sciences. Nature, and little use enabling them to speak not improperly in all
things; though they cannot be said to be learned in them, but only not to
be ignorant of them.

But for such Orators, to write, is commonly as hard and fatal to their fame,
as to speak is easy and graceful to them. For to that easily fl^en^
eloquence the strength of judgment is seldom joined, which must continue the
style graceful to posterity. For their prompt, and almost turbulent mind, when
in that leisure, which is given to Writers, it revolveth it self, is overladen
with the multitude of fancies that meet, and confusedly oppressed with its own
wealth, can neither write all which it does invent, nor iudiciously elect the
best.

Lastly, the way of writing is so different from that of speaking, and
requiring other kind of Nerves, that even he, who by a strong eloquence could
freely run over what he list, in writing does make but vain strokes, and such
as men in their dreams attempt. Yet blinded and corrupted with their own and
others flattery, they do many times, by an itch of writing, destroy that same
which they had gotten by eloquence. They should do better for themselves, by
far, to keep the world in a long expectation of their writing; than to
publish books to the hazard of their fame.

By these cautions, that lively and spreading mind, may conceal his own
weakness from the peoples eyes, and rise in an opinion of wisdom, whether
he be able to govern himself (which you shall not often see) or will admit
counsel, and be quiet at the persuasion of his friends: as those, that are
but half drunk do yet know that they are not sober, nor will they with too
stubborn and obstinate a confidence refuse the admonitions of their friend^.

Contrary to these men is another so^t, who seem at the first show as far
from that virtue which is truly in them, as those eloquent men do from the
imperfections, to which they are borne. These men when there is occasion to
speak suddenly, have a speech tardy and hard to come off. They do often
stick, and are squibbed with jests and taunts, which like little da^^s, are in
daily discourse thrown against them by th^se sudden and nimble witted men.
Nor do their words only come slowly off: but when heir opinion is required,
they are to seek and do not suddenly find what to de^ermine. But when their
mind is recollected, and reduced into it self to meditate, they can ^ive wi^h
subtilty enough into the depth of affairs and business and conceive fit words
to express their meaning. There is in them a deep steng^h opinions true and
pro^^^ab^e, not adulterated with Schoo^e-sophistry; but most worthy, if they be
scholars and use to write, to be delive^ed by themselves to posterity. But in
^his, fortune has (...) till with them, that since in the first entrance into
speech or business, they resemble men of a dull and narrow soul, they are
oftentimes by most (...) prejudice neg^ected and contemned. Therefore the
greatness of their minds being sometimes unknown, does what the favorable
hand of Princes to advance them into employmen^s and honors wor^hy of their
industry, even as ^he luster of most precious wares, if they be wrapped up
within bese bundle, without a title, can draw no customers at all to it.
Therefore for those men it is a most profitable course, to make their way well,
that their inward weith of mind may be known and those Clouds removed which
Nature had placed in the entrance to it. And this they may attain unto either
by writing (for what is ^ha^ else but displaying a Table of the Soul) or by
daily exercise to stir up the edge of their slow wit, that it may be known
to be as great and strong as it is; and last of all by as inward and long a
familarity as they can, to join themse^ves to those great men, who by that
long experience may not only understand what abilities are in them, but
advance them when they know it.

Between these inconvenient extremes of gravity and levity, is the most
worthy disposition, and fit to reach the height of humane dignity. They have a
moderate eloquence, then showed, when it is needful and more perfect i^ is,
when they hare ti^e and study: but in their familiar conversation a discourse
(...) and clear, not troubled at all with haesitation. A strength of judgment
not very much involved and slow; but though it be good on the sudden, yet
after delay and consultation it is fa^e stronger. This is the man is built for
virtues, and made to express private and public wisdom; or if he give his
able mind to vice, the weight of such an extraordinary villainy, which way
soever it lean, does fall with great danger.

But great minds from those which are dark and ignoble, are in this
distinguished by nature; that the first knows his own dignity, and does all
things freely, with an erected (though modest) spirit, ever contemplating
somewhat that is eminent and full of vigorous majesty: but the close and
obscure mind condemns it self to be imprisoned in narrow cogitations and
counsels, never daring to depart from his fearful humility. In small matters,
not exceeding the measure of his mind, he is exactly diligent; and there is
fitted to that disposition a kind of policy, not noble and high, but such as
we see in the least and weakest creatures, careful to keep their ^wne.

There are some among learned men, who either favoring their own endowments,
or deceived with the benefit of learning (which all but the very Barbarians
know to be wondrous great) deny that any mind is to be esteemed great, but
that which is capable of letters, or can possibly attain to just perfections,
unless it be adorned with them. By this means they exclude from the rank of
magnanimity and true humanity, men famous for public virtues, and borne to
govern people, if they be (forsooth) unfit for the subtiilty of learning: a
great error, or rather madness; for they may on the contrary more truly
affirm, that no man^ fit for civil affairs but one co^ceived in the riches of
nature but many vain and superflud^ witted men in the School^ have arrived eve^
to the high^est praise, such whose nature confined, as it were, within the
bound of some one science^ is dazzled at the sple^dor of that profitable
Prudence, to which all other sciences must give place; unless you think not
him more truly wise that can play the angur among his Citizens, and fitly
compose the co^motions of the people, than him, who by a perpetual
contemplation does nothing but observe the eclipses of Sun and Moon, the
courses of the stars, and vici^situdes of the year. Those men themselves, who
do with such absurd praises extol the Muses, do not account that man only
absolute, who is adorned with all kinds of science; but count it enough to make
him so, if he do excel in any one kind of learning; as if an excellent
Orator be unfit for controverted Philosophy, or if a Philosopher be not
capable of eloquence, and altogether ignorant of history and Poetry, yet they
will not exclude him from the number of learned and excellent men. That praise
therefore, which any one part of learning may gain, how dare they detract from
that Science, which consists in governing the people, and is far more
excellent than any thing belonging to Mankind! Do they think that wisdom
speaks to her Scholars only in Greek and latin, and not rather by a secret
inspiration, containing the worth of all languages? It were a poor thing to be
borne of an excellent mind, if that excellency lay in nothing but a disposition
fitted for Academicall learning. Those, whom we account the first Authors of
learning, did not sweat in the Schools, and yet we thought them borne under
good stars. To compose the manners of the people, to strengthen their Country
with wholesome counsel, to examine forreinerites, and transport those that are
good, into their own land: to observe also the motions of the heavens, least
the seasons of the year, for profitable uses of the people, should not be
known: This then was learning, and this our lettered men do but only
imitate. For when those ancients did strive to teach humanity and virtue to the
rude minds of the ignorant people, civil Philosophy by that means had her
original; when they contended against each other to persuade the people to
this or that action, eloquence had then her beginning. Lastly, what does
history, but leave the Prudence and subtilties of those ancients to our now
learned men, as their successors, if they be men of action; but if they be of
minds unfit for business, then as to registers only, and enroliers of the
ancient virtue. For to read history only for contemplation, in a vain and
idle pleasure, which passes away without fruit: but to imitate the virtue of
those praised men, is the true and public learning.

I will not deny but that is indeed a most absolute accomplished Soul, which
is framed both for the Commonwealth and Learning too. For then these two
endowments do by their mutual aid, advance each other to the sky. His high
and active policy does govern his learning, that it grow not light, nor base:
his learning again does arm that policy, that it should not only trust to
experience and knowledge of his own times, but make use of the skill and
labors of antiquity.

But if any man, as sometimes it happens, fit for public employment, and to
aid his Country, have no felicity at all in learning, he is notwithstanding
to be esteemed of a higher order and elegance, than he, which is only
capable of quiet learning, and School subtilties, unfit altogether for civil
discipline, which is most useful. Insomuch, as Favorinus may be thought,
rather Philosophically than jestingly, to have measured the knowledge of ADRIAN
by the greatness of his power. The Emperor Adrian was ambitious of the fame
of learning, and lighted by chance upon the Philosopher Favorinus. He being
provoked in argument by the Emperor, answered sparingly, and as if he
yielded, that the Emperor might freely triumph. His friends blamed him for
yielding so soon; but he replied, that they were deceived; for why (quoth
she) should not I think him the most learned, which has twenty Legions? The
Philosopher spoke not this without good ground: for to govern discreetly so
many Legions, was a point of higher science, than to find out any thing in the
Schools by the strongest and most exercised head in Contemplation.

But the splendor of wit, as of all things else, is often spoiled by too great
a confidence of it self. For many conscious to their own weakness, do
endeavor by labor to obtain that, which nature had denied to them, and by
daily diligence do so mould and frame their minds, that at last they exceil
those, which were borne happily to great matters; but considering too much the
strength of their own minds, have abstained from labor, as a thing not
necessary to them, but altogether superfluous. There is also a great difference
even bewixt those, who by industry endeavor to perfect their wits.

For some of them, whatsoever they purpose as their study and labor, are
busied only in the maine and highest points of it; but do not so much as let
their thoughts descend to the lower and less necessary points. Others are
overtaken with a contrary error, who fearing to leave any thing behind them
untryed and undiscovered, do so strictly search into the least things, and are
so desirous perfectly to scanne whatsoever they learn, that they cannot make
any great Progress in their intended Studies, nor ever arrive at the true and
liberal knowledge of that thing, whose every part they have so superstitiously
desired to discover.

Besides, all wits have not the same strength of patience to endure continual
labor. For the more subtle and apprehensive that the mind is; so the more
easily it penetrateth into any learning; but is dulled the sooner either by
greatness or continuance of labor. For such minds are not kept in thick
constitutions, but such as are open, and fit to receive aeriall draughts, and
pervious for the passage of animal and vital spirits; who as more subtly
they can display their sharpness, so by their thinness they vanish, and are
only repaired by idleness and recreation. And of such men not only the
labor, but even the recreation is precious, as filling their discharged minds
with a new strength, and for the most part storing their loose and wande^ing
fancies with high, and serious cogitations. As the felicity of rich Fields,
when they lie untilled, does sometime of it own accord plentifully and
wantonly produce such Plants, as are not inferior to the best Garden Fruits:
So thought COSMO DE MEDICIS, a sufficient Author of Prudence, the Founder of
that flourishing Tuscan Monarchy. He had taken his rest quietly, and without
care as it seemed, till it was late day; when one of his friends coming in by
chance, found him as yet between sleeping and waking* And where (quoth he) is
that COSMO, to whom we, as to an ARGVS, have committed our Commonwealth? He
does not use his eyes so much as in the day time. I have already dispatched all
my business both abroad and at home. Cosmo replies; Do thou think that in
diligence thou have outgone me^, whose very rest is more active and profitable
than thy labors?

Yet some notwithstanding are exempted from this fate; and, though men of great
capacity, can endure continual labor; few they are, and bestowed by Nature as
her dearest gifts upon the public affairs, who can exercise their deep and
piercing wits in lasting diligence, able to undergo perpetual employment, and
not confounded with the different face of business; so that they seem to be
borne as a releife to humane imbecility, and a preservation of Commonwealths.

The eleventh Chapter. Of valiant Minds, rash, fearful, proud, sordid; close
and reserved, open and free; of (...) minds following all things hotly, but
not long.
Minds undaunted in dangers, and confident in themselves, are as eminent among
the common sort, and exalted above others, at as great a distance, as Beds in
Gardens, or hillocks in plain Fields. But that disposition is at equal
distance sea^ed betwixt the confines of good and ill; and of it self affords
nothing to those, whom it possesses, but a froward heat, to make them excellent
in what ever they follow, virtue, or vice. For those men on both sides, by true
valor, or rashness, (two affections of kin, though much different) are
stirred up to the pursuit of vice or virtue. Rashness has almost the ^ame
appearance and countenance that valor has, and does oftentimes so far
deceive, that those, which make themselves the judges of great men's actions,
do (which you would think unjust) measure them almost only by the event. How
many Soldiers of the basest rank, because they have survived the dangers they
underwent, have attained the^ fame of warlike knowledge, and that dignity which
accrews to it? Others have been accused of dotage, because upon the same
projects, and in the same dangers they have been ruined. T^berius Gracchus by
the love of the people and his own power, was ambitious to be a Lawmakers,
and by a combination of the Nobility was put to death; the like destiny his
Brother Cajus tasted; they therefore, say some, were men of unadvised
rashness. Cajus Caesar by popularity and bounty winning the people, attained
to the Sovereign dignity; he therefore was accounted a valiant and wise man.
King AGIS contending against the Ephori, was strangled at Sparta with a base
halter. CLEOMENES boldly by the deaths of the Ephori, did establish the royal
dignity. What shall we censure of both their actions? Chance, or virtue? But
this instance is an especial one; ALEXANDER the Great, having quieted Asia,
had designed part of his Army to go, and keep Europe in obedience; and the
other part to stay with himself, least that any Commotions might arise in the
parts of Asia.

The Soldiers not knowing upon what reason the King divided his forces, do all
arise in a fierce mutiny; and casting off obedience, are not at all moved at
the presence and speech of Alexander. But he boldly, either through wrath, or
policy, leapt from his Throne amongst the maddest of them, and with his own
hand drew forth to punishment those men, that had most sawcily contradicted
him. That Majesty, which could scarce preserve his person, while he sought to
appease them, did then guard him in the act of punishing. This action of his by
the consternation of his relenting Soldiers, was renowned for high virtue: But
GALBA the Emperor going boldly amongst his mutineying Soldiers, was slain in
the midst of the Market place. Shall we call this valor or rashness? So
near, or almost confused is the reason that mixes this virtue with vice; or,
to speak more truly, valor is oftentimes forced to take the ways of
rashness; and then scarcely can it be vindicated from the suspicion of that
vice, unles the happy success make it honored: or he, that was driven to
that dangerous necessity, have by a long aestimation of prudence, deserved to
have it thought, that he used not rashly, but by the praescript of judgementt,
hose extreme remedies which so nearely trenched upon the vice of rashness.

Therefore this affection, when it is wary enough, is corrupted with too fatal
a confidence in it self; despising all things with too great a scorn, and
liable to the mischiefs of pride: apt to boast, not careful enough either to
avoid hatred (...) gain love, but ^unning headlong with a mad violence, until
the indulgence of fortune, and success of rashness be wasted, and no longer
able to bear him out. But where this affection can keep a mean, it grows up
into most eminent virtue, and ^aises the courage only in that case, to value
the dangers of life and safety, less than the infamy of forsaking their duty,
or betraying the cause of piety. But if any man with that undaunted courage can
join meekness, and have the power to bridle choler (which commonly waits
upon the strength of those minds) he is then a man of a most excellent and
accomplished society; and being awful in Peace, shall by his ability procure
a reverent fear, and by his moderation a loving respect from all that converse
with him.

There is another kind of adulterine boldness, but more safe; which may fall
upon spirits of the basest rank; when they dare to do things, not with their
own, but others dangers. This, but in name only, does almost in nothing agree
with that courage which we described before; and yet notwithstanding has not
been enough to raise undeserving men to fame and glory. None are more
beholding to this boldness, than Generals of Armies and Physicians; one by the
danger of their Soldiers, the other of their Patients do attain fame. And
indeed how many, not only Generals, but even Tribunes and Centurions have not
hunted for fame by the blood of their Soldiers? A hard condition of those
common Soldiers, whose praises must be all intercepted by one man! Yet the
policy of men in that kind is excusable to preserve the ^enerals, by whose
wisdom, more than the strength of the Soldiers, the foes are sometimes
vanquished; and the Soldiers upon this condition are entertained, that
whenever the Commonwealth needs them, they are to power forth their
Mercenary lives. But Physicians not by APOLLO the Father of AESCULAPIUS, nor
all the Muses, together with APOLLO, can sufficiently be excused; those, I
mean, who hasty in acquiring of wealth and fame, love not their Patients, as
the sanctity of their calling, and mutual affection of humane society does
require: but esteem them as Sacrifices to their own glo^^^, by a villainy,
which is safe, and therefore the oftener practiced. They use untryed and
suspicious medicines at the peril of those, whom they come to cure; not
content with the sure rules of Art, and praecepts of the ancient, but accusing
antiquity, as if they would (if they may be trusted) invent a new art under
their own names. If fortune this way do assist their rashness, and the
medicine given either for destruction or health (for they know not themselves
which) do good either by chance, or the strength of nature in the Patient;
they straight have gotten among the people a fame of certain, and almost
divine knowledge; and many others by their deaths shall pay for the cure of
this one man; while these Physicians do then sin more boldly and even with
the applause of dying men. But this T^agicall boldness arises not from that
disposition of mind, by which courageous men (whether valiant or rash) are
carried upon high undertakings. For boldness or valor is not to be terrified
with a man's own danger; and to fear in the behalf of others, is humanity.

Contrary to this confident and undaunted mind is the timorous nature; which
as sometimes it is carried upon honesty, so most commonly it turns to vice.
For if it be altogether joined with sloth, as loving security of any nature,
it then degenerates into the basest vices, and is altogether unfit for virtue,
or for private or public business. But it is hard, unless only when dangers
are at hand, to know such cowards; because that, knowing (...) ^^^mselves this
base fear, they strive with diligence to hide the signs of (...), and
cunningly counterfeit ^old speeches, challenging (as it were) all dangers, when
they see they are far from them; but injuries, affronts, and reproaches they
can put up, as well as fear. They tremble at every show of threatening fortune;
nor do they strive to decline those evils, which they fear so much, by a
valiant and constant endeavor, but by a dejected and ignoble way. They esteem
the virtue and force of every man, although untryed, above their own. They
hate all men, and yet admire them with a secret veneration, which is not (...)
against their wills, but ^^pleasing to them. But, when they may safely, they are
very cruel; either to counterfeit courage, or that their base and narrow
natures are prone to revenge, or else to prevent their future fear by
destroying them that might afterward threaten them. But their countenances are
kind, and much different from their inward cruelty: so that you may think them
like quicke-sands, covered with still waters, but deep and devouring in a
storm.

But especially, where a Prince is altogether of this timorous nature, his
Servants, and Subjects have just cause to suspect that softness of mind,
which seeks indeed to give content, but is not safe nor happy either to
himself or others. For even those men, that durst insult over the captived
disposition of their fearful Master, do sadly at the last suffer, in
satisfaction of contemned Majesty: and the Prince himself, though he suspect
those, whom his inbred cowardlinesse makes him fear, though he give them
respect more than is fitting: yet he hates those men, and sometimes breaks out
against them (letting himself loose wholly as it were) with a storm as
sudden and violeut, as before basely he had yielded to them. But to have the
Servants and Subjects cowardly, is oftentimes of great moment to secure the
Majesty of the Prince. But then he must not govern them with too gentle a
hand, least they think he fear them: nor provoke them by too harsh and
unseasonable commands, as altogether despising them; for a dangerous
insurrection may be made, even of the most cowardly men; where every man, in so
general a mutiny, is bold, not trusting to himself, but his fellows spirits.

But if any man be so borne to a fearful nature, that yet notwithstanding by
prudence and wisdom he can acquire true valor; and where there is need of
it, temper his natural fears; he is not only far from baseness, but
worthy of exceeding admiration, that can change a weak passion, and most
commonly bad, into true virtue. A notable example of fear, joined with these
strong virtues, in our fathers memory, was a great and renowned Soldier, to
whom France in her Wars did owe much. Stout he was of hand, and wise in
counsel, yet at the very approach of fight, when the enemies were in sight;
filled with a representation of the danger, his Body was so loosened, that he
needed a private place to empty himself both of his excrements, and his fear;
But when he had recollected his spirits, so skillful he was in marshalling
his Soldiers, and so courageous in fight, that you would doubt whether he
performed better the office of a Chie^etaine, or a common Soldier. At the end
of his life also, his noble (though calamitous) courage proved to the world
that such a pitiful fear may sometimes be joined with true valor. For that
tragical battle of Pavy, where King FRANCIS was taken Prisoner, and the
French lost their hopes of Italy, was made more sad by the death of this noble
Captain. The day before this overthrow, the King called a Council, and,
though himself were eager of fight, yet desired his officers to give their
advise. This old man did exceedingly persuade the King to stay for supplies,
which were already leavyed, and near at hand: desiring him not to throw into
hazard (especially at a time unnecessary, and in a foreign land) the estate
and welfare of France: that their consultation was not only for the Kings
honor but his safety. There was in the Council a hot young man, who, of a
turbulent spirit, was fitter to begin than continue a fight. He alleged, that
nothing was more honorable than that the victory (of which he doubted not)
should be gained by fight; that the enemies would receive too much honor if
they should be feared by so great a King, and so cheerful an Army; that the
Kings name had already frighted them, and the French horse would at the first
onset tread them under foot; he taunting besides this old Captain, said, it
was no marvel though an old man, and fearful, sought delays, whose mind
was shaken with his usual fears, and now was seeking a passage through his
guts. The old man could not endure the scurrility of so immodest a jest; but I
(quoth. he) seeing the K. will have us fight, wildy to morrow a^ honorable death
before his face; when thou forgetful of thy brags and rashness, shall by
abase ^light forsake that battle, which now thou hastenest on. This sad
Prophecy they both fulfilled; for the young man fled basely from the battle;
and the other, through noble wounds in the Kings sight, powered out that life,
which he before had promised.

This wary and modest fear may not only be joined to Prudence, but is
sometimes a great part of it, and very profitable in those men, for whose too
too forward and rash spirits the Common wealth might smart. But those men that
by this just and wholesome Art can govern their own minds framed to
fearfulness, are usually adorned with a most mild humanity, and full of
courtesy; and pious modesty will injure no man; reverencing as it were, even in
the basest and poorest men, the communion of minds and mortality. They are by
this inbred fear, more troublesome to themselves than others. For secretly
within themselves they labor by manly precepts to compose their sick minds
distracted with terrors against their wills; but openly they neither think it
seemly to confess their timorousness, neither through the impulsions of
their unquiet fears do they love to manage any thing either of their own, or
committed by their friends.

The proud and sordid minds are different from the bold and fearful; but borne
as it were, upon the borders of them. Pride the tinder of worst dispositions,
breaks forth diverse ways in manifold and heinous vices, obnoxious to all the
tortures of hatred, love, and chiefly envy. Perpetual and troublesome are the
vexations of those men, which do not so much strive to gain praise, as think
it is already due to them. They easily suspect themselves to be neglected, and
revenge in themselves with most bitter grief, this scornefulnesse (as they
account it) of other men. They know not their own vices, nor the virtues of
others. And when men are of this h^mor, faith, piety, and whatsoever is sacred
among men, they value below their fame and thirst of honors. And how much
soever succeed, nothing breeds their quiet, but carries them upon new, and more
distracting hopes: but there is no greater affliction than when Pride falls upon
a man of a fearful and effeminate mind. Shamefastness and fear do then
restrain his mad desires: and he in the mean time with a concealed swelling
punishes himself. But this disposition is unfit for friendship and every where
unpleasing; unless sometimes when pride by the dull and fearful minds of the
common people, is adored for magnanimity. But But minds that are base, and of
a sordid lowness, as they take no care for high achievements, so they account
nothing unworthy to obtain their Lusts. They either sleep in lazy Idleness,
and the Lethargy of pleasures; or else gape after wealth with an afflicting
desire, that cannot use it when they have it. With such commotions are these
abject minds usually troubled. If for a time they be raised with high
projects, and seem to follow reason, yet straight they are benumbed by their
natural sottishness, and wallow in their former baseness. Those that are
sunk in this disposition, are not borne to bear rule: nor yet are they very
fit for obedience; for they repine at other men's virtues, which they indeed do
neither love nor conceive; and therefore seek for a kind of freedom, in which
quietly, and without the check of any man, they may enjoy their own base and
narrow affections.

But we do sometimes favor vices, and give them the names of those virtues
which are are near to them. So rashness is honored for fortitude, and pride
adorned with the name of an erected manly nature; and this base dejected
humility puts on the colors of humanity, and that simplicity, which is taught
by true Philosophy. But we commonly censure no dispositions more unjustly, than
those that are open, and apt to do things like rashness. For upon such men,
as if they forsook modesty, the brand of levity is stuck: and on the
contrary, dull and close minds do among the people carry an image of wisdom;
we censure them both amiss, but not without some show of reason. But open and
active wits are neither fit for secret malice nor deceit, nor for the most part
filled with that malapartnesse, and other vices, which they may seem to make
show of. For in such men a desire of sudden speaking, and harmless jesting
is more praedominant, than any malicious intent. They scarce brook idleness,
still seriously intent upon some action, whether great or small; so that this
kind of diligence does usually shake off those sordid qualities, which commonly
grow upon slothful minds. They cannot spare their jests, though against a
friend; but the present delight more than any man's wrong, is ^ought by them.
They are gentle, not only in admitting friendship, but continuing it; and are
not hotly led by that pleasure, which flatters most men (as new) in the
beginnning of society or business. Whatsoever they take in hand, if they do
not exactly perfect it, yet somewhat and that pleasing, out of their own
Genius, they will bestow upon it; especially since what they do, is not wrought
with anxious labor, but excels in the grace of facility; as if brought by
natures own accord to its proper decorum. And if in Learning they write any
thing, they offend not the Reader with an opinion of too much pains; for the
readers do almost seem to partake of the labor with those Authors, who are
known not without much watching and trouble, to force in their sentences and
words.

Contrary to these dispositions, which are not at all disguised, but always
(unless it very much avail them to conceal) by an ingenuous confession
betray their actions, are those natures, which by a ponderous secrecy, like to
wisdom, do hide their intentions and desires. To these men many without
further trial do allow the name of virtue and industry. For it is a great
show of wisdom to speak sparingly, and by praescript; to bend the brow at
every mention of vice; and to affront or injure no man, at least openly or of
set malice. And lastly, what can come nearer to the image of an ample Soul,
than to seem by a deep and continual commerce to talk with wisdom? For so
would you think those men composed, which are given to the forenamed quiet and
solitude. But this slow and grave tranquillity has many lurking holes, into
which it receives vices also, whose very names he cannot hear publicly
without the signs of shame and horror (for they have tender foreheads, and
not reserved like their minds.) That silent and imprisoned Army of cogitations
cannot always be intent on the studies of industry and true virtue. For as the
heats and desires of all men decline from labor to the sweetness of pleasure,
so especially theires do, as being of a more soft and effaeminate nature.
Hence comes it that this often and id^e ^olitude represents uuto their minds
all manner of pleasures and of vices: in which filthy contemplation they
therefore more securely rest, because there they can f^eely be conscious only
to themselves, and openly, with piety, not very laborious, yet enough to gain
ths credulity of others, adore virtue. But yet do not think that they are
always intent in the speculation either of wisdom or vices; for, for the
most part, those slow minds do therefore stick, because they find not fit
matter of discourse; and in the mean time by their countenances, their
silence, or (if thou will) weightinesse (which as the gravest of men, so the
dullest of Cattle do express) they gain the estimation of integrity and
industry.

There is another kind of disposition which contains in it almost al these how
different so ever, with a wonderful, but not laudable variety. Yet a brave
disposition it were, if nature had allowed it a bridle as well as spurs. And
that is of men that run into the extremes of whatsoever their affections lead
them to. If they would be Religious, presently as if it were not lawful to
interpose any recreations among those holy duties, they put on a mortified
face, brooking no remission, and a look of such holiness as cannot last. They
are proud Censurers of other men's lives, and measure all men's honesty, by their
own sudden severity. Then they shake off the pleasure of their old
friendships, and cannot brook innocent mirth, which wise men mingle with their
cares, as an help either to forget them or overcome them. Anon, when the
strength of their minds is broken by too much intention, when they begin to
be weary of this rigid piety, which they so unadvisedly followed; not by
degrees, and ordinary turning tides (as it we^e,) but like a torrent tur^ing
(...), they run again (...) themselves as immede^ately, as before they had
forsaken the^ foolishly; (...) the very name (...) with all manner of jests
(...) the Professors of that (...) piety, which themselves (...) lately left.
While they are thus busied; behold, religion comes upon them again, and with a
sad repentance drives away that wantonness,; until they begin again to
repent themselves of that repentance. Nor are these frequent and immoderate
changes only in their religion; but in all things else they err with the same
heat. From most entire love they are carried (as it were with a whirlewind)
into extremity of hatred; sometimes immoderate in labor: sometimes nerve-lesse
in sloth; so in their loves or lusts, and whatsoever else can stir^e up
contrary motions in the minds of men. Nor can they govern their speech and
silence; if they be taken with a heat of speaking what company soever they come
into, themselves have all the talk, and are only heard; By and by when that
mirth forsakes the^, which made their minds so (...) with talk, they sit in a
sad silence, and as if collected into a discourse within themselves; so fix
their eyes, that they scarce know those that are present, nor hear when they
are asked questions; an aequall offense on both sides to the sweetness of
humane society, whereto speak opportunely, and to be silent only by (...), is
a lowed by ma^ners.

But the cause of (...) great an (...) in those men, is an inward kind of
sweetness; by which they suffer themselves wholly (...) and as that guides
them, they avoid or follow. That motion, upon what matter soever it carry them,
how full soever of cares and labor, yet presents it first to their minds in a
most pleasing shape; and overcomming their minds with a sweet and pleasing
violence, carries them away, and forces them to believe it in all things. But
when that show (...) vanished, and that (...) and fugitive sweetness (...)
another way, they straight follow it. For they are not only impatient (...)
our, but of pleasure it self, as soon as that inward (...) temptation is
gone. (...) this is a sign of a weak (...) impotent judgment: a mind formed
for virtues, but it is only for the beginnings of virtues: not stale either in
^aith, or friendship; but every where so unlike to it self that it is
distasteful. It (...) neither command it self, nor deny any thing. But it is a
sad fate, and ill for the people, when men of this unhappy disposition,
exempted from the laws of fear or modesty are borne to a Sovereign dignity.

The twelfth Chapter. Of amorous dispositions, How those affections are
tempered, and sometimes changed by Fortune, and diversiti^ of conditions of
life.
But in reckoning up all the affections of Mankind, it were against reason and
humanity to forget Love, which reigning in all breasts (except they be
altogether barbarous) claims notwithstanding a more near jurisdiction over
some, and fills them more with his cares. Love is a sweet and restless
desire to be liked by them, who either by chance, or by their own virtue, o^
by our error are liked by us; and so creep^s upon us from those ambushes, as
it were, that we sooner perceive our selves to be in love, than we think
upon the way of loving. It were not hard in the beginning to shake off this
load, if it did not by degrees and sweetly assault, so ensnaring those whom it
catches, especially unexperienced men, that they suppose it were inhumane,
barbarous, and inconvenient to themselves to shake off by a rough severity the
sweetness of this flattering mischief. But there is nothing more excellent among
men, than this affection, if it be rightly governed. For it sets a certain
curious gloss upon all virtues, and sometimes excuses even vice it self.
Unjustly do severe men accuse Love, and paint him in a l^ose and feeble
figure: when there is nothing more sincere amongst Mankind, provided that he
burn i^ just limits, and those raised by virtue, and fire not with an
unlawful flame where he is forbidden. (...) is this sweet desire sti^red up
only in young men, and in men of middle age; but boys also in their
harmless years, that you may know that this flame is rather borne in worthy
breasts, than lights by chance upon them. And (...) boys and youths are less
(...) to govern themselves, (...) their (...), although superfluous: therefore
love in them breeds a greater and more anxious care. And from hence their minds
are raised to achievements that are high, and above their age; as if by that
experiment they would prove to themselves, that they are worthy to be
beloved. A young youth that went to School, was by his careful Schoolemasters
often admonished to learn his book; but the book was hateful to him, that
loved play and liberty. A noble Lady by chance came to that Town, where he
lived, with two of her daughters that were Virgins* and because there was
acquaintance between the tw^ families, this youth (...) brought by way of
visitation to the Ladies lodging. He began immediately to admire one of the
young Gentlewomen, then to hold discourse with her, and in conclusion, even the
same day, to fall extremely in love with her. Then first his simple and free
mind began to be enthralled with cares. The next day he goes again to the
place, where he received his unfelt wound, and by prolonged discourses, so fed
his malady, that he grew worse and worse. For on the third day the Lady with
all her company going out of Town, left this youth scarce a living ^oule. And
he, poor wretch (obbed even of that ease) was forced to conceal his flame for
fear of being chid by his Father, or mocked by his fellows. After long
consultation within himself, he judged no course better for him, than wholly
to apply himself to his book; for so he thought he might gain his Father,
and in recompense of so great a diligence in study obtain from him a time of
recreation. And as a reward of his labor, he had resolved to get leave of his
Father, to go to a fair City not fa^re from thence; and that was it in which
the Maid dwelt. His Schoolemasters and fellows began to admire his exceeding
diligence; and often demand from whence so great a change of mind should
proceed, and love to learning in that youth, who not long before disdained the
very name of it. For in the morning he would rise to his book before his
fellows, and was often bid, before he would go to play. The heat of his love,
which caused this diligence, did make both his labor so easy to him, and the
Muses so sweet, that, before he was aware, he was taken with a love of them.
Afterward (as in that age it often happens) when long absence had made him
forget the young Gentlewoman and his hot love, an eager desire of learning did
still remain in him. And he following the liberal study, came to so ^igh a
proficiency in learning, that all the Muses are much indebted to him.

But Love a stubborn malady, and not to be cured with that facility, that
other affections are, unless it be strangled in the first motion, is hardly
removed by any means but length of time; that so wearied it may expire. For
while he is in his course, he finds somewhat always to increase, and advance
the power he holds. For if the Lover through all his griefs and melancholy
thoughts have but arrived at some success; he would think himself too cruel
to himself, to banish utterly so sweet a delight from him. But if a more
cruel fortune do either too long differ his hopes, or altogether take them
away; then also his g^iefe pleases him, and the mind pitying it self, and
with sighs revolving the cause of his calamity, melts in the pleasure of so
delicate a sadness. But that Love which is hid, is most lasting; either where
both the parties are secretly agreed; the very sweetness of the secrecy does
then please them; or where the Love is not mutual, and one only suffers, who
with secrecy endures his wound. Nor does the violence of this affection grow
only between the different sexes; for SOCRATES loved ALCIBIADES, and LYCURGUS
thought it no ill discipline to ordain that every youth should have his lover.
The chastity of nature leading men to just and brave Loves, looks not at all
at that difference; and you shall see many of the most honest men tormented
with a care (or to call it right) a love of some young men. And this love is a
certain tie of benevolence, more hot and violent than to be called
friendship. We have then a perpetual desire of instructing them; continual
wishes for their safety and Glory; fear for the success of whatsoever they
do; and think always that fortune, how lavish soever she be in her favors
toward them, does not recompense their deserts. That also is a fierce and
restless desire, which strives for unchaste ends to win a beauty of the
different sex. But yet think not but that examples of most pure chastity may
continue between different sexes; although the thing so full of danger, do
oftentimes deceive them; and they themselves by little and little (ere they be
aware, or against their wills) do love otherwise the^ they either thought or
wished to do.

But the mind of that man, whom Nature molded for a lover, is mild,
expressing in the very countenance modesty, and simple virtue; of a great but
merciful spirit; not had to be ent^cated to spare supplyants and contemn
revenge; exceeding paenitent when he himself offends; a great lover of offices
of humanity, impatient of idleness and all occasions of sloth, unless
forgetting the great benefits which he has received from Nature, he corrupt
the felicity of his disposition with lascivious wantoning, and so idleness.

It were a vain thing to desire to run over the whole variety of (...) humane
dispositions (...) which we have hear not down, are as the chief Springs,
from whence (...) flow either to vice or virtue; that by the knowledge of them
you may understand what men may be governed who are fit for friendship and
society, who are to be feared, and who for their sloth or (...). to be
regarded. For honesty and knavery, dispositions of true or adulterate wisdom,
free and narrow minds, and whatsoever is eminent in public and private
affairs, is by this fortune of affections distributed to Mankind. From this
contemplation of minds virtues and vices shall justly be rewarded: for unless
we curiously look into these secrecies of nature, a turbulent disposition will
often make it self appear a valiant and vigorous spirit: a dull or vain
mind will challenge the estimation due to gravity or true eloquence: and on
the other side, virtue will lie unknown, and at the first sight by the opinion
or show of some vice, be unjustly depressed below that honor which is due to it.

But a disposition, which is much reserved and hid, cannot be discovered
without a long and prudent search. Therefore th^se, who by the first appearance
censure the manners and dispositions of men, do entangle themselves in most
fearful errors. For certainly, as in the art of fe^cing nothing is more
dangerous th^n to fight with him that is squint-eyed (for you can scarce
conjecture at what place he aims his stroke his eyes seeming to turn the
contrary way.) so he that will deal with those men, who either by art, or the
benefit of countenance ca^ hide their dispositions, must long and strictly
deliberate within himself what opinion to hold of the^; lest if he esteem too
cruelly or favorably of them, he himself do first rue the rashness of his
opinion. The face especially does often deceive unexperienced men.

How many of a fierce and formidable countenance have been unjustly avoided,
as enemies to humanity, whom as soon as ever thou copest withal, the le^ity,
and sweetnese (...) conversation, will (...) opinion quite (...) by the (...),
and (...) of (...) custom have been brought to it; and under this disguise
retain a disposition most mild, (...), and shaped to all the laws of
humanity. There are those on the contrary, in whom, besides a person
adulte^^tely formed to the show of virtue, thou can find nothing to be
beloved. Some times a countenance betokening quiet lenity does hide a wrathful
and tragic disposition^* sometimes vigorous eyes have a Soul quite contrary;
last of all, vices do ly, as it were in ambush, under a slight
seeming-tincture of those virtues, from which they most degenerate.

This great and troublesome knowledge of minds cannot altogether ^e desired by
praeccept, nor other (...) required, than by the (...) of that (...) improoved
himself in this art, not only by his prudence, but his frequent errors.

But especially take heed that by one (...) or vice you do not in general
consu^e the whole (...) and di^position of a man. (...) many are borne with so
happy a towardlinese to one kind of di^cipline, that (...) as they are
conversant in that, no tokens of prudence and industry are wanting in them: but
in other things they are so foolish and ^^surd, that they scarce seem of a
(...) mind; others have one particular blemish in (...), that being wondrous
discreet (...) in their whole life, they seem to dear (...) in one pa^tor one
study. Nay you must not judge, by the sweetness and elegance of their society,
and conversation it self, of their wit and wisdom. For oftentimes in daily
conversation men of a narrow mind are less offensive than those whom the
greatness of a cheerful nature has made more careless; whilst they being
di^^ident do fear^u^ly set a watch upon themselves; or perpetually study (as
being not capable of greater matters) how to frame themselves to a fashionable
behavior: but the other of a m^re capacious nature, do either neglect such
vu^gar things, or else carelessly admit some vices as attendants upon their
virtues.

But it is not enough to find out this diversity of human minds, as nature
only has stamped it. There is another thing beside, that may either perfect
or change a disposition: namely their estate of life; either that wretched
condition or high dignity, to which every man either by chance or his own
virtue arriveth. How may, that were borne to a right and mild disposition,
have by the fault of too much felicity corrupted their natures? How many high
and vigorous minds, which, if fortune had suffered, had grown to be examples
of all virtue, opp^essed by lasting poverty, and c^uelty of fortune, have (...)
forgotten their own worth, and degenerated into affections quite contrary?
Athenion in his behavior a public example of honesty, as long as in the
University with thin diet and mean clothing, he declaimed for Virtue;
having once gotten the Sovereign power, did straight, together with his poor
clothes, put off his Philosophy. Abdolominus having long been used with his
own hands to g^t a living by dressing the Garden, when he was elected to the
Kingdom of Sidonia, wished that he might bear his royal fortune with the
same modesty and moderation that he had borne his poverty. Now therefore let
us consider also those affections, which by the condition of Fortune, or manner
of life are added to men; and oftentimes do kill those manners, which the
simplicity of Nature oppressed by no calamities, or enticed by no temptations,
had bred in them.

The thirteenth Chapter. That there is a difference between the Dispositions
of tyrants and lawful Princes; and again between those Kings, who come to
their Crowns by right of Inheritance, and by Election. Of the dispositions of
Noblemen gracious with Kings.
THose people, who subject themselves to no Scepter, though they abhor the
name of servitude, yet do not enjoy true liberty. For they must needs elect
Magistrates, to whom they give jurisdiction over themselves; and the public
power, which they glory to be in the whole Nations, is adored in a few men; so
that in those Countries, where you would think all did reign, the greatest
part are Servants; a secret law of things dispensing so the frame and order of
the world, that by the nerves of one head (according to the rule of the Deity)
many members should be governed. This spirit of Government, which loves to
reside in a few does more plainly show it self in the Aristocracy, but most
of all in a Monarchy, where all the power is in one. But that height of power,
to which GOD by a secret instinct has subjected Men, was not ordained for their
sakes, which possess the dignity, but those that are subject to it. Therefore
when Kings have abused their dignity according as their pleasures and ambition
swayed them; or the peoples ignorance has not understood their own commodity,
the name of Kings has oftentimes grown hateful, and Monarchy with much blood
and slaughter has been banished out of many Countries, and again restored.

All those Commonwealths that flourished heretofore, had Kings at the first.
But they being expelled by those that understood not true liberty, either the
blind popular government succeeded them, or else the rule of the Nobility;
that is, many Kings in stead of one. And as a member, which by violence is put
out of joint, cannot be put into joint but by violence again; so those
Provinces, which by this means had cast off the best form of government,
could not again, until they had cruelly paid for that error, be restored,
and reduced to their first right estate. For in those Co^mon-wealths, some
citizens swelling with ambition, had either by arms made their names great,
or by the peoples error engrossed too great and too little offices; or else had
seized into their own hands the strength of the Commonwealth, and called
themselves Kings. But they growing fierce (as it must needs be in a new and
hated State) did so pollute their reigns, which they by treason had gotten,
that the people for their sakes thought worse of Kings than ever they had done,
and the name Tyrant, which was once an honor to all Monarchs, became a word of
hatred, and public infamy.

But he, that will consider those affections, which Kings by the greatness of
their dignity do nourish in them, must not esteem alike the state of all
Kings. Those different ways that bring them to their height, do cause
different minds in them: and those that reign in a new-setled Monarchy, do
carry themselves in another manner than those who safely, and by the peoples
wishes reign over a Nation long accustomed to that government. And different
also are the minds of a King crowned by Election (as in Hungary, Denmark, and
the Roman Empire) and such a King as reigns by inheritance, and possesses
that state which his Father, and Grandsires held before him. New kingdoms not
well established by time nor the constancy of the people, do fill their
Princes with continual suspicions. They flatter the meanest subjects, and
fear the Nobility, especially whilst they think themselves are feared; and
daily consider with themselves that their estate, not yet settled, may by the
motion of fortune as easily be overthrown as it was raised. Nor are tyrants
only, that came unjustly to their crowns, disquieted with these thoughts: but
those also, who are lawfully chosen over such Nations as have not been
accustomed to the name and authority of a King. But this fear is greater in
Tyrants. For if they have subjected a Commonwealth, they fear the Nobility,
as men that will vindicate their lost liberty, and loath to serve him who
lately was their equal: Or if they have invaded a Monarchy, and expelled the
true heirs; with a continual care and vexation they suspect and fear the
peoples hearts, as inclining to their ancient Lords. Therefore they dare not
trust their friends, because being privy to their counsels, they know also the
means which way their Kingdoms may be undermined; and expect fidelity from no
man, since themselves have violated it. But in open show, and with a garb put
on of set purpose, they seek occasions of doing courtesies, and ambitiously
affect the fame of integrity, and love to their Country. They are exceedingly
liberal to the poor; great punishers of those vices, of which themselves gave
example, and lastly either Authors or restorers of the best Laws, and public
buildings for ornament of the City; to decline by those means the present
envy, and infamy of posterity.

In this manner a Tyrant is either bad by the fault of his condition, not his
disposition, or else is good by necessity. His mind is wonderfully austere,
his countenance wild, his thoughts ready upon all occasions, especially those
occasions which he fears; true pleasure he does not know, but is led with a
hope of it; and with vain pomp sweetning his inward cruel cares, he does as
it were cosen his own mind. But a lawful King either by election or
inheritance, confident in the right of his royalty, does not so descend to base
fears, or wicked preventions; although perchance he fall upon turbulent
times, mad Subjects, and whatsoever else a Tyrant fears. But those Princes,
which owe their fortune to election, whose royalty continues not in their
family, being as it were, private men in one respect, namely as they consider
their posterity, do seldom with their whole care and endeavor so much
procure the public good, as those Princes which receiving the Kingdom from
their Ancestors, strive to adorn it for their own Posterity. Therefore those
cares which are due to the public, they bestow upon their domesticke
affairs, in a piety which may be excused, if they can fitly divide their
thoughts, and look both ways, so to remember their family, that they forget
not their public charge. But if by chance they hope or desire top refer any
of their own blood to the succession, then by rewards and courtesy the peoples
suff^ages must be bought; Force must be omitted, and Majest^ it self laid
aside. So by a^ hidden and troublesome care his mind is a Servant even to
those men, by whom in public he is served and adored. In such cares
oftentimes for their private family, is the industry of those men taken up, who
for their Heroical virtues, did before seem worthy to wear a Crown.

Many times they decline to the worse part, corrupting their manners,
exercising with revenge their ancient hatreds and aemulations: when not
forgetting who were before at dissension with them, or who were cross in
voices to their election; their new power, not yet able to govern and contain
it self, does swell only with desire of revenge.

But if they be troubled with none of these mischiefs, yet for the most part
they are ambitious to do strange and wonderful things, and by the^ to renown
themselves and their times to Posterity. These high desire^ may as well be
inconvenient as profitable to the Commonwealth. For as in Apples and Berries
too early and forced ripeness is only pleasant because of the novelty of it;
but the Trees themselves by such forced manuring, and unseasonable heats, after
this fruit is brought forth, do presently decay: so in public affairs,
especially the greatest, acertaine order is to be observed; and those who
pervert or praecipitate those affairs, do seem as it were to kill the
Commonwealth. Yet notwithstanding elected Kings, almost in all ages, burning
with desire of a lasting fame, have either raised Wars abroad, or sought to
innovate something in their own Realms; to gain a name by their own
boldness and the danger of their men; and perchance valuing it at that rate.
Few of them with Stephanus Ba^tor^us the King of Poland do measure their
actions not by their own profit but the welfare of their country. There is a
saying of his extant, worthy to express the bravery of his disposition; I will
make the world (quoth he) understand how much a King chosen for virtue by the
consent of a Nation, is better than he, whom right of succession thrusts upon
the shoulders of unwilling people.

But those Kings to whom most truly this name of Majesty belongs, who leave to
their children that perpetuated honor which they received from their ancestors,
and now owing nothing to the peoples voices, from whom a^ came at the first,
may seem born to reign with another Ge^t^. But to search out this disposition
of theirs, that owes it self only to God, may perchance be too sacrilegious a
wisdom. Nor is it lawful for us to pry into those affections, which the
power of heaven has inspired into the^ for governing o^ the world, for
alteration of states, and managing the fates of Mankind. Some that are cu^ious
may perchance enquire whether it were better for Kings to begin their reigns
in their childhoood, so accustomed to that greatness, as a thing borne with
them, than to grow up under the reign of their Fathers or kinsmen, and
afterward receive their great inheritance; whether a quiet and obedient people
do soften and spoil a Princes disposition, while his power has a free
swindge; or rather that love of the Subjects do not endeare the Prince his
affections to them, as the master of a family to dutiful Servants. Lastly, if
a lawful Prince, by the peoples ill affection toward him, be forced to fight
for his own right, whether after the victory he will reign cruelly, showing an
hatred and contempt of them; or rather strive to appease them by a mutual
respect, as remembering the past dangers to be such, as may return more
heavily upon him. Arguments and examples are not wanting on both sides, (which
in the changes of humane affairs,) although proceeding from the same causes,
have not always found the same events.

But it is in vain to search into these decrees of heaven; let the Kingly
height not be touched with curious cogitations, but pryed into only with
adoration, as the secret mysteries of religion were: for it is piety to wish
for good Princes, but to condemn bad ones is unlawful. And seeing moreover
that they do not so much govern themselves, as give way to the fates leading
(who by their affections do ordain the declinations and growth of States) all
art and wisdom, that looks into their Genius, and conjectures of it, is often
deceived.

The first step from this great height is the condition of Noblemen. Either
thoser whom Kings choose for Counselors, to share with them the cares of the
Commonwealth; or those who by a great and entire ty of love are endeared to
their Kings. Through both these, as through the mouths of rivers which
discharge themselves into a great Sea, are the desires and hopes of the people
ca^ried. But they, as being advanced for different respects, have different
ways and dispositions. Those therefore who by their flower of age, or high
birth, or sweetness of behavior, are highly endeared in Princes Favors, have
for the most part minds bent to please; which although denied to their own
affections, they square according to the disposition of their Lord. This is
indeed a wonderful kind of servitude, and full of subtle art; hiding
sometimes a base and abject mind, sometimes a free and bold di^position.
Sometimes to follow pleasure, to sport or jest well, is as useful to them as
the greatest labor; Nay even to exercise a kind of state over their Princes,
and almost reign (but not too long and wantonly) does more kindle the Princes
affections to them, who desire as well to be beloved, as to love. For Lords
that are advanced to that slippery height of favor, if they know their Prince
to be of a soft nature, not brooking enough a continual use of the same
pleasures, must sparingly bestow their pleasing looks, or jests, or whatsoever
in them is delightful to him; dispensing them in so prudent a manner, that
affection stirred up often and by intermissions, may neither breed a loathing,
nor by neglect and oblivion be blotted out. But if the Prince be easy and apt
to change often his affections and Favorites, but wheresoever he apply him
elfe, his love as it is short, so is it blind and vehement; The Favorites
remembering that they are now in a high tide, but shall shortly return to their
own Sea, do make most greedy use of their felicity. For they are not afraid
by importune suites to weary this affection of the Prince, which unless it be
timely taken and made use of, like wines, which last not, it decays and
perishes of it self.

But ^arre different ways are to be taken with those Princes, who lose not
themselves in a torrent of affection, but to that sweetness of nature, which
makes them love, do join reason also. For this affection, being true indeed,
and perpetual (if they deserve it) as it can never do all things, so has
always power to do something. Nor must you rob altogether that tree, but
gather with choice the fruit of it, which will grow again for you. There fore
the Favorites of such Princes, do wholly ^apply themselves to them; and never
forgetting their Majesty, do always in their love give due observance,
modestly use their freedom of speaking or advising, and ofter consider that
they are Princes, than that themselves are Favorites. Those Favorites as it is
their first care, to hold up themselves in that height of grace, so always
make it their second endeavor to raise Estates, to get Offices and
governments, that if they do remove from that height of favor, yet they may
still retain some happy monument of their former power, and a stay to their
after-life. But those, who forgetting themselves, and too much trusting to
their fortune, in prodigal riot do consume all the wealth and revenew of that
rich favor, are worthy of a poor old age, and then in vain to repent
themselves of their unseasonable and ill acting so high a part.

Those Favorites also must use one caution, which, if they neglect it, does
sometimes ruin them; not to prefer themselves before their Prince in any
thing in which he either desires to excel, or thinks hedoth. If he love the
fame of policy, eloquence, valor, of the art of war or hunting; let him
yield, that knows himself to excel at it; for fear the Prince should be
fired with an emulation, that may not only extinguish the favor, but draw on
a cruel and heavy displeasure. For many times the Princes mind (with an
ambition not small, but more than the thing deserves) is desirous of fame in
such matters, and takes it heavily to lose the prize. There is no certainer way
for those Lords to gain their Princes affections, than to seem admirers of
them; but it must be done with art, and so as may gain belief, for all do not
lie open to the same flatter^es. Every Prince who either is co^scious of virtue
in himself, or swelled with vain credulity, either may be or loves to be
deceived by those arts; so many men striving to please and praise the^ do quite
overcome their modesty, and make them believe great matters of themselves.
Another great art of gaining their favor is to seem to love them, some Venus
(as it were) insinuating an officious grace, and requi^ing from the^ a
requital of affection. That man i^ yet alive, and enjoyes the height of his
fortune, who by such a happy accident increased the love and favor which his
master began to bear him. The King by chance with a fall from his horse
bruising his side, fell into a Fever; this Lord with a sad and astonished
countenance watched all night without sleep by his masters side. Whether it
were art or piety, he so far wrought upon the K. affection, that none was
afterward in greater grace with him.

Nor can we say that the disposing of so great a felicity (which foam few only
can enjoy, having so many rivals in compassing that happy favor) is only in
the hands of Fortune. For as Fortune alone does bring some men into Kings
favors; so many of them for want of art and wisdom do fall again from that
height; so that it may be said to be in Fortunes power, sometimes to raise men
to it; but of prudence to keep them in it. But it is therefore a more
fearful thing to fall from that happiness, because having been once
admitted into the Sacrament of so high a friendship, they can hardly fall from
it, but they fall into hatred, or at least a kind of loathing; for love does
not so often use to dye of it self, a^ to be killed by a contrary affection.

But those Noblemen, by whose hands Princes do manage the greatest affairs of
their Kingdoms, to whom they trust their secret counsels, and the ordering of
foreign and domesticke affairs, do commonly temper the strength of their
dignity after another way; as namely so to draw all the deepest and greatest
cares of the realm into their own hands, and so to appropriate them to
themselves, that they stand not in so much need of their Country, as their
Country does of their Service. And this they attain by a perpetual diligence
in those affairs, and removing, as far they can, not only others, but even
the King himself from the knowledge of them. For they may safely manage all
things when the Prince is plunged either in ignorance of his own business, or
credulity toward them. But these men being ignorant of their own fame, do as
seldom almost hear the truth as Kings themselves. For although they be
infamous for extortion or pride, or any other wickedness, and so generally
spoken of by the common voice, yet themselves many times know nothing of it,
until being overwhelmed with the weight of them, they begin at the same time
to feel the hatred and punishment too. Their countenances for the most part
are composed of gravity; access to them is not easy; therefore discourses are
short, showing much business, and a kind of Majesty. Among these there are
some, few, whose looks are neither confused with business, nor swelled with
pride. These are worthy of high praise indeed; nor are the other to be
condemned, who fashion their manners according to their dignity and fortunes.
For this high Majesty, above the vulgars pitch, is sometimes necessary, in
those men, by whose hands Kings do manage their greatest affairs: especially
seeing the difficulty of access and conference begets a reverence toward them;
whereby the minds of common people are bridled; for the people commonly do
either fear or contemn. But that asperity of a strict countenance, whether it
be disdain, or a true valuation of their power, may well be forgiven in
them, who for a reward of all their weighty cares, have this especially, as a
token of honor and respect. Besides being worn, as tt were, with continual
trouble and business, they cannot always put on the same countenances, or
look with a clear, and unchanged visage.

But if that power, and ability to help or deceive, do fall upon impious
minds, who intent wholly upon their own profit, neglect the public safety:
then although in their wickedness they counterfeit virtue never so subtly,
(as if neglecting their own domesticke affairs, they were careful only for
their Prince and Country;) they turn notwithstanding all their businesses
that way, which tends to the preservation and increase of their own dignity.
If they can help themselves while the Kings estate is troubled: while with all
diligence they seem to clear it, they do but involve it into more
difficulties, and throw it into dark perplexities. But if in a quiet kingdom
they can more securely reign, then of necessity they hate all com^motions, and
will rather suffer the peace of their times to continue, though growing in the
seeds of all evil, and perchance to the ruin of posterity. Lastly, the same
desires, which possess elected Kings, do commonly feed these Statesmen: both
of them holding a sudden transitory power, which is not at all to descend
upon their posterity.

Who therefore can choose but admire those men, which in so great a place can
keep integrity, and remember true virtue, when it lies in their power to
offend with so much ease, and so much advantage? Some such in every age, to the
releife of Mankind, have come upon the stage, men severe to themselves, of a
white and innocent honor, ambitious of nothing but the public good. But the
goodness of these men many times cannot keep them safe from envy. For by the
very slipperinesse of their dignity (upon which few are strong enough to stand)
and the vices of their fellows, their virtue oftentimes is wronged; and
detracting tongues will never leave those eminent places, in which they may
find matter of railing, sometimes justly, but never without suspicion.

But glorious is the fruit of such a dignity: that being safe, and out of
their ^each, they see the envy of other men against them; and those men forced
to give them respect, whom they know maliciously bent, hiding their aemulation,
and striving to express love. For such envy joined with admiration, and
stirred up only against felicity, does yield (I know not in what sense) a
kind of ambitious pleasure to those men, against whom it rises, as putting
them in mind of their own greatness, and the baseness of other men.

But they have another, and far more excellent prerogative in governing the
Commonwealth, that can lend a helping hand to brave and virtuous men, whom
poverty or some other calamity does keep down, and be ready, as it were, to
aid distressed nature. Which thing as it becomes the^ to perform, so can
they not leave it undone without suffering of punishment in themselves for it,
as secretly chidden by the indignation of good men, and upbraided by the image
of virtue daily complaining within them: For seeing they did deserve to be
advanced for this very reason, because they either are or seem to be men of
the ancient and prudent industry; Why should not they acknowledge men of that
excellent quality, and dearly love those that are of kindred with their own
dispositions? Nor are they ignorant which they be, or where they may be found.
For as all other living creatures, unless they be stark blind, can see and
know those that are of their own kind: so these men being of so clear a
sight, of so eminent and full a judgment, cannot choose but find out, without
mistaking, men that are of kindred to their own excellencies. And let them not
say that they are oppressed with the multitude of such natures, and that
neither themselves nor the Commonwealth are sufficient to provide for all of
them; it were well with Mankind, if there were so great a plenty of excellent
souls, that, when all public affairs were committed to them, some would be
still left, bestowed by God upon the world, as it were, for no action or
employment. But Mankind is not happy in such a plenty; and it was rare in all
ages, and among all Nations to find a deep and pure wit, fit to be employed in
any kind of civility, one adorned with learning, and borne with a clear and
valiant modesty, to dare all things, but nothing too much. When great men
invite such dispositions to partake with them in the public felicity, they do
first honor themselves, as of kindred to that Genius; and secondly add
strength to the commonwealth, which is never better governed than by wise me^.
As the fame of all eminent arts is stained by the multitude of artificers, and
the unskilfulnesse of the^, most of the^ being unable to do what they promise,
and seeking for their commendation only the vain name of such an art: so the
fame of wisdom and science has been often stained by unworthy men, who have
studied nothing less than the Muses, or true Prudence. But it concerns great
men to keep down that counterfeit and adulterate virtue; and advance true
industry, vindicated from the praejudice of unskilful men, to such rewards as,
of justice, are due to it.

The fourteenth Chapter. Of the studies and desires of Courtiers; Of the
different natures and affections of rich and poor men.
BEsides these two sorts of great men, befriended by Fortune, there are in
Kings Courts a great multitude of men of all births, noble and upstart, of all
estates and ages, who there seek after wealth, fame, and favor. And these
houses of Princes, though to the outward show they appear as places composed
to all jollity and pleasure, sometimes filled with revels, sometimes (for a
change of recreation) sweating with hunting games; full of honors, glittering
in pompous and gorgeous attire, and rich banquettings; where every man seems
to live in a garb of magnificence, and jollity above his condition: Yet to him
that looks more narrowly into the nature of it, they will appear in manner of
Faires or Markets, where men do exercise a most laborious kind of traffic.
How many arts, how many troubles belong to a Court life, scarce they themselves
can tell you, who have that way suffered along time for their ambition. Nor
does any man in this Sea deserve the haven, but he that understands that a
continual care and labor belongs to him to turn even those things, which in
such a life seem to flatter a man with soft shows of pleasure into severe
uses; and always in those very delights, find out matter of care and industry.
For as the hardest labors may grow into a delight (as when immoderate hunting;
or too watchful studies are pleasing to a strong and uncurbed mind:) so all
kinds of sport may by a severe intention be so tempered, that they may turn
to the burden of a true labor. Therefore the recreations and delights, which
are found in the Court jollity, do no way take the wisdom of those men who
have not yet satisfied their wants and ambition* to make them, among the^^
fading images of felicity, forget that themselves are not yet happy, and let
slip fortune, who for the most part never bestows her self upon any man, but
as the reward of an unwearied and strong diligence.

Would thou know therefore how, and with what countenance to receive these
Sirens, left if thou hearken to them, they hurt thee, or if too rustickly thou
conte^nne them, they proscribe thee as too unseasonably grave? There is no need
of a stern cou^nance or barbarous precepts. If they be of such a condition,
age, and person, as they may hope to thrive by these revels and Court sports,
then artificially they mould themselves to that magnificence, and pursue the
fame of Courtship; and especially turn their garb to that kind of jollity,
which is most pleasing to the Prince. But neither is it good for them with the
wast of their Patrimonies to buy the miseries of along hope: nor to let these
loose and pleasant-seeming baits mollify and corrupt their minds; thinking
dally with themselves, that they are now at the hunting, not the prey. But
others which are not by the same fortune invited to these shows of delight (as
unfit for them in condition or disposition) suffer not themselves to be
deceived with that error which the other unwary Gallants are, as to think
that a man cannot be a brave fellow, or accounted a Courtier, unless he be
eminent for extreme boldness, and all expressions of wanton jollity. They
know that ingenious virtue can there open to them other ways, and more secure,
to wealth and honor. And that Princes do more certainly esteem and
reverence a man, that understands his own condition and Genius, and follows
that, without any disguise or vain pride, than such men, as ambitiously
counterfeit and put on a grab, which fortune has denied to their persons and
conditions. This moderation do those wise men keep, who come to such
Court-baites, as to an art, to make use of them rather than enjoy them; but let
them, whom Fortune has not condemned to soluxurious a charge, taste these
delights in sober pleasure, and as a recreation only to their greater cares.
And rather as Spectators, then to be themselves a part of the Scene; Lastly
those who possess fortunes either by their own industry, or their ancestors,
may be allowed to follow those pleasures and recreations, as sorting with
their rank and quality.

Nor is it wonder if those men be unfit for great matters whom sluggish Luxury,
that looked no farther than it self, has as it were bewitched; since a
watchful diligence letting pass no occasion, is not more required in any
kind of life, than that of a Courtier. For as trees grow from little seeds,
and a man may stride over the fountain of greatest rivers: so in Court
greatest felicity has sprung from very small beginning^, and such as have not
been perceived by eyes intent only upon Plays and recreations.

METELLA obtained the marriage of DICTATOR SYLLA by this accident; coming into
the Theater, and lightly laying her hand on his shoulder as he sat, she said,
she desired to partake of his fortune. MARIUS in his beginning poverty received
his first encouragement from an accidental speech of SCIPIO, as prophetically
pointing him out to the height of warrelike honor. For he knew how the hearers
of this speech might be kept in this praejudication, and the greatness of his
growing fame from thence made up. So sometimes by a little and light blast we
are put in mind of a commodious wind, which if we follow, will carry our
vessel to such fortunes as were above our hopes, and almost above envy. It has
raised some only to light upon a great man, when he was pleasant and free, and
open to any acquaintance which fortune brought him: some by a seasonable and
happy sentence or jest: some by a sudden token expressed by chance of spirit
or industry, some by a casual commendation of one, who aimed not at that when
he spoke, have been strangely furthered in the way of advancement.

There is therefore in men that are worthy to follow the Court with fortune, no
rash soul, nor impatie^t of lingering and manifold hopes, but composed, and
always looking upon Fortune, and curious enough to find out whatsoever she,
though implicitly, promise to him. Nor do they wait idly until those seeds of
felicity do of their own accords, fall upon them. But by great arts they
further Fortunes good meaning to the^; of which the chiefest are to have
friendship with many, but with still observance, to keep the favor of one of
those which are of the nearest familiarity with the Prince. For that way of
rising is not so open to envy, and besides, the Kings friends, more than the
King himself, do often bestow the wealth of the Kingdom. Let that Nobleman
be such a one, as can prefer his friends with public benefits; for great
noblemen neither will give away their wealth, nor, if they would can those
rivers afford such strong tides, as a P. his sea ca^ do.

Nor must they weary the favor of that Noblema^ with often and unprofitable
suites; lest the very sight of them grow offensive to him, as fearing always a
fresh trouble; or else least spending his favor in small matters, they become
much indebted to him (as ever granting their suites) but little to fortune. In
Fables we see that point of wisdom expressed. NEPTUNE granted to his son
THESEUS th^ee wishes, and confirmed by a great oath that he should obtain
them. THESEUS having twice tried the Gods fidelity, when now his last wish
remained, he was so loath to throw away that certain benefit, which he could
never call back again, that at the time of his imprisonment in Hell, when
B^^STHO^S was (...), he did not invoke the promised aid of his Father, but
^^ared (as if there were somewhat beyond death) to redeem his safety at so
great a price.

There is in Court another labor of eminent profit; to be able to turn thy
nimble and active mind several ways, and to put on, at least in show, any
motion or garb that may be pleasing; which scarce any man can fitly do,
without strong and austere diligence, and a great command over his own
desires. By this art have many men gotten both estates and honors, either in
free Commonwealths, in which so many Lords cannot be all pleased with one
virtue or one vice; or in Kings Courts, where you must not only fashion your
studies to the Princes own honor, but must court all that are in grace with
him; who being often of various dispositions must be won by different kinds of
service.

These and the like studies of anxious diligence do they take who follow the
Court upon right hopes, and praecepts of true Prudence: but these things are
either not discerned, or else despised by the more tha^ blinded young
Courtiers; who oftentimes unworthy of their parents careful pains, fall away
from their wealthy modesty in a luxurius (and afterward needy) ambition. It is
enough for them to be named Courtiers, and numbered among men of honor; it may
be, because it is the first liberty that they taste after they are freed from
the jurisdiction of their Schoolemasters; and there are enough there to draw
these novices into deba^shment. But if they chance to receive the least grace
in countenance or words from the Prince himself, they are scaarce able to bear
so proud a joy; but with ravished eyes loo^^ about them to see who are by, to
witness this great honor. But especially they seek after the fame of
revelling and wanton Courtship, as a note of Nobility and manly virtue; nor do
they moderate themselves according to their own estates, but to the expenses of
great men; so emulating the course of those that are above them, and not able
to keep pace with them, they run themselves out of breath, and faint. From
hence they grow heavily in debt, and complain against the Prince, where
themselves are in fault; as if the Prince could infuse wisdom^ into all his
Servants; or that his sacred treasury, and thorough that, the Commonwealth
should suffer for the profuse madness of these wanton fools.

There, are not only in Courts, but in all kinds of life, different
dispositions of rich and poor men. I call not only those poor men, who are
in extreme want, and driven to take miserable care for meat and clothes, but
those al^o which want estates to support them in that state of li^e, which they
have taken; and ^^om which they cannot de^^end but by a sad confession of
poverty. Some poor men do openly vent their grief; and had rather complain
of the wretchedness of their condition, than excuse or conceal it. So to the
great ease of their calamity, they can openly child Fortune, and avoid a
greater trouble than poverty, which is, to counterfeit wealth. By this means
they can inure themselves to bear their misfortune, and by professed labor
seek a remedy against that grief, which they do not hide. Men become of this
nature, either by their low birth, which keeps them from blushing at poverty;
or else (which is almost a vice) they are so subdued and tamed by Fortunes
lashes, that they dare breathe no higher; or lastly by a brave and commendable
contempt of transitory things, di^daining to profess that condition, in which
the fates have placed them; able to manage great fortunes, and in poor estates
not deje^ted.

There is another kind of poor men, who with an obstinate and Spartan
patience can endure all the strokes of fortune. They with a merry-seeming
countenance, do hide the anxiety of their ca^e-distracted minds, and think
themselves happy enough, if they can seem so to others. So in an obstinate
concealment of their miseries, they suffer inwardly for that shamefastness,
being ever solicitous about their public fame, and moreover the talk of their
household Servants, who must both know, and sometimes feel those wounds. As
many of those poor men as do see help at hand, and near to them upon
certainty (which is enough to make cities stiffely endure a siedge) and have
for a while with fained cheerfulness hid their poverty, do not only deserve
not to be accused of pride, but to be accounted brave men, and worthy to be
speedily rescued by prospe^ity. But those men, which in their poverty, do suffer
that perpetual vexatio^, without any expectation of fortunes redress (at
least not hopeful) yet will so order their affairs, as in midst of perpetual
domesticke miseries, they will put on this mask of wealth; they are altogether
worthy of pity, and may without envy enjoy that ambition, which with so many
cares and calamities they have purchased. There are lastly some, thorough whom
wealth, like sudden gushes of water, does pass and spend it self in a
magnificence too high for it. Their minds do suffer a wonderful punishment,
and worthy of their madness; nor is there a greater or worse madness, than,
not to decline, by a mature confession of thy fortunes, a certain ruin; and
whilst by a charge that cannot last, thou would have the people think thy
estate great; thou make it so small that it can never after stand in any
mediocrity. This is especially the fault of Noblemen and young Gentlemen, that
come newly to their inheritances, who are of an haughty disposition, not
knowing frugality, but by a profusion of wealth seeking a fame higher than
their own estates, or the fortune of their ancestors. Their minds are
troubled with long maladies, and fall oftentimes from that greatness, which
they seem to carry; for there is scarce any humility, nor oftentimes plain
fraud, but they will secretly descend to it, to get money, which afterward
publicly, as it were in a whirlewinde of inconsiderate rashness, they may
pro^^^ely throw away. There is nothing more dangerous than to commit any
public office to such dispositins, who by any means strive to respite that
Poverty, with an anxious fear, but such an one as is not paenitent, they daily
and justly expect.

There are also as many diversities in the condition of rich men as of poote.
Some are born to estates left by their ancestors. Other men by degrees do get
wealth, and learn by little and little to be fortunate. Both of these are
neither transported with admi^ation of themselves, nor with immode are
exultation, long custom having almost destroyed the sense of daily joy which
is never excessive, when by deg^ees (...) and expires. But there are some, who
by a sudden torrent of Fortune are overwhelmed, and at one race do run as it
were from Earth to Heaven. And these men, by such an unusual sweetness are
transported to a forgetfulness of themselves and a most proud contempt of that
condition, from whence they are now translated. There happened lately a fi^
example for us to behold a mind drunke^ with sudden prosperity, and worthy of
relation, because by the view of one picture we may conjecture of other faces.

There were two youths, who by education at the same Schools, were endeared
together in a near tie of friendship. The name of the one was MELLA, the name
of the other CAEPIO, in who^e country the School was, and this beginning of
their love. The time passing away which that age does spend at School, Mella
teturned into his own Country; But first with Capi^ he entered into a dear
league of everlasting friendship; nor was this affection in them afterward
changed by their more manly studies and delights. For by often letters and
declaration of all their secrets, they still nourished their ancient
friendship. In the mean time an unexpected inheritance had raised Caepio to a
higher condition; and Mella about certain businesses was called into Capio's
Country. Of whose coming when Caepio understood, not now so mindful of
their old love, as glorying to have Mella a witness of his high fortunes, he
made haste to go and visit him. Mella his affection was sincere, and not
overcome by such assaults of Fortune. He therefore with a plain heart goes to
meet his friend, and affectionately embracing him, begins to remember all those
things, which friends at the first sight, after long absence, use to do. But
Caepio with a grave and composed look, and an affected voice, as if hs were
loath to change the copy of his countenance, began almost to sing to him. And
when he was invited to follow into Mella's lodging, to which, as in houses of
mean estate, there were narrow stairs; I prithee, Mella (quoth he) do thou
lead me into a chamber or a prison? Mella was offended with this scornful
majesty of Caepio, but loath himself to offend in that kind, told him, he did
but hyre the lodging; that the room, doors, and stairs were such as
travelers might make use of. But when they were come into the chamber, Caepio
carelessly flinging himself upon the bed, and smiling, began again with a
rusticke urbanity to detide the inconvenience of the lodging: Mella, though he
were angry, yet notwithstanding (as if he consented to Caepio) he hid it with
a smile also. But he casting his eyes round about upon the lodging, after he
had with a careless state surveyed all the furniture, turned his eyes and
countenance upon Mella: And seeing his boots, have thou an horse (quoth he) or
rather horses? Those that come out of your Country are of good price; and I
find none more fleet than they, when I chase the Stagge, in my woods. When
Mella told him he had none of his country Horses, and though he brought
some, yet he had lost them by some diseases, or, the distemper of a strange
air; why then (quoth Caepio) do thou wear boots? Mella in scorn answered
him, that he provided them against winter. Can you tell, (...) Caepio, whose
Coach that is, that stands before the door? When Mella told him it was his;
You said quoth Caepio, you had no horses. Not of our Country horses, said
Mella; but did you think I came through this City a foot? I hired German
horses to the Coach. Did two horses or four draw it (quoth Caepio?) By this
time Mella began to be fi^led with disdain as well as anger, but willing to
continue this Comaedy, he answered smilingly he had but two horses; that he
left four for such fortunate men as Caepio was. Tell me then, said Caepio; are
you known to your King? What quantity of Lands have you? Or do you command
any Lordships? Mella at this could scarce contain laughter, but made him
answer only, that he so enjoyed that mean estate which his ancestors had
left him, as that he might neither discredit them, nor ruin his posterity.
Again when he more (...) asked him how much his annual revene^ was, he
answered that it (...) him, and sometimes his friends too; and by that end
especially he valued his wealth. But when he saw himself assaulted with so
many questions, he resolved to turn the burden of answering upon Caepio, who
was most glad of it. Therefore Mella began to ask him how many Servants daily
attended in his house? And afterward how many horses he kept? And how gracious
he was with his Prince? Nor was Caepio any more modest in speaking of himself
than wife in questioning of others; but his especial discourse was of the
Court; where he said many of the Noblemen, were simple people. Some of them by
easy endeavors he gained for friends; others were taken with admiration of
his valor, for he had now been twice in the Field; and others of them, in
respect of th^^ favor, which he had with the King, were glad to proffer all
offices of friendship to him. Mella was now amazed, and confident that none but
a mad man could utter this. Therefore turning all his weariness into wonder
and pleasure, he began to urge him farther, and with mad questions to plunge
him, that was forward enough, into absurdities. There was a little rest, and
both of them after these follies had been a while silent; when CAEPIO, as if
some special thing had come into his mind, breaks out on the sudden, How
eager think thou are my hunting Dogs now of the Game? For I have charged
my men not to go abroad with them in my absence. My Hawks now are out of
date; for they are mewing their feathers at this time of the year. And
presently he added, the day grows old; f^e upon it; I should long since have
waited upon the King. He will chide me for being so long absent from him. With
these words in a stately embrace he falls upon Mella, who more humbly saluted
him, and inviting him home to his house, fitting his pride to a kind of
courtesy, he entreated him to make use of his faithful friendship, that
desired to serve him, and request him in what he wanted; he should find him
true in performance of his promises. This was the end of their discourse, which
amazed Mella, and made him curse sudden wealth, if it transport a man into
such madness.

This vice of immoderate boasting is incident not only to those men, whose
wisdom Fortune by her too sudden gifts has overwhelmed, but to those also
which place their glory in warlike feats. For having for the most part, rude
minds, and either nurtured in camps, or among those men, whose peace is
infected with the faults of camps, they think nothing more glorious than to
be feared; and absurdly think to be believed, while they speak of
themselves. From hence proceeds that boldness in bragging and high words, as
if their swords should purchase the favor and belief of all men. Hereupon in
ancient Comedies were the persons of Pyrgopoliniees, and Thras^ invented, to
show examples of this fierceness, flourishing more in swelling words, than
the true dangers of a War. But in Old men and Captains especially this fault
reigns more securely, and with more pardon; Minds indeed composed for glory,
but erring sometimes by inconsiderate vanity.

The fifteenth Chapter. Of Magistrates. Of pleading Lawyers.
THe next Dignity, after the majesticke height of Courts and Princes, is that
of Magistrates, to whom the fortunes of Suitors are committed, the punishme^^
(...) guilty persons, and th^^e offices, which are distinguished into diverse
titles by the number of those that practice, and the desire of getting of
wealth. These for the most part are advanced to their places by ^pen, and
permitted bargai^ing; or else in such Countries as these, sales are publicly
forbidden, by private, and more strict contracts with noble men, they find
there also some that will sell the Commonwealth. They pay oftentimes so great
and immoderate rates for their places, that it is plainly showed they seek for
them only through ambition and hope of prey. For to desire only to benefit
the Commonwealth with a dear care, which destroys their own esta^^ is not a
virtue of this Age, nor to be looked for perchance since the Curij, and
Fabritu. But seeing that no virtue is now followed gratis, and for its own
beauty, but all in respect of their rewards are made lovely to men: Therefore
this desire of wealth and gain in Magistrates may more easily be endured,
upon condition that they, content with that common and almost allowed way of
sinning, will afterward with sincerity of mind behave themselves in their
employment.

But as by that height which they undertake, they have power to moderate, and
if they please, to abuse the people under them; So unless that by mature
wisdom, and such as is not only capable of their place of judicature, they
can bridle their desires, themselves cannot avoid flowtes, and reproaches; but
those for the most part are secret ones, and in their absence. For openly by
flattering speeches they are stirred up to pride, and a vain confidence of
themselves; whilst so many suitors in law with great observance, but such as
does not last, do seek their favors: For no man, which is called into
question for his estate, but can be content humbly to petition the Judges, and,
if they be harsh and froward, to appease them; or if they lie open to a
favorable ambition, to feed them (like meat) with many prasses, and crindging
gestures. Rome did long ago teach the world that art, when offenders in fear
and reverence used to fall down at the Judges feet, clothed in base gowns,
and their hair in a vile manner neglected. But all these suppliants, what end
soever their businesses have, as soon as ever they are gone out of the Judges
presence, put off again this fearful disguise of soothing; and sometimes
among their companions remember with great laughter, and reckon up the
flatteries which they used, and the credulity of those, to whom they put them.
For Judges being always full of succeeding troops of clients, do many times
value themselves according to their flattery, and think that all those are
true honourers to their dignity, who by a composed humility do seek to gain
their favor. Those Judges, I mean, whose ambition is not acquainted with the
manners and subtlety of our Age; which they have seen nothing but the Schools
and Courts, in one of which they used to trifle, in the other to have
observance, and be deceived; or else are of narrow and easy minds, fondly to
believe them that speak for their own ends. But then especially are they
ridiculous to the people, when, as if they were ashamed of their own
condition, they put on the gestures and words of Soldiers, or in their attires
imitate the Court fashions, or follow other delights, which are not suitable to
the majesticke gravity of Gowns and tribunal Seats. Which errors do many
times overtake unexperienced young men; for young men are sometimes advanced to
those dignities.

But nothing is more miserable to a Commonwealth than when Magistrates and
Judges, forgetting that Goddess, under whose name, and by whose representation
they pronounce sentence, swayed in their affections, either by the greatness
of gifts, or favor of the pleaders, are not afraid to deceive the Laws. Nor
can I easily tell which is the greater fault to be swayed by money or by
friends; For that easiness in them of denying nothing to their Favorites,
opens a Judges breast to all impiety, accustomed thus by degrees to injustice,
that excusing his crime with a show of friendship, afterward wheresoever
hatred or hope shall lead him, he will not fear to offend, and to do that
for his own sake, which at first he did for his friends.

But if they be eagerly intent on wealth, and seek riches by the peoples
harms; then the body of the Commonwealth under such Physicians is more sick
of the remedies than of the diseases. But there are few that in an open way of
villainy, dare thus to satisfy the lusts of themselves or their friends. There
is a more lingering plague, or, if thou will, a modest cruelty; which now by
custom is almost excused; to entangle with intricate knots, and so prolong the
causes in their Courts; to be ended late, through an infinite and almost
religions course of orders. By these arts they prolong their domination over
wretched men, and deliver them up to be more polled by their ^^^cers. And with
perpetual prey they feed the advocates, and whole nation almost of those which
are fatted with the spoils of wretched Clients. And how intolerable are the
tricks of some? Justice which they are afraid to sell openly, they prostitute
under other Merchants. Their household Servants are their Remembrancers and
Secretaries, who use to put into order, and to keep in record of writing the
causes of suitors, and the instruments of them. But such men they do not admit
into this ambitious service, until by great sums of money, which they before
by suites have gotten, they make purchase of these places. Oh miserable mockery
of the fortunes of poor wretches, that come to these tribunals* That the
servants of Judges are not hired, but pay money to be admitted into their
family and service, what is it else but to buy a liberty of coosening, and by
stolen fees to rob the suitors, and by selling their suffrages, by either
shortening or obtruding books, dare to deceive both their Masters and aequity
it self. But many of these Magistrates have candeid minds, and prefarre
holiness, just honors, and that stipend, which the law allows them, before
the covetous arts.

These are grave men, and modestly composed within the greatness of their
fortune; Nor are they praised more by the flattery of those that seek their
aid, than by true fame of their piety and justice. But if you value the Courts
of these Judges not by the manners of each in particular, but by the gravity of
the whole College or assembly, it is wonderful how great a reverence they
will strike into you. For being admitted into their presence, you will
altogether think them worthy of that speech of CYNEAS, who said he thought
himself environed by as many Kings, as Roman Senators were then assembled.
But yet this Majesty will be a (...) more grateful and delightful spectacle,
to those men that being free from law business, have no hopes or (...)
depending upon their sentences; who sitting, as it were in the Haven, may
securely look upon the stormy Sea, and see these NEPTUNES governing the Waves
according to their own beck. When Rome and Carthage were in league,
MASSANISSA King of N^midia, who was also at friendship with Rome, had war
with Carthage. The armies were both encamped against each other, and the day
appointed for fight; when SCPIO the younger, being sent by chance upon other
business into Africa, came to the Camp of MASINISSA, and enjoyed the sight
of that great battle; he himself, which way soever Fortune inclined, was
secure by the Majesty of the Roman name. He went therefore up to the top of an
hill to view the battle, and there securely enjoyed the dangers of so many
men. And it seemed to him a matter of so ambitious a delight, that he said,
none ever had had that fortune before him, but only JOVE from IDA, and Neptune
from Sam^thracia, who placed out of all danger, beheld the battle of the
Greeks and Trej^nt. The same may be said of this spectacle of the Courts and
Judges, than which nothing is more delightful, if thou stand without danger,
and have no need either to entreat or fear. For thou may there grow
pleasantly acquainted with the learned minds of Judges (as many of the^ are
such,) or else perceive their want of sense and eloquence in some causes, and
so give sentence upon the Judges themselves. Or if thou love to be among the
trouble of the Court, the very noise of their running up and down, and
different looks, some animated with fear, some exulting with hopes, will so
take up thy mind and eyes, that thou will think thou beholdest a pleasant
scene of human madness. And especially the subtilty of the advocates, (whose
eloquence is there at sale) displaying it self in ostentation of Science and
pompous language, will be enough to give thee a delight sweet, and not
altogether idle; which while thou enjoyest, thou shall notwithstanding with
fearlesse sighs grieve sometimes for the miseries of others.

For the minds and condition of the advocates (as mankind does turn even her
aids to her own ruin) are much changed from the first institution of
officious Piety. To plead causes before the Judges, to accuse the guilty, and
defend poor Suppliants, was once a magnificent and liberal office, performed
by those men to whom the commonwealth committed the highest charges in the
Camp or Senate house. POMPEY the Great stood not ofter in battle than before
the Judges; and the first CAESAR'S, although they had all power, yet sometimes
they chose rather to aid the accused by way of advocation, than by the
suffrage of their high authority. And that magnificent function was so far from
having any hire but glory, that when afterward that right Nobility began to
decline, and Orators began to sell their pains, laws were made to forbid,
and brand with infamy such dangerous hires; and afterward when the public
vice had broken down those bars also, yet there was a mean set down, and a
certain pension appointed for that mercenary eloquence. But now when the world
grew mad, and suites did exceedingly increase; that thriving and numerous
nation are scarce enough for their clients, who spoil themselves to feed their
own dissentions.

But as all lawyers have one aim every where, to get wealth, and fame, so
according to the quality of the Countries, there are different studies, and
degrees, by which they come to that end. The especial part of their knowledge
is to understand the laws, not with a clear and candid Genius, such as they
had which made those laws, but as they are perplexed with innumerable and
troublesome poins of subtlety. To find out somewhat in them whereby to delude
the simplicity of them, that go plainly to work, is now esteemed the most
glorious thing. Among most nations those laws, which the Romans made for
themselves, and we call civil, are now in force. And because those laws were
founded by skillful Authors, they have strong diversity of learning in them,
and therefore the study of them does not only store the wits of students with
deep and hard cases of right and fact, but bestows upon them a fair
knowledge of antiquity, which is most precious for the adorning of humane life,
and strong (at least in pleading) for ostentation. But in those nations, among
whom laws were made not according to the Roman wisdom, but their own
municipall, and sometimes barbarous decretalls, there the unpleasant art of
lawiers contains scarce any thing of humanity in it, and unless it promised
them gain, would be hateful even to those that are the most studious in it.
For there the Lawyers dress not their wits with the Roman and Grecian science
or eloquence, but sticking upon certain terms, and contemplating the laws
sometimes for caution, sometimes for deceit, they scarce ever adorn or raise
their minds with purer learning.

England, which has entertained the Muses, and all studies of Learning in most
stately houses, and enriched them with great and high revenues, as it were to
perpetuate learning to Eternity, cannot therefore adorn her Students of the
Law with the humanity of Philosophy, and the Roman eloquence; because in her
laws there are no tracts and footsteps of the Roman law, or learned antiquity.
They are conceived in the French tongue, even that old French, which we now
either neglect or laugh at in ancient Authors. If there be any words in it,
which are now current, even those words, by changing the accents, and error
of pronuntiation, they have made their own. Those that are Students in this
law, do seldom regard any greater Science, and for the most part do not
learn the elements of the Roman language. It is thought enough for the
learning of a lawyer to be able to read over those old books, and corrupt
them in pronunciation. The young students live in colleges ordained for those
subtleties, and by long time, by conference with the ancients, and experience,
are instructed in them: for it is no small part of their age that will suffice
to make them learned in an art so laborious, and amplified by so many wits.
There is no more certain way to riches in that Country. For England quiet now
from foreign wars, is (with almost as great a destruction) given wholly over
to Law contentions; and seeing that the greatest Offices, and Magistracies are
ordained as rewards for that kind of learning, no marvel it is if the noblest
young men be taken with the study of it; insomuch as there is scarce any house
of Gentry, but in suites can find Lawyers of their own kindred. Those Lawyers
as a badge of their profession do wear long Gowns down to their feet, faced
with their own Cun^ies skins. This is their wear at home, and their
ornament abroad; nor do they make any scruple of going in public Booted,
their Spurs tearing their Gown that beats against them.

But France in other virtues and vices does instruct her advocates. Some time
they spend in the University professing the study of the Civil law. There some
with a happy Genius do follow their learning, others as if they were borne in
a Lethargy. But both of them (oh the Times) are capable, as a promiscuous
reward, of the same honors and the same titles. For those who have there
played the trewants through wanton idleness or dullness of Nature, may by the
help of a little money attain the degree of Advocate; only by buying the
suffrages of the other advocates, to whose testimony concerning the suffiency
of Students the Magistrates and Judges give credit.

Which was by an ancient custom, that such honor should be given to their
testimonies, in the old time before the minds of Learned men and Lawyers were
subject to so base a mercenary way. And these men so undeservingly admitted to
that degree, do afterward live in ignoble Colonyes, and among souls of their
own dullness, will serve to make wretched advocates before a blind Tribunal.
Or if they be borne of rich parents, they are straight received for their
wealth, and afterward (which is the grief) are made Magistrates.

But those that have adorned a happy wit first with law, and afterward with
eloquence perfited it, they with their worth do highly honor the whole rank
of advocates. Sca^se in any other men are the Studies of humanity so truly
found, or so great and happy a care in good Learning; insomuch as they seem to
instru^t the Muses (whom austere and rude Philosophers have kept as wild and
rusticke out of the society of men) to all the abilities of a civil life, and
taking them from their secret and mountainous aboades, fit them for the true
light of Conversation.

But some of them offend by affectation of too much Eloquence, and heated with
the incitations of Youth and vain glory, divert from their duty of advocation.
They desire only to tickle the ear of the Judges and Auditors with pleasure,
and of all the company, do less good to no man than their Client; and (as the
Poet of old scoffed) when they should speak of Goats, they love to begin
their discourse with the wars of HANNIBALL, to rehearse the overthrow at
CANNAE, and the stayning of AVFIDVS with Roman blood. Others of them are great
by exercising their wits in a long custom of deceiving, and to the ruin of
innocence, prostitute their mercenarie faith to the patronage of any Cause. So
to bear down the true evidences, to draw an artificial shadow, and to make
their wits have more to do than the Laws themselves in a Court of Justice,
are things which prove enough this public mischief; there are no causes, no
offenses questioned but may find a Patron, if they bring money; which, as a
thing quite outweighing all love to their Country, can never want observance
and respect. *

The sixteenth Chapter. Of Divines; Of Rulers in Religion.
LEt some of barbarous and unpolished natures scoff, as they list, with
contemptuous jests at the Majesty of learning; and account that mind manly and
noble, which eschewes all the Muses as base and useless; yet notwithstanding
their estates are oftentimes liable to the power of learning, which reigns in
all cases; and in judgment seats (which ought to be governed by the praescript
of science) they use to tremble, forgetting both their birth and boldness. But
there is another and a greater power, which gives learning a domination over
all Mankind; the administration of Religion and holy rites, which is committed
usually to men of learning; and which truly reigns over most men's minds;
curbing no less all others, who are forced of necessity to conceal their
Atheism and Impiety. Nor is there any estate so poor, or of so ignoble a
birth, as can keep a man from high fame, who in the way of religion puts forth
himself above the common honesty or badnesse. And least we should think that
this power of learning has not taken effect; how easily may we reckon up the
names of men unarmed, and only powerful in their books, who in this age
living under mean roofes, and contending in points of Religion, have set these
great and proud contemners of the Muses, together by the ears? Bearing, as it
were, the ensigns before Princes and Nations to calamitous and deadly wars,
which yet (as it seems) is not wholly appeased with our calamities, nor has
consumed the seeds of all that bitterness; which brought it forth.

There can be therefore no survey of minds more profitable, than of those,
which in these manifold storms of the world do sit at the stern of religion.
And these are to be distinguished into diverse ranks; some as Captains do
begin new religions, and either have true wisdom, or run headlong in
ambitious error. So was he that by laws given from heaven governed the Jews
returning out of Egypt. So was the great Creator of heaven and earth, who
taking upon him man's nature, did by his death open the way of life to
Mankind. And so (because here we describe not only honesty, but fortune,
which plays her games in humane affairs) was, Oh villainy! That man which
infected with his venom first Arabia and Syria, afterward whatsoever lies
between the Hellespont and India, and now from thence all the Countries as
far as the hither part of Hungary, and with his sacrilegious superstition
has corrupted almost all Africa. And those whom true and caelestiall
inspirations have led to the Majesty of founding religion, are not to be looked
into by us, bnt only with faith and adoration. But others who are not afraid
in so great a matter to abuse Heaven, and coosen the people, must of necessity
have such a mind as believes nothing at all either of their own Laws or of
Heaven, as spares no virtue* nor forbeares (unless (...) in show) any vice;
but (...) especially ^^efull to gain to themselves a (...) turning those
laws, which they make, to the lust and superstitions of their own Nation. Nor
can those which offend in this kind (as in other wickedness it often falls out)
be deceived themselves, or blinded with love of their own opinions, or the
things in question; but being conscious to their own wickedness, they know
themselves to be impious and the plagues of Mankind; especially when to
persuade the people to such a serious novelty is required a most bold
presumption, in subtle wit, and besides many lies are to be invented; as
namely that they saw or heard the Deity; that they consulted with him; and
whatsoever else those lewd impostors use to aver. But this is not a mischief
incident to every age; for but few (and not always with success) have gone so
far as to that most impious audacity. There is another kind of men, and
far more frequent, of those who profess not to forsake the religion of their
Fathers, or to broach any novelty; but only with more pure precepts to root
out errors which by humane corruption and contrary to the mind of antiquity
have crept into religion. And these men carry a most magnificent show of
honesty, and reverent wisdom (for who but subtle and industrious men would
venture on so great a matter?) And lastly, the very desire of innovating and
differing from other men does almost always find a multitude of followers.
The wrangling of such interpreters have much more divided the OTHOMAN Princes
from the PERSIAN by difference of Superstition than by emulation of Empire. But
what matters it how those people perish, who must needs err, what sect soever
they undertake to follow? But who would not grieve that we our selves which
are borne into the only light, should by the discords of learned men be so
miserably dist^asted? For sixeteene ages, in which our religions have
flourished, have brought forth above an hundred wits, which by a desire of
innovation, and our calamities have gotten themselves a fame. Whose proceedings
as I can never excuse (for by too great a fault of obstinacy they transgress
against that modesty, in which they seemed to begin) so we may not always justly
hate their first motions. For wealth, sloth, and idle security have with an
impotent p^ide and other vices overwhelmed all discipline among many of us; and
from thence as well the just indignation of learned men has bin stirred, as
the pride of busy bodies, shadowed with the veil of piety, has been first
fostered. For some possessed with just sorrow have thundered against it; others
with a secret ambition have loved the vices of the age, as things that would
give just occasion to their complaints and separation. They use to have both
one beginning. At the first they question not many things, and those very
sparingly, assisted by the prayers and exhortations of the best men: nor do
they seem so much to be angry as to admonish, and with sighs to p^ofesse their
grief. But when they are gotten to the height of a fa^tion, then with more
freedom do they provoke their adversaries, and on both sides is kindled a
most hot and furious emulat^o^. Then can they neither modest^y e- guide the
fortune of so great a fame, nor continue in those steps, by which at the first
they seemed to go to that godly and good endeavor; but rising up with a
greater pride, they condemn more things in their adversaries, and with greater
vehemence; either because they desire, in a miserable ambition, to give their
own names to that Sect which they have made: or because they durst not betray,
but by degrees, the first intention of their separation; or else because their
hatred is more incyted against those who did too fiercely and unseasonably
contend against their first and wholesome reprehensions. So many that with pio^s
beginnings have entered upon this task of reformation, have been afterward
betrayed by pride and bitterness of emulation.

But there are some who by a true and stout wisdom are encouraged to tax
those vices, which by the fault of Priests have shadowed themselves under the
Cloak of religion. These men, whose just zeal is thus tempered with true
modesty, must needs be of a sublime and valiant disposition, and (which is
ra^e) not laboring at all for their own ends, but the public good. By
reproaches, injuries, and i^l speeches they are neither stirred to hatred, nor
righted from their good intentions. This is a most excellent atchievment, and a
work of high virtue? For those, who are reprehended by them, are seldom
wanting to their vices, nor with patience can they endure a censurer. But they
will find some gloss to set upon their villainies, or (which is worse) stand
out in a stiff defense of them; and endeavor to bring those good admonishers,
into an opinion of sac^ilegious impiety among the people.

But as the rites of beginning Religio is do rely wholly upon the industry and
Genius of their Fo^^ders: so, after they are approved by the people, they have
their officers by whom they are administered. These men by several Nations are
honored with different titles: we call them high Priests, Bishops, and by
other titles of that nature. There is no better Government then this to
preserve Religion; which indeed was instituted by the prescript of Heaven.
Those among them, which are of a learned and laborious virtue, do indeed up
hold the safety of Religion; those that are wicked, do uphold it, at least in
show, and by virtue of their dignity.

It was once a function of great labor, and, whilst our Religion was
forbidden by public laws, of high and extreme danger: afterward when the
cruelty of our enemies was overcome and extinguished, that wealth, which was
heaped upon them to uphold the reverence of that dignity, did almost extinguish
the cause of reverence. For when temporal wealth and honors were added (as it
was fit they should be added) to those Divine callings, so great a burden
began to disperse them to the Earth, by the default of those, who in such a
mixture of these two, began to prefer Earth before Heaven. It is a sad
argument of decaying honesty, that a function of so great labor and care,
which was wont to seek out for Incumbents, is now sought for with much
eagerness and ambition by men, that think of nothing less then piety and
labor.

So this excellent and celestial dignity is for the most part ruined by her
own wealth and ornaments. And to apply a man's mind to those functions is for
the most part to be intent in raising of high and eminent riches. And those
that are possessed of those ambitious titles, do spend that wealth and
treasure, which was first given for public Hospitality, upon their private
wantonness, which pleases it self sometimes with a vain delight in
Pictures, sometimes in the curious labors of other Artificers; for a modest
sorrow would be ashamed to speak of those that spend them in worse things, and
plain villainy. But what madness is it not only to dare to commit those
villainies, but oftentimes to be ignorant how much they offend? For they have
prayers prescribed them to God, holy ones indeed, and such as they ought not
to omit; but having performed that little task, they think then they owe
nothing to Heaven, and the wealth of their Miters is lawfully bought by them.
What strange vizards are these and foolish madness? to think that that
function, which by a daily and strict labor thou can scarce perform,
should be fulfilled by a slight and perfunctory work. But if they would season
their delights with this wholesome cogitation, that they are placed in a
watchtower, and are called Shepherds; if any of the sheep do perish by their
sloth, it will prove their own destruction, this though perchance would
allay the license of their wantonness, pomp, and jollity.

But all do not wallow in the same delights and sloth. Some do abate
something from the charge of their pleasures to bestow upon learned men;
themselves also are given to learning, but it is but in a short fit, not to
last, and sometimes in show only. Some of them do attain to good learning,
overcomming sloth by a happy strength of wit. But they u^e that learning more
in nothing than in mainteining the privileges of that dignity which they
possess. They find out arguments for infinite liberties of their own, and
their hidden lusts do make them eloquent. By this means while they seem to
look up only into Heaven, and plead the cause of God; they are staked to the
Earth.

But those that have avoided these mischie^es, that are endued with a
disposition fit for their high calli^g, and do use then public splendor to
the good of the people, and the grace of Divine service (as there are always
some such) those will neither endure to loose the privileges which belong to
their dignities, nor encroach upon other-mens; but in a good contemplation they
join together how much they can do, and how much they ought. These are men
composed after the image of the old sanctity, of the same cares, and the same
manner of life, which in old time did deserve that wealth, which the Church now
injoyes. Lastly, these men (let none envy what I say) are truly worthy of the
wealth which old times bestowed, and of our highest reverence.

The people cannot be sufficiently taught from the Prelates own mouths, for
the number of them is but small. From hence a great number of learned men, and
graduates in Divinity are maintained every where, of whom some truly and
wisely do labor in that science which they profess; but others, you would
suppose, do labor more to uphold a faction, tha^ to find out truth. For carried
away with a great violence of mind they allow of a defense of any nature to
prove to the people the sanctity of their religion, and love to advance piety,
though by impious means. Therefore to maintain their own propositions, they
think they deceive fairly and with commendations, although evident arguments
may bring credit to that which they believe true. And speaking of their
adversaries, they do not truly deliver their tenets, but spitefully turn
them, almost contrary to the sense of the Authors. But that mad desire of
controversy does so far heighten their emulation, that where they begin a
little to differ, they will afterward be cross in all things from those men;
and think that a kind of piety. And then, as if those men who once have erred,
could hold or reproove nothing rightly, they think it a sin to acknowledge
in themselves any spots which those men have found out, and to wash them away
by a true reformation; and therefore by striving to defend those things which
plain truth tells us cannot be maintained, they bring an unjust praejudice
upon the honest and true part of their controversy.

There is a great affinity between all sorts of Lear^ing; and the same
affections which trouble Divines, do fall upon the other studies of the Muses;
especially that custom of insisting upon learned Controversies, and bringing
them almost to plain hatred. The wranglings of Lawyers do grow even almost to
uncivil words, threatening to each other the whip in our Age. Physic is
divided into sects with greater obstinacy; because they hunt for fame not only
for their own glory, but to gain wealth; nor are their controversies ever in
jest, or for pleasure only, whilst sick men must undeservedly suffer for
whatsoever they think amiss. But the kinds of all Learned men may be
distinguished into two ranks: One is of those men which are happy in much
knowledge and erudition, but being polished also with civil disciplines, they
do avoid the careless vility of Scholasticall manners: The other of those men
whose minds are bent wholly upon letters, being more conversant in the rotten
footsteps of Antiquity than in their own Age; These for the most part are
foolish abroad, and sordid at home. For they know not nor care for any other
Elegancy, than that solitary elegance, which they receive from contemplation of
the Muses, and had rather enjoy it so, than make true use of it. Yet may you
converse with these men to a great benefit of your self, if you know how to
extract gold out of their crude and formelesse earth, and make your self to
shine in those ornaments, which in them are not seen, as covered over with
much dust and rubbish.

FINIS.

