THE SEIGE OF BREDA BY THE ARMS OF PHILLIP THE FOVRT UNDER THE GOVERNMENT OF
ISABELLA ATCHIVED BY THE CONDVCT OF AMBR. SPINOLA

Louanii ex officina Hastenii M. DC. XXVII.

TO THE MOST EXCELLENT LORD AMBROSIO SPINOLA MARQVES OF THE BALBASES. KNIGHT
OF THE MOST NOBLE ORDER OF THE GOVLDENFLECE.
One of his Majesty's consell of State. Captain general of his Army, which
intered in Germany: Master de Camp General of, these States and Captain
General of the sea Army of the same.

Most Renowned, Glorious and Victorious PRINCE,
MAny were the reasons and motives which moved me to set forth in the Inglish
tongue, the illustrious seege, and worthy regayning of the town of Breda, by
thy so prosperous, and potent arm, and to dedicate the same unto thy
Excellency. First, so to diuulge unto the world (as much as I was able) the
invincible power of that Great and Mighty Monarche, the Catholic King of
Spain. Secondly, to spread abroad and to proclaim, the fame and piety of
that Pearl of the world, the most Excellent Isabella Clara Eugenia, Infanta
of Spain, such and so vvorthya Princess, whose very e^nimies approve of her
just, deserved and undeniable praises, being such indeed, as hardly any mortal
pen canset, them forth as they deserve. Thirdly, that both friends and foes
might understand, the true undaunted valor, and invincible courage, of such an
incomparable General, as thy self, who for thy ardent zeal and fervor to
the Catholic cause, I may for a brief and summary abridgment of thy virtues,
rightly call, the Captain of Captains, the triumphant Palm of all those who
bear arms, the scourage of rebels. Terror of Heretics, suppresser of
seditions, succor of Religious. Protector of virgins safeguard of Monasteries,
Bulwork of the lowcontries, and invincible Champion of the Catholic Church.
oneill and odonel those famous warriers of great renoome, prudent. and brave
conductors. their notorius acts so redouted that their enemies so feared them,
ey, and as. I have heard say, mootheres to cause there children to houlde there
peace when they cried, feared and affricted them. with this very name.
resultinge of the renoome of there rare victories, sore and blooddy encounters
and notorius executions. But the name of Spinola, danteth and makes to
tremble, not babes or children, but even the proodest, hautiest, and most
insulting enemy of the greatest Monarche, of all Europe, the King of Spain,
who as he is the greatest and most incomparablest of all the rest, and whose
only name al other Kings of Christendom (enemies unto him) do redout: so of
all the Captains and Commanders of this most Catholic King, no Captain,
nor no Commanders name is more redouted, then that of Spinola. For this is that
right worthy Spinola, which no Scipio, no Pompeo, no Caesar, did ever surpass,
in prudence, valor, vigilance, fidelity, and all other vertus. This is that
Spinola who by his Heroical facts, manifested to the world by so many most
famous victories, has accquired to him self everlasting glory, and left to
all posterity, perpetual memory. This is that Spinola, whom the hand of
the highest asisting, conquered and subdued, that almost impregnable town of
Breda. notwithstanding almost all the Princes of Europe, conspired with their
uttermost force to oppose him. This is that glorious flower of all Italy,
which contry, as it has brought forth many rare and incomparable warriers in
former ages, so has it now brought us forth a Spinola, no way inferior to his
worthy predecessors, but rather such an one, in whom alone, all their former
virtues seem to be revived. This is that Spinola, or rather to speak more
properly, that thrice renowned Spine or pricking Thorn, which has pricked the
hearts of all warlike Nobility, with the Spine or prick of emulation of his
incomparable virtues: But principally, this is that Spinola or right vvorthie
Spine, who has pricked the hearts of the present rebels and enemies of the
Church of God, with such a prick and deadly dart, as has vvounded them all
even to the heart. Fourthly and lastly, I was moved hereto, that in relating
the invincible power of that mighty Monarch the King of Spain the
unspeakable piety, zeal and devotion of the most Excellent Infanta, the
incomparable virtue, valor, prudence, and brave conduction of this their so
noble General, together with the united love unspotted loayltie, and rare
judgment of other his Majesty's Nobles and faithful subjects in these
executions, in all occasions, I might (with thy Excellencies leave) both
enlighten my beloueded contrymen, with thehonor of thy Heroical Acts, with the
rarieties, of that famous siege, and with the innumerable plots and stratagemes
of war, practiced as well on Thine, as thy enemies side. And the rather, for
that not only my self, but other Captains of my nation, with many of our
contrymen, served in this siege under thy colors, even from the first to the
last of the same, receiving, at thy Noble hands such infinite honor for our
service, as has and euershall, justly oblige our lives unto thee, whence I
douted not, but that as by publishing the same, I should (as both my duty and
desire was) perpetuat thy excellent praises to all posterity amongst my
nation; so they would reap to them selves, much fruit thereby, in contemplation
of thy virtues, and would with as willing minds receive the same, as I
willingly employed my pains in setting it forth, principally for thy honor,
secondarily for their vtilities, such in particular as ar more inclined to
wars; and ar desirous to learn some curiosities in the profession of arms.
Reign, Conquer, and ever Overcome (invincible Prince) which thy Excellencies
servant and most loyal Captain, and humble Orator, shall ever pray for during
life.

CAPTAIN GERRAT BARRY. IRISH.


THE SIEDGE OF BREDA
MAny things with theare greatness, have made the siedge of Breda famous,
above the memory of forepassed wars first, the suplies of great socoures,
that were on every side gathered toghiter by the enemy, The great
extraordinary socorres, and emulation of strangeres.
as though the contention had been not for the sauegard of one town, but for
the principality of the whole empire: the endeauoures of foraine nationes, so
much augmented the fame thereof, as that emulation it self, increased the
renoume of the victory. Next the wonderful, and unheard greatness of the
fortificaciones The admirable trinches.
which was made, by the enuironinge of a double trinche, against both an
enwarde, and an outeward enemy, such a one as hardly any forepassed
histories have left in writhinge moreover an incredible multitude of The
multitude of fortificasiones.
batteries, trinches, redutes, and fortes, and other fortificasiones of like
Kind, which both were perfected in that cruel time of the year, and in
auerie short space, there greatness considered. Furthermore, the great
dificultie Great difficult in tranporting of vitualles.
of transportinge provision Safely, in so long a journey, both in winter
time, and also in deep VVayes, the space of aleauen months, when in respect
of the costly cariadge by Vituales and cariadge desre.
wagones, imposed upon the willing provinces, the deuastation of viladges and
plases of defense, the prices of all merchandise were very great, nor any
wages paid to Vituales and cariadge desre.
any soilder, but very seldom and haulfe pays. Lastly acerteine peculiar
help of the divine power, continually asisteng our afayres, and beating down
the plottes of the enemies, as if it had been even favorable unto us, offendet
Amarue'ous favor of god
and ofensiue toward them. Of which divine providence, theare have apeered
so many, and so certain arguments, in all this war of Breda that albieth the
endeauoures, and vigilance of the comanderes were very great, yet douptlesh
they had efected nothing with all there cares, without the extraordinary help
of god, there chief captain. and thiese in amaner, are the things, which
have diuulged abroad the fame of this war, through out the whole world.
Breda albiet otherwise it be none of the greatest towns, yet in the compass of
the The s^reuid of Breda.
walls, it douthe contain no more then four thousand pases, so that it can
be walked round about almost in an hours space. seauentine viladges
aperteineth to the same with in his liberty. First in the year 1404. it fell
unto the house of Nasawe, by the dourie of Jane Polan, whow being heir of
Breda, married Engelberet count of Nasawe. The same town in the year 1567.
Duke de Alua when william of Nasaw fleinge for his treason When it came to the
house of Nasavve.
committed, got into the king of Spaines possession. The year after, it came
again to the house of Nasawe in the year 1577. the count of Hollac
compellenge it to be restored. Then again in the year 1581. being taken by
The times the to wne was lost and recovered
the baron of hautepen by force and craft was subject to the King for nine
years, until such time as aurager in the year 1690. by the fraud of
sendinge in of aboate, (wherein lay hid secretly seauentie soilderes, as in
times paste the greeks did be the troyan horse) got in to his possession
both the castle, and the city, be the comaunde of Maurish of Nasavve Prince
of orange.

The town being almost in the furt hermoste parts The situation
of Brabant, reaches to Holand by the river merka. it is environed wit he
neighbor towns, and viladges not far distant: It lies in amoste
pleasantpart of the land, fuche a one as very many captains and soilders
said they had not seen the like in all europe; so that not without cause
Grave Morish cauled Breda his paradyse. the fildes on every side plentiful of
pasture, and corn, all the meddos compassed with young plants, all alonge
are divided, with many riueres, as it were in there natural bounds; The roes
of tries being set in order, as it were by line or by square with there grine
bows, do on every side shadow the pasadges of the ways, and of the
houseses. Not far of there were planted four woudes, one of pine tries, and
three of oaks. There passes trough, it two riueres, Aa, and Merka, and
withone of those two it is enclosed. The river Aa being enriched with the
rivers Aa filles his ditches.
of the plain contrie, douth rum about the walls of the town, and is
retained with asluce, least the ditches about the walls be left dry, when
the water of the river of merka (whervvith it is mingled within the town)
are fallen a way withdraw the ebinge of the sea, and vvithall it turns a mill
of corn withdraw aslovve course, into the town. The place where the riueres
do mingel them selves together; by the influence of the river Merka, into Aa,
has retained The river merka paseth trovve the town.
the corupt name of them boath, Merkendal as it were to say, Merka in Aa.
Merka being shutt up from Aa. Betvvext two trinches of brik wales in those
very diches of the wales, slideth troughe the town, deuidethe be nature
into many parts, and broader, be little and little, povvreth it self into the
vvateres, and sea of Holand not far of from Dortdreght. It is daily stirred up
be reason of two tides. And by interposed sluses, it ouerfloweth the fildes of
the suburbs, as often as it pleases those of the town. From Aa, of oulde unto
the town the name of Breda was given by the brabanders unto whom Breed
signified broad, as if they would have expressed the chanel of the river Aa,
spreadinge it self obroad.

In the midest of the town, there is built an high tower of 362. foot, from
whence is afree prospect The height of the tower.
into the negboure towns, fit to give and receive singnes from afar of.

The houses are thught to be in number athousand two hondered. The town in
form, is triangle if the The number of houses in the town.
castle built by the walls should be comodiously takin. It being fortified
with walls, bridges, magasens, The form of the town
and with a double ditche of water, more does contain in compass, then a
thousand passes. Furthermore, it is so adorned with galeries, porches,
pillars, walks, and with so pleasant gardines, that hard it is to Judge And of
the wales.
wether it be more strong, or more beautiful. The walls of the town being
planted with a continuated row of oaks built not of brikes, buth of turff,
with three gates. made of brikes, do give an extrance upon three corners of
the town, besides that by the which men go out of the castle. The curtines
of the walls and of the castle, lieng betwext, does altogether contain the
number of fiftine bulwarks well provided with artileries and some corn mills
with wind sails: There are two plat forms upon the wales for the canon to
shutt afar off. Under thies at the foot of the wales next the ditches, there
are two shelters but some vvhate lovver, like to a third in anothher place
above which there is no mont adjoining.

Thies are as it were certain places of refuge, unto which men go be
sorties under the ground and they doapeere above the vvatheres, four feet in
heght. Below about the foot of the wales, there is a hedge of thorns,
having the boughs cut and bovved in, and vvrethed alonge, which serves for
defense to the shooteres and to the wales. The ditche lie open in an unequal
breadth, The bread of the disches.
when for the most part in a hondereth and fifty pases, and at least in
seven tie paces, there is discovered in the circuit of the ditches, fourtine
rauelinges cut in atriangle form, reachinge out of the midest of the river,
running about them, vvherof three do Join to the wales next the bridges of
the gates, and with other two, the water of the two riueres are divided into
the ditches. Another The outvver de fortisicasiones.
runes be a little bridge til it comes to the walls of the castle. Toward the
out ward side is a parapet of five foot high, that the small shot may the
better discover on every side. Five fortificasiones apeereth in the front of
the four gates of the town and castle. the cortines, and caualleros, are
corespondant in discouerenge the ditche, and they assure the same in some
thirty foot broad. The four have 210. foot in lenght on bothesides, in
breadth a hondereh and fifty: The greatest that leyes to the castle, is in
lenght two hondereth and forty paces; and two hondered broad. The front
being made crooked toward the Angles or corneres which the Spanard caul
tenacas and in Inglish horn works. There apeere sharpened stakes out of
thies works in clinenge dovvnevvardes The vvourkes of defenses.
to hender the a scent, if any ate^pt to scale the wales should offer. Over
the ditches of the outvvarde fortes, there is a haulfe moon enclosed with a
little vvalle, and ditche turned crooked the lenght of a cubitt, to defend the
shooteres; which they call the half moon; encompassed with another
ditche. From this ditche; the distance of some pases; there is a conterscarf to
which you are to goet trough a little raisinge bridge such a one as that of
the other side of the town. All thies in ward, and outvvarde fortificasiones
of the town, Ex good correspondance.
are so fitly disposed amongst them selves, and do discover, and answer one to
another that some bienge higher then other, others being equal in hight, the
one defend the other from the wales; and from the furthermoste to the
neereste if need be one may Form of the teritorie or fortificasiones
retire from the one to the other. lastly, the ground belonging to the suburbs
is of that nature and situation, that be continual ebinge and flovvinge of the
sea, or withdraw pooles suddenly dispersed, no man can have any access.
Furthermore an I land belonginge to the suburbs, cut out against the castle,
for the preparing of shipes, is environed with avvall of an in deferent
height. After this form Grave Morish, two years sense commanded wales,
bulvvarkes, rauelinges, parapetes, and ditches, to be made. But when the
situation and fitnes of the town, did as it were alure be its own nature, and
propriety, to stir up as it were a certain scoole of military discipline,
the states of the united provinces. desired that (which many foraineres judged
to be as it were the best wresteling place for soilders) for to exercise in
arms to be set before others for an example, and to be instructed. Hither
therefore did both frence, Inglish, and the Germans come together to learn
military disipline; Hither Grave Morish was wont to send bake those that were
skillful in war. (as often as consultation was to by made of exact
fortificasiones, and perfect works.) Hither he sent the Numero 1.
BREDA AS IT WAS FORTIFIED BY THE PRINCE OF ORANGE BEFORE THE SEIGE LAID BEFORE
IT.
A Bulwarks B Rauelins C Cats D Half Moons in the walls E The Counterscarpe
F Horn works G Half Moons with their Parapet H An Island on the other side
of the ditch fortified with a parapet I The Ports of the Town and Castle


son of Emanuel of Portugal nephew to him be his shister, made general over
atroupe of foot together with acompany of horse. Hither he sent both his
sons being bastardes borne, where of the one led at roup of foot.

Number I.
Justinius Nasauw broother of Grave Morish, was Governor of the town a man
exellinge be the use of long experience Justinius de Nasavve was Governor.
how could defend an a saulte be consel and asiege be frugalitie. John
Artsenius drosart lord of worms was chife of the cittisens, a man no lesh
constant then The drasats John of Artsens.
wise, for the moderateng of the dispensation of corn, and of tempering
seditiones, and ministtinge counseils, in sudaine and desperate cases. For the
defense of the town, there was used to be appointed commonly, sixtine companies
of foot, and to the castle, but one, of The number of the ordinari garisen.
horsemen five, in the whole sixtine hondreth soilders. Butt having under stood
of late the Rumor of the war, there were added eight companies of foot, and
of cittisens that were able to bear arms, there were nombred eightin
hondered, who me Artsenius ruled be authority. The number of citisens ruled be
Artsenius.
The corn provided for the soilders in vvinter was eight thousand two
hondered measures of wheat, of oats, two thousand eight hondered, of chese,
three Measures of orne.
thousand six hondered vveighte, and as many pound of dried stokfish. The
cittisens were commanded, man be man; to make prouition of corn for
tvvelfmonthes, before we couled come to besiedge the town; so that there
might be no necessity, to deminish the provision made for the soilders.

For the vvinnenge of this town, when many thenges Consideratio^s that
moved the Marquis to befidge this own.
did incorage the Marquis Ambrosio Spinolas mind, many things also did
withdraw itt. First the opportunity of the place did great lie enduce him,
both for the hindering of the frequent enuations of the enemies horsemen into
Brabant, which from thence they most comodiously desingned to whate part
they pleased; As also for the hindereng of al nauegasion betwext the adjoining
towns of Breda, And the borderinge towns of the confines of Holand, and
Zeland; Which is tought to have been don with no small dificultie, by reason
of some towns that were taken near at hand, with encredible losh to the
enemy. Further more many other commodities did allure him to attempt to take
this town, rather then any other; to wit the Zoile of the suburbs, fit for
making his trinches and fortificationes, either to make assault or to entrench.
Having a river fit to pass over, and easili to be damned up, which being don,
they who were besiged, might easily be kept from prouition. They had woods
nere at hand, the fildes were fertile for feedinge. Lastly this was
considered; that Breda being taken Bergen up Some, and other towns near at
hand might be taken the more easily.

On the contrary, the strenght of the town that was Difficulties the Marquis
formd in vvineng the town.
so fortified both be endustrie and nature, did discorage him; But espesially
the great dificultie of transportinge vituales a far of, when either the
enemies was to be a voided with a great convoy, for all our cities were
distant great days Iurneyes on foot, or that they might want vituales nor was
there behind them, any commodity of river, which could be sailed with
shipes to bear provision, vnlesh Breda, being near at hand, as it were the
theator of the enemies cities, could be bloked up. It was doupted whether that
with a great number of VVagones, with long and combersom vvayes be reason of
the winter, provision and vitualles might be brought unto us, which was manifest
could nether be don without adoble guard of soilders, nor without great
danger.

This was the state of the low contries at this time, and State of the low
contries.
of our affairs.

Filip the fourth King of Spain, did forbid that any peace should be made
with the confederated states, Iudgenge that truce, to be more hurtful then
war. The Archduces, Isabela Clara Eugenia Infanta of Spain, wife of Albertus
that excelent Prince deceased, thought it a disgraseful thing that the army
wherewith the King florisheth in the low contries, should be Idel, and
without Implomient the repulce of Bergenop some was not revenged, which being
retained after the sidge, the enemies gloried. Germany being quiet from wars
rested.

The strenght of the bastard Mansfelt yea and his very name, was almost
extent. There was entire pease betwext the Kings of France and Ingland, with
the only enemies of the confedrated prouences, there was Just cause of
hatred. Herupon war was intended against them, not for desire of rule, but for
desire of reestablissinge of religion, and recoueringe of there own.

Spinola in the 21. of the monthe of July in the year athousande six hondereth
twenty four goinge from Bruxeles, the time of the year being proper for
war, he corn being reepe, gathered an army. But he kept him self so reserved
in this affair, that although he fulli resolved to besiedge Breda, yet if he
perceived it hard to be effected; perhapes with a greater army a sit fell out
sent out by the enemy. he, out of every place wherein he lay, might be The
resolusion vvixt with the Marquis went unto the filds.
able. As he judged fit for the present good) to undertake the same turninge
his army which way soever it should please him.

The army was divided into three pattes, making a sheow The army was de uided
into three parts.
to go into diverse places, of set purpose to deceive the enemy.

Spinola goinge out of his Journey be montague, (where The Marquis visited
our lod^^ of montague.
that sacred te^pel is of the moother Virgin, renoumed troughout the world
with so many miracles) the mysteries of the cristian religion being duly
performed, and his deuosions being made at our lady is altar for the army,
led the foot men one way; and Lodouicus Velascus, Count of Zalazarius General
of the horse, led the horsemen an other way. John brauius de laguna governor of
the castle of Anwourpe with those that came from markland Joined with thies
trupes not far from turnehoute, which Gonzalus de Cordoua master de camp
general had governed.

The army being hire mustered by Spinola, and being In his rekoning much
leshe people then he sought.
found lesh then it was supposed neuerthelesh he had great hope of there
valor for being all chosen men. There were in the whole fiftine regimentes,
consisteng of ahondereth four score, and eightine companies; of horse, thirty
nine troops, Breeflie, eightine thousand in the whole.

Number II.
Justinius Nasaw ignorant of our design, but withal wary, Justinius de Nasavv
reforced the town vveth ahon dereth companies.
as sown as he heard that Spinola, was come hither, sent for five companies
of foot out of the adioyninge borderes of sualuen, to Breda, and other
fiftine being lately arrived out of Holand to Zwaluen (in which there were
two conductores of Grave Morish, and of Prince Hinri his broother, and many
Captains with hautriue afrence coronel, and morgan an Inglisman, and loqueren
aholander; The next day after that he understood Number. 2.
SPECIMEN OPERIS CORNVTI
A. Frons operis cornuti. B. Fossa lata passus xxx. C. Receptaculum D. Murulus
terreus E. Fossa altera F. Lorica decliuis G. Vrbis mocnia H. Fossa moenium I.
Opus nouum, post aduentum nostrum in Gilsam, externis munitionibus circumductum
a Bredanis, interna, allo passuum CXL. K. Lorica seu brachia tria fronti et
cornibus munitionum praestructa. L. Fossa M. Seps sudium in decliui Lorica
circum fossam.


that Spinola opproched nearer. There were sent three companies of horse to
Gitrimberque of the Count of Culingburge, Stire, and of Captain Villebon
Frence man. least there should by two many horses, for the scarcity of
feeding, when two companies of horse, with forty five of foot, were inogh
to defend the citti. To the offiseres who were lately come, to every one
was aapointed his standinge place, by the walls and outward ports. To
hautriue, whow led the frenc men and the valones, the watch was appointed at
the gate of Genikin. To morgan coronel of the Inglish, the gate of balduke, To
loquerin, to whom the low contrimen and scotsmen obeyed, was appointed the gate
of an wourpe. thies presently with great expedition fortified the front of
there outward wourkes each of them in several plases of defense the ditches on
the outeward sides were armed with athick hedge of stakes, Armed above like
unto athinge full of pikes, least any straggling should pass over. The
distance from the outmoste bank of the horn vvourkes, even unto the three in
ward defenses of there angles, was a hundred and forty pases, whereunto from
the one, to the other, sorties were made in there flanks to pass from the
horned vvourkes without.

And thies were the first works, added to Grave The Marquis consulted
with the matteres of the camp.
Maurish force, vverby those of Breda began to doupt the siedge.

Spinola came to Gilsh, a villadge distant from Breda two hours journey,
with his army. Here he consulted with many masters de camp touching the
beseeging of this town; asked the opinion of every one, what they tought For
many reasones they found great dificulties in the besidging of Breda.
of the siedge of Breda each one dissuadeth the assault: they afirmed the
town to be fortified with most strong vvourkes: That the standing water,
as often the town esmen lists) ouerflovveth all the suburburbs: the town to
be divided into many parts by the river. The garrison to be increased with
twenty eight companies of foot. our armies for there small number was
scarce correspondent to so great an assault, whereunto number was no lesh
needful, then valor. And if the enemy should come behind to assault the
army, before we had vvon so strong atovvne, we must of necessity, either
go a way with disgrace, or so small an army be exposed to adoble peril,
both before, and behind.

The Marquis Spinola having heard the opinion of The Marquis advertised her
Altesa of al.
the masteres de camp, knovving that some stood for the comanders and others
for Inferior officeres, and that him self was freely to dispose what was
principalli to be don; and was to do al things according to direction,
remained in the same place, and Informed Isabella the Archiduces whate the
opinion of the masteres de camp were. She having understood of so great
augmentasion of the garrison of Breda, made answer, that she would not tempt
fortune with the danger of so many valiant men. that she should be much to
blame if she estimed not there To conform with the opinion of the masters de
camps.
lives more dear, whom she knows to be so willinge that they would refuse
no danger at her comaund. notwithstanding, least so excelent en army of
soilders deprived of glory, should return home and do nothing, that Spinola
should consider whate exploite was to be taken in hand, for there good, and
comoditie.

Spinola having consulted with Hinri Count of Berges schefe Governor of
gilders (who was with an other He consulted withdraw Count Hindrique da Bergas.
army at the rhene) sent the sardgent may or Franciscus losanus with letters
unto him, to ask of him vvhate he thought fit to be don, as also Carlos of
Burgondi Baron of VVaken Gran balue of gant captain of horse should treat
withdraw Paulus bernardus fontanus, master de camp of aregiment of Valones, who
governed the province of Flandres, who might treat with him about Ademand
touching the t^nt^ng of the Island of casant.
the business of casant, an Island not far of from sluse. They treated long
with him concerning thies things, and afterward before the Infanta; and
acordinge to each ones opinion, so baron de VVaken, afirmed it to be easy, and
Monseurde Fontaine to be ahard enterprice: fontanus douted it: VVaken promised
good success, not with standing fontanus offered him self, to put the matter in
execution, so that his command might be given him in vvrithing for his
dischardge. The Infanta being willing in hope of the event, commanded it to
Fresent'y the matter was revoked.
be don, and appointed a day for the dispatch thereof: for thies affairs
fontanus went to Bruges. Three days after waken, was sent privily, but al
things being no we in aredines the Insanta, fearinge the voyadge should not
succeed well commanded that they should give it over.

In the mean while Spinola again consulted with such The Marquis turned
again to consuite touchingh the besieging of Breda.
as were fit, and with people of good Judgment, and with some captains
calinge every one aparte, he asked whate they thought of the besidginge of
Breda, though lately they had refused to attempt the assault. Here al again
(one only captain excepted) begone to aledge the dificulties Al denied excpt
one an a presented there reasones.
of the sidge, and that the town could not be entrenched in alonge time. The
circuit of the trinches, must of necessity be, four or five hours Iurney,
for the many places of passadge of the co^trie suburbs, which partly are in
accessible be reason of the marish grounds, partly ouerflovv when the
towns men do stop the river by asluce. Now so great aspace is to be filled
with so many standinge places and vvatch wards, that al most they must
needs meet together, or the town otherwise hardly to be blocked up: but
there vvanted soilders to be divided, into so many parts. Further it has
been commanded to all the towns men in particular that a suficient quantity
of corn should be provided for the enduringe of the vvinter, and sustenance
of the soilders. lastely it vvoulde be a matter of great time and labor, to
weake^ the town by famine, also abounding with all things. besides that if a
great army should be made for raysinge of the siedge, the enemy might come
behind, and even without fight would take and hinder our pasadges, and we
should be forced to retire, compelled thereto by greater honger and
necessity, for there condision and ours is so contrary, that they on every
side by the benefit of rivers, and cities, near adjoining could easily a
bound with all things, when al most no wind can blow, but might be
prosperouse for any cariadge by reason of the situation of diueres cities and
ports. For Seuenberk, gentenberk, heusden, towns of such as are
confederates, and lie near. Unto Breda three or foue hours distance, besides
some other encorparated viladges not far of, all which are fed with the sea, or
rivers, but we should stand in need of corn sooner then they of Breda, be
reason of the long, and hard transporting of corn in aiorney by land, which
way being but one, and very dangerous, should betide our army, in case the
enemy did altogether blok it up. and beseedge it. An wourp, The Kings towns
were far of.
maklin, Lier (which are our nearest towns to Breda) distant ten or twelf
ours journey from balduk, and herintal, (which are the nearest towns) and
are nine hours journey. one of the master de camps was of a contrary Only one
was of contrary opinion to the rest touching the be caging of Breda.
opinion, who not esteeming al thies reasones, did therefore think.

Breda was to be assaulted, for that no greater blow could be given to
Grave Morish seeinge he so deerly loved that town, which bieng lost, he
should loose much reputation. nor was it probable that the beseedged had so
ordered al there affaeyrs, that nothing should Number. 3.
Numeri significant horas itinerum.
* Signum locorum hostilium.
by quickly wanting in so great number, be want whereof, they should not by
enforsed to render it up.

Hunger would opress the town, wantinge externe helps; and the relife of
vituales being hindered, would soon cause poverty and discord amongst the
cttisens and the soilders.

Number III.
There were sent to discover, Franciscus Medina, Matheus The opinion of those
that went first to bring resolution of the situation.
otanus, and Don Iuan de Medises, who reported that the ground was fit, for
making trinches, and fortificasiones; the water of the river good, the woods
for fueil, and faxina, the fildes and barnes fit for foradging; but they did
earnestli afirme, that al those things were to be feared, which were aledged
by the masters de camp against the siedge. mean while, Losanus returned from
the Rhene with letters of Count Hendrick; who (having understood whate all the
masteres de ca^pe thought of the dificulties of taking Breda) Proposed unto
Spinola, Conde Hindrique propoundes to beseigde reas and embrik.
whate he judged meet, to be don concerning the beseedging of Embrik and Rhes.

That he was there present with his army, his companies somwhate increased, and
preparinge abridge over the Rehn with barks, with a fort Royal adjoined to the
same; that for the better security of both it seemed unto him that embrik
might by taken, which being gotten, Or grave rauestene and Genep.
Rheze would woluntarie yealde itself. But if it should not like him, that
abridge should by made (for want of boathes) that then was Grave and the
castles of Rauesten, and Genep, which also might by well beescheeged at once.
and that his excelencie should ordain that which he tought most fit,
hauninge first consulted with Antonius Baron of Grobendunck Governor of the
town of Baldukaman expert in the knoledge of those places. Spinola having
sent back Franciscus Medina master de camp of aspanishe regiment, with
losanus, declared unto him that hitherto he approved of the count of bergas is
advice, so far as it concerned Grave, Rauesten, and Genep, and de manding him
whate help needs for that enterpreece. The people necessary to beeleager
grave.
The count of bergus, required, that five thousand foot, and athousand horse
shouled be sent te assiste him and with them and the rest of his own army
were sufficient for that affair. But he advised Spinola to remain securely
with his army in the villadg of Gilshe, an to houlde the enemy in suspe^ce lest
they should draw fourth some Companies out of Breda or other garisones to
disturb the seedge of Grave. Spinola, both glade of the consel, and releeinge
upon the Judgment of so prudent acomander, related the business to the Infanta,
having sent medina, The Marquis advertised her Altesa.
and having also called fourth Baron Antonius Grobendunk (as count bergus
desired) he demanded, whate he thought of the proposed siedge of the castles of
grave, rauesten And sought for the opinion of Antonius Baron of Grobendonk.
and Genep? He plainly affirmed, that so many Interprises were not so easy as
it was supposed; but yet that it both might and ought to be hoped for, by the
Count of Bergas relation, a man most skillful in war, and very conversant in
those places. Many days being spent in this doubt, the army in the villadge
of Gilse, began to loose courage, the river which is a water nere to the camp,
was But little store of water in Gilsen.
two miles of, the wells, which were few, did either wax dry with heat or
were exhausted by over much Use, or the water being drawn fourth was so
foul, that it would not, but in alo^ge space of time be clear and settled.
And the thirst of the soilders was intolerable.
Hince the empapatie^ce of thirst in the extreme heat of the year, compelled
many to drinck unwholesome water, or to draw it out of ditches, or out of the
traces in the ground cut by the cart whiles, which caused disseases. Spinola
informed of this discomoditie, least he should slighly give credit to this
report, to the end that al things might be the more certain unto him,
enquireth of some of the masters de camp that were called, whether the
soilders were in so great want of water, as he was informed. They fearinge
either to sheow the fault of the camp, (because they would The Marque
informed of the truth.
please his ears) or measuringe other men's poverty, by there plenty, afirmed
that there soilders had water enoghe. The enformer hereof being sent for by
Marquis Spinola, the Captains being present, whilst he proceeds to make good
whate he said, John Cont of Nasaw Coronel of two german regimentes, arrived in
good time, whow having heard of the misery of his own soilders, uphelde the
informer in whate he said. Andone of those who had denied it, privily
whispered in the informers ears, saying that he was behouldinge to him for
that relation, which he him self was afraid to make.

Spinola having found out the truth of the matter, Welles were dug for
scarciti of water.
commanded Wells to be dug every wheare, and so aremedy was found against
this evil. forty thousand loaves of bread, were consumed by that bad air in
the camp of Giles.

VVithal there were at that time the tents of two Other disgrace happened in the
quarter.
Italian companies burnt, with a sudin fire: by means of al which
discommodities, no wages being paid before that day, and the price of vituales
being great, many by flight for sooke the camp.

Which example, Spinola fearinge least it should Soilders run a way.
be imitated of more, sought aremedy by severity, and caused four of the
fugitives that had fled; to draw lottes which of those four should suffer
death.

In the mean while, the free voices of many men were heard in the army; The
time of action, was spent in consultation; the spreading and publication
whereof, lost The enemy murmured of the Marquis. Iy and moked the Kinef Spain
le bohae spanel.
both the soilder and his reputation.

Many things were don most malepertlie by the enemy, against the King of
Spain, and Marquis Spinola, with shame and ignominy amonghst the Holanders,
there were sportes sheowed, by certain Iesters, in manner of merry enterludes,
which they called the spanish figth. There was in like manner aridiculus picture
of the Kings spread abroad among the common people, sekinge Breda with alitle
lantern; Marquis Spinola standing by, with both his hands scratchinge his
head, having vnderwriten a very spiteful and tantinge vearse. Grave Maurish
seeminge to be secure in all things, and lyenge Idely at Hage, as it were by
comptempt; is reported to have said merrily, that it had been beter for
Spinola to have gone to Geel (where mad men are delivered from there madness)
then to Gilsh. But thies things being slighted over, were forgotten, nether
did they move them to any sign of anger.

Spinola, aprouing the counsel of the Infanta, touching the besechinge of
Grave, having sent Ion of Medices with comaunde wills Hinri the count of
Bergus, to go with his army which he had at Rhene, unto Grave, promishinge to
send him the day appointed the Conde John de Nasavv sent to socor Count de ber
gas, brenging alonge with him Cowad de Aubermo^t aman skilful in this quarters.
troops which he required. where was sent presently, John Count of Nasaw.
(who refused the government of an army, lately offered unto him by the common
wealth of Venishe) with five thousand foot and four companies of horse: and
three canons with eightine boats, and other warlike engines. He comandes
Iohanes Conradus abermont Captain of horse of Balduke Don lie sento de (...)
follows (...). Count (...) took in mondeth^rk (...) and the rvvne of Genep.
to acompanie him, by reason of his skilfulnes of the places. The next day he
sendes privily hiacentus Velascus Marquis of Belueder, with other ten companies
of horse, to the number of athousand, with chardge, that he should posess far
and near all the catel about grave, and so defend the places at his pleasure,
wherein His soilders followed with great modesty and obedience.
after wards the tents were to be placed by the Count of Bergues. The Count
of Bergues, goinge to Grave, having soon asaulted the Castle of mondelberge,
the town and castle of cleaues, and the town of Genep as he was in his
Journey, took it by force, and by there rinderinge placed garisones over itt*
But the authority of Count Hindrik admonishinge the soilders, did so profit
those of the town, and so terrify the soilders from making piladge, that
neither was any man's name brought in question, who might be found to have taken
away any thing by theft out of the houses, though well adorned, out of whose
windows and houses, he commanded the castle to be beaten til they yealded.
Which thing, when the Burgermaster of cleaues informed Grave Morish de
Nasaw. did admire, boath at so great civility of the soilders, and at so great
virtue of the conductor, no lesh then at the integrity of another scaurus, as
also the not touching the fruits of the trees which many was wondered at. He
fortified on the other side of the Mosa the dorpe cauled mouck fit for
provision of vituales, and in the same place he pitched his tents. From
thence, he goes to discover Batimburg, and Rauestene, He pitched his quarter at
mouk Marquis of belueder took from the contrie of Grave great store of cattle
and to deceive the enemies, he goes with fiftine troops of horse, and three
hondered shot.

The Marquis of Beluedere, having gotten agreate booty of cattle, driueng away
all whatesoeuer he found from Grave to Rauestene, and sending them to Balduke,
caused much terror aborad. Hinrie of Bergues having diligently viewed
Batenbergue and Rauestene, sent for John of Nasaw, and Conradus Aubermont to
come unto him. He sendes him Conradus with comaund, to declare unto the Marquis
Spinola, that Rauesten could not be so Easily won. as it was suposed, but if
he would let Rauesten alone, Conde Hindrik sends again to the Marquis giving
his opinion of the dificulties in vvining of rausten
he would atempt to get grave. (if Spinola so commanded him) and was in good
hope to attain if. So he would send unto him some great forces. He comaundes
John of Nasaw, to pitche his tents on the other side of the mase, not far from
Grave, and that he him self would abide at mouck, til Spinola had declared
whate his pleasure was: Grave John pitches his camp on the other side of the
mase.
and singnified Unto him that he would in the mean time, make away over the
mase with abridge, for passinge the army, and joining it together if need
required. And count Bergues armed abrige outr the river.


At that time, there fell so horible atempeste in one night, with rain, wind,
lightninge and thunder, raging together alonge time, as if the elements were
confounded, and the very heaven it self would faule to the ground. A vvonder
full tempest.
Very obscure darkness, acontinual flash of lightning fire, acontinual noise of
thunderes, rain fauleng, not by dropes, but like unto ariuer, and violent
whirle winds. Lastly all things were full of terror, as if it had been the
last day. That night, Hinrie Fredrik of Nasaw, had designed Who the enemy is
forces vna aua ri tought to fall on the Excel, of Grauedendrike.
with his whole army to assault the tents of Hinrie of Bergues not yet
fortified, had not the tempest aforesaid diuerted it. Three days after, the
soilders of Grave being commanded to go fourth, they returned again to
overthrow the camp of count bergues with greater forces; but when neither the
people of Grave were come in due time, and Co^de Hindrique was fortified and
better prepared, all the controversy Grave John de Nasavv pit^ched his camp in
acomodions place.
was ended with a little squirmisch. John of Nasaw, as it was prescribed,
pitched his tents not far from Grave, haueng possesed so good aplace, that
they were enclosed with the river of the right side, before and on the left,
with abrook flowing from the river. Not with standing he made atrence before,
and on either side, in that distance, against the passage of the enemies. for
the fore front of the tents, the woods were fit for ambuscados, next, the
hills ariseng upon the town with agentel ascent, which being posessed be day
time by acompanie of horsemen, and be night retired for fear of sudden
opression of the enemy. Hence there was. daily ocasion given of small,
Skirmishes of horsemen, when in the morning, by reason of the trinches that,
were set upon by the enemy in the night our soilders fought to beat them
back; Stakenbrook Governor of the town of Grave to terrify ours, The
stratagesmes of the governor of grave was in vain.
having made anoice with his army approaching by night, as though he were
ready to breack in to the camp, comaundad them to sound aretreate, next day
after, being asked of Nasaw in discourse, wherefore he had disturbed his, and
his soilders sleep, with, such anoice of en signs? Count of Nasavv ansvvered
made answer, that he wondered more, why he came to take those cities by force
of arms, the enheritance whereof he was one day by right to take posession of.
To whom contrary wise Nasaw answered, that he let pass that In heritance for
the present (Because it was incertaine) but with all a spired after his own
government of grave. Which the governor hearing, said. Ireturne home; And
having said this departed, and presently began to shut into the tents of
Nassaw, as to exact punishment for his ambition.

After this, Aubermontius went from Hinrie of Bergues The Marquis tought strange
of the dificulties of Grave Hiudrik touching rauesten.
to Gils; whose answer being heard, Spinola wondered why bergus by his consel
objected so many difficulties, (whereof he professed him self to by the chife
man.) But yet because he revoked that which was proposed by him, touching
rauestin, for fear of the event, and desired to go to Grave (if he should be
commanded (he should do the same of his own head and thereupon go on spidilie.
With thies comaundes he sent back again Franciscus Medina with Auber montius
to Hinrie of Berguis. In the mean while he him felf does fortify Giles with
twelf redutes, The quarter of Gils was fortified with tvvelf reduties.
built about on ouerie side, least the enemy by that way, should suddenly
break forth unto the camp.

They of Breda perceiuinge this, supposing the purpose This of Breda being
deceived in there presumption turned to bring there mouables.
of beseedging the town, was altered by us, commanded all the househould stuff.
which they had transported into the towns adioyninge for fear of siedge, as
being now out of fear of war, to by recaried by boats. Neither did they
provide for vituales for aine longer time, but supposing they should have had
provision enogh, of that which they had got for winter, permitted those hondered
oxen which were lately carried into the town, to be brought back again, and
also two ships laden with cheese refusing for to buy it. furthermor all the
boores and there wives and children, who had before flyen into the town, and
whom as mise and deuoorers of corn, they commanded to go fourth to get
victuales (if any sidge had hapened) they received again those that were
retired from the fildes They received many of no service which was ocation
to shorten there victuals.
which our soilders spoiled, with no little loshe of victuales, as men given
wholly to there belli.

Furthermore it hapened by that pitching of tents by Marquis Spinola, that
neither Grave morish could understand whate we seriousely intended, nor yet
whate we feigned: to wit, whether we were fully resolved, to set upon Grave, or
Breda, or upon both together, or on any other city: and therefore was diverse
ways so troubled about the matter (not daringe either to draw any garrison
fourth of any one city to socor another; neyter there were sufficient
forces to socor both.) He also feared not to be able to furnish them in due
time of such prouitions He went into his brooth. camp.
befitteng. At lenght departinge fourth of Hage, his garden of recreation, unto
Hinrie Fredrick broother of Nasaw, unto the camps of nemegam, he commanded He
fortified wwinc^^.
artillery, and many engines and furniture of war, to by carried into Bomble,
and the places adioyninge to Balduke, Benefit found in the delaying.
to be fortified. And although the administrasion of war seemed to many, that
it would by in vain to delay it, aine longer, notwithstanding we optained
by that delay, that there remained no time fit for the enemy; when the fall of
the leaf aproched, the best time of remoouenge to whatsoever place, and ours
byenge now ready for whate ocasion soever

The report of the preparation (wherewith we seemed to be willing to set upon
grave) being diuulged among Duk de Bullon came out of breda to aside the
defense, grave.
the people, Duck de bullon Frenceman, whow tought that the war which he
expected at Breda, was transported to Grave, going thither to try his fortune,
and at his returning again to Breda, he found all the circuites of the town
shut up by ours. Hinrie of Bergues, knowenge The last in formasiones taken
b^^^unt Hindrik he found it far contrari to the first.
the situation and condition of Grave, having also understood the opinion of
the Inhabitance did contrary wise perceive all things, and releying upon some
men's judgments, persuaded Spinola. He perceived well that hardly in three
months space the matter could by executed. And in the mean while by reason
of the valleys which were about the town, wherein the tents were to be
pitched, that he should be, assuredly removed by the winter wateres. The
contrimen, and others that kneow the nature of the place afirmed, that the
spring being paste, it was to be aslaulted, hopinge that at the end of summer
it would be gotten: for after the faule of the leaf, all the places were
overflowed, and became inaccessibile. He receuied the Marquis to order.
About that time there fitly arrived Don Francisco de Medina, and monse de
Aubermont, sent by Spinola, whow brought command to count Bergues for the
beseeging of Grave, as he had been charged. Spinola much wondered at the
dispaired hope of winenge Raueste^ when he tought him self to be sure of
tacking itt. Notwitstanding if that could not be brought to pass, he commanded
him to go out of hand to Grave. Count Bergues being out of hope of He
affirmed to those that brught the order, that not hing could be executed
touching grave.
subduenge Grave, toulde both them that were sent unto him, that he was out of
hope at that time of getinge of it: but hoped that he should in a short space
get the casted of Genep, if Spinola permitted, which being won, he might
easily at an other time get Grave. They being amassed, demanded whate at last
would be the conclusion? They ansvvered count Hendrick.
That he could not understand, whow Grave so little distant shoule be now made
so strong that in his opinion it could not be taken, in which there was
neither garrison, nor provision, nor could be a better season? he prayed him in
Spinola, is name not to loose courage, and hope of the victory of own town,
who with all had proposed the wineng of so many other. Herunto the count
replied many ways, that three whole wikes were almost now paste; in which the
whole affair ought to have been dispatched in the bigineng. In the mean while
the enemy fortified his Army with frence and Inglish at nemegam, nor was he
far off. if Spinola would send part of his army that he was pleased to
aproach nearer, he would try his fortune. Touching this there were many
discourses, where fore Don Francisco Aubermont who was sent tought it better,
not to answer again butt by letteres, they carry letters He gave then letters
to the Marque.
from him to Spinola, whereof this was the contents. That it was manifest with
whate fidelity and care he had undergone the affairs that were committed unto
him, seeinge for that only respect he had brought under his subjection the
castle of mondelberge, the castle and town of cleaues, as also Genep, by which
means he could the better entertain his army. It is true he confeseth to be
the auctor of that interprice, but under Spinola is corecsion, whom he
perceived to be diversely troubled, and to doubt of Breda. That he believed,
those things which he proposed could be effected, but by the faulse raporte
of two men, to whom he had ouermuche trusted at the first, more then him
self had proved by experience it is not an unusual matter, for things that
were heard to be related of the behoulders as things that were seen, often
times great and prudent captains were often times so deceived.

He further afirmed that the same siedge about that time, could in no wise be
set, for, that he perceives that many sudden things, would happen
otherwise, then he imagined, yet that he would acomplish whate was commanded,
and refuse no danger, so that Spinola would command the same by his letters, and
with the same, excuse him to the King, if the affair should faull out
infortunatlie; as he him self had now presaged.

Spinola hauenge received thies letters, without all hope VVate he resolved
touching the beele^geringe of Breda.
of geting Grave settinge his mind wholly upon the siege of Breda, having
called back Count Nasaw, and the Marquis of Belueder, with there armies, and
with troops of other regimentes, whereof part was at Breda. He commanded Count
Hinrik had chard ge to be vigilant and loo kvvelto the borderes of gi^d^rres.
Hinrie of bergus not to tempt the castle of Genep, and to take heed of the
enemy near at hand (and to provide for the adjoining towns of gilders, and
not to remove, vnlesh the enemy did remove, and they remoouinge to pursue
them step by step. He sent from his camp Francis of Medina, unto the Infanta,
who should again propose unto her, the former purpose of beseginge Breda. she
mindful of the former difficulties, which had before been aleaged to her,
doutful whate she was to do, yet gives her consent, confidinge in the valor and
happiness of Spinola.

Bergues obeinge the orderes of Spinola, varilie with drew him self from the
enemy being nere at hand, that Maurish having displaied his collors with an
army of twenty thousand; adventured to assault his army which were four
thousand foot and athousand eighte hondered horse Grave John marched with his
troops vigilant and well ordered.
(Count John of Nasawe least that his troops should be taken and overthrown
by his enemies army, which then did compass him round about, divided his army
into three squadrons as it were to give battle.

An whole month was now spent in doutinge, and delaienge, so many melsengeres
being sent to and fro, to no purpose.

Many publicly detractinge Spinola, did not stik to say Some with little
respect murmured of the Marquis.
that this warlike interprise, was verie^l handled of him: and that the
consultes were fit to be treated in court, and the executiones in the filde.
Some otheres amongste there cups did recount Spinolas, ignominious repulsh
from Bergenopsome. (And inderision did paint fourth Spinola, pullinge down
Maurish from the table. others did call in doubt the loyalty of counde Hinrie
of bergues.

Lastly some said, that they should be forced to retire, having now omitted
to many good oportunities, by there daily lingering. Spinola begone no trence
nor batteri nor commanded any proclamation to be made, which at the pitchinge of
a camp are wont to by. thinkinge he might say to him self as cecar did in
passinge the river of rubicon, that yet we may rerurne again, and so confuted
all the speches of his calomniators by his valiant acts, And least that the
fidelity of Count Hinrie of bergues, or his renoome, should any way be
empaired, he tought to remit to her Altesa the declaration of the letters, of
which he commanded acopie to be drawn in presence of two witnesses, and tought
it expedient that acopie of them shuolde be published iudgeing that by no truer
testimony, then that of the Count of bergas own writing. both of them could
be purged he commanded muster to be paste of Muster was commanded to be pai^ of
the army.
the army, before any wages were paid, (which style, he kept almost duringe
all the time of the siege) least it should be any gain to others, and
discomodious to his majesty, and a faulss number be presented, having sent
count of henin master de camp of Valones to the Infanta, he causes neow
Neovve leiues were raist referred to the charge of cond^ hinn^.
troops to by gathered to the number of six thousand four hundred Valons,
wepones to be bought, and the rest of warlik furniture to be in areadines, and
the old soilders to be taken out of the garrisons, appointing neowe soilders to
be sent in there places.

After wards al hope of returninge home being taken away, resolving upon no
other course, he concludes to go to Breda.

The 28. of August he sendes a fore Francisco de Medina, with ten companies of
horse, and to the number of four thousand footmen (apointing the Spanards in
the vanegard, Den Francisco de Medina occupied the dorpe of G^nip.
and to march on til the dorpe of Genekin, the nerest vilage to Breda, giumge
him his instructions for that night. to which were adjoined the Irish regiment
of Earl of tiron.

Paulus Balionius master de camp of an Italian regiment at that time takes
unto his possession derheid (a vilage lienge beyond the town against Genep)
on the other Paulo Ballen pitched his tents in der ^yde.
side furnished both with his own, and a scots regiment of the count of
arguiel in the vane guard with fourtine companies, and of diverse nasiones were
gathered agoode troup of horse acompanied with certain pices of Artilerie.
Who the town of Breda was beleagered of (...).
Thus two sides of the town very neceslarie for the siedge were both taken in
one night. the people of Breda, and the inhabitance saw us there, before they
had any notice of us. which when they understood (our journey being finished
be break of day) they of Breda with seven Squirmishes begone.
canons, shot al day long, and defended the houses belonginge to the suburbs,
and next adioyninge Breda with supplies they sent out; the contrimen fled a
way, the soilders made small skirmishes, with little loss on either side; vnlesh
those of Breda meant to make them selves to be laughed at. who shot so right
that they killed amiller of there own near the town, and compelled the
captain of there own korsmen there watchinge, to forsake, his standinge
place, and to approache nearer the town, for fear of danger.

Number IV.
Spinola early in the morninge, remoues from Gils with the rest of his army,
and being come to Genep about The Marquis artueng from the tower of getnek
choised the necessary places to pitch his camp. Fortificia nons bego^ in
Gen^k.
noone; ascending first up upon the top of the church, discovered from on
high a fit place for the camp. Medina set upon alitle brook (in which amill
was turned, which ground bark.) Having first commanded to entrinch them
selves, and after wards gave order to make aforte, and threredutes, with
other shelters for the shot. he keeps also abridge, which lies upon Merka,
Others begone in Dorheyd^n.
not far from the church of geink. He sendes John of medices to terheyden to
choose aplace fit to pitche the camp. He declares that all the sluices are to
be taken, with A. Turris alta 362. pedes. B. Arx Nassauiorum C. Hortus Arcis
amaeniss^inus D. Merka flumen. E. ^da flaucius. F. Catarrhactae fluminis Merkae
G. Ostia fluuij Aa et mola aquaria. H. Tres portoe Vrbis et vna Artis. I.
Colles duo altiores in moembus. K. Tria receptacula in forsis moenium. L.
Munimenta XV. Boluers. M. Seps spinea ad pede^ moenus N. Moles XIV. Reuelins.
O. Lorica circu^fossas. Contrescerpe P. Maiora opera cornuta V. Q. Receptacula
praestructa operibus cornutis. R. Brachia et loricae ante cornuta. S. Quatuor
munitiones cornutoe minores. T. Sudes pinnis praesixae. V. Insula suburbana. X.
Collis in quo Mola Caesarea.


Number. 4.
BREDA NOVIS OPERIBVS POST SPINOLAE ADVENTVM MVNITA
which the water of the meddow ar either retained or slid into Merka; also
agreat hill, which they call the conniburies, upon this first day of the
siege Paulus Ballonius took with cock boats, twelf ships going to Breda,
laden Ballonius took ivv. If bar^ks of the (...).
with much provision and household stuff, which lightinge on at un wares he
seized on them; as asure foretellinge of victory, when the booty of so many
shipes, gave sign of recoueringe that city, which in former time with
aconterfet loadinge, was taken from the King by fraud.

The boatmen getting upon the bank on the other side, fled a way before our
men could take them: the booty being left to the soilders and the sayleres.

That day the people of Breda, defended by force and arms, the houses of the
suburbs of the villadge of Genik but in the night time they were set on fire,
to the number of thiertie, being all forsaken and quite spoiled. The next day
Artsenius Captain of the towns men guarded with eight companies of burgers,
cut down the wood of Grave Morish: (called Bell kromboske) which was under the
walls, The vvood was cut.
least ours lying hid in the woold, should watch opportunity at unawares, to
take the fortes nere the castle. That wood was set to open Sale:

The days en suing, certain little skrimishes were made, the people of Breda
breaking forth on every side, and Certain houses were burnt.
they endeavored to burn certain barnes and villadges, belonging to the
suburbs. All the houses of the townsmen The corn was visited.
were visited by public authority, and the quantity of corn was registered,
and related to Grave Morish, that he might understand it. Amill which stood
in the way to hage, being pulled apices, called cecars mill, he caused to Other
fortificattons we re adjoined.
be brought back into the city, and the hill whereon the mill stood, to be
fortified, in like manner four little horned fortes, for the defense of the
four bulwarks, which did uphould the walls of the town. Breda fortified
with so many sundry works, we have thought good to represent in this stamp.

After this, many houses of the people of hag, were The houses next adjoining
to the to^vvne were burned.
burnt by those of Breda. two viladges Genik and haide lyinge in the way, were
fortified by our soilders. In feowe days after Spinola commandes Teterin and
Hag (villadges one over against another, on both sides of the town) to be
fortifed. Teterin fell into Baron de The Marquis took posession of Teterns and
Hage. One of the quarters was committed to the charge of Baron de Ballan^on x
the other to count Isenberge. The form and greatness of the fortifications.
Balonson master de camp of the Burgonnons- Hage fell unto conde Isimburk
cornel of the germans; every one had his own companies committed to him, with
troops of other nasions. and the horsemen necessary for them. after this manner
were the first deuisions made of each quarter, exept Genik, were entrenched
with awall of earth and aditch. The wall was eight foot high, a leaven foot
broad, with abank of three foot for the commodietie of the small shot.
having dug on the outside aditch of seven foot deep, the bottom whereof
was contracted into four foot broad and the vpermoste part into ten foot.
The villadge of der heyde, that so it might extend the further, was divided
with doble fortificationes, under the chardge of ballon; The hill called the
conniburrowes; he him self kept for adefence. Not far from that hill he built
abridge Abridg was made upon the river of marka.
upon merka planted with boats, and plankes to supporte the pasadge. the
boats were fastened with ancors, both before and behind least they should be
moved by the waves.

Fortes of turff were built on both sides of the bridge, haulfe moons were
made for defense. Beams were laid by line measured to the heyght of the The
riuer^hut with stoccados to hind^r the passage, or navigations
river, driven into the ground both beneath and above the bridge, that no ship
nor boath may pass. The boats of burden lately taken, were tied with Number. 5.
Prima Spinolae ad Bredam Castrametatio, binis primum partibus, deinde
quaternis instituta.
Prima Bredae circumuallatio circulo duplici leuioris operae facta.
anchors; least the enemy on any side should endeavor by force to pass the
river. Charlos roma Sardgent mayor How the dorp of der (...) was divided
recommending to Charolus Roma the uttermost part thereof.
of Marquis de campolatar master de camp of an Italian regiment, incloseth with
certain fortes and defenses to the utmost part of the villadge of Derhaide
(where there are greater sluices of water and channels.)

Number V.
At last the besedging of the town, began to be laid on four sides, with a
little trench of earth, conducted alonge from villadge to villadge, from one
redute to another, with other great fortes set between them, distant four
hondereth or six hondereth pases, near and further, as the nature of the
situation and way required, which locked up, all there irruptions were let and
hindered, and all our peopel went freely without danger from one quarter to
another. From Genik toward hage, came Marquis campolatarius, toward
teteringen John count of Nasaw advanced his works. Spinolas quarter extended
with atrence of seven thousand paces; but broken in the middle, because The
disposition and distance of catch quartier.
the chief standing place; of the horsemen were at there backs. next adjoining
toward the town were four regimentes of spanardes, of Don Francisco de
Medina of Don John claro de Gusman, don Iuan ninno de touara and of diego luis
de oliuero, and the Irish regiment of the Earl of tiron. Ballonco^ is quarter
reached eight thousand five hundred paces. Balincons were encompassed, partly
with atrence of three thousand two hondered paces and The circuit of the first
fortifications.
part in the black dike (as they call it) was also two thousend four hondered
paces long. Isimburques were enclosed with a continuated trence, of nine
thousand five hondered paces. So that the outmoste circle of this first
trince, was thirty thousand six ho^dered paces. The inward trince next the
town was divided almost into two hondered paces; which was the distance from
one quarter to another, and contained in compass almost five hours journey
either trence was but five foot high, in the ditch seven The height.
foot broad, Deep in the ditch fix foot, the parapet was four foot high,
and the inward banquet divided into three stepes for the shot to ascend, and
decend, for there better comoditie to fight and in each banquet of the said three
one foot and haulfe broad. to both trinches seauentie redutes and fortes were
built or errected, in which the soilders were set in siege like order, company.
be company The reason why so disposed.
and forte by forte. in there due distance.

Spinola by little and little, compassed the town round about with four camps
on the other side. so that these lesser being altogether in compassed with
greater; stood in steed of little castles and forts. which thing he principalli
ordained, that both he might perfect so great a work with the labor of a feow
soilders, and that our defenses might be defenciue against great sallies and
assaults out of the town; which had they been divided into many parts;
without dout being exposed to the injury and peril of the enemy; they had
finished the works nothing the sooner. which manner of intrincheng; although.
it gave respit to the adjoining boores to bring corn and cattle in to the
town wherewith being besieged, they might afterward in dure hunger so much
the longer, yet were we of necessity so to do, for the causes which we spoke
of, the prudent consel of the master de camp Don Iuan de medicis touching
thies affairs was of no small emportance to the Marquis. The besieged
perceiumg this, set on fire the rest of the buildinges belonging to the suburbs
on every side, lest they should be left fit for us for the wourking of
treacheries; or be a let unto the^ for there shooting it being generalli
observed, that there were burnt to the number of four hondered and forty
houses.

The 16. of Sept. 1624 Justinius de Nasaw Governor of Breda, Justinius de Nasa^
Governor of Breda comaund d^ great salli to tempt the quarter of Isimburque.
The great sa^li made by the ^nemi^ out of Breda.
with the advice and consulte of certain of his chief leaders, and other
Captains resolved to make a salli out of the town of Breda (which was the
greatest he made during the siege consisting of all choice men, and of great
hopes and expectation, all which he appointed under the command and conduct of
the Captain of the guard of Grave Morish, a man of great valor and presumtion.

This Captain, at the very break of day, issued fourth of Breda, with intent
to hinder the begineng of the fortificacions Captain Barri had chardge of the
vvatch.
of the quarter of the Earl of Isimburque, whereof Captain Barri irishman one
of the Earl of tirones regiment. by his turn had chardge of the watch, close
to the enemy in open field.

The dutch Captain, issuing out so early in the morning, thought verily to
defeat the Irish by setting on The enemy was discovered by a sintinel of
Captain Barri.
them as they were asleep, at unawares, and unprovided: but it was the will of
God, before he came to the place, of his pretended execution, the faitfull and
vigilant Captain Barri, discovered there coming by a sintinel, which he had
prudentlie placed on a high three, to look about on every side, who espeing
them coming, presently called to his Captain, aduertising him that the filde
was full of the enemy, and began to frame asquadron of there pikes. Captain
Barri with great expedition, prepared him self, and Captain Barri prepared him
self for the fight with great expedition.
dreow on toward the enemy, beginning to order, and to divide his shot into
troops to inconter them, giving his officers and soilders the instructiones
necessary, for the fight, animating them, and presenting first of all his own
person, whereupon they al resolved with great valor and The valor and
resolution of the soilders.
mangnanimitie, either there to die, or to get the victory.

Then began that bloody skirmish on both sides, which The bloody skirmish
betwixt the enemy and the Irish.
lasted for the space of three hours, known and notorius to the whole army,
in which rare act and brave encounter, the Irish manifested the valor expected
of them slaying the Captain of the guard of Grave Morish, with an enginer,
together with many other brave gallantes and valiant soilders, In the which
the Captain of Grave Ma^rish is guard with maine others were slain
cleaving a sunder and cutting off their pikes, with his brave, experime^ted
and coragious shot; so that at le^ght the furious enemy was constrained to
retire, with great grife and no redress, other then rufully behoulding the
field full of dutch, french, and German blood. And which is The enemy was
forced to retire.
particularly to be noted, and to be wholly asscribed to the providence and
goodness of almighty God, that whereas those who, issued out of the city were
of so great number as The victory vvon be the providence of the almighty.
asoresaied, and Captain Barri with his companies, and the shot of Captain
dalahoid, and Captain morri, his contrimen and appointed comarads, to join
and assiste with their forces in all occasiones against the enemy, being in all
not above three ho^dred, not as much as one man were killed, nor but two or
three but slightly hurt: Although during those two or three hours space the
bulletes flew about The skirmish dedan d^cre for the space if three hours.
their ears, as thick as hayle, and in open filde without any shelter or
defense.

Captain delahoid and Captain morri seeing that Captain Barri began the
skirmish a distance of, toward the Captain de lahoid and Captain morrisp
dilie framed asquadrous of their pikes.
enemy, whete his appointed place happned to be that day, on the watch with his
company, presently delahoid, and morri with greare speed, framed a squadron
of the pikes of the said three companies, with a resolute, and magnanimous
mind to receive Captain Barri and his shot, To receive Captain Barri if need
did require. The resolution of Captain de la hoid and morri together with
their soilders.
under the shelter of their pikes, if need did require, and fall together with
their full force on the enemy, being prepared, and ready for that purpose, with
final resolution to live and dye en defense of that place, whereunto their
soilders co^desce^ded with are solute mind and great courage.

The valerouse, and prudent Earl of Isimburque upon Count Isimburque (...)
Infanterie into ivvosquad^ons with great expedition With intent^ to give
bbattell.
the first advice of Captain Barri, touching the quantity and presumtion of
the enemy, drew on unto the field, and with great expedition bravely ordered,
and divided his almain, and vallon Infanterie, into two squadrons, in form of
broad front with amostualerous determintion to encounter and give battle to the
enemy if need did require. And prudent lie preventing that if by chance the
Irish should happen to be dispearsed, to receive them in the midest of his two
squadrones, and order them aneow and fall with the full force of all on the
presumed enemy.

This noble prudent and mangnanimouse Prince of Isimburque with aforecast and
c^siderate resolution commanded Cattaine preston and (...) toward the enemy.
Capt. preston and Capt. gerat which were of two Irish companies to fall on
toward the enemy to defend a passadge where he spied soccor coming from the
enemy, to those that were recomended to the chardge of the Capt. of the guard of
the Prince of Orange and Capt. presto^ spienge the^ Cattaine preston spi^ng the
enemy with great courage and expedition did in cont^r them.
approchinge near, with great expedition ordered his men, and fell on the
enemy, and bego^ to skirmish, and like abraue co^ductor, divided his shot
giumg the^ the necessary instructiones to fight, animating them during the
skirmish which did continue almost three hours that at lenght by And (...).
his brave conduction, valor and resolut determination of his soilders the
enemy of force were constrained to retire, with the loss of many of theires,
not able to prevent any kind of redress. which to Justinius de Nasaw then
Governor of Breda was no small greef so that this greatest sallie that came The
enemy put to (...) which (...) de Nasavv was (...)
out of Breda sense the first day till the last were defeated by only the
ualor and brave condution of the five Irish companies before spoken of, next
under gods divine assistance, which the whole leager admiring. woundered much
of the victory considering the great multitude of the enemy The extraordinary
care and vigile^ce of the two sargent (...) Isimburque^ and of d^le de
burna^^d.
against so feow of ours.

The prudent care and great vigilance of the sarge^t mayor Go^mar de furdi^ of
the regiment of cou^de Isimburque, as also the Sargent Mayor of the Duke de
Burnauill truly deserved praise and renoome for there continual and
extraordinary care and vigilance, day and night, which was of notable
emportance for many respects, which here is needles to relate, but only to
remember the obligationes his majesty owes them for their prudence,
fidelity, great extraordinary care, and vigilance, and prudent carriage, day
and night with great punctualitie.

Excellent, most renoomed, and victorious Prince, many The constant z^le valor
and fidelity of the Irish to his Catholic Majesty.
are the reasones which constrained me to relate and make known in general
the incorrupted and constant Zele, approved valor, and undeniable fidelity of
the Irish nation to his Catholic Majesty. VVherof their many forepassed rare
acts made notorious their love, and approved loyalty in all occasiones; which
to his majesty, together Which to the Marquis and others his Majesty's
minicters is manifestly known.
with your excellency and others his faithful ministers, is daily remembered.
For which I do not dout, but there fidelity and faithful service is, and shall
ever be correspondent to the expectations of your excellency, whereof there
have been many trialls, and specially now of late in the leager And specially
at Breda.
of Breda; that whereas many of all nationes there assisting, did daily run
away, ey, and many to the enemy, but none of this nation, which to many is well
known. And be daily experience we found that as many of them as did serve on
our contrary side, daily came to our camp, which An evident proof of the
affection and fidelity of the Irish to his Catholic Majesty.
not only in this, but in all other semblable occasiones they made notorious
their inclined affection to his Catholic Majesty, in testimony whereof your
excellency can bear witness.

Also in another skirmis which the said Captain Barri Another skirmish
betvvext Captain Barri and the enemy.
had with the enemy, the first of Ianuarij 1625. Issuing out of the citti of
Breda, to discover the intrie of his quarter, he fell upon them, and with so
resolut and undaunted courage, that first he broke them, and next forced them to
retire following them even to the very ditches of the town till The enemy
constrained to retire and some of them taken prisoners.
they cast them selves into the water to save their lives where they were
rescued by the artillery of Breda; Barri not withstanding bringing back with
hem certene prisoners, as a true testimony of his victory.

After this by certain order sent by the Marquis Spinola Captain Barri sent
with the ingener kocke to break the dam.
to Count Isenbourge, the first of February 1625. this Cap. Barri, with a
hundred of the choicest soldiers under his charge, was commanded to go with
the expert engenier Cook, to break up a certain dam of the enemy, wherewith
they pretended to succor the city of Breda, and to drown all that quarter of
the army, but gods divine grace assisting ours, the dam by the force of the
high tide, and blustering wind, breaks of its own accord, just as Barri came
with his company, to the place to execute his purpose, so that with much ado,
they escaped the danger of that furious flood, by their swift running Cook the
ingenier being in great danger of drowning, whose life was saved by the
assistance of the pikes; that dam serving the enemy to noe purpose, but to put
them to innumerable and extraordinary charges.

And whereas during the whole siege, there were an incredible number of forts;
bulwarks and redouts, errected by the most prudent Marquis for the defense of
the army, against the enimi, and yet amongst them all, but one fort royal
alone, placed within a canons shot of the citti, this fort of so great
importance with all the artillery, and a munision belonging there to, was
committed only to the faithful keeping and care of Cap. Barri, who until
that time had for four monnethes together, served before Breda in the
openfield, even until the month of march without any kind of defense of forte,
evident arguments both of his valouer and fidelity, as also of the honor don
him and great confidence reposed in him.

All which, both the Marquis him self, and the Count of Isenbourg, have
testified, and confirmed under their public hands and seals, to his eternal
praise.

And were not that the great sallie, which issued out of Breda the 16. of
September into count Isinburques quarter were not beaten back by the Irish, it
would be hard for our wourkes to go forward if such sallies should beset us
on every side, and so continue. which iruptiones if they had made
continually. out of sundry parts ours being weakened in the biginning, for
there feones, and burden of there labor, and not being beaten back as they were,
it had been apainefull thing, at the self same time both to fortify and defend
them selves. But trough that respite which they gave us trough the great losh
they received, truly if thies sallies should continue any time, it were hard
for ours to fortify them selves. So that after this at leisure, we made up
both the trinches of all the siege, and were by little and little finished.
Redutes and fortes were built in the form whereof we represent in the precedent
page.

Number VI.
The redutes were fifty foot long, with a parapet ditche and palissada of
wood. Thies redutes were made of green turffe, with four angles on the
outside, or in square manner, and thirty five foot broad, there flank ahondered
The form of the re^louts.
foot, and within eighty. The outewarde height of thies is thirtine foot,
was equal to either of the other And the figure of the forts.
fortes, alike in thicknes fiftin foot, the ditch was made equal to both of
them, with walls not straight, but leyeng inwards eight foot high, and
twelffoote broad Number. 6.
Murus prioris circumuallationis terreus
Turres seu Redouttes e cespite
Castella terrea, seu Fortz.
Jurrium et Castellorum primorum aqualis altitudo et crassitudo.
to each of thies at there intrie was made a haulf moon, and for there better
security they entered into thies fortes upon aplank which at there will may be
taken, and set at any time, the which was laid on the ditch of the intrie of
these fortes. within were upright walls of eight foot high, upon the which was
abanket of five foot broad five foot high, to divert the enemies balls, and
to defend our shouters. Besides these so many fortes, atrince was cast up two
thousand five hundred foot long, from the village of hage, even unto the
bridge, by which Hage was And of the dike.
joined to derheid, five and twenty foot broad below, twenty foot above,
and six foot high; The ground whereof being at the first very soft, because it
could not support the weight of wagones and horses, being paued with plankes,
served also to bear the canons.

The engineres and such as were skillful of the places, affirmed The cause
where fore the dike was made.
that this dike was to be planted in this place, because the ground in the
winter being low and soft did so ouerflow with the fields that were wet of
there own nature, and with the ouerflowing wateres of the river merka, that
the enemy might sail this way, and would have their provision brought with
boats into the city. but be means of this dike the passage was shutt and
all soccor kept from them. VVhileste all these things were thus ordered,
Spinola went fourth every day, comanding the Coroneles and Captains, to call
the overseers of the wourkmen: and The di'igence and care infinishinge the
vvourck.
as nothing is to much hastened to alonginge mind, so he commanded, that the
unwearied should succeed and succor the wearied, so that they ceased not to
labor in the night. By which diligence it was brought to pass, that two
trinches of so great height, so many redutes so many fortes were almost
finished within seauintine days, nor yet but with feow soilders. But the great
assembly of the fleower of nobility, being incited on every side to learn
military disipline, and the example of many princes, were agreat provocation
to expedition, who among the common sort being moved with the greatness of this
war, put them selves to task and cut thurfes of earth, and carried fagotes
with there own hands. further more the extraordinary profit of this labor,
turned principally to ease the necessity of the soilders, with which the
army was kept least it should deboard for when as wages were seldom paid, and
those also but haulf pays, and the dearth of corn being great, the price of
the labor was daily paid to the soilders (who sets his labor to sale) by sole
example.

And as afterward neow works that were to be made; A remedy for the
necessities of the soldiers.
were disposed of, in the continual time of the siege, so the soilders labor
turned always to his own profit; some had rather live by beginge, then help
there necessity, with the gain of that kind of labor, which example seemed to
many that the necessity foght with honor, and toght more fit to die then spot
there honor. many be folishnes and to feow wisdom, had rather beg and be
ahongred with on distained honor, then to susdaine his life with honest labor.

Although two things at that time did grealie facilitat their labor and,
necessity first, the better condition of the ca^pes, then that of Gilse for
here the river and brooks did serve for drinck, the corn was ripe, and the
barnes were full of food: secondly aperpetual temperature of the air
conspiring as long as the soilders was in a manner exercised in cutting down
wood, making fagotes of shrub, carieng of bughes cutting of turffes, to build
trinches and fortes. By which means it came to pass, that our soilders were
subject to no diseases, when on the contrary, agreat pestilence, A remedy ours
had for not to full in any disease as those of the town*
and great agues, at the fall of the leaf, did afflight many of the enemies.

The enemies in the mean season by providing and taking care, did endeavor to
defend them selves, and about that time, they decreed two things wourthie of
memory first that artsenius Captain of the cittisens as often as consel of
war was holden, for giu^eng there opiniones in that consell, should have
authority as other Captains, where by the forces Arth^ns was permitt^d to
(...) in council of war.
of the soilder and the cittisen, should the more firmly be kint together.

The other, that every one being put to his oath should declare to the senate,
how much money they had, and lend it Eachone declared by his oath havv^ much
man^e he had.
to the treasures, created by the authority of the united lords, for the
defraying of the expenses of the works, and the soilders wages, when the
treasure house should be in want. And least any should deceive them, or refuse,
the Governor, The principal persons first took, their oath.
Captains, offisers drosart, Burgermasters, Coroneles, took their oath before
hand.

Then the common people won by authority, followed on not unwillingly, there
was gathered into the common pursh, ahondered and fifty thousand crowns, with
which somm of money wages were wikly paid unto the soilder, and the expenses
of the works were defraied moreover some sorts of abolished money, stamped
with a public mark, the oulde price was approved, and some also was augmented
that the some of money being forged anew might increase The soom of many vvhi^h
was joined.
or augment in value. VVithall, leave was given to sell cheese, and dried
stockfish out of a common barn, when Victuals we are (...) cut of the
public munition house.
butter and flesh fell short; but the cittisens forbore from selling, least
the soilder should stand in need.

Spinola understanding that his companies were but few, to make and defend so
many works at once, in so great adistance and circuit, by transporting of
vitualls afarr of, that it was most needful, at one time, both to make
provision of wood, and also of corn, and so many fortes should bemade and
kept, but especially, because acertaine rumor ran, that the bastard Mansfelt
would break again into the borders, to exercice the The Marquis understanding
of the coming of the hastard Mansfelt caused new (...) to be made.
robberies that he had lately failed in, and to call the King of Spaines army
from the siege, he ordains that five and twenty particular german companies
should be raised, each consisting of three hondered heads, withal he sends
from the camp Godfrido of Bergus, Baron of Grimbergue, The Daron of Grimberge
was sent to the Duke of Bauaria and Count ^illy.
(afterward Count) to the Infanta (in which he led acompanie of horse) that
from thence he might take his journey to that most excellent Count, John
Tillie, afterward to the most renowned Duke of Bauaria, for one Regiment of
those that were discharged by oath, and were to be sworn to the King of
Spain; This he effected with no lesh success, then speed, so that in steed of
one Regiment, two were offered. With all he sends into the provinces patents
to make up, ten companies of foot men, and some companies of horse all upon
his own charge.

Grave Mauris recovered the cit^ie of Genip, now forsaken Grave Maur^ took
posession of Mor^d ^ Bergues Genip and Cleues.
by our men of their own accord, as also mo^delbergue, and Cleues. He being
distracted with these buissines; and in throwing down part of the walls of
those of Cleue, left unto us a good opportunity to fortify and finish the
works. Hearing afterward of his coming to Breda, our men opening all the
flood gates of the rivers or sluices did all ouet drown, the fields of the
village of derheyden; on that side on which it was tought he might more easily
break through. The Marquis haueing sent Losano to Count He^drick, Count
Hendrick follow a him.
to make have, as he was commanded, fallowed after by verieshort iourneys,
albeit with very small troops, through the dangerous places of campine.

Count Brionius. Frenchman, being encouraged by this Brion the French man
resolved to state in Breda to see the occasions.
report, who had obtained leave of us to depart into France (from Breda)
where he served for a soldiar with a new hope of beholding the fight of Breda,
obtained leave of Spinola to teturne. About that time the enemy horse came out
Bergen opson, and haueing taken a prey of horses, and cariages, which were
coming with provision to our camp, greater troops of our army being sent
out, met them and put them to flight, and the booty recovered. They sought for
provision of (...).
Souldiars were sent from our camp to Seuenbergue, with a great number of
wagons to fetch provision. But because that town was free and held of neither
side, least it should receive any detriment by the liberty of the soldiers,
or The Aud^tor (...) was (...) the (...).
any soldier do any wrong to the inhabitants, Spinola sending for Theodorus
Scot, who did determine of all private and public controversies belonging to
the camp, or if there were any crime committed, or any controversy arose of
any spoils taken in war, he determined the same by the authority of the
auditour general, commanded The vinted stat^s did forbed that no vitualls or
munition should be sent.
to value the prices of all merchandise; promising that he would make
paiement, but by reason of the number of wagons, plenty of provision did much
abunde, and Spinola comaunding those of Seuenbark the carriadge thereof unto the
camp; the fearful Magistrates, presently aduertifed the States of Holand, yet
the cittisens offered agood sum of money The Marquis would not receive the
many offered.
for to buy corn, but Spinola refused it, affirming that he wanted the corn
that was carried into their camp, not buyng any from else where for their
money. Two priests of the society of JESUS, of those who employed there
endeavors in the camp. For the souls health of the soilder, went into that
town, together whith that company, to assuage the pilladge of the soilders,
The assistance of the ^^theres of the societ^e of Jesus was to the
Inhab^tance. And in particular to a minister of the (...).
and prevent injuries, were very behoufull to the towns men of Seauenberk and
the bouldnes of some men being irritated, they saved apreacher of the wourd;
together with his wife and family, prayinge them that no hurt might be don
unto them. which they admiring, who ever both diuulged abroad and expected more
severity The Prince of Poland arrived to the camp.
of those sort of priests, demanded how those black priests were changed?

In those days VValdislaus Sigismundo Prince of Poland and Suethe, came to
Bruxel to visit Isabella the Infa^ta, of whom he was most princely and most
royally entertained. He no lesh skillfull then loving war, renoomed for many
notorius victories, being desirouse to see the siege (having sent to Antwerp
Conde Selasarius general of the horse) was brought the last of September into
the camps of Breda. Spinola sendinge before some costly sadled The Marquis
went to receive him.
horses, acompanied almost with all the nobility, rode from the camp two
hours journey, and received him coming with many congratulations, and with
great sheow of love. There was atent prepared in ahouse wherein though nothing
belonging to kingly glory and majesty was, yet was there more military
ornaments then cleanlines and cittilik civility. Hither when the Prince came
about And withdraw great mangnificencie he received him.
night, having discharged all the canons, once, twice, and the third time, and
the drumes and trumpetes sounding, the moon was deprived of the sight of the
sun by asudaine interpositio^ of the earth. Betokeninge (if it may be The
eclipse.
lawful to foretell) that that Prince most expert in arms should one day
become the tamer of the turkish moon; The artillery begone to shut of.
Breda hitherto had not been touched with our cannon, nor was the more hurt
with so many shot of together, for that our soilders were commanded to shut
more for mirth then for destruction, and much shot went over the city
without doing any hurt; yea the besieged also, had more profitt then hurt by
that shooting, who from that time were exempted from the payment of all
tributes; according to the former custom: the next day, the prince led about
with sundry gardes of Spinola, where the enemy saw the people stand together
shot as thick as hail to salute them.

The day after he rode alone with Spinola, to take auiew of the other side of
the camp the rest being commanded Ours took eight frentz gentle men.
to stay behind for fear of danger.

At that very time eight young frencemen of noble houses, intending secretly to
slip by us from Breda to Grave The Marquis invited them.
Mauris is ca^pe, were apprehended upon the fenues, and were liberally
entertained, not as enemies but as frindly guestes Spinola invited the more
noble of them to his table (amongst whom was Marquis Gringnol vico^t, serius
with his broother, and Barron blianuill, youths of an excellent to wardnes)
and after (denieng them whate they demanded) told them that it was not his
custom, to suffer any to pass through his army, to the enemies; gave them
chois of returning to france or to Breda, from whence they came. The Marquis
gave them thar cho^^^ either to go to Ereda cr^ to France.
of which last offer when they made election, least they should seem to have
been more ready to undertaek the labors of the siege, then to endure them,
being carried to Spinolaes tent in acoache, led with atrumpet they were sent
back to Breda.

VValdislaus Prince of Poland, having viewed the works, The Prince departing
the camp v^^vved all the fortifications.
which until that day were not fully finished, is reported to have said that
the dice were cast betwext two great Captains Spinola, ad maurish, and that
one of them must needs loose his credit, Spinola accompanying him going out of
the camp, and having finished the compliments of courteous salutations
recommended him to count salasarius to be conducted to Antwerp.

Number VII.
The next day after, the Baron of beauoix coronel of Beron the Bavoix vve^t to
take poses^sion of a certain poct. which Grave Morsh mig^haue taken.
the burgondian regiment was sent with aleauen honderd foot, and five hondered
horse to fortify osterhaut; which the enemy might have taken to the great in
commodity of our men. The next day when he heard from thence the enemies drom
beath, sending out some that might. understand it, he admonished Spinola of
their coming the Of whose comnig headuertised The Marquis
scoutes related that maurish disembarked his army at Gintenberge. of which his
neow journey, nothing could for along time, be found out by inquiry; many
thought that he would take oudenbosk, and rosendal. it was thought fit that
those places should be taken before hand; least we should have any enemy
behind us; fearing otherwise that vitualles could not fitly be transported
unto us, and also we be kept from free fothering if the enemy should first
posessit. Spinola supposed that this thing was needles to be prevented. Knowing
well that neither the Marquis Ansvvered well to the purposet.
those places could be fit for them for anambushe nor so dangerous for our
provision when it should be fetched the farther of. which being so far from
their camp would be dangerous unto them, in so graeat adistance, we being to
avoid apassage not vnsecure to us.

Not much after, it was understood that Maursh his army was planted at mede,
which village is distant two hours journey from Breda: to wit he seemed fitly
to tak that Grave Maurice pitched his camp in m^de.
time for this coming when almost all our horse were absent, to accompany the
prince of poland which seemed very strange to many, that maurish attempted
nothing at that time, against our so feeble forces. Spinola, judging that there
were soilders enogh, having left agarde with artillery about the city;
ordained Franciscus Medina Commanded Number. 7.
A. Breda. B. Custra Mauritij in pago Medoe. C. Castra noua Spinoloe. D. Niger
agger. E. Noua Castella Spinoloe. F. Stagna ingentia art facta. G. Statio
Balionij et Caroli Romoe. H. Statio Baronis Balanconij.


to stand in place of deputy) over the neow quarter of Genik, he sending
before measurers, who were to choose aplace to pitche the neow camp. being
guarded with seven thousand foot, and thirty troops of horse, not far of
from osterhaut, within three thousand paces, pitched his The Marquis (...).
camp against the enemy: for in one spurt of running, and posessing of this so
cummodius aplace, the substance of the whole siege, had been turned up side
douwe,

For doutles if either Spinola had lost one day by delaying, or maurish had so
much prevented him by making The (...).
haste, Breda might have been, saved by the commodity of so small atyme for
betwext derhaid and hage their lay open very large spaces of land, and of
wateres, where by with little labor, victuals might have been carried into the
city, be wagons unto the river, and with little boats over the river, if
those places had first been taken by maurish: which might have been Don
Without any difficulty, when at that time there were no fortes of emportance,
betwext his army and the city (except four little redutes; And haueing wen
the other in the morning.
which were built on the black dike: But Spinola now with many soilders took
the ways and all the passages, betwext thies fortes, and the camp of maurish,
and preuer^ed him all hope of passing forward. So much does the cel^^itie and
the wisdom of the generals prevail in war^ ^^ which we have had this
victory.

Here was agreat plain filde of shrubbs, in which he might have extended his
army at lardge, if any fight had (...).
hapened: This he caused to be taken and posessed with certain troops of
horse. the rest of the horse bying placed further of; in the fore front of the
army.

Behind them there was atrinch formed as it were by nature; betwext Breda and
the shrubbs upon this he planted seven canons and placed the Infanterie behind
it comaunding to cut down the fright of the meadow, and of the rivers, and with
great expedition filled the ditches. Upon the right side he left agreater fort to
be defended of the burgondianes, which Baron of Beauoix had now almost The
form of the great forte.
finished. That fort of afoure square form, and of that greatness that the
canons might be planted upon: The walls were strong against the shot of the
artillery, six score foot long, in the flank twenty eight foot broad, and
fiftine foot high. There were long stakes on every side streaching out of
the woorck to hinder the ascending, within there was abanket and aparapet and
one step under the banquet for the comoditie of the shotthe parapet was five
foot heigh, ten foot thick compassed about on the outside with a ditch, of
two and twenty foot broad, so that from the bottom of the ditch, to the top
of the wall, it was twenty five foot high.

The camp disposed as before said, the fore front being two days in ordering
itt, Spinola expected Maurice, that The Marquis stayed for Grave Maurice two
days.
if he would fight, he might be ready and prepared for him. Someone perhaps
hearing that it was propounded in the conference of Spinola whether it were
better, or not in leuauing the fortificationes before or bring the soilders to
encounter Maurice, though his opinion werenot asked, yet he gave his sentence,
that Maurice was not only to be expected, but that bringing the companies from
the city, the whole multitude was to be employed against him, and that he was
to go thither with all his army he commended for he like fact, the Prince of
Parma, anoble man renowned heretofore for so many victories. Spainla having
spoken very honorably of the prince of Parma, showed that man would have been
the author of indiscreet council: that he seemed not to be far wide of the
fact recomited in (esops fables, by commending the uncertain event of a
battle, for a seige that was most crrtaine, lastly, that that should be like
a dog who letting go a morsel that he Number. 8.
VARIAE MAIORVM CASTEI
LLORVM FIGVRAE.
Dimensiones maiorum Castellorum.
had in his mouth, snatching at the shadow in the water, and so lost both. That
he would not so hasard his own fortune and his whole armies; that it was the
enemies part to make war, if he listed, and his to defend it, being offered.

Not long after, a certain master of the artillery, asked Spinola, why he
went not of him self to provoke Maurices He ansvvered prudenly.
army, not strenghtned with any great fortes, shooting of six or seven canons?
To whom Spinola answered, that it stood not with his honor, more lightly to
insult over the Grave Maurice kept his army together close seeing that the
Marquis prevented him in time.
enemy, then to carry him self ciuillie: that he was not accustomed to make
a bragging, but a prudent war: that it is a Commanders part, to combat no less
with council, then with sword and forces.

Number VIII.
Maurice having pitched his tents at mede, kept him self in them, nether gave
him self leave, nor any of his, to depart farther of. Which Spinola noting,
commanded five He commanded five forts to bemade.
fortes in a manner all of the same bigness, to be made on the left side, even to
der Heyde, for Barron Beauuoix, John To hinder his passage.
Count of Nasau, Phlilip Count of Fuggere, to cut of all passage to Grave
Maurice. which space being mighty and great, filled with continuated trinches.
betwixt the fortes was afterward adjoined to that first suddenly cast up
trence. To all these fortes, the form, for their diverse situation, was also
diverse in there form but their strenght and Grave Morish did not lettour
works.
height was equal with that other of Beauuoyes.

Maurice did assault our men, who were busy about these works, with no
irruptions nether by day nor by night during which days, he lost by flight,
many raw Inglish soldiars, whom he had called for to help him. A certain
French Trumpetter, by occasion of a thing that was lost, being set sent into
our army unto John Count of Nasaw, in the name of the french Nobility,
invited The French nobility desired to try there valor
him to approache nearer unto Maurices army to try their fortune with them.
The Count promised that he would come upon a certain hour the next day after
with three other And Grave John de Nasavv was no less desirous to (...) nuter
them. With three seconds.
there of his companions provided with there swords and two pistoles a pice,
and unarmed of other weapens. The next day after as it was agreed, at the hour
appointed, together with Coronel Steenhuse, and two Lieutenants of two
companies of horsemen, Grobbendonck the younger, and Botberge, he stood before
the enemies camp. There came out of the enemies camp, four horsemen, with
others following a far off, to the number of fixtine, with three hundred of the
enemies looking forth from the fore front of the army, amongst which Maurice
him self is said to have been the chief. There was amongst these four a young
man called Briant, his son who once the father of young Grobendonck had
overcome and slain in a single combat, having lost Lackerbec his Lieutenant.
He desiring to revenge his fathers death, sending a Trumpeter unto Spinola
craved leave to be granted him; to try the combat with him that flew his
father, as if otherwise he should have lived to long which Spinola refusing
him (holding Grobbendonck sone least he should escape) Briaut, ayoung man of
afierie spirit, sought occasion of his own accord. Count Nassau, having
received a bullet of his adversary on the fore part of his sadle, had his neck
burnt with the fire of his pistol. Briant, hardy both of hand and voice said.
At me, at me, shoot at me, who so ever thou art lo Briant, this day, this day
will revenge the wrong of his fathers slaughter. which having said, setting
spurs to his horse, in vain provoking the Lieutant of Grobbendonck the
younger with a pistol, he being pierced thorough with a bullet of his, taking
hold by the pomele of his sadle, his hand being half dead, felt presently He
procured (...).
to the ground so the undaunted valor of the two Grobbendoncs, the father and
the sone, vanquisted the two Briauts, the father and the son. There one
captain Steenhuse having wounded another of the enemies, there ran to help
them, those sixteen which came out of the enemies camp. Ours by little and
letle retyring themselves, whilst riding closer one to another, one of them
riding close to Nasau, pulls the bridle out of his hand, entangled with the The
Court (...) the danger.
pomel of his sword, so loses his sword, held by the bridle, and plucked forth
of the scabbard: so by two vne expected chances he exposed him self to the
sudden danger of two casualties. But Nassauius horse, other wise ardent and
unquiet, stood as amassed, and gave time to his master to take up his bridle.
The other, having left his sword, exposed him self to danger. Our Cornet, who
came to behold, forbedden (by the coming in of the enemy) to kill Briaut,
smites him on the head, yet brething, and taking horse, follows the rest. A
few days after when our troops of horsemen, stood in sight before the enemies
tents, Bouteuille Fre^chman, with a conuoie of five companies of horse, came to
remove them from their standing place. Baron Beauuoix, guarded with a Skirmish
(...) Baron of (...) and baron of Boutevill
company of Counts, being by chance a walkinge, came betwixt them, and
releeuing the guard, drowe the enemy back into a wood near adjoining. Hence
Bouteuille going forward a little, boasting of his own prouesse, relyenig upon
the promise of his friends, and on acoate of male, which he wore under his
cloak, prouokes ours to a single combat. The condition being accepted of ours,
besought to come further out from the wood, not removing from his place. shot
in the ranyes by one of ours, leting fall for And he retur^^d vvounded.
grief of the wound, the pistol which he had in his hand sled away.

In the mean space, whilst they seemed to be idle in Grave Maurices camp, nor
none endeavoring to fire our forts, nor to hinder our works nor none attempted
to provoke us with their assaulrs, he of purpose concealing his design,
because craft required deliberation, nether was it safe to atchieue great
exploits upon the sudden he resolved privily in the night, to set upon the
Castle of Antwerp: which accordingly And Grave Maurice determined is set upon
the Castle of Antvverpe.
he put in practice. It is thought, that he knew, that a few soldiars were left
for sauegard to defend the Castle, besides those, who either for their age, or
for their sickness, were dispensed with all. The Castle seming worthy to him of
his labor, and the gain greater, then the loss of Breda. In which were but
feovve people
Therefore he kept all his men in his camps at Bergenupsone and Rosendall, with
so great diligence under watch and ward within the walls, that not so much as
by any least sign, was any attempt perceived, either against Antwerp, or
against or army. The chardge of this expedition, was committed Giueing charg
to Bronchene.
to Bronchena Captain of Bergenupson of a company of horse having called him
to meda. He draws out a thousand foot, and two hundred horse, (as it was
reported) with all kind of instruments laid upon wagons, to the places that
were appointed. He makes the soldiar believe, departing from the camp and from
Rosendal, that they should go to Bergenupsone: and those that went from
Bergenupsone, that they were to go to the army. when he was come somewhat far
of from the city and from the town, he commanded all the blue and yeallow
coulered beltes (which the States soldiars were wont to wear) to be taken
away, and red ones (such as the Kings soldiars wear) to be put on, least they
should be known by the color of their belt for enemies, they should be
betrayed by the Boores stratagemes. Being asked of those that met them, who
they were; they were taught to Answer, that they went to Antwerp The fury of
the cuimie.
for provision whither it was reported that our men were to go about that
time. The coueringes of the wago^s, being marked with the Borgundia^ Crosses
after our fassio^, help the deceit. All the contry people thus deceived
covered with the darkness of a cloudy night, they come unto the Castle it self.
Then out of a hedge which they broake, they pulled up three or four stakes, and
some of Their presumption and success.
them got up on the bridge. The wind setting on the contrary side, hindered all
rushing, neying of horses, and noise The tempest favored their cause.
of wagons, to be heard within the Castle. They so much the more boldly, let
down their boats into the ditches, set lathers unto the walls, set a work
their sheeres, hammars, bars and other instruments cunningly made, to break
the locks of the watch houses, and to break up the gates from the hinges.
whilst these things were acting nere the walls, Andreas Cea, that old beaten
soldiar, to whom it befell to watch that night, harkned the more attentively;
Afterward hearing a noise, suspected their treachery, A contrie discovered
their arriueing.
and gave warning by discharging his piece. Ioannes Brauius, Governor of the
Castle, and other of the watch ran out of their standing place unto the walls,
and stood upon their defense. The enemies were so hindered The Governor and the
rest of his cause to asist.
with a greater noise of that wind (which at first being more temperat, they
approached more safely) that they could nether hold their boats. stable, nor
fasten their lathers to the walls, nor do any thing. Leaving therefore their
instruments for fear, their boats, and some of their ladders, perceiving them
selves to be discovered, departed with speed, being doutles prevented by the
interposition of divine power and so the treachery which was grievously
attempted against our affairs, found a very easy issue. Andreas Cea, for his
care of keeping the Castle, was more Andreas C^a was (...) his vigilance.
liberally rewarded then were in times past the keepers of the Capitol, by
Isabella the Archdutches, with a pension of fifteen crowns a month and by the
state house of Antwerp, with a rich suit of a apparel, and a rich belt. Grave
Maurice, being deceived of his hope (which he conceived in his mind as a
thing most certain) being grieved at the heart, remained for a certain time
in the camp, doing nothing and very pensive, many of his cottages Grifes of
Grave Maurice.
being over thrown by the tempest of that wind. But the horsemen of freese,
being also sent for by his command, arriving at Gittenberge, fell into great
danger: for in Panger of his horse.
that tempest, both the forts, and the bridge being broken, over which the
horsemen were to pass, hindered them from all succor of their fellows, so that
it was said, that they were easily to be rent in pieces and ouerthrouwen by us.
whereof Spinola being admonished, douting whether he should assault them with a
greater army he chose rather to omit some what in hurtinge, then with any
loss of his own men, to hurt the enemy: for following small commodities,
with great danger (with Augustus) The prudence of the Marquis.
he likened to those who fisht with a golden hook, which being lost, could be
recompensed with no catchinge. At lenght, Grave Maurice, having heard of
nothing done at Breda, after two and twenty, days that he remained at mede,
striking up his drums, and fyering his tents, departed sorrowful, as never
to return The retire of the Prince of Orange.
again. he is said to have been scarce afterward seen of his friends, so as
he admitted no comfort against his grief, Spinola seeing the continuale smoke
of the fires, going with a great company of horse to the enemies camp, finds
it to be empty. to the last company then retyring. Hear each one desiring
to show Ours fallovved them.
him self valiant and couragius in there Captains presence, they drove the
enemy from his place, standing for the defense of the company, whilst
constrainned by the retyring of many, they handsomely They took great booty
out of the quarters.
did save them selves. The sutelers merchandise, and many instruments of the
army family, being left and, became a prey unto the soldiar. But this
retaeict being prudently made by Grave Maurice, got him so much honor as the
enterprise being unhappily attempted, brought him grief. he might rightly say
with Antigonus departing. That he did not fly, but followed the profit that was
behind him for departing, he so provided for his own, and his soldiars safety
that he did both hinder the irruption of Spinola by works that were made, and
prevented be the present means of following after him to the And to effect the
^ame with greater security
quarters of Swalim, being the uttermost camp, which is the way to Seuenberge:
hereon he placed a fort for a forefront, instead of a refuge. On the side of
the fort, he cut a ditch of a good height, with a flank built long wise, to
defend those that departed, hither they safely retired them selves. if any
greater force of ours running upon them, and oppressed the rest, they defended
them hence they ran forth, to drive them back, trusting to the neerenes of the
trenche: for that work was so strong and so He fortified him self.
high, that it could not be assaulted on the sides, but by ladders, nor before,
but by a most narrow entrance. behind therwas asort upon the dike which did
enclose the parapet, on which side the dike of the village of heyde, was cut,
in the midest, left by this way ours should hinder the passage, He marched
with his arm^ to ^ondal.
Mauritius divided his army into two parts. He him self went to Rosendale,
with Ernestus Casimirus of Nassau, and fortified the place with atrench and
with other He (...) of Nasavv to o^ranga.
works. Hyenery Frederique of Nassau, was sent to take spranga, with the other
part of his army, which he also fortified with the works that were made,
Spinola having The Marquis returned to his first quarter.
spent a feowe days after Grave Maurices departure, thinknig he had done
sufficiently both for his praise, and Grave Maurice fell side in Rosendal. And
he went sick to haya. With (...).
his profit, he retired to his former companies nere to Breda. Grave Maurice
abiding a few days at Rosendale, beginning to be sick determined not to tarry
with his army. That care therefore; being committed to Ernestus Cassimirus in
Maurices steed, the Count of hage being sick, is brought back to Holland, as
one weary of all: where considering all things, that nothing prospered, nor
could find no end, by little and little he pined away, his sickness turning (as
is said) into a consumption. which thing peradventure might come to pass,
because he hoped, if the wars should have been prolonged until winter (as now
but a little summer was left) that either we should forsake the seege by the
cruelty of the time, or that we should be prevented of provision, by reason of
the difficulties of the ways as also by reason of his tents being so nere, He
sent for the bastard Mansfeild.
Notwithstanding, lest he should be deceived through our consta^cie and good
success, he sent for the bastard Ma^sfeld into holland, to muster or make up
new companies. he having talked with him at hage, being after sent to Rosendal
to Ernestus Cassimirus of Nassau, after he had treated of those things he
stood in need of, departing for France and England, he went to fetch aid
having undertaken He went for succor to England and France.
this sea voyage in the winter time, and that at first the sea was calm, a
while after, a smoking shower of rain poured forth from the black clouds,
together with turbulent storms of dangerous vaues, which made him that he knew
not where he was. Hence all the heavens, and the whole sea, were converted into
storms, which carried A great sterme.
the ships violently upon the rocks, or rune them a ground. They could not lie
at ancre, nor could they pomp forth the waters that beat in upon them: their
loading, and their armor were cast over board, to lighten their barks
swimming by the shore side, the waves enforcing rhem. Atlast, the cruelty of
the heavens, and of the seas being augmented made shiproack, drowning many of
his soldiars, he scarcely saved by the help of a little boat, so that he was
thought for a long time to be as dead. The King of England promised fourteen
thousand foot. There were some companies appointed for Mansfeld The king of
England promised assistance.

And the united provinces promi^ed to augment his army.


out of Liege, and else where supplies were gathered thorough Germany, to the
number of two thousand foot: but the united Lords resolved to augment their old
companies, with great troops of horse and foot, called out of England,
France, and Germany.

Spinola perceiving the enemies drift, admonishes the Archdutches, that she
should request of the Emperor against The Marquis aduersited the Infanta.
Mansfeld, like companies both of horse and foot. And that she should request
of the Duke of Bauaria, help of the confederat Princes of Germany, against
Mansfelds designs: Moreover, that she should command the Provinces to defend
their quarters whith fifteen thousand foot, which Andi that other troops may
be rais^^^yms.
they call curlinges, or selected men, and with three thousand horse, which
they call companies of the Ordinance, which troops, partly the Provinces,
partly the collectors of the Kings money, might pay their wages: to these foot
men, only during the time of war: to the horsemen, always after, that it might
belong to their charge, as often as any war should happen, presently to be
ready, and being offered, either to defend, or offend. The Archdutches Isabella
waing The Infanta governed all the troops.
all things with a marvelous princely providence, with continual labor and
consulting both by night and day, as she did order the whole business, and did
undergo so great a weight. which two things she did most easily bring to
pass, which no other could attain unto, by the authority of her name, and by
the favor she had amongstst the people. By her authority, with strangers: by
her favor, and grace, amongst her own. The succors therefore which Spinola
requested, she obtained of the Emperor by letters.

She sent the Count Octauius Sforzan to the Duke of Bauaria. The Emperor
promised three thousand foot, and two thosand and five hundred horse. The Duke
of Bauaria, Count Octau^us was sent to duke of Bauaria.
a thousand horse, and three thousand foot. The rest of the foot and horse,
were sent by the Provinces at the time The emperor and the duke promised
succor.
appointed, according to the number that was ordained. Then Spinola (on whom
depends the weight of this affair) wholly atte^ded to this one thing, that
to so great acompanie, according to the continuation of the war which he
forsaw, provision should be brought, both in great plenty and safety. And to
this end, understanding two things to be most necessaire, first wagons by
which he might supply The Marquis prudenly di posed the conuoy^s.
victuals, next by some perpetual guide, which might serve the camp in hard
times, and difficult ways, he made Henry of Bergues, chief of that
transportation, retayning in the camp Orchoa Gomeretio, Comissarie general,
as they call They were commended to Count Hendrick.
him, whom hitherto he had used in transporting of victuals, but now most of
all had need of him, with the rest of the horsemen, to make excursio^s about
Breda, and about the ca^pe. He sent the Count of Henning, to the States of
Brabant, Count hening was sent to the State of ^rabant to procure vvagons.
to procure wagons, that having persuaded them first, the other provinces
should also follow their example, the Count of henninge proposing the matter to
those who were to give their suffrage, he easily obtained of the^, that they
should all afterward agree unto it in the State house, when they The other
provinces were moved by this example.
both knew the present necessity, and were glad of the remedy for the public
good. Those therefore of Brabant condescending, those of Flanders, Henault,
Artois and the rest, did not un willingly condescend, that so many wagons
should be appointed.

At lyre there was a public barn of corn ordained, hither first was the
provision brought, and from thence to the Ammunition house was at Lyre ordained.
leager. The greatest part of the horsemen were committed to the charge of the
Count of Bergues, which were to take care of the provision; for the companies
of Breda, need almost The care and dingens of Count Hendricken conducting the
conuoy^s.
no other defense, then the fortification already made. This leaders name
although it was fearful to the enemy, yet he chose rather with his own act,
then with his fame, to deter them from all irruptio^. wherefore this way he
acquitted himself of his office. It was his custom, early in the morning
before day, to discover the disorder of the confused troops then sending
before some troop of light horsemen, to go after. To the first companies and
last, he joined artilleric, The order of his marchi^ge.
to give notice of the enemies coming, whose sign by so great asound, might be
carried a far off that by that sign which was given, the soldiars might be
gathered together, and hasten to that place which stood most in need. Both
sides of the way against Rosendal and Langestrate (where the enemies army lay)
to be set with troops of horse on both sides, And his prevention against the
treach^rie of the enemy.
and to set betwixt the horsemen light footmen, and with the rest of the horse
to enclose with the rest of the foot; so to go forward in their journey, and
yet in fight. That they should seek as much as was possible, the safest
passages, to prevent treacheries, disposing the ways that the passages might
be the more easy. If there were any danger, that he should be wary, not to bid
battle upon the enemies ground, and for that cause, either to expect in a
fitter place, or keep him self from disadvantage, and to set the wagons instead
of a trench, if they were to fight, bringing the shooters with in side. As
often as they were to march, that the Captains should go before, till the
last had passed, both to veew and hasten their companies, and then fallow after
all, and then in the march to before most; and finally, to come in time. To
provide places of lodging for the soldiar before night, then the gardes to be
appointed before night. To call the boores, to enquiri of the enemy, of the
ways, and to setwatch, as the custom was. Either to sease upon the bridges, or
to break them down, to take away passage from the enemy. To set the soldiars
ready in their standing places, with their horses bridled, if need were. That
they should send others out on every side, to take some, by whom they might
know the enemies design. Furthermore, to have certain spies who should
discover unto them, all their councels and attempts, whom he should reward
liberally. In the night, he Their spies.
should beset all passages with watchmen. and lest continuance should be
diminished by custom (which uses to happen by lenght of time) he should often
visit the standing The vigilanci he observed in his iourni by night.
places at unawares, not so much for distrust of those that walk the round, as
that being equal with the soldiars they should be the more willing to undergo
the labor with the leader. Now he took care, as well for the affairs of the
boores, as for provision. He as ouer-seer of the fires, admonished the soldiars
to put out the fire, which they had kindled Punishisment for disorders
in the barnes. He caused those that were more careless, by whose negligence
the slame ill enkendled arose and took hold of the houses, to watch
afterward abroad in the open air, punished them in their purse, and condemned
them to repair the damage. He admonished the^, after the manner of Aurelianus,
that they should live upon the spoil of the enemy, and not upon the tears of
those of their own side. To do justice for the contrie people, against the
liberty of the soldiar, to hear their complaints, and to punish the guilty.
The fruit which of all resulted.
By which discipline he brought to pass that the inahbitants (of whom there
was great care, had in the villages) that they out of the Churches and
steeples, wherein they put their wives, children, corn, and household stuff,
should give those things to be sold, which for fear sake they kept close and
shut up, and that the laborers of the ground should be exercised without any
impediment. With so great quietness, brought he hisarmie thorough the villages
of Brabant, with a special care which he had of the corn, fields, houses,
and men. The enemy by the fame of so exact a discipline, never durst so much
as once to carpe at our troops, that plainly with what honor the provinces
fulfilled, Alexander Seuerus for his modesty, whilst he led his amongst the
Parthians had great renoome for his brave conduction and government that name
chey talled Bergues of Croac, the The cr^aces called him God of the boores.
God of the contrymen.

By this so great care of the Count of Bergues, al though all the corn was
carefully preserved, yet because by reason of the number of horses the store of
grass was by little and little diminished in the ca^pe, and those horses for the
continuance The Marquis had great care of the horse and forage.
of their labor, were spoiled with leanenesse, when many did feed on chopped
straw, and on chafe (whereunto necessity compelled them to augment their
forage) Spinola provided for both these discommodities, after this manner. Lest
the rest of the forage, should fail for the horse in the camp, he sent a
company of horsemen, to guard those that went too and fro, into the wintring
places, unto the cities and towns adjoining nearer, where they might refresh
them selfs for a time, whilst victuales and waggo^s were made ready for lire.
And as at that time the forage for the ca^pe could not be spent, in which the
horses had carried thither provision, he forbid them to go unto the camp;
having likewise dismissed (as soon as they were unloaded) the wagons and
beasts of burden. hence the horses, when else where they were better fed, by
a little repose, were refreshed from their wearines and their leanesse. This
that Spinola might effectuat the more safely he built a great fort in the
village of Barlen three hours journey from the camp Fortifieng the vvayes in
diverse places.
and placed a garrison, adding thereto one company of horsemen. To this place
afterward, did Count Bergues bring provision, with his horsemen: here he staid,
whilst the wagons unloading, went out of the camps: hitherto did the companies
of horsemen, and other of footmen, meet them and receive them.

Furthermore, that in all events, the iorneyes might be the more secure, a fort
being made by Count Isenbergue, in the village of Leurence against Rosendale,
almost in that place, in which the river running betwixt, might be passed For
the security of the convvay.
by bridges or over shallow places. Furthermore, other three were made by
Henry of Bergues, betwixt Lire, Herentale, and Turnhoult: four also at Outturn
hout, in which the soldiar which were too and fro, took his rest in the night
which journey, al though it was far greater then the other, by which men go
directly thorough hooghstrat yet because it was far distant from the enemies
camps it was. thought to be more safe and certain; especialy when but mean
grrrisons were left for these two castles Hooghstrat, and Turnhoult. By this
circumspection, the ways were so safe, that the contrymen, chiefly of
Turnhoult accompanied almost with no conway, did securely transport victuals
to the camp by wagon. which liberty of going too and fro, when the enemies
knew, having once set upon them to rob them, they spoiled some wagons, driving
away their horse and carriars, not far from the village of Barlen.

Grave Maurice, meditating in his disease of new exploits, Grave morish once
again turned to tempt the castle of Antvvorp.
having not yet laid aside the hope of surprising the Castle of Antwerp, once
again vndertakenig anightly enterprise, purposed to set upon it the second
time. It pleased him to commit this business, to Stakenbrouck governor of Grave,
but his attempt fell out no more happily then the former for there fell
continually so great a rain, that their pieces served to no purpose, by reason
of the moystnes of their poudre; and when the enemy save fire in the night
upon the walls of the city, supposing to be betrayed, he suddenly retired
back with so great perturbation, that leaving part of his carriage, in places
not passable,, he specdely betook him to flight. It is thought that there was
a conspiracy of some treacherous cittisens made within A conspiracis ^f
treachery was (...) in the ^itie.
the town, who for desire of a new government had invited the enemy. Thirty
were commanded to be banished, whom petulancy of words made to be suspected,
but by and by they were forgiven, and some were permitted Some (...) and
pr^^er^ly forgiven.
to tarry still.

Grave Maurice therefore when he saw he could do nothing more against our
conuoyes, although his army was divided into two parts to lie in wait, turned
all his care to vex those which were said to help to bring the victuals. They
were taken who were found guilty of that fact, and were soundly punished in
their purse, nether did they spare those which were tributaries to the
confederated estates the rest being deterred with the greuousnes of the
punishment. Moreover, all the milles round about, were broken down, their
irons being taken away. The bakers and bruars, had The enemy (...).
their bruing vessels and their ouens spoiled. we also understood that it was
treated amongst them, whether it was the custom, that those places of the
field which were kept with little or few companies of soldiars (where our
provision lay) should be depopulated and destroyed. Some thought it fit, that
all the places round about should be set on fire, to which ours might have
access for provision, least they should be commodius for us, to bring
abundance of victuals. Others fearing, least also we should set fire on their
villages and free towns without guard or defense dissallowed of that council.
wherefore he opinions benig diverse (as it is wont to be in desperate cases) they
carried prisoners The enemy apprehend^d tho it that brought to the Marquis
proui^ion.
from Tourenhoult, hooghstrat, and the adjoining villages, some which had
relieved our tents with prouission and victuals. Spinola requiting them, as
many as he understood to have carried to the enemy food and victuales, he
likewese commanded to be taken, and to be punished in The complaints were
ansvvered.
eueri place Diverse of these complanied unto him by messengers, as if they were
inocent. He made them answer, that this was the estate of the present war, that
seeing the enemy did by all means hinder the bringing of provision, that he
also forbid the like; and if they would have him not to hinder them, they also
should desist from hindering ours: but if they went forward in hindering ours, he
also would go forward in hindering theirs.

By these examples and penalties, the contrymen and merchants being deterred,
not daring scarcely to bring any All things became deer.
thing into our army but by stealth, there ensued for a few days a great
dearth of bread, wine, bear, and other merchandise, which Spinola feared to
relieve by imposing on them a lesser price, fearing by how much he profited the
soldiar, so much the more he should hurt by the scarcetie of sellers and of
corn (which are allured by advantage gain.) for these causes, during those
days, some certain soldiars (which preferred hungar before honesty) they cut
in pieces for relief (a most miserable food) the carcasses of dead Some were
of necessity constrained to eat horse flashe.
horses: and by this necessity of ours, both the lesser famine of the
besieged, and the greater abundance of Maurices army (which was relieved by
the neerenes of the cities and rivers) we were to overthrow them. For then
there was plenty of provision in the city, at a reasonable rate, which the
state had caused to be set upon all merchandise, nor were esteemed at a higher
rate then before the siege least the cittisens and the soldiars, should think
them selves oppressed. Araser of wheat sold for sixteen shillinges: ar easer
of Prudence of the senate of Breda.
Rye, for ten:: of panick, for eight: of Barley for seven; and oats for as
much. A sack of salt was sold for eight shillinges. Dried stockfishe, and a
pound of cheese, for The price of vituales in the town of Breda.
three half pence A pound of green cheese, for a penny. A pottle of oil; for
two shillinges and a penny. A pottle of rape oil, for four pence. A pound of
beef for three half pence. And by this cheapnes of victuals, it was a wonder
how long the patience of the beseeged did endure. In the enemies camp, corn,
wine, food, was brought from all parts, at the lowest rate, Whether it was not
lawful for ours to have access. Spinola that he might succor the necessity
of his soldiars, besides the Kings daily allowance, he commanded to be daily
distributed to the soldiars man by man, beer measured out of the magazin or
amunision house which thing did greatly win their affection, and The Marquis
prevented a good remedi for the necessity of his so^ders.
was also healthful for them. The Infanta Isabella, against the rain and
winters wind, she caused to be given to the senteries (which were to watch
without any shelter) six hundred gowns, to the rest hose and shoes almost to
the number And also the Infanta.
of eight thousand. They of Breda, who gladly received of others that which
they would willingly should befall to our affairs (having understood of others
that our necessities were greater then they were, believed that for the space
of forty days, no provision had come into our army: that the Reports amonst
our co^arartes that cure army daily deca^^d.
greatest part of our army, was run away: and that the lesser part by far,
remained: that none now were of force to subsist, and endure the brunt of
labor: and that the rest, either for famine, or for sickness, would forsake the
siege. These and other things did the holanderes diuulge abroad. There were
some also that did more amply and with greater boasting, publish the same
abroad in print. The besieged therefore, vpbrayding us with our necessities,
brought forth their provision, as boasting of it, sometimes with oxen into the
suburbs. When The enemy b^sted of the (...) of th^r prouition
yet at home, casting their accounts, they had but ameane quantity of corn.
The state (least they should quickly consume, that which they tought to feed
longer upon, decreed that no man should brue beer, which should cost above a
crown. They took also away the tin and copper furnices, Preuension of the
enemy that th^re prouisi^^ might long endure.
from the makers of Aqua vitae, lest corn should be consumed by that means:
and that they held out so much the longer. But their boasting was rewarded with
a just punishment.

Number IX.
Spinola seeing them more freely, to wander about the walls, where certain
gardens were, to gater herbs and roots which were left, least they should
escape scot free, and that passage be open for messengers, on that side on which
the watch did seem to be less vigilant (by reason of the greatness of the
circuit) he caused to be made nere to the city in three places, some lesser,
and greatet fortes, and three batteries to place canons and artillery upon.
Those seeds of the fortes, Great and Little fortes and batteries were built.
which looked toward the city, to repel the balls of the pieces, had their
wall five and twenty foot thick. The bull warkes were of this form. The
greater standing in the village of Genip, which the Marquis of Campolatar
defended, The form of the fortifications.
was a hundred and sixty foot long. A hundred twenty five foot broad. The
walls behind and on the sides, were fifteen foot thick. But the thicker side
was made fit both for a walking and standing place. The angles standing out,
did perfect the fore front. There were in the building, nine prospectes or
windows, to place so many canons in. Each of eleven foot and a half in
bread made not straight, but with their brimmes slope wise. inwardli with a
banquet, made of turfes and boughs, eight foot high, with his papapett.
thirty five foot broad, and boorded over, to remove the canons speedely.
After this building, there was a leuel of a hundred and thirty foot long,
and fifty foot bread. Without under the prospectes, were sharp stakes: for a
refuge for the masters of the artillery, vaulted and hedged about, to defend
the flanks and bulwark. Then a ditch of forty eight foot broad, and seven
foot deep; from the higher brimmes, to the very bottom, it Number. 9.
Agger Tribuni Wyngardij.
Agger Baronis Balanconij.
Agger Comitis Isenburgici.
was thirty eight foot upon the outward bank, was set aranck of sharpened
stakes, to hinder the irruptions.

The other two bulwarks of Tettering and Hage, this Other fortifica^iones.
was the middle most, and that the least of the three, but the strongest by its
nere adjoining to the fortes, being built al most after the same manner,
differing only in lenght, breadth and corners, were kept by Baron Balinconius
and Count Isenbergue. While those things were thus ordered, afterward the
besieged, made irruptions out at diuersgates, and shot the balls of their
canons very thick against our works, and against our camps, but to little
purpose. Our works being finished, when they saw their affairs to stand in
hard terms, some of the soldiars, tradesmen, and husbandmen, for fear of
hunger, began to yield them selfs. For Some of the (...) them selves.
being wearied with the present incommodities afflicted with a great plague,
with long enclosing, and change of diet, they both had scarcetie of corn, and
they withal understood, that there remained little flesh, fish, and cheese.
Oil pressed out of rape-seede, and dipped in their bread, they commonly used
for their meat. There were very sumptuous banquets made to the soldiars by him
(...) made be the knoker of d^gges.
that knocked the dogs on the head, to wit for three half pence ameale. For he
for acertaine stipend of twenty shillinges a month, being commanded to kill
all the dogs to avoid the plague, furnished a table with those dishes,
nether had he daily a few soldiars to be his guess, to dine so well for so
little money. But when this life seemed to many men very hard and grievous, it
was made far more insupportable for fear of continuance, wherefore they
endeavored The enemy began to run avvoy. And the Marquis coma^a^d that the
(...) thou (...).
to better this their bad estate by flight. But Spinola sending a Trumpetter to
the Governor of the city with command, hewarned him, that none after that
time, etherin regard of rendering him self, or of flight, should hope for
parddon, of him, but should be driven back into the city, or be hanged, as
many as should come from thence, VVithall, he commanded all places, to be kept
with watches, by which they could pass privily. promising five and twenty
crowns Decompence for (...).
for a recompense, to those that cayght them coming out of the town. All for
the present being astonished, and therefore (as it often happens) made the
boulder hereby, committed them selves to the mercy of Spinola, who weeping,
with all possible prayers, entreated them without the fortes, that receiving
them, they would asist them with meat, or else kill them, rather then to send
them back into the city. Spinola received the wife of a certain tradesman
of Antwerp, together with her little child, now lately of her own head
departed out of the city; commanding the rest that came with her, to return
back, but afterward he dispensed more liberally. with his own law, sending
back none of the fugitives in to the town. when but few, and very seldom, any
Spinola comaund^d to ^^ boores to be hanged (...) of the city.
of them issued out. He hanged up two boores, in the sight of the city, which
in the dead of the night endeavored to carry thither victuals. This fact,
proved prositable, and better then mercy, others afterward being made afraid
by The said proved fact (...) N^ovv (...) of grave Maurice to (...) the city.
this exemple.

Grave Maurice, thinking with a greater number, to send victuals to the
besieged, bringing great quantity of corn and other provision to the havens
of the city nere at hand he prepares eighteen great boats with flat
bottomes which in a calm, might go unto them, which freed from the N^ovv in
(...).
surging of the seas, feared the sands nothing at all, and lie safely at ancre
in shallow places. To these he makes sides and fore-deckes, raised up on either
side and high of thick oak to resist all kind of force and battery. Every In
which was sent (...) and a (...).
one made after this manner, he armeth with four or six brazen and iron pieces,
furnishes with many balls of wilde-fire, afterward he loades them with corn
barreled up, with great quantity of cheese, bacon. and porke. All were set
with most expert shooters. He aduertiseth those of Breda at the same time, that
with some of their best The b^siged (...).
soldiars, they upon the day appointed, should break out of the town, and
should plant them upon our bridge. Those of Breda obeynig this commandment,
make ready fourteen ferrieboates, six whereof they furnish with so many canons,
and with balls of wild fire, and appoint three hundred soldiars to stand
upon the ships, they provide six hundred, which might sallie out from the
land, near the river. Which thing Spinola understanding, does fortify The
Marquis (...).
a bulwark which he made in the village of heyden with greater garrison (by
which way the enemy was to pass) planteing agreat hedge made of trees.
furthermore he determined to plant another roe or hedge, with greater stakes
bound together, two thousand four hundred paces long betwixt was fair little
forts, which he built over the blackdik, as they call it, lest by that water
which during all the winter, did flow into the city, the enemies might pass
their provision. for such was the nature of those meadows that as often as the
swelling of thesea raged (which always happened every twelve hours) over
flowing also with land waters, they might easily enter into the city with
flat bottom boats; and also made a passage for footmen, after the sea was
gone out. But behoulde, the winds which at the first were very prosperous for
Grave Maurice, to our unspeakable happiness, turned contrary. the raging also of
the sea, contrary to its custom, did scarce so much as move (...).
the waters: and so once again the divine power, did overthrow the enemies
design. In the mean while, whilst the ships laden with victuals and
soldiars, were stopped with the weather, the number of cheese and bacon was so
diminished Which provision vva^ for the (...).
by the pilfering of the soldiars, that little store of this his provision could
have come unto the besieged, although it had hapened that the ships had passed
by us. But a few days after, the corn which was barreld up, wet with the
moisture of the rain and of the ship, began to grow thorough the chinkes of
the barrells, after it was taken out of the ships: and thus the enemies always
endured one loss upon another.

Afterward, when our men were sent out of the camp to fetch wood and
forraige, (that nere at hand being spent) the enemies supposed, that our
soldiars being dispersed to gather forraige and wood, might easily be distroyed
by their horsemen: and for this cause, noted the more dilligently our gathering
of wood and forraige. They labored Great dangeres in ^^^ch^nge of vvood and
f^rradge to to our camp
by all means possibile about this matter, that our men might be deprived of
both: this seemed easy unto them because their strenght of horse was greater:
when as our horse were almost all employed, partly in defending the camp,
partly in bringing provision: and that it was all one, either to put them to the
sword, or hinder them of their carriage: which being lost, the siege could not
be mayantained. hence it happened by our daily foraginges (which was needful)
when foraige was fetched from vnuseall and dispersed houses, that few forraigers
could go about in to those dispersed and dangerous places; which though it did
not do great hurt unto us, yet it did great hurt to the soldiars, to the
beasts, and to the carriars. Spinola, least he should leave any long time so
little a spirt of joy to the enemy, afterward as often as he was to fetch
forraige, he expected the return of the companies, whom for Sauegard sake, the
Count of Bergues brought back within three leages of the camp; by whose
Saueguard, The Marquis prouented ^^ enemies (...).
he sent the forraigers from the camp, on every side, unto the fildes near
adjoining. Furthermore he so disposed of his conuoyes, that when the wagons at
Lyre were loaded with corn, dividing the number of horse and foot, the wagons
being laden with oats, they should speedely transport forriage into the
camp, which being afterward unloaded, the soldiars as soon as might be,
returned back to Lyre, to guard the other conuoyes. In the mean while, the
other horses, which were in a manner become un profitable to do any work, by
reason of their labor and leannes, were sent into more fertile places in winter
to fetch forage whilst others returned, to whom their own quarters, were
assigned for their repose. So the journeys being dubled with fresh horses, and
well fed; he provided The sollicitied and di ^aching of prouisiones was
refered to the ^harge of A^^cander H^se.
forraige and provision in a short time, over which officie, Alexander Hesius;
leftenamt of the Artillery was appointed, who used continual diligence and
expedition, in loading and transporting thereof.

But after the provinces (on whom of their own wills, the carriage of corn
and forraige was imposed) perceived the siege should long endure, and always
new requests to be added to the former, being wearied with the charge of so
many wagons continually sent, and seemed after to refuse, a new means of
getting provision was invented. There Other was gons were taken up for The
conducting of vituales.
were hired in all those villages, wagons with two wheels, which for their
greater compass, one horse commonly, but two at the most do draw with greater
speed then three do draw those which go upon four wheels, although they be
lesser. The price agreed upon for every one, which at the first was much
greater by reason of the difficulty of the ways, afterward in better times
was half diminished. So corn was provided with far less charges of horse and
wagons, with less forraige, with like expedition, equal number, and easier
price.

This new industry conseued Grave Maurice, who trusting Grave Morish deceived
in his conce^^
to the season of the time, believed, that by reason of so dear and so long
cariages, we should never overcome so great difficulties of corn, especially
because winter now was so nere at hand, and all the villages being emptied,
the corn was carried in to the cities, and the cattle, by reason of the war,
to be driven away far off. He is reported, braging, to have said to his
friends, that which once Pompeo said to Dirachius of Caesar. That he would not
refuse, but to be esteemed an Emperor worth nothing, if Spinolaes army
departed without shame; and therefore he would willingly grante that glory to
him (after Spinola had held out the siege the whole winter) that he might know
more then him self, and also more then the devils them selves. And God
prospered our affairs.
indeed, unless divine succor had continually more asisted our affairs then
human did, and the winter season (which usually was sharp) had been most
mild, we could never have overcome so great difficulties, with such
constancy. verelie the abundance of waters, which the townes-men sent upon
our camps during Noue^bre, when they shut the floodgates or sluices of the
rivers, to pour abroad Aa and Merkam, began to cast down our dikes put us
enough both unto fear and care. Nether did Spinola think, either that that war
could have lasted so long or that, there should need so great a number of
wagons, or that the expenses of carriage would prove so great: which burden, if
the provinces from the first beginning, had seen the whole together before
their eyes, per haps they would never have inbraced that with so good a will
and consent, as they faithfully sustained even to the end of the siege,
defreying the The fideliti of the provinces was admirable.
charges of four hundred wagons, as also paynig the wages of the provinces
footmen: by which fact, they showed themselves most faith full to their King,
and have acquired everlasting praise.

Moreover, who could foresee, so many troubles thorough all Europe, should be
stirred up, only for Bredaes sake? It was commonly believed, that there was not
sufficient provision of corn and victuals, for so many thousand heads, as
were kept in siege before the city. The cittisens accustomed to plenty, and
unaccustomed to war and hungar, would not endure or suffer penury.

The French, Scotch, English, VVallons, Dutch, (of whom many were placed in
garrison would never expect, till corn began to fail some by nature, others by
custom, being greedy of their own pleasures, made us live in hope of a
speedy rendering; so easy a thing it is to begin war at ones pleasure, but to
end it at an others. But besides the corn, which the cittisens had were man by
man commanded to provide, and which were laid up for the soldiars in the common
storehouse, the contry people (all the time that we lay at Gilse, it not being
as then resolved to shut up all the passages at once) carried a great quantity
into the city, for fear of war. Furthermore, all the Captains and
commanders, for the excessive gain, which they made by asking and receiving
the pays of those that died, resolved constantly in them selves, to undergo
all asperities; and so much the longer. by how much more soldiars dyed by
sickness and other miseries: because, by that loss, their gain daily
increased, and not unwillingly sustained their own hungar, by the wages of the
dead, getting death by poverty, and gain by death: so much more is gold
preferred before fidelity.

The number of those that died during the siege, was so great, that above five
thousand dead bodies, were brought in account to Libitine, which was the third
part of all the heads (which were in Breda) being numbered at the first to
fifteen thousand and so the sparingnes of the dead served for victuals to the
living. which thing lest we, nor the cittisens them selves should perceive, it
was provided from the beginning by the Magistrates of the town, that none
afterward, thohugh rich or noble, should have the A^ in vn^^^ to (...) the
(...).
bells runge at there burial.

These things, did not only deceive ours, but for the most part also, eue^ the
opinion of the besieged them selves (the Captains otherwise, who were mighty
in faction, had after a manner, set their faith to sale) and many of those that
fled from the city affirmed, that unless the sige were the sooner raised,
that they could hold out no longer: which self same thing, was written out
of Holland to the Count of Bergues. Also a German soldiar, who had served the
Hollanders nine months, being taken by ours, and known by the Count of
Isenburge to be one of his city, his life being pardoned, upon this condition
was sent back to Breda, that when as things were The zele of the Count of
^senburge.
in the greatest extremity, he should return unto our army, assured both of
his life, and of reward, after he had been two months at Breda, conversant
amongst the soldiars without suspicion being returned, he related, that the
soldiars, compelled by necessity, now began to sustain their lives with horse
flesh, nor had not corn for two months. He councelled them, that Spinola
should more often batter the city with his canons, at least in show, that
they might with the more apparent pretext, render them selves. They joyful and
encouraged with the relation of these things know for certain. what they
will, and what they wish? esteening the Hopes of good succes.
Count of Bergues nether to be deceived nor the German soldiar to have lied in
so great a matter, nor all the fugitives to have been false, they request
Spinola, to let them batter the city with their artillery. He although he
knew well enough, scarcely any thing was to be got with those engines amongst
soldiars inurded to war, the cittisens also, even with custom, to cast away
fear, yet condiscended to their request, that on three sides on which so many
bulwarks were close to the city) the walls of the city, and the houses,
should be battered.

Fhillip Count of Mansfeld, oportunely returned at that Count Man^felt (...).
time in to our army, lately Captain of a company to Gustam Adolphus King
of Suede, renowned for his famous facts, who had led his troops with great
authority. He having added industry, unto art (as use is the master of al
things) found out, that it might serve for great good purpose unto war, a new
kind of engine, which might be fitter for to transport, and carry the balls
farther, and that with less quantity of poudre; To give order to this
business, departing from the camp to Bruxells, he caused forty brass pieces
to be cast, also twenty three murdederinge pieces, to send forth balls of
wildfire. Thirty of those lesser pieces, of no more weight then a hundred and
fourscore pound, did every one carry balls of six pound weight: the then
greater, each one of seven hundred fifty pound, carried balls of five and
twenty pound.

The use of these, although they cost but half so much, was yet greater, and
more frequent: for the little ones, were easily drowen with two horse, and the
greater, with no more then four; wherasalthe old ones, must have seven, ten,
or eighteen. They carried iron balls, only with the third part of poudre,
further then the old one did. That This invented art of Manifelt was found
profitable.
abridgment, Ma^sfilds art invented; for he knew so well, how to boil with
fire the melted metal, that having less thicknes of brass, yet was of like
hardness, and was also bettet then the greater pieces; and their lightness so
much the less.

The balls also, although they were shot with less poudre, yet for the same
reason flew the further (for the fire being given in the center gives fire to
all the powder at once, but otherwise being given in the furmust part of the
botto^ drive the ball with greater vehimencie) of the piece.

An other invention also of this Count, was admired. Iron Another inuension of
count Manifelt to dr^^^ afire ball far longer then an Yr^n lact
balls made with salt peeter, of above a hundred pound weight, he made to
carry, seventy paces further then any other brass murdering piece. These he
shot from a far off, into the very heart, or midst, of the city, whereas
otherwise, all the force of murdering pieces, by reason of the long distance,
utterly died before they came there, because our bulwarks, were at lest six
hundred paces from the city we understood by the run awayes, do less damage
then terror to have surprised the besieged by the shooting of those balls; we
also saw (having got the city) the great ruins of houses that were
overthrown. One of the ammunition houses The besieged put to great terror.
(wherein the poudre was keept) having the top tumbled down, not taking fire,
fell without doing any hurt likely otherwise to have brought great slaughter
upon the city, But And in particular be the artillerte of co^nt Isenburque.
other balls of the canons, where with on a three fould side (and on that
especially which Count Isenbergue won) we battered the city, made such
fear, that both many houses were left empty, and the assemble was called
weekly to church, without the ringing of any belle, and at an unusual hour,
and at last the soldiars were commanded to go to their standing places,
without the ringing of the belles. The wife of Captain Aertsenius, that she
might encourage the fearful minds of the cittisens, when the bullets flew
very thick, being carried in her coache upon the walls showing a manlike
courage in a woman's body, taught that courage was to stand in steed of a wall.

The enemies affairs standing in these terms, it was commonly said amongst
the people, that the confederated States, and Grave Maurice were one angry
with another for The states complaining of Grane Maurich.
the ill managing of these matters. The States al eaging that because he had
left so much time to Spinola, to fortify his tents, busying him self to beat
down the walls of cleaues; that noting being done, (after two and twenty
days spent to no purpose) he departed from the camp at meade. Contrariwise,
Grave Maurice blamed the States, and here after spoke ill af their gouuernment
among whom generally in the opinion of all men, they altogether made their
profit of him. That he left it to themselves to judge; whether His answer to
th^r complainth
they had don him more honor, then they had received benefit from him.

The states displeased with that speech, and fearing least he would reject the
government, cried out together, that he was their sovereign Captain, nor did
at all dout of his wisdom and fidelity, but that they had only proposed those
things, which seemed to them to be expedient: that he should go forward to
defend the common-welth with the sword, to dispose of the war after his own
pleasure: that they would make it appear unto him, how dear Breda was, unto
them: that he should spare for no impositions, were it for no other respect,
then that it was the patrimony of the house of Nassau. He appeased with this
promise and excuse, lest he should suffer his diligence to be craved of the
Neovve leu^es of horse.
common wealth, caused a thousand horse to be enrolled and armed at his own
expenses. Mereouer, the States them selves, another thousand to increase the
companies which were expected from france. further they consult about making a
damme, wherewith they might shut up the A costly Dammad: be the in my to either
^ocer Breda or drown our camps.
passage of the river of Merka, not far from Seuenberge. This, forsooth,
seeming, to be the only means left unto them to deliver Breda, if as often as
the raging of the sea swelled high, accustomed to ouer-flow into the adjoining
fields, and the winter waters (which flow into the river by the brooks) being
retained, they should ouer-flow all the grounds and that, that standing water
was fit, either to send victuals by shipes into the city, or for distroying
of our army: they set therefore upon this matter, of so great They Joined
aninumerable quantity of barks and other materiales.
importance, and of so incredible expenses; they send to Seuenbergue in great
number of boats barks, and cock boats (whereof they have great abundance) to
that place, where there is a certain mouth of the river, which they call
Lamsgate, and the side-bankes to the clifts, ar full of hollow places, All
thies boats, were needful to carry the piles. Then many ditchers and wourkmen
being set a work they ordain wood to be cut down, turffe to be cut round
about stones, trees, plankes to be carried, boats to be loaded, and lastly the
piles, to be set opposite to either side of the bank: when behold, at by an
unexpected frost, of three days, they are compelled to desist.

In the very night of our Lords Nativity (upon which day they first did
undertake that work) Staken brouck, The vigilance of the count d^^sinburque
prevented the presumtion of Stakenburke.
with great troops of his, went to Rosendale, and comes behind the backs of
Isenburges companies, to see what he could epsy. he understood by his spies,
that but a little ditche being filled, it was easy to pass, which to fill,
there needed but some six or seven spads. Glad of this news, takes with him
eighteen companies of horse, with no more then seven spades. Being come to
the place he perceiues that the thing could not be done with the help of a
hundred spades, yet sending some before, he commandes them to attempt the
passage. Our hors-man that had his appointed standing, which watched not far
off, discharging his piece, gives the sign, and cries out arm. Stakenbrouck
thinking to be bewrayed by the sign, commanded to sound all the trumpetes,
contented only to have disqueted our camps, ran away. All passages being
otherwise so stopped by Count Isenbergue, with so many ditches, with so many
boughs of trees, and piles fastened in the earth, that they scarcly seemed
passable to a single man.

The frost being past, the workmen (although great difficulty was proposed of
dispatching the damme by reason of the swiftnis of the river) return to their
ommitted work they sink three very long boats of burden to the bottom,
laden with turffe, and with stones, and casting sagotts upon the earth,
together with the damme begume on both the brinkes of the river, laying the
turffes in order, driving great stakes betwixt to bind the ground, they advance
half way into the river. Moreover in the town it self of Seue^bergue, by
letting in and letting out the floodes they make sluices on the other side of
the river, that after the floodes had filled the fields, they kept them under
water by the height of that poole, by which it was needful to pass over the
ferrie-boates. full of provision. having therefore gained the ebbing and flowing
of the sea, they again prepare those things which are needful to furnish the
ships.

Spinola pondered that work with much care, and therefore The Marquis
continually careful in preventing (...) the (...).
he studeed before all things, that by the information of spies, he might
understand in all times, by day and night, what soever was done in that place.
And as often as the Moon was either new, or at the full (which days, ar wont
to cause the greatest raging of the seas) he planted more forces nere to the
camps of heyden and of hage, on which side the irruption was most feared.
Next, he caused the sluices of all the rivers (by which the land-waters were
brought about heydam, into the river of Breda) to be opened, whilst the waves
of the sea, ouer-drowned all the fildes, and, being retired, commanded, them to
be shut: and then when they came to work about their pretended damme (lower
now by the waters departed) he suddenly drawing Our slouses hinder^d much the
dam.
up the sluices, by letting go the rest of the force of the water which he
retained, sent it upon their work, and hindered all the administration of their
endeavors. Furthermore, setting mariners, by night cut asunder the banks of
the river of Merkain sundry places, the length of five thousand foot: for
which there was a two-fould reason. First, that such waters as they retained by
the damme, to make the channel of the riuerswell, and let out toward heydam
he, cutting the banks of the river might divert into the bordering valleys of
the fields. Next, that by how much the more water the surging of the sea
should bring over the banks, into the large spaces of the meadows it should
be returned back with the greater violence, by its departure, upon the damme:
which for certain so fell out, so that by how much the nearer, both the sides
of the damme approached together, so much the higher the sand raised it Rare
preuensiones and prudent care of the Marquis.
self from the bottom. finally asking the aduises of all carpenters and other
Inginieres, who denied that so great a damme could be preserved from higher
waters, yet before all councelles Spinola judged it expedient to provide, that
no place should be left the enemy to pierce thorough.

Number X.
To that dike therefore, which he had brought from the dock of the bridge
toward hage (dug thorough lest it might be passed with cock-boates) he
commandes another thicker hedge or roe of trees to be cast before, and to be
bound a boue with trees laid a cross after the manner of the other. Then he
caused a little shelter or parapet alongste to be set upon the dike on that side
of the stoccados of five foot high, to cover the shooters. Furthermore, here
and there he His vigilance and care prevailed
places aforte, whereon he might plant the Canons. Lastly, he blocked up the
river. with three or four roes or Ranks of great and strong stokadoes of wood
wherbe he might hinder the passinge of the enemy as well on the outward as on
the in ward sides if they should come to atempt our works or to soccor the
town that be means of thies stokadose Roes of s^cckados were in distance set
to hinder the pasing of the enemy.
there boats might be hindered in not passing the river or in taking
posession of our bridge and fortificationes. Betwixt these two outmost
stoccadoes of trees, there lay at incre the enemies ships which were lately
taken, with their Number 10
AGGER A SPINOLA IACTVS PALVSTRI LOCO Lorica, vallis lig^eis munitionibus,
aggeribusque tormentarijs firmatus.
A. Agger tabulis constratus. B. Pons Naualis inter Heydam et Hagam. C. Brachia
ponti praestructa. D. Seps. duplex palustri loco fixa. E. Vallus quadruplex seu
palisade in flumine Merka. F. Munimenta idonea imponendis maioribus tormentis.
G. Loricula nostroru^ trans Merkam.


mastes placed backwards upon the fore-decks, to receive and rent the sails of
such ships as they should meet. Upon them abridge was built, and a parapett
placed fast by the bridge, and boordes and plankes necessary for the same.
some had their keeles boared thorough with hoales, but yet Other inuensiones
were prevented to let the enemy in not pasing the river.
so stopped, that taking the sparres out of the hoales, they might suddenly by
sonken in to the bottom of the river and which being stopped might altogether
hinder the sailing and passing of the enemy. To the outward stoccadoes of
threes, two mastes were, tied together by the two points crossinge over the
river. Before these there lay a bark full of pitch, rosin, and tow, and with
other things prepared for fire, which, had the enemy come, being dispersed
into the enemies navy, would out of dout have caused great slaughter.

These things accomplished, the enemies not slowly, mended up again in the
nerer places, the detriment of the trenche cut by us, by a double fortification
made on there side, at the mouth of the river, lest we should hinder by our
irruptions, the disposition of the work. Also those of Breda, either that they
might come into some part of the work, and having broken the force of their
rivers, the damme at Seuenbergue might be more easily perfited, or that they
might recompense the work attempted in September all in vain, by destroying
the trenches with which the rivers ar divided, to let forth water upon our
camps, they began to make those bulwarks thicker, and to raise them higher.

This being known, Spinola (seeing he could not divert the river of Merka,
from his wonted current) he makes a ditch of two thousand two hundred The
Marquis prevented remedi to hinder the executions of their sluices and waters.
feet long, before the walls of the city (where a higher ground retained
the waters) by, which he turns all standing water, by a brook brought about
the side of the city, into Merka, lest the waters should be let up higher
into his camps. Which ditch, before it was finished being augmented and
strengthened in the river by those of Breda, being cast down by the diluge of
those waters that were gathered together, ouerth rue some of the sluices, and
fortifications of the walls, to the great affrightme^t of the city. Also
nere unto Seuenbergue, the great force of the water returneing back, drowned
three ships in the botthome of the river (which being laden, they had sunk
into it) and ouer-boare all the piles laid upon them. Unto which thing that of
the divine protection did succeed, because as long as that ditche was wrought
by so many handeslabouring together, although they shot continually against our
men forth of the city, yet the shoulder of one only soldiar was shot with a
little bullet.

Those of Seuenbergue would not yet desist from their design, which they had
in vain attempted the third or fourth time although they understood it was
most hard to be effected. They who saw the miserablenes of their estate, judged
that they went about with a vain dissimulation, to relieve the hope of the
besieged. They notwithstanding, bargain to repair the undertaken damme from
both sides of the banks of the river. To strenghten it, they faste^ straight
trees by a line in the river, filling it up with turffes given from hand to
hand. They fill up the spaces betwixt the trees, with great stones, turffes, and
boughs of trees. Least their labor should be intermitted, the turffes dug
out of low places (whence the swelling of the sea, draw back the water) they
lay up in piles, like to stacks; that such as by the swelling of the waters
appeared above, they might bring to with their cock boats. Lastly, so they
strive against both sea and river as if they would overcome even nature it
self. Justinius Nassau, began again to repair the bulwarks at Breda, and
gave order to amend the floud-gates, and fortresses that were fallen:
furthermore, to raise up the trenches and the walls before our cannons, lest
the houses should by endomaged by our shooting.

Spinola although he believed now in some sort the affirmation of the
Architects or engineres that his ka^pes could not be removed, nether by the
ouerflowinges of the chanielles by the waves of the sea, nor by the refluxes of
the ditches of the town, by which by the cuting of a new ditch, he diuerted
the water of the fenues into Merka, from the fields; yet because he knew the
Hollanders to be skillful in sea The Marquis prevented the pl^^ts of the enemy.
matters, both by speculatio^ and by practice, and saw the^ not desist from
their endeavors, sent continually spies to Seuenbergue, not content with the
report of what they found unless the^ selves had also seen, that to be true
which they affirmed. And when word was brought that the damme, for the most
part perfected did go forward, and many ships to lie at ancre, prepared to
carry victuals, turned that way, whether the win de of Breda carried them;
once again by Gods providence, the wind, which had blown prosperously until
that day, turned contrary, and so great a tempest arose on the sudden, that
the posts driven in to the river with The enuentions of the enemy prevailed
nothing against the tempest
sledges or ra^mers, the turffes, the fagots, and the stones, were ouer-borne
by the deluge, and the little boats wherewith they brought the turffes and other
materials, beaten one against another, and cast on the shore, and all
navigations utterly hindered But afterward by those te^pests they gained this,
by the change of the weather, and continuation of the winds, that the work of
the ondertaken da^me, they supposed necessarily to be deferred until the next
march.

These things understood, the Senate, lest either The preuidence of the senate of
Breda.
by the continuance of the siege, they should want victuals, or for want of
money should be unable to pay the soldiars wages, resolved by two ways to
provide a remedy. First to lenghten out their provision by measuring out and
distributing of it sparingly: for after that they They visited the houses and
barnes.
had once in the month of September, taken acount from house to house of the
corn, they again in October, calculate all the grain in the whole city;
and again in the same October, in two days space, all that was noted was
again measured, setting watchmen from street to street, writing down the
number of people in each family. And when the cittisens were found to have
twelve thousand measures of wheat, in the publicque storehouse, five
thousand; ad five hundred head of cattle, it was decreed, that there should be
measured, for so many weeks, to the soldiar, out of the common storehouse, a
hundred and fifty measures; to the cittisens, out of their own heap,
a-thousand measures; eighteen head of cattle to be slain, whereof the pound
should be sold for three penns.

Nether yet contented with that distribution, visiting again the garners of
the cittisens, they calculate once more all the corn, and forbade, none to be
sold, or carried away, without publicque authority, upon the penalty of All
the corn was brought into a store house.
forty crowns. By which penalty also they ordained, that no cittisen should
from thence-forth, brue beer in his house, lest bruing of the stronger beer
secretly, they should consume the more corn. Lastly, more was done in
December, when they commanded to be brought forth in public out of private
houses, what corn soever they kept secretly else where. And least any should
deceive them, in the mo^th of January, calling every one in to the court, they
urged them to take their oathe, that they should declare as they tought, how
many measures of wheat, meal, barley, oats, either of their own, or of
others, they had in secret: upon condition and obligation, that he who being
sworn, would not confess the number, in the mean while, should every day,
pay twenty shillinges: but who so should wittingly for-sweare him self,
should be both punished for L^vve ordained for the bakers m^^^rs.
his perjury, and should moreover be condemned in three score pound. with
these penalties were the bakers and the Number. 11.
millars also bound, to whom it was forbidden by a penal law to bake no bread
wayghing less then six pound and a quarter, or to sell to any one, more then
two pound, either of wheat, or of meal. These laws being made, the next day
after the calendes of January, the Magistrates and the Captains, going
thorough out all the houses and graneries, took the corn from every one,
making them to swear, that they kept no more corn from them secretly.

Then they began after this manner, to cure the discease of the want of money.
The Governor of the city, the Coronells, and Captains, and all the Officers,
swearing how They have coined new money.
much money every one had, affirmed, that what every one was able to lend,
should be coined a new.

Number XI.
Then were four sorts of money, of brass and silver made, of a four square
form: the three that were of silver were of two, four, and six shilinges,
those of brass, of a penny, halfpeny, and a farthing. Then was it published by
a Cryar, that that sort of money, should pass current for so much, and be of
such a value, as they were declared by their prices.

In the mean while, unwelcome news were brought unto us of Brocheme, a town
of Cleeue. Lambertus Charlesius Lambertut Charles beseeged Gogh whose vvolles
wear broken.
of Newmehe, Governor of the confederated States, understanding of the small
number of the garrison, and of the fall of the walls, gathering men, forth of
the adjoining confederated places, he endeuoreth to break into Gogh, on what
side he may, and does attempt it. Of nine hundred of ours, who were left in
garrison, only five hundred were esteemed fit to bear arms, the rest being
worn out with sickness or with wearines. The fortresses being weakened with the
moisture, where the ditches of the walls were full of foordes gave passage to
the troops, nor were on that side, planted with stakes, or with piles.

Iacobus Tourlandus Governor of Grocheme, advertised of the issu of the
soldiars of Newmege, advises the neighboring Governors of the Kings towns,
that they should look to them selves, being him self as he thought secure.
Ever now and then, he made the round about the walls, and the day before they
besieged the town, he doubleth the number of the watch. He commanded
four-score The vvatch was d^ubled
to guard that place, where the walls were broken, where it seemed by reason of
the ruins, a more easy passage did lie open. Also, what he had understood of
the enemies issue whate he had a duised his neighbors, what him self had
done, of al these things he gives account by writing unto Spinola; which
letters of Ioa^nes Gonsales Go^uernor of VVesel, of the uncertain state of
things, togheter with the letter of Tourland, being received he checkes
Tourland, that either forgetful, or careless of him self he undertook the care
of others when he could not, by reason of so great distance of place, send
succor from the camp in due time.

The enemy going forth in the dead of the night early in the morning, stood
under the fallen wall of the town. There were four thousand foot, and four
hundred horse. These, whilst they labored to get to the top by the ruins,
our fourscore watchmen, assricted on a sudden at the presence and number of
the enemy, forsaking their leader, with shameful fear betaking them to
slight gave way to the enemy to enter in, by that place which they had
undertook to defend.

They posessing the walls, with their weapons a while The enemy (...)
vn^vvares.
after, sease upon two gates, and upon the market. The most part of Tour-lands
own forsaking him, hardly able to withstand the assault, the enemy being now
come to the gates, gathering together some soldiars of those that fled,
endeauoreth to defend the Castle, and the other Gate of the city. He sendes
to VVesel, to Ioannes Gonsales, to crave Turland defended the castle and one
gate of that place.
help, promising both he and his, in the mean time to keep the place.
Gonsales writ back unto him, that he should still retain his former courage,
and auoweth that he should soon receive succor from him: only that he should
stand faithful. with much a do was that day sustained. By night, when ours
courageously opposed the forces of the enemy, at lenght there were beaten out
of the gates: only the Castle did remain. The next day after, perceiving the
succor of a thousand foot, who contrary to that which Tourland had advertised
to be done, entering by the posterne gate of the Castle by hastening, to break
the bridge, leaving three hundred on the other-side of the river; all which
were either slain by the enemy, or came alive in to their subjection.
Tourland, having mended with lathers and boordes, that bridge, which led out of
the castle into the town, and which him self had broken, about to make a
sallie forth into the city, being shot in the belly, was grievously wounded:
and so at last, in the sight of all the Captains, upon honorable conditions,
rendered it up.

Lambertus Charlesius, author of that expedition, got Tourland was sore hurt.
the victory, but enjoyed not the benefit thereof very long. For after certain
houses sacked, Churches robbed, Altars Gogh was lest.
subverted, Images burned, all things divine and human quite disordered,
lastly nether weighing nor moderating nothing, but to do injury, at last had
this victory, dying The imputie of Lamb^rt Charlis.
of the palsy, he received worthy punishment for his wickedness. It appeared,
even by the judgment of the enemy, that we lost no great matter by loosing
Grocheme nether And his reserved pain.
it was so much intercepted for desire of retayning it but thinking to divert
Spinola from Breda. For Breda being now rendered they aggreed with us (without
any condition asked on the other side) that that town should be reputed for
neutral and free. Those of Breda notwistanding, hearing That the town should
be reput^d for neutrall Those of Bredaflouteth at ours.
of that victory talking with our watch from the walls, with a witty
soldiar like wipe bid them be packing to Grocheme.

About that time, it was reported, that the troops, which Mansfield had
gathered, ran up and down in the borders The rumor and fame that paseth of
Mansfelt.
of henault and Artois (the bordering provinces next unto France.) The Infanta
Isabella, albeit she could not suspect, that any Prince would entangle her
flourishing affairs, The prudent preuentions of the Infanta.
with those forlorn affairs of Ma^sfield; yet because she was not ignorant,
that the wills of Kings, as they are violent, so to be mouable and uncertain,
she, according to the greatness of the peril, prepared for war howsoever, and
resolved to resist strongly, if it were offered: she therefore appointed
garrisons, about henault and Artois, for the defense of the confines. To those
of henault, she sent the Count of Emden for their comander, Artois she
commended to the Count of hoogstrat (who was chief governor thereof, to be
defended. She sent the Count of sforza, to hasten the Captains and the Duke of
Bauarias companies, against the coming of Mansfeld. She commanded the corn and
cattle to be driven into the remoter cities: she forbid horse to be
transported out of the low contries, into France, as the french had then forbid
corn to be carried into the low contries. Spinola likewise suspecting, that
Mansfeld seconded with the french, English, and German aids, would deflect
toward the lower Palatinat, commandes William Verdugius. Governor of those
places, to gather in garrison a hundred and eleven free companies of Germans,
(...) Marquis commanded the lovver (...) to by reforced
with two companies of horse, besides the company of Captain Gratfreus,
admitted into pay with five hundred horse. In the mean space, the soldiars in
the wallon provinces, armed them selves, with three thousand horse, and with
almost fifteen thousand foot; the companies gathered a new, toward the end
of summer, were also ready. S^cceris of the emperor and of the provinces.
The companies of the Count of Anholt, of three thousand foot, came, with a
winge of a thousand horse (Baron of Ainsi hastining them) the Marquis Spinella
armed on the borderes with the emperores socorres who resolved with a willing
mind and great desire to encounter Mansfeld, with four thousand two hundred
horse, and three thousand foot. All the Provinces companies, ar committed to
the command Don Carles clooma commanded this of the contrie
of Don Carolus Coloma, late Ambassador for the King. The Provinces horse,
were committed to Albertus Arenbergue, Prince of Barbancone Master de camp,
who was for that purpose lately called from the commandrie of the horse. These
were first wiled to stay at Namure, to the end to stop Mansfelds passage, if,
as of late, he should come to invade the borders: but understanding a while
after, that he went about to join him self, with Grave Maurices companies,
both of them, with the Provinces companies, planted them selfs not far from
Antwerp.

Spinola rejoicing to have so great an army, as the wallons The number of the
whole army.
scarce remember ever to have seen the like (for they were censured, besides
the garrisons of the bordering cities, to be thirty thousand foot, eight
thousand horse, yet ommitted no time without solicitude of the siege, but that
he endeavored by letters intercepted, to understand the counsels of Maurice,
and of the besieged. For this respect, he was not wearied, nether with
watchinges, nor with labor. He sets many in standing, and watching places,
promising the^ great rewards, if they could intercept any such letters. Three
were seen to enter into the city, our watch being either careless, or deceived
by their celeritie. Almost in that place, whence thiese were seen to slip by,
by those Letters of grave Maurish were found.
that sought. a few days after, a little purse was found, wherein two letters,
smeared round about with wax against the damage of the water, if they were to
be carried in by means of water. Both were Maurices; one written to Justinius
Naslauius, the other to teState of Breda, written with characters,
abbreuiations, al most inexplicable. In these, when many had traveled to
interpret them, only the good fortune of Michaele Ro^tartius, Secretarij to the
King Michel rotard explicated ^her meaning.
and to the Marquis prevailed. He, by continual study both day and night,
picked out their meaning. This was the substance of one of them, written to,
Justinius, with a shorter discourse.

That he had understood to his great content, so great quantity of corn, to
have been of late found amongst the cittisens: that they must especially be
careful, that by a sparing distribution, it might be likewise lenghtned,
whereby he might have the more time to bring supplies for which cause, he
labored with all possible endeavor, in France, England, and in the
confederated provinces. That for the same respect, Mansfeld was come, that
adjoining his companies, he might recall Spinola from the siege. That they were
now coming, and had been there, had not the contrary winds hindered them. That
there were two thousand horse (besides some companies gathered in the
Seigniorie of Liege, and else where) fourteen thousand English foot. at
Dover; ready to take ship. The rest of the foot in Germany, and the
confederated provinces, chosen by him, to the number of eleven thousand,
already shipped, with certain other companies, expected the weather. That they
had already once, set sail, but by a contrary wind were driven back. That as
touching the confederated States, that they would spare no cost nor labor, to
advance Mansfelds endeauours, and to deliver Breda, having by a new decree
ordained to gather four thousand horse, (above the number of the accustomed
army) in England and France; and there, more then six thousand foot. That as
it was firmly hoped, the spring approaching, that there should be armed,
forty thousand soote, and six thousand horse, to deliver Breda by one means
or other. That as to the great good of the army and of the city, he wished,
that the victuals (which Justinius him self had written) might last from the
present tenth day of lanuarie, for a hundred and eight days next ensuing* even
until the Calends of May. And albeit he hoped verily, that his whole army
should be ready much sooner, yet he prayed them, that the victuals should be
prolonged by sparing them, as much as might be, to the end that more time might
be gained, both for his own and another army, which was as yet abiding in the
borders of France. Now, that he desired to understand, what he tought of
distributing a certain portion of bread, to the soldiars, to the cittisens, to
their wives and children: that it seemed to him a thing worthy of
consideration, that commonly then more was wont to be eaten, there when bread
was given out by measure: otherwise not to buy more then was usual and
necessary, especially when it was sold at a high price. Besides that that
thing was wont to give occasion to tumults, how great caution soever was used
for the conservation of Justice. wherefore that he left all that to the judgment
of the senate it self, and council of war, what soever they should determine
to be for the good and profit of sparing of victuals. what the soldiars horses
were to do (corn and fodder being spent) that he dealt with the States
therabouts. Tat they promised, to pay the wages which the horsemen were to
receive for these that were alive, more then for those that were slain, so
that an indifferent valuatio^ were made thereof. wherefore that they should,
refufe nothing to endure extreme hu^gar, it being published abroad, that they
should be slain. That they should keep their milche-cowes (because milk was
very nourishing) for relief in their, last extremity, as long as any forredge
lasted. And although it was not to be douted, that he had of late with special
diligence, visited all the granaries and storehouses of the city yet that he
prayed him, continually to look about by all means, to augment the common
store house, if parhaps any thing were hid by any one by deceit. Furthermore,
that it was related to him by the Senate, of the careful desire of the people
of Breda, for the mittigating of all the distresses of the siege, with their
own purse and corn; but that there were also complaints brought by them,
against the insolency of those that were to defend them, who although they
could not justly complain, nether of lodging, nor of fire, nor of their pay,
nor of any excessive price of meats, yet by liberty and force, both by day
and night, were careless either to break down the houses, or dig up gardens, or
to pluck up their hedges, of their orchardes, or to spoil their stables, their
shops and standing places, and that only for lack of discipline, when some
lately put in prison for these faults, yet escaped without punishment. Which
example doutles might cool the fervor and promptitude of the cittisens in
watching, who now began to plead for them selves, that their own houses were
to be kept against their domestical enemy, before the walls them selves:
wherefore he desired, that if the same were hereafter found, they should be more
seuerly looked unto who so should offend, to the intent that the fear of
punishment might deter others: for that it was the part of soldiars, to forbid
injuries to the cittisens. And that it was his pleasure, that these his letters
should be delivered to the Captains, and assistants of the council of war,
whereby they may understand, that necessarily such in commodities of the
cittisens, were to be provided for, who were sufficiently oppressed in other
things. That of the new trench of the enemy, placed toward Seuenbergue there
was agreat palizado made of posts, Furthermore, the States cease not to damme
up the river of Breda near Seuenbergue, and that it should be shortly
finished: Number. 12. Specimen posterioris circumuallationis circulo passuum LII.
millium.
although many douted; that channel being stopped up, what would after come to
pass. By some it was thought the fields would largely ouer-flow: of others,
that it was douted. That the thing would judge it self, after the event. That
he knew for certain, that bosom to be so ample, that it could not be filled
but with infinite waters, although the river were retained: nether was there
need of any great help to break the dike, now so fortified by the enemy:
that that work would bring annoyance to the enemy, when he should come to
succor them. wherefore, that it should not be from the purpose, if against that
time, ships were sent by them unto him, for to help him. This was the
substance of the letters. In the end, at the foot of the letter, was added.
That Mansfelds companies, were once again set to sea, by a contrary wind,
were again brought back into the harbor. That Lambert Charlesius, Governor of
Newmege, had taken Grocheme by force.

Number XII.
These letters being received, and Maurices designs made known unto us,
calling and requiring so great forces of foreign soldiars, Spinola
understanding that all that war was intended against him, and that he was yet to
retain in the field full three months space, when Maurice had undertaken with
so great obstinacy, to deliver Breda, as though he esteemed the whole good of
the common welthe, to be placed in the loss of that one city) breaking down
first those forts, which lately being built at mede, Maurice had forsaken, he
resolved to encompasse his army with incredibile labor, with a trenche of
wonderful greatness, in the most wicked time of winter, least so great an army
of the enemy, should break in behind him at unawares, as they had appointed
at the beginning of the spring. That trenche when it was finished, in the
whole compass, contained fifty two thousand paces, so much greater was this
then that former made on the sudden containing no more then thirty thousand
six hundred paces. Posteritij will wonder, nether, would Pompey him self, or
Caesar believe it, if they were alive, of whom, the one, cut a trench, at the
most of fifteen thousand paces; the other, one of eighteen thousand to go to
Dyracchius, And lest any man should think that the count should be mistaken,
it is thought good, that the number of the paces thorough every camp being
found out by his own care and fidelity, should be committed to writing. The
quarter of Spinola in the village of Genik, with that which Salazarius general
of the horse, defended at his back, were enclosed with a trenche of two and
twenty thousand six hundred thirtee three paces. That of Balancon, with eight
thousand six hundred. That of Isenburgue, with a leven thousand five hundred
fifty four. That of Ballion, with nine thousand, eight hundred thirtiene.

Now Spinola had begun to compass within, with an Another trince was
commanded to be made.
other trenche, but of a lesser space, against the irruptions of the besieged.
That because the city was first rendered, was neuerfully finished, yet
contained with his imperfect circle, sixteen thousand paces. But does of these
were ten foot high, the walls arising, not upright, but step by step. Below,
fifteen foot thick, with abanket and parapet with in for the use of the
shooters, below ten foot thick, raised up five foot high, with a ditch
depressed without side seven foot Deep, in breadth fifteen from side to
side, the bottom lyeng open no more then eight foot. These two trenches had
so much more strenght then the former, which in height exceeded not five foot,
in thicknes seven foot, with a ditch nothing broader. Unto both of these
greater trenches, were built new redutes, and batteries, to plant canons upon;
furthermore were at every entry a haulf moon. Diverse Other fortificasiones of
the quarteres
redutes were also adjoined, by reason of the peril and dangerous cituation of
the place. They were so fortified with new receptacles, and with many other
works, that none but he who saw them, could hardly conceive the frame of so
great works; so that I. May with out injury, truly term them, a very
Labyrinth of fortifications. The number of all the works in the camps
(besides those fortifications, which were built in diverse villages, either to
defend Incredibile greatness of the fortificationes.
the conuoyes, or to defend the irruptions) were a hundred seauentie eight:
refuges, fourscore and sixtine: redutes, thirty seven: fortes forty five
with batteries reforsed: so far did this siege surpass the renowned endeauours
of Caesar, against Alesia and Dyrachium, where there were no more but four and
twenty fortes without any more fortificationes but atrence.

Whilst these things began to be set in order, Mansfeld Presumtion of
Mansfeld.
having gathered together certain helps beyond the sea, and else where
supposing him self in despite, now to be feared, fayning to go to the
Palatinat, humbly beseeches the Archdutches Isabella by letters, that she
would please to grant him a safe passage thorough her contrie, and to asist him
with a secret conuoy. he had conceited in The letter he vvrote to his aluza.
his head, that without any suspicion, he should be suffered to pass thorough
the Kings provinces (which way he was of necessity to go) to gratify his
Master the King of England. That he would not attempt the same without
aduertiseng her altesa which she, without discurtesie, could not seem to deny:
but if she should, then that he would make his way by force, which the equity
of his cause required. Isabella, having often tried the honesty of that so
well known man, thought it best to signifi by silence, how little credit he had
with her, and how little she feared his sudden gathered and inexpert army,
fitter for the plough, then for the war, nor composed scarcely of any other,
then of soldiars compelled by force, she being fortified with so many and so
expert soldiars.

In the mean space, those of Breda, whilst they see them selucs entrenched
with so great works, both expect with long hope, for Mansfieldes help, and
he (tossed too and fro with the sea) to tarry longer then they expected, began
to groan and to wax weary. For now cheese, and stock fish Extreme
necessititie and victuals vvounder full dear.
failed, now they began most cruelly to enhance the price of meats. A pound of
butter, was at half a crown: a pot of oil at six shillinges: an egg at
three pence halfpeny: a Great diseases.
measure of pease, three pound. a pound of Bacon, eighteen pence. which dearth
of victuals, the soilderes impatient of want, drove them to the dismal eating
of dead bodies Asistance of the cittisens.
others for the most part by the use of unaccustomed meats, became (as the
Physicians call it) full of scurffe. for being wearied with all sorts of
evils, afflicted with a grievous plague, were nourished with old and with
stinking wheat, long before provided against such an accident. The cittisens,
as the labors of the soldiars, and assudietie of their watchinges did diminish,
took upon the^ to keep the walls of the city, leaving the outward
forrifications to the soldiars: from which work none, albeit old and
exempted, would admit dispensation. Justinius Nassau, least the extreme dearth
and want of victuals, should cause some vproare amongst the soldiars, to the
end he might make them the more faithful to him, he chose the more needy The
governor disembled with his souldiars.
artificers to be in the places of the dead soldiars, that they might have
wages, when now they had no gettinges, and might succeed unto their labors.
Furthermore, acquitting them of every second watch, comma^ding them to watch
but every third night, became more gentle and more mild ^lackning the
severity of the former discipline.

Then the Captains exhorted them, the preachers of the wourd out of their
pulpits, besought them for Gods sake, that they would not grow faint hearted,
nor by the base title of rendering, to submit them selfs to the filthy
servitude of the Spaniard, that they should nothing dout of the assurance of
Mansfelds coming: because he seemed not to be The Captains procured to animate
the soldiars
present at the day appointed, that therefore they were deceived: that he was
nerer at hand, then they thought, but that the messages could not be brought,
be reason that all passages were stopped. That Spinola was not for hopes sake,
daily Their hops wear in vain.
exercised in making of so many fortifications: that he him self being witness,
he should not use their own affirmation: that the German, French, English, and
Holland helps, were at hand, for fear of whom, Spinola was busied day and
night; that it was an argument of unworthy tenderness, not to suffer penury,
helps being so near at hand, and but so little awhile before they would come:
that all difficulties were now overcome, and only liberty was expected: that
the impatience of a few days, ought not to loose the praise of so great
constancy and poverty endured. Which things being said, the Captains,
least they should be convinced of lying by the besieged, or that the miserable
condition of the city being seen and understood, should be brought unto us
by the report of the conuoyes, decreed that no Trumpeters or drummers sent by
us, should from thence fourt be admitted within the walls, but should expect
their answer without: and here by the council of manlianus, they should be
entertained honorably and liberally, to boast of the abundance of their
victuals.

The Magistrates also, looking into every thing, forbid the confraternities of
the cittiesen of all assemblies after the example of Augustus, least they
should enter into factions, under the title of a college, in the knot of some
wicked faction. The soldiars also were watched of the Captains, as often as
many walked about, and by their presence, the coniurations of those that
walked, were prevented. With these and the like remedies, was the city, in
peril, preserved, and the languishing minds of the cittisens, and of the
soldiards, sustained when they held up their necessities by only hope.

Now at lenght, Mansfeld with his companies of foot, approached by sea unto
Gittrenbergue, when heaven was The mischance of Manifeld in his navigations.
once again seen to fight against him. For the winds did so beat the
arrived navy, one against the other that many of the ships being broken, did
serve for nothing: then, as if all the cold of the winter had been reserved for
that time all the rivers were shut up with a sudaine frost, that provision
could no longer be carried to them. It is the custom of those of Gittenbergue,
to keep at home little provision, upon the confidence of continual navigations,
and of the neighboring places. Hence by the arrival af so great a company of
soldiars, there was small provision of meat for all them, the frost forbiding
to bring in new.

Furthermore, what with plague, with agues, with the sea, and with vomiting, by
reason of their long shutting up in the ships with the narrownes of the room,
and many filled Their new and raw souldiars endured gteate miseries.
with the filthy savor (being almost all raw soldiars, and unaccustomed to
tempests and stinckes, were cast into the waves, either dead, or half alive.
There was counted by some, above the number of four thousand. Some cast into
the sea for dead by swiming got to the shore, and ar yet living in the town.
Many dead bodies floting by the shore side unburied, and more every where cast
up by the sea upon the land, breathed forth a grievous plague upon the
neighboring towns of Holland. A very sorrowful spectacle to the English
soldiars, who by the outward soil, whether they were sent for succor, were
so, roughly entertained. But that which befell much more miserably, when
Mansfeld durst not set a shore those whom against their wills he constrained to
take their oathe, by the same remedy chiefly they dyed, by which they were
kept, least that they should runn away; to wit, enkindled by that prohibition.
Notwithstanding, many betaking them to us by flight, unarmed, ragged, presented
us a pattern of the rest, affirming them selves, to be in better fashion then
the rest, when almost all of them, were inuoluntarie, and inexpert in war, that
they were by and by taught how to handle their weapons, when they were to be
led in to the field. It was said to have been seen that some found amongst
them, who filled in all the poudre at once into their pieces mouths even to the
top. which had been measured to them for sundry shots, that there was scarce
place to put in the bullet: so skillful were they in their pieces. It appeared
by many letters, that those companies were gathered compulsitorilie, of the
most basest sort of the rascallitie; and that in a short time, what by
sicknesses, what by running away, they were so diminished, so that of fourteen
thousand, scarcely four did remain.

Whilst Mansfelds ships were with-houlde^ by the frost, that very season of
the year, admonished us of diverse considerations. The fort of Nordame nere to
Seuenbergue, inaccessible Several interprises were propounded.
in summer by reason of the waves, now to begone unto on foot by reason of the
cold: Prinsland also, Rosendale, and Seuenbergue it self, were thought might
easily be taken by reason of that weather. Dispatching therefore spies on every
side granadose, and balls of wild fire were also prepared, to cast in to the
enemies ships. But in vain, when the frosen crust of the rivers (which
otherwise seemed thick an firm) were so weak, for the snow in texmixed that
scarcely would they carry the weight of two or three soldiars at once. The
ways also the snow never lying in one equal height, but driven hither and
thiter by the wind into the ditches (so that doutfull places could not be
discerned from the solid) were very dangerous, to lead the troops that were to
march. The spies stood in snow sometimes up to the breast, sometimes up to the
mouth, and sometimes fallen or covered in the snow were feign to be haled out.
Nether their voice, nor their hollowing one to another; would any thing help.
Three soldiars of fuggeran practiced in all bold attempts, getting in to the
tents of Rosendale, after Three reso'ut soilderes of fugeresri gim^^t.
drinking and talking together, they had discried the enemies ships, betrayed
in their return, scarcely escaped by flight, one being wounded and taken. But
else where the fuggerans attempts fell out more happily, and a very few of
them, frequently brought back with them many captives. but the fortune and
deceit of war, is very variable.

There were some, who besought Spinola, that with the companies of Carolus
Coloma, together with some of his companies adjoined, he would suffet Rosendale
(little fortified to be assaulted. That they knew by the bewraying of the
inhabitances, that they were so affrighted with the fear of ours, that
gathering up their goods, would be more ready to rune away, then to stand to
fight: that that might be done without either damage or any danger, if in the
mean time our horse might be planted in two parts, before Bergenupsome and
prinsland. Spinola, to whom those things best pleased, which were done rather
with prudent council according to reason, then prosperous The Marquis is wont
to give credit to nothing without good fundament.
things done at adventure, treating all things with him self with more
serious examination, supposing that thing, could not very much, help to the
acquiring of that notable victory, chose rather to keep his soldiars safe,
for the occasion of a necessary combat, then either to fear the whole army
with the opinion of the enemies audaciousnes, or to encourage the enemies
minds by good success, if the skirmish of a few of his soldiars, should
perchance have fell out un fortunatly: for in war it happened, often times by
things of little moment, great alterations of things to be made: nether was it
the part of a prudent Captain, to poursue little victories, with great perils.

In the fourth of the Nones of March, the aniuersarie day of Breda, in times
past taken by the vninted Peers, by the fraud of a boat was changed. This day
those of Breda, Solemnity in Breda in memory of the day it was taken by the
hollandes by fraud.
being wont yearly to solemnise, now kept so much the more ren owmedly, by how
much perhaps hereafter they douted to celebrate the same the more seldom, more
truly after the manner of a solemn burial, then a birth day. for discharging
thrice toward the evening, all their greater and lesser Canons, they
consecrated the last night to the memory thereof.

Now the time was come, in which the intermitted affair of the da^me to be
made in the river, was renewed. That interualle of time, wherein the mariners
and the workmen desisted from their labors, had roused up the studies of sundry
persons. A certain person, undertakes upon the agreement of a great sum,
that he would finish the work, almost despaired. He, in the presence of those
whom the States had set over the care of this damme, choosing a place not far
from the former, where the river was fuller of hollow places, and more narrow,
he drowned stones tied unto little netts (lest they should swim away:) upon
the stones, he sprinckles a certain kind of binding sand (brought as it was
reported, out of England or France) to fill up the chinkes, and to fortify the
damme. The affair seemed to succed better then it did before, when by a sudden
alteration of the heavens, so great force afwater once again by the
ouer-flowing of the Moon of March (in which the sea then most of all does
swell) was stirred upon high, and so great a deluge of rain and vnthawed snow,
flowed together on every side, that the damme begun at Seuenbergue, and very
many forts of Rosen dale, and some part of the suburbs of the city of Breda,
were altogether ouer-turned. The ways also to our camps, and some of our
fortifications near to the city, were so drowned, that The waters did
ouerflovv the camps.
they could, for three days be gone unto not but by cockboates in which time
one camp being shut from another they were in great necessititie of victuals,
when they could No small damage don unto our quarters.
not go to one another with their wagons, nor was there means to have so great
a supply of boats: the river, the shore, and the fields being all alike.

Never could it otherwise have been more clearly known, by how great mercy of
God, the army was conserved Great favor of god.
the whole winter: for if the same extremity of winter time, and abundance of
snow (which fell in this short time of the winters departure) had happened in the
former months (as at other times it was wont to do) out of dout, we should
have been forced to forsake the siege, for no other cause then only for the
sharpnes of the weather: for in those few days, wherein it freesed so
severely, the sinnewes of many were shrunk up by the force of the cold, and
some amongst the watches, were found dead, Some had their hands and feet so
stiff, that they were feign to have them sawed of. Many carriars also, and
purweyors of corn (who the cruelty of the ways thorough rain snow, mire and
winds had cast back in their voyages made by night) were Delaying of the
provisions.
killed in the way by the frost. The conuoyes also were so hindered, that for the
space of three weeks, in which the snow and the frostes were dissolved with
continual raynes) scarce any victuals were brought besides that which the
wives of the German soldiars brought, daily almost setting their companies in
array) running abroad into the incorporated towns, brought into the camp upon
their shoulders. Of which women (who continually performed other duties toward
their husbands by fetching wood a far off, getting of forraige from all parts,
dressing their meat, washing their linen, carrying their houshould-stuffe
when the The almayne women wear of great service
drums were beaten) such respect seemed to be had of them in the camps, that
they were not held for any hinderance, but with honor were reputed to be men's
mules. The sraise they deserved


The waters being diminished, the enemies endeavors attempted again, with
great solicitude of mind, to finish the pretented damme. Spinola caused the
sluice of the river of Leure (which reached unto the river of Merka) to be
broken a sunder, and commanded certain rivers to be stopped, and diuerted,
which poured them selves abroad into our camps. He caused a trenche likewise,
which he had placed in the fennie grounds, from Merka to hage, to be raised
higher by three foot, lest the standing poole (though ouer-flowing might be
passed over with boats. to the end they might break back the force and
swiftnes of the river returning from Breda by certain letts set against it to
receive it, from either bank thereof did make within, here and there upon the
sides, hills, lyingout like, horned woorks, next before that place, where they
intended to build that damme before. Then they lay before that gaping or gulf
both which appeared in the medst betwixt the horned woorks of the river (by
which the force of the waters, now more straightened, were carried) long beams
after a triangle manner, fastened in the river with a little space betwixt, which
the river enclosed, but a little broaken. Then they began behind to make the
damme, secure, as they supposed, of the success. By their perpetual labors
The enemy begone new muented works.
both by day and night, they had now brought the matter to that pass, that
having brought trenches along on both sides. of the river, besides the little
straites of the mouth, it seemed All which was broken by the vvat^rs.
almost nothing remained to be stopped. But so great was the force of the
immense waters, both augmented and enforced, that now it disgorged like a most
raging torrent (which before always passed thorough the loose river with such
lenity) that scarcly could it be judged by the eye, on whether side it flowed.
Moreover, the bottom it self, And the t^mp^st aft^rvvards.
the sands boiling up of their own accord, thrust forth the beams rammed in,
so that the ra^med stoccadoes wholly slid away. And so great a tempest fell at
that time, that whatsoever boats, stones, turffes, fagots, and trees, were
laid in the water to strengthen the damme, was all ouerborne, and the navy in
which the Duke of Brunswick carried the french horse, was grievously torn in
pieces, even in Their ships wear torn in p^eces.
that passage, not a few quite over whelmed, many driven hither and thither,
which hardely could hold their course. Theyvvere now out of ^^p in going
forvv^^d with the dam.
So the enemy, seeing his so manifould preparations, to prove so ill, at last
judged it best to give quite over, a thing attempted so often in vain.

In those days, with notable craft, letters were sent from Justinius to
Maurice, and likewise from Maurice and Mansfeld, to Justinius, in which many
things, very necessary to be known, were discovered to Spinola. A certain
person, out of the care he had of the common good having gotten a country
fellow, skillful of the places and of the passages, and ready to undertake any
thing, agrees with him that laden with Tobacco, Butter and Cheese, like to a
run away (as though he had craftily cosoned our watch) should get to the
walls of Breda, and should present his service to Letteres of Mauri^h and
Iustin^.
Justinius, to carry letters to Maurice, if so he pleased. The man being of a
fickle mind and greedy of gain, (posest at home of nothing but of poverty,
sells his faith. Being thus instructed, as it was agreed, got to the walls of
the city: the merchandise, brought to those that were so hungry, made the
stranger to be very welcome. Justinius greedy of news, enquires many things,
of the camp, of the passage ^ cogging ^oore.
he had found out, and of the common opinion. He, as one of a perfidious mind,
like to Sinonius, and concealing his own, a cogger and dissembler of every
thing, telling somethinges truly, and lying in others, somewhat near to truth,
gained the opinion of an honestman: for those things which like us, we easily
believe. Being asked, whether he hoped, by that way which he escaped, to find
outsome passage to carry back letters, answering at the first fearfully, at
last he set their affections on fire with fair words, to undertake the
affair, which one thing he most earnestly desired, under the pretense of a
refusal. He therefore carries letters from Justinius to Maurice, with a promised
reward, if he brought back answer from him into the city. The dissembler
Faithful to the Marquis
promises all diligence: but when he ca^me into our camps he delivers Justinius
letters unto Spinola. VVherof the contents were as follow,

That he rejoiced much, to have received letters thrice from Maurice, by which
he understood, both that Mansfeld was safely arrived with German and English
succors, and so great warlike preparations to be made, for the releeuing of
Breda. That he should be careful, as he had promised that there should be
corn enough till the end of April or beginning of May, unless it should by
chance be burnt by fire, which the enemies often shot into the city. That he
would shortly find out new inventions for corn, by searching the granaries of
the cittisens. That the works of the enemies, ar lately extended from the
great trench, which lay before the water mill, to the camps of Balanconius,
and placed against the little tree of Guittenbergue. Those camps began to be
fortified with works by Spinola. The garrison of the ciitie was daily very
much diminished with the plague, bloody flux and with the scuruie. That the
sick could not be refreshed and cured. For want of medicines and wholesome
meats. That the rest who were in health, The garisen of Breda begone to
deminishe.
lost not their courage, but looked earnestly for an occasion to perform the
affair both well and valiantly. That the rape-oyle, was always first burnt,
before it was applied to dress meat with; but that there was but little left.

Spinola having read them, and sealing them sendes them by the same messenger,
promising the fellow a liberal reward, if he brought answer from Maurice, and
from Mansfeld unto him. Maurice supposing that he might securely credit the
messenger, by whom (with so great fidelity) he had received justinius letters,
gives both answer, and a reward for the fellows pains, and sendes him to
Mansfeld, to receive also letters from him.

The fraudulent and, cheating messenger, bringes both to The Marquis came be
the enemy is letters.
Spinola, and his reward being given him, getts him gone.

In those letters Maurice purges him self of his stay, and imposes the cause
of the prolonging of supplies, upon the contrary tempests of the year;
beseeching him that he would endeavor to prolong the victuals some weeks by
sparingnes, but unto the end of April: that he had need of so much time, to
gather and to join his powers together, that otherwise so extraordinary
charges of the united Lords, should be to no purpose, and their endeavors all
in vain. That these, indeed, were hard demandes, but that fortune must be now
helped by industry, especially seeing all the French horse gathered by
Mansfeld (two only companies desired, which wear daily expected) was now come
to Bullen, and to that end, the ships of the States ar gone to transport them
by a prosperous wind. That the French companies of footepart were brought by
Captain Candale, part were in the way, as the other companies were both of
horse and foot, gathered thorough German for the States. Lastly, the
French, English, and German supplies, were to come but a little after that
time, which he would have prolonged by him till after April.

Mansfeld promised that he would shortly be Justinius guest: that then he would
merrely drink his and his valiant companions health; That he was come, prepared
with a hundred companies of foot, and forty of horse, nor douted nothing of
supplies.

Spinola confirmed once again by these letters of the penury The Marquis was
informed of the necessity of
of their provision, and advertised of the slow coming of their helps, the
eleventh of the Calends of April which was the feast of easter, thought good
to try Justinius mind, by demanding of him to render it up.

For this purpose he sendes the Trumpeter of Count Salazarius with his letters
privily. That he had treated nothing with him touching Breda until this day,
about the quantity of corn which he had in the city; but now knowing
certainly upon what day he should receive victuals enough, and for that cause
it was not meet, that he should any longer delay the delivering up of the
city; that he would make him offer of reasonnable conditions, if he would
treath with him of a composition. And truly if he should require a little time
to expect aid (which notwithstanding for the strenght of their works, and the
greatness of the army lying round about; he might easily understand, that he
could in no wise succor the city, that it should be granted unto him, so
that he would now presently treat there of: else that hereafter there would be
no cause, of affording him the like favor.

Justinius having called together the counsel of war, reads Answer of the
governor of Breda.
the letters received from Spinola, and become proud with the promised coming
of supplies, and with the increase of victuals augmented by the death of so
many men, thus made answer.

That he was amassed, having read Spinolaes letters, and al his so strange
demandes: but so much the more, because he thought that he and so many valiant
companions of his, could be made afraidwith words; to whom he affirmed, that
nothing could happen to be feared, except it were a base report. That in time
it would appear, that (by flattering him self) he was ill instructed of the
state of the city, which he hoped to render into his hands, of whom he had
received the same, to be kept and defended.

Spinola (least the mind of the wearied soldiar should wax faint, by the
insolent braging of the besieged, which assumed to them so great courage)
prudently suppressed that answer in dead silence. Which was enough to persuade
the shortness of the remainder of the labor unto the soldiar, it was commonly
gathered by suspicions, that a Trumpeter was sent to lustine out of the camp,
touching the rendering of the city, as many did conjecture willingly, albeit
many feigned reports, and added some fears of their own, to that which they
had heard from others, when they understood those hopes of Spinola to be
deceived, or deferred any longer. The composition therefore was left for that
time, and the coming of foreign helps, was expected.

In the mean space, when all the enemies companies, having called out
garrisons on every side, (and hiered citisens for wages, set in order in their
place) were come to Guittenbergue: and Sprang, and in the same place other
soldiars looked for, who wintred at Rosendale, Spinola suspecting the delay of
that time supposing that they did counterfetta coming, and that indeed he was
but deluded, does fortify Bolduke, Reinbergue, VVesell with garrisons which he
had brought (which places he thought might partly be assaulted, to withdraw
him from Breda.) He places in Bolduke five hundred which Baron Grobendonc
Governor Reforce the town of Balaukt.
of that city had added for a supply to the company lately admitted, besides
the old garrisons. He calls seven companies of soote, from the Palatinat,
which might help the town of Reinbergue, nere adjoining, but it was
afterward known by the letters of Maurice, which Justinius Nassau had
received, that all their companies sent to relieve and deliver Breda were not
far of from our camps.

These places therefore being provided for as afor-said, Grave Mauric caused to
fire our munition house.
Maurice having sent his spies sets on fire the church of Genick, (wherein were
laid six thousand sackes of ground corn) with the measurer of oats dwelling
nere, the fire by the greatness of the wind, took hold faster then it could
be quenched. Two thousand sackes, (preserved by other sacks laid upon them)
were found the day following without any detriment. Spinola nothing grieved for
that mischance; above that which was meet and convenient The constance of the
Marquis.
(sending purueyors about to buy corn) speedily repaired the loss.

There were presented to Spinola by Vincentius Lasanius The care and asistance
of the prouidor Lasanius.
chief keeper of the Kings corn (behoulding the fire) three thousand sackes
of wheat, which he kept shut up in the camp against all mischances. The
Hollanders so insolently wrote abroad of these losses, that what they reported
to be consumed by the fire of one church can scarcly be contained with in the
walls of six great churches. They feign the numbers which perished in that
fire, to be two and twenty thousand sackes of wheat, and twenty thousand
sacks of meal, six thousand of barley, four thousand of pease and beans, four
hundred shoulders of bacon, and two hundred vessels of oil, two hundred
barrels of butter, three hundred bundells of stockfish, two hundred barrel of
heringes, two hundred barrells of salted biefe, two hundred sacks of salt,
three and twenty thousand cheese, a great quantity of flower, syrope, and
honny. With these fables, related at the heighest, the hollanders went about
to maintain their own hope, and to spread abroad our poverty.

Spinola admonished by letters of the danger of the store The Marquis gave
straight order to look well to the ponder.
house, which the enemies went about to set afire, as lately they had done the
Church dubling the watch, and cutting about another ditch, he caused it to be
kept more cautiously having transported almost half the quantie of the poudre,
into another new storehouse, lest if any danger happened, all should be burnt at
once, and the army stand in want. Tributs imposed by the Hollanders.


To prosecute that which rested of the war when the united, States understood,
that the treasure house was especially to be provided for, whereof they sought
to find some pretext, judging this to be enough to exact money; besides the
tribute that long ago was set upon the head of every one, they exacted of all
the cities and villages, the hundred part of all the prices and merchandise.

Furthermore the confederates and their companions, asked to be numbered by
representation, six hundred thousand crowns, and six hundred for letters of
exchance, by the treasures which kept the counting houhouses, Asistance of he
confederats.
to be sent to be counted to the States. That quantity of money being gathered,
there was enough for the enemy against that time we on the contrary, began to
fall short of money in our treasure house; for when for the setting upon Genua
the very same time, in which the King of Spaines armies were drawn forth,
were before Breda, nor could be with-drawen from thence without disgrace, the
french army passed the montaines like as conquerors, the fidelity of many
negotiators, began to be incertaine among forreiners (whom the terror of
beseeching Genua did afright) and so that which the enemies long a go had
plotted, which were at that time oppressed with great penury of money. Diverse
means therefore were proposed for collecting money;

They commanded the money of the year ensuing, to be Inventions to collect
money.
borrowed of all the Kings commons. The common impositions upon the cities,
to be lent before hand. To bargain with the Captains of the soldiars, that
every one for every second month should pay their companies, their wages as
from the King. If that should be a heavy burden, atleast the Captains them
selves, and their Coronells (which did excel in their own riches) contented
for two months without pay, should susfer them to go forth with their
troops; which last thing many of the Captains seemed to promise, but was
thought fit to be omitted for the present, least the novelty should denote
pouertee. At last it pleased to lay in gage the Kings revenues, upon condition
of a rent, and by this means the soldiar was asisted.

About those days, the King of Spain to compose the new combustions of
Italy, created Gonsalus Cordua General Den Gonzalo de Cordu^ was sent for
Master de camp general of Itallie.
of his army. Gonsalus had now been from the first beginning of the
expedition, in the camp of Breda, and with him, and with Count Salazarius,
Spinola consulted all his counsels, to others reserved, to these two
uncovered. He although most expert in warlike affairs, and famous for the
victory against Mansfeld, lately defeated and put to flight, yet he here
showed him self to be of such behavior, such as vellerius never painted for
their modesty, in act, like to those that did nothing, attributing nothing,
to him self, and by the same attayning all things; ever esteeming him self
inferior to others, quiet in countenance and in life, and mind always
watchful.

News being brought at this time of the death of the King of England did not
a little hinder the Hollanders and The death of the King of England
Mansfelds enterprises. The English, running from their colors, daily in great
nombers fled unto us. Mansfeld catching Henry of Nassavv joined all his forces.
any of ours by his soldiars, sent them back without exacting any ransom:
affirming that he had no enimitie with the King of Spain. Which thing Henry
of Nassau noting, calling his companies from Rosen dale, and gathering together
his garrisons from all the confines (as intending briefly to make an end of that
business) lest by doing nothing, they should dream of a defection, ordained the
And the Marquis commanded his force to approach nearer to the occasion,
bizonnos or young soldiars to be every day trained up in certain warlike
exercices. Spinola, that he might have in due time, helps and companies in a
readiness, commits to the charge of hoogstraet, Henry of Bergues with his
horse, and with some of the Emperors people, athousand horse of the duke of
saxony and 3000. foot of the Regiment of Collato. He knows very well both
the Castle and the incorporated. Town, and causes it to be fortified. From
thence he buildes six greater fortes, hard by the river of Hoogststrate, with
certain spaces betwixt, them even to the camps of Breda. In these interualles
or spaces (which met almost together) he placed perpetual companies of
soldiars, to the end that in a short time, the whole army might meet the
enemy at Breda or at Hoogstrate, as necessity should require. He places the
Count of Anholt with the German helps, Carolus Coloma, and the Prince of
Barbancone with the provincial companies, and with some other extraordinary,
of 3000. foot, and 1500. horse in the neighboring villages of Antwerp, Maclin
and Lyre. By reason of the greatness of that army, and number of the horse, so
great necessity began to grow of fodder, that the horses were feign to eat
hors-dunge, or the dry leaves of the trees or of little shrubbes. Oaths enough
could not be brought, where with so many charrets, and beasts of burden,
besides the sadled horses of the soldiars, might be sustained.

The sudden arrival of the soldiars accustomed to more freer liberty, and
unaccustomed to our discipline, not content Disorder of strangers.
with that former freedom of military theft, of a piece of money every day
butrobed the houses, spoiled the villages, and began to dishoner our army as
if they were enemies; afterward more insolent to call for their pay that was
behind, as if otherwise they would refuse to serve us. Our companies, then
which none had ever behaved the^ selves more innocently until that day,
instructed rather to hate the enemies, then to hurt their own friends, began
also to play (as the wits of soldiars ar always prompt to vice) the same
pranckes which strangers, did in mischievous facts, and to accommodate them
selves to their liberty. Spinola admonishing the Captains, supposing it
meeter in such a time, rather to pacify, the^ to exaggerate the force of those
fellows, ordained some few of their heads to be cut off, but aduising
secretly the Captains that they should ask pardon of him, forgave them the
punishment, judging that that was not a time to take notice thereof. Whilst
ours remain dispersed in these places, Maurice closed up the last day of his
Grave morich ended his days.
life at Hage, happy in this respect, that he lamented not a live, the
rendering up of his Breda. These ar reported to be the last words he spoke in
this life after which he uttered not so much as one wourd. Is Breda rendered, or
freed? that every one might plainly understand, that he was killed with the
grief ofloosing that city, the glory of the recovering whereof in times
past, had got him honor and renown, and for the defense whereof, at his own
and the States incredible cost, he had stird up almost all Europe.

Henry Frederick of Nassau, brother to Maurice, a Prince very exquisite in
warlike art, and in all vrbanitie, was chosen by the consent of the States to
administer war in the Hinrie Federtque of Nasavv his brooter was elected in
his place.
place of him that was deceased. In that interuall of time, on which holli
days were made for Maurice, and in which a new Commander was appointed for the
army, many of our Provincial companies, weary of the war, departed home from
their standing places; also not a few of the ancient horsemen, disgusted with
the hardness of the war, for the te diousnes of expecting their wages, forsook
their colors. So the French daily in greater number, came unto us in great
troops from Mansfelds army, complaining Sedicion in the quarters of Mansfelt.
that they were cosoned by him with hope of assaulting the Palatinat, nor in
seven months space, had received so much as one penny. Some of these men's
voices were there plainly heard to say, that they would not go against Marquis
Spinolaes army if in case they should be led. A young Frenchman, by trade a
Pothegarie, apprehended in Mansfelds camp, being to have solicited some of his
fellow citisens to run away, tied unto swift horses, and torn in pieces,
gave up the ghost.

Our soldiars at Breda, speaking with the besieged out of the watch, made a
coueant, that no piece should be shot in the mean while, (so that of two
armies, one seemed now to be made) afterward flooted one another. That ours
gave The centryes of Breda spoke with ours.
unto them a little Tobacco or cheese. They unto ours, morcells of their own
bread.

After a few days, the new Commander of the war, Henry of Nassau Prince of
Orange being returned to the camp, The besieged took a great comfort at the
election of their new general.
the besieged rejoicing at the nere approaching of the succors, shot balls
more liberally in to our army. One in Spinolaes tent, (he being then absent)
getting in thorough The Marquis escaped two dangers.
the roof of the house, took away the Canopie of the bed, and broke in pieces
two tables in the chamber, that as in times past, the hors-litter of Augustus
(being admonished by his friend to go out of the tent) was by the meeting of
the enemy, thrust thorough and torn in pieces, as though he had been laid
therein. Scarce four days after, when Spinola to discover places, sitting upon
a white horse, rode nere unto the city, the balle of a great Canon, broke the
bridle under his horses mouth, leaving the raynes in his hand: that it is to be
believed, that either the chief Commanders of war, ar in a morce secure
protection of almighty God, or by how the less any one spares him self in
battle, seems to be so much more the safer.

Spinola having ouer-passed these dangers, calling The Marquis fortified with
the next adjoining troop.
together the troops of the adjoining companies, places them, with in and
without, in diverse parts of the trenche. He places Count Anholt, in the outmost
parts of the camp of Ballancon against the plain of Oosterhout, by which it
was thought Mansfeld would breack thorough. He opposed Beauuoix against the
late companies of Maurice, toward the villadge of Mede. He made John of Nassau
commander of the plain of Champen

The Baron of Ainse, he placed under the title of a Coronel, made chief
comander of the parttcular companies of the Germans, behind the camps of
Genike to defend the standing place of the horsemen; he distributed the rest in
other places. Te commanded the troops of horsemen, to come to defend the
quarters, having daily doubled their numbers, and to repair to their standing
places, for the defense of the camp, and he was often afterward at the night
watch, especially on that side, on whiych he douted The valor where with he
proceeded.
the enemy would break thorough, whiter he betook him self every night.
until the enemy retvred back.

Never at any time did the virtu of this Noble man more show it self. The in
nightly watches, or his sleep interrupted betwixt whiles, never made him the
less affable. Being awakened, he looked with such lively eyes, he listened
with so attentive a mind, that he seemed not to have ssept at all: and he as
soon recovered his sleep, as he was awaked, so securely slept he, all his
carees being so well husbanded. In his apparel, he was negligent of all
curiouse trimming, and careless of adorning him self, even in the dignity of
a general. Touching the cruelty of the season, and the weather; and whether
it rayned, or snowed, or freesed, or blew, or wheter it were evening or
midnight, he cared not. He often times sustained hungar, two days together.
His bed, was often in his coache, or in the poor cottage of some soldiar. He
made no account of his meat, of his rest, nor of his own body. The burden of
his weighty affairs, was perpetual, and his labor above al belief. His mind
was a conqueror of al difficulties, as his countenance almost the same, in
adversity and prosperity, in whose peaceable mirth, the hope of the soldiar
might rest, secure his counsels he nether approved in his own opinion, nor
communicated them, but where it was necessary. Not dejected upon a sudden,
but by such as were made strong, by long delay. He was of singular silence. His
believing of new aduices, together with his distrusting of them, and as well his
slow creduIitie, as his ready contempt of heavy rumors. To provide for, to
consult, write, hear, command, to go about the camps, was like unto a daily
pastime. Never did he pretend any excuse for his wearines; never forbid access
unto him. He was familiar with the soldiar, with clownes, with the scoutes or
spies, still conserning the honor, of a general; nor this but when need
required. He bestowed more honor, and gifts upon those that were displeased or
auerted, who might corrupt the state of the war by their power, then he did
upon his friends; having no fear of others malice.

Three were taken in the village of Hage, who endeavored (...) spi^s were taken.
to carry into the city, a huge bundell of letters, also a good quantity of
Tobacco, and flagons of oil (wherewith to cure the scuruie:) they, hid the
letters of He^rie Prince of Aurange, written to Iustine, in the woods, whilst
they were taken One being put to the question, who at other times had often
passed thorough our camps unto the city, The letter of Hinry de Nas^vv to
^ustino.
thorough the carelesnes of our watch: he thorough the pain of the torment,
told of the place and of the letters. Henry wrote thus unto Iustine.

Maurice his brother, to be dead. That in his place, he was created general of
the army by the States; That that accident, should nothing the more hinder the
supplies: that he would come with his army (which could not be made ready,
nor march forward sooner) after three days, in the village of Dungens, two
leages from the city, whence from the top of the Tower, they might see them:
that he would do and attempt all things for the raising of the siege. That he
only should itch out the victuals, by measuring and diminishing of them, and
confirm their patience, setting before their eyes, the desire and good will of
so great and so choice an army, and the excessive expenses of the States. That
he should also write unto him, on what side, or by what means, he thought
Spinolaes camps might more easily be broken thorough: for which purpose, he
should conioyne all his studies and his forces, to his coming to him with his
supplies.

The besieged, who received letters brought privily to them, of the same
tenor, with these news, conceived joy, mingled with sorrow. The news of the
supplies, caused joy; the dead of Maurice, that most prudent and vigilant
Prince caused sorrow. They looked far and nere abroad in the fields, from the
top of the Tower: the succors being perceived, In vain they reioysed.
they rune together: joy was made amongst them, and the minds of all were
raised up to hope. With a horn, they begin to blow-forth our flight from
the Tower; they called unto us from the walls, that we would gather up our
trinkets: forgetting them selves, and that their Breda was a prey for us: we,
not they, being the hunters of this wild beast.

After that the enemies army was planted in the village of Dungense, Henry of
Nassau, going about to draw his army Hinrie of Nasavve in vain tent^d the to
vvre of ^st^rhaut.
nerer to ours, came to assault the Tower of Oosterhaut (which one and twenty
Burgondions, kept for the use of discoueric) sending before no small troop of
foot and horse, casting abroad some balls of wild fire. The burgundiones,
refusing to yield them selves unto the enemy, Not with standing the
burgondianes being f^ovv in number they had the viciorte of the enemy.
chose first to try all fortune, then to make a base rendrie, upon no
conditions formerly made. The enemies breaking the gates with apattarr, casting
fire into the Tower and into the Church, (when they could do nothing more)
effecting nothing, did depart. Five of the Borgondians were slain, and seven
were consumed with fire. Of so great a number of the enemy, many were wounded,
and many slain, whom ours killed with the throwing of stones, when they (for
fear of burning) wisely threw their poudre down from the top of the Tower:
and so with a small company, a great army was withstood. The burgondiones,
with their burnt faces, anointed with cerusa and with ointment showing their
fair wounds, were honored by Spinola, with the representation of a pension,
to They received apremi^ for there valor and virtue.
each one and colors given to the Sardgent who was chief over them.

The besieged, when now they could nether receive letters, nor any messengers
could safely go out of the city, A swallow was taken be ours.
sent out a swollow, which might carry on high a little scroale tied to her
wings. Isenburges soldiars, espying the bird by the piece of paper, bound by
alitle thride and now falling down, they catch it and carry it to the Count
Ise^burgue, Number. 13.
A. Agger Gertrudibergensis. B. Agger Seuenberganus. C. Statio Caroli Roma. D.
Castra Pauli Baglioni. E. Castra nupera Mauritij in pago Medensi. F. Agmen
hostile. G. Stagna palustria. H. Flumen Merka. I. Sepes ligneae quatuor in ipso
flumine.


Number. 13.
A. Agger Gertrudibergensis. B. Agger Seuenberganus. C. Statio Caroli Roma. D.
Castra Pauli Baglioni. E. Castra nupera Maurity in pago Medensi. F. Agmen
hostile. G. Stagna palus tria. H. Flumen Merka. I. Sepes ligneae quatuor in
ipso flumine.


who after sent it to the Marquis Spinola. These notes were written in the
scroale -- 1 -- 69 -- 2 -- 27. Now was there great expectation stirred up in
all the world, of some new event of Breda; hereunto ar the eyes and ears bent,
of al Kings and Princes. The very Emperor him self of the Turks, by reason
of the uncertain event of this siege, seemed to turn his sword into this or
that part, or to make peace. So that now it seemed not so much to treat of
Breda, but of glory, of existimation, by reason of so many succors sent from
every side.

Number XIII.
In the Ides of May, after midnight, Henry of Nassau, to try his fortune,
although with some detriment received, Hinry of Nassavve attempted our
quarteres,
yet the chief of his army being safe, caused the utmost camp of the village
of Heyden (a place dificult to be paste throw be reason of the situation and
works and far un fit) to be assaulted: be reason there was no way but to
narowe dikes cominge from the bordering towns of Seuenbergue and
Guittenbergue. He cutting their river sliding betwixt, and a little trenche from
without, being cut betwixt two dry ditches, was fortified with atrenche and
with a fort the new general of an ordinary form. But desirous of obtaining
fame, and inflamed with the emulation of his brothers fortunatnes, had
conceived all hard things, to be easy. By this dike therefore, of Gittenbergue
he sendes before the most expert English shot, and two hundred pikemen The
assaulting of the Inglesh.
of the rer-ward, all armed, with arms of proufes Coronell vere Englishman
being their leader, whom other English did a company, the French, and Germans
following after, that so they might preserve the English; al amounted almost to
the number of six thousand. There artillery and The order vvher with they
marched.
bagadge came in the rergarde: the hors-men stood on the side. Henry Nassau
him self, standing in the midest of his army, expected what would be the
event.

Spinola discovering that design, sent speedily to admonish Paulus Ballionus
and Carolus Roma, whose troops Of which the Marquis was advertised.
lay in those quarters, that they should be by and by in arms. They suddenly
place the watches and the guardes in their standing places, dispose the
soldiars, advertise all the Captains and Lieutenants, and prepare all other
things needful to be used. Before the break of the day, the companies of the
enemy came, and swiftly beat down the soldiar that stood sentinel before the
camp, before he could advertise his fellows that were behind him: that error
had been remedied, if but one horsman had watched in the Dike, and perchance by
so little a solicitude, that whole army of the enemy, might have been cut in
pieces: at least it cannot be douted, but that the, slaughter had been greater
then it was. The English with excellent courage of mind and audacitie setting
upon the first little redout, by casting balls of wild fire, drive away the
Standerd-bearer, with a few Italians which were therein, and sleying some, got
on the walls. Then placing shot behind the redout, and being got down into
the ditches, of the same for the defense of those that went before planting
more force in the haulf moon did succeed with the like audacitee and
felicity, Arrived to the forte.
and endeavor to inter in with their colors at the fla^ck of the forte, and
with hands and feet to scale the walls. The ladders and the graples were
left by the fearful carters in the rergard of the march, who when they durst
not advance the wagons, they fled away for fear of the canons thus the
success of great attemprs, little things do often interrupt. even then we also
found the defect of our little, reduts and of our ditches, whereto if stoccadoes,
with a just distance, had been prefixed (as it was appointed, but was ommitted,
either by oblivion, or by the difficulty of bringing materiales) nether had the
enemy so easily entered, nor could have cast those balls of wildfire, nor
could have lain lurking in the ditches against the canons.

The Italians therefore, who defended the trench of the dike of Seuenberg,
(retired) admitting the enemy to approach The Inglish sought most Vali^^ly.
nerer, left that little fort empty unto them, when, being open on that side,
they in no wise could defend it.

The English fought with this resolution, that it seemed to them they should
get no other time then this for their enterprise; nor was any courage wanting
in them. Carolus Roma, sardgent mayor of the Regiment of Marquis of Campolatare
sent Captain Camillus Phoenices, whilst his were in need of help with a
company for the defense of the little redout: but he, could nether by his
coming cause those that fled to stand, nor could him self withstand the
enemies violence. so that the supplied succor, augmented the peril. But when
Carolus Roma saw him to retire, with others beat Valor of carlos Roma.
back from the redout, pulling away the shield from the arm of one that
returned (because him self came without one) first unsheathing his sword, and
with his shield renewing again the declining fight, setting upon the English
strongly resisting with a Cesarlike courage, more generously sent them back
from whence they came, and staid their violence. Then they threw themselves
down by heaps, who The enemy were defeated.
from the fort, those who had cast ours from thence, some began to come to
themselves again: many fell wounded, and slain outright: not a few sought to
escape and save them selves thorongh the marshes: he who endeavored to carry the
colors into the fort, pierced with a pike, ended his life: three, who had
invaded there strenght next adjoining the fort were slain before the door of
the fort: all the rest, who fought hand to hand, having their heads and necks
almost cut off, died of so fair wounds, which fair death they deserved for
fighting valiantly, worthy to have overcome, unless ours had fought more
bravely, as also for a better cause. They which stood further off, were maimed
with the continual strokes of the greater canons, for the most part rent and
slain in miserable wise, in their hands, feet, and heads; when scarce any
ball was shot in vain at them, so There great destruction.
heaped together, which slew not feowe by reason of the diverse turnings of the
ditch. The hindmost English and French, could hardly follow the foremost for the
narrownes of the ditch but a returning being made, they might; so had they
throngd them selves together. Which being noted, ours enforcing them, they by
little and little did retire back: so much the presence of Henry of Nassau was
of force, that The retiringe of the enemy.
they should not be troubled with terror or danger. The retrait therefore, was
nothing more trouble some, then the coming on, so well did all of them keep
their orders. Above all others in that battle, the most excellent courage of
Cornell Vere, standing foremost in the company, was admired. The constance and
valor of Coron^l Very.
He stood still with the self same undaunted constancy of mind, emongst the
balls that were thick discharged, placing new for those that retired, whole
for the hurt, fresh for the wearied, until the fight, with a slow encountre
on either side, was ended: although it appeared, that each one was so well
exercised in war, that what was meet to be done, they could no less fitly
prescribe to them selves then be taught by another.

That fight (being against the wind, carried all the noice of the Canons
another way) was nether heard by the city, nor by any of our other camps.
Two messengers that were sent to Spinola, being either ignorant or troubled,
passing by that next Station, wherein he lodged, did not appear til al most all
the fight was finished and so the first skirmishe The Marquis as yet knevv no
thing of his fight.
was all past, before it was related to Spinola; first behoulding in the
morning, the sight of the miserable slaughter: the ditch was all strawed with
dead bodies, nor was there Number. 14.
Agger Oosterhautanoe planiciei impositus.
Agger Castello Beauuoxiano adiunctus aduorsus planiciem Oosterhautanam.
to be seem, but blood mingled with the dust, and the ground embrued with
blood: their guts were torn out with the canons, their heads cut off, their
hands and feet scattered, and the bodies of the slain all rent in pieces, a
horrible spectacle was seen on every side: part cast them selves into the
fennes, part half alive did grievously groan which being brought by ours into
the camp, after died. There perished above two hundred, understood by the
letters of Prince Henry to Justinius, when their fugitives made mention of full
five hundred: amongst which were eight or ten Commanders or leaders of
companies, and others noble by birth. Of ours there were slain, no more then
twelve, or fifteen. Amongst these, Camillus Phoenix. Captain of Fevv of (...)
were slained
the foot was slain, defending of the gate of the fort. Ioannes Baptista
Vrsinus, Captain of the foot, whilst he fought valiantly, was maimed in his
right hand. So that those two formerly had ill kept Breda for the King, as
much more ardently burned in mind, that so they might wipe away their vice, by
true virtue.

Number XIV.
Spinola viewing those places which the enemy had got fortified them with
stoccadoes, and shut up all entry to the More fortifications were made.
ditch on both sides of the water with this apiece fortification, and with
other works of that kind where he commanded also more artillery to be
placed. Furthermore the old trench, which lay over against the shrub of
Oosterhout, almost of the lenght of two thousand paces, he commanded to be
strenghtned with a thicker wall, against the shot of the canons, adding some
new bulworkes made without side, and changing the old ones. And as that space
was great (which was contained in the distance betwixt Hage and Heyden) he
filled with much foot and horse, building great houses of straw and clay for
standing places,

The news of this victory (least the beseeged should not know it) our
soldiars published from each adjoining trenche, crying out in soldiarlike
mirth, that succors were sent unto the city. The besieged smitten at the
heart with this report, when they nether saw succors come, and the fresh The
besieged did endure great hunger and misery.
remembrance of Maurices loss occurred, and the soldiar now eat hors-flesh,
and other victuals grew daily dearer, so that a pound of butter was sold for
twelve shillinges, a Calfe of seauenteene days old, for eight and forty
shillinges, a little hog, for eleven pound ten shillinges, a pound of Tobaco,
for ten pound: that the granaries and the chests of all, were once again
narrowly searched, and some who were found to had hid some corn, was taken
from them into custody: it was forbidden to the bakers, upon a penalty, to
sell no bread but only to the Officers of the war: the officers, to give no
more every day, but half a pound of bread to the soldiar: that all were
forbidden to have any bread twice baked (because it so might be kept whole, and
hid, the longer) for these things so me be gone to break up the bakers houses
wherefore an uproare being begunn betwixt They begone a^alteration and great
rumor.
the French and the English had not been for the great care of there Coronelles
but by and by, three of the authors being put in to prison, and the former
liberty granted of buying bread, the sedition was appeased before it was
diuulged. The Governor, and the commanderes, by admonishment retained others in
their duty, concerning all the vices of their garrisons, no otherwise then the
wounds of their own bodies yet after a little while, when necessity co^peld
them once again, to visit all the barnes and granaries, (...) but very little
store of bread.
the city being divided into two and thirty barnes (least any little cottage
should be pretermitted) no more then five and twenty measures of meal were
found.

Number. 15. OBSIDIO BREDAE PERFECTA.
A. Statio Marchionis Spinola. B. Statio Magistri Equitum. C. Statio Baronis
Barhanconij. D. Statio Comitis Isenburgici. E. Statio Pauli Bullionij. F.
Statio Baronis Beauuoixij. G. Statio Caroli Roma. H. Statio Comitis Anholtini.
I. Aggeres tormentarij interni. K. Interior circulus. L. Niger Agger, vt
vocabant. M. Agger nouus duplici sepe. N. Stagna art facta. O. Fossa a
Marchione iacta longitudine 2200. pedum ad deriuandas aquas.




Number XV.
Henry of Nassau, seeing the slaughter of the English, The Prince of orange
was much troubled.
smitten, and doutfull what he should do whilst he keeps those in his camp
he had received, and had lost many by flight, takes council with his, whether
he should again make an irruption amongst us, or whether by another, or by the
same passage, or rather whether he should refrain. Spinola with all his
companies nere at hand, expecting the But the Mar quese was very vigil^nt.
enemy borth by day and night, did that especially, that he might understand
by some sign, what at last Nassauius resolved. Our messenger being most
nimble, seeming fit for this purpose, to the end he should be known to
Nassauius, as he was to Maurice; therefore by practice he came into knowledge.
when he was kept. secretly in our camp, his Another fraud of aclvvne is wife.
wife going into the camp to Henry of Nassau, complaining much of a sickness
which her husband had got, by carrying Maurices letters to Breda, thorough the
winter waters, demandes the rest of that which was promised, but was yet unpaid
He joyful of the getting of a faithful messenger, promises to pay more
liberally, if now her husband would carry one letter for him into the city,
as he had done many of his brothers. The woman alleges her huslands sickness,
and the danger. At last the woman consents not unwillingly, and yet as it were
against her will, promises to do her best to persuade him. The wife departs;
the husband He also decey ued hinry of Nasavve.
returns half lame, as though his feet had bin spoiled with the winter
frost. Henry of Nassau, agrees with the man, as he thought faithful, and
delivers him his letters to carry into the city to Justinius, The messenger
said, that he promised to perform a very difficult matter; and receiving the
letters with a reward, he so departs. Having received them, he presently
bringes them into the camp to Spinola, and rewarded with a perpetual stipend,
he departs.

Henry in those letters, advised Justinius, of the late overthrow he had
received, whilst he set upon the fortificiones A copy of the contents of the
letter to Iustino
of heyden. From that day, he saw us also entrenched on every side with a
stronger trenche, which could not possibly be broken thorough. That he
remembered, for how few days the besieged now had victuals left them.
wherefore, lest by delaying of time he should at last be compelled, to receive
some disgrace with his companions, he should provide betimes, nor would he by
his ouergreat pertinacitie, overthrow the fortunes of all. That having received
these letters, he should give a sign, by discharging at midnight three canons,
and by the signification of fires made from the Tower, an hour after, how many
days provision the besieged yet had left the^. Assuring him in the mean
space, that if any occasion of bringing help, offered it self, that it should
be embraced of him, and of the whole army.

There came first into the city, another copy of the same letter, before
either Spinola had received his, or had understood John hanin a silder of stirub
by day came to our camp with letters
it, by reason of the difficulty to explicat the notes wherewith it was
written. A certain horsman of the Count of Styres, very skillful in all the
ways, in open day, escaped by our army into the city, whom those of Breda
seeing coming, received him joyfully with the discharging of nine From the to
vvre by signs of fire they signified for who many day they had victuals
canons. That nightly sign therefore of the sound of the three premised canons
was first made, before we could certainly know what it signified albeit we
suspected. They alighted fire eleven times, showing that they had victuals
left, only for so many days.

At that time, his Excellency William wolfangus, Duke of Bauiaria, Iuliers,
Cleue, and Montz, returning from VVelfango Guillielmo Duke of bautar (...) and
bergas came to our camp.
Spain, came into our Camps with desire to see the same. Spinola went before
to meet him coming far from the camp, and departing from his own Tent, he
received so Excellent a man, with as much show of love as he possibly could. He
congratulated him, with a festival sound of all the canons, and with the other
applauses of military joy. After on other days, being led about all the
works, he much admired the greatness and strenght of the siege. He related,
that the King of France said unto him (by whom he passed as he returned) he
could not believe, that Breda would be taken by Spinola by that siege: yet at
that time many The King of France is opinion touching this siedge.
things promised us a fortunat success of that siege, as, the continual
flight of the french from Mansfeld, the delay in releeuing the enemy, the
scarcetie of victuals within the city, the conflicts of the beseeged with
sicknesses, so great a dearth of medicaments, that of the Tobacco that Tobaco
was vvounderfull dear.
was brought, although else where it cost but four crowns a pound was sold in
the city for twenty pounds, which remedy they used against the scuruey:
besides that space of days, above six hundred horse were driven from the
enemies camps, being ill looked unto, as they grased.

This booty, when Monsieur of Marquet, leftenant of the horse, had hoped to
requite, he prepares in number sixty eight companies of horse, to set upon our
conuoyes with all at unawares. Sending therefore Captain Randwick The enemy
set upon our conuoy.
before with six companies, the rest lying hid in ambushe, set upon the
carriages) who without conuoyes contrary to Count Bergues commandment, took
another way) drove away the horses, ransackt the charrets and the pacques, and
poured out the provision. Henry of Bergues, wary of perils, albeit he were
ignorant of this voyage, had al ready commanded some companies of horse, to
watch all the passages of the ways, lest the enemies should break thorough by
some places at unawares. which that it might be done the more assuredly, first
he charged very straightly that no Captain, when the watch was, should be absent
from his company. Moreover, that he should place very far off from the camp,
the standing place of the centeries. Next, that some watchers, should go a
good space from the standing place before the company. Lastly, that some
standing horsman, should watch before the other watchmen, to take notice of the
enemies coming: which hearing, he should give a sign, and should retire unto
the watch. They, seeing a greater troop, retired back to the standing place of
the rest of the company. The company prepared their arms, and had fought,
had not the number been unequal; but at last returned to the camp. By this
means, both the coming of the enemy was hindered, and the watches, though
placed a far off, retired them selves without danger, and it seemed the whole
camp had time enough to arm it self,

By chance that day, the enemy met with the Count Hermanus Valor of count
Herman son to count Hindrick.
of Bergues, son to Henry of Bergues, a young man of a great spirit, and a
pattern of his countries valor. He hearing (as he was nere at hand) a noise,
and gathering together a small company he had, bouldly flies into the midest
of the troops of the despoilers, passing once, and again, thorough the midst
of them, some he lays upon the ground, and both troubles and terrifies the
others. These The enemy put to fl^ght.
he puts to flight: those admonish others of the coming of all our horse, and
so were their minds preoccupated, with the fear and flight of the first, as
that they thought nothing of resisting. They forsake their horses, they throw
down their burdens, and leaving the prey, they depart. The enemies gathering
so many companies together, in so long a time of the siege, in so wicked and
long iorneis, yet could never intercept so much as one conuoye. The enemy all
the time of the sage coul de not optaine victory in breaking of any of our
conuoy^s.


Henry of Nassau, not slow in his affairs, lest he should pretermit (as he
had promised) any industry to raise the sige, sent some boores and contry
clownes, corrupted with money and with promises, to set a fire, if they could;
our camps, and store house wherein our warlike furniture was kept. Spinola
catching some in cendiaries provides that his compes receive no detriment.

Henry of Nassau, attempting all things in vain, and setting the tents of
fire in the village of Dungens, the sixth of the calends of June, retired by
night into Langstrate, the tempest of the night, the blusteringe of the winds,
and a terrible The Prince of Orange out of hope.
shower of rain, did denote by many titles that obscure enterprise. The
soldiar could scarce stir his foot, the canons stuckfast in the mire, the
squadrones were disordered.

Spinola, understanding of this departure, thought good to Count Henry in the
Marquis name lought that they should yeald ^rcome to composition.
admonish Iustine Nassau, by the letters of Henry of Bergues (because he was
both joined in blood to the house of Nassau, and understood the contry manners
and language of the contrie) what he was to hope for of the succors of the
city now retired. Bergues therefore writes to Iustine, and promises upon
Spinolaes word, that he would bring to pass, that they should be received to
mercy upon honorable conditions, if they would treat of a composition: wherefore
that at a certain time and place he would vouchsafe Justinius de Nassau is
(...) The letters of Nassau b^ing pruden^y found out by the Marquis were sent
by Count Hendrick to lustino.
to come out of the city, to talk with him.

Justinius (lest by being ouer-hastie, he should somewhat touch his reputation)
sending back a trumpeter, makes him answer. How it stood touching the supply of
succor, that he was but three days past advised by the letters of Henry of
Nassau. If he knew any thing more, that he would not disdain to advise him by
letters; that he was troubled with By which he promised to render.
an ague, and could not go forth. The next day after, Spinola gave the letters
them selves of Henry of Nassau to be sent And the Marquis the honorable
conditions presented by Count Henrick to whom he gave full auctoritis.
to Justinius, enfolded as they were in obscure caracters, and another copy of
them in known characters, to Henry of Bergues to be carried, aduising him not
to delay the rendering any longer, Justinius perceiving, that all his own
designs, and his friends, were discovered, gave thanks to Henry of Bergues
for his good will toward him, and promises, that he would compound with
Spinola, so it were with honorable conditions, whereof his so brave companions
and citisens, without dout seemed worthy (and which he had written upon his
word) had decreed to covenant.

Henry of Bergues, having obtained Spinolaes letters, wherein he promised to
Justinius, to the soldiars, and to the cittisens of Breda, honorable conditions
of rendering, if now they would cut off precisely without further delay, nor
require a longer day; he sent them presently to Justinius, affirming (as it was
written in those letters) leave to be given of treating of all things after
his pleasure: wherefore, that he should the next day come to meet The works
ceased.
them out of the city half way and declare what conditiones he required, to
be put in writing his and our gardes standinge near adioyninge.

To that very time, the compass of our inward trenche, by the perpetual
diligence of our shipmen and our soldiars, was yet a working, nether did there
remain much to do, but it had been fully finished; when the workmen by chance
espied the Count of Bergues, with a soldiarlie mirth they demand of him, to
what purpose it was to make an end of that trenche, if now they treated of a
composition? He had scarce bid them leave off, when they throw away their
shouells, leaping for joy, more inclined to take their ease then to labor.
Justinius having received both these of And haueing read the letters of the
Marquis and of count Hendrick.
Spinolaes and of Bergues, calling together the council of war, proposes
the business. It is concluded to return answer. That those things which
Spinola and Bergues promised. where about the Magistrates being consulted,
sending Time and place was ordained for to treat of this matter.
their letters, they beseech Henry of Bergues, the next day after at seven of
the clock to come from the camp, and sending trumpeter, to admonish them of
the place where, they should meet him: and that there should come from the
city, which should request conditions in the names of all.

The day after, which was the last of May, Henry of Bergues, accompanied with
much nobility, at the hour appointed, goes forth of the camp, and sending a
trumpetter, aduertiseth Justinius of his coming. They with whom they were to
treat, issuing out of the city, the Count of Bergues commandes the
Nobility, to stand a far off, and goes forward alone only in the company of
Routartius, the Kings, and the Marquis Spinolaes Secretary. Standing in the
midst, the Legates approached, and the Seargent may or Case Deyden, Captain
Zouche, Aertsenius Co^sull, and a few Magistrates: lastly Coronell Hauteriuius
came. These letters of assurance being given, they presented in writing the
conditions of the accord. Of these it was disputed too and Those of the town
presented certain articles.
fro, nor were there but two articles to be rejected, and a third douted of.
The meeting being dissolved, the conference was deferred till three a clock in
the afternoon. By diner ours were ready betwixt the outward fortification,
under a Tabernacle spread a broad for that purpose. (all looking in heaps from
the walls. Here they began to treat of the begun composition, and that was
denied which disliked in The Marquis and Count Hendrick agreed upon the
articles excepting two.
the morning: to wit, of granting liberty of conscience to the heretical
cittisens, and of burying their bodies in hallowed places. Next it was
disputed, about four greater canons, and two murdering pieces, to be brought
out with the sauegard. Which seemed little to the besieged, but yet too much to
Henry of Bergues.

Routartius therefore is sent to Spinola, to ask of him what The liberality of
the Marquis with the besieged.
he thought. Spinola answered, that he would not deny the^ of such a small
matter. The besieged glad of the answer gave him thanks. Things being brought
to that pass, a present was brought forth. By and by Justinius Nassauius
Governor of the city, and other Captains with the principal Nobility which
was therein, came. Ours also, who were in great number not far off, being
gathered together, saluted one another Complements.
with glad congratulations.

In the Calends of June captain deyden which was of The agreement was brought
to be singned.
the company of the prince was sent to Spinola with a double copy of the
agreement, to set his hand on both, and he would by and by bring back the
other, subsigned by Justinius, and to be sent back, retayning the other. Then
were there a hondereth and twenty wago^es asked and three score ships, to
carry away the sick and the whole, and their household stuff. More wagons were
granted then were demanded, and as many ships as werein the river of Breda.
Next pledges were given on both sides. By those of Breda, The vvagones and ship
pes demanded were granted.
the Sargent mayor de la Caze, and Ogle Captain of the English foot. By
Spinola, Franciscus Losanus, and Carolus Philippus le Count, Captain of the
German companies, were given for pledges. And these were the articles of the
agreement set down in writing, by which Breda was rendered to the King.

I.
The Governor of Breda, the Coroneles Captains Lieutenants, and other Officers
belonging to the war, the soldiars, The condiciones the Governor and officeres
of Breda demanded.
whether they served on horse or foot, that they be permitted to depart out of
the city. That power be given of departing to all such as, are armed after
the accustomed ma^er of war with there colores displaied the drumes beating.
after the acustomed sound. That the horsemen be suffered to depart, with their
standards displayed, there trumpetes soundinge after the accustomed manner, all
armed, with their balls in their mouths, their matches alighted on both ends
with their beltes of poudre, with fiery touch and furnished with a number of
bullets; the horsemen sounding there trumpets, their flagges displayed, armed,
and carrying (as they are wont to go against the enemy.) That none of the
pensionaries be detayned (of what nation soever.) for any cause (albeit they
had in times past taken pay of the King of Spain, or of the Archduke, or of
the Infanta Isabella.) That all be permitted to go by the shortest and most
commodious journey to Gittenbergue in Holland, without any interruption, offense
or injury, safe in life, in body, weapons, horses, vessels and cariages (by
that covenant of promise which was meet.) Moreover, that leave be given to
bring forth their wives, children, and family, household goods, vessels,
horses, wagons, the weapons of the soldiars, dead, sick, or run away, with
out any obligation, of let, upon what pretext soever.

II.
That the preachers of the word, the Overseers, the common people, and their
scriueners, their Architects or Ingineres, the Judge of the military Senate,
the ingineres of the fireworkes, the Lieutenant of pioners, the canonnieres,
the Chyrurgians of the bands and troops the workmen applied about the
engines, the mariners, the letter-carriers, the overseers of the works, the
Provost marshalls, the Pioners, the carpenters and smithes, the prouiders of
victuals and al other workmen of forts and engines, their wives, children,
servants, horses, weapons be contained in the former article, and enjoy the
same favor.

III.
That all ships what soever shall be found for the present in Breda, arrived as
well for the Captains of war, as for others, be dismissed with all their
necessary instruments, into Holland. And let them be governed by there one
mariners, and be laden as well with their families, as with their household
stuff, armor, moueables; alsoo the cariages of the Coroneles, Captains,
Lieutenants, and other officers of war; Let them be filled with the sick, and the
keepers, and others who shall desire to sail into Holland by that opportunity.
That therefore the passages of thestopt river be laid open, for twelve days,
from the first day of signing the agreement, before they go out of their
garrison; to the end that the ships aforsaid may safely take their journey with
their loading, and with other things which shall be in the^, whilst they
appleed them selves to other acts of war at Blaec, from whence they may
retire them selves whether they please, as who by right having charge of the
moueables, might render them to their owners whose they were. Granting the
space of twelve days, that the ships be free from all injuries, prouokements,
and abuses, nor that either they or their wagoners, be diuerted or disturbed
from their course. That it shall be unjust to cause them to desist, upon what
pretext soever But if, either because the river be not open, or for that it be
not nauigable, their journey shall not be hindered, by that delay, nothing shall
be abridged of the space of the granted twelve days, but all that to be
granted to them void and free, that the mariners; and others (to whom it may be
more commodius) may safely take their ioyney by river, or nere the river. But
if some of these ships would tarry at Breda, let them notwithstanding be sent
to transport the carriars, and the cariages of the conuoy before they presently
return to their owners.

IV.
That the full number of wagons (which the Governor of Breda shall require) to
carry to Gittenbergue the burdens and bagage of the Coronells Captains and
officers of war, and other soldiars of defense (and who from thence shall be
brought back into the camps of Genike, by the interposition of a public
promise) to be supplied by the Marquis Spinola.

V.
That the Governor have leave to carry away together with the conuoye, four
canons and two murdering pieces, such as he shall make choice of, together
with all that which belongs to them, and as many balls and poudre, as shall
be needful to shoot off every one six times. And to carry those canons with
all their wheels and instruments, by land, or by water, as he shall think
good, and as shall be best for his commodity. The Marquis Spinola lending for
this purpose, horses charrets and wagons, together with wagonners, (if they
shall be requested by the Governor) to draw the canons, the murdering pieces,
together with the wheels and instruments belonging to then.

VI.
That the Prince of Aurange have lean, to carry all his moueables, which he
has either in the Castle or in the city, in to such place or contrie, whether
he, orany other (to whom, the care of them shall be committed) Or that they be
kept for a while in the Castle of Breda, until such time as the Prince of
Aurange dispose of them, at the least for half a years space. And that there
ships and shipmen coming from Holland to fetch them, free passage to be given,
no impediment being offered.

VII.
If perchance any of them, comprehended in the two first articles, cannot for
lack of health, goeforth of the city, together with the conuoye, that to such
leave be given of remaining in the city with their wives, family and
servants without hurt, until they have recovered their health and strength.
Then also at the first, opportunity, to give them favorable letters for their
departure, that so they may go safely where the please.

VIII.
That no officer of war, or soldiar, or Lieutenant of a company, whether he
shall provide him self to depart together with the conuoye, or after his
sickness recovered (as if he were comprehended in none of the former articles)
shall be retained, but in favor of the former points, every one shall be
suffered to depart freely. And that the creditors content them selves with the
only words or writings for payment of their dettors.

IX.
The Governor, captains and the rest of the Officers of war, the soldiars
already contained in the articles aforsaid, or other who soever, bound by
stipe^d and service to the united States, which shall have any houses in Breda,
farms, inheritances, or moueables (comprehending likewise the Captains,
Officers, the companies of horse of the Count of Culcnburge, of the Count of
Styre, and of Monsieur de S. Martin, with the widows and children also of the
same or of other companies, which for these two years hence betook them to
the city for sauegard) shall have a year and a halfes space, counting from a
month after the subsigning to the agreement, wherein they may at their pleasure,
carry away their goods, sell, pledge, alienat, change, and occupy according to
the law and common custom. Furthermore, that they shall enjoy all that space
of time, the revenues of their pensions, the profit of what they let out, with
the other fruits of their inheritance, due or to be due: to the full of all
things pertaining to them with in the city.

X.
The soldiars whether of garrison, or of the camp (who whether they are detayned
prisoners in the city or in the camps) as soon as the conditions shall be
signed, shall be sent back without paying any ransom, but only the value of
their expenses made by agreement.

XI.
Against the garrisons, no action shall be made of asking again any spoils,
but all booties shall be reputed al their own.

XII.
After the articles of the composition are signed it shall be lawful for the
Governor of Breda to send them by some man of known trust, to the Prince of
Aurange.

XIII.
The conditions being made, there shall be a truce, yet both shall contain
them selves in their fortifications as before; whether shall it be lawful to
approache either by day or night.

XIV.
First that the pledges be given two by two before the garrison depart they
shall follow the companies to Gittenbergue, and shall remain there the space
of twelve days, until the river be opened, and the covenants be accomplished.
That time being past, if none of the covenants be broken, they shall return.

XV.
The agreement being made: pledges shall be given on both sides, of like number
and condition: and the city being rendered, ours shall be restored to us
again.

XVI.
It shall be further granted, that the pledges given by the city of Breda,
shall be sent back, as soon as the garrison shall be brought in, to march away
together with the conuoye.

XVII.
The Governor and the garrison of Breda do promise, to go forth of the city
of Breda on thursday next, the fifth of June, early in the morning.

We Justinius Nassau promise to do our endeavors, that those things be kept,
which are contained in the articles aforsaid, hitherto so far as they do
appertain to us. In witness whereof, with the consent of the Coronells,
Captains, and the council of war, we have subsigned the same this present
day, the day after the calends of lune 1625.

IVSTINVS NASSAV.

The heads of the composition demanded of the Senate and people of Breda.
I.
That pardon and forgetfulness be both promised and performed, of all those
things which were commirted by the cittisens and inhabitants of Breda, of what
condition soever they be, whether committed before, or after the recovery of
the city, in the year 1590. Let no man be enquired of, nor let no evil be
inflicted upon any, no not upon pretext of treason, or any fault whatsoeuet.

II.
That the cittisens and all the inhabitants have power, as well absent as
present, of what condition soever they be whether subject to the service or
oathe of the States, or of the Prince of Aurange, or of the city, whether
they be free to inhabit the city the next two years, their life in safety,
no question made of their religion, no obligation to swear to another
religion, whilst they lead a modest life, far from all offense, that they may
deliberate for those two years space, whether they please to make their
residence there, or to depart. But if they shall resolve to depart, that they
be suffered to go at their own pleasure. They shall also freely enjoy their
own goods, that they may either carry them away sell, alienat, pawn, and
engage them at their pleasure, or let them hire them to be receued and governed
by those that shall redeem them. That their goods who have dyed within or
without the city, leaving their will behind them or not, come to the heirs
appointed, or to the next of their kindred.

III.
That it shall be lawful for every cittisen and inhabitant (whether he be
bound, or free) who after these conditions agreed upon, it shall please to
remove his dwelling, or to depart from the city for any other cause, to do
this at what time he shall please, by what land, by what water, with his wife,
children, family, household stuff, merchandise, and other moueables, no
impediment whatsoever being given, by no other, then by the authority of these
covenants. And for those that will either make their aboade, or will depart into
any other kingdoms, regions, provinces, or neutrall places, or subject to
tributes, that it be free and lawful for them, either to make their aboade or
to retire them selves perpetually without any trouble of coming or going for
their merchandise or affairs sakes, thorough cities and places subject to the
King of Spain, and to have right and leave to dispose of their moueables, and
others, and of their own goods, according as they will the^ selves. But
touching the Catholics returning again, and occupying their houses within
the city, there is no deed of any other prouiso then these present conditions.

IV.
They who to see to their affairs, shall go into the united provinces, to
them leave shall be given four times a year to go thither (admonishing the
Governor, of whom they shall necessarily receive authority of coming and
going) which he, but upon just cause, shall not refuse. Next they shall return
from thence within the space of two years from the grant of this agreement:
that afterward they may either go forward to inhabit the city, or to plant
their dwelling in free places, or of tribute. And let them enjoy these places,
no otherwise then those already spoken of, and the leave of coming and going,
and what commodity soever of these couuenants.

V.
It shall be granted to the preachers of the word, to depart freely with their
wives, children, family goods and moueables, without all offense of damage.
For these things, that wagons or ships be lent them, with time enough to
dispose of their affairs.

VI.
They shall be comprehended in this composition, who after the city shall be
yielded, did serve the place of a Deacon: as also they, who boar any
ecclesiastical office.

VII.
Also Stewards, Advocates, Substitutes, Treasurers, and others both cittisens
and inhabitants, who either have charge of treasure, or of accounts, or paying
of wages, or any other office, shall be contained in these conditions. And to
have free power to depart with all their goods, household stuff, and
writings: and further have right to use the benefit of this agreement, as of
others.

VIII.
As many martiners as ar in the city, who have their ships here, which they
may take with them shall enjoy the same privilege,

IX.
If there shall not be ships and wagons enough provided, to serve the cittisens
and inhabitants (who desire to depart together with their goods and household
stuff) to them with in the space of two years, it shall be granted to send
for from else where for ships and wagons, from Holland or other places, which
may afterward return freely in virtue of these conditions.

X.
That the cittisens and inhabitants of this city, shall be enjoined, with no
burdens of impositions, more then ar justly imposed upon those which dwell in
greater or lesser cities thorough all Brabant.

XI.
That the garrison of horsemen and footmen be placed in the city, after the
best manner that may be, and with the lest damage that may be to the cittisens.

XII.
They shall also be contained in this covenant who soever shall be absent,
either for their own or the cities affairs, that they may freely return into
the city, and enjoy the covenants that are made. The contry people also who
fled into the city, shall be suffered to retire them safely into the contrie.

XIII.
He who being of another religion, within the time of two years agreed upon,
shall dye in this city, that he be buried in some honorable place within an
orchard in the city: or else according to the will of his kindred, that the
corpse be carried out of the city where pleased him.

XIV.
The decrees of the Senate, and all the ordenances of the capital seat, not
hitherto forbidden, be estableshed, and take effect.

XV.
Who soever heretofore has lent money to the city, shall be suffered to
receive the rent and to make exchange. And yearly that their revenues and
their other affairs be assisted by the Senate by whom the revenues ar to be
paid.

All these things whatsoever in this agreement ar decreed and written, ar
agreed unto, ratified, and confirmed by the Marquis Spinola, and ar subscribed
unto by the legates of the cittee; the same Marquis promising, that he will
endeavor that it be also ratified by the most Excellent Infanta of Spain,
sealed with her broad seal, within fifteen days. Given the second of June
1625.

Many, whose dispositions were bent to more sharper courses, hearing of so good
and so favorable conditions, admired the Clemency of Spinola toward the
enemy; and Many acused the bea^n gnitie of the Marquis
some also blamed this pardon. They said, that this should have been handled
more seriously, and either to have put the besieged to the sword, or not to have
received them to mercy, but upon rendering up their arms, who by their wilful
pertinacitie had brought them selves unto that point, that they had died of
hungar, if they had been shut up but two days longer. And why should such
favorable conditions be offered them of our free accord, to whom And the
complaints they made.
even to give them their lives, was to grant them to great a benefit? That at
least Spinola should have expected a little, whilst that had happened unto them,
which ordinary happens to men thorough their overmuch partinacitie, to make
them seek that, and earnestly to beg it, which at the first they contemned:
and that they should first have craved a composition, before of our own
accords it should The condition of pre^ces and particular personos are diferent.
have been offered to them. Next why the unhappy part of the cittisens should
be suffered to go forth, safe with their household stuff and their goods,
before that money were paid by the Senate to the Catholics remaining, which was
ex torted by public and common oathe, to The (...) was well related.
make the works, and to pay the soldiars stipend? So wisely seemed they to
complain, who tied to their private opinions, ar wont to measure with the self
same measure, even the waightiest matters of government, not understanding that
princes ar to take another course, whose principal endeavors ought to be, to
gain renown and the peoples good will.

But Spinola houlding them to be more wise who ar more gentle in cruelty, and
that the fame of clemency, was to be preferred before the name of severity,
not ignorant, how much better it was for the common good, spedely to release,
then longer to detayne the Kings army before Breda (by reason of the sturres
of French, Italians; Germans, and Danes) made more account of the gaining of a
little time, then of the no great spoils of all Breda, or of so small disgrace
of the enemies, who yet perhaps would have defended them selves: mindful of
that old proverb, That it is better to be at the latter end of a feast, then at
the beginning of afray. And truly he judged it more expedient to prefer the
Majesty and clemency of his King (whose person he The general is bound to
take (...) of the (...) of his King more then of any particular glory of his
own person.
bore in this place, then either his own glory, or desire of revenge. That he
held it for a dishonor, of so great a number of provision left behind, and but
little, gone away, for testimony of his long patience and approved virtues
there remained in the city, forty three pices of ordnance (muskets) four
hundred fifty, whereof also a hundred and fifty were suffered to be carried in
the place of those that The munitio nes which were in Breda.
were overcome. (hargubushes) three hundred, of poudre a thousand one hundred
thirty five pound; match thirty four thousand pound; of greater balls, two
thousand; of lesser, an exceeding number; of balls of lead, forty thousand
pound mouldes to make balls of lead fifteen; granados two thousand one
hundred; of greater (which they call Bombars) three hundred forty four;
engines made to cast fire, a hundred and fifty; thirty barrells of pitche,
poudre, brimstone, bitumen; six barrells of great nails; long forkes of iron,
eleven thousand; of stakes with double forkes, an innumerable number; shouells,
four thousand; pickayes, or iron pikes to open the earth, sixteen hundred;
whele-barrowes, which are driven by the hand, to carry earth, a thousand; five
boats; four rolls of cable-ropes; forty graples; horscollers, a hundred and
thirty four score couple of cart-ropes; instruments made of fire, also
innumerable; one linen bridge, or made of canuas, gabians of wood or hurdles,
behind which the canons ar placed, very many; nor fewer to dispatch the hasty
bridge. Of all which a written catalogue was given to Thomas VVingardius master
of the Artillery.

Now the detts of the cittisens remaining, Spinola believed that the States
ought to have so great care of, as of their own credit and authority, which
should be utterly lost in the common wealth, if they but once deceived any one
of the beseeged cittisens; and therefore he was not careful hereof.

Upon the fifth of June the day was appointed for the coming forth of the
enemies garrison. Wherefore Spinola The Marquis commanded that none of the
souldiars should ^ be the besieged.
forbad, that none by soldiarlike frumpes or gibes, should use any disgrace to
those that departed: so modestly did he suppose the victory was to be used.
Abundance of wagons and boats, being prepared for that day, our soldiars were
set to watch at three gates of the city and of the castle. Count Hermanus
Bergues, with five companies of horse, went before the companyes of the garrison
departing, unto Gittenbergue. Also betwixt every ten wagons, went a little
company of our horse, for the sauegard of the bagage. The troops of horse of
Bergaignius, led another company of horse who enclosed them behind. In these
two, scarcely were there any horse, besides the ensigns, so greatly were the
horse decayed. The foot men went in the midst. Amongst these Justinius went on
horsback, one of the beseeged, Carolus Philippus le Count, accompayning him.
Every Captain had his own company, The Coronels went before the troops. The
coulors were borne displayed, the Trumpets sounding before them. The number of
the foot, were three thousand (for the sick were carried away in boats) Truly
they were a gallant company, whether one respect their persons, or their
weapons, and of greater beauty then ours were to wit, they were lodged more
stately and more at their ease then ours were, and had store of fire; nether
did their bread fail, till the day that they departed.

Spinola attended upon with a notable troop of Nobility, betwixt the inward
circle of the city, and the trenche, the conqueror him self beheld the
beautiful pomp of his glorious triumph. He courteously saluted all the
Captains The glorious triumph of his victory.
at their going forth, and first Naslauius the Governor, venerable for his gray
hairs, his wife and children, the son of Emanuell of Portugal, and two
bastards of Prince Maurices and they again with constant composed countena^ces
and voices, and with a modest enclining of the banners, saluted him. No
ignominious voice of provoking one another was once heard, but smiled with
favorable countenancs. The He was no less courtens in giuinge thanks.
companies being past all oppressed with the congratulations of all the standers
by and running thick together, admitted the duties of common courtesy, no more
cheerfully, then modestly, according to every ones due praise, for his labor
assigned and industry, in so great and so long difficulty of the siege.
Iohanes Medices was sent to Isabella the Infanta of Spain, who related to her
the joyful departure of the garrison; to whom Isabella gave a rich color of
gould and adia Headuertised of the victory the Infanta and the King of Spain.
mant being indeed a Princely reward.

Ferdinandus Guzmannus, master de camp of a Spanis Regiment, was sent with the
same news into Spain to Philip the fourth. Theodorus Camargius Coronell,
carried the first news of the rendering of the city into Germany to the
Emperor Ferdinandus.

The Count of Anholt, hearing of Mansfelds departure from the camp, dismissed
with his, presently followed him. The fame of the victory diuulged into
France, England, Italy, and Germany, was scarcely believed even by friends. A
short fable was spread abroad by the enemies of the conuoyes of Breda, and was
cried about by the voice of a common ballet-seller, and sold in a printed The
success byinge so great many vvoulde hardly beliue ^^t.
pamphlet the same day wherein the news was brought of the rendering thereof yea
even from Spain also letters were brought from the King into the
low-contries, in which Isabella was admonished, that she should consider again
and again, whether it were not more to the purpose, to recall Spinola from so
long and doutfull a siege: so sharply did many write into Spain to their
acquaintance in high authority, of the despair of getting the city.

Isabella the Archdutches, resolved her self to go in person to the city
that was won, and to visit the soldiars that The Infanta came to visit the
city.
had overcome. Spinola only keeping the gates of the city, command there
houses, villages, the tower and the church to be made clean, went to meet
Isabella, three leages from the city. Almost all there horse, either was sent
before to Antwerp to bring her on her way, or were placed in the middle way to
receive her, and she was entertained coming with great joy, and with a triple
discharging of the Canons, as with a dance of joy.

The footmen divided into diverse squadrons, rejoiced with no less sign of
noice and of shouting upon the gate of Hage, thorough which Isabella entered
into Breda, an Epigrame set upon the gate, was read, that taking away the
little word of envy it pleased him to soften.

PHILIPP US HISPANIAE REX This inscripcion was put vpt on the gates.
GVBERNAN TE ISABELLA CLARA EVGENIA OBSIDENTE SPINOLA HOSTIB US FRVSTRA IN
SVPPETIAS CONIVRANTIB US BREDA VICTOR POTITVR.

All the greater ordinances of the city, went off, once, twice, and the third
time. The Archdutches forbid Her alteza did forbid that th^ovve of mirth should
be made til first sacrifice should be made unto god as the ch^se author of the
victory.
bon-fires, or any other public show of joy to be made, in respect of the
reverence she bore to God, till first she had caused Sacrifice to be offered
unto him the day following in the great Church, as to the chief Author of the
victory. The next day therefore, Alphonsus Cardinal of Cueua, Ambassador of
the King of Spain, first said Mass, Isabella, her waiting dames maids, and
all the people The first (...) was celebrated by the Cardenal de la Cu^ba
ambasador of Spain.
being present. From Mass, Isabella went about the Church, to behold (if any
were left) of the oulde monuments of religion. She found here and there, empty
places, of the pictures of sepulchers, steps of heretical piety, against
their Ancestors that were dead. Yet found she whole the notable tomb of
Englebert the secon, dsomtimes Count of Nassau, builded by Henry his nephue,
of white and black marble. Another, which was of Engelbert the First, and of
John of Nassau, the picture of our blessed lady set thereon being taken down,
and defaced. which was done by the instinct of a Sibell Henry Boxhornes,
preacher of the word in Breda some times a Flamen priest of Jupiter amongst the
high Priests. She, to wit, by the oracle of Sibill, after the sixth month of the
siege of Bouldnes and impiety of sibilla wife of Box^orinck.
Breda, prophesying that the city should yield it self to the enemy, unless
they would throw down a picture of the virgin Marie, kept at that time in that
place which the religion of many of our very holy ancestors, had worshipped so
many years ago in that city; but others ignorant in religion, durst not
wrong it, being at that time safe and sound. In which thing, I know not what
I may ce^sure most to be reprehended, whether the patience of the benumed Senate
and people, in suffering so great a wickedness, as the treadding of antiquity
under foot, or their stupiditie in believing, or the impudent boldness of a
mean woman, against the picture of the blessed virgin consecrated by the noble
predecessors of the Nassaues, and set upon his tomb for memory to posterity.
An Epigrame or two of the fore-passed taking of, Breda being written on the
Thi^s writings were blott^d And otheres put in there place.
walls of the church, injurious to God and the Catholic King, were put out,
and these were set in their place, to signify the year wherein Breda was
recovered.

AMBROSI SPINOLAE VIGILANTIA BREDA EXPVGNATA.

The sacred ceremonies being ended, the tower of the church by night, lighhtned
almost with an innumerable Admirable fires of joy.
number of la^ternes and fires, were seen to burn even from Holland. All the
city shone with bon-fires, and with barrells of pitch. Then all the canons
shot off again. And which was a more beautiful spectacle, there was a circle
of continuated shining fires for the compass of two and thirty miles thorough
the circuit of the interior trenche, which Spinola having set with stakes,
straw, and fagots, commanded the soldiars to gather together and to burn them,
perpetual flashes of small shot shining betwixt, which like unto stars a
far off suddenly shining and vanishing, made a most pleasant sight.

The liberality also fo Isahella that excellent Princess, shined toward the
Church of Breda; and toward two Religious orders, of Capucins and priests of
the Society of JESUS, Liberality of her alteza
no less then her piety in sparing and praying to God to gain that city.
It was the common voice of all, that the Infanta by her perpetual prayers, and
those of her court, and And her piety and good life.
of other places by there continual prayers in the forty hour prayers to be
made in all the Churches, and by pouring out her alms amongst the miserable
won Breda, and not with weapons. And truly that the divine succors were more
present, then humane stratagems, none can deny: for to whom shall we refer
this benefit received, but to her so well known piety, to whom we may rightly
proclaim that saying. One woman has wrought confusion in the house of
Nabuchodonosor.

Isabella therefore came into the city, as a restorer of the ancient religion;
into the camps as to bestow in those days, the gifts and guerdons of a
Captain. She ordained an Anniuersarie Mass, in honor of the dreadful
Sacrament (who began first in the eve of the rendering of Breda, and Liberality
of her alteza to the relig^ouse.
the garrison went out on the octaue.) She gave to the Capucins to buy a housein
Breda, four hundred pounds. To the priests of the Society of Jesus, who were
divided into four quarters of the camp procuringe the health of the soldiars
souls during all the time of the siege she ordained to give five hundred
pound, to help to defray the charges of buying a college, which she bestowed
on them by way of alms. To the repayring of an old Abbie of Nuns, and
ruins of the Church of Ginick (which Maurice caused to be burnt) she gave no
small sum of money. All which arguments of singular Religion, when Alphonsus
Cardinal de la Cueua, Ambasador of the King of Spain, did signisie unto the
supreme head of the church Pope Vabanus the eight, the pope wrote unto him in
this manner following.

Our beloved son, health and Apostolical benediction. A letter of the pope
V^bano to the Cardenall de la Cueua.
we felt those your last letters, to be those golden phials, full of odors,
which recreat the souls of those that are in heaven, and comfort the diseases
of those in earth, we took breath a little, tossed in the height of the raging
sea, when we understood Religion to triumph in the town of Breda. God is not
forget-full of his mercies, and legions of Angels asist those Princes which
fight for heaven. verily this victory, is obtained, amongst so many conspiring
aids of impiety, and difficulties even of nature it self struggling against
it, that although it will remain in all ages a famous document of warlick
fortitude yet let it be reputed to be the benefit of that almighty warrior.
For not only the force of the enemy is domted, but even the very raging of the
floods. And now does the Prince of Austria, gather the excellent fruits of so
great a triumph, whilst with powerful forces she fortifieth religon. Nether
suPpose we that could be more prudently provided, for, then by the duties of
Priests, and endeavors of those Religious families, which ye made manifest in
repayring the Abbie of the City. And you we bless perpetually, who first,
the Angels applauding, and the Church rejoicing, performedst the dreadful
Sacrifice of the Mass upon those Altars, which of late heretical temeritie had
polluted. Furthermore, we praise your piety, when being adorned with the
purple of Roman splendour, show your self worthier in this present occasion, of
so great a priesthood. Pious purposees may bring you into participation of this
triumphall glory: for the fortitude of the Soldiar, does exterminate impiety
from the walls of the city; the piety of the Priest, from the minds of the
people. Only wishing honor to your name, The particular care of the Infanta of
the army.
we perpetually promise you our patrocinie. Given at Rome at S. Mary's the
Greater, under the fishers ringe, the 11. August. 1625. the second year of our
Pontificat.

Isabella having performed the duties of Religion, commanded a whole months
wages to be paid to the soldiars The gifts and liberality of her besovved
in the camps, and a thousand garments to be made, by the name of a donation.
Then in the ensuing days, she went about to behold the works, both of the
inward, and outward trenche, as a Reuerencer both of war and of Religion. In
the mean space Spinola with a great conuoye, set the city in order, spoiled
by so long a siege, and disposed the houses for placing the garrison. Isabella
placed Balancon trough his aproued virtues was (...) Governor of Bread by the
Infanta.
the Barron of Balancone Master de camp of the Burgundians, for Governor to
rule the city. The virtu of that man, his modestic, and vigilance, were so
well known without envy, that the soldiars of all nations, affirmed that
office of right and merit to belong unto him. The cittisens, who had heard only
by report of his fame, designed the government to him, and humbly besought it
might be deliueuered him: thus virtue cannot be concealed, and being known, is
beloved. Then was the Senate appointed for the people. Henricus Montens (from
whom the same was taken wrongfully) was created Burgermaster, excellent in the
knowledge of law, grave for his gray hairs, who also administered that office,
when the city by fraud of a fraighted boat, was last taken from the King,
he always was a true maintayner of his fatheres Religion. Cornelius vander
Locht, a man of a peaceable carriage, and a keeper of the ancient faith, was
given to him for Colleague. The other Senators, in virtu and faith, had been
approved be the common wealth. To the cittisens, the same form of government
and laws were appointed, as were to the city of Bolduke: although at first,
for many reasons, all of them could not be kept. The Senate, with the
furtherance of the Magistrates, gave a public school to be governed by the
Professors of the Society of JESUS: which order, Phillip Duke of Arscote, by
the commandment of Isabella the Archdutches (be her letters was put in
execusion.)

All things so set in good order, the conuoyes being dispatched, a guard of
three thousand foot, and seven companies of horse being designed, the
trenches, ditches, The garrison that was appointed for Breda.
and works with which Spinola had encompassed the city, he commanded to be
thrown down: worthy to have been kept, and to have been showed to
posterity, but for his use, who was the chiefest of so great a victory All
^ertes of fortificasiones of the camp were commanded to be broken down.
obtained, else should for ever have remained. Then the army being sent before
by some spaces; the Infanta was accompanied to Antwerp. The footmen being
divided unto, squadrones betwixt Hooghstrate and Breda, saluted her passing by,
with the applause of military joy. The horsemen not far from Hooghstrate,
placed in the great plain by Henry of Bergues, skirmished with military
Military sport ^.
sports like as in earnest war. Fifteen companies, set here and there one
against another, by a mutual en countring, and a feigned fight, exhibited that
comely aspect of war, as the inexpert almost, frame to them selves in their
mind. The sounding of the Trumpets, the running and retyring of the horses, the
raising of the dust from the ground, the glistering of head-peeces, and breast
plates, the brandeshing of the naked swords, the shoutes of those that ran
together, the fire and the smoke, and the sound of the gunnes discharged, and
the echo of the greater cannons playing also a far off, lastly all the
spectacles of a fight, save blood and slaughter.

Metuenda voluptas Spectanti, pulcherque timor. And which was most beautiful
of, all Henry of Bergues him self armed from top to toe, running as it were
for help, betwixt two Princes his friends, VVolfangus VVilhelmus, Duke of
Bauaria, Iuliers, Olive, and Bergues, and Rodulphus Maximilianus Duke of
Saxony, which three together, the sport being ended of the unbloody, war, ran
together to the coache of the Infanta Isabella conqueresse, The ari^mg of her
alteza and of the Marquis to an v^ourp
to salute her with their humble swords. Then Spinolaes, (tents being placed
some three miles from Antwerp) was brought into the city, with the rejoicing
eyes and voices of all that looked for him, together with the Archdutches.
Henry of Bergues with his companies is left to Hooghstrate, to carry the rest
of the conuoye back to Breda. Conde Hindrick remained inhooghstro^t to conduct
the prouisiones to Breda.


In the last conuoye therefore, which was brought into Breda, before the enemy
departed count Bergius about to haing by the riband of Spinolaes laurel,
studied to catch the enemy in a snare, by the inticement of a few prouokers to
battle, the rest lying in ambushe, which should then suddenly appear and
invade them. But the enemy, whether out of prudence, or out of fear, not
coming out of their tents, Bergius departed, doing nothing.

Isabella, whilst she remained at Antwerp, was drawn with the pencill of
rabens that excellent painter, and being graven with an instrument in brass,
she saw her self crowned with a garland of oak, in an imperial table.
VVorthie so to be pictured after that noble triumph, nor by no other hand then
by that of that Apelles.

The Conqueresse David was showed in a Scene, by the school of the Society of
JESUS, after a new kind of model, The tragedy of David was represented by
the fatheres of the Society of Jesus.
wherein after every Act, all the history of the thing performed, was most
delightfully exhibited, in the lively Images of dumme persons. With Isabella,
the rest of the Nobles of the Court beheld the same. A few days after it being
understood, that the enemy was retired into garrison, our army also retired
unto garisones. When Spinola came to Bruxells with a few, he was received with
new congratulations (albeit he avoided it by concealing his coming) against his
will and perforce, all running together to meet him. Meffengers being sent in
the mean space into Spain, King Phillip joyful of a double victory, of the
recovery of Breda, and of the Bay in Brasile, gave to the Marquis Spinola, for
so many labors employed, for so many enemies Amoste royal gift given be his
majesty to the Marquis.
overcome without slaughter, for so impregnable city subiugated, amost Royal
gift as is the chief government of the order of S. James, for either that was
to be the reward of so great a victory or the liberality of so great a King
giving, also greater then could be asked. Pope Vrbanus Letters of the Pope
Vrbano.
moved with the greatness of the things done at Breda, first congratulated
Isabella, and then Spinola for his fortitude and felicity, with most excellent
letters: the copies whereof, I have judged meet to be published, both for their
singular elegancie, as also for the excellent authority of the most prudent
Pontifice.

Pope Vrbans letter, unto the Archdukes Isabella Clara Eugenia.
Our Lord mighty in war, has lifted up his arm over the nations, which
intended evil to his servants, and the right hand of the omnipotent is
glorified in you, Triumphing with joy for the noble victory of conquered
Breda, with the same Epitaph we speak to your Nobility, who having surpassed
the praises of a woman's virtu, prosperously turned the forces of the
Austriacall power, for the defense of the orthodox faith. The band of the
heavenly army fought in your camps; and the constancy of warlike fortitude,
has taught noble nations, inhabiting by the spectacle of so singular a siege,
no hold in earth to be fortified with so strong helps, and defenses, which
the power of acamp armed with celestial helps, does not vanquish. You have
combatted with an enemy containing of perils, and with a cunning artificer of
unheard of terror, he seemed to study to send the very Ocean it self out of
her prisons in to the Austriacall army. He shut up the raging floods with sea
sluices ouerflowed that as it were with a new sea, he might swallow up the
camps of your Nobility. But the wicked have fallen into the ditch which they
dug, and our Lord has reigned. The Ocean restrained the surging waves in
their old seats, and the floods with-drue them selves. Into dry places. We
congratulate this victory to you, wished heartily with the desires of the whole
Church, to which Rome the mother of all Nations applaudeth, which the
testimonies of histories in ensuing ages, will proclaim. And truly how well
your Nobility does use them, we have understood by the voice of the report,
and letters of our ministers. Unless our lord keep the city, in vain do
the statio^s of soldiars watch, and he does arm those cities with legions of
Angels, in which the Catholic faith does prosper, the keeper of public
tranquillity, does predominate. we know with what solicitous piety, and with
what prudent acts you procure, that heresy may be cast forth from the people
of Breda, the mother of perfidie, and nurse of sedition, wherefore, seeing you
leave no place for Pontifical admonitions, we worthily praise and extolle the
glory of your name, and with our most exact prayers recommend unto God your
Nobility, that of so healthful a triumph, you may receive those fruits,
which the Church wishes, and impiety fears, and we bestow upon you
perpetually Apostolical benediction. Given at Rome at S. Maria Mayor under the
Fishers ringe, the 9. of August. 1625. the second year of our Pontificat.


Number XVI.
Pope Vrbanus to the Marquis Spinola thus congratulating.
Heaven triumphs in the victories of thy Nobility, And to Marquis Spinola.
whose branches nourished with the blood of heretics, and the head of
Catholic Religion crowns.

The overthrow of Breda will remain a monument to all Nations and ages of thy
virtu. Let the whole world know even at this day those Captains to be borne in
Italy, in whom the glory of Caesar, and of Scipio, does flowrish a new. Thou
have tamed those enemies, excelling in riches, mad in anger, and desying death.
The floods shut up with sluices, ar commanded to alter their course, and the
heaps of fuming waters, to enter the camps of thy Nobility. The favor of
heaven has thoroughly assuaged them all, and the constancy of thy courage.
Truly that city which treason had taken away from the power of Austria
fearful of the light and lying hid in skulking corners, that city by thy
Nobility, valor and virtu was recovered. The memory of Bredaes siege, will
remain for ever, and from thence, the Captains of ensuing posterity shall
learn, the art of warring, and examples of fortitude. Amongst the present
storms of tossed Italy, and of Princes disscordinge, the news received from
Breda, so far did this joyful beam of the divine clemency shine to our
Pontifical solicitude, that we have determined by the testimony of our
Apostolical letters, to extolle thee as the author of so great a good,
promising our patrocinie to they Nobility; to whom we wish the happiness of
long life, and bestow upon thee for ever, our Apostolical benediction. Given
at Rome at S. Maria Mayor, under the Fishers ringe the 9. of August 1625. the
second year of our Pontificat.

Great indeed, but true praises, now confirmed by Pontifical oracle. And
verily, how great that victory is, nether can the enemy as yet feel, the
wound being yet to green nor we, by the newnes of the joy, can yet esteem,
the same according as it deserves such like or greater victory, albeit great
ought to be reputed when the contention was, not for Breda, but for the loss
of fame and honor by the rendering of that city, which in vain the States
undertook, to defend with so great commotion of all Europe, with calling
together the helps of so many provinces, with the exhausting of so much
treasure, which has acquired an immortal name to the King of Spain, to
Isabella clara Eugenia Infanta and to Marquis Spinola.

CHRONOGRAPHICVM REX BREDAM CEPIT QVINTA IVNII.


APPROBATIO.
HIstoria haec latin primu^ conscripta memorabilis est, in qua qui attente and
grata mente considerauerit quae toto Bredanae obsidionis tempore terra marique
diuinitus contigere, non dubitabit cum Debbora in haec diuinae laudis verba
prorumpere De coelo dimicatum est contra eos. Quapropter eam dignam censeo,
quae non vno idiomate sed varijs euulgetur, quemadmodum hic eadem, etiam
Anglicano exhibetur.

GVILIEL. FABRICIVS Apostolicus ac Regius Librorum Censor.

WITH PRIVILEGE.
WIth Privilege and authority of his Catholic Majesty. as also of don^a
ISABELLA clara Eugenia Infanta of Spain, and of his Excellency, the Marquis
Ambrosio Spinola cheef General of their Armies in the Palatinat, and low
contries, and of the naual Army of the same.

LOVANII, Ex Officina HENRICI HASTENII, Vrbis and Academiae Typographi, M. DC.
XXVIII.

END

