A LETTER, Sent into England from the SVMMER ISLANDS.

Written by Mr. Jews Hughes, Preacher of Gods Word there. 1615.

Printed at London by I.B. for William Welby, and are to be sold at his shop at
the sign of the Swanne in Paul's Churchyard. 1615.

The coppie of a Letter written by Jews Hughes, Preacher of Gods Word in the
Summer Islands, to his friends in England.
Beloved friends, the goodness of Almighty God, in keeping these Islands secret,
from all people of the world (except some that have come hither against their
wills, to their loss, by means of shipwreck) till now that it has pleased
his holy Majesty, to discover and bestow them upon his people of England; is so
great as should stir them up with thankful hearts, to praise his holy and
great name, and to send such to inhabit them as fear God, and give themselves
to serve him in holiness and righteousness, that so, God may love to dwell in
those Islands, as he did in Sion, when he said, This is my rest for ever, here
will I dwell: for I have a delight therein. Psalm 132.13.14. And whereas it is
given out by some, that we do wrong to the King of Spain; they that think
so, are in an error. For the King of Spain had never any thing to do here,
and I hope never shall. The King of kings has kept these Hands from the King
of Spain and all other kings in the world; till now, that it has pleased his
holy Majesty to bestow them upon the King of England, and has put us his
subjects in quiet possession of them, without doing any wrong to the King of
Spain, or any other: and our hope is that if the Spaniards shall come to
invade us, that God will not suffer them to take that from us, that he has
freely given us.

It may be that some are afraid to com hither, because of the strange reports
that have gone of these Islands; as that they are the Islands of devils, and that
here are strange apparitions of devils, and fearful thundering and
lightening, as though Heaven and earth did meet together: believe me my
beloved, here are no such things (thanks be to God). True it is, that as
almighty God did set the Cherubims, and the blade of a sword shaking in
fearful manner to keep Adam from coming into Paradise: so by fearful
tempests, and terrible lightning and thunder, God has terrified and kept all
people of the world from coming into these Islands to inhabit them, as
appears by diverse signs of shipwreck, in diverse places about the Islands;
and this, as I take it, is the cause that such reports have gone of these
Islands; and that all Nauigators and Mariners have been careful to avoid and
shun them, as they would shun the devil himself: but now, since it has
pleased God, to discover them unto, and to bestow them upon his people of
England, here have been no such tempests nor danger, his holy and great name
be therefore pra^sed. And the more to stir you up to praise his hol^ name:
consider, I pray you of the manner how he brought our men to the first sight
and true knowledge of them.

He did not bring them to their loss and grief, by shipwreck as he did
others, but to their great joy, in saving them from shipwreck: for our men were
in danger of shipwreck, three days before they came to the sight of those
Islands: I mean our men that were bound for Virginia, in a Ship called the
Sea-venture, with Sr. Thomas Gates, Sr. George Summers, and Captain Newport,
had their ship so shaken and torn with a cruel tempest, as she received so
much water as covered two tire of Hogsheads, above the ballast, so as men stood
up to the middles with buckets and kettles to bail out water, and continually
pumped for three days and three nights together, the water notwithstanding
increasing upon them, and they so tired and out of hope, as they resolved to
shut up the Hatches, and commit themselves to the mercy of God. Some of them
that had comfortable waters fetched them out, and drank one to an other, taking
their last leave one of an other, until their more joyful and happy meeting
in Heaven.

Then Sir George Summers sitting upon the poope of the ship, where he sat
three days and three nights without meat, couming the ship to keep her as
upright as he could, did descry land, and called upon the people to follow
their pumping and bailing out of water, which they did, the water still
increasing, and the ship ready to sink into the bottom of the Sea.

Then Almighty God, who is always at hand ready to help in time of need, did
show his mercy and power, in causing the Sea to be calm, and in keeping the
ship from sinking, and in leading her safely to a safe place, where he lodged
her fast, between two rocks, so fast as she could not stir: then the
people with joyful hearts, praising God went safely to shore, and saved much
of their goods, and continued above nine months, very comfortably,
notwithstanding that their provision of meat, was spoiled with the salt water,
God did feed them plenteously with Hogs, Fish, Fowls, and other his good
creatures, and did multiply them: for, in that time, there were two children
borne and baptized; the one which was a boy they called Barmudas, the other
which was a girl they called Barmuda. Also they builded them a ship which
they called the Deliverance, and a Pinnas which they called the Patience, and
so departed from these Islands safely and comfortably on the tenth of May 1610.
with good store of Hogs flesh poudred, to carry with them to Virginia.

The eleauenth of July 1612. Master Richard Moore now Deputy Governor, arrived
safely, and with him about 50. souls, men, weomen, and children, to inhabit
these Islands, and since that time (by the mercy of God) diverse other ships
out of England have arrived safely with good supplies: therefore let not the
report that has gone of these Islands discourage any of the people of England
from coming hither.

Neither let the fear of foreign invasion discourage any. For; as I am
persuaded, and have heard Mariners, that have traveled far say, the like
Islands are not to be found in the world, where men may dwell so safe from
foreign invasion, because God has so compassed them about with fearful
rocks, as ships are not able to come near, but in two Channels, that lead
into two goodly and large harbors; the one at a place called the Gurnats head,
the other at a place called Dauies Point.

The Channels are so narrow and curious, as ships must come in very leasurely,
one after another, so as the forts on both sides the channels may sink them
with ease, by the help of God.

As it has pleased God, (for the safety of those Islands) in their first
creation, to inuiron them about with fearful rocks: so now in their first
plantation, it has pleased his holy majesty, to put into the heart of Mr
Moore, now deputy Governor, to fortify them within, so as in the judgment of
man, they are invincible.

At the Gurnats head he has built three forts, and planted them with great
pieces, and men to defend them; and at Dauies Point he has builded two forts,
and planted them with great pieces and men to defend them. He has also built
diverse other forts to keep long boats from landing, and to clear the
harbors, if ships should come in.

If long boats should venture to land any there, they will be but as men cast
away, because ships can not come near to rescue or help any way: therefore
let not fear of foreign invasion, keep any from coming hither.

There is great hope that (by the blessing of God) men may in time live very
comfortably here, and grow rich if they will provide feeds of Indico, etc.
and plants of currants, figs, raisons, mulberry-trees for the silkworms, and
vines, that they may have wine for their own drinking: I say for their own
drinking, because wine considering the leakeage, trouble, and charge will be one
of the least commodities these Islands will afoord.

For the present, Tobacco is the best commodity.

And for victuals, if men have boats, nets, lines, hooks, and striking irons,
they may have good fish at all times; as Rockfish, Angell-fish, Hogge-fish,
Amber-fish, Cutle-fish, Pilat-fish, Hedgehog-fish, Cunny-fish, Old-wiues,
Singraies, Snappers, Groopers, Cauallies, Morraies, Mullets, Mackerels,
Pilchers, Breames, Lobstars, Turtles, sharkes, etc.

Also here are Eeles in fresh water ponds. Rivers here are none, but ponds and
wells of very good and wholesome water, and a water descending from an hill,
which flows and ebbeth with the Sea, and yet drinks always sweet, like
milk.

Here is also plenty of Sea fowls, at one time of the year; as about the
middle of October: Birds which we call Cahouze, and Pimlicoes come in.

The Cahouze continue til the beginning of June in great abundance; they are
bigger bodied then a Pigeon, and of a very firm and good flesh. They are taken
with ease, if one do but sit down in a dark night, and make a noise, there
will more come to him then he shall be able to kill: some have told me that
they have taken twelve and fowreteene dozen in an hour.

When the Cahouze time is out, other birds called Noddies, and Sandy birds
come in, and continue till the latter end of August.

Here is no kind of beasts but hogs and cattes, and they but in one or two
places, which are thought to come at first by means of shippe-wrack. The
Hogs were many, but now are brought to a small number.

The Calves and Lambs that we brought out of England, did prosper exceedingly,
till the hunters met with them.

The Cocks and Hens we brought with us, do prosper and increase much, and
are a great comfort unto us.

And now that we have found out the right seasons of the year to set Corn, we
are like (by the blessing of God) to have plenty of this country wheat, which
is very good, large and fair, and more hearty and strong then our English
wheat.

Young children do thrive and grow up exceeding well, the climate is so
temperate and agreeable to our English constitutions.

The Air is very wholesome, and not subject to such contagious infections as it
is in England.

The longest day in the year is fowerteene hours, and the shortest ten from
sun to sun. When it is noone in England, it is about eight of the clock in the
morning with us.

The seasons of the year are two; a hot season, that begins about the middle
of May, and continues till the midst of August: all the rest of the year
is as a continual spring.

The heat of Summer is not so exstreame, but it may be well endured.

Fresh gales of Wind we have every day.

The greatest annoiance are flies, for two months and a half: they are almost
as busy in England.

Long and drizling rain is seldom seen, but great showers with great drops
very often.

Thunder and lightning, do no such hurt here as in England.

Snow, hail, frost, thick and foggie mistes we have none.

The night is lighter and more comfortable here then in England.

The birds make a noise almost all night, but not with such pleasant tunes as
the Larkes, and other birds do in England.

Here is no bird that sings in the day but the sparrow, the
Robin-red-brest, and the Robin williams.

The earth is very fertile, and so mellow and gentle, as it needs neither
plowing, nor digging, so that after the wood is taken off, and the grass and
weeds be burnt and destroyed, and the common business of fortifying be once
ended, men shall live here in much case, without such moyling and toyling as
is in England. The greatest labor will be in worming and pruning of some
plants, which children may do as well, and better then men.

I wish that all they that hereafter shall come hither out of England, would
consider with themselves, that these Islands, were never inhabited till now, and
that therefore they must of necessity labor hard at first, and be contented to
endure hardness and some want of many necessaries.

In time (by the grace of God) the storehouse shall be furnished with all
necessaries, for such as have money, and they that have not, if they be honest
and industrious, shall be trusted: But now in regard that the greatest part of
the people that be here, came very rashly and carelessly, not considering
whither they went, nor what they might in time have need of, I think that all
that can be brought into the store as yet will be taken up by them: and
therefore I advise such as are to come, (to bring every one that is able) a
barrel or two of biskets for his own eating, till he have cleared his
ground, and have wheat of his own.

Also let them bring oil, vinager, aquauite, barrel butter, pottes, kettles,
frying pannes, triuets, boules, traies, tanckards or pottes to drink in,
pailes to fetch water in, and little barrels or iarres to keep it in for their
drink. The water is very good and wholesome, such as many do delight in.

Also let them bring tongs, fireshouels, bellows, tinder-boxes, brimstone,
flint-stones, and steeles, spits, dripping-pannes, candle sticks, lamps,
locks, spades, shouels, pick-axes, hatchets, whetstones; sawes, hammers,
pearcers pincers, and nails, of all sorts so many as will serve to build a
house with, and leather to mend their shoes, and sparrowbils, or nails to
drive into them, else the rocks will tear them out quickly.

Also let them bring bedding: flock-beds are better then feather beds. And for
apparel, for the summer, let them bring Canuas, or stuffes; blew linen and
good buckrom the women do wish for.

Also let them not forget to bring Castle soap, pins points, lases, needles,
thread, thimbles, sheeres, and scissors. Also let them bring strong fishing
lines, of 12. or 14. faddoms long, and some small of whipcords and strong hooks,
the biggest, and as diverse as they can, and some small hooks for breames.

And above all things have a cate to leave their sins beninde them, and come
hither as it were into a new world, to lead a new life; and for the comfort of
their souls let them bring Bibles, and other good books: and pack up all
their small stuff in barrels; the barrels will afterward serve them for many
good uses.

Idle persons, and such as are given to filching, do live here in great
misery: so also do all whorish women in great disgrace, hated and loathed of
all honest people, which maks them weep, and sigh with tears to wish
themselves in England again, and for their comfort, to cool them a little,
they are now and then tawed at a boats tail up and down the harbor: so were
a couple served together, a man and a woman that came in the ship that came in,
and so have diverse others.

Also all such as are profaners of the Sabbath, and come to the service of God
but when they list, I see that God finds them out, and denies them his
blessing.

All they that have grace to serve God, are sure to prosper and live
comfortably, because God has said. Behold my servants shall eat, and ye shall
be hungry: behold my servants shall drink, and ye shall be thirsty: behold my
servants shall rejoice and ye shall be ashamed: behold my servants shall sing
for joy of heart, and ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall houle for
vexation of mind. Isai 65.13.14.

Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, and upon them that
trust in his mercy, to deliver their souls from death, and to preserve them in
famine. Psalm. 33.18. and 19

The Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall want no
manner of thing that is good. Psalm. 34.10.

Wait thou on the Lord, and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee, thou shall
inherit the land, when the wicked shall perish, thou shall see. Psalm. 37.34:

The God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord JESUS, the great
shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant make you
perfect in all good works to do his will, working in you that which is
pleasant in his sight, through JESUS CHRIST, to whom be praise for ever and
ever, Amen. Heb. 13.20.21.

From the Summer Islands this 21. of December. 1614. Yours as his own, Jews
Hughes.


