The Discovery of a London Monster, called, The Black Dog of Newgate;
Profitable for all Readers to take heed by.

Vide, Lege, Cave. Time brings all things to light.

Printed at London by M. P. for Robert Wilson, at his Shop at Grayes-Inne Gate
in Holborne. 1638.

To the Reader.
Marvel not gentle Reader, though in a mad humor, I have thus published the
Black Dog of Newgate, and here shown his tricks to the wide world to
wonder at; he is but a Curre indeed, not worth three half pence to be sold,
but if you will accept of my Pen and Paper, it may countervaile the charge of
six pence; it is no better then an ill favored black Dog, yet I desire you
not to think your time ill bestowed in the reading, nor the price too great
which you pay for it. When you have perusde it, and like it not, reward not my
good will with a scoff: But say the Dog came from Newgate, hang him up and
rend the Book in pieces, and then I will be your debtor in a Work of more
worth, but let me tell you by the way, This Dog, with many Dogs of his kind,
have I known a great while, and have received by them great wrong: otherwise
had I not bestowed so much time in deciphering a Cur; nay more, let me give you
to understand, that this Dog, thus shadowed under the name of a servant at
Newgate, was in my sight, by head and shoulders thrust out of Newgate: and now
men chosen instead of Dogs of far more pity and honesty, than that hell-hound
ever had.

Therefore let me thus conclude, that never Cur in shape of man, in that place,
shall commit the like abuses. No more for the Dog of Newgate: But for this Dog
of mine, wish me well, and I will never do you ill: Rest content, and I am
well pleased.

Fare you Well.
The Discovery of a London Monster, called, The Black Dog of Newgate.
AWonder, a wonder Gentlemen, Hels brook loose, and the Black Dog of
Newgate is got out of Prison, and leapt into a Sign: What the Devils here
(quoth a mad fellow going by) seeing the Black Curre ring'd about the nose with
a golden Hoope, his two sawcer-like eyes, and an Iron chains about his neck;
this cannot choose (said he) but be a well customed house, where such a Porter
keeps the door, and calls in company. Room for a customer, quoth I, so in I
went, where I found English, Scottish, Welsh, Irish, Dutch and French, in
several Rooms; some drinking the neat wine of Drleance, some the Gascony,
some the Bordeaux, there wanted neither Sherry sack, nor Charnico, Maligo, nor
Peeter Seem, Ambercolour'd Candy, nor Liquorish Ipocras, brown beloved
Basterd, fat Aligant, or any quick spirited Liquor that might draw their wits
into a Circle, to see the Devil by in^nagination: I seeing this Gallimaufry of
Company, set me down, and called for my whole pint alone, which I had not
half drunk up, but there sits down by me a poor Thin-gut fellow, with a face
as red as the gilded knobs of an Aldermans Horse-bridle, one, as it seemed,
newly come out of Limbo, with commendation to his rugged Devilship, Mounsieur
Shagg, the Black Dog of Newgate, who being a fellow, as I thought, not worth
six pence in money, yet would he spend eight pence to keep me company. I, to
equal his expenses, called for as much, and thereupon having both our wits set
upon the rack of invention, began to argue of the Black Dogs beginning,
and how he came first to be called the black Dog of Newgate: now touching the
same, I maintained that I had read an old Chronicle, that it was a walking
spirit in the likeness of a black Dog, gliding up and down the streets a
little before the time of Execution, and in the night whilst the Sessions
continued, and his beginning thus.

In the reign of King Henry the third there happened such a famine through
England, but especially in London, that many starved for want of food, by which
means the Prisoners in Newgate eat up one another altue, but commonly those
that came newly in, and such as could make but small resistance. Amongst many
others cast into this Den of misery, there was a certain Scholar brought
thither, upon suspicion of Conjuring, and that he by Charms and devilish
Whithcrafts, had done much hurt to the Kings Subjects, which Scholar, mauger
his Devils Furies, Sprits and Goblins, was by the famished Prisoners eaten up,
and deemed passing good meat. This being done, such an idle conceit possessed
the minds of the poor Prisoners, that they supposed, nightly to see the
Scholar in the shape of a black Dog walking up and down the Prison, ready
with his rabening Jaws to tear out their bowels: for his late humane flesh
they had so hungerly eaten, and withal they hourly heard (as they thought)
strange groans and cries, as if it had been some creature in great pain and
torments; whereupon such a nightly fear grew amongst them, that i^ turned to a
Frenzy, and from a Frenzy to Desperation; in which desperation they killed
the Keeper, and so many of them escaped forth, but yet whither soever they came
or went they imagined the black Dog to follow, and by this means, as I do
think, the name of him began.

Not so, quoth Signior Thin-gut, I think it rather an idle fiction, then a
probable truth; but this I must tell you Sir, (said he) I know it for a truth,
that there is no other black Dog, that I ever saw or heard of, but a great
black stone standing in the dungeon called Limbo, the place where the
condemned Prisoners be put after their Judgment, upon which they set a burning
candle in the night, against which, I have heard that a desperate condemned
Prisoner d^shed out his brains; and that is all the Black Dogs that I know,
or heard of: But if you be so pleased as to publish it, I will satisfy the
wondering world with a discourse of the Black Dog in the best manner I can, and
the very same, that the wisest judgments thinks it to be. In so doing (quoth
I) you please God, benefit your Country, and satisfy your ^riends: so with a
stayed look and in sober manner, he began as follows.

Sir (quoth he) the Black Dog is a black Conscience, haun^ing none but black
conditioned people, such as Newgate may ch^llenge to be guests; yet this rugged
Curre has his sev^rall abidings; as in the bosoms of Traitors, Murderers,
Thieves, Cut-purses, Cunny-catchers, and such like, who being the Devils black
Parator summons them, one after another, to appear personaily at his
Hempton-hall of his three-l^g'd-Tiborne, but in the mean time they commit many
notable fellonies and cozonings, to the great hurt of plain minded people: as
for example, I will first begin with a Woman Thief, which in my mind is a
limb of the Devil, for at any not able Robbery, where still a woman is an
Actor, there likely is committed some murder or other, for as they be the
kindest in love, so are they cruellest in hate: But now ^o one Woman Thief. I
once knew living about London, a lusty W^nch, Gentlewoman-like, clothed in
silk and tasf^ty, ^ood Plate and rich Furniture about her house, and well
esteemed of her neighbors, that had no other means to maintain her estate
but plain Theeverie: in what manner think you? mar^ in this kind: she had for
her p^rpos^ a homely suit of apparel, like unto a Trads^mans w^fe, a pa^re of
shoo^s with cloth soles to prevent crackling, a fire-sticke in her hand
vnkindled, and so in the morning b^time would she along the str^etes, and any
where she did chance to espy either Gentleman's or Merchants door open, in she
would, where being not intercepted by any, what thing soever lay in her way was
good purchase, and with her it should: as Hat, Cloak, Gown, Petticoate, or
Smock, or such like. But if it chanced that either Maidservant, or an
Apprentice, or any other met her, then would she desire to kindle her stick,
where sitting by the fire she would spend away the time hovering over it, till
the coast were clear, or else would she in needy sort request a cup of small
beer, which the honest minded Maid will fetch her, thinking her to be some
poor neighbor, perchance in a silver Beaker, which she like an Hipocrite will
sip, and simper over so long till the maids back be turned, and then goes away
beaker and all: she will sometimes in her cloth shoes tread so softly that a
mouse cannot hear her, and venture up into a Knights Chamber, he and his Lady
being in bed together, and carry away the Jewels they wore the day before, but
if being spi^d by any of the Household, she has the name of one Gentleman or
other aright, which is well acquainted in that house, and so escapes
unsuspected: other times she will venture into Mercers or Silkemens shops, when
they arebusied with most customers, as though she were some waitingmayde to a
Lady or Gentle woman there present, and with a hook under her wearing apparel
will, like a cunning Porter, bear away either Silk, Uelvet, or other rich
Stuffes, not perceived by the Shopkeepers, or any Customer, many such
conveiances is she Crast-master in, which in my mind are the black d^^des of
iniquity, and well may she be called one of the Black Dogs of Newgate, for at
last, the rewards of Newgate will fall to her share.

I could tell you likewise where the Black Dog keeps his randevous, if I do
not mistake, in the bosoms of Chamberlaines and Tapsters in great Inns: and
though the Master be an honest man, the Servants may be knavish, I speak not
to all, but ^o some, as by the Law Probatum est: To our purpose: A plain
Country Gentleman, Yeoman, Farmer, or such like, coming up to the Term, and
chancing to happen into one of these Inns, he as a guest boldly throws his
cloak down upon the Hall Table, thinking all true men in the house, being as
then full of Guests; in comes the Tapster or Chamberlain, in jesting manner,
and carries the Cloak away in good sadness, either into the Tap-house, or
into the Hostry, and there keeps it for his own; the poor Country man
missing it, makes inquiry, thinking some of the house had laid it up, but no
news thereof, (confess and be hanged) thinks he that keeps it in Lauender,
in too sweet a place for the countrymans having it again: the Innkeeper
himself hearing of his guests loss, goes chasing and fretting up and down,
that his house is thus discredited by thieves, and lays wait at every Brokers,
both in Long-lane, Charter-house-lane, Barbican, Hounds-ditch, and such like
places, but no news thereof; so is the countryman sent home to his wife
without a cloak, perhaps with as little money, by which means the Innkeeper
for ever after loses his guests.

Now come we to the Thief, Tapster or Chamberlain, I mean he that stole the
cloak in jest, he must now needs sell in good earnest; to whom, to the
Broakers? no: for there is wait laid: whither then, to a Neighbor? no neither
for then it may come to light, and be known of his Master: but unto a kind
of Fripperers it must be vented, which be certain Merchants of old wares,
going up and down to buy Lists, ends of Cloth, and old Cloakes, one of these
must buy it, and send it into France, to learn the French Tongue, or into the
Netherlands to speak Duch, these be terrible black Dogs indeed, and have
sawcer-like eyes that can look broad and wide quite over a whole City; but
let them alone and lose themselves in their own adventures, it concerns not
me, there is a whip in store for these Dogs, and their kennels will be
ransackt I fear me. But now to wade deeper into this Labyrinth of knavery, I
will tell you as notable a pranke as ever you heard by one of these arche
Bandoggs done within these few years. There were two of this faculty which I
name M. A. and M. B: whom (to bring this their proceeding purpose to effect)
either bought or hired two Chains, the one of perfect good gold, the other
plain copper double gilt, and away go they into the Country toward Beverley
Fair, in Yorkshire, well mounted upon two goodly geldings, as they had been
two substantial Gentlemen, and riding by the way they happened into company of a
Northern Gentleman riding from London, with whom they spent liberally,, and
every night at their lodgings were all fellows both at board and bed; in this
familiar sort riding together some two or three days, they began thus to
effect their purpose, and to cast forth their angling hooks to catch this
greedy gudgeon: First, M. B. spurring his Gelding as they rode together, got
some quarter of a mile of ground before the Gentleman, and his fellow knave
riding after a good pace, and lets fall the right gold Chain tied within a
Buckram bag, in the sight of Master A. directly in the high way; who seeing
it, starteth a little before the Gentleman, taking it hastily up, saying, A
prize, a prize, in a Buckram bag, a prize: half part quoth the Gentleman, not
so quoth Master A. I found it, but I am witness (quoth the Gentleman) and will
have half, or cry it lost in the next Market: During this controver^^e, they
overtooke Master B. who had let fall the Chain, and being made Umpire betwixt
them, gave judgment, that it should be equally shared, whereupon opening the
bag, they found therein, wrapped in a fair paper, a good Chain of Gold,
worth four score pound: the Northern Gentleman having it in his hand, made
bold to keep it till they came to Beverley, where at a Goldsmiths shop they
tried it, and being touched thoroughly, the Goldsmiths proffered for it full four
score pounds in ready money: nay, said the Gentleman, if it be so good, I will
have it my self, and give Master A forty pound for his part: Whereupon both
being agreed, home they go to the Gentleman's house, and receive their money:
but now mark the I^st, whilst the money was a telling, Master B. cunningly
convaies the copper Chain into the place where the gold Chain lay upon the
Table, being like to it, put in a Buckram bag and all, that one could not know
one from the other: so having received the money, away goes Master A. and B.
well contented for their journey, leaving the Northern Gentleman nothing but a
Copper chain for his forty pound, who perhaps like a wise man never perceived
till the guilt was worn off, and then where should he look my two Gallants?
marry, God knows where, unless it were howling at the grate at Newgate,
omongst those pitiful creatures. Having told this tale, the Bell began to
ring nine a clock, whereupon the Uintner calling, shut up the doors, it is
late, caused my friend and I to break company, who paid for our Wine, thanking
each other, and so departed, he to his lodging, and I to mine, where being no
sooner laid in my bed, and calling to mind, our passed discourses of the
Black Dog, and his first beginning, I fell into a most unquiet slumber, and
was all the night long troubled with a most fearful dream; for me thought I
was my self prisoner in Newgate, lying laden with I^on^ in great misery,
where being destitute of friends, money-lesse, and forsaken of all my
acquaintance, this following Dialogue is ^h subject passed betwixt my self and
one Z^^^, who was like wise a prisoner as I was, and perfectly acquainted with
matters touching the discovery of the s^^^arlatiue degree of Cunny-catchers:
pithy, pleasant, and profitable for all the Readers hereof.

The Interlocutors. The Author, and Zany, a prisoner. Author. ZAny, I have many
times been in hand with thee to give me some notes upon thy knowledge, as
concerning the notable abuses committed by a sort of dissolute fellows, who
are in very deed the worst members in a Commonwealth; I mean infamous
Cunny-catching Knaves, who continually seek the spoil of others to enrich
themselves, and now is the time thy help will do me some pleasure: for at the
request of a very friend, I was moved to write something of worth, whereupon I
made choice of the Black Dog of Newgate, to be a subject to write upon,
wherein I could not choose, diverse strong reasons especially mooving thereunto,
but in that title shadow the Knavery, Uillany, Robbery, and Cunny-catching
committed daily by diverse, who in the name of Service and Office, were as it
were attendants at Newgate. Again, I did choose to give my book that title,
as well to satisfy some, who yet think there is some spirit about that prison
in the likeness of a black Dog: of which fond imagination to put them out of
doubt, I thought good to give them to understand, that indeed there is no such
matter. The third reason was, for I being in Newgate a prisoner, and
overthrown by these kind of bad people, with their cunny-catching, in most
vile and wicked manner, in so much that whilst I there languished in great
extremity, I did both hear and see many outrageous injuries by them committed
on diverse sorts of people: the premises considered. I do entreat thee to let
me have thy help to set down some of their villainies committed in thy
knowledge, and I will not be flacke to present this book, being finished, into
their godly hands, who will assuredly give them condign punishment, as also
provide, that the like mischiefs shall be never any more put in practice by any
notable villains.


Zany. Indeed you say well, and I agree: but yet you know I am a poor man, and
am a Prisoner. Again, it is ill m^dling with edge tools. As you comprehend
them in the name of a Dog: so if they be angry, they will bite, and play the
Devil in their likeness. They have parlous heads, store of money, and some
good friends: all which I want. Neither will I name any: but if their knaveries
were known, it would be thought the gallows as fit for these Cu^ny-catchers,
as Newgate is for me, who am rather kept in to bribe them, then to answer any
offense I have committed: yet seeing you have begun well, I would wish you end
no worse: and for my part, tell you one of their knaueries, and I Will tell
another: so that ere we have done, if we tell al, the Cunny-catcher will think we
have told too much. But by your l^aue a word. I will name no man, for if they
should be named, their friends would be angry: and more then that, I rather
wish their amendment than their public infamy: of which motion if you like,
begin when you will, and when you are weary rest you, and I will go on with it:
for our matter being all one, no doubt our conclusion will be to the like
effect.

Godly, wise, honorable, worshipful, and gentle Reader, know first, there be
an infinite number of this sect and company of cunny-catchers, therefore it
were an endless piece of work to name them all: but for I know too many of
them, and have likewise paid for my acquaintance with them, it may be expected
I should name some of them, which for the inconvenience might thereby ensue, I
thought good to crave your patience on that behalf, assuring you that they are
easy enough to be known by their colors: but what wicked parts they have
performed, I will not fail but make manifest. Therefore, first I desire you to
imagine, that these fellows, these Cunny-catchers, I would say, do promise to
the world great matters: as for example. They will undertake if a man be robbed
by the way, they will help the party offended to his money again, or to the
thieves at the least. Likewise, if a purse be cut, a house broken, a piece of
Plate stole, they will promise the like: mary, to further this good piece of
service, they must have a warrant procured from some Justice at the least, that
by the said general warrant, they may take up all suspected persons: which
being obtained, then mark how notably therewith they play the knaves, how
shamefully they abuse the Justices who granted the warrant, and how notoriously
they abuse a great sort of poor men, who neither the warrant mentions, nor
the party agreeved in any wise thought to mol^st or trouble: and for they
shadow all their villainies under color of some especial warrant, let it
suffice thee to read the sequel, and then judge of their abuses, as they
deserve. Now first will I begin with their petty practices in their lewd
actions. Say there is a man or two robbed by the high way not far from London:
the rumor hereof being bruited in the City, these fellowos will be sure to have
intelligence with the first, in what manner the men were robbed, how much money
they lost, and where they dwell: the reason is this. The Cunny-catchers have
always abroad some odd fellows which are inquisitors of purpose, who always
what they hear rumord, they presently come and certify their good master
Cunny-catchers, of all whatsoever, how, where, and when this robbery was
committed; presently away goes E. H. or N. S or some of that set; and enquires
out the party that was robbed: with whom it H. or S hap so meet withal, some
occasion shall presently be found to intrude themselves into the company of
them be robbed: and after some circumstances, the Cunny-catcher begins to tell
of a strange robbery committed in such a place, saying it was shamefully done:
and withal, they will cast some words a far off as who should say in effect,
if I be not deceived I know the thieves, and it may be, that if I might speak
with him or them that were robbed, happily I should direct them how they might
take the villains.

All this while the Cunny-catcher takes no notice of them that were robbed,
neither does the Cunny-catcher make any show, that they knew any such matter to
be done to any in the company.

Now the poor men that were robbed, hearing their smooth speeches, one of them
begins very heavily to shape his tale in this, or such like manner. My honest
friend, I know too well that such a robbery was done, and in very deed, I was
the man was robbed in such a place, and at such a time as you speak off. I
beseech you good friend, stand me in what stead you may: and if you can help
me again to my money, or to take the Thieves, I will not only think my self
greatly beholding to you, but I will also please you to your content. I am a
^ore man, pray you do me what pleasure you may, good sir, I beseech you. Th^se
and such like s^eeches he uses. The Cunnicatcher presently joins issues
with him, and with much cunning he tempereth his talk. To be short, he
offers all the pleasure he can do him: but quoth he, you know I am a
stranger unto you, and I know not whether you will use me well or no: It may
be, when I have done you good, you will lightly reward me. But i will tell you
what I Will do: Give me but forty shtllings in hand to bear my charges the time I
may search them, and if I do not deserve it, I will restore it again, and
loose all my labor: if you like of this motion, so it is: if not, I will not
deal in your matter hot nor cold.

When the man that was robbed, hears him so brief, yet loath to part company
on the sudden: he in treats to know the Cunnicatchers name, and where he
dwells. To this question, another of the Cunnicatchers companions makes this
reply. Honest man, you need not doubt of his good meaning toward you: This is
such a one as may do you pleasure, if he please to undertake it. Then he
roundeth the man in the ear, and tells him his name is E. H. and that he
knows all the Thieves about London, and that he has done more good in
helping men to their own, then can be devised to be done by a hundred others,
praising him for a wonderful good member in a Commonwealth: further
certifying the party where this E. H. dwells, and with an oath whispering, he
wishes him to give him some xx. s. and then agree what he shall give him more,
when the Thieves be taken, making many protestations that he need not to
misdoubt of E. H. his honest dealing with him in any respect.

Presently the poor man puts his hand into his pocket and out he pulls an
Angel: then says he, M. H. I have heard of you before, and for I have heard
nothing but well of you, I am the willinger to deal with you: truly here is an
Angel for you, and I will give you a gallon of wine at the Tavern, and if you
do me good in this matter, I will give you xx. s. more: then with some
entreaty he desires them to take it in good part, and so gives him the money.

The Conny-catcher takes the money very quaintly, as though he would refuse
it, but in the end heel pocket it up, and is willing to go to the Tavern,
where after that drinking a gallon or two of wine, they conclude of the former
matter: and E. H. will out of hand get the Thieves into Newgate: and so much he
promises to perform upon his honest fidelity, not letting to say, if he do
it not, he dare be hanged for it.

Then the day is appointed, when within a week the party robbed shall come to
Newgate to know what news, and for that time they part, the honest man to his
home or about his business, the Cunnycatchers to some other odd place about
their knavery, where they laugh at the Cunny, devising how to get him in for
more money, never intending to do any thing in the matter, which they have
undertaken for the honest man, whose angel they drink merrily.

Now we will leave this man for a while to his business of more profit, and I
will proceed with the Cunny-catchers for their practizes.

These Cunny-catchers are never idle: and therefore it follows next to let
you understand of a notable piece of service the said H. and S. played with a
friend of mine.

It happened my friend being some time in question, could not miss but he must
needs have acquaintance with these odd shavers: and thus it fell out. My
friend being in a Tavern drinking with some of his acquaintance, whilst they
were drinking together, in comes H. S. who presently used great courtesy to my
friend: but to be short, they took full survey of his weapons, his good
cloak, and neat apparel, which was enough for them to imagine that my friend
had store of money: whereupon they asked if he would give them a Pottle of
Wine? which he willingly granted: and so after one Pottle, he gave them
another: the reckoning paid, and the company ready to depart, quoth S. to E. H
I pr^y you hark in your ear.

Presently he whispereth. Thus it is, my fellow has a Warrant to take you:
therefore in kindness I wish you to draw to your purse, and give him an Angel
to drink, and I will undertake he shall not see you at this time.

My friend hearing his tale tend to a cunnicatching effect, he begins to swear
they are cunnicatching Knaves, and they shall not wrong him in any respect.

To be short, the Cunnicatcher sends for a Constable, and charges the party
aforesaid with felony: the Constable knowing them to be in office (but not to
be such bad fellows) he presently apprehends the party: which done, the
Cunnicatchers seeing the prisoner in safe keeping, dis-furnished of his
weapons, they presently require the prisoner of the Constable, and they will be
his discharge: which the Constable did, thinking no less then they were right
honest men.

Now mark what followed. As these two knaves were a bringing this party
charged with felony to Newgate, one of them offers yet for xx. s. to set him
free: of which, when the party had considered, knowing though he were clear of
that he was charged, yet if he lay in prison till the Sessions, it would be
greater charges. When he was on Newgate stairs ready to go into the Batle, he
was content to leave his Cloak, that money he h^d in his purse, and his
weapons which were in the Constables hand pa^^e for the xr. s. which the
Cunnycatchers took, and discharged the prisoner without any more to do.

Not long after, the aforesaid Cunnicatchers meet with this their Cunny of xx.
s. price, and another who was known to be, as they term him, a good fellow
about the town in his company.

And where meet they, but in a Tavern not far without Bishops Gate, where
these two poor Cunnies had spoken for Supper: amiddest their good cheer, in
comes H. and S. bidding them be merry with their fare. One of these two being
an odd fellow, and in dread of these Cunnicatchers, knowing them very
perfectly, set on the best face he could, and bad them welcome, entreating
them to sit down, and do as they did, of which proffer the Cunnicathers
accepted willingly, and sat down with them and eat and drunk merrily: supper
being ended, the reckoning was called for, the shot paid, and all things
discharged, the Cunnies would feign have been gone.

Nay, quoth N. S. for of the two he was the grimmer Knave and had most skill to
talk, I must let you know that which indeed I am sorry to do. Yet if you will
do your selves good, you may use us well, and we will not use you amiss, to
be short, thus it is, such a man was robbed within this week, and he has got
out a warrant for you two by name. He has lost ten pounds: now if you will
restore the money, and bestow xx. s. on us two to drink for our pains, we will
undertake to satisfy the party and be your discharge, if not, we have a
warrant, and you must answer it at Newgate.

This back reckoning is something sharp, but there is no remedy, either pay
so much money, or else must a Constable be sent for, and so to Newgate as round
as a hoope.

To be short, this was the conclusion, the Cunnies paid down xi. l. every
penny, whereof ten pound was to be paid to the man in the moon, for I dare
take it upon my death, neither of these Cunnies did offend any such man, in
manner as these knaves had charged them.


Zany. By your leave a word, all this while you have not concluded what became
of the first Cunny these edde shavers meet with; I pray you be brief, and let
us hear how he was ended withal, and then you shall hear me tell you of
wonders, if these be held to be but of moment.


Author. Well then to the first Cunny; again at his time appointed, he comes
to the wise man of Newgate to inquire what is done in his matter, and at
Newgate the Cunny finds his add acquaintance with E. H. who at the first
sight has the time of the day for him, much courtesies, but to the Tavern they
must to debate the matter, where they must have a pottle of the best. Whilst
the Wine is a filling, the Cunny-catcher shows what great pain he has taken
to come to the Thieves, and how hardly they mist of them: but for it is best to
use few words, the Cunnycatcher from one day to another, still drives off the
Cunny, who is still in hope that the Cunny-catcher means good faith, whereas
indeed he never made account what faith was: so to be short, if the Thieves
robbed hi not some five or six pound, he has got, or if he find where he is, a
dry shaving as much as forty or fifty shillings more.

I tell thee Zany me thinks these are notable villantes, and pity they should
not be punished, who live by no other means but practicing such pranks as
these be.

Again this is a general rule to the Cunnicatcher, that when or where he
meets with such a one as has been at any time committed to Newgate, if that
fellow have good apparel on his back, the Cunnicatcher takes acquaintance
of him, and a quart of Wine they must needs drink, when the reckoning comes to
payment, the Cunnicatcher has brought no money from home that day, so by the
others drawing of his purse to pay for the Wine, he knows what lyning is in
it, then if he have money, the Cunnicatcher is in hand with him for a Bribe,
some odd crown or an Angel to drink: if the man be in any fault, fearing the
worst, he will not stand with him for a trifle: if he be in no fault, perhaps
he tells, in faith you are deceived in me, I am not he you take me for, and so
parts and gives him nothing.

Presently the Cunnicatcher uses all means to know where he lies, which when
he has done, within a night or two away goes this knave with soon old warrant
to the Constable of that liberty, craving his aid to apprehend a bad fellow who
is thought to have done much mischief, but for a surety he avoucheth him for
an arrand thief, and that he has been in Newgate. Upon these speeches the
Constable goes with this H. where the poor man lies, and apprehends him and
convaies him to Newgate, laying some Justices commandment on him, where he lies
till the Sessions, unless he come off roundly with a bribe to the
Cunnicatcher: but say the Cunnicatcher be mistaken in this fellows purse, and
that he have not so much as he supposed, yet the Cunnicatcher is so strong of
faith, that he will not believe the contrary: so by this means the poor man
lies in prison till he be quite a beggar, without releasement till the
Proclamation at the Sessions, at which time he is not worth the ground he goes
on, neither knows he, being utterly overthrown, how to have any remedy:
which is pitiful and lamentable.


Zany. I muse you should account of these trifling matters, whereas indeed they
are nothing in respect of the priz^^ they have played, and if you will give me
leave a little, I will come something nearer the Cunnicatcher then you have yet
done.


Author. I pray thee do: yet I must needs tell thee I have bin too near the
Cunnicatcher, and what I have spoken of him, it is not only with grief but
withsorrow to my heart, and anguish of soul, that these outrages should be
committed, to the utter undoing of so many, as within this thirty years have
been: for so long did I hear one of these Uillaines vaunt he had been in
office about Newgate: and what I have done or said on this behalf, with my
life and death, I am ready to make proof of it, that it is true. This mind I
bear, that the Devil should have his due of these Knaves, and I hold it my
duty to reveal whatsoever is to the good of a Commonwealth: and so I will,
though the Cunnicatcher swear to give me a cut in the leg for my labor, and
now Zany I pray thee go forward.

Gentlemen, though I want eloquence, yet you shall see I have a rolling tongue,
deep knowledge, and am a rare fellow to bewray many matters touching
cunnicatching.

Master Green, God be with thee, for if thou had been alive, knowing what I
know, thou would as well have made work as matter, but for my part, I am a
plain fellow, and what I know, I will not be meale-mouthed, but blab I wist,
and out it must: nay, and out it shall, for as the Comedian said, Plenus
rymarum sum.

I know twenty and twenty of these fine Cunnicatchers, who learn of the
Fencers to double a blow, knowing what belongs to the button and the bob: yet
for the Author has only used four Letters for two names, let them stand, and
when I name H he must think Zany can see whilst there is an eye in his head,
H. is aspirationis nota, and no le^^^r indeed, therefore I care not if this
Cunnycatching H. were wiped out of the Letters Row to h^ng on the Gallows, who
is fitter to be a Sipher to make up a number at Tyborne, then to be a man of so
bad condition. As for a Pottle of Wine he cares not who he hang so he may have
it, if it be but the Wine.


N. Is the first of the second name the Author uses. No Knave I warrant you:
and as for S. if he be in some sort a Knave to be proved, he will be contented,
nay, he must in spite of his teeth digest the name of a Cunnicatcher, for by
that are y^ being not worth a groat a year, he is able by his fine wit to
maintain himself in his Satin Doublet, Uelvet Hose, his Hat lin^d with
Uelvet, his Silk stock, his Rapie^ and Dagger gilt, his golden Brouch, and
all things correspondent as might seem a man both of wit and living. And now
I, according to my promise to the Author, will have a cast at these fine
Cunnicatchers, and I will not slander them in any wise, but speak the truth
unto death. If I say more then I will prove, I will never bid you trust Zany
again.

Not long since at a Tylting upon triumph on the Coronation day: many good
Subjects with joy assembled the place of Triumph, as well rejoicing to see the
Queens most Excellent Majesty, as also to see the Tylting performed, by
sundry Noble and Right Honorable personages.

Amongst the rest, there comes a woman with six pounds in her purse, which the
Cutpurse met withal, she, as it seemed, having more mind on the pleasures of
the present day and time, then she had of her purse.

The Iusts ended for that day, the woman thinking all had been well, takes her
way homewards with a friend of hers, yet by the way, this good woman must needs
drink with her friend a Pint of Wine: but here was the mischief, when the
Wine was to be paid for, the woman mist her purse, and looking on the strings,
with a cold heart she might perceive her purse was cut away.

Her friend to comfort her bad her take no thought, for he knew a man wou^d
help her to her purse again, and says he, we will presently go to him, for I
know where he dwells.

The woman thanked her friend for his courteous offer, and away they go to E.
H his house, where they found him, to whom they brake the matter wholly how it
was, desiring his help. Presently he had them in the wind, and bad them
welcome, promising that if they would content him for his pains he would do
her good, asking her what she will willingly bestow to have her money again.
At the first word she offered him forty shillings. All this was well, and they
agreed to meet next day about White Hall, where they shall have answer to their
content: and so after they had drunk a quart of Wine at the Tavern, for that
might they parted. The next day, according to promise they met, and this E. H.
had in his company a man, who he said was a Constable, but whether he said
truly or no, I will not say, but to the matter: They appoint the woman to go
to a friends house hard by, and she should hear more anon. Away went she, as
they had appointed her, and away go they to look for Cutpurses.

I warrant you they sought not long, but there they met with a Cutpurse, whom
they take by the sleeve: and there they meet with another as good a Cutpurse as
the former, and so they take at the least a dozen Cutpurses: which when they
have done, the Cunnicatcher begins to rail mightily, swearing they shall some
of them be hanged: but to prison they shall all go, unless this money be had
again, she wing a Warrant, or a piece of Paper at the least: which is
sufficient to bear the Cunnicatcher harmless, as he says.

Now the Cutpurses, though they be all clear of this matter, yet they begin to
quake for fear, offering rather then they will go to prison, they will make
up the money, so that E. H. will promise to give it them again when the
Cutpurse shall be known, who cut the Purse indeed. This motion the
Cunnicatcher likes indifferently: and so of these dozen of Cutpurses, he
takes of some more, and of some less, that the sum is largely made up:
which done, they are all discharged, marry they must have some twenty shillings
overplus for their pains and kindness showed to the Cutpurses, all which is
granted.

To be short, no Cutpurse escaped their hands, but he paid a share, so that
there was gathered the first day at the least ten pounds amongst Cutpurses, and
the next day this E. H. met with the Cutpurse, who cut the purse indeed, of
whom he took the money, with the vantage, and let him go, without answering
the matter: and to conclude, the woman had four pound of her money again, and
so the matter was no more spoken of.

I think this was a piece of knavery, if you talk of knavery, and yet this is
no knavery in respect of that I will show you in this next discovery of their
Cunny-catching.

At the Term time, these fellows H. and S. have had great booties by their
practices in this Art, and this is their manner.

In the morning away they go to Westminster hall, where they know the Cutpurse
will be about his business, but the Cunny catchers are not without a couple,
who are their consorts: who as soon as they come to the Hall, thrust in
amongst the thickest, and there they listen to hear if any purse were cut that
day.

Likewise, the Cunny-catchers, they take their standings one of them at the
water side, the other in some close place, at another Gate: so that lightly a
Cutpurse cannot come out of the Hall, but one of them shall spy him, and take
him by the sleeue, if the Cutpurse have done any thing, word is presently
brought to the Tavern, whither the Cunny and the Cunny-catcher are gone to
drink. Now if it be some small sum, the Cunny-catcher shows the Cunny a
good countenance; but if it be a large sum, as six pounds, or upwards, the
Cunny-catcher dissembling his intent, will not stay but the drinking of a
pottle of Wine.

The Cutpurse entreats their company, and offers both Wine and a breakefast,
but all is in vain, the Cunny-catcher will not tarry, swearing a great oath,
he is sorry that it was his chance to see this Cunny or Cutpurse this day, for
there is a mischief done, and he f^^res some will smoke for it. At this the
Cutpurse is af^ard, but he for that time scapeth their fingers, for the
Cunny-catcher will t^rry no longer.

Now the Cunny-catcher sends presently one of his company to seek out the
party who had his purse cut, which he performs with diligence, and meeting
with him, he tells the party, that he heard he lost his purse at Westminster,
and if he will be advised by him, he will help him to the most of his Money
again.

This honest man glad to have part again of his money, offers at first word,
the one half to have the other, assuring this odd fellow for certainty, that
he lost ten pounds.

Well (says this Factor for the Cunny-catcher) if your leisure will serve to go
with me, I will bring you to one does partly know who cut your purse, therefore
it is your way to follow his counsel, and I warrant you, my life for it, but
you shall have your desire.

Hereat the honest man is glad, and willingly goes along with him to a place
where he knows E. H abides his coming: Now being met, the Wiseman of
Newgate begins at the first dash, to tell them whereabout they come, even in as
ample manner, as if the man who had his purse cut, had told the tale himself.

No marvel though the Country man do wonder a while at the matter, but in
the end, he tells him it is so indeed, and according to the first motion
they agree, which is the one half for the other: the Country man willing to
refer the matter wholly to this Cunny-catchers discretion.

Then away goes the Country man with H. the Cunnycatcher, to a Justice, to
whom he signifies in every respect, how his purse was cut, desiring of the
Justice a Warrant to take up all suspected persons: of which motion the Justice
intending to do Justice, grants his Warrant, and gives it to H. willing him to
certify him what shall be done on that behalf, as the Warrant intends.

This Warrant obtained, the Cunny-catcher is as pleasant as a Pie, taking his
leave of the Justice, away goes the Country man, and his good friends with
him, and to the Tavern straight, where they spend some time in drinking a
pottle of the best wine, which the Country man must pay for: which done, H.
takes his leave of his Client, promising him not to be slack in his
business; which done they part, the Country man to his lodging, or as his
occasion serves, and the Cunny-catcher about his faculty.

Now woe to the Cutpurses, for as H. happens to meet with them, they must to
Newgate, showing warrant sufficient for a greater matter.

But you must take notice, that of a dozen or sixteen Cutpurses who he has
apprehended, he is sure enough that he which cut the purse indeed shall be
none of them.

This honest company of Cutpurses being all in Newgate H. goes presently and
certifies the Justice, what a sort of notable Thieves he has taken, desiring
the Justice to send for them at his pleasure, to examine them about the
Country man's purse, assuring the Justice that they are cunning Thieves, and
that he dare lay his life, they will confess nothing: which indeed the Justice
finds true: for they being axamined, will confess as much as nere a whit.

To Newgate away they go again, where they make all means to H. to stand
their friend, showing their innocence: yet rather then they will lie in
prison, one offers ten shillings, another twenty shillings, some more, some
less, as they are of ability: offering farther, to give besides the sum,
every one something to H for his good word to the Justice, that they may be set
at liberty.

Now the Cunny-catcher has the matter as he would wish it, and taking their
money first, he presently goes to the Justice, and certifieth him, that these
which he has apprehended, did none of them cut the purse: and for he has
gotten knowledge who did, he desires that they may be bayled.

The Justice glad to hear the truth is known, is willing to set them at
liberty, which upon their Bail he grants, Of this money the Country man
has never a penny, and all these Cutpurses are set at liberty.

Which done, H seeks diligently for the Cutpurse, who did the matter indeed:
with whom when he meets, he spares not to tell him how sore the Justice is
against him, and how earnestly the Country man will pursue the Law: and
further he swears, that some of them who were in Newgate told the Justice
plainly, that he cut the purse.

This peale rings nothing well in the Cutpurses ears, who can find no favor,
but to Newgate: yet upon entreaty made by the Cutpurse, the Cunny-catcher
promises, that for his part he will do him any good he can, wishing the
Cutpurse, as he is wise enough, so it were good for him to hold his own, and
confess nothing so the Justice, what proof so ever come against him, and in
so doing, it may lie in his power to do him good: telling him further, that
the man who lost the money, though he be sore bent against him, yet he will
partly be ruled by him.

Well to Newgate marches this H. with his Cutpurse: where he to welcome him
for his fair words, he clappeth on his legs a good pair of Boults and
Shakles: which done, he sends for the Country man, and tells him of these
good tidings, how the Thief is taken, and how he has used him.

The next way they take, is to the Justice, to whom H. signifies how the case
stands, railing mightily against the Cutpurse, even in the worst manner he
can devise: saying, it will be evidently proved that he cut the purse, and none
but he: further he requesteth that the Cutpurse may be examined. The Cutpurse
is sent for, who to every question the Justice can demand, having taken out his
lesson (confess and be hanged) has his answer ready, so that there can be no
advantage taken by his examination.

The Justice returns him to Newgate again, to abide till the next Sessions,
requiring the party to be bound to give evidence against him: but the country
man dwelling far from London, and it being long to the next Law-day,
alleges, he cannot be in the City at that time, for he is a poor man, and
has great occasion of business, so that he cannot be there to give evidence,
neither can he say if he would, any thing against that party: for so far as
he can remember, he never saw that fellow before in his life.

Yet H. promises, that it will be proved against the Cutpurse: so the Country
man and H. take their leaves of the Justice, making show as though they would
come again, though it be no part of H. his meaning.

H. goes straight to Newgate, where he falls in hand with the Cutpurse,
swearing unto him by his honesty, that he has labored ^he party who had his
purse cut, to take his money again, and not to give evidence against him,
assuring him with many oaths, that if he may have his money again, he will
presently go out of the town. The Cutpurse taking H. his hand, that no man
shall give Evidence against him at the Sessions, does presently send abroad to
his friends for the money: which as soon as it comes, he deliver^th to H.
and withal a large overplus, because he will be sure of H. his favor.

This done H. goes to the Country man, and fels him, he got no more but six or
seven pounds, of which if he will accept, and proceed no further against the
party, he has it to pay him: marry he will not be known to the Country man,
but that he had that money of some friends of the cutpurses, who upon the
former condition, is willing it should be paid, if not to have his money again.

The country man having haste out of the City, is glad to take it: out of
which sum, if it be seven pounds, H. must have half: so that the poor man
of ten pounds, has but three pounds ten shillings, whereas the Cunny-catcher
by this account has got at one hand and an other, very near forty Marks: the
money shard^, the Country man takes Horse, and away he rides: Again H. his
mouth is stopped, and the next Sessions the Cutpurse is quit by Proclamation, no
man being there to give evidence against him.


Author. O wonderful piece of villainy. I will trouble thee no further, thou
have told enough, and I will tell no more: who hears but this which is already
spoken, will hold these knaves for execr^ble U^rlets. So for this time I will
commend thee to thy other business, wishing thy liberty as I do mine own:
and if thou have occasion, command me to do thee good, if it lie in my power.


Zany. Sir, I thank you for your courteous offer: but yet I must tell you, I
could tell twenty such prancks as these are, which these Cunny-catching
fellows have played: but indeed they keep one order almost, in performing
them all: but since you think here is enough, I will say no more, and so fare
you well.


Author. Thus have you heard, gentle Reader, how at large this Black Dog is
desciphered: which Dog as he is, is worthy of your general hate: but for I
have with pains concluded my Book under that title, I will not request you
according to the old Proverb, Love me, Love my Hound: but only, love me, and
hang my Dog, for he is not worthy so good a name as a Hound.


Certain fearful Visions a p^aring to the Author of this Book, most worthy
to be noted.
WHen as black Titan with his duskie robe,
Had Tellus clouded with his curtains night,
Fair Phoebus peering underneath earths globe,
With winged Steeds hence takes his course aright.
Titan he leaves to bear imperial sway,
Commanding Night, as Phoebus did the day.
The fiery Chariot posteth under ground,
With Titans Mantle all the Earth is spread,
And wreathes of Ieat about his temples bound:
Earths Cell coal black, sweet Morpheus calls to bed,
No time to walk, to sport, to game, to see,
I did obey, that must commanded be.
Laid in my bed, I 'gan for to recount
A thousand things which had been in my time:
My birth, my youth, my woes, which all surmount,
My life, my loss, my liberty, my crime:
Then where I was, unto my mind recalling,
Me thought Earth gaped, and I to Hell was falling.
Amidst these fears that all my senses cumber,
Care closed mine eyes, and sorrow wr^ng my heart:
Oppressed with grief, mine eyelids 'gan to slumber,
But borne to woes, must of more woes have part.
A thousand Furies to my heart appearing,
That did affright my soul with ugly searing.
Thus lay I long beholding Hell and Devils,
Aghast with mazes, almost dead in fears,
Not knowing how to rid me from the evils:
They show in action, and in looks appears,
One Anticke monster, hidious, foul and grim,
Me most appalled, and most I looked at him.
Thought I at last, I will cry out for aid,
Striving to cry near dead, affright with fear,
I heard a voice, which like an Angel said:
Be not dismayed, for thou shall see and hear
Men devils, devils men, one both, both all del^ding:
Worlds evils, wrack then, sheeps cloth, wolves pray concluding.
Hearing a voice, my heart was much revived,
Noting the words, I did some courage take:
But sudden joys has sudden woes achieved,
A sudden noise this hellish crew did make,
Threatening by shows as though they would devour
My life and soul, subdued by terrors power.
Thought checked my mind, fears senses all amazing,
Hell broken loose, eyes visions furies affrighting,
Subdued earths powers, upreares hearts insight a gazing,
Terror of mind with hope, cries fears faint arighting:
Help me orequelled: waking with dread, I espied
Graced gracious Minerva, who thus to my outery replied:
Fear not at all, nor saint thou with beholding:
But light thy Lamp, and take thy Pen in hand,
Write what thou feast, thy Uisions all unfolding,
I will direct, and let thee understand,
What all these Hell hounds shadow by appearing,
Uiew thou their worst, and then write of their fearing.
Subdued by words, which did all works exceed,
Ravished with joys, such feature to behold,
Abjecting fear, my glutted eyes I feed,
Upon her brightness which all harms controlled:
Glimpse of her brightness, senses all endearing,
Legions of Devils, could no more fright with fearing.
I preas'd my self to take the hardest steel,
And from the Flint, I beat forth sparks of fire:
Kindling the Lint, my ready Match I feel,
Yielding my Lamp the light of my desire:
Soon spied Minerva, with Laurel crowned, and Bays,
Mirror divine, feature of worthless praise.
Before her feet submissively I tell,
Pardon I craved, fearing I was too bold:
Rise up, quoth she, and view these Hags of Hell,
For diverse secrets must thy pen unfold.
Make true record, what shall be showed to thee,
For these are they, which worlds deceivers be.
I Will cleanse thine eyes, least vapors do offend,
I Will clear thy wits, and give a pleasing muse:
The deasest ear shall to thy talk attend,
The work so worthy, thou may not refuse:
Newgates Black Dog, with Pen and Ink depaint,
Curres of this kind shall thereby have restraint.
Not for my sake do thou what I require,
But for his sake; and with that word me shows
A fair old Man, whose tears foretold desire,
And in a mantle mourner-like he goes.
His veins like Azure, his hair as white as wool,
Tresses before, behind a bare smooth skull.
And this is Time, Minerva thus replied,
Which mournes to see these Hel-hounds Times abusing:
How thousands in their ravening jaws have dyed;
Slaughtering Lambs, yet to the world excusing:
Offense with color shadowing mighty evils,
By name of service, and yet incarnate Devils.
No more quoth she, but take thee to thy Pen,
Resolve the wise, that they have been deceived:
Many Black Dogs have walked in shapes of men,
And with deceits the Commonwealth agreev'd:
His form and lineaments to the world disclose,
That this Black Dog be known where ere he goes.
My Muse began blush, dreading to undertake
So great a task: but Time again replide,
Fear not at all, Time does the motion make,
Unmaske this Beast, let him no longer hide
Himself in shrowds, who makes of sins a scoff,
Worlds great'st admire, when as his Uizards off,
Time then said I, fair Time I will not use
Longer delay, but satisfy thy will:
So Time will answer for my harmless Muse,
Who wants worth so nigh P^rnassus hill?
Be brief, quoth Time: with that I took my Pen,
Obeying Time, without offense to men.
Then did I fix mine eye upon this Beast,
Who did appear first in the shape of Man,
Homely attyr'd, of wonders not the least,
A Broome-mans song to sing this Dog began:
From street to street trudgeth along this Groom,
As if he would serve all the world with Broom.
But in a trice he did transform his shape,
Which stroke a treble horror to my heart:
A Cerberus, nay worse, he thrice as wide did gape,
His hairs all Snakes curling, they will not part.
Cole-blacke his hew, like Torches glow his eyes,
His breath does poison, smoke from's nostrils flies.
His countenance ghastly, fearful, grim, and pale,
His fomy mouth still gaping for his prey:
With Tigers teeth he spares none to assail,
His lips Hell gates, ore-painted with decay:
His tongue the Clapper, sounding woeful knell,
Towling poor men to ring a peale in Hell.
Like sepulcher his throat is hollow made,
Devouring all whom dangers make a prey,
Bribery his hand, spoil of the poor his trade.
His fingers talents ceasing to betray,
And with his arms he foldeth men in woes,
Destruction stil's the path where ere he goes.
Me thought his breast was all of burning Brass,
Through which there grew a a heart of hardest Steel:
His belly huge, like scalding furnace was,
His thighs both like unto a fiery wheel,
His legs were long, one foot like to a Hind,
The other foot a Hounds of bloody kind.
And in this shape I saw this monster walk,
About the streets, most fearful to behold;
But more to tell, since I begin to talk,
Here is the tale which time would feign have told.
Upon a sudden rusht this Curre on me,
As though my life his evening prey should be.
Within his clutches did he cease me fast,
And bare me straight unto black Pluto's Cell:
When there I came, he me in Lymbo cast,
A Stigion lake, the Dungeon of deep hell:
But first my legs he locked in Iron Bolt,
As if poor I had been some wanton Colt.
And then he began with basest terms to braide,
And then he threats as though he would me kill:
And then he daunces, for he me be^raid,
And then speaks fair, as though he meant none ill:
Then like Medusa did he shake his locks,
And then he threatens me with Iron stocks,
At last he left me in that irksome den.
Where was no day, for there was ever night:
Woes me, thought I, the abject of all men,
Clouded in care, quite banished from light:
Robbed of the Sky, the Stars, the Day, the Sun,
This Dog, this Devil, has all my joys undone.
Surprest with anguish, sorrow, grief, and woe,
Me thought I heard a noise of Iron chains
Which dinne did torment and affright me so,
That all my senses studied what it means:
But by and by which did me comfort more,
There came a man which opened Lymbo's door.
All lean he was, and feeble too God knows,
Upon his arm he bare a bunch of Keys:
With Candlelight about the Cell he goes,
Who roughly said, sir, lie you at your ease?
Swearing an oath that I did lie too soft,
Who lay on ground, and thus he at me scoft.
To see a man of feature, form and shape,
It did me good, and partly fears exiled:
But when I heard him gybe me like an Ape,
Then did I think that I was thrice beguiled.
Yet would I venture to this man to speak,
Into discourses, thus I began to break.
Nigh me poor wretch, that knows not where I am,
Nor for what cause, I am brought to this place:
Bound for the slaughter, lying like the Lamb,
The Butcher means to kill within a space.
My griefs are more then can my tongue express,
Aye me, woes me, that can find no redress.
Yet if thou be, as thou do seem a man,
And so thou art, if I do not mistake:
Do not increase, if so increase thou can,
The cruel tortures which me woeful make.
And tell me first who thou thy self may be,
That art a man, and yet do gybe at me.
Seeing the fears which did my heart possess,
Uiewing the tears that frickled from mine eyes,
He answered thus, a man I must confess,
I am my self that here condemned lies.
And by the law adiudg'd I am to dye,
But now the Keeper of these Keys am I.
This house is Newgate, gently he replied,
And this place Lymbo, where in now thou art:
Until thou pay a Fine, hear must thou bide,
With all these Bolts which do agreeve thy heart.
No other place may there provided be,
Till thou content the Keeper with a Fee.
With that he turned as though he would away,
Sweet, bide a while, I did him so entreat:
Quoth he, my friend, I can no longer stay,
Yet what you want, if you will drink or eat,
Or have a Fire, or Candle by you burn,
Say what you need, and I will serve your turn.
Quoth I, dear friend, then help me to a fire,
Let me have Candle for to give me light:
Nor meat nor drink do I wish or desire,
But only grant me gracious in thy sight.
And say, what monster was it pl^c'd me here?
Who has me almost lifel^sse made with fear,
Nay peace, quoth he, for there begins a tale,
Rest now content, and Time will tell thee more,
To strive in Fetters it will small avail:
Seek first to ease thy legs which will grow sore,
When Bolts are off, we will that matter handle,
So he departed, leaving me a Candle.
Away he went, and leaves me to my woes,
And being gone, I could not choose but think,
That he was kind, though first unkind in shows,
Who offered me both fire, bread, and drink.
Leaving a Candle by me for to burn,
It eased my grief, and made me less to mourn.
Ioying to see, who whilome had no sight,
I reached the Candle, which by burning stands,
But I unworthy comfort of the light,
A Rat does rob the Candle from my hands,
And then a hundred Rats all sally forth,
As if they would convoy their prize of worth.
In vain I strive to re-obtaine what is lost,
My woes are now, as woes at first began:
With change of griefs, my perplexed soul is tossed,
To see the end I did bethink me than.
How Time had promised secrets to disclose,
So I expect the worst of Hellish foes.
Whilst thus I lay in Irons under ground,
I heard a man that begged for relief:
And in a chain of Iron was he bound,
Whose clattering noise filled full my heart with grief,
Begging one penny to buy a hundred bread,
Hunger'd and starved, for want of food nigh dead.
Woe's me, thought I, for thee so bound in chains,
Woe's me for them, thou begg'st for to sustain:
Woe's me for all, whose want all woes contains,
Woe's me, for me, that in your woes complain.
Woe's me, woe's you, and woe is to us all,
Woe to that Dog, made me to woe a thrall.
Whilst thus I languish, I on sudden hear,
An uncoth noise which did approach my den:
Listening, unto the door I laid mine ear,
And then I knew the voices were of men.
Still in neerenesse drew they more and more,
At last I heard them opening Lymbo's door.
In first there came the man that gave me light,
And next the Dog, who brought me to that place:
Another with a Club, appeared in sight,
Three weaponlesse, as though they moan'd my case:
Fainting for fear, I knew not what to say,
Expecting then performance of decay.
But now this Dog is in a better shape,
In every point proportioned as a man:
My heart did throb, not knowing how to escape,
But to entreat this Curre, I thus began.
Fair friend, quoth I, if ^o thy will may be,
To case my grief, I le give thee any Fee.
With that he gri^'d, and thus he made reply,
Thou art a Uillaine worthy of this place;
Thy fault is such, that thou shall surely die,
I will not pity thee in any case.
Such as thou art, too many every where,
But I will seek in time to have them hear.
When he named Time, then I on Time did think,
But more he says, if thou have any Coin:
To pay for ease, I will a little wink,
And Bolts releasment, with discharge I Will joint.
Of this close prison to another Ward,
Paying thy Fine, or else all ease is bard.
Like as the child does kiss the rod for fear,
Nor yet dare whimper, though it has been beat:
So with smoothe looks, this Dog approach I near,
Before the Dev'll a Candle do I set.
Treating him fair, with fairest words may be,
Bidding him ask, he shall have gold of me.
Why then, quoth he, thy speeches please me well,
Partners (quoth he) strike off his Irons all:
Then up we went, as one should climb from Hell,
Until I came into a loathsome Hall.
When there I came, they set me on a block,
With Punch and Hammer my Irons off they knock.
No marvel though, whilst they my legs untide,
Mine eyes did surfeit, drink with woes beholding,
Bolts, Shackels, Collors, and Iron, Sheares I spide,
Thumstals, Wastbands, torturs grief unfolding:
But while the case of legs my sorrows calm,
Room, quoth a wretch, for me with Widows alms.
Take of these curtalles did another cry,
And on his knees he fell before this Curre,
Who to his sorrowing made a Dogs reply,
Down to thy Ward, and do not make this stir.
What now I know, if I had known before,
In stead of these light chains thou should had more.
With that the poor man was thrust out of sight,
And I all fearing, feared with fear of fears:
My Irons off, I went, as go I might
Unto this Dog, in whom all devils appears.
With golden Angel I this Cur presented,
Says he, one more, else I am not contented.
Wonder it was to see a Fiend of Hell,
To thirst for Angels of the fairest hue:
But Devils are Devils, and they would all orequell.
Man's life and soul, this Dog seeks to subdue:
His mouth to stop, Angels I gave him two,
Yielding persorce, as I perforce must do.
And then he left me in the Partners Hall,
The Grate does open, and this Dog out-goes,
Thousand sorrows holds my heart in thrall,
Yet there I am, not by my self in woes:
Hereon oreplunged with deep hearts grief cries,
I live a life thrice worse then he that dies.
An other sorry soul, without a ragge,
Hurckling for cold, in whom all want appears:
At last began speak, as if he meant to brag,
And thus he says: Hear have I been nine years:
Tell you of woes, when you my woes have seen,
And yet have many men more woeful been.
With that I rose, and to this poor man went,
In hope to learn some novils by his talk:
Approaching him among his discontent,
He asked me, if so I pleased to walk^?
And if you will, then follow up these stairs,
To walk and talk, deceives Time of cares.
I followed him as he that in a wood,
Has lost himself, and knows no way he takes:
And in distress^, I thought conferring good,
New woes with old, just mixture consort makes.
And though the place does naught but discord sound,
My soul for his, our discords concord found.
At first he gently took me by the hand,
And bids me welcome, as I were his guest:
You are a Prisoner, I do understand,
And hither welcome are both bad and best.
Men of all sorts come for offending hither,
And being here, here bidethey altogether.
And then he did begin thus to discourse.
Cease to lament with vain dispayring fears:
Thy self dissolved to dropps gains no remorse,
Here Is none regards, though all my mournings hea^^s,
If under earth, the Devils can prove a hell,
Theirs is not like to this, where wretches dwell.
See in you Hall are diverse sorts of men,
Some weep, some wail^, some mourn some wring their hands,
Some curse, some swear, and some blasph^ming then,
My heart did faint, my heads hair upright stands.
O Lord thought I, this house will rend in sunder,
Or else there can be no hell, this hell under.
Thus wondering I, on sudden did epsy,
One all in black came stamping up the stair^s:
Whose you I asked, and thus he made reply,
You is the man does mitti^ate our ^ares.
He preaches Christ, and does Gods word deliver,
To all distressed, to comfort men for ever.
Then drew I near to see what might be^ide,
Or what the s^quell was of that I saw:
Expecting good would follow such a guide,
As preach^d Christ, and taught a God to know.
A hundred clustering come the Pulpit near,
As if they longed she Gospel for to hear.
What Is this, quoth I, that now I do behold,
The h^gs of Hell, and Satan's impious limbs,
Some deeper secret does this sight unfold,
Then I can guess, this sight my senses dims,
Straight of my friend I asked by and by,
What it might be, who made me this reply.
You men which thou behold; so ^ale and wa^,
Who whiles looks up, whiles looking down beneath,
Are all condemned, and they must dye each man.
Judgment is given, that cord shall stop their breath.
For heinous facts, as murder, theft, and treason,
Unworthy life, to dye Law thought it reason.
The Sermon ended, the men condemned to dye,
Taking the^e leaves of their acquainted friends:
With ^orry looks, paysing their steps they ply,
Down to a Hall, where for them there attends,
A man of Office, who to da^nt lives hopes,
Does ^^rd their bands, and scar^e their necks, with ropes.
Thus rop't and corded, they descend the stairs,
Newgates Black Dog, bestirres to play his part:
And does not cease for to augment their cares,
Willing the Cerman to s^t near his Cart.
Which done, these men, with fear of death orepang'd,
Bound to the Cart, are carried to be handg'd.
This rufull sight, yet end to their doomed sorrows,
Makes me aghast, and forces me bethink,
Woe upon woe, and so from wofulst borrowes,
A swar^^e of grief, and then I sounding sink.
But by T^nes aid, I did revive again,
Might I have dyed, it had been lesser pain.
For now again the Dog a fresh assaults me,
As is my sp^yle were next to be inacted:
And like a subtle Curre in speeches halts he,
With thousand fleighty wiles, old shifts compacted.
Charging me off with that I never did,
In his smooth'st looks, are cruel bitings hid.
I spoke him fair, as if I had offended,
He treats me foul, who never did him ill,
He plays the gripe on Tytius intended,
To tire his heart, yet never has his fill.
Even so this Dog does tire and prey on me.
Till quite consumed, my golden angels be.
Then woeful want did make me often complain,
Hunger and cold do pinch me at the heart:
Then am I thrust out of my bed again,
And from my chamber must I needs depart:
To lowest Wards, to lie upon the boords;
Which naught but filth and noisome smells affords.
Midst forty men, surpised with care and grief,
I lie me down on boords, as hard as chennell:
No bed nor boulster may afford relief,
For worse then Dogs, lie we in that foul kennell:
What might I think, but sure assure me then,
That metamorphos'd, we were beasts not men.
Grief upon grief, did still oppress my mind,
Yet had I store Copartners in my woe:
No ease but anguish, my distresses find,
H^re lies a man; his l^st liv^s breath does blow:
And ere the sorry man be fully dead,
The Rats do prey upon his face or head.
Whilst thus I languish in my woes, appears
Time in his man^l^, looking fresh and bl^^he:
Yet whiles his eyes did shed some drops of tears,
Wherewith he seemed as he would whet his ^^the.
Quoth Time by m^^shall sorrows be appeased.
And now is the time thou shall of cares be eased.
I did present this Book which I did writ,
Into Times hands, who took it and perused it:
Yea, but says Time, thou must discover yet:
Who this Dog is, who else will be excused.
For able I so cleared thine eyes to see him,
So may not others, yet Time would have all fly him.
And for thy verses covertly disclose,
The secret sense, and yet does shadow truth:
Explain this Black Dog, who he is in Prose,
For more apparent, then thy Poem shows.
Truth needs no colors, then this Dog by kind.
Make known before, as he is known behind.
My Sithe, quoth Time, is now prepared to cut,
There is no sith^ ^^t Times shall longer dure:
Newgates Black Dog, must Time to silence put,
I Will br^^ke his teeth, and make his biting sure.
The sh^^es of M^^^ on Dogs of cruel kind,
Time shall confound, that bear so bad a mind.
Have thou no doubt, but Time shall set thee free,
And (...) h^r^after learn ^hee to beware,
Of (...) Black Dog, and do his dangers flee,
G^ve others w^rning, least like fall their share.
S^^ to (...) world, when thou ^rt freed from hell,
Newgates Black Dog thou saw, and knew too well.
And for thy Poem draws to a conclusion,
Times pl^^s^re is, that thou this Dog express:
I^ shape, in n^tur^, man: yet men's confusion.
A madding C^r, who does from kind regr^sse.
A mothers son, and most for to be wondered,
Of mothers sons; this Dog has spoiled a hundred.
In lowly sort, complain to highest ^owers,
Truth will be heard, and truth must not be hid:
With for like wiles, this Dog poor souls devoures,
This Dog of me^, desipher I thee bid.
And though there be Curs many of his kind^,
Say but the truth, and yet leave naught behind.
When time had said, I from my fear awake
Yet had I writ what premises contains:
I was no illusion moved me this Poem make,
But griefs endured, and woes my heart sustaines.
Grief, care, and woe, my silly heart do clog,
Fettered to shame by this Cur Newgates Dog.
Now as I have described him in some sort,
As he is fearful unto all him see:
His devilish practices given to report,
And set them down, as wicked as they be.
Here ends my Poem, Newgates Black Dog by name,
As it deserves either commend or blame.
FINIS.

