To mine approved Friend Andro Heart.
MASTER HEART, being at KINGHORNE, bearing company to my dear and sickly
Nephew, who is come thither to crave help from this recently laureate Master
Doctor, the newfound, much celebrated Well, I have penned a little Discourse,
containing in a Letter To my Lord Chancellar, the Nature and Effects of this
Water. But I am wonderfully importuned, either writing or diting Copies of the
same. For the which cause I send to you, as to a Common Father of Letters, the
principal piece: that you may give it the Cognissance of your Characters, and
a patent Pasport under the Seal of your Press. So constrained to cut short,
by the clamor of Mariners calling to the Tide, I take my leave at Leith this
8. of August, anno 1618.

Your most affectionate friend BARCLAY, Doct. Med.

THE NATVRE and EFFECTS OF THE NEW-FOVND WELL AT KINGHORNE: Declared by William
Barclay, Master of Arts and Doctor of Physic, AND Written in a Letter to my
Lord the Earl of Dumfermeling, and Chancellar of Scotland.

EDJNBVRGH, Printed by Andro Heart, ANNO DOMINI 1618.

TO MY VERY HONORABLE LORD, My Lord the Earl of Dumfermeling, and Chancellar
of Scotland.
MY LORD,
I Know how little leisure the Affairs of this Kingdom do afford to your L.
and I know how large a Discourse the Argument of this Letter does minister:
Therefore I shall not distract your L. busied attension; neither shall I
extend this purpose, but according to your L. intelligent judgment I shall
contriue an obscure and intricate subject to a compendious narration.

This lately found, and newlie-knowne, too-too long unknown Well, Si fama
didicit jam non mentiri. This Well is so blazed abroad, and our Physicians,
not without cause, are so loath to open their minds concerning the same, that
I, imboldened both by your L. countenance and Understanding, have taken the
hardiness to break the ice, and show to your L. so much as I can perceive,
touching the causes and nature of this Water, and of the effects and virtues
thereof, that the rest of my more learned Colleagues may be encouraged to dye
their exercised Quilles in this wholesome Liquour.

IT is a mixed water by the continual flowing through a Metal, from whence it
has contracted a spiritual energie, and a certain Mercuriall subtle
substance: To be short, The Metal which has communicated force and efficacy
to this water, is Tin. The reasons of my conjectures are taken from three
heads: 1. From the substance of the water: 2. From the effects thereof: 3. And
from the adjacent circumstances.
From the water it self are many pregnant reasons: As that the water being a
compound, and mixed body, it carries no savor or taste of any thing, but of
pure water; which argues none other Metal but Tin: For any other
Mineral, or Semi-minerall, except Gold and Silver, would bewray it self, by
taste or color. But Gold it is not, neither is it Silver, which I affirm by
the effects: For all Physicians, both Dogmatickes and Spagyrickes, receive
Gold and Silver amongst their cordial Medicamentes, and not amongst the
Nephritickes: But this water is by experience Diureticke, and asswadgeth
evidently Nephriticke dolours, wassheth the vreteres, and the bladder: which
effects the Paracelsians attribute to Saturn. I need not to draw the
consequent which willingly folowes the premises. More, this water being
distilled, or exhaled, leaves in the bottom of the Alimbecke a Salt vnsalt,
that is, a matter white like Chymik salt, which is unsavory, and somewhat
inclining to sweet, much like to the matter which the Alchimistes draw from
Tin, and call it Saccharum Saturni.

Now secondly, from the effects I prove it to be Tin, Because the whole
furnace of Paracelse keep as a great secret in their Philosophical
extractions, That Saccharum Saturni, that is to say, the salt of Tin is the
only special thing to cure an vlcere in the kidneyes, because it is
diureticke, and so carries to the afflicted part, and then it is detersiue and
drying, which qualities do cure an vlcere, and which qualities we find in
this water.

Lastly, from the adjacent circumstances, we reason this way: It is not
improbable, that there should be Tin in that part, because it is a Metal
familiare, and domesticke to this Yland, the best of Europe being found in
ENGLAND. And the channel of the water, in that clift of the Rock where it
flows, has participated of the tincture of Tin, as appears to every one
that beholds: The Rock it self notwithstanding being as it were imbrodered,
and pessimented with white laces of clear and chrystalline stones.

AS Toward the effects of this Water, There are two things to be said, 1.
What it might do, being Physicallie used: 2. And what it has done, being
Vulgarly abused. For the first I will superceede, because I am loath, at this
time, to trouble your Lordship for the other.

This water is experimented to be very aperitiue, and serves very much for
the washing away of Sand, being taken in such quantity as makes a speate:
(Neither has it been found that an exceeding great quantity of it has done
any harm) And it brings down little stones from the kidneyes, and
expels them also from the bladder. Yet it is not tried to have force to
diminish or demolish a conformed and solidated stone in the bladder, albeit it
hinders the intolerable doloures of the pitiable grauels, and quenches the
burning heat of their water, and causes them make water without painful
dropping. It is very detersiue, for the which quality it louseth the belly of
some. It is also very drying, and in this respect it binds the belly of most
part of Drinkers: as we remarke the same accidents fall out in the use of
Milk: For the croudy part binds some, and the serous or wheyish part louseth
others. Now joining these two properties together, to deterge and to dry, it
makes a sovereign remedy for all internal ulcers, also for this detersiue
quality, it is good for the sight, because it takes away all clouds or blots,
which effuscate or dim the Cornea tunica, and causes the Species
intentionales to pass more purelie and clearelie to the humor christallin.

I add thus much more, That there is not a more dainty Fairde for Ladies: no
not Oleum talci, which is so curiously ever sought, and never found. It
plaineth and polisheth their faces, and takes away all blots and furrows, and
leaves no frumples in their Skins, with greater security and honor, than
the venomous Sublimatum, or Cerussa, which they so frequently abuse, Because
this water has the most spiritual operation of Mercury, quintessenced from
the Tin: which I confirm by two reasons: The one is, because it is
sudorifick, and procures sweat in abundance, being drunken some number of
days consequently. The other is, because the temperament of it is hot, albeit
it be actuallie cold. The heat appears, in that it procures to the eyes
first a smart, and next a great itch.

Lastly, this is a sovereign and vnicke remedy for that disease in Women,
which they never acknowledge to be a disease, while it be almost past remedy:
and more than a disease, when Physicians have none help, but only sorrow to
hear their complaints, and the regrate of their lamentable negligence. So
ceasing to prosecute this warsh matter of water, I will never cease to continue

Your L. most humble and obedient seruitour BARCLAY, Doct. Med.




