LOT'S LITTLE ONE OR MEDITATIONS ON GENESIS 19. VERSE. 20. Being the substance of
several SERMONS sometimes delivered By WILLIAM INCE Mr in Arts, late Senior
Fellow of Trinity College Dublin. Published since his death, by R. I.

MATTHEW. 5. 19. Whosoever shall break one of these least Commandments and
shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven.

LONDON Printed by I. R. for the Kingdom of Ireland, and are to be sold by John
Crook and Richard Sergier, in Dublin, at the Sign of St Austin in
Castle-street. 1640.

Imprimatur Tho. Wykes. August 26. 1640.

Reverendissimo in Christo Patri LANCELO TO, Providentia divina D^o
Archiepiscopo Dubliniensi Hiberniae Primati and Metropolitae, Has, fratris
charissimi Gulielmi Ince, in artibus magistri, Colegii Sanctae Trinitatis
Dublin nuper socii senioris, lucubrationes posthumas, igni ab authore devotas,
e Sybillinis veluti foliis (ut plurimum) collectas, amore and cura fraternis,
luce and corpore donatas, in meritissimae, Tam authoris dum viveret, quam
fratris superstitis observantiae testimonium, L. M. D. D. D. Clementiae vestrae
servus a sacris addictissimus.

Randulphus Ince.

The Text.
GENESIS 19. VERSE.
18. ET dixit Lot ad eos, o ne sic quaeso Domine mi.

19. Ecce nune invenit servus tuus gratiam in conspectu tuo, and magnificasti
misericordiam tuam erga me, servando vitam meam, and ego non potero liberare me
ad montem, ne forte aliquod malum capiat and moriar.

20. Eccenunc civitas ista propinqua ad fugiendum illuc, and ipsa exigua est,
eripiam me nunc illuc, (nonne exigua est?) and vivet anima mea.

18. ANd Lot said unto them, o not so my Lord.

19. Bebold now thy servant has found grace in thy sight, and thou have
magnified thy mercy, which thou have showed unto me in saving my life, and I
cannot escape to the mountain, least some evil take me and I dye.

20. Behold now this City is near to flee unto, and it is a little one, o let
me escape thither (is it not a little one?) and my Soul shall live.

GENESIS 19. VERSE. 18, etc. And Lot said unto them, O not so my Lord, etc.


THese words are a part of a prayer, that prayer of a story, a story almost as
memorable as any, that was ever yet left upon record since the creation of man,
and that is the destruction of Sodom: upon which God indeed commanded the wife
of Lot not to look back, Verse. 17.
and her hard heart of unbelief and disobedience transformed her into a pillar
of stone; so that she, that on Gods bidding would not go, when she would,
should now stand, stand an eternal monument of Gods displeasure against the
children of disobedience.

Let it not awaken your wonder, that where the Text says a Pillar of Salt, I
say of Stone. It is consonant to reason, and the general voice of
interpreters, that it was Salt rather, quoad speciem, quam naturam specific am,
rather in resemblance of the grain then identitie of the nature: else would it
never have lasted through so many ages and years to Josephus his time,
Josephus. Antiquit. Iud. lib. 11. nam extat. (inquit) hodie quoque.
who tells us that in his time there was still extant such a Stone, which
tradition gave out to be this though then of one Stone it was become two
monuments, one of Gods anger against the Wife of Lot, and the second of Times
devouring teeth, which had dealt with this as with many other monuments, whose
antiquity we read by not reading them, and guess at their age and standing
by our neither reading nor understanding of them.

But of this, we are most certain, she was punished for disobeying, and her
disobedience was in looking back toward Sodom, when God had forbidden her.
Luke 17. 32.
But what was to her forbidden is to us commanded to look back upon Sodom. 2
Pet. 2. 6.


All judgments are more for public example then private revenge, and
whatsoever was written, Romans 15. 4.
was written for our instruction. Yea and sure by the quality of the
judgment, God meant it for public notice, and therefore God sent a flaming
judgment, that all eyes might see it, and by the light of it read his just
and fearful indignation against impenitent sinners: a flaming judgment that
it might be the world's Beacon to rouse and startle snorting security, to
awaken to repentance and detestation of sin: a flaming judgment, that men in
this might see a glimce of hell, and in this temporary foresee, and foreseeing
fear, and fearing prevent another which is eternal.

Look then back ye penitent and weeping souls, and judge whether is better,
to be bathing in those tears, or frying in those flames.

Look back impenitent and relentlesse wretches, and let your hearts (frozen in
the Lees and and Dregs of sin) melt and thaw at those flames, and let the
horror of so prodigious a judgment, work the like effect on you, as on the
Wife of Lot to transform you, that it may be true of you, which was of Nabal,
at the tidings of his wife Abgail, that his heart dyed within him and became as
a Stone. 1 Samuel 25. 37.
1 Samuel 25. 37.

Look then back and behold prodigions sin requited with prodigious
punishment; unnatural lust kindled with the fire of hell, punished with fire
that against nature rained from heaven. In this behold the severity of God:
with no less wonder behold his Mercy. Though for one righteous man's sake, he
will not spare Sodom, yet for Sodom will be not destroy one righteous man. In
this City, which was all chafe and therefore fit fuel for the fire, there
was but one sheafe the family of Lot, yet God will not destroy that, Mat. 3.12.
but graciously as he promises in his holy Gospel, sends his Angels to hind
it together and lay it in the Garner of safety, when he burns the chafe with
fire unquenchable.

Behold the riches of Gods goodness: Romans 2.4.
he might without the least tax of his justice have destroyed Lot, who was not
so righteous but God might have beheld matter of anger in him. He can never
want in man's wickedness a patronage and defense of his own justice, and though
he cannot find in the worst of men so much goodness as may merit the least
blessing; yet he cannot miss to find in the best of men so much evil as may
merit the greatest punishment.

Notwithstanding that good God which is never exceptiously apprehensive of man's
infirmity, nor uses the advantage of our weakness to show the greatness of
his power in punishing but mercy in delivering: yea though he (I say) do
sometimes make his temporary judgments (like his common favors the Sun and
rain) to fall with equal indifferency on the just and unjust: Matthew. 5.45.
yet more often and that especially in notorious and exemplary judgments, the
good man's singular piety shall find a singular preservation: and when wrath
and judgment (like an universal deluge) shall sweep away a nation, nay a
world of wicked men, God shall build the righteous an Arc of safety: and he
that like the Widowed Turtle singly mourned when all else generally rejoiced in
the pleasures of sin, shall when all howl in the bitterness of torment,
singly rejoice for his own particular deliverance.

A voice was heard (as Tacitus tells us) Audita major humanae vox, Tacit. hist.
lib. 5.
excedere Deos. Here was more then a voice, the presence of Angels, more then
their presence, a zealous fervor and earnestness, more then an earnestness,
a sacred violence to save Lot. While he lingered (says verse. 16.) the men laid
hold upon his hand, and upon the hand of his wife, and upon the hand of his two
daughters, the Lord being merciful unto him, and they brought him forth and
set him without the City.

Verse. 17. And it came to pass when they had brought him forth abroad, that he
said, Escape for thy life, look not behind thee, neither stay thou in all the
plain: escape to the mountain least thou be consumed. Where come in the words
of my text; And Lot said unto them, o not so my Lord: Behold now thy servant
has found grace in thy sigh, etc.

The words then you see are a prayer, in which observe the two natural parts
of every prayer, thankesgiving and petition.

1. Thankesgiving in these words, Behold now thy servant has found grace in
thy sight, and thou have magnified thy mercy, which thou have showed unto me
in saving of my life.

The Petition in the rest of the words.

In the thankesgiving observe.

First the order of it. Secondly the matter of it.
order, that he makes the former sense of Gods antecedent favor, the first and
best argument to obtain a subsequent request; Be pleased to learn an holy
policy;

That gratitude is the best prologue to a request, and a thankful
acknowledgement of a favor received, the best way to obtain another desired.

We send forth our prayers, oftentimes as Noab bis Dove, and both return
empty; Genesis 8.9.
the Dove because all the earth was covered with water, and our prayers because
all former favors are drowned in our forgetfulness and ingratitude. We are so
transported with the immoderate desire of the things we want, that usually we
forget what we have.

Odiosum sane hominum genus officia exprobrantium, Citero,
qua (says Cicero) commemorare debet is in quem collata sunt, non commemorare
qui contulit. The remembrance of courtesies done, sounds odiously in the mouth
of the giver, but gracefully becomes the mouth of the receiver, and to a free
ingenuous nature shall not only not be a check, that it shall prove a spur to
a second bounty.

I might here then in the authority of Lot's example, be bold to reprove the
customary forms of many men's prayers, in which petition ingrosses the whole
length of their prayers and strength of their devotion, while they (either as
no part) exclude thankesgiving, or (as to a less necessary part) give it the
last and least place, even the expiration of their zeal and prayer. Yet thus
it is that like the daughters of the horse-leech: Prove. 30.50.
we are still crying give, give; or like the Gudgeons ever gaping to be fed,
but our food obtained, stops our mouths; not a word heard in way of
thankfulness. As if the things which were worth so much importunity when
requested, were not worth acknowledgement when obtained.

But from the order of his thank. I come to the matter of it, in which observe
these 4 parts.

1. A gift bestowed, life. 2. The subject or object on whom, righteous Lot. 3.
The impulsive or moving cause, grace and mercy. 4. The quantity or extent of
that mercy, great, in this word magnified.
A temporal blessing, life, bestowed on a righteous man; yet Gods great grace
and mercy acknowledged to be the only cause, yields us this conclusion;

That even temporary blessings bestowed on the best of men, are of Gods free
grace and great mercy, and not at all of man's merit. Or briefly,

The best of men cannot merit the worst of blessings. I might easily prove it,
and as easily disprove the saucie boldness of those Romish dreamers, who
besides the Ladder of Jacob, Genesis 28.12.
Christ Jesus, (whose humanity stood on earth and his divinity reached unto
heaven) have found another ladder, even of their own merits: a ladder that
has not only perfection of parts but of degrees too, degrees by which they
can climb heaven. Such a one that good Patriarch never saw, never dreamed of,
neper somnium quidem. Nor we need we indeed a better argument against them then
their own arrogance, which does always bear witness against it self, and
proves those things wanting which it brags to be owner of. Luke 18.11.
Let these Pharisees then vaunt themselves to be higher and nearer heaven then
other men, but it may well be thought that rather the lightness of their
opinion, then real and solid truth lifts them up to this height, that they
think themselves highest, nearest heaven, Psalm. 138.6.
yet God that is in heaven beholds them a far off.

Let us rather imitate the humility of the truly good man, whose prayers are
so far from that odious theme of assuming merit, that none so much, none so
frequent in imploring mercy.

But this point being Polemicall, let me leave it to the Lords worthies, and
have to the second part of my text, Lots petition, which is;

1. First Negative, o not so my Lord. 2. Secondly Affirmative, o let me escape
thither, that is to Zoar: either part backed with a seeming show and strength
of reason. First of the Negative.
And the reason of that is a difficultate conditionis praescriptae, the
difficulty of the task imposed, I cannot; proved by a prosillogisme, Ne forte
aliquod malum capiat and moriar, least some evil take me and I dye. Evil
behind me, before me, with me, behind me from Sodom, before me, in the
disconsolate solitariness of an unfrequented mountain; in solitariness no
company, or company worse then beasts or men: least I be devoured by wild
beasts, or robbed by thieves who are wild men: or if I be secure from the
danger of fire behind me, of the mountain before me, yet I cannot for the
evil with me, the length of the way, therefore I cannot escape to the
mountain, ne forte aliquod malum capiat and moriar, least some evil take me
and I dye.

Next follows the Affirmative request, where observe.

1. First the order of it. 2. Secondly the matter of it.
1. The order, that it comes in under the Lee and shelter of his arguments, and
is set down in a close and Cryphick method, as though indeed it came in by a
strong and undoubted consequence, and rather by way of a necessary conclusion
then an humble petition. Behold now. (says Lot) this City, etc. O let me
escape thither, viz. to Zoar.

2. Lots Arguments to enforce his request are, 1. a re, and 2. ae persona.

From the thing requested or

1. Are, from the thing requested, and that, first qualitate, the quality of
it, secondly quantitate, the quantity of it.

1. First qualitate, and for quality its a City. 2. Secondly quantitate the
quantity and that, first Viae, or secondly Termini.
1. Viae, for the quantity of the way, it is near. 2. Termini, it is little: And
now having sent before these Arguments as Jacob bis three bands, Gen 32.19 and
31.
to mediate for the acceptance of his request, here follows the petition it
self like Jacob halting: and needs must it halt, that in a worse manner
wrestles with, nay against God in an unlawful request; Orecipiam me illuc, O
let me escape thither: nonne parvula eft? is it not a little one? The same
Argument by an Elegant Epanalepsis and interrogation again repeated, as though
he reposed a great deal of confidence in the smalnesse of the City, and by so
easy, so facile a request, would challenge God (as it were) of unkindnesse, to
deny him so poor a boon as a little one, yet of great and maine consequence,
as much as my life and safety is worth, and my soul shall live, which is
The last Argument from him self requesting, my soul shall live, which may
have a double meaning, either in opposition to the danger of the mountain, as
if he should say, in the mountain my life is many ways hazzarded, but in this
City it is secured: or it may be expounded of his content here, my soul shall
live, it will be a favor which will afford me much content and felicity.

Thus having as Dido with her Oxe-hide, Virgil.
cut the words into pieces, I have enclosed a large and spacious ground,
wherein I intend (by Gods assistance) to build my ensuing discourse, and first
of the Negative petition.

O not so my Lord.

The Angels (as you may read before Verse. 16.) had wrestled with Lot's
dullness, Genesis 19.16.
and with a sacred violence of love and mercy carried Lot and set him without
the Gates of Sodom, there bid him and them with him escape to the mountain and
live. Timor adderet alas.
You might imagine that fear (if his obedience halted) would lend him wings to
fly to the mountain, that his danger might have made him have trespassed
against his good manners, to have begun his journey before the Angel ended his
speech.

Quid statis? nolunt. Horat. Sermo. lib. 1. Sat. 1.
atquilicet esse beatis.

Behold a new delay from his unwillingnesse, a new dialogue and direction from
his better wisdom! Quid causae est merito, quinillis Jupiter ambas Iratus
inflet buccas, nequese fore posthac Tam facilem dicat, votis ut praebeat aurem?
Horat. ibid.
O not unto the mountain -- quid causae est merito? etc.

How justly might God cease to strive with him, and let him perish, who would
thus contend against his own safety? But God that is of infinite mercy, will
descend to man's own conditions for man's own safety.

Rather then Lot shall be destroyed, the strength of God will be overcome by
man's weakness, His wisdom be directed by man's folly: nay rather then Lot
shall be destroyed, God will use a loving violence, nay will even suffer
violence, let his own command be violated, man's will be established. Lot shall
do what he will, so he will be saved, prescribe God any conditions; make God
remit of his Justice against them of Zoar, which He would have destroyed, that
He may extend his mercy to Lot, whom He will save.

But this mercy of God belonging more naturally to the verse where the Angel
even to the wonder of patience accepts him even concerning this request also,
Genesis 19.21.
I will therefore no longer insist upon it, but only make the Act of Gods
mercy, lead me to the object of it man's perverseness, in Lots reply, One sic
quaeso Domine mi, O not so my Lord.

Man's a froward and perverse creature, one whom nothing can please, one whom
any thing cannot but displease: that can neither want his wishes with patience,
nor enjoy them with content, but with equal repining and discontent both
expects and attaines; in all variety of his desires being ever constant in his
old dislike, and the beginning of new wishes. It must be therefore a patience
no less then infinite that can bear with his petulancy and folly. How
disquietly does he tumble and toss, like the troubled Sea, with every wind of
report? every whisper of danger disquiets him, and plowes up the level of his
peace unto the furrowed wrinkles of forrow and discontent.

God in his first Creation went through all the creatures, and looking upon
each Species severally saw that they were good. Genesis 1.31.
Man in his corruption looks upon all the creatures, and sees something that
is bad in them. Adam had a divine knowledge to name all the creatures, Genesis
2.20.
we sons of Adam a diabolical knowledge to nickname all the creatures. All
our skill is become like the learning of these latter times mere Criticisme,
so that in this fair volumne of creation, in every class of the creatures,
where we might behold digitum Dei, the hand of God pointing at some curious
text, that volumne have we filled with our own Asteriskes and Errata's, and
where a candid censure might of every thing make a good construction and take
all in a fair sense, the malignitie of our wit will alter it with some idle
conjecture, and though to the fullest period subscribe a -- nonnulla
desiderantur.

There have been, and I doubt are yet some of Pliny his Scholars, who would
be Gods teachers, who had they been present when God was creating the world,
could have corrected the divine Ideas, and taught him how to have made all
things in better number, order and measure.

Since our first parents tasting the forbidden fruit; we their offspring
distaste the best things. The devil then promised a deity for eating, and
indeed we can mentiri Deum, we have a mock-divinitie, that let God make what he
will with never so much exactness, we can find a fault with it; speak the
most plain and powerful truth, we can question it: deal never so justly, we
can tax him for it: never so mercifully we can distaste it: like Lucian's Momus
that being called to judge of the excellence of those master-peeces which the
Gods made, Lucian.
an horse, an house, and a man, found fault with all three: that the horse had
not horns, the house motion, and the man a window to look into his breast.

As in the creation, so in the whole course of Gods providence, all Gods
actions fall under the censure of man's frowardness. Non etenim cunctis
placceat vel Jupiter ipse, Nec mittens pluviam nec cohibens pluviam. Prove.
Graec.


-- (...).
(...).
Whether it rain or not, all are not content.

It Is even a task of divinity to please man; not that this argues any
weakness in Gods power, who can do all things, but a wickedness in man's
nature that will be pleased with nothing. Not only the harder portion of
afflicton, but even the best of his favors we entertain with some dislike,
and Criticize with a froward curiosity upon the choycest of his favors. Nay
if God should give us all things in the world, and not content over and beside
all, all would be as nothing, but so far from satiating the unlimited desire
of man's appetite, or settling his thoughts in a quiet comp sednesse that they
would prove but a variety of vexation to him, he would be pinched in that
plenty, and starved in that variety: yea when God had done all to please him,
he should hear the voice of his discontent screaking in that harsh and
unpleasing note, O ne sic quae so Domine mi, O, not so my Lord, etc.

It is an opinion of the Pythagoreans and Platonists, Aristo. de Caelo lib. 2.
cap. 9
that the heavens by the revolutions of their orbs produce a most melodious and
divine harmony, and that as they are the measures of natural time, so they
keep an harmonious time. He pawn no faith upon it, that those Orbs are the
great Organ to that higher quire of Archangels, Angels and glorified Saints
that sing Hallelujahs to him that sits on the throne for ever and ever. Rev.
4.13.
But, sure I am, there is not more of various harmony there, then there is
hereof unpleasing discord: so that were it possible with Scipio in his dream,
Cic. Somnium Scipionis.
from heaven to behold the earth (at that distance like a Molehill) and men
like little Ants busy in the eager prosecution of their unquiet desires, so to
hear all the ejaculations and prayers of mortals, we should not see so much
variety of tumultuous motion, as we should hear of distaste and passion. What
murmurs, complaints, repinings: what clamorous frowardness, harshnesse,
whining tuchinesse should we here? How many notes of discontent and passion
harshly grate upon our ears, and a world full of ne sic quaeso's, not soes,
not so my Lord: all unquiet, and in all and every condition and estate a
general distaste and frowardness, one praying for that which another prays
against, one desiring that which another execrates, and every one envying the
condition of other, weary and complaining of their own, and both and all, in
their disagreeing wishes, agreeing in this harsh and unpleasing note. O ne sic
quaeso, Domine mi, O not so my Lord.

You will not wonder at the poor Gally-slave, who is forced under the rigid
exaction of a cruel master, at each tug to wrack nature, to the height of her
endeavor, and with his painting sighs and drops of sweat to wrestle with, nay
overcome the opposition of winds and waves, if you hear from this miserable
wretch, vented amongst his sighs, Ne sic quaeso, Domine mi, O not so my Lord.

You will not wonder that the poor labourer that carries the price of his
bread upon his forehead, and is forced to make the wheel turn with no other
Oil then his own sweat, if you hear the same from him.

Nor will you wonder at the poor wretch, that lies gasping in the Suburbs of
death (whose gasping it is hard to say whether it be to take in or let go the
poor remainder of his breath) you will not wonder if he, cast down upon the
hard bed of affliction, in a discontented frowardness rebound again, like a
stone toward the hand that cast him, with his Ne sic quaeso, Domine mi, O not
so my Lord.

But will you wonder to hear the rich man, upon whom the world flows, like
the setting of the Hellespont, one way without a return, a Moitie of whose
fortunes are both the wish and envy of thousands; whose labor is but
recreation, and the study of others but to please him; whom fair pleasure in
the variety of all her dresses courteth? Will you wonder that such an one, in
his choice of worldly pleasures should have his ne sic quaeso, that such a one
could have any the least distaste? But so it is.

Nor need we indeed to wonder. What can all these outward things comfort a man
in a languishing disease? This displicentia sui, is a sickness of our nature.
Since Adam first eat that forbidden Apple our Teeth are set on edge, Ezekiel. 11.
2
so that we disrellish even Angels food, Manna. Numb. 21.5.


The malignitie of our wit can find a fault where God never made any, and this
dislike of all Gods actions and censure of the whole course of his providence
is an Epidemicall, and general disease of man. For indeed who is there amongst
all the sons of Adam, that can justly say, his obedience moves in a direct
subordination to that first mover of all things? that with a ready will, he
acts the precepts commanded, that with an humble patience, abides the
punishments inflicted? No, no, since that fall of our first parents, the best
of our obedience halteth, and our patience is frowardness.

If God impose any task to be performed, inflict any punishment to be endured,
which is distasteful to the palate of our sickned nature, O it is impossible to
do the one, intolerable to suffer the other; with what frowardness we go
about the one, and undergo the other, and yet how little reason we have so to
do, let us see in Lot.

Why should we deny obedience to Gods commands, or interpose our not so, when
God commands always for our own good?

First, then go to the mountain

Secondly, he is thy Lord; how ne sic, with Domine mi, not so, with my Lord?

Thirdly, thou art his Servant, ne sis, a fit dialect for a servus tuus?

Fourthly, thou have found grace in his sight, and where is thy

Fifthly, he has saved thy life, Lot's obedience, and checkes to his ne sic,
to his not so; yet all are nothing, the authority of a Lord, the duty of a
Servant, the mercy of a deliverer, the thankfulness for this grace obtained in
saving his life. He is thy Lord, by authority he may command, thou his
Servant, it is thy duty to obey, and thou may be compelled to it: but thou
art a favorite to him, it will be the part of thy thankfulness, nay such a
favorite as owe thy life, and therefore should venture it in his service.

Lot offended therefore against his own safety, against the authority of his
Lord, against the duty of a servant, against Gods mercy delivering, against
the Laws of thankfulness.

But Lot cannot escape to the mountain. Cannot! then in vain are these Laws
of a Lord, of a Servant, of gratitude urged if Lot cannot obey. But let us see
the strength of his reason, if that will excuse the weakness of his I cannot;
first in a general survey after in a more full examination of them.

I cannot (says Lot) ne forte aliquod makim capiat and moriar, lest some evil
take me, and I die.

First, there is forte malum, perchance some evil.

Secondly, But what evil? nay that he knows not, it is but aliquod malum, some
evil.

Thirdly, let there be more than forte, a certain evil, more than aliquod,
let there be malum horrendum, inform, ingens, a great one: what then? O ne
forte capiat, Lest it take him.

Fourthly, well! be it so too; let there be an evil, and that evil a great
one, and that great one take him, yet et moriar, Lest it take me, and I die.
What Is in all this to excuse either the boldness of his not so, or the weakness
of his I cannot. For

First, it is causuall, whether there be, not mala, but so much as malum in the
singular, any one evil.

Secondly, it is casual, if there be malum, what it is: for it is but forte,
aliquod.

3. It Is casual thirdly, si sit malum aliquod, and hoc aliquod grande, utrum
capiat, if there be an evil, and that evil a great one, it is casual whether
it take him.

Fourthly, si sit malum, and hoc malum grande, and hoc grande capiuat, utrum
moriar, if there be an evil, and this evil a great one, and this great one
take him, it is casual whether it be mortal: And yet Lot cannot, will not,
dare not go to the mountain, ne forte aliquod malum, etc. Lest some evil take
him, and he die.

But now, as dividedly I have weighed his arguments, and have found them light,
let me set one part of the Text against another, and as in a picture, you shall
have the shadow of the one, to set of the sight of the other.

But first the subject of both parts (thy servant) must run through both
parts, and in that there is an argument, both against his ne sic, and ne forte:
his disobedient ne, and his destrusting ne. For if Lot be Gods servant, in
servitute tua perfecta libert as, in Gods service is perfect freedom Gods
servant that has God's pass, may go through fire and water, amongst Swords
and Cannons, nothing shall hurt him.

Now for collating of the parts.

The first thing in Lot's way is forte: ne forte, lest perhaps, lest perchance.
For that, against ne forte I Will set conspectus tuus: Ecce invenit servus tuus
gratiam in conspectu tuo; the eye of God's providence against blind obance,
and then shall not Gods eye see better to guard thee, then blind fortune to
hit thee?

The second stop is aliquod malum, and in that I Will grant the most, that it is
magnum or ingens malum: and then, magnitudini mali hujus or miseriae, I will
set against it magnificasti magnitudinem misericordiae, to the greatness of
this evil or misery, the greatness of Gods mercy. Psalm. 145.9.
And let that which is above all his works, answer the fear of the greatest
evil that can betide him.

Thirdly, against capiat, I Will set inven^ gratiam, he is accepted of God; let
acceptus then stand agoinst captus.

And lastly against moriar I Will set servando vitam, against lest I die, I Will
set in saving my life. And now collecting all, what reason had Lot to trespass
against the authority of his Lord, against the duty of a servant, against the
mercy of his deliverer? Why for fear of a forte, who was in conspecta Dei, in
Gods sight? Why for fear of any evil, who had found grace in the sight of God?
Why of the greatest evil, who had tasted Gods mercy magnified toward him? Why
for fear any evil should take him, who was accepted of God? Why for fear of
loosing his life, which God had so graciously saved?

It is disputed by Aulus Gellius in his first book of his Noctes Atticae, A.
Gellius. lib. 1. noct. artic.
whether a servant receiving such or such injunctions from his Lord, may upon
assurance of his masters greater profit, either leave undone his masters
command, or vary from it in any point or circumstance of moment. Or whether
there be required in a servant such an obedience which the Schools call caecam,
infinitum, and irrationalem; so that he ought to observe punctually the command
of his master, whether any unexpected accident threaten loss and disadvantage
to accrue by doing that which was commanded, and an assured profit by doing the
contrary. It Is neither proper to this place nor my purpose to dispute this
question, only give me leave to relate a Story by him recited, with which he
seems to determine the question.

Crassus Mutianus, a man that by Sempronius Asellio, and other historians is
reported to have bin happy in the joint fruition of five of the greatest and
chiefest of humane blessings, That he was the richest of the Romans, the most
noble, the most eloquent, the most skillful in the Laws, and lastly, that he
was High Priest.

This Crassus obtaining the province of Asia, and there besieging a City called
Leuca, sends to the chief Enginier of the Molealenses, (a People then in
confederacy with the Romans) to send him of two masts which he had seen in
their City, the stronger and longer, of which he might make a battle ram to
batter the walls of the besieged City. The Enginier being a skillful man, and
pondering with himself the use of the mast, sends him, not according to the
direction, the bigger, but that which he knew both easier for carriage, and
more fit for that use, which was the less. Crassus comma^ds him to becal'd
for, inquires why he sent not that which was commanded, and despising all
reasons he could allege, commanded him to be stripped and scourged with rods.
Before you brand Crassus with the name of tyrant, besides that you hear the
testimony of his wisdom, hear a second in his reason. He thought (says mine
author) all authority would be cheap and vile, si quis ad id quod facere jussus
est, non obsequio debibito, sed consilio non desiderato respo^deat, if a
serva^t might excuse the duty of his obedience to which he is called by the
saucines of his own advice to which he was not called; and that obedience would
be too much enfranchiz'd, if a servant might have the liberty to make his own
counsel the Oracle, at which his obedience would consult, whether he should do
or not do what his Lord commands.

If the authority of man's commands be so great and absolute, that it exacts
obedience peremptory, and that obedience either neglected or altered, though
upon the fairest pretenses of the commander's profit, honor etc. deserve so
severe a punishment, with how many stripes shall thou be beaten, Luke 12.47
thou evil servant, that do disobey, not man, but God, and that not for any
reason on his behalf (as that poor wretch that was scourged for Crassus his)
but for thine own private respects, honor, profit, pleasure, dare, though a
servant, a creature, make thine own ends a sufficient reason to infringe the
laws of the Lord, thy Creator, of thy God that cannot be deceived, of God that
needs not any advice, or the correction of second thoughts? For he neither
deceives nor can be deceived, of God that has so absolute a power, by so many
rights over soul and body, whose authority and direction are above questioning
either the power of the one, or the wisdom of the other.

The Centurion says to one, Matthew. 8 9.
go, and be goes, to another, come, and he comes, to his servant, do this,
and he does it. Shall God that is not as he, under authority, Romans 9.5.
but above all, and from whom all other is derived, have less power over us?
Let him say go, or come, or do this or that, he can hear nothing but ne sic,
not so my Lord.

It was argument enough in the School of Pythagoras (...), ipse dixit,
Pythagoras said so, to infer the truth of any paradox, and the faith of the
Schools is now a days taught that obedience (if I say not slavery) that in
Philosophy, Aristotle is like an Heathen Pope, whose text is avouched with the
authority of Canonical Scripture.

These shall rise up in judgment against the men of this generation, Matthew
12.41, 42.
yea and shall condemn them too, for they believe the sayings of Pythagor as
and Aristotle, Ioh. 14.6.
and behold a greater then both is here, that great Rabbi, that is the way the
truth and the life, yet let him speak and we believe not his word, command and
we obey not his law, but question both the truth of the one and deny the
anthority of the other, with not so my Lord.

Thus far of Lots Negative request, with the summary view, and ballancing his
reasons, it now remains that I proceed to a more full and particular survey of
the reasons which Lot pretends to justify this dislike of Gods Council, and
maintain his own opinion. And the first is from the difficulty of the task.

I cannot.

The way of the sloathfull man (says Solomon) is upon thorns. Prove. 15.19.
Man's unwillingnesse creates a difficulty in the most easy enterprise, and
his fear a danger in the most secure way. I cannot, is many times and in many
men nothing elsebut I will not, or I have no mind to this or that, and so me
thinks it seems to sound here, rather like a voice proceeding from the
reluctancie of an unsubdued will, then the deficiencie of a fainting strength.

There is a Lion in the way, Prove. 26.13.
says the sloathfull man; there are a thousand dangers, says the unwilling
mind. Unwillingnesse creates monsters, and sets them up in her own way, to
which (like Nabuchadnezzer to the Image himself had made: Dan. 5.1.
it falls down in fear, as he in reverence. Thus her own fancies fright her,
and with an unhappy skilfulnesse, where she finds no fears, her own fears
makes them.

But on the other side, it is near a miracle to observe, how much a ready and
forward willingness can effect. Danger and difficulty are not lets, but
spurs to her undaunted resolution, and so far from amateing her, that they
rather animate her; like a bullet that by grasing again mounts, it takes a new
and fresh courage at each obstacle, and in an heroical disdain of the least
affront, revenges in the second onset the disgrace of the first repulse.

Had Lot then brought a mind as willing to be commanded, as the command was in
it self easy to be obeyed, there had been no exceptions, no demurs between
Gods command and his execution, no pretenses of fained fears, and divinations
of I know not what evils might take him: but rather with a ready willingness
and industrious alacrity, he should have showed his obedience to Gods
authority commanding, his faith to Gods Wisdom directing, and how ever, his
thankfulness to Gods mercy delivering: he should then have said as the
servants in Naaman to their master. 2 Kin. 5.13. If the Lord had bid thee do
some great thing, 2 King. 5.13.
would thou not have done it, how much rather when he sath escape to the
mountains and he safe? or he would have taken up the saying of Shimei to
Solomon, 1 King. 1 King. 2.38.
2.38. The saying is very good, as my Lord has said, so will thy servant do:
he would have answered his fears with his faith, and silenced his reason with
his Religion; he would have done any thing but disobeyed, suffered any thing,
or any evil, rather then have requited so gracious a favor with so
distasteful a reply, as not so my Lord, for I cannot.

But let us see what exceptions his sluggish fear can make against Gods
injunction. Escape to the mountain. Why cannot Lot? I cannot escape to the
mountain least some evil take me and I dye.

God bestows an invalueable favor, which his thankfulness should have heard
with all joy, and executed with all readiness. But behold delays to Gods
have, exceptions to his Counsel, distrust of his protection, and almost a flat
denial to his command, a frowardness, and repining teachinesse, which would
rather run back in to the flame and perish in Sodom, then be delivered in the
mountain.

Escape to the mountain! says froward Lot; theirs a command has much
kindness in it, that drives me into more hazzards then it shuunes, and for one
danger escaped thrusts me on an hundred? There Is a journey indeed: to be
performed by an aged Father, with a couple of young and tender Virgins, and to
be performed by such, and by such in haste, and in haste by them that are
overcharged with an heavy burden of sorrow, for loss of kindred, goods,
country, and all; already even half fainting with this sudden violence and
expectation of unheard of wonders: a journey of that length as must needs make
some or all of us faint out right in the way, and so be overtaken by the fire
behind, or any other inconvenience which our weakness may give or others take
to destroy us.

But sure the tediousness of this long way, will be recompensed in the end and
the place we go to make amends, for the difficulty of the way through which
we go. Alas no: when with much weariness we have overcome the tediousness of
the way, whether come we? From a City to a Mountain, from delight some sweets
of a pleasant valley to the disconsolate loneliness of a vast wilderness:
from a place surfeited with the delights of nature, to a desert that cannot
supply her very necessities: from pleasant society, to a melancholic
solitariness, where life is a tediousness, and nothing else but a perpetuated
act of a living death. And therefore Lord, if (as thou pretendest) thou do
truly purpose, and wilt magnify that mercy which thou have showed to me
hitherto: Then, O not so my Lord, for I cannot escape to the mountain, least
some evil take me and I dye.

Thus has Lot found Gods Counsel guilty of hazard and inconvenience by a
jury of arguments, and produced many reasons to prove it as full of hazard as
he of jealoufies, and yet all indeed, but the surmises of his fear and
pretenses of an unwilling mind.

So does man's nature ever cavil against Gods commands, they are like this
journey to Lot, up hill, hard and dangerous, the precepts he imposes are
impossible to be done, Hujus legibus omnia delicta capite plectebantur: ob quam
causam Demades dicere solebat, Draconem non atramento sed sanguine leges
Scripsisse. Vid. A. Gellium. lib. 11. cap 18.
the crosses he inflicteth impossible to be suffered, his Commandments are
like the Laws of Draco written in blood, such as are to deny our selves; go
out from the world: pluck out our right eye: cut of our right hand, and cast
them from us: turn our left cheek to him that smites on the right: love our
enemies: crucify our affections, starve our appetites in a voluntary
abstemiousnesse. Paradoxes, (says nature) full of contrariety to the
principles that were borne with us, Mar. 8.34.
full of harshnesse to our appetites, Romans 12.1.
absurdity to our reason, Matthew. 5.29.30.39.44.
impossible to our strength. Hard sayings who can hear them, who c^n bear
them? Gal. 5.44.
And yet says our Savior. Ioh 6 60.
Mat. 11.30. Marth 11.30.
My yoke is easy and my burden is light: Psalm. 119.24.35.47 77.174.
and David, thy Testimonies are my delight: and the Apostles after their
stripes went away, Act. 5.41.
rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer for the name of Christ.

How then? the difficulty lies in the perverseness of man's will, not in the
bardnesse of Gods command. As therefore the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 4 3.
if our Gospel be beds, it is hid to them that perish; so say I, if Gods
commands be absurd, it is so to them only who have not their senses exercised
to discern good and evil: Heb. 5.14.
and if it be harsh, it is to them only that savor not the things of God:
Matthew. 16.23.
if it be impossible, Ier. 17.5.
it is only to him that trusts in the arm of flesh and makes not God his
strength.

Conquer then thy Will, and in that one conquest thou overcomest all other
difficulties: get but that mastery of that, and then the ways of God shall be
like the motion of Nature, smooth, and without rubor let, accompanied with
earnestness in the onset, delight in the midst and success in the end. Let
God command what he will, thy obedience shall answer, 1 Samuel 3.9.10.
speak Lord for thy servant hears: as my Lord has said, so will thy servant
do, 1 King 2.38.
and then shall it appear as sarre from truth, as thy thought, to answer as
Lot, not so my Lord for I cannot.

But it is now more then time to weigh his reason, and see what strength in that,
can excuse his weakness, in his I cannot.

Least some evil take me, and I dye.

And is this all Lot can pretend, a surmise, a nothing to disprove Gods
Conncell, and prove his own I cannot? Alas, what can thou weak man, if thou
can not this? What will not pose the best of thy strength, if a mere
surmise, *a forte, if an aliquid, if a lest and some evil can do it?

O the weakness of distrusting man! What are we, while we hold not fast on the
Rock Christ Jesus, the best of us a Peter, a Gedeon, a Lot? Behold a champion
one of the Lords worthies; yet see his strength, (his weakness I should say)
see what can trouble him. Here Is no realitie of evil, nor needs there any to
perplexe him: a fear, a thought, a very shadow will serve to melt his
substance into the cold swet of fear: a presumption of his own, Ne forte
malum, least perhaps evil, and ne forte aliquod, least some evil; I know not
what evil, it is indeterminate, and ne forte si aliquod malum sit (capiat,
least some evil take me, and ne forte) si aliquod malum sit, and capiat ne
moriar, least if it take him it be mortal, least some evil take we and I dye.
It Is casual whether there be an evil; it is casual if there be, what it is; it
is casual if it be, and be great, whether it take him; lastly it is casual if
it be one, and that one a great one, and it take him, whether he dye, and yet
righteous Lot cannot, dare not, will not go the mountain, ne forte aliquod
malum capiat and moriar, least some evil take me and I dye.

What needs the bloody sword of the slaying Angel, as against the Assyrians, 2
Kin. 19.35.
the fighting of the Stars in their courses, as against Sisera, Iud. 5.20.
the warring of the Elements, Genesis 19 24.
as falling of fire from heaven, Ezekiel. 5.12.
as on Sodom, infection of the air as against Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 6.11 13.
overflowing of Water as on the old world, Genesis 7.20, 21.
gaping of the Earth as on Corab, Numb 16 31, 32.
Dathan and Abiram? What need the swarms of flies, bands of locusts, frogs,
lice orot her his creatures, which stand ready to be the agents and ministers
of his vengeance against sinful man, when God can make man himself his own
punisher; his own fears, his own imaginary fears, his own torment and
executioner, drive him with himself, from himself, even to such an ecstasy of
fear, as shall make him (to cure them) to compound with the King of fears
death, Isa. 28.15.
and make a covenant with hell, that he may shun the present horror of hell?

But now, to show as well the weakness of Lots argument, as of his I cannot:
suppose for thy forte, a real evil, for this aliquod, one certain, and of
certain danger, yet might he have stood assured in the capiat and monia^, that
it should neither take him, nor he dye.

For what? does thy forte deifie a blind chance, and put out the eye of Gods
providence? or has that providence (which thou must needs confess in Sodom)
left thee at the gates of it, and will accompany thee no further? or was thy
safety from the throngs of the City, that thou art afraid to be with God
alone in the mountain? or do thou think him, as they did after, 1 Kin.
20.28.
a God of valleys and not of the mountain? or if thou think none of these,
why do thou think there can be any danger in obeying Gods Counsel or
command? Do thou think He does task thy obedience with a command that has
any danger, who therefore does command thy obedience, that thou may escape a
danger? If thou think Gods purpose be not to deliver, why will thou leave
Sodom, why will thou obey in that? If thou think Gods purpose to be to
deliver thee, why do thou not obey in this? Why not to the mountain, do
thou think the nearer heaven thou go, thou go the further from him that
is the God of heaven?

Well might thou have answered thy fears, as the Wife of Manoah did her
husbands. Judge. 13.23. If the Lord (said she) were pleased to kill us, he would
not have accepted a burnt offering at our hands, neither would he have showed
us all these things. So might Lot have argued. Did the Lord deliver me from so
great a danger as the flames of Sodom, and will he betray me to my petty fears
in the Wilderness, and He with whom Angels denied not to lodge, will they not
pitch their Tents about my Tabernacle, Psalm. 34.7.
to guard me? and again, if God was pleased to reveal his counsel to me of
destroying Sodom, would he not as well have told me of any danger, if any were?
is not that power, which can so miraculously punish the Sodomites, great enough
to preserve me, if he be willing, and that he is willing, this deliverance from
this common judgment assures me of more then common favor? Non potest tot
miraculorum filius perire, he for whom so many miracles were done its
impossible he should miscarry.

I will therefore obey readily (might Lot say) since God commands lovingly, I
will go, since God sends me, and though my reason dispute against it, and my
fears present me with a thousand hazzards, I Will neglect all: I have a
commission, Gods command will carry me through an boast of opposing dangers.

For indeed, what is it that I can fear? is it solitariness? He is never
alone whom God accompanies. Is it melancholy? the light of Gods countenance
shall shine upon me. Is it thieves? Psalm. 4.6.
amongst a throng of men violently bent to destroy me, God delivered me, by
blinding them, and cannot he much more hide me from a few wandering robbers? Or
is it want? He feeds the young ravens when they call upon him, Psalm. 147.9.
nay he can make the young ravens feed his servant. 1 King. 17.4.6.
Or is it last of all, wild beasts? Heb. 11.33.
he can stop the Lions mouths, Isa. 11.9.
and the wild beasts shall not hurt nor destroy in all his holy mountain.
What is it that thou can fear? is it any of these, or all of these or more
then all? Yet, Romans 8 31.
if God be with thee who can be against thee?

Yet all Gods former favors real and many, cannot win the conquest of these
few, and those only supposed fears: but he unthankfully forgets the one, and
sluggishly yields to the other.

God was pleased to make Lot his boast, but now he makes his guest a stranger:
his safety in Sodom, cost God a miracle, the blindness of many: yet Lot, more
blind then they, thinks him absent who is every where present, in whom he
lives, Act. 17.28.
moves, and has his being, gropes with more absurdity then the Sodomites for
Lots door; for him that is within, without, above, beneath, fills all places,
and is excluded from no place, for him that goes where he will he cannot miss.
Yet Lot sluggishly yields to his own fears, and the miracle that God had
showed in blinding the Sodomites, and carrying him without the City, cannot
win the conquest of his distrust, but he fears to follow Gods directions,
least some evil take him, and he dye.

I am divided in my wonder at Gods patience, and man's distrust.

Take here then first a measure of that which is indeed immensurable, the
Patience and long suffering of Almighty God, whom though we daily, hourly,
nay each minute provoke, Psalm. 7.12.
and answer every act of his goodness, with some fact of our unthankfulness,
yet still he continues his mercies, and even while we are finning against him,
even then, is he doing good to us.

What mercy not more then moral and mortal so ill requited, what patience
less then infinite so often abused, would not turn to revenging fury, break
forth into wrath and indignation?

Excuse the homeliness of a fable, and let the goodness of the moral win
your pardon of the tale it self. It Is thus;

A mortal being in heaven, from whence he might behold the earth, as a little
Molehill, and men, like Ants, busy in the eager pursuit of their unquiet
desires; amongst other things he sees a thief picking the purse of one that had
lately before saved his life. Our mortal being passionately angry at so foul
ingratitude, and unable by reason of the distance to call to them, grew so
enraged that he caught up Jupiters tripos, and threw it at the malefactor.
Jupiter enquires for the author and cause of his throwing, and finding it,
exeant (says he) eeoelo affectus mortales, qui dum, etc. Away with mortal
affections out of heaven, and from the government of the world, Si quoties
peccant homines sua, etc.
which would quickly either leave no stools in heaven or no men on earth.

The moral shows us the difference betwixt God and man, that it would be woe
unto the world, if God were, as man touched with humane passion.

Secondly, take notice here of man's distrust, God had graciously wrestled with
Lots dullness, and when he would have by his sloathfulnesse and delays
destroyed himself, was pleased, (rather then he would let Lot destroy
himself) to use a loving violence, by force to carry him and set him without
the City. Genesis 19.16
Yet now, him that God would save, when he neglected himself, he fears that
God would neglect him, when he would save himself.

Never had man more cause of confidence. So many favors might have excused if
not patronized an over bold presumption, and set him so far from
distrustfulnesse and fear of danger, that he might with far more reason have
run into a neglective carelessenesse of himself and danger. He might have
found seeming reasons, and a show of argument for such a fault, but there is
not in all the topickes of invention any argument or color to hide so foul a
distrust.

What obstinacy and baseness is in the distrustfulnesse of man? The arguments
of Gods providence are beyond our numbering multiplied even with the minutes of
our lives, and yet are our fears more frequent then our dangers. Let God
deliver us from the greatest evils, we dare not trust him in the least: deliver
us from a thousand, yet we dare not trust him in one. All his mercies exhibited
to us, in bestowing continual favors upon us, in preventing imminent dangers,
in delivering us out of many troubles and afflictions that have oppressed us,
all these cannot merit our trust in him, or arm us with undaunted confidence
against an appearance of danger; but as if there were no God, or as if that God
slumbered and slept, Psalm. 121.4.
and intermedled not in the government of the world (as the Stoics fondly
dreamed) we shrink and tremble at sight of every danger, and to secure our
selves think it a surer way to run to unlawful shifts, then rely on the
assureance of Gods providence. And as if Gods hand were too short to reach from
Heaven; we think it a far safer way to catch hold of that which is next us,
even any poor, unlawful, and therefore helps shift which our own reasons
shows unto us. So wanting that eye of faith (which is the evidence of things
not seen) and looking only with the eye of sense, Heb. 11.1.
we judge that God nor sees nor regards, because we see not him. Each new
danger awakes a new distrust.

What testimonies had God given to the captive Jews of Egypt of an especial
love to them, that for their sakes had showed the strength of his mighty arm,
Exodus 13.14.16.
in so many unheard of wonders? Is it in the belief of man that any danger
could beget their distrust? Yet see, Exodus 12.29.
they are no sooner redeemed, by the death of so many souls as that night of
horror caused (that might indeed be red for them and blush at their so foul,
so monstrous distrust) but they on the first occasion are ready to undervalue
their deliverance, and wish rather to have served the Egyptians, Exodus
14.10.11.12.
then to dye (as they feared) in the Wilderness.

A deliverance may yield us comfort for the present, but as if of a transeunt
nature it ends there, and seldom do we improve it to arm us in the future,
so relying on transitory and vain helps, every assault of danger looses the
joints and shakes the strongest of our weak built resolutions.

If God should say to us in our misery as he did unto the two blind men, Matt.
9.29. According to your faith be it unto you; it would be ill with us, each
affliction would overcome us, and the shrinking of our faith soon call on us
misery enough to overwhelme us: our own despair would open us a gulf, a
grave wherein we should bury together, both our selves and hopes, Matthew.
27.60.60.
upon which (like that great stone rolled upon Christ's Sepulcher) our miseries
should lie with so great weight, as would crush, and at last shrink us into
the lowest pit of hell.

If God should not find a better motive in his own infinite goodness, a
better cause in his own Son to deliver us when we are oppressed, alas what
danger, what misery so poor, that is not too strong for the weakness of man?
What could our knowledge foresee? What could our wisdom prevent, of those
evils we did foresee? What could our vain and transitory helps overcome? Nay
the Eye of our knowledge being disturbed by our fear, would present evils with
more horror: nay should not our knowledge hurt, not help us, whiles it looks
through the false perspectives of confidence and fear, it so making evils
greater or less then indeed they are? Yea and should not our wisdom rather
hurt then help us, while relying on the opinion of it own abilities, it rather
makes us secure, when it could not make us safe? Yea and should not the best
means our own wisdom could supply us with, rather hurt then help us, when
they should prove only like broken reeds to which when we should lean, Isa.
36 6
they break, and so run into our hands?

Pessimus in dubiis augur timor. Statius, lib. 1. Thebaid.
-- Fear is the worst Counselor. Yet these transitory helps, are the forts
of our greatest strength, and they to which we owe both the most of our trust
and thanks. We deifie nature, and rely on selfe-unable means, as if a
redeemed captive should reverence the sword and not the man that used it to his
rescue. Alas these things we trust to, they are but agent of the first and
prime cause, things which in themselves carry an equal indifference to be as
well the Ministers of his vengeance, as mercy. Heat, the greatest comfort of
sublunary things, so that it is called the Father of generation, yet how often
has that father (like Saturn) eaten his own children? Moisture, the mother
of generation, yet often has her womb proved a tomb, and swallowed up her
own issue?

There is nothing in the world proved either by more frequent or more
demonstration then providence, yet nothing in our practice more questioned. Who
believes God further then he sees him? Where is the faith of those ancient
worthies that believed above, against hope, Heb 11.
against the evidence of sense, Romans 4.18.
and beyond the possibility of nature, when natural reasons might call their
faith absurd, foolish, impossible? If God come, Luke 18.8.
shall be find faith upon the earth? shall he not find it is vanished into
its object, and become a thing not seen? Heb. 11.1.
Or if we have any faith, it is but all sensitive, and must take information
from our eye, our ear, our senses. Ioh. 4.48.
Give the Jews a sign and then perhaps they will believe. Ioh. 20.25.27.28.
Give Thomas an ocular demonstration, Let him see the print of the Nails in
our Saviors hands, let him thrust his fingers into his side, and then he will
acknowledge my Lord and my God. Give me some ground for my faith to walk on,
otherwise I must needs be at the brink of despair. I cannot like Peter walk
upon the water, Matthew. 14.29.30.
or if I do, the rising of a wave shall dash my confidence into despair, and
as if every hollow of the waves were to become my grave, my faith and I, must
both sink, and I cry out with him in despair, Lord save me I perish.

But O Lord, do not thou make good our fears to us: O be not in so remote a
distance as our diffidence would set thee, nor yet as a judgment of our
distrustful fears withdraw thy protecting favors.

What use shall I make of that has been said, but even that of the Psalmist,
I will go unto the mountain, Psa. 121.1, 2.
from whence my help comes: Learn to look with the eye of faith, more than
reason or sense, and then shall we see a guard of innumerable Angels incircling
us, pitching their Tents about our T^bernacles, 2 Kin. 6.17 Psalm. 34.7.
and let the miseries of wanting it increase our desire to get it, one grain
of which, even no bigger than a grain of Mustard Seed, Matt. 17.20.
if we were owners of, we might remove a mountain, but wanting faith, a danger
that is but as a grain of Mustard Seed, is able to move us.

But be that trusts in the Lord shall be as Mount Sion, Psa. 125.1.
that shall never be moved, but stands fast for ever: No evil shall come
near him or hurt him, Psa 91.7, etc.
and after a glorious victory of all miseries here, Luke 10.19
Romans 2.7.10.
he shall be crowned with glory and eternity hereafter.

Let us not then in a good cause be ever deterred, by the vain affrights of
fear or danger. The goodness of the cause ought to animate us, in the
evilnesse and hardness of the way to accomplish it. If God be the author, the
devil cannot be the hinderer. Honesty and goodness shoot in stright lines at
the last and best end Gods glory, and God will as certainly prosper the means
as he does propose the end.

Verum and bonum convertuntur (say the Schools) Truth and goodness are
reciprocates, there is no goodness without truth, no truth without goodness.
Magna est veritas and vincet, great is truth, and shall prevail, so all
goodness in the strength of truth shall at last overcome. The winds may blow,
the rain fall, Matt. 7.24.25.
the floods beat upon thee, but thou shall not fall, for thou art grounded upon
a rock.

Have thou begun then a noble, a glorious action, which redounds to Gods glory,
the Churches and Common-weal's good, Incapisti been, quis impedivit? Thou bast
begun well, Gal. 5.7.
who has hindered thee that thou continuest not? If the action was evil, why
did you undertake it? if the action was good, why do you not hold on? What if
slanderers back-bite you and traduce you? What if authority frown, what if
envy malign? what if the multitude rage, Psalm. 2.2.
and the people imagine a vain thing? thou have Gods commission; say not then
I cannot, it is but ne forte malum capiat and moriar, but a lest some evil take
me, and I dye.

Thine own cowardice, thine own weakness may conquer thee, Psalm 2, 3.
but all these, though they take counsel together, shall not be able to
withstand thee. If God set thee on work, he will bear thee through, maugre the
opposing fury of the devil and all his agents. Go on then in the strength of
the Lord, and be victorious. Psa. 71.16.
I tell thee, if for the forte, there be an evil real, that threat thee:
Sicapiat if it take thee, si moriare, if thou die, Romans 14 8.
yet know whether thou live or die, Romans 8.37
thou art more than conqueror. It Is better fall in a good cause than prosper in
an evil one. Only let not thy fear betray Gods cause to miscarriage. If
death it self be threatened to thee, die. Can thou ever have a better end,
than to die for that end for which thou and all things were made, Gods glory?
which grant (O Lord) that we may propose unto our selves, in all our thoughts,
words and works, that glorifying thee in this life, we may receive eternal
glory and felicity from and with thee, in the life to come, and that not for
any merits ^four own, but for his sake who has dearly bought us, to whom with
the father, and the holy Spirit, be ascribed all honor, praise, and glory, now
and forever. Amen.

GENES. 19. VERSE. 20. Behold now this City is near to flee unto, and it is a
little one. O let me escape thither (is it not a little one?) and my soul
shall live.


IT is a property of Divinity not to err. Perfection is a White, at which all
of us ought to aim, none may hope to hit. The best men have their errors and
imperfections, Optimus ille est qui minimis urgetur, he is the best man that
has least, he is no man that has no faults. Let him be excepted, that was
without exception, him that being man was more then man too, CHRIST JESUS, God
and man, in whom there was no fault, neither was guile found in his lips. All
others are comprehended under the condition of sin, which they shall never put
off while they are clad in these robes of flesh.

The best of Gods Saints have had their slips and falls, and to make them fly
forth from themselves, to a better and surer hold, they have had often
remembrances of their own weakness, in many grievous wounds, and bitter
derelictions, have often fallen, been wounded with the weak reed of their own
strength.

Wonder not then if you behold a David defiling his hands and heart with
innocent blood, 2 Samuel 12.9
and unlawful pleasures. David, 2 Samuel 11.5
though a man after Gods own heart, 1 Samuel 13.14.
was but a man. Wonder not to behold a Solomon, 1 Kin. 3.12
the wisest among the sons of men, committing a double whoredom, 1 Kin.
11.1.4.
Spiritual and Corporal; Solomon, though so wise, was but a man. Wonder not
that Peter so foully denied and abjured his master, Mar 14.66 67, etc.
unless you wonder that Peter was a man.

We receive with our birth and nature, two inevitable conditions; peccare and
mori, to sin and to dye. And though it has beseemed the piety of the Churches
children to justify the Patriarchs against the bitter taunts of scaffing I
shmaelites, and uncircumcised Philistines, and like the good sons of Noah, to
go backward with the vail of charity in their hands, Genesis 9.23.
and cover the nakedness of their fathers: yet must not that veil of charity
blindfold our judgment, so that we altogether deny those faults to be, which
we would have concealed from the scorn of irreligious men. Diminuit culpam
excusatio, non tollit. God would have the errors and faults of his Saints as
well to stand upon record, as their virtues; and therefore, Seneca Not. quaest.
lib. 6. cap. 23
as Seneca says of Alexander his murder of Calisthenes: hoc est Alexand.
crimen aeternum quod nulla virtus, nulla bellorum faelicitas redim^t. This is a
blemish that shall eternally stick on his fair name, which no virtue of his,
nor the glory of all his victories shall redeem: quoties enim quis dixerit;
occidit Persarum multa millia, opponetur and Calisthenem: quoties dictum erit
occidit Darium, opponetur and Calisthenem; quoties omnia Oceano tenus vicit,
ipsum quoque tentavit and imperium, etc. opponetur sed occidit Calisthenem. As
often as it shall be said, he slew many thousands of Persians, yea but it shall
be said again, he slew Calisthenes: As often as it shall be said, he conquered
Darius, yea but he killed Calisthenes: As often as it shall be reported to the
renown of his name, he subdued all to the very Ocean, and it too, and removed
his Kingdom from a corner of Thrace, till it knew no other bounds, but the
same with the whole earth; but, as a check to all his glory, it shall be said,
yea but he killed Calisthenes.

Thus it is in the blessed Scripture, with many of the Lords worthies, whose
religious life and integrity deservedly calls upon our wonder to behold them:
but then again, lest they of themselves should entertain too high an opinion,
or we of them -- desinit in piscem, some frailty or foul slip like Philip's boy
tells them, they are but men, subject to like infirmities as we are, sin it
self not excepted. No marvel then if we find righteous Lots arguments
against Gods counsel and direction, guilty of weakness and folly, for all his
confidence in his Behold now, this City is near to flee unto, etc.

See thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a fool than
of such a man (Says Solomon) Prove. 26.12. The opinion of our own wisdom is
the greatest argument of our folly Multi (says Seneca) pot^issent pervenire ad
sapientiam, Seneca.
nisi put assent se pervenisse: many men had been wise, if they had not been
too wise; and if they had not prevented themselves with the swollen dropsy of
selfe-opinion, had made a wholesome growth in solid wisdom. Many men had gone
far, if they had not looked back on their progress, in a multiplying
glass, and so thought they had gone far already.

This overweening conceit of our own knowledge, as in all other learning, so
especially in the height of divine speculation, things (I mean) which
transcend the reach of reason, is most dangerous. I dare in those commend a
faith implicit, and prefer caecam obedientiam and fidem, the blind and budling
faith of Papists, before the most nice and oculate of the most learned.
Credulity there takes the place of reason, and that, without usurpation: where
we have a new Logic, and authority becomes the best argument. To oppugn Gods
truth or counsel with our reason, is no less than the extremity of folly, and
impudence: we must deny our reason, become foolish, nay absurd to our own
wisdom, believe above, against it.

To defend Gods truth or counsel with our reason or arguments, is a foolish
and unwarranted zeal, and which action does more question our judgment than
commend our zeal. Though the Arc of Gods truth seem to us to be shaken by
the opposers and enemies of it, so that it appear to be in danger of falling,
yet ought not we to be so indiscreetly zealous, 2. Sam. 6.6, 7.
with Vzzah, to uphold it with the weak hand of our reason. Our obedience is
then best, when it seems most absurd: when it looks only on the authority of
the commander, and yet that without more examination concludes an equity of the
command.

It was the triumph of Abraham's faith, Romans 4.18 19, 20.
that above, against hope he believed God, when Sara's womb was now dead. It
was the triumph of his obedience to be ready to obey God, in sacrificing of his
own and only son, Genesis 22.10
when nature and reason had the fairest plea that could be against it, and
might judge it unnatural, unreasonable, monstrous and wicked. But he looked
rather to the author than matter of the command, and measured not the justice
of the action by the rule of reason, but considered the reason of his obedience
in the will, power and justice of him who commanded, who is a law to himself
and to all others.

It had been well with Lot, if his obedience, his faith or thankfulness, the
first to Gods authority commanding, the second to his wisdom directing, the
last to Gods mercy delivering, had made him follow the Angels direction, and
gone unto the mountain: but while he will be so wise to teach his teacher, God
shows him his folly by experience, and makes the mountain, which (if he had
gone when God bid him) a place of safety, God (I say) makes it afterward (when
he goes on his own errand) the place of his punishment.

You have heard before Lots negative request, with the reasons of it, not so my
Lord, for I cannot. Now it remains that we come more particularly to handle
his affirmative request, and reasons of it. O let me escape thither; to Zoar.

In the affirmative request we observed, First the order of it, and Secondly
the matter of it.

1. The order of it, that it comes in the rere of his arguments, under the lee
and shelter of them, we will therefore reserve to it the last place, and here
first take notice of his Asteriske or note of attention before which betrays
his confidence in the equity of his request.

Behold now, says Lot.

How weak is our wisdom, yet how strong our confidence and opinion? yet
obstinacy and pride bear up our opinions, even against God himself, so that
with a saucy presumption, we dare capitulate and indent with him, nay even
chalk him out the way with a not so, for I cannot but behold now.

Behold now.

When man looks through the false medium of his own affection and passion,
what monstrous errors and solecismes does he count? The intellective part of
the soul, is like a clear and undisturbed fountain, wherein the form of
things is truly represented: but when once the affections (which are the muddy
and earthy parts of the soul) are stirred up, it becomes a dirtie puddle,
wherein things are represented blindly, lamely, and falsely. The istericke eye
wonders that others see not all things yellow as it self does, and calls that
others blindness, which is indeed its own infirmity. This City is new. Yea
it is so near thy affection that a just distance being wanting (a condition of
perfect sight) thine eye must needs commit an error. If God therefore behold,
he shall but see thy error, rather then any thing that may move him to
condescend to thy request.

Behold now. Why, as though thou saw something that God saw not, or as though
He that had power to deliver thee, could want wisdom to direct thee, but He
must be directed by thee, with a not so my Lord, but behold now.

He that made the eye shall not be see? Psalm 94.9, 10.
He that made the soul and invested it with that noble and royal faculty of
understanding, shall not He understand?

Natura agit per line as breviores, (says Philosophy). Nature is never
superfluous in her actions, but goes the nearest and most compendious way to
work, and shall the God of nature, not do so much more?

God is in Heaven and thou on the Earth (says Solomon) if then He has the
advantage of the ground, Eccles. 5.2.
as much as the heaven is higher then the earth, needs He to be lifted up on
the shoulders of us dwarfes? needs that Sun of light our candle, that Ocean
our spoonefull, or that first intelligence our information or direction of not
so my Lord, but behold now? must He be beholding to thee for thy behold now?

Behold now. Why? as if God saw as man saw. Our eye is hindered by darkness,
by distance, by interposure of a gross body. Being not hindered, what sees it,
but color? It is terminated in the outward surface and superficies, never
penetrating into the inmost and retired essence. But Gods eye is not as man's,
neither does He look as man looks. Within, without, hidden, covered, dark,
light, are words, and things, to which only man's weakness has given a being;
to that eye of the world there are no such distinctions.

Here then (for a word of use) let us see the vanity of many men, who think
with the color of an excuse (which our ignorance has unskilfully doubted) to
bleare the eyes of that all discerning wisdom, to which thoughts themselves
(things of weakest essence and nearest nothing) are open and apparent. Heb.
4.13. Psalm. 139.2.


From the Asteriske and note of attention behold now I come to Lots reasons to
urge his affirmative request, which argue more the good man's affection, then
enforce his conclusion.

Innocenti a melior est quam eloquentia. Quintilian.
Innocence (says Quintilian) is better then eloquence and a good cause then a
good Orator. Magna est veritas and praevalebit. O there is a considence in
truth, better then all the flourishes of Rhetoric, all the proofs of reason.
Each color implies some defect, and each proof some doubt, that doubt, a
possibility of the contrary. And therefore it has usually been the guise of
innocence to make no argument her best argument, and the slight of reason, the
reason why she should not be slighted.

It was a brave and heroicke scorn in the Affrican Scipio, Titus Livius.
when being accused of treason against the common wealth, he (in stead of
answering) led the people to the Temple to give thanks for that renowned
victory (that day twelve months before) by him obtained. Scipio's virtue
scorned to be defended, let his actions not words speak for him. And me
thinks more could not have been said for Scipio then this silence, and his
disdain of defense did out do all oratorie. And verily truth (like a perfect
cube) needs not these poor props: let falsehood and a weak cause strengthen
their weak credit with these mercenaries, that like Tartars or Switzers will
be hired to either side for the better pay. For indeed our corrupted reason is
become the only advocate to passion and affection; and so vassatized unto
them, that as it is the greatest of our taskes, so is it that, wherein she
shows the best of her abilities, in making good the most desperate and
forlorn cause.

Our affections first resolve, and then make reason harrow all the Topics of
invention, to find defenses, if not excuses, using herein poor reason as a
great Potentate not long a go his clergy. For having a desire to marry within
degrees unlawful, he set his learned men on work to prove it lawful, and
again after a while (being cloyed and desiring change) set them again on
work to prove the former marriage unlawful.

Nay! so monstrous is the folly of our credulity, when our affections claim a
strong interest in the cause, that the same arguments shall serve us to prove
contradictions, yea and the same reasons persuade or confirm the lawfullnesse
of that, which in themselves prove it most unlawful.

Witness the words of my Text, with the two precedent verses, in which Lot
would prove Gods Counsel as full of danger as his own of convenience and
safety, when as all the reasons he can allege, prove the flat contrary.

This City is near to fly unto and it is a little one. This City.] Is it a
City and not the more likely to be sinful? It is Bela, a City of the
Plains, and not more likely to be in the same manner and degree sinful?

near Sodom and not the more dangerous? nay is it near as well in condition
as place? how much more likely to be joined in punishment?

is it little? how much more reason to be destroyed? For says God to Jonah
should not I then spare this great City Nineveh, wherein are more then
sixescore thousand persons, that cannot discern betwixt their right hand and
their left, and also much cattle. Jonah 4.11. How contrary is Gods argument to
Lots? God will have a City spared because it is great, Lot because it is
little. But these rich and fruitful plains had much endeared the heart of the
good Patriarch: loath he was to change a City, and a plenteous valley for a
mountainous and rockie desert, and therefore though God be his immediate
Counselor, the end his safety, yet being interested by affection, against the
authority of his Lord, the duty of a servant, the mercy of a deliverer, does
Lot struggle first by delays, and then with forced reason to prove Gods
Counsel full of danger, as his own request of convenience and safety. Nay so
far has his affection blinded him, worse then the Sodomites at his door,
for they could not see, because the Angels blinded them, Lot could not see when
the Angels directed him.

I think misguided, unsanctified reason, does rather breed suspicions then
clear them. Syllogismes never compounded controversies, seldom the law
friends. There is indeed an abstracted Logic, which prescribes forms and
motions, but follow it into the practice of men, it has still one term more
then it should, affection or passion. The Lawyer has not he his rationem
tinnulam for his quartum argumentum? and what wonder then if in a double sense
he commit fallaciam in quatuor terminis.

Nor is it thus only in our every days actions and occurrents, which
according to our interest reason must justify or at least excuse, but as if
that (...), that circle of Arts, had made them mad too with walkking in it, the
Schools themselves and Universities, have matriculated the same dotage. Who
would not unstudie reason and befoole all arguments, that should see a thesis
affirmative proved by many reasons, his true Negative proved also, yet both
answered, and after a long progress with inquisition and industry, arrive
fairly at the same point where it begun, and end in the greater doubt? Quid
leo est, nisi insanire cum ratione? What Is this but to be a learned fool, and
with great labor to make Cob-webs to be swept away? Magno conatu^ nugas! Would
not this (under things of faith) be enough to make a man a Skeptic? Sure we
need not, to the native weakness of our understanding and reason make it more
wretched by this slavery, and mancipation to our affections and passions,
unless to a weak eye we would throw in dust. But I leave them in their maze
and come to Lots arguments themselves to enforce his request, and first of the
object of his behold; the first reason of Lots affirmative request, being a
qualitate.

This City, it is a City.

In which (as in the rest of his arguments) I might propose to my self this
order. Every argument or reason has veritatem or veritatis speciem.





pro and con on every of his arguments.

As first in this first argument that it is a City the other a mountain, I
might show you in this one three several motives to Lots desire, Plenty,
Society, and Safety. Then in answering these again, I might (without being
Heterogeneall) dilate upon the commendation of their opposites Poverty and
Solitariness, each of which besides the true determining and moderating of our
desire of these, might suffice to hold discourse beyond the limits of your
patience. But I shall content my self to glance at some of these, rather then
to tie your patience in a long discourse.

First then of Lots first argument. This City. It Is a City, the other a rude
and barren mountain.

This City was before time called Bela as appears out of Genesis 14.8. until
this occasion of Lots request, and the reason of it, altered the name to Zoar,
which signifies little, because he said it is a little one, and is it not a
little one? It was one of the five Cities of the Plains, called the Plains of
Jordan, Genesis 13.10.
a Valley wherein nature prevented the labor of the industrious husbandman, in
a voluntary and unbought fruitfulness, so that it needed not to be watered
with the sweat of industry to make it fruitful, but of it self yeclded to the
inhabitants occasion of idleness, to the neighbors of envy, and to all of
wonder. Such a place it was, that it grew to a word exemplary to set forth the
pride and height of fruitfulness. It was watered like the Garden of God, Gen
13.10.
and like the plains of Jordan before the Lord destroyed Sodom.

Here were then three strong attractives to Lots desire, Plenty, Society, and
Safety, and in this City all these three concur to make life securely
happy. Abundance of wealth and delicacies to refresh the body, abundance of
company to delight and cheer the mind, and then safety which only makes the
other consummate in the security to enjoy them.

For plenty and riches it is true that Quintillan says, Quint. dialog. de
Oratoribus. page 689.
Divitias facilius est ut invenias qui vituperet quam qui contempserit. Its
easier to find a man that will despair them, then that will despise them, one
that can in the Schools wittily declaime against them, rather then one that
will disclaim them. Quis nisi mentis inops? he shall presently be begd for a
fool. To stand in tire upon his own bottom and not need to be beholding to
any, nay to have all that which shall hold all others either in his friendship
or slavery. O it is supremum mortalitatis votum, and locus diis proximus, it is
the highest condition mortality can be capeable of, and riches give it. Most of
the studies, inventions, toiles, travels and undertakings of men aim at this
one end, to be rich. Heaven it self is but too often made the price of this
purchase: Men go there to fetch gold, where they loose heaven and day; itum
est viscera terrae, into the bowels of the earth; deeper, into hell. This Image
of Caesar causes an universal idolatry, and to that superscription all
subscribe.

That Lot then, should desire to go to this City, rather then to a barren and
naked mountain, we need not wonder, unless we wonder that men prefer plenty
before poverty. I shall be industriously idle to make more words of so
confessed a theme.

In that it is a City there is a second attractive, Society, and that is to man
as his own element. Society is the life of our life, and solitariness is a
very living burial. I might here move a Problem, why men naturally in remote
and silent retirements and solitudes find a kind of horror and
affrightfulnesse?

Is it that as Solomon says of friends, Prove 27.17.
they strengthen the faces one of another, so our Genius does receive a mutual
comfort and livelihood from one another presence, and so in this solitude
(being out of the rays and circle of their virtue) acknowledges that want in
this weakness?

Or does the soul apprehend the presence of some good or evil spirit, which
are both ready, the one to offend, the other to defend us?

Or is it the reflexe of our own conscience upon it self, which being guilty
of sin, must needs be of fear?

Or is it antipathy of nature, which in this sees a praeludium of that
universal silence to which all go down? Siquis asperitate ea est ut congress
us and societatem hominum fugiat and oderit, qualem fuisse Athenis. Timonem
nescio quem accepim^^s, tamen is pati non possit, ut non acquirat aliquem apud
quem, etc, Cicero de Amic fol. 220 vide, si plac^t plura ibid.
What the reason of it is, I know not, thus much I am sure of, that this horror
is an evident argument, that man is politicum animal, that in his nature is
implanted a love of Society, and that he was as well made for Cities, as Cities
for him; so that Auchorites and Hermits are gone as far from man's nature, as
they are from his company.

Timon himself, that greatest Owl of Athens, and prodigy of nature, that
professed an antipathy to all man, nay, to all humanity, yet he (for all his
doggednesse) as Cicero wittily says of him) could not carere hominum
consortio, apud quos virus acerbitatis suae evomeret, he could not want the
company of men, though it were but to spit the poison of his gall upon them.

3. Now for Lots third attractive to the City, which is safety, that man should
desire it; needs no more proof, than that a man loves himself, and it were
vain in me to go about to prove it.

Here then were seeming reasons to justify the lawfulness of his request, and
excuse his unwillingnesse to obey God's command. But,

From the specious show and weight of those arguments, I come to the fallacy
in them: and for answer in general to all, first by concession; say, it is
true, suppose it, that this being a City, is more convenient to fly unto, more
comfortable to rest in, there are those invitations here which in the
mountains are not. But what then? must God be obeyed only with our
convenience, and the condition of our service be our own content? What is this
but to make Gods of our selves, and to observe him only whilst he will pleasure
us?

Egregiam vero laudem? Virgil.


How much better did afflicted Job: Job. 2.10.
Shall we receive good at Gods hands, and shall we not receive evil? What if
God commanded thee, not to danger, but to certain loss of thy content, thy
estate, nay thy life, will thou not obey? Is not he the supreme arbiter of
life and death? He that gave thee all, may be not therefore command all thou
art owner of? Must our reason, or will, or content be check-master with his
supreme authority, and our obedience be limited to our profit, our pleasure,
or such respects?

Yet it is thus alas, many times with many amongst us. God has many that seem
his servants, who are indeed but their own: men that follow him, but it is like
the Jews, Ioh. 6.26.
for the meats sake only, because prosperity, riches and honor are friends
with religion, and go along with it: let these part, and Religion take one way,
and prosperity another, these servants will soon acknowledge their master.

Religion had never worse friends than when it had most, and never so many, as
when the temporal sword joins with the Spiritual. The warm and clearest
Sunshine of the Gospel produces many aequivocall births, that pester the
Church wherein they are, such as are imperfect creatures, in respect of true
generation. These though they are in the Church, yet are they not of it, they
seem to hearken (with others) to Gods voice, but it is while it sounds to
their ears in a pleasing key; while their profit, their pleasure or reputation
run in paralells with religion, they hold the same course with Gods children,
but th^se part, the bias of their respects draws these crooked, these turn
too, to the left hand after their sinister ends. Let God command them to go, if
it be to that which crosses not their desires, they run with the foremost,
like a stone down a hill: but to any disconvenience, discommodity or discredit
(as Lot here to the mountain) O that is up hill, against the hair to them,
then O not so my Lord, they then cannot, lest some of these evils take them,
and they die; a thousand excuses, a thousand pretenses of fears and evils that
may take them, shall stand in their way, and you shall bear I cannot, lest
some evil take me and I dye. But if God will command them where their
affection draws, let them go that way, none more forward in their obedience,
their own respects and desires being the maine spring from which proceeds
their motion.

2. I might secondly answer, (especially of the two first) from the nature of
them, they heing adiapbora, things indifferent, that in themselves are neither
good nor evil, cannot, ought not to be desired without Gods commission to
enjoy them. But I leave this, and pass to the second general argument, which
is a quantitate viae, this City is near to fly unto.

It Is near.

1. Ease is a great flatterer of our nature, and difficulty, at equal
distance from our affection with danger. Labor is the price of honor, and
great and heroic spirits only the purchasers. The idle wishes of the sluggard,
nor the faint resolutions of the coward, will never arrive at that height where
honor dwells. A spirit that grows big as the danger does, and gathers as it
grows, shall attain the true greatness.

2. Secondly it is near, and so might befriend his curiosity, that though he
were forbidden to look back, Genesis 19.17
yet he might from hence see whether and how Sodom should be destroyed.

Curiosity is an itch of our nature, which we would have clawed, though with a
poisonous nail. It Is a disease we are all sick of. Our first parents set
their childrens teeth on edge with that sour apple (which their first
curiosity to be like gods in knowledge, Gen 3 6.
to know good and evil, made them taste) that sour apple (I say) has ever
since set their childrens teeth on edge. Ezekiel. 18.2 Genesis 3.7.
Yet they had their eyes opened; and what saw they? nothing, a privation that
they were naked. They saw much like the bleareey'd woman in the Fable, that had
covenanted with the Physician, to give him so much money when he had restored
her to perfect sight. The Physician at every visit stole away some of her
household stuff, till at last all was gone: by which time being cured, and he
demanding his reward, she tells him she now saw worse then ever, for whereas
before she saw her housefull of goods, she now could see just nothing. Their
curiosity and desire of divine knowledge brought them just to such a pass.

Their eyes were opened, Genesis 3.7.
but what saw they? That they were naked. Whereas before they were invested
with many divine and noble faculties, many rich attributes and privileges of
soul and body, they now saw themselves disroabed, naked and miserably
destitute of all those.

Their eyes were opened, and what saw they? Even much like the blind man in
the Gospel, Mar. 8.24.
men like trees, mankind degenerated into an inferior kind, violently hurred
with his passions, and become as the brute beast, Psalm. 49.12.20.
stupid as the block or tree.

Curiosity is often punished like jealousy. The impatience of the desire is
one torture, and it often finds a second in the object it seeks. It many
times fishes for a Serpent, or would try the dangerous conclusion to kill a
basiliske.

Such a Curiosity, was in the men of Bethshemish, 1 Samuel 6.19.
and it was a dear one, of whom fifty thousand threescore and ten men
forfeited not their eyes only but their lives, for prying into the Ark of God.

Such a Curiosity was in Rodericke the last King of the Goths in Spain, L.
Verulam his essay of Superstition.
and it was a dear one, when he would burst open a part of his palace, which
the religion of many ages kept untouched: and what found he? Pictures of the
Moors with a prophecy, that when that part of the palace was opened, the
people there resembled should conquer Spain, as indeed under Musae and Tarif
they presently did.

Such a Curiosity was in Pompey the great, and it was a dear one. Upon the
conquering of Jerusalem, not long before our Saviors birth, though stoutly
opposed and threatened by the Priests, he would needs enter into the Sanctum
Sanctorum. And what saw he to feed his Curiosity? Nothing but as Tacitus in his
history tells us, Tacitus lib. 5.
nulla intus Deum, effigy vacuam sedem and inania arcana: there was no picture
or image of God, it was not like the painted Church of Rome.

But what followed upon this? -- ex illo

Res illi fluere and retro sublapsa referri, some such thing met him as did
Brutus afterward that dampened and flatted his undaunted courage. And it is
worth the observing, that from that time things ever went down the wind, in
all his undertakings the sprightlinesse of his great and fortunate Genius
forsook him, and grew faint and cowardly.

It was none of the least commendations that Tacitus gives of Agrippa, Tacitus
in vita Agricolae. page 656.
retinuitque (says he) quod est difficilimum sapientiae modum, he set limits
to his wisdom it self, and prescribed a non ultra to his desire of
knowledge. And it is the Symtome of a well manned temper, to be able to reclaim
our unsatiate eagerness, and take of the edge of our desire to know.

It is in Pernassus as in other hills, there is an height to which we may let
our selves aspire: but some there are that think, that height must reach
heaven it self, and strive this way to enter into Gods Closet. That old itch
of our first parents to be like Gods, Gen 3.
to know good and evil, they can never claw of. But there is certainly an
height to which we may go, but he that rests not there, may go further, but
it is downwards, and that many times impotente sui pondere, with a swinge that
cannot control it self, till it carry him headlong into the dangerous
precipice of distraction and error. Such while like Elias they are wrapped in
the Chariot of contemplation, 2 King 2.11.13.
reach not to the perfect vision of the heavens, and things done and enacted
there (which they aspire to) but they let fall their mantles which should veil
their nakedness.

Knowledge, as it is in it self, is a sweet thing, but it has its sower sauce
with it. Like Vinegar it does not so much satisfy the appetite, as whet it
with a new and fresh desire. The Satyr that could not be content to see the
fire, but must needs in Curiosity feel it, scorched his fingers.

Now for answer to this second argument of Lots, and to show the fallacy of
it, whereas he says it is near.

The neernesse is so far from making lawful his request that it shows it
rather to be absurd: for if it be near Sodom, it is near danger, and the more
being as near in condition as in place. Is this Zoar a City of the Plains,
and not in the same condition of sinfulness with Sodom? Then Lot thou would
change place but not company, and the next degree to sin is to be in the
company of sinners.

Woe be to him that is alone (says Solomon) and yet (say I) better it is to be
alone then in the company of sinners, Eccles. 4.10.
and that in respect of a double danger infection and judgment.

First of infection, for (I dare be tainted, Dan. 3.27.
as for the three children in the fiery furnace, not to be burned. And good
reason is therefore this, since in our body there is not so great a disposition
to catch fire, as in our souls to receive the tincture of sin. The
customarie beholding of sin committed, (though by others) does in our selves
weaken the strength of our Antipathy, and by little and little familiarize it
to our nature, bringing us by an insensible progression, from a full hatred to
a faint dislike, from dislike to a toleration, from a toleration to a consent,
so to a delight, and at last to a society and actual commission.

infection is much, so secondly little less is the danger of judgment.
Witness Lot himself, who suffered in the captivity of Sodom, because he so
journed in the City of Sodom.

Tum tua res agitur paries cum proximus ardet. Virgil.


Who desires a vicinitie with danger? First therefore look unto thy safety,
and then to thine ease. It Is near to Sodom, and therefore far from safety.
He commits a strange soloecisme that makes the way his end, that looks how he
goes, not whether. Such is the folly of us wretched men. Do not we just as Lot
did? When the seeming pleasures of the way cozen us into hell, when foolishly
delighted with the pleasures of sin for a time we go on in the ways of death,
Heb. 11.25.
as an Ox goes on to the slaughter, or as a fool to the correction of the
stocks, till a dart strik through our liver: as a bird hastes to the snare,
and knows not that it is for his life. Prove. 7.22, 23.27.

Thus much for Lots first argument a quantitate viae, it is near. I proceed to
the second a quantitate termini, it is little, it is a little one, and is it not
perexigua, a very little one?

In which words (me thinks) I discern as much passion as hope of compassion.
Behold it is a little one, and is it not a little one?

Let me (with your patience) before I enter further into examination of the
argument (do what I think the words will give me leave) look over the pale
of Divinity, into the groves and shades of Philosophy, and there would I
desire the resolution of a problem: Why men have a kind of natural
indulgence and delight in little things? Or why men are more taken with things
that are under their just and ordinary proportion then those that exceed it?

For inanimate it is not only not so, but directly contrary, where with the
quantity of bulk is also increased the quantity of virtue, as in pearls,
precious stones and the like.

But for artificial things, it is indeed many times on the contrary, that the
value and esteem of them is so much the more, by how much they are the less.
To comprehend in the compass of a Wall-nut, or in a less quantity, so many
several springs, wheels, catches, motions, all distinctly, regularly moving,
is it not far more admirable, then the exemplar of the same in a great clock?
For our esteem of these lesser works, the reason is evident, in regard it
shows the more art, to contrive a work in the less quantity.

Materiam superabit opus -- Nay this is grounded upon nature, Ovid.
which nunquam abundat in supervacaneis, sed agit per lineas breviores, goes
the most compendious and near way to work.

But now for animated things, why we are more tenderly affected toward them in
their minority and infancy rather then in their adult-age and maturitie: What
may be the reason of that?











Sure if it be none of these, and that I may err in the reason, yet the thing
it self is evide^t, that naturally we are more compassionately indulgent to the
infancy and minority of the creatures, then to them in their adult-age and
maturitie, and our blessed Savior himself seems to acknowledge in his own
example this affection as lawful as natural in taking little children in his
arms, Mark. 10.16.
laying his hands upon them and blessing them, rebuking those that forbade them
to be brought unto him, and many such like passages.

But I am afraid I have dwelt too long on this theme, though I am confident,
not with any impertinencie to my Text, in which I find the strains of like
passionate indulgence, it is a little one, and is it not a little one and my
soul shall live.

But I proceed to examine the argument, and first of the probability of it,
and secondly of the fallacy.

Antigonus being desired by Cynick to bestow on him a Talent, answered, that a
Talent was more then became a Cynick to ask, Seneca. de Benef. lib. 2. cap. 17.
being again thereupon requested a penny, he answered that a penny was less
then became a King to give. A base and dishonorable evasion, that found a way
to bestow neither; whereas a noble and generous mind might have found a way to
have bestowed both. In the Talent he looked at the Cynick, what became him to
ask, in the penny at a King; what became him to give: whereas he might have
given a Talent as a King, and a penny, as to a beggar, yet both with decorum
enough,

I have related the story with Seneca's censure, with which though I will not
cross, yet thus much of true morality will Seneca himself grant me, at least
in one part of this reply: that any thing may not be requested, but that there
is a necessary decorum in all our desires. A monstrous request answers it
self. Eadem facilitate negatur qua petitur. He gives me a good reason to deny
him, who has no reason in his request, and indeed that man has forgot the
first ground of Charity, whose alms beggar him self; who by building an
Hospital makes himself a fit guest to live in it.

Ask therefore of thy friend but only that, which thou may ask without a
blush, and he give without a strain, else has he both, for colorable excuses
for thy denial. What reason has he to bestow that which thou have no reason
to demand? Indeed those requests are easily granted, that bring the blood into
the cheek neither of the asker, nor giver, not in the one, by the strain of
his modesty, nor of the other, by straining his ability.

Importunity and impudence is the baseness of beggary, which else may be
liberal, while it is asking, if it express as well a care of his estate from
whom thou ask, as his for whom, to which the easiness of thy request would
offer no violence, whilst for thy self thou can say with Lot, is it not a
little one, and is it not a very little one?

But otherwise thou teach him a just denial, who make thine own supply
another necessity. Be not therefore too importunate in thy demands.
Importunity is a civil robbery, if thou be importunate, let it be in another
superfluity, lest whiles thou pullest his coat to cover thine own, thou
discover his nakedness.

And as betwixt man and man, so toward God himself, our petitions are taught
a modesty in this example. Matthew. 20.21, 22.
To sit on Gods right hand and left, was a request of more zeal then
discretion, and therefore found with our Savior an answer rather of reproof
then grant.

We may not ask any thing of God himself, that were to make the power of God
familiar, and therefore miracles as they are rare things, are as rarely to be
asked. It Is not for Gods state to come every day abroad in his rays of
majesty and power: those are things of state, and reserved for solemn days
and occasions. And therefore miracles which are effects of Gods extraordinary
power, and a kind of new creation, are things from which God rested the
seventh day, unless some great and general occasion be offered.

By the way therefore, for popish Exorcists (those religious conjurers) that
make it but every days work to cast out devils, that have him at command, as
ready as if he were but their Tenant at will, it is to be feared they will be
some of those that pleading, did not we cast out devils in thy Name, Matt.
7.22, 23.
and in thy Name do many wondrous works? It shall be answered, Away from me
ye workers of iniquity, I know you not?

To conclude, our desires must not be measured at the infiniteness of Gods
power: we ought rather to weigh with a well-disciplined modesty, what we may
ask, not what God can give.

And thus having done with the probability of this argument, which as it
regarded himself, may seem good and allowable, I come to the fallacy of it.

This City is near, and it is a little one.

In the intention of which words, might be involved a twofold object: Gods
Power, or, Gods Justice.


1. First his Power, and then would the force of the argument depend upon this
ground. That a thing of no great difficulty may easily be granted. It Is but a
small matter for me to ask or thee to grant.

But then would the argument be odious in a suppositio^ or ground, that any
thing were hard or easy to God, whereas this is only so, in a finite and
measuredstrength. The infinitude and immeasurablenesse of Gods Power, knows
nothing that has any the least proportion of resistance. What be can do (that
is, all things) he can do easily. For who has resisted his power, Rom 9.19.
Romans 9.19. All things are swallowed up in this vastnes, he is able to do all
things with the same ease, the same strength: as easily move the earth out of
his foundation, as move an atome of dust, or the least grain of sand: the
sturdinesse of the oak is as plyant as the bul-rush, with the breath of his
mouth. And indeed difficulty is but the task of a finite strength: arising
from the resistance of the object, when a thing is accomplished, but sometime
with danger, many times with pain, and always with intention. To God there is
no such thing as difficulty, pain, or resistance. By what should any thing
resist him? All resistance is a contrario, but to God all things are
subordinate, acted by him, living, moving in him, and having their being from
him. Act. 17.25 28.
How then can any thing move against him? To give any thing that power that it
could resist God, were to make it God. But to him, dictum, factum, said and
done are all one. He spoke, and it was done, be commanded, Psa. 33.9.
and it stood fast.

But this first sense of the words, I pass by, as thinking it not so properly
the meaning of the words, and come to the second, made of the second object,
Gods Justice.

2. And if it be so understood, then would it be of a most dangerous sense: as
if he should confess indeed, that this Bela, or here Zoar, did indeed justly
deserve as it had partaken in a share of the same sins, so to partake in the
community of the same punishment. But yet it is but a little City, and the
inhabitants but few; what if then for my sake, so small a City, and such an
handful of men be exempted? Would that be any breach of Justice, or any task
of Gods impartial dealing, if of ten thousand ten should be spared? Would such
an inch break any square, so small a matter be stuck at, upon my desire, for
my safety? Spare it then, O Lord, it is but a little one, nonne perexigua est? so
exceeding little, that to pardon and pass by it, can no way impeach thy
Justice; which shall acquit it self well enough, in that number which shall
justly feel it is just rigor, and as to that number that shall in thine anger
suffer, these I sue for, lose all proportion, and become no number? so this act
of thy mercy being set, by that exemplary act of thy Justice, shall escape all
notice and censure.

Were I but guilty of a little oratory, I am persuaded, some might easily be
cozened into a belief, that the argument were very solid, and would well
enough hold water.

What? (says natural reason, and unchristened Justice) have I rigidly
observed all thy commandments from my youth hitherto? have I justled counter
against the world, Mat. 19.20
neglected (out of conscience and godly fear) my profits, my pleasures, my
humors, borne the obloquies and frequent scorns of the multitude; and shall
not a little sin, a small erro^^ be excused in me?

Is not this a frequent plea, that not only the formal worldling, but even
Gods servants themselves make, and wherein they are wonderfully pleased? as if
(forsooth) they had well accquitted themselves, if they have been diligent in
their callings, or the duties of religion; O then a little slacking, one
neglect or ommission may well enough be excused, and so sin in the crowde of
their virtues pass unseene, uncensured.

So goodness must be a stale to sin, and diligence the patrones, at least of
a small neglect! As if by doing well we purchased a liberty to do ill, and that
we might deal with God as the Roman slaves did with their masters, who having
served them all the rest of the year, yet for onst (at the Saturnals) their
masters served them: Macrobius.
so here, as if (forsooth) because we have done God (as we think) reasonable
good service, and been indifferently diligent in our callings, God must
therefore onst, or so serve us, authorize us to sin a little, and excuse us for
a little when we have sinned.

Is not this almost to make God the author of sin, and goodness monstrously to
father her own contrary? Would you not think it a monstrous madness, and
strange soloecisme, if a master should ask his servant why he had offended in
this or that command, and he should reply, because I am thy servant, or because
I have served thee well and faithfully in other things? Would you not think
this servant mad? And would you not think that master that would accept this
answer for a sufficient excuse, more mad and foolish than the other? Yet just so
do we deal with God. Why have we been bold in this or that matter to offend?
for onst to omit this or that duty, a little too slack of our diligence?
because (forsooth) we are his servants, because we have heretofore been
officious and zealous. What a strange reason is here, we are bad because we
have been good?

2. As in this monstrously we would make God the author, and goodness the
excuse and privilege of sin, so secondly, it is a thing we never make any bones
of, never stick at to sin a little, so it be but a little, it occasion be,
to step a little out of the way, so that we rove not past the outter, most
declination sin's of Zodiac. Let us go no further, and then, as if there were
a Cancer on hell's side, as there is in heaven, and that we could be
retrograde, return when we would, fearlesse of the steepness of that ascent,
and unwary of the deceitfulness of sin, we stop nor, (having begun our
carere (without Gods great mercy) till we are carried headlong into the vale of
death, and plunged in the gulf of eternal misery.

O (my heloved) take heed of this killing indulgence to your selves, to think
to sin a little, a little to go aside, a little out of the pale of Gods
protection. O consider what thou do, no more but give the devil a little
hold of thy soul, no more but begin'st a race from the top and verge of a
steep hill, no more but tear a little of the writing and covenant betwixt God
and thee, no more but add a little thorn to the crown of Christ.

And yet I am deceived almost as much as thou art? thou do not these a
little, but much, and highly, especially if voluntarily thou sinnest but thy
little.

its a great error that any finne is little?

that thou can return, repent, and retrive thy self being at a fault, but
thy little.

First, no sin is little. For tell me, what is little? I would feign know,
what is little.

Is a grain of sand little? Yes, in comparison of a pebble stone. But is a
grain of sand positively and absolutely little. No? For in respect of an atome
it is great; nay, that atome is not little neither. For if it be quantitative,
then has it extension, if extension then one part without another, and then,
at least those parts are less then the whole, and so might I dispute of those
parts, and the parts of those parts in infinitum. I know in regard of animate
bodies, the best Philosophers are of opinion that they have their praefixed
terms of magnitude upwards and downwards, their maximum quod sic, and minimum
quod non, their minimum quod sic, and maximum quod non: but there is nothing in
the whole universe, that is absolutely and positively little. And this I
affirm not only in bodies, but all accidents, whether qualities, actions or
whatsoever, to which in any manner we attribute quantity and the affections of
it.

Tell me then, what is a little sin? Sin being an aberration from the right
way, measure me the true distance of that aberration, measure me the line that
measures that distance; Omne quantum est divisibile in semper divisibilia.
thou will find a kind of infiniteness in it. For each line is infinitely
divisible.

The truth then is, we call some sins little, not that any is absolutely and
really so, but only in respect of some greater. So that our justification in
this kind, would prove but like the Pharisees merely comparative: Luke 18.11.
I thank God I am not as other men, nor even as this Publican.

Be not then so nerre a papist in thine opinion, that (as they hold some sins
venial) thon as absurdly holdst some sins little, or the Pharisees that hold
some of Gods commands to be but little ones. Matthew. 5.19. Be not deceived
(says S. Paul) for because of these things, Ephesians. 5.6.3, 4, 5.
what things? Ephesians. 5.6. Sins which the world esteems but little of
fornication, called but a trick of youth, all uncleanness, covetousness, nay
he names less yet, filthiness foolish talking, jesting, even for these
things: let no man deceive you with vain words, as if these were but little,
petty trifles of sin, toys, not worth the heeding, for whatever, how light
soever you may think of them, Verse. 6.7.
even for these things comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience: be not therefore partakers with them. And indeed, they that upon
this plea, are bold to commit any sin, argue more in it their own sauciness,
then the sins excuse.

It is not proper, nor probable that an offender will rightly judge of the
quality of his own fault. He must censure of it, against whom it was committed.

What was (in it self) the cating of an apple, Gen 36.
what the gathering of a few sticks, Number. 15.32.
or the upholding of the Arc when it was so shaken, 2 ^am. 6.6.
that it seemed in danger of falling? What can we think of these, which might
seem each one to have a good plea, the first of wisdom, the second
necessity, the third piety? Were not these small matters, and if sins very
little ones? and yet the least of these little ones, cost no less then death,
Gen 2.17. Number. 15.36.
at least temporal, and stretched in their nature to the merit of an eternal.
2 Samuel 6.7.
Take heed in these things of charging God foolishly. Job 1.22.
Shall not the Judge of all the earth do uprightly. Genesis 18.25. Yet if our
captious wisdoms have not learned so much Christian modesty to be controuled
by this authority, but that they dare think hardly of it, and speak it in the
place of extreme justice: reason it self may file into a smoother phrase, the
roughness of that word, and Christen it a most lawful and just severitie.
Romans 11.22.


Eadem ratio rotunditatis in majore and in minore circulo, sic and in peccato,
there is the same kind of roundnesse in a greater or less circle, so is there
the same kind of obliquity in the greater and less sin. A little thing is
little, but then unfaithfulness in a little is a great fault. Number. 15.
The gathering of those sticks, Genesis 3.2 Sam 6.
the eating of that apple, the touching of the Arc, were in them selves but
little things, but then the disobedience in these littles was no small fault.
God commanded, and his command (which is the bond of all our obedience) was
broken, and therefore what ever the things were, for weak and sinful man,
with neglect of so many great and strong obligements to offend an infinite and
omnipotent majesty, makes these little sins of so great a guilt, that as no
man without in justice can excuse their sins, much less with any justice can
any excuse their punishments.

But (let me name it truly) it is a kind of general Atheism, in this
declining age (out of the greater acquaintance in sin) that they dare with
boldness act those things against God, and esteem them but little, which (if
done against a King, nay far inferior men) would be judged, by common
civilitie, impudently absurd, and monstrous. And no marvel, if to Atheism be
added impudence, in those who knowing that there is a God, Tit. 1.16.
do yet in their works deny him.

that men having offended but a little, can easily reclaim them selves. Let
them do this or that, either for experience or curiosity, or company, or
gain, or pleasure, or the like, without fail they will go no further, the
devil shall in vain expect a further progress, into any further degrees of
sin.

Thou fool! is repentance a work of thine own? or if not, why will thou
promise so certainly, that which is not in thy power? Thou will sin a little
but surely return. To sin is in thine own power, but that thou repent is in
the power and pleasure of God only. 2 Timothy, 2.25.


Alack vain man! with how little reason do thou flatter thy vain hope?
Can thou leap off a steep rock, and think to stop in the middle way, when
thou art carried headlong impotente sui pondere, with a weight and swing unable
to manage or controwle it self? 2 Samuel 14.14.
Can thou spill water on the ground and think to gather it up, or put fire
to towe, and hope it will not rise into aflame?

O thou little know the fruitfulness of sin, the pronenesse and
inclination of thy nature, or the justice of God, that often punishes one sin
with another.

It is said of Ninus his victory, prior quaeque victoria causa sequentis erat,
Justin. hist. lib. 1.
every former victory occasioned the following: and most true it is of sin,
that every first makes way for the next, and he that makes no conscience to
commit the one, will make less to commit a second, and yet less of the third.
For as each act of sin stains the soul, so it gets an inclination and
disposition to further acts, by which is wrought custom, and by custom
necessity. As S. Augustine says, Augustine.
Dum servitur libidini, facta est consuetudo, dum consuetudini non resistitur,
inducta est necessitas, so that at the last, by this fatal gradation men a
rive at the height and impudence of sinning, from which (without Gods great
mercy) there is never a return, Heb. 10.27.
but a fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation which shall
devour the adversaries.

Yield not therefore to any the least sin, let not the infancy of it flatter
thee, though it smile upon thee with a childish innocence, and pretend naught
but harmless simplicity, for here, in a true (though differing) sense, may I
use the words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 137.9.
happy shall he be that takes and dasheth these little ones against the stones.

It was but a little cloud at first, 1 Kin. 18. 44, 45.
that afterward overcast the whole heaven, so a little sin, (if not scattered
by the sacred power of the blessed Spirit) will hide all the heaven from us,
eclipse the light of Gods countenance, and at last involue us in eternal
darkness. And as that little cloud became at length a dashing shower, the
least of grains, in its growth, becomes one of the greatest shelters; Agraine
of Mustard Seed, Matthew. 13.31.
which is indeed the least of all seeds when it is sown, but when it is grown
up, is the greatest amongst herbs, so that the fowls of the air, come and
lodge in the branches thereof. Matthew. 13.31. such is the increase and growth of
sin.

Believe not then the devil and thine own deceitful heart: they are
importunate with thee. What! will thou deny them a little? so little? such a
trifle? not grant so much room in thine heart as to sow one of the least
grains? Why will thou be thus fooled, and couzened out of thy soul? Look
whether tends the devils modesty. If he should say to thee downright, bluntly,
and without more ado, give me thy soul, he would startle as well thy courage,
as awake thy vigilancie: and because he does not so (knowing then he should he
sure to be denied) will thou be the more careless, because he is the more
cunning? Why; believe it, he asks as much in a poriphrasis: now he asks thee,
but this thy little; he asks thy soul, and aims (though he seem to play at
small games) indeed at thy whole stock. He asks thy soul, but more slyly,
least thou should deny him. And therefore, thou ought to be the more
circumspect, against his cheating modesty, by how much there is the more real
danger in his seeming less desire. It is so far from any care of thee, that
it is indeed but a cunning tolling of thee on, by a seeming carelessenesse, and
the innocence of a little sin. For know undoubtedly, that of these littles is
made the devils skrew, and the stairs that lead to bell are winding.

Nemo repent fit turpissimus -- No man at onst jumps into the extremity of
sin, Invenal. Sat. 2.
and the kingdom of hell (like that of Heaven) comes not with observation,
Luke 17.20.
but by an insensible progress, we go downward, and therefore are bid to
remember from whence we are fallen, Rev 2.5.
and the servants come to their Lord with wonder in their mouths, Matthew. 13.27.
Master did not thou sow good seed in thy field, from whence then has it
tares? It escaped their notice for a long while, even till the blade sprung up
and the fruit appeared.

Thou see, here it is wisdom to be a precisian, and that a nice and tender
conscience, is the best antidote against secretly insinuating poison.

Had David before made a covenant with his eyes, Job. 31.1.
he had not so nearly unmade his covenant with his God; when he beheld
Bathsheba from his tarras. 2 Samuel 11.13.17.
Little thought David that little thief, lust (that through the windows of
his eyes stole into his heart) should have opened the door to those two great
sins adultery and murder. 2 Samuel 12.9.
Little thought he, the fruitfulness of that sin of lust, would for one
infant, have doublely lost a man, first in drink and then in blood.

Little thought Peter (when he meant at first, Mark. 14.66, 67. etc.
with a plain denial, handsomely to have shitted of the dangerous
inquisition) to 01 have run into oaths and execrations. By stepping but
aside, he little thought to have run so far from Christ, even further then
they that before forsook him and fled from him. Matthew. 26.56.


You see then, how one sin ushers an other, and like one wave calls another,
till at last the deep waters go over thy soul. Can thou pull one link of
a chain and think the rest will not follow? In that little sin thou art
dejectus de statu and gradu, discomposed and disordered in thy posture, so that
thine enemy may close with thee. Such is the fruitfulness and improvement of
sin!

Since then, it is sins method, to win upon us by little and little, here a
snatch and there, let us be wise as serpents, Matthew. 10.16.
and countermine against the policy of that grand serpent. Let us arm our
selves with a sacred jealousy, and well wrought resolution, which as Satan in
vain by force, at onst should attempt to break, let us take heed, that he
never by his policy unravell, Seneca.
and as Seneca counsels, nobis quia regredi non est facile, optimum est non
progredi, because we cannot easily return, 'its best way not to go forward.

I have thus far insisted out this argument of Lots in a three fold sense
natural, morrall, and theological.

In the first (...) and in way of essay, I inquired into the reason, why men
are naturally compassionate, and indulgent to little things. Secondly I
inquired, what this is which we call little, and whether i: import any essence
or quiddity, positive and absolute, or only comparative and of relation.

In the moral sense of the words, I endeavored by some Ethicall precepts, to
stop the voracitie and greediness of our desires, both to God and man; to cure
men of that wolf and to train them up unto a discreet modesty, in all
requests, that what we ask may be without a blush, and given without a
strain, which will then be, when like Lot of his Zoar we can say for our
request, it is a little one, and nonne perexigua est, is it not a very little
one?

The Theological sense I have showed might be twofold, in regard of a twofold
object that may be supposed Gods power, or His justice.

1. His power, and then would the words involue an error as dangerous as
popular, viz. that any thing were easier or harder to God, whereas this is so
only in a measured and finite strength. It is a little one is a good argument,
in that it implies our modesty, but it is a little one is a bad argument if it
look at Gods power.

2. The second sense (supposing the second object, which is Gods justice) is
likewise dangerous, as confessing that Bela or Zoar (a City of the plains of
Sodom) does partake with the rest of the Cities in the community of the same
sins, but it is but a little City, and Gods justice cannot be impeached, as
partial in sparing so few men, so little a City.

Hitherto I have proceeded, and though perhaps I have made much ado about a
little, yet I am unwilling to let go the same theme.

Who will not there most fortify, where he knows his enemy will make the
greatest battery? It is this way, and almost this way only, the devil winnes
upon us. The Serpent thus by little and little winds himself in. He never
dealt with any except our Savior, Matthew 4.6.
to bid him, cast down himself from the highest pinnacle of the Temple: it is
his wont to us, to cozen us by degrees, from the height of our zeal and virtue,
as by winding stayres, and this way he is so much the more like to obtain his
end, by how much we are less able to discern either the declination or danger
of the way.

I had almost vented a paradox, and yet though I call it so, I will adventure
to expose it to the hazard of your censure, and am much deceived if it be not
acknowledged for more than half a truth; and this it is.

Little sins, or those sins which we take for little ones, are many times of
greater guilt and danger, than those which we esteem great ones. Be pleased to
suspend your censure, till I acquaint you with two or three reasons.

First they are committed in numbers, and so numero si non pondere valent,
their number will weigh against the others weight. The fruit of this forbidden
tree grows, if not great in bulk, yet in branches and clusters. Secondly,
they are done with greater boldness, and holdnesse is the very formale of a
sin, that which dies in the deepest guilt, and aggravates it beyond all
excuse, as if (forsooth) by the priledge of some extraordinary familiarity with
God, we might be borne out in a little boldness, and (as the foolish mouse
played with the Lions beard) expect that his patience should still sleep though
we tempt it every day, Psalm. 7.12.
with the saucie importunity of these childish and sportfull sins. Thirdly,
those sins men call little, are seldom repented of, and what wonder (when
committed with so much carelessness) if they be omitted in our repentance.
Possunt verba dare and evadere pusilla mala, ingentibus obviam itur. Fourthly,
they are causes of greater: and thereupon much of that guilt, which is in the
sins which follow in upon these little ones, may be transferred back again
upon those, without whose treachery they had never come in. And though by a
Physical necessity they produce not these succeeding effects yet by an
inclining (nay tempting) disposition, they open the gap too, and draw in a
whole huddle of sins, and those many times great ones.
Examples are of this but too frequent. Have we entered a little way into any
unlawful course, and do we not often find more desperate courage to wade
through, than modesty to forbear, or repentance to go back? Over shoes, over
boots: we are in, and cannot be much worse, or if we be, its as good on a
little further, and repent for altogether. There Is but a broken piece of a day
or estate left, I can do no great good with that: as good throw the helve after
the hatchet. Thus (in those and such like of the devils Apothegms) we encourage
our selves from sinning to sin, making that a spur which should be a bridle,
and engaging our selves by the infiniteness of this argument, to ingulphe our
selves into an irrevocable condition. Tush! Repentance is but a sneaking and
poor conditioned virtue, as good on, and secure sin with sin.

To this purpose there is a memorable example in Seneca, of one Piso, Seneca de
Ira, lib. 1. cap. 16.
a Roman General, a man most unfitting that rule, who was (to tyranny) ruled
by his own passions.

Two soldiers having gone together out of the Camp, and one only returning,
Piso condemns him that returned, as presuming him guilty of his comrades
death. In vain does the poor man crave any mercy, who is denied the just
trial of his own innocence, in the least respit. Away he is haled to the
block, where with his neck out stretched, ready to receive the fatal blow, when
behold fortune (more kind to him than that tyrant) presents him with the sight
of his fellow, just now upon his return. With mutual embraces, and the
joyful acclamations of the army, both are brought to Piso's Tent, that he may
be acquainted with the soldiers innocence, and his own mistake. But what?
must a great general, and that in the sight of all his army, acknowledge in
his acquitall, that he could be unjust? It shall be proved just, because he
will not repent, which rather than he will do, he will sin maturely, and
desperately, to prove he did not offend so much as rashly. Piso will now,
rather than acquit one, condemn both, both him that had not, and him that was
not murdered; so that because one did appear innocent, two must perish: nay
Piso added a third yet, the Centurion. And wot you the wit of his anger, to
find just cause for all? Thee (says he) I condemn to execution, because thou
wast condemned: thee, because by thine absence, thou wast the cause of his
condemning: and thee, the Centurion, because being commanded to execute him
whom I condemned, thou disobeyedst my command. Excogitavit (says Seneca)
quemadmodum tria crimina faceret, quia nullum invenerat, he found a way etc.

In dealing of which sort, of strengthening and seaming one sin with another,
we deal like a wise Counselor of the Duke of Florence, who (having a great
heap of dirt and rubbish, which without great labor, and much expense could
not be conveyed away) was by a grave Senater most politickly advised, to dig a
gaeat hole in the same place, and bury it in that. But (replied the Duke) where
shall that earth which is dug out of the pit be bestowed? (Why? says the
eight of the wise men) make the hole so much the deeper, and bury both.

Make the tale a fable, and laugh (in the moral) at thine own folly, thou
that think in what kind soever to hide one sin with another: 2 Samuel
11.13.17.
as David adultery with drunkenness, 2 Samuel 12.9.
both with murder: Mar 14 66 67, etc. 71.
as Peter simple denying of his Lord with cursing and forswearing, or (as
usually the custom of many is) to hide any offense with lying or swearing,
etc. Thou have dug a pit, Psa. 139.8
say as deep as hell (for thither art thou going) to hide thy first sin, yet
indeed in this more foolish than him I spoke of. But suppose it hid; where
shall the second be hid? make a deeper pit. Thou may go to hell that way, but
never hide thy sin from heaven, even there also shall thine hand, Ps. 139.10
and thy right hand find such out.

Resolve then, thou can not hide, much less secure one sin by adding more:
thou think to bury the first sin in the second, but where shall the second
be buried? How ridiculous is this conceit of men, yet how often practiced?
David himself (as I said) had this gull put upon him. He committed adultery,
to rid a way and bury this filth, he is guilty of drunkenness, and finding
this pit yet too little, he will wisely dig deeper, and go nearer hell yet, in
Vriab's murder: but finding the vain policy of it, and that this way the
mass of his dunghill did but rise to greater bulk (like the Augean stables)
his only way was by the abundant tears of repentance (as by an Alpheus) to
purge away that corrupted mass.

Peter was thus served too. He thought at first, but with a handsome conveyance
of his body, to have shifted off the blow he feared. But this little motion
carried him with such a swinge, that he ran further from our Savior then the
rest that fled: Mar. 14.71
he swears and forsweares, Luke 22.61
so that had not our Lord looked back to recall him, he had run eternally away
from him.

Do not these examples preach unto you strict vigilance, yea and preciseness
over your ways, that you offend not, though never so little, that you gratify
not the devil with the least sin. Thou see of what dangerous consequence and
fruitful improvement sin is: give him not one link, by pulling that, all the
whole chain will follow. Luke 1^, 22, 23.
Let not in then this enemy, whom thou may easily at first keep out, and who
(being onst admitted in) will be too strong for thee.

I have done with this argument, which I have longer insisted on, because it is
the strength and thigh of his request, Genesis 32.25.31.
but I have touched it in the hollow of it, and therefore you can expect no
other, but that the request must come in halting, which follows in these
words, O let me escape thither. But before I pass to the request, and last
argument, here stands in a parenthesis a passionate Epanalepsis, set down by
way of interrogation [is it not a little one?] In which having done with the
matter of the words, the Rhetoric only is left to our observation.

It is a little one, O let me escape thither, and is it not a little one?

In which words (methinkes) I find, as somewhat of passion, so much of a
compassionate indulgence, so that I know not what more winning, and
affectionately moving, could have been spoken. A right piece of true Rhetoric,
that woes the affections like a right artist, like one that would derive both
powerful and pathetically into his auditory his own notions, his own sense,
and like a common Genius of the whole body, animate the whole company with one
and the same soul. This is the true end of all Rhetoric, both profane and
sacred, ducere affectus, to take and lead the affections, quoquo velis, which
soever way you please. And to do that, is there any way but through the
understanding?

Which being truly and undoubtedly so, I can but wonder (for understand I do
not) what end they have proposed to themselves, whose preaching is more
affectedly obscure then Delphian Oracles, or Egyptian Ieroglyphicks: that
indeed make good in a bad sense, that of the Apostle that calls preaching
prophesying, 1 Cor. 14: 3.
that have mouths, nay words, and speak not, and would make good that curse
upon their auditors, to be of those, that hearing hear and understand not,
Isa. 6 9. 82
and seeing see and perceive not. Act 28.26.
And indeed I wonder at the patience of them that hear such, who are dealt with
as the Fox did with the storke. Who inviting the storke to a feast, powered his
liquor into so slat and shallow a dish, that the poor stork was only a
spectator, (while the Fox lapt up the meat) his long bill being unable to dip
in that shallow platter. For you that hear such, I know not (in that regard)
what you loose if you sleep whilst such preach, for if they will not make you
auditors, I know not, why you should (in the Church) only be spectators. But
for such Preachers, I would upon the pardon of a question, give them (I think)
good counsel. What need they labor an hour, not to be understood? Is it not
a more compendious way (if they would not be understood) to say nothing?

2. There is an other sort, that on the contrary, as the former make preaching
prophesying, so these in as bad sense, would make good that of the Apostle of
some that call preaching foolishness: as if because preaching must not be
gareish, 1 Cor. 1.21.23.
it must therefore be sordid. It Is beyond the patience of an understanding man,
to bear the rankenesse of their undigested meditations; and God sure, but for
our punishment never made such Ambassadors.

It is beyond both my purpose and skill, to prescribe the best way, who
acknowledge my self in the lowest class of learners. But sure, there is a
latitude, wherein men may both please and profit, and it will prove best, when
men learn first the inclination of their own Genius, and seek to perfect
that, whether in the kind of prosecution or action. Much of imitation is
distort and lame.

I have with a perfunctory touch done with this, and come to Lots affirmative
request.

O, let me escape thither.

God prescribes Lot the way to escape, fly to the mountain: Lot replies, O
not so my Lord, for I cannot, etc. there is a ne sic, of disobedience, O not so,
and there is a ne forte, that is his distrust, and then, behold, this Citle is
better, there is confidence.

1. Man's a distrustful creature, and yet man's a presumptuous creature. For
is there any climax in sin, whose highest step we have not reached. If the
baseness and abjectednesse of our fears shrink us as low as hell, the swollen
pride and height of our presumption preaches us as high as heaven: so that with
a saucie presumption, we dare capitulate and indent with God, nay even chalk
him out the way, with a not so my Lord, but behold a better convenience, O let
me escape thither; thither to Zoar one of the five Cities of the plains.

2. Man (you see) desires to serve God easily and cheaply, would have the way
to heaven down the hill, the way broad, strawed with violets and roses, good
store of merry companions along with him, and at the end a wide and open gate,
that might be hit blindfold, (O who then would not go to heaven.) He thinks
it not for the state of so glorious a Palace to have so narrow a Gate. It Is
that that offends many, and makes them turn back again to Sodom, that the way
should be so narrow, set with thorns of afflictions, that scratch and pull
back, a solitary and melancholic way (as many think) through disgraces and
reproaches, 2 Cor. 6.8. etc.
laden with an heavy yoke, an heavy cross: Matthew. 11.29.
that all the way must profess patience, Luke 9 23.
and invite a second blow after the first, Luke 21.19.
and at the end agate, that to get through they must creep low as the dust,
Matthew. 5.39.
and so straight that to get through a man must leave his wealth, Matthew. 7.14.
his dearest sins, nay even his flesh.

The Israelites way to the spiritual Canaan, is through a sea of sorrow, made
big with their own tears, that goes high with their own sighs, with a
spiritual Pharaob full of rage and at their heels, through a Wilderness,
where there are all things that threaten death and no sustenance for life,
Deuteronomy. 8.15.
no bread, no water, no flesh, no houses, a long way through deserts and
wildernesses, amongst many fiery serpents, through many enemies. O these are
the things that make many a one return again toward Egypt, Act. 7.39.
and go on merrily in the ways of death, Prove. 7.23.
till a dart strike through his soul. Men will, with much ado perhaps, be
brought to desire to escape the spiritual Sodom, but not by the mountain, O
that is up hill and against the hair, but by the way of the Plains of Zoar all
would escape. O (says every one) let me escape but thither, this way, by Zoar
and my soul shall live.

We would be content to invert that petition, thy will be done on earth as it
is in heaven, to thy will be done in heaven as it is on earth; that our
pleasure might rather be Gods service, then Gods service our pleasure.

Most men deem the man in the Gospel a fool to buy so dear a bargain, when
he found the Pearl, Matthew, 13.46.
that is to part with all that he had to purchase it. What needed this cost?
without doubt (say they) heaven 'may be had at an easier rate, and he but
overbought his bargain. Men will take God at his word, give him a sterile and
hungry mercy, good words and good wishes, but not sacrifice. Hos. 6 6.
Good thrifty Christians we are grown, that can go to heaven a cheaper way
then by good works, that is by the mountain, we can go by faith.

Mistake me not (beloved) as though in this just sarcasme. I tasked in the
least wise our doctrine, or befriended in any sort those unjust reproaches and
scandalls of the Church of Rome, that we should maintain, that faith alone
without good works can save us, or that good works are not at all necessary
to salvation. Our doctrine does more establish, yea, and encourage good works
then theirs, while it gives them so great a value that the least of them, even
giving a cup of cold water, Matthew. 10.42.
shall be rewarded tenne-thousand fold above 'its own worth: theirs rewarding
them only after the rate of their own worth.

I would to God our practice were according to our doctrine, and that it were
no more the fault of the men, then the religion so to cry up faith, faith, that
they have cried down good works, as if they were effects of superstition and
ignorant zeal. It is our practice not our doctrine that sets faith and good
works at odds, which are in them selves as much connexed and linked as cause
and effect, Sun and light, body and shadow, or what ever example of strongest
dependence can be found in nature. But I pray God we pay not dear, for
thinking to have heaven too cheap.

The Ephesians cried up Diana, Act. 19 28.25.27.34.
Diana, but gain was in it, gain was their godliness, yea their god. We cry
up faith, faith, and there is gain in it, Iam. 2, 24.24.
its to exclude good works, those (as if out of fashion with Popery) we have
not so much piety (shall I say?) or charity, as to keep up those stately
edifices which they built. Nay (I doubt) some are so far from putting a
finger to the work, that the repairing of S. Paul's is with them Popish.

To find a nearer way to the Indies has cost many a life, and to find a
nearer way to heaven, has cost many a soul. Many a one is in Sodom burned,
that went to escape by Zoar. Some will pray, but like sluggards in their beds,
will fast, but with curious refections; Prove. 26.14.
give alms, but not a moiety of their robbery, give a Vicar five pounds, and
rob the Church of five hundred; be temporal Bishops or spiritual Earls;
build an Hospital and rob a Church; do good at their deaths, and live how
they list. Its no wonder there be weavers, and tapsters, and other mechanic
Clergy if there be temporal Bishops. We will follow Christ, Luke 9.59.61.
but take leave of our friends first, or bury dead, but when he bids us follow,
we will not follow him to the mountain.

I come now to the last words and part of my Text, in these words, and my soul
shall live.

Man has committed in this a foul idolatry, in making the creature a God,
while before the enjoyment he promises all happiness (and what not?) in every
end he proposes. Man has done the creature again^ as foul an injury, while he
vilifies the creature in the enjoyment, as far as to hate, and loathingnesse.

-- Et concipit aethera mente. Ovid.


O, if we could but compass such a man's estate, honor, parts, our desires
should sit down, we had done for any further wishes. But do we there set up
our rest? nay alas are they not either distasteful, or only the whetters of
new appetite? When we enjoy them, how short we fall of that we promised from
them!

Let me escape thither and my soul shall live (says Let,) I have mine hearts
wish. Was it so? Alas he is no sooner there, but he flies away from thence to
the mountain. So far short are all outward things in giving a full content!

We are like the silly sheapherd in the fable, that seeing the Sun as it were
on the top of an overlooking mountain, makes haste up to see so glorious a
thing, but ariving at the top of that, it then appears on the top of an
higher: thither again his desire couzens him: with much labor, and fresh hope
he arives, it then appears on a third: and on his third access, leaves him
both now hopeless and weary. He finds to his cost, it is in heaven he looks
for, and that this is but a fond conceit, arising from his deluded sense.

Man is this foolish shepherd, he looks upon honor, and thinks happiness
is there; on wealth, that happiness is there; on mirth and pleasure, that
happiness is there; to come to these with as much pain as promise, he labors
to arive, in each object (like every hill) seems to rest: thither he arives,
sees it now in another object: follows that; it is not there. A new wish
tempts him, and that obtained deceives him. Alas fool, it is in heaven that
thou look for, the true Sun of righteousness, Mal. 4* 2.
He only has that which thou look for, in vain thou look, rest,
safety, security, happiness in Zoar, Eccl. 2.25.
in that which thy soul hastes to enjoy, if thou expect to find it in
sublunary things. There is only rest to be found in the mountain cut out of
the rock, without hands, Dan. 2 34, 35.
which filled the earth, my fills all places.

Let us therefore, if we think to escape the spiritual Sodom, go with David
to this mountain from whence our help comes; let us go not by the Plains,
but (leave to the papists their Zoar purgatory, the low way let us go via
regia, the high way, the difficulty is abundantly rewarded in the delights of
the end.

Let us then go on, Matthew. 10.22.
and that courageously in the way that God has commanded, and undoubtedly we
shall obtain the end which God has proposed and promised. Say not when He
bids thee that I cannot, it is but the weakness of thy sloth, not strength
that disinables thee: block not up the way, with the objections of thine own
fears: Dispense, and that but for a while, with a few, vain, false, and
transitory pleasures that would charm thee like Sirens in thy way, and then
the bitterness of conceited evils is already past, thou have escaped, have
overcome the height of the mountain, where thy soul shall live.

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.

