An example for all those that make no conscience of swearing and forswearing*
(...) Showing Gods heavy Judgment upon a Maid-seruant in London, who forswore
her self, and now lies rotting in S. Bartholomewes Hospital in Smithfield,
where many resort daily to see her.
To the tune of, Aim not too high.


Lo wiicked swearers all example take,
^^ they of God a mocking stock do make,
Although he sits in heaven and nothing says,
yet he does see and mark our wicked ways.
He se^rches in the closet of our hearts,
Where he suruayes our good and evil parts:
The soul he made to be the bodies guide,
That it should rule us when we went aside.
But when we let the Duill enter in,
Who still does tempt us unto wicked sin,
Then grace is fled, and God on us does frown,
Who with a glory us in heaven would crown.
Our soul must answer for our bodies deed,
As in thesacred Scriptures you may read,
(...) every sinner must receive their hyre,
Without Gods mercy in eternal fire,
The Lord has said, that he revenge will take,
Upon such sinners as do him forsake:
And it is most sure for God he will not lie,
But vengeance take for our iniquity.
(...) late in London and in other parts,
Swearers and liars they have felt his smarts,
One that committed had an evil crime,
(...)e forswear it at the very time,
And wished that she might sink into the ground,
Or that bright heaven might her soul (...)nd,
if she had done it, and did seem to cry,
And then the ground did open presently.
Two others that the like had done in sight,
Wished that Gods Judgment might upon the^ light,
And is it did, for straight they fell stark dead,
The Lord above knows where their souls are fled
But now a Story to you I will show,
Of a poor wretch that is distressed in woe,
That did the like, and did her self forswear,
Which sore example let each Christian hear.
She being in an honest service placed,
Has wrought her shame, and all her friends disgraced,
Did steal and pilfer many things away,
Which now has wrought her to this deep decay,
When things were mist, she did deny the same,
And with great impudence, deuoyd of shame,
Wished before God and men that she might rot,
It that such things she ever saw or got.
Yet she to prison straight way wa^ conuey'd,
And presently before she long had laid:
She did begin to rot, and stink so sore,
That they were forced to turn her out of door.
To Smithfield Hospital she then was led.
Where hundreds flock to s^^^ (...) in her bed,
Her toes and fingers do fal^ (...) ^^d rot,
With other joints, such is her heavy lot.
The Surgeons strive to do their chiefest Art,
And do apply their skill to every part,
But still she rots, her joints do fall away,
And God knows when, shall be her dying day.


SHe is repentant for her wicked sin,
Which in her former time she lived in,
She calls to God for mercy every day,
And to the Lord most earnestly do pray.
She does confess that she that fact did do,
For which she now does feel such grief and woe:
Wishing each servant might example take,
That she may be a warning for their sake.
And all forsworen wretches in that kind.
When then do, ill to bear her in their mind,
For fear the Lord does give to them their hyre,
As she did instly of our great God require.
Gods mercie's great when sinners do repent,
When in their soul they truly do recent,
Christ died to save those that the truth believe,
And in his me^rcy will them sure relieve.
As I to hope that he will save her souls,
Although her crime was very bad and foul,
For she repentant is, and craves for grace,
And hopes in heaven to have a resting plece.
Could we but think of Gods all-seeing eyes,
That nere were blind to our iniquities:
Our earthly minds of heaven will have a part,
Our tongs would speak from trunesse of our heart
Though we may think to blind the eyes of men,
Committing sins, forswering them again:
Yet them at last our conscience shall report,
Before a wiser Iu^^^ and higher Court.
Let no forswearer (...)ke themselu^^ (...)re,
Though with their only tongues t^^^ (...) all(...)
Oh let them not presume, but let (...) know,
Gods hand is heavy, though i^ (...)t flow.
Oh may this needless swearing be forborne,
Oaths are the plagues for which a land does mourn
Oh let us mourn (...) oaths, and mourn our fill,
Oh may we do it now, not swear we will.
Wish not for evil falsely on thy breast,
Thinking that God will spare with thee the rest,
God pardons sins that no man might despair,
God scourges some, that all men may beware.
Who knows whether himself the person be,
That God will punish for iniquity:
Oh with what face can men for mercy crave,
That wish themselves ill, and their wishes have.
Gehezi did of Naaman once require,
Gold, and two shifts of raiment for a hyre:
They that will seek for profit by a lie,
Shall lose their gains, and gain a leprosy.
Yet is the Lord to those that do convert,
More kind then our desire, or our desert:
And in the midst of our iniquities,
His Judgment does but go, his merce flies,
Look down, O Lord, on his distressed one,
That does not look to thee but with a groan:
And for her wished affliction, if you please,
Comfort her soul and give her body ease.
Or if the Justice farther will porceed,
To punish her for her periorious deed:
Lord grant her sins, may thr(...) be forgiven,
Give her affliction here, her (...) ^^auen.
Let servants that are often pu^ i^ trust,
Fly dealing false, and follow dealing inst:
Although your ill got goods, may seem full fair,
Your seeming substance proves infectious air.
H. I.

FINIS.
Lon^^^ (...)ted at for I. W.


