TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL MASTER THOMAS EGERTON Esquire, and sollicitour to the
Queens most excellent Majesty, grace and peace in Christ.
WHEREAS I was at Chester requested (Right Worshipful) to bestow some pains in
the presence of certain Recusantes (though I knew my self least able of
diverse there to discharge the matter) yet upon earnest entreaty I was at length
ouer-intreated to supply the room, and to undertake a suit so charitable.
Since which time it pleased some dear frinds to crave a copy of my labor:
which when they had obtained; they did with earnest persuasion assay to move me
to commit the same to the press. Whereunto though at the first I was loath to
yield, yet at length I was overcome and resolved to grant unto them: especially
because I had therein discovered the shameful, subtle and malicious practices
of our adversaries, the Papists, the popes Foxes, who in this our day breath
danger without delay and spite the grapes of our Saviors vine, that has
these many years fructified, and even now of gods mercy does flourish among us.
That so the Popes Foxes may be more throwly known: and being known, more
warily avoided: or rather diligently sought and made fast, least their liberty
do work an utter wast to our vine. And forasmuch as the care of Christ's vine
has craved, or rather the malice of the Fox has forced me to bestow this my
small and unworthy travel; as I crave the Christian Reader to take al to the
best, so (Right worshipful) I am bold to request your acceptance of the same,
as some pledge of my thankfulness to you. Desiring the Lord God to bless you
against all the Foxes and little Foxes of Rome, that seek nothing but the
destruction of our vine, which God continue and keep to our comfort and his
own glory, Amen.

Your to command in Christ, EDWARD HVTCHINS.

It is written in the Second Chapter of the Canticles and xv. verse: Take us
the Foxes, the little Foxes, which destroy the vines, for our vines have small
grapes.


IN the premises where Christ our Savior saw the readiness of the Church his
spouse to look to her children, and thereupon gave her great encouragement to
follow and not to fail in her purpose: to the end that she might the better
proceed in this her godly labor to the gaining and keeping of souls: in these
words he calls upon her chief pillars to consider his vines, how they
flourish and bear blossoms, and withal the Foxes and little Foxes, how they
are eger to wast them, that so they might be taken and prevented. For better
prosecution of which words I note two points. First a metaphor: 2. the matter:
the metaphor is double: in the first heretics are compared to Foxes: in the
second the godly are compared to vines. Of the 2. hereafter. Touching the 1.
metaphor, as generally in all, so in this I note, 1. the metaphor it self, the
title given to heretics: and secondly the reason: touching the first
therefore as heretics are sometimes compared to canker, because they do
corrupt and eat men: sometimes to leaven, because they do sour them that are
sweet in the faith of Christ: sometimes to dogs, because they have not only
mouths to bark, but also teeth to bite the godly: sometimes to evil laborers,
because they do labor under and for the devil to sow cockle to choke the
Lords corn: sometimes to ravenous woolues, because howsoever they pretend
themselves to be sheep, yet their whole heart is how to devour the sheep: so
here they are compared to Foxes. In which respect as I might at the first
persuade you to beware their fretting, because they are canker: their souring,
because they are leaven: their barkings and biting, because they are dogs: the
merciless heart that is in them, because they are reuenous woolues: so my
counsel might be and for this time shall be that you beware the^, because they
are Foxes. But why are heretics compared to Foxes': Surely they are compared
justly to Foxes, and among al heretics most truly do papists deserve the name
of Foxes: of Foxes, because they are unclean like the Fox: Foxes, because they
are subtle, and crafty like the Fox: Foxes, because they are ravenous and
greedy to devour like Foxes. For as the Fox is noted to be an unclean beast,
and most unclean when he is most hunted: right so does it fall out with al
heretics, and specially with papists, who are unclean always: even as the
unclean spirit is the father that has begot them, and the God that always
rules them. And as they are unclean always, so they are most unclean, when
they are most pressed with the word and most chased. And therefore when the
Lords Dogs do not only find their feet, but follow them: and not only bark
after them, but come so near as to bite them: when the godly pastors take
especial care of christ his lambs, and to that purpose do not only spy out
false and heretical spirits, but also defend the lambs of Christ, that they
may not pray upon them: when to this purpose their titles by them are proved
untrue: their interest a nullest, their claims counterfeit, their countenance
but the false flourish of a seducing spirit: oh then, what do they show
themselves to be but Foxes? When they are thus hardly followed, and to their
peril pursued, oh what are they but in proof, and therefore but in truth
titled Foxes? Unclean spirits always, but then most unclean, having nothing
but a face for a fence, and a mouth for a manner to slander and bark out the
matter. A point easy to be proved by the practice of all heretics, that
ever were, and specially of papists: but for this time wherein I am rather to
wet my finger, than to wash my whole hand, only to touch it. So it fell out
with the prophets, when they put their trumpets to their mouths and fought the
Lords battle against false Prophets, then did the wicked most slanderously
charge them and defame them. So likewise fell it out with the Apostles when
their sound did sound to the utmost, and their voice was heard in most places:
when their bow was at a full bend, and their arrows did wound the mighty and
tame many: the more they preached the truth and discovered untruth: the more
they painted out and persecuted false Prophets and idolatrous spirits, the
more were they abused, their good name and heavenly doctrine slaundered, as
new, not ancient: as schismatical, not catholic: as heretical, not true: as
devilish, not divine: as utterly corrupt and no way tolerable. And as it fell
out with the Prophets and Apostles, so has it fallen out with us in these our
days. For where we are troubled with many false Apostles, who do not only
not consent to the open truth, but also set themselves openly against it and
seek to withdraw others from it: when to that purpose they cast yet out their
pamphlets, and paper weapons to win the field of us: where yet we do from
time to time by the Scripture not only tear their weapons, but withal
discover their cause to the world to their utter discredit: in a word: when
thus they see that they can no sooner bid battle but that we as soon do foil
them: the^ what do they but fall from arguments, which should persuade, to
slanderous reporting and lying, not only against the persons of men, but also
for their sakes against the manifest truth professed by the^: For evidence
whereof at this instant not to trouble your worships with infinite instance, I am
content only to name their late censure and later defense, wherein they failing
in justifying of their divinity nothing less tha^ divine, have fallen from
reason to unreasonable outrage against the good name and zeal of godly men.
Howbeit for this point I need not to say much. For where there are too many
stiff papists at large and diverse in many places in prison or rather in their
paradise: if any man come to them of zeal and good will to work some good
among them: if to that purpose he offer a dispute and desire a conference:
either of prejudice to the cause they yield not thereunto: or if they do, yet
when they are brought to a non plus, and can say no more: what do they but fall
to railing and raging: what do they but apply their hearts to wish evil and
their tongues to speak worse of God and his religion? We are by and by without
any premise concluded to be heretics, no catholics: new fellows, no
ancients: of Luther, not of Peter: of Calvin, not of Christ: no less than
reprobates: so that where they cannot match us in reasoning, they fall to
unreasonable railing: and all their apology and final but yet reasonles
resolution is this, that they are catholics, and we heretics. Howbeit here
by the way a retentiue is ministered against all this their manner of dealing:
for since al heretics, and among al other, papists were never more pursued by
the force of truth, it is no marvel, if with the Fox they be most faulty
and filthy in their words against us and our religion. Just like Foxes, most
unclean when they are most chased. Whereas if we would let them alone, and
take them for religious rabbis: condemn our catholic verity for
vncatholique heresy, and take and esteem their catholic heresies for
Apostolic verities, and bend our knees to their Lord God the Pope and his
devotion, as we do to God and the only good religion, then should we be their
white sons, and hear nothing but well from them and among them. But where we
bow to God and not to Baal, and tread their popes triple-crowne, indeed
trouble-crowne in the dust, and take Christ alone for our catholic head: and
no traditions of Rome, but his word for our full and alone direction, whether
to believe or live, thereof it is, that neither our profession nor we for the
same can hear any thing but evil of them. Thus they prove themselves to be
most unclean, like the Fox, when he is hardly followed. And therefore what
shall I say to end this point of the metaphor, but desire you to pray: good God
therefore purge them or else purge the land of the^, for what are they but
Foxes? Foxes, and that not only because they are unclean, but also crafty and
subtle like Foxes. For the Fox is a crafty beast and he has his holes and he
will hide himself, and it shall be hard to drive him from one but that he will
find refuge for the time in an other, and yet at length the good hunter takes
him. Right so fales it out with heretics, but specially with papists: for they
are crafty and subtle spirits, and when we do most persecute and press them
with the truth, yet they have their shows and starting holes: they have their
distinctions, their shifts, and if one serve not, yet will they coin some
other colorably for the time to credit their untruth: whereby it comes to
pass (by the way to mention a lamentable matter) that for want of good
hunters, this their sophistry and Foxly divinity snareth many simple souls in
many places. But to come to the proof of this point of the metaphor. Thus they
commend to the world their good works under the name of merit: their merits
under the name of grace: their penance under the name of a sacrament: their
worship of saints under the name of Gods honor: their mass under the name of
Christ's sacrifice: their prayers for the departed under color of charity:
their vowed singlenes under the name of chastity: their vnsatisfieng
satisfactions under the name of godliness and duty. Thus they commend to the
world their mistrust of gods mercy under the name of godly fear: their
ignorantnes in scriptures under the name of Christian simplenes: their
pilgrimages under the name of devotion. Thus they commend till it come to lust
under the name of infirmity and yet profitable, yea a mean meritorious, more
therefore than expedient: their very stews under the name of evil, and yet
needful and convenient: yea rebellion under the name of catholic obedience,
and murder under the name of merit. Thus they pretend for their purgatory gods
justice: for their possiblenes to fulfill the law impossible gods mercifulnes:
for their abominable transubstantiation the almighties mightiness. In a word:
thus they commend their sensings, their shriuings, their offerings, their
purifiengs, their ignorant praying, their superstitious adoring, their kissing
of the paxe and such like lies, toys and vanities under the name of catholic
and ancient customs. Thus they play the crafty Foxes and seek to set a good
color upon their doctrine most openly false and heretical: upon their
practices most detestable, perilous and tyrannical. And though this were
sufficient to demonstrate this point, yet to show more to the proof of the
same. If we allege against their prayers to the departed a principle of
divinity, that there is one mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus:
they play the Foxes and run to their holes, they shift off the matter and say:
there is one mediator but not one only: whereunto when we answer that the
particle (one) in that place is not only a particle of affirmation but of
exclusion, as it is in the first place: Christ being our one and only
mediator, in whose name as there is one and one only God to whom we may pray,
they play the foxes and run to their holes: they distinguish that indeed there
is one and one only mediator of redemption, and that is Christ: but yet there
are many mediators of intercession: whereas yet the scripture speaks there of
both, and applies and appropriates both to Christ: and they for their parts
make the saints not only petitioners but redeemers: meriters and that not
only of temporal but of eternal things, and that not only for themselves but
also for others. So likewise where we allege against their Popes supremacy a
principle of Scripture: that Christ is the alone foundation of his temple, they
run to their hole and play the Foxes: they distinguish that there is but one
principal head of the Church and that is Christ: but there is another
ministerial and vicarial, and that must be their Pope: whereas yet the headship
of the Church is proper to Christ, and their pope by his title in this case,
(if Pope Gregory were not deceived, if the pope cannot err,) indeed is not
either top or toe of the Church. So likewise where against their justifying of
lust for no sin, we allege a principle of scripture: that every transgression
of the law is sin: and withal the prohibition of the law, thou shall not lust:
they run to their hole and play the Foxes: that the apostle speaks there of
lust with and not without consent: whereas yet the Apostle speaks in general
of al lust: and it were great folly once to dream that ever the Apostle
doubted whether lust joined with consent were sin or not. Thus to conclude, if
any man please to run over their summaries and questionaries: their old
schoolmen or new men: nay to leave al, if to this purpose a man remember and
run over Master Campian, that came into the la^d with a flourishing antecede^t,
with bidding of battle, with a crack and catholic show for all his fellow
Foxes of Rome and of Rhemes: yet where he was not only nearly assaied but
easily pressed with truth, what did he but play the poor Fox? he came into the
la^d for want of sound divinity with foolish sophistry, (what less can I call
it?) in proof and trial with ridiculous and childish distinctions, and those
were his holes and in them he thought to have kept himself safe or at least
close to the credit of his crack and to the deceiving of the simple for the
time, till treason had made the crafty conclusion, but al was too little: and
(God be thanked) he proved himself that way the seeliest Fox that ever came
among us. But to end this point of the metaphor: I only wish this, that al me^
beware the craft of heretics, but especially of papists, of seminaries and
Jesuits, who of al others play the Foxes most kindly. And therefore for a
caveat as for their old subtle and yet ouerbold crackes that they are of the
old stamp: that they are catholics: that they are the Church: that their
Church cannot err: that they only have the right sense of Gods word: that
they only wish the good state of the land, the salvation of your souls: her
majesty's favor and safety: nothing less (God save her from them): al well
(indeed all il, as you all know too too well) to all that wish well to Sion;
take heed of them: for these and the like be but holes wherein the Popes Foxes
seek to color out their cause and to cover their faithles creed, as
demonstration has bin made and that often to the world: and therefore to end
this part of the metaphor, what shall I say but once again pray: good God
therefore amend them or else make an end of them: for what are they but Foxes?
Foxes that not only because they are unclean and crafty like Foxes, but also
crafty and subtle to devour and destroy. For so does it fall out with all
heretics and specially with papists. They come in sheep clothing: with
fair titles and tales: they will appear like Angels of light: they talk of
virginity, merit, abstinence, hospitality, and al perfection, not only of duty
but of supererogatio^: they tell the world, that no world was good but when they
reigned: that then all things were plentiful: men charitable and faithful, and
what not? none live well but they, say they: they fast, they pray night and
day, they go long pilgrimages: they punish their bodies and do great penance:
but whereunto tendes all this but to deceive? these be nothing else but the false
flourish of a Pharisee, the Foxes sophistry to beguile the simple: for as much as
they are nothing less then that they would seem to be: they are no less then
Foxes. For to make the very best of them, what are they but as naught as
naught can make them? what are they but Foxes? in show gold, in truth copper:
in show flowers, in proof weeds: in show sheep, indeed ravenous Foxes: oh what
are they but Foxes? for what do they seek but every way and every day to
devour the bodies and souls of Christians? for what do their persuasions to
their religion most openly heretical? what do their conspiracies (now as you
know and may lament all) the very comfort and only hope of them, most
openly diabolical say any less? for (to appeal to you al) what is it?
religion catholic or deuilish: to save or to slaie the souls of men: to
command men under the pain of an eternal curse to believe that a mortal man,
the man of Rome, a prelate in title, in truth the pilate of the woorld, is
head of the church: that he cannot er: indeed to plurify the godhead, to make
man a god: what religion is it that accounts marriage in their incontinent
votaries as bad, if not worse, then double adultery? lust without consent no
sin? good works the merit of heaven? what religion is it, that says:
worship images, where God says: do not: but worship me only. Worship in
ignorance, where God says do not: but worship me only in spirit and verity.
Lastly what religion is it or how can it be good, that calls Gods word
dark, though light: the matter of strife, though the word of peace: imperfect
without tradition, though the rule of al perfection: yea the sense of the word
only gods word, and their sense the only true sense, which yet is most
apparently false. Though this were sufficient to prove this point, which I
might amplify more at large, yet to add a little more: for this is not al nor
almost any thing to the largenes of the matter: nay alas what shall I say of
them? are not papists cockle? do they not seek to destroy the corn? are they
not thorns? do they not seek to prick and tear the rose? are they not
dogs? do they not seek to devour the darling? are they not Foxes? do they not
seek to wast the vine of Jesus Christ among us? nay, to appeal to you al: oh
where had our corn been? how not choked? oh where had our rose been? how not
rented? oh where had the darling of Christ been? how not devoured? oh where had
his vine been? how not wasted, if papists had obtained their perilous
practices of old or of late among us? oh then once again to appeal to you al,
what are they but cockle? what less then the corn? what are they but thorns?
what less then the rose? what are they but dogs? what less then the darling?
what are they but Foxes? what less then the vineyarde of Christ our Savior?
shall I say al (Right worshipful and dearly beloved) and prove al by that that
you know and may lament all? happy could papists have thought themselves by
this time, if our natural Prince, our gracious sovereign, our Queen, our
Lilly Elizabeth, the very life and comfort of us al had bin torn in pieces:
happy were they now, if forreiners could come in among us: happy if there
were nothing but killing and murdering: in a word happy could papists think
themselves, if they saw al your children and friends slain before your faces,
and you were all to follow after: happy, if there were nothing but fainting
of thighs: nothing but foulding of arms: nothing but wringing of hands:
nothing but weeping, wailing and woing among you: happy if the devil and his
murdering servants could once dispatch and displace you. To this purpose our
gracious Elizabeth was like to be torn: to this purpose they have sought her
the glory of our land: to this purpose the catholics of Rome are grown to be
cruel and groan to be cutthroates: to this purpose they have not long since
attempted the matter: Good God therefore save us from them, for what are they
but Foxes? and because they are Foxes, therefore at this time I am (right
worshipful) to crave you to catch them. And so to omit the second metaphor,
because the time would be too short, I come to the matter. Catch (says
Solomon) the Foxes and the little, etc. Wherein I note two points: a precept
and the use. The precept in these words, take us the Foxes, and the little
Foxes: the use or end implied in these words: least our vines, etc. Touching
the first point, to omit many points and at this time only to note, 1. Who
are to be catched: Foxes and little Foxes. 2. Who are charged to take them. 3.
Who charge. For the 1. Foxes and little Foxes are commanded to be taken: old
therefore and young heretics must be taken, none spared, whether great or
little. For as leaven sowreth the dough, though it be but little: as pitch
defiles the clean, though it be but little: as a canker eats and marres the
body of man by little and little, though at the first never so little: so the
Fox and little Fox may wast the good vine: and therefore al Foxes are
commanded here to be taken: al heretics to be caught, least the Church of
Christ do suffer danger by them. But here alas what shall I say? for though al
heretics ought to be taken: though neither Fox nor little Fox ought to be free
but fast: though the vine be in peril of wasting by the fox though great,
though little: yet alas neither is little nor great Fox made fast but suffered
free in diverse places. Nay, oh what may we lament but the freenes of Foxes? for
what number of heretics? what number of recusants? what number of papists? to
give them their due and true name, what number of traitors are there abroad?
abroad and not taken? or if taken, yet sometimes enlarged? or if not enlarged,
yet so visited, where they are imprisoned, that many of the^ never find their
paradise, til they come to the prison? where I fear they want no maintenance of
overplus from their fellow-foxes: where I fear they want no conference, where I
fear, the Fox and the little fox are never so fast but that they do wast many
vines of Jesus Christ. But alas this should not be so: and here the Fox and
little Fox are commanded to be taken, that the vine of christ might be safer
then so. Who are therefore to take them? who are to take care, that it may not
be so? surely I take it, that this precept does bind minister and magistrate,
and therefore you (Right worshipful). For in both there ought to be such
carefulnes over the vine, that neither Fox nor little Fox should escape their
nets, where the vine is in danger. Howbeit they are to catch them differentlie:
the Minister by the word, the Magistrate by the sword: the one by love, the
other by fear: the one by softnes, the other by sharpnes: the one by
persuading, the other by punishing, if that persuasion may not prevail. And
therefore seeing that, then in this our day the light of the truth was never
more light, and Christ so bears his stars in his hand, that all men may
easily see the old and only true way that lust not to be blind: and yet with
our adversaries neither our Preaching nor Penning can any way prevail, but
that their whole travel is by night and by day, by land and by Sea, elsewhere
and at home here not only to dim the light of Jesus Christ by their false and
heretical doctrine, but also by force and violence to remove the stars that are
in his hand, that they may no longer shine unto us: nay since there is in them
such zeal to their heresies: such hatred of the truth, that they count
themselves even no less then half dead, that Sion lies not wast in the dust:
yea and to that purpose adventure not only their lyms but their vncatholicke
lives: content to turn their name of catholics for the name of vncatholicke
cutthrotes; now by profession and practice refusing the sweet name of innocent
Jesus for the traitorous name of Judas to work out the matter, it belongs to
the magistrate, and to you to your power (Right worshipful) to help that way,
least the vine of Christ do lie wast by the means: for the Lords sake to catch
Papists, for what are they but Foxes? whereunto the rather to move you, I shall
not need to remember you what the Fox has attempted of old or of late against
the vine, because of his liberty: all men do know it, and al good hearts may
lament and fear it, least the Fox attempt the like any longer, if that he be
not taken in time and prevented. But for this thus, it were policy and piety to
keep the vine safe: but this being so, neither policy nor piety but pitiles
impiety to let the Fox free, least the vine do lie wast. You know what I
mean: you know I speak truth: and therefore for the Lords sake look to your
charge and spare neither Fox nor little Fox, where you may come by them, but
see that you catch them. Oh cut Papists short of liberty: for what are they
but Foxes? In which case I do crave but your charity, though duty exact it.
Howbeit if the light of Gods countenance be dear unto you, if the Golden
Candelsticke of Christ be golden and glorious in your eyes and among you, if
your hearts be glad to see these gladsome days, wherein the Gospel of Christ,
the very power of God to save your souls is preached unto you: shall I say al?
if the state of our gracious sovereign and under her of Christ's dear Church
be dear unto you, then you should of your selves and readily look to the Fox
and little Fox that looks for the contrary: to catch them betimes and to let
them have the reward of Foxes, least they catch you before your time and to
your woe prove themselves to be Foxes upon you: which day as they hope for, so
if it should com (which yet god forbid, as he has forbidden these many years
of his goodness and infinite mercy) yet then you would wish, though too late, you
had taken the Fox. It were best therefore for all magistrates to be wise in time,
least peril bring repentance when it will be too late: and therefore diligently
to enquire for foxes: namely for papists: and to let them have neither liberty,
nor life, where the vine of Christ may stand in danger of wasting by them. For
that is the cause why this precept is given. Oh but there is small love in your
lips, will catholics say: nothing but cruelty in your mouth will others say: to
who^ I answer that so shall object and that out of my last part, that there is
small charity in them, whosoever they are, that would have the fox spared where
there is danger least the vine by the fox be wasted. For they that have no love
to the vine may pity the Fox: and in very deed there is none that wishes the
freedom of the fox, but he that wishes danger to the vine. But herein I need
not to answer much: I appeal to you al: whether ever the vine of Christ were in
greater peril of wasting than now it is? and why? but because the Fox has bin
too long suffered and has not by mercy and patience bin won but waxed worse,
as experience and too too late has made lamentable trial. Whereas if the fox
had bin taken in time, his might and malice had quite been cut off, and the
vine of Christ had been in better safety: but for this only thus I say. You
know and see all what mischief has come to the world, what danger to the
vine, because the Fox has not been taken from time to time: and therefore
hereafter for the Lords cause delaie you no time but see that you take them.
Let the vine of Christ be dear unto you, and spare not the Fox, least you lose
the vine. Oh spare us not Papists: for what are they but Foxes? for this is the
charity, that this my Text craves of you: this is the charity that ye owe to
the vine: and if any spare the Fox to the danger of the vine, that is no
charity but cruelty, and justice will be sharp to punish it in the day of
judgment, when all men shall have no judge but God, who is charity. Who will
be sure to smite home, if the Fox be not caught, that goes about to wast his
vine, but suffered to work his spite upon the vine. And surely since our
adversaries are so eger to choke the wheat of God, that they the tares: to hew
down his green trees, that they the dry sticks: to corrupt his sweet
dough, that they the leaven: to slaughter his Lambs, that they the butchers:
to wast his vines, that they the Foxes of Satan the God of this world may rule
and reign once again with their bell of Rome in the church of Christ: and
bring in steed of knowledge, ignorance: in steed of light, darkness: in steed
of truth, untrue tradition: in steed of Antichrist, the devil: and al to the
utter misery of your estate, that now is blessed and happy: since they slack
no occasions to bring this about, but every day and every way do gape and
groan for the last day of this your comfortable condition in Christ our
blessed Savior, as of al others, so among al and above al, of you (Right
worshipful and others of your calling) I crave to your power a contrary care:
for the Lords wheat, that the tare do not hurt it: for his sweet dough, that
the leaven of Rome do not sour it: for his Lambs, that the bloodsuckers of
satan: for his vine, that the Fox do not wast it. For (to appeal to the
consciences of you al) if they fight thus for darkness, oh what ought you to do
for the light? if they strive thus for ignorance, oh what ought you to do for
knowledge? If they do thus for heresy, oh for the Lords sake do you no less
for the truth and eternal verity of Jesus Christ: if they for Antichrist,
fight you for Christ: oh defend his vine and suffer not the Fox to wast it. Oh
save the vine from Papists: for what are they but Foxes? But how shall you save
it, you will perhaps say: I have answered and add: permit them not free: take
care to enquire and catch, and when they are taken, take care to keep them
from coming near the vine. You have authority to do it: God and under him
and for him our gracious Queen has given you power to do it: and if you shall
use it (as duty in these our dangerous days does earnestly beg it) the Fox
I grant may curse you, but the vine of Christ shall have cause to bless you for
it. Al which I do not say or urge (Right worshipful) so much to charge you
with a duty unknown, as charitablie to remember you of your duty, which I
know you do know. For I doubt not but you know that God has called you Gods,
and that you ought therefore among men and for men to be Gods, that you ought
therefore to be lights: enemies to darcknes and all the servants of satan the
God of darkness: in a word, friends to the vine, but foes to the Fox: foes
then to our vine foes, foes to Papists: for what are they but Foxes? Nay I hope
that you have a special regard of the vine and withal a good will to worry the
Fox. Only therefore I am here to entreat you and that in the blood of Christ
and bowels of his mercy, that this your godly care may increase: for the vine
of Christ does crave it, and if you remember never so little these our days of
danger, the subtle and the ravenous Fox himself of himself does force it.
Although I might remember you, that these words which sound that way, are the
words not of any less man then of Solomon in the person of Christ the true
Solomon, who has chosen to himself of al women but one virgin, of all birds
but one Dove, of all Doves but one Turtle, of all trees but the vine, and that
is his church whereof he has such an especial care, that as he has charged al
men, so (among and above al other) such as are of your high calling to be
protectours of the same, to catch the Fox and little Fox, that he do not wast
it, to catch the Popish Foxes, that go about to wast it. In fine, this is the
charge that Christ here gives, Christ who gave his life for his Church, his
vine: Christ who shall judge all: so that if either love to his Church or fear
of judgment may prevail, you are bound to do to your best in this behalf.
Oh but some will say it were wisdom for you to speak somewhat for the Fox, or
else the time may come, when the Fox will requite your favor. Whereunto I
answer, that indeed flesh and blood takes it to be the best course to spare
or at least in some sort to speak for the Fox, but wisdom commands and
charity craves that neither Minister do speak for, nor Magistrate spare the
Fox: and therefore Christ here requires in the behalf of his vine, that we
spare not to hunt and take the Fox, wheresoever, whosoever he be, that goes
about to wast the vine. And as for that day, which many men fear, indeed the
Fox of Rome hopes to work it, but I hope we shall never see it: and yet if we
do, our sins have deserved it, and I would pity the man most for his
pitiful case, that has spared the Fox, and al to find pity. For no doubt he
that pittieth the Fox that pittieth not but laboreth to wast the vine, should
find either in that day the Fox pitiles, and if he do, justly: or if not, yet
one day a God, that will be sure to punish the foxes friend and his vines
foe. And therefore as for those politiques whosoever, that spare to catch the
Fox that the Fox may spare to catch them in his day, when he coms to wast the
vine: that their policy is intolerable injury to the vine, and cruel dealing
toward their own souls, as without hearty repentance they shall find and
feel to their utter smart, when the master of the vineyard shall come to
catch and to bind for ever al Foxes, al foxes frinds, and foes to the vine. In
a word: this their policy what is it but folly to be pitied to spare the wave,
where the ship, the brier, where the flower, the wolf where the sheep, the Fox
where the vine of Christ is in danger? nay to endanger al and that to the
utmost: that when the ship is drowned, yet the wave: when the flower is faded,
then the brier: when the sheep is devoured, then the wolf: when the vine is
wasted, yet the Fox a professed foe may prove a frinde: but oh politic, or
rather fool, or rather foe to thy self whosoever thou art: O pittiles policy
may the vine say, the very next way to bring me to the wast, thy self to the
pray. Lastly to draw to an end. Perhaps it will be yet objected that the Foxes
are many, mighty and malicious, and therefore it will be hard and dangerous to
catch the Foxes that are in the land. Whereunto I answer, that indeed so it
is, and a misery it is to consider, that the Fox is so great, so mighty and
full of malice: our fathers have had trial before us, and the Fox of Rome has
spared to attempt no attempt in this our accepted time to prove himself no
less unto us. But here (Right w. and dear beloved to appeal to you al) how
came the Fox to be so mighty, but because he was not taken in time? and
because pity to be pitied, (what less may I say of it?) has made him mighty:
and might has made him the more malicious and hasty to bring our vine to the
wasting: therefore have you (Right worshipful and others of your high calling)
now the more cause to catch them, least their might, and with their might,
their malice do increase and grow to further evil and woe among us. God be
thanked, where of late both his might and malice have bin discovered, the Fox
has had some whelps taken, and they have found in justice the due reward of
Foxes. And since God has beyond our desert brought the perilous practice and
^^re pitiles purpose of satan by them to the light, and (as you al know) that
as yet the great Fox of Rome has many whelps among us, as some of the
principals are taken, so take you the care as far as you can, to hunt for the
rest. So will you do if the flourish of the vine: if the vine of Christ be dear
unto you. So shall you do what the true Solomon here craves of you. In a word:
you shall do well if you purpose it, but you shall do best and god will highly
bless you if you practice it. In the mean time to persuade you thus I end:
the time it self does urge it: for the Fox himself is ravenous: the vine it
self does crave it: for the state thereof is dangerous: and Solomon in the
person of Christ (who shall judge us al) does here require it, in whose name
therefore I end as I began: take us the Foxes and little Foxes, which destroy
our vines and vine blossoms. To God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost,
be al praise now and ever: Amen.


