The Black Dog of Newgate: both pithie and profitable for all Readers.

Vide, Lege, Cave.

Time shall try the truth.



To the honorable Sir John Popham Knight, Lord chief Justice of England: all
increase of honor and happiness.
TWo reasons, my Honorable good Lord, me especially moved, to dedicate this
Book to your Honor. The first; for, I held it my deutie, to certify you of
the notable abuses daily committed by a great number of very bad fellows, who
under the couller of Office and service, do mightily abuse both Justice and
Justices: which in this Book is largely discovered. The next; for, your Honor
being thereof certified, such bad fellows shall be the sooner looked into, and
their outragies quallified: so that the sooner by you, the like mischieues may
be prevented. What I have done, is in love and Zeal: Both which, I doubt not,
but they will excuse my boldness: And so the work be acceptable in your good
opinion, I will not regard the malice of the threatening Cunny-catcher; who
has sworn, if I publish this Book, they will do me what mischief they can.
But how little I regard their windy words, they may well perceive by my
proceedings: if this work had been worth a Talent, it should have been your
^^nors: and being a poor man's mite, I desire it may be acceptable: and if
hereafter I shall be better able, your honor shall not fail, but find me
ready to do your honor service, even to the uttermost of my power. Thus
assuring my self safe shielded with your favor, to whom I present this
Book, desiring you to take the full view of this Black Dog of Newgate, I
humbly, and in all duty, cease to be tedious: praying to the Almighty, to
lengthen long your days, with increase of all virtue and honor, and after this
life, to send you to everlasting happiness, and joys endless. Amen.

To do your Honor service whilst he lives, LVKE HVTTON.

To the Reader.
GEntle Readers, for my Repentance was so welcome, and so much the better
because it was mine: in some part to satisfy your courtesies, I thought it my
part to present you with thanks, and more, with my second labor: which
albeit, it be both my especial cost and travel, yet it is yours: and so I may
say, for you are willing to pay the prize of the Black Dog of Newgate.
Marvel not Gentlemen, that you pay so dear for a Dog, indeed a Curre: I
wish you all well, and though three halfe-pence be a Dogs price, yet if you
according to my Poesy, accept my Pen and Paper, it will counteruaile the
charge of six pence. You have known me better if you ever knew me, and never
worse if you now know me: But for I have read some books of Philosophy, I
thought it best to be my self, not as I was, for I hope you are otherwise
persuaded, but as I am, and so to live or die. But for it is no better then the
Black Dog of Newgate: I desire you not to think your time ill bestowed in
the reading, nor the prise great which you gave for it. When you have perused
it, if you like it not, say the Dog came from Newgate, hang him up, and rend
the Paper in pieces, and I will be your debtor a work of better acceptance,
yet let me give you to understand by the way, that this Dog, and many Dogs of
his kind, have I known a great while, and if I had not had great occasion, I
would never have bestowed so much time (...): Nay more, that you shall not
think this Dog nor any of his kind to be as they have been, the murderers
and utter undoing at the least of an infinite number, to be shadowed by the
name of Servant at Newgate, at this time I thought good faithfully to give you
to understand, that he who was ever able to keep a good Dog, and now to make
choice of his servants in Newgate, did in my sight, thrust this Dog by the
head and shoulders out of Newgate, making choice of men instead of Dogs: and
more I dare say, never shall a Curre in shape of man commit the like abuses,
during his time in Newgate. No more for the Dog of Newgate, but for this
Dog of mine, wish me still well, I will never do you ill, so to your content
as I wish, I leave you and me to my better content when God will.

For ever fare you well, Luke Hutton.

The black Dog of Newgate: both piththy, pleasant, and profitable, for all
readers.
WHen as black Tytan with his duskie robe,
had Tellus clouded with his curtaynes night,
Fair Phoebus peering underneath earthes globe
with winged steedes hence takes his course a right:
Tytan he leaves to bear imperial sway,
commanding night, as Phoebus did the day.
The fiery Chariot posteth under ground.
With Tytans mantle all the earth is spread,
And wreathes of Icat about his temples bound:
Earthes Tell cole black, sweet Morpheus calls to bed.
No time to walk, to sport, to game, to see,
I did obey, that must commanded be.
Laid in my bed, I began for to recount,
A thousand things, which had been in my time:
My birth, my youth, my woes, which all surmount,
My life, my loss, my liberty my crime:
Then where I was, unto my mind recalling,
Me thought Earth gapt, and I to Hell was falling.
Amidst these fears that all my senses cumber,
Care closd mine eyes, and sorrow wroung my heart:
Oppressed with grief, mine eyelids began to slumber,
But borne to woes, must of more woes have part:
A thousand furies to my heart appearing,
(...) torments my soul with fearing.
Thus lay I long, beholding Hell and Devils,
Aghast with mazes, almost dead in fears,
Not knowing how to rid me from the evils:
They show in action, and in looks appears,
One anticke monster, hidious, foul and grim,
Me most appayld, and most I looked at him.
Thought I at last, I will cry out for aid,
Bowning to cry near dead, afright with fear,
I heard a voice, which like an Angel, said:
Hutton be bold, for thou shall see and hear
Men Devils, Devils men, one both, both all deluding:
Worlds evils, wrack then, sheep cloth, Wolves pray concluding.
Hearing a voice, my heart was much revived,
Noting the words, I did some corrage take:
But sudden joys has sudden woes atchiued,
A sudden noise this hellish crew did make,
Threatening by shows as though they would deuower
my life and soul, subdewd by terrors power.
Thought checked my mind, fears senses all amazing,
Hell broken loose, eyes visions furies affrighting,
Subdeud earths powers, vprears hearts insight a gazing,
Terror of mind with hope, cries fears faint arighting:
Help me orequelled: waking with dread, I espied
Grast gracious Mynerua, who thus to my outcrie replied*
Fear not at all, nor faint thou with beholding:
But light thy Lamp, and take thy Pen in hand.
Write what thou sees, thy visions all unfolding,
I will direct, and let thee understand,
What all these helhoundes shadow by appearing.
Uiew thou their worst, and then write of their fearing.
Subdeud by worths, which did all words exceed.
Ravished with joys, such feature to behold,
Abiecting fear, my glutted eyes I feed,
Upon her brightness which all harms controld:
Glimse of her brightness senses all indearing,
Legions of Devils could no more fright with fearing.
I preasd my self to take the hardest steel,
And from the flint I bett forth sparks of fire:
Kindling the lint, my ready match I feel,
Yielding my Lamp the light of my desyer:
Soon spyed Mynerua, with Laurel cround and Bays,
Myrror divine feature of worthles praise.
Before her feet submissiuely I fell,
Pardon I craud, fearing I was too bold:
Rise up quoth she, and view these hags of hell,
For diverse secrets must thy pen unfold.
Make true record, what shall be showed to thee,
For these are they, which Worlds deceauers be.
I Will cleanse thine eyes, least vapors do offend,
I Will clear thy Wits, and give a pleasing muse:
The deafest care shall to thy talk attend,
The work so worthy, thou may not refuse:
Newgates black Dog with pen and ink depaynt,
Curres, of this kind shall thereby have restraynt.
Not for my sake do thou what I require,
But for his sake: and with that word me shoes
A fair old Man, whose tears foretold desire,
And in a mantle mourner like he goes.
His veins like Azure, his hear as white as Wool,
Tresses before, behind a bare smoth skull.
And this is Time, Minerua thus replied,
Which mournes to see these helhoundes Times abusing,
How thousands in their ravening jaws have dyed:
Slaughtering Lambs, yet to the world excusing,
Offense with culler, shadowing mighty evils,
By name of service, and yet incarnat Devils.
No more quoth she, but take thee to thy Pen.
Resolve the Wyle, that they have been deceived:
Many Black Dogs have walked in shapes of men,
And with deceites has Common wealth agreeued:
His form and lynaments to the world disclose,
That this Black Dog be known where ere he goes.
My Muse began blush, dreading to undertake
so great a task: but Time again replyde.
Fear not at all, Time does the motion make,
Unmaske this Beast, let him no longer hide
Him self in shrowdes, who makes of sin a scoff,
Worlds greatst admire, when as his vizards off.
Time then said I, fair time I will not use
Longer delay, but satisfy thy will:
So Time will answer for my harmeles muse,
Who wants worth to nigh Pernassus hill.
Be brief, quoth Time: with that I took my Pen,
Obeying Time, without offense to men.
Then did I fix mine eye upon this Beast,
Who did appear first in the shape of Man,
Homly attyrde, of wonders not the least:
A Broome-mans song to sing this Dog began,
From street to street trubgeth along this Groom,
As if he would fern all the world with Broom.
But in a trice he did transform his shape,
Which stroke a trebble horror to my heart.
A Cerberus, nay worse, he thrice as wide did gape,
His hears all Snakes curling, they will not part.
Cole black his hew, like Torches glow his eyes,
His breath does poison, smooke from his nostrels flies.
His countenance ghastly, fearful, grim, and payle,
His fomie mouth still gapeth for his pray:
With Tigers teeth he spares none to assail,
His lyppes Hell gates, orepaynted with decay.
His tongue the clapper, sounding woofull knell,
Towling poor men to ring a peale in hell.
Like Sepulcher his throat is hollow made,
Devouring all whom danger makes a pray.
Brybrie his hand, spoil of the pore, his trade.
His fyngers Talentes, ceazing to betray.
And with his arms he fouldeth men in woes,
Destruction still the path where ere he goes.
Me thought his breast was all of burning Brass,
Through which there grew a heart of hardest Steel:
His belly hudge, like scalding furnace was,
His thyghes both like unto a fiery wheel,
His legs were long, one foot like to a Hind,
The other foot a Hounds of bloody kind.
And in this shape I saw this monster walk,
About the streets, most fearful to behold:
But more to tell, since I begin to talk,
Here is the ease, which Time would feign have told.
Upon a sudden rushe this Curr on me,
As though my life his evening pray should be.
Within his clutches did he ceaze me fast,
And bare me straight unto black Plutoes cell:
When there I came, he me in Lymbo cast,
A Stigion lake, the dungion of deep hell:
But first my legs he locked in Iron boult,
As if poor I had been some wanton Coult.
And then he began with basest terms to braide,
And then he threats as though he would me kill:
And then he daunces for he me betrayed,
And then speaks fair, as though he meant no ill:
Then like Madusa does he shake his locks,
And then he threatens me with Iron stocks.
At last he left me in that irksome den,
Where was no day for there was ever night:
Woes me thought I, the abject of all men,
Clouded in care, quite banished from light:
Robbed of the Sky, the Scartes, the day, the Sun,
This Dog, this Devil, has all my joys vndun.
Surprest with anguish sorrow grief and woe,
Me thought I heard a noise of Iron cheanes:
Which din did torment and affright me so,
That all my senses studied what it means:
But by and by, which did me comfort more,
There came a man which opened Lymbos door.
All lean he was, and feeble too God knows,
Upon his arm he bare a bunsh of keys:
With Candlelight about the cell he goes,
Who roughly said, sir lie you at your ease?
Swearing an oath that I did lie too soft,
Who lay on ground, and thus he at me scoft.
To see a man of feature, form and shape,
It did me good, and partly fears exiled:
But when I heard him gibe me like an Ape,
Then did I think that I was thrice beguiled.
Yet would I venture to this man to speak,
Into discourses thus I began to break.
Aye me poor wretch, that knows not where I am,
Nor for what cause I am brought to this place:
Bound for the slaughter, lying like the Lamb,
The butchers means to kill within a space.
My greeues are more then can my tongue express,
Aye me, woes me, that can find no redress.
Yet if thou be as thou do seem a man,
And so thou art, if I do not mistake:
Do not increase if so release thou can,
The cruel tortures which me woeful make.
And tell me first who thou thy self may be,
That art a man, and yet do gibe at me.
Seeing the fears which did my heart possess,
Uiewing the tears that trickled from mine eyes:
He answered thus, a man I must confess,
I am my self that hear condemned lies.
And by the law adiudgd I am to dye,
But now the keeper of these keys am I.
This house is Newgate, gently he replied,
And this place Lymbo wherein now thou art:
Until thou pay a fine, hear must thou bide,
With all these boults which do agreeue thy heart.
No other place may there provided be,
Till thou content the keeper with a fee.
With that he turned as though he would away.
Sweet, bide awhyle, I did him so entreat.
Quoth he, My friend, I can not longer stay,
Yet what you want, if you will drink or eat,
Or have a fire, or Candle by you burn,
Say what you need, and I will serve your turn.
Quoth I, dear friend then help me to a Fire,
Let me have Candle for to give me light:
Nor meat nor drink do I wysh or desire,
But only grant me gracious in thy sight.
And say, What monster was it plast me here?
Who has me almost lyueles made with fear.
Nay peace quoth he, for there begins a tale.
Rest now content, and Time will tell thee more,
To strive in Fetters it will small avail:
Seek first to ease thy legs which will grow sore,
When boults are off, we will that matter handle.
So he departed, leaving me a Candle.
Away he went, and leaves me to my woes.
And being gone, I could not choose but think
That he was kind, though first unkind in shows,
Who offered me both fire, bread, and drink.
Leaving a Candle by me for to burn,
It easd my grief, and made me less to mourn.
Ioying to see, who whilome had no sight,
I reached the Candle, which by burning stands,
but I unworthy comfort of the light,
A Rat does rob the Candle from my hands,
And then a hundred Rats all sallie forth,
As if they would conuaye their pryze of worth.
In vain I strive to reobteyne what is lost,
My woes are now, as woes at first began:
With change of greeues my perplexed soul is tossed,
To see the end I did bethink me than.
How time had promisd secrets to disclose,
So I exspect the worst of hellish foes.
Whilst thus I lay in Irons under ground,
I heard a man that begged for relief:
And in a chain of Iron was he bound,
Whose clattering noise filde full my heart with grief,
Begging one penny to buie a hundred bread,
Hungerd and sterud, for want of food ny dead.
Woes me thought I, for thee so bound in chains,
Woes me for them, thou begs for to sustain:
Woes me for all, whose want all woes conteynes,
Woes me, for me, that in your woes complain.
Woes me, woes you, and woe is to us all,
Woe to that Dog, made me to woe a thrall.
Whilst thus I languish, I on sudden hear,
An uncouth noise which did approach my den:
Listening, unto the door, I laid mine ear,
And then I knew the voices were of men.
Still in neerenesse drew they more and more,
At last I heard them opening Lymboes door.
In first there came, the man that gave me light,
And next the Dog, who brought me to that place:
Another, with a Club appeard in sight,
Three weaponlesse, as though they monde my case.
Fainting for fear, I knew not what to say,
Exspecting then performance of decay.
But now this Dog is in another shape,
In every point proportiond as a man:
My heart did throb, not knowing how to escape,
but to entreat this Curre, I thus began.
Fair friend, quoth I, if so thy will may be,
To ease my grief I Will give thee any fee.
With that he grynd, and thus he made reply,
Thou art a villain, worthy of this place:
Thy fault is such, that thou shall surely dye,
I will not pity thee in any case.
Such as thou art, too many every where,
But I will seek in time to have them hear.
When he namde Time, then I on Time did think,
But more he says, if thou have any coin:
To pay for ease, I will a little wink,
And boults releasment, with discharge I Will join.
Of this close prison to some other ward,
Paying thy fine, or else all ease is bard.
Like as the child does kiss the rod for fear,
Nor yet dare whimper, though it have been bet:
So with smoothe looks, this Dog approache I near,
Before the Devil, a candle do I set.
Treating him fair, with fairest words may be,
Bidding him ask, he shall have gold of me.
Why then, quoth he, thy speeches please me well,
Partners (quoth he) strike of his Irons all:
Then up we went, as one should clime from hell,
Until I came into a loathsome hall.
When there I came, they set me on a block,
With punche and hammer, my Irons off they knock.
No marvel though, whilst they my legs untied,
Mine eyes did surfeit, drunk with woes beholding:
Boults, shackles, colors, and Iron shears I spide,
Thumbstals, wastbands, tortors grief unfolding.
But whilst the ease of legs my sorrows calmes,
Room quoth a wretch, for me with wydowes alms.
Take of these curtals did another cry,
And on his knees he fell before this Cur:
Who to his sorrowing made a Dogs reply,
Down to thy ward, and do not make this stur.
What now I know, if I had known before,
In stead of these light chains thou should had more.
With that the poor man was thrust out of sight,
And I all fearing, feared with fear of fears:
My Irons off I went, as go I might,
Unto this Dog, in whom all devils appears.
With goulden Angel, I this Cur presented,
Says he, one more, else am not I contented.
Wonder it was, to see a feend of hell,
To thirst for angels of the fairest hue:
But devils are devils, and they would all orquell,
Man's life and soul, this Dog seeks to subdue.
His mouth to stop, angels I gave him two,
Yielding perforce, as I perforce must do.
And then he left me in the partners hall,
The grate does open, and this Dog out goes:
Thousand sorrows holds my heart in thrall,
Yet there I am not by my self in woes.
Hereon oreplunged with deep hearts grief cries,
I live a life, thrice worse then he that dies.
An other sorrye soul, without a ragge,
Hurckling for cold, in whom all want appears:
At last began speak, as if he meant to brag,
And thus he says: Hear have I been nine years.
Tell you of woes, when you my woes have seen,
And yet have many men more woeful been.
With that I rose, and to this poor man went,
In hope to learn some nouils by his talk:
Approaching him, amidst his discontent,
He asked me, if so I pleased to walk?
And if you will, then follow up these stairs,
To walk, and talk, deceives time of cares.
I followed him, as he that in a wood,
Has lost himself, and knows no way he takes:
And in distress I thought conferring good,
New woes with old, just mixture consort makes.
And though the place do naught but discord sound,
My soul for his our discords concord found.
At first he gently took me by the hand,
And bids we welcome, as I were his guest:
You are a prisoner, I do understand,
And hither welcome are both bad and best.
Men of all sorts come for offending hither,
And being hear, hear bide they altogether.
And then he did begin thus to discourse,
Cease to lament with vain dispayring tears:
Thy self dissolud to droopes, gains no remorse,
Hears none regards, though all thy mournings hears.
If under earth, the Devils can prove a bell,
Theirs is not like to this, where wretches dwell.
See in you Hall are diverse sorts of men,
Some weep, some wail, some mourn, some wring their hands,
Some curse, some swear, and some blaspheming then,
My heart did faint, my head hair upright stands.
O Lord thought I, this house will rend in sunder,
Or else there can be no hell, this hell under.
Thus wondering I, on sudden did epsy,
One all in black came stamping up the stayres:
Whose you I asked, and thus he made reply,
You is the man does mitigate our cares.
He preaches Christ, and does Gods word deliver,
To all distressed, to comfort men for ever.
Then drew I near to see what might betide,
Or what the sequel was of that I saw:
Exspecting good would follow such a guide,
As preached Christ, and taught a God to know.
A hundred clustered, ^ying the pulpit near,
As if they longd the Gospel for to hear.
What Is this, quoth I, that now I do behold,
The hage of hell, and Satan's impious lims,
Some deeper secret does this sight unfold,
Then I can guess, this sight my senses dims.
Straight, of my friend I asked by and by,
What it might be, who made me this reply.
You men which thou beholds so pale and wan,
Who whiles looks up, whiles looking down beneath*
Are all condemnd, and they must dye each man,
Judgment is given, that cord shall stop their breath.
For hayneus facts, as murder, theft, and treason,
Unworthy life, to dye law thought it reason.
The Sermon ended, the men condemnd to dye,
Taking their leaves of their acquainted friends:
With sorry looks paysing their steps they plye,
Down to a hall, where for them there attends.
A man of office, who to daunt lives hopes,
Does cord their hands, and scarf their necks with ropes.
Thus ropt and corded, they descend the stayres,
Newgates Black Dog, beesturs to play his part:
And does not cease for to augment their cares,
Willing the Carman to set near his Cart.
Which done, these men, with fear of death orepangd,
Bound to the Cart, are carried to be hanged.
This ruefull sight, yet end to their doomd sorrows,
Makes me aghast, and forces me bethink:
Woe upon woe, and so from wofulst borrowes,
A swame of grief, and then I sounding sink.
But by Times aid, I did revive again,
Might I have dyed, it had been lesser pain.
For now again the Dog a fresh assaults me,
As if my spoil were next to be inacted:
And like a subtle Cur in speeches halts he,
With thousand sleighty wyles, old shifts compacted.
Charging me often with that I never did,
In his smoothst looks, are cruel bitings hid.
I spoke him fair, as if I had offended,
He treats me foul, who never did him ill:
He plays the gripe one Tytious intended,
To tire his heart, yet never has his fill.
Even so this Dog does tire and prey on me,
Till quite consumd, my golden angels be.
Then woeful want did make me often complain,
Hunger and cold do pinche me at the heart:
Then am I thrust out of my bed again,
And from my chamber must I needs depart.
To lowest wards, to lie upon the boords,
Which naught but filthe and noisome smells affords.
Midst forty men, surprisd with care and grief,
I lie me down on boords as hard as chenell:
No bed, nor boulster, may afford relief,
For worse then Dogs, lie we in that foul kennell.
What might I think, but sur^ assure me then,
That metamorphosd we were beasts not men.
Grief upon grief, did still oppress my mind,
Yet had I store compartners in my woe:
No ease, but anguish, my distresses find,
Here lies a man, his last lives breath does blow.
And ere the sorry man be fully dead,
The Rats do prey upon his face and head.
Whilst thus I languish in my woes, appears
Time in his mantle, looking fresh and blythe:
Yet whiles his eyes did shed some drops of tears,
Wherewith he seemd, as he would wet his sith.
Quoth Time, by me shall sorrows be appeased,
And nows the time thou shall of cares be eased.
I did present this Book which I had writ,
Into Times hands, who took it and perused it:
Yea, but says Time, thou must discover yet,
Who this Dog is, who else will be excused.
For albe I so cleard thine eyes to see him,
So may not others, yet Time would have all fly him.
And for thy verses covertly disclose,
The secrets sense, and yet does shadow truth*
Explain this Black Dog, who he is, in prose,
For more apparent, then thy Poem shows.
Truth needs no colors, then this Dog by kind,
Make known before, as he is known behind.
My Sithe, quoth Time, is now prepared to cut,
There is no sith, but Times shall longer dure:
Newgates Black Dog, must Time to silence put,
I Will break his teeth, and make his biting sure.
The shapes of men, on Dogs of cruel kind,
Time shall confound, that bear so bad a mind.
Have thou no doubt, but Time shall set thee free,
And yet hereafter learn thou to beware:
Of this Black Dog, and do his dangers flee,
Give others warning, least like fall their share.
Say to the world, when thou art freed from hell,
Newgates Black Dog thou saw, and knew too well.
And for thy Poem draws to a conclusion,
Times pleasure is, that thou this Dog express:
In shape, in nature, man: yet men's confusion,
A madding Cur, who does from kind regresse.
A Mothers son, and most for to be wondered,
Of Mothers sons, this Dog has spoild a hundred.
In lowly sort, complain to highest powers,
Truth will be heard, and truth must not be hid:
With Foxelike wyles, this Dog poor souls deuowers,
This Dog of men, desipher I thee bid.
And though there be curs many of his kind,
Say but the truth, and yet leave naught behind.
When Time had said, I from my fears awake,
Yet had I writ what premises contains:
It Was no illusion moude me this Poem make,
But greeues endured, and woes my heart sustaines.
Grief, care, and woe, my silly heart do clog,
Fettered to shame by this cur Newgates Dog.
Now as I have discribd him in some sort,
As he is fearful unto all him see:
His devilish practices now I will report,
And set them down as wicked as they be.
Here ends my Poem, Newgates black Dog to name,
Now read the rest, and then commend or blame.
FINIS.
A Dialogue betwixt the Author and one Zawny, who was a Prisoner in Newgate,
and perfectly acquainted with matters touching the discovery of the
superlatiue degree of Cnunicatching: pithy, pleasant, and profitable for all
the readers hereof.
ZAwny, Aut(...)
I have many times been in hand with thee to give me some notes upon thy
knowledge, as concerning the notable abuses committed by a sort of dissolute
fellows, who are in very deed the worste members in a commonwealth; I mean
infamous cunnicatching knaves, who continually seek the spoil of others to
inritch themselves, and now is the time thy help will do me some pleasure: for
at the request of a very friend, I was moved to write something of worth,
whereupon I made choice of the black Dog of Newgate to be a subject to write
upon, wherein I could not choose, diverse strong reasons especially moving
thereunto, but in that title shadow the knauerie, villainy, robbery, and
Cunnicatching, committed daily by diverse, who in the name of service and
office, were as it were attendants at Newgate. Again I did choose to give my
book that title, as well to satisfy some who yet think there is some spirit
about that prison in the likeness of a black Dog: of which fond imagination
to put them out of doubt, I thought good to give them to understand, that
indeed there is no such matter. The third reason was, for I being in Newgate a
prisoner, and overthrown by these kind of bad people with their
cunnycatching, in most vile and wicked manner, in so much that whilst I there
languished in great extremity, I did both hear and see many outrageous
injuries by them committed on diverse sorts of people: the premises
considered, I do entreat thee to let me have thy help to set down some of
their villainies committed in thy knowledge, and I will not be slack to present
this book, being finished, into their godly hands: who will assuredly give
them condign punishment, as also provide, that the like mischiefs shall never
be any more put in practice by any notable villains.

Indeed you say well, and I agree: but yet you know I am a poor man, and am a
Pisoner. Again, it is ill meddling with edge tools. As you comprehend them in
the name of a Dog: so if they be angry, they will bite, and play the devil in
their likeness. They have parlous heads, store of money, and some good
friends: all which I want. Neither will I name any: but if their knaueries were
known, it would be thought the Gallows as fit for these Cunnycatchers, as
Newgate is for me, who am rather kept in to bribe them, then to answer any
offense I have committed: yet seeing you have begun well, I would wish you end
no worse: and for my part, tell you one of their knaueries, and I Will tell
another: so that ere we have done, if we tell all, the Cunny-catcher will
think we have told too much. But by your leave a word, I will name no man, for
if they should be named, their friends would be angry: and more then that, I
rather wish their amendment, then their public infamy: of which motion if you
like, begin when you will, and when you are weary rest you, and I will go on
with it: for our matter being all one, no doubt our conclusion will be to the
like effect.

Godly, wise, honorable, worshipful, and gentle Reader, know first there be an
infinite number of this sect and company of cunny catchers, therefore it were an
endless piece of work to name them all: but for I know too many of them, and
have likewise ^aide for my acquaintance with them, it may be exspected I should
name some of them, which for the inconvenience might thereby ensue, I thought
good to crave (...) that behalf, assuring you, that they are easy enough to
be known by their coullers: but what wicked parts they have performed, I will
not fail but make manifest. Therefore, first I desire you to imagine, that
these fellows, these Cunny catchers I would say, do promise to ye world great
matters: as for example. They will undertake if a man be robbed by the way, they
will help the party offended to his money again, or to the thieves at the
least. Likewise, if a Purse be cut, a House broken, a piece of Plate stole,
they will promise the like: mary, to further this good piece of service, they
must have a Warrant procured from some Justice at the least, that by the said
general Warrant, they may take up all suspected persons: which being obtained,
then mark how notably therewith they play the knaves, how shamefully they
abuse the Justices who granted the Warrant, and how notoriously they abuse a
great sort of poor men, who neither the Warrant mentions, nor the party
agreeued in any wise thought to molest or trouble: and for they shadow all
their villainies under coullor of some especial warrant, let it suffice thee to
read the sequel, and then judge of their abuses, as they deserve.

Now first will I begin with their petty practices in their lewd actions. Say
there is a man or two robbed by the high way not far from London: the rumor
hereof being bruted in the City, these fellows will be sure to have
intelligence with the first, in what manner the men were robbed, how much money
they lost, and where they dwell: the reason is this, The Cunny-catchers have
always abroad some odd fellows which are inquisitors of purpose, who always
what they hear rumord, they presently come and certify their good masters
Cunny-catchers, of all whatsoever, how, where, and when this robbery ^as
committed: presently away goes F. H. or N. S. or some of that sect, and
inquires out the party that was robbed: with whom, if H. or S. hap to meet*
withal, some occasion shall presen^ly be found to intrude themselves into the
company of them be robbed: and after some circumstances, the Cunny catcher
begins to tell of a strange robbery committed in such a place, saying it was
shamefully done: and withal, they will cast some words a far off, as who
should say in effect: if I be not deceived I know the thieves, and it may be,
that if I might speak with him or them that were robbed, happily I should direct
them how they might take the villains.

All this while the Cunnicatcher takes no notice of them that were robbed,
neither does the Cunnicatcher make any show, that they knew any such matter to
be done to any in the company.

Now the poor men that were robbed, hearing their smoth speeches, one of them
begins very heavily to shape his tale in this, or such like manner. My honest
friend, I know too well that such a robbery was done, and in very deed I was
the man was robbed in such a place, and at such a time as you speak off. I
beseech you good friend, stand me in what stead you may: and if you can help
me again to my money, or to take the Thieves, I will not only think my self
greatly beholding to you, but I will also please you to your content. I am a
poor man, I pray you do me what pleasure you may, good sir, I beseech you.
These and such like speeches he uses.

The Cunnicatcher presently joins ishues with him, and with much cunnyng he
tempereth his talk. To be short, he offers all the pleasure he can do him:
but quoth he, you know I am a stranger unto you, and I know not whether you
will use me well or no: It may be, when I have done you good, you will lightly
reward me. But I Will tell you what I Will do: Give me but forty shillinges in
hand to bear my charges the time I may search for them, and if I do not
deserve it, I will restore it again, and loose all my labor: if you like of
this motion, so it is: if not, I will not deal in your matter hot nor cold.

When the man that was robbed, hears him so brief, yet loath to part company
on the sudden: he entreats to know the Cunnicatchers name, and where he
dwells. To this question, an other of the Cunnicatchers companions makes
this reply.

Honest man, you need not doubt of his good meaning toward you: This is such
a one as may do you pleasure, if he please to undertake it. Then he roundeth
the man in the ear, and tells him his name is E. H. and that he knows all
the Thieves about London, and that he has done more good in helping men to
their own, then can be devised to be done by a hundred others, praising him
for a wonderful good member in a Common wealth: further certifying the party
where this E. H. dwells, and with an oath whispering, he wysheth him to give
him some.xx. s. and then agree what he shall give him more when the Thieves be
taken, making many protestations, that he need not to misdoubt of E. H. his
honest dealing with him in any respect.

Presently the poor man puts his hand into his pocket, and out he pulls an
Angel: then says he; M. H. I have heard of you before, and for I have heard
nothing but well of you, I am the willinger to deal with you: truly here is an
angel for you, and I will give you a gallon of Wine at the Tavern, and if you
do me good in this matter, I will give you xx. s. more: then with some
entreaty, he desires him to take it in good part, and so gives him the money.

The Cunny-catcher takes the money very quaintly, as though he would refuse
it, but in the end he pockets it up, and is willing to go to the Tavern, where
after ye drinking a gallon or two of Wine, they conclude of the former matter:
and E. H. will out of hand get the thieves into Newgate, and so much he
promises to perfome upon his honest fidelity, not letting to say, if he do it
not, he dare be hanged for it.

Then the day is appointed, when within a week the party robbed shall come to
Newgate to know what news, and for that time they part, the honest man to his
home or about his business, the Cunny-catchers to some other odd place about
their knauerie, where they laugh at the Cunny, devising how to get him in for
more money, never intending to do any thing in the matter, which they have
undertaken for the honest man, whose angel they drink merrily.

Now we will leave this man for a while to his business of more profit, and I
will proceed with the Cunny-catchers for their practices.

These Cunnicatchers are never idle: and therefore it follows next, to let
you understand of a notable piece of service the said H. and S. playde with a
friend of mine.

It happened my friend being some time in question, could not miss but he
must needs have acquaintance with these odd shauers: and thus it fell out. My
friend being in a Tavern drinking with some of his acquaintance, whilst they
were drinking together, in comes H. S. who presently used great courtesy to my
friend: but to be short, they took full survey of his weapons, his good
cloak, and neat apparel, which was enough for them to imagine that my
friend had store of money: whereupon they asked if he would give them a pottle
of Wine? which he willingly granted: and so after one pottle, he gave them
another: the reckoning paid, and the company ready to depart, quoth S. to E.
H. I pray you hark in your ear.

Presently he whispereth. Thus it is, my fellow has a warrant to take you:
therefore in kindness I wish you to draw to your pursse, and give him an
Angel to drink, and I will undertake he shall not see you at this time.

My friend hearing his tale tend to a Cunny-catching effect, he begins to
swear they are Cunny-catching knaves, and they shall not wrong him in any
respect.

To be short, the Cunny-catcher sends for a Constable, and charges the party
aforesaid with felony: the Constable knowing them to be in office (but not to
be such bad fellows) he presently apprehends the party: which done, the
Cunny-catchers seeing the prisoner in safe keeping, disfurnished of his
weapons, they presently require the prisoner of the Constable, and they will be
his discharge: which the Constable did, thinking no less then they were right
honest men.

Now mark what followed. As these two knaves were a bringing this party
charged with felony to Newgate, one of them offers for xx. s. to set him
free: of which, when the party had considered, knowing though he were clear of
that he was charged, yet if he lay in Prison till the Sessions, it would be
greater charges. When he was on Newgate stayres ready to go into the Gayle, he
was content to leave his cloak, that money he had in his pursse, and his
weapons which were in the Constables hand pawn for the xx. s. which the
Cunny-catchers took, and discharged the prisoner without any more to do.

Not long after, the aforesaid Cunny-catchers meet with this their Cunny of
xx. s. price, and an other who was known to be as they term him a good
fellow about the town in his company.

And where meet they, but in a Tavern not far without Bishops gate, where
these two poor Cunnies had spoken for supper: amiddest their good cheer, in
comes H. and S. bidding them be merry with their fare. One of these two being
an odd fellow and in dread of these Cunny-catchers, knowing them very
perfectly set on the best face he could, and bad them welcome, entreating them
to sit down, and do as they did, of which proffer the Cunny-catchers accepted
willingly, and sat down with them and eat and drunk merrily: supper being
ended, the reckoning was called for, the shot paid, and althings discharged, the
Cunnies would feign have been gone.

Nay quoth N. S. for of the two he was the grimmer knave and had most skill to
talk, I must let you know that which indeed I am sorry to do. Yet if you will
do your selves good you may use us well, and we will not use you amiss, to be
short, thus it is, such a man was robbed within this week, and he has got out a
warrant for you two by name. He has lost ten pounds: now if you will restore
the money, and bestow xx. s. on us two to drink for our pains, we will
undertake to ^atisfie the party and be your discharge, if not, we have a
war^ant, and you must answer it at Newgate.

This back reckoning is something sharp, but there is no remedy, either pay so
much money, or else must a Constable be sent for, and so to Newgate as round as
a hoope.

To be short, this was the conclusion, the Cunnyes paid down xi.l. every
penny, whereof ten pound was to be paid to the man in the moon, for I dare
take it upon my death neither of these Cunnies did offend any such man, in
manner as these knaves had charged them.

^vny.
By your leave a word, all this while you have not concluded what became of the
first Cunny these odd shauers met with, I pray you be brief, and let us
hear how he was ended withal, and then you shall hear me tell you of
wonders, if these be held to be but of moment.

^or.
Well then to the first Cunny again at his time appointed, he comes to the
wise man of Newgate to inquire what is done in his matter, and at Newgate the
Cunny finds his odd acquaintance with E. H. who at the first sight has the
time of the day for him, much courtesies, but to the tavern they must to debate
the matter, where they must have a pottle of the best. Whilst the Wine is a
filling, the Cunny-catcher shows what great pain he has taken to come by
the thieves, and how hardly they mist of them: but for it is best to use few
words, the Cunny-catcher from one day to an other still drives off the Cunny,
who is still in hope that the Cunny-catcher means good faith, whereas indeed
he never made accoumpt what faith was: so to be short, if the thieves robbed him
of some five or six pound, he has got or he find where he is, a dry shauing
as much as forty or fifty shillings more.

I tell thee Zawny me thinks these are notable vyllanies, and pity they
should not be punished, who live by no other means but practicing such prankes
as these be.

Again this is a general rule to the Cunny-catcher, that when or where he
meets with such a one as has been at any time committed to Newgate, if that
fellow have good apparel on his back, the Cunny-catcher takes acquaintance
of him and a quarte of Wine they must needs drink, when the reckoning comes
to payment, the Cunny-catcher has brought no money from home that day, so by
the others drawing of his pursse to pay for the wine, he knows what lyning is
in it, then if he have money, the Cunny-catcher is in hand with him for a
bribe, some odd crown or an Angel to drink: if the man be in any fault,
fearing the worst, he will not stand with him for a tryfle: if he be in no
fault, perhaps he tells, in faith you are deceived in me, I am not he you take
me for, and so parts and gives him nothing.

Presently the Cunny-catcher uses all means ^o know where he lies, which
when he has done, within a night or two away goes this knave with some old
warrant to the Constable of that liberty, craving his aid to apprehend a bad
fellow who is thought to have done much mischief, but for a suertye he
avouches him for an arrand thief, and that he has been in Newgate. Upon
these speeches the Constable goes with this H. where the poor man lies, and
apprehends him and conuaies him to Newgate, laying some Justices commandment
on him, where he lies till the sessions, unless he come of roundly with a
bribe to the Connycatcher: but say the Connycatcher be mistaken in this
fellows pursse, and that he have not so much as he supposed, yet the
Connycatcher is so strong of faith, that he will not believe the contrary: so
by this means the poor man lies in prison till he be quite a beggar, without
releasment till the proclamation at the Sessions, at which time he is not worth
the ground he goes on, neither knows he, being utterly overthrown how to
have any remedy: which is pitiful and lamentable.

I muse you should accoumpt of these trifling matters, Za
whereas iudeed they are nothing in respect of the prizes they have plaide, and
if you will give me leave a little, I will come some thing nearer the
Cunny-catcher then you have yet done.

I pray thee do: yet I must needs tell thee I have been too near the
Cunnycather, Au
and what I have spoken of him it is not only with grief but with sorrow to
my heart, and anguish of soul, that these outrages should be committed, to the
utter undoing of so many; as within this thirty years have been, for so long
did I hear one of these vyllaines vaunt he had been in office about Newgate:
and what I have done or said on this behalf, with my life and death, I am
ready to make proof of it, that it is true. Thi^ ^inde I bear, that the
Devil should have his due of these knaves, and I hold it my duty to reveal
whatsoever is to the good of a commonwealth; and so I will, though the
Cunnycatcher swear to give me a cut in the leg for my labor, and now Zawny
I pray thee go forward.

Gentlemen, though I want eloquence, yet you shall see I have a rolling tongue,
deep knowledge, and am a rare fellow to bewray many matters touching
Cunny-catching.

Master Green God be with thee, for if thou had been a live, knowing what
I know, thou would as well have made work as matter, but for my part I am a
plain fellow, and what I know I will not be meal mouthed, but blab I wist,
and out it must: nay and out it shall, for as the Comedian said: Plenus rymarum
sum.

I know twenty and twenty of these fine Cunny-catchers, who learn of the
fencers to double a blow, knowing what belongs to the button, and the bob: yet
for the Author has only used four letters for two names, let them stand, and
when I name E. he must think Zawny can see whilst there is an eye in his head.
H. is aspirationis nota, and no letter indeed, therefore I care not if this
Cunny-catching H. were wypte out of the letters row to hang on the Gallows,
who is fitter to be a sipher to make up a number at Tyborne, then to be a man
of so bad condition. As for a pottle of Wine he cares not who he hanged so he
may have it, if it be but the Wine.

N. is the first of the second name the Author uses. No knave I warrant you:
and as for S. if he be in some sort a knave to be proved? he will be
contented, nay he must in spite of his teeth digest the name of a
Cunnycatcher, for by that art being not worth one groate a year, he is able
by his fine wit to mainteyne himself in his Satin dublet, Ueluet hose, his
Hatt lynde with Ueluet, his silk stock, his Rapter and Dagger gilt, his
goulden brouche, and all things correspondent as might seem a man both of
wit and living. And now I, according to my promise to the Author, will have a
cast at these fine Cunny-catchers, and I will not slander them in any wise,
but speak the truth unto death. If I say more then I will prove, I will
never bid you trust Zawny again.

Not long since, at a Tylting upon triumph on the Crownation day: many good
subjects with joy assembled the place of Triumph, as well rejoicing to see the
Queens most excellent Majesty, as also to see the Tylting performed, by
sundry noble and right honorable personages.

Amongst the rest, there comes a woman with six pounds in her purse, which the
Cutpursse met withal, she as it seemed having more mind on the pleasures of
the present day and time, then she had of her pursse.

The Iousts ended for that day, the woman thinking all had been well, takes
her way homewarde with a friend of hirs, yet by the way, this good woman must
needs drink with her friend a pint of Wine: but here was the mischief, when
the Wine was to be paid for, the woman mist her pursse, and looking on the
strings, with a cold heart she might perceive her pursse was cut away.

Her friend to comfort her, bad her take no thought, for he knew a man would
help her to her pursse again, and says he, we will presently go to him, for
I know where he dwells.

The woman thanked her friend for his courteous offer, and away they go to E.
H. his house, where they found him, to whom they brake the matter wholly how it
was, desiring his help. Presently he had them in the wind, and had them
welcome, promising that if they would content him for his pains he would do
her good, asking her what she would willingly bestow to have her money again:
at the first word she offered him forty shillings. All this was well, and
they agree to meet ^he next day about White hall, where they shall have answer
to ^^eir content: and so after they had drunk a quarte of Wine at the Tavern,
for that night they parted.

The next day, according to promise they met, and this E H. had in his company
a man, who he said was a Constable, but whether he said truly or no I will not
say, but to the matter: They appoint the woman to go to a friends house hard
by, and she should hear more anon. Away went she, as they had appointed her,
and away go they to look for Cutpurses.

I warrant you they sought not long, but here they met with a Cutpurse, whom
they take by the sleeue: and there they meet with an other as good a cutpurse
as the former, and so they take at the least a dosen Cutpurses: which when they
have done, the Cunnicatcher begins to rail mightily, swearing they shall some
of them be hanged: but to Prison they shall all go, unless this money be had
again, showing a Warrant, or a piece of paper at the least: which is
sufficient to bear the Cunnicatcher harmeles, as he says.

Now the Cutpurses, though they be all clear of this matter, yet they begin to
quake for fear, offering rather then they will go to Prison, they will make
up the money, so that E. H. will promise to give it them again when the
cutpurse shall be known, who cut the purse in deed. This motion the
Cunnicatcher likes indifferently: and so of these dosen of cutpurses, he
takes of some more, and of some less, that the sum is largely made up:
which done, they are all discharged, mary they must have some twentye shillings
overplus for their pains and kindness showed to the cutpurses, all which is
granted.

To be short, no Cutpursse scapte their hands, but he paid a share, so that
there was gathered the first day at the least ten pounds amongst Cutpurses, and
the next day this E. H. met with the Cutpursse, who cut the pursse indeed, of
whom he took the money, with the vantage, and let him go, without answering
the matter: and to conclude, the woman had four pound of her money again, and
so the matter was no more spoken of.

I think this was a piece of knavery, if you talk of knauerie, and yet this
is no knauerye in respect of that I will show you in this next discovery of
their Cunny-catching.

At the Term time, these fellows, H. and S. have had great booties by their
practices in this art, and this is their manner.

In the morning away they go to Westminster hall* where they know the
Cutpursse will be about his business, but the Cunny-catchers are not without a
couple, who are their consorts: who as soon as they come to the Hall, thrust in
amongst the thickest, and there they listen to hear if any pursse were cut
that day.

Likewise, the Cunny-catchers, they take their standings, one of them at the
Water side, the other in some close place, at an other gate: so that lightlye a
Cutpursse cannot come out of the Hall, but one of them shall spy him, and take
him by the sleeue, if the Cutpursse have done any thing, word is presently
brought to the Tavern, whether the Cunny and the Cunny-catcher are gone to
drink. Now if it be some small sum, the Cunny-catcher shows the Cunny a
good countenance, but if it be a large sum, as six pounds, or vpwardes, the
Cunny-catcher dissembling his intent, will not stay but the drinking a pottle
of Wine.

The Cutpursse entreats their company, and offers both Wine and a breakefast,
but all is in vain, the Cunny-catcher will not carry, swearing a great oathe,
he is sorrye that it was his chaunse to see this Cunny or Cutpursse this day,
for there is a mischief done, and he fears some will smoke for it. At this
the Cutpursse is afearde, but he for that time scapeth their fyngers, for the
Cunny-catcher will carry no longer.

Now the Cunny-catcher sends presentlye one of his company to seek out the
party who had his pursse cut, which he performs with diligence, and
meeting with him, he tells the party that he heard he lost his pursse at
Westminster, and if he will be advised by him, he will help him to ^he most of
his money again.

This honest man glad to have part again of his money, offers at the first
word, the one half to have the other, assuring this odd fellow for
certaintye, that he lost ten pounds.

Well (says this Factor for the Cunnycatcher) if your leisure will serve to
go with me, I will bring you to one does partly know who cut your pursse,
therefore it is your way to follow his counsel, and I warrant you, my life
for it, but you shall have your desire.

Heereat the honest man is glad, and willyngly goes along with him to a place
where he knows E. H. abides his coming: Now being met, the Wise man of
Newgate begins at the first dash, to tell them whereabout they come, even in as
ample manner, as if the man who had his pursse cut, had told the tale himself.

No marvel though the Country man do wonder a while at the matter, but in
the end, he tells him it is so indeed, and according to the first motion they
agree, which is the one half for the other: the Countryman willing to refer
the matter wholly to this Cunny-catchers discretion.

Then away goes the Countreyman with H. the Cunny-catcher, to a Justice, to
whom he signifies in every respect, how his pursse was cut, desiring of the
Justice a warrant to take up all suspected persons: of which motion the Justice
intending to do Justice, graunts his warrant, and gives it to H. ^^^ling him to
certify him what shall be done on that behalf, as the Warrant intends.

This Warrant obtained, the Cunnycatcher is as pleasant as a Pie, taking his
leave of the Justice, away goes the Countryman and his good friends with him,
and to the Tavern straight, where they spend some time in drinking a pottle of
the best Wine, which the Countryman must pay for: which done, H. takes his
leave of his clyent, promising him not to be slack in his business, which
done, they part; the Countreyman to his lodging or as his occasion serves, and
the Cunny-catcher about his faculty.

Now woe to the Cutpursses, for as H. happens to meet with them, they must to
Newgate, showing Warrant sufficient for a greater matter.

But you must take notice, that of a dozen or sixteen Cutpurses who he has
apprehended, he is sure enough that he whith cut the pursse indeed shall be
none of them.

This honest company of Cutpursses being all in Newgate, H. goes presently and
certifies the Justice, what a sort of notable Thieves he has taken, desiring
the Justice to send for them at his pleasure, to examine them about the
Country man's Pursse, assuring the Justice that they are cunning Thieves, and
that he dare lay his life, they will confess nothing: which in deed the
Justice finds true; for, they being examined, will confess as much as near
a whit.

To Newgate away they go again, where they make all means to H. to stand
their friend, showing their innocence: yet rather then they will lie in
Prison, one offers ten shyllinges, an other twenty shyllinges, some more
some less, as they are of ability: offering farther, to give besides the
sum, every one something to H. for his good word to the Justice, that they
may be set at liberty.

Now the Cunni-catcher has the matter as he would wysh it, and taking their
money first, he presently goes to the Justice and cirtifieth him, that these
which he has apprehended, did none of them cut the Pursse: and for he has
gotten knowledge who did, he desires that they may be bayled.

The Justice glad to hear the truth is known, is willing to set them at
liberty; which upon their bail he grants. Of this money the Country man
has never a penny, and all these Cutpursses are set at liberty.

Which done, H seeks diligently for the Cutpursse, who did the matter in
deed: with whom when he meets, he spares not to tell him how sore the
Justice is against him, and now earnestly the Country man will pursue the Law:
and further he swears, that some of them who were in Newgate (...) the
Justice plainly, that he cut the Pursse.

This peale ringes nothing well in the Cutpursses ears, who can find no
favor, but to Newgate: yet upon entreaty made by the Cutpursse, the
Cunni-catcher promises, that for his part he will do him any good he can,
wishing the Cutpursse, as he is wise enough, so it were good for him to hold
his own, and confess nothing to the Justice, what proof soever come against
him, and in so doing, it may lie in his power to do him good; telling him
further, that the man who lost the money, though he be sore bent against him,
yet he will partly be rewled by him.

Well, to Newgate marches this H. with his Cutpursse: where he to welcome him
for all his fair words, he clappeth on his legs a good pair of Boultes and
Shakels: which done, he sends for the Country man, and tells him of these
good tydinges, how the Thief is taken, and how he has used him.

The next way they take, is to the Justice, to whom H. signifies how the case
stands, railing mightily against the Cutpursse, even in the worst manner he
can devise: saying, it will be evidently proved that he cut the Purse, and none
but he: further he requesteth, that the Cutpursse may be examined. The
Cutpursse is sent for, who to every question the Justice can demand, having
taken out his lesson (Confess and be hanged) has his answer ready, so that
there can be no advantage taken by his examination.

The Justice returns him to Newgate again to abide till the next Sessions,
requiring the party to be bound to give evidence against him: but the Country
man dwelling far from London, and it being long to the next Law day,
alleges, he can not be in the City at that time, for he is a poor man, and
has great occasion of business, so that he cannot be there to give evidence,
neither can he say, if he would, any thing against that ^artie: for so far as
he can remember, he never saw that fellow before in his life.

Yet H. promises, that it will be proved against the Cutpursse: so the Country
man and H. take their leaves of Justice, making show as though they would come
again^ though it be no part of H. his meaning.

H. goes straight to Newgate, where he falls in hand with the Cutpursse,
swearing unto him by his honesty, that he has labored the party who had his
Pursse cut, to take his money again, and not to give evidence against him,
answering him with many oaths, that if he may have his money again, he will
presently go out of the town. The Cutpursse taking H. his hand, that no man
shall give evidence against him at the Sessions, does presently send abroad to
his friends for the money: which as soon as it comes, he delivers to H.
and withal a large overplus, because he will be suer of H. his favor.

This done, H. goes to the Country man, and tells him he got no more but six
or seven pound, of which if he will accept, and proceed no further against the
party, he has it to pay him: mary he will not be known to the Country man,
but that he had that money of some friends of the Cutpursses, who upon the
former condition, is willing it should be paid, if not, to have his money
again.

The Country man having haste out of the City, is glad to take it: out of
which sum, if it be seven pounds, H. must have half: so that the poor man
of ten pounds, has but three pound ten shillinges, whereas the Cunni-catcher
by this account has got at one hand and an other, very near forty Mark:
the money sharde, the Country man takes Horse, and away he rides: Again, H.
his mouth is stopped, and the next Sessions the Cutpursse is quit by
Proclamation, no man being there to give evidence against him.

O wonderful piece of villainy. A
Zawny, I will trouble thee no further, thou have told enough, and I will tell
no more: who hears but this which is already spoken, will hold these knaves
for execrable varlets. So for this time I will commend thee to thy other
business, wyshing thy liberty, as I do my own: and if thou have occasion,
command me to do thee good, if it lie in my power.

Sir, Z
I thank you for your courteous offer: but yet I must tell you, I could tell
twenty such prankes as these are, which these cunny-catching fellows have
played: but in deed they keep one order almost, in perfourming them all: but
since you think here is enough, I will say no more, and so fare (...).

Thus have you heard, gentle Reader, how at large this Black Dog is
descifered: which Dog as he is, is worthy of your general hate: but for I
have with pains concluded my Book under that title, I will not request you
according to the old proverb, love me, love my Hound: but only, love me,
and hang my Dog, for he is not worthy so good a name as a Hound: and so
wishing you all well, I conclude.

FINIS.

