B^vertue of holy obedyence openly to pu(...) late time happened and fortuned
in the parties and country of Greece in the which parties and cou^tres by force
and great strenght and mighty multitude of false myscreauntes Turks Enemies
of our holy faith Catholyke and principally that by great power did Inhabyte
and occupye aaynst right a mighty strong Castle called the Castle anaryne of
the Dioces of motonence of Right belongyng to a noble and true Christen Lady
called lady Isabet lascarina coming and dscendynge of the noble blood of
Co^(...) (...)obyll Lady and true inheretoure of the said Castle and by great
power and violence of the said myscreauntes violently (...)d and put out / and
the husbond and Lord of the said lady in mayntaynynge the faith like a noble
true and faithful (...) of Criste was there slain with a multitude and number
of christian people most cruelly. And the said myscreau^tes and (...)es not
being content with the great murder nor with vsurpyng and spoylyng of me^nys
goods but always perseuering (...) great and outragyous Tyranny deuouryd
spoiled and rauysshed many and diverse christian virgyns and Maidens (...)e a
way with them both children and virgyns there left a live / and in especial
after that they had most tyrauntly mur(...) and slain the lord husbonde and
knight of the said christian and noble Lady Isabet lascarina and spoiled the
said lady of (...) (...)oodses and treasures and violently took her by
strenght with them and her.iiij. children / that is to say.ii. sons and.ii.
(...)ers she being with child and inprysoned them most cruelly / and put the
said lady with her children to great Ransom (...)ute that is to say to the
Su^me of a Thousand and.iii. hundredth Ducates. And the said Lady was let out
of Prison to (...)e and gather together the said Ransom and she has left
her said.iiii. children there in prison for pleage unto the (...)e said su^me
of money be paid the which is inpossyble to her for to pay without help of
god / and good christian people (...) has lost all her moveable goods her
Castellis herytages lands and possessions and has no more recomforte but only
(...)d in good christian people. Wherefore our said holy fader dewely informyd of
this pyteous things aforesaid and consyde(...) that the Turk does enforce
himself from day to day to destroy and confound Cristendome / and utterly
to set at (...) and put out of memory the name of our lord Ihesu criste. And
also consyderinge the great doloure and marterdome that (...)ffee and daily
endure Impossyble for any erthly creatur to endure without pyteous death. Our
holy fader ye Pope (...)nge the premysses has opened the treasoure of our
mother holy Church that is the merytes of the passion of our lord (...)criste
and has given and grauated to all them / that of their charity gives of their
goods after their faculte or power (...)lpe or socoure the said lady and her
children as often and as many times as they so do / they shall obtain and
receive (...) (...)eres and.v. lentis of pardon and Indulgence of penance to
them enjoined as more openly apperyth in ye bull origynall.

(...) our said holy Fader the pope of his most habundant and gracious mind
has given in commandment and by the (...)all origynall straytly commands
all Archebyssoppes bysshoppis / Abbottis pryoures / and prelates of the Church
with (...) vicaris and curatis of what degree someuer they be within the Realm
of England that under pain of suspencion (...) of them publych or cause to be
publisshyd the said Bull and the effect of ye same as often and as many times as
they or any (...)n shall be resonably by the said Lady Isabet Iascarina or by
any of her procuratours required and desired in this behalf* (...)oreouer our
sovereign lord king Harry the.viii. By the grace of god king of England and
of France and lord of (...) aforesaid wylleth as it apperyth by his
commandment under his most gracious letters the said gracis perdons andIu
(...)nces to be publysshed through out this his Realm of England and that the
alms and deuocions of the good christian peo(...) gaderid for to give unto the
said pore Lady or her procuratours that shall gader in her name for to help
and pay the fore(...) Ransom and for to help our christian brether the which
end with so much pain and mysery where as they be detayned and (...)tyuyte at
this present time and has been taken for constancye abiding in the faith and
susteynyng the same of our lord (...) criste our savior and redemer.

(...)so the most reverend Fader in god my lord Archebysshop of Caunterbery
Legate and prymate of England has ouersene (...)tted and approbate the said
writing and Bull of our holy fader the Pope. And has given and granted by
writing (...) this Seall to all the said helpers for every time.xl. days of
pardon. And has commanded every person and curate with (...) prouynce to
declare the said indulgence in their Chirches. And favorably to suffer the said
Isabet or her proctour to ga(...) (...)d receive the Alms of the christian
people.

(...)o the bishop of saint Dauis has given and granted.xl. days of perdon.

(...)o other certain Cardinallis patriarchs and holy faders tenderly
considering the p^myssis and tyranny and worouges don / to the (...)ady and her
children against the christian faith of their good and gracious mind has
Enlarged the grau^tes of our holy / fader (...)open and has given for ye
redemption of the said lady and her children to all faithful people that of
their charity does socoure (...)e to ward their redemption or captivity
certain pardon and indulgence as often times as they give any thing there
(...)gere after follows.

(...)ste Sebastian Gylbart doctor of law ye reret fader in god Bishop
ypolite cardinal of Rome chaunceler.xl. days (...)don of pe^naunce Enjoined

(...)m Mich tell Acchebisshp and prymate of Acquetanye.xl. days of pardon for
penance enjoined.

(...)em archebisshop of Lyon^^.xl. days of pardon for penance enjoined.

(...)em George Acchebisshop of kothenage.xl. days of pardon for penance
Enjoined.

(...)em the order (...) prays daily for them that socour or help her and
her children and gives any almysse (...)de the redemption.

(...)n the reverent fader in god the Patriarch of Irusalem. And also the
patriarch of Constantynobyll has given and grau(...) all them that help the
said Lady and children.xl. year of pardon.

(...) the Pope (...) most gracious (...) that all manner of perdons by tofore
graun^^^ (...) fader head in buyldinge and (...) of the mother Church of Rome
(...) to have no place this holy grant (...) Indulgence granted to the said
Lady (...)


