NEPENTHES, OR THE VERTVES OF TOBACCO BY William Barclay Mr. of Art, and Doctor
of Physic.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by ANDRO HEART, and are to be sold at his shop on the North
side of the high street, a little beneath the Cross. Anno Dom. 1614.

A merry Epistle of the Author to the Printer
GOod Master Heart, I have sent you here a parasiticall Pamphlet, which, I am
sure, will be as far ben at every banquet as Gnatho himself or Pseudolus. It
will be a meet piece for Tipplers at Tavernes, and for Pedlers to help away
with their rotten Tobacco. So that by this work, I fear I shall be better
loved amongst fine scoalers then famous scholars. But if I find favor in this
Essay, I shall send you shortly Godwilling a scholasticall subject, and a
curious little work: fit only for those which aspire to the top of Pindus. The
one will bring to your shop the common sort of people, the other the most
learned, I deliver this Scottish brood unto you, Peraes and libram, make it
your own if you think it worthy, and esteem me so long as I live also

Your own from my heart W. Barclay Doct. Med.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL PATRICKE BARCLAY son and heir to Sr. PATRICKE
BARCLAY of Tolly Knight WILLIAM BARCLAY his Uncle D. M. wishes health and
happiness.
Very worshipful and my dear Nephew, I cannot but I must summond you, the
process being in matter of Tobacco, as a witness to testify the worth
thereof, and since you are charged, the custom requires that you have a just
copy of the Libell, which I present here unto you, not so much that you may
depose what you know of the virtues thereof, as that you may learn by this
discourse to continue with discretion in the practice of this precious Plant,
to the end you may eschew by precepts of Art the dulefull heritage of a
natural and paternall disease, and that you may bliss the house of your
nativity with a long, holy and wholesome life, and that house feel some
consolation by the counsel and care of him who being a bough of that old and
vnfading tree, shall endeavor to bring forth such fruit as may both profit
and pleasure all the branches and buddes thereof, and you before all as the
principal stock, which I wish may live longer then many long living Oaks, to
the ornament of our race and the comfort of

Your most affectionat and most seruiable Uncle W. Barclay Doctor of Medicine.

NEPENTHES, OR THE VERTVES OF TOBACCO BY WILLIAM BARCLAY D. OF MEDICINE AND
MASTER OF ART.
HERCULES to obey the commandment and will of IVNO, busied himself to
overthrow the most famous monsters of his time, his Arms were a bag and a
club. A most worthy Lady, and, if I durst say so, the very IVNO of our I Will
has commanded me to destroy some monstrous Diseases, so that to imitate the
most chiualrous Chiftan of the world, I have armed my self with a box for
his bag, and a pipe for his club: a box to conserve my Tobacco, and a pipe
to use it, by those two Godwilling, to overcome many maladies. If the hosts of
such Diseases do not betray my endeuoures to their hating and hated guests by
not using or abusing my weapons. But before I enter in the list, I must whet as
it were my wits with these two points, First why do I treat of a matter so
often handled by so many, so odious to Princes, so pernicious to sundry, and
so costly to all?

Secondly why do I as another CLODIVS reveal mysteria bonae Deae, and
profane the secrets of Physic? I answer that a good matter is not the worse
to be maintained by many: and Plus vident oculi quam oculus. As concerning the
hatred of Princes, one man's meat is another man's poison. The wine prince of
liquors hates vehemently colworts, and yet beer, aile, sider water, oil,
honey, and all other liquors do well agree with colworts. The king of France
drinks never Orleans wine notwithstanding his subjects do love it well.

I know sundry men that have such Antipathie with butter that they dare not
smell it. It has been pernicious to sundry I grant it, so has wine, so has
bread, so has gold, so has land, and what so wholesome thing is that cannot be
turned to abuse? If it be costly use the less of it. What? is not Rheubarbe
coastly? is not Musk coastly? is not Ambergreese coastly? As touching the
second point of my revealing this secret of Physic, I answer, I mean but to
reform the harm which proceeds of the abuse, and to show to my country men
that I am more willing to pleasure them then to profit my self, neither did I
swear to conceal that point when in a robe of purpure I wedded the
metamorphosed DAPHN^. It rests now to unfold what moved me to entitule this
treatise Nepenthes, because it has certain mellifluous delicacie, which
deliteth the senses, and spirits of man with a mindful oblivion, insomuch that
it makes and induces (...) the forgetting of all sorrows and miseries. And
there is such hostility between it and melancholy, that it is the only
medicament in the world ordained by nature to entertain good company:
insomuch that it works never so well, as when a it is given from man to man,
as a pledge of friendship and amity

The country which God has honored and blessed with this happy and holy
herb, does call it in their native language Petum, the Spaniards, who have
given it the right of naturalitie, in their soil term it Tobacco, the
Frenchmen which have received it in their country as in a colonie call it
Nicotian, in this our I Will of Britain, as in all other maritime parts, we use
the Spanish name of Tobacco. But esteeming it worthy of a more lofty name, I
have chosen for gossip the fair and famous Helena, and given to her the honor
to name this most profitable plant Nepenthes.

Albeit this herb disdaines not to be nourished in many Gardens in Spain, in
Italy, in France, Flanders, Germany and Britain, yet nevertheless only
that which is fostred in India, and brought home by Mariners and Traffiquers is
to be used, as after you shall hear the reason is.

Non omnis fert omnia tell us. But avarice and greedines of gain have moved
the Merchants to apparel some European plants with Indian coats, and to
enstall them in ^^ops as righteous and legittime Tobacco. Some others have
Tobacco from Florida indeed, but because either it is exhausted of
spiritualitie, or the radical humor is spent, and wasted, or it has gotten
moisture by the way, or it has been dried for expedition in the Sun, or
carried too negligently, they sophisticate and farde the same in sundry sorts
with black spice, Galanga, aqua vitae, Spanish wine, Anise seeds, oil of
Spicke and such like.

So that the most fine, best, and purest is that which is brought to Europe in
leaves, and not rolled in puddings, as the English Nauigators first brought
home.

The finest Tobacco is that which pearceth quickly the odorat with a sharp
aromaticke smell, and tickleth the tongue with acrimonie, not unpleasant to the
taste, from whence that which draws most water is most virtuous, whether the
substance of it be chewed in the mouth, or the smoke of it received. Skillie
tasters of wine, Bacchus butlers, know the wine Odore* fapore color.

So they which traffic daily with Tobacco do know it by these same three
senses. In a Goose there is nothing which does not serve either for meat or
medicine, ^o not so much as the doung: But in Tobacco there is nothing which is
not medicin, the root, the stalk, the leaves, the seeds, the smoke, the
ashes, and to be more particular, Tobacco may serve for the use of man either
green or dry, of green Tobacco may be made Syrups, waters, oils, unguents,
plasters, or the leaf of it self, may be used mortified at the fire to cure
the asthma, or shortness of breath, dissolve obstructions, heal the old
cough, burning ulcers, wounds, migraim, Colicke, suffocation of the mother: and
many other diseases, yea almost all diseases. If the Romans durst have wanted
so many years the help of Physic, using for all diseases only Colwoorts.
Truly I think the Romans might want now all Physicians eternally, if they
knew the virtue of Tobacco, seeing the spring of al their diseases is
defluxio^s and cathars for which the only antidot is Tobacco. I entreat here
the Lector of this treatise, to have me excused if I do not set down in special
the form and manner to prepare such remedies of green Tobacco, as I have
mentioned, for I would wish to do with Tobacco as Aristoteles did with his
Physics, for he wrote to his scholar Alexander, that he had published and not
published his physical Philosophy: So I must assay to say, that I have
revealed and not revealed the quintessence of Tobacco. As concerning the dry
Tobacco, it may be used in infusion, in decoction, in substance, in smoke, in
salt. Touching the infusion and decoction, because they are as dangerous and
more, than Elleborus albus, or antimonium, I will forbear to particularize,
remitting the practice of that part to the presence of some prudent Physician,
except it be in some desperate case of unknown poison. As for Tobacco in
substance holde^ in the mouth, as an apophlegmatisme, or medicin to draw fleame
out of the head by the mouth, I avow it to be one of the best and surest
remedies in the world against Paralisie, epilepsie or apoplexy, that is, the
falling ill, and Vertigo Idiopathica, the passion of dizzines in the head by
wind, that ever was found out. These are four of the most incurable diseases
that besiege the brain of man: for understanding of the which cure I must
remember the Lector, that since the days of Hippocrates, and in his days
there have been invented five sundry sorts of vacuations to void this our
body of filthy corruption whereof it is the continual harbinger, that is,
phelebotomie, vmitio^ purging by the stool, by vrins, and by sweating. Now in
the latter days has been invented a sixth way or manner of purging, which is
also by the mouth, not vomiting, but spitting: The only medicament which was
wont to procure such spitting, or slavering, was Hydrargyrum, quicke-siluer:
but now of new is found out this divine Tobacco, which if it be rightly used,
is a sovereign help, and a present purgation, and approved preservative
against the foresaid diseases, as also against Arthritis, the gowt, Lithiasis,
the stone in reins or bledder, and Hydropisie. But because it is said that
Tobacco and Hydrargyrum, work both after one sort, It shall not be amiss to
speak somewhat of the one and the other: First, there is no vegetall in the
world, has such affinity with any mineral, as has Tobacco with Mercure, or
quicke-siluer, for as Mercure purges, (...) above and under, being taken at
the mouth, so does Tobacco, and as Mercure being applied exteriourlie, purges
all the body by slauering, so does Tobacco being holden in the mouth. As the
best Physicians, Philosophers and Alchimists that ever were, can not agree upon
the qualities, neither first nor second of Mercure, some say it is both hot
and cold, both dry and moist, that it can bind and loose, that it can
rarifie and thicken, and in a word, that it is a Protheus, or a Magician. So
Tobacco is hot, because it has acrimonie, it is cold because it is narcoticke
and stupefactiue, it makes drunken, and refreshes, it makes hungry and
fills, it makes thirsty, and quenches thirst: Finally to bring man to
health, it changes as many forms as Iuppiter does shapes to convey himself
to his Mistress: This difference only there is, that Mercure being applied to
any part of the body, provoke spitting: But Tobacco purges by slauer only,
being taken in the mouth in substance or in smoke. The Alchimists vaunt that
they are able to draw out of every thing Mercure, sulphur and salt, but
truly out of nothing can they be sooner or better separated, then out of
Tobacco: I think that I durst be bold to say, that Tobacco is the Mercure of
vegetals, and Mercure is the Tobacco of minerals. Now to return to our
purpose, to wit, to the cure and preservation of an army of maladies, Tobacco
must be used after this manner. Take of leaf Tobacco as much as being folded
together, may make a round ball of such bigness that it may fill the patients
mouth, and inclyne his face downward toward the ground, keeping the mouth
open, not moving any whit with his tongue, except now and then to waken the
medicament, there shall flow such a flood of water from his brain and his
stomach, and from all the parts of his body that it shall be a wonder. This he
must do fasting in the morning, and if it be for preservation, and the body
very cacochyme, or full of evil humors, he must take it once a week,
otherwise once a month: But if it be to cure the Epilepsie or Hydropisie once
every day. Thus have I used Tobacco my self, and thus used Tobacco Iean Greis
a venerable old man at Nantes in the French Britain, who lived whill he was six
score years of age, and who was known for the only refuge of the poor
afflicted soldiers of Venus when they were wounded with the French Pickes, I
should have said Pockes. Thus much for the use of Tobacco in substance. As
concerning the smoke, it may be taken more frequently, and for the said
effects, but always fasting, and with empty stomach, not as the English
abusers do, which make a smoke-boxe of their skull, more fit to be carried under
his arm that sells at Paris dunoir a noircir to black men's shoes, then to
carry the brain of him that can not walk, can not ride except the Tobacco
Pype be in his mouth, I chanced in company on a time with an English merchant
in Normandy between Rowen and New-hauen. This fellow was a merry man, but at
every house he must have a Cole to kindle his Tobacco: the Frenchmen wondered,
and I laughed at his intemperancie. But there is one William Anslop an honest
man dwelling in Bishops-gate street, hard within the gate that sells the best
Tobacco in England, and uses it most discreetly. Because the matter of smoke
taking is controuerted and disputed, I will first decide this question of
smoke before I enter to show the commodity which proceeds of it.
Suffumigation or receiving of smoke, is not a new invented remedy, it is an
old and well approved form of medicine in many diseases, Hippocrates in his
book of the diseases of women teaches many kinds of smoke which women
should receive and specially of many unsavory and stinking things at the nose
and the mouth, to repress and thrust back the mother in the suffocation, a
fearful and dangerous disease. The most expert Physicians in our days admit
with one consent the smoke of tussilago to be received at the mouth, by those
which are ptisicke, or asthmaticke or have the cough of cold. Gordon a learned
old Physician, the Vade mecum of practitians, ordains Trochisques of
Ambergreis, Musk, and other Ingredients to be used after the form as we take
the smoke of Tobacco for the Epilepsie. In the book called Aphorismi
tonsorum, or Schola Salerni, there is a suffumigation made of Leek seeds, and
white Insquia^ seeds for the tooth ache to be received at the mouth. Leonardo
Fioravanti an Italian practitian commends for deafness a suffumigation made
with cinaber, frankincense and myrrh, to be taken at the mouth. Consider now
good Lector, and repeat again, Shall Hippocrates permit the smoke of stinking
feathers, and of old rotten shoes from a Coablers dunghill? shall other
Physicians permit the smoke of tussilago? shall Gordon prescribe the aromatical
smoke of musk and ambre? shall Schola Salerni permit Insquiam to be incensed in
the mouth which is a venomous plant, shall FIORAVANTI command the smoke of
cinabre, which is a present poison to infect the brain? and shall we only
banish the poor Tobacco which has more virtue for all these foresaid
Diseases, then each of the forenamed things has for their several sores. If
the mother vex and torment a woman, the smoke of Tobacco either above or
under, shall ease her more, then feathers or lether. If thou be ptisicke, if
thou be asthmaticke, if thou be urged to cogh through defluxion, the smoke of
Tobacco is better then tussilago: if the rage of toothache excarnificate the
goomes, Tobacco is better then Insquiam: if there be sounding in the ears, it
is fitter the^ cinabre. I ad further, that amongst so many thousands which use
and abuse Tobacco at al occasions without observation of any physical precept,
there are very sew found that can ascribe their death to Tobacco: so that if
Tobacco were used physically and with discretion there were no medicament in
the world comparable to it. Now to return from whence I did digress to show
the commodities of Tobacco, I lay here as a ground to build upon, that by
reason of the situation of man's head, which is above all the other members of
the body, the most part of diseases flow from the head, as from a fountain, so
that Tobacco going immediately to the brain, it not only augmenteth and
refreshes the animal spirits, but dries the sourse of innumerable diseases,
and fortifieth the brain. So that there is no man but may receive commodity
by the use of Tobacco, except only those which have their brain dry and hot,
which is a temperament unnatural to the brain, yea and a dangerous disease,
and the next degree to reauing to fury, to madness. I know that every one
will be curious to ask me how he shall know a hot and dry brain. GALEN in
his book which he calls ars parva, declares at large the signs of all
intemperies, yet to satisfy the minds o^ curious Lectors, it is evident that
his brain (...) hot and dry who sleeps very little or nothing who reaueth
waking, and forms monstrous dreams sleeping, and whose nose distilleth
nothing. It were a world of work to specify in particular all the diseases,
and symptoms that are helped or prevented by Tobacco, but I will only set
down those which I know either by mine own experience, or by the faithful
report of learned Physicians or of credible patients. I will begin at the
Epilepsie which is called by HIPPOCRATES morbus sacer, the falling sickness, and
this plant is called by some nations herba sacra: then after legittime
preparation, and such diet as a skilful Physician shall prescribe, let the
patient be purged with the infusion of Tobacco in hidromel, in the strained
liquor of this infusion dissolve four grains of the salt made of Tobacco and
give it to the patient to drink: herafter, having a cauter in his neck, he
shall take every day the smoke of a pipe of fine Tobacco fasting in the morning,
and once every third day he shall hold in his mouth the apophlegmatisme of
Tobacco in substance.

Now because this disease has some occult venom and malign quality, the
old Physicians by long experience have found out some things which help this
disease by an indeclarable virtue, and for this cause he shall take the smoke
of this confected Tobacco every day.

Take ambregreese, the seed of peonie, and stirax, of every one half an
ounce, of musk twenty grains, of lignum aloes the weight of three crowns,
of magisterium cranii humani an ounce, of the sowing thereof, half an ounce,
of fine Tobacco as much as of them all, make of all these a gross powder, and
take the smoke of it every morning, and thus the epilepticke shall attain to
his health rather then by the galls of dogs and superstitious characters used
by a number of ignorant deboshed Vagabondes and Montebanckes. The Hydropisie is
one of the ordinary customers that comes to crave health at the shop of
Tobacco, and specially if it be holden in the patients mouth in substance, or
if he take now and then of the salt thereof, and every day a pipe or two. The
Arthritis or gowt, and gravel are prevented prettily, because the antecedent
cause is taken away: it preserves from the toothach: it cures the migraim,
the colicke, the cogh, the cold: It stays growing fat: it is the antidote
of Hypochondriacke melancholy, it prepares the stomach for meat: it makes a
clear voice, it makes a sweet breath, it clears the sight, it opneth the
ears, it puts away the punaise, and opens the passage of the nose, it is
the nourse of the lights, it comfort nerves, and taken in sirupe there is no
obstruction that can abide it: it is present relief against the most part of
poisons: And in few words it is the princess of physical plants. To conclude
this discourse I must excuse here my plainness and simplicity with this
caveat to the curious Lector, that albeit the never too much commended Tobacco
be of sufficiency to cure many diseases: yet it is not of efficacy in all
persons, in all seasons, in all temperaments, but it must be used by the
direction of some expert and prudent Physician. There was on a time a diseased
Gentleman, who for to recover his health sent for a Physician, the which using
prudently and artificially his cure, the Gentle man became well, and because he
was subject to that disease often in the year, he remarked well how the
Physician had prepared his potion, what herbs he had decocted, what simples
he had infused, what electuaries he had dissolved, how much of every one,
how long they seethed, or steeped, at what a clock he did minister it, how
long he fasted thereafter, and at the next assault of the sickness he took
the same potion, observing all Circumstances, but was nothing the better: he
sent again for Master Doctor, and inquired what the matter should be, seeing
he was diseased with the same malady, he had taken the same potion, he used
it very rightly with all the circumstances and observations, he had not omitted
one jote, No said the Physician you lacked a principal point, a very necessary
Circumstance and an essential Cause, that is, you received not the potion from
the hand of a Physician: for if the patient, as experience teaches begins
to feel the first hope of his health at the arrival of his Physician: how
much more shall he be alleuated when he gives him out of his own hand the
Cup which contains the Covenant of his restitution, the earnest of his
Welfare, and the weapon to destroy his disease. Happy were the land that had
no need of Physicians, happy the land which having need of them has of the
best sort, and happy were the Physicians whose lote were to come in the land
where the Law of good King REVTHER were curiously kept, that no man under
pain of death should exercise physic that could not show a public
testimony of his lawful Calling. But I must say of Physic as a holy Father
said of the holy Scripture, hanc delirus senex, hanc garrula anus, hanc
sophista verbosus puts in practice, and is not punished. God save the
Country from diseases, and God save the diseased from such Doctors

FINIS.
To the favorable Lector health.
THere were some pages which I thought not meet to leave empty, good Lector,
either for thy sake, or for Tabaccoes sake, or for mine own sake: for thy
sake, because I weary not to talk with thee: for Tabaccoes sake, because the
worth of it deserves some verses: for mine own sake, because I never having
sleeped in Parnassus, but being a valley Poet, I persuade my self that my
verse, shall be read more for the merits of the maetter, then for the value of
the Work^man. Therefore I address my self first to gaze against a craig, from
whence some musical influence may bed^w my brain.

Vt sic repent Poeta prodeam.
To his good and old friend, M. Alexander Craig,
CRaig if thou knows the virtues of this plant,
Why do thou dye thy quill in Ink of blame?
If thou knows not, for to supply thy want,
Why follows thou the voice of faining fame?
Is it not slander to this plant and thee,
To speak of it so poeticallie?
To his good Cousing M. John Hay, of Ranasse.
HAnibal had a house in Bythinie,
Builded after his crafty own conceat,
On every side a door was privily,
For to preserve his life and staggering state,
But when the Romans came for to defait
The only one of whom they stood in doubt,
Hanibal would not fight against his fate,
Knowing the doors were known and siegde about,
Good Cousing Hay, the soul is Hanibal,
The house with many doors it is the head,
Death and disease as Romans siege them all
To suffocat the life without remead:
Except divine Tobacco make defense,
Keep open doors, and raise the siege from thenc^
To the abusers of Tobacco.
WHy do you thus abuse this heavenly plant
The hope of health, the fuel of our life?
Why do you waste it without fear of want,
Since fine and true Tobacco is not ryfe?
Old Euclio w^nt foull water for to spair,
And stop the bellows not to waste the Air.
To my Lord the Bishop of Murray.
THe stately rich late conquered Indian plains,
Foster a plant, the princes of all plants.
Which Portugal after peril and pains,
To Europe brought, as it most justly vants:
This plant at home the people and Priests assure,
Of his goodwill, whom they as God adore,
Both here and there it works wondrous cure,
And has such heavenly virtue hid in store.
A stranger plant shipwracked in our coast,
Is come to help this cold phlegmatic soil,
Yet can not live for calumny and boast,
In danger daily of some greater broyle:
My Lord this sacred herb which never offend^t
Is forcde to crave your favor to defend it.
To the most accomplished, and true Philoclea of this Isle, L. E. L. L. F.
SOme do this plant with odious crimes disgrace,
And call the poor Tobacco homicid,
They say that it, O what a monstrous case!
Forestals the life, and kills man in the seed,
It smoaketh, blacketh, burns all the brain,
It dryes the moisture treasure of the life,
It cures not, but stupifies the pain,
It cuts our days before Atropus knife.
Good Lady look not to these rauing speiches,
You know by proof that all these blames are lies,
Forged by scuruie lewd unlearned Leiches.
As time has taught and practice that all tryes.
Tobacco neither alters health nor hew,
Ten thousand thousands know that it is true.
To his very worshipful, an^ dear Cousing, the Lord of Boine.
THe Gut which Vulcan forged in his ire,
To punish those which follow Venus way,
Can find nothing to quench that flaming fire,
So fit as fine Tobacco sundry say,
For proof of which great Pillar of my kin
Tell what thou know: for to conceal were sin

