A NEW-YEARES GIFT FOR ENGLISH CATHOLICS, OR A Brief and clear Explication
of the New Oath of Allegiance.

By E. I. Student in Divinity; For a more full Instruction, and appeasement of
the consciences of English Catholics, concerning the said OATH, then has
been given them by I. E. Student in Divinity, who compiled the Treatise of
the PRELATE and the PRINCE.

1. PET. 2. Fear God, Honor the King.

christogram I H S.


MATTHEW. 22. Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's: and the things that
are Gods to God.

With license of Superiors. 1620.

A BRIEF SVMMARIE of what is contained in this TREATISE.
1. FIrst, An Admonition to English Catholics, to examine their consciences
exactly concerning this New Oath of Allegiance: for that by refusing the same
if it be lawful and ministered by good and full authority, (as this Treatise
conuinceth it to be) they hazard not only their temporal estates, but also
their eternal salvation, by disobeying and resisting lawful authority, and
the ordinance of Almighty God.

2. Secondly, are set down a Copy of the new Oath of Allegiance, The 13.
Priests Protestation; Mr. John Colletons Petition wherein he confirms his
former Protestation: and the Acknowledgement of Mr. Thomas Green, (a Religious
Priest of the order of Saint Benedict, and Professor of Divinity) concerning
his opinion of the said Oath of Allegiance, with certain notes and
Observations added by the Author to the said Protestation, and Acknowledgement.

3. Thirdly, Certain general Observations are set down, to know first, the
nature and conditions of every lawful Oath. Secondly, what rules are to be
observed for the understanding and interpreting of the true sense and meaning
of any ambiguous word or sentence contained in any Law, and consequently in
this Oath of Allegiance established by a Parliamentall Law. Thirdly, what was
the intent and meaning of his Majesty and the Parliament, in framing and
proposing this new and unwonted Oath of Allegiance, devised upon occasion of
that unwonted Barbarous and Deuillish Conspiracy of the Powder-Traytours; to
wit, not to make a distinction, betwixt Protestants and Catholics, but between
Catholics and Catholics, in point of their loyalty and civil obedience,
especially concerning the Popes authority to practice the deposition of
Princes, which was the ground of that damnable Powder Treason. Fourthly, to
know upon what assured grounds the Popes authority to depose Princes, or to
practice their deposition, may not only be barely denied, but also abiured as
damnable; impious, and heretical: to wit, for that it is a controversy among
learned Catholics, whether the Pope has authority to deprive Princes or no:
and consequently, that it is open injustice in the Pope; and manifest Treason
in the Subject to attempt the dispossessing of any Sovereign Prince, by virtue
of this pretended authority and claim, so long as this Controversy remains
a foot, and is not decided by a lawful Judge, and who without all doubt and
Controversy is known so to be. Fifthly, page 64. it is showed, that the Pope
is no lawful Judge to end and decide this Controversy concerning his own
pretended authority to deprive Sovereign Princes; for that it is a
Controversy among Learned Catholics, and approved by very many famous
Prelates, Cardinals, and Doctors cited by the Author, that the Pope, without
the consent and approbation of a lawful and undoubted general Council, has
not authority to decide, determine, or define any doctrinal question at all,
and much less in his own particular cause, as is this Controversy betwixt
Him and Christian Princes: and that therefore although he should take upon him
to decide this question, yet the Controversy would still remain a foot, and
be undecided as it was before.

4. Fourthly, In the first eight Chapters it is clearly showed, that there is
not any one Clause of the Oath, which wants either Verity, Justice, or
Judgment: and that therefore English Catholics not only may lawfully, but
also are bound in conscience to take it, when they are urged thereunto by the
Magistrate, whom the Prince and State has appointed to tender the same:
otherwise they resist lawful authority, and the Ordinance of God, which
whosoever resist purchase to themselves damnation. Romans 13.

5. Fifthly, In the ninth and last Chapter are clearly answered the Popes
declaratiue Breues, forbidding English Catholics to take the Oath, for that it
contains many things, which are manifestly repugnant to faith and salvation;
which Breues therefore do not make, but only suppose the Oath to be
unlawful, as containing in it some manifest falsehood or injustice: and
therefore, abstracting from the Popes Breues, some particular clause of the
Oath must be proved to be unlawful, which this Treatise does evidently
convince to be untrue. And first in this Chapter it is showed, that it is no
disobedience or irreuerence, not to obey. such declaratiue Breues, seeing that
they are grounded upon one of these two (or rather upon both) false
suppositions: to wit, that either the doctrine for the Popes power to deprive
Princes is certain, of Faith, and out of all Controversy, and the contrary
not approved by learned Catholics, which supposition is manifestly false: or
else that the Popes power to excommunicate, to bind and loose, and to absolve
from Oaths in general, and consequently his Spiritual authority is denied in
the Oath, which also is no less untrue: and that therefore English Catholics
not only may lawfully and without any disobedience or irreuerence, but also are
bound in conscience not to obey them, considering that they are so prejudicial
to themselves, so scandalous to the Catholic Roman Religion, which they
profess, and so injurious to their Soueraign Prince, who, being in real
possession of his Kingdom, cannot upon any controuersed Title or Power with
out open injustice be dispossessed thereof. Secondly, it is showed, that
albeit diverse Popes have since the time of Pope Gregory the VII. challenged to
themselves authority to deprive Sovereign Princes, yet they cannot be truly
said, to have been for any little time in possession of this their pretended
authority, right and claim: for that they have ever been resisted and
contradicted by Christian Princes and Subjects in this their pretended right
and claim, whereas, to possess authority, right, or claim to any thing, it
is necessary, according to the approved doctrine of Molina, and Lessius both
Jesuits, and of all Divines and Lawyers, that it be without resistance and
contradiction of the adverse part: but one may truly and really possess
corporal things, as Lands, Houses, Kingdoms, although he, that pretends to
have right to the same, yea and perchance has true right thereunto, contradict
and resist never so much. Thirdly, it is showed, that howsoever any man may
under pretense of following a probable opinion, think himself excused in
conscience and in the sight of God (wherewith Princes in their Tribunals do
not meddle, but leave men's consciences to the judgment of God, the only
searcher of all men's hearts) by concurring with the Pope to the deposing and
dispossessing of his Sovereign Prince; yet considering that it is not only
probable, but also most certain, that he is excused in conscience and in the
sight of God, by defending his Prince against such damnable, and traiterous
practices, which are grounded at the most upon a probable power, title, and
claim, and also that he cannot be excused from formal Treason in the
external Court, both Ecclesiastical and Secular of his Sovereign Prince, who
is in actual possession of his Kingdom, and cannot without open injustice be
dispossessed upon any uncertain and controuersed power, claim, or title
though it were never so probable; it is evident, that those Subjects might
justly be accounted worse then mad, that would in such damnable and traiterous
practices concur with the Pope to the dispossessing of their Sovereign
Prince, under pretense of a power, or title, which, even in speculation, and
abstracting from practice, can be at the most but probable.

6. Lastly, are set down, First, the Oath of France, or the first Article of
the lower House of Parliament, wherein of two hundred Deputies for the third
Estates were but six Protestants: Secondly, two Arrests or Decrees of the
Parliament of Paris, forbidding under pain of Treason Cardinal Bellarmines
Book against Barckley, and Suarez Book against our Kings Majesty's
Premonition, and thirdly another Decree of the said Parliament, ordayning
likewise that no person of what quality or condition soever do teach the said
doctrine of deposing Princes as problematicall or probable. All which Decrees
are proved to be agreeable to truth and justice, and that Christian Princes, by
virtue of their temporal power, have good and full authority, both to forbid
the teaching, maintayning, and publishing of all unnecessary doctrines and
positions, be they never so probable, as the teaching and publishing of the
same tends to the subversion of States-and to the disturbance of the public
peace in the Civil Common, wealth, and is dangerous to the Crowns and lives
of temporal Princes; and also to punish with temporal punishments the
teachers, maintayners, and publishers of the same.

AN ADMONITION TO ENGLISH Catholics.
1. COnsider with your selves, (Dear Countrymen) how greatly this new Oath of
Allegiance concerns you all, not only in your temporal states and liberty,
which in conscience you are bound to regard, and not wilfully to cast away,
(and the more if you have a charge of Wife and Children, for whom in nature you
are obliged to provide) but chiefly in your souls health, which above all
temporal things in this World you are bound to prefer. For what does it
profit a man, if he gain the whole World, and sustain the damage of his
soul? Mat. 16.
Now if this new Oath be truly an Oath of temporal Allegiance, and ministered
by lawful authority, (as this Treatise does convince it to be) doubtless
you incur the danger of eternal damnation if you refuse it, by disobeying
and resisting the just commandment of lawful authority, and the Ordinance of
Almighty God, from whom all power and authority does proceed. For he that
resists power Romans 13.
(or authority) resists the Ordinance of God; And they that resist purchase
to themselves damnation.

2. First therefore, it behooves you that are Laymen, to examine diligently
this matter, and not to be led hoodwinkd into the pit both of spiritual and
temporal misery, especially by blind and ignorant guides, who neither
understand, nor are desirous to know the true grounds of this important
Controversy, and therefore can hardly be drawn for the informing of your
consciences to descend with you in particular to the examination of the
lawfulnes, or unlawfulness of every Branch of this Oath, which many of them,
(I speak with grief, and not without Book) have not so much as ever read, but
to cloak their ignorance under color of Zeal and Devotion, without any
further examining, they only cry out to you in general terms, The Church, the
Pope, the Rock is that, which good Catholics ought to cleave unto; not
knowing themselves, what authority is spiritual and due to the Pope or
Church, and what authority is temporal and due to temporal Princes, and that
the Pope is not the Church, but only the chief member thereof; and that the
Popes opinion, and consequently his Declaratiue Breues, when they are grounded
either upon false suppositions, or else only upon his opinion, are not the
Rock, whereon Catholics ought to build their eternal salvation; and lastly,
not considering, that many times when Popes and Princes have been and shall
be in opposition, the Popes both have bin, may lawfully be, and also ought to
be resisted. As the resistance, which Philip the Fair made to Pope Boniface
the VIII. (who deprived the said King, and gave his Kingdom to Genebrard. lib.
4. ad annum 1294.
Albertus the Emperor, and declared, that he accounted them for Heretics, who
did not believe that the said King was subject to him in Spiritualls and
Temporalls) Vignerius ad annum.
and the resistance, which Lewis the XII. made to Pope Julius the II. (by whom
he was deprived, and his Kingdom Genebrard. lib. 4. ad annum 1503.

Guicciardin. lib. 11. hist.

Richeome in Apoleget. cap. 24 25.

See Brerely in the Preface of his Protestants Apology, etc. Sec. 20. 21. and
seq.


given in pray to any that could take it) is well commended by Lewis Richeome
Provincial of the Jesuits, and proposed for an example to be imitated; yea
and he shows, that whenever any Bishop of Rome should offend the King of
France, as those Kings were offended by those Bishops, the Jesuits in such an
occasion would do that which good Clergiemen, and good Frenchmen together
with the said King Philip, and Lewis did in those times, who defended their
rights against those Popes, Boniface and Julius, without any irreuerence to the
Sea Apostolic. And therefore, I beseech you, (Dear Contrymen) to take heed
upon what guides you rely for the directing of your souls in these important
affairs, and remember that Admonition of our Savior, Mat. 15.
Blind they are, and guides of the blind. And if the blind be guide to the
blind, both fall into the ditch.

3. Secondly, you that are Priests, and have taken upon you to guide others in
the way to salvation, and ought to be always ready to satisfy every one that
asks you a reason of that faith which is in you, 1. Pet. 3
if you think in your consciences the Oath to be lawful, and ministered by
good and full authority, you ought to take great heed, that your souls be
not defiled, nor your consciences stained with some worldly respect, and that
neither hope of gain or preferment, nor fear of want or disgrace keep you
back from giving warning to those, whom you are bound to guide, direct, and
instruct, to beware of the danger, which they are like to fall into by
resisting the Ordinance of God, if they refuse the Oath, when it is tendered
them by lawful authority; lest that you foreseeing their danger, and not
crying out to them to take heed, be not only partakers of their spiritual
harm, but do also cooperate to their temporal ruin, and so have cause to
rue your silence, and to cry out your selves when it is too late, Vae mihi quia
tacui, Woe is me because I have held my peace. Isa. 6.
But if perchance any of you, who in your consciences think the Oath to be
lawful, should for some worldly respect, (which God forbid) cry out against
the takers or approouers thereof, this were not only to sin most damnably
against your own consciences, but also in some sort against the Holy Ghost,
and to impugn that, which in your souls and consciences you think, and
acknowledge to be true, which how hardly it is forgiven either in this World,
or the next, Mat. 12.
our Savior himself does expressly witness.

4. Lastly, those Priests that in their consciences think the Oath to be
unlawful, and thereupon do not only give warning to those, whom they have
taken upon them to guide and direct, to take heed, and beware of the
spiritual danger, which they think will arise by taking the same, but also in
their zeal do cry out against their Catholic Brethren, who either do take
the Oath, or think it to be lawful, as Apostates from the Catholic Faith and
Religion, and disobedient children to the Pope and Church, (giving the like
occasion to others to cry out against them, as Apostates from their natural
Allegiance, and disobedient and disloyal Subjects to their temporal Prince)
it behooves them most of all to look to themselves, and, (according to the
admonition, which Card. Bellarmine upon occasion of relating the fearful
death of Pope Innocentius the III. gives to Prelates and Pastors Bellar. de
ge^itu, columbae, lib. 2. cap. 9.
) to examine all the secrets of their consciences most exactly, lest perchance
it be erroneous, albeit to them it seem to be sound and just: and that their
zeal (albeit to them selves seem pure, and according to knowledge) be not
blind, and grounded upon wilful or culpable ignorance, like that, which the
Jews had in crucifying our Savior, and Saint Paul, (when he was Saul) in
persecuting his Disciples, who thought thereby to do God great service.

5. And truly if their Zeal were hurtful to none but to themselves, they
would doubtless be the more excusable; but considering how prejudicial it is
both to his Majesty's honor, and also to his temporal Sovereignty, how
scandalous it is to Catholic Religion, and how injurious it is to their
Catholic brethren, not inferior to themselves in virtue and learning (whom
they seek to disgrace, and to make odious to all Catholics, epecially to
their benefactors and friends, and so by taking from them their good names and
maintenance, to bring them into extreme want and misery, and, as much as in
them lies, into manifest desperation (for which they are one day to render a
most strict account) they have great cause to examine their consciences
narrowly, and carefully to consider, upon what assured grounds they can excuse
themselves at the dreadful day of Judgment, for taking such scandalous,
injurious, and uncharitable courses, both against their Sovereign Prince,
(whom next under God they are bound to honor and obey in temporals) and also
against their Catholic brethren, who not only are as learned and religious
as themselves, but also have examined this important controversy, and all the
danger both spiritual and temporal that depends thereon, as diligently, if
not far more, then they themselves have done.

6. To the end therefore that all of you, (my dear Countrymen) may examine
your consciences in this point of the Oath, more easily and eactly, and be more
fully instructed therein, then you have been by I. E. the Author of the
Prelate and the Prince, (who, if the common rumor be true, will hear shortly
with shame enough what goodly Instructions he has given you) I have out of
Roger Widdringtons express doctrine and grounds collected this little
Treatise, which for that it was finished this first day of the year, I am
bold to present it to your Charities for a New-yeares-gift, as a small token
of the great desire I have both of your spiritual and temporal welfare. And
my only request is, that you will be pleased to read it, as I hope you will,
it being neither so prolixe, but that in some few hours you may mane it over,
nor so obscure, but that any man of mean capacity may understand it, and
after you have read it, to judge thereof accordingly. And if I shall hear,
that you have reaped any benefit thereby, I shall think my pains exceeding
well bestowed; but howsoever, I shall not think my labor lost by giving you
this evident token of my love: for that the love and duty I owe to my Prince
and Country, to the Catholic Religion, and to you my dear Catholic
brethren, and above all to God Almighty, the Author of all truth, yea truth it
self, and who will in due time render to every man according to his works,
Romans 2.
has, for the defense of a necessary truth, moved me to take this pains.
And so with my best wishes, I bid you heartily farewell, hoping that you will
be wise, and not be transported with a blind and intemperate zeal toward
Prince or Prelate, but that you will be careful to fear God, to honor the
King, and without all partiality, to render to God and Caesar (and
consequently to Popes and Princes) that which is their due.

A Copy of the new Oath of Allegiance, divided into eight Branches as it is in
this Treatise explayned.
1. I A.B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify and declare
in my conscience before God and the World, That our Sovereign Lord King James,
is lawful and rightful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's
Dominions and Countries.

2. And that the Pope neither of himself, nor by any authority of the Church,
or See of Rome, or by any other means which any other has any Power or
Authority to depose the King, or to dispose any of his Majesty's Kingdoms, or
Dominions, or to authorize any foreign Prince to invade or annoy Him or his
Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects of their Allegiance and
Obedience to his Majesty, or to give license or leave to any of them to bear
Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any Violence, or hurt to his Maisties Royal
Person, State, or Government, or to any of his Majesty's Subjects within his
Majesty's Dominions.

3. Also, I do swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any Declaration, or
Sentence of Excommunication, or Deprivation made or granted, or to be made or
granted by the Pope or his Successors, or by any Authority derived or to be
derived from him, or his See against the said King, his Heirs or Successors,
or any absolution of the said Subjects from their Obedience, I will bear Faith
and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and him and
them will defend to the uttermost of my power, against all Conspiracies and
Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against His, or their Persons, their
Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of any such Sentence or Declaration or
otherwise, and will do my best endeavor to disclose and make known unto his
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, all Treasons and Traiterous Conspiracies,
which I shall know or hear of to be against him or any of them.

4. And I do further swear, That I do from my heart abhor, detest and
abjure, as impious and heretical, this damnable doctrine, and position, That
Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope may be deposed or
murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

5. And I do believe, and in conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope,
nor any person whatsoever has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part
thereof.

6. Which I acknowledge by good and full authority to be lawfully ministered
unto me, and do renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to the contrary.

7. And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear,
according to these express words by me spoken, and according to the plain
and common sense and understanding of the same words without any Equivocation,
or mental evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever.

8. And I do make this recognition and acknowledgement heartily, willingly and
truly upon the true Faith of a Christian. So help me God.

A Copy of the Protestation, which thirteen Reverend Priests made of their
Allegiance to Queen Elizabeth, by a public Instrument the last day of January
1602. in the last year of her Majesty's Reign.
WHereas it has pleased our Dread Sovereign Lady to take some notice of the
Faith, and Loyalty of us Her natural borne Subjects Secular Priests (as it
appears in the late Proclamation) and of her Princelike clemency has given
a sufficient earnest of some merciful favor toward us (being all subject by
the Laws of the Realm to death by our return into the Country after our
taking the Order of Priesthood since the first year of Her Majesty's Reign)
and only demands of us a true profession of our Allegiance, thereby to be
assured of our fidelity to Her Majesty's Person, Crown, Estate and Dignity,
We, whose names are underwritten, in most humble wise prostrate at Her
Majesty's feet do acknowledge our selves infinitely bound unto Her Majesty
therefore, and are most willing to give such assurance and satisfaction in this
point, as any Catholic Priests can or ought to give unto their Sovereigns.

First, therefore we acknowledge, and confess the Queens Majesty to have as
full Authority, Power and Sovereignty over us, and over all the Subjects of
the Realm, as any Her Highness Predecessors ever had: And further we
protest, that we are most willing and ready to obey Her in all Cases and
Respects as far forth, as cuer Christian Priests within this Realm, or in
any other Christian Country were bound by the Law of God and Christian
Religion to obey their Temporal Princes; as to pay Tribute, and all other
Regal Duties unto Her Highness, and to obey Her Laws and Magistrates in all
Civil Causes, to pray unto God for Her prosperous and peaceable Reign in this
life according to his blessed will and that she may hereafter attain
everlasting bliss in the Life to come. And this our acknowledgement we think
to be so grounded upon the Word of GOD, as that no Authority. no Cause, or
pretense of Cause can or ought (upon any occasion) be a sufficient Warrant more
unto us then to any Protestant to disobey Her Majesty in any Civil or
Temporal matter.

Secondly, whereas for these many years past diverse Conspiracies against her
Majesty's Person and Estate, and sundry forcible attempts, for inuading and
conquering her Dominions, have bin made under we knew not what pretenses and
intendments of restoring Catholic Religion by the sword (a course most strange
in the World, and undertaken peculiarly and solely against Her Majesty, and
Her Kingdoms among other Princes departed from the Religion and Obedience of
the Sea Apostolic (no less then she) by reason of which violent Enterprises,
her Majesty, otherwise of singular clemency toward Her Subjects, has been
greatly moved to ordain, and execute seuerer Laws against Catholics (which
by reason of their union with the Sea Apostolic in Faith and Religion, were
easily supp^sed to favor these Conspiracies and Invasions) then perhaps had
ever bin enacted or thought upon, if such Hostility and Wars had never been
undertaken; We, to assure Her Majesty of our faithful Loyalty also in this
particular cause do sincerely protest, and by this our public fact make
known to all the Christian World, That in these cases of Conspiracies, of
practizing Her Majesty's death, of Invasions, and of whatsoever forcible
Attempts, which hereafter may be made by any foreign Prelate, Prince or
Potentate, whosoever either jointly or severally for the disturbance or
subversion of Her Majesty's Person, Estate, Realms, or Dominions, under
color, show, pretense or intendment of restoring the Catholic Roman Religion
in England, or Ireland, We will defend Her Majesty's Person, Estate, Realms
and Dominions from all such forcible and violent ass^ults and injuries. And
moreover We will not only our selves detect and reveal any Conspiracies or
Plots which we shall understand to be undertaken by any Prelate, Prince, or
Potentate against Her Majesty's Person or Dominions for any cause whatsoever as
is before expressed, and likewise to the uttermost of our power resist them,
but also will earnely persuade, as much as in us lies, all Catholics to do
the same.

Thirdly, if upon any Excommunication denounced or to be denounced against Her
Majesty, or upon any such Conspiracies, Invasions or forcible Attempts to be
made as are before expressed the Pope should also excommunicate every one borne
within Her Majesty's Dominions that would forsake the aforesaid defense of Her
Majesty and Her Realms, and take part with such Conspirators, or Inuaders in
these and all other like Cases, we in these and all such like Cases do think
our selves, and all the Lay-Catholikes borne within Her Majesty's Dominions not
bound in conscience to obey this or any such like Censure, but will defend our
Prince and Country, accounting it our duties so to do, and that
notwithstanding any Authority, or any Excommunication whatsoever either
denounced or to be denounced as is aforesaid, to yield unto Her Majesty all
obedience in Temporal Causes.

And because nothing is more certain, then that whilst we endeavor to assure
Her Majesty of our dutiful Affection and Allegiance by this our Christian and
sincere Protestation, there will not want who will condemn and misconstrue our
lawful Fact, yea, and by many finister suggestions and calumnies discredit our
doings with the Christian World, but chiefly with the Popes Holiness to the
greatest prejudice and harm of our good names and persons that may be, unless
maturely we prevent their endeavors herein, We most humbly beseech Her
Majesty, that in this our recognizing and yiedling Caesar's due unto Her, we
may also by Her Gracious leave be permitted, for avoiding Obloquie and
Calumnies, make known by like public Act, that by yiedling Her right unto
Her, we depart from no bond of that Christian Duty which we owe unto our
Supreme spiritual Pastor.

And therefore we acknowledge and confess the Bishop of Rome to be the
Successor of Saint Peter in that See, and to have as ample and no more
Authority or Jurisdiction over us and other Christians, then had that Apostle
by the gift and commission of Christ our Savior, and that We will obey him so
far forth as we are bound by the Laws of God to do, which we doubt not but
will stand well with performance of our Duty to our Temporal Prince in such
sort as we have before professed. For as we are most ready to spend our blood
in the defense of Her Majesty and our Country, so we will rather lose our
lives then infringe the lawful authority of Christ's Catholic Church.

William Bishop. John Colleton. John Mush. Robert Charnocke. John Bosseuile.
Anthony Hebborne. Roger Cadwallader. Robert Drury. Anthony Champney. John
Iackson. Francis Barneby. Oswald Needham. Richard Button.


This Protestation of the thirteen Catholic Priests (to which a great number
more would have subscribed, if the Articles which those Priests gave up to the
State, had been returned them back, but some few days before the end of the
time prefixed to them by the Proclamation, to make known to the State their
Allegiance) was the ground and foundation from whence the Parliament (as the
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury D. Bancroft told a friend of mine) framed the
form of this new Oath of Allegiance, as agreeable to the doctrine, which any
Catholic subject, according to the grounds of true Catholic Religion, might
lawfully maintain, to make thereby a true distinction not between
Protestants, and Catholics, but between ciuilly obedient Catholics, and in
all other things good Subjects, and such other Catholics as in their hearts
maintained the like violent bloody maxims that the Powder-Traitours did. See
beneath in the third Observation.
And doubtless, whosoever will compare the new Oath, and their Protestation
together, and do withal consider, that Queen Elizabeth was long before that
time deprived of all Regal power, authority, dignity, and Jurisdiction by
the Bull of Pius Quintus, and also observe upon what assured grounds and
principles those Priests could lawfully acknowledge her Majesty to have as full
Authority, Power and Sovereignty over them and all the Subjects of this Realm,
as any Her Predecessors ever had, and also could lawfully promise, that they
would yield to Her Majesty all Obedience in Temporal Causes, notwithstanding
any authority, or any Excommunication whatsoever denounced or to be denounced
against Her Majesty, or Her Subjects, as is aforesaid; he will clearly
perceive, that their Protestation is all one in effect and substance with this
new Oath of Allegiance, and that the only difference betwixt them is, that in
the Oath the Popes authority to depose the King, etc. is expressly and in plain
words denied, and in their Protestation the denial thereof is only covertly,
vertually, and by a necessary consequence employed; notwithstanding all the
euasions, tergiuersations, turnings, windings, sayings and vnsayings, which any
one of these Priests (if for some worldly respect or other motive he should
now repent him of what he had done) could to excuse himself from Perjury,
possibly use or invent.

A Copy of Master John Colletons Petition to the Lord Archbishop of
Canterburies Grace, wherein he confirms his former Protestation, many years
after the new Oath of Allegiance was established.
IF your Grace and the State saw the present affections of my heart, and were
pleased to look on my carriages past, neither trouble some, or vnrespectiue, I
hope the favor I am to desire, albeit it may seem extraordinary, yet the same
could not altogether be deemed unworthily extended. The voluntary and free
Recognition I made in the late Queens Reign as it then sufficed, and is now
extant in print, so does it still witness the readiness of my professed
Allegiance in all Secular and Civil affairs. Neither have I bin, am now, or
by Gods grace ever shall be otherwise affected, then in like sort to
acknowledge his Majesty that now governs, for my lawful Dread Sovereign,
obey in all Political administration, and defend his sacred Person, Crown,
and Dominions to the uttermost of my power against all enemies of what place
and calling soever. The commiseration I most humbly beseech your Grace to take
of my aged years, accompanied with sundry infirmities, is, to stand so good
Lord unto me, as to enlarge me upon sufficient security for my appearance
before your Honor, at the time your Lordship shall think fit to assign, An
evident mean of lengthing my life, beside the easing of the heavy charge my
imprisonment imposes. I would very gladly have been herein my own
Sollicitour in person, but that I hold the boldness greater in respect of my
disgraceful state, then I durst to adventure on without your Lordships good
liking thereunto first understood.

26. of March, 1610. Your Graces most suppliant Petitioner, JOHN COLLETON.

A Copy of the Declaration and Acknowledgement which Master James Houghton,
alias Thomas Green, a Religious Priest of the Order of Saint Benedict, and
professor of Dininitie, made under his own hand writing to the Lord Bishop of
Durham, the first of November, 1619. touching his opinion of the Oath of
Allegiance.
James Houghton, alias, Thomas Green, his opinion touching the Oath of
Allegiance.
1 FIrst, I do ingenuously confess, that his Majesty had very just cause, by
occasion of that most treacherous plot of the Gunpowder-Treason, to propose to
all his Subjects English Catholics (...) Oath of civil fidelity and
obedience due unto Kings both by the Laws of God and Nature, and that in most
effectual and peremptory terms, for trial of their fidelity and loyalty to
H^ Majesty their true Sovereign Lord and King.

2. Secondly, it seems to me that the Church had done her duty, if she had
showed her dislike of that odious practice of the Gun-powder-Treason, by some
public declaration in detestation thereof, both for his Majesty's
satisfaction, and for the confirmation of his Catholic Subjects in their
fidelity and allegiance unto Him.

3. Thirdly, I do ingenuously confess, that to me it seems most true, that
the doctrine, which approves murdering of Kings by their own Subjects or any
else, is both damnable and heretical, yea, though it be in casu Apostasiae a
fide aut Infidelitatis, in case of Apostasy from faith, or of Infidelity.

4. Fourthly, I do ingenuously grant, that it seems to me in my private
judgment, that there is nothing in the Oath, but that it may, according to
Roger Widdrington his Gloss and Exposition, be lawfully taken of English
Catholics His Majesty's Subjects, though some both Learned and Religious hold
the contrary.

Yet I find three scruples concerning the Oath, which cause me to entreat
some further time of consideration and conference for my better satisfaction.

The first is, concerning the Roman Council under Gregory the seventh, and
the Council of Lateran, sub innocentio tertio, whether they have defined any
thing in this point.

The Second is, whether it be fit for me to oppose my private judgment to
two Breues of the Pope, that say in the Oath there be many things contrary to
faith and salvation, though they express not any thing in particular.

The Third is, whether by taking the Oath I shall not give scandal to many
learned Priests and Catholics, who refuse it, and for refusal hazard their
lives and Estates.

In regard whereof I humbly pray further respite, for better consideration and
confererence: And in the mean time I promise and vow to be a true and
faithful Sabiect to His Majesty and His Successors during my life, and so am
fully resolved to continue, notwithstanding any Sentence from the Pope
whatsoever of Excommunication, Deposition, or Absolution of his Majesty's
Subjects from their natural obedience to Him, and his Heirs, etc. for whom I
most affectionately pray God of his infinite mercy, specially to direct and
assist in all their actions and proceedings.

Thomas GREEN.

But as touching the three scruples mentioned in the fourth Article, it is to
be observed, that all of them are particularly and very clearly answered by
Roger Widdrington. Widdringt. in Discuss. Discuss. part. 3. sec. 2. and in
detectione calum. D. Schulck.. 7 nu. 16. and seq.


And first to the Council of Rome under Pope Gregory the Seventh, he
shows, that in the Canon, Nos Sanctorum, nothing is defined, if we regard
the rules, which Cardinal Bellarmine alleges to make a true definition,
Bell. lib. 2. de Romans Pont. c. 12.
neither is there any mention made in that decree of any consent of the
Bishops, who were present; and that albeit any thing mentioned in that degree
had been expressly defined, yet considering that it is a probable doctrine,
that the Popes definitions in a Provincial Council, as was that Roman
Council, are uncertain and fallible, they cannot make the doctrine, which
they define, to be certain, and the contrary to be improbable.

Secondly, he shows, that neither from the words of that Canon it can be
gathered, that the Pope has authority to deprive Sovereign Princes, but only
inferior Lords and Magistrates by the consent and authority of those absolute
Princes, to whom they are subject in temporalls: and that therefore that Canon
Nos Sanctorum is to be understood only of those, who are subject to the Pope
in temporalls, and has force to bind only in his own Territories, or it was
confirmed by the consent and authority of other absolute Princes, as many
learned Canonists mentioned by Pope Innocentius, Hostiensis, and Ioannes
Andreas expound the Canon, Ad abolendam de haereticis. In can. Ad abolendam.
And as concerning the Dictatus Papae, which Lessius urges and attributes to
a Roman Council, wherein it is expressly said, Widdringt. in Disput. Theol.
cap. 3. sec. 1.
That the Pope has power to depose the Emperor: That he has power to absolve
subjects from their Allegiance, Widdrington shows that they neither belong to
any Roman Council, nor contain any definition, but only a declaration of the
said Pope Gregory's opinion, who thought he had such authority, and that he
might lawfully practice it, wherein nevertheless, as being a thing never heard
of before that Age, says Onuphrius, Onuphrius lib. 4. de varia creat. Ro^.
Pont.
he was greatly, and might lawfully be contradicted by true and virtuous
Catholics, as also at this present many other opinions of Popes concerning
their Dispensations and Absolutions in other things are contradicted by
virtuous and learned Catholic Divines.

To the Council of Lateran, Widdrington has answered at large, both in a
peculiar Treatise of the Decree of this Council against Lessius, and also in
his Confutation of Fitz-herberts Reply, wherein he shows, that, according to
the doctrine and exposition of famous and learned Canonists and Divines, the
Decree of this Council neither was, nor could be understood of Emperors,
Kings, and absolute Princes, who in temporal matters, wherein they are supreme
and subject to none but God, are not comprehended under any general names, if
the matter be penal and odious, and much less under the general name of a
Temporal or Principal Magistrate or Lord, (as neither an Abbot is in penal
and odious matters comprehended under the general name of a Monk, nor a
Bishop under the general name of a Priest) but that it is only to be
understood of Dukes, Earls, Majors, Bailiffes, and such other inferior
temporal Lords and Magistrates (as likewise by the names of a Temporal and
principal Lord or Magistrate, they are comprehended in the Emperors Decree,
who uses the very same general words;) and that therefore this Decree of the
Lateran Council had force to bind only in the Popes temporal Dominions, or it
was confirmed by the authority and consent of Sovereign Princes, to whom such
inferior Lords and Magistrates were subject.

To the second Scruple concerning the Popes Breues, Widdrington has fully
answered in his Theological Disputation, and more at large in his Answer to
Fitz-herbert: Cap. 10. sec. 2. part. 3. cap. vlt.
and partly in the last Chapter of this Treatise, wherein he shows, that it
is no disobedience or irreuerence not to obey these declaratiue Breues, being
grounded upon false suppositions, as he conuinceth them to be, and that it is
not only fitting, but necessary for every good and virtuous Catholic, not to
obey any such Breues, especially when they command a thing which is in
prejudice of a third person, as is the forbidding of this Oath, which is so
prejudicial not only to His Majesty and his subjects, but also to the
temporal Sovereignty of all other absolute Princes.

To the third Scruple concerning the scandal, Widdrington has fully answered,
partly in the Preface of his Apologeticall Answer, nu 21. cap. 10. sec. 3.
and more fully in his Theological Disputation wherein he has showed, that
if the Oath be lawful, and does not contain any falsehood or injustice, but is
an Oath of true temporal Allegiance, and ministered by good and full
authority, as this Treatise does make manifest, it is no giving of scandal to
take the Oath, but that those Priests and Catholics do give great scandal by
refusing it, and give just occasion to all Protestant Princes and subjects to
think, that true temporal Allegiance due to a temporal Prince cannot,
according to the grounds of the Catholic Roman Religion, stand with true
spiritual obedience due to the Pope and other spiritual Pastors, whereby
they mightily wrong all temporal Princes, they greatly scandalize the
Catholic Roman Religion, and as much as much as in them lies, they seek to
auert all Protestant Princes and subjects from showing any favor to the
professors of the same.

A Plain and necessary Preamble, wherein certain important Observations are
set down, for the better understanding of this new Oath of Allegiance.
BEfore I come to explain the particular branches of this new Oath established
by Act of Parliament, I think it not amiss to set down by way of a Preamble
or Preface certain general Observations, which may give no little light to the
better understanding of the same.

The First Observation.
1. First, therefore to know the nature and conditions of an Oath, it is to be
observed, that every lawful Oath must be discreet, just, and true; according
to that of the Prophet Jeremy, Ierem. 4.
And thou shall swear in Truth, and in Justice, and in Judgment.

Judgment is required chiefly in regard of the swearer, that he take not the
Name of God in vain, rashly, irreuerently, without just and urgent occasion,
and not duly examining the truth of what he swears; for the matter or thing
which is sworn, may oftentimes be true and just, and yet the Name of God may
be taken in vain, and without just cause or necessity to confirm the same.

Justice is required chiefly in a Promissorie Oath, to wit, wherein something
is promised for the future time to be done or omitted: and therefore as it is
unlawful to promise any thing which is unjust, so is it more unlawful to
confirm that unjust promise by Oath. Yet Justice may also sometimes be
wanting in an Assertorie Oath, as when one reuealeth a secret, which in Justice
he is bound to conceal, and confirms the same by Oath, for then he swears
truly, but unjustly.

Verity or Truth is necessary in all Oaths, for also in a promissorie Oath
two kinds of verity are required; the one is for the pesent time (wherein it
resembles the nature of an Assertorie Oaeth) for he that promises to do, or
not to do any thing, must have his words agreeable to his mind, and therefore
must for the present have a mind or intent to perform what he promises;
otherwise he swears untruly; the second verity is for the future time; for
he that promises any thing, calling God for witness of his promise, and
through his own default does not perform his promise at the time appointed,
is forsworn, and his promissorie Oath wants verity: But truth and verity
is chiefly required in Assertorie Oaths, to wit, wherein some thing is affirmed
to be true or false. And therefore as it is unlawful for one to affirm that
to be true, which he knows to be false, and contrariwise, for this were
expressly and formally to lie, or to affirm that to be true or false, whereof
he is uncertain or doubtful, for this were to expose himself to danger of
speaking an untruth, so also it is much more unlawful to confirm the same by
Oath.

2. Whereupon Perjury is defined by the Schoole-Diuines to be a lie confirmed
by Oath. Magister in 3. did. 39. S. Thom.
And therefore as a lie is divided into a formal lie, to wit, when one
affirms any thing to be true or false, and thinks otherwise in his mind
(for to lie, says Saint Augustine, August. lib de Mendacio.
is to speak against that which he thinks in his mind,) and into a
material lie, to wit, when one speaks as he thinks, and yet in very deed
it is otherwise; So Perjury is deuiued into material and formal Perjury,
for that Perjury is a lie confirmed by Oath, and only adds to a lie the
calling of God to witness of what he speaks. And therefore whatsoever may
be affirmed without danger of lying, may be sworn without danger of Perjury:
and as the falsehood which makes a formal lie, is not to be taken from the
thing as it is in it self or ex part rei, but as it is conceived by the
speaker, for that to lie is to speak against the mind, so the falsehood, which
makes formal Perjury, is not to be taken from the thing which is sworn, as
it is in it self, or ex part rei, but as it is against the mind and knowledge
of the swearer.

3. For the verity, which is required in an Oath, consists in this, says
Gregorius de Valentia and Sayrus, Valentia tom. 3 disp. 6. q. 7. p. 3.

Sayrus lib. 5. Thesauri cap. 4. nu. 7.


that the thing be true, at least wise according to the reasonable judgment
of the swearer. And therefore it is to be observed, that to judge whether an
Oath be true or false, we must not so much regard the thing sworn, as the mind
and knowledge of him that swears. So that whosoever affirms a thing by
Oath, says Siluester and Petrus Aragoua, Siluest. verbo Periurium q. 1.

Aragoua, 2. 2. q. 89. art. 3.


in that manner as he knows it to be true, is not formally forsworn: as if
he swear his opinion, acknowledgement, or persuasion, he must be morally
certain, that he is so persuaded, if he swear it absolutely to be so, he
must be morally certain it is so, otherwise he exposes himself to danger of
being forsworn, and although in very deed it fall out otherwise, then he is
morally certain, yet he is excused in the Court of Conscience from the sin of
Perjury, and he is not formally, but only materially forsworn.

The Second Observation.
4. Secondly, to know in what sense the words of every Law, and consequently of
this Oath, which is established by a Parliamentall Law, ought to be taken, it
is to be observed out of the doctrine of Franciscus Suarez a famous Jesuit,
Suarez lib. 6. de Legibus cap. 1.
that the " words of every Law are commonly to be understood according to their
proper and usual signification, and that if any words have many proper and
usual significations, that sense is to be taken, wherein the Lawmakers does
understand them, because upon the will and intention of the Lawmakers (which is
the soul of the Law) the substance and force of the Law, does chiefly depend.
Whereupon if by any means the will of the Lawmakers can be known, according
to it especially we must interpret the words of the Law, because that is the
true interpretation of the Law, by which we follow the meaning and will of the
Lawmakers. But if by the declaration of the Lawmakers we cannot gather the
meaning of any equivocal and ambiguous word or sentence contained in the Law,
then we must use those rules, which in all ambiguous and doubtful speeches are
prudently to be observed: to wit, that the matter or contents of the Law, with
the antecedents, and consequents, and other circumstances be diligently
considered, for by them the meaning of the words, and the will of the Lawmakers
will easily be gathered. And especially we must consider the beginning, Preface
or Preamble, of the Law, and with it to join the rest that follows: for to
the beginning, if there be no other let, all that follows is to be applied;
because in the beginning, or Preface of every Law is usually contained the
final end, cause, and reason, which chiefly moves the Lawmakers, and which is
morally a sure means to find out his will and meaning, and by which the
ambiguitie of any word or sentence is chiefly to be determined. And finally we
must always, if there be no other let, interpret the words of the Law, when
they are doubtful, in the more mild and favorable sense, especially if the
matter be odious, and penal, aeccording to those approved rules of the Law,
Benignius leges etc. Leg. Benignius ff de legibus. De regulis Iuris in Sexin.
Laws are to be interpreted in the more favorable sense, etc. And it is meet
that odious things be restrained, and favors be enlarged. " Yea, and if the
words of the Law being taken in their proper signification should argue any
injustice, or like absurdity to be in the mind of the Lawmakers, they must
be drawn to a sense although improper, wherein the Laew may be just and
reasonable, because this is presumed to be the will of the Lawmakers, as it
has been declared by many Laws in ff. tit. de Legibus. Nam in ambigua voce,
etc. Leg. in ambigua ff. de legibus.
For in a doubtful word of the Law, says the Law, that sense is rather to be
chosen, which is void of all default, especially seeing that the will also of
the Lawmakers may hereby be gathered: because it ought not to be persumed, that
the Lawmakers did intend to command any absurd or inconvenient thing. Thus
Suarez. What blame then do they deserve, who seek to wrest the words of this
Oath, to a sense which they account to be most false and absurd, with so great
prejudice to the souls and temporal States of English Catholics, and with no
less irreuerence to his Majesty and the State whom next under God they are
bound to honor and obey in all temporal affairs, whereas they may expound the
words, according to their proper and usual signification, in a true,
convenient, and favorable sense, as the Reader may see beneath?

5. Thirdly, to know the end and reason of this Oath and of the makers thereof,
it is to be observed, that the Parliament in the very beginning of this Act,
(to which according to Suarez, we must, if there be no other let, apply all
that follows) did expressly set down the cause, end, and reason, for which
this new Oath was devised, to wit, to make a better trial how His Majesty's
subjects stand affected in point of their loyalty, and due obedience. For His
Majesty and the State perceiving, that the Powder-Traytors. who were all of
them Roman Catholics, did ground, as it does appear by their confessions,
their barbarous and deuillish plot chiefly upon the Popes power to take away
the Crowns and lives from temporal Princes in order to spiritual good, and
knowing with all, that many other Roman Catholics did from their hearts
detest, and abhor such traiterous and diabolical practices, and the wicked
grounds thereof, thought it needful, for the better discovering and repressing
of such bloody Assasinates, and their disciples, to devise such an Oath,
wherein true temporal Allegiance due to all temporal Princes of what Religion
soever, should be demanded, and no true spiritual obedience due to the Pope,
or other spiritual Pastors should be denied, and yet the wicked principles of
that most damnable Conspiracy should be detected and abiured. And the
substance of this new Oath they did take from the Protestation of those
thirteen Catholic Priests (as the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Doctor
Bancroft told a dear friend of mine) only using another form of words, and
expressing some things concerning the Popes pretended authority, which in
their Protestation are not expressed, but only supposed, employed and virtually
contained, for in effect and substance they little differ, as partly you have
seen above, and more fully shall perceive when you have seen all the branches
of the Oath explayned. In his Premonition page 9. and in her Apology for the
Oath. page 2. and page 9.


6. And not only the Parliament has set down the end and reason of this new
Oath, but also His Majesty Himself has often by public Writings in express
words declared, that He intended to exact in this Oath nothing else of His
Subjects, then a profession of that temporal Allegiance and civil Obedience,
which all subjects (what Religion soever they profess) by the Law of God and
Nature do owe to their lawful Prince with a promise to resist and disclose all
contrary uncivil violence; and to make a true distinction not betwixt
Catholics and Protestants, but betwixt ciuilly obedient Catholics, and such
Catholics as are the Disciples of the Powder Treason. Whereupon he caused the
lower house of Parliament, who at first would have had the Oath to contain the
denial of the Popes power to excommunicate him, to reform that clause. So
careful was He, that nothing should be contained in this Oath except the
profession of natural Allegiance, and civil and temporal obedience. He said
in this Oath; for as the Oath of Supremacy, says His Majesty, was devised
for putting a difference between Papists, and them of our professions so was
this Oath ordained for making a difference between the ciuilly obedient
Papists, and the perverse disciples of the Powder Treason. And again, This
Oath, says His Majesty, was ordained only for making a true distinction
between Papists of quiet disposition, and in all other things good subjects,
and such other Papists as in their hearts maintained the like violent bloody
maxims that the Powder-Traytours did. The same also but in more ample words
affirms His Majesty in His Apology for the Oath.

7. Wherefore we must distinguish betwixt the understanding, belief, or
persuasion of His Majesty, and His will, intent, or meaning as He is a
Lawmakers. For albeit His Majesty should believe and be fully persuaded, that
the Pope is not the Supreme Head of the whole Church, and consequently that he
has not by the institution of Christ any power to excommunicate him, yet his
will and meaning is not, that His subjects shall in this Oath profess the same,
or renounce any spiritual obedience due to the Pope, which every Catholic,
according to the grounds of true Catholic Religion, is bound to acknowledge,
but only, that they make a profession of that temporal Allegiance, and civil
obedience, which all subjects, of what Religion soever, do owe to their lawful
Prince. From whence it clearly follows, that albeit there were in this Oath
some ambiguous or doubtful sentence (as there is not) which might be applied
as well to the denying of that spiritual obedience, which, according to the
grounds of Catholic Religion, is due to the Pope and other spiritual
Pastors, as to the professing of that temporal Allegiance, which is due to
temporal Princes, we ought to interpret the words in that sense, wherein,
according to the will, mind, and end of the Law, and declaration of the
Lawmakers, only temporal Allegiance is demanded, for that by the end and
reason of the Law the ambiguitie of the words, says Suarez, Suarez lib. 6. de
Legibus cap. 1. nu. 19.
is chiefly to be determined, and it is morally a sure means to find out the
will and intention of the Lawmakers, especially that reason which is expressed
in the Law, for then the reason of the Law is in some sort a part thereof,
because it is contained and supposed therein.

8. Fourthly, it is to be observed, that albeit English Catholics might at
the first, before they examined particularly the end, reason, matter, and
contents of this new Oath, justly suspect it to be unlawful, and to contain
in it more then temporal Allegiance; and that His Majesty and the Parliament
under pretense of demanding that temporal Allegiance, which by the Law of God
and Nature is due to all temporal Princes, did intend to have covertly at
leastwise abiured some spiritual obedience, which by the institution of Christ
is due to spiritual Pastors, both for that it is a new, uncouth, and unwonted
Oath of Allegiance, and expressly denies the Popes authority, to depose
wherewith other Christian Princes, in the ordinary Oaths of Allegiance, which
they demand of their subjects, do not in plain and express terms
intermeddle; and also for that it was devised by those, who are opposite to the
Catholic Roman Religion; yet this bare suspicion can be no sufficient cause,
ground, or motive to condemn it (as likewise no man upon a bare suspicion is
to be condemned) but only to have it examined, and if after due examination it
be found faulty, to reject it, if otherwise to approve it. But doubtless
whosoever will sincerely, and with a pure desire to find out the truth, and to
yield without all partiality as well to Kings as to Popes that which is their
due, examine the occasion, end, matter, and contents of this new and unwonted
Oath, will quickly find, that it is condemned by some, upon a bare and naked
suspicion and without due examination; by others, upon a blind and
inconsiderate zeal to the Sea Apostolic, not regarding in like manner the
duty which by the Law of God they owe to their temporal Prince; and by all
that think it unlawful, without sufficient ground.

9. For the occasion of this unwonted Oath, was that unwonted barbarous
Powder Plot of certain Catholics, who pretended to justify their never heard
of Barbarism under the color of Religion, and the Popes authority to dispose
of the Crowns and lives of temporal Princes in order to spiritual good; and
so no marvel, that to prevent the like unwonted cruelty was devised this
unwonted remedy. And albeit the inuenters of this Oath are opposite to the
Catholic Roman Religion and are fully persuaded, that the Pope by the Law of
God, has no authority over this Kingdom, so much as in spiritualls, yet
there meaning was not, as you have seen above, to meddle in this Oath with
that spiritual authority, which is granted him by all Catholics, but only to
demand a profession of that temporal Allegiance, which all the Subjects of
this Land, of what Religion soever they be, do owe to their temporal Prince,
and not to the Pope.

10. And therefore, which is carefully to be observed, this Oath does not
meddle positiuely with the Popes authority, for that it does not belong to
temporal Princes to declare what authority the Pope has, but it medleth
positiuely with the Kings temporal Sovereignty, and negatiuely with the Popes
authority; and it does not declare ^ what authority the Pope has, but only
what authority he has not. And what man, I pray you, can be so blind as
not to see, that whosoever expressly affirms King James to be his true and
rightful King and Sovereign in temporalls, and to have over him and his other
Subjects all Kingly Power, Authority, and Jurisdiction, does consequently and
vertually deny the same of the Pope? Wherefore if we well examine the matter
and contents of this unwonted Oath, we shall find, that His Majesty and the
State do herein deny no other authority of the Pope expressly and by name,
then which not only in the Protestation of those thirteen Catholic Priests,
but also in all other usual Oaths of Allegiance, which absolute Princes are
wont to demand of their Subjects, is vertually, covertly, and in effect
employed. For whosoever sincerely and from his heart acknowlegeth, any Prince to
be his only rightful King and Sovereign in temporals (which all absolute
Princes in their usual Oaths of Allegiance demand of their Subjects) he must
vertually acknowledge, that the Pope is not his Sovereign Lord in temporals,
and consequently, that he has no authority over his Prince or him in
temporals, and therefore neither to depose his Prince, or to dispose of His
temporal Dominions, for that these are temporal things for what end, cause,
crime, or pretext soever, either spiritual or temporal, they be done.

11. Fifthly, to know upon what assured grounds the Popes authority to depose
Princes, or to attempt and practice their deposition, is by Catholics denied
in this Oath, it is to be observed, that as Leonardus Lessius, a famous
Jesuit, notes very well, Lessius in his Singleton, part. 2. nu. 38.
a power which is not altogether certain but probable, cannot be a sufficient
ground or title, whereby immediately any man may be punished or deprived of
that right, dominion, or any other thing which he actually possesses, but such
a power or title must be most certain, and without all doubt or controversy.
Wherefore neither can the Pope, nor any other Prince, without manifest
injustice invade the Kingdom of another Prince, make war against him, or
seek to depose or dispossess him upon a probable, uncertain, or controuersed
title. For certes, says the Author of the Prelate and the Prince, (and who is
known to be a famous Doctor and Professor of Divinity though masked under the
name of I. E.) Cap. 11. page 235.
as it is injustice to put one out of his land or house, who has probable
right and and withal possession, because poti^r est conditio possidentis,
better is the condition of him that is in possession, So were it open injustice
in the Pope to deprive a King of his Crown and Kingdom, who has probable
right and withal possession. And this also is the received doctrine of all
Divines and Lawyers, Victoria in Relect de ture belli. nu. 29. and seq.

Vasquez 1. 2. disp. 64. cap. 3.

Gregorius de Valentia 2. 2. and Pope Adrian with many others cited by Valentia.


and grounded in the light of natural reason, and declared by the approved
rules of the Law, that no man can be justly invaded, or be put out of his
possession upon an uncertain or controuersed title, because In causa dubia,
sieve incerta potior est conditio possidentis, In a doubtful or disputable
cause the condition of the possessor is to be preferred, and Cum sunt iura
partium obscura fauendum est reo potius quam Actori. When the rights or titles
of the parties that are in suite are obscure, or not clear, the Defendant is
rather to be favored then the Plaintiff. And this is the first assured ground
and principle, for which the doctrine of deposing Princes by the Popes
authority may not only be barely and simply denied, as it is in the second
clause of the Oath by force only of the words, but also be abhorred, detested
and abiured as impious, damnable, most clearly repugnant to the Word of God,
and in that sense heretical, as it is in the fourth clause. The second
manifest principle is, that it is a controversy among learned Catholics, and
approved by many, and therefore truly probable, that the Pope has no
authority to deprive Princes of their Regal Power and Authority.

12. For the better clearing whereof, it is to be observed sixthly, that, as
Ioannes Azorius a famous Jesuit expressly affirms, Azor. tom. 2. lib. 11. c.
5. q. 8.
it has ever been a great controversy betwixt Emperors and Kings on the one
side, and the Bishops of Rome on the other, whether in some certain cases the
Pope has a right and power to deprive Kings of their Kingdom. For some Kings
have oftentimes (yea since the time of the great Lateran Council) contended
with Popes about this matter, saying, that they have their Kingdom from God,
and not from the Pope, and that in those things, which are civil and temporal
the power of Kings is supreme and absolute, and that herein Kings are not
subject to the Pope, although in sacred, Ecclesiastical and spiritual things
the Pontifical power is supreme, and that herein Kings and Princes are subject
to Popes, as children to their Fathers, and sheep to their Pastors, etc. And
many complained that Gregory the seventh did excommunicate Henry the fourth,
and deprive him of the administration of his Kingdom. Thus Azor. And it is a
controversy among the Schoolmen, (says Ioannes Trithemius Trithemius in
Chron. Hirsaug. ad annum 1106.
) and as yet it is not decided by the Judge, whether the Pope has power to
depose the Emperor or no. And the Ecclesiastical power (says Iacobus
Almainus Almain. de d^minio nature. ciu. and Eccles in probat. 2. conclus.
a famous Doctor of Paris, and whom Azor relates Azor. tom. 1. lib. 2. cap. 14.
among Classical Doctors) cannot by the institution of God inflict any civil
punishment, as are death, exile, privation of goods, much less of Kingdoms,
etc. Nay nor so much as imprison, vt plerisque Doctoribus placet, as is the
opinion of most, or of very many Doctors, but it is extended only to a
spiritual punishment, as is Excommunication, and the other punishments, which
she uses, do proceed from the pure positive Law, or as Gerson speaks,
Gerson de potest. Eccles considerat. 4.
from the grant of Princes. And the liberty of the Church of France, says
Petrus Pithaeus Pithaeus in Cod. libert. Eccles. Gallicanae printed at Paris by
authority of the Parliament, in the year 1594.
(whom Antonius Posseuinus the Jesuit commends for a man truly learned and
a diligent searcher of Antiquity Posseuinus in verbo Petrus Pithaeus.
) is grounded in this principle, which France has ever held for certain, that
the Pope has not power to deprive the French King of his Kingdom, or in any
other manner to dispose thereof; And that notwithstanding any whatsoever
Monitions or Monitories, Excommunications, or Interdicts, which by the Pope can
be made, yet the subjects are bound to yield obedience due to the King for
temporals; neither therein can they be dispensed or absolved by the Pope; Which
position is in very deed the whole substance both of our new Oath, and also of
the late Oath of France, which the lower house of Parliament would have had
established for a fundamental law.

13. And to omit now many other learned Catholics cited by Widdrington,
Widdrington in his Answer to Fitzherb. part. 1.
that it is a controversy among Catholics, and approved by many, and
therefore truly probable, that the Pope has no authority to depose Princes,
it is so manifest, that no learned man, unless he will be shamefully
impudent, can deny it, and the public Writings of learned Catholics on both
sides, See beneath in the end of this Treatise, the Oath of France the
condemnation of Suarez and Bell. Book, and a decree of the Parliament of Paris
touching the doctrine of the Popes power to depose.
the proceedings of the Parliament of Paris against the Books of Cardinal
Bellarmine, of Schulckenius, and of Suarez, the propounding of the aforenamed
Oath by the lower house of Parliament, wherein of two hundred Knights and
Burgesses there were but fix Protestants, besides the complaint of some Doctors
of Paris to the College of Sorbon against the Controuersia Anglicana of
Becanus, and infinite other testimonies of learned men of our own Nation, not
only of those who have taken the Oath, or think it to be lawful, but also of
many others, do most clearly convince the same. In so much that Cardinal
Peron, Card. Peron. in his speech to the lower house of Parliament.
compelled by so manifest a truth, does plainly confess the same; and
thereupon acknowledges, that the Pope himself does in France tolerate those
Catholics, that hold against him in this point, tolerate, I say, not as
public Usurers, Harlots, or other notorious sinners, are in some Countries
permitted, but by admitting them to Sacraments, which neither the Pope, nor the
Prelates of France could lawfully do, if for holding that doctrine those
Frenchmen were to be condemned of Heresy, Error, Temeritie, or any other
damnable sin. So that it is most clear and manifest to any man of judgment,
that it is a great controversy among learned Catholics, and that it is
approved by many of them, and therefore truly probable, that the Pope has no
authority to depose or deprive Sovereign Princes. See also the Author of the
Potestants Apology for the Roman Church in his Preface from Sect. 19. to the
end, where you may see his dislike of this doctrine for the Popes authority to
depose Princes, and taxes them, who ouercharge the supreme Pastor with
incompetent attributes of Authority in temporals: and in his own authentical
Manuscript he more particularly and expressly showed, that the Pope has no
Authority in temporals, either directly, or indirectly, which last words it
pleased those who had commission to print his Book to leave out, whereof he
greatly complained to a friend of mine. And likewise for the dislike, which
this learned Author showed in his Preface, of this authority of the Pope to
dispose of temporals, it pleased the Author, who translated his Book into
Latin, to leave out the Preface altogether, which nevertheless is a chief
part of his Book, and it deserved to be put in Latin as much if not more
then any other part thereof. But the Authors of Books must now adays, if
they look not themselves to the translating and publishing of them, speak as
it pleases the Translators and Censors.

15. Neither is it sufficient for any man, which also is to be observed, to
condemn any doctrine as temerarious or improbable, for that in his judgment
and opinion it is repugnant to Scriptures, ancient Fathers, Councels, Canons,
practice of the Church and Theological reasons, if it be approved by other
learned Catholics, who have examined all the arguments on either side; for
otherwise the Thomists might condemn of temeritie the Scotists, and the
Scotists the Thomists in the question of the B. Virgins Conception; The Divines
of Rome might condemn of temeritie the Divines of Paris, and the Divines of
Paris the Divines of Rome in the question of the Popes infallibility, and
superiority of the Pope and a General Council; and the Jesuits might
condemn of temeritie the Dominicans, and the Dominicans the Jesuits, in the
question of the efficacy of Grace: for all of them allege for their opinion,
Scriptures, Fathers, Councels, Canons, and Theological reasons, and it is
usual in most Theological questions to bring such arguments on both sides. But
true probability and improbabilitie, and whereof not only learned men, but
also the unlearned without any great difficulty or perplexity of conscience
may judge, is to be taken not from intrinsecall grounds, which are unknown to
unlearned men, but from extrinsecall grounds, to wit, the authority of learned
men who are known to approve that doctrine. And therefore Aristotle, Aristotle
lib. 1. Top. cap. 8.
whom all Philosophers and Divines do herein follow, did by extrinsecall
grounds define probable, to be that which is approved by wise, learned, and
skillful men in the Art which they profess: as in a matter of Law that is
probable, which is approved by learned and skillful Lawyers; in a matter of
Physic that is probable, which is approved by learned and skillful
Physicians, and in a matter of Theological learning that is probable, which is
approved by learned and skillful Catholic Divines: which definition of
probable is grounded in the light of natural reason, for that it is not
against prudence, and therefore no temeritie to give credit to one in a matter
wherein he is skillful, according to that vulgar maxim, Vnicuique in sua art
perito credendum est, Credit is to be given to every man that is skillful in
his Art.

16. These be the two principal grounds, for which the doctrine of deposing
Princes by the Popes authority may lawfully be denied, and also abiured in
the manner aforesaid; for if it be certain, that it is open injustice to
dispossess any man upon a probable, uncertain, and controuersed power or
title, and it is also certain, that it is a controversy, and not certain,
whether the Pope has authority to depose Princes or no; it follows
evidently, that it is as lawful for any man to swear, that the Pope has no
authority to depose Princes, as that he has no authority to commit open
injustice. But of this probability see more beneath in the end of this
Treatise.

17. The Seventh and last Observation is, that we must carefully consider,
what the swearer is bound to acknowledge and swear in every branch of this
Oath by force and virtue of the express words, and according to the plain and
common understanding of them, to which by the seventh branch he is expressly
tied, and what he may lawfully acknowledge and swear by reason of the matter;
for this distinction may no little avail to the better understanding of some
clauses of this Oath, seeing that it may often fall out, that in regard of the
matter one may lawfully swear that, which by force of the words he is not
bound or demanded to swear. As for example, if one be commanded to swear,
what his judgment, opinion, persuasion or acknowledgement is concerning
something, whereof notwithstanding he is certain; by force of the words he
is bound only to swear, that he thinks, judges, is persuaded, and
acknowledges it to be so, yet by reason of the matter which to him is
certain, he may lawfully swear that absolutely and assuredly it is so.
Likewise if one be commanded to abjure as false, and heretical a conditional
disjunctive proposition, which implies a choice to take which part of the
disjunction he please, by force of the words he is bound to abjure but one
part of the disjunction as heretical, because to make such a disjunctive
proposition to be false and heretical, it suffices that one part only of the
disjunction be false and heretical, yet sometimes by virtue of the matter,
when both parts of the disjunction are heretical, he may lawfully abjure both
as heretical, albeit by force of the words he be not bound thereunto. As
these propositions, Any man may lawfully honor, or blaspheme God, The Pope by
virtue of his Pastoral power may excommunicate or murder any wicked
Christian, are false and heretical, and yet one part of the disjunction is
true, and only the other is false and heretical: but both parts of this
proposition, any man may lawfully hate or blasphem God, are false and
heretical, and so by reason of the matter both parts may be abiured as
heretical, although by force of the form of words, to abjure the whole
proposition as heretical, it suffices to abjure only one part thereof as
heretical, And how this also may be applied to the fourth branch of the Oath,
wherein a conditional disjunctive proposition is contained, and whether the
doctrine not only of murdering Princes, which be excommunicated or deprived by
the Pope, but also of deposing them, may be abiured as heretical, you shall
see beneath. These Observations being considered, there will be found little or
no difficulty in any part or parcel of the Oath.

The First Chapter. The First Branch of the Oath, and an Explication thereof.
I A.B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify, and declare
in my conscience before God and the World, That our Sovereign Lord King James
is lawful and rightful King of this Realm, and of all other His Majesty's
Dominions and Countries. 1. This Branch (which is the ground and foundation of
the whole Oath, and as it were the root and fountain, from whence all the
other branches, wherein the Popes authority is any way denied, do spring and
are derived) is so clear and manifest, that no learned and well affected
subject can take any colorable exception against the same. In so much that Fa.
Parsons In his Book entitled, The Judgment of a Catholic English man, etc.
part. 7. nu. 22. page 13. and 16.
himself fears not to affirm, that there is no man, who sticks or makes
difficulty to acknowledge our Sovereign to be true King and rightful Lord
over all his Dominions, for that every English Catholic will swear and
acknowledge most willingly all those parts and clauses of the Oath, that do
any way appertain to the Civil and Temporal Obedience due to His Majesty
whom he acknowledges for his true and lawful King and Sovereign over all
His Domioions. And Martinus Becanus a famous Jesuit in the first Edition of
his Controuersia Anglicana writes thus: Becanus in Controuersia Anglic. cap.
3. p. 102
And truly to me it is certain, that all the parts and propositions of the
Oath are not false if they be well declared. For these are true: first, that
King James is lawful King of England, Scotland and Ireland: Secondly, that in
the same Kingdoms he is the Supreme or Sovereign Lord in Temporalls.

2. First therefore, if we consider the end of this Oath (which is only to
make profession of our temporal Allegiance, and to make a true distinction not
betwixt Catholics and Protestants, etc. the express declaration of His
Majesty, and the rules before mentioned in the second and third Observation,
it is evident, that by those words [ Sovereign Lord] is not to be understood
the Kings Supremacy in Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, but only in Temporal
and Civil causes.

3. Secondly, it is also evident, that albeit by force of the express words,
and the plain and common understanding of the same, to which the seventh
branch of this Oath tyeth the swearer, we are bound only to acknowledge that
King James is lawful and rightful King of this Realm, and of all other His
Majesty's Dominions and Countries, and not that He is the Sovereign Lord of
the same, both for that those words [ Sovereign Lord] are put only ex part
subiecti, and not ex part predicati, and therefore by virtue of the words are
not affirmed; as likewise he that styles the Pope most holy and most blessed,
does not affirm him to be most holy and most blessed unless the words most
holy and most blessed be put ex part predicati; and also that if we regard the
force and virtue of those words [ Sovereign Lord] they have not the same
sense, which the words [ lawful and rightful King] have, seeing that one may
be a lawful and rightful King, and yet not the Sovereign Lord of His
Kingdom, as if the Emperor should make the great Duke of Toscan King of
Hetruria, he would be lawful and rightful King of that Country, and yet not
the Sovereign or Supreme Lord of the same, because he is as a feudarie
subject to the Emperor. Nevertheless because the lawful and rightful King
of England. is also the Sovereign Lord of the same, by reason and virtue of
the matter we may lawfully, and if it be demanded at our hands, are bound to
acknowledge and swear, that King James is not only the lawful and rightful
King of England and of all other His Majesty's Dominions, but also the
Sovereign or Supreme Lord of the same. And in this sense, both the XIII.
Priests, and also M. Green understood the word Sovereign in their
Protestation and Declaration.

4. Neither is it to the purpose which some object, that the King of England is
the Popes Vassal, and as a feudarie subject to him in Temporals, and therefore
the Pope, and not King James is the absolute Sovereign and supreme Lord in
Temporals of this Kingdom. For although we should absurdly admit, that for
the title and claim of Temporal Sovereignty, which the Pope pretends to
have over this Kingdom by vettue of some grant of former Kings, may be
brought some probable proof, as there cannot, seeing that it is evident, that
no King of England has authority to give away His Kingdom, or make it
subject in Temporals to another Prince without the consent of the Kingdom it
self; and that no color of any probable proof can be brought from any
Authentical Instrument to show, that the Kingdom of England ever consented to
any such grant, yet considering that no probable title can be a sufficient
ground to deprive any man of that Right, Dominion, or any other thing which he
actually possesses, but such a title must be most certain and out of all
controversy, as I showed above in the Fifth Observation, it is manifest, that,
notwithstanding any such probable title, every subject of this Land may
lawfully acknowledge by Oath, that King James is not only the lawful and
rightful King of this Realm, and of all other His Majesty's Dominions and
Countries, but also the Sovereign or supreme temporal Lord of the same.

CHAP. II. The Second Branch of the Oath, and an Explication thereof.
ANd that the Pope neither of himself, nor by any authority of the Church, or
See of Rome, or by any other means which any other has any Power or
Authority to depose the King, or to dispose any of his Majesty's Kingdoms, or
Dominions, or to authorize any foreign Prince to invade or annoy Him or his
Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects of their Allegiance and
Obedience to his Majesty, or to give license or leave to any of them to bear
Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to His Majesty's Royal
Person, State, or Government, or to any of His Majesty's subjects within His
Majesty's Dominions. 1. This Branch supposing the former Observations, has in
it no difficulty at all, although we should admit, that the immediate object
thereof, or which is all one, that, which in this Branch by force of the words
we are bound immediately to swear, is not only our sincere acknowledgement,
and persuasion, but also that absolutely and assuredly the Pope has not any
authority to depose the King, etc. For considering that the whole tenor of
this Branch tends to practice, namely, to depose, to dispose, to invade,
annoy, bear Arms, raise Tumults, offer violence or hurt, and to discharge
subjects of their Allegiance, and also, that it is a doctrine approved by many
learned Catholics, and who have examined all the arguments on both sides, and
consequently, that it is truly probable, that the Pope has no authority to
deprive Princes, or to dispose of their Temporals, it is as clear and
manifest, that any man, whether he be the Kings subject or no, what opinion
soever he follows in speculation concerning the Popes authority to deprive
Princes, yet he may as certainly acknowledge and swear, that the Pope has no
authority to depose the King, that is, to practice his deposition, or any
other of those things mentioned in this Branch, as it is clear and manifest,
that he may certainly acknowledge and swear that the Pope has no authority
to commit open injustice, and that in a doubtful uncertain, and disputable
case, the condition of the possessour is to be preferred.

2. Neither do temporal Princes, or other private men that have any thing in
their possession greatly regard, what learned men, who by the subtlety of
their wits can easily find out some probable color of a broken and pretended
title, may speculatiuely dispute in Schools concerning their titles, so that
in practice, notwithstanding such disputations and speculations, they be
secured from being put out of that which they really and bona fide do
possess. And doubtless most miserable were the state of all men that possess
any thing of worth, and much more of Princes, if upon a title, which some
learned m^n may in speculation approve, it were lawful to invade their
possessions, before a lawful Judge, and who is certainly known so to be,
has decided and determined the title or controversy* To prevent which
mischief all Natitions being guided herein by the light of natural reason
have agreed in this manifest principle, that it is open injustice to put any
man out of his possession upon any title which is not most certain and free
from all controversy until a lawful and undoubted Judge has decided the
matter. (I said a lawful and undoubted Judge) for if it be doubtful,
uncertain, and questionable whether he be a lawful and competent Judge to
determine that cause, his decision cannot be sufficient to end the
controversy. For which cause the Pope is not to be accounted a lawful and
competent Judge to decide this question concerning his own pretended
authority to deprive Princes, for that it is a controversy among learned
Divines and approved by very many (as Pope Adrian, the Cardinaell of Cambray,
the Cardinal Cusanus, the Cardinal Panormitan, the Cardinal of Florence
Master to Panormitan, John Patriarch of Antioch, Abulensis, Ioannes
Parisiensis, Ioannes Gerson, John Mayor, Almaine, and almost all the
University of Paris cited by Widdrington Widdring. in the discovery of D.
Schulkeuius slanders.. 7.
) that the Pope is not a competent Judge to decide or define infallibly any
doctrinall point (and much less in his own cause) without a true and
undoubted general Council, and therefore although he should hereafter, (as yet
he has not) attempt to define and decide this question, his decision could not
end the controversy, nor give sufficient warrant to any man to practice the
deposition of Princes, upon so doubtful, uncertain, and questionable power or
title.

3. Nevertheless it behooves temporal Princes to be very careful, that
their titles to the Dominions which they lawfuly possess, be not so much as
speculatiuely, or only for Disputation sake disputed pro and contra, by learned
men, least that some ignorant or turbulent spirits, which either do not know,
or of set purpose to color their practices, under a pretense of a probable
title, will not take notice of the manifest difference betwixt speculation and
practice, may take occasion thereby to disturb the public peace, and to
molest, annoy, or to offer any violence or hurt to their Royal Persons,
States, or Government. For which cause the Parliament of Paris has with great
wisdom and reason oftentimes by public Edicts ordained, See beneath in the
end of this Treatise some of these Decrees.
that the doctrine of deposing their Kings should not be so much as taught and
maintained to be probable, or problematike, that occasion be not given to
seditious spirits (who know not, or will not take notice of the difference
betwixt speculation and practice) to attempt, under pretense of a probable
title any violence against the Crowns or sacred Persons of their Kings. And the
reason is manifest, for that the temporal Commonwealth has good and full
authority to forbid the teaching and publishing of any doctrine which is not
necessary, whereby probable danger to the Crowns and lives of temporal
Princes, and perturbations in the Commonwealth may arise.

4. First therefore, by those words of this Branch [nor by any other means with
any other] it is evident, that the Parliament, which represents the whole
body of the Kingdom or Commonwealth did not intend to meddle with the
authority which the whole Kingdom or Commonwealth may (according to the
opinion of some Doctors) pretend to have in some cases over their soueraign
Prince, as Lessius and others (whom the Authors of the Prelate and the Prince,
does seem to follow) do idly object. And although the meaning of those words
were, to deny, that the whole Kingdom, or Commonwealth has no authority to
depose their King, yet considering that it is also a probable doctrine, and
approved by many learned Catholic Divines, and Lawyers cited by Widdrington,
Widdr. in Apolog. nu. 111. and in his Answer to Fitz-herb. part. 3. and cap.
11. nu. 36. 37.
that the Commonwealth has no such authority, it is also lawful for any man
(of what opinion soever he be in speculation concerning this authority of
the Co^monweath) to acknowledge and swear, that the Commonwealth has no more
authority to depose the King, that is, to practice his deposition, then she
has to commit open injustice; But the true meaning of His Majesty and the
Parliament is, as the words themselves do plainly signify, only to deny the
Popes authority to depose, etc. to wit, that the Pope neither of himself,
that is, neither as a sole and total cause, nor by any authority, etc. that
is, neither as an Instrument or Minister of the Church or See of Rome, nor by
any other means with any other, that is, nor as a principal, or true and
proper partial cause or Agent, has any authority to depose the King, etc.

5. Neither by those words [ or to authorize any foreign Prince to invade or
annoy Him or His Countries] did His Majesty and the Parliamen^ intend to deny
the authority which temporal Princes may have in some cases to make war
against their neighbor Princes, and consequently against His Majesty, if he
should give them just cause of war (yet ever observing, that no probable
power, cause, or title can be a sufficient ground to punish any Prince, or to
invade His Countries) but, as the express words do plainly show, only to deny
the Popes authority, to authorize any foreign Prince to invade or annoy Him
or His Countries: because all the authority which temporal Princes have to
make war, or to invade the Kingdom of an other Prince for what cause, crime,
or end so ever it be, is derived from their temporal Sovereignty grounded
upon the Law of Nature, or Nations, and not from the Popes authority. And
likewise all the authority, which the temporal Commonwealth may pretend to
have in some cases to rise up in Arms against their Prince, is not derived
from the Popes warrant, license or authority, but (if there be any such power)
from the Law of Nature. And therefore with great reason this Clause denies in
the Pope all power and authority to authorize any foreign Prince to invade
or annoy His Majesty, or his Countries, or to give license or leave to any of
his subjects to bear Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to
His Maiestis Royal Person, State, or Government: because although they should
have any such authority, leave, or license, wherewith His Majesty and the
Parliament would not in this Oath intermeddle, they have it not from the Pope,
but from the Law of Nations, or Nature.

6. Secondly, in this Branch is not denied the Popes authority to command in
temporals in order to spiritual good, or to declare, that they who have
authority to depose, or to make war, are bound to use their temporal
authority, and to draw forth the temporal Sword, when the necessity of the
Church, and the spiritual good of souls shall require the same; for this
authority of declare and command does not exceed the limits of spiritual
power, as Widdrington has showed at large heretofore: Widdr. in Apol nu. ^.
and in all his other Books very often, but especially in his Answer to
Fitz-herb.
But here is only denied the Popes authority to depose temporal Princes, to
dispose of their temporals, to use or draw forth the temporal Sword, or to
authorize temporal Princes or subjects to use or draw forth the same: for
whosoever gives authority to another man to use the temporal Sword, has
authority to use it himself, although sometimes for want of strength or some
other necessary Instrument he cannot use it himself, yet still he has
authority to use it.

7. And although a Commander (which I wish the Reader to observe for the Author
of the Prelate and the Prince) is commmonly said to do that thing which is
done by his Commandment, (and so he that counsaileth, consents, or any way
concurreth although per accidens, and not by any proper virtue, or influxe of
his own, is said to do that thing) as he that applies fire to straw, or
commands, counsaileth, yea, or does not hinder the applying thereof, when he
is bound to hinder it, is said to burn the straw, although he be no true and
proper efficient cause of the burning thereof, but only a cause per accidens)
yet a Commander is not said to do that which he commands, as a true and
proper cause, or as having authority to do that thing which he commands*
(whereof this Branch of the Oath does only speak) but only as a cause per
accidens, (which according to the doctrine of all Philosophers, is no true and
proper efficient cause) unless by his proper power, virtue, influxe or
authority he concur to the doing thereof, and that the person commanded
has his power, virtue, or authority to do that thing derived from the
Commander, or depending on him.

8. For which cause a Painter, who commands his Servant to make a Picture,
and gives him rules and directions how to mingle his Colors, and afterward
to apply them, which without the directions of his Master, he himself could
not do, is the principal cause and agent of making that Picture, and the
Servant is only his Instrument or Minister, for that all the Art he has to
make that picture is derived from the commandment and directions of the
Painter, and depending on him, and yet a King, who has no skill to paint, and
commands the Painter to make a picture, is no true and proper efficient
cause of making that picture, but only a cause per accidens, by morally
applying the Painter that has skill to use the same. So likewise a Prince, who
commands his Officers to condemn and put to death an egregious malefactor,
is the principal cause of his death, and the Officers are only his
Instruments, Ministers, and Executioners, for that all the authority, which
they have to condemn and kill that malefactor, is derived from the Prince,
and depending on him, because only the Prince does authorize, or give them
authority to pronounce and execute that sentence: And yet the Pope commanding
a Prince to use his temporal sword, power, or authority when the necessity
of the Church shall require the same, as to make war, invade any Country, or
to put any egregious malefactor to death, is only a cause per accidens, of
that war, etc. by applying morally, to wit, by his commandment, the person,
who has authority to make war, etc. to the making thereof. But the Pope is
no true and proper cause of that war, etc. neither can he be said to make
that war, as having authority to make it, or as authorizing, or giving
authority, leave, or license, (whereof only this branch makes mention) to the
Prince to make that war, etc. Neither is the Prince in making that war,
etc. the Popes Instrument, Minister, or Executioner, (as the Author of the
Prelate and the the Prince absurdly affirms) for that he has not his
authority to make war, etc. derived from the Popes commandment, or
depending on it, whereas (according to the doctrine of all Philosophers) it is
necessary to an Instrument, that it have all it virtue to work derived from
the principal Agent, or depending on it; but all the authority, which
temporal Princes, or Commonwealths have in temporal affairs, is derived from
the law of Nations, or Nature, and not from the Popes authority or
commandment.

9. By which it is apparent, how grossly the said Author of the Prelate and the
Prince, in excepting against this Branch, was mistaken, for not considering the
difference between a Commander, who has only authority to command, but not
to execute, or do that which he commands to be done, and a Commander, who
has authority both to command, and also to execute or do that which he
commands to be done, although perchance he cannot effect it for want of
strength or effectual means, but not for want of authority, as every
lawful Prince has sufficient authority to subdue his Rebels, and yet he
cannot always effect it, not for want of authority, but for want of strength,
force, or effectual means, because his Rebels are more strong and potent then
he is.

CHAP. III. The Third Branch of the Oath, and an Explication thereof.
ALso I do swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any Declaration, or
sentence of Excommunication, or Deprivation made or granted, or to be made or
granted by the Pope or his Successors, or by any Authority derived, or
pretended to be derived from him, or his Sea against the said King, his Heirs
or Successors, or any absolution of the said subjects from their obedience: I
will bear faith and true allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, and him and them will defend to the uttermost of my power, against
all co^spiracies and attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his or
their Persons, their Crown and dignity, by reason or color of any such
sentence or declaration or otherwise, and will do my best endeavor to disclose
and make known unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, all Treasons, and
Traitorous Conspiracies which I shall know or hear of to be against him or any
of them. 1. This Branch of the Oath is somewhat clearer then the former,
because it does not expressly and in plain terms deny the Popes Authority
to deprive or depose Princes, but it only contains in express words a
promise, which the Subject confirms by Oath, that if in case the Pope has
denounced, or hereafter should denounce any sentence of Excommunication or
Deprivation against the King, his Heirs, or Successors, or any absolution of
the said Subjects from their obedience, yet he will bear faith and true
allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and him and them will
defend, etc. Nevertheless the lawfulness or justice of this promissorie Oath
supposes for the principal ground thereof, the verity of the former
assertorie Clause, and therefore it implies, and vertually contains a
denial of the Popes authority to deprive or depose Princes, and to absolve
Subjects from their temporal allegiance: for that whosoever does swear, that
notwithstanding any sentence of deprivation, or absolution of subjects from
their obedience made, or hereafter to be made by the Pope or his Successors
against his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, to make this promise just and
lawful, he must consequently deny, that the Pope has Authority to deprive
Princes, or to absolve Subjects from their obedience, as Suarez examining this
Branch of the Oath does most clearly demonstrate. Suarez in Defens. lib. 6.
cap. 3.

See Widdring. against Fitzherbert part. 1. cap. 5.


For if the sentence of deprivation to be made at any time hereafter against
the King, his Heirs or Successors, for any manifest cause or crime
whatsoever, may be just, lawful, and effectual, it is as unlawful to take
this clause, as it is unlawful for one to swear, that he will not obey the
Popes sentence and commandment, which hereafter he shall impose, be it never
so inst, and without all error or default: But if this sentence of deprivation
at any time hereafter to be made can never be just, it must needs follow, that
the Pope has no more authority to deprive or depose the King, his Heirs or
Successors, then he has authority to commit open injustice.

2. Wherefore those thirteen Reverend Priests, who solemnly protested to
Queen Elizabeth, that notwithstanding any authority (which words are far
more general, then notwithstanding any sentence of deprivation) or any
Excommunication either denounced, or to be denounced against her Majesty etc.
they would yield to her Majesty all obedience in temporal causes, would then
have made no difficulty to take this Branch of the Oath, and consequently to
free themselves from perjury, they must also deny the Popes Authority to
deprive and depose Princes, for that the justice of this Branch implies and
supposes as a chief ground thereof a denial of the Popes authority to
deprive and depose, as Suarez does most plainly convince.

3. First therefore in this Clause is not denied the Popes power to
Excommunicate, but only that Excommunication being a spiritual censure does
not work this temporal effect, as to make Kings no Kings, or to deprive them
of their Royal right and Sovereignty, and consequently not to absolve
Subjects from their natural allegiance, which, according to the doctrine of
Card. Bellarmine and Suarez they do by the law of God and Nature owe to their
lawful Prince. Bell. in Tract. contra Barclaium cap. 21. page 202.

Suarez in Defens. etc. lib. 6. cap. 3. nu. 6.


And thus much his Majesty has also in express words declared. The truth is,
says his Majesty, The Kings Majesty in his Premonition etc. page 9.
that the Lower house of Parliament at the first framing of this Oath, made it
to contain, that the Pope had no power to Excommunicate me, which I forced
them to reform only making it to conclude, that no Excommunication of the
Popes can warrant my Subjects to practice against my Person or State, denying
the deposition of Kings to be in the Popes lawful power, as indeed I take any
such temporal violence to be far without the limits of such a spiritual
censure as Excommunication is, And also that deprivation or deposition from
temporal kingdoms is not an effect of Excommunication, Widdrington has
showed at large heretofore, and Becanus and Suarez do also in express words
affirm the same. Widdrington in his Apology nu. 346. in his Answer to Suarez
part. 2. sect. 4. and in his Answer to Fitzher. part. 3. cap. 1.
From hence it is very apparent says Becanus, Becanus in quest. de fide
haereticis seruanda ca. 8. nu. 16. and in his Controuersia Anglic. cap. 3. qu.
2.
that Heretics by this precisely that they are excommunicated, are not
deprived of their Dominion or Jurisdiction either over their subjects, or over
their temporal goods, but this deprivation is a destinct punishment, and
inflicted by a destinct law. And again, It is one thing, says he, to
excommunicate a King, and another thing to depose him, or deprive him of his
Kingdom, neither is the one necessarily connected with the other. Many Kings
and Emperors have been excommunicated, and yet not therefore deposed, and
contrariwise many deposed, and yet not therefore excommunicated. See also
Suarez cited by Widdrington in his Apology, Suarez tom. 5. disp. 15. sect. 6.
nu. 3.
and in his answer to Suarez and Fitzherbert.

4. And therefore in very truth I am sorry, and do in some sort pity the
Author of the Prelate and the Prince (a man whom heretofo^e I have much loved,
respected, and honored) that he should so grossly forget himself, as to bewray
so palpably such great want of learning, judgment, and sincerity, in
affirming so boldly, and without any proof at all, Page 298.
that deprivation of Regal authority is an effect of excommunicating Kings
and Princes, and so in denying the effect, the cause is denied. For as, says
he, if you should say, A man is not risibilis, that is, has not power to
laugh, you should deny him to be a man, so in denying that the Pope can deprive
Princes of their Kingdoms, you deny in effect that he can excommunicate.
Whereas this Author knew right well, that Widdrington in that very Chapter
which he cites, did, by the express doctrine of Suarez and Becanus, but now
related, clearly prove against Lessius, (who urged even as nakedly and
without any proof at all the same objection) that deprivation is no effect at
all of Excommunication, much less proprium quarto modo, as risibilis, a power
to laugh is to a man, as this Author most unlearnedly affirms. And yet
forsooth he takes upon him, as it may appear by the very Title and
Inscription of his Treatise, to give a full Instruction and appeasement to the
consciences of English Catholics concerning the Oath of Allegiance. But this
shall suffice at this present for an imperfect portraying of this Authors want
of judgment and sincerity in his Explication of the Oath of Allegiance,
(especially if we consider his person, the Office he now bears, and the
doctrine which in former times he held) for that (as I am told) his perfect
Picture both in this and other points is already drawn, and will be set forth
in lively colors ere it be long.

5. Secondly, it is evident by the former Observations, that those words [
Heirs and Successours] do not signify Usurpers, as some would wrest them
contrary to the meaning of the Law, the plain and common signification of the
words, and the rules before alleged: For albeit this word [ Successour] may
in general be taken for every Successor, who either unlawfully or unlawful
does succeed, yet particularly and properly when it is placed in a Law, it is
usually taken only for a lawful Successor: wherefore according to that rule
of the Civil Law before mentioned in the second Observation, that the
doubtful words of every Law must be taken in that sense, which is without
default, this word [ Successours] must in this Oath established by His
Majesty's Law be limited only to lawful Successors, and who according to the
Laws of the Kingdom do succeed. For as according to Law, Id tantum possumus
quod iure possumus: We can only do that, which we can do lawfully or by Law,
so according to Law, he only is accounted to succeed, who by lawful right does
succed. Whereupon the Civil Lawyers do define Inheritance, to be a succeding
to all the right of one deceased, and an Heir, who succeeds him in all his
right, without adding lawful succeeding, or lawfully succeeds, for that it
is always so to be understood, and therefore being necessarily supposed, it
is not expressed, but altogether omitted in the definitions of an Heir and of
Inheritance. And whenever in the Common or Statute Laws of this Kingdom any
mention is made of the King and his Successors, this word [ lawfull] is but
few times added, although always it ought to be understood.

6, Thirdly, it is also evident by the former Observations, that by those words
[ Treasons and Traiterous Conspiracies] are only understood true, proper, and
natural Treasons, and which among all Nations, what Religion soever they
profess, are accounted Treasons, and repugnant to natural Alleagiance and
Temporal and Civil Obedience, and not such Treasons, which in regard chiefly
of Religion are by the positive Laws of some Nations made Treasons, and
accounted Treasons only for that they are punished with the penalties which
are due to proper and natural Treasons, as are the coming in of English
Priests into this Kingdom made by the Popes authority, and all reconcilements
to the Pope, though in matters that concern Religion. For as His Majesty and
the Parliament have declared, the only intent of this Oath is to contayn the
profession of natural Allegiance, and such civil and temporal duty and
obedience, which every true and well-affected subject ought by the Law of God
to bear to their lawful Prince and Sovereign with a promise to resist and
disclose all contrary uncivil violence. For to prevent such heinous attempts
and mischiefs, which in time to come might be plotted by the example of the
Powder-Traytours, who under color of Religion attempted that barbarous and
deuillish Conspiracy, this form of Oath was framed, says His Majesty, In
his Apology, page 2. nu. 2.
to be taken by all my subjects, whereby they should make clear profession of
their resolution, faithfully to persist in obedience unto me, acrording to
their natural Allegiance; to the end that I might hereby make a separation,
not only between all my good subjects in general, and unfaithful Traitors
that intended to draw themselves from my Obedience; but specially to make a
separation between so many of my subjects, who although they were otherwise
Popishly affected, yet retained in their hearts the print of their natural
duty to their Sovereign; and those who being carried away with the like
fanaticall zeal, that the Powder-Traytours were, could not contain themselves
within the bounds of their natural Allegiance, but thought diversity of
Religion a safe pretext for all kind of Treasons and Rebellions against their
Sovereign. Whereby it is apparent, that only such Treasons and Traiterous
Conspiracies are here understood, which are repugnant and contrary to natural
Allegiance, and not such Treasons which are not natural Treasons, but only in
regard of Religion are by positive Laws made Treasons, and to be punished with
the ordinary penalties of true proper and natural Treason. And in this sense
also those thirteen Reverend Priests understood the words Conspiracies,
Attempts, and Practices in their Protestation.

CHAP. IIII. The Fourth Branch of the Oath and an Explication thereof.
"ANd I do further swear, That I do from my heart abhor, detest, and
abjure, as impious and heretical this damnable doctrine, and position, That
Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or
murdered by their subjects, or any other whatsoever. 1. Although this Branch
may at the first sight seem somewhat suspicious in regard of that word
heretical, yet if it be duly examined, according to the former Observations,
it will easily appear, that it contains no such difficulty, as some
impugners of the Oath would seem to imagine, but that if it be lawful to
abhor, detest, and abjure the aforesaid position, as clearly false and
injurious to Princes, which the former Discourse does plainly convince, it is
also lawful to abjure it as heretical: or, which is all one, as containing in
it a falsehood, which is repugnant not only to natural reason, but also to the
Word of God revealed in the holy Scriptures: For, as every Doctrine and
position, which is agreeable to that truth, which God has revealed, is to be
accounted of faith: so contrariwise, every Doctrine and position, which
contains in it a falsehood, which is repugnant to the Word of God revealed in
the holy Scriptures, is to be accounted heretical, and repugnant to faith. And
in this sense, the word heretical is not only by all Protestants, but also by
many learned Catholic Divines commonly and usually taken, as Widdrington has
showed at large in his answer to Fitz herbert. Widdrington in his Adioinder to
the first and second part.


5. Neither is it necessary, that we must take the word heretical, as
likewise no other ambiguous word contained in this Oath, in that strict and
rigorous sense, wherein some Catholics take the word heretical, to wit, for
that doctrine which not only contains a falsehood repugnant to the holy
Scriptures, but also which by the Church or a general Council, which
represents the Church, is expressly and particularly declared and defined so
to be, but it suffices that we take the word, heretical, in a proper and
usual signification, and wherein Catholics do commonly take it, especially
when this common sense is agreeable to the meaning and understanding of the
Lawmakers: for that, according to the approved rule before set down in the
second observation, in a penal and odious matter, when the words of any Law
are doubtful or ambiguous, and there be many common senses of the same word or
sentence, we ought to take them in that common sense, which is more favorable,
especially when it is not against the meaning of the Lawmakers.

6. Neither also is it necessary to make any Doctrine or Position to be
heretical, that the proposition with all particular circumstances therein
expressed, must be contained in the holy Scriptures, but it suffices, that it
contain a particular falsehood, which only in the general is expressed in the
holy Scriptures, and that no particular word, or circumstance be added in the
particular proposition, which does make it not to be contained in the general
falsehood, as a particular in the universal. For which cause, these
propositions, It is lawful for one to take from his neighbor his purse, or to
murder him with a pistol, if he live a wanton or wicked life, are
heretical, and repugnant to those words of holy Scripture, Thou shall not
steal, Thou shall not kill, Exodus 20.
although those particularities of being a wanton or wicked man, or of killing
him with a pistol, are not expressly contained in the holy Scriptures, because
they do not give any warrant to stealing or killing, or make that particular
stealing or killing not be included in those general words, Thou shall not
steal, Thou shall not kill.

7. First therefore, although by reason of the matter of this Branch we may
truly abjure as heretical, not only the Doctrine of murdering, but also of
deposing Princes, which are excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, yet if we
only regard the force and virtue of the express words, according to the
plain and common sense and understanding of them, to which the seventh clause
of the Oath tyeth the swearer, we are not bound to abjure both Doctrines as
heretical, but it suffices, by virtue of the words, to abjure as heretical,
only the Doctrine of murdering such Princes, as Widdrington has showed in
his Theological Disputation, In his Theolog. Disp. cap. 5. Sec. 2.
and proved more at large in his Answer to Fitzherbert, in the end of the
second part. And the reason is, for that to make heretical a conditional
disjunctive proposition, which implies a free choice to take either part of
the disjunction if we please, it suffices that one part of the disjunction be
heretical, although the other part be not heretical, but perchance most true
and of faith, which contrariwise happens in an absolute disjunctive
proposition, which supposes and implies no such condition or choice. As for
example, This proposition, It is lawful for any man to honor or blaspheme
God, if he will, or, which is all one in sense with this, Any man may lawfully
honor or blaspheme God, is false and heretical, and may be abiured as
heretical, although one part only thereof be heretical, and the other part of
faith: For such conditional disjunctive propositions, for as much as concerns
the truth or falsehood of them, do not follow the nature of an absolute and
ordinary disjunctive proposition, but of a copulative proposition, to the
verity whereof is required, that both parts must be true, and to make it false
and heretical, it suffices that only one part thereof be false and
heretical, whereas contrariwise to the verity of an absolute disjunctive
proposition, which implies no such choice or condition, it suffices that one
part thereof be true, and to make it false and heretical, both parts thereof
must needs be false and heretical: for which cause this proposition, God is
honored or blasphemed by good and virtuous men, is true, because one part of
the disjunction is true, and this proposition, God is honored and blasphemed
by good and virtuous men, is false, because both parts of the proposition are
not false, but one of them is true.

8. That this proposition, Subjects may lawfully depose, or murder their
Prince, who is excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, or which in sense is all
one with the Doctrine and position contained in this Branch of the Oath (seeing
that only the Verb passive is changed into the active) is such a conditional
disjunctive proposition, as implies a free choice and condition to take either
part of the disjunction if we please, as likewise all such disjunctive
propositions, wherein the Conjunction [ or] follows the Verb [ may] do
imply and suppose, according to the usual signification of our English phrase,
a free choice and condition to take either part of the disjunction if we
please, Widdrington proves by many examples of propositions, neither can there
be alleged scarce any one proposition, wherein it is not commonly so taken. As
for example, You may stay here or depart: You may eat or drink: you may buy in
such a place Wine or Oil: You may have in the shambles Beef or Mutton: You
may go to such a place by land or by water: You may buy that land in fee-farme
or by lease. The King by virtue of an Act of Parliament, may take of convicted
Popish Recusants, twenty pounds for every month, or the third part of all
their lands. The Sheriff may presently hang a thief condemned to die, or delay
his death for some small time. If any person hold any lands of any other Lord,
then of the King, by Knights service, he may give, dispose, or assure by his
last Will and Testament, two parts of the said lands holden by Knights service,
or of as much thereof as shall amount to the full yearly value of two parts.
If a man by his last Will and Testament ordain, that his Executors may bestow
twenty pounds upon the poor, or repair such a Bridge, it is in the free
power of the Executor to choose whether of those two he please. Finally, in
clauses of reuocation, where the words are, That one may by any deed in his
life time, or by his last Will and Testament, revoke the said uses, and limit
new, it is in his free power and choice, to do it by the one or by the other,
as he shall think good. In these, and infinite such like examples, which may
be brought, the Verb [ may] implies a free power to choose either part of the
disjunction one pleases, neither can there scarcely be alleged any one
example, wherein the Conjunction disjunctive [ or] immediately following the
Verb [ may] is not commonly so taken: and especially when the latter part of
the disjunction, which is affirmed, is no way less certain, but rather more
certain then the former part: which note, I wish the Reader to observe chiefly
for the Doctrine of this present clause, which does not affirm, that Princes
being excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be murdered or deposed by
their subjects, for then some might imagine the sense to be that such Princes
may be murdered or at least wise deposed, because the deposing of such
Princes, is lesser then the murdering of the^, but seeing that it is affirmed,
that such Princes may be deposed or murdered, it is manifest, that the
Conjunction [ or] can not signify at least wise, because if the Doctrine of
deposing such Princes may be abiured as heretical, much more and not much
less the Doctrine of murdering them may be abiured as heretical.

9. And by this it is apparent, that to abjure as heretical this Doctrine, and
conditional disjunctive position, That Princes which be excommunicated or
deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their subjects, or any
other whatsoever; it suffices by force and virtue of the words, only to
abjure as heretical the Doctrine of murdering such Princes, although, by
reason of the matter, it be lawful (as you shall see forthwith) to abjure as
heretical not only the Doctrine of murdering, but also of deposing such
Princes.

10. That the Doctrine of murdering such Princes is heretical, or, which is
all one, contains in it a manifest falsehood, which is repugnant to the Word
of God, it is evident by those two places of holy Scripture cited by
Widdrington, Thou shall not kill, Exodus 20. which words are general and common
to every unjust killing, and Kill him not, for who shall extend his hand upon
the Lords anointed, and be innocent, 1. Reg. 26. Which words are proper and
peculiar to the murdering of Princes. Neither does the excommunicating, or
depriving of Princes by the Pope, which are added in this Doctrine and
position, give sufficient warrant to murder such Princes, although we should
admit that the Pope has authority to deprive them; for that Excommunication
depriueth only of spiritual graces, and deprivation only of temporal
Kingdoms, but neither of them of corporal life, as Suarez also confesses.
Suarez in defens. etc. lib. 6. cap. 4. nu. 10. and seq.
Yea we may truly abjure as manifestly false, damnable, and repugnant to those
words of holy Scriptures, Thou shall not kill, and consequently as heretical,
this Doctrine and position, That it is lawful for every man to kill a
malefactor, who is condemned by the Judge to dye, for that the sentence of
death denounced against him by the Judge does not give leave, license, warrant,
and commission to every man to put him to death, but only to the Sheriff, or
others, who are appointed Executioners of justice in that case.

11. That the Doctrine also of deposing such Princes is heretical, and
contains a manifest falsehood repugnant to the Word of God, it is evident; for
that to take away by force and violence the Crown and Kingdom of a Prince who
is in possession thereof, only upon a probable or controuersed title, is open
injustice, as you have seen before in the fifth Observation; and consequently
Theft and Rapine in a most high degree, and therefore repugnant both to that
precept of the Decalogue, Thou shall not steal, and to the third
Commandment, Honor thy Father and Mother, wherein the honor and reverence,
which is due from subjects to their Prince, who is the Father of the Country,
is according to the doctrine of all Divines included, and it is also specially
against that commandment of our Savior, Render to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, which precept includes also the negative, not to take away from
Caesar that which is his due, Matthew. 22.
as contrariwise that precept, Thou shall not steal, includes also the
affirmative, to render and restore back what has been wrongfully taken away.
Wherefore there is no more scruple to be made, to abjure the aforesaid Doctrine
and position as impious, damnable, and heretical, then to abjure it as
manifestly false and injurious to Princes, seeing that the manifest falsehood
and injustice contained therein, is expressly repugnant to the word and
commandment of God revealed to us in the holy Scriptures: and it is also
grounded upon these two manifest principles, and which without manifest
impudency cannot be denied by any man; The one, that it is a contouersie among
Catholics, whether the Pope has authority to deprive Princes, and the other,
that it is open injustice to depose, or to thrust one out of his possession
upon a title, which is not most certain but in controversy.

12. Lastly, I wish the Reader to consider the third and last exposition of
this Branch, which Widdrington brought in his Theological Disputation, and
defends at large in, his Answer to Fitz-herberts Reply against the same, to
wit, that albeit in regard of the matter, we may lawfully abjure for
heretical, the doctrine not only of murdering, but also of desposing Princes,
which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, yet, by force and virtue of
the words, we are not bound to abjure either the doctrine of deposing, or
also of murdering such Princes, for heretical, but only as heretical, that
is, for a very false and injurious doctrine in the highest degree almost of
falsehood and injustice, and which therefore in regard of the abhorring,
detesting, and abiuring thereof, has some resemblance and similitude with
heretical doctrine, although we take the word heretical in the most strict
and rigorous sense that may be. And the reason is, for that the Aduerbe [ as]
being an Aduerbe of similitude, does properly and usually by force and virtue
of the word denote only a similitude, and if at any time it signify an
identitie, equality, or realtie, as (sometimes it does, but most commonly it
does not) it is not by force of the word, but only in regard of the matter, to
which it is applied. And this Explication will serve very well to convince the
wilfulness of him, who out of his hatred to this Oath, will contrary to all
reason, and the rules before assigned out of Suarez, needs have the word
heretical to be taken only for that, which the definition of the Church
makes heretical, and which before was not heretical, although it was most
evidently false, and repugnant to the holy Scriptures, and the word impious
only for that, which is against piety, which is due to God or carnal Parents,
albeit otherwise it be never so wicked and injurious to Princes who are the
Fathers of the Country. For we may very well answer him, that the Aduerbe as
being an Aduerbe of similitude, and by force of the word, and, according to the
plain and common sense and understanding of the same, signifying only a
similitude, and not a reality, but in regard of the matter to which it is
referred, does in this Branch denote only a similitude of that strict and
rigorous Heresy and Impiety, because the matter, to which it is applied, will
not suffer it to signify a doctrine impious and heretical in that strict and
rigorous manner, but only by way of comparison and similitude: and then the
sense and meaning of this Branch is, that I do abhor, detest, and abjure
that doctrine and position as impious and heretical, that is, in a most high
degree of horror and detestation, and not much unlike to the detesting of that
doctrine, which is impious and heretical, in that overmuch strict and rigorous
manner. Nevertheless this Explication, as has been showed above, is not
necessary, but only for such wilful persons, as do seek to expound the words
of the Oath in the most odious sense, contrary to the plain and common
understanding of them, and the true meaning of the Lawmakers.

CHAP. V. The Fifth Branch of the Oath, and an Explication thereof.
ANd I do believe, and in conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope nor
any person whatsoever has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part
thereof. 1. This Clause has in it no more difficulty, then is in the former,
seeing that it implies, supposes, and is grounded upon the justice and
verity of the Third and Second Branch. First, therefore by those words. [ And
I do beleeue] is not understood a supernatural belief, but only a moral
credulity, as the next words [ and in conscience am resolued] which are an
explication of the former, do sufficiently declare: and the sense of them is,
that I do think and am persuaded in my conscience, that neither the Pope,
etc. For it cannot with any reason be imagined, that the words which are last
added, must diminish, but rather increase, or at least wise more fully declare
the truth and verity of the former words: As for example, it were unaptly
spoken to say, that such a one is a man, and also a living creature; Princes
may be murdered, and also deposed by the Pope: I do most certainly believe
so, and also I do think or am persuaded so.

2. Secondly, the meaning of this Clause is not to deny the Popes power to
absolve, or dispense in Oaths in general, but only in this Oath, or any part
thereof, as the express words do plainly signify; neither does it follow,
that because the Pope cannot dispense in this Oath, therefore he cannot in
other Oaths, wherein there is not the like reason as of this, or that because
he can dispense in other Oaths, wherein there is not the like reason,
therefore he can dispense in this.

3. Thirdly, neither is it the meaning of this Clause, that if perchance any
one should offend God by taking this Oath against his conscience, thinking it
to be unlawful, the Pope has not power to absolve him in the Sacrament of
Penance from the guilt of sin thereby committed, but only the meaning is,
that the Pope has not power to absolve or dispense, with any man in this Oath,
or any part thereof, that is, to free, release, and discharge him from
performing any of those things, which in this Oath he has promised to
perform, or, which is all one, to give him leave or license to do against
that, which in this Oath he has promised to do, or not to do. For all the
parts and parcels of this Oath are either assertorie, as that Our Sovereign
Lord King James is lawful and rightful King of this Realm, etc. and that the
Pope has not any power or authority to depose him, etc. or to authorize any
foreign Prince to invade or annoy Him or His Countries, or to discharge any
of His subjects of their Allegiance, etc. and that from my heart I do abhor,
detest, and abjure as impious and heretical, etc. and no assertorie Oaths can
be dispensed withal, neither has the Pope any power or authority, according
to the received doctrine of all Divines, to absolve any man from the bond of
these kind of Oaths; So S. Thom. 2. 2. q. 89. ar. 9. and all other Divines.
And the reason is, because the matter of an assertorie Oath being of an act
present or past, is now made altogether necessary and irreuocable, for that as
soon as ever the Oath is made, it is either true or false by reason of the
truth or falsehood of the act which now is past. Wherefore seeing that it is
impossible, that the act which is past, be not past, so also it is impossible,
that the Popes Dispensation or Absolution can alter it or recall it: for it is
impossible, that the act of swearing, which is now, or has been true, be not
now, or has not been true: Or else they are promissorie, to wit, wherein some
thing is promised for the future time to be done, or not to be done. And only
these kind of Oaths can be dispensed withal. For as well says Saint
Thomas, S. Thom. 2. 2. q. 89. ar. 7.
with whom all other Divines do herein agree, the bond of an Oath is referred
to some thing which is to be performed or omitted, wherefore it does not
appertain to an assertorie Oath which is of a thing present or past, but only
to a promissorie Oath.

4. Now in this Oath of Allegiance only three things are promised by the
swearer, all which are contained in the third Branch; to wit, that
notwithstanding any declaration or sentence of Excommunication or deprivation
made or to be made against the Kings Majesty, his Heirs or Successors,
First, he will bear faith, and true allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors: Secondly, he will defend them to the uttermost of his power
against all Conspiracies etc. and Thirdly, he will make known unto them all
Treasons and traiterous Conspiracies, which he shall know or hear of to be
made against any of them. Wherefore there is no more difficulty in this
Clause, then is in the third, whereon this Clause is chiefly grounded. And
therefore it is most evident, that the Pope has no more authority to Absolve,
or dispense in any of these three things, which the swearer promises, then he
has authority to depose the King, and to make him no King: for that it is
most certain, as Cardinal Bellarmine him self confesses, Bell. in Tract.
contra Barclai. cap. 21. page 202.
that Subjects are bound by the Law of God to bear faith and true Allegiance
(which includes the resisting and disclosing of all Treasons and Traitorous
Conspiracies) to their lawful Prince, so long as he remains Prince: seeing
that it is evident, as well observes Suarez, Suarez in Defens. etc. lib. 3.
cap. 3 number. 3.
that the obligation of obedience in any degree or state whatsoever does so
long endure in the subject, as the dignity, or power and jurisdiction does
endure in the Superior, for these are corelatiues, and the one depends on
the other. Therefore it is manifest, that the Pope has no more authority to
absolve, or dispense in this Oath, or any part thereof, to wit, in those three
things before mentioned, then he has to make Kings no Kings, and to deprive
them of their Regal dignity, power, and jurisdiction.

5. Fourthly, neither is it the meaning of this Clause, that the Pope has not
any power to absolve the swearer from the promise which he makes to perform
those three things mentioned in the third Branch, only with this reduplication,
as it is sworn or confirmed by Oath, or, which is all one, only from the
sacred and religious bond of the Oath; but the meaning is, that the Pope has
not authority to absolve from this Oath or any part thereof for as much it
concerns the civil and natural obligation of temporal Allegiance; both for
that, when it is said that the Pope has authority to absolve one from an
Oath, which he has made to do some certain thing, the meaning is, (according
to the plain and proper signification of the words, the common Doctrine of all
Divines, and the usual practices of Popes, who when they absolve from any
Oath, they absolve from all obligation whatsoever contained therein See the
Canons Nos Sanctorum, Iuratos, Absolutos.
) that the Pope, has authority to release him of that promise, and to give
him leave to do otherwise then he has promised by Oath to do: And also for
that his Majesty and the State, according to whose meaning especially the
doubtful words of this Oath are to be understood and determined, do little
regard this subtle quircke of refined wits, whether the Pope has power to
absolve his Majesty's subjects from the sacred and religious bond of their
natural Allegiance, or, which is all one, only as it is sworn, or confirmed
by Oath, so that notwithstanding the releasing of this sacred bond, they may
be assured, that the civil and natural obligation of the subjects temporal
Allegiance, to the confirmation whereof this Oath is superadded, does remain
inviolable, and indispensable, and by the Popes authority cannot any way be
dissolved or diminished, but that his Subjects, although they might by the
Popes authority be absolved from the sacred bond of their Allegiance as it is
confirmed by Oath, are nevertheless by the Law of God and Nature obliged to
bear faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, and that therein the Pope has
no authority to dispense.

6. And although we should for Disputation sake admit, that it were the
meaning of this Clause, that the Pope has no authority to absolve the swearer
so much as from the Sacred bond of this Oath, or any part thereof, or, which is
all one, from any of these three things promised in the third Branch, only with
this reduplication as they are sworn, or confirmed by Oath (of which nice
subtlety his Majesty and the Parliament by all likelihood little dreamed) yet
any man may with great reason think, and in conscience be resolved, that the
Pope has no such authority: for that, according to the common doctrine of
Divines, the Pope has not power to absolve from Oaths, when the absoluing from
them tends to the temporal prejudice of a third person, unless either
directly or indirectly he has power to dispose of the temporal goods of that
person. For he has not power, says Sotus, Aragona, and Sayrus Scotus lib. 8.
de Instit. q. 1. art. 9.

Aragona 2. 2. q. 89. art. 9.

Sayrus lib. 5. Thesauri cap. 8. number. 4.


to release an Oath which one has made to another man to pay him that debt
which he owes him, because he has not power to take from another man that
which is his own, and therefore he can not do him wrong in releasing the Oath
which was made unto him. Wherefore this difference is between Vows and Oaths,
that in changing and dispencing of Vows that only must be regarded which is
more pleasing to God, but in releasing of Oaths great caution must be used,
that no wrong be done to a third person.

7. And this is far more evident in the doctaine of Saint Thomas, S. Thom. 2.
2. qu. 89. art. 9.
whom the greatest part of Divines do herein follow, who houldeth, that the
Pope cannot dispense in Oaths by releasing directly the sacred obligation of
the Oath, for that this obligation is de iure naturae, wherein the Pope cannot
dispense, but only by declaring, that the thing promised by Oath, which before
was a fit thing to be sworn, and therefore by virtue of the Oath to be
performed, so long as it remains so, is now, by reason of some particular
accident or circumstance, become unlawful, hurtful, or an hinderance of
greater good, and therefore now no fit matter to be sworn, nor by virtue of
the Oath to be now any longer performed. From whence it plainly follows,
that the Pope cannot absolve from this Oath of Allegiance, unless he has
power to declare, that temporal Allegiance, which Subjects by the Law of God,
and Nature owe to their lawful Prince so long as he remains Prince, be
unlawful, hurtful, or an hinderance of greater good, which he cannot in any
wise declare, unless he has power to make a King no King. For consequently
he should also declare, that God and Nature commanding Subjects to bear true
faith and Allegiance to their lawful Prince, should enjoin them an unlawful
or hurtful thing, or which is an hinderance of greater good, which is
impossible. And so in this Clause there is no more difficulty concerning this
point of the Popes authority not to absolve from this Oath of Allegiance, or
any part thereof, then is in the former clauses, wherein the Popes authority
to depose Kings, and to absolve Subjects from their natural allegiance, is
denied.

8. Lastly, by those words [ nor any person whatsoeuer] is not understood the
Kings Majesty: Both for that in the Laws of this Realm the Kings Majesty is
not understood by the name of person, or persons, when the matter is odious:
and also, as in no penal law the Prince or Lawmakers himself is included under
any general word, because he is not subject to such laws, according to that
principle of the law, Princeps legibus solutus est, The Prince is free from
laws: Leg Princeps. ff. de Legibus.
so also when it is said in the Law, that no person whatsoever has power to
dispense in that law, or to change or alter that Law, the Lawmakers himself,
who is above the Law, is not comprehended under those general words; yea and,
as well observes Salas and Sa, both Jesuits, In a general speech the person
who speaks is understood to be excepted. Salas disp. 21. de Legibus sec. 3.
regula 22. and Emanuel Sa verbo Interpretatio. nu. 14.


9. And although we should admit, that the Kings Majesty were included in
those words [ nor any person whatsoeuer] yet this clause would nevertheless
be very true: And the reason is, for that albeit his Majesty has power to
dispense with his subjects, that they shall not take this Oath, which is not
the meaning of this Clause, yet he has not power to absolve them from this
Oath, or any part thereof after they have once taken it, which is the true
sense and meaning of this Branch. First, for that to dispense or absolve from
Oaths (taking those words [to dispense or absolue] according to their proper
signification, and as they are taken commonly by Divines) does belong only to
spiritual and not to temporal power. Wherefore the Divines make a great
difference between absoluing or dispencing in Oaths or Vows, and releasing
or annulling the same; and they affirm, that to release or annull an Oath or
Vow, a temporal power, yea and sometimes private authority may suffice, as
Parents may release and annull the oaths and vows of their children; but to
absolve or dispense in an Oath or Vow, a spiritual authority and jurisdiction
is necessarily required. But secondly, and principally, for that his Majesty
has not power to release his subjects from their temporal and natural
allegiance, unless he will cease to be their Prince, because temporal
allegiance is by the law of God and Nature due to him from his Subjects, so
long as he remains their Prince; and therefore he cannot absolve, discharge,
or release them from the Obligation of this Oath or any part thereof; or, which
is all one, he cannot give them leave, not to bear faith and true allegiance
to his Majesty, and consequently not to defend him to the uttermost of their
power against all Treasons and traiterous conspiracies, which shall be made
against his Royal person, Crown and dignity, and not to do their best
endeavor to disclose, and make them known unto his Majesty, seeing that to
perform all these things Subjects are bound by the law of God and Nature,
wherein no temporal or spiritual authority can dispense. And therefore the
Author of the Protestants Apology for the Roman Church, trac. 3. Sec. 5. does
very well affirm, that all Catholics are by all Laws, Divine and Humane,
indissolubly obliged in the highest degree of all earthly Allegiance to his
Majesty that now is, as to their true, undoubted, lawful Sovereign liege
Lord and King.

CHAP. VI. The Sixth Branch of the Oath, and an Explication of the same.
WHich Oath I acknowledge by good and full authority to be lawfully ministered
unto me: and do renounce all pardons and dispensations to the contrary. 1.
This Branch contains in it no difficulty at all, if we consider what has
been said before; to wit, that in this Oath is only demanded a sincere
profession of true temporal allegiance, and that no authority or obedience,
which is due to the Pope, is denied therein: And that to treat of the Popes
authority, not affirmatively what power he has, but affirmatively what
authority in temporalls the Kings Majesty has over his Kingdom and
Subjects; and consequently what authority in temporalls the Pope has not over
the said kingdom and subjects: and also, that to exact of Subjects an Oath not
only of their temporal allegiance in general, but also of such allegiance in
particular, which his Majesty and the State shall for prudent reasons and
motives think to be necessary for the preservation of the Kingdom from
future Treasons, Invasions, or Perturbations, so that it be contained within
the bounds of true temporal allegiance, does no way exceed the limits of
temporal authority.

2. First therefore by those words [ good and full authoritie] is not
understood any authority of the Kings Majesty in Ecclesiastical causes, but
only in temporal matters, as is the ministering of an Oath of true temporal
allegiance. For although his Majesty be persuaded, that he has full and
supreme authority not only in temporal, but also in Ecclesiastical affairs,
for external government; and that the Pope has not over him or his Subjects
within this Realm, any authority or jurisdiction, nor power to excommunicate
his Majesty, yet his meaning is not to meddle at all in this Oath either with
his own, or with the Popes Ecclesiastical Supremacy, but only with his own
temporal Sovereignty, and consequently with the Popes authority not to
depose him, or to dispose of his Kingdom, or to authorize any foreign Prince
to invade or annoy him, or to absolve his Subjects from their obedience, etc.
And therefore, as I observed before in the third observation, we must
distinguish betwixt his Majesty's understanding or persuasion, and his meaning
or intention: for his meaning was not to exact in this Oath of His Subjects all
which he is persuaded he might lawfully exact of them, but only to demand of
them in this Oath a profession of that temporal Allegiance, which all Subjects
are bound by the Law of God to give to their lawful Sovereign, as it is
manifest by the declaration both of His Majesty and also of the Parliament:
and therefore He was careful not to meddle with the Popes authority to
excommunicate Him,

3. Secondly, it is certain, that albeit Christian Princes have not authority
to define and determine what position is heretical, or to punish Heretics
with spiritual punishments (for these are mere spiritual things) yet they
have authority to command their subjects to abjure such positions as are
already defined, or known to be manifestly false and repugnant to the holy
Scriptures, for such: and to punish with temporal punishments the obstinate
maintayners of the same, especially as the mayntayning of such positions is
hurtful to the public temporal peace, whereof the King has charge: and who
therefore may also by the material Sword repel the wrongs and injuries
offered to the temporal Kingdom or Commonwealth by Clergymen, and also the
abuses of the spiritual Sword, when they tend to the hurt of the civil
Commonwealth, as Franciscus Victoria, Ioannes Parisiensis, and Couerruuias do
well observe. Victoria Relect. 1. de potest. Eccles. sec. 7.. octaua propositio.

Parisiensis de potest. Reg. and Pap. cap. 11. ad 37.

Couerruu. cap. 35. Practic. question.


Wherefore a King, says Dominicus Bannes, Bannes 2. 2. q. 11. ar. q. 1.
does punish Heretics as most seditious Enemies to the peace of His Kingdom,
which cannot be preserved without unity of Religion. And Marriage, says
Dominicus Sotus, Sotus in 4. did. 29. q. 1. ar. 4.
being a Sacrament in such sort, that it is also a civil contract, it nothing
lets, but that as in the former respect it belongs to the Ecclesiastical
Court, so in regard of the later it is subject also in some sort to the Civil.
Not that Princes can alter those things which are of the substance of
Matrimony, but that they may punish them, who contract they shall offend
against the public peace: for against those crimes, whose judgment does
belong to the Ecclesiastical Court, they may also ordain punishments, as they
disturb the peace of the Commonwealth. Which doctrine of Sotus may in the very
like manner be applied to Heresy, which being a spirirituall offense in such
sort, that also it disturbeth the temporal peace of the Commonwealth, it
nothing lets, but that as in the former respect it belongs to the
Ecclesiastical Court, so in regard of the later it is subject also in some
sort to the Civil; not that Princes can determine and define what is Heresy,
but that they may punish Heretics, when by defending heretical positions,
they shall offend against the public good. For against those crimes, whose
judgment does belong to the Ecclesiastical Court, they may also ordain
punishments, as they disturb the peace of the Commonwealth. And therefore
Christian Princes have good and full power to compel their Subjects to abjure
impious, damnable, and heretical positions for such, when it is necessary to
the preservation of the public temporal peace, and to discover how their
Subjects stand affectted in point of their Loyalty and due Obedience.

4. Thirdly, it is evident, that Clergymen being truly subject to temporal
Princes, in regard of their natural birth, and of their living in Civil
Society with others, and consequently bound, according to the common doctrine
of Divines, to observe their just Laws not only virationis, but also vi legis,
by force of the Law, do owe true Allegiance to their natural Prince, no less
then Lay men, and that therefore he may lawfully demand of them, as they are
Subjects, an Oath of their Allegiance, whenever he shall justly suspect
their fidelity. And although some Clergymen should be so capricious, as to
imagine, contrary to the practice of the Primitive Church, the doctrine of the
Ancient Fathers, and manifest reason, that they are not subject at all to the
authority of temporal Princes, and thereupon should make a scruple to take
this Oath as lawfully ministered to them by good and full authority, yet this
could not be a sufficient proof, that the Oath is unlawful in it self, or
that Laymen cannot lawfully take it, and also acknowledge, that it is lawfully
ministered unto them by good and full authority.

5. Lastly, in those words [ And I do renounce all Pardons and Dispensations
to the contrarie] is not employed a renouncing in general of the Popes
authority to give Pardons and Dispensations, but, as the words do plainly
signify, in them is only contained a denial of the Popes authority to
dispense with the Swearer, or to give him leave and license to do contrary to
that which he has promised in this Oath. Wherefore the verity of these last
words is chiefly grounded upon the lawfulness of the Fifth Branch. For if the
Pope has no power and authority to absolve the Swearer from any part of this
Oath, because those three things before mentioned, which he promises to
perform, he is bound by the Law of God and Nature to perform, and that
therein no authority of Pope or Prince can dispense, it is manifest, that he
may lawfully renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to the contrary.

CHAP. VII. The Seventh Branch of the Oath, and an Explication thereof.
"ANd all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear
according to these express words by me spoken, and according to the plain and
common sense, and understanding of the same words without any equivocation, or
mental evasion, or secret reseruasion whatsoever. 1. This Branch is greatly to
be regarded, for that it expressly declares, in what sense the Swearer is
bound to take all the parts and parcels of this Oath. And first, by those first
words And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear,
etc.] it is manifest, that the immediate object of all this Oath and every part
thereof, or, which is all one, that which in all the former Branches I do
directly and immediately swear, is my plain and sincere acknowledgement, to
wit, that our Sovereign Lord King James is the lawful and rightful King of
this Realm, etc. and that the Pope has not any power or authority to depose
him, etc. and that I will bear Faith and true Allegiance to His Majesty, etc.
and that from my heart I do abhor, detest and abjure as impious and
heretical, etc. and that I do believe and in conscience am resolved, etc. and
that it is lawfully ministered unto me by good and full authority, and that I
do renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to the contrary. Whereupon the Oath
concludes thus: And I do make this recognition and acknowledgement heartily,
willingly and truly upon the true faith of a Christian. So that the plain and
proper meaning of this Branch is, that whatsoever I do swear in this Oath, I
do swear plainly and sincerely according to these express words, etc.

2. Secondly, the meaning of those words [ without any equivocation, etc.] is
not, that there is not to be found in this Oath any equivocal words, and
which may not have two proper and usual significations, especially if they be
taken barely and by themselves alone (for if we consider them as they be
joined with other words and make a full and perfect sentence, and do also duly
regard the intention of the Lawmakers with the other observations before set
down, we shall hardly find any one sentence in this Oath so equivocal or
ambiguous, that according to the common understanding of men it has two
senses, equally common, which is properly to be equiuocal.) But the plain and
proper meaning of those words is, that the Swearer must not in this Oath
equivocate, or use any equivocation, mental evasion, or secret reservation
whatsoever, but that he must deal plainly and sincerely according to the mind
and intention of the Lawmakers. For it is one thing to use equivocal words,
and an other thing to equivocate, or to use equivocation, because one may use
equiuocal words, and not deceive or delude the hearer, for that he uses the
words in that sense, wherein the hearer understands them. But to equivocate
implies a fraudulent, deceitful, and insincere dealing by using the words in
an other sense, then the hearer understands them.

3. Wherefore the plain meaning of this Branch is, that albeit in this Oath
there might be found diverse common senses of the same words, yet the Swearer
must not equivocate, but he must take the words in that sense, wherein the
Lawmakers understands them, with whom he is bound, by virtue of this
Branch, to deal plainly, sincerely, without any guile, fraud, deceit,
evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever. But if perchance there should any
difficulty arise concerning any ambiguous word, or sentence contained in this
Oath, and the will, meaning, and intention of the Lawmakers could not be
known, then we must use those rules, which, according to the approved
doctrine of all Divines and Lawyers, we have above set down for the
interpreting of doubtful and ambiguous speeches in any Law. And namely among
the rest, that in penal Laws and odious matters the milder and more
favorable sense, and which contains in it no absurdity, is to be chosen.

4 Seeing therefore that, according to the doctrine of all Divines, it is not
lawful to equivocate, or to use equivocation, but we must answer plainly and
sincerely according to the meaning and intention of the Judge, when he
proceeds iuridically, and demands no unjust and unlawful thing, but which
he has authority to demand, it is manifest, that the verity of this Branch
depends wholly upon the lawfulness of the Oath, and upon the authority of
the maker thereof, and that consequently there is no difficulty in this
Clause, supposing the lawfulness of the former Clauses, and that this Oath is
lawfully ministered by good and full authority.

CHAP. VIII. The Eight and last Branch of the Oath.
"ANd I do make this recognition and acknowledgement heartily, willingly, and
truly, upon the true faith of a Christian. So help me God. 1. The
lawfulness of this Branch depends wholly upon the verity and justice of the
former Clauses, and will clearly appear, if we suppose, as has been showed
before, that this Oath of Allegiance contains in it no falsehood or injustice,
and that it is ministered under great penalties by lawful authority, to make a
trial how his Majesty's subjects stand affected in point of their loyalty and
due obedience. For as Vasquez observes very well out of Aristotle, Vasquez 1.
2. Disp. 51. cap. 3. and disp. 73. cap. 7. and disp. 86. cap. 5.
with whom all Divines and Philosophers do herein agree, to make an act of
virtue to be morally good and virtuous, it is not only required, that it have
a good and virtuous object, but also it must be done directly for the
goodness and honesty of the virtue it self, and not for any other end or
motive. For otherwise if one do acts of virtue, as of justice, or temperance,
not for justice or temperance sake, but for some other end, as for lucre, vain
glory, fear of punishment, or any other motive whatsoever, he sholl do,
says Aristotle, Aristot. 2. Ethic. cap. 4.
just or temperate actions, but he shall not do them justly or temperately,
neither shall he for doing those actions be accounted a just or temperate man.
Seeing therefore that every just and virtuous man ought to observe just Laws,
not for fear of punishment as the wicked do, but heartily, willingly, and
truly, that is, sincerely, and unfeignedly, for the love of virtue, it is
evident, that every good and well affected subject may and ought to take this
Oath of Allegiance, supposing it to be lawful and ministered by good and full
authority, not for fear of punishment, as likewise we ought to observe God
his commandments, not for fear of eternal damnation, but heartily,
willingly, and unfeignedly, for the love of virtue and obedience. Wherefore it
is manifest, that every good and virtuous Subject ought to have a far greater
willingness in observing just Laws, although they be imposed under pain of
death, then has a Merchant being in danger of drowning, to cast over board his
goods for saving his life: for that a Merchant in that case is only willing to
lose his goods, for that otherwise he cannot escape the danger of his life,
but every virtuous man ought to observe just Laws heartily, willingly, and
unfeignedly, for virtue and obedience sake, although he were in no danger of
being punished for not observing the same.

2. And thus thou see good Reader, that this new Oath of Allegiance does not
want either Verity, Justice or Judgment, as well in regard of the takers, as
of the makers and propounders of the same: That the State, supposing that
horrible Powder Treason, which was grounded upon color and pretense of the
Popes authority to take away the Crowns and lives of Princes in order to
spiritual good, had just cause to devise a new Oath of Allegiance, wherein
mention should be made of the aforesaid authority, to make a true difference,
betwixt ciuilly obedient Subjects, and the perverse disciples of those Powder
Traitors, it is evident by that which has been said before in the fourth
observation: and that therefore the State in devising and propounding such an
Oath did not want Judgment. Also that the Subject has just cause to take the
Oath, supposing it to be lawful and ministered by good and full authority,
and that consequently in taking it, after he has examined and seen the
lawfulness thereof, does not want Judgment, it is as evident, as that there
is no want of Judgment to observe the just commandment of his Lawful
Superior, when after due examination he finds the commandment to be just.
And finally, that no assertorie Clause of the Oath wants Verity, nor any
Promissorie Clause wants Justice, or, which is all one, that no falsehood or
injustice is to be found in any part or parcel of the Oath, it is manifest by
the former Explication of every Branch in particular.

CHAP. IX. An Answer to the Popes Breues.
1. THere remains only one difficulty to be explained concerning the Popes
Breues, which forbid English Catholics to take this new Oath for that it
contains many things which are plainly against faith and salvation. And
although Widdrington both in his Theological Disputation, and also more fully
in his Answer to Fitz-herberts Reply has cleared this difficulty,
Wriddrington in his Disput. Theolog. cap. 10. sec. 2. and in his Answer to
Fitzherb. part. 3. cap. 7.
yet I think it not amiss briefly to set down some general heads of his
answer to the said Breues, whereby any judicious man may have sufficient
grounds to judge not only how far the Popes aforesaid Breues, but also all
other of the like kind may without any irreuerence or disobedience to the Sea
Apostolic be contradicted, or not admitted by good and virtuous Catholics.

2. First therefore, Widdrington shows out of the approved Doctrine of Suarez
and other Divines, that there be two sorts of Laws or Precepts, the one are
called Constitutiue, for that they do not suppose, but make the thing, which
they forbid, to be unlawful, which, if that Precept were not, would be
lawful, as the Precept of the Church to fast from Flesh in Lent, to abstain
from servile works upon commanded Holy Days, to receive the Blessed Sacrament
at Easter, or the like: And that no Constitutiue Precept of the Church does
bind, when by observing it there is danger to incur some notable corporal
or temporal hurt. The other are called Declaratiue, for that they do not
make, but suppose and declare the thing to be unlawful which they forbid, as
being forbidden by some former Law; as the forbidding of Theft, Murder,
Whoredom, Usury, and such like, for that they are before forbidden by the Law
of God and Nature: And that the obligation of Declaratiue Precepts does only
depend upon the reason and former Law, which in the Declaratiue Precept is
supposed and declared: So that if there be no such former Law or prohibition,
as in the Declaratiue Precept is supposed and declared, the Declaratiue Precept
has no force to bind.

3. Secondly, he shows, that the Popes Breues forbidding English Catholics
to take the Oath, do not contain a Constitutiue, but only a Declaratiue
Precept, neither do they make, but suppose and declare the Oath to be
unlawful, for that, say the Breues, it contains in it many things, which are
manifestly against faith and salvation; and that consequently, if in the Oath
there be nothing against faith or salvation, as the Breues suppose and
declare, it is manifest, that the Breues have no force at all to bind English
Catholics not to take the Oath, for that they are grounded upon a false
reason, supposition, and declaration.

4. Thirdly, he shows that all declaratiue Breues are either definitive, or
grounded upon some former definition, of Pope or Council, or else they are
only opinatiue, or grounded upon the Popes opinatiue judgment, persuasion, or
probable opinion: And that if they be grounded upon the Popes opinion, no man
is bound to obey them, as neither to follow his opinion, whereon they are
grounded: but he may as lawfully contradict them, as he may contradict his
opinion, although the Pope think it to be never so probable: And that upon
this ground, cause, and reason, it was lawful for Catholics to contradict
the declaratiue Breue of Pope Nicholas the First, De consecr. did. 4. can. A
quodam Iudaeo.
wherein he declared, that Baptism ministered in the name of Christ without
expressing the three persons of the B. Trinity was valid and true Baptism:
And the declaratiue Breue of Pope Celestine the Third, Which was once extant in
the Canon Law, in cap. Laudabilem de controuers. coniugot.
wherein he declared, and, as Alphonsus de Castro says, Castro lib. 1. de
haeres. cap. 4.
he defined, that Marriage is so dissolved by heresy, that the party whose
Consort falls into heresy, may lawfully marry an other, which Doctrine is
now condemned in the Council of Trent: Sec. 24. de Reform. can. 5.
And the declaratiue Breues or Letters of Pope John the 22. who publicly
taught and declared, that the souls of the Blessed should not see God, before
the resurrection, See Castro lib. 3. contra haeres. verbo Beatitudo haeres. 6.
Bellar. lib. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 14. Hadrianus Papa in quaest. de Confirm.
circa finem, and other Histories.
wherein he was contradicted by the Doctors of Paris, and caused to recall
his Doctrine: And the declaratiue Breue of Pope Boniface the eight, wherein he
declared, that Philip the French King was subject to him in spiritualls and
temporalls, wherein he was contradicted by the French Nation, and taxed of
wonderful impudency. See Nicolaus Vignerius ad annum 1300.


5. Fourthly, he shows, that the Popes declaratiue Breues forbidding
Catholics to take the oath, for that it contains many things which are
manifestly against faith and salvation, are neither definitive, for that they
are not directed to the whole Church, nor do contain any of those rules,
which, according to Cardinal Bellarmine and other Divines, is required to a
true and infallible definition of faith (for only of this kind of definition
now we speak) and that although they were definitive, yet considering that it
is a probable Doctrine, that the Pope has no authority infallibly to define
without a general Council, no Catholic is bound to give more credit to his
definition, then to follow his probable Doctrine and opinion: neither are they
grounded upon any former definition of Pope or Council, and which all
Catholics are bound to admit for a true definition, as Widdrington has
proved at large by answering all the Decrees and Canons of Popes or Counsels;
which Lessius (masked under the name of D. Singleton) has scraped together.
But they are grounded only upon the opinatiue judgment of the Pope, and some
other Divines of Rome, who then were of opinion, that many things are contained
in the Oath manifestly repugnant to faith and salvation, for one of these two
grounds and reasons, or rather for both: The first, that the Popes power to
excommunicate, and consequently his spiritual authority is denied in the
Oath: and that the Breues were chiefly grounded upon this reason, Widdrington
conuinceth by the Popes answer to Fa: Parsons; Widdrington against Fitzh. part
3. chap. 17.
by the consult and resolution of the Divines of Rome; by Cardinal Bellarmine
Bellarmine in his Answer to the Apology, page 9.
(who doubtless would not in this point dissent from the opinion and
resolution of the Pope, and the other Divines of Rome, nor they from him)
affirming that in the Oath is plainly or manifestly denied to the Pope, power
to excommunicate even heretical Kings, for which he is deservedly taxed by his
Majesty of manifest falsehood: and lastly, by those words of the Breues, that
in the Oath are contained many things, quae aperte aduersantur fidei, which are
plainly or expressly repugnant to faith: But none of our learned Adversaries
dare affirm, that the denial of the Popes power to depose Princes, is
plainly and expressly repugnant to faith, but at the most, tacit, and tecte,
conertly, and closely, and that by many far fetched (and ill deduced)
inferences and suppositions: See Suarez lib. 6. cap. 1. de Iuramento
fidelitatis.
and that therefore they supposed with Cardinal Bellarmine, that the Popes
power to excommunicate, is denied in the Oath: The second ground or reason is,
that the Popes power to depose Princes, to dipose of their temporalls, and to
absolve subjects from their temporal allegiance, which doubtless is denied in
the Oath, is a clear point of faith, and not in controversy among
Catholics, both which grounds and reasons are manifestly false, as has been
sufficiently convinced by the former Discourse: and consequently, that it is no
more unlawful not to obey the Popes declaratiue Breues forbidding Catholics
to take the Oath, they being grounded upon the aforesaid reasons and
suppositions, which are manifestly false, then it is unlawful not to approve
the said false reasons and suppositions, for that a declaratiue precept has no
more force to bind, according to the Doctrine of Suarez, (which is also
conform to manifest reason) then has the reason and supposition whereon it is
grounded.

6. Lastly, he shows out of the doctrine of Dominicus Sotus, and other
divines, Sotus de de delegendo secretoto memb. 2. nu. 2. See Widdrington in the
Discovery of the 15. colum of D. Schulked.
that if a Prelate, or any other Superior command a thing, which the Subject
doubts to be unjust, and the thing which is commanded be in prejudice of a
third person, who is in possession of his goods and good name, it is no
irreurence, or disobedience in the Subject not to obey, propounding to his
Superior with all humility and reverence the reasons of his doubt. Seeing
therefore that Widdrington has in the name of English Catholics propounded
to his Holiness the reasons which moved them to doubt, that his declaratiue
Breues were not just, as being greatly prejudicial to his Mtiesties temporal
Sovereignty, and namely for that they were grounded upon the two aforesaid
false reasons and suppositions, and that they have not had as yet any
satisfaction concerning those their doubts, it is not only manifest, that they
cannot be justly taxed of any disobedience or irreuerence to his Holiness, for
not obeying the aforesaid Breues, but also it is an evident sign, that his
Holiness could not satisfy their doubts, and that now he plainly sees, that
he and his Divines were mistaken, and that his declaratiue Breues were grounded
upon those false reasons and suppositions which he could not justify or make
good: Otherwise he would without all doubt, in regard of his Fatherly care, and
Pastoral charge, have sought to have given them all possible satisfaction in
this point, which so nearly concerns not only their souls health, and
their temporal states and liberty, but which also is so injurious to his
Majesty, and so scandalous to Catholic Religion, giving occasion to all
Protestant Princes and subjects to persuade themselves, that the profession of
the Catholic Roman Religion cannot stand with true and constant loyalty, but
that it is a Nurcery of unjust Invasions, Rebellions, and Powder-Treasons.

7. Wherefore, (for the last farewell) I beseech you again and again (dear
Countrymen) not to forget those two most certain Principles, whereon is
chiefly grounded the Doctrine for the justifying of the Oath, and for the
securing of Princes from all traiterous Conspiracies, practices, and attempts,
under the color and pretense of the Popes authority to depose them; to wit,
that it is a great controversy among learned Catholics, and therefore not
certain, but truly probable, that the Pope has no authority to deprive
Sovereign Princes, and that no power or title, which is not most certain but
in controversy, can be a lawful ground, whereby immediately any man may be
punished, or deprived of that right, dominion, or any other thing which he
really and bona fide possesses; both which Principles, are, as you have seen,
so clear and manifest, that no learned man can from his heart deny them,
howsoever some one or other for some temporal respect, end, or motive, may
speak or write contrary to his mind and knowledge.

8. But, as Widdrington toward the end of his Answer to Fitzherberts Preface
well observes out of Molina, and Lessius, both famous Jesuits, there is a
great difference betwixt the possessing of temporal and corporal goods, as
Lands, Houses, Crowns, Kingdoms, and the like, and the possessing of
authority, Jurisdiction, rights, and claymes, which one may pretend to have to
such temporal goods. For that possession properly is only of temporal goods;
and such goods may properly be possessed, although the party, who has true
right to those goods, contradicts never so much; but rights, and claymes are
not properly possessed, but they are only said to be, as it were, in some
sort, or improperly possessed: and besides, to the possessing of power,
authority, jurisdiction, right; or claim to any temporal thing, in such
manner as right, jurisdiction, and claim may be said to be possessed, it is
necessary, that the right or claim, which is pretended, be without
contradiction and resistance of the adverse part. Otherwise if one should
challenge any right or authority be it good or bad, true or false, and should
exercise that pretended right or authority, the adverse part contradicting, he
might nevertheless be said to be in possession of that right or authority,
which is manifestly false and absurd. For so if a Layman should pretend to
have true spiritual jurisdiction over Clergy men, as power to excommunicate,
and should exercise that pretended jurisdiction, he might be said to be in
possession of true spiritual jurisdiction, although the Clergy should never
so much contradict and except against the same. And for this reason, albeit
some Popes have for as many hundreds of years, as have been since the time of
Pope Gregory the Seventh, challenged a right and authority to deprive Kings
of their regal Sovereignty, yet they cannot be said to have been for one day
or one hour in possession of that their pretended right and authority,
because Christian Kings and Subjects, from the time of Henry the Fourth
Emperor, who was the first Emperor that was deprived by Pope Gregory the
Seventh, until the time of Henry the Fourth most Christian King, who was the
last King who was deprived by Pope Sixtus the Fifth, have ever resisted and
contradicted this pretended authority and claim of Popes to deprive them of
their temporalls. And although perchance there should have been, or hereafter
shall be some or other Christian King, who for some private or public respect
and interest, has not, or shall not resist the Popes sentence of deprivation
denounced or to be denounced against him, but rather yield thereunto, yet this
cannot prejudice his successors, or be a sufficient ground, that the Pope may
be truly said to be in possession of his pretended right, authority, and
claim to deprive Kings in general, but at the most to deprive that King in
particular, who did not resist or gainsay, but rather acknowledged the right
and authority, which the Pope claimed to deprive him.

9. Finally, although it may be objected, that diverse Popes have practiced
the deposing of Princes, and many learned Divines have approved the said
practice, therefore the practice being approved by many learned and skillful
men in the Art which they profess is truly probable, even according to
Widdringtons grounds, which he takes from Vasquez: Yet this is easily answered.
For those Popes and learned men in approving that practice for lawful, did
either think assuredly, that the doctrine for the Popes power to deprive
Princes was most certain, unquestionable, and out of all controversy, and
that the contrary doctrine was not at that time, nor could lawfully be
approved by any learned Catholic, which howsoever those Doctors might at that
time think or be persuaded (wherein nevertheless they were greatly deceived,
because even from the first broaching of this doctrine and practice by Pope
Gregory the VII. A thing unheard of before that Age, says Onuphrius, Onuphr.
lib. 4. de varia creat. Romans Pont.
it has ever been a great controversy, says Azor the Jesuit, Azor. cited
above in the Sixth Obseruat.
between Popes and Emperors) yet now it is so clear and manifest, that there
is at this time a great controversy among learned Catholics concerning this
authority of the Pope. as that all the World both by the public writings and
proceedings in this controversy can give sufficient testimony of the same: Or
else those Popes and Doctors, did not consider and examine the difference
betwixt speculation and practice, but without any further examination, thought
every doctrine that was probable and approved by learned men in speculation,
and might speculatiuely and abstracting from practice be disputed in Schools
pro and contra, might also be practiced, and put in execution, not considering
whether it tends to the prejudice of a third person, and to the dispossessing
him of that which he actually and bona fide possesses, or no, whereas it is
most certain and out of all controversy, (as has been showed above) that it
is open injustice to deprive upon a probable or controuersed power or title any
man of that which he has really in his possession.

10. Now it is evident, according to Vasquez doctrine which Widdrington
follows, and which stands with manifest reason; that the approbation, and
authority of ancient or modern Doctors is not sufficient to make their
doctrine probable to other learned men, if either their doctrine be grounded
upon some principle, which to those learned men is manifestly false, or it may
be confuted by some reason, which to those learned men seems invincible and
not to be answered, and which reason those Doctors have not seen, considered,
and examined; Obseruandum tamen maxim est, etc. But it is greatly to be
observed, says Vasquez, Vasquez 1. 2. disp. 62. cap. 4. nu. 18. cited by
Widder. in disp. Theolog c. 10. sec. 2. nu. 16.
that it may sometimes fall out, that the ancient Writers, whose opinions are
now in controversy, did not consider some Reason, Law, or Decree, which has
great force against their opinion: but contrariwise that the later Doctors
being convinced with that Reason, Law, or Decree, do now defend the contrary
opinion. If therefore a learned man seeing that Law or Decree, or considering
that new reason does defend the opinion of the later Writers against the
ancient, he cannot follow in practice the opinion of the ancient Writers,
against his own opinion, or which is all one by reason of their authority and
approbation, because the opinion of the ancient, who have not seen, or
considered that Decree, or Reason, ought not now to be accounted probable. And
therefore Widdrington defining probable to be that, which is approved by
learned and skillful men, for the better understanding and explication of the
last words, he added, who have seen and examined the difficulty, for if they
have not seen and considered that particular difficulty and controversy,
they cannot be accounted learned and skillful therein.

11. Now the particular difficulty, and controversy concerning this point, and
which those Popes and Doctors mentioned in the objection did not consider and
examine, is, whether, supposing it to be now a controversy, and to be
apptooued by learned Catholics, that the Pope has no authority to deprive
Princes, it be not open injustice in the Pope to deprive Princes of their
Kingdoms and Dominions, which they really and bona fide do possess. And
therefore unless it can be convinced, that it is not at this day a
controversy among learned Catholics, whether the Pope has authority to
deprive, which is as hard a matter, as to prove, that the Sun does not give
light at noone days, or else that it is lawful upon a doubtful, uncertain,
controuersed and probable power or title to thrust by violence any man out of
that, which heeactually and bona fide possesses, the practice of deposing
Princes, under pretense of the probability of the Popes power to deprive
Princes, cannot be accounted probable to any learned man, so much as to excuse
him in conscience, and in the sight of God from formal sin and injustice.

12. But to conclude with this Observation, which I wish you (Dear Countremen)
diligently to consider; That howsoever any Subject concurring in practice with
the Pope to the deposing of his lawful Soueraigue Prince, may under pretense
of some probability of the doctrine to depose Princes by the Popes authority,
persuade himself, that he is excused from sin and formal Treason in his
conscience, and before the sight of God, (wherewith Princes not knowing the
secrets of men's hearts, but leaving them to the judgment of God, do not
intermeddle in their Tribunals) yet considering these two things: The first,
that it is most certain and out of all controversy, that he is excused in
conscience, and before the sight of God from all sin and offense in defending
his lawful Prince, who is in possession, and in resisting such invasions and
depositions which are grounded only upon a probable power and title, whereas
he cannot with any reason assuredly persuade himself, that he is secure in
conscience by taking part with the Pope against his Prince, who is in
possession of his Crown: The Second, that it is also most certain, and out of
all controversy, that he may justly in taking the Popes part against his
Prince being invaded and deprived under pretense of a probable power and title
(although in very deed the power and title were never so probable) be accused
and condemned both in the Secular and also Ecclesiastical Court of the Prince
invaded of open and manifest Treason, and as a manifest Traitor be deservedly
put to death: for that it is open injustice in the Pope (says the Author of
the Prelate and the Prince) to deprive a Prince of his Kingdom to which he
has probable right, and withal possession, and consequently it is open
Treason in the Subject to take part with the Pope in that case against his
rightful Prince. These two things, I say, being duly considered, I think
those Subjects to be stark mad and senseless, and to have neither the fear
of God nor Man before their eyes, that can be drawn to approve such damnable
practices, and consequently neither the doctrine, grounds, and principles
thereof: or to concur with the Pope, to the deposing, and dispossessing of
their Sovereign Prince, under pretense of a power, title, and claim, which
even in speculation, and abstracting from practice, can be at the most but
probable. And so recommending to your prudent considerations this my serious
and sincere advertisement I make an end, and request you ever to have in mind,
that which I said in the beginning and cannot too often repeat: Fear God,
Honor the King: Render to God and Caesar (and consequently to Popes and
Princes) that which is their due. 1. Pet. 2. Mat. 22.


A Copy of the Oath of Allegiance, or the First Article, which the Lower House
of Parliament (wherein of 200. Deputies for the Third Estates were but six
Protestants) propounded to the French King, to have established for a
fundamental Law, in the general Assembly of the three Estates, holden at
Paris in the year 1614.
The First Article of the Third Estates, taken out of a Book entitled,
Apology de l'Article primier du Tiers Estat. page 4.
THat, to stay the course of that pernicious dostrine which some years since
has been broached, against Kings and Sovereign powers established by God, by
seditious spirits, who attend only to disturb and subvert the same,
Supplication may be made to the King, that he will cause to be decreed in
the Assembly of these Estates for a fundamental Law of the Realm, That, for
as much as he is acknowledged Sovereign in his Estate, nor houlding his
Crown but from God alone, There is not any power on Earth whatsoever it be.
Spiritual or Temporal, which has any right over his Kingdom to deprive the
sacred persons of our Kings, nor to dispense or absolve for any cause or
pretense whatsoever, their Subjects from the Allegiance and obedience which
they owe to them: That all the Subjects of what quality or condition soever
they be, shall hold this Law for holy and true, as agreeable to the Word of
God, without distinction, equivocation, or limitation whatsoever: Which shall
be sworn and signed by all the Deputies of the Estates, and from henceforth by
all that have Benefices or offices in the Kingdom, before they enter into
possession of their Benefices, and be admitted into their Offices: That all
Masters, Regents, Doctors, and Preachers shall be bound to teach and publish,
that the contrary opinion, to wit, that it is lawful to kill and depose our
Kings, to rise up and rebel against them, to shake of the yoke of their
obedience, for any occasion whatsoever, is impious, detestable, and contrary
to truth, and against the establishment of the State of France, which depends
immediately on none but God: That all Books which do teach that false and
perverse opinion, shall be held for seditious and to be censured: All
Strangers that shall write and publish it, for sworn Enemies of the Crown:
All his Majesty's Subjects, that shall adhere unto it, of what quality or
condition soever they be, for Rebels, infringers of the fundamental Laws of
the Kingdom, and guilty of Treason in the higstest degree. And if there be
found any book, or Discourse written by any Stranger Ecclesiastike, or of any
other quality, that contains any proposition contrary to the said Law
directly or indirectly, the Ecclesiastikes of the same Order established in
France shall be bound to answer them, to impugn and contradict them
incessantly, without respect, ambiguitie, or equivocation, under pain of being
punished with the same punishments as above said, as abetters of the enemies of
this State.

This Article is in effect and substance all one with our new Oath of
Allegiance, and the lawfulness thereof is manifest by the former Discourse;
and how greatly Card. Peron was mistaken in impugning the said Article,
Widdrington shows both in his Answer to Fitz-herbert part. 3. chap. 11. number.
15. and seq. and in his Discussion of the decree of the Lateran Council
against Lessius part. 2. sec. 9. and part. 3. sec. 9.

A Copy of the Arrest, or Decree of the Parliament of Paris, wherein Card.
Bellarmine his book against William Barclay is condemned.
Taken out of the Records of the Court of Parliament, the 26. of November 1610.
THis present day the Kings Solicitours, ( Lewis Seruin the Kings Attorney
making the Declaration, and Lewis Duret the Kings Advocate subscribing)
advertised the Court, that it was related to them, that some few days since
there has been divulged in this city of Paris a new book entitled Tractatus
de potestate Summi Pontificis in temporalibus aduersus Gulielmum Barclaium,
Auctore Roberto S. R. E. Cardinale Bellarmino. Romae per Bartholomaeum
Zannetti, printed this present year; out of which book diverse persons, some
with a good intent, and others with an evil, have divulged many things, which
they have collected from thence. And because this Book does contain
propositions, which are prejudicial to the Kings power and authority, and to
the State of France, of whom the Author speaks in the same manner as of other
Kings, Princes, and Commonwealths, they have through their care gotten a Copy
thereof, which they having exactly read and examined, thought it their duties
to advertise the Parliament of those things, which are against the Powers
established by God, and especially against this Kingdom. Wherefore they have
observed, that Cardinal Bellarmine does in this new Treatise not only teach
those propositions, which he affirmed in his former books, as in that book
which is entitled, De Romani Pontificis Hierarchia written in the time of Pope
Sixtus the V. and dedicated to the said Pope, which he has divided into five
books, in the last whereof he maintains, that the Pope has temporal power
indirectly; But they also have observed, that to this erroneous assertion
others no less false, and tending further are added in the places by them
cited, which the Parliament, if it be so pleased, may behold. And first the
very Title is to be observed, wherein he gives to the Pope a power in
temporals. Then he brings diverse authorities from the writings of Italians,
Frenchmen, Spaniards, Germans, English and Scots, beginning with Pope Gregory
the VII. who lived in the year of our Lord 1073. etc.

Wherefore to the end that fraud and deceit may for the safeguard of true French
men be prevented, the aforesaid Attorney general considering, that in regard
of Conscience, and the office which he bears in being the Kings Attorney, he
is bound sincerely to discharge his duty, produces Cardinal Bellarmines
book, which was written, when our King Henry the Great was living (in whose
reign none durst adventure to diuulge the same) but published forthwith as
soon as he was dead, wherein he has noted diverse places, which the
Parliament may peruse, especially page 37, 38. 57. 58. and 76. 77. to which may
be added 160. 115. 116. And moreover, he exhibiteth in written hand the
requests, which the Kings Attorneys do in the Kings name demand; to wit, that
by Decree of the Parliament it be enacted, That none of what quality or
condition soever, shall receive, have, keep, print or utter this book of
Bellarmine, under pain of Treason ordained against those that shall transgress
the same, etc.

The matter being examined, The great Chamber, Criminal, and of the Edict
being assembled.
THe Court has decreed and does decree, that no person of what quality or
condition soever, under pain of Treason ordained against those that
transgress the same, do receive, keep, communicate, print, utter, or sell
the said Book, which contains that false and detestable proposition, tending
to the subversion of supreme Powers established and ordained by God inciting
Subjects to rebellion, and derogating from the authority of Princes, animating
to attempt against their lives and Crowns, and finally to disturb the public
peace and quietness.

Those that have Copies of the said Book, or know any that have, are
commanded forthwith to make it known to their Judges, that, upon the demand of
the Kings Attorneys, Inquisition be made against the Crime, and those that be
guilty be punished accordingly. It forbids under the same punishment
Doctors, Professors, and others, to treat, dispute, write, teach directly or
indirectly in Schools, Colleges, or other places, the said proposition. The
said Court does ordain, that this Decree be sent, read, published, recorded,
and observed according to the before said manner and form in all the Benches
subject to the Jurisdiction of this Court. The Substitutes to the Kings
Attorney are commanded to cause forthwith this Decree to be put in execution,
and to advertise the Court within a month of their diligence.

Made in Parliament upon Friday 26. Nouemb. 1610. Signed VOISIN.

The decree being made, the Kings Attorneys were sent for, to whom the pleasure
of the Court was signified, and according to the Decree the said Book of
Bellarmine was delivered to their hands.

A Decree of the Court of Parliament made the 26. and executed the 27. of June
1614.
Against a Book printed at Collen this present year, which is entitled,
Francisci Suarez Granatensis Societatis Jesus doctoris Theologi Defensio fidei
Catholicae and Apostolicae aduersus Anglicanae sectae errores, containing many
maxims and propositions contrary to the Sovereign powers of Kings ordained
and established by God, the safety of their persons, the peace and quietness
of their States.

The Place where the Kings arms of France and Navarre are set By F. Morel and
P. Mettayer the Kings ordinary Printers and Stationers 1614.
With his Majesty's Privilege.
Taken out of the Records of the Parment.
The Court of the great Chamber, Criminal, and of the Edict assembled, having
seen the Book printed at Collen this present year, entitled, Francisci
Suarez Granatensis Societatis Jesus Doctoris Theologi Defensio fidei Catholicae
and Apostolicae aduersus Anglicanae sectae errores, containing in the third
Book Chap. 23. p. 376. 79, 80, 82. Chap. 29. p. 410. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
17, 18, 19, 20. Chap. 6. page 834. Chap. 8. page 844. and in other places many
propositions contrary to the Sovereign powers of Kings ordained and
established by God, the peace and quietness of their States, and that it is
lawful for their subjects and strangers to attempt against their persons:
Conclusions of the Kings Attorney general.

All which being considered;
The said Court has declared and does declare the propositions and maxims
contained in the said Book to be scandalous and seditious, tending to the
subversion of States, and to induce the subjects of Kings and soueraign
Princes, and others, to attempt against their sacred persons: and the
discourses, making mention of King Glodoueus and Philip the Fair, to be false
and slanderous: Has ordained and does ordain the said Book of Suarez to be
burned in the Court of the Palace by the Executioner of high Justice. Has made
and does make injunctions and inhibitions to Stationers and Printers, not to
print, sell, or utter it, and to all persons of what quality or condition
soever, not to have, copy out, keep, teach in Schools nor in other places,
nor to dispute the said maxims and propositions. It does ordain, that,
according to the Arrest made the 8. of June 1610. that the Decree of the
Theological Faculty made the 4. of June the same year of renewing the
doctrinall Censure of the said Faculty made in the year 1408. confirmed by
the Council of Constance, together with this present Arrest or Decree, as also
those of the year 1578, and 95. be read every year the 4. day of June as
well in the said Faculty, as in the College of the Priest and Scholars of
the College of Claremont, This College of Claremont, is the Jesuits College.
and of the four Mendicants. And that at the instance of the Kings Attorney
general informations be taken of the transgressions against the said Arrests:
and Inhibitions be made against the copying out, having, and keeping the like
books.

Made in Parliament the 26. day of June 1614. Signed VOISIN.

Moreover, it is decreed, that the Fathers, Ignace Armand Rectour in this
City, Cotton, Fronton, and Sirmund, shall be sent for the first day of the
Court, and it shall be showed them, that contrary to their declaration, and
the Decree of their General, made in the year 1610. the Book of Suarez has
been printed, and brought into this City against the authority of the King,
the safety of his Crown and State: And it shall be enjoined them to cause
their General to renew the said Decree, and that it be published; and that
they bring in the Act within six months; And that they provide, that no
books, containing such damnable and pernicious propositions, be hereafter
made or published by any of their Society: And that it be enjoined them, to
persuade the people by their Preachers, the Doctrine contrary to the said
propositions: Otherwise the Court will proceed against the transgressors, as
against Traitors, and perturbers of the public peace.

The aforesaid Arrest, or Decree, and what has been decreed, was pronounced
in the presence of the Fathers, Ignace Armand, Charles de la Tour, who came in
place of Father Cotton absent, Fronton du Duc, and James Sirmund: And the
Arrest was executed before the great Stairs of the Palace, the 27. of June,
1614.

A Copy of another Arrest or Decree of the Parliament of Paris, wherein the
former doctrine of practizing the deposition of Sovereign Princes is
condemned, and the former. Decrees, made against the Books of Card.
Bellarmine, and Suarez, are again confirmed.
An Arrest or Decree of the Court of Parliament touching the Kings Sovereignty
in Temporals, and against the pernicious doctrine to attempt upon the sacred
persons of Kings.
The place of the Kings Arms of France and Navarre. At Paris. By F. Morel, P.
Mettayer the Kings Ordinary Printers and Stationers. 1615.

Taken out of the Records of the Parliament.
WHereas the Kings Attorney General has complained to the Court, all the
Chambers thereof being assembled, that albeit by many Arrests or Decrees,
heretofore made with great and mature deliberation, the Court has confirmed
the Maxims, which have at all times been held in France, and are naturally
engrafted to the Crown, That the King does not acknowledge any Superior in
Temporals of his Kingdom but God alone, And that, no power or authority can
rightfully release his Subject; from the Oath of Allegiance and Obedience which
they owe to Him, nor suspend, deprive, or depose him from his said Kingdom:
and much less, to attempt, or to cause to attempt either by public or private
authority against the sacred persons of Kings: Nevertheless it has been
aduertized, that by Discourses, as well in private as in public, many persons,
do presume to call in question the said Maxims, to dispute of them, and to
hold them for problematike, from whence may arise very many inconveniences,
which of necessity must be provided against, and that speedily: He (the said
Attorney) requesteth, that seeing the Court is assembled, all businesses set
aside, it will be pleased to ordain, that the said Decrees shall be renewed,
and again published in all the Benches subject to the Jurisdiction of this
Court; to the end that the minds of all the Kings Subjects, of what quality or
condition so ever, may be kept firm and assured concerning the said Maxims,
and Rules, and for the safety of the Kings life, the public peace and
quietness: With Inhibitions not to transgress the same under the penalties
set down by the said Arrests. And that it be enjoined to all their Substitutes
to cause the publication thereof to be made, and to certify the Court within a
month, under pain to be deprived of their Offices.

The Court, all the Chambers being assembled, has ordained and does ordain,
that the Arrests of the 2. December. 1561. the 29. December. 1594, the 7. of
January, and the 19. of July 1595. the 27. of May, the 8. of June, and the 26.
of Nouemb. 1610. and the 26. of June 1614. shall be kept, and observed
according to their form and tenor. Forbidding all persons, of what quality
or condition soever, to transgress the same. And to this end they shall be
published in the Bayliwikes, Stewardships, and other Benches subject to this
Court by the care of the Substitutes to the Attorney General, who shall
certify the Court with in a month under pain to answer it at their peril.

Made in Parliament the second of January 1615. Signed VOISIN.

The lawfulness of all these Arrests or Decrees is manifest, partly by that
which has been said in this Treatise, in the Fourth and Fifth Observation, and
in the Second, Third, and Fifth Chapters, and more particularly by Widdrington
in his Discussion of the Decree of the Lateran Council against Lessius, part.
2. sect. 9. for that Christian Princes by virtue of their temporal power have
good and full authority (according to the doctrine of Ioannes Parisiensis,
Ioh. Paris. de potest. Reg. and Pap. c. 21. ad 37.
Victoria, Victoria Relect. 1. de potest. Eccles. sec. 7.. octaua propositio.
Sotus, Sotus in 4. did. 29. q. 1. ar. 4.
Ba^nes, Bannes 2. 2. q 11. ar. 4. q. 1. in fine.
Couerrunias, Couerr. cap. 35. pract. quest.
and which is grounded in manifest reason) to forbid the maintayning, teaching,
and publishing, not only of heretical erroneous, and false propositions, but
also of all unnecessary doctrines and positions, be they never so probable, as
the teaching and publishing of the same is dangerous to the Crowns and lives
of temporal Princes, and tends to the subversion of the State, and to the
disturbance of the public peace in the Civil Commonwealth, whereof the
Prince has charge, and to punish with temporal punishments the teachers,
maintayners, and publishers, of such dangerous and seditious doctrines.

Haec omnia Ecclesiae Catholicae indicio subiecta sunto.
FINIS
Page Line Faults corrected. 8. 13. would would not. 35. 4. at first at the
first. 71. 16. Authors Author. 87. 27. or unlawful or lawfully. 133. 20.
bound bound. 144. 16. bound bound. 146. 10. dipose dispose. 187. 1. and to be
and be. 191. 4. Deputies Deputies.


