blazon or coat of arms
BE it known to all Criste^ people that sir John^ Pyllet Eng(...) Knight of
the holy sepulcre of Criste coming from Iherusalem / was ta(...) Mauris and
Infidels cruel ennemys unto cristes feithe / and by them throu(...) their great
torments and thretnynges of death was compelled either to leu(...) feithe and
to follow and observe their most da^pnable sect and laws outhe(...) unto
them many millions of ducates of gold / and because the said Knyg(...) to lose
the goods of this world than he woldes deny the faith of Christ(...) the
joy of everlasting life / has bound himself in the su^me of.ii.M. d(...)
(...)tayne Venycians the which did pay the said su^me of.ii.M. ducatis out of
hands to the fore(...) (...)ris and Infidels for the delyuerau^ce of the said
Knight from their prison and tourmentes. Fert(...) foresaid Knight is bound by
the oath of his religion and by laudable ordynau^ces and statut(...) to come in
his own person or by some sufficient man for hymnat without his great costs
a(...) his great Master now and for the time being as often as he shall be
called to fight for the (...) Christian feithe against the said Infidels cruel
ennemies unto christian religion. And where also (...) full to the said Knight to
come contrary to his oath and profession. And it is also honest t(...)
(...)chauntes of Venyce should be recompensed and satisfied of their duty the
which can not be d(...) Knight except he should selle such lands and goods
Immouable which he has within (...) ducates. And also the said (...) the
honor of that religion and Knights of the same should be compelled to beg
(...), his (...) tender consideracion whereof yt the said Knight might be some
what relyued / and that criste^ (...) be the more gladder to put to their
helping hands to the premises in asmoche as by such (...) they may trust
to obtain the health of their souls / Our holy father pope Leo that now is
(...) self not sufficient to socoure all such parsones that be oppressed and
comes to Rome for a (...) by the mercy of almighty god and by the auctorite of
saint Peter and Paul to every man and we (...) truly penytent and confessed /
which by him self or by any other man shall, put to their help and give their
alms unto the foresaid John^ Knight of the said holy sepulcre or to his
de(...) payment of the said su^me of.ii.M. ducates has released as often as
they shall do it.xv. yer(...) (...)ny lents of penance enjoined. And in like
manner for these consideracions above said.xii. Car(...) granted.xii.C. days
of pardon for every time so doing. Also my lord Archebyshope (...) (...)ry
Prymat of England has granted.xl. days of perdon. Also my lord byshope of
Lynce(...) (...)ted.xl. days of pardon. Also my lord Byshope of Rochester
has granted.xl. days of per(...) (...) my lord Byshope of Chester has
granted of his special grace.xl. days of pardon. Als(...) (...) Salisbury
has granted.xl. days of perdon. The su^me of ye hole Indulgence is.vii.M.v.
(...)

Also our soueraygne lord King Henry the.viii. has given out his letters
Patentes v(...) Seal requyrynge and praynge to all them that be his true
lovers and subiectis fauorablye t(...) messangers. Ferthermore has straytly
charged and commanded to all singular heed officers yt Mayres / baylyues / and
Co^stables of every Cite / brough / and town / as well within the liberty
(...) they to gether the alms deeds of every charitable and well disposed
person / and it so gathere(...) (...)red to the said Collectours / and they to
have for their good deed Goddis blessing and ou(...)

God save the king.

