A Discourse, Between UPRIGHT the SHOEMAKER AND MASTER PATTENT, the SMITH.

Both meeting on the Horse Exchange in Smithfield, on the 20. day of April.
1639.

Ne Suitor vltra Crepidam. By T. J. two men in conversation

LONDON, Printed by B. ALIOP, and T. F. for Francis Groves dwelling on
Snow-Hill meare the Sarazens Head. 1640.

UPRIGHT. AND PATTENT.
Pattent Whether in such have Mr. Upright; you look as if you did not know me.


Upright. I do indeed Sir, yet I am persuaded I have seen you; and now I
think ont, it was at the Sessions house.


Pattent. Right Sir, my name is Pattent; I endited Mr. Chambergaine for
receiving of Inmates:


Upright. I perfectly remember you good Mr. Pattent; how go s trading with you
now, I am afraid we shall have a dead time on it, you have little to do I
think; when Summer comes Pattents grow out of date.


Pat. You are in the right sir, and which is worss, the City had rather go wet
shod then have them brought up again


Up. Say you so, troth I cannot much blame them, for to say truth, you have not
made them set viceable for the Common wealth, you have only a respect to your
private gain Master Pattent, you got sweetly for the time they lasted.


Pat. By your savor Master Upright, now you talk of deceit in Trading, I must
tell you your own too: did you never vent Calves Leather for Neat, and
oftentimes for Spanish to some ignorant Customers: nay now you tell me of
unserviceable ware, how many of the Kings Subjects have you put in the stocks
without authority not vagranto and Beggars, but Gentlemen. Merchants, Citizens,
with their wives and aughters.


Upright. I understand your wit: you mean that I have made their shoes too
little for them.


Pat. Yes sir,


Up. They had better be in the Shoomakers stacks, then be so gauled by Pattents
as they have been.


Pat. I do not think but you have drankt your Mornings draught in Wormwood
Beer Mr. Upright.


Upright. Why?


Pat. You fall so bitter upon me:


Up. I shall be bitterer ere we part Master Pattent.


Pat. Do thy worst Shoemaker.


Upright. No no no, not the worst neither: The best I have to tell you will
make you made enough, do you remember when you were Constable Master Pattent,
when you took me in your watch on Crispine and Crispianus Night, and carried
me to the Counter.


Pat. Ha ha ha, yes I do, I do.


Up. Do you laugh at it.


Pat. Yes says, I remember you went beyond your Last then.


Upright: I remember thou were the troublesom'st tyrannical Constable that
ever knocked down iniquity with a painted staffer Thou would have a finger
in every man's business, thy very name was hateful, if they did but hear of
Pattent they were danted, thou have had a pernicious wit, or else thou could
never overcome Scriveners and Brokers, they have cursed thee sufficiently, the
low Country Butter-boxes wished ten hundred thousand funne of Devil take
thee, because they were forced to weight for Butter till you brought the
transporters to composition: And what had your Loggerhead to do with Mr.
Logwood the Dyer; thou will undertake to teach people to dye well, and thy
self could never live well.


Pattent. Very good.


Up. Not very had sir, it is you I am talking off, do you hear Pattent, the
Spanish Merchant Don tobacco vows a revenge upon thee, and I much fear he
will take thy life: for he says he will send his two Factors, Verinus and
Mandungus to stifle thee.


Pattent. The devil he will, they are from him already man he has put them to
board in blind Alehouses.


Upright. No matter, there is more ways to kill a Dog then hanging of him.


Pattent. A Dog you Dunstable.


Upright. Yes you payer Kite, and now I talk of hanging, there could not be so
much as the hangmans office to sell but Tyburne, and the rest of his kindred
must allow you a pention for it.


Pattent. So, so, so, can Saint Hugh and his bones protect you to talk thus
liberally Shoemaker.


Upright. Oh yes, yes, yes, thou giv'st me authority, I know I may talk freely
by patent my friend:


Pattent. It was Master Patent.


Upright. I that was when you traded in sheepskins and Lambskins oh thou were
a precious Woolfe in Lambskinne.


Pattent. You will answer all this, will you not.


Upright. No, I scorn it, I believe I have spoke more then thou can answer.


Pattent. But hark ye goodman Shoemaker.


Upright. Goodman Shoemaker, I deny and defy the title. I am a Gentleman, my
gentility is of Antiquity, thou art an Vpstart; Shoes were made when thy
villainous Pattenis were not thought on.


Pat. Well I may chauce shortly brew a little Worm wood for you.


Up. Brew say you, you have brewed for us already I thank you, all the
Gentlemen Cordwayners in St. Martins do wish but to have the browning of thee
for abusing the Brewers: which has made them abuse us and send us enchanted
small Beer in stead of strong, before you had a hand in the Brewhouse we could
have old English beer would makes all mad before Monday noone, now it is so
small we can scarce get drunk by Tuesday Night, a whole tun of our beer
will scarce for a Dutchman: this you have done good Master Pattent.


Pat. Shall I be blamed for this, I think I did the Common wealth a great
deal of good to keep it sober.


Up. I thou art a necessary member for in keeping of them from being drunk,
thou make them mad, as I run a Shoemaker and free of the Cordwainers, every
prentize, I had came home sober last Shrovetuesday night: It was not so I am
sure when I was a Lad:


Pat. Hay, hay?


Up. Yes and straw to, you put me well in mind on it, the horses that had been
well bred and pampered in the Country, and had their allowance of hay freely,
and lay at rack and manger, eat what they would; now they are srinted: how
many pound of hay is there in a Load Mr. Pattent.


Pat. I cannot tell?


Up. We must buy hay for our horses as we buy sigs by the pound do you
believe when you waighed Hay that Justice held the States.


Pat. I see you will have License?


Up. Not from you Jack straw, unless you were in office again:


Pat. Jack straw?


Up. I prithee answer me to one question and he just with me to a strawes
breadth?


Pat. Declare your wit?


Up. How many ounces of straw goes to the littering of a Mad man a year in
Bedlam.


Pat. It Is a mad question?


Up. I that is true, I know who I speak to.


Pattent. Why do you count me for a Madman.


Up. No for a wise man: and a man that has had experience ith mystery, this is
no question for a Madman to answer:


Pat. It seems your conversation is altogether with wise acres: was it not you
that asked the silly question once; whether Red-herrings came out of the red
Sea or no.


Up. No but it was you that made men pay as dear for them, as if they came
from thence, I wonder you had nothing to do with dainty blote herring, blote,
blote, or dried Sprats; I believe you had something to do with Gudgeons,
though thy self art as miserable now as poor John was* is it not you that one
Lent endited a poor man of Felony for frying of Bacon.


Pattent. Of Felony?


Upright. Yes of Felony, and you would needs justify it with an Act of
Parliament, which when one looked on it which had better eyes, it was not
frying of Bacon, but flering a Beacon.


Pattent. Ha ha ha.


Upright. Do thou laugh at thy own ignorance, do you hear Patent, did I
never know you a Dunghill Raker.


Pat. I a Dunghill raker, ye Pantoffle.


Up. I cry you mercy Sir, you did only rake them that raked Dunghills, look
to it, for there is an army coming against thee, whose weapons are strong iron
hooks; the Captain of them is Tattardemalion Tagragg: those that be under his
command I shall nominate to thee. Britch bottom out, Ralph Parch and stitch,
Will work and fast, Hadge Leather Scrap, Sam Scrape and take, Daniell Dunghill
Work.


And a great many more out of my memory at this time that have made up a ragged
Regiment and vow no more to be obedient to thy authority Moreover the Hop
Merchants have an intent. on to marry all the female Bonelace makers, and get
Children to fortify themselves against thee they say if thou do but come
amongst their hops again, they will scarce leave thee a leg to hop away upon,
and the Bonelace makers have taken such spirit against thee, that in stead of
Bone-Lace thou shall return with laced bones, and take my word Pattent, thou
had better be in the middle of English pikes, then amongst their Spanish
needles.


Pat. Do you hold any confedrase with this lawless faction Mr. Upright that
you can so well tell the manner of the revenges they will execute upon me.


Up. I promise thee I do not think but they will burn thee when all comes to
all, and ther^s an end of Pattent.


Pat. It must be some of your female Bonelace makers then, I care not a button
for the rest of the Rebellions.


Up. Don't you care a button? Master Panyer in Hoope Ally will make you care a
button, why thou Jack in a box, could not thou be content to gain
Authority omongst the Buttonmakers of Amsterdam, where the sisterhood might
have paid thee tribute; besides Buttons for thy breeches.


Pat. Yes when their breeches make buttons, have I lived after that rate to go
secured among Precisians you vagrants.


Up. Among Precisians you puppie, what need you confine your self to one Sect
when there is so much division amongst them.


Pat. That Is all one, they hold the greatest sway who care no more for knocking
a man's brains out in zeal, or for the good of the common cause: then I for
philiping a fly to death, I would not be within ye jurisdiction of new England
for a million.


Up. Nay I think thou had better be in the great Maguls Country:


Pat. Or have been Page to Sir John Mandevill, I should hope to return with
more security.


Up. Well, but now we have been in Amsterdam, New England, and Magoll; let us
return to old England again, where there is many honest men will welcome you
home, one Mr. Cipres.


Pat. Oh the Hathand maker.


Up. Then there is another one Mr Kitling.


Pat. A fiddle string maker?


Up. Master Clay:


Pat. A Tobackopipe maker?


Up. Master Glass Eyes.


Pat. A Spectacle maker?


up. Master Curry:


Pat. A Combmaker?


Up. Do you hear Pattent cannot you dance all trades, how many Halls have you
been free of:


Pat. What Is that to thee?


V. That is a question all men ask when they are ashamed to give an answer.


Pat. Ashamed?


up. Did I say thou were ashamed:


Pat. 'Twas your pleasure?


up. Give me thy hand I am sorry for it, I cry thee mercy I took my marks
amiss: I Will give thee thy due for that efaith I think thou were ever
shameless, have I hit the Nail on the head now Smith, are you pleased:


Pat. You have spoken all?


up. Not all, but I am drawing to an end?


Pat. Would thou had spoke thy last once?


up. I shall vex thy soul first Sirrah, unless thou can come off with good
Language, thou will suffer many Deaths in one, the Hatband maker will choke
thee or strangle thee with Cipres, the Gut string maker will make strings of
thy Guts which will cozen the Fiddlers most abhominably, for they will never
stand in Tune, the Tobackopipe makers, Spectacle makers, and Comb makers, will
compound with the Dicemakers for thy bones to make falce Dice with, and that is
a way to make thee as mischievous in thy Death as thou were in thy lifetime,
and if thy Bones prove so deceitful, we may very well turn the the other end of
an old Proverb, what was bred in thy flesh will never out of thy bones.


Pat. I have heard you, and doubt not the worst their malice aims to inflict
upon me, I have ere this my tragedy he brought to pass, contrived a means to
work revenge on them.


Up. Declare, I shall be glad to hear it, I always had an itching desire to
mischief as well as thou:


Pat. Thus then, I will bring up a fashion amongst some of our temporising
gallants to forsake the wearing of hatbonds, we will have all our fiddle
strings from Rome and Venice, and as I am a Smith. I have a conceit to make
iron tobacko pipes and steel Combs, and our old men when they once grow dim
sighted, shall have their writings read to them.


Up. I this is pretty well, but not in your power to perfect, this is a harder
project upon them, then the first you had, it will be a hard matter to draw the
humors of the whole Kingdom to these fashions: besides your iron work will
do no good, for we have many phantaslike Company keepers that only take
Tobacko to break the pipes, and shall we be beholding to other Nations for
fiddle strings or comb our heads with Horse Combs. Besides there is a strange
conceit indeed that all old men should have their writings read to them, it is
enough to undo half the old men in the Kingdom, their Mistresses shall not
send to them letters of commendation, or places of new (...) mieting, but they
must be enforced to have their wives to read them, and what inconveniency that
would bring, do but judge: No no, this will not do Mr. Pattent, I am a little
in have, I think it be dinner time, I will only give you one item more and
then i will leave you to your own direction, were you never acquainted with one
Mr. Fortune.


Pat. Yes, yes, a Horner.


Up. Ware horns, take heed of him are you marid.


Pat. What of that?


Up. Take heed of him, that is all; I speak as a Friend.


Pattent. Friendly council.


Upright. It is so, then do not you know Mr. Kill Cow.


Pat. Yes the Butcher.


Up. The very same, he has a great many friends abroad, so has Ball his Dog,
be sure you go not through field lane, Newgate market, Butcher row, St.
Nicholas shambles, East Cheap, or Southwark, there is wait laid for thee in
all these places, and if they meet thee thou will be stuck fuller of Skuers
then a Surloyne of roast beef at Christmas is stuck with Rosemary: And by all
means come not near the Bear garden for wares and Dogs are friends and all
agree, on thee to act a bloody Tragedy.


Pat. Well sirrah, you are a vailing fellow, I Will talk no more to you?


Up. One cold word more good Master Pattent.


Pat. But sirrah why does these things trouble you so much?


Up. I tell thee my name is upright, my nature is like unto my name, and I
defy such juggling in a Commonwealth, it makes my honest countrymen beg, in a
land of plenty; I have something to say to you (now I consider Christmas is so
near) concerning Cards, what new game have you set a foot, that the knave of
Dyamonds does cozen the king of Hearts and all his Subjects to the very Ace, y'
are a sure Card sirrah, when Pattent deals, all the rest do but hold Cards.


Pat. Why not, why I tell thee I will cozen my Father at Cards.


Up. Prithee do not swear i will belee ve thee, the Father quoth he, I the
Father of thy Country -- you are going now, you do not love to hear of your
faults, I have only one thing more to say to thee, and then fire or ye Iakes
consume thee.


Pat. I thank you sir, spit out your spleen, what is your next venom?


Up. No venom upon my credit, now I have laid open thy soul inside, I will
give thee a purge that is with Soape:


Pat. With Soape?


Up. With Soap, I with Soap, that was a purge dear enough as you ordered it,
all the good Huswifes in London, and those that take a pride in clean linen,
have an intention to wash thee clear from all thy former villainies; but I am a
fraid they will do no good upon thee, they will be enforced at last to hang
thee up for the sign of ye Labor in vain, which is the end I bequeath thee
too, and though I am no Barbar good Mr. Pattent, I must leave you ith suds at
this time, for I have talked my self weary, my shop Iournimen and prentises
expect me, if you have any thing to say to me, you know St. Martins, I will not
change my house now the world is in hope of reformation. So good even sweet
Master Pattent.


Pat. Farewell sir?

And though these things I can no longer thrive by,
Hang him that wants, who has all Trades to live by.
And so Master Patten,
Pray learn this martin,
The seat which you sat in,
In your furs and your satin
Must now be forsaken,
Your knavery is taken,
And toth Devil removed.
Your dearly beloved.

FINIS.

