BRIEF introductions, both natural, pleasant, and also delectable unto the
Art of Chiromancy, or Manuel divination, and Phisiognomy: with circumstances
upon the faces of the signs. Also certain canons or rules upon diseases and
sickness. Whereunto is also annexed as well the artificial, as natural
Astrologye, with the nature of the planets. Written in the Latin tongue, by Ihon
Indagine Priest. And now latelye translated into English, by Fabian Withers.

LONDINI. Apud Iohannis Day. 1558.

To the gentle Reader.
IT was the use amongste the aunciente Philosophers (most gentle Reader) that
they never admitted or received any scholar, unto whom they did not indict
and appoint a certain time to hear and keep silence: willing the^ in no wise
for to speak, until that by hearing they had learned to speak wiseli and
discretely. Whose example being present in my mind, and also the rash and
temerarious judgments of many conversant before my eyes: I thought it good to
admonish you, that following the example aforsaid, to bestow some labor and
time in perusinge and readinge this brief work of Chiromancy, or manuel
divination, before you enter into judgment of any effect or certainty of the
same. The which thing if thou diligently and attentislye do: I dout not, but
that beside the great pleasure and delectation, thou shall find therein that
thou shall in likewise repe and gather no less good fruit and profit thereof.
For herby thou shall perceive and se the secret works of nature, how aptly and
necessarily she has compound and knit each member with other: giving unto ye
hand (as unto a table) certain signs and tokens whereby to discern and know
the inward motions and affectyons of the mind and heart, with the inward
state of the whole body: as also our inclination and aptnes to al our
external actions and doings. For what more profitable thing may be supposed or
thought, then when a man in him self, and by him self, maiforsee and know his
proper and fatal accidents: and thereby to embrace and follow that which is
good, and to avoid and escliue ye evils which are iminent unto him, for the
better under standing and knowledge thereof. And for as much as the Chiroma^ci
unto some peradture may seem obscure and dark: we have anexed hereunto an
Epiloge or brief collection of the art of Phisiognomy and circumstances upon
the faces of the signs, with certain canons or rules, as well for ye knowledge,
as also for the curing and helping of diseases, very necessary and profitable.
Then orderly coming unto Astrology, we have described unto you as well by the
artificial Horoscope, as also by the natural entering of the Sun into any of
the.xii. celestial signs: the hole effect and power that any of the Planets
or erraticall stars may by any means work in us, Whereby having recourse
first unto the hand, and marking and noting such signs and tokens as therein
shall appear, then becholdinge the proportion and liniaments of the hole body,
and according to the prescript rules to way and considre the equality and
agreablenesse between them, with like respect had unto the nativity, judging
either by thartificial Horoscope, or by the natural course of ye Sun: you shall
not only see and perceive a great necessity and affinity between our
terrestrial and the celestial bodies, but also forse and know a. M. accidents
either to good or evil provided unto us, and hanging over our head. But least
that any man should think that hereby we attribute so much unto natural
providence, as though it were inevitable, and thereby use it as a refuge or
sa^ctuary, for all their evil actions and doings. Unto such we will object
thanswer of Crisippus writing in this manner. Although (says he) ye nature has
provided al thing from the beginning, and yt by her providence al things are
moved and styrred up by a certain necessary reason and motion: yet
notwithstanding our dispositio^s and minds are no further subject or in danger
thereof, then their propriety and quality is concordante and agreeable unto the
same. For if yt by nature our wits be first made holso^e and good, and after
endued with reason and understanding: either they do utterly put of and avoid
al evil influences and accidents or else receive and bear them the more easily
without hurt or damage. If contrariwise our dispositions of them selves be rude
and gross, not endued with any kind of letters or good learning to assiste and
help them withal: with every light conflict or assault of our natural
inclination, we run hedlong into al kind of errors and vice. Even folowinge
the ensample of the Cilindre stone, which by nature being apt to roll and
tomble, and being cast or thrown down in^o holow or steye places: does run
with out ceasing, not so much because it is cast or thrown, as for his own
nature and aptnes thereunto, and not having in it self any thing to withstand
the same. The aucthor him self in like manner forseing the cauillations of
certain evil disposed persons which would make al things subject unto the
influences of the heavenly bodies: before he enters to speak of the judgments
of natiuities, writes in this sort. We ought (says he) first to know and
understand that the stars do not provoke or force us to any thing, but only
makes us apt and prone: and being so disposed, does as it were allure and draw
us forward to our natural inclination. In the which if we follow yt rule of
reason, taking it to be our only guide and governor: they lose al their force,
power, and effect, which they by any means may have in, and upon us.
Contrariwise, if we give our selves over to follow our own sensuality and
natural disposition, they work even the same effect in us yt they do in brute
beasts. And this shall be sufficient at this time to answer the vain objection
of natural providence, whereby the fruit of this work might by any mean
seem to be converted into any vice or error, the which in deed of it self, is
very necessary and profitable. What should I need to stand about with long
circumstances, to describe the particular commodities of these brief works
anexed togethers: when that the labor is so small, yt with once or twice
dilligent and attentife reding, the hole effect is known and understand
Notwithstanding, I would wish and desire yt al men which shall read or take any
fruit of this small treatise: to use such moderation in perusyng of the same,
that they do not by and by take in hand to give judgment, either of their own,
or of other men's estates or natiuityes, without diligent circumspection and
taking head. Wayinge and considering how many ways a man may be deceived, as
by the providence and discretion of the man in who^ thou geuest judgment. Also
the dispensation of God, and our fallible and uncertain speculation.

Wherefore, let al men in seking hereby to forsee their own fortune, take heed
that by the promise of good, they be not so elate or high minded, giving them
selves over to osiuetye or idleness, trustinge altogether to the natural
influences, neither yet by any signs or tokens of aduersitye to be derecte or
cast down: but to take and way all thing with such equality and
moderation, directinge their state of life and living to all perfectness and
goodness, that they may be ready to embrace and follow all that which is
good and profitable, and also not only to eschew and avoid: but to withstand
and set at naught all evil and adverse fortune, when so ever it may happen
or chance unto them.

FINIS.
The book of Palmestry.
The first Chapter of the distinction of the hand.
THE ancient Greeks, who (as it may appear by yt long and old use of the word)
did use this sort and kind of Diuinatyon, which is gathered by the
beholdynge of man his hand, called it by this propre name of Chyromancia.
Wherefore I intending to write the rules and observations thereof, do think it
necessary and mete first of al to discribe the hand of man, and point out and
set forth his parts, whereby such rules and precepts as shall be given upon
this manuell divination, may the more easily be understand and known. The
hand therefore being extent or opened abroad, the plain within is called the
palm, in the midst whereof there is a certain space called the concaue or
holownesse, out of the which the five fingers have their original and
beginning. Amongst the which, the first being the strongest and most gross,
is called the Thombe: the next is called the index or forfinger, because in
showing or pointing to any thing, we do commonly use that finger. The next that
follows and is in the midst of the five, is by the same name called the
middle finger: next after this, is the ringe finger: so called, because it is
commonly to wear a ring of gold upon it, and specially that on the lefthand,
for because as learned men hold opinion, there does pass a certain small
sinnowe from that finger to the heart of man: wherefore it seemed good in times
paste to the antiquity, to wear a ringe as a crown upon that finger, or else
as some do suppose, that goulds by nature does comfort the heart. The last
finger and least of all, is called the ear finger, because it is commonly
used to make clean the ears. And thus far concerning the fingers. More
over, the hand being closed or shut with the fingers turned in, we call the
fiste, the nether part whereof (amongst such as use this Art,) is commonly
called the percussio^ or stroke of the hand. The^ the place where the hand is
drawn and gathered in, and joined to the arm, is also called the wreste.
Furthermore, every finger has his proper rising or swelling of the flesh,
which does rise at the rote or nether part of the said fingers, and of some
is called hills, and are attributed unto the names of the Planets. Among the
which is reckened the risyng or hill in the nether part of the fist, called
the percussion of the hand, so that in the hand are limited and appointed
several places unto every of the Planettes, whereby judgment may be
gathered. For the risynge or hill of the thombe is assigned unto Venus, and
marked with this carecter, the hill of the fore finger to Jupiter, and is thus
noted, the middle finger is attribute to Saturn, with this note, the ringe
finger to the Sun, with this character, the hill of the little or ear finger
is under Mercury, with this mark, the risyng or hill which is in the
percussion, the Moon does possess, and is thus figured. Now what place Mars
shall have we will show you hereafter, but first we will make description of the
incisions and divisions of the hand, which we call the lines. Amongst the
which there be two chief and principal, which be these: the wrest which
divides the hand from the arm, and is almost joined to the line of life, or
of the heart, the which beginueth under the hill of the forefinger, as it were
between the forefinger and the thombe, and does divide the hand stretchinge
downward toward the wrest. In the same side of the hand at the hill of the
forefinger, begins a line which passes overthwart the hand to the hill of
the Moon, and is called the middle crinean natural. And these two lines thus
beginning and passing sundry ways, make the form and shape of a triangle. To
the whiche^, if the line of the Liver or stomach, which begins over
against the wreste, and passes under the hill of the thombe, to the hill of the Moon, by the end of the mean natural line, do apere, as in some it does not,
it finisheth the triangle. And the space contained within these lines, is
attribute and given unto Mars, and is called the triangle of Mars, noted with
this figure.

There is also an other line called the table line, beginning under the ear
finger, at the end of the hill of the Moon, and runs to the forefinger, and
is so called, because the space between it and the middle or mean natural does
argue or show the fashion of a table, and that space is always called the
table or quadrangle of the hand, and the line is also called the line of
fortune. And these be almost the chief divisions or lines of the hand, to the
which all other less and smaller incisions and lines are referred. But now as
near as we can we will discribe them all, and as far as parteyneth to this
Art, show their nature and signification. And first I think mete to speak of
those lines, which take their denomination or name of the three principal
members of man's body, that is of the heart, the brain, and the liver. For as in
those parts, whatsoever is in man is altered and changed: so by those three
incisions and lines, a man may foresee and pronosticate what soever shall
happen, touching health, or adversity, or other things natural. The which if
any man think to be vain and triflying: let him call to remembrance the
ancient Philosophers of Pythagoras sect, who chieflye by the proporcion and
liniaments of man's body, did declare and pronosticate the manners, state, and
end of man his life. For what is said of Socrates, when that a certain man
professying the Art of Phisiognomye, or speculation: beholdynge Socrates,
judged him by his outward habyte to be a very evil manne, of unclean life,
libidinous, and given to all evil, was therefore wonderfullye rebuked of his
scholars, as though he had shamefullye flaundered him. Socrates answered,
that in deed naturallye he felt such mocions and inclinations, so that if he
had not corrected the vices, his nature by the rules of reason, he had been
such a one as he had pronounced him to be: meaning thereby all those
vices, which nature and destenye has planted in us, may easilye by reason
and custom be amended, if we will strive against destinye. And the prince of
the Paripetecians Aristotle, said, the hand of man to be made of Nature,
the principal organe and instrument in man's body. For since it is his
office to minister and serve all other parts of the body, and that in human
generation, the virtues, powers, and strength, of all members do come together.
It is very consequente and agreeable, some certain signs and tokens of the
quality and complexion of man, to be known and perceived by the hand.

Such is the proporcion of members among them selves, that they do partake one
with another in all things. And further, that this art of Chyromancie was
used in the time of Pliny, he him self does affirm. Wherefore I take it to
be my duty to admonyshe you what you ought to attribute to this art, and what
is else to be joined with it, lest any man should think to include or shut up
the knowledge of so high and great things into so straight and narow corners.
Wherefore what I think herein I think good to show. As often as I must
answer to any that enquireth, by and by as is accustomed, I look upon the
hand, and therwithal behold the whole body with the lineamentes, and
proporcion of the same, which is called his Physiognomie, (whereof in the book
following I will entreat,) then I cast my mind to the hour of Nativity,
month, day, or year: the which known, I refer strait to the rules of
natural Astrologye hereafter by me written, then plainly iudgyng none of
these by them selves sufficient. And thinking it better to judge them foles in
geuyng light credit, then I to be counted rash and folishe hastye in geuyng
sentence. So that when I have gathered all these things together, and taken
hold of that which I think meet for my use, I utter my judgment, estemyng
the point of a mad manne by lokyng only in the hand, to give judgment of
the life and all the states of man's body. And now I return to the rules of
Chyromancie.

chiromantic diagram A The table line, or line of fortune. B The line of life,
or of the heart. C The vvreste of a woman. D The pomell of the hand. E The
middle natural line. F The line of the liver or stomach.




chiromantic diagram A The table line. B The pomell of the hand. C The vvreste
of a man. D The line of the liver. E The table or quadrangle. G The hill of the
thombe. H The line of life, or of the heart I The triangle. K The middle
natural line.




chiromantic diagram The names of the fingers after the Planets.
A The imperfect table line. B The sister to the natural line. C The line of
the liver or stomach. D The sister of the line of life. E The line of life.




The second Chapter of the line of life, or of the heart.
THe line of life, called also the line of the heart, begins as is said
before at the hill of the forefinger, passing by the midst of the palm, goes
to the wrest. The which if it be long, strait, lively colored, bright and
clear, it betokens long life, endomaged with few diseases or sickness.
Pliny affirmyng the same, says: that it is token of long life to have
vpryght shoulders, and two long incisions or lines in one hand, the which are
to be understand of the line of life, and the mean natural line. If that the
natural powers be weak, and that the line do appear short and of diverse
colors, runnyng in and out, thin or slender, and cut or parted in sunder,
with many overthwart riuels or small crestes, it does declare shortness of
life, much sickness, small strength, and that he in whom this is so noted,
shall seldom or never bring any thing to a good end. So likewise, the line
gross, long, and undivided, does show all the contraries to the same. Wherefore,
if any man do require or ask a reason of this thing, we answer yt the blud,
which does norish the heart, and is also thought to be the seat and resting
place of ye mind, to be the cause efficie^t of this thing. For it is most
certain, that as ye blud is pure, or vnpure: so the line shall be colored,
either clear or dark: so as long as blood does abound, it shows reddye and
brighte: and contrariwise, pale, and swart, when the blood does fail or war
scarce. Whereby as well the natural heat diminished and the weak body, as also
the strong and lusty body is showed and declared. The^ if this line be narow,
subtle, and well colored, and stretch forth toward the mean natural: it
signifies a man of good counsel, of subtle understanding, and of an high and
princely mind and stomach. And if it be broad, il colored, and pale: it
signifies the contrary. This is always to be noted in all principal lines,
that if they be strait, not divided, neither cut, and well colored, it does
declare a good complexion: if they be contrariwise disposed or set, if shows
the contrari: Also if ye line of life be gross, deep, and diversely colored:
that is to say: one place read, another pale or swarte, is a sign of malice,
craft, envy, and the man to be a great talker, and boaster, and one that
stands much in his own conceit. If the line be gross and very red, it
betokens a crafty, a filthy, and an inconstant man, but if it be pale, mixed
with a certain redness: it signifies an angry man, almost mad with anger.
And it be very red, mixed with palenes or swarthnesse like lead: it shows an
unconstant, unshamefast, wavering, traitorous, and angry man, and delitinge to
stir up mischief, and sow discord. But if it be red in the part next the
wreaste: it signifies cruelty, and oftentimes it chances to be forked in the
upper corner, which betokens an unstable man, a runner about countries, and
marueslous in all his doings, the which if it be crooked and writhen toward
the mean natural line: if signifies a craftye, disceitfull, wanton, and a man of a perverse and froward mind: and if you happen to find in the hand
of a woman, a cross, with three small lines at the upper corner of the line of
life: it signifies an unshamefast, and dishonest woman, but if that cross be
found about the right corner in the line it self, and be deep in: it
signifies an ungodly and mischeuous woman, which shall suffer great
punishemente for her mischief. For such a cross in that line, does always
betoken euel, both in man and woman. If that there be found two lines in
thend of the rising of the thumb, nere the line of life, as they were liyng on
the one side: by ye token I judge the man to die shortly. And if ye line of
life have branches stretched out toward the mean natural, in form as you see
in the margente: it is a sine of riches, honor, and perfection. But if ye said
branches run dounward toward the wrest in this manner, it signifies poverty
and damage by household servants, through their untruth, and if the said
branches do pass strait through the triangle to the mean natural: it
signifies a man, after diverse and sondrye dangers and chau^ges of fortune,
to come to prosperity and riches. Moreover, many small lines dividing the left
line, betokens much sickness: further, if there be in the line of life certain
points or grains scattering: it declares a man unshamefast, a fornicator, and
in ieoperdy of his life for murder in a tumult, whereof he was auctor him self,
and shall be diverse times sore wounded.

When in the beginning of the line of life be three small crooked lines,
deuidinge it in this manner: it is a token of a leprosy to come, for it does
declare the il disposition of the liver, whereupon this which is already said
may be gathered, that if the line of life be long, and deep, well colored,
having a good proportion with the mean natural line, and the line of the
liver or stomach, and that they two be of due quantity and length, and well
colored: it is a good sign of long life, good nature, wit, disposition, and
complexion. And oftentimes there be found in the line of life one or of these
notes, which do signify the loss either of one, or both eyes, the which
although they be seldom found, yet in my self I have had the experience, for
in the same place of my hand is the same mark, the which when I saw, I called to
remembrance in what danger I was of one of my eyes, for sitting by the fire in
winter, I fell therein, and tumblinge in the flame with my left eye, I was
vehemently tormented. Albeit I find that not only that did prognosticate that
euel unto me, but also the opposition of Mars, and the Moon in my nativity. For
I find at the time of my birth, Mars to be in the eleuenthe house in a manlye
sign, and the Moon likewise in the fyfthe house, which constellatio^, is
observed of the Astronomers to signifye some such thing. And in so much as I
have found this true it does so much the more verify that which I said before,
that these arts were joined together, as it were by a certain alyaunce, or
affinity, and that the one without the other could very little preuail. For it is
most certain, the inferior bodies to be governed by them above, and as all
power and strength have their influence from those heavenly bodies: so like
wise al lack and default to come by them, it is most sure. Wherefore we may well
consider, that nature was a careful workman about the creation of man's body,
which has given knowledge to man diuersiy and manifoldly, to judge by these
three most noble and principal parts.

In the other parts, she has not so done. For she has set in the hand of
man certain signs and tokens of the heart, brain, and liver, because that in
them the life of man does chiefly consist. But she has not likewise done of
the eyes, ears, mouth, hands, and fete, for because those parts and members
of the body, seem rather to be made for a comeliness or beautye to the body,
then for any necessitye. Therefore all hands have the three lines aforesaid,
but the other incisions or lines many do want or lack. Husbandmen being
also excluded from hence for their continual labor. Wherefore, since these
two sciences need such a mutual help, one of the other: I will declare unto you
out of astrologye, the nature of the Erratical signs, which the Crekes call
Planets. Saturnus makes sad, circumspect, covetous, slow, and little speakers,
and self lovers. Jupiter causes pleasant, liberal, quiet, sobre. and eloquent
persons, Contrariwise, Mars causes cruel, fires, and liers. The Son makes
godly, wittye, happy, or fortunate, and coragious me^. Venus causes
incontinent, libidinouse, comely and fair. Mercury causes subtle, craftye,
learned in sciences, and nimble men. The Moon makes quick witted, and comely,
but unstable and slow. Now I have spoken of the diversity of dispositio^s and
wits: I will also show somewhat of voice, and speech, whereby the diverse
effects and workinge of the Planettes amongst them selfs, may the better be
understand and known. Saturnus does cause a slow and scriking voice or speech,
Mars a crashing voice, like the breaking of metals. Jupiter, a shril, sounding,
and gentle voice. Venus makes a weak, soft, pleasant, and effeminate voice.
And so likewise does the Sun, and Mercury, The signs also have their proper
voices, for Virgo, Gemini, Libra, Aquarius, do make good voices or soundes.
Aries, Taurus, Leo, Capricorn, and the last part of Sagittary, cause mean
voices. Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces, are either altogether dombe, and without
sound: or else minister some great impediment in yt speech, There be also certain
signs, called fertile, because they do increase with Cancer, Scorpio or
Pisces. And others be called barraine. as Gemini, Leo, Capricorn. So that what
so ever a man can do, may be applied to the signs, as furderers of the same.
The which thing in that it can not be denied, so much the more are they to
be counted slau^derers, which esteem and report Astrologye not as divine, but
as a vain frivolous art, or knowledge, who^ in their places we will set forth
with their colors. But now to return to our purpose.

chiromantic diagram

If you find a cross in this fort about the upper corner, procedinge out of
the line of life, and on the nether side, three small lines, and on thupper side
two, as you may se by this figure, it signifies a libidinouse and an
unshamefast woman. But if the three lines be found in the nether end of the line
of life toward the wrest, it betokens that the woman shall suffer grievous
punishment for some mischief, or cuel doing.

chiromantic diagram

When that certain small lines do divide or touch the line of life in the upper
end, in form prescribed: it does declare the infirmity and sickness of yt
body. But if on the other part of the mean natural line, there be incisions in
this manner, liynge as it were direcily from the nether part of the line, and
risinge upward: it betokens cuel, as pain in the head, which comes of
exhalations of the stomach, or some such other disease. And those three lines
on thend of that line, do betoken euel, as shall appear hereafter.

The third Chapter, of the mean natural line.
THe line which begins at the root of the line of life, and passes
through^ the Palm of the hand, toward the hill of the Moon, or pommel of
the hand: is properli called the mean natural line. The which if it be
strait, and undivided with any small overthwart lines, it shows good health,
a sound brayn, a quick and lively wit, and also a good memory. If it be long,
stretched out to the hill of the moon, it does declare a stout stomach and
long life, which if it be short, that it pass not the holownes of the hand:
it betokens a fearful, covetous, unwise, and unfaithful man, and if the
said line do not stretch out to the hill of the Moon, but end ever against
the space, which is between the middle finger, and the ring finger: it
betokens a man of il manners, and that shall not live long. Then if the same
line run out beyond the hill of the Moon, and turn in again in form of a
half compass: the farther it stretches, the longer life it betokens, but
in age poverty. But if the same line at the upper end do rise toward the
fingers, it signifies an unshamefast and malicious man, the which if it rise
very much toward the fingers, it does declare him to be very folyshe, and
unwise. Contrariwise, if it turn down ward almost to the palm of the hand,
it is a token of a covetous and unclean man. On the other part, if it turn
upward, touch the table line: it signifies some great ^osse, and adverse or
evil fortune: and if the same line be writhen, unequal, and of diverse
colors: it is a token of an il disposed mind, and oftentimes of theft. The
line being strait, equal, and bright colored: betokens a good conscience,
and justice. But when the mean natural line is broad and gross, with a
certain redness intermedled: it signifies a rude disposicion and lack of
wit. And if it be nether to straight, nor to large, and well colored: it
betokens a merry, chereful, and a fortunate man, but if it be subtle, and
slender, swarte, or pale: it declares weakness of the brain, and vapores
rising from the stomach into the head. And if the line appear gross, and
very deep and has a certain small line nere to it, red colored: it shows an
angry and furyous man. Again if it have certain knotty spaces in this manner o,
so many knots as there be, it does declare so many murders, either al ready
committed, or hereafter to be done. The which knottes if they be not fully
closed or shut, they are a toke^ of a great quareller, which shall beat and
wound, but not kill outright. If there be in the same line certain gross
pricks, or points: it shows an unmannerly, folish, and unpleasant manne, the
which points if they be very read: it betokens a very cruel and fierce
man. If the same line be crooked, making half a circle, with a certain obscure
or dark color: it signifies danger by four foted beast, or else to be
slain of wild beast. And oftentimes, nigh the same line there be two small lines
joined together (as in the figure of the hand following you shall see) which
signify wounds, but not with weapon. More over, if there be a cross in the
same line, over against the middle finger: it betokens that the man shall dye
within a year. If any man have this line forked toward the wrest, with small
divisions: he seems to set al his mind on mischief, and neither to fear God
nor man.

chiromantic diagram Linae media naturalis



This figure of the hand here described with the mean natural line, beginning
at the rote of the line of life, and passing directly through the midst of
the hand, without any incisions: signifies the good state of the body, and
health of the brain. And when it makes a sharp corner, with the line of life:
it declares a quickenesse of memory, and vprightnes of mind. But if it be
(as is rehearsed in the cannon before) unequal, not stretching past the pit or
cave of the hand: it betokens a fearful, covetous, and a forgetful person.

chiromantic diagram L. me^sal

L. naturalis



If the mean natural line above figured, make as it were a half Circle, with
a certain obscure color: it threateneth hurt by beasts, and oftentimes
death. But if at the end of this line on each side do appear two small lines:
it signifies wounds by Weapons. If there appear over against the middle
finger a little Cross divided with small lines, it does demonstrate the
weakness of the body, and brevity of life: and so much the rather if the
square or quadrangle be lackyng in the hand.

chiromantic diagram

If the hand before portured, have in the mean natural line certain pale
knottes: how many knottes there be, so many murders it does declare already
committed: if they be red, they do pronounce the person to be hereafter both
a murderer and thief. If there be crooked incisions in the said natural line: I
judge him to be a very unhappy and unfortunate manne. And by the cross
there, I suppose him to be full of strife and debate, and desirous of discord.

chiromantic diagram

When this mean natural line stretches to the table line, and is crooked in
the end in form prescribed: it declares a noughty evil tonged man, a sheader
of blood, and shall often be in danger for the same, and at the length
peradventure suffer condign punishment. If the same line have privy incisio^s:
it does denounce a proud, bablyng, and angrye man. But if there be a cross in
the upper corner, right against the risyng or hill of the thombe: it shows an
honest man, and apt and disposed to all kind of goodness, and so likewise on
the contrary.

The fourth Chapter of the table line.
THis line is called the table line, because it makes the fashion of a table
in the hand, for so we do call the space remainynge between it and the mean
natural line. It is also called the quadra^gle or square line, because that
with the mean natural line, it makes almost a quadrangle or square. If this
line be equal, long inoughe, deep, and strait: it is a token of a good nature
and strength of the principal members of man, of modesty, temperance, and a
constant mind in all good works. If it stretche past the hill of the
forefinger, and touch the hill of Jupiter: it is a sign of vehement anger and
cruelty, being read above, is a sign of a promoter, and enuiynge another
man's felicity or welfare. And having branches risynge strait to the finger
of Jupiter: it does promise promocion, increase of riches: and that being
poor, shall come by little and little to honor and worship. But if the line
be naked without any branches stretchyng toward the root of the forefinger:
it betokens an unfortunate and poor manne. If it have in the end three small
lines or branches about the hill of Jupiter, runnynge strait forth to the
upper corner: it signifies a fortunate, liberal, merye, modest, and noble
manne, which deliteth in all kind of comely and cleanlye apparel, and swets
smelles and sauoures. In whose birth who does consider the Horoscope, (whether
he find Taurus or Libra, whom Venus does rule: or Sagittarius and Pisces,
upon whom Jupiter has dominion: or what planet else there be) shall easily
perceive and find the cause and reason of this matter: a cross standing in
the same place, does signify a liberal man, a lover of truth, benign, gentle
to be spoken to, and in a manner one endued with al kind of virtue. But if this
line do finishe or end over against the hill of the middle finger: it
betokens a lier, a self lover, inconstante, disceitful, unshamefast man, and
a sower of strife and debate. When this line is joined with the mean natural,
so that they both make a sharp corner: the same man shall be in many dangers
both of body and mind, that he shall be even wearye of his life. And if he
lack the mean natural line, that the table line ioyninge to the line of life
do make a sharp corner or point, I judge that that manne shall lose his head,
or be deadlye wounded, and shall never bring nothing to pass. If this line
be divided, that one part look toward the mean natural, the other toward the
hill of Saturn: it is a token that he shall be often in danger of his life,
and yet escape. The same line being subtle and strait at the end under the
hill of Jupiter: it signifies a governor of household: and promotio^ or rule
over his brethren, kindred, and equalles. If it has incisions over against
the middle finger: it betokens a flatterer, and a double tonged manne, whom
few men shall love. If a line coming directlye from the quadrangle to the
hill of Saturn, deuidinge the table line, do make a little cross there: it
threateneth violent death. For as this line is a token of great felicity and
good fortune, if it pass by the hill of the middle finger, and stretche
beyond the hill of the forefinger: so likewise, not touching the middle
finger, and endinge under the hill thereof, is a sign of extreme poverty, and
many calamities and dangers.

The^ this line having any interruptio^s or incisions liyng scattered, it
signifies a folish, and an unconstant man, whose study or desire is to be in
conte^tion with women, as now to love, now to hate, and oftentimes to chide and
fight with them. And this line being deep, subtle, and pale, at the end
aforesaid: declares an honest chaste man, but weak, and much troubled with
sickness and diseases. But it is an ill sign, and specially in a woman, when
the line beginning at the mean natural, going to the hill of the middle
finger, does both divide the table, and the table line, and is forked in the
end. And that woman which has a line coming from the line of life, to the
hill aforsaide: it signifies that woman to have killed her own child. The
which line if it turn backward to the hill of Jupiter: it betokens that
woman shall have great inheritance, if that line be redder then the other: it
betokens pain in the bowels, and knawing about the nauel. Again, if that line
be double, cuttinge the table line: it shows that the man shall dye a
miserable death. For both in man and woman, it is a toke^ of an il end. And
often the table line toward the hill of Saturn or Jupiter, is seen forked:
which does note the man shall suffer many weary labors and travails in his
life, the which the redder it is, it shows him ye more inclined to anger.
When there appears in the same line, certain small lines risinge one by
another: the more there be, the more honorable they declare him to be, and to
have the greater power and rule. But in whose hand there is no table line at
all, I conjecture them to be of both kinds, il willing, contentious, angry,
unfaithful, unconstant, and ready to al mischief. More over, if there appear a
line, coming from the table line toward the little finger, it is observed,
that man neither to be good nor fortunate: but covetous, angry, and horribly
sad, and also filthy, enuioue, and a companion of mischief, if there apere any
lines red, between the table line, and the ear finger: it betokens so many
marriages as they be in number, but if they be crooked and pale, they be already
past. Again, if there be found under the root of the table line certain
crooked crosses, so many as there be, so many deadly enemies do they betoken.
When that a line coming from the table to the hyl of Saturn, divide the table
line, and make a cross on the end thereof: it is said to be a token of a
violent death. And certain wise men in this science say, that if there be
small incisions about the upper end of the same line: it betokens sickness in
youth. If they be in the midst, in middle age: if at the other end, in age:
and if the same lines run downward, the discase shall be of cholore, if they
ascend, of fleume: if they rise out of the midst upward, it shall be of blood:
and if contrariwise they turn downewarde, it shall be of melancholye, after as
his color is brighte or darcke. Here is to be understand, that Cancer,
Scorpio, and Pisces, do rule the salt fleume, and Saturn causes all diseases
that come of a viscouse or slimye fleume, as the morphew, leprosy, canker and
gout. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn, are of like nature, cold, and dry, and
rule the melancoly. And therefore Venus does cause cold and moiste diseases in
the throat and privy members. Likewise the Moon causes the dropsye, falling
sickness, and appopleri. Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius, have dominion of the
cholere and agues, and biles, which come of blood. Likewise Mars does rule
hot agues, fronsies, and the worm in the head: unto Jupiter we attribute the
co^bust blood, unto Mercury is applied the diseases of the mind, bitter, and
heavy thoughts, and troubled conscience. The Son brings hot and dry
diseases. Al which things shall appear more plain hereafter, where the nature
of the planets and signs shall be spoken of, wherefore note always yt the
redness of the lines or incisio^s come of the heat of Mars. Therefore in all
the judgments of this manuel diuinatio^, I will you to have respect to the
nature of yt planets and signs, wherein the sun was the time of nativity or
birth. And so likewise the Phisiognomy must be taken head of, and by that mean
the wise judge shall get both profit and praise.

chiromantic diagram L. me^sal



If there be found in the line of fortune (called also the line of
prosperity) three small branches and be joined with the line of life, and
therewith divide the wreast: it betokens a good and quick wit, but if it
join to those lines, as it is here described, with a certain writhinge or
crokednesse: it signifies an euel, perverse, wicked, and a malicious
slaunderer, and one which coueteth alwaie to shede blood. For when so ever
you shall see these manner of lines, strait remember and have recourse to the
nature of Mars.

chiromantic diagram L. mensalis.



The table line thus disposed that it begin and end in his due places, do
declare the good state of the body, and strength of the members of generation.
But contrariwise, if there be no table line at all, or that it be without
branches short and gross, stretchinge out beyond the hill of the
forefinger: it signifies a mischeuous person, and hard of learning or
understanding.

chiromantic diagram

These three Branches in the end about the hill of the forefinger, against
the upper corner: is a good sign both in manne and woman. Also a little
Cross in the same place, betokens good likewise. If the said table line
have many incisions: it signifies hatred of Princes, and of great men: but
if the incisions be unequal and dispersed, you shall understand the varietye
of Fortune.

chiromantic diagram

If that the table line be lackinge in the hand of man or woman: it is a
very evil sign. For it shows a man prompte to all mischief, which also
shall die an evil death. There must also be respect to the lines about the hill
of Mercury, for there is the signs of marriage, and the judgment of such
things as pertain to the planet of Mercury.

chiromantic diagram

Again, if the table line do throughlye touch the natural line, that it make
a sharp angle as you may see: it betokens ill, for so many perils shall
hang over his head, that he may iustelye repent that ever he was borne. But
if the natural line be lacking, and the table line touch the line of the
heart: (except I be utterly disceiued) that man shall lose his head, or dye
some ill death. When a certain line (as here you may see) doths divide the
table line, and make a small cross in the upper end: it does betoken a violent
death. The which line, if it rise strait upright in the hand of a woman, and
divide the table line: it is an evil token, for the which seek the cannon or
rule before. If there be a small cross in the end of the table line: it
betokens spiritual dignities, and the rather, if there be two crosses (as I
have often proved:) it signifies ecclesiastical promotions.

The fifth Chapter of the wrest.
THe space which as is aforesaid appering in the joining of ye hand to the
arm, is called the wreaste, the which if it be pure, and of a good lively
color: it declares the good estate of the body, and contrariwise the evil.
And note, that for the most part there be two lines which as it were divide ye
hand from the arm. If there be two lines, then if that next the hand be
equal, strait, and well colored, stretching upward: it promises riches, yea,
although he be very pore, it promises increase and felicity, and so much the
rather, if there be strait branches and not overthwart. If that a line rising
at the rote of the arm, do run up to the rote of the middle finger: it
signifies good success and prosperous fortune. But if there be in the space or
joint four equal lines well joined, deuidinge the arm overthwart, behold
great honor and dignity, succession, and heritage of thy kindred. And if there
be found in the rote of the arm, near the hill of the thombe, nigh the line
of life (if it descend so low) three lines or stars or more: it signifies
that person to be accused and betrayed by women, and to suffer slander by
them. Further, if a line beginning in the middle of the wrest, go toward the hill
of the Moon: it does pronosticate many storms and troubles of fortune, and
privy enmity and hatred. The which line if it be crooked and unequal: it is a
token of continual bondage, and that that person shall never come to promotio^
nor riches. If there be many lines scatred in the wrest, and rise to the hill
of the tho^be: he that has that sign, is in danger to be afflicted, wounded,
spoiled, or cast in prison by his kindred, or by those who^ he most loved. If
there begin certain lines in the arm, and divide the wreaste, and join
together in the upper parie: that man without doubt, shall die in exile or
banishment. The which lines if they do not fully close, but be somewhat distant
a sonder: he shall end his life amongst foreign nations, far from his own
country. The same lines tendynge to the pomell of the hand, do for show long
nauigations and iourneyes by sea, and an unstable life to be spent in such sea
perigrinatio^s. Further, if there go a line directly from ye wreste, to the hyl
of the forefinger: it signifies a long journey, and a difficult or doubtful
return. Also, if there rise a line at the wrest, and run into the cave of
the hand, and be very read: it declares the weakness and diseases of the
body to come. But if it be pale: they be al ready past, and no more to be
feared. If there be found in the hand of a womanne a triangle, tendyng from
the wreste to the hyl of the Moon: it shows her to have been corrupt,
defiled, and defloured in her first youth and flower of her age. Moreover, if
there be about the wrest of a woman a little cross: I judge her thereby both
honest, wise, and chaste. Behold the the signs of the good estate of the body,
when the space in the wrest next the hand at the other next the ioynte of the
arm, be both of good and lively color, having the four incisions
aforesaid: it betokens al goodness. Again, how hateful are the three
Stars, which threaten danger by accusation and slander. Mark also going
from the wrest to the pomel of the hand, how manifest an argument of
infelicitie and evil fortune it is. The^ that coming from the wrest to ye hill
of Jupiter, how it signifies a forain, and far distant life to be led. Another
rising upright, does promise riches and favorable fortune. Moreover, the
signs which are in the hill of Jupiter: betoken riches, honor, and dignity.
Also four lines almost co^passing the arm (as you may se in the hand following,)
are tokens of long life, and certain lines going from the rote of the arm,
making a sharp angle or corner, and a small cross by the^: do promise great
quietness of life, and to pass his time merilye with promotion. But the
cross be away: it does only promise succession and heritage of many. If the
cross or certain little stars be there: that man shall lack nothing
necessary to his life.

chiromantic diagram

If there be found in the wreste two large lines, and the nether line be
subtle: it signifies riches until the middle age, and after worship, but
decrease and decay every day more and more. If there rise out of the same
lines two small lines, as it were supporting and holdinge up one another, and
certain other lines rise up directly through the palm to the natural line: it
is a token of great integrity, and declares that man to be of a good
conscience, the which through his behavior shall come to great riches and
prosperity, and also come to a good end: but yet it will be the longer or
these things happen, if the line ascendinge be crooked and writhen.

chiromantic diagram

If that two lines beginning at the wreaste, do rise through the Paime to the
hill of the Sun or ringe finger, and the same hill be divided with two lines
overthwart: it signifies a compasser or doer of great things, which shall
have rule and authority in kings business and affairs, and thereby get both
great honor and richesse.

chiromantic diagram

If in the wrest there be seen a certain gross line, and then an other
subtiller and slenderer, and the third grosser and deper then the other: it
preposeth abundance of richesse in the first age or youth, infelicitie and
poverty at the middle age: and in the third and last age, recouerys of al
before lost, with increase of riches, and a quiet life unto the last end. If
there be two crooked lines ascendyng to the hill of Jupiter, and upon the first
ioynte of the same appear two lines going overthwart: it signifies increase of
substance, by long iourneys and travails. The same lines going to the hill
of Mercury: betokens a man apt to many things, but not fortunate to great
richesse. But if they run to the finger of Saturn: there can be no worse
sign, for he will al covetousness, and immoderate desire, envy, and disdain
at an other man's felicity and welfare, and a mind given to al evil.

chiromantic diagram

The sixte Chapter of the Triangle.
THe triangle in the hand is three lines, (that is to sa^e) the line of life,
the mean natural line, and the line of the liver or stomach: which are so
disposed and set, that they make the form of a tria^gle. And the space
enclosed within those lines, is divided into three parts or corners: whereof the
first is made by the line of life, and the natural line, and is called the
upper angle. The Other which is formed by the line of life, and the utter part of
the triangle: is called the sinister or lift angle. The triangle being^ of
equal angles, having lines fair, well colored, and strait: does represent
the good quality of nature, and of the body, with health and securitye of
the mind, with fame and renoume, and also long life. And contrariwise, the
lines being darcke, unequal, no making a plain triangle: does derlare the
contrary. Further, if the space of the Triangle be wide and broad, it does
argue a stout, liberal, and bold stomach. Again, if it be strait and short,
it betokens nigardy, covetousness, and fearfulnes. If the plain within be
pale, declininge to swarthnesse: it signifies an angry and disceitful person.
Also, if it be cut and divided with many wrinkels: it she weth the ill
disposicion of the body. Moreover, the upper angle is closed by the line of
life, and the natural line three manner of ways: first of al, if it close in the
cave of the hand over against the valley: between the forefinger and the middle
finger: we judge thereby a miserable life, endaungered with calamities and
captivity, and a mind full of anxietie and care, and oftentimes as it were
drowned and overcome, and specially for the desire of money. Secondlye, if it be
well closed with a sharp corner under the midst of the hill of the forefinger:
it declares a good nature, a quick wit, and good disposition, happy and
prosperous success, with integrite of manners. And all these things are so
much the perfecter if the angle be well and sharply closed. Thirdly, the lines
not joining together, but having a certain space left between: is an
argument of an ambitious man, a self lover, vnpure, and unmannerly, a
slaunderer, and cruel, a lier, and living without praise or good name. The
which man if he happen to come in captivity or bondage: he shall never
recover again his liberty. And if he be fre, yet he shall die miserablye. The
space within the triangle roughe and hard: is a sign of anger, and craft,
and subtilitie, if it be roughe with wrinkles: it signifies envy, hatred, and
slanders. When there does appear a certain line between the two lines so nere,
that it touch either of the^: it signifies that man shall either be poisoned,
or have some mortal wou^d. When there appear in the upper space four lines
deuidinge one another like crosses: it shows envy, backebitinge, with study
and desire to oppress others. For the two lines joining sharplye together,
does declare the goodness of the hole body, but if they end in the cave or
pit of the hand precisely over against the finger of Saturn, making an
angle: it betokens bloudsheadinge diverse and sundry ways: as wounds of the
head, flux of the belly, and if this sign be in women it signifies the
incessant flux of the menstrue, and danger in childbearinge. If there be in
the triangle a figure like a star: it shows and aduoutrous woman, and past
shame and furious, which through her irrefrenable anger, shall fall into such a
frensye and madness of mind, that she shall covet and go about to cut her own
throat. When so ever you perceive in the hand of a woman in the place
aforesaid, a certain star puttinge forth a long role: judge that woman to
have four husbands. If in the same space there be a cross with out any
incision: it betokens good both in man and woman. For in those which have
that sign, it betokens a life well passed, and to end with good name and
fame. The right angle being very sharp, does show a circumspect, witty, and
sparing man: the same being obscure and gross: is a sign of rudeness,
sloth, and much given to slep^. The left angle sharp, betokens a babbler and
crafty man, not withstanding witty and painful: but if the upper corne^ be not
sharp, and having as it were the ca^acter of Saturn: it is a token of an euel
and plain Saturnine nature. And he whose fingers are so set, that there be in
every ^oynte as it were certain spaces or risinges crooked and unequal: it
betokens him to become very pore, and to live miserablye. If there be in the
upper part that is in the third joint, an evident writhing or crokednesse: it
is a sign of envy, disceite, malice, and altogether of an euel disposed
mind, which man also shall lead a life full of misery and calamity.

chiromantic diagram

The Triangle both in the hand of man and woman, does signify much
goodness. But if there be found in the hand of a woman within the triangle,
the similitude of a star: it betokens an unchaste woman, and given over to
the lust of the flesh. Also, in a man it is a sign of evil. Further, if
there be in the hand of a man abouie the right angle, an express plain
star: it does plainly declare an untrusty, troublesome disceitfull, and
slanderous person: Also a thief and robber, doing al thing be it right or
wrong, by violence, inclined and also instructed in all evil, who at the length
shall dye an evil death. Small branches in the beginning of the line of life, or
table line: does betoken abounndance and increase of household.

chiromantic diagram

chiromantic diagram

If a star having a long stalk or branch going from it, be found in the
hand of a woman: it do the declare that she shall have many husbands, as often
as the two lines of the upper corner be distante a sunder with a space between
them, it is an evil sign. Also, four lines deuidinge them selves in the upper
corner in manner of a cross: do demonstrate an envious detractor, and a man of
euel fame and name. The^ a figure as it were the caracter of Saturn, does
pronounce an euel end: the table line also fashioned as you may se, does
betoken an unfortunate man, and given to the belly, if there be the figure of a
forke either upward or downward in the said triangle: it shows an inconstant
and libidinous man.

The seventh Chapter of the Quadrangle.
THe quadrangle is called that space which is between yt line and the mean
natural. Then if the incisions of this quadrangle be of a bright and lively
color, it does promise the equity and uprightness of life: and
contrariwise, it does declare a wicked and naughtye man. The same space ample,
and large: betokens liberality and stou^nes of stomach. A cross also in yt
same place of the hand, signifies good success in ecclesiastical
ministrations, and is so much the more fortunate, if the figure be doubled or
tripled like unto a lattise: but if the same cross be crooked or undivided with
overthwart incisions, it does pronosticate the contrary to all that is
aforesaid. Moreover, an evident star in the same place, does demonstrate a
stout manne, vprighte, true, and of a good conscience. The which manne
although through adversity and misfortune he fall into poverty, yet he shall
rise again by his own virtue and goodness: Yet notwithstanding, it shows him
to be a feminine man, which also shall suffer some adversity and trouble for
women.

chiromantic diagram

Oftentimes also the hole table is lacking: then if the table line join with
the natural line, and begin a triangle: it shows that man to be in danger
to be slain by many that shall lie in wait for him. But if in the end of the
table about the pommel of the hand there be a manifest cross: judge thereby
many perigrinations, long iourneis, and often chau^ging of place, but thereby
good fortune. When the two lines which make the table be far distant, with a
great space between them: it is a token of superfluous heat, and intemperate
humors in the body. Contrariwise, the plain or table of the hand being
narowe and straight: betokens a covetous man, careful to get goods, and
therwithal deadlye cruel. And this is sufficientlye spoken of the principal
incisions or lines which are within the hand. And consequentlye we will
entreat of the risinges or hills of the fingers, and also of the fingers them
selves, with the stations of the planettes, and what so ever else shall remain
nedeful to be spoken of.

You have heard before declared what these characters, lines, and crosses in
the table of yt hand, do signify and foreshew. The star also in the midst
of the Table, does show a lover, and mainteyner of all honesty and goodness,
and therefore had in reverence, and aspiringe to great dignity. And let this be
a general rule, for all those whose hands do quiver and shake by nature, (for
unto many it happens by chance, and to other some by sickness and
diseases,) to judge them as angrye, scolders, and braulers, unclean men, and
dronkerds.

The.viii. Chapter of the hills of the fingers, and first of the hill of the
thombe, called also amongst ancient writers, the hill of Venus.
Now that there is sufficientlye entreated of the principal lines of the
hand: we will also write of the particular incisio^s of the fingers, and of
their hills: laiyng before your eyes their significatio^s, with the natures of
the seven planets, whereby you may know what is agreeable among them, and
contrariwise what does hurt. The rising or swellyng of the flesh, beginning at
the line of life, desce^dyng strait to the wrest is called ye hill of the
tho^b: it is also called the hill of Venus, because it is soft and plain with
very few or no wrinkcles or incisions, and being ruddy and lively colored: it
shows the good quality and estate of the body, also a lover of women, and one
delityng in cleanely and fine appare^. But if there appear in the same place a
certain short line going down ward by the line of life, (and therefore called
the sister of the line of life:) it signifies a man delitynge in venerye.
Notwithstanding, the same line being long, not broken of, wholly accompaniyng ye
line of life through: does promise continual richesse. But if it begin not in
the upper end of the hill, but peradventure in the midst, or not far from
the nether end: it betokens lack and penury in youth, but after abundaunce
and plenty. Often also there be four lines equally distant, coming from the
top of the hill to the wrest, which do promise richesse and honor even in
the first age, the which lines if they begin not at the very, top but at the
joint of ye tho^be: they do promise the same success, but longer and latter
to come to pass, even in the extreme age. If the same four lines do divide
the upper joint of the thombe a little within the nail, or be very near the
same joint, and be long, brighte shining: they betoke present honor and
riches. And also ruie and dominion if the same four lines be divided or cut,
with other small lines going overthwart. Many times there is a subtle incsio^
beginning at the top of the hill of the thombe, going toward the line of life:
which signifies that man shall die by some stroke of weapon. Also, many brighte
lines risinge over against the fore finger, and deuidinge the line of life,
are tokens of many perigrinations and long ioureneis into diverse places. The
same lines dividing the line of life in ye upper part or beginning: shows a
boaster and an ambitious manne, riotous, and dene^rous. In some also a red line
wandringe up and down the hill of the thombe: betokens incest, and carnal
company with his kindred. Albeit, I would not have such credit given to this
science, that this should strait be judged true, the hand being looked
upon, for when we speak of accompaniynge with kindred, we would have it
understand that man to be so enflamed with fleshly lust and appetite, that
there is but little hope that he will abstain from them. To the which thing it
behooves much to behold the face and hole body of the man, which does
declare the state of life to come. For they which be pleasant manered,
leadinge a merry and ioconde life, being conuersaunte and reioysinge in plays
and daunses, have small stars in their hill, for this is the whole study of
Venus: and such men have their hill commonly divided with many small and
brighte incisions, whom if you do well behold, you shall see his face well
colored, his body decently co^pact, his eyes black and clear, a pleasant
countenance and honest gesture, and altogether ^enerous, and therefore wanton,
riotous, lecherous, delitinge in dise play, daunsing, and other pastimes,
having pleasure in flours, roses, and sweet smells costly apparel, desirous of
gold and silver, often laughing, conversant amongst women, desirous and apt
to learn all sciences of this sort and nature, and of a dull wit and
understanding to learn any other thing. Also light of belief, easy to be
deceived, liberal, gentle, just and faithful, deliting in painted tables and
pictures, and al so desirous to learn to paint him self, having good fortune in all things of that sort, in the contraries not so fortunate: Whose life shall be
pleasant with mean substance, not covetous of lucre and gain, beloved of
many, given to all kind of pleasure, not easilye moved with anger, not
careful about hard and doutful business, but content with his present estate,
setting al anxiety and trouble of mind apart, and so living to his last end.
For likewise as in this, so in all other is the nature of man to be considered,
as well by the habit and proportion of the body, as by loking in the hand,
wherefore that which is here expressed, let it be an example to be followed in all others. Further, they which have the hill of the thombe divided with many
small wrinkles not equally dista^t, but scattering and out of order: are to be
counted fleshli, vnpure, froward, and brawling, delitinge to be in contention
with women, burninge so much in lust that they be never satisfied but seek
strange and unaccustomed kinds of use like unto monsters and beasts, how be
it they be of an unpleasant conversation and life, deliting in no kind of wisdom
or learning, nether profiting any thing at al therein, but very apt to learn al
handye crafts, and to devise and inuente al things pertaining unto riot. The
cause of this I assign to Venus being in the.vi. or.viii. house in the birth
of such men. Whereby you may perceive how Astrology and Chiroma^cy do mutually
embrase the one the other, so that one without the other can not well be understand,
as shall be showed hereafter more at large.

chiromantic diagram

Venus.


If there be about the first joint of the thombe a creste like a ring going
round about, and dividing the thombe: many do stiffly judge and say that that
manne shall be hanged. The which thing I have proved true in one man, but because
I have seen many hanged which have lacked that mark, I leave it as uncertain.
Also three or four incisions in breadth under the first joint: betokens
richesse and honor in youth, if they be above that joint, it shall be in the
middle age, but if the same incisions be near the second joint: it signifies
the same effect, but in the extreme or last age. If any womanne have her
thombe so marked (as is described in the second figure) I judge her to be
eschewed and avoided, as craftye and naught. Also this mark in the midst of
the hill of Venus: signifies a libidinous, euel mannered, and an aduoutrous
woman, willingly putting forth her self to hordome and vice, wonderful
vnte^perate, and vnsa^iable in copulation. Further, what married woman has three
lines somewhat unequally distant, deuidinge the first ioynte of the thombe: it
shows her to be in danger either of death, or of a wound by her own
husband. More ^uer, many small crosses under the second joint, declares a
very holy woman, given to religion. Again, only two of those marks does
signifye an unfaithful babbler, and a woman full of strife and discord. Also
many small branches in the same place does betoken a wanton women, and one
sone ripe.

The.ix. Chapter of the hill of the forefinger, and of the finger, with the
nature of the Iouialles.
IVpiter the most benificial planet of al, has his place in the hill which is
under the forefinger, the which hill being plain and smoth, does show unto
the honesty of life and goodness of nature. And so much the rather, if there be
certain small dark riules going out from the same finger, the which if they
be not far distant: it betokens honor and dignity by princes. And some
being bolder, do define and say, that he shall attain to so many degrees of
honor, or ecclesiastical dignities, as there be such incisions in his hand.
It is also a token of magnitude and boldness, desire, and study to compass
great things, as also a desire of renown and glory: when a strait clear
line beginning at the rote of the forefinger, almost at the mean natural line,
does turn back again to the corner of the hill. A small line also goinge from
the table line to the hill of the forefinger: does signify the same aforesaid.
If that certain overthwart riules do divide the lines aforesaid, they betoken
wounds in ye head. Also a gross, bright, and ruddy line, deuidinge the
forefinger from the middle finger in a man, does betoken the sickness of the
intrailes or bowels, in a woman it signifies danger in child bearinge, and
so much the more danger, if it be very red. More over, crosses in the hill of
Jupiter, do signify honor and promotions in so many degrees, as there be
found crosses, for it has been often seen, such men to have gotten henefices
and ecclesiastical promocions abundauntlye. And those men having those marks,
are chiefly called Iouials, or of the nature of Jupiter, having for the most
part good success in all affairs of that sort or kind, who for the most
part are of a mean stature, and pleasant form or shape, whitely colored,
thick heered, comely eyed, given to clenlines and mirth. They be naturally
stout stomaked, and hie minded, having to do in great and weighty affairs,
liberal often times above their ability, coveting to rule and have dominion
over other, despisers of al mediocrite and mean estate, honest, noble,
covetous of glory and renown, ambicious, pleasant and merye, faithful and
friendly, abhorrynge al fraud, and disceit, peaceable, apt and inclined to al
learning and wisdom, politic, and eloquente. The walkyng or going is mean,
neither fast nor slow, betokenyng a great constancy of mind. No men more
fortunate then they, or that sooner obtain their desires. For the most part
always in favor with princes or great men, loving dearly their wife and
children. Also prosperous and happy in succession and posterity. More over,
they be great eaters, and therefore often diseased with the rawenesse of the
stomach or liver, or else long lived, having a clear and shril voice, and the
foremost two upper teeth stickinge out. And thus much of them on whose birth
Jupiter is lord, without conjunction of any evil with him. Furthermore, many
lines going ouerthwarte in the upper ioynte of the forefinger in the hand of a
woman, do declare that she shall have large inheritance by the death of her
friends and kindred. The same in the middle joint, do signify envy, lying, and
disceit, which signs if they be in the hill of Jupiter, do minister suspicion
of an angry, testy, unmannerly, and scolding woman.

chiromantic diagram

Jupiter.


And thus have I also found out the number of children: If any woman have in
the middle ioynte three bright incisions runnyng lengthwaies, whereof the
middlemost is short and blunte at the one end, and an other bright line going
overthwart, and two other dark lines which touch not the middle short line.
Also wicked and noughtye women have stars with a half compass in the hill
of Jupiter.

chiromantic diagram

The same also do declare three crok^d lines almost equally distant within the
utter joint of the forefinger. Contrariwise, it is a token of honesty and
chastity, when the middle ioynte is divided with many lines going in length,
with a star in the midst. Also it promises great inheritance or riches to
come (whether it be by order of inheritance, or of ecclesiastical dignities
or promocions) unto him that has a clear star not interrupte with any line
or wrinkle in the hyl of Jupiter. A line going from the hill of the middle
finger to the wreaste: shows fearful and weak hearted men, but
notwithstanding envious. Some also affirm, that those which have that line, if
they chance to be taken and cast in prison: either they shall dye there, or be
grievously punished, or very hardly escape and be delivered.

The.x. Chapter of the hill of the middle finger, appropriate to Saturnus of
the finger it self with the nature of the Saturnines.
THe middle finger of the hand as is aforesaid in this science, is attribute
unto Saturn, and called by his name, and therefore the risynge underneath it, is
also called the hill of Saturn. The which hill if it be plain and smoth
without wrinkles or incisio^s: it declares a simple man, paineful, and without
disceit. If that a riule coming from the table line do cut the hill of
Saturn: it signifies a careful man, disquieted and vexed with daily troubles
and cares, always studiyng and musyng on something, notwithstanding seldom
rich. Also many incisions in the same place, do declare an heavy and pensiful
life, full of penury and necessity, prisonment, and torments. Likewise, a
line bowyng from the rote of the ring finger to the hill of Saturn, shows a
flouthful and sluggish man, folishe, and rash, never doing any thing wittely,
albeit sometime folishe, bold, of a folysh and rude mind and understanding.
They say also, that woman which has more lines between the fingers of the
Sun and Saturn, then between the Sun and Mercurye, there being some lines
also: to be apt to generation, and specially of men children. This also I know
certain, that if any small lines go from the principal lines of the hand to
the hill of Saturn: they declare an evil disposition, and not a very honest
life. It is also judged a token of sterilitie and barrennes in a woman, to have
a cross or a star in the first joint of ye finger. And those which have ye
hill diversely divided with riules, the other hill being smothe and plain, are to
be judged Saturnins, whose nature for the most part is to be pale colored,
uncomely vysaged, their eyes fixed downward to the ground, in going slow,
lean, and oftentimes crooked backed, and for the most part evil manered. For
Saturn makes them malicious, disceitful, and craftye, delitinge chiromantic
diagram to be alone, regardyng no man, without al frendshippe. Not very curious
about their meats, great drinkers, and often times great eaters, continually
disquieted with cares and miseries, never free from them, full of heavy and
fearful thoughts and imaginations, loving fennes and standing waters, living
filthelye, slow and rare of speech, cold of nature, weak bodied, and sickly,
of a low voice, hoorse, and sluttyng, lightly enuiyng other, and whom they
hate, they persecute continully without remission. Their delight is to build,
to plant, plowe, and al thing that will continue, having no great pleasure in
women, and therefore seldom having children, but diynge without issue.
Wonderful defe^ders and kepers of their liberty, judging it extreme misery
and evil to serve and be in bondage, deliting in black, and therefore clothing
them selves therewith, full of suspicion and fear, giving great regard unto
dreams: and thus far of Saturnins. That womanne that has five or six lines
in the first joint of the middle finger runnynge downewarde, shall bear a
son which shall be a priest. Also that manne which has a star in the same
iointe, shall either kill or be killed.

The.xi. Chapter of the ringe finger and hill, and the nature of them borne
under the Sun.
depiction of the Sun

THe hill of the ringe finger, called also of most learned men the hill of the
Sun, is that which rises in a certain space between the finger and the
table line, if there proceed from the rote thereof to the table line, certain
small lines: they work the same effect that Mercury does amongst the
Astrologians, which makes a man of a pregnant and quick wit, given to diverse
kind of learning, proud, and eloquent, also fortunate to promotions, as well
profane as spiritual. But if there be other lines drawn overthwart the^, or
that they divide one another: it signifies the clean contrary. But if the same
lines do not touch or divide the other: it is a good token that he shall
overcome and tread down al his enemies. The which, if they neither touch ye
finger, neither be equally placed from the table line, but be hangyng between,
according to the alteration of the lines: they note the change of estate, and
life. Also, many slender read lines in the same hill, do show a wise and merry
man, the which lines if they be crooked and red: betoken diseases wherewith a
man is presently vexed and troubled. If they be pale, pains al ready past.
Again, if they divide the^ selves like a saint And rewes cross, stretched from
the table line to the first joint: it signifies a prouidente and circumspect
man in doing his business. There is also another token pronouncing fortunate
things, specially in getting of honor and dignity, and al things pertaininge
to virtue, liberality, and wisdom: which are two crooked lines, equally distant
going from the wrest, as you may perceive by this figure.

chiromantic diagram

Also many lines in the hand of a woman about the upper joint runninge to
gether, do show ye same. And more over, that she shall be had in reverence and
made rich by her husbands, also they show her to be devout, but not to lead
no monastical life. So likewise, if they be in the second joint, they declare
that she shall always be had in reputacion and honor but amongst them of her
own stock. Always they signify riches, as well in men as in women. But they
are euel if they stretche to the hill of the Sun.

The.xii. Chapter of the hill and finger of Mercurye, and of his nature.
depiction of Mercury

THe hill of the ear finger or rather of Mercury, is between the little finger
and the table line. It is greatly material whether it be plain without
incisions or veins.

For it being well colored without wrinkles, shows a constant mind in a man,
in a maid integrity. A slender line rising at the table to the rote of the
hill: betokens liberality. Also mani such lines beginning between the table
line, and the little finger: signifies so many marriages as there be lines.
Notwithstanding, the length, color, and slendernes of them must be marked:
for the pale lines signify marriages past, the long and well colored the^ to
come. It happens often some of them to be gross and very red, whereby thou
shall judge a lier, a these, and robber, and one defiled with all kind of
mischief. Now if there be a crooked line, as it were a circle goinge from that
finger to the middle finger: it declares an excellent wit and disposicion, in
whom there is great hope, that he will he apt and prompt to al kind of
affairs. If there be small crooked lines in the upper part of the little finger
in the hand of a woman: it shows a condition propre to al women, which is
pride, much talk and babbling, with inconstancy. And this for the most part is
the Phisiognomy of all the Mercurians, mean colored betw^ne black and white,
hie foreheade, round face, fair eyes like a cat, black and thin berd, slender
body, comelye stature, thin lips, sharp nose, shril voice and ready, a quick
motion and stirringe. If thou will for know this by the hill: if it be full of
strait lines, he is also of a pregna^t wit, bold, a horemonger, faithful,
ready to lie, a lover of his own sects, a hater of superstition, not
regardinge temples nor oracles, apt to al sciences Mathematical and Geometry.
Finallye, a man fit for all assaies, a doctoure, a poet, endued with the
knowledge of tongues, a sercher of secrets, a Philosopher, hearty, modest, but
full of words, hurting no man, deliting in the cleanest handye crafts, as in
painting and such like. Albeit, he is more vexed with sickness and troubled
with delusions of spirits, then other men.

chiromantic diagram

There be also certain tokens, whereof the first in the first joint does
declare a man to be studious, chiefly of Rethorike, arrogant, proud, and of a
ripe wit. That in the second joint although it vary from the first, yet has
it the same effect, it shows an excellent preacher or oratoure, if it stand
overthwart: he is troubled with sondrye passions, horrible dreams, and euel
fa^tasies. If in the third joint there be a cross, it is a sure sign of
poverty and necessity. And this is sufficient of Mercury, although the figure
do not contain all the signs, yet we have described the chiefest and
principal, for who can comprehend so many sorts of lines and tokens of so
diverse dispositions in so small a room. We have left nothing out in the
cannon or rule, which might be to any effect or purpose.

The.xiii. Chapter of the utter part of the Triangle, and of them over whom the moon has power and dominion.
depiction of a devil

First of al, I will declare what the Chiromanciers call ye utter part of yt
Triangle, it is the same which by the common name is called the line of the
stomach or liver, with risinge at the tail of the line of life, touching the
mean natural, makes a triangle, if there be no let in the natiuitye. Albeit, I
know in some it does not join, yet it is not to be left out, for it is found
to be of as much force as all the other, for if it make a perfect Triangle with
the mean natural and line of life: it shows the flourishing health and
prosperity both of body and mind. If it happen to be dark colored and full
of points: it shows the il digestion of the stomach, morphew, colic, phlegm,
bindinge of the bellye, pain of the stomach and ribs, and specially if it
be pale. But if it be well drawn, ruddye, nearer the line of life then the
middle natural: it betokens pain in the head, if contrariwise, it be nearer
the middle natural, it signifies the inflammation of the lungs, anexed with a
fervent ague, ye kongh, and stink of the mouth. Also, such a circle in the
place of the Moon, although it seem to be but a reft, yet it betokens the
loss of one eye, if there be two, the loss of both eyes, which thing I
have proved true by my own hurt. Likewise a star in the same place,
signifies a wicked and mischeuous man. If you desire to know ye phisnamy of
the lunatickes, they be whitlye faced with some red, their brows joined
together, their face and cheeks blown, unequal eyed, somewhat black,
peradventure marked in the face, unthrifty, sickelye, unstable, slow, folish,
pore in youth, in the second chiromantic diagram locus line

age richer somewhat. But in thertreame age miserable again, dotinge,
unfortunate, and borne to trauail, given to the falling sickness and Palsye,
to the flixe and blastyng, except the Moon in the rote of nativity have the
Sun or Jupiter propice and in amity with her.

The.xiiii. Chapter of the place of Mars, and the nature of the Martialistes.
chiromantic diagram locus Martis.



Mars.


We thought it mete before we spoke of Mars, to place hi^ in the cave of the
hand in the triangle, over against the natural line: in the which if there
apere another perfect triangle according to all the natural properties of the
Martialists: you may pronosticate, ye by hew much ye same is larger and bigger
the man is to be judged the more vicious. And specially if it be well
proportioned with the lines. The phisnamye herein is not to be despised, which
I have therefore adjoined because it should help the Chiromancier the better in
judgment, otherwise it can not be so exactly judged. They be hie colored in
the face, as burnte of the Sun, thin heered and curled, small eyes,
somewhat crooked bodied, with a sharp and fires aspecte, boulde, covetous,
disceitful, a briber, unfaithful, a iester, unshamefast, light, unconstant,
angry, seditious, suspicious, impaciente, a murderer, a boaster, a mocker,
perjured, and a counterfaiter of all things, that may be counterfaited.

The conclusion of this work of Chiromancy.
Chiromantial prognostication or manual diuinations, according to the places
of the. vii, Planets.
BEsides the Charecters and lines which are commonly in the hand, there does
often appear strange notes and marks, which betoken some great unknown
thing, wherefore our intent now is to she we their effect and meaning. W^
have showed before the natures of the signs, and what Planet is lord of
every man, now we will attempt to know what suspecte tokens be in the
Planettes: I mean not thoose in the heuens, but (heir charecters which be in
the fingers, of what force they be.

Of the place of Mars.
THe place of Mars is in the Triangle, wherefore if you perceive or finds such
a mark or sign drawn in this sort in the triangle, judge that man to be a
Martialist, and that he shall be hanged. The other three marks over against
the table of the hand: signifies boldness, stubburnesse, severity,
wastinge of his patrimony and inheritance, with oppression of his friends and
kinsfolk.

chiromantic diagram Of the finger of Venus.
VEnus does possess the thombe and the hill thereof, which for the plainness
of it, is called the hill of Venus, if there be in the first joint such a mark,
they shall prospere in all their affairs. In the second iointe, it betokens
pouertye, and near the nail, that he shall have a leprous child, or else in
the place of Venus, it she weth a venerous man, given to incest and aduoutrie,
and specially if the marks be in the hill.

chiromantic diagram

Of the finger of Jupiter.
IVpiter has also his proper marks, who possesses yt forefinger, as is here
presccibed, in the first joint they signify an aduoutrer, and in thupper
ioints riches, and specially in age. The other signs for the most part
betoken no ill.

chiromantic diagram

Of the finger of Saturn.
Saturn the highest amongst the^, keeps the middle finger with his private
charectes here discribed, which declare a saturnine man, whose nature you may
partly gather by that which is aforesaid, and partly we will define more at
large hereafter.

chiromantic diagram

Of the finger of the Sun.
A Line portured in this sort appearing in the ring finger, called properly the
finger of the Sun, signifies long life and prosperity, al other apparances
are tokens of evil.

chiromantic diagram

Of the finger of Mercury.
THey have appointed unto Mercurys the little finger with certain lines,
whereby you may perceive and know a Mercurial here briefly expressed, they
betoken benefits or offices, all other signify sadness, melancholy, and
heaviness.

chiromantic diagram

Of the place of the Moon.

THe place of the Moon is in the pomel of the hand. Wherefore if thou perceive
the lines here discribed rising from the wreste: it shows sluggishnes, in the
place of Jupiter dullness and folishnes, and specially in women, which by
nature are not very wise.

chiromantic diagram

The Conclusion.

YOu have heard (dear Reader) the signs and marks of the planets, by the
which without Astrology you may learn and know unto what planet every man
is subject, desieryng you to take this our Treatise in good worth, and to make
a proof thereof with labor and diligence, lest yt we may be thought herein to
have spent our time and labor in vain. There lacks but only judgment, the
labor or pain is nothing: for so much as the hole effect may be understand
and known by once or twice readyng at the most.

Fare ye well.
The second Book entreats of an Epiloge or brief collection of the hole
sum of the Art of Phisiognomy. By the which you may understand and perceive,
what every membre from the crown of the head, to the soul of the foot, does
signifye and mean. Also a brief introduction upon the faces of the signs,
with certain cannons and rules, upon sickness and diseases. And first to begin
with the eyes.
THe eyes therefore being moiste and clear, shows mirthe, good manners, and
an honest life, declininge and loking downward, red, and very great: betokens
glotony, and fleshly lust. Small hollow eyes, covetousness. Graye eyes an
evil man: hollow eyes a craftye man, waueringe unstable eyes, declare a
seditious, suspicious, unfaithful boster. Great eyes sloth, tre^blinge eyes
sluggishnes, glistering eyes betoke^ dro^ke^nes, small eyes vnshamfastnes,
diverse colored and small: signifies crafty flattering. Turning toward the
nose, betokens lecherous men. Great dropping^ eyes with an unstable
countenance, mad men. Dry eyes, crafty men. Black clear eyes, just, witty,
libidinous, and cunning. The circle of the ball gren^: declares a craftye
wicked man and a thief. Moiste eyes stoutnes of stomach, perfect speech and
good counsel. Great glistering eyes: show mad men, light, and glotons, Crooked
hollow and dry eyes, declare unfaithful and traitorous persons. High eyes,
large, clear, pure, and moist: are tokens of circu^spect, diligente persons,
and lovers. Always running and droppinge without cause of sickness, declares
folishnes. Misty dry eyes, unfaithful me^. Larg eyes glistering, moist, and
clear: signifies witty and high men, violent, stout, and boasters. Black and
shining eyes, fearful and euel men. Swelling eyes and raw: shows glotons and
vnamiable men. Small and holow eyes, covetous, disceitful men. Chereful eyes
betoken just me^, prone to laughter, gentle, and holy. Moist eyes, good
counsel. Winking eyes, a these and a lier in wait. Bleared eyes, libidonous
me^. Upright brows, amiable, the brows hanging over effeminate platynge with
the bries: signifies adulterous persons.

The forhed narow, shows a folishe person, long, one apt to learn. A hie
fore hend swelling and round, is a sign of a crafty man and a coward. Full of
wrinkles, full of cares, round, envious and craftye, A large forhed betokens a
liberal man.

The brows heery, signifies stutting: and being extent to the se^ples
vnclean^^nes.

The face plain and ^lat, declares a man full of debate and strife, without
any rising or swelling: infurious, and an unclean person. A lean face is
token of a wise man. A fleshy face one apt to learn. A sad face shows sometime
folishnesse, sometime wisdom.

Open ears betokens a man without reason or understanding, great ears an
unwise man, small ears a fool, square ears a learned and wise man.

A sharp nose shows an angry person, thick and low, evil manner^. The nose
tending or stretching to the mouth, declares honesty, strength, and apt to
learning. A great nose good, a little nose a disceitful person. A nose like an
ape, betokens a libidinouse and riotous person.

The nosethrilles thick and strong, betokens strength: round, fear: drawn
in length, merry and coragious: ye nosethrils narow and round are tokens of a
fool.

A big mouth shows a bold and hardy warrior. The mouth very big with
the upper lip hanging over: signifies a glotton and an ungodly man, a
babbler, rash, folish, and unsteadfast.

Slender, thin, and subtle lips, betoken eloquence, but thin lips with a
little mouth, an effeminate person. Flesshy lips a fool. And they whose dog
teethe do bear out their lips, are to be counted co^tumelous, slanderers,
and unfaithful. A sharp throtbole signifies a vain sester

A long slender neck declares a fearful evil mannered man, thick and long: a
furious, fearful, and stubburne person. A mean neck, a strong and virtuous
man, and apt to learning. A thick neck, shows rude, barbarous, and ungentle
persons. Sharp neck a slau^derous person. A short neck rashness. A crooked neck
a covetous man. The neck turned to the right side: shows a te^perat man.
Turned to ye left side, a hoar master and a fool.

A great breast is always praised, a larg breast does represe^t Magnanimity,
boldness, and honestye. A little breast a fearful person. A pursye or gross
breaste, an ungentle and cruel man.

The paps hanging down from the breast, do show a violente man.

A great belly, declares an indiscreet folishe man, proud, and riotous. A
lanke belly with a big breaste, a man of understanding and counsel.

A broad back declares gentleness. The mean proportion both of the back and
breast, is always commendable: a crooked back is token of a nigarde, and
covetous person.

Very long arms are sign of boldness, honesty, and strength, short arms a
sower of discord and riot.

The hands very short does signify a gross and rude person, fat and flesshy
with the fingers likewise inclined to theft. Small hands crafty men.

The feteful of flesh declares folishnes, Small and slender fete, hardness.

Slender legs show ignorance, gross legs, boldness and strength. Large and
full of s^^owes, fortitude, and strength. Short and fat legs, crueltye. Crooked
and hollow inward, is a token of very (...) men. Soft and sw^lling legs, evil
ma^nered men.

The sh^nne gross and short with a sharp heel and fat thighs, do
prognosticate madness or frensye to come or happen to that party.

Thus have you here these brief introductions to this art of Phisiognomy, by
the which a man may judge the dispositions of other. Following herein Aristotle
and Valla, who did the like, by whose help we have performed herein that we may
or can. Wherefore, if any man will slander us, let him know that we have not
written any commentaries, but a co^pendious treatise of this science, and thus
an end.

Brief introductions upon the faces of the signs, what effect the Sun does
work in every house or mansion.
NOw that we have fully proposed and also determined as well to instruct, as to
induce and allure the studious and desirous, to the study and knowledge of
Astrology, and that there be many things to be observed and marked therein, as
the situation and placing of the houses, and the judgments of the Horoscope:
we think now only to remain necessary to entreat or speak of the faces or
triplicities of the signs, and of their work and effect in every degree. For
the Sun and every other Planet have diverse and sundry effects in each
degree and face, working one thing in the first triplicity, another in the
second, and a far different and contrary operation in the third face. The
which that you may the better understand, every sign is divided into thirty
degrees. The same thirty being parted again into.iii. parts, ye first part or
order to ten, does make the first face or triplicity, and al which comes
between ten and twenty, is attribute to the second: and that which remains to
ye thirty degree, is added to the third face. And in this manner music you
divide all the other signs: and these degrees as they increase in number, so do
they in force and strength. So toward the end they be of loss power then
they were in the beginning or middesie of the triplicitye, and specially in
the last faces or triplicities. These notes and others we have brieflye drawn
or taken out of Abraham, Haly, Alcabitius, Firmicus and such others.
Wherefore, if any zoylous or envious person, will obiecte or demand why we
join these things to our doings: we answer that those learned men did
not fullye and distinctly write the whole effects, which a perfect Astrologian
might altogether do. But rather to admonish their own Disciples and scholars
then to teach others. And these things thus being touched, we will proceed to
speak of Aries.

The Sun in the first face of Aries..
THe Sun in Aries, which is the first and principal sign, amongste the
twelve, and in the first ten degrees of the same, does commonly make those
which be then borne, red colored, small visaged, lanke and slender bealied,
and lean, marked in the left sote, or elbowe, having many friends, hating
evil and loving all that is good.

In the second face which is from the tenth degree of Aries, to the twenty
degree of the sam^e, it makes them black colored, the which blacknes is not
reputed as any vice or deformity, but for a comeliness and great ciuilitye.
They be also of a mean ciuility, angry, suspicious, disceitful, and hartye,
compassed and beset with many ennemies which shall pursue him even unto death.

In the third face it makes them oftentimes red, inclining to a saffro^
color solitary, and devising crafts and disceites

The sun in the first face of Taurus.

Makes them that be borne apt or diligent, great eyed, and great lips, marked
in the neck, but very merye, and always occupied in riot and banketinge.

In the second face, it makes them wa^ton and riotous, (but not so much as in
the first face) runners about countries, and unsteadfast.

In the third face it causes a colder complexion because of Saturn which
does possess this last face, and brings the pains or diseases of the
ears, belly, and thighs.

The Sun in the first face of Geminy.
Who so ever happens to be born the Sun being in the first face of Gemini,
is for the most part of a mean stature, well bodied, every membre decently
compact, marked in the head or knees, gentle, and painful, unfortunate through
women, and commonly without issue.

In the second face it does minishe the stature, adding blacknes of color,
marked in the elbow or preuy members, and that which seems to be deminished
or wanting in the other parts, is repaired and fulfilled with eloquence.

In the declination of the third face, it makes them to decrease in honestye
and the due proporcion of the me^bres, making them folishe, and inuentors and
spreaders abroad of iestes and vain trifles.

The Sun in Cancer.
THey which are borne in the first ten degrees of Cancer, are comelye both of
body and here, narrow brows, quick and pregnant witted, marked in the
right arm and thighs, having a good spirit and disposition, and plenty of
friends.

In the second face read heeres, short stature without any beard, and marked
in the eyes.

In the third face it makes the^ gross and dull, with heery brows, full of
ytch, and as it were blown or puffed up in the face.

The Sun in Leo.
SO in the first face of Leo, is the gift of life, and it makes the^ of a small
comely body, reddy colored, mixed with some white, rouling eyes, straight
body, full of diseases in their feet, and specially in age: famous and
notable, simple, and beloved of the kings and rulers of the earth.

In the second face it makes the^ large breasted, the stones and privy members
slender, hearty and honorable.

In the third face short of stature, rose colored, mixed with white, vexed
with much sickness, a whoremonger, and lover of women.

The Sun in Virgo.
THe Sun possessing the first face of Virgo, causes a comely stature, high
and tal body, a fair face, witty, prudence and quick, curled here, a player
of instruments, with a quick and shril voice, learned in many sciences, but
vnfertil and barren in having or bringinge forth of children.

In the second face it makes the^ likewise comely cou^tenanced, small eyes, fair
nose, religious, learned, honest, without blame or reproach, and desirous of
praise.

Under the third face, simple, fair, apt, witty, prudent, and good.

The Sun in the first face of Libra.
BEing a sign of a ma^ly shape or form causes a fair face, a simple, painful
and modest person, which shall be wounded in the head.

In the second face it makes likewise a fair face, but blexe eied, or squint
eyed, for they shall have some default in them.

In the third face it makes them honorable, reverent, and comely: in thend of
this face it makes them oftentimes of both kinds, and let them take heed they
take no venomous thing.

The sun in Scorpio.
Causes them which are borne to be euel favored, marked in the head or
shulders, or in the left foot or arm, large brested, merry, and pleasant in
giving checks or tauntes, sobre, and discrete.

In the second face it causes a great head, and a great babbler, marked in the
knees or back.

And under yt third face makes a small and little stature, gogle eyed, a glotton
or great eater, and a horemonger.

The Sun in Sagittarius.
Makes them of a comely countenance and tall stature, belonginge to the
Court, studious and desirous of good things.

Under the second face it causes a comely and fair countenance and stature,
inclined to a saffron color, thin brows, and marked in the breast.

In the third face tal and comely, large and big brested, marked in the breast
and foot.

The Sun in Capricorn.

Makes oftentimes a large breaste, a tender and soft person, of a compete^t
stature, but somewhat black colored, marked in the elbow or breast craftye.

In the second face fair, marked in the left arm, but if the nativity be by
night, it makes them malicious, long nosed, and quick witted.

In the third face it causes a comely body, a citrine face, marked in the
arm or knee, angrye, louelye, and a lover of women.

The Sun in the first face of Aquarius.
THe sun in the first face of Aquarius makes a comely bodi and face, marked
in the breast or left foot, also benign, easy and gentle to be spoken to,
tractable, and familiar amongst men.

Under the second face, it makes the^ very long red face, marked in the back
or elbow, endomaged with many vexations and tribulations.

In the third face it causes a short stature, a rose colored countenance,
marked under the elbow, and a lover of women: but if it happen him to be borne
in the last degree, he shall not only be different and contrary disposed in the
proportion of the body, but in all his actions and doings.

The Sun being found in Pisces.
Causes a soft body, white, big breast, comely beard, fair forhed, clear
skin, large and fair eyes, full of flesh and honest.

In the second face, an equal and short stature, black bearde, thin heared,
nimble and merry.

In the third face it makes the^ comely and decent in all members, and gives
also clerenes of sound or voice.

This also we have judged worthy to be noted and marked, that in artificial
Astrology there be certain forms or signs, which do cause greatness or
bigness, as Leo, Virgo, Sagittarius: and certain which cause divination or
making less, as Pisces, Cancer, Capricorn.

The beginninges also of Aries, Leo, and Taurus, do cause bodies to tend to
grosenesse and strength, the ends of the same, do contrariwise cause leannes,
slenderness, and debilitie: likewise the beginninges of Gemini, Scorpio, and
Sagittarius, cause leanness and debility, and the ends of the same,
grosnesse, and strength, but Virgo, Libra and Sagittarius cause equalitye and
good proportion. Taurus, Scorpius, and Pisces, as Halye writes, do work and
cause a diverse and unequal proportion of the body. For they which are borne
in the day, are clearer then they which are borne in the night: for the
night doothe help the Planettes, signifying obscurity and blackenesse. Also
the Moon in conjunction with Mercury, in the hour of nativity, and not
being ascendent: causes the fallinge sickness, and specially if Saturn be
in any angle in the day birth: or Mars in the night birthe. Also Saturnus in
any of the angles, either in the night or day birthe, causes madness, and
specially when Cancer, Virgo or Pisces, are found in any of the angles. More
over, Saturn in the houses of the lights: that is to say, the Sun or Moan,
which are Cancer and Leo, it be tokeneth the passion or hurt of the eyes.

These signs, Aries, Cancer, Scorpius Capricorn and Pisces: do signify and
cause biles, leprosy, red spots, itches, scurffes, deafness, stuttinge,
baldenesse, and a small bearde.

Cancer, Scorpius, and Pisces, are signs of many sons or men children. Also
these signs betoken the honesty of women, their religion and puritye of life,
Taurus, Leo, Aquarius.

These signs have reason and are called reasonable signs, Gemini, Virgo,
Libra, the first part of Sagittarius and al Aquarius

Signs moving to anger and sharpenes, are Aries, Leo, and Scorpio.

More over, Gemini, Virgo, and Libra cause great, loud, and shril voices,
Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces, are dombe, and without voice or sound.

There be three planets which do give riches: that is to say, Jupiter, the
Sun, and Venus. The Sun also gives wisdom, Mercury eloquence, and Venus
goodlye utterance or pronunciation.

There be also three signs oriental or of theast. Aries is the heart of
theast. Leo the second triplicitie and the lift part of theast, and Sagittarius
his right part or side Capricorn is the heart of the Southe, Taurus the list
side, and Virgo the right. Libra is the heart of the west, Aquarius the list
side, and Gemint the right.

Cancer is the heart of the north, Scorpio his lift part, and last of al
Pisces his right side.

Wherefore, if you will know to what end this respect or disposition of the
signs does belong or attain, you shall briefly hear. We have said there be
three signs oriental, or of the east, three meridional, three perteininge to
the north, and three to the west. The oriental signs profit us, if that they
risyng, and the sun being in them, we order and direct al our doings to
that coast, part, or place.

As if thou w^lt lead an healthful life, sleep quietly, prospere in children
if thou be married, or have any thing to succeed or go forward, if thou will
sell or make any bargain, or hope for any honor or gain, or any such like:
to direct al your doings toward that place, in the which the sines having
respect to those things, are situate or placed. So contrariwise, if that we
fear the evil success of any of those things, the contrary signs are to
be eschued. And in this sort may you sudge of the other signs. Also we have
made a larger description hereof, where as we make mention of the quality and
nature of the houses. Thus have we here no less copiouslye then brieflye
discribed the nature of the faces of the signs, neither do I perceive how they
could more compendiouslye have been touched, not iudgyng it of great effect to
have tarried long herein with great circumstances. At be it, they be necessary
unto Astrology, yet are they not of such force (that as is said in the
proverb, both ship, and helm were to be committed unto them) or that the
hole rule, and governance of Astrology did depend on them. For as they can not
well be left unknown, yet are they with such a moderation to be learned and
understand, that upon the knowledge of them a man ought not to judge him
self by and by an Astronomer. Wherefore, who soever thou art that semest to be
prope^se or apt to this science, mon of ctor.
I warn thee to use moderation, and to do nothing rashlye, neither
unadvisedly to give judgment of any man his nativity. There are so many
things whereby we mate be discetued, as the wisdom and circums^^^ ^^^on of
the man, the dispensation of O^^, and our uncertain judgment. ^^^^or
example, it may be that a man home under Aries, be very fierce and angry,
who waiyng with him self the foulnes of the vice, does moderate and suppress
his anger. If I then should judge this man an angrye or testye man, who would
not mock me and laughe me to scorn, albeit nature and destinye do incline
thereunto: yet notwithstanding the sentence and judgment is so to be
tempered and ruled, that without perfect respect had to all things, thou utter
nothing rashely. The which if you do not take heed of, be assured you shall
neither Prognosticate or foreshewe any truth: but also become a mockyng stock
to all men. And this I do every where admonish you of, because I have known
manse to have erred and been foulye disceiued: who thinkyng them selfs sure,
have been (as they say) sixtene foot of from the mark or prick.

Certain cannons or rules upon sickness or diseases, by what means the
patientes may be cured and helped by the aspectes of the signs.
The preface.
THE folishe and unadvised sort of Physicians which in these our days we see
so much to advance them selfs, and claim unto them selves the supremacy over
us, albeit they be commanded by their auctours not to take in hand to cure any
man, without having respect unto the stars. So far are they distant from
the true knowledge of Physic, which are ignorant of Astrology, that they
ought not rightly to be called Physicians, but disceauers. Howbeit, it is now
come to this point, that amongst an hundred you shall scarsely find one, the
which can truly discern what time every medicine ought to be ministered. The
which is no marvel, for how can they find any time to bestow or occupy them
selves in Astrologye, which have no leisure to read Galene or Hipocrates, but
do all thing a head or unadvisedly by certain prescript receiptes. Like as
there was a certain (no simple man) at Moguntia, whom you would have judged to
have been the third Cato or another Galene, if that gravity would help any
thing thereunto. This man being most rude and unlearned, vied two receiptes,
from whence he had drawn the^ I know not. There was in them. 3. sz. of
Elleborns, or so much feamonye, to purge the womb. These he ministered by
course, without having respect either to the completion or sickness: by the
which vain trifles he scraped together so much money, that being dead, he
left behind him. 3000. gilders. He judged the whole effect of this science to
consist in losinge of the bealy. Such effect has au^thoritie and boldenes in
Physic. These sort of rude and gross men the which disdain to learn, we
will neither admonish nor yet reduce into the right way. But unto others which
intend hereafter to be Physicians, we will prescribe certain rules whereby
setting apart al old vain trifles, they may learn from above to help the
patient or diseafed. For it hath-bene many times experimented and proved, that
that which many Physicians could not cure or remedy with their greatest and
strongest medicines: the Astronomer has brought to pass with one simple
herb, by obseruinge the mouyng of the signs, the which we have wholly divided
in Canons.

THe first Cano^. There be four signs the which behold or govern the inward
parts of a man, the which Physicians do call the spiritual me^bres. Those are
Cancer, Leo, Virgo, and Libra. Of these Cancer beholds the Liver, the lunges,
and the heart stringes. Leo governs the stomach, and the mouth thereof. Virgo
the nether part of the stomach, the bealy, the midriffe, and the bowels. Libra
has respect to the nether part of the bealy, the loins, and the navel.

The.ii. Canon. Cancer which gonerneth the lunges, engenders the cough, the
pertises, and pleurisy. Leo causes impostumes, taunders, fevers, and
pestitence. Virgo the swelling of the bealye, the dropsy, and hardness of the
belly, and collicke. Libra causes the exulceration of the bowels, pain in the
bealy, and about the small of the back: and chieflye if the signs aforesaid
happen into those houses which are naturally evil. Such as are the. 6. house,
the. 8. and. 12. house from the ascendent or Horoscope.

The.iii. Canon. He which is borne under Taurus for the most part shall be in
peril by poison, witcheraft, or the colic: and specially in the fatal years,
which are the.vi.viii.xviii.xx.xxiii.xliiii. according to the revolution of
every twelfe year, beginning at the.viii. year of the nativity. And because
that Taurus does govern the throat, they do also refer unto him the squinancy
and al impostumes and biles which happen in the throat, ye which when the
expert Physician does understand and know, let him take heed that he minister
not^vnaduisedly.

For this is almost a general rule, that the Sun, or rather the Moon being
in any sign which beholds any member vered or diseased during that
reuolutio^, there be no medicine ministered thereunto, or else that it be ministered
in such ^^^te, not to cure or heal, but to comfort and nourish, least that
it decline into a worse estate, unto such time as the Sun be removed out of
that sign.

The. 4. Canon. They which are much vexed or troubled with the Strangulion or
stone, or with any such kind of diseases, most commonly are borne, the Sun
being in Aries or Gemini.

The. 5. Canon. They that have Pisces in their ascendent, or are born under
Pisces, are in danger of hot infirmities: as hot fevers, knawynge of the
bealye, and poison, because of Libra and his lord of the.viii. house. These
diseases shall partlye happen by harlottes, and evil women, and specially in
the. 44.56.78. years, in the which he shall be in great danger of death.
Wherefore, the wise Physician ought carefullye to observe those things. There
be also certain evil times and years of a ma^s life, which are at every seven
years e^^h: so ye every seventh year is perilous. Wherefore, if you wilt prolong
the days of thy life: as often as thou come to every.vii. or.ix. year, (if
you give any credit to Marsilius ficinus or Firmicus) diligently consult with an
Astronomer, from whence, and by what means any pearil or danger may happen
or come unto thee, the^ either go unto a Physician or use discression and
tempera^ce, and by that means thou may defer and prolong thy natural end,
through the rules of Astronomy, and the help of the Physician. Neither be
ashamed to enquire of the Physician, what is thy natural diet: and of ye
Astronomer, what star does mosle support and favor thy life, and to se in
what aspect he is with the Moon. Likewise, in the beginning of thy sickness
to behold the Sun in the day, and the Moon in the night. They, if they be
let or hindered, there must be great head and diligence be had upon the
pacient. The like is to be feared in all sickness, when the Moon and the lord
of the ascendent be let in the.viii. house, which is called the house of
death. For in such case it is past all hope, without the great diligence and
labor of the expert and wise Physician. These and many other such like
things, the wise and learned Physician ought diligently to observe and take heed unto.

The.vi. Canon. Leo in theyght house engenders to him that is borne under
Capricorn these kind of diseases: that is to say, knawynge of the stomach,
the pluresie, the coughe, inflammation of the liver, and impostumes of the
stomach. Wherefore in curyng or helpyng thereof, you must eschew wedensdaye,
because of, the sixth house Sunday, because of in the.viii. house, and
thursdaye, because of Sagittarius in the.xii. house.

The.vii. Canon. Cancer causes the inflammation of the lunges, with a feruet
ague. The sun being in sagittarius, engenders likewise the Ethica, and
swellyng of the lunges. But and if Saturnus be in sagittarius, it causes the
swellyng of the feet, and the gout. Saturnus in cancer causes the pain of
the coddes, stones, and privy members.

The.viii. Canon. Scorpius engenders the gowte in the hand the sciatica, and
sometime the pain in the head. If Saturn be in scorpio, it causes also
pain under the ancley. Wherefore let this diet be used, not to wash their
heads upon a tuesdaye, neither use any hotie bathes, the sun being in
Aries, lest they fall into a continual headatche, for then they shall be in
great danger of frenesye or madness.

And for because that the evil days, months, and years, are to be observed
and taken heed of: let them abstain specially from hot things. The
fortunate days for the cure and healpe of such as are infected with that
kind of melancholye, are thursdaye, mondaye, and Sunday. The unfortunate
days are tuesdaye and wedensdaye. And for so much as Scorpio does behold
the privy members, they ought not to be ministered unto the sun being in
Scorpio.

The. 9. Canon. They that have Virgo in their Horoscope, or else are borne under
Virgo, for the most part have the natural infirmity of the legs or fe^^
swollen: the legs runnyng with corrupt and filthye matter, or else the eye
liddes or chekes full of pimples. In likewise, great pains in the head
through the exhalation of humors out of the ^ete unto the head. The which
pains are sone dela^ed and appeased by cutting the swelling of the feet. And
so much the rather if Saturn be in Virgo at the time of nativity. Wherefore if
thou diligently consider it, thou shall perceive and see it to be a natural
disease, and for the most part inevitable. And therefore only to be au^ided and
put of by the natural observation of the signs. Such ought to abstain from
hot houses, whether they be to wash or sweat in, which if they can not
altogether eschew, let them abstain Tuesdaies and Saturdaies, and the euel
months and years before prescribed: because ye at those times more the^ at
any other, they do most vehemently pour out their mischief and poison. Let
them also refrain from al Autumnal fruits.

The. 10. Canon. The unfortunate days unto such as are borne under Leo are
Saturday and Thursday, the which thing must be taken head of in their diet: for
all sharp and pepered meats, are hurtful for the^. Moreover, they may take no
drinckes or purgations. And in like case when the Sun remoueth out of Leo,
and comes unto Capricorn or Pisces, they must abstein from al kind of
saltfish and diminution or letting of blood.

The. 11. Canon. If that any manne chance to fall sick, the Sun being in
Aries, and thou be admitted or called for Physician: understand that he in
especial, engenders the pains of the head, and deafness, thereof with ye
du^nes of sight. Wherefore, beware that thou minister no hot bathes or stews,
because of Mars, and specially in October, when the sun does possess
Scorpio, neither give him in his diet, any Mutton, Rams flesh, or Lamb,
neither suffer him to wash his head upon the Tuesdaies, wedensdayes because
of Mercury being Lord of Virgo in the.vi. house, whereas Mars al so does
privily rejoice, and Scorpius in the eight house, for then they prolong the
sickness, not only because the.vi. house is mansion of sickness: as also that
Virgo is a sign cold and dry, earthlye and Melancholye. Not withstandinge,
this hope remains that the patie^t shall not depart. And al be it Scorpio, as
is aforsaide, be in theight house which is the mansion of death, because that
Mars is Lord of the same sign, it prevails nothing, for no evil Planet is
noisome or hurtful in his proper mansion or house: and such kind of men
most of all, shall be without pearill of the swearde. Wherefore after his
recovery or amendment, you must warn the patiente that he do not take in
hand any ioureney, the Sun being in Pisces, which is the. 12. house from
the Horoscope.

Or elsse not to have to do with notaries or scribes, grauere, or gold smithes.
Also that he abstain from women, and horses. For by all these things
infirmity or sickness may happen unto him, by reason of the.vi. house,
which is the house of sickness, and chiefly in August the Sun having his
course in Virgo.

The. 12. Canon. In like manner, the noumber of the years of the pacient are
diligently to be observed and marked, for always every.vii. and.ix. year,
are mortal and deadly, and are called of the Astronomers: the perilous time of
a man's life at every.vii. years end. The cause thereof, is the great mutacion
and change of the bodies, that happens in those years. For Saturn which in
the other years is far distaunte from us, is then joined to the Moon, which
is the lowest planet of al. Wherefore you musse observe in the revolution of the
years, the aspectes of those Planettes: and thereby judge whether there be
any danger toward the patiente or not, or whether Saturn or Mars which also
governs every.ix. year, be in strength or power to work their malice upon
us, or elsse if that any good or favorable Planet, have the rule or dominion
over him. And by this means you shall not only put away ye sickness: but also
through thengines of Astronomi, defer and pro^ong the fatal end and death.

The. 13. Canon. Always the diet of the patient is to be enquired, secondlye
the Horoscope of the nativity, and then by a figure erect to behold ye stars
of the planets, and by the situation of the^ in their houses to know their
strength and operation with the cause of thinfirmitie, and the lord of the
birth: and so by the contrary qualities of the signs, to drive away the
disease, as we will declare hereafter by examples.

The. 14. Canon. Furthermore, you must note and mark every.vii. day, and the
courses. For thereby is life or death to be looked or hoped for, but which be
those Cretical days, we have referred to be learned of the Physician. As for
as much as examples to most instruct and teach, we have anexed one. It may
happen peradventure, that in the beginning of the sicken^^^^ the Moon be in
Aries, which is a hot and dry sign, and according to his nature, does
inflame the diseases. Here thou ma^est admonish the sick person to be
paciente, and that his pain will be delayed at the.vii. day, at which time the moon will be remoned into Cancer. For Cancer being cold and moiste, and being a
quartile aspecte unto Aries: except the sickness be very furious, will
moderate the same through his coldness and moistures. The which thing if thou
diligently attend and mark, thou shall sone perceive and understand. And in
like sort thou must work b^ the other signs, considering how ^i signs of
like nature, diseases are augmented and increased: and by the co^traries, they
be cured and helped.

The. 15. Canon. In likewise the second number of days is to be observed and
marked, which is the. 14. day, the which does give a certain and
determinate judgment, by means of the full Moon, not so much for the Crisis
as for the influence of the Moon being the^ in opposition. As Aries, and
Libra, Taurus, and Scorpio.

The. 16. Canon. The medicines the^ selves have likewise their propre signs,
neither are they indifferentlye to be ministered at all times. For some serve
for gargles, some for suffumigations, and other some sorpotions or drinks.
Wherefore to avoid tediousness, I will comprehend all these in our Canon.
The Moon being in Aries, Leo and Sagittarius, it is good to corroborate and
strength the virtue attractiue in a man.

Under Virgo and Taurus the virtue retentiue, the digestive in Gemini, Libra
and Capricorn, gargiles, vomettes, and suffumigations are to be ministered, the Moon being in Aries, and sometime only gargles in Taurus, Laxatiues by drink
in Scorpio, by electuari in, by pills (if you will) in Pisces, in Gemini and
al confortable medicines is to be received and taken. In Libra or Scorpio,
suppositories or glisters.

The. 18. Canon. In the ministringe of purgations, there is great respect to
be had unto the Moon, and her aspectes. For she being in Cancer, and having a
trine or sextile aspecte with Venus, it is good to pourge cholere, having the
like aspectes with the Sun: is good to pourge phlegm, and with Jupiter
melancholye. either by pills or by gobbets, called of the physicians Boli. But
if thou will pourge by drinks: use the same aspectes in Scorpio, and likewise
in Pisces for ministering of pills. And if that two Planettes at one time be in
the aspectes aforesaid with the moon, two purgations may be taken at once. As
for example, if the Moon be at one time in a trine or sextile aspecte with
Venus and the Sun, you may pourge both Choler and phlegm together.

The. 19. Canon. Such as have in the root of their nativity, Mars in Aries,
or on his triplicitye, are colericke, for the most part indaunger of hot
fevers, by abounda^ce of cholere, phrenesi, pushes or biles coming of blud,
scuruy itch, burninges, and such diseases as consume and eat the flesh, the
holy fire. The which diseases, if they can not vrterly be avoided and eschued
the Physician or surgean must take dilligent he^e that he may drive away the
disease by the rules of qualities of the signs before expressed.

The. 20. Canon. The like is to be understand of al those with Mercury evil
placed in the house of Mars, the which when thou perceiuest in any nativity:
judge thereby hot fevers, pimples rising of blood, the canker, the kings euel,
and holy fire, darkness of the eyes, suffocation, and moreover, horrible and
fearful thoughts and verations of the mind. Ercept there come any temperament
unto the Moon, either in the signs or places appointed unto Venus, and
specially in collericke men.

The. 22. Canon. The infirmities of the phlegmatic, are of an other sort:
for unto them happens most comonlye the agewes called Quotidians, and are
much vexed with cold, the which is perceived by the Urine, which for the most
part is thick and raw. Wherefore such must use exercise and labor, and
abstain from al fat flesh and swine flesh, also from chese and milk, and
from the marrowe and brains of be astes.

The. 23. Canon. Saturn with the Moon engenders the fallen sickness, black
chollere, leprosy and fistula. Also the morphew, gout, and oftentimes sudden
panges.

The which diseases when they happen are leasurelye and gentellye to be dealt
withal, neither may thou in such case strive against the Planets: except
the medicine be such as will endeavor with all force and strength, to expel
and drive away the sickness, and pull it up clean by the rotes. Also, if any
man be borne, at the time of the conjunction of the Sun and Moan: always
that nativity is judged evil, for it makes men when they come to age,
daungerously afflicted as it were with evil spirits, to be sickely, inclined
to the falling sickness, to madness, and such kind of diseases, as may
hardly and difficultlye be cured by the Physician.

The. 24. Cannon. You may also judge by the course of the Sun, the
sickness which we are in danger of, if that ye mark the month in which the
man is born. As for example. The man borne under Scorpio, shall be endomaged
with the disease of the shoulders, the gout in the hands, and the contraction
or conuulsion of the hands or fingers. If it be a woman, it causes the pain
in the spleen and stomach. Likewise, they which are borne under Cancer, shall
bevered with a dry scuruy itche, or roughness of skin, biles, and pushes. The
women with knawyng in the bowels, and pearils by waters. Taurus brings the
infirmities about the throat, and many other vexatio^s of the body: and
specially in the evil months and years prescribed. Also Leo causes ye pains
of ye stomach. And Aquarius engenders quotidian fevers, as we have briefly
touched before.

The. 25. Canon. This is also to be noted no less profitable unto the sick
manne then to the Physician, that is to say: if that the patiente have Saturn
or Mars in the seuenthe house, it is not convenient to meddle, neither with
physician nor Physic: although the Lord of the house, be never so
unfortunate, for so Galene thought it meet. Also if the Physician be
Saturnine or Mertiall, such as is the patiente: It is approved and known,
that these kind of men are borne for the destruction of mankind. For it is
impossible that they should ever cure or help, or bring any thing
prosperouslye to pass, except peradventure amongst profane and rusticall
people. Such one we have known, a man surely well learned, and in great
reputation amongst noble men, in whom there wanted nothing as touching
the art or science, how be it being admitted either to priests, noble men,
or ecclesiastical rulers, his labor and knowledge was always frustrate and
in vain, and brought the most part of them to their end: but contrariwise
amongst the profane and rude sort. he did cures without any difficultye or
pain. Hereby you may perceive as well in this as in all other things, of what
force and strength the planets are. And this dare I be bold to profess, that
who so ever has Mars conjoined with Venus in the.vi. house, that he shall be an
excellent Physician. And such kind of men, ought not to give them selves to
any other kind of learning or knowledge. I could rehearse unto certain
grave men, Physicians witnesses hereof: unto whom it is a ready and easy
matter to cure and help: yea, even without any pain or labor. And again,
other some unto whom it is so difficult and hard, that withal their possible
endeavor, they can scarsly bring any thing to pass, whose names we will keep
under silence, least we may seem to backbite or slander any man. Thus we have
briefly spoken, not hereby to expound all things which can not be done in so
few words: but to minister occasion unto Physicians, that beholding and
considering the utility and profit of Astronomy, hey may with their hole power
and endeavor embrace the same, and thereby learn not only by the prescript
rules of men to help the diseased: but also by their own wit and engine to
put away the diseases, even without medicines. For every sick man is not of
that sort that he can bear salues or medicines. For some by diet, and others
by observations of the signs may be cured and helped. Scorn us who will, we
verelye have written these things of a sincere mind and affection, intendyng
shortly to set forth greater things. But first we thought it good to declare
the things in general: and afterward the some and effect whereon the matter
depends.

A compe^dious description of Natural Astrologye, never so briefly handeled
before. Made by, John Indagine Priest.
FIrst of all and chiefelye, it is mete to resell and put of the objections of
such as obtecte and saic: that besidethe Sun and the Moon we attribute very
little or nothing at all to the other Planets, but do collocate and set the
whole sum and power of Astrologye in them two only. Wherefore let every
man understand and know, as much virtue and force to be in them two, as in
all the other. And that the Sun has the whole power and governance in the
day, and the Moon in the night, so that it is not neadefull to have respect
to any of the other planettes. And this is the only difference between
natural and arificiall Astrologye, that that thing which artificial
Astrology does by the several observations of every Planet and Horoscope: the
same does natural Astrologye bring to pass by the only observation of the
motion of the Sun and Moan. Or else they are so knitte and toyned together,
that the one without the other can not well be learned or understand.
Wherefore, he shall not lofe his labor which shall join them both together,
as well for the learning, as for the pleasure of them: for the natural has
somewhat more delectation then the artificial, albeit the other seem the
better. But now we will define what a house is.

A House is a certain space in the firmament divided by certain degrees, by
the which the planets have their motion, so Metaphorically called. For as in a
house there be many mantions: so every planet has his proper place in the
heaven or firmament, by the which they do move, and in the which they be
resident and situate. And it is called the description or diuiston of the
signs by. 30 degrees, for every house or sign has 30. degrees.

astrological diagram

The number of the houses.
AS the Astronomers do make mention in their common Rithmes, there be.xii.
houses, the which we will here ascribe with their interpretations.

The first is interpreted the house of life The.ii. the house of faculties or
substance, called also of thimportunity of the place, the gate of hell.
The.iii. is the mancion of brethren. The.iiii. being the bottom of the
heavens, and the angle of the earth, is the house of parentage. The.v. is the
pleasure of Venus, the house of children. The.vi. of evil fortune, servants,
sickness, and the pleasure of The.vii. being opposite to the first, is the
house of marriage and open enemies The.viii. is the house of death. The.ix. of
religion or long iourneys, the delight of the Sun. The.x. being the middle of
the firmament, is the house of rule or governance. The.xi. is the house of
Fortune, the exaltation of Jupiter. The.xii. is the house of prisons, evil
fortune, the pleasure of Saturn.
Of the principal Angles or houses of the heaven or firmament.
Amongst these.xii. there be certain which are called ye principal angles or
coruers of the firmament, which are the first, the tenth, the seventh, the
fourth. The first is the angle of the East, the Horoscope of the birth, and
the house of Aries. The second is the midst of heaven, and the house of
Capricorn. The third is the angle of the west, and perteyneth to Libra. The
fourth of Firmic9 is called the bottom of the firmament. And in these four
almost the whole judgment does depend and consiste. For they are the
principal angles and houses, and the planets have more power and strength in
them then in any of the other.

Medium celi.

Oriens.

Occidens.

Imum celi.



I Judge it but supersticious unprofitably to entreat much of the beginning of
the natiuitic, because it does rather pertain to artificial Astrology: as of
the fall of the sede into the womb, and the ascendente of the hour of the
natiuitye, which (as I said) perteyneth to an other kind of speculation. Our
intention at this present is fullye derected to the Sun, and the sign
wherein the Sun is the day of nativity.

For as Ptolomye is witness, there are as great effects and virtues in the
Sun as in all the other Planets. And those things which nature and long
experience has taught us: we will make evident unto you, letting pass all
superstitious things.

Of the effects of the Planets.
FIrst of all it is convenient to declare the natures and effects of the
Planets in every house, the which although we have sufficiently handled in our
book entitled Octocedro^, yet I am nothing a hashed to describe it here the
second time.

If any man be borne between the.x. or.xi. day of March, (when the sun
commonly does enter into Aries) and continues there through three decanes or
faces, unto the.x. or.xi. day of April, Mars is found larde in the day of
nativity: who being by nature fierye, and Aries likewise, does augmente and
increase his heat and furye, and al other cull dispositions, more then if he
had been in an earthly or watery sign.

Saturnus wheresoever he be, and specially in the.vi.viii. or.xii. house, is
the auctoure of all miseries, calamities, labors, and sickness.

Venus being temperate, causes a man to be a lover of women, of plays, songs
and bankettes, and all things pertaining unto mirth.

Mercury is the minister and geuer of wisdom and eloquence, laws, rethoricke,
subtle works, merchaundise, and such like.

The Moon causes madness, unsteadfastness, moistness, and stouth.

Jupiter in the angles is the auctor of beauty, richesse, honor, and rule.

The Sun in the ascendente, or in the angles makes a great and honorable
personage, and had in reputation amongst princes and great men.

The signs also causinge beautye, are Gemini, Libra, Virgo, and the first
part of Sagittarius.

Workers of mean beauty, Scorpio, Capricorn and Pisces.

Barren signs, are Gemini, Leo, virgo.

Causinge defection or lack of children Aries, Taurus, Libra, Sagittarius,
Capricorn, and Aquarius.

Mean and without voice, Cancer, Scorpio, pisces.

Ministering reason, Virgo, Libra, Aquarius, Gemini.

The qualities of the signs I judge are well inoughe knoweit.

Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius, are hot and dry.

Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn, melancholic, cold, and dry.

Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces, are cold, moist, and waterye.

Gemini, Libra, Aquarius, are hot, moist, and ayrye.

And thus always three signs agreing in one nature, do make a triplicitie. And
every Planette likewise have certain powers and effects in their private or
proper houses, as for example.

Aries and Scorpius, are the houses of Mars.

Taurus and Libra, of Venus.

Gemini and Virgo, of Mercury.

Sagittarius and Pisces, are the houses of Jupiter.

Capricorn and Aquarius, are attribute to Saturn.

The Sun has only one house, which is Leo.

The Moon possesses also Cancer.

Every sign has likewise his proper signification in the creation of the
members of man's body.

Aries has of the body of man, the head and the face.

Taurus the neck, and the throat bole.

Gemini, the shoulders, arms, and hands.

Cancer the breast, the heart, stomach and ribs, spleen, and longes.

Leo the nether part of the stomach, back, and sides.

Virgo the belly or midriffe, Diaphragma and bowels.

Libra the loins, the nether part of the belly and nauel.

Scorpio the priuye members, stones, blather, and thighs.

Sagittarius the buttocks with the appertenances. And Capricorn the knees.
Aquarius the legs, Pisces the feet and souls.

Certain worthy notes concerning the sun and Moon.

Least that any should herein be deceived, we think it not mete to be let
pass, concerning the sun and Moan, the which al be it they be the chief and
princes of the Planettes: yet are they never Lords of the nativity, as for
example. If ye Moan be in Gemini, or in Cancer, which is her own house, when
a child is borne: yet shall not the Moon have the dominion of the birthe, but
it shall be imputed to the Lord of the house following. So likewise, if a man be
born the Sun being in Leo, which is his proper house: yet he loses the
dominion of the nativity, and it is derived unto Mercury being patron of the
next mansion Virgo. Again, the Moon being in Virgo, Venus is Lady of the
birthe, because of Libra following which is the house of Venus. Neither is it
unprofitable to admonish you also of his, which I perceive every where to be
doubted of, that ye euel planets as Saturn and Mars, are not so hurtful and
pernicious in their own proper houses, as they be in ye mansio^s of others. I
will propound an example of the first sign, whereby it may appear more
evident. We will set the Sun to be in the time of some natiuitye in Aries,
whose nature you al ready know, and what effect he works being in the
Horoscope. Then in therection of the figure, join Mars with Aries being Lord
of the house: and thereby judge that he which is born shall live long.
Notwithstanding, Mars who although he be naught, and ill, yet he does not so
much pour out and show his malice being in his own house; as if he were in
another house, sacring that instead of hurt by the sword, he threatens
sode^ne sickness, because Mars being in Scorpio, the.viii. house, neither
shall those sickness bring death. And this is for an e^a^ple. The like is
also to be understand of Saturn, being in Capricorn or in Aquarius. And left we
may seine here utterly to neglect artificial Astrology, ye which we do not
deny, but to be requi^i^e, to the understanding of the natural. Wherefore, we
mindinge to declare the force and strength of the signs, we will first do it by
artificial Astrology: so that any man lacking Firmicus and his tables, having
a plain Astrolobe, and beholding thascendent at thoure of ye nativity: may by
these small instructions give iudgmet. And after this in order, in another
phrase I will do the same by natural Astrology the which shall help the
artificial.

Of the first house and horoscope in Aries

IF any man will peradventure demand what operation and effect the Horoscope in
Aries does work in us. First of all I admonish the^ that the stars or signs
do not provoke or force us to any thing, but only does make us prone and apt:^
being so apt, they do move stir us up unto the things we are so prone unto.
From whose motion we are fre and out of danger, that following the rule and
gouerna^ce of reason, they shall have no effect in us. But if co^traciwise, we
only follow our natural stinction they shall work the same effect in us, that
they do in a manner in brute beasts. Wherefore, this Horoscope makes them
which are borne, flourishing in youth, without brethren, or one at the most, if
they be fortunate: having a mutable inheritance, now gotten, now lost, and now
lost, and st^ait recovered again, inclined to the diseases of the head, rather
then to any other sickness (because Aries has chief respect to the head). For
ye most part bestowing his labor and good will upon unthankful persons, and
specially Aries being in the Horoscope. Next after the Horoscope, must head be
taken unto the chief angles, and what sign is in each angle, which may easily
be rekened, by the fingers or else by a figure erect, as for example. Aries
being in the first house, Ca^cer possesses the nether part of the heaven,
Capricorn the midst, and Libra the west, and now we will show, what these
principal angles do promise.

Capricorn in the midst of the heaven, does discern honors, riches,
promotions, secrets of religion, and a suttel wit.

astrological diagram

Libra in the west shows the life and courtly manners, the which life few do
allow: for it is unconstant, casting down a man from honor and reputation, into
in famy and reproach: fortune now flattering and laughing upon him, and by and
by vering him with sundry miseries and calamities, so that he shall have no
comodity or gain, without incomoditye and loss. All this shall happen through
emulation or ye despite of his companions. But al these evils, whatsoever they
are Ca^cer in the nether part of the heaven does amend and recompense. We have
joined hereunto a figure, by the which as in a table you may perceive all
things perfectlye.

Of the second house and Horoscope in Taurus.
NExt after Aries, Taurus does orderly follow, and is placed in the figure to
the second house: the which, as we said before, is the house of substance or
riches. If any man therefore will know whether he shall be rich in the first,
second, or third age: let him judge according to ye lords of the
triplicities and their places. Which we will do hereafter. Now we will only
speak in general.

The Horoscope or ascendent, being in Taurus, thou shall judge in this sort:
that that man shall be painfully disquieted with sundry cares for getting of
richesse, which he shall easily attain unto, and be as apt to lose the same
again, and shall triumph over his enemies.

Aquarius also in the midst of heaven makes him acceptable unto Princes and
great men, and gives him rule in public affairs and offices, and
peradventure in business perteinynge to waters, because he seems to be most
given to the nature of the water.

Scorpius in the west causes a hearty and beneficial person, the which shall
lose his wife, if it be a woman, she shall lose both her husband, and her son
or child.

astrological diagram

Leo in the nether part of the heaven causes him to challenge his patrimony,
the which (notwithstanding all the endeavors and liyng in wait of his kindred)
he shall obtain and get.

Of the ascendent in Gemini.
Whosoever has this Horoscope, shall have prosperity and good fortune by his
parents, brethren, friends, kinsfolk, and great men.

According unto Firmicus Pisces being in the midst of the heaven, causes
the^ which are so borne, to get their living by moiste and watery things,
howbeit for a time he shall not live of his own costs, but shall get the
stipende or fee of some prince or city.

Sagittarius in the west does contrariwise threaten destruction unto his
brethren and kindred, whereby through diverse cares and vexations being put
besides his mind, he shall be a long time tormented. After this his enemies
waxinge fierce, and vyolentlye coming upon him, and the waves of mischiefs
still increasynge: he shall be compelled to forsake his own natyue country,
and shall be banished and driven away as Cain was, until at length by the
help of God, he shall be restored into his former estate and condition.

Virgo likewise in the bottom of the heaven does threaten the very same, but
by change and increase of time (according to the state of the incommodities
and hurtes) it does increase abundaunce and good fortune.

Here you may behold the figure.

astrological diagram

Of the Horoscope in Cancer.
Cancer in the Horoscope does dispose the natural disposition, and al other
fortune in this sort. It makes a man of a quick and subtle wit, albeit
somewhat slow, pleasant, quiet, and angry, earnestly pursuynge all evil
persons, whose anger is sone appeased. Also strong, moderate, and grave, by the
which gifts he shall be promoted unto public offices, and have his living by
them. Many shall obey him, and some by compulsion flatter him but fainedly and
not heartily. Saturn is also hurtful unto him, if that he be either in the
Horoscope or any near aspect For he does forshew not only violente death, but
also continual veration with sickness, and the death of his brethren.

Howbeit Aries being present in the midst of ye heaven, does resist him all that he may, and makes him also acceptable unto princes and great men,
desirous of good things, also wastyng and recoueryng again his patrimony and
inheritance.

With like clemency Capricorn in the occide^t shall cause him to be spotted
with infamy, which he shall shortly after wipe away, and many other misfortunes,
and shall restore him into his former estate. And shall also encourage him to
seek out hidden and secret things, but not without great vexation and travail.

astrological diagram

Libra in the bottom brings sorrow upon sorrow, dispersying the patrimonye,
and gettyng it again, preferryng him to public or civil offices, whereby
great and secreate affairs shall be committed unto him, which are not
accustomed to be committed, but only unto very good men.

And where as Saturn before in the Horoscope does threate^ a violent death,
Libra does alienate the same, promising an honest death and burial. And if
Jupiter be in the sign following, it causes the first child to be a son.

Of the Horoscope in Leo.
THey also which have Leo in the Horoscope for the most part are troubled
with business not perteinynge to them selves, whereby they get them selves
immortal name and fame, preferring them selves unto other nations, loving
liberty, neither willynglye suffering subjection: bestowinge all their labor
and travail to prescribe laws and ordinances to other. Mars in the
artificial figure being opposite unto Leo does to al effects deny men
children: except Jupiter being present do appease his rigor, who peradventure
will give a daughter.

Taurus in the middeste of Heaven, causes him to be suspecte amongst Princes
and great men, and makes him a ruler of publyke offices. Also promoted into
dignityes by great men, wittye in all things, and likewise fortunate in all
things but only in marriage, for because he shall refuse the most honest and
beautiful women, and marrye either an old woman, or a woman of evil name, or
else a wydow.

Aquarius being in the occidente does give both increase and losses.
Scorpius in the nether part of the heaven, makes him a ruler over certain
affairs. And they also have Taurus in the midst of the heaven, whom Mars
beholdynge with a contrary aspecte, does threaten both imprisonmente, and
also death in a strange place or country.

astrological diagram

Of the Horescope in Virgo.
THe Horoscope in Virgo does vehementlye provoke a man to lechery and riote,
and causes him to be so far in love with women, that he would abuse all
women. It does also minister riches and religion, and makes him ruler over
aunswers and oracles, so that he shall be thought to be of the noumber of the
Gods, wittye and cunning in all things, searchynge out al things a good
artificer, with abundance of richesse, whether it happen by religion, by
learning, or by merchandise.

Gemini being in the midst of the heaven, does promise in a manner the
same effect: how be it, noc so sone, but does add a goodly wit and
disposition in seking out of secret things, and prescribinge rules and
precepts of living unto others.

Pisces also tending toward the west does not only for show the same: but
also more plesa^t and joyful things, as beauty or comlines, liberality,
gentleness and softness, with favor and love amongst me^.

Sagittarius does add unto this the favor and gifts of the gods, as
felicity and plenty of all things, as of children, ecclesiastical rule, and
agility and quickness to do al these things. And this is the desteny of him,
which has Virgo in his Horoscope, the other three signs being also gathered,
as you may here perceive.

astrological diagram

Of the Horoscope in Libra.
LIbra being ascendente at the hour of nativity, causes sickness, dangers,
enemies, and great strifes and debates, how be it, after all those dangers, it
decrees victory and triumph. Also promotions, religion, sincerity, and
integrity of judgment. In nothing so unfortunate as in having of children, for
when he has gotten certain children, and begins to put all his hole
confidence and trust in them by and by, they shall decay and dye, even those
in whom he had set his full hope and trust in.

If any man desire to know what dignities he shall have and in what place, ye
may very well be perceived by Ca^cer being ascende^t in the midest of the
heaven. Who promises ecclesiastical promotio^s or stipend, and to have his
living out of the common treasure. Hither also are to be referred the
substance, nobility, and children, which shall happen abundantly in age: how be
it he shall not be so fortunate in children, except Jupiter do behold him with
some foundly aspecte.

Aries being in the accident, shall minister all these things in watery places,
or about the water: shall also bring him into great dangers, long iourneys, and
desert places, into pearils by his wife: and peradventure into a frensye or
madness til he draw in age, and then he shall have an end of all these miseries.

Capriobrne shall tesse him hither and thither, and seldom suffer him to be in
quiet, nether will he suffer his patrimony to be in surety, but now up, now
down, now loss, now recovered again: because for the most part they be wanton
which have Capricorn in the nether part of the heaven. Also be shall have a
son by an unlawful woman.

astrological diagram

The Horroscope in Scorpio.
I Judge the nature of the Horroscope in Scorpio to be manifest, according to
the natural guiding of the thing taking life therein. For it makes an angry
man, privily pouring out his poison, and backbityng with his pestilent tongue,
very rich, and tossed with many perils, and thereby almost brought to
desperation: the which being somewhat quieted and pacified, he shall enjoy a
quiet fruit and use of glory, dignity, ministration, and religion. It adds
also a lively spirit and vigor of mind, with adournament of speech.
Further, notwithstanding his former damages, it gives increase of children,
which shall recompense his sorrows passed.

astrological diagram

For so much as it happens seldom but ye the other pricipall angles perform the
same which the ascendent does promise: so Leo possessyng the midste of the
heaven, does promise that which is aforesaid, adding thereunto fortitude and
strength to perform the same withal, giving also dignity, as an imortal reward
of virtue.

Taurus in the accident gives him victory over his enemies, as well privy, as
apert. Howheit he shall be infamed for lechery, the which he shall also wipe
away by little and little, now encreasyng and augmentyng his inheritance, and
shortly dispersing and spoiling it again.

Aquarius in the nether angle threateneth peril and danger by water, and
ingratitude of them unto who^ he has been most beneficial.

Of the Horoscope in Sagittarius.
THe Horoscope in Sagittarie is reckened amongst them which wrappeth a man in
manifold dangers and perils being ascende^t, for it does allure them which
are borne under it to travail long iourneys, and to commit them selves to the
seas and great waters. It ministers also naturally a prompt and ready wit to
all good learning and discipline, so that they follow nature.

Wherefore, if Virgo happen to be in the midst of the heaven, it does augment
his fortune, recompensyng the labors of his mind and wit with some notable
preferment, by the which he shall excel others: using the same liberalitye in
helping others, although they be unthankful.

astrological diagram

Gemini in the west gives children and neuewes by and by in the middle age,
and shall give him rule or office over books and secret things.

Pisces in the nether part of the heaven g^ueth help out of watery places,
makes him faithful, to whom secrets may be committed, noble, either by blood
or gentleness: whom, if Jupiter do behold with any mean aspect, he shall marye
a wife which has been defiled before, or an adulterous woman.

Of the Horroscope in Capricorn.
Capricorn in the Horroscope is not altogether an ill sign, for it causes a
man to be loving, merry, faithful, somewhat crafty, abundant, but faint hearted,
and very supersticious in prayer. Moreover, libidinous, and the pleasure being
once paste, he will strait be at defiaunce and mishandle the women. Also of a
strange life or living, and a secret sensore or judge, and specially of
religion, or such like maiters.

Libra in the midst of the heaven brings in his gain by the loss and death
of others, makes him also honest, godly, acceptable, eloquent, and learned:
and in his necessity wowyng and praiynge unto God, whereby after all evils and
misfortunes, he shall obtain a prosperous and happy age.

Cancer in the occidente stirs up all his friends against him, and
increases innumerable perilles and dangers toward him. The same thing also
Aries does thretten in the bottom of the heaven, for all his substance,
dignities, and offices astrological diagram shall be tossed to and fro, now up,
now down, until at the length as is said, Libra shall moderate the same, yet
shall be nor preserve his son or child, but that he shall be grievously vexed
with sickness.

Of the Horoscope in Aquarius.
THe effect of this Horoscope is such that it makes them meanly rich,
promoted them unto great men, and casts them into many dangers, out of the
which, even in the midst of desperatio^, he shall be releued by the holy of god.
It makes them also kepers of hospitality, liberal, and prodigal, and a
patron to the^ which seem to excel in good sciences, handlyng and dispensing
holy matters.

Scorpius possessyng the midste of the heaven, gives strength, and causes a
hard and vile life, never permanent or abidyng in one place, having ill
fortune by his wives. But last of al, he shall be delivered out of al these
evils by the help of good men. Leo in thoccide^t shall cause him to be often at
varia^ce with his wife or concubine, he shall also mary with an old woman,
which shall flatter him, promisyng him great gifts, but in her heart she shall
love other better then him. His own household shall be his enemies, by whose
healpe his other enemies shall go about to destroy him. And he shall marie
either another man's wife, or else a widow.

Taurus in the nether angle, encreseth his glory and pomp which he is given
unto, enrichynge him also with other men's goods, and causynge him to live
long.

astrological diagram

Of the Horoscope in Pisces.
PIsces makes them very witty, bold, hearty, faithful, fre^dly, and somewhat hie
minded, promoting them also to honor. Sagittarius in the upper angle, shall
cast him headlonge into many pearils and daugers. Notwithstanding, makes him
personable, and bold to move debate and strife with great men, and shall bring
other men's goods in pearil and danger, and thereby possess that which is none
of his own.

Virgo in the occidente, makes him hartye, a keeper of hospitalitye, secret, a
steward, and one loving his wife immoderatly, whom she contrariwise shall not
love, and al other unto whom he has beneficial, shall be unthankful. Whereby
he shall be often vexed and troubled through his wife and children.

Moreover, he shall be troubled with sickness, by reason of Gemini in the
nether angle. He shall also have a disease whom none shall know but him self, he
shall lose his substance, and recover the same again, and also be helped by
his fre^des, lest he might seem destitute. He shall surrendre his spirit to his
maker in a strange land or place, out of his own country by sudden death.

astrological diagram

Hereafter follows the natural judgments of Astrology, according to the
revolution of the Sun, through the.xii. signs of the Zodiac.
HItherto we have entreated ye obscure sayings of others, concerning the
judgments of the Horoscope. But because we only promised to entreat briefli
of those things, which others have handled with long comentaries: some
peradventure would impute theft unto me, in adding other men's doing unto mine.
Of ye which theft I am nothing ashamed: for albeit ye theft in all things be
reprehensible, yet in learning only it is comendable and praise worthy, and
especially when that a man goes about by the same to enucleat and discuss
the dark and obscure sayings of others. This we speak unto such as envy al
our doings, like as ye barbarous people, which being nether apt, nether
prompt to any kind of good learning: yet they judge all things in their own
tongue and language vile and naught. Thou, who so ever thou art, that read
these things, rather way and consider our mind and intent, then our words,
mindinge to teach and make evident all things unto thee: which if it come
other wise to pass, it is contrary to our mind and purpose. Now we will enter
upon the natural judgments, whereas briefly concerning Aries, it is in this
sort.

The Sun in Aries.
THe Sun being in Aries, makes the^ which are born, nether rich, nether
very pore. Also angry, but sone pleased, studious, eloquent, diverse, proud,
liyng, and luxurious, promising (as they say) mountains of gold, and performing
nothing, euel reported of amongste his kindred, and shall be brought in danger
by his enemies, which shall be men of power. He shall be bury by four foted
beasts, as being cast of a horse, he shall receive great wounds with danger
of death. So much unfortunate and aduers shall al kind of hauking, hu^ting,
fishing and al things to be done on horseback, be, and happen unto him: in
other things he shall be more fortunate and happy, and also long lived. Also if
it be maid which is born, she shall be given to liyng, angry, fair, curious,
deliting in new and strange things, envious and fruteful in children, whose
first child shall be slain: she shall be in many pearils and dangers; whereby she
shall get a mark or skar in the head, or elsse be naturally marked there, or in
the feet. This we have noted also out of certain authors, that the children
of Aries, being borne in the day, shall be fortunate and of great reputation and
renown amongste great men and princes: contrariwise, they which are borne in
the night, to be unfortunate, and of no reputacion.

astrological diagram

The Sun in Taurus.
TAurus does make the^ bold and fortunate in atte^pting hard and weighty
affairs and business, a victor or conqueror of his enemies, a great
trauailer, and banished from his native country. Also servile, familiar,
angrye, but more in youth the^ in age^ for age shall take away al inco^modities
and displeasures, and shall bring richesse and marriage, by which means he
shall be exhilerate and made joyful and glad. For if he go about to mary in
youth, he shall scarce attain unto it, how be it age does not take away
sickness, but increases sadness, melancholy, black choler, and causes
hurt, as biting of a dog, and that about the.xxviii or.xxxv. year of his
age. These things once passed, he shall flourish again and live very long. It
makes also the women children wanton, painful, obediente, and full of words:
also infamed for whoredo^, which infamy shall vanish away by little and little,
when she comes to the age of.xxi. years, she shall have many husbands and
children, wise and witty in helping and counsailing others also circumspect and
rich.

astrological diagram

The Sun in Gemini.
GEmini being naturallye fair, does cause also a fair child, merciful, wise
and wittye, liberal, a boaster, a runner and strayer about countries, taking
small regard to his own business, whereby he shall be neither rich, neither
oppressed with poverty, but of a mean estate. And of such fidelitye and
faythfulnesse, that he shall have the rule of the common treasure, merye
mineded, full of understanding, subtle, gentle to be spoken to, (...) and by a
certain instruction acceptable unto men, as they which have Venus in the rote
of their natiuiti. Also fair of face, endued with good learning and science: as
Mathematical sciences, the laws, and Arithmatick. This singular gift he has
also before others, that being angrye, he can dissemble and cover his anger. He
shall be in great danger about.xxiii. years of age, either to be bitten of a dog,
or hurt by fire, or else by Iron or weapon.

astrological diagram

The Sun in Cancer.
CAncer being naturally cold and moiste, does make gross the flesh, and does
allure and provoke to the love and company of women. Also it causes a good
wit, humility, and wisdom, full of strife and debate: and for the most part
giving victory over al his enemies. Attemptinge many things, and specially on
the sea, often in danger, and vexed with many inco^modities, with much
poverty and misery. And al be it he be the causer of gain, yet shall he be
never a whitte the richer: he shall dig for treasure, and find that, which
he ^oked not for. But if it be a maid, she shall be fat, beautiful, nimble,
angry, and sone pleased, diligente, wise, civil and shamfast, witty,
disceitful, and crafty, saying one thing and doing another: always careful
and paineful, ordained to many dangers, as by water, by fallinge, by child
bearing, and by the c^licke, having her first child weak and tender, the
other somewhat stronger. And if she happen to commit any faut of infamye, after
the age of.xxvi. years it shall be clean abolished and put out of mind. After
the which age, whether it be man or woman, it promises good success and
fortune. It makes them also well heered, modest, faithful, painful, greadye of
meat and drink, acquainted with noble men, and fortunate in husbandrye.

astrological diagram

The Sun in Leo.
THe Sun in Leo, makes a stout stomach, bold, arrogant, eloquent and
proud: a mocker and scorner, unmerciful, cruel, hard, and hard to be
entreated. Beset with many miseries and perilles, out of the which he being
escaped, shall obtain some common office: as to be a centurion or a captain
over.v.c. lokinge for benefit at the hands of three noble men, unfortunate in
children, and for the^ susteininge much labor and affliction, prone to
anger, and putting him self in many dangers, enflaminge cholere, promoting
to honors and dignities, and brings them in danger of fire, sword, and
violence of beasts, whereby he shall dye out of his own house or place. How be
it by the help of God, he shall escape out of all these dangers. Likewise,
if it be a maid, she shall be bold, have a great and large breaste and slender
legs, which are tokens of stoutness and boldness, anger, slanders and
bablinge, albeit that the softness which is in women, does somewhat remit and
assuage thexcesse of ye same. She ought also specially to take heed of hot
water and fire, by ye which she shall be gretli in danger she shall also be much
inclined to the sickness or knawinge of the stomach. But after the age of.xx.
or.xxi. years, she shall be fortunate in richesse, the which she shall obtain
by the help of great men, and the use of other men's goods: also in
housekeping, beauty, and love. Notwithstanding, she shall have but few
children.

astrological diagram

The Sun in Virgo.
SO likewise Virgo does make them fortunate in household affairs, witty,
true, stout, and ambitious. His wife shall die before he know of it, diverse
things also shall be taken and stoine from him, and he shall be revenged of his
enemies. Moreover, he shall be so much given to boastinge and bablinge, that he
can not hide and keep close his own secreates, fair of face, well mannered,
a lover of women, and deliting to be in the courts of great men and princes.
Moreover, just wise, good, and honorable, a patr^ne and defender of his
friends: also holy and merciful, comelye bodied and well frended. A maid of
the same birthe, shall be wittye, honest, and shamefaste, well willinge,
diligente, circumspecte and angrye, she shall marrye about the age of sixtene
years, and shall bring forth her first begotten of an elogant and goodly
form or shape. Howbeit, whether they be men or women, they shall be wrapped in
many pearils and dangers.

astrological diagram

The Sun in Libra.
THe Sun in Libra causes the child to be libidinous, busye, fortunate, and
specyallye upon the waters, or things perteinyng to the water. Also by sweet
spices and precious stones, and such like. It causes likewise a comely body
and nimble, a pleasant tongue or speech, a good name, sekinge out secrets,
but seldom steadfast in promises, although he pretend otherwise. He shall put
him self in great dangers and troubles. His first wife shall not continue
with him long, he shall also have enheritance of the goods of dead men, and
partly by his own wit and industrye. Neither shall he be altogether
unfortunate by four foted beasts. He shall suffer many and great things for
wome^s sakes, and shall be infamed for unlawful companiynge with them. Also he
shall be a good interpreter of dreams, whether his birthe be by day or night.
The women shall be frendelie, merry, and iocunde, settinge her whole delight on
the fields and herbs, wanderinge into strange places. About the age
of.xxiii. she shall marie, which maxiage shall be fortunate: whose beauty,
pleasant speech or tongue, and comely behavior, shall greatly prefer and
promote her. Neither are the children of Libra altogether unapt to letters or
good learning. But let them take heed of scaldinge water and of fire, for
they shall receive hurt by them, without great regard he had.

astrological diagram

The Sun in Scorpio.
SCorpio does augmente the inheritance, and adds boldness and stoutnesse,
also flattery, by the which he shall disceiue many, showing (as they say)
bread in the one hand, and hidynge a Stone in the other: minglynge poison
with honye, perfourmynge almost nothing that he promises. Notwithstanding,
merye, and jesting, yght of belief, and a Conqueror of his enemies. It
causes also the women to be frendlye, wise, and craftye, which shall be
disceyued of her first hu^bande: her other husband she shall joyfully use,
and overcome her enemies. She shall also have the pain of the spleen, and be
marked either in the head, or shoulders, or brawne of the arm. It makes
both kinds bold and rasshe to rob and steal, and to search out
forbidden things, and to make contractes or bargains. Also it makes them
wanton, fornicatours, unstable, and full of evil thoughts and imaginations,
babblyng and angrye, and sometime very sad and afflicte. Howbeit, there shall
be Princes and great men which shall esteem and set much by such sort
of men, and also of the common people which shall flatter them, whereby they
shall be had in reputation and honor.

astrological diagram

The Sun in Sagittarius.
SAgittarius is not altogether evil, for the Sun dwelling in it does give
fortune, and ministers a courage to take any thing in hand, whatsoever thou
purposest: and specially to travel strange countries, and to pass the seas,
and not to return without great gain. He shall also get friends to come into
the houses and courts of princes, (not to gather up the trenchers, or lick
the disshes as the common and viler sort of courtiers do: but to be put in
some office, as to be steward or such like, to the which promotion his agility
and strength shall greatly prefer him. Moreover, he shall be altogether given to
ridinge, haukinge, huntinge, daunsinge, and leapinge, plays and games,
combats and conflictes, for the which he shall have many enemies which shall
envy him and impugn him grievously, whom he shall not withstandinge vanquishe
and overcome. He shall also possess his fathers inheritance, which happens
not unto al me^. And oftentimes it makes them just, wittye, still, hearty,
ingenious, faithful, gentle, firm and stable, paineful and boastinge. The
woman also shall not much differ: for she shall be full of anxietie, painful,
merciful, and much envied and lien in wait for by euel men: but she shall
overcome them and be fertile in child bearing. She shall mary about the age
of.xvii. years, but if that marriage proceed not, she shall not mary until the
age of.xxiiii. years.

astrological diagram

The Sun in Capricorn.
Capricorn makes the child angrye and light, accompaniynge him self with
vile and suspicious persons. Also painful, and distracte and vexed with
diverse variaunces, the which adversities he shall boldly and stoutlye bear
out and sustain. He shall be ready to dye for the love of some pore and
simple maid, the which at length shall cast him into some disease and sickness.

It makes them also meanelye rich, beneuolente, cheerful, and merye: but
unsteadfast, if the natiuitye be by night. In his age, when he sees his
richesse increase, he will begin to love money, and decline from his former
liberality, unto covetousness, for in youth he was easy to be handeled. He
shall prospere in nauigations, and specially toward the East, for his fortune
shall come out of the East from great men. The Phisiognomye of these
children for the most part is such: a little head, hollow eyes, and a
mean voice. Bathes be profitable unto him being sick. The women are
tymerous, and very shamefast, and shall have dominion and vyctorye over their
enemies, and shall straye far abroad.

astrological diagram

The Sun in Aquarius.
AQuarius makes the child frendlye, but covetous, and apt to quotidian
agues, unfortunate about waters, which naturally he shall abhor. His good
fortune shall begin to increase about thage of.xv. or.xvi. years, at the which
time he shall begin to wander and straye through diverse places, and wax
somewhat rich, which richesse shall never come to abundance, but shall be
dispersed again until his latter years, which shall make amends for that
which has been over liberally spent before. Neither shall his long iourneis
turn him to any great lucre or gain, but he shall look for, and obtain
greater profit at the hands of others. Further, he shall be vexed with sundry
incommodities, losses, and pearils, and specially with his wife, and other
women: for she shall fall into a palsy, neither shall he have the fruition of her
any long time, nether shall he prosper with other women, but she being once
dead, al things shall come more fortunate to pass.

The maid borne in Aquarius shall be proper and fine, true, and constant, and in
these three points, she shall excel the man. She shall also be enriched by
other men's goods, and let her take heed of her children, for she shall be vexed
with many inco^modities, and attempt strange places, she shall be but of a mean
estate unto thage of.xxii. years, and then fortune shall begin somewhat to
favor her: and she shall optaine mean richesse. Oftentimes both the men and
women be soft of speech, wise, ingenious, faithful, merye, and continually
angry with their enemies.

astrological diagram

The Sun in Pisces.
PIsces in youth, does vere his children with many evils, and oftentimes with
out deserte: and makes them covetous, merye, diligente, players, neglecting
fortune, of a good disposition, loving the company of good men. Also of a
quick and ready tongue, bold, standinge much in their own conceit, and
fortunate in sekinge out treasures: for this is only given unto them, that
they shall find something unlooked for. They shall also be partly enriched by
other men's goods. They shall not live long, except they pass ye age of. 35.
years, then there is hope of long life: yet shall they never be very rich, al be
it in their own opinion, they think to possess the richesse of Cresus. Full
of troublous thoughts, and shall be brought into captiuitye through women, and
few things shall prosper with them in their childehode or youth. They shall be
marked in the elbowe or foot, and their fortune is toward the Southe. The
maiden children shall be hot, bold, of insolente tongues, contumelious, and
full of braulinge and scoldinge, beset with many pearilles, (and puttinge all
honestye aparte) she shall forsake her husband: and if she be not let, she
will marye her self unto an aduoutrer. Also they shall be much vexed with the
torments of the belly and stomach. And thus you have the second time the
influe^ces of the signs sufficiently spoken and entreated of.

astrological diagram

The nature of the houses.
Now there does remain to speak of the natures of the houses and signs
how and in what things they favor or help our doings, and what is to be
done in every sign: whereby we may^ so order all our accions and doings,
that all things may come prosperously and happily to pass. For this is the
only scope of Natural Astrology, to the which if we do not attain, I know
not (as Alchabitius says) to what end it can otherwise be profitable unto us.

THe first house is given unto Aries, who also is the first sign in order, and
is called of the Astronomers the house of life, and signifies the beginning
of all works: and that which in the beginning of the life shall either delight
the child, or else vex him and trouble him, also his strength and weakness: and
finally, al things that pertain to the natural life.

The second house is of Taurus, and is the house of substance, living,
ministration, and servants, and betokens the end of youth. In the which
house if Jupiter and Venus happen to be: they will chiefelye increase those
goods which amongst the lawers are called mouables, and also vnmouables, as
gardens, fields, vineyardes and yearly rentes, and what so ever does endure
long. Also if any man do hier any bond servant under this sign, he shall be
faithful in all things he shall be put in trust withal.

The third house which signifies success by brethren, sisters, kindred, and
small iourneis, is attribute unto Gemini. Wherefore if any manne have Aries in
the Horoscope, you may pronounce unto him good fortune by his brethren and
kindred, by great men, and his neighbors.

It is good under this sign, to write and send letters, to take in hand
short iourneys, to begin friendship or brotherhode, and send letters, to take
in hand short or such like.

The fourth house is called the mansion of parents, inheritance, treasures,
and secreates. In this house it is good to contract, bie and sell, and to
change vineyardes, fields, and possessions, to build houses and engines, to
lay foundations, to big the earth, and to choose thy sepulcher, for all these
things Ca^cer does prosperate.

The fifte house, is the house of children, and love, legacies, and gifts, and
of al those things which after death do pertain either to praise or
reproach. It is expedient therefore under this sign to take in hand all
things that comes in mind, to chearishe thy self, to banquet and make good
cheer, to straye abroad, to enter in couenauntes and friendship, because of
Venus ministringe gladness. It is good also to put on new garments, to write
Epistles, to be merye and play, and to get him faithful friends, which may
defend him in his necessity and need.

The sixte is the house of infirmity and sickness, sadness, and servant,
the delight of Mars, and is imputed unto Virgo. It is not good herein neither to
bie nor sell, because of unfaithfulness, labor, and sorrow: and specially by
Mercurials and virgins, whom a man ought to eschew. For it heapeth against us
false witness, thieves, and those which shall lie in wait for our life,
menslears, and blood sheders. Also tumultes, seditions, and factions, and al
these shall happen by the Virginistes, and Mercurials, because ye Mars as is
aforsaid does reioise i^ these things.

The.vii. is in Libra, which following by and by after the sickness, is the
house of marriage, and of those things which are handled about the middle
age, as it were in equal balance. In this it is good to amend and recover
things lost and in desperation: and because it is the house of perfect enmity,
it is good to have to do with thine enemies, to begin wars and debates, and
specially for them which have Aries in thascendent.

The.viii. mansion is attribute unto Scorpio, and is the house or portion of
death, fear, and inheritance of dead men, and of such things as are done
after death. Wherefore take heed that in this sign thou take in hand nothing,
nether enter upon any journey or commit thy self unto waters, because that
herein he shall easily take hurt. Wherefore al battles, co^tentions, unjust
causes, enmities, and evil women are to be eschued, and specially if they rise
by means of inheritance.

The.ix. is in Sagittarius, the house of faith, religion, long iourneys,
wisdom, philosophy, Mathematical sciences, books, epistles, narrations,
messages, dreams, and rumoures, which every one have their proper star in
the firmamente or heaven. Wherefore the Sun or Moan being in that house, it
is good to take in hand the things aforesaid, for because they shall sooner
take effect at that time then at any other, for it is the mansion of perfect
friendship.

The.x. house is in Capricorn, and is called the house of kingdom, rule, and
office, and what so ever pertains to power. Wherefore, if thou will give forth
any precept or commandment, or bring any province or city in subjection, or
attain and get any rich kingdom, or have to do with any judge, or take in hand
the defense of the poor, or have conferens with great or noble men: al these
things may happily and fortunately be done the Sun or Moan being in this house,
co^monlye called the house of Capricorn by the reguler order, Aries being in
ye first house.

The.xi. is referred to Aquarius, and is the house of praise, of good Fortune,
the delight of Jupiter, of servants, and helpers in this ma^sion. It is good
to set upon thine ennemies, to get friends, to praise them by whom thou lokest
for reward and gain: and finally, to take in hand al things that we would
have come well to pass.

The most evil and pestilente house in a manner of all is the.xii. house, for
it is the mansion of enemies, prisons, labors, miseries, envy, murmurations,
and beasts, and is the end of life. In this house let no goodness be looked
for, but let him take heed of imprisonmente or fetters, the which (if he
chance to come into in this sign) he shall be hardly delivered out. And if
that Saturn the Lord of the house, or Mars be there: if woorketh death, and
all kind of mischief. And thus successiuelye of all the other signs.

Hitherto we have spoken of the nature and effects of the signs, in what
things they being ascendente, do help and further us. Now we will call to
mind again somewhat which was spoken before concerning the Planets, about
the which, (as the matter does require) we will not tarry with long
circumstaunce according to the Proverb, not mindynge to make an Elephant of a
fly: a great matter of a small.

Saturn Lord of the Birthe.
SAturnus whersoeuer he be Lord of birthe, does draw the mind of those which
are borne under him, having the bridle at liberty: to be hie minded and
stubburne, to malice, and to many miseries and calamityes. Howbeit, he gives
faieth and wisdom to persuade, and to discern that which is just and true
in all matters but in his own, in the which he shall not be so circumspect. He
shall trust much unto him self and to his own wit, a small eater, but a
large drinker, not greatly affectioned toward his wife and children.

Moreover, he causes the body to be lean, cold, and dry, filling it full of
evil humors, makes palenesse, brings sickness sone, and heapeth all
diseases together; as the inflammations of the lunges, with a fervent ague, the
dropsy, the gout, the kings evil, botches and biles, fallinge of the here, and
blindness, fallinge sickness: and finallye, the whole seas and floude of
noughtye and vicious humors. He does also cut of and shorten the life, either
in a moiste place, or else in a strange or deserte place, out of his native
country. It is also very evil if Mercury do fall in the house of Saturn, for
he makes an inchaunter, a coniurer, a Southsayer, a truse breaker, and an
enemy of his parents and brethren, and of al other men.

Jupiter Lord of the birthe.
IVpiter does every where deserve praise for there is no point of counsel,
wisdom, knowledge, eloquence, and beautye, which he does not liberallye
minister and give: so that if you will discribe any good manne, you may well
feign him to be a Iouial. And brieflye, if thou wendicate unto him al virtues
and goodness, thou canste not err. For the Iouialles be fullye replenished
with all those things, so much less do they lack any thing. To what end
shall I need to commend and praise their magnanimity, with their large honors
and promotions: when as I said before, there is nothing found to be wantinge
or lacking in them.

Mars Lord of the Birthe.
COntrariwise, Mars being naturally evil, does make them disposed to all
kind of evil. And as we said, there was nothing in Jupiter blame worthy: so
we do again pronounce, that there is none so great a mischief, but that the
Martialistes dare boldly take in hand: nor none so foul a crime, wherewyth
they are not contaminate and defiled. It is counted an heinous thing amongst
them to be honest and good. And it is counted a great virtue to rob and
steal, to kill, to burn, to lie, to disceaue, and delude. And to be short,
it is natural unto them to commit all unlawful things. And if there be any
thing more mischeuous then other, they think it lawful for them to do it
without shame or punishment.

Venus lady of the birthe.
THe properties of Venus are so well known that I shall not need to stand about
it with great circumstances: neither do I see why she should not be joined
with Jupiter. For unto all the effects and works, to all the virtues and
sciences, and finallye, to all the good things that Jupiter does give: she
adds splendoure and renown, and also riote, and specially if Jupiter be in
any frendlye aspecte with her: or that Mercurye be in conjunction with Saturn
and Mars, her signification is well known.

Mercuri lord of the birth
Unto some Mercury seems doubtful good with the good, and evil with the evil.
Howbeit alone he is very good in geuinge the dowries of the wit or
disposition, in the which he does excel Jupiter and Venus. As for the sorts
and kinds of sciences and learning, they are so well known, that we shall not
need to repete them here again.

The Sun with the lord of the birth.
AL ye which is aforesaid of ye good planets, we would also have it understand
of the Sun. For he is assured of a good planet which has him, I mean not
lord of yc birth: for that he is never. Likewise as the Moon being with the
lord of the birthe seems to me to be (as it were) mean between Mars and
Venus, and therefore keeps as it were a mean in the natural gifts. But if she
happen to come in conjunction with Jupiter, Venus, and Mercurye: who will not
judge that man most happy.

The Moon with the lord of the birth.
The Moon only for this cause is evil reported, because it does bread
instabilitie and unsteadfastness, the which in a man brings also al kind of
mischiefe^.

Canons or rules for the erexion of the figure of the heaven.
THE same order of the signs is observed herein that is in the artificial, for
what sign is ascende^t, every planet according to the order, is to be put
into every house. As if Aries be the ascendente of the birthe: place Aries in
the first house, Taurus in the second, Gemini in the third, and Cancer in
the fourth. If the Sun be in Cancer, short sha^ place Cancer in the first
house, Leo in the second, Virgo in the third, Libra in the fourth, Scorpio in
the fifth, Sagittarius in the sixte, Capricorn in the seuenthe, which is
opposite to Cancer, and the other in their order as you well know.

But the Lordshippe and governors of the signs is clean preposterous and
contrary to that which is alleged of Firmicus: for here only respect is
had to the Lord of the ascendente, and after him the other Planettes in each
house are to be placed according to their natural order.

And in this only it agrees with the artificial, that the Lord of the
ascendent is placed with the ascendent of the other planets, there is no order
but only the natural order. As for example, I desire to erect a figure of
nativity, the Sun being in Aries, I know the order of the houses. I will set
in the first house Aries, in the second Taurus, in the eight Scorpio, in the
nynthe Sagittarius, in the.x. Capricorn, in the.xi. Aquarius, in the.xii.
Pisces. And the signs being thus set, is almooste the whole order of them
which judge by the Horoscope. Now follows the order of the Planettes. First
of al I appointe to the Lordship of Aries, Mars: for he is Lord of the sign,
to the second house I ascribe the Sun, to the third Venus, to the fourth
Mercurye, to the fifte the Moon, to the sixthe Saturn, to the seuenthe
Jupiter, to the eighte Mars, to the ninthe the Sun, to the tenthe Venus, to
the leuenth Mercury, to the.xii. the Moon.

Thus you see the Lord of the ascendente only, except al other planets, to
be placed according to their natural order. I would not that any man should
understand me herein, that when I speak of the ascendente, that I mean the
ascendente of the hour or Horoscope: but of the sign in the which the Sun
is at that time.

Likewise, in the second revolution, thou shall set Saturn in the first
house, and shall be the Lord of life at the age of xiii. years. In the second
house Jupiter, and according to his nature judge the substance of the child.
To the third house add Mars, and by him judge concerning brethren and
kindred, and short ^ournets. To the fourth house, the sun, and according to
his Nature, have respect to the parents and inheritance at xvi. years of age.
And by this example you may raise to any man a like reuolation, and perceive
thereby what shall happen yerelye. For this house does not signify that short
revolution wherein the Sun is every two hours: but a yerelye revolution.
Wherefore we have added a revolution, stretching to. 84. years, according to the
ascendent in Aries: but if that any other sign be ascendent, you must form
an other reuolutio^, but according to this tipe or rule. If thou will judge of
children, look to ye fifth house. For sickness, small beasts, or servants: behold
the sixte house. For marriages and open enemies, the seventh house. For death
and inheritance by dead men, and such kinds of things: give judgment by the
eight house, and so likewise of all the other houses. Neither do I understand
and perceive what either ought or can be further spoken or said herein. The sum
of this art is to know the natures of the signs and planets, and then to erect
a figure, and to exercise that which you have read. Prove it who will, and he
shall see it not only to agree with the artificial: but also for to excel it,
as well for the easiness, as also for the certainetie of the same. Thou see
(as we said before in our preface, and now again without shame) that there is
nothing so much to be taken h^de of, as a few things which are taken out of the
artificial. Neither is it unknown yt Liechtenbergius the best learned of his
time in natural Mathematical sciences, by this only Art to have made all the
astronomers astonished, and to have wrought straungs things. Wherefore it should
feme very evil, if that we should suffer the learning and cunning of such a
man to be obscured and kept close, for these our doings we have drawn out
of him. Wherefore we are the less to be blamed if that we have not satisfied
eueri man's mind: except you will count it faut worthy, that we have expounded
and set out other men's good works, unto the posteritye, and prefer them
before our own. The which thing if it be culpable, who is then without
shame or reproach, even they which are counted best learned in this time and
season. We have added hereunto a figure of the revolution: he that will know
the other reuolutio^s, let him read the tables folowinge.

A Figure of the revolution of the Signs and Planettes according to Natural
Astrologye, whose ascendente is, and the Lord of the same.

astrological diagram

A continuation or prolongyng of the figure aforesaid, from the first year of
the Horoscope in, unto the end of.84. years.

1 13 25 37 49 61 73 2 14 26 38 50 62 74 3 15 27 39 51 63 75 4 16 28 40 52 64
76 5 17 29 41 53 65 77 6 18 30 42 54 66 78 7 19 31 43 55 67 79 8 20 32 44 56 68
80 9 21 33 45 57 69 81 10 22 34 46 58 70 82 11 23 35 47 59 71 83 12 24 36 48 60
72 84

By this order (gentle Reader) you may multiply your revolution into an
infinite number.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Ihon Day, for Richard Judge, dvvellinge at the North
door of Poules Church, at the sign of the Bible.


