A SERMON Preached at York, before the right Honorable, Henry Earl of
Huntington, Lord President of her Majesty's Council established in the North,
and other noble men, and Gentlemen, at a general Communion there, the 23. of
September in the eightienth year of her Majesty's reign:

By Mathewe Hutton Deane of York.

Imprinted at London, for Richard Sergier. Anno. 1579.

W. C. To the Reader, the knowledge and blessings of the truth.
AS the zeal and strength of our gracious sovereign, the Queen, was very
great to the praise of God, and the blessedness of her kingdom, in bringing the
Gospel by a reentrie into this land, when the Lord brought her, in his rich
mercy unto the kingdom: So her Majesty's care has been from time to time
great also, by the preaching of the word, by many good Laws, by the
authority and countenance of her Magistrates, to further the course and
advance the estimation thereof, to the releeuing of the people from that
darkness, wherein they walked: that coming to the light of the truth, they
may become children of the light, and inheritoures of the life, which is in
Christ Jesus. This has appeared many ways in many places, and namely in
her Province of York, at a solemn assembly of the honorable and woorshipful
of those parts: where after a very learned and godly Sermon, fit for that
assembly and action, they were together partakers of the Lords table, to
testify to God their religion, to show their obedience to her Majesty's
proceedings, and to leave it witnessed to the whole world, that they embrace
the Gospel, and labor, by their example, to draw others also to the love of
the same truth.

Touching the Sermon, For the Authors great learning and good Spirit, it must
carry great praise with as many as know him, especially with them, that know
him best. As many as know him not, may in reading it, behold the good graces
of God in him, for the work of the Gospel, and a notable spirit plainly
and soundly confuting the chiefest grounds of the Popish religion: upon which
sandy grounds notwithstanding (though they pretend Peter to be the rock)
many build, not foreseeing the ruire and great fall of the house.

For, Antiquity and Generality are good marks of the church, joined with
better: alone, they may as well justify sin and error, as the Romish
Church. Those other chief marks it has not, the true and pure use of the
word and Sacraments, But as it wants the chiefest marks of the Church of
Christ, which deceive not: So it has undoubted signs of the church of
Antichrist, a doctrine prejudicial to the offices and merits of Christ, a
foundation that GOD has not laid, the persecutions of Antichrist, the
blasphemies of Satan, the marchandises of the great whore of Babylon, and the
mark of the beast. O that they, which have trafique with her, would come out
of the Merchauntes false light, and might have their eyes open, and their
hearts also, to consider what stuff they have for their souls laid in pawn
to her, for payment of their obedience and tribute.

As for their justification by works and not by faith only, it does plainly
show, they understand neither the imperfection of their perfectest works,
nor the grace of GOD, which saves them, that believe through faith in the
merits of Christ alone. Which faith notwithstanding necessarily brings
forth good works, not meritorious causes, but manifest notes to us of our
salvation in the merits of Christ Jesus the Lord and Savior.

In that they forbid the people to read the scriptures: they commit too too
manifest violence, in withholding our evidence, in dispossessing us of our
fathers last will and Testament. How shall they demand the legacy, that know
not the gift? How shall they keep the conditions, that know not the covenant?
If they say the scriptures are hard, they speak (to say no worse) ignorantly,
of the will or power of God that either would not, or could not speak
plainly, and to the heart of his people, to the understanding of his children.
But as the children of this world, they were wise in their generation: they
kept that back, which might bring the kingdom of God forward: they put the
light under a busshell, that it might not shine to those that came into the
house. Darkness did best set out and most maintain the works of darkness.
Nevertheless, sure it pleased God for his glory, to show mercy unto many,
causing the light to shine out of darkness, and bringing this evidence into
light, and the light thereof into the possession of the sons of men. They (as
many of the^ as appertain to the holy election of God) have had eyes to see,
and hearts to consider, what it is to walk in darkness, and in the shadow of
death, what it is to lie fast bound in Babylon in misery and iron, and what it
is to dwell in the house of God, to behold his beauty, and to visit his holy
temple, to serve the Lord, and to wait for the fullness of his rich mercies in
Christ Jesus our Lord. As for the sufficiency of the Scriptures, if no man
may add any thing, there wants nothing: If no man may take any thing away,
there is nothing too much. Whereupon they that have eyes to see and will see,
may behold that the scriptures are all sufficient and perfect: dangerous
therefore is the contrary doctrine of Hosius, one of the Master Masons at the
great building of Trent: But his doctrine is lately and sufficiently confuted.

Whereas they deny some, the lawful remedy against fornication, their deeds
bewray their doctrine: for they not regarding it, died in the disease, whereof
they condemned the remedy.

For the Invocation of Saints, and the doctrine of the new mediatourship to
the Mediator, which is but one, it shows a great faith and trust in those
Saints, as being more ready and willing to help, where they promise no
help, then God, that does both promise, and keep the covenant of mercy
made to Abraham and his seed, even as many of them, as seek the face of God,
and walk in newenes of life, which is the true seed of Abraham, and the
Israel of God. But if Saints can be neither so able, (if they be able at al)
nor so willing to hear and help us, as is the mighty and most loving God of
our salvation, why do any in a blind niceness strain courtesy, to pray unto
God, which is commanded, and make no conscience to give his honor to others,
which is forbidden.

Concerning the mass, it has been long ago publikelie indicted, and truly
condemned of gross Idolatry and forgerie. Saint Paul in that great
mystery, testifies for himself to the Corinthians, That he added nothing to
the simple institution of the Lords supper: but what he received, that he
redeliuered, and what he received not, that he delivered not at all. But they
of the Mass have delivered in charge to be believed and received, a body
without quantity or quality, a sacrifice for the quick and dead, a
woorshipping, a reservation, and such like superstitions and abominations,
antique (I grant) and old borne in respect of these times: but neither they
nor their mother conceived in respect of the Apostles time.

These points, that I have but in a word or two noted, are plainly and
learnedly handled in this Sermon: I trust in the mercy of God, to the
redeeming of many from error that heard it, or, without a set judgment
against the truth shall diligently read it. Others, that already embrace the
truth, and yet in opinion rather then in reason and judgment, (of which sort I
would there were not many) may here receive reasons out of the word of god,
to confirm their good zeal and judgment, to answer for themselves and their
religion, when they shall either be asked a reason of their hope and faith of
the brethren, or otherwise shall be assailed of the adversary. For, good
Reader, labor and provoke others to labor, especially those under thy charge,
for ability to answer for their religion: and to show better evidence for
their inheritance in heaven, then any man can show upon record for his
inheritance on the earth.

Therefore I desire thee, not so much in these words, which I have written in
love to the matter, and the Author, as I crave it in my heart at thy hand, to
make thy fruit of this sermon first preached, to kindle flames of zeal in the
hearers, to their increase of knowledge, and a good conscience: And now allowed
to the print in the same godly purpose, to nourish and preserve the same zeal
with great increase in all the readers, especially of those, that have already
heard it, and may now read the same again: which will be as the former and
latter rain, to make the fruit ripe, and full in Christ Jesus. Which fruit
that thou may reap, I leave thee to the work and instruction of Gods holy
Spirit, praying thee, when in hearing or reading these Sermons, thou find
the rich treasure of knowledge and faith, to pray earnestly to God, that the
same most rich treasure of his word may be plentifully bestowed upon all men
in all places far and near, to the everlasting glory of Gods holy name, in
gathering those, that are to be gathered and in keeping them, that are already
gathered in Christ Jesus. Amen.

Ierem. 6.16. State super vias, and videte and interrogate de semitis antiquis,
quae sit via bona? and ambulate in ea: and inuenietis refrigerium animabus
vestris. Stand upon the ways, consider, and inquire of the old ways, which
is good, and walk therein: and ye shall find rest unto your souls.


IN the time of the Prophet Jeremy, there was great contention among the
preachers of the word, the true teachers of the people of God, and the false
Prophets. For the one threatened war, and captivity unto the people, for the
great wickedness of the land: the other said: Pax, pax. All should be well.
The One said: Templum Domini, templum Domini: The Temple of the Lord, the Temple
of the Lord, and that the Lord would never destroy that holy place: the other
cried, that the house of God was become a den of thieves: and the Lord would
surely visit that place. The one commended the ceremonies, and rites of the
law, and exhorted the people to offer up their sacrifices, as most sweet and
pleasant to the Lord the other said, that their incense oblations and burnt
offerings were to him an abomination, because they were offered without faith,
the only salt and seasoner of al our works. The one cried the traditions of
thelders, the traditions of the fathers, the other answered, that they
worshipped God in vain, teaching for doctrine the ^^ceptes of men. In this
co^tentious tim^ there were many (especially of the su^est sort, that doubted
whom to believe, ^ho^ to mistrust, which way to avoid, and w^^h to walk in.
And therefore the Prophet^ ^e. brings in, in this place almighty ^^d
himself speaking to the people and tel^ the^, what they should do. State
super ^s, and videte, etc. Stand upon the ways and ^nsider, etc. In which
words, he wille^e^ not to be careless in things touching ^ir salvation, but
studious painful and la^ous. Stand upon the ways and consider, inquire, etc.
2. He shows them, where to seek the best way, not in new ways found out
of late, but in the ways that have been of old time: Ask of the old ways,
etc. Thirdly he would not have the^ think every old way to be walked in, and
therefore wills the^, among the old ways, to search the best, and walk
therein: last of al to incorage the^, to follow his counsel, he tells the^,
what they shall gain thereby: And you shall find rest unto your souls. The
same doctrine is as needful to us now, as it was then to them, seeing the same
occasion is among us at this time, that was among them. For while there is
great disputation every where in matters of religion, while the Papists show
one way to salvation, the Protestants an other: the papists say, Te^plum
Domini, templum Domini: The holy Church of Rome, the holy catholic church of
Rome, the protestants reply, Facta est meretrix vrbs fidelis: and that she is
now become the whore of Babylon: the papists say, The co^stitutions of the
church the traditions of our mother the church: the Protestants answer, that
they worship god in vain, teaching for doctrine, the preceps of me^. there are
many that have wavering minds, and know not what way to take: To them no doubt,
the Counsel of the Prophet is very good: Let them stand upon the ways and
consider, and inquire of the old ways, which is best, and walk therein: and
they shall find rest unto their souls.

The text contains these two points, the Counsel, and the Commodity
ensuing: The Counsel is, To stand upon the ways, and consider, to ask of
the old ways: which is best, and to walk therein. The fruit that will grow
thereof: is, That we shall find rest unto our souls. But because I can not
speak of every parcel at large, I have chosen to entreat only of these two
points showed unto me by the text, and by the time required at my hands. First
very briefly, that we must seek the good way among the old ways, and yet
not every old way to be walked in: Secondly by a brief discourse, through
the chiefest points of religion, I will declare, that that old way is the
best, wherein our Fathers walked by the commandment of almighty God: and
that also that is the Oldest way of all, and that corruption of Popery is a
way of later time found out. The which thing that I may do, so that the name of
God may be glorified, and we that be here present edified, I shall desire you,
to assist me with your hearty prayer. etc.

STand upon the ways, and consider, etc. He would not have us negligent in
things perteining to our salvation, but vigilant, and painful to find out,
and to know the truth. He tells us where to seek, among the Old ways. Lo,
Antiquity is one noate, or mark of Verity. Vincentius Lirinensis says:
there be three especial marks or badges, to know which is true Doctrine in
the Church, Antiquity, Universality, Antiquity,
and Consent. And surely where these three co^curre in the church, there is no
doubt but there is the truth, there is the Good way, wherein we should walk. But
because truth dwells as a stranger here on earth, and has more enemies then
friends, she finds not so much courtesy amongst men, to be suffered to
wear all ways all these three badges: Therefore the same Vincentius asks
the question, what is to be done, if error do invade the greater part of the
Church, and be maintained with Consent of the greater part? He answers that
in such case, we must fly to Antiquity. He gives an example: The wicked
doctrine of Arrius had once almost infected all Christendom: Constantius the
Emperor was an Arrian: Liberius Bishop of Rome an Arrian for a time, and gave
his handwriting against the divinity of our Savior Christ: almost all the
Bishops in the world did yield to that blasphemy: he says, That in this
case, the former time must be considered, what was the doctrine of the Church,
before Arrius began to spread his heresy, and that is the truth. For it goes
not with religion, as it does with the statutes of the Realm, and judgments
at common Law, where the later is thought the better: For in religion, the
first and oldest is the best. The doctrine of the Church is older than any
Idolatry or superstition of the Gentiles, the Gospel was preached in Paradise
by God himself. The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head, Genesis
3.15.
The writing of Moses older than any writing of the Gentiles, The doctrine of
the Apostles, older than Popery, or any other heresy. Tertullian against
Praxeas, says, Quod peraeque aduersus omnes haereses preiudicatum sit, id esse
verum quodcunque primum id esse adulterum quodcunque posterius. This must be
taken as a rule to prejudice all heresies, that that is true which is first,
that counterfeit and false, which is brought in afterward. Truth it is that
Basilius says to Amphilochius cap. 29. Persuasiua sunt quodammodo vetera
dogmata, velut in antiquitate canicie quadam reuerendum quiddam habentia. Old
religion is apt to persuade men to embrace it. For why? The antiquity thereof
is as it were gray hears, and hoare head, that moves men to reverence it. Yet
must we take heed, that we be not moved with the only name of Antiquity,
that we be not deceived with a visard, or colored white head and bearde. For
truth many times is accused of Novelty and error, and much commended for the
Antiquity. When the Gospel of Christ was first preached unto the Gentills,
it seemed new unto them, and they alleged Antiquity, for the defense of
their idolatrous religion. Act. 17. May we not know (say the Philosophers)
what new Doctrine is this, whereof thou speak? And in the 19. chap.
Demetrius the Siluersmith, and the Towneclarke of Ephesus allege not only
universality, but also antiquity for their goddess Diana. And Lactantius in
his book De iustitia says: Deorum cultores libenter errant, and stultitiae
suae fauent, a quibus si rationem requiras persuasionis eius, nullam possunt
reddere, sed ad maiorum iudicia confugiunt, quod illi sapientes fuerint, etc.
The worshippers of false Gods are willingly deceived, and flatter themselves
in their own folly, of whom if you ask a reason of their conscience, they
can yield none, but fly to their forefathers, and say, that they were wise
men, and not like to be deceived. And Symmachus that famous Senator, but
sworn enemy to Christ's religion, writes thus, (as Prudentius says Lib. 2.)
Si longa aetas authoritatem religionibus faciat, seruanda est tot saeculis
fides, and sequendi sunt nobis parents, qui foeliciter secuti sunt suos. If
continuance of time give authority to religion, we must still give credit to
so many hundred years, since the days of King Numa, a thousand years at
the least: and we must follow our fathers, who most happily followed their
forefathers. Lo, they did not examine the ways of their fathers, whether
they were good or evil, yet would they needs follow them, and thought
Antiquity a sufficient argument so to do. I read of one Radbodus King of the
Phrisians, a Panim, that when he was persuaded to become a Christian, and was
ready to be baptized, and had one foot in the fount, he stayed, and asked
the Bishop, what was become of all his progenitors, and which Way they were
gone, that were never christened, nor believed in Christ? The Bishop answered,
that without baptism, and the faith of Christ, he had no warrant, but to say,
that they were gone to hell: he pulling out his leg again out of the water,
Surely, says he, I will go with them for company. So a great sort had rather
err with their forefathers, thento embrace the truth, if it seem unto them
new. Cresconius the heretic could say to S. Augustine: Our fathers received
this of their fathers: Truth, says S. Augustine. Sed errantes ab errantibus:
As the Jews received of their fathers, that the body of Christ was stolen out
of the sepulcher: but being false at the beginning, continaunce of time will
not make it true. Therefore if our fathers err, we may not follow them,
neither is every old way good, but that only, wherein our fathers have
walked by the commandment of God, as showed unto them by his holy word.
Therefore the Prophet wills us to ask of the old ways, which is good, and
walk in it, And Hierom says: Stand upon the ways: that is, upon the
Prophets: they be the ways, that will bring us to Christ, who is the way, the
truth and life, And Tertull against Marcian says: Constat id verius, quod
prius, id prius, quod ab initio, id ab initio, quod ab Apostolis traditum. It
is plain, that that is the truest, which is first, that first which was from
the beginning, that from the beginning, which was delivered by the Apostles.
Against which way no Custom though it be never so old, may prevail. Christ
said that he was Truth, and did not say that he was Custom. Cyprian, Epist.
ad Pompeium. Consuetudo sine veritate vetustas erroris est. Custom without
truth, is nothing else but an old error. And Lib. 2. Epist. 3. Non debemus
attendere quid aliquis ante nos faciendum putauerit, sed quid, qui ante omnes
est, Christus prior fecerit. We must not regard what any man, before us, has
supposed good to be done, but what Christ did, which is before all. And this in
deed is the true Antiquity, that we must embrace: this is the old way, wherein
the Prophet exhorts us to walk: this is the way, which Christ by his
Prophets, his Apostles and word has taught us, and this indeed is the oldest
way. In comparison of which, the corruption in Popery is new and lately
invented, as will appear, if we do make a brief discourse through the
principal points of religion now in controversy.

And first to begin with our justification. Justification.
The scripture teaches that we are conceived in sin, borne in sin, brought
up and nousied in sin, by nature the children of wrath, death and damnation,
bondmen and slaves unto Satan. The old way and only true way to be delivered
from death, and to be received into Gods favor again, is by our Lord and
savior Jesus Christ: Genesis 3.15.
Who alone is the seed of the Woman, that broake the Serpents head: Genesis
18.18.
Who alone is the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: In whom all the nations
of the earth are blessed: Esaie. 53.5.
Who alone was wounded for our transgressions, Esaie. 63.3.
and broken for our iniquities: Who has trodden the wine press himself alone,
and of all the people, there was none with him: Who in the fullness of time,
came as it were out of the bosom of his father, took upon him our nature, was
borne of the virgin Marie without sin, and in our nature, did not only
fulfill the Law of God most absolutely: (which we should do, and can not
do, by reason of the corruption of our flesh) but also in the same nature,
did most obedientlie suffer most cruel death upon the cross, to that end,
that if we effectually believe in him, his punishment should stand in steed
of our punishment, his righteousness, in liew of our righteousness in the
sight of God. This is the old and only good way for sinners, to obtain gods
favor again. For the Scripture teaches it: Ioh. 3.16.
So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son: that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have life everlasting, Math 11.18.
Come unto me all ye that travel, and are heavy laden, and I will refresh
you. Romans 3.24.25
We are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in
Christ Jesus, whom GOD has set forth, to be a reconciliation through faith in
his blood. Ephe. 2.8.9.
By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves: it is the
gift of God, not of works, least any man should boaste himself. 1. Io.
2.1.2.
If any man sin we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiatio^ for our sins. By which places and such
like, it appears plainly, that the efficient causes, the fountain and
welspring of our justification, is the love and mercy of almighty God: the
matter and form, price and merit, is Christ's obedience, death and passion:
the final end is the glory and praise of God, and our endless salvation in
Christ's kingdom: the instrument or hand, wherewith God does reach unto us
salvation from heaven in Christ Jesus, is the Gospel, and the preaching
thereof: The instrument or hand, whereby we take hold of Christ and his
merits, is a true and lively faith in Christ our Savior: The fruits of the
spirit woorking in us, and the true effects of a justifying faith, are
virtuous and charitable deeds. Of which Saint Augustine says: Sequuntur
iustificatum, non praecedunt iustificandum. Good works follow in him, that is
justified, but go not before in him that is justified. If this be the best and
oldest way, which ascribes all our salvation wholly to Christ his merits: it
follows, that that is an erroneous and lately found out way of the Papists,
which attribute some part of our salvation, to our own worthiness, to the
merits of Saints, to the works of supererogation, to the sufferinges of
Martyrs laid up in the Popes treasure house. For though the sufferinges of
Martyrs, be the sufferinges of Christ, and in them Christ does suffer in his
mystical body: yet this suffering is not the price of our redemption, nor
any part of it, but his death and passion, and blood that he shed in his
natural body upon the cross once for all. Saint Augustine: tract in Iohann.
84. Etsi fratres pro fratribus moriamur, tamen in fraternorum peccatorum
remissionem nullius sanguis Martyris funditur. Albeit, one brother die for an
other, yet is the blood of no Martyr shed for remission of sins. And in the
same place: Imitari quis potuit morientem, nemo autem redimentem. In dying,
some man might follow Christ, but in redeeming, no man could follow him. Leo
also a Bishop of Rome, in three places affirms the same. Epistola. 97. ad
Leonem Augustum. Epistola. 83. to the Bishops of Palestine, and in the
twelfth, Homily of Christ's passion: That no Saint, by his death, did pay an
other ma^s debt. For, that was only the office of Christ (as Basil says)
who alone was void of sin, and he alone the unspotted Lamb of God, that
takes away the sins of the world. As for the sufferinges of Martirs, they
are (says Leo) Patterns of Patience to others, but merit no righteousness. And
this he says, to the great impouerishing of the treasure-house of merits,
and no small discredit to Popish pardons. Let us therefore follow the counsel
of the Prophet Jeremy, Stand upon the ways and consider. etc. It is an old way
showed unto us by GOD him self, that all men ought to read and learn the
Scriptures. Christ says, This is eternal life, to know thee the only true God,
and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ: And he commands To search the
Scriptures, for they are they, that bear witness of him. And Hierome says in
the Preface to the Prophet Esaias, That not to know the scriptures, is not to
know Christ. And Chrisost. upon the Epist. to the Coloss. 3. wills Lay men
to get them the Bible into their houses, as the wholesome medicine of their
souls: If not the whole Bible, yet the new testament at the least. Audite
obsecro seculares omnes, comparate vobis Biblia, animae pharmaca. etc. And he
imputes the cause of all evil, to the ignorance of the scriptures. Therefore
it is a new way lately found out, that ignorance is the mother of devotion.
Let us therefore follow the Counsel of the Prophet, Stand upon the ways and
consider. etc.

It is an old way, wherein Gods children have walked, to believe that al things
needful to salvation, are contained in the word of God. This Saint John
teaches the cap. 20. Many other things did Jesus, which are not written in
this book: The Sufficie^cie of the Scriptures
but these are written, that you might believe, that Jesus is the son of God,
and that in believing, you might have life by his name: Which words Cyrillus
expounds thus: Non omnia quae dominus fecit, conscripta sunt, sed quae
scribentes, tam ad mores quam ad dogmata putarunt sufficere. All is not written
that Christ did, but so much as the writers thought sufficient, as well to
manners, as to doctrine. Saint Aug. de doctrina Christiana. lib. 2. Cap. 9.
says, In his quae aperte in scripturis posita sunt, inueniuntur ea omnia quae
continent fidem moresque viuendi. All things containing faith and manners, are
manifestly set down in the scriptures. Basilius de fidei confessione says.
Manifesta est elapsio a fide, and superbiae crimen, aut reprobare quid ex hiis
quae scripta sunt, aut superinducere quid ex non scriptis. It is a manifest
sliding from the faith, and a great pride, either to reject any thing that is
written in the word of God, or to bring in any thing unwritten, John. 10.4.
For Christ's sheep hear his voice, and will not hear the voice of an other.
And in his Morals he says, That if whatsoever is not of faith, John. 10.4.
is sin, if faith come by hearing, hearing by the word of God, whatsoever is
brought in beside the word of God, is not of faith, and therefore sin. This
old way teaches us, to content our selves with the truth of Gods word.

But it is a by way lately found out, to clog the Church with unwritten
verities, and to make the traditions and constitutions of the Romish Church, as
necessarily to be believed and received, as the scriptures of God. Therefore it
is good for us, in this point also, to hearken to the counsel of the Prophet
Jeremy, To stand upon the ways, and consider, to inquire of the old ways,
which is the best, etc. It is an old way showed unto us by God him self, The
marriage of Ministers.
that the Ministers of Gods word may please him in the holy state of
Matrimony, instituted in Paradise by almighty God himself, the first Priest
that coupled man and wife together in holy Wedlock, honored by our Savior
Christ in Cana of Galilie, John. 2.
not only with his blessed presence, but also with the first miracle that he
did. S. Paul says, Marriage is honorable among all men, and the bed
undefiled, Hebr. 13.4. 1. Cor. 7.9.
and they that have not the gift to live continently, are cou^selled to marry.
Ignatius Scholar to Saint John the Evangelist, in his Epistle to the
Philadelphians, desires of almighty God, to be received in the kingdom of
Christ, and to sit but even at the feet of those that were married men, and
pleased God highly in that holy state: As Abraham Isaac and Jacob, and Esaias,
and other Prophets of God: As Peter, and Paul, and other Apostles. Chrysostom
also upon the Epistle to Titus, says, That matrimony is so precious a thing,
that therewith a man may be exalted to the high seat of a Bishop. Gregorius
Nazianz, in monodia in Basilii vitam, says, That. S. Basils father being a
married Bishop, was nothing hindered thereby from doing his office. The same
Gregorius also in the funerals of his father, says, That he being a married
Bishop, was much helped in his office by the wisdom and diligence of his
wife, Gregory's mother. Sozomenus, lib. 1. cap. 11. says, That Spyridion a
godly bishop had wife and children, and yet nothing hindered by them in his
calling, but was so holy that he wrought miracles, Theophilactus upon the. 8.
chap. of Matthewe: Peter's wives mother was sick. etc. Learn here, that
Matrimony is no hinderance to virtue: for the chief of the Apostles had a
mother in Law. But the Papists say, that the Apostles left their wives, when
they followed Christ and preached the Gospel. But Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 9.
That Peter and the rest of the Apostles, did carry their wives about with
them. So does Clemens of Alexandria an old writer, scoolemaister to Origines
about 1300. years ago, understand the place in the 3. book. Clemens also
Bishop of Rome in the seventh book (if it be his book, as the Papists say it
is) says, That Peter did carry his wife about with him, when he went about
preaching. For truly if the Apostles, after their calling, should have cast
of their wives, they should have done contrary to the Canons, that are called
canones Apostolorum (of which the Papists make great account.) The sixth canon
is this: Episcopus, aut presbiter vxorem propriam nequaquam sub obtentu
religionis abiiciat. A Bishop or priest may not in any case put away his wife,
under color of religion. And the Council holden at Gangra in Paphlagonia,
about the year of our Lord 324. does accurse them, that think a married
Priest, by reason of his marriage, may not offer, and refuse to receive, if he
minister.

The general Council also at Nicea in the year 318. does allow the opinion
of Paphnutius: That it is Chastity for one to keep company with his own
wife. And the sixth general Counsel did. 31. decrees, That Priests and
Deacons, shall neither at their orders taking, be compelled to vow a single
life, nor after constrained to be separate from their wives. And Simmachus
Bishop of Rome, he says, as Gracian recites did. 81. Volumus vt sacerdotes
prohiberi debeant, ne cum mulieribus conuersentur, excepta matre sorore, vel
vxore. We will that Priests shall not be conversant with any woman, except she
be his mother, sister, or wife. And this to be the old way, the very gloss it
self confesses: Loquitur secundum antiqua tempora. He speaks according to
times long ago past. In which old way notwithstanding the Priests of the
East Church have walked and do walk until this day. And surely if the
Pristes of the Latin Church had walked in the same, albeit their worldely
pomp had not been so great, yet the godliness of their life had been
nothing less than it is. For true it is, that is said in the Council at Basil,
penned by Aeneas Syluius afterward Pope of Rome, and called Pius the second:
Multi saluarentur in sacerdotio coniugato, qui sterili in presbiteratu
damnantur. Many Priests might be saved in matrimony, which being
unmarried, are condemned. The same Pope, (as Platina writes) had often times
this sentence in his mouth: Magna ratione sacerdotibus ablatae sunt nuptiae,
sed maiori restituendae videntur. There was great cause to take marriage from
Priests, but greater, to restore it unto them again. Alfonsus also the
Spanish Friar confesses plainly, That marriage by the institution of God, is
no hinderance to Priesthood. Wherefore if this be the old way showed unto us
by the word of God, 1. Tim. 4.3.
that Matrimony is lawful for all sorts of men: We may conclude with Saint
Paul, That to forbid marriage is the doctrine of Devils: that it is a new
way leading to perdition, Heb. 13.4.
to forbid a thing that is honorable amongst all men: and to wincke at
fornication, which is detestable before God: Si non cast tamen caute: To give
a dispensation, to keep a Concubine, which can not be dispensed withal, and
not to permit a lawful wife, which needs no dispensation. But let us stand
upon the ways and consider, inquire of the old ways, which is the best. etc.

It is an old way showed unto us by God himself, to direct al our prayers unto
God: Prayer unto God.
All the prayers in the old Testament and in the new, are wholly and only
made unto God. And so we are commanded to do. Psalm. 50. Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. Christ taught his Apostles to pray unto God: Math. 6.9.
Our father etc: He wills them, To ask in his name, and it shall be granted
them S. Paul. 1. Tim. 2.5.
1. Tim. 2. That there is one mediator between God and us. 1. John. 2. If any
man sin (says he) we have an advocate with the father Jesus Christ the
righteous, 1. John. 2.11.
and he is the propitiation for our sins. As for prayer to the Saints
departed, or to any Angel, we have neither example, nor commandment in all
the scripture. The Angel Apoc. 19. refused to be woorshipped of his fellow
servant. Apo. 19.10.22.9.
Augustine de vera religione, cap. 55. says, Honoramus Angelos charitate, non
seruitute. We honor the Angels in loving them, not in doing service unto
them. And of the Saints departed he says. Honorandi sunt Martyrs propter
imitationem, non adorandi propter religionem. We must honor the Martyrs, so
that we make them patterns, to imitate and follow, we may not woorship them in
way of religion. Chrysostom commends very much the woman of Canaan, Math.
15.22.
for that she came not to the Apostles for her daughter, but directly to
Christ. Vide prudentiam mulieris, non rogat Iacobum, non obsecrat Ioannem, non
pergit ad Petrum. See the wisdom of the woman, she does not entreat James,
she does not beseech John, she goes not to Peter, but directly to Christ. And
in the same place, If thou have a suite to a man, thou ask what he does,
and whether he be at leisure or no? And thou hear that either he is a
sleep, or not at leisure, and peradventure the servant will not vouchsafe to
give thee an answer: But if thou go to God thou shall need none of these
things, neither minister, nor Porter, nor mediator. Christ alone, both God
and man is the only Mediator, both of redemption and intercession. Augustine
lib. 2. cap. 8. contra Epist. Parmeniani, Pro quo nullus interpellat sed ipse
pro omnibus, hic vnus verusque mediator est. He that prays for all, and none
for him, he is the only and true Mediator. Epiphanius: contra Colliridianos.
Ne co^medas de ligno, etsi pulchrum est lignum, non tamen ad esum: etsi
pulcherrima est Maria, et virgo, et honorata, non tamen ad adorationem nobis
data, sed ipsa adorans eum, qui ex ipsa carne genitus est. Genesis 3.2.
Thou may not eat of the tree (said God to Adam) though the tree be fair
and pleasant to behold, yet is it not given to be eaten on: So, though the
virgin Marie be most beautiful in all virtue, an holy virgin, and honorable,
yet was she not given to be woorshipped, but she her self did woorship him,
which was borne of her as touching the flesh. He says further: Sit in honor
Maria: pater, filius, et spiritus sanctus adoretur, Mariam nemo adoret. Let the
virgin Marie be had in honor: the father, the son, and the holy Ghost must
be woorshipped: as for the virgin Marie, let no man woorship her. All the
Psalms of David all the prayers of the godly, throughout the whole scripture,
are directed unto. God alone. And in deed this is the old and safe way,
warranted by the word of God. As for the invocation of Saints, in comparison
of this way, is a very new way though it be found in diverse ancient writers.
But it is a way found out of very late time, to turn all the Psalms of David
into prayers to the virgin Marie, and to turn and change Dominus into Domina,
the Lord into our Lady as Bonauentura, a schooleman of great estimation among
the Papists, has done. As for example: Where David says in the fourth
Psalm. Hear me when I call, O God of my righteousness, etc. Bonauentura says,
Bonauentura his Psalter. Psalm. 4.1.
Cum inuocarem exaudiuisti me domina, et e sublimi solio tuo mei dignata es
recordari. When I cried, thou heardest me, O our Lady, and vouchedstsafe to
remember me from thy high throne. Psalm. 16.1.
Where David says in the sixtenth Psalm, Preserve me O Lord, for in thee have
I put my trust. Bonauen. says, Preserve me, O our Lady, for in thee have I put
my trust. Where David says in the 54. Psalm. Save me, O god, for thy names
sake, and avenge me in thy strength: Psalm. 54.1.
Bonau. says, Domina in nomine tuo saluum me fac, et ab iniustitiis meis
libera me. Save me O Lady for thy names sake, and deliver me from mine
unrighteousness. Where David says, in the 110. Psalm: The Lord said unto my
Lord, sit thou on my right hand, Psalm. 110.1.
until I make thine enemies thy footestoole Bonauentura says, The Lord said
unto our Lady, O my mother, sit on my right hand, etc. And not only the
Psalms of David turns he thus, but also the Song of Moses, the prayer of
Ezechias, Te Deum, Benedictus, Benedicite, Quicunque vult, and the whole
Letanie. And yet notwithstanding these blasphemies, Pope Sixtus the fourth of
that name, did canonize this Franciscane Friar for a Saint, in the year of our
Lord 1482. But this is a new way, and a great way about, to turn our prayers
from God most merciful, most mighty, most able to help us, and most willing
to hear our prayers, and to pour them out, not only unto the dead, (who
whether they hear us or no, we can not tell) but also to stocks and stones,
which have eyes and see not, Psalm. 115.5.
ears, and hear not, mouths and speak not, hands, and handle not, feet,
and walk not.

But it is true that follows in the same Psalm: They that make them, are like
unto them, and so are all they that put their trust in them. Let us therefore
stand upon the ways and consider. The Lords Supper.
etc.

The old way to minister the Lords supper, is that, which our savior Christ
did go in himself, and commanded his Apostles to walk in also, set down in
the 26. cap. of Saint Matthew. the. Math. 26.26. Mark. 14.22. Luke. 22.19. 1.
Cor. 11.24.
14 of Saint Mark. the 22. of Saint Luke, and the 11. of the 1. Cor. That
Christ, in the same night that he was betrayed, took bread, and when he had
given thanks, he brake it, and gave it, saying: Take, eat, this is my body,
which is given for you, do this in remembrance of me. Likewise, after
Supper, he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it them,
saying: This is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed for many, for
remission of sins, do this, as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance
of me: for as often as ye shall eat of this bread and drink of this cup, ye
show the Lords death, until he come. The Apostles liked well of this form of
ministering the Lords Supper, and did nothing swerve from it. They were not
curious, nor ceremonious, but the faithful being gathered together, after some
exhortation, they recited the words of the institution, and said the Lords
prayer, and so distribution was made to all that was present. Platina in the
life of Sixtus the first says. Nuda primum haec erant, and omnia simpliciter
tractabantur, Petrus vbi consecrauerat, oratione Paternoster vsus est. Speaking
of the Lords supper: These things (says he) were naked at the beginning, and
all was handled simply and plainly, Peter when he had recited the
institution, said the Lords prayer. Lo: this was the Malse that Saint Peter
said. That which Platina speaks of Saint Peter, the same does Gregory
affirm was the usual mass of all the Apostles, lib. 7. in his Epistle to John
Bishop of Syracusa. But afterward this Simplicity by little and little,
began so to offend the successors of the Apostles, that in continuance of
time al was turned vpside down, the substance taken away, and the name lost.
First, a little of the Name: then I will speak of the Substance it self. The
Names used in the scriptures, are these: The Lords supper, the body and blood
of Christ, the bread and the cup of the Lord, the Lords table, the
participation of the body and blood of Christ. Justinius Martyr and Irenaeus
call it Eucharistia, thankesgeuing. It was named also Synaxis, by reason of the
assembling together of the faithful, to receive it. And the whole action was
called Liturgia, The ministration of the Lords supper. And about four hundred
years after Christ, in the Latin Church it began to be called Missa: The
word Missa.
But for what cause, there are diverse opinions. Some say that it is an Hebrew
word, and derived of Masas: for Mas signifies Tributum, a tribute paid unto
the Prince. And this interpretation agrees well unto the Lords Supper,
wherein we offer up unto GOD the sacrifice of praise and thankesgeuing, for the
redemption of mankind, by the death and passion of our Savior Christ, as a
tribute and bounden duty, that we owe unto God: But some had rather have it
derived of Nasas, which is to lift up: and Nes, in Hebrew signifies a
standard or banner. For this they think does agree very well unto their
Mass, wherein they lift up Christ (as they say) in form of bread, to be
woorshipped of the people, and offer him up to God the Father, for the souls
in purgatory. And they would feign find their Mass in the scripture, and
therefore allege the. 16. Chap. of Deutro. Thou shall keep a solemn feast
unto the Lord, with a voluntary lifting up, Deuteronomy. 18.10.
or oblation of thy hand. The Hebrew word is Missah. Lo say they, the very
name of our Mass, is in the old Testament. But I merueile, why they are so
fond, to think, that this place makes any thing for their Mass, seeing that
that Missah, which the Jews offered up in the feast of Pentecost, was not
Christ's body, (which then was unborn) but certain loafes of bread made of
their new corn, whereof some were leueined, and offered up unto the Priests
use? Or why abhor they in their Masses. Leueined bread, used in the Jews
Missah, since they will needs borrowe their mass, from the Missah of the
Jews? The thing of it self (I grant,) is indifferent whether we use
Leauened or unleavened bread, at the Lords table. But surely the Popish Mass
should come somewhat nearer to the Missah of the Jews, if they would not
utterly condemn leauened bread, nor deny the substance of bread to remain
after consecration. But the best opinion is, that Missa is a Latin word. And
in this opinion is Polidorus Virgilius, Beatus Rhenanus, Michael Ritius,
Isydorus, Ispalensis and Rahbanus. Michaell Ritius lib. 2. Of his story of the
French kings, says, Antiquitus in vano deorum superstitione, peracta re
diuina, conuersus ad plebe^sacerdos aiebat (...). 1. populis missio, quo verbo
potestatem faciebat abeundi volentibus. Idem mos a nostris etiam seruatus est,
vt libo iam libato, pronuncietur per ministrum, Ite missa est, ilicet, ire
licet. In the time of the old superstition of the Gentiles, the sacrifice
being offered, the Priest turning himself unto the people said, (...) 1.
Populis missio, the people may depart. The same custom is observed amongst us
Christians, that after the sacrifice offered, the minister shall say, Ite missa
est. That is to say: Go, ye may depart. For Missa was used for missio: as in
Tertulli. Cyp. and Optatus often we read, remissa peccatorum, for remissio.
It appears also, that the whole action of the Lords supper was divided into
two parts. To the first part were admitted, not only the faithful Christians,
but also Nouices and learners called Cathecumeni, as yet unchristened: And not
they only, but Jews, Gentiles, heretics and notorions offenders. But when
the sermon was done, and the Epistle and Gospel read, and certain other
prayers, and the Priest ready to go to the Lords supper, then the Deacon
cried, Ite missa est. At which words all departed, saving the faithful
communicantes. Of this we read in the fourth Council holden at Carthag.
Episcopus nullum prohibeat ingredi in Ecclesiam, and audire verbum Dei, sieve
Gentilem, sieve Iudaeum, sieve haereticum, ante missam Cathecumenorum. Let the
Bishop forbid no man to enter into the church, and to hear the word of God,
whether he be Gentile, or Jew, or heretic, before the Nouices be sent away.
Then after the communion was done, the Deacon cried once again, Ite missa est.
By which words he gave them leave to depart, which had received the Lords
supper. Of this we read in Saint Ambrose, in an Epistle to Marcellina. When
the Cathecumeni were sent away, word came to me (says he) that the souldiars
were in armure. Ego tamen in officio mansi, and missam facere coepi, Yet for
all that, I continued still in the office of ministration, and began to do
mass. In which place, this word Missa does signify the latter part of the
communion, or ministration of the Lords Supper, after the Cathecumeni were
sent away. This word Missa, so often soundinge in their ears, being the last
word pronounced unto them by the Deacon, and the word whereby they were
dismissed, and the word (which some, desirous to be gone, did long for to
hear, of all other words,) was made so familiar unto the people, that the
whole action by them was called Missa. And after the learned also used the same
word. And as the Deacon did twice pronounce Ite missa est: First when he
sent away the learners not christened, then when they were dismissed that had
communicated: so did they divide it into two masses. The first was called Missa
Cathecumenorum, The mass of the learners or hearers: The other, Missa
fidelium, The mass of the faithful. This I take to be the true
interpretation and occasion of vsinge this word Missa. For the
interpretation, that Pope Innocentius makes, Innocentius 3.
is altogether foolish. Ipsum sacrificium, id est, hostia, dicitur missa,
quasi transmissa, primum nobis a patre per sanctificationem, postea patri a
nobis per oblationem. The sacrifice or host, is called Missa, because it is
sent over first from the father unto us, by consecration, then from us to the
father, by oblation, etc. Lo, he makes a tenise ball of Christ's blessed
body, in one day to be tossed from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven
above ten thousand times. For in every mass, it is sent up and down, and
if at one instant some Priests do consecrate, and some do sacrifice: at one
instant it is sent up and down, which is a miracle, not much marked of the
Papists themselves. But to cease to speak of Nocentius, me think I hear a
Papist say: Is the mass so old in deed? And did Saint Ambrose say mass? Yea
surely, S. Ambrose said mass, he confesses it himself, it can not be
denied, his own books are extant. But I add, that that mass which he said,
was not the Popish mass worthelie banished out of England, but the old mass,
and indeed a communion. The Popish Mass.
As for the late Popish mass, it was more hundred years in the womb of the
Romish Church, while it was conceived formed, fashioned and perfected, than is
the Elephant years in the dammes belly, or man months in his mothers womb.
It was not made altogether, but patched up by little and little: Celestinus
made that part, that is called Introitus, the beginning of the mass, about the
year of the Lord 430. Gregory the first made many prayers in the mass, and
appointed Kyreeleson to be nine times repeated, about the year of our Lord
590. Gelasius appointed Graduale to be sounge, about the year of our Lord
500. Pelagius, the commemoration of the dead, Anno Domini 560. Eutichianus is
said to have made the Offertorie, almost three hundred years after Christ.
And one Adam de sancto victore, a Monk of Paris the Sequenties, of late time.
Leo the third decreed, that in pain of deprivation, the Priests should not
say mass, no not in the day time, without a candle: and that the altar should
be censed with frankencense, 800. years after Christ. Moreover the holy Canon
(as they call it) of their mass, is not of that antiquity, that some suppose
it to be. Gregory seems to say, that one Scolasticus made it. But Fasciculus
temporum, and Innocentius the third, say that Gelasius was the principal
compilar of it. So that by the testimony of two Popes, (whose witnesses is
good against themselves) there was no such Canon in the Church certain hundred
years, as is used now in the Popish mass. Polidorus thinks that no one
Pope made it, but that a great number of Popes one succeeding an other, put to
their helpinge hands, and made it such a creature, as it now appears. The
same Innocentius the third is he, which in the year of our Lord 1215.
concluded in a Council at Laterane, that by the words of consecration, the
bread and wine were changed and transubstantiat into the body and blood of
our Savior Christ. Which ground being suerly laid, they would not stay there,
but builded up still the tower of Babel. For his successor Honorius the
third, about the year of our Lord GOD, 1218. appointed the Sacrament to be
lift up over the Priests head, and the people to fall down and worship it,
and to set up their Idol in the highest throne of majesty. Vrbanus the fourth
in the year of our Lord GOD, 1262. did institute that great solemn and
principal feast, called Corpus Christi day, wherein the Sacrament should be
carried about in processions in a monstrant made for that purpose, that the
people might see it thoroughe the glass. He granted also, that all they that
did fall down and worship it, should have pardons for many days. And to
make all things perfect. Thomas Aquinas made a peculiar office or mass for
Corpus Christi: as Platina, and Onuphrius do testify. Lo, these are the
Authors of the Popish mass, and thus has it been patched up by little and
little. As for the mass, de quinque vulneribus, they will neither have Christ,
nor his Apostles, nor any mortal man, to be the maker of it in earth: For the
very mass book it self says, that it came down from heaven, and was sent
to Pope Boniface lying sick upon his bed, by the Archangell Raphaell with
this message from GOD, that whosoever, being sick of whatsoever sickness,
should cause the said mass to be said for him five times, he should recover
his health: And if it should be said likewise five times for any soul in
Purgatory, by and by it should be delivered from thence. This is set forth
in print in the mass book it self, which was printed at Paris in the year
of our Lord, one thousand five hundred and sixteen. If any man have the
book, let him turn to Commune sanctorum, and the two and twentieth leaf, and
there he shall find it. But since that time (which was 60. years ago) the
light of the Gospel has so shined in the world: and so discovered the darcke
clouds of Popery, that in the later printes, for very shame of the world,
they have left it out. Shall we think that either Christ, or his Apostles, or
Saint Ambrose, or any ancient father, did ever say any of these masses,
which either were clouted up by so many Popes, so many years after Christ,
or sodenlie at once invented to maintain and increase superstition and
idolatry? Is it not good counsel, that the Prophet Jeremy gives us in this
place, To stand upon the ways, and consider, to ask of the old ways,
which is best, and to walk therein, that we may find rest unto our souls?
That which Christ did, and commanded his Apostles to do, that are we sure is
good. But the chiefest points of the Popish mass (as transubstantiation, the
denial of one part of the Sacrament to the lay people, sacrifice propitiatory
for the quick and the dead, and private mass) these things were not once
dreamed upon, in the primitive church. Is it like that the Apostles at the
last supper, Math. 26.26.
when our savior Christ sitting with them, took bread, and after giving of
thanks gave them, saying: Take, eat, this is my body, which is given for
you, did once imagine of transubstantiation? Transubstantiation.
They had been brought up in the Law of God from their infancy, which was
openly read in their synagogues every Sabbath day. They knew (no doubt) the
usual phrase of the scripture, which gives to the Sacrament the name of the
thing, whereof it is a Sacrament. Circumcision was a Sacrament of the
covenant, that God made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and is called the
Covenant. Genesis 17.13.
Genesis 17. The Pashall lamb, a Sacrament of the passing over of the Angel, and
is called the Passover. Exodus 12. Exodus 12.11.
The Rock which did yield abundaunce of water to the children of Israel in
the wilderness, Exodus 17.6.
Exo. 17. was a Sacrament of Christ the true Rock, and is called Christ. 1
Cor. 10.4.
1. Cor. 10. Baptism is the Sacrament of our second birth: and is called, The
Lauer of regeneration: Titus. 3. Saint Cyprian de unction chrismatis says:
Significantia and significata eisdem vocabulis censentur. The things that
signify, and the things that are signified, ar called both by one name. Saint
Augustine, Lib. 18. De ciuitate Dei, shows a reason, Omnia significantia
videntur sustinere personas earum rerum, quas significant: Things that
signify, do seem as it were, to sustain and represent the person of those
things, whereof they are signs. And Epist. 23. to Bonifacius he says. Nisi
sacramenta similitudinem quandam haberent earum rerum quarum sunt Sacramenta,
omnino Sacramenta non essent. Ex hac autem similitudine, plerumque etiam
ipsarum rerum nomina accipiunt: sicut ergo secundum quendam modum Sacramentum
corporis Christi, corpus Christi est, Sacramentum sanguinis Christi, sanguis
Christi est: ita Sacramentum fidei fides est. If Sacraments had not a
likeness unto the things, whereof they are Sacraments, they were no
Sacraments at all. This likeness is the cause that they have the names of the
things them selves: Therefore, as after a certain sort, the Sacrament of
Christ's body is his body, the Sacrament of his blood, is his blood: so
Baptism the Sacrament of faith, is faith. Bonifacius did ask this question of
Augustine. When an infant comes to baptism, they that bring him, are
demanded, whether the child believes or no? and the answer is made, that the
child believes: How is this true, seeing the child has no understanding? He
answers, that the child does believe, because it does receive baptism the
Sacrament of faith, which is called faith or belief: as the Sacrament of
Christ's body, is called his body, etc. Contra Adimatum Cap. 12. he says:
Non dubitauit Dominus dicere: hoc est corpus meum, cum signum daret corporis
sui. Christ did not doubt to say: this is my body, when he gave a sign of
his body. And Tertullian, lib. 4. contra Marcionem. Christus acceptum panem,
and distributum discipulis suis, corpus suum illum fecit, hoc est corpus meum
dicendo, id est, figura corporis mei. Christ took bread and when he had
distributed it unto his disciples, he made it his body, saying: this is my
body, that is to say: this is a figure of my body. Theodoretus dialog. 1.
says, That the Scripture uses to give the name of the thing to the
Sacrament, and the name of the Sacrament unto the thing. Christ's natural
body is called bread, and his natural blood is called wine: And
contrariwise, very bread and very wine, is called his body and his blood.
Ioh. 6.51.
His body is called bread, when he says: Panis quem ego dabo, caro mea est.
The bread that I will give, is my flesh. And Tertul. against the Jews,
Lactantius also Lib. 4. and Hyerome upon the 11. Chap. of Jeremy, to the same
effect do understand these words: Iere. 11.19.
Mittamus lignum in panem eius. Let us put wood into his bread: which indeed
are the words of the Jews, that conspire against the Prophet Jeremy, and
take counsel to mingle poinsonfull wood into his meat, to destroy him. But
because the conspiracies against Gods Prophets, were figures of that wicked
conspiracy of the Jews against our Savior Christ, these fathers whom I have
rehearsed, apply that sentence unto Christ: Against whom, when the Jews did
cry, Crucifige, crucifige, Crucify him, crucify him, in effect they said:
Mittamus lignum in panem eius. Let us put wood into his bread, or fasten his
body unto the cross. Lo, say they, his natural body in this place is
called bread. Theodoretus likewise, to prove that his natural blood is
called wine, does allege the words of Jacob, Gene. 49. Who speaking of
Christ, Genesis 49.11.
that was to be borne of the tribe of Judah, says, Lauabit in vino stolam
suam, and in sanguine vuae vestimentum suum. He shall wash his garment in wine,
and his mantell in the bloodde of the grape. This prophecy, says Theodoretus
was fulfilled, when our savior Christ the true vine, did sheade for us his
most precious blood upon the cross, which blood issuing and descending
abundantly out of his precious wounds his hands and side, did wash his
body, which was as it were the mantell and vesture of his godheade, Neither
ought it (says he) seem strange unto us, that his blood should be called
wine, because Christ says of himself: Ego sum vitis vera. Ioh. 15.1.
I am the true vine. Now it is certain, that the juice of the vine tree, and
as it were the blood of the grape, is wine. And as the natural body of
Christ is called bread, and the natural blood of Christ is called wine: so
very bread indeed, is called his body, and very wine indeed is called his
blood. For so Theodoretus concludes in these words. Qui quod natura corpus
est, triticum and panem appellauit, and vitem rursus seipsum nominauit, is
symbola and signa quae videntur appellatione corporis and sanguinis honorauit,
non naturam quidem mutans, sed naturae gratiam adiiciens. He that called his
natural body wheat, John. 12.24.
John. 12. and bread, John. 6.48.
John. 6. and himself a vine, John. 15. he gave this honor to the signs,
John. 15.1.
and symbols which are seen, that he called them, by the name of his body,
and blood, not changing the nature, but adding grace unto nature. But why did
Christ change the names of bread and wine, and called them his body and
blood? He answers, That he changed the names, for that he would have them
that are partakers of these heavenly mysteries, not to consider the things
that are seen, but to have their minds fixed upon the things, whose names
they bear, and to believe that change, which is by grace. And Dialog. 2. he
says: Signa mystica post sanctificatione^ non recedunt sua natura, manent enim
in priori substantia, figura, and forma, etc. The mystical signs do not
depart after consecration out of their nature, for they continue in the same
substance, figure, and form, etc. Gelasius also a Bishop of Rome writing
against Eutyches, says: Certa Sacramenta quae sumimus corporis and sanguinis
Christi, diuina res est, vnde and per eadem diuinae efficimur consortes
naturae: and tamen esse non desinit substantia panis and vini. The Sacraments
which we receive of the body and blood of Christ is an holy thing, and
therefore by the same are we made partakers of the divine nature, and yet there
cease not to be in the Sacrament bread and wine. This no doubt, was catholic
doctrine in the days of these fathers, this was thold way, that our Savior
taught them: But the Papists have found a new way, that the words of
consecration being pronounced, the bread and wine are transubstantiat into the
real body and blood of Christ. (...) yea into Christ himself, yea into God
him self, per concomitantiam. For so we read in the Legend of Saints, added
unto Lombardica historia. Three kinds of power.
There are in God three kinds of power, magna, mayor, maxima. As for example.
The great power of God appeared, when he made one thing of an other, as man of
the earth, and woman of the ribbe of man: But the greater power of God
appeared, when he made heaven and earth of nothing. But this is the greatest
power of all, that one creature, of an other creature, should make the
creator: And this power is given neither to Angel nor Archangell, but to the
holy Priests. What is blasphemy, if this be not blasphemy? Surely I cannot
tell. God that made all things, is not made himself, neither can he make
himself, for if he could be made, he were not God. And shall a sinful
miserable Popish Priest, in a corner take upon him to make the maker of all?
Let us therefore give ear unto the Prophets counsel. Let us stand upon the
ways and consider, inquire of the old ways, which is best, and walk
therein, and we shall find rest (...) them, that the people did receive the
Lords supper in both kinds? And so they do in the Greek Church unto this
day. Gabriel Biel, a school Doctor confesses, that this institution continued
in the church a great while, neither can he tell, when one kind began to be
used first, nor how it came in. And Alphonsus confesses also, that although he
had bestowed great pain to know, how and when the people began first to
receive in one kind, yet could he not find it out. And surely, it was never
taken to be heresy, to keep Christ's holy institution, before the Council at
Constantia in the year of our Lord 1417. Let us therefore stand upon the ways,
and consider, ask of the old ways. etc.

Thirdly, Sacrifice.
Christ in his last supper did not sacrifice for the quick and the dead, for
the sins of the whole world, for that did he once for all, upon the altar
of the Cross. Which oblation being most perfect, neither can nor needs to
be repeated. For repetition is an argument of imperfection Heb. 10. Moreover
whereas there are four things to be considered in Sacrifices (as Saint
Augustine says) Quis? Quid? Cui? Heb. 10.3.
pro Quibus? Who does offer? What does he offer? To whom? And for whom? Who
does offer? A Priest: What does he offer? A sacrifice: To whom does he
offer? unto God, to whom only sacrifice is due: For whom does he offer? for
men that are sinners. In all others these four things are distinct one from
an other: First the Priest: Secondly the Sacrifice: Thirdly almighty God, to
whom, and fourthly sinful men, for whom sacrifice was offered. But in Christ
only these four did concur in one: Christ was the Priest, Christ was the
sacrifice, Christ was all one as touching his divine nature with the father, to
whom he was offered, and as touching his humane nature (sin only excepted)
all one with us, for whom he offered him self. And with this one oblation,
has he made perfect for ever, those that are sanctified, as says Saint Paul
to the Heb. 10. For the continual memory of which sacrifice, Heb. 10.1. and
10.
he did institute the holy sacrament of his blessed body, and blood, to
continue in the Church until his second coming, for our full redemption: Do
this (says he) in remembrance of me: And as often as ye shall eat of this
bread, and drink of this cup, ye show the Lords death until his coming.
It is true, that the old fathers with one consent call it a sacrifice: But
they expound themselves not to mean of a real offering, of a real body,
really present: But of a Sacrament of that real oblatio^, which he made once
for all upon the Cross. For as it is called the body and blood of Christ,
both in the Scriptures, and in the ancient writers, because it is a holy
sacrament of Christ's body and blood: so is it termed of the old writers, a
Sacrifice, and the self same sacrifice, that Christ did once offer upon the
Cross, because it is a Sacrament of that oblation, to put us in a thankful
remembrance thereof. Chrysostom and Saint Ambrose do say, That we offer
up Christ daily: But we do it in remembrance of his death, and work a
memory of that sacrifice. He was offered up once: But this sacrifice is, as
it were, a copy drawn out of the first original, to put his death and
passion always in our remembrance. Augustine also in the 20. book against
Faustus says, That the Jews before Christ's coming, in offering up the
sacrifices appointed in the law, did promise and prophecy of Christ's oblation
upon the cross. Christ when he died, did perform it in deed: and we
Christians, now after his ascension into heaven, do celebrate the memory
thereof in the Lords Supper. But the Papists are not content with this: But
they say, they have him really present, and hold him up, in their hands, in
the same quantity, that he was upon the Cross, though not after the manner
of quantity, and reallie offer him up to the father. They that thus brag of
Christ's captuitie, would hold him captive.


Brulifer says, Quem totus mundus capere non potest, noster captiuus est: non
ergo, dimittamus priusquam quod petimus obtineamus. Whom the whole world
cannot contain, is now our captive: therefore let us not let him go, until he
have granted our request. This and such like blasphemies, wherein they give to
creatures the honor due to GOD, they call Spiritual daliance. But it is
indeed more than daliance: for it is plain Spiritual fornication. Therefore
let us follow the Prophets Counsel. Stand upon the ways and consider, ask
of the old ways, which is best. etc.

Last of all, Communion.
Christ did not institute a private Mass, but a Communion: he willed all that
was present to take and eat: he commanded them all to drink. In the Church
of Corinthus and in all Churches many hundred years after Christ, it was the
action of the whole Church, wherein many eating of one bread, should be
made one mystical body. It appears by Justinius Martyr, in his Apology to
the Emperor Antonius for the Christians, Cyprian, Ambrose, and the Liturgies
that go abroad in the name of James, of Basil of Chrysostom, and the oldest
writers, that when the Lords Supper was ministered, there was some parcel of
scripture read, a Sermon made unto the people, a collection for the poor: and
all that was present did communicate. Chrysostom says, Qui mysteriorum
particeps non est, improbus et impudens adstat. He is an impudent looker on,
that being present, does not communicate. This was Catholic religion in
those days: But now in Popery, without preaching, without teaching, without
sense and understanding, in a tongue that the Priest himself understands
not, in a corner without Communicantes, one eats and drinks all. How much
therefore are we bound, to give God most hearty thanks, that has moved the
Queens Majesty, her Council, the Clergy, Nobility, and Commons of this
Realm, that they, giving good ear unto the Prophet Ieremies Counsel in this
place, have stood upon the Ways, and considered, have asked of the old
ways, which is the best? and have restored unto us, the old, ancient,
Catholic, and Apostolic religion, as well in other principal points of
doctrine, as in the Lords Supper, and have delivered unto us, not an half or
mangled Supper, but the whole Supper, not a superstitious and idolatrous
ceremony, to transubstantiate the holy signs into Christ's natural body and
blood, but an holy Sacrament instituted by Christ, wherein we feed on
Christ, we eat his body, we drink his blood sacramentally, spiritually,
effectually, and sufficiently, to the spiritual nourishing both of our bodies
and souls to eternal life: Not a propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and
the dead, (that great ground of Popish Purgatory) but a lively memory and
representation of Christ's death, until his coming. God for his Christ's sake
make us thankful, continue his Truth and verity amongst us, and grant,
that as she cannot be spoiled of this mark of Antiquity, so it would
please him even for his Christ's sake, that she may find such favor among
men in earth, that she may wear openly the other two badges, I mean Consent
and Universality. God bless the Queens majesty, Queen Elizabeth, with many
and prosperous years, convert or confound all her enemies, and give all us
grace, that be here gathered together for this holy purpose, that we,
bearing a fervent love, toward almighty GOD, a dutiful obedience toward
her Majesty, and her Laws, and unfeigned charity one toward an other, come
not to this holy table, for fashion sake to please the world, but of very
good zeal to God and his word: That we receiving these heavenly mysteries to
our endless comfort, may dwell in Christ, and Christ in us, may be one with
Christ, and Christ with us, may be made members of his mystical body in this
life, and in the life to come pertakers of his celestial kingdom: Unto the
which he bring us, that most dearly bought us, Jesus Christ the righteous: To
whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, three persons and one true and
everliving God, be all honor praise dominion and power for ever and ever. Amen

Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vine-tree, by Thomas Dawson,
for Richard Sergier 1579.


