CERTAIN Godly and learned Sermons.

Made upon these six following Parables of our Savior Christ, declared in the
Gospel.

1. Of the unclean spirit. 2. Of the prodigal son. 3. Of the Rich man and
Lazarus. 4. Of the vvounded man. 5. Of the unmerciful servant. 6. Of the
faithful servant.
By S. I.

Nascimur in commune bonum. At London, Printed by I.R. for R.B. and are to be
sold in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Sun. 1601.

To the right Reverend Father in God, Ma. Doctor Babington, Bishop of
Worcester, a plentiful measure of Gods grace in this life; and eternal joys
in the life to come.
MAtters of learning, are most fit to be presented to the^ that excel therein.
For as the proverb is, Scientia ^emi^e^ habet inimicum, prater ignorantem: so
by the same rule may I say, Scientia nemi^^em habet amicum et Mecanatem, nisi
studiosum fa^t^re^^que honorum literarum. Let wisdom grow in favor with them
that have knowledge, and weighty discourses be accepted of learned men. Calvin
and Erasmus, making their Comentaries upon the New Testament, took choice to
dedicate them to Kings and Princes, and Nobles, which I take it, was not only
to make them in love with religion, but also to make them to favor and further
it, to the utmost of their power. Though my self be nothing comparable, and
not so much as worthy to carry their books after such learned men, yet I may
take example from them.

And although (Right Reverend) I know right well, that you not only favor
religion, but are an earnest professor thereof, and that I need not to exhort
and stir you up therein: yet the principal scope of this my writing is, and
of this my dedication, in most humble and earnest sort to desire you, tha^^s
you have done much good already by your printed labors, so you would vouchsafe
yet more and more, to further Gods church and the ministry by this means.
Among whom my self being but a mean member, have reaped great profit by your
labors. For the which, as we of the ministry chiefly, are to acknowledge gods
goodness for raising up such an instrument in his church, so as many as have
been furthered and bettered by your painfulnesse, are also to account
themselves beholding unto you, as I am, I speak it unfeignedly. I hear being
one of your neighbor Diocese, that you have great care of a learned
ministry, and at the entrance of your honorable place in VVorster, you showed
your self a forward man therein. I beseech your Lordship to pardon my
presumption, and to take my meaning in good part. For them that are unlearned,
and either would, or by any means are like to enter into the ministry, where
you have to do, either you may advice the^ (as no doubt you do) to stay a
longer time, till they be sufficient, or debar the^, or exhort and counsel
them to take upon them another course of life. For those being unlearned, that
are already placed, who considering their own wants and weakness, might
bestow some part of their living upon sufficient and able men, to help to
discharge that weight duty which lies upon the^ to perform in that
behalf; if they be unwilling this way, and of themselves will be studious and
painful, endeavoring to discharge a good conscience in their place and calling,
no better helps can they have then learned books. Who if they would but follow
the direction which you have already set forth, I d^^^ a^sure them they may
do much good in their congregation. Now as Kings and Princes desirous to
govern their people well, do not only command them to live in due obedience
and civil order, but also do prescribe laws and statutes, that thereby they
may be directed to live as they ought to do: so such men as your self under
Kings and Princes, being appointed great Governors, and having a great
charge, do well to persuade your Clergy under your jurisdiction, that they
have especial care to instruct the people committed to them: but they do
better, that by all means they can devise, do help and further them, to make
them able Ministers.

The example of your Lordshippes painful preaching, is a notable encouragement
in this behalf, but if it would please you as yet further, to preach to the by
your painful pen, they might at good leyfare instruct th^^^el^^^, (...) by due
meditation make good use thereof to the edification of others. And that you may
continue in your godly (...) of a learned ministry, as also the unlearned may
take heed what they do (...) much herein they offend, let me further
persuade, by the words of that learned and reverend man Ma. Doctor Some, who in
a printed book aunswering Penry his objections, sh^weth his great forwardnes
in this matter.

I beseech you let it not seem ^^d^ous unto you, though I recite unto you that
which there I have r^^d The words are these as follows. Doctor S^mes
desire of a learned ministry.
I have (...) very earnestly and humbly, by wri^ing^ and speech, for a learned
ministry. I have received very comfortable answer of very great and
honorable personages, who have already, (thanks be to God) employed some, and
will no doubt employ more in the churches service. Penry makes a speech as
proceeding from unlearned ministers, chap. 25. which make the ministry
vltim^^^^ (...). They in their practice say, Lord, whether of soul or no, we
care not; but rather then we should not have the means to live in this life,
(for this is their only scope in continuing in the ministry,) require the
blood of souls, and what thou will at our hands. And so senseless men, they
sell themselves body and soul, unto everlasting woe and destruction.

To this speech Ma. Doctor Some answers wisely and discreetly. I am so far
(says he) from being a defense, to ignorant either Levites before, or
Ministers now, that I confess freely, that their entrance into the
priesthood and ministry, and ^^^^uance in it, most absurdly, was and is a
g^eeuous sin.

If the Lord has or shall punish them senerely for their intrusion, into so
high a calling, they cannot plead not guilty. If they do it is in vain, for
at Gods bar, they shall not be acquitted. You write that the ignorant
Ministers, whom you call senseless men, do sell themselves body and soul to
everlasting destruction: Your speech is true; Illi viderint: Let them if they
be not graceless and shameless, look into it. All that I say unto it is, the
Lord for his Christ his sake; heal that sore. It is not so grievous (thanks
be to GOD) as it was, I assure my self it will be less, I would to God it
were none.

So far Master Doctor Some, who I am persuaded uttered this, not so much
addicted unto learning, (being himself a man very learned) as principally
upon a good conscience, considering the weight charge that lies upon the
Minister to perform, to teach, to confute, to comfort, which cannot be
performed without learning.

Now in token of a thankful mind, for that good which I have already
received by your public painfulnesse, (both by private meditation, and
public practice, for the which the Lord be praised,) I have made bold to
present this Book unto your Lordship, not so much for patronage and
protection, (which also I desire) as in reverend sort, once again to exhort
you, and to draw you on, to be mindful of us of the ministry; and to
remember my humble request herein.

Concerning the Reader, he may persuade himself, that that doctrine shall most
prevail with his auditory, that stands upon diversities of instructions,
leading the mind onward, with a kind of v^ri^^y and delight. And therefore I
have taken principal choice in this sort, as you see, to set forth these
parables with as (...) and apt notes as I could, being furth^^ed herein, by
Gods help and assistance. Wherein if there be any thing to be liked, it is Gods
doing, if there be any fault, it is mine own.

God grant that we all, of the ministry especially, may prove to be wise
virgins, and that such as your self, which have received five talents, may
well remember that these two twins were bone both together, at one and the
self same time, Honores et Onera.

Your Lordships as unknown, yet praying God to prosper your labors to his
glory, and the good of the Ministry. S. I.

Memoriae Matter Methodus. The several deuisions of every particular Parable.
Of the unclean Spirit. Luke. 11.24.
This Parable may be divided into these three parts following.

1. First all of us, are subject to the manifold temptations of the devil, who
prevails in some more, thou i^ whersome. 2. Secondly, there is a t^^^ when
the devil goes out of us, either by Gods secret grace, or good counsel, or
true and unfeigned repentance. 3. Thirdly, his woeful return, in them that are
not watchful, and do not their best endeavor to keep him out, when they are
once free from his thraldom, and slavery. Psalm. 125.5.
Of the prodigal Son Luke. 15.11.
This parable sets forth unto us, these four things.

1. The excellent estate of man, being furnished with Gods blessings and
graces in a plentiful measure, under the description of the prodigal son,
having received all his patrimony. 2. The decayed estate of man, being left
unto himself, and so falling from God, and provoking gods displeasure, by his
manifold offenses, and daily and continual sins, thereby working his own
woe and destruction. 3. The restored estate of man, through the mercy of GOD,
expressed in the great kindness of the Father, that went out to meet his son.
As also in the death and passion of Jesus Christ, expressed by the killing of
the fat Calfe, the best raiment, the Ring, and shoes, and royal feast.
Whereof the prodigal Son is made pertaker by faith and repentance. 4.
Lastly, we ought to be so far from repining and grudging at the salvation of
sinners, and their accepting into favor, that we ought rather to rejoice,
beholding Gods great mercy, and gracious and unspeakable goodness herein.
All which matters are set forth, by the declaration of diverse particular
circumstances, as the Text does afford.

The Parable of the Rich man and Lazarus. Luke. 16.19.20. etc.
In this Parable are set down these five considerations following.

1. First, the example of a wicked worldling, very loose and careless, setting
light by GOD, and despising his poor neighbor. 2. Secondly, the pattern of
a godly man, submitting himself to Gods will in all his distress: and
waiting for comfort and deliverance, according to Gods good will and pleasure.
3. Thirdly, the joyful estate of the godly after death, being full of
unspeakable comfort and glory. 4. Fourthly, the lamentable estate of the wicked
after death. Wisd. 5. 5. Lastly, the Word of God being delivered by the
Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles, is reverently to be heard, and dutifully to
be obeyed, which to our great good, calls us unto repentance and newness
of life.
The Parable of the wounded man, that came down from Jerusalem to Jericho. ()
Luke. 10.25.
Many apply this Parable to the decayed estate of man, and how he is
restored: but by the circumstances of the text, it seems rather to be
wrested. For here is set down a comparison, betwixt mental religion, and
outward profession, the notable trial whereof is seen, in the works of
charity.

This parable may be divided into these three parts.

1. The deceauable opinion of Man, that thinks religion does consist rather
in the knowledge of Gods will, then in the works of charity. I am. chap. 1,
27. Mat. chap. 5, 20.

3. That heathen people, as also those of a contrary religion, excel true
professors in the practice of good works. And so much the more, because they
put the hope of their salvation in their good deeds, looking for a reward, not
of mercy, but of desert. The Priest and the Leuite went by, and the Samaritane
showed mercy: and of those ten that were healed of the leprocie, only one
returned to give thanks, and he was a Samaritan.

The use and application of the Parable, in the commandment of our Savior
Christ, inioyning and exhorting us unto the works of charity.

An other division of this parable.
This Parable may be referred to these three heads.

1. The unmerciful disposition of most men and women, given too much to self
love. 2. That there be few, that have care of the poor, and of the misery of
them that are distressed, and that have any fellow feeling. 1. Cor. chap. 12.
verse. 25, 26, 27, 28. 3. That as it is Gods commandment, so there is nothing
more acceptable to god, and more commendable before men, then to do good to
those that stand in need. Which is an especial fruit of faith.
Of the unmerciful Servant, that would not forgive his fellow. Math. 18.21.
In which example or parable, these four matters are to be examined.

1. An exhortation to the mutual forgiveness of offenses, from the example of
God, daily forgiving those that are far unworthy. 2. The ingratitude of the
world toward God, and their unmerciful disposition, toward their neighbor. 3.
The punishment of their ingratitude, and cruel behavior. 4. The use and
application of the Parable.
The Parable of the faithful servant. Math. 24.45.
This Parable stands upon a twofolde description.

The first is, of a painful Minister, whose properties are to be faithful and
wise, looking for his Masters coming.

And whose reward is, that he shall be blessed, that is found so doing. As
also that he shall be made Ruler, over all his Masters goods.

The second is, of a negligent Minister, whose properties are, that presuming
of his Masters long stay, he waxes altogether careless of his duty. And
also behauing himself very indiscreetly, gives himself to all
licentiousness.

Whose punishment is, that his expectation shall be deceived, and his hope
suddenly cut off. Furthermore, that his portion shall be with the hypocrites.
The greeuousnesse of which punishment, is here expressed in these words: There
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

The Parables of the Gospel moralized.
Of the unclean Spirit.
LVKE. 11.24. When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks through
dry places, seeking rest. And when he finds none, he says, I will return
unto mine house whence J came out. And when he comes, he finds it (empty)
swept, and garnished. Then goes he, and takes to him seven other spirits,
worse then himself: and they enter in and dwell there. So the last state of
that man, is worse then the first.
IN this Parable these 3. principal considerations are to be observed. First,
that all of us (by nature) are subject to the temptations of the devil, to his
often and manifold temptations, who prevails in some, more then in other
some. Adam was tempted, and he fell; and the wicked continually yield to his
temptations, and are overcome. Christ was tempted, and he resisted, and
vanquished him, and in him and by his power, all the godly are co^querers over
the devil, and his wicked and overthrowing temptations. Secondly, there is a
time when the devil goes out of us, either by Gods grace, or good counsel, or
true and unfeigned repentance. He goes not out willingly and of him self, but
he is thrown and thrust out.

Thirdly, his woeful return in them, that do not endeavor to keep him out,
because their estate shall be far worse, and they shall hardly or never be cured
and recovered. Our maisterful sin, whereunto we are given, more then to any of
the rest, is never alone, but is accompanied with many other. And when the
devil enters again, he brings in with him; nay, a legion follow after him,
for he comes with power enough, and thinks it impossible that he should be
resisted, or if he be resisted, he will not so be vanquished, neither will he
ever give us up, so long as we are compassed with this mortal and sinful body
of ours. Romans 7.24. Heb. 12.1.

Some think this parable was vttred to the wicked Scribes and Pharisees, and the
rather through the provocation of their blasphemous speech, against their own
conscience, which said, that he cast out devils by Beelzebub. But it is more
likely he spoke it to the man, that was possessed with the devil, out of whom
the devil was cast out. Where it is most worthy of our meditation to consider,
by whom he was cast out, not as the Pharisees suppose by Beelzebub, but by one
more mighty and powerful then Beelzebub, and all the devils in hell. 1. Ioh. 3.8.
For to this purpose appeared the son of god, that he might lose the works of
the devil, which are sin, death, and hell. Greatly to comfort the godly in all
distresses of body and mind, while they are assured, not only that through his
help all desperate diseases are cured, but also that the malicious work of
satan, is by his almighty power, utterly destroyed and scattered. Giving us
sufficient encouragement, not only not to fear that hurt which satan may
work against us, but also to have recourse to him in all our distresses,
either of body or of mind, how dangerous soever they be, as also to give him
thanks and praise, for his manifold goodness toward us, and being delivered, to
take heed, least by our negligence, we fall into the like dangers again. As
Christ gave warning, to him that had been diseased thirty eight years, and
now was healed, and brought to his former strength, by the virtue of his
heavenly power and gracious goodness: John. 5. Behold, thou art made whole, sin
no more, least a worse thing come unto thee.

Christ put forth this parable, not so much to warn him, out of whom the
devil was cast, as also in the behalf of the company that was present, and
the standers by. Ioh. 12.30. To teach all the godly and the Ministers
especially, to have great regard of their talk, that it may be powdered with
salt, that it may tend to edifying, and may give grace to the hearers. Colos.
4.6. For oftentimes the standers by, do more mark, and give more diligent
heed, to that which is spoken, then the party to who^ the speech is directed,
and to whom it does most pertain.

The scope of this parable is principally to show, how heavy a judgment they
heap upon themselves, which refusing the grace of God offered unto them, do
lay open a passage for the devil to enter in again. For if through their want
to heede-taking, they give him entrance again, he will most hardly or never be
driven out. Therefore are we willed, to work out our salvation with fear and
trembling, Phil. 2.12. And to resist the devil, that so he may fly from us,
James. 4.7. And let us apply this parable to Christ his meaning, as if he had
said, I came to expel satan out of you, that I might reign within you. And
if you will not that I should reign in you, and over you, and that you despise
my grace and goodness, in this sort shall you be punished, that the evil spirit
which was cast out of you, shall return again, and your stubbornnes shall thus
be rewarded, that you shall altogether be blinded, and reserved to most woeful
destruction.

How subject we are to the devils malicious intents and continual temptations,
How subject to the devils temptations.
may appear herein, not only by his hatred to the common sort of mankind,
but even to the best. And beholding his temptations against our Savior, we may
not look that we should stand free. For if he were bold to vex the head, he
will not spare the members. He spared not our first parents in Paradise, in the
estate of their innocence and integrity, how much less will he spare us,
which are compassed about with so great corruption and sin? If he was bold to
tempt David to adultery and murder, Aaron and Solomon to idolatry, Peter to
perjury, and Saint Paul to the lusts of the flesh. 2. Cor. 12.7.8.9. How
shall we think to escape, which are not strengthened or endued with so great
gifts and graces? If he had his force against lob, a righteous man, and one
that feared God, God himself so witnessing of him, let us make no other
reckoning, but to prepare our selves to temptation. He is most busy about us,
when we are least aware of his working. He is not only diligent to compass
the earth to and fro, but he goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he
may devour. And therefore no marvel, though we read. Reave. 12.12. a woe
pronounced against the inhabitants of the earth, because the devil being cast
out, is come down unto them, who has great wrath, because he knows he
has but a short time. He could not prevail in heaven, therefore he will show
all his force on the inhabitants of the earth. Whose wrath is great, and
therefore we must look for no mercy at his hands, whose time is but short, and
therefore he will lose no opportunity, whereby he may draw us to our destruction.
And seeing his time it but short, and the battle not long, let us frame our
selves, the more valiantly to resist him. And here is the comfort of the godly,
that the disciples of Christ, saw satan fall down from heaven like lightning.
Lu. 10.18. For as the force of the lightning is sudden and soon gone, so the
fiercest assaults of the devil, are but short, to them that can through Gods
grace endure and overcome them. Again, this is another comfort, that though he
be come down upon the earth, yet he is thrown out of heaven, and they whose
especial delight is in heavenly meditations and godly exercises, are most free
from his wrath, though not altogether free from his temptations.

This woe touches not the godly and them that resist his temptations, for from
them he soon flies. Iam. 4.7. but as for the ungodly he has them in a snare,
and woe be to the^ that cannot avoid and resist him. 2. Tim. 2.26. Howbeit, they
that are most godly, the devil almeth at the^ most, either to bring them to
shame, or to utter overthrow. As Christ said to Peter, giving him a
forewarning, Lu. 22.31. Simon, Simon, behold satan has desired to winow you
as Wheat, but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. The corn that
is winowed is sifted to the utmost, so does satan tempt and try the godly, as
far as possibly may be.

Again, the corn being winowed, does show it self in his excellency; so the
godly being tried and found steadfast, do make Gods grace and goodness to
appear in them most glorious, to their great commendation: nevertheless,
through their own strength, they cannot stand steadfast. 1. Cor. 10.12. To many
their temptations are their crowns. Iam. 1. My brethren, count it exceeding
joy, when ye fall into diverse temptations. For hereby the worthy virtues of
the godly are made manifest, which lay hid before.

Satan, to work Joseph's ouer-throwe, does not only lay before him a most
tempting bait, but sifts him to the utmost. For his lewd. Mistress, through
the devils temptations, being bewitched with his love, does not upon the
first denial leave of her suit, but assaieth him again and again, using all
means, and seeking all occasions and opportunities, yet by Gods grace he
with-stood them all. And though there-hence there arose his greatest troubles,
yet God did deliver him out of all, and made his supposed shame, the greatest
occasion of his future honor and renown. The like may be said of Susanna.

As the devil showed all his policy in tempting Christ, so is his craft and
subtlety more forcible toward the godliest, and them that are best disposed,
because they are some stay and hinderance unto him, that he cannot so greatly
prevail in the world as he would. For by their good counsel, and good
example, and godly behavior, they win many unto God, and so do greatly
cross and prevent the mischievous malice of the devil; and because this sort
of people, I mean the godly, are farthest out of his reach, so are the
temptations which he works against the^ most mighty. Knowing that the rest
of the world, in whom he rules as he list, are easily carried away with
shows and shadows.

After he had tempted Christ, and could not prevail, it is said he left him
for a season, purposing to return again. So also deals he with the godly,
whom though he cannot bring to the bent of his bow, though he give them
respite for a while, yet his mind is to set upon them with fresh assaults. And
many which have good gifts and graces, he overcomes with ease and pleasure,
and idleness, and negligence, or else makes them to abuse their gifts, to badde
ends and purposes. When we are idle, then is his fittest time to overthrow us,
nay, when we are in godly exercises, he cease not then to practice his
feats. Bringing in wandering thoughts, either when we hear the Word, or be at
our prayers, being careless at the time, and forgetful afterward. He makes
not only the instruments of sin, that is, all vices; but even the best
gyfts, and godliest exercises, the means to serve his turn, and to work his
mischief against us.

As for them which have a greater regard, and are more wary, he enters and
incloseth within them by sly and secret means; as if they are bent to any
good, to hinder them from it, by showing unto them many difficulties, lets, and
hindrances, that the way to heaven is strait and narow, and as it were the
climing up of a sandy hill, or high rock, and that the passage thereunto, is
full of dangers, and full of troubles. He causes many godly that are set in
high rooms, to fall, and to give offense, that thereby others might take a
liberty to do evil. Neither does he refrain to inuegle the minds of them
that are set in highest degree, as the fairest marks he has to shoot at, to
make them swerve and go astray. As if they be in place of judgment, to give
false sentence for gain of gold; if they be set to reprove the sins of the
people, to stand in fear of men's displeasure; if in state of nobility and
great possessions, to make their will a law, according to the Latin verse.

Sic volo, sic iubeo, stet pro ratione voluntas.
So I will, and so I command, and let my will stand for a reason, and for a
law. But especially, and above the rest, if they be princes, he tempts and
persuades them, that all things are lawful for them, that they are above
their laws, and are not to be censured by any man; whereby they persuade unto
themselves a liberty to sin, and who should control them, as was manifest
in the Emperors of Rome.

His sleights are so deceitful, as to show the bravery, pleasure, and profit
of any thing, whereunto he tempts; but he keeps back from us the
mischiefs that accompany the same; and so blinds our eyes as it were in the
noone day. The murderer he makes believe, that revenge is an ease to the heart,
and keeps back that blood will require blood.

Him that follows the lewdnes of his fleshly lusts, he tickleth him on in
this, how pleasant it is to continue and wallow in such sinful desires, and
keeps back the sicknesses and diseases, and other painful griefs, which may
shorten his life. Him that is given to theft and robbery, him he persuades
that he may have wealth at will, and live as he list, and keeps back from
him the horror of a shameful death, which he is not always like to escape.
Him that is given to slander his neighbor, what favor and advantage he
shall get by it, and keeps back this fearful sentence, Who so privily
slaundereth his neighbor, him will I destroy.

Thus he steals all inconveniences and hurtful after-claps out of our hearts,
that we might not see the snare that is lay de before us, and the dangers that
we are like to fall. into. All occasions he watches, to allure and to
provoke us, he comes near unto us, and feels our affections and
inclinations, and offreth matters to our senses. If we be given to drunkenness,
he will entice us by the pleasantnes of the wine, and the sweetness of the
drink; If unto gluttony, he will entice us with plenty of meat and
belly-cheere; If possessed by the lusts of the flesh, he will tempt us with
the beauty of women, who have no care of their chastity, and make small
account of their honesty and good name; If unto any of these, or the like
motions and temptations, we give our consent, then has the devil what he
would, and so will he use means to proceed f^rther, so will he take
advantage against us, by watching and prying into the corruption of our own
nature, and so becoming daily and continually our domestical foe.

And although we may keep our selves in, never so warily, and restrain our
selves, and have an eye unto our own inclinations, yet if we be too hard for
him one way, he will venture upon us another way, he will never leave, but
still be tempting of us. And therefore our life is truly said to be a warfare,
that we might always stand in a readiness, to fight against these temptations,
to be always practiced in avoiding that which is evil. When one temptation
will not take place, our enemy tries another, as an invincible fighter, that
is still prepared unto the combat. One temptation follows in the neck of
another, either in matters which concern the body and outward affairs, or
such as pertain to the spirit and mind of man, and to the estate of another
life.

Therefore, when one temptation is past, and the trouble ended, we must not
think to rest vnmolested, as flesh and blood naturally persuades it self, we
must not be lulled in the cradle of security, but we must always prepare our
selves to a new and fresh assault, to be ready to encounter with every new
temptation. And this is the cause why many are overcome by temptations,
because they promise peace and safety unto themselves in this life, because
they are always unprovided, and never look for the worst, never look to
prevent temptations. Being altogether ignorant of the devils diligence, who is
ready at all assaies, and looks after every occasion.

But we in this matter are altogether as careless as they that are recovered
from some great and dangerous sickness, we think we shall not fall into
the same, or the like again. Howbeit we must know, that temptations are more
rife with us then sicknesses, and the dangers of the one, far greater then
the other.

Most men and wemens minds he inforceth to gross and shameful sins, The
unclean Spirit.
and foul faults, whose hearts by custom he has fully possessed, and who lie
open to his assaults. And above all other, his ordinary temptation is, by
adultery, whoredom, uncleanness, and wantonness: and therefore he is truly
termed in this place, to be the unclean Spirit. He is called an unclean
spirit, not only because he has lost his purity and his innocence, wherein
he was first created, but also because he delights in all uncleanness, and
is an utter enemy to all holiness.

Knowing well our inclination, and how prone our corrupt nature and flesh and
blood is to this sin, he makes us to fight against our selves, while he
stands by to behold the conquest. According to that the Apostle Saint Peter
gives us warning of, saying: Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and
pilgrims, to abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul. It is
not barely said the Spirit, but the unclean Spirit; to put a difference
betwixt it and the Spirit of God, which is mentioned without any addition, Gal.
5. and 6. Romans 8. Esaias. 41. An evil spirit possessed Saul.

The devil is said to be unclean, principally in respect of his unclean
qualities, and because he provoke us to uncleanness, making us to fall from
goodness, that he may draw us to eternal torments.

But how subtle and crafty, how powerful and maisterfull soever his
temptations be, 2. There is a time when he goes out.
yet there is a time when he goes out of us, though it be much against his
will. By good counsel much is brought to pass, which is the means which GOD
uses to bring some into the way again. Their own conscience also testifying
unto them, how far they go astray, and moving them to forsake the devil
and all his works. But the cheifest means whereby he is thrown out, is the
converting grace of God, which does not only minister good thoughts, and good
wishes, and good desires, but gives sufficient effect and power thereunto,
making us able to throw out the devil, and to resist him. The effect of this
grace is, that it provoke us to true repentance, which does not consist in
the shedding of tears so much, as in the conversion of the heart, and the
amendment of our life and conversation. All this notwithstanding, how soever
he be thrown out, like a malcontent he never rests, but seeks to enter in
again, being full loath, to be long without his Mansion and dwelling place.

The force of Christ his redemption, does principally work this exile and
banishment of the devil, and his daily intercession in the behalf of the
godly, does work it more and more. Where by the way we have a notable
instruction, to consider how miserable the estate of mankind is by nature,
that he is the habitation and resting place of the devil, and of the unclean
spirit. Neither is it true only in this or that man, but in all the posterity
of Adam. And this is the glory and renown of our natural or rather corrupt
integrity, that both in body and in soul the devil reigns in us. By how
much the more therefore, have we cause to extol the unspeakable mercy of God,
who of filthy and loathsome stables of the devil, makes us temples to
himself, and consecrat places, for his holy spirit to rest in. Only diligent
carefulnes is here required, that we continually remember, how great a benefit
we have received, in that we are freed from so troublesome a guest, and so
deadly an enemy. And now have we time to consider Gods goodness, and to
continue therein, and to behold the great dangers we were in, and to learn to
avoid them, and to detest the devils malice and mischievous working, and to
make a vow with our selves, not to be overcome and ruled by him.

By good counsel he may be thrown out, and yet no sufficient discharge, but
as he will thrust in again, so will he easily be admitted. Some do utterly
refuse good counsel, and cannot abide to hear it, and hate them that bring
it and show their good will herein. And they that show themselves tractable,
for a while, may give consent, and also have a purpose to order themselves
there-after, and yet the devil can alter all, and make them stoop again; and
they that were at defiance, are ready now to shake hands, and to make a new
covenant, what friend and faithful counsailour so ever speak against it. The
guilt of conscience, the sight and knowledge of his sin, the fear of Gods
displeasure, and danger of hell torments, is enough to make us forswear the
devil, and to hate his allurements, and to desire godly company and counsel,
the devil lets us alone, so long as we are in this mind, he hopes we will
not long coutinue in this vain, his time he will watch, when he knows how to
take us tardy, and then the Castle is wone again, and a stronger garrison set
to keep it. The grace of God is the canon shot, that breaks down the walls.
When a strong man armed keeps the breach and the passage, for a while he
possesses and keeps all in peace: But when a stronger then he comes upon
him, and over comes him, he must be feign to give place. And this is a
greater comfort, that his armor shall be taken away from him, and the spoils
shall be divided. For Christ in his cross and passion overcame the power of
the devil for us. Coloss. 2.15. He has spoiled the principalities and powers,
and has made a show of them openly, and has tryumplied over them in the same
cross, and made a glorious conquest. And not only so, but also having led
captivity captive, has given gifts unto men, that being strengthened by his
grace, they also should be conquerours through the virtue of his power. And
this is the glorious and tryumphant gift of Gods grace, in whom while it
vouchsafes to enter as a conqueror, it brings with it many good
companions, and joyful effects. 2. Corinthi. 7. For godly sorrow is one of
the attenders, which causes repentance unto salvation. And behold what godly
sorrow works, what great care follows, to serve God, to live in his fear,
to avoid our former sins; what clearing of our selves in acknowledging our
faults, and asking God forgiveness, and desiring to be renewed in mind, and that
God would create a new heart in us. Ps. 51. What indignation and holy anger,
that ever we were so much misled; yea, what fear, least we should fall into
the like offenses again; yea, how great desire, to continue in a godly life;
yea, what a zeal of Gods glory; yea, what punishment, what judging and
chastising of our selves, to prevent Gods anger and judgment. 1. Cor. 11.33.
and practicing those virtues and godly qualities, which are contrary to our
former vices.

Now although he be thus valiantly resisted, yet is he not thoroughly
vanquished, nor utterly banished, though his force and power against us is
broken, yet his evil will remains, and he will let pass no device, but puts
dangerous matters still in practice against us, and we shall not be free from
him, so long as we live in this world. Therefore it behooves us to look unto
our selves, and always to stand upon our watch. For like a malecontent, he
never rests, but seeks to enter in again.

When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, Seeking rest.
he walks through unclean places seeking rest.] For as a furious man is
never at rest, till he has wrought a revenge. so is the devil never at rest,
till he has done some hurt and mischief. And this is his chiefest delight,
and his chiefest study, his only practice and trade, wherein he is most
diligent, though he have no thanks for his pains. All his endeavors tend to
man's destruction, and especially where he is driven away by the force of Christ
his grace and power, the more is his desire to hurt, the more is his rage. And
before we are vouchsafed of this heavenly help, our mortal enemy makes but a
sport to reign within us at his pleasure, but being driven out of us, he takes
great grief thereat; having thus lost his booty and his pray, he gathers new
strength, and stirs up all his senses and wits a-fresh, to set upon us, and
to assault us. Therefore is he said to walk through dry places, because his
banishment out of us, is to him, as a desolate and most uncomfortable
wilderness. Being cast out of man, he is said to seek rest, because he is then
most vexed, and most at disquiet within himself, seeking by all means
possible, to recover that which he has lost. Here then we are to learn that
as soon as we are called by Christ his grace, that we are to look for mighty
temptations and heavy assaults, for the devil will not so easily loose his
pray, as also we are with all circumspection and warines, to set our selves
against him, and to use all means to prevent his power, for his hatred is most
deadly, and his fury and rage not ouercom by a little. Howbeit, this
forewarning, ought not to breed any fear within our minds, or any whit to
discourage us, but rather to fore-shew us what danger may fall upon us, through
our own negligence.

Seeking rest,] If we will give him entertainment; but we must watch and keep
him out, and fight the spiritual fight, craving Gods help by prayer, and
using all good means. He has rest enough in the life of a wicked man, in the
adulterer, the unmerciful usurer, the thief, the whore, he holds therein
fee-simple, he takes up his lodging there for term of life and longer to.
Although he seek rest, yet he is never at rest, for he goes about like a
roaring Lion, seeking who^ he may devour, he rests in them whom he has
gotten, and lays garrison to keep his hold, but still as a conqueror he
thirsts after more, neither is he ever satisfied. God rested the seventh day
from his works, but the devil will never rest from his works. The godly that
fight in this world with the devil, and their ghostly enemies, though here
they have a hard co^bate, and much unquietness, shall hereafter rest from their
labors, and enter into eternal rest. Re. 14.13. But the wicked which here have
ease, hereafter shall have no rest.



And when he finds none, he says, His woeful return.
I will return unto mine house, whence I came out.] Wherein these circumstances
may be observed. First our negligence and sinful and easy backsliding. And
when he comes, he finds it empty swept and garnished. Secondly his cruelty
in returning, in that he brings with him 7. other spirits, worse the^
himself. Thirdly, the woeful estate of that man or woman, who forgetting God
and themselves, have yielded themselves captives to the devils slavery. They
enter in and dwell there. So the last state of that man is worse then the first.
In which woeful case, for are-storatiue this may be added, that no man or woman
despair, if they be not utterly past grace, though they fall again, seeing
there is a difference betwixt a resolute determination in sin, and a repentant
mind, which is heartily sorry for every fall and offense.

I will return.] He says not, I will seek to return, or I will do my best
endeavor to return, but I will return, as though nothing should resist him,
and no power were able to vanquish and overcome him. So cunning he is, that he
has his turns and his returns, his terms and his vacations, and he will
come again, although he go into a far Country, he is with us before we are
aware. When he told Christ that all the Kingdoms of the earth were his to
give, yet it was nothing so, and likewise where he says he will return, he is
oft-times hindered, that he cannot do as he would, but few there be that
keep him out, and too many that through their negligence, give him too easy
an entrance.

Unto my house whence I came out.] First he comes to the house, before he
enterprise to come in. First he viewes the state of the man or woman, whether
he or she be returned to their old sins again. And as houses be the
habitations of men, so men themselves be often the devils houses, for this is
spoken by similitude and comparison.

But why should the devil call the soul of man or woman, his own house, or
rather he should say, I will enter into that house from whence I came. The
soul of man and woman by creation, is Gods image, but the image of the devil
is the deformation of all; he usurps the possession of the soul of man, it is
none of his by right. 1. Cor. 6.20. For the soul and the body is the temple of
God, and of his good spirit by right. 1. Cor. 6.13.15.19. How then have we by
sin, and the devil by his temptations, made them dens for thieves, and
Cages for unclean fowls. If a Gentlewoman of high estate, should match with a
vile and abject slave, although it did nothing concern us, would it not grieve
any of us to see it? so is the estate of thy soul, subject to the slavery of
the devil. Or if a man had married a rich beautiful and noble gentlewoman,
adorned with all gifts and graces, which may be devised to be in a woman: and
yet notwithstanding should so be sotted, and entangled with the love of some
foul and dishonest beggar, or servile maid of his house, as for her sake to
abandon the company and friendship of the said wife; to spend his time in
daliance and service of his base woman, to run, to go, to stand at her
appointment: to put all his living and revenues into her hand, for her to
consume and spoil at her pleasure, to deny her nothing, but to wait and serve
her at a ^eck and at her call; yea, and to compel his said wife to do the
same: would ye not think this man's life miserable and most servile? And surely
the servitude of our former sins, and the return of our former evil life, is
far more slavish and intolerable. For no woman, yea no creature in the world,
is, or can be of that beauty or nobility, as the grace of Gods spirit is, to
who^ man by his creation was espoused, and to who^ by forsaking his wicked
life, and by repentance he had yielded himself, which notwithstanding after a
while we see abandoned, contemned, and rejected, as though there had been no
such covenant made, and all for the love of sensuality, and his former wicked
delights, wherewith he is bewitched, which are utter enemies to the grace of
God, and as a most deformed creature in respect of reason. In whose love
notwithstanding, or rather servitude and senseless bondage, we see many so
overtaken and drowned, as that they serve their sensuality day and night, with
all pains, perils, and expenses, and do constrain also, even the good
motions of Gods spirit, to give place at every beck and commandment, of this
new mistres, or rather stepdame.

It is a grievous evil, to be nourished, and to grow up, and to be nusled in
sin. The child that is borne and bred up in a dark prison, makes the same
reckning of darkness, as other do of light; they that are borne slaves, and are
used thereunto, make little account of liberty; and they that know little of
heavenly and eternal matters, embrace the delights of the world, and the
filthiness of sin, vain and transitory things, for true and precious blessings,
which endure for ever, counting a banished land as welcome to them, as their
own country. So many of the Jews being bred and brought up in the bondage of
Aegipt, did not once so much as think of liberty. And out of such manner of
people, wholly given up to sin, when the devil once entered he never went out.
But when the good spirit of God has dispossessed him, and cast him out, by
hearing the word preached, and by causing us to harken and to obey good
counsel, and good exhortation, then he may say, I will return into my house
from whence I came, if so be that I may find it ready for my turn, and that
upon new remembrance I may claim new acquaintance. And behold a shame it is to
say it, and a sorrow it is to think of it, he finds the house swept and
garnished fit and ready prepared for him. Swept.
For a sinful soul is a swept house to him; and when the good spirit is
banished, and so honorable a guest has very slender and also vnreuerent
entertainment, the devil enters again as into his own possession, and
claims that house to be his own by law, which he has so good evidence to
show for. The neglect of Gods grace, is the devils chief delight, and they
that are destitute of Gods spirit, are fit to receive the devil. As for the
godly and the faithful, which are foundly and plentifully endued with Gods
grace and holy spirit, they are so well fenced and provided, that the devil can
find no hole, or the least chink to enter in at. The house swept and
garnished, is a similitude drawn from the use and custom of men, whose
chiefest delight is to have all things handsome and neat, when they are to
entertain their friends. But unto the devil it is nothing so, for beast-lines
is the beauty and trimmed house that he delights in, and nothing pleases him
but filthiness, the lewd liver, the drunken tossepot, that smells all of drink,
the abominable swearer, and bawdy talker, those are houses for him, and as a
princely palace. When we have bid farewell to God and godliness, then are we
fit for him, and those be his rooms of choice, when through the neglect of
Gods grace, all good qualities are banished, and when we are thus banished from
our selves. We prepare our house for God, by faith and repentance;
contrariwise provision is made for the devil, when we think not of Gods
judgments, and when the fear of God is choked and smothered up within us. Da.
13.9.

When he finds a man or woman polluted in sin, and defiled again, and
continuing in their former sins, whereof they have repented, this is the
house which is swept, and prepared for his coming, and in such sort as he would
wish to give him entertainment. It is not cleanlines, or hansomnes, or
sweeping, or garnishing, wherewith the devil is delighted; the reason is,
because he is an unclean spirit, and his delight is in uncleanness, and those
men and women that are most unclean, they are the only hoasts to entertain so
loathsome and so homely a guest. When the house is swept from all cleanenes,
from all godliness, honesty, and virtue, then is it swept as it should be for
him. This sweeping is well expressed in the Scripture, by two similitudes; the
first is, as when the Sow after washing has walowed in mire, and is all dirty,
then is she compared unto that clean soul, which the devil makes choice of;
the other similitude is, of the dog that is returned to his own vomit. 2.
Pet. 2.2.2.

Sweeping is not enough, paring with an iron instrument is more needful. The
former custom of sin, sticks hard in thy remembrance, and a simple and bare
confession of thy accustomed sin, which may be compared unto a slight
sweeping, is not of that force, but that thy old custom will bring in the devil
again, and give thy old Landlord his induction, into his new possession. Thou
had need therefore to pare it away with great sorrow and hearty repentance,
joining thereto all diligence and watchfulnes, against the same, and especially
and above the rest, craving Gods help and assistance, that thou may overcome
thy old evil custom. But deceive not thy self in thy negligence, when thou
do these things for a show and fashion, confessing thy sins in such sort
as though thou had some other business in hand, and in the mean time as one
that is careless, thou live content without fear, laying thy head upon thy
pillow. Whereby it comes to pass, that the devil being as it were invited
into the house of thy soul, through thy evil custom, makes have and looks
not for a second bidding. See therefore that thou pluck up thy evil weeds by
the root, and leave no show of the root thereof, in the ground of thy heart, if
it be possible, least it take sap and strength and grow up again. And that thou
may the better do this, practice that virtue which is contrary to thy vice,
which has so mightily entangled thee, as sobriety in steed of drukennes,
chastity in steed of whoredom, humility in steed of pride, love and charity
in steed of slander and evil report, liberality in steed of usury,
oppression, and extortion, and so in the like, giving heed thereunto with all
painfulnes, circumspection, and watchfulnes. For as the Ethiopian cannot
change his skin, nor the Leopard his spots, so some are wholly given to sin,
and can never return, because they will not. He that is used to wholesome meat,
cannot brook that which is unsavory; and the soldier that is accustomed to
eat horseflesh, after a while can away with it well enough. So before we are
given to a custom of sin, it seems ugly and loathsome, but when once we
are caught in the snare, and have given our selves thereunto, and have had a
pleasant taste thereof, then we drink it down, as though it were sweet wine,
and being once thus wedded, we are never purposed to be divorced and to break
off. Come counsel, come threatenings, come persuasions, come punishments,
afflictions, the displeasure of God, the shame of the world, a guilty
conscience, the fear of death and of hell, all is one. Iron twice hardened,
must needs be most durable. We are like the deaf Adder, which stops her
ears, and we will not be called, or if we be called, we will not be vvone,
charm the charmer never so vvisely. The sinner when he is fallen into the
depth of sin, then he despises all warnings, and sets very light by his
best friends. They regard not the grace of God, but receive it in vain, and
take as great delight in their sins as if they were possessed of heaven, and
with the sow, they altogether delight to wallow in the mire.

Secondly, it is said, that he found the house from whence he came, Empty:
empty. Mat. 12.44. After we have repented, we become idle, and lie open, even
as open as Noah, and as careless as Lot. Give no place to the devil, Ephesians. 4.
The idle give room enough, but they that are exercised in godly studies and
labors, the devil has no place there. The children of Dan took Lais, the
people being careless. David was enticed to adultery, being idle. Many seem
to labor, and to be busied in a thousand matters, as though they had not so
much leisure as to eat their meat, and yet their time is but idely spent,
because it is only in the affairs of this life, and not concerning that which
is to come; all for the body, and little or nothing for the soul. Luke. 10.42.
Little children in making their toys are marvelous busy, and we in these
worldly matters are too forward, and all to little purpose, because the care
of heavenly things is so much forgotten, or at leastwise so slenderly
regarded: being marvelous wise in our own conceit, while we understand
nothing. God would have the people of Israel to gather Manna, not to last a
week, or a year, but for every day. So must we cast of sloth, and labor
continually in the works of our vocation, until the sabbath of rest and of
glory come, so greatly desired of us, where then most happily, we shall enjoy
the fruit of all our labors. Revel. 14.13. and this especially, that by our
painful labors, in all godly sort, we have been kept from committing great
and many offenses, which otherwise we thight have fallen into, being preserved
by Gods grace, and made able to live in his fear, and in his service.

Thirdly, he finds it garnished.] A bed orderly made, does inuit us to lie
down, and a fair and hansome house, does provoke us to come in, and being
entered, there to make our stay and abode. The garnishing of the house is but an
accidental ornament, and the occasions of sin, are great inticements
thereunto. Therefore the Apostle wills us not only to refrain from sin,
but even to abstain from all appearance of evil. 1. These. 5.22. Moses would
not leave a hoof behind him. Occasions of sin must be avoided.
Exo. 10. and we must avoid every little occasion: for the occasions of sin,
are the ornaments of the house wherein the devil delights to dwell, the
occasions of sin, are the devils pledges, whereby he has an interest in us.
If thou have repented thee of thy whoredom, retain not thy whore, nor any
jewel or token of hers, whereby thy mind may be entangled to come into the
remembrance of her love: for that is the devils hook and snare, whereby he
minds to catch and entrap thee, and to lay sure hold on thee. The whore
keeps thy tokens, and presents them to thine eyes, to draw thee into her
love again. Leuit. 8. Not only the flesh of the heiffer, but his skin and
entrails, were cast out into an unclean place. Deuteronomy. 7. God commanded his
people to overthrow the Altars of the Cananites, to break their Images, to cut
down their groves, to burn all the ornaments of their Idols, that there might
no token of idolatry, nor any remembrance be left. Iehu took order, that all
Bals priests, every mother son should be slain. Exo. 33. Moses made the
people to drink up the ashes of their golden Calfe.

Many retain the love of the world, and the relics of sin, and are very
loath, nay they will not leave them at all; their ancient evil custom
remains, whereby it comes to pass, that miserably they fall, into the
manifold inconveniences and great dangers of their former sins. He that
flies not occasions, cannot avoid sin, and he that loves danger, shall
perrish therein. This is that which our Savior Christ warns. Mat, 18.9. It
is better to enter into the kingdom of heaven halt and lame, then having two
hands, or two feet, to be sent into hell fire. God commanded King Saul to
destroy Amalec, and to spare no living creature that was in his land, but he
saved Agag the king of the Amalekites alive, and spared the Oxen and sheep
alive, and therefore was he cast out of his kingdom, and came to a miserable
end. 1. Sam. 15. Why did God command the oxen and sheep to be slain? they
were harmless creatures. The reason is, because they were the goods of those
that were evil, and served for their use. So must we kill and extinguish not
only sin, but the occasions of sin, that serve thereunto, and that draw us
to the same, and by fresh rem^brance provoke us to the performance thereof.
King David prayed god that he would remove from him the way of iniquity. And
Psalm. 1. he pronounces him blessed, that has not stood in the way of sinners.
And Solomon in his proverbs, chap. 4.14. gives a charge, Enter not into the
way of the wicked, and walk not in the way of evil men: avoid it and go not
by, turn from it, and pass by.

A holy Father, S. Ambrose, does well note the prophets speech, in that he
rather says, Remove the way of iniquity, then remove the iniquity it self:
and because many should have avoided the sin it self, if they had not entered
into the way thereof. We read not of any great sin, that wise king Solomon
committed, beside the multitude of his wives, and his idolatry, for the which
his posterity was deprived of the greatest part of his kingdom. But surdy he
had never fallen into idolatry, if he had avoided the occasions thereof, and
withstoode the bewitching temptations of his idolatrous wives. He married
outlandish wives, of idolatrous Nations, and as he doted upon the women, so he
could not avoid their strange inticements. The occasions were so great
inforcements thereunto, that his wisdom could not prevent it. Which occasions
had they not been so forcible. God would never have given that forwarning as
he did in his law. Deuteronomy. 7.17. Neither shall he take him many wives, least his
heart turn away (from the law of GOD,) 1. Kings. 11.4. Not only the King, but
the people also were debarred from marrying with idolatrous nations, least
they should entice them to idolatry, as the daughters of Moab, by this means
brought them to their shame. Numb. 25.1.2. and were the death of three and
twenty thousand of the Israelites. 1. Cor. 10.8.

Then goes he, and takes to him seven spirits worse then himself.] The
devils cruelty.
The second thing in his woeful return, was his cruelty, seeking the utter
destruction of him whom he recouereth, and has drawn into his snares. And
how should not he be utterly destroyed, which has so great a company to come
against him. Who when he had enough, and more then he could do, of himself
to be delivered but of one unclean spirit, in what distress and lamentable
estate shall he be, when seven such unclean spirits enter possession within
him, and seven worse then the former?

The number of seven, is taken for an uncertain number, for he brings many
more, and sometimes a whole legion come together. These spirits are worse then
him self, because the latter sins are far worse then the former. This is a
foul blotte of ingratitude in him or her, that falls once and twice, and
again and often into his former iniquities, which he has by Gods grace so
greatly detested: yea, and vowed the contrary.

But as no man pittieth him who has taken loss upon the seas, if he
adventure again, and suffer shypwracke, being in a manner brought to utter
poverty before: so none lightly will have compassion on them, who are now
cast away through their own folly and negligence, and whom no warning will
serve to take heed of their future miseries.

Thus being justly forsaken of all pity and compassion, the devil he will
be sure to show them none. But as GOD and the Angels of heaven delight at the
salvation of a finner, so the devil rejoices at nothing more then at their
destruction: for this is his booty and his pray, and his chiefest triumph.

A^ nothing delights God so much as mercy, so nothing delights the devil
so much as cruelty. And to show forth his cruel disposition and nature
herein, he is well resembled to the most cruel beasts that are. As to a
Dragon. Revel. 13. that great Dragon, to a Serpent, whose poison and sting is
most deadly, Gene. 3. To a roaring Lion, who with open mouth seeks to
devour. 1. Pet. 5.8. He knows that himself alone, is able to work the
destruction of any whom God forsakes, but he thinks he cannot sufficiently
perform his rage and fury, unless he bring company enough, as though he
should make an end and consume the sinner all at once.

His chiefest mischief is in accusing us before God; he tempts us to sin,
and when we have committed it, he leaves us to our selves, and to Gods
displeasure, looking still for our final destruction; which if we be not made
pertakers of Gods mercy, shall then appear, when the soul parts from the
body, and when it shall be brought to the tribunal seat of Gods judgment,
there to give account. 2. Cor. 5. Reu. 13.10.

And they enter in and dwell there.] And. etc.
They that are fallne from the grace of God, are twice more subject to the
devils rage ^^en they were before, and now he has greater liberty then ever
he had, and takes more surer hold: So that it is in a manner impossible to
throw him out; but if we may obtain that he may be thrown out, yet does he
leave behind him seven worse then himself. This shall prove to be a just
punishment for our negligence, and God gives them up to satan's cruelty, who
thus deserve to be forsaken. The devil is said to dwell in our soul, when he
enters therein by his most powerful temptations: wherefore, let them that are
once cleansed, delivered and freed from him, consider what manner of guest they
were troubled withal, and also how crafty a companion he is, which knows
our frailties, how and which way to creep within us, and to recover a second
possession. And if the way do not lie manifestly open for him, he is not to
learn how to undermine us. Let us endeavor therefore that Christ may reign
within us by his holy Spirit, that so all passages may be stopped, and that the
devil may not enter, nor get any holdfast of us. For let his assaults be
never so fierce, and his craft and subtlety never so secret and undermining,
ye^^^n he not prevail against the godly, whom Gods grace does always keep
in safety. And we know that this heavy punishment is denounced, and also
reserved to the contemners of Gods grace, whose minds being utterly darkened,
and all care of godliness being trod under foot, do wexe more profane then
Infidels and heathens.

So the last state of that man, is worse then the first.] This is the woeful
state of that man or woman, who forgetting God and themselves, have yielded
themselves captives to the devils slavery. And this falls out true, according
to Christ his words, which he sapke to the man that had been diseased eight
and thirty years, and now had been recovered, Ioh. 5.14. Sin no more,
least a worse thing come unto thee. Sin no more so notoriously or so
presumptuously: for in one sin God may take thee and punish thee for all, and
take heed least thou be plagued with some strange punishment, as was threatened
to the Israelites. Leu. 26.18. that they should be punished seven times more,
according to their sins. Deu. 28.59. The Lord will make thy plagues
wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed, even great plagues, and of long
continuance, and sore diseases, and of long durance. Moreover, he will bring
upon thee all the diseases of Egypt, whereof thou wast afraid, and they shall
cleave unto thee. The like in a manner has the prophet David. Psalm. 68.21. God
shall wound the head of his enemies, and the hairie scalpe of such a one, as
goes on still in his wickedness. Sin no more, thy former sins were blotted
out of Gods remembrance through thy repentance, why will thou set thy sins
again before God, and renew the remembrance of them, that thou may be
punished for the new and the old together. Hebr. 3.12. Let us take heed, least
there be in any of us, an evil heart and unfaithful, to depart away from the
living God, and great need we have to exhort one another daily, least we
should be hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin, and so be utterly debarred
from entering into Gods rest. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of
GOD; for he is a consuming fire. Hebr. 12.29. For if we finne willingly and
resolutelie, after God has granted us his grace, and if we extinguish the
same utterly, there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a fearful
looking for of judgment, accompanied with the distrust of Gods mercy, and with
the trembling forethought of eternal condemnation; being continually vexed
with the torment of an evil conscience, to be ready to fall into despair
every hour. 1. Tim. 1.9. A worse thing shall fall upon thee, not only in
regard of worldly punishments, but of everlasting torments. If we incline unto
wickedness with our heart, the Lord will not hear us. Psalm. 66.16. and Psalm.
125.5. Yea, as for such as turn back unto their own wickedness, the Lord shall
lead them forth with evil dooers. Reu. 22.14.15. Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall
be turned into hell, and all the people that forget GOD.

How miserable this estate is, it might be amplified by setting down what our
first estate is by creation, and what we are by nature, even the children of
Gods wrath and displeasure. Ephesians. 2. How we have been helped by grace, and now
fallne away by wilful negligence, and being hardened every day more and more
in sin, do grow to a desperate resolution. Most needful therefore is the
counsel of the Apostle, 1. These. 5. as we are willed to rejoice euer-more,
because God has done so great things for us, as to deliver us from the
unclean Spirit, and that God by his goodness, Psalm. 51.10. has made us a
clean heart, and renewed a right spirit within us; so to pray continually for
Gods grace, that we may not be overthrown: for of our selves we are not able
to stand. Let us for this and all other Gods benefits, be still mindful to
give thanks, and especially we are to take heed, that we do not extinguish
the good spirit of God, and quench the force thereof, which is the lively and
vital spirit of the soul.

Second falls there are of infirmity, Falls.
the which the godly are sorry for, and rise again by repentance and
amendment; and second falls there are of resolution, with the delight of
former sin and wickedness, in that man or woman whose heart is now wholly
separated from God, and shall never rise again. That sick man that has
recovered his health, and falls into his sickness again, the strength of his
sickness is greater, because the power of his nature is weaker: so the second
time of our falling, the devil takes more hold, and more advantage, and we
prove to be more weak to resist, partly through the guiltiness of our
conscience condemning us, and our sinful nature drawing us, and betraying us
more and more. Ecclus. 34.26.27. He that washes himself, because of a dead
body, and touches it again, what avails his washing: So is it with a man
that fasteth for his sins, and commits them again, who will hear his
prayer, or what does his fasting help him? We cannot know how far worse the
latter sins are then the former, until we know how bad the former are. The
former deserve the displeasure of God, and the losle of his fanour; and surely
the second deserve the loss of everlasting life, and eternal punishments in
hell. When we forsake God, and prefer sin before his service, and before a
holy life, then he leaves us to our selves, and departs from us. And as in
his presence is the fulness of all joys, so in his absence is the misery and
distress of all vvoes.

If thou should take into thy house a dishonest, foul, and sluttish woman,
and set her at the upper end of thy table, and command thy wife to serve and
to wait how would she, bear this reproachful injury? Would she not rightly
complain on thee, and had she not just cause to forsake thee and thine house?
Jacob departed from Laban, because his countenance was changed toward him.
When God has left our soul, all the devils and all the creatures rise up
against it, being left desolate, void, and forsaken of Gods help and direction.
Psalm. 3.2. According to that in the psalm, God has forsaken him, persecute and
take him, because there is none to deliver him. Therefore the prophet prays.
Psalm. 51.11. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit
from me. When the King leaves his Court, all go with him, and when God
departs from the soul, all his blessings go after, neither do they stay
behind. As if they should say, God is not in this place, in this man, or this
woman, therefore let us depart hence and be gone.

Ezech. 3.20. If a righteous man turn from his righteousness, and commit
iniquity, I will lay a stumbling block before him, and he shall die. He that
has gone the right way, and has turned back with resolution, or upon
presumption, I will give him up into a reprobate mind. Again, chap. 18.24. If
the righteous turn away from his righteousness and commit iniquity, and do
according to all the abhorninations that the wicked man does, shall he hue? All
his righteousness that he has done, shall not be mentioned, but in his
transgression that he has committed, and in his sin that he has sinned, in
them shall he die. Were it not great folly in that man, which had brought
great treasure from a far country, with his own danger and hazard, that he
should venture all at the throw of a Die, which he has labored so painfully
for: and shall we, for a little pleasure of sin, lose all the hope of a
virtuous life, and run into so great danger as may follow there-after? Yea,
we shall show our selves far more mad, for he that has lost his treasure,
may undertake the journey, and bring as much more again. But the presumptuous
sinner, GOD forsakes him, and sildome or never does help him. The devil
tempts, man consents and obeys, and God forsakes. Such a one shall be like
unto Lots wife, that was turned into a pillar of salt, and the earth which is
sowed with salt, can bring forth no fruit. Of turning of Lots wife into salt,
Master Doctor Babington writes very effectually in his comfortable notes on
Genesis, to this present purpose. When Zedekiah was taken, his eyes were put
out, and he was led into captivity; so when the devil takes us the second
time, he blinds the eyes of our mind, and keeps us in continual bondage,
until the time do come, that he may thrust us into hell. That ship which is
without a guide, goes not where it were best, but where the tempest enforces
it: So that man or woman which is destitute of Gods grace, does not that which
is meet and convenient, but that which the devil tempts the^ unto, leading
them along, with sweet and sugared baits. If one only offense of our first
parents, brought so great mischief unto all mankind, how much more dangerous
shall our manifold, and daily, and heinous offenses be. The light of nature
does show unto us, the dishonesty and shame of sin, because it makes us to be
noted and pointed at. For this cause we hide our selves, and would not be seen
or known, perceauing well, how great honor and credit we loose by sin, and
that thereby we fall into public disgrace and discredit.

I let pass the woeful punishment after this life, and think good to make
mention of those griping sorrows, wherewith an evil conscience is tormented
in this life. First, End.
the end of sin is doleful, and has such a sting with it, The sting of
conscience.
that it oftentimes brings despair unto the party, that for want of Gods
grace and true repentance, grounded upon the promises of Gods sweet and
everlasting mercies, they become the lamentable executioners of themselves.
The sting of thy conscience is a sharp thorn, and as a dagger to stab thee at
the heart. The sound of fear is always in thy ears, and when thou think of
peace, the^ treason is toward thee, and when thy body would take rest, thy
restless mind will suffer no sleep. When Ammon defiled his sister, his
conscience abhorred the deed, and his sister was loathsome unto him. Judas the
Traitor, when he had sold his Master, his guilty conscience never rested,
until it had brought his damned body to a shameful death. Shame.
The second torment of a guilty conscience, is vvorldly shame. That woman that
has a spotte in her face, is always desirous to hide it, but being beautiful
and fair, she rejoices to be seen. Adam gets Fig leaves to cover his
shame, and afterward hides himself out of sight. David would hide his
adultery, by sending for Vriah home to his house, that he might take her home
unto him, and lie with her, and to this intent he sends him delicate fare,
to provoke him to lust, all which when he refused, and nothing would serve, he
sent him into the war to be slain.

The third torment of an evil conscience, Fear of punishment.
is the restless fear of punishment in the world to come, which the
distrustful mind, by the light of reason, and guilt of sin, and the
threatenings of Gods law does forecast; so that we need not either Scripture
to prove it, or faith to perwade it, seeing that GOD is a just Judge, and
sends punishments in this world, as forerunners of the punishments in the
world to come. The wicked man is always fearful and distrustful, and leads
a life without comfort. He flies when no man pursues him, Pro. 28. The thief
flies at every least suspicion. The Viper is not killed with his own poison,
but sin destroys that conscience, wherein it enhabiteth, it ray seth up
fears, and provoke to despair.

The last state of that man that is fallen into sin again, not so much of
infirmity, as of delight and purpose, The last state worse in three respects.
and continuance in sin, is worse then the first in three respects. First, in
respect of the devil. Secondly, in respect of the sinner himself: and
thirdly, In respect of the devil.
in respect of God. In respect of the devil, because he handles him more
cruelly, and watches him more narrowly, giving him no liberty, nor scope to
escape. The laylour fearing not his prisoner, gives him some liberty, but if
he escape and return again, he lays on double fetters, looking to him day
and night, least either he should file his irons in sunder, or break prison.
In like case, the devil having us within his compass he takes little thought
and care, persuading himself that we are sure enough: Well, by Gods help and
by his grace and goodness we escape his hands, we are freed from his thraldom,
and set him at defiance, and find in our selves, a marvelous readiness and
cheerefulnes thereunto. But if thou be so unhappy, as to fall into his
thraldom again, then is thy second misery worse then the first; then will he
lay on load of irons, and watch every instant, and at every turn. Where,
before he offered thee a few temptations, he will now practice a thousand ways,
he will lay many stumbling blocks before thee, and shut up all passages, and
keep thee very straightly. For if the company of the godly, were the means to
deliver thee out of his prison, and so rescue thee, he will so provide, that
thou shall shun, yea by little and little hate their company, and so will he
harden thy heart, against all good counsel and persuasions. If preaching of
the word did withdraw thy heart from him, and win thee unto God, now will he
have dainty devices of pleasures, and worldly baits enough, that thou shall not
be able to escape his hook: And by these means will he shut up all passages;
and the Castle being taken again, he will set a stronger garrison, and bring
with him seven other spirits, worse then himself, who after they have entered,
will dwell there, and make their continual aboade.

Secondly, in respect of the sinner himself, In respect of the sinner.
his last state shall be worse then the first. He will grow from worse to
worse, until there be no recovery: the second disgrace will make him contemn
all good means, and bring him to be past shame. Like unto the man that has
the disease of the Lethargy, whom neither talk, nor striking, nor pinching,
shall keep waking. The sinner falling into the depth of sin, contemns all
good persuasions, counsels, and godly inspirations. Proverb. 18. And his heart
is become like the face of a harlot, that cannot blush, his heart will not
relent, neither is there any remorce. Iere. 3. And then who will go about to
wash the black Moore, and to make his skin white, and who will come near that
Sow, which is nothing else but all dirt over.

Thirdly, in respect of God, the last state of the sinner is worse then the
first. In respect of God.
Because that sinner is so much the more left of God, who returns to his
former sins again, like the dog to his vomit, and God does take the less
care about his salvation. The Physician that has healed the sick body, gives
him a charge, and prescribes an order of diet, wills him to avoid gross
meats, marrish fowls, fish, and other hurtful meats, which may impair his
health. But the Physician being out of sight, if he follow his hurtful
appetite, and fall into his sickness again, the Physician being sent for, is
loath to meddle with him, and gives him up to himself, and makes him an
answer of denial, leaves him as one despairing of his health, seeing him so
careless and so witless, that he cannot tell what is good for himself, and
whom no counsel can make to beware, and to look to himself. Even so God
deals with that sinner, that having been often pardoned, and often cleansed,
yet will run headlong into his former sins again, he then leaves him to
himself; and whom God forsakes, the devil lies in wait for, as the Woolfe
deuoureth that sheep which is without a Sheep-heard. Therefore the Lord
speaks justly by his Prophet Jeremy. chap. 51. We would have cured Babell,
but she would not be healed: let us leave her therefore, and come out of her,
least ye be pertakers of her sins and of her punishments. And of Jerusalem the
Lord says, Iere. 15. Who will take pity on Jerusalem, and who will pray for her
peace; thou have left me says the Lord, and have gone backward. As if he had
said, I will heal thy malady no more. Pharaoh had diverse plagues to heal him,
but he continued in his stubbernes. God left him for the multitude of his sins;
for God denies to such sinners, not only his effectual help and the power of
his holy spirit to their conversion, but all other helps also, whereby other
sinners are allured unto repentance.

King Saul offended God greatly, he was pardoned, and had a fair warning, and
least he should offend again, he had an especial commandment, but he fell
afterward in such sort, that falling from God, he never recovered again,
neither returned into favor. The sons of Ely were not obedient unto the
voice of their Father, the reason is added, because the Lord would destroy them
for their manifold sins, and that they were past amendment. And though
Moses, Noah, and Samuel, should pray for such people, the Lord would not hear
them, neither would he be entreated in their behalf.

Now for a restoratiue in this woeful case, A restoratiue in second falls.
this may be added, that no man or woman despair, if they be not utterly past
grace, though they fall again, seeing there is a difference, betwixt a
resolute determination in sin, and a repentant mind, which is heartily sorry
for every fall and offense.

Gods mercy does oftentimes cast out the devil, that he cannot have any
quiet possession, and wandering in dry places, and being in his sorrowful
banishment, he is still busy with us, to give him entertainment again. Which
we do, as often as by sin we quench Gods spirit in us, and have not that
reverent, and due, and weighty consideration of Gods grace, as we ought to
have. He that has been sick and newly recovered, unless he take great heed
he falls into his sickness again: So we being newly cleansed from our sin,
through our negligence and carelessness fall many ways into it again. First,
because we think our selves whole and sound, and upon a sudden are cast down
again. Again, though sin be for a while banished, it is not clean rooted
out, for relics remain, and such sparkles which will kindle flames. We are
sleepy, and the devil is too watchful; the spirit is weak, and the lusts of
the flesh too powerful. The Israelites delivered out of Aegipt, had the
Philistimes to molest them, and the devil by his temptations, and the world by
evil counsel, and evil example, are always at our elbowes, to trip us and to
give us a fall. The sick man being newly recovered, must com to his strength by
dainty meats, and he that is newly recovered from sin, must seek after
heavenly food, to make his soul strong, as often prayer, hearing Sermons,
reading of good books, and frequenting good company, harkning to good
counsel, and by all means to avoid the occasions of his former downfall. Let
him not presume of his strength, nor think himself too sound, diverse
occasions may make him fall again. Still let him suspect the worst, and fear
a fall; for he that will resist the devil, must still stand armed. The body
is kept in health by labor and exercise, and the soul if it will continue in
a happy estate, must not only avoid all evil works, to the best of our
power; but we must endeavor to practice all good works, and so shall we make
our foundation so sure, that nothing shall ouer-throw us. And this shall be
unto us, in steed of walls of brass, to keep out the fiery darts, and
fierce assaults of the devil. So shall we continue in that state, wherein
GOD by his mercy has set us free. Otherwise, if we be careless and
negligent, and sliding into our forme^ sins, if the devil take new
possession, after he has been thrown out, and so throw us out of Gods
favor, and remove us from our happiness, wherein we were newly placed; Surely
it may be well said of us, the last state of that man shall be worse then the
first. Our great inconstancy, and weak frailty, and vile corruption, and most
infected dispotions, does herein show them selves, in that solemnly professing
our repentance for any bad behavior, and vowing to the Lord, and with our
selves, that no more we will do so, yet contrary both to promise and to
purpose, we fall again, into the self same offense and sin. And if the
Lord should never receive us again, after such a transgression, we had but
what justly and greatly we deserved. Yet Gods mercy is more, not to embolden
any to wickedness and impiety, but to comfort them that are inwardly grieved,
with their great frailties. Wherefore, with desire to stand, and all possible
endeavor against such second falls, let us hear yet what the Lord says, if in
our great weakness we do fall, I mean into the same offense again after
repentance. For we see the prophets in every place exhort men to repentance,
not which had once offended, but which with an obstinate contempt of God, had
not stayed to run into all kind of wickedness, and which after a show of
repentance, yet returned to their sinful course again, the prophet Jeremy of
all other is full of places, if you list to read any. Again, the Lord in his
law, would have daily sacrifices offered, sometime in the name of the whole
people, sometime in the name of a private person, as well for offenses committed
by ignorance, as for voluntary transgressions and falls, which assuredly should
not have been done, except there had been mercy even for second falls. For the
Lord would not deceive his people with vain figures. In the 78. Psalm, we very
plainly see, that God was entreated to forgive most hipocriticall and obstinate
sins. And now in the time of his Gospel, his goodness is not straited or
deminished, but even now also more plainly it is proclaimed to the world, that
at what time so ever a sinner sorroweth from his heart, there is pardon with the
Lord, without exception against often committing of the same offense. When the
Lord inioyneth us to forgive our brethren seauenty times feauen times, does he
mean new offenses only, such as they never committed against us before; or he
means all whatsoever, or how often so ever, fallen into to by their frailty.
And if so, does he require more mercy of man, then he the God of mercy will
show; or shall the creature excel the Creator in any goodness? God forbid. See
it therefore, and be with comfort most assured of it, that if we sin, not
seven times, but seauenty times seven times against his Majesty, and even in
the same thing, and so often with weeping eyes and sobbing soul, fall at his
feet for mercy, for so great frailty, there is mercy with him, and pardon to
true repentance.

But take heed we turn not the grace of God into wantonness and presumption.
Beware presumption.
For if I seek and suck out loosenes and liberty out of this doctrine, be sure
I savor it to death and not unto life. And what know I, whether ever I shall
have grace truly to repent, what so boldly and presumptuously I have dared to
commit. When the Apostle says, If any man sin, we have an advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins;
do ye think we may tie this, to only such sins, as were never committed
before, without a very plain and great injury to that place of Scripture? No,
no, we cannot, and therefore a true ground of comfort, even for sins often
fallen into, so that frailty, and not loosenes be the cause. Read the ninth of
Daniel, and see if he confess not sin often committed, and as it were in a
continued course, and yet despaireth not of mercy. What means that article of
our faith, I believe the forgiveness of sins? shall we gloss upon it thus, that
is of such sins as I never committed but once. Surely if we do, it must be
said, cursed be the gloss that corrupts the text. For that article comprizeth
all sin, before baptism, and after baptism, before repentance, and after
repentance, ever through the course of my life, in this world whatsoever it is,
how often so ever I have slided into it through frailty; yet God giving me true
repentance for it, I believe the forgiveness of it. Yea, it is that spiritual
comfort, that cannot be spoken of sufficiently, neither can we enter into the
depth or height thereof; to wit, that GOD would have his children, so sure of
the pardon of their sins, even of all their sins, without exception: whereof
he gives them a dislike, and true abborring, as that he would have it an
article of their faith, so that they should not be sound Christians, if they
believed it not. Lastly, even the petition in the Lords prayer, craning daily
forgiveness of daily trespasses, dare you restaine it, to trespasses committed
only before repentance, and exempt all second falls, after such repentance and
purpose to amend, the Lord forbid. And therefore take it also with the former,
as a sure proof of pardon also, for these offenses. Only let me admonish
you, which I cannot too often speak of; beware presumption, beware loosenes,
beware negligence, and have due care to avoid these second falls. And say not
God is merciful, and therefore I will sin, To 6.1. For as he is gracious to a
sorrowful sinner, so is he dreadful to a presumptuous offender; and frailty
shall find mercy, when boldness shall find judgment and wrath for ever.

The godly, although they fall through the infirmity and weakness of the flesh,
yet they do not give their consent to sin, but by mourning strive against it,
being sorry they cannot have the better hand, being ashamed of themselves. So
that they may truly say with the Apostle, To. 7. The evil which I would not
do, that do I.

And if Manasses, after so many abominations found favor with God, as his
effectual prayer does testify, why should the godly mind be cast away in
despair. And though it seem somewhat impertinent to this purpose, let us
behold the estate of King Solomon, being so rarely endued with wisdom, and
the knowledge of Gods service, yet fell away by idolatry; of whom some doubt
whether he were condemned. Yet that it was not so, these reasons briefly set
down, Reasons to prove why Solomon was not condemned.
may persuade us. First, that he was a figure of Christ. Secondly, considering
his most excellent prayer, which he made at the dedication of the temple, a
note of Gods spirit inhabiting in him, which also did worthily show it self in
his most rare wisdom. Thirdly, for his repentance, testified in his book
called Ecclesiastes. Fourthly, because God loved him. 2. Sa. 12.24. As it is
said of Esau and Jacob, God hated the one, and loved the other, To. 9.13. and
whom God loves he loves to the end. Ioh. 13, 1. Also the gifts and calling of
God are without repentance, To. 11.29. Fifthly, for Gods promise. Ps. 89. My
mercy will I keep for him for evermore, my loving kindness will I not take from
him. My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my
lips.

No reason therefore there is, for any of us to despair of Gods grace and
goodness, if there be any spark of grace left within us; in the mean time let
us take heed, that we quench not the spirit, and bring sorrow to our selves,
and danger to our souls. Howbeit, the most bad nature of mankind is such, and
we become such grievous offenders, and so careless with all of our own
salvation, and so wholly given up to the world, and to the vanities and
pleasures thereof, that unless the Lord by his surpassing and wonderful mercy,
should turn us unto repentance, by more great vehement, and weighty helps of
his grace, then commonly are to be seen, and more mightily and graciously
should mollify our hard and stony hearts, and break and tame our evil
dispositions, and bring under our froward and stubborn wills, to the obedience
of his most holy will, surely we should never continue in a good course, but
fall away from God, and from our own salvation.

Seeing therefore it is so hard to be wone to God, let us take heed how we
fall away from God; and if we have offended and be forgiven, and often
forgiven, let us remember the warning Christ gave to the woman taken in
adultery, Go thy ways and sin no more. Shimei that cursed David, and had
his pardon granted him, on that condition he should not go out of Jerusalem,
forgetting his promise, that stood upon so weighty a condition, as the hazard
of his life, through a small occasion, for covetousness to recover his servant
that was gone from him, lost his life, without any more favor or hope of
mercy. At which time also his former wickedne^s was brought to his remembrance,
and his punishment pronounced to be so much the iuster for that. So let us lay
this example to our heart, and take heed of the least occasions of sin, least
after we have repented and vowed amendment, we be taken tardy in our own
negligence and forgetfulness, and all our former wickedness laid to our charge,
and no favor and mercy any more to be granted. Remember Lots wife, 2. Pet.
2.19. For of whom soever a man is overcome, even unto the same is he in bondage.

And if we, after we have escaped from the filthiness of the world, through
the knowledge of the Lord, and of our Savior Jesus Christ, are yet entangled
again therein, and overcome, our latter end shall be worse then our beginning.
psalm. 125.5. The Lord will be good to those that are true of heart; and as for
such as turn back unto their own wickedness, the Lord will lead them forth
with the evil dooers. If any withdraw himself, says the Lord, my soul
shall have no pleasure in him. Let us often remember that warning, with due
consideration, which I have already spoken unto you of; Sin no more, least a
worse thing come unto thee. 2. Cor. 2.11. Beware of often sliding, Gen 38, 26,
Psalm, 68, 21, and 66, 16, Wisd. 1.2. to 6.
and especially let us take heed that we add not sin unto sin, least we meet
with that worse thing, that is, least we die in our sin, and be damned for
ever. 2. Pet. 3.17. Ye therefore beloved, seeing ye know these things before,
beware, least ye be also plucked away, with the evil conversation of the
wicked, and fall from your own stedfastnes. But grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: to whom be glory both now and
for evermore. Amen.

Deo soli omnis laus sit, et gloria, et gratia in secula.
Of the Prodigal Son.
LVKE. 15.11. He said moreover, A certain man had two sons: And the younger
of them said to his Father: Father, give me the portion of the goods, that
falls to me. So he divided to them his substance. etc.
AFter that the unclean spirit was driven out of the prodigal son, and that
he had left his lewd life, he returned not to his own evil custom again,
neither did he give the devil a second entrance. We read not that David, Mary
Magdalen, and Peter, sinned any more, as they had done. For why, the
remembrance of their former sins, made them more watchful and wary. 2. Cor.
2.11. Genesis 38.26.

This parable does lively represent unto us, our excellent, our decayed, and
our restored estate. Our excellent estate in Adam, in whom our patrimony was
given us, in most large and liberal sort, we being endued with holiness and
righteousness, being created after the image of God, being furnished and
adorned with all heavenly gifts and graces, and being furthered with all
temporal blessings, fit and convenient for this life. Our decayed estate,
through his wilful disobedience and manifold offenses, through our original
corruption and actual deprauation, our evil inclinations, and our disordered
life, behavior, and conversation. Our restored estate, in our conversion to
GOD, in true and unfeigned repentance, in a holy life, and godly obedience, as
also especially in Gods great bountifulnes and mercy, in calling us, in giving
us repentance, mollifying our hard hearts by his heavenly grace, and by his
word instructing us daily, in the course of godliness, and especially by his
powerful working in us, framing us thereunto, and inabling us to perform what
soever is agreeable to his holy will and law, whereby we are daily more and
more acceptable unto him.

Again, it shows us, what we are, being left unto our selves: how easily
we are given to fall away from GOD. Nothing does sooner bring us to the
knowledge of God and of our selves, then our own rod and misery. Furthermore,
we see the happy estate of affliction, in that it is a mean to bring us to
repentance, and to the favor of GOD. Lastly, here appears Gods great
bountifulnes and infinite mercy toward sinners, waiting for our repentance,
and rejoicing at our conversion, and being more ready to forgive then we to
ask pardon. Wherein this is a great comfort unto us, that the infinite
multitude of sins cannot remove his mercy from us. But to follow the text
more naturally, and in such order as it is laid down before us, let us
consider these observations.

First, that having received his patrimony, he went from his fathers house.

Secondly not only from his fathers house, but into a far country.

Thirdly, what he did there. He spent his patrimony riotously and wastfully.

Fourthly, what insued in those days. There followed a famine.

Fiftlie, the miserable estate of a sinner, under the condition of the prodigal
son, feeding swine.

Sixthly, the effectual conversion of a sinner, and where-hence it proceeds,
namely from affliction, and the knowledge and feeling of his own misery.
Seventhly, how Christ is our present Advocate, in our distress and misery,
when we call upon him, earnestly and unfeignedly, and in truth and sincerity.
Because through the humble sure of Christ, the prodigal son obtained mercy.
Eyghtly, the infinite mercy of GOD, which is not overcome by the multitude of
our sins, to remove all despair. Ninthly, the great solemnity that God and
all the holy Angels do make, at the conversion of a sinner. Lastly, an
encouragement to them that live well, that they may continue in well doing,
and be godly still. As also an instruction to them, not to murmr at Gods
works, but rather to reverence them, and to rejoice that it has pleased him to
deal so graciously with sinners, and to call them home that went so far
astray. Whereby we are further taught, not rashly to judge of any, but to
hope the best, and in charity to pray for their amendment.

There is no parable in the gospel more full of comfort and consolation.
Whereby I am persuaded, that there is no such grievous sinner, nor heinous
offender, which would not turn unto God, if he consider in this example gods
goodness and bou^tifulnes, and the entire love of so merciful a Father, which
of his own gracious accord, went out to meet his prodigal son, and to
receive him without any show of denial; contrary to the custom of earthly
Fathers, which fret and fume, and are hardly drawn to such mercy. How kindly
does he embrace him, array him, put a ring on his finger, kill the fatted calfe
for him, make merry and rejoice for him. And how far of he was from casting
in his teeth, his former evil life, that he makes no mention thereof, but
rather finds fault with the elder brother that repined thereat, seeking to
satis-fie and appease him.

The younger son, not in age but in manners, not in years, but in want of
wisdom, whereby he is the more easily inclined, and drawn unto bad ways.
Some aged men, are but young in their words, gesture, and conversation: and
these the prophet Esaias, 65. calls young men of an hundred years old. Some
are young men concerning their time, and yet are aged men in good behavior, as
Joseph, David, Samuel, Daniell, John Baptist. According to that the Lord said
unto Moses, Numb. 11. Gather unto me seventy men, whom thou know to be
ancient in discretion, given to be virtuous and godly, and well disposed.

The foolishnes and lightness of a sinner is here set forth, in that he is
termed a young man. For, for the most part they know but little, and have
experience but of a few matters, they are unskillful in their own affairs,
and stand in great need of counsel.

If this prodigal Son, left his Fathers house, Foolishnes.
and sought his own decay and destruction, it was through his own folly,
wherewith he was ouer-ruled, and headlong carried away. As forecast is more
worth then great maintenance: so is wisdom the disposer and the continuer of
great wealth. Children consider no more then that which is before their eyes,
neither do they forecast things to come. Deuteronomy. 32. O that they were wise,
then would they understand this, they would consider their latter end. And our
Savior Christ says, Luke. 19. O that they had known the time of their
visitation, at the least in this their day. The Apostle Saint Paul wishes
every where unto the faithful, that they be filled with the knowledge of God.
For it is no marvel, if God be forsaken of them to whom he is not known,
which neither hear the word of God, nor have it, nor make any care or regard
thereof.

The prodigal son understood not the great blessings that were in his
Fathers house, but afterward affliction gave him to understand, when he felt
the want thereof. So we leave God and fall into sin, Blindness.
because we know not the mischiefs that flow from thence. Were it not that the
Hawks eyes were hid, and his feet tied, he would mount aloft into the
skies: so if the eyes of our mind were not blinded with worldly pleasures and
vanities, we should sure be lifted up with heavenly thoughts, to despise these
earthly delights. For all the commodities and pleasures of this life, have but
a short time of continuance, Phil. 3. Sinners continuing in their sinful race,
are inwardly blinded, that they cannot see the light of God, nor find the way
to come out of their loathsome darkness. For although there be many sins, some
of weakness, and some of malice, yet ignorance is the root of all. For when we
know not whether there be a God or a devil, heaven or hell, joys or torments,
no marvel if we wilfully run into all wickedness. All which, if the
sinner did well know and believe, he would not so easily offend as he does,
at leastwise he would not fall into so many and so great and dangerous sins
as he does, and that daily.

No man sins, but he that sees not what he loses by sinning. Therefore
let us pray with the prophet. psalm. 12. Lord lighten mine eyes, that I fall
not in death. And psalm. 118. Give me understanding, and I will search thy
law, yea I will keep it with my whole heart. Let us desire true knowledge, that
we do not leave GOD, that we may remain with him, and be in his house, be
content to be ruled by him, and keep his commandments.

Not only ignorance of Gods goodness, blessings, gyfts and graces, does turn
us away from God, Confidence in his own wisdom.
but also the confidence in our own strength, our own self will, and our
own self-love. No persuasions can alter a young man's mind, and a wilful
sinner, until he have fully tried his own way. Beyond all measure they trust
too much to themselves, to their own strength and wisdom, policy and fetches,
thinking themselves to be of such good government, that they know well enough,
how to order and to dispose their own matters. And this self wisdom, is the
cause that many forsake god. Therefore the Lord says, Revel. 3. Thou say, I
am rich, and want nothing, and know not that thou art miserable, and poor,
and blind, and naked. But how little we are able to do without Gods help and
grace, shall be showed hereafter. Peter was bold, and presumed saying, Though
all men be offended, yet will not I be offended; who because he trusted too
much to his own strength, was overcome by a filly maid. Mat. 26. So also
David herein confesses his own fault, Psalm, 29. I said in my prosperity, I
shall never be removed, and presently after, Thou turnedst away thy face from
me, and I was troubled. And having full trial in himself, he reproves them
which put not their trust in God. Psalm. 52.8. Lo, this is the man that took
not God for his strength, but trusted unto the multitude of his riches, and
strengthened himself in his wickedness.

But now let us hear this foolish youngster, Father. etc.
and prodigal waster. [Father, says he, give me the portion of the goods
that falls to me.] This portion is that gift of reason and understanding,
which God has imparted unto us. As if he had said, Father, give me leave to
live as I list, and to do as I think good. Heere-hence comes all the
mischiefs and inconuences in the world, either because men desire to do what
they list, or else, because men regard not to live after Gods will, and in his
obedience. He would be like unto God, to order all things according to his
pleasure. This pride and self-will, is the heginning of all sin in the
world, which makes the^ accursed that are thereto addicted. He shakes off his
fathers government, and his own will must stand for a law. Self-love
overthrows judgment, darkneth sense and reason, poysoneth the will, and
hinders the course of salvation, shutting up all passage thereunto. For such
men as are so entangled with the love of themselves, neither know God, nor love
their neighbor, nor seek after virtue; but only mind those things whereby
they may advance themselves, gaping for honor, and hunting after promotion.

Free Will does underprop this self-love, Freewill.
which of it self is but a weak stay. For although by sin our free will be
not utterly taken away, in natural and moral actions, yet nevertheless, it
remains so weak and unable, and so defaced in spiritual matters, that it
cannot resist any temptations. But as a ship in the Sea having lost her rudder,
is tossed to and fro with the least blast of wind: So this free will of ours,
unless it be conformed by repentance and humility, and framed a new by
yielding our selves to Gods gracious direction, (for of our selves we are not
able so much as to think a good thought,) it is so crazed and so wavering, that
it is easily overthrown, by every temptation of the flesh, the world, and
the devil.

Before the fall of our first parents, our free will was perfect, inclining to
all goodness, but after their fall, it became subject to sin, and to damnation,
from the which it could not be delivered, but by the grace of Christ our
Savior and Redeemer. Yet the will of man has not altogether lost his force and
freedom, being ruled by deliberation, judgment, advice, and consent. Without
me, ye can do nothing, says Christ. John. 15. Where our power to do good is
taken away, not our free will.

The infant has power to go, but is subject every minute to a fall: So the
weak will of man, has some power and liberty, but yet without the help and
grace of God, it cannot frame it self the right way, to the course of a better
life, to continue in goodness, no more then a child can go far without the
help of his Nurse and guide, to stay and to direct him. The infant that is
fallen, cannot rise without the help of his Nurse; and we that are fallen into
sin, can not rise from sin our selves, neither have we power to leave
sin, or to embrace the good inspirations of Gods holy Spirit, or to refuse
and resist the devils temptations, without the special grace of God, which
only can raise us, and give us courage and comfort unto all godliness.

The infant, although he be led by the hand of the Nurse, may be unwilling to
go, so a sinner may be obstinate and continue in his sins, although he be
directed, corrected, and punished by Gods hand. All evil deeds come through
our own free will, but all good purposes, come from the inspiration of Gods
grace. For after the fall of our first Parents, we were borne the children of
wrath, and conceived in sin, and by the force of our free will, we could
neither rise from sin, nor yet fulfull the commandments of almighty GOD.

Nay, although we have obtained Gods grace, and forgiveness of our sins, yet
are we not of force enough to overcome the devils temptations, and to avoid
our fleshly lusts, unless by the continual and daily help of GOD, we be
strengthened in the gift of perseverance to a godly life. Wherhence it is
manifest, that seeing we can do so little of our own selves, that it is great
rashness too much to presume of our own strength, and to trust to our own
wisdom, whereby we may think our selves well able, to rule and govern our
selves through our own direction.

This made the prodigal son too foolishly, and like a child that wants
discretion, to desire to live according to his own liberty. God draws not
any one against his will to salvation, but suffers the wickked to take their
own course. The prodigal sons father did not hold him, being willing to
depart: neither does he enforce him to depart, being willing to stay. The
portion of goods which GOD does give to every one, is to some eloquence, to
other-some, wisdom or riches, or strength, or knowledge, or place of honor,
all which we are given most easily to abuse, as this prodigal Son spent his
portion wastfully. And this is worthy to be noted, and daily to be seen by
common experience, that they that have the best gifts, do either not use them
at all, or else apply them to an evil end, not to commend Gods graces in them,
but to make themselves the more inexcusable.

And not long after.] For of our selves we cannot long stand, but we fall
quickly and suddenly, as soon as God with-draweth his hand. And the devil
sleeps not, but watches and seeks all occasions, how he may overthrow
that man or that woman, whom he sees destitute of Gods help and grace; the
devil has somewhat to set him aworke, until he has brought to pass his
own destruction. When our first Parents were left to themselves, through the
high conceit of ambition, they threw themselves down into great misery, while
the devil in the mean time persuaded them to be as Gods.

When the younger son had gathered all together. When etc.
] We being fully fraught with Gods gifts, either wisdom, riches, honor,
strength, or the like, we begin to take pride, and think there shall be no
alteration. This prodigal son thought himself in so good case, and so well
provided, that no thought of future misery did once enter into his mind, as
though it were impossible that ever he should feel the misery of adversity,
thinking no other but that his wealth and prosperous estate, should never come
to an end. He left his Fathers house, trusting to his treasure, and to his
wit, and so begins to dig down his mountain, which afterward came to a
molehill. Prosperity abused.
But mark how he lifts himself aloft, having gathered all together. Saul
being of low degree, and in his Fathers house, amongst the common sort, lived
well, and commendably, but having obtained a kingdom, he left the Lord, and
did much wickedness. David, being as yet a shepherd, and persecuted by king
Saul, his life was without blame; but when God gave him rest from all his
enemies, then did he commit adultery and murder.

Here we may learn to take dislike, against the riches, honors, and
prosperous estate of this world. For, for want of wisdom, and through
negligence, great danger comes at unawares. In the Mountains of Gilboa, King
Saul and his sons were slain, and in the honors and prosperity of the
world, virtue does oftentimes take a fall. Prosperity at the first show
appears most sweet and pleasant, but brings there-withall great dangers to
the soul, if they be not wisely prevented. In prosperity therefore think of
adversity, and so the thought of alteration and change, shall breed wisdom and
moderation. The pride of prosperity cast down this prodigal Son into
extreme misery. Haman was happy when he was in favor with the King, but in
his greatest iolity, his destruction was then most near. The same fell out to
Pharao and Senacharib, the one being drowned in the Red Sea, the other being
stabd in by his own sons. But when this prodigal Son had this liberty,
let us see what he did, and how he employed himself.

Into a far Country.
His Father sent him out into banishment, neither willed him to go out of his
house, but he himself, no body denying him, of his own accord, or rather
through his own lightness he went away, and left his Fathers house. So the
sinner of his own accord, does leave the government of his heavenly Father,
and does make a voluntary separation, Will.
refusing the direction of Gods word, the counsel of the godly, and of their
faithful friends, yea spurning against the secret warning of their own
conscience.

No doubt many about his Father, gave him counsel to the contrary, but they
could not turn his mind, all means were assaied, but nothing would serve the
turn, nor beat back the humor of his licentious liberty, his stubborn will
could not be tamed, his mind must needs be fulfilled. Under this parable,
the lawless affections of many young men are set down. For this prodigal
son lives yet, and will do, until the worlds end. But if they will needs
go, and will needs have their swinge and sway, if they will needs run their
race, they have their time, even such a time, that god does leave them to
themselves. For God does not for sake any, till he be first forsaken. And if
we will needs go, be it known unto us, that we run upon our manifest hazard
and danger. For who can tell whether in this disordered course, he shall come to
mischief, or to some miserable end, or whether God will show him mercy, that
he may call himself to better remembrance. As we read Eccles. 11. Rejoice o
young man, etc. God works with those that fly from him diverse ways, either
by secret crosses and afflictions, or by open punishments and miserable ends.
1. Tim. 5.24. or else by granting unto some the gracious gift of repentance. He
runs far that never returns, as indeed many are so desperately bent that
they never return. But into this prodigal son, God poured such abundance of
his mercy, that it had his issue in plentiful tears, and he became a new man.
And so happy was his conversion, that his Father had great joy thereof,
expressing the same in diverse comfortable tokens.

Out of this example we may gather, that the cause of sin is our own will, not
God, or the devil; yea, our own sinful flesh, how soever many can make blind
excuses, for their own evil life. The first beginning of all evil is to
turn away from God. The children of men, says the Prophet, psalm. 62.9. are
deceitful upon the weights: For in one balance they put their pleasures and
profits, in another they place GOD and heavenly considerations, making the one
to weigh a great deal lighter then the other; making more account of earthly
things then of God, whom we should love above all, with all our heart, and with
all our soul. All that God has done for the^, they consider not, and they
altogether neglect. Your sins, says the prophet Esaias, have made a separation
betwixt you and your God. A false balance is an abomination unto god, prou.
11, 1.

This prodigal son, as a man of no experience went rashly to work, Rashness.
neither did he consider what good things he enjoyed in his Fathers house, nor
what he lost, nor yet how great danger he did undertake. He little
considered the manifold inconveniences that fall out in this life. He that is
too rash, shall afterward repent. Man sins in have, because he cannot a
little refrain his wilful affection, before he do duly and wisely consider
the end of sin, and the evil success thereof. But if we could refrain our
selves, and not rush on so hastily, little considering the danger of our
souls, we would not run on into such headlong sin. Therefore David said.
psalm. 118. I considered my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. The
Bethulians were too rash to yield themselves to Holofernes, if God did not
help them within five days. As often as the people of Israel came to Moses,
before he would give them an answer, he asked counsel of God. O that we would
take this course, as often as the desire of revenge, honor, or lust should
provoke our minds, not to give any of these any answer, until we had asked
counsel of god; but we answer hastily and rashly, not considering god nor
his commandments, and so run into diverse mischiefs and dangers. Joshua
rashly believing the Gibeonites was deceived. Good aduisement must go before
good deeds, much more before evil deeds. The virgin Mary, before she
answered the Angel, did wisely consider what manner of salutation that should
be. A foolish Nation Deuteronomy. 32. without counsel and wisdom, does not consider
nor forecast their latter end. David too hastily believing Sheba, his lying
tale, did great wrong to Mephibosheth, contrary to his covenant. When the
woman taken in adultery was brought before our savior Christ, he made a stay
before he spoke his mind. When Achab was thoroughly bent to war, the prophet
Micheas warned him he should not do it, he took not his warning, but the
King was one of the first that died, nay the only man, and none but he that
perished. For the King of Aram made proclamation, on, fight neither against
small nor great, save only against the King of Israel. And when the King was
smitten, the battle was ended. 1. Reg. 22.34.36. So the sinner which is as it
were bewitched, and too much given to any sin, no warning of Preachers, nor
counsel of friends, shall withdraw him from sin, or bring him to amendment,
until his own rod has made him smart, or his own deserved destruction has
made an utter end of him. As also on the contrary side, there be bad companions
to persuade him and to harden him in his sin, that he cannot turn back, nor
so much as have any leisure to entertain a thought of repentance. Therefore, if
thou will not go wandering out of the way of life, lay aside thy disordered
passions and affections.

Balaam, before he went to curse the people of God, asked counsel of God, and
had the denial, yet through the desire of rewards and promotion, he was
foolishlie led along to his own destruction. GOD opened the mouth of his Ass,
and he gave him warning, and it would not be: his eyes were opened as Elisha
his servant to see the host that compassed Elisha, and he saw an Angel with a
drawn sword, ready to sley him, yet must he needs go forward whom the devil
drives. When thou art set to sin, thy conscience does reprove thee, but thou will not be warned, and beatest it back: therefore, if thou payest for it by
Gods correction and punishment, gods judgment is just, and thou have cause to
condemn thy own wilfulnes, as many do when they are brought to lamentable
ends. Therefore the Wise man says. Ecclus. 18. Go not after thy concupiscence,
nor follow not the inticement of thy lust, let reason and judgment take
place, and pray with the prophet, psalm. 17. O Lord lighten my darkness. Every
determination goes awry, which proceeds rather from thy will, then from
reason and judgment.

The Jews having their choice, rather call for Barrabas to be delivered the^
Christ, and we judge them worthy of extreme punishment, that were so unjust
in their verdict, and so wicked in their consent. But consider thy self, and
thou make a far worse choice; for thou yeeldest thy self to sin, and
give thy soul to the devil, refusing Christ and thine own salvation.
Hereby showing thy self far worse then ever the Jews were in their choice.
The prodigal son had rather follow his lust, then obey his father, and made
more choice of his own licentious liberty, then of all the benefits that were
to be had in his Fathers house: So the sinner makes more account of his own
sinful delights, then of all the joys of heaven.

The prodigal son goes into a far country, Degrees in finning.
and one sinner goes farther from god then another, some sin of infirmity,
some of ignorance, and some of malice, some of presumption, and some against
the holy Ghost. Many, think they cannot run far enough from god, of whom the
prophet speaks, psalm. 139. Whether shall we fly from gods presence: Shall
we fly into heaven? it is no part of our thought. Shall we fly into the
uttermost part of the earth, the whole world is under Gods government. Shall we
fly into hell? no say we, that way of all other we would escape and avoid,
although indeed we make choice of it, and the broad way that leads to
destruction is more beaten. Why if it were there, surely gods hand would find
us out there. Shall we take a long voyage by sea, into some newfound Land: it
may be God will send us further then we are minded to fly. For little did Jonas
think by flying from God, that god would send him into the bottom of the sea.
For though Jonas returned from death to life, yet was that a rare example of
gods mercy, and the like punishment rather to be feared, then such a strange
event to be looked and hoped for. Well, if we will not venture so far, but
only fly into the darkness, we must know that with God, the darkness and light
are all one. Ecclus. 23.18. And although Adam hid himself from gods presence,
yet was he still in gods presence, neither could he escape.

He that travels into a far country, may meet with thieves to spoil him,
may wander into deserts and unknown ways, may light among wild beasts that
may devour him. Howsoever, he shall come among unknown people, whose
conditions he may fear, but scarcely trust, and sooner shall he fall into the
company of bad companions, then of those that shall do him good, or have care of
his welfare. All these dangers and inconveniences might he avoid, by
remaining in his Fathers house, and yielding himself into his fathers
government. The prophet Esaias, chap. 29. makes mention of some, that did honor
God with their lips, but their hearts were far from him. But how can it be,
that seeing God is every where, that any of us all can go far from him. As
the prophet David says: psalm. 139. Whether shall I go from thy presence? If
I go up into heaven, thou art there: if I go down into hell, thou art there
also. If I take the wings of the morning, and remain in the uttermost parts of
the sea, even there also, etc. There is no distance of place betwixt God and
the sinner, for God by his power and omnipotency is every where, neither can
we escape gods presence. But the sinner goes far away from the Lord, by his
rebellious will. Honor thy father and thy mother. Thou shall not kill, steal,
bear false witness, covet. The practice of a sinner is quite contrary unto
these, as the common experience of the world does show.

The Scribes and Pharisees loved that which Christ hated, and hated that which
Christ commanded. Either in thought, word, or deed, we are quite contrary
unto Gods law, and so go far away from him. Therefore the prophet says well,
Health and salvation is far from the sinner, because they have refused the
righteousness of God. The sinner is separated from GOD, by his ungodly behavior
and wicked deeds. He goes farthest from god, that commits the greatest
sin: as he that does wrong to his parents, rather then he which hurts his
neighbor, and he sins more that kills his neighbor, then he that
lusts after another man's wife. Being in the estate of grace our sin is
greater, then when before we tasted Gods goodness, and had a feeling thereof:
and when thou have forsaken the world, to cleave again to the world and to
embrace it, when thou have repented thee of thy sin, and then to fall into it
again, is a greater offense. Of whom Christ says: Now thou art cleansed sin
no more, least a worse thing come unto thee.

Thou go far from God, by adding and multiplying thy sin, so that thou
despisest or neglectest all good exhortations and warnings. Many go far away
from God, Sin by degrees.
not upon the sudden, but by little and little. For as many sicknesses go
before death, so many sins go before destruction. First a dislike of
goodness, and then a loathing, and so by little and little we are with-drawne
from godliness, and we which heretofore were earnest professors, become
key-colde in religion, and in the works of charity. First Eve saw the
forbidden fruit, then she desired it, then she tasted it, then she gave it
to her husband. Caine, and the brethren of Joseph, first took a dislike, then
came envy, then hatred, then murder. Potiphers wife first lusted, then was not
ashamed to open her lustful intent, being denied, she defamed him, and
provoked her husbands great displeasure against him, that he was thrown into
prison.

But how great an inconvenience it is, to go far from GOD, What it is to
depart from God.
this example of the prodigal son does show, who leaving his fathers house,
found nothing else but famine and misery. What found Hagar, being out of
Abraham's house, but want and sorrow. Genesis 16. They that forsake the Lord,
shall have great trouble. The Chickens that are in dangers of the Kite, so long
as they flock about the Hen are safe, but when they go straggling, they are
caught up; So they that make the Lord their refuge, and are guided by him,
they are in safety, but when they depart from him, and go far away, the
devil goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. 1. Pet. 5.
When Caine went away from god, there was no more account made of him, then of
a vagabond and odious person. Genesis 4.14. Behold, says he to God, thou have
cast me out this day from the earth, and from thy face shall I be hid, and shall
be a vagabond and a runagate upon the earth, and who soever finds me, shall
sley me. This is the dangerous and fearful estate of them, which committing
sin, depart from God.

But among many inconveniences and dangers, these that follow are worthy the
noting.

They that sell wares, forswear themselves for a little gain, making more
account of a little silver, then of Gods commandment. And because our love is
more set upon these worldly and transitory things then upon God, therefore is
God so slenderly regarded. The Apostle S. Paul, because he made so slender
account of this world, therefore he truly said, I account all things but dung:
and when he makes mention of God, he speaks with great reverence. Tit.
2.13. Looking (says he) for the blessed hope, and appearing of the glory of
the mighty GOD. Hebr. 12.29. Our God is even a consuming fire. So likewise in
the psalms. The Lord is a great god above all gods. psalm. 89.6. to 10. Great
is the Lord our god, and there is not end of his greatness. psalm. 47.2. He
is the great King upon all the earth. verse 8. God reigns over the heathen:
God fitteth upon his holy mountain. psalm. 144.5. and 146. And how is, it
that we make so light account of god, but that we prefer the least things in
the world before him.

more art thou entangled with the cares and pleasures of this world, which
vanish away like a shadow, and therefore may well be compared thereunto. They
which hunt after honor, and greedily seek after riches, they for the most
part never catch this shadow, neither are they pertakers of their desires, but
follow after apparent deceits, and such matters which in time to come shall
yield no help. Therefore the Prophet, psalm. 4. cries out; Why do you seek
after vanity, and follow after leasing?

Spirit, cannot bring forth any work to eternal life, the seed that is cast
into such an unprofitable ground, will com to nothing. When the King does come
to any town, all things abound, and there is great plenty, but when he
departs, there are as many wants as there were before: so when Gods presence
does rest in our hearts and souls, we are prepared to euergy good work, but
when he is absent, the door is open to all vice and wickedness.



The fifth and last inconvenience of a sinner separated from God, is that when
he is debarred of his mercy, he is presently subject to his anger, and to his
wrath. He that is farthest from Gods favor, is nearest to his punishment. As
may be seen in the prophet Jonas, who flying from God, was cast into the sea.
He fled from God, when he commanded him, and fell into his punishment, when he
thought least thereof. If thy son fall sick at thy house, thou may have
many helps to restore him again, but if he be sick in a strange country, he
is destitute of thy help, neither can thou do him any good. The farther we
are from heaven, the more subject are we to the danger of hell.

A weak and frail sinner, although he often fall, may be recovered, and the
godly which pertain to GOD, and are under his government, they fall not
finally, but rise again: but they which are past grace, which are hardened in
wickedness, and multiply sin, for the most part do perrish for ever.
Whereof there are two notable examples recorded in Scripture, the one of
Peter, the other of Judas the traitor.

Peter denied the Lord thrice, but because he repented in heart, he was not
cast away, but received unto mercy. Psalm. 37.32. Pro. 24.15. But Judas went far
from God, and had rather be found among the enemies of Christ, then in his
company. No marvel therefore though he died in his sins, and because he
went so far astray, therefore did he fall into so great mischief, as
afterward was apparent.

If thou have gone away from the Lord, endeavor all thou can to return unto
him again; which thou shall most readily perform, if thou do return the
same way thou wentest from him, Ephesians. 4. Cast off lying, and speak every man
truth unto his neighbor; he that has stolen, let him steal no more, but
rather labor, and work with his hands, the thing which is good, that he may
have to give to him that needs. Let the proud learn to be humble, the
drunkard to be sober, the riotous to be chaste, the misers to be charitable. If
we have gone away from God, let us approach unto him by a reformed life, holy
manners, and holy conversation. That it may be spoken of us, as Paul speaks
of the Ephesians, chap. 2. Ye which were a far of, are made near. But more
God-willing shall be said hereof, when we shall speak of the return of
the prodigal Son.

Now let us come to the third principal point, 3. What he did in a strange
country.
namely, what the prodigal Son did in a strange country, and how he behaved
himself, and that was loosly enough, for he spent his patrimony riotously and
wastfully. When this youngster had received his patrimony, he was so pricked up
in pride, that he thought himself a Lord or a King, to do what him listed,
and abroad he must to show his bravery. His Fathers house could not hold
him, his licentious will and loose liberty set him forward, the devil being
at his elbow to tell him what a jolly fellow he was; and the devils workmen,
evil companions, set this matter abroach, to bring him and his estate, rather
to confusion then to perfection, to woe then to happiness. And now this
sorrowful game begins, and his shame is set out to every man's view, for he
consumed all his goods among harlots.

And there he wasted his goods with riotous living.] Wasted all.
Having received his portion, he sets not himself to live under any civil
government, neither does he in any sort regard his credit, but as an outlaw,
an abject, and an extrauagant, and a wilful waster, sets all at six and
seven, he and his companions being like to the grasshoppers of Egypt, that
eat up every green thing.

First he spent all, and secondly among harlots in riotous living. Many a one
through poverty spends all, and some by debt overthrow themselves; some
through suretiship are undone, some are ouershot by suits of law, some through
sickness and physic are brought to a low ebb: some by fire are made full
poor, some through shipwreck are cast behind hand, and diverse are the
inconveniences that fall out in the world, whereby a man's estate may be
brought to nothing. But none of all these hindrances come through wilfulnes,
for the man that fears god, may be brought to all these hazards: but the
ungodly vvaster has no defense for himself.

By this departing from GOD, see how the wretched sinner loses all that he
received, which was very profitable for him, to the attayning of everlasting
life: As knowledge, understanding and grace: yea, he spoyleth both his body
and soul in this life, and in another. All the good deeds which he has
done in this life, are by this means defaced, as though he had done no such
thing. According to that we read, Ezech. 18.24. If the righteous turn away
from his righteousness, and commit iniquity, and do according to all the
abominations that the wicked man does, shall he live? All his righteousness
that he has done, shall not be mentioned, but in his transgression that he
has committed, and in his sin that he has sinned, in them shall he die.

Tell me if one abiding among the Indians for the space of twenty or thirty
years, and after returning into Spain loaded with wealth, forgetting all his
former labors and dangers, which he undertook before he could come to that
treasure, should wilfully in one night hazard all at the dice or cards,
would not every one in his company, judge him not to be well in his wits? But
the careless sinner is far more foolish, who running into mortal sin,
does ouer-throwe the fruits of a godly life, 30. or 40. years spent in
prayer and fasting and alms, and many other godly exercises, and indangering
the hope of a better life. He for a short delight, and by greedy covetousness
to gain, loses all in a night what he has gotten a long while, yet thou
doing the like betwixt God and thy self, art far more foolish. For he may
return to the Indians, and get as much more, but the sinner cannot do so,
for the most part rather making himself the servant of sin, then seeking to
break of the course thereof, and as the servant labors for the Master, so
the sinner makes himself a bond-slaue to the devil, being altogether unable
to practice any work to the obtaining of life everlasting. First thou do
loose all thy good deeds which thou have done: and secondly, thou do bring
thy self into that estate, from the which thou can not easily recover thy
self, and therefore none more unhappy, none more unwise.

But how did this prodigal son wast and consume all his goods? With riotous
living.
With riotous and licentious living, among varlets and whores. Which often
falls out among the^ that are negligently brought up, who when they are come
to years of discretion, care neither for parents, nor masters, nor
Magistrates, nor their betters, thinking themselves equal to all, and
inferior to none. They despise both the counsel and the company of those that
be good and godly, in gaming and banqueting they exceed, spending that most
carelessly and lewdly, which their parents gathered together with carke and care.

This prodigal child wasted all in wantonness and whoring, Whoredom
which vice consumes the gold of grace, and the power and strength of nature;
weakening the body, disturbing reason, making the wit and understanding very
dull, spoiling us of money, honor, of temporal benefits and blessings, and of
eternal happiness, and bringing us unto utter overthrow and confusion.
Therefore Solomon says, he that nourishes a whore, wastes his substance.
Pro. 29.3. and he that loves feasting, shall die a beggar. Therefore it is
compared unto fire that deuoureth all, wasting our wealth, consuming the body,
and destroying the soul. This sin provoked GOD to destroy the world with
water, and to consume Sodom, and other Cities thereto adjoining with fire and
brimstone. The Sichemites and Beniamites for this, were put to the sword.
Absolon killed his brother Ammon at a banquet, for defiling his sister. Through
this Solomon was driven to idolatry, Sampson lost his eyes with shame and
discredit, David felt the smart hereof, his children committing incest and
murder, to his great grief to hear of it. This caused the two wicked Judges
to be stoned to death, and for this offense there fell in one day 23. thousand
of the people of Israel. Whereby we may gather how great this sin is, that
had so great punishment, and whereof in the Scripture there are so many
fearful examples. Our Savior Christ suffered many sins among his
disciples, but not this. He bore with the unbelief of Thomas and of the rest,
suffered their pride and ambition, when they strove who should be the greatest;
when they called for fire from heaven, to consume the Samaritans, and to be
revenged of the^, he gently reproved them. When they envied at others, for
casting out devils in his Name, he did not so greatly rebuke them. The
covetousness of Judas, nay his treason, Christ did freendly forwarne him of.
Peter denied him, and forswore him, and yet he restored him.

The beastlines of lust, he which feeds among the Lillies could never abide
in his company. And therefore his love was especially bent unto the Evangelist
Saint John, for his purity and virginity. He is the servant of the devil,
whose mind does only run upon beastly cogitations. And the Apostle, Gala.
5. does pronounce of them, that they that are so carried away, shall never
enter into the kingdom of heaven. This sin is the fire of hell, the matter
whereof is gluttony, filthiness the flame, shame the smoke that ascends
therehence, and everlasting torments the end and the reward thereof.

When the devil tempted our Savior Christ, he did not once offer to
entangle him by this means, knowing how far it was from his nature; and how
much he did detest it, the devil was not so gross, but he assaulted him with
finer conceits. This sin destroys the body, shortneth the life, defaceth
virtue, and is the manifest breach of Gods law. All other sins defile the
soul, but this defiles both soul and body. Your bodies are the temple of
God, and he that defiles the temple of God, him shall God destroy. 1. Cor. 6.

Thou can not avoid Gods severe judgment, if thou do impudentlie abuse
the Temple of God. But now this cursed plague has spredde it self over all
the world. Lots daughters are counted most infamous, but I fear me there are
some which are more worthy of shame, which in the sight of the world are
counted chaste. They required only to preserve seed of their Father, but many
wives follow lust too greedily, more then to have children; beside, many other
shameful behauiours unknown to the world, whereof their conscience no doubt
does accuse the^. Let them call for mercy and forgiveness, and endeavor
chastity, without the which none shall see God. The female among beasts having
conceived, do never suffer the male to come near them: Thus the unreasonable
creatures teach us, that make great account of Christianity, to be sober,
temperate, and chaste. God forbid that all should so be affected; and they that
are so overtaken may learn to amend for shame of themselves, and fear of
eternal punishment.

This sin is overcome by flying from it, Remedies of lust.
as the Apostle counsels. 1. Corin. 6.18. Fly fornication.

his help by prayer, and that comfort and strength which Paul had, the same
shall we have; My grace is sufficient for thee. To these helps may other also
be added, to keep our selves as much as may be, out of the company of Women,
according to that verse, Carpit enim vires paulatim vritque videndo famina.
Again, to settle our selves to study and earnest meditation, and to use our
selves to hard fare, and hard lodging:

Sine cerere, et Baccho friget Venus.
And this is it which the Apostle speaks of, 1. Cor. 9.27. I beat down my
body, and bring it into subjection.

By this prodigal son we are taught, into how great misery, a foolish and
selfe-willed man or woman is brought unto, by following their own unbridled
will. He was wealthy, sound, and in especial account in his fathers house,
but every one sees into how great poverty and misery he is brought; in
following his own swinge and sway, he lost all that ever he had, and of a
wealthy man and in high degree, became most unhappy and of base account; being
pinched with poverty for his abundance, having rags for his robes, and being
enforced to eat husks with Swine, which before could away with nothing but
delicates and dainties. We see also what is his reward which forsakes the
Lord; as also what his practice is that is left unto himself, becoming worse
and worse, and falling from one sin into another. Mark also how the number of
sins increase daily, until they have altogether ouer-whelmed us. We learn
also what a horrible judgment and miserable condition remains to him whom
GOD gives over, and who is thus left to himself. On the contrary, what a
great joy and comfort it is, to be under Gods direction and tuition, the which
only keeps us from sin, from danger, and from eternal death.

They that are not under Gods guiding, and under his safegarde, how great are
their miseries? and into how many inconveniences do they fall, how many
mischiefs and calamities do light upon them. This prodigal Son lost all,
spent his goods riotouslie among harlots, and being driven to great poverty,
was almost starued to death by famine. to wit, what ensued in those days,
after he had spent all. There followed a famine and miserable scarcetie.

Now when he had spent all, there arose a great dearth throughout the Land,
Now. etc.
and he began to be in necessity.] This is the end of riotous and
maisterfull youth, which quickly consume all and come unto great miseries, if
not lamentable ends. Wherefore, it is the duty of the parents, to bring up
their children in the instruction and information of the Lord, Ephe. 6.4. And
if their education prove well, and their children be of good government, so
much they have got and gained, as also they, are to give GOD thanks that has
given so good success. But if the contrary fall out, this cross and
affliction is patiently to be endured, and the parents are in the mean time
to content and comfort themselves, that in doing their best endeavor, they
have discharged their duty. Ezech. 3.19. For often times it falls out, not
only to slothful and negligent parents, but also to those that are most
watchful and careful, that they may have children wicked and ungodly, far
differing from the disposition of the parents. And the more worthy and godly
the Parents are, the more are they vexed with this affliction, as Adam had
Caine, and Noe had Cham, and Abraham had Ismaell, and Isaac had Esau, and David
had Absolon and Ammon, Eh had Hophni and Phinehas, and Samuel had sons given
to corruption and bribery, all which did greatly disgrace their Fathers houses,
stock and lineage.

In this prodigal Son, although he were so forgone, yet God does not
utterly forsake him, but reaches him out the hand of mercy, and shows him
the means of repentance. First, in setting before his eyes his poverty and
misery, and then pinching him with famine, that by his rods and chastisements,
he might draw him to newness and amendment: Ose, 2.9. And worthily he began
to want, to whom the treasure of knowledge and wisdom, and of the fear of
God, did seem a matter so base, preferring his own pleasures, and the vanities
of the world before it, and who had forsaken the high estimation of heavenly
wealth. He that leaves the wellspring, must needs thirst, and he that
departs from treasure, must needs want, and he that emptieth himself of
honesty and goodness, must needs come to nothing. He began to want and suffer
hunger, because nothing can satis-fie a prodigal mind: and he is worthy to
be famished which will not feed of heavenly food. Where-soeuer Joseph went
there was plenty, and where he was not, there was scarcety enough. So where God
is, there is no want, and where his helping hand is not, it is no marvel
though all come to hauock and ruin.

Three things are here worthy to be considered. The sheep over who^ the
devil is shepherd, have noisome herbs to feed on, and venomous water to
drink, which secretly infect unto death. For honors pleasures and riches
bring destruction to the soul of a sinner, they deceive us of eternal life,
and keep us far from it.

He that is sick of the Dropsy is still athirst, and wealth and pleasure
still call for more. psalm. 145.15. The eyes of all wait upon thee, o Lord, and
thou give them their meat in due season. Coniurers can set abundance of
dainty ^eates before thine eyes, but if thou touch to taste, there is nothing
but only the deceit of the eyes, which for a time they can wonderfully delude.
So the deceauable world, can persuade her followers. that all her gyfts are of
great weight, and that they are sufficient to satis-fie our desire to the
uttermost, but in the end they prove to be vain, more unconstant then the
wind, and lighter then vanity it self. And this is a most true cause, why
sinners can never be satis-fied and find themselves contented. He that is a
Husbandman, would be a gentleman, a gentleman a squire, a squire a Knight, a
Knight a Lord, a Lord an Earl. So are all the desires of the world, they
stir up hunger, but they never satis-fie hunger, or quench thirst. Therefore
the prophet truly speaks of such: Ye have eaten, and have not enough, ye
have drunk and are thirsty, ye clothe you, and are not warm, he that earneth
wages, puts the wages into a broken bag. The water that was poured about
the Altar, was burnt up. 1. Reg. 18. Jonas gourde withered: so in all the
pleasures and profits in the world, there is a worm ingendered within them,
that does consume them. The more thou have of this worlds goods, the more does
the fire of thy desire break forth into a flame, as if thou should endeavor
to put out fire with oil.

wide, and he will fill it. Which is not meant of the mouth of the body, which
a little may fill, but of the contentation of the soul, which is not easily
satisfied. The soul being made to the image of God, must then be in his best
perfection, when God does begin to renew it. In God only is sufficiency, rest,
quietness, and perfect joy: without GOD there is nothing but grief and
perplexity of mind, which increases and multiplyeth, while we make that
account of the world as we do, seeking our rest and chiefest solace therein.
That vessel which is put into the water, is very light, but being taken out,
is very heavy: So, so long as thy mind does rest in God, all things are
comfortable and joyful, but when it is plunged in worldly desires, all things
seeme^^d and sorrowful.

The ungodly being weary in serving the world, are most combersome unto
themselves, having a clogged soul, and a heavy conscience. For honors, wealth
and pleasure, they have not so glistering a show, but they have as many dangers
joined with them. The godly in their chiefest perplexities, miseries and
distresses, have rest and joy in God, who fills their hearts with great
cheerefulnes, whereas without God, there is neither peace of conscience, nor any
other true comfort. The body can take no rest being straightened in a narrow
room, and all the worlds delights are too strait for a godly soul, for it
desires to be enlarged with that freedom which comes from God, even as the
bird which is fed with dainty meat in a cage, makes more account of further
liberty, although he be destitute of dainties.

Moses being in Pharaos Court, could not so well serve God, as when he was
quite clear from it. Seeing the^ there is no rest in these worldly matters,
turn unto God, and make a better choice, and a happier change. When God made
man, he rested from all the works which he had made, so did he not rest when
he had made other creatures: Seeing therefore GOD rested in making man, let
man's chiefest happiness be in resting in God.

God fills our desires with goodness, says the Prophet, neither is our
appetite satis-fied until it enjoy that wished end. For our soul is of so
noble a disposition, that it can find rest no where but in the chiefest good.
Therefore the holy king and prophet says, Even as the Heart desires the water
brooks, so longs my soul after thee, o God. My soul is a thirst for God,
yea even for the living GOD, when shall I come before the presence of God. My
tears were my meat day and night, while they daily said unto me, where is now
thy God?

He was absent far from god, therefore he wept, hungring and thirsting after
him, desiring to be replenished with god, that he might find all perfect joy.
And feeing the world cannot fill up thy desire, betake thy self to Christ.
Come unto me ye that hunger and thirst, and I will refresh you, Math. 11.28.
John. 4.14. And I will fill the empty soul with goodness. Psalm. 36. Delight
thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee thy ha^s desire.

Hitherto we have showed, how that in the world there is nothing but famine and
great scarcetie, and penury of all things; but in God only there is perfect
sufficiency, joy and glory to be sound. Now let us see a further reason of
these things afore-sayde, and why in the world is scarcely, and all plenty
with God, which is the third thing to be spoken of. The world is not
sufficient, because the large and ample capacity of our minds does further
extend it self. The soul which was created for God, what-soeuer is inferior
to God, it counts it but base. The pottle or the gallon, cannot be filled
with the measure of a pynt, and all the worlds goods, is but as a grain of
mustard seed in the belly of an Elephant; they fill the soul and satisfy the
mind in such sort, that still there is some place empty, so vain they are and
fall of sound (as empty vessels have a great sound) and in these desires there
is no soundness, no perfection.

Again, the desires of the soul are infinite, the profits and pleasures of
this world have their bounds. So that there is no other remedy for us in this
life, but to remove our minds from the desire of these earthly things, and to
transport them unto God, and heavenly considerations, that so our minds and
our desires may fully be contented. For all other creatures GOD has appointed
their food, but God only is the food of the soul. As grass for the Lion,
and flesh for the horse is unmeet food, because they are not agreeable to
their nature, so ought not earthly desires to be the food of the soul. For
there is nothing in the world to serve the mind, but only God. Pride, and
covetousness, and envy, and pleasure, are the things that men's minds do most
aim at, but these are rather the famine then the food of the soul. The grace
of God, and the heavenly gyfts of his holy Spirit, they only comfort and
nourish the soul, and strong then it. Why is bread rather the nourishment of
man's body then poison? The reason is because the one is agreeable to the nature
of man, the other does destroy it. So is GOD the food of the soul, because
his presence and goodness is most agreeable thereunto, being created after
the likeness of God; as for all other matters, they are nothing else but death
and famishment. And if thou feed the soul with any earthly considerations,
it is as if thou should feed the body with stones and gravel. As our soul
without God begins to be sad, heavy, hungry and dead, so all the delights;
pleasures, profits, and commodities of this world, are nothing but misery and
poverty. is, the miserable estate of a sinner under the condition of the
prodigal son, feeding Swine.

Then he went and claue to a Citizen of that Country, and he sent him to his
Farm to feed swine.] This is the best preferment, that we get by the devils
service. First, by our own voluntary free will we yield ourselves slaves unto
the devil, for the devil has no power over us, till we have put our necks
into his yoke. Which work when we have once performed, we are very hardly
with-drawne from our ungodly purpose. And when the devil has us in his bands,
he then sticks too close unto us, neither is it as we may suppose, so easy a
matter to shake off his yoke. Our wilful disobedience comes not of ignorance
or infirmity, but of froward and stubborn disposition, inclined to all
wickedness. And this is the difference betwixt the godly and the wicked, the
godly falling into sin, rises again, but the wicked continues his course.
Neither can we be likened to the devil in nothing more, then in the
perseverance of sin, in spending the best of our time so, and in waxing old
therein.

The prodigal Son enforced by famine, went not to his Father, Shame
unprofitable.
not that he had altogether forgotten his Father, but that shame kept him
back, which keeps many from good purposes. He had rather suffer famme and
banishment then that he would once confess his fault: Many had rather be vexed
by the torment of conscience, then in the sight of God to humble themselves and
to keep a smothering fire within their breast, then to open their grief to a
godly friend, or faithful Minister to have ease and comfort. If thou did
consider the safety of thy soul; and the quietness of thy conscience, the
reproach of men should never daunt thee, neither should the shame of the world
ever confound thee. What need thou to care what the world thinks of thee;
so that thou be in Gods fad our, and be reconciled unto him. Whose displeasure
if thou could perceive, neither the shame of the world, nor any other let,
should keep thee back from the due consideration of thine estate. God knows
all, and why should thou be ashamed, to confess thy fault before him? But
because either the shame or estimation of the world, does more prevail with
thee, then the quietness of thy conscience, or the fear and favor of GOD,
therefore art thou drowned in thy sin, sinking therein daily more and more.

It may be he thought his father so severe and extreme, that he would not be
entreated, or that all former charity or favor, was banished from his breast,
so that either by famine, Despair.
or through despair, he was brought into that case, to be separated far
from his Father, and to yield himself into dishonorable slavery who before
was free. But many are of so abject a mind, that they fear there is no place
for mercy, having so often repented, and yet fallen again, and despayring of
amendment, they say within themselves; Many times have I purposed to cut off
the course of sin, and to mend my life, but yet I cannot, my sinful estate is
so^^^ong; therefore seeing I cannot choose but sin, I will for ever remain
therein. Little thinking their foolishnes is so great, that though we sin
against GOD through weakness, not of presumption, if it be a hundred times, yet
if we turn to the Lord by true repentance, he will so often forgive us. These
faint-harted people, despairing of Gods goodness and mercy, and having no hope
of amendment, cast themselves headlong into sin, and yield themselves wholly
into the power of satan, perceauing themselves to be fallen from grace, and
from the favor of God. This prodigal son, had rather suffer the most
terrible tyranny of the devil, then to endure some hardness in coming to his
fathers house, where he should enjoy all freedom and wealth. Strait is the
gate that enters into life, and broad is the way that leads to destruction.
The Israelites had rather return into Egypt, and to suffer the tyranny and
persecution of Phamo, then to undertake a little labor in the Wilderness, that
they might enjoy the promised Land, flowing with milk and honny. Such is the
estate of many finners, who had rather still (...) kept under the slavery of the
devil, then by confessing their sins, to receive spiritual comfort from
Christ, and to obtain his grace and favor.

He sent him to his farm to feed swine. To feed Swine.
] He is cast out of the City, which is an honorable place, and sent to base
drudgery. The sinner is dismissed of heavenly meditations, and entangled in
wordly business, and overcome thereof. Such is the course of most men now
adays, being given to worldly business, merchandise, bargains, and other
affairs of this world, that they leave no time to serve God, having their
minds herewith choked up, so that they do not so much as once think of God.
Neither do their minds run upon any thing else, speak, do, desire any
thing, but that which is worldly, temporal, and fleshly. In this sort may
thou be termed a keeper of swine, which feeding thy body, do suffer thy
soul to starve. And as after the death of swine, there is no more remembrance
of them, so of all these thy worldly labors, there shall be no profit
remaining to thee, concerning an other life. For what shall a man get if he win
the whole world, and loo^^ his own soul? Our soul is that whereof we ought
to have especial care, and by the which we are reasonable creatures, and
differ from brute beasts. But following our own fleshly desires, we become
like brute beasts, and feed swine taking upon us a most abject state of life,
not whorthy to be called men, but to be compared to refuse and dunge. To feed
the eyes with beautiful shows, the taste with sweet meats, and the feeling
with all inticements, what is it else but to feed the belly, the senses, and
the flesh, as if with swine we delighted to wallowe in dirt and mire. The
place of Esaias, chap. 34. is notable, comparing man's ruinous estate to
desolations, where in the place of come, shall grow nettles and thorns, and
their stately houses, shall be nothing else but an habitation for dragons, and
a court for Ostriches. etc. This swinish people shall be like unto the
Madianites to Sisera and unto Iabin, of whom mention is made, psalm. 83.9. which
perrished at Endor, and became as the dung of the earth.

And he would feign have filled his belly with the husks that the swine eat,
but no man gave them him.] By husks are here understood all other matters
besides and without God, as pleasures and profits, wherewith we desire to
satisfy our selves, which are the jewels of this present world. For all that
is in the world, as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride
of life, is not of the Father, but of the world. Which things the most part of
the world do hunt after, and for the which they are so eagerly set, that they
raise strife and discord In^^^^ and when they have all done, it is but for
buskes, for vain and transitory things. The daintiest food does but fill
the belly, and afterward goes into the draught, and the chiefest pleasures
serve but for a time, and afterward damn the soul. When men enjoy those
pleasures which they would, they think they shall never have enough, therefore
is here mention made, that although the prodigal son would have filled his
belly, yet no man gave them him. The devil will not fulfill thy appetite in
the course of sin, fearing least when thou have thy fill, thou should
forsake him, and detest his service, and betake thy self to the service of God.

The devil sets before thee the beauty of every woman thou lookst upon, to
draw thee into his net. When he has caught thee, he keeps thee from the
presence and sight of the woman which thou love, least being satisfied with
her love, thou begin to contemn the sin, and to condemn thy self, and depart
from that sin and turn to the Lord. This is the devils policy, to give thee
but a taste, to keep thy appetite always fresh, to hunger after his sauce,
keeping thee still in slavery, and making thy chiefest delight to be a
torment unto thee. Pharao denied to give the Israelites straw, to make them
more weary: Holophernes stopped the water springs from the Bethulians, so that
through scarcely of water their thirst was rather increased then quenched. So
the devil gives thee a taste, to make thee more hungry, but never satis-fieth
thy desire, to make thee the more greedily to hunt after it. Thou refusest the
fountain of the water of life, and diggest unto thy self unwholesome waters,
our of broken cesterns: thy waters stink through the uncleanness of thy vices,
and taste full evil, through the bitterness of our conscience diversely defiled.
What madness therefore has entered into our minds, that we forsaking the true
and euelasting goodness of GOD, should desire to be fed with chafe and with
husks, that are cast unto Swine: especially seeing our creation is so noble,
and that by gods word, and by his grace, we are chosen and called to enjoy such
excellent treasure in Christ Jesus. We being blinded, take husks for dainty
meat, which are rather provided for swine then for (...), whose stomachs can
hardly away with such meat. Beware therefore seeing thou are bought of Christ,
with so high a p^ic^, and redeemed and set at liberty, that thou deliver not
thy self again into the ^^iuery of sin and the devil. Compare this present
estate of a sinner, with that former wherein he was created, or wherein since
we were created, by Gods grace we stood.

Before we had a Father, now we have a Lord, what said I a Lord, nay a
tyrant, before we were free, but now slaves; before was this prodigal son
furnished with plenty, now is he pinched with scarcety; before he lived in
his fathers house, now among robbing and destroying strangers; before he was
accepted among the sons of a kind father, now is he cast out to dwell with
swine, before he was fed with Angels food, now is he glad with husks, and
cannot fill his belly. Consider this, and depart not from God. But if thou have
gone astray, despair not, mark what follows, and thereby receive comfort.

Then he came to himself, and said.] the knowledge and feeling of our o^^ne
misery. He came to himself, He came to himself.
and therefore it is a token he went far astray, and was in a deadly swoune of
sin, but being a long while in a trance, at l^st ^e revived. Erring in
religion, and disordering himself in life and conversation, doing those
thin^^^ which were quite contrary to Gods Laws* now his return is first
begun, in and (...) his understanding, calling himself to remembrance, what
kindness he had in his Fathers house, comparing his former happiness to his
present misery, being not in so good case as his Fathers hirelings, and now
he enters into discourse, and debates the ma^^er with himself.

Esaias, 16.12. Hear me vee stubborn hearted, that are far from justice. For
there is nothing so far from us, as we are from our se^^es. Therefore men
being entangled and insoared in sin, and given up to the vanities of this
world are without the^ selves, and wander in the world. He came to him self,
which was estranged from himself* he went out, and forsook him self, and
l^ft his Father, and calling himself to better remembrance, found himself,
being lost unto himself.

Considering his former happiness, he is raised up with hope of pardon and
forgiveness for his offenses; and now knowing and feeling his misery, he
begins to be another manner of man then erst he was before, bethinking
himself how well he was before, and how unhappy a change he had made by
falling into sin. The fear of ^od; and common reason is banished, when sin
comes in place. We say that a mad man, or a drunken man, is not his own
man, because he speaks and does those things which a man in his right wits
would never do; but when he is sober and fencible, and has left his
foolishnes, then we say he is returned to himself. So he that forsakes
God, and cleaves to the devil, is either mad or deuilish, being possessed
with an evil spirit. Christ said of his perfecutours. They know not what they
do, and Saint Stephen to the like sense, Lord lay not this sin to their
charge. When thou see a fool, or a mad body, or one possessed, to rave, and to
rage, then look upon thy self, who through sin do show thy self a^
foolish before GOD, as the other does in thy sight. If it be a thing to be
wondered at, to see the body possessed with a devil, how much more horrible is
it, to think that the soul should be possessed by the devil. If it be a
matter to be laughed at, and a thing very indecent, that which a drunken man
says, or does, how great is the foolishnes of that soul, that is left unto it
self, and has not God for his guide. If it be a miserable and a lamentable
thing to behold a mad man, how much more unhappy is that man, who neither
l^^^th according to reason, nor yet frames himself to be ruled according to
Gods word, and the direction thereof. Happy is that man which being recovered
from spiritual mad n^^ or drunkenness and from the power of the devil, does
come to himself. He runs far they say, that never returns: and surely
thereb^ many that never come to themselves forgetting God and themselves not
knowing that they are manicled and fettered, who if they vver^ not too much
their own foes, might enjoy most gracious and heavenly freedom* There were
two urgent causes, that provoked this prodigal Son to come to himself? The
first was his famine and misery. The second the great, plenty which was in his
fathers house, which made him to break forth into these speeches, and to say.

How many lined servants at my fathers, (...) bread enough, and I die for
hunger.] God fendeth sinners f^^^ne, Affliction.
that they may seek sustenaunce from him, as also they may acknowledge their
fault in abusing his b^^^^^^s before, and that they may make the more account
of them, when they are sti^^e partakers thereof. For if this prodigan bonne
hall not been punished this way, he would hardly or never have come to a
better mind.

Many are the plagues and punishments which God vse^h to make us return unto
him* Esaias, ^8. Affliction gives vnder-standing 80 after Moses had recited many
plagues and punishments which were to come upon the people of Israel.
Deu^onom. 30. (...). he a^^^^^ this. And it shall be when all these shall come
upon thee, that thou shall return into thy heart. Mark the words how he
fore-telleth that they shall return into their heart. 1. Kings, 18. In the time
of E^^as, the people through fim^^re called unto the Lord! Matthew 3. John
Baptist threatening the pains of hell, did in his time draw the people to God.
Now is the axe (says he) set to the root of the Tree: every Tree that
brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire.
First Paul was strooken to the earth, and made blind, before he was won
to the semice of GOD, Acts, chap. 9. Hosea, 5.15. In their affliction they will
seek me early. Jeremy 2.2^. In the time of their trouble, they will say,
Arise and help us psalm. 83.16. Make their faces ashamed, o Lord, that they may
seek thy name. Psalm. 30. In my prosperity I say de, I shall never
bere-mooued. Then did thou turn thy face from me and I was troubled. Then
cried I unto thee, o Lord, and gate me unto my Lord right humbly. All the
miseries and punishments which here fall upon us, do nothing else, but enforce
us to go to God. Ezech. 7.4. My eye shall not spare thee, and ye shall know
that I am the Lord. 2. Chr. 26. Manasses being imprison prayed, and the
Tsralites bitten with Serpents knew the lord. Therefore Nehemias says, chap. 9.
In the time of their tribulation and affliction they cried unto thee, and thou
hem d^st them out of heaven. Judge. 6.1. Afterward the children of Israel
committed wickednessem the sight of the Lord, and the Lord gave them into the
hands of Midian seven years. ver. 6. So was Israel exceedingly impouerished
by the Midianites, therefore the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, ver.
7.8. And when the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, the Lord sent a
Prophet; who willed the^ not to fear, but there-with-all puts in this Item.
But ye have not obe^ed my voice.

As the mother desirous to weane the child, puts some sour thing upon her
teates, that by that means the milk may be forsaken: so GOD does always
mingle bitter matters with the pleasures of this world, that we may grow in
dislike of the^, which is a token of his fatherly goodness. Hose^. 2. The
foolish man has said in his heart, I will go after my lovers, which give me my
bread and my water, my wool and my flax. But the Lord in merty says, I will
hedge thy way with thorns, that thou shall not find thy paths. Though she
follow after her lovers, yet shall she not come at them, though she seek
them, yet shall she not come nigh them. Then shall she say, I will go and
return to my first husband. Now she did not know that I ga^^ her her corn and
wine, therefore will I return and take away my corn, in the time thereof, and
my wine in the season thereof, and will recover my wool and my flax, lent to
cover her shame. And now will discover her l^w dnesle in the fight of her
lovers, and no man shall deliver her out of my hand, I will also cause all her
mirth to cease. Afterward I will allure (...); and bring her into the
wilderness, and speak freendly unto her. What place of Scripture more
significant to set forth this matter in hand. The Lord ^ath hedged with
thorns, the way of that foul^ that departs from him, as this prodigalb sun
is pinched with famine and penury, that went from his fathers house. Wherefore
he resolves to go to his former friends where he was far better before, as
this pindig all son, comparing his former al^^^dance with this pre^ent want,
went and remined. The dog when her is hungry, looks up to his master waiting
when ^eo will cast him somewhat to care, and been a full, begins to play the
wanton so for these transitory things of this world, we call to God, and when
our turn is seued, then e^ther we play rio^ ^or go wand^ing from God. How
profitable therefore in follow affliction, and labor, which make us return
again. The great famine and hunger which the sonnet of Jacob felt, was the
cause that they found out their great friend Joseph, and that their Father
might receive great joy for the recovery of his lost son, and that they
should confess their fault, and say. Worthly ^^o we suffer these things, which
sinned against our brother, and did not consider him in his misery. Gene. 42.
As this pr^d^g^ll some returned (...) his Father, so his father first did give
him this grace, that he might return, opening the eyes of his mind and soul,
that he might know his offence^ and hate the sin, considering the great
misery that should far upon him, if he did it no^. This made him lift up his
soul to God as Nabuchadnezzer did after his seauemy^r^s banishment among the
wild be^stes. Then he rose and find, I will go to my Father, calling his
former life to reme^bran^^, and sorrowling therefore, purposing afterward most
fled fastly to amend: For they that res^^ue to continue in sin, are not yet
^lsem Awake from sin, thou that s^e^pest and ^^ll^ west in sin and stand up
from death (...). He wisely conside^eth all ^ces, I am his som^e, they are but
hirelings; I do not only hunger, but am almost farm s^ed, and they have
plenty; I am one, and they many; though I have offended, yet my father is
pitiful. My former life has not been so bad, but by Gods grace I may amend,
and come into savor again. Which is well woo^^y the no^ng, for many see their
sa^l^e* are sorry and repent them; and yet through the want of the hope of Gods
mercy and forgiveness, fall into despane. It had been no comfort to say, I
perish with ^a^^^e unless he had raised up himself to think^ how many
hirelings were in his Fathers house, who^ he fed to the full, so great was his
bounty and goodness. John Bap^^st threatened hell torments to sinners, but yet
raised them up with comfort of forgiveness, and hope of Gods mercy. Behold,
s^^th he, the lamb or god, which take^^ away the sins of the world Peter when
he had sharply rebuked the Jews for Christ's death, does exhort every one to
repentance and to be baptized. Acts. 2. Paul being s^^^^en blind, was willed to
rise and to go into the city, and there he should know what he should do.
Acts. 9. After Peter had forswo^ne Christ, and wept bitterly, he heard of this
comfort. Tell P^ter also that christ is risen. Mar. 16.7.

Two things are here apparent, the acknowledgement of sin, and the mercy of
God, fear and hope. Both come from God; by the one he casts us down, by the
other he raises us up again. Considering the hirelings, this whetteth on his
misery, and moves* unto repentance, in that his estate is far worse then
the hirelings, I had almost said then any man's else. Preferri^^ the worst
before himself, and desiring but the lowest room in the house of God* a^ the
prophet David mourns that h^ co^ld not com into gods presence* seeing the
sparrowe builds her nest by thy Altar^ ^o Lord He thinks himself unworthy
to aspire to a high room. Many of Gods children have spiritual and temporal
comfort enough, and I want, and am like to per^ish. There are many in god^
house which serve God rather for fear of punishment, then for the love of GOD.
But b^tter it is to be a servant in Gods ^^^se then to be a Prince in the
world. The greatest part, seek after goods, and ri^^^^ do i^^^^race, but Lord
grant us thy (...) thy favor and thy grace. psalm. to And if GOD be so
gracious and bountiful to them that serve him for fear, how much more tender
care will he have over his own children, whose hope he will not make void,
not leave their good deeds unrewarded.

I will rise, and go to my Father.] In that he says he will rise, he shows
that he was fallen, seeing none can rise but they that are fallen; In that he
says he will go unto his father, he thereby confesses he went far away
from him. Calling him his Father, he makes it evident, that since his
departure he has been in the hand of a Tyrant. Hereby we also perceive,
that a sinner can find no comfort and refuge, but from him whom he has
offended. Finding no rest but rather great dangers in that course of life, for
the choice whereof he forsook God, now he decrees to return to God, in whom
only is his life and his hope.

The soul being made to the Image of GOD, can be satis-fied with nothing but
God. Therefore the prophet David says. What have I in heaven or earth that I
desire in comparison of thee. If a gh^tton have a little meat set before him,
he says, What is this for me? In like sort the prophet says psa^ 16. All
things in the world are nothing to him. I shall be, satis-fied when he shall
appear^ in his glory and perfect beauty.

But wherefore do we desire so much the goods of this world? and having
obtained them, why do we set so little by them? because above all these,
the comfort of God does more rejoice the soul. Who^ we die, we must leave all
our goods behind us but if we have not the good will of god, what shall after
become of us? Again, the care in keeping, and the trouble in gathering, and the
fear of loosing our worldly wealth, breed great hindrances unto us, and keep
us from the service of God while all the room^ in our soul, is taken up for
this golden guest, that God (who ought to be more dear unto us then gold, and
all the treasures that we can devise) cannot be received of us. Eccles. 2. I
have made me great works, and built me houses, and planted me, vineyards etc.
yet for all this, Solomon pronou^c^d, that all was but vanity. He that drinks
of this water shall thirst again, but he that drinks of the water of life,
shall ^^^er thirst again. Ioh. 4, All the time that Jacob was in Labans house,
he was entangled and wearied with many labors, but when he was departed from
him, he met with a company of Angels. God is the fountain of all goodness, and
therefore the soul desires God, that it may enjoy these (...). Honor and
riches are transitory, but the goodness of God is perpetual. He that is in his
iourny, his mind cannot be at q^iet (...) he com to the end thereof, and he
that makes a long voyage by sea, is diversely ^oubled, until be com to his
wished haven; and the chiefest end of man, is to be united unto God. Upon who^
al our desires and wishes should be settled; for thou shall show me the path of
life faith the prophet. psalm. 16.12. In thy presence is the fulness of joy, and
at thy right hand there is pleasure for evermore. There are not many, but one
chief happiness. and that is in God, without whom there is no happiness to be
found.

The knowledge of his offense, Confession.
did compel the prodigal son to turn unto god. Christ willed the daughters
of Israel not to weep for him, but for themselves, and for their own offenses.
This acknowledgment of our fault and repentance, is of great use, if it be
joined with humility. So are evil matters turned unto good, as the Berro^^ of
so^r^ He^b^, do suck out sweet (...)

The proud Pharise lessning his faults, made them greater, and the Publican
making his faults great by humble confession, did bring them to nothing. For
after repentance and amendment, comes forgiveness. The one thief that was
crucified with Christ, did not acknowledge his fault, and therefore was he
condemned, the other with humility submitted himself to Gods mercy, confessing
the greatness of his sin, and craving mercy, therefore was he received into
Paradise. It is no small help to the Physician, that the sick party does
show his grief, and where it lies, and can open and declare some cause of his
sickness, so shall he the better apply himself to work his cure.

Againt, the bountifulnes of his Father, and the good usage that he found in
his house, made him not only to think, but verily to purpose to return. The
image of God being defaced by sin, cannot appeace but in those that are
predestinate, Predestinate.
and chosen to everlasting life; there remains still an inclination to
godliness, and a sighing for Gods who although they be entangled in manifold
sins, yet do they carry the por^^^^^ of their nobility. As it may happen in a
young man, who coming of noble stock, and through want of government,
wandereth from his Fathers house, and into strange countries, being out of
apparel, and base in the sight of the world, yet in his behavior shows his
breeding, that we may say; Surely this youth comes of great kindred. So may
it be said of the predestinate, who although they fall into sin, and seem
contemptible to the eyes of men, yet do they retain an inward forwardnes to
virtue and goodness, whereby they are mightily furthered, that they may rise
from sin. Furthermore, the remembrance of the great clemency and gentleness of
the Father, did provoke the prodigal Soune to set forward.

For our instruction this we may learn, not to s^t or ^st in sin but to rise
and walk, that we may follow Christ. They that follow Christ do not sit, but
as it becomes the sons of light, they walk. Therefore if thou will follow
Christ, thou must rise and walk in godliness and good works, and giving good
example, Math. 13.44. He that found a treasure hid in the field, went and sold
all that he had. Wherefore let us not sit and continue in our vices; but as
the Heart which is beset with hounds, sigheth and mourns the more, if he see
any man pass by, as it were craving help and rescue: So we being compassed
about with so many dangers, call for help from Christ, who was made man for
us, and therefore having some taste, does know our infirmities and dangers.

This prodigal Son coming to his father, cast in his mind what he should
say, and so should we examine our consciences before we come into Gods
presence. And also we may confess to a learned and discreet Minister, and to a
godly and faithful friend, that before them we may be humbled, and from them we
may receive comfort and instruction.

But what is it that this prodigal Son has in his mind to say, Father, I
have, etc.
[Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee. And am no more worthy
to be called thy Son, make me as one of thy hired servant.]

prodigal son obtained mercy.

The hope of mercy and forgiveness made him call GOD his father; for otherwise,
through the desert of his wicked life, he could not imagine him but to be a
severe Judge. And how could he, or can any of us all call God our Father, but
by the means of Christ, who has satisfied for our sins, and paid the
ransom with his own precious blood, and by that means has procured us
favor. He is the son of God by nature, we by adoption and grace. Before we
were subject to sin, to the devil, to the fear of death and damnation, but
now has Christ delivered us from this flauery and captivity, from this fear
and danger. For he has sent his Spirit into our hearts, to testify that we
are the sons of GOD. To. 8. to give us comfort against despair, and to
encourage us in the work of godliness, knowing that our works are accepted of
him. so long as we live in his fear col. 2. We which were in sin, are quickened
in Christ. having our sins forgiven. For he has put out the handwriting of
ordinances, that was against us, he even took it away, and fastened it upon
the Cross. And has spoiled the Principalities, and Powers, and has made a
show of them openly, and has triumphed over them in the same cross. Ephesians. 2.
He has quickened us which were dead in trespasses and sins, wherein in time
past we walked, according to the course of this world, and after the prince
that rules in the air, even the spirit that now works in the children of
disobedience. Among whom we also have had our conversation in time past, in the
lusts of our flesh, in fulfilling the will of the flesh, and of the mind, and
were by nature the children of wrath as well as others. But God which is rich
in mercy, through his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead
in sins, has quickened us together in Christ, by whose grace ye are saved.
And has raised us up. We which were without Christ, and were aliants from the
common wealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenant of promise, and had
no hope, and were without God in the world, and were once a far off by the
blood of Christ, are now made near* For he is our peace, betwixt GOD the
Father and us in him we have the peace of conscience, and boldness toward God,
as we read. 1. John. 3.20.21. If our heart condemn us, God is greater the^ our
heart, and knows all things. Beloved if our heart condemn us not, then have we
boldness toward God. And what soever we ask, we receive of him, because we
keep his commandments, and do those things which are pleasing in his
sight. Now therefore we are no more strangers and forrainers, but Citizens
with the Saints, and of the household of God. For through him, we have an
entrance unto the Father. So that now we may rejoice in God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement. Then being
justified by faith. To. 5. we have peace toward GOD, through our Lord Jesus
Christ; by whom also we have access to God our Father, who only has brought
us into his presence, and arrayed us with his own garment of holiness and
innocence. Heb. 10.22. Let us draw near with a true heart, in assurance of
faith, sprinkled in our hearts from an evil conscience, and washed in our
bodies with pure water, chap. 4.16. and let us go boldly unto the throne of
grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.
Through this comfort, that most un godly King Manasses, after the view and
sight of his former iniquities, and hope of mercy and forgiveness, was
encouraged to com to god as his father. Thou are the most high Lord says he,
of great compassion, long suffering, and most merciful, and repentest for man's
miseries. Thou o Lord, according to thy great goodness, have promised repentance
and forgiveness to the^ that sin against thee, and for thy infinite mercies have
appointed repentance unto sinners, that they may be saved. Thou therefore, o
Lord, that art the God of the just, have no appointed repentance to the just,
as to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, (which have not finned against thee in like
sort as I have done,) but thou have appointed repentance to me, that am a
sinner, for I have finned above the number of the sand of the sea. My
transgressions, o lord, are multiplied, my transgressions are exceeding many,
and I am not worthy to behold and see the height of the heavens, for the
multitude of mine unrighteousness. I have provoked thy wrath, and done evil
before thee. I did not thy will, neither kept I thy commandments, I have set
up abominations, and have multiplied offenses. Now therefore I bow the knee of
my heart, beseeching thee of grace. And so forth most excellently, as appears
in his prayer, set down after the 2. book of Chronicles.

Peter went out, and wept bitterly, Mary Magdalen washed Christ his feet with
tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head. The Publicane would not cast
up his eyes to heaven; Manasses boweth the knees of his heart, beseeching grace;
and the prodigal son, calling himself to remembrance, and humbling himself
by repentance, and in great hope of pardon and forgiveness, approaches unto GOD,
saying; Father, I have finned against heaven, and before thee. The name of
Father is a comfortable name, therefore has Christ placed it in the beginning
of that daily prayer, which he has taught his disciples. Our father which art
in heaven. etc. that they might the more boldly, and cherfully come before him,
and what can the father deny the son, who takes pleasure in doing his child
good. See also how merciful the lord is, who being offended does not disdain
to be called a father, of great sinners, who have mightily dishonored him.

I have finned;] he humbly confesses his fault, neither does he excuse
himself, as Adam and Eve did, neither does he lay the fault either upon his
corrupt nature, or the devils inticement, or evil company, counsel, or evil
examples in the world, which might provoke him thereunto, but only upon
himself. For when we sin, it is more our own fault then other men's, for we are
not compeld there-unto. Wherefore David beholding the destruction of his
people, says, O Lord, it is I that have finned, but these sheep, what have
they done. This confession of sin does GOD require of a sinner; although he
know all, he looks for the voice of thy confession. For by the mouth man
confesses unto salvation. The sinner accusing himself, does prevent the
accuser, and does provoke Gods mercy.

Father, I have sinned,] not as other men, but my sins are more then the hairs
of my head. I have finned against heaven, as the prophet calls the heaven and
the earth to witness against the Israelites. I will not go about to clear my
self, but I will plainly confesle that I am unworthy of all favor. These
thoughts came not unto him by the course of his natural wit, and worldly
reason, but through the grace of God, which altered his mind, and by the force
of faith, which made him mount above all earthly considerations. For if he had
followed his own natural reason, he would have said, I did not understand
wherein I offended, neither have I done these things of set purpose, but
foolishlie was I led away through ill company and bad counsel, and therefore
there is cause why I should be pardoned. Which course of he had followed, he
might rather have provoked his Fathers displeasure, then drawn him unto mercy.
Before an earthly Judge our confession does condemn us, but before God it is
the means to procure our salvation. The Lord says, Ezech. 18 My ways are not
as your ways, neither are my thoughts as your thoughts. David, Manasses, Mary
Magdalen, Peter the publican, and the thief, did humbly confess, that their
offenses were greater then their punishment and therefore they obtained mercy,
whereof Caine and Saul, and Achab, and other missed, because proudly and not
humbly, they asked gods mercy.

I have sinned against heaven,] because I have made more account of earthly and
corruptible matters then of heavenly, as if a man should more highly esteem the
servant then the Master. God has made all these earthly things for the body,
and the body for the soul, and the soul for himself, that it might learn to
know him, love, honor, and reverence him. I will praise the lord always, says
the prophet, psalm. 33. and my mouth shall be full of his praise. Man through sin is
dumb, and cannot praise God.

I have finned before thee,] that is in the inward receipt of my soul,
where-into no man's eyes can pierce, but only God above, and many and more
heinous are our offenses, the^ are openly known to the world. As the prophet
says, psalm. 50. Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy
fight. He lay with Bathshabe secretly, and more privily did he conspire the
death of Vriah, yet was it not so secret, but it was most manifest to God,
there were few or no witnesses, but only God and his conscience. Every sin
before God, is rather esteemed from the inward heart, then from the outward
work. For out of the heart, come, adulteries murders, and the like. Mat. 15.
And that thou may know that David finned privily, Nathan said from GOD, Thou
have done this in secret, but that which I will do in punishing thy sin,
shall be before al Israel. Ananias and Saphira finned before God. We commit
those things before God, which we would be ashamed to do before a prince or
noble man, yea, before any mean man.

I have finned before thee,] o Lord my God, what small account have I made of
thee, how little have I regarded thee, I should have considered that thou
did look upon me, and behold my doings, that although I was much and long
provoked by my sinful flesh, yet the remembrance of thy presence, authority,
and scuerity in punishing should have restrained me. Is God blind, that he
cannot see our offenses. psalm. 94.9. Eccl. 23.18. He. 4.13. nay our blindness is
lamentable, which cannot see our blindness is lamentable, which cannot see our
own misery, until it be almost past remedy, and we in a manner brought to
despair, as our first parents in paradise, and Judas after he had betrayed
Christ.

The wicked Judges that would have defiled Susanna, would not behold heaven.
Although sinners believe that God knows all, yet they suspect that he is not
offended with their sins, or else they flatter themselves, thinking that they
shall escape scotfree, because GOD does forbear to punish them. The
forbearing of GOD, which should provoke the^ to repentance, does harden them
in their sines. That the eyes of God cannot be blinded, let us hear what the
Word of God does say to this intent, 1. Sam. 16. GOD sees not as man sees,
for man looks on the outward appearance, but God beholds the heart. psalm.
7. The righteous God tries the very hearts and raines. He fitly and aptly
says, that God searches, for the smallest things that are, cannot escape his
sight, he searches diligently, as it is said of the woman that swept her
house and lighted a candle, to find her Iost groate. The knowledge of God
diueth into the bottom of the great deep, Ecclus. 24. so that, that which
never man saw, is manifest unto him. Let no man think his sin to be
unknown, neither let him say with the wicked Judges, The Orchard doors are
shut, and no man sees us. The Judge of all the world sees thee, before whose
judgment seat thou shall stand. Many are like the foolish beast, which having
his head hid, thinks all his body hid to. Although we see not God, ye God
sees us, and is about our paths God willed Ezech. chap. 8. to dig through the
hole of the wall, that he might see the abominations of the house of Israel.
Then he said unto me, son of man, have thou seen what the ancients of the
house of Israel do in the dark, every one in the chamber of his imagery? for
they say, The Lord sees us not, the Lord has forsaken the earth.

I have sinned before thee,] so impudent and shameless was I, and like a beast
before thee, neither considering thy secret knowledge, nor fearing the power
of thy manifold punishments, for diverse are the ways which thou use to
punish offenders. I have finned before thee, for thou only know my
secrets. Man does not see the hainousnes of his sins, till God do open his
eyes. The devil blinded our first parents eyes, to make them believe they were
gods: but when God opened their eyes, they appeared to themselves to be most
miserable creatures, and to be ashamed of themselves, and their own nakedness.

I have sinned;] plenty made him wild and uncivil, and like to a brute beast
that has no understanding, being altogether disobedient and unruly, therefore
came this misdry well upon him, as a fit mean to bring him to repentance. So
fit it is, that God by great extreamities, should violently break our unruly
nature, and that miseries and despair should pull us down upon our knees,
whom no other remedy can tame. And happy is that distress, which
constrayneth a man to amend his cuill life.

This tenor and form of speaking unto his Father, no eloquence or art of
Rethoricke had put into this young man's mind, but his own conscience, being
grieved and displeased with it self; and yet not utterly conceauing an
extreme ill opinion of his Fathers goodness. For Gods mercy is not truly
received, till hearty repentance become an humble suter, which has all his
ground, of comfort in the hope of Gods mercy. And the confession of our sins,
ought always to be according to the nature of the offense; Psalm, 32, 5.
if public, then public confession: if otherwise, betwixt God and thy
conscience.

I am no more worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy hired
servant.]

This is one effectual note of repentance, when we are persuaded that we shall
not be refused of our heavenly Father, but that we shall obtain mercy and
forgiveness, although we be altogether unworthy. Though I am not worthy to
be one of thy household, vouchsafe me to be a hanger on. Unworthy he was to be
called his son, because by sin he had many ways defaced the Image of God,
and now being far unlike unto him. By sin he made himself the servant
of the devil and of sin. For of whom-socuer a man is overcome, even unto the
same is he in bondage. 2. Pet. 2.19. Thefore I confess my self unworthy of
favor, or to be vouchsafed the name of a Son, and humbly request that I may
be as one of thy hired servants. So that prudent woman Abigaell, knowing that
David requested her to wife, 1. Sa. 25.41. says, Behold, let thine handmaid be
a servant, to wash the feet of the servant of my Lord. The Centurion said, I
am unworthy thou should come under the roof of my house. And for this
humble confession Christ praised the Centurions faith, and granted his request.
Luke, 7.8.9.

Depart from me, says Peter, for I am a sinful man. Yet none more worthy,
then they that count themselves most unworthy. The prodigal son for his
humble confession, obtained pardon, neither did he only confess his fault,
but followed his matter thoroughly.

So he arose.
So he arose, and went to his Father.] Would God we did so rise from sin, when
we purpose to arise. Back goes he, home again, weeping and sighing, whereas
he had before departed from his Father, as pert and fierce as rash and wilful
as might be. All our life is passed in good desires, we purpose to arise, and
yet we never do arise, that is, we never settle our selves to perform good
works, which are the fruits of true repentance, Repentance.
and of a lively faith. Many detest sin, yet are they like to the door that
is turned to and fro upon his hinges, and never moves out of his place. What
profit is it to purpose, unless thou perform. Let us walk while we have the
light, for the night comes wherein no man can walk, but goes far astray.
While we have time let us do good Gala chap. 6. Seek the Lord while he may be
found, call upon him while he is near. It ought to move thee much, to make
have to turn unto the Lord, because many are dead and gone, which purposed
well, and never performed, had in their minds to turn unto the Lord, and yet
never converted. This delay has deceived many, and the sinner that promises
himself long life, comes short thereof, taking upon him to dispose of the
time to come, which only belongs unto God. Iam. 4.14. Thou know not what
shall be to morrow. It is not for you to know the times, and seasons, (says
Christ to his disciples) which the Father has put in his own power. Acts.
1.7. In the time of Noe, God cut of twenty years of those years, which he had
granted unto the world, that they might repent, because they would not make
use of the time that God granted. And if GOD did abridge the time which he
had promised unto sinners, because they would not rerepent, what will he do to
them, to whom he has made no promise of any time. Yea although thou did
know, thou should live long, yet ought thou speedily to repent. For then
is thy repentance more acceptable to God, when thou do offer it in the prime
of thy youth, and in the flower of thy age. But they which delay the time to
their decayed age, may fear least they drink up the dregs of Gods wrath. The
best of our time we offer unto the world, and the worst to GOD: when as those
things we offer unto God, ought to be the choysest, and of chiefest account.
Deu. 15.21. In the sacrifices of the Lord, they were commanded to offer a male
of a year old, without spot or blemish. Mal. 1. They that offered the blind
and the lame, were reproved: Offer it now to thy Prince, says the Lord, will
he be contented therewith.

But why do thou bestow thy best time upon the world, and the basest time to
God? How foolish were he that were almost drowned, and should refuse or delay
to have help. Late repentance is sildom true and sound, but rather enforced and
counterfeit. The rich man in the gospel, would have repented, but it was too
late for himself, and therefore he spoke for his five brethren. So thousands
after death, shall bewail the time that they lost in their life, and did not
repent, and now would, but it is to no purpose.

This prodigal Son, considering his miserable estate by sin, and from how
great dignity of Gods grace, he was fallen, purposed to leave the bewitching
love of sin, and to turn unto the Lord, which as he truly intended, so
faithfully did he fulfill it: and he rose, and came to his Father. The same
ought thou to do, and to rise from thy manifold offenses, not delaying
until to morrow, for thou know not whether thou shall live so long.

He came not to God of his own mind, but by his special grace he was directed
thereunto. The especial help which, GOD offers unto a sinner, to further
him in the work of repentance, is of two sorts. Some before, How repentance
is wrought.
inuiting us to repentance, some follow, and are inseprably joined thereunto.
Of the former sort, are Preachers, Sermons, holy inspirations, exhortations,
and counsels of friends, the fear of hellfire, the hope of everlasting life,
afflictions, miracles, examples of others, and the like. For by all these
means, God does forcibly draw, and mercifully allure sinners unto repentance.
These helps, of many are called ineffectual helps, not but that they are
sufficient to turn the hearts of wicked sinners, or at least to leave the^
without excuse, but being made void by the stubborn and obstinat mind of
sinners, who continue in sin, with a stiff purpose, those helps want their
happy success. Of the latter sort are the continual good motions of Gods
Spirit, which never leave us, until in secret sort they have tamed our
rebellious will, while the goodness of God, after a most loving and bountiful
affection, does make us pliable to his will. So that now we shed abundance of
tears, and are most willing and desirous, to alter the evil course of life,
and to frame our selves to all godly ways. These helps are called most
effectual, being joined with the work of repentance, so inseprably, that
without these it cannot be, neither can these helps be made void, seeing god
himself does make them most forcible. Although these latter helps are most
necessary, and that the former have no force without these, yet the first are
mighty persuasions, and most auailable inducements, for the stubborn minds of
men, are not won without manifold occasions and inforcements. This prodigal
Son, had the former helps, as affliction; poverty, famine, and misery, which
did allure and exhort him, to lay aside his sinful life, and to turn unto
God. GOD also put in his head, the remembrance of his fathers house, that
calling to mind his former happiness, from whence he was fallen, he might with a
most earnest desire, seek to recover the same again God granted him the
knowledge of himself, and oponed his mind to behold his misery, whereby he was
brought the more speedily to return. Whereby he gathered his wits together,
and stirred up himself, and rose and came to his father.

It is to be noted, that there be diverse degrees to turn unto God. First he
calls himself to remembrance, then he does accuse and condemn himself for
that sin and wickedness, whereunto he sees himself so much given and so
headlong carried away. Thus did this prodigal Son return, beholding the
miserable estate, The degrees of repentance.
whereinto he was fallen, through his own wilful will. This is that whereunto
the prophet Esaias exhorts, chapter 46. Remember this and be ashamed, brings it
again to mind; O you transgressers, remember the former things of old. So
Jeremy, chap. 18.11. Return you every one from his evil way. Joel. 2.13.
Rent your heart and not your garment: so likewise allthe Prophets.

And when he was yet a great way off, his Father saw him, and had compassion
on him.] The eight matter worthy of our consideration in this parable is, the
infinite mercy of God, which is not overcome by the multitude of our sins,
to remove all despair, vvhere-into we are most easily ready to fall.

Behold a pattern of the gracious mercifulness of God, who having just cause
to be angry, yet when he saw this lost son, turned his anger into pity and
compassion. The Vulture sees a carcass a far of, then flies unto it, then
ceazeth upon it, and lastly feeds ther^on. Christ saw this prodigal son a
far off in the region of sin, for health and salvation is far from
sinners, until it please GOD to make it near. He saw him with the eyes of
pity and compassion, as he looked upon Peter, after he had thrice denied him.

God does not look when we will return unto him, but rather does prevent us
with his mercy and grace. Therefore it is no doubt, but that when we do
repent, GOD does receive us into his favor, And if men, which by nature are
desirous of revenge, and which stand too much upon their own authority, yet
through a fatherly kind of affection, forgive, the great offenses of their
sons, yea, of their own accord, will endeavor to seek after them, shall
we think that God is, or will be more hard to us, whose goodness is infinite,
and which far surpasses all the kindness that an earthly father can show. Esa.
65.24. Before they cry, I will hear them. psalm. 32.5. I said I will confess
unto the Lord my unrighteousness, and thou forgauest the iniquity of my sin.

It is the mercy of the Lord, that we are not utterly consumed, as the prophet
Iere. speaks. When he was a far of; that is, when he first purposed to
return unto the Lord. So soon as he had a mind to be made whole, even before
he made his moan unto Christ, or knew what Christ was, this most loving and
gentle Father, friend and Savior, made him whole, and bad him sin no more,
least a worse thing might befall him. And here is fulfilled that which God
speaks by the prophet Esaias, chap. 65. It shall be that ere ever they call, I
shall answer them, and while they are yet but thinking how to speak, I
shall hear them. He did behold him as David desired, psalm. 25.17. Look upon
mine adversity and misery, and forgive me all my sin.

God has great care over the godly, even when they go astray from him,
neither does he straightway cast them off. The prodigal son could not
return, nor once conceive so holy a desire, unless God had looked upon him,
with a most gracious aspect. 2. Cor. 3.5. The image represented in the glass,
cannot lift up the eyes, unless he whose image it is, do first look up.
Therefore that thou must lift up thy eyes to heaven, thou had need that God,
whose image thou art, should first look down upon thee from heaven, and cast
the eyes of his mercy upon thee, that thereby thou may be drawn to lift up
the eyes of thy mind, to him that looks upon thee. For unless he do
first, by a special influence look upon thee, thou can neither look upon
him, nor be converted unto him. Thou can not rise and go unto him, unless
he move thee, and lead thee, or enforce and draw thee. As our Savior says;
No man comes unto me, unless my heavenly father draw him. Ioh. 6.

Wherefore, the spouse in the Canticles, acknowledging his secret power, and
most friendly operation, prays saying, chap. 1. Draw me after thee, we will
run after the savor of thy sweet oyniments. If thou do not draw me, I
cannot come after thee. So the prophet Eze. chap. 2.2. When God commanded him
to stand upon his feet, the spirit entered into him, and set him upon his
feet, for unless the Spirit of the Lord had helped him, he could not have
flood by himself. Lam. 5.21. Turn thou us unto thee, o Lord, and we shall be
turned. So fist he be held Peter, and after he wept bitterly. The psalm. 104.
speaks of God, ver. 32. The earth shall tremble at the look of him, if he do
but touch the hills, they shall smoke. This is he which brings the lost
sheep into his fold, who only does heal our infirmities, and has mercy on
our iniquities. This is he only of who^ Job speaks, chap. 27. God has
mollified my heart, and the Almighty has put my soul in bitterness, God only
does give repentance. For as Saint Paul says, It is the gift of God, 2. Tim.
2.25. When he wills us, to instruct with meeknes them that are contrary
minded, proouing if God at any time will give them repentance, that they may
know the truth. So that the mercy of God is necessary, not only in the work
of repentance, but before we do repent. According to that in the psalm. Thy
mercy o Lord shall prevent me.

All our endeavors are not sufficient to justify us (...) to reconcile us unto
the lord, Justification.
but that which is wanting in us, the Lord most bountifully does supply. Some
vvorke^ p^^^yning unto our justify cation, are only wrought of God, yet must
not we be dile but do our best endeavor. For as that body is dead, which has
not motion and stirring; so that faith is not so effectual, which wants good
works. Some works of GOD go before our instification, which do not requite
eyth^r our consent, or our help and furtherance. Of which sort are
Predestination, Election, and Calling; to knock at the door of our
conscience, by his secret and most gracious inspirations. Betwixt these whereby
our justify cation is begun and ended, there are other middle works
concurrent, as Faith, Hope, Charity, Repentance, and Practice of a godly life,
which require also our endeavor. The free gift of Gods grace, and an ability
to per^^^^^ good-vvorks, is only Gods gift, which be does most largely grant
to them, which are obedient to his holy calling.

When he was a far off, his father saw him, and had compassion on him;
therefore the forgiveness of our sins, and our justify cation, is only
ascribed to his mercy. And that thou may perceive, how ready God is to
forgive finners, to help and to favor them, therefore it follows in the Text.

He ran and fell on his necl^e, and kissed him.] In his foreknowledge, ^unning,
and embracing him, his great clemency and mercy is apparent. His Father does
not debate the case with him, does not chyde and threaten him, but straightway
does embrace him. Wherefore they gather foolishly heere-hence, that say gods
mercy is not ready for sinners, till they by repentance provoke him thereunto.
Hear say they, our heavenly Father is set forth, to be most easy to forgive,
but not before the the sinner do purpose to return; therefore God does not
vouchsafe any his famous, before they seek it. True it is, that the sinnen may
obtain pardon and forgiueries, that it is most requisite that he should be
touched with sorrow of conscience, whereby he may be displeased with himself but
it follows not therefore that repentance, which is the gift of God, should
have his first beginning of man's own motion.

And in this sort, far unfitly is an earthly father compared unto God, for it
is not in man's power, by the secret instinct and working of the holy spirit,
to renew and alter and change the heart of a sinner, and of a stony, to make a
fleshly heart, Eze. 11.19. and 36.26. But the question is not he^re, whether man
being converted, of himself return unto the Lord, but under the person of an
earthly father, Gods mercy is commended, and his readiness to forgive. The
grace of God, which hastneth, and speedily works, requires no delay. As the
nurse seeing the weak child to set forward to go, does presently run to stay
him: So does God help those by his grace, to begin and continue in godliness of
life, whom he has framed thereunto. Job. 14. Thou shall call me, and I shall
answer thee, thou love the work of thine own hands. The mercy of God is
not slow to them that truly repent. As soon as we being touched with sorrow,
call unto him for mercy and forgiveness, he opens the wings of his mercy, to
receive those that fly unto him, that they may return into his favor, and be
reconciled unto him. How-beit, it falls out most backwardly, that the more
diligent God is to do us good, the more forward are we to all evil, and slow
to goodness. How hasty were the Israelites, to give their jewels and earings to
the making of a golden calfe, and to bad purposes we are liberal enough, if
not too prodigal. But who is there, that to the rele^^e of a poor man, would
give his ring off his finger, or gold out of his purse, nay scarce a poor
penny, and what small help is a penny? Upon whores and harlots, most ungodly
we consume great wealth, but upon our poor kindred, we are loath to bestow
the least help. Virtue calls unto us, and commands us and we are fast
asleep, and hear not, Vice and wickedness does but becken, and hold up the
finger, and we run most speedily. We are hasty to do evil, but slow to good
works.

He fell upon his neck.] Whereby is declared not only Gods love, but his
great care, in preserving, guiding, and governing of them, which turn unto
him, he does cherrish and embrace the repentant sinner, with both his arms of
mercy, love and compassion. His lest arm is the forgiveness of sins, and his
right arm is the promise of glory and everlasting life. According to that of
the prophet, Hosea, 11.3. I led Ephraim, as one should bear him in his arms.
I led them with cords of a man, even with bands of love, and I was to them
as he that takes of the yoke from their jaws.

And kissed him.] Which signifies the infusion of his heavenly grace, pouring
forth the greatness of his affection, and showing the effect of his heavenly
bounty and goodness, toward a penitent sinner. By these sencible matters of
embracing and kissing, more high and heavenly things are meant. By the kiss is
meant the perfection of grace, because a kiss is a sign of perfect
reconciliation, good will, peace, and love, and therefore it is set in the last
place. Great is the gracious favor that God shows to mankind, The manifold
mercies of God.
for if he should straight lie deal with the most godly, he should find
matter enough to condemn them. But so exc^eding is his mercy and compassion,
that he presen^eth sinners, calls back those that fly from him, gathers
together those that are disperced delivers them that are ready to perrish,
quickneth those that are dead in sin, justifies them whose deserts have been
far otherwise, rebukes those that are negligent, stirs up those that
sleep in sin, raises up those that are fallen, instructs those that are
ignorant, brings back those that are gone astray, embra-braceth them that
return, and keeps and preserves the^ by all means possible. Who soever
therefore does duly consider Gods mercy and compassion, has no cause to
distrust and to fall away from God, but rather to be comforted with hope of
pardon. Why therefore o sinner, do not thou depart from sin, seeing that thou
may be graciously received. For, at what time soever a sinner does repent
him of his sin. I will put out all his wickedness out my of remembrance, says
the Lord. How ready is Gods mercy toward thee, that he may graciously receive
thee, and crown thee also with honor. Come out then out of thy prison, into
this place of liberty, and if it be possible that thou can wind thy self out
of the slavery of sin, thou shall find thy Savior with his arms wide open,
most lovingly and graciously to receive thee, and also to prepare thee an
everlasting dwelling place in heaven, after this wretched life, and that more
princelike the^ any king in this world does enjoy. Fear not little flock,
contemptible, base, and despised in the world, for it is your Fathers pleasure
to give you a kingdom. Why do thou not stir then from sin, being almost
ouer-whelmed, why do thou stand in dirt and mire, when thy feet may go upon
clear ground?

Some Father would have taken up his prodigal child very sharply, and
corrected him severely, he would have called this spend-thrift to account how
he had spent his goods, how he had wasted his patrimony, where he had been so
long as a vagabond. But behold the great compassion of the father of this
prodigal son^^, resembling Gods mercy to a desolate sinner. He does not ask
account of him where he was, or how he had wasted his substance, he does not
revile, neither does he handle him sharply, but with a most mild and joyful
countenance, and a loving behavior, goes out to meet him, embraces,
kisseth him, and makes great joy. O inestimable love, and infinite charity,
and goodness unspeakable. What mind is it that would not burst forth in
tears, what hard heart is it, if it were harder then the Adamant, which would
not be mollified and relent, at so great kindness and courtesy offered. Return
therefore unto the Lord, who art far off from him, it is his desire a sinner
should live, and he would not his death, how headlong and void of reason then
is he, that will refuse life, and take hold of death. O Lord break all our
stubborn hearts, and make us to sigh and groan under the most heavy burden and
weight of sin, who are maruailously laden, and yet think our selves in great
ease, and at great liberty. Make an end of thy sin, and look up to God who
will ease thee. For when thou night and day do think upon nothing else, and
do set thy self to nothing else, but to offend and displease God, he daily
and hourly heaping upon thee a thousand means of his mercy, waits for thy
return, and daily looks for thy happy repentance. The happy remembrance
whereof, did make this prodigal son to say.

Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy
to be called thy son.] Great sins, great grief, but a short confession, and
this is a weighty point of repentance, when with the sense, the feeling and
remorce of sin, is joined both sadness and shamefastness. And where there
is not this sadness and shamefastnes, the sinner can never return to goodness.
Therefore there must go before repentance, a holy anger and inward grief and
coffeehouse, that we have displeased God. For following our own ways, we
grow to great forgetfulness, but returning unto God, then are we brought to true
remembrance.

Truly did the Apostle S. Paul speak. 1. Cor. 15.9. I am not worthy to be
called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God joyfully remembering
gods mercy, and his own happy return. For the more graciously the lord does
visit a sinner with his mercy, the more deeply does it sink into the heart of a
true penitent sinner, the more does he humble himself before God, and the more
grievously does he accuse his own wicked nature and disposition. The more
clearly that he does perceive Gods mercy and compassion, and does behold his
majesty and holiness, comparing thereunto his own un worthiness, ingratitude,
frowardnes, and his most sinful inclination, the more does he detest the same,
and the more plainly does he confess his fault. All which matters, when the
prophet Esaias did evidently behold, he cried out of himself, chap. 6.5.
saying, Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of polluted lyps. Job
also, 42.5. says, I have heard of thee, by hearing of the ear, but now my eye
sees thee. Therefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. When the
Apostle Saint Paul savve so much in himself, Romans chap. 7. he cried out, O
vvretched (...) shoes on his feet.]

stripe, is given a kiss, for a token of perfect love and atonement. Happy is
that sinner, who^ the Lord vouchsafes to kiss and embrace, because he
confessed his sins, and refused the name of a son, for that in his conscience
he knew himself faulty, there was brought forth the best robe, and restored
unto him. How-soeuer he has behaved himself, says his Father, my son he
was, he has been dead, and now is he called to life again. For sin is the
death of the soul, and he runs toward death, which leaves and forsakes
the Author of life. He leaves and forsakes the Author of life, whosoever
is in love with the things of this world, for the worldly pleasures are far
wide from Gods schooling. And such a one is revived again, as does repent and
reform his sinful life. He was lost without any hope ever to be recovered
again, if he had be one left to himself, howbeit he was found and gotten
again. To depart away from the fathers house, is to perrish, for out of the
same house, there is no health.

The Father speaks not to the Son, but to the servant, he that repents and
prays for Gods goodness, receives no answer, (...) Now when I passed by
thee and looked upon thee, behold, thy time was as the time of love, and I
spredde my skirts over thee, and covered thy filthiness, yea, I swear unto thee,
and entered into a covenant with thee, says the Lord God, and thou becammest
mine. Then washed I thee with water. etc. Thus does our heavenly father not
only forgive our sins, in burying and putting quite out the remembrance of
them, but also he restores unto us those gyfts, which we had lost. As he
does deprive us of them, and take them away, punishing our unthankfulness
thereby, and driving us to shame, by the reproach of our nakedness. Now by these
tokens of Gods love, the true and effectual forgiveness of our sins is
signified.

The father wills the servants to bring forth the best robe, and gives no
time of delay; for in this case, delay breeds danger. When a sinner in this
sort does recount his manifold offenses, Despair.
and is vexed with the torment of conscience, it is high time to yield help,
for fear least through despair he be cast away. There is no stay betwixt
forgiveness of our sins, and Gods grace and favor. The health of the body is
not recovered but by little and little, because the matter is not of so great
weight, but the distressed estate of the soul, must be relieved with all
speed, that may conveniently be offered and affoorded. When the body is sick,
we are marvelous diligent to have health, yea, if it be but the headache,
we can suffer no delay, seeking for help, and calling for Physicians,
according as our power and ability will stretch. So after our sin
committed, we should be as hasty to rise and to repent; Repentance.
but herein every little excuse stays us back, and we are content to delay
this time of our conversion, a great deal longer then we should, and so much
the more, being entangled in wordly affairs, and altogether drowned in
forgetfulness. In so doing, thou loosest the practice of good works, and art
troubled for want of the peace and quietness of conscience.

Again, thou know not how suddenly thy life shall be taken from thee.
The humble confession of thy fault, is the happy entrance to obtain Gods
mercy. VVash you, make you clean, says the Prophet Esaias, chapter 1. verse.
16. take away the evil of your works, from before mine eyes, cease to do
evil. The whole Church, which is the company of the godly, shall help thee
with their prayers, or if thy confession be private, thou shall be much
comforted by the admonitions of thy faithful friends, or godly Minister, unto
whom thou shall confess thy fault. Loose not so great a benefit through thy
negligence, and defer not the health of thy soul. Suffer not so ugly and so
loth-some a guest as the devil is, long to abide in thy soul; which by right
is the Temple of God. Suffer not the devil to make any mansion in thy soul,
who should not have the least entertainment, but expel him, and thrust him
forth.

And if thou do perceive thy self, to be in the jaws of this cruel Woolfe,
call for the help of Christ, that most stout and valiant Shepherd, which can
tear in pieces the laws of the Woolfe, yea, of the most stoutest Lion. 1.
Sam. 21.9. As the sword which is never occupied, gathers rust in the sheath,
and is fit for nothing, so that soul which gathers still the filth of sin,
and is never cleansed, is fit for no use, but only for destruction. The
servant are willed to bring forth the best robe. God only gives grace, and
forgiveness of sins, but by the hands of his servant the Ministers, it is
applied unto sinners; who upon their true repentance, in Gods name, and in his
behalf, do absolve them from their sin. As the psalm 130. says, With the
Lord there is mercy, and with him there is plentious redemption, and he shall
redeem Israel from all his sames. The Ministers, they bring forth this
precious robe out of the Wardrobe of Gods mercy, and of the infinite merrits
of Christ his death and passion.

He put on a ring on his hand.] That is, Ring.
he gave him power to practice all good works. He restores unto this
penitent sinner, the garment of holiness and grace, and all other good works
which he did in the state of grace, before he fell from thence.

He put shoes on his feet.] That is, Shoes.
he made the rebellious affections, of his corrupted heart and stubborn will,
obedient and subject to the rule and government of his godly and sanctified
soul: he made them most swift and ready to do good, which before were slow
to all godliness, and most quick to all wickedness.

But God not content only here-with, of a Reuenges does show himself a great
Comfor^^^ not only forgiving sin, but granting grace, to take heed of future
follies, and how we fall into the like offenses again. As Job says, chap. 22.
If thou return to the Alo^ghtie, thou shall be built up, and thou shall put
iniquity far from thy tabernacle. Thou shall lay up gold for dust, and the
gold of Ophir, as the flints of the rivers. For weakness thou shall have
strength and for ignorance and blindness, thou shall have heavenly wisdom, and
in stand of the wine of the pleasures of this world, thou shall drink of the
water of life, and shall never thirst after the pleasures, profits, and
vanities of this world, but still continually thou shall grow in dislike of
these, and long for those joys which never shall have end.

Many a one forgiues through fear, others would revenge, yet cannot, but God
with his only beck can destroy whom he will. Yet he being so often provoked,
despised, and refused, does patiently forbear us, and lovingly allure us, and
friendly receives us, and most comfortably embraces us. Making great joy at
our repentance and amendment, and steadfast purpose to continue in goodness;
therefore he bids his servants, Kill the fa^ calfe.
to [Being the fa^^^ calfe and kill him. And le^ us ^^te and be, merry. For
this my soon, says he^, ^as dead, and is alive again, and be was los^^ but
he is found, and they began to be ^^^rie.]

This does represent the great joy wh^^^ Christ took out of the conversion of
sinners and publicanes, with whom hoe did (...), and for the which matter he
was reproved of the Sotibes and Pharisees. Unto whom he ^^^swered, that he came
not to call the righteous, but the sinners to repentance. Again head ^led them
to consider what this meant. I will have mercy (says he) and not sacrifice.
Not only the Angels in heaven, reioyde at the conversion of a sinner; but also
the whole church and God himself, and therefore he says, let us be merry. The
first thought of a sinner is of his sin, next of his own ma^^^, (...)
froward disposition* he^re-hence (...), ^^^eth the hatred and (...) of sin.
This made Petes to say, Depart from me, 6 Lord, for I am a sinful man. There
is not so much joy* when the sinner (...) there is also a^gr^^^ joy, The joy of
a sinner ^^^^^^ed.
when he (...) a good course, and ^^^eth himself to live well, after the (...)
of Go^^ most holy will.

Not only his (...), ^^^ends, and household (...) all some himself (...) see so
happy a change. No tongue can utter the extraordinary joys and (...), which God
granted to the souls and inward (...) of them, which having ^spans^ to God. If
after th^^ (...), there were no glory remaining for the godly (...) illegr^^^
(...) th^^ (...) they have, should pers^^^ the^ (...) out sin. See the
difference betwixt the keeping of Swine and the ple^^^ (...) fathers table. In
sin there is not (...), and ^^^me, and ^^^th, (...) in (...) abound a (...)
and gracious fa^^^ (...) sinners are decea^ed (...), the in that they ^^ink
ther^^^ (...) so great comfort and plen^^ to be sound (...) life as they (...)
they (...) a lew^^ life, esteeming (...) (...) of ^his (...) ^he^fore they are
(...) (...) lewd woman (...) ^^^ence for (...) life, would s^^^er divine, but
that she fea^eth poverty and divert other worldly helps and for that cause
endangereth her soul for ever. But let that of the prophet comfort thee, Psalm
36. I never saw the righteous forsaken, nor their seed be^ing their bread. The
birds of the heaven, they neither sow nor spin, yet God provides for the^; how
will not god provide for them much rather, which truly tu^ne unto him. See how
he provided for this prodigal son who as soon as he left his sinful life, found
a banquet prepared, and joyful company, and pleasant music. The children of
Israel departing from the bondage of Egypt, saw Gods miraculous deliverance,
sang and rejoiced, and never wanted food from heaven until they can into the
promised land of Can^an. They which leaving the vani^^es of this world, make
their volage through the Deserts of this life, se^sing God and seeking ^^^enly
Cana^^^. God grants the^ many, worthy meditations and heavenly co^forts,
where with they are inwardly fed, as with Manna from be^^^, having diverse
s^^^es (...) ^^^agements, that they should not saint. The Israelites, in Egypt
fed upon Onions and Garlic, but in the Desert they fared most daintily* so
this prodigal son before he came to his father fed upon husks, but being
returned, has his part of the fat calfe.

It is worthy the noting, to see how in the beginning of our conversion, it
pleases God to grant abundance of joy, as he did to this prodigal son,
and to the Israelites going out of Egypt. This God does in great mercy,
considering the great frailty of them, who newly have returned. For they stand
in need of special help and comfort. Who although they be returned by Gods
especial appointment, sustain^ many labous, and endure many tentations, as the
people of Israel did in the Desert. Yet in all these labors and trialls, they
are not forsaken of the Lord, but at last they have the upper hand, as the
Israelites had of the Cana^nites. Many think a virtuous life is painful, and
a vicious life most pleasan^, but the difference is in the end. For the end of
the virtuous life is joy in another wo^ld* how troublesome so ever it has been
in this world, but the end of a vic^ous life is most l^mentable* when these
short joys a^^ soon out off. The beginning of our conversion, and the end of
our perfection, God does crown with greatest joy. Fruit trees when they begin
to bud, have a flourishing show, and when they yield their fruit, then are
they most accounted of. In some God does magnify his mercy, in others he
rewards their good deeds.

When God by his secret grace, does espouse himself to the soul of any man or
woman, because he receaueth the some poor and naked, of his own cost he
makes a bountiful feast neither does he order the matter after the deserts of
that soul which is espoused unto him, but according to his own wealth and
abundance, having all from him self, and nothing from that. Therefore it is
said in the Canticles, My sister is but a little one, and has no breasts. The
parents love their children, but especially the young ones, they carry in their
arms, and tender them most. So God is most tender over them, that are newly
converted unto him, and bears much with their infirmities, and helps them
forward, and stays them as a nurse does her children. Therefore Christ did
not only lovingly and mercifully receive the publicanes and sinners that
repented, but was conversant with them, and did eat with them. He that found
his lost sheep, laid it on his shoulders with joy; and when he ca^h home he
called together his friends and his neighbors, saying unto them, Rejoice with
me, for I have found my sheep which was lost. So the woman when she had found
her groate that she lost, called had friends and neighbors saying, Rejoice
with me, for I have found the piece which I had lost.

The prodigal Son said, I will rise and go to my Father, and say unto him,
Father I have finned against heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to
be called thy Son, make me as one of thy hired servants. So he arose and
came to his Father, and when he was yet a great way off, his Father saw him and
had compassion, and ran and fell on his neck and kissed him. Then the Father
said to his servant, Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him, and put a
ring on his hands, and shoes on his feet. And bring the farte calfe, and
kill him, and let us eat and be merry. For this my son was dead, and is
alive again, and he was lost, But he is found, (for the Scripture tern^eth
them dead that are given up to find, and they are risen from the dead, which
r^pent and amend.) And they began to be me^ry at so happy a change* For I
say, unto you, that joy shall be in heaven for one sinner that ^onuerteth*
more then for ninety and nine just men, which think they need none amendmen^
of life] Yea, there shall be joy in the presence of the Angels of God, for one
sinner that conuerteth.

But now let us behold the murmuring of the Pharisees, whom this elder grudging
son does represent; and how Christ plays the advocate pleads for
sinners, and takes their part, which is the last thing to be spoken of and
wherein the whole parable is conclude.

Now the elder brother was in the field, and when he came and drew near to
the house, he heard melody and dancing* And called one of his servants and
asked what those things meant. And he said^ unto him, Thy brother is come, and
thy Father has killed the fatted calfe, because he has received, him safe and
found. Then he was angry and would not go in, therefore came his Father out
and entreated him (...)

In this last consideration, in contained a great encouragement, to them that
live well, that they may continue in well doing, and be godly still. As we
read Re. 22.11. He that is righteous, let him be righteous still, and he that
is Holy, let him be holy still. Behold I come shortly, and my reward is with
me, to give unto every one as his work shall be. Son (says this Father)
thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine. Also here is contained an
instruction unto the godly, not to murmr at Gods works, but rather to
reverence them, and to ^eioyce, that it has pleased him to deal so graciously
with sinners, and to call them home, that went so far astray. Whereby we are
further taught, not rashly to judge of any, but to hope the best, and in
charity to pray for their amendment. Ia 6.2^. Ga 6.1.^.

As we are willed to mourn with them that mou^^e, so also are we counseled to
rejoice in all christian sort, with them that rejoice, and not to repine and
grudge at any thing that good is. Especially we should rejoice and be g^^d one
with another, at the conversion of a sinner, as the Apostles rejoiced at the
conversion of the Gentiles, Acts, 11, 18. When they heard these things they
held their peace, and glorified God saying. Then has God also granted to the
Gentiles repentance unto life. The Pharisees through the pride and high
conceit of their own worthiness, and disdain of sinners, could not rejoice at
the conversion of sinners, or that any savor should be showed them. Our
Savior Christ sitting at table in the house of a Pharise, and Mary Magdalen
standing behind him, and wiping his feet with the hairs of her head, the
Pharise which bad him, thought this with himself. If this man were a propher,
he would surely have known who and what manner of woman this is, which
touches him, for she is a sinner. To whom Christ answered, by way of a
parable, that many sins were forgiven her, because she loved much, because
she turned from her vain love, and turned to the Lord with all her heart,
Math. 20. The master of the vineyard, when he was to pay the laborers their
hire gave unto them that came in last, as much as he gave unto them that came
in first, therefore the laborers murmured against the master of the vineyard,
saying. These last have wrought but one hour, and thou have made them equal
unto us, which have born the burden and hear of the day. And he answered one
of them sayings Friend, I do^ thee no wrong, is it not lawful for me to do
as, I will with my own. Is thine eye evil, because mine is good (...) Jonas
when he had prephecied the destruction of Niniuie, went out of the City, and
sat on the cast side of the City, and there made him a Booth and fate under
i^ in the shadow, till he might see what should be done in the City. And God
made a gourd to rise up, which shadowed Jonas from the heat of the sound,
whereas he was glad. Anon after GOD caused it to perish, whereupon Ionast
wished in his heart to die. Then God said unto Ionast Do thou well to be
angry for the gourd? And be said. I do well to be angry unto the death. Then
said the Lord. Thou have had pity on the gourd, for the which thou have not
labored no^ther mads shi^ grow, which came v^ in one ^ight, and perished in
another, and, should not I spare Niniuie that, (...) City wherein are six
score thousands persons, that cannot discern betwixt they^^ ^ight hand and
their left? Should man that has need of Gods mercy, repine when GOD shewth
mercy unto others, especially Jonas, which had so manifold try all of Gods
mercy. We know not into what sins we may fall, when as we would be glad
to cry and call for mercy, and to desire others to pray for us. Who was more
approved of the Lord, the Leuit, or the Samaritane that helped the wounded man,
that fell among thieves.

Many in these our days are like to those before recited, Envy.
which are sorry that God is either bountiful, or merciful unto others, and
do envy that GOD does good unto sinners; which in a manner seem to sin
against the holy Ghost, because they are agreeued to behold Gods goodness and
gracious works in others. Who by reason of GODS mercy, grow to be
malicious, being herein like unto spyders, who out of good flowers, can
gather nothing but poison, and in so doing, treasure and heap up unto
themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and of GODS just indigriation.
They oppose them selves agayrist Charity, which is the Lady and Queen of
all other virtues. Wherein their sin is so much the greater; as also the wise
man faith, Wisd. 2. Through envy of the devil came death into the world, and
they that hold of his side prove it. Through envy of Gods glory, the Angels
became devils, through envy of man's estate, the devil tempted him to disobey
God and so overthrew him. Caine slew Abell, because his own deeds were evil,
and his brothers good. Joseph's brethren through envy sold him, and Saul
persecuted David and the Jews crucified Christ. Ah cruel vipers, that sought
his death, who came to give them life.

If we were as holy and as righteous as ever were David, Samuel, Esaias, Jeremy,
yet herein we should not murmr, to see God show mercy to others. Moses
wished himself to be raced out of the book of life for the Israclites.
Samuel prayed for Saul, I^remy wished his head were a foundtaine of tears
that he might weep for his people. Christ prays for his persecutours. Father
forgive them they know not what they do and S. Stephen prayed that the Lord
would not lay that sin to their charge. Poor publicanes and sinners that are
distressed in conscience, and feign would come, suffer them to come unto me,
for of such and to such appertains the kingdom of heaven. For they are your
brethren, and I am the father of them, and of you, and love them entirely. They
having care of their salvation; at last are turned to the Lord, whereof you
also ought to rejoice, and to give God great thanks. If we grudge and repine at
Gods mercy toward others, and it proceed from enity, our nature is most bad,
if from out severity, we are too extreme Judges, little considering what we
would should be done to us, in the like case, and what may fall our upon our
selves. Let us mark the high mind of the Pharise, and how he boasted of his
own righteousness, Luke 18. I thank he and God, that I am not as other men,
decea^e^s, adulterers, or enen as this publican! I fast twice in the week. I
give ^ithe of all that I possess. The self same thing says the elder
brother, Lo these many years have I done thee service, neither brake I at any
time they commandment, and yet tho^^ never gau^st ^n^ a Kid, that I might
make ^e^y with a^y friends. But when this th^^ ^o^e w^^ come, (dis^^infully
spoken) which has deuo^^^d thy goods with harlots, thou have for his sake
killed the fat calf^^] T^^^ 3, 3. For we our selves also were (...) times
past, unwise, disobedient, deceived, serving the lusts and diverse pleasures,
living in maliciousnes and envy, hateful, and ha^i^g one another. But when the
bountifulnes and love of God our Savior toward man app^a^^d; Not by the worke^
of righteousness^ which we had done but according to his mercy he saved us by
the washing of the new b^th, and the ^ene^ing of the holy ghost^. Which he
shed on us abound and through Jesus Christ and Savior, that fat calfe and
that (...) on late Lamb, which was slain for^s that our ^ou^es might (...) on
his deserts and hand of especial comfort there hence. These Pharise^ never
tooled upon th^^^ a merciful disposition, and ^^^^fore ^^^ev, not (...) ^o
mercy ^u^^s the poor (...) away (...) justified in gods sight, (...) boasted
so much of his (...) d^^de^,) so gods mercy is (...) his goodness more abound
(...) and are (...) ^^iffe ^ppon (...) For they (...) stand, may fall; and let
them that think they stand, take heed least they fall.

If we will be accounted the children of god, we must brotherly forgive those
faults and offenses, which god himself forgiueth Many understand the Jews,
under the name of the elder brother, for w^e know how with great pride and
lo^^^es, they did grudge at the calling of the Gentiles. But they which so
expound this parable, do not well confider the true ^^^^ing thereof; although
it may suffer that application; Hipocra^es cannot abide that gods mercy should
be so large, who were they such obedient sons as they boast the selves, yet
they ought not so proudly and so disdainfully, to envy and grudge at their
poor brethren, who repent and turn to newnes of life.

Oftentimes the elder are set aside, and they ou^ger made more account of so
(...) pleases God to debase the judgments of (...) Esa^^ the elder, yet Iaco^
^ad the blessing Manasses the elder, yet Ephraim prese^^ed, king David ^ad
elder brethren* Adoniah was the elder, but Solomon had the (...) the world,
(...) the elder (...) estimation, so hipocrites ^eare the greatest show of
holiness. In outward services, they are obedient as Esau, i^ the mean time they
can hardly abide that Gods mercy should ^e showed to sinners, being ready in a
manner to ^all GOD to account, as though, ^^ne were (...) of Gods fa^ou^, but
^^^ly they themselves, who although they seem still to be in the fathers
presence yet are not always heirs. For the last shall be first, and the first
last. Hipocrites who may be ^^^med the sons of Ag^^ (...) are preferred, and
for a whi^^ they stand for ^ei^^^ who like Isma^ll vaunt themselves of their
birthright, and (...) and disdain^ their younger brethren* Whose intolle^a^^e
pride and severity, does further appear; in that they must be entreated of no
lower a man them the fath^^ (...) they should not think hardly, th^^ mercy
should be showed to their brethren. By the example of the father, (...) learn
to be ^^^ourable toward the (...) faul^^ of (...) brethren, although God does
(...) request us there^^to.

To (...) effect, (...) chap of Master (...), upon these words. My brethren
be not many Masters, knowing that we shall re^^aue the greator condemnation.
For in many things we s^^all.

Which words he^de^idoth; first int^^^^ exhortation or admonition, that the
godly and Saints of God, do not ambitiously or rigorously censure their
brethren.

Secondly, into the reasons of that his exhortation, which are two. 1. From
Gods ^^^ine ^^dgement, which shall be the ^^^uien ^n^^nvs; li^ we shall judge
othe^^ s^ s^a^ply. ^. From the imbecilitie and frailty of our nature which are
subject to sin, as well as other then are.

VVe^s^^ in thoughts, in speeche^, and deeds, as the examples of holier men
then we are, being recited in Scriptures do declare. Three respects there are
in men, whereby their rigor toward other should be ab^te^ First, to recount
what in former times themselves have been. Secondly, to think what here-after
they may be. Thirdly, to remember what presently they are. Ou^ of other men's
falls, a fourfold profit insueth. 1. The glory of god, his power and mercy is
made manifest, in making the^ vessels of glory, who by theys fins deserved
(...) A soft answer puts away wrath, but grievous words stir up strife. An
enemies hasty nature, may be appeased by gentle words, and all strife and
contention by this means may soon cease. So the Apostle S. Paul teaches us,
not to be quarrelsome, but to be modest, showing al gentleness unto all men.

But he answered and said to his father. Lo, these many years have I done
thee service, neither broke I at any time thy commandment; and yet thou never
ganest me a Kidde that I might make merry with my friends. But when this thy
son was com, which has devoured thy goods with harlots, thou have for his
sake killed the sat Calfe.]

Hipocrites accuse God of iniquity, and judge themselves just. For when they
have performed the outward obedience of the law, they think they have perfectly
fulfilled the whole law, and that by right they ought to have, not only the
blessings of this life, but also the loves of another. For say they, we never
broke thy commandment. As the young rich man said, All these things have I
observed from my youth. Math. 19.20. But when they hear out of the gospel,
that GOD does not respect men's merrits and deserts, but does freely forgive
sins, and receive sinners unto mercy, of his own good will and undeserved
favor, they by and by judge GOD to be most unrighteous, which does reject
those which have deserved so worthy well in the sight of the world, and does
receive notorious sinners, and known offenders. Esaias. 58.3. We have fasted,
say they, and thou have not regarded; we have humbled our souls, and thou
knew not. What righteousness is this, to condemn us that have fulfilled the
law, and to save them which have so diversely transgressed it? This is the
foolish boasting of hypocrites. This elder brother is worthy of reproof in two
respects: First, that he had, no cause to ^e angry, to see his younger brother
to be s^ well dealt withal, seeing it was no hurt o^ harm, or any
disadvantage unto him. Secondly, having no regard of the welfare of his
brother, he is sad and heavy, to see him so joyfully received.

This elder brother, this Pharise, this b^sting iusticiary, says not; So many
year o^ thou have bredde me up: thou have taken great sorrow and care for me;
and I shall never be able to make recompense and amends. But he forgetting his
duty, is up with his deserts: So many years have I served thee. As the other
said, I fast twice in the week, I pay tithes of all that I possess, and so
forth.

What could be spoken more arrogantly, then to say he never broke his
commandment? Who could of right say so, but the only son of God, who truly
might say, I do those things which please my Father, Ioh. 8. All other may say,
We have gone astray, and are unprofitable servants, psalm. 14. Luke 17. If he
had committed no other sin, yet in this he broke the rule of charity,
envying at the good estate of his brother, and taking no compassion of his
former misery. Neither does he say, My brother, but in contempt, Thy son. So
great was his pride and high mind.

These Pharisees would have Christ to be conversant with none but themselves,
and these iusticiaries, would have none to have part in Christ, but only
themselves. But now let us mark how tenderly and mildly Christ answers unto
this murmuring and grudging son: not stirring him up, or provoking him to
anger, but rather by all means making him to know his bountiful mind toward
him, and what he minds to do for him, that with all thankfulness h^e might
accept of his goodness, and be well content with his Fathers dealings.

And he said unto him, son thou art ever with me, and all that I have is
thine. It was meet that we should make merry and be glad; for this thy
brother was dead, and is alive again, and he was lost, but he is found.

The great gentleness of God is herein seen, in that so graciously he bears
with the faults of murmurers, and vouchsafes to call him son, although he
were a most grudging son. He would also win and weane him from his fault,
by making him consider the daily bessings that are powered upon him, and the
great abundance, that he is like hereafter to be partaker of. Neither does he
reprove him sharply, but exhorts by mild persuasions, saying;

It was meet that we should make merry, and be glad; and why art thou thus
offended, seeing thou should be in this case as joyful as we. For this thy
Brother.]

Note how he says not. My son, but This thy brother, to allure him to
mutual concord love, and good will. Whereby we also have a warning, to show
compassion one toward another, and to rejoice at the good one of another,
seeing we are the same people and Nation, having one God, one Redeemer, one
Baptism. Exodus 32. When the people had offended, the Lord said unto Moses. Go
down, thy people have committed a great sin. And Moses likewise unto the Lord,
O Lord, let not thy wrath break forth against thy people, utterly to consume
them. Therefore now if thou pardon their sin, thy mercy shall appear, but if
thou will not. I pray thee raze me out of thy book, which thou have written.

He was dead, and is alive again.] And such is the estate of those that depart
from God, that they are counted for dead, and lost, but when they return to
God, they live again. For repentance it is, that makes the way to Gods mercy:
of which mercy we take hold by faith, but yet we are not capable of that
mercy, until we displease our selves. Through sin comes death. For death is
the wages of sin. Romans 6. In that we are ^ecouered from sin and death, it is
Gods mercy, as the prophet Ose speaks, chap. 13. O Israel, one has
destroyed thee, but in me is thy help. Where had Jonas been, or what had
become of him, if God had not thought of him in mercy; and brought him to
comfort again. The benefits that GOD daily pours down upon us, show that
our destruction comes not from him, but we our selves are the workers of our
own overthrow. And when we are restored, we are to rejoice of Gods mercy and
goodness, etc to accuse and condemn our own wilfulnes, froward and stubborn
nature, which so rebelliouslie is set to contrary Gods commandments, and holy
will and law.

By this parable, sinners are to behold an assured trust in Gods mercy that
they may learn to repent, and to yield themselves to Gods calling. Also,
those that stand, may learn to fear God, and not to contemn poor penitent
sinners, but let them fear Gods judgments, there-withall acknowledging Gods
mercy for forgiveness of sins, that even they also may obtain salvation
through Jesus Christ. Who was therefore sent of God the Father, into this world
to save sinners. 2. Tim. 1.15. For God has not sent his Son into the world, to
judge the world, but that the world by him should be saved. Ioh. 3.17.

The Father of this prodigal son, had more joy in the recovery of his son,
then in the loss of that great wealth and substance. Under the example of the
Father, pleading in the behalf of his prodigal son, is manifestly declared
how Christ answers for sinners, becomes their Patron, Advocate, and
defender: that we also may learn to humble our selves, to the release and
help of sinners, to be gracious, loving, and modest to all, and to be well
inclined even toward our very enemies, which continually murmur and speak ill
of us. Which thing if thou shall frame thy self unto, and do thy endeavor to
the best of thy power, thou shall live in peace, both with God and man, and
have the love and good will of all, and after this life ended, thou shall be
pertaker of eternal joy. Amen.

Soli Deo laus, et gloria, et gratia.
The Parable of the Rich man and Lazarus.
LVKE. 16. There was a certain Rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine
linen, and fared well and delicatly every day.
THis parable sets forth unto us, the woeful estate in time to come, of
unmerciful rich men in this world, for they are worthy to have all mercy
denied them, which when they were requested thereunto, yet showed no token
thereof.

In this parable are set down these five considerations following.

First, the example of a wicked worldling, very loose and careless, setting
light by God, and despising his poor neighbor.

Secondly, the pattern of a godly man, submitting himself to Gods will in all
his distresses, and waiting for comfort and deliverance, according to Gods good
will and pleasure.

Thirdly, the joyful estate of the godly after death, being full of unspeakable
comfort and glory.

Fourthly, the lamentable estate of the wicked after death. Wisd.

Lastly, the word of God, being delivered by the prophets, Christ, and the
Apostles, is reverently to be heard, and dutifully to be obeyed, which to our
great good, calls us to repentance, and newnes of life.

The Evangelists have not disposed all things in order, but have set forth the
effect of Christ his exhortations, so far forth as was needful, to the
edification of the Church. And in this parable, our Savior does show what
shall be come of the^ hereafter, which having no regard of the pore, give
themselves wholly to their pleasures, in the mean time suffering the poor to
hunger and starve, while they might relieve them. Although it seem to some a
plain parable, yet it is more likely it was a thing done, because the name of
Lazarus is put to. The effect of this parable is, to with-drawe us from the
abuse of our wealth and riches, and to persuade us unto bountifulness and
liberality toward the poor. For whom would not the lamentable and of the
Rich man fear, and in time to make them learn to be merciful to the poor.

The rich man is here set down without any mention of his name, because god
raketh no care of the wicked, nor remembers their names. We are willed to make
us friends of our riches, not by purchasing Lands, but by giving to the poor,
that when we shall want, as the poor now do, then they may receive us into
everlasting habitations. And by this example he persuades us, that we do not
neglect, or forget, or disdain to give alms. For who would not these words
tenisie, [Sonne, remember that thou in thy life time receiuedst thy pleasures,
and like wife Lazarus pains; now therefore is he comforted, and thou art
tormented]

This is a in of trailous change, and a miserable alteration, to see any but
the other day, to fare daintily, and to go bravely, and after a while to be
tormented with thirst, to be naked and spoiled of all helps. In this sort shall
the vnmertifull rich. suffer hunger and thirst, when as they that have served
GOD, and lived in his fear, shall want no manner of thing that is good. By the
rich man is signified not only he that has great wealth, but that has wise,
children, die^ and for ualities in abundance. Whose estate Job does lively
describe, chapter 21. And these are they which banker every day, (...) Jobs
wastful children. But if you consider the estate of the poor, all things are
quite coutrary. And the end and their death does show all, or rather their
estate which shall be after death, which makes the godly that were miserable in
this life, to be then most glistering and glorious, and the rich, which in this
life lived as Kings and Emperors, and were ungodly withal after death to be
in far worse account, then the lowest pages, and the basest vassals, and the
vilest and poorest beggars on the earth. Yea, full gladly would they change,
if it were possible, on this condition, that they might return again from
death to life.

It is not their riches that brings them to this unspeakable misory but the
abuse of riches, which do soon move us to the forgetfulness of GOD and our
selves, and to commit many greauous sins and offenses, the devil taking
occasion thereby to ouerthrewe us. For no doubt, as there have (...) godly rich
man as Abraham, Isaac, David, Ichosaphat, Job, so there are many yet in the
world, and God in crease the number of the^: but for the most part they give
themselves to great wicke^^^^, and as they increase in wealth, so they decrease
in godliness.

This story teaches us, that there is another life after this, and that the
soul is immortal, Immortality.
which many rich men can not abide to hear, or at least wise could wish it
were not so. But the godly that are poor, and miserable, and wretched, here
may comfort themselves, with that saying of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 15.10. If in
thynlyfe only we have hope, we are of all men the most miserable. And their
hope of another life, does make many things in this life which are bitter, to
seem pleasant.

If GOD be just he will give glory to the good, and punishment to the badde.
Romans chap. 2. ver. 7. Heb. chap. 11. ver. 6. But this righteousness is not
performed in this life, and therefore is it reserved to an other. In this life,
the rich and wealthy enjoy the world at will, and the godly are oppressed and
cast down, and suffer much injury. But to the good, this is their comfort,
that all things fall out to the best, and they are abundantly recompensed in
another life.

Lazarus had comfort for all his miseries, and (...), and eternal inly ^s, for
temporal greefes and sorrows. We read not in this story, that the rich
ro^^ got his good sv vhi^stly, but that he was (...) for his ha^i^^es, in that
he did not dispose of the^ according to Gods will and (...). As the holy
Apostle says, Charge them that are rich in this world. (...) Timo. ^on^, that
they do good, and b^^ri^h in good wo^lls, and ready to distribute. Laying up
in store for themselves a good foundation against the time (...) that they may
obtain eternal life. And Christ also gives us a fair warning, Math (...)
that (...) lay not up for our selves insures upon earth, where the rust and
moth does c^^^^ple. And when we make a f^^^st not to bid the rich and (...)
might bid us again, but to bid the poores for although they can make (...)
pence, (...) in pence shall he ^^^^^^ned with life to come, and at above
surfuction of the just.

If nothing were to be ^^^leed for, or to he (...) after this life, what were
more (...) Lazarus life, and what more stately and glorious, then the life of
the rich man, and how kingly were his tyranny. But therefore has god appointed
a day to judge all matters, when as the cause of the godly shall be heard and
righted, and the wicked brought down full low, which did advance themselves
so high. And then the Emperor shall stand at the bar, and the King and Judge
himself shall hold up their hands. Therefore this story, as it does comfort
the godly, so it does wonderfully terrify the wicked. It teaches the godly to
be constant and patient, and full of hope; it also shows how necessary good
works are, and among the rest, the works of charity and mercy.

This Rich man was not an infidel, or Gentile, but of the stock of Abraham,
neither let us think that God will spare us, for the name of Christians, if
our deeds be worse then the heathens. This Rich man was not condemned for his
incredulity or unbelief, but for his hardness of heart, and unmercifulness
toward poor Lazarus.

This story is set before our eyes, for our example, and let us take heed,
least that fall out to us, as fell out to him. Beware that thou be not given
too much to the pleasures of this world, and to the vanities of this present
life. See thou do not forget the poor, which lie at thy gate, suffering
hunger and thirst. He might have used his wealth well, and served God, but he
abused it diverse ways. First in his apparel, being too sumptuous, clothing
himself in purple and fine limen. Secondly in his fare, being too delicate,
not now and then, but every day. Thirdly, in applying it otherwise the^ to the
benefit of the poor. No doubt in these days, there be very many of his pitch
and quality in all respects, and yet are very iocund and joyful, vainly
promising unto themselves everlasting life. VVoe be unto them, for everlasting
damnation does stay for them. And as the world does decline to his end, so in
all bad vsages it exceeds.

How can we think our selves to be in the number of Christians, when as
Christ most earnestly taught humility, temperance, contempt of the world, and
charity in words and in deeds, when as now there is nothing less practiced?
But rather in steed thereof, pride, lechery, covetousness, and cruelty. But
surely the enemy of our salvation, the envious man has sowed this darnall,
while we sleep, and while our Pastors slept, which should watch over us,
and instruct us: and this his cockle and darnell, has he sowed in the midst
and thickest of our corn. Let us hereafter learn, that we are not called to
these foresaid vanities, but to bear Christ his cross.

If this we will not vouchsafe to learn, let us fear to taste of the Rich
man's torments. We easily slide into these extremities, through the corruption
of our own nature. For the root of iniquity is in us, sending forth
branches, which still budde forth blossoms, and our nature to evil, is very
fruitful and very abundant. Gene. chap. 6. psalm. 14. A covetous rich man, is
loved of no man, because he is only good for himself. Other sinners,
although they hurt themselves, yet they are profitable to others. The proud
man has a great family; the gorgious builder sets many men a work.

Beside, the covetous hurt the Common weal mightily, keeping in provision,
and making a dearth. And many of them in this their flourishing, would be
accounted of the poor people and common sort, as if they were gods.

There was a certain Rich man.] For indeed they look to be alone. There was,
but now he is not, he is gone and vanished. psalm. 37.36. I my self have seen
the ungodly in great prosperity, and flourishing like a green Bay tree: and I
went by, and lo he was gone, I sought him, but his place could no where be
found. And being in hell, this they can say, Wisd. 5. What has pride profited
us, and the pomp of riches brought us? All these things are passed away like a
shadow, and as a post that passes by, as an arrow out of the bow, and as a
ship upon the sea, which is swift under sail. Where are infinite number of
welthy men, that have lived heretofore, and is not their remembrance quite
forgotten? They that seek fame in earthly things, their fame has an end,
Name.
but the remembrance of the just shall always flourish, as Josias, whose
remembrance is as honny in the mouth, and as music at a banquet. The memory of
the wicked. God does root out, as he rooted out the remembrance of Amelek
from of the earth. The Rich man is not named, as the psalm. 69.29. says, Let
them be wiped out of the book of the living, and not be written among the
righteous. As when we talk with a stranger, and our friend ask who it was,
we say, we know him not, because we regard him not, neither do we care for him.

Clothed in purple.] Not that all gorgious apparel displeases God, or that
the finenesse thereof is utterly damnable, but because it seldom falls out,
but that we exceed herein. He that desires bravery in apparel, App^rell.
will daily by new additions increase riot, and after awhile will throw him
self into all intemperance. But this Rich man in this place, is not so much
condemned for his riot, as for his cruelty.

For his rich and ouer-sumptuous apparel, he spent his riches wastfully. Not
but according to their degree, men and vvomens apparel may be more costly
then other-some, and yet all ought to be in a measure. But now the world is
given to this excess, that every one will go in these expenses of apparel,
far beyond their bounds. Nay, in this respect, servants, and those of the
meanest calling, can scarcely be known from their masters and betters. Every
ones mind is on great ruffes, and for want of maintenance, they will venture
the best joint in their body, til at last their great ruffes come to rough
halters. Alas, if they did confider, a time of sickness may come, when their
great ruffes will do them no good, a time or trouble, when thy money may stand
thee in steed, thy ruff cannot help: a time of preferment, a time of age, and
diverse are the casualties of our life, whereon our money might far be better
bestowed.

The men and women in former times, were not so arraied, but were content with
that which was decent. The garments that God prepared for our first parents,
were of Goats skins. Gene. 3.21. Christ his garment was simple and plain,
without any seame. The holy women in the first age of the world, even Abraham's
wife, that great rich woman, tired herself most modestly, herein obeying her
husband. 1. Pet. 3. chap. For many women in this do much contrary their
husbands will, without modesty, going beyond their husbands calling, and
without care of impouerishing his estate, flourish for a time, and afterward
come to decay. But the modest and sober behavior of men and women in this
respect, especially of Christians, is a mean whereby other are won to nue
religion. 1. Pet. 3.1. Heb. 11.37.38. Such of whom the world was unworthy,
vvandered about in Sheepskinnes. Because they placed not their delight in this
world, but they that had rather please the world, and please themselves then
God, cannot frame themselves to any modest attire.

By brave attire, the mind is reared up in pride, and in forgetfulness of GOD:
and who is it among a hundred, that in this case think themselves to be but
dust and and ashes, and that they have no long time of continuance here? Yea
who is it that had any meditation of another life, that would not tread this
vanity under foot. Before sin man had no need of garments, for as the Sun
does glister in light, so was man adorned with grace, and as the white Lilly,
so was he decked with innocence. And when he was wounded by sin, then he
sought to clothe his nakedness, and who vvoulde bous^ of those clothes* that
have been lapped ^^d ^rapped about his wounds? In (...) costly couerings thy
pomp is spread do^^ to the ground, and the wo^me i^spredde under thee, and the
worms cover thee, says the prophet Esaias, chap. 14.11. (...) (...) especial
care of the hid man of the heart, that that be vncorrupt, ioyn^d with a
meek and quiet spirit, which before god is a thing much set by, chap. 3.4.
And is not chaste and pure conversation before God, the rarest jewel, and the
brauest attire that can be? Though iewel^ be Gods gifts, and the riches of the
earth Gods goodness, yet the abuse of these is our sin. And how much this
displeases GOD, we may read, Esaias chap. 3. where the prophet pronounces a
threatening, to the gorgeous apparel and excessive pry de of the women of
Isra^^h.

The Rom^^^es (the rich^st people in the world) made a ^awe, that no man's wife
should hau^ ab^^e half an ounce of gold in their raiment. Thou that ^rt a
Christian, beh^ld Christ hanging on the Cross naked, for thy manifold
offenses, that by that consideration, thou mais^^ put out of thy mind all
foolishness, and worldly bra^crie. And ^fithys does not move thee, think
what brave apparel thou carriest with thee (...) thy grave, a simple shee^^,
and so fare well, fr^^ the fight of ^he world for ever* and presently do
thou turn into worms and ^^ttennes, and into stinking savor, not to be
abidden above the earth. And this strange change comes suddenly, it may be in
the ruff of thy roralie.

And fared desicatly every day (...) Making his belly his God, as many do, Diet.
whose glory is to their shame, who only ^^nde earthly things, Phil. 3. Who
as they should honor GOD with great reverence, yet make great care to provide
most precious things for the belly. Yea, many a man's table is served with
greater reverence, then God is served in the church. And many a ones chiefest
glory, is their chiefest shame, while they reroyce in their vanity, and in the
works of iniquity. Many live to eat, but let us live to serve the Lord.
Modesty and temperance, do rather respect necessity then curiosity; and the
reasonable satis-fying of hunger, then the dainty pleasing of our appetite,
which provoke to fulfill the lusts of the flesh.

GOD has created us to know the heavenly happiness, that knowing it, we
might be in love therewith, and being in love therewith, we might so
earnestly desire it, that we might in wished time enjoy it. And why do
thou leave these matters, and take all thy care for the body. If any should
be so gracious with a King, as to be made his chief Secretary, and anon after
to be made the groom of his stable; were not this a great disgrace, neither
could this Secretary take these things in good part. No more can God abide
thee, when thou turnest away from prayer and fasting, and alms, and other holy
exercises, to satis-fie thy pleasure. I take my self to be of far better
account* says Seneca, then that I should be borne to become a bond-slaue to my
body. And this comes to pass among us, when we make small account of
heavenly meditations and godly exercises.

O wretched man that I am, says the Apostle Saint Paul, who shall deliver me
from this body of sin? To. 7. Let us walk honestly, as in the day not in
gluttony and drunkenness, neither in chambering and wantonness: but put ye on
the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no thought for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts
of it. Romans 13.13. Take heed to yourselues says Christ, Luke 21.34. least at
any time your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, and least
that day come on you at unawares. For as it was in the days of Noe, Luke,
17.26. so shall it be in the days of the son of man; they are, they drank,
they married wives, and gave in marriage, unto the day that Noe went into the
Arc, and the flood came, and destroyed them all. The nourishing of the body is
not forbid, but the superfluity thereof; building of houses is not denied, but
glorious and sumptuous buildings are spoken against: garments are profitable,
but the bravery of garments, and excessive expenses are to be avoided. The
mean would very well serve our turns and the excess might very well be
bestowed to the benefit and behoof of the poor.

Have convenient care for thy body, but let it not be thy chiefest study, but
rather let it be thy chiefest care, how thou may be rid from these cares. The
body is but the garment of thy soul, and who would make more account of the
garment, then of the body, and of the body, rather then of the soul? Yet for
the most part, the world is set upon banketting and carowsing, and he is not a
man in these days, that cannot quaffe and carowse, and drink as much as a
horse. Indeed being like unto horse and mule, that have no understanding. And
so is the world, that Christianity is turned vp-side down, into good
fellowship and Epicurisme. Birds of a feather will fly together. yea and draw
many into the snare, that little thought of any such matter. The Physician will
say, that the body is best nourished with one dishe of meat, and now it is no
dinner of account, that has not great store and variety of dishes; but which
of them comes to the poor man's share? Stand at the gate of rich men's houses,
and see what store of scraps come forth; who if they did rightly consider Gods
commandment, would make the poor their chiefest guests.

Poets have mightily inueighed against the riot of their people, but if they
were now among Christians, what would they do? what would they speak? what
would they write? Surely they would hold their peace and wonder and grieve with
sorrow of heart. This I think was a great cause of the unmercifulness of the
rich man, toward Lazarus, that he thought all provision but little enough for
himself. Let us learn abstinence and sobriety, according to the counsel of
the Apostle, To. 8. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die, but if ye
mortify the deeds of the flesh by the Spirit, ye shall live. That ship which
has too heavy a burden, must needs sincke, and that body which is ouer-loden
with gluttony, must needs make the soul more guilty. God that he might show,
how small a care man should have for meat, did first appoint him the herbs
and the fruits of trees, to be his meat. Genesis 1.30. to teach him abstiuence
and sobriety. Paul the elect vessel of God, did diverse ways keep under his
body, 1. Cor. 9.27. and will thou spend thy time in eating and drinking, in
quaffing and gur^nun dizing? Daniel, that he might be more ready for heavenly
consolation and comfort, fared full barelie. Dan. 1. The devil has no greater
weapons against us, then our own sinful appetites, and if thou will overcome
him, take away his weapons, and keep thy body in subjection. Cruel beasts are
tamed with watching, and by this manner of resisting, the devil flies from us.
For if thou shall afflict thy body with watching, and fasting, and prayer, thou
shall triumph over the devil. Nothing is more against the devil, then
asperitie of life, and nothing makes him more bold, to tempt us, and to set
upon us, then when we give ourselves to liberty, and to pamper up our bodies
with delicat^ and dainties.

And fared delicatly every day.] Sometimes to fare delicatly is no fault, and
to be merry with our friends in good and honest, and civil ^ort, as is the
custom of some men; else how should we pass away this wearisome life of ours,
if we were debarred of all liberty, and all recreation. But to use this
continually, and every day, is the fault here spoken against. For a day or two
thou may be merry with thy friends, but in such sort that thou leave not of
thy manner of praying, heavenly meditations, and thy strait course of life.
But in this thy mirth, turn all to the best, and give God thanks for his
great abundance, which the sensual and senseless Rich man cannot frame
himself to do, looking upon the variety of meats, how and with what manner
of meat he may fill and stuff his belly.

Yet this is worthy the noting, that God does grant these sinners and rich
men, health, riches and many dainties, to this end, that by these means, he
might allure and win them, to serve him with freer minds, and to consider from
whom they have them, that they may use them as he has appointed, if not
hereby to leave them without all excuse. You see the sleeting Hawke which
flies astray, is not brought again with threatening, but by showing the bait.
So God uses the rich and wealthy which go astray from him; thee allureth them
with his manifold blessings and benefits, that they may rejoice to come to his
l^re, and to obey his will. The Lord wayteth for the conversion of sinners,
that they seeing his great goodness, and how much they are indebted, may at the
last relent. But if there be some few that do relent, there are many
thousands, the more is the pity, that are too too stubberne, abusing Gods
blessings at their pleasure, as this rich man did. To such the Prophet
Ezechiell gives warning, chap. 16. by the example of Sodom. This was the sin
of Sodom pride, fulness of bread, abundance of idleness, neither did they
strengthen the hand of the poor and needy. Thus much of this rich man's excess
in apparel, and riot in fare; the third is of his unmercifulness toward poor
Lazarus. But before we handle that point, let us see what manner of man this
poor Lazarus was, even an image and pattern of the godly, afflicted in this
world, and in manifold distress.

And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his gate full
of sores.] Lazarus is here named, because GOD has care of the godly, and
their names are written in the book of life, because being sustained by hope,
with patience they endure such crosses and afflictions, that it pleases GOD to
lay upon them, for the try all of their faith, and for their further
exaltation in the lfe to come.



Among worldly men, the rich men are known above the rest, and when we talk
of them, their names are perfectly remembered; but as for the pore, their names
are unknown, or if we do know them, we can scarcely vouchsafe to call them
by their names. Howbeit the Pastors and Ministers ought to have care of them,
as if they were their own children. Where we read in the book of Deuteronomy. That
there should be no poor, we must not think it a commandment, that none
should beg, but that the rich should not see the poor want, and that they
should minister all things necessary for the^. And indeed if the rich men were
such as they should be, there should be no beggar, nor any to beg from door to
door. For if they duly consider it, they are but stewards, and God has put
the^ in trust, to dispose those riches which he has put into their hands. Many
wonder and fay, Why does God grant to the wicked rich man, such store of wealth
and riches, and why does he suffer poor Lazarus, Why the godly afflicted.
and the godly for the most part, to be subject to such extremities, and to
endure so many inconveniences? In which question they are so entangled, that
they cannot find out any fit answer to satisfy their minds. But Gods works
do proceed in such order, that if any thing do seem to us to go out of
order, we must blame the weakness of our own capacity, and not the wisdom
of God, which is far beyond our reach.

The vviddowe of Sarepta, which gave Eliah entertainment, lost nothing. 1,
King. 17. The Shunamite also that entertained Elisha, 2, Kings, 4, gained an
especial favor; and doubtless they that have done good to the poor, sometime
or other find it. God appointed Lazarus to be the rich man's trial, who was
found to be merciless, and therefore in his greatest need, did miss of mercy
and favor, when he required but one drop of water, for he vouchsafed not to
give Lazarus of the crumbs that fell from his table.

Which was laid at his gate full of sores.] This and other circumstances,
Which. etc.
are set down to make the rich man's fault without excuse. If he should say that
there were many poor, and he could not satisfy all, there was but Lazarus
only. If he should say I knew him not, I saw him not; why he lay at his
gate. Or that he was not so sick, but that he might labor for his living;
he was full of sores: or that he stood not in so great need; he desired to
be refreshed with the crummes that fell from the rich man's table, and could
not have them. So just shall his punishment be at the day of judgment, that he
has no excuse for himself, but must needs stand dumb and speechless.

Lazarus showed no token of impatience all this while, Affliction.
so the godly rejoice in tribulations, knowing that patience brings forth
experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed. By Lazarus
example let us learn to take our cross and affliction patiently. In short
space things shall be altered. Reave. 22. Behold, I come quickly, to give every
man as his work shall be. And then shall this our short affliction, be turned
into everlasting joy.

And desired to be refreshed with the crummes, And, etc.
that fell from the rich man's table, but no man gave him.]

The rich man's unmercifulness.
The world most liberally grants all things necessary to the rich man,
being most plentifully provided, and enjoying all things at his will: and
contrariwise it suffers poor Lazarus to have many wantes. How ignorant
or forgetful is the world, which makes no more account of that which God
eommaundeth, and which hereafter shall redound so greatly to their good, I
mean to be merciful to the poor.

uants, and if the Master be cruel, the servants also be as unmerciful.
Ecclus, 10, 2. As the Judge of the people is him self, so are his Officers,
and what manner of man the Ruler of the City is, such are all they that dwell
therein. If the Master be a dicer, or a whore master, such also are his
servants, if the master be pitiful and merciful, and of good behavior,
such also are his servants and his children, most willing and glad to help the
poor. Gene. 24, 12. and 43, 23. 2, Sam. 13, 28. And the younger take example
by the elder, by course of nature.

Abraham being given to hospitality, his wife and his servant were as willing
to give entertainment; such also was Lot, being brought up in Abraham's
house. Joseph being godly, had a godly servant, which said to his Masters
brethren, Peace be unto you, fear not, your GOD and the GOD of your Father,
has given you that treasure in your sacks, I had your money, and he brought
forth Simeon unto them. Contrariwise, wicked Absolon had wicked servant,
which killed his Brother Ammon at their Masters commandment. 2, Samuel,
13.28.

Let Fathers and Mothers therefore teach their people under them, not only in
words, but in deeds and godly qualities. But how this is performed now
a-dayes, no man can be ignorant, when as in steed of virtuous qualities, they
teach them all manner of vices, bringing them up in idleness, and all licentious
liberty. It is no marvel therefore to see the servants out of order, when the
Masters are without any godly behavior, or good government, who being by
nature given to follow all evil vvayes, will quickly prove as bad as their
Masters. The distempered behavior of many rich men in these days is such,
that what to maintain their bravery, and other excessive charges, they run
into other men's debt, and seeing they are not good to themselves, how can
they be good to the poor. Rich men give gifts to the rich, but toward the
poor they are too sparing: too prodigal tovvard the world, and toward GOD
too wretched. As the Israelites gave their Jewels, to the making of a golden
calfe, so do the rich men to their harlots, and to the committing of outrages,
they care not what they spend.

Oh how wicked are these days, wherein no man loves the poor, no man does
comfort them for Gods sake, yea few or none will scarcely vouchsafe to look
upon them. These lovers of the world, and enemies of their own souls, how
many Lazarus do they see, and will not see, turning away their eyes, being
more careful for their Horses, and Hounds, and Pages, then for the poor, whom
Christ has commended unto them. Of such manner of people, the Lord complains
by his prophet Amos, chap. 6. They put far away the evil day, and approach
to the seat of iniquity. They lie upon beds of Iuory, and stretch themselves
upon their beds, and eat the Lambs of the flock, and the fat Calves. They
sing to the sound of the Violl, they drink wine in boules, and annoint them
selves with the chief ointments, but no man is sorry for the afflictions of
Joseph. And this rich man in his iolity, had no regard of poor Lazarus. But
that the rich man and all his house should be utterly ashamed, and left without
excuse: see what follows.

Yea, and the dogs came, and licked his sores.] When the Prophet Balaam did
wickedly, God opened the mouth of his Ass he rode on, to give him
understanding, and these dogs that had better fare to taste, licked Lazarus
sores, to reach their master mercy. O cruel people, more merciless then
dogs, which commonly hunt the poor from the door, yet now they were
pitiful to condemn their masters great unkindness, and to make them if they
had any grace, to blush for shame. The property of dogs is to bark and bite at
strangers, and to drive them away. But here the kind nature of dogs, overcame
the hard hearts of men, and they are more gentle and loving, then men that
should have showed mercy. The rich man was clothed in soft and costly raiment,
and fed with dainties to the full, and is laid upon his beds of down. But the
poor man pines with famine, is pincht with cold, and a marvel it is, that
he lives among his great wants, and as the other lay easily upon his soft
bed, so the poor man had no other lodging then the bare ground. But as they
were unlike in life, so were they far unlike in death, as the event of the
history does prove. We all die, and as water we pass away, the rich and
poor, the noble and base, the learned and unlearned, all are subject to death,
and when death comes, that makes a new alteration. For many that have been
most miserable in this world, after death have a joyful estate, and many that
did flourish in this world, after death see all things changed quite contrary.

And it was so that the beggar died, and was carried by the Angels, into
Abraham's bosom.] Lazarus dies as though he were forsaken of God and man, and
the rich man lives yet longer, to enjoy his pleasure. Yet a little while, and
surely but a little while, although in the sight of the world, his life be long.

thee to repentance? If thou dooest not know so much, thou heapest unto thy
self wrath, against the day of wrath. The devil does greedily wait for the
death of a sinner, fearing least while he lives, he may repent, although he
seem never so desperate. But when the sinner dies in his sin, the devils
rejoice, saying, Now thou art ours, and have lost everlasting life for ever,
thou art ours and no man can deliver thee, or take thee out of our hands. Then
shall he see heaven shut up against him, and GODS displeasure to take full
place, and him self to be in most lamentable misery, and past all hope of
remedy.

Wherefore now bethink thy self, now crave mercy and forgiveness at GODS
hands, now shed abundance of tears; for this is the time of grace, this
is the acceptable time, this is the day of salvation. And if ye have the grace
to to hear and understand, and to foresee your own misery, harden not your
hearts from God, harden not your hearts unto your own destruction.

The order of the narration of the History is to be considered, for when the
Evangelist speaks of them being alive, he p^^ferreth the rich man before
Lazarus. For in this life the rich are of chiefest account, in chiefest places,
in bankers and judgment seats, in honor and dignity, who but they. But in
speaking of them; being dead, Lazarus is first mentioned, for before the wicked
rich, the godly poor are preferred in another life. The glory of the godly
begins in their death, as the glory of the wicked does end in their death. The
misery of Lazarus is ended in his death, for he whom no man regarded in his
life, the Angels took him up after death. And who would have thought, that
this poor wretch being so despised, should be so accepted of God, but the ways
of God do far differ from the ways of men, neither are his thoughts as our
thoughts. Esaias, 55. But to see how God does honor the godly in their death,
let us mark what follows.

And was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom. And, etc.
] Whereby we understand that the Angels are present at the death of the godly,
to perform their charge appointed unto them. Heb. 1, 14. Psalm. 91, 11. O happy
soul which here was visited of none but of dogs, now not one Angel, but
many Angels come to do it service. So that the devil has no power over the
souls of the godly, but over the vessels appointed unto wrath. A bay or bosom
is a haven and place, free from turbulent waves; the world is the maine sea,
and heaven the haven of rest. And he that in life could find no comfort, after
death was carried into Abraham's bosom, that man of great compassion and
hospitality. Or rather, because Abraham was the Father of the faithful, he
is there placed where Abraham is: or more near, where Christ our head is,
there shall the godly and faithful, Christ his members be. John. 14.1.2. And
although here is no mention made of Lazarus burial, we must not therefore
suppose, that he was cast forth to the fowls of the air, or the beasts of
the field, for no doubt he was laid in Christian burial, but his burial is
not remembered, because it was not performed with pomp and solemnity, as the
rich man's burial was, which was the last of all the Rich man's pride and
bravery. And what good can a pompous burial do, to miserable souls that are
damned in hell.

world, for the world passes away, and the lusts thereof, but he that
fulfilleth the will of God, abides for ever. It is appointed to all men to
die, and after death comes judgment. Heb. 9.27. And no otherwise likely it
was, but that this Rich man had his doom and judgment, before he was sent to
hell. For after his death and burial, was he condemned and forsaken of God,
and utterly deprived of all joy and comfort.

And being in hell in torments, he lift up his eyes, And etc.
and saw Abraham a far of, and Lazarus in his bosom.] What did his pompous
burial do him any good, as the rich men take great care for their glorious
funerals; but as for poor Lazarus, there was no mention made of his burial.
But better were it for rich men, to have a rich soul to God, then after their
worldly braueries, to be thrown down into hell. He went not down to hell, to
see what there was done, but to feel that which was intolerable, and to
abide such misery, that never should have end. And why was it? he came to his
goods aright, but he did not dispose them as God commanded. He was no thief
nor Usurer, but only unmerciful, and therefore found no mercy. If he were so
grievously punished, for not using his own goods well, what shall become of
thieues and Usurers, which deceive other men of their goods, and do unjustly
detain them.

Hellish torments can no more be conceived, then heavenly joys, both being
infinite. And as in hope, we have some taste and feeling of heavenly joys, so
is it sufficient to know these endless vvoes in gross, and after a sort,
though confusedly, so far forth, as may serve to keep us in Gods fear. And
though we cannot enter into the depth of these matters, let us leave of to be
curious, and meditate on those things which are most necessary. In this example
we learn, that the wicked through the feeling of their misery, are meruallously
vexed, and are desirous of some comfort. Yet all hope being cut of, they feel
a double torment. First, the remembrance of their manifold and heinous sins,
is a continual torment unto them. Secondly, the consideration of the joys of
the godly, increases their grief far more, comparing their unspeakable
joys, with their endless and insufferable miseries.

This rich man's sorrows, therefore were mightily increased, The rich man's woes
increased.
first by seeing Lazarus in so good case, and himself in such endless woes.
Secondly, beholding how unrecoverable his state was, for out of hell, there is
no redemption. Thirdly how co^fortlesse he was, in that he required but one
drop of water to cool his tongue, and could not have it, although he earnestly
requested the same, having the least comfort denied him, that was unmerciful
in small matters. And lastly, in fearing the damnation of his brethren, which
were yet alive, and were like to drink of the same cup. In vain does he look
upon him after death, which was unmerciful to him in his life. He does not
behold him with the eyes of his body, but with the eyes of his mind, his
understanding was now opened, which in his life time was shut. The Wise man
counsels, that we should not turn away our eyes from the poor, least the
Lord turn away his face from us. And as the Mold-warpe, so is the rich man
blind all his life, and cannot see himself, nor God, but is altogether busied
about earthly considerations. And as the Moldwarpe is said to open his eyes at
the time of death, so these rich men at the time of death, can say, Vanity of
vanities, vanity of vanities; and all is but vanity. After death they can say,
What has pride profited us, or the pomp of riches? Wisd. 5. It is well
spoken, but it is considered and thought upon too late.

He saw Abraham a far of, for salvation is far from the wicked. psalm.
118. So far of was the Rich man from Lazarus, as the grace of God from sin,
virtue from vice, heaven from hell. He that lay at the rich man's gate, is in
great glory, and far above him; and he that in this life wanted no comfort,
now wants no misery. To this agrees that of Solomon, pro. 14.19. The evil
shall bow before the good, and the wicked at the gates of the righteous. Dives
lived in this world in pleasure, and Lazarus in labor and sorrow, but now is
Lazarus exalted and he tormented. As the Lord says by the prophet Esaias.
65.13. Behold, my servant shall eat, and ye shall be hungry, my servants
shall drink, and ye shall be thirsty, my servants shall rejoice, and ye shall be
ashamed. Behold, my servant shall sing for joy of heart, and ye shall cry
for sorrovve of heart, and shall howl for vexation of mind. Lazarus in this
life begged of the rich man, but the rich man after begged of the poor man:
and as the rich man heard him not, so was not he heard. As we read, Prou.
21.13. He that stops his ear at the crying of the poor, he shall also
cry, and not be heard. As it was a pain to the poor man, to lie before the
rich man's gate, he in penury, and the rich man served so plentifully; so was
it a pain to the rich man, to see Lazarus in such great glory, and himself in
such great misery, and unspeakable torments. For as God when he cast Adam out
of Paradise, placed him not far from thence, that he might daily behold
from what a blessed place he was banished, so did GOD set before the eyes of
the rich man, the happy estate of Lazarus, that he should be vexed so much the
more. Wisd. 5. Then shall the righteous stand in great boldnesle, before the
face of such as have for mented him. And they shall change their minds, and
sigh for grief of mind, and thy within themselves. This is he who^ we
sometimes had in derision, and in a parable of reproach. We fools, thought his
life madness, and his end without honor. How is he counted among the children
of God, and is portion is among the Saints. It is not said here, The diversity
of torments.
that the rich man was in torment, but in torments, for manifold are the
torments of hell. The want of Gods most comfortable presence, which no doubt
the damned do desire, if not for the love of Gods goodness, yet for their own
ease and infinite refreshing. The outward torments of the body, expressed by
the fire, in respect of which, our fire is but a painted fire. The worm of a
gnawing and biting conscience. Most ouglie darkness, worse then the darkness of
Egypt. A most beastly stink, with infinite other torments, whereof the least
is most intolerable, or more then can be suffered or devised in this life.
Even against nature, they shall desire not to be, and wish they had never been
borne. There shall be no power able to deliver them from thence, and the
remembrance thereof, from time to time, shall most grievously torment their
minds. These pains endless and comfortless, shall make them die which
cannot die. Wherefore, considering these torments, there should be nothing so
hard in this life, which God did command, but we should

Then he cried and said; Father Abraham have mercy on me, and send Lazarus,
that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue. For I am
tormented in this flame.]

What great increase of sorrow was this, that he should desire to have comfort
from Lazarus, and yet could have none. He cried and made a great lamentation,
because his pain was so exceeding great. Now he calls him Father Abraham,
whom he would not follow in his life time; again, he calls him father too
late, and repents too late. See what it is to boast of the name of a
Christian, and not to show the practice thereof in our life and conversation.
For not every one that can say, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven. Math.
7.21.22. Many shall say in that day, Lord, Lord. And he shall say unto them, I
know ye not; Depart from me ye that work iniquity. The foolish Virgins,
Math. 25.11. could say, Lord, Lord, open to us; But he answered and said,
Verily I know you not. And they that said, Lord, when saw we thee a hungry,
or naked? To them it shall be said, Inasmuch as ye did it not to the poor for
my sake, ye did it not to me, knowing that I committed and commended the
poor unto you in my steed. The poor ye have always with you, but me shall
ye not have always. Then also shall they hear that doleful doom, sentence,
and judgment, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire. Math. 25.41.
Father Abraham have mercy on me. He called for mercy too late, as also he was
far unworthy of mercy, which would take no pity and compassion of his poor
neighbor. And he shall have judgment without mercy, that shows no mercy.
Math. chap. 18.

Heere-hence we may gather two profitable instructions. The first is, to show
mercy to our poor neighbor, if we will look for mercy at Gods hands.
Secondly, to call for mercy and forgiveness, and pardon of our sins in this
life, and not to defer it until the last hour, or at least wise till after
death. To defer it to the last hour, is to hazzardous and venterous, when as
we may sooner miss, the^ to have our request granted; the other that is after
death, is altogether vain and unprofitable. He that would not show mercy to
his fellow servant, that ought him but a hundred pence, was greeueously
punished. Ecclus. 28.2. Forgive thy neighbor the hurt that he has done to
thee, so shall thy sins be forgiven thee also, when thou prayest. What
measure thou metest, the same shall be measured to thee. Endeavor therefore
what thou can. to be merciful to the poor, calling thy self to
rememberance, how greatly thou stand in need of mercy from God. As for this
rich man's too late repentance, he was not so wise as David, psalm. 50. Hear o
Lord, and have mercy upon me, Lord be thou my helper: for what profit is there
when I go down to the pit; and out of hell there is no redemption. And
therefore earnestly and humbly he prays for mercy in his life time, before
the eternal bars do close him in. Neither did this rich man repent that he
had offended God, but being in excessive pain, he called for release, when
as then none would be granted. Follow the Wise man's counsel, Eccles. 9.10.
All that thy hand shall find to do, do it with all thy power; for there is
neither work nor invention, not knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave,
whether thou go. O Lord in death who will remember thee? and in hell whose
tale shall be heard?

So long as a great piece of timber is carried upon the water, so long it
seems light, but when it is cast upon the Land, then he that before could
move it with his hand, cannot now do it with all the force of his body:
Likewise, so long as we live, the burden of sin seems light, as though we
had no burden at all, but when death Gods messenger has cited us to appear,
before the court of his tribunal seat, then do our sins appear in their
colors, showing themselves to be infinite, and the burden of them
intolerable. And we which would not foresee these eternal punishments,
shall then be thrust down among the damned, for ever to feel them. My
sins, says David, are gone over my head, and are like a burden too heavy for
me to bear. psalm. 40. My sins have taken such hold upon me, that I am not
able to look up: yea, they are more in number then the hairs of my head, and
my heart has failed me. O Lord, let it be thy pleasure to deliver me; make
have o Lord to help me.

Set the 50. psalm before thee, for a pattern to follow, and let thy heart
shed forth tears abundantly. And then shall thou find that comfort which
Christ promises, Math. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden,
and I will ease you. And how comfortable this easing shall be, look upon
the history of the prodigal son. Luke. 15. This foolish rich man, would not
lay down his burden in his life time, and after death is was bound of so fast,
that he could not shake it of.

But why did he speak to Abraham, and not to Lazarus? Because he judged him
after his own disposition, that he would not forget to revenge: whereas with
the godly there is no such quality even in this life, much less in another.
Thinking this with himself; If I in my great prosperity, had no care of him,
surely he will have as little care of me, neither will he come unto me.
Therefore he makes his request unto Abraham, supposing that he knew not what
was happened. But let us hear what his request was.

Send Lazarus, that he may dip the typ of his finger in water, and cool my
tongue, for I am tormented in this flame.] Alas, what could a drop of water
comfort him, and should he not by and by again; be in as great torment? And
what was the torment of the tongue, to the unspeakable pains of all the rest
of the body? Just are the judgments of God, and he reco^^penceth accordingly.
For he that denied small matters, was enforced to crave even the least help,
which nevertheless according to his desert, was denied him.

Let no man despise the poor, for God can make the richest man poor in a
moment. The sons of Jacob came afterward into the hands of Joseph, Despise no
body.
whom before they hated unto the death, contemned and despised. Thou may
stand in need of his help, whom now thou do scorn. For so it may fall out,
that GOD may appoint him to do thee good. Saul deadly persecuted David, and
God delivered Saul into his hands twice; and had not the godly heart of David
had more pity, the cruelty of Saul had justly deserved death. Simei that
cursed David, and thought he should never return any more to reign, was
feign to cast himself down, as it were at his feet, to crave mercy. Haman
was enforced to do Mardocheus great honor, whom before he could not abide to
look upon. And this happens to many. Wherefore if thou be placed in high
authority, do not exalt thy self too high, for he whom thou contemnest, may
be in higher estate then thy self, and may requit thee again.

Where there is mention made of the rich man's tongue, we must understand that
the soul has no tongue, nor hands, nor fingers, Tongue.
but this is rather to be understood in a spiritual consideration. The souls
have no parts nor members of the body, because they are spirits. Yet they are
said to suffer in the members of the body, because in those members they have
most offended. As this rich man in his dainty fare and delicate diet. Balthazar
after his banquets and boules of wine, lost his Kingdom and his life, 2,
Maccabees, 15, 13. Nicanor blasphemed GOD, and therefore Maccabeus hand
conquered him, caused his head and hands to be cut off, and his tongue to be
cut out, and given to the fowls.

They that have abused their tongues in swearing and cursing, by GODS
appointment at the time of their death cannot speak, whereby they might
confess their sins and crave mercy, who as this rich man shall be cruelly
tormented in hell, when their souls are parted from their bodies. This
torment is expressed by Saint John, in his Revelations, 16, 10. They gnew their
tongues for sorrovve. And blasphemed the GOD of heaven for their pains, and
for their sores, and repented not of their works. Heere-hence let us learn
to bridle our tongues, because as Saint Paul says, What soever things are
written, are written for our instruction.

Why did not the rich man require the help of Jacob, Joseph, Job, David, and
the like; because the poor were brought forth for the rich, that they seeing
them might be provoked to liberality, and that GOD might favor them the more:
Many good instructions in beholding the poor.
and especially that the poor man's prayers ascending above the skies, might
prevail for them: not after death, for our prayers prevail one for another
while we live.

That we beholding the poor might be put in mind of our great wantes, that
we might exercise the works of charity, that we might give God thanks that
he has provided for us better; that we might learn devotion from them. That
we might be put in mind to ask of God, as they ask of us, that we being
good to the poor, we might cut off all languishing expenses, and fulfill Gods
commandment, that it might be a mean to practice all virtue and god lines?
Now follows the answer of Abraham to this rich man.

But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy life time, receauedst thy
pleasures, and likewise Lazarus pains, now therefore is he comforted, and
thou art tormented.]

He puts him inmind of his former flourishing estate, to vex him so much the
more. For it is one of the unhappiest things in our great misery, to remember
that we have been happy. Remember that thou in thy life time as if he had said;
Thou have lived to thy self and not to God, thou have served thy own lusts
and pleasures, and have not lined in Gods obedience, thou have had all the care
for thy self, and not for thy neighbor. Remember, or else there should be no
sting of conscience, for we would feign forget.

God graunts the wicked many good things in this life, for special causes, to
teach us not to murmr at their estate. As God does lay many afflictions and
crosses upon the godly, to purge them, to refine them, to try them. But after
this life the one have perpetual torments, the other most happy joys. Look
not thou therefore for joy and prosperity here on earth, and to have thy
heaven here and in another world. The rich man for his stately houses, has
darl hell, for his dainties and delicates, eternal torments, for his mirth and
music, weeping and gnashing of teeth, and pitiful wringing of hands.
Contrariwise, Lazarus for his manifold afflictions and tried patience, infinite
recompense. 2, Cor. 4, 17. For our light, affliction which is but for a moment,
causes unto us a far most excellent and an eternal weight of glory. While
we look not on the things which are seen^, but on the things which are not
seen, etc. Also the Lord says by his prophet Esaias chap. 6, My servants shall
cate and you shall be a hungry my servants shall rejoice, and you shall be
ashamed. Let us learn to suffer afflictions with the people of God, as Moses,
rather then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. They that rejoice
here shall sorrow there, psalm. 126, 6. They that sow in tears, shall reap
in joy, Matthew. 5, 4. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.
When Jacob blessed Joseph's sons, he put the youngest at the right hand. In
this world the wealthy are at the right hand of glory, the poor at the left
hand of shame, but in the world to come, it shall be otherwise, for God will
exalt the poor and throw down the mighty. When the Egiptians lay dead upon the
Seashore, the Israelites sang praises unto the Lord. When Lazarus wept, the
rich man was in joy, but after a while the rich man's joy was turned into most
lamentable tears. Let us learn not to despise those that be poor and weak,
for this is Gods work in them, to purge their manifold infirmities and
imperfections: and in like case was Job tried, and in many such distresses
are the godly afflicted from time to time, and so shall be unto the worlds
end. Again, let us not judge the rich and vvealthy to be happy, because they
suffer no adversity. For the end tries all, not in this world, but in
another. psalm. 73.

Son.] This is spoken by way of reproach, because in his life time he did so
much and so vainly boast, that he was Abraham's son, now his hypocrisy and
vain boasting is laid before his eyes, to wound his mind the more. Again,
heerewith-all we must not so take it, that eternal destruction is reserved
for them always, that have had abou^dance of wealth. For riches do not
debar or shut us out of the Kingdom of God. But the meaning is, that this
rich man being drunken with the pleasures of this present life, gave himself
to all worldly delights, setting light by GOD, not believing, but contemning
heavenly joys, therefore is he woorthily plagued for his great negligence and
contempt. Who when thou wast created to immortality, and the law of God did
lift up thy mind to heavenly meditations, thou forgetting thy excellent estate,
had rather be like the swinish Epicures, who put all their felicity in
pleasure, therefore thou receauest a reward meet, convenient, and suitable to thy
brutish life. And now where is thy fine silks and purple, where be thy
perfumes, where be thy feastings and bankettings, where is thy piping and
dancing, and the variety and diversity of thy manifold pleasures. While thou
were alive, no kind of wine could please thee, being cloyed with them, so
great was the deliciousnes of thy mouth, neither would thou all that while
so much as give a little water to Lazarus being thirsty, and now thou can not
obtain so much at a pore drop of water, to refresh the scalding heat of thy
tongue. Insteede of thy gallant Mannours which thou had then, thou have now
the dark dungeon of hell, for thy delicate pastime, everlasting pain, for thy
songs and merriment, continual weeping and howling. And now by the just
judgment of God, which cannot be changed, thy due place is limited unto thee,
where thou must remain for ever.

He is comforted, who suffered so many miseries and distresses of this life,
which no man must foolishly so interpret, as to apply the same to all that have
endured miseries here in this life, to whom it shall be so far off, that their
afflictions shall do them good, that it shall be unto the^ a beginning of
endless miseries. Howbeit, the patience of Lazarus is here commended, because
it arises of faith, and of the true fear of God. For every one that suffers
miseries, does not deserve the praise of patience, but they which for the
trial of their faith, and in a good cause obaying God, have abidden and
endured great extreamities, in hope of a better life: For the^ which have
endured such a christian warfare, is reserved a crown, and perpetual rest and
heavenly joys. Contrariwise, the profane contemners of God, and the deriders
and scorners of all godliness, which wallow in all fleshly pleasures, and who
have so choked up the light of nature, that all desire and care of godliness is
quenched and vanished, for such perpetual torments are prepared, to make a
woeful and sorrowful change, for their earthly and vain delights.
Furthermore, we must remember, that the comfort which the children of God do
enjoy, consists heerem, that they beholding this blisful estate in
meditation, mind, and contemplation, should steadfastly go through the course
of a godly life, resting themselves upon the sure and certain hope of enjoying
the same. As on the other side the wicked are miserably vexed, as it were with
a sense and feeling of hellish torments, which hang over then heads, (...) that
they may have of his grace, to live a godly life, in all holy obedience,
according to the will of God, for fear least it be said, Depart ye cursed into
hell fire, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. But this godly course,
of exhorting and praying one for another, is not practiced, but rather scorned
and contemned of this wicked world, which how necessary it is, they shall know
hereafter when they feel the smart of it.

His desire of his brethrens repentance, proceeded not from the love of God,
that by their conversion God, might be glorified, but only that his pains
might be eased and their torments prevented; not least in their life they
should not offend God, but least after death, their estate should not fall out
to be most damnable. Let Lazarus cool my tongue, for I am tormented in this
flame; the ease of torments, is all the matter they aim at they are not
gr^eued, that God is not served, or many offended by their example, but these
among the ungodly, are the rich man's speeches; I am tormented, and least they
also should come into this place of torment.

As they that by doctrine, and counsel, and persuasion, and godly life, and
conversation, have wone many to God, shall have a singular prerogative above
many other; so also they that have been the cause of other men's falls, sins,
and offenses, either in doctrine or wicked counuersation, their torment thereby
shall be the more increased. Therefore S. Austine says, that the pain of
Arrius the Heritique, is daily increased, because by his evil doctrine, he
led away many from the knowledge of the truth, and of their own salvation. For
as wicked people, while they live here, seek only their own things, and not
those things which are Jesus Christ's, as also neglecting their poor brethren,
not regarding their good or commodity; so in hell likewise they care for no
more, but their own affairs. What burns in hell but our own wilful will,
what destroys the world but self-will, inclined to stubbernes, and all
rebellion and disobedience. And here are they c^ofuted, that think the dead
have care of the affairs of them that are living. For here is no doctrine
delivered to confirm it, but that which is here set down, is to show the
miserable estate of the rich wicked man, and of all wicked men, in that
requests (...) and others would feign hear voices out of the air. But such
strange desires of men God will not satisfy, neither will he by this means
derogate from the authority of his word. Again, faith does not depend upon
miracles and wonders, but is the special gift of Gods holy spirit, which
proceeds from the hearing of the word. And it is the proper gift of God, to
draw us unto him, which works effectually by his word. Therefore there is no
hope that those means may profit us, which draw us from the obedience of Gods
word. We must confess that our nature is inclined to nothing more, then to
vain revelations, and we see how eagerly they throw themselves into satan's
snares, that refuse the word. From hence came Negromancie, and the black
unlawful Arts, which the world does greedily hunt after, and in a mad mood
does search to the bottom.

We must not therefore harken unto the dead, by which means the devil
spreads his lies and illusions, neither must we look to be taught by Angels
from heaven, Ga. 1, 8, The wisdom of men must be lay de a-side, which is
altogether foolish in Gods affairs, 1. Cor. 2, 14, and 3, 18. And we must
desire to be instructed by Moses and the prophets, that is, by Gods word
only, that we may be edified and take profit thereby, and especially that we
may herein show our obedience to God, who has appointed this means only to
know his will. And he that will not believe Gods word, will not believe
Christ, if he should return again, much less the Angels, or them that arise
from the dead.

When a voice came down from heaven, concerning Christ, saying. This is my
beloved son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him; should the disciples have
said, Nay, but an Angel from heaven, shall certify us better of thy will. The
chiefest service we can show to God, is to obey him according to his will.
Should Moses, after God had prescribed him how his tabernacle should be made,
have caused it to be made and fashioned after his own mind? When Saul was
appointed by GOD, to smite Ameleck, and to slay both man and woman, infant and
suckling, both oxen and sheep, camel and ass, he spared Agag the King, and
the better sheep and the oxen, and the fat beasts, and the Lambs, and all
that was good, and would not destroy (...) unbelieving world, has had more
care, and give greater credit, then unto the direction of Gods word; and by
that means has many a soul perrished, which otherwise might have been
saved. But if there be any godliness, sense, or reason in us, let us mark the
words of the holy Apostle S. Paul, Gala. 1.8. Though that we, or an Angel
from heaven, preach unto you otherwise, then that which we have preached unto
you, let him be accursed. And that it might sineke more deeply into our hearts
and minds, he repeateth his words again, least we should not remember the^,
or least we should not regard them. As we said before, (says he) so say I now
again, If any man preach unto you otherwise, then that ye have received; let
him be accursed. He adds a reason hereunto. For now preach I man's doctrine,
or Gods, or go I about to please men? For if I should yet please men, I were
not the servant of Christ.

What did the Lycaonians to Paul and Barnabas, Gods said they are com down to
us in the likeness of men; therefore they would needs do sacrifice unto them.
So soon (...) man's heart withdrawn from the service of God, and great need it
was the Apostle should instruct them otherwise. The world in this great light
of Gods truth, is yet deceived, wandering in darkness, when the sun shines
fair to direct their steps. Thy Word, says the prophet, is a Lantern unto
my feet, and a light unto my steps: but the foolish world she from the light
of Gods word, to man's traditions. And the gospel is yet hid to them that
perrish. 2. Cor. 4. In whom the god of this world has blinded the minds, that
is of the infidels, that the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, which is
the Image of God, should not shine unto them. But to the^ that are yet steadfast
in the profession of Gods truth; and are persuaded in the true Religion, which
is grounded upon the warrant of Gods World, let me speak unto them, as the
Apostle S. John speaks, 1. Epist. 4.1. Dearly beloved, believe not every
spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are of God. For many false prophets
are gone out into the world, and are even at this day rife in the world, and so
will be toward the worlds end, and principally then. Which shall be a token of
the latter day. For many shall say, here i^ Christ and there is Christ this is
the true religion, and that is the true religion spreading lies, and men^
traditions, believe them not. Yea, they shall be so forcible in their
persuasions, that if it were possible, they should deceive the ^^^y elect. But
those hearts which are established in true religion, will always make the Word
of God, their guide, and their warrant, come signs or wonders. Angels (...)
from the dead, to show them otherwise.

If one came from the dead, they would amend: The rich man is deceived: for
Lazarus no this that he^^^ is spoken of but the brother of Martha, of whom we
read. John. 1^. being raised from the dead, yet wo^lde they not believe but
would have slain him. Nay they would not believe Christ to be raised from the
dead, but hired the fouldlours to make a contrary tale lusty the are they
reproved, which seek after miracles and after death me us do^^ trines.
According to that we read Deuteronomy. 18. Let none be found among (...), that asks
down sell at the dead. Fo^^^^ that do such things, a^^ ^o abhomidation the
Lord. They are here reproched Which would have religion taught them by
miracles, for as a learned Father says. He that seeks after miracles, that
he may believe, he him self is a miracle, who believes not, when all the
world else believes, Again, at the beginning of Christ his doctrine and true
religion, it was necessary that miracles should have been showed, as Christ
was plentiful in them: but after his doctrine was plain and evident, the
ordinance of miracles is now taken away, and the vvarrant of Gods Word ought
only to take place. Being instructed of Gods will and Word, by godly and
faithful Ministers, we ought with all reverence to embrace it, and to make
special regard and account thereof seeing that GOD has ordained it a mean,
for our happy conversion and repentance, and for the working of amendment and
newness of life in us. For according to the rule of Gods Word, both our faith
must be directed and our sinful life con^^^ted, and amended and ordered.

The saying of Abraham pleased not the rich man that his brethren should hear
Moses and the prophets for the rich and mighty of this world, do do^^ ^^^neuer
vouchsafe to hear the word at the mouths of the preachers, least (...)
thereby, they should be counted good and godly, or least they should be
reproved of their faults, or debarred of their pleasures. They love their beds
better then the Church, and pleasure and pastime is their paradise. So far of
are they from honoring God as they ought, that they can scarcely vouchsafe to
give their presence in the Church, when as many with their lips serve god, but
their hearts may be far away from him.

No meruell that he remembered his five brethren, who were drowned in the depth
of worldly business, whose chiefest delight was to spend whole nights at cards
and dice but could not yield their presence for an hour or two to hear Gods
Word, it was irksome unto them, and they were awearie thereof. As for books of
pastime, and merry tales, they could hear them all day, and not be aweary. The
food of the soul, the heavenly Manna they loathed, desiring to satis-fie
their minds in the lusts of the flesh; even as the rebellious Isralites longed
after the fleshpots of Egypt. And such as the world was then, so is it now, if
not worse, full of Atheists and Epicures. O ye foolish, when will ye
understand, and seek after God, has your souls may live?

See the importunity and rashness of this rich man, which goes about to reach
Abraham, Nay father Abraham, etc. So we being reproved by the mouth of the
Preacher, begin to repine thereat, being as willing to be spoken unto from the
dead, rather then to hear the voice of the living, and that is full little or
nothing at all. Saul was desirous to be instructed by Samuel, being dead,
whose words being alive he did not regard. Abraham seeing his words cannot
prevail with this importunate rich man, breaks of his talk, and leaves
him unto himself. For as silence is the best answer to a fool, so a discreet
answer may satis-fie and importunate and troublesome person.

Then he said unto him: If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither
will they be persuaded, though one rise from the dead again.] When Christ was
dead, many bodies of the Saints arose, and went into the holy City, and
appeared unto many. But were the Jews ever awhit the better for it? nay rather
the worse, and a great deal more hard hearted. The Angels, although they be in
high degree, and the ministers of the highest, yet are we rather to believe the
Master, then the servant. And the only way to learn well, is to give credit
to the words of our Master and Teacher. And that we may cut of the rebellion
of our own sinful disposition, we must be prepared to the hearing and reading
of God word, and pray that God would open our eyes and that it may bring forth
fruit in us, to the glory of his Name the benefit one of another, and to our
own great comfort. Which thing is mightily furthered, by often hearing the
Word preached and by daily and due meditation thereof. The reason of every thing
may not be demanded for the mysteries of Divinity pass our reason and
capacity, As the Apostle, speaks unto the Corinthians, 1 Col. 3.1. I could
not speaks unto you brethren as unto spiritual men, but as unto carnal even
as unto babes in Christ. I gave ye milk to drink, and not meat, for ye were
not, yet able to hear it, neither yet now are ye able. The articles of our
belief are the principles of (...) religion, which although we cannot
understand presently, nor sound the depth of them at the first view yet it is
required of v^ that we should believe for unless we believe, we shall never
understand any thing.

The conversion of the whole World was brought to pass, not by wise and
learned men, but by simple men and fishers, which could never be effected by
the power and strength of any great Emperor, or by the wisdom and learning
of any heathen Philosopher. For (...) our does not believe the Word of God,
will hardly give credit to any worldly means or miracles what soever. So
froward is our wilful ignorance, and so stubborn, that it will hardly on
never yield it self to be instructed.

This history painteth forth unto us, the wonderful course of the world, and
the vnriable estate of the sons of men: some rich, some beggars; some live in
all abundance, some are pinched with great extremity, and inioyful, and another
mourns. Yet neither (...) the one to be counted happy, nor the other
miserable, until the tin and day co^^, when the s^en^ts of all hearts shall be
made manifest. 1. Cor. 4.5. It teaches us also to despise the vanities of this
world. We would by our good wills be^ith and mighty in the world, and for the
same we venture many a hard iourny by sea and by la^^^el yet if it should be
put to thy choice whether thou would have the rich man's life with eternal
torments, or the poor man's life with heavenly joys, thou would be well
advised what thou did. For what could all the pleasures, and wealth, and
treasures of this rich man, comfort or help him after death? They can neither
deliver him from the power or hour of death, nor from the hand of hell; and
being in hell in torments, they can afforde no manner of remedy psalm 48.16. Be
not thou afraid though one be made rich, or if the glory of his house be
increased; for he shall carry away nothing with him, neither shall his pomp
follow him when he dies. He is cast into hell, where for temporal plesures,
he shall be punished with eternal torments, because ^ee preferred those worldly
vanities, before the ^are of another and a better life. The poor shall not
always be poor neither shall the rich be always flourishing. Look upon
Lazarus, now like a King and look upon the rich man, being far worse then
a beggar. And this for the most part is the end and period of earthly honors
and wealth, and this is the unhappy issue of fleshly pleasures and sinful
lusts, and of the dainty sweet delicates of this world. Everlasting life is
given to those works of charity, which proceed from faith, and likewise the
unmerciful, are like to be too too miserable.

Hereby we have especial warning, not to faint in our minds, and to be
offended with God, when we see the wicked in this world full of wealth, and
having no punishment laid upon them, doing in a manner what they list; as
also in seeing the godly to be poor and miserable in this life, and subject
to diverse extremines. For God does order all things better in another life,
and this world is but the place and time of trial. The long sufferance and
patience of God, does make the punishment of the wicked more just; and the long
patience of the godly, does make their joys in another life far more
comfortable. If in a Goldsmiths shop, thou see dross and coals, and such
refuze, and therewithal precious vessels of gold and silver, rings and jewels,
it does somewhat discontent thee to see so disorderly a sight: So in the Church
of God, where there are many holy and godly people, you see many wicked; such
mighty men like Nemrods,

Of the wounded man that fell among thieves.
LVKE. 10.25. Then behold a certain Expounder of the Law stood up, and
tempted him, saying.
THis worldly Wiseman had knowledge enough, and so no doubt he thought of
himself, therefore he did not demand the question to learn, but to try and
to tempt, as they do that take a pride in their learning. Mark how the great
learned men, and those that thought themselves full wise, were Christ his heavy
friends and deadly foes, and they are the first that set themselves against his
doctrine. There is no people so bad and so dangerous as learned men, that have
an evil conscience, doing more hurt in a city and Commonweal, then a
hundred plain men, and simple ignorants. For they infect more then a plague,
the one distroying the body, the other indangering the soul. Such are those
that set up and maintain false doctrine and idolatry, filling all the world
with troubles and tumults, with seditions and treasons; as in these days
Campian, and Heart, and other their confederates, flowing from Rhemes, joining
to their false religion, treacherous practices, allowed by Cardinal Allen,
Saunders, Moorton, and the like, how many true subjects hearts have they drawn
from her Majesty, from true religion, from the hope of their true salvation;
from God, and making themselves most lamentable spectacles.

In an Apothecaries shop, painted boxes, with goodly inscriptions have poison
within them, and from many learned men, may proceed most dangerous doctrine,
and manifest error, as poisoned wine may be drunk out of a golden cup. Many
learn to know, and few to practice, and to become good. Wicked Herod, Math.
2. serched the scriptures, not that he might be the better thereby, or edified
in soul and conscience; but that he might know where Christ should be borne,
that he might come to kill him.

Many are very painful in the studies of the laws, Lawyers.
searching Chronicles and Antiquities, proposing unto themselves promotion and
gain, as their chiefest scope, and therefore much wrong is done by such manner
of men, the law wrested, and many a good cause over thrown. But where are
those learned Lawyers, that with a good conscience undertake other men's causes;
if they be good, they stand for him, and dispatch him without demurrs, and long
delays: if they be wrongful, they will not once meddle with them, giving the
party counsel to surcease, and to live charitably. as a mutual member of the
same body, and as a good Christian and loving subject, under a mild and
gracious Prince. God forbid but that there should be store of them, and I doubt
not but that there be manic good men among them, of a good conscience, and
worthy to dwell in a Christian commonweal, but I must needs say they are
hard to be found; and a man shall a great deal sooner light upon the quite
contrary, so great a number there is of that profession, and I had almost said
of that disposition. In all knowledge, the groundworke and foundation ought to
be a holy life and godly conversation, the glory of god, and the benefit of his
church and commonweal. This knowledge is rectified knowledge, the other is
wrested, greatly abusing so excellent a gift, and so worthy an ornament. And
what grace is it to see a precious ring in a swines snout. Godly and virtuous,
is better then wise and learned, without the which, wisdom and learning is
like a sword in a mad bodies hand, who cares not who^ he strike, yea though he
slay himself. A learned man without virtue, wisdom and government,
overthrows himself, and many more, by his evil example, and false doctrine.
First learn to know God rightly and truly, and then thy learning shall stand
thee in steed. psalm. 119. First the prophet David prays that the Lord would
teach him the way of his statuts, and the^ that he would give him
understanding. Let lerning be built upon the foundation of virtue. Put a
precious garment upon a dead body, and it warmeth not, because there wants
natural heat in the body, which gives life and moving. So if the fire of
Gods love, does not burn in thy heart, all other external matters, be they never
so glorious in the sight of the world, as authority, learning, knowledge,
eloquence, wisdom, shall do thee but little good.

This Lawyer, under the show to be instructed, comes to tempt Christ: the
devil under the show to advance our first Parents, Tentation.
undermines them: seeking to relieve Christ in the Desert, went about to make
him offend God, and to obey him. Math. 4.3. The Evangelist calls the devil
by the name of a Tempter, because it is his chiefest work. And in diverse
places of the gospel, we shall read, that many asked questions of Christ, or
rather were sent from his enemies; to entangle him in his talk. To whom he
sometimes well answered. Why tempt ye me ye hypocrites. As in the cause of
giving tribute unto Caesar: for when they showed him a piece of silver, he
asked whose Image and superscription it was, and they said unto him Caesar's
Give therefore (says he) unto Caesar, the things that are Caesar's, and to GOD
those things that are Gods.

Many ask questions, not because they are ignorant, but because they would
entrap. Achab asked of Micheas the Prophet, 1. Kin. 22. whether he should go
to battle? not that he would know the truth, but only to satis-fie his mind.
So many ask needless questions, not to be instructed, but to show their
unprofitable curiosity. But let us hear what his question is.

Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life.] Hearing Christ speak of
blessedness, Master. etc.
he enquireth the means that lead thereunto, being not ignorant thereof, as
appears by his answer, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, etc. But temptingly
he spoke it; Besides, he calls him Master, that under the show of good will
he might the sooner deceive him i^ as the Scorpion has aslattering
countenance, but stingeth with the ^aile. Under fine coucht words malice does
not always appear. God in his law commanded, we should not wear a garment
of linsie wolsie, as they do which have one thing in their mouth, and another
in their heart. The world is too full of such people, which can speak well of
thee to thy face, but behind thy back sell thee, and still making thee believe
they are thy especial friends. They have a policy to speak well of others,
whom they hate, to make thee do the like, that they may entrap thee, and bring
thee into trouble, by some words that may fall from thee unawares, which shall be
made far worse. Woe to the double heart, and to the lyps that speak wicked
things, and to the sinner that goes two manner of ways. Ecclus. 5.15. and
6.13.

He might also call him Master in mockery, as in the court of Pontius Pilate,
they clapped a crown of thorns upon his head, put a reed in his hands, and
bowed the knee disdainfully, and sang, Hail King of the Jews, and all to
deride him. Also in the house of Caiaphas, making a jest of his prophetical
function, they hid his eyes, and struck him on the face, saying: Prophecy who
it was that smote thee. And as in his passion and prophecy, they scorned him,
so now in his doctrine, they call him master, but in the way of mockage.

He is desirous to know how to obtain everlasting life, because it is the
mark that every one shoots at, though there be few that use the means. This
life although it seem never so long, yet is it but of short continuance, in
respect of the time to come: for he that shall recount with himself the time
past, it seems unto him but as yesterday, or rather but as a moment. So Jacob
at his first coming into Egypt, when Pharao demanded of him how old he was,
answered: The days of my pilgrimage, are a hundred and thirty years: few
and evil are the days of my life. Few, because they suddenly vanish, and
evil, because of the manifold miseries, and vvearisome labors that fall out
continually in our life.

Wherefore, as the fowls desire to fly, the fishes to swim, and creeping
things to craule upon the earth, neither is nature deceived in these
operations: so do men naturally desire everlasting felicity, the which the
mind does always long after, and cannot be satis-fied, and never rests,
until it has obtained it; which happiness cannot be accomplished in this
life, but in that which is to come. So that the soul desires GOD most
inwardly; for only in his presence is life, and at his right hand are joys
for euer-more.

This Doctor of the Law, although he be worthy of reproof, because he
tempted our Savior Christ, yet herein he is worthy to be commended because
he does not put forth unprofitable and vain questions: Curiosities and
needless questions to be avoided.
but is rather desirous to know and understand, the way that leads to
everlasting life. Would GOD all our speeches, conferences, and meetings, were
to this end that we might know how to be saved. Ye shall see many men's minds
run upon needless curiosities, (...) vineyard, gave unto every one a penny,
he hired laborers, not loyterers, painful dooers, not vain boasters. Christ
says in the gospel of Saint John, Every branch that bears not fruit, he
takes away: by taking away, he means casting into the fire, that it may
burn, because it brings not forth fruit. And the Prophet Esaias, chapter 1.
wills the people of his ty me, to do well. He says not, Learn to say
well, though that be good, but learn to do well, which is harder; and also
far more necessary.

Infinite are the places of Scripture to this effect, all which conclude, how
that God does far more accept godly dooers, then idle talkers. To the
substance of water, is added moisture and cold, it has also these qualities,
to be clear, and very fluent, all which if they want, yet the substance of
water remains. In a well ordered Commonweal, the substance thereof is the
peace and quietness of the Citizens, the necessary helps, are the mechanical
Sciences and trades. So in the spiritual life of the soul, is faith, hope,
charity; the outward and necessary forniture thereof, is the Sacraments,
spiritual sacrifices, of prayer, praise, thanksgiving, alms deeds, and all
other godly and holy practices. For in these, thou must be fruitful, if thou
vvilt show unto the world, that thou have faith, hope and charity. How shall it
be known, that thou have charity, when thou have no alms deeds? how shall it
be known, that thou have hope of another life, when as all thy joy is settled in
this world. All the glory of the Kings daughter, says the Psalmist, is from
within, having within faith, hope, and charity, and being outwardly adorned
with godly works. Hereby the soul becomes glorious, but not so glorious, as
it shall be in the world to come. To these are required patience, constancy in
persecution, chastity, perseverance, and many other virtues also, which now I
cannot recite. But how can they say, that they have a true faith, whose life is
most ungodly and unclean, being ouerloden with manifold iniquities.

He asks what he shall do, to inherit and possess eternal life, for this life
is but a tenement at will. The heavenly inheritance is without chang and that
possession is without displacing, or any alteration, and how excellentis the
estate of man, that is born to enjoy and possess heaven. Which in this life he
cannot attain, till death has given the stroke, and made a happy passage for
him. Yet in this thy life, by thy lewdnes and wickedness, thou may dispossess
thy self of that heavenly inheritance. And in that it is called an
inheritance, the bountifulnes and mercy of God, does wonderfully shine and
show it self; for they that are heirs, come not unto their inheritance by
desert. But now let us hear what Christ his answer was.

And hesayd unto him, What is written in the law? how read thou?] Certain
it is that the law does set down a rule, how to frame our lives, and to obtain
everlasting life, yet can it do nothing else but condemn us: and therefore it
is called the ministration of death and condemnation. 2. Cor. 3.7. Yea, it
increases the gilt and weight of our sin, and makes it to appear more
manifestly. Romans 7.13. All which comes not to pass through the fault of the
law, Law.
being holy, just, and good, but because our corupt nature is so badde, that
it is more ready to break. then to keep the law. Romans 8.3. Therefore,
although no man be justified by the Law, yet the law does contain perfect
righteousness, neither does it promise everlasting life in vain, if we were
able perfectly to fulfill it. Neither ought this doctrine to seem strange unto
us, that God does first require the righteousness of works, and then offer
everlasting life without the desert of works. Because it is most necessary that
we should first know our miserable estate, not only in transgressing the Law,
but also in deserving the curse and punishment appointed thereunto, that so we
may more earnestly and more humbly, seek the mercy of God, in the death and
passion of Jesus Christ.

Our own righteousness cannot obtain everlasting life, therefore it must be
the free mercy of God that must do it. Christ having regard to the Lawyers
question, answered him aright. For he did not inquire how he might obtain
everlasting salvation, but by what works he might accomplish the same,
saying: What shall I do to inherit everlasting life. The Law does show how we
are justified by works, and yet no man is justified by works, because we
cannot perform it. In the mean time Christ does prevent their slau^derous
offense, who sought to entrap him, as though he did pervert and overthrow the
law.

A marvel it is that thou, says Christ unto him, which art a Doctor of the
law, art ignorant of this point, who should teach others. Would God many that
are Christians, and of great years, did not stand in need to be instructed in
the doctrine of Christianity, or rather in the principles of religion. Who
make great boast of their perfection, and yet being asked, are not able to
render an account of their faith. And yet this is a further inconvenience, that
although they are so ignorant, yet they would be loath so to be accounted, and
also unwilling to learn. Set shame aside, for this is no shame to learn to
be instructed. A craftsman is of no reckning that is unskillful in his trade,
and he is unworthy the the name of a Christian, that is such an infant in
Christian religion. And as foolish pity does mar a City, so worldly
shame in matters of religion, does overthrow piety.

Christ sends this Lawyer to the Law, in the knowledge whereof he did so
advance himself: first, that he should be satis-fied by his own knowledge: and
secondly, that he should make it manifest, that in the law and word of GOD, is
showed the way of salvation, which teaches what we should believe, do,
follow, fear, and avoid. For the whole Scripture, as says Saint Paul. 2. Tim.
3.16. is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to improoue,
to correct, and to instruct in righteousness. That the man of God may be
absolute, being made perfect unto all good works. Therefore Christ commands
us to search the Scriptures. John. 5.39.

Christ sends the Lawyer to the Law, and the searching of the word: he
sendes him not into the palaces of Princes, where it seems is the most happy
life, but indeed the soul does there gather infection, which does rather
tend to the destruction then the salvation thereof. For what is there to be
learned, but the desire of honor and promotion, envy, strife, and factions;
there shall ye see pride and bravery, and boasting of valor, dainty
banketting, and gorgeous attire, all which are the devils temptations, to lead
us unto hell. In the houses of noble men, dicing from morning to night, and
outrageous swearing.

He sends him not into the house of Merchants, that he may learn lies and
false oaths, how he may deceive his neighbors. Take counsel from Gods law,
not from the world, learn to govern thy self after Gods commandments, and
not after the fashions of this wicked world, which is altogether an enemy unto
God. And the beginning and cause of our destruction arises here-hence, that in
all our affairs we rather take counsel of the world then of God. If thou
have received an injury, the world bids thee seek revenge, that thou
should do well to thy friends, and hate thine enemies: yea spill the
dearest blood, if it be in thy power. But the royal law of God, speaks of
peace and love, willing us to love our enemies, and to do good to those that
hate us, and to pray for them that persecute and hurt us.

If the tentation of the flesh do trouble thee, the world would have thee to
satisfy thy lust, to follow thy pleasures, to offend God, to be unclean and
beastly. But God says, hereby thou loosest thy honor, thy soul, thy
conscience, the joys of heaven, and that blessedness which never shall have end;
thou loosest thy self, thou loosest (...) withdraw thy love. But seeing there
is no hour, wherein GOD does not bless us with his benefits, we always owe
all dutiful affection unto him. Who planteth a vinyard, and eats not of the
fruit thereof? and to whom is the fruit due, but to him that planted the
viniard? Who would not show love to him that does him good? The brute beasts
are most loving to their benefactors, the fierce Lion is as meek and mild as a
lamb, to him that feeds him. How does the dog fawn upon his master, yea
and mourn for him, and fight for him, committing himself to danger and
hazard, to do his Master good. Only ungrateful man, does not know his
Creator, which does sustain and nourish him, and seeks by all means how to
befriend him. Esaias. 1. Here-hence it is that the prophet exclaimeth, The ox
knows his owner, and the ass his masters cryb, but Israel has not known,
my people has not understood. O the senseless brutishnes of man, who in his
duty may be instructed of the brute beasts.

Thou love thy grounds, thy cattle, thy possessions, because they are thine,
and why do thou not love GOD, who is thine,

The division of the heart, is the death of the soul; for as the body being
divided cannot live, so neither can the heart if it be divided. How long, says
the prophet Eliah, do ye halt between two opinions? If riches increase,
says David, set not thy heart upon the^. If God possess that room, why should
we give place to any other? God is a jealous God, who as the husband would
have his wife not to set affection on any but upon him alone, so God requires
thy whole heart. If he see our hearts and minds too much set, either on wife,
children or goods, he takes them away, that we should not be forgetful of
him. But if we will needs continue in that mind, he gives us over to our
distempered humor. I will take away my zeal from them, says the Lord by his
prophet Ezechiell, love what thou will, fulfill thy desire.

The Prophet Esaias, when he saw the people of his time so unbridled, and so
doted upon the love of the world, wondered how God could so patently bear it,
and being so jealous, he asks the question. Where is thy zeal whereof thou
speak, I will put my zeal in them, and now do I see every soul play an
adulterous part. God therefore, seeing he is most jealous, says, prou. 23.26.
My son, give me thy heart, yielding no part thereof to any other, but love him
with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy understanding.
Concerning which matter, read master Smiths sermon, entitled, The Christian
sacrifice, most excellently penned.

This commandment seems impossible, that we should love the Lord with all
our heart; so that there be no regard, left to any thing else. Which is
especially to be understood, in matters of weight, and great necessity, as in
the cause of religion, in time of persecution, and in the trial of thy
honesty, when thou art tempted as Joseph, and Susanna, and in avoiding any
sin what-soeuer. Setting God always before thy eyes, and treading under
foot, whatsoever the world, or the devil, or thy flesh shall move thee unto,
being either most delightful and pleasant, or profitable to the outward man.
And such a one is truly said to love God, with all his heart, and with all his
soul. In the mean time, while there is no occasion of sin offered, we may
love our parents, wife, and children, and friends, on this condition, that our
soul have always a watchful cave, not to sin against god at any time for
them or for our selves, or for any consideration in the world whatsoever. Holy
loseph, that pattern of humility, loved god above all, who being invited by
his Mistress to commit adultery, gave this wise and discreet answer,
setting God before his eyes, Genesis 39. How can do this great wickedness, and
so sin against god? He had rather loose his unlawful pleasure; then loose God.
Holy David, when he might have slain King Saul, chose rather not to offeud
god, then to revenge himself.

Renouned and chaste Susanna, when she might have offended god without any
impeachment, or open knowledge in respect of the world, the thing being kept
close: yet she had rather in a good cause, undergo any worldly shame, or
great wrong and injury what-soeuer, then to forsake God, her hope, her crown,
and her castle. Love those things which god does suffer thee to enjoy in this
world, as much as thou will, for god does give thee large liberty, so that
when there is any occasion of offending god offered, then we gather our wits
together, and look about us, as did holy Joseph, David, Daniell, and the
three children, Susanna, and the like, loving god above all, and in the highest
degree, rather submitting our selves to any torment what-soeuer, then by
offending god to hazard our souls, in everlasting torments.

And thy neighbor as thy self.] Our Savior may seem herein too much to
commend unto us the love of our neighbor, in that he ioynes it so near unto
the love of god. How-beit, the love of god, and the love of thy neighbor,
spring both from one fountain, and from one inward affection, and from one
cause, so that they cannot be separated or parted a sunder. Therefore S. Paul
says. He that loves his neighbor, has fulfilled the law. Thou can not
avoid the love of thy neighbor, but thou must shake off the love of god also.
Wherein we may clearly see, how much god does account the love of thy neighbor,
that he thinks he is not loved, unless for his sake we love our neighbor
also. As also that God in the 2. table of his law, has spoken more largely of
the love of thy neighbor. For the commandments of the first table are but 4.
in number, the commandments of the second table, are six, and yet in the
first table, is contained the love of God. In the second table, the
commandments are all negative, but one, which does show the severity and
straitnes thereof, to make us take the better heed. Therefore our Savior
says, Ioh. 13. In this shall they know that you are my disciples, if ye love
one an other. He says not that ye are known to be my disciples, by working
miracles, or by the gift of prophecy; but if ye shall love one another: for
this is the badge of Christians, whereby they are distinguished from the douils
company.

When our Savior Christ taught his disciples, (the time he was conversant
with them) humility, patience, contempt of the world, and other christian
virtues and duties: the persuasion of love, charity, and good will, he
reserved to his last supper, to the intent that he might most firmly imprint
the love of our neighbor, into the hearts and memories of his disciples. For
this is given us by nature, that look what our friend does give us last in
charge, when he departs from us, that stickest longest in our remembrance. In
this duty of love, consists the perfection of al christianity. Therefore S.
Paul says, that the whole law is comprehended in this one thing: Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self. He that fulfilleth both these commandments as
he ought may without blushing appear before God. David says, o Lord I have
loved thy commandments, and therefore he desired the presence of God, but
Adam being called, fled from God, and hid himself, because he had disobeyed
God: and therefore durst not come into his presence. The prophet says not, I
have known thy law, or I have kept thy law, but I have loved thy law. To
keep thy law, is of necessity and fear, but to love, proceeds from inward
affection. The love of God is perpetual, but the love of the world, or of our
selves, is but for this life; for the love of the world and of our selves, we
endanger our selves, but for the love of God, we find a means to be pertakers
of the kingdom of God, and of everlasting joys. The especial cause of loving
our neighbor, is in respect of his soul. And a good shepherd will not spare
to lay down his life for his sheep, and many have been content to be offered
up, for the confirmation of the faith of others.

This do^, and thou shall live.] See how Christ does provoke us unto good
works, This do. etc.
teaching us that we should walk in them. He says not, Say this, or believe
this, but do this That is, love God, and love thy neighbor, and show forth
the works of charity. As the Apostle speaks. 1. Ioh. 3. Let us not love in
word, neither in tunge only, but indeed and in truth. He that seeeth his
neighbor in necessity, and shuts up his compassion from him, how remains
the love of God in him. He that loves his neighbor, has life, and he that
loves not, abid^th in death. 1. Corin. 13: Though we speak with the tongue
of men and Angels, and have not love, it were nothing. As the body is sustained
by natural heat, so is charity the life of the soul, without the which it
is as dead. If thou hate, thou have a name that thou live, but thou art
dead and if thou find thy self thus dead, love and live. We are translated
from death to life, because we love the brethren. Nothing is so precious unto
us, as life, whereof this is an cuident token, that for the same, we can be
content to have an ^r me or a leg cut off, and to drink most bitter potions.
Yet is this life no true life, but rather a shadow, and an image of death. If
we can be content to endure such things for this life, which is of so short
continuance, how should we bestirre our selves, and what should not we
undertake, to attain the glorious life everlasting. For Christ speaks not
here of this transitory life; but of everlasting life, which is the seat and
dwelling place of the blessed. The Gods of the Gentiles, require the death of
infants, and that men should sley themselves, but the Lord says by the prophet
Ezech. 18. I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he return and
live. Oh how good is our God, who I would were loved of us as meet is, and
that we could frame our selves to obey his holy will: and for this our love
and holy obedience, requiteth us not only with this transitory life, but will
crown us hereafter with eternal joys.

But he willing to justify himself, said unto Jesus; Who is then my
neighbor? But. etc.
] Herein he shows himself to be an hypocrite, that he would justify
himself, as though he had fulfilled the whole law of God perfectly, and left
nothing undone. Our hypocrisy is especially found in the keeping of the
second table, for that is the (...) sold and given to the poor, not being
moved thereunto through charity, but because he was a thief, and bare the
bag. The son of Jacob, when they sold their brother Joseph, willing to
justify, themselu^s before their Father, and to clear themselves from all
offense, brought their brothers garment, stained with blood, as though nothing
might be lay de to their charge. So Herod purposing to kill Christ, made a show
that he would go and worship Christ. The wicked Judges would have cleared
themselves, to be far from the offense which they lay de to Susannas charge.
But let all these understand which dissemble with their double heart, that there
will come a time, when all shall be revealed, as the treachery of Absolon,
Heliodorus and Herod's was, and if not in this world, yet in another.

He says he loves God, and yet makes question who is his neighbor. But he
that loves not his neighbor, whom he sees daily, how shall he love God
whom he has not seen? He speaks suspiciously, as though a man might love
God, and yet never thelesse be cruel and hurtful to his neighbor. The Jews,
they had only respect to them of their own nation, supposing it was lawful
for them to hate allants and forrenners, and to let them alone, without doing
them any benefit on good at all. But the name of neighbor does extend it
self to a further compass, to wit unto all men. Forasmuch as oftentimes it
chances, that he which is nighest to us in birth or country, is farther from
us in affection and love, then our very foe.

And Jesus answered and said, A certain man went down from Jerusalem to
Icricho.] This might be, for Jerusalem was in the high mountain Sion, and
I^icho in a low place: Besides, there was a desert betwixt Jerusalem and
Jericho, where passengers were spoiled by thieves, and where Zedechias the King
was taken by by the Captains of the king of Babel, when he fled from
Jerusalem. Some apply this man that was wounded by thieves unto Adam, and unto
mankind: the priest and the Leuite unto the sacrifices of the old law, and
Christ unto the Samaritane which healed mankind, being spoiled by the devils
temptations, of the gifts and graces of God, the denill being compared here
unto thieves.

Some compare the man that came from Jerusalem to Jericho, unto a sinner that
falls from the estate of grace, unto the deformity of sin. But how far this
is from the sense and true meaning, every man may perceive. For the chiefed
cope that our Savior a^^eth at (...) to show who is our neighbor. For he
is our neighbor that can do us any good, whether he be bethen or Christian,
faithful or unfaithful, good or evil, We ought to love God, more then our
selves, and our neighbor as our selves. Every one living is our neighbor, who
although he be evil, yet may come to a bett^^ course of life, if he so
continue, we must seek to win him by our example and good exh^r^a^^on.
They that are in the estate of misery, are chiefly our neighbors, and they
that have compassion of other men's distresses, and are willing to help them,
do most of all perform the duty of neighbors.

By this man which went down^ from Jerusalem to Ie^icho, Christ understands
any man of what state and condition (...) he be the poor, abject, humble sad,
(...) and des^^^^ of our help^* and in a word^ to conclude, every one to whom
we may do good. Consider therefore thou that art ri^^, that tho poor man is thy
neighbor (...) thou that art wise, that thou are bound to help the simple
and the ignorant; thou that art bealthfull, remember him that is sick and
comfortl^sse, and that Christ has commended him unto thee: if thou be
joyful and in prosperity, that the band of love and charity does make thee to
open the bowels of compassion, toward him that is in affliction and misery. By
him that went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, Christ understands all that
are in need and necessity, to whom he would have thee to show compassion and
mercy after the example, of the Samaritane. Not only the poor and distressed,
but also the rich and wealthy, are here contained under the title of neighbors.

A certain man came down.] Principalilie this is to be referred to the poor
man, which leads a solitary life, alone by him self, having no companion
nor comforter, being left and forsaken in a manner of all. Every man will
visit the rich man, and keep company with him, every one pray seth him,
and vvaiteth upon him. But the poor man's estate is lamentable, who suffers
his misery alone, and scarce a neighbor to make any question of him, or to
make any inquiry after him. If the rich be sick, Physicians are sent for, and
he has many friends, and many helps: the poor man in his sickness has small
help, lives alone, and dies alone. Jerusalem had many friends in her
prosperity, but being in distress, they l^ft her all alone. Therefore she
weepeth, saying; All my friends have despised me, and are become mine enemies.
The rich in their distress, have friends at will, and more then they would,
but where are they that help the poor, and they are worthy of commendation;
and therefore no marvel if Christ do so point out a merciful man, with this
example of wonder.

The poore-man suffers his misery alone, and no man will vouchsafe to know
him, neither is there any reckning made of him. It may well be said. The poor
man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho; for the rich men they rise, and are
promoted unto honor, but as for the poor, they have many hindrances, and
every man keeps them down, they are in a manner cast down headlong, and
made to go from worse to worse. He went from Jerusalem to Jericho; that is,
from riches to poverty, from prosperity to adversity, from a quiet, to a
troublsome life. The poor man that has not to bring up, or to prefer his
children, does break his sleep with diverse troublesome cares. The wheels of
a clock are always running, and what is the cause, but the weights that pull
them down? so is necessity as the heavy weights that hang at the whe^les of a
clock, that never suffers him to take any rest.

God has knit together all mankind with a holy band of fellowship, and
surely the Lord for no other cause, has set down the name of a neighbor in
his law, but that he might more lovingly inui^e us to the love one of
another. But because men being blinded with a natural kind of pride, and
selfe-liking, cannot think so well of others, as of themselves, therefore they
refuse to do the duties of christianity and charity. Whereas nature it self
being our director, teaches us that we were created one for another.

And fell among thieves.] And what could the thieues get at a pore man's hand,
according to that of the Poet; That an (...) means; so fame of is it, that
thou do open the bowels of pity and compassion unto him. Job says, chap.
12.6. The Tabernacles of robbers do prosper, and chap. 20.19. He has undone
many, and forsaken the poor, and has spoiled houses which he builded not.
Extortioners have spoiled the people, says the prophet Esaias.

And wounded him.] The wounds of the poor, is the grief of his heart, Wounded.
beside the extremity which is showed against him. Which things are as
grievous, if not more grievous, then any outward wounds can be.

And departed.] As Wolves being satis^fied with dead carcasses. Departed.
Ezech. 22.27. co^plaineth of such in his time; Her Princes in the midst
thereof, are like VVolnes, ravening the pray, to shed blood, and to destroy
souls; for their own douetous lucre. And their prophets have daubed the^ with
untempered mortar. The people of the land have they violently oppressed, by
spoiling and robbing, and have vexed the poor and theneedy^ yea, they have
oppressed the strangers against right. And I sought for a man among them, that
should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before me for the land, that I
should not destroy it, but I found none. Therefore have I poured forth my
indignation upon them, and consumed them with the fire of my wrath: Their own
wales have Irendred upon their heads, says the lord God. If rich men would
call themselves to better remembrance, and repent themselves of their doings,
the recompense were half made. But the more is the pity, they remember no
such matter, and go away without rebuke or blame, and without remorce.

Leaving him half dead.] When upon any exigent thou take away the poor man's
ox or his cow, do thou not leave him half dead, seeing thereby his life is
maintained. When thou castest him into prison, he cannot labor for his
living, neither can he pay his debt ^uer aw^i^ the sooner. And not only
himself, but his whole family is in great misery, do therefore to him, as
thou would be done unto in the like case, let thy heart relent, and work a
deed of charity, release him, forgive him, and God will pay thee and bless
thy store; if in the mean time thou be not so forgetful, that thou call
not to remembrance how many ways, and after what fort God has released and
for given thee. Remember what ill success he had, that would not forgive his
fellow servant. Math. 18. When thou pinchest the laborer in his hire and wages,
thou leauest him half dead. Iam. 5.4. Ecclus. 34.22. The bread of the needful
is the life of the pore, he that defraudeth him thereof, is a man of blood.
He that takes away his neighbors living, slaieth him, and he that
defraudeth the laborer of his hire, is a bloodshedder. Deu^: 4.10. to 16.
Ecclus. 7.20.21. and 33.29. Le. 19.13. It is no marvel that that is called the
life of man, without the which he cannot live, and in taking away that which
should be his living, although he live a free a fort, yet is he through
forrow, hare broken, and as a man half dead. And for a^e the poor the
widows, the Orphants and the afflicted, dealt withal in this life. But now
our Savior exhorts unto char^tie and mercy, as in the words following.

And by chance there came down, Priest.
a certain priest that way, and when he saw him; he passed by on the other
side.] And it chanced that a certain priest was going a iourny, which lay the
very same way, and whereas for the very order and profession of priest-hoode,
which he had taken him unto, he ought chiefly above others, to have
fulfilled the commandment of GOD: yet notwithstanding, himself being a
Jew, saw one that was a Jew, and being himself a man of Jerusalem, saw
one of Jerusalem spoiled, wounded, and lying half dead and yet passed by, no
whit moved with any drop of piety and compassion. And although the Jews by
the privilege of adoption, were separated from all other Nations, that they
should be Gods holy inheritance, yet such was their barbarous, uncivil, and
hethenish contempt one of another, as though there had been no acquaintance,
no fellow ship among the^; as though they had not been people of one and the
self same Nation. Therefore our Savior Christ does here in this Parable,
desenbe their cruel neglect of charitable affection, whereof their own
consciences did pronounce them to be guilty.

The covetousness of this world has offered violence unto justice, and she being
thus disgraced, has ascended up into heaven, so that it is hardly or not at
all to be seen on the earth. They that should be most bountiful, are for
the most part too hard-harted; and they that have their livings to be good to
the poor, being blinded by covetousness, dissemblingly pass by the poor,
neither will they take notice of the^, neither will they enter into any feeling
affection, or inward consideration of their miseries; the Lord make them to
remember themselves, that they may learn to be merciful. For they are the
servants and ministers of him, that is most merciful, and who causes his
rain to fall as well upon the unjust as the just.

God gave no possession to the Levites, because he was their inheritance,
whereby is signified, that he that then left the priests without any earthly
possession, would also have it so now, that their hearts should be be
estranged, from the love of this world, and earthly possessions, and from the
greedy desire of wealth, looking for no more then that, which should serve
their turn. Therefore, If the Minister serve God, and employ his vocation
diligently, let him not fear, seeing the Lord is his portion.

The Lord commanded the people of Israel to allot out Cities to the Levites.
Numb. 35.2. which he did to this intent, that they should not be entangled in
worldly business. Pharao gave inheritance unto the priests, and when all the
Egyptians were enforced to sell their land for food, the priests were spared.
But now in these days, the Ministers livings are so curiold, and their
maintenance for the most part so poor and bare, that they are in a manner
enforced with Saint Paul, to make Tents, and to seek ways how they may live,
there are so many Church-robbers every where.

And likewise also a Leuit, Leuite.
when he was come near to the place, went and looked on him, and passed by on
the other side.] A Leuite also passing by the same way, at whose hand a man
might justly have looked for the due observing and keeping of Gods
commandment: because he being a man dedicated to the Temple, was a minister
of Gods holy service, and therefore ought to have been a man of devotion, yet
showed small token thereof. For this man, even as the other had done, though
he saw the wounded man well enough, yet passed forth on his way, and did no
helps at all to his brother and countriman of the same City, that himself was
of, And such as the priest was, such also was the Leuite, the inferior taking
example of the better. There was no pity, no compassion, no bowels of mercy in
any of them both. According to that of the prophet Jeremy, chap. 8.10. Every
one from the least to the greatest, is given to covetousness, from the prophet
even to the priest. Full little were they exercised in alms deeds, and in the
works of charity, which should have given good example unto others.

Then a certain Samaritane, as he iournied, Samaritane.
came near unto him, and when he saw him he had compassion on him.] The
Samaritanes were not of the Jews, but strangers and idolaters. For when
Salmanasar the King of the Assyrians, had carried away capture, the ten tribes
of Israel, for their manifold offenses, out of Samaria, into Assyria the king,
least the land should be wast placed diverse people of diverse nations, there to
inherit and to inhabit. Who not knowing GOD, but worshipping idols, and at the
beginning of their dwelling not searing the Lord, the Lord sent Lions among
them, which slew them. Which thing when it came to Salmanasers cares, the King
of the Assyrians, taking counsel with his Princes and Nobles, he sent thither
one of the priests, which he had brought from Samaria, to teach them how they
should fear the Lord. By who^ they having heard the Law of Moses, with a
certain reverence, began to worship God, yet so that they served their idols
also. These did the Jews hate, and they were despised of them, whom they
called Samaritans, to whom they objected that they had devils, because under
idols they worshipped devils. And this thing (...) lay de unto our Savior in
great reproach, that he was a Samaritane, and had aedeuill.

Then a certain Samaritane.] Hecre we are fully taught, not only who is our
neighbor, but how we must bestow our^d mes, and in what measure. First, the
Samaritane seeing the vvounded mand was mo^ued with compassions, therefore the
reis required in us, an affection of mercy, where bis we should think other
men's distresses to pertai^e even to our selves. The mind mst he thoroughly
affected and induell with this quality, according to that of the Apostle, Heb.
13.3. Be mindful of them that are ^ound, as though ye were in bands with them.
For Paul says, that there are certain wicked men; without natural
affection. Romans 1.30.

After the priest and the Leuite came the Samaritane who espying the man that
had been robbed, and lay half alive, half dead, and maruelling what the
matter was, he drew necre unto him, and perceauing the exes come, misery of
the man, was moved with petty and compassion toward; this Jew, whereas
himself was a Samaritane, and yes ^^e Jews do very sore abhor and hate all
Samaritans. For all his journey he does not pass by him, but comes and
draws nerae unto him; neither does he only pirry his case wish lamentable
words, and so make have onward on his journey, and who business, as most men
do. For as Samaritane says, chap. ^.25. If a brother or a sister be (...),
and destitute of daily food, and one of you say ^^^o them, Departmence, warm
your selves, and fill your (...), notwithstanding ye give the^ not those
thinga^^ich are needful no the body* what had path it? The Samaritane (...) to
his helping hund, such physic as he had he applies, he does not excuse the
matter that he is no physician, but for the present necessity, having wine and
oil about him, and knowing the^ to be good, first cleanses his wounds with
wine, and then supples them with orle until better remedies could be had. He
thinks not of the loss of his wine and oil, and what hinderance it was unto
him, but is glad it served to so good a purpose. He lights off from his horse,
to set the wounded man thereon, the wounded man being unable, he helps him up
with his-hands, he directs him forward, committing the care of him to no other
but to himself, and seeing he could not bring him into his own house, he
conuayeth him into an Inn. There he spares not, either for costs or pains,
and he looks to him him self, because in Innes and strange houses, such poor
men's miseries are little regarded, neither are they tended as they ought. And
seeing his business required have, and that he could no longer tarry, he makes
further promsion for him, he takes forth our of his purse, so much money as
might serve, till his return, and delivers it unto the Host, requesting the
Inne-keeper that he should see the wounded man well attended and kept, until
such time as his journey being done, he should return the same way back again
saying; Mine Host, ye have money for the purpose, see to this man at my cost and
charge, that if ye shall beslow any thing above this sum that I have delivered
you, you for your part shall not be a looset one mite by it, reckon it to me
when I return again this way, and whatsoever ye shall lay out upon him, I will
pay it you again. He promises to return, and al his gesture and behavior
was, to show that he could not be in quiet till he saw him well and whole
again. Behold here a most plentiful and wonderful measure of love and
christian charity.

And a great shame it is to christians, that heathen people are more merciful,
yea, many of the Recusants herein excel us, and shall no doubt rise up in
judgment against us. If we be slow in ordinary distresses, yet in great
extreamities let us show our selves forwardly, at leastwise for the shame of
the world, if Gods mercy do not mocue us. Show forth the fruits of thy
profession, and let not faith be dead within, and let not God and the world,
and thy own conscience condemn thee. Be not as the rest of the world, who
either pass by and regard not, or else give but some good words and wishes, or
if they give any relief, it is but very slender, so that it does the poor but
little good. Alas, what is the relief of a penny or a shilling, to him that
stands in need of a pound. Yet the fashion of the world is, to make great
boast of this slender relief, like unto the boasting Pharise, as though we
were great alms folks to be wondered at and chronicled. But who will like this
Samaritane, seeing a poor man in great distress, light off from his horse,
and hinder his journey, and forgetting his affairs, bend himself wholly for
the time to help in such a case. The proverb is, that many a little makes a
mickle, and we think when we give somewhat, that every one will likewise; but
God knows almes-folks are very rare, for how should it be a thing so greatly
commendable, if it were common. Little knows the full belly what the hungry
belly means, and if we did feel for a while the penury and scarsity of the
poor, we would be more willing to relieve them, and also we should manifestly
see and perceive, how small the number is of them, that give no more but poor
Peter pence.

Seeing this Samaritane showed greater kindness, the^ either the Priest or the
Leuit, heere-hence we may learn, that if we will be accounted more holy then
other, and of greater perfection, that we do not so behave our selves, that
our conversation be worse then soldiers and publicans. You see that the
priest and the Leuit, both of them were of the elect people of the Jews, and of
that tribe which was prepared to do God greatest service, and which were
judged the holieft among the people, as they should have been, and yet was
there found in them, neither charity nor compassion. But this Samaritane which
was a gentile and an idolater, which had no knowledge of God, and was despised
of the Jews, so that it was counted a reproach, if a Jew did talk with a
Samaritane, or had any business, or any thing to do with him; this Samaritane I
say, showed him self more godly then the Jews, and not better then the common
sort, but better then the priests and the Leuits, which did teach and exhort to
virtue and holiness, and which should have given worthy examples, like lights
upon a hill. So the priests of the temple, which descended of the holy
patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, did slander our Savior Christ, who was
reverently used of the woman of Canaan, which came of cursed Cham. He found not
that faith in Israel, which he found among the Canaanites. I fear me it will
fall out, (and I would in this I might be found a liar,) that in the day of
judgment many publicans, and of the common sort, shall be preferred before us,
which preach the word, and exhort other unto virtue, and make great boast of
Religion, seeing many of those whom we do teach, do far pass us in life
and conversation, and may teach us, if not in words and exhortation, yet in
godly works. As the Lord said to many proud Pharisees, that publicanes and
sinners should go before them, into the kingdom of heaven. Many shall come
from the East and from the West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, when as the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into utter
darkness. Which is enough to teach us, to despise no man, but always to live in
holy fear and humility. For before God the works of charity and godliness, are
more esteemed, then either learning, wisdom, or the glorious show of
Religion. For God has not respect of the persons or of high degrees, but God
regards more the inward affection, and the perfection of charity. The Priest
and the Leuite were of higher degree then the Samaritane, but the Samaritane
showed himself the better man. For the priest and the Leuit being of the same
nation, should have had compassion on the wounded Jew, but they did nothing
less, passing by, and regarding not.

Here also we learn, how few there be that have mercy on their poor
neighbors, when of three there was but one that had compassion. And such are
our times, which in steed of mercy, exercise cruelty toward our neighbors.
Then among three yet there was some mercy found, but now you shall scarce
find one among a hundred, which remembers and releeueth the estate of the
poor and distressed, as daily experience shows. Now a man may see a great
company of poor and Lazarus people, lie at the church doors, and all the
company pass by, neither is there one among twenty that will turn his eyes
unto the poor, so farve off are they from comforting them, either in words or
deeds. And most lamentable it is, that there be many poor householders that
are eshamed to show their distress, yet is their estate well known of the
rich and wealthy neighbors, which can scarcely find in their hearts to talk of
them, or to be sorry for their necessity. And if they be requested to show
relief, and to give somewhat, their ears are shut up, and their stony hearts
cannot relent, to hear their pittious moan, but as though they heard nothing,
they dissemble all. But if thou will not hearken unto my words, have some regard
to gods word, Pro. 21, 13. He that stops his ear at the cry of the poor,
he shall also cry and not be heard. The which thing the most patient Job
considering with a merciful heart, makes manifest his godly disposition, as a
pattern of mercy unto all, chap. 31, 16. If I restrained the poor of their
desire, or have caused the eyes of the widow to fail, or have eaten my
morsels alone, and the fatherless has not eaten thereof (for from my youth he
has grown up with me as with a father, and from my mothers a womb I have
been a guide unto her,) if I have seen any perish for want of clothing, or
any poor without covering. if hi^ (...) have not blessed me, because he^ wi^^
warmed with the fleece of my sheep. If I have lift up my hand against the
^^a^hedesse, when I saw that I might help him in the gate. Let my arm fall
from my shoulder, and my arm be broken from the bone.

Thirdly, we are taught by this example, to show charity and mercy, not
niggardly, but in alarge and plentiful measure, for God regards a cheerful
giver. This Samaritane had not only compassion, but went to him, poured oil
into his wounds, bound them up, brought him to an Inn, prayed the Host to have
care of him, and left money in his Hosts hands. Compare this example to the
rich man, who would not refresh poor Lazarus at his gate, yea, Lazarus found
more mercy of his dogs then of him, for they licked his sores. But as the one
found favor with God, so the other no doubt feels eternal torments. What
is a slender relief to him which stands in need of great succor, bring him
into thy house, and supply his wants; if thou will not bring him into thy
house, go to the poor where they are and show thy alms as God has enriched
thee. This Samaritane was no penny-father, no niggard, his hands were not shut,
but most liberally and plentifully did he relieve the wounded man. Let this
Samaritane be thy example, and be it known unto thee, that whatsoever thou be
slowest on the poor, thou give into the hand of Christ, which will
recompense it with advantage. For many are his blessings, which he has, and
may hereafter bestow upon us, in respect both of our body and soul. Pinch not
thy self therefore, which surely thou do, when thou do not help the poor.

By this Samaritane also we are taught, not to be ouer-squemish in beholding
the sores and wounds of the poor, as many too daintily turn their eyes away,
and stop their noses. This Samaritane, he handled the poor man's wounds, and
bound them up. Christ humbled himself, and healed every disease among the
people, and refused not their company.

Fifthly in giving our alms, we must not consider his Country or personage,
his qualities or deserts, that thereby we should withdraw our hand from doing
good, but only we must remember he or she is our neighbor, as also we must
have an eye to their great wants and necessities. Many are not willing to give
alms, but to their kindred, and such as they know, other some fall into the
examination of the lives of the poor, whether they be of good or evil
behavior. This shows mercy not to one of his own nation, but to an enemy.
Refrain not therefore thy liberality from thy neighbor in his necessity,
although he have spoken very badly of thee, although he be thy enemy. Yea, let
him be a stranger, who^ thou never saw in thy life before, yet consider that
he is thy neighbor, and that he is made according to the image and likeness of
God, let that be thy looking glass, and help his miserable estate It is the
duty of justice, to enquire into other men's faults, but the property of mercy
is to have compassion.

Last of all, hereby we are warned, not onley to be inwardly affected, but
also to put to our helping hand. Many rich people will take pity, but
there-with-all they have many dolaies and diverse excuses.

Which now of these three think thou was neighbor unto him that fell among
the thieves? And he said; He that showed mercy on him. Then said Jesus unto
him, Go and do thou likewise.] Now Christ comes to the application of the
parable, and to answer this learned Doctor. And this is the conclusion of the
parable, where our Savior reserueth the wa^ightiest matter to the last.
Showing that not only he is our neighbor, which may do us good, but he also
that stands in need of our help. Whom we must help, not only in words and
passionate speeches, but also in comfortable relief, which is acceptable both
before God and man. The more merciful that any one is, the nearer does he come
to the nature of God. Delay not thy mercy, put so acceptable a work in
practice, be not slow, go and do thou likewise. Titus the Emperor would say,
that he lost a day, when in that day he had not done one good turn, to some
man or other.

Jesus commended this Doctor, that he had made a right answer and a true,
moving him there-with-all, that his life should be like and answerable unto his
words, and that he should be willing, rather to be like to the Samaritane, then
to the priest or the Leuite, who as men living to the behoof of themselves and
no more, had little or no regard of any other, but the Samaritane, where by
birth and kind he was enemy unto the Jew, in charity and love became his
neighbor.

All the universal progeny of mankind, being through the malice of satan,
spoiled out of the clothing of innocence, sore wounded with all kind of vice,
cast a side, destitute of help, half dead, and even at the next door to
desperation, Jesus coming down from heaven, vouchsafed to visit and see
them. And to the end he might the better help them, by taking man's nature on
him, he came very near to man, both seeing and being seen, hearing and being
heard, feeling, and being felt; and having pity on our extreme distress, he
took upon him our sins, and bear them on his own body, he did in his own
proper person suffer that we had deserved. The same Jesus has seen to the
curing of us, who never turned his face from any sinner, were he never so vile
or abject. Whereas the proud and disdainful priest passes by him, even then
giving up the ghost, whereas the Leuit neglects him, bidding God have mercy
upon him and so going forth on his way as he had begun, least he should
sustain some hinderance or damage in the things of the world, while he
helps his neighbor. Jesus this Samaritane has his Hosts and In-holders, to
whom he leaving the earth, and ascending into heaven, does commit the wounded
man to be well looked unto, promising a reward in heaven, if through the
abundance of charity, they shall have laid out any thing more, then was
commanded, for the healing of the pittious body. And by these In-holders, are
to be understood, the Apostles, Ministers, and Preachers, by whose painful
preaching, he does cure and help mankind, and gathers the same from the
violence of thieves, into the inner room of the church, where the wounds of
sin are healed.

By the doctrine of the gospel, our very enemies must be loved, and by Christ
his example, the poor, the strangers, the fatherless, and widow, are to be
relieved by our alms and charitable devotion. For true it is that Christ is
loved in his members, in whom likewise he is offended, when their weak
consciences are offended, and is put to open shame of the world, when they be
put to shame, and is put to death when they be put to death, and wants relief,
when they are in need and necessity.

The fountain of mercy is the love of thy neighbor, for if thou do not
affect the party, thy mercy will soon grow key cold. And that thou may
take liking to the party, yea, although he be thy enemy, if it be no more but
for Gods cause, and at his request, mark what Christ says. If ye love me,
keep my commandments, whereof this is one, Love your enemies, do good to
them that hate you. Kill thy anger and thy wrath, bury thy hatred, and tread it
under thy foot, GOD has been favorable unto thee, do somewhat at his
request, do more for his love. Heb. 6, 10. God is not unrighteous, that he
will forget your works and labor, that proceeds of love. Heb. 13. To do
good, and to destribute forgette not, for with such sacrifices God is pleased,
2, Cor. 9, 6, 7. He which sows little, shall reap little, and he that
sows plenteously shall reap also plenteously. Let every man do according as
he is disposed in heart, not grudgingly, or of necessity, for God loves a
cheerful giver, 1, John, 3, 17. Who so has this worlds good, and sees his
brother have need, and shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the
love of God in him. Tob. 4, 7. Give alms of thy goods, and turn never thy
face from any poor man, and then the face of the Lord shall not be turned away
from thee. Be merciful after thy power, if thou have much give plenteously, if
thou have little, do thy diligence gladly to give of that little. For so
gatherest thou thy self a good reward in the day of necessity, Pro. 19, 17.
He that has pity upon the poor, lends unto the Lord, and look what he
lays out (he shall loose nothing) it shall be paid him again. Psalm, 41.
Blessed is he that considers the poor and needy, the Lord shall deliver
him in the time of trouble. The Lord preserve him, and keep him alive, that
he may be blessed upon earth, and deliver not thou him into the will of his
adversaries and enemies. The Lord comfort him when he lies sick upon his
bed, make thou all his bed in his sickness. Gal. 6, 10. While we have time let
us do good to all men, and specially to them which are of the householde of
faith. 1, Timo. 6, 17. Charge them which are rich in the world that they be
ready to give, and gladly to destribute, laying up in store for themselves, a
good foundation against the time to come, that they may obtain eternal life.

In conclusion, gather this lesson also, to see the mildnes of our savior
Christ, how largely, and modestly, and delightfully, he answers and
satisfies his enemy, which came to entrap him, that we may learn with (...)
modesty and good will, to answer them that seek our hurt. Yea, all superiors
are hereby advertised, not to be too austere to them, that demand any thing
of them. See you not how Christ answered this crafty Lawyer to the full, when
he might have cut him off in shorter terms, or else answered him with silence.

See also how by these demands, and by every little occasion, our Savior
delivered many profitable and wholesome instruc^^ons. By this example righteous
men, and the friends of God, and the lovers of men's souls, are glad upon the
least matter offered, to profit as many as they may, and for the love of God
and their neighbors, to show forth many good works. According to the
exhortation of our Savior Christ, Math. ^, 16. Let your light so shine before
m^^, (...) they (...) see your good works, and glorify yo^^ s^^h^r which is in
heaven.

In another since, Jerusalem is said to signify Paradise, where-hence man
was cast out, and deprived of all spiritual gyf^^ and graces, as immortality,
righteousness, and holiness, the true knowledge and fear of God. Jericho
signifies this world, and the calamities and miseries thereof, and the diverse
infirmities wherewith man is oppressed by sin. By thieves, the devil and his
kingdom, evil counsel, company, example. By garments, heavenly graces, and
the perfection which man had before his fall. By wounds, his infirmities, and
the corruption of his whole nature, which hinders us that we cannot love and
serve god as we ought. By the priest and the Leuite, the sacrifices of the old
Testament, which could not deliver us from sin and death. By the Samaritane
Christ, which delivered us from sin, death, the devil and hell. By the
Samaritanes iournying, Christ his descending from heaven, and taking upon him
the nature of man. By coming near, undertaking the affections of man, being
like unto him in all things, sin only excepted. Had compassion. The cause
that moved him, was his mercy, and not our desert^. He binds up our wouds
when he forgiueth our sins, and heals our manifold infirimities, and
asswageth our sorrows. Oil is the gladsome tidings of the gospel, comforting
and raising up our distressed consciences. Wine signifies the law, which
does sharply urge and accuse the conscience, as the wine does straiten the
wound, does purge it, and make it clean from putrefaction. He put him on his
own beast, so has Christ taken upon his own body our infirmities. Brought
him to an Inn, and made provision for him, Christ has brought us into the
Church, according to that of Saint Paul, Whom he has chosen, them also has
he called. For those who are not called, are no members of his Church, neither
any of his people. The two pence here named, are the Law and the Gospel, the
two Testaments, by the ministry whereof, the church is instructed and governed,
and so shall be to the end of the world. The law does terrefy, the gospel does
comfort, and proposes Christ unto us, to be our spiritual Physician, which
does mollify the wounds of our conscience, with the oil of his grace. The
Host is every faithful and painful Minister and preacher, which with
conscience takes care of the flock committed to his charge. Who is willed to
take care of his flock, Directions for the Minister.
and commanded so to do from god, and that in the government of the church,
they show not themselves unfaithful and negligent. Who may not ad man's devises
to gods word, but in expounding thereof, must direct his full scope, to the
proportion of faith, and being also painful in his profession, no doubt he
shall receive the promised reward. And if any trouble and persecution grow
thereupon, let us refer al to Gods good will and pleasure, and in all extremities,
learn to depend upon Gods providence. In our painful calling, God will assist
us with his grace and heavenly blessing and will strengthen us in the
continuance thereof, give us courage, and make us constant. And what dangers
soever fall out, God will not then and there forsake thee, but he will stand
by thee, as the Physician stands by the sick man, or the Nurse by the
child. In all extreamities he will be thy guide and comforter. A faithful
Minister, and a diligent man, shall have good success and many comforts.

Go thou and do likewise.] They show mercy, which have a fellow feeling, and
help according to their calling and ability, as did this Samaritane. And
though this doctor of the law, might boast much of the fulfilling of the law,
as many do, which did never fully examine themselves, and their consciences,
by the due trial and touchstone of the law, yet had he, and so have we need
of the mediation of Christ, to give a salve to our sore, and to recover us from
our corrupion and imperfection. And this does Christ perform freely, No
perfection in this life.
and of his mercy, which mercy we take hold on by faith. And seeing thou have
not yet fulfilled the law, why do thou brag and boast of thy own
righteousness. Which is far from the righteousness of the law, whereunto our
corrupt nature cannot make it self subject. Besides, no man can perfectly
fulfill Gods law in this life; here we begin, but elsewhere we shall end in
perfection.

Soli Deo omnis laus, et gloria, et gratia.
The Parable of the unmerciful Servant.
MATH. 18.21. Then came Peter to him, and said: Master, how often shall my
brother sin against me, and I shall forgive him, unto seven times? Jesus
said unto him, I say not to thee unto seven times, but unto seauentie times
seven times. Therefore is the kingdom of heaven, likened unto a certain
king, which would take account of his servant. And when he had begun to
reckon, one was brought unto him, which ought him tenne-thousand talents. etc.
NExt after the notable example of the merciful Samaritane, by comparison and
contrariety, the example of the unmerciful servant seems most worthy of our
consideration and edification. Every one ought to forgive his neighbor that
has offended him, so often as he asks forgiveness. According to that which
elsewhere our Savior exhorts, Luke. 17.3. Take heed to your selves, if thy
brother trespass against thee, rebuke him, and if he repent, forgive him. And
though he sin against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day
turn again unto thee, saying; It repents me, thou shall forgive him. As
this parable does show, by Gods great patience, and by the riches of his
mercy, how ready we also ought to be to forgive one another. The kingdom of
heaven, may be applied to the Church of God in this life, the which God does
rule by his word and by his Spirit, and does mightily and miraculously defend
it, from all enemies, privy hypocrites, open Atheists, cruel Tyrants, the
devil, death, sin, and all the power of hell. God is the King, and we are
his servants, into whose hands he puts his gyfts and graces, that we may
employ them to his glory, and the benefit of his Church. And in this sense also
we are debtors unto God, because no man can fulfill his law, as he requires,
but diverse ways we do transgress the same.

to understand, that all of us shall give account of those things, we have done
in this body, 2. Cor. 5.10. Hebr. 9.27. Romans 2.6. John. 5.28. Ten thousand
talents does show our infinite debt, and our manifold sins and
transgressions, more then the hayres of our head. And as he whose debt is
infinite, and being far unable to pay, has no other mean to help
himself, but to fall down on his knees, and to crave mercy: so are we
willed by this parable, that seeing we cannot satis-fie for our manifold
offenses, we should fly unto the mercy of God, whereof we have assured and
most precious promises, through the merrites of Christ our Savior. By which
only mean satisfaction may be made, and not through our good works and
merrits. Which if they were all stretched out to the utmost advantage that
might be, yet can they come nothing near, if all were sold, yet payment cannot
be made. For in this our corrupt nature, who is it that can in the least part
thereof, satis-fie Gods law? And therefore, that that was impossible to the
law, inasmuch as it was weak because of the flesh. God sending his own
Son, in the similitude of sinful flesh for sin, condemned sin in the
flesh, that we might fly to him for our satisfaction, and the gracious
forgiveness of our most huge debt, after the example of this servant, which
acknowledges his great unworthiness and insufficiency, prays for mercy, and
obtayneth the same.

Peter puts forth this question after the common custom of men, who would be
forgiven, but are loath to forgive others. The third or 7. time, is not here
limited, but rather we are willed never to faint, in so godly a work of
charity. Luke. 17.4. and always to frame our selves to be mildly and
mercifully disposed, and that our minds and hearts, should be free and clear
from hatred and malice. This is one sort of forgiveness, all desire of revenge
set apart, to love him that has offended thee, and to requite an evil turn
with a good, although we think hardly of him according to his desert. Many
abuse this doctrine of patience and forgiveness, caring not what hurt they do,
because we are bound to forgive. But in this place is meant, that they should
be sorry for their fault, confess, and ask forgiveness. Yet many are so
stubborn, that they will not acknowledge their injuries, but add now unto the
old, how-beit, in this case also, we are commanded to forgive. Another kind
of forgiveness it, when we so receive him to mercy that has offended us, that
we think well of him, and are fully persuaded, that the remembrance of his sin
is forgiven before God. Which is not only spoken of private injuries, but of
all other offenses. Therefore he wills, that they that are fallen, should be
relieved by our merciful endeavors.

This doctrine is very necessary, because by nature we are for the most part
too austere, and satan sets us on to this cruel severity, that they that
cannot be forgiven, should be driven to sadness and despair. But here a
question may be made, if we may believe others upon their words, when as
oftentimes they break. Whereunto we answer, that when such through their
leuity and inconstancy, abuse our patience, yet asking forgiveness, we ought
to pardon them, with this wisdom, that after, we take heed of them, and
pray to God to mend them, acknowledging their manifold weakness, and being
sorry for the^ And because it is a thing in a manner impossible to flesh and
blood, and most hard (...) drawn to mercy and forgiveness, especially when
the often faults of our br^^he^ are to be endured, and that we are wearied
with their manifold offenses, therefore the Lord uses a most fit parable to
this purpose. Teaching them that are intractable, and which cannot be entreated
in this case, that they provide but badly in their own behalf, because they
shall find the like measure at Gods hands. This similitude stands in three
comparisons: that is, the Master is compared to the servant, a great sum to
a small debt, and Gods wonderful and unspeakable mercy, to our extreme
cruelty. All which declare, that we far more grievously offend God, then any
brother, or enemy, or mortal man can offend us.

The servant therefore fell down, The servant. etc.
and besought him, saying: Master appease thy anger toward me etc.

Here is the pattern of true instification, which requires that we should
acknowledge our unworthiness, and fly unto Christ our Mediator; The one is
trial of our repentance, the other reaches (...) the height of faith, whereby
we assure our ^^^nes of forgiveness, through Christ his merrites.

Then that servant Master had compassion, and loosed him, and forgave him
the debt.] Here is declared the order and manner of free justification;
namely, that GOD does freely forgive us our sins, and justify us, that is,
he reputeth us as just, and does discharge us from the guilt of sin, for
his Sons sake; and does impute unto us the righteousness, merrites, and
deserts of his Son, as though we had perfectly in our persons, fulfilled the
law of God.

Concerning forgiveness, it is either Ecclesiastical, or civil.
Ecclesiastical, when in the public congregation, by the comfortable tidings
of the Gospel, either privately or generally, we receive the comfort of
forgiveness of sins. Or when upon the peculiar and particular confession
of some one or more, with public prayer the Minister pronounces pardon.
Civil forgiveness is, when among our selves, we forgive one another, not
bearing hatred in our hearts, for wrongs committed, nor yet thirsting after
revenge.

Some will say we must forgive one another, therefore we must not defend our
selves, nor seek redress. But there is a difference betwixt a lawful
defense, and private revenge, and God has appointed the Magistrate to do
right and equity. After which sort a Christian may defend himself, as Paul
did, appealing unto Caesar. Acts. 15. But private revenge, which is a desire to
hurt, proceeding from a wrathful mind, is here forbidden. As it is written,
Romans 12. Vengeance is mine, I will repay says the Lord. And suits of law in
matters of extremity, (as that must be the last refuge, when nothing else will
prevail) these suits of law, I say, with a godly mind, may be followed with
charity. Always reserving our selves to equity, and to neighborhood, not
caring to sit down by a little loss, so that we may recover our own, in any
good and indifferent sort.

But here it was necessary to be spoken, to prevent an objection, that seeing
his master willed him to be sold, his wife, and children, and all that he had,
and payment to be made that some gather here-hence, that satisfaction may be
made for our sins, by our part, and through our endeavors. But the prophet
Esaias in his 53. chapter declares other-wise. Therefore all of us being debtors
in this case, are enforced to fly unto Gods mercy, and to crave the release of
this our great debt, which we can never satisfy. Neither does God always
show his severity at the beginning, that we being compelled, should seek for
release, yea, rather by his free mercy offered unto us, he does prevent us in
this case; but only in this parable is declared, that if God should deal
with us in extremetie, what should become of us. As also, if he should exactly
require of us, that which we are indebted unto him, how needful it were for
us, to fall down upon our knees, and to sue for favor. For this is the only
hope of help, that sinners have. Therefore the prophet David being oppressed,
with the great weight and burden of his sins, cries out. psalm 143. Enter
not into judgment with thy servant, o Lord, for in my sight shall no man
living be justified.

But when the servant was departed, he found one of his fellows, 2. The
ingratitude of the world.
which owed him an hundred pence, and he laid hands on him, and took him by
the throat, saying; Pay me that thou owe.] Here follows the cruelty of
an unmerciful heart, which shortly after was revenged upon it self. And here
is declared, the second matter worthy of noting in this parable, which is the
ingratitude of the world toward God and their unmerciful disposition toward
their neighbor. Who would have been to forgetful, as suddenly, when the
greatness of his Masters benefit was so fresh in his remembrance, that his
heart could be so cruel toward his fellow servant. For surely, if any of us
all, could remember Gods great mercy toward our selves; and how deeply we
are indebted to God we should never find in our hart^ to show such extremity
toward others. And therefore he may be poynted at with a note of wonder.

Who would have done it but that servant, that graceless and unthankful
creature^ little considering that he would be loath so to be dealt with all
himself: and as we are went to say in this case, showing himself worse then
a Jew or Turk. His cruelty is further expressed, from the person of his
fellow servant, who kneeled down to him, and could find no mercy, a (...)
heart that had no pity: he could have (...) no more, if he had utterly
denied him.

Again, his cruelty in expressed by his g^^sture, in that he took him by the
thr^^^e, without any former civil and ^u^teous means of demanding; al which
did show a heart fully possessed with cruelty. But that all cruel minds may
somewhat relent, let the^ consider the manifold causes to move them to charity
and forgiveness.

The first is Gods commandment Secondly, because revenge is the honor due
only unto God. Thirdly, because we are guilty of manifold offenses, wherein
we desire forgiveness of God, and therefore we ought to forgive others.
Fourthly, the common peace and quietness of the Church, which is mightily
troubled by this means. Fifthly, our prayers, the most necessary work in this
life, are hindered by continual hatred, which thirsts after revenge. And
lastly, hereby many weighty affairs of this life are broken of.

Either the second, third, or fourth warning may take place, and it is the
duty of Christians, to seek peace and ensue it. If they be injuries done unto
our selves, then be pacified and mittig^ to thy anger, forgive them for the
causes afore-sayd. If they concern the honor of God, then may we be (...)
let our zeal be (...) with wise^^^^. As in the case of blasphemy, heresy, and
Atheism, which we ^^ght to redress^ to the utmost of our (...), and such
stubborn people whom we cannot (...), we ought to leave to the judgment of
God. 2. Tim. 4.14. The godly often times ^^ire and give offense, and among them
also ^re dissentions. These (...) fall out among them that are more perfect
then others, and therefore the scripture does so manifestly set down, the faults
and offenses of the godly. The reprobate and evil disposed, after twice or
thrice warring are to be left unto themselves, and to GOD, (...) those that
have any spark of grace, cannot be too often warned.

This unmerciful servant should have (...), what power his Master had (...)
him, when he kneeled down unto him, asking forgiveness in a case very desp^^^^
and past hope. His masters boundtifulnes, and his (...) should have drawn him
to mercy and compassion. (...) all th^se (...) were (...), had so fraught him,
and possessed him with cruelty, and (...) him, (...) into (...). Whose (...)
self in these (...) had (...) from hi^ (...) had (...) with him, and ^^^ecting
with (...) by, will (...) of his cruelty. Secondly, ^pan^ toward a stranger,
which (...), but (...) his own f^llow (...). Thirdly, for a final (...)
himself was (...) forgiven; for what is a (...) h^ndred pen^^. Where by
tal^^^^ are signified our gre^^ous and ha^nous of (...) and by the persee,
c^s^el (...) and final (...) f^^lts. His (...) ^^^^leth down, yet does (...).

His fellow servant (...) and cruel^ behaved, (...) heart, for the godly have
a fellow-(...) world be to pass by, o^ full (...). The godly are not only
(...) when they cannot (...) unto God (...) and (...) prayer, for redress and
(...). The (...) unmerciful of (...), (...) and what ini^de (...) will not put
in practice, having (...) ^^^enly consideration. Christ his (...) death for
them, and the heavy an^^^ and distresses of his soul, are not (...) Heb. 4.15.
Romans 5. (...). and (...). No such (...) do enter into their (...). Well the
poor cries and com^^^ his cause to God, and GOD will (...) a time to consider
it, psalm. 10. For (...) ^^^ing ^^^ed with the prayers of the godly, who are
greened to see such (...) ^^^ing highly offended (...) the great ingratitude of
worldly (...) for these great disorders punish (...) with ^^ue^s miseries and
ca^^^ (...).



Then his Master called him, and sa^d to him (...) ^ill s^^^unt. I forgave
thee all (...) etc.] This great cruelty cannot (...) vnpu^^^hed, though it be
to^^er^ted for a (...)* And as God is the god of wisdom so ^ee handles his
matters most (...) does not rashly punish him, but first repro^ueth him, and
debt (...) the cause with him. So do^^^ God by his Ministers, and messengers,
reproo^^ us before he does punish us.

Ough tell thou not* etc.] Christ requires of us thankfulness, for his bene^^^
bestowed, and for the forgiveness of ou^ ^^^nifold offenses, that we should not
be ^^gorous unto our brethren, and unto our neighbors, but that we should be
ready, and ensie to forgive.

So his Master was wreth.] This shows the infinite anger of God against sin,
especially, against those sinners which (...) hard hearted toward others, and
are (...) desirous of revenge, the^ inclined to mercy and forgiveness.

And delivered him to the Iaylers.] which is spoken concerning the doleful
prison of ever lasting damnation. For although god do offer mercy unto all, yet
this cruel minded people are not worthy of it, who ^^ll yield no favor nor
pardon. Which saying agr^^th with that of Saint James chap. 2.1^. Th^^^ shall
be judgment without mer^^ to him that will show no mercy. The same punishment
is appointed to them, which will not be reconciled to other in this (...) Thou
shall not come thence all thou have paid the utmost farthing. When hence the
adversaries of true religion, gather their fained doctrine of pu^gatori^^ (...)
will delivered (say they) to the ^aylor, Purgatory.
(...) he paid, which was some time or other though if were long first. Though
not in this world, nor in hell, yet (...) ^^^orie. But this place does euer^^^
(...) purgatory. For certain it is that Christ means he^re eternal
^amnation, and no tempo^^^ punishment, where^^^ (...) Gods judgment. And (...)
co^de^^ed to these eternal pu^^^, there is no release.

(...) ^^ylors and ^ormenters, are his conscience condemning his sin, the
^^^ble ac^^^ of the (...), outward punish^^^ (...), war, pe^^^ (...) and
(...) a thousand such dangers, and (...) punishments of this life, but (...)
come. He (...) deliue^^^ (...) any hope of re^^^ (...) so much (...) is no hope
of re^^^ (...) to the ^ay^our, (...). To (...) Gods eternal judgment and
punishment^ so gri^^ous are the punishments and pains, that are appointed to
them that will not forgive. So that if men and women cannot bet drawn to
merciful dealing, by Gods commaund^^^, and for his love, and for his sake,
(...) le^^^wise for their own safety, yet let the^ ^^ue especial care there
unto, for the terrible and most eternal torments, which are reserved for
unmerciful people* Gods plagues in this world, and his punishments in another.

The debt of thy manifold offenses still remains, and unless thou forgive
others, thy grievous punishment also remains. The debt of our manifold
sins still remains, and therefore we had need of continual forgiveness,
during our life. But does this forgiveness of our neighbor, and of one another,
deserve forgiveness at gods hand? No in no wise; but rather it is a sign and
testimony unto us, assuring us of Gods mercy and forgiveness, ^^ther of gods
free gif^ and grace and goodres, the^ of our deser^ any way forth.

Till ^oe should pay all that (...) ^oe to him.] Which is a thing (...). For^^
(...) whom w^ (...) is infinite, so is ous sin, as the offense ag^^^ the
Princ^, ^^^ore then against a p^^^ person. For it we be not able to (...) were
one for an hundred, how shall a thousand talents be paid, much less ten
thousand, by him that has not a hundred pence to satisfy. But if he were
cast into prison, until the time that he might pay, there were some
likelie-hoode, that that time might come, wherein he might sat^^fie; and so
there might be forgiveness of our sins, if not in this life, yet in another.

Howbeit this word until, does not here (...) as we may suppose, any
limitation of time, but rather a time without time, which never shall be ended.
For the pains and torments of the wicked, shall be endless. Again, by man,
Gods justice can never be satisfied.

But it seems too hard and extreme punishment, that temporal offenses
should be punished with eternal torments. Adams eating of the fruit forbidden,
did seem a light offense, but it was not so in Gods light. For the offense is
not so much to be consid^^^d, as the party against wh^^^ we (...) offend:
and seeing it is against (...) punish^^^, (...).

So li^^e wi^^ (...) do unto you, (...) (...) ^^^pass^^.]



Our forgiveness ought to be ^olu^^^ne, not forced by constrained? We are
follow ^er^aunts under our Lord (...) Master, and therefore we ough^ free
^^ly and brotherly to be^^e with the (...) and in^^^ (...) one of mother.
(...) ^^g^l^ themselves are (...) which (...) o^^ ^^gligence and (...) (...) so
waig^ly they see it, they (...) sorry, and they make complaint, and (...) s^^^
a righ^^^ us (...), which wi^^ (...) and (...), before (...) no respect (...)
persons. Neither (...) ^^^sted, either by favor (...) (...) way with any (...).

(...) afte^-times to forgive (...) do we do is from (...) them into for^^^
(...), and ^ee as willing to (...) th^^^ good (...) have been F^^ most
commonly there remains in ous (...), a hard remembrance of i^iuries pass^^*
But God (...), and cannot abide (...) or dissembling, and therefore, if we d^^
(...) ^^^erly (...) ou^ of our minds these wrongs committed against us, it is
not for us (...) for favor and forgiveness of (...) offenses. According to
that Christ ha^^ (...) us (...) pray. Forgive us our trespasses (...) forgive
them that trespass against* (...) vnless^ every man: forgive hi^^ ^pan^ th^^
with all his here lighter (...) against him, our heavenly (...) not forgive us,
the greated (...) against him; but also w^^^ (...) and call (...) those which
he (...).

(...) God (...) Father, do (...) offenses let us (...) they offenses; (...)
(...)* Forgive us our ^esp^ss^^^ (...) that trespass against us. Such (...)
other shall, God (...) ^uenging minde^ (...) with ^^^nall (...). Now (...) we
must not only in (...) show forgive, but from the (...) ^^^ly and in
hypocrisy as the law does (...) perfect obedience, not only out-wo^^, (...)
inward also. Ye shall not keep^^ (...) in your har^^, which upon every light
^^^casion, you may put in practice, but (...) your (...), forgive offenses,
rememb^^ gods commandment, and be not forgetful how many offenses he has
forgiven thee and what he has done few thee. Thou (...) do much for a friend,
do more for God. Nourish peace, concord. and vn^tie use and seek all mea^^^
(...) preserve the same. Whereby our priue^^ estate and the common commodity
of all (...) ma^^ tained which thing is most acceptable, and commendable before
God and godly then.

We must, remember first, who it is that is meant by the Creditor secondly,
when the Creditor demaund^ the (...). Thirdly how great the s^mme is. Fou^^h
(...) to be ^^one in this case, (...) selves ^^^ing de^^^, as (...) them (...)

The (...) GOD the heavenly King, who h^^^ (...) us many good things,
righteousness holi^^^, and many other heavenly gifts and graces, and also has
made us ^^ewards of ^^ny other his blessings, which we ought to dispose to
his glory, the good of his Church, the benefit one of another, and to our
own comfort and ^o^tentment. But we have been so far (...), sa^^^ fying the
debt required at our (...), that by our abusing of Gods gyfts and blessing^,
we diverse ways increase the debt, which grows to so great a so^^, that
no ^^^table to pay the same, though he should sell himself, and all that h^^
has.

Secondly, although, GOD do continually put (...) in mind of this debt, yet
he is to be though^ then chiefly to call for a ^^^ing first (...) often as
our conscience charge (...) sin, and as it were ci^^^ (...) to the
judgment seat of GOD. Secondly, when the holy Ghost comes (...) minist^^
(...) of the Law, and by the (...) thereof, r^prooueth sin, and (...) unto
punishment. Again, (...) of God^ (...) are seen. (...), by (...) cre^^
judgments, and (...) punish^^^ (...) off ^^ders that (...) (...). verse 24.
Add (...) ve^ed with crosses, or sickness, (...), which are as it were Gods
(...) and sargants, to call upon us for the payment of the debt:

But why are sinner called debt^* Because that as ordinary debts, do bind
^^en to payment, so do our sins bind us to the satisfaction of such on
infinite penalty.

Thirdly, the debt amounting to ten thousand talents, is far beyond (...)
poo^er Whether (...) mean the number of our iniquities, which are (...)
hayres of our head, (...) whether we (...) the fulfilling of the Law of the
Lord, which we can in no manner of wise come ^eere unto the satisfaction and
full obedience thereof.

Fourthlie, what is to be doo^^ in this case, concerning our selves a We must
follow^ the example of this Debt^^, which (...) down be^^^ (...) editor (...)
himself and (...), which (...) the greatness of our sins, and be (...) wo^^.

(...); into so great (...) ^po^ trust of Christ's deserts, we (...) to (...)
beau^nly, Father, desi^^^ (...) ^^^ness^ and re^^^sement of the (...) Wh^^^
thing if we do faithfully and ^^^tly we (...) ^^^mise that he will forgive us
the whole debt, and receive us into (...) Although the releasement of the debt
be v^etly free in respect of our s^l^^^ yet if we look^ upon Christ, who for
our s^^nes suffered dreadful punishment, there is made satisfaction to god for
our (...). Secondly, beside this sufficient p^^^pent, it ouereweth man's
merrits, and (...) ^^^eth the fire of purgatory; for if the debt ^^^leased,
why is the debtor punished. Lastly, i^ opens to wretched sin^^^ (...) of
^^^ly grace, and spiritual comfort, especially in the conflict of death and
d^spi^^^re. And so much the more is our distress cased, when we think upon
the (...) which i^ the precious death of Christ, wh^^ become a sacrifice for
our (...) to opp^^^st Gods weath, to satisfy the (...) sins, and to (...)
in^^ s^^^ and by which (...) off^^^, and sin ^

How (...) we (...) the (...) th^^ so great me (...) (...) repen^^^de (...) ^
red^^^ion In (...) our whole (...) think upon on (...) thankful^^^ (...) we may
glorify God (...) so gre^^^ (...), with heart mouth, profession, and (...) our.
And most heed^^^ must wee^^, in framing our whole (...) we (...) not so great
a benefit through out (...) (...) this (...) off all debtor did.

What the (...) of the vn^^^ ser^^^ was, it is to apparent, and (...) reason
and common sense does (...), ye^ thereby is showed the most (...) ^^^ture of
the common sort, which is most eager upon revenge, and (...) from (...). But
if, they would be^^^ the (...) of the prophet Eli^^^ (...) and ^^^^^^er it,
they would^ (...) a great (...) the sooner inc^^^ed to (...), who (...) he ^
(...) brea^ (...) (...) sought (...) (...) shall sooner (...) be^^^ then (...)
(...) into (...) (...) Alexander the great hea^^^ (...) most trus^ie friends to
be at (...) only rebuke (...) has that when the^ (...) out again (...) would
kill them both (...) him that wa^ the causes so that (...) they lived
pe^teably. In like case if was sh^ulde duly consider the heaui^ doom, and
judgments, which was laid upon this (...) welfull (...), ^yther we would
easily forgiven, or not be hasty to revenge, but ^^^king p^^se, we would be
(...) ^^^ised* Bu^ leaving the unmerciful (...) to his Ma^ster, let us for our
(...) story, ^^^-what is needful for us (...) toward the (...) that have
offended (...)

Wherein was must understand, that there are two kind^ of men that offend us,
So^^ (...) one as the^^^ ^^^rceiue themselves to ha^^^ offended, (...) and by
in ho^^^ ble^^^st desire, for (...), But as concer^^^ (...) that is ^^^orne
and, wilful let (...) all des^^^ menge, and cease (...) him sti^ b^^^ rather
requite him (...) and turn just^^^de of a^i^^trie* (...) in the, (...) time,
then have a (...) vn^^ him. For when as God wills to wish well to our member,
has does not soo^th, with (...) should like well of those things (...) himself
conde^^^^th (...) incoming is only, that our minds should be (...) from
malice? Ma^e over. there are private offenses betwixt man and (...) publiques
offenses by (...) go^^ (...), both which upon amendenter^, must ^haritably be
forgiven, as we would look^ to be forgiue^^t Gods hands.

Sol^ D^^ (...), s^^glo^ia at gra^^^.
The Parable of the faithful Servant.
(...) 45. (...) and wise, wh^m (...) R^der que^ his (...)
OF all vn^^^^full (...) the careless and negligent Minister, is most (...)
s^ffereth the souls of them that are committed to ^^charge, to perrish for
want of spiritual ^^ode, being herein also very unmerciful unto
themselves, because the blood of them that perrish, shall be required a^ their
hands. Ezech. 3.18. Who as their calling and duty is very honorable, being
the servant of the most High, so their charge is very weighty. For next unto
the Prince and Magistrate to rule, the Ministers have the chiefest and
waightiest charge imposed upon them. And as the (...) and wea^ly, ought to
provide for (...) of them that stand in need of their ^halpe, s^ far foo^th
as they may, so must the Minister (...) care (...) deli^^ the heavenly (...) of
the (...) no occasion, (...) of th^se tha^ are (...) (...) his charge (...) to
comfort the distress^^ and (...) to ^pan^ the (...) her (...), and generally,
to (...) into the true sh^epfold, Such a one may be compared unto afterward,
that can being forth of his treasury things both new and old, Math. 13.52, and
can apply himself unto the performance of his duty, a^ occasion f^^^^th; and
that this parable is principally meant of the Ministers, the ^^^de^ of the
Apostle S. Peter declare (...), 1^.4^. Who asked of our Savior Christ whether
(...) told that parable o^^ly to th^^. Of which sort and degree of men,
because there are more that are negligent and careless, then painful and
diligent, therefore the qualities of both are hee^e set down, and also what
reward each of them shall look son

Because godly and painful Ministers be very ^a^e to be found, therefore the
^olie Christ, makes it a ^^^estion of wonders Who then, (...), faithful
servant. No doubt th^^ be many thus disposed, but (...) of the ^^^^tude, that
are contra^^^^ (...), they be but very few, and as (...) a hundred, and he
that run^^^ (...) easily (...) the number. The faith^^^^ (...) being ^^^^full
of his Masters co^^^ng, is watchful; and sets (...) perform (...)
^osines, with care and conscience. And i^ the number of them be bu^ small; good
Lord daily increase them, and thrust forth such laborers into thy v^^^ard,
and into thy ^aruest. Math. 9.37.38.

The cause that godly Ministers, are watchful, painful, and faithful is,
that they look for their Masters coming, approving themselves to GOD, in all
vpr^^^^ies and good conscience, Acts, 20. Heb. 19.1. Sam. 12. referring all
their injuries to God. 1. Cor. 4.3.9. to 14. and 15.19. Who in his good time
will send them comfort. Wis^. 5.

A good Minister has his commendation from these two qualities. 1. Faithful.
First, that he is faithful, and secondly; that he orders his a^sayres
with great wisdom. And such a one is he^, whom his Master ch^feth to be
Ruler over his household; Such also that are destitute of these qualities, do
rather intrude (...), they are ch^se^. This ground, the Apostle S. Paul (...)
the Minister, that they should work upon. (...) (...) of us (...) of Christ,
and (...) of (...) of God. And as for the rest, i^ is (...) of the disposers,
that every man ^ee found^ faithful. The faithful behavior of a Minister, is
the painful discharge of his that in his place and (...). Of whom the Apostle
speaks (...) Epist. ^.^7. The Elders th^^ (...) well, are wee^ hi^ of double
honor. (...) there which labor in the word^ and doctrine^. And h^^^ weighty
this m^^ter is ^he Minister, to be found faithful, (...) Savior Christ
declares, when he wa^ ^or^e (...) the his ^aue of his disciples, in that
earnestly h^^ (...), Peter of all loue^^ to feed his sheep; and that ^ee
sh^^^^ not for^et it; he pun^sh, him in (...) thereof three times together.
Io^^. (...). Those things which are (...) ^^st (...) of and our most desirous
to (...) filled, we keep to the latter end^, of out sp^^ch, (...) out last
fa^e^ell. And a^ Peter ha^ his charge, so likewise (...) sufficient try^ll ^owe
w^^ghty and necessary a (...) was to ^each and feed the people, (...) at his
last f^rew^^^, (...) the Elders in h^nde of the (...) in the last chapter of
the first (...) Elders also that are among you* I beseech, and earnestly (...)
and a (...) of Christ, and also^ (...) of God, which depends (...) you.
^^^ing (...) ^ot by (...) for filthy lucre, but of a (...) Not a^ though ye
(...) Gods her^^^gh, but that ^e (...) flock. And be^^^^ (...) of man is to
do^ that (...) and with a courage, whereof (...) therefore the Apostle le^^^th
nothing (...), that (...) them to so not ess^^^ a word, adding to his
exhortation (...), of (...) And (...) appear, says (...) a^ incorruptible
drown of glory.

The Apo^^^ Saint Paul, one of the most faithful (...) that (...) in Gods
sel^^^, ^^king ^i^ leave of the Ephe^ians, Act^ (...) and gi^^eth thy^ last
special no^^ of remembrance. (...) therefore (...) selves and ^o all the
flock, whereof the holy Ghost (...) made you ouer-seers, to feed the Church
of God, which he has purchased with (...) own blood. And there-withall
shows the cause of his earnest exhortation, in the two verses following, that
after his departure, grievous Wolves should griter in among them, not sparing
the flock. And moreover, that of themselves (...) should arise speaking
per^^^se things, ^o dravv^ disciples after them. Therefore, if they would show
themselves faithful, s^^u^^^es, they must watch, and look to these matters
putting them in mind by his ovv^^ ^^^mple, I ceased not (says he) to vvar^^^
every one both day and night with ^eare^^ That he might well say, 1. Cor.
11.^. ^^ye followers of me even as I am of Christ, Whose painful labor how
gra^^^ i^ was not only appears by his Epistles which he wrote but also by
his own (...) without boasting or fa^ning: 1. Co^. ^^. (...) By the g^^^^ of
God I am that I am, and his grace which is in me, was not (...) But I labored
^ore ^ho^^dan^^y the^ they all, (...) but (...) grace of GOD which is w^^h are
^. Tim. 1.12. Therefore I thank him which ha^^ made me strong, which is Christ
jesus ou^ Lord; for he^ cou^^ed me faithful, and put me in his (...). And
how faithful he was, and all Ministers ought to be, he expresses by a fit
simi^^^^^. 1. Cor. 3.9. For we together (...) God laborers, ye are Gods
husbandry, and god^ building.

And as he himself according to the glace of GOD (...) him, was a skillful
master build^^, so ought we to be diligent and painful, and never to leave
till we have brought the building from the foundation to the very roo^e. And as
husbandmen cease not from their labor in tilling the earth, by fallowing, and
dunging, and st^^ing, and sowing, till they have prepared the ^^and to bring
forth fruit, and then (...) rest to Gods good will, to give (...), and a
plentiful ha^^^^. So ought the Ministers which are (...) of the ground of
man's (...) in rooting (...) king againsting and deno^^ting (...) of God, as
also in (...) at (...) other was the te^^ing us, (...) is the (...) of the
ground. They must (...) of instructing and (...) their best, by sowing the
seed of Gods word: and so as men that can go no (...), they commit the
prosperous success^, of their labors unto gods wisdom, who says what is
most fit and convenient. For (...) that plant^^h any thing (...) but God that
gives the i^ crease. And although we (...) our selves, in the performance of
ou^ d^tie, and that acknowledging our manifold wa^^^ and great insufficiency,
(as indeed who is sufficient for these things, and that in consideration we
begin to fay^^ and (...) be discouraged ye^ let us. (...) comfort, which we
read, ^. Cor. ^.^^. Th^^ if th^^ be first a willing min^^ (...) according to
that a man has, and not according to that he has (...) also consider, that
God has not (...) one, and that (...) himself any sufficiency (...) a (...),
and (...) ^e (...) faithful, and painful, Now^ ^e is (...) a faithful (...)
which (...), but he (...) with all can, (...) and for (...), see (...) the
(...) of his power (...) pro^^ore the glory of God the co^^^ing of the Church
and the (...) of (...). And what it is to be (...) ^ll and ^^yt^ull in thi^
(...) Apostle showed (...) I ^^^^ge (...) Timo^^^y, before God (...) before the
but do Jesus Christ, which (...) ^^dge the quick and (...) at (...) kingdom
(...) the word be (...) ^^ason, and our of (...) improus rebo^es, exhort, with
all long (...) and doctrine.

You see how straight a charge the Mi^^^ (...) to be painful; and least he
should ^^^age excuses for his negligence, (...) how and wherein he should
(...) Towe (...) pains. They that have the greatest g^^^^ have the greatest
abiditie and yet I know not how it sommeth to pass, (...) out most often^ that
they become (...) painful (...) the deuilly to (...) gospel, to take a^^^^
the so^^ of the so^^^e, and to ^^^pe (...) blin (...) and ignorable, (...) such
Pallours (...) (...) of (...) probation pleasure, ^ are our apped upon a (...)
and (...) ob^^^ the ^^th (...) that the (...) patse (...) does shall be (...)
to they (...) (...) But many (...) they (...) discharged them (...) if (...)
and ther^in their B^^rl effces;, (...) for the most part of the years (...)
(...) Yet they do same butter (...) leave in they (...) a godly, (...) and
diligent Pastor, allowith go him sufficient (...) our age him the (...) for
God pegardeth a (...) recall and (...) niggardly giu^^

If weath and ^stimation be the utmost scope of they desires if they have ^yes
^o (...) ^o hares to confider, the (...) did promotion is not in this world
(...) in another God said to Abraham (...) cr^^eding great reward: and the
Lod^^^^ had no part among their brethren, (...) God is they (...)* If they
look for (...) things in this world, they have (...) Math^^^* But how (...) no
out God Rom (...)* What is it (...) dindering among the (...) and then how can
they prospe^^ po^^^^ (...) If the day (...) of Israel (...) had (...) from
heaven ^^^rie (...) p^^^sh^d for want of food You that (...) great (...) and
for the most part (...) of people committed (...) your charge, in (...) on
three places ^more or less consider what I say, and God put it into your
hearts, in have due care thereof, it is ^^^^site, and shall hereafter no doubt
(...) required (...) your hands, when you shall be called to your account;
which time you your saldes know you cannot eseape. And these words; To
who^^^se^ues much is given of him shall be much required, are annexed to the
punishment of the slothful and negligent sen^^nt. Luke. 12.47. That s^uant
that knew his Masters will (...) not himself, neither did accouding to has
will, shall be beaten with many stripes. 1. Tim. 4.16. Take heed unto thy
self and unto learning, continue (...)* For is doing this, thou shall both
save thy self and them that hear th^e. But if thou be^^egligent therein,
assure thy self (...) in ^^^^ing, thou runnest into greaten (...) then thou
are well divine of. And (...) the rather because a number do punish son (...)
of ^^ode, that are committed to thy dia^ge^. For (...) no preaching (...) the
(...)

Faithful in delivering Gods truth, without error.
Her shall show hin^^dse at ^^^^full (...) (...) painful per^^^tance of his but
i^ but also ^hen ^e (...) ^^^ciall care with all warines and (...) spe^tion to
deliver the truth of God in ill sincerity, without my ^^ot of hesesie, or
mingling man's decious there will* What is chasse in comparison of wheat, or
^^^sse in respect of gold what is darkness unto light (...) Iere. 23.28. What
a foolish wo^^^^ is it to lay hay or stubble upon Gods building? and to bring
in gross^ (...) and palpable heresies; through (...) constering, and
misinterpreting of Gods word^ after our own foolish fa^^ies. Nay if (...)
bring gold and silver, and precious stopes, that it to say, the finest denices
of man, as are (...) of congradity, and super^^^ gation, in ^^^tion of Saints
and the like all come^ to nothing. Therefore leveu^y one that (...) take heed
how he (...) death. For other foundation can no man lay (...) that which is laid
which is I (...) Christ's (...) C^or. 3. (...). And as for (...) and tra^^tions
of men, they are (...) i^ respect of Gods (...) and (...) (...) and admonished.
Some of man, I have (...) a Watch (...) adomonish them (...) if thou (...) not
speak he shall (...) iniquity; but his blood will I (...) hand. But if thou
do warn (...), and he do (...) he shall die (...) his (...) thou have
delivered thy (...). The (...) something is repeated in the (...) of the same
prophecy, (...) the ^^^^^ssity of this matte^ and how (...) ^^esh and blood
do dr^^^^ book^; yet gods commandment (...) ^^ur ^^^o them; and alp^ick
(...) Esaias, ^^. If I even I am he (...). Who (...) thou that thou should (...)
^^^are a mortal man. and the son of (...) s^^ll (...) as grass: And for
(...) Lord ^^y Ma^^^, that has (...) heaven (...) the (...) of (...). Our
Saui^^^ Christ know^^^ before hand; the (...) of (...) ^heref^^ does (...) and
(...) them (...) this (...) specially in the gospel of (...) chapter ^0, 28.
And (...) them which like the bo^^^, (...) the soul, but (...) which is able
(...) destroy both soul and body in h^^^ you, I say unto you, (...) him (...).
17.14.

In what great danger their are they, which ^^w (...) under (...) not (...)
the^ (...) for (...) finnes For (...) the Wis^^an says, Pr^^. (...) flattering
mouth causes ruin, both to them that use it, and to other (...) See the (...)
of King (...), 1. Kings 22. I^^^^ ^3, 3^. Behold, I will come against the
prophets (says the (...)) which (...) chap. 6.14. They ha^^ healed the hurt of
the daughter of any people, with sweet words, say^^g (...) p^^ce, when that
(...) peace. (...) They say still unto them that (...). The Lord has said, ye
shall have peace and they say to every one (...) after the stubbornnes of his
(...), no evil shall come upon you, chap. ^^.13. (...) 16.1. These. 5, 3. Prou.
24.24. He that says to the wicked thou art righterou^ (...) shall the people
curse, and the (...) shall (...) him. But to them that (...) shall be pleasure,
and upon (...) sh^^l come the blessing of goodness. Pro. ^7, 15. Esaias, ^, ^3.
Therefore the Apostle Saint Paul ^e^^yeeth in the (...) of a good consci^^^^^^.
(...) We speak not such he, as they that (...) men, but God, (...) neither did
vv^e^^^^^^ (...) ^^loured doue^ous^^^ (...) is ^^cord* ^ (...) therefore (...)
to follow^ and let us take (...) of the contr^^i^ (...) though (...) with ^ohn
Baptist, for repro^^^ of (...) happy shall we be. And (...) the (...) this point
now (...) it is counted a ^aul^ and (...) of reprpo^^^ ye^ (...) of ^^^de
(...) these which are contrarily (...) at (...) th^^ stirs up in (...) and
fer^^^^ (...) in b^a^^^^ (...) and (...) iniquity. (...) where of (...) all
(...) occasions and excuses, to harden (...) h^rts and consciences there^^^^
(...).

(...) and ^ompe^^^^y with them, (...) shall never th^^^ten and (...) Gods
(...) they^ offen^^^, him (...) to speak. and (...) them. But if he touch (...)
and thirst the reformation of abu^^^, ^^eking they^ good etc amend^m^^t; the^
by and by he ^^^^^eth out of favor, and is subject to (...) dangers. Acts.
22.22. Away with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not mo^^ that he
should live.

How-beit, as in weighty matters, great wisdom is to be used, so doubtless
in this duty of the Minister, Dan. 4, 24. Iere. 26; 13. to 16. And at one says
very well, C^m^ reprehensi^, omnes ^^^^^ones, c^d^^^ (...) aliaque host^l^a
portendat, tanto maiore vt^^dum s^p^entis^^ ominisque malutiae et turb^^^
^^^^ms, vel minima suspicio remouenda. Another also very effectually; Quanto
ze^^^f^^^ nidior, ac vehementior spiritus, profus^^^que charitas, eo
vigil^ntiori opus est scienti^, quae zelum supprimat, spiritum tempere^, o^
(...) charitatem. Let all things be done in love, in order, in time in place,
with dis^^^^ion and circumspection, having due consideration of the
circumstances, which is an especial point of wisdom. Hereof shall I speak
more, when I come to entreat of the wisdom of a faithful ser^^^^^.

But the greatest breake-backe ^o a Minister, in performing his duties, (...)
^sp^^^ally to keep him from reproo^ing (...) (...) care of worldly
commodities, (...) in discharging his d^^y, a^o^^ the care of worldly
commodities.
which (...) ^s th^rn^s, and do so choke us, (...) they make us altogether
unprofitable in our ministry. For if rewards do blind the eyes of the Wise,
and pervert the words of the just, Deuteronomy. 16.19. shall not the Minister be too
much carried away, that has regard to these things. Therefore that which is
just and right follow, and although thou be debarred and abridged of earthly
commodities, (as nothing so ready then to take from the minister) yet make thou
more ^cc^^nt of Gods blessing, and persuade thy self, that a good conscience
is a princes treasure, yea, and more worth then all the world. Shall I make the
question? Is there a man that respects the discharge of his duty, more then
silver and gold, he may truly be said to be a faithful man, and worthy of
great commendation. And no doubt there be many so disposed, though to say the
truth, and in comparison, they be but rare and (...), which seek not their own
profit, but the good and profit of many, that they might be saved. 1, Cor. 10,
33. 2, Tim. 2* 4. Appar^nt vari, ^asto in g^rgite nautes. No (...) that
w^rr^^^h, intangleth himself (...) the affairs of this life, because he
would please him that has chosen him (...) be a^o^^diou^. The H^sb^^d man
(...) not only labor before he rec^^^^ the fruite^ but he must also wai^^
the time of harvest with all patience, James. 5* 7. And he that proves
masteries, ^bstaineth from all things, that he may obtain a corruptible
crown, but we for an incorruptible 1. Cor. 9, 25. The Lord give every
Minister wisdom in this cause, and that he be not too much doted upon
worldly commodities.

Yet is there another weighty hinderance to keep him from the faithful
discharge of his duty, Contempt makes him faint, which would be faithful.
that is when the minister cannot endure scoffs and taunts, contempt and
disdain. Here is the practice of his patience, and the trial of his humility.
For he lightly whom persecution will not make af^^y de, will sloope at this
cross. It is wisdom to redress injuries in all godly charity, but many
things must patiently be born, which cannot be amended. Take the Apostles rule
for thy direction. 1, Cor, chap, 4, verse 12. We are reviled, and yet we
bless, we are persecuted and suffer it. (...) are evil sp^^^^^ of, and we
pray. We are disdained, mad^ a jesting stock, and a Table-talk, we are made
a^ the ^^^th of the world, and the of soo^^^ng of all things unto this (...).
and shall it still so continue, without red^^ss^, without amendment. Yea, as
long as the world endures: and therefore upon necess^^y thou must arm thy
self with patience, go forward in thy duty, and tr^ade all such disgraces
under thy feet. Hebr. 12.2. Looking unto lesus the Autho^r and finisher of our
faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, and
despised the shame. If they have (...) the Master Beelzebub, what are the
servants to look for better entertainment, at the hands of this shameless
world. Ioh. 1^, 18. If the world hate you, you know that it hated me before
you: if ye were of the world, the world would love his own, but because ye
are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the
world hates you. Remember the word that I say de unto you, the servant is not
greater then his Master. Let us not deserve reproaches as evil doo^rs. 1, Pet.
4, 1^. but rather let us behave our selves blameless, without reb^ke in the
midst of a naughty and crooked Nation. Phil. 2.1^. That by our good works,
which they shall (...), ^et. ^, 12. they may glo^^sie god in the (...) when it
shall please God ^^^all them, (...) to convert them Mat, ^, 1^, Blessed and
(...) man revile you, and say all mann^^ of evil against you, for my sake, and
for the faithful discharge of your d^tie, and shall do these things falsely,
without any dese^^ of yours. And let this be an It^^ unto us, Luke, 6, 26. Woe
be to you, when all (...) speak well of you. 1, Cor, ^5.32 2, Tim, 4, 7. The
Apostles fought with beasts as Ephesus, and surely these scoffers be no
reasonable creatures, their, behavior ^^^ing altogether foolish, and they
themselves being such, who^ Christ compares to si^ne; Cast not pearls before
swine. Eze. 33, 30, to the end of the chapter. If they will not be amended,
yet be not tho^ discouraged. Commit thy cause to GOD, 1, Pet 4, 19, who in his
good time, will order all things beyond thy expectations and leave such
scoffers and scorners to him, which is ready to judge quick and dead, 1, pet,
4, 5, to whom they shall give their accounts. And a time shall fall out, that
they shall know that a prophet was among them, Eze, 33, 33. Wherefore, let us
learn to say with the Apostle, 1. Cor. 4, 5. I pass very little to ^^dged of
you, (...) of (...) judgment.

S^ake off all discontentment^, and let no such ^^ners be any hinderan^e unto
us, why we should not show our selves faithful to the utmost of our power Rom,
8.18 In all things let Ministers have especial o^^e, to pray unto God
continually, and to beseech him, that they ministry through the holy Ghost,
may be effectual toward them which are committed to their charge, for whom
they shall give account, and with whom they are put in trust: and that god
would bless his own ordinance, and let them endeavor what they may, so to
apply themselves, that they may be fit instruments, not only to win them
that be godly disposed, but also to recover such, which seem to be desperate
and past hope. The Lord give us wisdom, to behave our selves in this ease as
we ought to do.

Who then is a faithful servant and wise.] The next property in a minister is,
Wisdom also required.
that he ioyns to his faithful care all wisdom. And to this intent, not only
to win the vveake, but also to work a miracle, upon those which he obstinate;
I could vvish the ministe^ still to s^^ before his eyes, the counsel which the
Apostle Saint Paul gives to Timothy, 2, Tim, 2, 24. 2. Cor, 12, 16,
The servant of the lord must not strive, but must be gentle toward all men,
apt to ^e^ch, suffering the evil men patiently. Instructing them with
meekness that are contrary minded, proouing if GOD at any time, will give
them repentance, that they may know the truth. And that they may come to
amendment, out of the snare of the devil, which are taken of him at his will.
Rom, 1, 14. Colos. 1, 28. We preach Christ, admonishing every man, and
teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in
Christ Jesus. And as Solomon prayed unto GOD for wisdom, above all other
things to govern his people well, 1, Kings. 3.7, to 11, because be knew not
how to go out and in before them, so the learned man that is, and that has
most experience, is often to seek in this matter.

James 1, 5. And if any lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, which gives to
all men liberally, and reprocheth no man, and it shall be given him. For as we
know not what to pray as we ought, Rom, chap. 8, 26. but the Spirit makes
request for us, so we know not how to behave our selves wi^sely and discreeth,
without the direction of the same spirit. Our minds by nature are full of
darkness, and he that is guided by his natural reason and mother-wit, and great
learning, does oftentimes miss in bringing his matters to pass. In this case
let us observe all occasions, and watch all opportunities, and apply our
selves unto them, unto who^ we are bound to do good, seeing we are debtors not
only to the wife, but also to the unwise. Rom, 1, 14. And here the Apostle
shows him self an, excellent pattern and example, 1, Cor, 9, 19. Though I
be free from al men, yet have I made my self servant unto all men, that I
might win the mo^e. And unto the Jews I become as a Jew, that I might win
the Jews: to them that are under the law, as though I were under the Law, thus
I might win them. To them that were without the Law, as though I were
without the law, (when I am not without the law, as pertaining to GOD, but
(...) the law through Christ) that I may win them that are without the law.
To the weak, I become as weak, that I may win the weak: I am made all things
to all men, that I might by all meaned save some. And how can this be brought
to pass, but with singular (...), wherein although some may be op^^^ded, yet
it is rather an offense taken them given, (...) Cor. 10, 32, Especially let us
take need of gross offenses, whereof is said, It were better a milst^^^
should be hanged about their necks, and they drowned in the S^^, Math. 18, 6,
7. Wherein we ought to have great care of godly conversation, that all be done
to edifying. Ephe, 5, 1, 10 5, Let us f^^are ourselves to graui^e, agreeable to
our calling, avoiding foolish jests and unseemly behavior, but rather let us
exhort unto godliness, and admonish unto virtue, and give thanks for Gods
benefits and blessings, and in all things behave your selves as it becom^eth
Saints, saints by calling, and saints by profession and conversation. And
seeing we are (...) Candle set upon a hill, let our light so shine, that they
which see our good works, may glorify our Father which is in heaven. Math, 5,
^6.

He cannot behave himself wisely in his minister^^, Wise in curing spiritual
infirmities.
that has not a feeling of the infirmities of others. For this (...) it is
testified of (...). Heb, 4, ^5, We have not an High priest, which cannot be
touched with the ^^^ling of our infirmities, but was in all things ^^^^^pted in
like sort, yet without (...) chap. 2, 18. For in that he suffered and was
^^^^^pted. ver. 10. It became him for whom are all things, and by whom are all
things, (...) that he brought many children unto glory, that he should
consecr^^^ the (...) of their salvation through (...) was said to Peter, Luke,
22, ^^. When thou are con^^^^ted, strengthen (...). 6.1.2. The Apostle in this
(...) sp^^^^th very wisely, Brethren (...) a man (...) by occasion into any
(...), ye which are spiritual, restore such a (...) the spirit of meeknes,
considering thy self, least thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another
burden, and so fulfill the law of Christ. A great f^^therance hereunto is,
when they show themselves meek and mild, and ^^^^le to be ^^lked withal, See
more beereof, in the first leaf of B. Hoopers history, in the book of Martins.
with all (...) without all some and severe behavior. In this quality the
Apostle S. (...) not only in that he be^^^ (...) to al (...) in godly sort, as
we (...) but also where it is said, Asts, 18, (...) all that came in unto him.
And for want of (...) wisdom, the peoples (...) oftentimes estranged, who
otherwise might be wo^^e and gained unto God.

A great difference there is betwixt them that give the raines to their wicked
disposition, and betwixt them, that feeling them sel^e^ subject to mighty
sins, are (...) with the Apostle, saying, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of sin. The godly are often overtaken with their
infirmities, wherein theye case is to be pinied, and we must pray for them,
and be sorry with them, sometimes in a manner not to take knowledge of their
weakness, sometimes gently to admonish, but bi^^erly to reprove them we ought
in forbear, unless the case do grow toward ^^ire mities. Look upon the
estate of S. Paul himself, To. 7. This weakness of ours s^^^eth well to ho^^e
us, and to make us more ^arnestly to call for gods help, this would ease us
from all murmuring and grudging against God, considering our own unworthiness.
Again, in matters of religion, they that are yet (...) and backward, may
hereafter be more strong and (...), yea, though some start aside to (...),
^^forsaking (...) those in whom there is any hope, we are to account of them
not as en^mies, but as brethren 2. These. 3.15. The civil Magistrate punishes
diverse offenses with death, but the Minister is always to seek the amendment
of the party.

His mind must far differ from the multitude in this respect, who are given to
despise and condemn, and make a triumph of other men's faults, making them
odious unto al men, which is the next way to drive them to despair, little
considering, that if their faults were written in their own for-heads, they
would depart one after another, having nothing to say to to the offenders, as we
read of the Scribes and Pharisees, John. 8. which set the woman taken in
adultery before Christ, and being reproved by their own conscience, went
forth from the Eldest to the last. A difference there is betwixt open and
wilful offenders, and them which ^yther through negligence or infirmity go
astray. The one rise again and repent, the other are bent to continue in they^
sin defending the same, and conte^^^ing all good admonitions. Those that sin
upon ^^firmitie, are to be brought into the way (...) ^^^^cted and condemned.
And this we shall perform, not by fo^^e, or vpbrayding speeches, or aust^^^ty
of countenance, but by all mildnes and gentle^^^ considering the manifold
tentations of the devil, and the pronenes of our corrupt nature and sinful
flesh, beside ^^ill examples, counsel, and company. Romans 15.1. We which are
strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our
selves. For Christ also would not please himself. Math. 12.20. Who would not
break a bruised reed, not quench the smoking flax. Finally, the behavior of
a Minister in this behalf, must be friendly, familiar, loving, like unto a
father, another, or nurse, having respect to time, place, persons, and as the
cause it self shall require.

Wisdom in reproving.
Many not considering the frailty and infirmity of man, are too bitter in
their reproof and admonition, putting no difference in respect of times, of
persons, and places. 1. Tim. 5.12. Who first should seek remedy by all gentle
means, before bitter reprehensions and heavy threatenings be denounced against
any. In threatening also, we must keep that measure, that the bounds of
charity be not broken, so long as th^^^ i^^my hope, and to count them that
offend not as enemies, 2, These, 3, 15. But good God, what hurly burly and
vn^ph^^^^^ (...) oftentimes seen in Church assay^^^^ for want of this
wisdom. And as the Magistrate does often wincke at some offendes, so the
Minister must bear with some infirmities; Extat preclara diui. Barnardi
homilia h^c de re.
and better it is to temporise, then by untimely remedies, to set mis^^^^fes
abroad. Many men's minds which otherwise might be won, are alienated and
estranged, through the over severe behavior of the Ministers: as again,
through their negligence and childish lenity, and too mild behavior, many
grow to be too loose, and give great offense. As occasion serves, the
ministers must show themselves either mild and compassionate, or rough and
severe. And he that will perform his ministry in good sort, as is meet and
convenient, must secretly know and inquire the inclinations and dispositions,
the manners and customs of those, over whom he is set. And furthermore, he
ought earnestly and continually to pray unto God, that he would grant him the
spirit of wisdom and understanding, that he would give him favor among his
people, and incline their hearts toward him, and that he would make his
admonitions toward them effectual, and that he would give good success to his
labors. The most part do offend grievously in the manner and circumstances of
reprehending, either for such matters which they do not well consider and
look into, or they do it vnceasonably, in respect of time and place, and
company, or without all reverence of their persons and callings, and for
themselves most uncharitably, and far from the rule of Christianity. For the
amendment of others, and peace and quietness ought to be the scope of
reprehensions. Let al things be done honestly and in order, to edification, and
not to destruction. Gods dishonor must rather move him, then his own private
wrongs, neither must his public ministry be troubled by such distemperature,
let nothing fall from them unadvisedly, or that may taste of their own
discontentments. Having always regard to Gods cause, first we must convince
the^ of their sin, and the exhort to repentance. Many cry repent and amend,
and thunder out the judgments of God, this in deed ought to be done; but if
we do not first, show them, what is amiss, it will not be effectual. For
then will David confess his sin, when Nathan shall lay the parable close to
his conscience. 2. Sa. 12.13. Then is Nabal stricken as dumb as a stone, when
Abigael shall wisely watch her time, and tell him of his churlishnes. 1. Sam.
25.36.37. There is a time for all things, and he is wise that knows
opportunity, and the Minister must sometime wait his time. Ecclus, 31.31. and
6.7.26. and 21.25.26. 2. Tim. 2.24. Then will the Samaritane woman leave her
scoffing, when Christ shall come home to her conscience. John, 4.18. And then
let the Preacher look to profit by his public doctrine, and the brother by
his private counsel, when first they shall prove to their consciences, that
of this or that sin they are guilty. Yet this withal they must remember,
that with the heat of their reprehensions, they join consolation and comfort,
especially to them that are to be comforted. As the prophets in their
prophecies, give evident example. 2. Sam. 12.13. Da. 4.24. Heb. 6.9. 2. Cor.
7.8.9. and 2.7.

It is lawful and necessary for the Minister of God, sometime to use sharp
words, if he means to do any good, especially when he has to deal with
men, whose faces are of brass, and therefore cannot blush, whose necks are of
iron, and therefore will not bow, whose hearts are of flint, and therefore are
not easily softened, whose consciences are even as it were seared up with a hot
iron. Howbeit, the Minister of God is not always to lay on load, as some
indiscreetly fill their sermons with inuectiues and exclamations, whereas a
little wisely spoken and in time, in godly and christian zeal, shall more
prevail, then all such hot inflammations. Sometimes therefore with Paul he is to
doubt whether he should come with a rod, or with the spirit of meekenes and
mildnes. And as he shall perceive the^ either more obstinate or tractable, so to
make the edge of his reprehension blunt or sharp, as he sees his Still to
drop, so to quicken or slake his fire, and so to strain or let down the
string, as that neither by too much straining, or too much loocing, that string
be brought more out of tune then it was at the first, and so be still left out
of tune. Again, he is not to handle all a like, but to remember, that all the
strings of an instrument are not a like placed, a like natured, a like sounded,
not all tuned and strained a like, not all out of tune at once, nor all out of
tune a like, and that according to their place, greatness, or smalenes, nature,
quannty, and quality, every one must more or less be strained. And even so it
is among men; the Magistrate must be reproved, but with great reverence and
singular modesty; the elder sort must be reproved, but as fathers, the younger
sort, but as children, and every one according to his place and calling must be
dealt with all. 1, Tim. 5, 1, 2.

Again, if he shall perceive two to be fallen down into one and the self
same sin, he is wisely to observe, how they came down, and warily to put a
difference between the one and the other. For the one may fall by weakness,
the other of wilfulnes, the one of ignorance, the other of malice; the one
therefore with lenity, the other with seventy must be proceeded against. And
always he must temper his speeches, according to the nature and disposition of
the persons, with whom he has to deal; and recording to the quality and
quantity of the sin against which he deals. Examples hereof we have not a
few in the scriptures. Christ will not break the bruised reed, nor queneh the
smoking flax. Math. 12, 20. Esaias, 42, 3, but the rebels will he batter in
pieces, like a potters vessel. Psalm. 2, 9. Moses was the meekest man upon the
earth, yet none more angry with Aaron then he, nor more severe against
idolaters then he. Paul will persuade Agrippa, to become a christian, and will
convey himself into the bowels of the Galathians, to win them unto Christ, but
he means to take up Peter for halting, and to pronounce Elymas the very
child of the devil.

Nevertheless, to be reproved justly and soundly out of Gods word, and
according to their desert, has not a like effect in all. As may be seen both
in the stubborn behavior of Jeroboam, in the old Testament, and of the
malicious and wicked Jews, when Stephen the martyr laid their faults before
their eyes, Acts, 7, 54. For hereby they were made the worse, their hearts
burst for anger, they gnashed at him with their teeth, they stopped their
ears, and ran upon him all at once. Nevertheless whatsoever happen, the
wicked must stoutly be resisted, neither is their force to be feared, howsoever
the fear of danger make many to draw back. But if our labor take not effect,
according to our wish and desire, let us understand, that this christian
fortitude, is a sweet smelling savor unto God. The nature of the wicked does
herein lively show it self, in that they become worse and more stubborn.
For as dogs being cast in the water, or tied by the neck or legs bark and
bite at them which stretch our their hands to help them, for they think they
come to do them more hurt: So they that are bound with the chains of
wickedness, cannot take in good part the godly endeavors, of them which would
set them free, but take all in the evil part, and interpret all to the worst,
taking them to be their chiefest enemies, and after the fashion of dogs, they
turn back again, and bark, and bite, and tear.

Godly and christian severity, is both profitable and praiseworthy, most
agreeable to the nature of medicine and physic. Some must be so gently used,
that nevertheless we do our best, to amend their faults, first by primate
admonition, and causing other to join with us, in the same business: but if
that will not se^^e, to use open reprehension, and if that prevail not, to
commit the matter to the censures of the church, to leave the^ to Gods
indgment, either in mercy to be converted, or in justice to be confounded, and
so to avoid them, as those in whom there is little hope of amendment.

Our admonitions and reprehensions, must be tempered with wise moderation,
least if they be too hard, strait, and too severe, some be utterly cast down and
overthrown. For there are that yield themselves so humbly unto the word
preached, that when any thing is denounced, their heart melts, and their
flesh trembles. And though it be not applied by the preacher, yet they apply
it very strictly unto themselves. And if any fault whereof they are guilty be
amplified, or a comfort not presently ministered, they are in the horrors of
death, and brought almost to desperation. Now because these are the best
people, and n^erest unto the king dome of God. Psalm. 51.17. Esaias, 61.2. and
66.2. Math. 11.28 therefore the more wisdom must be used. For as in a
purgation in some poison, but great preservatives mixed therewith all, so
reproves given to tender consciences, and trembling hearts, must have
consolations to comfort, (...) we are no whit glad of their faults, but rather
grieved at their falls. Our reproves must proceed from a hatred of sin, and
a conscience, and care to amend our brethren, and not of a stomach to revenge,
or utterly to disgrace them, thereby making them more obdurate, and in a manner
desperate.

Paul speaks to King Agrippa, Acts, 26, 27, as though he would teach us a way
to win sinners, every word is a motive, and shows, that he which fisheth
for souls, had need to have many nets, and observe time, place, and
calling, and fit all words before in his mind, least he loose his bait. He
that has Paul's spirit, knows how to handle all in due order, both the
froward and the gentle disposition, and is well instructed, both to apply
comfort, as well as reproof. Of all professions the Divine must be ready to
lay his hand in a manner under their feet, to win them unto GOD, as the the
Apostle speaks. 2. Co^^^th 4.5. We preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus
the Lord, and our selves your sema^^^s for Jesus sake. And reading the History
of Queen Katherine Patre, in the book of Martyrs, he may learn somewhat
thereby. By nature we would have others humble themselves to us, but Paul
humbled himself to his inferiors, to make them humble themselves to GOD. He
that beseeches, (which is for the most part the Apostles phrase) shall easter
persuade, then he that thundreth, and many have been drawn with the cords of
love, which could never be hawled with chains of iron. God is love, and his
Ministers must speak in love, or else they do not speak like Paul. He that
fisheth for souls, and does not take this net, shall fish all day, as Peter
fished all night, and caught nothing.

Be wise to bear with infirmities, show thy self gentle, that thou may
the better win them, and not only to be as a Father to teach them, but as a
Nurse to weane them from vice, as the child is weaned from the breasts, which
is done by all fair means. Knovving this that perfections come not upon a
sudden, Rome was not built in a day, nor Troy vanquished in a year, stay the
time, and the effect will shevve great wisdom. In the means time, vvatch all
occasions, and advantages, and use all means to recover them, of whom there is
any hope: as for the obstinate and the scorner, leave them to God, who either
for their further punishment, will give them up, or else in his good time will
convert them, and amend what is amiss. And that his doctrine, reprehension,
admonition, and exhortation, may be of more force, let him remember that he is
no private but a public person, and therefore he must behave himself with all
gravity. In this vocation, labors are to be endured, grievous dangers, hatred,
and persecutions are to be expected, and so much the more, by how much more
faithfully we shall discharge our duty. The which things our flesh does
meruailously abhor: all which notwithstanding we are not therefore to refuse
the ministry, but with a good mind and courage to undergo all dangers that
may fall out, consecrating our selves, goods, and lives, and all that ere we
have unto God. More hereof might be spoken, but I refer it unto another
time, when I shall have leisure to set it down, more orderly.

Applications are as necessary as reprehensions, Application.
but many deliver general doctrines without applications, forgetting or at
least not understanding, they do but little good, when they speak not to the
heart. For this is one of the chiefest points and parts of the ministry, which
has his use in teaching, comforting, confuting, exhorting, and the like. Which
ought to be done both publicly in the congregation, and also privately in
cases of sickness, and all other afflictions, against the tentations of the
devil, especially in the troubles of a distressed conscience, when as the
wisdom of the Minister, shall most appear.

His wisdom must be seen also, in laying the foundation of his building, Wise
in the order of teaching.
and in his order of teaching, which at his first entrance, ought to be
observed. Wherein if his auditorie be learned, it were good to deliver the
principles of Religion briefly; if his people be unlearned to speak of the^
more at large, and so to ground all his doctrine there-vpon, and to show how
every thing may be referred to some part thereof. And they that are most
learned, may take it in good part, to hear those things which their children
and servants are to be instructed in, and which they themselves had wel-neere
forgotten. Our Savior spoke many things unto the people, but yet in such
sort, as they were able to hear it. Mar. 4.33. We have many things to say,
says the Apostle, Heb. 5.11. which are hard to be uttered, because ye are dull
of hearing. 1. Cor. 3.2. I gave you milk to drink and not meat for ye were
not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able. According therefore as the
congregation is, so ought we to apply our selves, not to teach mysteries, where
principles are to be delivered, until by long custom they have been thoroughly
exercised. Still we ought to regard the capacity of our auditory. 1, Cor. 3.1.

Understanding is to be referred to the mind, but wisdom is the directour of
our particular affairs and daily actions, which teaches, what, when, and how
every thing is to be done. And they are said to be unwise, who frame not
themselves accordingly, although they know what is to be done: a great
difference there is betwixt contemplation and action, and they that are well
learned, are oftentimes far to seek herein. Sometimes he must show
himself sober and grane, that he be not contemned, sometimes friendly and
familier, that he be not judged too arrogant and too proud, sometimes he
must use moderation, and sometimes exhort and entreat those things, which by
right may be commanded and enjoined. But how and when this is to be done,
wisdom is to direct. So must they govern themselves in their places, that
they be rather loved then feared, or else they shall bring all to havoc,
where otherwise they might do good; and through their troublesome behavior,
they may stir up such storms and tempests, which will not easily be alayed
and pacified. And having care of so many, he ought to be as the eye in the
head, which ouer-vieweth all other parts, and sees always what is most fit,
necessary, and convenient. The Lord in his law commanded that they should
offer nothing unto him that was blind, and a Minister without wisdom, is as one
that is blind, who oftentimes runs into great discredit, through his own
foolishnes, and overthrows his estate, which otherwise might be of longer
continuance. Deuteronomy, 1.15. Moses appointing governors, called for men of
wisdom and understanding, and such whose behavior was well tried. A
Governor without wisdom is like a ship without a rudder, which is carried
away with every wind and tempest. In their places Ministers are governors, and
what manner of governors they ought for to be, we may read Exo. 18.21. They
must be chosen with all deliberation and aduisement, such as be men of courage,
and not faint-harted; Ministers what manner of governors.
men fearing God, and not of loose behavior, whose lives may breed more
offense, then their doctrine may do good; dealing truly without corruption, 1.
Pet. 5. rather regarding their duty then their commodity, whose behavior ought
to be in sincerity, without all hypocrisy. And having these qualities, they
are worthy to be set over thousands, and over hundreds; without these, they are
not to be placed over fifties, no not over tenns. Let him govern as well by
his example, as by his doctrine, let him be forgetful of iniuties, and slow to
anger, constant and patient in adversity, circumspect and wary in prosperity;
let him be given to do good unto all, to hurt none of set purpose, and so
shall he easily win their hearts and good wills, and make a way to do much good,
in his teaching and government. When they thus ^^t^^ i^^^ the s^^^^ght (...)
i^^^^^tion of their d^ty or (...) themselves (...) when they call to minde^
that they (...) to give account of the people, commi^^^ to their charge.

I cannot (...) all the poyn^^ (...) ^^^^dome, which are to be require ^^in^
say the full Minister, because the (...) of (...) infinite; and who (...) ^^ll
^et down wh^^ it fit in this (...), but many things must be left to private
use, and paticul^r experience, (...) time and occasion shall s^^^oe. Only I
will give a further cau^^^ according to the direction of our Saint Christ, th^^
Minister^ ^^^me to be wi^^ (...), and inno^^nt as Do^es. Among men seeing there
are many troubled (...), they cannot (...) too wary, and (...) ^^^^our Christ
would not commit himself (...) he know what (...) man. John (...). The (...)
knowing himself, to be hated, does (...) a^^y (...) danger ^^^ther is the
Minister in^^^^^der^^ly (...) run (...) danger^ (...) as the h^^mlesse Do^^,
(...) by na^^^^, subject to many dang^^^ (...) take her flight, looking when
she shall be ^^^^^ken or taken, and oftentimes falls into the hand of the
Fowler: So ought not the Minister to be too fearful, but to g^^on in hi^
^ourse, and to commit himself to God^ government, and gracious protection, who
can turn all ad^^^^^ti^^, afflictions, and calamities, to our good, and to the
best Romans 8. as it fell out to I^seph. He that is to (...) wary will
ven^ur^^^^^ (...) and again, he that is too careless, and too secure, shall
suddenly come to a fall.

Such faithful and wise Ministers, are seldom p^^ferred by man; For, for the
most part in this case, temporal Patrons (...) such, who are most fit for
their commodity, who are far unfit to minister spi^i^^all food in du^
season, for want of (...). And as for giving bodily food to the (...), and to
strongers, they are kept (...) enough. Yet (...) Ministers meet not with such
^o^^eto^s: Patrons, and Church (...), God forbid they should, and GOD in his
good time, either alter their minder or diminish and decrease the (...) them.
(As contrariwise, many great (...) favor learning, and set it forwards,
whereof we rejoice, and pray that God would bless them in their doings, that
still they may have care to promote Gods glory, and to do good to his Church.



He that fulfilleth the law of God, The reward.
shall live thereby, and he that is faithful and wise, shall not be without
his reward. But as he is not worthy of a reward, that does his work by
halfes, so none shall receive the blessing, but they that hold out to the end.
Blessed is he who when the master comes, shall be found so doing, To.
chap. ^.7. Math. chap. 10.22. Romans 11.22. Ezeck. 18.24. Those Ministers that
be faithful, and wise, diligent and painful, are hated of the world,
scorned, and misvsed: and they that are negligent, careless and good fellows,
are highly esteemed of i^^ille world, and much made on, but they (...) not in
what danger they are before GOD. Yet ought (...) to be no discouragement, to
painful and faithful Ministers, whose reward is not in this life, but in
another, 1, Cor. 15.19.

Until the time that the Master comes, is the servant trial, and before
the master comes, he cannot receive a reward. It is never said during this
life, It is well done good servant and faithful: but when we shall be called
to our account. And if then we shall be found to have done faithful service,
to our lives end, then shall we be received to our eternal rest. According to
that comfortable saying: Reave. 14.13. I heard a voice from heaven saying unto
me, Write, Blessed are the dead which hereafter die in the Lord, Even so
says the Spirit, for they rest from their labors, and their works follow
them. No man is blessed before his death, the crown of rejoicing is after this
life: and happy is that man that continues in says, hope, and charity to the
end of his life; whose delight is in the law of the lord, and whose continual
practice, is in all godly and christian exercises.

This hope, of blessedness, is the thing that every one aims at, and few do
attain there vn^oly^^ this is the recompense of a faithful Minister; whose
troubles and afflictions of all men, as they are great, and such as are able to
daunt, and to discourage him utterly, (so unthankful, froward, and mischievous
is this wicked world, to them that seek their good) yet in the midst of all
his extremities, this ought to stay his mind, that he shall be blessed in
another life. This ought also to comfort him, and much to rejoice him, that he
has his masters good will. For the more faithful a Steward shall show
himself in his masters affairs, the more shall he procure unto him the
evil will of the servants and household. The which he must not so much regard,
(though it greatly molest and vex his mind) as he ought especially to
consider, either the favor or the displeasure of his Master, that has put
him in trust.

The faithful servant shall not labor in vain, and for nothing, neither is
the Word and promise of God, to be compared to the unmerciful dealing of many
covetous Masters; who when the servant has used all diligence, and has been
answerable to all trust, that might be required at his hands, and has spent
the best of his time in his affairs, and has been greatly for his profit, yet
has no ca^^ and conscience to reward him, but send him away empty. But the
Lord is most plentiful in (...) (...) and when we think be (...) and that
we (...) of his remembrance, then will (...) himself a gracious and
bountiful. GOD. For shall there be a liberal thought^^ (...), and shall it
not be far more in God (...) riches and treasured, (...) this disposition.
(...) not so much as once dream that he should be arrayed in the royal
apparel, which the King did wear, (...) that he should be set upon the King
horse* and that the crowne-royall should be placed upon his head, and that
one of the Kings most noble princes should see it performer and that such a
joyful proclamation should go before him; Thus shall it be done unto the man
whom the king will honor. This resemblance and comparison, may sti^e up the
weak minds of faithful ministers, who through manifold mistries are in a
manner discouraged. For the recompense that GOD has in store for them, in^^^e
greater them can be vttured, or can be imagined: so that the Apostle might w^ll
say, To. 8.18. I count that the affliction of this present time, are not worthy
of the glory which shall be showed vntov^. And although we may comfort our
selves, that we are the sons of God, yet this heapeth infinite comfo^^ upon
us, to think that yet it (...) what we shall be. 1, John. 3.2. ^^^^^ing that
when our joyful Redeemer (...) ^^peare, we shall be like him as he is. And if
we continue in our faithful and painful endeavors, let us assure our selves,
this saying of Christ pertayneth unto us, Luke 22.29. I appoint unto you a
kingdom as ^oy Father has appointed unto me: that ye may eat and drink at
my Table in my kingdom, and sit on seats, and judge the twelve Trybes of
Israel. Hereof does Christ himself assure us, Luke 10.^^. Blessed are those
servant, whom the Lord when he comes shall find so waking, verily, I say
unto you, he will gird himself about, and make them to sit down at table, and
will come forth and serve them. Setting before themselves the diligence of the
Apostle Saint Paul; they may look for the same recompense, 2, Tim ^^. I have
fought a good fight, and have finished my course; and therefore in full hope of
Gods merciful acceptance, he might w^ll comfort himself, From hence forth is
laid up for (...) own of righteousness. And though their diligence be not
equal to that of the Apostle, yet if it be to the utmost of our power, the
Apostle himself do^th p^^ us in comfort of the same recompense, as we may
read in the same place. Which unspeakable recompense, is well compared to no
lesser a dignity, then a mou^^e, which is the chiefest here in this vvouldes
nay the comparison of a crown, is inferior to that reward, seeing the
excellency thereof, neither eye has soma nor ^aro has heard, nor has ever
entredi^^^ the h^rt of man. 1. Cor. 2.9. It behooves them therefore to
consider, that are ^^lled to so honorable a work, as to he Sea^^^^a^d^ of the
most high GOD, the God of heaven and earth, that they perform not their charge
negligently, but if it be possible, beyond their power and strength. For if the
common servants bring in their, ta^ke appointed, how much more painful must
the Steward of the house show himself to be, who has a far greaten charge*
For to what purpose does the Lord so highly prefer them, but that they should
pas^^ all other in faithfulness, wisdom, and diligence Generally, all have a
charge to look to their business, and to set themselves roundly there unto, and
therefore slothfulnes and negligence in a Minister, is too great a blot and
blemish. If they were sluggish and unmindful, yet the hope of so excellent and
exceeding reward, should rouse them, and also make the^ most cheerful and
forward, and to be angry with them selves, to behold their own backwardnes^
What my son, and what the son of my womb, and what the son of my
desires, give not thy strength to the vanities of this bewitching world. Let no
man take thy crown from thee. Reu. 3.11. but remember how honorable a master
thou se^uest, who wilful well accept of thy diligence, and recompense thee more
then a hundredfold, Faint not, be not weary. Behold, says be, I com shortly.
and ver. 21. To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my throne.
The Angels appeared to the shepherds watching their flocks. Luke 2.8.

are fully persuaded, they shall never be called to account. Psalm. 14.1. The
fool has said in his hare, there is no God, because he feeth th^^ the wicked
are not always punished, who are let run on, that their judgment may be both
greater and more just. 2. Peter. 3.3. There shall come in the last dives
mockers, which will walk after their lust^ and say. Where is the promise of his
coming* for since the Fathers clied, all things continue alike from the
beginning of the creation Eze. 12.22.23. Zeph. 1.12. Ames 5.18. Although Christ
does defer his coming. it is not because he is slack (...) his promise, as
some men count sla^^^^^ 2. Pet. 3.9 but he is patient toward (...) and would
have no man to perrish, but would all men to com to repentance. The (...) the
day of judgment, and Christ his coming are fear^full remembrances, to evil
sen^ ^^^nes, they are matters most certain and ^ur^ (...) come to pass^s we
think it long, and therefore make bold to do (...) lift; b^^ thee o^e
certified to the (...) Pe^. ^.7. N^we the end of all ^sapan^ hand. The time of
thy death, which thou know not whether it shall be to morrow, is the day of
judgment unto thou, and the (...) of Christ^^ coming to call thee to thy
accounth Wherefore put aside thy foolish (...), that because the master
deferr^th his coming, thou may let loose the raines to all licentiousnes; but
let the instruction of the Apostle Saint Peter, in this place be thy direction.
Be ye therefore sober and ^^rching unto prayer. The time of the latter end of
the world, and of thy last and, is kept close from thee, that thou may be
always in a readiness. The time of deferring the Masters coming, is no matter
whereon thou may ground, but rather thou must look for the contrary. The one
is fo^^^ld, that it shall be su^da^^e (...) centai^^, b^^ for the other, thou
have b^yth^^ proof^^ of warrant. And when (...) be assured of Christ his
coming? (...) it shall not be far of but th^^ thou (...) look for it ^ue^^
day, and (...) the very expectation of so (...) fence so often as it sinkes in
(...) by due consideration, (...) will (...) up our dull and slumbering (...)
(...) the course of a careless (...) wicked life, and make us lay aside all
vain and worldly boasting.

So that there is no persuasion more rehe^^^^ and (...), then the fearful
consideration of Gods tribunal seat, which (...) of us all shall ^^oyde or be
free from. Wherefore, that wen may be s^^red up to the (...) ^^forma^^ed of our
duties, in our several c^lling^, let every one of us give diligent ^^eade there
unto, setting before our ^eel this sudden and unlooked for coming of our
lord and Savior in the clouds, through the long forbearance whereof, the wicked
one so forgetful of God, and of themselves, and are so hardened in sin. Ti^
(...) 11.10.15.

But generally from other degrees of people, (...) are heard per^iculerly to
speak (...) Minister^, who (...) are (...) by the evil serua^nt. Of whom I
would to GOD I had no oceasion to (...) as in a great number all (...) p^^se
^^all be not blameless, (...) suppose the, greatest part to be (...) if there
be any spots (...) I would they were removed, (...) there might (...) no
offense in the (...) God. The first evil property of them, is the presuming
of the long stay, either of the end of their lives, or of the latter and of the
world, of the day of ^^dgment, and of the coming of (...) Savior Christ, to
call them to aco^^^t ^^d thereupon they become (...) of their (...). Following
the example of De^^^^, who forsook (...) ^alling, (...) this present world.
And this (...) laid of many Ministers, only to (...) rich and wealthy, whereby
they become unfit for Gods service, for no man can serve two ^^nisters; for
leaning to the one, h^^ must either despise, or at leastwise neglect the other.
Renown, estimation, wealth, case, ^o hunt after these things, this is fa^^e
from sending. And many parents set forth their children to learning for ^hi^
inte^^ and ^^^pose, having no further consideration, (...) wic^^^^ themselves.
My son^^ (...) and merry life, he shall get (...) ^^ings, promotions, and
dig^^^^ whereby to pleasure himself and hi^ friend^. And surely the building
follower (...) the most which they come to (...) this Tesson which they learned
of (...) ^^thers, do b^^^^^ ^^^edy (...) of Bl^^^^^es and pron^^ (...) th^^
(...) fecders of their (...) though (...), ^o teach, (...) (...) strange matter
and fame from (...). These are they, which if they feed (...) flock at all it
is rather upon cons^^^int th^^ ^^^^^gly, rather for filthy in^^^ then of
^^^^dy mind, rather to inri^h their coffe^^ then to build to themselves a good
(...) to seeking that which i^ their own, and not that which it Jesus Christ's
1. Pet. 5. Phi. 21. 2. Cor. 1^.14. And so it falls out that the greate^ main
(...), the less come, the greater (...), the less diligence, so that the
deceit of ^iche^, and the (...) of this would do not only choke the Word, and
make (...) frui^^ul his them that heart is but also do stop the (...) of the
(...) of that he cannot speak, and weakneth the hand of the sower, that he
cannot (...) for (...) ^^ede. How many Ministers at (...) who before they come
to wealth and (...) into (...), ^^in full but afterward (...) Gods co^^^^ (...)
fo^^^^ting themselves, and the^^ (...) and what account here afterthdy (...)
Heb. 18.17. The Apostlegent has (...) the people, to obey the^ has (...) the
our (...) of them, for they (...) ^aith (...) for yo^^ soulds, as they that
must (...). But these has (...) sight, and yet warth not^ who least (...) of
giving ga^, and yet great (...) shall be required at their hands. They (...)
rule well are worthy of double (...) specially they that labor in the World
and doctrine, 1, Tim, 5, 17, but they that labor not, but in this case show
them (...) gr^^^ lo^^rers, are worthy great reproose, who rather seek the
cro^ite of the wordde, then that they will appro^ue themselves unto God^d whose
d^i^^est desire is to become wealt^^^, and to inriel^ themselves by winning
souls unto God, that is ^hey^ least care Greater wealth they have from God,
then they can have in this world for God does give them the gyfts and graces of
the holy Ghost, whereby they may discharge that waight^ calling which is (...)
had unto them. And therefore the Ap^ste (...) 1, 14 calls it a wo^rthy thing:
and few the^^ be that have that ability from god, to deho^^ his Word to the
edifigation of the people. But many careless ministers loose the pic^i^^s
graces of the holy ghost, and are the ^^^^ed of that worthy thing, and rich
treasare, through their own d^^aul^, and through want of practice. See more
hereof in M^. Smith sermon of he a^nly ^^rife. (...).

Math. ^.13. Ministers are said to be the (...) of the earth, whose office is
to season man with the sole of heavenly doctri^^. But if the sal^ have lost his
sau^r, wherewith shall it be salted^ It is thenceferth good for nothing but to be
cast out, and to be trodden ^^der fo^^^ of men. Meat not only becomes
^^s^^^^ry, for want of salt, but is ^^erly lost, through the fault of them that
should better see to it; and for want of preaching, the people pe^rish through
their f^^lt, that have the ouer-fight of the^. Acts. 19, 28. Heb. 13.17. And by
this means, such negligent Ministers grows out of fa^our, not only with God
but also with (...) who would not ^^^erly dislike that Physician, that
suffers his patient to die (...) his hand, who if he would have (...) might
have recovered him. Tim^^hy is willed that he should study, and (...) by all
(...) to show himself a (...) man approved of God, that needs not to (...)
But with what face shall he appear before Gods tribunal seat, which ha^^^
(...) ded all painful end^^ors, su^^ring the people ^^^^^^ted (...) his charge
to (...) for want of spiritual food. Ezec. 13. If the wicked be not
^^^^ooished, they shall die in they (...), but (...) blu^^^ shall be requ^red
at the (...) hand of the slothful Minister. (...) and blood spy^^, what (...)
the wealth of the world make (...) A good Shephe^^d is wa^e (...) night, as
Jacob was, Gene. 3^ (...) property of a^^ evil sheph^^^^ (...) eareth not
which way the (...) ^^^^^^der, nor into how many (...) they ^^^nes and these
are (...) do ^^^^med h^^elings then shephe^^^ (...) his own example the
Apostle (...) the qualities of a tru^ ministed, (...) 27, who spent his time in
(...) pa^nsu^nes, in watching often, in (...) and thirst, in fastings often, in
cold an^^^ ^^^^dnes. Beside all these things (...) outward, faith he; I am
comb^^d (...) (...) the care of all the Chu^^^ (...) there the^ he would be
(...) labored with his hands, to (...) that the gospel by his preaching
(...) the more free (...) ^ (...) the Apos^^ (...) ^ ^ (...) ^^^mple. But if
there be (...) God is their belly, and whose (...) wholly (...) upon earthly
(...) let them assure themselves that their glory shall be to their shams, and
that their (...) in Gods affairs, shall turn to their destruction. Wherefore
in the name of God and in his fear, let not us make evil (...) and slothful
w^^^him en our ex^^pla but rather as a dashing rock let us (...) once, fore
casting the (...) may follow, and let us go forward (...) but vocation, and
make an end thereof with fear and trembling, which may (...) more careful and
more diligen^^ (...) flesh and blood had need to be (...) forward; which is
soon with^^^ (...) doing good by the least bin^^^ (...) may be. Let us make
straight (...) feet, least that which is hal^^^ (...) and of the way, but let
it rather (...) Give all diligence to your (...) and ioy^^ (...) ^^tiou with
your (...) good conscience in all (...) in the (...) and (...) and the (...)
(...) and patience, and ^ of ^^ill that (...) loss both of (...) of (...) may
(...) be compared (...) of the (...) of the (...) Re. 9.^5. where under the
(...) the minister of that congregation is (...) stood Unto who in God (...)
wors^ that thou art neither cold (...) For what betw^^^ the care of their (...)
wherein they cannot but in (...) what be touched, and betwixt the (...) this
world wherein they are (...) they may well be termed such that they (...) neither
hot nor cold. Now then (...) hear further, what was said to the (...) of the
L^odicians, that by his (...) they may take heed. Therfor^^ (...) art
lukewarm, and neither cold (...) will com to pass, that I shall (...) of my
mouth. For thou saye^^, (...) and in^^ eased (...) have (...) of nothing and
know nor (...) ^how are vvreched and (...) and powe, and blind at ^^ked. As
(...) Archippus, (...) is take illed (...) of (...) calling (...). Take (...)
(...) Lord, (...) and ^^lk wisely (...) them that are with (...) s^^ke (...)
way and occasion they (...) to diff^^^^ the Ministers, thereby ^^^^^ding to
^^aspheme the glorious gospel of Christ, after which they be ^^^^ed. The
minister must fight a good fight, having says and a good conscience, in the
performance of their ministry, whereof ma^^ do daily make shipwreck. And if
they have care of an incorruptible (...), 1. Cor. 9.^5. 1. Pet. 5.4. Let them
^^sta^^e from all things that may binder them, and let them, endeavor so to
run, that they may obtain. 2, Tim, 1, 6. Stir up the (...) of God which is
in you, and (...) not the Spirit, 1. These. 5.19. For wherefore has God given
the gifts of the holy Spirit, but to the edifying of the Church Ephe. 1.12. and
h^ that by his daily exercise, and studious labor, does not endeavor to (...)
these gyfts, shall loose them by littl^^ and (...). And the lamentable
expe^^^nce of th^se (...) days does sh^^^, the wherein ministers should show
themselves most artfull; that the^^^ their negli^^^^ (...) 1. Cor. 4, 5. We
(...) says the Apostle, (...) the Lord, and our selves your serua^^^ for
I^s^^s^^e^. Would God every minister, could (...) say, (...) his conscience did
not inwardly accuse him, that he made not himself a (...) to worldly wealth,
and diverse other worldly hindrances. For surely the pro^^^^^^ (...), Religion
has brought forth the^^^, and the daughter has devoured the mother.

These careless ministers, may ^^ell be compared to sleepers; for as they that
sleep, exercise no part of their body, so these, as men without conscience, or
any feeling (...) remor^e, do utterly let go the consideration of their
duty, wherein they cannot show themselves too painful. Therefore let not us
sleep as do other. 1. These, 5, 6. but let us watch and be sober. For they
that sleep, sleep in the night; and they that are drunken, are drunken in the
night. And seeing evil minister put of the day of their ministers coming, let
them remember the warning the Apostle S. Peter glor^^^. 1. Epist. 4, 7. Now
the end of all thinger^^^ (...), be ye therefore sober (...) watching in
praye^, watching in your (...) and calling. For the day of the (...) upon a
sudd^^e, ever (...) upon (...) with child, when as (...) and ^^^^hful
ministers, shall not escape the dreadful sentence of judgment, and the
torments of hell which are endless.

And begin to smite his fellows, and to (...) and drink with the drunken.]
The second property of an evil servant and negligent Minister is, that
presuming of his m^^stres long stay, and being altogether careless of his
duty, he behaueth him self very loosely, and gives himself to all
licentiousnes. Among servants, in one and the self ^^me house, is so falls
out, that they that are diligent, are hated and envied of them that are
slothful; so in the house of God, which is his church, the servant are of
diverse and contrary qualities, some are well given, and some are set to
disdain, contemn, and despise them; some through care and conscience, are
diligent in their calling and other-some that have little or no card: and
conscience, think it a needless curiosity for Ministers to be so diligent.

But (...) they (...) ^^tter like of painful (...) them their example (...)
behold the charge of (...) down, 2. Tim. 4.1. (...) Apostle, speaking unto
Timothy, before God, and before the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall judge the
quick and dead at his appearing, and in his kingdom, preach the word, be
instant in season and our of season improve, rebuke, exhort, with all long
suff^ing and doctrine. Heb. 3.12.13. Take heeds ^^ethren, least at any time
there be in any of you, an evil heart and unfaithful, to depart away from the
living GOD. But exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, least any
of you be hardened, through the deceitfulnes of sin.

Who should exhort, if the Minister should not? and also how often he should
exhort is here set down, that he should do it daily. But as learning and
knowledge has none so great an enemy, as him that is ignorant, so surely the
painful and diligent Ministers, have no such great enemies, as they that are
most slothful, careless, and negligent in their calling. Hence arise scornful
and disdainful behavior, slu^^derous, and untrue reports; and reproaches,
which are more gre^^ous to the minds, th^^ shipes are to the fl^sts and blood,
which may be understood under smiting of his fellows.

The Lord by the prophet Esaias, chap. 21, 22, 23. does greatly reprove them, who
when they were called to weeping and mourning, gave themselves to joy and
gladness; slaying oxen and killing sheep, d^ting flesh, and drinking wine,
^ating and drinking; as though they should ^^ie the next morrow. But this
iniquity, as there we may read, was not purged till they dyed. And when
Ministers, give themselves to spend their time in the vanities and pleasures
of this world; as though this world, and the transitory joys thereof, were
their portion, Wise, 2, 9, it may well be said of them, that they think their
master is far of, and that he will never come. So did not Moses that faithful
servant in gods house, who chose rather to suffer adversity with the people
of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. These that are so
given to worldly pleasures, the Apostle Saint Iudo, ver. 18. terms to be
mocleers, which shall arise in the last time, and which shall walk after their
own ungodly lusts, which having a show of godliness, have denied (...), which
turns the grace of God (...), showing he^^^by whereinto they are ordained.

Whose worldly and sinful life, as it ought to be no example unto us, so are
we willed to avoid and to turn away from such: Eating and drinking in a
moderate sort, is no other, but to be pertakers of Gods benefits, Eccles, 5,
^8. but to eat and drink and to be drunken, and the excessive abuse of Gods
creatures, shall make ministers (of all kind of people) most g^il^^e, and to be
without all excuse. For to him that knows how to do well, and does it not,
to him it is sin. Not that it is no sin to others, but that it is the
greater sin to him.

How worthy of reproof this evil servant and negligent worldly minister is,
will better appear, by companing him to that minister, who deserves
commendation. 1, Tim. 3. He given to watching and sob^ietie, this to carelesnes
and pleasures of this present life: He being harberous, bestowing his goods
upon strangers and the pore, keeping hospitality for the that are worthy
thereof; this being covetous, and given to spend nothing on the poor, or to
good uses: he apt to teach, this will not (...) into the hatred of the world,
by being too busy, who had rather keep men's good will by saying nothing:
(...) no striker* (...) what is they^ d^^ie, and still set this as their gl^sse
before them; the negligent and careless ministers, beholding herein, in how
many ^^atters they offend, may learn warily to ^^^yth^, and speedily to amend
the^. There great faults are here reproved, where unto (...) nature is
mightily addicted, that is, First ease and idleness: Secondly, ^ouetousnesse:
and thirdly, hard dealing by which means, many worldly ministers, strange the
minds of those that are committed to they^ charge, whom by they^ discreet and
charitable dealing, they ^ight otherwise w^^. Much wrong is to be p^^ up, many
displeasures to be born^ (...) ^^^sgested, some toff^^ and disaduantag^^^^ not
so greatly to be regarded. Their (...) ought to be of greater account, which
(...) not so easily performed. These things wise minister, has in de^p^
consideration, whereas they that (...) vndis^^^, (...) gods stray in sin, and
in offending GOD, and yet they do neglect (...) ha^^ they ^^y car^ to
admi^^s^^ (...) them in any dis^^^sse (...), they give them no comfo^^ (...)
they ow^ them any thing, they (...), being ouerhasty (...), and l^^^ng go
(...), ch^^^y^ are of their souls, (...) might gain^ unto God, (...) the (...)
the (...) commodity, that they might receau^. Being the end, nay die (...) of
all their (...), The (...), 19, (...) to be the very utmost, of the (...) of a
true, godly, and pa^^full (...) Who is it now a days, that (...) which he may
have, and the excell^^^ and slavery of a man's (...), is their in silver and
gold, and worldly commodities, wherein a Minister should show great wisdom,
rather regarding the good estate (...) his people then to satisfy his own
hungry de^^^^.

Companying with worldlings.
Lastly, to are and drink with the drunken, i^ well spoken of them, who of all
company m^^^ their cho^^e of (...) worldlings, father then of those that be
godly and ve^^^^^^y disposed. Which if they did to (...) them unto God, as
Christ (...) Publicans and sin^^^ (...) of their sinful life, but (...) them
out of the kingdom of (...) and to deliver them from th^^ straies of the
de^^ll. ^. Tim. 2.^, (...) (...) of the wicked, so long as we dwell in this
world; 1, Cor. ^, 10, but the godly are grieved with th^^ evil examples, as
the soul of righteous (...), was vexed with the uncleanly conversation of the
wicked. 2. Pet. 2, 7. And ^eere-hence it arises, that the prophet David, Psalm.
120. is grieved at the heart, that he must dwell among the wicked. We is (...)
that I am constrained to dwell with Meseck, and to have my habitation among the
tents of Cedar. In the mean time, to long as the Ministers and the godly live
in the world, which is so full of offenses and corruptions, Phil. 2.15. let
them learn to be blameless and pure, a^ the forms of God without rebuke, in
the midst of a naughty and crooked Nation, among whom they ought to shine, as
lights in the world Mat. 5, 16.1, Pet. 2, 12. And for their further comfort,
this they may assure them selves, that how so^uer in this world they are
troubled with the wicked, yet in the world to to^^^ they shall be altogether
free from them. For no Cana^oite shall enter or be se^^e in (...) them ably
Jerusalem. Zach; (...) any unclean thing. Re. 21.17.

And for an ^^m, a cau^at, and forewarning, to take heed of the company of the
ungodly, let us consider these weighty reasons. First, that they can minister
no matter of true comfort unto us, seeing all their ways are full of offense.
Secondly, they are strong to draw us unto evil, and wen weak to resist, and
to shun their ill example. For flesh and blood without the special grace of
God, and the assistance of his holy spirit, is easily taken in the snare. The
use therefore hereof, is to teach us, first, never to take any delight in
their company, and secondly, to avoid their company to the uttermost of our
power, and where we cannot, to suspect even their friendship.

How the evil examples of the ministers are to be interpreted.
But least by the declaration of the properties of an evil servant and
negligent Minister, as also beholding their faults and falls, we should grow
out of love with Gods word and our christian profession; or else through their
offenses and scandalous examples, we should fall away from God, and from our
own salvation, by sliding into herisie and papistry, or letting loose the
reins to licentiousnes and ungodliness, it is mere and convenient, that we
should speak somewhat, that men's minds might be stand, and better instructed in
this matter. Indeed many are the examples of offense, whereby the more is the
pity, many hundreds are carried away, and the church of God is not so perfect
in this life, but that it has many blemishes. I must needs confess, that
such evil ministers are a great discredit and disgrace unto Religion, and who
by their evil life, hang milstones about their necks, too heavy for them to
bear, and which shall plunge them down, not into the depth of the sea, but
into the bottom of hell, if they take not heed, and amend betimes and repent.

The ministers of Gods word and truth, ought to be lanternes of good life and
conversation to the world, and if they give offense, their fault is greater,
then if it should come from any of the inferior sort. Howbeit we are to
consider, that they are not made of so perfect a mold, but that they are
subject to faults, as well as other men. The high priest, the consecrate
priest, the holy priest, who only was to enter into the holiest place of all,
he was first to offer for him self, and for his own faults, and then for the
offenses of the people. Heb. 9.7. Now although ministers be sinful men, and
some through their fault more in disgrace then others, as Peter said, Lord
depart from me, for I am a sinful man, yet are not we therefore to refuse
their instruction, b^^ rather to consider, and g^dly to recrea^^ the treasure,
that is brought unto us in (...) then vessels. We can accept the good tidings,
that beggars bring, yea, it may come from our utter enemies, as the news of
plenty, brought by the four Leapers, was joyful to them of Samaria, 2, King.
9. The prophet Esaias complains that he is a man of polluted lips. David's
godly psalms are not refused for David's nototious faults, and Peter's perithy,
has not v^terly disgraced his godly persuasions. For as coals from the Altar,
touching Esayes lips, made them clean, so repentance was the salve for Peter's
sore.

VVoe be to them that give offense Math. 18, and that we have too often in our
minds and in our mouths, being too forvvard to give sentence of judgment
against others, and by they^ example we make bold to do the like, as though
their offenses should be sufficient exe^ses for us, making not the right use of
such offenses, that is to take heed by them ^^d not to make them our pa^^^^ to
follo^^. No^ vi^it^^ (...) ^^rfe^tis, pl^^^que sapi^^^^^^, the godliest man
that is has his fall, his weakener frailties, and infirmities. Pro. 3^, 16*
and many bad examples are too apparent, Non taman examples vinitur, sed
legi^^^. It is not the evil example of man, but the direction of, Gods word,
which ought to be the rule of our life and of our actions. For them by we
shall be judged Job. 12.48. We shall not be called to account, why we lived
not as such a good Minister gave us example, or why we did evil, because such
a Minister did offend, but our account shall be, why we have not lived
according to Gods word. Psalm. 1199. Revel 20.12. The word is pure of it self,
though man be sinful, the cunning and commendable works of a Mason or of a
pain^^ is not disgraced for the evil life of the workman for the work will
show and comend it self and as I said before, treasure is not to be refused,
though it be brought in place but ^^^^ly.

And that you may know what manner of vessels they are which God does use in
the ministration of his holiest work in hearing his name before the world and
preaching the (...) of Christ the richest treasure that ever the earth it
^aued; they are earthly vessels, made of clay (...) of the self same mold
whereof (...) kind is fashioned Prophets they are but as Moses sp^ke like unto
their brethren (...) only in similitude of flesh but of sinful and ^^^^le
flesh, G^ 5, 3. Apostles they are and Christ chose twelve of them, but
Iuda^^^^^ (...) evil incarnate, and Peter was a fathan in his kind, and none
were Angels. They are also the men of God, yet men, or if they be Angels, by a
more honorable style then their nature can bear, Re. 8.1. Behold he bath not
found stedfastnes in his Angels, Job, 4, 18, or if they be stars in the same
vision, behold the stars are n^^^ur^ in his sight. Job, 25, 5. From both
which places of Job, is inferred by way of ^^^^^rison; much less they that
dwell in ^ooses of clay, whose foundation is in, the ^^st, and they are
consumed before the ^^^ath, much less man that is but ^^^^nnes and the son
of man, that is but a (...). He fear (...) bear^^h a tongue in the sad days,
that f^^^^th not this or ^^^th like objections against us. They say and (...)
physician first (...) thy (...) preach that a man should keep the (...), by
^^^aking (...) The Bishop therefore says the same father, is not without fault,
whose son is either disobedient or dissolute. Be it that some such there are,
that feed themselves and not the flock, some wicked and irreligious, accounting
gain godliness that have made the house of God a den of thieves, that are but
spots in our feasts: yet the Lord be praised, the Lord has his, who watch
over Sion day and night, that weep for her, that pray for her, that prefer
Jerusalem in all their mirth, that go in and out before Gods people, that give
them food in due season, that care for the souls committed to their charge, as
men that must give a strait account to the searcher of hearts and reins.

Do we approve the faith by the persons, or the persons by the faith, as
says Chrysostom. When thou shall see an unworthy priest accuse not his
calling, Judas was a traitor, yet was it not the fault of the Apostolic order,
it is the fault of his mind, not of his ministry. As water that runs
through a wooden or leaden pipe, neither washes away the furrednes of the pine
no^ defiles it self, but waters the garden whither it goes, and makes it
fruitful: and as the sunbeams shine through many loathsome places, and yet
can never purge the place, nor the place pollute the^; even so the word of God,
may be fruitful to others, when it is fruitless in him that teaches others;
it may be a whetstone to give an edge, or a trumpet to stir up, when yet we may
be as dull as stones, and as heavy as lead. And therefore the Apostle prays,
that when he has taught others, he may not himself be found blameworthy,
Good corn is not the worse for a patche sack, nor bad wine the better for a
golden cup; no man refuses gold for the dross that is mixed with it, nor
Roses for the thorns that grow among them. What if Saul be among the prophets?
what if Judas be among the Apostles. If the like measure might be used against
any estales, against the Nobility of this Land, the Judges, and Gentlemen, or
any other degree besides ministers for the pretended faults of some few, to
ouerturne the estate of all; who might promise to himself one hours security.

Seeing then the matter so stands, that ministers are but men, and the
go^^^est, iustest, and wisest have had their falls, we are not in this sort to
set our selves (...) hatred against the^, neither to scoff, taunt, scorn, or
libell at their faults, but rather in a fellow-feeling, as though the case were
our own to pity them, and to be sorry for their faults and falls, especially
if they proceeded of infirmity, and not of use and custom. To pray to God that
he would vouchsafe in mercy to pardon their faults, and that he would grant
them better grace, not only to repent and ament, but also that they offend not
again, in that or the like sort, and that they may continue in grace and
goodness, to their lives end. And that as they have dishonored God by their
offenses, so now they may show themselves good examples, to Gods glory, (...)
good of the church, and the satisfying of their own conscience; that if it be
possible they may recover what they have lost, both before God and men.

Forth ^^ore, we have in them an example of our own weakness, what we are of
ourselves, and that we might have fallen into the same, or the like offense; as
also we have occasion to give GOD thanks, that hi^^^^to we have not so fallen
into open ^^^^dite or shame, though our pri^^^ and pa^^^ler sins, have been
and (...) God, as their knower offen^^^ (...) most profitable use we gather
from ho^^e, that ^^^ing of our own strength we, (...) ^^^right, not a day not
an how^^ with out Gods assistance, but that ^^slesh is ^^^yle, and the devils
temptations strong, so are we of our selves every way too ^^^ke to resist such
f^^ie darts; and therefore d^^^^ and howrely, instantly and earnestly, and
humbly to call to GOD for his ^^pe and grace to deliver us from over throwing
temptations, and that God would give us strength to over come them, and that
he would give an issue unto the temp^^^^^^; that we may be able to bear it 1.
Cor. 10.13. And let him that it strongest and most resolute, and in his own
conceit sure, let him take heeds least he fall. For as for the wicked and
ungodly who are already in the devils spares, and under his ^h^^^dome and
captivity, he takes no ease for their back-slyding; but as for the^ which yet
are not his he is still about, and sli^^ their elbowe to provoke them: he (...)
thee when thou least think of him ^ight and day he vvaites upon thee, and
against him that stands out most, even against him does ^^be^^ all his (...)
Those things we ^^^^^^ly and ho^^fully to look unto, (...) of (...) and in
respect of th^^ (...) we are to perform the (...) of ^^^^ty, to do as we
would be (...) and to (...) to God for them, that they may rep^^^ and amend.
And that God (...) renue^^ns holy spin^ within (...) 54, which is almost
e^^niguished and drive (...) only some remnant less (...) of fire under a
heap of ash^^ That is would pl^^se God, not to cast (...) ^^^^^tly, as they
(...) desh^^ed, but (...) with the comfortable (...) passion (...) of his
grace, he would show them merry, as ^e showed unto (...) ^he Apostle. Ga 6, 1.



The punishment of the negligent minister.
As the (...) ^^ruant and painful minister, (...) his blessing and reward, so
(...) the evil servant and negligent (...), ^ooke to r^^pe according to (...),
2, Cor. 5, 10. Gal. 6.8. To. 2.9, 13. The punishment therefore of the evil
servant and negligent. Minister is twofold. First, that his expectation shall be
deceived, and his hope suddenly cut off. And secondly, that his portion, shall be
with hypocrites. The grieuousnes of which punishment, is here expressed in
these words, that there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Such evil servants and negligent Ministers, which presuming of the long stay
of their masters coming, give themselves to all licentiousnes, having no care
either of their inward conscience, or outward conversation, being rocks of
offense, and making themselves examples of evil d^^ings, cannot look for any
other, then a just punishment for their due deserth. According as the Lord
speaks by the prophet Jeremy, chap. 9.9. Shall I not visit them for these
things, faith the Lord, or shall not my soul be avenged, on such a Nation as
this? Yea, their punishment shall be greater then they are aware of, and it
shall come more suddenly then they looked for it. And the sudden overthrow of
the wicked, shall be far more terrible, then that which is looked for. For
those troubles and inconveniences, which come unto us, whereof we have a
forwarning, are borne more patiently, and with a more contented mander but
unlooked for mischiefs, besides the grievous extremity of them, do greatly
amaze our minds, with the sudden fright thereof. The rich man said to his
soul, Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years, when suddenly his
years, and his days, and his long expectation was expired, and finished in
one nights warning; O fool, this night shall they take away thy soul from
thee. Our ^^^ter and, and the day of judgment, and the coming of Christ, all
is kept close, to the intent that through hope of long life, men might not
become too presumptuous, in the mean time playing the Atheists, forgetting GOD
and themselves. For as though this thing were certain, that men's lives were to
be prolonged according to their wish and desire, many settle themselves to
enjoy the pleasures of this life, spending their time in all ungodliness,
mal^ing this account, that if they have but op^^^^^re to repent before their
death, all shall be safe with them. Who are as far vvide in their judgment,
as the heaven is from the earth. For when they shall think of nothing, but of
peace and rest, then hasty destruction shall comin place. 1. Thessalonians,
chap. 5.3. 1. Conn chap. 15. ver. 5, 32. When as no time or respite of
repentance shall be granted. And many in their death having time, yet find
repentance a most hard thing to perform: and that repentance as it is too
late, so in a manner it is never true and effectual. Which thing is commonly
seen in the lives of them, whom GOD does grant to recover their former health
after dangerous and desperate diseases, that they return to their old byas,
and become as badde if not worse then ever they were before.

Others there are of another vain, Let us eat and drink, (say they) for to
morrovve we shall die: Which kind of people are so far from loooking for
their Masters coming, that they think there is no such matter at all; and
that after death there is no more remembrance. Who had great need to be often
put in mind^, that they be not deceived, for such ^uill words do not only
corrupt their (...) that utter them, but make them also far worse that hear
them; and evil speeches oftentimes prove more offensive, then evil deeds,
because we are far more easily drawn to sin and vice, then to goodness, and
evil words do soon corrupt good manners. Awake therefore to live
righteously, and sin not. For some have not the knowledge of God; nay many have
the knowledge of God, and yet make their Christian profession reproachful,
through their evil behavior, and to them it may well be so spoken to their
shame. To whom their masters coming shall be in the twinkling of an eye,
when as the dreadful sound of a trumpet, shall call and summon them in all
have, to appear before his tribunal seat of judgment, there to give their
accounts, who no doubt will be found altogether unprepared and unready.

They which in the whole course of their life, have refused the grace of God
offered unto them, and have not harkned unto the Lord, knocking at the door of
their hearts and consciences, Reu. 3.20. shall at the time of their death, and in
their ^^st need, miss of that grace and favor, which so often negligently
and carelessie they have refused and despised. When the time is, let the^
accept thereof, god knows when ever the time shall be again, and let them take
heed it be not said unto them; The time was, and the time is past^ Gods grace
and favor is not at our commandment, as time and tide tarrieth no man, so
the time of Gods grace must pe^^^^e neglected of any. For such a sudden time of
death may come, that all thought of ^^pentance may be out of the way, when as
fear and horror shall wholly possess their minds.

The second part of the punishment of an evil and negligent minister is, that
has shall be cut of, and that his por^^n, shall be with hypocrites. He shall be
cut of and separated from the company of the godly forever. During this life,
the tares and the whea^e grow both together, and the wicked shall be mingled
with the godly: (...), in this life it so falls out; that the wicked shall be
preferred, and set over the godly, and also are in their company, but in the
life to come, then they shall be parted as^^der the sheep from the Goats, the
^l^ct from the reprobates. After death there shall be a separation, and by
death they shall be (...) off, they shall (...) no part in the ioy^l of the
elect, they shall have neither fellowship not company with them. They shall not
only be not off from the compa^^^ of the godly but also from the presence of
GOD. They shall not come into the mount Sio^^ to the Cane of the lining God,
the celestial Jerusalem, neither (...) the cornp^^ie of innumerable Ang^^^ Nor
to the congregation of the first bo^^^ that are written in heaven, neither to
the Spirits of inst ^^dip erfect them.

But as the Wheat and chafe are both upon one floor^ ^^ll the time (...)
voin noing, und then the wind blows away the (...), Matthew, chap, 13.47. In
the Net there are all fif^^^^ good and b^dde, but wh^^ they come to the
Seashore, they (...) gather the good into vessels, and ^^st the badde away.
The gold and the ^^^sse (...) joyned^ogether insper ably, till (...) pu^ in
the fire, then the gold goes one way, and the ^^osse another in the (...) of
h^^uest, the Tares are first gathered and bound in sheaues to be burnt, but
(...) being gathered, shall be brought (...) the Barn: So shall it be at the end
of the world, the time of cutting off, the time of trial, the time of
sep^^^^^^, the Angels shall go forth, and so^^^ (...) from among the just, and
shall cask them into a s^^^nace of fire, there shall be wayding and gnashing of
teeth. And the shall the ins^ (...) in the king dome of their (...). This
separation shall be far worse, then was that of king Nabuchadnezzer, Dan chap
4, 20 when as the watchman and the Holy one came down from he auen, and said,
Hour down the we, and destroy it; for though he was driven from the company
of men, to live among the beasts, being, thrust (...) of his throne, to live a
long time in great dishonor and disgrace, y^^ he re^orned again to his
kingdom. But these evil ^^^uaunts and negligent ministers, being d^c^ cut
off, shall never come to th^^r place, etc neure reconer their for men estate
again.

The master when he comes, shall not only put this evil servant beside his
office, but also he will out him off and separate him, and join his part with
hypocsiles, which have the title and name of the office of the gospel, which
have the name of christians, but their lives and behaui^^ are quite ^^^^^ry,
betwixt whose inward conscience, and (...) ward profession there is great
difference. (...) (...) appear unto you. For a hard judgment shall they have
that bear e^^le. Principally all evil stewards, unfaithful servants, and
negligent ministers, and generals lie, all that have knowledge, if they lead a
wicked life, shall have a greater judgment, because of their knowledge,
wherewith God has youchsafed to open the eyes of their mind, that they may
discern between good and evil. Luke, 12. That servant that knew his masters
will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be
beaten with many stripes. For knowledge, without a life aunswerable thereunto,
is like the Letters which V^iah carried against himself, it draws with it a
greater judgment, and oftentimes condemns the bearer. Knowledge without
virtue, leanes a man without excuse, and is a witness against him, because he
understands what is good, and yet will not do it. Iam. 4.17: To him that
knows how to do well, and does it not, to him it is sin. To him it is sin
with a witness; with a witness of forwarning, with a witness of a ^^^ful
con^s^^ence, with a witness of God^ displeasure, and of the grievous
punishments that hang over our heads.

He that wittingly offends GOD, is worthy of the greater judgment. For if
that servant which ignorantly does fall into sin, shall not escape punishment,
what is he worthy of, who upon set purpose shall transgress his masters
commandment? They which have charge over gods people, if they offend, they do
it not upon ignorance, but being overcome of their own evil affections,
they dishonor their Lord and master, and provoke his great displeasure against
the^. In the mean time, let no man think that ignorance shall excuse him from
his fault, and from the punishment thereof. For lightly, ignorance comes
through negligence, and many may know, which refuse to know. A great difference
is betwixt them that sin of ignorance, and them that violently and furiously
rush against the witness of their own conscience. Let us therefore pray, that
Gods will may be done, and that our rebellious will may yield obedience unto
him. And the more froward that we find our affections, the greater need have
we to pray to God for grace. Romans 7.23. I (...) an other law in my members,
rebel^^g against the law of my mind, and leading me captive unto the law of
sin which is in my members. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me, 2,
Cor. 12.8. I besought the Lord thrice. And he said unto me, My grace is
sufficient for thee; For my power is made perfect through weakness. Ministers
are chosen to be the light of the world, and the salt of the earth, and
therefore greater watchfulnes is required at their hands. Our Savior
considering man's weaknet and frailty, and the great charge of his disciples,
wills them instantly to watch and pray, least temptation should overcome
them, least their own unruly dispositions, should overrule them, least when
they had preached to others, they should become, like unto the Carpenters, that
made Noah's Arc. 1, Cor. 9, 27.

We are all the servant of God, and therefore we ought all of us, to be
painful in the works of godliness, and they that have greatest knowledge, and
greatest gyfts, and graces from God, ought to show themselves Good examples, to
win other, and not to destroy, many, by giving great offense. All in (...)
case are not funished alike with Gods ^yfts, and therefore more is requi^^^
(...) their hands, to whom God has showed himself more beneficial. He that
has the greater knowledge, must be more circumspect and wary in his
behavior, not only before God who knows all things, but also before men,
that we give no offense, as much as is possible, and to the utmost of our
power. He also whom God has enriched with temporal blessings, seeing God
has put him in trust therewith, must have care and conscience to be
beneficial, where God appoynteth. Else shall we be like to that evil and
unfaithful servant, who negligently and unwillingly let pass and set light
by his masters commandment. For he that knows how to do well, and does
not, heapeth sin, and heapeth wrath. Many hear Gods Word preached, good
exhortations, and good admonitions, and yet sin wilfully, having knowledge
and forwarning to forbear.

The contempt of Gods word shall never go long without punishment. And this
was the cause, that made our Savior to denounce so great a judgment Math. 14,
21. Woe be to thee Chorazin, we be to thee Bethsaida: for if the great (...)
which were done in you, had been done in Tirus and Sidon, they had repented
long agone in sackcloth and ashes. But I say to you, it shall be easier for
Tirus and Sidon at the day of judgment, then for you. The dissolute behavior
of Tirus and Sidon, might have excuse through ignorance, wherein Gods Word was
not preached, to call them to repentance; who though they wanted Gods word,
yet had they the light of nature, and the law of their conscience to direct
them. But Chorazin and Bethsaida, which herds Gods Word, and yet were never
the better, shall be worthy of greater judgment. Whom God does not vouchsafe
of mercy, them he does justly appoint to destruction, and from whom he
with-draweth the blessing of his Word, them does he suffer to perrish, Acts.
16.6.7. Again, to make other without excuse, he causes his Word to be
preached, and that they should be exhorted unto repentance.

But of all other, the Ministers are heerin to look to themselves and as they
know most, so to frame themselves to live best, and (...) suspect a fall in
the greatest time of their strength. 2. Pet. 2.20. For if they, after they have
escaped from the filthiness of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord,
and of the Savior Jesus Christ, are yet entangled again and overcome, the
latter end is worse with them then the beginning. For it had been better for
them, not to have known the way of righteousness, then after they have known
it, to turn from the holy commandment. psalm. 125. Unto those that are good
and true of heart, the Lord no doubt will do well. But as for such as turn
back unto their own wickedness, the Lord shall lead them forth with the evil
dooers. It was said to the Scribes and Pharisees, who had the interpreting of
Gods law, and to deal in Gods affairs. Math. 23. Woe be to you Scribes and
Pharisees, hipocrites, for you shall receive the greater condemnation. And let
the saying of the apostle to the Heb. chap. 10.26.27. prevail, sufficiently to
admonish us. If we sin willingly, after that we have received the knowledge
of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a fearful
looking for of judgment. The Lord therefore in mercy grant us his grace, to
live in his fear, and let us endeavor what we can, to make an end of our
salvation with fear and trembling. phil. 2.12. and 3.14. And let us follow
hard toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus, and continue so unto the end. For as none shall be crowned before the end
of their race, so before the day of our death, we may fall away from GOD.
Solomon that was perfect in Gods service, yet toward his latter end, his
outlandish wives woone his heart unto idolatry.

This second part of the punishment of the evil servant, and negligent
minister, is aggrauated and made more grievous, by that which is added
thereunto, that their portion and woeful inheritance shall be in that place,
where shall be nothing else, but weeping and gnashing of teeth, perpetual
sorrow without the least taste of comfort, no not so much as the least drop
of cold water shall be granted to them, that shall be tormented in those
flames. Iere. 48.10. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord negligently.
1. Cor. 9.16. They that preach the Gospel have nothing to rejoice of, in
respect of merit and desert. Luke 17.9. 10. for necessity is laid upon them.
But if they preach not, they must look for a woe. For if they do it
willingly, they have a reward of Gods bountifulnes, but and if they do it
against their will, notwithstanding the dispensation is committed unto them. I
would to God they would consider this, that have the greatest gifts, and yet
use them least; which are fit instruments to glorify God, and yet make
themselves the vassalls of this present world, forgetting the Apostles earnest
persuasion, To. 12.1. I beseech you brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye
fashion not your selves, like unto this present world. 1. John, 2.17. For the
world passes away, and the lusts thereof, but he that fulfilleth the will of
God, abides for ever. Such hipocrites and loose-liuers, and also careless and
forgetful ministers, for their sweet pleasures, wherewith they are drunken in
this world, taking so deep a draught of this cup of transitory fornication,
estranging their hearts from God, unto whom once they had espoused themselves in
holy marriage, and given their names unto him, shall be punished with
intolerable torments. And they that by the dutiful performance of their
office and calling, would not wait for their masters coming, but gave them
selves in the mean time, to all liberty and licentiousnes, their laughing
shall be turned into weeping, and their songs into gnashing of teeth. The worm
of their conscience shall never die, and they shall be vexed with perpetual
grief, for the neglect of their duty; and they shall always weep and mourn,
that they had no better grace. They that behave themselves most negligentlie,
think least of all to come to this torment. I could wish that men would
betimes look unto themselves, and have a due consideration of their weighty
charge; and not so much to be exhorted thereunto, through the fear of hell
torments, as to be allured with the consideration of the unspeakable reward of
eternal joys. As the Apostle S. Peter 1. Epistle. 5.4. does most comfortably
persuade all ministers. Feed the flock of God, which depends upon you
willingly, and with a ready mind. And when the chief shepherd shall appear,
ye shall receive an incorruptible crown of glory. Which he has promised that
cannot lie, and with whom is no variablenes nor shadowing by turning, James,
1.17. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but the promises of GOD shall be most
sure and certain. To which gracious God, be all praise and thanksgiving, in
the congregation for ever. Amen.

Soli Deo omnis laus, sit et gloria, et gratia.

