THE JMAGE of God, or lay man's book, in which the right knowledge of God is
disclosed, and diverse doubts besides the principal matter, made by Roger
Hutchinson. 1550.

Newly imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate. Anno do. 1560.

Cum gratia and priuilegio Reginae maiestatis per septennium.

The contents and Chapters. What God is.
We must learn what God is of gods word, and not of man's wisdom. Chap. 1 God
is of himself. Chap. 2. fol. 6 God is a spirit, and how the scriptures do
grant unto him a head, eyes, hands fete, and al other parts of man's body he is
a bird, a shoter, a husbandman, Christ is his Image and man also. Chap. iii.
Fol. 7 God is immutable, and how he is other whiles angry, otherwhiles pleased,
sometime a sleep, sometime awake, sometime forgetful, standing, sitting, walking.
etc. Chap. iiii. Fol. 14 God is unsearchable. chap. v. 17 God is invisible,
and how the faithful of the old testament saw him diverse times. chap. vi. 18
God is every where, and how Christ is in the Sacrament. chap. vii. 19 God is
full of understanding. cha. viii. 31 God is truth, and whether it be lefull to
lie for any consideration. chap. ix. 73 God is full of compassion. chap. x. 42
God is full of righteousness, and of the prosperity of evil, and the affliction
of good men. chap. xi. 43 God is full of al goodness, chap. xii. 46 God only is
immortal, and of the immortality of souls and angels. chap. xiii. fol. 47
God is the maker of all things, whereof he made them, by whom, and who made
the devil, and of the beginning of syn and evil, Chap. xiiii. 48 God rules
the world after his providence, and how he rested the seventh day, Chapter, xv.
Fol. 53 God only knows al things, chapter xvi. 73 God only forgeueth sin: our
pardoning what it is, of losing and binding, Chapter. xvii. fol. 76 God only is
almighty, and whether he can sin, die, or lie, with other properties. Chap.
xviii. fol. 92 God is defined by ye scripture. chapter xix. 99 xx. 100
What a person is.
In what order he will write of a person. A person is not a difference of
vocation and office, and that the fathers of the old testament worshipped a
Trinity, Chapter. xxi. fol. 101 A person is no outward thing, and why the
church has used this word. Chapter. xxii. fol. 107
That there be three persons.
Christ is a substance. Chap. xxiii. 109 The holy spirit is not a Godly
inspiracion, is governor of the world, to be prayed unto, a forgeuer of sin.
Chapter. xxiiii. fol. 112 Christ is unconfounded, why he became man, and why he
came so long after Adams fall. Chap. xxv. fol. 120 The holy comforter is
unconfounded, why he descended in the lykenes of a dove. Chapter. xxvi. fol.
130 Corporal similitudes of God. cha. xxvii. folio. 134
That all three are but one God.
The deity of Christ and the spirit deny not a unity. Chap. xxviii. fol. 142
All the parts of the definition made of God are proved to agree unto Christ.
Chap. xxix. fol. 161 All the parts of the same definition are proved to agree
to the almighty comforter and spirit. Chap. xxx. fol. 166
Heresies confuted in this book.
AGainst the heresy of trans^stantiatio^, and corporal or local presence. cha.
vii. fol. 21. Against the Anthropomorphites, otherwise named humaniformia^s
which suppose God to be of corporal form and shape. chap. iii. fol. 7.8.9
Against popish and outward priesthod, and the sacrifice of the mass. Chap.
viii. folio. 33.34.35. etc. Against the Priscillianistes which think that for
some consideration sometime lying is not forbidden. cha. ix. 13.37.38 Against
the Origeniftes, which say that all men and women, and deuels also at length
shall be saved. chap. x. fol. 42 Against the late Epicures, which think that God
so rested the seventh day from all his works, that now he works no more.
Chap. xv. fol. 53 Against Astrologers, that think all things are governed by
fate and destiny, and by the influence and moving of the stars. Chap. xv.
fol. 61 Against such as think that we through love or forgeuing other, deserve
remission of our misdedes, Chap. xvii. Folio. 76.78 Against our late
Anabaptists and Donatistes, which teach that evil ministers can not
christen, lose and bind. Chap. xvii. Fol. 80.81 Against Peter's primacie. cha.
xii. 81.82 Against the late Anabaptists, and Nouacianes, which deny those
that fall after Baptism, to be recouerable. Chapter. xviii. fol. 91.92 Against
the Patripassians, and Sabelanes, which confound the Father, Christ and the
holy spirit, saying that they be three names and one thing. Chap. xxi. fol.
101.102 Against our late englysh Saducees, and Libertines, which deny the
almighty comforter to be a substance, and hold that he is a godly
inspiration. Chap. xxiiii. fol. 112 Against the same Libertines, and Saduces,
which make the unlearned people believe, that good angels are nothing else then
good mocio^s, and that hell is nothing but a tormenting conscience, and that a
joyful, quiet, and merry conscience is heaven, Chap. xxiiii. Fol. 112 Against
the damnable opinion, that the devil is nothing but a filthy affection coming
of the flesh, and that all evil spirits are carnal mocions, and sensual
lusts. Fol. 116.117 Against the assercion of the Arriannes, that Christ took
upon him our flesh, but not a soul also. fol. 121 Against the damnable opinion
of the late Anbaptist which denied that Christ took his humanity of the
blessed virgin. Chap, xxv. fol. 121.122.123 Against the Arians that deny the
father, Christ, and the holy spirit to be of one substance and essence. fol.
142.143 Against the multitude of Gods. 145 Against the Manicheis, which make
two Gods, calling them two contrary principles. fol. 144.145 Against the
heresy of praying to saints Folio. 145.146 Against unwritten verities. 104
TO THE MOST REVErend father L. Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Cantorbury, Primat
of al England, and Metropolitan, his most humble Roger Hutchinson, wishes
peace, welfare, and eternal felicity.
PVblius Scipio (he that was first surnamed African) right honorable Father was
wont to say that he was never les idle, then when he was Idle, meaning thereby
for so much as he was a magistrate that he most earnestly thought and mused of
common wealth matters, when he seemed to others least occupied. A worthy saying
for so noble a man, and to be embraced of all rulers, namely in these
troubelous days, in which so many things be disordred, and need
reformacion. So albeit I am no Magistrate as noble Scipio was, bu^ a private
person, yet I have thought it my bounde^ duty to see such hours, in which
I might have been unoccupied, which some spend in banketting, rioting, and
gamning, bestowed neither vnthriftely, ne idelly, but to the profit of the
common wealth, to teach the lay people understanding and science to the
uttermost extente of my small power.

Understanding is a seed that God sows in man's soul, and among al his
gifts, knowledge is the chiefest. It ordreth the mind, governs the body,
directs al our works and affairs, teaching us what ought to be done, and
what is to be left undone, without which nether a king can rule his subjects,
nor the captain guide his army, nor a Bishop enstruct his flock, ne any man
of science or crafts man show forth and practice his art or occupation. Now
if we recount other things to be of great price and value, your wisdom
knows that the knowledge of God surmou^teth so far all other sciences, as
God himself excels all other creatures. And the same without denay is most
profitable and necessary both unto kings, Dukes, Earls, and Lords, as
appears. Psalm. ii. Deute. xvii. Esaias. xlix. where they be named the nourses
of Religion, and also unto gentlemen, marchauntme^ yeomen, husbandmen, to al
degrees spiritual and temporal. Vain are all men, Sap. 1^
which have not the knowledge of God, says the wyseman: Romans ^
and Paul testifies that because it seemed to them not good to have the
knowledge of god, god gave them up into a leude mind to their own hearts
lust, and to all uncleanness. For if he be light, such as know not him, 1 John. ^
do stumble in darkness: if he be the way, they that be ignorant have lost
their way: if he be the truth, John. 14
al such as have no acquaintance with him, be blinded and disceiued: if he
only be good, Luke 1^
we must borow and crave all good things of him alone: if al science be the
lords, we must be (...), Gods scholars, if he only be almighty, Eccle. 24
all our power strength and ability comes from him: if he be life, the end
of such as be ignorant, Mark. 10
and will not seek to know the Lord, shall be eternal death. For our savior and
mercy stock says yt this knowledge is eternal life: This is eternal life, to
know thee and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, (...) be ye true God. John. 17
But we must fetch the right knowledge and true description of him out of holy
write, which as the Apostle tells is profitable to teach, 2 Timothy 3
to control to amend, and to instruct in all righteousness. I have made this
treatise of him out of the same, and forasmuch as my intent and matter herein
is to portray and paint our savior Christ, who is the bryghtnes of the
everlasting light, Hebr. 1 Sap. 7
the undefiled glass and lively Image of the divine majesty, I do call it
the Image of GOD. Or else because such things be here opened and discovered,
which be necessary to be believed and known of the lay and unlearned people (I
would not have them utterly lack Images) name it if ye will, the lay man's
book, for images were wont to be named Libri laicoru^, the books of the laity.
I am not the first that has painted Christ, Paul painted him long sith to
the Galathians, as he witnesses: Gala. 3
I have painted Jesus Christ before your eyes, and have cru^^fied him amongst
you: and all the other Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets were painters. My
mind is not to portraye any new^, ^^raunge, or unknown Image, but to renew,
and repair again the old Image that Paul made, which has been so darkened
with gloses, and is so bespotted with colors of man's wit, so stained
through shameful covetousness, liberty, and gredy ambicion, that marueyle it
is to se men so vnreuerent toward the majesty of God their maker.

Seneca a wise and sage Philosopher wills yt mete gifts be not vnmeetely
given to unmeet persons, as armor to women, nets to students, wives to
boys: and Christ the wisdom of God commands: Give not that which is holy
to dogs, neither cast ye pearls before swyne, meaning thereby, Math. 7
that all kind of gifts ought to be agreeable and answerable to their degrees
and vocacions, to whom they are given. Now what thing could be devised more
agreeable to your graciouse estate, then his Image, whose glory and honor you
have always sought to advance, not without great danger of your goods and
life, for which you are bound to render him most hearty thanks, that he chose
your grace for a bless^^ instrumente to sweep clean his house and church, to
redress all abuses, and to restore again his fallen and decayed glory,
maugre the head of all ennemies. Therefore I do present and dedicate this Image
honorable father, unto your grace, both for the worthiness of the matter
(which is incomparable) for the metenes of your person, for a perpetual
monument of my good will toward your Lordship, and also for a testimony,
token, and declaration of my zeal and benevolence to my country men. If I shall
se it to be profitable to them, I shall be encoraged to take mo fruitful
matters in hand, in which I desire continually to occupy my self, but the
world is so evil, so unkind, so unthankful to students, that poverty
causes them to remitte, and slack their studies, and to seek the world to
maynteine their necessities. Abundance and wealth dwells only with those,
which have Gods houses in possession, which eat up his people like bread,
and are not content to live upon their own sweat, but do live upon other
men's goods and labors, upon the church goods, which are the pores. I do
mean all such, as in the papistical time were wont to live of their lands to
keep good hospitality, to maintain schools, and houses of alms, and now
they be purchessars, and sellers away of the same, usurers, rent raysers,
grasiers, and farm mongers, whereby hospitality, tillage, and many good houses
be decayed in England, and the Realm is unpeopled, and disfurnyshed. Besides
some be berebrwers, some fermers of benefices, some persons, some vicares,
buyers of improparations, some deanes of colleges, some prebendaries, and
officers also in the kings house. Again priests, which should be preachers,
and distributers of the holy sacraments, be lawiers, commissaries,
chauncellors, officialles, proctors, receivers, stewards, the office of
salvation is unregarded through covetousness. And lawiers which be no priests,
be parsons, vicars, prebendaries against the ordinance of God, of which saint
Paul records: Even so did the Lord ordeine, 1 Cor. ^
that they which preach the gospel, should live of the gospel, and no other,
neither king, Lord, Gentleman, ne lawier. And (...) this mingle ma^gle of
spiritual, and temporal regiment and offices is suffered, as if there were
nether god, ne magistrate ordained of god to redress such abuses. What
marvel is it, if man's ordinances and statutes be broken, where the ordinance
of God is plainly resisted, and not received?

Other some that pretend they be true preachers of Gods word, and are counted
holy and discrete men, retained the kings chapleines, and with other lords
both spiritual and temporal, be in deed benefice mongers, prebend mongers,
have many archdeaconships, deanries, and they do not the office of one of their
vocatio^s: some once a year or twice peradventure, does preach a sermon before
the king, or at ye spittle, or at Paul's cross, to delude and paynte the
world, and to uphold their good names. But in the country where is most
need, and where their liuinges lie, they preach not at all, the most part never
preach. Idle chaplains many years possess, and withholde wrongfully preachers
livings. Is not the ordinance of god broken here in? Is not his proclamation
disobeyed, which he procl^^^eth by the mouth of saint Paul: ^ Tessa. 3
He who laboreth not, ought not to eat? Had Eleazar, and Abiather, so many
liuinges? Did Hely, Achimelech and Sadoc, dispend so much of the costs of
paryshes, and do nothing therefore? Abiatha^ Sodoc.
Did temporal men amongst the Jews in the old testament thus live of the
altar, as they do now of the Gospel? Look on their examples, behold the
Apostles, behold Timothe and Tite, and if we do allow the doctrine of the
primative and apostolical church, The Aap^stles.
let us follow the example of the same. Behold the elder fathers, Origin,
Ciprian, Ambrose, Ierom Austen, Chrysostom, and others, which spent all their
lives in preaching Gods word to the people, as appears plain in their
works, which be either sermons lessons, homelies to the people, or else
disputations, and confutations of heresies in their times. Their trade was to
preach and expound the scriptures to the people on the holy days, The elder
fathers were preaching prelates.
and on some work days, and the^ they procured their exposicions and sermons
to be written in latin or greek for the erudition of them which followed. Some
begin to renew this trade now in E^gland, I beseech almighty God to prosper
them. I am sure that the best learned of them, is not able to prove that it
ought to be otherwise, or that the scriptures do allow these pluralities of
livings, dispensacions, to^ quots of promocions, non residences,
improperacions, and this mingle mangle. Paul commands every man to exercise
that vocation whereunto he is called. He aloweth every man one vocation, ^ Cor. 7
one office and occupacion, not many, for he says in vocatione, in his
vocation, not in his vocations. I hearsay an ecclesiastical law, which I have
long desired, shall come forth shortly, I trust therefore that al spiritual
abuses shall be redressed spedely, without any consideracio^ of private lucre to
any man, high or low, spiritual or temporal, and according to the counsel of
which David speaks, saying: the word of God is my counselor. Truly onles
these things be reformed, english service, homelies, and the right use of the
sacrane^tes, do not make us christen me^: We differ from the Turks, but in
outward rites and ceremonies, not in the substance of our faith, which is
vpryght conuersacio^ and go^^ life. But they which should reform others, some
be enta^gled with the same vices them selves. Dicing and carding are forbidden,
but dycyng and carding houses are vpholden, some in their own houses, and in
the kings majesty's court (God save his noble grace, and grant that virtue
and knowledge may mete in his royal heart) give ensample to his subjects to
break his statutes and laws. Prisons in London, where men lie for debt, be
dycing houses, places of correction and punishment, be de^nes and schools of
unthriftiness, open drunkerdes have no punsshment, aduoutrie is recou^ted but a
light matter, chaplains are found of the costs of pore parishes, through which
disorder many thousands here in england be deprived of the sweet milk of Gods
word, and lack teachers to declare the^ their duties toward God and their
king. This is not only my lamentation, but the lamenting of all true herted
Christians, the voice of the cominaltie, the decay of the commonwealth, and a
joyful hearing, glad and plesaunt news to our enemies, that gape and look for
the end of these matters, which will be destruction and ruin, (...) this
darnell of covetousness and liberty every man to do what him list, be not
weeded out, and Gods wrath pacified by some redress and amendme^t. For seeing
the head is so sick and disseased, what marueill is it if the body be so
froward, so disobedient, and so desperate, If thou wylt heal the body, thou
must begin with the head, for his health comes thence: I would say, the
next way to make obedient and Godly people, is ye godly enample of magistrates.
It is written: Secundum iudicem populi sic. etc. Eccle. 10
As the rulers of the people be such are their subjects. They are named of God
the heads of the people, of others the bellies of the common wealth. As the
head is troubled when the hand, the leg, yea the little finger suffers
anguysh, and the belly sends sustenau^ce to all the parts of ye body: so
rulers, in that they are called heads and bellies, ar admonished of their
office, to regard the need and oppression of their subjects, and to care for
the whole body of the common wealth, lest if they tender one part, and
oppress another, it bread and gender division, strife, rebellion, and parties,
as it has done. And they li^^wise are admonished to be obedient, tractable and
lowly of service. Nothing is more sauegarde to a prince, the^ the love and heart
of his commons and nothing is more dangerous, more slippery, then to be
feared, for as father Ennius said: que^ metuunt, oderunt, Ennius.
quem quisque odit, perisse expetit.

Who^ men do fear, him do they hate wtal. And whom they hate, they wyshe and
seek his fall.

And Jesus the son of Sirach, says: Eccle. 1^
An unwise prince spoyleth his people. Look on the ensample of Roboa^, and upon
the good counsel yt his young minions gave their king, I think he rewarded
them for it afterward as desirers of division and parties. 3 Reg. 1^
They that will be feared of many, must needs be afraid of many. The glory of a
king, is the welfare of his subjects. It was a merry world (quod ye papist)
before the Bible came forth in englysh, all things were good chepe and
plentyful. Nay, nay, if these things were reformed, and every man both
spiritual and temporal were compelled by some law and statute to serve but in
one vocation, and one office, we should have a golden world England would become
a paradise, God would bless us as he has promised both heavenly and bodily.
The redress and amendeme^t of enormities in the common weal, must come from
the magistrates, not by rebels, for they are powers exalted and ordained of God
for the same intent, who heals the body by the policy of the head, not of
the fete. If not, we shall instead of the comfortable promises of God be
destroyed and overwhelmed with terrible plagues which he threatens to the
breakers of his law, Deuteronomy. 28
as dearth, war, discention, vprores, insurrections, pestilence, strange
disseases. etc. We have a taste of these curses already, God has bent his bow,
and let slyp some of his arrows, (which be his plagues) long since among us, we
may perceive by that which has chaunsed, what touch he will keep with us
hereafter, and what is like to follow.

O eternal God spare thy servants, let not the enemies of ye truth have such
cause to rejoice, suffer not hogs, filthy and covetous men to root and tread
down thy vineyard any longer, but hold up the staff of thine enheritaunce: Let
not the preaching of thy smete son increase the damnacion of thy people, but
do thou draw and turn them, work their ame^dement who hold in thy hands
the hearts of rulers and al me^. Al these enormities be the fruits of evil
hearts, make them O God clean hearted, that they may power forth good fruits
by the operation of thy holy spirit, who preserve your grace in good health and
make your government prosperous to you, to this Realm, and to the church of
God.

So be it.

At London the.xxvi. of June.

Master doctor Byll.
Images are made to put us in mind
Of that which is dead or far absent,
But God is neither as we do find.
But aye living, and each where present.
Images are cursed graven by man's wit
In place that are set for any religion,
But an Image made out of holy wryt,
Is not forbidden in mine opinion.
An Image is painted here in this book,
Neither with false (...), nor ma^s inue^tio^s
But out of Gods book set out to all folk,
Fruitful and necessary to al true christians
Hutchinson shope it for good men to regard
With thanks his costs, with praise his pains reward.
AN EXACT TABLE OF ALL the principal matters contained in this book.
A
ABsolutio^ of the the minister. 90 Abraham lied not to Abymeleck. Fol. 38
Abraham's vision. 103 135 A clean sacrifice. 33 Accidens remain in in the
sacrament. 117 Against fate and destiny, or the influence of the stars. 61
Against Peter's premacy. ^^ A glass. 104 A glass to se God in Fol. 138 Against
prayinge to saints. 145 An exhortation to swerers. 1^ Angels are Gods repers.
Fol. 13 Against the corporal presence. 21 All lying is forbidden. 37 All
things were made of nothing. 52 A new sacrifice. 34 An exhortation to kings.
55 Angels apere in diverse shapes. 66 Angels ar ministering spirits. 74
Anabaptists doctrine, evil. 80 Anabaptists aledge two seeds in Mary. Fol.
123 Anabaptists would be calde, to give a reconing of their faith. Folio. 173
Arm of God. 9 Armor to fight against the deueil. 118 A^rius interpretation
confuted. 155.142.178 Aristotle. 150.145 As there is a God, so is there a
devil* 117 A single nature, not mix^. 161
B
Baptism commanded. Fol. 1 Baptism purifieth us. fol. 1 Baren ground
resembled to men. ^^* Bishop Firmius answer to the king. 40 Bishops must have
an eye to their vocation Folio. 87 By the everlasting word, al things were
made. 110 Borne upon the waters what it is. 49
C
Cause of sickness. 50 Christ became man, and why? 120 Christ took both soul
and body. 121 Christ brought not his flesh from heaven. 1^^ Christ took not the
feed of angels. 12^ Christ's flesh holy. 124 Christ's flesh is to be worshipped.
177 Christ borne of a pure virgin. 124 Christ not the holy ghostes son. 128
Christ did deck him self with our nature Folio. 126 Christ why he was te^ted.
1^7 Christ suffered for us. Folio. 106 Christ* the begotten son of God. 103
Christ confuted his enemies with scriptures. 4 Christ not in the sacrament
touching his humanity. 21 Christ's body received from heaven by faith Folio.
23 Christ's flesh gives life. 23 Christ is the vine touching his flesh. 24
Christ's priesthod, has ended the Levites. 32 C^^ist looked upon Peter. ^^
Christ's prayer preserved Peter. 87 Christ's coming or sending, what it is.
Folio. 125 Christ is a substance 161 Christ is a spirit. 161 Clea^^hes.iiii.
reasons. Fol. 60 Corrinthia^s punished for abusing the sacrament. 29 Creatures
are not punished by desteny. 67 Corporally. 108
D
David obtained understanding, how? 31 Devil no fleshly mocion. 119 Devils
confess Christ to be the son of God. 119 Dial, declarth ye dai. 56 Dives and
Lazarus. 58 Diagoras. 59
E
Eyes of God what they signify. 8 Earth cursed of God, why? ^^ Epiphanius. 95
Evil me^ receives not Christ's body. 28
F
Fantastical heads. 2 Fancies, what cause? 3 Face of God, what it signifies.
8 Fate, what it is. 67 Father vnbegotte^* ^3 Fete of God, what? 10 Fear god
above al. 21 First point of our profession. 1 Finger of God. 92 Figure of
Christ. 110 Fills heaven and earth. Folio. 162
G
God a pure substance. Fol. 99 God a pure nature. 14 Gods nature hid from our
eyes. 12 Gods majesty showed Folio. 3 Gods power vpholdeth ye heavens. 62 Gods
remission, goes before our love. 78 Gods word the keye of knowledge. 52 gods
sho, what it is. 11 Gods remission goes before our pardo. 74 God is a father.
152 God is life. 158 God only of himself. 62 God is a spirit. 27 God is full of
understanding. 31 God ia full of truth and mercy. 41 God is full of
righteousness. 43 God is full of compassion. 45 God is a flood or streme. 158 God
works al things to purposes. 56 God honored by swearing, how? 10 God is said
to be an husbandman. 12 God is said to be a shoter, how? 12 God is said to be
angry, how? 15 God is said to sleep. 15 God looks upon the earnest repentant.
89 God was seen of the fathers, how? 18 God sees the wicked every where. 21
God gives understanding to his. 31 god is full of mercy. 41 God loves whom he
scourges. 44 God saves no man against his will. 45 God maker of al things
Fol. 47 God made not the devil. 51 Gods judgment vnchercheable. 17 Gods head.
8 Gods repers. 13 God robed of his. 2 Good angels. 115 Gospel is the spiritual
sword. 4 Gospel a sermon of gods mercy. 5 Gospel makes true christians. idem
H
Hears of god. 8 Hand of god. 9 How god does laugh. Fol. 15 How god is said to
awake, to forget, to remember, to sit, to stand to go, to walk. 16 How god is
in all places. 20 How god dwells with us. idem How god is unto all men. idem
How Paul, was a citezen of Rome. 40 Hell has three significations. 43 How god
is said only to be immortal. 46 How God is said to rest the seventh day. 71
How God is said to repent. 73 How we do forgive one another. 77 How the Pope
loses and binds. 83 How ye father is seen in Christ. 105 Holy ghost to be
praid unto. 113 Holy ghost appeared like a dove. 130 How Christ is a flour or a
rose. 132 How God is named ye sum of understanding. 135 How God is fire (...)
light. 137 Heathen opinion confuted. 144 How the father, Christ and the holy
spirit be one God. 152
I
Image of God. 1 Image of the father is an Idol. 13 Image of God lost. 14 I am
the vine, and this my body are diverse phrases. 24 Jacobs saying to his father,
is no lie, but a mystery. 39 In hell no rede^tion. 42 Immortal properly. Folio.
47 Impossible, for herd. Fol. 94
K
Kingdoms, why they are translated. 55 Kingdoms, scourged, why? 58
L
Leaven of the Phariseis 3 Letter kylleth what it is. 5 Left hand of God. 9
Logyck necessary. 17 Lying, hated of God. Folio. 36 Love suffers al things.
86 Lybertines error. 111 Law is an axe. 126
M
Mouth of God, what? Folio. 9 Man made after the Image of God. 13 Man's soul,
what there is in. 14 Malachie, makes nothing for ye mass is plainly declared.
32. Fol. 34 Man that was wounded. 35 Ministers have no sacrifice, but common
with the laity. 36 Merchant man. 37 Mydwyues of Egypt. Folio. 37 Man's soul,
is both mortal, and immortal. 47 Man makes himself evil. 51 Men's knowledge
imperfect. 73 Mary Magdalen. 76 Ministers, how they do forgive and retain
sin. 79 Manichies confuted. Fol. 148
N
Nose of God, what it signifies. 8 No sacrament, is a sacrifice. 35 No perfect
difinition, can be made of God Folio. 99
O
Only God is to be sworn by. 10 Our life, a shadow in this world. 16
Objections answered. Folio. 29.42.44 Origenistes belefe. 42 Oppression, what
mischief comes thereof. 55 Our life a warfar. 134 One God, who rules all. 147
One name. 156 (...) grace. 159 Our thoughts miserable. 179
P
Picture none can be made of God. 1.2 Papists, will have their gloses. 4
Papists seek al means possible to drive us from scripture. 4 Philosophy, the
true use thereof. 18 Papists say here is Christ and there is Christ. 22
Pyghius calls gods word a nose of wa^. Picklock. 23 Pyghius argument,
answered. 32 Peter's vision. 33 Papists, have made seven orders. 36 Perfect
causes. 67 Peter's keye, what it is Folio. 81 Pope cannot show Peter's last will.
87 Proceading of the holy ghost. 104 Parsonally. 108 Papists, stubburn in
their doings. 116 Prophets never prayed to no creaturs. 121 Pithagoras. 150
Perminides. idem Preachi^g a work* 173 Papists would be called to give an
auns- to their faith. 174 Peter prays to the holy spirit. 175
R
Right had of god. 9 Reasons to prove three persons. 102.103 Resurrection. 115
Raue^s and not doves, who? 131 Reasons against praiyng to saynctes. 146
S
Symonides answer, what god is. 2 Spirit of god, teaches what god is. 2
Strange doctrine what it is. 3 Samaritanes. 3.2 Scripture is the power of god.
4 Scripture ought to be studied. 4 Scripture is the immortal sede. 5 Shoulders
of God, what is meant. 9 Sin seperateth us from god. 20 Substance of bread
remains. 24 Substance, or natural property. 26 Substance of bread not
changed. 27 Sacraments of the new testament beter then the old. 27
Sacrame^tal receiving necessary. 30 Sacrifice of thanks, offered in all places.
33 Scripture uses to call al things new. 34 Scriptur full of tropes and
figures. 39 Sin the cause of barons. 49 Serpents, flies, and worms, why
they were made. 51 Sit in the temple of god, what is signifies. 90 Samosathan
an arch-heretike. 109 Spirit is every where. Folio. 112
T
Touchstone. 3 Tongue of god. 9 This is my body, expounded. 24 Three similitudes
in ye sacrament. idem Thanks ought to be given for the death of Christ. 50
Thieves, that robbed ye wounded man. 35 Thorder of ministers* only. 36 To
affirm yt is false, is to lie. 38 The mouth that lies kills the soul. 40
Trouble makes us to leran to know god. 43 The cause in us of co^dempnation. 45
The holy spirit, is the maker of ye world. 48 To mai^tein a king. 55 Three
opinions. 66 To wash Christ. 76 To be renewed. 96 the word substance. 108 Three
bodies. 109 The holy spirit forgeueth sin. 113 Two sorts of resurrections.
115 The Godhead is vndefileable. 125 The do^e a scholemaster unto us. 132 The
works of the.iii persons be vnseperated. 139 Tha^es Milesius. 149 Temples are
to be dedicate to God only. Fol. 176
V
Uoice of God must be harkened unto. 1.2 Unwritten verities. Folio. 104
W
What God is. 1 Weapons of our warfare. 3 Worldly wisdom, folyshnes. 5 What is
meant, by these words (he y^ is) 7 Womb of God. 9 What stained red clothes be.
11 Wings of God what they signify. 12 We shall see God face to face. 16
Wickedness coueteth ye dark. 2^ We cannot escape gods hand. 21 We must receive
the sacrament, why? 31 Wounded man, what is signified? 35 Wicked shall have
endless pain. 42 Why god does punish the Godly, aferd. 43 World, is the
workmanship of the whole trinity. 47 Why Christ is named a word 48 World,
the workmanship of ye trinity. 49 Works of God in beasts, be not
unprofitable. 51 World governed by Gods providence 54 Why good men are
afflicted. 58 Why stars appeared at the birth of Christ Folio. 64 Who is
forgeuen and when. 80 Who is the rock. 83 Why Peter was named Sephas. 84 Why
Christ byddeth Peter thrice feed my sheep. 85 What is most necessary in a
preacher. 86 Whether God can sin or lie, or not. 92 Word, person. 108 Why
christ was born of a woman. 120 Who are the brethren of Christ. 124 Why christ
was born of a virgin, espoused and married. 125 Why all men ar borne babes, not
able men. Folio. 126 We are the sons of God by adoption. Fol. 126 Why Christ
came in the end of the world. Fol. 125 Why Christ was baptized. 127 Why Christ
suffered death. 128 Why he died on the Cross. 128 Why Christ took our nature.
128 Why the holy ghost apered. 130 Why the spirit is named oil. 167
FINIS.
AN OTHER TABLE TO find hard textes, and such as have been abused for evil
purposes, plainly and truly expounded.
GEne. 1. In ye beginning God created heaven and earth. 48 Gene. 1. The spirit
of the Lord was borne upon the waters. 49 Gene. 1. God said let there be
light. God said let there be a firmament Folio. 49 Gene. 1. Let us make man to
our similitude, and after our likeness. fol. 13. cha. 27. fol. 138 Gene. 1. God
beheld all that he had made, and ^o, they were exceading good. 49.50 Genesis 2.
God rested the seventh day from all his works. 71.72 Gene. 3. Adam, where art
thou? 73 Gene. 3. Cursed be the earth in thy work, in sorrow shall thou ^ate
thereof. 50 Genesis 3. The sede of the woman shall grind the serpents head. 123
Gene. 4. Where is Abel thy brother. 73 Gene. 6. I repent me yt I made man. 73
Gene. 12. Abraham said to Sara his wife: say I pray thee that thou art my
sister. 38.39 Gene. 18. And the lord appeared unto Abraham, and he lift up his
eyes and looked, and lo three men stood not far from him. 103.104 Genesis 18. And
there came two angels to Sodom at even. 104 Gene. 24. You shall bring my hoare
hears with sorrow unto hell. 43 Genesis 26. Isaac dwelled in Gerat, and the men of
the place asked him of his wife, and he said that she was his sister. 38 Gene.
27. Isaac said unto Jacob, art thou my son Esau? and he said, I am Esau thy
eldest son. 38 Exodus 1. And the mydwyues answered Pharao: ye Hebrews women are
sturdy women, and delivered before we come at them. God therefore dealt well with
the midwiues. 37.38 Exodus 3. God said unto Moises, I am that I am. 6 Exo. 15.
Thy right hand Lord is glorious in power, thy right hand has all to dashed
the enemy. 169 Exo. 15. With the spirit of thine anger the water gathered
together as a rock. 169 Exo. 33. you shall se my hi^derparts, but my face you
can not se. 8.9 Ex. 33. The lord spoke unto Moises face to face, as man
speaks unto his friend. 18 Deuteronomy. 3. The Lord thy God is a consumyng fire. 137
Deuteronomy. 4. Unto thee it was showed that thou might know that ye Lord is God.
etc. 156 Deuteronomy. 6. The lord our God is one God. 156 Deu. 33. They yt draw nigh
his seat, shall taste of his doctrine. 10 1 Reg. 2. Our lord brings folk
down into hell, and brings them again. 24 1 Reg. 16. It for thinks me yt I
have made Saul king. 73.74 3 Re. 22. Micheas said unto Achab. I saw the Lord
sit on his seat, and all the company of heaven standing about him. 18 ^ Reg. 2.
Behold there came a charet of fire, and horses of fire, and did put them a
sunder. etc. 66 Job. 7. The life of man is a warfar upon ye earth Job. 8 Man's
life is a shadow. 16 Job. 18. The hand of the Lord has touched me. 9 Job. 34.
For the wyckednes and sin of ye people, he makes an Hipocrite to reign over
them. 55 Psalm. 2. This day I begotte thee. 137 Psalm. 2. Kiss the son lest
the Lord be angry. Folio. 15 Psalm. 2. He that dwells in heaven shall laugh
them to scorn, and the Lord shall mock them Folio. 15 Psalm. 7. God has bent
his bow and made it ready, he has prepared weapons of death, and ordained
arrows to destroy. 12 Psalm. 8. I will beh^^d the heavens the workmanship of
thy fingers the moon, and the stars, which thou haste made. 169 Psalm. 10.
His eieliddes behold the children of men. 8 Psalm. 16. Defend me under the
shadow of thy wings. 11.12 Psalm 21. The generation which is to come shall be
told unto ye Lord, they shall tell his righteousness. 74 Psalm. 33. The eyes of
the Lord are over the rightuous. 8 Psalm. 44. God which is thy god has
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. Psalm. 59. Over Edom
will I stretche out my shoe. 11 Psalm. 62. All they that swear by him shall be
commended. 10 Psalm. 70. Show us the light of thy countenance, and we shall be
holy. 8 Psalm. 98. Worship the fotestole of my fete Folio. 177 Psalm. 101. The
heavens ar the works of thy hands. 169 Psalm. 109. Sit on my right hand. 9
Psalm. 109. Of my womb before the morning star I begat the Folio. 103 Psalm.
116. The right hand of the Lord has don maruels, the right hand of the Lord
has gotten the victory. 9 Psalm. 118. All things serve thee. 166 Proverb.
Because I have called, and ye have refused, I will stretche out my hand, and
there was none that could help you, and I will laugh at your destruction, and
will skorne you, when that which you feared shall come. etc. fol. 15 Cant. 2.
I am the flour of the field, the Lilie of the valleis, and the rose among
thorns. 132 Esaias. 6. Behold this has touched thy mouth, and thine
unrighteous is taken away, and thy sin forgeuen. 171 Esaias. 11. There shall
come a rod forth of the root of Iesse, and a blossom or flower shall arise
out of the root. Folio. 122.123 Esaias. 40. Who measures the heavens with his
span? who held the waters in his fist? who co^prehe^deth the whole earth in
three fingers? weighed the hills and mountains in a balaunce. 6 Esaias. 45. The
occupiers of Egypt, the merchants of the Morians, and Sabees shall come unto
thee with tribute, they shall be ^^ne, they shall follow thee, and go with
cheines on their fete. The^ shall fall down before thee, and make supplication
unto thee, for God is in thee, and there is none other God beside thee. 135
Esaias. 63. Who is this that comes from Edom with stained clothes of Bosra. 11
Esaias. 66. I will flow upon you like a water flood of peace, and like a flowing
stream. 158 Ier. 10. Behold ye house of Israel ye are in my hand, even as the
clay in ye potters hand. 9 Ie. 23. Is not my word like fire says the lord and
like a hammer that breketh ye hard ston? 99 Ierem. 32. Thou haste brought thy
people of Israel out of the land of Egypt with an almighty hand with a
stretched out arm. 9 Three. 1. We have provoked his mouth unto wrath. 9 Threno.
4. The spirit before us Christ the Lord 161 Danie. 2. Thou saw the stone cut
out of the hill withouten hands break into powder, the Iron, bras, earth,
silver and gold. 124 Dan. 3. He has delivered us out of hell. 43 Dan. 7. His
clothyng was as white as snow the hear of his head like pure wolle. 8 Sopho.
1. I will stretch out my hand over Judah and Jerusalem, and I will rote out the
remnaunt of Baals. etc. 9 Mal. 1. I have no pleasure in you, and as for an
offering I will not accept it at your hand, for from the rising of ye sun
unto the goinge down thereof, my name is great among the gentiles, yea in every
place shall there sacrifice be done, and a clean offering offered up in my
name. 32.33 Jonas. 3. Who can tell whether God will turn and repent and pacify
his wrath and preserve us. 15 Sap. 5. The sun of righteousness and
understanding arose not upon us. 135 Sap. 12. God made the world of a confused
heap. 52 Eccl. 18. he that lives evermore, made al things together. 52
Baruch. 3. He is our God, and there is none other able to be compared unto him.
154 Mat. 1. Behold a maid shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son.
Folio. 125 Math. 1. Espoused to Joseph. 125 Math. 1. His mother Mary. 120 Math.
1. That which is conceived of her, is of ye holy ghost. 124.125 Math. 2. They
found the child with Mary. Folio. 124 Ma. 2. we have seen his star in the
east. 46.47 Math. 2. They kneled down and worshipped him, and opened their
treasures, and offered gifts, gold fra^ke^sence and myrre. 65 Math. 3. And
Iho^ saw the spirit of God discende like a dove, and light upon him. 130.131
Mat. 3. The axe is put to the rote of the trees. Folio. 126 Math. 3. Then came
Jesus from Galile to Jordan, to be baptized of Ihon. 127.128 Math. 4. Then came
to him the tempter and and said. 127 Math. 5. Blessed be the clean herted, for
they shall se God. 131 Math. 6. If ye shall forgive other their trespaces, your
heavenly father shall also. etc. 77 Math. 10. Be ye innocent as doves and wise
etc. Fol. 132 Mat. 16. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock w^l John. 10. I and
my father are one. 106 Ioh. 14. If a man love me, he will keep my word, and
my father also will love him, and we will come unto him and dwell with him.
Folio. 20 John. 14. Whosoever sees me, sees my father. 105 Ioh. 15. I am the
vine, and ye are the branches. 23 John. 15. My father is an husbandman. 23
Ioh. 16. He shall judge the world of sin. 167 John. 17. This is life
everlasting that they might know thee the only true God, and who^ thou haste
sent Jesus Christ. 154 Ioh. 17. I pray not for them alone, but for the^ also
which shall believe on me through their preaching, that they al may be one, as
thou fatherr art in me. etc. 143 John. 20. Whosoever sins ye remit, they are
remitted unto the^, and whosoever sins ye retain, they are retained. 79
John. 20. Receive the holy spirit. 171 John. 20. And many other things did
Jesus which are not written these are written that ye might believe. etc. and
have life eternal. 104 John. 21. Simo^ Ioanna, love thou me more then these?
and he said yea lord, thou know I love thee. He said unto him: feade my
la^bes. He said to him again, love thou me? Peter answered: yea Lord thou
know I love thee. He said unto him: feade my sheape. And he asked him the
third time. 85.86 Acts. 10. And there came a voice to him, arise Peter, kill
and eat, but Peter said: God forbid Lord, for I have never eaten athyng that
is unclean or comen. 175 Act. 10. While Peter thought on his vision, the
spirit said unto him: behold men seek thee, arise therefore get the down, and
go with them, for I have sent them. 176 Acts. 19. Paul passed through the upper
coasts, and came to Ephesus and found certain disciples and said unto them:
have ye received the holy ghost? and they said no. And he said: wherewith were
ye then baptized? And they said, with John's baptism. And it follows when they
heard that, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus again, and Paul
laid his hands on them, and* they spoke with tongues and prophesied. 91 Act.
22. Then the captain came unto Paul^ and said to him. Tell me, art you a
Roman? he said yea. And the Captain answered: with a great sum obtained
I this fredom. And Paul said: I was free borne. 40 Romans 3. By the deeds of the
law no flesh shall be justified. 121 Romans 5. The law entered that syn should
increase. 126 Romans 8. We know not what to desire, but the spirit makes
intercession myghtely for us, with gronyng, which can not be expressed with
tongue. 131 Romans 8. God sent his son in the likeness of sinful flesh. 125 To.
8. Every creatur is subdued to vanite. 166 To. 9. Who can resist his will. 44 1
Cori. 2. The eye has not seen, and the ear has not heard, neither have
entered in to the heart of men the things which God has prepared for them
that love him. 170 1 Corin. 2. The spirit searches all things, yea the
bottom of gods secrets. For what man knows the things of a man, save the
spirit of man which is in him Even so the things of god none knows but the
spirit of God. 170 1 Cor. 6. Ye are washed ye are sanctified, ye are justifies
by the name of the Lord Jesus, and the spirit at our God. Fol. 171 1 Cor. 6.
Your bodies are the temple of the holy ghost which is in you, whom ye have of
God, and ye are not your own, for you are dearly bought. Therefore glorify God
in your bodies. 176 1 Corint. 8. Althomgh there be that are called gods in
heaven and earth as there be many gods, and Lords many, yet unto us is there
but one God, which is the father of all things, and we in him, and one lord
Jesus Christ, by who^ are all things and we by him. 154 1 Corin. 10. One
loaf, one body, we that be many. 52 1 Cor. 14. The secrets of his heart are
opened and he falls down on his face, and worshyppeth God saying: that God is
in you in deed. Fol. 177 1 Cor. 15. By a man came death, and by a man comes
the resurrection of the dead, for as by Ada^ al die, so by christ al be made
alive. 120 2 Cor. 3. The letter kills, the spirit gives life. 4 2 Cor. 10.
The weapons of our war are not carnal things, but the power of God to cast
down strung holds. 3 Galat. 3. There is no Jew, nether Gentil, nether bond ne
free, ne man ne woman. 107 Gala. 4. In the fulness of time God sent his son.
125 Galath. 4. God sent Christ. 125 Gal. 4 Borne of a woman. idem Philip. 2.
Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of discention, for we are
circumcision serving the the spirit, which is God. 35 Philip. 2. He became
obedient to the death of the Cross. 128 Colo. 2. Beware lest any man come, and
spoil you through Philosophy, and deceitful vanity. 17 Col. 2. In Christ
dwells all the fulness of ye godhead corporally or bodily. 108 2 Tessa. 2. He
shall sit in the temple of God, and show him self as God. 88 1 Timo. 1. Unto
God king everlasting, immortal, invisible, and wise only by praise. 155 1
Timo. 2. God would have all men saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth.
45 1 Timo. 6. He that is blessed and mighty only, which only has immortality.
155.156 Hebr. 1. Which being the bryghtnes of his glory, and express image of
his substance. 106 Hebr. 6. It is impossible, that they which were once
lightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were become partakers of
ye holy ghost. etc. if they fall, should rise again by repentance, crucifiyng
unto themselves again the son of God, and making a mock of him. 91.92 Hebr. 13.
Be not carried about with diverse and strange learning. 3 Iaco. 1. Comes down
from the father of light. Fol. 45 1 John. 1. God is light and in him is no
darkness. 137 1 John. The seed of God remains in him Fol. 123 1 John. 5.
There are three which bear record on earth, the spirit, water, and blood, and
these three are one. 104 1 John. 5. There are. ii^ which bear record in
heaven, the father, the word, and the holy ghost, and these three are one.
Folio. 142 Apoc. 19. He had a name written, that none knew but he him self.
Folio. 78
FINIS.
The first Chapter.
We must learn what God is of Gods word, and not of man's wisdom

THe first point and chief profession of a true christen man, is most
steadfastly to believe, that there be three persons and one God, as we are taught
in Baptism, which is commanded to be ministered in the name of the father, of
the son, Math. 28
and of the holy spirit. For in ye bath of holy baptism, we are regenerate,
washed, purified, and made the children of God, by the workmanship of the three
persons, which formed also heaven and earth, and all the glorious fairnes of
them, they brought the children of Israel out of the house of bondage, they
preserved them from the tyranny and oppression of the Heathen, they gave also
unto the Heathen prosperity and adversity, peace and war, poverty and
riches* they govern the universal church, whose works be inseperable.
Wherefore I think it necessary to declare what God is, and what a person
signifies in the deity, for as much as the commen sort of people are ignorant
of their maker and governor, and the signification of a person is applied to
diverse things. And because these two points be dark and hidden mysteries,
and no less necessary to be known of al men, then hard to teach, I will shape
my speech after such a perceiuable fashion, that I may by Gods help make an
Image of God for the capacity of ye simple and unlearned. God spoke to the
Israelites out of the fire in the mount Oreb, and it is written yt they heard a
voice, but they saw no Image, Deuteronomy. 4
because they should make none after it. For it is a dishonor to God, a
derogation and defaming of the divine nature, to make any similitude thereof,
either of gold, silver, stone, wood, or in thought and mind. We must hear his
voice, we must learn what God is out of Gods book, not of man's wisdom. For if
al things which be under the sun, be to hard for man, as the wise man
tells, Eccle. 1
how much more be the secret^^ of Gods nature hid from his eyes, of the which
Esaias writes: Truly Lord thou art hidden from us, Esaie. 45
counting himself one of the ignorant. Simonides
Simonides a famous clarke among the Heathen teaches us how feeble ma^s wit is,
in declaring this mystery, who when he was enquired of king Hiero what a thing
God was, he asked a day respite, and the next day when he was enquired again,
he asked two days more, and when they were expired, he asked more, not
ceassing to double his days, until Hiero required of him why he did so? For
because said Simonides, the more I consider it, the darker it is unto me: And
no marvel, for as no man knows what is in man but ye spirit of man, so al men
be ignorant what God is, except they be taught of ye spirit of God. For seeing
Paul says: the eye has not seen, 1 Cor. 2
nor the ear has not heard, ne yet have entered into the heart of man, the
things which God has prepared for them that love him: how much more does he
himself surmount our capacities? But it follows: God has opened them unto us
by his spirit, John. ^
for the spirit searches al things, yea the botom of gods secrets. And this
spirit speaks and breaths on us in the scriptures, as it is written: My
words are spirit and life.

Experience does teach us, and the Apostle warns us, how sa^tastical our
heads be in searching Gods mysteries. For some imagine God to be a corporal
thing, and of ma^s shape and form, because the scripture does grant in
diverse places unto God hands, fete, ears, eyes mouth and tongue, called comenly
Anthropo morphites. Read the.x. book of the tripartite history.vii. chap. and
there you shall find a great contention concerning this matter, Li. x. hist.
^rip^r. ca. 7
between the monks of Egypt, and Theophilus bishop of Alexandria, albeit the
sect of the Epicurus held this assercion long before as it appears in the
first bok of Tullie De natura deoru^, where this opinion is eloquently confuted
by Cotta a Senator of Rome.

Roma. 1
Other rob God of his glory and give it unto his creatures, worshipping ye Sun
the Moon, the fire, yea and mortal men for the immortal God, and unreasonable
beasts, for the author of al reason, wisdom, and understanding. And some
dishonor him by honoring of dead saints, and worshipping of bread and wine,
without any co^maundment of the scripture, any example in the old or new
testament, any authority of the doctors. I will not stand in rehersing the
sundry fantasies of men as touching God. What is the cause of al these
phansies and diversities, but that for which Esaias controleth us, saying: Esaie.
1
The ox knows his Lord, and the ass his masters stall, but we know not god.
Come therefore good christen people, and harken to the words of the Lord, and
I will show you in them ye majesty of God himself, his face and countenance,
his magnifice^ce and highness, which cannot abide the fellowship of any
creatures. Hebr. 1^
Paul unto the Hebrews warns us that we be not carried away with diverse and
straung doctrine, Strange doctrine what it is.
which (...) much to say as if he should command us to fly man's doctrine. For
m^n be the strangers, whose doctrine he bids us fly, as Peter witnesses:
^early beloved I beseech you as strangers and Pilg^ims. etc. Paul also
expounds h^m^elf, 1 Petr. 2
saying that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, confessed themselves to ^e strangers
and Pilgrims upon the (...) dwelling in tent^s. And Christ says that his
sh^pe hear not the voice of strangers, John. 1^ Math. 8.
that is the doctrine of men, the which in the viii. of Mar^^e is called the
leaven of the Pharisees and of Herod. The leaue^ of the Pharisees.
Wherefore if we be sheep of his pasture, and people of his hands, let us follow
his counsel, for he is our shepeheard, our head, and the truth, and of his
Apostles, for they are his laborers and workmen, remembering that David says,
understanding is good to them that do after it. psalm. 110. a Luke. 12. a
For he that knows his masters will and will not follow it, he shall be more
greuovsly punished. Christ says unto a woman of Samaria at Jacobs well besides
Sichar, John. 4 Samaritans, Jews.
yt she and her people worshipped they knew not what, for they leaned to
custume and fathers, rather then to the text of Gods word, saying: our fathers
worshipped in this mountain. But the Iewe^ ^leauing unto Gods word, and
worshipping in the temple, knew what they worshipped, the which was written
for our enstruction, that we should repare unto the scriptures in all doutes,
and controversies, the which is the only touch stone to examine and try al
doctrine, the forged, pretensed and false, from the sincere, germane and true.
The weapons of our war says Paul: 2 Cor. 10.
are not carnal things, but the power of God to cast down strong holds, to
overthrow inventions, that is to vanquish heresy, to destroy all il doctrine.
Verily the Gospel is that power of God (for so Paul terms it) unto salvation
to all them that believe. Scriptu^^ is the power of god Roma. 1. A swearde.
The Gospel is the spiritual swerd that shall prevail against Satan, much
more against heretics and his members, this swerd shall overcome Antechrist,
whom god shall sley with the breath of his mouth: With this swerd Christ
confounded the devil, maintained his disciples, Ephe. 1. 2 These. 2 Math. 4
Math. 12*
sclaundred of the Phariseis as Sabbath breakers, proved the resurrection
against the Saduces, taught a certain young man ye way to heaven, contented the
Phariseis touching marriage, Math. 22
with this swerd the Apostels in diverse assembles confuted the Jews after
Christ's ascension, as in their acts is regestred. The papists reply that
the scripturs are not sufficient and able to confou^d heretics, but their
interpretations and gloses upon them, because they be not plain and evident,
but dark and hard, and may be wrested to many purposes. How did Christ confute
the devil? With scripture or expou^ding the scriptures? Again, Gods word is a
lantern, a light, it turns the soul, it gives wisdom eue^ unto babes, A
lantern Psa. 118.
it reioyseth ye heart, it lightneth the eyes, it is a candle shining in a dark
place, and therefore not hard nor dark, 2. Peter. 1.
but easy and plain, and to be studied of all men high and low, pore and rich,
To be studied of all m^n. Job. 7.
spiritual and lay. For the holy and pacie^t man Job says, that the life of
man is nothing else, then a very warfare upon the earth, full of misery and
trouble, set about with a great multitude of mortal enemies, the devil, the
world, and the flesh. Wherefore the sweard of Gods word is very necessary unto
all that be in this warfare. gods word (...) a sword. Luke. 22.
For who goes to battle without a sweard? Does not he yt takes away thy
sweard, betray the unto thine adversaries? Christ says, he yt has no sweard,
let him sell his coat and by him one, and the papists seek al means possible
to spoil ye people of their sweard which is Gods word, saying it will make them
heretics: 2. Cor. 2
for Litera occidit, spiritus est qui viuificat. The letter kills, and the
spirit quikneth, is Gods word the letter? The^ we must not read it* least it
kill us, least it make us heretykes. Ihon. 17 1. Peter. 1.
But harken what master Doctor of all veritye says. Sermo tuus veritas est.
Thy word is truth. And Peter calls the self same immortal seed, by which we
are borne a new, Immortal seed. Ihon. 15. Roma. 10.
and which lasts and lives for ever. Does immortal seed kyl us? Does truth
make us heretics? Christ declares the operation of this seed saying, now you
ar clean by my word, and Paul says: Fides exauditu, that faith comes
thereof, not heresy. These fruits this seed enge^dreth where it is sown: truth,
cleannes of life, regeneration, and faith. He that talks with wise men,
becomes wiser by there communication. And shall not he that talks with God ye
author of al wysdom in his scriptures, be edified thereby: 2. Cor. 3. The (...)
letter wha^ it is.
The^ what is Littera occidens, the murdering letter? Truly the law which
causes anger, by which comes knowledge of sin, Roma. 4. Roma. 3. Galath. 3.
which is a scolemaster unto Christ. The law first kills, that Christ may
make alive, it condempneth, that Christ may justify, it shows sin, he
heals sin. The gospel is a sermon of Gods mercy, that he has blotted out
our sins by faith only in Christ's blood, it makes no heretykes, xii.
men by preaching of it, Math. 5.
made the unfaithful and heretics, faithful and true Christians: this candel
was not light to be put under a bushel, Math. 5
but to be set in the candelstick, to give light to them that be in Gods house.
Luke. 11
For Christ cries, woe worth them, that take away the key of knowledge, nether
entering them selves, ne yet suffering other to enter. The key of knowledge is
Gods holy testament and word, gods word the key, the touch stone
that which before we called the touchston to discern good doctrine from
evil. When they had taken the touchstone from us, they made us believe that
Peuter was silver, and they sold us copper for gold, making ye scriptures a
nose of wax and a tenis baule, wresting them unto every purpose. Thus we see
from whence we must fetch the knowledge of God, verily out of Gods word which
is the truth, and not out of the questionistes or schole me^ or other like. For
he says by his Apostle: Esaias. 33.
I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and I will cast away the understanding
of the prudent. Where is the wise? where is the Scribe? where is the searcher of
this world? ^. Cor. 1.
Has not God made ye wisdom of this world folishnes? As God is known only of
himself, so we must only learn of him what he is. As for man he knows no
more what God is, then the unreasonable beasts know what man is, yea and so
much less, as there is more difference between God and man, then between man
and the beasts.

Wherefore all leaven, al strange doctrine and man's wisdom set apart, I will
see what the scriptures teach us concerning God, nor I will not disdain to ask
where I shall see cause, nor be ashamed to learn where I am ignorant, desiring
him that reads this treatise, where the scripture is plain to believe (for
except we believe, we shall not understand) where it is doubtful to search with
me, where he sees himself out of the way, to revoke his opinion, where he
sees me in an error, to inform me, and I will be glad to learn, and so we
shall follow the rule of charity, searching both after God, whom it is
written: psalm. 104.
Seek the Lord and his strength, seek his face evermore.

The second Chapter.
God only is of him self.

WHen Moses desired ye Lord to show him his name, the Lord said unto him:
Exodus 3
I am that I am. That is to wit, I am of my self I am only. Nothing is of it
self without creation, without corruption, save only I, which am that I am.
Which understanding God himself does declare speaking further unto Moses, this
shall thou say unto the children of Israel. He that is, did send me unto you,
for nothing is save only God, forasmuch as they stand not by their proper
strength, but by the power and goodness of him. The heavens, the waters, the
earth, the hill^s would fall, onles he measured the heaven with his span, Esaias.
40
held the waters in his fist, comprehended the whole earth in three fingers,
weyed the mountains and hills in a balaunce: by which phrases is meant that he
governs, ordreth, and disposes the^ as he lists. Nether the Sun could
give light, ne yet the fire heat, al things would decay and perish, onles he
did rule them, as the soull does man's body, unto whom only that belongs and
apperteineth* which the Greeks call on, the Latinistes, est, as witnesses the
Apostle. Non est in illo, est and non, sed est in illo est. 2 Cor. ^


Of all other things ( non) may be said for once they were not, but not of
God, because he was always, he is, and he is to come, all things have their
being of him, and he of him self. Except we understand this saying (he that is,
sent me unto you) after this sort, it makes no difference between God and his
creatures. For all be it they have not their beginning of themselves, but of
him, yet it is truly said of them that they are. Moreover what could ye
Isralites have thought Moses to have meant by these words, (he that is) then a
certain man sent him unto them? If they had taken Moises so, they would not
have left Egypt and followed him into the wyldernes, but they took these words
(he that is) for God himself, and therefore followed him* the which throughout
the Bible be never spoken of any creature, but only of him that made all
creatures. The name of God also declares this sense to be true, which is Ihuh,
of four letters in all tongues, in Greek Theos, in Latin Deus, in English and
Dutch, God, in the French Dieu, in spanishe Dios, in the Almaines tongue Got,
and therefore called Tetragram maton, and in Latin Quadrilitterum, derived of
Essendo, or rather that word that signifies Esse in the Ebrue, is derived of
it. The Jews read for that word, Adonai, not that it can not be expressed in
their tongue, but for a reverence to Gods name, the which as they thought was
not once to be named.

The.iii. Chapter.
God is a spirit, and how the scriptures do grant unto him a head, eyes,
hands, feet, and all other parts of man's body. God is a bird, a shoter, a
husbandman, Christ is his Image and man also.

WE read also in ye scriptures that God is a spirit, and no corporal thing.
John. 4.
God is a spirit and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit, and
truth the Lord no doubt is a spirit. But you will say, if God be a spirit, 2
Cor. 3
how is it that the Prophet affirms him to measure heaven with his span, to
hold the waters with his fist, Esaias. 40
and the earth in three fingers? David also says: The eyes of the Lord are
over the rightuouse, psalm. 33
and his ears are open unto their prayers, and the hand of the Lord has
driven out the Heathen. Has a spirit, fingers, hands, psalm. 4^
eyes, and ears? Whersoeuer scripture does attribute unto God a head, ears,
eyes, eieliddes, nose, mouth, lips, tongue, heart, womb, hands, right or left,
fingers or a finger, an arm, hinder parts, fete, it is not to be understand
literally, but a spiritual sense is to be gathered of such words. Because
our understandings be weak and not able to perceive God, if he should use such
words as become his majesty, he boroweth common and plain words to declare a
difficult matter unto us: and even as mothers before they can teach their yo^g
babes to speak, are feign as it were to lispe stammar and stut with them, so
God to teach our capacities, uses these familiar manner of speches.

When thou read that God has a head, what god^ head is.
thou must understand his divine nature, which was be^^re all things, and unto
it al things be obedient. His hear^.
His hears signify his Angels and the whole multitude of the chosen. Dan. 7.
his clothing was as whit as snow, ye hear of his head like pure woll, where the
head of God is his deity and Godhead, his clothing and his hears be his
Angels and elect, which be like whit snow and pure woll. God is said to have
eyes, Eyes.
because he sees al things, and nothing is hid from him in whose sight as the
Apostle tells no creature is unvisible, for all things be nak^d and open
unto his eyes. His eyes also sometimes be taken for his favor. The eyes of the
Lord are over the rightuous. Psalm. 33
His eye liddes be taken for his secret judgments. Psalm. 10 Eieliddes.
His eye liddes behold the children of men. He is said to have ears, because
he hears al things. The ear of the gelouse hears all things and the noise
of the grudgings shall not be hid. Ears. Sap. 1
His nose does signify his inspirations in the herts of the faithful. Nose. ^
Reg. 22.
Smoke went out of his nosetrelles. The face of God is the knowledge of his
divine nature, His face. Psalm. 79
of the which is written, show us the light of thy countenance and we shall
be hole, that is grant us to know thee. Otherwise Gods face signifies ye
unvisible nature of Christ's deuinitie, as Exo. does declare, you shall se my
hinder parts but my face you can not see, Exodus 34
that is thou shall se Christ's humanity, but his divinity can not be seen.
Mouth. Threno.
Gods mouth is taken for the son of God the father. We have provoked his
mouth unto wrath, or his commandment. Esaias. 59. Tongue. Psalm. 44. Arm. Iere.
32
The mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Gods tongue is the holy Ghost. My tongue
is the pen of a ready writer. His arm signifies Christ, of whom Jeremy
writes. Thou have brought thy people of Israel out of the land of Egypt, with an
almighty hand, with a stretched out arm. Where also Christ is called ye hand
of God. For he is both his arm, Hand. Christ.
and his hand. Moreover Gods hand is taken some time for his power. Behold ye
house of Israel, ye are in my hand, Power. Iere. 18
even as the clay in the potters hand. Some time for his scourge says he: I
will stretche forth my hand over Judah and Jerusalem, Scourge. Soph. 1
and I will rote out the remnaunt of Baal, of the which scourge Job says, the
hand of the Lord has touched me. Job. 19 Right hand Christ's glory. Psa. 116
Furthermore Christ i^ called Gods right hand. The right hand of the Lord has
done maruelles, the right hand of the Lord has gotten the victory. It is used
also for the glory of the father concerning which he says to his son, sit on
my right hand. And in some places for everlasting joy and life. And he shall set
ye sheep on his right hand, Math. 25
and the Goats on the left hand, where as his right hand is taken for uerlasting
joy, Left hand.
so his left hand signifies the torments of the wicked. Gods finger is the
holy ghost. If I cast out devils in ye finger of God. Luke. 11
etc. For where Luke says in the finger of God, Math. 12 His finger
it is in Matthew: If I cast out devils in the spirit of God. Gods finger
therefore is his holy comforter. For as the hand, finger, and arm, are three,
and yet but of one body: so ye father, ye son, and the holy ghost, are three
persons, and one substance, one God.

The heart of God.
The heart of God ye father signifies the secret of his wisdom, of which he
begat his word, that is his son without beginning, without any passion, my
heart is enditing a good matter. His womb is used in the same signification.
Psalm. 44. Womb. psalm. 109
Of my womb before the morning star I begat thee. God is said also to have
shulders, Shulders. psalm. 90 Hinder parts.
because he bears up all things as it were upon his shulders, for all things
stand by him. The hinder parts of God is Christ's humanity, the which he took
upon him in the end of the world, that we might live without end, which is
called also Gods fete. Fete.
For as his head signifies his deuinitie, so his fete signify Christ's
humanity, the which is subject unto Gods deity, as our fete are unto our
heads. Thou have put all things in subjection under his fete. psalm. 8
In some places preachers of Gods word be meant by his fete. They that draw
nigh his fete, shall taste of his doctrine. Deu. 33 An exhortation to swerers.
You swearers and blasphemers which use to swear by Gods heart, arms, nails,
guts, legs, and hands, learn what these things signify, and leave your
abominable oaths: For when thou swearest by Gods heart, thou swearest by Gods
wisdom: when thou swearest by Gods arms, thou swearest by Christ: when you
swearest hands, legs, thou swearest by his humanity: when thou swearest by his
tongue, and finger, thou swerest by the holy ghost, and swearing by his head,
thou swerest by his divine and blessed nature, and swearing by his hears, thou
abusest his creatures, by which thou art forbidden to swear. When an oath is
necessary we are bound to swear by God only, unto whom al honor is due, for we
honor that thing whereby we swear. It is naught to swear by the Mass, a
prophanacion of Christ's supper, and a patched creature of the Bishop of Rome,
God is honored by swearing.
which was longer in patching, then Salomo^s great temple in building. Nether
is it lawful to swear by any saints, as Judges and Stewardes make the simple
people do at cessions and courts, God only is to be sworn by. Psalm. 62 Heb. 6
for if they be to be sworn by, they are to be prayed unto, and to be honored.
David says all they that swear by him, shall be commended. And Paul unto the
Hebrews speaks thus: that God because he had no greater thing to swear by,
swore by him self, whereby we must gather, yt we must swear by God only. They
that swear by his creatures, or by the Mass, be Idolaters. But some will say,
if we honor y^ thing whereby we swear, let us swear by God, that we may honor
him. Brother be not deceived. God is honored by swering, but how? Truly when
thou swearest by him in a weighty matter of life and death, before an officer,
or in any other matters of importance, thou do him honor and homage: but if
in every trifle thou call him to witness, thou dishononorest him, and breakest
his commandment, which says: Non assumes nomen domini. etc. Thou shall not
take ye name of thy Lord God in vain: Swear therefore by God, as God has
commanded thee, and thou honor him. I trust now it is evident that God not
withstanding all these forsaid parts and members, is a spirit, and no bodily,
no corporal, no sensible thing. If there be any that think otherwise, I would
fain learn how they set the scripturs together, which can not be contrary one
to another, for scripture is truth, John. 17
and truth can by no means be contrary to the truth.

If they will prove of the places before that God is like man, I will prove also
because the scripture says: who is this yt comes from Edom with stained red
clothes of Bosra, which is so costly, Esaias. 63
that God goes in a red coat, which if it be true, he must needs have a
tailer, or else make it himself, for those words ar spoken of God, as the place
shows. But if we weigh the place diligently, What stained red clothes be Edom.
we shall find that Edom is the earth, and the stained red clothes, are
Christ's blood, which he did shed upon earth for our sins. And they which
demand who he is, be his creatures, which shall marvel at the wisdom of God in
delivering mankind from the bondage of the spiritual Pharao by blood, by death,
by the cross. I will prove also, yt he has shoes: for he says by David, over
Edom will I strech out my shoe. And then he must needs have a shomaker, Psalm. 59
what gods shoe ^s.
or else make shoes him self. But Edom is the earth, the Apostels fete be his
shoes, for it is written how bewtiful are the fete of them which bring glad
tidinges of peace. John. 10
He stretched his shoe over the earth, when he sent them to preach to al
creatures. For their sound went into all lands, their words to the ends of
the world. Psalm. 18
I may prove also with like arguments unto these, because Gods word does
attribute wings unto God, Psalm. 16
that he is a byrd, and so if he be like a man and a byrd, Psalm. 7
both, he is a mo^ster: and because it does attribute unto him bow, shaftes,
and quyuer, that he uses shoting, because it grants to him a fan, a flore,
wheat and chafe, Math. 3
that he occupies husbandry. David says: defend me under the shadow of thy
wings, likening God to a bird, forasmuch as he is no less careful for his
chosen then the Hen is for her chickens, as Christ declares very well crying:
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children together,
Math. ^3.
as the hen gathered her chicke^s under her wings, and ye would not. And it
grants God bow and shaftes and a quiver, How God is said to be a shoter.
to signify him to be a punisher of the ungodly, and a rewarder of the Godly,
for as much as men minister help or vengeance one to another oftentimes
through bows and shaftes, and one Prince aideth an other with archers. He has
bent his bow says David, and made it ready, Psalm. 7
he has prepared weapons of death, and ordained arowes to destroy, that is, he
will aue^ge evil me^, he will reward them for their oppression* he will punish
them for their ungracious devises, except they amend, he has whet his
sword. And ^ell may God be compared to a shoter. For as the shoter the less
or more he draws his shaft his stroke is thereafter, and if he draw it far and
up to the Iron, then it pays (...) likeness of God? Yea truly, but in soul,
in mind, in y^ inward man, not touching his body. Wherefore Augustine a man most
expert in Gods word, cries out against the Image of the trinity, calling it
Sacrilegium. A staining of Gods honor, The image of ye father is an Idol.
and an Idol, because the glory of the immortal God is changed into ye
similitude and Image of mortal man, forbidding such an Image, not only in the
church, but also in thought and mind. I suppose that the Antropomorphites
erected this Image. When Philip desired Christ to show him the father, John.
14. Hebr. 1
he rebuked him, and answered: he that sees me, sees the Father, for he is
the only Image of the Father, as Paul writes, not a domme Image, How man was
made after the Image of God.
for he is his word not a dead Image, for he is life and resurrection, not
cou^terfet, for he is truth. God is a spirit, not flesh, a soull, not a body.
The soull of man is said to be made, Ad imaginem and similitudinem dei, after
the Image of God, Gene. 1
because it is a spiritual creature, unvisible, incorruptible, not of the
substance of God, as the Maniches, Priscillianistes.
and the Priscillianistes do falsely defend, but made of nothing. For then it
should know all things, as God knows, and be ignorant of nothing: it should
be void of al affections, mutabilitie, and inconstancy. There is in man's
soull, reason, discerning good from evil, truth from falshead. There is memory,
by the which he remembers things past, there is will, by the which he
choseth what him lyketh. Besides this, our first parents were made with out
spot, void of sin, clean, righteous, holy, replenished with all flowers of
virtues and knowledge. In these things, man was formed after the lykenes of
God: In these we be like ye Angels, Gene. 2
our bodies we have comen with the brute beasts, it was made of the mould of
the earth (as Moses tells) before there was any similitude, likeness, or image
of god in man. S. Paul also declares this to be true, saying: Ephe. 4.
be ye renewed in the spirit of your minds, and put on ye new man, which after
the image of God is shape^ in righteousness, and true holiness. And in another
place: Collossi. 3.
lie not one to another after that ye have put of the old man with his works
and put on ye new, which is renewed in knowledge after ye image of him yt made
him. (...) place: as for the scorneful, he shall laugh them to scorn. How God
does laugh Prou. 2.
God is not of such affection as a man is, to be moved with mocage and
laughter, for he rejoices not in the hurt of man, but at his amendment: and it
is written: Abhominatio domini omnis illusor, God abhors scornful persons:
but as ye man which laugheth at other me^, is furthest from a mind to help
them, and to remedy their griefs: so is God to such as despise his
commandments, set light by his threatenings, and are not moved with his
promises: this is Gods laughter and scorning. He is said to sleep, when Christ
lay dead in his grave whose death is called a sweet sleep of Hieremye, How he
is said to sleep.
or else when he is slow to help his elect out of trouble, as in the. Psa 43.
Arise, Psalm. 44
wherefore do thou sleep O Lord. And contrariwyse, he is said to awake, when
he does straight way without any tarying socour them, To awake
help them, and deliver them. He is said to forget us, when he takes his mercy
from us, Forget.
for forgetting his statutes, ordinances, and commandments, and to remember
us when we change, Remember.
not he. Jesus Christ that is God yesterday, and to day continues the same
for ever. He sits not after humane manner, but after another sort. Sit.
To reign and to sit, be one thing in God, and of one signification and
meaning. God reigns over the heathen, Psalm. 46
God sits in his holy seat he sits over Cherubin, which is by
interpretation, fulness of knowledge, by which word angels be meant, and the
minds of good men, for in them god sits and reigns, as Solomon
testifies: The soul of the righteous is the seat of wisdom. Sapien. 7
To stand.
And scripture also attributes standing unto God for long suffrau^ce, where
with he calls us to repentance, who is said also to go, and to walk, Gooe.
Walk.
not by changing of place, for he fills all places, but by ocupying ye mynds
of the faithful, as in the Prophet: I will dwell amng them, and walk among
them, Esaias 55. 2. Cor. 6
and be their God, where dwellinge, walking, and to be their God mean one.
When these things be spoken of God, the change is to be understood in us,
and not in him, as if you and I should drink both of one drink, and I
should like it, and you mislyke it, the diversity is not in the drink but in
us: even so God, after diverse co^ditio^s of me^, is said to be pleased with one
and disco^tented with another, to remember some, and forget other, not that the
very passions of anger, of mercy, of remembrance, of forgetfulness, take place
in him, in whom is no affection, no passion, but the scripture uses these
speeches for our weak understandings feeding us with milk, because we are not
able to digest stronger meat. As long as we be in this life, we must learn
of God such terms, for our life is a shadow, our knowledge is imperfect, we
se in a glass, in a dark speaking, with a corrupt eye. Nothing can be properly
spoken of God, 1 Cor. 3
for then he should not be unspeakable. Who cannot se better in the clear
light then in a shadow, with out a glass then in it? we see in this life as it
were with a pair of spctacles, but when the spectacles shall be taken away, we
shall se clearly God face to face, who was never seen yet, with bodilye eyes.
Then shadows, glasses, dark speeches, spectacles, milk, and the corrupt eye,
shall be taken away according to the voice of the trumpetour: when that which is
perfect comes, yt which is imperfect shall be done away,

The.v. Chapter.
God is unsearchable.

THe scripturs teach him also to be ineffable in all tongues, unsearchable in
thought, nothing can attain unto him, in so much that Paul cries out: Romans 11
O the deapnes of the righteousness and wisdom and knowledge of God. How
unsearchable ar his judgments, and his ways vntraceable? If his judgments
surmount our capacities, much more he himself, and if Paul's, much more ours.
Logike the science of reason, discussing all doubts and controversies,
confuting all men's wisdom, beholding the beams and brightness of Gods glorious
visage, fails in searching what he is, and becomes folishnes. I speak not
this judging Logike to be unprofitable to the reader of Gods word, no, I think
rather such as iangel against it, to be void of all reason, for as much as
they speak against the act of reason. Logike is an excellent gift of God not
to be despised or disco^mended least we be unthankful unto God, Lodgike.
but to be diligently learned and commended. Many clatter and prate that Peter
and Paull never learned Logike, Philosophy and such dregs, which I deny:
for Christ said, he would send them the conforter, who should teach them al
things. If the holy ghost taught them all things, he taught the^ also Logike.
There you have that the Apostles learned Logike. But you will reply that the
holy ghost taught them al things necessary for a preacher. Paul also declares
that Logike is necessary for a preacher when he says that a bishop must be
Didacticos. That is apt to teach. Christ and his Apostels in their sermons, 1 Timothy 3
disputation and letters, use al forms of arguments, al sorts of reasonings,
all ways and means of inventions, as I would prove if I thought it needful
to stand in this matter. That which Paul writes to the Collossians, Videte ne
quis etc. Colloss. 2
Bewar least any man come and spoil you through Philosophy and deceitful
vanity makes for philosophy not against it. For Paul there bids the^ take heed of such men that with their Philosophy went about to hinder the gospel,
to stop the prosperous success of Gods word, abusing Gods gift to the
destruction of them self and other, rebuking the il co^dicions of men, and not
dispraising the art for he himself was a great Philosopher, Now if Philosophy
did set forth a false and untrue matter, that it confonded ye faith of many,
how much more is it able to set forth the truth.

The.vi. Chapter.
God is unvisible, and how not withstanding, the faithful of the old testament
saw him diverse times.

But to return unto our matter, as he is unsearchable, so he is unvisible, as
Paul records unto Timothe: 1 Thm. ^
To the unvisible God and wise only be honor and praise for ever and ever. There
be some things unvisible, which not withstanding be subject to mutabilitie, as
man's thought, memory, will, and all spiritual creatures: and whatsoever also
is visible, is also mutable. God is said only to be invisible, because he is
void of all mutabilitie. He says vn^^ Moses, no man shall see me and live:
By John Baptist, Exo. 30 John. 1
no man has seen God at any time. If no man has seen GOD, how did the
faithful of the old Testament se him? The scripture says that the Lord spoke
unto Moises face to face as a man speaks unto his friend: Exodus 33
And Micheas affirms unto king Achab the wicked, I saw the Lord sit on his
seat, 3 Reg. 33
and all the company of heaven standing about him. Steauen also ye first martyr
that we read of in the new Testament, loking up steadfastly with his eyes unto
heaven, Act. 7
saw ye glory of God, and Jesus standing on his right hand. How Moises,
Micheas, and Steven, saw God, who is invisible.
To these I answer, Moises saw not God with his bodily eyes, who is a spirit,
nor thou cannot gather any such thing of the text, which says that God spoke
unto him face to face as a man unto his friend, that is God talked familiarly
with him, not that he saw him in that place, albeit we read oftentimes that
God appeared unto him and to all the Israelites, Exodus 33
but not in his own nature and substance, but in his creatures and visible
forms: For Moises desires God afterward, if I have found favor in thy ^ight,
show me thy self manifestly, wherefore he did not se him manifestly before, but
only talked with him And as for Micheas and Steauen, 1 Cor. 12
they saw God as Paul did when he was carried up unto the third heaven with the
eyes of their belefe, of their mind, not of their body. As long as we continue
in this life, we shall never se the divine and blessed nature, because our
hearts be unclean: Math. 5
Blessed be the pure in heart says Christ, for they shall se God. This life is
a warfare and a purifying of our hearts by faith from sin. As long as the
warfare endures, there is no perfect victory of sin, for victory makes an
end of war: the victory of sin is the perfect vision of Gods glory, which
is gotten by faith as John the beloved disciple testified: 1 Ioh. 5
This is the victory that overcomes the world even our faith. Who is he that
overcomes the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the son of God. Of
these it appears that God is a pure nature, unchangeable unsearchable
invisible..

The.vii. Chapter.
God is every where, and how Christ is in the Sacrament.

HE is also every where by nature, not by grace according to which he says by
Jeremy: Hiere. 23
heaven and earth do I fill. For the heavens be his seat and the earth is his
fotestole. This thing belongs only unto God, and to no creature, nether
spiritual, ne corporal. A certain Christen man being demanded of a
Phllosopher where God was, enquired of him where he was not. Wherefore the son
and the holy ghost be no creatures, for of the son it said: wisdom reaches
from one end unto an other mightily, Sapi. 8
and orders al things lovingly, and of the holy comforter likewise: The
spirit of the Lord fills the round compass of the world, Sap. 1
and vpholdeth all things. There is a great difference between man's soull and
his body, but exceading more difference between God and his creatures, who made
both the soull and the body. He is not said to fulfill the world as the water,
the air, the Sun light, which by deuisio^ be in many places: he is in all
places without division wholly, and contained in no place. But as a sound or
noise is hard more of some, and less of other some, being of equal distaunce
from it, as they be of quick or dull hearing, so all be it God be present with
all things, yet he is in some more plentifully, in some less not with
parcialitie, but according to the diversities of their capacities. If God be in
all places, Sap. 1
how is it true that wysdom does not enter into a froward soul, ne dwell in a
body subdued unto sin? Surely sin does separate us from God, 2 Cor. 7
for what company has light with darkness? What concord has Christ with
Beliall? What fellowship has truth with falshod? I answer God is said to dwell,
to enter, where he favors, where he loves, after which sort he is not in
the wicked, but after another sort he is in them: For where he is not by his
favor and grace, he is by his righteousness, where he is not a benefactour, he
is a punysher, where he is not a dweller, he is an auenger. John. 1.
But Christ says if a man love him, that his father and he will come to him,
if they will come to him, they were not with him before, and so God is not in all places. This text shows how all such things are to be understood in
God. The words expound one another, which be these: If a man love me, he will
keep my word, and my father also will love him, and we will come unto him and
dwell with him. Where the coming of God the father, and dwelling is the same
that goes immediately before, my father also will love him. These words be a
good comentary to the other words before: we will come to him, we will dwell with
him. Whereof it is manifest that all such phrases dark speeches and ridels make
nothing against the presence of God in all places, Psalm. 137
but rather fortify and establish it: we can go no whither from his spirit, we
can fly no where from his face: if we climme up unto heaven, he is there: if
we go down unto hell he is also there.

We must not imagine him to be contained in place, and yet he is al thing in all.
He is to all men as he finds them: he is good in them that he finds good,
and ill to them that be ill: he is a helper in them that be good, and a
punisher in the^ that be evil. If thou lokest for any succor, help, or aid at
Gods hand, forsake that is evil, and follow that is good. When thou stealest,
wickedness coueteth ye dark.
or go about aduoutry, thou tariest for the dark, thou love the night,
because thy works be of darkness, lest thou should be seen and shamed, lest
thou should be taken and hanged. Thou go unto the kings high way, and
take a standing, thou go to thy neighbors house, and robbest him, thou
ridest up to London to sue thy neighbor, to rob him of his right: God sees
the wicked eury where.
Call to remembrance that God is with thee every where: he is with thee going,
he is with thee by the way, he is with thee when thou art doing thy deuelish
purpose: he stands by and looks on, writing thy fact as it were in a pair
of tables, and at the last day he will make it known unto al men to thy utter
confusion, shame, and condemnation. If thou be afraid of men, Fear God above
al.
that destroy the bodi, fear him that has power to throw both thy body and
soull headlong into hell into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone,
which is the second death. Thou may escape the punishment of man, but
thou can not escape Gods hand, who punishes more grievously then man. Whither
will thou fly? from God? We cannot escap gods hand.
surely thou can not fly from him, but by flying unto him: thou can not
escape his wrath, which is his righteousness, but by appealyng unto his mercy.
David compared God to a man that draws a bow, the farther he draws his
shaft which is his punishment, the greater is the stroke thereof.

There is a great altercation now a days, Against the corporal presence.
Christ is not in the sacrament touching his humanity. Mar. 13 Math. 24
whether God be in the sacrament or not: he must needs be there, for he is in all
places. But whether is he there by his divinity or humanity? Christ warns us
that in the latter age there shall arise many false Prophets, and
Pseudochristi that is false anointed (which be the Bishop of Romes gresed
butchers and sacrificers) which shall say, lo here is Christ and there is
Christ. These Pseudochristes, be not they of whom they speak afterward in
the same chapters: many shall come in my name saying I am Christ, but another
sort, for these shall not challenge this to them selves, but direct man to
other: and of these false anointed that shall point us to other, he says:
Nolite credere, believe the^ not: and therefore I dare not say that he is there
after his humanity, least I be a false Prophet, for this is spoken of his
humanity, not of his divinity. Touching his divinity, I say unto you good
people, lo here is Christ, and there is Christ, for it is here, there, in the
town, in the city, in the chapel, in the church, and wilderness, and every
where, as I have declared. The papists say yt this place makes not against ye
presence of Christ's body upon earth, An objection
but against false Prophets, which should preach in the last age, false
doctrine: True it is, Christ speaks here against such. But what false
doctrine shall they teach? The answer.
Shall there come two at one time in one age, of which false prophets shall say,
he is christ and an other shall say no this is Christ, pointing to some other?
There were never yet two in one age, which both were said to be Christ's, of
any false prophets nor the scriptures do not mention or regester any such thing
to come, for the verity says yt many such shall come. Now we never read that
many have reported and said, here is Christ, and there, onles we take it to be
spoken of the papists, which show Christ unto us in many places at once, in
every chapel, and on every Altar. Many shall say of them selves that they are
Christ, but these be other doctors, compare their words together, and thou
shall find that I say true, the one text does not expound the other, but they
be two diverse prophecies of two diverse things. This false doctrine then is
nothing else, but to teach Christ's body after his ascentio^ to be upon the
earth, visibly, or inuisibly. Pighius, Pighius interpretacion.
who calls Gods word a nose of ware, wresteth this text to another purpose,
taking Christ here for his church. Lo here is Christ, and there is Christ,
(says Pighius) that is, heretics shall say: here is the church, and there is
ye church. O wise exposition: shall heretics say that Christ is here and
there, touching his members and church? No verily, this is no heresy: for
Christ's church is in many places, Mark. 13 Math. 34
in deserts and other. If Christ must be taken for his church in this text,
then we are compelled also to understand the church by him, in the text which
immediately follows, where he says, believe them not: Christ that is the
church shall come as lightnynge, we must take Christ for the same through out
the chapter. Read diligently, examen the circumstaunce, which is chieflye to be
regarded in the exposition of doubtful places, open the scripture with the key,
The keye. The pycklock.
not with the pykelocke, that is: expound it by tt self, not by private
interpretation, and you shall find that Christ there is taken for Christ, not
for ye church, as Pighius would strain the place, making of ye scriptures a
nose of wax. You will ask me then whether we receive Christ's body? yea truly
from heaven, from the right hand of the father, not out of ye bread, nor in ye
bread. For onles we eat his flesh and drink his blood, we shall not dwell in
him, We receive Christ's body from heaven.
we shall not arise at the last day, we shall not have eternal life. Christ's
humanity is the mean, whereby we must obtein al things the way, by which we
must clyme up to heaven, the ladder that Jacob saw going unto Mesopotamia,
reaching up to heaven, with angels ascending and descending upon it. Christ
teaches this using, not only his word and commandment in raising the dead,
as God, but also his flesh as a help and mean to the same. Math. ^
In raising the daughter of one of the chief of the synagoge, he took her by
the hand and raised her. Math. ^
When he cured one full of the leprosy, he stretched out his hand and touched
him. When he entered into the city of Naim, meetinge a dead man carried out,
Luke. 7.
the only son of a wydowe, having compassion on her, he touched the bear, and
raised him from dead. There be infinite places of scripture, which teach us that
Christ's flesh gives life, delivers from death, expels vice, but this is
notable, forasmuch as this wydowe signifies the church, and her dead son
represents mankind, dead through the sin of Adam. Christ is a vine and we are the branches, as he witnesses himself: Ihon. 15.
Ego sum vitis vera. etc. I am the true vine, and my father is a husband man,
and vos estis palmites. The branches cannot live, onles they take norishment
of the substance of the vine and of his juice: Even so the soul of a christen
man must needs be fed with the sweet flesh, and comfortable blood of Jesus
Christ. If we be branches, we be nouryshed of the vine: I would learn whether
he be the vine after his humanity, or by his divinity. He is not the vine
touching his divine nature, for the vine is not equal with the husband man,
but at his commandment. Christ touching his divinity, is the husbandman,
and equal with his father. Mark, Christ is ye vine, towchynge his flesh.
he is the vine therefore concerning that nature, in which he is inferior to his
father, which is his humanity. If then Christ be the vine not by his
divinity, but by his humanity, and we the branches: then we must be
refreshed of the vine, that is of his humanity. This metaphore has been abused
to many evil purposes, as to prove Christ not to be God, because he is the
vine, it has been racked also to prove that these words, hoc est corpus meum,
This is my body, is a like phrase, a like speech, as when Christ says, ego sum
vitis, I am the vine. I am the vine and this my body, are diverse phrases.
They be no like phrases, but far different and diverse: for the vine, is no
sacrament, neither the door, nor the way, be no sacraments. The bread of the
which Christ said, this is my body, is a sacrament, This is my body expounded
not a bare and naked metaphore, the rock was a sacrament, the brase^ serpent
was a sacrament, not metaphores only. Luke. 22. Math. 26 Mark. 24.
When Christ said this is my body, he ordained a sacrament, yt is, he gave ye
name of the thing to the sign, so yt notwythstanding, the matter, nature, and
substance of the sign remains: unless this substance remain, The
substance of bread remains.
the bread is no Sacrament. For sacraments (says S. Augustine) are so called
of the similitude of those things, to which they be sacraments. Take away the
matter, the substance, and nature of bread and wine, and there remains no
more similitude. Now all the fathers that were before Gregory do confess, that
the scriptures do wytnes, that there must be three similitudes in this
sacrament: Three similitudes in the Sacrament.
a similitude of norishing, a similitude of unity, and a similitude of
conversion. The similitude of norishing is this: Of norishing.
that as bread and wine do norish our body and comfort our outward man, so the
body and blood of Christ, be the meat and fode of our souls, and do comfort
our inward man. Of unity.
And the similitude of unity is this: that as the lo^^ of which we eat was
made of many corns of wheat by the liquor of water knoden in to dough, and yet
is but one loaf, and as the wine wa^ made of the juice of diverse grapes, and
yet is but one cup of wine, so al they that eat Christ's body, and drink his
blood, being many, are made one body, and one flesh by the liquor of charity
and love, the mistical body of our savior Christ which is his church, not his
natural body: for the bread is a sacrament not only of Christ's natural body,
but also of the congregation and mistical body: and therefore Paul says, that
albeit we be many, 1 Cor. 10
yet notwithstanding we are, Vnus panis, vnum corpus, one loaf, and one body.
What a loaf are we? Verily even Triticeus panis, a wheaten loaf by the
similitude of unity, which I have declared. Of conue^^sion.
The similitude of conversion is this, that as the bread and wine is turned in
to ye substance of our bodies, so by the receiving of Christ's body and blood,
we are turned into the nature of them, we are changed and made bones of his
bones, and flesh of his flesh. He that eats my flesh says Chrst, and
drinks my blood, he abides in me and I in him: that is to say, we be made
one flesh and one blood, and the same nature that my flesh and my blood has,
the same gets he that eats me. These similitudes must be in the bread and
wine or else they be no sacraments. Now take away the substance, matter and
nature of them, and what similitude remains either of norishing, or of unity,
or of conversion. These similitudes be in the very substance and inward nature
of bread and wine, not in the outward show of accidents, which do nether
noryshe, nether are they changed, neither have any similitude of any unity.

Here percase gentle reader thou will demand of me: seeing I teach the
substance of bread and wine to remain after the consecration, what I do
answer to the doctors and fathers which oftentimes do say that the nature
and substance of bread and wine is altered, is turned into the body and blood
of our savior Christ, as Ciprian in his treatise which he writes De cena
domini, of the Lords supper says: Ciprian de cena domini.
Panis non effigy, sed natura mutatus, this bread is chaunge^ not in the
outward show, but in the nature and substance: and Ignatius says the same,
and Cirill, and Ambrose, and Hierom, and Augustine, and Chrisostom whose
doctrin^s we do follow, and we do allow, and embrace them.

How the doctors do say that the substance of bread is changed.
Be not deceived good people, they are nothing against this doctrine, but the
pillars and mainteiners thereof, if their wrytinges be truly understand: Mark
the phrases, compare their sayings together one with an other, and you shall
find, that many do fasly slander them, and that they, which boast and prate
most of the doctors and old fathers, understand not the old fathers. So they
say that Eliseus changed and altered the nature of Iron, 4 Reg. 6
when he made it to swym above the water, so they say that Elias changed the
nature of fire, when through his prayer it fell from heaven, 3 Reg. 18 Ambrose
de sacram^tis. Exodus 3
and consumed his sacrifice of wood, stones, and dust. The nature of fire was
changed, no man can deny it, at what time God appeared unto Moses out of a
bush in a flame, for the bush was not consumed. He commanded ye fire not to
hurt his faithful servant, Sidrach, Misak, and Abednago, Dan. 3
and preserved them harmles, from the hot burning oven. There again nature was
altered. Elias and Eliseus did not turn, alter, or change the very substance
and inward essence or matter, either of Iron, or of the fire into any other
substance, or nature, but the natural property of the^ making the Iron which
is heavy to houe above ye waters, Substance for natural property.
and causing the fire which is light to descend dounward. Even so the doctors
and old fathers which we allow and follow, say that the substance of bread and
wine is changed, that is the natural property of them, so that where as
before they were only the meat of the body, now after the words rehearsed,
they are the fode of the soul also, for so much as they deliver unto us
Christ's sweet flesh, and comfortable blood: before it was comen bread and
wine, now it is holy and sanctified, before it was no sacrament, now it is a
sacrament of the blessed body and honorable blood of our savior Jesus Christ.
But for a more manifest proof, yt the old fathers believed the substance of
bread to remain after the consecration, I will aledge some of the^. Ireneus
says, that every sacrament is made of two natures, Ireneus
of a heavenly nature, and of a terrenal or earthly nature. Now take away the
substance of bread, and what earthly nature or substance remains in this
holy sacrament? The papists say, that the earthly nature is Christ's body, An
objection.
which he took of the earth when he was borne of the blessed virgin Mary: For
she was earth, and all men be earth. To this I answer, The answer.
that Christ's body is earth in very deed, yet it is not the earthly and
terrenall nature of this sacrament, which must have three similitudes, of
unity, of nutricion, and of conversion, as is declared before, which
similitudes can not be in Christ's body. Moreover hear what Origin says:
Origin.
Panis sanctificatus vadit in ventrem: The sacramental bread enters into the
belly. Wherefore enters it thither? but to norish our bodies, to feed them, to
be ye meat of the flesh. Wherefore the substance thereof is not turned, not
changed, not altered, but remains and continues: for accidents do nether
feed, nor norish. S. Augustine also subscribeth unto them, saying: Augustine.
Accedat verbum elemento, and fit sacramentum, he says not succedat, but
accedat, which is this much to say: Let the word be added to the element, and
then it is made a sacrament. Thus it is evident that ye bread and wine which is
the element remains, and is not tra^substanciat, both by autentical
scriptures, which do allow three similitudes, and also by the consent of all the
doctors, and elder fathers: For out of doubt, Athanasius, Basil, Nazianzene,
Hierome, Chrysostom, and other, both Latinistes and Greeks, do not disagre
with these. Moreover the rock was a sacrament of Christ's blood, and yet not
transubstanciat: They and we drink one spiritual drink, as Paul records.
Likewise Manna was a sacrament of his body without any such mutacion. 1 Cor. 10
You will ask me then whether our sacraments be better then the sacraments of
the old testament? How our sacraments are better then the sacraments of the
old testament.
Yea truly, but not of their own nature, but through ye grace of God, through the
fulness of time: because in this testament the face of Christ is more clearly
discovered and known, and not through any transubstanciation. These be ye days
which the Patriarchs and Prophets desired to come, the days of salvation, and
the acceptable time. I have opened the true meaning of Christ's words: this is
my body, and declared the necessity, the use, the fruit, the mary, and
swetenes of the holy communion, which fruit is incomparable. For if all they
which did but touch the hem of Christ's garment, Math. 9
received their perfect health: How much more shall we be made strong and
conforted, if we have Christ in us. This holy communion gives life, destroys
death, quickens our bodies, lighteneth our souls, banysheth sin, and
increases virtue. For as a little wax, powered upon other wax, is made al one
with it, even so they that receive this sacrament worthily, abide in Christ,
and Christ in them. A little leaven sowreth a whole batch, but the seldom
receiving of this sacrament, if (I say) it be received worthily, brings
remission of sins, purges our souls, makes clean our herts, amendeth our
understandings: but the oftener the better. All you that approach unto this
table, and desire to be branches of the vine, and to be sealed into the
fellowship of the congregation, forsake your sinful living, entend to lead a
new conversation from the bottom of your hearts, pourge out the old leaven,
and become new dough, Evil men do not receive Christ's body.
bury al affections and live unto virtue: otherwise ye nether eat Christ's
flesh, nor drink his blood. He that eats Christ's flesh, has eternal life:
John. 6 The first reason.
Yea mary says the Papists, if he eat it digne, worthily, adding unto the
text, or else making it false, but he may receive it unworthily as Judas did.
Examen this exposition with the touchstone, open the scripture with the key,
not with the pick lock and thou shall find that Christ's flesh is not received
unworthily. In all the scriptures this word, indigne, unworthily, The second
reason.
is but once read concerning this sacrament, and there (mark) the bread and
the wine is said to be received unworthily, not Christ's most comfortable flesh
and blood. Quicunque manducauerit pane^ hunc. etc. He that eats of this
bread, and drinks of this cup (says Paul) unworthily, he shall be gilthy of
the body and blood of Christ. 1 Cor. 11
Lo he says, he that eats of this bread unworthily, and drinks of this
cup, not of the body and blood of Christ, which always be received unto health.

Chose now gentell reader whether thou will believe ye papists, which teach
that Christ's flesh is received of evil me^ unworthily, ^r Paul which says he
that eats of this bread, that is not commen bread, not daily bread, but
sacramental bread, that is meant by the word (this.) If they can show in any
place of scripture where this word (unworthily) is joined with the body of
Christ, as I have showed where it is coupled with bread, I will be of their
opinion. Christ's flesh is meat according to his own saying, The third reason.
John. 6
Caro mea vere est cibus. etc. My flesh is very meat and my blood is very
drink. Now meat does hurt, where it finds a belly corrupt with naughty
humores. Even so this spiritual fode, if it find a man defiled with sin,
increases his dampnation, brings him unto destruction, not of the nature of
it, but through the default of him that receceiueth it. Yea if we be defiled
with corrupt humors, we be no partakers of these deinties. But peradventure the
Papists will reply, if it be meat then is it received both of good and evil
men, for nether of both sorts can live without meat. an objection answered
To this I answer, it is the meat of the soul not of the body, the fode of
the spirit not of the flesh, and therefore it is not received of evil persons,
because the meat is good and they be evil, so that this is a strong argument:
Christ's flesh and blood is meat, ergo it is not received of evil men.
The.iiii. reason.
Moreover Christ's flesh and blood is the vine, as I have proved before, and we
be the branches.

Only the brauches be fed of the vine. Evil men be not branches of the vine. A
Silogisme.
Ergo evil me^ be not partakers of ye vine Which is Christ's flesh and blood.

Therefore let no Judas, no Simo^ Magus, no man with a cloked mind think that he
is fed with these deinties. If it were not lawful for the vncircumsised in
flesh to eat the figurative paschal lamb how much more is it unlawful for ye
uncircumcised and unclean in heart, to taste of these deinties? If he that
despised Moises law was condemned without any mercy unto death under two or
three witnesses, how more grievously shall he be punished which treads under
foot the son of God, and cou^teth the blood of the new testament as an unholy
thing, wherewith he is sanctified. Purge out ye old leven, or else thou may
not, nor thou can not eat this sweet bread. Paul testifies that many among
the Corinthia^s, for ye abusing of this sacrament, were punished with weakness,
with sickness, yea and many stricken with death, the which he wrote for our
enstruction. Against the coming of our friend we make clean our houses, and
look diligently that al things be trym: And are we negligent in puryfying of
our minds against the coming of the great king, who has promised to dwell
with us after the receiving of this holy meat? Thanks ought to be given for ye
death of Christ.
I would wysh that men would give thanks more customably immediately after the
receiving thereof unto God, for the redemption of mankind and for all his
benefits, syngyng the C. Psalm. O be joyful in the Lord all ye lands,
serve the Lord in gladness and come before his presence with a song. And the
Psalm that begins: O com let us sing unto the Lord, Psalm. 94
let us heartily rejoice in the strength of our salvation, let us come before
his presence with thanks giving. With the.C.iii. Psalm: Praise the Lord O my
soull. For who comes to the table of any man, and departs without any
tha^kesgeuing: it is called also a sacrament of thankesgeuing. I would men would
as diligently dispose them selves to receive this sacrament, as they do
eftsoon delight to talk of it: if they would prepare them selves to receive
it more often, the holy Ghost would enstruct them and become their scolemaster,
for wysdom enters not unto a soul subdued into sin. But I hear some say: I
will not come to receive the sacrament for I can, and do receive the body and
blood of Christ at home, in the field, and in the church, yea every where
without the sacrament, The sacramental receiuyng is necessary.
believing upon his passion. Truly if thou be godly minded and do call his death
to remembrance, trusting to have pardon of thy sins by the effusion of his
blood, thou do eat his body and drink his blood. But thou art not godly
minded, but carnal, the servant of sin, if thou despise the ordinance of
God, and his commandment, who bids the, take, and eat: and carnal and
ungodly men do not receive the body of Christ, but the spiritual and godly.
Thou may say likewise, I will not com at the minister for remission of my
sines, and for absolution, The absolution of the minist.
for God is not bound to his sacraments, he pardons without the ceremony of
ministration, as he did ye thief, Mary magdalen, and other. Sure it is, God
forgeueth thy sins before thou come to the priest, if thou have earnest
repentance, and true intent of amendment: for he says, In quacunque hora.
etc. In what hour soever ye unrighteous man does repent. etc. and yet
nevertheless he himself commands ye to come to them, for he has given them
authority to louse and to bynd, and to bless and curse* Now what their
lousing, blessing, and absolution is, shall be declared herafter, in the.xvii.
Chapter. So albeit Christ's body be received in faith, without the sacrament:
yet thou must come unto the sacrament because thou art commanded, or else thou
art an evil man. It is not enough to receive it spiritually we must receive it
also sacrame^tally: yea he that will not receive it sacramentally, neither does
he, neither can he, receive it in faith spiritually: for I have proved before,
ye evil me^ do not eat these dainties.

The.viij. Chapter.
God is full of understanding.

GOD is also full of understanding, If any man lack wysdom, Jacob. 1.
James bids him ask it of god, which gives to al men indifferentlye, and
castethe no man in the teth, and it shall be given him, if he ask it without
wavering, without mistrust. David asking with a sure faith obtained his
request, Psalm. 118
in so much that he had more understanding then all his teachers, and was wyser
then the aged, but what follows? for because I keep thy commandments. Thou
ask not in faith, without keeping of Gods commandments, ostende mihi fidem
tua^ ex operibus, show me thy faith says James, of thy works. Psalm. 98 Psalm.
18. 3. Regu^. 3
Keep them and he will give the understanding. His testimonies are a lantern,
and give light even unto the babes. He gave Solomon an understanding heart to
judge his people, and to discern between good and bad, so that there was none
like him, neither before nor after. He gave him also honor, and riches, and
long life, which be his gifts. He opened the minds of his discyples, Luke. 24.
that they might understand the scriptures. 2. Cor. 12
He took Paul up into ye third heaven, and taught him things which cannot be
uttered. He ^^lled Besaliell and Ahaliab with the spirit of God, Exodus 31.
with wisdom, understanding and knowledge, to find out curiouse works, to
work in gold, and silver, and brass, to karue in wood, to grave in stone, to
make ye tabernacle of witness, the Arc, ye mercy seat, the table the pure
candlestickes, the alter of incense, vestiments to minister in, and the holy
garments for Aaron the priest. Wherefore he himself, must needs be full of all
wisdom and all understanding. But these things, as they were commanded to
them of the old law, so we of the new law are not bound to them, because we
have no commandment. For as Paul writes unto his nation, Hebre. 13*
we have an altar whereof they may not eat, which serve in the tabernacle. The
priesthod of the levites, there sacrifices and there laws be disanulled.
Christ's everlasting priesthod, has made an end of all the Levites priesthod,
yea and of all other priesthod save only that, which belongs to all Christen
men. The oblation of his body once for all, upon the altar of the cross:
which was a slain sacrifice for our sins abolisheth all other, and the law
of his Gospel has blotted o^t the law of the carnal commandment. But our
Romans allege the prophet Malachy, Malachy makes nothing for the sacrifice of
the mass or popish priesthode.
for the defense of the sacrifice of their mass, and for their Popish
priesthod, by whom God says: I have no pleasure in you, and as for an offering
I will not accept it at your hands. For from the rising of the Sun unto the
going down of the same, my name is great amongst the gentiles, yea in every
place shall there sacrifice be done, and a clean offering offered up in my name.
Albertus Pighius, one of ye bishop of Romes chief knights, Pighius argument
labors to prove that this text is meant of the oblacion of the mass, whose
reasons be these. First that it cannot be taken for the oblation of Christ's
body on ye cross, for God promised here such a sacrifice that should be offered
in all places, and of the Heathen. That was offered in one place, in Iewry only,
and of the Jews. Moreover it can not be such a sacrifice as David commended,
Psalm. 50
that a troubled spirit, a broken and a contrit heart is a sacrifice unto God:
for the Prophet speaks here of a clean sacrifice unto God, all that we offer
unto God, is spotted, unclean, and defiled, as the clothes stained with the
flours of a woman. The Prophet also speaks of a new sacrifice that was not
before, Esaie. 63
but should be used among the Heathen, and offered only of the priests. But we
have the sacrifice that David praises commen with them of the old law, and it
is to be offered of all christen men and women: wherefore it must needs be
spoken of the mass. This is Pighius reason, The answer.
yea the principal argument of all the papists, unto which I beseech you hear
patiently my answer. I entend to write a comentary to Malachie, but I will take
it out of gods word and I will open scripture with the key. I defend that
Malachie means none other sacrifice, then an oblacion of a pure and contrite
heart: and I prove it thus. First Malachie speaks of such a sacrifice as
shall be offered in all places unto God, as undoubtedly this has been, and
shall be to the worlds end. He speaks also of a clean sacrifice: The
sacrifice of thanks is offered in all places.
Is not ye oblacio^ of a contrite heart a clean sacrifice? Yea truly, or else
it were not to be offered up unto God, to whom no unclean thing is to be
presented. Paul speaking of this sacrifice, calls it a holy, A clean
sacrifice. Roma. 11
and an acceptable sacrifice, saying: I beseech you therefore brethren by the
mercies of God, yt you make your bodies a quick sacrifice, holy, and acceptable
unto God. etc. He means not that we should kyl ou^ bodies, slay our selves,
but kill al our carnal lusts, unlawful desires, evil affections in the body,
which is a sacrifice of a contrite and humble heart. And where as Pighius
affirms against this, that our hearts be unclean, I deny it not: but
nevertheless God accepts them as clean and calls the^ so in his word, as
by David saying: Make me a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within me:
Psalm. 50
And by Christ: blessed be ye pure in heart or clean hearted, Math. 5
for they shall se God. We read in the acts, when Peter was a hongred at
Cornelius house, that the heavens opened, and certain vessels came down to him
as it had been a great shete knit at four corners, wherein were all manner of
four ^oted beasts, and that he was bidden to arise and kill, but he would not,
saying: he did never eat no unclean things: but he was aunswed and commanded
not to esteem any thing unclean, Act. 1
which God has c^^nsed. Even so I say unto Pighius yt seeing Paul, David and
Christ call it a clean sacrifice, and that GOD has puriti^ied our hearts, it
becomes not him to name it otherwise: For a good man, a good tree, out of the
good treasure of his heart, brings out good fruit. But the papists say that
this is no new sacrifice. I affirm that it is, Math. ^ A new sacrifice. 2 Cor.
^*
for as much as God says, behold I make al things new. If all things be new,
then this is a new sacrifice, albeit we have it comme^ with the fathers of the
old testament: The scripture uses to call things new, when they be commanded
a new, as Christ commanding his disciples to love one another before his
passion, says: John. 1^ 1 John. ^
I give you a new commandment that ye love one another. And John likewise
again: a new commandment I write to you, not that these commandments were
not me^cioned before, but that they were so necessary that it pleased God to
renew them again: in which signification the oblation of a co^trite heart, may
also be called a new sacrifice, and that after the phrase of the holy
scripture, although Pighius spurn against it, who not knowing or not
remembering this acception of ne^enes, does falsely affirm that the sacrifice
that Malachie entreats, only apperteineth unto priests. I trust I have
sufficiently declared by the testimonies of Gods word that a contrite heart is
that clean and new sacrifice offered in all places, of which Malachie speaks.
That ye Lords supper, which men call the mass, is not a sacrifice for sin,
S. Paul declares plainly, saying: sine sanguinis effusione. etc. that without
sheding of blood no sacrifice ca^ blot out sin. The first reason.
If Christ be sacrificed or offered in his supper for the expiacion of sin,
his precious and most comfortable blood is shed again, is poured forth again:
Hebr. 9
for without bloodshed is no remission, it must be a bloody sacrifice, not a
dry sacrifice, for which sin is pardoned. Christ (says Paull) by his own
blood entered once for all into the holy place, and found eternal redemption, so
that all sin both that is past and that which is to come in the chosen, is
and shall be pardoned by his eternal sacrifice, which was offered once for all on
ye cross. And sin being forgiven as the Apostle tells by the virtue of it,
The second reason. Heb. 10
there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but only a co^memoracion and a
memorial. For the love of God, and of our own souls, let us keep and use this
sacrament and other in the church, as Christ the author of all sacraments
commands. He mencioneth no such use, or rather abuse and prophanacion. That
is a sacrament, in which God certifieth us by some outward and sensible sign,
The third reason.
yt he gives unto us sumwhat: as for an example, in baptism there is water;
which preaches unto us remission of sins by Christ's blood. Now a sacrifice
is an other thing, No sacrament is a sacrifice.
for in a sacrifice we give, dedicate, and present some thing unto him.
Wherefore the supper of the Lord is no sacrifice for sin, for as much as it is a
sacrament. Mark this difference brethren, and be no longer disceiued. The
parable of the thieves teaches us yt Christ's coming has disanulled al such
priesthod as is called sacerdotiu^, The.iiii. reason. Luke 10 The wounded man.
but presbiterum remains. The priests and Levites pass by, and leave the
wounded man, which was robbed going from Jerusalem to Jericho, vnholpe^,
unprovided for. Is not he socoured only of the Samarita^? The wounded man,
sig^ifieth all mankind, who descended from Jerusalem to Jericho, Jerusalem.
when he was expulsed out of paradise into this miserable world. For Jerusalem
is as much to say, as visio pacis, or visio perfecta, a peaceable vision of God
which man had in paradise. The thieves yt robbed and wounded him, Thieves.
were the Devils, that entised him to eat of the tree of concupiscence, and
robbed him of his understanding, of fre will, of dominion and lordship over al
creaturs, of ye image of God after which he was made, and made him after the
image of the devil himself. The priests, the Leuits, were not able to help him,
but only the Samaritan, that is Christ heals him, and restored him to the
image of God again. Read over the four, The.v. reason.
five, seven, nine, and ten, to the Hebrews, and thou shall find that the mark
yt S. Paul shoteth at in th^se Chapters is only to fortify, that al such
outward priesthod is taken away. Moreover mark what I say unto thee: the.vi.
reason.
Read over all the new Testament, and thou shall not find once this word
Sacerdos, Priest, applied or spoken of any one sort of ministers, as the commen
sort do use it: but when it is refe^^ed to the Phariseis, and to such as do
apperteine without al doubt to the old testament, it is referred always to all
christen people, which all be Sacerdotes through Christ: and ministers have no
manner of sacrifice, but commen with the laity, both men and women: that is to
say, the sacrifice of thanks geuyng, and the quick and lively oblacion of
their own bodies, Ministers have no sacrifice, but co^me^ with the laity.
the new Testament requires no other sacrifice. I do not mean, that every
man or woman may christen marie, purify women, may leuse and bind consciences,
may distribute the holy sacrament: but I mean, that popish and outward
priesthod is crept into the church of God, against the word of God, and I do
believe and confess no mo orders of ministers but three, that is Deacons, The
order of Mini^^. only.
and Presbiters, and Bishops. These three the scriptures aloweth, and showed the
manner of their creation, and declares their offices and duties. There be mo
ministrations, I will not denay, but they may be reduced all to these three. The
Papists make.vii. orders, ostiaries or porters, Seven orders.
reders, acolits, exorcistes, subdeacons, deacons, and priests, but nether of
the names of.v. of them, nor yt which is meant by the names, nor their
crea^io^, nor their offices be expressed in the scripturs. And if I would recite
the offices that they the^ se^es assign, and their form of creacio^, I think
mo would laugh at them, then allow them. Some of the doctors write that there
were some so called in ye church at their days, but that their offices were
such, as they decribe, they can not show out of any doctor. They have kept
the names, and changed the duties and offices, and have appointed the^ other
duties, as it is plain, namely in the office of a deacon, and so they do not
only rack ye scriptures, but also deprave and corrupt the doctors, to maintein
their dreams, and fantasies, and by the name of antiquity and fathers, they
lead us from our father in heaven.

The.ix. Chapter.
God is truth: and whether it be lawful or honest to lie for any consideration.

GOD is also full of truth and mercy, of whom David witnesses that al his
ways or paths ar mercy and truth. Psalm. 24 Psalm. 5 John. 24 Prou. 6
He destroieth al those that forge lies, and deliteth in such as be true, for
he is truth it self. Salomo^ among.vii. things which God hates rekeneth lying
twice, as yt which God most abhors, affirming also in another place, that a
false witness and lying lips shall not escape punishment. There be that think it
lawful to lie, as ye merchant man to sell his wares with more aduau^tage, and
the Priscillianistes, Prou. 1^* Marchan^ man.
who held this opinion yt for a greater aduau^tage lying is not forbidden to
cover their covetousness: and to excuse their daily lying, they make three sorts
of lies, Ioco sum, perniciosum, officiosum, ges^ing lies, pernicious, and
officious, of the which they say two kinds to be lawful honest and
commendable, bringing these examples. Nasica when he came to Ennius the Poets
house to speak with him, Nasica. Ennius.
Ennius having earnest business, commanded his maid to mete him at the door,
and to say that he was not within, who knowing that her master had bidden her
to say so because of his business, departed. Sone after it fortuned yt Ennius
came to his house, and knocking at ye door, enquired for him. Nasica hearing
one knock and perceiving out of a window that it was Ennius, answered with a
loud voice that he was not at home. But Ennius knew his voice and came in. Then
nasica came unto him and said: you are impudent, for I believed your maid that
you were not at home, and will not you believe me my self? In this example be two
lies, one of Ennius maid at her masters commandment, the other of Nasica, in
the way of jest and mirth, which both be defended to be honest. But I tell you,
al lying is forbidden. Sara. Genesis 18 Abraham. Genesis 12 Jacob. Genesis 20 Genesis 27
Sara also is alleged, who when she had laughed, denied it to three men which
came unto Abraham: and he likewise is brought in for calling his wife, his
sister. And Jacob the patriark through the sutteltie of lying, stoieaway his
fathers blessing, and the title of enheritaunce, from his elder brother Esau,
at the counsel of his mother Rebecca. The scripture records also, The
midwiues. Exodus 1
that God dealt well with the midwifes of Egypt, and made them houses, because
with a lie they hindered the deuillish intent of cruel king Pharao, and
preserved the babes of the Hebrews from death. How is it true the^ that he
destroieth all liyng lyps? Raab. Act. 5 Iosu. 2 Iosu. 6 Hebr. 11
Ananias and Saphi^a his wife are slain for lying, but Raab the harlot is
rewarded, and numbered of S. Paul among the faithful, because she by lying
saved the messengers or spies of the Israelites, from the pursuers of the king
of Jericho. Iehu the king of Israel saying he had a great sacrifice to do unto
Baal, King Iehu Iosu. 2 Iosu. 6 4 Reg. 10
gathering his priests from all the coasts of Israel into one temple, murdered
them all through his lie, and is not reproved for the same: wherefore all lying
is not forbidden. We read of Christ himself how he feigned that he would go
further then ye town of Emaus, Luke 24
and the elect vessel S. Paul is not abashed to say he was a citizen of Rome
and borne fre. Act. 2^ Act. 23
With these e^a^ples lying is maintained, disceit and falshod allowed and named
policy and prudence. But I say unto you, ye abuse Gods word, ye rack it, ye
make it a nose of wax ye open it not with the right key, but with a picklock:
name not subtlety policy, nor lying ieste or duty: all crafty schoffing,
all profitable lying is dampnable. You bring for the defense of your leasinges.
Nasica, Sara, Abraham, Jacob, the midwifes of Egypt, Raab, Iehu, Paul and
Christ. As for Nasica his saying was a ieste, The answer.
a merry conceit and no lie. Iestes and merry conceits be no lies, for as much
as they be uttered not to harm, noy, or hinder any man, but for mirth sake. A
man may affirm yt which is false, Abraham lied not Genes. 12
and yet make no lie, for to ly, is to affirm an untruth with a mind to hurt,
e^damage, and deceive some man thereby. Abraham said not to Abimilech, she is not
my wife: but she is my sister which was true, for she was his sister by his
father, but not by his mother, the daughter of Aran his brother and
consequently of his father, for asmoch as, filij siliorum dicuntur etiam filii
auorum, the son sons or daughters are called also the sons and daughters
of the grandfathers. And so she was Abraha^s sister, because she was his
fathers daughter: and she was his fathers daughter, because she was his
brothers daughter. Wherefore he spoke nothing that was false, but he kept yt
close which was true: saying she was his sister, and not confessing her his
wife: the which thing also his son Isaac did afterward. Genes. 26
But this was no liyng to hyde the truth, but to affirm that which is false.
And otherwise Sara lied in deed, and her example is in that point to be
eschued, for many things are written, which are not to be followed. The story
of Jacob is no lie but a mystery, and the mystery proved true afterward. The
sayi^^ of Jacob i^ no ly, but ^ mistery^e Gene. 27. Luke. 13
When his father asked him: who art thou son? He answered, I am Esau thy eldest
son whereby nothing else is meant and signefied then that which Chrest says:
ye shall se Abraham, and Isaach, and Icob, and all the Prophets in the kingdom
of God, and your selves thrust out, and they shall come from the east, and
weste, and north, and south, and sit in the kingdom of God: and behold, they be
last, which shall be first, and they be first, which shall be last. This thing
now is com to pass, for we are his people, Rom^. 9*
which were not his people, and his beloved, which were not beloved. S. Paul
names this a mystery: Roma. 1^
I would not this mystery should be hidden from you brethren, lest ye should
be wise in your own conceits, for as much as blindness is partly happened in
Israel, till the fulness of the Gentyles be come in. Of these places it
appears, that Jacobs saying, I am Esau thy eldest son, is as much to say,
as the last shall be first, and the first last, which is a true saying and no
ly, because it is a mystery. For if we count mysteries to be lies, we must
count likewise al parables and metaphores, all tropes and fygures, to be no
less, Apoca. 5 1. Cor. 10 Ihon. 11 Math. 13 Ihon. 15 Luke. 22 Hiere. 23 Psalm.
143 Psalm. 38.
in which ye meaning is to be considered, and not the proper signification of
ye word. Christ is called a Lion, a rock, a door, a Lamb: the children of
the kingdom are called good seed, and the wicked tares. The father of heaven
is named a husbandman, and Gods word a sweard, a hamer, a key. Man's life is
called a span, a shadow etc. These manner of speeches be no lies, but plain
demonstrations of hard matters, in easy and common terms. We be taught by ye
lion, rock, and door, which we know, what Christ is, whom we know not: and by
the husbandman, we learn what God ye father is. By the sword, the hammer, the
strength of Gods work: by the key, how it is to be expounded: by the spanne,
the shadow, the shortness of man's life, which be fruitful matters. In
se^blable manner, in this story we learn of Esau, the blindness of ye Jews, and
of Jacob ye younger, the fulness of ye Gentiles. Now to speak of ye midwyues of
Egypt, and of Rahab, God did not reward them for their lie, but for their
mercy, because they dealte kyndly with his people, for which also he forgave
them their ly, wherein theye sinned undoubtedly, grievously. Exodus. 1.
For the mouth which lies kylleth the soul. If those midwyues had been perfect
women, they would have refused that office whereunto Pharao appointed them, for it
was to murder the infantes of the Israelites: and Rahab had don better, if she
had not lied, but answered: I know where they be, but because I fear God,
Iosu. 2.^
I will never show it. They could have lost nothing by this answer, although
they had suffered death therefore. For blessed be ye dead that die in the Lord. By
the other way, they gat them houses upon the earth, but this way they might
have purchased that house, of which it is written: blessed be they, which dwell
in thy house, they shall praise the evermore. Stories make mention of one
Firmius bishop of Tagasta who making this answer in such a case, Bishop Firmius.
lost naught thereby. When the Emperor sent his officers to search after a
certain man whom he had hidden, he being inquired for him, said he would not
deny but that he had hidden him, because of lying, but that he would never
betray him: for which answer he was grievously pained, but no pain could cause
him to disclose where the man was. The Emperor marueling at his stedfastnes
delivered him. Iehu in his lying is no more to be followed, then in the sin of
Ieroboa^ the son of Nabat, which made Israel sin with the golden calfes in
Bethel and Dan. 4 Reg. 10
For it is written of him, that he forced not him self to walk in ye law of
the Lord God of Israel with all his heart. S. Paul made no lie, for he was in
dead a citezin of Rome, how Paul was a citezen of To.
because his father was fre: as at London the children of fre men be citeze^s
and fre. Now as concerning our savior Jesus Christ God forbid that we should
say he lied, in whose mouth no gyle could be found who speaks of him self,
Luke. 24
I am the way, the truth. His pretending to go further was no lying but a true
meaning, for he went further afterward, when he ascended up into the heaven in
the sight of his Apostles, which thing only was me^t by his p^etending to go
further, for it is a mystery. No man therefore can affirm y^ Christ lied, but
he that denies him to have ascended: many false things are fained to signify
and teach true things which be no lies, for they be not spoken as things
true, as things done, but to teach us what we should do, as the narration of
Lazarus and the rich man, Luke 16 Luke 15
the parable of him which had two sons, of the which one abode at home with
his father, the other went into far countries, the parable of trees in the
book of Judges which spoke one to another, Iudi. 9 Math. 2^ Math. 25 Luke 15
Luke 18 Math. 13 Luke. 1^
the parable of the vineyard, of the virgins, of ten grotes, of the sheep, of
the unrighteous judge, of mustardsede, and of the Pharisie and the Publicane.
If all these be lies, Christ is a great and notable her, who spoke always in
parables to ye people, the Prophets are liars, yea all the scripture is full of
lies, not only the scripture but all heathen writers use this manner of
teaching, Horatius* Esopus.
as Horatius making the little mouse to speak, and Esopus giving language to
fowls, fishes and four foted beasts, and yet no any wise man slaundred them
at any time of lying. Thus it is evident that they which maintain lying, rack
the scripturs, and open them not with Peter's key, but with a pielock, and that
the examples brought for lying, either be no lies, but iestes, as Nasica, or
mysteries as Jacobs, Christ's or true sayings as Abraham's, Isaac, and Paul: or
else if they be lies as Ennius maid, Sara, the midwiues, Raab, Iehu, they are
earnestly to be eschued, 1. Ihon. 2
for no lie is of the truth, and whatsoever is not of ye truth is naught, seeing
God is truth.

The.x. Chapter.
God is full of compassion.

HE is also full of mercy, letting the sun shine upon good and evil, and
sending rain to both sorts. Thou most gracious Lord bring forth grass and
herbs for cattle, Psa. 103
and fode out of the earth: thou geuest us wine to make our hearts glad, and oil
to chere our cou^tenau^ce, and bread to strengthen ye heart, thou satisfiest al
men's desires with good things, and specially of those that be merciful, as ye
only begotten son makes proclamacion in ye mountain: blessed are ye
merciful, for they shall receive mercy. Math. 5
The earth is full of thy mercies, and it (O lord) reaches unto ye heaven, no
place is empty of thy mercies. Psalm. 32
The Origenistes defend that Gods mercy perceth into hell, and that al men, the
devils also shall at length be saved, alleging this scripture: His mercy be
upon al his works, Psalm. 105 Psalm. 144 Eccle. 18
and the mercy of God is upon all flesh. They bring also Gods righteousness in
judgment, which they deny to punish sin everlastingly, for then the
punishment should be greater then ye fault which is temporal, and has an end.
This is a merciful heresy, but God shows no mercy against his truth. His
truth says: depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, Math. 25.
which is prepared for the devil and his angels. No man can here justly say
that everlasting fire is taken for a long fire, albeit the latin word eternum,
be some time taken so, Prod^uturno, for the Greek is, Thanswe^
(...) which word is never taken but for ever more world without end. As for
their argument that the punishment must be no greater then the fault, I answer
that our least fault deserves everlasting fire, because it is committed
against GOD, who is everlasting, all be (...) the fault be begone and ended in
time, so that he is more to be considered against whose divine will it is done,
then what is done. For the scriptur denies him ye kingdom of heaven, Math. 5
that breaks one of the least co^mau^dements. Does it not cry that in hell
there is no redemption? Psalm. 6
And in death, who reme^breth thee? And who will give thee thanks in hell? And
where the tree falls there it shall lie. The continuance of hell fire is
described notably of Christ where he commands us to cut of our hand, Mark.
9
our foot, and to pluck out our eye, that is to prefer heavenly things to our
fathers and mothers, and familiar frindes, saying: if thy hand offend thee, cut
him of. It is better for the to enter into life maimed, then having two hands
to go into hell, into fire unquenchable, where their worm dies not and the
fire never goth out. What ca^ be more plainli, more vehemently spoken of the
endless pain of the wicked, then these words, into fire unquenchable, where
their worm dies not, and the fire never goes out, which terms in ye same
place be repeated twice more afterward. If there be no redemption in hell, An
objection
how is it written in the book of the kings, our Lord brings folk down
into hell and brings the^ again? we read also that Anania, 1 Reg. 2 Dan. 3
Psalm. 15
Azaria, and Misaell blessed the Lord for delyuering them out of hell, and
saving from ye power of death. Hell has three sign^cations.
This word hell in the first place does not signify that which is commenly
meant thereby, but a grave or pit that is dug, for the Hebrew word is sheol.
If any evil chance unto my son Ben Iamin in the land whether you go, Genesis
2^*
you shall bring down mine hoar hears with sorrow, unto hell, that is into my
grave. In Daniel it signifies adversity, trouble and misery, as in many other
places.

The.xi. Chapter.
God is full of righteousness, and of the prosperity of evil men, and the
affliction of good men.

This endless punishment of the wicked is no derogacio^ to Gods great mercy, but
rather a mirror of his righteousness, for as he is merciful so is he
rightuouse, as the mercy endures for ever toward the good, so his righteousness
endures no less time toward the evil. David testifies him to be just in all
his ways, Psalm. 144*
and holy in all his works. By his righteousness, he hated Cain, Esau, and the
thief on the left hand: and by his mercy he loved Abel, Jacob, and him that
hong on ye right hand: through these two happened the blindness of ye Jews, and
the fulness of the Gentiles. If he be unrighteous, how shall he judge ye world His
saints judgments be rightuous: Roma. 3
he shuts the unrighteous out of heaven, he rewards right dealers,
wherefore he himself must needs be a rightuous God. Thou will say: why the^ does
he suffer the wicked to prosper, geuyng them riches honor and children? And
why does he punish the godly with poverty, sickness, and al kind of misery? Why
does he suffer wicked Manasses to murder cruelly Esai? Why does he let Jeremy
be slain of Apires, Zachary of the hie priests, John Baptist of Herod,
Christ of Pilate? Why does he suffer the Devil to plage ye pacient man Job with all kind of adversity? Why will he al good me^ to bear a cross in this world
S. Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 11
when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, lest we be damned with the
world. And it is good for me (said David) that I have been in trouble, Psalm. 118
that I may learn thy statutes. Here two causes be rehearsed why God lays
affliction, trouble, and the cross, upon the shulders of his elect, that they
may avoid dampnation, and learn to keep his co^maundeme^ts: for trouble gives
understanding. Lord (says Esaias) in trouble they cry unto thee, Esaias. 28
the adversity which they suffer is a lesson unto the^. When the outward man
perishes, Esaias. 26.
the inward is renewed day by day. Moreover God has set at the entering of the
garden of pleasure, 2. Cor. 4 Genesis.
Cherubin with a fyrie sweard, moving in and out to keep ye way to the tree of
life, to which there is no access, but by affliction, which is porter, as it
is written: we must enter through much trouble into the kingdom of heaven.
Wherefore God loves them whom he troubles, Proverb. ^ Hebre. 12
and he scourges every son yt he receives: they that are under no
correction ar called bastards no sons. Cato when Pompey was overthrown of
valeaunt Julius Ceasar, began to be angry with God, thinking him percial, but we
christen m^n may not do so, knowing adversity to be a token of Gods favor, an
occasion of vnderstandi^g, a cause of ame^dme^t. These scripturs teach us yt
God punishes his elect, for their erudicion and commodity, nor for any
unrighteous, albeit ye holiest man that ever was, deserves a cross in this
life. His rigtuousnes enpouerisheth us, plageth us, and condempneth us, and his
mercy enricheth us, heals us, and crouneth us. An objection Romans 9
But it is written of Jacob and Esau, that or they were borne, or they had done
good or evil, God loved the one and hated the other, which was contrary to al
true judgment. S. Paul in the same place compares God to a potter, and men to
clay. The answer.
The potter has power over the clay, to make even of one and the same lompe
one vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor. And has not God power over
us, which be but clay, that is naught, the children of wrath, to condemn or
to save? The Latin word here declares more plainly what we be which is, Ex
eodem luto. We be al become dirt by the faul of the first Adam. If he croune
dirt it is his mercy, through the second Adam. If he co^dempne it, he gives
right judgment. Thou will say then, Romans 9
why blames he us? For who can resist his will. He made thee not clay, that is
the child of death, but after the Image of God and without sin: Thou art dirt
and clay through the sin of Adam not because of thy creation: For God would
have al me^ saved. The caus^ in us not in God.
And why be they not? the cause is not in him, but in us, not that we be able
to withstand his will but because he will save none against their will: he will
save al, that is all that will take it when it is offered them, all that refuse not
the salvation of their own souls, as the Israelites did. Math. 23
For Christ says unto them, that he would have gathered them together as the
hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and they would not, such be not
saved, for God saves no man against his will. There is the^ no parcialitie, no
unrighteous with God, whose judgments be unsearchable but never against
justice: above our capacity, but never against equity. Who is able to
discuss, why some die old, some young, some in middle age? why some be poor,
some rych, some gentlemen, some Lords, some kings, some of a base ston and
other infinite diversities. If these things were necessary to be known, God
would have opened the^ in his scriptures, but in that he speaks not of the^,
judges the^ unprofitable for us to know Let us believe that God works al
these things and that therefore they must needs be right and just because he is
ye workma^, not searching things above our understandings, but say with S.
Paul: O the depenes of the riches, and wisdom, and knowledge of God? how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways vntraceable? for who has
known ye mind of the Lord, or who was his counceller?

The.xii. Chapter.
God is full of compassion

HE is full of all goodness, S. James witnessing of him yt every good gift is
from above, Jacob. 1.
and comes down from the father of light, that is father of good me^, for they
are called light, Vos estis lux mundi, you are the light of ye world. 1. Cor. 3
What have we that we have not received? He is liberal, pacient, merciful,
wise, Jacob. 1.
strong, constant, equal, faithful, magnifical, a^^able, liberal, giving to
all me^ indifferently, and casting no man in the teeth. Pacient, calling us
through his long suffering unto repentance. Roma. 2
Merciful, not dealing with us after our sins, Psalm. 102
nor rewardyng us according to our wickedness. Wise, Psalm. 14^
for of his wisdom David says: there is no number. Strong, for he is our
buckeler, our shield, our strength and defense, the rock of our might, and
castle of our health: Constant, Psalm. 63.
with whom no man can prove any variablenes. Equal, for there is no
parcialitie with God, there is no Jew, James. 1 Roma. ^
nether gentile, nether bound nor free, nether man ne woman, but all be one in
Christ Jesus. Faithful, for he is a strong God and a faithful, stable in all
his words. Galath. 3 Deute. 7 Psalm. 144 Psalm. 101 Psalm. 8.
Magnificall, for the work of the Lord is great and worthy to be praised, the
heavens, the Sun and the Stars, the waters and great fyshes therein, are the
worck of thy fyngers. Affable exhorting us continually to ask, Math. 7
knock and pray unto him, and talkyng with us most familiarly, first by holy
Fathers, his Prophets, and Patriarchs, afterward by his only begotten son
Jesus Christ, walking hear upon earth, Hebre. 1.
to whom belongs all power, majesty, rule, and honor. We read of a certain
ruler which called Christ good master, Luke. 18
asking him, what he should do to obtain everlasting life, whom Christ
rebuked saying, why call thou me good? none is good save God only. If God
only be good, then all goodness is in him.

The xiii Chapeer.
God only is immortal, and yet nevertheless, the minds of men and Angels be
immortal.

HE is without beginning, without ending. How ca^ he have any beginning, of
whom al things take their original? How can he have any end, who is of
himself and by no other thing? Heaven and earth perishes, and all yt is in
them shall fade away as grass, and as the flower of the field, but our God
lives eternallye, who speaks of himself: I am Alpha and Omega, Apcalip. 1
the beginning and ye ending, which is, which was, and which is to come. Paul
affirms the same unto his discipl^ Timothe, giving al honor and rule unto
God, 1. Timo. 6.
who only has immortality. If only God have immortality, How God in ly is
said to be immortal.
why does Christ forbid us to fear men, which slay the body, and cannot slay
the soul? how is man formed after the Image and similtude of God? How can
the immortality of the mind be defended and of Angels? Angels.
truly man's soul is immortal, and yet only God is immortal, for this word
(only) does not deny this privilege to other things, as to man's soul, to the
Angels, but God is said only to be immortal, as he is said only to be good,
and only to forgive sin. Man's soul is both mortal and immortal.
Man's soul is immortal, but clean after an other sort then God, who only has
immoralitie. For the scripture testifies of man's soul that it dies, saying:
suffer ye dead to buay their dead, that is to say: let the dead in soul, bury
ye dead in body. Math. ^
It is troubled with affections, with passions, and subject to mutabilitie. But
it so dies through vice, that it cease not to live in his own nature: It is
so mortal, that it is also immortal. Wherefore God is only everlasting, immortal
evermore, who is only immutable. And if this interpretation do not content the,
hear an other, That is immortal properl^ which is without beginning, without
ending. Immortal properly.
Al creatures have a beginning, of the which some neuerthelsse are called
immortal, because they have no ending, as the angels, man's soul, but only God
is properly immortal, who speaks of himself, Apoca. 1
I am, which is, which was, which is to come. This belongs only to God and to
none of his creatures, to none of the works of his fingers: of which some may
truly say, that they be and ar to come, but not that they were, because once
they were not.

The.xiiij. Chapter.
God is the maker of all things, whereof he made them, by whom, and who made
the Devil, and of the beginning of sin and evil.

IN the beginnig GOD made al things, wherefore he has no beginning: and that
which never had beginning, can not have ending. When I say, God made all
things, The world is ye workmanship of the whole Trinity. Ihon. 1 Psalm. 32.
I mean that the father, the son, and the holy spirit formed heaven and earth,
angels and men, and all other creatures of nothing. For of the son it is
written, al things were made by him, and of the holy comforter: by ye word of
the Lord, were the heavens made, and all the hosts of them by ye breath of his
mouth, where the latin is, Spiritus. Yea in the beginning of the book it is
written of them both, that they be no creatures: Christ maker thereof. Genesis.
1 In the beginning. Ihon. 8
of ye son in ye beginning, God created heaven and earth, that is in Christ.
For he answers ye Jews askyng what he was, I am the beginning which speak
unto you, and in whose behalf David speaks: Psalm. 38.
In the beginning of the book it is written of me. Paul to the Hebrews
repeteth the latter text and expounds it of Christ. Hebre. 1^
And Dixit Deus fiat lux. etc. God said, be there light, be there a firmament:
God said, the waters be gathered together, God said, Genesis. 1. God said.
be there lights in the firmament. This phrase and manner of speaking, is joined
with the creation of every thing. What did God say? what language did he
speak? Did he speak grek, latin, Italian, french, spanish, english, or
hebrew? Mark, this was no audible voice, no sounding or transitory noise,
coming from the lights, but God said be there light, fyrmament. etc. that is
to say, God made these things by his saying* by his word by his voice, which
is christ, as it is written: In ye beginni^g was ye word, Ihon. 1.
that is in ye father was christ, and al things were made by it, and nothing
was made without i^ as Moises teaches very well, repeting these words Deus
dixit, God said: in ye creation of every thing. why Christ is named a word.
And why is Christ called his fathers word? Truly because he is his image, and
no man comes to the knowledge of the father but by the son. And as we do
open manifest, and declare our minds one to another by our words and
communication, Hebr. 1
so God is disclosed, opened, and discovered by Christ. John. 1
No man has seen God at any time, thonly begotten son, which is in the
bosom of the father, he has declared him, in his sermons he is sincerely
published, and plainly painted and portraied. For this cause he is surnamed ye
saying of God, and an audible and a tra^sitory word, not properly, but by a
metaphore, and borrowed spech. And this tra^sitory word, made al things,
vpholdeth al things, governs al things. Now touching the holy spirit, we
read in the first Chapter of generation, and spiritus domini ferebatur, The
holy spirit is maker of ye world. Genesis 1
the spirit of ye Lord was born upon the waters. Many do expound by the spirit
in this text, the wynd, but it can not be taken so for many causes. First the
wynd is the exhalatio^ or spirit of the waters, this was ye spirit of God, as
the text does say. Moreover ye wind then was vncreat, unmade. For I think no
man will defend that the wind was made before the first day, which is made after
these words. Born upon the waters what it is.
And others do read for ferebatur super aquas, fouebat, vel exclu debat aquas,
the spirit did bring forth or hatch the waters, and so in deed the word
signifies in the Sirian tongue, wherefore was borne upon the waters, is no blast
of wind, but a metaphore of the hen, and a borrowed speech. The hen is borne of
her eggs and sittteth upon them, and so hatcheth her young: and so the holy ghost
was borne upon the waters, sat upon the^, brought forth and hatched all
creatures which there are called waters. For as it is written, Psalm. 103
when thou let thy spirit go forth, they are made. Basil who for his great
learning was surnamed magnus, expounds this text thus, and says: Basil.
that his predecessors took it so, and S. Austen is of the same mind, Austen.
Melanch.
and Philip Melanctho^ aloweth their interpretation. Thus it is evident yt the
universal world is the workma^ship of the whole trinity, whose works be
inseparable: as they be inseparable, and one almighty, everlasting, invisible,
unsearchable god, of one substance and nature, power and majesty, who
gathered the waters together as it werin a bottel, who makes ye clouds his
chariot, and goes upon the wings of the wind, and who spreads out heaven
like unto a curteyn. After that he had finished al his works, he beheld the^
and ^o they were exceading good. Now there be many things not good,
unprofitable, vnfrutful, perilouse: for thorns and thistels prick us, the gout
greueth us, the pocks, the canker consumes us, the sciatica payneth us,
spasmes, palsies, fevers noy us, serpents do poysen us, flies do bite us,
cats do scrat us, flees do eat us, mountains weary us, snow does let us,
thonders do fear us, the cocodrils do kill our bodies, and the devil our souls.
God made not these things, for all that he made was good: and if he made not
these, he made not al things. The earth brings forth thorns and thistels,
Sin the cause of barenne.
and other venomous herbs, not by nature, but through the sin of man, unto
who^ God speaks: Because thou have obeyed the voice of thy wife, and have
eaten of the tree of which I commanded the not to eat: Cursed be the earth in
thy work. Genes. 3
In sorrow shall thou eat thereof all the days of thy life, and it shall bear
thorns and thistels unto thee, and thou shall eat the herbs of the field, in
the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread. Genesis. 1
Before sin, we read not that the earth brought forth thistels, bushes,
unfruitful trees, but grene gras, fruitful trees, and herbs bearing wholesome
seeds.

The fall of Adam also caused al manner of griefs, panges, sickness, disease, The
cause of sickness
which then began to torment man, when God had said: In sorrow shall thou eat
thereof all the days of thy life. By this word sorrow, al such things be meant
and signified. If you ask me why God suffered the earth to bring forth thorns
and unfruitful trees, my answer is, Why God curses the earth.
not to pain the earth with the^, which feleth no pain, but to admonish us, of
our sin, to put us in remembrance of our fault, to be a warning unto us, as
often as we se the^, to take heed that we sin no more. For if he punish the
earth for our sins how much more will he punish us? Wherefore this memory
shall continue until the sting of death, which is sin, be taken away, and
until that be brought to pass that is written, death is consumed into victory,
1 Cor. 15
death where is thy sting? Hell where is thy victory? by unfruitful trees he
warns us, yt we be not unfruitful. For as husbandmen forsake their trees not
do^ging not watring the^, when they be baren, but to burn them, even so God
cease to pour his blessings upon the unfruitful, for he is a husbandman:
harken what his only son says, whom we are commanded to hear: I am the true
vine, and my father is the husbandma^. John. 15
He that abides not in me, is cast forth as a branch, and is widdered, and
men gather it and cast it into the fire, and it burns: This fruit we may
gather and learn of the unfruitful tree. By siknes partly he scurgeth us for
our sin, partly he tries us, and lerneth us his will as it is written, the
oven proves the potters vessel, Eccl. 27 who made the serpe^ts flies, and
other like.
so does temptation of trouble, try rightuous me^. Now we are come to those,
which demand who made serpents, Cocodriles, flies, worms. etc. Of which
much harm and no profit comes. Verily he who made al things: Although they
be hurtful unto us for our disobedience, yet be they exceading good in their
own nature, and profit unto the furnishing of the whole world no less, then
the other, which we recount more profitable and preciouse. If an ignorant man
chance to go into a conning man's shop, and happen to see many ^oles there that
he knows not, he thinks them either to be unprofitable, or not necessary:
Even so we in almighty Gods shop, which is the world, do judge many things to
be naught, because we are ignorant. The Cocodrill, the little fly, the small
flee, have their commodity, albeit we know it not: Our ignorance does not
argue Gods worcks to be unprofitable, yea Gods glory and wonderful power is
more marvelous in making the little fly to hear, to taste, and to feel, with a
mouth, with legs, with wings, a body, the stoma^k, the other inward parts,
then in an Elephant: and more marvelous in a frog, then in a great Whale, and
in a mouse then in a mighty horse. If thou come into a rich man's house and
see much stuff, thou think al to be to some purpose, and dare thou
judge yt God in his house has made any thing to no purpose? Al Gods creatures,
either be profitable, or hurtful, or not necessary: thanck him for the
profitable, take heed of the hurtful, and question not, reason not of things
not necessary. For although thy capacity can not perceive it, yet God has
made all things in measure and number, Sapien. 11 who made ^he Devil.
and weight: he made not ye devil, for he made him an aungel, and he made
himself a devil by sinning, when he fell from heaven as lightening. For the
devil is as much to say as an accuser, Luke. 10
and a seducer, of the Greek word Diaballi, which signifies to accuse, to
infame, to disceiue: God made man, but he made not man evil, so he made him an
angel but not a devil: he made many angels, but they made them selves evil,
for no evil comes of him, as it is written: he beheld many things yea all that he had made, and ^o they were exceading good. Genes. 1
But why did he make him an angel, knowing he would become a devil? why did he
make other angels innumerable? why many thousands of men, women, and children,
which he forseeth shall be dampened? Verily that he might declare himself to be
rightuous in punishing the ungodly, as he is merciful in rewarding the godly:
no man can blame him therefore, but rather magnify his righteousness. He
compels them not to sin, for which they ar dampened. Should God (because he
forsawe they would be evil) abstain from creatinge them, which is good? Is it
not lauful for him to do what him lists with his own are their eyes evil
because he is good? Math. 20
should he not do well in making them, because they would do ill in offendyng
him? Of this thing seek a further answer, in the.xii. of the book of wysdom:
Sapien. 12
but let us return from whence we are straied, al beit these questions are
annexed unto our purpose. The smyth is not able to make any thing without Iron,
nor the Carpenter without wood, nor the Tailor without cloth, nor the Shomaker
without leather, nor the Potter without clay, but God who is almighty, made al
things of nothing. All things were made of nothing together in six days.
Before any thing was, what could there be to make them of, except he would
have made them of himself? Jesus the son of Sirach says, Qui viuit in
eternum creauit omnia simul. He that lives for ever more made al things,
Eccle. 18
simul, together, that is, God made first a confused heap, called in Greek
Chaos, of nothing, and of that heap he formed all things, as it is written:
Sap. 12
Qui fecisti mundum ex materia informi, who have formed the world of a confused
heap. He made this heap altogether, where he says: in the beginning God
treated all things, Genesis 1
heaven and earth, for the heap is called there heaven, and earth, as afterward
also it is called the water: the spirit of ye Lord was born upon the waters. So
far no time, no order of days is mentioned: afterward, God of this heap in six
days, shapeth al things, so that both be true that God made the world in syx
days, and that he made all things together. This article of creation is
necessary to be known, for as much as some deny God to be the maker of the
world, and gives the glory thereof to angels, as the Menandrians, Saturnians,
Cerinthians, and al so the Nicolitanes, and it is ye first article of our Creed.

The.xv. Chapter.
God rules the world after his providence and how he rested the.vii. day.

OTher grant God to be maker of al things, but they suppose, that as the
shypwright when he has made the ship, leaves it to ye mariners and medleth no
more therewith, and as the carpenter leaves the house that he has made: even
so God after he had formed all things, left al his creatures to their own
governance, or to the governance of ye stars, not ruling the world after
his providence but liui^g in ease and quietness as ye Stoiks, Epicures, and
diverse astrologers, because it is written yt on the.vii. day God rested from al
his works. To these I answer with the prophet David: Psalm. 14^
God covers the heaven with clouds, prepares rain for the earth, makes the
grass to grow upon the mou^tains, gives foder unto the cattle, makes fast ye
bars of ye gates of Sion, blesses ye children within, makes peace in our
borders, fills us with the flour of wheat, gives us snow like wol, seatreth
the hoar fr^^t like ashes, Psalm. 144*
casts forth his ise like morsels, helps them to right that sustein wrong,
loses men out of prison, gives sight to the blind, raises up them that are
fallen, cares for strangers, defends the fatherles, socoureth the widow:
wherefore he is not an idle God. For as the body lives through the life of the
soul, even so the world continues by Gods governance, who rules it as ye
master does his servant, without whom it per^sheth in the twinkling of an
eye. All things wait upon him to receive fode in due season, Psalm. 103
when he gives it them, they gather it, when he opens his hand, they are
filled with good things, when he hides his face, they are sorrowful, if he take
away his breath, they die and are turned again to dust. The common wealth of ye
Israelites, teaches us how wonderfully God provides for the^, Gene. 33 Gene.
45
that he has chosen. He preserved Jacob from his brother Esau, he sent Joseph
into Egypt, to make provision against the.vii. dear years, Psalm. 104 Exodus 10
Exodus 7 Psalm. 78 Exodus 8
he sent darkness amongs the Egiptians, he turned their waters into blood, and
slew their fish, their lands brought forth frogs, flies, lyse, grasshoppers,
caterpillars, yea even in their kings chambers, he brought them forth of the
house of bondage and slavery with silver and gold, he rebuked the sea and dried
ti up, Exodus 1^ Exodus 14 Exodus 13 Psalm. 11 Exodus 1^
and he led them through the deep, as in the wilderness, he spread out a cloud to
be a covering, and fire to give light in the night season, at their desires
came quails, and he filled them with the bread of heaven, he opened the rock
of stone, and the waters flowed out, so that rivers came into the wilderness, he
dried up the waters of Jordan, that ye people might pass over, he overthrew
the walls of Jericho, Iosu. 3 Iosu. 6.
and made the sun to stand still, and the day was lengthened, he s^ew mighty
kings, Sehon king of the Amorites, Joshua. 1^
and Og king of ^asan, and gave away their la^d for an heritage. Of which
scriptures it does consequently follow that he governs the world by his
providence, Psalm. 134* Nume. 21 Deuter. 3 Joshua. 12
and not by the whale of fortune, or by force of destiny, For if he gouerne^
the^, he governs us, seeing the earth is the Lords and all that is therein, the
compass of ye world, Psalm. 23
and all that dwell therein.

But some do say that he governed the Israelites, 1. Peter. 2
the sede of Abraham the chosen generation, but not the refydne of the earth,
which he gave up to their own governance. Verily God ruled all, as he is Lord
of al. Acts. 14. Acts. 17
For Paul preaches to the Athenians, that we live, move, and be in him. He
gave them also rain, light, corn, grass, as he himself teaches Job out of a
storm, saying: Who deuideth the abou^dau^ce of waters into rivers? Job. 38
or who makes a way for yt stormy wether? that it waters and moystureth the
dry and barren ground, to make grass grow where no body dwells? Who is the
father of rain? Or who has begotten the drops of our dew, out of whose womb
came the yse? Who has gendred ye coldness of the air, yt the waters are as
hard as stones, and ly co^geled above the deep? Did he not styr up Pharao among
ye Egiptians? 3. Reg. 20
Benhadad among ye Sirians, Salmanasar among the Assirians, Nabuchodonozer
among y^ Babilonians, Darius among the Medes, Artaxarces among the Parthians,
Alexander among the Macedonians, and Vaspasian among the Romans? In the book
of ye Kings Elias is commanded to anoint Hasaell king of Siria, 3. Reg. 19
Iehu of Israel, and Eliseus to be Prophet in his room. Whereby he teaches
us, yt he makes Prophets and Kings, and takes away their kingdoms, as it is
written. Propter iniustitias, and iniurias, and diuersos dolos. etc. Eccle. 10
Because of unrighteous dealing, wrong, and diverse deceipts, kingdoms shall be
translated from one to another, for ye power of the earth, is in the hand of
God. An exhortation to Kings.
If kings would earnestly believe this which is Gods own voice, and behold how
many kings he deposed in ye book of kings, and for what causes, they would be as
earnest to set forth Gods glory, that is, to cause the gospel to be preached
through their dominions, and to relieve their pore brethren, which be members
of the same body that they be, children of the same father, and heirs of the
same kingdom and that which is done to them, is done to Christ, as they have been diligent, politic, yea rather deceitful, in encreasinge their revenues,
in filling their hutches with gold and silver, they would first seek for the
kingdom of God, and then God would be there castle, and cast al other things
upon the^, Math. 6
or else he is untrue of his promise. One being demanded how a king might rule
safely and assuredly, answered: if he d^uyse good laws, and se them diligently
practiced. This is a necessary lesson for all princes, that will live in
quietness, or that will enjoy their crounes with long continuance, And a king
aught to be a father to his subjects, not only to the gentlemen, but rather to
his pore commons, for they have more need. He is the head of them, as well as of
the other. What causes vprores, and insurretio^s, sooner then oppression of the
pore? Or what provoke ye wrath of God more against them? If I were demanded
how a king might not only pas his time safeli, but also al his posterity and
ofspyrng continue in possession of the kingdom, I would answer: if he seek the
glory of God unfeignedly, For if kingdoms be translated for unrighteousness, they are preserved by rightousnes. If promotion come neither from the east, nor from
the west, but from the king of heaven, the wai to attein it, and to maintein
and continue i^* is to please the king of heaven, The pacient man Job says:
that almightye God oftentimes for the wickedness and sin of the people,
suffers an hipocrite to reign over them. Now I think that there was never
more godly pretense, more outward show of holiness, more dissimulation in
Rulers, then now is, and this is Ipocrisy, and all the people be like the
rulers I warant you. I would wish that all kings would diligently read over, and
earnestly believe ye cronicle of the kings, there they should find that which is
written: Prou. ^
by me kings do reign. Cirus king of Persie, caused a proclamation to be made
throughout his empire, 1. Esdr. ^
that the Lord God of heaven had given him all the kingdoms of ye earth. Is God
of less abillitie now to do these things the^ he was? Or is he of les knowledge
and understanding? But to the matter again. If he do not govern y^ world by
his providence, it is either because he cannot and he is not able, or that he
will not, or that he is ignorant what is done here. But there is no ignorance
with him to whom all things be naked and manifest, and he lacks no cunning,
for he is almighty, and nothing is impossible to him, and he lacks no will,
for he is full of goodness, mercy, and compassion, and promises plenty of all
good things to the godly, and scarcity to the evil. wherefore he rules al by
his providence, he causes thu^der, lightning, hail, frost, snow, darkness,
life and death, barennes and fruitfulnes, rain, and fair wether, wind,
hunger, battle, peace, and pestilence, as it is written, prosperity and
adversity, life and death, poverty and riches, come of the Lord. God sends
al these things partly to admonish us of our frailnes, partly to punish the il,
and partly to try the good, as I have entreated before. I put case thou knew
not wherefore he ordained many things, as thou art ignorant why he formed thee
a man and not a woman, an English man, and no Italian, were that a just cause
deny his providence? Were it not a like thing, as if thou should deny that
I would be at London at the beginning of Michaelmas term, because thou
know not my suit? We must think almighty God to form al things to good
purposes, God works all things to purposes. The dial
al be it his works surmount our capacities. When you ^okest upon a dial, which
declares how the day passes away, thou art moved to think that it is made
by art, and not by chance. If one would carry a globe into Ireland, The globe
whose daily turnings would work the same thing in sun, the Moon, and the five
mouable sterres, which is done in heaven every day and every night, which of
the^ would think in yt wild country the globe to be made without singular
conning? And do we think that God governs the world the which comprehends
both the dial and the globe and the makers of both, by luck and fortune? Are
the parts governed by reason framed by art, finished by conning, and not the
whole? Or did Archimides by art cou^terfet the mouinges of heaven, and God not
rule the same by his providence? If God do not rule it, there is some thing
more mightier then he, which does it. But he is almighty and none is able to
compare with him. Towns cities, kingdoms, Empiers, be governed by counsel, much
more the whole. The world is called of wisemen the city of al creatures.
Wherefore as Athens, Tounes. Cities. Realms
Lacedemon, Venise, Rome, Paris, London and York, have Mayres, Aldermen,
Bailifes and Constables, to govern them after counsel: Even so has it, but
who is able to be Maire or Constable thereof but ye hiest? therefore it is only
ruled of him. An objection answered. Telamon. Regulus. Cinna. Marius. Dionisius
Diogines.
But you will say, that city is not well governed, where vice is maintained and
virtue punished, as Telamon who denies Gods providence, because good men be
pained and evil favored: why was Regulus tormented of the Carthaginians? why
did cruel Cinna kill so many noble men? Why did C. Marius sley the good queen
Catulus? Why did Dionisius, Pisistratus and Phalaris, put so many to death?
Diogenes Cinicus, was wont to say, that Harpalus a strong thief upon y^ seas
bare witness against God, that he was not mindful of us because he continued so
long. Albeit this objection be partly resolved before, yet I will touch it
again, that it may be plentifully confuted, taking an example of S. Paul who
unto ye Philippia^s writes, It greueth me not to write one thing oftentimes,
for to you it is a sure thing. If Paul Gods chosen vessel, to who^ he gave no
singular grace thought it nedeful to write one thing oftentimes, how much more
must we think the same of our small understandings and ^eble brains, which
be less able to paint Gods secrets at one time? When thou see one exceading
rich and unworthy of riches, think not him happy, condemn not Gods
providence, judge not al things to go by luck and fortune. Remember Lazarus and
the rich glutten, Lazarus.
ye one was cruel, proud, unmerciful, vnpitiful, and yet stored with all
things: The other humble, meake, full of patience, full of goodness, and yet of
notable poverty and siknes, he did not accuse God, deny his providence,
complaining with any such words as these: I have not greatly sinned against God
and yet I am hunger pined, pained with cold, and punished with sickness, but
this evil man lives in wealth, pleasur, ease and health: How can it be, that
God is mindful of us? How it is true yt he governs ye world? No truly, he
took it pacienly, he thought himself worthy of Gods rod. Luke. 10.
Wherefore he was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom, the rich man was
condemned to hell torments. The prosperity of the evil in this life encreseth
their dampnation in the other, Why good men are aflicted.
and the good have adversity in this world that they be not dampened in the
world to come. There is a comen saying: the end tries ye deed. Many thieves in
this life live welthily, many aduoutrers, many extortioners, many Idolaters,
many tenderlin, ges. etc. Is this a sufficient cause to deny Gods prouidce? No
truly. If at the latter day he condemn the good, and croune the evil, then say
that he was unmindful of us: if not, say he is a righteous God, mindful of both
good and il, for the end teaches ye no less. If therefore thou have affliction
in this life, deny not Gods providence, but cnumfort thy self with thexa^ple
of Lazarus, of Paul, of Christ. Think that he punishes sin in this life, that
thou be not damned for it in the other. But now I will speak of evil rulers.
God suffers evil men to reygne over the people, because of their sin and
abominable living, as the common saying is,. Qualis populus, talis princeps.
That is, like people, like prince. He scourges them with tyraunts, because they
be a froward, Iudic. 3 Iudic. 4
and overthwart generation, going a stray from him, and starting aside like a
broken bow. The book of the Judges registreth, that God left to scourge
Israel, five Lords of the Philistines, and all the Sidonites, and Heuites,
that dwell in mount Lybanon, he styrred against them when they sinned, Chusan,
Rasathaim king of Mesopotamia, and Eglon, Iudic. 19
King of the Moabies, Iabin, King of Canaan, and he suffered Abimelech, a cruel
tyrant to reign over them. Wherefore was Israel so often sold into the hands of
the Egiptians, Chaldees, Assirians, but for there wickedness? If God spared not
his chose^ generation, natural branches, and his own house, will he forbear
the wyld olives? Cinna and Marius, Dionisius and Phalaris, Pisistratus and
Harpalus, were rods and scourges, wherwt he scourged the heathen for their
Idolatry, shameful lusts and vntha^kefulnesse as Chusan, Eglon, and the
Philistines, were unto the Israelytes. If they would have forsaken their
vicious living, and returned unto and whom they knew of his works, but were
unthankful, not glorifii^g him as God, he would have delivered them from those
tirauntes, by good rulers and magistrates, as he delivered the Israelites from
Chusan, Rasathaim king of Mesopotamia, by Othoniell ye son of Kenes, Iudic. 3
Iudic. 4. Iudic. 5
from Eglon by Ahud, and from Iabin king of Canaan, by Barak and Debora.
Wherefore these examples do not deny Gods providence, but prove us to be sinners
and declare his rightful judgments both upon y^ Jew and gentil, yea rather
they do establish and fortify his governance, teaching him to be mindful of
al nations, in giving the^ good kings for their virtue, or cruel tirauntes for
their vice. Diagoras he that thought God to be unmindful of men, Diagoras
atheos.
coming to Samothratia, a friend of his showed him a table, wherein many were
painted which through vows had escaped shipwreck, and were come into the
haven, to whom he said: but they are not painted which vowed, and nevertheless
were drouned, ascribing their deliuerau^ce unto the blindness of fortune, and not
unto the goodness of God. Does Jonas so? Does Paul so in the Acts, Acts. 27
when he and all that were with him were in ieoperdie of shipwreck? No truly he
bids them be of good comfort, he takes bread and gives thanks unto God
who had promised him by an angel that an hear should not fall from the head of
any of them. It chaunsed an other time Diagoras sailing upon the sea, that a
great slawe of wynd arose, the mariners thought that God had sent them a
tempest because they had taken him into the ship, and agreed among them selves
to cast him into the seas, thinking that then they would be quiet. But Diagoras
desired the^ to look about and showing them other ships in no less danger, he
asked them whether Diagoras was in those other ships also meaning that
te^pestes come not of gods providence, but by fortune and luck. How much wiser
and more likely is the opinion of the noble clerk and most excellent
Philosopher Cleanthes, who fortifieth Gods providence with four reasons.
Cleanthes 4. reasons
One is because he forseeth al things. The second for as much as he gives
plenty, and scarsitie, cold and heat, corn, increase of catel, and infinite
other. The third, because he fears us with thunderboltes, pours down
shoures, hail, snow, causes plages, earthquakes, and blasing stars. The
fourth and greatest, is the constant turnings of heaven, the marvelous iourneis
of the sun^e, the moon, and the stars, ye glorious fairenes of them, the
co^li order of al things. Who entering into a schole where he sees all things
be done in order, will not think it to be governed by some wise scole master?
if the scole cannot keep a good order without a wise scole master, much les the
world which comprehends al scoles and scole masters. But who is able to be
scolemaster over al creatures but God only? Wherefore he rules them by his
providence, An induction. A house.
as the scolemaster does his scolers. Is not that house best governed, best
stoored with all things necessary, which is ruled by counsel? An army
is not ye army in better case, which has a wise and polyke Captain, then
that which has a rash and folish? The ship likewise, that has a singular
cunning master, A Ship.
goes safely and assuredlye. But nothing is better ruled then ye world, in
which ye house, the army and ship, be contained, which of the comely order and
great beauty that is in it, is called of greeks (...), and of the latinistes
Mundus. If we will search the holy scriptures, which bear witness of God, we
shall find that he governs the whole world, not as kings do their realms,
myndfull of weighty matters, and unmindful of small, but yt he is mindful both
of great and small. The Raven, the Storke, the Oule, the Pellicane, the Kyte,
the Sparow, and the little Wren, the Quayle, the Dove, the Swalow, all.iiii.
foted beasts, are preserved by his providence. Did not al manner of creaturs
enter into the Arc by couples at his commandment, Genes. 7.
and were saved from drouning? Does not he puruey meat for the Raue^, when his
young flicker about him: Did not they at his commandment bring bread and flesh
to Elias beside the broke Karith? Job. 38 Exodus 16 3. Reg. 17 Luke. 12
Five Sparowes are sold for a farthing, and yet none of them be forgotten of
him. He fed his heritage with Quayles. He gives Pellicanes, Storks, Kytes,
possession in the court of this world. He fedeth ye lions whelps in their
de^nes and lurking in their couches. Job. 38
He shut their mouths, that they should not hurt his servant Daniell. Yea,
Daniel. 7
he numbreth the hears of our head, and clotheth the lilies of the field. I
cannot here, Ma^h. 10 Against fate destiny, or the infle^ce of ye stars.
but some what rebuke such as curiously marketh their birth day, and birth star,
as if their life, and doings were governed of necessity by ye influe^ce, and
moving of ye stars. They teach that there is such a pith and efficacy in the
signifier cyrcle, called of the Greeks, Zodiacos, that every part thereof has a
several, and vehement operation, the which virtue is so^dry and diverse, through
the seven mouable stars. By it they will al things to be ruled, and specially
man: whose head (as the say) is governed by Aries, the neck by Taurus, the
shulders by Gemini, and his fete by Pisces, which be signs in heaven, so named
of the similitude of those things yt they signify in earth, supposing
almighty God as one tired with six days labor, the seuent day to work no more.
And if one be borne under Aries, they promise him that he shall be rich and
wealthy, because wethers be profitable beasts, rendering to their masters every
year a good flesh. If thou were born under Taurus, they say thou shall be a
servant, a slave, a drudge, and an underling al thy life, for so much as this
beast is yoked inplowes and carts, and set to al drudgery. And if thou weee
borne under Scorpius, they tell thee thou shall be a murderer, a thief, a
blasphemer* because ye Scorpion is full of dedly poiso^, deducing ye causes of
governance in heaven, of ye properties of beasts in earth. This opinion has
caused much idolaty, and giving the glory belonging only to God, to ye works of
his fingers. For when men persuaded their selves that al things were governed
by stars, the worshipped the sun, the moon, and the other mouable, and
immovable stars: and thinking that riches come from them, they have not prayed
unto God, of who^ only al good gifts are to be desired. The first of Genesis,
Gene. 1^
witnesses wherefore they are formed and created, not to rule man's life
violently, not to govern us, as the ryraunt does his commons, but Vt sint in
signa, and tempora, and dies, and an^os. etc. to be for signs and seasons,
days and years, to shine upon the earth, and to divide light from darkness.
Many would excuse their viciouse living by the influences, and virtue of ye
stars, saying yt they constrain them unto sin, as the servant of Zeno the
Philosopher blamed his master for striking him because as he said, ye stars
compelled him to sin. If our birth star cause us to sin, and to do that is
honest, wherefore should we be blamed when we do il, or praised when we do well,
seeing it is our nature and fatal destiny to do both, and not in our power to
do otherwise? who blames ye sun, because he burns the grass of the field,
making it unwholesome for cattle, who prayseth the water for que^ching of men's
thyrst? Or the Sun for warming them? Because they cannot do otherwise, they
ar neither praised, ne blamed: and shall we be blamed or praised, for yt which
is not in our power? If Christ the lively image of the father, Luke. 10 Ihon. 1
Mark. 8 Ihon. 18
praised Mary Magdalen justly for choosing the better part, for pouring a box of
preciouse ointment upon him before his burial, if he justly reproved Peter for
cou^selyng him not to come at Jerusalem, and for using the temporal sword
against the servant of the high priests, this is an untrue doctrine, which
takes away both praise dispraise. We read in ye scripture, Mark. 9
that God has prepared unspeakable torments for such as break his
commandments. Wherefore does he so, if destiny compel them to sin? If thou
be accused before an officer of murder, and laiest for thy self that thou have
done it against thy will, if thou can prove it, thou art discharged. If ye
hangman of Calice put a man to death at the commandment of an officer, he is
not blamed therefore. Yea, mine enemy will forgive me, if I hurt him against my
will. And will almighty God punish us so grievously, for breaking his
commandments through fate and destiny? You Justices, Shryues, Bayliffes, and
Cunstables, why presume ye to punysh evil doers? if a thief come before you,
he is not to be blamed, but his destiny: if an adultrer, an Idolatrer, an
extortioner, you can lay nothing to his charge, but to the stars which
cause him to be naught, will he, nill he. No man escapes punishment, by laying
of destiny for him, no officer will accept this answer of an evil doer, no
master will allow his servant laying this for him, nor the mistres her maid,
nor the scolemaster, his dysciple, nor the marchantman his prentice: whereof it
is evident, that all men condemn this dampnable opinion by natural reason in
their deeds, albeit the words of some, sound to the contrary. If we think al
thing to be governed by destini, we must needs agree to ye libertines, which
make no difference between good and bad, between right and wrong, between light
and darkness, Libertines
but defend all things to be lawful and honest, calling notable vices,
vocations commanded of God. If they spy a theife they blame him not, but
exhort him to continue in his vocation. They bid the band, the strong whore,
apply their vocations, ^. Cor. 6.
for S. Paul says: all things be lawful unto him, if unto him, to us. They
ground this doctrine of the regeneration, the which they say is a full
recoueraunce by Christ, of yt which we lost by Adam. He, before his faule,
knew no difference between good and ill, but fell by knowldge of good and ill.
Now they say that Christ has taken away evil, Gene. 3
and therefore all that we do is good: ^. Ihon. 2
for he that is born of him, sins not because his seed remains in him, and
and he can not sin. Whosoever sins has not seen him, Luke. 18
neither has known him. Wherefore they that will be the sons and children of
God, must be like unto children, which neither know, nor do neither good nor
ill. For the kingdom of God belongs unto such. Does not fate and destiny
teach ye same? Math. 19
Nothing is good ne bad, except it be volu^tary, nothing is to be praisd or
dispraisd, nothing is to be punished, or reco^pe^sed. It takes away all
laws, statutes, acts, proclamatio^s, for all me^ be borne to obey them or to
break them. If to obey them, they need not, if to break the^, they profit
not. But you wilt answer it is profitable, that acts be put forth, that such
as be disobedient, escape not unpunished. O cruel destiny, which both causes
us to do evil and punishes us therefore: Is it not a like thing, as if a man
should throw the down hedlong from the top of Poules steple, and after finding
ye alive, would al to beat the therefore? I would feign learn whether all men and
women, in the time of the holy man Noe, and the host of Pharao which pursued
the Israelites, Gene. 7. Exodus 14*
had one fate and destiny. They were destroyed with one kind of punishment. I
would know whether all the Sodomits and Gomorrians were born under one planet,
Gene. 1^
which all at one time, and after one fashion were consumed with fire falling
from heaven.

The Idolatrers which worshipped the golden calfe, were slain therefore. Exodus
32
The earth opened her mouth, and swalowed Chorce, Dathan, Number. 1^
and Abiram and all their adherents, for their rebellion and insurrection
against Moses their head and ruler. If all things were governed by ye
stars, these men should have had diverse punishments, because their destinies
were unlike. Who knows not that there have been diverse excellent in many
faculties and sciences, and that many were borne at the same time with them,
for at al times an infinite number are born, and yet we have none like Homer in
poetry, like Samson in strength, like Aristotle in Philosophy, like Solomon in
wisdom, like Appelles in painting, like Euclide in Geometry, like Tully in
eloquence. Were none borne under the same instillation, that our savior Christ
was? It is likely, that both some of those babes, Math. 2
which Herod murdered were borne at the same time, and also diverse in other
regions. Stories make relation, that Anaxagoras a noble Philosopher was trussed
in a foteball, Anaxagoras
and spurned to death, at the commandment of a cruel king, if it had been his
distenie, it would have chaunsed as well to other born under the same star.

But you will say, if the stars do not govern us, Why stars apeared at the
birth of Christ.
why did such a notable star appear when Christ was borne? A star governed his
nativity, for the wysemen say: vidimus enim stella^ eius in Orie^te. etc. We
have seen his star in ye East. Truly that star was none o^ the mouable or
immovable stars, but a new star, in a new and marvelous case, never seen
before ne afterward. As we read in the Cronicles, of many wonders which
happened commenly before great bat- and conquestes, as in the time of P.
Crassus, and L. Sceuola, milk rayned from heaven. In the time of L. Domicius,
and C. Lelius, a maid was borne with two heads, four hands, and four feet:
And in the time of M. Anthonius, and P. Dolobella, there was seen a great
blasyng star, and three Suns: Even so at Christ's birth, which was
wonderful, appeared this star, who as touching his divinity, had no mother,
and concerning his humanity, was borne without a father. The wise men which
moved by this star, came to seek after Christ, signify the wisdom of man,
which in matters of Religion is folishnes. Wherefore God of his infinite mercy
opened the incarnation of his son by this star, and therewith stirred the
wise to offer unto him, Aurum, thus, and mirram, Gold, frankincense, and mirre.
By Gold is signified that he is a king, Math. 2
by Frankincense that he is God, and by Myrre that he is man. If God had not
opened it unto them, they could never have known his incarnation, the which
S. Paull calls Misterium absconditum a seculis, a mystery hid since the world
begone, and since the beginning of generations: Colloss. 1
but now it is opened to his saints, to whom God would make known the
glorious riches of his godnes. For this cause the star appeared, Psalm. 8
and not to govern all the doings of our savior Christ violently: All
things be cast under his feet, and he made the stars: therefore he is not
subject to the stars. But because heavenly matters surmount our capacities,
his coming into this world was declared unto the Jews by the Patriarchs,
Prophets, shepherdes, and the holy word of God, and unto the Gentiles by this
star, and his Apostles: which s^ar went before the wise and prudent men, till
it came and stood over the place where Christ was. What wise man will impute all that Christ did afterward to this star, which after it had brought the wysemen
unto him, appeared no more? Do our birth stars cease to appear after a certain
space? Do they stand over the place where we be borne? Or do the^ leave their
accustomed circuit? Wherefore it is evident that this star was ordained to
preach Christ* and not for fate and destiny, to serve him, and not to force
him, who can not be forced, for he works what he will in heaven and earth,
and all the world is his workemanshyp. Many doubt whether this star were a
true star, or an angel, or the holy ghost. I leave every man in this matter to
his own judgment, Three opinions touching this Star.
so that his verdite disagree not with the scripture, but edify and instruct
the hearer, nevertheless I will talk my simple fantasy therein.

If it were a very star, why did he leave his accustomed progres? Or how could
he be a guide unto the wise men between Bethleem and Jerusalem, being placed
with the other stars in the firmament of heaven? We read that the sun stood
under Iosue, and went backward under Esechias, Joshua. 10 4 Reg. 20. Angels
appear in d^uers shap^
but never of no star that left his ordained circuit, and wandered, as one that
loses his way. Peradventure an angel appeared unto the wise men in the
lykenes of a star, for they appear in diverse likenesses and shapes. At mount
Oreb an angel spoke unto Moises out of a bush in the lykenes of fire, Exodus 3
Joshua. 5
and at Galgall to Iosue the son of Nun, like a man of arms. Helias is
carried up to heaven in a charet of fire, and with horses of fire. 4 Reg. 2
The charet and the horse be the angels of God, which be ministering spirits
accomplishing all his commandments. The angels appear unto Abraham and Lot,
Gene. 1
like three wayfaring men. Manne and his wife saw an angel talking with them,
as he had been a Prophet. Iud. 13
So it may well be that an aungel in the similitude of a star, was a guide to
the wise men. For aungeles are called stars in the scriptures, as in the
revelation of John: Stelle sep tem ecclesiarum angeli. Apoc. ^
The seven stars are the angels of the seven congregations. Other think
that this star was nether angel, nor a material star, but the holy spirit,
which opened the incarnation of Christ, both unto the Jews and to the
Gentiles: but unto the Jews in the likeness of a Dove, and to the Gentiles in the
shape and similitude of a star, of which Balaam an Astronomer, prophesied long
before, Orietur stella ex Jacob, there shall come a star of Jacob, Number. 24.
that is a shining light of the holy ghost, the which shall lead the Heathen to
the knowledge of Christ in the likeness of a star, as he fell upon the Apostles
in the shape of fire. Act. ^
Thus much I have spoken of the star, that appeared at the nativity of
Christ, because many by it, would prove fate and destiny. But what (say they)
is fate and destiny? A steadfast and immutable order of causes, What fate is.
whereby all things are done of necessity, called in Greek (...) True it is,
nothing is done without a cause, but yet many things may seem to be done without
any necessary cause: for some causes be perfect, and some in our judgment again
may seem to be imperfect. Perfect causes. Unperfit.
Fire causes heat perfectly, and water cold, but surfiting causes sickness, a
wound causes death, study causes learning imperfectly: for a man may surfeit,
be wounded, and apply his study, and yet nether be sick, nedy, ne learned. If
all causes were necessary, but presuppose they were, yet I would deny all things
to be ruled by their necessity, of fate and destiny: for almighty God works
what he will in them of his good pleasure. Exodus 2*
He appeared unto Moises out of a bushe in a flame of fire, and yet the bush
consumed not. Dan. 3 Gene. 17 Gene. 18 Luc. 1 Number. 17 Joshua. 10 Math. 1 Math.
8.9
He commanded the fire not to hurt Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, and saved
them harmeles from the hot burning oven. Did necessity of fate and destiny
make Sara and Elizabeth, which were barren and past children, fruitful? Did
destiny make Aarons rod bud, the sun to go bakward, a maid to conceive, the
blind to see, the deaf to hear, the dead to arise? If almighty God then did al
those things he leaves not his creatures to be governed of causes which
depend one on another, but rules them at his pleasure.

Solomon witnesses of GOD, that he does lengthen the life of his, and shorten
the life of the wicked, saying. Prou. 10
The fear of the Lord makes a long life, but the years of ye ungodly shall be
shortened. There be many examples of this in the Bible. The Prophet Esaias
commands king Esechias to put his household in an order, 4 Reg. 20.
because he should die out of hand and not live, and yet at his earnest
request, God lengthned his life.xv. years. Thus we deny that the creatures
are governed by stoicall destiny either in their birth, death or any of their
actions, but only by the providence of God, as the examples of the Scriptures
concerning the birth of Jacob and Esau, Phares and zara, do witness. Jacob.
Esau. Gene. 29
for the notable birth of Jacob and Esau does confute destiny, and destroy the
influence of the stars, for they were borne both at one time, in one place,
of one woman, by one man, and yet they were as unlike as fire and water, as
light and darkness, as black and white. So were Phares and zara, two twins
also the children of Judas by his daugter Thamar. Gene. 38
These examples declare destiny and influence of the stars, to be but a
fable, yea they fortify Gods providence, teaching him to be a gyuer of diverse
graces, unlike fortunes, and several blessings. I grant that an Astronomer
may tell, by the observation of the stars, to what occupation, to what estate
of life every man is most feat, most ap^ by nature: but that he can tell man's
fortune by any of his art or cunning, I deny utterly: For our life is not
ruled by the mouynge of the stars, but by Gods providence, who works all
things in heaven and earth.

How then is that true, which is written in the book of generation: Gene. 2.
How God is said to have rested the.7. day. Gene. 3.
Compleuit Deus die septimo opus suum, and requieuit ab vni uerso opere. etc.
He finished and he rested the seventh day from all his works. God rested the
seventh day from the works of creation, from formyng of new creatures, but
not from governing of them.

The Carpenter after he has finyshed the the house, medleth no more therewith,
if God should do so, all creatures would peryshe. If man's body can live
without quickenyng of the soul, the world may continue without his providence.
For he is to the world, that the soul is to the body, and more necessary to
ye governance of it, then ye soul to ye governance of the body, forasmuch as
he is ye maker both of soul and body: Thou must not imagine that God was weary
with six days labor, because he is said to have rested the seventh day, who
made all things, and governs them without labor, and rested without
werynes. For resting signifies endyng. In the seventh day God rested from al
his works, that is, he ended, he finished the creation of the world. Why then
does not the scripture say, he ended all his works, but that he rested from
them? Truly not without an urgent cause, for God is said to have rested from
all his works, which he made exceadyng good, for because he will give us rest
and quietness from our trauayl, if we will do all good works, as he made all
things exceading good. This phrase of speaking is used much in the scripture,
as of the Apostle, we know not what to desire as we ought. Spiritus intercedit
pro nobis gemitibus inenarrabilihus, bu^ ^he spirit makes intercession
mightily for us with groninges, Romans 8.
which can not be expressed with ^ong. The holy ghost does not groan, but
makes us to groan and lamente our sins, nor make intercession, but sturreth
us unto prayer. Moses uses the same manner of spekyng unto the Israelites,
saying. The Lord your God tempts you, Deuteronomy. 13
to know whether you love him. God does not tempt his to know any thing
thereby, who knows all things, but to make them to know how much they love
him. He cries unto Abraham, now I know that thou fear God, Gene. 22
in that thou have not spared thine only son for my sake, that is, I have
made thee to know. So he is said to have rested, because he will make us to rest
with him in glory. If we endeavor our selves to follow him in goodness, who made
nothing, but it was good. Wherefore this resting of God does rather establish
his providence then make against it, declaryng him to be myndful of good men,
and to have prepared them a restinge place, where they shall behold his
glorious countenance ever more, for he is called in latin Deus, in Greek (...)
(which word signifies to run) because he hastes unto every place, to govern
and order all creatures.

The.xvi. Chapter.
God only knows all things.

AS we sufficiently taught, that God is the worker of al things, ^ap. 19.
so if we search the Scriptures, we shall find that he only knows al
things, and is ignorant of nothing, as Jesus the son of Sirach witnesses:
The Lord knows al science. Eccle. 4^
The knowledge of men is imperfect, and increases by diligence, for the mortal
and corruptible body is heavy unto the soul, and our earthly mancion keeps down
understanding, Sapi. 9
so that we can not perfectly judge of earthly things, much les of heavenly
matters. Angels have a more plentiful knowledge then we, and yet they be
ignorant of many things, Mark. 13
as of the last day and hour, which the father knows only, but God knows al
things perfitly, who is the Lord of knowledge, whose wysdom can tell things
that are past, and discern things to come. 1. Reg. 2. Sapi. 8 Eccle. 42
The works of al flesh are before him, and there is nothing hid from his eyes,
his wisdom knows the subteltie of words, and can expound darck sentences. He
seeks out the ground of the heart, and understands al imagination. No
thought may escape him, nether may any word be hyd from him. He called unto
Adam and said unto him: Adam vbi es, where art thou? not because he was
ignorant, Gene. ^
but to teach him what he had lost, and to move him unto earnest repentance
for his syn. After like sort he asked Cain, Gene. 6
where is Abel thy brother? not for to learn yt, he knew not, but for to punish
and dismay him. The scriptur tells that Penituit deum quod hominem fecisset
in terra: How God is said to repent. Psalm. 21 ^ Reg. 16
God repented yt he had made man upon the earth, and sorowed in his heart, who
repents also of making Saul king of the Israelites. He is said to repent, not
that he is ignorant of things to come, who forsawe that Saul, and al mankind
would become abominable, but when we change and go astray from him, or return
to him, and are either punished for our sin, or rewarded of his mercy. After
the first sort he repented of making mankind, of making disobedient Saul king,
and of the choosing of the Jews, who once were ye people of God, and now the
members of Antichrist. After the other sort, the Heathen are become ye
worshippers of God through the favorable regard of Jesus Christ, which once
were the sons of wrath, and the sheep going astray: Through it the traitor
Judas lost his Apostleship and is justly dampened in hell, and the thief after
great robbery is delivered from the cross and mercifully crouned in paradise.
This change from good to il, or from il to good, which is done by the secret
and most rightful judgments of almighty God, in the scripture is called his
repentance, and the change is in us, and not in him. David a man according to
Gods hertes desire, witnesses of him saying: Psalm. 21
The generation which is to come shall be told to the Lord, they shall tell his
righteousness. He does not say the Lord shall be told to the generation, but the
generation to the Lord: of which words we can not gather, that any thing is
told God, whereof he is ignorant, that he may know it, but that he is told that
which he knows already, as the angels tell unto him our prayers and alms
deades, and as we show God our griefs and what we desire in our prayers.
Raphael one of the seven angels, that stand before God says unto Toby: I have
offered thy prayer before the Lord, Toby. 1^
whereby is meant that they be ministering spirits, for their sakes, which shall
be heirs of salvation, not that God lerneth our need by them, Hebr. 1
who knows what is necessary for us, before we ask it of him, Math. ^
nevertheless he wills us to ask that we may receive, Math. 7 Luke. 11
as it is written: ask and it shall be given you. Every one yt asks receives,
and he that seeks finds, and to him that knocks, it shall be opened.

After this sort S. Paul is to be taken, saying: Petitiones vestre innotescant
apud deum, let your requests be known unto God. Ph^lip. 4 Colloss. 4
Why do thou marvel that God is showed that he knows, seeing ye men
oftentimes are told of other, that which they knew before. If thou mislike this
exposition, hear another. These words, the generation to come shall be told the
Lord, be as much to say as the Lord shall be praised in it, for to tell unto the
Lord, is to praise knowledge and magnify him, as to live unto the Lord, to eat
unto the Lord. Roma. 14
S. Paul expounds eating to the Lord, to be giving of thanks, and praising
him when thou eatest: saying, he yt eats does it to the Lord, for he gives
God thanks. If doing to the Lord be geueng of thanks, as S. Paul declares,
saying, he does it to ye Lord, for he gives thanks, then of necessity
telling to the Lord, is tha^king of him, forasmuch as al ^elling is doing. We
read of the son of God in the revelation of John, Apoca. 19.
that he has eyes like the flame of fire, and on his head many crowns, and a
name written, yt none knew but he himself. If non knew it but he him self, the
father knows it not: whereof follows that God knows not al things. To
this I answer, because the father and Christ be one, that ye father knows it,
for as much as Christ knows it, Ihon. 10
nor ye text does not exclude the father from the knowledge thereof, saying none
knows it, but he himself, for the lantin is, Nemo scit, that is no man
knows. Moreover this saying, no man knows it, but he himself, teaches us,
that only his divinity knows it, not his humanity, for yt is excluded by
these words, no man knows it. But Christ's deuinitie is ye fathers deuinitie,
who both are al one by nature, not by person: wherefore, that which Christ
knows, the father knows also. This text does not diminish the fathers
knowledge, but rather establishes, only God to know all things, saying that
only he himself knows this name: whereby these words (he himself) we are
compelled to understand the deuinitie, the nature and majesty of God, to know
it only, and Christ's humanity to be ignorant of it, which also does not know
the last day.

The.xvii. Chapter.
God only forgiueth sin: Our pardoning, what it is: the losing and binding of
ministers.

HE is said also only to forgive sin, who drives away our offenses like the
clouds, and misdedes, as ye mistes. The Lord says: I am even he only, Esaias.
44 Esaias. 43
yt for mine own selves sake, do away thine offenses, and forget thy sins. The
unfaithful Jews acknowledge this, laying blasphemy to our savior Christ's
charge, because he said to to one sick of the palsy: Mark. 2
Son, thy sins are forgeuen thee. Likewise, when he forgiueth many sins to
Mary Magdalene, Luke. 7
in the house of Simon, because she loved much, they ask who he is which
forgeueth sins also. The stifnecked Jews found fault with Christ, in forgeuing
of sins, because they believed not him to be God, to whom that only belongs
and to no creature. For who can forgive sins, but God only? They should rather
have gathered him to be very God, then a blasphemer, forasmuch as he proves
this to belong unto him upon the earth, restoring strength and health unto the
sick man, to carry his bed home, whence he was brought of four me^. When he
says of Mary Magdalen washing his fete with tears, Mary magdalene.
and wiping them with her hears Remittuntur ei peccata multa, quoniam dilexit
multum: Many sins are forgiven her, because she loved much, we may not think
that love causes remission of sins, but that remission of sins causes love.
For that our love follows, and goes not before, Gods remission goes before
our love
Christ declares in the same place, saying: He that has much forgiven, loves
more, and to whom less is forgiven, he loves less. Does not Christ here
manifestly teach, that Gods forgeuing, enge^dreth is us much love or little? if
we examine the circu^stau^ce of the place, and ponder it diligently, we shall
find it to be no otherwise. Simo^, who bad Christ unto his house, is offended
that Mary Magdalen touched Christ, and marueileth that he will suffer a mysse
woman to be so homely with him, as to wash his fete, and anoint them. Christ
therefore said unto him: Many sins are forgiven her because she loves much:
to whom less is forgeuen, he loves les, as if he should say: Simon, thou art
offended that I let a sinful woman touch me: be no more offended, she is no
longer a sinful woman* for I have forgeuen her many sins, and because many
sins are forgiven her, she loves much. For he, to whom much is forgeuen,
loves more: wherefore marvel not that I let an honest woman, which has her
sins forgeuen her, and therefore loves me greatly, touch me: marvel not that I
let a penitent woman wash my fete, wipe them with her hears and anoint ye same.

I would the clergy and laity would wash Christ. What is that? truly to be
penitent for their il living, To wash Christ.
to mourn, to weep, to lament their covetousness and gredy ambicion, their
pluralites of personages, non residences, ferming of benefices, totquots,
necligence in their vocations, and absence from their cures. Ve mihi, quia
tacu^* Woe be unto me for holding my peace. Al men and women, yea kings,
queen's, lords, and ladies, follow good Mary Magdalene in this point, and cry
not, call not unto her, prai for us, prai for us. But the devil is crafty, he
makes us omit to follow the saints, for which their lives were written, and
persuades us by his ministers, which be heretics, to pray unto saints, which
can not help us. This is the true meaning of these words, not that her love
went before to deserve, or to be a cause of remission of sins, but that she
might honestly wash Christ, who^ she loved much, for her sins pardoned. The
parable of two detters, declares this to be true, by which christ proves unto
Simo^, the great love that she bare unto him. For if ye detter to who^ the
crediter forgeueth.ccccc. ducates, loves him, better then he to whom he
forgeueth but fifty, the^ Mary loved Christ heartily, who blotted out al her
sins. Do not the detters love the crediter, because of his liberalite: eue^
so Mary was not forgeuen through the merit of her love, but she loved because
she was forgiven. Christ witnesses yt the crediter forgave his detters, when
they had nothing to pay. What is this, but that almighty God pardons our
sins, not for any crum of love in us, but of his tender and gracious favor?
For we are ye detters, and he is ye liberal crediter: but how shall we answer
the phrase of scripture, which says that many sins were forgiven her because
she loved much? Do we not use to say, somer is nigh, because ye trees blossom?
and yet the blossoming of the trees does not cause somer, but somer causes
them. So winter causes cold, and not cold winter, and yet we complain of
winter, because it is so cold, so we say the tree is good, because ye fruit is
good. But Christ teachi^g his disciples to pray, wills the^ to ask pardon of
God, as they pardon other: Math. 6 How we do forgive one another.
for if we forgive other me^ their trespasses, our heavenly father will also
forgive us. Wherefore, it is not a thing belonging only to god. Man is said to
forgive his neighbor, not by pardoning ye everlasting punishment, which is the
reward of al sin, Roma. 6
and is pardoned nether of thy neighbor ne yet of priest but of God alone, but
by refraining his anger, by pacifying himself, by asswaging his fury. S. Paul
she^eth what our forgeuing is saying: Ephesi. 5
let not the sun go down upon your wrath. Eccle. 28
He that seeks vengeance says the preacher, shall find vengeance of the
Lord. To seek vengeance is not to forgive thy neighbor, but this vengeance
is nothing but a displeasure in this life, wherefore to forgive, is to seek no
ve^geaunce in this life, we have nothing a do with the other life. After this
sort Christ commands the Jews when they offer any gift at the Altar, Math.
5.
if they be out with their brethren, Math. 1^
first to labor are co^ciliation, and then to offer. After this sort S. Peter
is charged to forgive his brother sinning againg him, not only seven times, but
seventy times seven times. This commandment belongs also unto us, for S.
Peter asks Christ in the name of the congregation.

God only forgeueth the punishment which is prepared for the devil and his
angels, and for ill living men, as he only crouneth such as he forgeueth. Of
who^ is it spoken but of God only: 1. Reg. ^
The Lord kills and makes alive, brings down to hell, and fetches up
again. Gods remission goes before our pardoning.
Some also reason of this place in the Lords prayer, that we must forgive
first, tha^ ask forgeuenes of God, perverting ye true meaning thereof. Christ
teaching us to pray for pardon of our trespasses, as we forgive them yt trespass
against us, means not that by forgeuing, we merit or deserve remission of our
misdedes (for we be all detters unto God, some of.vC. pe^ce, and some of.l. and
have nothing to pay) no rather he certifieth our weak faith by these words,
and bids us to be well assured, that God forgeueth us, as we be sure that we
forgive other, making our perdoning a sign, a token yt God perdoneth us, and
not a cause thereof. For except God forgive us first, and pour the dew of his
blessing upon us, our nature will not forgive, but revenge and punish.
Thexample of the servant which ought his master.xM. talentes, who was first
forgeuen the whole det, and after imprisoned because he forgave not his fellow,
makes nothing against this interpretation. For he was first released and
pardoned, but afterward when he would not pardon his fellow, he became a dettour
unto God again, and was throune into prison. For when thou say forgive me,
as I forgive them that trespass against me, thou make a promise to God, if he
be merciful to the, to be merciful unto thy brother: the which thing if you
do, asertein thy self, yt God has melted thy sins, as the fire does the
wax, and let thy doing be a token unto thy conscience, that thou art in his
favor. This is the cause why Christ taught his to pray thus, not that our
remission deserves any thing at Gods hand, who gives us al things through
Christ, in whose name whatsoever we ask, we shall have it. He that asks
forgeuenes of God, and cannot enforce his heart to forgive his brother, let him
think yt he has asked, but not received, because he asked amiss, and that he
rather kindles Gods wrath and indignation against him, then pacify it. For he
deserves forgeuenes, as he forgeueth. If he cannot find in his heart to
forgive his fellow, but laith hand on him and takes him by the throat, and
casts (...) him into prison, let him think that God will deliver him
likewise unto the iayler for breaking his promise, till payment be made: for
sin is called det in scripture, because a punish^e^t is due for it. For this
cause we are commanded to ask forgiveness as we forgive, that it may be a
seal unto us, a token and a certificate of Gods mercy and favor, or of his
displeasure and anger.

This I have spoken partly constrained by my matter, and partly because Stephen
Winchester straineth this place for the justification of works. As every
private man forgeueth his brother, so much more, the ministers of Gods word
have power to do ye same, for to them belongs forgeuing and retayning, How
minesters do forgive and retain sin* Math. 16
bynding and losing of ye whole congregation, to them Christ gave the keys of
ye kingdom of heaven. How then does God only forgive sin? Truly they are only
ministers of the forgeuenes, and preachers of his mercy or of his wrath. Their
forgeuyng and losing, is to declare ye sweet and comfortable promises, that are
made through Jesus Christ in Gods book to such as be penitent, and their
binding and reteining, is to preach ye law, which causes anger, to such as be
unpenitent. Or their losing is to declare before ye congregation, Roma. 4
that God forgeueth the believing, and their bindeng is to show, that God will
not pardon the unbelieving, because they are without purpose to amend and
reform their livings. The common sort suppose y^ God forgeueth them, as soon as the minister layth his hands upon their heads, although they return to
their old living. Be not deceived, except thou repent, Who is forgeuen and when.
he has no authority to forgive ye, for he is a minister of forgeuenes only
to such as repent and will amend, his commission stretches no further. If thou
from the bottom of thy heart, be sorry for thy trespass, if thou be without al
desire to sin, if thou earnestly mind to amend, God forgeueth the before you
come at the minister, who first cleansed the man from leprosy, and after
commanded him to show him to the priest, Math. 8
for a witness to the congregation. So he raised Lazarus first, Luke. 5
and afterward bad his disciples lose his grave bonds. As the priest of ye
old law made the leperies clean or unclean: Ihon. 11
so byndeth and unbinds, forgeueth and reteineth, curses and blesses, the
ministers of the new law.

They put the name of God upon the people, but he only does bless them, Nume. ^
they minister the sacrament of forgeuenes, but he only does forgive: as S*
Paul fortifieth unto the Corinthians, saying: neither is he that planteth any
thing, neither he that waters, but god which gives the increase. 1. Cor. 3
As an enbssaadour makes peace with a strange king, to who^ he is sent with a
message, but they which bear witness of the peace make it not, no more do they
forgive sin, but be witnesses thereof, that God pardons them through the
embassage of Jesus Christ, Acts. 1 Acts. 2.
who is our high Ambassador. Wherefore Paul calls the preaching of ye glad
tidinges of the gospel, ministration of ye spirit, and righteousness, and he
names the preaching of the law, ministration of death and dampnatio^: ^. Cor. 3
by which two he means nothing else but losing and bynding, 1. Cor. 5.
as he teaches us, binding and losing him that held his fathers wife. The
Anabaptists and Donatistes teach, Against ye Anabapt.
that evil ministers can not lose, because God says that he hears no
sinners. I grant that God hears not their prayers, Ihon. 9
yet the sin of ye minister does not disanull the sweet promises which are
made to such as repent and believe Christ. Be he good or bad, God performs ye
words spoken of him, not presuming beyond his commission. Does Gods mercy
depend of the goodness of the minister? the^ our faith can not be steadfast and
sure, but wavering and uncertain, forasmuch as no man can deserne who is a good
minister: for he that seems good, may be an hipocrite. The Scribes and
Phariseis were evil ministers, Math. 23
and yet were we commanded to believe them, whatsoever they say, sitting in
Moises seat: that is, as long as they teach Moises, and not their own
inventions. Sacraments be seals. Does not ye seal make like print, whether
it be of gold, silver, or iron? If it seal deper or shalower, that which is
sealed, is cause thereof, not the stuff: So the difference is in them, which
come to the minister, and not in the ministration of good or evil, which both
make one print for ministration is a seal. Why does Paul rebuke ye
Corinthians because one said he held of Paul, another said, 1 Corin. ^*
he was of Apollo: but because they thought the virtue of the sacraments to
hang of the worthiness of the minister. If their morthines or unworthiness make
the sacraments effectual, or not, the^ of two good the more worthy, makes the^
more effectual, and it were better to be christened of John, than of Thomas of
Inde, better to be sent of Cephas than of Timothe, better to receive the
communion at Paul's hand than of Apollo: but their ministration differs not,
and we are forbidden to rejoice in men: for nether he that planteth is any
thing, nether he that watreth wherefore al ha^geth of God, who gives the
increase, who only forgeueth sin, and not of the worthiness or unworthiness of
the minister. The key which Christ promised unto Peter, What the keye is. Math.
16
saying: Tibi dabo claues regni caelorum: To the I will give the keys of the
kingdom of heaven (who answered in that behalf of al as all were asked) is
Gods holy word, wherewith ye minister binds and vnbindeth us, as the keye does
shut and open the door. Against Peter's primacie.
The Papists expound the keys to signify a general authority and supremitie
granted unto Peter, above the other Apostles, and al kings, the which now
they give t^ their great sire of ^ome as to ye only successer of Peter. To
these I answer that Christ gave non of his Apostles further authority then he
had himself: for when he sends them he says: Ihon. 20 Math. 20
As my father sent me, so I send you. Wherefore was he sent? Not to be ministered
unto, but to minister unto other. The people would have made him their king and
head, Luke. 22
but he refused it, Ihon. 6 Math. 17 Roma. 1^
he paid tribute to Caesar at Capernaum, he was a minister of circumcision many
years, he says unto him, which desired part of his brothers inheritance:
Who made me a judge or deuider ever you? Luke. 12.
Wherefore ye keys be no temporal authority. Has ye disciple a further
authority then his master? Or is the servant above his Lord? Christ
commands Peter to pay tribute unto Caesar, Math. 10 Math. 17* Acts. 8
to put up his swerd, who in the acts sends not other, but he himself is
sent of the Apostles to lay hands upon them in Samaria which believed through
the preaching of Philip, and he is asked a count afterward, why he went and eat
with the uncircumcised, Acts. 11 Acts. 1
he appoints no man in the room of Judas, but all the Apostles chose two
indifferently, and cast lottes, beseching God to temper them, that the lot
might fall on ye most ablest. Wherefore he was not head of Apostles, kings and
Emperors, but a fellow minister, as he witnesses of himself, saying: I exhort
ye ministers among you, 1. Peter. ^
which am their fellow minister. Albertus Pighius the Bishop of Romes chief
Knight in his controversy of the Congregation, peruerteth the scripturs, to
prove that Christ, at his departing, made him head of the church and general
shepherd of his flock. First, touching the keys, he says, that the civil
lawyers, with ye keys, give possession of house, burrow, town, and city: As
for an example, King Henry the eight, of most famous memory, was made Lord of
Bulloin, when they delivered the keys thereof to his majesty. Moreover Christ
commenly calls his church Regnum, a kingdom or Monarchy. If it be a
kingdom, says Pigghius, one must be head thereof, Math. 3.4.10. Luke. 10
not many: for that is a kingdom, where one governs. If one must be head, who
is that but he and his successors, that had ye keys of the kingdom given him.
These be reasons of deceitful vanity, and after the ordinances of the world,
and not after Christ, of which S. Paul warns the Collossia^s, to take heed.
Collos. 2
Among lawyers, possession and dominions is ^eue^ by the key, but we must
learn what the key is, of him that gave it, and not of Lawyers, who tells us
what the key is, saying: Woe be to you lawyers: For ye have taken away that key
of knowledge. Where no man can deny but that by the key of knowledge Gods word
is meant and signified, Luke. 1^
which is the only key given to the Apostles. This is the key, wherewith the
ministers are commanded to lose and to bynd, to forgive and to retain, to
bless and to curse. The bishop of Rome, losing and justifying men through
traditions and ceremonies, and not with the key of gods word, has not Peter's
key but a picklock, of which he bosteth himself to be head of the church.
This key is the.ii. Testaments which Christ commanded his Apostels to preach
to al nations, and because there be two testaments he calls them keys. For
every Scribe of this kingdom brings forth of his treasure, things both new
and old, new things that is the sweet tidinges of the gospel, to vnbynd us,
Math. 13
and old things that is the old Testament and Moises law to bind us: and
every minister has this key as well as Peter. If Peter be head of the church
because it is a kingdom, and scriptures ar to be expounded after the law and
ordinances of ye world, then Peter's son should have been head after his
father: or if he had no son, the next of his kindred, not the Pope: For in all
kingdoms, the son or the next of ye kindred is heir to the crown. But nether
Peter, nor the pope be heads thereof, nor no other upon the earth: but the
everlasting Jesus Christ, who needs no heir, who has promised to be present
with his congregation unto the worlds end, who names his congregation a
kingdom, Math. 28
not that he made Peter Lord aver us, or the Pope, but because he is Lord, and
we have promised obedience unto him. Peter calls him our chief shepherd, and
forbids priests to be lords over the parishes. The Pope says that Peter
is the rock, 1. Peter. 5
upon which the congregation is founded, and than he will be Peter's heir,
because Peter was once at Rome. Math. 16
But the scriptures, which are the true touchstone to examine al
interpretations by, Who is the rock.
teach us that Christ is the rock, and not Peter, when he says unto Christ,
thou art the son of the living God, and is ^unswered: Thou art Peter, and
upon this rock I will build my congregation: These words, upon this rock, are
not to be understand of Peter, who was so inconstant, that he denied his
master thrice, but of Christ who is ye son of the living God: as S. Paul
teaches us saying, Petra aute^ erat Christus: That is, Christ was the rock,
whom in another place he calls our foundation, 1. Cor 1^
and says: No man can lay another foundation. If no man can lay another
foundation, then Peter is not the foundation. The scriptures use to liken
Christ and ye congregation, to a bridgrome and his wife: for he is called the
bridgrome, 1. Cor. 3
and the church is called his spouse. Wherefore S. Paul makes matrimony a high
mystery. The husband appoints no other to be head over his wife, but he only
is her head: for else she should be under two heads: no more does Christ over
the congregation to which he is only husband, and a gelouse husband. If Peter
be general head, Ephe. 5. Ihon. 11 Ihon. 15 Ihon. 14*
and the Pope after him ye congregation is married to many husbands, and has
many heads, contrary to the order of honorable wedlock. Christ only is ye door,
the way, the truth, and the li^^, ye true vine: so he only is the rock and
founda^ion, in whom every building coupled together grows up to an holy
temple in ye Lord: Ephe. ^
as S. Peter witnesses, calling him a living and head corner stone, ^ Pet. 2
disalowed of me^, but chosen of God, refused of the bylders, and upholding the
buylding, that it fall not flat upon the ground. In the same place, Peter
calls Christ the rock and not himself. If you look for the self same word.
But the papists reply, that we all as living stones, are made a spiritual
house by Christ. Why then say they, may not Peter be the stone, ^ Pet. 2
who^ Christ named Cephas, which is by interpretation, a stone? This text
grants other to be the stone as well as Peter: for it is generally spoken of
al christen men. If you be not a stone, thou have no fellowship with Christ. He
named Peter Cephas, that is a stone, because when he believed him to be Messiah,
John. 1
he became a stone of ye congregation: As he gave Bonargus to name which is ye
sons of thu^der, Why Peter was named Cephas, a ston
to James and Ihon: not that they were to be thu^dred and preached, but yt they
should be ernest preachers of Gods word. Andrew brings him to christ, in who^
he believed through his preaching. Christ welcomed him with most sweet words,
saying: thou art Symo^ the son of Jonas, thou shall be called Cephas, which
is by interpretacio^ a stone. What means Christ by these words but this:
Simo^, before you wast the son of Jonas that is, the son of death, as thy
fathers was, thou shall no more be so but a ston of my congregation, for which
I am come to suffer, because you beleuest in me. This is Christ's meaning, not
yt Peter is the stone, whereon we be builded, but a stone of the building, a
sheep which is lost and recovered again, a member of his congregation, Christ
only is ye ston whereon the building is founded. We are small stones of ye bilding
founded on him. he only is ye rok which saves his church from rain, floods and
the winds, from hell gates, from syn and death, as he teaches us saying. He
that hears my word and does thereafter, is like a man that builded on a rock.
Some may understand this text otherwise, Math. 7
yt Christ called Peter a stone not that he only is that, but in the behalf of
the whole congregation. If Peter were not head of the church why does Christ
ask him thrice: Petre amas me? whether he loved him, why Christ bids Peter
thrice: Feed my sheep.
and command him only thrice to feed his sheep? Lo, says the Romanistes, here
is he made head of ye church. Here Christ going to his father, commits the
congregation to his governance. This place does not establish Peter's
supremicie, but rather deny it, for as much as Christ gives him no
commandment, no authority, but such as belongs to al ye Apostels, bidding
him show his love in feding his flock, and preaching him. For no man will preach
him who^ he loves not. Ihon. 21
Does not he give like commandment to all the Apostles, saying: Go and preach
throughout all the world and to al creatures. Mark. 16
Then why does he ask Peter only thrice, and command him thrice, and not the
other? He asked him thrice, because he denied him thrice, that his three nayes
might be recompensed with three confessions S. Augustine says upon this place:
Austen.
Three confessions are required for three naies: That the to^g might do as much
for love, as it had don for fear. Cyrilli.
And Cyrillus says the same. They expound it thus, not for Peter's primacie.
But I will speak this more plainly: Christ did ask and command Peter thrice,
for two causes: the one was that by his confession, the rest of the Apostles
should know, that he was restored into favor again, from which he had fallen:
The other is, yt al men might learn by Peter, What is most neces^ary in a
Preacher* 1. Cor. 4*
what thing is most nessary in a preacher, which is, that he love him entirely
and hertely, whom he preaches. Paul speaking of ministers says: it is
required of them that they be found faithful. But who is faithful to him, whom
he loves not? Moreover, diligence is required in a preacher: as S. Paul
teaches his beloved son Timot. Preach thou the word: be fervent, 2. Timo. ^
be it in ceason or out of ceason: improve, control, exhort with all long
suffering, and doctrine. What thing causes diligence so much as love? through
love shed abroad in our hearts, by the holy ghost, all things are made easy
and sweet unto us, which before were both hard and vnplesaunt. For love
suffers al things, believes al things, 1. Cor. 13
hops al things, endures al things. There is a commen saying, that nothing
is hard to him, which loves. Love makes labor, trauail and pain, light and
sweet to the hunter, yea, in snow and foul wether, in cold and frost, at al
seasons. But they which love not the pastime, nether will, ne can abide such
pains, as to run through thick and thin, to leap hedges, and ditches. Romans 5
etc. Through love, Christ was sent of his father and humbled himself to our
nature, and was whipped, scorned, wounded and slain for our sins, as it is
written: God sets forth his love toward us, forasmuch as while we were yet
si^ners, Act. 5.
Christ died for us. These things were sweet and plesau^t unto Christ. Through
love, the Apostles rejoice that they are beaten, in the Acts. Through love, S.
Paul was beaten with rods, was often in hunger, ^ Cor. 11
in watching, in thirst, in labor, in could, in nakidnesse, often in perils
of robberi, in perils of wilderness, in perils of ye sea, in perils of false
brethren. Through love, Heb. 11
mani holy men have been burnt for ye truth, racked, stoned, hewn in sonder,
slain with swerdes, hunger-pyned, and drowned. Fire and water is not more
necessary for the preservation of this terrenal life, then love in a preacher,
which is the mother of faithfulness, of diligence, of patience, and of all
virtue We read in Mathue, Math. 16
how Christ before he sent his disciples to preach, examined them what they
thought of him, saying, whom say ye yt I am? not that he was ignorant thereof,
from whom nothing is hidden, 1 Timothy ^
but to give an example to our bishops, to lay hands suddenly upon no man, and
to try their doctrine, to examine their learnings, for lerning also is a
quality most necessary in a preacher. So in this place he examineth Peter
whether he love him, because love is so necessary. I would wish yt our
magistrates, and the overseers of Israel would set this example of our savior
Christ before their eyes, and diligently follow it. The captain going to battle
mustreth, gathering many together, and choseth out the most ablest to serve his
Prince. What merchant man will take any to be his prentise, onles he have
certain qualities, necessary for his occupatio^. Colligeners in their electio^s
pose their scholars, assaie their wits, try their learnings, ask their
conditions, before they chose them. Bishops.
If bishops applied their vocations as diligently as other do their
occupations, the heritage of ye Lord should be in much better case, his
vineyarde should not be roted up, and destroyed with beasts of the field, The
hill of Sion would wax grene and beutiful. Demos^^^nes.
The Noble Orator Demostenes was wo^t to say that he was greatly ashamed of his
small study, when he considered the great pains, which artificers took at
Athens to get money, and yt he was moved to more earnest study thereby. Have not
ye overseers of the house of Israel much more cause to be abashed for their
great neclige^ce? They follow not the Noble captain, which mustereth before he
goes to war, and chooses out taul and able men, but they send al yt come, and
refuse none, they esteem preaching often and diligently to be against their
honor and dignity, they allure learned men from their cures and make them
stewares of their lands. They give them benefice upon benefice, but they will
not suffer them to come at their parishes to preach, to exhort to instruct. And
this practice is custumable, not only in them, but in the most part of great
men and women. For commonly they take benefised men to be there Chaplaynes, and
cause them to lie from their benefices, the which when they have done a good
whyll in their service, then they give them another benefice for there pains,
and then cause them to ly from two benefices, and after from three, and then
from four, and to put holy water swingers in there roumes and cures. I speak
not this against al Lords and Bishops, but against unpreaching prelates, and
couitouse Lords, which find their chaplains at the costs of pore parishes,
and not of their own lands. Well, the blood of all souls yt perish for lack
of instruction (my lords) shall fall on your heads, beware and amend betimes.
Give your chaplaynes sufficient wages, and pil not pore parishes. I accuse no
man, every man's co^^cie^ce at the last day, before the bar of ye terrible judge,
shall either deliver and quit, or condemn and cast him. But Pigghius replieth
further for Peter's supremitie, because Christ shows him that Satan desired
to sifte all the Apostles, Luke. 22
and bids him strengthen them, saying: Simon Simon, behold Satan has
desired to sifte you as it were wheat, but I have prayed for the, that thy
faith fail not, when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren.

Before trouble, Christ uses to give his Disciples warnyng, that they be not
dismayed, mated, or discoraged, but armed with patience, as in telling them
that he must go to Jerusalem, Math. 1^
and be slain of the high priests and lawyers, in showing them the destruction
of Salomons temple and tokens of the latter days. Math. 24.
And wherefore he showed them, he teaches saying, but se that ye be not
troubled and take heed, I have told you before. In the mount Oliuet, he showed
them that all they shall be offended by him the night following, as it was
written: I will smite ye shepeherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattred
abroad. That which was said to them all in mount Oliuet, Math. 26 ^^cha. 13
is spoken now severally unto Peter, because he had more need of warning then
the rest, because he offended more, because he trusted much in himself.
Therefore Christ says, Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired to sift you,
but I have praid for thee. The meaning of which words is: the devil shall
busely tempt you all at the time of my passion, and specially the Peter more
then the rest, he shall not preuail, for I have prayed for thee, trust not in
thine own strength but in my prayer, onles I had prayed, thou should have
been the son of dampnation, and not have repented. For it is written, the
Lord turned back and looked upon Peter, and then he went out and wept bitterly.
Luke. 22
He denied him once and wept not, for the Lord had not looked upon him. He
denied him again and wept not: for Christ did not yet look upon him. When he
denied him the third time, How christ looked upon Peter, corporally or
spiritually
Christ's look moved him to lament his offense with abunda^t tears. But there
rises a question, whether Christ looked upon him with corporal eyes, and
admonished him visibly or not? If we read the Gospel diligently, we shall find,
that Christ was in a chamber within, and many about him which spat in his face,
and buffeted him with their fistes, and that the Apostle Peter was without in
the haull, some time sitting, sometime standing at the fire with the
servants, as all the Evangelists agree. Wherefore, Christ did not look on him
with corporal eyes: but as he looked upon the low degree of his hand maid, that
is to say: He did help him with his mercy, secretly: He touched his heart:
Luke. ^.
he visited him with his inward grace which caused him to pour forth outward
tears. He bids him strengthen his brethren, when he is converted, not as
head of the^ but as a labourer in his vineyard: For these words, strengthen
thy brethren, be as much to say, as feed my sheep, preach ye glad tidings of ye
gospel, which stre^gthneth the sick soul as it is written: Man shall not live
by bread only, Math. 4
but by every word that comes out of the mouth of God. David witnesses, and
experience teaches us, that bread comforts, and stre^gthneth the heart of
man, Psalm. 103
and yet the life is more worth then bread, and the body more of value then any
meat. Math. 6
Wherefore these words give no authority to him above the rest of the
Apostles, but rather be a narration of his fall, through presumpcio^, and of his
rising again only by Christ. If Peter were head of the church, yet yt does not
stablish the Popes supremite, unless he can show Peter's last will, and lawful
testament, wherein this is given him. I have spoken this of the prima^y, partly
because the Papists, with subtle and crafty reasoning, and wrong leauening of
the scriptures, allure the consciences of many into this damnable opinion,
partly also being occasioned of my matter, for he has presumed many years to
forgive the sins of such as would give him money, to lose and to bless them,
and to curse and hold the sins of them, which were against his mind,
according to S. Paul's prophesying, he shall sit in the temple of God, and show
himself as God: 2 Thessalonians. ^
What is to sit in the temple of God and boast him self as God: but to reign
in the consciences of men, and to take upon him that which belongs only to
God? Now to make a brief rehearsa^l of this matter, there be four things
necessary to be known concerning remiss^d of sins. Who forgyueth the sin,
wherefore or for who^, by whom, to who^. The scripture answers these four
questions. We learn who forgiueth sin of it, saying: Who can forgive sin,
but God only. Mark. 2
And for whom we are pardoned our misdedes, S. Paul teaches us, writing to his
countrymen of Christ: For this cause is he mediator of the new Testament,
that through death, which chaunsed for redemption of those transgressions that
were in the first Testament, they which were called, Hebre. ^
might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. And to the Romans: He
which spared not his own son, but gave him for us al: Roma. 8
how will he not with him give us al things also. If God give us al things for
Christ's sake, we have remission of our sins, also by him. By who^ god for
gives, Christ tells us, saying: whose sins ye forgive shall be forgeuen, and
whose ye hold shall be holden, Ihon. 20
which words be spoken to ministers. Sometime he does forgive without the
certificat of the minister, for he is not bound to his sacraments, but works
what he will and how he will. Acts. 9.
Paul after he had heard Christ speak, was sent to a minister, yet he was
lightened from above before Ananias, Luke. 23
who laid hands on him, knew thereof. The thief which hung on ye right hand,
was straight carried into Paradise without any ceremony of ministration, which
God has ordained for our infirmities, not that it is a necessary mean unto
him. Now he promises forgeuenes to all those which repent and intend to lead a
new conversation, and to make their bodies a lively, holy, and acceptable
sacrifice unto him, as the coming of John the christener before our savior
Christ teaches us, who began his preaching at repentance, Luke. 3.
saying: repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. He baptized many in
Bethabara beyond Jordan, but they confessed their sins first. He reviled the
Phariseis and Saduces, and bad them do fruits worthy repentance. Christ also
when it was told him that Herod had laid hands on John, coming to the coasts of
Zabulon, Mark. ^
and Nepthalem began with the same, and not only that, but he commands his
Apostles to begin with it, when he does auctorise them to preach. He sends by
and by after them other seue^ty to preach the same. Mark. 6 Math. 1^ Luke. 9
Luke. 10
I would our magistrates were as diligent in sending forth preachers: but they
have no leisure to muse of the common wealth, they are so gredy of private wealth.
In the acts many being pricked in their hearts through Peter's preaching, Acts.
2
ask him and the other Apostles, what they should do to achiue and get
remission of their sins, and Peter answers the^, saying: Repent and be
baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins.
Of which textes and examples it is evident that God does not forgive our
sins, pardon our trespasses, and wype out our misdedes and offenses, unless
we have an earnest purpose and fervent mind to crucify our old man, and to
become new dowe and sweet bread, albeit the minister lay hands on us an C.
times. for he regards the heart, not the ceremony of ministration, searching
the botome and ground of it, and trying the reins, rewarding every man
according to the fruit of his counsels.

The.xviij. Chapter.
God only is almighty, and whether he can syn, die or lie, with other mo
properties.

THe next property belonging to the majesty of the Godhead, is that he is
almighty, and can do what him list in heaven and earth as the book of wisdom
tells us: Unto thy almighty hand, that made the world of naught, or as other
translate of a confused heap, it was not impossible to send among them a heap
of bears or wood lions, or cruel beasts of a strange kind, Sapi. 11
such as ar unknown, spouting fire, or casting out of a smoking breath, and
shoting horrible sparks out of their eyes, which might not only destroy them
with hurting, but all so kyl them with their horrible lokyng. Like as the small
thing, that the balau^ce wayeth, so is the world before him, ye^ (...) as a
drop of the morning dew, that falls down upon the earth, for he has power
of al things. The glorious and famous deliverance of Israel show his hand to
be almighty, Exodus 9 Roma. 9 Sapi. 16 Exodus 7. Exodus 8.9 Exo. 10.14 Exodus 16
Sapi. 16
his arm to be strong and infinite, who raised up Pharao for this only purpose,
to show his might on him, and that his name which his power and rightousnes
might be declared through out all the world. He punished the ungodly, that
would not know him, with strange waters, hailes, raines, frogs, lice,
flies, moren sores, grasshoppers, thik darkness. He drouned Pharao in the reed
sea, and led his people through the middel thereof, he fed them with angels
fode, and sent them bread from heaven. He took away the heritage of kings and
gave it them. Luke. ^
We read that the angel answered the holy virgin Mary asking how she could
conceive, sithen she knew no man, that ye power of the highest should
ouershadowe her, and that by the same power her cousin Elizabeth should have a
son in her age, for with God can nothing be impossible. Christ says it is
easier for a great Came^ to go through the eye of a nedel* Mark. 1^
then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven, notwithstanding many
rich me^ have entered thither as Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, king David, the
pacient man Job, in the old Testament: and Mathue, Zacheus and Joseph of
Aramathie in the new. We may gather them, that God can easily cause a mighty
camel to go through the eye of a fine nedle, wherefore al things be possible to
him, as Jesus teaches his disciples, that with men to be impossible, but not
with God, for with him all things are possible. Some deny him to be almighty,
Whether God can sin, or lie, or not.
for he can not sin, he can not lie, he can not be disceiued, he can not die.
Ye rather he is almighty, because these things have no stroke in him, which be
infirmities not powers, and include a certain wekenes and feebleness, and no
omnipotency. If he could either sin or die, or be deluded and lie, he were not
almighty, for he that sins, becomes the servant of sin. Remember ye not
says Paul that to whomsoever ye commit your selves as servants to obey,
Roma. 6
his servants ye ar to whom ye obey, whether it be of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto righteousness? Christ also answers the Jews denying that they
were bond: but Abraham's sede: Ihon. ^
verily I say unto you, whosoever commits syn, is the servant of sin. S.
Augustine a noble member of the christian congregation says: Austen.
Magna dei potentia est non posse me^tiri, It is a great power of God, yt he
can not lie. The same may be said of deceauing, of al sin, of dying, the
which can not be in God, because he is almighty. Other reply that we can do
many things, which the deity can not: As walk, speak, eat, and drink, to
which I answer, that albeit God by himself, do not these things, yet he
works the^ al in his creatures: For he makes them to walk, speak, eat,
and drink. If he should do these things in his own nature, he should be like
unto man, and so not almighty. Christ tells a man, whose son was vexed with
a domme spirit, yt al things are possible to him that believes: much more al
things are possible unto God. But thou will say: If I believe, nothing is
impossible unto me, the^ only God is not almighty. Mark. ^
Nothing is impossible unto beleuers, notwithstanding they be not almighty,
because they can do nothing of themselves, which (...) an infirmity, and no
almightines, but live, move, and be in him S. Paul in his letter unto the
Philip. Philip. 4
says that he can both cast down himself, and excede, be hungry, and suffer
need, yea, yt he ca^ do al thing but through ye help of Christ, which
stre^theneth him without who^ we can do nothing. Wherefore, Christ is almighty,
and therefore God by nature, not by nu^cupation only, Ihon. 15
We read in Paul to the Heb. Impossible est eos qui semel. etc. Hebr. 6
That it is impossible, yt they which were once lightened, and have tasted of ye
heavenly gift, and were become partakers of ye holy ghost. etc. If they fall,
should be renewed again unto repentance, crucifiyng unto themselves again ye son
of God, Against ye Anabapt.
and making a mock of him. If this be impossible, where is gods almighty hand
and omnipote^t arm? Impossible, in this text is not to be taken for yt which
can not be or come to pas, but for that which seldom and very hardly is done:
for Paul speaks the very same thing again straight way in a similitude, that
the earth, which drinks in ye rain that comes often upon it, and brings
forth ^earbs convenient for them that dress it, receives blessing of God, but
that the ground which bears thorns and briars, is reproved, and nigh unto
cursing. The barren ground here which resembles man, with thorns and
thistles, resembling sin, is not all ready accursed, but rebuked, and nigh
unto cursing* so the man which falls after he is lightened, is not without al
possibility of amendment, but in great peril of damnation. For as the barren
ground bering thorns and thistles may become fruitful, so such one may be
renewed and rise again. Me think Paul by this similitude which immediately does
follow, shows what he means by this word impossible. Wey the similitude and
the purpose why it is brought, and I think you will not refuse this
interpretation. The disciples use the same word in effect unto Christ, askyng
him who can be saved? which is as much to say, as it is impossible for any to
be saved. But he answers the^, that with men it is impossible, but not with
God: teaching us ye rich m^n have hard access unto heaven: and for these
words, Mark. 1^
with men it is impossible, before he says: Luke. 18
children how hard is it for them that trust in richesse, to enter into the
kingdom of God? Inpossible for hard.
Wherefore it is not against the phrase of the scripture to call ye impossible
which is hard, and seldom. The Nouatians, Anabaptists and Catharoi, abuse this
place, to prove that all such as do fall after baptism, can not rise again, but
ar dampened, and not recouerable. I trust my exposition do more accord to ye
truth then this dampnable assertion, against which, I think it necessary
somewhat to speak: for I have heard say that there be many of this opinion in
England, and partly I do believe it. After the triumphaunt deliuerau^ce of the
Israelites out of Egypt, God ordained two manner of offringes among them, one
for sins done of ignorance, an other for trespasses done willingly,
promising forgeuines unto both. If some Anabaptists say that these were not
done after baptism, ^euit. 5.6
for the Israelites lacked baptism, Paul answered him, saying: Brethren, I
would not ye should be ignorant of this, how our fathers were all under a
cloud, ^. Cor. 10
and all passed through the sea, and were all baptized under Moises in the
cloud, and in the sea. etc. Wherefore, after baptism God forgeueth sin, done
both of ignorance, and also willingly. If he say that under the law such
might be restored, but not under grace, I would know of him, whether the mercy
of God be augmented or diminished through the coming of our savior Christ.
Epiphanius, an ancient writer and of famous memory tells that one Meletius
an archeretike, Epiph^nius.
spread this opinion over a great part of Egypt and Siria, and prevailed
against Peter bishop of Alexandria, who was slain afterward of the cruel
tirau^t Maximine. But thanks be to God, there be innumerable examples, which
notably confute and vanish it, and among all none more worthy, then one in the
history of S. Ihon the beloved Apostle. Eusebius in his third book and.xxiii.
Chap. writes of him, Hist. Ecc^. L^. 3 ca. 2^
that he turned maruelously a certain young man from stealing unto Christ,
which had fallen from Christ to stealing. Gene. 37 Gene. 35 Gene. 38 Nume. 27
2. Reg. 2 4. Reg. 2^ Luke. 22*
In the old Testament the Patriarchs conspire the death of Joseph and rise
again. Ruben defiles his fathers bed, Judas commits fornication, Moises
displeases God at the waters of strife, David falls into aduoutrie, Acts. 8
2. cor. 2 Math. 28 Luke. 15
Manasses into Idolatry, in the new, Peter denies his master thrice, the
Galathians follow another Gospel, and ar recovered by Paul, Peter exhorts
Simon Magus unto amendment, Paul desires the Corrinthia^s to receive him
again whom he had excomunicate, Christ byddeth us forgive our brethren seventy
times seven times, the angels in heaven rejoice at the conversion of a sinner.
These examples and authorities be very plain against ye blasphemy of the
Nouatians and Anabaptists, which would bring men unto desperation and
infidelity. If they cleaving to this word impossible, refuse to take it for
that which is hard, as it does signify often in the scriptures, yet this place
makes nothing for their desperate opinion, but rather destroys and
vanquisheth it, Another interpretation
as ye circumstaunce of it declares. For Paul denies that he which is
baptized, can be rechristened, so that these words, it is impossible that they
should be renewed again, be the same in effect, which he has in an other place:
Ephe. 4
One Lord, one faith, one baptime. And that it is so, and no otherwise, I will
prove with.iii. manifest reasons. One is because as the words immediately before
do teach, he speaks there, The first reason.
of doctrine pertaining to ye beginning of a Christen man, as the foundation of
repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God, and of the doctrine of
baptism, of laying on of hands, of resurrection and judgment, and mounteth
afterward unto perfection, that is, touches Christ's everlasting priesthod,
his death, and the disanulling of the law. By which words he teaches us, that
he speaks not of repentance alone, but of the whole foundation of a christen
man, which is baptim, and those things which he does anex unto baptim. For in
ye primative church as this place and ^ther shows, men first were moved unto
repentance* then unto faith in Christ, then sealed with the sacrament of
baptism, then confirmed with laying on of hands, and last of all cert^fied of
the resurrection and general judgment, and yt al, at the time of their
christening. Now after yt he has declared this manner of christni^g, and
begi^ning of a christen man, this form and fashion of ye primative church, he
says incontine^t, that it is impossyble for such as fa^^e after this
lightening, to be renewed again unto repentance. Who does not se, considering
what goes before, and whi these words be brought in, that he speaks of the
whole order and form of Baptism, and denies that this form and fashion can
be Iterate? The second Reason.
My next reason is that he must needs mean so, because ye text does not say
that it is impossible for such to repent, but Rursus renouari, to be renewed
unto repentance, requiring a renuyng with the repentance. What is to be
renewed, then to be borne again, the which is done only by baptism? We may
repent without baptism before and after, but renewed unto repentance, we can
not be without this noble sacrament. Wherefore S. Paul in this place forbidth al
iteration of baptism, not of repentance. Thirdly it appears to be so also of
these words: The third.
Rursum crucifigentes sibimet ipsis filium dei: Crucifying unto them selves
againg the son of God, and making a mock of him. For all such as will be
christened more than once, Roma. ^
crucify Christ again in a figure, and scorn his death, as insufficient to
take away their sins. For baptism is a figure of it, as s. Paul witnesses,
saying: Remember ye not that al we which be baptized in the name of Jesus
Christ, are baptized to die with Christ. Wherefore, as Christ died but once
making full satisfaction for sins: so baptism is but once to be ministered, but
they deny this also. If any man would know the use of the primative church, in
this point, Eusebius regestreth, that Alexander bishop of Alexandria, Hist.
Eccl. li. 10. ca. 14*
calling a counsel of learned men, enacted that all those which Athanasius
christened in the way of pastime, being chosen bishop, Athanas^.
by a company of laddes, and being but a boy him self, ought not to be
rechristened. The Anabaptists allege the.ix. of the Acts, where it is
written, that Paul findyng certain disciples at Ephesus, which had not received
the holy ghost, baptized the^ again in the name of the Lord Jesus. Paul's
baptising in this place is nothing but giving the holy ghost by laying on of
hands, as the text expounds it self. Acts. 1^
For first Paul is said to baptize them in the name of Christ, and then these
words according to the use of scriptures be expounded with them which follow,
that is: Paul laid hands upon them and the holy ghost came on them. If thou
think that Baptism can not be taken for giving of the holy Ghost, harken what
John the Baptist says of our Savior Christ, Math ^
and him self: I baptize you in water in token of repentance, but he that
comes after me shall baptize you with the holy ghost and with fire. Ihon. 4
Christ nev^r baptized any with water, and yet the scripture says he
baptized, because he gave the holy ghost. In this signification Paul baptized
them again in the name of Jesus Christ without all iteration of the sacrament.
Melan^thon takes this place unto the Hebr. which the late Nouatians would
wrest to maintein their opinion, to be of the sin against the holy ghost, out
of which no man can rise for it is never forgeuen. Thou have now gentle reader
two interpretations of the terrible saying of S. Paul, follow that which thou
iudgest to be most true. But to return to our matter, may deny Gods
om^ipotencie, because he can not revoke that which is past. The Greek Poet
says.

(...)
(...).
The power of God does fail in naught, save this:
To make undone that thing that once done is.
Yes truly, God can do this if he will, albeit we judge contrary of his infinite
might and power: but it shall never come so to pass, because it is to be
supposed, that God never will that thing, to be undone, which he has once done.
For he works al things, and that without repentance. If he would that thing
to be undone, which is gone and past, or that word to be unspoken, which is
spoken, repentance should take place in him. Yet can he do it, albeit it be
impossible unto our understanding. The infirmity is in us, which can not
comprehe^d such a power, such a majesty, not in him. Through like infirmity,
the Heathen supposed there were many gods, because it seemed to the^ impossible
for one to rule and govern all things. Therefore they divided the governance
of ye world between ^hre, giving heaven and earth to Jupiter, ye seas to
Neptune, the low places and hell to Pluto. The^ craved plenty of corn of Ceres,
riches of Plutus, wine of Bacchus, Luck in hu^ting of Diana, good fortune in
woing of Venus and Cupido, learning and vtterau^ce of Mercury, and victory in
battle, of Minerua and Mars. Through like infirmity, the Papists brought in
pilgrimages, dedicatio^s, praiyngs to saints, thinking God either not so able,
or ^ls not so wylling and merciful to hear our requests and accomplish them.
Some because they will rather deny his omnipotency, then confess their own
infirmity, say that he is called omnipotent, because he can do whatsoever he
will, and not all things. I had rather acknowledge my infirmity, then
diminishe his omnipotency.

The.xix. Chapter.
God is defined out of his scriptures.

THere be many other things also belonging only unto ye deity me^cioned in the
scripture, Hebre. 6
as I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, the
house of bondage and slavery, Deute. 5
and the name of the Lord is a strong castle, the rightuous flies unto it,
and shall be saved, and it is God that justifies. God works in us both ^he
will and the deed, Prou. 18 Roma. 8 Philip. 2 Hebre. 13 1. Ihon. 1 1. Ihon. 4
Deuteronomy. 6.10 Math. 4
God is a consuming fire. God is light, God is charity, thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, when I call upon the Lord, he
hears me: for nothing is to be honored, called upon, nothing hears our
prayers, nothing is charity, light, consuming fire, nothing justifies and
saves ye rightuous, save God only. The scriptur does attribute these
properties to no manner of creature. Hitherto leuing all superfluous questions,
which have rather curiosite, then profit, I have applied my kind of writing to
the capacities of the congregation, of which ye most part be lay, and declared
what God is, out of his most sacred and holy word, which is the only way
leading us to the knowledge of him, the only light illumining our darkness,
the only fire and hammer that breaks the hard stone, A hammer
that is vanquisheth il doctrine, and confou^deth al heresies. They which seek
him without it, Ierem. 23
not content with ye wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, nor with the
doctrine of Godliness, 1. Tim. 6
go out of their way, walk in darkness, ouerwhelm the^ selves with reasons of
man's wisdom* learn always, and never can get the knowledge of him, wast their
brains about unprofitable questions and strife of words whe^of spring envy, 2.
Tim. 3
railinges, evil surmisings, vain disputacio^s of men with corrupt minds,
and destitute of the truth. Wherefore, The Child
as the child before he is born into the world, abides in his mothers womb,
and takes all nourishment of her, so we must learn what God is with in the
bounds of his word, not at rouers, until he mercifully deliver us from this
bondage, and out of the dungion of the body, and grant us to behold him face
to face. Now gathering a sum of my sayings, I will define what God is, not
that any perfect definition can be made of him (for he is unsearchable) but for
the capacities of the laytie, for whose sakes I write this, that they may
behold him in a glass, and a shadow, who ca^ not be seen in this life perfectly.
God is a spiritual and pure substance or nature, immutable, invisible,
unsearchable, fyllyng heaven and earth, full of understanding, of truth, and
righteousness, of mercy, of wysdom, of al manner of goodness, without beginning,
without ending, not create, not made, and maker of al things, subject to
nothing, and governing al things, knowing al things, yea, even the inward
thoughts, ententes and hearts of men, forgeuing sin, only to be honored,
called upon, only hearing, justifying and saving us, of an almighty arm and
majesty, the father unbegotten, the son b^gotten, the holy spirit proceading
from them both. I have declared before, all these things to be attributed unto
God in his holy word, and the scripture does not only not deny but eftsoon
grant the same al, and every one unto Jesus Christ our savior, and to the
holy ghost our comforter: as it shall appear more evidently hereafter.
Whereupon it must needs follow that both Christ is God, and the almighty
conforter also by nature, and not by name only as they of who^ it is written
Ego dixi, dii estis: I have spoken you are Gods.

The.xx. Chapter.
In what order he will write of a person.

NOw seeing that I have showed what God is, according to the talent of my
knowledge, I think it convenient unto my matter, to declare what this word
person signifies in this place, forasmuch as the signification thereof is
referred to diverse things. And because many heretics do mistake and wrongly
expound this word in the glorious and blessed trinity, as they know which have
read ancient chronicles of times past. I will first show what a person is not,
the which is easier, and with the same that there be three persons in ye
supergloriouse deity. For we must learn weighty and hard matters by
foreknowledge of easy things. This done I will show what the word person does
signify in the godhed, then I will apply the definition thereof to Christ, and
then I will refer the same to the holy comforter, I will prove Christ to be a
substance, and I will fortify the holy spirit to be a substance, and Christ
to be unconfounded, and the holy spirit to be unconfounded. Finally I will
portray and paint the three persons, that is the trinity by corporal
similitudes, whose nature in it self is ineffable and unsearchable. And albeit
these things be profound and high mysteries, and as hard as they be necessary
and unknown and never yet disclosed in our mothers tongue, yet I will so shape
and order my oration and speech after such a homely and perceiuable fashion,
as shall be most mete and agreing to the capacity of those that be simple.

The.xxi. Chapter.
A person is not a difference of vocation and office, and that the fathers of
the old testament worshipped a Trinity.

THe Patripassia^s and Sabellia^s, Against ye Patripassians.
and after them Pho^inus, and of late Seruetus, define a person to be a certain
condition and difference of office, as when we say, Ros^ius sometime sustained
the person of Achilles, and sometime of Blisses, or yt a king and a prophet be
diverse persons. For as one man may represent ye person of Achilles and Ulysses,
and nothing lets, but one man may be a king and a prophet, as David was: so
they say that ye father is the son, and ye holy spirit also, and that they be
not three several persons. The story of Christ's christening banisheth this
opinion, Math. 3
where we se a notable difference of the three persons. The father sounds these
words: this is my beloved son. The son is seen standing in Jordan, ye holy
ghost lights upon him in ye likeness of a dove. If the father, the son and the
holy ghost, be three names, and one thing: as of this heretical definition of a
person, it must needs follow, then the father both sou^deth the foresaid words,
was baptized of Iho^ in ye famous river of Jordan, and appeared also in ye
likeness of a dove. But this doctrine is contrary to the truth of the gospel.
Wherefore a person is not a difference of office. Furthermore, the Apostles are
commanded to christen, in the name of the father, the son, Math. 28
and the holy ghost. If the father be all three, he is named thrife, and so it
is Tautologia ociosa, Roma. 1
a folish and vain repeticio^. And this of S. Paul likewise: Grace be with you,
2. Cor. 1
and peace from God our father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, who uses this
manner of salutatio^ in all his Epistles, Philip. 1
the which is vain and superfluous, if we credit this dampnable opinion.
Hearken what he says in an other place: Colloss. 1
Unto us there is but one God, which is the father, of whom are al things, and
we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 8.
By whom are al things, and we by him. Does not he teach us here, that there
be two persons, Of whom By whom.
one of the father, the other of the son, not confounded together, and that
these two persons be but one God? Christ says: Ihon. 7*
My doctrine is not mine, but my fathers which sent me. Wherefore, he and his
father be several persons, and not one thing. Isaac was a figure of Christ:
Gene. 22 Isaac. ^ Christ.
For as Abraham, at the commandment of God, led him unto his death: So Christ
was sent of God, to be slain for our sins. And Sampson likewise, and many
others: but Abraham, Isaac, Manoad, Sampson
Sampson, were several persons: wherefore, the father and Christ be not all one
thing. But I will speak of all the three persons, of the glorious Trinity. And
for so much as many hold opinion, that they of the old Testament nether
worshipped, ne knew any Trinity, but honored only an unity, and sought no
further.

I will first begin with the testimonies of the old Testament* that it may
appear that this doctrine was preached from the creation of the world. The
beginning of the book of generation teaches us, Genes. ^
that there be three several persons, saying: In the beginning God created
Heaven and earth: Where euide^tlye by ye name of God the father, and by the
beginning his son, by whom he made all things, are to be understand. Ihon. 8
For who is the beginning, but Christ? who answers the Jews? asking what he
was: I am ye beginning, which spoke unto you, and in whose behalf David
speaks in ye beginning of ye book, Psalm. 35
it is written of me. After these words of the father and the son it follows
immediately: Hebr. 10.
The spirit of God was borne upon the waters, the which is the third person in
ye gloriouse trinity. Some take the spirit here, for the wynd blowing upon
the waters. If they examine the text diligently, they shall find ye wynd was
yet unmade, and that ye waters there do not signify, that which we call water
commonly, but the confused heap, of which God formed all things. If God were
not a trinity, he would not have said let us make man to our similitude, and
after our likeness* For these words (let us, our similitude, our likeness) cannot
be spoken of one person. Neither they which are spoken after the miserable
captivity and faule of Adam: The Lord God said lo, Adam is become as one of
us, in knowledge of good and evil. But here thou will say, An obie^tio^
answered.
these Phrases prove not many persons, for does not the king say, we will that
this or that be done, and yet he is but one? Kings and Emperors use to say
so, because they have cou^selloures commonly, whose prudent aduises they
follow: but of God, it is written: Quis cognouit mentem Domini, aut quis illi
fuit a consiliis? Who has known the mind of the Lord? or who is his
counselloure? And therefore he does not say so, for like consideration, Pithag.
but because yt as Pithagoras says: He is Ternarius numerus, The third number,
which co^nteineth al other numbres, both unity, euens, and odds. Esayas
teaches us the same, Esaias. ^
where he says that he saw the seraphins flacker from above and cry each one
to other: Holy, Holy, Holy, is ye Lord of Hosts. By this word holy, thrice
repeted, we are taught that there be three persons and ^y the words following,
the Lord of hosts not iterate, that there is but one Lord. I will prove the
same, by the propertyes of the three persons. The Congregation confesses the
father to be unbegotten, Unbegote^.
and no heretyke can deny it, and the scripture tells us, that the son is
begotten, to whom ye father says: Thou art my son, this day I begat the:
Begotten. Psalm. 2
not that the father is elder then Christ: for as he was always a father, so
he was never without a son, but begat him without time: also of my womb before
the morning star begat I the. Psa. 109
God ye father has no womb or corporal form: but by his womb, we must
understand his substance: as if he said, of my substance, of my own nature I
begat thee. If God the father begat Christ of his own substance, which is
immutable, how could of the same substance his mutable flesh be made, as our
late Anabapt. defend? God begat God, and light begat light, as a man gets a
man, and a dog gettech a dog, for a man cannot get a dog. The holy ghost is
neither called unbegotten nor gotten. For if we call him unbegotten, we bring
in.ii. fathers. If we name him begotten, we make.ii. Christ's. He is said to
prosede equally from the father and from the son, Proceeding
as he is equally God, and equally almightye, to be honored equally and every
wheare equally. Peradventure some will require proof out of the scripture of ye
proseeding of the holy co^forter, Scripture proving ye proceeding of the holy
spirit.
because we say that nothing is to be believed upon pain of dampdatio^, which
is not in ye scriptures. For many do allege this processio^ of the holy spirit
for unwritten verities, therefore I say I will prove it by certain testimonies,
albeit I will not deny, but that many things be true verities, which be not in
the scriptures, as it is true that I wrote this book, and not written, it is
true that king Edw. the.vi. God save his noble grace, is King of England, and
vnwritte^ But mark good christen people, when we disalow vnwritte^ verities,
we except such, and do speak only of such things, as be needful and
necessary for the saving of our souls. All such things we say, be written in
Gods book. Unwritte^ verities.
For Ihon says these are written yt ye might believe, and have eternal life, if
we observe these things we shall have eternal life, and what ca^ we desire more.
Al such necessari points be written. Away therefore with vnwritte^ verities. But
how prove ye ye processio^ of ye holy spirit by scripture? That he proceeds
from ye father, christ techeth his disciples saing when ye co^forter is come
whom I will send unto you from the father, Ihon. 15
he shall bear witness of me. That he proceeds also of Christ, these. S.
Paul's words be a sufficient record. If there be any man that has not the
spirit of Christ, Roma. 8
the same is none of his. For he can not be Christ's spirit not proceeding of
him. He is ye virtue, Luke. 6
which went out of him, and healed ye people of Jerusalem, of Tire, and of
Sidon. Further our Savior Christ after his victorious and gloriouse
resurrection, to teach us that the holy ghost proceadeth from him equally, as
he does from the father, breathed on his disciples and said, Ihon. 20 Luke. 24
receive the holy ghost, and lo I send the promis of my father upon you. If
therefore the father be unbegotten, ye son begotten not made, the holy comforter
proceeding, there be three person^s not confounded together. The father is a
spirit, and the son likewise, and the father is holy, and the son likewise,
but another of both is the holy spirit, the holy ghost. He is an unspeakable
communion of the father and son also: therefore these two words be truly
verified severally of the^ both, but not together. If the holy ghost be the
father, he sends him self that is he proceadeth from himself. If he be the
son, he is the son of the father, and of Christ also, for every son is the
son of twain of the father and of the mother. But God forbid that we should
imagine any such kind of thing in the father and Christ. If he be nether of
both, he is a several person. No earthly man is able to discuss this nativity
of Christ and procession of the holy ghost, after what manner both be done, for
both be unspeakable as it is written: Who can declare his generation? Of the
holy co^forter it may be said also, Esaie. 55
who can declare his proceeding? wherefore we must eschew curious talking of these
mysteries, and steadfastly believe because of ye scriptures. Christ says: the
father is greater then I. If he be greater, Ihon. 14
either they be two several persons, or else the father is greater the^ himself.
David witnesses yt the father sets Christ on his right hand The Lord said
unto my Lord, Psalm. 109
sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine ennemies thy fotestole. And
that he sytteth there, we learn of saint Paul, who exhorts us to seek those
things, Colloss. 3
which are above where Christ sits on the right hand of God. Then either
they be two persons or else the Father speaks to him self and sytteth on his
own right hand. The father hears, and Christ prays, John. xi.
he blesses and Christ gives thanks, he commands, and Christ obeyed,
John. xii. John. xvii. John xiiii. John. vii.
he teaches and Christ learneth. For Christ records this of himself, as my
father taught me, so I speak. These properties learn us that they be two
persons unconfounded, for so much as we can not apply or refer the^ to one
person.

Abraham's vision. A Glass.
The vision which appeared to Abraham in the oak grove of Mambre, declares unto
us a manifest distintion of the godhead, and yet not a Trinity of Gods. For he
saw three men, and yet he called them Lord, not Lords. If that vision be
pondred depely, Gene. 18
it is a glass wherein we may behold the face of the glorious trinity. The
majesty and nature of God himself, for as those three men were three several
persons, and yet were named but one Lord, so the father, the son, and the holy
ghost, be three persons and one God. Some will reply that Abraham spoke to one of
the three, when he said Lord, whom he acknowledged to be the chief, taking the
other for his ministers and servants. This is proved to be false of that
which follows: and the Lord went his way, as soon as he had left talkyng with
Abraham, and Abraham returned to his place, and there went two angels to Sodom
at even, and Lot sat at ye gate of the city. Lot calls these two men after
they had brought him without the city, commanding him not to look backward,
Lord not Lords. Wherefore he which departed was not chief, and their Lord. If
he had been chief, Gene. 19
the scripture would not name the twain, remaining Lord which in calling the
twain Lord also, signifies unto us, that there was no superiorite, no
pre-eminence, no prerogative among the^, but equality, as in the trinity,
which is figured by these three men. Some will say, that Lot speaks not to
both, but to one of them. Why then does the scripture say, Loath said unto
them, oh nay my Lord, behold for as much as thy servant has found grace in
thy sight. etc. These two men signify Christ and the holy Ghost, not the
father, for so much as they say that the Lord sent them to destroy that
place. For Christ and the holy comforter are sent, but the father is never
sent, but sends: Notwithstanding he which departed before they came to
Sodom, sending them twain thither, represents the father of heaven, of who^
Christ and the holy ghost both be sent. Now let us se good christen people how
this vision does portrey or paint the Trinity. As three men appeared, so there
be three persons: As these three persons are named one Lord, so the Trinity
is one Lord, one GOD: As the Father is unsent, so one of these is not sent,
and as the father se^deth Christ and the holy ghost into this world, so here
twain be sent of one unto Sodom and Gomor: as the twain which were sent are
called one Lord, so Christ and the holy ghost are but one god. Protogenes
never painted Ialisus at Rodes so excellently, nor Appelles, Venus, nor
Policletus, ye image of Doriphorus, as this vision does lively declare ye
properties of the glorious Trinity, Roma. 11
of which, through which, and for which, al things are. But let us search how
the scripture uses to speak of the Trinity. 1. Ihon. 5
John says: There ar three, which bear record on earth, the spirit, water and
blood, and these three are one. The trinity is signified by these three. Spirit*
The spirit is ye father, for Christ calls him so speaking of the true
worshipping: God is a spirit. And by ye name of blood, we may understand
Christ, Blood.
who for our sakes is become flesh, and blood. By the name of water the holy
ghost is meant, Water.
whom our savior Christ calls water, saying: If any man thirst, let him
come unto me ^ drink. Ihon. 4*
He yt believes on me (says ye scripture) out of his belly shall flow streams
of water of life. This spoke he, Iho^. 7 Ihon. 1^ 1. Cor. 1^ Christ. Door.
Rock. Uyne. Bread. Brydegrome. King. Physician. Ihon. 6 Luke. 11 Ihon. 3
Spirit. Fire. Finger. Math. 3 Exodus 8 Luke. 11 Hebre* ^
says Iho^ the Evangelist, of ye spirit, which they that believed on him,
should receive. Wherefore as a spirit is not blood, ne water, no more is the
father, the son, or the holy ghost; but a distinct person. Christ is named
also a door, a rock, a vine, bread, a bridegroom, a king, a Physician, and his
father a husbandman. If the father be Christ he is the door, the rock, the
vine, yea rather as a husbandman and a vine be diverse things, so Christ is
not the father. The holy comforter is called fire which all be diverse things
from those often times, and the finger of God and the oil of gladness, and
anointing, that figuratly be spoken of the father. But my think I hear some
suttell searching and crafty witted man reply, that as Christ and the vine,
the door, the rock be diverse names of one thing, 1. Ihon. 2
and the holy ghost, and oil* and fire, and anointing, An object. answered.
that so ye father, the son, and the holy ghost, be three names and one thing,
and that the father is called by these names, as he is called before by the name
of a husbandman. This were somewhat, if we had evident Scripture^ that the
Father is Christ, or the holy Ghost, as we have that he is a husbandman: And so
we have say they. For Christ says: I and my father are one, Ihon. 10 Ihon. 14
and whosoever sees me, sees my father. These textes pluck up this opinion
by the roots: For in that he says (we are) he teaches us, We are
that he and his father be not one person. For as much as (are) can not be
spoken of one person. And in that he says (one) he declares that he is of
the selfsame substance. One.
O the depenesse and exceading power of Gods word, which with two sillables
(are and one) confou^deth two heretics, How the father is seen in Christ.
the Arrian, and Patripassion. The other text declaring the father to be seen
in Christ, does not prove them one person, but rather twayn, teaching us that
which S. Paul writes to his countreimen: that he is the brightness of the
fathers glory, and express image of his substance. A glass. Hebre. 1.
When men look in a glass, and behold their own faces, they use to say, that
they see them selves, and they and that which they see, be not al one. When
they se the picture of Christ in a painted cloth, they say they se Christ. If
we se Christ in his picture, if we se our selves in a glass, much more the
father is seen in Christ who is no cou^terfet, but the bryghtnes of the
everlasting light, the undefiled mirror of Gods majesty, the lively image of
the fathers substance. And for as much as he is the image of the father,
Sapien. 7
he is not one person with him, no more then the Image of your person is
your self, or the image of my father William Hutchynson is my father, or the
Image of our noble king Edward the.vi. is the king. God grant that virtue and
knowledge may mete in his roial heart, to the confusion of evil doers, and
heretics. They be.ii. persons, not.ii. gods. For ye kings Image is called the
king, and yet they be not two kings S. John speaks after the same manner of
all three together: there are three which bear record in heaven, 1. Ihon. 5
the father, the word, and the holy ghost, and these three are one. Does he not
teach us plainly that God is a trinity? Thus to conclude this chapter, if the
father be both the son and the holy ghost, he took our nature upon him, he
was tempted of the devil, he suffered hunger and thirst, he was buffeted and
scourged of the Jews, and put to death cruelly, and he also came down in the
lykenes of a dove, and in the similitude of fyrie tongues, he begat himself, he
sent himself, he granted himself a seat of the right hand of himself, he is
an Image, he is greater then himself, he is God to himself. If he can not be
these things, we may easily perceive, that he and his son, and the spirit be
distinct and unconfounded persons, and that this word person in the glorious
trinity does not signify a difference of vocation.

The.xxij. Chapter.
A person is no outward thing, and what a person is in the Godhed, and why
the church has used this word, concerning God.

THis word also is used for all such things, as do cause favor,
parcialitie, regard, and friendship, or anger, hatred, displeasur, enmity, both
in the old and new Testament, as for riches, authority, office, country,
beauty and poverty, bondage, scarcity, deformity. After this signification
and acception, king Iosaphat a worthy prince, an earnest promoter of godliness
and learning, witnesses that with God there is no unrighteous, no regarding
of persons. 2. Para. 1^
S. Paul also tells the Gallathians, that he looks on no man's person,
Galath. 3
and that with out parcialitie he regards both Jew and gentil, bond and fre,
man and woman. Roma. 3
And James bids us to avoid such consideration and regard. Jacob. 2
But in the gloriouse trinity a person is nether any outward thing, nether
any condition or difference of vocation, but as we may gather of the
scriptures, and as me^ learned in the^ teach, a person in the Trinity is an
unconfounded substance, Parsone.
or as other define with many words: A person is a singular substance,
indivisible, not confounded, declaring unto us a distinction of the godhead,
Why this word is used in the Godhead.
and not a trinity of Gods. I suppose it necessary for ye understanding of
this definition to declare for what consideration and skill the faithful
congregation has evermore used this word. For as much as ye scripture teaches
us and our belief tells us, yt god is three, they thought it necessary to
declare what three God is, who is not three fathers, for nether Christ is the
father, nor ye holy co^forter, nor three sons, for ye father is not the son,
nor the holy ghost, nor three holy comforters. Then what three is God? Hear an
example, when we sai Sydrack is not Mysak, nor Misack Abdenago, we grant they
be.iii. but if we will know what.iii. they be, we must find out a more general
word, that is.iii. men. Likewise Mary, our savior Christ's mother, and Mary
Magdalene, and Mary of James be.iii. and if we be further demanded what three
they be, we answer with general word, that they be.iii. women. Even so ye
congregation answers this question, what three is God? with this general word
person, to declare yt there is a destinctio^ between Christ and his father, ^
the holy spirit. For a person is a general word belonging also unto men, for as
much as one man is a substance unconfounded with another: as Abraham is not
Isaac, and he is not Jacob, ne Jacob is Abraham. But here we must ^ote, that as
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob ar one sustaunce touching man's nature, yt so God
albeit he be.iii. persons, yet he is not.iii. substau^ces, but only one
substance. If there be.iii substau^ces, there be three Gods. Some clat^er and
prate yt no such words as substance and person, be found in gods book, and
therefore that they be not to be used concerning God. What if I show and find
the^ in gods book, in the Bible book, will thou then use the^? I will show this
first, after I will prove that the meaning of these words may be gatherd of
infinite textes of scripture. Thirdly and finally concerning this treatise, of a
person I will paint the Trinity by corporal similitude, whose nature it self
is ineffable and incomprehensible. We find the word substance spoken of God in
Paul's letter to the Israelites: The word substance
where he records that our Savior Christ is a lively image of ye fathers
substance. Hebre. 1
Also in his letters to the Corinthia^s he witnesses that to God only that
belongs, 2. Cor. 1
which the Grecians call (...), the Latinistes est, saying: Non est in illo est
and non, sed est in illo est. We may find in the same Apostle the word person,
The word person.
in the foresaid cception and signification: for in his letter to the
Collossia^s, he writes of Christ: Colloss. 2
(...), in him, in Christ dwells all the fullness of ye godhed corporally, or
bodily, that is, Christ is a divine person. Corporaly Personaly
For corporally in this place is as much to say, as that we call in the
gloriouse Trinity, personally, as the Greek word (...) does manifestly prove.
We find also ye word (...), spoken of the godhead in the book of the second
law, Deute. 4
otherwise named Deuteronomie. Moses exhorting the people unto obedience, and
fulfilling the law, says: The Lord spoke unto you out of fire, and you heard
his voice, but you saw no Image. Where the latin text of these words, ye saw
no Image, is Corpus non vidistis. For the Grecians, in whose language S. Paul
did write this letter, at yt time used this word (...), for that which we call
now a person, and as we say there be three persons, so they acknowleged
(...), three bodies. 3. Bodies.
Therefore as (...) signifies a person, so (...) must needs signify
personally. But because many heretics racked this word to prove ye three persons
to be of corporal form and shape, the successors of the Apostles, were
constrained to use another word for the same meaning, and so they used for it
(...), which word continued in use many years. But now also this word is not
used, for as much as some heritiks would prove by it, that God is three
substaunces. For which considerations the Grecians of more latter time use for
it, the word person, saying, there be (...) in the same meaning and
understanding, in which they of more ancient time confessed: (...) or (...):
This is ye doctrine of the Apstles, ye confession of Martirs, ye catholic
churh, and general faith of the congregation.

The.xxiii. Chapter.
That Christ is a substance.

Now I will prove, that the scripture grants unto Christ, and to the holy
ghost ye meaning of these words substance, and person, that is that Christ
is an vnco^fou^ded substance, and the holy ghost likewise: and first I will
prove that Christ is a substance, and afterward that they be unconfounded, and
so it shall be sufficiently declared that God is three. For a persons an
vnco^fou^ded substance: ye word or thought of man is no substance, but a
transitory thing. Ihon. 1
But Ihon records that Christ is the word of the father, how then can he be
a substance? Samosat.
Tharch heretic Samosaten made this argument, who also denies the three
persons saying, that the father is Christ, and the holy ghost both. To him I
make this answer: S. Ihon in the same place tells us, that Christ who is
the word, is God, and that God is a substance. I have proved before in my
treatise, what God is: wherefore we must needs grant that Christ is a
substance, or else deny him to be God. Tell me Samosaten what thou beleuest of
the Father? Is the Father a substance or not? Both Photine, and Seruete, thy
adhere^ts grant this. Thou say also that Christ is the father. Do thou
not confess him to be a substance, in yt thou say he is the father?
Again, in denieng him to be a substance, do thou not deny him to be the
father, for the father is a substance? Thy own sayings prove Christ to be a
substance, and not to be ye father. If he be the father as thou grauntest,
then is he a substance. I grant the so much, but I deny that, of which thy
assertion proves him a substance. For no man is his word, no man is his own
thought: but Christ is the word and thought of the father, Gene. 4^
wherefore he is not ye father no more then the words of Joseph to his brethren
are Joseph himself. S. Ihon witnesses, that ye word which is Christ, is not a
transitory word, a sou^ding word coming from the lights, but by a metaphor.
But an everlasting word, John. 1*
by which all things were creat, things that are in heaven, and things yt are
in earth, things visible and invisible, whether they be majesty or lordship,
either rule or power, saying, all were made by it, Colloss. 1
and nothing without it. He says also that this word is God. It vpholdeth
things, disposes all things, governs all: wherefore it is a substance, for
these things can not be aplied to any thing which is no substau^^^: and if so
be it be substance, the^ christ is a substance, for christ is ye word. Christ
is figured in the scripture by diverse things. Figure of Christ.
Abraham and Isaac were figures of him, and the wether which was slain for
Isaac, ye stone which Jacob anointed, Gene. 22
the ladder, Joseph sold into Egypt, Moises rod, Iosue, Gene. 28
Sampson, the brazen serpent, a cluster of grapes, be figures of him, which al
be substau^ces, and is he himself no substance? We read not in holy writ that
substau^ces, Gene. 37
and no substaunces be likened and compared together. The scripture bears
record of him, Exodus 7 Nume. 21 Nume. 13
yt he is no dead image of the father, for he is life and resurrecio^: nether a
dum image, for he is the fathers word: Nor insensible, for he is wisdom: nor
counterfeit, Ihon. 12
for he is truth, but a lively and express image, and therefore a substance,
Ihon. 1
for so much as all living things be substau^ces. He answers the Jews
reuiling him, Ihon. 14
that he said Abraham had seen his days: Verily verily I say unto you, Ihon. 8
er Abraham was borne, I am, by which words we learn not only that he is a
substance, but also that he is both God and man. God, because nothing is save
only God, and man, forasmuch as in man's flesh he spoke. Moises says of him, he
that is did send me unto you: for the son sent him. Exodus 3
The son did show him self in the likeness of fire, the son went before the
Israelites, by day in a pyller of a cloud, and by night in a pyller of fire.
He carried them to the land of promis, he appeared unto them in many likenesses
and similitudes, his workmanship governed the world from the beginning, as his
answer teaches us unto the Jews accusing him for healing a certain man on the
sabbath day: Ihon. 5
my father works hitherto and I work. As if he should say: why blame you me
for working on ye saboth day, who never ceased to work? If ye blame me, blame
also mi father, who works hitherto. If ye can not justly accuse him, ye can
not justly blame me, for I and my father are one. Whatsoever he does, that does
the son also, Ihon. 10
he rules al things from the beginning and so do I. He works hitherto and I
work hitherto. Our savior Christ teaches us here, that he is licensed to
work on the sabbath day by the example of his father, who works continually,
and that the commandments of the sabbatticall rest belong nothing unto him
working inseperably with his father: And also that he governs all things
with the father, and is not idle, condempning and co^troulling the damnable
opinion of the Arrians and Paullians. It is nedeles to speak any further of
this thing.

The.xxiiij. Chapter.
That the holy spirit is a substance not a Godly inspiration, he is every
where, governor of the world, to be prayed unto a forgiuer of sin.

But touching the holy conforter many doubt whether he be a substance or not.
The Saduces and Libertines say, Against ye libertines.
that all the spirits and angels are no substaunces, but inspirations,
affections, and qualities: That good angels, are good affections, Godly
motions, which God works in us, and that dyuels and evil angels are beastly
affections, evil thoughts coming of the flesh. Therefore I think it agreeable
unto my matter, to prove ye holy spirit to be a substance, for unless he be
so, he can not be the third person in the ouerglorious Trinity. Sapien. 1
The book of wisdom witnesses, yt the spirit of the Lord fills the round
co^pas of the world. The spirit is every where.
We can go no whither from this spirit, we can not avoid his presence, we can
not fly from him, but by flying unto him, we can not escape his righteousness,
Psalm. 138
but by appealing to his mercy, for there as he is not by his favor and grace,
he is by his wrath and displesur where he is not a been factor he is a
punisher, where he is not a dweller, he is an auenger. Who can deny him to be a
substance, who fills ye world, and not ye world only but Christ also the
only savior of ye world, of who^ it was written: Luke. 4
Jesus full of the holy ghost returned from Iorda^. If he fill the world, he is
God, for this belongs only God as I have proved before. If he be God, the^ is
he a substance not an inspiracio^ coming from God as our english Saduces, and
outlandish Libertins do teach. Esaias. 63
The Prophet Esaias records yt he governed the congregation of the Israelits,
yt he was their deliverer out of Egypt, their guide in ye wilderness, ye worker
of wonders saying: where is he, Gouerner of ye world.
who brought the^ from ye water of ye sea as a shepherd does his flock? where
is he which ^ed Moises by the right hand with his glorious arm? Where is he that
led them in the deep as an horse is led in the plain and he answers: The
spirit of the Lord led the^ as a tame beast goes in the field. He governs
also the present congregation, Ihon. 14
for Christ promises, that he would pray the father to send us another
comforter to abide with us for ever. And Paul testifies that the spirit gives
to one vtteraunce of wisdom, 1. Cor. 12
to an other faith, to an other gifts of healyng, to another power to do
miracles, to another prophecy, to another judgment of spirits, to another
diverse tongues, to another interpretacion, which be necessary offices in the
congregation, so that the holy spirit may say also: The father works hitherto
and so do I, for he workth inseperably with the father and the son. Whereof it
must neades follow, that he is a substance, and that he is God, for the
governance of the world belongs to the majesty of the Godhead, as I have
proved before. If he were nothing but a Godly motion, a good affection, and
inspiration, Math. 3
he would not ne could have showed himself in the likeness of a dove, and in
the similitude of fyrie tongues. Acts. 2
He is the finger of God, he is fire, oil, anointing, water, an advocate, a
cole, Exodus 8 Luke. 11 Hebre. ^ 1. Ihon. ^
for all these the scripture gives him. Wherefore he is a substance, forasmuch
as al these be substaunces, not inspirations. For the scripture does not lyken
substaunces, to things that be no substaunces. He is also to be prayed unto,
to be called upon, for what is baptism: To be prayed unto. Ihon. 8
but an invocation of the father, the son, and the holy spirit, and therefore
a substance. No man prays unto an inspiration, no man cries to an
affection. Our praying unto him proves him to hear us, Esaias. 6
to be almighty God, to be every where to know the thoughts of all men, but
nothing hears, nothing searches thoughts, but a substance, then he can not
be a thought, a motion coming from God, yea, rather these properties prove him
to be the third person in the over gloriouse deite. That comforter says
Christ the holy ghost whom my father will send in my name, Ihon. 14
he shall teach you all. If he be a teacher, he must needs be a substance. If
he be an inspiration, he is the doctrine, which is taught, not the teacher
thereof. Luke. 9
He gave Simon an answer that he should not se death, before he had seen the
lord Christ. He through the mouth of David spoke before of Judas. Acts. 1
He at Antioche commands to separate Barnabas and Paul to the worck, Acts.
13
whereunto he had called them. He forbids the^ to preach Gods word in Asia.
Acts. 16
S. Luke of the acts tells that he monished Philip to join himself to the
chariot of the gelded man. Acts. 8
Do not these textes, prove him to govern the congregation? Do they not
witness him to be mindful of both, good and evil? Do they not deny him to be
an inspiration coming from God? Do they not fortify him to be a substance to
be ye third person, to be God? S. Peter when he says: holy me^ of God spoke
by the inspiration of the holy ghost, puts a plain difference between him
and an inspiration, for he is not the inspiration, but the worker thereof, the
sender of it. Wherefore as the worckman is not his worck, as Protogenes is not
Ialysus, Appelles is not Venus, 2. Peter. 1
the carpenter is not the house, no more is the holy spirit an inspiration.
The spirit forgeueth sin.
He also forgeueth sin, makes us the sons of God, for we are christened in
his name, and that we should believe that ye holy spirit works in baptism, it
pleased the almighty Trinity yt he should notably appear at Christ's baptising.
Math. 3
For this consideration the holy co^forter at that time showed himself in the
likeness of a dove. Does any aungel forgive sin, or Archaungel? No truly this
belongs to the father only, the son only, the holy ghost only. But me
thinks one replieth. Seraphin speaks unto the Prophet Esaias: Behold, Esaias. 6
this has touched thy mouth, and thine unrighteous is taken away, and thy
sin forgiven. He says not, I have taken it away, but this, speaking of a
hot cole taken from the alter with the tongues, not ch^rcoale, not seacoale,
but the cole of the holy ghost, who may be well called a coal, for he is fire.
Job. 26
The pacient man Job tells us, that almighty God garnished ye heavens with
his spirit, and with his hand wounded the rebellious serpent, with who^ David
agrees saying: By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, Psalm. 31
and all the hosts of them, by the spirit of his mouth. Wherefore in ye work
of creation, Moises makes relation of him, Gene. 1
telling us that the spirit of God was born upon the waters. Basyl who for his
great learning was surnamed Magnus, expounds this place of the holy ghost,
and says, that his predecessors took it so: for the word spirit can not
signify wynd there, which was then not made. Was borne upon the waters is no
blowyng, but as much to say as he sat on the waters, for as the Hen sytting on
her eggs, hatcheth her yo^g ones, so the holy ghost hatched al creatures, which
there are called waters, as it is written, when thou let thy spirit go
fourth they are made, so you renuest the face of the earth. Is the garnisher of
the heavens, maker of ye world, forgeuer of sins, myndfull of the
congregation, no substance but a fantasy, an imagination? And here I suppose
it be agreeable unto my matter, to speak somewhat of al good angels in general,
and evil spirits: for if I can prove them to be no motions, but substaunces,
much more the holy comforter is a substance. But if it be beside our purpose,
yet it shall be a profitable and necessary digression, for there be many late
Libertines and late English Saduces, which would teach out of scripture, that
there is nether place of rest, ne pain after this life, that hell is nothing
else, but a tormenting and desperate conscience, and that a joyful, quiet and
merry conscience is heaven, and that devils ar evil thoughts, and good angels
good thoughts. First if this doctrine be true, we believe in vain the
resurrection of our bodies, which is grounded of scripture, Resurrection.
and nothing else: so yt if you believe scripture, this is a false, pretensed,
and damnable doctrine. If our bodies shall not rise, then is Christ not risen,
says Paul, 1. Cor. 15
and al preachi^g is vanity: but our bodies be dead through ye syn of Ada^,
and shall be raised through the righteousness of Christ Jesus. By a man came death
of soul and body, and by a man comes resurrection of soul and body. Were not
many christen men baptized over dead men's graves in the primative church, in
token that the dead should rise again? S. Paul in his.xv. Chapter to the
Corinthians, the first letter, does nothing else but confute this damnable
opinion of the Saduces denying the resurrection, which now the Libertines begin
to renew. But our Saduces grant the resurrection, they say we must rise from
syn, if we will come to heave, which is a merry and joyful conscience. 2. sorts
of resurrection from sin from death
There be two sorts of resurrections expressed in Gods word, of which it is
written: Likewise as Christ was raised up from death by ye glory of the father:
Even so we also should walk in a new life. This new life is resurrection from
sin: Roma. 6
Christ's raising is the other resurrection that is of the body, Roma. 8
which began in Christ, the first fruits of the dead. For Paul says: He that
raised up Christ from death, 1. Cor. 15
shall quicke^ our mortal bodies: and in another place: it shall rise a
spiritual body. Our Saduces, because they either will not, or can not perceive
the difference between these two sorts of resurrection, which both are in
scripture, grant in words, and deny in deed both heaven and hell, both good
angels and il, defending al resurrection to be from sin to virtue, from vice
to godliness, from uncleanness to sanctifitation. Resurrection from sin is but a
figure of the other resurreccion. For Paul says: Christ being once raised from
death (not from sin, Roma. 6
who never sinned) dies no more. Likewise imagen ye also, that ye are dead
concerning sin, but are alive to God. The^ it disanulleth not resurrection of
bodies, but fortifieth the same, forasmuch as if there be a shadow, there must
needs be a body. Now let us search what the scripture teaches us of good
angels and believe them. Angels.
For a scripture given by inspiration of God, is profitable to teach, to
control, to amend: and it is truth. 2. Tim. 3
No man can deny angels to be creaturs, and almighty Gods workmanship, Ihon.
17*
as Paul witnesses: He makes his angels spirits, and his ministers flames
of fire. Hebre. 1
How then are they inspirations? Luke regestreth that at Christ's birth a
multitude of heavenly soldiers (which were angels) song glory to God on high,
Luke. 2
Luke. 1
and peace in earth, and rejoicing to men. Therefore they be no inspirations.
Did an inspiration appear to priest Zachary burning ince^se in the temple?
Did an inspiration show him that Elizabeth his wife should bear him a son?
Did an inspiration make him specheles? No truly, for the aungel tells what he
is saying: I am Gabriel that stands in the sight of God, and am sent to speak
unto thee. In yt he says I stand and I am sent, he declares that he is a
substance. And if Gabriel be a substance, ye rest be also substa^ces. They
rejoice over every sinner y^ repents, Luke. 15 Math. 18 Psalm. 91 Luke. 16
Math. 4
they behold the face of the father in heaven, they assist and bear us up in
their hands, they cari Lazarus into Abraham's bosom, they minister unto Christ
after his temptation, they delivered ye law unto the Israelites, Acts. 7 Math.
25
they shall come to the general Judgment with Christ, and after the
resurrection, they shall be made like unto them. Math. 22
If they be inspirations, tell me how, speaking, singing, standing, se^ding,
joy, seeing, punishing, hands, help, and infinite other things, which the
scripture gives to Angels, can be in an inspiratio^ and without a substance.

Me think this assercion has affinity with the doting opinion of
transubsta^tiation. For our Romanistes, although they more stubburnely, then
truly, and more obstinately, then devoutly defend, that no bread remains
after the consecration, yet they cannot deny, but that many accidents remain,
as the culloure of bread, the taste of bread, breadth, length, and other, the
which cannot be in ye comfortable and sweet flesh of Christ, wherefore either
the substance of bread remains, or else we must sai with the papists, that
these things be without a substance, the which is as if we should say, there
is sickness, and there is health, there is cold and heat, moisture and drith,
but there is no such thing as a body. An angel of ye Lord comfort Agar ye
Egiptian, Gene. 24
beside the well of Seer, and commands her to return to her mistress.
Abraham promises his servant, that an Angel shall aid and further him in his
journey. Jacob when he blesses Ephraim and Manasses, Gene. 24 Gene. 4^
prays yt the Angel of ye Lord, which had been his succor at all times, might
bless and multiply them. We read that an Angel governs ye hosts of the
Israelites, an Angel of the Lord kills thousa^ds of the Assyrianes, Angels
certify women of Christ's resurrection, 4. Reg. 19 Luke. 24 Acts. 1 Hebre. ^
and the disciples of his glorious return. Wheafore they be no inspiratio^s,
no mocio^s cu^ming from God, but spiritual substau^ces, and ministering
spirits, sent to minister for their sakes, which shall be heyr^s of salvation.
Now as I have spoken of good Angels, so I think it no less needful somewhat
to speak of evil Angels. For there be many late borne Saduces, which have
persuaded their own wavering minds, and allure the consciences of others to
y^ to the foresaid opinion, that the devil is nothing but Nolitum, or a filthy
affecton of the flesh, and swaruing from honesty, virtue and godliness. I think
such have either already said in their hearts: there is no God, or yt they may as
easily be brought thereunto, as Cherea was unto Pamphila. Cherea durst not
ieopard in his own apparel, but fained himself to be anoteer. Even so our
late Saduces and Libertines, will not reason these things stiffly for
disturbing ye co^monwelth, or rather for losing their lives. But it is to be
feared, that under the color of christians, they say they reason in the way
of disputation, when they speak from ye bottom of their hearts. If any man
winch at my writing, he declares yt he is a Saducie. If there be a God, as we
most steadfastly must believe, verily there is a devil also, and if there be a
devil, there is no surer argument, no stronger proof, no playner evidence,
that there is a God. Be not al evil angels spirits? Then ar they not sensual
motions, but spiritual substau^ces. But I will leave arguments, and call truth
to witness, let us ask the scripture what the devil is, let us enquire of
Peter and Paul, let the Prophets and the Evangelists testify. S. Peter says,
1. Peter. ^
that our aduersari the devil walks about like a roaring lion, seking whom
he make devour. He compares him to a Lion, he walks, he seeks. And the
chosen vessel Paul, Eyhes. 6
warns us to put on ye armor of God, that we may stand steadfast against the
crafty assaults of ye devil, forasmuch as we wrestle noe against flesh and
blood, but against rule, against power, against worldly rulere of the
darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness for heavenly things.
He makes a difference between the devil and his assaults, which be beastly
affections, saying: against ye crafty assalts of the devil, and he calls
them rulers, powers, wherefore they be no fleshly motions. But you will say he
calls them spiritual wickednesses, Ihon. 1
a wickedness is no substance. So Terence calls Dauus, Scelus: Tully
calls Cateline Pestis, so the scripture caleth God love, truth, and light,
and il men darkness. Job* 1
We read in ye story of Job, yt when ye seruau^ts of god came and stood before
the Lord, Satan came also among them, and God talks with him, and he answers
that he had walked through the land, and craves of God to suffer him to
scourge Job, without whose leave he could do nothing. After he rayseth the
Sabees against Job, he kylleth his servant, he slays his children, he
smites him with marvelous sore byles, from the sole of his foot unto his
croune, so yt he scraped away the filth of them with a potsherd. Did an
affection worck these things, or a spiritual rule and substance? To deceive
wicked king Achab, he promises that he will be a liyng spirit, 3. Reg. 22
in the mouth of.iiii.C. prophets, he vexes king Saul, Reg. 16.
Christ sees him as lightning, falling down from heaven, he blyndeth all those
that believe not the Gospel, he works al iniquity, Luke. 10
he seduced Adam and Eve, he is ye enemy which sows tares to destroy the sede
of everlasting life, Math. 13
yt is, of Gods word, he is the strong harnessed man, and spiritual Pharao
ouercome^ of our savior Christ, Luke. 11
he is the governor that rules in the aier, and king of this world, Ephesians. 1
he sets Christ on the pinnacle of the temple, and on a high mountain,
shows him the glory of ye world, he buffeteth S. Paul, Math. 4
le^t he should be exalted out of measure, 2. Cor. 12 Judas. 1
through the abu^daunce of revelations, he strives with Mighel the Archaungell,
and disputes about the body of Moises, he shall cast the faithful congregation
into prison for.x. days he is the dragon cast out of heaven by the blood of the
lamb, Apoc. 2
and pursuing the woman. Then he is no fleshly motion, unless our savior Christ
had such beastly motions, unless also heaven were full of such which was full of
traitorous angels. In the country of the Gargasites two devils seeing christ,
cried out, what have we to do with thee. O Jesus son of God? Math. 8
art thou come hither to torment us before ye time? And they beseech him of leave
to go into the herd of swine. Do affections cry talk, kill, smite, fall from
heaven, tempt Christ, pursue the church? Christ tells us they shall be punished
in the fire with the wicked, saying: Math. 2^
depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire which is prepared for the
devil and his angels. S. Peter says that God spared not his angels that
sinned, but cast them down into hell and delivered them in to chains of
darkness, Peter. 2
to be kept unto dampnation. Paull commanded the Corinthians to deliver him
which held his fathers wife to Satan, ^. Cor. 1
for the destruction of the flesh. He means not that they should give him
over to the lusts of the flesh, and suffer him to abide in vain pleasures.
Wherefore deuels ar no fleshly lusts, carnal motions, sensual affections.
Deuels believe and tremble says James. They confess Christ to be the son of
God, Jacob. 2 Math. 8
as in the Eua^gelists we may read more the^ once or twice. But I think our
Saduces will be edified more by a coniurer, the^ by the words of godliness,
wherefore I send the^ to co^iurers, sorcerers, enchau^ters, charmers, witches,
which will learn and persuade the^ that there be devils, and that they be not
lusts of the flesh, but spiritual substaunces, and spirits created for
vengeance, which now in ye end of the world shall power out their strength,
Eccle. 38
to pluck the Lamb of God out of the minds of al men. If therefore al angels
both good and evil be substau^ces, and not Godly or beastly lusts, much more
God the holy ghost maker of al spirits, knower of thoughts, governor of the
church, forgeuer of syns, hatcher of ye creaturs, filler of al places, is a
spiritual substance and no inspiration.

The.xxv. Chapter.
Christ is unconfounded, why he became man, why he was borne of a woman, he
took both the soul and body of man, why he chose a virgin to be borne of, and
why a virgin hand fasted and married, why he was a babe at his beginning, not an
able man, as Adam was at his first creation, why he came so long after Adams
fall, why he was baptized, tempted, crucified. etc.

NOw albeit both Christ be a substance and the holy ghost also, yet it does
not follow, that they be two persons in the supergloriouse trinity, for they
may be both one, as the Sabellians do teach. Wherefore now I will prove that
they be unconfounded, yt which being proved, no man can doub^e hereafter, but
they be two persons: for a person is an unconfounded substance. We may
learn out of Gods book, that nether the father, nor the holy comforter took
man's nature upon them, but Christ only. For as through a natural man we were
banyshed out of paradise, Whichrist became man
made the children of everlasting damnation, so it pleased the almighty
trinity nether by an aungel or Archaungel, but by a natural man to restore us
again, and make us heirs to salvation, 1. Cor. 15
as Paul witnesses: by a man came death, and by a man comes resurrection of
the dead. For as by Adam al die, eue^ so by Christ al be made alive. And the
will of God was that he should be born of a woman. God sent his son. Math. 1
Galat. 4 Why he was borne of a woman
Factum ex muliere, borne or made of a woman. But why was Christ born of a
woman? Truly because syn and death ouerflowed the world through ye first woman,
he works the mystery of life and righteousness by an other woman, yt the
blame of sin should not be imputed to his creature, which is good, but to ye
will by which Eve sinned. For seeing he is a savior both of men and women, he
becomes man, for so much as man is the better kind, yet he is borne of a woman,
yt we should believe him to be a savior of women also, so that his birth of a
woman, and his becoming man, declares him to be mindful of both kinds. But
here we must note that Christ took man's nature upon him, not by the turning of
his godhead into his manhead, but by assumpting of manhead unto his godhead,
not by confusion or mixture of substance, but by unity of person. For as the
reasonable soul and the fleshly body, is one man: so y^ deity and humanity is
one Christ. When I say Christ took our nature upon him, Christ took both soul
and body.
I mean not yt he took flesh only, as some heretics have thought, but the
soull of man also, for so much as he is no half savior, but a redemer of both.
For he witnesses of himself: Tristis est anima mea, Mark. 14* Ihon. 10
my soull is sad unto death: and I have power to put my soul from me, and I
have power to take it again, no man takes it from me. David speaks also in
his behalf, thou shall not leave my soul in hell, Psalm. 1^
nether shall thou suffer thy saint to se corruption. Some are moved to think
that Christ took not man's soull upon him, An obiecti^on answered.
but the body only, because his beloved disciple says, Verbum caro factum est,
the word was made flesh, making no mention of a soul. S. John says, Ihon. 1
the word was made flesh, as Paul records, that by the deades of the law no
flesh shall be justified: Roma. 3 Galat. 3
The which in another place he says more plainly, through the law no man
shall be justified, understanding by the word flesh, not the body only, but
the hole man both body and soul. This manner of speaking is often in the
scripture, Psalm. 64
for David says: thou hear ye prayer, therefore al flesh comes unto thee,
all flesh for all men. And note here a vehemency in the words (thou hear)
as if he should say: We pray to thee, for we do know that thou do hear, but of
other we know not that they hear, and therefore we only call on thy name. Thus
did the old Patriarchs, this was their faith. We never read that they prayed
to any creature. Hiere. 7
And Jeremy curses him that makes flesh his arm, that is puts his trust in
man. And John Baptist testififieth that al flesh shall se the savior sent of
God. So Ihon the Evangelist says, the word was made flesh, Luke. 3
as if he had said the word was made man, took ma^s flesh and nature, which
word is Christ. I have declared before, Against ye late Anab.
whi he is named a word, and what manner of word he is. But whereof was he made
flesh? Of what matter and stuff was his humanity shapen? or did he bring it
out of heaven? Gene. 2
No truly. The first Ada^s flesh was formed of the earth, as it is written:
then the Lord God shaped man of the mould of the earth. And whereof the second
Adams flesh was made the blessed apostle S. Paul tells, saing: When the
fulness of time was expired, God sent his son Factum ex muliere, Galat. ^*
made or born of a woman. He did not pass through her as water gusheth through a
pipe or condite, but took part of her substance and nature. Wherefore ye
Prophet Esaias names him a flower or blossom coming out of the rote of Iesse.
Esaias. 40 Canti. 2
Solomon names him a Lily, and a Rose among thorns. Does not every flower
take his nature of the body and stok, out of which it grows? Does not the
Lily and Rose likewise? Are grapes gathered of thorns, or fygges of appell
trees? Besides this it was needful, that the same flesh should be punished on ye
tree, which offended in eating of the fruit of the tree, that the same flesh
should be justified and rise in rightousnes, which died in sin and
unrighteous. For by a man, says Paul, came de^^h, 1. Cor. 1^
and by a man comes resurreccion of the dead. And as by the disobedience of
one man, many became dead: so by the obedience of one man many be made alive.
W^y and consider the comparison that Paul makes between the first Adam and the
second Adam in the.v. to the Romans, Roma. 5
and it destroys this opinion utterly. Besides, S. Paul says that we be
flesh of his flesh, and bones of his bones, speaking of Christ: Me^bra sumus de
corpore eius, Ephesi. 5
de carne eius and de ossibus eius: We are members of his body, of his flesh,
and of his bones. But how are we (good christen people) flesh of Christ's flesh,
except he be flesh of Mary's flesh, and bones of Mary's bones? Besides, he did
suck his mother, and took his norishment out of her sweet breasts. For we read,
that a certain woman came unto him and said: Beatus venture qui te portauit,
Luke. 11
and vbera que suxisti: Happy is the womb that bare the and the paps which
gave ye suck. Nether Christ, who is truth, does not reprove her as a liar:
wherefore we must neds grant that he took his nature, substance, manhod and
flesh of her. I do touch this matter, because not long since, I communed with a
certain woman which denied this point, and when I and M. Whytehead, Thomas
Lever and others, alleged this text against her opinion: Semen mulieris
conteret caput serpentis: The sede of the woman shall grind or breack the
Serpents head. She answered: I deny not that Christ is Mary's sede or the
woman's sede, nor I deny him not to be a man, An obiect^.
but Mary had two seeds, one sede of her faith, and another sede of her flesh
and in her body. There is a natural and a corporal sede, and there is a
spiritual and an heavenly sede, as we may gather of S. Iho^, where he says:
The sede of God remains in him, and he can not sin: And Christ is her sede,
1. Ihon. 2
but he is become man of the sede of her faith and belief, of spiritual seed,
not of natural seed: for her sede and flesh was synful, as the flesh and sede
of others. Thau^swe^
The sede which is promised unto Adam is named to be Semen mulieris, the sede
of a woman, the same is the sede of Eve, the self same afterward is called the
sede of Abraham, of Jacob, the sede of David, and of the blessed Virgin. But
the sede that S. Ihon speaks of, is Semen Dei, the sede of God, that is, ye
holy spirit, not Abraham's sede, David's sede, or Mary's sede. How ca^ it be
their sede which took no substance of them? Further, the same promise is renewed
unto Abraham, Jacob, David, and others with all these special words, Gene. 22
Gene. 26 2. Reg. 7 1. Para. 2 Psalm. 122
that of their wombes, of their bodies, of their fruit, of their bellies, of
their loins, of their flesh, the savior of ye world shall be born, not of their
faith, of their belief. Wherefore it must needs be a fleshly, a natural, and a
corporal sede, of which Christ was made man, maugre the head of the devil and
al heretykes. He took not, says Paul, on him the angels, but the sede of
Abraham takes he on him. Hebre. 2
Now ye spiritual sede is in angels more plentifully, then in men, for so
much as they be not depressed with the gross lompe of the body. And that we
should firmly believe and steadfastly credit, Ex quibus Christus est secundum
carnem, Roma. 9
that he is of the fathers concerning the flesh, S. Matthew and S. Luke reken
his kindred fetch his stock and generation, Math. 1 Luke. 3
from Adam, Enok, Noe, Abraham, David, Solomon, Roboam, Zorobabel. etc.
Moreover, Christ came not only to dye f^r our sins, but also to be an
ensample unto us, and a perfect pattern of good living, as shall be declared
afterward. For So Much the^ as we be partakers of flesh and blood, he also
Participauit eisdem, Hebre. 2
took part with us. If he took other flesh, not made of his mother, but of what
matter it pleased him, he took no part with us, nether does his ensample
belong unto us. He is our brother. For S. Paul says, he is not ashamed to call
the^ brethren, saying: I will declare thy name unto my brethren. Now brethren be
of one nature and substance touching their flesh and body. Therefore she that
denies Christ to have taken his flesh of his mother, is not the sister of
Christ, but the eldest and first borne daughter of Antichrist. Yet she
pretended that she believed that Christ was a true and natural man, but in deed
she denies his ma^hod: for if he had any manhod or humanity (as no doubt he
had) he had it undoubtedly of his mother, or else he was no man. If he had it
not of his mother, define and show from whence he had it. Yea, they say it is
unknown and undefined in the scripturs. How the^ can we warrant Christ's
humanity against heretics, if we make it uncertain whereof he took it, and if
it be unknown whereof it was shapen: But albeit he took flesh of his mother,
yet it was holy flesh, not synful flesh that he took, for so much as it was
conceived, and wrought by the over shadowing of ye holy ghost. Why he was borne
of a virgin
Al be it the seed and flesh of other be sinful, yet hers was not so, but
sanctified by the holy spirit and most clean: for to her it was said:
Benedicta tu inter mulieres: Blessed art thou amongst women. He is Lapis de
monte excisus sine manibus, comminuens. etc. The stone of which Daniell
records, Daniel. 2
that was cut out of ye hill without hands, which has and shall break into
powder the golden, silver, brazen, and iron kingd^mes, that is the.iiii.
Monarchies and Empyres of the Caldies, and Babilonians, of the Medies, and
Persies, of the Macedonians and Greeks, and of he Romans. The hill out of the
which this stone is taken, is the tribe and house of Judah, which dwelt and was
situate upon mount Sion in Jerusalem: and by the words (without hands) is meant
that this stone, without man's seed, man's help and nature, came out of ye
foresaid hill, in that he took his flesh on no earthly father, but only of the
substance of Marye his mother, of whose breasts the said flesh was nourished
afterward.

Christ was conceived of the holy ghost, not the father, who touching his
humanity has no father upon earth, Luke. 1 Math. 1
as concerning his divinity he has no mother in heaven. Further, he was borne
of a Virgin, for so much as Virginity is a far more honorable thing then
wedlock. The blessed Virgin Credendo, non concum bendo grauida facta est,
Esaias. 7
was made fruitful by faith, not by man's help, by the spirit, not by lechery.
For it was seeming that the unspotted lamb Jesus Christ, Math. 1
who should blot out our sins, as the fire melts the wax, that he should
be born without all original sin. Why he was borne of a virgin espoused
and married. Math. 1
Notwithstanding was borne Ex Virgin desponsata, of a Virgin handfasted and
married, partly yt the young Virgin should not be destitute of a helper, a keeper,
a nourysher in her adversity and travail, and her progress into Egipte,
partly also that none should recount wedlock vnelean, or matrimony un pure,
for so much as he vouchsafed to be borne therein. Neither is it any dishonor, any
defacing to ye divine nature, that Christ who fills all ye world, filled the
womb of ye blessed virgin, no not if her flesh had been sinful and
unsanctified. The Godhed, is vndefilea^le.
For his divinity is not defiled therbi no more then ye son shining upon
carrein and filthy ^akes is dishonored or defiled through their stinking
sents, or rather much less for he made the sun. For the divinity is said to
be vndefilable, not because it touches no thing unclean, but because it
continues clean, whatsoever it touches. Wherefore, he was not defiled with
the Virgins womb, but sanctified it, hallowed it with his presence, and made it
most clean and chose himself a mother in earth, because before he had a father
in heaven. If any man think, because Christ was borne of the holy ghost, Christ
is not the holy ghostes son.
that he is ye holy ghost son, let him not be deceived: for it is no sure
reason, if any thing be born of an other, to make it straight the son thereof,
as for example: Ihon. 3
We are borne of water, and yet we are not the sons of water: we are borne of
the holy ghost, and yet we are not the sons of the holy ghost, but the sons
of our heavenly father. Also lice, hears, and lumbrykes are bred and gendred
of man* and yet no body calls them the sons of man. Likewise many ar called
the sons of some, and yet they cannot be said to be born of them, as Eschinus
is son to Mitio, and yet not borne of him. And ye scripture calls them, ^.
Reg. 10
Filios Mortis, the sons of death, 2. Reg. 1^. Iudi. 19 1. Reg. 2 Ihon. 17
the sons Belliall, the children of the devil, the children of sin and
perdition, the sons of wrath, the sons of hell, which were never born of it,
but made unto ignominy, and Filios dilectionis, ye sons of love, ye sons
of light, Psalm. 8^
of promise, of strength, of the kingdom, not borne of it, but such as shall be
fellow heirs with Christ, and are prepared for ye kingdom. So our savior
Christ is said to be conceived of ye holy comforter, and borne of him, and yet
he is not his son, but thonli son of God ye father, unto whom we be also
sons: Colloss. 1 Ephesians. 5
but we be the sons of promise, he is ye son begotten, we be sons through
adoption, Christ is the son of God by nature, for as much as the scripture is,
that he was conceived of the holy ghost, who being God became man. We cannot
gather thereof, Roma. 9 2. Reg. 2* Math. 8
yt he is Christ's father: for touching his humane nature he was borne without
a father, as touching his other nature he lacke^ a mother: but rather we may
reason that he is his mother, for ye mother co^ceaueth, not the father, and so
he shall have.ii. mothers, the which is impossible, wherefore he is the only
son of God the father.

Math. 2
But why is he borne a babe, and a litell one, not an able man as Adam was? Adam
was made an able man, because he was made after the image of God, not in sinful
flesh through any sin of man. But his posterity and of spring ar born babes,
Why al me^ be borne babes, not ^able men.
forasmuch as they are borne in sinful flesh, as David witnesses, saying:
Ecce enim in iniquitatibus. etc. Behold, says David, I was born in wickedness,
and my mother conceived me in sin. Unreasonable beasts, as the calf the
little lamb, the whelpe, as soon as they are borne can go, run, find out
their mothers teates, and suck them without any help of other: only man when
he is borne, can nether ocupy his tongue in speaking, nor fete in going, nor
his hands to find, and except his mother or nourse thrust her breast unto his
lyps, he knows not where they are, nor what to do, and would cry for hunger,
yea, famyshe before he ^ould suck of his own accord. This infirmity is in our
bodies, when we be young, because Adam and Eve sinned when they were old:
forasmuch as then our minds also be weak and blind through the same sin,
that the feebleness of the body might be agreeable to the ignorance of the mind.
Gene. 3
For as both body and soul sinned in eating the apple, ye mind in lusting, the
body in taking, so both are punished, the body with infirmity, the mind with
ignorance. Now our Savior Christ albeit he were not borne in sinful flesh,
yet because he was not borne in the likeness of this sinful flesh, he was borne
a babe, not of perfect bygnes, like Adam: Roma. ^
his flesh was not sin full in deed, but holy and undefiled, yet it seems
sinful in that he took both this, and al other humane infirmities, as hunger,
Gala. 4
thirst, cold, heat, poverty, death upon him, which ouerflowed the world
through sin. Misit deus filium suum, God sent his son. His coming is his
incarnation, and his sending likewise. The father is not said to come, or to be
sent, because he was not incarnate. That the coming and sending of Christ is to
be taken of his incarnation, Christ's cu^ming or se^ding, wha^ it is.
we may perceive by this. For who comes there where he is already? Or who is
sent thither? But Christ is every where touching his divinity, for he is the
wisdom of the father, which reaches from one end to another mightily, Sapien.
8
and ordreth all things lovingly. Seeing therefore he is every where, how comes
he where he was not, by appearing in his humanity? But it is a great question
why God sent his son, Cum venit plenitudo temporis, in the fulness of time,
^alat. 4
why he came no sooner, but in the ends of the world. If he had com long
before, many had been saved which have perished. For since his incarnation many
mo have believed him, then did in time past* for he is the light* shining in
darkness. Whichrist came in the and of the world.
Truly he came, when he saw his coming should be most profitable, not being
moved thereunto through the consideration of our merits, but of his own
voluntary goodness: for our deseruinges did not constrain him to come. Wherefore
we can not blame him for the loss before his in carnation: for it was not
undeserved, it was a just loss. Cain ye thief blame the judge for conde^pninge
him according to the law? Or is the Physician to be blamed coming of his own
accord to heal the pacie^t, if he tarry long? He came therefore when it pleased
him, when he knew he should be most welcome. If thou help one before his need, he
does not take it so thankefully as when thou succourest him in great need. The
hungry man who has need of meat, will tha^k the more for it, then he which has
plenty. The poor will give the more habundaunt thanks for thy money then the
rych. Before ye time of Christ's coming, men were not nedy, they were not
hungry, but thought themselves rightuous, rich in all good works, true kepers
of ye law. Wherefore it was necessary, Roma. ^
that ye preching of the law should go before his coming, by which men should
learn, that they had need of a Physician. Math. 3
For by the law comes knowledge of sin. The law is, Sicuris ad arborem
posita. The law^ is an axe.
The axe which shall hew down al those that bring not forth good fruits. The
law is a glass wherein we may behold our nakedness, our unclean thoughts,
our filthy living. Lex subintrauit. The law says Paul entered in, Roma. 3
that sin should encrese: where abundance of sin is, there as he records
also, is more plentuousnes of grace of the part of the giver, Roma. 5
and more thank of the part of the pacient, for as much as the sick tha^keth
the Physician, not the hole man. Wherefore Christ the Physician of our souls,
wou^^ not come but to help the wounded man, to call sinners unto repentance,
Luke. 10
to seek the sheep which was lost. For this cause God the son of God, equal
with his father, in the end of the world, Math. 9 Math. 18
humbled himself to our nature, to deliver us from the bondage of the spitual
Pharao the devil, who held us prisoners perforce until Christ entered into his
house, which is the world, and bound him and (...) him of his goods. This is
the fullness of time, of which Paul speaks, saying: When the fullness of time
was come, God sent his son borne of a woman. The warrior which will deceive
his ennemies, puts away his own apparel, and clotheth him self in their
apparel, that he may safely go into their region, and behold all their
provision, and afterward easily ouercom the^: so our savior Jesus Christ, in
the later end of the world did deck and cloth him self with our nature, to
deceive and conquer the devil, who had seduced and conquered mankind in the
likeness of a serpent: which policy is figured long before in Jacob, Gene. 27
who steals away the blessing from his brother Esau in his brothers raiment.
Did the father and the holy ghost take our nature upon them? were they borne
of a woman? were they conceived of the holy ghost? were they borne little babes?
Did they use this policy to deceive the devil? If not, then is Christ
unconfounded with them. Christ also was baptized, not the father, nor the holy
ghost. Math. 3
For the father sounded these words at his baptism: This is my beloved son
in whom is my delight: and ye holy ghost descends like a dove, and sits
upon him. Wherefore is he christened? not for any spot of sin, Whi christ was
baptized.
any crom of uncleanness in him, but for our eruditio^ and ensamble. For if he
came to be baptized of John his servant, how necessary is baptism for us
which be his servant, and defiled with original and actual trespaces: If he
required baptism of him, disdain not thou to be christened of thy inferior,
despise not baptism be thou never so holy, never so perfect, have no light
opinion of it. If it were a light thing, Christ would not have required it for
our example. Christ also fasted after baptism, and was tempted of the devil,
he fasted for our example, and was tempted for our victory. Why tempted Mat. 4
He was tempted in all sin and overcomes, teaching us by his example how to
overcome. The devil te^pteth him with the lusts of the flesh, with lust of the
eyes, and with the desire of worldly promocion: with lust of the flesh, saying:
If thou be the son of God, speak that these stones be made bread. Deuteronomy. 8
But Christ answers, teaching us to fight in like case: Man shall not live by
bread only, but by every word that comes out of the mouth of God. Sapi. 16
He te^pteth him, bidding him cast himself down from the pinnacle, because it
was written that angels had charge over him. Christ answers: thou shall not
tempt thy Lord thy Ged. Psalm. 90
He tempts him with desire of promotion with the lusts of the eyes carrying
him into the mountain, and promising him the glory of ye world. Deute. 6
But he who made all the world, refused worldly honor, and teaches us that God
only is to be worshipped. Al sin is contained in the devils three temptacions,
and al virtue in Christ's aunswers. The devil with three proposicions would
inuegle Christ in all heresies, but Christ confuteth him with three scriptures.
And that thou should not think that Christ is the holy ghost, touching his
incarnation, he is said to be conceived of the holy ghost, and in his
baptising the holy comforter descends upon him, and when he is tempted, the
spirit leads him into wilderness: wherefore he is vnco^founded with ye holy
ghost.

Christ also suffers death to deliver us from the tyranny of death, not the
father nor the holy ghost, for he offered his flesh, an odoriferous, and sweet
smelling sacrifice to the father. Why he suffered death.
The cause why he humbled him self unto death, is forasmuch as our first
parents lost Gods favor through pride, for it was said unto them: taste, and
ye shall be as Gods: For this cause it pleases Christ to overcome the devil by
humility, Gene. ^
who through pride entised us from God, and we also must overcome by humility,
recover Gods favor by humility, enter into the kingdom of heaven through
humility. Down therefore proud stomach, down peacocks feathers, down high
mountain, and become a low valley: Prou. 15
The Lord will break down the house of the proud, and he that humbles
himself, shall be exalted, as we may learn of the Publicane and the Pharisey.
Luke. 14
We must return to paradise by humility, Luke. 18
which we lost by pride. Humility is the porter of heaven gates, F^ctus est
obediens vsque ad mortem crucis. Philip. 2
He became obedient to the death of the cross. But why is Christ crucified for
our sins? Why he died on the cross.
Why did he chose this kind of death before other? Truly because this kind of
death is accursed, and all that die of it, as it is written: cursed is every one
that hangs on tree. For so it comes to pass that Christ was accursed for
us to deliver us from Gods curse, Gala. 3
as Paul says: Christ has delivered us from the curse of law, in that he was
made accursed for us. Acts. 1
Only he rose from death to life, only he ascended into heaven in the sight of
his disciples, not the father, nor the holy ghost. Some searching wits
demand whether Christ could not deliver us, but by assumpting our nature, by
suffering most cruel torments. He could, Why he took our nature.
but he would not. He took our nature, because he came to deliver our nature,
that nether kind should think they are despised: he became man, and was born
of a woman, that the serpent which seduced both man and woman, might be
overcome through both. To del^uer us.
Moreover he came not only to deliver us, but also to be an example of good
living. For example.
We be desirous of riches, he preferred poverty, we hunt for promotion, he
would not be a king, we are careful to make heirs, to leave many children
after us, he despised such fashion, we disdain to suffer wrong, he suffered al
wrong, we can not abide to be reviled, he held his tongue, we hate our ennemies,
we are vnpainful in doing our duties, he was scourged, and whipped of his own
will for us, we be sore afraid of death, he died for us. He was sent also to
heal our infirmities by well doing, To heal v^
which came through sin. How ca^ our covetousness he healed but by his
poverty? How can our furiousnes be cured, but by his patience? How can our
unkindness be recompe^sed, but by his love? How can our tim^rousnes be boldened,
but by his resurrection? Further, how could he more set forth his exceading
love toward us the^ in dieng for us. A greater love then this has no man, then
to bestow his life (says Christ) speaking of his own death. Ihon. 1^
The deity suffers no infirmity, which is impossible, wherefore it was
necessary that he should take our nature upon him, who came to heal our
infirmities, and to teach us to cure them through well doing. If he had taken
them in any other nature, the^ we might think that he despised our nature, that
he loved us not, that the example of his life belongs nothing unto us. For if
he had been tempted in another nature, or died, how could we learn to withstand
the devil, to overcome te^ptacions, to despise death of him? Sapi. 8
Wherefore there was no way, like this to redeem man. He is wisdom, wherefore he
took the most wysest way.

The.xxvi. Chapter.
The holy comforter is unconfounded, how and why he descended in the likeness of
a dove, rather then of any other bird.

NOw that I have proved Christ to be vnco^founded, mine order requires to
fortify the same thing of the most glorious and holy co^forter, the which is
done partly already: for in that we have proved that Christ is not the holy
ghost, the blessed and almighty comforter is vnco^founded with him. He is
vnco^founded also with the father, in that he proceeds of the father, in that
he leads Christ into the wilderness, Ihon. 14*
in that he is sent of the father, as Christ says: When the comforter shall
come, who^ the father shall send in my name, Math. 4
and in that he is sent of Christ also, as it is written: When the comforter
shall come who^ I will send in my fathers name. For Christ sends him, the
father sends both him and the almighty comforter, but he himself is unsent.
That he sent Christ, the Apostle testifies: When the time was full come, Gala. 4
God sent his son borne of a woman, and made bond to the law, the which
must be understand of the father, because he says: Ihon. 16
God sent his son. Wherefore Christ himself says: I went out from the
father, and came into the world. His sendyng, and his coming is his
incarnation, as I have proved before. So the almyghtie comforter is said to be
sent, because he appeared in visible forms as in the lykenes of a Dove, and
Fire, not that he became a Dove and Fire, as Christ became very man, but that
it pleased him to work his graces and benefits by a dove and fire, Why ye
holy ghost appeared.
that our hearts might believe his presence, and know his power through those
outward and sensyble apparitio^s. He became not a dove as Christ became man,
for as much as he came not to deliver doves, as Christ came to deliver man. God
the father, ^^cause he never came to show him self i^ any visi^le shape, ne
yet took any nature ^^on him, therefore he is said to be (...) ^he Lord says
Moises, Deuteronomy. 4
s^ake unto (...), out of the fire in Horeb, and you heard his voice, but ye
saw no Image. Wherefore he is neither the son, nor the holy ghost, which both
were sent, and both appeared in many visible forms, For we read I say, of the
holy ghost, that he apeared, sicut columba, Math. 3
in the likeness of a dove. Why does he appear in ye likeness of a dove?
This notable apparitio^, was don for many causes. One is, that we should believe
ye holy ghost to be a worker in baptism, to wash us, to purify us, to
regenerate us, to make us Gods children, and heirs of salvation, and therefore
the disciples are commanded to christen in his name, as in the name of the
father and the son, Math. 28
for all be notified here in Christ's baptising* Pater in voce, Filius iu
homine, Spiritus sanctus in columba. The father is notified in the voice which
sou^deth, the son in man's nature, the almighty comforter in ye dove. For
as al three be present here, so they (...) work inseperablie, in every man's
ch^^^^ening. The next cause is, forasmuch as a dove of al creatures, is most
innocent, and noyeth no beast, not ye little worm: most chaste, for they never
break wedlock, once begun, but keep it undefiled to the end of their lives,
for if so be the male or female, through vnchastloue haunt the company of any
other, then they flock and gather together, and rend ye aduouterer, and
aduoutres in pieces: void of anger for they have no gall, lovers of amity and
frendshippe. And this apparition was shadowed and figured, by the dove which
Noe sent out of the arc in ye time of the general floude. Gene. ^
For as that dove returned in the euentide, with a leaf of an Olive tree in
her mouth, signifyinge peace, so ye holy ghost gives peace, causes all
frendshippe, engenders all love.

And why? Verily as he is an ineffable communion of the father and the son,
as he joins and knitteth them together with a fast, sure, and vnlosable knot,
so he glueth, and coupleth our hearts, upon which consideration, he properli is
called charity or love. As the dove also mourns in his love, so the holy
ghost makes us to bewail our sins, and lament our misdedes, as it is
written: The spirit helps our infirmities, for we know not what to desire
as we ought, Roma. 8
but the spirit makes intercession mightelye for us, with gronings which
cannot be expressed. The holy ghost does not groan, but is said to groan, as we
call a merry day which makes us merry, and a sad day, which causes sadness,
and as cold is called pigrum because it makes us slow. But blessed be they
that mourn like the dove, Math. 5
and in the love of God, for they shall be comforted. Such as groan for
poverty, and ar dismayed, discouraged, and mated through enprisonment, or any
kind of persicutio^, be ravens, not doves, be wethercocks and worldlinges. For
ye raven returned not again to the arc, which is the church. The dove makes
his nest in some holow and high rock: So let us set our minds and desires upon
ye rock, which is Christ. The dove cherysheth the young of other, as well as
her own, the which is a lesson unto us to love our neighbors. The dove also
will not eat of al manner of grain but chooses out ye most fine and pure,
teaching such as hunger and long for the truth, to feed of Gods word, and to
beware they fall not upon every carrion. The dove with all diligence and kindness
cherishes his mate when she has young ones. Wherefore the alknowing comforter
appears like a dove, who commands his to be doves, that is is to say,
chaste, pacie^t, kind, mourners for their sins, faithful and diligent to there
wives, ernest beleuers in ye rock, readers of Gods word, and lovers of all men.
This is the innoce^cie which Christ inspired with the dove, commands,
saying: Be ye wise as serpents, Math. 10
and innocent like doves. The almighty and alknowing co^forter is vnco^founded
also with the father, in that Christ was concaued of him, not of the father, of
whom Esaias prophesies: Esaias. 11
there shall come a rod forth of the rote of Iesse, and a blossom or flower
shall rise out of ye root. The root of Iesse is ye kindred of ye Jews, ye rod
is ye blessed virgin Mary, ye blossom or flower of Mary is Christ, as he
witnesses of himself: Ego flos campi, Canti. 2
and lilium connallium. etc. I am the flour of the field, the lilie of the
valeis, How christ is a flower ^ a rose.
and the rose among thorns. The rose plucked and taken out of the garden
loses not his smell, and stilled with the fire, smells sweter then ever it
did, pouring forth an odoriferous water, no less wholesome for many things then
pleasant. Even so Christ being taken out of the garden of this word, flourished
more then all the flowers therein, grew in a further authority, then all the
holy Patriar^es and Prophets, cast an odiferous savor over all the world, Ihon.
12
which drew al men to him, and being dug in the side with a spear of the
cruel Jews which are the thorns, poured forth a water healing al
infirmities. This blossom or flower was conceived of the holy comforter, not of
the father. Moreover the almighty comforter is the gift of God, for the Lord
says unto Moises: I will take the spirit which is upon thee, Nume. 11
and give it them, and Christ also as it is written, who spared not his own
son, Roma. 8
but gave him for us al, how shall he not with him give us all things. Wherefore
the fath^^ Christ, and the holy ghost be distinct a^ ^undry persons. The
comforter is unconfounded also, in that he was borne upon the waters, Gene. 1
Acts. 8
in that he commands Philip the Evangelist to join himself to the chariot
of ye gelded man, in that he commands Peter to arise and go with Cornelius
servants, in that he commands to separate Paul and Barnabas, in that he is
ye finger of God, in that Christ breathing on his disciples gave him, saying:
Acts. 1^
receive the holy ghost. He also desce^deth upon the disciples in likeness of
fire, Ihon. 20
teaching them to speak al languages, because ye Gospel should be preached to
al nations. And David records, there is nether speech ne language, but their
voices are heard among them. Their sound is gone out into all lands, Psalm. 18
and their words to the end of the world. The Roman dominion has reached
^arre, but the preaching of the sweet tidinges of the Gospel shall go further.
For those nations which the sharpenes of swerd could not overcome, shall be
vanquished by him, yt fights not with swerd, but with wood and word. Christ
gave not the father by breathing, he descended not in the likeness of a dove, or
fire, he commands not Peter to go with Cornelius servants, he was not born
upon the waters, he is not his own finger, wherefore he is not the holy ghost.
But albeit nether Christ, nor the almighty comforter be confounded with ye
father, yet they are of one and the selfsame substance with him. For the
scriptures teach Christ to be the hand of God, and the holy ghost to be his
finger. The body, ye hand, and finger, ar one substance, and yet the finger is
not the hand, nor the hand the body, nor the finger the body. If therefore the
scripture do grant to Christ, to ye holy ghost, to the father, ye meaning of
the word person: that is to say, that ye father is a substance, Christ is a
substance, ye holy ghost is a substance, and that the father is vnconfou^ded,
Christ vnconfou^ded, the holy ghost unconfounded, as I have proved, it must
needs follow yt they be three persons, for a person is an vnco^founded
substance. This is the catholic faith, the confession of martirs, the
doctrine of the Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists.

The.xxvii. Chap.
Corporal similitudes of God made in the scriptures. why he is named light,
fire, the sun. etc. the image of God in man's soul.

NOw gentle reader, seeing I have declared what a person is out of the book of
holy scriptures, and also proved with infinite authorities, that there be three
persons, that is three vnco^founded, and distinct in property, I will disclose
the divine and blessed nature of the almighty Trinity, by corporal and earthly
similitudes, that you may behold as it were in a glass, and with a pair of
spectacles those things which exceade and surmou^t the capacities of all
creatures. The invisible things of God says Paul that is ye eternal power and
Godhead are understand, seen, and learned of his works from the creation of
the world. Roma. ^
As long as we continue in this tabernacle and mortality, we shall never have
perfect understanding of the eternal God, forasmuch as the hearts of al me^ and
women be unclean. Math. ^
Blessed be the clean hearted says Christ, for they shall se God. Our life is
a warfar, a night, and a purifiyng of our hearts from sin and ignorance,
through charity and faith. We walk in faith says ye Apostle and se not, 2.
Cor. ^
with this only ladder we ascend to the intelligence of the secrets of God,
things supernatural can not be perceived with natural light. Cherubin and
Seraphin and all the blessed company of angels are ignorant of the majesty of
God for they know not the day of Christ's glorious return, Math. 24
and yet they have more ple^tiful knowledge, then we, forasmuch as they be pure
minds, and were never nether blinded through sin, ne hindered through any
earthly mansion and corruptible body. Scrutator maiestatis, opprimetur a
gloria. Prou. 25
Whosoever is an ensearcher of Gods majesty, is oppressed of ye glory. No man
is able fully and perfitly to know the nature of a gnat or a little spider. Be
not displeased then, if I show the the Trinity in his visible creatures, as it
were in a glass, but glorify God, and be not unthankful to him which has
opened him self in them to thy capacity, feding the with milk, because thou
art not able to digest strong meats. And because no man shall be offended with
this manner of teaching, I will make no similitudes of the Trinity, but out of
the ple^tiful storehowses of the scriptures. The best and most lively glass
that ever I beheld the Trinity in, is the vision which appeared to Abraham in
the oak grove of Mamre. Abraham^ vision. Gene. 1^
For as there three waifaring men show them selves unto Abraham, so God is three
persons, and as these three men are called one Lord, not Lords, so the three
persons are one God, one Lord, one substance. And as Christ and the almighty
comforter ar sent of the father. So here one se^deth twain unto Sodom and
Gomorre, and as the father is unsent so he is not sent, but sends. And as the
twain which are sent to destroy Sodom are called one Lord of Lot, Gene. 1^
so the faithful congregation confess and believe Christ and the alknowing
comforter to be one God. I touched this similitude before, and because it is so
notable, I thought it not unworthy to be rehearsed again. There be many
similitudes declaring certain properties of the trinity, and some agreeable in
one point, and some in another: but none does so paint and portray it before
our eyes, as this vision does. We may find an image of the trinity in the
sun, Sapi. 5 How God is named ye son of understanding
for God is called by the name of the sun in the book of wisdom: Sol iusticie
and intelligencie non est ortus nobis. The sun of righteousness and
understanding arose not upon us. There is but one sun only not many, so there
is but one God. The sun shines upon both good and evil men, so the
liberality of almighty God, mainteineth both. The moon and all the sterres have
not their light of themselves, but of the sun: so the congregation, and godly
me^ which are called by the name of ye moan, and stars in ye scripturs, have
no light, no crom of virtue, no goodness of them selves, but by participatio^ of
the divine nature. They which gase upon the sun, ar blinded with his clear
light, so al searchers of Gods glory beyond the scriptures, are overwhelmed
with the majesty thereof. The presence of the sun chereth al things, when he
is absent night comes, and darkness, and nothing would grow if he did not
rise on the^. So when God hydeth his face, they are sorrowful and die, when he
looks on them, they wax young, ^sal. 103 Democrit
and lusty like an Egle. And as Democritus, and other Philosophers hold
opinion that the sun is infinite, so al things be infinite in God. He is of an
infinite arm, of infinite majesty, of infinite wisdom. As the sun is the
fountain, out of which comes both the light, and the heat, so is the father
the fountain out of which issues the son and holy ghost. And as nether the
light nor ye heat does send the sun, but the sun send them, so ye father is
sent nether of Christ, nor of the holy ghost, but he sends them. And as of
the sun and of the beams both together comes the heat or warmnes, so from
the father and the sun both together proceeds the al^nowing comforter. But
as the sun light by division is in mani places, so the blessed trinity fills
places without division, nether contained in place, nether moved in time. Now
if the sun were without beginning and ending, eternal beams would come out of
him, and everlasting heat, would proceed out of ye sun, and his beams. Wherefore
in as much as God the father is immortal, Christ his son also must needs be
immortal, forasmuch as the father is lykened to the sun, and Christ to the
clear and bright beams, Sapien. ^
for he is the bryghtnes of the everlasting light. I would know of the Paulians
and Arrians whether the father in time begone to be a father, or was a father
evermore without time. If they grant that he was a father ever the which they
can not deny, then it must nedest follow, that the son was evermore. For he
was not a father before he had a son, but he was called a father of the
son, and he that is always a father, has evermore and always a son. If
Christ was not evermore, then time was before him, and the Apostle lies,
calling him, Colloss. 1
Primogenitum omnis creature, first begotten of al creatures, for time is a
creatur, and was before him. But time was made by Christ, for all things were
made by him, Ihon. 1
as ye beloved disciple witnesses. If he were the maker of time, the^ he was
before all time, and that which was before al time, is not moved in time but
is without time, without beginning and immortal. Wherefore Christ is immortal,
and then he is God, for only God is immortal after this sort. Likewise the
alknowyng co^forter was evermore, who is compared to the heat, for an
everlasting heat must needs proceed out an everlasting sun, and everlasting
beams. He is, digitus dei, the finger of god. If I cast out devils in the
finger of God. Luke. 11
etc. For where Luke says in the finger of God, it is in Matthew. I cast out
devils in the spirit of God. Math. 1^
Then either we must confess him to be without beginning, and of the substance
of God, or else grant that God once lacked a finger, and deny the same to be
of the substance of the body. Like reason may be made of christ who is the
hand and the arm of God: for God was never without his finger, Ierem. 3^
hand, ne arm, and then al three be of the same nature with the body. And for
so much as Gods finger is almighty, and his hand and arm likewise, both Christ
is almighty, and the blessed co^forter also, and Christ is God by nature, and
the holy comforter also. For nothing is almighty and of the nature of God, but
God only. But the Arians reply that ye father is elder the^ the son, and that
he which begets is before him that is begotten. Ego hodie genui te. An
obiect^ answered.
This day begat I thee. This is true in fathers upon earth, but not in an
everlasting father, who must needs have an everlasting son. Nether does this
reason hold in all earthly things, for fire gendreth light and heat proceeds
from it, and yet the fire gendring, and light gendred, and heat proceeding be
Coena, not one before the oother: Therefore it is against reason that ye father
begetting, and Christ begotten, and the holy ghost proceeding should be
coeterne, coimmortal, and not one before the other in time, but each one of
them before al time. And well may the trinity be likened to fire and his heat,
and light, for God in the scripture is called fire. Dominus deus tuus ignis
consumens est. How God is fire and light. Deuteronomy. 4 Ihon. 1
The Lord thy God says Moises is a consumyng fire. And Ihon calls him also
light, saying: Deus lux est, God is light, and in him is no darkness at al. And
Christ witnesses of him self that he is light, saying: I am the light of the
world, who is Lumen de lumine, light of light. For as the fire ministers light
to a multitude, Ihon. 1
and yet is not minished or consumed therbi, so God bestows innumerable
benefits upon us, and yet his liberality is not hindered therwt. Likewise also
in a ca^del, of which many other candels be light, the light is not thereby in
any wise diminished or hurt at al. One supper does not refreshe or suffice many
as well as few, but ye voice of one preacher teaches as well a hundred as one.
The sound of one bell is nevertheless when it is heard of many: Even so he who
preserved the small portion of meal and oil for the wydowe and her son, 3. Reg.
17 Math. 14 Mark. 6 Luke. 9
that was not diminished, who with a very few loaves, and a certain fishes,
refresshed a great multitude, so yt those things were not diminished but
increased, knows how to employ his benefits with out any loss or detriment
to his liberality. Moreover as fire se^deth forth both heat and light, but
nether heat ne light sends fire, so ye father sends both Christ and the
alknowing comforter, and he is unsent. And as both the light and the heat are
of ye fire, so Christ and ye holy ghost both ar of the father, the one
begotten, the other proceeding, and the father only is of him self, and of no
other. And as fire is not before heat, and light, no more is the father before
the son and the holy Ghost. But in that place which I rehearsed out of
Deuter. God is called fire, because he melts the sins of those that will
amend, Deuteronomy. 4
as the fire melts war and punishes the sins of disobedient persons with
unquenchable fire: and John calls him light for the same cause. 1. Ihon. ^


For light puts away darkness, and is contrary to it. For these properties
and diverse other, the scriptures call God the sun of rightousnes, fire, and
light. If we ponder the^ diligently, we shall find also the Image of the
blessed Trinity in our selves, in our own natures. For it is written: Gene. 1
God made man after his Image, after ye Image of god formed he him. This Image
is in our souls, not in our bodies, as I have proved in my co^futatio^ of the
Anthropomorphites, A glass to se God in.
or humaniformia^s. Man's soul is a lively Image of God. The soul is a spirit,
almighty God is a spirit, the soul quikneth, and rules the body, the
Trinity governs the maruelouse frame of this world. Reason, will, and memory
are three, but one and the same soul. So ye father, the son, and ye holy ghost,
are three distinct in property, and one God. Whatsoever thing the soul does,
these three be the workers thereof. Reason cannot discern good and evil, truth,
falshed, plainnes and craft, proof and sophisticatio^, without either will or
memory. Neither will chooses what him lyketh, without the other: nor memory
reme^breth not things gone without reason and will. These actions and works,
which are said properly to belong only to memory, and only to reason and will,
in very deed ar done by the workmanship of all three. So the father, ye son,
and the holy ghost, The works of ye. 3. persons be vnseperab.
work all things vnseparablie, not that each of them is unable to work by him
self, but that they all three are one God, one spirit one nature, as reason,
will, memory, ar one soul. The son works always with the father, for
whatsoever the father does, Ihon. 5
y^ does the son also, and Christ records, that as his father works
hitherto, so he works* The almighty co^forter can not be absent from their
works, for he is the spirit of them both, and fylleth the round compass of
the world. Sapien. ^
If I would gather all the works of ^ch person into an induction, I could
manifestlye prove this, to the capacity of all men, but it is to long to
speak of their works. I will speak of the creation of the world, of
Christ's incarnation, of his miracles and resurrection, proving al these to
have been done by the workmanshippe of the three persons. For if the Trinity did
work inseperablye in these, no doubt it has don likewise in all other. First
touching the creation of the world, no man distrusteth the fathers workimg, of
whom that is supposed to be spoken: In the beginning God created heaven and
earth. If thou doubt of Christ and the holy comforter, harken what ye prophet
David says: by the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and by the word of
his mouth, the glorious fairenes of them. Wherefore heaven and earth be the
workmanship of the three persons. Was Christ conceived in the womb of Mary by
the workmanship of the holy comforter, and is he not maker of the world? If
the three persons work evermore without seperatio^, why does the scripture
grant certain works to one person, An object. answered.
and certain to another? Truly to teach us, that there be three persons, that
there be three distinct, three vnco^founded. Only the person of the father
sounds the voice in Christ's baptism, only the holy ghost appears like a
dove, and only Christ is incarnate. Notwihstanding both the flesh of Christ,
and ye voice of the father and the apparitio^ of the alknowing co^forter, be
the workema^ship of the whole Trinity. I mean not that Christ and the holy
ghost sou^ded the voice, but that they were workers of the voice* the father
only sou^ded it, not Christ, not the holy ghost. For they be distinct and
unconfounded, they be three, not all one, three persons not three names. So the
holy ghost only showed himself in ye shape of a dove, not the father, not
Christ. Nevertheless the dove in which he apeared was the workemanshippe of al
three. So neither the father, ne yet the blessed comforter were incarnate, but
Christ only. Nevertheless the flesh, and nature of Christ was the workema^ship
of the whole Trinity, whose works be ^nseperable. This may be gathered of the
words of the Angel to Mary. Luke. ^
Spiritus sanctus superueniet in te, and virtus altistimi abu^brabit tibi. The
holy ghost (says Gabriell) shall come upon the, and the power of the highest
shall ouershadowe thee. By the highest the father is to be understand, by these
words, Virtus altistimi the ver, ^ue or power of the highest, the son.

For so S. Paul calls him to the Corrinthians, saying: we p^each Christ
crucified unto the Jews an occasion of fallinge, to the Greeks folishnesse,
1. Cor. ^
but unto them which are called both of the Jews and Greeks, we preach Christ
the power and wisdom of God. The word virtus is trans^ated in english, virtue
or power, the greek word is, Dunamis, both in Paul, and in the answer of the
aungel. Peradventure some man will deny that the father is meant by ye word,
Altissimus. Therefore I will fortify his operation with an other reason.
Christ's incarnation is his sending, as I have proved before. For who is sent
thither, where he is already? But he is every where touching his divinity:
Wherefore he is sent thither, where he was not, ^y appearing in his humanity.
And it is plain that the father sent him, wherefore the incarnation of Christ,
is the workmanship of the holy glorious Trinity. The scripture tells that
our savior Christ also by his word and commandment did cast out many devils:
but the same witnesses yt the father and the holy ghost did work with him,
lest thou should think the works of the trinity to be separable. For of his
father he himself says: Ihon. 14
The father that dwells in me is he which does the works. And of the aldoing
comforter also: I cast out devils in the scripture of God. Math. 12
Like proof may be brought of all his other miracles. So only Christ arose from
death to life, and yet the holy Trinity raised him. For of the father it is
written, who raised Christ from death: Gala. 4
And of himself he testifies, saying to the Jews asking a token: Destroy this
temple, and in three days I shall raise it up again. And that ye holy ghost
raised him, Ihon. 2
Paul is record and wytnes, saying: Wherefore if the spirit of him which raised
up Jesus from death dwell in you. Roma. 8 Ihon. 6
And John also: ye spirit quikneth. For it is not to be taken only of the
quickening of our souls but of our bodies also, nether is it unlike that the
holy comforter did raise him, whom he formed in the virgins womb. Like prove
might be made of all the peculier works of the alworking comforter, and of the
father. Wherefore their works be no more separable, then the works of reason,
will, and memory, namely seeing they be one God, as the other three be one soul.

The.xxviij. Chapter.
How there is but one God only the divinity of Christ and the aldoing
comforter notwithstanding this unity.

NOw I have almost declared all the contents of this treatise that is, what God
is, what person signifies and that there be three persons in the glorious
Trinity. For the proof of my last matter, and content, I will first teach with
evident scriptures, that there is but one only God, and the^ with reasons, not
of philosophy, but gathered out of them, for the scripture is profitable to
teach, ^. Tim. 3
to control, and to instruct. Then I will prove that the same scripture
grants al and eueri one of ye parts of the definition made of God, to our
savior Christ, and that done, I will fortify also that all the parts of
the same definition are granted to the alknowing and almighty comforter. The
Christian congregation believes the father, ye son, and the holy ghost to be one
God, not by nuncupation only, but by unity of nature. For if the multitude of
the^ that believed were Cor vnum, and anima vna, one heart and one soul, Acts. 4
if he which is joined unto the Lord, is one spirit, if man and wife be one
flesh, one body, as ye Apostle witnesses, 1. Cor. 6
if al men be one substance touching there nature, if the scriptures testify
that in human things many be one* how much more are the father, the son
and ye holy ghost one God, which differ not in nature and substance? for it is
written, there are three which bear record in heaven: the father, the word, 1.
Ihon. 5
and the holy ghost, and these three are one. The unity of their nature proves
them not to be three Gods but one God. The damnable sent of ye Arrians
expounds this text: Ari^s interpretation confuted
Hij tres vnum sunt, these three are one, that they be one in will, in assent,
and consent, and not in their substance, nature, and divinity: to which I
make answer, that in all the scripture they can not find vnum sunt, spoken of
things which differ in substance and nature. Wherefore spoken of the three
persons, they prove the^ to have no diversity in there nature: and if that be
true, they must grant of necessity yt they be one God by nature. S. Paul
says yt he yt pla^teth, and he yt watreth, vnu^ sunt, are one* Are they of
diverse substance and nature? no verily: 1. Cor. 3
for both of the^ were men. He speaks these words of himself, and of Apollo
(for the congregation reioysed in them) forbidding the Corinthians to rejoice
in men, and teaching them to rejoice in God only. Wherefore these words, Vnum
sunt, in this place are not spoken of things which differ in substance. Let us
ponder other textes. The same Paul unto the Galathians, says: Al you Vnum
estis in Christo Jesus, Gala. 3
are one in Christ Jesus. He speaks this of the Gala. which al were of one
nature, of one lompe, and substance. For they al were men, of men. Here thou
see also reader, that these words vnum sunt, are not spoken of things which
differ in substance. But the Arrians reply that ye Apostle witnesses, that he
which is joined unto the Lord, 1. Cor. ^
is one spirit, and yet he is not of the same substance that the body is. The
latin there is not vnum sunt, An object. answered.
are one of which I do speak, but Qui adheret domino, vnus spiritus est, he
yt is joined to the Lord, is vnus spiritus, one spirit. For vnus joined with
another word, as with spiritus, may be spoken of things which are of
discrepant nature, as i^ is here: but vnum sunt, is never so spoken. Search all the Bible through out, and thou shall find this to be true. I grant that the
words vnum sunt, be spoken often of assent in will, but only in those things
which differ not in nature and substance. And truly the father, the son, and
the holy ghost vnum sunt voluntate are one in will and assent, but also of one
substance, nature, and divinity, forasmuch as vnum sunt, are one, is never
spoken of things which differ in substance. An other obiiection answered.
The Arrians reply further, yt Christ prayed for his elect, vt sint unum, that
they may become one, as he and his father were one. He does not pray that they
and he, and the father may be one, but that they be one, as he and his father
be one, both in nature and will, as it follows in the same text. Vt omnes vnum
sint, sicut ^u pater in me and ego in te and ipsi in nobis vnum sint. Ihon. 17
That they al may be one, as thou father art in me, and I in thee, that they
also may be one in us. For mortal men can not be of the same substance that
God is, they may be one in God, but not with God, they may be one as the father
and Christ be, but not of their nature: that is the three persons of the
glorious trinity are one in will and assent, and substance also, so the chosen
after this life, as they are now of one substance, so shall they be then also,
not with God, but in God, of one assent, consent and will, and not squaring one
with another, for they shall be al one in Jesus christ and Christ shall be al
things in all, and God shall be all things in all, which proves Christ God.
Colloss. 3 ^. Cor. 15
vnum sunt is spoken here of the elect which differ not in substance, for they
be men. Therefore the father, ye son, and the holy ghost, ar of one substance
and divinity: and if they be of one substance and divinity, they are not three
Gods, but one God, as it is written. Harken Israel, the Lord thy god is one
God. Deuteronomy. 6
He says unto Israel by Moises, where are their gods wherein they trusted? the
fat of whose sacrifices they eat, Deuteronomy. 32
and drank the wine of their vessels. Let the^ arise up and help you, and be
your shild. Se now how I am alone, and that there is no God but I. I can kill,
and make alive, and what I have smitten, that can I heal, I will lift up my
hand to heaven and say, I live ever. If there be many Gods, their kingdom is
divided: but the kingdom of God is everlasting, wherefore it is not divided, for
every ki^gdom divided shall be destroyed. Mark. 12
The hebrew word for God, Elohim.
is Elohim, which is not of the singular number, but of ye plurel. For there
be three persons, but it is always joined with a verb singular, lest yt we should
think there were many gods. Moises uses this word for the english which is
God: when he says: in the beginning god created heaven and earth, wherefore we
may learn, that the world is the workma^ship of ye hole trinie. This word is
used commonly for god, to signify that whatsoever is done, is the work of the
three persons, for as they be not seperable, so they work vnseparablie. The
Heathen opinion confuted
The heathen supposed there were many Gods, because it seemed to them impossible
for one to rule and govern all things, yet they divided the governance thereof
between three: giving heaven and earth to Jupiter, the seas to Neptune, the low
parts and hell to Pluto. But the scriptures, which is truth and cannot lie,
testifies that the three persons without division, without labor or pain,
without time, govern al things, for their works be inseparable. If so (...)
there be many Gods then is there somewhat, where in one of them does differ from
another. Now if that be any good thing, he is no God that lacks, or wa^teth
any thing yt good is. For as he that names a king does in this one word
comprehend many excellent things, so he that names God does comprehend in
this word an infinite sum of al good things. We read of a certain ruler, which
called Christ good master, asking him what he should do to get and atchiue
eternal life, whom Christ rebuked, saying: why call thou me good? Luke. 19
None is good but God only. If God only be good, the^ al goodness is in him, as
I have proved in my first matter. He is life, is truth, he is light, he is
strength, he is health, he is, Thassos agathon, that is a treasure and heap of
al goodness. And if that thing wherein they differ be an evil thing, that can not
be God yt has any evil thing in him: for he wil^eth no wickedness. The Heathen
which worship many Gods, did and do think no evil to come by the^ by ye light
which they had of nature, and judged the^ to revenge and punish all that they
took to be sin. Now if God be a rightuous punisher of vice, he must be void
of the same. Wherefore natural reason teaches that there is but one God. Does
not the noble and worthy Philosopher Aristotle teaches us this, Aristotle.
proving that there is but, vnum primum mobile, one first mouer, who moves all the heavenly spheres. The Manicheis make two Gods, which they call, Against the
Manichees.
Duo principia contraria, two principles, one contrary to another. For they say
ye one is an evil God, maker of visible things, the other a good God, maker of
invisible things, and they say also that both of them be vnbegotte^, vncreat,
and of them selves. Then are they immortal. But if they be immortal, there is
no god that only has immortality, and Paul lies who says that God, 1. Tim. 6
not Gods has immortality. And all the prophets, evangelists and Apostles be
liers, teaching with one assent yt God only forgeueth sin, yt God only knows al
things. For if there be two Gods, both of the^ must have these properties. If
either of the^ know not all things, then is he ignorant, and then no God. If
both know all things, then is there no God which only knows all things.
Both also must forgive syn, the good because he is merciful, the evil because
he is ye cause of al sin, and then is there no God, which only pardons sin.
Moreover, if both the Manicheis gods be immortal, if both pardon sin, if both
know al science, they be not contrary, for knowledge is not contrary to
knowledge but ignorance, and unmercifulness is contrary to mercy, and forgeuing,
and death to immortality. Wherefore there be not two contrary principles, but
one principle, and one God. The christian congregation confesses that the
father is, Principiu^, a principle or beginning, for so the beloved disciple
calls him, saing: In principio erat verbum. Ihon. 1
In the beginning was the word in the father was Christ. They acknoweledge
Christ also to be Principium, Ihon. 8
who answers the cruel Jews demau^ding who he was, saying: ye beginning
which spoke unto you. But the father is pricipium non de principio, Christ is
principiu^ de principio. They confess the almighty co^forter also to be
principium, forasmuch as he with the father and the son made all things, and
governs them as I have proved before. Notwithstanding there be no^ three
beginnings, but one beginning only, as there be not three gods, but one God. The
papists also bring in many gods, Against prai^ng to sain^es.
but covertly and privily. They teach the people to pray unto saints, to Saint
Luke for the ox, to Job for the pox, to Rock for the pestilence, to Since for
things lost, to Christopher for continual health, to the Queen of heaven for
women with child, to Clement for good beer, yea they entise the people also to
worship and honor their images. The fyrst^ reason.
If they be to be prayed unto for these things, they be gods, for in praying
unto the^, we acknowledge them to hear us, to be almighty, to be every where, to
know ye thoughts of al men, to be a strong castle unto such as sly unto the^,
but these things belong only to God, as I have proved before: Wherefore they
make them gods.

O crafty devil, O suttel papists, the Jews are reproved by the voice of the
prophets, for making many gods, in yt they prayed unto Baall, Astaroth,
Moloch, and the Queen of heaven for aid and soccour. Why do we not ask al
good things of him, Thessa. 2
which is the author and geuer of al good things, both to his ennemies and
frindes, both to the heathen, and to the congregation. Is his hand smitte^ of
that it can not healp? Esaias. 50 and.59.
Have we perceived at any time crudelitie or unkindness in him? Are his ears
stopped that he can not hear? Or his eyes so dim that they cannot se? Psalm.
85
He planted theare, he made the (...), wherefore he both hears most easily,
and sees most perfitely. And because he is the ^ou^taine of al mercy, he
grau^teth our requests most merc^fully. He is not like an earthly king* who
sets porters at his gates, he is not hard to speak with, for he is the gate
himself, as he tells us, Ego sum via, veritas and vita. Ihon. 14 Ihon. 10
I am the way, the truth and life, and Ego sum ostium, I am the door. There is
but one way, on^ door, and he that enters in by the door, fyndeth pasture,
he that enters in, not by the door, he is a thief, a robber. And why? For he
robs God of the glory belonging only to him, giving it to his creatures.
They which sly unto saints, depart, make many ways, many doors and many Gods.
If they are to be prayed unto, we must believe on them. For the Apostle says?
Quomodo inuocabunt in que^ non crediderunt. How shall they call on him, pray to
him, The third Roma. 12
on whom they believe not. If we must believe on them, then let us be christened
in their names. But holy baptism is commanded not to be ministered in their
names, but In nomine, in one name of the father, the son, and the holy ghost.
Wherefore, as they are not to be believed upon, so are they not to be called
upon, but God only whose highness disdeineth ye fellowship of any creature. Let
us therefore pray unto him, Ieremi. 2
for he is the well of water of life, let us not dig vile and broken pittes
which hold no water, let us take heed of the streets of Egypt, and of the
ways of Assiria. God is no wilderness to his people, nor la^d without light,
but a merciful and a liberal God. Such a^ make flesh their arm, are accursed.
Psalm. 39 Ierem. 32


Let us make Christ our arm, for he is the arm of God, who in all things
became like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and a faithful
bishop, Hebre. 2
in things concerning God, to pourge the peoples sins. God only knows our
need, scartheth aur thoughts and inte^ts, grau^teth our desires, blesses and
crowns us, and there be no more Gods, no more hearers, no more iudgers of
thoughts beside him. He says by his Prophet: Esa. 44. and.45
I am the first and the last, and beside me is there no God. Have not I ye Lord
done it, without whom there is none other God? the true God and savior, and
there is else none but I, and therefore turn unto me all ye ends of the earth,
so shall ye be saved. For I am God, and there is else none. If there be many Gods,
the divine power, governance and rule, is divided between them, and then it is
not an everlasting power, but mortal, for whatsoever is divided, is mortal.
But natural reason, denies God to be corruptible, and his power to decay.
Wherefore it protests yt there is but one God, which rules all. Moreover the
divine power, is a perfect power, and a general authority, for God is almighty
and general governor. If there be many Gods, each of them has a certain portion
to rule. But they which have but portions, are no Gods, for the power of God is
a perfect power, and a perfect power, co^prehe^deth all power. If there be many
Gods, they have several dominions, and every one of them lacks so much, as
the other Gods have, and so the mo Gods they be in number, the less is their
power and authority. As for example, ye king is most mighty who has all the
world under him, for all things are his, ye riches of al men belong unto him. If
there be many kings, they are of less power, there is no such authority among
the^, no such power, for eueri one of them has his dominion, his portion to
rule, and presumes not beyond his own bonds: Even so if there be many Gods,
they are of less power, but reason gives God a perfect, and an absolute power.
Wherefore there is but one God only, for as much as perfect power cannot be in
many. Also it there be many, how do they know that they shall continue of one
mind and will? If they do not as it is like, for it is a common saying: Tot
capita tot sensus, as many minds as heads, then this diversity will provoke
them to battle, as we read in Homer, who brings in ye Gods fighting one with
another: some of the^ taking part with the Troyanes, some with ye Greeks, for
diversity in will causes war. The heathen grant that God has a general
authority and a perfect power, but they say that he has many Gods of less
power, which are called minores dij, to govern the world under him. But they
lie, for they be no gods, because they be ministers under him, no more the^ ye
officers under the king, as chau^celers, maires, preside^ts, judges, shriues,
bailies and Constables, are kings. God is not like a man, he works all
things without hands, without any werinees or pain, nether does time measure
his works, Psalm. 148
with whom it is, Dixit and facta sunt, he spoke the word and it was done.
Whe^fore he nether has need to rule under him, nether can any such be Gods,
whereof it must needs follow, yt the world is governed by one God. No city is
well ordered but of one Mayre, no host of me^ but of one general captain.
Wherefore the Greeks sailing unto the famous city of Troy, chose Agamenon to
be king of kings, and wylled all to be obedient unto him. If in one host there
be so many chief captains, as there be thousands if every have his captain,
whom he must only obey, no order, no array can be kept for every captain will
be with his men where him lysteth, and every one of the^ will refuse to
endaunger himself and his men, and will pass the ieopardie to him that is
next. Even so except by one God the whole world be governed, all things will
decay, and peryshe. If it be true which is comenly said among me^, Omnis
potestas impatiens est consortis, that power receives no fellowship, how much
more is it true in that ineffable power which apperteineth to God, whose
highness receives no fellowship of any other. What a king is to his realm, that
God is in ye world, one realm has but one, so one world has but on God. For
this cause and other the scriptures use to call him a king. No ship is well
governed of many masters, no flock of mani shepeherdes, no schole of many
scholemaisters, no city of many Mayres, no host of many captains, no
kingdom of many kings, all things stand and are preserved by an unity. And
Virgill records this thing saying: Principio celu^, ac terras, ca^posque
liquentes,
Lucentemque globum lune, titaniaque astra,
Spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per artus
Men's agitat mole^, et magno se corpore miscet
First heaven and earth, and clay fields in deed
with moan and stars, ye spirit wtin does feed
The mind spread through the vayns, eke moves the mole.
Mixing it self unto the body whole.


The Poet Virgil bears record that there is but one God, for one body has
but one mind, and God is the mind of the world, wherefore as there is but one
world, so there is but one God. And that no man should mis^^me this spirit and
mind of which he speakith, not to be God, he expounds these words in
another place, saying: Deum namque ire per omnes,
Terrasque tractusque maris, celumque profundum.
God goes through al, seen or unseen with eye.
Through earth, and sea, through heaven deep an hie.


^uide also in his book called Metamorphosis, witnesses that one God formed al
things of a confused heap. I do not call poets to witness, that I think any
credit to be given to their words, but to show that this thing is so
manifest a truth, that they which were blind did se it. But as I have spoken of
poets, so will I speak of the Philosophers. Thales Mil^sius, one of ye seven
famous wise men, Thales.
held opinion that water is the stuff and matter of which al things were
made, and that God formed them thereof, grau^ting both one God to be maker of al
things, and also telling whereof. For the scriptures call the confused heap,
of which al things were made by the name of water, as it is written. Gene. 1
The spirit of god was born upon ye waters. Pitagoras also defines god to be a
mind, filling, Pithagoras.
and ruling all the porcions of ye world. And one body has but one mind,
wherefore the world has but one God. For God is a mind, and the world is the
body. He also said that the number of three, was the beginning of al things,
teaching the people of his time that god is a trinity, in a riddle and obscure
speech, because it would not be born openly. If there were many worlds as some
think, it were some probability to say there were many gods. Parmenides.
Parmenides thinks yt there is but vnu^ ens. The noble and worthy philosopher
Aristotle de parti^g out of this life, Aristotel
prayed unto ye same ens, saying: ens entium miserere mei. And well may god be
called ens, who only is of himself, and al things have their being of him.
Plato also says, Plato.
yt the ^ouerna^ce of this world is a Monarchy, and that God only both made
and rules it. Hermes.
Hermes trismagist. teaches the same thing, and that he is unsearchable. Marcus
Tullius the famous orator agrees with them, Tullius.
who teaches that God is, Men's soluta qued^ and libera and segregata ab omni
concrecione mortali, omnia sentiens, and omnia mouens, that is to wit: God is
a simple mind, nether being made of matter and form, nether mingled with
accide^ts, knowing all things, and ordryng them.

The Sibilles also taught the same in old time, which were women that did
prophecy before the coming of our savior Christ, so called because they did
disclose many of Gods secrets.

For the Aeolians call the gods, Sions* not Theous, and counsel or secrets, not
Boulen, but Bullen, and there were ten of the^, The most famous of them, which
was called Erithrea, says thus of God. (...). Sibbella Erithrea.

One God alone thete is I wot,
Both infinite, and vnbegot.
Who is called also for the same skill, ametor, and apator, motherles, and
fatherles. She witnesses also that this god made heaven, and garnished it with
lights, made earth and the waters, saying: (...)
(...).
(...).
There is alone one chief god which did make
The heaven, the sun, the moon, and eke the stares,
The steady earth, and sea fluds that shake,
With all fruit bearing trees. etc.


And that he is only to be honored and none other thing. (...)
(...).
Him only worship ye,
That rules the world alone,
Which has from the beginning be
And ever shall be one.
And she brings a reason why, for as much as he is governor of the world,
and only without beginning and ending. An other Sibille also cries that this
is the voice of God.

(...).
I am one God my self alone,
And beside me God is there none.
Appollo also, whom the folysh people for his wisdom supposed to be god, Apollo.
worshipping him as God after his death, when he was demanded what God was,
made this answer.

(...)
(...)
(...).
He that is of himself and of none other
Whom naught can hurt, who never had a mother,
Whose name can by no means be full expressed,
Who in the sire does live and take his rest.
Lo this is God: as for thangels and we,
Of this great God a right small portion be.
Be not discontent (genle reader) that I myngle the sayings of Philosophers
and Poets, with the verity of the scriptures. For Paul cites Poets to
fortify Gods providence, Acts. 17
saying: In him we live move, and have our being, as certain of your own
Poets say, for we are also his generation, the Prophets also make relation
of Giantes, and of the valley of Titans. Esaias tells of the maremaides and of
the daughters of sparowes, and Jeremy says of Babilo^, that the daughters of
Marmaydes shall dwell in it. The wyseman also speaks of the^. Ezechiell
mencioneth the destruction of Gog and Magod, which all be spoken of much in
Poets. The scriptures also use to teach us truth by fables, as ye parable of
trees in the book of Judges witnesses, and many other. But to turn to our
matter there is but one God, forasmuch as all men confess him to be a father,
God is a fat^er.
both because he is the fountain of all things, and also gives al
necessaries to men as a father. But it is against nature for any man to have
many fathers, wherefore it is against nature to worship many gods. He is a Lord
also and a Master, for to him belongs to avenge and punyshe. But no man can
serve two Masters. Wherefore if God be to be honored, Luke. 1^
he is one god not many. If there be many, there can be no God which only is to
be honored. But how can the father, the son, and the holy ghost being three, be
one God? Truly because they ar one mind, How ye fa^ther Christ and the holy
spirit* be one God.
one spirit, one substance, and can not be separate. The father is as it were a
ple^tiful spring or fountain, the son is a river gushing out of it. The
father is the sun, Christ is the beam issuing out of it. The beam can not be
seperat from the Sun, nor the River from the spryng. Christ also is the hand
of God, and the holy comforter is his finger, the hand and finger are not
seperat from the body. I will declare this with a familier example. If a father
have a son, whom he loves so much that he makes him ruler of his house,
yet ye house is said to be governed by one master and ruler, not many. So the
world is the house of one God, and the father and the son, because they
disagre nether in nature, ne in will are one God. The kings image is called
the king, and Christ's image Christ, and yet they be not two kings, nor two
Christ's: so the father and Christ are one God, for Christ is the fathers
image, no dead image, for he is life and resurrection, nor counterfeit, for he
is truth, nor dumme, for he is the word. But the Arrians reply that as I say,
David, An object.
and Solomon ar of one substance, and yet they be three men, not one man, yt so
albeit the father, the son, and the holy ghost be one in substance, yet they
are not one God. I answer, that Isay, David, Tha^swer.
and Solomon, are called three me^ not one man, because every one of them,
although they be of one substance, has a diversity in time, in knowledge, in
bigness, in place. For there can be no unity, where there is diversity. But
the father, the son, and the holy ghost, are one god, forasmuch as there is no
diversity among them. They are al three immortal, of like knowledge and
majesty, and not contained in place, but fillers of al places. Many also are
called by the name of man, as the lord is my helper, I care not what man may do
unto me, and it is better to trust in God then in man. But in men there is
unity of certain things only, as of nature, Psalm. 117
or love or faith. General unity belongs only to the father, the son, and
the holy ghost: wherefore they be one God. Further that the father and Christ
are one God, the prophet Esaias teaches, saying: the lord has said moreover,
the occupiers of Egypt, the merchants of the Morians and Sabees shall come
unto thee with tribute, they shall be thine, they shall follow thee, and go with
cheines upon their fete. They shall fall down before thee, and make supplication
unto thee, for god is in thee, Esaias. 45
and there is no other God beside thee. God the father speaks these words to
Christ who is one God with the father, for ye father is in him, and says that
there is no god beside him. If thou deny them to be one God, thou deniest the
divinity of the father, who says to Christ, God is in thee, and there is no
God beside thee, because he is in his son, Ihon. 14
for it is written: The father that dwells in me, is he that does the
works, and I am in the father, and the father in me, there is no God beside
him, because they both ar one God. God is in god, and yet there be not two Gods,
and the Lord is in ye Lord, and yet they be not two Lords for we are forbidden
to serve two Lords. Nemo potest duobus dominis seruire. Luke. 16.
But both the father and Christ ar to be honored and served. For of Christ it
is written that the three wise men kneled down, Math 2.
and worshipped him and opened their treasures and offered unto him gifts,
gold, frankensence and myrre. By gold confessing him to be a king, by
frankensence to be God, and by myrre, to be man, nether ar they blamed
therefore. A woman of Cane worshipped him, and obteineth her re^uest. Math. 15
Roma. 1 Galat. 1
And Paul in the beginning of al his letters professes him self to be ye
seauaunt of Jesus Christ, wherefore he is to be honored, Math. 4
and the^ he is one God with the father, for it is written: Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God, Ihon. 13
and him only shall thou serve. You call me, says Christ Lord and master, and
ye say well for so am I. Math. 23
And he warns us that we call not one another master, for one is our
master. The Apostle also witnesses yt there is but one divinity, one power
and majesty of Christ and the father, saying: although there be yt are called
Gods, whether in heaven or in earth (as there be gods many, and Lords many) yet
unto us is there but vnus deus, one God, which is ye father, of whom are all
things, and we in him, and vnus dominus, 1. Cor. 8
one Lord Jesus Chri^st, by whom are al things, and we by him. For as in that
he says, that there is but one Lord Jesus Christ, the father is not denied to
be Lord, so these words unto us there is but one God, which is ye father, deny
not Christ to be God. He numbreth not him among those which are Gods by
nuncupation, but joins and coupleth him with the father, from who^ he is
inseparable. Baruch. ^
The Prophet Baruch says of him: he is our God, and there is none other able
to be compared unto him. Wherefore either we must grant him to be one God with
the father, or else make the father vnderlyng to his son, for none is to be
compared to him. That the Prophet speaks these words of Christ the same text
following shows: it is he that has found out al wisdom, and has given her
unto Jacob his servant, and to Israel his beloved. Afterward did he show
himself upon earth, and dwelt among men. This text declares also that Christ
governed the congregation of the Israelits, in that it says, he found out all
wisdom, and gave her unto Jacob and Israel. Read that Chapter, and thou shall
find yt he prepared ye earth at the beginning, and filled it with all manner of
fowls, and beasts, and that he governs the same, and that he wotteth al
things, that he is great and has no end, high, and unmeasurable, which things,
all prove him one God with the father, as he testifies of himself, saying to
his father: Hec est vita eterna. etc. This is life everlasting, that they might
know thonly true God, Ihon. 17
and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ, that is, that they might know the, and
Jesus Christ to be thonly true God. Neither does (only) here deny the holy
ghost to be one God with them, forasmuch as he is of the same essence that
they be, for he proceeds of them both, no more then ye father is excluded by
the same word and the son, where it is written: The things of God, knows
none but the spirit of God. 1. Cor. ^
The father and Christ are not excluded from that knowledge, which is said here
to apperteine only to the holy ghost. So when soever they two are said to be
the only true God, the almighty co^forter is not denied to be god also with
them. We read in the revelation of S. Ihon, of a name which none knew but he
only, who had it written, that is Christ, and yet both ye father knew it, who
knows al science, and the almighty co^forter also, for he searches al
things, yea the botome of Gods secrets. Wherefore when Moises cries: Apoca. 19
Harken Israel, the Lord thy God is one God, when all the Prophets preach
that there be no more Gods but one, Eccle. 42 1. Cor. 2
the divine nature and essence is not denied to Christ and to the almighty
comforter, no more then dominion and Lordshippe is denied to the father, because
Paul says, to us is but one Lord Jesus Christ. So God is said only to have
immortality, 1 (...)
and yet nether Christ is immortal, who says unto the rebelliouse Jews: Ihon.
8
Verily verily I say unto you, if a man keep my word, he shall never se death.
For if the keeping of Christ's word lead us to immortality, how much more is
he himself immortal, without beginning or end? Neither ye holy comforter, for
of him Paul writes: If the blood of oxen, and of goats, and the ashes of an
heyfer, when it was spryncled, purified the unclean, as touching the purifieng
of ye flesh: Hebre. 9
how much more shall ye blood of Christ, which through the eternal spirit
offered himself without spotte unto God, pourge your consciences from dead
works, to serve the living God. Luke. 7 1. Tim. 1 1. Tim. 7 Luke. 18
So God is said only to forgive sin, only to be wise, only to be mighty,
only to be good, which textes and sayings, are spoken of the gloriouse
Trinity. If they were spoken of the father only, as the Arrians teach, then
the evangelist would have said, who can forgive sins, but the father only, and
none is God sa^e the father only. Paul also says* not unto the father wise
only, but unto God, king everlasting, immortal, invisible, and wise oniy, that
is to the blessed Trinity be honor and praise for ever and ever. For if we
take him otherwise, we make him a lier, who grau^teth power, immortality, and
wisdom, in diverse and sundry places, both to Christ our savior, and to the
spirit the comforter. And these things do only apperteyne and belong to them
three, neither are they attribute to any other. Whereupon it must needs follow,
that they be one God. Nothing proves this more plainly then the hebrew text,
whersoeuer the scripture cries unto us, that there is but one god. Moses says
unto ye Israelits, Iehoua Elohenou, Iehoua Ecadh, Deuteronomy. ^
that is, the Lord our God, is one God or one Lord* This text can not be spoken
of the father only, for the hebrew word for God is Elohim, of the plurell
number, not of the singular, to teach us that there be three unconfounded, which
nevertheless are declared to be one God, and of one essence, majesty and
power, for so much as they are, Iehoua Ecadh. For Iehoua, is the peculier,
special, honorab^^, and most blessed name of God, for which the Jews did use
to read Adonai, not that it could not be expressed in their language but for a
more reverence to Gods name. Moises also says in another place, Deuteronomy. 4
unto the it was showed, that you might know that the Lord is God, and that
there is none but he, whereas for god, the english he uses Elohim, so for the
Lord, he uses Iehoua. Esaias. 44 and.45
Esaias the Prophet does likewise, speking of one God, and rejecting al other.

Wherefore the Trinity is one everlasting and the only immutable, invisible,
and almighty God. I will prove this to be true in these four words, power,
name light, virtue, for the father is almighty as it is written: I am the Lord
almighty And the son also is almighty, Gene. 17
for the wyseman calls him ye almighty hand, and the almighty word of God.
Sapi. 11 and.17
The holy comforter also is almighty forasmuch as he is the finger of God,
wherefore they are one God. They have also one name, for the Apostles are
command to christen al nations in the name of the father of the son, They
have one name.
and of the holy ghost. Note here that the scripture says in ye name not in
the names, Math. 28
and to teach us that there is one divinity, one majesty, and one name of
the three persons, the scripture tells that Christ, and the holy ghost, come
not in diverse and sundry names, Ihon. 5
but in one name Christ says: I come in my fathers name and ye receive me not.
This name of ye father, is Christ's name also, for the Lord says in the book
of departure to him. Ego anticedo in nomine meo, and vocabo te nomine meo
domini in co^spectu tuo. That is, I will go before thee in my name, and I will
call thee by my name Lord in thy presence. Thou learnest here that Christ, and
his father have one name, learn also that the almighty, and alknowing
comforter has the selfsame name, in that he comes in the name of Christ, as
it is written: that comforter the holy ghost whom the father will send in my
name. He is sent in Christ's name, Ihon. 14
wherefore he has one name with him and the father. Acts. ^
This is the name of ye blessed trinity, of which it is written: there is no
other name under heaven in which we must be saved, wherefore they have but one
divinity. I will prove ye same of those things which the scripture says of
god. God is light says John, and in him is no darkness. Christ also is light,
1. Ihon. ^ Ihon. ^
for of Iho^ the baptist it is written: he was not ye light, but to bear witness
of ye light which lights al men coming into the world. God is light. 1 John.
1. Christ is the true light. John. 1. Ergo Christ is the true God.
Of the almighty comforter also it is written: Psalm. 4
Signatum est super nos lumen, the light of thy countenance, O Lord, is
sealed upon us, but who is the light sealed? who is the seal? that is ye holy
ghost, of whom Paul writes: Ephesi. 1
ye are sealed with the holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our
inheritance. Note also yt he is not another light but the same light that the
father is, for he is the light of his countenance, wherefore he is the same
God, and one God with the father and the son. But some fellow will ask me
where I find the father to be light: truly in Paul, who calls Christ the
brightness of everlasting light, where by everlasting light the father is meant.
Christ also is virtue, Hebre. 1 God is virtue. 1. Cor. 1
for Paul calls him, Dei virtutem atque sapienciam, the virtue and wisdom o^
God.

We read also that the father is virtue, where it is written: Videbitis filium
hominis ad dexteram virtutis, ye shall see Christ, Math. 26
ye shall se the son of man on the right hand of the virtue or power. And that
the holy ghost is virtue Christ witnesses saying: Accipietis virtutem
adue^ientem in vos, spiritus sancti, you shall receive virtue or power of the
holy ghost. Acts. 1
Luke also speaks this of the holy ghost, Virtus exibat de eo, virtue gushed
out of him, wherefore they be one God. Luke. 6 God is lif^ Ihon. 14
The son is life who says: I am the way, truth, and life. So the father also
is life, as Iho^ witnesses, saying: that which was from the beginning, which
we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and
our hands have handled of the word of life, for the life appeared, and we have
seen and bear witness, and show unto you that eternal life, which was with the
father. 1. Ihon. 1
Here he named our savior Christ the word of life, and eternal life. But what
means he by calling him the word of life, then that he is the word of the
father? wherefore the father also is life. And if so be the Apostle call Christ
life, why is not the alknowyng comforter life, who is the spyrite of life, as
it is written: The spirit of life was in the wheles. Note here reader that
Christ is not another life, but the same life that the father is, Ezechi. ^
in as much as he is that eternal life, which was with the father. For if he be
one life with the father, the^ must he needs be one god with him. The father
also is a flud, as he records of himself: God is a flood or stream. Esaias. 66
I will flow upon you like a water flud of peace, and like a flowyng stream.
And Christ caleth ye almigtie comforter a fludde, saying, out of his belly shall
flow rivers of water of life. This spoke he of the spirit. Wherefore the holy
ghost is a flud or stream, Ihon. 7
and that a mighty and great flud, washyng and clensing the heavenly city of
Jerusalem from al filth and uncleanness as David winesseth, there is a flud,
which with his rivers reioyseth the city of God, the holy dwelling of the
highest, no other stream can wash, purify and cleanse us, but this. God grant
that this flud may ouerflow the banks of England, God send it into the court,
and into the kings chamber, into his heart, and into his counsels chamber, and
into the midst of the parliament house, to wash and banish away all
covetousness, in spiritual things, as ferming of benefices, pluralities of
prebendes and personages, absence from cures, from colleges, improperations,
first fruits. etc. and parcialitie, and the gredy wolf of ambicion, pride,
unmercifulness and oppression out of the hearts of nobility. God send it into
the hearts of Bishops that they may once again yet be preaching prelates, and
al priests, that they may power forth clean and pure doctrine as diligently as
they have powered holy water many a day. The holy spirit is the true holy
water, the true flud wasshing away our sins, not the unprofitable ceremonies
of the sire of Rome. Wherefore our savior Christ must needs be a flud also, for
out of him gushe these streams of eternal life. They have also one operation,
They have one grace.
and they do work al things vnseperabli, as I have proved in ye chap. before,
where I declared man's soull to be the image of God, wherefore they have one
diuitie. Moreover it is written: grace with you and peace from God the father,
Galat. 1
and our Lord Jesus Christ. Behold thou see here that one grace comes from
the father and the son, and one peace likewise, the same also come from the
holy ghost, for of peace it is written: Galat. ^
the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering and Zachary calls
him ye spirit of grace. God has promised to pour upon Jerusalem the spirit
of grace and mercy, and Peter says to those that were pricked in their hearts
through his preaching, Acts. 2
Accipietis gracia^ spiritus sancti, you shall receive the grace of the holy
ghost. One charity.
They have also one charity and one love, for of ye father and the son it is
written: who loves me, shall be loved of my father, and I will love him: Ihon. 14
and of the holy co^forter, ye fruit of ye spirit is love. Through this love of
all the three persons Christ suffered death yt we might live, Ihon. 3
for of the father it is written: God so loved ye world, yt he gave his only
begotten son, and of Christ, I live by the faith of the son of God which
loved me, Gala. 2
and gave himself for me. The spirit also gave him, for Paul says of Christ,
which through the eternal spirit offered himself without spot unto God. Hebre. 9
They have also one counsel, for Esaias calls ye holy ghost, the spirit of
counsel and strength, and Christ is called, Ange^^s magni consilij, an angel of
great counsel, Esaias. 11
because he is the wisdom of God, they are of one will, they command and forbid
one thing, One counsel
their calling is not diverse, but one. And as the father is called Lord, so is
the holy co^forter, so is Christ.

We read that the spirit of the Lord came upon Sampson, whom he calls also
his strength, saying: if my hear were cut of, my strength would go from me.
Iudic. 14
But after that his seven locks were cut away, the scripture says, that the
Lord departed from him, Iudi^. 16
calling the spirit which governed him, Lord. If they have one nature, one
kingdom, one power, one counsel, one operation, one name, one virtue, one life,
one peace, one grace, one commandment, one vocation, one will, and seeing they
be one light, one charity, one stream, and one Lord, how can they be diverse
Gods. There is a general unity of al things in them, wherefore they must needs
be one God also.

I trust now it be sufficiently fortified, and established, that there is but
one god of heaven and earth, who governs and ordreth al things. Natural
reason proclaims this, as it were out of some high place, unto al creatures.
His almighty and everlasting power proves ye same. The Poets confess and
grant him to be alone, the Philosophers co^discend to the^, the Sibilles
magnify and acknowledge him, ye false gods of ye Pagans themselves confess
him the Prophets of the true God evermore taught this, the Eua^gelistes and
Apostles fortify the same, nature preaches one God, which acknowledges one
world, faith tells us the same, for there is but one faith of both
testaments, as the Apostle witnesses, and baptism also, for there is but one
bath of holy baptism, which is ministered in ye name of the trinity. The
glorious death of many thousands of ma^t^rs, both of men, children, women, and
virgins, which by no manner of torments could be plucked away from this faith,
have sealed it, and the constant and steadfast consent, agreement, and
conspiration of all times and nations with one mind and accord has enacted
this, so that the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

The.xxix. Chapter.
All the parts of the difinition made of God are proved to agree unto Christ.

AS I have spoken of al iii. persons of the blessed trinity together, so now
for a more evident proof of my last content, I will fortify out of the stoore
house of ye scriptures, yt all the parts of my definition made of ye only king
of kings, immortal, and almighty God, do belong and appertein also both unto
Christ, and to the alknowing and most blessed co^forter. The first persel of my
difinitio^ was: Christ is a substance
God is a spiritual substance. That Christ is a substance, no man will deny, for
he is no accident. Read my.xxiiii. chap. and there you shall find this thing
proved. But how ca^ you prove yt he is a spiritual substance? The prophet
Jeremy says: Threno. ^
Spiritus ante facie^ nostram Christus dominus, that is ye spirit before us,
Christ ye lord. Note yt he calls him both a spirit and lord. If there be no
spirit he can not be God, for god is a spirit: and inasmuch as he is a spirit
and a substance he is a spiritual substance, Christ is ^ spirit.
not touching his humanity, but touching yt nature, in which he is lord, as
the prophet declares very well, saying: ye spirit before us Christ the lord,
meaning that he is Lord in that he is a spirit, for ye Lord is a spirit. Pure
nature follows in the difinitio^. By the word pure, is meant, that God is one,
2. Cor. 3 A single nature, and not mixte.
and a singular substance, not myxt, not compost. Either Christ is such a
substance, or else he is a creature. If he be a creatur, the^ is he subdued to
vanity, not willingly, for the Apostle witnesses. Quippe vanitati creatura
subiacet non volens. Roma. 10
Every creature is subdued to vanity, Christ is not subdued to vanity, Ergo
Christ is no creature.
That Christ is not subdued to vanity, I prove thus. Ihon. 14
The ruler of this world came and found nothing in him. Ergo he is not subdued
to vanity.
But some Arrians will say, yt he was subdued unto vanity, in yt he took our
nature upon him to restore us, when we were forlorn: for the preacher cries of
all things under heaven: Ecclesi. 1
al is but vanity, al is but plain vanity. Albeit this were truly spoken, yet
can not S. Paul's saying be verified of Christ, who says: every creature is
subdued unto vanity, not willingly. Christ took our nature willingly, restord
us willingly by his precious death and passion, as he himself does testify: no
man does take my life fro me, but I put it away my self, wherefore he is no
creature. Ergo he is a pure, simple, and single nature, without al mixture or
composicion. Immutable: Paul tells us that he is immutable, for in his letter
to his countrymen, he witnesses that the father speaks these words of
the.ci. Psalm. unto Christ: Aebre. 1 Psalm. 110
Thou Lord in the beginning have laid the foundation of the earth, and the
heavens are the works of thy hands, they shall perish, but thou shall
endure. They shall wax old as does a garment, and as a vesture shall thou
change them, and they shall be changed, but thou art the same, that is,
unchangeable, and thy years shall not fail, Lo ye father witnesses that
Christ is immutable. We read also, Hebre. 13
Jesus Christus heri and hodie idem est, etiam in secula. Jesus Christ
yesterday and to day, and the same continues for ever. This property
belonging to no creature, proves him God. For, God only is immutable, Jesus
Christ is immutable. Ergo Ieus Christ is God.


Invisible: This is another property, which the scriptures give unto God.
Christ is a spirit touching one nature* then if al spirits, if our souls be
unvisible, how much more is Christ unvisible, the maker of spirits and
souls? Paul calls him touching this nature, vertutem dei, the virtue or
power of God. Wherefore he is unvisible, unsearchable: Paul in the same place
calls him the wisdom of God, and the wisdom of God is unsearchable. There
follows in the definition: He f^lleth heaven and earth. Sapi. 8
Filling heaven and earth. This also belongs unto Christ, for of him it is
written: Wisdom reaches from one end to another mightily, and ordreth all
things lovingly. Harken also what he says unto his disciples. Wheresoever two
or three be gathered together in my name, Math. 18
there am I in the midst of them. This proves him to be the true God, for no
creature can be eueri where. Full of understanding: he is the wisdom of God.
Sapien. 8 1. Cor. 1
Full of truth: I am the way, truth, and life. Full of righteousness, Pater
non iudicat quemquam, sed omne iudicium dedit filio. Ihon. 14 Ihon. 15
The father judges no man, but has given al judgment unto Christ, who in the
last day, shall appear both unto good men and euel, in that form in which he
suffered, not in his divine nature. The father is said to judge no man, because
neither he nor his son, in his divinity shall be seen in judgment, for their
divinity is all one. Then Christ is full of rightousnesse, for as much as he
shall judge ye world in his humanity, unto whom the father says: Psalm. 44
Hebre. 1
God thy fear shall be for ever and ever. The scepter of thy kingdom is a
right scepter. Thou haste loved righteousness, and hated wickedness. Full of
mercy. Jacob. ^ Philip. 2
The wisdom from above is full of mercy. When he was equal with God, he made
himself of no reputation, and took upon him the shape of a servant for our
sakes, which were his ennemies. Full of wisdom: in Christ are hid all treasures
of wisdom and knowledge. Full of all manner of goodness: Colloss. 2
for in him dwells all the fullness of the God head bodily, Colloss. 1
and of his fulness have all we received grace for grace. Ihon. 1 Jacob. 3
James also witnesses: that the wisdom from above is pure, peaceable, gentle,
easy to be entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits. The next property of God
is to be eternal. This belongs to Christ, for he is the beginning of all
things, he is the progress or middle course, and he is the end and prick.
The beginning and ending, for he says: I am Alpha and Omega, Ihon. 14
ye beginning and the ending. And he is the middle course, in that he says, I
am the way. He promises life without end to such as keep his word, Ihon. 8
saying: Verily verily I say unto you, if a man keep my word, he shall never
se death. Therefore he himself must needs be immortal. Nothing is without end
and beginning save God only. Chrst is without beginning and end. Ergo Christ
is God.
There follows in the definition of God, maker of all things: that Christ
made all things Paul records, Coliss. 1
saying: for by him were all things created, things that are in heaven, and
things that are in earth, things visible, and things invisible, whether they
be majesty or lordship either rule or power. He that made all things is God.
hebr. 3. Jesus Christ made all things. Coloss. 1. Ergo Christ is GOD.
Then it follows in ye same description: Subject to nothing, Ihon. 3
and governing all things. He is subject to nothing, for we read of him, he
that comes from heaven is above al. He governs al things, for he says:
Ihon. 5
whatsoever ye father does, that does the son also, and my father works
hitherto, and I work. Whatsoever we ask the father in his name, he will do
it, and without him we can do do nothing. This declares him to be god by
nature, not by nuncupatio^ only, as they of whom it is written: Ego dixj dij
estis. Psalm. 8^
I have said you ar Gods. It follows: Knowing al things: Nothing has this
knowledge but God, as I have proved before. But we read yt Christ knew the
inward thoughts and intents of men. Ihon. 2
Jesus did not put himself in their hands, because he knew al men, Math. 26
and neded not that any should testify of them, for he knew what was in man.
He knew the hour of his death, he knew that al his disciples should be
offended in him that time, he knew that Peter would fall and rise again, he
knew what would become of Judas, he opened the minds of his disciples, that
they might understand the scriptures, and the Disciples confess him to know
all things, saying: Luk^. 14 Ihon. 1^
Now we know that thou know all things, and nedest not to ask any
question.

The next thing appetteyning only to God, is forgeuing of sin: for I have
proved before, that no creature can do this: but we read that Christ forgeueth
sin, Mark. 2
and is reviled of the Phariseis therefore, Luke. 7 Apoca. 22 Math. 2.15 and.28
who also forgeueth many sins to Mary Magdalene, because she loved much. To
be honored: Ihon would have worshipped an aungel, but the aungel forbids
him, the wise men, the Cananite, Mary Magdalene, Ioanna, Mary of James and
other worshipped Christ, and were not blamed therefore. And Paul in his epistles
confesses himself the servant not of any aungel or archaungel, Roma. 1
Philip. 1
but of Jesus Christ. Wherefore he is one God with the father, Math. 4
for one God only is to be worshipped. There follows in the definition of God,
to be called upon, and that he po^dreth our desires. That Christ is to be
prayed unto for all manner of things the Prophet Esaias teaches us, Esaias. 11
Ictes. 7
saying: The rote of Iesse shall be set up for a toke^ the Heathen shall pray
unto him. Saint Steven cries unto him: Acts. 9
Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Paul asks him, lord, lord what shall I do? and
he is taught. Paul also prays unto him, and the father together, 1 Thessalonians. 3
saying: God himself our father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, guyd our iournei
unto you. ^. Thessalonians. 2
And again^ our lord Jesus christ himself, and God our father which has loved
us, and has given us euerlas^^ng consolation, and good hope through grace,
comfort your hertes and stablish you in all doctine and good doing. The Apostle
shows that he is one God with the father, and of equal power, in that he
offers one prayer to them both, and in that he puts otherwhiles ye father
foremost, and otherwhiles our savior Christ. Iustifiyng and saving us: 1. Ihon.
1 Roma. 10
who justifies and saves us, but he who is our savior, our raunsom, our
spokesma^, our mercy stok, the end of the law to al beleuers, of who^ Iere.
says: Ierem. 3^
This is the name that they shall call him, the Lord our iustifier. Almighty
follows and ends the definition. If it be true which Paul says: Philip* ^
I can do al things through the help of Christ which stre^gthneth me, how
much more is Christ almighty himself, of whom John writes, Dicit dominus
omnipot^^^* Apoca. 1
the Lord almighti says. And the wisema^ calls him the almighty h^nd, Sa^^
1^8
the almighty arm, the almighty word of God. Seeing therefore the scripturs do
continually preach one God, and the same do grant al things belonging to the
majesty of the God head unto Jesus Christ either we must deny the father to be
the almignty and only invisible god, or else we must confess his son by
verity and unity of nature to be one God with him.

The.xxx. Chapter.
All the parts of the same definition are proved to agree to the almighty
comforter and spirit.

THe alknowyng comforter also is one God with them both, for as much as it
cannot be denied, but yt all and every one of the same things do apperteine
unto him. For a plain and evident proof of this, I will course over the
difinition, or rather description of God once again proving the same to be the
definition of the holy comforter. God is a spiritual substance: so is the holy
comforter. That he is a spirit no man will deny: that he is a substance, not a
godly mocion or co^citation, not an accide^t, I have proved in my.xxiii. Chap.
He is also a pure nature, unmixed, vncompost, uncreate, for he is no creature:
which all and every one are bond and servants unto, their maker, not fre,
nor at their liberty, as it is written: Vniuersa seruiunt tibi, Psalm. 11^
al things serve the. The holy spirit speaks this by David. He says not
seruimus, we serve the, but seruiunt, they serve Paul also says: Creatura
liberabitur a seruitute corruptionis. Roma. 8
The creature shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption. But of the holy
ghost it is written: vbi spiritus domini, ibi libertas, 2. Cor. 3
where is the spirit of the Lord, there is fredome. We read also of him, 1.
Cor. 12
that he deuideth to every man several gifts as he will. 1 Cor. 12 All
creatures do serve. Psalm. 118. The holy ghost is at liberty, 2 Cor. 3 Ergo
the holy ghost is no creature.
And if he be no creature, he is a singular and pure nature, void of all
composition and mixture. Immutable, what soever is immutable, is a creatur:
Invisible, al spirits be invisible, but not immutable: for to be both immutable
and invisible apperteineth only to the majesty of God. Wherefore the holy ghost
is God. Filling heaven and earth follows in ye diffinicio^, which thing truly
belongs only to ye divine and blessed nature as ye Psalmograph witnesses:
domini est terra and plenitudo eius. Psalm. ^3
The earth and the fulness thereof is ye Lords, and he says by Ierem. I fill
heaven and earth. Ierem. 23 Sapi. 1
Now that the blessed co^forter does so, ye book of wisdom tells, saying:
The spirit of the Lord fills the round compass of the world: Psalm. 138
and David teaches the same, saying: whether shall I go the^ from thy spirit?
whether shall I go from thy presence? If I clime up into heaven. etc. What
angel, what archaungel, what rule, what power, what creature is said to fill
the world, the which the holy comforter does? Yea and more then the whole
world, for he filled the savior of the world, Luke. 4
as it is written: Christ full of the holy ghost, returned from Jordan. God only
is every where, The holy ghost is every where, Ergo the holy ghost is God.
Unsearchable: no man can comprehend what manner of thing his own spirit and
soul is, and the mind, which almost judges and discusseth al things is not
able to discuss it self, much more the spirit of the almighty God surmounteth
our understandings, and not only ours, but also of angels, and archangels, for
of the spirit, Psalm. 64
David writes: God which is thy God has anointed thee with the oil of
gladness, above thy fellows. The holy ghost is this oil and anointme^t, Acts.
10 Why the spirit is n^med oil.
for Peter witnesses that Christ was anointed with the holy ghost. And well is
the holy ghost named the o^l of gladness, lest thou should suppose him to be
a creature. For the nature of oil is such, that it will not be mingled with any
moist creatur, but heaueth aloft, and keeps above, when other naturs descend
to the botom. Full of understanding: for he is the spirit of understanding. Full
of troth: Esaias. 11 Sapi. 7 Ihon. 14 and. 15
for he is ye spirit of troth, which the world can not receive, and which
proceeds from the father, and of him it is written: he shall teach you al
truth. Full of righteousness: for as the son is our judge, so judgment
belongs to the holy co^forter, as it is written: when I depart, Ihon. 1^
I will send the comforter unto you: when he is come, he shall judge the world of
sin, of righteousness, and of judgment. This text thacheth him to be a
punisher of sin, an aue^ger of unrighteous, and wrong judgments. Noble
king Solomon through his inspiration gave rightful judgment of the two
infantes. Solomon.
Daniel except he had been inspired by him, could never have disclosed the lie
of lechery. Susanna. 1
When Susanna was condemned unto death through ye false accusation of ye
elders, she cried with a loud voice unto God, and obtained remedy. When she
was led forth unto death, it is regestred that the Lord raised up the spirit of
a young child whose name was daniel. etc. Also the spirit of Moises was divided
among.lxx. of the elders of Israel, Nume. 11
that they might judge the people according to right. Wherefore the holy ghost,
who both teaches other to judge aright, and is a judge himself, must needs be
full of al righteousness. Full of mercy: He is full of mercy, forasmuch as he sent
Christ to restore us, when we were forlorn, as the Prophet tells us in
Christ's person. Esaias. 48
Misit me dominus and spiritus eius, the Lord sent me and his spirit. His
sending is his incarnation, as I have proved before. Full of wisdom, for he is
the spirit of counsel and wisdom. Full of al manner of goodness: Ezech. 1 Esaias.
11 Ihon. 15 Roma. 1 Esaias. 4 Roma. 8 Ephesi. 1
He is the spirit of life, the spirit of knowledge, wisdom, and understanding,
counsel, strength, of the fear of God, of truth, of sanctification, of
judgment, of adopcion, of promise, of grace, and love, joy, peace, long
sufferyng, gentleness, and goodness it self, Hebre. ^^ Galat. 5
faithfulness, meekness, temperauncie, be the fruits, and gifts of the holy
spirit.

Eternal: many things be everlasting, which had their beginning, as angels, as
the soul of man and other: but they are not eternal, for that apperteineth
only to the majesty of the deity. That the holy and almighty comforter is
eternal the Apostle witnesses, saying: How much more shall the blood of
Christr, who through the eternal spirit offered him self without spot to God,
Hebre. ^
purge your consciences. He is not content to call him eternal, but tells us
also, that Christ through the spirit offered himself a slain sacrifice for our
sins. And we read that Christ, Ephesi. ^
before the foundation of the world chose us.

Wherefore the holy comforter who was the work master thereof, was before the
foundation of the world, and for as much as as he was before all, he has no
end. For that which is with out all beginning, is also without endyng. God
only is eternal, The holy ghost is eternal, Ergo the holy ghost is God.
Maker of al things: Job tells that God with his spirit garnished the
heavens, Job. 26 Psalm. 31
unto who^ David agrees saying: the spirit of his mouth formed all the hosts
of them. Wherefore in the work of creacion, Gene. 1
Moises makes relation of him, showing us that the spirit of God was borne
upon the waters. Basyl, who for his great learning was surnamed Magnus,
expounds this text of ye holy ghost, and says that his predecessors took it
so, and S. Austen is of the same mind, and Philip Melancthon aloweth their
interpretacion, as I declared before. For truly ye word spirit can not signify
wynd in that place, the which when these wo^ds were spoken, was vncreat. What
is meant the^ by these worde^ ( Borne upon the waters) Verily no blast of wynd,
but that he sat on the waters, for as the hen sitting on her eggs hatcheth her
yo^gones, so the holy ghost hatcheth al creaturs, which there are called waters,
as it is written: when thou let thy spirit go forth, they are made, Psalm.
103
so thou renuest ye face of thy earth. He that made all things is God. Heb.
iij. The holy ghost made al things, Ergo the holy ghost is god.
Job also says of him: Spiritus diuinus qui fecit me, the divine spirit who
made me, confessing him both divine, Psalm. 21
and his maker. And as when we read: Opera manuu^ tuarum sunt celi. Psalm. 8
The heavens are the works of thy hand, we acknowledge Christ the maker of the
world, Psalm. 1^
who is Gods hand, so when we read, Videbo celos tuos opera digitorum tuorum,
^unam and stellas que tu fundasti. That is, I will behold the heavens the
workma^ship of thy fingers, the moon and the stars which thou have made. Let
us acknowledge also the holy ghost Gods finger to be our maker, for as much as
the same works in other places are called the works of God. For as when the
hand works, the fingers work also, so the hole trinity formed al things of
a confused heap, whose works be inseparable as I have proved before. Governor
of al things: The canticle of Moises records that he governed the
congregation of the Israelites. For when they had passed over the sea, Exodus 16
they gave herty thanks for their deliverance to all the three persons: to ye
father and the son in these words. Thy right hand O Lord, is glorious in
power, thy right hand has also dashed the enemies: and to the holy ghost,
saying with ye spirit of thine anger the water gathered together as a rock. For
Christ is Gods right hand, and by the word spirit the holy ghost is meant, and
in that he says Lord, he signifies the father. Wherefore their deliverance is
the workmanship of the whole trinity, which works al things in heaven and
earth. But the Prophet Esaias protests the governance of the holy ghost more
plainly, Esaias. 63
saying: Where is he who brought them from the water of the sea, as a
shepeheard does his flok? Where is he which led Moises by the right hand, with
his glorious arm? Where is he that led the^ in the deep, as an horse is led in
the plain? and he answers: The spirit of the Lord led the^ as a tame beast
goes in the field. ^. cor. 12
The same spirit governs the present congregation, geuyng to one vtteraunce
of wisdom, to another faith, to another gifts of healyng, to another power to
do miracles, to another prophecy, to another judgment of spirits, to another
diverse tongues, to an other interpretation, as the Apostle witnesses, which
be necessary offices in the church.

Who gave Simeon an answer that he should not se death, Luke. ^*
before he had seen our spokesman Jesus Christ? The holy ghost. Who leads the
congregation in to al truth? who teaches us al verity? ye holy ghost. Who
commands to separate Paul and Barnabas to the work whereunto he had called
them, that is to preach the sweet tidinges of the gospel to the gentyles? The
holy ghost. Acts. ^^
Who forbyddeth them to preach in Asia? who commands Peter to arise and get
him down and go with Cornelius servants? Acts. 10
who sent those servants unto Simon the Tannars house for Peter? The holy
ghost. Who monysheth Philp the Deacon to join him self to the chariot of the
gelded man, Acts. 8
which was chamberlein to Candace Queen of the Ethiopians? The holy ghost. Do
not these textes prove him to govern the congregation? to be myndfull of both
good and evil? Do they not deny him to be a creature? do they not fortify him
to be ye third person in the gloriouse Trinity, and to be God? Yes verelye.
All things are governed by God, The Holy ghost governs all things, Ergo,
the Holy ghost is God.
Knowing al things follows, the which belongs to the alknowyng comforter,
for as much as he is the spirit of knowelege. Esaias. 11
The Apostle witnesses that man neither by the help of his outward senses,
nor through the gift of reason, can atteine to the understanding of those
things which are prepared for the chosen. 1. Cor. 2
He denies this knowdlege to the senses, saying: Oculus non videt, neque auris
audiuit, the eye has not seen, and the ear has not heard, for these be the
two principal powers: and to all man's reason and wisdom, by these words
following: Neque in cor, nethre has entered into ye heart of man the things.
Mark. 13
etc. for the heart is the place of understanding. Angels also are ignorant of
some things, as of the last day and hour, which the father knows only. But
of the holy comforter it is written: the spirit searches al things, yea the
bottom of Gods secrets. 1. Cor. 2
Paul is not content only to say this of the spirit, but he adds two
arguments proving the same. The one is a similitude, that as the spirit of man
knows the things of man: so the spirit of God knows ye things of God, and
al things be his, Ergo he knows al things. His other reason is, that ye
spiritual man, through his inspiration discusseth all things.

He who knows all things is GOD, The Holy ghost knows all things. Ergo
the Holy ghost is GOD.
The next property in my definition belonging to God only, is to forgive sin.
How prove you that the holy ghost can do this? Harken what Christ our mercy
stock says? Receive the holy ghost: whose sins ye remit, Ihon. 2^
they are remitted unto them. Note that the holy ghost pardonth sin. No man
can remit sin, they do only minister forgeuenes, in the name of the father, of
the son, and of the holy ghost: they pray, God pardons, they employ their
service, rem^ssion and mercy comes from above, as I have declared and proved
in my Chapt. that God only forgeueth sin. 1. Cor. ^


Furthermore, ye are washed says S. Paul, ye are sanctified, ye are justified
by the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God: Ergo the spirit
forgeueth sin. The Prophet Esaias tells, that one of the Seraphins with a hot
coal taken from the altar with tongues touched his mouth, Esaias. 6
and his sin was molten away. He means neither charcole, nor sea cole, but
the cole of the holy ghost who may be well called a cole, for he is fire:
wherefore the holy ghost does forgive sin. No man can deny, but that in
baptism sins be forgeuen. The holy ghost by baptism does regenerate us, and
make us Gods children. For that we should believe him to be a worker in
baptism, with the father and the son, the bath of holy baptism, is
commanded to be ministered in this name also. And for the same skill it pleased
the gloriouse Trinity, Math. 28
he should appear notably at Christ's baptisinge, in the likensse of a Dove.
And as for Christ, he was not baptized for any wrincle of sin, but for our
example and only erudition. Seeing then the Holy ghost was a worker in
Christ's baptism, much more he is worker at our christeninges, which proves
him to forgive sins. God only forgeueth sin: The Holy ghost forgeueth
sin, Ergo the Holy ghost is GOD.
To be called upon and prayed unto. The holy ghost is to be prayed unto, for
what is baptism, Math. 28
but an invocation of the father, the son, and the holy ghost? as all three be
named, so they all three hear the prayer of the minister, forgive the sins of
him which is christened, and make him of the child of dampnation, the heir of
salvation. That we should fastly and firmly believe this workmanship of the
whole Trinity in our christeninges, that three persons every one were present at
Christ's baptising, who had no need of baptism, I say, Math. ^
but only for our erudition and ensample. The father notifieth himself in the
voice which sou^ded, the son, in man's nature, the aldoing co^forter appeared
notably in ye likeness of a dove, Why in the likeness of a dove, rather then of
any other bird, ie declared before. Moreover ye holy ghost both hears our
prayers, for he is every where, Roma. ^
and he helps our infirmities, as ye Apostle witnesses: Ergo he is to be
prayed unto. Again faith is his gift, prophecy is his gift, vtteraunce,
miracles, ^. Cor. 12
judgment, tongues, healing be his gifts. And truth, for he is the spirit of
truth, Esaias. 11 Roma. 1 Ezech. 1
and wisdom, counsel, sanctification, life by the same reason, and love joy,
peace, patience, gentelnes, goodness fidelity, mekenes, temperauncie be his
graces and fruits, Galat. 5
as is proved before: which proves that he is to be prayed unto. For the
scripture uses this reason to move us to pray unto God, that he is ye geuer of
those things that are asked, as the Apostle James, saying: if any of you lack
wisdom, Jacob. 1 Ephesi. 3
let him ask of God which gives. And Paul he is able to do abundantly above
all that we ask or think. And Christ uses the same reason, Ihon. 14
saying: what soever ye ask in my fathers name he will give it you. If the
Papists can show, that S. Paul and the blessed virgin, and other now being
with Christ touching their souls, and in the earth touching their bodies do
now give gifts and graces unto us, truly I would pray unto them to give me
some. But who is able to prove this out of the scriptures. The spirit knows
al things, yea the boto^ of Gods secrets, much more the botom of our hearts,
ergo he is to be prayed unto. Does not he hear our prayers, which commanded to
separate Paul and Barnabas unto the work, whereunto he had called them? Paul
was called an Apostle by God, The holy ghost called Paul, Ergo the holy ghost
is God.
It is no trifle to preach, Preaching is a work
but an earnest work and labor, and the labourer and workman is worthy of his
wages. The work and office of salvation is unrewarded in England, and thought
not ^ecessary, which mus^ needs bring in the unclean spirit of ignorance
again. Therefore let us pray to the holy spirit to amend it, and to separate mo
Paul's to this honorable work and office. It is a com^ saying, Honos alit arts,
rewards norish a^tes, and Magistrates are ordained of God to maintein
knowledge, to destroy ignorance and sin. I would wysh that preachers were
sent abroad into the country, as well as to cities, and great tounes for they
are the shop of Christ as well as others. And that as Christ disputed in ye
temple, and Steven with the Libertines and Alexandrines. And Paul when he went
a preaching, Luke. ^ Acts* ^
disputed in the audience of the people, against those that would not hear the
truth, at Athens with Philosophers, and at Ephesus and other places: that so
now every preacher which is known to be groundly learned and seperat to this
office, Acts. 17
when he comes to any parish which has a popish person or curat, that he
should have authority to examen them in the sacraments, Acts. 18
and other principal matters, and that they either acknowledge ye truth before
their parishes or else be compelled to say their conscience and knowledge in
open disputation with the preacher: so that the church wardens of every parish
be overseers of the same for avoiding of tumult and disturba^ce. By this means
papists and others should best be won, and overcome, and the people should
learn more of one disputation, the^ in ten sermons. Further, if there be any
suspected to be an Anabaptist in the said parishes, I would to God well learned
preachers were authorized to compel and call such to render account of their
faith before the whole parish, and if it were found Anabaptisticall, that the
preacher enter disputation with him, and openly convict him, by the scriptures
and elder fathers, and if he remain obstinat, the same preacher to excomunitate
him, and then to middle no further with him, but give knowledge thereof to the
temporal magistrates, which for civil consideratio^s may punish him with
enprisonment, death or otherwise, as their wisdo^s shall judge most mete for a
civil quietness, and a godly order. Now both papists, and Anabaptists
complain that they are put to scilence, and the people have more a^^^au^ce in
their scilence, then in the preachers, and do think that they could persuade
and prove their matters, if they might be suffered. But if this way were taken,
it would apeare most evident that al their doctrine were builded on the sand, not
on the rock. There be many discrete and sober well learned preachers both in all
ye elder fathers, and in the scriptures, which if this way were taken or
another like, would confound al heretics, and beat down papistrie, and
discourage the best learned of them, and persuade the people after another sort
then is done yet. Thus did ye Apostles, thus did ye elder fathers, as Ambrose,
Iero. Aug. and others, as apereth of their works, which be either sermons to ye
people, lessons, homelies, or disputatio^s against heretics. Now if a preacher
come and preach in a parish in the country, if the person, vicar, or curat,
be of a corrupt judgment, as the most deal be, by reason of the daily company
and familiarity that they have with their parysh, they do discredit the
preacher when he is gone, and mar all that he has done, which they nether
could, ne durst iustifi^ before his face. Therefore I would it were remedied
this way or some other: namely if they be married men, then they will sclaunder
them, rail on the^, frump them: yea some noble and spiritual lords had rather
receive idle sodomites, and dum priests to their chapplains, then married
preachers. They think it unmeet yt such should be colligeners, nay it is
unmeet yt your chapplains should be prebendaries in cathedral colleges, Deanes,
Archdeacons, suffraganes, and live so idly as they do: and yo^ which keep them
be gilty of their negligence, do oppres and rob the people of the word of God,
and find your servants of their costs. It is unmeet for the kings
chappleins, and Amners to ^e absent from these colleges, out of which they have
great liuinges, and to do no good in the country about. It is not unmeet for
married priests, present in ye colleges, and doing their duties to have their
livings. I would the kings majesty would give his chapleine sufficient wages and
bind them to read (...) of divinity every day, or thrice (...) in his ^al: it
were a noble order for a kings house to be a schole of divinity, and godly
example to al lords spiritual and temporal, then they should be as Esaias
calls the^, Esaias* 4^
true nourses of religion. If such as be married were allowed their wages and
com^s to their own houses, and bound by some statutes to preach on holy days in
the country about, it were much better the^ it has been or is, and yet
nevertheless such as be single might keep a come^ table, and a come^ haull,
for all will not mary no more then they do out of colleges. They should not live
idly as they have done and do^, for Paul's rule is yt he which labors not,
ought not to eat, and saint Augustine in his book entitled De opera monachoru^,
Augustine
cries out against idle coligeners. Were not this a better reformation, then
to suppres and put down colleges? O living God, this is a strau^g kind of
surgery, a strau^g reformation, to swepe things away, to make that private
which was commen. Well, David says that God will make them like to Sisera and
Iabin, Psalm. 83 Iudic. 7
like unto Ored and Zeb, which have the houses of God in possession, he will
rote out their generation: even to the pysser against ye wall. I speak not this
of ye universities, but of cathedral colleges and other, in which be
sufficient livings to maintain married men. But to return to our matter: like
silogismes may be made of other matters as that. God delivered the children of
Israel from the Egipticall bondage. Deu. 5 The holy ghost was their deliverer.
Esaias. 30. Ergo the holy ghost is God.
If we ponder the circumstance diligently we shall find that Peter prayed unto
the holy ghost when he fell into a trance and saw heaven open in Simo^ the
tanners house. P^ter prays to yt holy spirit.
He prays to him yt says: what God has cleansed, make thou not come^: For
it is written: there came a voice to Peter. Arise, kill and eat, and he said:
God forbid Lord. But the holy ghost is he who cleansed, for he fell sodeinly upon
the gentiles to cleanse them, and he is called water, and a ^loud for the same
skill: Ergo he prayed to the holy ghost. It is to be supposed, that Peter praid
unto him who answers, and commands him in that trance, to go to
Cornelius: but it is written, that ye spirit commands him, Ergo he prayed to
ye spirit. Also the spirit sent Cornelius seruau^ts unto Peter, for he says
unto him, go with the^, and doubt not for I have sen^ the^. Wherefore it is
probable yt Cor. also prayed unto ye spirit, albeit he knew him not well for his
requests were granted of him.

Moreover the holy comforter has a temple, not of stone ne of wood, but far
more honorable, the bodies of the (...) and chosen, for which Christ died as
it is written: your bodies are the temple of the holy ghost which is in you,
whom ye have of God, 1. Cor* ^
and ye are not your o^ne for ye ar derely bought, therefore glorify God in your
bodies. Lo he both gives him a temple, and calls him God, and is he not to
be prayed unto and honor^^* That the holy ghost is the true God, unto whom
temples are erected and builded, the Acts of the Apostles declare with plain
words Ananias ( quod Peter) how is it that Satan has filled thine heart to
lie unto the holy ghost? and he adds, th^^ have not lied unto men, but unto
God. ^o the holy ghost is God, so Ihon calls Christ the true God. Hic est
verus deus, and vita eterna. He is very God, and everlasting life. And seeing
there is but one God, the three persons are that one God, which is only to be
prayed unto, to be worshipped, and to who^ we should dedicate, both the temple
of our bodies, and al temples of wood, Temples (...) to be dedicate to God onl^.
stone, or other stuf, and to no saints departed, to no angels or
archaungels, for then we honor them which is idolatry and robery. God only
has a temple, The holy ghost ha^h a temple, Ergo the holy ghost is God.
To be honored: Nothing is to be honored but God only, for it is written:
Seruie ru^t cr^a^ure potius qua^ creatori, Roma. 1
qui est deus benedictu^ in secula. They worshipped and served the creature,
more the^ the maker, which is God blessed for evermore. He both monysheth us to
serve God only, and reproves such as honor creaturs. Now that the holy ghost
is to be served and honored, Philip. 3
ye same Apostle witnesses saying: beware of dogs, beware of evil workers,
beware of dissencio^, for we are circumci^ion, serving ye spirit which is God.
Lo Paul confesses him self to be the servant of the spirit. Some do read
here, spiritu deum colentes, seruyng God in spirit, but ye greek text
discusseth that interpretacion to be false, which is, (...), that is to say
worshipping ye spirit, which spirit is god. If Paul had meant, Quod spiritu deum
cole bant, that they in spirit served God, he would have said, (...), as he said
in the same place, (...), rejoicing in Christ, and not trusting in flesh. For
that the holy ghost is to be worshipped, he declares also, saying: if all do
prophecy, and there come in one that believes not, or one unlearned, he is
rebuked of all men, and is judged of every man, and the secrets of his heart
are opened, and he falls down on his face and worshippeth God, saying that
God is in you in deed. But he who spoke in the^ was the holy ghost, 1. Cor. 14
of who^ prophecy comes, and of whom it is written: Non estis vos qui
loquimini, sed spiritus patris qui loquitur in vobis. ^. Cor. 9
It is not you which speak, but the spirit of my father which speaks in you.
Wherefore when they fall down and worship him which is in them, they worship the
holy ghost. If the sweet flesh of our savior Christ be to be honored, as we
are commanded, adorate scabellum pedum meorum, Psalm. 98 Christ's flesh is to
be worshipped. Luke. 1 Esaias. 66
worship the fotestole of my fete, the which is joined in unity of person to
the divine nature, and promoted to the company and fellowship of the deity,
without al doubt the alknowyng conforter is to be honored, of whom this flesh
was conceived. For by the fotestole, earth is understand, as it is written.
Heaven is my seat, and the earth is the stole of my fete: and by the earth,
Christ's flesh is meant. To worship any other earth, An Obiec.
is Idolatry: and well may his flesh be called so, for all flesh is earth. The
Arrians deny that the holy ghost is to be served, Ihon. 4*
because John writes: The hour now is, when true worshippers shall honor the
father in spirit and truth, for such the father seeks to worship him. God is
a spirit, and they that worship him, Tha^swer.
must worship him in spirit and in truth. If they deny the holy ghost to be
honored, because the Evangelist does not say, the spirit is to be honored, but
God must be honored in spirit, they must deny likewise, yt Crist is to be
honored, because he says that God must be worshipped in truth, for Christ
says, I am truth. Ihon. 1^
God only is to be served, The holy ghost is to be served, Ergo the holy ghost
is God.
Justifying us: Paul proves the spirit to be a iustifier, saying: ye are
washed, ye are sanctifietd, 1. cor. ^
ye are justified by ye name of the Lord, and by the spirit of our god.
Almighty: this belongs to the com^orter, for he is the finger of God, or else
the finger of God is weak, then is some impotencie in his hand, in Christ,
for whatsoever the hand does, that does the finger also. But Solomon ^al^eth
the holy ghost, (...), that is, omnipotente^ and omniscium, almighty, and
alknowing. He is the Lord of nature, and therefore he can do what him ly^t, as
Christ and the father can. God only is almighty, The holy ghost is almighty,
Ergo the holy ghost is God.
These silogismusses and brief arguments may be profitable helpers for
thun-learned, as it were with a (...) dagger to dispatch and sl^a ^he
b^^sphemouse heresy of the Arrians* I could dilate thease things into a long
volume if I would, but my purpose is not at this present to write a defense of
God, but an Image. I do enstruct a beginner not a divine, I do arm a young
soldiour to faith and belief, not an old worn champion to battle and fight.
Hereafter when I shall s^ occasion, I will put forth a defense with a
confutation and answer to contrary reasons. Now I have proved out of the
storehouse of the scripture, that there is but one definition of the father, of
the son, and of the holy ghost, whereof it must needs follow, that they are
but one God. All things that agree in definition, agree in essence and nature,
The father, the son, and the holy ghost have one definition, Ergo they have one
essence and nature.
This doctrine destroieth all the doctrine of the Arrians, and proves them
co^substanciall. But me think I hear some Patripassian reply, that if they
agree in the definition, they are confounded, and are one person. They agree in
the definition of God, not in the finition of paternitie, or of a son, or of
a holy ghost, for neither Christ is the father, nor the almightye, and
alknowynge comforter is Christ, they be three unconfounded and yet one God and
Lord

O God of our fathers, and Lord of mercies, Sapi. ^
thou that have made all things with thy word, and ordained man through thy
wisdom,, that he should have dominion and lordshippe over thy creatures, which
thou haste made, and haste willed thy angels to minister unto him, that he
should order the world according to equity and righteousness, and execute
judgment with a true heart, give to all thy people wisdom, which is ever about
thy seat, endue them with the spirit of knowledge, of council, and
understanding, as thou did promise by thy sweet son, Esaias. 1^ Ihon. 14
that he should lead them into all truth, for we are thy servants and thy
handmaidens, the works of thy fingers.

O send him out of thy holy heavens, and from the throne of thy majesty, that
he may govern us, that we may know what is acceptable in thy sight. For he
knows and understands al things, and can lead us soberly in all our works,
and preserve and continue us in his power, so shall our works be acceptable.

For what man is he, that may know the council of God? or who can think what
the will of God is? The thoughts of mortal men are miserable, and our
forecastes are but uncertain. And why? our understanding and spirit is
depressed with the gross lump and dongion of the corruptible body: our time
is but a space and short, very hardlye can we discern the things that are
upon earth, and great labor have we, or we can find things which are before
our eyes. Who will then, seek out the ground of the things that are done in
heaven? Oh Lord, who can have knowledge of thy understanding and meaning,
except thou give wisdom, and send thy holy ghost from above, to reform and
redress the ways of them which are upon earth, that men may learn the
things that are pleasant unto the, and to live lovingly one with another,
every man being content with his own vocation, and follow ye same, be
preserved through wisdom. Grant this GOD for thy sons sake Jesus Christ
our spokesman and advocate, to whom with the and the holy spirit, be all
praise, dominion, honor, rule and thankesgeuing now in our days and ever. So
be it.

FINIS.

