A TRVE RELATION OF THE GROUND, Occasion, and Circumstances, of that horrible
Murder committed by JOHN BARTRAM, Gent. upon the body of Sir JOHN TYNDAL of
Lincolns Inn, Knight: One of the Masters of the Honorable Court of Chancery,
the twelfth day of this instant Nouemb. Written by way of Letter from a
Gentleman, to his Country friend.

Together with the Examination of the said Bartram, taken before the right
Honorable, Sir Fra. Bacon Knight, his Majesty's Attorney General: and Sir
Henry Yeluerton Knight, his Majesty's Solliciter General, according to special
directions given by his Majesty in that behalf.



LONDON, Printed by John Beale, 1616.

A True Relation of THE GROUND, Occasion, and Circumstances, of that horrible
Murder committed by JOHN BARTRAM, Gent. upon the body of Sir JOHN TYNDALL of
Lincolnes Inn Knight, One of the Masters of the Honrable Court of CHANCERY,
the twelfth day of this instant November.
SIR,
NO streams run swifter then the rumors of unhappy accidents; though it often
falls out that the faster they run the more troubled their current is.

You cannot but have heard of the cruel murder and massacre of Sir John
Tyndall, wrought by the wicked and bloody hand of John Bartram; But I fear
that different humors in their relations, have set several stamps upon the
fact: some fanciing circumstances that fell not out; some knowing neither the
number nor the truth of them; some neglecting to divulge the particulars; and
some mistrusting error in the report, are rather filled with wonder at the
action, then with hatred of it. You shall hereby in a short period, have the
corn winnowed from the chafe, and real truth brought you, without either
mixture or addition of fancy or falsehood: being drawn from them that best knew
it, and had best cause to understand it: wherein you shall see, how neglected
sparks lurking in a corrupt heart, will soon break into flames of mischief.

One Leonard Camberlin, about seven years past dying without issue, and
without Will, there was obtained for Anne Chamberlin, then an infant, his
brothers daughter, by the practice and labor of Sir Phillip Scudamore, an
administration of Leonards goods: This Anne was neither privy to it, nor had
profit by it; but by this means the personal estate of Leonard, fell into the
fingers of Sir Phillip, who when he had sifted the estate thoroughly, shifted
himself our of the kingdom, and being ill affected to the Religion here,
pretended to gain the liberty of an evil conscience beyond the Seas, where he
died a Papist.

John Bartram having married the half sister of Leonard, in the behalf of his
wife, obtaines a repeal of the Administration granted to Anne, and had it
committed to his wife as of right it ought.

When he had thus gotten the Administration, he and his wife complain in
Chancery against Anne Chamberlin, that she might discover the true estate of
Leonard the Intestate, and have the same by order of that Court set over to
them.

Heerevpon Anne makes her answer upon her Oath, but is able to discover no
particulars of the estate, neither in debts nor otherwise, for nothing came to
her hands, but all was latcht in the hands of Sir Phillip Scudamore in pretense
of her right, as Administratrix. But Bartram descending to proofs in this
suit, had the precise testimony of two witnesses, that there was due to
Leonards Chamberlins estate from one Harris upon all bonds, accounts,
reckonings, and specialties, 200. pound.

The Cause coming to hearing, the Lord Chancellor (in his Honorable Justice)
minding that Bartra^ should have from Anne Chamberlin, so much of Leonards
estate as was proved in Court (which was 22. pound) upon all bonds and
reckonings from Harris and no more: And so pronouncing his decree, by the error
and slip of the Register, it was set down, and penned that a bond of 200.
pound made by Harris to the Intestate should be by Anne delivered to Bartram
and his wife.

Bartram herein espying his advantage, hotly pursues the decree, to have a
particular bond of 200. pound brought in Court and delivered: which when Anne
examined thereupon, could not perform, excusing her self by Sir Phillip
Scudamores catching into his hands, of all the bonds and specialties due to
Leonard the Intestate, she was ordered by the Court to bring in the 200.
pound, and to pay the same to Bartram and his wife; which she did, and they
had it.

When Bartram saw he had caught the prey, he never hunted, and had the two
hundred pound in his purse, as due upon a particular bond, which was neither
confessed by the party, nor proved by the witnesses; that this Sent might die,
in his crafty covetousness, he would not too eagarly follow the Chase; but
sleeps upon this many months, before he sets his foot forward in this suit
again.

A year after he reneues his cry, and moves the Court: That because it stood
proved, that upon diverse accounts, bonds, reckonings, and specialties, there
was due from Harris to Leonard the Intestate, the sum of two hundred pound;
therefore desired, that Anne the defendant (at this time married to Sir George
Symons) might bring those into the Court to be delivered to him and his wife
which was granted by the Lord Chancellor accordingly, and a day certain given
for performance thereof.

When Bartram saw the day past, and the Order not performed, he eagerly sues
forth upon the defendant Annes contempt, the ordinary process of the Court, till
it came to proclamation of Rebellion: And though he might have seen himself
checked by the hand of God, in taking her to rest, who lived a restless life,
by his disquieting her in suits, yet does he not desist, but seeing her closed
up in the earth, hunts her husband Sir George Symons till he brings him to the
bay, and then lays hold on him as for a contempt, in not bringing in his wife
while she lived, the Law supposing every wife amesnable at the will of her
husband, and by order of the Court in the Justice of it, gets him committed to
the fleet, where he has remained in the nature of a prisoner, from Hillary
term last, till the last day of this Michaelmas Term.

Now Sir George Symons finding himself thus ouerlayed by his adversary
Bartram, and that his hawks eye watched now to make him his prey: petitioneth
to the Lord Chauncellor, and humbly by way of motion also desires, that the
whole proceedings in the cause may be reuiewed; the confession of the defendant
Anne upon her oath while she lived may be considered, and the proofs
compared, to see if any particular bond of two hundred pound, or if any double
sum of two hundred pound were proved; enforcing, that Bartram had already in
his purse as much as any way was warranted by proof.

The Lord Chauncellor somewhat compassionate herein, and as in all cases, so
especially being tender to restrain the subject of his liberty, unless he
incur some manifest contempt, was pleased hereupon to refer the same to Sir
John Tyndall, and Master Doctor Amye, two ancient Masters of the Court, that
they should certify to him the whole merits of the cause, yet kept himself
even in the course of Justice, not enlarging Sir George Symons, upon this
suggestion, but allowing his liberty upon Reconusance to appear from day to
day.

Hereupon Bartram according to the course of the Court, exhibited
Interrogatories to Sir George Symons, touching the contempt by him and his
wife; who upon examination was found to be privy, and acquainted with the
process that went forth against his wife, and thereby was in truth in a
contempt for not bringing her into Court: But he would not examine Sir George
whether he had any bills, accounts, reckonings, bonds, or specialties, due or
belonging to Leonard Chamberlins estate, which when the two Masters of the
Court perceived, they asked him, why he did not examine Sir George upon that
point: and he answered, it was needless, for he thought in his conscience,
and was persuaded ir George had none of them. Yet you see with what violence he
both takes him, holds him, and keeps him.

Now when Sir John Tyndall, and Master Doctor Amy, had exactly with great
pains, and with often search sought out, and found the true merits of this
cause, they returned their report into the Court the fourth day of this present
November, in these words.

That upon due perusal and consideration both of Answer, Confession, and
proofs, in the Cause they did find, there was but one two hundred pound in all
due: But that upon the eager pursuit of Bartram, Sir George Symons had suffered
long imprisonment; And they thought it time he were released, which
notwithstanding they referred to the better judgment of the Court.

In which report you may note three things.

First that the matter of it was just.

Secondly that it had no bitterness in it, more then well became Judges, who
ought not to be insencible when they find the Court had been made an
instrument of any man's causeless suffering.

Thirdly, that it was not concluding or peremptory, but left the matter to the
judgment of the Court.

When this report was returned into Court, there was nothing suddenly done upon
it, but day was given to Bartram until Tuesday the twelfth of this Month, to
show cause, why Sir George should not be enlarged, and himself dismissed out
of Court.

Now when Bartram saw this bitte put into his mouth, whereby his covetous
desire was bridled, and his imaginary hopes lost, which was to have another two
hundred pound, to which he had no color of right; his heart begins to swell:
And seeing this just report as a shield to defend Sir George Symons from his
pursuit, he turns his fury another way, and casts his resolution of Revenge
upon Sir John Tyndall, whose person while he lived was,

1 Of great reputation for his integrity:

2 Of great respect for his temperance and moderation in the place he held:

3 Of good opinion for his learning and experience.

4 Much to be reverenced both for his birth, pains, and his age.

Yet neither his age, nor his pains, nor his innocence, nor his integrity,
could be any arguments for Bartram to spare him, or any buckler against his
bloody violence.

Wherein you shall see what spurs the devil sets to his heels to hasten him
to hell.

He before coueted but money, or bonds from Sir George Symons; now that spark
is quenched, a greater flame arises: nothing now will quench his thirst, but
the blood of Sir John Tyndall: See now the steps he seeks to tread, and you
shall perceive this action of his had, 1 Crafty preparation. 2 Wicked
resolution. 3 Hellish execution.


1 He strips himself of his estate, and the eight day of this month he makes
a voluntary deed of gift of all his goods, to one Master Drake, with whom he
confessed he had no acquaintance. When this deed came to sealing, he would
have had the Scriuener dated the same, as if it had been made in July before,
which he did of craft to defraud his Majesty of the forfeiture of his goods, he
knew would follow upon the villainy of his fact: but no importunity could win
the Scriuener to that dishonesty.

2 Being thus turned naked, he now clad himself only with malice, and
opportunity to revenge: and the tenth day which was Sunday, there is a noise of
blood sounding in his head, and then as he confessed before the Honorable
Judges of the Kings Bench, he resolved to kill Sir John Tindall, as if he
should murmur to himself; Sir John has bereaved me of my unjust hopes,
therefore he shall die an unjust death.

3 Being settled in this mad resolution to shed blood, on the eleventh of
this month, the engine of death must be thought of. And that must be, 1 Not a
sword: for his old withered hand could not weild it. 2 Not a dagger: for he
could not be sure of his aim, and by that he might perhaps stab him, but not
kill him. 3 But a Pistol must be the executioner. And why? first, it is easy
to handle: secondly, it is shot off before it be seen: thirdly, it tears the
body, and carries the life away with it.


The instrument of death being thus thought of, he scoureth his Pistol, lays
his bullets ready, which as he said, had lain rusting by him six years
before, and now must be scoured to act this tragedy.

On the twelfth of this Month, being the day when Bartram by his Counsel
should show cause to the Court why Sir George should not be enlarged, and
himself dismissed, he retained no other counselor then the Devil, who as
you may fear by the sequel, (leaving secret things to God) had the Fee he
ever seeks for, the soul of Bartram for the counsel given him.

Now this day, first he bestirres him early to seek out Master Drake, to
whom he had given his goods, carries his deed with him, carries by a Porter
after him, his best gown and best cloak, comes to Master Drakes house,
delivers him the deed and the goods brought by them (as he said) put him in
possession of all the rest This done, he stays not, but hastes again to
Westminster, where missing his opportunity to work his revenge, about eleven
of the clock the same day, he betakes him to a Skuller upon the Thames, and
in the way between Westminster and the Temple, he shootes of his Pistol (as
he said) to scour it, having only powder in it, which no sooner went off, but
he charged it again with double bullet, and closely carrying it by his side,
landed at the Temple stairs, went up to Lincolns Inn, awaited at the gate the
alighting of Sir John Tyndall from his Coach, met him going toward his Chamber,
affronts him, complains his back was broken by his Report, yet (as he said)
moved Sir John the matter might be put to Compremise, to which the Knight,
nothing suspecting the train laid for him, answered only (as Bartram
confessed) What a Compremise now?

Hereeupon, as Sir John was entering into his Chamber, this man possessed with a
murdrous Devil, taking that answer of Sir John as a scorn, discharged his
Pistol upon him, not before him, but behind him, shot him through, so as
instantly he fell down, and with a groan only ended his life.

Company soon came in, but Sir John Tindalls man stricken into a maze, was not
able at first either with his hand to lay hold on the offender, or by his
speech to discover him: for Bartram had cast the Pistol from him, yet he
hasted not away but stood still, no stranger coming in suspecting him, his
hoary hairs carried so grave a show.

But after a little pause, Sir John's man gaining his spirits again, and
Bartram seeing he could not be hid, revealed himself, and withal stabd
himself with a pocket dagger, but the vigilant eye of Sir Peter Hayman
instantly taking hold of his arm, so dulled the stroke, as that the hurt was
not great, which this wretch perceiving, with his left arm drew forth a knife,
(having prepared also a double weapon of death for himself,) and offered again
to destroy himself, but was likewise prevented.

Now alas Sir, you see there was in truth no words of provocation in the
answer of Sir John, and who knew his countenance must say, it was ever mild
and pleasing, not lofty nor sower. But malice that carries a man out of
himself, makes every object seem vglye, and every word sound harsh, more
speedily to thrust on revenge. Howbeit in the action it self, you may observe
many things which might have made Bartram hateful to himself, and which will
still keep him living as a Monster of men, and as a scorn to posterity. For
you see,

1 The ground of his Malice was unjust: stirred up by a just report, as has
been showed before.

2 If offense had been in the Report, he should not have been his own
Revenger, but have sought redress at a higher hand: the Lord Chancellor being
never deaf to any just complaint.

3 He wreakes his Malice before the Report did hurt him: for it was not then
decreed.

4 Fourthly, he did it suddenly and unsuspected, under a show of treaty and
conference.

5 He did it trecherously and cruelly, discharging it behind his back.

6 Age assaulted age, which is not usual, each of them being 75. years old at
least.

7 Observe the place: It was in an Honorable and civil society, where every
man there, thinks himself within his Castle.

8 It was done not with a single, but with a double bullet, as if he had
thought his flesh to have been of steel; or as if his malice meant not only
to murder him, but to mangle him.

9 In this desperate fury, his malice turned her edge upon himself, and he
sought to have been his own Butcher, but that his Master the Devil (mercy
not Interuenient) reserved him as for the place of Judas, so for the end of
Judas to be his own hangman.

10. Which is most remarkable herein, he made a duellum and assault not only
upon a just man, but even upon Justice it self, which the Devil could not
vaunt of in many Ages before, and which is very fearful in example: For all
the Judges of the land, yea, all the Noble Counselors of State, if they
consult but with their own humane weakness, may in fear, of that man values
most, which is his life, let fall and unloose their courage in doing Justice,
least he that thinks himself wronged, prepare the like Repast for them, which
Bartram here did for Sir John Tyndall.

Howbeit I hope such fears shall vanish, for sure God who is the preserver of
men, will not suffer Justice which is the bond of man's society to be broken,
but though by this execrable Action one link be fallen, yet the chain is
whole, and he will still increase it both in strength and beauty.

Again, forbear to censure the manner of Sir John Tyndals death: speed of
death is not always a Judgment, nor the suddenness of it suspicious, where it
finds a man in the way of Righteousness: but argues anger, when it takes a man
in an act of sin.

Sir John Tyndall, was at this time walking in his Calling appointed by God;
and Bartram in his Calling appointed by the Devil. Here what Solomon says,
and it will both stay your heart, and set strait your judgment, Eccles. 7.17.
There is a just man that perishes in his justice, and there is a wicked man
that continues long in his malice: And though his reckoning be not yet, yet
stripes and plagues do wait upon his account.

You see and may persuade your self, that Sir John, paying that debt to God,
which was due to Nature, and being by a malicious hand offered up as a
sacrifice, both for his Justice, and in his Justice, had the Angels his
attendants to carry him to heaven, for there is rest to the children of God.
And as for Bartram, (though it be safest to leave his judgment to God; yet if
the tree be judged by the fruit, it being both corrupt and rotten, we may say
it was near to burning.

But I will return to Bartram living: This detestable murder was presently
spread abroad; and at the first it was as strangely voyced as committed: For
fame taking hold no doubt of the obstinate carriage of Bartram without
remorse; and interpreting the Induration of his heart to proceed from some
great Injustice done him by Sir John Tyndall: blazed it abroad as if he had
been but a kind of scourge of God upon an unrighteous Judge: and that though
he was not to be Justified in the Fact, yet he was to be pitied in his wrong:
So as that Spirit, which was first a spirit of Malice in the heart of Bartram,
turned it self into the spirit of Error in the mouths of men.

But the first thing that was done in proceeding against this foul Murder,
was, that the Judges of the Kings Bench took examination of the fact: And
being doubtful that his hurts were dangerous, and desirous that an examplar
Justice should not by accident be prevented, gave order he should be speedily
indicted and arraigned. Master Attorney General also having a care that a
cause of so great consequence that might as well strike fear into the best
Judges, as sore warn the corrupt (nay might concern any man that has in any
place or office but the power to discontent, so that no man can tell who shall
suffer, and who shall look on) should not pass in any obscure and ordinary
manner, sent for Master Solicitor, and desired him that he would be provided
to make some declaration, such as the cause required for the honor of Justice,
and for a note of distinction between so rare a cause and ordinary matters of
the Crown.

Master Attorney conceiving at that time that the fact being so notorious and
confessed upon examination, Bartram would not have pleaded not Guilty: but it
fell so out, that he confessed not the Indictment but pleaded not Guilty:
whereupon the Jury being not then ready at the Bar, further day was given
for his trial.

In the mean time, his Majesty hearing of this strange accident (as his manner
is) was desirous to penetrate into the root and Center of this man's malice and
fact: and in his Princely wisdom, considering that this cruel murder must
either spring from the instigation of others, or from Bartram himself. And if
from Bartram, it must proceed either from an inueterate habit of a desperate
and wicked life: or for some insufferable wrong that Sir John Tyndall had done
him, signified his pleasure by the Lord Chamberlin unto Master Attorney; That
there should be some stay of the public proceeding, until Bartram were
farther examimed, and directed the Examination to be upon three heads: First,
touching the Incitation: Secondly, touching Bartrams course of life and
Religion: and lastly touching the Iustnes or Iniquity of Sir John Tyndals
report.

Whereupon Master Attorney calling Master Solicitor to assist him, took the
examination, whereof I send you a copy, having obtained leave of his Honor so
to do.

In which examination it plainly appears, that the Devil needed no Broker,
but wrought immediately ypon the malice of the man, whose course and
conversation of life was always disordered, and not without touch of Popish
Religion; though it seems to be true that he was a kind of Church-walker in
Westminster, and came diverse times to hear either the service or the music.

But for Sir John Tyndall, he does sufficiently clear him from bribery, either
from being corrupted by his adversary, or tempted by himself, and in the
merits of the cause he had scarce a word in his mouth to impeach the report
(as you may well perceive, if you compare his examination with the former
relation of this business) in so much as both at that time he did confess,
that it was one of the foulest murders that ever was committed.

And after he said to his under keeper, that the Kings Counsel (who had used
him with much compassion toward his age and hurt) had cut sore into the
business, as finding (belike) at that time some compunction, though it after
vanished as the morning cloud.

For notwithstanding the Lord Chancellor had in great wisdom given especial
charge and direction that cate should be had of this man, as well for his body,
as for his soul: For his body in 2. kinds, that his hurts should be looked
to, and that he should be kept from doing himself mischief, having once
attempted it. And for his soul, that he might have some godly Preacher to
bring him to the sense of his sin (which is not so well discerned in the
commitment of it, as in the punishment of it) and to save him from impenitency:
yet so was Gods will, that in the end he destroyed himself: but yet in that
form of execution which the Law and Justice had prescribed, and not by any
other death, as he had formerly sought to effect.

For on the seventeenth day of this month, being Sunday in the morning, this
man took occasion to send away his keeper to fetch him a Bible for his
comfort, requiring that it might be a latin Bible, and with a Concordance
(thinking belike that such a Bible was not so easy to be had) but there being
one found in the house, and his keeper bringing it sooner then he expected, he
sent him again for an English Bible, and that also being quickly returned
unto him, he said he was not satisfied with the translation, and desired
another Translation, which he thought was harder to get: and the better to
win time, told his keeper likewise that his stomach was empty, and therefore
desired him to bring with him also some Ale, with a toste: and in the mean
time by a rope that he had gotten tied unto a Tenter hook, that was fastened
above the window to hang a hat on, he hanged himself, his legs almost
trayling on the ground. The continuance of which desperate resolution to make
away himself, the reason may be gathered upon some speech he let fall at
several times as I have heard, that he would be sorry to be hanged in
chains: so that he that had no sense of preserving his life and soul, yet
had apprehension and care of his senseless Carcass.

And so you have here an end of this Tragedy, not presuming to give any
judgment, either of the furious passions of these times, or of the dangers of
Authority, or of the errors of Rumor, not to make any interpretation of the
fact, or the circumstances thereof, but by this plain declaration which I here
send you, leave the same to your meditations, who I am sure desires to know the
truth herein, and who have more leisure, and will enter into them more
sincerely (perhaps) then we do here in London.

29. November, 1616. Your assured Friend, N. T.

The Examination of John Bartram, taken this 16. day of November, 1616. before
Sir Francis Bacon his Majesty's Attorney General, and Sir Henry Yeluerton, his
Majesty's Solicitor General.

LONDON, Printed by John Beale. 1616.

John Bartram,
BEing asked whither after his coffeehouse at the Report of Sir Io: Tindall
and Doctor Amy, he did not use any words or speeches to his Attorney, or any
private friend, whereby he threatened the revenge upon Sir Io: Tindall, he
protests that as he desires comfort at his resurrection, he did never use
any such speeches to any person.

Being asked touching his Religion, he says he is no Papist, nor ever was, but
says that he was about 20. years since indicted in the Kings bench by malice
for Recusancie, to which he then pleaded his conformity, and was discharged
thereby.

Being asked whether ever he gave or promised to give to Sir Io: Tindall any
money, reward, or gratuity in this Cause, he denies that ever he gave any, or
had at any time any speech with him tending to any such purpose.

Being asked whether he had any knowledge that Sir John Tindall, or Doctor Amy
were corrupted or bribed by his adversary to make the last Report, says that
he does not know it.

Being asked (the state of the question being whether there were any particular
bond or debt of 200. pound between Harris and Chamberlin, besides debts upon
Account, and upon specialtie amounting to that sum) whether he knew of any
such particular bond or not; he says he never saw any such bond, nor knows
it otherwise then by the recital thereof made in the decree, and some Orders
made in that Cause, and in a cross bill wherein (as he conceiueth) there is
mention thereof.

Being asked, whether he be penitent for his Fact, says, that he takes it
to be as foul a murder as ever was committed, and if he has uttered any
speeches to the contrary he is very sorry for it.

John Bartram.
Examinatur coram Fra: Bacon. Hen: Yeluerton.



