AN ANSWER TO A CERTAIN TREATISE OF THE CROSS IN BAPTISM.

Entitled A Short Treatise of the Cross in Baptism, contracted into this
Syllogism.

No humane ordinance becoming an Idol may lawfully be used in the service of
God. But the sign of the Cross, being an humane ordinance is become an Idol.
Ergo: The sign of the Cross, may not lawfully be used in the service of God.


Wherein not only the weakness of the Syllogism it self, but also of the
grounds and proofs thereof, are plainly discovered.

By L. H. Doct. of Divinity.

August. Sermon. 19. de Sanctis. Crucifixus noster a morte resurrexit, and coelos
ascendit: Crucem nobis in memoriam sua passionis reliquit.

Idem Sermon. 130. De Tempore. C^^^ Christi, est clavis paradisi, and insigne
regni.

Printed at Oxford by Joseph Barnes, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard
at the sign of the Crown, by Simon Waterson, 1605.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND MOST REVEREND FAther in God, RICHARD, by the
providence of God, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England and
Metropolitan; and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
NOthing makes me more afraid, to offer this mine answer, to your Graces view
and censure, then the very length, which contrary to my purpose and conceit, it
is now grown unto. For both it may justly argue me of indiscretion; for
framing so long an answer to so short a Treatise: and the longer it is, the
more must it needs be subject to diverse and sundry oversights. Both which give
me just occasion much the rather to fly to so safe a sanctuary, as your Graces
patronage, not only against them, who for the matters sake will certainly
mislike it: but even against them also, who favoring the argument, may
peradventure judge the coat too big for the body, or wish something otherwise
then here they find it. May it please your Grace therefore to remember, that
first this matter of the Cross in Baptism, is that great stumbling block,
whereat al our discontented brethren do take offense; and secondly, that in
this small Treatise all the chiefest arguments which they usually make against
this sign, are comprehended: I make no doubt, but that both your Grace and al
other indifferent Readers, will easily pardon my length. Especially because my
endeavor was, to give just satisfaction to every objection, and to leave
nothing unanswered, that might seem to carry any weight of reason with it*
which course, as I held throughout the whole Treatise in general, so more
especially in the last part. Where our objections, which the Treatiser makes
show to satisfy, are justified to be too weighty, for so slight and incoherent
answers, as are fitted unto them. The Treatiser more over, not only somewhat in
every part of the Treatise, but fully and of resolved and settled purpose in the
last part, makes great vaunt, that either the Ancient fathers in their times
used not this sign at al in Baptism, or if they did, they used it to far
other purposes the^ we do now; or lastly, if they used it to any such end yet
even in them it was never free from sin, and superstition. I thought it
therefore a principal part of my duty, somewhat more at large to insist upon
these points, being things in my judgment not slightly to be passed over. And
accord^ngly have declared, both that the Ancient fathers used this consignation
of the Cross in Baptism in their times, And also that they used it, (though
to other purposes too) yet even to such ends and purposes, as our Church does
at this day: and lastly, I have freed (as I trust) as well our Christian use
thereof, from suspicion o^ ^^olatry, as that use which the Auntients had of it,
from that imputation of sin and superstition, which unjustly is supposed to
have accompanied it in their times. And this I trust may be sufficient excuse
and defense for the prolixity of this answer. As for the ouersights and
imperfections therein contained, no just Apology can be made: only I must fly to
your Graces favor, and good acceptance of the Readers. I could have wished,
and from my heart I do desire, that the late Conference before his most
excellent Majesty, (so much desired and expected before it came) might have
had that success whereof there was hope given at the first. That is either
utterly have taken away, and made an end of these quarrels in our Church, or at
the least, after full satisfaction given, (which there they had) somewhat abated
the heat of their coffeehouse. That so we all with one heart and one mind,
might have provided ourselves against that head of Popery, that by these
domestical dissentions gets daily strength among us. But it is come to
pass (I know not how) that these conte^tions are since that time, much more
rife then they were before, and prosecuted with greater heat the^ ever; As
though by that meeting in the conference, they had rather taken heart, and
greater courage, then any foil; and new strength rather, then any just
reprofe, or satisfaction. Where upon, as diverse others have endeavored to
answer their exceptions to our Church Ceremonies in general; so I have
labored to take out of the way all their scrupels and objections against this
particular of the Cross in Baptism* wherein my conscience bears me record,
I have walked with an upright heart, and sincere affection; and I verily thinck,
according to the truth in this behalf. If therefore there shall be any thing
found therein, answerable to the worth and dignity of the cause; all that justly
and properly belongs only to your Grace, from whom it took the first
beginning. If otherwise, I shall be always ready upon better information, to
reform my errors and oversight. How soever I commend both it and my self to
your Graces honorable favor and protection, and shall be always willing to
dispose my labors according to your Graces direction; studying in althings
wherein God shall enableme, to advance the glory of God, and knowledge of his
truth* whereof as God has made your Grace the greatest ornament and pillar in
our Church; so I humbly beseech him of his infinite goodness, to bless all your
religious and careful endeavors for the same; And withal, to give you many
honorable days and comfortable Assistants in so great a work; to the glory of
his holy name, contentment of his most excellent Majesty, and perpetual good
of this Church and congregation.

Your Graces most bounden and dutiful Chapleine LEON. HVTTEN.

AN ANSWER TO A TREAtise of the Cross in Baptism. The Title whereof is A
short Treatise of the Cross in Baptism contracted into this Syllogism.

No humane ordinance becoming an Idol, may lawfully be used in the service
of God. But the sign of the cross being a humane ordinance, is become an
Idol. Ergo The sign of the Cross may not lawfully be used in the service of
God.


This short treatise of the Cross in Baptism consists of three principal
parts. 1 The maine syllogism whereinto this whole treatise is contracted. 2
The proof of the several parts of this syllogism. 3 The answering of
certain objections.


THE ANSWER TO THE WHOLE SYLLOGISM. Concerning the maine syllogism, let us
consider, first a little of the form, and then afterward come unto the matter.
IN the form I only observe, that if the Treatiser had gone ordinarily to
work, and kept himself exactly to the terms of his Mayor, the Minor would
much better, and with less suspicion of deceit have been conceaved thus: No
humane ordinance becoming an idol, may lawfully be used in the service of
God. But the sign of the Cross is a humane ordinance becoming an idol. Ergo
The sign of the Cross may not lawfully be used in the service of God.


For so the ambiguity of the word, becoming would have still remained, and we
might still have been at our choice whether we would take it for beseeming,
and adding ornament or decency to an Idol, or for being made or become
indeed an Idol it self. And I marvel much why the Treatiser held not this
course, considering that, first it would have been as availeable for his
present purpose, and secondly it would still have left an impression in the
mind of the readers, that no orname^t, or other thing beseeming or adding
decency to an Jdol (and they can make what the list an Jdol) may lawfully be
used in Gods service. By which means as great a blow would have been given
to Caps, Su^rplisses, Hoodes, and Copes, as now by this Treatiser is given to
the sign of the Cross.

But the Treatiser (you will say) meant more honestly, and therefore having
used a word of doubtful signification in the mayor, he very sincerely
restrained it in the minor to his purposed intent, thereby showing that he dealt
plainly, and intended no deceit. His sincerity and true dealing is no ways
testified by this means: for had he indeed meant plainly, and intended no
Sophistication, he would have conceaved his syllogism in usual, and known
terms, and such as are proper and familiar in this argument of ceremonies, as
namely insteede of humane ordinance he would have used Ecclesiastical
constitution, for becoming an Idol, he would have said, abused to Idolatry,
or superstitiously abused, in place of service of God, he would have put
celebrating of Gods service, and so have concluded in this, or some such like
form.

No Ecclesiastical constitution, that sometime has been superstitiously
abused, may afterward be reduced to his first lawful use, and so retained in
the celebrating of Gods service. But the sign of the Cross in Baptism, is an
Ecclesiastical constitution, that has sometime been superstitiouslie abused.
Ergo The sign of the Cross in Baptism may not be reduced to his first
lawful use, and so retained in the celebrating of Gods service.


This observation I make the rather because the very name of humane ordinance
is always odious, and imports traditions merely humane, wicked, impious, and
lying, proceeding from our corrupt nature: for the which cause humane
doctrines, the commandments of men, are reproved by our Savior: contrariwise
the name of Ecclesiastical constitutions, is much more gentle, and gracious,
and imports ordinances made by the Church of Christ, Zanch. in compend. loco.
26. page 640.
which the very name affords to be not merely humane, and therefore not
false, but in part divine, and therefore good, true, holy, and such as please
God. The reason is. The Church is ruled by the spirit of Christ, who is the
truth, and therefore the traditions of the Church are true and holy. And yet it
pleased the Treatiser, in his charity, rather to use humane ordinance, then
Ecclesiastical constitution, to what purpose and intent let the indifferent
Reader judge.

But because he was to make choice of his terms by his own judgment, and not
by my direction, I will therefore follow him in his own words. And then I say
again, that if he had indeed meant honestly, and intended no sophisticatio^,
he would in such propositions, as express a thing to be just or unjust,
lawful, or unlawful, have set down the circumstances of time, persons, and
place, or such other like. Of time in this sort.

No humane ordinance, once of good use, that afterward became an Idol, may
lawfully be used in the service of God. But the sign of the Cross being a
humane ordinance, once of good use afterward became an Idol. Ergo The sign of
the Cross may not lawfully be used in the service of God.


Of place, and persons thus. No humane ordinance beco^ming an Idol in the
Church of Rome, and among the Papists, may lawfully be used in the service, of
god in the Church of England, and among the Protestants. But the sign of the
Cross is a humane ordinance becoming an Idol in the Church of Rome, and
among the Papists, Ergo. The sign of the Cross may not lawfully be used in
the service of God in the Church of England, and among the Protestants.


For thus the falsehood and inconsequence of his argument would easily have
appeared unto all men. But the Treatiser thought it more for his advantage, to
muddie his propositions, concealing all circumstances that might give li^ht to
the point in controversy, and to set down his argument confusedly, the more to
stu^ble the unskillful Reader. But leaving the form of this syllogism, let us
briefly come to the matter therein contained.

The Mayor.
No humane ordinance becoming an Idol, may lawfully be used in the service of
god.
The answer to the mayor.
The mayor is merely false, for although the Syllogizer does verily persuade
himself, that he has cunningly contrived into on proposition, two
inexpugnable reasons, why the sign of the Cross may not lawfully be used in
the service of god, the first because it is a humane ordinance, the second
because it is become an Jdoll, yet there is no truth neither in the one, not in
the other.

Concerning the first, that no humane ordinance is to be used in the service of
god, I would feign know of the Treatiser what he means by the service of
god. Jf he mean ( preaching, which to that sect is now become almost the only
service of god) J will propose such plain matter against his assertion, as
himself shall not be able to contradict. The sentences which St. Paul borrowed
out of heathen Poers, Aratus. Acts 17.28. Menander, 1. Cor. 15.33. Epimenides,
Titus. 1.12. were first of humane invention: for so the Apostle expressly
cites two of them in there several places. Secondly they were used in the
service of god: For the first was used in a sermon to the Athenians; the second
in that great argument and heavenly discourse of our resurrection: the third in
his instruction to Titus how he should carry him self toward them of Creet.
And lastly, for any thing that ever J could learn, they were well and
lawfully used in gods service. For though it have pleased those that are of
opinion with our treatiser, in the humor of there sect, and favor of there
ignoranc, utterly to reject the use of all humane learning in their sermons,
yet J hold it not therefore unlawful: And sure J am that, Ambrosius delect andi
gratia vtitur sententiarum argutijs: Hieronymus poetarum illecebris, et Mimorum
salibus: Tertullianus facetijs et iocis: Chrysostomus similibus, collationibus,
et metaphoris ad illustrationem et delectationem admirabili artificio
concinnatis, as a learned man speaks of those fathers.

And Saint Augustine, a greater clarke then any they can set against him, is of
opinion that De doctr. christian. lib. 2. c. 4.
Si qua forte vera, and fidei nostrae accommoda dixerunt, non solum formidanda
non sunt, sed abijs etiam tanqua^ iniustis possessoribus, in vsum nostrum
vendicanda: now if a man upon these grounds should infer, that therefore all
humane ordinances and inventions are not excluded from the service of God, I
marvel what our Treatiser would think of his universal negative proposition.

Secondly, if by the service of God he understand the Leiturgie and form of
divine service and prayer, then I demand what manner of Leiturgie there was
in the Church of the Jews till the time of our Savior. For we are not to
imagine, that in their daily sacrifices, in their Sabbaths, and new moons, and
other festival days, men assembled only to perform the bare outward actions
of killing their sacrifices, and offering their oblations, without any form of
prayer and Leiturgie for such holy purposes. And yet those outward actions only
are recorded and registered unto us, as being of Gods institution, and those
other of prayer, and thanksgiving, and vocal service of the congregation (if
any such were, as certainly they were) are passed over in silence without any
record or remembrance; which makes me to conceive (and verily I shall remain in
that opinion til I be reformed) that al other complements were wholly left, and
permitted to the direction of the Priests. For had there been any such forms
of prayer and thanksgiving instituted by God, they would (noe doubt) either have
been recorded by Moses, as well as there form of blessing the people,
mentioned Numb: 6.24. or preserved as safe as the other Ceremonies and rites of
there sacrifices. And herein J am the rather confirmed by the Titles and
Inscriptions of diverse psalms, which in the times of those oblations and
sacrifices were used in holy meetings. But the whole manner of ordering and
disposing of them seems to have been in the Priests and Levites, and them
that had the chief government in holy assemblies. For so much both the sending
of diverse psalms to the Chaunter, or him, that excelled in music as
Ieduthune, Asaph, the sonns of Corah: and the names of certain Jnstruments, or
tunes whereto they were to be set, as Neginoth, Shoshannim, Alamoth, and such
like, do most manifestly import. Also I would feign know of the Treatiser
whether the appointing of the Singers, Priests, and Levites in their orders and
courses, which is ascribed to David, 1 Chronicles. 25. to It hoida, 2. Chro. 23.18.
to Ezechias, 2. chron. 31.2. were a humane ordinance, or not? for that it was
used in Gods service, these alleged places sufficiently testify: and that it
was a humane ordinance instituted first by David, and renewed afterward by
those others, these places following plainly affirm. The song of the Lord
began with the trumpets and instruments of David King of Jsraell. 2. Chron:
29.27. Ezechias the King and Princes commanded the Levites, to praise the Lord
with the words of David, and Asaph the kings seer. 2. Chron. 29.30. and after
the captivity, Joshua the Priest, and Zerubbabell the governor, appointed the
Priests in their apparel with trumpets, and the Levites the sons of Asaph
with Cymbals, to praise the Lord after the ordinance of David King of Israel.
Esra: 3.10.

Thirdly if by the service of God, he mean the outward ceremonies of our
religious carriage, and behavior while we are in the Church hearing Gods word,
and praying unto him in the congregation, I would know whether those
ordinances which the Apostle S. Paul prescribes That women should keep
silence in the Church 1. Cor. 14.34. That men should pray bare headed and women
covered. 1. Cor. 11.4. That men coming together to the Lords supper should
stay one for another, and that profane feasting should not be mingled with the
Lords Supper. 1. Corinthians. 11.17. whether J say these, and many such like were
of humane institution or divine? Jf they were of man's ordinance, then the
Treatiser is much mistaken, for all these belonged to the service of God, if
they were not of humane but divine institution, how then does he call them My
things, The ordinances that I have delivered? 1. Cor 11.2. and why speaks he
not in Gods person, but his own? I will that men pray every where lifting up
pure hands. That women array themselves in comely apparel. 1. Tim: 2.8.9. and,
I permit not a woman to teach. 1. Tim. 2.12. Jf the Treatiser shall say that in all these examples formerly alleged, those men were led by the spirit of
God, and therefore what soever they appointed was Gods ordinance, my answer
there unto is, that now also the Church of God is guided by the same spirit:
and as now, so even then also, there was a difference to be made between those
things which God commanded in such actions, and those things which were ordered
by men: else the scripture would neither so expressly have mentioned such
things to have bin done by such men, as in the former examples: nor St. Paul
have spoken in his own person so resolutely, as in the latter. A manifest
proof whereof we may draw out of the same Apostle speaking of a matter of
greater importance, namely marriage, 1. Cor: 7. where he would not have
acknowledged, that some thing he spoke by permission, and some other things by
Commandment, as in the 6. verse, nor have so exactly distinguished between the
Lord commands and not I, speaking of equal marriages, verse. 10. and I
command, and not the Lord, speaking of unequal marriages, verse. 12. But only
to give us to understand, that in these matters of ceremony and outward order,
where he uses not Gods express authority, there he speaks of his own
judgment, directed always, as him self verily thinks. 1. Cor. 7.40. by the
spirit of God.

Hitherto J have spoken only of those things, wherein I would willingly be
instructed, concerning the Leiturgies of the old testament til the Apostles
times. Now, if I should resume the same points, and discourse of them, as J
find them to have been used in the Primitive Church and immediate ages next
after the Apostles, I should press the Treatiser with such a multitude of
examples above al exception, as must needs overthrow his weak position. For
first for sermons, both in there preachings and in there writings, how full of
humane arts and secular learning are the ancient holy fathers? For although in
the end and scope of there learning, Tertull. in Apol. cap. 46.
* Quid adeo simile Philosophus et Christianus? Graeciae discipulus et caeli?
famae negotiator, et vitae? etc yet in the commerce and intercourse of there
knowledge, as on the one side, Quis poetarum? quis Sophistarum qui non omnino
de Prophetarum font potauerit? vt facile credatur diuinam literaturam,
thesaurum fuisse posteriori cuique sapientiae: so on the other side, Aug. de
doct. christi. li. 2. c. 40.
* Nonne aspicimus quanto auro et argento et vest suffarcinatus exierit de
Aegipto Cyprianus doctor suauissimus, et Martyr beatissimus? quanto Lactantius,
quanto Victorinus, Optatus, Hylarius, and to omit the rest, quanto ipse qui
hoc scribit Augustinus? So that in those times, Lactant. lib. 4.
* Philosophia humana suis armis confecta obmutuit. and there was not any one
of the ancient fathers, that was not able to convince profane Poets,
Sophisters, and Philosophers, out of their own principles and superstitions,
God in his wisdom so giueing gifts to those his most worthy instruments,
Niceph. Call. lib. 8. cap. 29.
that they, * Tanquam periti Musici gratum et iucundum decantantes carme^,
super vacaneas quoque percurrere plectro chordas potuerint, et ornatus gratia
supra eas quae ex vsu sunt, alias etiam adijcere.

Secondly for the Leiturgies and form of divine service in those times, as we
do willingly acknowledge, al things to have been of far more simple and plain
observation, then they came afterward unto, so it cannot be denied, but that
even then also humane ordinances and inventions were used in Gods service: for
what else shall we call, and to what head shall we refer, the Leiturgies of St.
James used in the Church of Jerusalem? of St. Basil used in the Church of
Caesarea Cappad? of St. Chrysostom used in the Church of Constantinople? of
St. Clement, used in the Church of Rome? and generally of all those other
famous Leiturgies mentioned in the Ecclesiastical histories, and recorded to
have been used in several Churches in the most flourishing state of the
Primitive Church? what conceit shall we have of those zealous and religious
Christians, that have in all ages, and in all Churches, without any interruption,
so devoutly song, and said, Athanasius, and the Nicene Creed? what of the
heavenly dittie, Te Deum, compiled by St. Augustine, and St. Ambrose, and from
them derived into al Churches? what of the sacred hymn Trisagium, used first
in the Church of Constantinople, and afterward commended to the world by the
council of Calcedon? what of so many excellent hymns, verses, Antiphonies,
Responsories, Rogations, and Letanies, as we read to have been made by S.
Gregory Nazianzen, S. Hilarie, S Ambrose, S. Augustine, Synesius, Prudentius,
Gregory the great, Sedulius, and diverse others, used continually in the
Church? And lastly, (to avoid infinite examples to this purpose) what shall we
think of the fourth Counsel of Toledo, Conc. Toleta. 4. Canon. 12.
that does justify the saying of prayers, and singing of hymns made by men,
against such as would have nothing used in the church, but what is in the
Canonical scriptures, or has been received by the Apostles? De consec. dist^
1. ca. de hymnis
Quia nonnulli hymni humano studio in laudem Dei, atque Apostolorum, and
Martyrum triumphos compositiesse noscu^tur, sicutij quos beatissimi Doctores
Hylarius and Ambrosius condiderunt, quos tamen quidam specialiter reprobant,
pro to quod de scripturis sanctorum Canonum, vel Apostolica traditione non
existunt; respuant ergo and illum hymnum ab hominibus compositum, quem in fine
omnium Psalmorum dicimus, gloria and honor patri, and filio, and spiritus
sancto, etc. Similiter and totum illud, quod sequitur post Angelicum hymnum,
gloria in excelsis Deo, etc. quod tamen Ecclesiastici Doctores composueru^t,
etc. I have the more willingly repeated the most part of the Canon, because it
so fitly meets with the thwart humor of certain men of our time, who
scoffingly and in contempt call those godly songs made by men (which are joined
in the same volume with our singing Psalms) Ballads and Jigges and such like
names, and can abide nothing but the Geneua Psalms (as they call them) to be
sunge in our Christian congregations. As if they certainly were Gods word it
self, and not rather expositions and paraphrases made by men.

Thirdly; for the rites and ceremonies of those times it must be remembered that
first for a long space in the church, they were Iudaical, either because me^
borne and brought up in the Jewish Paedagogie, Beza epist. 8.
knew not what belonged unto Christian liberty, or else because many worthy
and famous men in those days were of opinion, that all the Jewish ceremonies,
could not suddenly be abrogated, without the great offense and sca^dal of the
weaker sort. Of which opinion it seems St. Augustine also was, who oftentimes
praises and commends this saying, Iudaica^ Synagogam cum honor fuisse
sepeliendam. Secondly it is to be observed, that they were diverse and sundry
in diverse Churches, Socrat l. 5. c. 21. Eusebius. hist. Eccles. lib. 5. c. 23.
according to that saying of Socrates. Omnes Ecclesiarum ritu qui in singulis
vrbibus, regionibusque vsurpantur, scriptis mandare vt valde laborio sum est,
ita vix aut ne vix quidem fieri potest. Cuiusque enim religionis and sectae
varij sunt ritus, licet eadem de ipsis habeatur opinio, and qui in eadem fide
consentiunt, ijdem ritibus and ceremonijs inter ipsos discrepant.

Thirdly, it must also be remembered that they were liberae observationis, no
one Church prescribing to another, nor conde^ning another for diversity of
ceremonies, but every one following their own customs, and using that
freedom that is agreeable to christian liberty. This point is fully proved by
many particulars in the place formerly alleged out of Socrates, and most
plainly delivered unto us, not only in the example of St. Ambrose, Cum Romam
venio, ieiuno Sabbato, cum hic (Mediolani) sum, non ieiuno, Aug. ep. 118. ad
Ianuarium,
but also by his advise and council commended to S. Augustine, Sic etiam tu ad
qua^ forte Ecclesiam veneris, eius morem serua, si cuiquam non vis esse
scandalo, nec quenquam tibi. Which advise and council of S. Ambrose, as often
as St. Augustine thought upon, he always embraced as an oracle from heaven,
because he had often found, and with much grief lamented, that many weak
brethren were troubled by the contentious obstinacy, and supersticious fear of
some men, who in those matters, which cannot certainly be resolved upon,
neither by the authority of the scriptures, nor by the tradition of the
universal church, became so troublesome that they thought well of nothing, but
what they did them selves: Either because they had some slight reason for
there opinions, or because the custom of there Country was otherwise, or
because they had seen things otherwise carried in some places where they had
travailed, and therefore thought best of that, which they had learned furthest
from home. Now out of these premises, we may gather this firm and sure
Conclusion, That therefore the Ceremonies of those times were certainly of
humane ordinance: or, to speak more properly, of Ecclesiastical Constitution.
For had God given any law concerning the^, neither could the Jewish rites have
continued so long, neither could they have bin so diverse as they were, neither
could they have bin of so free observation, but that one church must needs have
bin sca^dalized by another. And although this were sufficient to infring the
Treatisers proposition: yet I will give the Reader a little taste of those
things only, which antiquity has alvvaies commended in this kind, that he may
thereby be induced, to think the more reverently of Church Ceremonies. The
translation therefore of the Sabbath into the Lords day, and that men prayed
with their faces toward the East, of whose ordinance and institution were
they? Of the first St. Augustine plainly affirms. Aug. de Tem. Sermon. 25.
Apostoli and Apostolici viri, and sancti Doctores Ecclesiae, decreverunt omnem
gloriam Iudaici sabbatismi, in illam transfer. The second also is very
ancient as Iustine Martyr witnesses referring it to the Apostles. Respon. ad
orthodox. qu. 118.
A quibus morem orandi accipit Ecclesia, ab ijsdem etiam locum accepit, viz. a
sanctis Apostolis. In like manner we read that our Lord and Savior instituted
his supper in the Evening, Mat. 26.
and after meat, Cum autem illi manducarent accepit Jesus panem, etc. From
whence then is it, that now for six hundred years, it is received in the
morning, and before men eat? For the former St. Augustine says, Aug. ep. 118.
ad Januarium.
Saluator quo veheme^tius commendaret mysterij illius altitudinem, vltimum hoc
voluit infigere cordibus, and memoriae discipulorum, a quibus ad passionem
digressurus erat. Et ideo non praecepit quo deinceps ordine sumeretur, vt
Apostolis, per quos Ecclesias dispositurus erat, servaret hunc locum. For the
latter he demands, Nunquid propterea calumniandum est vniversae Ecclesiae
quod a ieiunis semper accipitur? ex hoc enim placuit spiritui Sancto, vt in
honorem tanti sacramenti, in os Christiani prius Dominicum corpus intraret,
quam exteri cibi. This custom was in use therefore every where in his time,
except only in some few parts of Egypt in the cuntries near unto Alexandria
and Thebais, as Socrates observes, Quos probabilis quaedam ratio delectavit,
etc. as S. Augustine speaks in the same Epistle. It was afterward commanded
in the third provincial council of Carthage, Aug. ad Jan. ep. 119. cap. 15.
Tertull de coron mill. cap. 2.
Can. 29. and lastly confirmed by the sixth general council in Trullo. The like
may be said of the Jnstitutio^ of Holly days, of Lent, of kneeling in the time
of public prayer used all the year long, save only on Sundaies and Pentecost,
on which days the custom was, Just. Mart. respon. ad orthod. qu. 115.
orare stantes, to stand while they prayed, for such like reasons peradve^ture
as Iustine Martyr yields for it. Lastly those ceremonies in prayer mentioned by
Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in illa verba very adoratores in sp. and ver. adorabunt.
Cum manus extendis, pectus tundis, faciem in coelum erigis, and oculos aperis,
quid aliud facis, quam vt totum hominem ostendas Deo? And those other spoken of
by Tertullia^, Illuc, Tertull. Apol. ca 30. and contra Judaeos cap. 10.
idest in coelum, suspicientes, manibus expansis, capite nudo, genibus positis,
manibus caedentibus pectus, facie humi volutata. As also that they stood up at
the reading of the Gospels, and kneeled at the Sacrament, what other ground had
they then humane Institution? And I trust that that ceremony of virorum prior,
Bez. ep. 24. ad ^.
foeminaru^ posterior ad mensam accubitus, and all those others, which our new
reformers would have brought in, either in their standing, or sitting, or
walking at the Communion, if they might have prevailed, in their general
proiects of a form of Church Leiturgie, and of a Church discipline so often
tendered to the Parliament, would in short time have proved no better, then
humane devises and inventions, though never so fayrely colored with the names
of Apostolical customs, and honored with the most glorious titles of, The
most holy Discipline, the scepter of Christ, and full placing of him in his
kingdom. Concerning the second, that nothing beco^ming an Idol may lawfully
be used in the service of God. Before I come to answer the proposition, J
desire the Reader a little to observe the Treatisers phrase, and manner of
speech. His phrase is becoming an Idol: will you know the reason? He had not
spoken home enough, if he had only said being abused, for the word abused,
would have implied a good use once, which the Treatiser perhaps will not admit
that there was ever any of the Cross. Neither thought he it sufficient to say
abused to Idolatry, for then perhaps, it would have been too hard a task for
him to prove, that nothing abused to Idolatry may lawfully be used in Gods
service. And therefore there was no remedy, his phrase must needs be, becoming
an Idol. But how, I pray you, may a humane ordinance become an Idol? Do you
intend by this speech a Metamorphosis, or Transubstantiation, whereby it
cease to be the nature it was, and is turned into a nature it was not? But
that is clean against the Apostles mind, who says that Idolum nihil est in
mundo. 1. Cor. 8.4.
Your meaning then must be, that by the cogitation and mind of men, ascribing
deity to the ordinance, it was framed and made an Idol. For other essence and
becoming it can have none. What then needed this far fetched speech becoming
an Idol? But that perhaps you meant thereby to express your zeal, or rather,
as I suppose, to astonish the ignorant, and make the sign of the Cross more
suspected, and odious to the people. But leaving the Treatisers speech let us
come unto his matter.

And here J must debate a little with the Treatiser, whether the matter of an
Idol, (for the form we see by the Apostles doctrine is none, but only in the
mind and cogitation of the Jdolater) whether J say, the matter of an Idol,
being silver or gold, brass, lead, or stone, etc. after it is altered and
reclaymed from the Jdolatrous use, may not as well be used in Gods service, as
Churches, or Lands, or vessels may, which sometimes have been consecrated unto
Jdols: J am of opinion it may. For as Tertullian speaks, Apol. cap. 12. and
13.
De simulachris ipsis nihil aliud deprehendo, quam materias sorores esse
vasculorum, instrumentorumque comunium: and that therefore as they Jdolaters
them selves, Publicos et domesticos deos publica et domestica potestate
tractarunt, pignerando, vendicando, demutaudo in Cacabulum de Saturno, in
trullam de Minerua, every man as his present will or necessity required, so
we, abandoning the superstition, and embracing the Creature, which God at the
beginning made good, may apply it to his service. My reason is this, while the
Jdoll, and they things consecrated to the Jdoll, were both abused to Idolatry,
they were both equally distant from God, and alike removed from his service,
differing noe otherwise, then that the Jdoll was the thing worshipped, and the
consecrated thing, that where with it was worshipped. And suppose the Jdoll
were a little farther estranged from God, and a stepp further in the power of
the Devil, yet, Non desinit esse eius qui creauit, No creature of God can be so
far alienated from him, vt non posset quando vult repetere. Nihil enim ita
est sub potestate Diaboli, quin ad gloriam et honorem dei possit converti. Jf
this be granted (and as I think it will not be denied) then this phrase to
become an Idol, imports in effect no more, then to be abused to Jdolatrie,
or to be consecrated to the service of an Jdol. Whereby it will come to pass,
that whatsoever may be alleged, for the good and lawful use of things in Gods
service, that were sometimes abused to Idolatry, the same also may be alleged
to prove, that even that thing also may have a good and right use in Gods
service, which sometimes has been an Jdol it self. Tertull. de Idolat. cap.
8.
Nec enim differt, says Tertullian, Si extruas, velexornes, si templum, si
aram, si adiculam eius extruxeris, si bracteam expresseris, aut insignia, aut
etiam domum fabricaveris. Nay he goes farther and plainly affirms, Mayor
est eiusmodi opera, quae no^ effigiem co^fert, sed authoritatem. Wisd. 13.16.
And in very truth the Artificer that made it knows well enough, that it is
but wood or stone, Minut. in octa.
etc. Nondum Deus saxum est, lignum, aut argentu^; Ecce ornatur, consecratur,
oratur, tum postremo Deus est, cum homo illi valuit, and dedicavit, says
Minutius, The greatest fault then is in him, that by erecting, adorning, and
adoring of it, procures unto it the credit and opinion of a God. Aug. in Psalm,
113.
For by this means, Etiam qui non invenit vitalem motum, credit numen
occultum: seductus forma, et commotus autoritate, sine vivo aliquo Habitatore
esse non putat.

Having laid this foundation, J come now to examine the Treatisers
proposition. And first, if we consider it in Thesi, That nothing once abused,
may ever after be well used, but must be utterly abrogated and rejected. It
will easily appear to be most untrue, not only in things natural and
artificial, which have been exceedingly abused: (for so wine must be gone,
because it has been abused unto drunkenness: meats, because some have abused
them to gluttony: swords, because by some cruel hands they have been imbrued
in innocent blood) but even in those things also, which are said to be the
devises and inventions of profane and heathenish Jdolators, nay, even of the
heathen Gods the^ selves, which yet might be thought most unlike to be fitted
to holy uses, for that they have proceeded from such corrupt fountains. Of
things natural, Aug. Epist. 154 ad Publicolam.
St. Augustines opinion is, Si de area vel torculari tollatur aliquid ad
sacrificia Daemoniorum, etiam sciente Christiano, tamen vtitur mundis reliquis
fructibus, vnde illa sublata sunt, etc. Eue^ as we use those fountains, out of
which we most certainly know, that water is drawn for the use of sacrifices.
Neither doubt we to fetch our breath from that air, into which we know, that
the smoke of all the altars, and incense of Devils does go. For we must beware,
least that if we shall suppose, that we may not eat those herbs which grow
in the garden of the Temple of an Jdoll, it also follow, that we imagine,
that the Apostles ought not to have eaten bread in Athens, because it was the
City of Minerua, and consecrated to her Deity. This also may we answer of
that well and fountain which is in the Temple, and of those sacrifices which
are cast into the well and fountain: nay more, which are therefore cast into
the water, to do sacrifice unto the waters, Neither must we therefore refuse
the benefit of this light, because they sacrilegious, when so they can, cease
not to sacrifice unto the same. Sacrifice also has been offered unto the
winds, which not withstanding we use to our manifold commodity, although
they themselves seem as it were to draw in, and suck up the smoke of those
sacrifices. Of artificial things likewise St. Augustines judgment is the same.
Neque enim propatria non est miles armandus quia contra patriam no^nulli arma
sumpserunt. Nor therefore may not the good and skilful Physicians use medicinal
yrons for cure, and safety, because the unskillful and ill-disposed men, do use
the same for death and destruction. Otherwise no iron were to be used either
in house or field, for fear least some man should therewithal slay himself,
or others: nor must there be a tree, or a cord remaining, for fear least any
man should hang himself. Neither must we make any windows, for fear least
some one or other should cast himself headlong from the same. Tertullian also
is of the same opinion, not only concerning those things, but of such things
also as have been used and invented by the Pagan Gods. Tertull. de coron mill.
cap. 8.
For, Primus Mercurius literas excogitaverit, etc. Let it be so (says he) that
Mercury was the first that invented letters, yet for all that I will acknowledge
them to be necessary, both for matters of co^merce amongst men, and also for
our studies toward God. Vide August. de doct. Christ li. 2 cap. 18.
Nay, say also that he likewise invented Music, neither will I deny (knowing
what David did) but that this invention also was agreeable to the Saints, and
ministered in the service of God. Let Aesculapius be the first inventer of
medicines: why, I remember that Esaie ministered a medicine of figs unto
Ezechias being sick: and Paul could tell Timothy, that a little wine was good
for his stomach, and for his many infirmities. Yea, and though Minerva also
first framed a ship, yet J see that Jonas and the Apostles sailed in ships.
And, which is more, though every thing, and vessel necessary for our use, had
one of the heathen Gods to be the author, yet that is no cause why Christ
should not be clothed, or S. Paul not wear a cloak. And J must confess
also that Christ lay upon a bed, and used a basin when he washed his Disciples
feet: and that he powered water out of a pitcher, and was girded about with
Linen, the stuff peculiar to Osiris. Lastly, Aristotle speaking of the use of
Logic and Rhetoric. Arist Rhet. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Si obijciatur (says he) quod valde nocebit is, qui vtatur unjust huiusmodi
facultate rationu^, why this is an ordinary objection against al good things
(virtue only excepted) and most of al against those things, which are most
profitable, as strength, health, riches, military discipline, etc. For these
be things, which a man may do much good withal, if he use them justly; and
exceeding much hurt, if he use them unjustly. The reason hereof is, because the
evil using of good things, proceeds only from the corrupt nature of the
vser, and therefore cannot alter the goodness of the creatures, which God has
made, and stamped upon them this mark, that God saw that every thing that he
had made, was exceeding good. Genesis 1.


The self same reason also holds in Hypothesi, to what thing so ever a man
will apply it, and is most true even in the point we have now in question.
Things abused to Jdolatrie, nay even to make an Idol it self, have not
therefore lost al manner of good and holy use, because the fault was not in the
things so abused, but in the^ that abused them so. A proof hereof we have in
the Apostle S. Paul, who used that thing in the service of God, whereof other
men had made an Jdol. For I demand. The altar in Athens, having this
inscription, unto the unknown God, was it not a thing consecrated to an Idol?
Or rather, not to digress from the Treatisers phrase, was it not become an
Idol it self? I suppose the Treatiser will not deny it: for S. Paul reckons
it among their superstitions, because they worshipped, they knew not what. And
did not S. Paul use it in the service of God? No doubt he did, when he took
the Inscription thereof for the text and theme of his sermon. Whom you
ignorantly worship, him show I unto you. Lastly, did he not use it lawfully in
Gods service? J am persuaded he did, both because the Athenians could not be
better convinced, then by their own ignorant devotions and superstitions, and
also because God gave a blessing to this sermon, in Dionysius Areopagite, and
Damaris, and diverse others: according to the observation of Cassiodore in the
Tripartite history. Hist. Tripart. lib. 9 cap. 29.
Ille sancto spiritu ditatus, multos Atheniensiu^ adduxit ad fidem, quando ea
quae in ara erant scripta, sensu propria narrationis exposuit.

Jf this example will not content our Treatiser, J remitt him over to the 6.
Chapter of Iosuah ver. 17. and likewise to the 6. Chapter of Judges ver: 25. Jn
the former place the City of Ierico, and all the wealth therein was made
Anathema, an execrable thing unto the Lord: and yet all the silver, and gold,
and vessels of brass and iron were consecrated unto the Lord, and commanded to
be brought into his Treasury. Judge 6.25.
In the latter place God commanded Gedeon to destroy the altar of Baal, and to
cut down the grove that was by it, and yet he would also have the wood of the
grove that was cut down, and the bullock that Ioas the father of Gedeon had
stalled seven years, and had so long before ordained for a sacrifice unto
Baal, to be offered to himself for a burnt offering. And why all this? but to
make it manifest that God is the Lord of all things, and that nothing can be so
far gone into the power of the Devil, but it may be again reclaimed to the
honor, and service of God. For although Moses in the golden Calfe, and Ezechias
in the brazen Serpent, showed each of the^ a memorable example of their
religious zeal, and just anger against Idolatry: the one by burning the Calfe
in the fire, grinding it into powder, strowing it upon the water, and making
the people drink thereof. The other by breaking the Serpent in pieces, and
calling it Nehushtan, a vile and contemptible piece of brass: yet those
actions rather commend the zeal of those good Princes, detesting the Idolatry
and Idols themselves, then are any ways left for a necessary rule for other
men. For whereas there are two things memorable in these actions, the one, the
taking away of the Idolatry, the other, that utter destroying, and abolishing
of the Jdols; The first, is left to Christian Princes and Magistrates for an
example of imitation: The latter, as it increases a commendation of their
zeal, so it imposes no necessity on other men to do the like: as may
appear, not only by the two former examples commanded by God himself, but
also by many other worthy, and famous reformations made by Christian Princes,
in the Primitive Church. Among whom one Theophilus is commended in the
Tripartite history, for faithfully perfourming the commandment of Theodosius
the Emperor, who had given him commission, to destroy all the heathen Idols in
Alexandria, and to employ the matter and riches of them, to good and holy uses.
According to which commandment, Idola Deorum destructa a Theophilo, Hist.
Tripart. lib. 9. cap. 27.
ex mandato Theodosij Imperatoris, conflabantur adfaciendas ollas, and ad
Alexandrinae Ecclesiae diversos vsus, cui ab Imperatore donati fuerunt Dij, ad
expensas egentium. Many examples of the same Theodosius, and of Constantine the
great in former ages, as also of other Christian Princes and Magistrates in
their several times, might be alleged to this purpose. But I will conclude
this point with the most judicious sentence and resolution of St. Augustine,
whereby he confirms whatsoever I have spoken. Epist. 154 ad Publicolam.
Cu^ templa, Idola, luci, etc. when Temples, Jdols, groves, or any things of
like quality, by autorized power are ruinated and cast down, if they be
translated into common, and not proper uses, and converted to the honor of the
true God, that falls out in them, which happens also in men, when as of
sacrilegious and ungodly persons, they become pliable and conformed to the true
religion. And well may we imagine, that God has intimated and taught us
this, in those testimonies which he laid before us, when he commanded that the
wood which grew in the groves of strange Gods, should be used in the
holocaust, and that all the gold, and silver, and brass of Ierico, should be
brought into the Lords treasury. Jf this judgment of St. Augustines be true,
then it is as lawful to use the matter of an Idol, or to speak in the
Treatisers language, that very thing that was become an Jdoll, in the service
of God, if it be reclaimed and removed from Jdolatrous superstition, as it is
for a man, from an Infidel to become a Christian, or from an evil and wicked
man, to become a true convert, and faithful servant of God. And thus much to
be answered to the Mayor.

The Minor.
But the sign of the Cross, being a humane ordinance, is become an Idol.
Answer to the minor.
In the minor likewise there are two things comprehended.

First that the sign of the Cross in Baptism is a humane ordinance, which
none of us ever denied, but do willingly acknowledge with Tertullian that, Si
legem expostules scripturarum nullam inuenies, etc. And yet we cannot see, how
this may either advantage the Treatisers cause, or exclude the sign of the
Cross, from being a lawful and commendable Ceremony, in the service of God.

But for all that J must desire the Treatiser, that he and J may demurre a
little longer upon this point. For, notwithstanding all that is already
granted, me thinks J may further say, that it is so a humane ordinance, as it
is also a divine. It is a divine ordinance, in as much as it is a part of that
decency, which is commended unto us by the Apostle: and it is a humane
constitution, in as much as it does particularly design that, which in the
general was pointed at, rather then expressed. And this doctrine J learn of
Mr. Calvin himself, Calv. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 10.
who gives this rule, quia in externa disciplina, et ceremonijs etc Because
God in outward discipline, and Ceremonies, would not prescribe any thing
severally for us to follow, (for that he fore-sawe that those things would
depend most upon the condition of times, neither judged he one form agreeable
to al ages) in this case we must resort to those general rules which he has
given, that according there unto, al things may be examined, what soever the
necessity of the Church shall require to be commanded. Him self follows
this rule, and by the Ceremony of kneeling in the time of solemn prayers,
which he uses as an example for illustration, he gives us this general
direction, how to judge of this whole matter of Ceremonies. Namely out of St
Paul's general exhortation, 1. Cor. 14.40.
Let all things be done decently and in order, to deduce every particular after
this sort.

Whatsoever Ceremony is done decently, and in order, is a part of St Paul's
general exhortation,

But the Ceremony of kneeling at solemn prayers, is done decently and in
order, Ergo.

It is a part of St Paul's general exhortation.

Now because the Treatiser and his adherents, will hardly believe that this
particular Ceremony of the Cross in Baptism, can as justly, as that of
kneeling be deduced, and applied out of this general, J will out of Mt.
Caluines own grounds clear this point also.

First this Ceremony of the Cross in Baptism, has in it that Decorum or
Decency, that by Mt. Calvin is required. Decorum, or decency, as he teaches,
consists in these points. That it be so agreeable to the reverence of holy
mysteries, as it may also be a fit exercise to piety, or at the least, that it
add a beauty or ornament fit and agreeable to the action. And that not without
fruit, but so as it may admonish the faithful, with what modesty, religion,
and observance, they should handle sacred things. Al these parts of Decoru^ are
in the Cross.

It is agreeable to the reverent majesty of sacred mysteries. For what can be
more agreeable to holy mysteries then the sign of that, which was the
consu^mation, and accomplishment of all holy mysteries? Then the sign of that,
whereon he has nailed the Bill that was against us: through the blood of which
Cross, he has set at peace, both the things in earth, and the things in
heaven. Secondly, it is a fit exercise unto piety. For, De sanct. ser. 19 de
verb Apost. ser. 7. Tract. in Joan. 118.
Ad Christu^ recta nos ducit, It leads us directly unto Christ and puts us
in mind of him that died for us, shadowing out unto us, the height, and
breadth, length and depth of his love, as S. Augustine shows in diverse
sermons. Thirdly, it is an ornament, Quia crux Christigloria Christiani. an
ornament fit and agreeable to the action: The actio^ is the receaving of the
child, into the body of Christ, and therefore most agreeable it is, that the
child should even then be signed, with the mark and badge of him, in to
whose service he is presently received. Fourthly, it is not without fruit, but
does admonish the faithful, with what modesty, religion, and observance they
should handle holy mysteries. Two things are commonly objected by the
Treatisers friends against the sign of the Cross in Baptism. First that it
is a vain and idle ceremony of no fruit, and to no purpose. Secondly, that by
being significant, and symbolicall, it brings a new word into the Church.
These two objections do utterly thwart and overthrow each the other. Against
the second, the judgment of Calvin in this condition is mainely opposite, who
here requires in the decency of every ceremony, that it be not without fruit,
etc. intimating thereby, that such ceremonies, as are not significant, must
needs be vain. Against the first: I am to answer now, and I doubt not but it
will appear, to be of much fruit, and to very good purpose, if it do admonish
us of these things. And that it so does, J declare thus.

First it admonishes us of modesty, because it is as a watchword, and secret
remembrance, to keep us from sin, the grand impugner of modesty, and mother of
shame, bringing to mind, whatsoever Christ has wrought, and we vowed against
sin, and so causing that Christian men never want, a most effectual, though a
silent Teacher, to avoid whatsoever may deservedly procure shame. And for that
cause it is made upon the forehead, Aug. tract in Joan. 53.
vbi est quodammodo seeds verecundiae; vt de nomine eius fides non erubescat,
etc. That we should neither be so bashful, as to be ashamed of that, wherein
there is no shame, nor so, sine front (as the same S. Augustine speaks in
another place) as not to fear that, Jn psalm 141.
which is the only deserver and bringer on of shame.

Secondly, it does admonish us of Religion, for those reasons alleged before
in the condition. Sed, et si solu^ hoc significat, quod ait Apostolus, that
they that belong to Jesus Christ, have crucified the flesh, with the lusts, and
concupiscences thereof, how great a good turn were that alone?

Thirdly, it does admonish us with what observance holy things are to be
handled, namely with an e^e, and due regard always had, to the easines and
familiarity of the Ceremony, that it be vicine, hard at hand, and obvious, nor
far fetched, as profane ceremonies commonly are, but, admodum simplex, and
praesentis admonitionis crucis Christi, as Mr. Bucer in his censure judges
this to be.

Again: this ceremony has in it also that order which, in Mr. Calvines
opinion, St. Paul intends, because it is done with such moderation in our
Church, as may justly take away al confusion, barbarity, contumacy, troubles,
and dissentions* being so reduced to the first institution, as neither too much
is ascribed unto it, as in the manifold superstitions of Popery: nor too
little, or rather nothing at al, as in the confused fantasies of the
Anabaptists. But you will say there are dissentions about this ceremony in our
Church, true, but in whom is the fault? not in our Church, that by the order
of this Ceremony, would take away al confusion, tumult, and dissension: but in
those turbulent men, who will neither admit, vt qui praesunt, regulam ac legem
been regendi nouerint, aut plebs quae regitur, ad obedientiam Dei, rectamque
disciplinam assuefiat, which is the first thing required in order: nor suffer,
vt been composito Ecclesiae statu, paci et tranquillitati consulatur, which is
the second. And these be the true causes, why they cannot content them selves
with the good order of this Ceremony, but would have Novelties, and
alterations brought into our Church. But J leave them to be better advised by
the good counsel, and earned judgment of Mr Bucer. Bacee. de ordin^ Minist
Eccle. i^ Aug cape^
* Ad illos aute^ qui offenduntur, unto such as be offended, because some
usual rites are yet retained, we may well answer, that if they would but
consider, how neither discipline, nor order can be preserved in the Church;
without some Ceremonies, this might suffice to satisfy them: For if we grant
that, which cannot be denied, that it is behoueful, for some Ceremonies to be,
it is then a necessary consequent, that usual Ceremonies, which we may well
use, cannot be reprehended, even for that sole antiquity, which does procure
the^ rather authority, the^ reproof with all men that be careful to continue
the quietness of public peace, and fear to be taxed for leuitie, and affected
novelties, which al together, as much as possibly it may, ought to be avoided,
in the propagation of true doctrine.

Lastly, this ceremony of the Cross in Baptism, has in it al those other
conditions both negative, and affirmative, that Mr. Calvin requires in
laudable Ceremonies. First negative, it is not thought necessary unto
salvation, nor in that respect to bind the conscience. Secondly, it is not
received with any opinion of divine worship thereto belonging. Affirmative, it
is accompanied with that gravity, that is required in all honest actions.
Thirdly, it is reverend, and may both procure a venerable regard to the
mystery, and also be a help to stir us up to piety. Fourthly, it tends
to edification. And lastly, that it may want no complement, it has his
general foundation in the Scriptures. And therefore by these rules of Mr.
Calvin, may be well said to be both a divine, and humane co^stitution. Divine,
because it is founded upon S. Paul's general direction, Let all things be done
decently and in order. Humane, because the continual use and practice of the
Church, has always thought this consignation of the Cross in Baptism, one
of those Ceremonies that are performed with decency and order, and therefore
judged this particular, to be fitly deduced out of that general.

Secondly, that the sign of the Cross is become an Idol. And herein lurketh,
the whole deceit of the Treatisers Sophisme, who because it is confessed, that
the Cross has been abused among the Papists, and worshipped, cultu latriae,
as himself afterward shows, would thereupon infer, that therefore the
sign of the Cross in Baptism, cannot be well used by us Protestants. Our
answer therefore in few words is this; Jf he mean that the Cross is become
an Idol, in the Church of Rome, we grant it. But what is that to us? If he
mean that the sign of the Cross in Baptism, is become an Idol in the
Church of England, we deny it: and then to what purpose is this Treatise? For
whereas he would make our Cross in Baptism, the same that it is in the Church
of Rome, both in name, and in form, and in religious, Page 14.
though not Idolatrous use, as he speaks, It will appear upon due examination
to be utterly untrue. For to grant that they are the same in name (for they
are both called Crosses: and in form (for they are both cross lines drawn in
the air, and yet I must tell the Treatiser, that their using many Crosses in
the same thing, does diversificare forma^, make the form diverse from us that
use but one) yet the religious use of them is notoriously different. For first,
they give unto their Cross divine power, and virtue, as if it could sanctify
things crossed therewith, drive away Devils, heal infirmities, and fence us
from all manner of danger: we ascribe no such virtue or power unto ours.
Secondly, they yield unto their Cross, ability to merit pardon for venial
sins, to convert sinners, and to give salvation: we yield no such ability,
or efficacy unto ours. As for their Idolatrous use, whereby they adore and
worship their Cross, cultu latriae, we much more dissent from them, and are
far from giving any adoration, or either outward or inward service unto
ours. So as it seems the Treatiser was not well advised when he said, their
cross and our cross is the same in religious use, for neither did he
remember (as I shall tell him hereafter) that we put no religion in the use of
the Cross, as the Papists do, but only use it in a religious action: neither
I believe (if he were well put to it) could he show the difference between
the religious use, wherein he says we agree with the Church of Rome, and the
Idolatrous use, Lact. li. 4. c. 28.
wherein they differ from us. For if Religio be very cultus, and Superstitio
falsi, as Lactantius distinguishes, J should think that our use, being very
cultus, were only religious, and theirs being nothing else, but falsi cultus,
were only Jdolatrous, and superstitious. But J leave the full sifting and
examining of these points to there proper place. Jn the mean time J make this
observation, out of the Treatisers own mouth, that, contrary to his aimed
intent, and purpose in this syllogism, he freeth us from al Jdolatrous use of
the Cross: whence, against the malignitie of this Miner proposition, J gather
this Conclusion out of the Treatisers own words.

That which has not an Idolatrous use in our Church, is not an Idol in our
Church.

But the sign of the Cross has not an Idolatrous use in our Church. Ergo.

The sign of the Cross, is not an Idol in our Church.

The Mayor is plain, for Idolum, and Idolatria are Relatiues, Posito vno,
ponitur et alterum, For neither can an Idol be, but where Idolatrous use is,
neither Idolatrous use, but where an Idol is. The Minor is the Treatisers own
proposition, and the truest proposition in his book, and therefore the
Conclusion must needs directly follow of the premises.

The Conclusion.
Ergo, The sign of the Cross may not lawfully be used in the service of God.
Answer to the Conclusion.
The Conclusion of every syllogism receaueth his virtue and strength of the
premises, which being firm and true, it stands good, being weak and false,
it fails, and is of no effect. The Mayor therefore of this syllogism being
false every way, as has been declared; and the Minor being untruly fitted,
and applied, to the sign of the Cross in Baptism, used in our Church, This
Conclusion strikes without any force, and missing the body, lights into the
air and hurts not. And for any thing in this syllogism contained, the
Cross may be still both lawfully and commend^bly used in the service of God.

And thus much for answer to the maine syllogism, the ground and foundation
of this Treatise.
The Treatise. 1. Sect.
The use of the Cross in Baptism is not a thing indifferent, but utterly
unlawful, for this reason; It is against the Apostles precept. 1. Joh. 5.21.
Babes keep your selves from Idols. Answer.
From the maine syllogism, the Treatiser comes to the proof, first of his
mayor, and then of his minor. Proof of the Mayor.
For so he tells us in the margent, and we must needs believe the margent,
because it tells us so in Capital letters. For otherwise if we look upon the
words prefixed immediately before his proof, we shall find a proposition, that
is nether the Mayor nor the Minor of the former syllogism, but a mixture and
composition of them both, for it has the terms of unlawful used in the
Mayor, and of the Cross en Baptism used in the Minor, and of a thing
indifferent, never yet mentioned in either proposition. So that leaving that as
an animal amphibion, and of the two, likelier to be the Minor, I rather believe
the Margent then the Text. And that the Treatiser may in some honest sort seem
to conclude his fundamental proposition, I frame his argument after this manner.

That which is against the Apostles precept, Babes keep your selves from
Idols, may not lawfully be used in the service of God.

But the use of an Idol is against the Apostles precept, Babes keep your
selves, etc. Ergo:

The use of an Idol is not lawful in the service of God.

The Mayor proposition I grant to be true, but upon these conditions.

1 That you take the word against, in his proper signification, for contrary or
opposite unto: and not for praeter besides, or otherwise then the Apostle
prescribes, as most of your friends and favorites do.

2 That hereupon you be not too insolent, and infer this contrary conclusion,
Ergo, Nothing may be used in the service of God, but that which is in the
Apostles precept. For there are many things laudably used in Gods service,
whereof the Apostles have given no precept. For whereas the Apostle St. Paul
promised the Corinthians, other things will I set in order when J come, and yet
never after disposed, or set in order those other things, for ought that
appears in any of his writings, our undoubted persuasion is, that both the
Apostles left many things unordered and undisposed: and also in matters of
Ceremony, belonging to order, decency, and edification, there is always a
power left in the Church, to dispose, and order such things, according to the
several times, places, natures, and occasions of every Church.

To the Minor J answer, that the use of an Jdoll, quatenus an Idol, that is,
while it is an Idol, or as long as it retains the form, credit, and
estimation of an Jdoll, is indeed against the Apostles precept: but this is no
hinderance, why we may not use that thing in Gods service, which is now
reclaimed from the Idolatrous use, though we certainly know, that it was
sometimes used as an Idol, as before has bin declared. For those things which
are recovered out of the evil uses, whereunto they were applied, and restored
to holy uses in Gods service; Ipso ministerio consecrata sancta dicuntur, in
eius honor, Aug. in ps. 113*
cui pro nostra salute inde servitur.

But let us now see how the Treatiser does first explane the sentence of S.
John in this next section, and afterward confirm his explanation in the third.

Treatise. 2. Sect.
For the explanatio^ where of two things are to be scanned. First, what is
meant by an Idol. Secondly how far we are to keep our selves from Idolles,
An Idol is, Quicquid praeter Deum diuiuo colitur honor: and though some
restrain an Idol, to a visible form, because it is derived, (...): yet, as a
learned writer observes, Zanch. de redemp. li. 1. c. 17.
Qui de omnibus idololatriae generibus acturi sunt, latius nomen Idoli
accipiant necesse est. Idoli igitur nomine intelligitur, quicquid homo vel
simpliciter vel (...), sibi extra verum Deum proponit, fingitque colendum.
Neither is this spoken without good reason, for nothing is properly an Idol,
quatenus est visibilis forma, sed quatenus religiose colitur. If therefore it be
worshipped, it may be an Idol, though it be no visible shape: otherwise the
worshipping of Angels and the souls of the just men, were no Idolatry, seeing
these are invisible spirits. And therefore the sign of the Cross, if it be
religiously worshipped, may prove an Idol, though it be, transiens quiddam, a
thing vanishing in the air, and no permanent form. For as that learned
Zanchie speaks, there is, duplex Idolum, the one real, the other,
imaginariu^ and tantum mente conceptum.

For answer to the second Question. Men may keep themselves from Idols two
ways, viz. a cultu, and ab vsu Idoli, from the worship, and from the use of
the Idol. For the first St. Paul is so strict, that he allows not the
Christians, so much as to be present in the Temple, at the Idolatrous feasts,
though they did it without any internal opinion, or external action of
worshipping the Idol.

But John in this place does not speak so much of the worshipping, as the use
of the Idol, for (as Augustine in psalm: 113. well observes) the Apostle
commands, vt caueant non tantum a cultu simulacrorum, sed a simulacris ipsis,
that they avoid not only the worship of the Images, but also the Images or
Idols themselves.

Now the use of an Image or Idol may be civil, or religious: and both of them,
public, or private.

That an Image, even such an Image as is Idolatrously worshipped, may be made
and retained for civil respects, of ornament, story, or such like, we make no
question, though the tolerating of them in open and public places, even extra
cultum, be offensive, and turn into a snare, as Geacons Ephod was to his
posterity, when it was abused to Idolatry. And upon this ground we yield, that
though the Cross be apparently an Idol, yet in Princes banners, coronations,
coin, Crown, or any other civil respect, it may have lawful use. But that
anything of man's devising, being worshipped as an Idol, should be used,
Religionis ergo, and in the worshipping of God, seems directly against St.
John's precept* for, how do I keep my self from the Idol, or, how do I show
my zealous detestatio^ of that filthy Idolatry, when I retain it, and use it
so honorably as in the Temple, in the Sanctuary, in the service of God? Which
interpretation of this place of St. John, the Church of England does, on the
warrant of Tertullian, approve and commend.

Answer
In the explanatio^ of the first point, what is meant by an Idol, I see not
any great matter to be dissented in, from the Treatiser: only J perceive not,
how by any of these descriptions the Cross may be made an Idol: neither in
the explanation of his second point, how we are to keep our selves from the
Idol, is any thing greatly to be reproved, so long as he speaks of keeping
our selves, a cultu Idoli, from the worship of the Jdoll: only J must tell
him, that those words, which he cites out of St. Augustines words, upon the
113. Psalm, vt caueant non tantum etc, either are not St. Augustines upon that
Psalm, or else my book and his do disagree. For J have diligently fought for
them, all that Psalm over, but cannot find them: which J do not observe, as if
J took exception against the Treatiser: for, facilis est error, a man may
easily miss in a quotation: or against the words them selves, let them be St.
Augustines, or the Treatisers, or any other man's; and let them forbidd both the
worshipp, and use of Idols, as much as they can, we mislike both the one, and
the other, as highly as the Treatiser him self does. The things that in this
section I take exception unto, are in those points he delivers, de vsu Idoli,
as:

1 These words. That an Image, even such an Image, as is Idolatrously
worshipped, may be made, and retained for civil respects of ornament, and such
like, there is no question though the tolerating of them, in open and public
places, even extra cultum, be offensive, and turn into a snare, etc. The first
part, That they may be made and retained for civil respects of ornament or
such like, we easily grant: but those other words, Though the tolerating of
them, be offensive, and turn into a snare, sound harsh in mine ears, not
only because they contain a flat contradictio^ to the Treatisers own words a
little after, where he says, that without doubt, the meaning of the second
commandment is, to bind the Church from al such snares, and allurements to
sin, and that al occasions and means leading thereunto, are likewise
prohibited: but especially, because they contain a contradiction to the truth.
For what else gave occasion to Jdolatry at the first, but the vain glory of
men, making statues, and portracts of their triumphs, and for the memory of
them whom they loved? Which at the first were civil respects, but when they
came to be a snare, were no better then Jdols. Had the Treatiser well observed
the nature of the words, which he here delivers, he would have found, that
nothing is Scandalum, offensive, or a stumbling block, til it be set to make
men stumble: nor a snare, till it be laid to catch and entangle. Such things
are no longer tolerated, then while they retain their civil respects: if once
they become offensive, and snares, Isa. 57.14.
then God commands presently, Cast up, cast up, prepare the way, take up the
stumbling blocks out of the way of my people.

Again, if this speech of the Treatisers be true, as he maks no question,
what reason has he to be more friendly to an Jmage, even such an image as is
Jdolatrously worshipped though etc. then to our Cross in Baptism, which is
neither an image, nor Idolatrously worshipped, nor retained, cum opinione
cultus, nor offensive, or a snare to any, but such as will be offended without
cause? Jf either I in this answer, or any other of the conformable Clergy,
should suffer this, or such a like speech to fall from us we straightway should
be reckoned Antichristian, and Popish, and favorers of Jdolatry: but our
Treatiser, and his friends, may say what they will, and yet always be
commended.

The next words immediately following are as lavish as the former. Upon this
ground we yield, that though the Cross be apparently an Idol, yet in
Princes Banners, etc. First, your ground is weak, as even now we declared, and
then if the Cross be apparently an Idol, neither Princes Banners, nor Crown,
nor Coin, nor any other civil respect, can make it have a lawful use. Your
perpetual arguing from secundum quid ad simpliciter, does bewray an exceeding
desire to deceive both others, and your self. For, be it granted, that the
Cross is an Jdoll secundu^ quid, that is, according to the use of the Church
of Rome, will you thence conclude simpliciter, that therefore the Cross, among
whom, and wheresoever, and used howsoever, is apparently, and simply an Jdoll?
who sees not the childishness of this caption?

3 The third speech argues the Treatiser to be both injurious, and ma^tious.
Jniurious, in that he says, that the Cross, a thing of man's devising, being
worshipped as an Jdoll, is used by us in the worship of God; for neither use we
that thing, which is worshipped as an Jdoll, because there is nothing like
between our Cross, and their Cross but the name only, as is before declared
in the answer to the minor: neither do we use the Cross, as a thing to
worship God thereby, but only as a thing to put us in remembrance of our duty.
Malicious, in that he says, it is used by us, Religionis ergo, for Religionis
ergo in this place, is the same phrase with Religionis causae afterward: And
in my understanding is properly Englished, for the Religions sake, or because
of the Religion, that we suppose to be in it: and therefore the Treatiser does
but double, and dissemble, when he translateth Religionis ergo, to retain it,
and use it, so honorably as in the Temple, in the Sanctuary, in the service of
God. For out of what Authors can he show, that to use a thing, Religionis ergo,
signifies to use a thing in the outward service of God the Treatiser knows
well enough, that these speeches differ, and bear not the same meaning: and
yet is content to fasten upon us, that we use the Cross Religionis ergo, which
is a most malicious calumniation. And J must tell him the more plainly of this
iuggling, because he uses it very much, and thinks it a fit bait to catch the
simple. True it is, we use the sign of the Cross, in a religious action,
namely in Baptism, but we use it not Religionis ergo, with any conceit or
opinion of Religion, that we ascribe unto it; and this I give the Reader as a
perpetual caveat, against the grand imposture of the Treatiser. Jn vain
therefore is that which he adds of the Church of England, approving and
commending of Tertullians interpretation of this place of John, worthily it is
approved, and commended, as most fit and agreeable thereunto. Tertullian never
meant those words against the sign of the Cross in Baptism, of which he
always speaks most honorably: neither does the Church of England in that
Homily, otherwise apply his testimony, then to the detestation both of the
service or worshipping, and also of the very shapes and likeness of the Images
or Idols them selves, his words there, are effigies and imago as the same
Homily does well observe. Our Cross is neither of them both.

Treatise. 3. Sect.
And this point is further strengthened by the second commandment, which
forbids not only to worship, but even to make an Image, or any similitude
whatsoever, to wit ad cultu^, or for religious use, as according to the
scripture the best interpreters, partly against Images in Churches, partly on
the words of the precept do most naturally expound it. For surely if Idolatry
it self, as a most execrable thing, be forbidden, then all occasions and
means leading thereunto are likewise prohibited, and what stronger provocation
to that spiritual whoredom, the^ erecting Images, in the place of Gods
worship? Plus enim, vt recte Augustinus in Psalm. 113. valent simulacra ad
curuandam infeliccm animam, quod os habent, nares habent, manus habent, pedes
habent, quam ad corrigendam quod non loquentur, no^ videbunt, non audient, non
odorabunt, non tractabunt, no^ ambulabunt.

And therefore without doubt, the meaning of the commandment is, to bind the
Church from all such snares and allurements to sin. And therefore does Augustine
in quaest. super Leu. q. 68. well conclude from this commandment, that such
making of an Idol, can never be just or lawful.

Now if no similitude at all be tolerable in Gods service, then much less any
that has been, and is worshipped Idolatrouslie.

Tertullian against the Gnostics, accounted them Idolaters not only which
worshipped, but those also which made and retained Images ( nempe ad cultum,
or for holy use) and in his book, de Idololatria, he vehemently reproves
the very makers of Images, though they did not themselves worship the^, which
shows in what execration the Primitive Church held any religious use of an
Idol.

The like we may find in Epiphanius, ad Johannem Episcopum Hierosol. where he
reports, that finding an Image of Christ or some Saint hanging at a Church
door, he rent it in pieces, avouching, that to hang a picture in the Church of
Christ, was contra autoritatem scripturarum, contra religionem Christianam,
contrary to the authority of the scriptures, and the Christian Religion.

From hence I conclude, that if the godly fathers were so vehement against the
erecting of the Images of Christ, and of Saints, even at that time, before any
worship was given unto them: Much more would they withstand it now after men
have made Idols of them. And if they would not suffer an Idol, so much, as in
the place of Gods worship: would they endure themselves to use such an Idol as
the Cross in the service and sacraments of God? Their zeal against that
spiritual fornication, would never permit them so highly to honor such an
execrable thing: neither was their zeal herein without ground of knowledge,
for the spirit of God in Psalm. 115.8. speaking of Idols, They (says he) that
make them, are like unto them, and so are all they that trust in them. Where a
plain difference is made between makers, and worshippers of Idols, and both
condemned as Cursed transgressors of the Law. Shall any then make the Idol of
the Cross, and that Religionis causa, and yet be innocent?

Questionless by David's example, we must make no mention, that is, keep no
honorable memory of an Idol, and therefore without doubt, not give it so much
honor as to use it, or the memorial thereof in the house of God, and in his
holy worship: Isa. 50.22.
but as Isai: says, we must pollute the relics, and the very covering and
ornament of the Idol, and cast the^ away as a menstruous cloth, and say unto
it. get thee hence.

Answer.
The Treatiser confirms his explanation of the sentence of St. John by the
second Commandment, and by the testimonies of S. Augustine, Tertullia^, and
Epiphanius thereunto applied. Wherein giving way to his allegatio^s, because they
are only against Jdolatry, and making of Jmages to worship them, J only mark
his scapes, and overreachings, whereof the first is in these words Ad cultum, or
for Religious use: where J note, that how soever in words, he would feign make
Cultus, and religious use different things, that so he might seem to follow
his proposed division, de cultu et vsu, yet in his proofs he makes them both
one; A manifest argument, that in all this discourse he never comes nere our
use, of the Cross in Baptism, which is so far from Cultus, and religious
use, (as he understands it) that we neither worship it, nor suppose any religon
to be in it, as J said even now.

A second escape of his, is in this conditional Collection, upon the second
Commandment, and testio^nies of St. Augustine, If no similitude at all, be
tolerable in Gods service, then much less any, that has bin, and is worshipped
Idolatrously. For whereas the second Commandment, and all his proofs there
upon, run mainly against Cultus, or religious use, (which to him are both one)
he cannot thence conclude, that therefore the use of some similitudes, in a
religious action, without any worship ascribed unto them, or opinion of
religion reposed in them, is not tolerable. For by this general restraint,
beyond the nature of his proofs, he may as well exclude the use of Sacraments
out of Gods service, which certainly are some kind of similitudes, of those
things which they do represent: according to that of St. Augustine, Aug. ep.
23. ad Bonifacium.
Si sacrame^ta quandam similitudinem earu^ rerum, quarum sunt sacramenta non
haberent, omnino sacramenta non essent. Again his illation and inference upon
this supposition, is likewise false: for though that were true: yet some thing,
that has bin heretofore Idolatrously worshipped, may lawfully be tolerated
now; and some thing that even now is Idolatrously worshipped, (which yet is not
granted of the sign of the Cross in Baptism, as shall hereafter appear) may
be lawfully tolerated in some other, that are free from all conceit of
Jdolatrie, as formerly has bin declared.

Thirdly, he over-reacheth in his collection upon the words of Tertullian and
Epiphanius, where he asks, would they endure themselves to use such an
Jdoll as the Cross, in the service and sacraments of God? We answer, they
would, such an Jdoll, as our Cross is: And we are persuaded that both they,
and St. Augustine too, would like it well enough. When they should perceive,
that without opinion of superstition, or efficacy ascribed unto it, it were
reclaimed to the very same symbolicall or ceremonial use, it had in their
times, howsoever in the times between them and us, it has bin abused by some
to Jdolatrie. Epiphanius misliketh it not in his time, Epiph. lib. to. 2.
contra haeres. Ebionis.
as may appear in that narration he makes of Josephus. Tertullia^, we are
sure, would endure it well enough, who so often and willingly mentions it and
in all his writings commends the use of it, Tertull. de coron ^il. cap. 3.
Ad omnem progressum atque promotum, ad omnem aditum and exitum, ad vestitum
and calceatum, ad lavacra, ad men sas, ad lumina, ad cubicula, ad sedilia,
quaecunque nos co^versatio exercet, frontem crucis signaculo terminas. T.C.
lib. 1.
Insomuch that T. C. pronounces (full rashly and without al cause) that the
Lord left a mark of his curse upon it, for coming out of the forge of man's
brain, and being so much abused. Aug sermon. 181. de temp.
And for St. Augustines opinion I refer you to his hundred eighty and one
sermon, de tempore, or if that please you not, to his sermon de verbis domini,
Aug ser. de verbis domini.
where he says. Quod ipse honoraturus erat fideles suos in fine huius saculi,
prius honoravit cruce^ in hoc saeculo, etc. Quod cu^ magna Insultatione
persecutores Judaei Domino procurarunt, cum magna fiducia seruieius, etiam and
reges in front nunc portant. And yet notwithstanding all this, we are as well,
and better persuaded of their vehemence against erecting of images, and of
their zeal against spiritual fornication, then the Treatiser is, and can more
easily be induced to believe, that their zeal herein was not without
knowledge, then these men can so slenderly acquaint themselves with their
knowledge, or zeal: and as in this: so in all other points, never cite any
testimony out of them sincerely, and according to their meaning.

Fourthly* the Treatiser much overlasheth, where he marshals us among the
worshipers of Idols, Concluding that streine of his with this forcible (...),
shall any then make an Idol of the Cross? and that Religionis causa, and yet
be innocent? True it is. The prophet David says. They that make them are like
unto them, etc. but what? is his meaning that they are like unto them for
simply making them? J trust no: for then how will you justify your former
words? that an Image may be made and retained for Civil respects, we make no
question: His meaning is the^, They that make them to worship them, Wisd. 13.17.
and to put their trust in them, as all Idolatrous makers do, are like unto
them, we make the Cross indeed, but neither to worship it nor to put our trust
in it: And therefore J hope are no more to be Condemned as cursed Transgressors
of the Law, then you are when you write the letters of T. C. name, which you
cannot do but you must needs make a Cross. And J think verily, that you put
more religion in this T. then our Church does in the sign of the Cross. As
for your Cra^be of Religionis causa, it is answered before, and is an odious
imputation, by you fastened on our Church, without all color of truth.

Treatise. 4. Sect.
Now if any doubt, whether the sign of the Cross be adored: and so made an
Idol: let him well consider the tract of Bellarmine, de adoratione crucis,
where distinguishing the Cross on which Christ was hanged, from the similitude
thereof, he says, ceterae cruces illi similes, inter sacras imagines
numerantur. And after he distinguishes those similitudes of Christ's Cross,
into the Image, and sign of the Cross, so that if the Image of the Cross be
taken for an Idol, (and who knows not that it is the universal Idol of
Popery, and to be adored, even cultu latriae, which worship, as they themselves
hold, is due only unto God,) the sign of the Cross must needs be taken for
no better. Besides, the same Bellarmine having, De Imag. l. 1. 30
as is said, distinguished the cross into three sorts, the true Cross, the
image of the Cross, and the sign of the Cross, he lays down this doctrine
generally of them all, omnes cruces adoramus, and particularly of the sign of
the Cross he says, De Imag. lib. 2 cap. 29.
signum crucis quod in front, vel in aere pingitur, esse sacru^ and
venerabile. To this agrees Po^tiformus Sarisb. 4. where it is thus professed,
adoramus crucis signaculum, per quod salutis sumpsimus sacramentum.

And that the Image, and sign of the Cross, is of one, and the same account
with Papists, Confer. with Heart. cap 8. divis. 4. page 509.
appears evidently, as by diverse, so particularly by Heart. For Doctor
Raynolds, showing that the Church of England, has justly left the sign of
the Cross out of the supper, for the Idolatry thereof, does prove that it is
worshipped as an Idol, by such testimonies, as indeed belong to the image of
the Cross, which Heart no way excepted against, does imply, that look what
estimation they have of the Image, the same they have of the sign: and what
honor is due to the one, is due to the other. Andra. Orthod explic. lib. 9.
Bellar. de imiib. 2. cap. 50.
For in very deed they carefully teach, that it is not in regard of the
matter, wherein the Cross is painted, or the color whereby it is shadowed,
but only and simply, for the expressing of the likeness of Christ's Cross, and
for the representing of Christ crucified (which the sign performs as well as
the image) that they adore the Cross with the same honor, that is due unto
Christ himself: And this no doubt was the meaning of Aquinas, when he says,
Th Aquin part 3. q. 25 artic. 4.
that every effigies or likeness of the Cross (whereof the sign is one) is to
be adored cultu latriae: and Costerus does avouch, that the same worship is due
to the sign, as belongs to the very Cross of Christ. When he says (though
falsely) Christiani, Coster. Euch. cap. 11.
a Christi temporibus, semper summa veneratione coluerunt ipsum signum
dominicae crucis, and signum crucis, quo se quotidie muniunt, Mark that the
sign of the Cross is worshipped, summa veneratione, Orth. explis. lib. 9.
with the highest degree of honor, and, as Andradius in express words says,
In the same manner, that the Image of Christ himself is worshipped: then the
which, what can be more clear to prove, that not only the Image, but the
sign of the Cross, is by Papists most Idolatrously worshipped?

If any say, that to the sign of the Cross none boweth the knee, or vaileth
the bonnet, and therefore it is not adored. I answer first, that adoration is
interne, and externe: and the externe adoration is therefore Idolatry, because
it proceeds from the interne, as Zanchius very learnedly, Zanch. de redempt.
lib... c. 17
and largely shows.

If a man may invocate to an Angel, or give any honor internal to a
creature, shall it not be called Idolatry, except he bow outwardly unto it? How
then does Paul say that Covetousness is Idolatry? For a rich man does not
outwardly worship his goods; Ephesians. 5.6. Coloss 3.5. ^^rk. 10.24. Tim. 6.19. Luke
12 15. Phil. 3.19.
yet because he gives unto it interne confidence, which is due unto God, it is
truly called his Idol, as unto the Sardanapali there belly is termed their
God: Right so the Papists ascribing to the sign of the Cross, that honor, and
confidence which belongs to God, do make it an execrable Idol, Quaest.
disput. de venial p^ce.
and so most unfit to stand in the sanctuary, or to be annexed to the holy
things of God. For first they ascribe unto the sign of the Cross, power and
virtue to meritt pardon, at the least for venial sins, as appears by Tho.
Aquinas, Bellarmine, and the Rhemistes.

Also it is held, to partake of power efficient, and immediately operative, and
that to convert sinners: Marshall de cruce. fol. 114. 115. yea to gain
salvation, Hosius co^tra Brent: page 227. and generally the whole rabble of
Romish Doctors, do teach to put great affiance in this sign, for chasing away
devils, and curing diseases, and sanctifieing both man, and other Creatures to
the use of man.

Secondly I say indeed, they do give outward, as well as inward worship to the
Cross. For it is apparent, that they invoke it, in the same manner, that
they invoke Saints, when they say. Per crucis hoc signu^ fugiat procul omne
malignum. By this sign of holy Cross, let evils al fly far from us. Again
by the sign of the holy Cross, from our enemies deliver us o Lord our God.
Also in another place, victorious Cross and admirable sign, make us triumph
and joy in heavenly Courts divine yea in prayers, they join at with Jesus
Christ, as in officio Missae, is to be seen, where they supplicate, per
misericordam Jesus Christi, per auxilium and signum Crucis, per intercessionem
beatae Mariae, etc. They couple it also with the blood of Christ, in these
words, defend me Jesus ab omnibus vitijs, malis praeteritis, praesentibus, and
futuris, per signum sanctae crucis, and per in aestimabile pretium iusti, and
pretiosi sa^guinis tui. All which does most manifestly prove, that among the
Papists it is religiously honored, both with inward confidence, and outward
reverence.

Answer.
Though all that the Treatiser alleges in this sectio^, should be granted,
yet nothing is concluded against our Cross. For whereas his conclusion should
be this, Ergo. the sign of the Cross in Baptism, as it is used in the Church
of England, is an Idol, he brings us only this conclusion, Ergo. the sign
of the Cross, in the Church of Rome, is an Idol, his argument is this.

What soever the Church of Rome does adore, with divine honor, and whereunto it
yields both interne confidence, and outward worshipp, is an Idol,

But the Church of Rome does adore the sign of the Cross with divine honor,
and yields unto it interne confidence, and outward worshipp, Ergo.

The sign of the Cross, in the Church of Rome, is an Idol.

The Mayor is false. What soever the Church of Rome does adore, etc For so the
bread in the Lords supper, should likewise be an Idol, because the Church of
Rome does adore it, with divine honor, and yields both interne confidence,
and outward worshipp thereunto, as is better objected, then answered in the
first objection. Again, if unto those words, whatsoever the Church of Rome
does adore etc. is an Idol, you had added those words, in the Church of Rome,
your Mayor had been true, and we should not have denied it. But from secundu^
quid, to conclude ad simpliciter, (as you always do,) is too simple a
Conclusion to deceive any man, that is but a mean Logician: we cannot grant
that their is, eadem ratio vrbis et orbis: nor that that must needs be an Idol
in every place, that the Church of Rome has made an Idol within her own
Jurisdiction.

Touching the Minor, we partly grant it, and partly deny it: we grant it, De
signo crucis materiali, such as were Crucifixes, of wood, stone, or metal,
and plain Crosses of all sorts, without the Image of Christ. And so we
understand all your proofs, two only excepted, whereof you shall hear our
answer by and by. De signo, or rather de co^signatione crucis immateriali,
drawn in the air, or upon the forehead, without any print remaining, we deny
it, and answer to your two proofs, the one out of Bellarmine: Signu^ crucis
quod in front, Vel in aere pingitur, est sacrum and venerabile: the other out
of Costerus. Christiani summa veneratione coluerunt signum crucis, quo se
quotidie muniunt. that there is great difference between veneratio, the word
that they use in those places, and adoration, the word that you apply unto
them; The first expressiing only a reverent regard, that they have of the
sign; The other a religious worship, which you say, they yield unto it. J will
not take upon me their defense, nor justify their absurdities, for J willingly
acknowledge, that they have too too superstitiously thought of this
consignation also, and extended their summa veneratio, to the highest degree of
supersticious opinion, in ascribing too much power, virtue and efficacy
thereunto, as you declared in the second place of this Section. But yet J cannot
be persuaded, that signum sacrum and venerabile, or su^ma veneratio, as they
call it, do signify adoration, with divine honor, or interne confidence, and
outward worship, as you affirm,

Three things therefore I answer to the Minor. First, That the Papists do
indeed very superstitiously deem, of the consignation of the Cross in
Baptism, that it is of virtue, force, and efficacy, which we do utterly and in
plain term deny. Secondly, I suppose that the Treatiser will never be able
to prove that the co^signatio^ of the Cross in Baptism, (eve^ in the grossest
time of Popery) was ever made an Idol, or had any divine adoration, or interne
worship or externe honor exhibited unto it. For first, how could it, the
thing ceasing to be, as soon as ever it was made? and then, who should
worship it? The child could not, the Priest and people reflected rather their
devotion to their material wooden Crosses, and metal Crucifixes, which they
had ever at hand, then to this immateriall transient mark. Ac certum est,
Zanch de redemp. li. 1. c. 17
omnes fere Idololatras solitos semper fuisse, neque Deum, vel verum, vel
falsum, vel vllam creaturam, externa adoratione colere, and adorare, nisi sub,
and in aliqua figura illum representante, and so far only holds that, Tho.
Aqu p 3. ^ 25. 4. cap.
which you allege out of Tho. Aquinas, that every effigies, or likeness of the
Cross, is to be adored, with the same honor, that is due unto the Prototypon:
namely, if it be effigies, a material shape or similitude, which remains
post opus, not the immateriall effigiatio, or signing, that passes, and
leaves no impression, after the Action. Ephesians. 5 6. Coll. 3.5. Phil 3.19.
As for your allegations out of St. Paul, that covetousnes is Idolatry and
that unto the Sardanapali, their belly is their God, the comparison is not
equal. For the divine honor, that you conceive to be founded in consignatione
crucis, is grounded only upon a thing transient, and imaginary, but
contrariwise, the Idolatry of the covetous man, and felicity of the belly-god,
are both founded in materiali obiecto, upon a real, and not upon an Imaginary
foundation; Zanch. de rede^p lib. 1. cap. 17.
Auarus tribuit the sauris suis quod proprium est Dei, and Sardanapalus saginae
suam foelicitatem.

Thirdly, J affirm, that though Popery has esteemed superstitiously of the
Cross in Baptism, which we confess, and given divine honor unto it, which
we think may very probably be denied: yet our consignation in Baptism, is
altogether different from theirs, as before has bin declared in the answer to
the Minor of the maine Syllogism.

Treatise. 5. Sect.
And therefore if their Idols, may in no sort be annexed to the service of our
God, the Cross in Baptism ought necessarily, to be crossed, and cursed out of
our Leiturgie.

Answer.
This is that, you have all this while houered about, and yet can find no fit
Medius terminus to conclude. For how will these two propositions hang together?

The sign of the Cross in the Church of Rome is an Idol, (which has bin the
only thing you have proved in the former section.) Ergo:

The consignation of the Cross in Baptism, used in the Church of England,
must needs be crossed and cursed out of our Leiturgie?

You undertake to leap too far at once, there are many banks in your way: you
must prove, first that the sign of the Cross in Baptism, in the Church of
Rome, is an Idol, which is not granted. Secondly, you must prove, that our
Cross, and their Cross in Baptism is al one, in number, nature, use and
estimation: you must lastly prove, that we may not lawfully redeem, an ancient
Ceremony, out of his abuse, nor restore him, to his ancient lawful use
again: al which, I fear, or any of them, will be too hard a task for you to
undertake, but your present argument is this.

The Idol of the church of Rome, may in no sort be annexed to the service of
our God, but must be crossed, and cursed out of our Leiturgie.

But the sign of the Cross in Baptism, is an Idol of the Church of Rome.
Ergo:

The consignation of the Cross in Baptism, in the Church of England, must be
crossed and cursed out of our Leiturgie.

The Mayor is granted. The Minor is denied; for first, as was said before, you
will not be able to prove, that their immateriall consignation with the Cross
in Baptism, was ever made an Idol: and if you chance so to do, yet sure I am
you will never prove, our consignation of the Cross in Baptism, to have bin an
Idol of the Church of Rome; your conclusion therefore, and your premises are
so far a sunder, that they will never be reconciled. It seems your crossing
and cursing has lighted upon your own conclusions, they are so cursedly
crossed, and crossedly cursed, that they conclude nothing plainly and
directly.

Treatise. 6. Sect.
Neither is it sufficient to say that the Cross amongst us, is neque numero,
neque vsu, the same that theirs is, and though theirs be an Idol, yet ours is
not. For when God commanded his people, to break down the Images of the
heathen, and to extinguish the very name of the^, had they performed that
chardge, if they had burnt all the Idols of Canaan, and afterward made new of
the same form, and to another use, though not Idolatrous, yet religious? Or
how have we discharged our duties, and showed our detestation of that filthy
Idolatry, if having defaced all the Popish Crucifixes, and Idols, we erect them
new in our Church, though not to worship them, yet to any other holy use
whatsoever?

Answer.
If this be not a sufficient answer, then you may make it more sufficient by
adding neque aestimatione, neque opinione religionis, as has been taught you
before; But why is this reason insufficient? Your reason is, For when God
commanded, etc. To your first demand I answer, no. And yet that touches us
not. The things compared are nothing like. They should have destroyed the old
Idols, and not have made new: we make no new Idol, but restore an ancient
Ceremony of the church, to his first integrity: which we take we may lawfully
do.

To your second J answer likewise* That we erect no new Popish Crucifixes, and
Idols in our Church, but restore an ancient constitution of the Church, to the
reverend use of the consignation of the Cross in Baptism: Not to worship it,
nor yet to ascribe virtue unto it, as you would suggest, but to be a Ceremony
of Decency, and Order, agreeable to so holy, and religious a Sacrament.

Treatise. 7. Sect.
It is true, that our Cross, and theirs is the same both in name, and form,
but not in use, for then were it Idolatrous; Now I do not say that the Church
of England does commit Idolatry: but that it ought to abstain, not only from
the Idolatry, or worship, but even from all religious use, of such humane
ordinances, and inventions, which others have and do Idolatrously adore; For,
if to erect Crucifixes, and other Popish Images for holy use, be (contrary to
the Commandment) a keeping of an honorable memory of the Idol, how can the
religious use of the Cross in Baptism, being as well an Idol, as any of
their Images, be retained without breach of the Law: Babes keep your selves
from Jdols?

Answer.
It is true, that our Cross and theirs is the same in name, but neither in
form, nor religious use altogether. J say altogether, because in some
religious use, ours and theirs is the same: namely in this, that both they, and
we use it for an outward Ceremony, to testify that the child shall not be
ashamed, to confess the faith of Christ crucified: their superstitious use we
admit not, and their Idolatrous use (which I wonder how you do distinguish
from their superstitious use) you free us from. But you say, we ought to
abstain, not only from the Idolatry, or worship, but even from all religious
use, of such humane ordinances, as others do Idolatrously adore. From the
Idolatry I confess, but not from that religious use which is good, and
tends to a good end. That it is a humane ordinance, hinders not, because
being withal an Ecclesiastical Constitution, it is thereby made in part
divine. That they use it some way superstitiously, is no reason, why we should
not co^cur with them in that wherein they use it well. For, Aug. de doct. christ.
li. 2. c. 18.
Quisquis bonus, verusque Christianus est, Domini sui esse intelligit,
vbicunque invenerit, veritatem.

The erecting of Crucifixes, and other Popish Images, for holy use, is indeed
a keeping of an honorable memory of the Jdol, and yet the well using of the
sign of the Cross in Baptism, in our Church, is not so. For neither does our
Church propose it as an Idol, but as a Ceremony of decency, and Order, fit
for a sacred Action: neither does it propose it as a remembrance of Popish
Idolatry, as you would imply, but as an outward testimony of our profession,
and as a memoratiue sign, to put us in mind of our Christian duty: which
may make us rather detest, then religiously remember the abuses of Popery. And
therefore neither is it as well an Idol, as any of their Images, which you will
not prove in have: nor a breach of the Apostles exhortation, Babes keep your
selves from Idols.

Now we come to the third general part of this Treatise, wherein the Treatiser
endeuoreth to answer certain objections of ours, in defense of the Cross:
Our first objection he sets down in these words.

The first objection. 8. Sect.
The sign of the Cross in the first institution was free from superstition
and Idolatry: and if the abuse which grew after be removed, why should it not
recover his ancient use, and indifferency, like as the bread in the Lords
supper, which the Papists do religiously adore?

The Treatisers answer to the objection.
There is great difference etc. I expected the Treatiser in his answer to our
objections, framed by himself, would have made every thing plain and
evident: so as a man at the first sight, might perceive the answer fitted and
applied to the objection in every point: But some thing there was: either have,
or Jgnorance, not knowing how to answer, or Conscientia fraudis, or J know
not what, that would not suffer him to speak directly, nor to exemplify his
allegations, but make him wind himself every way, and so to double, and huddle
things together, that my self J confess, and J believe few men else, can find
in him, Quid cui respo deatur, what is answered unto which; as to any man that
diligently marketh, what he says to the first objection, may plainly appear.
By which means, though he has put me to a double labor, yet J will endeavor
in my Reply, both to fit his answers to the objection, and make them
stronger; so, that the indifferent Reader shall perceive, that no wrong is
offered him; and yet with all J will so discover his shifts, and windings, as al
me^ J hope that come not with that obstinate resolution of, Non persuadebis
etiamsi persuaseris, shall rest fully satisfied, and contented. Now therefore to
his answer.

His answer consists of three parts. The first whereof is of those
differences, which are between that, which God has created, and commanded,
and that which man has ordained: whereby he would implie, as I take it, that
the reason is not like, why the Cross recovered out of the abuse should
return to his ancient integrity; and why the bread in the Lords supper,
reclaimed from Popish adoration should be again restored to his right use.

The second part of his answer, is of a double use of the Cross: Civil and
Religious, whereby he would imply, as I think, that the civil use may be
restored to his ancient indifferency, but the religious use cannot.

The third part of his answer, is concerning our abusing of the sign of the
Cross, in the Church of England, who, he says, retain it among us with
opinion very superstitious, and erroneous; and use it otherwise, then the
ancient fathers did: Each of these I will consider by it self, in their
several order: The first therefore he delivers in these words.

Treatisers answer to the 1. Object.
There is great difference between that which God has created, and commanded,
and that which Man has ordained, for the one is necessary, and no abuse can
alter the nature of it; the other indifferent, and by abuse may become
unlawful: and therefore Hezechia did worthily break the brazen Serpent, not
seeking to redress the abuse of it: Now howsoever Bellarmine would
insinuate, that the Cross is founded on Scripture, yet the weakness of his
arguments, do bewray the vnsou^dnes of the matter; and therefore Tertullians
judgment, is to be preferred, which plainly says, De coron. mil.
that there is no warrant in Scripture for it; Horum inquit si legem postules,
scripturam nullam invenies, traditio tibi praetenditur auctrix, consuetudo
confirmatrix, fides observatrix.

Reply to the Treatisers answer.
Here J observe, first your assertion, That there is great difference, between
that which God has created, and commanded, and that which man has ordained.

Secondly, your proof of this difference, by these particulars.

1 That which God has commanded is necessary, as the bread in the supper of
this nature are Churches, Pulpits, etc. things of necessary use, and warranted
by God himself.

That which man has ordained is indifferent, as the Cross in Baptism.

2 No abuse can alter the nature of that, which God has commanded, and is
necessary: as the bread in the supper, Churches, Pulpits, etc. That which man
has ordained, and is indifferent, may by abuse become unlawful; as the
retaining the brazen Serpent, which was no where commanded.

3 That which God has commanded, is warra^ted by the scriptures.

That which man has ordained, is not warranted in the scripture.

For howsoever Bellarmine would insinuate, etc. yet you prefer Tertullians
judgment, who says, Traditio tibi praetenditur auctrix, etc.

Jf this be not your meaning, in the first part of your answer, I confess, J
cannot attain unto it: your words are so intricate, and doubtfully set down;
which has caused me to use the help of your margent, for the better
understanding of your text.

For reply therefore unto this your assertion, we willingly acknowledge, that
there is indeed great difference, between that which God has created, and
commanded: and that which man, as man, has ordained: for the first proceeds
from the clear fountain of al goodness, wisdo^e, and truth: the latter from the
corrupt fountain of man's heart; wherein naturally is nothing, but wickedness
ignorance, and falsehood: But if you make your comparison, between that which
God has commanded, and that which the Church of God has ordained, (as in
reason you ought to do) the difference is not so great, as you would have it;
Let Gods commandment have worthily the first place, and pre-eminence in all
things, as is meet; but let the ordinances of the Church, be immediately
subordinate unto Gods commandment, and ranged in a second place: not only
because the Church of God hears his voice; but also because she is ruled by
his spirit: and by the great, 2. Pet. 1.4.
and precious promises of God, is made partaker of the divine nature: which no
doubt does assist them, even in the laws also, and constitutions, which are
made for Order and Decency in the Church.

Concerning your first proof, and point of difference, when you say, That
which God has commanded is necessary, that which man ordained is indifferent;
J grant, that which God has commanded is indeed necessary, for the matter,
Beza ep. 2. circa med.
and necessary for the form: (wherein yet look upon the second Epistle of
Mr. Beza. How far it is necessary to be done as he has commanded:) necessary
to be reclaimed from all abuses, that it has bin subject unto: and necessary
to be restored to his first and true use. But before we grant you your second
proposition. That which man has ordained is indifferent: we must be
instructed, what you mean by this word indifferent: for if you understand,
the things them selves, as they are of themselves, we grant that the Church
cannot make a thing indifferent, to be of it self, other then a thing
indifferent: but if you understand the same things, as they are for use,
lawfully commanded, or forbidden, by the authority of the Church, then we must
tell you, that it is not freely in your own power, and liberty, whether you
will use them, or not use them accordingly: for then they cease to be
altogether indifferent, and beginn to become some way necessary: which that you
may the rather believe, J will direct you to Mr. Bezaes 24. Epistle, where you
may learn it.

Bezae ep. 24. ad 5. 6. 7. and 8.
Res alioqui per se mediae (says he) mutant quodammodo naturam, cum aliquo
legitimo mandato, vel praecipiuntur, vel prohibentur; quia neque contra iustum
praeceptum omitti possunt, si praecipiantur, neque contra interdictum fieri, si
prohibeantur.

Things otherwise of them selves indifferent, change their nature after a sort,
when they are either coma^nded, or forbidden, by any lawful authority:
because they can neither be omitted, contrary to the just precept, if they be
commanded; nor done contrary to the prohibition, if they be forbidden. And a
little after.

Jbid. m* 9.
Nam et si conscientias proprie solus Deus ligat: tamen quatenus Ecclesia,
ordinis and decori, adeoque aedificationis rationem habens, leges aliquas de
rebus medijs rite condit, eiusmodi leges pijs omnibus sunt obseruandae, and
^atenus co^scientias ligant, vt nemo sciens and prudens, rebellandi animo,
possit abs^ peccato, vel facere quae ita prohibentur, vel omittere quae sic
praecipiuntur.

For though God only does properly bind the consciences: yet so far forth as
the Church, having regard of order, decency, and aedification, makes rightly
any laws, concerning things indifferent: those laws are to be observed, by all
godly men, and so far bind the consciences, that no man wittingly, and
willingly, with a purpose of rebelling, may without sin, either do those
things which are so forbidden, or omit those things, which are so commanded.

I pray you Mr Treatiser, mark diligently the words, conscientias ligant, or,
nemo sciens and prudens rebellandi animo, possit absque peccato: for you know
how many of your brethren, are forgetful of this instruction: without sin,
say you, what sin J pray you? Hemmingius in Syurag cap. de adiaphonu^. 9
J refer you for answer to an other. Qui violat Ecclesiasticam politiam
peccat multis modis: primum enim reus fit violati ordinis in Ecclesia: deinde
authoritatem Magistratus contemnit: tu^ infirmorum conscientias vulnerat:
postremo nocet exemplo: and charitatem erga fratres violat.

He that breaks the Ecclesiastical Policy, sins many ways: first he is
guilty of breaking the orders of the Church: secondly he contemns the
authority of the Magistrates: thirdly, he wounds the consciences of the
weak: and lastly he hurts by example, and violateth the law of Charity.

Again whereas speaking of things necessary, in your margent you give us to
understand, that of this nature are Churches, Pulpits, etc. J demand, of what
nature? mean you of the same nature, that the bread in the supper is? for so
the purport of your answer seems to imply, that being only urged in the
objection. Jf this be your meaning, you are very much mistaken: for though
Churches and Pulpits, are very necessary in deed, in their kind: yet their
necessity is not of that nature, that the bread in the supper is of. For the
bread in the supper, is simply, and absolutely necessary, insomuch that if
there be no bread, there is no Sacrament: but Churches, and Pulpits are only
necessary for convenience, Tert. Apol. c. 2.
and decency: for I hope, those Caetus antelucani, ad canendum Christo and Deo,
meetings in the morning to sing to Christ, and God, as Tertullian speaks,
frequented by the Christians, in the time of persecution, Just. Mart. Apol. 2.
non lodge a fine.
were grateful unto God, though not done in Churches, and those verba
praepositi exhortatoria, ad imitatione^ tam honestarum rerum, words of the
Provost, wherewith he exhorted to the imitation of so honest things, which
Iustine Martyr mentions, may be esteemed good sermons, though not delivered
out of Pulpits. To conclude this point, if Churches be of the same nature for
necessity, that the bread in the supper is, how has it of late years come to
pass, that many of your brotherhoode, in the freedom of Christian religion,
have made choice of private houses for their sermons, rather then of Churches?
and of the end of a table in a Gentleman's parlour, rather then of a Pulpit?
These your practices have made proof unto the world, that Churches, and
Pulpits, howsoever necessary, are not yet so necessary, even in your own
opinion, as the bread in the supper: nor so greatly respected by you, as here
you would make us now believe.

Your second point of difference, between things commanded by God, and
ordained by man is, No abuse can alter the nature of that, which God has
commanded, but that which man has ordained, may by abuse become unlawful: as
the retaining the brazen Serpent, which you note in the margent, was no where
commanded, and therefore Hezechia did worthily break it, not seeking to
redress the abuse of it.

In the first of these propositions. No abuse can alter the nature of that,
which God has commanded. I confess J do rather guess, then well understand
what you mean by altering of the nature: J suppose your meaning to be this,
viz. that no abuse fastened by Papists, upon the bread in the supper, can so
alter the right use thereof, but that by the Orthodox and right believers, it
may again be reduced to his first integrity: we concur with you in this
opinion, and think the very same in the sign of the Cross: No, say you, not
so, because that which man has ordained may by abuse become unlawful: this we
confess also, but add, that by right use, it may again also become lawful:
for what should hinder it? Because, say you, it is ordained by man* so then the
point of difference consists in the diversity of the Authors: the bread
abused may again be rightly used, because God is the author of that
institution: the Cross in Baptism once abused, can never again be rightly
used, because man is the ordainer thereof: God and man do differ, tanquam
creator and creatura: between whom Christ being both God and man, is (...),
medius: between God I say, on the one side, and all mankind on the other: but
to bring them yet a great deal nearer: God and faithful man, regenerated by
the spirit of God (of which sort is the Church and every true member thereof)
do differ, tanquam pater and filius, as the father and the son, Ier. 3.1.
I will be a father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters,
between whom Christ in both natures, is, (...), 2. Cor. 6.18. Ephesians. 3.22.
a mediator, or reconciler, to take away that difference, which was between
them, and us, that we might be the habitation of God by the spirit: So that
these, as you see, differ only as relatiues, whose difference is, their
natural reciprocation, and whose diversity is their coniunctio^: the on not
crossing, but referring it self unto the other: Only God and unregenerate men,
differ, tanquam hosts, like opposites, Romans 8.7.
for (...) that swaieth in them, is enmity with God, as the Apostle teaches:
so that, except you will say, that unregenerate and wicked man, is the ordainer
of the Cross, as you do falsely, when you say it is, the invention of
Antichrist, the man of sin (for by your own confession, it is more ancient
then he) you see there is no such great difference between the bread in the
supper, and the Cross in Baptism, ex part autoris, in respect of the
authors. The one being the ordinance of God, the other of the Church of God,
which hears his voice, and is guided by his spirit: the one being the
ordinance of God, the other of the faithful, the obedient Children and sons of
God: as partly before has bin declared. J supposed rather, that you would have
made the difference to consist, in the diversity of the pollutions, which each
of them in the time of their abuse had co^tracted. The bread, a pollutio^
indeed, but easily separable, and remoueable from it again: The Cross such a
pollution, or filth, as afterward you please to call it, as no water can
cleanse it, nor any pretext purify it, for the holy service of Iehoua. But
because you use these florishes, in the next sectio^, J will spare to speak of
it, tell J meet you there.

Thirdly you press us with the example of Hezekiah. The brazen serpent, say
you, though commanded by God himself, yet retained without his express
commandment, became an Idol, and was therefore worthily broken of Hezekiah,
not seeking to reform the abuse, Therefore much more the Cross in Baptism,
which was ordained by man only, being abused in as high a degree of Idolatry as
the brazen Serpent was, is utterly to be destroyed, without any farther
redress.

This is the, nodus Gordius, (...), and height of all your objections, your
fortress, and bulwark, your Herculeum and Achilleum argumentum, wherein you
repose all your strength and greatest confidence: and therefore J will endeavor,
so to fit mine answer, to every point thereof, as J trust the indifferent
reader, shall easily perceive your weakness, even in the midst of al your
strength:

Therefore concerning your comparison, between the reformation of Ezechiah, and
our Governors, J answer, first in this example, we must put a difference,
between those things that are common therein and left for example of imitatio^
to other men, and those things which are proper, and peculiar to this action:
The things common to all good reformers, and left to others for example of
imitation, are these.

First the duty of a King and chief Magistrate, on whom it lies to reform
abuses, and without whose authority, no private man is to assume that office,
unto himself: Aug epi 50. ad Bonif. comitem.
Rex domino aliter seruit quia homo est, aliter quia etiam et Rex est: quia
homo est, et seruit viuendo fideliter quia etia^ Rex, ei seruit, cum ea facit
adseruiendum illi, quae non potest facere, nisi Rex. which J note the rather to
put our Treatiser, and his adherents, in mind of their too much forwardnes, to
begin reformation, being but private persons, and to put it in practice, without
commission. Bucer. in script. Angl page 154.
Nemo hanc autoritatem publicam, Wolphius in hunc locum.
and consensum Ecclesiae, Priuatis hominibus, vt hoc agant, pius et sapiens
author est nemo. Those private men, that are thus busy, had neither piety nor
wisdom, to give the^ counsel for so doing. Secondly His zeal in Gods cause,
which was most fervent, and such it ought to be, in all good Governors, and
reformers. Thirdly his reformation in repressing Idolatry, and taking away the
occasion thereof. Fourthly that together with his reformation, he joined
instruction, and teaching of the people: for when he saw them to repose a
power of healing, in the brazen Serpent, he called it Nehustan, and showing
the^ the matter, taught them that it had no such power in it; and was nothing
but a lump of brass: al these things, J doubt not, but that our reformers
proposed unto themselves, for an example of reformation.

The things proper to this action, and having peculiar reference, after a
sort, to the person of Hezekiah were first his manner of reformation, by
breaking the brazen Serpent in pieces, and utterly annihilating of it: Secondly
the particular motives that might induce him, to this reformation, namely one
inward, being extraordinarily moved thereunto by the spirit of God, which does
appear in this, that he did otherwise reform it, then his religious
predecessors before him had done. Another outward being occasioned so to do
because Achaz his father, had either himself brought this superstition into
his kingdom, or else being brought in formerly, by his Predecessors, had by his
example, and authority given great furtherance, and encouragement thereunto; and
therefore, utterly to take away that stain wherewith Achaz had stained the house
and stock of David, Hezekiah, no doubt, was the rather induced to this
distroying kind, and manner of reformation.

Now if our Predecessors, and Reformers followed him not, in this manner of
reforming, by vttter subuersio^, they had great reason so to do, being men,
whom neither the abuses might so particularly concern, as this did Hezekiah,
and knowing moreover, that, Ad eundem finem multis medijs peruenitur.
Reformation of abuses, and taking away of Jdolatry is the end, and this end may
be attained by more ways then on, as either, by

Instructing the people, and teaching them the right use: or by Laws
prohibiting the Jdolatry: or by punishments, either penal, or capital, upon
the transgressors of the laws established: or by removing the thing (if it be
a material thing, as this was) out of the places of resort, into some secluse
place, where the people might neither come at it, nor see it, and where
without offense it might still be kept, for a monument of Gods mercy: or
lastly, if nothing else will serve, by utter abolishing, and destroying the
thing. Now because, of all these ways, he made choice of that, which he
judged, and which was indeed, the most expedite, and ready way, and withal the
surest, that Idolatry might never be committed to it again; Aug. de civit. Dei
lib. 10. c. 8.
(Religiosa potestate Deo serviens, cum magna pietatis laud contrivit) doing
God service, with his religious authority, he brake it, and is worthily
commended for his piety.

If it had seemed good in his judgment, to have taken some of the other
courses, as it is likely, David and Asa, and Iehosophat, and other good kings
of Judah before him did, his co^mendations, as theirs, had bin no whit less,
though his reformation had neither bin so expedite, nor so sure for time to
come: for which cause also, that great and famous execution, which K. Henry
the eight did upon the Monestaries of this Land, is likewise commended: yet
many both zealous, and religious professors, could rather have wished, that so
many famous Monuments, erected sometime to the service of God, but then abused
by the wicked and sinful inhabitants, might still have retained the end and
punishment have lighted only on the offenders.

Yea but you will say, where the abuses could not otherwise be redressed; but
had it remained still unbroken, it would still have bin a stumbling block, and
occasion of Idolatry, there the readiest, and surest way was to be taken: J
grant where the abuse could not otherwise be redressed as in the brazen
Serpent, etc. but where the abuse may otherwise be redressed, as in the sign
of the Cross, there destruction, and utter subversion, is not always the best
cure. And herein plainly is the difference, between the brazen Serpent, and
the Cross. Hezechiah saw the abuse of the Serpent; 2 King 18.4.
otherwise incureable, for unto those days (says the scripture) the children
of Jsrael, did burn incense unto it* unto those days, imports a long time
before, and an inevitable abuse, that had long continued; wherein (as we are in all good reason to conceive) the former godly kings, David, Asa, and Iehosophat,
who are greatly commended, for their reformations, had no doubt made trial of
al other means, and yet experience made proof, that by all those it could not
be redressed. In which case Hezechiahs course was necessary, and, hoc
supposito, the rule of Pope Stephen holds. Did 63. cap. Quia Sancta.
Per hoc, magna autoritas ista est habenda in Ecclesia, vt si no anulli ex
praedecessoribus and maioribus nostris, fecerunt aliqua quae illo tempore
potuerunt esse sine culpa, and postea vertuntur in errore^ and superstitionem:
sine tarditate aliqua, and cum magna autoritate, a posteris destruantur. For
this cause this authority is to be esteemed great, in the Church, that if some
of our predecessors, and ancestors, have done somthings, which at that time,
might be without fault, and afterward are turned into error, and superstition,
they may be destroyed by posterity, without al lingering, and with great
authority. Our Church contrariwise perceives, by the fruitful experience, now
of almost fifty years, that the abuse, of the co^signatio^ of the Cross in
Baptism, is cureable, where obedient, and conformable Teachers, instruct the
people a right and it seems further, that this abuse, would have bin much more
redressed before these days, had not the Treatiser, and his accomplices hindered
the work, by their untrue slanders, and accusations, both of our Church, as
retaining the relics of Popery, and of the thing, as if it were the mark of
the beast, and framed in the forge of Antichrist; which they know to have bin,
a decent Ceremony used in the purest age, and by the greatest pillars of the
Church, long before any show of Antichrist did appear.

Again J answer, that it is by the Magistrates to be considered. First,
wherein the abuse does more principally reside; whether in the persons, that do
abuse the thing, or in the thing that is abused. For reason would generally,
that as by the skillful Physician, cures are applied to those parts, that are
most affected, so by the discreet Magistrate, the redress should be made
there, where the abuse principally consists. Jf in the persons the easines,
or difficulty, of reforming them, is diligently to be respected. Jf in the
thing that is abused, the Magistrate is likewise to consider, of what nature
the thing is. If evil of his own nature, and first institution, as Lupanaria,
the Stews and such like places be, then without al question, their best
redress is, their utter subversion, and destruction. Jf good of his own
nature, and first institution, but abused by me^, as both the brazen Serpent,
and the sign of the Cross were: Then the consideration is, whether the thing
thus abused, be such, as may well be spared or such as cannot well be spared. Jf
so, then it is apparently, the readier, and easier way, to take away the thing.
If otherwise, then the wisdom of the Magistrate, will direct him, rather to take
away the abuse, then destroy the thing. These considerations in the matter of
the brazen Serpent, made good king Hezechiah to find, that the brazen Serpent
was for one peculiar time and occasion, that it had long before his days
performed that service, for which it was erected, that it belonged not to the
people of his time, nor had no such cure, as before, to effect: That though the
Serpent were a type of the Messiah, yet there remained a memory of it in the
books of Moses, that would serve that turn, though this were taken away.
Lastly, that it was all one, these things considered, whether it were preserved
still, or utterly abolished: upon which grounds, he proceeded, to that, so much
commended execution, brake it in pieces, and called it, Nehushtan. The same
deliberations likewise, in our reformers, in the matter of the Cross, made
them to find, that the consignation of the Cross in Baptism, was not more
peculiar to the times of the Primitive Church, then to ours: That it had not
performed all that service, for the which, it was first instituted. That it is
an admonisher, as necessary now, against Atheists, Mockers, and Blasphemers, as
it was at the first, against heathen, and Pagan Idolators. That if it were
taken away, the Church of Rome, might justly accuse us, of abrogating an
harmless, and innocent institution, Non temere, nec subinde, nec levibus de
causis ad novationem est decurre^ dum Calv. Inst. lib 4 cap. 10.
of the Primitive Church. That it is not indifferent to our Church, whether it
be taken away, or not: both because we are not to reject ancient institutio^s,
where there is no need, and also to make known to the Romanists, that we
willingly reject nothing, that possibly may be reduced, to his first
integrity. Upon these grounds and deliberations, our good Magistrates in K.
Edwardes days, did not abolish the use of the Cross in Baptism. And upon the
same grounds our worthy Prince, and Magistrates that now are, think it meet,
to retain it still. Quid hic peccatum est? what offense J pray you is this? or
why should not you be as favorable to our Christian liberty herein, as the
most learned Mr. Beza is? Beza Respon. ad Franc. Baldvin. page 227.
Scio non nullos sublata crucis adoratione, aliquem signi crucis vsu^
retinuisse; vtantur igitur ipsi, sicut par est, sua liberate.

I answer thirdly that our Reformers did the same thing, in their reformation,
of the Cross in Baptism, which Ezekiah did in his reformation of the Brazen
Serpent: for what was that which Hezekiah did? surely it was, that he took
away the abuse, wherein it was faulty, not the right use, wherein it was
typical, and figurative. The abuse wherein it was faulty, was the burning of
Incense unto it, and worshipping of it, and the occasion of this abuse was that
opinion, and estimation of Deity, which the people had falsely affixed unto it:
both these he took away; namely the abuse, and the occasion. Our reformers
have done the very same; They have taken away, first, the abuse of the sign of
the Cross in Baptism; which was, the too great estimation, and opinion, of
grace, power and virtue, that the people erroniously reposed in it: and
secondly, the occasion of that abuse; which was the ignorance, and
misunderstanding of the people, for want of instruction.

Only the difference is: that the abuse which was the least, in the Idolatrous
Jews; namely their false opinion of Deity in the Serpent, was the greatest in
our men, as touching the Cross: and that which was the greatest in them;
namely their worshipping, and burning incense, unto the Serpent, was none at al
in ours, in the sign of the Cross. For our men, going as far as they, in
ascribing virtue, which was an equal fault in both, could not go so far in
worshipping, and adoring, because of the diversitiy of the natures, of the
several things. The brazen Serpent, being a substance material, and permanent,
and therefore easily subject to adoration, by reason of the outward shape, and
form: The sign of the Cross an action immateriall, and transient, and
therefore nothing so easily, to be worshipped, by reason it wanted both
substance, shape, and form.

Secondly Hezekiah, neither took away, nor purposed to take away, the right
use of the serpent, wherein it was not faulty; namely, that it was a type, of
Christ's exaltatio^, on the Cross, and therein a representation, of the Messiah:
This use remained still, after the reformation of Hezekiah: Neither did our
Governors, take away that use, of the sign of the Cross, wherein it was not
faulty: Neither did they suppose it meet, to take it away: but restoring it to
that use, for which it was instituted at the first, left it still to be a
memoratiue sign, of our promise made to Christ in Baptism, and a secret, and
faithful admonisher of our duties. So that we may safely say, our Reformers
followed the reformation of Hezekiah, most exactly in all points, wherein the
diverse natures of the abuses, and the things, did not make a necessary
difference of their reformation.

Concerning your comparing of the authors: The brazen Serpent commanded by God,
and the Cross in Baptism ordained by man, though J have answered thereto
before, this now J add moreover, by way of retortion: Though both did give
occasion to Idolatry, yet the brazen Serpent, even therefore, because it was
ordained by God, might minister a more probable, present, and obuious fall into
Idolatry, then the Cross in Baptism, in that it was ordained by man: This I
declare thus.

When men's minds are once infected with superstition, they take hold soonest
of that, which is most commended by the author: and the more worthy the author
is, the more firmly they cleave to that, which they have once fastened their
error upon, if therefore they find God to be the author of it, they take that
for reason sufficient, why they should worship it. This cause made the
Idolatrous Jews, not only to worship the brazen Serpent at the first; but also
to think, that in so doing they did well; because they worshipped only that,
whereof they knew certainly, God himself to be the author. The same reason
moved those Idolators, reproved by the Prophet, Ierem. 13:19. Ierem. 8.2.
to burn incense to the Sun, and Moon, and all the host of heaven, and to
worship the^, thinking their Idolatry the more justifiable, because it took
occasion, not upon any invention of man, but upon those excellent creatures
of God, whom he has placed so high, and adorned with so great beauty:
Contrariwise, the devises and inventions of men, such as the Cross is, are
always doubtful, and suspected, even unto the Idolators themselves; and have
not their occasion, so present, and immediate, as the other: For first, the
Author must have some reason for his devise, and then authority, to give
countenance thereunto: and lastly, the opinion of the people, approving the
reason, and embracing the authority, which points being well considered, as they
make a farther way about, to bring the credit of adoration, to that which is
invented by man: so they are good means, to persuade the people to forsake
their Idolatry: when they have embraced it: So that your argument, from the
diversity of the Authors, does rather make against you, then give any strength
to your cause.

The like may be said of the opinion of virtue, which the Jdolator is always
willing, to ascribe unto his Idol. For when it does manifestly appear, that
that, which he makes an Idol, is commanded of God, the Jllation is far more
present and easy Ergo, it cannot be without virtue: then can be applied to any
ordinance devised by man.

Concerning your comparing of the brazen Serpent, and the Cross together, we
must confess, the Jdolatrie is like, and worthy to be punished with like
extirpation, so long as you compare, the material brazen Serpent, with the
material Cross, of wood, stone, brass, or any outward sensible substance.
For these having once gotten the opinion of Deity, to reside in the^, expose
themselves to be adored by the vulgar sort, no less, and in no inferior
degree, then the Serpent did. But when you extend your comparison, to match the
immateriall consignatio^ of the Cross in Baptism, with the material brazen
Serpent, your comparison holds not correspondency, as in the former. For
there is great difference, between this consignation, and those other Crosses:
so that, wherein this is different, from them, therein also it must needs be
different from the brazen Serpent. From those other Crosses, and so
consequently, from the brazen Serpent, this consignation of the Cross in
Baptism, does differ, First in matter: they material, and sensible, this
immateriall and insensible. Secondly, in the end, they made perhaps, and framed
of purpose to be receptacles of divine worship, this only to serve for a sign
of remembrance, being therefore justly to be reckoned among those things, Quae
pertinent ad (...) and (...); Bucer in script. Angl. page 454.
which belong to order and decency: Because it admonishes the rude people of
their duty, and calls men to a remembrance, of that obedience, that they owe
to God, by a manifest and special signification, whereby the Church is edified.
Thirdly, in the abuse, they abused in as high a degree of superstition, as the
Serpent was, this only abused in erroneous opinion, and conceit of virtue, and
power, falsely ascribed unto it. And fourthly in redress, they no ways
cureable, but by demolition, this curable by informing the understanding
aright, and teaching the ignorant, that we repose no power and virtue in it,
nor yield any divine worship unto it, but use it only as an admonisher, and
reme^brancer of our Christian duties: and therefore you must not argue, that
because those material Crosses were as offensive as the brazen Serpent,
therefore this immateriall consignatio^ must needs be so. You shall do better
to distinguish them in name, calling them, as they are indeed, Crosses, and
this the consignation of the Cross: then to confound them in nature, or suffer
your self to be deceived by the name, as if what things soever agree in name,
must of necessity agree in superstition, and Idolatry.

Lastly concerning your marginal note, that God no where commanded the
retaining of the brazen Serpent; we answer, nether does he any where forbid it:
and J make no doubt, but had it not bin abused to superstition, it might
without offense to God, have been retained, though he gave no express
commandment so to do. And he that considers, what great prerogatives the
brazen Serpent had, will (I suppose) be of the same opinion. For it was erected,
not by man's, but by Gods direct commandment. It was adorned and commended,
with a most famous and memorable miracle: It was a monument of a very strange
and extraordinary cure: It had continued a long time, and might almost allege
Prescription, why it should be retained still: It was a type and figure of
Christ's exaltation on the Cross, as himself expounds it: As Moses lift up
the brazen Serpent in the wilderness: Ioh. 3.14.
so must the son of man be lifted up, etc.

But what would you infer upon the not retaining of the brazen Serpent? That
we should not retain the use of the Cross in Baptism? But this our Church
has enjoined, and commanded, whose commandment, we are bound in conscience to
obey, so long as it commands nothing contrary to the word, and will of God.
For howsoever you and your consorts reject obedience, yet we take it not our
duties so to do. Laws made by the Church, of things indifferent (as Mr. Beza
told you a little before) do so far bind the conscience, Beza epist. 24. ad 5.
6. 7. and 8. Number. 9.
that no man wittingly, and willingly, and with a purpose of resisting (take
heed Mr. Treatiser this clause conclude not many of your Brotherhood) may
without sin, either do those things which are so forbidden, or omit those
things which are so commanded. Calv. Jnsi. lib. ^. c. 10 par. 6. 31
Christiani populi of ficium est (says Mr. Calvin) quae secundum hunc canonem
(in quo charitas moderatrix est) fuerint instituta, etc. It is the duty of
Christian people to observe and keep those laws that shall be made, according
to this rule, (meaning where charity is the Moderatrix as he said before) with
a free conscience indeed, and no superstition, but with a godly and ready
propension to obedience. Neither must they have them in contempt, not by
careless negligence omit them: much less through pride and stubbornness
openly violate and resist the^. Where, by the way, let it trouble no man, that
Mr. Beza says conscientias ligant, Mr. Calvin says, libera quidem
conscientia. For Mr. Beza in his binding of the conscience, has respect unto
the obedience that is due unto the authority, Mr Calvin in his freedom of the
Conscience, has reference to that estimation we should have of the things, not
to think otherwise of them then of things indifferent, though commanded by
authority: to which purpose Mr. Bucer also speaks, Bucer in script. Angl.
page 454.
has etsi seruare and omittere etiam extra scandalum licet, tame^ si ex
proternia aut petulantia quis ordinem, publica autoritate constitutum contemnat
and turbet, non leuiter peccat. These Ceremonies though it be lawful to observe
or omit, where no scandal is offered, yet if any man upon frowardnes or
wantonness, shall contemn, or disquiet the order, that is established by public
authority, he sins greiuously. And let this suffice for answer to your
example of the brazen Serpent, and second point of difference.

Your third point of difference J take to be, The bread in the supper, is
warranted in the scripture. The Cross in Baptism has no warrant in the word,
For howsoever Bellarmine would insinuate, etc.

The former of these, That the bread in the supper is warranted in the
Scripture, we know right well: to the latter that the sign of the Cross is not
warranted we answer first, that it is no where in the Scripture forbidden.
Secondly, Non requiritur necessario, Pet. Mart. in Ep 4. ad Hopperum.
vt in sacris litteris expressam mentionem exhibeamus, singularu^ reru^quas
vsurpamus. Thirdly, that though in express words it be not warranted, yet
virtually, fundamentally, and in suo principio, it is even in the Scriptures
comprehended. The principle, and foundation that J mean, is, that general
precept of the Apostle concerning things indifferent. Let all things be done
decently and in order, 1. Cor. 14.40.
in the generallity whereof this particular is contained, as by the deduction
before mentioned in the answer, to the Minor of your maine Syllogism, may
plainly appear; Lastly concerning Bellarmins insinuation, that the Cross is
grounded etc: we stand not upon it, nor build our opinion upon any proof of
his. Yet, as it is certain that the material Cross, Ioh. 3.14.
whereupon Christ suffered, was shaddowed by the pole, whereupon the brazen
Serpent was lifted up (for so our Savior himself does resemble it) so I see
not what inconvenience can follow, Aug. de catech. rudibus cap. 20. Cyprian ad
De^^et. cap. 19.
if we should say with St. Augustine, and St. Cyprian, that eve^ this our
immateriall co^signation, did take his first beginning and occasion in the
primitive Church, upon the signing of the Israelites door posts, Exodus 12.7.
with the blood of the Pascall Lamb: or by the signing of the^ that mourn in
their foreheads with the mark of the letter T. or by Jacobs blessing of Ephraim
and Manasses with his hands a cross, Ezech. 9.4. Genesis 48.14.
whereby as Musculus observes, Wolf. Muscul in Genesis cap. 48.
Adumbrabatur mysterium Crucis, in quo est omnis verae benedictionis fons and
origo. But all this we yield unto you, and embrace with you Tertullians
judgment, that this is established by no other warrant, then by the authority
of the Church, the weight whereof you have sufficiently hard of before. But now
let us hear the second part of your answer, to our first objection.

Treatise. 9. Sect.
Now it is farther to be noted, that a double use of the Cross is mentioned
in antiquity: one civil, and the other religious, against the former we do
not dispute, yielding all reverence to those Christians, which by that note
showed their reioicing and glory in that, which the heathen counted their
shame. But now, that abuse has turned the Image and sign of the Cross, into
an Idol, it seems thereby to be made execrable. For Gideons Ephod being first
a civil monument of victory, when the people went a whoring after it, was it
lawful for the Magistrate, to erect in the Tabernacle or Sinagogue, though not
the same yet the like, both in name and form to any religious use? Would it
have sufficed to have said, this is not the same Ephod, that Israel makes an
Idol of, neither is it set here to be worshipped (for your brethren do
grievously sin therein) but only to keep in mind the great victory that God by
Gedeon gave to Israel? Right so the Cross used by the ancients to shevve that
they were not ashamed of Christ crucified, being merely civil, and yet
expressing a most Christian resolution, having bin abused, yea continuing to be
worshipped, both in Imagine and in Signo, It seems that this filth has made
it unfit, on any pretense of restoring it to his ancient use, to be annexed to
the holy things of the Sanctuary. Especially while there are so many Papists,
that superstitiously abuse it among us. Now for the religious use of the
Cross, by the ancients, it was never free from sin and superstition, as
afterward is showed, and if it were, yet it being an humane ordinance and now
not only abused to Idolatry, but beco^ming it self a most abominable Idol, no
water ca^ cle^se it, nor any pretext purify it, for the holy service of Jehovah

Reply to the second part of the Treatisers answer.
The Treatisers maine forces are spent already, in the first part of his
answer, All these things that follow are nothing else but, leuis armaturae
milites, his light horsemen and florishes, to make the number of his arguments
seem the greater. Jn this Section he tells us of a twofold use of the Cross
mentioned in antiquity, one Civil, the other Religious. This we acknowledge to
be true. The use was held of the^, as a Trophee, and public Monument, of that
great victory which God gave to Constantine against Maxentius. For which cause
Constantine, at the first made the sign of the Cross in his imperial banner,
stamped it upon his Coins, graued it in his statues, and Images, and in the
armor of his Soldiers: And the like has bin used by all Christian Princes ever
since. Secondly, as an orname^t in story, or outward beautifiing of any thing:
Thirdly, as an outward mark of distinction from the heathen Jdolaters, whereby
in their common meetings, and intercourse of life, they made it known, as well
to the Jnfidels, as to one another, that they were Christians, and no ways
ashamed of the Cross of Christ.

The religious use they made of the Cross, consisted more privately, in a
mutual reference toward themselves, and was frequented, First in their actions
of common life, still to excite their devotion, to admonish them of their
duties, and put them in mind of Christ crucified. Muniantur aures, Cyp. ep. ad
Thi^ar. cap. 8.
ne audiant edicta feralia. Muniantur oculi ne videant detestanda simulacra.
Muniatur frons, vt signu^ Dei incolume seruetur. Muniaturos, vt dominu^ suu^
lingua victrix tucatur: as Cypria^ speaks. ad omne^ progressu^ atque
promotu^, Tertull de coron mil. cap. 3.
etc. as Tertullian declares, They used to mark their foreheads with the sign
of the Cross, at every moving, and stirring of their bodies, as they went out,
as they came home, as they put on their clothes, pulled on their shoes, and
as they washed; at table, and at candle-lighting, going to bed, and sitting
down, and generally in every particular action of their life. Secondly, they
used the sign of the Cross, in the Sacrament of Baptism, as we do now, for
a present admonition, and memoratiue token, continually to put us in mind of
our duty and profession, which in that Sacrament we undertake. J have therefore
the more particularly mentioned these differences, that J may the better
express this point to the understanding of the Reader.

Concerning therefore the civil use of the Cross, among the Ancients, the
Treatiser delivers us these oracles.

1 That he will not dispute against the civil use, and yet he tells us, that
now by abuse, it is turned to an Idol.

2 He yields al reverence to those Christians, which by that note showed their
rejoicing, and glory, in that which the Heathen counted their shame: Yet
withal he says, It is made execrable.

3 He says, the Ancients, to show that they were not ashamed of Christ
crucified, expressed thereby a most Christian resolution: But withal he adds,
By the filth which it has since contracted, it is made unfit on any pretense
to be restored to his ancient use, and to be annexed to the holy things of the
Sanctuary.

Touching these his speeches, as we willingly embrace that, wherein he
commends the Ancients, (which is a thing very rare among that generation) so
we would also free our selves, that tread only in their steps, and use it no
worse then they did, from those imputations of making it an Idol, execrable,
and a filth, which the Treatiser does lay upon us, if not as Authors, yet at
the least as Abettors.

And therefore leaving their religious use, to his place, because the Treatiser
speaks these things only of the Civil use: J would feign learn, which of
those Civil uses mentioned before, we have thus greiuously abused. Jf he say
the first use in Banners, Coins, Statues, Sect. 2.
Armor and such like, or the second, in matter of History, or outward ornament,
or beautifiing of any thing, himself is far more faulty, then any of us. For
of the former he has yielded before, that in Princes Banners, Coronations,
Coin, Crowns, or in any other Civil respect, it may have a lawful use: yea,
though it be apparently an Idol. And touching the latter he makes no
question, but that it may be made and retained, though it be of an Image, even
such an Image as is Idolatrously worshipped. Neither can J possibly see, how we
have made an Idol, execration and filth of their third civil use, whereby
they made it a note of distinction, from the Infidells. For that is the very
point, for the which, in this place he so commends the Auntients, yielding al
reverence to those Christians etc. and again, They have expressed a most
Christian resolution: etc. So that except the Treatiser have some other Civil
uses, of the Auntients in store, that we know not of, we cannot be persuaded,
that we retain any Civil use of theirs as an Idol, execrable, and a filth,
either in the Image, or in the sign.

But yet he proves it by the example of Gideons Ephod. For Gideons Ephod,
says he, being first etc. J take the force of his reason to be this.

That good civil use of any thing that is abused, and continues to be
worshipped both in Imagine, and in signo: is made an Idol, execrable, and a
filth. This he proves by the example of Gideons Ephod.

But the good civil use of the Cross among the Auntients, is abused and
continues to be worshipped, both in Imagine et in signo. This he takes to be
proved by the practice of so many Papists, as do superstitiously abuse it among
us. Ergo,

The good civil use of the Cross among the Auntients is made an Idol,
execrable, and a filth.

The mayor I grant to be true, not simpliciter, but secu^dum quid that is, only
there, and among them only, that do abuse the good civil use, and continue
worshipping of it, both in Imagine, and in signo. Jn them, and to them it is
indeed an Idol, execrable, and a filth. But what is that to others, that
neither abuse it nor worship it? Tit. 1.15.
To the clean, says the Apostle, all things are clean, but to them that are
defiled, and unbelieving, nothing is clean, but even their minds, and
consciences are defiled. Shall the sins of one man, think you, be laid upon
another? Ezech. 18.20.
God has promised no. Anima quae peccaverit ipsa morietur, The soul that
sins that shall die; The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father,
nether shall the father bear the iniquity of the son. Your perpetual harping
on one string, from secu^dum quid, to simpliciter, makes that your music is
nothing pleasant, as J have told you often before.

Touching the proof of your Mayor, by the example of Gideons Ephod, which you
say, being first a civil monument of victory, etc. J answer, that it was not
only a civil monument, and therefore your co^paring of it with the civil uses
of the sign of the Cross, among the Ancients, is unfit.

And that it was not only a civil monument, besides St. Augustines authority,
Aug. quaest. in Iudic. quaest. 41
the very name and nature of the Ephod, which he made, does plainly teach. For
what else is an Ephod, but that most glorious and beautiful upper garment,
which the high Priest ware in the celebration of divine sacrifices? P. Mart. in
hunc locum.
Potuisset carmen vt Barac and Debora co^scribere, vel columnam erigere aut
quippiam simile. If he intended a civil monument only, why made he choice of
an Ephod? Jf besides the civil remembrance of his victory, he also intended the
service of God (as St. Augustine judges) the^ was it not only for a civil
monument. Now that the service of God, was also in his intention, not only the
name of an Ephod, Gedeon illud Ephod Po^tificale and pretiolum confecit. Pet.
Mart.
Quo nomine omnia possunt intelligi, quae constituit Gedeon in sua civitate,
velut ad colendu^ Deum, similia tabernaculo Dei, ea locutione quae significat a
part totum, propter excellentiam vestis Sacerdotalis, By which name all things
may be understood that Gedeon erected in his city, as to worship God, like
the tabernacle of God, by that manner of speech called Synecdoche, which by a
part does signify the whole, for the excellency of the Priests garment) but
the scripture also seems to co^vince. Judge. 8.27.
For there it is said, That al Jsrael went a whoring after it. And that it was
the destruction of Gedeon and his house How could it be to his destruction if
he meant it not to the service of God?

Gedeons sin then was, not that he erected a civil monument only, August.
as you say, but Quod extra Dei tabernaculu^, fecit aliquid simile, vbi
coleretur Deus. But because without the Tabernacle of God he made some like
things, where God should be worshipped: which was plainly against the will of
God, who had appointed his worship, to be frequented no where, but where the
Arc of the Covenant was, which at that time was in Silo.

2. J say that there is no just comparison between Gedeons Ephod, and the
sign of the Cross in Baptism. For the end of Gedeons Ephod was, either for
Gods service, (and the^ it was faulty, as is said before,) and so is not the
Cross with us: or else (to make the best of it, and to grant you your own
interpretation) it was, that the memory of Gods benefit toward him in his
victory, might not be abolished, and then the sign, which he used, was not
fit, not agreeable to the matter. For, Pet. Mart. in hunc locum.
Deus non mandaverat in lege, vt fieret Ephod in istum vsum, sed tantum vt
sacerdotes cum sacrificaturi essent, illud induerent: Signo igitur minus
dextero and opportuno vsus est. God did not co^mande in the law, that an Ephod
should be made to this use, but only that the Priests should wear it, when
they were sacrificing; wherefore he used a sign not so commodious, nor so
fit. But our sign of the Cross in Baptism, is most fit, and natural, and
agreeable to the actio^, to signify the end, which we intend thereby, which
is not so much to imprint a memory of Gods benefit toward us, as to remember
and admonish our selves of that duty, which in Baptism we promised unto God.

3. To your question. Was it lawful for the Magistrate, etc. I may as well ask
you. Was it not lawful for the Magistrate so to do? Or if that Ephod were
unlawful, was no Ephod to be used in Gods service afterward?

4. As touching, that you say; The sign of the Cross in Baptism, among the
Ancients was merely civil, I answer, that you have heard before, that it was
some way religious, though they reposed no religion in it. For those uses that
they made of it, To be a sign of their profession of Christian religion, To
be a token that they were not ashamed of the Cross of Christ. To be a
testimony eve^ before Jdolaters; That they put their hope and confidence in
Christ crucified: are rather to be counted religious, in my understanding, then
only and merely civil, as you conceive of them.

Your minor proposition offends in the same caption that your mayor does. For
say that the good civil use of the Cross is abused and worshipped by the
Papists, what is that to us? Pet. Mart. ep. 4. ad Hopperum.
Indifferentia non possunt illos, qui pura sinceraque agunt mente, and
conscientia, contaminare, why I pray you may not we use that well, which they
used ill? As well as an Orthodox writer may use the same Logic and Rhetoric,
to prove the truth, which Heretics do to oppugn the truth? Aug cont.
Crescon. Gramma. lib 1. cap. 1.
Or an honest Soldier use those weapons in defense of his country, which
Rebels and Traitors use for the destruction and desolation thereof, as was
before alleged out of St. Augustine. Your proof holds well for the
material sign, and for the superstitious conceit of the Cross in Baptism,
but that they adored them as an Idol, remains yet to be proved.

Concerning the religious use of the sign of the Cross in Baptism, he says
two things.

First that among the Ancients, it was never free from sin, and superstition:
Secondly if it were, yet being a humane ordinance, and abused, and made a most
abominable Idol, no water can cleanse it etc.

Touching the first, which of their religious uses do you mean? Jf that which
they hold in their actions of common life; we neither commend it, nor condemn
it; we condemn it not, because we suppose it may be well used, when it is
done, only to excite, and put us in mind of Christ crucified, without any
conceit of virtue or meritt, or power therein reposed, as we verily think the
Ancients used it; Hem. in cap. 5. ep. 1. Joan.
Qui mane surgens and vesperi cubitam vadens, signat se cruce, in signum
Christianae militiae, contra Satanam, no^ est culpandus, modo absit
superstitio. We commend it not, because we know how apt the common people are,
to be led away with that misconceipt, that so long has cloven unto it: And yet
we ca^ no ways allow of yours, nor of your Patriarch T. C. judgment, Sect. 13.
T. C. lib. 1. page 170.
wherewith be censureth it. That the Lord has left a mark of his curse upon it,
whereby it might be perceived to come out of the forge of man's brain etc. This
censure of his is too pere^ptory, and offends not only against the rule of
Charity, that bids us think the best of them, whom we know not, especially of
the Auntients; but of Justice also: In that he lays the fault, of
superstitious succeeding ages, upon the religious and godly Fathers, that were
before them. For why might not that be without abuse at the first, which we are
certain, P. Martyr in cap. 7. Judic. Beza de notis Eccles. Cathol.
was greatly abused afterward, as well as the sepulchers of Martirs, and
relics of Saints, and the Images of Christ, and his Apostles, al which had a
good use at the first, and yet afterward where occasions of heinous Idolatry
and superstition.

If you mean their religious use of the sign of the Cross in the Sacrament
of Baptism, we utterly disclaim your sentence, and doubt not but that it was
free from sin, and superstition, both in the Auntients, and in our Church. And
to this your rash and inconsiderate condemning of the Ancient Fathers, and by
them us, we oppose the more temperate and indifferent opinions, of your own
friends; who by how much they were more learned then your self, so much the
more modest, and respective they were of Antiquity, then are you. And because
you shall not think, that J will pervert or falsify their meanings by my
interpretation, J will set down their speeches in their own words, as J find
them in their writings.

Mr Beza does both grant, by way of Co^cession, Beza respons ad Franc. Baldwin.
that there might be a good use of it in the Primitive Church Fuerit sane
tempus, quo fuit aliquis istius signaculi, aduersus Christi crucifixi
contemptores vsus: sit etiam diu et libenter a Christianis vsurpatus, pro
externa verae religionis professione, Beza de Eccle. catho. notis.
and also in express words affirm, Crucis consignationem, co^stat initio
fuisse apertam Christianismi professionem.

Hemingius delivering certain observations and conditions, how the sign of
the Cross may in these days be well used in the Church, concludes with this
testimony of Antiquity. Heming. in ep. 1. Joan. cap. 5.
His rationibus existimo vsos esse signo crucis Augustinum, Epiphanium,
Athanasium, qui multu^ signaculo crucis tribuerunt, propter significatione^ et
admonitionem.

Bucers testimony to this purpose is most famous, that it was, Bucer in ordin.
Eccles. cap. 12.
vsus in Ecclesia antiquissimi, admodum simplex, et praesentis admonitionis
crucis Christi.

Pezel. in Refut ^^^ech. Jesuit.
Pezelius speaks more plainly in their commendation, Antiqui hoc signo
profitebantur, quod Christiani essent quod crucis Christi eos non puderet, quod
in Christo spem, et fiduciam omnem collocatam haberent.

Daneus respon. ad Bellar. cont. 7. ad cap. 29.
Daneus yet goes further, and says Finis propter que^ Patres lauds istas
signo crucis Christi tribuunt, sanctus et pius est: Patres enim illas lauds
scribunt de signo crucis quatenus est, et erat confessionis Christianorum
intrepidae de Christo testimonium, liberum, apertum, manifestum, licet illis
propterea minarentur Ethnici panas grauissimas. Erat igitur huius signi inter
Ethnicos vsurpatio, confessio de Christo crucifixo pulcherrima. etc.

Mr. Perkins not only excuses it from superstition in the Ancients, Perkinsus
in Demonst. prob. cap. de signo ^^^^is ^um. 2.
but also declares, as Daneus did, wherein it was justly commended by the
fathers. His words are these. Crux non fuit a veteribus adorata, multo minus
latria adorata: veneratio tantum ei tributa fuit, id est vsus cum reuerentia,
eamque vsurparunt in testimonium fidei suae, simulque laudant quatenus fuit
signum intrepidae fidei in Christum crucifixum ante ethnicos, etiam dum illi
paenas minarentur.

Zanchius speaking of the use of this sign in Constantines time, freeth all the
former ages from superstition, Zanch. de oper. Redem. l. 1. c. 15.
Huc vsque nihil superstitionis habebat signum illud.

Lastly Goulartius speaks more plainly in this point, Goulart. in Cyp. ad
Demet. cap. 19.
then any other, Quamuis veteres Christiani (says he) externo signo crucis vsi
sunt, idtamen fuit sine aliqua superstitione; et doctrina de Christi merito, ab
errore, qui postea irrepsit, pios seruavit immunes. And in another place.
Tertulliani saeculo, et aliquot sequentibus, Idem in Cypr. Ep. 56. ad
Thibaritanos, ca. 7.
Christianicum Ethnicis Christum crucifixum deridentibus permixti, vt doctrinae
salutaris, quae in Christu^ nos credere iubet, se minime pudere testaerentur,
digitis in aere formabant figuram transuersam quasi crucis, quae Cerimonia tunc
erat Christianismi, non superstitionis Magicae, (vt postea accidit,) symbolum.

That it might once have had good use, and was a profession of Christianity, as
Mr. Beza speaks, Or that St. Augustine, and other Auntients used it with such
due regard, as thereto belonged, as Hemingius thinks, Or that it was a most
ancient use in the Church, very simple, and of present admonition of the
Cross of Christ, as Bucer testifies: to my understanding does plainly
describe, a most Christian and religious use of it, among the Auntients, and
utterly discover your slanderous accusation.

But those other that tell you particularly, wherein it was well used, as Pezel.
M. Perk. and by a proposition most manifestly contradictory unto yours, say, it
had a most holy and godly end, as Daneus, and that it was without any
superstition in the Auntients, as Goulartius, and Zanchius do, They J say
plainly free it from sin and superstition, and with a contrary testimony in
flatt terms, convince the insolency, and audaciousnes of your false
asseueration.

Touching the second. if it were: yet being an humane ordinance etc. your two
reasons, because it is an humane ordinance abused, and because it is now also
become an Idol, are answered before. And it has oftentimes bin said that
those pollutions how abominable soever, do extend them selves no farther,
then to the Persons that are polluted with them: Jndifferent things cannot
defile them, that use them with a sincere mind, and pure conscience, how
soever they be abused by others:

And therefore you might well have spared your huge words, Execrable, abominable
Idol, filth, no water ca^ cleanse it, nor any pretext purify it, etc. except
you had brought other arguments then these, the weakness where of does most
manifestly appear. All the bigg words, that you can bring, will not make the
uncleanness, you speak of, defi^e the Innocent, nor the pollution, and
abomination of Popish Idolatry, cleave unto the true Protestant, that with a
good conscience, uses the Ceremony, and with heart and soul, abhors the
superstition. And thus much to the second part of your answer. Your third
follows now to be considered.

Treatise. 10. Sect.
But in very deed to speak as the truth is, the Cross is retained among us,
Canon. 30.
with opinion very superstitious, and erroneous. For in the late Canons it is
said, that the Child is thereby dedicated unto the service of him that died
on the Cross: what is this but to equal man's ordinance with Gods? And to
ascribe that unto the Cross, which is due unto Baptism? A conceit fitter for
ignorant Papists, then learned Christians to assent unto. Neither do we use it
as the Ancients did, for Cyprian, Augustine, Chrysostom and others, as is
apparent at those times did consecrate the elements therewith, and did not
cross the childs forehead at all, but referred that unto the Bishops
confirmation; So that our crossing the Infants forehead, and not the element of
Baptism, is a mere novelty, without any warrant of that antiquity. Neither
will that place of Tertullian de resurrectione carnis prove the contrary. The
flesh is washed, that the soul may be purged, the flesh is anointed, that
the soul may be consecrated, the flesh is signed that the soul may be guarded,
the flesh is shaddowed by the imposition of hands, that the soul may be by the
spirit enlightened, the flesh does feed on the body and blood of Christ, that
the soul may be filled and fatted of God. In which words, he ioining together
diverse Ceremonies of the Christians, does indeed me^tio^ the signing of the
faithful, but it may as well be referred to confirmation, expressed by
imposition of hands, as to Baptism, understood by the washing of the body;
and that on better reason for it is more then probable, that the sign of the
Cross was not yet used in Baptism, seeing, Just. Martyr in defens. ad
Antoninum and Tertull. de Baptismo, and de corona militis, do describe the
form of Baptism, used in those times, and yet make no mention of the Cross
therein: which in all likelihood they would not have omitted, if it had bin
used therein; Especially Tertullian, who in that very place speaks of the
Cross, as used out of Baptism in the ordinary blessing of themselves.

Reply to the third part of the Treatisers answer to the first objection.
This tenth Section contains two grievous accusations, wherewith the
Treatiser does charge our Church, and the governors thereof.

The first, That the sign of the Cross is retained among us, with opinion
very superstitious and erroneous.

The second, That we do not use it as the Ancients did: Grievous crimes no
doubt, if they be justly laid upon us; But if unjustly, then mere reproaches,
and slanders of the Treatiser.

Touching the first. S. Hierome says, In causa haereseos nemixem decetesse
patientem. It becomes no ma to hold patience, when he is accused of heresy.
The Treatiser belike, meant to try our patience, when he burdened us with
opinion of the Cross both erroneous and superstitious. Jf he had accused us of
error only, the matter had not bin so very great. For, homines sumus, errare
possumus: we are men and therefore subject unto error. And yet here also he
might have remembered, that the company of those l^arned men that made the
Canon, was as unlikely to err, as either the Treatiser or his adherents. But
when unto his accusation of error, he adds the most heinous crime of
superstition, this is such an imputation, as whereof by all good means we are
bound to clear our selves.

But he proves it: for in the late Canons, it is said, that the child is
thereby dedicated unto the service of him, that died on the Cross, what is this
but to equal man's ordinance with Gods? And to ascribe that unto the Cross,
which is due unto Baptism? A conceit fitter for ignorant Papists then learned
Christians to assent unto. If we assented either to the one or to the other,
it were indeed not only a conceit fitter for ignorant Papists, then learned
Christians, but also an opinion erroneous and superstitious, and which is more,
proud, insolent, and presumptious too.

But how does the word dedicated, enforce thus much: namely, because the
Sacrament, which is Gods ordinance, can do no more but Dedicate the Infant, to
the service of him that died on the Cross. And therefore when we say, the
sign of the Cross, which is but man's invention, does Dedicate, do we not
equallmans ordinance with Gods? and ascribe that unto the Cross which is due
unto the Sacrament? J answer, no: For first the Sacrament does more then
dedicate only, for it really gives that which it promises, and is to the
child that, which it does signify. Contrariwise, the Cross, neither gives
any thing to the child, nor promises, nor is any other thing, then an outward
Ceremony only, signifying that the child hereafter should not be ashamed to
confess the faith of Christ crucified etc.

Secondly, the word Dedicate does not always signify, to sanctify or to
Consecrate, but sometimes to appropriate, to appoint to some special use, to
declare and testify, that the thing is assigned, addicted, and called out to
such, for such a several purpose, office person, or service. And this is most
manifest, by that use of this word, which is most ordinary and common in our
speech: As namely to dedicate a book to a great personage, is not in in our
language to consecrate, and sanctify it unto him, but by that word of
Dedication, we testify and declare our love, duty, and affection toward him,
and appoint the book so dedicated, to be a manifest sign, token, proof,
argument, and declaration of our love. The word Dedicated therefore being
Ecclesiastical, and very frequent in this signification, it was thought fit
to be retained in this matter, rather then to take in a word more strange and
nothing so significant: Especially considering, that there are many words, and
sentences in that Canon, both affirmative and negative, very sufficient to
declare, and make manifest unto al reasonable men, that the Church of England
does not attribute any sanctifiing, or consecrating of the child to the
service of Christ, unto any virtue, grace, or power, of, or in the sign of the
Cross.

Thirdly though both the Sacrament, and the sign of the Cross may be said to
dedicate, yet they do not both dedicate after the same sort, for the Sacrament
does dedicate as a sign, and as a Sacrament too, the Cross as a sign or
ceremony only, the Sacrament does dedicate as a cause efficient isntrumental,
working inwardly, by the operation of Gods spirit, the Cross does dedicate as
a cause declaratory, testimonial, witnessing outwardly to the Church, and to
the party that is baptized. And so much the very words of the Canon would
have taught you, but that you would not learn, when it says, Accounting it a
lawful outward Ceremony, and honorable badge, whereby the Infant is dedicated,
etc.

The wearing of a badge, or cognizance of some noble man, or the colors of
some Captain, does not, J hope, in your apprehension, make the servant or
souldior that wears it, to be of such a noble man's retinew, or such a
captains regiment. But because he is of that retinewe, he wears that badge
or cognizance, and because he is of that regiment, he wears those colors.
And yet both the one and the other, does make other men to know, and withal
does put himself in remembrance, that such a noble man's man, or such a
captains souldior he is, and such he ought to show himself to be. Even so it
is in the matter of the Cross. The sign of the Cross makes not the child
to be the servant, or souldior of Christ, but because by Baptism he is so
made, therefore he is signed with that honorable badge, that thereby, both other
me^ may know that he is the servant, and soldier of Christ, Declaratorie
quoad alios, memorative, et monitorie quoad scipsum.
and himself may be remembered, and admonised, that he is in all his life to
show himself as the faithful servant of such a master, and the courageous
soldier of such a captain: Which our Communion book most wisely, and beyond
all exception of malice, sets down in these religious terms. In token
that he shall not be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ crucified, and
manfully to fight under his banner, against sin, the world, and the Devil, and
to continue his faithful soldier and servant unto his lives end.

Lastly, if the Canon should have said, sanctified, or consecrated, I perceive,
we should have had much a do with the Treatiser: And yet al Antiquity, as
afterward I shall have better occasion to declare, Aug. de peccat. meritis and
remissione, lib. 2. cap. 26.
and specially St. Augustine teaches us so to say. Catechumenos, says he,
secundum quendam modum suum per signum Christi, and oratione^ manus
impositionis, puto sanctificari. J think the Catechumeni are sanctified, after
a certain manner of theirs, by the sign of Christ, and prayer of laying on of
hands. But what need J allege St. Augustine, our own men use the word
consecrare to signify, to allot, or appoint for some use, as I told you before
the word dedicare did signify: As may appear at large by the testimony of
Goulartius, Consecrare panem and vinum, Goulart. Cap. ep. 63. number. 39.
est ea divinis ac sacris vsibus destinare, etc. But our Canon of purpose
declined those words, which might any ways breed offense unto the weak
brethren, and made choice of this harmless and innocent word, Dedicated, which
favorably understood, gives no offense, and is far from al such danger of
error and superstition, as the Treatiser would make the ignorant reader to
believe.

Your second accusation lays two greiuous Corruptions to our charge, as
namely.

1 That in the sign of the Cross we do not that which the Auntients did. For
Cyprian Augustine, Chrysostom, and others, as is apparent, at those times did
consecrate the elements therewith, which we do not.

2 That we do that which the Auntients did not: For they did not cross the
child's forhead at all, but referred that unto the Bishopps confirmation: So
that our crossing the Infants forehead, and not the element of Baptism, is a
mere nouelty, (of some 600. years standing as you say in the Margent) without
any warrant of that antiquity.

For answer to the first. That we do not all that the Ancients did, that is, not
use the sign of the Cross to so many purposes, as they did, we do easily
acknowledge: But this is nothing to the point in question. For what if this
particular you allege, of consecrating the Element with the sign of the
Cross, were one of those Naeui of the Ancients? What if they, happily, did
amiss in so doing, as you say afterward they did? Or what if they did well in
so doing, and the superstition was brought in afterward? Will you have us to
embrace their vices as well as their virtues? Or will you take away the liberty
of our Church in making choice of her Ceremonies? Or will you hence conclude,
that we may not retain their good things, for the which they are worthily
commended, except we also receive those defectes and imperfections, which
succeeding ages brought in afterward? But this is no way agreeable to reason:
I rather think it better to follow that counsel that St. Hierom gives, of
reading Origens works, Hieron. ad Tra^. qutll l. 1. ep. 54.
and to apply it to this matter of the Ceremonies of the Auntients, Vt bona
eorum eligamus, vitemusque co^traria, iuxta Apostolum dicentem, omnia probate,
quod bonum est tenete etc. That we choose their good things, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 21.
and avoid the contrary, according to the Apostles saying, Try al things, keep
that which is good. For they which are carried away, either with too much love,
or with too much hatred of him, by the distemper of their stomach, seem unto
me to be under that curse of the Prophet, woe be unto them, that call good
evil, and evil good, Isai. 5.20.
that make sower sweet, and sweet sower.

But Cyprian, Augustine, Chrysostom, and others did consecrate the Elements,
you say, with the sign of the Cross, which we do not. They did indeed, and
in those times they did it well: Jf we should now do the like, we could not
choose, but do very ill.

That they did well in so doing, J am the rather persuaded for my part, (For J
am not willing to conceive any thing amiss of those blessed, and excellent
instruments of Gods glory, that by any reasonable construction of their words
may be salued) because they did it without offense, in respect of others, and
without opinion of virtue ascribed to the sign of the Cross, if you respect
their own judgments. without offense to others, for at that time the
Jnstitutio^ of that Ceremony, and the reasons of the Jnstitution, were so well
known unto al men, that no man could be ignorant of them, nor take offense at
them: without opinion of virtue in the sign, in their own judgments, Because
that consecration or sanctification which they attributed to the sign of the
Cross, was rather in name so called, then any hallowing indeed, and rather an
outward declaration, that the Elements were consecrated then any cause of their
consecration. And that this was their conceit of the sign of the Cross, is
most manifestly apparent by those words of St. Augustine. Aug. de peccat.
meritis and remiss. lib. 2. c. 26.
Sanctificatio Cathechumeni, si non fuerit baptizatus, non sibi valet ad
intrandu^ regnum coeloru^, aut ad remissione^ peccatoru^. Again, they did not
ascribe that consecration of the elements, how little soever they thought it to
be, unto the sign of the Cross, which they made upon it, but always with the
sign joined something else. So the same St. Augustine in that place when he
says, Cathechumenos secundum quendam modum suu^ puto consecrari per signum
Christi, does not rest there, and say only, Cyp. de passion, dom cap. 11. Sect.
12.
Signu^ Christi, but ioineth thereunto, et orationem manus impositionis. and so
St. Cyprian, whose testimony you cite afterward, says indeed, Operationis
autoritas in figura crucis, omnibus sacramentis largitur effectum but withal he
adds. (which you thought wisdom to suppress, as not making for your
purpose) and cuncta peragat Nomen, quod omnibus nominibus eminet, a
sacramentorum vicarijs invocatum. But of this we shall say more in the 12.
section.

That we should do very ill, if we should use this Ceremony now, these reasons
induce me to conceive. First, The people are now more prone to error, and
misconceit, then they were in those times. Secondly, some things, and among
others this, were more fit for those times, then for these. Goulart. in sy
prian Epist. 56. ad Thibaritan.
Distinguenda sunt tempora, says Goulartius. and before him St. Augustine, and
then it will easily appear, that that may be done well at one time, which cannot
be done well at another. Aug. epist. 5. ad Marcellinum.
Mutat a quippe temporis causa, quod recte ante factum fuerit, ita mutari vera
ratio plerumque flagitat, vt cum aliqui dicant, non recte fieri, simutetur,
contra veritas clamet, recte non fieri nisi muteturiquia vtrumque tum erit
rectum, sierit pro temporu^ varietate diuersum. As in a child many things are
permited by the Parents, which will not be, when he is come to riper years: So
in that infancy and innocence of the Church, many things might well be done, by
the Auntients, which cannot be well done by us, now in the ma^hood, or rather
old age of the Church: And lawful it was for them, while Christianity was yet
but green, to be led and brought on by those outward rudiments, which we have
no need of now.

If you ask, why these reasons, should not as well make against the signing of
the Child in the forehead, as against the signing of the Elements, The answer
is easy: first, the danger is not so great, nor so remediless in the one; as
in the other, Secondly, the ends are different: The signing of the Child's
forhead was then, and is now, for admonition; The signing of the Elements, was
the^ dangerous, and would now be desperate for consecration, if we should
embrace it: And therefore me thinks, you should rather commend the wisdom of our
Church, which out of the number of those Ceremonies, which were troublesome to
good consciences, and burdensome to the Church, as that learned Bishop
speaks, Iuell. in Apolog.
has culled those which were harmless, then any way dislike us, for not
retaining all those ceremonies of this sign, which though used by the
Ancients, might prove scandalous to the weaker sort.

For answer to the Second, That we do that which the Ancients did not, for
they did not cross the childs forehead at all, but referred that unto the
Bishops confirmation, I make no doubt, but the Treatiser by the Ancients, that
he speaks of, ente^deth those especially, that were nearest unto the Apostles
times, and that flourished within the compass of the first three hundred
years: which by all men is reputed the purest age, and, as it were, the
maidenhead, and virginity of the Church. For he cannot be ignorant, that in the
ages that succeeded after them, this custom was most ordinary and frequent in
all Churches. This supposed I answer:

First, That either the Treatiser is deceived, or the whole Christian world for
so many ages together, has bin very greatly overseene, that, ever since the
first times, even from such as lived with the Apostles themselves, have
received this consignatio^ of the child's forehead in Baptism, as one of the
most ancient Ceremonies of christianity. This is acknowledged, not only by our
best late writers, whose speeches to that purpose I have reported before, in
the 88. and 89. pages, but also by the Ancients, out of who^ they learned it,
whose authorities come now to be considered. So that if the Treatiser can
reform this common error, of so many learned men, and of so long continuance,
he shall do (no doubt,) a good work, and a great service to the Church of
Christ; This he cannot bring about, except he either deny the authorities of
the Ancients, or give their words some other interpretation, then they do
apparently signify, and al men hitherto have made of them.

Dionysius lib. Eccles. Hierar. cap. 4. and 5.
Dionisius commonly called Areopagita (whether truly or falsely J will not
discuss, but certainly a very ancient writer,) makes often mention, of
signing the party that is baptized, with the sign of the Cross, And to
express that he means the Cross in Baptism, he calls the Sacrament of
Baptism (...), the Sacrament or seal having the form of a Cross; And
describing the manner how it was done, he says, Imponit (minister) eius capiti
manum, co^signansque illum, sacerdotibus ma^dat, virum susceptoremque
describant. This authority must needs be understood of Baptism, which he there
descr^beth, calling it Sacramentum illuminationis, and can by no interpretation
be referred either to the Element, as is manifest by the words, Imponit eius
capiti manum, consignansque illum, nor to the Bishopps confirmation.

The like is to be thought of that place of Justin Martyr, who flourished about
the year of Christ 140. Just. Mart. resp ad orth. q. 118.
Dextra manu in nomine Christi consignamus eos, qui hoc signo egent: where,
first al men understand him, to mean the consignation of the Cross. Secondly,
that he cannot mean it of confirmation, it is more then probable, because he
mentions only dexteram manum, whereas confirmation requires imposition of
both; vt adumbratio septiformis gratiae melius significaretur, that the
acumbration of the seauen-fold grace, might thereby be the better signified.
Thirdly, it cannot be understood of the Element of Baptism, for his words
are consignamus, etc. qui hoc signo egent. importing the persons, and not the
Element. Neither lastly can it be referred to that use of the Cross, which
they observe in actions of common life, because in that, every man did sign
him self, but in this he speaks of such as were signed by other men.

The next that J will remember after him, is Origin (for Tertullians testimony,
because the Treatiser alleges it against us, shall be considered afterward)
who lived in the same age with Tertullian, though somewhat after him, about the
year of our Lord 220. his words are these. Origin. Homil. 2. in Psalm. 38. Tom.
1.
Vt non exprobremur ab insipiente, co^vertamus nos ab omnibus iniquitatibus
nostris, ne deprehendens in nobis maculas peccatorum, id est, suae voluntatis
insignia, exprobret, et dicat, ecce hic Christianus dicebatur, et signo, hristi
signabatur in front, meas autem voluntates, et meachirographa gerebat in
cord. Ecce iste, qui mihi et operibus meis renunciavit in Baptismo, meis
rursu^ operibus se inseruit meisque legibus paruit. This is an evident
testimony against the Treatiser, mentioning both Baptism, and the sign of the
Cross, and the forehead whereon it was signed.

From Origin J come to St. Cyprian, who was famous in the Church about the
year 250. whose testimonies against the Treatisers assertion, as J will not
take upon me to repeat the^ al, (for they are very many,) so it cannot be
either misliked or suspected, if Jacquaint the reader with some few: especially
seeing the Treatiser himself does acknowledge Cyprian to be the first, Sect.
12. Cyprian de unit. Eccl. ca. 16.
that makes mention of the Cross in Baptism. Jn his treatise de vnitate
Ecclesiae, he has these words. Ozias Rex leprae varietate in front maculatus
est, caparte corporis notatus offenso Domino, vbi signantur, qui dominum
promerentur. Again, to Demetrian Proconsull of Afric, Ad Demet. ca. 19.
he speaks thus. Evadere eos solos posse, quirenati and signo Christi signati
fuerint, Cap. 22.
and a little after, Hunc (Christum) si fieri potest, sequamur omnes, huius
sacramento and signo consecremur. In all which places, Cap. 7.
as also in his fifty sixth Epistle ad Thibaritanos, Cap. 22.
and his third book Testimon. ad Quirinum, not only Pamelius who may seem
somewhat partial for the Cross, but Goulartius also, whom the Treatiser cannot
suspect, do acknowledge that he speaks of the Cross in Baptism.

Lactantius that lived after Cyprian about some 50. years, and flourished in
the beginning of the year 300 speaks much to the same purpose. Extendit
Christus in passione manus suas, De vera sapien. lib. 4 cap. 26.
orbemque dimensus est ut iam tum oste^deret, ab ortu solis vsque ad occasum,
magnum populum ex omnibus linguis, and tribubus congregatu^, sub alas suas esse
venturum, signumque illud maximum atque sublime, in frontibus suis suscepturum.

After Lactantius lived St. Basil the great in the Church of Caesarea
Cappadociae, in the year 370. or there abouts, who rehearsing the traditions
used in his time, Basil de spirit sacto. cap. 27.
reckons this in the first place. Vt signo crucis eos signemus, qui in
Christo spem suam posuerunt.

The last of this age, is St. Augustine, whose glorious labors lightened the
Christian world, about the end of the year 300. To rehearse his many
testimonies were an endless work, and therefore J will content my self with
two only, Aug. de fide and symb. ad Catech. lib. 4. cap. 1.
the former in his fourth book de fide and Symbolo ad Catechumenos, which he
begins with these words, Per sacratissimum crucis signum, vos suscepit in
vtero, sancta matter Ecclesia: and the latter in his exposition of the 30.
Psalm. Jn Psalm 30.
Non sine causa signum suu^ Christus in front nobis figi voluit, tanquam in
sede pudoris, ne Christi opprobrio Christianus erubescat. To the which purpose
he speaks in Psalm. 141. vsque adeo de cruce non erubesco vt non in occulto
loco habeam cruce^ Christi, In Psalm. 141.
sed infronte portem, etc. To which place J refer the reader as also to his 53.
and 118. Treatise, upon St. John: and his 181. sermon de tempore, and diverse
other places. So that these proofs of the Auntients duly considered, we may be
bold to pronounce against the Treatiser, that the Auntients did use to sign
the Child's forehead in Baptism, Demonst, prob. ca. de signo crucis. Refut.
Catech. Iesuitic.
and to affirm with Mr. Perkins, Signum crucis per multa saecula fuit in
sacrame^ti administratione, simplex ritus; and with Pezelius. vetus est haec
Ceremonia ab ipsis incunabilis Ecclesiae Christianae vsurpata.

The collection therefore of the Treatiser is vain, when he concludes after
this sort.

They that in the use of the sign of the Cross in Baptism, do not
consecrate the Element, which the Auntients did, and do cross the Child's
forehead, which the Auntients did not do not use the sign of the Cross, in
Baptism as the Auntients did.

But the Church of England in the use of the sign of the Cross in Baptism,
does not consecrate the Element, which the Auntients did, and does cross the
Child's forehead which the Auntients did not. Ergo.

The Church of England does not use the sign of the Cross in Baptism as the
Auntients did.

For first, touching the form, it is a Sophisme compounded of all manner of
Fallacies. that which is most apparent is, Fallacia compositionis: for ex
propositione vera in sensu composito, infert conclusionem falsam in sensu
dinisio. Touching the matter, it is merely false. For in the Mayor it does
assume, that the Auntients did not use to sign the Child's forehead, which is
refuted by their alleged authorities.

Secondly he does conclude the abuse of one Ceremony, by the Non use of
another, which has neither relation unto it, nor dependency on it, nor both
are ordained to the same end: and therefore the one cannot necessarily infer
the negation or affirmation of the other: as if with less ado. and in fewer
circumstances, he should have concluded thus.

They that in the use of the sign of the Cross in Baptism, do not use
consecration of the Element at all do not use the consignation of the forehead
well, and as the Auntients did. But the Church of England in the use of the
sign of the Cross in Baptism, does not use consecration of the Element at
all. Ergo. The Church of England does not use the consignation of the forehead
rightly, and as the Auntients did.
The not using of consecration at al, is no reason why the consignation of the
forehead may not be used rightly. For though both agree in this, that they both
be consignations, and are both used in the Sacrament of Baptism, yet they
differ in this, that they are distinct Ceremonies, differing one from another
in nature, for they are merely distinct, and have no dependency, the one of the
other: and in use, For they are not ad Idem, they have not both reference to
the same end and action. the one presumptuously going before the Sacrament, and
arrogating to it self some kind of preparing of the Action, the other
modestly, coming after, and admonishing us only, what we promised in the Action.

I might better conclude thus against their novelties in the Lords supper.

They which do not receive the Communion kneeling, which the Auntients did,
and do receive it standing or sitting, which the Auntients did not, do not
receive the commumon as the Auntients did.

But the Treatiser and his adherents do not receive the communion kneeling,
which the Geniculatio specie^ habes piae and Christianae venerationis, ac
proinde potuit olim cum fructu vsurpari. Bez. Epist. 12.
Auntients did, and do receive it standing or sitting, which the Auntients did
not. Ergo:

The Treatiser and his adherents do not receive the communion as the Auntients
did.

For here, though the Ceremonies of kneeling which the Auntients used, and of
sitting or standing, which the Treatisers friends use, be different, the one
from the other: yet both the affirmatio^ of the one, does necessarily infer the
negation of the other, and also both of them are ordained to the same end and
Action, namely the receiving of the communion.

Thirdly the Treatiser assuming it, as a thing granted, that the Ceremony of
consecrating the Element, is auntienter then the Ceremony of signing the
forehead, does thereupon conclude, that the most ancient of the Fathers used
the consecration of the Element, long before the consignatio^ of the forhead
was heard of. Wherein he is exceedingly deceived* For though the Ceremony of
consecration be of great antiquity, yet he may learn of Mr. Perkins that it is
not to compare with consignation. Perkins demon plobl cap. de signo crucis.
For he says, Annis a Christo 300 crux transiens, (which is the consignation
of the Cross) fuit signum externae professionis fidei not only adhibitum in
vita communi, as he says, but in Baptism also, as before is proved out of the
Auntients: But Mr. Perkins staieth not there, he says further vix vnquam
adhibita fuit ad signandum sacrame^ta, nisi circa annum 400. Neither then was
it straightway used in co^secrating of the Elements, but by degrees: primo vt
signaret nobis Christi bona, Aug: tract: 118. in Ioannem: tum postea vt per eam
benedictio sacramenti and consecratio fieret.

Why the Treatiser should deliver us this strange doctrine, That the Auntients
did not use to sign the Child's forehead at all in Baptism, J cannot conceive:
only J suppose his error might come thus: The Auntients speaking of two uses of
the co^signatio^, the one in common life, the other in the Sacrament, as is
said before, do make far more often mention of the use in common life, then
of the other, and sometimes join them both together in one periode: So that
except the judgment of the reader, can direct him to descerne, which clause
belongs to the one use, and which to the other, the error in this point is
very easy: And so it seems the Treatiser was deceived, applieing al their
speeches whersoeuer, to the use in common actions, and referring none to that
in the Sacrament of Baptism. But now let us see how he proves his assertion.

First the Auntients referred that, (says he,) to the Bishopps confirmation,
so that our crossing the infants forehead, and not the Element of Baptism, is
a mere novelty etc: True it is that in confirmation, the Child's forehead was
signed by the Bishopp, but how does this convince, that in Baptism it was not
signed by the Minister? That in confirmation, Tertull. de Bapt cap. 8.
the Child^ forehead was signed, we easily believe, for so Tertullian tells
us in many places, and Cyprian in his Epistle ad Jubaianum, Cypr. ep. 73. de
Heret. baptiz. Cap. 8.
Nunc quoque apud nos geritur, vt qui in Ecclesia baptizantur, praepositis
Ecclesiae offerantur, per nostram orationem, ac manus impositionem spiritum
sanctum consequantur, et signaculo Dominico consu^mentur. But the affirmation
of this does not infer a negation of the other. Yes, say you, they referred
that unto the Bishops confirmation: They referred indeed confirmation, and all the rites, and Ceremonies thereof, unto the Bishop, as was meet: But did not
they, think you, perform all the rites of Baptism themselves? your speech
does import as if you favored confirmation, and allowed of the consignation
there. Jf you favor it truly, J am glad: for the Ceremony of confirmation is
ancient, and has a good use (and yet J know not that our Bishops use the
consignation of the Cross in that action) Jf you mention it only for your
purpose, without any allowance of the confirmation, it seems you care not
what you say, so you may give the least blow to our settled orders of the
Church. It seems likewise, that you ascribe greater antiquity to the signing
in confirmation, then to that in Baptism: For you infer immediately here upon,
that our crossing the Jnfants forehead is a mere nouelty. J cannot yield, that
the signing in confirmation should be auntienter then the signing in Baptism,
no more then J can yield, that confirmation is auntienter then Baptism: And
yet for all that, J acknowledge the signing in confirmation to be very ancient,
and am glad to hear you argue for the antiquity of that, which your admonition
to the Parliament so much extenuateth, calling it superstitious not agreeing to
the word of God, Popish, and peevish, full of toies, and degenerating from the
first institution: (I am glad J say, to hear you plead the antiquity of that
Ceremony, though it be with opposition to an auntienter) but yet J nether
acknowledge confirmation so ancient as Baptism: Nor the signing of
confirmation, so ancient, as the signing of Baptism.

Because you thought, we would not believe this strange speech of yours upon
your bare word, without proof, you note unto us in your margent: Tertull. de
Baptismo cap. 7. et 8. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 42. Innocent. 1. ep. ad Decentium number.
3. Rabanus Maurus de institutione Clericoru^, ca. 30. Durand. Rational divin.
li. 1 cap. de consecrat. You might have done well to have reported their words
too, and no doubt, you would have done it, had they been so pregnant for your
purpose, as you make show. Tertull. de baptis. cap. 9.
Tertullian in that place confesses indeed, that the sign was used in
confirmation, but neither there, nor in any other place does he deny it of
Baptism. Your second authority shows that Novatus the Heretic after his
Baptism, Eusebius li. 6 c. 42
reliqua consecutus non est post morbum, quae iuxta Ecclesiae canonem consequi
debebat, obsignationem videlicet ab Episcopo. But how does this prove that the
sign was not used in his Baptism? The like may be said to your testimony out
of Innocentius, his words indeed are. Innocent. ad De cent ep. 1. tom. 1
coacil.
De consignandis Infantibus manifestu^ est, no^ ab alio qua^ Episcopo fieri
licere. But he speaks this of confirmation, only which he there proves must
be ministered by the Bishop alone, he makes no mention of Baptism at al. Your
other two authorities out of Rabanus and Durandus speak somewhat more plainly
and directly to your purpose: for the first says signatur baptizatus cum
Chrismate per Sacerdotem in capitis summitate, per pontificem vero in front,
etc. Ruban. Maurus de Jnstitut. clerico. lib 1. c. 30. Durand. ration. divin.
lib. 1. cap de consecrat. ita^ lib 6. cap. 83.
The second says: Christiani bis ante Baptismu^ inunguntur oleo benedicto,
primo in pectore deinde inter scapulas, and bis post Baptismum, primo in
vertice, deinde per Episcopum in front, making a distinction of the places: To
these I answer.

First, That they make a distinction of the place where this sign was made: in
Baptism on the crown, in confirmation on the forehead: But they make no
distinction of the sign, for they say, that the child in both was signed,
whereas your proof should be, that the child was not signed in Baptism.

Secondly, J say that this difference, of the upper part of the head, and the
forehead, is a nice difference, and might well have bin the devise of latter
times: Especially seeing Durandus says: Primaetres vnctiones introductae sunt
potius vsu quam per aliqua^ scriptura^. Thirdly, J answer that in Durands time,
the child in Baptism was not signed in the crown only, but in the forehead
too: For so says Durandus your own author: Durand. lib 6. ration. cap. 83.
Sextum donum Baptismi est in vertice, id est in summitate capitis, super
cerebru^ cu^ chrismate facta perunctio: septimu^ est in front chrismatio: and
that you may be sure, that this, in front chrismatio, was with the sign of
the Cross, he tells you, that omnia chrismata cum crucis figura perficiuntur.
Jbid. cap. 84.
Lastly, J oppose to those late writers, the authorities of the Ancients before
rehearsed, and withal the judgment and liberty of our Church, which rather
chose to follow the uniform simplicity of the Ancients, then the diverse
multiplicitie of these latter writers, whom I suppose you do not quote,
(especially Durandus) for any liking you have of them, or credit you yield to
their authorities.

But our crossing of the Infants forehead, and not the Element of Baptism, is
a mere novelty of some 600. years standing, etc.

Our crossing of the Infants forehead, and not the Element is no noveltie, as
has bin already showed. Your speech does sound as if, if we did cross both
the forhead, and the element: then it were no novelty. And this is true too:
For crossing of the element also is ancient, though not so ancient as the
crossing of the forehead alone. As for your marginal note, of some 600. years
standing, it is so manifest an untruth, as I marvel, you could be persuaded
to set it down.

Secondly, your second proof is out of Tertullian. Neither will that place of
Tertullian, de resurrect. carnis, Cap. 8.
prove the contrary: Caro abluitur, vt and anima emaculetur, caro vngitur vt
anima consecretur, caro signatur, vt and anima muniatur, caro manus impositione
adumbratur, vt and anima spiritu illuminetur, caro corpore and sanguine Christi
vescitur, vt and anima de Deo saginetur. Hence you gather that though indeed he
mention the signing of the faithful, yet it may be as well referred to
confirmation as to Baptism: True; And yet more properly to Baptism, the^ to
confirmation. For in these words, alluding as you say, to diverse Ceremonies of
the Christians, it is far more likely (as any man that is acquainted with his
articulate manner of writing will think) that he endeavored rather, equally to
fit each several clause to his several Ceremony, then to apply any one to
two: which must needs follow upon your interpretation.

Thirdly, your third proof is a probabili. It is more then probable, say you,
that the sign of the Cross was not yet used etc. The probability you speak
of, is none at al. Concerning Iustine Martyr in his second Apology to
Antoninus, it was not necessary that he should there mention any thing more,
then those things, which did belong to the substance of Baptism: For his
purpose was to be breife, and not to propose every Ceremony of Christianity,
but to mention only their prayers, and the things essential in the Sacrament.
And therefore no marvel, if he did omit this Ceremony here, especially seeing
he does remember it else where, as has bin showed, and even in this Apology
he says before, that nothing was done, without this figure of the Cross.
Concerning Tertullian, not remembering it in the places, you cite, who, you say,
would not have omitted it, if it had bin then used: especially in that very
place, where he speaks of the Cross, as used out of Baptism: J answer that
even that might be sufficient reason, why he omitted it, when he spoke of
Baptism: Because he that says, omnem progressum, omnem promotum, and
quacunque nos conversatio exercet etc. does except none, and therefore not
Baptism. Again he that says it was used, in Actions of civil conversation,
does leave no place of doubt, but that it was much rather used in their holy
actions of Religion. Lastly there are some learned me^, that understand those
words in the seventh chapter: Exinde egressi de lauacro perungimur benedicta
unction, Tert. de Bapt. cap. 7.
of the sign of the Cross, which was used in all annoyntings, as you heard
before out of Durandus.

Treatise. 11. Sect. 2. Objection.
But the sign of the Cross is not used in Baptism, but when Baptism is
ended.

Treatisers answer to our 2. Objection
If you take Baptism, only for that dipping and sprinkling of the party, it is
true, and so none of the Popish additions, whereby they defile the holy
Sacrament, are in Baptism, for those, which apud Bellar. Baptism. comitantur
are not impious; But if you take Baptism, as indeed we do, for the
administration of that Sacrament, then both the prayers before, and the prayers
after the Actions, after the dipping, do all indifferently belong to one and
the self same thing: yet it is all, vna and continua actio administrationis
sacramenti: Sure it is, that it must be said to be, either in Baptismo, extra
Baptismum, aut nullibi, if it be out of Baptism, how is it by common consent
of all said to be, signum crucis in Baptismo.

Reply to the Treatisers answer to our second objection.
This whole answer to our second objection is nothing else but a mere cauil
of the Treatisers: For though the whole action, being vna et continua actio
administrationis sacramenti, as you-name it, be called Baptism: Yet it is so
called, a digniori part, and therefore we may very well, and ought always to
distinguish, between those things, which are essential in this action, and
those things, which are accidental, between those things which are for
substance of Baptism, and those things which are for decency, and ornament.
For ne ij quidem, qui ista excogitarunt, vel ab alijs introducta defenderunt,
aliud esse censuerunt, quam Baptismi ornamenta.

No, say you, you must not so distinguish, but you must take Baptism as we
do: Beza resp. ad Franc. Baldwin.
for otherwise None of the Popish additions, whereby they defile that holy
Sacrament, are in Baptism, for those which apud Bellarminum Baptismum
comitantur, are not impious: All this notwithstanding, you must give us leave to
distinguish those things which in their own nature are distinct: True it is
that none of those quae apud Bellarminum Baptismu^ comitantur, are of their
own nature impious, neither are they of the essence of Baptism, and therefore
we hold, that they which are Baptized, in the Church of Rome, are rightly
Baptized. But if those apud Bellarm: are not impious, as you say, why call you
them Antichristian? and if they be Antichristian, how are they not impious? we
see your kind affection toward our Church: Our signing with the Cross in
Baptism is Antichristian, as you call it in the 14. Section, and yet these
Popish additions, that defile the Sacrament are not impious.

Your argutation, that it must be either in Baptismo, extra Baptismum, aut
nullib^ is answered in a word. It is in Baptismo, that is in administratione
Baptism, and not in essentia Baptismi. It is in Baptism as an outward decent
Ceremony, and ornament of the action, not as an inward part or substance of the
Sacrament.

Treatise. Section. 12. 3. Objection.
The sign of the Cross is very ancient. Treatisers answer to our 3.
objection.
So are many popish traditions, and if on that ground, we are to retain it,
why do we not give the Baptized, lactis et mellis concordia^? why do we not
bring offerings for the dead? for Tertullian the first of the Fathers that ever
mentioned the Cross, does establish these, and the sign of the Cross, by
one, and the self same warranty. Besides if upon the Fathers tradition we use
the Cross, then must we receive, and use it, as they have delivered it unto
us, that is, with opinion of virtue, and efficacy, not only in the Act of
blessing our selves, and in the expelling of Devils, but even in the
consecration of the blessed Sacraments: De coron, milit.
For the first Tertullian is wittnes. Ad omne^ progressum, ad omnem promotum,
ad omnem aditum, atque exitum, ad vestitum et calceatum, frontem crucis
signaculo terimus: Lib. 2. 20. epist. ad Demetr. Lib. 4. cap. 17.
For chasing of Devils, Hierome counsels Demet. vir. to use the Cross: et
crebo inquit signaculo crucis munias frontem tuam, ne exterminator Aegipti in
te locum reperiat: Lactantius de hoc signo scribens, ait Christi sectatores,
inquinatos spiritus signo passionis excludere: Chrysostom: in Psalm: 109. Crux
inquit munit mentem, ea daemones vlciscitur, ea tollit morbos animae. But these
superstitions are small in regard of that efficacy, which in the Sacraments,
Cyprian. de passion.
antiquity ascribed unto the Cross: For Cyprian (being the auntientest, that
makes mention of the Cross in Baptism) speaks of it. cuius virtus omnia
peragit Sacramenta, sine quo signo nihil est sanctum, nec; aliqua consecratio
meretur effectu^, And again: Quicunque sunt Sacramentorum ministri,
qualescunque sunt manus quae vel mergunt accedentes ad Baptismum, vel vngunt,
qualecunque pectus, de quo sacra exeunt verba, operationis autoritas in figura
crucis omnibus Sacramentis largitur effectum: August. in Ioh. tract: 118. Quod
signum inquit nisi adhibeatur sieve fro^tibus credentium, sine ipsi aquae, qua
regenerantur, sieve oleo quo Chrismate inungu^tur, sieve sacrificio quo aluntur,
nihil eorum rite perficitur: It were superfluous to rehearse the rest.

Reply to the Treatisers answer to our third Objection.
I looked in this place, that you would rather have proved, the noveltie of
this Ceremony, and that it is no ancienter then of some 600. years standing
(as you please to jest before) then so easily yield, that it is very ancient,
as here you do: For you do not deny the antiquity, that which was objected,
but imply, That antiquity is no cause sufficient why we should use it,
because, say you, so are many other Popish traditions.

Your answer contains these two brances.

1 If antiquity be a cause, why we should retain it, why should we not
retain other Ceremonies also, as ancient as this?

2 Jf upon the Fathers tradition we use the Cross, why then do we not use it
with opinion of virtue and efficacy, as they have delivered it?

Unto this your answer you add by way of Corollary that though it be ancient,
yet antiquity could never free it from sin, and superstition; whereupon you make
two observations.

1 How dangerous a thing it is to bring in any humane invention into the
service of God.

2 How it may justly be reputed Popish and Antichristian, though it were before
those times wherein Popery and Antichrist were hatched.

First: we do not think, that Antiquity alone without reason and truth, is
cause sufficient, why we should retain a Ceremony: Yet it may give us good
cause, to examine the reasons, that moved the fathers to use it, and not
without just cause rashly to abrogate and disanull it. Now because our Church
by examining those reasons, that caused the Fathers to institute, and use this
Ceremony of the Cross in Baptism, has found, that as it was then, so it
may be still a Ceremony of decency, and profitable admonition in the Church:
she has therefore according to that liberty, which in matter of Ceremony, is
permitted to every several Church, retained this, and abrogated some other,
which in her judgment, seemed both more burdensome, and less profitable. These
reasons co^curring with antiquity, add the greater weight unto it, as on the
other side, it adds also unto them; and all of the^ together yield cause very
sufficient, why some ancient Ceremonies rather be retained, then other some.
And therefore to your first question, why do we not use other ancient
Ceremonies as well as this, J answer, Because our Church thought them not so
necessary, nor convenient. She might, no doubt, have still retained them, if
she would: For J willingly submit my weaker judgment to that most grave, and
learned judgment of Mr. Bucer: Bucer in 4. ca ad Ephesians.
De caeteris signis, quae in sacris adhibita sunt a veteribus, vel hodie
adhibentur a multis, vt sunt ignis ad exorcismos, and catechismos, and alba
vestis Baptizatorum, sacer panis qui dabatur Catechumenis, and pleraque alia
sic sentio: Si quae Ecclesiae essent, quae puram Christi tenerent doctrinam, et
sinceram seruarent disciplinam, hisque signis vterentur simpliciter, et pure,
absque omni superstitione, vel leuitate, praecise ad pias admonitiones, easque
probe omnibus intellectas, eas Ecclesias non possum equidem, propter signorum
talem vsum condemnare.

Your two examples of Lactis et mellis concordia, and offerings for the dead,
are ancient Ceremonies indeed, and in those times, had, no doubt, their very
good and profitable use: as of the former Tertullian testifies lib. de coron.
mil. cap. 3. and of the latter, both Mr. Beza, Beza de notis Eccles. P. Martyr
in ca. 7 Judicum.
and Peter Martyr, as is recorded before. and therefore though Tertullian does
establish these, and the sign of the Cross, with the same warranty of
tradition, or Ecclesiastical constitution, yet our Church counts them not so
necessary, nor so fit for these latter times.

The second branch of your answer is: If upon the Fathers tradition, we use
the Cross, then must we receive, and use it, as they have delivered it unto
us, that is with opinion of virtue and efficacy: Supposing that this opinion of
virtue and efficacy (whereof we shall say more afterward) was evil in the
Fathers, yet there is no reason, why we having free liberty to make our choice,
should be bound to take their evil things with their good, as has bin showed
before out of St. Hierome: For he that gave us the free commission of omnia
probate, Page 97.
restrained us only to good things in our choice quod bonum est tenete.

But my affection (willing J confess in nothing rashly to accuse the
Auntients) leads me rather to think, that eue^ this opinion of virtue and
efficacy that you speak of, was no evil thing in them, For though they used
the consignation of the Cross, in those actions, that you mention a little
after, yet they yielded no opinion of virtue and efficacy, to that sign, but
to the Cross, and passion of Christ, whereof that sign was an outward token
and resemblance: And this J hope to make apparent to the indifferent reader, in
every particular of your accusation.

First therefore you accuse them for ascribing virtue and efficacy, to the sign
of the Cross in the Act of blessing themselves, in common conversation: and
this you prove out of Tertullians Ad omnem progressum atque promotum, etc. But
what if they by this act of signing themselves with the sign of the Cross,
did not intend blessing of themselves, as you term it, but remembrance of
Christ's benefits performed for them on the Cross? For so S. Cyrill answers
Julian the Apostata, when he had called the Christians, Cyrill. Alexand coner.
Iulianum lib 6. tom. 3.
miseros quibus curae esset semper, and d^mos and frontes, signo pretiosae
crucis signare: Haec omnia (says he) meaning the benefits of Christ's passion
which he had recited before) recordari nos facit salutare lignum, 2. Cor. 5.15.
and suadet, ut cogitemus quod, sicut dicit diuinus Paulus, vnus pro omnibus
mortuus est vt viventes non vltra sibijpsis viva^t sed ei qui pro ipsis mortuus
est and resurrexit. And a little after, pretiosi ligni crucem facimus in
memoria^ omnis boni and omnis virtutis. What if they ascribed not this which
you call blessing, to the sign of the Cross, but to Christ's passion,
represented and remembered unto them by this sign? for so M. Perkins teaches
you to think of them: Crux (apud veteres) non significat ipsum signu^ crucis,
Perkins demo^st prob. cap. de signo crucis.
sed per Metonymiam passionem crucifixi. To which purpose he expounds
Constantines (...) id est, Deo, non signo: and cites an authority of
Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in Mat. Hom. 55.
Crucem non simpliciter digito in corpore, sed magna profecto fide in mente
formare oportet. And afterward concludes all that he had said before, with
this most excellent rule, how the Fathers are to be understood. when they
attribute any thing to this sign: Omnia dicta Patrum, (says he) vbi cruce^,
spem, redemptionem, ac salute^ etc: esse volunt, intelligenda esse relative, vt
referantur ad passionem Christi, vel ad ipsum crucifixum, signo crucis
representatum: So that not only the Fathers reposed no such virtue and efficacy
in the sign, but also, if any man should use it now, (which yet J will not
commend unto any man, by reason of the scandal it may bring with it) J hold
that judgment of Hemingius very sound, Hemin. in 1* ep. Joan. cap. 5.
Qui mane surgens, et vesperi cubitum vadens* signat se cruce, in signum
militiae Christianae, non est culpandus, modo absit superstitio.

Secondly you accuse them for ascribing virtue and efficacy to the sign of the
Cross, in expelling and chasing away of Devils, for proof whereof, you cite
Hierome ad Demetriadem, Lactant. lib. 4. cap. 17. Zanch. de redemp. l. 1. p. 366
and Chrysostom in Psalm. 109. All these autorities J easily grant to be true,
and a number such like, in the writings of the fathers: and yet J deny that in
those speeches, they ascribe any opinion of virtue or efficacy to the sign of
the Cross. This is not mine own opinion only, but J learn it of that
excellent divine Hier. Zanchius. I doubt not, says he but that sometimes Satan
was driven away indeed at the sign of the Cross, Hier. Zanch. de redempt
lib. 6. ^^^. 366.
as Augustine reports many miracles to have bin done with that sign, and the
Devil also, to have bin chased: De ciuitate Dei lib. 22. cap. 8. Veru^ non
propter vimsigni, sed propter virtutem fidei, in Christum crucifixum, qua
praediti erant, et sunt fideles, in fugam vertebatur, atque vertitur Diabolus.
Goulartius, speaks to the like effect: Goulart. in Cyprian ad Deme^rian. cap.
19.
Signum illud (crucis) ad passionem et sanguinem Christi pertinere Cyprianus
testatur, Quamuis ergo veteres Christiani externo signo crucis vsi sunt, id
tamen fuit sine superstitione: et doctrina de Christi merito ab errore, qui
postea irrepsit, pios seruauit immunes, Cyprian himself speaks so fully to
this purpose, as any man that marketh his words cannot conceive so grossly of
the Ancients: Cypr. de passion. Christi. cap. 11.
His words be these, I am videt Hebraeus, et quicunque de seruitute Aegyptia ad
repromissae patriae libertate^ anhelat, quod sanguis Christi efficacius, quam
sanguis agni illius, quem in Aegypto Israel immolavit, contrarias abig at
potestates: cuius hodie tanta est autoritas, and potestas, vt non solum
Israelitica limina muniat, sed etiam ab ijs qui Israelitice non vivunt, solum
Sacramenti signu^ repellat Daemonia, and vbicunque conspecta fuerit, terribilis
sit sacri nominis virtus, and sanguinis nota. This testimony J have rehearsed
at large, because it most excellently delivers unto us, as well his own
opinion, as the opinion of all the Ancients, touching this sign. And yet if you
desire a plainer testimony, hear M. Perkins, who in most express and
significant terms utterly acquitteth the^ of your unjust accusation. Perkins
demon prob. cap. de signo crucis.
Veteres (says he) secruce co^tra Daemones munierunt, non quod externo signo
crucis tantam vim and efficacia^ adscrip serint, sed hac solenni ceremonia suam
fiduciam in crucem id est, mortem Christi, apud alios testari, et quodam quasi
monitorio fide^ excitare voluerunt, quae omnia mala de pellit: And because you
shall not have the use of this Ceremony without a reason, Zanchius tells you
why it pleased God to show such power at the making of this sign, vt illos in
sincera fide confirmaret, Zanch. loco supra citate.
qui primam ad Christi veniebant religionem

Thirdly you accuse them for ascribing virtue and efficacy, to the sign of the
Cross, in consecration of the blessed Sacraments, And this you aggrauat with
Tragic words. For these superstitions, say you, are small in regard of that
efficacy, which in the Sacraments Antiquity ascribed unto the Cross: and this
point you prove out of St. Cyprian de Bapt. and passione Christi and St. Aug.
118. tract: upon St. John. All these authorities J willingly acknowledge: But
withal J must give you to understand, that you cite your first authority out of
St. Cyprian, Cyprian. de bap. Christi cap. 2.
mala fide, For there, by the Cross he means Christ's passion, wherein the
Apostle St. Paul boasts: Cyp: de pass. Christi cap. 11.
and your second partially and to your own advantage, as partly has bin told
you before: For after these words: Operationis autoritas in figura crucis,
omnibus Sacramentis largitur effectum, you should have added that which
immediately followed, Et cuncta peragit nomen, quod omnibus nominibus eminet, a
Sacramentorum Vicarijs inu^catum, and then the latter part of the Sentence
would have cleared the former, from that most wrongful imputatio^ that you lay
upon it. S. Quando per crucem Christi quam f^^erunt m^li, in celebratione
sacrament^^um, eius bonum nobis omne signatur, and so Mast Perkins himself
expounds it. demon prob. ca. de signo crucis.
Aug. in that place shows, not how the Cross sanctifies, but how it
signifies.

It is a very strong and strange conceit of yours that could induce you to
think, that the Ancient Fathers were so simple, as to ascribe any efficacy of
consecration of the Sacraments, unto the sign of the Cross, you cannot be
ignorant, that the name or word of consecration, is an Ecclesiastical word, of
frequent use in the matter of Sacraments, called sometimes Sanctification as in
Cyprian, and diverse others, sometimes (...) Invocation, as in St. Basil, and
Theodoret, sometimes (...), Benediction, as Mat: 26:26: Mark. 14.22. 1. Cor.
10.16. sometimes (...), Thanksgiving as Luke 22.19. 1. Cor: 11.24. but most
ordinarily consecration in the writings of the Fathers. Neither can you be
ignorant, that S. Paul calls the cup. 1. Cor. 10.16.
(...). The cup of blessing, which we bless, referring this blessing not
unto God, but unto the cupp: insomuch as Oecumenius expounds the Apostle, as
if he had said thus: (...) the cup of blessing which we bless, that is which
we prepare with praise and thanksgiving. It is evident therefore, that the name
of consecration, when we speak of the Sacraments, is no such name as we should
be afraid of, having so good warrant for it: especially in the Scriptures. The
thing that is signified by the name, would likewise be considered, that thereby
we may also judge, whether the Auntients be justly taxed by the Treatiser. The
thing therefore signified by this name, was nothing else among the Auntients,
but a sequestration of the Elements, from their common use, and a sanctifiing
of them, by prayer, and invocation, and thanksgiueing unto God, to that holy
use which was proper to the Sacraments: as of the water in Baptism that it
might be sanctified, to the mystical washing away of sins: of the bread and
wine in the Lords supper, that it might be prepared and sanctified to the
spiritual eating of Christ's body, Aug cont. Faust Manich li. 20. cap. 13. Tom.
6.
and drinking of his blood. Noster calix et panis, says Sr. Augustine, certa
consecratione mysticus fit nobis, non nascitur: proinde, quod non ita fit,
quamuis sit panis, et calix, adiumentum est refectionis, non Sacramentum
religionis. Thus far the Ancient Fathers are free from blame, for even we also
in our Church do the same thing: For we likewise do by prayer and invocation
sanctify the Elements, (which are otherwise of their own nature ordained for
common use,) that they may serve for holy uses: and that those things, which
were before necessary helps, for the use of life, and clensing of our bodies,
may now become effectual signs of regeneration, and of the body and blood of
Christ, for the norishing of our souls. Neither do we now in our Church
abhor the name of consecration, not think the thing to noe purpose, but
ascribe unto it a certain effect of change, that it works in the Elements,
not of their substance, into an other, nor of their natural qualities, (as the
Papists conceive their Magical consecration) to effect Transubstantiation, but
of their use, and service only; that those things which were for common use
before, are now dedicated and appropriated to these holy uses.

Again a man that truly estemeth, that the Fathers ascribe no virtue nor
efficacy to the sacraments themselves* will easily free them from this
imputation, of ascribing virtue and efficacy to the sign of the Cross in
Consecration. For how can any man imagine: that they which attribute the virtue
and efficacy of consecrating the Elements to the sign of the Cross, should
not much more ascribe unto the Elements so consecrated, some efficacy and
virtue of themselves? Now that they ascribed no such power unto the Sacraments
themselves, nor had any conceit of grace to be conferred by the opus operatum
of the Sacraments, as the schoolme^ afterward conceived, we have most full and
certain assurance out of their own testimonies. S. Hierome says. Qui plena
fide non accipiunt Baptisma, non spiritum sanctum, sed aquam percipiunt S.
Ambrose likewise to the same purpose, spiritus munus est, gratiam implere
mysterij. St. Augustine is plentiful in this argument. Sacramenta, no^ quiae
sumuntur sed quia creduntur, sanctificant. And again, in fidelibus and Electis
Sacrament a hoc vere efficient quod figurant. And again, Visibilis sacramenti
forma, a ministro datur, ipse autem Christus invisibilem dat gratiam. And in
another place, Aqua cernitur, sed qui non videtur spiritus operatur. August.
quest. ex nouo Test 59. De vnct* Chrismatis cap. 3.
Vnde tanta vis aquae, vt corpus tangat and cor abluat, nisi faciente verbo,
non quia dicitur, sed quia exeditur? And St. Cyprian most plainly of all.
Effectum sanctificatis Elementis, non propria eorum natura praebet, sed virtus
divina potentius operatur, vt adsit veritas signo and spiritus sacramento:
atque ex ipsis rerum efficientijs dignitas gratiae patefiat, and interiori
homini innotescat.

Yea say you, all this were well enough, but herein the Fathers are to be
blamed, because in consecration, they used the sign of the Cross, and
ascribed this consecration, and sanctifying of the Elements unto that sign.
They used the sign of the Cross therein indeed, and thence are these
speeches of theirs which you alleged. But they ascribed not this
consecration, and hallowing to the sign of the Cross, but unto Christ's
death, whereof the Lords Supper is a remembrance. 1. Cor. 11 24.
Do this in remembrance of me And Baptism a similitude or representation,
we that are Baptized into Christ Jesus, Romans 6.3.4.
are Baptized into his death, and die buried with him by Baptism into his
death, etc. And therefore in these Sacraments of Christ's death, they made the
sign of the Cross, whereon he died, to signify that it was his death, that
gave efficacy and virtue to these Sacraments. Also they ascribed this
efficacy and power, not unto the sign of the Cross, but unto the words of
consecration, or if you will rather so call them, of Christ's institution
according to that of S. Augustine. Accedat verbum ad elementum, and fit
Sacramentum. And because the words of Christ's institution refer us always to
his death, therefore they made in the pronouncing of the^, the sign of the
Cross, whereon he died. Hence it is, that though they used the sign of the
Cross in consecration, yet they attributed not the virtue of consecration unto
it, but unto Christ and his institution. And therefore St. Cyprian, wheresoever
he mentions the one, Cypr. testim. ad Quirin. lib. 2. cap. 21.
does always join the other with it: As, in passione crucis, et signo virtus
omnis est, and potestas; and in the examples before rehearsed, with Figura
crucis, he ioineth peragit nome^ invocatum, and with signum repellat daemonia,
he ioineth, sacri nominis virtus, and sanguinis nota. Aug: sermon 181. de Temp.
vide and sermon. 19. de Sanctis.
The like does S. Aug. Omnia quaecunque sanctificantur hoc signo dominicae
crucis cum invocatione Christi nominis consecrantur.

The distinction that you make between Tert. and Cyp. that Tert. should be the
first of the Fathers that ever mentioned the Cross, and Cyprian the
ancientest, that makes mention of the Cross in Baptism, is a very vain and
frivolous distinction. For (to keep my self within the compass of those
Ancients that I have before cited,) both Justin Martyr, before Tertullia^,
mentions the Cross: and Tertullian himself, as also Origin, which were
before Cypria^, make mention of the Cross in Baptism, as before J have
declared. It were superfluous, say you, to rehearse the rest, and these too,
except you rehearsed the^ to better purpose.

Treatise. 13. Sect.
But hereby it is evident, that the religious use of the Cross, was even at
the first sinful, and superstitious, neither can it be showed, that it was
ever used by the Fathers: Religionis ergo sine admixta superstitione, and this
inventio^ did no sooner creep into the Sacrament, but it drew unto it self
such superstitious conceit of efficacy and necessity, that without it, the
means which God appointed for the consecration of the Elements, seemed over
weak, yea vnavaileable, according as some Lately in Surrey a child rebaptized,
because the Cross was omitted.
amongst us, account not their children lawfully Baptized yea, will have the^
rebaptized, if the Cross have bin omitted.

Answer.
This is that which you add, by way of Corollary, to your answer, importing
thus much in effect, as J conceive: That though the sign of the Cross be very
ancient, yet antiquity could not free it from sin, and superstition: we do not
allege the antiquity of the Cross, as an argument to free it from sin and
superstition, which we think in our use, and in the use of the Ancients, it is
not infected with. But we allege it, as an argument why it should not be
rashly changed, and taken away, as you would have it, both because it was
ordained upon good reason, and advise at the first, and has bin used ever
since, with no small profit to the Church. As for the evidence you talk of, it
does not yet appear, the use of it in actions of religion, without opinion of
virtue and efficacy, was ever free from sin and superstition. But to this your
accusation, J shall need to speak nothing in this place, because J have
answered it before against you, and against your grand Master T. C. Especially
seeing here you bring no matter, but repeat your former equivocation of
religious use, and repose unto us your old Crambe of Religionis ergo, so often
recocted.

Your second objection, that this invention did no sooner creep into the
Sacrament, but it drew unto it self such superstitious conceit, of efficacy
etc. Is likewise answered in the last section, the conceit of superstitious
necessity, that, you say, it drew unto it, that without etc. is the fault of
the persons that so conceived of it, and not of the sign it self: For this
sign of the Cross perinde est, atque is qui vtitur, been vtentibus bonum est,
male vtentibus malu^ est, And therefore the best way to reform this
misconceite, is to instruct them aright, that do thus superstitiously conceive
of it, A far better way then utterly to abolish it, as may appear even by
your own example of a child lately rebaptized in Surrey, because the Cross
was omitted: For if this be true, it is manifest, that the taking of the use of
the Cross clean away, would sca^dalize and alienate more men's minds from our
church, then the retaining of it still can do; for seeing that they that will
take offense at the removing of it, are the weaker and you that know what
belongs to matters of such indifferency are the stronger, it is much more
agreeable to the rule of Christian charity, that you in the spirit of mildness
should bear with their infirmities, by allowing the lawfully established use
thereof, the^ they should have any cause of offense given unto them, by the
utter abrogating and removing of it. Jf any man among us, upon such conceit
of necessity of this sign, as you intimate, have caused his Child to be
rebaptized, because the Cross was omitted, Charity bids me not to doubt, but
that the wisdom, and authority of our chief Governors, have had an eye unto
it, and the Minister that gave the offense, has bin heartily sorry for his
omission: For, Take heed, says the Apostle, in another thing indifferent,
least by any means this liberty of yours, 1. Cor. 8.9.
be an occasion of falling to them that are weak: But now we will consider
your two observations.

Treatise. 14. Sect.
Out of which may be observed, first how dangerous a thing it is to bring in
any humane invention, into the service of God, since in the very pure age of the
Church it was punished with such a spiritual curse of horrible superstition.
Secondly, though at this time Popery was not hatched, yet the mystery of
iniquity was then a working, and the beginning, as it were of the whorish
fornication was found, even in the Fathers times, so that as worshipping of
Angels in Paul's time, Colloss. 2.18.
prayers, and oblations for the dead, in Tertullians time, be rightly counted
Popish and Antichristian, though as yet that monster was not borne, so this and
other ceremonies ratified by the Popish Canons and constitutions may well be
taken for Popish and Antichristian, even in the Fathers times, seeing they then
made a way for the Beast, and since have received farther impiety, and
authority from him. Wherefore, to conclude, as I say exhorts Gods people, to
keep themselves from the rites and pollutions of the Heathen, saying, depart,
depart ye, go out from them, and touch no unclean thing: so the spirit in
the same manner, charge the Church not to middle with the corruptions of
Antichristian Babylon, but go out of her my people, says he, that you may not
be partaker of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. The fear
of which curse does keep us from all the superstitious, and idolatrous
ceremonies of that whorish Synagogue.

Answer.
Touching your first observation, How dangerous a thing it is, etc. Though J
have said sufficiently before, yet this one word I add more by way of
remembrance: That if humane invention be brought into the Church, either with a
purpose to a^tract any thing from the institution of God, or to equal them to
Gods ordinance, or to obscure and darken Christ's institution, or to impose a
yoke or burden upon men's consciences, or with opinion either of efficacy or
necessity, or with mixture of impiety and superstition, or that they should be
esteemed any otherwise of, then of things indifferent: then we confess, that it
is indeed a thing very dangerous to bring any humane invention into the service
of God: and that the curse of God will always accompany such inventions. But
on the contrary side, if they be brought into the Church, only as Ceremonies,
to attend Gods institution, as ornaments for decency, order, edification, and
admonition, or if the causes, ends, and uses, for which they were first
instituted, remain still: (all which circumstances concur, in our use of the
Cross in Baptism,) then we see no reason, why they may not lawfully be used
in Gods service; and hold them not only free from Gods curse, but also
accompanied with his blessing, so long as they are retained and observed with
these limitations:

Touching your second observation, how a thing may be justly reputed Popish and
Antichristian, though it were before that monster of Popery and Antichrist were
hatched. J must needs say, you bring us to a pretty and strange speculation,
and derive the pedigree of Popish Antichristianisme farther, then he that began
the Troia^ war gemino ab ouo: for you fetch it from before the egg, and the
Hen too, and make me to remember that vaunt of the Arcadians, that boasted they
were before the Moon.

That a Ceremony, that is opposite unto the Doctrine and Gospel of Christ, (as
you wrongfully suppose this to be) may be Antichristian, before Popery, J do
not deny, for, Even now, says Saint John of his times, 1. Ioh. 2.18.
there are many Antichrists: 2 Thessalonians. 2.
The mystery of iniquity began to work betimes; It wrought in Simon Magus, and
his followers, while Christ was yet alive; It wrought in Elimas the Sorcerer,
in the false Apostles, and in the Nicholaitans, in Menander, Ebion, and
Cerinthus, even in the Apostls times; All these were Antichrists: And any
heresy either in doctrine or Ceremony, that they held against the truth and
word of Christ was Antichristian. But that a thing should be Popish and
Antichristian, and that before Popery was hatched is in my understanding as if
you should have said, The chicken was a bird before the Hen peeped out of the
shell. As in other things, so in Antichristianisme, Te^pora sunt distinguenda:
or else we shall make a confusion of all things, and so speak of heresies, as
if all heresies were but one heresy: and those which St. John calls many
Antichrists, were but one Antichrist, called (...), that Antichrist whom you
conceive the Papacy to be.

Coll. 2.18.
You prove this, a simili, as worshipping of Angels in S. Paul's time, etc.
Antichristian they might be rightly counted, because they were against the
truth, and doctrine of Christ, Popish they could not, because neither was
Popery yet heard of, nor had the Papacy yet embraced those superstitions.

Again, that a thing should be Popish or Antichristian, is not in the thing,
but in the minds of them that make it Popish and Antichristian. For this you
have bin often told, that no ceremony can be Popish and Antichristian of it
self: Bucer de sacris vest. ad Hopp.
Ritum aliquem Aaronicum esse vel Antichristianum, in nullis haeret Dei
creaturis, in nulla vest, in nulla figura, in nullo color, aut vllo Dei
opere, sed in animo and professione, bonis Dei creaturis, ad impias
significationes abutentium. Things are good, says he farther, not only in
their natural effects, as bread in the effect of feeding, and strengthening of
the body: wine, in the effect of drinking and heating: but also in their diverse
significations and admonitions: Quae scriptura docet, diabolo, vel malis
hominibus, ea^ factam esse potestatem, vt abusu suo vllam queant Dei creaturam,
et bonam etiam significando et admonendo, per se malam facere et impiam?
wherefore nothing can be said to belong to the Preisthood of Aron, but that
which is used to that superstition, as if it were necessary and profitable of
it self to salvation, even now after Christ is reveled; or whereby some
occasion, to embrace or retain that superstition, or to trouble the concord of
Brethren, may be ministered: So likewise no rite can be called Antichristian, but
that, whereby some profession, and communication with Antichrist may be showed,
or may serve to that profession or communication: And a little after he has
these words, very pertinent and effectual to this purpose: Eam enim libertatem
etc. For if any man will say that this liberty (of Ceremonies) may be permitted
to no Church of Christ, he must needs yield to one or other of these
inconveniences, Either that nothing is granted to the Churches touching the
Lords supper, but that wheteof they have the express commandment of Christ,
and then all the Churches must be condemned of wicked boldness and presumtio^
etc. Or that there are not any Churches, which the Lord does so far free from
al suspicion and abuse of his good creatures, that all the good creatures of God
are pure (through true faith in his name) to them that are pure, yea even in
their signification; which who soever shall say, he therein must also deny,
Christ to be that Lord, which he has promised himself to be to al men, that
is, their deliverer from al uncleanness: Or that wicked men by their abuse can
so pollute the creatures of God, which are good of themselus, as they can serve
no godly man to a godly use: which is manifestly against the testimony of the
holy Ghost: Ro^: 14.14. 1. Cor. 8.4. et 9.20. 1 Timothy 4.4. Or certainly that it
is not lawful for Christians, to dispose of al things, for admonition of their
Creator and ours, of his benefits toward us, and of our duties toward him:
which is repugnant to that, that the holy Ghost teaches every where,
concerning the knowledge and worship of God in all his works, and doing al things
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to the glory of the father.

This testimony of Mr. Bucer J have therefore repeated at large, because
therein two things very effectual to this present question are delivered.
First, that the church has liberty and power to ordain things indifferent
in Gods service: And secondly, that no abuse of other men ca^ so pollute the
creatures of God, as that the pollution should ever after cleave to the
creatures, as the Leprosy of Naaman did unto Giezi: but the corruption
remaining only in the minds of them that did defile the creatures, they become
again pure, to them that are pure, that is, to the faithful. Whence it
follows necessarily, that nothing can be justly reputed Antichristian unto
any, but unto them that use it to that end, that Antichristian profession may
be advanced by it, or with that opinion, that they that are Antichristian do
ascribe unto it: whereupon it must as necessarily ensue, that seeing we in the
Church of England, do not use the sign of the Cross in Baptism, to advance
the profession of Antichrist, nor with those opinions that Popish Antichrists
do ascribe unto it, therefore unto us it remains pure and clean, and leaves
the Popery and Antichristianisme, that it had, sticking still in the minds and
consciences of Popish Antichrists. The foundation therefore of your observation
being thus shaken, we will now try the iointes and sinews of your argument,
whereby you would conclude this Ceremony to have bin Antichristian in the
Ancients, and therefore must be also such in us. Against the Ancients you argue
thus.

That which was the beginning, as it were, of the whorish fornications, and
made way for the beast, may well be taken for Popish and Antichristian. But the
abuses and opinion of virtue, and efficacy, that the Ancients had of the sign
of the Cross, were the beginnings of the whorish fornications, and made way
for the beast. Ergo The abuses and opinion of efficacy and virtue, that the
Ancients had of the sign of the Cross, may well be taken for Popish and
Antichristian.
To the Mayor. That which was the beginning etc. It is true in the^, in who^ it
was the beginning of whorish fornications, and in who^ it made way for the
beast, as in Simon Magus, Elimas, the Nicholaitans, the false Apostls, and the
Heretics: al which, no doubt, gave the beginnings to the whorish
fornications, and made way to the beast. Jn the holy fathers that did not so,
it cannot be justly reputed Popish, or Antichristian, as has bin declared in
the last words before.

To the Minor: But the abuses etc. It is false: for the Ancients did not abuse
it, neither had any opinion of virtue and efficacy of it, as is showed in the
12. sect: and therefore your co^clusio^ touches none but the^, that were
forrunners of Antichrist; It cannot touch the Ancient fathers, that opposed
themselves, to the first working of the mystery and resisted the Heresies, that
made way to the Beast. Like unto this is your reason that you make against our
present use.

That which has since received farther impiety, and authority from the
Antichrist, may justly be taken for Popish and Antichristian now. But the sign
of the Cross in Baptism in the Church of England, has since received farther
impiety and authority from the Antichrist. Ergo The sign of the Cross in
Baptism in the Church of England, may justly be taken for Popish and
Antichristian now.
The Mayor of this argument holds true as the Mayor of the former did, that
is, in them in whom it has received farther impiety, and authority from
Antichrist, Jn others in whom it has not received farther impiety, it holds
not.

The Minor is false, for in the Church of England the Popish abuses of the
Cross, have received neither further impiety, nor authority, but contrariwise
are al removed; and the first sincere use of the Ancients is retained: For we
use this sign of the Cross, in truth, to no other purpose, the^ we use the
name or word Cross, that is, only for signification and admonition; and
seeing there is no other difference between the^, but what the word sounds
unto the ear, that the sign represents unto the eye, why should there be
more fault found with the one, the^ with the other? or why should our using of
more outward means, for helping our infirmities, in remembering Christ's passion
be misliked, Seeing in all other matters, the more means we use to help our
weakness, the better we reckon of the^: Beza in defen. and reprehens. Sebast.
Castle.
Ex quo nostrae redemptionis pretium in cruce pependit, illud ipsum crucis
vocabulum an tea ignominiosissimum, nobis Christianis factum est
honorificentissimum. Jf the word Cross be so honorable, because our Savior
sometimes hunge upon the Cross, why should the sign of the same thing be so
dangerous and pernicious? And therefore your conclusion no way hurts the
Church of England, but only in the unjust calu^niation, that it lays upon it,
and in it upon the Ancients whose reputation, and integrity, touching the
Cross, standing good as for any thing you can say against it (it always will)
it is not possible for you to fasten the Popish abuses, and whorish
fornications of the Romish Antichrist upon our Church.

The exhortation, wherewith you conclude this your Treatise is good, in Thesi
unto al men, and even in this particular Hypothesis of the Cross in Baptism,
to the^ that are entangled, and defiled with Popish conceits, and
superstitions. But unto us, that are no ways partakers of those corruptions,
you might very well have forborne it.

The fear of a curse, least being partakers of the Romish Antichrists sins,
you should also receive of her plagues, keeps you, you say, from his
superstitious Idolatries: The fear of a curse, ought, no doubt, to be a great
bridle to restrain all men from doing evil. But we invite you not to be
partakers of the Romish Antichrists sins, but only of our society, in our
innocent and harmless Christian Ceremonies. Wherein if you fear a curse, you
fear where no cause of fear is. If you fear a curse indeed, as you pretend,
you shall do well to translate this fear of yours, from the harmless use of
the Cross, wherein either there is no danger at all (as we are persuaded) or
no certain danger (which your selves cannot prove) unto the most certain and
undoubted danger of disobedience; whereunto, without al peradventure, there is
due a fearful and severe curse, as we are taught by the exampls of Corah,
Numb. 16.1.
Dathan, and Abiram in the book of God: To which purpose also the wise
preacher, that sought to find out pleasant words, and an upright writing* even
the words of truth, does advertise us, Eccle. 8.2.
namely to take heed to the mouth of the King, and to the word of the oath of
God, that is, as the Geneua note does well expound, it, obey the King, and
keep the oath, that thou have made for the same cause. Nae perturbate a facie
eius abito: Cartwright in ^. 1. cap. 8 Eccl.
For this is radix rebellionis, says M. Cartwright, Siperturbate animo ferri
se patia^tur: vnde fit, vt plerique a subiectione debita deficiant, cum ira,
indignatione, ambitione, lucri cupiditate, ab officio discedunt; This is the
root of rebellion, if men will suffer themselus to be carried with
coffeehouse, from the presence of the King: whence it comes, that many men
fall from due subjection, when they depart from their duty, either for anger,
or indignation, or ambition, or desire of gain.

The conclusion to the Treatiser and his friends.
And thus far J have atte^ded the Treatisers discourse, step by step and foot by
foot, omitting, as J think, nothing that is material: and yielding, as J hope,
just satisfaction to al them, that with peaceable minds, and impartial
affections shall be pleased to weigh his arguments, and my answers in
indifferent balances: wherein if J have done any thing that may content (though
in the least degree) you to whom this answer is addressed, J shall think this
labor of mine, well bestowed: where unto, as J was first moved by them, which
had authority to command me, so it was on my own part most willingly
undertaken, with an ernest desire to ad if possibly J might, some drop of water
to the quenching of that flame of coffeehouse that thus rages amongst us:
And J trust, J may the rather hope, that some good hereby may be effected, in
that J came into this work, with a single mind, and without al eye or
affection to any particular man, that might be imagined to be the writer of
this Treatise of whom, J neither had, nor yet have, so much as the least
inckling or suspicion. Only the matter and argument of this Treatise, drew on
my pen: which (to speak my judgment and opinion of it) seemed unto me so
warily set down, as that it might both stumble a weak and unsettled reader: and
also add obstinacy, and stiffnes, to minds already possessed with love, and
liking of that opinion; though it have neither strength of argument, nor power
of persuasion, to winn any man unto that conceit, that either had judgment to
descerne the manifold fallacies and captions therein used, or stood before
contrarily affected.

That which J would now say is, to desire the Treatiser and his friends, that
they would first reform themselves, and remove this stumbling block, which
themselves, and not our Church has laid before them, out of their own ways.
If it be, as they are wont to say, against their consciences, the^ to reform
the error of their own consciences, which no doubt, they may do, by informing
their consciences aright, and laying true Science as the surest foundation of
their consciences; If otherwise it be but only fear, least they may seem by
yielding to have over seen them selves, and having so^times preched against
this Ceremony, may be accused of leuity and inconstancy in their doctrine, and
so consequently bring on some discredit, unto their Ministry* Let the^ know,
that al these are but humane respects, and can no way be alleged, as just
causes, why they should break brotherly amity and concord, and make a rent and
dissentio^ in the Church of God. Neither can these outward respects give any
just excuse, to disobedience, and opposition, against the Magistrate, and laws
established: which being of things indifferent, made for preservation of order
and decency in the Church, bind their consciences: and that resistance, that is
made against them, is made against the ordinance of God.

Secondly, J do very heartily desire them to consider how great a mischief
they have brought upon our Church: what breach of Christian charity among our
selves, which being al of one household, should be all of one mind; and what
rejoicing and courage they have given to our common enemy, (...): How the
Papists rejoice to see this iar amongst us: how Popery daily does prevail, and
take strength, and heart, by occasion of this breach. How much better were it,
to turn these forces that are spent upon our selves, against the common
adversary? who (as lamentable experience has taught us) makes this strife of
ours, a fit occasion and instrument to overthrow our common faith. As lately
did appear most manifestly, when they endeavored to cloak their barbarous, and
inhumane cruelty, with the color of your disco^te^tme^t against the state Full
of rage and malice is Satan now toward the last time of his hopes: he works
every way, and lays al his snares to deceive the simple: in some by pretensed
zeal: in some by delusions and false impostures: in some by divellish plots
and desperate designs: and generally in all sorts of men, by heaping disgraces
and contempt upon the reverende Clergy, and Ministry of this Church as if
they were the only lets, that hindered the full strengthening and perfecting of
his kingdom.

These things and many other grievous sins, and works of darkness, that blush
not now to show themselves in the open day, could not thus swarm amongst us,
as daily they do, if we all truly intended the same thing: if we could
faithfully and unfeignedly give one an other the right hand of fellowship, and
seriously do the Lords work with one consent. My hearty desire therefore, and
earnest request is, that you with us, and we with you, would rightly consider
these things: and knowing that our holy Ministry in preaching of Christ
crucified, is the most forcible way, whereby it pleases God to weaken the
strength and body of sin, give our selves wholly to that work: That laying
aside these questions of Ceremonies, that have now a long time troubled our
peace, our contention hence forth may be against them, that differ from us in
the substance of our saving faith: That so God may give a blessing to our
labors, and we all with one mouth, and one mind may glorify God the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

FINIS.

