Luke Huttons lamentation: which he wrote the day before his death, being
condemned to be hanged at York this last assizes for his robberies and
trespasses committed.
To the tune of Wandering and wavering.
I Am a poor prison^^ condemned to dye,
ah woe is me woe is me for my great folly,
Fall fettred in yrons in place where I lie
Be warned young wantons, hemp passes green holly
My parents were of good degree
by whom I would not counseled be,
Lord Jesu forgive me with mercy relieve me,
Receive O sweet savior my spirit unto thee.
My name is Hutton, yea Luke of bad life
ah woe is me woe is me for my great folly:
Which on the high way robbed man and wife,
be warned young wantons, etc.
Enticed by many a graceless mate,
Whose counsel I repent too late. Lord, etc.
Not twenty years old alas was I
ah woe is me woe is me, etc.
When I began this fellonie
be warned young wantons, etc.
With me went still twelve yeomen, tall
Which I did my twelve a Apostles call. Lord, etc.
There was no Squire nor barron bold
ah woe is me woe is me for my great folly:
That rode the way with silver or gold,
be warned young wantons, etc.
But I and my twelve Apostles gaie,
would lighten their load ere they went away, lord, etc.
This news procured my kins-folkes grief,
ah woe is me woe is me
They hearing I was a famous thief
be warned young wantons,
They wept they wailde they wrong their hands
that thus I should hazard life and lands. lord, etc.
They made me a Iaylor a little before, ah woe, etc.
to keep in prison offenders store, be warned, etc.
But such a Iaylor was never none,
I went and let them out every one. lord, etc.
I wist their sorrow sore grieved me
ah woe is me, etc.
Such proper men should hanged be
be warned young, etc.
My office then I did defy
And ran away for company. lord, etc.
Three years I liu^d upon the spoil
ah woe is me etc.
Giving many a carle the foil
be warned young etc.
Yet never did I kill man nor wife
though lewdly long I led my life. lord, etc.
But all too bad my deeds has been,
ah woe is me, etc,
Offending my country and my good queen,
be warned young, etc.
All men in Yorke-shire talk of me,
A stronger thief there could not be. lord, etc.
Upon S. Lukes day was I borne, ah woe, etc.
wham want of grace has made a scorn. be war. etc.
in honor of my birth day then,
I robbed in a bravery nineteen men. Lord, etc.
The country weary to bear this wrong.
ah woe is me, etc.
With huse and cries pursude me long, be war, etc.
Though long I escaped, yet lo at last.
London I was in newgate cast.
There did I lie with a grieved, ^^nde,
ah woe is me, etc.
Although the keeper was gentle and kind,
be warned young etc.
^et was be not so kind as I,
(...) let me (...) at liberty. lord, etc.
At last the shiriffe of Yorke-shire came,
ah woe is me, etc.
And in a warrant he had my name,
^e warned young, etc.
(...) he at York thou must be tried,
With me therefore hence must thou ride. lord, etc.
Like pangues of death his words did sound,
ah woe is me, etc.
My hands and arms full fast he bound,
be warned etc.
Good sir quoth I, I had rather stay,
I have no heart to ride that way. lord, etc.
When no entreaty might prevail,
ah woe is me, etc.
I calde for beer, for wine and ale,
be warned, etc.
And when my heart was in woeful case,
I drunk to my friends with a smiling face. lord, etc.
UUith clubs and staves I was guarded then,
ah woe is me, etc.
I never before had such waiting men
be warned etc.
If they had ridden before amain,
Beshrew me if I had called them again. lord, etc.
And when unto York that I was come, ah, etc.
Each one on me did pass their doom. be war, etc.
and whilst you live this sentence note,
Evil men can never have good report. lord, etc.
Before the judges when I was brought,
ah woe is me, etc.
Be sure I had a careful thought, be, etc.
Nine-score inditements and seauenteene,
against me there was read and seen. lord, etc.
and each of these was felony found,
ah woe is me. etc.
which did my heart with sorrow wound, be, etc.
What should I here in longer stay,
For this I was condemned that day. lord, etc
My death each hour I do attend,
ah woe is me:
In prayer and tears my time I spend. be etc.
And all my loving friends this day,
I be entreat for me to pray. Lord etc.
I have deserved long since to die, ah woe etc
A viler sinner liude not then I: be etc.
On friends I hopte my life to save,
But I am fittest for my grave: Lord etc.
Adue my loving friends each one,
ah woe is me woe is me for my great folly,
Think on my words when I am gone,
be warned young wantons, etc.
When on the ladder you shall me view,
think I am nearer heaven then you, Lord etc.
Hutton.

FINIS.
Printed at London for Thomas Millington. 1598.


