OF THE VVOOD CALLED GVAIACVM, THAT HEAL^^H THE FR^^^^E POC^^^ AN^ also helps
the gout in the feet, the ^^^^ne, the palsy, ^^^^^^, dropsy, falling evil,
and other dyseases.

LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THO. BERTHELETI M. D. XXXVI.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.

The preface of Thomas Paynel ch^non of Marten abbey, translatour of this book.
NOt long agoo, after I had translated into our english tongue the book
called Regimen sanitatis Salerni, I happened being at London to talk with the
prynter, and to enquire of him, what be thought, and how he lyked the same
book: and he answered, that in his mind, it was a book much necessary, and
very profitable for them that take good head to the wholesome teachynges, and
warely followed the same. And this much farther he added thereto, that so
fareforthe as ever he could here, it is of every man very well accepted and
allowed. And I said, I pray god it may do good, and that is all that I desire.
And thus in talking of one book and of an other, he came forth and said:
that if I would take so much pain as to translate into English the book
that is entitled De med^rina guaiaci, et morbo gallico, written by that great
clerk of Almayne Vlrich Hutten knight, I should, said he, do a very good deed.
For seeing hit is ^oth, as this great clerk writes of this medicine Guaiacu^
(For he him self has had the very experience thereof) how needful and how
beneficial to the common welthe were it? For almost into every part of this
realm, this most foul and peyneful disease is crepte, and many soore
infected therewith. When he had said thus his fantasye, and that I had
bethought me and well aduysed his words, I answered: If I thought it would do
good, I would take the pain with all my very heart, and hit were much
greatter, and yet (said I) I fear me, it be as much or more than I am able
to accomplysshe. For I doubt whether I may com to the clear understanding
thereof or not: It is in ernest a matter strange enough to translate, not only
for the names of herbs and other diverse things therein contained, but also for
the phrase and eloquente style. But what so ever answer I made him, I finally
determined to translate the said book, as I have done in deed, not so well I
am sure, so plainly and so exquisitely as many other could, if they would
vouchesafe to take the peyn: But yet I trust I have not much erred from the
true meaning of the auctour. And I say not the contrary, But sum words
have I left barely englysshed, and sum not at al, but they be such, as are
by those names in latin usually known to physicians, without whose counsayl
(specially those that be approved and known to be syngularly learned in
physyke) I would counsayll no man to be to bold either to practice or receive
any medycine.

At Marten Abbey. an. dmi. 1533.
The table of this book.
THe beginning of the french pockes, and why it has diverse names. cap. j. fo.
1. The causes of this disease. Cap. ii. fo. 3. Into what diseses the french
pockes are turned. cap. iii. fo. 4. How men at the beginning resisted the
french pockes. cap. iiii. fo. 6. what help the author of this book used in
this syckenes. cap. v. fo. 8. The description of the wod Guaiacum, and of the
finding and name thereof. ca. vi. fo. 10. Of the ordering of Guaiacum in
medycine. cap. vii. fo. 12^ The manner of curing with this wodde Guaiacum. cap.
viii. fo. 15. How a man must live and dyete him self in this cure. cap. ix.
fo. 19. That Guaiacum woll not be myngled with any other thing. cap. x. fo.
22. What place the physicians have in this cure. cap. xi. fo. 24. Whether
concerning this cure there ought any regard to be taken of the age of the sex,
or quality of the bodies. cap. xii. fo. 27. whether the use of this wodde be
like in all placis. cap. xiii. fo. 29. What time is best to be cured with this
medicine. Cap. xiiii. fo. 31. That we must utterly forbear wyme and women in
this cure. cap. xv. fo. 35 That salt must be eschewed in this cure. Capit.
xvi. fo. 37. Of sklender sedynge and hunger, which are necessary in this cure.
cap. xvii. fo. 39 How hunger may easily be suffered. Capit. xviii. fo. 42. The
preyse of Temperaunce in the despite of ryotte. cap. xix. fo. 43. Whether a man
may be restored to his health by reason of the dyete only, that is appointed in
this disease. cap. xx. fo. 55. How a man ought to order his belly in this cure.
cap. xxi. fo. 57. How in this cure one may be moved to sweat. cap. xxii. fo.
58. How this medicine shall help this disease, and whether it heals men
suddenly orels by leisure. Cap. xxiii. fo. 59. What power the wodde Guaiacum is
of, and what diseases hit helpethe beside the pockes. cap. xxiiii. fo. 62. What
kind of dyseases this medycine of Guaiacum has taken from the autour of this
book. cap. xxv. fo. 65. As touching the order of living after this cure is
paste, what he that is healed ought to eschew and observe, is shortelye
descriued. cap. xxvi. fo. 68.
Thus ends the table.
The beginning of the french pockes, and why it has dyners names. Ca. i.
IT has pleased god, that in our time sycknesses should arise, which were to
our forefathers (as it may be well coniectured) unknown. In the year of
Christ. 1493. or there about, this foul and most grievous disease began to
spredde among the people, not in France, but first at Naples in the
fre^chemens host, whereof it took his name (which kept war under the french
king Charles) before hit appeared in any other place. By which occasion the
french men putting from them this abhorred name, call it not the french
pockes, but the evil of Naples, reckenynge it to their rebuke, if this
pestilent disease should be named the french pockes. Not withstanding the
co^sente of all nations has obtained, and we also in this book will call it
the french pockes, not for any envy that we bear to so noble and gentle a
nation, but because we fere, that all men should not understand, if we gave it
any other name.

At the first rysynge thereof some men supersticiously named it meuyn syckenes,
of the name (I know not) of what saint. some accounted it to come of Job
scabbe, whom this syckenes (I think) has brought in to the number of
saints. Some iuged it to be the infirmity, wherewith the monk Euager was
grieved, through immoderate cold and ea^ynge of raw meats, when he was in
deserte. And therefore he also was sought from far countries, with great
resort of men, offering gifts habundantly at his chappelle, which is in
Vestrike. And because the name of sayncte. Euager was not known among the
common people of Almayne, they called it Fyacres sickness for Euagers: Not
enquerynge what the lives of these were, but only believed that these could
help them. Such opinions had the people, and thus they did rise: There
was images offered and hanged before saint Roche, and his old sores were new
remembered, which thing if it were done of a godly mind, I do not reprove,
but if it were done, that those might get aua^tage that were the inue^ters
thereof. I marvel that disceyte should have place in so great discomforte and
sorrow, and in so miserable destruction of mankind.

But the divines did interpretate this to be the wrath of god, and to be his
punysshement for our euylle living. And so did openly preach, as though
they, admytted into that hye counsaylle of god, had there learned, that men
never lived worse, or as who says in that golden world of Augustus and
Tiberius, when Christ was here on earth, most myscheuous diseases did not
begin: or as who says, that nature has no power to bring in new diseases,
which in all other things makes greatte chaunges: or as who says, that
within short time in our days (because men be now of good living) the
remedy of Guaiacum is found for this sickness. So well these things do agree,
which these men's minds, that declare god (as they think) do preach unto us.
Than began the physicians business, which serched not what should take away
this disease, but what was the cause thereof, for they might not abide the sight
of it, much more they abstayned from touching. For when it first began, it
was of such fylthynes, that a man would scarsely think this sickness, that
now reygneth, to be of that kind. They were vyles, sharp, and standing out,
having the (...) and quantite of acornes, from which came so soul humors,
and so gre^ (...), they who so ever ones smelled it, ^h^ught him self to (...)
e^^ect. The color of (...) was derke grene, and the ^^ght thereof was more
grievous unto the (...) the pain it self: and yet their (...) were as though
they had lain in (...).

This disease, not long after his begyn^^^^ (...) into Garm^nia, where it has
wondered more largely than in any other place^ which thing I do ascribe unto
our intemperaunce.

There which than took counsel of the (...), prophesied, that evil not to
endure a^o^e.vii. years, wherein they were disceyued, if they meant of this
disease and all the i^el that comes thereof. But if they me^t it of the forsaid
most filthy kind, which comes of him self, and not only of infectio^ but
through the corruption of the air, or the ordinance of god: than were they
not dysceyued. For it tarried not long above the.vii. year. But the infyrmytie,
that came after, which remains yet, is nothing so fylthy. For the sores at
sometimes ben little, not so hye nor so hard. And sometime there is a certain
broad crepynge scabbe, for his venym enters deper, and brings forth more
diseases.

It is thought this kind now adaye^ to grow in no person, but through
infection by defylynge of him self, which thing especially happens by
co^ulation. For if appears manifestly, that young children, old men, and
other, which are not given to the bodily lust, ben very seldom enfected
therewith. And the more that man is given to wantonness, the sooner he is
infected. And as they live, that been taken therewith, so other it shortly
leauethe them, or long holds them, or utterly consumes them. For it is very
easy unto the Italyans and Spanyardes, and so such as live soberly, but through
our surfetynge and intemperate living, it does long contyn^e with us, and
greuousely does vex and chafe us.

The causes of this disease. Cap. ii.
THe physicians have not yet certeynly diffined the secret causes of this
disease, although they have long and peinfully with greatte variete serched
therefore, But in this thing all do agree, which is very euydent, that through
some unwholesome blastes of the air, which were at that time, the lakes,
fountaynes, flodes, and also the sees were corrupted, and thereof the earth to
receive poison, The pastures to be enfected, venemus vapors to come down from
the air, which living creatures (in drawing the brethe) received. For this
disease was found in other bestes like as in men. The astrologers fetch the
cause of this infirmytie from the sterres, saying, that it procedethe of the
conjunctions of Saturn and Mars, which was not long before, and of.ii.
eclipses of the son: and they do affirm, that by these signs they might
perceive many coleryke, and fleumatike infirmities to follow, which should long
continue, and slowly depart, as Elyphancia, lepre, tetters, and all ill kind
of scabbes and boiles, and what so ever euylles deformethe and vnfasshionethe
the body, as the gout, palsy, sciatica, joint ache, and other like dangers.
And that these things should chance rather in the north part by reason of
this sy^ne Aquarius, wherein fell the first ecclypse: And in the west part by
reason of this sign Piscis, in the which fell the last eclyps. But the
physicians affirm this sickness to come of ill and habundant humours^ as of
coler black advst yelowe, and fleume salt or advst, and that of one of these
alone, or of certain, or else of al these myngled, whose sharpnes strekinge to
the outward parts of the body, burns and dries the skyn, and fylleth it
full of scabbes, but that which comes of raw heavy and gross humors, they
say is driven into the joints, and causes great peine in them, and to arise
knobbes and swellynges, and knottes to gether, and the skyn to ryuell. And
moreover the heed to ache, whereby the beauty of the body is clean altered and
gone. Some breuely concludyng say, that this infirmity comes of corrupt,
burnt, and enfect blod. And all these things were in doubtful disputation, ye
nature there of not yet known, but now it is known, they be also approved. for
in mine opynion this sickness is no other thing, but a postumation and rotting
of vnpure blod: the which after it begins to dry, turnethe into swellyng
and hard knobbes, the which thing proceeds of the liver corrupt.

To know more of the nature or qualytyes of this infyrmytie should be very
tedious and hard to judge. For we se in our time, what diverse concertations,
and opinyons have benne to boldly dysputed: and what pain the physicians have
taken therein, sens the beginning thereof. The physicians of Garmanie, for the
space of.ii, years meddled with such disputation, and yet when I was but a
boy, they undertook to heal me: but what profit came thereof, the end has
showed, not withstandinge they were bold to meddle with strange dregs and
spices, and to myngle and mynister many things, which they should not have
mynystred. And I remember, they forbode me to eat peasen. For in some places
there grow certain worms in them with wings, of the which hoggefleshe was
thought to be infected, because that beast specially was diseased either with
this, or else with an other not much unlike unto this.

Into what disease the french pockes are turned. Cap. iii.
THe peynes of this disease already rehearsed are in manner no peines to ye grefes
that follow thereof: for this disease tournethe it self in to great
inconuenie^ce and peine: In so much that al manner of syckenes, having or
causing any pain in ma^s joints, seems to be contained therein. For first
there is sharp ache in the joints, and yet nothing appears: afterward the
gatherynge to gether of humors causethe the members to swel, but after that
such vile matter is waxed hard, than a man shall feel the vehemente peynes
thereof. This is the first coming thereof. For it seems to edifye and fortyfie
a castle, there to rest a long season, and thens to disperse and cast into
every part of the body all manner of ache and peynes. And the longer the said
swellynges tarry fro rottynge and rypynge, the more peyns shall the pacient
suffer. And above all other peynes of this infirmity, this is the violentest,
and that troubles man most. I my self had such a little knobbe, and
swellyng above my left hele in the inner side, the which after it was indurate
and hard, by the space of.vii. year, could by no power of oyntementes, or any
manner lappynges and cheryshynges be made soft, or caused to putrify and
rotte, but continued flylle like a boon, until that by the help of Guaiacum
it vanysshed away by littell and little. This thing as touching women rests
in their secret places, having in those places litel pretty sores full of
venemus poison, being very dangerous for those yt vnknowingly meddle with them.
The which sickness gote^ by such enfected women, is so much the more vehement
and grievous, how much they be inwardely poluted and corrupted. By this the
senowes (at sum times) do slack and wax hard again, at sometime they
shrink, and some time the sickness turns it self into the gout, or into the
palsy, or into apoplexi, and infecteth many one with lepre. For it is thought,
that these infirmities be very neighbors one to a other. And that for many
reasons, which are common to both euylles. They that be taken with pockes,
often tim^s become lepres, and often times through the sharpnes of their peynes
they shake and queuer as men in a fever.

After all this there buddeth out and appear small holes and sores, which
turn them self into cankers and phistuls, or continual sores: and the more
they putrify, the more they diminishe the bone. And wha^ the bones be
putrified and corrupt, the pacient through long continuance of sickness, waxes
lean, for the flesh consumes away, and there remains but only the skyn
to cover the bones withal: and through this many a one cha^seth to be
thisiques, the which inwardly be full of corruption. Beside all this, out of
this infirmity flowethe an other, which some men do call cacesia, the which
fylleth a man's flesh and also his skyn full of water: Sum have sores in
their bladder, and often times many men's liver and stomach is utterly consumed
by this infirmity. And in this thing their opinion is false, that say that
the gatheryng to gether of humors and swellynges wrinkels and knottes come not
of the nature of this infirmite, but that it chances only to those that have
benne rubbed and anointed with ointme^tes made with quick silver. I am sure the
most part of the physicians of Almain be of this opinion, but yet they have been disceyued in this sickness, as they be in many other. For I know it for a
surety, there be some, that have had these infirmities and sycknesses, which
were never noynted with quick silver, as I have had experience in my father
Vlriche de Hoten.

How men at the beginning resysted this insirmitie the french pockes. Cap.
iiii.
When the physicians were thus amassed, the surgions came forward in the same
error, and put to their hands: and first they began to bourne the sores
with hot yrons. But for as much as it was an infinite labor, to touch them
all, they went about to aduoyde them by oyntementes, but diverse men used
diverse oyntementes, and all in vain, except he added quick silver thereto.
they beat for this use the pouders of mirre, of mastique, of ceruse, of
bayberyes, of alam, bolly armenie, cinaber, of veermelon, of coral, of burned
salt, of rustye brass, of leddrosses, of rust of iron, of Rosen, of
Turpentyne, and of al manner of best oils, oil of bey, oil of pure roses and
terebinthium, oil of gyneper, of great effect, oil of spyke, swynes greece,
fat of ox feet, and butter made specially in may, talowe of gootes and
hearts, virgins honye, powder of read worms dried in to dust, or consumed with
oil and beaten, camfere, euforbium, and castory: and with.ii. or.iii. of these
foresaid thniges myngled to gether they auoynted the sick man's joints, his
arms, his thyes, his back bone, his neck bone, with other places of his
body. Sum anointed them ones a day, some twyes, some thryes, some four times.
The pacyente was shut in a stufe, kept with contynuall and feruente hete,
some.xx. and some.xxx. hole days: And some were laid in a bed within the
stewe, and anointed, and covered with many clothes, and were compelled to
sweat. Part of them at the second anoyntynge began to saint meruaylously.
But yet the ointment was of such strength and effect, that what so ever disease
was in the hyer part of the body, it drew into the stomach, and from thens up
into the brain, and thens the disease avoided both by the nose and the mouth,
that did put the pacient to such pain, that except they took good head, their
teth fell out, all their throtes, their longes, their roffes of the mouths,
were full of sores, their jaws did swell, their teethe were leused, and
contynually there avoided the most stynkyng skome and matter, that could be,
and what so ever it ra^ne upon, by and by it was polluted and infected, whereby
their lyppes so touched, gathered sores, and within forth their chekes were
grievously peined. All the place, where they were, did stink. Which manner of
curing was so peinful, that many had lever die tha^ so to be esed. How be it
scantly the hundredth person was eased, but shortly after fell down again: so
that his ese dured very few days. whereby men may esteem, what I suffered in
this disease, that proved this manner of curing a.xi. times, with great ieopardy
and peril, wrestling with this evil.ix. years. And yet in the mean time
taking what so ever thing was thought to withstand and resist it. For we used
bathes and herbs lapped about them, and drinks and coresies. And for this we
had arsnicke, ink, calcantum, verdegres, or aqua fortis, which wrought in us
so bitter pein, that they might be judged very desirous of life, that had not
lever die tha^ so to prolong their life. but tho curings were most bitter and
peineful, which were made with ointmentes. And was also so much the more
dangerous because the ministers of it knew not the operation thereof. For the
surgions only did not use it, but every bold fellow went about playing the
physician, gyuynge to all manner of men one ointment, either as he had seen it
ministered to other, or as he had suffered it him self. And so they heled all
men with one medycine, as the proverb says, One shoo for both fete. If ought
happened amys to the sike, for lack of good counsel, they wist not what to do
or say. And these men torme^ters were suffered to practice on al persons what
they would while the phisitio^^ were done as in an universal error and
ignorance. And so with out order or rule, with tormente of heat and sweat
ple^tie, al were cured after one facion, without regard of time, habyt, or
complexion. Another these ignorante anoynters had not so much knowledge, as
with laxes to take away the matter, which caused the evil, or to diete them, or
appoint any diversity of meat, but at length the matter must come to this
point, that they should lose their tethe, for they were losed, their mouth was
all in a sore, and through coldness of the stomach and fylthy stenche, they lost
appetite. And all though their thyrste was intolerable, yet found they no
kind of drink to help the stomach: Many were so light in their brain, that
they could not stand: and some were brought into a madness: and not only their
hands tre^dled and shoke therewith, but also their fete and all the body: some
mumbled in their spekyng as long as they lived, and cowde have no remedy. And
many I have seen die in the myddel of their curing. And one I know did so his
cure, that in one day he killed, iii. hushand men, through immoderate heat
which they suffered patiently, shut within an hot stewe, trusting that they
should the sooner obteygne their health, till through vehemente ^eate their
hearts failed them, and perceived not them self to die, and so were wretchedly
strangled. Other I saw dye, when their throtes were swollen in the intrie,
that first the fylthy matter, where they should have avoided in spyityng, coud
find no way out, and at length their breath was like wise stopped: and an other
sort, when they could not pysse: very few there were, that gat their health,
and they passed through these ieopardies, these bitter peines, and evils.

what help I used in this sickness. cap. v.
AS often as I was anointed, to keep these euylles from my mouth, that
customably came, I used only alam, which I kept in my mouth, rollynge it
from one side to an other, until it melted. And when I went about to wrappe
up my sores, and comfort my members, I used these herbs, absinthio, camomilla,
hyssoppe, pulegio, arthemisia, sage, and other such boiled in wine and water.

And ones for my sores I made an ointment by the counsel of Eytelvolfe, of
alam, verdigr^se, purist honey, and vinegre by equal portions.

And afterward I learned ^f a soldier in Italy an other oyntmente, made of
lyme and water, after this manner. I put well water or river water into a new
pot, never seasoned before with any lycour, and sod it therein: and when it
boiled fervently, I powered it upon vnsleyt lyme (that is it, that no water
has touched) in a basin or a clean vessel of wodde, before not occupied with
any lycour. And when the lyme was dyssolued, and after a lyttel rest lay in
the botom: I took away the skome that swom above, and mouynge not the lyme,
powered out the clereste water, and kept that for my purpose, when I would
occupy it: I took a sponge or a lynnen clothe, and depped hit in the water,
sum time rolled, as I moughte, and often times warmed and moysted my sores
therewith, washing and wypynge away all the fylthynesse. Thanne I took a piece
of cloth so moysted, and lapte it about my sores. And with this water my peynes
were eased, and the swellynge swaged, the soores were cleansed, and the heat
and enflamations driven away, which thing is to be meruaylled at, seeing the
nature of lyme other wise is to kendle. I found nothing like this: And me
thought I was well helped therewith, and had avoided the destruction, that was
at hand. In so cruel assautes of this disease I used also cassia, if I would
be laxatyue, and did often times sweat, and let go blood drawn out with
gourdes. And when I was in Italy monysshed, that to eat in the morning the
quantite of a walnutte of rasins terebinthia, should be of great efficacitie to
amend the fa^tes of the blood, what manner of thing it is I know not, and to
make the belly lanke, and help the stomak, which both things I found true,
I used the same. They said also, that it did help no little thing the
synowes, and strengthed the joints and members. And by this means and
abstinence of meat and drink, and good dyete, I avoided many things, which
moughte have utterly dystroyed me in so long and injurious seson, for the
most part wandrynge abroad in the world, and through poverty driven to
much aduersite, never at rest and quietness, but always veyed and troubled.
And have so preserved my self, that all though my legs were eaten with so
many deep and grievous soores, yet was there not one synewe hurt, nor one bone
perysshed. And if at any time the disease took my face, no euylle happened in
my mouth and tongue, so that the inward partee were preserved. For I voyded
away those things, that might hurt my stomach, and with a rare help
defended my lyghtes and lounges: and by these helps I moughte suffer and drive
forth this disease, but clearly put hit away I conde not: which thing was
the easynge of pain, and not the cuttynge away of the cause of pain, the
differrynge of evil, and not the taking away thereof.

A better remedy came of Guaiacus, ye of that only came health, which I do
intend now to discribe

The description of Guaiacum, and the finding thereof and name. Cap. vi.
IF we ought to give thanks upward unto god, both for good and euylle: how
much are we bound for the gift of Guaiacum: ye how much does the gladness
and joy of his benygnite toward us, pass the sorrow and pein of that
infirmity? The use of this wod was brought to us out of an ylonde named
Spagnola, this ilonde is in the west nigh to the country of Amerik, set in that
place where the length of Amerike, stretchynge into the north, does end: and
was found of late days among the new lands, which were unknown by the
old time. All the inhabytauntes of that ylonde sometime be diseased with the
french pockes, likewise as we be with the mesels, and small pockes. Nor they
have no other remedy for it but this.

A certain noble man of Spain, being tresaurour in that province, was
grenously troubled with that infyrmitie: And after the people of that land
had taught him that medycine, he brought the manner and use thereof into
Spayn, showing of what power and virtue it was in those parts. The physicians
would not allow it, perceiving that their profit would decay thereby, not
withstanding at length they took in hand to cure with the same wod, but with
such arrogancy, attributyng so much to their precepts and order, that except
they were observed, they affirmed this wood should be spent in vayn. Which
thing I marvel they could persuade to any man, and make him believe it, saying
it is plainly known, that in that ylande were never physicians. And yet has
this wood Guaiacum always ben there used. But in this cure what besines is mete
for the physician, I will here after declare. Now I will speak of the thing
intended. They have given it this name Guaiacum. For so the Spaniardes write it
with latyne letters, following their own manner of found, which word the
people of that ylande pronounce with open mouth Huiacum.

And Paulus Ritius showed me at the city of August, that he hard say of a
Spanyarde, which had been in that yland, that the first syllable Gua, of this
name, was not pronounced of the Spagnolenses with G, but that his own tongue
did require it so to be written. And they of that Island found it with, V,
puffed out, as though it were Huiacum, a word of.iii. syllables with them,
and not Guaiacum. We may give unto it some excellent name, calling it lignum
vite, as Philo the physician called his dregs the hands of god: and this
day the physicians with grea^te boste call their co^fections manus Christi,
apostolicu^, gratia dei, Antido^um, Paulium, and many other such superstitious
names. They say it grows like an ash with us in height, and is sound,
bryngyng forth a nutte much like a chesse nutte, his tymbre is oil and fat,
in color like box, but somewhat blackishe. And they judge that the best, that
has most black: but that which is like to box, differs from that, which
is black. For this is within, and the other without: or to speak more plainly,
the black is as hit were the heart and marowe. The wodde is meruaylous heavy,
for the leest piece of hit, cast into the water, synketh straight to the botom.
There is no wodde so hard, as it. For it is so hard, that it will not cleue:
another hither to have we seen any, that was chyned. And they that sell it say,
it will in no wise yane or chap. When it bourneth and flameth, it makes a sweet
odor: and there follows fro it, when it burns, a gomme, which we yet know
not, for what purpose it serves: This gomme is somwat black, and shortly
after it is fallen away, it is very hard. The bark is not so thyck, but is
meruaylous hard. Which tokens well marked, I think he that shall counterfete
this wod, can not deceive the byer. For be it, a man may be deceived in the
color, how is hit possible all these things to be in one, a fatnes,
smelling, somewhat like rosen, such weight as no wodde has beside? Than the
go^me that comes from it, when it flameth? such hardness that may scantly be
cut? And the lest piece cast into the water will not swim above? And the taste
ones known will never suffer a man to err, which as it is to al men
unpleasant, so it is to me ye very pleasant. They say it contynueth not after it
be sodden, but paullethe, in the summer after iii. days, and in the winter
somewhat later. And therefore we must chose the fattest and weightiest thereof.
For that which is old, is light and lean. Upon this description let the
physicians, if hit please them, draw out the causes of such efficacitie by
their long disputation, as for me I more rcioyce, that it is, than I search
what manner of thing it is. How be it I grant them worthy of much thank,
that shall first show unto us the nature thereof through out known: But now
there be some, that wey and esteem the strength and virtue of this tree by
these known marks, as though they had suffered it in all points. which
thing is done, as me seems, very hastyly and tymely, thinking that the cause
and reason of such efficacy and power ought to be serched for in this tree,
after his nature and use is known, like wise as it is done generally in all
other medicines. But now of his use, and how it ought to be prepared unto
medicine.

Of the ordering of Guaiacum in medicine. cap. vii.
IT is ordered after this manner. The wod must first be made as small as may be,
which thing sum do, at a torn, and thanne without any more ado, they lay
the shauynges a water, and sum do first broyse or stamp them in a mortar,
so much that they bring them into powder and duste, to thyntente they may
the sooner be through soked, and their strength sodden out. But I wot not,
whether that make any matter, I have seen some, that have cut it first with a
saw, and thanne raped the peses with a rape, and have taken and put them
into water. How so ever it be, whether it be turned, raped, or beaten to
duste, they soke a day and a night one pound weytght in eight of water, taken
either of a well or of a river, or as I did, of a pyt, than they sethe it in a
new glased pot, and clean washed, with a soft fire of coals, by the space of
fyxe hours, and more, until hit come to the one half, with great head
taking and diligence, leeste hit run over through much heat. For that
which over runs loses (they say) much of his virtue, and is of less power.
And therefore it may not be sodden in the flame, but it requires few cooles,
and a pot not filled almost by the.iii. part. The skome that flows above,
they taken away to anoint the sores with: for we know it to have much power
to dry. After it is thus sodden, they streyne it, and power it in to a glass.
And than they put to the grondes eight pound water and sethe it again (as
before) as it were a second messhynge. This thynner they give them to drink
with their meat: the first is drunk in the stead of a medicyne. And this is
all to gether, that delyuerethe us from so great and grievous disease, this
decoction is it. This is the chief point and anchor of our health. And it has
so little need of any other thing, that it will not abide any manner mixture, or
mynglynge, as I will shortly after declare. Sum would, that light water and
clear should be gotten for this purpose. Some admytte all manner sweet water
indifferently, because in sething what so ever it be, it is purified. All would
that good diligence and head should be taken in time of sething, that it ru^ne
not over, or boil to fast, and they bid that the pot be close stopped, that
nothing brethe out: but wha^ the skom is perceived to rise, it must be softely
opened, and the skomme taken out, and so covered again. They put this
decortion (when it is streyned) into a glass, only because it should be seen,
and because a glass of all vessels is purest and clennest. The color of this
decoction is some what like muddye water, when it is some what troubled. Wete
lynnen in it, and it wexeth grene of a meruaylous show. The relesse thereof at
the first tastynge, is some what sour, but to him that uses it, by little
and lyttel it waxes pleasant. The phisityons were so bold, as to put, to a
pound of this.iiii. ounces of honey. Which thing, as I do not improve, so do I
deny it to be necessary. And I would nothing should be added unto such a
thing, being of such power, where as it needs not. For what needs a man
there to bestow his labor, where as no need is: And to say the troth, the
relesse of Guaiacum is not so grenous, that it requires to be tempred with
honey. Yea were it not for my masters the phisytions all men would be contented
therewith. How be it what needs me to name phisytions, when I speak only but
of tryflers? For they that be counnynge and expert, as is O most noble
prince, Stromer thy physician (and through frendshyppe mine also) and thy
other physician Coppus, such I say, understood and knew, how hit is not
conueniente, either to meddle it with unknown things, and myngle them, or
else to add ought unto those things, which as yet are not perceived to
lack ought. The which thing as hit chanced us to have communycatyon of
this wood Guaiacum, at the city of August, when many had auysed me to commyt
my self to this manner to cure: and I, for newnes of the thing would here none
of them: Stromer speaking after this manner of this wodde with great gravity of
words said, that he feared leest the helthsom and excellent power of Guaiacum
should be diffamed through the superfluous additions of unlearned physicians:
which thing if hit were not done, nothing coul^e be found better against
this sycknes. And with his words caused me straight without any taryenge to
cast my self hedlynge into this experience of Guaiacum. And therefore I would
this, now ones spoken should be generally understand, that as often as I shall
conplaine in this small treatise of physicians, all men should think me to
mean them, that have no erudition nor experience, and that boste them self
amongst the common people, of the title and name of their doctorshyp, which
they bought that knew another greek nor latin, and yet no science requires
more erudicion or knowledge of the tongues than phisike, the which being
most ignorant, do lightly abuse the simple people of Germaynie, seeing there
is no doubt made of his lernyng, that is ones garnyshed with the name of
Master doctor. But why have I used in this thing so many words? Verily to
make my cause good with the, excellent prince, and to defend my self against
them, that by this occasion might accuse me, as one that spoke words more
snappyshe than besemed me. Which thing when sum of the lawyers and divines
did of late, against whose learning they said I inueyed without good manner,
when I did snybbe but only the unlearned, and them which were soore gre^ed
and were bitter enemies unto such good learning, they caused many a good
manne to think, that I was against them, and yet was that thing far from my
manners, and also the purpose, wherein I than was occupied. which thing seeing I
perceive your excellentnes to know well enough, I will leave these run agate
anoynters, and theuyshe physicians, and also these vntaughte doctors, and come
unto Guaiacum, the which in me dicine must thus be used.

The manner of curing. Cap. viii.
THe pacient must be kept in a close chamber, without air or wind, where
fire must be nourysshed contynually: or else he must be in a stewe, after the
manner of Almain, which shall not need always to be kept hot, but must be
close, and defended from air, that no air blow upon him for the time of
this curation, he must also beware of cold. Therefore if he be cured in
winter, or in Autumn, he must look, that he have fire in his chaumber, erely
in the morning specially before day: for than is the cold fernente, he must
cause the cleftes of the wyndowes, if any be, to be stopped with plaster, or
other like matter, and upon the chaumbre door must he hang carpettes, or other
like things, within and without, that no cold or air enter into the
chaumbre, or come out. when he is thus ordered, his meat must be dimynisshed.
First the fourth part of that he was wont to take, and than the third
part, and shortly after the one half, that he may learn to bear hunger: and
his wine must be well watered: thanne must he take a purgation, other with
regard that hit be such a one as shall be thought sufficient to cut away
the cause, or take away the matter, that norisheth the disease, other such a
one without any regard at all, as may emptye the hoole bealye. For that
thing, as I perceive, only is required, which thing done, thanne may ye
there upon begin this work after this manner. The decoction which was first
sodden, and is strongest, must be ministered unto him twice adaymy^ke warm, a
gobblet or cyat ones in the morning at.v. of the clock, or there about, and
again at night, at.vii. of the clock, we call a ciates, a cup that will
receive half a pound, whereof we may gather, seeing.viii. pound of water is
required to the seething of one pound of wodde, and the one half thereof must
be consumed in the seething, that so there must.iiii. pound remain, and must
drink thereof twyse a day, that the decoction of one pound of Guaiacum is
suffyciente for the four days. For hit is now a common manner with
phisitio^s, to measure their lycoures by weyghte, and they have clean cast
up the names of measures. It must be drunk at one draught with out any breath
taking.

After he has drunk, let him rest more than.iiii. hours, and let him the
first.ii. be covered, that by the help of heat this medicine may be
dygested abroad into the members, and the pacient may sweat out that that
noyeth. which thing to do how profitable it is, I will declare when place
comes. And it shall not hurt, if he be close covered one hole hour before he
drink, that he may be hot.

Some will not in any wise he should rise from his bed in five hours after he
has taken his ciates of drink.

He must take his meat in the myddaye, and not before, and than as little as
may be, for this medicine above all things requires an emptye bealy. And
therefore he must eat, not to fill his emptynes, but to bear up the life,
not to gether strength, but to keep him self from feinting. Another is there
any ieoperdy to be feared. For Guaiacum has great strength in it self both to
refresshe, and also to comfort, not such as be full, but only those that are
empty. Ye they say, that none faylleth, eat he never so little, so that he
drink faithfully this decoction. In the mean time, he shall not be anointed
in the out side, except he have soores or swellynges. And for this there is a
white ointment made of Cer^ssa, rose, oil of rosis, with camphire, which is
laid on with a lynnen clothe. Some anoint them only with the skom of
Guaiacum, or else dry it into powder, and cast it upon them. And besides
this skomme, there is nothing of this decoction occupied in the out part.
Some be healed in short time, and some in long. The most part in.xxx.
days. They command him to be pourged again the.xv. day. For this reason I
think, because, as Alexander Aphrodicius thinks, they that hungre and
receive not their meat as they were wont to do, fall away, and gather a
certain sharp matter and eger, so that such matter must be avoided, that the
body of the ^ike may be empty. This decoction shall not be dronken that
morning, when he receives his purgation: but at night let him take it
again, and after that day, he may eaie more largely. And again the.xxx. day
more lyberally: how be it this more liberally, and that more largely must be
very little, as I shall show you in the next chapter But some, lest any
impediment should be to let the operation of this medycine, have kept one
order of eating equallye through out the.xxx. days: and truly the stronglyer
a man abides to hunger, the better and more quyckely he shall be healed.

And although the desire of eating grow daily more and more, yet must he
remember to absteyne, comfortyng him self with the surety of health, if he so
do. For the body being so wasted and emptied, not only with hungre, but also
with sweat, ye being long time as a deed body through the greuousnes of
this evil, shall high fast to the appetite of meat and drink.

When this cure is comme to an end, so that the sick is almost ready to goo
abroad. he must than take again some medicine to purge him with, but so that
after that purgation, he may drink again as he did before.iiii. or fix
days space, wherewith they make up the hole cure. Some will not that he should
go out of the chamber, where he lies, before he be through hoole. Some
think.xxx. days suffyciente to keep his chamber: and that he may than go
forth. But yet warely by little and lyttelle, and not straight into the open
air: but first he must walk in the same house, from chamber to chaumbre, and
than to some neighbors house, not far of: until he be used to suffer the
air. For there may be no sodeyne change, but must use him self to all
things by little and little. And that which remains of the syckenesse
they say will lyghtely be hoole, after he ones stere abroad. And that to be
true I have proved in my self. For when the.xxx. days were passed, the soores
of my legs were not yet closed, and therefore I kept.x. days more. And when
those.x. days were gone, yet was not I hoole. Wherefore, ferynge the cold,
because winter than began. I intended to keep in other.x. days: but I was
compelled by the physicians counsel to goo abroad, and put it in adventure,
which thing happed not amysse. How be it the soores that I had than, were not
deep in the flesh, or swollen outworde: But only in the hier part of the
skin, and lacked nothing else but ^kynne to cover them with, which they had
scantly the.xl. day after I went out. And I that time, in very sharp winter,
made my iourneye from Vindele into Frannce. The causes of this slow healyng I
did coniect this to be. The physician suffered me to eat more mete (as I after
perceived) than I should have done, and also he sodde my drink thynner than he
ought. For I occupied not fully.v. pound of this wodde, where as other
occupy.viii. and some.x. wherein my physician was deceived. For he, saying my
body weke of nature, and moreover exten^ated and consumed with the long
continuance of this grefe, thought that a little thing was sufficient to
drive away the disease, and for that cause fed me the largelyer, fearing
soore leeste my strength should fail me, which was double error. For so much
as he ought not to have looked what my body was thanne, but what manner body it
was wont to be, and again the nature of this medicine is such, that it will
suffer none to faint for lack of strength. Wherefore be they never so weke,
they ought not therefore to ministre the less, but rather somewhat the more. For
it does nothing suddenly, but werketh health by litel and litel. And therefore I
allow best that decoction, that was longeste at the fire, and is comme to a
little of much wode: so that I would counsaylle them, to the intent hit
might be the stronger, to sethe hit often times to the third part.

And if any would be lose belyed, that is wont to be bound, they will him to
take the ponder of Guaiacum sodde^ in the water, and to drink half an ounce
thereof in the morning. And if that help not at the first, to go thereunto
again. But this framed not with me, no not when I took it again.

How a man must live and diet him self in this cure. cap. ix.
THere is yet much a do for the ordering of a man, as thouchynge his diet.
Some think best to eat nothing but bread, which Galenus calls the
cleannest fedynge with, a few rasyns, which breadde they give to the weight
of.iiii. ounces, without salt or other sauce. And they think best to absteyne
generally from all manner meat, except it be a little brothe made with a
chekyn: which they are contented he ^uppe or eat with his bread moysted
therein ones a day. For at night they give nothing but a few rasins, and an
ounce of breadde.

Other will that he have half a chekyn, if it be yet young and tender: but if
it be any thing grown, they think a quarter y^onghe, which must be sodden
in clean water. Whereunto they put another salt, another other sauce, but sum
put a little sugar thereto. Of breadde they give.iiii. ounces at night, as
before, a few rasins, with an ounce of breadde. But as long as he is under
cure, he must take heed, that he never so much as taste salt. They allowne
white bread, made of wheat, well bulted, which made for the nones, they
season with sugar. Which thing is not evil. There be some that add to his
fedyng (not so much in the place of meat as of medicine) a little borage,
other of the leaves only, or (if there be any) of the flowers, which he shall
eat sodden in water alone, or with his chekyn. And this is the order of
fedynge that some do keep continually, some think.xv. days sufficient for
this dyete, and tha^ they will his hunger to be eased: and the.xx. day they
give him meat twyse. But let them take heed, that follow that. For truly
this medicine require the, that the pacient be made as thynne with hunger as
may be possible. How be hit sum chance to be through healed within.xv.
days, and yet that not withstanding they put to a few days more thereto.
They drynk unto their meat of that second decoction not warmed but cold. And
this is all the fare, for hyderto none durst pass this measure. Not
withstanding I dispyse not the physicians, that dispute of the dangers, that
may chance to dry and hot bodies, if they be driven to this strayte dyete,
bringing for them Galen and also Hipocras, which seem in many places to be
against this exquisite dyete in fedynge. But of these that used Guaiacum, I
saw as yet none in ieoperdye, and I gather at this time precepts and
monitions out of experience, and not doctrine out of books. And also I my self
am of dry and hot complexion, and yet this hunger brought me another into a
p^^^ike nor etyke, which thing they seem to fear.

For as much as it is thought wisdom to pronyde for all things, I will that
if any man fear him self, that he get physicians to keep him, and that this
is suffyciently spoken of this thing. I will now go forward with other
things.

In the time of this cure, the pacyent must forbear al busynes, and cut
away. ^ll sad thoughts, and rest from al care. And therefore they command
rest and quietness from consultations, and also studyes: so that the mind may
utterly be free from all motions and workinges, and give him self holly to
ydelnes and rest, losed from al trouble and care, which thing must be
understand of all manner of men, but most specially of them, that be naturally
melancoly: They must also beware of anger: for that as Galene says, kendleth
chefely the coleryke matter. And more over we must take heed, that nothing
happen in that time, that may move us to heaviness.

Let the sick person here syngers and mynstrelles, and give him self to
sportes, pastymes, and musyke, and some time delight him self with merry
talking. But to company with woman, how much he must eschew that. I will
show hereafter. I took great pleasure in redynge and making merry things. And
the physicians spoke against hit, and not without a cause, saying they believed
it to be labor and busynes unto me: but I took it not as my study, but as a
pastyme, and for my recreation. But yet would I not this to be to other for an
example.

Now some begin to wax very hungry after the syxte day: but I felt no grefe
before the.x. day. And in this case this is the only comfort, not to se
other eat, nor to see meat, nor to smell the savor thereof. Never the less
when any perceyuethe him self to faint, and wexe feeble for lack of meat, I
would not that he should by and by receive meat or strange confection, to
comfort and bring again his strength, but to refreshe his spirits with
odours and plesaunte smelles: for even with the savor and smell of such
odours Galenus thinks the spirit and life to be nouryshed and comforted. Yet
in this thing as regard must be had, what every man's complexion requires,
lest like things be ministered to them, that be dry and hot, and unto them
that be moist and cold, or things of one quality be minystred unto them
all, that be of both extremes.

As I do more allow through out the things, that grow among us, as famyliar
and nygh to our nature, so by the example of Democritus, who with the vapor of
hot bread made his spirit even than departing to tarry hole.iii. days,
think I that we should help them that faynte other with that breed, or else
with a roasted oynion hold to the mouth? For I plainly know, that in an oynyon
was sometime such virtue and power. Which thing is also proved to be done
with the odor of wine. For therewith Philip the physician did recover
Alexander, as we may se in Quintus Curtius. And by the traditions of the old
physicians we se his power and virtue in this purpose preferred above al. But
by all means we must nourysshe the spirit with the sweet savors and smelles:
for so much as that is the life, and above all thing the odor of old sweet
wine is praised in this thing. Next is the smelle of honey, specially rose
honey, also of appuls, of the which thing Stromer never ceassethe to monysshe
me, affermynge that he knowethe, how strong, and how helpyng they be in this
thing. Of these some prefer orenges: other prefer cotonia mala. Vyneger is also
praised, but specially vinegar made with roses: and mustarde is well allowed. For
these things, say they, do refreshe the wits, and sustain the strengthes.
As for cynamom, nutmegges, styrack, citrous, saffron, a giloflower, musk,
camphire, and such costly ware, I leave to deinte fellows, But cumm^, an^sse,
coryander, lauander, amarake, roses, mynte, rue, rosemary, violettes, sage,
castorye, with other growing amonges^ us, none of the physicians that have any
judgment, improuethe, but they affirm these to be good for this purpose. And
I oftentimes do use such helps to the greatte comfort of my health. The sick
man may also use rubbynges, so that they be softely done, by all the time of
his said lyinge: which as they are for other things profitable, so I believe
they would not hurt in this thing. Let his heed be rubbed with a warm
clothe, and combed with an yuory comb.

That Guaiacus will not be myngled. Cap. x.
FVrthermore this medycine will abide nothing to be put to hit. Where at the
physicians be commenly astonyed: which would we should have none other
medicines in price, but such as receive their power from the.iii. parts of
the world, which think that they should lose al their auctorite, except they
joined to gether for us in their poticarye compositions, Indie, Aethiope,
Arabie, and the Garamantes, that dwell in the extreme part of the world. For
what will they allow, that is not dear and costly? And I beseech god, that
their counsel be never hard nor obeyed in the using of this wodde Guaiacum.
And that Stromer may be in this thing as a prophet, and in my judgment a
true. For he fears, and that very wisely, leest they at length will put
their hands thereunto.

Therefore let al men believe me, that have proved this medicine, that it is
sufficient to heal this disease: and that of it self without any other
thing. But as I said, a purgation in the beginning, and again a little
the.xv. day, and than in the last end, Which thing I would have done with
somone thing, not with any medicine made of many things. For I verily believe,
that the physicians look than to their own profit and lucre, and not for the
health of men, when they say, they must search, what takes away the cause of
this infyrmytie, as though this wodde did it not. And verily this is evident,
there is no other cause to use such purgations, but to cleanse the belly, and
again with abstinence and hunger to draw out and emptye the holle body. But
what say ye thereto: In that rude country where this Guaiacum grows, are no
physicians, no strange nor ferfetched ways nor rules of phisike. But
perchance men use there some herb or rote to purge with, and all do use one
thing, not to take away the grefe, but that when the belly is emptied Guaiacum
may the better work. wherefore in this, my coumsel is, that ye tourment not
your belie with things costely prepared, and specially to avoid the
compositions made of many things.

In this mind I stycke surely, that I would suffer nothing to be poured into
me, but only cassia by it self, and yet they offered me gladly many things,
And I was also wont before to pour in not only Reubarbarum but other things
also more barbarous than Reubarbarum, but my counsel came to a very good end.
which counselle if any will follow, he has an exaumple, commandment he
has none. For we teach not these things being our self taught of other, but
we monyshe you, that which we have proved, which thing I would all should
remember, that I teach nothing here rasshely, but that which I have learned
by mine own experience and prove, I deliver unto other. And if I had learned
ought else, it should not be kept close: but now saying by diligent search and
studious labor I have found out the power and virtue of Guaiacu^, which if
I do not well perceive, it is a fault. But if I have learned it, as it is in
deed: I do not greatly covet reward ne land, I will show you all the hole
faithfully. For that has this medicine deserved of me, except I would be
unthankful for so great benefits. And therefore seeing many well liking men
of nature are corrupted through the diversity of medicines, yea and some of
them utterly dystroyed, my sentence is, that nothing shall be added to help
this medicine, for this wod of it self is sufficient to pluck up this disease
by the roots. If any thing be put unto if, specially of these things, that
are inwardely received, this medicine takethe no help thereof, but rather is
corrupted and let from his workynge. This thing must be added thereunto,
that they, which drink of this Guaiacum, of whatte so ever state they be, in
this sycknes have so little need of bathes, that they be utterly forbid by
them that be expert, to wash so much as their heed, as long as they shall
be in this cure, and are permytted very seldom to wash their hands, but
never with cold water.

What place physicians have in this cure. Cap. xi.
But now I know, that some suspectethe me to be of this mind, that I would no
physician to be used in this cure, which thing is far other wise. For my mind
is, that sum, that is well learned and wise, should be gotten, which is not
bold ne lyberall in pourynge in of potycarye ware. His custody and also his
order, if he have learned the use of the admynistratyon of Guaiac^m, I would the
sick person should use. And these myscheuous busy fellows, which are so
glad to offer to us this strange waare, and medycines, if any be brought
from the heedes of Nilus, of which, the more they cost, the more they make
of the^, aua^syng them above the moon, these I say I would have driven away,
and in no wise to se the sick, no not through a latis. I have proved this
thing even so to be as Asclepiades judged, which thought all manner drenches
vnfrendely to the stomach. And Celsus also says, that medicines for the most
part hurt the stomach, ye and moreover that happened to me, that the same
authore showed before should happen, that medicines received into the body,
when they had been kept in the lower partis, were driven back again into the
heed, and caused great pain, which thing let all remember that will enter
into this cure, that they commit not them self rasshly to such tourmenters,
not only because the nature of this wood is not yet well known, but also
because it is their manner never to knowledge ignorance, but always to command
somewhat, to ministre and give some what, unto whom a man shall at no time
show his water, how well and helthfull so ever he be, but they will make
their bylle to the potticaries, recipe, recipe, take, take, saying, that
outher they suspect some sycknes to be begone, outher else that, the which is
now at hand, must be prevented or it come, except thou swallowe this (say
they) or drink that, thou haste the axes. O my scheuous men, if they may be
called men, and worthy to be hated of all the world. But what so ever they
be, they have been bold to take upon them many things of late about the
administration of Guaiacum, trusting in them self, unto that work, the
sellers thereof helping them forward through some conuention and bargayn made
between them I believe. For wha^ they saw, that by means of this rude vile,
and contemptible medicine there should be hereafter no need of their
disceptations. For I know some that would withstand so favorable and good a
thing, and yet durst not. And of the other side, when the marchantes feared,
leest they should selle but little, if the physicians allowed it not, for no
man would lightly go unto a medicyne, that came from so strange a place, and
was ministered so far from the commen manner of medicines: than they agreed
betwyxte them, I believe, that this should be spredde among the commen people,
that the physicians labor was necessary in this cure: So that they selling a
remedy approved of the physicians, moughte get as they were wont, and the
physicians in the mean time should lose nothing of their stipendes, seeing that
they were called unto this cure.

I know certain physicians of a better ^orte, that went into Spain in the
emperors name, and in the name of a bishop here, only to enquere and search
for this thing. And these, when they were taught of them that learned and knew
the thing in Spagnola, told nothing in manner other wise than our experience
has: but that they added of their own brains, what medicines, upon what
days, with what observations ought to be received, and by a mathematical
dyete, how they should behave them self in eating and drynkyng, which thing
I believe, they did of no euylle mind, but after their manner and
supersticiousnes, used of seem good physicians, which are so desirous to help
the sick, and are so tender toward them, that sometime they do more than
they should. Their good minds I do allow, but yet I think it dangerous, to
agree unto all men in all things. But to return again to these ill minded
phisitio^s. I think they be agreed with the marchantes, that they may be
admytted into part of the lucre and gaynes. For I my self did se a certain
physician, if we vouchsafe to call a rude and an unlearned ass by this name,
who with many words dyspraysed this wodde Guaiacum, as a vain thing, and
nothing worth: but that the merchants fained it to do these things. But
shortly after this lewd dispreiser was called unto the cure of a certain
rich man, and shortly after to an other: And when the man began to smelle
the gold, and saw greatte gaynes to comme through the multitude of such
sick men, he began first to be more gentylle, and to diminishe his cruelnes
and malice more and more, and within a while preised this wod, and greatly
auanced it, and said: Now at the last, I my self have proved the meruaylous
power and virtue of this wodde. Nay nay ass, but now thou haste found thine
advantage therein.

And after this manner this medicine seems to come into their canons, likewise
as all other medicines have done, which thing if it be done by the authority
of the wise, expert, and learned physicians, I improve it not: How be it my
mind gyuethe me, and I verily believe, that they can not do it as yet: And
again I think hit not very necessary. For either in Spagnola, where are no
physicians, somewhat is lacking unto this medicine, or else it ought here
likewise to be ministered without such supersticiousnes and formalities. May
there any man be so light of believe, as to think that the physicians can
handel this business more counnyngly, than they which knew it by experience
in them self, considering how that Guaiacum has not continued so long with
us, that they might in that space have serched and learned his nature. And to
speak in few words, men do yet marvel at the thing, and is not as yet come
unto perfyte knowledge. Therefore can it not be under their canons in this
short time, or any cause of his operation showed.

Let this therefore stycke fast in all men's minds, that they think this
simple diete sufficient to cure and heal them, which we teach by experience,
in our self. Let them be seen and looked upon, of the sober and learned
physicians: but let them leave the dregs and spices of this other sort.
Let them bid farewell for ever and a day to these that goo about to restore
us from diseases with their disputations. These are they, which, as I said,
allow nothing that is vile and of small price, and which think that I
tell fables, when I say that I have driven away the axes mo than eight times
by drinking of mine own water, by and by at the beginning: and with no other
medicine. And that I have seen men in Saxony, which have quenched all manner
diseases with drinking hot buttred beer. And again they will not believe me,
that there is a servant of my faders, which with.iii. certain herbs sodden in
wine, has healed a man's brain pan broken to pieces: and many sore and
evil wounds has he heled with a few herbs of our own growing, sodden in
wine or water, and that within.x. or.xii. days, without any fear of fever.
But this they think a vile medicine, saying it is not done after their
canons. And the same thing do they judge of Guaiacum, whose nature and power,
how clerelye they understand, and what manner words they use to have of hit,
we may perceive by the answer of a certain noble physician, not now young,
that he should begin to practice, but of extreme age, that it is very lykely
he fealethe A^icen, Mesuen, and other authors of phisike, as well as his own
nails. This physician when I was wrytinge these things, and taking my journey
from Frankeford, where he was writing of his recipe, was asked of a certain
friend of mine, what he thought of Guaiacum, I have not seen it, said he, but
what so ever it be, the weight, the color, the savor, must be considered in
qua^tite and qualyte. Than said I, his weighte is very heavy, and synketh in the
water, how little so ever the cuttynge be: and has the same color almost
that is in box, and it smells fayntely, somewhat of rosen: doeste thou know
now by this, what the nature and power of Guaiacum is? Than he thynkyng to
face me down with words, chattered I wotte not whatte, out of Arystotels
predicamentes. Than said I, It may be, good fader, saying the disease is new,
and this a new medicine, that the holle matter is yet unknown unto you.

Thou art deceived said he, it is no new disease, saying Plini writes
thereof. Than I, being desirous to know, what he knew in Plini, that I knew
not, asked him, what name Plini gave unto this disease? Mentagran said he,
quia vexar mentem, that is to say, because hit vexith a man's mind. Than
said I, why and do not other infirmities and sycknes than tourme^t and vex a
man's mind? or does not frensyes, madness, the falling evil, and other
ra^ysshynges of the wits this thing more than the french pockes? As he was
interpretynge I can not tell what: good old man, quod I, learn against an
other time to answer more wisely, and specially in such things as
apertaigne to man's health. For if ye had read Pliny, ye would not say
Mentagram to come a mente, but a mento. For in the chynne that disease first
began, which thing declares it to be an other syckenes than the french
pockes.

And who could forbere to rebuke this mischeuous mad ass heed? But let us
pass over these rascal physicians, of the which we se a great part rich in
words, but in the knowledge of things very poor, and let us return to
our purpose, whereof this is the pythe, that physicians shall be taken in this
cure, not as ministers of medycines or healers, but as kepers. And these to be,
as I have often said, chosen, wise, and well learned, and most expert, and
such as had lever be wise by them self, than err with the common sort.
And such as if they could heal a sick man with eating beans, would not
seek for any costly and especially strange medicines.

Whether concerning this cure there ought any regard to be takyn of thage of
the sex, or the quality of bodies. Cap. xii.
When they, which I told you went into Spain, to know the use of Guaiacu^,
enquered, whether children and great aged persons moughte be hospen. with this
remedy. For seeing they were weak, it was in deuteronomy, where they coud abide this^
diete: answer was made by them that had be^ in that ylonde, that they never
saw children by this remedy delivered from syckenes: But the men of that
ylonde showed them, that children were wont so to be cured, and women likewise
without any difference, and old men also very often.

Whereupon I remebre the notable saying of Hipocras, that old men may well
away with fasting, but men in strong and steadfast age scantly, young men
much wors, and children worste of all, specially they that are of a forward
and quycke mind. How be it Galenus will not old men there to be understand
men of the last cast.

Furdermore it is well known, that they that are of a sanguine qualite of body,
may abide hunger better and longer than the colerike. For in the sanguine the
humors that nourysshe the bod^ are more abundant and plenteous, the heat is
temperate and less burning: for it is myngled with moisture to make hit
slacker, but in these other, all things are thynne and dry, and nedy of
humors. Now who doubts, but they that be fleumatike may best abide hunger,
saying they have more moisture than them needs. Which things marked and
per^eyued, none that will take this matter in hand can lack counsaylle, in
what age or complexion so ever it be, but he shall know how to diminyshe the
meat, and how to enlarge it, and again how to bring in strayte fasting,
and how to lose it. Another that only, but also how much or how little of
Guaiacum ought to be spend. How be it in this thing I think ly^tell
regard to be taken, because this decoction, as I have before told, is not
such as heals by violence, or hastily brings health, but such as
bryngethe forth his effect slowly, and by lyttel and lyttel, and in a manner
can not be perceived, so that I think hit not to be feared, whether hit be
ministered to an old manne, a child, or a maiden, leest there be to much
given, so that no man pass to far the mesure, which I have appointed.
Therefore ye se, that I command no more to be given to the fat, than the
lean. And also Celsus ^aith, there is much diversity betwyxte a strong body
and a fat, and again betwyxte a thynne body and a weak. For they that be
thynne have much blood, and they that be fuller have more flesh. Which
thing often times deceyueth the physicians, as I told you it happened in me,
while they iuged a sklender body to be weak, and a fat body and great to be
strong and mighty. This one thing I think best to show you of in the
way, that my father being almost, lx. year old, was helped with this
Guaiacum, observing and keeping this diete straytely, and yet suffered no great
grefe: and in the mean time counsaylled with no physician, no he saw not
ones a physician, but only used my prescriptions.

Whether the use of this wodde be like in all places. Cap xiii.
FVrthermore I wot it well, that men will ask me, whither the use and effect
of Guaiacum be every where like. And also seeing it is a gery strange thing,
whether it be as conuenyent for the Germayns as the Spanyardes, and for those
that live soberly, as for these that live otherwise.

For as it seems no doubt in other medicines, but that there ought a regard
to be taken, of the nature of the place, so likewise ought there, as it
seems, about the admynystration hereof. For as the season of the year must be
marked, so like wise must the plage of the sky be considered, and that for
many causes, and specially because we may abide hunger otherwise in a thycke
air, than in a thynne. But the resydue of these things, I leave to the
physicians, to be more diligently discussed of them. That that I have learned,
and as much as seems to apperteyne to the Germaynes, I will open unto all men.

They of Spain think, this medycine ought to be like wise ministered in all
places for this disease, saying it has nothing, but that that al men may use
every where indifferently, and also has been proved among the people of.v.
diverse nations. First hit came from Spagnola into Spain, and than other
nations about them sought what profit would come thereof. And when they
understood, that many had used it sprosperously, the Ricilians received it.
From thens it came into Italy: and shortly after we of Germany have learned
the power thereof by experience. And of late we hard say, that by the help of
this wodde, many be cured in France. Which thing saying it is so, and saying
we live under that air, which is not so much subject unto syckenessis, as
the country of Spain and Italy are, through the subtylnes of the air, and
therefore need less to fear those yuels, which may other wise chance, as the
fevers, stytches, and such other: And again seeing we have strong bodies,
that may well away with labors, hunger, and thirst. And also the minds of
the Germaynes, for the most part, are meryly set, what should cause us to
think, but that our region and men be very apt unto this medicine? Which
thing Paulus Ricius, a physician of pure judgment and high erudition,
approuethe, and more over affirms, that he knowethe by plain experience,
that no nation is more apt unto this dyete. But if we had not seen some
restored unto health through the help of Guaiacum, and now should begin to
prove hit: we ought not believe, that god were so much set against us, that
he would either keep this helthfull medicine from us, or defraude us of the
virtue thereof, seeing it was brought from Spagnola into Spain, and had the
same virtue there, which hit had at home: except a man will say, that
Guaiacum disdayneth to be carried unto us, his nature first not changed, or
when it comes to the Germaynes, that than it suffers that great and mighty
power and strength of his, to be taken from him, and no where else. And it is
plainly known, that with us his help is very present, and peradventure more
present than else where. And our men, as they be much given to surfetynge, so
can they, if need require, abide very long and strongely both hunger and
thirst. And more over as our bodies abunde with heat, so are they very
strong. For after the judgment of Aristottle, they that inhabyte cold
countries, have much natural hete in them, and they that have much heat,
for the most part are of great strength. And because the Almayns use much
eating and drinkyng, Ricius the physician was demanded of late, what he
thought, whether it were best to remyt somewhat unto them in this cure of this
skle^der and thyn dyete, and he said: No by sayncte mary, not thus much, but
rather handle them the strayter, let these greatte belyes used in eating and
drinking, be driven to a much thynner dyete than these thynne and lean
Italians. And he showed me him self, that he had punysshed with hunger one
of these fat fellows.x. days longer than he ought to have done, because he
would have nothing remain that might let the operation of Guaiacum.

This thing and such other I do gladly rehearse by Ricius, and do make often
mention of Stromer, that such as shall read this book may understand, whom I call
good and right philitions, and how unworthy I th^^ke these commen tormenters
of men of the dignite of this title and name. And that strange countries may
know, that Germaynie has some good and excellent physicians. And that I
delight as much in the learning and amity of them, that be good and well
learned, as I hate these unlearned and foolehardy fellows, which after they be
for their money ones made doctors, straight profess, that they can reuyue
the deed, and restore life to them that are buried. But I will return unto
these.ii. which be of an other sort, of the which two Stromer, when I asked
him the last year a medicine to pounge me with, said, Do not vex thy stomach
with medicines in this age of thynne, in which nature is able of her self to
do all things much better. For as he is very scarce in pourynge in of
medicines, so brings he all sick people unto a very strayte rule of diet.
Wherefore when he had taken in hand to cure one in the city of August after
these ways, and he said, that he ^eared, lest he could not absteyne him self
from women: Saying than (said he) thou haste decreed to dye, thou have no need
of my help, and so forsook him and left him to his intemperauncie.

Of this sort there are two physicians moo, of excellent name: whereof the one
is thy physician, most noble prince, named Gregory Loppus, which has helped
me no little thing in the writing hereof, the other continuethe in the
archebysshoppe of Colyns court, called James Ebelly, a man of so great
authority, that four year before, that he was made the commen physician, all
physicians were they never so counnynge, gave place unto him. The other was
had in great honor of all the chief learned men of Papia, where this study
floryssheth, as well for the knowledge in phisike as for other good learning,
which he had joined unto phisik. But this is no place to reken up the
excellent learned men, but my purpose is to write mine experience of Guaiacum.
And therefore in this place I repete this to conclude with, that I verylye
think, that this wodde will help al manner of men, where so ever they be
become, brought up, or continue.

What time is best to ta^^ here unto. Cap. xiiii.
IT seems for sum causes that follow, that it is better to prove this cure
in summer than in winter. First because (as Galen says) the moisture in
summer increasethe and runs in all the body, and does goo and comme: and
therefore the pestilente humors may lyghty be separated from the good, and
they may be expelled and banysshed: and these that be wholesome and good kept.
Secondely because all diseases in winter do fasten their rotes deper, and take
surer hold, and in summer contrary wise, the humors be still mouynge, and
the body is apt unto all chaunges. But these consyderations apperteyne
generally unto all diseses: But as concerning this our cure of Guaiacum, for
as much as a great part of hit stondethe in dyete and sufferaunce of great
hunger, therefore it is most expediente to begin in summer. In that season a
man may better away with this dyete thanne in winter, when men are very hungry.
For if the body, being hot and boylynge of it self, as it is in summer,
should moreover be loded with meat, hit would lyghtely be dissolved into
diseases. But in the winter if woll not so, for so much, as hipocrates
says, that in winter a man's body inwardly abounds with natural heat,
and outwardly lacks it, for so much ^as than it auoydethe and flees from
the sharpness of the cold, wherewith the body outwardly is compassed, into the
inward parties, as unto a strong hold and castle: and there closes it
self up: But contrary wise in summer the same natural heat in man's body
follows, as Aristotle thynkethe, the nature of the air, and therefore puttethe
forth it self, and flees out to the extreme parts of the body. But so it
is, that the very nature and propretie of this medicine is, to reduce into the
body, and bring home again such natural heat as is lost.

And therefore this it semethe vnconueniente to go in hand with, or pu^^e in
experience this cure in the winter. For tha^ it is thought dangerous, when the
hete of the outward parts is drawn unto the inward parts, fe^te the
outward lymmes be forsaken and fe^te emp^ye of their strength and power,
specially in them that be cold of nature, which other wise in the winter lose
their heat, and have their bodies slain through the violence of cold, and be
like unto deed folk.

But here may we not pass over that, which Coppus admonyssheth, saying,
Guaiacum moves a man to sweat, cas^ynge out the evil humors, that be
noy^ull to the body: Therefore says he, the summer is most apt for this cure,
when the humors are more subtylle, and the skyn thynner. And in the winter the
ways and poores, by the which the sweat should have his course, and be
expelled, are stopped, and the humors gathered to gether, and clodded. But on
the other side for so much as in this cure done by Guaiacum, the sick are
grieved with nothing more, than with thirst, it is thought, that the syck may
worse absteyne from drink in somer than in winter. Wherefore in Spain, and
where the heat is vehement, they durst not hitherto prove this experiment in
the summer. Furthermore in winter (after the mind of Alexander Aphrodisius)
there ingendreth on a man through much eating (For than have men much
better appetite thanne in other seasons) an humor called pituita, that is
fleume, which thing might be avoided, if this cure were than in hand, in
which, great abstinence must be observed and kept. These things we have
spoken as touching the times of feruente heat and fervent cold, and now we
will speak of the other two seasons that be betwyxte both, of the which two.
Autumn seems the worste of both. For than is there great abundaunce of all
manner syckenes, and the humors wa^e worse and worse, because this time of the
year is unequal and without order, always chaungynge and inconstant, brynging
in many kinds of diseases. For as Celsus affyrmeth, Autumn kills many a one.

Furthermore the french pockes are very noyful to the synowes, and the said
author teaches, that winter and Autumn be not mete nor apt times unto
medicines, for the resolution of the synowes. But these are the reasons of them
that dispute generally and speak not only of the use of Guaiacu^. Wherefore
this I think, that summer (at the left ways in Almayne) may be best taken:
but that is that part of summer, that begins when vere ends, as in May,
for than there is not here so much heat, but the sick may well abide and
suffer thyrst: And in winter the cold is very feruente, and likewise in vere
and Autumpne the cold is sharper, thanne the sick may abide in this cure.
For it is one of the chief points for him that is restored by Guaiacum, with
all diligence to eschew cold.

And as for such incommodities, as may happen in the summer, to the intent
they may the less be feared, I have spoken of before, and shall repete them
again, when place shall be. And nevertheless at this time I do affirm, that
this drink of Guaiacu^ does meruaylously stere up the natural power and
strength, and has power and might to quicken and to make lusty the body,
which for lack of natural heat is weak and consumed: Which things if
they were not as I have said, and had not Hipocrates in a certain place, if I
well remember me, said: that Vere and Autu^ne are the most aptest tyme^ to
lett^ blod and minister medicines, verily the counsayll of Celsus should than
have sem^d best, which says: Vere is the holsomest time to go to phisike,
and next unto that winter, and that is very dangerous, and Autumn most
dangerous of al.

That we must utterly forbear wine and women in this cure. Cap. xv.
ANd may I not boldly affirm, this medicine to be given us (...) god, seeing
hit never helps, except a man be given to holiness of life? Verily where as
we be brought into the favor of god by two virtues specially, that is by the
chastity of body, and abstinence of meat and drink, as the laws of christen
people bear record, let him be ^ure except he bind him self straytly in
these bonds, he shall not only come unto this medicine in vain, but shall go
forwards also in the same with no little danger. In so much that it is plainly
known, that he shall dye without remedy, that uses any woman before the.xl.
day after the cure is begone, either because the body so emtyed, is not able
to suffer the injury of that act, or else because god will not that any man
should use such his great benefyte vnpurely. And therefore among al them that
proved this wod in Almayne, it happened one fellow to dye, and that through this
fault, as they that were present affirmed by their oaths.

And next unto this the use of wine is known most pestilent, and must be
avoided in this cure. For it loses the joints of the body, and hurts the
sinowes. And for as much as it has vehement power to enter into the lymmes,
and shake all the body, it is thought, that this decoction of Guaiacum shall not
profit in his body, that uses wine, but shall rather put him in ieoperdy and
fear of death, when these things Guaiacum and wine, which are most
contrary, mete and come to gether. Therefore some there be, that monysshethe to
absteyne from wine an hoole month after the time of this cure is paste for so
much as this medicine keeps his course of workynge many days after it is
dronken. And therefore lest any thing should stop or let it, they take away
the use of wine, and he that fleethe the voluptuous pleasure of the body, must
take heed, that he give no place to glotonie. For the old proverb witnesses,
that hunger never begets adultery. And again it is said, that Venus waxes
cold without bread and wine. Aelian^s wrytethe, that Zaleucus the lawyere of
Locrense, forbede sick men wine under peyue of death, with out the physicians
counsel. But be it the nature of Guaiacum might suffer this voluptuous act, and
did not abhor wine, yet does the physicians books with full mouth make
mention, that they are very hurtful and grievous unto that body, which is take
with this sickness, and principally for the joints. Wherefore Celsus reports,
that there were some that were vexed with ache in their limbs, which through
one years abstinence from wine and women have benne safe all their life. And
the same Celsus concludes, that such as are borne chaste, or be gelded, or
children, or ever they fall to woman's company, and likewise women, except them
that have their flowers stopped, are seldom tempted with this disease. And
Alexander in his problemes says, that such as drink water only, are quycker
in all senses than other. For wine stops the ways of the mind, and dulleth
the senses. And Cicero says, that for so much as wine profyteth the sick but
selde, and hurts very often, it is much better not to give it, than under
the hope of doubtful health to run into open ieoperbie. And Venus, in what so
ever state a man be, coldeth the belly, and dries it, if Aristotle be true. For
in such coupling, the natural heat departs, and through the euaporation
that than is made, drynes is caused and engendered.

Lo sobernes and chastity two holy ordynances of life, be the principal
observation in this thing, the highest precept, the chief point of helih,
which diligently kept, no ieoperdye can rise. For be it they tarry the
medicine or utterly stop and let hit, yet they put not a man in ieoperdye
of his life, when they be neglected.

That salt must be eschewed in this cure. Cap. xvi.
Among all the things that must be avoided, sum men do meruail, why salt
is forbidden to be used for the space of this dyete, considering there is
other times nothing more wholesome for man's body: and they say, that they can
not perceive, how any hurt should comme thereof in this disease. The which
comes all to geter of the corruption and putryfaction of the bloudde, seeing
only salt most of all things preseruethe and defends from both these.
And more over the nature of salt is to make fast and dry up, to bind and
cleanse: which propretie were thought most metest and necessary to be
ministered, to pluck up this disease by the rotes. First because the body
infected with the pockes, is loosed and shaken: secondly because the humors
proceed and flow out from one matter. Thirdly, which is the chief point of
al, because the corrupt and infecte blo^de is yet within the body vnpourged.
For this syckenesse is no other thing, than a certain order and state of the
body changed through the trouble of the blood: Even as it hapeneth in a ^ytie,
when a sedicion and partakynge enters into a commen welthe, and the common
people be moved in their minds: than are all things scattered abroad without
order, and moved out of their places, nothing hangs to gether, nothing
standethe, nothing abides, no quietness, no peace, but all full of trouble,
unto the which change of the body, motion of members, and thakynge of joints,
with all such troubles, there must come some sad and wise father, a man of
high authority in the commonwealth: for his godlynes and good deservings
toward all men (who as Virgyll says) may govern and rule with words their
hearts, and quiet their stomakes. So in like manner is it in salt, which as I
said, through fasting, driynge, byndyng, and purgynge, does put to quietness
things, that are moved, does unite and knytte things that are broken, does
bynd to gether things that are plucked aparte, does make caulme and quiet
things, that are troubled: and brings quietness and sauegarde unto all
things: yea how greatte a thing and how necessary thought Pliny salt to
be, saying without salt a man's life can not endure? And therefore say they,
how can that hurt in this syckenes, which in other diseases conserueth all
things? And for as much as in this cure we must take heed, that no corrupt
humors be abunda^t, and salt resolves and cleanses all filthy moistnes, and
also keeps down and restray neth the flowynge of the body: it is thougt we
should be more plentuous of salt herein than else where. Notwithstanding
these reasons, we must have an other consider ation herein. And first of all
as much as appertaynethe unto his disease, how the sick must forbear salt
meats, not all manner, but only such as are very sharp. Let it be asked
of the physicians, which have long before time prosecuted that matter to the
uttermost, for this time, seeing the medicine of Guaiacum is specially
entreated of, we may say, that though all physicians know the use of salt,
except hit be very little, to be noyous and hurtefull in all other passions
of the synowes, and in such diseases as spring of corrupt blood, and of
yelowe and black color, or salt fleume, for so much as with his tartshes,
it narpeneth coler, and burns the bloudde, and with his native drynes causes
the humors and nutriment of the body to dry up, and by that means distroyeth
all things, that should help unto health. Yet never the less about the
administration of Guaiacum they forbede utterly all manner use of salt: for the
same consyderation they fordede all sharp things, and moreover all things
penetratine: and among these, spices, and wine. For so much as all such
through their sharpenes and persynge power, do open all poores and entreyes,
and goo deep: which violence runnyng through the body, Guaiacum can have no
place to work. If these reasons do not satisfy those men's minds, I will say
unto them, as the philosophers say of the stone Magnes, if it be anointed with
garlyke, it draws not iron to it, so like wise Guaiacu^ has a certain
secret virtue, and can not tell whither it be as yet known, to abhor
specially the use of salt, and which power is lost if salt ones come unto it.
And this have we spoken of the for bearing of salt in this cure. Now will
we speak of the sklender fedynge and hunger, wherewith the body must be
weakened and made lean, whereupon all the matter of this dies hangs.

Of sklender fedynge, and hunger, necessary in this cure. Cap. xvii.
Although we spoke before of the small and thynne fedynge, that the sick
must use, and how his meat must be diminished, and he brought to hunger, yet
we think it very necessary to warn you ones again of the same thing, in
this place, not only because this medicine requires a void and an emptye
body, from all manner fulness, but also because I would declare, that in old
time there was a like manner to cure the sike. And we may also read in Diodoro,
that the Egiptians did heal their sick other with fasting or else with
vomit. For they affirm, as he recyteth, that sycknesses are engendered
specially of the superfluity of meat. And therefore they thought that way of
curing to make most unto health, that tuketh away the first causes of the
disease. Let not therefore these dronkerdes, these interpretate fellows, given
to surfetynge, be grieved with this dyete, which as Persius says, delyteth only
in delitious fedynge, and may live scantely half a day without meat: whose
bealy as the prophet says, is their god, and all their mind and life is
nothing but fedynge. Let such fellows, as I said, cesse their grudginge
against this dyete, seeing that thereby so excellent and so good a thing is
obtained, and so great an evil is avoided with so little labor. And let them
not than in this thing speak of the great ieoperdye, which may comme of
weakness, through long abstinence: as who says, that he may faint, that
^ateth after this manner. For Plini says, that none dyethe for lack of meat
before the.vii. day: and may continue until the.xi. day. And al be it he
writes, that in his time there was a woman in Germani, which lived sometime
full twenty days without meat: and sometime.xxx. And that he saw a man,
which continued.vii. wekes without meat, drynkyng every second day only
water. Plini also says, that he knows for a surety, that the Scythians
having certain herbs in their mouths, abide hu^gre and thirste sometime.xii.
days. And some also say, that the christen philosopher Amonius, never eat but
only tosted bread, which thing if any man greatly marvel at, let him
remember, that this is also written in the stories, that certain of the mages
lived ones by meal and herbs only. And that Diodore writes, that the old
Egiptians meat was herbs and roots.

And Hesiod^^ monysheth, saying, we should line and eat Malus and asphodelo.
And Plato writynge of the laws makes mention, that Epimenides was contented
sometime so to live. If any man will set these thingis before his eyes, and
consider the^, tha^ shall he perceive, that we live very deinteously in this
diete, and do take in a manner more than needs. But if it were a very hard
thing to absteyne so from meat, what is he that loves him self so little, but
he would to get his health, suffer this grief? or that had not lever
suffer.xxx. days hunger, than to be sick as long as he lives? or had not
lever pass over so many days with stronger hunger, that he may live the
resydue of his life holle and sound of body, than to anoyde this little
grief, and to be turmented all the days of his life with intolerable
sorrows, and to have runnynge from him stynkynge and fylthy matter? I have
told you, that this is no new manner of curing: for always the best
physicians have commanded abstinence to the sick. Of the which nombre is
Asclepiades, who, as Celsus says, writes, that the most sooner aygne remedy
against the fever is, as he has proved it, to diminisshe the strength of the
patient with much watch and abstinence, in so much that at the first
beginning of the syckens, they should not soomoche as wasshe their mouth.

Abstinence, says Eusebius, both keeps the bodyly health, and the
shamefastenes of mind. Wh^rby it appears, that little and temperate feding
is profitable to the flesh and the soul, as wytnessethe Timotheus, which
being on a seson with Plato at supper, having before him such meat as he was
wont to have, turned toward his friends and said: They that Plato receives
to super, shall be well at ease long after, meaning that after much eating of
diverse and abundant costly dysshes, deynteously dressed, there followed evil
and raw digestion, and greatte grefe of the stomach. Wherefore afterward when
it chanced him to mete with Plato, he said unto him: Ye Plato do ete this day
rather for to morrow than for the time present.

And in Lucian Gallus the cock Pithagory iugeth it a great benefit of god
given to Micyllus, because he could always with hunger avoid al fevers. And for
that cause was without such disease. Now what shall we say to that, which as
sayncte Hierome wrytethe, that certain dyseased with the joint ache and the
gout, after their goods were gone, and were from them, and were brought to
poor fare and simple meat, they did recover their health? For they (says
saint Hierome) took no thought nor care for their household, and the habu^dance
of meat and drink, which do break both the body and the soul. And anon
after he says: There is nothing that dullethe a man's mind so much as a
full bealy: rysynge and tournynge hither and thither, blowynge out wind with
balkynge fysting and fartynge.

This story may be a learning unto many men, which is read of a certain
great belyed and fat abbot. As he was carried unto certain bathes, it
fortuned him to mete with a gentylman, who asked him whither he was going? the
abbotte made him answer and said, that he must go unto the bathes. Why (quod
the gentylman) are ye sick? Nay (quod the abbot) I am not sick, but I have no
appetite unto my meat. I go therefore now unto the bathes to get again mine
appetite, which I did of late lose: for they are holsom therefore. Verily
(quod the gentylman) In this thing I can be a better physician unto you. And
took the abbotte with him, and put him into a deep and da^ke dongeon, where he
fed him certain days hungerly: and than at last he asked him, whether he
had an appetite to hie meat? Ye mary (quod the abbotte) I says (quod the
gentylman) than is it reason that thou gyne me a reward for my medicine, and
made him pay two hundred crowns, and sent him away in good health, with
such an appetite, that he could have eaten both beans and lekes, where as
before he refused all manner meat, were it never so deyntie: and so was he
well ordered, seeing he sought not meat with hunger, but hunger with meat.
But peradventure we have spoken more than enough of this thing, therefore let
us go unto other matters: But first I must tell you (to make an end of this
chapter) that Guaiacum requyrethe not a bealy that is replenysshed with
varyetie of meats, or troubled with wind in the inward parts, but purified
and cleansed from al rawnes and grosnes of humors.

How hunger may easily be suffered. Cap. xviii.
ANd this scarsenes of meat can not only be borne, but also m^ye easily be
borne, and that through the virtue of Guaiacum: which after that the body is
ones brought down, does both preserve the life, and also causes that the
fycke shall not need to eat any thing at all. Therefore did I not without a
cause give warning, that the sick should absteyne from meat as much as may
be. And if he way feeble or faint, he may not be helped with meat, but with
the sweet savors, which I speak of, as much as is possible, put to his
mouth, and specially with hot breadde. But if any feel him self to be wasted
and ready to slide away through weakness. Which thing how it should chance
in any manne, I can not tell: for in me there happened no such thing at all,
that I neded any manner help: Than I would counsel him to use these things,
which Pliny thinks eases hunger, and quenchethe thyrste, when they be very
little tasted of, that is butter and lykeresse, reclisse likoresse. Drels in
this thing we must follow Celsus, which says thus: This one thing must
always be observed, that the physician be often times caused (...) sytte by
the pacient, to consider what strength he is of, and to cause him as long as
he has any strength to wrestle and fight with hunger. And if he begin to
doubt of his weakness, to help him with meat.

Except any had lever follow that, which Gellsius says, that Erastrat did
write, that the Scythians, when they for sum cause must needs suffer hunger,
do thruste together their belly and bind it round about very straightly with broad
swadlynge bonds, thynkyng that by such pressynge to gether of their bealy,
hunger may be put away, or the easelyer borne. For seeing, as he says, hunger
comes of emptines, and is caused of the voydnes and holownesse of the
intrayles, and of the bealy, than when the bealy is gyrded in hard, so that
the emptines is filled, and the holownes joined, there can be no hunger where
as these things be not, and utterly forbearynge of meat, may lightly be
born. But why say I, vitterly for bearyng of meat, which can not be in this
cure? I may well call it hunger, what so ever it be, that any abides. For it
may be suffered well and easily, though a man take nothing in the world to
help it. But unto these deynteous sick persons what thing can be light?
which can not only suffer no hunger, but also not to have a stomach unto
meat, they think it intolerable. For the which if at any time they be
sick, we might pray god, that they never recover, considering they esteem
hit a greatte grefe to bye health with a lyttel sufferynge.

Of these manner persons if I speak some what largely, I do it after mine
accustomed manner, specially when I perceive many of my country men the
Almaynes, to er^e in this behalf

The praise of temperaunce in spite of ryotte. Cap. xix.
But I beseech almighty god, that this nation may ones know it self. Which
thing I do not desire so much, because it is uncomely, that the people that
rulethe all the world, should so live, as for that, that such intemperancie
and ryotte is an occasion to us of great euyls, and also to be greatly
despised. If other people should eat and drynge as much as they coud, they
think they should pass the law of nature: but when we cromme in so much,
that we can not bear it, we look after laud and praise. What meneth these
strynes and contentions of our valyant drynk^rs? When he that drynketh is
received with triumph, when it is glory to overcome in drinking, and no
shame to be drunk and cast it up again. O count^ry, O empire. As for the
Polonians, or if there be any other that passes us in dronkennes, I regard
them not, but this nation I say ought to remember them self, and have regard
to their dignity: except it seem, that other nations are comen under this
empere, not for the reverence and opinion, which they had of our noble
forefaders, but to despise and mock us. Verily it must needs be, that they
were far other men, that had such honor given unto them, than we be, that are
thus despised. Is there so much as a child in Italy, that knows us by any
other name, than by the name of dronkerdes? Seeing thanne that other strange
nations do speak sooner of our vice than of our humanity or virtue: shall we
not change our lyuinge? Shall we not fere to lose this honor to our great
rebuke and shame? Or shall we not think, that hit is more shame to us to lose
the title and profit of the empire, that has benne a glory to receive, when
it was offered unto us?

Or that sober men and reasonable will be content to be under the rule and
dominion of a drunk and barbarous nation, being without all good humanite.
But if hit can not happen into the brains of our men to understand their own
shame, yet at the lest let them know their own dystruction. And if we set
so little by the lost of our glory and the rebuke and shame of our
voluptuous mind, that we will not leave for that, our unthrifty living: let
us at the least wise have so much wit, as to care for our bodily health,
which must needs be troubled and brought to naught in such festynges,
surfetynges, and drynkynges: about the which, as the satirike poet says,
leapethe and skyppeth in greatte companyes of al kinds of deseses. But Germani
has lost his wit and understanding, and has forgotten it self, not all
Germany, but many in Germany. These be they that draw their dyners unto
soupper, and their suppers in to far night. These be they, which through
their mysorder, have caused a strange poet, but yet not an ylle poet, for he
seems to hate ill men, to write to the greatte selaunder of this countreye,
saying: Bacchus sytteth at the deyse, and Appollo is cast out of all company.
For all the life there is nothing else but drinking, that is, they set more by
drinking than by wisdom. How be it these drongerdes, that err through
madness and lyghtnes, might lightly be despised: but these that with their
deynteous fare, and nyce and wanton apparel cast them self heedlonge into the
mydmayne see of voluptuousness and pleasures. These I say, be worthy to by
hated of all the world. These be they, that lie upon their pyllowes of down
heped together, that consume what so ever may be gotten by land or see, not to
sustain their life, but to delyght their sweet mouths, that must wear the
fyneste lynnen, that must be robed in purple, that rejoice, to be wrapped in
soft myes skynnes, not so much to keep them from cold, as for delicacie and
wantonness. These be they, that may not touch commen clothe, whose skyn can not
suffer but the finest and softest thing that may be gotten: that take their
counsel in quaffynge, and in their counsels quaffe, that meddle with no sad
matters, but led all their life in feastynges.

These things are not used (I say ageyn) through al Germany, but specially,
which thing is to our great shame and rebuke, among the chief and the nobles
of Germany: which pamperde up daily with all manner deyntie fare, exercisyng
dyners and suppers meat for popes, in them they bankette, in them they bring
one to an other, and therein have such pleasure, that they had lever dye, than
to be plucked from hit. They have none other care, but to fylle the bealy: by
whom Salust if he had suspected such bestes ever to come in Germany, might
well have spoken this his saying. Many men given to fedynge and slepynge, have
passed even as strangers their holle life, without knowledge and learning. But
let a man cast with him self what opinions the Romans ^ad in these days of
the people of Germany: and thanne set before his eyes, what a monster, and
how hateful this cherysshynge of our throtes, that we now use, had been then?
In the which when we have spente a great part of our life, and have received
thens those things that must needs solowe that kind of life, that is
innumerable kinds of diseases: than do not we confess nor knowledge our faut,
but do accuse god of cruelty. And though hit be we our self, that get and
bye with great cost and expenses the seeds of all our syckenes, and norysshe
with all out heart our own mischief and destruction, cherysshynge out euyls
with the lost of our holle patrimony, yet when we be ones down, and set
up with quosshens and pyllowes heped round about us, not able to move hand
nor foot, than we blame nature, and say, we may thank god of all our euyls
and peynes.

For no glottons do otherwise, than they did, which Iunenall spekethe of,
which believe, that god in his fume and wrath does cast these diseases upon
their bodies: and therefore call them the gonne stoones and weapons of god. But
would to god we would return to our oten porage, and be covered as we were in
time paste, with wolle^ garments, so made that every lymme and part of us
might be seen, and to wax weary of this sylke, and hate these garments so
full of plaites. For what other things are all these, but first the wastyng of
our patrimony, and than the purchasyng and incresse of all euylles and
diseases? Verily our a^ cetours, being very nyggardes in this things, did
greatte acts and excellent things with high glory. But when did we, that to
fulfill our pleasant affection receive venom in the stead of meat, any thing
worthy the honor and glory of Germany? It was far better for us to be
called and counted barbarous, when our living was homely and rude, than now
to have in this ryottous life, and this shame, the laud and praise of wits
and good learning.

What would great Charles say now, if he came again to us, and saw our princis
in their utter garments of sylke: seeing that he him self wore a shert of
habergyn? Or what would one of the Othons say, which stretched out and
enlarged their virtue and valyantnes in duste and durte: when our men anoynte
them self with strange and costly bawmes?

There is a notable execration of Chrysyppus against them, that use oyntmentes
voluptuously to the pleasure of other. The devil take these delycate fellows,
says he, that have sclaundered so good a thing, the people that were wanton
and given to pleasure used it in times paste. But it was never thought, that
the Germayns should ever come to this point, to smell of oyntementes and
bawmes. And now we call for poma^ders, muskeballes, damaskepo^ders, and all
manner sauers as things necessary to our life, and think it great honor to us
to smell of such strange savors. Another is it women only that are in this
faut, but men, specially princis and priests.

Solon forbade oyntmentes to be sold in (...) cite of Greece: And the
Lacedemones expelled them from their city, saying, that they corrupted and
marred their oil.

And Lic^rgus took away from the same Lacedemons bankettynge, feastynge, and
^ostely dyners. And Socrates (as ^enophon says) did grievously rebuke such
ryottes abundance.

Trewely the old Germayns minded no such voluptuous plesures, and they thought
it a very strange thing, to live any thing wantonly or nycely. I have hard
some old men say, that when they were young men, it was a suspecte thing to
wear a gown, when we now a days do honor and worship purpull. And
therefore we may well cry, O corrupted and wretched world.

They were covered with the skynnes of wild beasts, and lay in their feldes
under the sky, and were made stronger with contynuall labor, where we that be
wantonly and nycely clothed, and take our pleasure under our gaye gylted
houses, be through all kinds of ryotte and voluptuous pastimes utterly
weaked, and of all manly strengthes deprived. And may any man think, that
this manner of living can lightly have an end, seeing the chief and principal
example thereof comes fro them specially, that be called prestes? What they be
in deed god knows, and they only, to whom it has pleased god to give trewer
eyes to se with. These do not use al manner pompes and excesses in things
appertaynyng unto the service of god, but every one of them must swym at home
in his house in all manner of costly and deynteous dyshes and cups, and they
call eating and drinking living, or if they do not so call it, yet verily
they so esteem it. And therefore seeing they do so, other men think they may
do the same.

And this the laudable and naturalle custom and fascion of Germany is
banyshed. For we be so far gone, that we excede all other nations, be they
never so evil, in such abundaunce and voluptuous pleasures. It had more
becommed us to have driven these things out from the mids of us, and as
Diogenes did to the Tartis and fine manchettes, so to have said to this
strange ryottous manner, O gueste go and get the hens quickly. Ye the
examples of strange nations ought ones to have taught us. And seeing to
bankette and surfeit most largely is now adaye counted most kyngly, why do we
not here the answer of Menedemus the philosopher, which he made to Antigonus,
askyng him whither he should go to a daynteous and costely feste or not? Have in
mind (said he) that thou art a kings son. Antisthenes, to a certain
person praysynge delicious fare, said, I would our ennemies fared delycately.
The words also of saint Paul ought to be written in our heart, saying: Meats
are given to the bealy, and the bealy to meats, but god shall make an end of
both. The same Paul when he condemned the works of the flesh, among
which he nombred excess of drinking and eating, he addethe to these words,
Of the which things I now warn you, like as I have before times warned you,
that they, which commytte such things, shall not be the inheritours of the
kyngedome of god.

But they now do the same things, which ought to be our gides into the
kingdom of god, priests, chanons, bysshoppes, and prelates, in so much, that
it is now come into a proverb through out all Germany, Let him be made a man
of the church, that loves to live pleasantly, as though such a life were
metest for them.

The frugalitie of my grandefather Laurence Hutten, which is worthy to be
written, ought to move us unto much glory, who allthough he were rich, and
much occupied in greatte matters of our princis, both in war and peace, yet
would he never admytte into his house pepper, saffron, gynger, nor such other
straung spyces, nor used garments but only of our own wol, al though there
were sometime precious vestures given unto him for the well doing of his
busynes. And he did not only this him self, but also among his equalles
he rebuked greatly the fascions and manners of men, saying. We seek ever
strange things, as though we had not growing with us, wherewith our meat may
be made delicate. If we will please and delight our taste, or as though the
great price of our garments did increase the qualities of the mind. But I
will cease to speak more of this man, leest I should seem to covet mine own
glory. If I had first told you this one thing me thinks it is not so goodly a
thing to be borne of this my stock and familye, in the which be sum causes
besides this, whereof I may glory, as to be borne his neuewe, that thus has
lived. Our predecessors, and such as I my self have seen old men, when I
was but a child, when they did keep in their meat, drink, and clothing such
temperance, they were of good liking of body, and through great labor were
hardened against hunger and thirst, heat and cold, where as we at the first
frost, sheuer and shrink together both hand and foot: and as soon as winter
begins, we be treble ^urred, and be shut up in our hot houses, out of the
which we go not until mydsommer, when the son and heat bourneth and parcheth
all things. And as I say, where as now scantly the.x. person of the noble
men can be found in Germania, but he has either the gowte in his fete, or in
his hands, or is grieved with the dropsye, sciatica, or lepry, or is tourmented
with this french evil, which bry^gethe these greattest euyls with him.

But at the last let us return and enter into that life, which is metest for
this nation and empire of Germany, and which even they, whom I told you lived
wantonly, can be well contented to here praised. For I think there is not one
of these, that give them self to such delycate and ryottous life, but he
hates the same in other, except he be so blinded through intemperancie, that
he loves these vnthryf^ie manered Sardanapales, and Heliogabalos, or does hate
the persimonia of many, which be of the contrary facion. Truly virtue seems
very amia^le even to them that does little follow or regard it.

It was an old meat of Catos, porage made with chese and eggs. And Plini
rehersethe, that gruelle made with otemelle grootes was ones the meat of the
very and true Germaynes, as it is yet of many unto this day. But we feed upon
strange and beyond see victualles, thinking that we have so much need of
them, that every house holder has decreed to sell these things, that grow
with us, to bye the other with: which one thing has enryched the Fucher^:
which in the mean season, that we thus nouryshe our bodies, have all the
money, and like wise all the excellent goodly places in Almayn. For they being
the ministers of our voluptuous living, are so incresed, that there is no
prince in Almayne able to compare with them in riches. So far be we gone,
and so little perceive we, what things Germanye denoureth and consumes.
Wherefore I think that he was of excellent wisdom (if any such was) that
feared in times paste, lest such voluptuous and delycate life should enter
into Germany: whereof (as every m^ may plainly see) spryngeth so much
pestilence, and so many diseases: and ageyn perceived, that they should live
quietly, that could be contented to lack such pleasures and delyciousnes. For
they that dress our herbs, and line with them (as there be some true
Germaynes yet remaining) they are of good health and bodily liking, but they
that be spice fyngered, and belche synamom, and smell all of clo^es, and have
all their pleasure in goodly array, these be they, that are subjects to al
kinds of diseases and euylles. How properly therefore did the Satirike Poet
call the gowte Rich? For it medleth not with them that are poor, and drink
no wine, but hit is a companion for rich men, dronkerdes, surfetours, and
delycate lyuers, which (as the same poet says) to get sweet morselles,
leave no place vnserched.

And so, though this countreye bring forth that that is necessary for the
life, yet as though nature had utterly forsaken them, they ron unto strange
things, fetching their garments their meats and medicines from Hercules
pyllers, from the ilonde of Taprobana, from the river of Ganges, and from
places farther of than these, even almost from the heed of Nilus.

The wrache of god light on these deed men's heedes, that first received these
euyls into Germany. For they have done a thing unworthy for the grauite of the
Germains. Truly they, our forefathers, were none such, the which preferred
the labors and peines of Hercules above the fleshly lusts, obone the delycate
meatis and soft beds of Sardanapalus. But O lord Chyrste, how delycate,
how holsomme fedynge is breadde made of rye or whete, and gruelle made of
millio, oriza, ptisana, and otemele porage? Add thereunto so many kinds of
herbs, and so many diverse garden spyces, as anyse, coryandre, cynomum, fenell,
musterde, neppe, oynions, lekes, garlyke, and specially if we will believe
Pliny, persley has a singular good grace, to season meats with. And for
drink we have ale and biere. And for the rich men there is wine, which is
the pure and clean drink of the earth, as Appollonius judges: so that it be
used scarsly, whether it grow in France, or upon the banks of Rhenus. We have
also of our own beestes flesh both tame and wild, which are not of
vnpleasante taste. We have fruits of trees, not to be despised, how rich is
Germany, how plenteous of all meats, how abundantly does hi^ minister all
things necessary for the life of man? Wherefore my chief desire and vow is,
that they never lack the gowte, nor the french pockes, that can not live
without pepper: And I pray god, they may ones be brought to extreme hunger,
which now search in all places, not for meat to live with, but for delycates
and deintees, wherewith they may stere up their sweet mouths and provoke their
appetites. How justly did Galenus envy health to such fellows, when he
forbode all physicians from the curinge of dronkerdes, and of them that are
given to the belly? If such at any time were sick, for they by and by (says
he) through intemperate living hepe up again gross and vndygested humors,
so that they be cleansed and purged in vain.

The necessity of nature is lightly contented, says Hierom. Cold may be
expelled with course clothyng, and hungre with little meat.

When Anaxerses the king of Perse was brought to that necessity, that he eat
dry fygges and barley bread, than he beholdynge his fortune, and such a
greatte change, said: O what pleasure is this, that my regal abundaunce
kept me from? By the which example we may know, that they only live in
knowledge of their own life, that live scarsely and soberly: And on the other
side, they that be given to the norysshynge of their bodies, and the pouring in
of al things, be as men erryng in darkness, and perceive not their own life,
so far are they from the life of pleasure.

How be it within short space, when they be ones fallen into diseases, than
they begin to feel and perceive, what life they have chosen, and what is the
reward of the same. For as Persius says, when the hard, and stony go^te, the
branches of their old sursetynge, has broken their joints: than they
mourn, that they have passed their days so grossly, and consumed their life
so fylthely, and be so sorye to late of their life to comme.

Do we than doubt, what is the cause of all the syckenes, that the Germayns
have? seeing we may yet remember, that this pestilence and mischefe of the body
did enter with that rank and riottons life. For here we do now so give our
selfs to whores and pleasures, that we seem to strive with other strange
people for the maystry of filthy living, as men do in games for the best
wager. And for this purpose we have certain ministers very expert. The^e
get and conueye unto us from the fardeste parts of the world prouocations
of glotony. These bring in from far, with meruaylous delyght, both to eat,
to drink, and also to clothe our selfs with. Wherein saying they have long
and many days continued, to their own (as I said) great advantage, they have
made some so delicious, that wha^ they be here in Almayne, they must drink
wine of Corse, they must have meats out from Italy, and contrary wise, when
they be at Rome, they use wine of Rhene, or that which Neccarius brings
forth. O peruersed custom of living. O my scheieffe, worthy to be hated of
all men, even so m^che the more that they be bishops, which do these
things, and are the ring leaders thereunto. Such manner of persons I believe do
desire of god, as Aristotle writethe of Philoxenus, to have the necks of
cranes.

Aristophanes reproves the tables of the Syracusanes, and the voluptuous
abundance of the Sibarites. If at that time he blamed such things, what
would he say, if he now lived, and saw our banketing? feastynge, our
quaffynge and drinking? Therefore as many as coueyte virtue and knowledge,
let them take heed and harken to Pythagoras, which says: that a man, that
ryseth not above man, can not ta^t or atteyne any high thing, that is to say,
as long as a man lives vnchastely and dyssolutely, be shall never do any
great thing with wit or mind. The most holsommest fedynge for man (says
Pliny) is one manner meat, the heapyng of diverse tastes is pestiferous, and
sawces are worse than that. Persins well perceived these things when he thus
spoke in greatte mode. Thou would have lyttie joints, and a hole body in
age. Ye but the full dysshes, and the fat denteous, will not suffer the
gods nor Jupiter to grant thereunto.

And Cicero brings in Cato saying: that a libidinous and intemperate youth,
makes age very feeble. And he aduyseth and counsaileth us to eat and drink so
much as may sustain the bodily strength, and not oppress it, thinking that
nothing can be so unfriendly unto the mind of man, which he callethe an
heavenly reward and gift, as voluptuousnes is. Nor as long as lust and
pleasure bears rule, Temperance can have no place: Neither virtue may bear
any stroke, where lust and pleasure reigns. And therefore he judges, that we
ought to give great thanks unto age, which causethe that we list not to do
that thing, which we ought not. For voluptuousnes, says he, being an
enemy unto reason, stops and lets all good counsel, and blyndeth the
eyes of the mind, and medleth nothing at al with virtue. And therefore he
thinks, that old men are happy, which when they lack feasts, full dyshes,
and the cups often walking, they lack also dronkennes, rawnes of stomach,
and be not combred nor vexed with dreams, which manner of things, accompany
them that are given to such wantonness. For Hierom says, that diseses come of
to much eating.

There is a pretty ieste, of a certain physician of this country, which had
a syke man in cure, that had runnynge legs, and that not withstanding was
given to bankettynge and drinking myghtyly, and yet complained that his
medicines prevailed not, And that his soores ran faster, than they did at
the beginning: Truly said the physician, they would cease ro^nnynge out, if
thou would cesse powryng in.

Galenus affirms, that the great chuffes, whose life and occupation is
fedynge, may neither live long nor be helthful, and their minds be so
wrapped with over much blood and fatnes, even as it were with myer, that they
have no manner heavenly meditation, but do always think upon eating,
drinking, fartynge, and shytyng.

The old Romans called that fedynge necessary, that was slender and sparyng.

And among the greeks litell meat was much commended by the writing of many.

The Essees, which were a certain sort of philosophers among the old Jews,
are lauded of Josephus, because they had turned their daily abstinence into a
custom, and an other nature. The same Joseph prey seth the continency of the
Phariseis. He that would ones have had us distroyed, I think has desired,
that this custom of living might enter among us. And therefore seeing Marcus
Cato (as hit is written in Pliny) did take great care and fear, lest the
Greeks should invade Italy, with their wanton and voluptuous living: which of
our forefathers has provided, that none of these spycis and sylkes should be
sold in Germania? farewell pepper, farewell saffron, farewell sylke. Or if
there be any use thereof among other nations, I pray god that this nation
never know it, or se it. And Christ send our countey men this mind, that
they may call home again the frugalite of their elders, and facion them selfs
to their honest sparynge.

With what stout stomach does Anacharsis bost the order of his living? Unto
me (says he) hunger is a sweet morselle, the ground is my bed, a cloak of
Scithia (that is a beasts skyn) is my garmente.

Sober Demosthenes drove dronke^ Aeschines out of the city. Socrates hatyng
the tavern haunters, and such as have al their delight and pleasure in their
throtes, said: Many men live to the intent to eat and drink, but I eat and
drink to live. O, very wise man, and worthy so to be taken by Apollos
commendation.

And this saying of a greek poet is to good to be forgotten: Thou thy self
must rule the bridell of thy belly.

What say you? Whatte manner fellow think you Epicurus was? Whom all the world
persecuteth, as a fellow of pleasure, which put the highest felicity in
pleasure? Truly what so ever it be, that he made so much of, he meant in the
only use of bread and water, and did much commend slender living, and such
as may quickly be gotten. And writing unto a certain friend of his, he
says: Send me a little che^e of Cithridi, that I may, when I woll, fare
somewhat more deynteously.

Anaxagoras said, He that eatethe sauourly, needs but little meat. Porphirius
wylleth the mind to be cleansed and purged with abstinence. And Philostrate
wrytethe, that Porus, the king of Inde, was exceeding strong and mighty, not
withstanding he never fed but upon bread and water. Masinissa lived.lxxxx.
year without any manner delicate fedynge. And Mithridates, king of Ponte, which
kept wars with the Romans.xl. years, used to eat his meat standing, so
far he was from our facion, that he would not sytte down on a soft
quoysshen.

Titus Li^i^s writing of Annybal, ^aith, He measured his mete and drink after
the need of nature, and no^ after pleasure. He had not the times of watchyng
and sleping distincted by the day and the night, but when his besynes might
spare him, than took he his rest, and yet not such as is caused with a soft
bed and silence.

And among the lauds of Augustus Caesar, this is the chief, that he was
content with little meat and drink. But we had lever order our life after
the facion and manners of glottons and pleasant fellows, living contrary
unto nature, to the destruction both of body and soul, than to the
preservation of them both to set before us these examples of life, so
noble and so helthfull. And I pray you, the Turks and other, that are not of
this our religion, will they ever desire to become christen men, when they se^
us thus to live? But I trust that our nation will ones at last beware and
wax wise again, being taught with our own harm,

Now again unto our purpose. And for so much as I have spoken of abstinence
and sklender fare, I will show whatte I think of him, that orders him self
after this dyete, whether he may be restored, which some men do think, even
without the drinking of Guaiacum.

Whether a man may be restored by this dyete only. Cap. xx.
OF them that be good ought to be none evil opinion, neither suspicion: but
trewely these comen phisitio^s be sore gre^ed, that this medycyne can do so
much, and that it alone can do it, even without their meddling. They fume very
sore, that so many in every place be sodeinly helped, of whom they trusted to
have had a perpetual stipend and continual lucre. Wherefore they strive very
styffely, fearing lest in time to comme it shall take away the trust that
men have in them. They have spoken of late certain trifelynge and vain
words, which if they spoke as they though, must be ascrybed to their
ignorance: but if they spoke it of envy, than unto their mischeuous mind. They
say, that a syke man may be recovered only by this dyete and order of life,
which is prescribed in this cure of Guaiacu^, though he never drink of this
docoction of Guaiacum, another receive any other medicine.

And I my self have seen them, that have promised, that they would sethe the
shauinges of Juniper, and of oak, or asshe, or pine tree, or al these together,
and they douted not, but that they would with these help men of such dyseases
as well as with this decoction of Guaiacum. Where unto (all though I suspecte
their malicious intent) yet I pray god send them as good fortune as they
would wysshe. For what could be a greater commodity unto this nation, then to
have such a remedy growyng in our own woddes, which must else be fet from so
far? But I greatly fear, lest they go in vain about this their rash
promise, both because I think this to be a greuouser disease then may be put
away with hunger, without any other medicine ministered, special after it
has fastened his roots depely, as for the most part it is wont to do. And also
if these trees, which I spoke of, could do any such thing, their virtue and
power I think should not have gone so long vnkowen, saying they grow here
among us. Never the less I am content, they make a proof. For what other
thing has a physician to do, but daily to find out somewhat, and to know by
experyence, and to search what will help every grief and syckenes? But this
thing I would all should be admonisshed to believe, whereof I spoke before, that
the help of frugalitie and scarsenes, as hit is great in other diseases, so
it is, and that specially, in the french pockes, but yet not so great that it
may amend the blood that is infected and corrupted thorughe the ve^oum of
this disease, without such medycines, as have their power and strength to do
it. As by example. If two kept war together, and the one of them obtained of
me, that I should not help his aduersarye: verily I may impute unto him, that
I hurt him not, but that I have help him, I may in no wise. And likewise the
absteynynge from meat and drink, as it does not take away the disease, so
does it not noryshe. As one might say, that he another bound a person wha^ he
might, another losed him when he might not.

I have showed you, that many have been restored to their health from the gowte
and joint ache, when they brought them self to a more sklender and a sobrer
diet, and ab^steined from wine and women: but I never thought so of the french
pockes, and the maladies that follow thereof. For that enters so deep, that it
can not lightly be pl^cked up, and spredeth so broad, that it can not with a
little thing be brought to gether, but it so infecteth the hole body, on
which it ones catches hold, that it can not be taken from any part alone, but
when it is driven out from the hole, as at one brayd or pluck. Believe me, that
have proved many things herin to my great hurt, if any man might have
avoided this evil with sobre and scarce living, I had avoided it long sins.
For by the space of.iii. hole years I kept my body as low and as lean as could
be, in so much that in that space I felt no grefe of my disese, but yet I was
not clean ryd from it. Never the less goo to ye noble promysers, sethe ye
asshe, make ye redye Juniper and pyne tree, and take box to, if it please yo^,
and horn beam, and plane tree, and ye shall get right great thank of all
men, if through your dylygence we may have here at home, that we must else
seek so far of. Ye and ye shall do much more for us, than the Fuchers
should, though they made pepper or cynamum to grow in this countreye. And so
gladly as I would receive this thing at your hand, if ye would ever give it
forth: so before ye give it, I will not believe, that there is any such thing
in you, no I will not so much as hope for it, seeing I have gaped so often
times in vain lokynge for those golden hills.

How a man must order his belly in this cure. Cap. xxi.
ALL the time of this cure the bealy auoydeth very little and hard, and that
with much ado, and that is not only because he eats litel but also because
the nature of this medicine is to dry and byndeth. How be it I have hard say,
that this thing happens not to every man a like. For some say that anon after
the beginning they were lose belyed, and some were so contynually: Whereof I
did marvel. For in these.xl. days it never went from me so much as ones,
but as it was compellyd. For in this diete it may be kept to the.v. or.vi.
day, without any ieoperdy: And than in the morning the shauyng of this
Guaiacum soden in water, must be dronken to the mountenaunce of half an ounce.
And if it move not at the first, it must be given again the next day, and so
the third day, and if it help not so, ye must than pour in clisters underneath,
or suppositories prepared for the nones. For the belly must needs be losed. And
if a man will lose him self by drinking or eating Cassia, I think he does
not much amysse, so that this be done but ones, and that morning let him
not drink Guaiacum: I would not that he should be eased with vomites: for they
make the body cold: and (as Plini says) they be evil for the eyes, and
specially for the tethe. There be many things in this cure, that stop the
bealy. First because the body is emptied in the beginning with a pourgation,
and than because there is lyttel meat received. But as this place is closed
and shut from eiections, so is there somewhat in the mean season, other by
sweating, through the strength of Guaiacum, that expels things hurtful
and superfluous, or else in the urine, the which is more moist than that
comes of the meat. And one thing is greatly comfortable, that in the time of
this cure there chances no swellynge, nor there are no peynfull throws or
aches felt, nor the taste comes not bitter, nor there rysethe no lothynge of
meat, nor vaporous breathe not lightly ascendynge from the stomach to the
heed, as in other diseses. And that the pacie^t is purged, it is easily
perceived by making of water: nor to the intent that should be done, none
other provocation should be sought. Now will I speak a lyttelle of sweating.

How in this cure one may be moved to sweat. Cap. xxii.
IF the pacient can not sweat, sum think, that means should be sought to
provoke him thereto. And therefore they cast on him many clothes, and let him
lie three or four hours covered hot. And though this among all things that
we suffer, be one the hardeste: yet I felt even to the very feyntyng, that so
chances no fayllyng, all they that were cured with me, endured it most
grievously, and they said, that this was the hardest thing in all this cure

But if I might laufully say my mind here in (all most I dare not show that
that I have learned) I would no man should be provoked to sweat, save that the
pacient shall as the thing requyrethe, keep his bed three or four hours,
and pass not, and let him be covered, but not with over many clothes, nor to
lie over stylle and stere not: but in any wise let him not be put to much
vexation.

And I think verily, that as well in this cure as in other, the physicians of
my country do many things fondly, which ought not to be done. For as this
medicine of hit self causes one to sweat, even so hit will not abide
compulsion. Whereof this may be a dew prove, that I perceived my self no
sooner to sweat, when I was covered with three or four furs, than when I
had to wrye me but one couerlede. But this I would ye should understand, that
the pacient must needs sweat, and if it will not come naturally, than it must
be provoked meanly. For I allow nothing that is forced. And I warn you, that
ye eschew those, that are wont to toste the bodies at the fire, or that would
have the stews over hot. For such hea^is distroye the bodies, and dry up
the humors that nouryshe the strengthes.

And where I said swette must be provoked meanly, or easily, it must be thus
taken: that if one be wryed with the clothes of one bed, so that the loode of
the clothes grieve him not or erke him: I suppose through the operation of
Guaiacum, he shall sweat enough.

How this medicine shall help, and whether it he aleth men sodaynely, or at
leisure. Ca. xxiii.
But now I suppose, hit is high time to declare, how the effect of this
medycyne may be perceived and understand, and when the pacientes begin to
mende, and whether this curing be sudden and swyft, or late and slow.
Wherein, as I use in all other, I will open to you those things, that I my
self have both seen and known: but this I warn you of before, that if it
have chanced other wise to any manne, thanne I write, that he lay not the
blame in me.

I have learned, that Guaiacum helpethe by little and little, and not suddenly,
and gothe forward fair and easily, and not violently. For it is so far from
the truth, to think that it helps one sodaynely, that somtymes, from the
first day to the.xxv. the disease comes so sharp, and the pain and ache so
augmenteth, and the soores so enlarge, that a man would think him self in
worse case during these days, than ever he was before: either because tha^ the
disease is rooted up and drawn from the inner partis, and the rootynge up is
peynful, or else that the alteration, which than is caused in the disposition
of the body, breakyng out with a great violence and shaking, puts a man to
grievous pain. For undoubtedly this me dicine draws out this myscheuous
disease by the rootis, and that does it unto sum forth with after they begin
to take it, and to some other it tarieth a longer time: but it does so to no
man before the.vii. day, and to many (as it did to me) after the.xx. day, if it
tarry longer er hit work this effect, than the defaute is other while in the
pacientis, when they will use excess in feding. In me (as I said before) the
fa^te was in sythynge of Guaiacum, for by reason that the physicians in
preparynge thereof, made it smaller than they should have done, I was the longer
er it wrought on me. And I have hard physicians say, that according to the
complexio^ of the bodies it works sooner and slowlyer. And this is sure and
certain, which thing Stromer often affirmed unto me, that if they, the whose
wit is more subtyle, and are right attentively given unto study, hap to
fall sick, their diseases shall be more vehemente and longer continue. And
many think, that it skylleth greattely, as well in this disease, as other, in
what placis of the body the syckenes should chance, for the right part is more
healeable than the left. Because, says Alexander, by larger exercise the
matter is stopped, and made more apt to heal. Also they say, it is more
harder to heal the uttermost partis, because they be far of from the body,
it is longer they can be nouryshed and fed. And there it is to be taken head,
whether the grefe does ascend or descend. Celsus says, that what so ever
grefe goth downward, is the more curable. And again. All grefe, which
proceeds upward, is worse for the medycyne to come unto. And that such
diseases, that chance in our secret partys, as they are most plentefull and
sharp, by reason of inflammation (whereunto those parts are specially
subjects) so are they forth with and soonest healed. Which as in all other
medicines they may be moved, so for the new use brought up of Guaiacum, I
wot not whether it be always so or no. But this let every man take heed of,
that where so ever the grefe be, and with what so ever kind of the pockes
they be peyned, that they prepare well Guaiacum, and after they have drunk so
long thereof that it be spredde and run into the veins: thanne ye may be
sure their ache little and little goth away. And otherwhyle the ache comes
again, and is more sharp and peynefull: and goth away again. For after it
ones begins to swage, and than waxes soore and peynfull, it endurethe not
long. And they that have soores, shall have the flesh eaten away about the
soores of a great breadthe. And that is a token, they begin to heal. For
unto me it cha^ced, as it never did before, that about the.xxv. day my legs
were eaten so bare, that ye might have seen the bone the breadth of a man's
nail, which thing put me in great fear: but with out any difficulty,
within a few days after the flesh grew and was restored again. And by this
I perceive well, that the nature of this medicine is to purify and cleanse the
soores underneath and under the flesh, to prove and show first the virtue
thereof. Hitherto have I seen few or none, whose soores were clean healed,
that were kept close till they healed. And therefore I have hard many expert
therein say, that tha^ Guaiacum makes an end of his operation, when the
pacient returns to his meat, and in every thing takes again his old
custom of ly^inge. I told you before, that it was necessary for me to keep
in, till the.xl. day. Al things well pondered, I perceive, that this medicine
requyrethe a long season to work perfectly. For the nature of this medicine
is not to break, or pluck away the blood, but by lyttel and lyttel to amend
and purify it (in which blood being corrupt, rests all the force and
strength of this disease) and to expel and divide fro the body the hurtful
humors, that are norysshmentes of this disease, from some in their urine and
sweatynges, and from other sum in their sieges. And when of this disease a
man begins to wax whole, than the first operation of Guaiacum is to make a
man to sweat, and secondly by the passages of the urine it purges, by which
menes it fetches out and voydeth marvelous foul fylthynes. And than the
hands and feet wax meruaylous cold, in so much that they seem to have no
heat in them at all. Whereof physicians say this is the cause, that than this
medicine draws the heat from the utter parts to the inner, the which
inward parties after they be warmed and made hot, than the heat spredeth it
self in to the outward parties. For this, without any doubt is proved, that
their lymmes, that be heled with Guaiacum be most hot. And.vi. or vii.
wynters next following, my legs and fete would be so cold, that I could
never get them warm inoughe, though I wrapped them in never so many
clothes, now they wax so warm, that with a very thyn hose or such like
garment, I put a way the cold. These things thus understand and known, we
must comme to this point, that is, to know the operation of Guaiacum, and
against what sycknesses it helps.

What power Guaiacum is of, and what sycknesses it helps. Cap. xxiiii.
THe most principal and the chieffest effect of Guaiacum is to hele the
french pockes clean, pluckyng them up by the roots, but specially when a
man has been diseased with them of alonge time. For I have seen them, that many
a day lay soore peyned with the pockes, sooner and better restored unto their
health, than they, on whom the scabbes began newly to appear. Not that on
those, newelye diseased any thing should be left unhealed, but that the
curing goothe forward more hardely, and the disease stycketh faster and is
more greuousely plucked out. For Guaiacum does resolve and distroy meruailously
swellings, getherynges to gether of ill matters, hardnesses, bumpes, and
knobbes. Fluxions or runnynges it utterly takes away, either consuminge or
tournynge the same an other way. It causes the soores to impostume without
any manner of grefe. And if any thing lie hid within, it rooteth it out. And
so of some (as hit did to me) hit makes the bones bare, of some it shewethe
the synowes, and breaks the veins, or eats most depelye in, and it
heals these parties that be infected with this disease, and with such
stynche and fylthinesse, that the sauoure can not be abyden.

And therefore the physicians say, that the virtue of this medicine is to
heat, to dry, and to amend the fautes ol the blood and of the liver: but it
works all these things with such a temperaunce, that indifferently, whether
the cause be hot or cold it easethe the pacientes. Wherefore with the drynes
thereof it restreyneth the flyde, destroyenge the hurtful humors that flow
out, orelles plucketh up by the roots the cause of their beginning, and
restorethe again the good disposition of the body. It does extenuate fleme,
and the poores or passages of the vryne, that chance many times by
perunctions to be shut, and also other in this disease hit openethe, ye and
provoke and compels the vryne to make and have way. For the which skylle
some think it helps them that have the stone, and that it compels the
stones to issue out of the bladder. I have experyence, that hit greatly
mynisheth black coler. And therefore it makes a man more gladsome, and
quenches anger. Undoubtedly hit has a a greater virtue against melancolye.
And hit takes away runnynges and droppynges, and it lyghtneth his heaviness, by
heatynge (as it may be thought) the brain. It is said, that hit amendeth
soores, which were before ill healed, how so ever they come, and cuttethe
again the scarres. It amendeth the leannes, which has long continued in the
body. And therefore when this cure is done, me^ wax very fat al their life
after. They say it has a meruaylous virtue against the stynkyng of the mouth,
and does amend the grief of the brethe, which also comes through the fault
of anoyntynge. It helps the inward parties, and specially the stomach, the
which it holle renews, and makes the brokynge as good as ever it was before.
His effect is excellent for the members that be fallen away and diminished, it
increases them and fyllethe them up, it stretches forth the sinowes that are
shro^ke, and those that be lose it fastneth and makes strong. It is also
proved, that such parties as through this disease be made deed and without
felyng, are again quickened and brought to their old felyng and lustynesse. I
said before, that as touching the bealy it varyed. For some it did bind, and
some it made laxe till they were weary. And again, sum it did bind in the
beginning, and afterward hit losed them, and made them lanke belyed. And
that the very shauynges broken as small as could be, to the mountenaunce of
half an ounce, was given in drink to provoke a siege. I have also said, that
the measure thereof is not given after the proportion of his strength, that
receives it. For hit makes not one weaker when it is mynistred. And now this
one thing I affirm, that if it be.iiii. times sodden, yet is not all the
virtue gone out. Wherein I do not believe other men, but I my self have proved
it. How be it I deny not, but the first broth is much stronger. Sum there
are, that steadfastly believe, that it is very good for fistules and cankers, and
for the parties that be eaten with cankers. Certain it is, it helps them
that fetch their wind with pain, and can not breath, if that fault come
through this sickness, or through anoyntyng.

And for as much as I have showed before what euyls come with this sickness,
it were but labor in vain to repete them, which all it takes away,
distroyeth, and vanquyssheth, as I before told: and that (if they be old)
very lightly. And in like manner it helps the gowte. For I my self have seen
two restored to health, which were ^ore vexed in their fete: but yet the
physytions say, that it helps only those that have gotten the gowte through
cold, which thing I leave to them to complain of. It is also an helthfull
remedy for the palsy, and especially when it is new and lately begone. For
than it quenches and dryueth it away: which thing I do write upon the
report of faythfulle and sad men, that have knowledge thereof. For as for me,
I did never hitherto se any that was so delivered.

Ricius told of a leper, the which though he were not clean delivered by this
medicine, yet was he made much better and cleaner, and such a man as men might
suffer his company: so that Ricius judges, that this medicine is able to hyde
and stop leprosy, though it can not take it clean away. But if this cure
were used ones again or often, than he believed, that the great hurt of that
disease should be put of for a long time. And more over he had great hope,
that if this syckenes were thus prevented in the beginning, it might utterly
be purged and cleansed, and the syke restored. And for as much as this medicine
has virtue to dry up, some go about to minister hit for the water betwexte
the flesh and the skin, which is called the dropsy, the end whereof we
look for. It is well known to be profitable against the falling evil, as
the physicians say, if the disease be of a cold kind. I have seen them that
were inwardely dyseased and grieved with many other syckenesses, that were of
an evil and corrupted stomach, and could but badly digeste, and when they
would recover them selfs from their long feebleness and sycklynes, and repair
again their strength and health, have prepared them selfs unto this cure,
the physicians not aduysynge them the contrary. And Ricius approves the same
in many. For so much as he knew (as he said) that a hoole man, or but
little acrased, might come unto this cure without any hurt: and he did
perfectly believe, that the good liking of the body was kept, preserved,
defended, and confirmed therewith. Let hit now content you, to have hard
spoken these things of the helps of Guaiacum, of the which if any man will
ask me the causes, I will send him to the physicians that be expert. For as
for me, I profess no such thing. Neither yet did I begin this book, to
thentent that I would by and by give a reason of these things that I would
write, but this thing I promised, what so ever I found of Guaiacum, and
perceived by experience, other in my self, or in other, and what so ever I had
either seen or hard of other, that would I faithfully and trewely put in
writing, leaving an occasion to many after me, to declare the thing as it is
worthy. And now that all men may know, what Guaiacum has done in me, I
will show in what parts of my body, and after what fascion I was diseased.

What diseases this remedy has taken from me. Cap. xxv.
BY this one chance hit is known, that we ought not to dispeire in any bodily
disease, though we be brought never so nere to deaths door. For how many
were we, after the physicians had given us up, that were restored to health
through the sodeyne and (as a man would say) the heavenly help of Guaiacum?

I know one, my very sure friend, which when he saw me so bytterly vexed
with this siknes, that for pein I could another rest by night, another eat by
day, aduysed me to kylle my self, saying there could no remedy be found, and
my dody seemed to drop away in fylthy matter, to my great pain and sorrow,
and no hope at all of recouerye, saying to me, it becommethe the to be
delivered from this evil, whether hit will or not. But he had forgotten,
that we were christians, and remembered to well, that we were friends and lovers.
For hit is our part to be hold all things in them that wytnessed in times
past, whom we now call martyrs, unto the world, our savior Christ manfully
sufferynge for his sake great tourmente; and peynes. How be hit if any thing
may cause a man to long for death, truly it is the tourment of this sickness.
For I utterly deny, that ever the father of Licinius Cecine, suffered any such
^orowe or pain, when he slew him self with the iuise of Papa^ers, Or that
ever any other, which did like wise, felt so in^ollerable euyls, as this
syckenes causes. For this pestilence besides al his vexatio^s and tourmentes
(which pass far al other) only with his fowlenes and lothelynes is able to
make one weary of his life.

When Speusippus the philosopher was ones plucked and drawn with the palsy,
that he dispeyred to escape, and then met with Diogenes, and bad him well to
fare and good health: Diogenes (they say) answered, saying: And thou likewise
farewell in no means, saying thou art such one and can be content to live.

The same Diogenes, that was wont to be so styffe a philosofer, what trow ye
would he have said, if he had behold and seen me, when I was likewise vexed, as
they that had the palsy, and besides that was so loathe some both in sight
and savor, that al were grieved with me, and some did hate me? And yet I did
live and had some hope, although I had been oftentimes deluded and mocked
through the great promyses of the physicians. And lest any man should think
that my disease was either light, or in one part only, I will show in what
taking I was. First I could do nothing with my left foot, for there had
this evil dwelled viii. years and more, and in the mydlegge, where the shyn is
covered with flesh very thynne, there were sores inflamed through the
inflammation of the flesh, rottyng with great ache and bournynge, and as soon
as one waxed hoole, an other brake up. For there were many, here some and
there some, which could by no help of the physicians be brought to gether in
one. Over them was a knobbe so hard, that a man would have thought it a bone,
and in that was exceeding pain and ache, beatyng and pryckyng without
ceassynge. There was also very nyghe to the right ancle above, a certain
swellynge and gatheryng, which was also hard like a bone, and was the oldest of
all, wherein remained the remenantes of this pestylence fresshe and new risen.

When the physician went about this with iron, with fire, with hot yrons, or
with any other instrument, they profited nothing: sometime it was swollen very
vehemently, with great pain and akynge, sometime hit aswaged and was gentyller.
And it grieved me less when my foot was hold toward the fire, and yet would
it not suffer to be covered with much gear: it ran so that a man would
have thought hit would never have been stopped. And as often as I would rest
or stand upon my foot, my pain was intolerable: than upward the calfe and
the knee were meruayllous cold, and as things deed. The thyghe was clean
worn away and consumed to extreme leanes, and the skin was so thyn, that
there seemed nothing else left to cover the boon with. Moreover the joints
were so louse, that long time I had much adoo to stand hilone, and to be
short: the one of my buttockes was but a thing wethered away. In my left
shulder there was such pain, that I could not lift up mine arm: the
extreme parts of my shulders were weke and woxen very styffe: in the mids
of the brawne of mine arm there was a swellynge as much as an egg, and as for
the rest of mine arm even to the very hand, was clean worn away. And on
the right side a little under the lowest rybbe, there had I a sore, which was
not in deed peynfull, but it boiled out certain foul and stynkynge matter,
and issued very fylthyly after the manner of a fystule with a narowe mouth
outewarde, and inward it was of a large holownes. And above him there was also
an other as though a bone had been bredde there upon a rybbe. And to
conclude I did plainly feel a streme and issue come down behind from the
top of my heed unto all these. And where it began the leeste touch in the
world made my heed to work as though the brain pan had been broken, another
might my face be turned backewarde, but as it was turned with the hole
body. This one thing yet wolle I not pass, wherfrom if Guaiacum had
delivered me, and done nothing else, yet ought I to have lauded and preysed
his virtue greatly, and that is noone sleep, which I coueted so deedly, and
was so much given thereunto, that almooste in.vi. years space there escaped not
one day, when the physicians cried out upon me, saying: that was the cause
of all my diseases, and yet I could not refrain my self from it. But now
is that gone so far from me, that I trow if I should enforce my self to sleep
in the day time, I could not. With all these, and so great euyls all though I
was so maystred, that al men dispeyred my health: yet my good angel (I believe)
wylled me to tarry and look for somewhat. And lo through the help of Guaiacum I
am bold now to live, and to draw brethe again. Which mind god give to all
good men, that they never cease to hope and trust. As for me I repent my
self in nothing, and i^ by any means long life might be granted unto me, I
have greatte hope that I should live hoole, sound, and lusty. And of this
disese, and of the remedy of Guaiacum, I have written these things, that came
to my mind ^ery faithfully, truly, and as my lernyng would suffer me, and here
would I make an end, if I thought it not necessary to admonysshe them, that
shall read these things, how after this cure, the sick must be ordered, as
touching the order and manner of their living, which thing I will perform
and that breuely

As touching the order of living after this cure is paste what is to be
observed. Cap. xxvi.
I Gave warning before, that after this cure is paste, and the pacient is
departed owte of the cloister of this medycyne, wherein he was close kept, he
must use consequently in his living a certain diet and order by the space
of.iii. or at the lest.ii. hole months. And now that we be come to the very
propre place to entreat of the same thing, I say that it is so necessary to
be done, that who so ever has recovered his health, except he afterward take
good head, dilygently observing many things, and live for a space under a
certain rule, as though he were yet shut up: I say plainly that his health
shall not long endure. And therefore three months are appointed unto such as
were either greattely consumed and low brought in their syckenes, and had
many issues, and avoided much, or else were sore hurt in their synowes and
lymmes, or be so weakened in their body, that a little time can not be
sufficient to gether up perfitely their cromes again. And on the other side,
they that be strong and not so far gone, nor broken, unto such.ii.
months, after their setting out ar enough as it is thought. ^ut by cause I
would provide surely for them that will follow me, I will advise them to
observe and keep this prescrypte very long, and to begin with, they shall
absteyne them selfs long time from the fl^shely act: Because they that be
recovered through Guaiacum, have their bodies very tender and utterly weak as
yet, as though they had been lately new borne? And therefore if they should
have the company of woman, whereby the new gotten strength is weak and grene,
and not yet ryped: it would by and by dissolve and destroy the strength and
myghtis of all the members for ever. And for as much as the use of carnal
copulation brings into peril not one membre by him self but all the hole
body at one choppe: What other thing may we say, he pretends, that
medleth carnally with women (being so febled) than wyllyngly to slay him self,
or at the least spedily to distroy his natural strength, and plainly cast his
health away.

And if some be forbodden the company of women, which be never the less of
good liking in body, and have no disease at all: How much ought they to
avoid and flee it, that thus have lost their health and might, and must labor
all that they can to repair the same again? And if before.xiiii. year of age
none is strong enough unto that act, because his strength is not full
furnyshed to put so ieoperdous a thing in experience: How tha^ ought be to
beware and take heed, that is thus now borne again, and has so young and
tender a body, that he offer not him self to be rashely plucked and torn
before he have received his strength, and is well hardened therein.

The next point here unto is this, that though they shall have a gredye and
sharp appetite to meat, being emptied with continual hunger, yet they must
resyste the same, and as much as may be to behave them self very soberly and
scarsely in their fedynge. And therefore they must first use very little
meat, and afterward some what more, goinge forth by little and littell, so
that there may be a good space e^ that they come to their old custom of
eating, exercysynge them self softely, beginning no new thing hastily or
suddenly, utterly absteinyuge fro al wynes except it be first delayed with
much water, and be also of hit self small and of good savor and clear, and
yet so, very moderatly. Let him also, that is cured, be well fensed against the
violence of the air, and specially in those times, that be grievous with cold
wind and rain, orels let him goo forth abroad very seldom. He may take
meat twyse a day, but at euentyde very little, and all that time he may never
follow his appetite, but must avoid fulness, as the greattest evil, that can
be. He must also above all things forbear fyshe, and feade upon young and
tender flesh, such as is of light dygestion, and nourysshethe purely,
which they be ye may know by the physicians teachynges. And these things
must have place, in the said two or.iii. months, for other things which
shall be further observed, may be learned more plainly in the things following.
For now I will advise and monyshe with few words, not only them that are
recovered by Guaiacum, but other as well from what so ever disease they be
delivered, if they tender their good health and welfare, and desire to be
long in prosperity, whatte things they shall follow. And here it is chiefly
to be noted (how be it al does now know it) that this one thing is hit that
makes this sycknes to be very grievous, because there is great difficulty in
dyetynge. For when this disease is overcome, it is not one only that must be
observed in the order of our living, but many things: and diverse must be
rekened upon. In so much as what so ever things there be, whether they be
with or against all the diseases, which I said before followed this syckenes,
he that is recovered, must set them before him, endeuorynge him self with all
diligence to obtain them, that make with him, and to anoyde them that be
against him. Wherefore he must be always very careful in his living, that al
thing may be done ordinatly. Not with standing if this medicine have saved
any, there is for them great comfort, because they that are expert thereof,
plainly think, that after the pacientes have ones received their health, and
the time of observation, which follows this cure be past, nothing that is not
contrary to their old manner of living can put them in any danger, so that
they used not before to live without order utterly. For that same order shall
serve him, that is thus restored, as shall serve them, that never had the
sycknes. Wherefore they think it not so much to be regarded, what a man
eats, as how much he eats: And therefore no kind of meat to be forborne,
no choice of meat to be had, concerning the quality of fedynge, nothing
to be cared fore, but that which is known to apperteygne to the commen
conservation of health, and to the universal avoiding of all maladies and
diseases. Wherein that that Celsus teaches, perchance shall not be the leest,
which is, that every man take heed, lest while his body is in prosperity,
the aids and succor against aduersite be consumed and wasted.

Health is preserved (as the same Celsus says) by diet, by medicines, by
oyntynges, by frictions and rubbynges, by baynes, by exercise, by caryage
about, by clear and pleasant reading: which things how they ought to be
considered fully and holle, I leave you to ask of him. Here will I breuely
touch a few things, and such as apperteyne to dyete. This I think they
must feed pleasauntely and moderately, and take such meats and drynkes as be
of lyghtest dygestion. For as Poule says, The chiefest point of education is,
that the meat be such as will lyhgtly dygeste and nourysshe well, not slow
in digestynge, nor clammye, nor plentuous in superfluities: and the drink to
be small wine, white, pure, and a little delayde with water.

And Celsus says, Se your meat be not fatty, clammy, nor wyndy. And by his
counsel ye must absteyne in all such dyseases from all manner salt meats,
sharp, sour, and bitter. For the same reason I think, whereof I made mention
before. And Paul says, In eating, the greatteste fault is satietie and
fulness. For all though the belly digeste well, yet the veins to much
replenysshed, labor soore, they swelle, they break, they be stopped and
filled with wind, and plain it is, that the worst dyseases of all comme of
sacie^ie. He thinks this only to be avoided, that no man fylle him self.
And I judge the same but not only, for I would more over nothing to be dressed
deintuously, nothing to be ^auced curiously, and that many dysshes of diverse
kinds be not set before us, another will (as these rich men use) six,
or.vii. or sometime.x. messes at one soupper to be brought in. For a man
would not believe, how much these things hurt, not only the stomach, but
also the holle digestion.

And therefore I will repete again this thing, which is spoken of the same
authore: Variety of meats is greattely to be avoided, specially when
contrary operations and virtues be in them. For when they be so thruste in,
they resist digestion, and the same thinks Galene, and Auicene, and as many
as be of pure judgment in physic.

Cato (as Tully writes) commands so much meat and drink to be received,
as may refresshe the strength and power of the body, and not oppress it.
Wherefore by the counsel of Xenophon, we must make for the most part a small
dinner, that there may be a place for the supper.

Plainly this disease is of that sort, that Galenus thinks to come of
fulness, which thing is thus to be understand, not that I think all that
lives in surfetynge, straight way to be cast into the french pockes (all
though such shall not escape dyseases, no not most grievous) but if any have been vexed before with them, and than healed, eat and drink intemperately, he
must needs fall again into them. And therefore the meat that is received, let
it another be diverse nor much, that the stomach be not loded, and dygestion
let. And again let it be (as I monysshed) easy in dygestynge. Pliny
says, all manner sharp meats, all that is to much, and all that is hastily
received be hard in workynge, and harder in somer than in winter, and harder
in age than in youth.

It is written in Tully, he that medleth not with exquysite meats, looded
tables, and often cups, shall not be combred with dronkennes, rawnes of
stomach, or dreams. But for as much as when this cure is done, we must
provide, how the body, that has hitherto benne emptyed and made lean, may
be brought ageyn unto his old state, therefore peradventure those meats must
be used, that increace and fill the body, not with noyfull humors, but such
as Celsus reherseth in the.iii. chapter of the first book.

Pliny also says, The bodies grow and increace with sweat and fat meats,
and with drink, they diminisshe and go down with dry, lean, and cold
meats and thurst. But this must be wisely understand, for those things,
which I have often before monysshed. But saying Galenus warnethe us in all
things to take heed to the bealy, For what so ever, says he, is corrupted, in
that it is a cause of rot unto all the body, and so of diseases, I think it
best to take those drynkes and meats, as Celsus teachethe, which do both
noryshe and make the belly soft.

But if any, through the dyuelles provocation fill him self, and lode his
stomach with meat, more than it is able to bear: if he list to seek help by
sleep, let him here Pliny, saying, To dygest in sleep, it makes more for the
corpulentes than the strength of the body. And therefore the phisytions would
have the great fat wrastlers to make their digestion by walking. But if he had
leauer ease him self by vomit, as many do counsel, and Paul specially
teaches, for through vomytes many euyls oftentimes have been stopped, and
withstand, let him read his doctrine, showing how one may lightly vomit.
And if another of these be regarded, or to late proved, than peradventure he
must go to phisike, whereunto if the sick be compelled, I can give him none
other commandment, but even the same, which I have oftentimes spoken, that
he commytte him self to a sober and learned physician, or to a well expert,
rather than to one that is of high exquisite learning, and to him that powers
in no medicines, but of very constrainte, ye and those medicines that be simple
and not compowned and mingled with many things, and as much as may be
ministers the things of our own country growyng, and not things far
fette. And if such a physician counsel you to take a laske, than see ye
remember that which Paul teaches: which is that ye do it not often, left
through often prouokyng, nature forgette the office of clensing of the body of
her own motion.

As concerning meats, which be wholesome, and which vnholsomme, and how
every kind of meats helps or hurts, except a man declare it to the
uttermost, it were better speak nothing thereof: And therefore I would have the
authors read, as Celsus, which entreats shortly of the kinds of meats.
And Paulus which handles at large in.xxiiii. chapters the natures and virtues
of meats: or else Galenus which by him self is sufficient for all,
pretermyttynge nothing in the books of nourysshementes. And so would I now
have made an end of feadynge, if there had not chanced to come to my mind
certain things worthy to be noted. And first I will admonysshe you of eggs.
There is no meat (says Plini) like eggs that nourissheth in syckenes, and
lyethe not heavy, and that is instead of wine and meat both.

And Auicene affirms, that the yolks of eggs of a hen, of a partrige, or
of a phesaunte do pass all meats for them that have their blood diminished
or their heart faynted. Alexander Aphrodisius thynkethe that it conteyneth in
it self the qualites of all the elements, and to conclude there is in an egg
a certain show of the world, Both because it is made of the four
elements, and again because it is gathered round in spear fascion, And has
a lively power. Eggs fried many do forbydde: among the which are Paulus
and Galenus. And does not allow the food of herbs. And many other do forbid
the same, at though Marcus Cato praises brassicam above the moon. He that
eats daily his fylle of ptisana, his nutrimente Galenus thinks can by none
other meats be hyndred. And the same thing would I say (says he) by beans:
if they filled not with wind. Of the use of milk both in meats and also in
medicines, Paul does entreat very goodly. Alexander says, milk is light
in digestynge, and nouryssheth well. For that may lightly go into bloudde, that
is made of bloudde, and in a manner hit is blood made white.

Of many things I have showed you a few, but yet he that desires to have
health, ought, says Paul, to know how great power wine has. And the same
says, if wine frete any man, he must drink cold water. And the next day
drink the iuise of wormewode, and walk upon it, he must rub his body and
wasshe it, and than refresshe him self with little meat. Wynes that were
lately must, and also wynes that be to old, must be avoided, says Galenus.
For these heat to much, and the other nothing at all. That fedynge says
Paul, that keeps a man bare and sklender, is much surer for the health,
thanne that which makes one fat. But for as much as little meat gives
another strength nor stedynes unto the body, therefore he after addethe saying.
Such meats as are of a mean nature, are the chief nourysshementes of all.
For they engender bloudde of a mean substance. And as such are most
meteste and conuenyent for our bodies, so be they that bring forth ill
humors most noyful, and therefore must they always be auo^ded. This says
Paul. And he teachethe more over, that rye breadde nourysshethe more than all
other, and that weaten bread is of hard dygestyon and wyndy, and that barley
bread is of little strength. He that will know the vttermooste of fedynge,
let him read this Paul and Galenus as I said. we in this country never used
annointynges, in Italy they have used them, but now they be al most lest.
And Galene commendethe rubbynges of the body above all things, inculcatynge
oftentimes and many things thereof, and specially in his books of preserving
health. And the same does Asclepiades hyghly auance, and Hipocrates also very
greatly, whose saying this is, which was after him repeted of many. Through
rubbing, if it be vehement, the body is made hard, if it be soft and easy,
the body is made soft, if it be much, it diminishes, if it be mean, it
fylleth.

In our days that high learned man Erasmus Roterodamus, using thus daily and
specially in the morning at his vprysynge, thinks thereby that he preserves
his health, the weakness of his body (which is very great) not withstanding.
And has warned me diligently, that above all other things I and all other
students should use the same. I follow the counsel of my friend, and find
ease therein. Some ^orbidde wasshynges and all manner bathes, and they say, that
they be unwholesome for all such as be recovered from this disease. I think
because they mollify the sinowes, and lose them, and therefore they will not
that water should touch the^, and yet they do not (saving for that) improve
sweatynges. water hurts the synowes though it be warm says Alexander, not
because it is warm, but because hit is moist. Paul commending warm washyng
says thus: It takes away werynes, it shakes down fulness, it heateth, it
mitigateth, it mollifieth, it disperseth, it provoke sleep, and makes all
the body fat. And is very commodious and agreeable both to man and woman young
and old, so says Paul. Not withstanding the Italianes now a days wash
not but very seldom, whereof I do not meruayll, saying in times past they used
it daily as writing testifies, and also the tokens of the bates remaining at
Rome, which were builded like unto cities.

In exercises Galene teaches, that mesure must be kept and observed,
saying, Immoderatnes I reprove every where. He likewise says, As exercise
before meat is the chiefest thing to preserve hel^h, so is al manner motion
after meat most noyful. For the meat is scatered out of the belly before it be
digested, and therefore gadreth many gross and raw humors in the veins,
whereof al manner diseses are wont to be engendered. Paul auyseth us, so long
to exercise our self, until the body begin to swel and waxereed, our
motions strong, equal, and easy, and the swette seem to be myxed with vapor:
than first to rest, when any of these begin to change. They monysshe
also to give rest and quietness unto that membre, which was lately restored
to health. And Hipocrates says: The remedy of the foot is rest. Whereof
Alexander gathers that, that which is heled again must needs have rest. For
motion (says he) causes flowynges of the superfluous matter, which may
reyse and styre up inflamatio^. The worst thing that can be to him that has
akynge knees, is to ride, says Celsus. He also thinks it not good for them
that be gowty. The old men exercised them self also in voice, that they
moughte sing and also read more ^lerely.

I said I would entreat of these things, as occasyon gave, not much
regarding any order, but as every thing, worthy to be noted, should com to
mind. And therefore let no man look for any greatte thing here, if there be any
that would know, I have showed in what authors what things he shall find.
But ^oo here comes an other to mind, he that will preserve his health, must
take heed (says Galene) to.ii. things specially, one is, that the meat be
agreinge and mete for him: an other is, that there follow good brookynge, and
clensynge of those superfl^ities, that are left of the meat. It is recyted by
Paul, that the old men thought it was sufficient to defend and preser^e
health, if the burden of the belly and bladder were daily vnloded well and
without fault, according to the portion of the meat and drink received.
Galene as concerning the use of Venus, has left nothing untouched,
affirmynge that act to be an ennemy unto the health of all them that are dry
of complexion, and specially of them that are also cold. For Venus (says he)
is vnhurtefull only unto them that be hot and moist, and be aboundante of
sede. And again he says: They that have their bodies well tempered and
without fault, ought not utterly to absteyn from Venus, as they that be cold
and dry ought. Also Paul says, dry copulations hurts all men, and most
of all if cold be joined to dries, so that they only, which be hot and
moist, may use it without ieoperdye. As labors are profitable unto health, so
are also copulations if they be used with mesure. This one thing ought al to
know, that all they that have had the french pockes ought with great care,
for love of their sinowes to avoid carnal copulation. Paul indgeth it well
done to exercise children, that through the labor of body and mind, they may
be brydeled and restrained from the violence of bodyly pleasure. Hipocrates
compares that act unto the falling sycknes. Alexander Magnus was wont to say,
that copulation and sleep were two the greattest tokens of mortalite.

The holsomes also of the air must be looked upon, which is a good post of
health. That air, says Paul, which is infected with evil vapors, puffynge
out pestilente blastes, or is nygh unto a synke or draught, or is mu^ty, or is
kept in a valey, compassed round about with hills, hurts al ages. And the
best air is most wholesome. For unto a temper at body a separate air ^
profitable, says he, and a distempred is for him that has a contrary
temperature. Sycknes is nothing else, says Galene, saving a motion without
nature. Than he says: The physicians understand him to be hole, all whose
members be according to the cour^ of nature: and contrary wise thanne to be
sick, if any part go out from his nature. It is forbidden by the doctrine of
the physicians, that no man drink streyghte upon chafynge. They say also,
that all sudden chaunges are dangerous. This is also admytted for truth,
that contynuall idelnes is most contrary to good health. And contrary wise,
Mean exercise is great aid and succor. Galen says, deep rest of the body
is the greattest evil that can be for the preseruyng of the health, as moderate
labor is the greatteste good. As perteynyng to sleep, when it ought to be
taken and how much Paul teaches abundantly, and also what commodities
follow, when it is well taken in time. With noone sleep there is none that
holds. For such as be of a sad nature, or be troubld with thought and care,
the physicians ingeth very good to call for some manner pastimes and mirth, to
find out by some means, whereby the heart may be chered, and the sadness of
mind eased. Pensyfenes says Paul, must be driven away with the swetenes of
soundes.

He that is in good health (says Celsus) and at his own liberty, needs to
care another for medicines nor oyntmentes. Which thing as I do allow, and
would not them that be of good lykyng and health to be bound greatly to any
manner rule of living: so think I it needful for them, that have been sick,
or have syckely bodies, or do follow such kind of living, that they can
not well defend the bodyly health, to have a rule of living, to order them self
by. For Galene monysheth, that a law and rule of living is in no wise
superfluous. For diete, says he, is a very medicine.

These things that I have here written, most noble prince, I repute most
profitable to this purpose, both by mine own and others experience, and also
by the teaching of them that were hyghly learned. The which things I have
written unto your excellence, not because ye should your self make a proof of
them (from the need whereof I beseech our savior Christ to save and keep your
magnificence) but that they may be ready, if any of your court chance to have
need of them. And of such things as I have written, ye shall use the judgment
of Stromer, as I said before. For your other physician Gregory Coppus has
seen those things already, and did help me in some of them, but that was
incidently, when from him I sped me to Moguncia, for business that I had there.
But if it had so fortuned that I might have been in your court with him (For
than ye were away in Germanye) I should have entreated more warely of all these
things, and set forth my book more perfectly. But how so ever it be now, I
pray your excellence to take hit well i^ worth. And I present hit unto you
for a gift and token of this new year, which I pray god may be lucky and
prosperous unto you, And as fortunate as your own heart will desire, without
disdain or envy of any person. Thus I commend me unto you, most noble,
most worthy, most benign, and excellent prelate, whom almighty god long
keep in good health and prosperity. Amen. Written at Moguncia with mine own
hand.

Thus ends this book De morbo gallico, compiled by Vlrich Hutten knight.

