A FAITHFVL DECLARATION OF Christ's holy supper, comprehended in three Sermons,
preached at Eaton College, by Roger Hutchinson. 1552.

Whose contents are in the other side of the lefe.

Newly imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate. 1560.

Cum grat^a and priuilegio Regiae maiestatis per septe^^ium.

THE CONTENTS OF the first sermon.
THe first sermon shows why Christ ordained his supper after the eatinge of
the Paschall lamb, that the Jews easter lamb, was a figure of our
sacramental bread and wine, a commemoratio^ of their delyueraunce, and a
sacrament of Christ's death, that the Jews had some continual rites and
sacraments, and other some temporal: how their sacraments and ours, how their
receipt and owres do differ. Why God, who is immutable, disanulled their rites,
and ordained new rites and new ceremonies for us. For what cause men absent
themselves from Christ's banquet, to the which they should come not annually, but
continually. That as it is best to come fasting thereto, so it is not evil by
occasion to receive after meat and drink. That to bless is not to make a
cross upon the sacrament, but to render thanks to God ye father, for the
remission of our sins through the seed promised. That Christ ordeyneth here
no private mass, but a communion, and that the scriptures, and the Oriental
church disalow al private receipt, that as it is not evil to receive the holy
sacrament at thy mouth, so it is better to take it in thy hands, as Christ and
his Apostles did, and the laytie of the primative church.

The contents of the second sermon.
THe second sermon declares what a Sacrament is, that the nature and matter of
the signs remains* that Christ affirms bread to be his body, and wine to
be his blood for three properties and similitudes, and not for any
transubstantiation, and mutation of their natures. That his body and blood are
the sustinaunce of man's soul and spirit, which are not fed or nourished with
corporal food. That both the spiritual eating, and the sacramental receipt are
necessary and commanded. That by our worthy receyt of the sacrament, we are
made Christ's body, not by faith only: but also realli. What a testament is,
what the new testament is, and what the old is. That the old christians
before Christ's cumming, did eat his body and drink his blood, as truly, as
really, and as effectually as we do. How Christ's body and blood be present in
his holy supper, that they are not to be honored in the form of bread and wine
with eleuatio^ of hands or kneling, but by faith in them, by cumming to his
supper, by giving of thanks and by offering unto him franke^se^ce and myrre,
that is to say: by confessing him to be very natural man borne of his mother
after the fullness of time for our redemption: and very god begotten of his
father before al time, that this is the catholic faith, and the doctrine of
the elder fathers of Christ's church.

The contents of the third Sermon.
THE third sermon shows that Christ's flesh, which is the bread of life, is
never received unworthily, never unto destruction, but always unto salvation,
unto righteousness and justification. That Christ with plain words, and the
elder fathers, do affirm the substaunces of bread and wine to remain after
the consecration: how the elder fathers do affirm the natures of the signs to
be altered and changed without any transubstantiation. That Christ's cup ought
not to be denied to the laity, that such as come unworthily to Gods
sa^raments, be gylty of Christ's body and blood, albeit they receive the only
figure and sign thereof. That after the receipt of the holy sacrament, relapse
into sin is daungerouse, that we must pass our life time thencefurth, in
prayer and geuyng of thanks, and go into mount Oliuet, that is: seek for
heavenly things, and despise earthly things.

THE PRINTER TO the reader.
FORASMVCH (gentle reader) as al felicity health, and prosperity of a christen
man, stands and consists in the perfect knouledge of the true and living
god and of himself, which knowledge every faithful man may plentifully and
abundantly find in the holy and sacred scriptures, as it were in a most pure
and clear glass or myrrour. In which all men ought to delight and exercise
themselves both day and night, to the amendment of their own lives, and to
the edifieng of their neighbors. And considering also yt there are many in
these latter days, (God amend them and send them better grace) the which only
study with hand and foot, toth and nail (and yet would be counted good
Christians, when in very dead they ar nothing less) to impugn the truth and
to bury in perpetual obliuie and forgetfulness the monumentes labors and
travails of most worthy men, who refused no pains to aduau^ce true religion
and to overthrow the false religion superstition and idolatry. I have therefore
taken upon me (through Gods help) to set forth and bring to light these
sermons which were given unto me by master Roger Hutchinson, to put into
prynt, and that a little before the death of the most Godly king, King Edward
the sixth, and because immediately after his death Gods true religion was
overthrown and trodden most shamefully under foot by the bloody Papists. I was
enforced and compelled, not only to surcesse from printing of these sermons but
also of diverse others Godly men's works. The author of these sermons liyng on
his death bed. Whom (the Lord took to his mercy) sent to me in my trouble,
desiring me, that whensoever almighty God of his own mere mercy and goodness,
would look no more upon our wretchedness, (wherewith we had most justly provoked
him unto wrath) but wipe awaiour sins, and hide them in the precious wounds
of his son Jesus Christ, and turn once again his merciful countenance
toward us, and lighten our hearts with the bright beams of his most
glorious Gospel, that I would not only put these Sermons of his in print: But
also his other book, called the Image of God, the which he himself had newly
corrected, declaring, that although God should take him unto his mercy, yet he
would leave behynd him some little monument of his good heart, mind, and will, the
which he bore toward ye truth of Gods holy word, and furtheraunce and profit
of Christ's church, for that diverse sectaries were crept in under ye color and
title of true religion, who through ye persuasion of the devil has sowed
their diuilish (...), as ye Aria^s, Anabaptists, Pelagia^s, Papists, and diverse
others, yt the flock of Christ's congregation, might have some strong armoure
for ye sure defense of themselves, and fit weapons, when they shall have at
any time, any doing with those sectaries to ye utter overthrowing of the^.
Therefore as the authors good will was (through ye help of God) in setting forth
y^ book for thy profit: So accept and take it in good part, and give the
thanks unto God. And as touching these sermons, judge of them thy self as God
shall give the grace. Thus fare thou well in him y^ lives for ever. Amen.

The.25. of September.
THE FIRST Sermon on the Sunday next before Easter. The sum of the Gospel.
THe Gospel of this day (well beloved in the Lord) conteyneth a narration of
such things, as our master Christ did immediately before he was (through the
covetousness of Judas, and envy of his own nation) betrayed unto death. It is a
long process as you have heard, worthy of perpetual remembrance, and a worthy
matter to be declared to al men and women. For it sets forth plainly before
our eyes, as it were in a scaffolde the sede promised, which by many dark
ridels and figures is signified and shadowed in Moeses and the Prophets, and
contains the benevolence, the loving kyndnes, the great tender mercy, and
good will of God the father, who so loved us that for our honor he suffered his
honorable and only begotten child to be dishonored and oppressed of malicious
and covetous men. And that so noble and worthy a benefit should not fall out
of remembrance, which is the alone author of our redemption, and our only
comfort against sin, that we should reserve this his loving kindness in
continual memory, and not be unthankful, he has commanded us by the mouth
of Christ our Lord to celebrate a commemoration of his favor and clemency, of
his sons dishonor, and death, and to resort unto the holy sacrament of the
same, that is, of Christ's honorable body and blood.

Because this matter is so long, that it cannot be worthily declared in one
hour, nor ^wayne, and forasmuch as many be yet ignorant of the fruit, of the
use and cause, of the mary and swetnesse of the Lords supper, and know not
what it means, nor what a sacrament is, and Easter now draws nigh, at
which time al men and women dispose them selves to come to Christ's banquet, as
I would wish they would also as well at other times, and so come do, whose
prayers God does not forget yet because the most part will not come, but at the
aforesaid feast, therefore and also for as much as it is a member and parcel of
the gospel of this sunday before Easter. I thought it good to speak now of
this matter, which is an abbridgement of the whole scripture, as well for the
erudition of those that be unlearned, as also that such as be stubbornly
wedded to their own judgments, and are hardened against the truth, may not
excuse them selves by ignorance, when to render an account of their faithes
they shall be cited to appear at the bar before the divine majesty. But that
you may ye better impresse in your hearts and carry away that which I shall speak
hereof, I will rehearse unto you that part and member of this gospel, which
co^prehendeth Christ's supper.

Whiles they were eating, Jesus took bread, and when he had given thanks, he
brake it, and gave it to the Disciples and said: Take eat, this is my body.
And he took the cup and thanked, and gave it them saying: Drink of it every
one, for this is my blood of the new Testament shed for many to the forgeuenes
of sins. I say unto you. I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the
vine till that day, when I shall drink it new with you in my fathers kingdom.
And when they had given praises, they went out in to mount Oliuete.

This matter is declared how we do receive Christ's body and blood in the
sensible sacrament of bread and wine, Luke. 22 Mark. 14* 1 Cor. 11
and also without the sacrament is showed in the sixth chapter of S. John's
Gospel. Ihon. 6
That I may speak hereof to the promotion of Gods glory and find out such
lessons and such doctrine in ye text which may be to your instruction and
edifying, which be assembled here to serve God in prayer and hering his word,
let us ask gods help and spirit, for the which I shall desire you to say the
lords prayer after me. Our fa. etc.

This Gospel (well-beloved in the lord) is full of spiritual erudition and
heavenly comfort, it has as many good lessons, and fruitful matters as words,
yea and as many heresies be gathered of the words thereof as good lessons, as
shall be declared. Lest through plenty of matter I be ouerlong and tedious, I will
ouerrun it in order, as the text leads, speaking much or little of every
sentence, as I shall see nedeful for your enstruction, desiring you not to look
for a learned and profound declaration, but only for a plain exposition and a
faithful confession of the catholic faith. First and in the beginning of the
supper in that the text says.

Whiles they were eating, Jesus took the bread. Of this we may learn, that
Christ and his disciples did celebrate this sacrament of his honorable body and
blood, Why Christ ordained his supper after the eating of the lamb.
not after the present use and manner of the congregation, but after other
meats and drinks. First he did eat his passover, and Easterla^be with his
disciples after the custom of the old testament, Their la^be was a f^gure of
our sacrament.
which passover and easterlambe was a figure and shadow of our sacramental
bread and wine. For as they of the old law did eat yearly an easterlambe in
remembrance of their deliverance from Egypt and from the expression of Pharao:
Of their deliverance.
so we of the new testament do receive sacramental bread and wine in
remembrance of Christ's death and passion, through which we are delivered from
the Egypt of sin, from the gates of hell, and from the power of the devil.
And as the paschal la^be was ordained and eaten the night before the children
of Israel, were delivered from Egypt: so likewise this sacrament was ordained
and eaten the night before we were delivered from our sins. And as when the
Israelites were escaped out of Egypt, they did eat nevertheless the paschal
lamb, which was called still the passing by or their passover and pasport,
because it was a remembrance of their passage out of Egypt, and they eating
the same heartily reioysed, offering him sacrifice, and acknowledging with
infinite thanks, that they were the fellowship of them, that had such a merciful
God: So we now being delivered from sin, do eat nevertheless the sacrament,
which is still called his bodi, that once died for our deliverance, and we
hartly rejoice, offering to him ye sacrifice of praise, acknowledging with
infinite thanks, that we are of the feloship of them, which have such a
merciful and mighty God through Christ. And their lamb was a sacrament not
only of their deliverance out of Egypt, but also it was a sacrament of Christ
to come, Of Christ
that he through death, should deliver both the Jews, and all other men from
the tyranny and bondage of Satan, as John the christener taught the Jews
saying: John. 1
Ecce agnus dei, qui tollit peccata mundi, behold the lamb of God, which
takes away the sins of the world. He names Christ a la^be enstructing us
that their passover was a figure of his death and passion. And Paul confirms
the same saying: Pascha nostrum immolatus est Christus. 1 Cor. 5
Christ our paschal lamb is offered up for us. Of these textes and similitudes
we may gather, that their passover was not only a figure and shadow of
Christ's death, but also the same unto them, How our sacraments and theirs do
differ.
that our sacramental bread and wine is to us. And when they did eat their
lamb, such as believed on Christ to come and were by faith christians did eat
spiritually his flesh, and drink his blood, as truly, as really, and as
effectually, as we do eat it now, which be of the new testament, as shall be
proved more plainly hereafter. Here is the difference, and diversity between
their eating and ours, a lamb was their sacrament, and so was the rock, of
which they drank in the wyldernes, so was manna also, for they had many
sacraments, in which they did receive Christ's body and blood. And some of
their sacraments were continual, Continual and temporal Sacraments.
and other some were temporal. Their easterlambe was a continual sacrament
from the time of their deliuerau^ce out of Egypt, until Christ's death. Manna
also, and the rock were Sacraments thereof, but because they continued but for
a time, and in one age, they were but temporal Sacraments. We of the new
law have not many Sacraments hereof, but only one Sacrament of bread, and
wine, in the place and stead of their Easterlambe, as appears of the
similitudes before rehearsed, and also of the institution of Christ's supper.

For the text says that whiles they were eating, Jesus took bread and the cup,
that is immediately after that he had finished the ceremony of the passover, he
ordained his last supper, enstructing us hereby, that bread and wine be unto us
of the new testament the same in effect, in use, and operation, that the
aforesaid lamb was to the old-christians, which were before the coming of the
sede promised.

Why God has disanulled the cites of the old law.
Here percase you will reply and say. If in the ceremony of the easterlambe they
of the old law did eat Christ's flesh and drinck his blood, why is this
ceremony now abrogated and disanulled? why have we a new sacrament of bread
and wine? Is it convenient for the divine majesty, which is immutable, to make
orders and laws, and to alter and change them again as men do? Mala. 3
I answer: they were under the law, we are under grace, they were under the
old testament, we are heirs of the new testament. And because our law and
theirs, our testament and theirs, our priesthod and theirs, be diverse and
different, therefore we have diverse sacraments from them, both of Christ's body
and blood, and also of other things, they had Manna, and a rock, and an
easterlambe, we have only bread and wine. They had circumcision for a
continual sacrament, and the read sea, and the cloud that went before them out
of Egigt for temporal sacraments, we have instead of these one continual
sacrament the lauer of regeneration. Nether can any mutabilite be laid unto
God, who is immutable, for this mutation of orders and sacraments, no more
then to the husbandman, which commands his servants to apply other
business in winter, and other things in summer or springtide. This universal
world is Gods house, Gods mancion, and palaice, they of the old law were his
servants, and we be his children and sons through Christ. Now every
householder commands other things to his servants, and other things to
his children. And a king does not govern his realm with one sort of laws and
statutes, but makes positive laws for every time and every purpose as
occasion is ministered, and so does God. S. Paul declares this diversity and
policy of almighty God very well, where he says: Lex pedagogus est ad
Christum, Gal. 3
That is, ye law was a scholemaister unto Christ, but faith being come, we are
no longer under a scholemaister. A good scholemaister does not use one trade
in teaching, nor one book, but diverse trades, and diverse books, as his
scholars encrese in learning. The Physician does not cure all disseases with
one medicine. So the eternal God, ordained diverse Sacraments, diverse rytes,
and ceremonies in diverse times and ages, because of the diverse conditions and
natures of men. The Sacraments of the old law did shadow, figure, and
preach Christ to come, our Sacraments do show him as it were upon a
scaffold already come unto our eyes. Therefore it was convenient that their
orders and ours should be diverse, lest if their orders did remain still, it
might give some occasion to Heretics to deny that Christ is yet come. Many
other causes might be rehearsed of this mutation of Sacraments, which be not
so necessary now to be spoken of, therefore I will omit them, and proceed to
other matters. Albeit the Easter lamb of the Jews, which yearly was slain
and eaten in remembrance of their deliverance from Egypt and in hope of the
coming of Christ, whom S. John and Paul do name our easter lamb, albeit I say
their sacrament were a figure of our bread and wine, yet we may not gather
hereof that the holy communion of Christ's honorable body and blood is to be
resorted unto, but once a year, because they had but a yearly la^be and an
annual remembrance, and that always at the feast of Easter, as some bishops
of Rome have taught in times past, which would have the layte of every realm
to have but an annual communion that is but once a year, and as many apere to
be persuaded yet, but vaynly and wickedly. For this is the common fashion of
the most part of men and women, all the year long they absent them selves from
gods table. And why? Why men absent the^ selves from Christ's table.
because they are loath to be pained with the remembrance of their sins, and
with the consideration of their offenses. The remembrance of our offenses
makes us heavy and sorrowful, depriueth us of all mirrh, brings us into
sadness, and makes us tremble for fear of Gods displeasure. Therefore Jesus the
son of Sirach says. Eccle. 21 zacha. 5
Dentes leonis, dentes eius, sin has teeth, like unto a Lion. And the
Prophet Zachary compares it to lead. David he names it a burden saying: Mine
iniquite is over my head and does press me down with a grievous burden. Psalm.
37
Because I say they will not feel this burden, and because they desire to live
merely in the pleasurs of the flesh, in dronkennes, in hordom, in glotony, in
feasting and banketting, in oppression of their neighbors, in covetousness, in
unrighteous dealing al ye year long, therefore they will take no remorse, no
penance, no remembrance of their sins but once a year. What need I says
the carnal man to his own heart within him self, what need I to trouble my
self with fear of Gods displeasure, with the memory of my sins with the
remembrance of hell, of death, of the devil every weke or every month? How can
a man be merry and think always of death and hell? no, I will take mi pleasure, I
will laugh and be merry all the year, I will do what my list, and at Easter I will
repent, then I will come to the Lords table, but not before. Examine thine own
thoughts, thou oppressor, thou dronkard, thou horekeper, thou flatterer, and
enter into your own hearts, you shall find this to be the cause of your long
absence, and of your seldom coming to the Lords ba^ket. For as he that has
a hungry and a gready stomach to his meat, declares hereby his body to be void
of all corruption, and that he is in good and perfect health: so I say unto you,
to observe an annual communion is a token of an unrighteous man, of a
stubborn servant, of an unquiet woman, and to come often is a token of one
which strives against his flesh, which keeps battle with the devil, and
laboreth daily to live Godly and blameless. For here we remember Christ's
death and passion. The remembrance of Christ's death makes us to remember our
own offenses and sins, for he died not for himself, but for our iniquities
and misdedes. The remembrance of our offenses wrappeth us in sorrow and
heuines? Sorrow and heuines do cause us to fly unto God for his help and mercy
as it is written, Psalm. 117
in trouble I cried to thee, who embraces us like a loving father. For as
sorrow and heuines entered first into this world for sin, Genesis 3
and for the gylt of Adams disobedience, so the same now does expel sin
again, and lead us into virtue, as Paul teaches. Tristitia secundum deum
operatur penitentiam in salutem. Godly sorrow says Paul causes repentance
unto salvation. ^ Cor. 7
Moreover in that the text says that whiles they were eating, Jesus took
bread and ordained his last supper, some do reason hereof that the Sacrament is
not to be received fasting as the custom now is, It is best to come to
Christ's banquet fasting.
but after other meats and drynkes, after a certain refection, banquet, or
maundy, which they say those that be rich should make to refresh the power and
nedy. For the defense of this mau^dy they allege not only Christ's example,
but also where it is written, ^ Cor. 11
that the Corinthia^s in deed kept such a maundy: But Paul reprehendeth them
therefore, and disanulleth their custom, as an occasion of glotony, of
dro^kennes, of pride, of contention, and other misbehauiour in the church,
saying unto them: have ye not houses to eat and drink in? or else dispyse ye
the congregation of God? And again: if any man hunger, let him eat at home,
that ye come not together unto condempnation: nor Christ did not celebrate this
sacrament after other meats and drinks to stablyshe any such custom, nor to
give us any example, to do the like, but rather to teach us, that our
Sacramental bread is succeeded in stead of the Jews Easterlambe, and that
their ceremony is now disanulled and abrogated. Therefore the universal
Church commonly according to Paul's mind to the Corinthians uses now to
celebrate the Lords supper fasting without any Maundy, and not after other
meats. Notwithstanding as he does well, which comes fasting to the Lords
table, so he does not ill, which by occasion comes after that he hack eaten
and drunk. Meat and drink do not defyle, do not make a man an unmeet gest
for Christ's board, for the marriage dinner of the kings son, but lack of the
wedding garment, that is, sin and iniquity.

There is no commandment in the scriptures, Math. 22
which restrains those that have eaten from the communion Paul reproves not
the Corinthians for any such thing, but because they made Maundeis and
bankettes in the house of prayer. In their own houses he does not forbid them
to eat, and drink before the communion, but permits it, and leaves them to
their own liberty and necessity herein saying: ^ Cor. 11
If any man hunger let him eat at home. I touch this matter partly through
occasion of the text, and partly also to reform those, if they will be
reclaimed, which for lack of knowledge, or offended with those that come after
meat through some necessity which offense comes of a good zele and of a good
intent, but good ententes must be reformed according to knowledge. And percase
some will be offended with me for uttering this matter. Be not offended with
truth, be not disceiued, nor bewitched with superstition and blind zele, but
consider my words indifferently, or rather not my words, but ye words of
Chrisostom, a learned and an elder father of christ's church, who says a great
deal more in this matter, then I have said, whose saying moved me (...) this
time to touch this matter. Chrisost. Homil. 9. ad popul. Antioch.
For onles he or some other learned man did affirm it, I would not teach it.
He in his.ix. Homily ad populum Antiocheum, is earnest against those, which
withdraw them from the communion many times, because they were not fasting, and
he exhorts them to come otherwhiles after meat saying: Si tibi persuaseris,
quod post cibum and potum, and ad (...) conuenire necesse est, omnino, and
inuitus multam geres curam modesty, and neque in ebritatem, neque in craxula^
vnquam deduceris. Cura enim and expectatio in ecclesiam co^ueniendi, cum
honesta me^sura cibum and potum sumere docet, ne ingressus and fratribus
commixtus postea vinum redolens, and inordinate eructans, ab omnibus
praesentibus deridiaris. Which words be thus much to say. If thou determine
with thy self to come otherwhyles to the communion after thou have eat and
dronk, by this means thou shall learn to be modest and sober in thy
behavior, thou shall never offend in dronke^nes, nor defile thy self with
glotony, but remembering Gods table, thou will take meat and drink with
moderation, lest coming to the church, if thou smell of wine, or belche
inordinatly through the fulness of ye stomak, thou be a laughing stock to all that shall se thee in that taking. Whenever thou art Godly affected,
whenever thou have remorse for thy sins, with an ernest intent of
amendment, and reformation of thy living, be not afraid to com to Christ's
banquet, to the marriage diner of the kings son, whether thou have eaten and
drunk, or art fasting. Be afraid if thou being an officer or magistrate do
devise evil statutes either ecclesiastical or temporal contrary to the statutes
of the eternal God, M^gi^^^a.
or if thou do make unlawful grauntes and give dispensations lycences and
cockettes, to carry wol, leather, corn, or other wares over the sea,
enpouerishyng many thousands to enriche thy self and few others. T^ylers.
Be afraid if thou be a Tailor, and do steal part of their cloth, which cost
them dear, from thy customers, making them believe that no less then three
yardes will serve their tourn, when two yardes be sufficient.

Drapers. Poticaris
Be afraid to come, if thou keep a drapers, or an Haberdashers, or Poticaries
shop, and do oppress thy brethren by taking immoderat and unreasonable
gaynes. If thou be a husbandman, Husba^dme^
and wylt not store markettes and fayres, nether with grain, nor with cattle,
which is thy vocation and calling. If thou be a Butcher and wilt not sell thy
Beues, Butchers.
Muttons, and Veales, at the Kings price, or for reasonable vantage, but
killest them without effusion and lettyng fourth the blood, that they may way
more, to the poysonyng of the eaters. If thou be a baker, Bakers.
and do break the kings assyse and statute, hurtyng many to benefyt thy
self. Pastor^.
If thou be a Person having cure of soull, and yet do nothing therefore, but
feed thine own body, and live idely, and do not only not preach thy self,
but also when other preach to thy paryshioners thou defacest them behind their
backs, and do discredit the^, as much as lies in thee, as I know one was
defaced not long ago, which preached wholesome and fruitful, doctrine even in
this place. If I say thou be such a one, presume not to come to Christ's
banquet, lest in his stead Satan enter in to thee, as he did into Judas, and
y^ be expelled into utter darkness. Presume not to come without thy wedding
garment, without a renewed heart, in malice and out of charity, in sin and
iniquity. Be afraid if thou be an extorcioner, an oppressor of others for
thine own commodity, if thou be a flatterer, a pyke thank, a tale bearer, a
spy, or an instrument unto oppression and iniquity, if thou be a sower of
debate, strife and variaunce, if thou be a sclaunderer, that is an ill speaker
of goodmen. For it is lawful to say, that an evil man is an evil man, and
that an oppressor is an oppressor, if thou have admonished him, and he not
amend, Who is a sclau^derer.
this is no sclaunder. Yea I say unto you, that it is flattery, it is grievous
sin to speak well of such an evil man, for it is sin to lie on the devil
according to the common saying. Flattery. Esaias. 5
Woe worth them says the Prophet Esaias, that call evil good, and good evil,
which makes darkness light, and light darkness, that makes sower sweet, and
sweet sower, woe be unto them. We must bless evil men, that is pray for their
amendment and reformation, so Christ's commandment is to be taken, which he
gave his disciples. Math. 5
(...) (...), bless them that curse you* that is, pray for them, for they
corrupt the text which turn it speak well of the^, onles they expound well
speaking to be prayer to God for their conversion. We may not speak well of
them which be notable euel, for we may not ly, we may not flatter, lest that
curse of the Prophet fall upon us, which says, woe be to you* yt call evil,
good etc. Therefore let us say ye truth of such evil men that shame and report
may cause them to amend, and that other may be afraid to commit the same
faults, and to follow their ungracious example. If we praise evil men, besides
that we ly, we encourage other to follow them, we imbolden them to go forward in
wickedness, and to rejoice in sin, we do break Gods commandment, which
says: Non dices falsum testimoniu^, Exodus 20 Deuteronomy. 5
thou shall be no false witness. But of this in aniwyse beware, that thou do not
report evil of those, which be Godly. For as the other is flattery, and lying,
so this is sclaunder, and railing, and against the aforesaid precept, and the
Prophet also cries woe unto such, that call good evil, Esaias. ^
and light darkness, and sweet sower. Before thou come to Gods lord, examyn
and try thy self whether thou be gilty of any of these things before rehearsed,
of oppression, of flattery, of malice, of flaunder, of lieng, of envy, of
batemaking. Follow the council of S. Paul, judge thy self, that thou be not
judged of the Lord. And as householders and masters of colleges do call their
stewardes and bowsers to an account and audit, ^ Cor. 11
to know what they have received, and what they have expended, and laid forth
for every thing, what is not received, and what remains still in their
hands, so do thou, make thy self a judge over thine own conscience, call thy
soul to give an account of al his thoughts, call thine eyes to a reconing for
all their wanton and unchaste lokes, examyn thine ears, whether they have been
corrupted with flattery, with detraxion, or with evil counsel, call thy
hands to accounpt for couetously taking that which was not thine, ask
accoumpt and a reconyng of thy tongue, what oaths, what slanders, what brags
what baudry, what evil council, what heresy, and what pestiferous doctrine he
has sowed and uttered. For if thou do not prove and examyn thy self according
to Paul's counsel, but come with a defiled conscience to Gods board, thou do
not eat Christ's body, which is the bread of life, and is received only unto
health and salvation, but thou do eat Panem mortis, the bread of death, the
bread of judgment, the bread of dampnation, and art gylty, as Paul says: of
the body and blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 1^
because thou do abuse, defyle, and despise the Sacrament thereof. But to
return to the text, S. Mathewe writes that our Savior Christ gave thanks,
and that after thanks rendered he brake bread and distributed it to his
Disciples.

Where as Matthew, and Luke say, that He gave thanks, Luke 22 Mark. 14.
Mark has these words: He took bread and blessed and brake it.

Here we say that to bless is to give thanks to God for all his innumerable
benefits, To bless is not to make a Cross.
and namely for our redemption through Christ. No says the Papist to bless is
to make a sign of the Cross on the Sacrament. And to defend this
interpretation they allege. S. Paul's authority, who says: is not ye cup of
blessing, which we bless, partaking of the blood of Christ? 1 Cor. 10
I answer. The Greek word in these two textes which they allege for their
crossing is (...), which word cannot signify to cross. For where as Paul
terms it the cup of blessing, which we bless, ye greek is (...). And for the
english he blessed and brake the bread, Mark says in the greek tongue, Mark.
14.
in which he wrote his Gospel (...). Which word I say can not signify to
make a sign of the cross. For the Greeks never used it in such signification,
and the Oriental and Greek church never took it so, nether do we read, that
the Greek church used ever any such gesture upon the sacrament. Then what is ye
meaning of these words he blessed and brake the bread. You shall understand,
that to bless is a word of many significations, and many times used in the
scriptures, and yet throghout the whole Bible it does never signify to make a
sign of ye cross. I do not mean, nor affirm yt it is evil, to make a cross
on thy forehead, but to teach that Christ crossed the sacrament, and to defend
crossing to be a necessary ceremony to be used at the distribution of Christ's
supper, this is papistical leue^, supersticious doctrine, and to make the
scriptures a nose of wax, a tenes baull, and to wrest them to every purpose. To
bless here is to give thanks to God the father for his merciful beholding of
our misery, for pardoning Adams disobedience, and for sending his son to be
borne of a woman, to grind and break in sonder the Serpents head, that is to
destroy the power of the devil through death, through his cross, and by
theffusio^ and shedding of his blood. And the cup of blessing, of which Paul
speaks, is as much to say, as the cup of thankesgeuing. For he expounds it
even so in the next Chapter himself. And where as Mark says that Christ
blessed, Matthew and Luke say, expou^ding on another, that he gave thanks. For
this use, intent, and purpose this sacrament was chiefly, and principally
ordained, that we should not forget the great clemency and special favor of the
eternal God for the death and passion of Christ our Lord, but reserve this his
benefit, in continual memory. And therefore many of the elder Fathers do name
this holy Sacrament (...) or (...), that is a renderyng of praise and a
thankesgeuyng. It follows in the text how after that Christ had given thanks,
That he brake the bread and gave it to his Disciples and bad them take and eat
it, and he took the Cup likewise and gave it them saying: Drink of it every
one.

Or as Luke says, he took the cup, and said: Accipite and diuidite inter vos,
take this and divide it among you. Christ our master does not receive this
holy Sacrament alone, Christ ordeineth here a communion, not a private mass.
Actu. 2
but with his Disciples, nether do we read in all the new Testament, that
ever any received it privately, or severally from others. The Acts of ye
Apostles testify that they which believed resorted together oftentimes to
celebrate this Sacrament. But they do not speak of any private receipt: for
Christ ordayneth here no private Mass, but a Communion. Let us follow his
example, and celebrate Christ's supper, not as our forefathers have done many
years and of long time, but as Christ, who is before all time and all years*
did celebrate it first, and as his Disciples did use it in the primative and
Apostolic church. You will say there has been a custom contrary many years,
An object.
and I have heard some say, that when the devotion of the layte and temporalte
waxed cold, that the Apostles and their successors gave liberte to ministers to
receive it alone. I answer, this custom begone but of late days, Thanswe^
and not many years agone. For as Cronicles do make plain and evident
relation, Gregory surnamed the great the first Bishop of Rome, Gregorius magnus.
of that name, was the first founder of private Masses, who was Anno dom. 595
almost for the space of six hundred years there was no private receipt. Moreover
this is most certain, and true, that the Oriental church never unto this day
did allow or use private masses, The East church.
as app^reth plainly of the name, which they give to this sacrament. For they
call it (...) that is a communion, or a coming and assemble together of many in
one place. And for an evident proof of this, you shall understand yt Plinius, he
that was Profos Bithiniae, Plinius.
that is governor and captain of Bithinia, In the time of ye wise Emperor
Traianus, this Pliny I say in a certain Epistle, which he writes to the foresaid
Emperor, De ritu christianorum, of the rights and fashions of the christians,
is a witness hereof, that the Greeks in his time had a communion, and no private
masses. And other learned writers do credibly report, that certain churches of
the Venetians within this.xxx. years, and less did not celebrate the Lords
supper alone, The Uenetians.
or any man privately by himself. And it may well be, that they do so still at
this day: of these it is evident that private masses be not of so ancient, and
long co^tinuaunce, or so universally received, as the papists do face and
brag the matter after their accustomed sort. But you will go further with me
and say: If the laite will receive, An object.
they may, for they were never restrained, but if they will not, thinking
themselves unworthy to receive it often themselves, why may not the priest
receive it alone for them. We may pray one for another, Thanswer
so we are exhorted to do, but no man may receive the sacrament for others, but
for himself only. That which thou receiuest, thou receiuest by thine own faith,
and for spiritual fode to thine own soul, and not to others. For it is written,
iustus ex fide sua viuet, the rightuous man shall live by faith, Abac. ^ Romans 1
Hebr. 10
by his own faith, and not by an other man's faith, nor by another receipt. And
as no man has norishment or sustenaunce, of the meat which another does eat,
so this spiritual fode does profit only such, as take and eat it themselves,
according to Christ's precept, they be not edified, nor refresshed with an
other man's spirit, with an other man's faith, or receipt, no more then they be
regenerat and renewed with the baptime of others. 1 Cor. 1^
For if it be true that Paul says: Qui enim manducat and bibit indigne,
iudicium sibi manducat et bibit, that is he that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks to his own condemnation, and not to any other
man's condemnation, Ergo he that eats and drinks worthily, eats but to his
own health and salvation, and not to the health and profit of others. The
benefit, the fruit, and the whole co^modite of this sacrament depends upon
the promises which Christ has annexed to it, which promises be pronounced
only to those, that come to his supper themselves, as these promises.
Whosoever eats my flesh, John. ^
and drinks my blood, has eternal life, I will raise him up (says Christ) at
the last day, and he dwells in God, and God in him: these promises I say be
not made to thee, onles thou come to Gods table thyself, another man's receipt
does nothing profit, or edify thee. Therefore Paul unto the Corinthians, after
that he restrains them from making any banquet or refection before this
supper, ^ Cor. 11
afterward speaking of this Sacrament, he commands boeth priests and
others, not to receive one for another, but one to tarry for another, saying:
Alius alium expectate, cum conuenitis ad manducandum: Tarry says Paul one for
another, when ye come together to eat. He speaks these words of Christ's
supper, for he forbids the Corinthia^s in the same Chapter, to eat any
other meat in the house of prayer, then bread and wine in commemoration of the
death of Christ. Ambrose a learned and holy father of Christ's church, S. Ambr.
does so construe and take this text disalowyng and reproving al private
receipt, and also Theophilact. Theophil.
For Ambrose says upon this text: Ab inuicem expectandum est, vt multorum
oblatio simul celebretur and vt omnibus ministretur. That is to say: we must
tarry for others, that many may offer up thanks and praises, and that all the
congregation may receive. Thanks be unto God, that we have Christ's supper in
that fashion and manner, which he him self observed, yet because all men be not
persuaded, and some do murmur and grudge at this Godly reformation, and of a
stubbornes absent them selves from the holy communion, and would fly back
into Egypt again to hear Masses, as they were wont to do, I thought it
necessary to touch this matter to reform their judgments, if they wylbe
reclaymed.

What word of God, what authority of scriptures can be alleged for private
masses? Or who is able to show, that ever any of the Apostles, any holy man in
the primative church, or any of the elder Fathers before Pope Gregory, did
celebrate privately? If there be nether example of any holy man, nor no
autorite, no text, no testimony of the scripture to maintain them, let us
conclude that it is but a dream and fantasy of man, submitting our judgments
to Gods book. Moreover as Christ did not ordeine his supper to be received
privately for benefactors either dead, or alive, or for others, no more did he
eleuate and lift up the sacrament over his head to be seen and worshipped of
his disciples. The elevation.
He gave it them into their hands to eat, and not to honor it, to receive it,
and not to worship it with holding up of their hands, and knocks on their
breasts. Only God is to be honored with this kind of reverence, and no
sacrament, for God is not a sacrament, neither is the sacrament God. What a
sacrament is, is to long a matter to entreat now, because I will not weary you,
I will difer this point unto the next sermon. Then I will show you also how
Christ's body is in the holy sacrament, and proceed further into the text. Let
us use it, as Christ, and his Apostles did. If thou will be more devout, then
they were, be not deceived, but beware yt thy devotion be not idolatry. Christ
gave it the^ into their hands, It is best to take the sacrament into our
hands.
not into their mouths. Nether be thou afraid to take, and ha^del it with thy
hands, as they did. Consider not how it has been used in times past, the
counsel holden at Rotomage, Council. Rotomag.
did first forbid men to take it in their hands, regard more Christ's example,
and the example of his Disciples, and of the primative church, which always
did take it into their hands, then the late example of our forefathers. But
thou wylt say, the kings book, made by the learned clergy and wise men of this
realm, according to Gods word, and confirmed by most high authority of the
Lords and commons of the Parliament, commands me to receive the holy
Sacrament at the priests hands into my mouth. As the Apostles commanded all
christen men and women, Act. 15.
to abstain from blood* and from straungled meats, to bear with those that
were weak, and for other certain considerations, which co^maundme^t S. Paul
afterward disanulleth, professyng no meat to be unclean, Romans 14* Tit. 1
and licensing them to eat both blood and straungled, which license they
embraced wyllingly and obediently: and as they of the primative church
commanded the people to receive it at their mouths, because some receiving it
in their hands, did convey away the Sacrament secretly to abuse it to
superstition and magical uses. So the king commands the same in deed for
like considerations for a time and season for an uniformity, and to bear with
thy infirmity and weakness, until thou shall have more knowledge by readyng
and hearing Gods sacred word, and until thou shallt be grown a strong and a
perfect man in Christ's holy religion, entending as I take it when thy heart is
tilled with the seed of Gods word, and able to digest stronger meat, to make
an uniform law to the contrary, and to command all men, women and children,
to receive it with their hands, as priests do, and as Christ and his Disciples
did, and the layte of the primative church. For indifferent things the kings
majesty with his clergy and the advice of his Parliament may do and undo,
forbid and command, and make one law this year, and an other clean contrary
the next year. Therefore when soever the same authority shall will thee to take
it in thy hands again, or if they shall will thee to receive it syttyng, thou
must as willyngly obey their commandment, as they of the primative church did
embrace Paul's commandment touching blood and straungled meats,
notwithstanding it was a contrary commandment to that which all the Apostles
had concluded upon a little before, Act. 15
as is regestred. In the mean time I do not bid thee disobey, or break their
first commandment. But if it be an indifferent thing, thou wylt say why may I
not do as I list, or how may they forbid me to take it with my mouth, for then
they make it not indifferent. It is not evil to receive with thy mouth, but it
is better to receive it in thy hands, for as much as Christ's Disciples did
so, and in indiffererent things the magistrates may command thee to do that
is the better, yea or that which is worse, as they shall see cause and
considerations. Prepare thy heart therefore to obedience in such things, and
be as ready to receive it in thy hands as with thy mouth, be as ready to
receive it syttyng, as knelyng, yea even to morrow, if they shall will thee so
to do.

And as thou do willingly obey them in that they bid thee take it with thy
mouth, so obey them concerning adoration, for in that they command that the
Sacrament shall not be heued, nor lift up, they forbid thee to honor it.

Thus I have declared you my faith and knowledge, The conclusion with
^^umera^^on and pra^er.
that is why God ordained his supper after ye eating of the la^be, that their
lamb was a figure of our sacramental bread and wine, a commemoration of the
deliverance, and a Sacrament of Christ's death, that the Jews had some
continual rites and sacraments, and other some temporal. I showed you how
their sacraments and ours, how their receipt and ours does differ, why God who
is immutable disanulled their rits, and ordained new rites and new ceremonies
for us, for what causes men absent them selves from Christ's banquet, to which
they should come not annually but continually, and that as it is best to come
fasting thereto, so it is not evil to receive after meat and drink. I have
proved, that to bless is not to make a cross upon the sacrament, but to
render thanks to God the father for the remission of our sins through the
sede promised, that Christ ordeineth here no private Mass, but a communion,
and that the scriptures and the Oriental church, and S. Ambrose a godly and
learned father of the Latin church, disalowe all private receipt. And that as it
is not evil to receive the holy sacrament at thy mouth, so it is better to
take it in thy hands, as Christ and his Apostles did, and the laite of the
primative church. These matters be touched hitherto, but onles God inwardly
with his spirit do teach you this Philosophy and wisdom, and transform your
hearts and judgments, leading you into all truth, my preaching is but lost
labor. Therefore let us call upon the name of God with prayer, and invocation
for his help and holy spirit. Let us pray for the universal company of
Christ's church throughout all Realms and dominions, whersoeuer they dwell,
namely for the congregation of England and Irelande, desiring the ete^nall God
of his fatherly mercy to co^tinew and strengthen both them and us in the
confession and obedience of his word and truth. Also for all infideles and
unbelievers, that God may turn their hearts to believe upon his son Jesus
Christ our Lord, for S. Paul unto Timothe commands us to pray for all men.
For the kings majesty a prince of most excellent hope, that virtue and
knowledge may dwell in his noble heart. For these things, for the remission of
our sins, and for Gods help hereafter in all our works, words and
thoughts, I shall desire you to say a prayer after me.()

The Prayer.
O Eternal God, who art the author of al truth, and did ordeine this holy
sacrament, of bread and wine, by thy only begotten son, in the roum and place,
of the easterlambe, which they of ye old law, did ea^ yearly, for a memory of
their deliverance, from Egypt and from Pharao, by thy mighty power, and in
hope of the coming of Christ, whom John the christener, and Paul, do call our
easter lamb, that we of the new law, receiving this new sacrament, should
reserve thy loving kindness, in continual remembrance, in that thou have sent,
thy only son, to become womans seed, to break the serpents head, and to
deliver us, from the power of the devil, and from the bondage of syn, by his
cross, and by theffusion of his most honorable blood: Here our prayers and
supplications O merciful father: and send us thy syerit, from thy holy place,
to persuade al men and women, to celebrate thy supper, after the example of
Christ, and of his Apostles and disciples, and stablish the hearts of the
people, against false teachers, of private masses, and of supersticious
crossing, with the contemplatio^ of Christ's ensample, with the use of the
Oriental church, and with the knowledge of thy holy scriptures, yt we may be
mete gestes for thy table, and be partakers of all the benefits of Christ's
death and passion, to whom with the and the holy spirit, ^e al honor, and
glory, and praise, now and ever. So be it.

THE SECOND SERMON upon the Lords Supper.
IN my last Sermon well-beloved in the Lord, where as I began to declare unto you
ye Lords supper, which was a part and membre of the Gospel, and through plenty
of matter I did not end the same, now occording to my promise I will show you
what a Sacrament is, and how Christ's body and blood be present in his holy
supper.

Thus much remains yet to be spoken of: Take eat (says Christ) this is my
body. And likewise of the Cup he says: Drink of it every one: For this is my
blood of the new Testament, shed for many, to the forgiveness of sins. I say
unto you: I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine till that day,
when I shall drink it new with you in my fathers kingdom. And when they had
song praises, they went out into mount Oliuet.

That I may declare this heavenly matter to Gods honor and find out such
lessons and eruditio^ as may be mete for this audience and for your edifying
and enstruction, which be assembled here to serve God in prayer and hearing his
word, let us ask Gods help and his holy spirit, for the which I shall desire
you to say the Lords prayer after me. Our father which art in heaven. etc.

There is no matter in the holy scripture well-beloved in the Lord, more
necessary to be known and to be discussed, then these words of our savior
Jesus Christ, This is my body, and this is my blood of the new Testament. There
is no text, which has been so abused and racked to maintein superstition and
diverse purposes. And where as Christ ordeineth here a sacrament of unity to
knit us together in peace, amity, and love, Inimicus homo super sen^inauit
rirania, that is the devil, Math. 1^
who goes about to deprave all Godly things, has sown so many tares, and
such pestiferous opinions, and hurtful seeds, and dampnable doctrine in men's
hearts, by his ministers the Papists, the questionistes, scholemen, and the
Anabaptis^es, that nothing now is a matter of more contention, of more debate,
strife, and variaunce, not only between man and man, but also between co^tries
and kingdoms, because every man is wedded stubbornly to his own judgment, and
where as they should reform their opinions and submit their judgments to
Gods scriptures, as to the touchstone which tries good from evil, they rather
do rack and wrest Gods word making it a mariners slop, or a nose of wax, and
bowyng it unto every purpose. Therefore I thought it good to utter my knowledge
which is but small in this matter, not to teach such as be enstructed, and
already ripe in knowledge, of whom I am desirous to learn my self, but partly
for their sakes and eruditio^, which be unlearned, and of ye laite, that they
may know how to prepare themselves to come to Gods board this holy time of
Easter, and at other times, and partly also to testify and profess my
conscience and faith in this matter.

Many do affirm and think these words of Christ (this is my body) to be a
like phrase, a like kind and a like manner of speech, as when he says: Ego sum
vitis, John. 15.11.14. Luke. 5 Math. 9 Apoc. 18
I am the vine, I am the door, I am the way, I am the bridgrom. They be no like
phrases, but far diverse and different. For the vine is no sacrament, nether the
door, nor the wey, nor the bridgrom, be no sacraments, but metaphores and
borrowed speches. The bread of which Christ said: this is my body, and the mine
which he affirms to be his blood be not bare and naked metaphores, as ye
aforesaid phrases are, but they be sacraments, of his honorable body, and
comfortable blood, as both the Occidental and Orie^tal, and the Greek church,
and al writers both new and old, do acknowledge and confess with one voice.
For all christendom have always agreed in this point. Therefore the nature of a
sacrament being thoroughly known and examined and tried, it will teach you ye
meaning of Christ's words and how he is present in his supper. What is a
sacrament. What a sacrament is
I will not devise a description of mine own head, nor show a fantasy of mine
own brain, I will follow in this matter the sentence, and judgments of
others, whose excellent lerning and singular virtues ar known to all the world.
S. Austin an elder and holy father of Christ's church, S. Austyn de catechi.
rudib.
and a man of a most ripe judgment and sharp searching wit in the scriptures,
in his book de catechisandis rudibus, defines a sacrament thus: Sacramentum
est signaculum inuisibilis gratiae, a Sacrament is a visible, a sensible, and
an outward sign, or token of an invisible grace or benefit. And he expresses
the meaning of this definition, more plainly in a certain letter, verily in
his.xxiii. Epistle, which he writes to one Bonifacius.2. Epist. 23
Where he witnesses all sacraments to be figures and similitudes of the
benefit and grace, which they do represent and signify, saying. If
sacraments have not certain similitudes of these things, whereof they are
Sacraments, then are they no Sacraments. And for this similitude for the most
part they take the names of the very things. And S. Cyprian has even the very
same doctrine, S. Cyprian de chrism.
and the same words in a certain sermon, which he made de chrismate of
anointing. If therefore the bread of which Christ says this is my body, be a
sacrament, as can not be denied, then it has the name of Christ's body,
because of some similitudes, which shall be declared streightwaies, and not
because of any transubstantiation, that is to say, it is a sensible, and an
outward sign of his holy flesh, and the wine likewise is a sensible sign of
his honorable blood without any mutation, change, or alteration of the
natures and substau^ces either of bread or wine. But because this is a dark
and a secret mystery, I will assay to express it more evidently, and to declare
the similitudes and properties, which do change the names of bread and wine,
but not their natures and essence. Give diligent head, and ponder well what I
shall say, for this matter is very hard. When our savior Christ affirms
bread to be his body, and wine to be his blood he ordeineth a Sacrament, that
is, he gives the name of the thing to the signs of bread and wine, so that
notwithstanding the matter, the nature, and subance of the signs, do remain
and continue. Onles their substance, and natures do remain, I say unto you,
bread and wine can be no Sacraments. For sacraments as I told you before out
of S. Austin, ar so called of ye similitudes of those things* to which they be
sacraments. Take away the matter, the substance, and nature of bread and
wine, and thou take away all similitudes, which must of necessity be in the
signs of bread and wine after the consecration, and in that they be
sacraments. For all the elder and learned fathers of Christ's church, do
confess with one voice, and the scriptures do witness the same, Christ
affirms bread to be his body for three properties and similitudes.
that there must be three similitudes and properties in bread and wine a
similitude of norishing, a similitude of unity, and a similitude of
conversion, for which properties and similitudes bread and wine, be named
Christ's body and blood, and not for any transubstantiation or alteration of
their natures. The similitude and property of norishing is this, A similitude
of noryshing.
that as bread and wine do norish our bodies and comfort our outward man, so
the body and blood of Christ, be the meat and food of our souls and do
comfort our inward man. Christ expresses this similitude calling himself Pane^
vitae, John. 6
the bread of eternal life, and professing his flesh to be very meat, and his
blood to be very drink. That is the food and spiritual sustenaunce of man's
soull and mind. This I say is one cause, why Christ affirms bread to be his
body, and wine to be his blood, S. Hiero. super Ma.
as S. Hierom teaches us writing thus of Christ's supper upon Matthew: After
the eating of the mystical lamb with his Apostles, Assumit panem, qui
confortat cor hominis, he took (says this holy father) he took bread which
comfort the heart of man. And that this is S. Hieroms meaning, Beda in Lucam.
Beda does declare, who upon Luke does set out this sentence of Hierom more
copiously saying: Because bread does confirm or strengthen the flesh, and
wine works blood in the flesh, therefore is the bread referred mistically
unto Christ's body, and the wine is referred unto his blood.

Another cause why bread and wine is named Christ's flesh and blood, is
another similitude of unity, A similitude of unite
which is thus much to say. As the Sacramental lofe, of which we do eat
coming to the communion, is made of many corns of wheat by the lyquore of
water, knoden into doghe, and yet it is but one lofe or one cake. And as the
holy wine is made of the juice of diverse and many grapes, and yet is but one
cup of wine, so all they that eat Christ's body and drink his blood through
faith, though they be never so many, yet by the lyquor of charity and love
they are made one body and one flesh, the mystical body of the Son of God,
which is his church and congregation, and not his natural body S. Paul
expresses this similitude witnessing that the bread is a Sacrament, not only
of Christ's natural body, but also of the congregation, and mistical body
saying: ^ Cor. 10
Vnus panis vnum corpus multi sumus, that albeit we be many, yet
notwithstanding we are one lofe, and one body. What a lofe are we? Verily even
Triticeus panis, a wheaten lofe, by the similitude and property of unity,
which I have declared. S. Cipria^ also in his sixth letter, Cypr. lib. 1 Epist. 6
which he writes to one Magnus, in his first book aloweth this similitude
writing thus.

The Lord (says this holy father) calls bread made of many grains or corns
his body, and he names wine made of the joyce of the clusters of diverse
grapes his blood. And S. Austin In sermon de sacra feria paschae, in a certain
sermon, which he made of the holy feast of passover allows the same
similitude or property, proving us by this property to be Christ's body,
saying: because Christ has suffered for us, he has betaken unto us in this
sacrament his body and blood, which he has also made our selves. For we are
also made his body, and by his mercy we are even the same thing, that we
receive. And afterward he says in ye said sermon: now in the name of Christ
you are come as a man would say to the chalice of the Lord: there are ye upon
the table, and there are ye in the chalice. The third similitude of conversion,
A similitude of co^ue^sion.
for yt which also the Sacrament is affirmed to be Christ's flesh and blood, is
this: that as the bread and wine are turned into the substance of our bodies
by fedyng and susteining them, so by the receiuinge of Christ's body and blood
we are turned into the nature of them, we are changed, and altered, and made
holy flesh of his flesh, and bones of his bones, as Paul witnesses. Ephe. 5
And Chrisostom confirms the same saying: nos secum in vnam massam reducit,
neque id fide solum, Chriso. ho. 83. super Math.
sed reipsa corpus suum effecit. We says this holy and learned father, we are
made one matter with Christ, not by faith alone, and charity, as he writes also
to the people of Antioche, Homl. 63. ad popul. Antioch. Amb. li. 4 sacra. ca. 4
but we are made even his very body, reipsa, that is effectually truly and
really. And S Ambrose does write that we are changed and turned into Christ,
and Emisenus also does profess a real mutation, Emisenus
of us into Christ, and yet we are not transubstantiat, and converted, we are
not transformed into him, but our nature and substance remains still, as it did
before our receipt of the Sacrament, and so does the nature and substance of the
Sacraments. For if the nature of bread and wine be altered, our nature must be
altered in like manner, for as much as the fathers witness that we do eat
Christ's flesh, reipsa, that is really and effectually, so that our flesh is
made holy flesh of his flesh, and we must be as Paul says, bones of his bones.
Ephe. 5
How ar we flesh of his flesh? not by any mutation, or change of our
substance, essence, or nature, which remains still, but in that we do eat
Christ's flesh, and drink his blood by faith and belefe, by which only Christ
is eaten and dronken, and no ways else. To eat Christ's flesh, and to drink
his blood is to believe, that the son of God took on him our humanite, to believe
that his body was nailed upon the Cross, and that his blood was let s^^th, and
shed for the remission of our sins, for our transgressions, and offenses, and
to repose us into his fathers savor again, who was displeased with us. To
teach us this he calls himself the bread of God, that came from heaven, to
give life unto the world. John. 6
Which chapter is a manifest probation of this matter, that his flesh is never
eaten, nether in the sacrament, nor without the sacrament, but only by belief.
S. Augustine, S. Austyn in cap. 6 Joan.
whose excellent learning and virtue is well known, does so take all that is
spoken there. For he says writing upon the same Chapter: Vt quid paras dentes
and ventrem? Why do thou make ready thy teeth and belly? Vis man ducare
Christum? Will thou eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood? and he
answers, Creed and manducasti, that is to say, believe and I say unto thee
thou have eaten his flesh, and drunk his blood. But here the Papists reply,
An object. answered*
that Christ's flesh is eaten in the Sacrament, and without it, and that
without the sacrament, it is eaten only by faith. But in the Sacrament it is
eaten without faith of those that eat it unworthily, as Judas did.

I answer: Christ's flesh, as it is ye bread of life, so always it does give
life to the spirit, which evil men have not. Moreover Christ's flesh is meat
according to own saying: Caro ^ea vere est cibus, my flesh is very meat, John.
^
and my blood is very drink. What meat and drink is it? Verily the meat and
drink of the soul, Christ's flesh is the meat of the soull.
not of the body, the fode and sustenau^ce not of the flesh, but of the spirit,
as the figurs and sacraments of bread and wine, are bodily sustenaunce. For
the spirit is not fed or noryshed with corporal fode, Ma^s soull is not fed
with corporal fode. John. 3
for it is written, Quod natum est ex carne, caro est, that which is borne of
flesh is flesh, that is to say, carnal and fleshly. And Christ reproves
such, which understood that he would give his flesh to be eaten really and
corporally, John. 6
and substantially, saying: The flesh profits nothing, it is the the spirit,
which quickens, but there are some of you that believe not, as if he had said:
I took not my body of the holy virgin to give it to be eaten really and
naturally for the remission of sin, or to ordein any carnal eating, but I
took my body, and became man to die for sin, and that ways to profit and
sanctifite you. Mortua prodest caro, non comesa, the death of my flesh
profits and avails you, and not the eating thereof, which profit you must
receive by faith only, and through belief in my passion by the operation of the
spirit. My flesh is the bread of life, in that it shall be beaten, torn, and
slain for you, not in that it shall be eaten. For that the fruit, the benifit,
and whole commodite of his coming should be distributed into the world by his
his death only, he teaches us himself by a similitude saying: John. 1^. 1 Cor.
11.
Nisi granum frumenti deiectum in ter ram mortuum fuerit, ipsum solum manet,
onles the corn, which is sown in the ground, do first die, it does not
increase, if it die, it brings forth much fruit. So his body does profit us,
not in that we eat it really, but in that it was beaten cruelly, scorged and
slain for us, in that it was crucified it is the bread of life, the bread of
salvation, redemption, and justification. With these sentences Christ plucketh
us from carnal eating, and teaches us, that his body is eaten by faith only in
this life. But I hear one say, which deliteth in his own wit, and thinks
that he cause further in a mylston beyond others. If we receive Christ's body
by faith only, what needs the sacrament? What boteth it to come to the Lords
table, That both the spiritual and sacramental receipt are necessary.
saying we may receive his body without the sacrament, whersoeuer we be, if we
believe upon him, whether we be in the field, or in the town, or in our beds.
Truly if thou be honestly and Godly affected, and do revoke Christ's passion
to thy memory, hoping for remission and pardon of thy offense through the
sheding of his blood, and through the death of his body, thou do eat his
body, and drink his blood. But if thou regard not his sacrament, if thou
regard not the promises, which he has annexed to his table, if thou pass not
on his commandment, which is. Take ye, eat, and drink ye of this every one
thou do not believe, but art carnally minded and the servant of syn. Where
faith is, there is also hope, modesty, humilite, sobernes, and obedience to
Gods precepts, for the nature of faith is to justify. Now carnal and
disobedient me^ do not eat Christ's body, forasmuch as it is eaten only in
spirit and in faith, that is of spiritual and faithful men and women,
always unto health and redemption, and never unto hurt or destruction. Thou
may say likewise, I will not come to the church to pray, for God hears
me every where. Thou may say likewise I will not be absolved of the minister,
for God is not bound to his sacraments, and he only bloteth out sin without
the ceremony of ministration, as he did the sins of the these, of Mary
Magdalene, Luke 23.7*
and of others. True it is, God absolueth before thou come to the priest, if
thou have earnest remors, and an unfeigned purpose to amend. For he cleansed the
mam from Leprosy, of whom Mathewe speaks, he raised Lazarus from the death
of the body. Math. 8
And Paull from the death of the soull, Luke 5 Genesis 15 Act. 9
before they were with any minister. He received also Abraham into his favor
before he was circumcised. Not withstanding we have commandment to repair to
the minister for absolution, for to them belongs to loose and to bind, to
bless and to curse, as appears of ye foresaid ensamples. For Paul after that
he was lyghtened from above was directed unto Ananias to receive imposition of
hands.

The Leper also was commanded to show himself to the priest for a witness to
the congregation. And Lazarus after his vprysing was delivered to Christ's
disciples, which were priests, to be losed, and stripped of his grave bonds.
And the patriark Abraham after that he was justified and accepted into Gods
favor, Romans 4 Genesis 17
he received the sacrament of circumcision, as a seal of the righteousness,
which is by faith. So albeit Christ's body be received in faith many times
without the sacrament, yet thou must come unto his board, because of his
commandment, because of his promises, and also to receive spiritual comfort,
and increase of faith. Otherwise thou do nether eat his body, nor drink his
blood, nether shall thou be partaker of the fruits of his passion, which
appertain to those only, which by receiving the memorial of his death, do
show them selves not to be unkind or forgetful, but obedient and thankful.
It is not enough to receive it spiritually, we must receive it also
sacramentally, for both receipts be required and commanded, and Christ him self
with his Apostles used both for our eruditio^, ensample, and enstruction. Here
a question may be demanded no less necessary to be known, then hard to
dissolve and answer. If Christ's be eat only by faith, how is that true,
which I rehearsed out of Chrisostom that we are transformed into Christ, By
worth^ receipt we be made christ's body really.
and made his body non solum per fidem, not only by faith, sed reipsa, but also
really, truly, and effectually. You shall understand well-beloved in the Lord,
that when we receive Christ in faith, that this receipt joins, and coupleth us
effectually and really, unto Christ. Not only our hearts and minds, but also
our bodies and flesh be purified, be washed and cleansed by this receipt, so
that Christ our head and Lord, dwells and abides in us hereby, and
norisheth, and fedeth us continually with faith in his blood, and with the
comfort of his holy spirit, making us lively, holy, and very members of his
mystical body. This is the affect and meaning of Chrisostoms words, in which
he affirms, that we are made the body of Christ really, truly, and
affectually. Hitherto I have declared unto you two matters, what it is to eat
Christ's body, and that three similitudes or properties be necessarely required
in this sacrament, as I have proved as well by evident textes of the Gospel, as
with the authority of many of the elder and best learned fathers of Christ's
church, whose doctrine and interpretatio^s I exhort al men to follow. Of these
similitudes or properties we may gather yt the matter and natures of bread and
wine do remain, and that Christ's words, This is my body, be as much to say, as
this is a sacrament of my body. For these similitudes and properties must be in
the bread and wine, in that they be sacraments, and after the consecration,
else they are no sacraments. For take away the substance, matter, and nature of
them, and what similitude or property remains either of nutrition, or of
unity, or of conuertion? Ergo the assence, nature, matter, and substance of
bread and wine is not altered, not transformed, not transubstantiat, but do
remain and continewe, as before for these properties and similitudes be in the
very substance and inward nature of bread and wine. The scholemen and Papists
to defend and mainteyne their transubstantiation, An object.
which is the bishop of Romes kingdom, and the fortress, and castle of all
superstition and idolatry, they make the accidents of bread and wine the
sensible, and outward sign, and the visible earthly, and terrenal nature of
this sacrament. Thanswe^
When thou metest with such a scholemaister, that teaches this doctrine, and
that the bread is not bread still* answer him thus. Sir there must be three
similitudes and properties in the sacrament, a similitude of norishyng, a
similitude of unity, another of conversion. But these three properties and
similitudes can not be in the outward show of accidents, that is in the
color, in the fasion, in the breadth, and roundnes, in the quantity of bread
and wine, for these things nor no other accidents do not norishe, and feed
us, be not converted into us, nether have they any property or similitude of
any unity. But the bread and wine have al these similitudes, they do norysh,
they be turned into our nature, and they do conteyne a similitude of unity.
Therefore bread and wine is the outward and sensible sign, and the terrenall
nature of this sacrament, and the bread is bread still, and the wine is wine
still* as well after the consecration, as before, or else they be no sacraments,
and yet not withstanding they be named the body and blood of Christ, not
because of any mutation, change, or alteration of their natures and
substau^ces, but because of the three similitudes, and properties aforsaid.
Answer papisticall teachers on this wise, and with this reason, and they shall
not be able to gainsay thee. Now let us enter somewhat further into the text and
in into other matters. Christ speaking of the cup says: Hic est sanguis noui
testame^ti. This is my blood of the new testament or of the new covenant.
What mean these words the new testament? What a testament is
and what is a new testament? Verily a testament is as much to say as a legacy,
or behest of goods. So S. Austin defines it: Testimentum est, quo defertur
bono rum hereditas, a testament says S. Austin is a behest and legacy of
goods. S. Austyn
And there is an old testament, and a new testament, as Christ teaches us
here. The old testament is a bequest, The old testa. what it is.
and legacy of temporal goods, and earthly commodities unto the sinagoge of
the Jews. The new testament is a bequest of eternal and heavenly
enheritaunce, What the new test. is
through Christ unto all men, both Jews and Gentiles. Or otherwise. The old
testament is the axe set to the root of the trees, Math. 3 Luke 3 Romans 4
the law which causes anger that is the preaching of the law against wicked
men, for lex iusto non est posita, the law says Paul, was not ordained for
good men, 1 Timothy ^
but for evil, and therefore he defines it in another place to be ministratio^
of death and damnation. 2 Cor. 3
But the new testament is a sermon of Gods mercy and cleme^cy of salvation, of
redemption, and righteousness through the effusion of Christ's blood, who
calls all men and women from superstition to true holiness, from shadows to
light, from the letter to the spirit, and from the works to the flesh, to
labor and work in his vineyard, yt is, to honor and glorify God by well doing
in hope of plenteous reward. Wherefore S. Paul unto the Corinthians, names it
the ministration of the spirit and of righteousness. Gal. 4
And he compares the first testament to Agar to Abraha^s bondwoman, and the
second he likeneth to Sara his lawful wife and a fre woman, signifying hereby
that the one does gendre unto bondage, and the other to eternal life. And both
testamentes do remain yet and be effectual at this day. Both testamentes be
yet effectual.
The old testament is not disanulled in evil me^, but in good men. For such as
live in sin and ignorau^cie of God, and do measure and judge holiness by outward
ceremonies, and such as do gape gredely after eartly things, such as be
Iulianites, and without conscience, and do think mortal corpo, mortal animo,
all such belong to the old testament, and be yet under the stroke of the axe,
under the law which causes anger. And from the beginning of ye world good
men, as Adam, Enoch, Sem, Noe, Abraham, and David, which in all their
ceremonies had an eye to Messiah, and believed in Christ to come, were of y^ new
testament, and under grace. Therefore if thou will come to Christ's table,
beware that thou be not of the old testament, that is defiled with syn, and
iniquity, and with out repentance, and an unjust getter and retainer of
worldly commodities. For Christ calls his table the blood of the new
testament. The nature of this table and of Christ's blood is such, that if thou
presume to come unto it unworthily, with a belly corrup with naughty humors, yt is
with sin and iniquity, it will lead thee unto thy destruction, as it did
Judas, not of ye nature of it, but through thy great default, who do not try
thy self, before thou come. Yea if we be defiled with sin, we be no
partakers of these deinties, we do not drink ye blood of life. Of these few
words, which I have spoken in this matter, you may gather both what ye
testame^ts be, and also how they do differ. But percase you are desirous to
learn more plainly, That the old christians did eat Christ's flesh as really as
we do.
what is ye meani^g of these words: this is my blood of ye new testament.
Verily these words be as much to say, as this is a sacrament of my blud, which
was let forth and shed for ye remission of sins, this is another blood, and a
diverse from ye blood of the old law. Their blood was their sacraments, in
which the old christians, which did perteine to ye new law, did drink Christ
through faith. The rok was their blood, and their paschal lamb, their
sacrifices, of goats, oxen, and sheep, to which evil men came as well as good,
but the evil did not drink Christ's blud, but only ye figure thereof, because it
is of ye new law, and they were of ye old law. But the old christians, that is
they which in drinking of the rock, and in eating their lamb, and other
sacrifices had an eye, and a faith in Christ to come, did eat his body and
drunk his blood, as truly, as really, and as effectually as we do. For they
were of the new testament as well as we, and therefore they drank the very
spiritual blood of the new testament, in that they believed upon the sede
promised. Hereu^to Paul bears witness saying: our fathers did all eat of
one spiritual meat, 1 Cor. 10
and did all drink of one spiritual drink. For they drank of that spiritual
rock, that followed the^, which rock was Christ. And the Psalmographe says:
Panem ^e coelo dedit eis. etc. Psalm. 77 Psalm. 104.
That God gave them bread from heaven, and the bread of angels, which bread is
Christ, as he teaches us himself, saying: Amen, amen, dico vohis, non Moises
dedit. etc. Verily, verily, I say unto you, Moises did not give you bread from
heaven, John. 6
but my father. etc. That he is the bread, which his fathher gave them, he
declares saying. I am ye living bread, which came down from heaven. Whereof
it is evident that the old christians, of which Paul speaks in the text
before rehearsed, did from the foundation of the world eat Christ's flesh and
drink his blood as really and effectually as we do now. But the ungodly
which were before his birth did nether eat his flesh, nor drink his bound, as
Christ himself teaches us, saying: Patres vestri manducaueru^t manna and
mortui sunt, your fathers says Christ, John. 6
did eat Manna, and be dead. Note that he says not our fathers, but your
fathers, as if he had said: your fathers, which would not believe the Prophets,
but were persecutors of them, and blood sokers as you be, they did eat manna,
that is the sensible sacrament, and mortui sunt, and yet they were not
partakers of the fruits of my death, but died eternally. But the old fathers,
which before my incarnation believed in me to come, did not only eat ye
sensible sign, and outward sacrament of Manna, but also tasted the dainties of
my honorable body and blood, which are the bread of life and redemption, and
they died not, but do live thereby. For of such Paul says: that they drank of
the spiritual rock. 1 Cor. 10
But because you shall not think that I do wrest the scripturs to prove that
the old christians did eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood in their
sacraments, hear what the Godly and learned bishop S. Austin says to this
matter. S. Austyn in Joan.
He upon the sixth chapter of S. John's Gospel, speaking of the old fathers
eating, and ours, and by occasion, expou^ding there the text of Paul, 1 Cor. 10
affirms evidently that which I have cought, saying: Omnes eandem escam
spiritalem manducauerunt, spiritalem* vtique eandem, nam corporalem alteram,
quia illi manna, nos aliud, spiritalem vero quam nos, sed patres nostri, non
patres illorum, quibus nos similes sumus, no^ quibus illi similes fueru^t.
Which words in effect be thus much to say: They all says this learned and
elder fafather, speaking of the the old christians, did eat one spiritual
meat. They did eat one spiritual meat, not one corporal meat, for Manna was
their corporal meat, that is, their outward and terrenall sacrament. But
another thing that is bread and wine is our corporal meat, and our Sacrament.
They did eat the same spiritual meat, that is Christ's body, which we do eat,
but our fathers, as Paul says, that is such Godly men, as we are like unto,
did eat this spiruall meat to their health and salvation, but your fathers,
which were oppressors of the Prophets, whose ways you do follow, did not eat
Christ's body but only the corporal meat of manna, ye figure and sacrament
thereof to their death and condemnation, and therefore of them Christ says:
Mortui sunt, that they died, meaning the second death. This is S. Austins
doctrine of the Sacrament not only upon the forsaid chapter, S. August. li. de
aetilt. verae pae.
but also in his book which he writes De vtilitate verae poenitentiae agendae,
how profitable a thing it is to do worthy penance, and in his.xix. book
against Faustus.

Here you will say S. Austyn in his preface upon Psalm. 73. does extol our
sacraments above the sacraments of the old law for diverse causes. Lib. 19.
co^tra Faustu^ cap. 16.
If they did receive Christ's body and blood in their sacraments, how is this
true? An object.
Wherein are ours better? I answer: our sacraments are better then theirs, not
of them selves not of their own nature, Thanswe^
of their own dignity, and worthiness, but because of the fulness of time,
because the face of Jesus Christ is now more clearly discovered and known in
the new Testament.

Their sacraments as S. Austin says in the aforesaid place, promittebant
saluatorem, S. Austyn in Psalm. 73
did promise Christ, that is, did shadow, figure, and preach him to come,
ours dant salute^, do give health by Christ, that is, do show him to our eyes as
it were upon a scaffold already come. They were under the yoke of the law, under
the letter, under many rydles, under figures and shadows, as children, but we
are under grace, under the spirit, under the verity, under fewer rites, and
under a more excellent testament, as coheyres with Christ. God spoke to them by
Patriarchs, and holy Prophets, and by other means, as it pleased him. But now
is the time, which the Patriarchs desired to see, the acceptable and golden
time, and the days of salvation, in which God speaks both to the Jews and
to the Gentiles, by Jesus Christ his own word and wisdom, Heb. 1
as Paul declares, for these causes S. Austin in the aforesaid place, and in
other places prefers our sacraments and rites of the new testament to the
old law, not for their own dignite, for their own excellency, and worthiness,
nor through any transubstantiation. Read his preface aforesaid, and there thou
shall find these causes, which I have rehearsed, and no other. Notwithstanding
the old christians did drink Chrstes blood and eat his flesh, yet they (I
say) had another blood that is a diverse sacrament from us. They had a paschal
lamb, a rock, ye blood of oxen and of sheep in their sacrifices, we have wine
instead of the^. For seeing the testamentes be changed, and the priesthod, and
law is altered, therefore the sacraments also be newed and changed. This
says Christ of wine, This is my blood of the new testament, that is a new
sacrament of my blood, a certificat of my last will and testament, this is a
testimony and as it were the broad Seal and patent of my benevolence, of my
cleme^cy and favor toward you.

And this similitude declares very aptely and fitly, how his body and blood
are present in his holy supper. How Christ's body is present.
The body and blood of Jesus Christ be in his holy supper, as thy house with
thy garden and other commodities, is in thy lease, which thou have by the
College seal of Eato^, or of Wyndsore. Or as thy living is in thy patent,
which thou have confirmed and ratified with the broad seal of England. The
words of Christ's supper be as it were a lease, or patent. The sacrament is as
it were his broad seal, and his stamp, to certify the weak faith that God
the father does love and favor thee, and dwell in thee by the grace of his
holy spirit for his sake. Thy house and garden be not locally, not really, nor
corporally in thy lease, but effectually and sufficiently for thy profit and
commodity. So Christ's body and blood be in bread and wine. This is no new
similitude of mine own making, for I told you that I would speak nothing of
mine own head, it is the similitude of Gregory Nazianzen an excellent clarke,
Grego. nazianzen.
and a holy father of the greek church. He.xii.C. years agon writing against
the opinion which is called now the Donatistes opinion, used this similitude,
and affirms all sacraments to be seals. S. August. in saluta. ad Romans
S. Austin also in his book, which he writes upon the salutation of Paul's
Epistle to the Romans, calls them Sacrosancta signacula, that is holy
seals. But thou will say, these be high matters, and above my capacity tell
me how I shall prepare my self to receive this Sacrament. Many coming to the
Lords table, do misbehaue them selves, and so do the lokers on, in that they
worship the sacrament with kneling, and bowing their bodies, and knocking their
breasts, and with elevation of their hands. Christ is not to be honored in
form of bread and wine.
If it were to be elevated and showed unto the standers by, as it has been
used, Christ would have elevated it above his head. He delivered it in to the
hands of his Disciples, bydding them to eat it, and not to hold up their
hands, to receive it and not to worship it, and he delivered it to them
sitting, and not kneling. If either the bread, or the wine, were to be heaued up,
or to be reserved and hanged up in a pix, as it has been abused, if it were to
be honored of ye receivers, or to be kneled unto of ye lokers on, undoubtedly
Christ would have left us some commandment so to do, or else have taught us by
his ensample, or at the lest he would have left some promise of reward annexed to
this outward reverence and homage, or some threatening and punishment, for such
as will not worship it. I verily for there is nothing laudable, nothing
ryghtuous, nothing honest, or acceptable in Gods sight, nothing to be done for
the which he has not left in his scriptures either some commandment, or some
promise of reward, or some example. By his promises, by his thretnings, by his
precepts, and through the examples of Godly men and women, we know good from
evil, we know what is to be done, and what is to be left undone, what is to be
praised, and what is to be dispraised, what delights and pleases, and what
discontenteth and displeases, the divine majesty. Gods book is no vnper fight
work, but a pefect book co^teining all things to be done, the whole duty of a
christen man, and sufficient doctrine to enstruct a gods man in all good works,
and to make him perfight, as Paul witnesses writing to Timoth. and he must
needs accuse God either of ignorauncy, ^ Tim. 3
or of folly, or of negligence, which says that he has left any thing
untouched and vndeclared, which concerns a christen man's office, and is
needful and necessary unto salvation. All such things, be expressed in Gods
book, for in the writing of the Prophets, he requires the observation of his
law only concerning religion, and he thre^^eth great plages and grievous
punishments, to those that do ad any thing to his word, that is, to those
which teach any other doctrine or any work to be necessary unto salvation,
which is not co^me^ded in his word. But nether Christ, nor any of the
Prophets, nor his disciples, do give us any example to honor the sacrament,
for they kneled not, nether held up their hands, but sat at the table as the
text witnesses. Nether does God promise any benefit either spiritual or
temporal to such as honor it, nor he does not give us any precept so to do,
nether in the old, nor new testament. Therefore I say unto you that it is syn
to worship the sacrament, to hold up thy hands, or to bow thy body, and knele
to it. For to worship God otherwise then he has taught us in his holy book,
which is the Bible, is mere idolatry. Be not disceiued good people, nor
bewitched with superstition and false holiness, for the Apostle S. Paul says:
quic quid non est ex fide, peccatum est, Romans 14*
whatsoever is not of faith, which comes as Paul says also, by hearing Gods
word is syn. If thou will honor the sacrament, I ask the whether thou do it
with faith, or without faith. If thou do it through faith, show me some text,
some testimony, some authority of Gods word, or some example in Gods book, for
fides exauditu faith says Paul, Romans 10
comes by hering gods word. If thou worship it without Gods word, without
faith, which comes only by Gods word, hear what Paul says to the: It is
impossible to please God with out faith. Hebr. 11
For to worship god otherwise then he has taught us, is heresy, is idolatry,
is disworship and dishonor of the divine majesty. Socrates.
Socrates a Heithen, and no christen man, and yet a learned and a great famous
clerk, he in his life time held this assertion, that every God is to be
honored and worshipped after such manner, and with such ceremonies and rites, as
he himself teaches, and commands. He did attribute more wisdom and more
authorite to false gods, the^ we do to the God of heaven and earth, who is the
fountain of al wisdom, power, and authorite. It is to be feared yt he at the
last day shall arise to the condempnation of many, which profess Christ.

An object. S. August. in Psa. 98
But here some reply that S. Austin writing upon these words. Adorate scabellum
pedum eius, worship the fotestole of my fete, that he makes Christ's flesh
which is earth, ye fotestole of Gods fete, and that he affirms and proves of
this text, that Christ's flesh is to be honored. For his words be: Nemo illam
carnem manducat, nisi prius adorauerit. Et non solum non peccatur adorando,
verum peccatur non adorando, that is to say: no man may eat that flesh, before
he first do honor it. and it is not only sin to honor it, but it is syn not
to honor it. I do not deny, y^ Christ's flesh is to be honored and worshipped.
God forbid, Thanswe^
for it is promoted to ye feloship of ye deity, and joined in unity of person
to y^ divine nature. But I deny yt the sacrament is to be worshipped, ye bread
and wine are not to be honored, for they are not his flesh really and corporally,
but a certificat, a seal, a patent, or lease thereof, as I have proved. How is
Christ's flesh to be honored? How Christ's flesh is to be honored.
Verily Christ's flesh is to be honored in heaven, not in ye form of bread and
wine, in glory, and at ye rightha^d of God ye father, not in ye sacrament. It
is honored by coming to his supper, and by obeying his precept, take, eat, and
drink of this al, by receiving of ye sacrament, not with eleuatio^ of hands to
bread and wine, or with knocking, or with kneling before bread and wine. His
blood and body are honored, even as they are drunk and eaten, that is by faith
in the^, and by giving of thanks to him for his dishonor and death, and by
confessing him to be without a father very natural man of his mother after ye
fulness of time for our redemption, and very God begotten by his father without
a mother before all time. So the wise men which came from the east parts by
the leading of a star, worshipped him at his birth, and are therefore commended,
and preserved from king Herodes cruelty. They kneled down says the text,
Psalm. 71 Math. 2
and worshipped him, and opened their treasures, and offered gifts, gold,
frankynsence, and mirre. By gold they confessed him to be a king by
frankynsence they acknowledge him to be God, for all nations do offer that only
to such, which they take to be gods, and by myr, with which such as dye be
anointed, they confessed him to be a mortal and natural man. So do thou knele
to Christ, and worship his body and blood not in the east parts, but in the
heavenly Jerusalem, and at the trone of Gods majesty, not in the sacrament,
but in heaven, where he is now at the right hand of his father. Offer unto him
their frankynsence and myr, that is, confess him to be very God, and very
natural man* confess him from the bottom of thy heart to be thy Lord and thy
savior, and render unto him many thanks and due praises for humbling himself
to ma^s nature for thy redemption and honor. This is the true and right honor,
with which he would have his body worshipped. Hold up thy hands to Christ's
body in heaven and spare not, knele to it, knock on thy breast. If thou will
knele and worship it in the sacrament, thou do like as if the aforesaid
wysemen had in the east parts worshipped him in ye star, had kneled to him in
the star, and offered their gifts to the same, which had been idolatry, and so
is this.

Thou must go to Bethleem that is to the house of spiritual bread, which bread
is Christ in the glory of God the father, and there thou must worship his body,
not in the form of bread and wine: For Bethleem is an Hebrew word, Bethleem
the house of bread.
and in Latin and English it is as much to say, as ^omus panis, ye house of
bread. You have heard one way, how Christ's body may be honored. Chriso. ho. de
sument. indigne, diuina m^st.
Chrisostom a learned and a holy father of Christ's church teaches us another
way in a certain Homily, which he writes to the people of Antioche, De
sumentibus indigne diuina est and sancta misteria, of such which unworthily and
irreverently presume to come to Gods holy mysteries. He there speaking of the
worshipping of Christ's body, does not teach them to knele, or to hold up
their hands to the sacrament, but a clean other way. Because you shall not
think this to be new doctrine, which is the faith and doctrine of all the
elder fathers I will rehearse unto you his words. Vis christi corpus honorare?
will thou honor Christ's body says Chrisostom? and he aunwereth, Ne nudum cum
despicias. etc. then clothe him and have pity on him, when thou see him
naked. And he adds a reason: Qui namque dixit, hoc est corpus meum, and verbo
factum confirmauit, ide^ dixit, Math. 25
esurie^tem me vidistis, and non pauistis me, and quod non fecistis vni ex his
minimis, neque mihi fecistis, that is to say, for he that said this is my
body, and performed his word, said also, you saw me hongry and fed me not, and
that which you have not done to one of these little ones, you have not done to
me. He proceeds further, and brings in Peter against those which do worship
God after their own fantasies, saying: Discamus itaque Philosophari, and
christum prout ipse vult venerari: Let us learn this Philosophy says
Chrysostom, that is to honor Christ, as he has willed us to honor him. For
that honor is most acceptable to him, which is honorable, or worshipful,
which he does esteem, and not which we do imagine. For Peter thought no less,
but that he honored Christ, when he forbad him to wash his fete, John. 1*
notwithstanding he did not honor him herein, but rather did dishonor and
disworshyp him. So do thou worship and honor him with pity and liberality
toward the pore. These be the words of Chrysostom, in his homily against
such as come unworthily to Gods mysteries, in which he teaches us, that to
honor Christ's body, is to glorify him by doing of good works. For this
cause he took upon him his body and became a natural man of woman's seed, as
it is writtten.

God has raised up a horn of health unto us in the house, that is, of the
stock and kindred of his servant David, and why? It follows: that we being
delivered out of the hands of our ennemies, Luke ^
should serve and worship him without fear all the days of our life in holiness
and righteousness before him. I have declared two ways how Christ's body and
blood are to be worshipped. One way is by faith in his blood, by giving thanks
to him for his incarnation and coming, and by offering him frankynsence and
myr, that is, by confessing him to be very God, and very natural man. Another
way to honor it, is to serve him in holiness and righteousness, and to exercise
in earth y^ works of mercy toward the pore.

The elder fathers used no other worship toward Christ's body before Honorius
the third bishop of Rome. Honorius the third. 1226. lib* 2 Decret.
He first commanded bread and wine to be worshipped with elevation of hands.
Anno post Christum. 1226. lib. 2. Decret. titul. de celebra. missarum. For the
space of a thousand years there was no such custom.

The papists object here that the body of Christ is present under the form of
bread to be honored. An object.
If (says the Papists) a man say unto thee this is my right hand, or this is
a stone, thou beleuest him. God says this is my body, and not this is a figure
of my body, or this does signify my body, and he that eats my flesh has
life, not he that eats a figure of my flesh, and we do not believe him, but
do make of sugar, salt, and of chese, chalk. I answer: Christ does not say,
this is trasformed, Thanswer
this is turned this is transubstantiat into my body, nether that the nature,
and substance of wine does discontinue, or is excluded, as you would force the
words. Here rests all the matter, how this word ( est) is to be understand,
which is never taken in that sense, in which they would take it here.
Throughout the Bible no transubstantiation is expressed by this word, nor by no
other phrase, This is ye doctrine of the elder fathers and scripturs.
the scripturs speak of no such mutatio^. But the other phrase (this is) for,
this is a figure, is commen and dashed every where in the scripturs. The rock
says Paul was Christ, that is a figure of Christ. 1 Cor. 10 1 Cor. 5 Act. 4
Math. 2^ 1 Pet. 2
He names him also ye easterlambe, which was but a figure of him. He is
called a stone, the word of God is named seed, Ephe. 2 Mark. 4. Luke 8 Apoc.
19. Ephe. 6 Math. 16 Luke 11 Psalm. 118. Pro. 9 Psalm. 60 Pro. 18 John. 5 Math. 3
a swerd, a kay, a lantern, God is called our banner, our castle, Ihon the
christiner is named a burning candell, and he names the law securim an axe,
which is set at the rote of the trees, which al be figurative speches. And the
elder fathers do so expound this text, they confess and teach Christ to
speak here figuratively. Christ saeith: Tertullian who was but.210. year
after Christ, and.13. hundred years agone, he lib. 4. against Marcion, who
said that Christ had no natural body, Tertul. li.
but only aparant flesh and a fantastical body says thus: 4. cont. Marrc.
Christ taking bread and dealyng it to his disciples, made it his body saying:
This is my body, that is a figure of my body. And of these words he contriueth
an argument against Marcian, in this wise: But the bread can not be a figure of
it, if Christ had no true body. For a vain thing, or fantasy can take no
figure. Lo how this ancient father expounded these words.

S. August. prefa. sup. psalm. 3.
S. Austin also takes Christ's words in like manner, saying thus in his preface
upon the third Psalm. He admitted Judas unto the maundy, wherein he delivered
to his Disciples the figure of his body and blood.

And Ambrose in his book of Sacraments speaking of the cup, Ambro. de sacram.
says that we drink there Similitudinem pretiosi sanguinis, the similitude of
his precious blood. But though they say that Christ's aforesaid words be a
figurative speech, they do not teach bread and wine to be bare and naked
metaphors, but holy Sacraments having many promyses annexed unto them, for
which promises the visible signs be named Christ's body and blood, and not for
any mutation of their natures, or substaunces. Therefore albeit thou have been
led and made to believe in times past, that this doctrine is new learning, yet
think not so hereafter.

It is the doctrine of Christ, the faith of ye old fathers, the confession of
innumerable martirs, which have ratified it with the loss of their lives in hope
of plentuous reward hereafter in ye kingdom of god. That we may have grace to
believe ye truth concerning this holy sacrament, to use it aright, and to refuse
all false doctrine, and that these words, which I have spoken in your outward
ears, may sink into your hearts and minds, let us call on the name of
Christ (who ordained this sacrament) with invocation and prayer.

The prayer.
O Christ the son of God, and our saving health, who do affirm bread to be
thy body, and wine to be thy blood, because of certain properties, and
similitudes, the nature notwithstanding, and the matter of the signs,
remaining and continuing, hear our prayers and supplicatio^s, and grant unto
us for thy merciful promises these our requests. As our outward man and
natural flesh is norished with bread and wine: so of thy clemency noryshe and
feed our inward man with the food of thy sweet flesh. And as bread and wine
are made of diverse grains, and of the juice of many grapes, nevertheless they
are but one lofe and one cup of wine: so work thou in us one heart and mind,
and knyt us, in a continual amity, Godly love, and unity by the operation of
thy holy spirit. And as the natures of the signs are turned and converted into
our nature, so do thou convert, turn, and transform us into thy nature,
making us thy body, and holy flesh of thy flesh, not only by faith, but also
really and effectually, that is lively, holy, and very members of thy mistical
body. Abide always in us, and norishe us continually, with the grace of thy
almighty spirit, with the fode of thy eternal word, with faith in thy holy
blood, and with the death of thy precious and natural body, which thy body, is
the bread of life to us, the bread of redemption, and righteousness, not really
eaten, but in yt it was cruelly beaten, and slain for us. Teach us the right
use, of this thy sacrament, and deliver us from superstition, idolatry and
ignorauncie with which both we and our forefathers, have been snared and
fettered in times past. Fulfill these our desires and petitio^s, of thy
voluntary goodness and fre mercy, who lyuest and reignest in one glory and equal
majesty, with the father and the holy spirit world without end. So be it.()

THE THIRD SERMON upon the Lords Supper.
Hitherto (christian hearers) I have furnished Christ's supper with two sermons,
as it were with two disshes. There remains yet apercel vnspoke^ of which now I
entend to finish. I have declared the meaning, theffect, and the understanding
of these words of Christ our lord: Hoc est corpus meum. etc. This is my body,
and this is my blood of the new testament. And I have showed as well out of the
scripturs, as also by the authority of the elder and learned fathers of gods
church, that they are thus much to say: This is a sacrament of my body, and
blood, this is a certificat of my favor, a testimony, and as it were a broad
seal and patent, that God my father is reconciled unto you, that he does
embrace, that he does love you, and dwell in you by the grace of his holy
spirit, That chris^^s flesh is (...) unto ^amation.
for theffusion of my blood, and death of my body. I told you also what it is
to eat Christ's body, that it is not eaten really or corporally, for as much as
it is the meat and sustenaunce not of our bodies and flesh, but of our spirit
and inward man, which are not fed or norished with any corporal nature, or
bodily substance. Or to express this thing more plainly: Christ's flesh is
panis vitae, the bread of life, in that it was beaten, not in that it is eaten.
It is the bread of salvation, of rede^tion, of sanctificato^, of righteousness,
and of justification, in yt it was cruelly scouged, and slain for us, and not
through any corporal, any real, or natural receipt. As he teaches us
himself, John. vi. reproving those, which understood that he would give his
body to be really and substancially eaten, saying: Caro non prodest quicunque.
etc. The flesh profits nothing, it is the spirit that quickens, that is to
say the spiritual receipt and eating does profit and sanctify you, the bodily
and corporal eating is unprofitable.

To eat Christ's flesh and to drink his blood, is to believe that the son
of God concerning his humanity and flesh was nailed on the cross, and that
his blood was let forth for ye expiatio^ of our sins and for our redemption and
righteousness, and to repose us again into Gods favor. And this spiritual
receipt, which is by faith, is so effectual, and of so mighty, and so vehement
an operation, that as matrimony makes man and wife one flesh according as it
is written: Genesis 2 Math. 19
Erunt duo in carne vna: So it joins us unto Christ re ipsa, that is really,
truly, and effectually, making us flesh of his flesh, and bones of his bones,
as Paul witnesses. That is lively, holy, and very members of his mistical
body. Ephe. 5
For Paul does not speak there only of natural flesh, but also of holy flesh
and clean from syn, which shall arise and be immortal, not by the course of
nature, nor by Adam, but through Christ, who does knit and couple and in
corporat his chosen to himself by his sacraments and faith, so that they may
truly thenceforth say with Paul, Viuo iam, non ego, sed viuit in me Christus: I
live, Gal. 2
yet now not I, but Christ lives in me. Gods holy word knows no other receipt
of Christ's very body, and natural flesh, nether in the Sacrament, nor without
it.

Nether any of ye elder fathers of christ's church, do acknowledge or teach
any other eating. Because it is to long a matter to allege them all, I will
allege two or three of the chief and principal and best learned, of which ye
adversaries, of the truth do brag not a little. S. Austyn in euang. Joan.
S. Austin a famous Godly and learned father of Christ's church, writing upon
S. John's gospel, affirms this eating most plainsaying: Credere in eu^ hoc est
ma^ducare pane^ vinu^. etc. To believe upon Christ says this holy father, is to
eat the bread of life. And again: qui credit manducat, and inuisibiliter signa.
He that believes, eats, and is fed inuisibly. An object.
Here percase thou wylt say: as Christ spiritually, and worthily is received by
faith of good me^ unto salvation, so evil men do in the sacrament eat his
flesh unworthily and without faith and unto condemnation. By what testimony of
the scripture can this be proved, Thanswer
that Christ's flesh is eaten unworthily and unto dampnation? Paul says
quicunque manducauerit panem hunc. etc. 1 Cor. 11
He that eats of this bread, and drinks of this cup of the Lord
unworthily. He does not say, he that eats Christ's body unworthily, or
drinks his blood unworthily, which always be received to sanctification, to
life, and salvation, but he that eats this bread, that is not common bread,
not daily bread, but sacrame^tal bread, that is meant by the word (this)
Throughout the scriptures this word (unworthily) is never joined with Christ's
body, never with his blood, for they do sanctify their receivers. S. Austin
also denies this destinction Sermon circa sacra feria paschoe, S. August.
sermon. circa sacra feria paschal.
writing thus: Qui non manet in Christo, and in quo non manet Christus,
proculdubio non manducat eius carnem, nec bibit sanguinem, etiam si tante rei
sacramentum ad iudicium sibi manducet and bibit: That is to say, he that
abides not in Christ, and in whom Christ abides not, without doubt he eats
not Christ's flesh, nor drynketh not his blood, although he eat and drink
the sacrament of so great a thing unto his dampnation. This holy father, does
teach and confess here, three things, which things he teaches likewise in
many other places of his books. One is that evil men do not eat Christ's
flesh, for it is the bread of life, and ryghtuousnes. Another is that they do
eat the sacrament and the only figure thereof.

Thirdly that they eat the said only sacrament and the only figure unto
condemnation, making them selves as Paul says gilte of Christ's body and
blood, which they do not receive, 1 Cor. 1^
because they will not believe.

These three most true and Godly lessons of this elder and learned father be a
manifest denial of the transubstantiation, and of all corporal, real, and
natural receipt. Let us learn hereof that there is a difference between
Christ's honorable body and blood, and the visible sacrament and figure thereof,
such a diversity and difference, as is between thy house, and thy seal and
lease thereof. S. Ambro. de sacram.
S. Ambrose also his master and the great clerk prosper do teach us the very
same doctrine. For Ambrose in his book which he writes of Sacraments says:
Qui discordat a Christo non manducat carnem eius. etc. He that discordeth from
Christ, does not eat his flesh, nor drink his blood, although he receive the
Sacrament of so great a thing unto his damnation and destruction.

And Prosper in his book of sentences, Prosp. lib. senten.
says of such unworthy receivers, that though every day indifferently they
do receive, that they eat the sacrament and figure of so great a thing unto
the comdemnation of their presumption, and not Christ's body. Beda sup. 1
Corint. 11
Bid also has the very same words. And the famous and learned father S.
Hiero^, does confirm this to be a true doctrine, S. Hierom super Esa.
writing upon the ^66 Chapter of the Prophet Esaias, saying: Dum non sunt sancti
corpore and spiritu, nec comedunt carnem Jesus, nec bibunt sanguine^ eius, as
long says this elder and Godly father of Christ's church, as long as they be
not holy and clean in body and in spirit, they do not eat the flesh of Jesus,
nor taste of his blood. Of these it is evident that as the sensible sacrament is
received unworthily of ungodly men unto condemnation, so the body of Christ,
which is the bread of life, is only received worthily, and of good men, always
unto salvation, expiation, and righteousness, and of no man unto destruction,
death, and damnation, s. Austin. sermo. de sacr. fer. pasc.
whosoever is partaker of it: as S. Austin says in his sermon of the holy
feast of passover. Therefore if we say yt ungodly men do eat Christ's flesh,
we deny the doctrine of all the elder fathers, we deny Christ to be the bread of
life, we deny him to be our righteousness, our saving health, our expiatio^, our
ransom, our sanctification, and holiness, who will not fail to deny us
likewise before his father, Luke 12
onles we renounce this diuelysh error. Notwithstanding both S. Austin, and
other of the fathers, do affirm otherwhiles, that Judas and other ungodly
persons did eat Christ's body, meaning by Christ's body the Sacrament thereof,
and giving the name of the thing to the figure and sign. For sacraments be
called by the very names of those things, which they do represent and
signify and whereof they are Sacraments, Augustine. Epist. 23
as both S. Austin teaches in his Epistle, which he writes to Boniface, and
also the holy martyr and famous clerk S. Ciprian in a sermon, which he maket
de chrismate, of anointinting. Cipria. ser. de chrism.
For this cause Christ's flesh has two significations both in the scripturs
and elder fathers. For as properly, Christ's flesh has two significations.
and in his natural and chief acception, is that substance, and humanity,
which was born of the virgin Mary and suffered on the cross for the expiation
of our sins, so sometime it is token also for sacramental bread, and wine.
In which signification when the elder father do affirm ungodly men to eat
Christ's flesh, the papists would make us to believe yt they teach Christ's
flesh, which is the bread of life, to be eaten unworthily unto damnation, not
understanding the doctors, and yet great braggers of knowledge and learning, or
rather deprauing and corrupting the doctors to maintain their
transubstantiation, which is the castle of all supersticion and Popery, leadyng
us under the names of fathers and antiquity, from our father, which is in
heaven, unto whom that I may declare the remnaunt of Christ's supper, to your
edifying and enstructio^, which be come together to serve God in prayer and
hearing his word, let us make humble supplication. etc.

It follows in the text: I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the
vine, until that day when I shall drink it new with you in my fathers
kingdom.

Christ our master (well-beloved in god) names here the sacramental wine the
fruit of the vine and that after the consecration. If the nature and substance
of wine were disanulled, and turned into Christ's flesh, he would not so name it,
for christ's flesh is the fruit of Mary the fruit of David, and others, not ye
fruit of ye vine. And as the wine is the fruit of the vine, Luke 1 Psalm. 131^
Act. 2
and therefore it is not altered into the substance of Christ's body, which is
the fruit of those fathers, from which Math. 1 and Luke 3. do fetch his stok
and generation, so undoubtedly the sacramental bread is the fruit of wheat after
the consecration, and in that it is a sacrament of Christ's honorable flesh.
For unto this fruit he himself compares and likeneth his body saying: nisi
granu^ frumenti. etc. Onles the corn which is sown in the ground do first
die, it does not increase. If it die, John. 12
it brings forth much fruit. And theuangelistes do testify with one voice, yt
Christ both took and gave, and also that he brake this fruit to his disciples.
What took he? bread. what gave he to his disciples? the same yt he took. And
what did he break? Verily even yt, which he gave them. Ergo he gave them not
his real body, and natural flesh, which was borne of the blessed virgyn, for
though he died for us concerning his body, yet the said body was not the^
broken, when he ordained his holy supper. Moreover almighty God many years
before in the mystery of the easter lamb forbad the breaking thereof by the
mouth of his holy Prophet Moises saying: Exodus 12 Number. 9 John. 19
os non comminueti^ ex eo, ye shall not break a bone of it, which words the
Evangelist S. John does refer to Christ's body. The primative church followed
this example of their high bishop in breaking the sacramental bread as Paul
witnesses, Panis quem frangimus. etc. is not the bread which we break says
Paul a communion or partaking of Christ's body* 1 Cor. 10
And the universal church through out all Realms and dominions from ye
Apostles time have religiously observed this ceremony. Seeing then the
sacramental bread that is after that it is a sacrament, must be broken to be
distributed to such as come to Gods table, how is it daily turned into the
substance of Christ's honorable body, which now is impassible, and in eternal
glory? How can it be his real and natural flesh, which was not then broken,
when he brake the the bread? It was broken afterward when his hands were
nailed to the cross, and when his blood by the cruel Jews was let forth out
of his side with a spear for our redemption, in remembrance of which benefit
the sacrament of bread is broken continually without any alteration change or
transmutation of his nature. For the Apostle S. Paul speaking hereof does
always name it bread as in the aforsayd text: Is not ye bread which we break.
etc. And again: we are all one lofe and one body in as much as we all are
partakers of one bread, and as often as ye shall eat this bread. etc. and
whosoever shall eat of this bread unworthily, and again, 1 Cor. 10 1 Cor. 11
let every man examine him self, and so let him eat of this bread. Lo S. Paul
names the on part of this sacrament bread, whersoeuer he makes mention
thereof, and Christ our Master, whom we are commands to hear, names the
other part the fruit of the vine, by their names teaching us that the matter
the ensence and the substance both of bread and wine, are not transformed, are
not transubsta^tiat into the substance of his flesh and blood, but do remain
and continue, as well after the consecration, as before, or else they can be no
sacraments, as I proved in my second lesson. Nowithstanding Christ in his
supper affirms bread and wine to be his body and blood, and calls his body.
Granum frumenti, a wheat corn: and his blood the fruit of the vine. For those
three properties and similitudes which I have declared, John. 12
and also for another similitude, which now he teaches us here, that is
because his body and blood are the fruit of Mary, the fruit of David, the
fruit of Abraham and of others, as it is written, Ex quibus Christus est
secundum carnem, Romans 8
Christ is of the fathers touching his flesh: Even as the sacramental bread and
wine are the fruit of wheat and the fruit of the vine. For this cause and such
other he calls his body Granum frumenti, a wheat corn, and affirms the
signs to be his flesh and blood, not for any mutation of their substaunces.

For this similitude and such other do change the names of bread and wine, but
not their natures, and essence into Christ's nature, for Christ's nature is the
fruit of many Patriarchs, and diverse kings, Act. 2 Psalm. 131.
not the fruit of the vine, nether yet the fruit of wheat.

But the Papists reply here, that Paul calls the sacrament bread so many
times, An object.
and that Christ names the wine the fruit of the vine, not of that it is, but
of that it was, not that they are still bread and wine after the consecration,
but because they weere so before. And they defend this their distinction and
interpretation with two strong arguments, and invincible, as they do think.
Their first argument is gathered of the words of Christ immediately following in
that he says that he will drink of this fruit of the vine in the kingdom of
his father, with his disciples.

We shall be fed (says the Papist) in Gods kingdom which is the glory of the
life to come with this fruit of the vine, but we shall not be fed there, with
the corruptible fode and naturs of bread and wine. Ergo their natures do not
remain and continue, and wine is called the fruit of the vine and bread
Granum frumenti, a wheat corn, or the fruit of wheat, of that it was, not of
that it is. I answer, Thanswer
his fathers kingdom in which Christ says that he will drink new wine with his
disciples, in the aforesaid text, is not the glory of the life to come, but
that time which followed immediately his resurrection, in which not for any
necessity or hunger as S. Austin says epi. xlix* which he writes to one
Deogratias, S. Austyn Epist. 4.9.
but for a trial and probation that he was verily risen concerning his
humanity, he did both eat and drink with his disciples, as Peter witnesses
in his sermon to Cornelius. Then he drank the fruit of the vine a new with
them, Luke 24 Act. 10
that is after a strange and a new sort, having not passible and mortal, but
impassible and immortal flesh, and such as neded no bodily food. Chrisost. in
Math.
Chrisostom a learned and Godly bishop of Christ's church does so understand
these words of Christ. For upon Matthew he writes thus expounding this very
text, meminit iam resurrectionis ac regnu^ patris eam appellat, that is, Christ
remembers now his resurrection, calling it his fathers kingdom. Nether is it
against reason or the phrase of the scriptures to take gods kingdom in this
signification, which began chiefly to florishe immediately after Christ's death
as appears, ^ct. 2
and as he him self taught his disciples that it should so do, saying: Cu^
exaltatis fuero, omnia tra ham ad meipsum, when I shall be lifted up I will draw
al things to my self. For God does not reign only in heaven, but also in
this life, as it is written: Regnum dei intra vos est, Luke 17
the kingdom of God is within you. Christ speaking of drinking new wine in his
fathers kingdom, means this reign, whereby God the father reigned in the
hearts of the faithful after his sons resurrection by the grace of his
almighty spirit, with many visible gifts and signs. Therefore it can not be
proved of these words, that the natures of bread and wine are disanulled.

Their second reason wherewith they would prove the sacraments to be named
bread and wine, An other objection.
in that they were so before, and not in that they be so still, is framed and
made of many like phrases in the scriptures. When the serpent, which was made
of Aarons rod devoured the serpents, which the enchau^ters of Pharao made of
their rods, the text faith, Exodus 7
that Aarons rod did eat up their rods (calling the^ rods) because they
were so before. So the scriptures many times do name man earth, Genesis 3 Eccle. 10
forsomuche as he was earth touching his body before his creation. They do
call wine water, which was made of water as we read.

After this sort says yt Papists, Christ names his blood wine, John. 2
and the fruit of the vine, and his body bread, and Granum frumenti, a wheat
corn, or the fruit of wheat. Thanswer
Though Aarons rod were turned into a Serpente, yet this mutation was no
transubstantiation, neither is earth transubstantiat into man, nor water into
wine.

The scriptures make relation of many wonders, and miracles in both
testamentes, but let them show any transubstantiation in any of Gods miracles
from the beginning of the world, and I will be of their opinion. If they can
not, it is against reason that they should abuse Gods miracles to prove their
transubstantiation, and to mainteyn their own dreams and inventions.

Moreover the scriptures do manifestly express a mutation in the aforesaid
miracles. They testify with plain words, that the rods turned to Serpents,
that man was formed and made of the earth, and that water was made wine, but
they do not testify that bread and wine are turned into Christ's real body
and blood, neither do they say that Christ's body and blood was made of them,
but rather deny it. For Paull says that God sent his son, Factum ex muliere,
made of a woman, Gal. 4.
teaching us with manifest words, that touching flesh and blood he is woman's
seed, that is the fruit of Mary, not the fruit of the vine.

But because both they and we have scriptures, and it must needs be that one of
us does wrest and deprave them, let us make the elder Fathers of Christ's
Church as it were Judges and Arbiters whether the substaunces of bread and
wine, remain or not, and which of us do open them with the piklok, and which
with the key, yt is which of us do expound them a right. Ireneus bishop of
Lions, who flourished in Christ's church above xiiii. C. years agone, Irenius
co^tra Valen.
writing against ye Valentinians, says thus touching this matter, Panis
terrenus accepta vocatione a verbo dei no^ a^plius. etc. the terrenal bread
after the consecration is no longer common bread, but a sacrament, which is
made of two things, that is of a heavenly nature, and of a terrenall nature.
The heavenly nature, of which he speaks, is undoubtedly Christ's body and
blood, now in glory at the right hand of God the father. The terrenall nature
is that thing, which before he named terrenall bread, which he denies to be
any longer bread, but he does not teach the nature thereof to discontinue,
neither once dream of transubstantiation. For these two things be required in
this mystery not before the consecration, but afterward, in that it is a
sacrament, for they make it a sacrament. But they say that this terrenall
nature is not ye substance of bread, An object.
but the outward show of accide^tes. How do you prove this interpretacion to
be true? Thanswer
Nay says the Papist, how can you improve this interpretation? Because it is
against the doctrine of those Godly and learned fathers, which succeeded Ireneus
from time to time. For Terrullian not fifty years after Irenius in his first
book against Marcion, Tert. (...). cont. Mar.
speaking of this mystery, affirms plainly and evidently, that the substance
of bread remains, saying: Deus panem creaturam suam non abiecit. etc. That
is, God did not cast away nor disanull bread his creature, but with it
represents unto his body, onles we will condemn Tertullian as an heretik in
this matter, and set Ireneus and him at discord in the sacrament, which yet no
man never laid to their charges, these words do force and compel us to take
the terrenall part of this sacrament for ye very substance of bread and wine,
and not for their accidents. Moreover Origin who in the same age with
Tertullia^ was a famous preacher among the Alixandrians, Origin. in Mat. ca. 15
writing upon S. Mathewes Gospel, does confirm this doctrine saying: Panis
sanctificatus iuxta id quod habet materiale, in ventrem abit, and in secessum
eijcitur, that is to say, the sacramental bread touching his matter goes into
the belly, and is cast forth from thence again. Ergo the essence and
substance thereof is not disanulled.

Ciprian also was in their times, and taught the same doctrine at Carthage,
Ciprian. Epist. 3. lib. 2.
which the famous clerk Origin preached at Alixandria. For he writing to one
Coecilius affirms sanguinem Christi non offerri, si desit vinum calici, that
Christ's blood is not offered, (that is let forth for our redemption) if there
be no wine in the chalice. Ergo such as do teach wine not to remain, but to
be disanulled by transubstantiation by his doctrine do deny that Christ has
suffered for us.

Also in his Sermon which he writes of the Lords supper, Ide^ de coe^^a domini
showing how bread and wine, are changed into Christ's body and blood, he
boroweth a similitude of his incarnation, teaching us that as Christ now is
both God and man, and partaker of two natures, God in that he says, my father
and I are one, and man in that he says, my father is greater then I, that even
so there be two natures in the holy sacrament, as Irenius taught before his
time. Thus you se that these four fathers, which I have rehearsed, taught in
diverse countries almost in one time with one voice and assent, the matter and
substaunces of bread and wine, not to discontinue after the consecration, but
to remain and abide, which doctrine many years has been and is yet of some
infamed as heretical, but of those which understand nether Gods holy word,
nether ye elder fathers, because the veil of covetousness and of honor of
which Paull speaks, hangs before their hearts, 2 Corin. 3.
even as it did before the hearts of the Jews, which sought in Christ not
remission of their sins, but worldly riches and felicity. If these fathers
taught a truth as it cannot be denied, how dare ye say, that the Sacrament is
named bread and wine not of that, it is, but of that it was so before. Where is
your distinction and refuge? Where is your transubstantiation? how dare you
name this new lerning?

Be not disceiued good people with false and ignorant teachers which open Gods
word with a piklok, and not with ye right key, submit your judgments to the
doctrine of the elder fathers, and to ye scriptures, which are ye key and the
touchstone to try good doctrine from evil. But for a more manifest probation,
that this doctrine was taught continually from time to time almost five hundred
years after Christ, I will rehearse unto you ye doctrine of some of those
fathers, which were after Ciprians time S. Ambrose bishop of Myllaine, says
thus of bread and wine in this mystery: Ambro. li. 4. de sacra. cap. 4
Si ergo tanta vis est in sermon domini Jesus. etc. That is, if Christ's word
be of so great power to cause those things to be which were not, how much more
is the same able to continue things, and yet to change them into some other
thing. This holy father who flourished in virtue and learning three hundred
and.xxxix. years after Christ teaches us here two things. First that the
signs do remain and continue, that they were. Secondly that they are changed
into another thing, for so much as of common bread and wine they are made a
sacrament of Christ's honorable body and blood. Also Theodoret a famous and
notable learned man, Theodoret dialog. 1
and bishop of Cyrus, who was wrongly infamed of malicious tongues, that he was
a Nestorian, taught the same doctrine not many years before Ambrose time. He
in his first dialogue, which he writes against those that denied the verity
of Christ's body teaches with most evident words the substaunces of bread,
and wine, to continue saying: symbola appellatione corporis and sanguinis sui
honorauit, non equidem naturam ipsam transumtans, sed adijciens gratiam
naturae. Christ (says this Godly father) gave the honorable names of his body
and blood to the signs of bread and wine, not changing their natures, but
joining grace with their natures.

In his second dialogue also he says: Neque enim post sanctificationem mistica
simbola illa natura sua propria egrediuntur, Dialog. 2.
sed manent in priore sua substa^tia, figura and specie, which words be this
much to say nether after the consecration do the mystical signs of bread and
wine, lose their own proper nature, but do continue and remain in their former
substance, figure, and shape. This famous bishop taught this doctrine.xii.
hundred years agone and more, and yet the Papists name it new learning.

Moreover Chrisostom, who flourished four hundred years and five, after Christ,
Chriso. ad coesa. mon.
and for his great knowledge and eloquencie, was made bishop of Constantinople,
and is famous at these days throughout the whole world, for his virtues and
learning, he in a certain letter which he wrote against the Apolinaristes to
Cesarius a Monk in the time of his second banishment, says of the sacramental
bread in Christ's supper, that after the consecration, Liberatus est quidem ab
appellatione panis, dignus autem habitus est dominici corporis appellatione,
etia^ si natura panis in ipso permansit, that is to say* The Sacrament after
the consecration, was no more named bread, but it was called by the name of
Christ's body, notwithstanding the nature of bread remained and continued still.

What can be more plainly and directly spoken against the transubstantiation,
which was not heard tell of, until five hundred years after the incarnation
of our Lord Jesus Christ?

Of these it is evident that by the judgments of the elder fathers the
sacraments be named bread and wine, not of that they were before the
consecration, but of that they are still so afterward as well as before. For
they did preach and teach with one voice and assent in diverse regions and
countries, and in diverse times and ages a thousand years agone, that bread and
wine are a sacrament of Christ's honorable body and blood without any
transubstantiation, that is transmutation, change or alteration of their
substaunces and natures. And Christ our master confirms this to be a most
true doctrine affirming with an oath, Amen dico vobis. etc. The wine after the
consecration to be the fruit of ye vine, not the fruit of Mary, or the fruit
of David, and so does Paul five times naming the other sensible part of this
mystery, bread as Christ before him named it Granum frumenti, a wheat corn, or
the fruit of wheat.

Here again they reply that the fathers do say that the natures of bread and
wine are altered, are turned, An object.
and changed into Christ's nature. For S. Ambrose in his book which he
writes De ijs qui mitiantur mysterijs. Cap. 9. speaking of this sacrament
says, S. Ambro* li. de mist.
Benedictione etiam ipsa natura mutatur, that after the consecration the nature
of bread and wine is changed. And for a probation hereof, he reherseth many
things, whose natures GOD changed with his word, and benediction. He tells
how GOD changed the nature of Moises rod, turning it into a serpent, that he
changed the nature of water diversely, turning the rivers of Egypt into blood,
compassing the Israelites with y^ read sead, Exodus 14. Exodus 15
as with a wall, causyng Iorda^ to run backward, and making the bitter flood
Marath sweet and delectable to drink. He changed also the nature of the rock
which poured forth water. Heliseus changed the nature of Iron, causing it to
swime above the water. Helias changed the nature of fire, when at his prayer
it came down from heaven, whose nature is to go upward. These examples says
the Papist S. Ambrose allegeth to prove that the nature of bread is turned, is
changed and altered, Ergo it does not remain and continue.

Ciprian also in his sermon of Christ's supper says: Cipria. de coena.
Panis non effigit, sed natura mutatus* etc. That this bread is changed not in
shape, but in his nature. And Theophilact. writing upon John. 6. says:
Theophil.
panis quem ego dabo, non est figura carnis, sed caro mea est, tra^seleme^tatur
enim panis. etc. that is, the bread, which I will give, is not a figur of my
flesh, but it is my flesh* for the bread is transformed.

I answer. Thanswer
Nether do we deny the natures of bread and wine to be changed and altered,
and yet their substaunces must continue, for this mystery as Ireneus teaches
us, must have an earthli nature after the consecration, as well as before, for
so much as this sacrament is made of two natures. How the fathers say y^ the
nature of bread is changed.
Then how are the natures of bread and wine changed? Verily even as Ambrose
says that the nature of water was changed, when the reed sea stood about the
Israelites like a wall, and gave them passage, as the nature of water was
changed, Exodus 14 Exodus 15
when Jordan ran bakward, and when the sower River Marath was seasoned and made
sweet, and delectable, Exo. 15.17*
as he says that the nature of the rock was changed, when it pored fourth
waters, as he says that Heliseus changed the nature of Iron, 4 Re. 6
when he made it swym above Jordan, and as Helias changed the nature of fire,
causing it to descend dounward, 3 Reg. 18
which naturally ascends upward. After this sort the natures of bread and
wine, ar changed and altered in Christ's holy supper, that is the natural
property of them. For before the consecration they do only norish the body,
after the consecration they do feed our souls with Christ's sweet flesh,
with his comfortable blood, and with a devout remembrance of his death and
passion. In this signification Ambrose affirms the natures of bread and wine
to be altered, Nature has two significations. Natural property, essence.
and tra^sformed in christ's supper, meaning (I say) not their substa^ces and
very essence, which is the proper acceptance of ye word (nature) but the
natural property of them, as appears of his own forsaid examples. For the
substance and very essence of fire was not altered, though it descended downward
against his natural property, nether was ye very essence of the read sea
changed, though for a time it stood like a wall about Gods people. Iorda^ was
a river still, though he ran bakwards, and the stream of Marath was water still
notwtstanding his nature was changed, that is his natural property, which
was sowernes into swetnes. The rock which powered forth abundau^ce of water
remains a rock still. Nether did Heliseus alter and change ye very substance
and inward essence of iron, when he caused it being heavy to houe above ye
waters. in all these miracles, which were wrought by the mighty power of God, ye
natures of the red sea, of Jordan, of Marath, of ye rock, of Iron, and fire are
said to be changed and altered, that is, their natural properties. The word
(nature) can not be understand otherwise in the forsaid examples. Besides,
approved writers do use it in this acception and signification, as Marcus
Tullius in his book de Somnio scipionis, of scipio his dream: Tullius de
somnio scipionis.
Haec est anima natura propria. etc. This is says Tully the very nature and
office of the soul to move himself. Notwithstanding Ambrose brings two
examples, in which the very essence and substaunces are changed, as the
turning of rods into serpents, and the turning of the waters of Egypt into
blood. Exodus 7
He alleges these two examples not to prove the transubstantiation, but to
prove and stablish a less mutation in the sacrament by those greater
mutations. For nether the rods of Aaron and the enchaunters were
transubstantiat into serpents, nether were the rivers of Egypt transubstantiat
into blood. We do never read throughout the scriptures of any such mutatio^
in any of Gods miracles from the beginning of the world.

Therefore when Ambrose, and Ciprian, or any other of the old fathers do say,
that the nature of bread and wine is changed, they do not exclude their
substaunces and very essence, which they teach to remain after the
consecration, as I have proved before, but they speak of a mutation of the
natural properties of bread and wine, whereby they are no longer common bread
and wine, but through Gods power and benediction sanctified and holy
sacraments, chering us with the comfortable promyses, which God our father
has made unto us for the effusion of his sons blood, and for the death of
his body. The elder fathers do acknowledge, confess, and teach no other
mutation of ye outward signs. As for Theophilact, Theophil.
he is not of authority to stablish any article, for he reproves the Latin
church for believing the procession of the holy spirit, and he was the year
after Christ.1058. In the time of Lanfranke and Gerengary, when the bishops of
Rome took upon them first stoutly to maintain and to publysh the doctrine of
transubstantiation, which before time was scarfly heard of. Albeit his words
touching the sacrament do not disagre with the doctrine of the elder fathers
if they be well construed. When he denies the bread to be a figure, he
speaks of a vain and bare figure, for so he expounds himself upon Mark,
denying that it is figura tantum, a figure only, which we do confess and
grant. But he says that the bread is transelemented, and transformed. He
says also writing upon the said chapter of John, that we are transformed, and
transelemented in to Christ, and almost all the elder fathers do say the same.
And yet our natures remain, we are not transubstantiat, we are not made
Christ's real flesh, but undefiled and holy flesh of his flesh, and such as
shall arise and be immortal with him: for he does knit, cople, and incorporat
us to him self by his sacraments. Therefore as this word (transformed) does
prove no mutation of our substance, no more does it prove the substance of
bread, and wine, to discontinue. There remains yet one reason, with which
they defend their transubstantiation, unto which I think necessary to make an
answer, for so much as it is commonly in all the mouths, both of lay and
ecclesiastical persons, which suppose Christ's body to be eaten really and
naturally. They say if we do not eat Christ's flesh really, why does S. Paul
make such as receive unworthily guilty of the Lords body and blood? Why does he
teach such to eat and drink their own damnation, 1 Corin. 11
because they make no difference of the Lords body. These words do not prove
yt Christ's body is eaten of us really or substantially. For Paull speaks
there of unworthy receivers which do not eat Christ's body, Unworthy receivers
^ regiltie of the Lords body.
which is the bread of life, but the only figure and Sacrament thereof, and they
do eat the said only sacrament and only figure to their judgment and
condemnation, as I have proved. This is not my doctrine but the doctrine of
Hierom, Ambrose, of S. Austin, of Prosper, and of Bid, as is declared in the
beginning of this lesson. The contemp of Gods sacrament, not ye contract or
touching of christ's real body which is now in heaven, brings damnation and
causes this giltines. For as he which violently plucketh down the kings
majesty's arms, or breaks the kings great seal, or clippeth his coin,
commits an offense against the kings own person, so they, which abuse the
sacrament of Christ's body and blood, presuming to come to it as to common
bread, not reconciling them to their brethren, nor sanctifying them selves to
god, such presumers and unthankful persons do offend against Christ himself,
be guilty of his body and blood, that is of his death, and do eat their own
damnation. To come to Gods holy sacrament irreverently, To make no difference
of the Lords body what it is.
without the wedding garment, without any examination of thy life past, without
giving thanks to God the father, for the dishonor and death of his son,
this is Non diiudicare corpuus domini, to make no difference of the Lords
body. For Paul names here the sacrament the Lords body, even as Christ did,
when he said of bread and wine, this is my body and blood. For as boeth
Cyprian, and S. Austin and other elder fathers do teach, sacraments have the
names of ye very things which they do represe^t and signify with certain
similitudes. The aforsaid word of thapostle cannot be understand otherwise, for
he speaks of ungodly me^, which do not eat christ's body but the only figure
to condemnation. He uses a like phrase in the beginning of the said chapter, ^
Cor. 11
where he says that every man praying or prophesying with a covered head
dishonesteth and shameth his head, yt is Christ, referring to Christ an offense
done to man's head, because it is a sacrament of Christ. After a like sort
necligent and dome pastors, which do contemn their flock, and neglect the
honorable office of preaching, ar pronounced of ye prophet Ezechiel, Ezech. 3
guilty of their bloudes, which do perish for lack of enstruction and
teaching. That unworthy receivers are guilty of Christ's body and blood through
a like contemt and dissolutnes, presumption, and negligence, and not through
any natural, any corporal or real eating of his flesh. S. Ambrose declares
expounding Paul's aforesaid words as it follows: Dabu^t poenas mortis
domini, Ambro. super episto. 1 Cor. 11.
quia pro illis occisus est qui eius beneficium irritum ducunt, they shall be
promised for Christ's death (says this holy father) because he was slain for
them, and they do set light by his benefit. He does interpret such to be
guilty of the Lords body, which do not eat his flesh that is the fode of
life, as I have proved before, but the only figure thereof to the condemnation
of their contempt, presumption, and unkindness. Therefore no transubstantiation
can be proved of this place, for the defense whereof, they do most shamefully
wrest, and deprave not only the scriptures, but also the elder fathers. And to
impresse the same depely into the hearts of al men and women, Christian cup ought
not to be denied to the laytie.
they have with holden from the laytie many years Christ's cup for fear as
they say of sheading his blood, of which I will speak a few words in your
gentil ears, and then I will conclude and finishe this matter.

Christ our master commands all men, and women to drink of his cup, Math.
26.
which commandment the Apostles observed as long as they lived, making no
prouise, nor tradition to the contrary. And the universal church followed and
observed religiously the said precept for the space of a thousand years after
Christ, as many be proved by plain testimony of ancient writers. For how with
such hands (says Ambrose unto Theodosius the Emperor) will thou take the
Lords holy body? S. Ambro.
How dare thou drink of ye cup of his precious blood? These words prove
that the te^poraltie in this holy fathers time received the sacrament in both
kinds, and that in their hands. S. Hierom says priests, Hierom. in cap. 2.
Ma.
which do consecrat the sacrament, and deliver the blood of Christ to the
people. Chrisostom also observed in his time this precept at Constantinople.
Chrisost. 2 ad Corrin. Cap. 9
For he says the priest does not eat one part, and the laity another part
after the manner of the old law, but unto all is distributed one body, and one
cup. And Gregory surnamed the great after whose time sincere doctrine began to
decaie, Gregory.
witnesses that this custom was kept in the Romain church in his days
saying: you have learned what the blood of the lamb is, not by hearsay, but by
drynking it. Yea five hundred years after his death Gelasius bishop of Rome.
1118 years after Christ made a decree for the confirmation of this custom,
Galasius. 1118.
because then some presumed to take under one kind. Nether can it be proved
that the laytie were restrained from the Cup of Christ before the rain of
Friderike the first surnamed Barbarossa, Fride. Barbarossa. 1160.
to which restraint notwithstanding the Oriental church would never consent,
but use kinds always. Yet the Papists would make it a tradition of the
Apostles, where as in very deed to cause men to have an honorable opinion of
private masses and of their transubstantiation, they them selves of late days
have taken on them to forbid that, which Christ commanded, that which the
Apostles followed, that which the universal church observed from time to
time, as is declared.

And because they would not be counted presumptuous for making this restraint,
An object*
they cast many perils and dangers, which might follow, if the Cup were made
common to all men, and women. Did not Christ who fortold many things to his
Disciples, who is the wisdom of God the father, forsee these peryls and
dangers? If he did forsee them, Thanswe^
why did not he make a restraint? Or at the least command a restraynt to be
made afterward?

Yea Christ of the bread speaks not so universally, take ye, eat ye: But
concerning the Cup, he gives a general precepte, drink ye of this all,
Math. 26.
as forseing this restraint, and enstructing men aforehand not to obey it, when
it should come. An other objection.
Yet some are so impudent, and so drouned in ignorauncie, that they dare defend
the one kind by Christ's example and the Apostles. They say, that Christ at the
town of Emaus distributed but bread only to a couple of his disciples, it is
not mentioned that such as embraced the fellowship of the Apostles received any
wine, Luke 24
the text says that they continued in breaking of bread. Act. 2
Therefore as it is a laudable custom to use both bread and wine, so it is not
evil to distribute bread only to the temporaltie. For both Christ and his
Apostles did so in the primative church. I answer: Christ did not consecrate
the sacrament to his disciples at the town Emaus, Thanswer
but by his mighty power wrought a miracle in the division of the bread so
Nycholaus Lyranus, writing upon the said text, Nicolaus Liranus.
does understand it, witnessing that Christ brake the bread so even, as if he
had cut it a sunder with his knife. Now though bread only be named, yet this
is no sufficient proof, Act. 2.
that they did receive the sacrament, but in one kind. For under the name of
bread the scripturs do co^teine meat and drink, and all manner of victualles as
in the Lords prayer, when we say, give us this day our daily bread, Math. 6
we ask all necessary fode for the norishment of the body. Again we read that
Christ went into ye house of one of ye chief Phariseis, Manducare pane^
sabbato, Luke 14*
to eat bread on the sabbath day, that is to dine or sup with him, as all
writers take it.

The Prophet Esaias says to every one of us, Frange esurienti panem tuum, Esaias.
58
break thy bread to the hu^gry, exhorting us by an Hebrew phrase under ye name
of bread to minister all bodily fode, all necessary sustenaunce to the poor.
Some make another answer to the aforesaid place of Luke. Erasmus in his
annotatio^s doubts whether the bread which Luke says was broken among the
christians of the primative church, Erasmus.
were common bread or sacramental, and sanctified. And many other are likewise
in doubt hereof. Wherefore no certain doctrine can be stablished of ye
aforesaid place. Yea though Luke both cap, 24. and Act. 2. do speak of the
sacrament, yet forsomuche as all victualles are comprehended under the word
(bread) who is able to say, that the sanctified no wine. It follows in the
te^^ that Christ, and his disciples, When they had given praises, or as some do
read had song an Hymn, they went out into mount Oliuet.

What god r^quireth of us after our receipt.
We are taught here by the ensample of Christ and his Apostles two offices,
which God requires of us after the receipt of the Sacrament, first in that they
gave thanks and praises, let us learn, that it is the office of every
Christen man, before he depart from Gods table, and also all his life time to
render hearty thanks to God the father for his great clemency and mercy, for
the remission of his syns, through the dishonor and death of his honorable
son. To this end and purpose this mystery was chifly, and principally ordained,
yt so noble, and worthy a benefit should not fall out of remembrance, for so much
as it is our only comfort against damnation, and eternal death. Therefore many
of the elder fathers of Christ's church do name this sacrament (...), that is a
thankesgeuing. Follow the ensample of Christ thy high shepeherd and of his
Apostles, which finished not this mystery with out thanks to the divine
majesty. Their continued also in giving of thanks, and breaking of bread, as
Luke regestreth, writing their lives after Christ's ascension and departure.
What words they used, Act. 2.
it is unknown, and also whether they sang an Hymn, or only said it. The
greek word is indifferent either to singing or saying. but though god do not
here esteem ye voice but ye heart, yet both song and instruments be laudable and
approved ceremonies in Gods church as I would prove, but only because I will not
be over long. If we will not honor God with due thanks for his innumerable
benefits procured unto us through Christ, Relapse into sin is dangerous.
but become unthankful and unkind, if after that we be delivered from sin and
received into Gods favor, we turn from his holy commandment, then is our
latter end worse then the beginning. For of such S. Paul says: 2 Pet. 2
If any man defile the temple of God, 1 Cor. ^
him shall God destroy. Behold examples hereof in the new Testament. Judas
after that he had been long in the blessed fellowship of the Apostles, for
betrayng the giltles for a brybe, Math. 27 Act. 1
and through the detestable vice of covetousness, hong himself, and utterly
lost the favor of God. Act. 5
Ananias and Saphira his wife, for practicing the said detestable vice of
covetousness after breaking of bread in the primative church, were stricken with
sudden death. Many among the Corrinthians were stricken with diverse diseases, 1
Cor. 11
and some with sudden death for like offenses, as Paul witnesses. For nothing
displeases ye divine majesty more nothing so kendleth his fury and
indignation, as relapse into sin, after that thou have been at his sons holy
table. For thou treadest under thy foot his honorable son, Hebr. 10 Hebre. 6
thou crucifiest him again, thou countest the blood of the new testament which
sanctified thee, an unholy thing, and do dishonor the spirit of grace.

The second office, which we are taught here, is thencefurth to pass our life
time in prayer and in sekyng after heavenly things. For Christ and his Apostles
from giving of thanks, go straght ways to mount Oliuet, which place as John
the Evangelist says, Judas who betrayed him knew very well: for Jesus
oftentimes resorted thither with his disciples to pray. Ioh. 18 Luke 22
If he had gone to an unknown place, seeing his time was at hand, many would
have thought, that he had suffered death for our redemption against his will.
To avoid this suspicion and to teach us that he died of his own voluntary will
and goodness without compulsion, Et secundum propositum. etc. Ephe. ^
That is according to the purpose of his father to the praise of the glory of
his grace, he resorted to his accustomed place, which his betraier knew. Also
he resorted thither as Luke writes, to pray, not that he had need of prayer,
Luke. 2^
which is a remedy against sin, but to stir us thereunto by his ensample.
For seeing he prayed often and so diligently, who neded not being without all
spot of sin either original or actual, how needful a thing is the same for
us which be sinners? As the life of fyshes lies in the water, and out of
water they lose their lives, so I say unto you the soul of man, and woman
dies without prayer, nether can we eschew evil, or exercise virtue with out
continual and earnest invocation of Gods daily help. Let us learn therefore
of Christ, who prayed not for him self, but for our example to resort after
the Communion not to the tavern or ale house, not to a bowlyng ally, nor to a
dysing house, as many do daily, but to go into Mount Oliuete, that is, to a
place of prayer, as he did, always thencefurth lokyng upward toward
heavenly things, that he may increase in us all spiritual gifts to the glory
of his name. For as fathers in earth will not let their children know their
priuities, their secret treasures, and riches, nor make them partakers of
their commodities and lands, as long as they follow the wyld swing of their
youth, and delyght in vanities, no more will God the father to the lovers of
worldly vanities, deal his spiritual graces, nor discover the glorious riches
of his kingdom. We must despise worldly things and become Egles, that is, we
must fly up into Mount Oliuete, we must lift our minds up into heaven, where
Christ's body is, at his fathers righthand. For it is written, Math. 24
Vbi cadauer, ibiaquilae, where the carcas is, thither the Egles resort. Christ
our master, names his own body a carcas, because of his death and passion,
for onles it had died, we had not arysen. And he calls us Egles, teaching us
that we must not crepe on the ground, we must not tarry in earth, but we must
eleuate not bread and wine, but our hearts, our thoughts, our cogitations, and
spirits to the throne of Gods majesty, where Christ's body which was a carcas,
is now in eternal glory, to whom with the father, and the eternal spirit be
al honor, and glory, praise, and thanks. So be it.()

The Prayer.
O Heavenly Father, who do norysh Godly men with the fode of thy sons
flesh, and the drink of his blood, which his flesh and blood is the fruit
of many, the fruit of David, and others, not the fruit of the vine, nor the
fruit of wheat: Hear our prayers and supplications, and so til our hearts
with the sede of thy holy word, that we may be of their fellowship, which are
fed with thy sons body, the fode of life, and not of the number of the
ungodly, which do eat the only figure and Sacrament thereof, to the
condemnation of their presumption, contempt, and unthankfulness. Stablyshe the
hearts of thy people with the knowledge of the scriptures, and with the
doctrine of the elder fathers of thy holy church against such as
ignonorauntly and falsely, teach, that thy sons flesh, which is the bread of
life and righteousness, is reciued unworthily and unto condemnation of ungodly
men. Confirm and enstruct them with thy sons commandment, with the
ensample and use of the primative and Oriental church, against the pestiferous
doctrine of those, which to maynteyne supersticion, deny the cup of thy new
testament, to the temporal and laytie. Grant these our requests O most
merciful God, that we having a right opinion of thy Sacrament, may use it a
right, may come thereunto worthily, and after this life praise thee con^^^ually
in mount Oliuete, that is in the eternal glory, for the remission of our
sins, and for all thy benefittes bestowed upon us for the dignity and
worthiness of Christ, who with thee and the holy spirit, lives and reigns one
God, world without end. Amen.

FINIS.

