Bromleion.

A Discourse of the most substantial points of Divinity, handled by diverse
Common places:

With great study, sincerity, and perspicuitie.

Whose Titles you have in the next Page following.

Scribimus indocti, doctique problemata passim.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed. 1595.

Insigne Bromleianum. TIMOR DOMINI INITIVM SAPIENTIAE.

The contents of the principal things handled in this book.
Of the fear of God. The Glass of Vanity. Of the word of God. Of God. Of his
Creation. Of his Providence. Of creating man after his Image. Of Justification.
Of Predestination. A pattern of Sanctification. The benefit of Adoption. A
Remedy for Sorrow.
To the Right Worshipful, and the chiefest now alive, of the Honorable house
of the Bromleies, his great friend and favorer, Sir Henry Bromley Knight, S. I.
wishes the grace and favor of God in this world, and in the world to come,
perpetuallioyes.
MAnet alta mente repo'stum, The Poets speech, expressing the effect of
displeasure. So hardly are we given by the course of nature to forget injuries
and displeasures, or to let pass discurtesies offered. But as the wise man
says, it is a man's honor to pass by an offense; so noble dispositions, do
not so much regard the injury of their inferiors, as what may best fit and
beseem their estate. I must needs confess (Right worshipful) that I have
greatly offended, by reason of my absence and want of thankfulness toward you
for so great benefits received. But as I found that I was many ways unworthy
and unable, to stand before your honorable father, so have I full proof of
the self same insufficiency in my self toward you, even unto this present
day. Thinking it all that I could well perform, (if it were possible, to make
any requital or part of amends, for such bountiful liberality, as also more
then common courtesy from your self,) to make my hearty prayers unto God, for
your prosperity and good estate, that you might rise from credit, to worship,
and honor, and princely favor, that you might match, or at lest wise come as
near as might be, to that high degree, which your noble father possessed. Yet
could I not think that sufficient, unless I had in some measure, showed unto
your worship some fruit and effect of my study and labors, unto the which I
was so greatly maintained, by your honorable fathers liberality, and
furthered also, not meanly, by your favor and good will, which was and is the
more to be remembered of me, because it came from you, on my part, undeserved,
and which is more, unlooked for.

This that I have presently dedicated unto your worships view and patronage,
part of it, is no other, then that which you have read before, and somewhat
more to express my painfulnesse and good will, though otherwise it be but
mean, and not so worthy the reading as I could wish it. I labored in the
first part of the Epistle to the Romans consisting on Justification, and was
so bold, as to present it unto your fathers honor, thinking also to have done
my best in the second part of the same Epistle, concerning Gods eternal
predestination. Which at this time by Gods help I have finished, yet so, that
my shoulders were eased of the burden. For lighting upon a treatise of that
matter, written by that famous and learned man, M. Theodore Beza, (far more
excellent, then I could either devise or frame) glad was I, that my study and
searching was so well prevented. The places of scripture which were added to
prove every weighty point, were so confusedly set down, that they might have
wearied the reader, rather then directed him. Which when I perceived, I took
some pains though small, to help in that behalf. And because every reader is
not of the like understanding, and that this point of religion seems hard to
conceive, (especially to them whose wits be not exercised in searching such
matters) I thought good out of every chapter, to take out the principal
matters, and to join the^ to their proofs, desirous to make al as plain and
as easy as might be possible. All which I humbly request your worship, to
accept in as good part, as it is offered, which shall be a mean to encourage
me, to labor further, if it like you. And so I leave to trouble you any
further, only wishing, that your name and credit may be such, as was that of
the Right honorable the Earl of Bedford, who had deservedly gotten this
title, The good Earl of Bedford. That in religion to God, and to the Church;
in loialtie and faithfulness to the Prince, and to the Realm; in love and
liberality, to learning and poor scholars; in care and bountifulness, to
the poor and needy; you may according to your deserts, carry this godly and
honorable title in the mouths of all men, that when they name you, they may
so report of you, to be, The good Knight, Sir Henry Bromley.

Your Worships in his prayers to God, for you, and yours. S. I.

The Epistle to the Reader.
THe title of this book (gentle Reader) may seem somewhat strange unto thee at
the first blush, and such, that if it be misco^strued, may procure me some
dislike or discredit. It may be, that I have followed the example of others,
who think themselves greatly pleasured, if they can get their betters,
masters, landlords, to name their children after their names. If this be the
meaning, it may somewhat abate that dislike, discredit, and derision, which
otherwise would fall upon me, in which respect I may be vouchsafed of pardon.
Or otherwise I may be taken in an other sense, as to declare my affectionate
good will to my honorable patron deceased, as if I had caused this to be
ingraued by his tomb, Hoc monumentum posuit. And if it be such that it may not
deserve that credit, as I know it cannot, but will have his time to vanish, much
like the earth or the water that is frozen, and is anon resolved; (for a wonder
had never the gift to continue long, much less a trisle) yet thus much it may
declare, that I was not altogether forgetful. Or if it be a mean, to
encourage others of wealth and account, to be beneficial to poor students, let
the one have the good report, the other the profit, and let the derision
redound to my self. For my part concerning my patron, the right honorable sir
Thomas Bromley Knight, Lord Chancellor, and one of her Majesty's most
honorable privy Council in his time, I must needs confess, and make it
known to the world, how the beams of this gracious sun did shine upon me.
Diet, apparel, books, silver and gold, preferment, countenance, favor, good
will, and what ever my heart might desire; neither can I satisfy my self, or
express my bounden duty, by any gradation. And as I was unworthy of so great
benefits, so the chiefest of them came unto me unlooked for. Such was the
bountifulness of him, whose renown shall remain, so long as the deliverance,
from the Scottish Queens conspiracy is remembered! Oh that poor and painful
students might meet with such liberal purses! and with such noble and
honorable Bromleion hearts! Sat sit optasse, et siinuenisse rarum. What the
poor both see and receive, let them report, to the shame of them, that hoord
up their wealth, and consider not that God has made them but stewards, and
has put it in their hands, if they had hearts to dispose. Especially if they
could remember this, which is set down in sacred writ; Pro. 19. 17. He that
has pity upon the poor, lends unto the Lord, and look what he lays out
it shall be paid him again.

Now as concerning these my rude and rural labors, if I might, I would avoid
disdain, or if I may do any good, it is the thing that would rejoice me
greatly. This unlearned work, some will say, should have lain by me a long
while, until it might have bin done more perfectly, or else it should never
have been put forth. Other excuse have I none, but this, that I could not tell
how otherwise to show my duty, and to give a proof of my good will, where I
was so greatly indebted. It may be taken in good part, if I answer you, as one
John Philpot in the reign of King Richard the second, answered certain noble
and honorable personages, who found themselves greatly agreeued, that a
merchant had got a prize on the enemy. His answer was; That he did it not, to
take away the praise of chiualry from them, but rather that they might be
encouraged, to do greater exploits. I have not put forth this slender
exercise, to bar any (that are well disposed, better learned, and right
willing to edify) of their praise and due commendation; of the which I
confess my self far unworthy, but rather to animate them, that they let
not their gifts lie hidden, which being made manifest and known, might procure
the benefit of many. He that cannot do better, to him this may be some help,
the rest may take it in good part, and labor to do other good, who do both
long for good helps, and would be glad of that which might further them, to
ease their painful study. They that would attain to learning, lightly are
those of the poorer sort, who have many hindrances. Want of books, want of
sufficient maintenance, want of time, and many other lets. I must needs
acknowledge many wants, and my imperfections are great, wishing other that are
better able, that they would be of that mind, as to do good to others, whose
capacity is but weak and simple, who have small helps, and yet are set in
such places, where they of duty should edify and instruct, and would, if they
were better able. If in this book I have not done well, I will be glad to be
better informed, and willing to hearken to the direction of others, and to
follow their counsel, Ending this tedious Epistle, with this my wish, desire,
and request, to them that are learned, and willing to do good;

His meliora. Thine to his power, S. I.
Of the fear of God, and where it is to be learned, namely in the word of God.
Of the word of God, which co^teineth the Knowledge of God, and that as he is
to be considered In Himself. His works, which are General creation.
Providence. Particular creation of man, according to his Image.





Certain most comfortable Exercises of Christian Religion, gathered together
in one volume, for the benefit of all such as love and fear the Lord.
Psalm. 112. 1. 2. 3. Blessed is the man th^^ fears the Lord, and delights
greatly in his Commandments. His seed shall be mighty upon earth; the
generation of the righteous shall be blessed. Riches and treasures shall be in
his house, and his righteousness endures for ever.
THe Prophet David desirous to draw true blessedness and heavenly happiness,
into a short sum, does in this Psalm, and likewise in the first Psalm,
entreat thereof, as though he meant purposely to discourse of nothing else,
but of the cheifest happiness, and cheifest delight of a godly man. Whereof,
as he himself was fully persuaded, so in a godly mind and Christian zeal, he
thought it his part to spread this love and excellent knowledge, into the
hearts of all. Much like to the godly affection of holy Abraham, of whom God
testifies, I know y^ he will teach others. So King Solomon, having tried all
the delights and worldly happiness, that flesh and blood might desire, cries
out; Vanity of vanities, Vanity of vanities, and all is but vanity: not
hiding his excellent knowledge within himself, (as the Proverb is, Cunning
men are dangerous, and loath to let other men understand what they know) but
being moved with a charitable affection, he does not reveal this secret to a
few, or to some of his friends and to no more, but he professes himself to
be a Preacher, and as it were a public Crier, that all may take heed and
beware. So also this kingly Prophet David, is in steed of a Preacher, and
begins his discourse somewhat unlike to that of King Solomon, but both to
the same effect. In the beginning of his book, King Solomon shows what we
should avoid, and in the beginning of this psalm, and of this his book of
Psalms and heavenly meditations, King David shows us what we should desire.
They that are desirous that men should hearken to their persuasions, and to
read their writings; promise in the beginning some excellent matter to
entreat off, that they may win their minds, to seek and search thereafter,
as for pearls and treasure. And among all matters, if all the books might be
read, which has been made from the beginning of the world, until this
present time, there shall nothing be found to be so profitable, so necessary,
so heavenly, as is the disputation and discourse of the cheifest good. Wherein
these two Kings of blessed memory, the father and the son, David and
Solomon, have not traveled as worldly minded men, to advance either honor,
or riches, or pleasure, wisdom, strength, beauty, eloquence, and such
matters as the world does admire and wonder at; but as if with the Apostle
Saint Paul, they had been wrapped into the third heaven: they scorn these
worldly delights, and set before our eyes, nothing else, but what the spirit
of God does put into their mouths, and move them to exhort us unto. As it
was said unto the Prophets, Thus says the Lord; And again, Son of man,
thus shall thou say and speak unto the people. The one, that is King Solomon,
he speaks thus in his last Chapter of his book called Ecclesiastes,
(principally there setting down, what is the cheifest happiness) Let us hear
says he, the end of all, Fear God, and keep his Commandments; For this is
the whole duty of man. King David he begins his book; Blessed is the man
whose delight is in the law of the Lord, and who does meditate therein day
and night. Both of them aiming at these two principal matters, the one
commending unto us the fear of God, the other, exhorting us to the study and
knowledge of the word of God. And although the Prophet David d^^ greatly
commend the study of the law of God, in his first Psalm, yet also throughout
his Psalms, he makes special exhortations unto the Fear of God. As amongst
the rest, principally in this hundredth and twelfth Psalm.

Blessed is the man, (he says not, that flows in riches, For godliness is
great riches, if a man be content with that he has; He says not, that
enjoys his pleasures, because they fight against the soul; He says not,
that is advanced to honor and promotion, for it is an easy matter with the
Lord to bring them down, that are exalted; He says not, that have the
favor of Princes, for that may be daunted by tales of ill will, and buried
in displeasure; He says not, that are strong and valiant, For the Lord has
no pleasure in the strength of a man, but he delights in them that fear him,
and put their trust in his mercy; He says not, who are wise, For the wisdom
of man is but foolishness in the sight of God: and he that will be wise
indeed, must deny his own wisdom, that God may endue him with true
wisdom; He says not, they are beautiful, for they are but snares to catch
fools. But above all others) Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, and
delights greatly in his Commandments; His seed shall be mighty upon earth,
the generation of the righteous shall be blessed; Riches and treasures shall be
in his house. Two great worldly blessings. His seed shall be mighty, and his
generation blessed; And again, He shall enjoy plenty and abundance of riches
and treasures. Fully and sufficiently shall he be satisfied to his
contentment, he shall not need to go far, as Merchants venture their lives
upon the seas to become wealthy.

Per mare pauperiem fugiens per saxa per ignes, but it shall be in his house,
because God shall make all things prosper about him. And this was the blessing,
that was promised to Abraham, (when God had tried him, whether his fear were
planted in his heart) I will surely bless thee, and will greatly m^ltiply thy
seed, as the stars of heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore;
And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, because thou
have obeyed my voice: because I have perceived my fear to be within thee. In
steed of wealth and treasures and worldly blessings, this was Gods promise unto
him; Gene. 15. 1. I am thy exceeding great reward.

Fear God and keep his Commandments; For this is the whole duty of man; As
if he had said, it is altogether and wholly, the blessed estate of man.
According to which course and perfect rule, we ordering our lives, we shall
do those things which are pleasant and acceptable, and so be presented holy
and blameless in the sight of God, at that dreadful day, when we shall be
called to our accounts, and when the secrets of all hearts shall be open and
made manifest.

Somewhat I mind (God willing) to utter unto you, concerning the fear of God
in general sort, for the better lightning of that which I shall entreat off,
and so to pass purposely to the commodities and commendations thereof.

The fear of God, is nothing else, but a reverent awe What the true fear of
God is.
and obedience due unto him, whereby we are loath to offend him, not so much
because he is able to punish us, as principally, because his love is shed
abroad in our hearts, and our minds fully possessed therewith. And that it may
be the better known of us, we must separate it from a false kind of fear. For
as the true fear of God brings life with it, so the contrary fear
betokens death. Therefore the true fear of God is such, as whereby we
reverence God, and are most willing in all lovely sort to do his
Commandments, as children are obedient to their parents, or if it may be
said, more tenderly. But as for the other kind of fear, A false fear.
it is either servile and ^lauish, when we are driven to this obedience for
fear of punishment, or else it is that wherewith the lawless and unruly sort
of people, who have not the true fear of God before their eyes, are frighted
and wonderously amazed, do stand in horrible dread what shall become of them.
As they that are appointed to execution, their fear is deadly, so these,
considering how grievous the judgments of God shall be against them, for those
heinous sins which they have committed, there is nothing before their eyes,
but the fear of death. The which fear, I must needs confess, the godly in a
sort and for a time, may be touched with; and yet by the power of their
releeuing sa^iour, they are raised up to comfort, and the good spirit of God
does seal in their hearts, the mercies of God the father, through the
forgiveness of their sins in the blood of Christ. But as for the wicked and
ungodly, who are void of the grace of God, who spend their lives in all manner
of lewdness and naughtiness, they are not only overtaken and inwrapped in
this deadly, dreadful, and desperate fear, but they are overcome thereof, and
as a ship in the sea, that is suncke and past hope of recovery, they are
utterly overwhelmed Three effects of the true fear.
for ever.

And yet there is a more certain knowledge of the true fear of God,
consisting in these three effects. First, that 1.
whereas corruption and naughtiness lurketh in our hearts and would feign have
a vent and issue, the fear of God does keep that evil back, and does so
restrain, bridle, and keep in our corrupt and evil inclinations, that they
shall not in any case break forth to the dishonor of God, 2
and our own shame and confusion. The second effect, note or mark of the true
fear of God, is by departing from evil. For he that fears God truly,
departs from evil and sin unfeignedly, de^esting and abhoring the same,
both in himself, and others. The third effect 3
and note, whereby the fear of God is known to be in us, is, when we are
purposely set to amend our former evil lives, and stedsastly determined with
the Prophet David to keep the Commandments of our loving and gracious God.
Which matters would desire a longer discourse, and hereafter God willing
somewhat may be spoken, but at this present, they cannot be stood upon. Only
that which I promised, that lies upon me to perform, namely to set forth
the commodities and commendations of the true fear of God. For nothing does
more persuade men's minds, the^ the consideration of the high and great
commodities and advantages, of that, whereunto we would persuade them.

The fear of God, is to keep our selves, not so much The commodities of the
fear of God.
within the order of the laws of men, as of the laws of God; The laws of men
have respect but to the outward deed, but the laws of God to the heart and
inward thoughts of the mind. No doubt, every one thinks it a worthy matter,
to them that can keep themselves in that compass, but because they know not
the happiness that consists therein, therefore they do not so greatly set
their hearts and minds upon it. Which happiness and great commodities and
advantages, that it brings, being considered, would make us to have it in
high estimation, and more to desire it, then that happiness which the world
does account off. Therefore let us hearken how the word of God does set it
forth unto us, that we may be fully assured and perfectly know the benefits
thereof, and that we may account all earthly and worldly delights, in respect
of this delight, but vanity; that we may be thoroughly inamoured therewith, as
if we did behold the glorious and glistering throne of the Majesty of God,
and that we may be as they that are ravished with an excellent and excessive
desire, who can never be at rest, until they have obtained it.

And because the heart of man, is principally set upon earthly commodities, and
temporal blessings, therefore it pleased the spirit of God, first to begin
with that persuasion, that so by little and little, he might draw their minds
from earthly commodities to heavenly matters, of great weight and importance.
And to say the truth, what profit is there, or what blessing may be reckoned,
which the fear of God does not bring. The Prophet Moses in a brief sum,
does set down all worldly commodities, which proceed from the fear of God,
which are named, Deutro. 28. These blessings says he, shall come upon thee,
and overtake thee; Blessed shall thou be in the City, and blessed also in the
field; Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground,
and the fruit of thy cattle, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy
sheep; Blessed shall thou be when thou come in, and blessed also when thou
go out; The Lord shall cause thy enemies that rise against thee, to fall
before thy face, they shall come forth against thee one way, and shall fly
before thee seven ways; The Lord shall command the blessing to be with thee
in thy storehouses, and in all that thou set thine hand unto; The Lord
shall make thee plenteous in goods; He shall open unto thee his good treasure,
even the heaven to give rain unto thy land in due season, and to bless all
the works of thy hands, so that thou shall lend unto many Nations, but shall
not borrowe thy self; And the Lord shall make thee the head, and not the
tail; and thou shall be above only, and shall not be beneath; thou shall be
of the better, and not of the baser sort, of whom there is made small reckoning
and account; yea thou shall live in countenance and be well taken. It is said
of our savior Christ, that he increased in wisdom and stature, and in
favor with God and men; so is it also with them that fear God, whom it
pleases God, to account and accept for his children, they shall increase in the
favor of God and men, and they shall live with credit and good report; Good
report.
whereas if thou live contrary and without the fear of God, every body shall
be ready to speak ill of thee: and as the Proverb is, An ill name, half
hanged.

In consideration also of which prosperity, the Prophet David does break
forth into this speech of wonder. Psalm. 31. 19. How great is thy goodness o
Lord, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee? And how have thou done
for them which trust in thee, even before the sons of men? And as though the
Prophet could not sufficiently satisfy himself, with the commendation of the
estate of them that fear God, and live in his obedience, he utters yet more,
being plentiful in his speeches as the sea is in his waves. Psalm. 128. Blessed
is every one that fears the Lord, and walks in his ways; When thou eatest
the labors of thy hands thou shall be blessed, and it shall be well with
thee; Thy wife shall be as the fruitful vine on the sides of thine house, and
thy children like the Olive branches round about thy table; Lo surely thus
shall the man be blessed, that fears the Lord; yea further, he shall see his
childrens children, to rejoice his heart, and make his life the longer.

All this prosperity the wicked sort shall see and behold, The wicked envy at
their prosperity.
and be amazed, they shall be angry in their heart, and shall greatly envy to
see the godly in such good state, they shall gnash with their teeth and consume
away: For their own envy shall eat them up, and bring them to their grave
before their time.

God does enrich the godly, and them that fear him, in such sort, that it is
past man's expectation, and past that, The strange enriching of them that fear
God.
which the godly themselves may hope for; so that it seems strange and
wonderful to the world, both that the godly might have the greater cause, and
that with most cheerful hearts to praise and magnify the name of God, and be
thankful unto him; and also that all other that see it, may acknowledge it to
be Gods doing: and as Iannes and Iambres the sorcerers of King Pharaoh said;
when they resisted Moses the servant of God; This is the finger of God, and God
has done it, and he only has brought it to pass: who has a care over his
children, more then the hen that flocketh her brood together, and covers
them with her wings. As we read in the Psalms; When my father and mother
forsake me, the Lord takes me up. According to that in the Prophecy of
Esaias, Cap. 49. 15. Can a woman forget her child, and not have compassion on
the son of her womb? Though they should forget, yet will not I forget says
the Lord. So true it is, that the Prophet David records, I have been young
and now am old, and yet saw I never the righteous forsaken, nor their seed
begging their bread. Which thing is manifestly seen in the examples of
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, and their posterity, which examples I cannot
stand upon, but only I refer you to their stories in the book of Genesis,
where you shall see the plentiful goodness of God toward them, being fed,
maintained, and enriched only by Gods hand, which stories are most worthy
both the reading and meditation. They that fear God want nothing, whereas the
Lions want and roar for hunger. The earth is the Lords, and all that therein
is; and he has prepared the earth and all the blessings thereof, principally
and chiefly for them that live in his obedience. So that they may speak boldly
and with assurance of confidence; Quaeuis terra patria. Every place in the
world is my country. Whereas the wicked enjoying these earthly blessings, do
rather usurp them, then that they are the true owners and lawful possessours
of them.

This strange and wonderful enriching of them that live in the fear of God,
that wise King Solomon amongst the manifold experiments of worldly affaies,
does note and that is thus. That howsoever the wicked labor and toil for
wealth and riches, yet at last it comes into their hands, that fear God, and
they are possessours thereof. Eccl. 2. 26.
So we read in his book called Ecclesiastes, and these be the words, very
heedfully to be marked of us, which this King laid up in his highest
remembrances. Surely to a man that is good in his sight, God gives wisdom,
and knowledge, and joy, but to the sinner he gives pain to gather and to
heap, to give to him, that is good before God. Which words both the good and
the bad may well consider and ^use upon, and lay it to their heart, that they
may learn and be wise. Which words, sense, Job. 27. 13. 16. 17.
and meaning, is confirmed in the history of Job. This is the portion of a
wicked man with God, and the heritage which he shall receive of the Almighty;
Though he should heap up silver as the dust, and prepare raiment as the clay;
He may prepare it, but the just shall put it on, and the innocent shall divide
the silver. As it is in the book of Proverbs; The wicked shall be a ransom
for the just, and the transgressour Pro. 21. 18.
for the righteous. When a plague and mischief, and danger is toward, the
righteous shall escape, and it shall fall upon the wicked, they shall be
delivered, and the wicked shall come in their places; so also though they
gather great wealth and substance, they shall be least owners of it, for god
will so dispose it, that the good shall enjoy it. For it is nothing in the
sight of god, suddenly to make a poor man rich. The Prophet Moses does she we
a manifest example and proof of this commodity, and blessing from god,
toward them that fear him. God gave the Deuteronomy. 6. 10. 20.
Israelites his children and beloved people, the land of Canaan, which flowed
with milk and honey, and which abounded with all gods blessings, he gave them
this land which before was the possession of sinners. But how? He gave them
great and goodly Cities which they builded not; houses full of all manner of
goods which they builded not, nor labored for; Wels of water necessary for
their use, which they digg^d not; Vineyards and Olive trees to their comfort
and delight, which they planted not. And this is it, which is to be considered
herein, that all came without their labor, without their desert, god gave it,
it was his blessing.

As the self same Prophet does set it dewne for a punishment of them that
fear not god. Thou shall have Deu. 28. 4. 39. 30.
Olive trees in all thy coasts, but shall not annoint thy self with the Oil.
Thou shall plant a Vineyard and dress it, but shall neither drink of the
wine, nor gather the grapes; Thou shall build a house, and shall not dwell
therein.

The excellent commodities which were performed to Abraham's posterity, were
long before promised to Abraham, for this cause only, because he feared god,
as we read, Genes. 22. I know thou fear God (says god to Abraham, by the
mouth of an Angel) Therefore will I surely bless thee, and will greatly
multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven; and so forth, as before.

I might enlarge this commendation of the fear of The grievous punishments of
the contrary.
god (which is and ought to be the only delight of a Christian mind) by
reckoning up the miseries that fall on them in whom the fear of god is not
seen. Which are war, famine, pestilence, poverty, shame, and discredit,
the torment of an evil conscience, diseases, and strange kinds of death, to
make an end of them in fearful sort, that they may be an example unto all
other; beside many other discommodities which now I do not stand upon, but
think good rather to leave it to your consideration. Helping your remembrance
with this one notable place of scripture, recited in the Prophecy of Jeremy.
15. 1. 2. 3. Then said the Lord unto me, Ier. 15. 1. 2. 3.
Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet mine affection could not be
toward this people; Cast them out of my sight and let them depart; And if they
say unto thee, whither shall we depart, then tell them, Thus says the Lord;
such as are appointed to death, unto death; and such as are for the famine, to
famine; and such as are for the captivity, to the captivity. And I will
appoint over them, four kinds says the Lord. The sword to slaie, and the
dogs to tear in pieces, and the fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the
earth, to devour and to destroy.

From riches and wealth (which although it be a great The company of prophets
holy men and angels.
blessing of God, yet if it please God to exercise our faith and patience with
poverty and want, we must take the one in as good part as the other) let us
come to an other worldly blessing, and great comfort, and that is to a matter
of credit and honor. We should think our selves happy men, if we might be
thought worthy, to entertain and receive into our houses, those that were of
highest account about the Prince: but behold what great favor, is showed them
that fear God, that not only holy men, and Prophets, but Angels also have
made choice of them, to come to their houses, and to be familiar with them. 1.
King. 18. Eliah that famous Prophet of the Lord, appeared not to King Ahab, but
to his servant Obadiah, the governor of the house. The reason is, because
Obadiah feared God greatly. The same we shall read in the whole course of the
Bible, that the Prophets and messengers of the Lord, they did not resort unto
the common sort, but unto them that feared God. When our Savior Christ sent
forth his Disciples to preach, as it is in Mat. 10. 11. he willed them, when
they entered into a City or Town, to enquire who was worthy in it, that is,
whether there were a man that feared God there, and there to abide till they
departed. And that Angels have resorted unto them, letting pass the rest, it
is recorded in the book of Genesis, of Abraham and of Lot. Yea Angels have
comforted them in their distresses. As the Angel that was seen with the three
children in the fiery furnace; and the Angel that delivered the Apostle S.
Peter out of prison; the Angels that comforted Jacob when he stood in fear of
his brother Esau. So is it, Psalm. 34. 9. The Angel of the Lord pitcheth round
about them, that fear him, and delivers them.

Let us ascend yet higher, from earthly commodities to Wisdom.
heavenly gifts and graces, and see how by the fear of God we are furthered in
them, that we may fully and perfectly know, that there is no happiness that
man can desire, which the fear of God does not reach unto. And first
concerning that excellent gift of wisdom; It is said, that The fear of God is
the beginning of wisdom, and a good understanding have all they that do
thereafter. And what greater commodity can there be, then wisdom? For it
makes men gracious among Princes and great men. And by daily experience we
see, that they that excel in wisdom, excel in credit also. Whereas Kings
and Princes have been despised of their subjects; Nobles also and mighty men,
have been little set by of their inferiors, for want of wisdom, applying
themselves to their lusts, and to the vanity of their humors, whereby they
departed from the sear of God, so that there was no wisdom found in them.
Whereby they became as the Prophet does set them forth Psa. 49. 20. Man being in
honor has no understanding, but is compared unto the beasts that perish; And
again, as we read, Pro. 3. 35. The wise shall inherit glory, but fools
dishonor, though they be exalted. When king Saul saw that David 1. Sa. 18.
was very wise, he was afraid of him, and when he understood, that the Lord
was with him, then was he more and more afraid, and Saul became always
David's enemy. And when Ecc. 24. 11.
the Princes of the Philistines went forth, at their going forth, David behaved
himself more wisely, then all the servants of Saul, so that his name was much
set by No other cause was there, that brought Joseph from a prisoner to the
estate of a Prince, but that the fear of God had planted wisdom in his
heart, for the which he was so highly honored among strangers. The fear of
the Lord is the only step to wisdom, as we read Psalm. 25. 12. What man is
he that fears the Lord? him will he teach the way that he shall choose. Nay
further, The secret of the Lord, is revealed to them that fear him, and his
covenant to give them understanding. All earthly secrets may be found out, but
as for The hidden mystery of salvation.
the wisdom of God and the secret of the Lord, concerning the spiritual
understanding of his heavenly will and secret blessings; Let the depth say, It
is not in me, and the height say, I cannot attain unto it. Only he that
fears God is partaker thereof. So says that worthy servant of god Job. 28.
Behold to man he said, the fear of the Lord is wisdom. The fear of God does
not only lead us to that wisdom, which may serve for this present life, but
by steps and degrees, it does bring us to that wisdom which makes us
partakers of salvation, which is a most principal benefit and blessing. Ye men
and brethren, says the Apostle, Act. 13. 26. Children of the generation of
Abraham, and whosoever among you fears God, to you is the word of this
salvation sent. For the word of God, may well be termed the word of salvation,
because it is the food of our souls, and shows us the way to life, and how
we should be partakers thereof. Which heavenly wisdom, no doubt the heathen
people have, and as yet do want, because they are such of whom the Prophet
speaks, The fear of God is not before their eyes; And as one says,
Stultoru^ plena sunt omnia. They all run after vanity, and such things that
cannot profit, whereby they can never attain unto true happiness, which ought
to be their cheifest delight. And that especially if they had the grace to
consider, what notable and worthy effects it has, to make them partakers of
that happiness, which they would full gladly enjoy. For it works A remedy
against sin.
in the people of God thus much, that it expels and drives out sin; it
keeps the deadly poison of the devils temptations from our hearts and minds.
It brings the quiet fruit of peace, and makes a merry and cheerful A quiet
conscience. Long life.
heart, whereas the guiltiness of sin does make the heart heavy, and the
countenance sad; It gives long life, and increases the days of man, who so
desires to see good days, let him resort unto her. The treasures of wisdom
are with her, and she raineth down knowledge and understanding. Yea it
greatly furthereth us, in that which is our exceeding comfort, and that is,
That Our requests heard and granted.
God will perform the lawful requests, and godly desires of them that thus
fear him. For it is no more with them, but seek and find, ask and have.
Whereas all other, are never partakers of their desires, especially to their
good. For as they that were found without the Ark of Noah, had no life; So they
whose hearts the fear of God does not possess, reap and receive no blessing
from God. He that possesses her, shall thus be blessed in this life; And
furthermore, also he shall be happy at his latter end. A happy death.
Ecclesi. 1. 13. 18.
O well art thou, and happy shall thou be, says the wise man. Whosoever
fears God, it shall go well with him, at the last, and he shall find
favor in the day of his death, and in the end he shall be blessed. What a
great commodity and advantage is this, that how troublesome soever, the life
of them that fear God shall be in this world, yet their latter end shall
be blessed. Happy is the man which fears the Lord. For he will place his
mind upon his Commandments; therein does the fear of God consist, and in
that fear, there is our happy estate. The fear of God, is the fountain of
life, the root of wisdom, the Crown of joy, yea heaven it self, to them
that look for heaven.

And these are the principal commodities, which the fear of God does bring,
being sufficient and forcible enough, to make us in love therewith, and to set
our whole minds thereon. Which being so furnished, shows it self unto us,
as it were crowned with a garland of all the blessings, gifts, and graces of
God, much like a Princes Diadem, which is set out and garnished with precious
stones of all sorts, and those also of high account.

But who can sufficiently commend it, and set forth the praises thereof as it
deserves, sitting as it were a Lady and a Queen about the throne of God,
whose commendations well we may admire and wonder at, but who can reach so
far as fully to express them?

The fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, and a The comme^dation of the
fear of God is, that the praise thereof endures for ever.
good understanding have all they that do thereafter; The praise thereof
endures for ever. Amongst the rest, this seems to be the only commendation
of the fear of God, that the praise thereof endures for ever. All flesh is as
grass, and fades, the world which seems to have no end, shall vanish, the
heavens shall ware old as does a garment; but as the word of the Lord
continues for ever, so are the praises of the fear of God everlasting.
Wheresoever the Gospel is preached says Christ, throughout all the world,
there shall also this deed of Mary Magdaline (which anointed his body with
costly Oil, and wiped his feet with the hair of her head) this deed which
she has done, shall be spoken of for a memorial of her, meaning thereby not
the deed so much as her heart and affection. And such shall be the memorial of
them that fear God, according as it is said, The name of the godly shall
flourish, and the remembrance of the wicked shall rot. As the whirlewind
passes, so is the wicked no more, but the righteous is an everlasting
foundation. The wise man after he had entreated of diverse and weighty matters,
and drawing to an end of his book, as though he had for gotten one principal
point. Let us now says he, commend the famous men, who were honorable in
their generations, and were well reported of in their times. There are of them
that have left a name behind them, so that their praise shall be spoken of.
There are some also that have no memorial, and are perished as though they had
never bin, and are become, as though they had never bin born, and their
children after them. But the former were such men, whose righteousness and fear
of God, has not been forgotten, and whose commendation shall endure throughout
all ages. Their seed shall remain for ever, and their praise shall never be
taken away; their bodies are buried in peace, but their name lives for
evermore. There is a seed of man, which is an honorable seed, the honorable
seed are they, that fear the Lord.

Diverse other goodly sentences the scripture does afford, in commendation of
the fear of God, but I thought the weight of reasons alleged, would more
prevail, then the multitude of words, which do delight but for the present
time. Much like pleasant music, which is no longer of force to move our
minds, but while it sounds. But the weight of the reasons continue in our
remembrance, when as the multitude of words, may soon be forgotten, as if we
had seen our face in a glass, and when we are gone, we remember it no more.

2.
That delight which is next to the fear of God, and an The next delight to the
fear of God, is the knowledge of gods word.
excellent delight above all worldly delights, I think good at this present,
not to stand much upon, but to refer you to a more ample declaration thereof,
because I have spent so much time in setting down the commodities and
commendations of the fear of God, unto the which no persuasions can be too
tedious. But because the study and knowledge of the word of God, is the only
means, whereby the fear of God is taught, maintained, and increased, therefore
does it seem a matter as worthy to be considered, and to be persuaded as the
other. And so much the rather, because we cannot come so perfectly to the fear
of God, as by the knowledge of his word. To the proof whereof, we have an
excellent sentence, Prou. 2. The words be these; My son, if thou receive my
words, and hide my commandments with thee, to incline thine ears to wisdom,
and to bow thy heart to understanding, if thou call for understanding, and
utter thy voice for knowledge, if thou seek her as silver, and dig for her as
for her treasures; Then shall thou understand A light to our understanding.
the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God. All the life of man
without the knowledge of the word of God, is but a wilderness, and that is the
only path to bring us out, all our understanding is but darkness, and that is
the only lantern that gives us light. Our parents that beget us, they beget
us after their own image, and that is sinful, so that as we are borne in
sin, so all our The seed of life.
delight by nature is in sin. Therefore this seed and this begetting, may
well be termed a mortal seed, and a begetting unto death. But that we may
have a reverent care, and a great delight in the word of God, we are given to
understand, that it is the immortal seed, the seed that begets us unto life.
As says Saint Peter, Epistle I. He has begotten us again, not of mortal,
but of immortal seed, which he affirms to be the word of God that endures
for ever. And this is the singular commodity thereof, I. John. 3. 9. That he
that is borne of God, sins not, unto death, but if he fall, he rises
again by repentance. The reason because he sins not, nor delights
herein, nor suffers it to reign within him, is; for that the seed of Gods
word, joined with his fear, remains within him, neither can he sin,
because he is borne of God, and begotten unto life, by his holy spirit. As
they that are in the flesh cannot please God, for the wisdom of the flesh,
is enmity to God; so the word of God does make the power of his spirit more
effectual within us, and teaches us how to please God, and to live in his
favor. Blessed is the man that fears God, for his great delight is in gods
word, and he makes more account thereof, then of any treasure. For all
precious things in the world, they can continue with us but while we live in
the world, but the seed of gods word, as it is everlasting, s^ it accompanies
the soul even when it is departed from the body. We are troubled about many
things in this life, but as our Savior Christ says, there is but one thing
necessary, and that is, the hearing, reading, learning, and meditating on the
word of God. And as wisdom is one of the Wisdom.
greatest commendations that can be given to the fear of god, so does the word
of god deserve the self same commendation. By thy precepts and commandments,
that is by thy word, says the Prophet David, I am wiser then the aged, and my
elders, By thy word I have gotten understanding, therefore I hate all wicked
ways. This is your wisdom says that holy man Moses, unto the Israelites,
Deu. 4. And this is your understanding in the sight of the people, which shall
say, Only this people is wise, and of understanding, and a great nation. And
this was the wisdom that god would should more prevail with a King, and
highest governor in a realm, then all the wisdom of his counselors. As we
shall read in the book of Deutro. 17. And when the King shall sit upon the
thorn of his kingdom, he shall read in this book all the days of his life,
and it shall be ever with him. To what end and purpose? Even that he may go in
and out wisely, before his people. That being taught and instructed by the word
of god, he may direct not only his own life in the fear of god, but also may
govern his realm in the same fear. That so he and his people might be
preserved and presented blameless in ye sight of god, which is the greatest
comfort of the soul, and therefore can be no greater delight. The word of god
is the seed of grace, which being sown in the furrows of Christian hearts,
increases and multiplieth exceedingly; It is the spiritual sword, that
cutteth the flesh from the spirit, which seperateth all impure thoughts from
the mind, and abandone th all lustful desires from the heart; It is the sacred
fire, that burns away the superfluous humors of worldly desires and worldly
vanities; It is the wholesome leaven, that seasoneth and edifieth the soul; It
is the sweet bread, that feeds the people of God; It is the true key, that
opens unto us Christ Jesus the door, and only way to the kingdom of heaven.
And when this wisdom of the word of God; enters into our hearts, and when
this knowledge delights our souls, then shall counsel preserve us, and
understanding shall keep us. For it does not only convert the heart of some,
unto the true fear of God, It conuerteth. It preserves.
and call back the sinner y^ goes astray, but it daily preserves other some
in the same fear, and causes them to hold on in a right course. But how?
Chiefly by meditating and musing on the word of God, by ordering the course of
our lives thereafter, and setting our whole delight thereon. The King as I said
before, and cheifest in a realm, was commanded to read the word of God all the
days of his life. An example whereof, we have in Joshua, who was appointed of
God, to be the Prince and governor over all the people of Israel, who by name
was thus commanded. Let not this book of the law depart out of thy mouth, but
meditate therein, that thou may observe and do according to all that is
written Prosperity.
therein. For then shall thou make thy way prosperous, and then shall thou have
good success. When we will signify a great pleasure and delight, we say it is
a pleasure and delight for a King, and every one would wish that he were
partaker of Kings delights. Behold then, which and what is his cheifest
delight, and let it be of the same precious account with thee, as it ought to
be with the king. And this delight in reading the word of God, in hearing it
preached and expounded unto us, the daily musing and meditating thereon, what
we have read and heard, and what has been taught us, this delight does bring
with it, the hatred and detestation of sin, and shall in time breed in us,
the love and reverent fear of God, and at last make us partakers of heavenly
joys.

In consideration of which effects, that the word of God works within us, the
Prophet David in his psalms does highly extol it in this sort. The word of God
is more to be desired then gold, yea then much fine gold, sweeter also then
honey and the honey comb; Moreover by thy word is thy servant made circumspect
and wary, to keep himself within the compass of thy fear, and in keeping of
thy word, there is great reward. Whereupon he also shows the great delight he
had therein. I am as glad says he of thy word, as Psalm. 119.
one that finds great spoils, I love it above gold and precious stones, my
soul has cleaued thereunto, and loved it exceedingly; If I had not had a
delight therein, I should have gone astray and perished. Yea therein have I had
as great delight, as in all manner of riches, and dearer it has been, and is
unto me, then thousands of gold and silver. And therefore in the Gospel it is
rightly compared Mat. 13. unto a treasure hid in the field, which when a man
has found, he hides it, and for joy thereof, departs and sells all that
he has and buyeth that field. Also unto a pearl of great price, which when
one lights upon, he goes his way, and sells all that he has, to get it.
And among men, he that has a treasure, his mind for the most part, will be
upon his treasure, and whether he be abroad or at home, where his treasure is,
there will his heart be also. So he that has a pearl of great price, his eye
will be still upon it, always looking and beholding it. It shall be either set in
a King and Signet, that it may be upon his finger, or with some chain of gold,
or some cipres, or the like, it shall be hanged about his neck; such store will
he make of it. Therefore in great wisdom did God provide for his people, that
they might always have his word in remembrance, and take a delight therein,
that they might always mus^ and meditate thereon. Deuteronomy. 6. For they were
commanded to write his word, not in their halles or parlours, or inner rooms
of special account, but also upon their gates. And yet a little nearer, that
it should be wrought upon their garments, not only that their eyes should
still behold it, as a pearl most precious, and an incomparable treasure, but
that their tongues might also be talking thereof, and teaching their children
both when they sat in their houses, and when they walked by the way, and when
they lay down, and when they rose up.

All other delights, which flesh and blood is wont to hunt after, are both
transitory, and of small continuance, and also comfortless, by reason of the
manifold cares, as also the A confutation of the chiefest worldly delights and
excellencies. A^
miseries which follow after. For to let pass the meaner and baser sort, which
are not worthy to be spoken of, let us try and examine the chiefest worldly
delights, let us walk a while, with King Solomon, into this earthly paradise.
And first let us behold the glittering show of wealth and riches, how either
pride steppeth forth and puffs up the mind, and sets us a flaunt to all
prodigality; or covetousness creeps within us, to make us needy more then
needs. For the covetous man who Riches.
especially makes wealth and riches his delight, his jewel and his God, what
does he else, but in great plenty live in misery, neither does he further
use or enjoy his goods, but only to behold them with his eyes. Such toil and
labor in getting; such care and breaking of sleep to keep them; such fear
in loosing, as though we had resolved with our selves, to live and die
therewith, as though our lives should end, when any trouble, casualtie, or
calamity, should make us loose our goods. Far unlike to wealthy and godly
Iobe, who being brought to misery and loss of all, gave manifest proof,
that his only delight, was not placed in his wealth and riches, but with a
patient contented and godly mind, uttered these words. Naked came I into the
world, and naked shall I go out again. The Lord has given, and the Lord
has taken, Blessed be the name of the Lord. Again, it is not without great
cause, that they are called; Riches of iniquity, because for the most part,
they are gotten by wrong and oppression, by fraud and deceit. And therefore no
marvel, if the Apostle give this counsel. 1. Tim. 6. 8. Let us says he,
always carry contented minds. For they that will be rich, fall into
tentation, and snares, and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown
men in perdition and destruction. For the desire of money is the root of all
evil, which while some lusted after, they erred from the faith, and pierced
themselves through with many Lands purchased for a name.
sorrows. Some there are that heap up riches to purchase lands, to get
themselves a name, and to leave the same to their posterity, which thing the
Prophet David notes, Psalm. 49. They trust in their goods, and boast themselves
in the multitude of their riches; They think their houses and their
habitations shall continue for ever, even from generation to generation, and
call their lands and houses by their own names. The chiefest delight they
have, is to leave these goodly possessions to their heirs, that they may keep
their name, and that they be not forgotten on the earth, never seeking the
Lords favor and mercy, to direct and make strong their desires, neither ever
seeking to plant his fear in them, that must enjoy those things. But their
issue is thereafter, and the Lord turns all cross in his judgment, so that
they are dispearced, and driven often to forsake not only the place; but the
very land. For being brought up in all idleness, looseness, and liberty,
they soon ouerlash and run beyond their compass, and through lewdness and
riot, they bring all to nothing, and being pinched with scarcity and penury,
they commit some mischief or other, whereby they are enforced either to fly
their native Country, or to end their lives both lamentably and fearfully. He
that never knew the getting, can keep no measure in spending, as also evil
gotten goods, come never to the third generation, as the wise man says; She
begets a son, and in his hand is nothing.

We think them best beloved of God, who enjoy most The blessing of God in
heavenly gifts.
wealth and substance, but if we have eyes to see, the blessing of God,
consists in heavenly gifts and graces, which the common sort do not enjoy,
albeit their wealth may be without number. What is it for him that had such
store of goods, to rejoice and say to his soul. Soul live at ease, and take
thy rest, for thou have much goods, laid up for many years; when that he could
not enjoy his life a night to an end: yea further, it may be feared, that with
his life, he lost not only his goods, but his soul too. In respect whereof, we
may well say with the Prophet David;

The greater sort crave worldly goods,
and riches do embrace:
But Lord grant us thy countenance,
thy favor and thy grace.
For thou thereby shall make my heart,
more joyful and more glad:
Then they that of their corn and wine,
full great increase have had.
When I saw that such delight had such heaviness, I turned aside to behold the
excellency of wisdom, and there Wisdom.
I found but vanity and vexation. For he that seeks by learning to come by
wisdom, behold how he is incombred, before he come to the goal, and though
all run, yet but one receives the prize, that is, few there be that do
excel. (Yet by the way, we must not therefore leave off, but run on with a
good courage, in hope that at last we may obtain.) The eye is never satisfied
with reading, and the mind searches till it be weary, our spirits faint before
they come to the depth, and when they are nearest, then are they far off. Which
makes the holy man Job say, Cap. 28. Where is wisdom found? and from whence
comes it? and where is the place of understanding? Man knows it not, and it
is hid from the eyes of all the living. Here is the vexation of the spirit. For
in the multitude of wisdom, is much grief, And he that increases knowledge,
increases sorrow; he searches after it, and cannot find it. According to y^
saying; Maxima pars eorum quae scimus, est minima little quae ignoramus.
Although we know much, yet our ignorance is as great, if not greater; as if the
understanding of man, were nothing else, but covered over with darkness.

Many there are, who being too desirous, to know more then is meet and
convenient for them to search after, have been so bold as to clime into Gods
secrets, but with Lucifer they have had their falls. And yet because they
cannot be partakers of their unlawful desires, by lawful means, they enter
into covenant with the devil, to show them hidden matters, and to help them to
their desires, damning thereby their souls for ever, for a worldly delight
which cannot long endure.

Again, some being as it were wrapped into the heavens, with a foolish conceit
of their own wisdom, thinking none so excellent as they, exalted in their
imaginations, being over and above ravished with self love, rather then there
should want any to praise them, admire and extol themselves. But even as it
was said to King Nabuchodonozor, O King to thee be it spoken, thy kingdom is
departed from thee; so in a manner, as by experience we see, the self same
voice sounds into their ears. To thee that do admire and exalt thy self
in thy wisdom, to thee be it spoken, thou art bereft of thy wit and senses,
and thy understanding and wisdom is departed from thee. Whereby such become a
gazing stock and wonder, to men and Angels, and a wretched and woeful
spectacle to themselves.

Being thus satisfied with the view of wisdoms vanity, I went along and
followed my guide, and he brought Honous.
me to the mount of honor, and made me behold the vanity of this high and
mounting delight. To see what creeping and crowching, what capping and kneeing,
and how as servants and slaves men were suitors to honor, and yet behold again
their slippery estate, much adoo to come thither, and yet soon thrown down
and dispossessed. What is the estate of Kings and Princes in their thrones, who
although they have many and sundry delights, yet are they recompensed with
infinite cares and troubles, and still in danger of treachery and treason.

The Magistrates, Judges, and highest Officers, in a realm, although God has
vouchsafed them in his own title, and called them Gods, yet shall they die
like men, nay for the most part, they live corrupted men. Which thing if King
Solomon had not seen in his days, and foreseen what would have fallen out in
time to come, he would not so resolutely have set it down. Eccle. 5. 7. If in
a country says he, thou see the oppression of the poor, and the defrauding
of judgment and justice, marvel not. For so it is like to come to pass. So
that there are fears and cares enough, and matters to make them guilty, and
their souls heavy, that have set their hearts upon honor, howsoever at the
first it have a glorious show in the sight of the world, but as for delight, to
speak and say it truly, there is none.

When the wise King had showed me thus much, what Pleasure.
flawes, crackes, and rents there were, in the cheifest delights of worldly
men, it was a matter too easy to judge of the rest, and of the meaner sort.
Which could term no otherwise, but mere foolishness and madness, toys and
trifle. The viole and harp and musical instruments, how do they delight the
heart? What a joy is it to spend our time in minstrelcie and dancing? But what
if music have his mourning, and that such foolish mirth do end in
heaviness? What is beauty but the provoking of lust, and the forgetfulness of
God, which makes us with an impudent face to say (when we are called to God,
from this and all other earthly vanities) I am married to beauty, and have set
my heart on vanity, and therefore he says not, have me excused, but in plain
terms, I cannot come. And when we think of brave apparel, and delicate
fare, as though that were a thing to be desired, let us remember the rich man,
which was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared well and delicately
every day, who though he flaunted on the earth, and made the world his
chiefest heaven, yet afterward fried in torments, and found the doleful hell,
to he his dwelling place for ever.

Now what purpose is it for us, to desire to live long, Long life.
when there are no true delights, but shows and shadows thereof? When all
things in our life are vain, what pleasure is it to live, seeing that (as it
is most certain) the longer we live, the more sinful we are. This life of
ours must have an end, and peradventure a fearful, or an ungodly end, which
if we could, but remember and think upon, it would abate and pull back our
rejoicing hearts, although all our delight were to live. How much better were
it, to prepare our selves against the day of death. Seeing that a short life is
sometime a great blessing of God, when as the course of sin shall be cut off
in us; And again, when we are taken away from woeful times to come, and from
those miseries which fall upon the world. Wisdom. 4. Enoch was taken away,
least wickedness should alter his understanding. For wickedness deceives and
bewitcheth the mind, and the unsteadfastness of concupiscence, does soon
pervert the simple heart. And because the soul of this holy man pleased God,
therefore hasted he to take him away from wickedness. Yet the people see
understand it, and consider no such things in their hearts, how the grace and
mercy is upon his Saints, and his providence over the elect. The wicked and
ungodly, although they live long in great prosperity, and see not the grave in
many years, yet is their estate accursed, and they live long to their greater
vengeance and condemnation, until the measure of their sin be filled up to
the brim, and that the judgment of GOD wayt for them at the door.

Seeing then that these delights, which worldly minded men make so great
account of, come to nothing, and are in themselves but mere vanities, and as
it were shadows without a body, and therefore may fitly be compared to S^dome
Apples, which in outward sight and show, are very fair and beautiful, but
when we come near to touch them, they fall to ashes. Let us return to the
true delight and only paradise of the soul, I mean the word of God, in Word.
which paradise, is the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, the tree also
of life and immortality, wherein are perfections to be found, and such as may
well content the heavenly Angels and blessed souls. Which is the only
instruction of wisdom, the guide of our life, the light in darkness, which
shows us a way to enter into paradise, although Cherubins, and the blade of a
sword shaken, be set, to keep the way of the tree of life; I mean, it shows
us the way into the highest heavens, although there be many lets and
hindrances to keep us back. And the way that it only Fear.
chaulketh out unto us is this; The fear of the Lord, and the especial regard
of his will and commandments, which has the promises and blessings of this
life, and of that also which is to come. By which direction of the fear of
God, we read that the famous Patriarch Abraham, was safe from the injuries of
strangers; Lot delivered from the devouring fire, that came down from heaven,
and from those dreadful judgments; Noah escaped the drowning flood, and
perished not with the ungodly; Job that worthy mirror of all succeeding ages,
preserved from the rage and wicked intent of the devil; Jacob set free from the
murdering hand of his brother Esau; Joseph from misery, exalted to honor;
Enoch taken from the wicked world, and translated into heaven. By which
examples and testimonies drawn out of the word of God, we see the high and
great commendations of the fear of God, and that there is no worldly delight
to be compared unto it. In a word, the chiefest commodities and blessings, that
the heart of a natural man can desire, and the greatest glory that he can wish
to rise unto, all are included and comprehended within the fear of God.

Unto the which, that I may as I would, exhort you, let us call to our
remembrance, the words that God spoke unto his people, by his servant Moses,
saying. O that there were such a heart in them to sear me, and to keep all
my commandments always, that it might go well with them, and with their
children for ever. O that they were wise, then would they understand this, then
would they know that the fear of God does make a blessed life and a happy
end. That we may perceive that the fear of God, does teach us to be upright and
just, and to eschew evil as it did Job; that so God may grant our requests as
he heard and granted the prayers of Cornelius; that it may come to us as it did
unto Iudeth, that none be able to bring an evil report of us, because we fear
God. Finally, that it may be said of us, as it was of King David, that he was
a man after Gods own heart, because that with all the power that was in him, he
did perform those things which God would have him, and that we may be minded
as he was, I had rather be a door keeper says he, in the house of the Lord,
then to dwell in the Palaces of Princes.

And so as people endued with wisdom, and with an heavenly spirit, let us
pass by these delights of the world, which are rather nullities then novelties
of account, and let us leave them to the world and worldly minded men.

To conclude, let us consider, how the wise man does exhort us, to the love and
admiration of the fear of God, the delight, wherein is no vanity, and the
happy joy which always shall endure. Eccle. 40. To labor says he, and to
be content with that a man has, is a sweet life, but he that finds a
treasure is above them both; Wine and Music rejoice the heart, but the love
of wisdom is above them both; Gold and silver fasten the feet, but counsel
is esteemed above them both; Riches and strength lift up the mind, but the
fear of the Lord is above them both; There is no want in the fear of the
Lord, and it needs no help. The fear of the Lord, is a pleasant garden of
blessing, and there is nothing so beautiful as it is. In which fear, God give
us grace in this our transitory life long to continue, and hold out in the
same, even to the end of our lives.

To God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, three persons, and
one everliving God, be rendered all praise, dominion, and power, now and for
evermore, Amen.

The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and a good understanding
have all they that do thereafter; The praise thereof endures for ever. Deo
gratia, solique gloria. But to the intent ye may be confirmed in that whereunto
I have perswade^ you, although I have done my best endeavor to show the vanity
of earthly delights, yet doubting that this would not satisfy, I thought good
to draw a^ide the Curtain, and to she we you the picture of Vanity it self,
as though none but Appelles had painted it, and therefore have of purpose
inserted it.

The Glass of Vanity.
Eccle. 1. 2. Vanity of vanities, sath the Preacher: Vanity of vanities, All
is Vanity.
THis book begins with all is Vanity, and ends, with Fear God and keep his
Commandments. If that sentence were knit to this, which Saloman keeps to the
end, as the haven of rest, after the turmoyles of Vanity: it is like that
which Christ said to Martha; Thou art troubled about many things, but one
thing is necessaire. That which troubles us Solomon calls Vanity; That which
is necessary, he calls the fear of God: from that to this, should be every
man's pilgrimage in this world; we begin at Vanity, and never know perfectly
that we are vain, until we repent with Solomon. Therefore this is his first
greeting and lesson to all, after his conversion, to warn them that all is
Vanity, as if God had said to him as he said to Ezechiel, Cause Jerusalem to
know her abominations, as though men did not know their sins how vain they
are, as Eliphaz says, He believes not that he is vain; which makes every man
defer his repentance until the very hour that sin makes preparation to
leave him, and then fainting, he is unwilling to depart, because he is not
ready. Therefore I have chosen this sentence, which speaks of nothing but
Vanity, to show how we take the way to misery, for the way of happiness, and
turn the day of salvation, to the day of vanity. Let cuery man think as I go
in this matter, why he should love that which Solomon repents, if he think
Solomon happier after he repented, than he was before.

This verse is the sum or contents of all this book, and therefore Solomon
begins with it, and ends with it; as if he should say. First this is the matter
which I will prove, and after, this is the matter which I have proved. Now you
see whether I told you true, that all is Vanity, I may call it Salomons
Theme, or the fardle of Vanities, which when he has bound in a bundle, he
bids us cast it into the fire: for after he has done with them, in his last
Chapter and thirteenth verse, as though he would have no more thought of
them, he turns away from them, as if he had buried them, and goes to another
matter, saying; Now let us hear the end of all, Fear God, and keep his
commandments: for this is the whole duty of man. As though he were exceeding
glad, that after so many dangers through the rout of Vanities, yet God let him
see the haven of rest, and brought him to the right end, and set him upon the
shore, where he might see his vanities, as Moses looked back upon his
enemies, and saw them drowned behind him.

The whole narration does show, that Solomon wrote this book after his fall.
When he had the experience of vanities, and seen the folly of the world, what
evil comes of pleasure, and what fruit grows of sin; he was bold to say,
Vanity of vanities, etc. which he avouches with such protestation, as though
he would justify it against many adversaries: sor all the world is in love
with that which he calls vanity. Therefore he puts too his name in the midst of
his sentence, as if he would defend it against all comers: if any man ask, who
broched this strange doctrine? the Preache^ (says Solomon) to testify his
hearty conuerfio^ to God, he calls himself a Preacher, in the witness of
unfeigned repentance, as if God had said unto him, Thou being converted, convert
thy brethren, and be a Preacher as thou art a King: So when we are converted,
we should become Preachers unto other, and show some fruits of our calling, as
Solomon left this book for a monument to all ages, of his conversion.
Therefore they which write, that Solomon died in his sin, and that such a
famous instrument of God went to the damned, do great wrong to the worthy
King, which give them such an example to repent, and would correct their rash
judgment, if they considered, First, that he was the clearest figure of Christ
(except Melchisedes) which passed all Kings in his prosperity, and all men in
his wisdom. Secondly, that he was inspired by the holy Ghost like the
Prophets; to be one of the pens of God to write his holy word, the word of
salvation, which was not fit for a reprobate. Thirdly, that God promised to his
father, that he would not take his spirit and his mercy from him, as he did
from Saul, nor forsake him as he did Saul; but correct him in another sort.
Fourthly, that God is said to love him: therefore, as Paul concludes that Jacob
was elected, because God says, Jacob have I loved: So we may conclude, that
Solomon was elected, because God says, Solomon have I loved. Fifthly, that in
Luc. 13. 28. All the Prophets of God are said to be in heaven: and therefore
Solomon being an holy Prophet, must be holden to be in heaven. To show that he
was a holy Prophet, in 2. Pet. 3. 2. Peter calls all the Prophets which wrote
the scripture, Holy Prophets. Lastly, we may gather out of the seventh Chapter
of this book, and the 30. verse: and out of the 5. of the Proverbs, and the
14. verse: that Solomon had left his Concubines and vanities before he wrote
this book. Therefore, to say that the figure of Christ, the pen of the holy
scripture, the man whom God loved, the wisest man that ever was, and one of the
holy Prophets, dyed a reprobate; is presumption against the word, impiety
against God, and wrong to the dead. Although because of his grievous fall in
Idolatry, and uncleanness, God left him in disgrace, and makes no mention of
repentance, where he speaks of his death; That they which stand, may take
heed least they fall, and see how easy it is to slip, by the example of him
that was wiser than they. Salomo^ being wicked, and yet saved, was a figure of
ye church, whose sins are forgiven. Thus having found as it were the Mine,
now let us dig for the treasure. Vanity of vanities, etc. This is Salomons
conclusion, when he had gone through the world and tried all things, like a
spy sent into a strange country, as if he were now come home from his
pilgrimage, they gather about him, to enquire what he has heard and seen
abroad, and what he thinks of the world, and these things which are so loved
amongst men; like a man in admiration of that which he had seen, and not able
to express particulerly one after another, he contracts his news into a word:
you ask me what I have seen, and what I have heard? Vanity says Solomon: And
what else? Vanity of vanities: And what else? All is Vanity. This is the
history of my voyage, I have seen nothing but vanity over the world. Carry
this for the news from ye Preacher: Vanity of vanities, All is Vanity; as if
he should say, Vanity, and greater Vanity, and more than Vanity: So the
further he did go, the more vanity he did see; and the nearer he looked, the
greater it seemed: till at last he could see nothing but vanity.

When he was come to this, that he did see all things vain, upon which men set
their hearts; he was moved with compassion, and could be silent no longer, but
needs he must write to them which seek felicity (as he did) in transitory
things, to warn them y^ they seek it not any longer in these foolish things,
which have no stability nor contentatio^, but fly from them to the fear of
God, which has ye promises of this life, and of ye life to come. Therefore he
begins, with All is vanity; as if he should say, Love not ye world, nor y^
things of the world: for I have tried that there is no certainty in them.

Thus he withdraws them; First, from the wrong way, and then sets them in the
right way to happiness, which he defines at last, to fear God, and keep his
commandments. When he had gone through a thousand Vanities, then that comes in
at the end, even like our repentance which stays till death: So his drift is,
to show that man's happiness is not in these things which we count off, but in
those things which we defer: his reason is, that they are all vanity: his
proof is, because there is no stabilitie in them, nor contentation of mind:
his conclusion is, therefore contemn the world, and look up to heaven from
whence ye came, and whither ye shall go. This is the scope which Solomon aims
at, as though we did all seek happiness, but we go a wrong way unto it:
therefore he sounds a retire, showing that if we hold on our course, and go
forwards as we have begun, we shall not find happiness, but great misery,
because we go by vanity. Therefore to fright us out of that way, he breaks
forth into an exclamation, Vanity of vanities, All is vanity. Now Solomon
full of wisdom, and schooled with experience, is licensed to give his
sentence of the whole world. For the spiritual man judges all things, his
judgment is so certain, that it runs before the evidence, and co^demnes all for
vanity, before he convince them to be vain; whereas we prove first, and
condemn after, because our words are no authorities; he concludes first, and
prove after: neither any judge did condemn so many together. Solomon resolved
all ye questions of ye Queen Sheba, yet Salomo^ never answered so many
questions at once as now; for what can you enquire, but hear you have an
answer? Ask him as the soldiers, and harlots, and Publicans, asked John,
What is sin? Vanity says Salomo^. What is pleasure? Vanity too. What is
bewty? Vanity too. What is riches? Vanity too. What is honor? Vanity too.
What is long life? Vanity too. This is y^ state of all things after ye fall,
all turned to Vanity. This is no reproach to the things, but a shame to him
which so abused them, y^ all things should be called Vanity for him. What a
testimony is this of him which should be the only servant of God on earth,
whom he created in righteousness and holiness, whom he framed to his own
Image, whom he placed in Paradise, and would have raised to heaven, to hear
that he has so polluted his life with sins, that now there is nothing but
Vanity. This is a lamentable song which will make him weep that tunes it, if
he think what he says, how his state was changed since Adam his father died;
Once God said, That all was good, and now he says, That all is naught and
vain, as though he forbad man, that which he created for man. That is not
Salomons meaning to debar men from the use of creatures: although all things
changed with man, and became worse then they were; yet he does here rather
show, that man reapes nothing but Vanity out of these things, by reason of
his corruption: then that the things themselves are vain, if they were well
used. For even since the creation, Paul says, 1. Tim. 4. That every creature
of God is good, and nothing is to be rejected, if it be received, or used with
thanks giving, for it is sanctified by the word of God, and prayer. That is it,
which makes them profitable to us, which because it is wanting for the most
part, therefore Solomon says, that all are vain to us, not vain of
themselves, but because they are not sanctified as they should be. Therefore in
the 2. 24. the 3. 12. and 22. the 5. 17. the 8. and 15. he shows a way how we
may make a profit of all, and rejoice in our labors, and find a lawful
pleasure in earthly things, so often he calls us to the use, least we should
err as the Monks and Erenits have done before, mistaking these words, when he
says, That all is Vanity, they have forsaken all company, and government, and
Office and trade, and got themselves into the wilderness amongst beasts, to
live in quiet and silence, saying that men could not live in the world, and
please God, because all is vanity. So while they counted all things vain, they
became vain themselves, and left those blessings which Salomo^ enjoyed after
his knowledge, more tha^ he did before. Therefore it is vain man y^ Salomo^
reproves, which is not only called Vanity, but lighter than Uanitie. If he
did not things vainly, nothing should be vain in the world, whereas now by
abuse, we may see sometime a great vanity in the best things, as in the worst:
For are not many vain in their knowledge, vain in their policies, vain in
their learning, as other are vain in their ignorance? Was not the wisdom of
Achitophel a vain thing? The swiftness of Hazael a vain thing? The strength
of Goliath a vain thing? The treasures of Nabuchadnezzar a vain thing? The
honor of Ammon a vain thing? The beauty of Absalon a vain thing? The
knowledge of the Scribes a vain thing? The devotion of the Pharisees a vain
thing? And so is the learning of all those a vain thing, that do no good with
it, but either it lies under a bushel and moulds, or else it prattles like
Tertullus, always against Paul, striving to make war between them which love
dearer then any brethren.

By this you may see that Vanity is bold, when she breaks into houses, and
Churches, and Palaces, and sometime Vanity may come to infect, where Truth may
not come to reprove; Is it not high time then to sound this Alarm again,
Vanity of vanities, etc.

If we could hear how vehemently, and how pitifully* Solomon pronounced this
outcry, happily it would move us a little, to hear how he did exclaim of his
own life, and condemned himself, as it were by the sound of Trumpet, that all
might hear. For we are all by nature such deaffe Adders, that whether the
Prophets come piping, or mourning, or crying, they go from us again mourning
like Jeremy, We would have cured Babel, but she would not be cured. Nay the
City of Jerusalem would not (says our Savior Christ) when he wept for his
Israelites.

Therefore, Solomon speaks thrice, like a Crier; Vanity of Vanities, etc. as
the mother which would feign make her son to hear, she dubbles and trebles
her words: What my son, and what the son of my womb; and what the son of
my desires. So when god* would stir us up to hear, he cries thrice to the
earth, and says* Earth, earth, earth, Hear the word of the Lord. So when
Solomon would diswade from the company of the wicked: read Prou. 4. 14. how
often he repeats the charge; Enter not into the way of the wicked, walk not in
it avoid it, go not by it, turn from it, and pass by: as though he would
never have done, or as though we would never hear: so Christ when he taught
Peter what was his duty, rehearsed it thrice: Feed: Feed: feed. Joseph shows
the reason of these repetitions, when he tells Pharaoh why his dream was
doubled, because the matter was important and certain. Therefore when Solomon
repeats this saying so often, he calls for audience, as though he had some
weighty and great matter to utter. Such a point of wisdom it is for every man
to know, that all is Vanity, if we direct not things to their right end, as
when the holy Ghost would signify that God is all holy, he repeated thrice;
Holy, holy, holy* So when he should show that man is all vain, thrice he
repeated vanity, to show how hardly man believes that he is vain: therefore
he brings in three assertions, as it were three witnesses to prove it. All
agree upon the same words, but that the last is more plain, and says that all
is Vanity: that is, that man is not only changed and become vain: but from
the vanity of man, as the Apostle faith: The creatures are subject to vanity,
and have not the glory and liberty which they should have, for the sin of man.
A spiritual* eye does see some vanity or other in every thing, as appears
betwixt Christ and his disciples at Jerusalem. They gazed upon the building of
the Temple as a brave thing, and would have Christ to behold it with them; but
he did see that it was but vanity, and therefore said; Are these the things
that ye look upon? As if he should say* How vain are you to gaze upon th^^?
If Christ thought the beauty of his Temple a vain thing, and not worth the
sight, which yet was bewtiful, and built by his own prescription: how should
Solomon express all the vanity of the world, to which all m^n have added
more and more since the beginning? Therefore, as if he wanted words to express
it, as he did see it; he breaks forth into an exclamation, and repeats the same
often, Vanity of vanlties: as if he should say, I cannot speak how vain the
world is, and very vain, and naught but vain: speaking as though he had the
feeling sense of it, as though the world stood naked before him, and it grieved
him to see, he cuts his words in ^^yding manner, ^^d makes short riddance, as if
it irked him to speak all that he knew. Therefore that which he speaks, he
speaks roundly, that if they read no more, but* sleep all the Sermon after* yet
the first sentence shall strike a sting into their hearts, and leave a sound
behind to waken them when they are gone, as many you know* remember this
sentence, which remember no sentence in all this book beside. Who has not
heard, Vanity of vanities, etc? Though few have conceived it, this is the
phrase of scripture, when the holy Ghost would command the song of Solomon
above all other songs, he (...) it, The song of songs; so called in the
Hebrews, and mencion^^ 1. King. 4. 32. When he would exalt the heavenly King
above all, he calls him, The King of Kings; so when he would note a great
Vanity, and yet a greater, and a greater than that, which is the greatest of
all, he calls it, Vanity of vanities, and when we would note a great fool, we
will say, a fool of fools, a sin of sins, a servant of servants. These are
scornful names to the world, and homely titles to give our pleasures, to call
them Vanity of vanities, and again, Vanity of vanities, and yet again,
Vanity, and as though we would provoke them to fall out with us, like a man
that sharpens his enemy with tauntes, when he would egg him to fight. He
might have mollified his terms, before he condemned the world thrice, but the
world is no chaungling, that Solomon should change his judgment, but vain it
is, vain it was, and vain it will be, and therefore a thrice vain world he
may call it: First, Vanity, straight, Vanity of vanities; and suddenly, All
is Vanity. What a transcendent is this? as though it increased while he spoke,
so fast grows this weed to worse and worse, like the Image which appeared to
Nabuchadnezzar, the first was of gold, the second of silver, the third of
brass, the fourth of iron, the fifth of clay; so by many changes the world
grows worse and worse, and all they which follow it. When a man begins to like
of pleasure, and opens the door to one vanity which he loves, straight as
many vanities flock to him, as Solomon had Concubines, till the Temple of God
be like a den of thieves. Therefore when Solomon beheld such a plurality, and
Totquot of Vanities, like surges coming one upon another in pleats and folds;
he spoke as though he would show Vanity hatching vanities; Vanity of
vanities, All is Vanity. The first saying does pass without let, but the last
rubbes, and sincks not into the hearts of men so easily as it is spoken. Me
thinks I hear some dispute for Baall, and bid Solomon stay, before he come to
All is Vanity. It may be that sin is Vanity, and pleasure is Vanity: but
shall we condemn all for sin and pleasure? What say you to Beauty, which is
natures dowry, and cheareth the eye, as sweet meat does the taste? Beauty is
like a fair Picture; take away the color, and there is nothing left. Beauty
indeed is but a color and a temptation: the cull^ur fades, and the
temptation snareth. But what say you to Riches, which make men Lords over the
rest, and allow them to go brave and lie soft, and fare daintily, and have what
they list? Riches are like painted grapes, which look as though they would
satisfy a man, but do not slake hunger, nor quench his thirst. Riches indeed
do make a man covet more, and get envy, and keep the mind in care. But what
say you to Honor, which sets a man aloft, and makes the knee how, and the
tongue sooth, and the head stand bare, as though they were other kind of
creatures above men?

Honor is like a King in a play: when his part is done, his ornaments are
taken from him, and he which held the basin to him, is as good as he. Honor
indeed may command all but life, he makes a fair show now, but when death
comes, all is one.

But what say you to prosound Knowledge in deep mysteries, which makes men
sought unto, and called deep Clerks, and great Doctors? Knowledge is like the
Letters which Vriah carried against himself: so Knowledge draws a greater
judgment, and oftentimes condemns the bearer.

Knowledge without Virtue, leaves a man without excuse, and is a witness
against him, because he understands what is good, and will not do it. Yet there
is another darling of account behind: what say you to long life, which causes
a man to see his childrens children, and makes him reverent unto the people?
Long life is like a long night, when a man cannot sleep: so Age is wearisome
with sickness, and strives with it self because it cannot walk, nor talk,
nor hear, nor see, nor sleep, nor taste, as it was wont, therefore wishes
often, that night were gone, that the pain were past; Indeed he that sees many
days, sees many miseries; and therefore what is not vain in life, since life
it self is vain? Show me the light which will not darken, show me the flower
which will not fade, show me the fruit which will not corrupt, show me the
garment which will not wear, show me the beauty which will not wither, show
me the strength which will not weaken, show me the time which will not pass,
and I will reclaim that all is Vanity; yet this will not go for truth, before
men have smarted for the trial. Some are so vain, that they count nothing
Vanity, but that which is vainer than the rest, delights them most, for there
is as it were, a commonweal of vain persons, and he that can be vainest, is
like a King of ye rest. Some are of this mind, that they think all is vain,
but that which they love, and therefore they call them vain and curious, and
fantastical, which speak against their vanities, and say that it is
necessary to be vain, for they cannot live, unless they deceive; they cannot
please, unless they flatter; they cannot be believed, unless they swear;
they cannot be esteemed, unless they royst; as Demetrius thought he should
beg, unless he should sell Images. There is another sort, like the buyer in
Prouer. 20. which says, It is naught, it is naught, but when he is gone apart,
he boasts; It is naught before men, and swear that all is vanity, but when
they are gone apart, they reconcile themselves unto it, and kiss it, and
promise to be vain still; but they cannot abide to be counted vain, the
vainest man that is. This shows that the folly of the world is so open and
shameful, that her lovers must needs condemn her. You shall hear them say
oftentimes, It is a vain world, a wicked world, a naughty world; yet they
will not forsake it to dye, like dastarde soldiers, who rail against the
enemy, but dare not fight against him. All is Vanity, but this is Vanity of
vanities, that men will follow that which they condemn. But this is, that
every sinner might condemn himself: for the conscience must judge first, and
then God as our Savior says: Out of thy own mouth, and so out of thine own
heart, I will condemn thee, naughty servant; showing that the wicked condemn
themselves, before they are condemned of GOD. These are thewords of fools,
which cares not what is their end, so that their way be pleasant.

Oh that here were a full end or conclusion of Vanities, but behold, a greater
vanity is behind: for our religion is Vanity, like the Scribes and Pharisees,
as Matthew says in the 23. Chapter, and 27. verse, having a bare show of
holiness, as he says: he could call it but a show of holilinesse, and scarce
that. Our Vanity is vanity, but our holiness, is but a show of holiness,
not worthy to be called holiness, but like holiness; yet the most part have
not so much as the show of holiness, as the Pharisics had, but are vain in
show, inside and outside too. Thus we find nothing yet but Vanity. I cannot
lead you from one unto another, to show you the several vanities of every
person, or every thing, because Solomon says, All is Vanity. How many then
have we to condemn us, whose vanities are sprinkeled in every thing? which
have not only so many vanities as there be things, but many vanities in
every thing. As in our fare, how many vanities are there, which makes us
rise sometimes sick, sometimes sleepie, sometimes drunk, yet are there also
more Vanities; in our sportes, our laughing, and swearing, and ieasting, and
scoffing, and dallying, and playing with the Scriptures, which oftentimes
leaves such a sting behind, that we had rather have lost our sport, than feel
the worm that gnawes us for it. And yet there be more vanities in our apparel,
ruff upon ruff, lace upon lace, cut upon cut, 24. orders, to the third and
fourth degree, as though our apparel were apparelled, until the woman be not
worth so much as her attire, that if we could see Vanity her self, how she
would go, if she did wear apparel, she would go even almost like our women:
for she could not go, nor speak, nor look vainer. Who does not know that
these are vanities, and that they might leave them, if they would? But that ye
may see that there is a heart within, vainer then apparel without. Therefore
when these vanities are worn out, they will have new, and still new, till all
be spent upon vanity, and when they begin like the prodigal child to see how
vain they were, when they have bought wisdom with sorrow. What would Solomon
say, if he should see how vanity is grown since his time, what a height she
is mounted, what a train follows her, that there is no Prince in the world
has so many attendants as Vanity? She was but an Impe then, but now she is a
mother, and who can number her sons and daughters? The child is vain in
playing, the mother vain in dandling, the father vain in giving, the Courtier
vain in spending, the soldier vain in boasting, the suter vain in striving,
the traveler vain in talking, the merchant vain in swearing, the gentleman
vain in building, the husbandman vain in carking, the old man vain in
coveting, the seruingman vain in soothing, the young man vain in sporting, the
papist vain in superstition, the Protestant vain in conversation. Every
vanity is so pleasant to one or other, that they cannot miss one. So she gads
by sea and by land, and still more disciples flock unto her, of gamsters, and
swearers, and players, and tiplers, and hacsters, and Courtiers, as thick as
flies of Egypt, which buzzed in their ears, and their eyes, and their necks,
before and behind, that a man cannot set his foot but upon vanity. As the
waters covered the earth, when but eight persons were saved: so vanity covered
it again, a worse deluge than the first; because it has not suffered eight
persons to escape, but every man is tainted with some vanity or other, which
God seeing in that place and City which should be best in the world (that all
men in the City were vain) ^alls it the City of Vanity. So we may call it
the world of Vanity, because she has an interest in every person of it, she
sits upon the earth like a Serpent, and hatcheth all the sins which ye see
amongst men. As full as heaven is of bliss, so the world is fraught with
Vanity, Court, City, Country, whither does not Vanity go, but to Heaven?
Seeing then that Vanity is extolled amongst men, Solomon gives his sentence,
that All is Vanity; Christ like a Mediator concludes upon it, that there is
but one necessary; therefore let our sentence be like theirs; For sin, if we
had Salomons repentance, we should see such an image of Vanity before us, as
would make us cry again and again, as often as Solomon: Vanity of vanities,
Vanity of vanities, and all is Vanity. What a sweet sentence is this from a
King, who may live as they list by authority; as to say, that all is Vanity.
Oh, that we might hear Kings speak so again: for it is a speech which had
need of some to countenance it; for none are counted vain now, but they that
speak against vanity. Then Solomon cried it, but now we must whisper it. You
may see how times are changed: Once this was sound divinity; now it is flat
railing: to say that all is vanity, is even the vpshot of a disturber. If ye
ask the Atheist or the Epicure, rogish Players, what is a disturber? you shall
see that they will make Solomon one, because he speaks against vanity. For
this is their definition; he which will not allow men to profane the Sabbath,
but says, that Cards, and Dice, and stage Players, and May games, and May
poles, and May fools, and Morris-dauncers, are Vanities, is a pratler, a
disturber, and an Archpuritan, by the law which the Jews had to kill Christ.
The reason is, because men cannot abide to be controlled of their pleasures.
Therefore they hold it as an offense, to speak against their sports, or their
customs, or their follies, or their pleasures, or their titles, or their
toys; and they which would not be counted precise in these times, must take
heed that they go not so far as Solomon, to term all Vanity. But they
must say, that the vanities of great men are necessary recreations, and the
vanities of the people are means to make unity; Greater books are written to
maintain this, then Solomon made to refute it, so they have made their wit and
their learning vanity, and are vain in print. But they that would know now of
what standing such precise reprouers are, and how ancient this reproof is,
may see here, that if this be a crime to call Vanity, Vanity, the wisest man
that ever was before Christ, was herein crimminate. Not when he straied, but
when he repented, in his best mind, when he became like a Preacher, he
preached this first, Vanity of vanities, All is Vanity: yet many had rather
cry it with Solomon, then believe it with Solomon. And while they are wondering
at him, some are taken out of the way, and cut short of the time which they set
to repent: from others, God takes away his grace, so they never return,
because their guide is gone. This the holy Ghost pointed at, when he says,
They followed Vanity, and became vain; showing that the things we follow,
will make us like themselves, and lead us whither they belong, to heaven or
hell. In Romans 8. 20. Vanity is put for destruction, but it is never put for
salvation; If other creatures are subject to a kind of destruction for the
sin of man, as Paul shows, what destruction shall light upon man for his
own sin? Therefore let our sentence run with Solomon, Vanity of vanities,
All is vanity. We could afford the world better words and fairer titles than
Vanity of Vanities: but call what we will, Solomon shows what it is, and what
we will say in the end when we have tried it; then Vanity, of Vanities: yet it
is comfort of comforts, glory of glories, life of life's. But Laban showed
himself at parting; so at parting, you shall see how it will serve you, they
seem pleasant vanities, and honest vanities, and profitable vanities: but
David calls them deceitful vanities; Jonas comes after, and calls them lying
Vanities; that is, which promise pleasure, and profit, and all, but deceive
all, when they should perform. They play Laban, which gave Leah for Rachel. If
they be lying vanities, and deceiful vanities, then are they woeful and
miserable vanities; therefore, if we be not come to Salomons conclusion, to
think that All is vanity, it is because our own vanity will not suffer us to
see the vanities of other things. When we have proved like Solomon, as fast as
every man grows in knowledge, and experience, so he begins to cry Vanity,
and after, Vanity of Vanities, and at last, All is Vanity: so we contemn not
all at once, but one sin after another, one pleasure after another, till at
last, we count all is vanity; and then we are come home with Solomon, and may
be Preachers unto other. Thus I have shown unto you as it were a limme of
Vanity, you may look about you and see the whole body: For if she be any
where in this land, this is her pontifical Sea, where she is never
Nonresident. Now I will leave you, to examine these sayings, whether all things
have not been in vain unto you yet, If they have been vain to you, and yet
are good in their own nature, then think how vain you are, who have turned
so many good things to vanty. Yet to set you in the way before I end, I will
answer them which ask, if All things be vanity; As Solomon says, Tell us
what we should choose, that we be not vain; Christ says, That one thing is
necessary. Is Solomon contrary to Christ, No? Therefore Solomon excepts one
thing too, To fear God, and keep his Commandments. Therefore if all be
vain but this, let the tempter take thee up again, and show thee the
kingdoms of the world, when he says, All these will I give thee, thou may
say, All this I contemn; for All is vain.

What then? Turn away my eyes (says the Prophet David) and my ears, and my
heart too from vanity. Try and prove thou no longer, for Solomon has proved
for thee, it is better to believe him, than to try with him. Therefore it
remains, that as they brought forth their vain books, after Paul's
preaching, and cast them into the fire: so ye should cast out all your vanities
this day, and sacrifice them to God, for they have been your Idols, that never
man may see them after. And as God gave Job other children, so they will give
you other treasures, fear not that your joys will go away with your
Vanities, as many think they should never be merry again, if they should be
converted to Religion. But as David daunced before the Arc, as merrely, as
Herodias daunced before the King: so know undoubtedly, that the righteous
find more joy in goodness, than ever the wicked found in filthiness, nay
(says David) more than they can find in riches and Honors, when their Wheat
and Wine ^bounde. As a Horse is a vain thing to save a man, so all these
things are too vain to make a man happy. I appeal to your selves, if ye
have tried the pleasures of Vanity already, (as I know ye have) whether ye
may readily say with Saint Paul, What profit he loved her before, so when the
sport is past, and Death looks us in the face, we shall hate our Vanities
more, than we love them now, all this does conclude, that our Savior said to
Martha, But one thing is necessary. Which God grant we may choose, for his
son Jesus Christ, and then we have learned this lesson.

FINIS.
Of the Word of God.
John. 5. 39. Search the Scriptures; For in them ye think to have eternal
life; And they are they which testify of me.
A Heathen King and that famous Monarch, that mighty conqueror, known and
renowned throughout all ye world for his victories, Alexander the great; among
all his martial affairs, had great desire to search for wisdom, and to
increase his courage by reading the writings of learned Homer. Queen Sheba
hearing the praise of Salomons wisdom, could never rest until she came into
his presence to hear him. Which signifies a great desire of wisdom to be
ingraffed in us by nature, and that the praise thereof does pass with
admiration. For he that searches after wisdom and knowledge, desires more
then gold, if it were as pure, as fine and precious, as that of Ophir; the eye
may be satisfied with the glistering show of the one, but it can never be
weary in searching after the other; which if indeed it might be seen with
bodily eyes, would stir up a wonderful love and admiration thereof in our
hearts and minds. To hear a man of wisdom and gravity speak, what
thronging would there be to hear, what heedfulnesse and attention to
understand. If an Angel from heaven, or God himself, might be heard to
speak, what a rare and singular matter were it. Doubtless it should be heard
with a shout greater then that of Herod, when the people cried, The voice of
God and not of man. Yea with a far more resounding voice, then that of the
Idolaters, mentioned Acts 19. who in commendation of their Idol god Diana,
gave a shout almost for the space of two hours, all crying out with one voice,
Great is Diana of the Ephesians. But so it is, that although in the first age
God spoke to Abraham, Noah, Moses, and other holy men, yet now it has pleased
him to take an other course, and that is, that we should hear him speak out
of his word. And therefore it was well answered unto the rich man in the
Gospel, that would feign have his brebren that were alive, to be taught and
instructed concerning the way of God, if not from God himself, yet by an
Angel, or at leastwise, by one that should come unto them from the dead, that
so they might amend their lives, I say it was well answered, They have Moses
and the Prophets, they have the word of God, let them hear them, if they will
not give care to this word, it is because there is no life in them, if they
yield not unto it, they will not be persuaded though one rise from the dead
again. We cannot say it is far off, what may it be? Say not in thy heart
says the Aposte, Who shall ascend into heaven, or who shall descend into the
deep? For the word of God is nearer thee, even before thy eyes. Thou need
not to wander a long journey as Queen Sheba did, to hear King Salomons
wisdom, for thou have it at home, and even within thy own doors. When
Queen Sheba departed as one sorry that she could not always be present with
him, to be further taught and instructed, she pronounced his servants to be
happy, that were always about him to hear his wisdom. Blessed are they
(says our Savior Christ) that hear the word of God and keep it; and as well
it may be said, as Sheba did of Salomons servant, O how happy are they,
that have the Word of GOD before them, and in their presence, to read and
search for wisdom, far greater then that of Salomons; For behold a greater
then Solomon is here. As in the Gospel, Mary that heard Christ preach the word,
is greatly commended above her sister Martha, that was troubled with worldly
cares, and neglected the hearing of Gods word; So does the Prophet David
wonderously encourage us, not only to the hearing, but also to the reading of
the word of God, and searching the scriptures. Psalm. 119. Lord (says he) what
love have I unto thy law, all the day long is my study in it.

No marvel then if the King were commanded to have this book, this word, and
the scripture of God, and that he should read therein all the days of his
life, that he might learn to fear the Lord his God; No marvel if the Queen
of the Ethiopians chief governor, Acts. 8. had a desire to read the
scripture, having happily heard the commendation thereof; No marvel if the
noble men of Berea, did diligently read the scripture, because they were
thoroughly persuaded, that it was the doctrine of life, and the power of
salvation.

And this is one of the waightiest and most profitable speeches that ever our
Savior uttered. Search the scriptures; for in them ye think to have eternal
life; And they are they which testify of me. Which sentence, divides it
self into these two principal parts, whereof the first is a commandment;
Search the Scriptures; The second, is an effectual reason, to move us to the
fulfilling of that commandment. For in them ye think to have eternal life,
etc. In the commandment we may consider our unwillingness to search;
Secondly, the manner how we should search; Thirdly, the great hindrances that
keep us back from searching.

The connsel of a friend is good, but the heart of a man is froward against
good counsel, so that where he loves dearly, he wishes, that to his
counsel, he could add a commandment. Therefore the holy spirit of God and
our redeeming friend, knowing how slow and how unwilling we are to take
good counsel, takes upon him to command us to so good a work, as is
greatly for our behoof, as though counsel were not sufficient, nay scarce to
command would serve. For as the flesh and the world for the most part have the
upper hand, and Gods good spirit is welny quenched, so heanenly matters are of
base account, and the desires of the world prevail and carry us whither they
would. Forgo all says Christ to the young man, and give to the poor, but he
went away sad and heavy; They that are worldly minded, and are not touched with
yeloue of God, cannot love his word, and if they be willed and spoken to never
so much to search the word of God, yet they cannot hear. Wisdom cries in
the streets to them that pass by, and every one passes by, and do not
regard, because that vanity is in their eyes, and in their minds, and in
their hearts, so that wisdom can find no place, nor such a soul as shall bid
it welcome, and give it entertainment. If we had had but half a word, or half a
counsel to search after wealth and riches, although it were into far
countries, we should refuse no labor, if to seek for honor and promotion,
every one would have thought himself worthy to wear a crown; if to seek for
pleasures, who would not have followed the lure? Nay who would not prease and
throng to get in, although the gate were never so straight? But when it comes
to search the scriptures, to learn the word of God, every one has this
shift, I pray thee have me excused. As though the ways of death, were the
ways of life, and he that should counsel us to search the word of God, were
rather our enemy then our friend. As the Apostle speaks to the Galathians. Am
I therefore become your enemy, because I wish you well? He that reproves a
man, shall find more favor at the last, then he that flattereth with his
tongue, and he that searches the word of God, shall find more comfort at the
last, then all the delights of the world could afford him. Many that have gone
astray, and lived in the displeasure of God, when they have harkened unto the
word of God, they have been so altered in mind and purpose, that thencefoorth
they have determined with themselves to take a new course, and to live in the
fear of GOD. For the word of God is forcible to beget us a new life. What age
is more licentious, and given to naughty ways, then youth is? and yet the
word of God is of such virtue, that it is able to tame their disordered
humors. Else the Prophet David would not have verified the same.

Psalm 119. 9. Wherewithal (says he) shall a young man redress his way?
even by taking heed thereto, according to thy word. And the Apostle Saint
Paul also witnesses the like effect, in the commendation of Timothy, in that
he had known the holy scriptures of a child, which had made him forgo and
forsake the disordered course of unbridled youth, and had furthermore made him
wise unto salvation. Well, we are counseled and commanded to search the word
of God, yet where there is one to give us that counsel, there is a hundredth to
draw us back. For as where God has his Church, the Devil also has his
chapel, so as God has his saving the word, the devil has destroying books
enough. He works with the flesh, and the flesh overcomes the spirit, as Eve
did Adam, when she brought him to his destruction. When the Preacher is at his
Sermon, you shall see some few to hear, but go to the stage Plays, and you
shall find multitudes; If it be an amorous book, or of pastime and mirth,
every one has it in his hand, but if the word of God be laid before us, we
count it a matter too solemn, and will not vouchsafe to read it. The wisdom
of the flesh is enmity to God, and the nature of man is given to hate that
knowledge that leads to God. But as for the want of the knowledge of the word
of God many perish, so because they refuse to search it, whereby their evil
ways may be redressed, and they kept in the fear of God, therefore god gives
them up to a reprobate sense to follow wickedness even with greediness, and
to fall into foul and heinous offenses. Because there is no knowledge of God
in the land, (says the Prophet) Hosea 4. 12. they break out by swearing and
lying, and killing, and stealing, and whoring, and blood touches blood, and
one sin and mischief comes after an other. What follows such matters our
consciences will give us to consider, and we cannot be ignorant what is like to
fall out. If they were wise says the Prophet Moses, they would consider their
latter end, and if the vanity of folly did not too much reign within us, we
would seek after wisdom, and not be slow to search the word of God.

But let us leave them that care not for this knowledge, The manner how to search
and so care not for an other life, so that they may live in this world at
their pleasure, let us leave them to their fancies, which at length will
deceive them, and to their vanities wherein they are delighted. And as for them
who have any hearts to read the word of God, indeed whose hearts God has
touched and moved thereunto, let us search and set down the best way how they
may be directed in the reading thereof, that it may tend most to their
profit.

First therefore, as holy things must not be touched with With reverence.
unwashed hands according to the proverb; so must we approach to ye reading of
gods word, with sanctified minds and circumcised hearts. When we are to come
into ye presence of the prince, we prepare our selves with all reverence and
humility, that our requests may be heard, and our desire granted, and so does
the majesty of God lie hid in the scriptures, as though God were there to
speak unto us, and therefore a double reverence is to be used, that is the
greatest reverence that may be, when we come to the reading of the scriptures.
The counsel of Solomon, Eccl. 4. 17. is this. Take heed to thy foot, when thou
entrest into the house of God; which also gives us warning, that we come not
irreverently to the reading of the word of God. For as a fool comes hastily
without deliberation, and knows not that he offends, so he that comes
without reverence, commits folly, although he think in coming to the
reading of the same, he does full wisely. Jacob in coming to his brother Esau,
made seven courtesies, and they which will come dutifully to the reading of the
word of God, cannot come with too much reverence. And herein consists an
With denial of thy own wisdom.
especial point of reverence, to have that high estimation of the word of God,
as to think there is no wisdom to be found else where, but only therein. For
they that swel with the thought of their own wisdom, and think themselves
wise enough, although they never read the word of God, do greatly disgrace the
majesty thereof, and advance themselves in their own folly. God grant says
the Prophet David, That the wisdom of Achitophel may be turned into
foolishness; and so it fares with them that stand in admiration of their own
wisdom, that they are fondly puffed up in their fleshly minds, and are the
farther off from wisdom and knowledge, by how much the more, they think
themselves fraught and loaded therewith. See thou a fool says Solomon, there
is more hope of him, then of such a one as is wise in his own conceit. There
is hope of a fool that he may be wise, because he will hear instruction, but
of him which is wise in his own conceit, there is no hope to make him wise,
because he thinks he knows that, which he should learn. A fool when he
holds his peace, is counted wise, for he is lowly in his own conceit, and
does not presume of wisdom, but for the desire thereof, he will separate
himself to seek it, and occupy himself in all wisdom. Whereas he that is
selfe-conceited, shows himself a fool indeed, in that being void of
wisdom, he will not search after it, as if a hungry man should not care for
food, imagining with himself that he is full enough already. What kept the
Scribes and Pharisees and other such great Doctors, from the knowledge of the
mysteries of God, but the fond conceit of their own wisdom and knowledge.
And such were also the Athenians, who thought their learning to be so
profounde, that they scorned at the simplicity of the gospel. But behold
how they are overtaken, for god confounds the wisdom of these men that are
so selfewise, and casts away their understanding. And this is a great
punishment, that the word of God is unto them foolishness, neither can they
perceive or feel the sweet comfort thereof, and that through their own default,
and through their own pride. To ye wilful blinded Jews, the word of god is a
stumbling block, and to the wise and learned Grecians, it seems but
foolishness. But better it were far away for them to acknowledge and forsake
their own foolishness, then to drown in their own wisdom. And he that
will truly profit in the reading of gods word, must lay down that high
conceit, and humbly submit himself with all reverence to be taught, as the
sacred word shall instruct him. Deny thy own knowledge and learning, and so
shall thou find both knowledge and wisdom to satisfy thy soul.

When thou have resolved with thyself, to submit thy wisdom Not to read only,
but to search.
to the wisdom of god, let thy heart cleave thereunto, and let thy mind be still
desirous to read it, as the suckling and young tender infant cries for the
sweet milk, whereby it is nourished and maintained. So the Apostle S. Peter.
1. Epist. 22. does counsel us, that as newborn babes we should desire the
sincere milk of the word of god, that we may grow by it. Even as the heart
desires the water brooks, so let our souls never rest, til we have quenched
our thirst with this water of Paradise, and satisfied our selves with this
sweet milk and heavenly Manna. A little milk will not content the infant,
and a little food will not break hunger, and a little strength will not be
auailable to put back the force of the enemy. He that will resist the devils
temptations, must be thoroughly armed with the word of god; he that will be a
perfect man in Christ, must grow from strength to strength, from milk to
strong meat, from the principles of religion, to the mysteries of salvation,
that he may at length prove, what the good and perfect will of God is. At our
first entrance to read, we be but as babes, and although we be of great years
and ripe discretion, yet if we deny not our own wisdom and become as babes
to learn, and to be taught by the word of God, we shall never know the way that
leads unto life. And as the infant cannot be thoroughly satisfied, but still
and often calls, so if we think to grow from children to men to godward, we
must often read, and often search his word. Humane knowledge, I mean the
knowledge of the Arts and liberal Sciences, comes not by mean pains, and
the knowledge of God, which he has revealed in his word, cannot be obtained
unless we search for it most diligently. He that finds a vein of gold and
silver, diggeth and searches with labor and sweat, till he comes where
mine is, and where is plenty; And if we find any sweetness in the word of
God, as doubtless they that be diligent shall find great comforts, it is not
wisdom to rest, until we have filled our souls with all heavenly pleasures.

Yet there withal we must take heed, that we be not overthrown To search,
but not too far.
in our desire of searching. Still let us avoid extremities and keep the
mean, let us not be desirous to know more then God has set down for us to
know. For many think themselves not wise enough, unless they know all, and
wiser they would be, then either they are, or may, or can be. Honey is sweet,
but overmuch annoyeth; it is good to search the word of God, but it is danger
to search too far. The secrets of God, are as the Sun to our eyes, the more
we behold it, the more our eyes do dazzle, and the more we search above our
capacity, the more our wits are confounded. They that dig too far in mines,
are subject to the fall of the earth, and also to damps that may arise, both
which, they are to have as great care unto, as y^ silver or gold which they
take so great pains for. Let us desire knowledge of God as Solomon did, to his
comfort and benefit, and not desire it as Eve did to her hurt. For they that
aspire and clime so high, fall again like Babell, and run into doubts, while
they seek for resolutions. This desire of ouersearching is a rock, against
the which many have made shipwreck, busieng their heads with unknown
mysteries, before they understand necessary See more in M. ^miths sermon,
called A looking Glass for Christians.
principles. It is good to leave off learning, where God has left off
teaching; For they which have an ear where God has no tongue, miss of their
desire, while they look for knowledge, and wander into thickets and deserts,
while in the mean time it were more safe for them to keep the high way.
Content thy self therefore to know those things only which pertain to thy
salvation, and say with that blessed Apostle S. Paul, I desire to know nothing,
but only Christ crucified. Let no man presume to understand above that which
is meet for him to understand, but let his understanding be ruled by
Sobriety, as God has granted to every one the measure of faith.

Neither let us be discouraged from reading, least we should search too far.
For those things which God has set down unto us to know, and understand, we
cannot search too much. But our fault is herein, when we will know more then is
revealed, and more then it is Gods will that we should know. Otherwise as we
are every day and every hour falling away from God, so the continual reading
of the scriptures, may be a mean to keep our selves within the fear of God.
The word of God is the seed of life, and he that has regard thereunto, shall
continue in life. Wherewithal shall a young man, nay wherewithal shall young
and old, and every estate direct their way, but by ruling themselves after the
word of God. And as there is a fault to be too careful, and to search too
far, so is it as great a fault to be too careless and negligent. As when
we read for fashion sake, or with a light consideration, when we have not a
godly, religious, and a devout care, to have our selves edified, instructed,
and comforted. It is not enough for us to settle our selves to read it by
fits, here a little, and there a little, (here a line, and there a line, now some
what, and after a while nothing at all, but if we mind to profit thereby, we
must make it our daily study and chiefest exercise. The warfaring man will
trauaileth, until he come to his iournies end, our life is but as a continual
travail, and still we must have recourse to the word of God, for counsel and
direction until our time be to leave the earth and go to heaven.

But as no gift of God does prosper with us, unless we To make our prayers to
god that we may profit in reading.
make our prayer to God, that he will give a blessing unto it; so especially in
the reading of Gods word, we must use this help. The understanding of our
mind by nature, is nothing else but darkness; and again our hearts be
inclined to all naughty corruptions, and unless we pray unto God to remove
these stumbling blocks, neither shall we be instructed in our souls, nor
amended in our lives. If thou want wisdom, ask it of God, and when thou
set thy self to the reading of the Scriptures, pray that thy reading may
tend to thy profit. Abraham's servant, prayed that he might have a prosperous
journey, so ought we much more to pray, that we might be happy in our
reading, or that our reading might procure our happiness. And even as when we
pray, so also when we read, we must be godly affected; that is, we must
unburden our minds and our hearts from all worldly cares and fleshly desires,
that GOD may have his working in us, and that his holy spirit may guide and
direct us. And so it shall fall out, that as the snow and the rain do water
the earth that it may bring forth increase; so in our reading, our eyes shall
be opened, that we may see, and our cares that we may hear, and our hearts
that we may conceive, that all may be referred to Gods glory, our own comfort,
and the profit of others, or else all our labor and study shall be in vain. They
that abound with riches and worldly wealth, because they pray not y^ God will
give a blessing unto it, it turns often to their hurt; so they that read Gods
word, and pray not withal, that God may make it profit with them, it often
prevails with the^ no more, but to make them without excuse. It is not so
much read and profit, but pray and profit, and then they reading shall turn to
good. For as reading is profitable, ^o pr^ier is more necessary, which sets
forward every good work, and brings down Gods help from heaven.

Now although in the reading of the word of God, we (...) is, (...) word is
kept from (...) an (...) tongue.
^schue all those faults, which I have before remembered, yet there are two
other rocks and mountains, to clime ou^r. And this is the cross that we
shall find in all good endeavors, that there are mighty hindrances and
pullbacks, whereas the way to do evil is plain and has no let. Concerning
which two principal hindrances, first of all, it is lamentable, to consider,
how that the word of God, should be as it were forcibly kept from doing good to
other, and that they for whose sake it was ordained, should have least profit
by it, or rather no profit and benefit at all, as if that food should be
prepared, and cast away for want of eating. The word of God is the food of the
soul, which cannot choose but perish, if it be not fed and nourished by it. He
that brings us a glass to look in, and yet shuts it up with the cover,
he that brings us into the light and yet closes our eyes; he that sets
meat before us and forbids us to eat, may justly seem to delude us, and
he himself rightly to be accused of folly: So the word of God, which is to us
as a gla^^^ to look in, thereby to see our defaults, which is a light unto us,
whereby our steps ought to be directed; which is the food whereby our souls
are nourished, if it be delivered unto us, though peradventure in a learned,
yet in a strange and unknown tongue, which none of us understand and know,
what profit shall we take thereby? If one of an outlandish nation, a Spaniard,
a Frenchman, an Italian, should light into our company which are English men,
and should speak unto us in their tongue and language, meruellous good
matters, should we be ever a whit the better, in that we do not understand
them? Suppose they come into our Churches and preach unto us Gods word, to what
end are all their speeches? Among the plagues and punishments that God
threateneth unto his people for their disobedience, this is not the least, that
they should go into captivity, to such a nation whose language they should not
understand. In the law it is written, by men of other tongues, and by other
languages will I speak unto this people, yet so shall they not hear me, says
the Lord. So that a strange tongue, which we understand not, is a sign unto
us of Gods curse and punishment which he lays on us. Moreover we are to
understand, that it is the principal policy, and secret mischeeueus working
of the ^^^^ll, to hide the Gospel and word of God from us, who desires nothing
more, then to separate us from God, who desires nothing more, then our utter
overthrow and undoing. And to bring about this his policy and mischeeuous
working, he has his ministers even deceitful workmen, which thus teach, that
ye word of God ought not to be read in a known tongue unto the people. Which
indeed is the only way, to keep them in Idolatry and superstition, when they
know not the truth of Gods word and pure religion. And while they persuade the
people, that ignorance is the mother of devotion, that the less they know, the
more devout they are, this is rather a furtherance to their damnation, because
they know not God, and the way to salvation. For as the extreme want of bodily
food procures death to the body, so the extreme want of spiritual food,
that is of Gods word, procures death to the soul. It is meet say they, that
the scripture should be set down in an unknown tongue, least some in reading,
pervert them, unto their own damnation. Which is not a sufficient reason to
deny others the reading thereof; as if we should never use wine, because some
by abusing it, have fallen into drunkenness; or never take a weapon in hand to
defend our selves, because many have been killed thereby. But this reason of
theirs, is but a device of man's brain, and has no warrant from Gods word, but
is rather contrary unto it. And herehence also arises an other argument of
theirs, that because it is said, The priests lips should keep knowledge,
therefore it is not for every one to search the scriptures. Indeed it behooves
the Minister to be learned, that the people may be resolved of their doubts by
him; yet nevertheless there is no estate of people debarred from the reading
the scriptures. For as God would have every man to come to the knowledge of his
will, so he wills and commands every one to search the scriptures, no
estate, no calling, excepted. Otherwise, if none but the priest and minister be
to read the scriptures, as they are men, so under the color and pretense of
Gods word, they may put forth their own devices, and their own imaginations. An
other reason of theirs is this. Pearls are not to be cast before swine;
comparing the word of God, (as it is indeed, a most precious treasure, and as
much to us as our souls are worth, because it is the mean to win souls)
comparing it to a pearl, and the lay people, for whom Christ died and shead
his blood, to procure them salvation and everlasting life, to compare the^ to
swine. Which speech of theirs, because it is ungodly, uncharitable, and
vnchrististian, I leave it to the judgment of others, as not worthy of any
answer. God forbid that the lay people, although they are unlearned, if they
be so godly disposed, and God do move their hearts thereunto, as to seek the
comfort of their souls, by reading of the scriptures, and word of God, God
forbid that they should be debarred from the reading and benefit thereof. But
even as the Eunuch spoken of in the Acts of the Apostles, being but a lay man,
and yet the chief governor to a Queen, although he were unlearned, did yet
for all that read the scriptures, and could not understand them to the full;
so may we according to his example, although our capacity be so weak that we
cannot understand them, give our selves to the reading of ye scriptures. For as
God sent unto him a teacher, Philip by name, into his charet, unaware to him,
as he was in his journey, and reading the scripture, so we know not what helps
it may please God to grant us, that are desirous to read his word, that thereby
we may know his will, and be edified and instructed to our souls comfort. And
seeing we have that blessing, that many a land has not, I mean to have the
scripture in our own mother tongue, how shall we excuse our selves before God,
if we be not diligent and painful to read.

The other mighty hinderance, whereby we debar The second hinderance is,
that they say the word of God is too hard to be understood.
our selves from the reading of the word of God, is, that we think it is too
hard to be understood. Like the slothful man, which says a lion is in the
way, because he is loath to work. Whither I will not, I cannot go; and the
property of an unwilling servant is, to answer his arrant before he be
sent. Why should we give forth that the scripture is hard before we read it.
Whereas the spirit of God does set it down, that the word of God does give
understanding even to the simplest, comparing it to a lantern and to a light,
which lightneth every one that comes unto it. For as without the light of the
Sun there is nothing but darkness on the earth, so without the knowledge of
the word of GOD, there is nothing but ignorance among men. And this is a
wonderful disproofe of them, that stand in this doubt, thinking it to be too
hard for them being of a simple understanding, and that therefore the Doctors
and learned men should read the word, even this disproueth their opinion, that
heavenly matters are often hid from them that are learned, when contrariwise it
pleases God to open the eyes of the simple, and to give them understanding.
Else how should it be true that Christ says, I give thee thanks o father,
Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise,
and have opened them unto babes, even so o Lord, because it was thy good will
and pleasure. If our Gospel be h^d says the Apostle, it is hid to them that
are lost, and if the word of God be hard to be understood, it is hard unto the
unwilling and unto unbelievers, and such as are blinded of their own accord.
Which difficulty and hardness of understanding, comes not to pass, through
the word of God, which is evident and plain to them whose eyes God opens,
and whose hearts and minds it pleases him to enlighten, but through their
default, who either through their sins and wickedness, deserve that Gods
word should be hid from them, (for the knowledge of God enters not into a
sinful soul) or who stubburnly refuse it and will not be taught thereby; or
who are of such a faithless heart, that will not believe it, and yield
themselves thereunto. Such are not only blinded through their own natural
weakness, but moreover God for a punishment unto them, does give them up to a
contrary sense, to believe lies, vanities, untruths, and such deceits, that in
so doing they may procure unto themselves damnation, because they would not
receive the love of the truth, that they might be saved.

Indeed some things there are in the scripture, according Some matters hard.
as we read in the Epistle of S. Pet. cap. 3. v. 16. that are hard to be
understood. No doubt, to make us not to think lightly of them, or that our
wisdom is able to comprehend them, without the help of the spirit of God,
and also to make us humble in our own conceit, and diligently and earnestly to
crave of God in our daily prayers, that he would make us partakers of the
knowledge of his will. Many things are hard to be understood, which they says
the Apostle that are unlearned and unstable, wrest and pervert, as they do also
other scriptures, unto their own destruction. The faults being removed
wherewith unskillful readers are overtaken, there is no cause to say that the
scriptures are hard. The unskillful, and the unlearned, reading the scriptures,
and giving that interpretation, that their own sancie or want of wisdom does
afford them, they may soon wrest and pervert them, and easily mistake. For
the wisdom of man is but foolishness in Gods matters. But when we settle our
selves to the reading How the scriptures are easy, and how to read them to
profit by them.
of the scriptures, we ought therewithal to frame our selves to prayer, that
it would please God to lighten our understanding, that otherwise is altogether
dark and foolish by nature, to open our eyes which are shut up in ye compass
of our own ignorance. And thus reading the scripture, with prayer for Gods
assistance, that it would please God to grant us wisdom to understand them,
and that we may not be ouerruled by our own foolish fancies; when we read
them, with an earnest desire to profit by them; then shall the scriptures be
easy to us, which before thought them to be too hard. Again in reading of the
scriptures we ought not to be over rash, to give our judgment out of hand,
especially in weighty matters, but to compare one sentence and place of
scripture with an other, and always to have an eye that they agree to the
articles of our belief. And if we cannot so be satisfied, but that still
doubts do arise, we ought to have recourse to them that have further knowledge.
If there be any strife about lands and possessions, we crave the sentence of
the Judge, if any disease be in the body, straightway we send for the
Physician; So if any doubt or controversy do arise in matters of religion,
the learned Minister is to answer and resolve them, by the word of God, and
to show them the true meaning thereof. Many things are hard to them that are
vnsiable and unconstant, such as are ready to be carried away with every
wind of vain doctrine, always wavering, sometimes in one mind, and
sometimes in an other, to such it is no marvel, if the scripture be hard and
little for their profit. The nature of man, as it is given to hear news, so
it is maruellously inclined to search out all secrets, yet none are more
confounded in their own wisdom, and none more driven to uncertainties then
they be. But as for those matters which are for our salvation, and for the
instruction of our lives, they are most easy to be read, known, and
understood, even of the meanest and simplest, that search thereafter in all
humbleness of mind.

The second principal matter which I noted unto In them ye think to have
eternal life.
you in this portion of scripture, wherehence my text is taken, is the
effectual reason, to move us to perform the commandment of our Savior
Christ, Search the scriptures. The commandment is great. For in them ye think
to have eternal life; And they are they that testify of me. Health is more to
be desired then wealth, and a man will give all that he has for his life; yet
the life here spoken off, does far exceed this life, as far as the heaven
does the earth, and the way to procure that life, is more easy then to
preserve this mortal and transitory life. No way so easy as to search and
find, to read and to be comforted, to understand wherein true life consists,
and to enjoy it. And because we should not find this easy way and to keep us
from all searching, therefore the devil caused the word to be closed up in an
unknown tongue, and in the mean time we were carried away with vanities, and
held in darkness and ignorance, lest when we should hear others, or read Gods
word our selves, we might understand and believe, that so we might be saved. He
blinded the world, and cast a mist of ignorance before their eyes, and kept
away the comfortable sunshine of the word, hindered the message of glad tidings,
and carried away the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ in a cloud, that
it might not comfort our hearts and consciences, that we might not be partakers
of ye blessed benefits of God toward us in Christ Jesus. As the forgiveness of
our sins, the favor of God, a holy life, a quiet conscience, a steadfast hope
of everlasting life, and of the joys that are to come. We were hindered from
this searching, that we should not tread the right way to everlasting life and
salvation, but that we should go a by way to everlasting death and
condenmation. In the latter times there shall be many false teachers, so that
if it were possible they should deceive the very elect. And this deceit is no
mean slight, but the indaungering of our souls, that we shall never be
partakers of everlasting life. And therefore we are willed to try the spirits,
to try such false teachers by the touchstone of Gods word, and to examine
their doctrine, whether it be agreeable to the scripture. Search the
scriptures, for in them ye shall have life; that is, ye shall be assured that
ye shall not be deceived in the way of life. Therefore the scripture may be
compared unto the star, that led the wise men unto Christ, so that when they
came where he was, it stood still. Music does not only alaie raging and
furious minds, but does draw them also to a further desire thereof: so the
word of God does not only assuage and beat down the evil inclinations of our
hearts, but also breeds in us a mind to order our steps aright, to live
well, to refrain from the iniuring and oppressing of our neighbors, to do
good to all, and by little and little it draws us, not only to the love
thereof, but even with an earnest purpose of mind, we are thereby won to take
that way that leads to everlasting life. For it mortifieth our sinful
desires, by showing us the It mortifieth sinful desires.
bitter punishments that remain, and that they shall never enter into the
kingdom of God that are led by them. Let not sin reign in your mortal
bodies, for the wages of sin is death, that is the everlasting death of body
and soul. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit ye kingdom of
God; Be not deceived, neither fornicators nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor
wantons, nor buggerers, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor railers,
nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God. God is not mocked, for
what we sow, that shall we reap, for he that sows to his flesh, and
follows his fleshly desires, shall therehence reap corruption and woe, but
he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. For
we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may
receive the things which are done in his body, according to that he has
done, whether it be good or evil. And blessed are they that do his
commandments, that their right may be in the tree of life, and may enter in
through the gates into y^ City. For without shall bedogs and inchanters, and
whoremongers, and murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves or makes
lies. Finally, to whom it shall be said, Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. It abateth and
restrains sin within us, as we read Psalm. It works bettering.
119. I have hid thy word in my heart, that I might not sin against thee;
Through the reading of thy word I got understanding, therefore I hate all
wicked ways. Yea they that are godly minded, and painful and diligent in
searching the scriptures, with a desire by Gods grace to profit by them, they
for the most part bring forth such plentiful good fruit to godward, and such
an upright conversation to the world, that in their faith and belief to God,
and in their life to men, they seem in a manner blameless and without fault,
although indeed while we live in this world, we are compassed with many
infirmities, and greatly pressed with the burden of our sins, which do so
hang and cleave so fast unto us. By the reading whereof, and the working of
Gods good spirit in our hearts and consciences, and in our lives and
conversation, we begin to be altered and changed into that which we
read. And we become daily less and less proud, less wrathful, less
covetous, and less desirous of worldly and vain pleasures. And daily
forsaking our old vicious life, we increase in virtue more and more. Well
therefore may the word of God, James 1. 21. be called a saving word, which is
able thus to save us, by bringing us in hate of sin, and breeding in us the
love of God and all goodness. So that we may say with the Prophet David, Thy
word is the very joy of my heart.

It teaches us to be heavenly minded, and to prepare our selves to heaven, by
setting the vanities of the world, Prepares us unto heaven.
before our eyes, and the end of the world; and how we should watch against
that time, that we be not condemned with the world. Love not the world says
Saint John, nor the things that are in the word. For the love of the world,
drives out the love of God; but he that regards ye word of God, and
fulfilleth his will, abides in GOD for ever, whereas the world and all the
vanities thereof, do perish and fade away, 2. Pet. 3. 10. 11. The day of the
Lord, meaning thereby the latter day, will come as a thief in the night, in
the which the heavens shall pass away with a noyce, and the elements shall
melt with heat, and the earth with the works therein, shall be burnt up.
Seeing therefore that all these things must be dissolved, what manner persons
ought we to be in holy conversation and godliness, being prepared to heaven and
heavenly minded. Take heed to your selves, watch and pray continually, that ye
may escape those things that shall fall on the world, and that ye may stand
before the son of man, not tremblingly, but with great joy and comfort.

Adversity, misery, crosses, and troubles, through grief Works patience,
in all worldly miserie^.
and thought, cast many away, but they that are practiced in reading the word
of God, know that there is nothing more available to lift up our hearts to
Godward, and to settle our minds there, whereas true joys are to be found,
then is the reading of the word of God. Many fret and fume and vex themselves,
when loss of goods and friends, and other such worldly helps do overtake
them; but the word of God does breed a quiet and contented mind, as to say
with Job, Naked came I into the world, and naked shall I go out, The Lord has
given, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord; And to
say with the Apostle Saint Paul, Phil. 4. 11. 12. I have learned in whatsoever
state I am, therewith to be content, and I can be abased, and I can abound,
every where in all things I am instructed, both to be full and to be hungry, and
to abound and to have want; all which I am able to do, through the help of
Christ which strengthen me. Godliness is great riches, and a contented mind
passes all, resolving with our selves according to the direction of Gods word,
that God works all for the best to them that love and fear him. That which
does overthrow some and cast them in their graves, through the fault of their
own impatient minds, works wonderously in other some, which have recourse
and seek counsel in Gods word, as to join them unto God, and to bring them
out of the love of the world and all the vanities thereof. And as he wishes to
the Colos. so let us desire, that we may be strengthened through his glorious
power unto al patience, with ioyfulnes* giving thanks unto the father, who has
requited all griefs and troubles, all losses, all miseries, with a far
greater recompense, in this, that he has made us meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light.

As the word of God does strengthen us in all worldly Makes us endure
persecution and death it self.
miseries, to take all things with a contented and patient mind, so even in
the loss of our lives, for the defense of a good cause and Gods truth, it
moketh us joyful and exceeding glad. As some when they were whipped and
scourged for the profession of Christ, endured it with joyful minds, and
praising God that they were counted worthy to suffer for his truth. Rejoicing
in tribulation, rejoicing in persecution, rejoicing in torments, rejoicing in
death, because they have bin so well learned in gods school, in gods book,
that ye love of God is thoroughly shed abroad in their hearts, by the inward
secret, and most heavenly working of his holy spirit. Triumphing against the
world, and the cruelties thereof, being fully persuaded, that neither life nor
death, nor any thing else, shall be able to separate them from the love of God,
which is in Christ Jesus. We learn that we are the children and beloved of
god, and that we are heirs even the heirs of god, and fellow heirs with
Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with
him. For the afflictions that may fall out unto us, are not worthy of the
glory that shall be showed unto us, and that we shall receive in the kingdom
of heaven. If it were not so says the Apostle, we were of all men the most
miserable, if our hope were ended in this life, and if that persecution had not
a joyful recompense. He that strives not, shall never be crowned, and he that
does not take up Christ his cross, even to the death, shall never come where
he is. To them that thus endure trouble, and are thus hated, reviled and slain
of the world, they know and are assured by gods word, that there is a crown
reserved for them, which the Lord shall give them at that day, dreadful to
others, but joyful to them. When it shall be said unto them, Come ye blessed,
enjoy the kingdom prepared of my father for you, from the beginning of the
world.

Search the scriptures; for in them ye think to have etrnall life; And thus
they do perform it.

It follows in those words which I have read unto They testify of Christ.
you touching the effectual reason, that should move us to the reading of the
scriptures. And they are they, which testify of me. In them ye think to have
everlasting life, because they direct us unto the knowledge of Christ, wherein
consists life. According as he says of himself; I am the way, the truth and
the life. To him says the Apostle, Act. 10. 43. give all the Prophets
witness, that through his name, all that believe in him, shall receive
remission of sins. This is life everlasting, says the Evangelist S. John.
17. 3. that they know thee to be the only very god, and whom thou have sent
Jesus Christ. And thus the word of god does testify of our Savior Christ,
Ioh. 3. 16. That God so loved the world, that he has given his only begotten
son, (for the redemption of the world) that whosoeur believes in him should
not perish, but have life everlasting. They are they which testify, that I am
the only life to true repentant sinners, to give them ease and comfort, that
are swallowed up and overwhelmed with heavy sorrows, and as it were utterly
cast away through grief and distress of mind, for their sins. According as
the Apostle says, Christ came into the world to save sinners. Come unto me
says Christ, all ye that be heavily laden, with the burden of your sins,
and I will ease you, and I will refresh you. For I came not to save the
righteous, but to call the sinners to repentance. They are they which testify
of his holy and undefiled conception, being conceived by the holy Ghost, and
borne of a virgin, and so being without all blot of sin, to the intent that we
might be freed from our uncleanness, which we draw from our parents, being born
in sin, and conceived in iniquity, being defiled by original sin and
natural corruption; which testify of his life and conversation, that it was
altogether vnrebukable and blameless, and that in every point he fulfilled the
law of God, y^ his righteousness and perfect obedience, might be imputed unto
us, which are otherwise under the curse of the law, that our sin and
disobedience might be covered, and that we might not be called to account for
the same; which testify that he was condemned before an earthly judge, to
acquit us from the dreadfuil sentence of the heavenly judge; which testify
that in body and soul he suffered grievous torments, that ye wrath of god
might not take hold of us; which testify of ye wonderful work of his
resurrection, and of his triumphing over death, sin, hell, and the devil, to
make us joyful conquerers; which testify of his glorious ascension into
heaven, to give us assurance of y^ heavenly possession which he has purchased
for us; which testify y^ he shall be y^ judge of quick and dead, to give us
everlasting comfort, which have put our whole trust in him, when all other
unbelievers, wicked, and ungodly people, shall stand in his presence with great
horror, seeing his coming shall be to be revenged of their unbelief and
contempt.

Finally, in an other consideration, we may say, that they They bring us to the
knowledge of God and our selves.
are they that testify of him. For first and principally they teach us the
knowledge of God; Secondarily and consequently, the knowledge of our selves.
The knowledge of the Almighty power of God in the creation of all things; of
his infinite wisdom in disposing them in their due order; of his great goodness
in doing al these things for the use and benefit of mankind. Indeed the
creation of the world, and all the creatures therein, do bring us to the
knowledge of God, and this is only the scripture of the heathen people, but
yet this does not show unto us sufficiently, how God is our God, and our father
in Jesus Christ, which knowledge we do only attain by reading the word of God;
And this is the scripture of the Christians. Through which knowledge of God in
respect of Christ, we learn that God has entered into a covenant with all
faithful people, that he would be their God, and that they should be his
people. And that therefore they ought to perform unto god his due scruice,
which especially consists in these three points. First, to worship the true
God, and to detest all idolatry and false gods, to make our prayers to God
alone, and religiously and devoutly to serve him; Secondly, that the worship of
God does consist in spiritual matters, as faith, hope, charity, obedience,
righteousness, holiness, innocence, patience, truth, and all godliness. Thirdly,
to improve, accuse, and condemn all wickedness and sin, infidelity,
desperation, disobedience, impatience, lying, hypocrisy, hatred, slander,
injury, and wrongful dealing; uncleanness, lust, gluttony, and all other
ungodliness and iniquity. Furthermore, that God does in mercy and favor
reward the good, and according to his justice punish the offenders; and that
therefore he has prepared joys and torments after this life. For our souls
are such that they never die, and our bodies shall rise again to be joined to
our souls at the latter day. In respect of which knowledge of God, the
scriptures do persuade us so to live in this world, that through our sin and
ungodliness, we lose not our happy estate in the world to come.

As touching the knowledge of our selves, that is, of our The knowledge of our
selves.
excellent estate wherein we were created; of our fall, whereby we lost and
forfaited that estate; and how again we are restored unto the same, the word
of god does thus instruct Man's excellent estate.
us. That god by his infinite goodness created man according to his image and
likeness, to this end that he should be good, holy, immortal, happy, and
partaker of all his benefits; having then and in his time of innocence,
Freewil, to fulfill and perform those things which god required at his hands,
and to do his will and commandments. Lastly, in granting him the rule and
government over all his creatures. The knowledge of our fall, consists
herein, and so His fall.
we are taught, that man being created in so excellent estate, continued not in
his innocence and uprightness, but fell away by his disobedience from god,
and from his excellent estate. The causes of whose fall, were the temptations
of the Devil, the enemy of all mankind; the enticement of Eve his wife; his
infidelity in not veleeuing gods word to be true, and doubting the punishment
which god foretold; lastly his own high mind and wicked will, by which means he
disobeyed god, and so became sinful. The sequel and effects of his
disobience, sin and fall were theirs, that thereby he provoked gods wrath
against himself, that according to his deserts he was vexed with infinite
miseries, and that he brought death upon himself, and upon all his
posterity. And so through sin, he changed the image of god into the image of
the devil, and caused that his offspring and posterity should be by nature the
children of wrath, and subject to misery, death, and damnation.

Concerning the restoring of man, we read, that gods His restoring.
mercy herein, is great and singular, who according to his infinite and
unspeakable goodness, pitying man's misery, of his mere grace and favor,
did give his own son to death for the forgiveness of our sins. And that
the mean whereby man should be restored, was, that the son of god should be
incarnat, and take our flesh of a godly woman and pure virgin, being conceived
of the holy ghost, and thereby pure and without sin. Who in our flesh performed
perfect obedience, to make us acceptable; who by dying in the flesh did
satisfy Gods wrath, and by death overcame death, and him that had the power of
death, that is the devil; who delivered the faithful children of Adam, and
set them free from the bondage of Satan; who procured them to be adopted the
sons of God, being by nature the children of wrath; who sanctified them and
inducd them with the gifts and graces of his holy spirit, that they might be
framed to express the image of God in their lives and conversation, that they
might be holy, both in body and soul, and so recover their former estate, and
become fellow heirs with Christ of everlasting life, being immortal and
blessed, and eternally glorified.

And thus when in our painful endeavors, we shall perceive that God has
granted unto us to understand his will and his word, it will breed an inward
comfort in our hearts and consciences, which shall be a sufficient witness
unto us, both of Gods love and favor, and of his saving and everlasting
mercies toward us.

God gave the heathen people a land, wherein were rivers Conclusion.
of waters and fountains, a land of wheat and barley, and of viniards and
fig trees, and pomegranates, a land of oil and honey, a land wherein was no
scarcity, a land whose stones were iron, and out of whose mountains they dig
brass, they possessed great and goodly cities, and houses full of all manner
of goods, they wanted no earthly commodities that their hearts could desire.
All which blessings, although they enjoyed them to the full, yet in respect of
the word of God, they were all but as vain shadows. The great blessings of
his word and of his laws, he gave only to his own people. He dealt not so,
does the Prophet say with the Heathen, nay he dealt not so with any nation
under the Sun, neither had the Heathen knowledge of his laws. Which great
blessing, and the only treasure of all treasures, we enjoying through the
mercy and favor of God, shall we be found so negligent as not to search and
spend some time and study therein. The time shall come says Christ, that ye
shall desire one of the days of the son of man, and shall not see them. What
if God should send a famine, not of bread, nor of bodily food, but of his
precious word? What if he should punish us by Idolatry: by giving power to a
strange nation to ouerrunne us. We may wander from sea to sea, and from the
North even to the East, then we may run too and fro to seek the word of the
Lord, and yet not be partakers of our desires. Now we may read, let not the
opportunity slip until the time come that we may wish and want. We never
lightly know what health is, till sickness come, and then we may be nearer to
death, then to recover our health. What was it to Moses that he could see that
pleasant land and goodly lebanon, and could not enter into it? And what comfort
will it be to us to think that we had time to read and search the word of
God, when we shall be debarred from the use thereof. O that we could be
persuaded to read and search, that we might find eternal life, or that the
love thereof were planted in our hearts, that we might be desirous still to
hear, read, and meditate in the same, who in so doing, are pronounced
blessed. Blessed is the man whose delight is in the law of the Lord, and
therein does he meditate, that is, continually spend a great part of his time,
in that holy and heavenly, and saving exercise. Which blessing, God of his
mercy grant us, and frame our minds to the earnest desire of reading and
understanding his will and and his word, and I pray God give effect to the same
and prosper it. To God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, etc.

Some read the word for fashion sake, Idle readers.
Mat. 13. 19.

Much like the high way seed:
And some being touched, by gods good grace, Christian workers.
Mat. 5. 6.

Do read it for their need.
Yet is the wisest natural man 1. Cor. 2. 14.

Herein, but ignorant and blind:
And daily must we pray to God, Prayer for understanding.
Ephesians. 1. 16. 20. Iam. 1. 5. Colloss. 1. 9.

To light our darkened mind.
And if that profit we do mean,
To get and gain thereby:
We must not read, but once and twice,
To satisfy the eye.
But often must the cud be chu'd, Read often, if we mind truly to profit.
Ps. 1. 1. 2. Ios. 1. 8. Mat. 13. 23

That more delight be found:
And often must the land be til'd,
To make a perfect ground.
Causes why men understand not the Scriptures.
Naturalll blindness. Worldly wisdom. No love and hearty affection to read
the Scriptures. A forestalled and preiucate mind. An unrepentant heart. They
read not to mend their lives, and edify their souls.
Necessary rules, to understand the Scriptures.
Prayer that Gods spirit may take away our blindness. To deny our selves. A
mind desirous to learn. A renewed and reformed heart. A mind wholly settled on
the love of God. The principal scope, the glory of God, the amendment of our
lives and manners, and the reformation of our errors.
Causes why we do not take profit by the Scriptures.
Slacknesse in reading. Ignorance of certain words and names. Ignorance of the
chief drift of the matter. Ignorance of the effect of the law and the Gospel.
To err from the rule of faith, contained in the Creed; and from the consent
of scriptures, by extrauagant opinions, which have not warrant in the word.

Contempt of Interpreters, and godly Ministers, whose learning and reading is
sufficient to instruct thee, to satisfy and resolve thee.

Of God.
Exodus. 34. 6. 7. So the Lord passed before his face and cried; The Lord, the
Lord, strong, merciful, and gracious, slow to anger; abundant in goodness and
truth; Reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression,
and sin; not making the wicked innocent.
SImonides a learned and wise Philosopher, being on a time demanded what God
was, gave not any sudden answer, but took a pause, and stood much in doubt
what answer to make. At last, perceiving with himself, that he was unable
presently to resolve the question, desired a day longer to think on the
matter; which time being expired, and his answer looked for, he desired two
days more. At the two days end, being unready as before, he prolonged to
give his judgment, and still doubled the time. Whereupon the other maruelling,
and desirous to know the cause wherefore he refused to answer; seeing he could
delaie the time no longer, but that he must needs speak somewhat, He burst
forth into these words, saying. The longer I consider of it, the more dark
your question seems to be to me, and more intricate. For it lay not in his
wisdom, nor in the wisdom of any man, to comprehend the infinite nature of
God. Can thou measure the earth? or sound the depth of the sea, or perfectly
discern how high the heaven is from the earth? If these matters be impossible
unto thee, much less shall thou be able to set down what God is, who fills
the heaven and the earth and all places. Which thing when thou set thy
self about to know, it is, as if thou were placed in the midst of a labyrinth
or maze, wherein thou maeist go too and fro, and when thou think thy self
almost out, then art thou entangled as if there were no end.

The longer we muse upon this mystery to know what God is, the longer we may,
and yet never the nearer. So that we may say as the Astrologians and Chaldeans,
answered King Nabuchadnezer. It is a rare thing, and none can declare it
unless it be God himself, whose dwelling is not with flesh. More safe
therefore it were, only reverently to think of God his sacred and
incomprehensible majesty, and not to meddle with so weighty a matter, but that
it has pleased God himself, to utter the same to his servant Moses, and so to
all posterity. For as God did not show his majesty unto Moses when he
desired to see him, but only his hinder parts, so also because Moses had not
the capacity to conceive the nature and essence of God, therefore he let him
understand what he was, by his properties and qualities, in these words; The
Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in
goodness and truth; Reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and
transgression, and sin; and not making the wicked innocent.

This Text, stands especially upon these two principal points, his justice
and his mercy, which are the two notable effects of his nature, and whereunto
may be referred all that is spoken of him in the scriptures. Which here in a
few words is lively set down and described. Of ye which we may consider in
order as they lie, nothing unto us these five things. First his sacred
Majesty, and the force of his power. Secondly his gentle disposition, inclined
rather to mercy. Thirdly, how he uses all means to keep us in his fear,
and loath that any should offend. Fourthly, how he offers and performs
mercy unto sinners. Fifthly, his holy and righteous nature, abhoring and
punishing wickedness. These words which I have read unto you, did God give
forth of himself unto Moses, at the delivery of his law, principally to
strike a majesty and reverence into the hearts of the people, that they might
have care to fulfill his law, and not to set light by it. For although God did
show himself so friendly and so favorable unto his people, yet would he not
have them too much to presume. Therefore he uses a majesty to remove all
contempt. For as by nature we are given to disdain and to despise, and are
most prone unto contempt, so was it most requisite that this mean should be
used, to restrain and bridle our disordered nature. The experience whereof, we
may see in children toward their parents. For the familiarity which parents
use to their children, does make them less to be regarded. And if their
parents do command them to do any thing, they will grudge thereat, whereby
they grow to such boldness, that this familiarity does breed within them
an inward kind of contempt. But if in their countenance, iesture, and all
their behavior, the parents show a government agreeable to their estate, to
hold their children in dutiful subjection, then will they use great reverence
unto their parents, and stand in awe of them, and in willing sort will be most
ready to obey. In like sort God would not have his people so much to presume
of his favor and good will toward them, as though they could use the same at
their will, and being his creatures, they should lift up themselves as though
they were equal to their Creator. But being their God and their Creator,
thereby they should understand, that his most high supremacy was so great
above them, that by right and authority he might command them: To plant
in their hearts such a dutiful care as was meet and convenient. For nothing
does sooner abrogate and abolish the weighty consideration of laws, (which
is the bond of civility and society among men) then contempt; and again
nothing can more confirm and establish them, then a dutiful care joined with
reverence. Therefore had God an especial regard of the estimation and reverent
account of his law, least the Majesty thereof, together with his authority,
might be neglected and little set by. Sanctify the Lord of hosts, and let
him be your fear, and let him be your dread, says the Prophet, Esaias. 8. For
lo he that forms the mountains, and creates the wind, and declares to man
what is his thought, which makes the morning darkness, and walks upon the
high places of the earth, the Lord God of hosts is his name. And therefore
he may justly, and that with a majesty, report himself unto his people, The
Lord, the Lord. Even high and terrible, and a great King over all the earth,
who is greatly to be exalted in the congregation of Princes. For the Lord is a
great God, and a great King above all Gods; the Lord has prepared his throne
in heaven, and his kingdom rules over all. Greatness, and power, and glory,
and victory, are his, he excels, and is most mighty, he is the Lord, and
his name is most glorious, the earth is his footestoole, and he is higher then
the Kings of the earth, who are but his vassalles. And says the King
Nebuchandnezer unto Da^iel, Cap. 2. I know of a truth, that your God is a God
of Gods, and the Lord of Kings. Pharaoh also the King of Egypt, who so
grievously persecuted the Israelites, was driven so to confess, in that he
spoke unto Moses, that he would pray unto the Lord for him, to take away those
grievous plagues, wherewith he was justly punished for his disobedience and
hard heart against the Lord. By which his punishment of the highest in the
earth, and as it is in the Proverbs of Solomon, Although they be mighty on
earth, yet are there mightier then they, by which his punishment, he declares
himself to be the only Prince, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Which
thing the example of Sanehereib, the King of Ashur, can well testify whom the
Lord withdrew from the siege and slaughter of his people and put a hook in his
nostrils, and turned him back the same way he came, and caused the Angel of
his wrath, to sley a hundredth four score and five thousand of his soldiers.
Although Rabshakey his Ambassador, in his be half gave forth these words;
Hear the words of the great King, the King of Ashur; Thus says the King, Let
not your King Hezekiah make you trust in the Lord, saying; The Lord will surely
deliver us, for who are they among all the gods of the nations, that have
delivered their land out of mine hand, that the Lord should deliver Jerusalem
out of mine hand? But as you heard his soldiers were slain, himself was
driven to flight; and furthermore, as he was worshipping his Idol god Nisroch,
Adramelech, and Sharezer, his own sons, flew him with the sword and escaped;
they flew this great King, the King of Ashur. The Lord reigns, let the people
tremble, he sits between the Cherubins, let the earth be moved. I make a
decree says King Darius, that in all the dominion of my kingdom, men tremble
and fear before the god of Daniel; for he is the living god and remains for
ever, and his kingdom shall not perish, and his dominion shall be everlasting,
King Nebuchadnezar, to iustisie the Lord in these words, The Lord, the Lord,
did extol and magnify the King of heaven, praised and honored him that
lives for ever, whose power is an everlasting power, and his kingdom is from
generation to generation. And this did the King confess, after that he had
felt the mighty hand of god and his power. Let the spirit of Princes be
subject unto the Lord, that even the chiefest with the lowest, may acknowledge
this sovereignty, that he is the only Lord; who is highly to be praised and
greatly to be feared, for glory and strength are before him. Wherefore give unto
the Lord ye families of the people, the glory of his name, give unto the Lord
the power which is due unto his majesty. When the lion roareth, all the beasts
of the forest tremble, and when god commands, who will not obey? If the
Captain that has authority over his soldiers, may say to one, Go, and he
goes; and to another, Come, and he comes; and to his servant, Do this, and
he does it; Shall not we be as ready when the great Captain the Lord of hosts
shall charge us? If the servants shall be diligent to fulfill their masters
will, to how at his beck, and to make haste when he calls, shall not we yield
our selves to the obedience of our Lord and master, which dwells in the
heavens, who has the Angels at commandment, and whose creatures we are; who
has more authority over us in the wide compass of his dominion, then has
the master over his servant within the circuit of his house? The servants that
are disobedient, may fly from their masters displeasure, and escape; but if
we be rebellious, we cannot avoid the anger of the Lord. His eyes are in all
the corners of the earth, neither is there any place wherein we may be free, if
it please God according to our deserts to strike us. Look what the Prince may
do among his subjects, much more in ye highest degree, may the lord of the
whole earth do among us. Many lawless people may resist that which ye King
commands, although it may not be resisted by the authority of his crown and
dignity; yea furthermore, may put the king in hazard; but the authority of ye
highest King is such, that he makes the stoutest heart to tremble; well may
they murmr and grudge, and set them selves in defiance against him, but they
shall be able to do no more, although they were as mighty as the devils in hell,
they shall no whit prevail. A consuming fire shall go before him, ye mountains
shall be al in a smoke, the earth shall tremble at his presence, and ye wicked y^
disobey his commandments, resist his will, and are as far as they dare at
defiance, shall in their time hide themselves in ye holes of the rocks, and
wish y^ the mountains might fall upon them. And then shall they know, how y^ he
only is the lord, that he has authority to command, and y^ they were bound
to obey. In diverse places of the holy scriptures, in the prophecies of his
servants and messengers, by whom he declared his will, and whom he gave in
commandment to deliver his message unto the people, when they speak of any
matter of weight, they use these words. Thus says the Lord. To put y^ people
always in remembrance of his high sovereignty and authority over them. As in
the Prophecy of Jeremy, the Lord says unto Jeremiah, thou shall say unto
them, Thus says the Lord; If ye will not hear me, to walk in my laws, which I
have set before you, and to hear the words of my servants the Prophets, whom I
sent unto you, both rising up early and sending them, and will not obey them:
Then will I make this house like Shiloh, (meaning that his Temple and his Church
should be forsaken, and ye priests delivered up to the sword) and I will make
this City a curse to all the nations of the earth. The destruction of this
City, shall be a matter of fear, and wonder, and shall be continually in
every man's mouth, as an example of the revenge that the lord has wrought.
Worship the lord in the glorious Sanctuary, tremble before him all the earth;
Say among the nations, The lord reigns, surely he shall judge the people. In
the tenth Chapter to the Hebr. The Lord shall judge his people. Before whose
judgment seat we shall all appear, to receive those things which we have
done in our bodies, according to that we have done, whether it be good or
evil. As the wise man in his book called Eccle. puts us in mind; Rejoice o
young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy
youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes, but
know, that for all these things, God will bring thee to judgment. If thou
set light by, and disobey that which I command thee, I am the Lord, thou shall
not escape; when I shall show my self from heaven with my mighty Angels in
flaming fire, rendering vengeance, and paying every one according to his
deserts. The Lord, the Lord, shall appear in glory, when he comes to
judgment, and all his holy Angels with him.

And before him shall be gathered all nations, and he shall separate them one
from an other, as a shepherd seperateth the sheep from the goats, and he
shall set the sheep on his right hand, and the goats on the left. Unto the
goats, that is to them that have disobeyed him, he shall say, Depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his angels.
And if god spared not the angels, that had sinned, but cast them down into
hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be kept unto damnation,
and spared not the old world, but brought the flood upon the ungodly, and
turned the Cities of Sodom and Gomorra, into ashes, condemned them, and
overthrew them, and made them an ensample unto them, that after should live
ungodly; Surely the Lord as yet, and from this day unto the end of the world,
will reserve the wicked and unjust unto the day of judgment unto punishment.
The Lord shall consume them, with the fire of his wrath, and render upon their
heads their own ways, and they shall know how true and certain this is,
that he is the Lord. For in his hand is a cup, and the wine is read, it is
full mixed, and he powers out of the same. Surely all the wicked of the earth
shall wring out and drink the dregs thereof. Therefore are we willed to lead
our lives before the Lord, in fear and trembling, considering how dreadful
the Lord is. As says the Prophet David, My flesh trembles for fear of thee,
and I am afraid of thy judgments. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord
and his fearful judgment, we persuade men, that they have a diligent regard
to that which the Lord has commanded. And seeing that the Lord shall come in
such dreadful manner, to judge the ungodly and disobedient, what manner persons
ought we to be in holy conversation and godliness? And being fully persuaded
thorof, let us be diligent, that we may be found of him without spot and
blameless. And let us mark what is written in the last words of the book of
Solomon called Ecclesiastes, his words are these. Let us hear the end of all;
Fear God and keep his commandments. For this is the whole duty of man. For
God will bring every work unto judgment, with every secret thing, whether it
be good or evil.

Thus much you have heard concerning his sacred and Strong.
fearful majesty, wherein also the force of his power does show it self;
and yet it is further expressed, in that he is said to be strong. Which
especially is to be seen in his punishments, where I might bring in manifold
and infinite examples of plagues against the wicked, proceeding from his just
anger, whereby the Lord has showed his mighty power, and declared his
majesty to be most dreadful and full of force. As among the rest were most
notorious, the drowning of the old world, and the burning of Sodom and
Gomorrha with fire and brimstone from heaven. This his mighty power did not
the Lord make known only to strangers, but even to his own people, in
making the earth to open and swallow up some; the fire to burn and consume
others; a mighty great plague to make a riddance of them; fiery serpents to
sting them to death for their murmuring and rebellion, that they also might
confess and acknowledge the mighty power of the Lord. And to declare how
strong he is, he makes mention of his three great plagues, the Sword, and
Famine, and ye Pestilence, whereby not a few, but thousands and infinite
multitudes perish, when it pleases God to strike by them, as we may read in
diverse places of the scriptures well known to them, that are but meanly seen
in them. Again, this is a great argument to prove how strong he is, that when
one punishment is sent, and past and gone, he can send another, and another in
the neck of the same, and still increase his power, by adding, and doubling,
and multiplying. For as his mercies have no end, so his judgments cannot be
numbered. And where his anger is ^^^led, there his power grows stronger and
stronger. In the Prophecy of Iere. cap. 15. 2. 3. The Lord instructs the
Prophet what he shall answer the Jews, that had so greatly provoked his
wrath. And if they say unto thee* Whither shall we depart? then tell them, Thus
says the Lord, Such as are appointed unto death, unto death; and such as are
for the sword, to the sword; and such as are for the famine, to the famine; and
such as are for the captivity, to the captivity. And I will appoint over them
four kinds says the Lord. The sword to sley, and the dogs to tear in pieces,
and the fowls of the heaven to deuou^, and the beasts of the earth to destroy.
He might have gone further in reckoning up his plagues, and never been wearied
in throwing down his thunderbolts. That proud and hard hearted king Pharaoh,
that said; Who is the lord, that I should hear his voice? I know not the lord.
The lord, that he might make manifest his power, showed himself to this wicked
king in diverse plagues and punishments. Which were such, that one exceeding an
other, one was more grievous then an other. The waters of his land being turned
into blood; the earth covered with frogs; the dust of the earth, changed
into lice; the air replenished with great swarms of flies; the hand of the
lord was upon their beasts and cattle, and they died by a mighty great
murrain; there came a scab-breaking out into blisters upon man and upon
beast; the lord sent lightning and thunder, and hail, mixed with fire, and
that very grievous; also he sent devouring grasshoppers, such as was never
before, neither after them should be the like, which did eat up every green
thing within the land, herbs of the field, and fruits of the trees; for the
space of three days there was such a darkness in his land, that none saw an
other, neither did they rise from the place where the darkness took them. The
lord left not there, but yet was more grievous; for he smote all the first
borne of Pharaohs land, the first borne both of man and beast, from the first
borne of Pharaoh himself that sat on the throne, unto the first borne of the
captive that sat in prison; And there was a great cry in Egypt, for there was
no house where there was not one dead. Finally, God made an end of those
punishments, with the fearful and utter overthrow of Pharaoh himself, and all
his host in the midst of the sea. They themselves confessing that it was the
strong hand of the lord himself, in these words, The lord fights for them.
In the Prophecy of I^el 1. 3. 4. Tell you your children of it, says the
Prophet, and let your children show to their children, and their children to
an other generation, whether such a thing has been in your days, or in the
days of your fathers. That which is left of the palmer worm, has the
grasshopper eaten; and the residue of the grasshopper has the canker-worme
eaten; and the residue of the canker-worme, has the caterpiller eaten. And
these small creatures does God call his great host, showing himself no where
so strong, as when he works by weak and slender means. When the lord by
his Prophet Moses, Deutro. 28. had feared the people by foretelling so many
grievous punishments, yet further to let them understand how strong he was.
If thou will not keep says he, and do all the works of this law, and fear
this glorious and fearful name, The Lord thy God; then the Lord will make
thy plagues wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed, even great plagues and of
long continuance, and sore diseases and of long durance. Moreover, he will
bring upon thee all the diseases of Egypt, whereof thou wast afraid, and they
shall cleave unto thee; And every sickness, and every plague which is not
written in the book of this law, will the lord heap upon thee until thou be
destroyed. So true it is, that the Prophet speaks. The arm of the Lord is
not shortened, but his hand is stretched out still. Strong in his wrath,
stronger in his punishments, and so strong, that flesh and blood cannot endure
the least thereof, but is ready as it were to fall in pieces, when it is
remembered, and when they hear of it.

The Lord, the Lord, strong, and able to punish, and 2
yet such is his nature, that he is more inclined to mercy. Slow to anger.
And therefore to comfort the weak spirits of mankind, that they should not
utterly faint and be dismayed, through the consideration of his fearful power,
he adds these words which follow, that is, That he is merciful and gracious,
slow to anger. For as a father has compassion on his children, so has the
Lord compassion no them that fear him. For he knows whereof we be made, he
remembers that we are but dust. So the Lord says; My spirit shall not always
strive with man, because he is but flesh. And here is his gracious mercy seen,
in that he does not always presently punish and out of hand. The old world had
a hundredth years space, a long time to be think themselves and to repent. And
after all this time, it pleased the Lord to look down upon the earth, before
he gave the last sentence, and said unto Noah, An end is come. Before God would
proceed to his fierce vengeance against Sodom and Gomorrha, although their
sins were exceeding grievous, and the cry thereof ascended up to heaven, yet
he said, he would go down and see whether they had done altogether according to
the cry, and if not, that he might know. As though he had wished and desired
in his heart, it had been otherwise. In the Epistle of S. Peter, it is
remembered of some in the latter days, who hearing the Prophecy of the latter
end of the world, and seeing it not come to pass after a long time, should
scoff and mock thereat, and say, Where is the promise of his coming, for all
things continue alike from the beginning of the creation. To whom the Apostle
thus answers, That a thousand years in the sight of the Lord, is but as one
day; and that the Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count
slacknesse, but that he is patient, and would have no man to perish, but would
that all should come to repentance. The Lord is a merciful and gracious God in
forbearing, Wis^* H. 20. His mercy is upon all; and though it be in his power
to destroy, yet he makes as though he saw not the sins of men, because they
should amend. Love covers a multitude of sins, and the Lord would in mercy
pass by our infinite ef^ences, if so be yet in time we would return. Although
we have grievously offended, yet he does not straightway execute his anger, but
patiently waits, to see whether his loving kindness and long suffering, may
provoke us to the obedience of his will, and to do that earnestly and with a
good heart, from the which before we went so far astray. He does not punish
us according to our desert, nor reward us after our iniquities, but shows
himself most favorable, that our hearts may relent and serve him. Although
the Israelites kept not the covenant of their God, as it is Psalm. 78. 38. 41.
and walked not in his law, but sinned against him more and more, yet was he so
merciful unto them, that he forgave them their misdeeds, and destroyed them
not, yea many a time turned he his wrath away, and would not suffer his whole
displeasure to arise. For he considered that they were but flesh, and that
they were even as a wind that passes away, and comes not again. God
considering our frailty and weakness, is patient toward us, and so tender
hearted, that he would have no man to perish. And therefore before any
punishment, that God did use against his people, he gave them warning thereof
by his prophets, that they might have just cause to say, that the Lord was
gracious and merciful. As we read in the book of Nehemiah, cap. 9. 30 31.
that God did forbear them many years, and protested among them by his spirit,
even by the hand of his Prophets, but they would not hear, therefore he gave
them into ye hands of the people of the lands. Which point of Gods mercy, let
every one of us apply unto himself, and bethink our selves, how God does
bear with us from day to day, and what diverse and often warnings he uses
toward us, to move us to return unto him. By which forbearing, many are won
to God, as also the worst sort are hardened against the day of wrath, heaping
unto themselves vengeance against the day of the declaration of Gods just
judgment. Wherein all both the best and the worst cannot say otherwise, but
that the lord is gracious and merciful in forbearing. Slow to anger and of
great kindness, yet Correcting.
not so slow, that he will never strike, or that he will suffer his patience
to be abused, but when he is thoroughly provoked, he puts his anger in
effect. Nevertheless as the wicked feel the weight of his anger, so toward
his people he does so moderate the same, that in wrath he remembers mercy,
and causes his punishments to be but remedies to his his own people, as the
Surgion uses cutting and launcing, for the benefit of him whom he so
handles. The scourges and afflictions 2. Macc. 6. 12. 17.
that God sends amongst his people, are not for destruction, but for a
chastening. For it is a token of his great goodness, and of his gracious
kindness, not to suffer sinners long to continue, but straightwaies to punish
them. For the Lord does not long wait for us, as for other Nations, whom
he punishes, when they are come to the fullness of their sins; but thus he
deals with us, that our sins should not be heaped up the full, so that
afterward we should be the more grievously punished. And therefore he never
withdraws his mercy from us, and though he punish us, yet does he never
utterly forsake us. So slow he is to anger, that he punishes them that go
wrong, in a measure, warning them, by putting them in remembrance of the
things wherein they have offended, that they might leave their wickedness.
Furthermore, he makes them feel his rod by a little and little, giving
them space to repent. If says the wise man, thou haste punished the Egyptians,
the enemies of thy children, (having deserved death) with so great
consideration, and requesting unto them, giving them time and place that they
might change from their wickedness; with how great circumspection will thou
punish thy own children. When thou do chasten us, thou punishest our
enemies a thousand times more, to the intent that when we judge, we should
diligently consider thy goodness, and when we are judged, we should hope for
mercy. We are never further off from God, then when he does most favor us,
and he is never more truly served, then when he strikes us with his rod. These
effects of Gods anger, and his corrections, may more truly be termed
chastisements, then punishments; according to that of the Prophet Jeremy, cap.
10. 24. O Lord correct me, but with judgment, let thy punishment be lenified
and moderated with mercy, let it not proceed in thine anger, least I be
consumed and brought to nothing. In the Psalm 85. God says by the mouth of
his Prophet; If my children forsake my law and walk not in my judgments,
then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with
strokes and scourges. For as sin and the breaking of Gods commandments, is
the cause of correction, so is correction the remedy to bring us into the way
again. By which forcible mean of Gods favor, we are so humbled and altered,
that it procures amendment in us. Yea it wrought mightily with the heathen
king Nebuchadnezer, and brought him to ye worship of God. This forcible mean
of Gods favor, (I say of his favor, for otherwise where he does correct
us, he might destroy us) prevailed so with King David, that after he felt the
stroke of his correction, he desired that the Lord would instruct him in his
law, and furthermore, that it grieved his heart to see the wicked transgress
Gods law. Finally, how great the goodness of the Lord is in correcting us,
we may well perceive by the words of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 11. 32.

We are chastened of the Lord, because we should not be condemned with the
world. For those whom GOD loves, those does he chasten, as for the wicked
and ungodly, he lets them run on still, till they have filled up the
measure of their sin, and then in stead of correction, which might convert
them, they shall feel the grievous and heavy burden of Gods wrath, utterly
to destroy them. Correction brings with it time and place to repent, but a
sudden destruction cutteth off all repentance. For the grace of God, does
often accompany correction, as always his wrath is joined with destruction.

The Lord is mercisull and gracious, slow to anger, to bring the wicked to
repentance, whom the Apostle Romans 2. does greatly reprove for their hardness
of heart, and for abusing his gracious mercy and long suffering. Despisest thou
says he, the riches of his bountifulness, and patience, and long sufferance,
not knowing that the bountifulness of God leads thee to repentance. Again,
he is mercisull and gracious, and slow to anger, in respect of the godly,
because he does not put his anger in full execution against them. And that
when he strikes them, being moved thereto by his anger, it is for their great
good and benefit.

A more large exposition of that which goes before, is 3
Abundant in goodness.
seen in these words. Abundant in goodness and truth; Reserving Mercy, etc.
Which words give us to understand, how God uses all means to keep us in his
fear, by enriching us with his benefits, and pouring down his blessings upon
us; and not only that, but effectually performing, whatsoever faithfully he
has promised, dealing with us, and alluring us, as we see how carthly fathers
go about to win their children to all virtue and goodness, by fair words
and promises, and sometimes bestowing gifts upon them. And this only and most
substantial argument, does the Apostle S. Paul use. Act. 14. 17. as it were by
most sensible means, to draw the minds of the heathen people from their
Idolatry, to the true worship of God. For says he, although God suffered you
to walk in your own ways, yet (that you might be without excuse) he left not
himself without witness among you, in that he did good, and gave you rain
from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling your hearts with food and
gladness. All which benefits, although he might have withdrawn, because you
abused them to his dishonor, yet still was he abundant in goodness, when you
were most unworthy of them. A master will not do good to that servant, that
shall disgrace him, a father will withdraw his heart from an unkind child.
Although a man's jealousy be such, that having just cause to forsake his wife
for her lewdenesse, he will never be entreated to receive her; yet is the
Lord abundant in goodness; Let my people says he, put away her
fornications, and I will receive her again into favor. The Lords works are
not as man's works, and he is abundant in kindness, far contrary to our
nature, who can hardly or never incline our hearts to favor. This goodness
GOD does not only use to the Heathen, to make them lift up their hearts and
minds from the creatures to the Creator, but in like sort, also he deals
with the wicked, to make them change their minds. He sends down his rain
upon the unjust, as well as the just, and for the most part, they enjoy the
goodness of God in a more plentiful measure, then do his own children. As
it is said in the Psalm, Whose bellies thou fillest with thy hid treasure;
for they abound, when other are in scarcity, they feel no want, when other
are pinched with penury. As though Gods benefits were hid from the good, and
secretly bestowed upon the badde, which matter has such ill success, that
the wicked are more badde, more proud, more wrongful, more lewd and vicious,
as though they were not only Lords, or rather tyrants over Gods flock, but
also had the blessings of GOD at their own will and commandment.

Such was the difference betwixt the rich man and Lazarus, the one in his
roabes, the other in rags, the one faring delicately, the other not having so
much as a morsel of bread to satisfy his hunger; so were the Egyptians
Lords, when the Israelites were slaves; the Canaanites dwelling in a land
flowing with milk and honey, abounding in plenty without a scarcity, when the
posterity of Abraham wandered in the wilderness, and endured many extremities.
The Viole and the Harp are in the feasts of some, and Jacobs affliction is
not once so much as thought on. And who does not see how the worser sort
does abuse the abundant goodness of God. O that the complaints and miseries
of the poor, could make their hearts relent, or the wishes and prayers of the
godly could procure a sufficient redress, or the fearful ends of their
forerunners, could warn them. The Egyptians drowned, the Canaanites destroyed,
the rich man in hell. O that they would think, that they cannot have their
heaven here and in an other world, or that fearful sentence might prevail
with them. Revelation 18. 7. So much torment for so much pleasure, weight for
weight, and measure for measure, at leastwise if it be not beyond all
measure. Yet more properly and more truly it may be said, that GOD is
abundant in goodness toward his own people. As the Prophet Moses does in
most large sort set it down. Deutronomie. 28. According as he had foretold
unto his servant Abraham, testifying of himself. I am all sufficient; And
again, I am thy exceeding great reward, work uprightly before me. When he
and his were strangers in other lands, he suffered no man to do them wrong,
but reproved even Kings for their sakes; being ready to be consumed by
death and famine, he provided they should not want; being grievously
oppressed of their enemies, he heard their cry and delivered them, he smote
all their enemies, and brought them forth with silver and gold, and there was
not one feeble person among their Tribes; he brought forth his people with
joy, and his chosen with gladness. And gave them the lands of the Heathen,
and they took the labors of the people in possession.

This doctrine is so comfortable to the good and godly, that although the
world see it not, yet they feel and perceive in secret sort, that the Lord
is abundant in goodness toward them, always having regard unto them, so
far forth as stands with his glory and their good. Blessyng them in
prosperity, defending them from their bodily and ghostly enemies, providing
for them in all necessities, standing by them, and comforting them in all their
miseries. God was abundant in goodness toward his people, and is and will
be unto the end of the world, but always with an exception, as he did to
the Israelites. Unto all other blssinges says the Psalm, GOD gave unto them
the lands of the Heathen, and they took the labors of the people in
possession. To this end, that they might keep his statutes, and observe his
laws. But as it fell out amongst the Israelites, so it is daily seen amongst
us.

The Lord in the Prophecy of Esaias, compares his people to a Vineyard, and
his abundant goodness, to the care he had over that Vineyarde. He caused
his Vineyarde to be seated upon a very fruitful hill, he hedged it in, and
gathered out the stones of it, he planted it with the best plants, and he
built a tower in the midst thereof, and made a Wine press therein. Then he
looked that it should bring forth grapes. What could I have done any more
to my Vineyarde, that I have not done unto it? Why have I looked that it
should bring forth grapes, and it brings forth wild grapes. Such also
has Gods care ever been to us, and for us, as was that of the husbandman over
his fig tree, who dressed it, and dug round about it, and dunged it, but
when he comes to seek for fruit, I am affraide he shall find none. But
with Gods abundant goodness, let us also consider and fear this, least the
tree be cut down. For every tree that brings not forth good fruit, shall
be hewn down and cast into the fire. And such judgment that was pronounced
against the Israelites, shall also light upon us. I will tell you says the
Lord, what I will do to my vineiard, I will take away the hedge thereof, and it
shall be eaten up, I will break the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden
down. And I will lay it waste; it shall not be cut, nor dug, but briars
and thorns shall grow up; I will also command the clouds, that they rain
no rain upon it. God grant that every one among us, may consider his
estate, how good the Lord is unto him, and be warned betimes. I beseech ye
that ye be not partakers of Gods bountiful goodness in vain.

To Gods abundant goodness he puts a seal of Abundant in truth.
full assurance, and that is his promise, least that we should stand
doubtful of his goodness. The world is full of promises, but they be nothing
else but deceit; the devil can promise as fast, but his promises are
untruths; for he is the father of lies. The fickle and uncertain minds of
men are ready to promise any thing, but for the most part there is no more
hold in their words, then in the wind. The world, the devil, and men,
promise mountains, but the truth is, if they perform any thing, it is but
molehilles. So that it were better never to harken unto their promises, then to
hope for help from them. It is the Lord only that keeps faithful promise,
who ever lives, and always helps. For GOD is not as man, that he should
lie, neither as the son of man, that he should repent and change his mind.
Has he said, and shall he not do it? And has he spoken, and shall he not
accomplish? Though man do promise, yet is he always wavering, and more likely
to change his purpose, then to continue constant. But this is one of the
unchangeable properties of god, as to be steadfast in his promises. According
to that of the Apostle Saint James 1. 17. Every good giving, and every
perfect gift, is from above, and comes down from the father of lights, with
whom is no variableness, neither shadowing by turning. All his promises are
yea, and Amen, that is to say, certain truths. For as he is abundant in
goodness, so also is he abundant in truth. God is always mindful of his
promise, although it be to a thousand generations. As the Psalm does
testify concerning the Israelites, That God remembered his holy promise, and
Abraham his servant. For as he promised that his seed should increase into
multitudes, so also was it his promise, that they should possess the gates of
their enemies. For although they were a long time evil entreated, and held
under cruel slavery and bondage, yet God for his promise and mercy sake, at
length did set them free: And brought them into a good and plentiful land,
flowing with milk and honey, and abounding with all Gods blessings, but so,
that it pleased God to try them by many extremities. Wherein our frail nature
is too weak, for if god do not perform when we look for it, we are ready
straightway to say, Is the promise of the Lord come to an end, and has he
forgot to be good and gracious? Should we receive good at the Lords hand, and
not evil says Job? And is it not for us to wait and stay the Lords leisure?
And although many fall away for want of present performance, yet let not us
doubt the goodness of God, which is a sure stay in the time of need, if we be
steadfast in hope, and not too impatient in trouble. And why should not we wait
for the goodness of god, although our miseries be great. Behold the husbandman
waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long patience for it,
until he receive the former and the latter rain. If God for diverse necessary
considerations, regarding that which is most for his glory and our good, do
withdraw his help in this world, yet he requites it in an other world,
granting us a better matter then we can desire of him. And so it falls out,
that when we think his promise does us least good, then does it turn to our
best advantage and greatest comfort, requiting earthly miseries with heavenly
joys. So exceeding good is he unto us, by using all means to keep us in his
fear, and so does he help and stay us, lest we should fall away from him.

Yet frail flesh is ready to fall away every hour, and 4
does often fall away for all gods goodness, nevertheless the Reserving mercy,
etc.
mercy of the Lord is such, that he lifts us up again. As the Psalm. 90. 3.
says, When we are fallen into destruction, yet the Lord has a comfortable
word, and bids us, Come again. The Lord has mercy in store, and his
goodness is so great, that he reserueth mercy for us. It is too manifest, that
there are but a few that cleave to the Lord, and again that infinite thousands
cast themselves away; yet is the Lord so pitiful, that he reserueth mercy for
thousands. The day of his wrath and last judgment, is but one day, but he
delaieth that day many a thousand days and years, because he would Offering
mercy.
have no man perish, but all to come to repentance. Reserving mercy by offering
repentance, saying; At what time so ever a sinner repents him of his sins,
from the bottom of his heart, I will put out all his wickedness out of my
remembrance says the Lord. If the wicked will return from all his sins, that
he has committed, and keep al my statutes, and do that which is lawful and
right, he shall surely live and shall not die. And in an other place if he
return, he shall save his soul alive. Every where in ye scriptures does God
show forth his mercy by his servants the Prophets, warning his people early and
late, in season and out of season. Yet as the rain that falls upon the
barren ground has no effect, so ye mercy of God being offered, does not
always enter into our hearts. Yea so hard a matter it is, even for those which
pertain to God, to receive his mercy offered, that unless God himself do
turn their hearts, by giving them repentance, they should Giving repentance.
never be saved. What then shall we say to them that are left in their sins?
Surely as he is merciful to his servants, so his revenging hand is upon the
ungodly. For on them he will rain suares, fire and brimstone, as says the
Psalm. The more ye God did offer mercy unto his people, the more they did
refuse it. Nevertheless says God, Psalm. 89. My mercy will not I utterly take
away, nor suffer my truth to fail. According as the Prophet Esaias remembers,
Except the Lord of hosts had reserved unto us, even a small remnant, we should
have bin as Sodom, and should have bin like unto Gomorrha. Even as a firebrand
is taken out of the fire half burnt, so does ye Lord reserve mercy, even when
we deserve destruction; and so it fares with us as with a thief, who is
brought to ye gallows to suffer death, with the halter about his neck, and yet
by some extraordinary favor is saved. Doubtless by our sin and desert, al are
lost, and in ye way of damnation; but yet by ye mercy and favor of god, when
many are left in their sins, and sent to eternal punishments, some after a
wonderful sort are saved. And y^ which is more to be wondered Saving thousands.
at, even thousands are saved. As we read in ye Revelation of S. John, of such
a Tribe were sealed 12. thousand, until it came to many thousands, and yet in
respect of many other also, y^ shall be saved, they are but a few thousands.
Reserving mercy for thousands, as it were by a thousand means; For A
plurality of Gods mercies.
there is a plurality of gods mercies; and more ways he has to bring us
unto him, then we can well consider of. He calls us unto him, by offering
repentance, he assisteth us with his grace to do good, moves our minds
inwardly by infinite good inspiratio^s, gives us space to repent, by diverse
occasions, opportunities, and encouragements; allureth us outwardly, with
exhortations and promises; Fears us by his grievous punishments showed upon
others for an example; lays ge^lle correctio^s upon us, as poverty,
adversity, losses, and sickness; threatens us with eternal death, least we
should utterly be lost and destroyed with others. Yet further are there his
preventing mercies, whereby he either uses means to withdraw us from our
wickedness, or hinders and stops the evil intents of the devil and the
world, keeping us from evil company, and from evil counsel, arming us and
giving us strength against them. So soon as we rise in the morning, we go
forth to fight with two great and mighty giants, the World and the Devil. And
whom do we take with us, but a traitor? even this brittle flesh of ours, which
is ready to yield us up to the enemy at every assault. Only he which suffers
Satan to compass us, does prevent him and stay him from destroying us.
Amongst the rest as the Pardoning. 2. Cro. 30. 8. Col. 2. 13. Ier. 31. 34.
chiefest, are there his pardaning and forgiving mercies, when he puts all
our wickedness out of his remembrance, that they shall not be once mentioned
against us. And so prepares our hearts unto him by writing his laws in our
hearts, making us hearts of flesh, which before were stony and stubborn, and
making us obedient, being before sinful and disobedient. He reserueth mercy
for us, by receiving us unto mercy. As the Apostle S. Paul testifies of
himself, that he being the chiefest sinner, and a great offender above many,
yet was received unto mercy, his iniquity, and transgression, Receiving.
and sin, being forgiven, not imputed unto him, nor laid to his charge.

The fifth consideration set down in my text, is concerning 5
the holy and righteous nature of God, which abhors and punishes
wickedness. Whose mercy as it reaches unto thousands, yet lest he should
seem thereby to favor sin and sinners by forgiving iniquity, transgression
Not making the wicked innocent.
and sin, therefore he adds these words. And not making the wicked
innocent. For although he favor repentant sinners, yet as touching them that
are obstinate and continue in sin, he reckons not them among the innocent.
Shutting up the declaration of his own holy and righteous nature, by setting
down his justice and severity against sin, to make us beware lest we
provoke his anger by sin, and to strike a terror and a fear into the hearts
of all sinners and offenders, giving them to understand, what they are to look
for, if neither his mercy nor his threatenings will prevail. It seems that
the wicked are innocent, because God does not punish them, and because in a
manner they do what they list without controulment. So they run their course,
and God does suffer them, not because they are innocent, but because their
vengeance may be the heavier. It is with them as it was with Shimei, who cursed
David, concerning whom, he gave a charge unto his son Solomon, saying. Behold
Shimei cursed me with a horrible curse, but afterward he came unto me, and I
swear unto him, that I would not slay him with the sword. But thou shall not
count him innocent. For thou art a wise man, and know what thou ought to
do unto him. Therefore thou shall cause his hoare head to go down to the
grave with blood. Which after fell out worthily, because he brake the
commandment that the King had given him upon pain of death, and which he
most willingly gave his consent unto, so that his blood was upon his own head,
and his death came to him through his own default. Such is Gods gracious
goodness to suffer the wicked for a time, deferring their punishment which every
hour they deserve, and he might put in execution, and will no doubt perform
it all in Quod differtur, non aufertur.
his time. For either they be cut off by a violent death, or some way or other,
God shows his grievous judgments on them. Though God withhold his hand, yet
he strikes at length, and they shall not always escape scotfree, that think
themselves to be innocent. When the Ammorites had filled the measure of their
sin, Gods destruction came upon them, and when the time of the wicked is
come, they shall know themselves to be guilty. The tears go among good corn
until the harvest, but at harvest, the tears are burnt, and the good corn is
brought into the barn and preserved. The wicked are among the just, and often
are so taken in this world, but in the world to come they pay for it, when the
just and innocent shall be received into joy. Who thought themselves more
holy, then Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, that murmured against the servant of
God, Moses? but the earth devoured them, to show that there was neither
holiness nor innocence in them. Some men's sins go before unto judgment,
and some follow after. Some are punished in this life for an example unto
others, and some escape until their dying day. But as after death comes
judgment, so then shall it heavily be laid to their charge, neither shall
they be pronounced innocent. As God is holy and innocent, so no wicked and
unclean person, shall come into his rest. For without the gates of his
heavenly City, shall be dogs and inchaunters, and whoremongers, and all
wicked persons, who when their hour is come, shall be rewarded according to
their deserts. A guilty life, will have a fearful death, and torments wayt
in an other world, for careless finners in this world. Guilty and innocent
can never agree, no more can life and death, heaven and hell, which may well
put us in mind of our estate, least we be numbered and plagued among the guilty
and ungodly. Else when we look for mercy, we may meet with judgment. For
commonly this is in every man's mind, and this is his resolution, if they can
escape the danger of man's law, although they be never so much faulty, they
think themselves as clear as the best, and that no man is able to lay any
thing to their charge. It may be that we may go for honest in the sight of
the world, but before god and in his fight, we shall never be taken for
innocent.

Again, this clause is well put in, to make us not to be too bold, or to
presume of gods mercy, because as we see his mercy and gracious kindness is
so often remembered. Although God be merciful, yet is he also just, and will
not at the end, account ungodly and wilful sinners to be innocent.

A covetous man is desirous of more wealth then he can Conclusion.
well use, and a curious and searching mind, would enter further into the
knowledge of god, then it can perfectly conceive. Wherefore let it suffice us to
know that only, which god has revealed of himself, and that which is more
necessary and needful for us to understand. Even that he is just and
righteous, to fear us from sin, and to make us desirous to continue in well
doing. Also that he is gracious and merciful, that we should not utterly be
discouraged if we have offended god, but that we should hope for mercy, if we
unfeignedly and truly repent. For God reserueth his mercy for such, by forgiving
them their sins, and so receiving them unto mercy. Mercy and truth says the
Prophet, have met together, righteousness and peace have kissed each other. The
world is overflowed with wickedness, and many do rather presume of Gods
mercy, then that ever they are like to be pertakers thereof. And here is the
dump, and this is a fearful word, that although they dream of mercy, yet
they shall find the contrary. For God will never reckon them to be innocent,
nor ever reserve his mercy for them. And although they cry, Lord, Lord, yet
shall they not enter into his kingdom. For when they think to enter into his
rest, it shall be said unto them; Depart from me I know you not. Let us always
remember, that the Lord is strong, and that his anger is fearful, and that
his punishments are intolerable, and hell torments everlasting; that so the
fear of the Lord may still be before our eyes, and that we may be affraide to
offend his majesty. Then shall his mercy stand us instead, when we fall and
have offended; whereas otherwise, we shall be bold to commit sin, and flatter
our selves, that god will be merciful, when as indeed we do but deceive our
selves, and shall surely find hell, when we think to go to heaven. God grant
that the knowledge of God, may turn to our good, and that through our defaulte
in flattering of our selves, and presuming too much of Gods mercy, we fall not
away from mercy. To whose mercy I commend you, desiring you not to forget his
justice. For God is a consuming fire, and wilful and obstinate sinners, shall
never escape his euerduring wrath.

To God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, be all glory and
praise, both now and ever.

Amen. Deo gratia, solique gloria.
Of his Creation.
Genesis. 1. 1. In the beginning, God created the heaven and the earth.
AS I have set down unto you the knowledge of God by his properties and
qualities, so also is he further known by the consideration of his works. As
says the Psalm, The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
shows his handie work. Amongst the works of God, first in order most
notable, is the work of his creation, wherein his power and wisdom is
manifestly seen, giving us a larger and more delightful knowledge of him,
then that we should busily occupy our studies, in searching the secret and
hidden nature of God. The spirit of God begins first with ye declarion of
this most excellent work, breeding the knowledge of God in our minds, as it
were by a wonder. In the beginning God made the heaven and the earth. Which
sentence does afford us these three instructions. First the consideration of
the creation of ye world Division.
and the creatures thereof, and whither the world and the creatures were made
to endure and to continue for ever. Secondly, how the world and all the
creatures therein contained, were made. Thirdly, the cause, the end and use,
wherefore they were made. The world it self how beautiful a palace is it,
and as it were a heaven, in respect of hell beneath, as it self also is a
thing of nothing in respect of heaven above. The heaven glistereth with the
glorious sight of the Sun, the Moon, and the stars. The Sun rejoices to
run his course, even his speedy and hai^ie course, and as it were the glory
of all Gods creatures, comes forth with a majesty, forbidding the eyes of
all earthly creatures to behold it, which by his force does burn the
mountains seven times more, then does the heat of a furnace. God gives light
to the darkness it self, and causes the Moon to appear, when ye light and the
glorious beams of the Sun are gone down. The infinite multitude of ye stars
show forth his wonderful wisdom, and decketh ye heavens much more, then all
the precious stones and costly ornaments ye are in princes courts. Cast down
your eyes, and behold ye creatures on the earth. The mighty lion which is a
figure of gods power, at whose roaring all ye beasts of the forest do tremble;
the ravening bear ye instrument of his wrath, as the example of the mocking
children that did disdain the Prophet Elisha, does testify; the nourishing and
clothing creatures, the cow, the sheep, and ye goat, to ye praise of his
goodness. Wherein also the trees do instruct us, the olive tree with his
fatness, the figtree with his sweetness, the vine tree with his cherishing.
How do ye herbs set forth the wisdom of God? In that he has given to every
herb his property, some for comfort, some for delight, some to continue
life, some to restore life, as none know it better then the expert Physician,
to who^ God has opened his wonderful works therein. Besides these, look upon
ye lilly of the field, whom God has so richly arraied, that Solomon in all his
roialty is not like to one of these. A wonder it is, to see how he has hid
great treasure, in the lower parts of ye earth, not only tin and lead, brass
and iron, but silver also and gold, and precious stones. The earth, the world,
and every part thereof, give manifest witness, what God has wrought. Every
element is furnished with his creatures, the air with birds, the earth with
trees and herbs and inestimable treasure; and as the waves of ye sea are
innumerable, so are the creatures therein contained; even as the stars of the
sky, which no man can term and call by their names, but only God himself. To
every beast of ye field, and to every foul of the heaven, Adam gave names, but
ye creatures of the sea, as the hidden work of God, Adam saw not, man knows
not, neither ca^ they ever be searched out, that we may wonder at Gods wonders.
Some have said, that there is no creature on the earth, but ye sea does yield
ye like. Among the creatures of the sea, none sets forth the work of Gods
creation so much, as the huge and great whale, which ouerturneth mighty ships,
and strikes a fear into the heart of man. As says the Psalm 104. 24. O Lord
how manifold are thy works! In wisdom have thou made the^ all; The earth is
full of thy riches, so is the wide and great sea also, wherein are things
creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts. There go the ships, and
there is that Leuiathan whom thou have made to take his pastime therein. When
the wise man had delighted himself with ye remembrance of the works of Gods
creation, either being ravished with the delight, or unable to satisfy his
mind, he breaks forth and says; Who has seen all the creatures of God, that
he might tell us? For when he has searched to the utmost of his power, yet may
he truly say; There are hid yet greater things then these be, and we have seen
but a few of his works. He does not measure the knowledge of man in this
matter, that he has attained the one half, but leaves him in the very
entrance, as though he had had but a glimce of some, and not a sight of all.
As Adam being placed in Paradise, had not a full view of all the secrets
thereof, neither had he any understanding of the tree of life, but as soon as
he had tasted of the tree of knowledge, for his rebellion and disobedience, he
staid not long there. Let us therefore satisfy our selves with ye knowledge of
Gods creatures, if it be but in a measure, and be contented though we see not
all; but by and in them that we do know, let us praise and honor him, who in
such comely and bewtifull, and unsearchable sort has made all. Timantes a
cunning Painter, taking in hand, to express ye sorrow of Agamemno^, for ye
death of his daughter Iphigenia, and perceiving his skill would not reach so
far, covered ye prince his face with a veil, leaving his sorrow to be
conceived by ye mind of ye beholders, whose eyes in this respect he could not
satisfy. In like sort, finding my self unable to fulfill thy desire, and to
set down the consideration of all Gods creatures, think it good to leave the
rest to thy study and labor, and take that to be sufficient for this present
purpose, which I have said, using silence where much may be spared, thy study
eased, and mind delighted. For brevity brings attention, and a long
discourse tediousnes. The learned Philosophers and searchers of gods works,
perceiving the excellency of gods creatures, and the bewtifull frame of the
world, gave it a a name agreeable thereunto, and called it Beauty it self. For
if the works of men deserve great commendation, and that the Carpenter in the
frame of his house, the Mason in his stoneworke, the Painter in his pictures
may excel, how much more excellent, and passing bewtifull, shall the frame of
the whole world be, and the workmanship of every creature made and ordained and
created of God? Who, as he is in all respects worthy praise, so doubtless
must the works be which proceed from him, infinite, incomprehensible, only good,
only almighty, only wise, only excellent, in whatsoever may be said to be his.

When the Disciples of our Savior Christ, showed Whether to endure.
him the fair building of the Temple and the garnished work, Marvel ye at
these things, says he? The time shall come, that there shall not be a stone
left upon a stone, which shall not be thrown down. The Temple it self, yea
even the bewtifull gate of the Temple, shall come to havoc and ruin. There
is nothing excellent in the world, that is of long continuance, and the world
it self has but his time, and shall pass away as though it had never been,
nor ever created, not through the default of the workmanship, but through
their procurement, for whose benefit it was made and created. Show me the
light which will not darken, show me the flower which will not fade, show me
the fruit which will not corrupt, show me the garment which will not wear,
show me the strength which will not weaken, show me the beauty which will not
wither, show me the time which will not pass, and tell me if thou can,
whether that the world be of the continuance but of an hour. The end
whereof, is compared to the travail of a woman, the coming of a thief in the
night, the flashing of lightning, sudden and unlooked for, in a moment, in the
turning of a hand, in the twinkling of an eye, before a man can say, what is
done, or what is toward. For as GOD said, It repents me that ever I made
man: so not long after, he uttered his voice to Noah, and said; An end is come.
He created man and he fell, he made the world, and it shall not always endure.
Man was made out of the dust, and to dust he shall return; the world was made
of nothing, and to nothing shall it vanish; it shall ware old as a garment,
and at length be consumed with fire. The goodness of the Lord is great in the
continuance of the world, and longer should the time be, if the wickedness of
men did not abound. Which time, if it were not shortened, no flesh should be
saved, but for the Elects sake, for the benefit of the good and godly, the
days of the world shall be cut off. Let me alone, says God to Moses, that I
may consume this people utterly. Now come many miseries, losses, extremities
and plagues upon the world, but for the sin that is practiced in the world.
Which doubtless will be the cause of the end of the world, and of the
destruction of gods bewtiful frame, fire and brimstone fell upon Sodom and
Gomorrha, a part of the world, whereas, if it had pleased God, it might have
lighted on all the world. The windows above, and the depthes beneath, were
opened, and the whole earth was overwhelmed with water. A token of a greater
judgment, and of a greater destruction, when not a part of the earth shall be
consumed with fire, but the whole earth, yea even the heavens also and the
whole world it self. The glorious Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the
Moon into blood, the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the
heaven shall be shaken, the earth shall be dissolved, the sea and the waters
shall roar. And if the words of the Apostle Saint Peter be true, as without
all peradventure they are most certain, because the spirit of God has set
them down, which cannot lie, neither can be deceived; as the world of old
perished, being overflowed with water; so the heavens and the earth which are
now, are kept by the power of God in store, and reserved unto fire, against the
day of judgment, and of the destruction of ungodly men. This latter day, the
end of the world, shall come as a thief in the night, in the which the heavens
shall pass away with a noise, and the elements shall melt with heat, and the
earth with the works that are therein, shall be burnt up. Sin, iniquity, and
wickedness, says the wise man, has cast down the thrones of the mighty, and
brought ye earth to a wilderness, and so it shall fall out, ye thereby all things
shall be brought to desolation, and not only ye earth but the whole world shall
come to nothing. Yet three days, and Niniue shall be destroyed; yet but a while,
and y^ a little while, and the time of the world shall be expired. For the end of
all things is at hand. Plentiful Sodom, and bewtiful Gomorrha, are defaced,
their beastly lusts, and the abusing of Gods benefits, was the cause; Man
should never have died, if he had never disobeied, and the beauty of the world
should still have continued, if the inhabitants of ye world had given no other
cause. But now all things tend to their decay, the heavenly powers do fail in
their operations, and the herbs have not their former force, and the
Physician is driven to uncertainties. The body of man is not so perfect and
healthful as in the beginning, but subject to manifold diseases, his time
holds not out to hundreths as heretofore it has done, but few are his
days, because his days are evil. Death to man, destruction to the world, yea
all the creatures of the earth do groan under the burden of that mystery,
whereunto they are subject by man, and hope to be delivered of it, and hope to
be purged from their corruption. When our Savior Christ came near to
Jerusalem, he wept, to think of the desolation and destruction that should
come on Jerusalem, that fair and bewtifull Jerusalem, that glory and wonder
of all the earth. And the more that we know the excellent work of God in
the creation of the world and his creatures, wherein we cannot choose but take
passing delight, so often as we do consider and meditate on the same, even
there withal also, when we think that all things shall come to a ruin and
downfall, that the heavens and the earth shall be consumed with fire, then may
we begin to shead forth tears, in a lamentable consideration, that so glorious
a workmanship, and so wonderful a frame, should come to a final destruction.
When Elisha the man of God, looked steadfastly upon Hazael, he 2. Kin. 8. 12
wept, because he foresawe what great misery he should work against the
children of Israel. Which thing says he, the Lord has showed me. The woes
that shall come upon the world in the latter time, shall make the godly minded
to mourn in their thoughts. Reave. 12. 12. Woe to the inhabitants of the earth
and of the sea, for the devil is come down unto you, which has great wrath,
knowing that he has but a short time, and that his mischief over the world,
shall end with the world. Which thing makes them to wish, that their lives
were at an end, that they might not behold such great calamities, as also to
rejoice at their estate, which have lest the earth and possess the heavens. Oh
says the Prophet Jeremy, ca. 9. 1. that mine head were full of water, and mine
eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for my people,
even for the slain of my people; as if he had said, for them that are and
shall be destroyed. Because they are all adulterers, and an assembly of rebels.
This is a weighty cause, to make us all to weep, which cause also does make
the earth and all creatures else, to mourn and groan. Go to now ye rich men,
says the Apostle S. James, weep and houle; and so might he have warned al
people, and all sorts, and all degrees to weep, as King Hezechias did, when he
turned his face to the wall, being sorry that he had offended God, and that an
end was come unto him therefore; to weep as the Apostle S. Peter did, bitterly,
for his grievous sin, whereby he forsook his Lord and master. Let this make
every one to weep, both for others and for themselves, in their chambers and
in their closets, at home and abroad, where ever they go, and what ever they
do, considering that the sins of others, as also their own sins, should be
the cause of so great an overthrow. Turn unto me with all your heart, and
with fasting, and with weepiing, and with mourning, and rent your hearts and not
your clothes, and turn unto the Lord your God, says ye Prophet. For who
knows, whether God will return and leave a blessing. Let every one thus weep
for themselves, and thus turn unto the Lord; for who knows whether God will
change his anger and forget our sins. And though death and destruction of the
world, be a heavy plague that shall light upon the most part of the inhabitants
of the world, I say, who knows whether this shall turn to us for a great
blessing. The consideration of which blessing, will make us turn our tears
into joy, and our mourning into mirth, not such joy as the world, but as the
spirit of God shall move our hearts unto; It shall make us lift up our heads,
because that when the end of the world shall be, our perfect redemption shall
be accomplished. Finally, it shall also make us more wary by this warning.
According to that of the Apostle Saint Peter, The end of all things is at
hand. Be ye therefore sober and watching in prayer. Take heed says Christ,
least that day come on you unawares. For as a snare, shall it come on the face
of the whole earth. Take heed least ye be taken in surfeiting and drunkenness,
in chambering and wantonness; Take heed lest ye be choked with the cares of
this world, and be too earthly and worldly minded, when ye should be heavenly
minded, seeing that ye world shall have an end, and we know not how soon, nor
how sudden it shall be. Love not the world, nor the delights of the world,
and let not thy heart cleave thereunto, but lift up thy heart and thy mind to
heaven and an other life, whereas thy dwelling is like to be for evermore, if
so be thou be not thy own hindrance, and be taken amongst the five sleepie
and foolish virgins spoken of in the Gospel. Qualis vita finis ita.
For as the tree falls so it lies, and if in the end of the world, nay in
the end of thy life (which is the end of the world to thee) shall be fire and
flame, so thy end shall be hell fire, and such grievous torments which can
never be uttered, and shall never be ended.

The second principal consideration which I noted 2
unto you in this text, is; How and after what sort the world and all the
creatures therein contained were made, consisting on these three
circumstaunces. First, that God Of nothing.
made all things of nothing. Secondly, that they were made by his word and
commandment. Thirdly, that all his creatures were created very good. A
strange and incredible manner, that God should make all things of nothing. Yet
as we read in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Chapter 11. 3. Through faith we
understand, that the world was ordained by the word of God, so that the things
which we see, are not made of things which did appear. For he made all things
of nothing, when as yet there was none of them. Wherein the Apostle does well
attribute the matter unto faith; for by our natural reason, we were never able
to comprehend it, but contrariwise, we should think it a matter too absurd and
against reason. As also in the conception of our Savior Christ, that he should
be borne of a pure virgin, without the help of man, has seemed unto many, a
matter in no wise to be believed. In so much, that some have been bold to say,
and their speech ungodly enough, that the body of our Savior Christ was
rather a fained body, then a body like unto ours of flesh and blood. Our
Savior Christ said unto his disciples, That it was easier for a rope to pass
through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into ye kingdom of
heaven. Whereat they marvelled, saying; Who then shall be saved? To whom Christ
answered. To men this seems impossible, but to God all things are possible.
And herein is the difference betwixt the works of God and me^, that they can
bring nothing to pass but by means, but God shows his power unto us, in y^
without means of nothing, he can do all things. Sarah Abraham's wife laughed,
when she heard that she should have a son in her old age, seeing it had
ceased to be with her after the manner of women, and that her womb had so long
been barreine, and as it was to be thought now dead. What says she, after I
am waxed old, and my Lord also, shall I have lust? But the Angel answered;
Shall any thing be heard to the Lord? who as of nothing made infinite creatures,
so caused he of one, even of one which was dead, to spring, so many as the
stars of the sky in multitude, and as the sand of the sea which is
innumerable. What more impossible then to put life into a stone? Yet says John
Baptist unto the Jews, that boasted themselves, that they were Abraham's
posterity, God is able of these stones, to raise up children unto Abraham.
How should we say in the Articles of our belief, I believe in God the father
Almighty, unless we were fully persuaded that he were able to do all
things whatsoever he would. Which things also the Devils know and do believe.
Else the tempter would not have said unto Christ; If thou be the son of
God, command that these stones be made bread. What foolishneshnesse is it then
for us, to measure the infinite power of God, within the narrow strait of our
own conceit. Much like the servant of the Prophet Elisha, who saw nothing,
when as there were round about his master and himself, horses and char^ts of
fire, the mountain full. Yet this matter of Gods Almighty power, is more
manifest in the resurrection, that after our bodies have been consumed to
earth and ashes, and has been meat for the fowls of the air, the beasts
of the earth, and the fishes of the sea, when every part and parcel of our
bodies are brought to nothing, yet shall they return to their former estate,
and be renewed again. As Iobe says; I hope to see my Redeemer in the latter
day, not with any other, but with these same eyes. What is it for him when all
things are vanished, and consumed to nothing, to bid them return again; who
as the Prophet faith, Renueth the face of the earth, and does cloth it yearly
as it were with a new garment. What is it for him to make a plentiful land
barraine, and to bring forth nothing, as he did by the land of Sodom and
Gomorrha, and to make a barraine land to be plentiful, and to bring forth all
things. For as he turns the floods into a wilderness, and dries up the
water springes, Psalm. 107. 35. So again, he makes the wilderness a standing
water, and water springs of a dry ground. Darkness and light to him are both
alike, so is it his only property, both to make all things of nothing, and
that there should be nothing impossible unto him. Wherefore let us not
foolishly imagine, that out of nothing, nothing can be made, as some have
thought, and those not meanly learned, but when we come to the view of the
works of God, all learning and wisdom of man must (...). And although we
read, that man was made of the dust of the earth, the fishes and fowls of the
water, the woman of man, yet the first beginning of all things was of nothing:
let us with Iobe. cap. 26. 7. behold yet a little more nearer, very manifestly
and also with great delight. The words of Iobe are these. He hangs the
earth upon 2. Esd. 16. 501.
nothing. Which thing is subject even to our senses. For the heavens every
way forth do compass the Earth and the Sea, and the Earth and the Sea
stands of it self without any manner help, but only from GOD. And
although every one cannot perceive so much, yet the learneder sort have
tried it, and found it out by learning, and some passengers and travelers, if
not by land, yet by sea have adventured it. If it hang upon nothing, wonder
not. For God has laid the foundations of the earth, Psalm. 104. 5. that it
never should move at any time, making it fast, and giving it a law which
should never be broken, till he saw good, and that all should be ended.

But that we should be somewhat more resolved in this By his word.
doubtful matter, this we are to learn, that as God made all things of
nothing that did appear, so also he performed this wonderful work, only by
the word of his mouth. The Potter makes his vessels out of the claie, the
Carpenter builds his house of timber, the Smith forgeth his instruments out
of iron, but show me the workman that can but wish his work made ready to
his hands, without any other help, but only to have it for the wishing.
Only and alone it was God that commanded and said, Let it be so, and it was
so. Psalm. 135. 6. For whatsoever it pleased God, that did he in the heaven, and
in the earth, in the sea, and in all deep places. To us that have a very small
insight in the infinite works and power of God, it seems impossible it should
be so, yet the word of God which is the foundation of all truth, has
certified us that it is so. Psalm. 33. 6. ^. By the word of the Lord were the
heavens made, and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth. For he
spoke and it was done, he commanded, and it stood. His effectual power, was in
his word and commandment. In the beginning God created the heaven and the
earth, and said; Let there be light, and there was light; Let there be a
afirmament, and it was so; Let the earth bud forth herbs and trees, and it
was so; Let there be lights in the heaven, and there were lights; Let there be
fowls in the air and fishes in the sea, and there were multitudes, and God
was delighted in the work; Let the earth bring forth all beasts and cattle,
and presently they were to be seen. This was that eternal word of God, which
was before all things, the ingraued form of the image of God, the second
person in the godhead, by the which all things were made. This was the word of
God which was before his works of old, which was set up from everlasting, from
the beginning, and before the earth. When there were no depthes, neither any
fountains abounding with water, before the mountains were settled, and before
the hills, he had not yet made the earth, nor the open places, nor the height
of the dust in the world, when he prepared the heavens it was there, and when
he set the compass of the deep. When he established the clouds above, when
he confirmed the fountains of the deep, when he gave his decree to the sea,
that the water should not pass his commandment; when he appointed the
foundation of the earth; then was his word with him a nourisher, and it was his
daily delight, rejoicing always before him. She is the breath of the power of
God, and a pure influence that flows from the glory of the Almighty; She is
the brightness of the everlasting light, the undefiled mirror of the majesty
of God, and the image of his goodness. Which being one, she can do all things,
and remaining in her self, renueth all. In the beginning was the word, and the
word was with God, and that word was God; The same was in the beginning with
God. Al things were made by it, and without it was made nothing that was made.
In it was life, even the life of all gods creatures, quickening and preserving
all things, and in great wisdom disposing all things in their due order. So
that the wise man might well call it the delight of God, which sits about
his throne, and the bewty of all his creatures, through the beholding whereof,
it pleased God to pronounce and say, That all things that were made were very
good, and in respect of their workmanship excellent.

This also is worthy the marking, in the work of gods creation, that whereas
in the works of all earthly creatures, there is labor and sweat, and
weariness, god by his almighty power brought this wonderful matter to pass,
with great ease, with great delight and joy. It was no more with him but his
word and his commandment, only it was his will it should be so. At whose will
and word and commandment, as all the living creatures were made, which he in
his infinite wisdom thought good off, so also might he have caused many more
to be made and created, not because he was a weary of his work, but because
he thought it not expedient. Yet some may think that Gods Creation was a
labor unto him, and a wearisome labor, because we read, that he rested the
seventh day, from all his work which he had made. Which he did not, because
he fainted as it were under the burden of so weighty a business, (for it was
neither a business nor a matter of weight, nor a burden unto him) or for his
ease and refreshing, but only for his delight, and further contentation, but
only because it was his will, and that it so pleased him. The easiness of this
work is so much the more to be wondered at, not only that it was without
pain and weariness, but also that he did both undertake and finish the same
of his own accord, and of himself, without any other helps and means.
Nothing excellent, nay if it be never so mean, that is done on the Earth, but
has great helps. The City and the Tower which Nimrod and his company went
about to build, the top whereof, they purposed should reach unto the heavens,
(a mirror to the world if it might have been finished) was it done by one or
by two? No, an infinite multitude put their heads and their hands to it, and
all little enough. There were Carpenters, and Masons, and such as should make
brick, and burn it in the fire; there were master deuisers, and master
builders, and inferior drudges, and a number of laborers, as thick as the
swarms of Egypt. They labored all jointly, with heart and hand, heauing and
shouing, toyling and sweating, and all to no purpose, to their great grief and
coffeehouse, for all was dashed. How were the Pyramides of Egypt, those
famous monuments, erected and set up, as easy think you, as if one stone might
be laid? View the building but of a small cottage, and say what a busy piece
of work it it. But with God was no such thing, he was all alone, and there was
none other; he begun it, and he brought it to pass; he commanded, and
never labored; he created, and never rested; until all was as you see. The
night and faintness come upon man, and he must of necessity leave off. That
creature which has not his rest, cannot continue his strength to labor. When
the Sun rises, man goes forth to his work and to his labor, but how
long? If six or seven hours together, without some food and some refreshing,
it is a marvel, but if he continue until the evening, he can stay no
longer at it, for the weakness of his body will not suffer him, and the
light of the day is closed up with night and darkness. Again, the works of
men may have many chaunges, before they come to perfection, and the workman
himself may be displeased at his work, and begin anewe, but GOD as he is
unchangeable, so even at the first was his work perfect, without any
alteration. Who has made the earth by his power, and established the world by
his wisdom, and has stretched out the heaven by his discretion. Ier. 10. 12.

Furthermore, in the manner of Gods creation, this is All good.
not the least and meanest thing to be considered of; That all that God made
was good. And God saw all that he had made, and behold it was very good.
Every thing in his order and in his kind perfect, and absolute, as says the
Prophet Moses, though not durable and always to continue. No marvel then if
the learned did name the world to be beauty, seeing God himself after he
had created all, saw that they were very good. Also because the majesty,
wisdom and power, gods workmanship, did give a grace to every thing to adorn
it, and to set it forth to the commendation of man. The works of the Lord
says the Psalm, are great, and worthy to be praised and had in honor, which
also are sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. All the works of
the Lord says the wise man are good, and he gives every one in due season,
and when need is. So that a man need not say, this is worse then that. For in
due season they are all worthy praise. And therefore praise the Lord with
whole heart and mouth, and bless the name of the Lord, who upon all his works
has powered forth his blessings, and has made the wise and godly to behold
it, although this knowledge be kept from the wicked, who in no sort are worthy
to be partakers either of gods goodness or of his blessings and comforts. None
are so set to dispraise and discommend, and to disdain at gods works and his
creatures, as the wicked, which are ready to find fault where they have no
cause, and to despise that, whereof they see no present use, and to curse and
abhor those creatures, whereby they may have any hurt or hinderance. Yet
certain it is, that god has made nothing, that has any fault, although many a
graceless people think so, which are destitute of wisdom. For the one
commends the goodness of the other, and who can be satisfied with beholding
gods glory in them. For through him all things are directed to a good end. Many
creatures seem to be created hurtful, and some will say, what good is in them?
Doubtless god forelawe that the earth should be filled and inhabited with two
sorts of people, the good and the bad, the wicked and the godly, for whose
sake, were created his beneficial and helpefull creatures, and his plaguing
and revenging creatures. Which god in his wisdom has thus disposed, to frame
us to thankfulness, to a reverence and fear of his majesty, that we should
not offend him, or provoke his anger against us. And although the foolish mind
of man may think some creatures of god to have no goodness in their creation,
because they that deserve the contrary find it not, yet in their nature they
are good, because they are the work of God, and this is their goodness, that
they execute Gods punishments. A notable example whereof, we see in the
Prophecy of Daniel, concerning his malicious enemies and wicked accusers, who
when they were cast unto the lions, were torn in pieces, before they came to
the ground, which if they had done upon a ravening kind of nature, it would
have been seen upon Daniel himself, who was cast amongst the lions before
they were, and yet was not touched. To give a manifest proof unto us, that God
has made them to execute his wrath, and has ordained them to a good end,
though in their tune they be terrible and most hurtful. Which as yet more
manifestly it appears in the examples of the Prophets, that disobeyed Gods
commandment, and was therefore slain by a lion, whereof we read, 1. King.
13. The old Prophet which had caused the young Prophet to transgress Gods
commandment, as they were sitting at the table, the word of the Lord came unto
him, and he cried unto the young Prophet, saying; Thus says the Lord, because
thou have disobeyed the mouth of the Lord, and have not kept the commandment
which the Lord the God commanded thee, but came back again, and have eaten
bread and drunk water, in the place, whereof he did say unto thee; Thou shall
eat no bread, nor drink any water; therefore thy carcass shall not come into
the sepulcher of thy fathers. So when the Prophet was departed and gone, a lion
met him by the way and slew him, and his body was cast in the way, and the
ass stood thereby; the lion stood by the corpse also. The ass which is wont to
be the pray of the lion, was unhurt, the hungry lion stood by, as though ^e
had no lust to eat; because God had shut his mouth to show his judgment, and
therefore the lion stood still, till other came to behold the same, and as it
were to bear witness. In the lion we may behold gods wisdom in all other
cruel and terrible beasts, who never rage till men be come to an outlawe, I
mean when they forget God and themselves, then does God use the fierceness of
his revenging creatures, because he would have good order kept, and that men
should live in awe, and as we say, under a law, even Gods law, which is most
righteous and holy. This is not ordinary, for God has put the sword into the
Magistrates hand to punish offenders, and to cut them off, but sometimes he
punishes extraordinarily. As we read, Eccle. 39. 28. 32. There be spirits
that are created for vengeance, which in their rigor lay on sure strokes. In
the time of destruction, they show forth their power, and accomplish the wrath
of him that made them. Fire and hail, and famine, and death, all these are
created for vengeance. The teeth of wild beasts, and the scorpions, and the
serpents, and the sword, execute vengeance for the destruction of the wicked.
They shall be glad to do his commandments, and when need is, they shall be
ready upon earth, and when their hour is come, they shall not ouerpasse the
commandment. The night and darkness is created of God to a good end, that
all his creatures may take rest therein, yet was it a grievous punishment unto
the Egiptians, and a forerunrer of hellish darkness. Frogs and lice, and
grasshoppers, and such creatures, lightly do no great hurt, but when God would
punish the Egiptians his enemies, by them, they came among them in abundance,
and in swarms, and molested them grievously, in so much that the land did
stink with their huge heaps. No creature we think so ugly to look to, as a
toad, yet it is a good creature of God, and in his time deserves praise. The
physician knows it, which creature, though some do use to mischief, yet he to
medicine; for he draws ye virtue and dried po^^er thereof into his purging
helps; yet so, that he allaieth it with greater preservatives. Again, God
does make this creature commendable unto us, if it were for nothing else but
for the precious stone which is found in him, and therefore is set in gold, and
some do wear it in their rings, being there delectable to their sight, which
otherwise they take to be so loathsome. Concerning all hurtful creatures,
which in their creation are good, if we find our selves agreeued, let us
consider and weigh the matter with greater deliberation, and we shall then
find, that no creature had been hurtful, if man had not been sinful. So that
now the fault of man is to be blamed and lamented, not Gods creation, which is
highly to be honored, and cannot sufficiently be praised. The most hurtful
creature, that ever was, or is, or shall be, I mean the devil, let us consider
Gods work in him. For he was made angel of heaven, which for his pride was
cast down into hell, and forced to dwell in bottomless darkness, and
plagued with everlasting torments. In respect of which his excellent creation,
the history of Job numbreth him among the children of God, that is, his Angels.
As in the chapter 1. v. 6. Now on a day when the children of God came and stood
before the Lord, Satan came also among them. Also the Prophet Michaah, 1. Kin.
22. 19. speaking of the deceiving of King Achab by a false spirit, generally
amongst Gods angels, makes mention of him. The devil was good at the first,
how hurtful so ever he is now. Which is a good instruction to us that stand,
or rather that think we stand, lest we fall away from God as he did, and so be
partakers of his woeful miseries. Lastly, let us behold our selves, next to
the angels, none more excellently created then we, but as the devil fell away
from God and all goodness, so by our disobedience in our first parents, did we
deserve the like punishment, and in like sort to be cast away, unless God in
great mercy had taken compassion on us, and delivered us from the gates of
hell. For whose goodness we have the greater cause to be thankful, that he
gave his only son to death for the redemption of mankind, passing by and
leaving these rebellious Angels in their cursed estate. And to see, no
creatures have defaced gods work so much as they, that were his most
excellent creatures, and of whom it might have been very well said, They are
very good. So that almighty God was highly displeased, and sorry that he had
created them, wondering as it were with himself, that so great wickedness
should ouergrow and ouerwhelme his excellent goodness, as though light had
been put out in utter darkness, and life for ever swallowed up of death. For
after a while God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and
that all the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart were only evil
continually. Then his mercy and his wrath did strine together, now for pity
he mourned, and then in justice he thought upon punishment to destroy them from
the face of the earth. All the works of God were very good, but let us be
hold y^ works which are now brought into the world, which being never made by
God, are crept in by the devils malice, and man's corruption, as breaches and
blots of Gods order, and of his good creation. Such are sin, deformity,
confusion, tyranny, calamity, death and destruction. Which works deserve
hatred and lamentation, and are far from praise and commendation. For they
are the horrible deprauation, of the order first made by god. For god has not
made death, neither has he pleasure in the destruction of the living. For he
created all things that they might have their being, and the generations of the
world are preserved, and there is no poison of destruction in them.
Concupiscence is not of the father, but of the world; Sin came of the devil;
Death through sin. The Devil the father, Sin the mother; and Death the
child, the child of perdition, and everlasting condemnation. 3


The third and last matter of weight, which I gave you The use and end of Gods
creation and of his creatures.
to consider of, was, the end and use of Gods creation, why and wherefore all
his creatures were made. Which is twosold. First and principally, herein God
regarded his own glory. Secondarily and consequently, the use and benefit of
mankind. The Lord has made all things for himself says Solomon; which the
Prophet declares in these words; The heavens declare the glory of God; and as
yet is more plainly expressed in the words of the Apostle, writing to the
Romans, Chapter 1. 20. For the invisible things of him, that is, his eternal
power and Godhead are seen by the creation of the world, being considered in
his works. But so vain are men by nature, and ignorant of God, that they
cannot know him by the good things that are seen, neither consider by the
works the morkemaister. For they have thought, the fire, or the wind, swift
air, or the course of the stars, or the raging water, or the lights of
heaven to be governors of the world and gods. Who though they had such
pleasure in their beauty, that they thought them gods, yet should they have
known, how much more excellent he is that made them. For the first author of
beauty, has created these things. Or if they marvelled at the power and
operation of them, (for in his creatures God shows his power) yet should they
have perceived thereby, how much he that made these things is mightier. For
by the beauty and greatness of the creatures, the Creator being compared with
them, may be considered. He walks upon the clouds, and brings the
winds out of his treasure, he rules the raging of the sea, the Lord God of
hosts is his name, he is the Lord of power. Which is partly seen in the
thunder and lightening, whereat not only the cruel beasts of the forest do
tremble, but even the hearts of wicked men, which are given to dishonor and to
blaspheme God, do quake. Which is the fear of all creatures, and the
amazement and astonishment of the whole world. The foolish gods of mortal men,
what power have they in their works, or what glory: One has a scepter and
cannot rule, an other has a sword in his hand, and cannot wound his enemies,
or defend his friends, or save himself: but GOD shows his power and glory
herein, by destroying his enemies out of heaven, and thundering upon them.
For as the Prophet Samuel, ^^ Sa. 7. 10. offered the burnt offering, the
Philistines came to fight against Israel, but the Lord thundered with a great
thunder that day upon the Philistines, and scattered them, so they were slain
before Israel. But more fearfully he showed his power by this means against
the Egiptians, Exodus 9. 23. For when Moses stretched out his rod toward
heaven, the Lord sent thunder and hail, and lightning, upon the ground, and
the Lord caused hail to rain upon the land of Egypt. So there was hail, and
fire mingled with the hail, so grievous, as there was none the like,
throughout all the land of Egypt, since it was a Nation. And the hail smote
throughout all the land of Egypt, all that was in the field both man and
beast, also the hail smote all the herbs of the field, and brake to pieces
all the trees of the field. This is not usual, but then it was for his
glory. Moreover, God showed his glory, his power and his might, to his own
people, to strike a fear into their hearts, and that they should not
transgress his law. For at the delivery of his law, he showed his terrible
majesty by thunder and lightning, by fire, by a cloud, and darkness. So
that the people said; Behold, the Lord our GOD hath-shewed us his glory and
his greatness, and we have heard his voice out of the midst of the fire. Yea
when they saw the thunders and the lightnings, and the sound of the Trumpet,
and the mountain smoking, they fled and stood a far off. The Prophet
David prays that God would be revenged of them. Cast forth thy lightning
says he, and tear them, shoot out thine arrows and consume them. And in an
other place, as he speaks of the thunder, The Lord thundered out of heaven,
and the highest gave his thunder, hailestones and coals of fire; so he
speaks also of his lightening. He sent out his arrows and scattered them,
he cast forth lightenings and destroyed them. The heavens declare his
Godhead, by the creation of those beautiful creatures, which the Heathens
have taken for Gods, the Sun, the Moon, and the stars; his Godhead and his
goodness, in sending down rain and showers, and causing fruitful seasons,
to fill our hearts with joy and great gladness. According to that of the
Prophet Jeremy, cap. 14. 22. Are there any among the vanities of the Gentiles
(meaning their idols and silly gods) that can give rain, or can the heavens
themselves give showers? Is it not thou o Lord our God? Therefore we will wayt
upon thee, for thou have made all these things. The extraordinary course of
Gods creatures, when it pleases Almighty GOD so to work, does wonderfully
set forth his glory. How should the fire loose his strength and forget to
burn, as we read of the three children that were cast into the fiery furnace,
which was made exceedingly hot, and yet they were not hurt, nor any smell of
fire about their garments? How should the sea part it self and stand upon
heaps, as it did to give the children of Israel passage, and to set them free
from their enemies? How should the earth open and swallowe up people as it
has done, to execute Gods just judgments? An example whereof, we have in
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and since their time has been seen in the world?
How should all this come so to pass, unless only it were to set forth the
glorious and fearful name of the Lord. This made the people to wonder at the
great power and might of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in taming the
raging of the Sea, and breaking the extreme force of the blustering winds.
For he rebuked the wind and the waves of water, and they presently ceased,
and it was calm again as before. And all they that saw and beheld the same,
were sore amazed, and said; Who is this, that commands both the winds and
water and they obey him; Glorifying God, because they never saw any such
thing. The hurtful creatures that God has made, even by them his glory does
more appear. The white has a fairer show, being compared with black; the
comfort of the day, is made more manifest, by considering the discomfort of
the night and darkness: after sickness we are more thankful for our health,
and hurtful creatures do make us more to esteem the benifit of gods goodness,
in the help of those creatures which are for our use and profit. For God in
great wisdom, has made as well hurtful things as others, that by contraries
a fuller knowledge might grow in man, to the praise of God, that has done all
so well. Concerning which hurtful creatures, let us not be too rash, but
bridle our thoughts with wisdom and moderation. For although presently and at
the very first sight, we know not the good of a creature, yet God is not
therefore presumptuously to be misliked for creating the same, who may do
with his own as pleases him best. Again, many creatures there are, which
seem to serve to no use, yet most certain it is, that God has made nothing
in vain. And a man need not to say, What is this? Wherefore is that? For he
has made all things for their own use. Wherein let us refer all to Gods
secret wisdom, who knew what was best for his glory. And although the use of
them be unprofitable to us, yet is it well known to God, and let us be of the
same mind with the Apostle saying, Of him, and through him, and for him, are
all things, to whom be praise and glory for ever, Amen. Neither let us be
backwards in giving God this glory due unto him, seeing the creatures
themselves do glorify God in their obedience. The stars shine in their watch
and rejoice. When he calls them they say, Here we be; and so with
cheerfulness they show light to him that made them. And of all the rest of
gods creatures so it may be said. Lastly and principally, God has made man,
for his glory. For as he has made all things for his own sake, so has he
made even the wicked for the day of evil: Because the justice of God shall
appear to his glory, even in the destruction of the wicked. For as the
scripture says unto Pharach, For this same purpose have I stirred thee up,
that I might show my power in thee, and that my name might be declared
throughout all the world. Again, as God would have his power known, by
suffering with long patience the vessels of wrath prepared to destrustruction,
so also was it his pleasure to declare the riches of his glory upon the
vessels of mercy, which he has prepared unto glory. Who has chosen us in
Christ before the foundations of the world, that we should be holy and without
blame before him in love, who has predestinate us to be adopted through Jesus
Christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise
of the glory of his grace, wherewith he has made us accepted in his beloved.
Although God has made the wicked against the evil day, to show his glory by
his justice, yet does his glory more consist in the works of mercy. For mercy
rejoices against judgment, and his mercy is over all his works. His wrath
reaches to the third and fourth generation, but his mercy unto thousands.

Above all other creatures, as God is gracious and merciful For man's use.
unto man, so also is he more bountiful unto him, then unto all the rest. For
he has created all things for man's use, granting unto him most largely, and
that more liberally, then any prince his gift can be in all his royalty. For
man was the world made and ordained not for angels, nor for others creatures,
but only so far forth as they serve for the use and benefit of man. And
what greater comfort can there be to the godly, then to think as God has
principally created the heavenly Angels for his glory, so also secondarily for
their benefit. There be revenging Angels (as in the Psalm 78. 50. God sent
evil Angels among the Egiptians, and also in the destruction of Sodom) the
which lay on sure strokes on the wicked; and there be comfortable Angels
which wayt upon the godly. As it is in the Psalm; The Angel of the Lord
tarrieth round about them that fear him, and delivers them. As the Angels
for the defense of Jacob against the injury of his brother Esau; the Angel in
the fiery furnace, with the three children; the Angel that delivered Peter the
Apostle out of prison. Thou have man says the Prophet, lower then the Angels,
and yet behold the goodness of God, in that he has made them servant unto
man. And if he has ordained the Angels to help us, much more other creatures
to serve us in our need, to cherish and to comfort us, to feed us, and to
cloth us. Let us look upon other creatures, and consider the heavens, the
moon and the stars which God has ordained, and it shall make us to say in
joy and comfort. O Lord what is man, that thou art so mindful of him? The Sun
as it cheereth all other creatures, so is it a great comfort unto man, and it
is a pleasure unto him to behold the fair beauty thereof, and gives him
courage in all his work and labor. The Moon has her diverse observations,
and great profit, which is the school mistress unto the husbandman, to teach
him to sow and to plant, and a chief director unto the Seaman, to order his
voyages and nauigations by Sea, to mark the ebb and the flow by the new and
the change. And with the husbandman and the Seaman, we may yet learn further,
with great delight and singular help that God has sent. See how the sea does
swell in waves and rise in mountains, and roar as it were for coffeehouse,
that it cannot ouerflow the face of the earth. For by the course of nature, the
earth should be under and the water above. For the water is a lighter element
then the earth, neither could the earth avoid the mastery of the sea, were it
not that other order were taken, and that God had set the sea his bounds, as
if he had said; Here shall thou stay, and break thy proud and swelling
waves. They go up says the Psalm, as high as the hills, and would feign be
above the mountains, they go down to the valleys beneath, even unto the
place which thou have appointed for them. Thou have set them their bounds
which they shall not pass, neither return again to cover the earth. Ask
them which venture upon the sea, who see the works of the Lord, and his
wonders in the deep, and they will tell thee that they are now carried up so
high, that they think themselves in the heavens above, and by and by they fall
down into the deep, as if the waters should be their grave; and no marvel
that their soul melts away because of the trouble, and that they are at
their wits ends. The sea has his bounds set, that man might have his
dwelling, and this is Gods favorable appointment. Who not only abateth the
force of the sea, but also makes it nauigable, to give him rest at home, and
to bring him treasures from far. Yet is there an other matter well near as
strange as this, to see how God orders all things, fit and convenient for
the habitation and dwelling of man. For as GOD gave a decree unto the Sea and
Waters to give man room, and not to hinder his dwelling, so also has he laid
his commandment upon the wild beasts, and enclosed them within the
desartes and waste places, as it were, setting unto them also, their bounds,
which they shall not pass. So that although they roar after their pray, and
go raunging about to devour, yet they shall roar and raunge, and rage no
further, then their compass and the desert, unless God for a punishment unto
men, do give them further leave, as I have showed you before. These cruel
creatures, they come not where man has his dwelling, but only such creatures
as are for his use, and for ye maintenance of his life. The hornet is in the
wood, the be in the garden, the lion and the bear are in the desert, kine and
horses at thy door and in thy stable; wolves far away, and sheep about
thee; wild beasts are in desolate places, that man may be at rest and in
quiet. A manifest proof of Gods ordinance herein, is set down in the Psalm.
104. Thou make darkness o Lord, that it may be night, wherein all the
beasts of the forest do moan; The sun arises, and they get them away
together, and lay them down in their dens. Then man goes forth to his work
and to his labor, until the evening. The wild beasts says the Prophet do
moan, but he makes no further mention but of the forest. And that we need not
fear their rage, he speaks of the night, when man takes his rest and his
doors are shut upon him. And for a further assurance of Gods gracious care
over man, he says, that as soon as the Sun rises, they get them away; which
could not come to pass, unless God had so wrought it. God has ordained the
day that man might labor therein, and the night to give him rest; he caused
the fowls of the air, the cattle on the earth, and the fishes in the sea to
multiply and increase, that man might take thereof for his food. The bread to
streng then him, the wine to cheer his heart, the sheep to cloth him,
diverse herbs for medicine and to cure him in his sickness. Quarres for stone,
trees for timber, that men might make them houses and dwelling places, to keep
them from the fervent heat in summer, and in the winter from pinching cold,
from storms and tempests. In a word, all things to comfort him, all things to
cheer him, all things to rejoice him. When God had thus created all things for
man, the earth to walk in, the beasts to feed and ^loath him, all things else
for his use and profit, yet was man as it were all in a wilderness, he saw no
creatur? fit and convenient to keep him company; yea when God himself had taken
a view of all his creatures, he saw no help meet for man. The Lord brought
all creatures unto man to give them names, and as they were all before God, we
read that God found not a help meet for Adam. And then he said; It is not
good that the man should be himself alone, I will make him a help. Therefore
the Lord caused a heavy sleep to fall upon the man, and he slept; and he
took one of his ribs and closed up the flesh in steed thereof. And the rib
which the Lord God had taken from man, made he the woman and brought her to the
man, who before, was like an imperfect building. Although God had special
regard of the increase of mankind, yet in the creation of the woman, there is
nothing so much spoken of as that she should be a help. But I would to God
that men would more regard Gods ordinance, and consider there withal, what
for frailty of men requires. If themselves be able to refrain, let them
give god thanks that has so enabled them, and if other have not the same gift
with them, there is no cause why they should be despised and disdained, if
they use the remedy appointed, and avoid the extremity. Unless they count
whoredom more tolerable then marriage, and that estate which the spirit of
God does term honorable in all degrees of men, to be contemptible in some.
Which matter nevertheless is so warily to be handled, that we run not into
contempt, through want of wisdom and discretion. It were to be wished says
the Apostle, that all men were as I am, but every man has his proper gift of
God. And the same Apostle foretells, that in the latter days such shall
arise, that shall forbid marriage. Yet so to teach, to forbid to scoff or
disdain, has this mark to accuse their conscience in so doing, that it is
neither honest, nor good, nor laudable, but only the doctrine of devils.

Not only has God thus created all things to satisfy man's necessity, but
also for his delight and pleasant contentation, even plentifully, liberally,
and largely: Yet so, that we use his creatures with moderation, and not in
excesie, godly and soberly, not wantonly and wickedly, not wasifully and
prodigally. Either in thy diet by too much dei^caten^^e or gluttony; or in thy
apparel unto pride; or in thy gorgeous building far more then need is, to
be laughed to scorn for thy vanity. The plentiful goodness of God should be
applied to good uses, but such is man's either wanton^sse, or foolishness, that
such matters slip out of his remembrance, and vanity is entertained, as
though all these things were created for vanity. Abundance should procure
thankfulness and the relief of the poor, but in steed of thankfulness,
steps in a slumbring kind of idleness, and in steed of relief, disdain and
contempt of the poor; and charity waxes key cold, where iniquity bears
the sway and has the upper hand. Behold says the prophet Ezech. 16. this was
the iniquity of Sodom, Pride, Fullness of bread, Abundance of idleness,
nether did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy. The better sort use
Gods benifits to his glory, their comforts, and the help of others; But in
the worser sort of people, of whom the world is too full whose minds are given
altogether earthly, fleshly, and sensually, there is no such regard, no such
consideration, but the more wanton and vain they are, the more they think they
please others, even such as are like them selves: Otherwise they give great
offense to them that are godly and well minded, and virtuously disposed, and
provoke gods anger against themselves. Come say they, let us enjoy our
pleasures; as though they were borne for nothing else, but to eat and drink,
and to play. Let us fill our selves with costly wine and ointments. Let us
crown our selves with rose buds, before they be withered. But to what purpose,
and what is their mind in so doing? Their answer is this. Let not the flower
of our youth pass by us, and let us all be partakers of our wantonness, and let
us leave some token of our pleasure in every place. For that is our portion say
they, and this is our lot; and this is the only life we look to have. They
that sow to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; and everlasting
heaviness shall be their portion. For how sweet so ever they think it is,
yet bitterness shall be in the end. Though GOD have created many things, as
well for delight as necessity, yet they turn them to a wicked delight, as
though the distemperature were the right use. Surfeiting and drunkenness,
pride, and excess, whoredom and uncleanness, chambering and wantonness, and
what not? Being far from the mind of the holy Apostle, Use the world as
though thou did not use it. Let not this delight of the creatures, draw thee
from thy duty to thy Creator. That which should provoke thee the more to love
him, let it not be a mean nor any occasion, that his anger should be stirred
against thee to punish thee. The grace of God has appeared, to teach us to
live, not only godly and righteously, but also soberly in this present world,
looking not on these worldly delights, but waiting for the coming of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, who shall make our bodies like to his glorious body,
and at his coming, who shall take us together with him into the heavens. Let
no man grudge if he be debarred from some delights. For God has not granted
to every one alike, and well is it for the poor, if they have sufficient to
satisfy their necessity, although they also be not restrained from all the
delights of Gods creatures. Wherein the rich and wealthy, although they have
great liberty, must also remember, that God has enjoined them a law of
sobriety, let them look upon the wild beasts which have but their compass,
and upon the mighty waters which have their bounds. They that have not this
liberty, let them take all things thankfully, and be content with their estate
which God has placed them in. And let them frame their minds to the counsel
of the Apostle, Phil. 4. 12. I can be abased, and I can abound; every where
in all things I am instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry, and to
abound and have want; For I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith
to be content. If GOD has granted thee store and plenty, thou may use
his creatures to thy delight, but because the nature of man is given to
excess, and few there be that know the mean, therefore God with these
delights, requires also sobriety, that all abuse may be avoided. Use a little
well that thou may be partaker of much more, and so shall heavenly joys
follow earthly delights. By these things god does try us whether we be meet
and fit for him, or whether we will make our selves the servants and slaves
of the devil. God grant we be found gold and not dross, wheat and not
chafe, which is like to be burnt up with unquenchable fire. Ecc. 39. 26. The
principal things for the whole use of man's life, are, water, fire, and iron,
and salt, and meal, wheat and honey, and milk, the blood of the grape, and
oil, and clothing. All these things are good to the godly, but to the sinners
they are turned into evil, being made culpable and faulty before Gods
judgment seat, by reason of their abusing of them.

Thus you have heard how God has created all things, especially for his glory,
so also that they might serve to the health, life, necessity, and pleasure of
man. But more frankly and with greater consideration and respect to the good of
his chosen people, all which are unto them, as it were instruments, ministers,
and means, whereby God doing them good, might be honored and praised of them.
Only man God created for himself, and all the rest for man, that man,
together with all his creatures, might set forth his glore. O speak good of
the Lord, says the Prophet, all ye works of his, in all places of his
dominion; and there withal does stir up himself to do to; Praise thou the
Lord, o my soul. For what is man o Lord, that thou have such respect unto him,
or the son of man, that thou should so regard him. So long as live will I
praise the Lord, and my mouth shall be full of his praises. All thy works
praise thee o Lord, and thy Saints also give thanks unto thee, they show the
glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power. That thy power, thy glory, and
mightiness of thy kingdom, might be known unto men. O praise the Lord ye
Angels of his, ye that excel in strength, ye that fulfill his commandment and
hearken unto the voice of his words; O praise the Lord all ye his hosts, ye
servants of his that do his pleasure. O praise the Lord of heaven, praise him
in the height. Praise him Sun and Moon; praise him all ye stars and light.
Let them praise the name of the Lord. For he spoke the word, and they wear
made; he commanded, and they were created. (They were not made by blind
chance, but by the power of his word they were created) From the heavenly
creatures, the Prophet passes to the creatures of the earth, whom he makes
to sing the same song. Praise the Lord upon earth, ye dragons and all depthes;
Fire and hail, snow and vapors, wind and storm, fulfilling his word;
Mountains and all hills, fruitful trees and all cedars; Beasts and all
cattle; Worms and feathered fowls. Lastly, when he had given all other
creatures their summons and their warning, he puts men also in remembrance,
least they should be found more unthankful then all other creatures, and so not
worthy of any of Gods benefits. Praise the Lord o ye kings of the earth, and
all people, princes and all judges of the world; young men and maidens, old
men and children, high and low, rich and poor, one with another, praise ye the
name of the Lord. For his name only is excellent, and his praise above heaven
and earth. In praising let us end, and join our selves in this duty with the
four and twenty Elders spoken of in the Revelation of S. John, being before
the throne of God, who fell down before him that sat on the throne, and
worshipped him that lives for ever, who also did cast their Crowns before the
throne, saying; Thou art worthy o Lord our God, to receive glory and honor,
and power, and to thee be given all dominion, might, and majesty; For thou
have created all things, and for thy wills sake, they are and were created.

Deo gratia, solique gloria.
Of his Providence.
2. King. 7. 18. And it came to pass, as the man of God had spoken to the
King, saying; Two measures of Barley at a shekel, and a measure of fine flower
shall be at a shekel, to morrow about this time in the gate of Samaria. But
the Prince on whose hand the King leaned, had answered the man of God, and
said. Though the Lord would make windows in the heaven, could it come so to
pass? And he said, Behold thou shall see it with thine eyes, but thou shall
not eat thereof. And so it came unto him; for the people trod upon him in the
gate, and he died.
After that God had created the world and all the creatures therein, it may not
be thought that he left them alone to themselves, to live or die, to continue
or perish: although it may seem so to us, because when god had made his
creatures, he rested. But he did neither cease nor rest, as men do from their
works which they have made, as after the house is built the work man has no
further care; and so in all other labors finished by man's hand. Truth it is,
that God rested from making and creating more creatures, but not from norishing
and cherishing, from governing and guiding the world and all the creatures
therein. Whose works are wonderful, and daily seen of them which have eyes
to see it. Wherein we must also consider, how God bringetth these matters to
pass, most commonly, ordinarily, and by means, but sometimes extraordinarily
and without means, as the example set down in this text which I have read
unto you does show. Which Division.
text deuideth it self into these two parts; whereof the first is a prophecy
and a declaration of Gods gracious providence, by the mouth of the prophet
Elisha, in these words; Two measures of barley and so forth. In the second part
we may consider the unbelief, distrust, and blasphemous speech of one of the
kings nobles, as also the judgment of God for his unbelief and distrust, and
the just punnishment for his offense in these words. But the prince had
answered, and so forth. In this first part, not only is set down the
providence of God in nourishing, but his mighty power and wise foresight, in
governing and ordering matters as seems best, to the further manifestation of
his glory, by his justice and merice, to the good of the godly, and for a just
punishment to the wicked, profane, and ungodly. How God does nourish all his
creatures, cannot better be set down, then by the words of the Prophet David,
in his Psalms. He waters the hills from above, the earth is filled with the
fruit of thy works, he brings forth grass, and makes the earth to bring
out food. And least they should die for thirst, he also prepares for their
need, for he sends the springs into the rivers, which run among the
hills. All beasts of the field drink thereof, and the wild asses quench
their thirst.

Furthermore, speaking of the infinite and innumerable company of Gods
creatures in the Sea, These says he, wayt all upon thee, that thou may
give them meat in due season. When thou give it them they gather it, and
when thou openest thy hand they are filled with good. The eyes of all things
look up unto thee, thou openest thine hand, and fillest all things living with
plenteousnes. For he makes grass to grow upon the mountains, which may
seem very strange, because of the patching heat of the Sun. For it is
said, that the Sun does burn the mountains, seven times more then does the
heat of a furnace. His plenteousnes does farther appear, in that as it is in
the history of Iobe, he not only makes the rain to fall upon those places
which are fit for man's dwelling, but even upon the wilderness also, where no
man is. Job. 39. 26. 38. How secret is his blessing and plentiful hand, that
he makes even the barren ground to yield forth pasture. As in the same
Chapter of Iobe we read, that he has made the ass to dwell in salt places,
that is, in unfruitful grounds, whereas in man's reason there seems no food
to grow. Many creatures as far as we can perceive, serve to no use, and that
mighty creatures, which will not be fed with a little, yet God opens his
plentiful hand and they want not; whereby we learn his great ability to
preserve, whatsoever wonderfully he has made. We cannot but wonder, how bears
and lions, and such devouring beasts should be fed, which are as it were
insatiable. Therefore Job says, Will thou hunt the pray for the lion, or fill
the appetite of the lions whelps? Who is it that prepares for the raven, when
the birds cry unto God wandering for lack of meat. The lions roaring after
their pray, do seek their meat at God, says the Prophet. Yea when cattle
can look for nothing else but drought and famine, as in the time of winter,
when the earth denies food, and has closed up her sap within her bowels,
and when the grass is consumed with pinching frostes, and covered with
staruing snowes; herein also, is God said to open his hand and to be
plentiful, in that he grants them fodder, and makes the earth in summer
season, to bring forth abundance, that in time of need the cattle may have
enough. But some are so rash in their speeches, that they will impute this
ordinary course of gods daily providence, to a secret kind of virtue, which
God say they, has given to every thing at his first creation. Which reason of
theirs, how fond and foolish it is, we may perceive by this, that nothing can
long endure without such food, as comes by Gods hand and providence. Some of
them feeding upon wholesome meat, some upon carrion, some of grass, some of
prouender, some cleaving to stones and finding nourishment in them, some on the
sand of the sea, and some upon ^^ime and mud, some on the fruits of the trees,
and some upon the flowers of the field. He has appointed some beasts to be a
food for other, as the ass is the lions pray, and diverse small fishes are
swallowed up of greater. And who is it that can perfectly set down, the diverse
sorts of nourishment and food, which God has ordained for all his creatures,
to the preservation of their lives. Which if it had not been so, I mean, if
God had not had care of the preservation of his creatures, his creation had not
lasted but for a moment, and the glory thereof had not reached unto this time,
neither should it have continued as it is like to do, unto the worlds end.
But as God created all things to set forth his glory, and next, for the use of
man, so also has he appointed food to all living creatures, that they might
minister food unto man. Wherein we may well perceive the gracious and loving
care, that God had for man, who before he would have him to be in ye world,
provided all things necessary for him. Not unlike to a man here among us, that
loving the friend who^ he intends to have with him, and to come unto him, ere
ever that he will have him come, makes all things ready, that may be either for
his pleasure, or for his necessity, and then sends for him to come, all
things thus being ready and prepared. Which is not so to be understood, as
though God of necessity did and does so provide for man, but rather of his
goodness and of his mercy. For in steed of health, we deserve sickness; in
steed of plenty, penury and scarcity; in steed of wealth and riches, poverty
and misery. Therefore God through our prouokement, does sometime withdraw his
plentiful hand, and in steed of his gracious providence, calls for a famine
and for a drought, upon man and upon beast, and breaks the sta^^e of bread,
whereby man's heart is strengthened. Indeed God releeueth man above all other
creatures, but yet for sin, God takes his food away from him. If ye keep
all my statutes and continue in my fear, ye shall eat the good things of the
land, if not, I will withdraw my blessings, and send the contrary, says God by
his Prophets. As especially we may read Deu. 28. among the rest of gods
blessings, If thou shall obey diligently the voice of the Lord thy God, and
observe and do all his commandments, blessed shall be thy basket and thy dough,
thou shall have plenty, and the Lord shall open unto thee his good treasure,
even ye heaven to give rain unto thy land in due season. But if thou will not
obey, cursed shall thy basket be and thy dough, and the Lord shall shut up his
good treasure against thee, and ye heaven that is over thy head shall be
brass, and send down no rain, and the earth that is under thee shall be iron,
so fast closed, yt it shall yield thee no fruit nor any increase. Thou shall
carry out much seed into ye field, and shall gather but little in, for ye
grasshoppers shall destroy it. Thou shall plant a vinyard and dress it, but
shall neither drink of ye wine nor gather the grapes, for ye worms shall eat
it. All thy trees and fruit of thy land, shall ye grasshopper consume. God shall
prepare for thee and send thee plenty, but for thy offenses, thou shall not be
partaker of it, but he will give it unto vermin before thy face, to make thee
wonder at his judgments, and to descend into thy self and examine thy own heart
and conscience, that have given such cause. As the Prophet Ezechiel testifies,
cap. 14* 13. Son of man, when the land sins against me, by committing a
trespass, then will I stretch out my hand upon it, and will break the staff of
ye bread thereof, and will send famine upon it, and I will destroy man and beast
forth of it. For he will cause ye heaven to stay it self from dew, and the
earth to deny her fruit. And he will call for a drought upon ye land, and upon
ye mountains, and upon the corn, and upon the wine, and upon ye oil, upon all
that the ground brings forth, both upon men and upon cattle, and upon all
the labor of the hands. And what a grief will it be, to see ye seeds of corn
rot in the earth, and to be changed from corn into weeds. How grievous shall
it be to hear the dumb beasts for to mourn, and to see ye herds of cattle to
pine away, because they have no pasture, and the flocks of sheep to be
destroyed for want of fodder. Yea ye rivers of waters also are dried up,
because the fire of the wrath and displeasure of the Lord, shall devour all.
How should a hundredth fall before ten, unless God had given them up to the
hands of their enemies? And how should Gods providence be debarred from man,
but that God did shorten his hand through their fault? For when Gods anger is
hot against men, then does he cause the enemy to besiege them, and in the
distress of the siege, shall they feel the want of gods gracious providence.
As we read in the aforesaid chapter of Deutronomy. The enemy shall besiege
thee in all thy cities, until the high and strong walls fall down, wherein
thou trust est. Then shall the tender and exceeding dainty man, that loathed
common meats, for want of food eat his own children; also the tender and
dainty woman, which would scarce put her foot to the ground, and was fed as it
were with princes delicats, be glad to eat her after burden, and hunger shall
so byte her, that she shall be ready to eat her child before it be delivered.
Which distress being foretold, afterward fell out in the days of wicked king
Ioram. For his enemies did so besiege him and his people, until the famine was
so great, that an asses head was at four score pieces of silver, and that the
women did eat their children. Well therefore might ye king say, seeing the Lord
does not succor thee, how should I help thee, with the barn or with the wine
press? Meaning, that it lay not in him to help them to any vittaile. For
when God shuts his hand, and withdraws his providence, who can help? When
there is plenty, we think all things come by a common course, but until we be
pinched with want, we shall never perceive gods providence, and then we cry to
God for food, and never before. For the sin of man, God turns plenty into
scarcity, and in steed of food, they find famine; yet to comfort the hearts
of the godly, when other are ready to die for famine, they shall have to serve
their turn. On every side death, famine, misery, crying and weeping, and yet God
shall f^ed them, God shall provide for them, and they shall be so well prepared,
that whatsoever fall out, they shall be content with Gods visitation. As the
rain falls in one place and not in an other, so shall gods blessing reach
and extend it self, more to some then to other some. When there was a famine in
the land, Abraham had to suffice him; so also fell it out unto Izake his son,
when there was a famine and he a stranger in the land, God increased him with
store. But a far greater proof of Gods providence, in the behalf of the
godly, is seen in the example of Joseph the son, and Jacob the father, with
all his children and posterity. For when many lands were ready to starve, they
were fed liberally, as it were from the kings table. So it falls out betwixt
the godly and the wicked, when we think of Gods providence. Abraham, Izake,
and Jacob, have plenty, when Esau is almost dead, for want of a mess of
pottage; and when the prodigal son would feign have filled his belly with
the husks that the swine did eat, but no man gave them him, nor had pity on
him. The lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they which seek the Lord shall
want no manner of thing that is good. For the relief of the whole city of
Samaria, but especially for the comfort of the godly, did God send his Prophet
Elisha, to tell them of plenty, saying; Two measures of barley at a shekel, and
a measure of fine flower shall be at a shekel, to morrow about this time, in
the gate of Samaria. After great scarcity, upon a sudden great plenty, and
more store of corn then of money to give for corn, enough to satisfy them
that were most hungry, and besides to spare. God never suffers his to want
long, though for the wickeds sake, they are somewhat restrained for a season.
Who by his providence is so abundant, that even the wicked also, as the Psalm
says, are filled with his hid treasures. Esau had rich possessions, and Ismael
was a great Lord, and from him came Princes; The hand of God was opened in
most liberal sort unto the Canaanites; yet therewithal we must understand,
that this lasted but for a time, and also to teach us, that if God be so
liberal to them, which are without God in the world, how much more careful
will he be over them that are godly. Trust thou in the Lord and do good, (which
two matters are sure tokens unto us, that if we do so, Gods providence will
never fail us) dwell in the land, and thou shall be fed assuredly. Delight thy
self in the Lord, and he shall give thee thy hearts desire. God makes his
Sun to arise on the evil, as well as on the good, and sends rain on the
unjust, as well as on the just. Yea sometimes their portion is so great, that
they spread themselves like a green bay tree, yet their time is but short. I
passed by says the Prophet, and ^o they were gone, I sought them, but their
place could no where be found. They that wayt upon the Lord and fulfill his
will, they shall inherit the land; yet a little while, and the wicked shall not
appear, the seed of the wicked shall be cut off, and the righteous shall
inherit the land and dwell therein for ever. Fly from evil, and be doing good,
and dwell for evermore. And although the wicked be maintained by gods
providence, and that largely, yet is it especially for this cause, to make them
without excuse, when they shall be called to account, because they have not
lived in the fear of God, seeing that God dealt with them so plentuously.
Wherefore seeing the providence of God has this consideration joined with it,
that they only that fear God, and do his will, are truly partakers of the same*
let us keep our selves in compass, and desire no more of God, then that which
shall relieve our necessities, and be a means to continue us in gods fear.
Delicates and dainties, are for them who are carried away with the lusts of the
flesh; I kept my body under, says S. Paul, lest when I had warned other, I my
self might be reproved. At man's first creation, God appointed every green
herb to be his meat, to teach him abstinence and ^obrietie. In like sort, in
the Psalm 104. we read of Gods ordinance, for the sustenance of all creatures
in these words. He causes grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the
use of man, and that the earth might yield him bread to strengthen his heart.
No speech of delicates and dainties, to breed a contentment in our minds. Not
but that according to their estates and degrees, men may use delicate fare in a
good and godly sort, but the unruly nature of man, is rather given to excess,
then to a mean. And happy is he that can use the creatures of God without
offense. Read the scriptures, and for the most part you shall see, where
mention is made of dainties, it has also these companions; Sin, and
Forgetfulness, Excess and Riot. The Israelites they could not be content with
Manna which came from heaven, even Angels food, but wanton they were, and
needs they must have other fare, grudging and murmuring against God. They fell
a lusting and wept withal, saying; Who shall give us flesh to eat? We
remember the fish that we did eat for naught in Egypt, the cucumbers and the
pepons and the leekes, and the onions, and the garlic, whereof we had such
store as we could wish; but now our soul is dried away, and we can see nothing
but this Manna. Then GOD sent them quails, even dainty flesh. The sweet
mouths of the Sodomites stirred up the flesh, and enforced the heart and mind
to consent to great filthiness, and their bodies were too ready to perform
it. Proud they were, and idle, forgetful of God and of themselves, and
disdainful toward the poor. King Belshazzar, as we read in y^ procie of
Daniel, ca. 5. in his excessive feasting did abound, but even then also, he was
carousing to his co^cubines, and praising his idol gods of gold and of silver,
of brass, of iro^, of wood, and of stone: and further, he abused the holy
vessels of the temple. The prodigal son, had a dainty tooth, and he must
satisfy his mind and spend till all was gone, and that quickly. He spent it in
excess and whoredom. The rich man fared daintily, but he had no regard unto
the poor; and harkened not unto their cries. But what became of these dainty
people? While the flesh of the quails was betwixt the teeth of the Israelites,
a plague came from God and consumed a number of them; Fire and brimstone from
heaven burnt up the Sodomites. The same hour that King Belshazzar was feasting
riotously and wickedly, he saw that with his eyes, that troubled his
thoughts, and made his countenance to change, and his heart to melt, and his
knees to beat one against an other, for fear and trembling. A heavy matter
was showed him, the loss of his kingdom, he escaped not so, but he lost his
life too. After the prodigal son had eaten up his portion of goods, and
spent all in sugar and sauce, then came beggary and misery, and homely meat,
husks with swine. The rich glutton, whose table was furnished in his life
time to his hearts desire, after his death had hell fire to his meat, but
wanted drink to quench his thirst withal, and could not get so much as a
drop of water to cool his tongue, though he made great entreaty for it.
Godliness is great riches, if a man be content with that which God has cast
unto him, and by his gracious providence has given him to enjoy. A small thing
says the Prophet, unto the just man, is better then great riches, to the
wicked and mighty: For they are daily fed as with Manna from heaven, and have
sufficient, when the wicked have never enough, but ever hunger. The wise man
being desirous to live in the fear of God, and being resolved in a contented
mind, desires to be fed by Gods providence, no farther forth, then that which
should be meet and convenient for him. Two things says he, have I required of
thee o Lord, deny me them not before I die. Remove far from me vanity and
lies; Give me not poverty, nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me,
lest I be full and deny thee, and say, Who is the lord? or lest I be pore and
steal, and take the name of my God in vain. As y^ Apostle speaks of them,
that are too too desirous of riches, so may I speak of them y^ are not content
we gods providence, but like wantons call for more. For such discontented
minds fall into tentations and snares; and into many foolish and noisome
lusts, which procure their destruction. For in such fond desires; the root of
much evil lies hid. Wherefore let us carry the mind that Jacob did. O Lord
if thou will give me bread to eat, and clothes to put on, thou shall be my
God, and I will worship thee; and if we have raiment and food necessary for
us, let us therewith be content. A little serves the turn to a contented mind,
and the poor man's children that are fed but with bread and water, are as fair
and in as good liking, if not better, then are the rich men's children, that
have choice of meat at the full. A notable example whereof, we have in the
Prophet Daniel, who being fed but with pulse and water, was fairer and in
better liking, then all the children which did eat the portion of the kings
meat. It is not the meat, but the blessing of God that does all. For although
God has appointed the bread to be our food, yet we live not by bread only as
Christ teaches, but by every word that proceeds out of ye mouth of God, and
from his secret maintenance. In him we live, we move, and have our being. A
great deal without gods blessing shall do us little good, and his providence
makes a little suffice, and has framed and taught nature, so to be content.
Which goodness of God in blessing a little, let us mark in the estate of the
rich and the poor. We think the poor is not able to live, because he wants
worldly helps; such as other do abound withal, and which they cannot find in
their heart to part from, to do the poor good, although God has so
commanded them, and blessed them with store, to this intent that they might be
helpful to the poor, and to those that stand in need. For God has made the
rich and wealthy his stewards to dispose his goods. But behold, the poor man
in his need and necessity, is either disdained or despised, or at least wise
not comforted of the rich and wealthy. Yet God does not so leave him
comfortless, God does not so leave him without help. For the poor that live
in the fear of God, and take an honest course of living to maintain
themselves, God blesses their labors, and makes a little to stretch far.
Whereas oftentimes, the rich and wealthy, having not the fear of God before
their eyes, and trusting to worldly helps, and in the mean time, ryotting and
spending their goods, as though they had mountains, they soon waste all and
come to nothing, much like the prodigal son, who wasted all to his shirt,
and at last, wanted bread to feed him. I have been young says the Prophet
David, in his Psalms, and now am old, and yet saw I never the righteous
forsaken, nor their seed begging their bread. Where he puts a difference
betwixt the poor, whereof some be slothful, and some be painful. The
slothful indeed they beg their bread, because they refuse to get their
living by the sweat of their brows, as God has commanded. And again, God
has laid his curse upon them, that they have the ill will of all people,
wheresoever they go; and no marvel it is, if God withdraw his helping hand
from them. But as for the painful and honest that are poor, gods blessing is
with them, and God ministers unto them diverse helps, and gives them this
comfort, to rejoice them withal, and to cheer their hearts, that they shall
live in credit, having the good will of all, and as we are wont to say, in good
name and fame. So that we may truly believe, the saying of the Prophet, That
the righteous are never forsaken, but that GOD raises them up friends, and
rather then they shall want, feeds them him self.

Although God by his providence does nourish all creatures, Prayer.
and principally man, yet as the lions seek their meat at God, and the ravens
cry unto God, so ought we also much more to make our prayers unto God, that he
will give us our daily maintenance, and not only so, but to take some honest
course of life, to get our living, and to use all other lawful means,
warranted and allowed by gods word. There is nothing given, but lightly it is
requested, and God makes us to stand in need every day and every hour, to the
intent that we should pray for it. Else our Savior Christ would not have
taught us to pray, Give us this day our daily bread. God gives meat to every
living thing, in due season; but as the Prophet says, They look up unto to
the Lord, they hope and trust to receive relief at his hands, when they cry
they are heard; and when we make our prayers, Our Father which art in heaven,
etc. then are we made partakers of our desires. Wherefore they are to be
accounted worse then beasts, which will neither open their lips, nor lift up
their eyes and hearts to heaven, but look they should have maintenance from
God, because they hear tell of his providence, thinking that God is bound to
relieve them. Although Jacob knew that he should be maintained by gods
providence, yet he made his prayer unto God for food and raiment. When the
poor cries, the Lord hears him, and fulfilleth the desire of them that
fear him. So the wise man prays, that God would feed him, and supply his
wants and necessities. Every good thing comes from God, and if we account so
of our maintenance and sustenance, as we cannot otherwise choose, we must look
for it at gods hand, whose manner is, to give nothing without prayer, nor
refuse our prayers when we call unto him, but grants our requests in due
time, if so be he see it meet and convenient for us. Unto our prayers, we must
add painful labor. For we are not created in this world to be idle, but gods
commandment is, that we should get our living by the sweat of our brows.
Mark and see, whether gods providence wait upon the slothful, and thou
shall see his field grown over with nettles and thorns, and himself clothed
with rags. Is not that belly empty, whose hands refuse to work? and does
not winter starve him up, that will not seek his living in the summer? Whereas
contrariwise, the painful hand plenty, and God gives good success to their
labors, so that they are able to help others besides themselves. And
furthermore, God notes them out with this mark, that the idle live in
contempt and shame, and dishonor, when they that seek Gods blessing by their
labor, are crowned with credit, and are honored in the gate and open presence,
and are commended of all men. But of this matter, more God willing hereafter.
These and many other means, has God knit and joined unto his providence, yet
not so, but that he is able also to help us without these means, neither are
we so to put our trust in them, as though by them we had help, and not by gods
providence. Amongst other means of maintenance, there is the help of friends, in
whom we must not so repose our selves, as though God did not give us our
maintenance by them. As for example, Jacob and his children, being in great
distress of famine, was to be relieved by the help of his son Joseph that
sent for him, yet his trust was upon Gods providence, and therefore he has
principal respect therennto, and asks counsel of God. Joseph like a kind and
loving child sent for him, the king of Egypt also was desirous y^ he should
come, but yet he would not set forward, until God had assured him of his
providence. In whose example, let us mark and consider, that whatsoever
comforts God grants us in this world, friends, children, or princes
themselves, yet let our ankerhold be y^ Lord, and none but he. Knowing y^ with
him these comfortes shall profit us, and without him fail us, as most fickle
and uncertain things, even then, when we would be most glad to enjoy and have
them. I, I will be with thee, is a word of trust, and let it ever be looked too
of us. The stay and staff of all men in their business, is the Lord, and
none but he. For mark I pray you, how God draws Jacobs eyes from looking
upon Joseph's honor and credit in the land, whither now he was going, and from
beholding ye kings favor and kindness, that had so friendly sent for him; how
he withdraws his heart from trusting in these things, unto himself, and his
protection and providence, saying; I will go with thee. As if he should have
said, This is thy safety, thy stay and staff, that will hold thee from
falling, even my presence with thee, and my providence for thee, not thy sons
power and honor, though it be great, nor yet the kings favor, though indeed
it be very gracious. If by the means of friends any thing fall out according
to our hearts desire, let us give god the thanks, who has so disposed their
minds toward us, and has made them the instruments of his bountifulness to
help us. To whom also we are to account our selves beholding, and a dutiful
mind will not rest, until there be recompense made one way or other, to the
utmost of his power. For that good which he has received, he will acknowledge
god to be the author, but his bountiful helpers among men he will honor, as
it were the Angels and Ministers of god, ordained for his relief and comfort.
And that by gods appointment he is bound unto them, through whose hand and
help, it pleased him to show forth, and to power his benefits upon him. And
yet great is the difference betwixt the help of friends and the help of god.
For man uses thus to reason, I have bin good unto him, and stood him instead,
therefore he may not grate upon me any more, and in all equity and reason, he
is not further to urge me, and a man may be too bold of his friends. But our
sweet and gracious god quite contrary, I have been good and still will to
continue. To make true the words of ye Prophet. It is better to put our trust
in god, then to put any trust in Princes. But because this mean and help of
friends, has been and is often greatly abused, to withdraw our hearts and
minds from the undoubted trust of gods neuer-failing providence, which ought
only to be our refuge and stay, above all other worldly stays, I mind god
willing to speak more here of in the second part of this text. Most true it
is, that although god do provide for us, yet most commonly he uses so to do
by means. Notwithstanding, rather then he will suffer his to perish, he uses
means that are extraordinary and unlooked for, and such, that unto us may well
seem very strange. Who would think that a raven a hungry foul, should spare
from himself, and bring unto man, yet we read 1. kin. 17. 4. that the Prophet
Eliah was fed by ravens. Was it of their own accord think you? Nay, God
says, I have commanded the ravens to feed thee. For to strengthen his faith
against persecution, God did promise to feed him miraculously. So likewise we
read of the Prophet Daniel, who being in the lions den, was like to starve for
any meat that was brought, yet God had respect unto him in his necessity. For a
certain Prophet in Iewry called Abacuc, having made pottage, was going to the
field, to bring it to the reapers; but the Angel of the Lord said unto Abacuc,
Go carry the meat that thou have into Babylon, unto Daniel, which is in the
lions den. And Abacuc said, Lord I never saw Babylon, neither do I know where
the den is. Then the Angel took him by the crown of the head, and bare him
by the hair of the h^^d, and through a mighty wind set him in Babylon, upon
the den. And Abacuc cried, saying; O Daniel, Daniel, take the dinner, that
God has sent thee. Then said Daniel, O God thou have thought upon me, and
thou never failest them that seek thee, and love thee. So Daniel arose and did
eat, and the Angel of the Lord set Abacuc in his own place again immediately.
The Prophet Jeremiah, being in the dungeon and ready to die for hunger, God
thought on him, and made a stranger to labor for him, and to speak in his
behalf. For one of the kings Enuches and chief officers, Ebedmelech, the
black Moore, which was in the kings house, heard that they had put Jeremiah in
the dungeon. And he went unto the king and said, My Lord the king, these men
have done evil in all that they have done to Jeremiah the Prophet, whom they
have cast into the dungeon, and he dies for hunger in the place where he is;
for there is no more bread in the city. Then the king had compassion, and
committed the matter unto the Eunuch, to take order for Ieremiahs relief. The
widow of Zarephath, in great famine, having but a handful of meal in a
barrel, and a little oil in a cruse, when she and her son had spent that,
she looked for nothing else but present death. But the Lord did comfort her by
the mouth of his Prophet Eliah, saying. The meal in the barrel shall not be
wasted, neither shall the oil in the cruse be diminished, until the time that
the Lord send rain upon the earth, and there be plenty. And according to the
words of the Prophet, it fell out so unto her. When the Prophet Eliah had
thought to have given up his life, being in distress, the Angel of the Lord
had brought him a cake, and a pot of water, and set the same at his head: and
touched him, and awaked him out of his sleep, and said unto him, Up and eat.
So he arose, and did eat and drink, and walked in the strength of that
meat, forty days and forty nights. And if it be lawful to bring in
foreign histories, into such w^^ghtie matters, I will show you a thing as
strange as the former: which is recorded in the history of the wars of the
low Countries, Page 79. The words of the Author are these. Now when I call to
mind the wonderful works of God, I cannot pass over, but tell you, how that
after the murder and massacre of Narden, and the whole town on a flaming
fire, a young Lad was saved, by running out of the gates of the town into a
little gardain full of roots. The father of this boy was murdered, and his
mother being ravished, was hanged up by the arms, of the Tyrants Spaniards,
and when the fire came and took hold of her house, she being tied by the
arms, could not get away, so that she was burnt in her own house. The young
Lad, having not eaten any thing for the space of three whole days together,
wept bitterly, both for the death of his parents, as also by reason that he was
hungerbit. But God who never forsakes his, sent him relief. For the very same
night, there came unto him a wel-fauoured young man, in white apparel, who
gave him whereon to feed, and said. Weep no more my fatherless child, for I
will never leave thee. Eat and be of good cheer, for they that have murdered
thy father and mother, shall have a double plague light upon them. Thy tears
shall be turned into joy and gladness, and their laughing into tears and
mourning; and forthwith the young man vanished out of sight. When my father and
mother forsake me, says the Prophet, the Lord takes me up. And there ye see,
that they that have neither father nor mother, want not, no not when they are
in great distress. Wonderful are Gods works, and infinite are his mercies,
and his ways past finding out. Oh what is man, frail man, wretched and
miserable man, that God should thus regard him, may we well say with the
Prophet. And shall that God that prepared for man ere ever he was, now forsake
man when he is, if he be not most unkindly, and too unkindly forsaken of man?
It cannot be, it can n^^^r be. And therefore in all distresses, let us cast our
eyes upon him, and think of such examples of his love and rare providence, as
these are, which I have recited unto you, and be sure, that he knowing what we
have need of, will never forsake us. All this it pleases God to work in our
behalf, God works for his own glory.
to the intent that he should be praised and honored of us. O Lord our God,
says the Prophet, how excellent is thy name in all the world. And again,
Psalm. 146. 7. 9. Blessed is the Lord which gives bread to the hungry, that
relieueth the strangers, the fatherless and the widow. When Jacob met his
brother Esau, in token of good will, he gave him a rich present, and
therwithall acknowledged Gods bountifulness toward him, in these words. God
has had mercy on me, and therefore I have all things. When Daniel was relieved
by gods providence, he gave thanks, and said. O God thou have thought upon me,
and thou never failest them that seek thee, and love thee. When our Savior
Christ fed the people, even a great multitude, with 5. loves and 2. fishes, he
looked up to heaven and gave thanks. We are earnest to crave good things of
God, but slow to give thanks. To give thanks for that which is received, is
a way to help us to more, in time to come; to be thankful for the old, brings
with it a new benefit, and a new good turn. But because by nature we are very
backward in this duty, therefore God puts his people in mind thereof by his
prophet Moses. When thou have eaten and filled thy self, says he, thou shall
bless the Lord thy God for the good land which he has given thee. Beware that
thou forget not the Lord thy God, lest when thou have eaten and filled thy
self, and have built goodly houses and dwelt therein, and thy beasts and thy
sheep are increased, and thy silver and gold is multiplied, and all that thou
have is increased, then thy heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy
God, who fed thee in the wilderness with Manna from heaven, and who brought
forth water for thee, out of the rock of flint. And again; Bewa^^, as though
he could not speak it too often, to such as were dull of hearing, as Christ
had his disciples, Watch, twice or thrice, and yet found them sleeping. Beware
least thou say in thine heart, My power and the strength of mine own hand,
has procured me this abundance. But remember the Lord thy God: for it is he,
and he only, which gives thee power, to get substance, and only in his
blessing, is all abundance. Let not this be our first care, if our store be
increased, to pull down our barnes and make them larger, but rather let us
lift up our eyes to heaven, in consideration that God has so blessed us, and
let us pray, that god will vouchsafe to give us the use of his blessings, to
his glory and our comfort. For to every one, to whom god has given riches, and
gives him power to eat thereof, and to take his part, and to enjoy his
labor, this is the gift of god. Otherwise a man may see much good, and
peradventure rejoice and boast of it, but he shall never come to enjoy it. And
then what profit and comfort is it to him, that he has thus labored for the
wind. The distrustful prince, did behold great plenty, but came no nearer.
The rich man that boasted of his goods, lived not long after. And this we must
think with our selves, as God has enriched us, so also will he be remembered
of us.

The order of Gods providence being thus set down, concerning the maintenance,
preservation, and food of all creatures, we may also behold how God does
gouerns all things. Which although it be not plainly set down in the text
which I have read unto you, yet may it be inferred upon the cause of this
plenty, set down in the words of the same Chapter. As if it might be
demanded, what was the cause, that after such scarcity and famine, all things
were so plentiful, and so good cheap? which could not come to pass, but only
by the finger of god, and by his secret ordinance. The reason thereof, and the
words of the Chapter, are these. For the Lord had caused the Camp of the
Aramites, to hear a noyce of charrets; and a noyce of a great army: so that
they said one to another; Behold the King of Israel, has hired against us, the
Kings of the Hittites, and the kings of the Egyptians to come upon us.
Wherefore they arose and fled in the twilight, and left their tents, and their
horses, and their asses, even the camp as it was, and fled for their lives.
This sudden change, might A new line.
seem to come from fortune or some blind chance, yet is it manifestly set
down, that it was Gods working, and that he only brought this matter to
pass. Who is the author, not only of plenty and scarcity, but of sickness
and of health, of wealth and poverty, of war and peace, of drought and
rain, of tempests and fair weather, of barreinnesse and fertility. Yea he
guides and governs the hearts of men, and their affections; yea even their
tongues, and all their actions. And that which is more strange, he has an eye
to the smallest matters, the hairs of our head, the lighting of the sparrowes
upon the ground; and that which seems to be but a matter of chance, the
ordering of lots in matters of weight, he disposes them too. Nothing comes
to pass by fortune and chance, nothing by destiny or necessity, but all by
Gods providence and handie work.

And having now to entreat of gods government over his creatures, and ye
affairs of the world, it is as if I should walk in a wide field, or sail in
the large sea. What other men have thought of gods government, it is base and
light, but what we are to think thereof, let us daly weigh with deep
consideration. Men of void minds, have thought God only to sit idle in the
heavens, and to behold those things which are done; othersome, that he moves
the world, and all the parts thereof, but not that he does direct the peculiar
actio^ of every creature. They will confess his great power, but they deny his
infinite and incomprehensible and most wise government in the world, or in the
affairs of men, or men themselves. Some were content to yield a little, and
they were persuaded, that he ruled all things in heaven, but as for all things
under the heaven, they thought were ruled and ordered by fortune and chance.
Doubtless God does rule all matters, and orders ye means that tend
thereunto; neither are they as a ship on ye sea without a governor, or as an
arrow in ye air, which is blown aside of every light wind. But to prove unto
you, that God by his providence is ye only guider and governor of all things,
it seems very expedient, first to remove all doubts out of your mind
concerning fortune and destiny, which are too rise in most men's mints and
tongues. Which are two great stumbling blocks, being taken out of the way, we
shall the more clearly perceive and certainly know, the virtue and force of gods
heavenly The opinion of fortune removed.
providence. This opinion of fortune, has brought almost all the world to
fortunate minds, and unsteadfast hearts, when they think that all things run
upon hap and chance, which are otherwise ordered. If a man in his journey light
upon thieves, and be robbed and spoild, whereunto will he impute his loss and his
hurt? Are not these his words? It was but my ill hap. So if sailing upon the
sea, through some sudden tempest, he make shipwreck, or traveling by the way
meet with wild beasts, if he be killed by the fall of some house or some
tree, who is it that thinks of any other cause then of fortune, as if the
blind were led by the blind, and so both fall into the ditch. For fortune is
fained to be blind, because foolish men see not the cause of those things that
are done; and how can a blind man judge of colors? If one digging in the
earth, find any treasure that has been hid, or find a bag of money, as he
is going by the way, or after great storms and tempests, hardly escape death,
and come safe into the haven, then who but lady Fortune; and fortune is
honored as a Queen, yea rather as a goddess. Of like, such a goddess, as
the Apostle Saint Paul speaks of, Unto the unknown God. So is the true God
robbed of his honor, who only is the author of weal and woe. Was it a
chance or Gods appointment, that bears came into the city, and devoured the
children, that mocked the Prophet. Putcase, that two neighbors go to the wood
together, Deuteronomy. 19. 5. one heweth wood, and as his hand strikes with the axe,
to cut down the tree, if the head of the axe slip from the helm, and hit
his neighbor that he dies, was it a chance trow you? The scripture and
word of God, decideth this matter, and says; that God has offered him into his
hand. Exodus 21. 13. God has diverse punishments for sin, and his judgments
are most just, though they be most secret, and hid from the eyes of men. The
field is pitched, two great armies meet together, the fight endures long; now
one army is ready to have the upper hand, and after a while the other, at
length say we, by good hap that army overcame. If it be true that this matter
fell out by hap, how can the word of God be true, (which without all
controuersitie is the only truth) which avouches the contrary in these words.
Prou. 21. 31. The horse is prepared unto the battle, but the victory is of the
Lord. He that prepares himself unto a long journey, looks no further then
to that which is besore his eyes, and wishes that he may have a lucky iourny,
and then al is well, at least wise if it end well. But Abraham's servant going on
his masters business, to seek a wife for his masters son, prays to God
for a prosperous journey, and lifts up his eyes to heaven. Whereas these
fortuune-folks run hedlong on, and look to meet good fortune by the way,
much like to him, that ran after his shadow to catch it, when it ran away
from him, as fast as he followed it. Where shall a man think and see fortune and
chance more, then in drawing of lots, but as we shall read, Pro. 16. 33. This
fortune matter, is ruled by God. The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole
disposition thereof is of the Lord. Look into all weighty matters which were
committed unto lots, and you shall plainly see and perceive gods work lively
set down. Especially in the history of Jonas the Prophet, and of Achan that
sold the Babylonish garment. Josh. 7. and of the choosing of Matthias unto the
Apostleship, in which business, after they had made their prayers unto God,
that he would show them out the man, whom he had chosen, they committed the
matter to lots, and the lot fell on Matthias. So you see what a follery, the
devised speech of fortune is, and y^ those matters which we think to be done by
chance, are brought to pass by gods appointment. Yet some more wise the^ the
rest, letting pass Destiny.
all speeches of fortune and chance, have surely thought, and steadfastly
affirmed, that the affairs of men, and men themselves are ruled by destiny.
And herehence come those speeches; He was borne to this or to that, he was
marked to be of this or that condition, his destiny was to die by such or such
a death. One dares not go such a way for thieves, an other, if he see a swoorde
drawn, thinks he shall be thrust through with it: an other fears to dwell
in rotten houses, lest by this means they should come by their destiny; and a
thousand such like fears, do possess their Multi fata vitantes in fata
incider^nt.
hearts, being ready to tremble at every shaking of a leaf. That which the
wicked fears, does often fall unto them, but the righteous, is bold as a
Lion, and puts his trust in God, and is not amazed with such vain fears,
and is fully persuaded, that so long as he keeps himself in the fear of God
and doing well, no evil shall come unto him. Contrariwise, they that think
all is dispatched by destiny, fear every hour lest they be dispatched them
selves, and in steed of a quiet heart and mind, there is nothing but
faintness and fear of trembling. What carke and care to defend themselves
and to prevent mischiefs, and yet all in vain, if Gods providence be
otherwise, whereunto we must have special regard in all our actions and
endeavors, and so to rest our selves contented with Gods will, whatsoever
falls out. If any be given to lewdenesse or any naughty disposition, if any
hurt come, or any grievous trouble, or hazard of life, surely will they say, he
was borne under an ill Planet, and under an unlucky sign. Which indeed is not
so, but rather Gods punishment laid upon him, who oftentimes gives over some
to an evil mind, and lets them run on, that their punishment might be the
greater, and brings many to their death, by his secret and most just
judgments. But suppose that the Plannets and the Stars, the heavenly
influences and celestial bodies, do work any inclinations in the minds of
men, or foreshewe some grievous events: yet these leaude inclinations and
fearful events, cannot come nigh them, nor touch them, nor hurt them that
frame their lives according to the rule of Gods word. No better witnesses in
this matter, then they that have been more privy hereunto, then the common
sort. To the proof whereof, I will show two examples, or evidences and
instances. Socrates a learned Philosopher, being judged by one that was
skillful, to be dull, sensual, and incline^ to sundry foul vices. They that
were present, knowi^g the wisdom and virtue of Socrates, laughed him to
scorn for his great judgment, and other of his frinds were very much
agreeued and displeased with him, to hear him say so. Nay says Socrates, let
his judgment nothing move you. For certainly such a one had I been, had not
the instruction of Philosophy, amended the corrupt inclination of my nature.
Well then, if the instruction of Philosophy, may so much prevail, as to alter
our minds and inclinations, much more shall the word of God, and the force of
his holy spirit be effectual in us, to the full performance of so good a
purpose. The other proof, to disprooue all matters of destiny, taken out of
one of the destiny writers is this. Take no notable thing or any great matter
in hand, neither begin any long iourny in the hour of Mars, if you can by any
means know when it is. Then follows that, which dasheth all by his own
confession. But says he, who so ever put their whole trust in God, and do
guide their lives by the rule of his holy word, (be they never so simple and
unlearned) God will so direct them, that they shall avoid all such dangers and
perilous times. And contrariwise, the wicked being learned, (yea though they
know the times) shall not have power to avoid them. As I have seen says he in
many, which afterward they did well consider, though too late. It is not
therefore blind chance, nor heavy destiny, but Gods providence, which in
great wisdom orders all things, and brings all things to pass, and has
the times and seasons, and all plagues and punishments in his hand, to send
them forth, or to keep them back. All which he disposes to the benefit and
good of his chosen children, as also to the destruction of the wicked and
ungodly, and to the greater manifestation of his own glory, partly by his
mercy. Haman the Agagite as we shall read in the history of Ester, hated
Mordecay the Jew unto death, the reason was only this, because Mordecay bowed
not his knee unto him. One man's death could not satisfy his ^nger, he thinks
in his mind to destroy a number, even th whole nation of the Jews. To bring
his matters to pale, what is his policy? First he does falsely and that
greeuou^* accuse the Jews to the king, to procure his hatred and heavy
displeasure against them, and furthermore to make his purpose sure, he offers
to bring into the kings treasury ten thousand talents of silver, if so be the
king would give forth commandment, that all the people of the Jews might
be destroyed. The King yeedeth, Haman makes haste, and being in iocund joy,
forthwith Haman causes a gallows to be made for Mordecay, and all his mind
runs upon sheading blood. The king is requested in the Jews behalf,
Mordecay, his good deed that that he did for the king, in opening treason that
was practiced against him, is called to remembrance, and the cause of this
pretended murder made manifest, that it was only the malice that Haman had
conceived against Mordecay for no matter of weight. God turns the heart of
the king, and makes him to call back his wicked decree. Mordecay is honored,
as the only man whom the king would honor, and Haman himself was hanged on
the same tree, which he had prepared for Mordecay. Was this Hamans destiny, or
was it Gods providence, to bring it so to pass? for the benefit of his people,
and for the overthrow of this proud and wicked Haman. King Darius, because the
spirit was excellent in Daniel, preferred him above all other rulers and
governors in his kingdom, and further thought in his mind, to set him over
the whole realm. And because the king had so preferred Daniel, his enemies
being moved with envy, they sought occasion against Daniel, and prevailed so
far against him, that he was cast among the lions to be devoured of them; God
shuts the mouths of the lions, the hungry lions, that Daniel may be
preserved. The accusers of Daniel, and they which sought his blood, by the
kings commandment, they, their wives, and their children, are cast into the
den of lions, and the lions had the maistry of them, and brake all their
bones a pieces, ere ever they came at the ground of the den. The righteous
escapes out of trouble, and the wicked shall come in his steed says Solomon
in his Proverbs. Look into the self same history of Daniel, and there shall
ye read of Susanna, the wife of Ioachim, a beautiful, and that which is rare,
a chaste and godly woman also. Through her beauty, two wicked Judges were
inflamed, and having gotten time and occasion, to come privily into her
presence, needs she must yield unto them, or else no way but death. She
refuses, and commits her cause to God, and cries out. The wicked Judges
they bear witness against her, that she would have been naught with a young
man. And when she was led to death, God raised up the spirit of a young child,
to try out the matter, and the Judges being found guilty, were stoned to
death, and Susanna delivered. Was this their destiny, or or was it the
manifestation of ye justice of God in his judgment? God knows by his
wonderful providence, how to bring the mischievous intents of the wicked to
naught, turning all to the setting forth of his glory, by showing his justice
on the one sort, and declaring his mercy unto the other, to the comfort of the
godly, and to the terror of the wicked. For as god has a provident and
fatherly care over the godly, not only prospering their estate of life by his
manifold blessings, and helping them in all their necessities; but furthermore
asswaging their griefs, and easing and comforting them in all their miseries
and distresses: so also has he a stroke in ye practices of the wicked, that
they shall be able to do no more, then yt which he has determined, and shall
give the^ leave to do. As our Savior Christ answered Pilat, when he said unto
him, Answerest thou nothing? know thou not, that I have power to loose thee,
and power to condemn thee? Jesus answered and said unto him, Thou could
have no power, unless it were given thee from above. Which also is confirmed
by the sayings of the Apostles, Act. 4. 28. concerning the death of Christ.
Doubtless say they, against thy holy son Jesus, whom thou had anointed,
both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the gentiles and people of Israel, gathered
themselves together, to do; whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel had
determined before to be done. Diverse ways has god to restrain the malice of
the wicked, and to break their mighty purposes. Sometimes he casts a dumpe
into their minds, and takes away their understanding; sometimes although
their senses be fresh, and and their minds current, and marnellous ready, as
a lion to the pray, yet before they come to the deed, God casts a fear
into their hearts, or stops them some way or other, that they cannot do as
they would. Sometimes god gives them leave a degree further, as to begin and
to put their mischief in practice, but before their matters come to an end,
he crosses all, and they stand amazed, to think what was done. Absolon he
lays his plot, to put his father out of his kingdom, and uses flattering
means, and steals away the hearts of the people, his mind was current, and
his senses fresh, he takes counsel of the matter, and it goes forward. The
trumpet is blown, and the people rebelliously are up in arms against their
lawful king, the matter begins now to be set on foot, Achitophel he gives
mischeeuous counsel, but god turns it into foolishness; The armies meet,
but upon a sudden, Absolon and his army are discomfited and dismayed, and before
he can come to the victory, and to enjoy his fathers kingdom and his crown,
he hangs upon an oak, being caught by the long locks and hair of his head,
and thus taken up between the heaven and the earth, he hangs, til Ioab one of
ye chief captains of his fathers army came, and thrust three darts through
him, and dispatched him of his life. King Pharaoh he cannot away with the
people of god that dwell in his land, he is affraide they will be more mighty
than his people. He takes upon him to be wise, and to stop the increase of
the people, and gives commandment to slaie the men children, the midwiues
fearing god, they keep them alive. Yea he that afterward was most against
him, was preserved alive by his own daughter, and daintily kept, as one of the
kings stock, so long as he would himself.

When this device failed, he lays upon them sore oppression and grievous
burdens, and taskes them to the death, belike to make them fly his land. God
takes such order in their behalf, that they should depart out of his
kingdom. I know not how, but the king will not give them leave, and when they
were going out, he pursued after them to destroy them, and in the pusuit lost
his own life, and many more of his people. The histories of France can tell,
that although their persecuting king, be in his complet harnes, and in his
roialtie shall show his valor among his friends and subjects, yet while he is
Iusting, a splinter of Momorance his spear, shall enter, as the arrow did
between the joints of king Ahabs Brigandine, that he died, and shall strike
him through the holes of his eyes, into the brains, that he dies, even a
little before that he ioyeth, to see and behold the death of a few poor
Christians. Mark and wonder, at the estate of our Sovereign, and gracious
Queen Elizabeth, whom pray we, that God may long continue among us, to his
glory, and our comfort. What malice and mischief against her? One curses, an
other rejoices to perform treachery, the third, in a holy and devout mind,
counts it religion, to murder her, whom God has anointed, and established
to rule and govern us. Poisoning assaied, Sorcery and witchcraft put in
practice. She takes them to be her friends, which are come to dispatch her of
her life. Either in her countenance, they see Gods presence, or in their hearts
is a fainting fear, that the dagge charged, cannot shoot off, or the poinado
ready, can do no hurt. No counsel and no practice, against Gods care, and
providence, and mercy. What hindered king Saul from killing David, who
afterward was king in his place? Or who hindered the desperate Jews from
killing the Apostle S. Paul? Or how came it to pass, that Esau after he had
purposed the death of his brother Jacob, yet in steed of cruelty, showed him
mercy? There was no other cause, but Gods working and his providence, who
defends his with a stretched out arm, and turns his wrath against the
rest. Where also we may learn in the examples before remembered, that none
meet sooner with harm, then they that most meant it, they dig a pit for
others, and fall into it themselves, they think it shall not so fall out, but
they know not what Gods power is, and how he brings his matters to pass.
Which he so does, that we may have just cause to say, Doubtless there is a God
that judges ye earth, and rules all things by his providence. And the more
that we may wonder hereat, and glorify God, certain it is, that Gods
providence does then shine most brightly, when our matters are most
troublesome; yet how troublesome soever they be, God directs all to a good
end, to the good of the one, and the punishment of the other; to his justice
and to his mercy. The thunder seems to shake the heavens, the lightning to
burn up all; rain and hail, and tempests, make men aghast, and yet in a
moment God takes away all, and makes the weather fair. The blustering winds
are up, the sea rages and rises up in mountains, and threatens to ouerflow
the earth, and suddenly there is no such matter, but a still and quiet calm.
The Aramites, they come in multitudes, and ready to swallow up the Israelites,
nothing before them, but fear and hunger, and famine, and death, and suddenly
again, safety, and plenty, and peace. As if one in a dream had seen
dreadful things, as to be slain by his enemies, or devoured of wild beasts,
or drowned in the sea, but when he was awake, it was nothing so. In all
extremities: God helps his by his gracious and mighty providence; yet so,
that he will have us also to put Nomb. 14. 44.
too our helping hand, and not to stand still idly, and look that God should
do all for us; neither are we again to put our selves rashly into danger, and
so to tempt God. If God do offer us means of deliverance, let us not neglect
them, or be slow to use them, if he foresheweth dangers, let us not rush into
them, as king Ioas did, who although he were a godly king, yet through his rash
enterprise lost his life; who being foretold what would fall out, yet foolishly
would adventure. God has granted unto men, the reason to beware, and also to
consult of doubtful and dangerous matters, which God uses diversely to the
performance of his providence. Let wisdom and care, and diligence be used,
and commit thy wisdom and counsels to Gods will, and then God will further
our causes; Be flothfull and negligent, and see what will follow, even dangers
and mischiefs before thou art aware.

Yet let us wade further into the affairs of men, and search these two
weighty points, concerning prosperity and adversity. What greater
prosperity can there be in the world, then is the prosperity of a king? yet
nothing is more ruled by gods providence then this matter: as though God had
especial care of them, that should represent his own person. Wherein he has
always regard to them, who walk uprightly to keep his statutes, and
commandments. As it was said unto Joshua, Meditate in the law of the Lord,
that thou may observe and do according to all that is written therein. For
then shall thou make thy way prosperous, and then shall thou have good
success, and I will be with thee, says the Lord, whither so ever thou go.
Which is confirmed by the example of king David, who gave his son Solomon
this charge. Take heed to the charge of the Lord thy God, to walk in his
ways, and keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his judgments, and
his testimonies, as it is written in the law of Moses, that thou may
prosper in all that thou do, and in every thing whereto thou turnest thee.
That the Lord may confirm his word, which he spoke unto me saying; If thy sons
take heed to their way, that they walk before me in truth, with all their
hearts, and with all their souls, thou shall not said he, want one of the
posterity, to sit upon the throne of Israel. Now mark how the providence of
God does work upon this foundation, and upon this ground. King Saul when he
thought upon no such matter, was made king by Gods appointment, for God
commanded the prophet to anoint him king, who so continued, until he
disobeied Gods commandment. And then he that anointed him, was the messenger
to tell him, that God had dispossessed him of his kingdom. Because (says he)
thou have cast away the word of the Lord, the Lord has cast away thee, that
thou shall not be king over Israel any more. The Lord this day has rent the
kingdom of Israel from thee, and has given it to thy neighbor, that is
better then thou. The like we read of king Solomon, the son of David, who
had so large a promise, with this excription, if he kept the covenant of God.
Solomon brake it, and in steed of worshipping the true God, he followed after
other Gods, even strange Gods, and such as his godly father knew not.
Wherefore the Lord said unto Solomon; Forasmuch as this is done of thee, and
thou have not kept my covenant and my statutes which I commanded thee, I will
surely rent the kingdom from thee, and will give it to thy servant. As we
read, 1. K. 11. 26. Jeroboam Salomons servant, and the ^uerscer of his works,
lifted up his hand against the king; and this was the cause. The Prophet Ahijah
met with Jeroboam, and the prophet caught his garment and rent it in twelve
pieces, and bid him take ten pieces unto himself, signifying that the most
part of ye kingdom should be his; because his master king Solomon, did most
worship God aright, but fell away from him by idolatry. And that the providence
of God may be more manifest; we read, that after Jeroboam rebelled against
Salomons son which sat in his throne, I say this young and unwise king, he
gathethereth a greater power to go against him. But ye word of God came unto
Shemaiah ye man of God, saying; Thus says the Lord: Ye shall not go up, nor
fight against your brethren, the children of Israel. Return every man to his
house. For this thing is done by me. They obeyed therefore the word of the
Lord, and returned and departed. And so was Ierochoam king Salomons servant,
established in the crown, and the true heir put by, because God gave it him.
Solomon the father would have slain him, Rehoboam the son would have
executed him as a traitor, and yet behold, it was not in their power: which
only work of Gods providence, in disposing of kingdoms, Adonijah Salomons
brother considering, it made him relent from his purpose of seeking the crown
by mighty means, as otherwise he would have done, if it had not been for
that. For this is his confession, putting forth a request unto Salomons mother.
1. K. 2. 15. Thou know (says he) that the kingdom was mine, and that all
Israel set their faces on me, in token of their favor and consent that I
should reign, because I was the elder brother; howbeit the kingdom is turned
away and is my brothers; for it came unto him by the Lord. God (says king
Nabuchodonozor that heathen king) according to his will works in the
inhabitants of the earth, and none can stay his hand, nor say unto him; what
do thou? Whom he will he sets up, and whom he will he throws down. And
according to that which I have said, Daniel told that wicked king Belshasar,
the son of proud Nabuchodonozor, (when he sent for him to read the writing
that was against him, and to give the interpretation) O king, hear says the
prophet. The most high gave unto Nabuchodonozor thy father a kingdom, and
majesty, and honor, and glory, and so forth. Thou have seen Gods judgments
against thy father, and yet thou have not humbled thy heart, though thou
knew all these things: but have lift thy self up against the Lord of
heaven, and have praised thy gods of silver and thy gods of gold, and have not
glorified God, in whose hand thy breath is, and all thy ways. Therefore has
God sent thee this writing, to show thee, that thy kingdom is at an end, and
that he has given it unto others. As the same prophet speaks elsewhere. God
changes the times and seasons, he takes away kings, and sets up kings.
Next to a kingdom, to be in great honor, credit and estimation, is like the
prosperity of a king. Some are exalted unto honor, and some are left in
disgrace. Study and device with thy self, how it should come to pass. And
when thou have done, thy reason cannot attain it. Look in the word of God,
and thou shall learn the cause. Which is this. Psalm. 75. 6. Promotion and
preferment, comes neither from the East nor from the West, nor yet from the
South. The Prophet knowing that the mind of man would wonder hereat, begins
the wonder himself. And why? (says he.) And then resolves the matter. God is
the judge, he puts down one, and sets up another. As the Magistrate is
appointed of God, for the punishment of the wicked, but for the praise of them
that do well, so God by his providence does order preferment, and to those
that are good in his sight, he says; Ye are Gods: but gives them a warning
there withal, that they should not be exalted in pride; Ye shall die like men.
Not only honor is the gift of God, but contempt is his punishment, Psalm. 107.
40. God powers contempt upon Princes, (as says the Prophet,) Mal. 2. 9.
and for their wickedness and tyranny, causes their subjects to contemn
them. It is not so much, the lack of duty in the inferiors, but it is the
hand of God to dispossess them of their honors. And as he debaseth the
wicked, so he lifts up them that fear him, and causes the unworthy, (that
is, them that are thought unworthy in the sight of the world,) to wear the
crown. When Hannah the mother of the Prophet Samuel, gave thanks to God, in
her song of praise, she has these words; The Lord brings low and exalts,
he raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts up the beggar from the
dunghill, to set them among Princes, and to make them inherit the seat of
glory. As is manifestly seen in the examples of Saul, who was exalted to be a
King, from low estate, and as he was seeking after his fathers asses; David
who was taken from the sheepefull to be a mighty Ruler; Lastly of Joseph, who
from the dunghill and filthy prison, was made to sit among Princes.

The prosperity of wealth and riches, from whence comes it, if not from the
providence of God, which gives thee power to get substance, and denies the
same to othersome for all their carke and care, labor they, and sweats they
never so much, as has been heretofore declared in the commodities of the fear
of God. Where this cannot sufficiently be wondered at, that when the wicked have
taken toil and labor, God takes all away from them, and makes the just and
godly to be the right owner^. It is a small thing in the sight of God,
suddenly to make a poor man rich, as it is most easy to him, to bring rags
to rodes, and shackles and fetters to the scepter and to the crown. The
benefits and blessings of God, and the work of his providence in matters of
prosperity, is greatly to be seen among the godly, as also his punishments
and plagues; and matters of grief and adversity are powered upon the ungodly,
as it were out of gods hand. Search the causes of wars, which is one of gods
mighty scourges, and does as it were, contain in it self, all other miseries,
sickness, famine, poverty, and such like; and see whether God has not the
only ordring. The Prophet Esaias. 7. 17. speaking of wars, whereby the Israelites
should be vexed, shows by whose means, that vexation should come upon them.
The Lord shall bring upon thee, and in that day the Lord shall hiss for the
fly, that is at the uttermost part of the floods of Egypt, and for the be
which is in the land of Ashur; meaning by the parable of the be, their enemies
the Egiptians and the Assirians, who although they were a far off, yet should
come flying toward them, and sting them to death. The furious and cruel mind of
man in war, thinking upon nothing but slaughter and havoc, sword and fire,
robbery and rauishment. Yet as the mighty ship is turned about with a small
rudder, and the fierce horse is guided by the bridle, so does God ouermaster
their purposes, and disposes all things according to his pleasure. Which thing
does lively appear in the aforesaid Prophecy, Chapter. 10. Gods anger is
stirred up against the Jews, and he is disposed to execute his vengeance, and
the wicked that shall perform it, are called by the name of hammers, axes,
sawes, and also may well be said to be whippes and scourges: and here in this
place, they are compared to a rod and to a staff. O Ashur, the rod of my
wrath, and the staff in their hands is mine indignation. I will send him to
a dissembling nation, and I will give him a charge against the people of my
wrath, to take the spoil, and to take the pray, and to tread them
vnderfeete, like the mire in the street. In that which follows, mark their
mischeeuous intents. But he thinks not so, neither does his heart esteem it
so, but he imagines to destroy and to cut off, not a few nations. Gods
work herein, is to chastise his people, for their amendment, and he has
respect unto his justice, the wicked Assirians, they purpose to destory them,
to enrich themselves, and in them is nothing to be seen, but the work of
malice and of the devil. But to let you understand, that God has as it were a
bridle in his hand, to restrain them, the Prophet uses these words. Shall
the axe boaste it self against him that heweth therewith? Or shall the saw
exalt it self against him that moves it? When they shake the rod, shall it
magnify it self against them that take it up? When they lift up a staff, is
it not wood? True it is, and most true, that no creature is able to do any
thing, but as God appoynteth him, and that they are all but his instruments, to
do his work, though the intentions be diverse. When he will, he sends
wars, and again, at his will they cease, as the Psalm says, He breaks the
bow and knappeth the spear in pieces. Though Sanacharib come with multitudes,
as the dust of the earth, against poor King Hezekiah, and his people, and
thinking to devour them at once, yet shall God put a hook in his nosthrils,
and a bridle in his lips, and shall bring him back again the same way he
came, his whole army shall be destroyed in a night, and he shalve amazed at gods
wonderful work. Ammon and Moab, and the inhabitants of mount Seir, come up
against Judah and their king Ichoshaphat, 2. Chro. 20. Wherefore they fearing
pestilence, famine and the sword, with other mischiefs, that war does bring
with it, and seeing themselves unable, make their prayers unto God, saying; O
our God, there is no strength in us, to stand before this great multitude that
comes against us, neither do we know what to do, but our whole trust is in
thee. Then God sent them comfort by a Prophet, saying; Fear not, for the
battle is not yours, but Gods; Stand still, move not, and behold the
salvation of the Lord. And now behold Gods providence, and his work. When
they of Judah began to shout, and to praise God for his great mercy, then the
Lord laid ambushments against the children of Ammon, Moab, and mount Seir, to
flaie and to destroy them. And this is strange, when they had made an end of
the inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to destroy an other, till there was
not a man left, as though every one had sworn his own death. The like example
is in the book of Judges, cap. 7. For when Gedeon, whom the Lord had
strengthened, came against the Midianites and the Amalekites, whose number was
as it were without number, so many were they. Gedeon caused the trumpets to
blow, and the people cried; The sword of the Lord and of Gedeon. And the Lord
set every man's sword upon his neighbor, and upon all the host. Not only in
matters of war, but in all other punishments God has his work, according to
that of the Prophet Amos; Shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord has
not done it? As if he had said; Can any adversity come, without gods
appointment? Read ye 28. cha. of Deu. and see whether it be not so. Which thing
holy men heretofore well considering, did not impute their distresses and
miseries to any other cause, but only to y^ providence of god. Joseph had great
wrong and mischief wrought against him, by his own brethren. Does he blame his
brethren, or revenge himself on the^? No. But the uses them well, when he might
have procured their trouble. He kissed them and wept upon them, and made
himself known unto the^, and did not discomfort or discourage them. Come near
my brethren, says he, I am Joseph your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt; Be
not sad, neither grieved with your selves, y^ ye sold me. For God did send me
before you, for your preservation. When ye thought evil against me, God
disposed it to good. Fear not, I will norish you, and your children, and he
comforted them and spoke kindly unto them. When Shimei cursed king David, and
they that were about him, would have slain Shimei for so doing; Suffer him to
curse says he, and let him alone: for he curses, eue^ because ye Lord has
bidden him curse David. Who dare then say, wherefore have thou done so? David
remembered y^ words of ye prophet; I will raise evil unto thee, out of thine own
house. Behold my son which came out of mine own bowels, seeks my life, how
much more a stranger? Suffer him; It may be that ye Lord will look upon my
affliction, and do me good for his cursing this day, and send me comfort in due
time. Job in a godly mind, when he was driven to great adversity and misery,
repineth not, neither curses as ye fashion of ye world is, when they meet with
such heavy crosses, but he looks up to heaven and says; Naked came I out of
my mothers womb, and naked shall I go hence. The Lord has given, and the Lord
has taken it. Blessed be the name of the Lord. In all his affliction did not
Job sin, nor charge God foolishly, by rash and unadvised, by grudging, wicked,
and reproachful speeches. If Joseph and David, had set their eyes upon them,
that did them wrong, they should have thought upon revenge. But because their
trouble was by gods will, and from his sending, therefore they take it in good
part, both reuere^tly and patiently, not only because they cannot resist, but
because god wills nothing, but that which is just, and for ye good and
benifit of them whom he so afflicts. As the prophet says; It is good for me
that I have been in trouble. Let pass therefore the injury of men, which might
increase thy sorrow and grief of mind, and hasten thee to revenge; and consider
gods will, who has breught that to pass, which thy enemies have done against
thee. Marvel not, but commit ye matter to gods infinite wisdom, whose will, as
it is often most manifest, so is it more often hid and unknown. Let us only
harp upon this string, y^ as by his benefits he does move us to serve him, so
by his crosses and punishments, he drives us to repentance. When miseries
come, we can see Gods providence, God grant that when he sends prosperity,
we may acknowledge his goodness and not be forgetful.

So much for the government of God in the affairs of men. Now let us consider
the same in men themselves. A sect of Philosophers called Pripatetickes,
although peradventure they did acknowledge ye providence of God in many things,
yet rather then they would have man subject to the same, would deny that there
were any providence at al, as if it grieved them that gods providence should
stretch further then their own reason did lead them. And so long as they tried
the matter by their own wits, as if they had fought with their own shadows,
they were confirmed in their untruths, but if they had but opened the book of
God, they should full well have perceived, how man himself is subject to Gods
providence. O Lord says the Prophet Jeremiah, Chap. 10. 23. I know that the
way of man is not in himself, neither is it in man to direct his steps. That
which men conceive in their minds, God does privily and after an vnscarchable
sort direct, as stands best to his lyking. As we read in the Proverbs of
Solomon, Chapter 20. 24. The steps of a man are ruled by the Lord, how then
can a man understand his own way? What part in man more secret unto him, then
his heart? Or if there be any thing in his own power and will, is it not the
heart? Yet God above which made and fashioned all hearts, and is the only
searcher of the heart, and knows the meaning thereof, he is also the ruler of
the heart. As fierce as a lion, so is the kings heart, and he thinks with
himself, who can either control him or command him. King Nabuchodonosor his
proud heart, God did abase. And king Solomon has uttered it, that the kings
heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of waters, he turns it
whither soever it pleases him. When Queen Hestor came in the presence of her
Lord and King Ahashnerosh, he was very terrible, and he lift up his face, that
shone with majesty, and looked fiercely upon her, therefore the Queen fell
down and was pale and faint. Nevertheless God turned the kings heart and
mind, that he became gentle, and being careful, leaped out of his throne and
took her in his arms, til she came to her self again, and comforted her
with loving words. The same God that turned this kings heart to gentleness,
hardened king Pharaohs heart, who was cruel unto his dying day. King Saul when
he was newly made king, most of the people despised him, save a few only,
whose hearts the Lord had touched to go after him. Psalm. 105. 25. He turned the
hearts of the enemies of his people to hate them, which God uses as a mean
for their deliverance. Which thing the godly well knowing, that God has men's
hearts in his hand, pray unto the Lord, that he would give them favor in the
sight of them, which had led them away captive. Joshua. 11. 19. 20. There was
no city that made peace with the children of Israel, save those Himites that
inhabited Gibeon, all other they took by battle. For it come of the Lord; to
harden their hearts, that they should come against Israel in battle, to the
intent that they should destroy them utterly, and show them no mercy. Which
thing the harlot Rahab confessed unto the spies, praying mercy for her, and for
her friends. I know says he, that the Lord has given you the land, and that
the fear of you is fallen upon us, and that all the inhabitants of the land
fainte because of you. For as a good courage is the Lords gift, as we see in
the example of Joshua, whom God willed to be strong and of a good courage; so
for a punishment of them that fear not God, he promises to give them a
trembling heart; and a sorrowful mind. Leuit. 26. 36. If ye walk stubburnly
against me, I will give you over into your enemies hands, and I will send a
faintness into your hearts, in the land of your enemies, and the sound of a
leaf shaken shall chase you, and ye shall fly as flying from a sword, and
shall fall, no man pursuing you. Again, when they walk obediently, see how
the Lord turns the hearts of others to do them good. The example of king
Pharaoh is notable, I speak not of that king that did oppress the Israelites,
but of that king, that did relieve them. For when the tidings of the meeting of
Joseph and his brethren came to Pharaohs ear, the text says, it pleased
Pharaoh well and his servants. Where we see the power of God toward his, as to
give them favor in the hearts, ears and eyes, of any mortal man whatsoever,
whose ministry it shall please him to use, to their relief, comfort, and
countenance. He rules poor and rich, mean and mighty, to his childrens
comfort, when he will. The Prophet David, that Gods favor may be toward him,
prays, that God will create in him a new heart, and for a stony and
rebellious, prays that he would give him a tender and a repenting heart. As
God rules the heart, so he orders the affections, that come from the heart.
Esau had a wrathful mind, and his purpose was to slaie his brother; but when
his brother and he met, behold how all was turned; embracing, and kissing,
and tears, and tender love. Who wrought this loving affection in Esau, and
changed his hatred into good will? Only the Lord, even the mighty and
merciful Lord, he has wiped murder and wrath out of his mouth and heart,
out of his mind and purpose, and out of his might and power. When the
Midianites and the Amalekites came against Gedeon, they were neighbors and
friends, but before they departed, every one slew an other. For God had so
determined. In consideration whereof, who would not tremble at Gods
judgments, to think how God works in the hearts of the wicked, bringing
that to pass that he will, and yet for all that, plaguing and destroying the
wicked according to their deserts. Affections, passions, and dispositions, are
ruled by God. If he list he causes friendship and love, if he please, he
sets dislike and hatred, and ever well in respect of hun. It is the justice
of God, that they who have joined in lyking one of an others counsel and deed,
further then God allowed, should as far jar as ever they were friends.
Surely such end will ungodly friendship have. Daily we see it, that they that
have been best accounted, become most hated. So able is God, to set such at
variance amongst themselves, and to continue their jar to his good pleasure.
Pilate and Herod, of a long time had been enemies, but about Christ his death
they became friends. What was it else, but Gods doing? to hasten that, which
he had determined to bring to pass, for the redemption of mankind. The
ordering of men's affections, prevails so far to the good of the godly, that
as it is in the Proverbs, chapter 16. 7. When the ways of a man please the
Lord, he will make his very enemies at peace with him. Further, it is to be
considered, that god not only rules the heart, and the affections of the
heart, but even the tongue also. Proverbs 16. 1. The preparations of the heart
are in man, but the answer of the tongue is of the Lord. The Prophet David
speaking of the mischeeuous intents of the wicked, and how they are revealed,
says the Psalm 64. 8. 9. Their own tongue shall make them fall, insomuch,
that who so sees them, shall laugh them to scorn. And all men that see it
shall say; This has god done: for they shall perceive, that it is his work.
Again, the tongues of the godly God directs, as shall be best for their
behoof. The nature of man is fearful how to answer, being called before
mighty men. But to the comfort of them that fear God, it is written, Mat. 10.
17. Ye shall be brought to the governors and kings for my sake, in witness to
them and to ye gentiles; But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or
what ye shall speak: For it shall be given you in that hour, what ye shall
say. For it is not ye that speak, but the spirit of your father, which
speaks in you. Concernining other parts of the body, As the Prophet prays
that God would open his eyes to see the wonders of his law, so also he prays
that he would turn away his eyes, that they should not behold vanity. The
disciples that iournied to Emaus, their eyes were holden that they could not
know Christ. The eyes are shut, and sometimes also the ears are dull and closed
up. Act. 28. 27. King Saul had a spear in his hand, to throw at David but his
hand was restrained. The heart, the affections, the tongue, the eyes, ears,
and hands, yea the whole body, God rules, as is manifest in the example of
Saul the persecutor, who after became Paul a blessed Apostle. Yet before his
conversion and happy change, he breathed out threatenings and slaughter, and
made have to procure trouble to the godly. But as he iournied, it came to
pass, that he fell from his horse, by a miracle from heaven, was stricken blind
and cast into a great fear and trembling.

I have been hitherto tedious, because the treatise is so comfortable, in the
rest I purpose to be brief, to satisfy thy mind. The marvelous providence
of God, and his most secret handy work, being now declared, concerning the
affairs of men, as also men themselves; there remains behind, a matter as
weighty as the rest, and that is this. That if all things be ruled by Gods
providence, and by an even and upright hand; First how falls it out, that
such mischievous and wicked deeds are committed in the world as we daily see.
Secondly, why do the wicked and ungodly flourish, when as they that serve God
most are put to the worst, and that they find their affairs to go cross and
ourethwart. Which matters, although they be so weighty, I cannot now stand
upon, but must refer the handling of them, until some other time, only at
this time I mind God willing to touch them, and briefly to set down the
resolution. God has so created the world, that he is still governor thereof,
in such sort, that nothing is done or can come to pass, but by his counsel
and providence. And albeit the devil and the reprobate, labor by their
wickedness and mischiefs, to bring all things to confusion, yea and the
faithful by the faults that they commit, pervert good order and justice, yet
God has the chief superiority above all, and turns the evil into good.
And howsoever it be, he disposes and governs all, with a secret bridle, and
after so wonderful a fashion, that we must reverence it, with all humility,
because we are not able to comprehend it. Vain therefore are their speeches,
and most ungodly, which seem to defend their wicked deeds by gods providence,
and making the divine majesty (which is nothing but holiness it self) in a
manner culpable with them. Whose speeches are after this sort. Some desperate
ru^^ian has slain a good citizen, he has performed say they, gods counsel;
an other has stolen or committed adultery, he has done that which God has
suffered; an ungodly and careless child lets his father die, and never seeks
for remedy and help, he could not resist God, which had so ordained from the
beginning. And thus they shroud their heinous sins, under gods providence,
and think they deserve no otherwise but well. They think they did perform
gods will, but they followed their own wicked will. Gods commandments are to
the contrary, whereunto we ought to have respect. And if any thing be committed
otherwise then may stand with the same, it cannot be without offense, much more
will the sin abound, if it be expressly and purposely against gods will and
commandment. God brings about his purpose and decree diverse ways, according
to his infinite wisdom; which herein shows it self so much the more, that
he can use the works of the wicked well, though the wicked be foully in fault.
Thieves and murderers, and such malefactors, are often instruments of gods
justice, unawares to them; yet nevertheless there can be no lawful excuse for
their notorious mischiefs. For if the law of God be not sufficient, their
own conscience will reprove them, and cry vengeance against them. In God
there is no evil, in men there is nothing but evil. The Sun by his heat,
causes a stinking smell to come forth of a carcass, when as there is no such
thing in the Sun but in the carcass. So God uses the mischievous deeds of
the wicked, as may stand most with his glory, though it tend to their great
condemnation, unless the mercy of god be the greater. It lies in Gods power
to restrain them, but oftentimes he gives them up to themselves. As our
Savior Christ confessed, when he was taken of his malicious and cruel
enemies. This is your very hour says he, and the power of darkness. For
then God gave liberty to Satan and his ministers, to execute their rage. In
their minds was malice, mischief, and cruelty, but the glorious purpose of
God, was to give his only son for the redemption of the world. God detesteth
sin, but yet turns the wickedness of sinners, as seems best to him,
oftentimes to the confusion of themselves, to make his justice more famous. The
wicked cannot choose but do ill, God is not the author of their wickedness;
but at what time, or against whom their mischief shall break forth and take
place, that is in Gods hand, and in his most mighty power.

As for the other matter in question, why the wicked flourish, and the godly
are oppressed. Although it be so, let us not therefore deny Gods providence.
Many tyraunts there are and wicked men in the world, and as Job says, the
tabernacles of robbers do prosper, and they are in safety that provoke God;
They reign and rage, and their power is great: yet who knows, what God
minds to work by them? Amongst the rest, this seems to be one cause, that
ye minds of the godly might be proved. There are many excellent virtues which
lie hid in them, which without this means cannot be known. Especially in the
time of martirdom and persecution, when they shall be tried and put to death by
tyrants, for the profession of gods truth. And although otherwise also they
suffer many mischiefs and wrongs, by the hands of them that oppress them, yet
they that have respect to gods working herein, receive much comfort by gods
good spirit, and perceive oftentimes gods gracious and mighty hand in
delivering and defending them, that he may be praised of them for his mercy,
whereof they have so rare and comfortable experience. Otherwise god has such
great care over the godly, that even the angels of his wrath which are far
more mighty then tyrants, and all the oppressors of the earth, even those
wrathful angels shall not hurt them. As we read Reave. cap. 7. 2. Those
angels, to whom power was given to hurt the earth and the sea, they were
charged, not to hurt the earth, neither the sea, until the servants of god
were sealed in their foreheads. Those houses in Egypt whose door posts were
sprinckeled with blood, were safe from the destroying angel, when other houses
not so marked, were stricken with death. The angels that came to destroy Sodom,
confessed they could do nothing, till Lot was gone out of Sodom. The devil
could not hurt Job, without gods leave. If then neither angels nor devils, much
less can tyrants and wicked men hurt us, when gods pleasure is to the
contrary. But if his pleasure be so, that they shall prevail against us, let
us fly unto god by true repentance for our sins, and wait patiently his
good leisure, when it shall please him to send help and redress. For he
uses then to send remedy and comfort, when men think none. God rules all
things according to his good pleasure and will, his order of government is
most beautiful and excellent, his judgments most right and unblameable, the
means that he uses, and whereby he works, are diverse and wonderful, as
is best known to his wisdom, and hid from man's understanding. Turning all to
the good of his people, sometimes restraining the power of the wicked, and
sometimes making them to fulfill and obey his will, against their own wills.
So that the godly may say, I have been young, and now am old, and yet saw I
neue^ wonderful works, and that my soul knows right well.

The last part of this text, which I have read unto you, does show out the
punishment of God, and their il success which distrust Gods providence. Which
is made manifest in the judgment of God against the prince, that gave out such
distrustful words, and said; Though the Lord would make windows in the heaven,
could it come so to pass? But it was answered him, that he should see great
plenty, but should not eat thereof. And so it caine unto him, for the people
trod upon him in the gate, and he died. For in this fearful example, let us
censider of what estate, countenance and calling, this man was, that said; If
God would open the windows of heaven, could it be so? By his estate and
degree, he was a prince, and one of the kings chiefest nobles, and such a one,
on whom the king leaned, who should have glorified God most. For the higher
the degree is, the more does God require at their hands. If a mean man had
spoken it, there had not been so great cause of offense, neither should it have
been so much regarded. But seeing a noble man, and that a prince did speak it,
eueris one thought so too, and all their hearts no doubt were daunted.
According as we read, Eccle. 13. 24. When the rich man speaks, every one
holds his tongue, and look what he says, they praise unto the clouds. But
if the poor man speak, they say; What fellow is this? and though he speak
wisely, yet can it have no place. When king Abimelech, had told his servants
weighty matters, they were all affraied. The word of a magistrate, superior,
and high calling, pearce far, and that which they speak, is in every man's
mouth. It prevails much among the lower sort, either to draw them to good,
or to move them to the contrary. If their speeches and deeds be otherwise
then well, us makes great men great examples, as we read; And he smote down
the chosen men that were in Israel According as we see in a realm, when the
heads and chief doers of any rebellion be cut off and put to death, the rest,
their courage is gone, and all things are quiet. If the sin and offense be
notorious in persons of account, God sometimes makes their punishment to be
notorious also; that y^ matter may be remembered, and that there may be a fear
in every man's heart, that they do not the like. How highly his, and all such
speeches, do offend and displease God, we see by his example.

Far be it therefore, that any should distrust gods providence, either in
feeding and nourishing us, as we say; there is no mouth but God sendes meat,
and as it is in the Psalm; He gives food to all flesh, for his mercy
endures for ever. Or that we should distrust him and his power, in other
matters whatsoever; for god is above all, and rules all. But yet the nature of
man is too distrustful, and lightly none do put their trust in god, but they
that know gods providence, and are fully persuaded thereof. And yet to see how
backward men be, that even the very best have been found faulty herein, as
Moses an excellent prophet, and one that saw gods wonders and his miracles; the
disciples also that were continually in Christ his presence, and did so often
see his mighty and strange working. When the people of Israel murmured for
want of flesh, and were destrous to satisfy their lust, and not their hunger;
God spoke unto Moses and told him, that the people should not eat flesh a day
or two, or five, or ten, or twenty, but a whole month, until it came out at
their nosthrils. God heard them and granted their request; But how? in his
anger, as the words do import which follow. Because ye have contemned ye Lord
which is among you, and have wept before him, saying; Why came we hither out of
Egypt? Which plenty, when Moses had heard from god, yet he doubted greatly,
and measured gods power by his simple reason, and therewithal gave forth
distrustful speeches, saying. Six hundred thousand footmen are there of the
people, among whom I am, and thou say I will give them flesh, that they may
eat a month long. Shall the sheep and the beeues be slain for them to find
them, either shall all the fish of the sea be gathered together for them, to
suffice them? And the Lord said to Moses, Is the Lords hand shortened? Thou
shall see now whether my word shall come to pass unto thee or no. Our Savior
Christ to try what was in man, having a great multitude present, and minding to
relieve and to feed them, he says to one of his disciples; Whence shall we buy
bread, that these may eat? This he said to prove him, for he himself knew
what he would do. Philip his disciple answered him. Two hundredth peniwoorth of
bread are not sufficient for them, that every man may take a little; And Andrew
an other of his disciples said; There is a Lad which has five barley loaves and
two fishes, But what are they among so many? And Jesus said, Make the people
sit down; and he gave thanks and brake. The men y^ sat down, were in number
about five thousand, and they had all enough and left. And they filled twelve
baskets with ye broken meat that remained. Let no man distrust Gods providence,
God has enough in store for us all. Let us descend from the best, and look
into the minds of yt common sort. As in this example which follows, which I
have used before, but to an other purposc. How far did the Israelites go
astraie? who had manifest proof of Gods providence even from heaven, and
diverse ways else, and that in strange and miraculous sort: They begin to
grudge and to distrust as it were, against their own conscience. He brought
water say they out of the stony rock, so that it gushed out like the rivers;
yet for all this they sinned against him, and provoked the most highest in the
wilderness, they tempted god in their hearts, and required meat for their lust,
they spoke against god also, saying; Shall god prepare a table in the
wilderness? He smote the stony rock indeed, but can he give bread also, or
provide flesh for his people? When the Lord heard this, he was wroth. I will
add one example more, concerning the providence of god, in the government of
the affairs of men. The example is not so wonderful, as the hearts of men are
fearful, and their minds distrustful. God had promised to give unto his
people the land of Canaanites, to possess and to inherit, but before they
had overcome it, god willed Moses, that one of every Tribe should go to epsy
and search the land. These spies they knew for a certainty, that by gods
promise they should possess the land, and yet when they came back, there was
nothing but distrustful speeches in their mouths. The land say they, flows
with milk and honey, and is plentiful of all gods goonesse; nevertheless the
people be strong that dwell in the land, and the cities are walled and
exceeding great, and moreover we saw the sons of Anake there. And we be not
able to go up against the people, for they are stronger then we. It is a land
that eats up the inhabitaunts thereof; (for the giants yt dwelt there were so
cruel, that they spoiled and killed one another; and those also y^ came to
them) all the people y^ we saw in it, are men of great stature; for there we
saw giants the sons of Anake, which come of ye giants, so that we seemed in
our sight like grasshoppers, and so we were in their sight. They did not thus
only bring up an evil report and distrust themselves, but also made all the
peoples hearts to saint, so that they cried and wept, and wished they were
dead, and said; Wherefore now has the Lord brought us into this land, to fall
upon the sword? Our wives and our children shall be a pray. And they said one
to an other; let us make a captain and return into Egypt. All these examples,
are to prove, not only how we are given to distrust, but also that it is a
great offense against GOD, and that they that have been faulty herein, have
smarted for it. To teach us to hope, although we see no present help, and not
in any sort to distrust God, in whom is all power, and who brings to pass
what ever he will both in heaven and earth. God gave Moses leave to see the
plentiful land of Canaan, that goodly mountain and Lebanon, but he suffered
him not to enter into it, although he prayed God. I pray thee let me go over,
and see the good, that is beyond Jordan. But the Lord says, he was angry with
me for your sakes, and would not hear me. And the Lord said unto me, Let it
suffice thee, and be content, speak no more unto me of this matter. Get thee
up into the top of the mount P^sgah. And as soon as he had viewed that pleasant
land, God caused him to die there. What was the cause? no other but this, the
people murmured, and Moses distrusted. The people of Israel had bread enough,
nay they had honey out of the stone, and oil out of the hard rock, yet they
thought y^ God was not able to give them flesh. But they had trial thereof, to
their cost. For God caused that they had flesh as thick as dust, and and
feathered fowls like as ye sand of the sea, and that in such plenty, that
they were al aweary of it. But now comes sour sauce to their sweet meat.
When the Lord heard their grudging and distrust, he was wrath. So the fire was
kindled in Jacob, and there came up heavy displeasure against Israel, because
they believed not in God, and put not their trust in his help. While they were
chewing y^ meat, the wrath of the Lord was kindeled, and the people were
consumed with an exceeding great plague, and the chosen men, and the chiefest
of account in all Israel, were smitten down. And yet for all this they sinned
still, and believed not Gods wondrous works. Therefore their days did he
consume in vanity, and their years in trouble, and soon and hastily they
perished, as though they had not been. Last of all, let us see the heavy
judgments of God upon the difcomfortable spies, and upon the distrustful
people. The spies that brought up that vile slander, died by a plague before
the Lord, and the people whose hearts fell away from God through their ill
report, God pronounced, that for their disobedience, they should wander in the
wilderness forty years. Certainly says the Lord, I will do so to all this
wicked faint-harted and unbelieving company. For in this wilderness they
shall be consumed all of them, from twenty year old and above that have
murmured, and there they shall die and leave their carcasses. Furthermore says
the Lord, Your children which you said should be a pray, them will I bring in,
and they shall know the land; the land which you through your distrustful
hearts have refused. Wherefore content your minds and set your hearts at rest,
there is none of you all shall enter into the land or see it; save only
Joshua, the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Iephnueh, which spoke
comfortable words, and who in their hearts and minds were fully assured of
Gods help, and doubted not but that God would perform his promise, and
encouraged and cheared up the peoples minds, saying. Let us go up at once and
poslesse the land, for undoubtedly we shall overcome it. As if he had said;
God is the same god that ever he was, and his power is not weakened. Fear not
the people of the land, for they are but bread for us, and we shall easily
overcome them. Their shield is departed from them, there is no strength in
them, and the Lord is with us, fear them not. Although David was in sight but
as a grasshopper, yet he overthrew Goliath that great giant, and cut off his
head, because God had made the way. Joshua and Caleb, because they had an other
spirit contrary to the people, that is, because they had a faithful heart,
only they and their seed were brought into the land and did inherit, and were
partakers of gods blessings above the rest, because their hearts were not
wavering, but upright and steadfast. An Angel of God was sent to tell Zacharias
the Priest, that his wife Elizabeth should bear him a son, by whom he should
have joy and gladness. But because he and wife were both stricken in years, he
doubted, and said to the Angel; Whereby shall I know this? The Angel answered,
I am Gabriel that stand in the prsence of God, and am sent to show thee these
good tidings: And behold thou shall be dumb and not able to speak, until the
day that these things be done, because thou beleeuest not my words, which shall
be fulfilled in their season. Our Savior Christ did oftentimes not show his
power and help, because of the incredulity, distrust, and unbelief of the
people. The sister of Lazarus beginning to distrust, John 11. 46. Christ stepped
unto her, and stayed her unbelief, saying; Did not I say unto thee, that if
thou did believe thou should see the glory of God? Was it only spoken for
her sake, and not for ours also, who are as ready to offend God by distrust,
as she was? Yes doubtless this is Gods watchword unto us. Believe and do not
distrust. Have I not said unto thee only, believe; and so shall we be
partakers of our wantes and desires. For who ever trusted in God and found not
comfort? It is only our distrust and unbelief and nothing else, that keeps
good things from us. And if we be fully persuaded of Gods providence, as it is
most meet and requisite for us, especially if we will have all things go well
with us, all distrust must needs go away, as mistie fogges and vapors vanish
when the Sun arises. Which if we be not resolved to do, we shall altogether
depend upon uncertainties, and waver with the wind, and commit our selves and
all our affairs as heathen people do, for want of the knowledge of God, to
fortune and chance. And here by the opposition and contrariety of fortune,
destiny, and Gods providence, we may plainly see from whence comes all
distrust and fear. If we think that we are ruled and our whole estate ordered
by fortune and destiny, then shall we be affraide to go out of our houses, for
fear of meeting a mad dog, or some other hurtful beast, or least a tile
should fall from the house and dash out our brains, or walking in our garden
lest we tread upon some toade, or some adder or snake do wind about our
legs; If we sail on the sea, rocks and sands, and winds, and tempests,
and pirates; if thou staiest at home, thy house may be burnt, and thieves in
the night may put thee in danger of thy life. Let us come a little nearer, how
many sicknesses to bring thee to thy death; such a one every hour thinks on
physic, and if he do take physic, he is afraid it will destroy him, and
bring him to his grave; in a word, every minute of an hour a new mind. And so
betwixt doubt, fear, and hope, betwixt good success and il success, they live
and linger out a faint and languishing life. And when they by their wariness
and heed taking, to avoid all hurts and miseries, none sooner light upon them
then they, and none more free from them, then they taht least fear and commit
themselves and their affairs to god. The godly and resolved mind, in respect
of them that are fearfully and fortunately minded, his estate above the other
in happiness does excel; his days are more cheerful, and his life of longer
continuance. There is no more lively an example of a fearful and fortunate
mind, then in a conetous man, and such a one as thinks to bring about all
things by his own wisdom and foresight: whose minds are so entangled with
doubts, that their sleep, nay almost their life goes from them. For when they
have entered into such cares, they cannot so soon be rid of them, but at and
abroad, in company and alone, day and night, such matters run in their heads,
as though they were borne to endure such miseries. They are affraide of
hindrances and losses, of overthwart and cross dealing; such and so many be
their enemies which lie in wait to pluck them. Some with friendly words
desirous to borrow, whom they cannot well deny, and then they think they
shall never see that again. They will prenent that matter, and lay out their
money upon a piece of land, and although they play loath to depart, yet a doubt
comes into their minds of fast or loose, and if they loose they are even half
undone. What if their title should not be good, or their evidences unskillfully
made, men's heads be so full of subtilties: So after they have bought it and
paid for it, they have a wipe, and all is gone, and peradventure their mends
in their hands. The^ comes thought and care, which they have taken to the
heart, and makes an end of their life, and they are gone. He purchases for his
son, if he should be a waster or leaud liver, as good never lay down the
money, or if by wrong and injury he should be defeated and put out of all,
better well spared then so spent. One care overtake an other til night comes,
and then they muster, as thick as flies in the air, or motes in the Sun. When
they late them down in their beds, their hearts and minds stand up, and refuse
to bear the body company. Either they think upon their goods at home, money,
corn, and such like chaffer, or their cattle in the field, or their money that
lies in other men's hands. They devise where they may light upon a good
bargain, and how they may compass it, they are afraid some will go betwixt
them and home, and know not whom they may trust, the world is so full of craft.
Such kind of people I may well term to be night-walkers and down-liegers, who
have given their names to fortune, and have either forgotten, or will not
vouchsafe to look upon Gods providence: Which would bring them great ease and
contentment of mind, and rid them of these infinite cares, which otherwise they
are subject unto and cannot avoid, if their lives lay on it. An other sort
there are somewhat more eased of care, but yet distrustful of gods providence;
such are they, who if their friends were dead and gone, think they are utterly
undone. Little remembering, or at leastwise not considering that of the Prophet;
Though my father and mother forsake me, the Lord takes me up; And though I had
no friends, yet Gods help is above all friends. Again, happy were I will some
say, if such a man of honor and worship were my friend, or if I had the favor
of such a rich and wealthy man, I might have some help of maintenance from
him, and I should be sure whatsoever fell out that he would stand me in steed;
he would see me take no wrong; he would speak for me, and spend his money in my
behalf; he would not refuse me, if I or any friend of mine stood in need of
him. Men's minds be changeable, and friends be deceitful, and nothing so
uncertain as to trust in man. I speak not against them that are careful to
procure friends in all good sort, but for a man to put his whole stay and
trust in friends, is not only an offense to God, but sometimes, yea and
oftentimes it so falls out, that it is but a vain help, and as a broken
staff. How fled Iobes friends from him in his misery? In prosperity a friend
cannot be unknown, for then they flock as doves to a house, but in
adversity the number is very small, even as one swallow which cannot make a
summer. Prou. 19. 7. The friends of the poor will depart from him, though he
be instant with words to have comfort from them, yet will they yield none. Who
will vouchsafe to look upon him that is in need and in adversity? lightly a
man's very friend will then forsake him.

There is an other distrust, as faulty as the former, as when a man is
careful more then needs, and so pensive that it wears him away. That care
which is in a measure and agreeable to Gods will, is to be commended, as when
men travail painfully to get their living in that vocation wherein God has
placed them; but otherwise it is to be reproved. For by that care, we grow
greatly into the distrust of Gods gracious providence; which distrust our
Savior Christ does much speak against. Which of you says he, by taking care,
can add one cubit unto his stature? Behold the souls of the heaven, they sow
not, neither do they reap nor carry into the barnes, yet your heavenly father
feeds them. It is written in the law of Moses, Thou shall not mussel the
mouth of the ox that treads out the corn. Does God take care for oxen? Or
says he it not for our sakes: Doubtless it is written for our sakes. For God
in making the law, had principal respect unto men. But if thou would feign
know how thou may avoid this distrust, our Savior Christ does also instruct
thee, saying; Take no thought, that is, take no thought more then ordinary, in
extraordinary and unmeasurable sort. If thou would have God to serve thy
turn, and show thee the means of thy maintenance and relief; his counsel
is, first to seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness: that is, how to
serve and please him. And then behold all these things shall be ministered and
cast unto thee: so that thou shall not have any such great cause to care, but
that thou may well disburthen thy self, and cast all thy extraordinary care
upon God. And in so doing, Cast all your care upon God, says the Apostle, and
he will care for you. Who will comfort them that are comfortless, and provide
for them that stand in need. That old and godly Tobit may be our example, who
having had often trial hereof, spoke comfortably to his son, and with a
steadfast mind in GOD, Fear not says he, forasmuch as we are made poor, for
thou have many things, if thou fear God and fly from sin, and do the thing
which is acceptable in his fight. So that in what want and distress so ever
we be, let us not break forth into discontend speeches, but together with
painful endeavor, let us make our most hearty and earnest requests unto God
our Father, who in due time will perform that which we pray unto him for, if
he see that it be profitable for us. Matters greatly unlooked for, and as it
were impossible, does God work for them and in their behalf, who put their
whole trust and confidence in him. For either he will raise them friends of
strangers, or make yea sometimes their very enemies to take pity and
compassion on them, and to do them some good, or take away the wicked, that
the godly may enjoy their great wealth and possessions. And who can reckon up
the means that God has in store? For alas what a miserable case were it, if
a man should be left to himself destitute and forlorn. Let us look back to
our childhood and infancy, and we shall be assured of comfort. For before that
God would have any of us to live and breathe in this world, we see that he
provided parents and friends, and nurses, and houses, and comforts, and
whatsoever might Conclusion.
be needful for us. And therefore from our cradle to our grave, such helps
cannot want, if we love and serve him. Mark Gods care for other creatures; If
he give food to the ass in dry and barreine grounds; If in due season be
satisfy the ravens, when they cry and call to him being pincht with hunger; If
he suffer not the roaring lion to want, that is ready to starve; (for although
they have enough to day, yet know they not what shall be their food to morrow,
or where to have it before God send it) If he showed unto Hagar and to her
child (being ready to perish for thirst in the wilderness) a well of water,
when she thought no other but present death; If he cloth the lily with royal
array, which is to day in the field, and to morrow is cast into the oven, that
is to say, a thing in a manner of no account: How much more will he provide
for mankind, who has created all things for their use, profit, and comfort.
The earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, and they that live in his
fear shall not want, where ever they be. The Lord is my shepherd says the
Prophet, and therefore can I lack nothing. As Jacob said; The Lord is
merciful to me, and therefore I have all things; He shall feed me in a
green pasture, and lead me forth by the waters of comfort. Yea thou shall
prepare a table for me, against them that trouble me. Psalm. 23. Thou have
anointed my head with oil, and my cup shall be full. See what plenty
follows a steadfast trust in gods providence. The full persuasion whereof, is
also a staff and a stay unto us, to avoid all injury and hurt. The Prophet
David in the example of his own person, does greatly comfort us. The Lord is
my help, I will not fear what man can do unto me, the Lord is the strength of
my life, of whom then shall I be afraid? When the wicked (even my enemies and
my foes) came upon me to eat up my flesh, they stumbled and fell. Though an
host of men were laid against me, yet shall not my heart be affraied, and
though there rose up war against me, yet will I put my trust in him. Although
I walk in the shaddowe of death, and look every hour to loose my life, yet
I am resolved in comfort and trust, committing my life and all my affairs into
thy hand. Walk uprightly, and set God always before thy eyes, and there shall
no evil happen unto thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling.
Psalm 91. Thou shall not be affraide for any terror by night, nor for the
arrow that flies by day, nor for the pestilence that walks in the darkness,
nor for the sickness that destroteth in the noone day. A thousand shall fall
beside thee, and ten thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not come nigh
thee, because thou have made the Lord thy shield and thy buckler, thou shall be
as dear unto him as the apple of his eye, and he shall carry thee as the Eagle
does carry her young ones upon her wings, and be as careful for thee as the
hen is over her chickens. Away then with fortune and destiny, which is the
fear of heathen people, and leave them to be punished and plagued by such
peevish gods, and let us which know the trus God, being taught by his word, and
who have learned otherwise, refer all to Gods providence. What if there be
diverse heinous matters practiced in the world? What if the mighty oppress
the poor, and the wicked the godly? Yet we know that there is a God in heaven
that sees all and judges all, and in due time will call all men to their
accounts, and although God do suffer them unpunished in this world, yet they
shall surely pay for it in an other. In the mean time, let us reverently
think of gods works, who rules all well, though we know not how, and it be
altogether hid from us. And who is it that dare ask account at Gods hands?
whose power is never idle, but what ever fall out, he orders it as seems
good unto him, and without his decree shall nothing come to pass. Great is our
discomfort, and we are entangled in much misery for want of the knowledge of
Gods providence; the full trust whereof, when it has taken deep root in our
hearts, come good success or ill success, our hearts are well at rest. And
this makes us to be of a quiet, contented, and patient mind in all adversity
and trouble, as also to be thankful in prosperity, and in all the course of
our lives there shall appear a calm, although the tempests be up. And so
much the more is our comfort, because we are assured, that God is our loving
father, far passing the love of any earthly father, and therefore will follow
us with constant good will. And because he is also God Almighty, he holds
all creatures in his power, so that without his pleasure, they are not able not
only to do any thing, but not so much as to stir. For they that oppress and
do wrong, are by the bridle of Gods providence brought into order, to consider
that they have no other power to move themselves or to do any thing, but as
they are directed of God: Who appoints evil men as rods, to what purpose
so ever he thinks good, neither have they any power of themselves to hurt;
but contrariwise, we have sufficient help in God, against their and all other
harms, whatsoever. Why should such speeches be uttered through a weak and
faint mind, as to say; If God would open the windows of heaven, could it be
so? Or else to say the like speech, This is impossible to be brought to pass.
For with God shall nothing be impossible. The Lords hand is not shortened, but
stretched out to do us good; yea doubtless he will open the windows of
heaven, to power down his blessings upon us, if we do not deserve the
contrary.

To conclude, (craving pardon that I have been so long) let me say unto you, as
the Apostle S. Paul said to the Corinthians; O Corinthians, our mouth is open
unto you, our heart is made large. Ye are not kept straight in us, but you are
kept straight in your own bowels. Gods hand is open, and his bountifulness is
unsearchable, God is not straight to us, but we are straight unto our selves.
God is of power to help, and right ready he is, because his mercy endures
for ever. Let us not be so backward, as not to ask and pray for it, and to use
all means that are lawful. For God works by means, and sildome by
miracles. Let us not be impatient and distrustful, neither in any case give
forth ungodly and blasphemous speeches, avoiding all means to procure Gods
anger, and committing our selves wholly to his mercy and fatherly care in all
our necessities. And God open our eyes, as he did open the eyes of Hagar,
Abraham's maid, that so we may always depend and wait upon his enduring and
bountiful providence. To God the father, God the son, and God the holy
Ghost, etc.

Deo gratia, solique gloria.
Of Creating man after his Image.
Genesis 1. 26. Furthermore God said; Let us make man in our Image, acaccording
to our likeness; and let them rule over the fish of the sea, and over the
foul of the heaven, and over the beasts, and over all the earth, and over
every thing that creeps and moves on the earth.
When GOD had made the light, the heaven, the Sun, the Moon, and the
Stars, the earth and the sea; and had replenished the sea with fishes, the
air with birds, the earth with beasts, and had provided food and maintenance
fit and convenient for the use of man, the^ did he make and create man. Of
whom, first I think good to entreat somewhat concerning the creation of the
body, and so to pass to the creation of the soul; in respect whereof, and of
those heavenly quallities wherewith his soul was then endued, he is said to be
made in the image of God, and according to his likeness. The Lord God made
the man of the dust of the ground, and breathed in his face breath of life,
and the man was a living souls. The first man is of the earth, says the
Apostle. And all men are of the ground, says the wise man. Which God so
wrought in great wisdom, knowing full well the softie mind of man, and how
far he would exceed in pride. For as that proud King. Nabuchodonosor, by
Gods appointment was thrust out of his Throne, and turned among beasts, that
thereby he might learn to humble himself*: so it pleased God to create man
of so base a matter as dust, that by the remembrance thereof, he might frame
himself to lowliness. What more contemptible then the dust, which the wind
blows too and fro, and which we tread upon? Go to the pismire and to the ant,
says the wise man to the sluggard, and as well he might have warned the proud
mind and hautie heart of man to look upon the pecocke, which being lifted up
with the bravery of her painted feathers, thinks her self fairer then any
beast, and none so bewtifull as she, but when she turns down her eyes and
looks on her black and dirtie legs, then she lets fall her plume of
feathers, with the conceit whereof she looked so aloft. Many look so high
that they know not the ground they tread on, and foully would they take
scorn, if it should be told them that they were but dust and earth.

The Prophet Jeremy to pull down the high stomachs of the people, to whom he
was sent, does not doubt to call them so, repeating it often in their ears
that they might remember it. O earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord. Which
thing that godly Abraham well remembering, freely and of his own accord
confesses, when he made his request unto God for Sodom. Behold says he, now
I have begun to speak unto my Lord, I am but dust and ashes. Few there be
that think so, and more, few that will acknowledge it. He that is of base
degree, vaunts himself of nobility, and they that come of noble blood, lift
up themselves to the skies, as if the staff should boast it self that it were
no wood. They never look down to the earth from whence they came, nor
consider the grave whereunto they must go; Dust and ashes, earth and worms
meat. To consider that we came of the dust, is not only profitable to bring us
to humility, and to know our selves, but also to put us in mind of our
latter end, that we may be the better prepared unto God, and learn to deny
our selves, and forsake the world. Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and
naked shall I return to my first mould, to the womb of all things, that is
the earth. Dust was my first creation, and dust shall be my latter end and my
dissolution. And yet it is worth the marking, to see how GOD does set forth
his glory herein, that that creature which he made of dust and earth, should
have continued for ever and never died, if the same creature had continued in
his obedience, and truly performed that which he most easily had commanded.
Although man was created of the dust in his first beginning, yet God caused him
to increase and multiply by natural seed, and by lawful matrimony. Wherein
also Gods work is daily wonderful and miraculous; For although the parents
do their endeavor, yet it is God that frames the child in the womb of the
mother, by his mighty power, neither does that matter always come to pass
after a natural sort. For monsters oftentimes come from women, not by the
means of the parents, but God has so ordeaned it, that they should be
tokens of his judgments. And that the child in the womb is the work of
God, let us search it out in his word. The wise man utters it in this sort.
In my mothers womb was I fashioned, to be flesh in ten months; Wisdom 7.
2. I was brought together into blood of the seed of man, and by the pleasure
that comes with sleep. The pleasure that comes with sleep, then seed,
the seed is turned into blood, and after comes flesh. But wherehence are
bones and sinews, the order, the shape, and the proportion of the body? The
Prophet David, Psalm. 139. 14. declares it, and says; I am woonderously made.
And speaks of God his work, thus; Thou have covered me in my mothers womb,
my bones are not hid from thee, though I was made in a secret place, and
fashioned beneath in the earth, thine eyes did see me when I was without form,
for in thy book were all my members written, which in contiuuance of time were
fashioned, when as there was none of them before.

After seed and blood, and flesh and bones, and sinews, and all things
prepared and set in order, then comes the soul, but not from the soul of the
parents; for God gives the soul by his secret power and unsearchable working,
ask not how, but content thy self and wonder. Yet if thou desire to have
this matter more plainly showed thee, turn to the tenth chapter of Job, and
read his words which are these, directing his speech unto God. Have thou not
powered me out as milk, and turned me to curddes like cheese? thou have
clothed me with skin and flesh, and joined me together with bones and
sinews. And thou have given me life and grace, that is reason and
understanding, and many other gifts, whereby man excels all earthly
creatures. When God had made man, he breathed into him the breath of life, and
he was a living soul. Yet this is not sufficient, to declare how man was
created in the image of God, and according to his likeness. Which image and
likeness is not so to be understood, that either in body or in soul, we do
resemble God himself. For God has no such form and substance, neither does
he consist of flesh, or blood, or bone. God is a spirit, and altogether
incomprehensible. Neither let it any thing at all move us so to be persuaded,
because we read in the scripture, The mouth of the Lord has spoken it; the
eyes of the Lord behold all things, his ears are open to the prayers of them
that fear him; he delivered his people by a mighty hand, and a stretched out
arm; he will make his enemies his footestoole. Not that God has either mouth,
or eyes, or ears, or hands, or arms, or feet; but it is so set down in
respect of our weakness, who are not able to understand heavenly matters, but
by earthly similitudes, and by familiar examples and comparisons. And because
we are too earthly minded, therefore by such speeches we are lifted up to the
consideration of more excellent things. In the shape and proportion of man's
body, he is more comely and beautiful, then all the rest of gods creatures;
yea, and God has planted in his face and countenance a majesty, that all
other creatures might fear him and reverence him: yet we must not think with
our selves rudely and grossly, that the image of God consists in y^ outward
proportion, lineaments and shape of the body; although herein God has
granted mankind a superiority, dignity, and worthiness. Because the bodies
of all other creatures are framed as it were groueling on the ground, but
mankind is made upright to behold the heavens, and those things that are above
the heavens, and that by a supernatural and extraordinary sight. The image of
God is not this outward shape and proportion, but the inward and most virtuous
qualities of the soul. Wherefore it was no marvel that God said, Let us make
man, taking counsel of his wisdom and power. Concerning all things else, that
he made, he only said, Let it be so; and they were so: but having further care
of mankind, as of a matter more weighty, he takes more aduicement, and
minds to show a greater excellency in the creation of man and woman, to
whose souls he gave so great gifts and graces. Whereby the way, let us not
imagine, that there are more gods then one, because God said, Let us make; but
rather the authority of the Trinity is proved unto us, that though there be
three persons in the Godhead, yet there is but one God. For as God the father
creates, so is God the son the wisdom of all the creation, and from God
the holy Ghost, proceeds the virtue and power of all things. The excellent
qualities of the soul, and wherein the image of God consists, is especially
to be seen in these two points, namely, Holiness, and Holiness and
Righteousness.
Righteousness: yet furthermore, they had Free Will; and by their creation,
were immortal and free from death; and last of all, God gave unto them this
great privilege, as to have the sovereignty, the rule and government over all
his creatures. By which we plainly understand, that our first parents in their
time, were free from all sin: which time, is called their time of innocence.
In respect whereof, Solomon searching the nature of man, and comparing the time
of his iniquity, to the time of his innocence, does thus pronounce of him.
Only lo this have I found, that God has made man righteous, but they have
sought many inventions, and are gone astray through their own foolishness,
and so are the cause of their own destruction, and are fallen away from the
image of God which he had planted in them. The image of God consists in the
depth of wisdom, in the unmeasurableness of power, in the infiniteness of
his goodness and mercy, being perfect holy. perfect righteous, doing all
things according to the pleasure of his own will, in whom only dwells life
and immortality. The most of which qualities, if not all, man at the first was
endued withal; which were and are in God in the highest degree, but to man
they were given only in a measure, and in a far inferior degree, and that
with a condition, if so be he did continue in the obedience of gods
commandments. This image of God in our first parents, is nothing else but the
natural conformity and disposition of the soul, and of all the functions,
powers, and operations thereof, unto the law of god; whereby freely, and
voluntarily, it inclines unto true and perfect holiness and righteousness,
that according to that rule, he might serve god his Creator, all the days of
his life. For as god is a spirit, so will he be worshipped in spirit and truth,
and in sinceriie of heart and mind, hating all manner of counterfeit and false
worship, whereunto the nature of man is now too much inclined, and had rather
worship any thing then god himself. Also his dealing to his neighbor should
be inst and upright, but such are vanished out of the world, and now there is
nothing but subtlety and craft, and wrongful dealing, and all injury and
oppressien practiced, good herbs are plucked up, and nothing is now to be
seen but weeds. The holiness that god requires of us, and according to the
which our minds and hearts were first framed, is the holy obedience and true
worship of god, joined with a sincere love of god, proceeding from an
effectual faith, in the knowledge of God his word, and his works. In steed
whereof now ratgneth idolatry, the love of ye world, and worldly lusts, and the
ignorance of God his word is more rife, then ye knowledge of the same, and none
more accepted, then they that most despise it. The righteousness also which
God now requires, and wherewith we are enabled, is such a lovely respect and
friendly regard of our neighbors, that we have care of them as of our selves,
and wish no otherwise unto them then to our selves, and do unto them as we
would other should do unto us, and that not outwardly and for a fashion, but
inwardly and from the heart, not in a word only, but in deed, yea in our
thought and secrets. This holiness and righteousness was once planted, but
never came to perfect growth, the good corn is choked up, and as we say, il
weeds grow apace. The days of this present evil world are such, that now the
age wherein we live, may well be termed an iron age, and worse if worse may be,
in respect of the first age, and the beginning of the world, which time, was a
golden and precious time, when the hearts and minds of men, were as fine and
pure as gold, or if there be any thing that may be said to be more pure.
Now is there a veil cast over our minds and consciences, our faces are
covered as it were with visors, and a thick skin is grown over the heart,
all shame is banished, and a holy mind and a true and sound heart, is either
very rare, or no where to be found. Which in the beginning was not so. So that
now we had need daily to have these words often repeated unto us. Lord who
shall dwell in thy tabernacle? Who shall rest in thine holy mountain, and be
received into heaven when this life is ended? None but such as walk uprightly
and work righteousness, and that speak the truth from their heart: Who do
not abuse their tongue in slaundering, nor do any evil to their neighbors,
nor receive and believe a false report against them. In whose eyes a vile and
wicked person is contemned, and who makes much of them that fear the Lord,
who performs his oath and changes not his mind, although it be to his own
hinderance. Who give not their money to usury, seeking thereby the undoing and
utter impouerishing of their neighbors; who take no reward against the
innocent, or stand against them and do them harm. And they that do these
things, and whatsoever else may stand with an upright conscience in the fear
of God, they shall never be moved, that is, they shall not be cast from Gods
presence, as they shall be that do the contrary, but their part shall be in
the kingdom of heaven, and their souls only shall rest among the blessed
souls. Let us look into our first creation, and let that be our example and
our pattern, and let that be the high way for us to walk in. In the soul of
man there are two especial parts, first his understanding and reason;
secondly, his will and desire, and all the motions, affections, and
inclinations that proceed from the same. His understanding by his creation,
was furnished with all knowledge meet and convenient for him, so that he
needed not any to teach him, but God had endued him with that knowledge which
might have well directed him, chiefly in those things that pertain to the
worship and service of God, to his own salvation, and the benefit of his
neighbor. And not only his understanding and reason was fraught with all
knowledge, but his will also and his desire, was most ready to perform the
worship of God, his will and desire was most ready to the obedience of Gods
commandments. Then by his understanding he was able to discern the truth
perfectly, neither did any heresy, false doctrine, false religion, idolatry,
superstition, or vain opinions, blind his understanding, or trouble his mind.
Then was there no wicked lusts that did assault his will and desire, or that
did hinder him from the worship and service of God, but he was wholly framed
and inclined to do the will of God. His eyes were not filled with lust, his
tongue was not given to evil slanderous and blasphemous speeches; his hands
were free from theft; his feet were not swift to shead blood; drunkenness and
gluttony had not taken hold on him; fornication and whoredom, had not defiled
him; neither had any other sin that may be named, power over him. But
whatsoever things were true, whatsoever things were honest, whatsoever things
were just, whatsoever things were pure, whatsoever things pertained to love and
charity, whatsoever things were of good report; if there were any virtue, or
if there were any praise, on these things his thoughts were settled, to these
things his mind was only and wholly inclined. And thus you see what is meant
by holiness and righteousness, which is the chiefest part of the image of
God, and the especial consideration thereof.

The next matter which is to be considered in the image of God, is, that our
first parents had Freewill to perform that which was good, pleasant, and
acceptable in the sight of God. But they had it in such sort, that they might
fall away from it, and when they were fallen away they could not come to it
again, neither was it in their power to recover it, as also their posterity
could never attain unto it, although they make great boast. They give forth
speeches of wind, and great brags without truth. Indeed it cannot be denied,
but that in the time of the innocence of our first parents, they had Freewill
as we read, Eccle. 15. 14. God made man from the beginning, and left him in the
hand of his counsel, and gave him his commandments and his precepts, that if
he would, he might observe the commandments and testify his good will. He
set water and fire before him, to stretch out his hand unto which he would.
Before man, was life and death, good and evil, choose him whether. But alasie,
in steed of good, he did choose evil; in steed of a blessing, a curse; in steed
of life, death, By the gift of God it was in his power and Freewill, to obey ye
commandments of God, that so after this life he might be partaker of the
heavenly toys. Which gift, for want of good heed taking he lost, and that to
the great misery and overthrow of all mankind. This gift and good quallitie did
not long continue, but by an unhappy means he did commit evil, and so to the
end of his life continued, inclining rather to evil, the^ doing good. Once he
had Freewil, and at the time of his creation, when God powered his blessings on
him in great measure, but after that he fell away from God, by disobeying his
commandment, neither he nor his posterity had ever after any power to do good
of themselves, but rather the contrary. And then was their Freewill turned into
a slavish will, because it was wholly made subject to the power of sin,
through their own desert, and through their own procurement, and through the
crafty working of the devil; and now all our minds are set upon nothing so
much, and delights in nothing more then in ill doing. Much like a crooked
tree which can never grow straight. The first man had not this grace of God
whereby he should never incline to evil, but yet he had that grace, whereby
he might always have been preserved from evil, if he would have continued
therein, but by his Freewill he forseeke this grace. And when he had thus
wounded himself, he could not be healed of himself, and when he had made
himself sick, he could not rise again at his pleasure. But for the better
understanding of this matter, I will lay you down four degrees of Freewill
in man, which may stand and be approved by the scriptures and written word of
God. The first degree is, that he had Freewill, but chaungeably, that is, GOD
left him in the hand of his own counsel, to stand or fall, to continue, or
to go astray, he gave him not withal full strength to abide and to hold out
unto the end, as he gave unto the heavenly Angels, who by his grace continue
in well doing. And such was his weakness, that he did not continue, whereby
we may understand what is in man if he be left unto himself, and not vpholden
by God his grace. The second degree of Freewill is to be considered after the
fall of our first parents, and that may truly be termed a slavish will, being
as I may say, free, and most far from doing well, and most unable thereunto.
Because now no flesh that is men and women, that are begotten of flesh and
blood, can of themselves do but the works of the flesh, that is, all that evil
and naught is: as every one having just trial of themselves know, whether
those things that they do are perfectly agreeable to the commandments of God,
and so their own conscience shall be their witness, and thereby they shall
accuse and judge themselves, that they are far wide. And although in the
outward show of the world, such works which they do may seem good and
godly, yet being examined by the law of God, and by the straight rule thereof,
we must needs confess and acknowledge, our works to be both naught and evil,
so far forth as they proceed from our selves, and are not directed by God:
which direction of gods good grace and holy spirit, makes an other difference.
Wherefore the third degree of Freewill is in them, whom God has called to a
better course of life, that is, to holiness and righteousness, to virtue and
goodness. And yet this power of Freewill to do good, is very weak and
slender, because they cannot stand, endure, and continue, they cannot do that
which is good without the especial grace and gift of God. Who also are ready
to fall away from god, into some grievous sin or other every hour. As indeed
such kind of people, the devil does greatly and mightily, and most of all,
tempt and provoke to sin. For, for them which are his own already he takes
no thought. They who are thus altered and their minds changed, from following
evil ways, which come by the temptations of the devil, and the secret deceits
of sin that dwells within them, and of the world which has so many evil
examples to allure them, they should soon swerve, and easily be overcome,
unless they were sustained and vpholden by the help and assistance of God.
Which help, which gift, which grace and assistance, we obtain at the hands of
God, only by prayer, and by a steadfast faith. The last and the fourth degree
of Freewill, is in the best sort of people, and that after this life in heaven,
which shall be immutable and without change, and without swaruing. For then
shall we do nothing, but that which good is, and that with a constant mind
always to persevere and to continue in la^ding and praising God, and doing
his will, as now the Angels of heaven do. And this may suffice concerning
Freewill; both that we may know, what power of Freewil was given to man in his
first creation, and also what is to be thought, and how we ought to be
persuaded of it.

When by man's Freewill he came to his downfall, then he proved Gods word to be
true, Thou shall die the death; whereas before he was in the state of life and
immortality. For he was created immortal, with this condition, if he had
continued in Gods obedience, but being wilful and careless, he came to his
death, and was in the way to hell, when he thought to climb up into heaven.
When he was immortal, he knew not what it meant, but when through his folly,
he perceived his days to be shortened, he wondered at the one, and grieved to
remember the other. The estate of immortality wherein our first parents were
created, was nothing else but a continuance and endurance of life, and a
freedom from death. And although it be now usual and common, and nothing more
common, then for every one of us to die, yet at the first it was not so. If
our first parents had obeyed, they had never suffered death, but when they gave
themselves to sin and to deceitful vanities, then they knew themselves to be
mortal, and then death came upon them. As we read Romans 6. 23. The wages of
sin is death, but everlasting life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ
our Lord. And in the first Chapter of the same Epistle, verse 12. As by one
man, (meaning Adam the first man) sin entered into the world, and death by
sin, and so death went over all men, forasmuch as all men have sinned: so
that the cause and only cause of death is sin. And because the best sort of
men and women are sinful, though not in that degree and in that measure as the
wicked and ungodly are; yet because even they also have procured the wrath of
God, through their sin, they must needs undertake the punishment of sin,
which is death. But there is a great difference to be considered off. For
death to the godly is life, and happy are they that are delivered out of this
miserable and wretched world. For they know that while they are here, they are
absent from God, that is, from the enjoying of his presence. And again they
know, that if their earthly house, their bodies of dust and claie be destroyed,
they shall have a building given of GOD, that is, an house not made with
hands, but eternal in the heavens. For therefore they sigh, desiring to be
clothed with their house, which is from heaven, that mortality might be
swallowed up of life, and their earthly mansion changed for an everlasting
habitation. In the godly there is a great desire of death; what moves them
hereunto? Even this, that they may enjoy immortality, and be made partakers of
that part of the image of God, which by the means of sin, they were deprived
off and put from. But as for the ungodly, it is nothing so with them. For they
tremble and shake at the remembrance of death, as we read of Naball, who when
his wife told him heavy news which was toward him, his heart died within him.
The sea men when they are tossed up and down with the waves of the sea, and
near to be cast away, and their ship drowned, their soul melts within them;
so the wicked, their heart dies within them, al ye parts of their body quake,
their souls within ar sore vexed, and miserably tormented, with y^ present
forethought, and as it were feeling, of y^ everlasting death, and those
endless torments which they shall endure. And this moves them in a wonderful
and secret sort, to that fear they are in, that they know by death they shall be
taken from all their joy, and that they shall pass from this short life, which
they have here in this world, to death, and from this light death, which is no
more but a separation of the soul from the body, to a second death which is
everlasting death. And from death to these torments, which are, the worm of a
continual guilty conscience; the wrath of God increasing their punishment
from time to time; the restless cruelty of the devil and hellish spirits to
punish them; where there shall be nothing else but wringing of hands, weeping,
and gnashing of teeth. Felix the governor, shook and trembled, when he heard
Paul disputing of righteousness and temperaunce, and of other weighty
matters, as of death, the resurrection, and of the judgment to come, and
willed him to depart out of his presence. Much like to king Belshazzar, who
when he saw a hand writing upon the wall, whereby was declared the end of his
kingdom, and the end of his life; his countenance changed, his thoughts
troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were looced, and his knees smote
one against the other. The fear of death is in them as it was in king Saul,
(1. Sam. 28. 20) who when he was told how near his death did approach, he
was sore affraied, his soul fainted within him, and he fell along on the
earth, neither was there any strength in him, he refused meat and would not be
comforted, because through the sorrow of his death, he had a taste of the death
and torments which were to come. The cause why we lost this benefit of
immortality, is sin and disobedience, which brought us to our death, and to
our last home. The difference of death betwixt the godly and the wicked is
this, the one sort is greatly desirous to die, the other are greatly affraied
of death. That man was created unto immortality we may perceive, in that one
part of man never dies, which is his soul. Furthermore, the body also shall
receive immortality at the day of resurrection, when the general judgment
shall be, and when all flesh by the sound of a Trumpet shall be summoned together
from the four quarters of the earth. Then the bodies of all that have been
departed from the beginning of the world, together with them that shall die
unto the end of the world, being raised up, shall be joined unto their souls,
and both shall be immortal, and shall live for ever, either to receive joys and
everlasting bliss, or torments which shall never have end. The one sort to live
with God and his Angels, the other sort, with the devil and the fiends of hell.
Which immortality of the body, is confirmed by that of the Apostle writing to
the Corinthians. 1. Cor 15. 52. 53. In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye,
at the last trumpet, shall the dead be raised up incorruptible, and we shall
be changed. For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal,
must put on immortality, and then shall death be swallowed up in victory,
death shall be utterly vanquished neither shall it have any further power. Two
men we read of in the scriptures, that were partakers of this benefit of
immortality and freedom from death, and these two were taken from the earth
into heaven, without any separation of soul and body, neither did they suffer
death according to the usual course of men. The names of these men, were Enoch
and Eliah. Of Enoch we read, Genesis 5. 24. And Enoch walked with God, that is,
he pleased God, and he was no more seen, for god took him away, and he was
translated and carried up into heaven. Eccle. 44. 14. Upon the earth was no man
like Enoch, and therefore was he taken up from the earth for an example, (chap.
4. 16.) to the generations of men that shall come. Yet we may read of him more
plainly, Hebr. 11. 5. By faith was Enoch taken away, that he should not see
death, neither was he found, for God had taken him away. For before he was
taken away, he was reported of, that he had pleased god. Of Eliah we shall
read, 2. Kin. 2. 11. And as Eliah and Elisha, went walking and talking
together, behold there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and did
separate them twain. So Eliah went up by a whirle wind into heaven. And for
the better proof hereof, it follows in the same Chapter, that certain
children of ye Prophets which were at Jericho, desired of Elisha that they
might send to find him out. And said unto him; Behold now there be with thy
servant fifty strong men, let them go we pray thee, and seek thy master,
if so be the spirit of the Lord has taken him up and cast him upon some
mountain, or into some valley. But he answered them, ye shall not send, yet
they were instant upon him till he was ashamed? wherefore he said; Send. So
they sent fifty men which sought three days, but found him not. Which two
examples, do sufficienly declare, in what estate man had been, being free from
death, if he had pleased God. For as among men they were the most righteous, so
passed they into heaven after an extraordinary and most happy sort: to show
there was a better life prepared; and also to be a testimony of the
immortality of souls and bodies. Who were taken from the earth into the
heaven, that after this life they might live with God, enjoying all happiness.

How mankind was created immortal and free from Government over all Gods
creatures.
death, ye have heard; and now it remains that I should show unto you what
authority and privilege in respect of the government of beasts, God gave
unto man, and in what sort. After that God had made all his creatures, he
brought them unto man, to see how he would call them, and as he called them so
were their names. Furthermore, God had planted in the beasts, a kind of
reverent fear, and dutiful service toward man. In respect whereof, the
Prophet David does greatly extol Gods goodness, in that he did not only indue
the soul of man with heavenly qualities, but also in that he gave him the
dominion over all the works of his hands. Psalm. 8. What is man says he, that
thou art mindful of him, and the son of man that thou visitest him? Thou
made him a little lower then the Angels, to crown him with glory and
worship; Thou made him to have dominion of the works of thy hands, and thou
have put all things in subjection under his feet. All sheep and oxen, yea and
the beasts of the field; the souls of the air, and the fishes of the sea, and
whatsoever walks through the paths of the seas. Among the rest of the fishes
of the sea, I read this of the Dolphine. Fishes according to their first
creation says the Author, at the sight of man acknowledge his dominion over
them. And the Dolphine, though he be a most regal and princely fish, yet when
he sees man come near him, he shows reverence as to his Lord. But as after
man's fall and his disobedience to God, the earth became unfruitful for man's
cause; so also are all other creatures disobient to man even to this day. Yet
as they of all others, are partakers of immortality that come nearest to the
Image of God, in all true holiness and unfeigned righteousness; so especially
unto them is the rule and government granted over beasts. But they that are
quite contrary disposed and enemies unto God, in their sinful lives and
behavior, the beasts and all other creatures, have rather rule and government
over them, and as it were a power to set themselves against them, and to
ouermaster them. For God does sometimes punish men by the rage of beasts, who
herein are at Gods commandment, and are ready to execute his will and
pleasure. The fiercest and cruellest creatures that ever god made, have had no
power over the godly, as we may read in the histories of the bible, but rather
they have had a reverent estimation of them, as it were acknowledging the image
of god in them. No beast so fierce as a lion to devour a man, and therefore in
the Epistle of S. Peter, the devil is fitly compared unto a roaring lion,
seeking whom he may devour. Yet Daniel being cast into the lions den, they
do not only not offer to touch him, but also sit by him as though they had
him in reverence, and were set to guard and keep him. A Viper is a most
hurtful, venomous, and deadly Worm, much after the order of blind worms and
stinging adders, and where the worm lies it procures death. Yet we read
Act. 28. that when the Apostle S. Paul and his company were greatly refreshed
of the Barbarians at Melita, and S. Paul had gathered a number of sticks and
laid them on the fire, there came a viper out of the heat and leapt on his
hand. Now when the Barbarians saw the worm hang on his hand, they said among
themselves; Surely this man is a murderer, whom though he has escaped the
sea, yet vengeance has not suffered to live. But he shook off the worm into
the fire, and felt no harm. Howbeit they waited when he should have swollen,
or fallen down dead suddenly. But after they had looked a great while, and saw
no inconvenience come unto him, they changed their minds, and said; That he
was a god. This holy and godly man shook off the worm into the fire and felt
no harm. Wis. 16. 10. The teeth of the venomous dragons could not overcome
them that feared god among the children of Israel. For gods mercy came to help
them, and healed them. It was neither herb nor plaster says the wise man
that healed them, but thy word O Lord, which heals all things. According as
Christ promised to his Disciples, Mat. 16. that they should have power not only
over venomous beasts, but over the devils themselves. Ye shall take away
serpents, and if ye drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt you. So in the
tenth Chapter of the gospel after S. Luke, Behold I give unto you, says
Christ unto his Apostles, power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over
all the power of the enemy, and nothing shall hurt you. This power which he
gave to his Apostles, was so much the more manifest, that it was in him to give
them that gift, because he himself was in the wilderness forty days among
the wild beasts, and had no hurt of them: yea his presence made them amazed,
whose anger if they had felt, they could not have lived an hour. The
Israelites Deuteronomy. 8. 15. were in the great and terrible wilderness, amongst the
fiery serpents and scorpions, yet he was their guide. Well therefore might the
Prophet David say, Psalm. 91. Who so dwells in the secret of the most high,
shall abide in the shadow of the Almighty, and he that makes God his defense
and trust, shall perceive his protection to be a most sure safeguard. There
shall no evil come unto him; He shall walk upon the lion and the aspe, the
young lion and the dragon shall he tread under his feet, and be as safe as was
the Apostle S. Paul, that shook off the viper from his hand, being never a
whit the worse. 1. Sa. 17. 36. King David before he was exalted to ye throne of
Israel, and being at that time in no higher estate then a shepherd, before
that he did encounter with Goliath, that great giant of the Philistines, that he
might be suffered to undertake that enterprise, he showed king Saul, that as he
was keeping sheep, there came a lion and a bear to devour and to take their
pray; but he not only took the pray from them, but slew them both. Sampson
also of whom we read, Judges 14. 6. As a young lion roared on him, he rent him
in pieces as it were a kid, and yet had nothing in his hand. The Prophet Fsay,
chap. 11. 6. 7. 8. did foretell, that when Christ should come to restore the
image of GOD in man, from which he was fallen, he shows in what obedience,
cruel and fierce beasts be, even to the little child. The wolf shall dwell
with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie with the kid, and the calfe and the
lion, and the fat beast together, and a little child shall lead them. And the
Cow and the bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie together, and the
lion shall eat straw like the bullock. And the sucking child shall play
upon the hole of the aspe, and the weaned child shall put his hand upon the
cockatrice hole. What lions and bears are, we know, the leopard is a beast
that inticeth other beasts unto it, and being in his compass and reach, he
deuoureth them. The aspe and the cockatrice are two most hurtful and
poysonable beasts, whereof the one, that is the cockatrice, destroys a man a
far off, with the forcible poison of his sight. A little youth of seven or
eight years old, as by experience we see, rules both oxen and horses which
are great and strong beasts. Our proverb is, If the horse knew his strength,
no man should tame him. Yet even children do rule and guide them, not that they
so much fear the children, but because they reverence the image of God in man,
even in the children. Whereby they show what privilege in the rule and
government over beasts, at the first time when man was created, God had
preferred him unto and granted him. The raven is a bird that stands greatly
in need of food, whose birds cry unto God, wandering for lack of meat, yet
how needy so ever they be, they brought the Prophet Eliah his meat. As we
read 1. King. 17. 6. And the ravens brought him bread and flesh in the
morning, and bread and flesh in the evening, and he drancke of the river. That
fierce and cruel beasts at Christ his coming should be so mild and gentle,
it gives us to understand what a punishment was laid upon man for sin, in
that beasts were not only not under his rule and government, but wild and
untameable, and putting them in danger of their lives. The Prophet Hoshea,
chapter 2. 18. tells the Jews, that when they shall repent them of their
idolatry, that in that day God will make a covenant for them with the wild
beasts, and with the fowls of the heaven, and with that, that creeps upon
the earth, that he would so bless them, that all creatures should favor
them, that they should have no need to fear, but might sleep safely. Which
thing also is promised to the godly, as we may read in the history of Job,
Chapter 5. 22. Thou shall laugh at destruction and death, and shall not be
affraide of the beast of the earth; for the stones of the field shall be in
league with thee, and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee. At
home and abroad thou shall have nothing to make thee sorrowful, but all things
before thy eyes shall give thee large cause to give God thanks.

I have showed you how men have prevailed, (that is, the best and godliest sort
of men) against fierce and cruel beasts, and how they have reverenced them,
and stood them greatly in steed. Now as for the ungodly and wicked sort of men,
they have been far from this rule and government, insomuch that the meanest
and the weakest kind of creatures have had power over them. For example, A fly
is a beast which lightly no man cares for; yet Pharao king of Egypt, and all
his people, were so troubled and molested with them, that great swarms of them
came into the kings palace, and into his servant houses, and into the houses
of all the Egiptians, so that through all the land of Egypt, the earth was
corrupt, by the swarms of flies, Exodus 8. 24. As we read, Wised. 16. 9. The
biting of grasshoppers and flies killed them, and there was no remedy found for
their life; for they were worthy to be punished by such. A frogge is a beast
of as little account, yet the same king his servants and his people, were so
pestered with them, that they came into their chambers, leapt upon their tables
as they were at meat, molested them in their beds while they slept, so that
for the time they could be at no rest and quiet for them. A louce is of less
account then Wisd. 16. 9. Psalm. 78. 45. Wis. 12. 8.
any of these two, yet was he and his people greatly vexed with them. Herod the
king mentioned Acts 12. in most stately and royal apparel, pronounced an
eloquent oration before Hornets.
the people, insomuch that the people gave a shout, saying; The voice of God
and not of man. But immediately the Angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave
not the glory unto God, so that he was eaten of worms and gave up the ghoast;
as his grandfather before him was eaten up of lice. The stones of the street
shall be against the wicked and ungodly, and at the shaking of the leaves of
trees, they shall be sore affraide. And this is the rule that the wicked and
ungodly have over beasts, that is, that they are subject unto the beasts. So
does God execute his vengeance, and perform his wrath against offenders,
using beasts as instruments and means thereunto. As we shall read Ezec. 14.
15.
in the Prophecy of Iere. 5. 6. Wherefore a lion out of the forest shall
slaie them, and a wolf of the wilderness shall destroy them, a leopard shall
watch over their cities, every one that goes out thence shall be torn in
pieces, because their trespasses are many, and their rebellions are increased,
and all repentance is banished, and their hearts are hardened. God foretold his
people by the mouth of his Prophet Moses, how after this sort he would punish
them that disobeied him, Leuit. 26. 21. And if ye walk stubburnly against me,
and will not obey me, I will then bring seven times more plagues upon you
according to your sins. I will also send wild beasts upon you, which shall
spoil you, and destroy your cattle, and make you few in number. So your high
ways shall be desolate, because none dare pass thereby for fear of beasts.
Among the rest of grievous plagues wherewith God did mind to punish the people
of the Jews, the plague of evil beasts was not the least, as we shall read in
Prophecy of Ezech. cap. ^. 17. I will send upon you, famine and evil beasts,
and they shall spoil thee, and pestilence and blood shall pass through thee,
and I will bring the sword upon thee, I the Lord have spoken it, and therefore
be sure of it. The people of Israel Nomb. 2. 1. 6. because they murmured
against God, and against his servant Moses, God sent fiery serpents among
them, which stung them so, that many of them died, because they were not
content with Gods providence, and loathed the food that God ordained for them,
calling it light bread, and naming it with disdain. 2. King. 2. 23. 24. As the
Prophet Elisha was going by the way, little children and wicked impes came out
of the city and mocked him, and said unto him; Come up thou bald head. But
two bears came out of the forest, and tore in pieces two and forty children
of them. 2. King. 17. 25. The Assirians that dwelt at Samaria, at the beginning
of their dwelling there, they feared not the Lord, therefore the Lord sent
lions among them which slew them. I read that the Tribe of Dan and of Gad,
because they wrought wickedness in the sight of the Lord, in persecuting them
that kept the law, that the Prophet Ezechiel gave them a terrible token. For
Adders destroyed their children and all their cattle, for their sin and
iniquity. Dorotheus in the life of Ezechiel. As the waters are commanded not
to ouerwhelme Iere. 8. 17.
the earth, so are bears and lions, that they should not hurt and annoy men,
as we read, Psalm 104. The Esaias 30. 6.
nature of the lion is to devour man and beast, what ever he meets withal,
but God restrains him, and makes him couch in his den. Yea God has
appointed the light of the Sun to strike a fear in him, to this purpose,
that man may go forth to his work and to his labor, until the eueniug,
without either hurt or hinderance. Yet we see when God determines to work his
vengeance and wrath on man for sin, they fear not the light of the Sun,
but come forth to perform the will of God in their might and in their rage, as
I have further declared in the Treatise of the work of Gods creation. Exodus
23. 28. God promised the Israelites to send hornets to drive out the
Canaanites, and other heathen people before them. If ye amend your ways and do
uprightly, says the Lord, by the Prophet Joel, chapter 2. 25. I will render
you the years that the grasshopper has eaten, the cankerworme, and the
caterpiller, and the palmerworme my great host, whith I sent among you to eat
up and to consume all the increase of the earth, and the fruits of trees. To
this purpose, namely how God does punish sinners and wicked people by evil
beasts, there is remembered a notorious and fearful example, and that not so
strange as true, wherewith at this time I think good to end this matter,
having reserved it unto the last place, that it might the longer be kept in
your remembrance. The example is this; A king of Poland, whose name was
Popileus, a king of infamous life and manners, did oftentimes wish in his life
to be devoured of rattes. At last according to his wish, they set upon him, as
he was making good cheer, and being well tipled, crowned with garlands,
smeared with sweet ointments, and overcome with surfit and excess. Which
rattes says the author, came from the dead carcasses of his uncles by the
fathers side, which he and the Queen his wife had poisoned. For rattes of a
huge greatness being come forth, leapt upon the feasting tyranut, and his wife
and sons, and bitte them cruelly. His guard could not drive them away,
because when men were weary, the rattes continued day and night without any
wearines. Burning fires were made, and Popileus his wife and sons, were
placed amidst them; but for all that, the rats passing through the fire, ceased
not to gnawe the man-queller. They assaid an other element and used the help
of the water, and this murderer of his fathers brethren, together with his
wife and children, were carried to a deep standing water. Notwithstanding the
rattes continually followed them, and made holes in the boat and vessel where
they were, insomuch that the water entering in, they were in danger of
drowning. Wherefore the mariners fearing to be drowned, brought the vessel to
the shore, where an other company of rattes meeting them, and joining with the
former, did more grievously annoy them. Which when they perceived, the
defenders knowing it to be Gods vengeance, fled all away. Popileus now
having none to defend him, being altogether forsaken and forlorn of all his
subjects and friends, seeing no other help, got him to a high tower, where
he found himself no safer then he was before, but the rattes having as it
were a greater liberty, run up to their pray with a swift course, and there
they destroy and devour the two boys; the wife, and this wicked Popileus,
that neither he nor any of his generation should remain alive. Small creatures
and weak rattes, to make an end of wicked people; and where the image of God
is not, nor any spark of grace does appear, in respect of them, brute beasts
are of more account; and wicked persons are despised and tormented of beasts,
who otherwise might be honored of them, and commanded by them. Unto the
fearful example of king Popileus, the same author adds the loathsome end
of the Emperor Arnolphus, whose flesh and entrails were eaten up of lice, and
nothing left uneaten, save only his griftles and his bones, although the
physicians did their best, who can do nothing when God says nay, and
hinders their working by not giving effect to the same. A king devoured of
rattes, and an Emperor of lice, mighty rulers and great governors, and yet
had no power over such weak creatures. God did not vouchsafe them to end there
lives by sickness, or sword, or famine, or pestilence, but that they might be
more odious and detestable, and of infamous memory to the world, and all
succeeding ages, it was Gods will, that thus they should be devoured, and that
their sin should not be unpunished; and that mighty men should be plagued by
Gods hand, who otherwise seem to be lawless. That Emperors and Kings, Nobles
and Magistrates, and all the great ones of the world, may not think, that they
shall escape scotfree, but as they are mighty, so are their mightier then they.

Thus according to that small skill that it has pleased God to grant me, I
have brieflly discoursed of those principal matters comprehended in the image
of God in man, being created in righteousness and holiness; having Freewill
at the first; and furthermore, crowned with immortality, and freedom from
death; and lastly, the privilege, sovereignty, and government over all Gods
creatures, then being granted unto him of God. And this is that happy estate
wherein man was created, and which for a time he did enjoy, but he did not
long continus therein. Who through his own fault and disobedience, fell away
from so great gifts, and graces, and blessings.

God grant that both our hearts and minds may be so framed from day to day,
to the image of God, in holiness and righteousness, and all good and virtuous
quallities, that God may be glorified in us, and by us; and that our Free will
works, which are nothing else but inclinations to sin, may from time to time
be redressed, until that sin and the corruption thereof, which lies hid in
our hearts, may at the last be rooted out; that so we may be partakers of that
immortality and freedom from death, which by reason of sin we have lost, and
are now for the same cause hindered from. Finally, that we may obtain that
privilege, rule and government, not over beasts which is but for a time, but
over our beastly affections and sinful desires, which are rise in us, and now
prevail and have the upper hand, that they may be cut off for ever, and that
we may never displease God. And that at length we may come to that place, where
we may continue always in giving thanks unto him, and setting forth his
praises, where we may enjoy the presence of God, with the full fruition of all
happiness, and where we shall see and behold him as he is, face to face. To
God the father, God the son, and God the holy Ghost, etc.

Deo gratia, solique gloria.
Of Justification.
The knowledge of our misery; A comfort in our downfall; The ftaie, the happy
estate, and the life of a regenerate man, taken out of the Epistle of Saint
Paul to the Romans.
THe righteousness of man, is as a defiled, polluted, and menstruous cloth,
whereby we become hateful unto Our minds are corrupt by Idolatry.
God. For when we should glorify God in his creatures, perceiving in them his
eternal goodness, wisdom and power, yet we turn the truth of God into a
lie, worshipping the creature, in stead of the Creator, which is blessed for
ever. Then also are we unrighteous and most wicked in our lives. For there is
none of us that Our lives shameful, by our wicked behavior.
understands and seeks after God, yea willingly (from whence flows all
wickedness) we forget God, none that does good, contemning God, and admiring
our selves, being puffed up with vain cogitations, far from the obedience of
God. Our feet are swift to shead blood, and our throat is an open sepulcher,
we are deceitful, and our tongues are filled therewith, we are given to all
cruelty and oppression, destruction and calamity, are in our ways, and the
way of peace have we not known, the fear of God is not before our eyes. Yea
we do not only commit those things our selves, which we know are worthy
death, and are condemned by the law of GOD, but also favor them that do
them. And this is the state of man being left unto himself, in which estate
even the regenerate should be inwrapped, if god All subject to condemnation,
and so under the mercy of God.
did not correct there wickedness. So that by nature being without Christ, we are
shut from the kingdom of God as obstinate, stubburne, and rebellious persons,
a people that cannot repent but go on still in our wickedness, and are
aliaunts and strangers from the commonweal of Israel, and deprived of the
blessings of God, and are all as condemned persons, unless it please God to
draw us unto him, and for our stony heart, to give us a fleshly heart, that
may resolve it self into tears, and unless it please God to forgive us our
sins, and to renew our corrupt hearts. Most true therefore is that general
proposition of S. Paul; For there is no difference, for all have sinned and
are deprived of the glory of god, even of eternal life and happiness, whereat
all of us do aim. Now seeing the heart of man is deceitful, and who can
know it? Seeing there lurketh many starting holes therein, and that the
branches are endued with the selfsame sap that comes Although we be not
just by nature, yet we would seem to be just by condemning other.
from the root, I mean, seeing we are ready to excuse our selves in our own
wickedness, by accusing of others, as did our forefather and our first root
Adam; and that the nature of man is to clear himself, and to hide his sins
from god, being given to all hypocrisy, and that he is ready to justify
himself by condemning other; albeit he commit not heinous sins (such as are
mentioned Those that might otherwise think themselves just, being compared to
the law, are wicked.
in the latter end of the first chapter, nor give consent unto them, yea
although he show himself a professed enemy to those vices; yet because he is
not altogether free from them, or at leastwise tainted with some of them, if he
consider his estate he cannot show any defense for himself. So that by his
fained and hipocriticall kind of righteousness, first he is in excusable;
secondly, he incurreth the judgment of God, which is according to truth,
against them which commit such things; thirdly he despises the riches of his
bountfulnesse, patience, and long suffering, not knowing that the
bountifulness of God leads him to repentance. The effect of which his
hypocrisy, is this, that after his hardness, and heart that cannot repent,
he heapeth up as a treasure unto himself, wrath, against the day of wrath,
and of the declaration of the just judgment of GOD. An other sort there is,
that willingly pluck their necks out of the choler, and would be spectators
and beholders of other men's misery, by reason of sin and transgression, There
is no man just by excuse.
thinking themselves without spot and blameless, standing upon this guarde,
that they never knew the law of Moses, the servant of GOD, whereby they might
direct their lives according to the will of GOD. Nothing regarding the
firmament, the heavens, and all other creatures, whereby they are incited to
acknowledge the eternal power and wisdom of God, and to glorify him in
them, and to give him thanks, for so great benefits which he has ordained
for the use of man. But more blockish are they, which boast and vaunt of the
The righteousness of man, stands not in the knowledge of the law.
knowledge of the law of God, (as did the Jews, who put all their safety in
this, that Abraham was their father, that the oracles of God were committed to
them, that the covenant was propper unto them, that the temple of God was
amongst them, that they were the people of God, and the beloved of the Lord)
and yet for all this, labor not to live in the obedience of the law. For the
Lord chose them as a peculiar people, that they might serve him in all
holiness and righteousness, which thing they altogether neglected, thinking
that God had chosen them for their worthiness. Wherefore the foolish All
excuse taken away from them.
heart of man which is full of darkness, cannot device any way how to be
righteous, but his devices and his righteousness, is foolishness before God,
and altogether condemned of the spiritual man. For if hec think to be just
by condemning other, breaking out into these words with the Pharisee. O God I
thank thee, that I am not as other men, extorcioners, unjust, adulterers, or
even as this publican, he Hipocrite.
pronounces the sentence of judgment against himself, in that comparing his
life to the law, he is most culpable and faulty. But rather let us understand
and learn what the meaning of this is; Every man that exalts himself
shall be brought low, and he that humbles himself shall be exalted. If he would
start aside because he knows not Gentile.
the law, and so imagine himself to be free, his conscience is a thousand
witnesses, and the light of nature and reason commanding and highly
commending those things which are good, hating, forbidding, and punishing,
those things which are wicked and evil, shows him how to live in the service
and fear of God. For in that by nature (says the Apostle of all) they do the
things contained in the law, they having not the law, are a law unto
themselves, and they that have sinned without the law, shall perish without
the law. The effect of which knowledge of God, by the light of nature and
reason, being written in their hearts and consciences, shall rid them from
all excuse, and be most effectual, yea horrible, in that dreadful day of
doom, when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Chist, the books, that
is, their consciences, being then laid open. Lastly if only the knowledge of
the law Jew.
could prevail, that thereby we might be justified and counted righteous, we
had wherein we might rejoice. But seeing not the hearers, but the doers of the
law, are justified before God, and that God requires a circumcised heart, and
is uot satisfied with vain shows and ceremonies, it follows, that they are
not just which only know the law, and y^the circumcision of the heart, I mean,
the inward righteousness, consists in the spirit, not in the letter. Wherefore
they that sin in the law, that is, having knowledge of the law, shall be
judged by the law. This then is the full sum of the matter, that both Jews
and Gentiles are under sin, that is, are justly condemned for sins, and are
subject to the curse which is due unto sin. For as with righteousness there
is absolution, so with sin there is condemnation. So that it is not in man to
rid himself from the curse of the law, by any devised righteousness.
Hitherto the drift of the Apostle has been to show, how that man's
righteousness is far from the obedience of the law, and that righteousness
which God requires at our hands. And endeavoring to give a more clear light
to the righteousness of God, he plucketh away the visor of their feigned
righteousness, and discovers their faces; yea he sets before us, and
launceth out, the venom and corruption of our heart, comparing our
righteousness, or rather our excessive wickedness, with the rule of the law,
which by a fit exaggeration, he shows us as plain, as if black and white
were laid together, darkness and light were weighed in a ballaunce. Such is
therefore the righteousness of man, that The righteousness of man, compared
to the law, how faulty it is.
we think our selves just without the knowledge of the law, without the
effectual working thereof, and before we examine our selves, our lives, and
sins thereby. Sin is not imputed while there is no law, and no man is
punished as guilty and faulty; For where no law is, there is no
transgression, and contrariwise, by the law is the knowledge of sin. And
sin, that it might appear sin, works death in us by that which is good,
that sin might be out of measure sinful by the commandment. Moreover, the
law entered thereupon, By the law is the knowledge of sin.
that sin might abound, both that which is original, and that which daily
carries the sway in our actions. The use of this manifestation, is referred to
The use of the law is two sold.
two points. The first is, that men might be so much the more guilty;
Secondly, the benefit of god in Christ Jesus, should be so much the more
glorious. The second What the law is in it self, and what to us. The law is
spiritual.
general point in this comparison is, what the law is in it self, and also
having respect unto us. In it self it is holy, and the commandment holy,
just, and good, it is spiritual, and requires of us an beauenly pureness,
yea the heart and inward affection, (because God judges the secret motions of
the same) and a cheerfulness, and a willingness, in the outward deed. So
that nothing is more contrary to the law, then hypocrisy, lying, and deceit.
Now then as the law is spiritual, so we We are carnal.
are carnal, sold under sin, and being in the flesh, the affections of
sin, which are by the law, have force in our members to bring forth fruit
unto death. Yea, the whole natural man is bondslaue to the law of the flesh
and of sin, which possesses the unregenerate, and wholly reigns in them.
For they neither will, nor do good; so that although the law of nature, and
light of reason do teach them, and inform them what is good, their conscience
bearing them witness, and the law of God ^ore perfectly establishing it, and
making it known; The law of our slesh.
yet the law of our flesh is most imperfect, and full of obstinate rebellion.
For our corrupt nature turns the benefit of the law to our destruction;
whereby it follows, that that is most perverse and wicked, which turns
that which is wholesome in it self to condemnation. In the unregenerate man,
it brings forth death, and may well be accused of him, because it has this
operation in him, that it causes wrath, stirs up grudging, fretting and
murmuring of our nature. How the law is the power of sin.
For the more it presses by reason of our infirmity, in that we are not able
to withstand it, it stirs up sin, because we are ready and most desirous
to do that which is sorbidden, it is the force and power of sin, it
increases sin and slaieth us, and makes us guilty of the wrath of God, and
eternal death and damnation, Wherefore if we say there is no sin in us, we
How we do the works of the law.
are found liars, being reproved by the law. And as for the outward
works of the law which we do, are either for fear of punishment, which
might ensue upon the offense, or else for love of our selves, that we might
rejoice in our own righteousness. But seeing with our works there is joined
stubburnnesse, and the heart rebelleth within, (because the law reproves our
concupiscence) and that naturally even from the loins of our forefather Adam,
there is ingraffed into us a servile fear, and deadly hatred of the law, if
not of the lawe-giuer, our works can in no wise come to the height that they
may please GOD. The law therefore is spiritual and just, and holy, and good;
and by the law comes the knowledge of sin, therefore is every mouth
stopped, and all the world found subject unto the judgment of God. How then
may No man justified by the law.
we imagine, that by the works of the law we may be justified? seeing that
it is said, by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified. Again, it
is impossible to be made righteous by the law, not only to him The regenerate
are stained with sin.
that is not regenerate, but unto the regenerate also, in that their
righteousness is stained with so many sins, and they culpable of judgment
before God. For the law cannot justify those that are in the flesh. The law
is spiritual, but we are carnal, sold under sin, and enemies to God, and
strangers from ye common wealth of Israel. Howsoever therefore we think to
please God by the outward works of the law, yet is not that the righteousness
which The righteousness that God requires, is of the heart. No justification
by works.
God requires. For the circumcision is of the heart, in the spirit, not in
letter, whose praise is not of men, but of GOD. But if Abraham be justified by
works, he has wherein to rejoice, but not with God, seeing that if
justification might be accomplished by the works of the law, it were
altogether debt, and not favor. But that should not be blinded with a vain
opinion of debt and merit, there the Apostle crosses this sentence with a
contrary position. For to him that woorketh not, but believes in him that
justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness. Which
afterward he proves more manifestly by the fall and ruin of the Jews,
being compared with the Gentiles.

What shall we say then? that the Gentiles which followed righteousness, have
attained unto righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith. But
Israel which followed the law of righteousness, could not attain unto
righteousness. Wherefore? because they sought it not by faith, but as it it
were by the works of the law. For they being ignorant of the righteousness
of God, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not
submitted Our justification is by Christ. In all humility we ought to confess
our selves to be sinners.
themselves to the righteousness of God. For Christ is the end of the law
for righteousness, unto every one that believes. And unless we acknowledge
our selves to be sinners, being void and destitute of any righteousness that
is in us, we seem to deface and to darken the worthiness and dignity of
Christ. Which consists in this, that he is the only light, salvation, life,
resurrection, and righteousness, and the sovereign physic of every man's
soul; and to what end? If not to lighten the blind, to restore them that were
condemned, to quicken them which were dead, to raise them up which were brought
to nothing, to cleanse them which were polluted with all filthiness, to cure
and heal them which were death, sick, and almost swallowed up thereof. Nay
but if we attribute any part of He that attri buteth any thing to himself,
derogateth from God, and wrastleth with him. How Christ is a rock of offense.
righteousness unto our selves, we wrestle as it were with Christ, whose
property it is, to beat down them that are fleshly minded, and to relieve
those that are heavy laden with the burden of of their sins. So that Christ
is a stumbling block, and a rock of offense, not that it agrees unto him to
be so, but that malicious minds do take offense through their own corruption.
For they stumble by reason of their own pride, and their damnation is in them
selves. What senseless blockishnesse is it therefore in us, that we should
derive salvation, righteousness, and justification, from the law, which is
our downfall, and the cause of wrath? Nevertheless if we be not as yet
satisfied, he uses an other effectual proof, whereby we may plainly see,
that righteousness and justification is not by the law. For the promise yt
was made to Abraham, the father of the faithful, and that he should be the
father of many nations, (through gods everlasting covenant with him, that he
would be his god and the god of his seed after him) I say the promise, The
promise is not by the law.
that he should be the heir of the world, was not given to Abraham and to his
seed through the law. First because the law cannot comprehend the promise;
secondly, because faith should be joined in vain to the promise, which should
be apprehended by works. Again, if justification depended Justification, that
is, the righteousness of God, pertains unto all.
upon the law of Moses, then should god be the Savior only of the Jews, but
it is god who shall justify circumcision of faith, meaning the Jews, and
uncircumcision through faith, meaning the gentiles. And in that, that Abraham
was justified being uncircumcised, it also follows, that justification
belongs unto them that are uncircumcised. This therefore may be the general
conclusion of this point, that we are not justified by the law and the works
thereof, comprehended in these three propositions. All both Jews and gentiles,
are under sin, that is, are justly condemned for sin. All have sinned, and
are justly deprived of the glory of god, that is, of everlasting life. All the
world is subject to the judgment of god. And herein is the praise of his
justice, in that we deserve it, as also the praise of his mercy, in that freely
in Christ he forgiueth us so great damnation. So that here it rests, that
there is but one way of But one way of salvation.
salvation, to wit, Jesus Christ and his righteousness, apprehended by faith.
For the gospel of Christ, is the power of god unto salvation, to every one
that believes, to the Jew first, and also to the Grecian. Unto which faith,
although Works.
that works are necessarily adjoined, and are as the light which is seen
together with the flame, yet they avail not unto justification, but rather
signify, that a man is inwardly justified before god. Therefore although faith
be not without works, yet faith alone without works, does Faith only,
justifies.
justify. The law manifests sin, and death which was before the law, it
causes wrath, and does not reconcile us unto God, but the true reconciliation
and purification, The righteousness of God.
comes only from the righteousness which is of God. And seeing
righteousness is not sound by the law, it is necessary and behoouefull, that
we look for righteousness elsewhere. And because man could not accomplish any
righteousness, therefore least he should utterly perish, God exhibiteth a way
which he promised of old, whereby he should be justified and saved before him,
Christ is our righteousness.
without the law. The matter and ground of this righteousness, is Christ
apprehended through faith, who is offered unto all, because all have sinned.
Which righteousness is freely given without any merit of ours, for we are
justified freely by his grace, through the God the au thour of this
righteousness
redemption that is in Christ Jesus. The author of this righteousness and
justification is God, for he so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten son, to be offered up for our sins, and to make full
satisfaction, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have life
everlasting. Whom GOD set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his
blood. Righteousness in the death and resurrection of christ.
The material cause, is the death and resurrection of Christ: for he was
delivered to death for our sins, and is risen again for our justification.
The cause formal or isntrumental, is faith, whereby as it were with an hand,
we apprehende the righteousness of GOD. For with the heart man believes unto
salvation and to righteousness. Christ is our reconciliation through faith,
while we lay hold of the promises The end of this righteousne, what?
of Gods mercy in him. The final cause, is the glory and praise of the
goodness of God, in that being enemies, he reconcileth us unto him. Wherefore
we are not saved by works, or partly by faith, and partly by works, but all
our rejoicing is excluded by the We are justified not by works, but by faith.
law of faith. And our justification depends only upon GOD, that his glory
might be established, for the promise of God is through faith, and not by the
law. For as the law is the cause of wrath, so is faith the appeasing of our
consciences, whereby we understand, that we are justified. And if any man make
the law his ground and his rock, he is fallen from grace; for they are
utterly abolished from Christ, whosoever are justified by the law. So that
they that put their confidence in the works of the law, Christ shall profit
them nothing: By whom only we obtain to be called the sons of god, and
the heirs of the kingdom of heaven, by whom we are delivered, and redeemed
from the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. For GOD has
given the spirit into our hearts, that we may cry Abba father. Which spirit we
receive by faith, and not by the works of the law, for they that are under
the law, are under the curse, and under most dreadful fear. And the
general proposition of the Apostle is, that no man is justified by the law,
for the law is not of faith, but the just shall live by faith. For by faith
we are the seed, posterity, and children of Abraham, and heirs by promise,
and fellow heirs with Christ of his everlasting kingdom. By the law and the
covenant, there is a difference betwixt the Jews and the Gentiles; but by by
faith there is neither Jew nor Grecian, there is neither bond nor free, there
is neither male nor female. For all are one in Christ Jesus. Therefore by faith
is justification, whereby the scriptures foresawe that the gentiles should be
saved, and that the law could give no life, and that by the law there was no
righteousness, because the scripture has concluded all under sin, that the
promise by the faith of Jesus Christ should be given to them that believe.
Therefore it is by faith, that it might come by grace, that the promise might
be sure unto all, both them of the law, and to them of the seed of Abraham.
Wherefore seeing the righteousness of man by nature, is nothing else but
wickedness and hypocrisy, backs^iding by excuse, boasting by vain knowledge
without practice, and that the law cannot be fulfilled, because the corruption
of man is quite contrary unto it, and abhors the law, and that we are all
under sin, and so by the law under damnation, in that it lets us to
understand the hugeness of our sin, and the curse and punishment due
thereunto: every mouth is stopped, and all the world subject unto the judgment
of god, and to that damnation which the law of god and the corruption of our
nature requires. And that the Apostle might bring us, to the persuasion of the
justice of faith, which is the pathway and the highway unto salvation, he
says, that we know that whatsoever the law says, it says it to them which
are under the law. So that there is but one way of salvation, even the
righteousness of god There are three branches of the righteousness of God by
says. Remission of sins.
by faith, whereof are three especial branches; Remission of sins;
Imputation of Christ his righteousness; Sanctification, newness and holiness
of life. Remission and forgiveness of sins, is given to the church and
faithful of god, in that of his free mercy and goodness their sins are
blotted out, and the account made void, that they shall not be called unto
judgment, neither shall any punishment be exacted at their hands. Whereby all
satisfaction falls to the ground, in that of his free mercy and goodness,
the Lord puts away the remembrance and punishment of our sins, forgiueth
al our infirmities, redeemeth our life from the grave, and crowns us with
mercy and compassion; yea, he only forgiueth, because he only is offended. I,
even I (says he) am he that puts away thine iniquities for mine own sake,
and will not remember thy sins. Yea though they were as red as scarlet, and
as a menstruous cloth, as the stars of the sky, and as the sand of the
seashore which is innumerable. Even original sin, which Original sin.
is the root of all mischief within, together with all the branches thereof,
the lusts of the heart, the evil motions of the mind, the consent of reason,
the deed performed. He forgiueth all our negligence in not keeping his
commandments, and our transgression and rebellion against them, he has
delivered us from the guilt, and from the punishment, and has freely enriched
us with life eternal, by the merits and intercessions of Christ Jesus our
mediator, who is our redemption and sanctification, and satisfaction: that we
might be delivered from condemnation, for there is no condemnation to them
that are in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation
through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness by the forgiveness
of sins that are passed. This is that righteousness of God, through the
faith of Jesus, even the remission of sins, whereunto all the prophets witness.
The Apostle speaks by way of proclamation. Be it known unto you therefore
men and brethren, that through this man, is preached unto you the forgiveness
of sins, and from all things from which ye cannot be justified by the law of
Moses, by him every one that believes is justified. By way of consolation and
comfort, for they are glad tidings. Little children, I write unto you, because
your sins are forginen you for his name sake. By way of doctrine. And ye
know that he was made manifest, that he might take away our sins: In whom
we have redemption through his blood, that is the forgiveness of sins.
Nevertheless though we be freed from the punishment, yet are we subject
Affliction and correction.
to the correction which it pleases god to lay upon us, either for the trial
of our faith and patience, or to bring us to humility, or for some other
occasion which he in his wisdom best knows.

The second branch of the righteousness of God by faith, 2. Imputation of
Christ his righteousness.
is, the Imputation of Christ his righteousness, whereby we are justified, and
stand as righteous before the judgment seat of God, not being clothed with
our merits, but being enriched with his mercy. In consideration of which
righteousness, we are to cite and to summo^ our selves, before ye tribunal seat
of Gods judgment, where we shall understand what is that righteousness which is
required at out our hands, eue^ a most perfect and absolute obedience of the
law, which reqireth What is the true righteousness. Man is altogether sin.
the heart, and a most heavenly pureness. And seeing that man is full of
corruption and wickedness, and from the sole of the foot unto ye head, there
is nothing in him but wounds and swellings, and sores, and that the head is
sick, and the whole heart is heavy (contrariwise, Christ being man, and taking
our sinful flesh upon him, yet being without sin, is in most glorious sort
apparelled with righteousness, yea even the hemme of his vesture lacks not
virtue, being so gloriously arraied in a vesture of broydered gold and needle
work, as the Prophet speaks) from Christ have we all our clearness and
purity, all our attire, wherein we shine as Angels of light, by whom all
righteousness is derived unto us: which the prophet in the person of Iehoshua
lively Zachar^ah 3. 3.
expresses. Now Iehoshua was clothed with filthy garments and stood before the
Angel; and he spoke unto those y^ stood by him, saying; Take away the filthy
garments from him. And unto him he said; Behold I have caused thine iniquity
to depart from thee, I will cloth thee with change of raiment. And I said, let
them set a fair diadem upon his head, so they set a fair diadem upon his
head, and clothed him with garments, and the Angel of the Lord stood by. What
may be the filthy garments? Even the uncleanness of our wickedness, the
impurity of our thoughts, our abominable and daily weltring in our sins, and
until they are taken away, how ougly and contemptible are we in the sight of
God? Which place of the Prophet, though some interpret it of Christ, in that he
was clothed in our flesh, and bare our sins, yet in respect of us, it may
have this sense and meaning. For what are we else, before it please god to
take mercy upon us? He it is that cleanses us from our sins for his name
sake; he it is that saw us when when we were polluted in our blood, and then
he said, we should live, even when we were polluted in our blood, he said; Thou
shall live. Behold I have caused thine iniquity to depart away from thee, and
I will cloth thee with change of raiment. For he What the rich garment is
wherewith the polluted sinner is a^^aied.
was made sin for us that knew no sin, that we should be made the
righteousness of God in him. Yea where sin abounded, there grace abounded
much more; that as sin had reigned unto death, so might grace also reign by
righteousness to eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Which
righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus Christ, is imputed unto all, and
upon all that believe. By this imputation, we are clothed with the
righteousness of Christ, through whom, we behold the face of God to be unto
us most cheerful; by whom we have an enteraunce unto the father; by whose
purity and holiness all our spots are covered. Without which imputation all
our works are unrighteous, for by the righteousness of faith are all our
works made perfect; and being ingraffed into Christ, and made partakeres of
his righteousness, our The effect of this righteousness.
works are accounted before God as just and righteous; in whom all our
imperfections are blotted out; and those works which are done of faith, are
accepted through the imputation of Christ his righteousness. For as in us there
is nothing but sin, so in Christ is all our sufficiency, upon whom, as upon
the sacrifice, was cast that curse of man, that his condemnation, might be our
absolution; and our happiness, his righteousness; according to that of the
prophet David, who knew it by his own experience to be most true, that the man
is blessed, unto whom God imputes righteousness without works. Blessed are
they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is
the man unto whom the Lord imputes not sin, that the lord might only be just,
and a iustifier of him, that is of the faith of Jesus. Who took upon him our
person, was accused for us, and judged as a sinner, not for his own, but for
the faults and transgressions of other, being himself pure and without spot,
that he might undertake that punishment that was due unto our sins, and endue
us with his righteousness. So that now we are just and righteous in him, not
that we can satisfy the judgment of God by our own works, but that we are
accounted just and righteous through Christ, who is ours through faith. Who is
made unto us, wisdom, and righteousness, and satisfaction, and redemption,
that he that rejoices, might only rejoice in the Lord; for whose sake we are
freely accounted both just and innocent before god, in whom are seen the
glorious treasures of God, that we might be enriched by him. For if we look
for salvation, we are taught by the very name of Jesus, that it is in him; if
we seek for any other gift of the spirit, they are to be found in his
anointing; if we seek for strength, it is in his dominion; if we seek for
cleerenesse, it is in his conception; if we seek for tender kindness, it
shows it self in his birth; whereby he was made in all things like unto us,
that he might learn to sorrow with us. If we seek for redemption, it is in
his passion; if we seek for absolution, it is in his condmnation; if we seek
for release of the curse, it is in his cross; if we seek for satisfaction, it
is in his sacrifice; if we seek for clensing, it is in his blood; if we
seek for reconciliation, it is in his going down into hell; if we seek for
mortification of the flesh, it is in his burial, if we seek for newness of
life, it is in his resurrection; if for immortality, it is in his victory over
death; if we seek for the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven, it is in his
entrance into heaven; if we seek for defense, for assuredness, for plenty
and stoare of all good things, it is in his kingdom. And therefore this is
the diadem and bewtifull crown that is set upon our heads, the fine linen,
and the silk, and the broidered work, wherewith we are covered; these are
the ornaments wherewith we are decked, the bracelets on our hands, and the
chain that is put about our necks; this is the frontlet on our face, the
earings in our ears; this is the garment of silver and gold wherewith we are
clothed; this is the fine flower, the honey and the oil whereby we become so
bewtiffull. Even the remssion of our sins and the imputation of Christ his
righteousness, who has put away our transgressions like a cloud, and our
sins like a mist, and filled our hearts with joy and gladness, that in a sure
confidence we may break out and say. Now there is no condemnation to them
which are in Christ Jesus. Rejoice therefore O ye heavens, at the goodness and
mercy of the Lord, for he only has done it; shout ye lower parts of the
earth; brast forth into praises ye mountains, 3. Sanctification. The law is
fulfilled of the regenerate, by reason of Christ.
O forest, and every tree threin. The third branch is sanctification and
holiness of life, whereby as before, being unregenerate we hated the law, and
the law was unto us the cause of death; now being reconciled to God of our
own accord (respecting our former rebellion) we are ready and obedient to do
the will of God, yea and all our delight is therein: so now unto us it cease
to be a curse and condemnation, for the law of God is writ in our hearts,
whereby we understand the will of God, and are stirred up to the obedience
thereof. So then through faith, the law is not made of none effect, but it
does rather establish the law. For without Christ the law is not fulfilled,
yea it sets our concupiscence on fire, and makes us subject unto
condemnation, but in Christ we find the exact righteousness of the law, for
he is the end of the law to eucrie one that believes, by whom also we are
sanctified, and our hearts framed to the obedience of the law, which though it
be imperfect, yet does it aim at perfection. And this obedience proceeds
from faith, which through the merit of Christ obtains the holy spirit, which
spirit does make us new hearts, does exhilarat us, does incite and inflame our
hearts to do the law willingly. Now the law in the regenerate, that is, in
those whose sins are forgiven, unto whom the righteousuesse of Christ is
imputed, who are sanctified, brings forth good fruits. Therefore evil
actions proceed not from the law and from The works of the regenerate, no
cause of justification.
the regenerate, but from sin and our corrupt nature. Neither let us think
so highly of these fruits, as though from thence our justification were
derived. For though we hate sin in other men, and especially in our selves,
although we delight in all things which are agreeable to the A true doctrine of
good works.
will of god, although all our actions and conversation do express the same,
yet are they but signs and tokens of our love to God, and arguments to us of
our election; and fruitful examples to draw others to that excellent
knowledge which is in Christ. The law in the regenerate, and a mind rightly
formed and ruled, persuaded on thing, but corruption also which has her seat
in the regenerate, an other thing, for it strives against the spirit and the
law of the In the regenerate, is a fight betwixt the flesh and the spirit. An
especial comfort in this fight, is, that we are under grace.
mind, so that they cannot either live as well as they would, or be so void of
sin as they could wish. Nevertheless this is their comfort, that they are
not under the law but under grace, whereby enjoying the favor, mercy,
freegoodwill and benevolence of God toward us in Christ, the relics of sin
are not imputed unto us, but we are reputed and accounted before God, as men
fully and perfectly just. He has given us his spirit, the fulness whereof we
do not enjoy, because in this life there will always remain in us remnants of
sin, which fight against the spirit. Which conflict, the Apostle plainly
sets forth before our eyes, having sufficient experience thereof in himself.
For the mind of a regenerate man is spiritual, but he himself is carnal, sold
under sin, and that which he hates, that does he; in his flesh there is no
good thing. To will, is present, but he finds no means to perform that which
is good, yea evil together continually is present with him, and though his
inner man delight in the law of God, yet does he see an other law in his
members, rebelling against the law of his mind, and leading him captive unto
the law of sin, which is in his members. And that even the godly might know,
that they are laden The profit of this fight.
with infirmities, therefore is this sting left in their flesh, that they might
always have recourse unto the Lord, who is able to beat down satan under
their feet. For this From whence is victory in this fight.
victory is in Christ, and therefore S. Paul with a gladsome voice breaks
out, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Who indeed is sufficient and
well able to endue us with that strength, that we may valiantly overcome the
assaults Armor of proof,
and fiery darts of satan. For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but
mighty through God, to cast down holds, principalities and powers, even the
prince of darkness of this world, and al spiritual wickedness which is in high
places, as it were on the higher ground, and has marvelous vantage over us.
Wherefore we ought to be more heedfull We ought to watch and be diligent.
and diligent always, and watchful, that ye enemy take us not at unawares:
seeing not only our enemies without us are very strong, but also our own flesh
is ready to betraie us, and to take armor against us. And who knows not how
hard a thing it is to behave himself wisely and warily in a civil war?
Wherein, although we know not which part shall have the upper hand, yet to
fight with an expert and renowned Captain, it seems unto us, that the
victory is written in our hands, yea and our hearts are fully persuaded, and
rejoice in hope thereof. In this fight, we cannot want a wise and expert
Captain, which has borne the brunts of this war, and overcome the danger
by a greater force from above, then ever was seen to be in man. Whose The best
counsel in this fight is continually to resist sin, and to meditate and
practice mortification.
counsel is, that by all means, continually we resist sin, giving us to
know and understand, that he that obeys sin, is the servant of sin
unto death. But we are neither servants nor debtors unto the flesh, to live
after the flesh, for if we live after the flesh, we shall die for ever, but
if we mortify and kill the deeds of the body by the spirit, we shall
live. If we desire to bear about us the dying of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
life of Jesus shall be made manifest in our bodies, even in our mortal flesh. We
are baptized in Christ even into his death, that as he was raised up from the
dead to the glory of thy father, so we should walk in newness of life, that
our old man being crucified, the body of sin might be destroyed, that
henceforth we should not serve sin, in that we are dead thereunto. Therefore
because our life is hid with Christ in God, let us set our affections on those
things which are above, and let us mortify our members which are on the earth,
fornication, uncleanness, inordinat affections, evil concupiscence,
covetousness, which is idolatry, As the victory over sin consists in the
mortification of our sinful flesh. So the way to happiness is vivification
and holiness of life.
together, with all those works of the flesh which the Apostle names, Galat.
5. 19. 22. or elsewhere, yea and all those which are contrary to the wholesome
doctrine of Christ: knowing that the wrath of God comes upon the children of
disobedience, and that the end of sin is death, and that the fruit of
holiness, and the end thereof, is everlasting life; for the wages of sin is
death, but the gift of God is everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Think ye therefore that ye are dead to sin, but are alive to God in Jesus
Christ our Lord, whom God has raised up and sent to bless us, in turning
every one of us from our iniquities, that we might walk in the spirit, and in
all godliness of life; whereby we may avoid the lusts of the flesh, and walk
worthy of that vocation whereunto we are called, being followers of God as
dear children, approving that which is pleasing unto the Lord: By all means
avoiding the fellowship of the unfruitful works of darkness, and that as
children of light, we may fulfill the works, and bring forth the fruits of
light and of the spirit, in all godliness, righteousness and truth: having
peace in our conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost to godward, through Christ;
giving thanks always with spiritual songs, singing and making melody to the
Lord in our hearts. Now seeing we By this sanctification we are enabled to
perform our duty to
are in Christ, let us be as new creatures, for old things are passed away,
behold all things are become new. For whereas before we were haters of God, and
maliciously set against him, now through his mercy who has written his laws
in our hearts, and given us a heart of flesh, through the grace which we have in
Christ, we are ready and willing to love God, to fear him, and to keep his
commandments, God.
whereby he dwells in us and we in him: ready to acknowledge him to be the
giver of all good things; ready to give him thanks for all his benefits;
ready in all necessities and agreeuances, to pray unto him, and to seek help
at his hands, to put our trust only in him. Yea the image of God in a measure,
is renewed and restored in us, that we might walk in newness of life because
he is holy. And as our life and conversation is renewed to the glory of God, so
is it also profitable to the furtherance of our neighbor, whom in all
charitable order, we are as Our neighbor.
willing to help as our selves, being merciful, humble, long suffering,
forbearing one an other, forgiving one an other, as Christ forgave us.
Providing for the necessities of one an other, as Christ is plenteous toward us
in all good things, heartily loving one an other, laying aside all filthiness,
not only for the love of God and hatred of sin, but also for fear of
offense, least our brethren by our example, should be drawn to evil. Dealing
in all simplicity, in that the old man is put off with his works; putting
away all hateful and cursed speaking, for that the gospel and doctrine of
Christianity is in all kindness and brotherly love, which is even the full
accomplishment of the law, submitting our selves one to another in the fear of
the Lord. Having the peace of God ruling in our hearts, the word of Yea we are
instructed how to behave our selves in all wisdom.
God plenteously dwelling in us in all wisdom, procuring all things honestly
in the sight of God and men, having peace as much as in us lies with all men,
using this world as though we used it not; neither being too much axalted in
prosperity, nor cast down in adversity, but as the children of God, we
commit our ways unto him, yield our selves to the direction of his holy
spirit, in all obedience, depend upon his providence, trust in his promises,
wait patiently for the day of revelation and the coming of Christ, endure and
persevere unto the end. Yea we are mortified in the body because of sin,
having our life in the spirit Spirit.
for righteousness sake. Which spirit quickneth our mortal bodies, bears
witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God: Whereby we are rid
from the spirit of bondage which is in fear, and are endued with that of
adoption, which brings forth good fruits, which the father accepts, though
indeed they be of small perfection and not aunswerable to that high calling
which is in Christ. God does not only by imputation accept our works, but
Affliction the end of this fight.
also by affliction tries our obedience, before we come to that spiritual
rest, which he has prepared for us, and we in hope enjoy. Yea we are heirs
with Christ: How or in what respct? If so be that we suffer with him, that we
may also be glorified with him. Which affliction and persecution, is the end of
our spiritual fight, and the entrance into glory: Which in this world is to
us as a proof of our patience; our patience, a help to experience; our
experience, a furtherer of our hope; which hope makes us not ashamed, The
proffite of affliction.
because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by the holy ghost which
is given us. Again, it makes our infirmities and imperfections known unto
us, it corrects our sinful desires, and the evil lusts of our flesh, it
brings us to a mutual and hearty love one of an other; it breeds in us a
courageous mind to withstand the assaults of Satan: it increases in us the
hope of our election, frames us to immortality, works a most effectual and
gladsome Perseverance in affliction is the stay of the spiritual man.
and comfortable meditation of the life to come. Only we are to take heed of
this downfall, that we faint not, because the crown of glory is not given, but
to him that overcomes and endures until he come to the end of his race.
Moreover, unto these commodities which come unto us by reason of these
afflictions, there are also added most Consolation in affliction.
comfortable consolations. For it is the will of God that we suffer affliction
for his name sake, and blessed are they that do so. And if God be on our side
who can be against us? All things come from the providence of God, if with
gladness we receive blessings from the Lord, why should we not in all
obedience receive punishment and correction also? We know also, that al
things work together for the best, unto them that love God, and to them that
are called of his purpose. Yea our afflictions, indeed light afflitions, which
are but for a moment, cause unto us a far more excellent and an eternal
weight of glory. Not that we in respect of those afflictions are worthy of the
same, but because it pleases the father, to give unto his children the
kingdom of heaven. Let us therefore with all patience wait for the perfection
of our adoption, even the redemption of our soul and body. And though we sigh
while we are in the flesh, yet are we not alone, for our brethren also which
have the first fruits of the spirit, sigh together with us; yea every creature
groneth with us also, and trauelleth in pain even to this present time, until
it be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of
the sons of God. And seeing even the creatures shall be restored, how
comfortable should our hope be, while we look not on the things that are
seen, for they are but temporal, but on the things which are not seen, which
are eternal. For the which with patience we abide, knowing that our hope is
not of those things which we see, and shall in time most certainly come to
pass. Not only our brethren and every creature sigheth with us, but also the
spirit is partaker of our gronings, and while we offer up our prayers to god
in our afflictions and extremities, the spirit helps our infirmities, and in
a greater measure makes request for us, with infinite sighs, which The spirit
a helper of our infirmities and ignorance.
cannot be expressed. Yea, he helps also our ignorance, in that according
to the pleasure and will of God, he makes request for the saints, and he which
searches the hearts, knows what the meaning of the spirit is. Moreover the
finisher of our hope and the crown of our glory even Christ Jesus, which is
dead, yea, or rather which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of
God, he makes intercession and request also for us. Now then are there any
accusers of whom we The assured confidence of salvation which we have in God
through Christ.
ought to be affraied before God, seeing that God absolueth us as just? can
satan charge us? or does his accusations any whit avail? seeing that
through faith in Christ, we have peace toward god, and our conscience is
delivered from the guilt of sin? Who shall lay any? nay the whole burden of
our sins to our charge? It is god that clears, it is god that justifies,
yea it is Christ that vnladeth us. Come unto me says he, ye that are heavy
laden, and I will ease you, and refresh you. Who shall condemn us? Is it not
Christ that has redeemed us, who also shall come to be A caveat.
our judge? Only let us cast aside our high minds, which are lifted up with
merit and desert, and confessing our unworthiness, Humility is greatly
requited to Justification.
in all fear and humility let us approach unto the throne of grace, there to
receive these bounteous alms and rich treasures, which the gifts of Sheba, nay
the wealth of Solomon cannot accomplish, which neither silver, gold, or
precious stones, yea the delicatest treasure in the world, nay the world it
self may match and counteruaile. Which heavenly treasure, could by no other
means be bought and purchased for us, but by the precious blood of Jesus
Christ; who as an innocent lamb without spot, How our righteousness and
justification, is accomplished.
was offered up for our sins, even the just for the unjust, who being free
from sin, and knowing no sin, yet was made sin for us, that is a
sacrifise for sin, that we might receive I say, this rich treasure, even the
righteousness of God in him, redemption and justification. So that the
punishment of our sins is swallowed up in victory, that with the Apostle we
may in joy burst forth and say. O death where is thy sting? O grave where is
thy victory? The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin, is the
law. But thanks be unto God, who has given us victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ. Who shall seperat us then from the love of Christ? shall tribualtion, or
anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? As it
is written; For thy sake are we killed all day long. We are counted as sheep
for the slaughter. Nevertheless in all these things we are more then
conquerers through him that loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither death,
nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things pr^sent, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to
separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. The s^^^ne
of all, is this; that the righteousness of man, by reason of idolatry and
wickedness proceeding from his corrupt nature, is abominable in the sight of
god; and that by no excuse or devise, he may acquit himself before the
judgment seat of God; but he is subject, both Jew and Gentile, to the
condemnation which the justice of God does require. Therefore lies it not in
man's power, by the law of the works thereof, to attain unto righteousness,
because in his heart he hates the law, he being carnal, and the law
spiritual. As he desires to hide his sin, so by the law, is the knowledge
of sin, and as he seems to himself, to be just, before he examine his life
by the law, (not but that by the law he is condemned, but he puts his
condemnation far from him, and thinks not of it (so is the law the cause
of transgression of sin and of death. Yea, the regenerate man is stained with
sin, therefore neither can he be justified by the law. So that the
righteousness of man, is that, which is from God by faith in Christ, unto all
that believe. Of which righteousness, there are three branches. Remission of
sins, which is not free from correction, though there be deliverance from
eternal punishment and damnation. The second branch, is the Conclusion
Imputation of Christ his righteousness, whereby the filthy garments of our
sins are taken from us, and we arraied in a vesture and garment of broydered
gold, I mean, having not only our sins forgiven us, but the righteousness and
holiness of God also imputed unto us. The third branch is sanctification and
holiness of life, by the which we are made fit to fulfill the law. Yea, seeing
that while we are clothed with this body of flesh, sin remains, and that
the flesh fights against the spirit, we are to meditate and practice the
mortification of our sinful flesh. Having this advantage, that we are under
grace, and that also by Christ we obtain victory. And not only to practice
mortification, but to bring forth the fruits of the spirit, and of the inner
man, even the love which we do owe unto God, and that charitable duty which we
are bound to extend to our neighbor. And at all times we offer up our selves
as an acceptable sacrifice unto God, seeking the glory of his name, as well by
our death, as by our life, knowing this, that in afflictions whatsoever, (if so
be it we endure with patience) we shall not be destitute of comfort and
consolation. Yea such, that may swallow up the bitterness of all torments,
beside that rich reward that is reserved for them in the life to come, who with
all confidence and boldness, willingly and readily confess Christ before men,
standing to the trial of their faith, and the assuredness of their undoubted
hope, even to the sheading of their blood. Now the God of all comfort and
consolation, even the God of peace, which brought again from the dead our Lord
Jesus Christ, the great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the
everlasting covenant, make us perfect in all good works to do his will,
working in us that which is pleasant in his sight, through Jesus Christ; To
whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be all praise, dominion, and power,
both now and for ever,

Amen. Deo soli laus and gloria.
Of Predestination.
A brief declaration of Predestination, set forth by that learned man and
principal member in Christ's Church. M. Theodore Beza.
A weighty and most necessary matter for every true Christian to know,
containing the very ground and principal scope of religion: which the more we
read, the more we may, both for the sweetness and singular profit that it
yields to them whose hearts it pleases God to open, and whose minds are
lightened by Gods good spirit.
He that has ears to hear, let him hear. Mat. 13. 9. They which pertain to
the kingdom of God, to them it is given to know this and all other secrets and
mysteries belonging to salvation and everlasting life. As for the rest, and
them which are without, all things are spoken in parables; there is a veil
before them, that they seeing, should not see; and hearing, should not hear;
and having hearts to perceive, should not understand. Mat. 13. 11. Act. 28. 25.
26. 27.
The first Chapter.
The question of Gods eternal Predestination, is not curious or unprofitable,
but of great importance, and very necessary in the Church of God.
SAint Augustine in his book of Perseverance, De bono perseuerantiae.
Objection.
chap. 14. says; that they which were against him as adversaries in this
question, did allege that this doctrine of Predestination, did hinder the
preaching of Gods word, and caused that it could not profit. As if says he,
Answer.
this doctrine had hindered the Apostle Saint Paul to do his duty, who so
oftentimes does commend unto us, and teach Predestination, and yet never
cease to preach the word of God. Also says moreover; As he that has
received the gift can better exhort and preach, so he that has received this
gift, does hear the preacher more obediently, and with greater reverence, etc.
We do therefore exhort and preach, but they only which have ears to hear, do
hear us quietly, and to their comfort: and in those that have them not, this
sentence is fulfilled, That hearing with their ears, they do not hear, for
they hear with outward sense, but not with the inward consent. Now why some
men have these ears, and others not, it is, because it is given to some to
come, and to others not. Who knew Gods counsel? must that be denied which is
plain and evident, because that cannot be known which is hid and secret?
Again in the 15. Chapter; I pray you (says he) if some under the shadow of
Predestination, give themselves to slothful negligence, and as they are bent to
flatter their flesh, to follow their own lusts, must we therefore judge, that
this which is written of the foreknowledge of God is false? Now surely this is
very handsome, and to the purpose, that we shall not speak that which by the
scripture is lawful to speak. Oh we fear (say you) least he should be
offended which is not able to understand and take it. And shall we not fear
say I, lest while we do hold our tongues, he that is able to take the truth, be
taken and snared with falsehood and error? Also in the twenty chapter of the
same book, he writes in this sort. If the Apostles and Doctors of the Church,
which came after them, did the one and the other, both teaching the eternal
election of God purely and truly, and also retaining the faithful in godly
life and manners, what moves these our adversaries (seeing they are overcome
with the manifest and invincible truth, to think they speak well, saying;
Although this doctrine of Predestination be true, yet it ought not to be
preached unto the people. Nay so much the rather it is good to be thoroughly
preached, that he that, has ears to hear, may hear. And who has them? But
he that has received them of God, who promises to give them. And as for him
that does receive it, let him refuse it if he will, so that he that does
receive it, may take it, drink it, be sufficed, and have life. For as we must
preach the fear of God, to the end that God may be truly served, so must we
preach predestination, that he which has ears to hear may hear, and rejoice
in God, not in himself, for the grace of God toward him. This is the mind, of
that excellent Doctor, as touching this point. Which notwithstanding, binds
us to two conditions. The one is, that we speak no farther herein, then Gods
word does limit us. The other, that we set forth the same thing which the
scripture teaches accordingly and to edification. Wherefore we will briefly
speak of both these parts: first of the doctrine it self, and next, of the
use and applying of the same.

The second chapter.
Of the eternal counsel of God hid in himself, the which afterward is
known by the effects thereof.
GOD whose judgments no man can comprehend, The council, purpose, and will of
God, is the fountain and original of all causes.
whose ways cannot be found out, and whose will ought to stop all men's
mouths, according to the determinate, and unchangeable purpose of his will,
by the virtue whereof, all things aremade; yea those things which are evil and
execrable, (not in that they be wrought by his divine counsel, but forasmuch
as they proceed of the prince of the air, and that spirit which works in the
children of disobedience) has determined from before al beginning with
himself, to create all things in their time for his glory, and namely men;
whom he has made, after two sorts clean contrary one to the other. Whereof
he makes the one sort (which it pleased him to choose by his secret will and
purpose) partakers of his glory through his mercy, Vessels of honor.
and these we call according to the word of God, the vessels of honor, the
elect, the children of promise, and predestinate to salvation: And the other
whom likewise it pleased him to ordain to damnation (that he might show
forth his wrath and power to be glorified also in them) we do Vessels of
dishonor.
call the vessels of dishonor and wrath, the reprobate and cast off from all
good works.

This election or predestination to everlasting life, being Our election is hid
in the secret purpose of God.
considered in the will of God (that is to say) this self same determination
or purpose to elect, is ye first fountain and chief original of the salvation
of Gods children: neither is it thereon grounded as some say, because god did
foresee their faith or good works; But only of his own good will, from whence
afterward the election, the faith, and the good works spring forth.
Therefore when the scripture will confirm the children of God in full and
perfect hope, it does not stay in alleging the testimonies of the second
causes, that is to say, in the fruits of faith, nor in the second causes
themselves, as faith, and calling by the Gospel, neither yet sometimes in
Christ himself (in whom notwithstanding we are as in our head, elected and
adopted) but ascends higher, even unto that eternal purpose which god has
determined only in himself.

Likewise, when mention is made of the damnation of the reprobate, although the
whole fault thereof be in the^mselues, Reprobation is hid in the secret
purpose of God.
yet notwithstanding, sometimes when need requires, the scripture to make
more manifest by this comparison, the great power of Gods patience, and the
riches of his glory toward ye vessels of mercy, leads us unto this high
secret, which by order is the first cause of their damnation. Of the which
secret, no other cause is known to men, but only his just will, which we must
with all reverence obey, as coming from him, who is only just, and cannot by
any means, nor of any man in any sort be comprehended. For we must put
difference betwixt the purpose or ordinance of reprobation, and reprobation it
self; The secret purpose to elect or reprove only appertains to God, but the
causes of election and reprobation are manifest in the Scriptures.
because God would that the secret of this his purpose, should be kept close
trom us: and again we have the causes of Reprobation, and Damnation, which
depends thereof, expressed in Gods word: that is to say, corruption, lack of
faith, and iniquity, which as they be necessary, so are they also voluntary in
the vessels made to dishonor, like as on the other part, when we describe
orderly the causes of the salvation of the elect, we put difference betwixt
the purpose of the electing, which God has determined in himself, and the
election which is appointed in Christ. In such sort, that this his purpose, or
ordinance, does not only go before election in the degree of causes, but also
before all other things that follow the same.

The chief matters gathered out of this second chapter, with places of proof
taken out of the word of God, joined thereunto.
God disposes all according to his will, and has created all things for his
glory, and namely man. Concerning whom, first he challenges the ordering of
all affairs, as also the hardening of hearts. Secondly, he has made them
after two sorts, the one contrary to the other.

That God disposes all according to his will.

Esaias. 46. 9. 10. 11. 12. Remember the former things of old; For I am God, and
there is no other God, and there is nothing like me. Which declare the last
thing from the beginning, and from of old, the things that were not done
saying. My counsel shall stand, and I will do whatsoever I will. I call a bird
from the East ( Cyrus which shall come as swift as a bird) and the man of my
counsel (who shall execute that which I have determined) from far; As I have
spoken, so will I bring it to pass, I have purposed, and I will do it.

Esa. 14, 26. The Lord of hosts has determined it, and who shall disanull it?
and his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it away?

Dan. 4. 32. All the inhabitants of the earth, are reputed as nothing, and
according to his will he works in the army of heaven, and in the inhabitants
of the earth, and none can stay his hand, nor say unto him; What do thou?

Ephe. 1. 9. 11. And he has opened unto us the mystery of his will, according
to his good pleasure which he has purposed in him. In whom also we are chosen
when we were predestinate according to the purpose of him, which works all
things after the counsel of his own will. Gal. 1. 4.

Job. 9. 10. God does great things and unsearchable, yea marvelous things
without number.

Romans 9. 20. O man, who art thou which pleadest against god? shall the thing
formed, say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus?

That God has the ordering of men's affairs, as also of hardening the heart.

Gene. 45. 7. 8. Joseph to his brethren, God says, he sent me before you, to
preserve your posterity in this land, and to save you alive by a great
deliverance. Now then, ye sent me not hither, but God, who has made me a
father unto Pharaoh, and Lord of all his house, and ruler throughout all the
land of Egypt.

Esaias. 10. 5. 6. 7. 8. 11. 12. 13. 15. O Ashur, the rod of my wrath, and the
staff in their hand, is mine indignation. I will send him to a dissembling
nation, and I will give him a charge against the people of my wrath, to take
the spoil, and to take the pray, and to tread them under feet like the mire
in the street. But he thinks not so, neither does his heart esteem it so,
but he imagines to destroy and cut off not a few nations. For he says; Are
not my princes altogether Kings? Shall not I as I have done to Samaria, and to
the idols thereof, so do to Jerusalem and the idols thereof? But when the
Lord has accomplished all his work upon mount Sion and Jerusalem, I will
visit the fruit of the proud heart of the king of Ashur, and his glorious and
proud looks. Because he said; By the power of mine own hand, have I done it,
and by my wisdom, because I am wise. Shall the axe boast it self against him
that heweth therewith? or shall the saw exalt it self against him that moves
it? As if the rod should lift up it self against him that takes it up, or the
staff should exalt it self, as it were no wood. When God has punished his
children with the rod, he casts it into the fire.

Iere. 10. 23. O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself, neither
is it in man to walk and to direct his stepps. For though man may purpose, yet
God will dispose.

1. Kings. 12. 15. The king Rehoboam, (Salomons son a wise father and a
foolish son) following the counsel, of young men and green heads,
harkened not to the lawful request of the people. For it was the ordinance of
the Lord ye he might perform his saying, which he had spoken by Ahijah ye
Shilonite, unto Jeroboam the son of Nebat.

2. Chro. 10. 15. A note out of the Geneua bible, upon this place of scripture,
concerning Rehoboam, who yielded unto young men's counsel. Gods will imposes
such a necessity to the second causes, that nothing can be done but by the
same. And yet man's will works as of it self, so that it cannot be excused
in doing euiil, by alleging that it is Gods ordinance.

2. Chro. 11. 4. When Rehoboam had gathered nine score thousand chosen men of
war, to fight against Israel, that is, those his subjects which did rebel
against him, the Lord warned him, and them by his prophet Shemaiah, saying; Ye
shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren, return every man to his
house. For this thing is done of me says the Lord. They obeyed therefore the
word of the Lord, and returned from going against Ieroboham.

2. Chro. 22. 7. And ye destruction of Ahaziah came of god, in ye he went to
Ioram. For when he was come, he went forth with Ioram against lehu, the son
of Nimshi, whom the Lord had anointed to destroy the house of Ahab.

2. Chro. 25. 19. 20. King Ioash sent unto king Amaziah and said; Thou
think, lo thou have smitten Edome, and thy heart lifts thee up to brag.
Abide now at home, why do thou provoke to thine hurt, ye thou should fall
and Judah with thee? But Amaziah would not hear, for it was of God, that he
might deliver them into his hand, because they sought the Gods of Edom.

The note upon ye place. Thus God oftentimes plagueth, by these means wherein
men most trust, to teach them to have their recourse only to him. And to show
his judgments, he moves their hearts to follow that which shall be their
destruction.

The ordering of the journey of Abraham's servant, and of the three wise men
that sought Christ by the leading of a star; the circumstaunces also of
Christ his death and passion, show how God rules the affairs of man.

Psalm. 64 8. 9. Their own tongs shall make them fall, insomuch that who so
sees them shall laugh them to scorn. And all men that see it shall say; This
has God done, for they shall perceive that it is his work.

Pro. 19. 33. The lot is cast into the lap, but the disposition thereof, is
of the Lord. Which thing is wonderfully expressed in the story of Jonas.

God orders not only their affairs, but their affections also, as hatred,
good will, joy, and sorrow.

Pro. 21. 1. The kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of
waters, he turns it whither soever it pleases him. Ge. 21. 22. 23. Esther.
15. 11.

Acts. 4. 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. Why did the Gentiles rage, and the people imagine
vain things. The kings of the earth assembled, and the rulers came together
against the Lord, and against his Christ. For doubtless against thine holy
son Jesus whom thou had anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the
Gentiles and people of Israel, gathered themselves together, to do whatsoever
thine hand and thy counsel had determined before to be done.

2. Sa. 16. 11. David said to Abishai, and to his servants; Behold, my son
which came out of mine own bowels, seeks my life, then how much more now may
this son of Iemini. Suffer him to curse, for the Lord has bidden him. It
may be that the Lord will look upon my affliction, and do me good, for his
cursing this day.

Pro. 16. 7. When the ways of a man please the Lord, he will make also his
enemies at peace with him.

Genesis 31. Now Jacob heard the words of Labans sons, saying; Jacob has taken
away all that was our fathers, and of our fathers goods has he gotten all his
honor. Also Jacob beheld the countenance of Laban, that it was not toward him
as in times past. And the Lord said unto Jacob; Turn again into the land of
thy fathers, and to thy kindred, and I will be with thee. Then Jacob called his
wives, and said; I see your fathers countenance, that it is not toward me as
it was wont, and the God of my father has bin with me. And ye know that I have
served your father with all my might. But your father has deceived me, and
changed my wages ten times (ye is, oftentimes) but god suffered him not to hurt
me. If he thus said; The spotted shall be thy wages, then all ye sheep bare
spotted: and if he said thus, the party colored shall be thy reward, then bare
al ye sheep party colored. Thus has God taken away all your fathers
substance, and given it unto me. And ye angel of god said unto me in a dream;
Jacob lift up now thy eyes, and see all ye heegoats leaping upon ye shee-goats
ye are party-colored. For I have seen all ye Laban has done unto thee. And
now arise, get thee hence out of this country, and return into the land where
thou waste borne. Then his wives answered and said unto him. Have we any more
portion and inheritance in our fathers house? Therefore all the riches which
god has taken from our father, is ours and our childrens, now then, whatsoever
God has said unto thee do it. Then Jacob rose up, and set his sons and his
wives upon camels, and he carried away all his flocks, and all his substance
which he had gotten, and so fled. Which thing, when Laban heard, he made haste
and ouertooke them and spoke angerly unto Jacob. And again he said, I am able
to do you evil. But the God of your father, spoke unto me yesternight,
saying; Take heed that thou speak not to Jacob ought save good. Jacob said
unto Laban, Except the God of my father, the God of Abraham, and the fear of
Isaac, had been with me, surely thou had sent me away now empty. But God
beheld my tribulation, and the labor of mine hands, and rebuked thee
yesternight. Then Laban said; Now therefore come and let us make a covenant.

Gene. 27. 41. Therefore Esau hated Jacob, because of the blessing wherewith
his father blessed him. And Fsau thought in his mind, the days of mourning for
my father will come shortly, then I will slay my brother Jacob.

Gene. 32. Now Jacob went forth on his iourny, and he was to meet with Esau.
And Jacob fearing his brother, prayed unto God, and said; I am not worthy O
Lord, of the least of thy mercies which thou have showed unto thy servant; I
pray thee deltuer me from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau. For I
fear him, least he will come and smite me, and the mother upon the children.
Gene. 33. And as Jacob lift up his eyes and looked, behold Esau came, and with
him four hundred men. So Jacob went and bowed himself to the ground seven
times, until he came near to his brother. Then Esau ran to meet him, and
embraced him, and fell on his neck and kissed him, and they wept. And Esau
said; What meanest thou by all this drove which I met? Who answered, I have
sent it that I might find favor in the sight of my Lord. God changed Esaus
murdering mind, and malicious heart, and turned it to love his brother Jacob;
and to embrace him lovingly and friendly.

Concerning the hardening of hearts, how it pertains to God.

Romans 9. 18. He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will, he hardneth.

Deuteronomy. 2. 30. Sihon, the king of Heshbon, would not let us pass by him. For
the Lord thy God had hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate,
because he would deliver him into thine hand, as appears this day.

Josh. 11. 20. It came of ye Lord to harden their hearts, that they should come
against Israel in battle, to the intent that they should destroy them utterly,
and show them no mercy, but that they should bring them to naught, as the Lord
had commanded Moses.

1. Sa. 2. 25. Ely warned his sons, saying; If one man sin against an other,
the Judge shall judge it; but if a man sin against the Lord, who will plead
for him? Notwithstanding they obeyed not the voice of their father, because the
Lord would ^ley them.

John. 12. 40. He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, that they
should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their hearts, and should be
converted, and I should heal them.

To you says Christ to his Disciples, all things are opened that pertain to
the kingdom of heaven, but to them which are without, all things are spoken
in parables.

God has made mankind of two sorts, the one contrarieto the other; the one to
declare his mercy, the other, to declare his wrath and judgment, in both, to
set forth his glory.

Romans 9. 22. 23. The which thing the Apostle for our better understanding, does
teach us by similitudes and comparisons. Has not the potter power of the clay
to make of the same lump, one vessel to honor, and an other to dishonor? What
and if God would to show his wrath, and to make his power known, suffer with
long patience, the vessels of wrath prepared to destruction, and that he might
declare the riches of his glory upon the vessels of mercy which he has
prepared unto glory.

2. Tim. 2. 19. 20. The foundation of God remains sure, and has this seal.
The Lord knows who are his, and let every one that calls on the name of
Christ, depart from iniquity. Notwithstanding, in a great house are not only
vessels of gold and of silver, but also of wood and of earth, and some for
honor, and some for dishonor. And that we may know and apply it to our selves,
whether we pertain to God or no, he sets down the tokens and marks.
Verse 21. 22. If any man therefore purge himself, he shall be a vessel to
honor, sanctified and meet for the Lord, and prepared unto every good work.
Fly also from the lusts of youth, and follow after righteousness, faith,
love, and peace, with them that call on the Lord with a pure heart.

Romans 8. 29. 30. Those which he knew before, he also predestinate to be made
like to the image of his son, that he might be the first borne among many
brethren. Moreover, whom he predestinate, them also he called, and whom he
called, them also he justified, and whom he justified, them also he glorified.

Concerning the other sort, whom he made to declare his wrath and judgment,
thus we read.

Exodus 4. 21. And the Lord said to Moses, when thou art entered and come into
Egypt again, see that thou do all the wonders before Pharaoh, which I have
put in thy hand, but I will harden his heart and he shall not let the people
go. Cap. 10. 1. Again the Lord said unto Moses, Go to Pharaoh, for I have
hardened his heart and the heart of his servants, that I might work these my
miracles in the midst of his realm. Caep 9. 16. Of Pharaoh, God said; And
indeed for this cause have I anointed thee, to show my power in thee, and to
declare my name throughout all the world, cap. 14. 4. I will harden Pharaohs
heart, that he shall follow after you, so I will get me honor upon Pharaoh and
upon all his host, the Egiptians also shall know that I am the Lord.

Pro. 16. 4. The Lord has made all things for his own sake, yea even the
wicked for the day of evil. So that the justice of God shall appear to his
glory, even in the destruction of the wicked.

To. 3. 5. Now if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God, what
shall we say? Is God unrighteous that punishes? I speak as a man. For thus
the wicked use to reason, and yet them selves shall be found in fault, and the
workers of their overthrow.

To. 9. 19. The wicked say; Why does he yet complain, and find himself
agrieued at us? For who has resisted his will (seeing he has thus determined
of us?) The Apostle answers them. O man who art thou which pleadest a against
God? Shall the thing formed, say to him that formed it, why have thou made me
thus? Has not the potter power of the clay, to make of the same lump, one
vessel to honor, and an other to dishonor? What and if God would to show
his wrath, and to make his power known, suffer with long patience the vessels
of wrath prepared to destruction? In this matter we ought not to dispute or to
be inquisitiue, but rather in high estimation to reverence the will of God, and
persuade our selves that we are of the number of those, on whom Gods mercy
shall be showed; and labor by all means by prayer, and all other holy and
virtuous exercises to assure our selves of the same.

Election, proceeds only from the will of God, but not because he did foresee
what was in us.

Deuteronomy. 4. 37. And because he loved thy fathers, therefore he chose their feed
after them, and has brought thee out of Egypt in his sight, by his mighty
power.

Ezech. 16. 59. 60. Thus says the Lord God, I might even deal with thee as
thou have done. Nevertheless I will remember my covenant.

Ioh. 15. 16. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you,
that ye go and bring forth fruit, and your fruit remain.

Romans 9. 10. Rebecca when she had conceived by one, even by our father Isaac,
ere that the children were borne, and when they had done neither good nor evil,
that the purpose of God might remain according to election, not by works, but
by him that calls, It was said unto her; The elder shall serve the yoonger.
As it is written, I have loved Jacob, and I have hated Esau. For he says to
Moses, I will have mercy on him, to whom I will show mercy; and I will have
compassion on him, on whom I will have compassion. So then it is not in him
that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy. Therefore
he has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will, he hardens.

Romans 11. 5 Even so at this present time, is there a remnant through the
election of grace. And if it be of grace, it is no more of works, or else were
grace no more grace; But if it be of works, it is no more grace; or else were
work no more work. What then, Israel has not obtained that he sought, but
the election has obtained it and the rest have been hardened. According as it
is written; God has given them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should
not see, and ears that they should not hear, unto this day

Tim. 1. 9. Who has sauid us and called us with a holy calling, not according
to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given to
us through Christ Jesus before the world was.

Ephe. 2. 8. For by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God; Not of works least any man should boast
himself. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, which God has ordained that we should walk in them. He has chosen us
to do good works, and not to be careless, because we are chosen, but rather
to assure to our consciences, our election, by good works. According as we
read, Collos. 1. 10. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord, and please him in
all things, being fruitful in all good works, and increasing in the knowledge
of god; strengthened with all might, through his glorious power, unto all
patience and long suffering, with ioyfulnesse; Giving thanks, etc.

Ephe. 1. 5. 11. Who has predestinate us to be adopted, through Jesus Christ
unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his will; In whom also we are
chosen, when we were predestinate according to the purpose of him, which
works all things after the counsel of his own will.

Although the causes of Reprobation proceed principally from the secret and
hidden purpose of God, yet are there also sufficient causes in our selves.
Among ye rest, these three, Driginall sin, that is, that natural corruption
wherein we are born. Secondly, the daily sins and offenses which we commit.
Thirdly, Unbelief.

Gods hidden purpose.

Romans 9. 13. I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau. Where he says, not only that
Esau was ordained to be hated before he did any evil, (for in so saying, he
should not seem to exclude any thing but actual sin and incredulity) but
also says expressly before he was borne. Wherefore he excludes original sin
also.

If the Apostle had grounded reprobation upon man's corruption, the case had
been clear and resolute if it had been true; But forasmuch as he says
plainly, if so pleased God, and it was not in their power to change this his
good pleasure, he bridleth man's wisdom, that it might reverence and wonder at
Gods mysteries, as it is most just to do. And also encourages the elect to
honor the grace of god, which is declared and made famous by such a comparison.

Causes in our selves of reprobation, Original sin.

Psalm. 51. 5. Behold, I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother
conceived me.

Ephe. 2. 3. By nature we are the children of wrath.

John. 3. 19. And this is the comdemnation, that light is come into the world,
and men loved darkness rather then light, because their deeds were evil.
Their own corruption is a cause in themselves of their own damnation.

Actual and daily sin.

Ephe. 4. 17. Henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk, in vanity of
their minds, having their cogitations darkened, and being strangers from the
life of god, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardness
of their heart: which being past feeling, have given themselves unto
wantonness, to work all uncleanness, even with greediness.

1. Cor. 9. 10. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom
of god. Gal. 6. God is not mocked; For whatsoever a man sows, that shall he
reap. For he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption,
but he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting.

Romans 8. 13. If we live after the flesh ye shall die; But if mortify the deeds
of the body by the spirit, ye shall live.

Unbelief.

Exodus 5. 2. And Pharaoh said; Who is the Lord, that I should hear his voice
and let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go.

John. 6. 64. There are some of you that believe not. For Jesus knew from the
beginning, which they were that believed not.

Ioh. 10. 26. But ye believe not; For ye are not of my sheep as I said: My
sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and and they follow me.

Ioh. 12. 36. While ye have light, believe in the light, that ye may be the
children of the light. These things spoke Jesus and departed, and hid himself
from them. And though he had done so many miracles before them, yet they
believed not in him. That the saying of Esaias the Prophet might be fulfilled,
that he said, Lord who believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed? Therefore could they not believe, because that the Prophet says
again, He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart, that they should
not see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and should be
converted, and I should heal them.

1. Pet. 2. 6. Wherefore it is contained in the scripture, Behold I put in Sion
a chief corner stone, elect and precious, and he that believes therein shall
not be ashamed. Unto you therefore which believe it is precious, but unto them
which be disobeient, the stone which ye builders disalowed, ye same is made ye
head of the corner. And a stone to stumble at, and a rock of offense, eue^ to
the^ which stu^ble at ye word being disobedient, unto the which thing, they
were even ordained.

2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. 11. They that will not believe, God shall send them strong
delusions, that they should believe lies, and so be damned.

Romans 11. 20. The Apostle speaking of the Jews and the Gentiles, says of the
Jews; That through their unbelief, they were broken off, and that the
Gentiles stand by faith.

2. Cor. 4. 3. 4. If your gospel be then hid, it is hid to them that are lost;
In whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of infidels, that the
light of the glorious gospel of Christ, which is the image of God, should not
shine unto them.

The third Chapter.
How God puts in execution his eternal counsel, as well toward the elect,
as the reprobate.
THe Lord God, that he might put in execution his eternal counsel to his
glory, prepared a way according to his infinite wisdom, indifferent both to
those that he would choose, and those also which he would refuse. For when he
determined to show his infinite mercy in the salvation of the elect, and also
his just judgment in the condemnation of the reprobate, it was necessary that
he should shut up both under disobedience and sin, to show his mercy to all
those that believe, that is to say, to the elect, (because faith is a gift of
God, which properly belongs to the elect) and contrariwise, to have just
cause to condemn them to whom it is not given to believe, nor to know gods
mysteries. Therefore god did this in such sort, and with such wisdom, that the
whole fault of the reprobates damnation, lies in themselves, and on the other
side, all the glory and praise of the elects salvation, belongs wholly to
his only mercy. For he did not create man a sinner, for then he The creation
of man.
should have been (with reverent fear be it spoken, the author of sin,
which afterward he could not justly have punished) but rather he made him
after his own image, to wit in innocence, purity, and holiness. Who
notwithstanding without constraint of any, neither yet forced by any necessity
of concupisence, as touching his will, (which Man's fall.
as yet was not made servant to sin) willingly and of his own accord
rebelled against God, binding by his means, the whole nature of man to sin,
and so consequently, to the Adam fell not by chance.
death of body and soul. Yet we must confess, that this fall, came not by
chance or fortune, seeing his providence does stretch forth it self even to
the smallest things. Neither can we say, that any thing does happen that God
knows not, or cares not for, except we would fall into the opinion of the
Epicures, from the which God preserve us; neither yet by any bare or idle
permission or sufferaunce, which is separate from his will and sure
determination. For seeing he has appointed the end, it is necessary also, that
he should appoint the causes which lead us to ye same end. Unless we affirm
with the wicked Manichees, that this end happens at all adventures, or by
means of causes ordained by some other God. Furthermore, we cannot think that
any thing happens contrary to gods will, except we deny Enchiri. ad Laurent
Cap. 99.
blasphemously, that he is omnipotent and almighty. As Saint Augustine notes
plainly in his book De correptione gratia Cap. 104. We conclude therefore,
that this fall of Adam, did so proceed of the motion of his will, that
notwithstanding it happened not without the will of god: who^ it pleases by a
marvelous and incomprehensible mean, that the thing which he does not allow,
(forasmuch as it is sin) should not happen without his will. And this is done
as we said before, that he might show the riches of his glory toward the
vessels of his mercy; And his wrath and power upon those vessels, which he has
made to set forth his glory by their shame and confusion. For the final end
of Gods counsel is neither ye salvation of the elect, nor The final end of
Gods counsel, is neither salvation nor damnation, but Gods glory.
the damnation of the reprobate, but the setting forth of his own glory, in
saving the one by his mecy, and condemning ye other, by his just judgment.
The^ to avoid all these blasphemies, unto the which, the infirmity of our
wits, does draw us, let us confess that the corrupion of the principal
work that God has made (which is man) is not happened by chance, nor without
the will of him, who according to his incomprehensible wisdom does make and
govern all things to his glory. Albeit we must confess (in despite of man's
judgment, which was limited in the beginning within a certain compass, and
after, was miserably corrupted) that the whole fault of his damnation lies in
man. Forasmuch as betwixt the secret and incomprehensible The whole fault of
man's perdition is in himself and not of God.
will of God, and the corruption of man's nature which is the very first
occasion, of the reprobates damnation, the will of the first man was a mean,
which being created good, has willingly corrupted it self, and thereby opened
the door to ye just judgment of god, to condemn all those, to whom it does
not please him to show mercy. And if they would yet object and cauil; saying y^
they cannot resist ye will of God, let us suffer the^ to their own
destruction, to plead against him, who will be able enough to defend his
justice against their quarrelling. Let us rather reverence y^ which passes the
reach and compass of our wits, and turn our minds wholly to praise his mercy,
who by his only grace has saved us, when we deserved the like punishment and
damnation, and were no less sinners and wicked the^ they.

The chief matters, with places of Scripture for proof.
God has appointed a way to his infinite wisdom, and to the execution of his
predestination, shutting up al, under disobadience, sin, and unbelief.

Gall. 3. 22. But the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the
promise by the faith of Jesus Christ, should be given to them that believe.

Romans 11. 32. God has shut up all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon
all (that believe).

So that the way to the Godly to be partakers of mercy is to believe, wherein
we must understand, that faith is a gift of God, peculiarly belonging to the
elect and chosen children of God.

Acts. 13. 48. And when the Gentiles heard it, they were glad and glorified the
word of the Lord, and as many as were ordained unto eternal life, believed.

Ephe. 2. 8. For by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God.

Titus. 1. 1. Paul a servant of God, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ according
to the faith of Gods elect (which is proper and peculiar unto them) so that
they that are partakers of faith, may assure themselves y^ they pertain to god.

Philip. 1. 29. For unto you it is given for Christ, that not only ye should
believe in him, but also suffer for his sake.

Gal. 5. 22. The fruit of the spirit, is love, joy, peace, long suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith.

John 6. 65. No man can come unto me, except it be given unto him of my father.

As also they that do not believe nor know God, are justly condemned.

2. These. 3. 2. Pray for us that we may be delivered from unreasonable and
evil men; For all men have not faith.

Mat. 13. 11. It is given unto you says Christ, to know the secrets of the
kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given; For the gospel and means of
salvation, is hid to them that perish. 2. Cor. 4. 3. 4. and. 2. These. 2. 10.

Ihon 12. 37. And though Jesus, had done so many miracles before them, yet
believed they not on him. That the saying of Esaias the Prophet might be
fulfiled etc.

Man created in innocence, purity, and holiness.

Gene. 1. 27. Thus God created the man in his image, in the image of God
created he him, he created them male and female (And what virtuous and holy
qualities were there, which were not in the image of God according, as it is at
large set down Ephe. 4. 24. Put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness, and so forth, to the end of the chapter.

Man fell not from God by constraint or necessity, but became servant of sin,
through his own will.

Genesis 3. 6. So the woman (seeing that the tree was good for meat, and that it
was pleasant to ye eyes, and a tree to be desired to get knowledge) took of
the fruit thereof and did eat, and gave also to her husband with her, and he
did eat, which thing was contrary to the commandment of God and a penalty
of death set upon them, if they did eat, as we read, chap. 2. 16. 17. And the
Lord God commanded the man saying, Thou shall eat freely of every tree of the
garden; but as touching the tree of know^edge of good and evil, thou shall not
eat of it. For whenever thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death.

By which fall and and disobedience, he did bind and draw the whole nature of
man to sin, and so consequently to the death of body and soul.

To. 7. 20. Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but the
sin that dwells in me.

To. 5. 12. Wherefore as by one man, sin entered into the world, and death by
sin, and so death went over all men, forasmuch as all men have sinned.

This fall of man came not by chance or fortune, because the providence of God
reaches even to the smallest matters.

Mat. 10. 29. 30. Are not two sparrowes sold for a farthing, and one of them
shall not fall on the ground without your father? yea and all the hairs of
your head are numbered.

Pro. 16. 33. The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposition thereof
is of the Lord.

What matter God has so ordained, to show his glory by mercy to the one, and
wrath to the other.

To. 9. 21. Has not the potter power of the clay, to make of the same lump,
on vessel to honor, and an other unto dishonor? What and if God would to
show his wrath and to make his power to be known, suffer with long patience
the vessels of wrath prepared to destruction? And that he might declare the
riches of his glory, upon the vessels of mercy, which he has prepared unto
glory?

Pet. 2. 6. 8. Behold I put in Sion a chief corner stone, elect and precious,
and he that believes therein, shall not be ashamed. A stone to stumble at, and
a rock of offense, even to them which stumble at the word, being disobedient,
unto the which thing they were eue^ ordained.

Neither salvation nor damnation, is the final end of Gods counsel, but his
own glory.

To. 9. 17. For the scripture says unto Pharaoh; For this same purpose, have I
stirred thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and that my name might be
declared throughout all the earth.

Pro. 16. 4. The Lord has made all things for his own sake, yea even the
wicked for the day of evil. For ere the children were borne, and when they had
neither done good nor evil, that the purpose of God might remain according to
election, not by works, but by him that calls; it was said unto Rebecca
their mother; The elder shall serve the younger. As it is written, I have loved
Jacob, and have hated Esau.

Well in this cause may men plead against God, but it shall not prevail.

To. 9. 19. 20. Thou will say then unto me, Why does he yet complain? For who
has resisted his will? But O man, who art thou which pleadest against God?
shall ye thing formed, say to him yt formed it; Why have you made me thus?

But rather we ought to reverence that which is past our reach, and turn our
minds wholly to praise god in his works, especially for his mercy toward us.

To. 11. 33. O the deepenesse of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge
of God! how un searchable are his judgments? and his ways past finding out.

Ps. 107. 8. O that men would therefore confess before the Lord his loving
kindness, and praise him for his wonderful works, that he does for the
children of men.

The fourth Chapter.
By what order God proceeds to declare and execute his election.
When God determined with himself the things before The foundation of that
election, which is manifest unto us.
mentioned, he by a more manifest order of causes, which notwithstanding was
eternal (as all things are present to him) disposed orderly all the degrees,
whereby he would bring his elect unto his kingdom. Forasmuch therefore as he is
merciful, and yet could not forget his justice, before al other things, it was
necessary yt a mediator should be appointed; by who^ man might be perfectly
restored, and yt this should be done by ye mercy and grace which does appear in
ye salvation of his elect. But man being so weak, that he cannot abide the
weight of gods wrath, does so much flatter himself in his most miserable
blindness, that he cannot perceive it, because he is wholly in bondage to sin,
so that the law of god is to him as death, so far is he unable of himself
to recover his liberty, or to satisfy the law of God in the very least ^ote.
God therefore the most merciful father of the elect, moderating in such sort
his justice, with his infinite Jesus Christ our mediator.
mercy, appointed his only son, who was the very same substance, and God
eternal with him, that at the time determined, he should by the power of the
holy ghost be made very man, to the end that both the natures being joined in
Jesus Christ alone, first all the corruption of man should Justification and
santification in christ.
be fully healed in one man, who should also accomplish all justice, and
moreover, should be able enough to sustain the judgment of God, and be a
Priest sufficient and worthy of himself to appease the wrath of God his father,
in dying as just and innocent, for them that were unjust and sinners: covering
our disobedience, and purging all our sins which were laid upon him. And
finally, with one only offering and sacrifice of himself, should sanctify, all the elect, mortifieng and burying sin in them, by the partaking of his death,
and burial, and quickening them into newness of life by his resurrection, so
that they should find more in him, then they had lost in Adam. And to ye
intent this remedy should not be found and ordained in vain, ye Lord god
determined to give his son, with all things appertaining unto salvation to the^,
who^ he had determined in himself to choose: on ye other side to give the^ unto
his son, that they being in him and he in the^, might be co^summate and made
perfect in one, by these degrees yt follow; according as it pleased him to
bring forth every one of his elect into this world. For first when it pleases
him to disclose yt secret which he had purposed from before al beginning, at
such time as me^ least look for it. As me^ are blinded and yet think they see
most clear, when as in very deed death and damnation hangs over their
heads, he comes suddenly and sets before their eyes the great danger
External v^ca^ion^
wherein they are, and that they might be touched more sharply and lively, he
adds to the witness of their own conscience, being as it were a sleep and
dead, ye preaching of his law, and examples of his judgments, to strike them
The law.
with the horror of their sins. Not that they should remain in that fear,
but rather that beholding the great danger thereof, should fly to that only
mediator Jesus Christ. In whom after the sharp preaching of the law, he
sets The Gospel.
forth the sweet grace of the Gospel, but yet with this condition, that they
believe in him, who only can deliver them from condemnation, and give them
right and title to the heavenly inheritance. Yet all these things were but
vain, if he should only set before men's eyes these secrets by the external
preaching of his word, written and published in the Church of God, which
notwithstanding is the ordinary means, whereby Jesus Christ is communicate
unto us. Therefore as touching his elect, unto the external The inward calling.
preaching of his word, he joins the inward working of his holy spirit, the
which does not restore (as the Papists What Freewill is, after the fall of
Adam.
imagine) the remnants or residue of Freewill. For what power soever of
Freewill remains in us, serves to no other use, but willingly to sin, to
fly from God, to hate him, and so not to hear him, nor to believe in him,
neither yet to acknowledge his gift, no not so much as to think a good
thought, and finally to be children of wrath and malediction. But contrariwise,
changes their hard hearts of stone, into soft hearts of flesh, draws them,
teaches them, lighteneth their eyes, and opens their sense, their heart,
their ears and understanding. First to make the^ to know (as we have said
before) their own misery, and next to pla^t in them ye gift of faith, whereby
they may perform ye condition which is joined Faith has two parts. Faith which
does apprehend iustificaon by Christ, and sanctification.
to the preaching of the gospel. And that stands on two points, the one
whereby we know Christ in general, believing ye story of Christ, and the
prophecies which are writ of him, the which part of faith as we shall declare in
due place, is sometimes given to the reprobate. The other which is proper, and
only belonging to ye elect, consists in applying Christ (who is universally
and indifferently preached to all men) to our selves, as ours. And that every
man make himself sure of his election, which has been hid before al time in
Gods secret, and afterward revealed unto us, partly by inward testimony of our
conscience through the holy Ghost, joined to the external preaching of Gods
word; and partly also by the virtue and power of the same spirit, who
delivering the elect from the servitude of sin, persuades and conducteth
them to will, and work the things which pleased God. These then be the
degrees, whereby it pleased God to create and form by his especial grace,
that precious and peculiar gift of faith in his elect, to the intent that they
may embrace their salvation in Jesus Christ. But because this faith in us is
yet weak, and only begun, to the end that we may not only persevere in it but
also proffit, (which thing is most necessary for all men to do) first according
to the time that our adoption is revealed unto us, this Baptism.
faith is sealed in our hearts, by the sacrament of Baptism; and afterward,
every day more and more, is confirmed and sealed in us, by the sacrament of the
Lords supper. Of the The Lords supper.
which two Sacraments, the principal end is, that they be sure and effectual
signs and pledges of ye communion of the faithful with Christ, who is their
wisdom, justice, sanctification, and redemption. For this occasion it is so
oftentimes mentioned by Saint Paul, that we being justified by faith, have
peace with God. For whosoever has obtained the gift of true faith, has also
by the same grace and liberality of God, obtained the gift of perseverance. So
that in all manner of temptations, and afflictions, he doubts not to call
upon God, with sure confidence to obtain his request, (as far as it is
expedient for him) knowing that he is of ye number of Gods children, who cannot
fail him. Moreover, he never swarueth so from ye right way, but at length by
the benefit of Gods grace, he returns again. For although faith, sometime
seem in the elect, as it were for a time hid and buried, so that a man would
think it were utterly quenched, (which God suffers, that men might know
their own weakness) yet it does never so far leave them, that the love of
God and their neighbor, is altogether Love.
plucked out of their hearts. For no man is justified in Christ, who also is
not sanctified in him, and framed to good works, which God prepared that we
should walk therein. This then is the way, whereby God by his mercy does
prepare to the full execution of his eternal counsel, them amongst his elect
whom it pleases him to reserve till they come to ripe age and discretion. As
touching the other whom he calls into his kingdom, so soon as they are
borne, or in there tenuer years, he uses a more short way. For seeing he does
comprehend in that his free covenant, (whereof Jesus Christ is the mediator)
not only the faithful, but also their posterity into a thousand generations,
calling the same by express words, holy; there is no doubt, but the children
of the Saints, which appertain to election, (whom he only knows) he has
given to his son, who will not cast them out.

The chief matters, with places of scripture for proof.
The orders and degrees whereby the faithful, the elect, and chosen children
of God, are made partakers of their salvation. And the principal degree
whereby God would bring his elect to his kingdom, was in appointing his only
son, to be our Mediator and Redeemer.

Ephe. 2. 3. 4. In times past we had our conversation in the lusts of the
flesh, in fulfilling the will of the flesh and of the mind, and were by nature
the children of wrath as well as others. But god which is rich in mercy,
through his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead by sins,
has quickened us together in Christ, by whose grace ye are saved.

Ioh. 3. 16. 17. For god so loved the world, that he has given his only
begotten son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish but have
everlasting life. For god sent not his son into the world, that he should
condemn the world, but that the world by him might be saved.

The son of God by the power of the holy Ghost, was made man.

Mat. 1. 20. While Joseph thought to put away his wife, the Angel of the Lord
appeared unto him in a dream, saying; Joseph the son of David, fear not to
take Mary for thy wife. For that which is conceived in her, is of the holy
Ghost.

Luke. 1. 34. 35. Mary said unto the Angel; How shall this be (that I shall
conceive and bear a son) seeing I know no man? And the Angel (Gabriel)
answered and said unto her; The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power
of the most high shall ouershadow thee, therefore also that holy thing which
shall be borne of thee, shall be called the son of God.

To the end that both natures being joined in him, the corruption of man might
be healed.

Ioh. 1. 14. And the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we saw the
glory thereof, as the glory of the only begotten son of the father, full of
grace and truth.

2. Cor. 5. 19. 21. God was in Christ, and reconciled the world to himself, not
imputing their sins unto them. For he has made him to be sin for us which
knew no sin, that we should be made the righteousness of God in him.

Who should accomplish all justice.

Romans 8. 3. That that was impossible to the law, in as much as it was weak
because of the flesh, God sending his own son in the similitude of sinful
flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh; That the righteousness of
the law might be fulfilled in us, which walk not after the flesh, but after
the spirit.

Romans 5. 18. As by the offense of one, the fault came on all men to
condemnation; so by the justifying of one, the benefit abounded toward all men
to the justification of life.

1. Cor. 1. 30. We are of him in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us,
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.

And should be able enough to sustain the judgment of God.

Romans 3. 25. God has sent forth his son, to be a reconciliation through
faith in his blood.

Esaias. 53. 4. 5. 6. 10. Surely he has borne our infirmities, and carried our
sorrows. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our
iniquities, the chasticement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes
are we healed; All we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to
his own way, and the Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all: yea the
Lord would break him, and make him subject to infirmities, when he shall make
his soul an offering for sin.

1. Pet. 3. 18. For Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust, that he might bring us to God.

And by the one, and only sacrifice of himself, might sanctify the elect,
killing and mortifying sin, and quickening them to newness of life, through
the virtue of his resurrection.

Romans 6. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. How shall we that are dead to sin, live yet therein?
Know ye not that all we which have been baptized into Jesus Christ, have bin
baptized into his death; that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the
glory of the father, so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we be
graffed with him to ye similitude of his death, even so shall we be to the
similitude of his resurrection; Knowing this, that our old man is crucified
with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should
not serve sin.

Colloss. 2. 13. Y^ which were dead in sins, and in the circumcision of your
flesh, has he quickened together with him, for giving you all your trespasses.
And chapter 3. 1. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are
above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God.

The most part of the chapter, pertains to this effect, and no time lost in
the reading.

Ioh. 17. 19. For their sakes sanctify I my self, that they also might be
sanctified through the truth.

Heb^. 9. 13. 4. For if the blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of an
heiffer, sprinkling them that are unclean, sanctifies as touching the
purifying of ye flesh; How much more shall the blood of Christ, which through
the eternal spirit, offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience
from dead works, to serve the living god?

That this grace might not be in vain, God gave with his son unto his
people, all things pertaining to salvation, and everlasting life.

Romans 8 3^. 32. What shall we then say to these things? If god be on our side,
whom can be against us? Who spared not his own son, but gave him for us all
to death; how shall he not with him give us all things also?

John. 17. 2. 9. 10. 11. 12. 22. 23. 24. 26. Thou have given him power over all
flesh, that he should give eternal life to all them that thou have given him:
I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them which thou have given
me, for they are thine; and all mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I am
glorified in them: and now am I no more in the world, and I come to thee, holy
father keep them in thy n^^e, even them whom thou have given me, that they may
be one as we are: while I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name;
The glory that thou gave me, I gave them, that they may be one, as we are
one: I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, and that
the world may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them as thou have
loved me. Father I will that they which thou have given me, be with me, even
where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given me; for thou
louedst me before the foundation of the world; I have declared unto them thy
name, and will declare it, that the love wherewith thou have loved me, may be
in them, and I in them.

He opens this secret when men least look for it.

Genesis 3. 15. (When God was appointing punishment unto our first parents, he
interlaceth this comfort) I will also put enmity between thee (meaning the
serpent, or the dinel by the serpent) and the woman, and between thy seed,
and her seed. He shall break thine head, and thou shall bruise his heel.

Genesis 22. 18. When Abraham thought there was no way but death with his son,
because God had so commanded, God altered his commandment, and having tried
his obedience, he said; That in his seed all the nations of the earth should
be blessed.

Ephe. 2. 4. 5. God which is rich in mercy, through his great love wherewith he
loved us, even when we were dead by sins, has quickened us together in
Christ, by whose grace ye are saved.

Romans 5. 6. 8. 10. For Christ when we were yet of no strength, at his time
died for the ungodly. God sets out his love toward v^, seeing that while we
were yet sinners, Christ died for us. And when we were his enemies, God
reconciled himself unto us by the death of his son.

1. Cor. 2. 7. 8. We speak the wisdom of god in a mystery, even the hid
wisdom which god had determined before the world, unto glory. Which none of
the Princes of this world has known; for had they known it, they would not
have crucified the Lord of glory.

Collos. 1. 25. 26. I am a minister according to the dispensation of god, which
is given me unto you-ward, to fulfill the word of god: which is the mystery hid
since the world began, and from all ages, but now is made manifest to his
saints.

Eze. 16. 6. 8. 9. And when I passed by, I saw thee polluted in thine own
blood, and I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood; Thou shall live, even
when thou wast in thy blood thou shall live. Passing by thee, and looking upon
thee, behold thy time was as the time of love, and I spread my skirts over
thee, and covered thy filthiness, yea I swear unto thee, and entered into a
covenant with thee, says the Lord God, and thou becammest mine. Then washed I
thee with water, yea I washed away thy blood from thee, and I anointed thee
with oil.

Ephe. 2. 12. Ye which were without Christ, and were aliants from the
commonweal of Israel, and were strangers from the covenants of promise, and
had no hope, and were without god in the world. Now in Christ Jesus, ye which
once were far off, are made near by the blood of Christ.

1. Pet. 2. 10. Which intime past were not a people, yet are now the people of
god, which in time past were not under mercy, but now have obtained mercy.

Men are blinded, and yet think they see.

John. 9. 41. Jesus said unto them; If ye were blind, ye should not have
sin, but now ye say we see, therefore your sin remains.

John. 3. 19. This is the condemnation of the world, that light is come into
the world, and men loved darkness rather then light.

John. 1. 10. 11. He was in the world, and the world knew him not, he came unto
his own, and his own received him not.

Philip. 3. 6. Concerning the law, I was unrebukable (says ye Apostle of
himself, examining no more but his outward life).

Then in mercy, God causes their dangerous estate to be set before them, by
preaching of the law.

Romans 3. 20. By the law, comes the knowledge of sin, Law.
chap. 4. 5. The law causes wrath, chap. 5. 20. The laws entered thereupon,
that the offense should abound (that it might appear to be notorious in the
sight of god.)

Romans 7. 9. For I once was alive without the law, but when the commandment
came, sin revived; and verse. 14. The law is spiritual, but I am carnal.

Romans 2. 15. Which she we the effect of the law written in their hearts, their
conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing one an other, or
excusing.

1. Tim. 1. 9. 10. The law is not given to a righteous man, but unto the
lawless and disobedient, to the ungodly, and to sinners, to the unholy, and to
the profane, to murderers of fathers and mothers, to men-stealers, to liars,
to the perjured, and if there be any other thing that is contrary to wholesome
doctrine.

Gal. 5. 19. 20 21. 22. Moreover, the works of the flesh are manifest, which
are adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, idolatry, witchcraft,
hatred, debate, emulations, wrath, contentions, seditions, heresies, envy,
murders, drunkenness, gluttony, and such like: whereof I tell you before, as
I also have told you before, that they which do such things, shall not
inherit the kingdom of god, (but verse 18. are under the curse of the law.
Deuteronomy. 25. 15.

Romans 7. 13. Sin, that it might appear sin, wrought death by the law.

2. Cor. 2. 16. It is the savor of death, unto death: (It casts down to
hell, it fears and wounds our consciences.

2. Cor. 3. 9. It is the ministration of condemnation.

To. 7. 7. I knew not sin but by the law, For I had not known lust, except
the law had said; Thou shall not lust

2. Tim. 25. 26. Instructing them with meekness that are contrary minded
(showing their faults out of the law of God) proving if God at any time will
give them repentance, that they may know the truth. And that they may come to
amendment out of the snare of the devil, which are taken of him at his will.

Acts 2. 37. Now when they heard it, they were pricked in their heart, and said
unto Peter and the other Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do?

Not that they should remain in fear, but beholding their danger, might fly
to Christ.

1. Ihon. 2. 1. 2. My babes, these things write I unto you; that ye sin not,
and if any man sin, we have an aduocat with the father, Jesus Christ the
just. And he is the reconciliation for our sins.

Ihon. 2. 12. As many as received him, to them he gave power to be the sons
of God, even to them that believe in his name.

Ihon. 3. 16. 17. 18. God so loved the world, that he has given his only
begotten son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. For God sent not his son into the world, that he should
condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved. He that
believes in him, shall not be condemned, but he that believes not, is
condemned already.

Mat. 9. 13. I came not to call the righteous, but the sinners unto repentannce.

To. 1. 16. The gospel is the power of salvation, to every one that believes.
And so almost in every leaf of the whole scripture.

Called they are to comfort, by the preaching of faith.

To. 8. 17. Then faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.

To. 8. 1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Chap. 5.
1. Then being justified by faith, we have peace toward God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ.

2. Chor. 5. 18. All things are of God, which has reconciled us unto himself
by Jesus Christ; and has given unto us the ministry of reconciliation. For
God was in Christ, and reconciled the world to himself, not imputing their
sin unto them, and has committed to us the word of reconciliation. Now the^
are we imbassadours for Christ, although God did beseech you through us, we
pray you in Christ his steed, that ye be reconciled to God. For he has made
him to be in sin, for us that know no sin, that we should be made the
righteousness, of God in him.

1. Pet. 1. 23. Being borne anew, not of mortal seed, but of immortal, by
the word of god, who lives, and endures for ever*

Coloss. 1. 27. 28. God would make known, which is the riches of his glorious
ministry among the Gentiles, which riches, is Christ in you, the hope of
glory. Whom we preach, admonishing every man in all wisdom, that we may
present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.

Gene. 3. 8. Adam and Eve, heard the voice of the Lord God, as he was walking
in the garden, in the cool of the day. (So God chooses his best time to win
us, not in the time of our offense, when indeed he might justly destroy us,
but after we have committed sin, in mercy he calls us, that we shall
remember, and have remorse for that which we have done.

John. 6. 47. Verily verily, I say unto y^^. He that believes in me, has
everlasting life.

The outward preaching profits not, unless the inward working of Gods good
spirit, be joined unto it.

Ihon. 6. 44. No man can come to me, except the father which has sent me draw
him (by the power of his spirit, ^^d v. 65. Jesus said, no man can come unto
me, except it be given unto him of my father.

Mat. 13. 10. 11. His disciples said to him; Why speak thou to the people in
parables? And he said, because it is given unto you, to know the secrets of the
kingdom of god, but to them it is not given.

John. 4 10 Jesus said unto her, If thou know the gift of god, and who it is
that says to thee, Give me drink, thou would have asked of him, and he
would have given thee water of life.

John. 3. 3. Jesus said unto Nicodemus, verily, verily, I say unto thee, except
a man be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of god.

1. Cor. 2. 11. 14. For what man knows the things of a man, saving the spirit
of a man, which is in him? even so the things of god, knows no man but the
spirit of god. But the natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of
god. For they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because
they are spiritually discerned.

2. Cor. 3. 5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as
of our selves, but our sufficiency is of god.

Ezekiel. 11. 19. (The spirit of god works in us by altering our hearts)* And I
will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within their bowels, and
I will take the stony heart out of their bodies, and I will give them a heart
of flesh. Chap. 36. 26.

John. 16. 13. When the spirit of truth is come, he will lead you into all
truth.

Psalm. 119. 18. Open my heart, that I may understand the wondrous things of thy
law.

Ephe. 1. 9. 16. 17. 18. He has opened unto us the mystery of his will,
according to his good pleasure, which he had purposed in him. I make mention
of you in my prayers, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of
glory, might give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation, through the
knowledge of him. That the eyes of your understanding may be lightened, that ye
may know what the hope is of his calling, and what the riches of his glorious
inheritance is in the saints. And what is the exceeding greatness of his power
toward us which believe.

Esaias. 50. 5. The Lord God has opened my ear, and I was not rebellious,
neither turned I back.

Psalm. 119. 73. Thine han^s have made me and fashioned me, O give me
understanding therefore, that I may learn thy commandments.

Collo. 1. 9. We cease net to pray for you, and to desire that ye might be
fulfilled with knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding.

Iere. 31. 34. And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every
man his brother, saying; Know the Lord; For they shall all know me, from the
least of them to the greatest of them, says the Lord; for I will forgive their
iniquity, and will remember their sins no more.

2. Tim. 2. 25. Proving if God at any time will give them repentance (and open
their hearts.)

Luke. 24. 16. 45. When our Savior Christ talked with the two disciples that
went to Emaus, their eyes were holden that they could not know him. Then opened
he their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures.

Acts. 16. 14. And a certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the
city of the Thyatirians, which worshipped God, heard us: whose heart the Lord
opened, that she attended unto the things that Paul spoke.

Our election is made sure unto us, by the testimony of the spirit.

1. Cor. 2. 12. Now we have received, not the Spirit of the world, but the
Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that are given to us of
God.

1. Ihon. 3. 24. Hereby we know that he abides in us, even by the spirit
which he has given us.

1. Ihon. 5. 20. We know that the Son of God is come, and has given us a
mind to know him.

And by the testimony of our conscience.

To. 8. 15. 16. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again,
but ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba father. The
same spirit, bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God.

Pal. 4. 6. And because ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his
son into your hearts, which cries, Abba Father.

Ko. 8. 14. For as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of
God.

By the virtue of Gods spirit, the elect are delivered from the slavery of
sin, and it does persuade and conduct them, to will and work the things
which please God.

Phil. 2. 12. 13. Wherefore my beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not as in my
presence only, but now much more in my absence, so make an end of your own
salvation with fear and trembling. For it is God which works in you, both
the will and the deed, even of his good pleasure.

Ihon. 8. 36. If the son therefore shall make you free (by his spirit) ye
shall be free indeed.

Romans 6. 18. Being then made free from sin, ye are made the servants of
righteousness.

But because this faith is but weak, and only begun in in this life, that we
may not only persevere in it. but also profit by it, it is sealed in our hearts
by the use of the Sacraments.

Mar. 16. 16. He that shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved; but he
that will not believe, shall be damned.

Act. 2. 38. Then Peter said unto them; Amend your lives and be baptized,
every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins,
and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost.

Romans 6. 3. 4. Know ye not that all we which have been baptized into Jesus
Christ, have bin baptized into his death? We are buried then with him by
baptism into his death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the
glory of the father, so we also should walk in newness of life.

Gal. 3. 26. 27. Ye are all the sons of God, by faith in Christ Jesus; For
all ye that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, verse 29. And if ye
be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed and heirs by promise.

Gal. 2. 11. 12. In whom also ye are circumcised with circumcision made without
hands, by putting off the sinful body of the flesh, through the circumcision
of Christ; In that ye are buried with him through baptism, in whom ye are also
raised up together, through the faith of the operation of God, which raised him
from the dead.

Ephe. 5. 26. 27. 28. Christ so loved the church, that he gave himself for it,
that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it by the washing of water through the
word; that he might make unto himself a glorious church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blame. The
note thereupon; Baptism is a token, that God has consecrated the church to
himself, and made it holy by his word, that is, his promise of free
righteousness and holiness in Christ.

1. Pet. 3. 21. ( Noah's flood) To the which also, the figure that now saves
us, even Baptism, agrees, not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but
in that a good conscience makes request to God, by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ.

1. Cor. 10. 16. 17. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the
communion of the body of Christ? For we that are many, are one bread and one
body, because we all are partakers of one bread.

Romans 4. 11. After he received the sign of circumcision, as the seal of the
righteousness of the faith which he had.

For this occasion it is mentioned, that we being justified by faith, have
peace with God.

Romans 5. 1. 2. 3. 4. Then being justified by faith, we have peace toward God,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. By who^ also we have access through faith unto
this grace, wherein we stand and rejoice under the hope of the glory of GOD.
Neither do we so only, but also we rejoice in tribulations.

Where faith is, there is also perseverance, and a steadfast purpose to continue.

Phil. 1. 6. And I am persuaded of this same thing, that he that has begun
this good work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ.

Nomb. 23. 19. God is not as man, that he should lie, neither as the son of
man, that he should repent; Has he said, and shall he not do it? And has he
spoken, and shall he not accomplish it?

Psalm. 23. 6. Doubtless, kindness and mercy shall follow me, all the days of
my life, and I shall remain a long season in the house of the Lord.

Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I will require, even
that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold
the beauty of the Lord, and to visit his Temple.

Mat. 24. 24. And except those days should be shortened, there should no
flesh be saved, but for the elects sake, those days shall be shortened. (Lest
they should fall away, as it is said of Enoch, that he was taken away, lest he
should be deceived by wickedness and sin.)

John. 6. 37. All that the father gives men, shall come to me, and him that
comes to me, I cast not away.

John 17. 15. I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but
that thou keep them from evil.

John. 10. 27. 28 My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow
me. And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither
shall any pluck them out of mine hand.

John. 13. 1. As he loved his own which were in the world, unto the end he
loved them.

Hebr. 10. 23. 24. etc. Let us keep the profession of our hope without
wavering. For he is faithful that promised. And let us consider one an other,
to provoke unto love and to good works. Not sorsaking the fellowship that we
have among our selves, as the manner of some is, but let us exhort one an
other, and that so much the more, because ye see that the day draws near.
For if we sin willingly, there remains a fearful looking for of judgment.

Upon this gift of faith and perseverance, the godly doubt not to call upon
God in all afflictions.

Romans 8* 38. 39. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels,
nor any creature, shall be able to separate me from the love of God, which is
in Christ Jesus our Lord.

2. Cor. 1. 21. 22. It is God which stablisheth us with you in Christ, and has
anointed us, who has also sealed us, and has given the earnest of the spirit
in our hearts.

Iom. 1. 6. 7. 8. 9. He that wauereth, is like a wave of the sea, tossed of the
wind and carried away. Neither let that man think, that he shall receive any
thing of the Lord. A wavering minded man, is unstable in all his ways.

Hebr. 4. 16. Let us therefore go boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may
receive mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.

Hehr. 10. 21. 22. Seeing we have a high Priest which is over the house of God,
let us draw near with a true heart in assurance of faith, sprinckeled in our
hearts from an evil conscience, and washed in our bedies with pure water.

1. John. 4. 17. Herein is the love perfect in us, that we should have
boldness in the day of judgment, (by reason of this perseverance wherewith he
has enabled us.)

Yet the godly may swerve and fall, as did Moses, Aaron, David, Peter, but at
length, by Gods grace they return again.

1. John. 3. 9. Whosoever is borne of God, sins not, (finally) For his seed
remains in him, neither can he sin, because he is borne of God. (Through ye
power of his word, and the operation of his holy spirit.)

2. Pet. 1. 10. Wherefore brethren, give diligence to make your calling and
election sure. For if ye do these things, ye shall never fall.

No man is made righreous, but he that is made holy, and framed to good
works.

Ephe. 2. 10. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus to good
works, which God has ordained, that we should walk in them.

Ephe. 1. 4. He has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world, that
we should be holy, and without blame, before him in love.

The way, whereby God by his mercy, does prepare his elect to his kingdom, is
by the mediation of our savior Christ, while they steadfastly believe, not
only that he is their perfect sacrifice, but their advocate and intercessor to
God for them.

Heb. 9. 13. 14. 15. 16. For if the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of
an heifer, sprinckling them that are unclean, sanctifies as touching the
purifieng of the flesh. How much more shall the blood of Christ, which through
the eternal spirit, offered himself without spot to God, purge your
conscience from dead works to serve the living God? And for this cause, is he
the mediator of the new Testament, that through death, which was for the
redemption of the transgressions, that were in ye former Testament, they which
were called, might receive ye promise of eternal inheritance.

1. Tim. 2. 5. For there is one God, and one Mediator, between God and man,
which is the man Christ Jesus.

As concerning infants, which die as soon as they are borne, who are elected
and chosen unto life by Gods secret purpose, the way is more speedy; For they
are presently in the hands of God: Because he accepts the children of the
faithful.

Gene. 17. 7. Moreover, I will establish my covenant, between me and thee, and
thy seed after thee, in their generations, for an everlasting covenant, to be
god unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.

Exo. 20. 6. Showing mercy unto thousands, to them that love me, and keep my
commandments.

1. Cor. 7. 14. For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the
unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband, else were your children
unclean, but now are they holy.

Chap. 5.
After what sort, almighty God does execute and effectually declare his
counsel, touching Reprobation.
BY these things whereof we have spoken, it may easily The old Adam, is the
foundation, of the reprobation, which man's judgment can attain unto.
appear, how God makes them to go to their own place whom he created to
that end, that he might be glorified in their just condemnation. For as Christ
the second heavenly Adam, is the foundation and very substance and effect of
the elects salvation; so also the first earthly Adam, because he fell, is the
first author of the hate, and so consequently, of ye damnation of the reproved.
For when god moved with these causes, which he only knows, had determined to
create the^ to this end, to show forth in them his just wrath and power, he
did likewise orderly dispose the causes and means, whereby it might come to
pass, that the whole cause of their damnation might be of themselves, as has
bin declared before in ye third chapter. When man then The judgment of God
toward infants that are reprobate.
was fallen willingly into that misrable estate, whereof we have spoken in ye
chapter before, God who hates justly the Reprobate, because they are corrupt,
in part of the^ he does execute his just wrath as soon as they are borne, and
toward the rest that be of age, who^ he reserueth to a more sharp judgment,
he observes two ways, clean contrary one to the other. For as concerning
some, he shows How Reprobaton, is first manifested. No calling to the Cospell.
them not so much favor as once to hear of Jesus Christ, in whom only is
salvation, but suffers them to walk in their own ways, and run headlong
to their perdition. And as for the testimonies that God has left to the^ of
his divinity, serve them to no other use, but to make the^ without all excuse,
and yet through their own default, seeing their ignorance and lack of
capacity, is the just punishment of the corruption wherein they are borne. And
surely, as touching that they can attain unto, in knowing God by their light
or rather natural darkness, (albeit they never failed in the way but so
continued) yet were it not in any wise, sufficient for their salvation. For it
is necessary for us that shall be saved, that we know God, not only as God,
but as our father in Christ. The which mystery, flesh and blood does not
reveal, but the son himself, to them whom his father has given him. As An
unprofitable calling, or of none effect.
concerning others, their fall is more terrible. For he causes them, to hear
by preaching the outward word of the gospel, but because they are not of the
number of the elect being called, they are not. And forasmuch as they are not
able to receive the spirit of truth, therefore they cannot believe, because it
is not given unto them. Wherefore when they are called to the feast, thy refuse
to come, so that the word of life is folly unto them, and an offense; finally
the savor of death, to their destruction. There are yet others, whose hearts
God opens to receive and believe, the things that they hear, but this is
with that general faith, whereby the devils believe, and tremble. To conclude,
they which are most miserable of all, those clime a degree higher, that their
fall might be more grievous. For they are raised so high by some gift of
grace, that they are a little moved with some taste of the heavenly gift, so that
for the time, they seem to have received the seed, and to be planted in the
church of God, and also show the way of salvation to others. But this is
plain, that the spirit of adoption, which we have said to be only proper unto
the^ which are never cast forth, but are written in the secret of Gods people,
is never communicate unto the^. For if they were of ye elect, they should
remain still with the elect. All these therefore, because of necessity and yet
willingly, as they which are under the slavery of sin, return to their vomit
and fall away from faith, are plucked up by the roots to be cast into the
fire. I mean they are forsaken of God, who according to his will, the which no
man can resist, as also because of their corruption and wickedness, hardens
them, makes their heart fat, stops their ears, and blinds them. And to
bring this to pass, he uses partly their own vile concupiscences, to the
which he has given them up to be ruled and led by; and partly the spirit of
lies, who keeps the^ wrapped in his snares, by reason of their corruption, from
the which as one out of a fountain, issues a continual flowing river of
infidelity, ignorance, and iniquity. Whereby, it follows, that having as it
were made shipwreck of their faith, can by no means escape the day which is
appointed for their destruction, that God may be glorified in their just
condemnation.

The chief matters, with places of scripture, for proof.
Concerning the reprobation of the wicked, whom God makes to go to their
own place, and has created them, unto that end that he might be glorified in
their just condemnation.

Acts. 1. 25. That one of thse two may take the room of ministration, and
Apostleship, from which Judas has gone astray, to go to his own place.

Romans 19. 22. What and if God would to show his wrath, and to make his power
known, suffer with long patience the vessels of wrath prepared to destruction?

Mat. 25. 41. Then shall he say unto them on the left hand; depart from me, ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his Angels.

As Christ the heavenly Adam, is the foundation of our salvation, so the first
earthly Adam by disobedience, is the first author of hate, and so
consequently, of the damnation of the reprobate.

Romans 5. 18. Likewise then, as by the offense of one, the fault came on all men
to condemnation, so by the justifying of one, the benefit abounded toward all
men to the justification of life.

1. Cor. 15. 22. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ, shall all be made
alive.

In part of the reprobate, does God execute his just wrath so soon as they are
borne.

Exodus 20. 5. A jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children, to the third and fourth generation of them that hate me.

Ephe. 2. 3. We were by nature the children of wrath, as well as others.

Romans 5. 14. Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them also, that sinned
not after the like manner of the transgression of Adam. Meaning children which
have not as yet actually offended, who are born and conceived in sin.

Concerning them that are of age, he reserueth a more sharp judgment. For to
some he shows not so much favor as once to hear of Christ, by whom is
salvation.

Mat. 1. 21. And he shall bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name
Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins.

Acts. 4. 10. 12. Be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel,
that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazaret, this man stands here before you
whole. Neither is thore salvation in any other. For among men, there is given
none other name under heaven, whereby we must be saved.

Acts. 13. 26. Ye men and brethren, children of the generation of Abraham, and
whosoever among you fears God, to you is the word of this salvation sent.

But suffers them to walk in their own ways.

Acts. 14. 16. Who in times past suffered all the Gentiles to walk in their
own ways.

Acts. 17. 30. And the time of this ignorance, god regarded not, but now he
admonishes all men every where, to repent.

Acts. 1. 24. Wherefore also god gave them up to their hearts lusts, unto
uncleanness, to defile their own bodies between themselves.

Ephe. 1. 12. Ye were at that time without Christ, and were aliants from the
commonweal of Israel, and were strangers from the covenant of promise, and
had no hope, and were without god in the world.

And run headlong unto their own perdition.

Ephe. 4. 17. Walk not as other gentiles walk, in vanity ff
of their mind. Having their cogitation darkened, and being strangers from
the life of god, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the
hardness of their heart. Who being past feeling, have given themselves unto
wantonness; to work all uncleanness, even with greednesse.

1. Pet. 4. 3. 4. 5. For it is sufficient for us, that we have spent the time
past of the life, after the lust of the gentiles, walking in wantonness,
lusts, drunkenness, in gluttony, and in abominable idolatries, wherein it
feemeth to them strange, that ye run not with them unto the same excess of
riot, therefore speak they evil of you, Which shall give accounts to him that
is ready to judge both the quick and the dead.

To. 1. 28. For as they regarded not to know God, even so God delivered them up
unto a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient; being full
of all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, coue tousnesse,
maliciousness, full of envy, of murder, of debate, of deceit, taking all
things in the evil part; Whisperers, backbiters, haters of God, dooers of
wrong, proud boasters, inuentors of evil things; Disobedient to parents,
without understanding; Couenant-breakers, without natural affection, such as
can never be appeased, merciless. Which men, though they know the law of God
(being written in their consciences, which the Philosophers call the law of
nature, the lawiers the law of nations) how that they which commit such
things, are worthy of death, yet not only do the same, but also favor them
that do them.

And as for the testimonies that God has le^t ^^ them of his dignity, they
serve to no other use, but to make them without all excuse. And yet through
their own default, seeing their ignorance and lack of capacity, is the just
punishment of that corruption wherein they are borne.

Romans 1. 19. 20. Forasmuch as that which may be known of God, is manifest in
them. For God has showed it unto them. For the invisible things of him, that
is, his eternal power and godhead, are seen by creation of the world, being
considered in his works, to the intent that they should be without excuse.

Acts. 14. 16. 17. God in times past, suffered all the gentiles to walk in
their own ways. Nevertheless he left not himself without a witness, in
that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling
our hearts with food and gladness. And Chap. 17. 27. That they should seek
the Lord, if so be they might have groped after him.

Through there own default.

To. 1. 21. Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God,
neither were thankful, but became vain in their imaginations, and their
foolish heart was full of darkness.

John. 15. 22. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they should not have had
sin, but now have they no cloak for there sin, verse. 24. If I had not
done works among them, which none other man did, they had not had sin, that
is, they had not been so greatly in fault.

To. 2. 12. For as many as have sinned without the law, (that is, without the
knowledge of the written law) shall perish also without the law their
conscience being a law unto them.

John. 3. 19. And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world,
and men loved darkness rather then light, because there deeds were evil.

And surely that which they can attain unto, in knowing God by their light, or
rather natural darkness, (albeit they never failed in the way, but so
continued) yet were it in no wise sufficient unto salvation. For it is
necessary for us that shall be saved, that we know God, not only as God, but
as our father in Christ.

John. 17. 3. And this is life eternal, that they know thee to be the only
very God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. And chapter. 3. 26. He that
believes in the son, has everlasting life, and he that obeieth not the
son, shall not see life, but the wrath of GOD abides on him.

The which mystery, flesh and blood does not reveal, but the son himself
to them whom his father has given him.

Matt. 11. 27. All things are given to me of my father, and no man knows the
same, but the father, neither knows any man the father, but ye son, and he
to whom the son wll reveal him.

Mat. 16. 16. 17. Simon Peter answered and said; Thou art that Christ, the
son of the living God. And Jesus said unto him. Blessed art thou Simon the
son of Jonas. For flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my father
which is in heaven.

John. 1. 10. He was in the world, and the world knew him not. But as many as
received him, to them he gave power to be the sons of God, even of the^ that
believe in his name. Which are borne not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. And chap. 3. 5. 6. Jesus answered
Nicodemus, verily, verily, I say unto thee, except that a man be borne of water
and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. That which is
borne of the flesh, is flesh, and that, that is borne of the spirit, is spirit.

Secondly, they are called by the preaching of the Gospel, but because they
are not of the number of the elect, being called they hear not.

Luke. 12. 47. That servant which knew his masters will, and prepared not
himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beat wiih many stripes.

Matt. 22. 14. For many are called, but few are chosen.

Luke. 13. 34. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and stonest
them that are sent to thee, how often would I have gathered thy children
together, as the hen gathers her brood under her wings, and ye would not;
Chap. 19. 44. They shall make thee even with the ground, because thou knew
not the time of thy visitation?

Iere. 7. 27. Therefore shall thou speak all these words unto them, but they
will not hear thee; Thou shall also cry unto them, but they will not answer
thee.

Pro. 1. 24. 26. 28. 26. Because when I called, ye refused, I will laugh at
your destruction, and mock when your fear comes. They shall call upon me,
but I will not answer, they shall seek me early, but they shall not find
me; Because they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord.

And forasmuch, as they are not able to receive the spirit of truth.

John. 14. 16. 17. And I will pray the father, and he shall give you an other
comforter, that he may abide with you for ever. Even the spirit of truth, whom
the world cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows it him; but
ye know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be in you. Chap. 12. 39. 40.
Therefore could they not believe, because that Esaias says again, he has
blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart, that they should not see with
their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I
should heal them.

2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. All men have not faith.

Mat. 13. 9. 11. He that has ears to hear, let him hear.

To you it is given, to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but to
them it is not given.

1. Cor. 2. 14. The natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of
God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know the^, because they
are spiritually discerned.

The word of life is folly unto them, and an offense.

1. Cor. 1. 18. The preaching of the cross, is to them that perish,
foolishness, but unto us that are saved, it is the power of God, Verse 23. 24.
We preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews, even a stumbling block, and unto
the Grecians foolishness; But unto them which are called both of Jews and
Grecians, we preach Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God.

And finally, the savor of death unto death, to their destruction.

2. Cor. 2. 16. To the one, we are the savor of death unto death, and to the
other, the savor of life unto life.

Thirdly, their hearts are opened, but they believe generally.

Iam. 2. 19. Thou beleeuest that there is one God, thou do well; the devils
believe it, and tremble.

Fourthly, they are most miserable of all, who climb a degree higher, that
their fall may be the more grievous? For they are raised by some gift of grace,
and yet fall away.

Heb. 6 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. For it is impossible that they which were once
lightened and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the
holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good word of God, and of the power of ye
world to come, if they fall away, should be renewed again by repentance,
seeing they crucify again to themselves the son of God, and make a mock of
him. For the earth which drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and
brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives blessing
of God. But that which bears thorns and briars is reproved, and is near
unto cursing, whose end is to be burned.

Yea for a time they seem to have received the seed, and to be planted in the
Church of God.

Mat. 13. 20. He that receives seed in the stony ground, is he which hears
the word, and incontinently with joy, receives it; yet has no root in
himself, and dureth but a season.

And also show the way of salvation to others.

Acts. 1 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. Ye men and brethren, this scripture must needs
have been fulfilled, which the holy Ghost by the mouth of David, spoke of
Judas, who was guide to them that took Jesus. For he was numbered with us, and
had obtained fellowship in the ministration. He therefore has purchased a
field with the reward of iniquity, and when he had thrown down himself
headlong, he brast asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out. And it
is known unto all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, insomuch that that field is
called in their own language Aceldama, that is, the field of blood. For it is
written in the book of Psalms. Let his habitation be void, and let no man
dwell therein. Also; Let an other take his charge.

But this is plain, that the spirit of adoption which we have said to be
only proper unto them which are never cast forth, but are written in the secret
of gods purpose, is never communicate unto them.

Ezech. 13. 9. And mine hand shall be upon the Prophets that see vanity and
divine lies, they shall not be in the assembly of my people, neither shall they
be written in the writing of the house of Israel, neither shall they enter into
the land of Israel.

John. 6. 37. All that the father gives me, shall come to me, and him that
comes to me, I cast not away.

For if they were of the Elect, they should remain still with the Elect.

1. John. 2. 19. They went out from us, but they were not of us; For if they
had been of us, they would have continued with us. But this comes to pass,
that it might appear that they are not all of us.

1. Cor. 15. 58. Therefore my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast immovable,
abundant always in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your
labor is not in vain in the Lord.

Jude. 20. 21. Ye beloved, edify your selves in your most holy faith, praying
in the holy Ghost. And keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the
mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.

2. Pet. 3. 17. 18. Beloved, Beware lest ye be also plucked away with the error
of the wicked, and fall from your own steadfastness. But grow in grace and in
the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to him be glory, both now
and for evermore. Amen.

All these therefore because of necessity and yet willingly, as they which are
under the slavery of sin, return to their vomit, and fall away from faith,
are plucked up by the roots, to be cast into the fire.

John. 8. 34. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that commits sin, is the
servant of sin. And the scruant abides not in the house for ever.

Ephe. 4. 17. 1. Pet. 4. 3. 4. 5. To. 1. 28. As above, look in the margent for
this mark. (ff.)

To. 7. 14. For we know that the law is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold
under sin.

To. 8. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. They that are after the flesh, savor the things of the
flesh, but they that are after the spirit, the things of the spirit. For the
wisdom of the flesh is death, but the wisdom of the spirit is life, and
peace. Because the wisdom of the flesh, is enmity against God; for it is not
subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. So then, they that are in
the flesh, cannot please god. Because the works of the flesh, bear such swaie
with them.

2. Pet. 2. 19. Of whomsoever a man is overcome, even unto the same is he in
bondage. For if they after they have escaped from the filthiness of the world,
through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, are yet entangled
again therein and overcome, the latter end is worse with them then the
beginning. For it had been better for them, not to have known the way of
righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from the holy
commandment given unto them. But it is come unto them according to the true
proverb; The dog is returned to his own vomit, and the sow that was washed,
to the wallowing in the mire.

And fall away from faith.

1. Tim. 4. 1. Now the spirit speaks evidently, that in the latter times,
some shall depart from the faith, and shall give heed unto spirits of error,
and doctrines of devils.

Are plucked up by the roots.

Mt. 15. 13. Christ answered and said; Every plant which my heavenly father
has not planted, shall be rooted up.

John. 15. 2. Every branch that bears not fruit in me, he takes away, and
every one that bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more
fruit.

Mat. 3. 10. And now also is the axe put to the root of the tree, therefore
every tree which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into
the fire.

John. 15. 6. If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch and
withers, and men gather them and cast them into the fire, and they burn.

I mean, ^hey are forsaken of God, who according to his will the which no man
can resist, and also according to their own corruption and wickedness, their
hearts are hardened, their ears stopped, and their eyes blinded.

Romans 1. 24. Wherefore also God gave them up to their hearts lusts, and unto
uncleanness.

Acts. 14. 16. Who in times past suffered all the Gentiles to walk in their
own ways.

Whose will no man can resist.

Romans 9. 19. For who has resisted his will? See more in the notes of the first
chapter.

Hardens them through their corruption and wickedness.

Romans 1. 27. 28. And likewise also the men left the natural use of the woman,
and burned in their lusts one toward an other, and man and man wrought
filthiness, and received in themselves such recompense of their error as was
meet. For as they regarded not to know God, even so God delivered them up unto
a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient.

Makes their hearts fat, stops their ears, and blinds their eyes.

Esaias. 54. 7. There is none that calls upon thy name, neither that stirs
up himself to take hold of thee; for thou have hid thy face from us. And
chapter 6. 9. And the Lord said; Go and say unto this people, Ye shall hear
indeed, but ye shall not understand, ye shall plainly see, and not perceive.

(o) The Genena note upon that place. Whereby is declared, that for the malice
of man, God will not immediately take away his word, but he will cause it to be
preached to their condemnation, when as they will not learn thereby to obey
his will and be saved. Hereby he exhorts the Ministers to do their duty, and
answers to the wicked murmurers, that through their own malice their heart
is hardened. Mat. 13. 14. Act. 28. 26. Romans 11. 8.

Verse. 10. Make the heart of his people fat, make their ears heavy, and shut
their eyes, lest they see with their eyes and hear with their ears, and
understand with their hearts, and convert, and he heal them.

And to bring this to pass, he uses partly their own vile concupiscences, to
the which he has given them up to be ruled and led by.

Romans 1. 26. For this cause God gave them up to vile affections, etc. See more
in that chap. And Esaias 64. 7.

And partly also the spirit of lies, who keeps them wrapped in his snares.

2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. Even him whose coming is by the working of
Satan, with all power and signs, and lying wonders, and in all
deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness, among them that perish, because they
received not the love of the truth, that they may be saved. And therefore, God
shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe lies; That all they
might be damned, which believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness.

John. 3. 19. And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world,
and men loved darkness rather then light, because their deeds were evil.

Ezay. 63. 17. O Lord why have thou made us err from thy ways, and hardened
our heart from thy fear.

To. 11. 32. For God has shut up all in unbelief.

Acts. 7. 42. Then God turned himself away, and gave them up to serve the host
of heaven.

1. Kin. 22. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. The Lord said; Who shall entice Ahab that he
may go and fall at Ramoth Gilead? And one said on this manner, and an other said
on that manner. Then there came forth a spirit, and stood before the Lord,
and said; I will entice him. And the Lord said unto him, Wherewith? And he
said, I will go out and be a false spirit, in the mouth of all his Prophets.
Then he said, thou shall entice him, and shall also prevail; go forth and do
so. Now therefore, behold the Lord has put a lying spirit in the mouth of all
these thy Prophets, and the Lord has appointed evil against thee.

2. Cor. 4. 3. 4. If our Gospel be then hid, it is hid to them that are lost.
In whom, the God of this world has blinded the minds, that is, of the
Infidels, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, which is the image
of God, should not shine unto them.

By reason of their corruption, from the which, as out of a fountain, issues
a continual flowing river of infidelity, ignorance, and iniquity.

2. Tim. 2. 26. And that they may come to amendment out of the snares of the
devil, which are taken of him at his will.

Whereby it follows, that having as it were made shipwreck of their faith.

1. Tim. 1. 19. Having faith and a good conscience, which some have put away,
and as concerning faith, have made shipwreck.

Can by no means escape the day which is appointed for their destruction, that
God may be glorified in their just condemnation.

Prou. 16. 4. The Lord has made all things for his own sake, yea even the
wicked for the day of evil.

Romans 9. 21. 22. Has not the potter power of the clay, to make of the same
lump, one vessel to honor, and an other unto dishonor? What and if God
would to show his wrath, and to make his power known, suffer with long
patience, the vessels of wrath prepared to destruction?

The sixth Chapter.
Of the last and full accomplishment of Gods eternal counsel, as well toward
the elect, as the reprobate.
FOrasmuch as God is justice it self, it is necessary that The full execution
of god counsel.
he should save the just, and condemn the unjust. Now they among men are only
just, who being by faith joined to Christ, grafted, rooted in him, and made one
body with him, are justified and sanctified in him, and by him, Whereof it
follows, that ye glory to the which they are destinate to the glory of God,
appertains to them, as by a certain right or title. On ye other part, they
which remain in Adams pollution and death, are justly hated of God, and so
condemned by him, not excepting so much as the^ which die before they sin, as
Adam did. But both these manners of executing Gods judgments, as well in these
as in the other which are elected, are in three sorts, whereof we have already
declared the first. For the elect, in that same moment that they In the elect.
have received ye gift of faith, have after a certain sort, passed from death
to life, whereof they have a sure pledge. But this their life is hid in Christ,
till this corporal death, make them to step a degree further, and that the
soul being loosed out of the band of the body, enter into the joy of the Lord,
Finally, in the day appointed to judge the quick and the dead, when that which
is corruptible and mortal, shall be clad with incorruption and immortality,
and God shall be all in all things, then they shall see his majesty face to
face, and shall fully enjoy that unspeakable comfort and joy, which before all
beginning, was prepared for them; which is also the reward, that is due to the
righteousness and holiness of Christ: who was given for their sins, and
raised again from death, for their justification: By whose virtue and spirit,
they have proceeded and gone forward, from faith to faith, as shall manifestly
appear by the whole In the Reprobate.
course of their life, and good works. Whereas altogether contrary, the
reprobate, conceived, and brought up in sin, death, and wrath of God, when they
depart out of this world, they fall into an other gulf of destruction, and
their souls are plunged in that endless pain, until the day come, that
their bodies and souls, being joined again, they shall enter into everlasting
fire, which is prepared for the devil and his Angels. Then by these two ways,
(which are The glory of God.
clean contrary one to an other) the last issue and end of Gods judgment,
shall set forth manifestly his glory to all men, foramuch as in his elect, he
shall declare himself, most just and most merciful. Most just I say, for that
he Perfectly just, and perfectly mereifull.
has punished with extreme rigor and severity, the sins of his elect, in
the person of his son, neither did receive them into the fellowship of his
glory, before he had fully and perfectly, instified and sanctified them in his
son. And most merciful, forasmuch, as he freely appointed with himself to
elect them, and according as he had purposed, chose them freely in his son,
by calling, justifying, and glorifying them, by means of that same faith,
which he had given them through the same grace and mercy. On the other God is
perfectly just.
there side, touching the reprobate, their corruption and infidelity, with such
fruits as come thereof, and testimony of their own conscience, shall so
reprove and accuse them, that although they resist and kick against the
prick; yet the most perfect justice of God, shall be manisest and shine by all
men's confession, in their just condemnation.

The chief notes, with proofs.
As God is just, so it is necessary that he should save the just, and condemn
the unjust. Now amongst men none are just, but by faith, being by faith joined
to Christ, grafted, rooted in him, and made on body with him, and thereby also
justified and sanctified by him and in him. Whereof it follows, that the
glory to the which they are destinate, to the glory of God, appertains to
them, as by a certain right or title.

Ge. 18. 25. Be it far from thee, from doing this thing, to flay the
righteous with the wicked, and that the righteous should be even as the wicked,
be it far from thee shall not the judge of all the world do right?

To. 11. 19. 20. Thou will say then; The branches are broken off that I might
be graft in; Well, threugh unbelief they are broken off and thou stand (and
are graft in) by faith, be not high minded but fear.

Colloss. 2. 6. 7. 8. 9. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord,
so walk with him, rooted and built in him, and stablished in the faith as ye
have been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving. Beware lest there be any
man that spoil you, through Philosophy and vain deceit, through the
traditions of men, according to the rudiments of the world, and not after
Christ.

Made one body.

1. Cor. 10. 16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion
of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of
the body of Christ? For we that are many, are one bread and one body, because
we are all partakers of one bread.

John. 17. 21. I pray for them, that they all may be one, as thou O father art
in me, and I in thee, even that they also may be one in us, and the world may
believe that thou have sent me.

And thereby sanctified and justified in him, and by him.

Romans 8. 30. Moreover, whom he predestinate, them also he called; and whom he
called, them also he justified; and whom he justified, them also he gloried.

1. Cor. 1. 30. But ye are of him in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
wisdom and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.

Romans 3. 25. Whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in
his blood, to declare his righteousness by the forgiveness of sins, that
are passed through the patience of God. To she we at this time his
righteousness, that he might be just, and a iustifier of him which is of the
faith of Jesus.

And also glorified.

Romans 9. 23. And that he might declare the riches of his glory upon the vessels
of mercy, which he has prepared unto glory.

To. 8. 30. And whom he justified, them he also glorified.

John. 17. 22. 23. 24. 25. And the glory that thou gave me, I have given
them, that they may be one, as we are one, I in them, and thou in me, that they
may be made perfect in one, and that the world may know, that thou have sent
me, and have loved them, as thou have loved me. Father, I will that they which
thou have given me, be with me, even where I am, that they may be hold my
glory which thou have given me.

On the other part they which remain in Adams pollution and death, are justly
hated of God, and so condemned by him, not excepting so much as them which die
before they sin, as did Adam.

To. 5. 14. But death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them also, that
sinned not after the like manner of the transgression of Adam.

Ephe. 2. 3. We were by nature the children of wrath as well as others.

The elect in that same moment that they have received the gift of faith, have
after a cerraine sort passed from death to life.

Ihon. 5. 24. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my word and
believes in him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but has passed from death unto life.

Whereof they hane a sure pledge, the Spirit of God, that dwells within them,
and certifieth their hearts.

1. Cor. 1. 22. It is God which stablisheth us in Christ, who has also sealed
us, and has given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts. And chap. 5. 4. 5.
For indeed, we that are in this tabernacle (of this earthly body) sigh and are
burdened, because we would not be unclothed, but would be clothed upon, that
immortality might be swallowed up of life. And he that has created us for
this thing, is God who also has given unto us the earnest of the spirit.

Ephe. 1. 12. 13. 14. That we which trusted in Christ should be unto the praise
of his glory. In whom also ye have trusted after that ye heard the word of
truth, even the Gospel of your salvation. Wherein also after ye believed, ye
were sealed with the holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our
inheritance, until the redemption of the possession purchased unto the praise
of his glory.

But this their life is hid in Christ.

1. Cor. 1. 7. 8. Ye are not destitute of any gift, waiting for the appearing
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Who shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may
be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Romans 5. 2. By whom also we have access through faith unto this grace wherein
we stand, and rejoice under the hope of the glory of God, and chapter 8. 23.
24. 25. 26. And not only the creature, but we also which have ye first fruits
of the spirit, even we do sigh in our selves, waiting for the adoption, even
the redemption of our body; For we are saved by hope, but hope that is seen,
is not hope. For how can a man hope for that which he sees? But if we hope for
that we see not, we do with patience abide for it.

Colloss. 3. 3. 4. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.
When Christ which is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him
in glory.

Until this corporal death make them to step a degree further, and that the
soul being loosed out of the bands of the body, enter into the joy of the
Lord.

Ephe. 2. 6. God has raised us up together, and made us sit together in the
heavenly places in Christ Jesus.

Philip. 1. 23. For I am greatly in doubt on both sides, destring to be loosed,
and to be with Christ, which is best of all.

Luke. 23. 43. Jesus said to the thief that repented; Verily I say unto thee,
To day shall thou be with me in Paradise. And chapter 16. 22. And it was so,
that the beggar died, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom.

Wis^. 3. 1. But the souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, and no
torment shall touch them.

Eccle. 12. 7. And dust return to the earth as it was, and the spirit return
to God that gave it.

Then shall they enjoy fully, that unspeakable comfort prepared.

Romans 8. 18. For I account that the affictions of this present time, are not
worthy of the glory which shall be showed unto us.

Mat. 25. 34. Then shall the king say to them on his right hand; Come ye
blessed of my father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you, from the
foundations of the world.

1. Cor. 15. 42. 43. 53. The body is sown in corruption, and is raised in
corruption. It is sown in dishonor, and is raised in glory: it is sown in
weakness, and is raised in power. For this corruptible, must put on
incorruption, and this mortal, must put on immortality.

1. Cor. 2. 9. The things which eye has not seen, neither ear has heard,
neither came into man's heart, are, which God has prepared for them that love
him.

By whose virtue and spirit they have proceeded and gone forward, from faith to
faith, as shall manifestly appear by the whole course of their life and good
works.

Romans 1. 17. The righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith.

^^ 2. Re^. 1. 2^1. 2. Grace and peace be multiplied to you by the knowledge of
God and of Iesns our Lord. According as his godly power has given unto us all
things that pertain unto life and godliness, through the knowkledge of him
that has called us unto glory and virtue. Whereby most great and precious
promises are given unto us, that by them ye should be partakers of the godly
nature, in that ye fly the corruption which is in the world through lust.
Therefore give even all diligence thereunto. Join moreoner, virtue with your
faith, and with virtue knowledge, and with knowledge temperaunce, and with
temperaunce patience, and with patience godliness, and with godliness,
brotherly kindness, and with brotherly kindness, love. For if these things
be among you and abound, they will make you that ye neither shall be idle, nor
unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. For he that has not
these things is blind, and cannot see far off, and has forgotten that he
was purged fro^m his old sins. Wherefore brethren, give rather diligence to
make your calling and election sure; For if ye do these things, ye shall never
fall. For by these means an entering shall be ministered unto you abundantly,
into the cuerlasting kingdom of out Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Whereas altogether contrary, the Reprobate conceived, borne, and brought up in
sin, death, and the wrath of God; when they depart out of this world, they fall
into another gulf of destruction; and their souls are plunged in that
endless pain, until the day come, that their bodies and solues being joined
again, they shall enter into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil
and his angels.

(...): Psalm. 5 ^^^5. Behold I was borne in iniquitle, and in sin has my
mother conceived me.

Ephe. 2. 3. And were by nature the children of wrath as well as others. Romans
7. 14. sold under sin.

Romans 5. 14. Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin, and so death went over all men, forasmuch as all men have sinned.

Dani. 12. 2. And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall
awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame, and perpetual contempt.

John. 5. 28 29. Marvel not at this, for the hour shall come, in the which
all that are in the graves shall hear his voice. And they shall come forth
that have done good, unto the resurrection of life, but they that have done
cuill, to the resurrection of condemnation.

Luke. 16. 22. 23. 24. The rich man also died and was buried, and being in hell
torments, he lift up his and yes and saw Abraham a far off, and Lazarus in
his hosome. Then he cried, and said; Father Abraham have merry on me, and send
Lazarus, that he may dippe the tippe of his singer in water, and cool my
tongue, for I am tormented in this flame. But Abraham said; Son, remember
that thou in thy life time receiuedst thy pleasures, and likewise Lazarus
pains, now therefore is he comforted, and thou art tormented.

Mat. 25. 41. Then shall he say to them on the left hand, Depart from me ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his angels.

The seventh Chapter.
After what sort this doctrine may be preached with most profit.
SInte we have now declared the effect of this doctrine, What discretion the
matter requires.
it remains also, that we show what order we think best to be obseru^^, in
preaching and applying the same to every particular man. Whereas, many find
this matter, so sharp and strange that they fly from it, as from a dangerous
rock; it is partly to be attributed to the malice and arrogance of men; And
partly to the rashness and lack of discretion of them that teach it; and
thirdly, it is to be imputed to their ignorance, which cannot orderly apply
the same to themselves, which faithfully and truly has bin taught of others.
Concerning them which sin of malice, it only appertains to GOD to amend
them; Which surely he has done always in his reason, and likewise will do
from time to time, to whom he has appointed to show mercy. But for others
which remain^ obstinate in their sin and wickedness, there is no cause why
we should be moved, either for their number or authority; to dissemble Gods
truth. And as touching the second sort, I have thought these things
principally to be observed in preaching this mystery. First, as in all other
things, so chiefly in this matter of predestination, they ought to take
diligent heed, that in steed of Gods pure and simple truth, they bring not
soorth vain and curious speculations or dreams. Which thing they cannot
choose but do, which go about to compass and accord these secret judgments of
God, with man's wisdom, and so do not only put difference betwirt
predstinatio^ and the purpose of god, which thing they must needs do, but
separate the one from the other. For they either imagine a certain naked and
idle permition, or else make a double purpose and counsel in God. From the
which errors, they must needs fall into many and great absurdities. For
sometimes they are constrained to divide those things, which of themselves are
joined most straightly: and sometimes, they are compelled to invent a great
sort of foolsh and dark distinctions, wherein the further they occupy
themselves and search, the wi^er the^ stray; from the purpose, and so entangle
their miserable brains, that they can find no way out. This then ought to be
avoided, with all careful diligence, chiefly in this matter, which above all
other ought purely and cincerely to be taught in the church of God. Moreover,
What manner of words and speech must be used.
as much as is possible, let them take heed, though sometimes for a more clear
understanding of things, a man may be bold and godly and reverently to do)
that no strange manner of speech, or not approueable by gods word, be used. And
also that such praises and words which the scriptures approve, be expounded
fitly, least otherwise any man should take occasion of offense, which as yet is
rude and ignorant. Furthermore we must have good respect Consideration of
persons.
unto the hearers, wherein also we must make distinction betwixt the malicious
and the rude: and again, betwixt them which are wilful ignorant, and those
which are not capable through a simple and common ignorance. For to the
malicious and wilful, our Lord is accustomed to set forth plainly the
judgment of God; but the other must be led by little and little to the knowledge
of the truth. Likewise we must take heed, that we have not so much respect to
the weak, that they in the mean season which are apt to understand be
neglect, and not sufficiently taught. Whereof we have notable examples in S.
Paul, which declare to us the wisdom and circumspection which he observed in
this matter, chiefly in the 9. 10. 11. 14. 15. chapters of the Epistle to the
Romans. Also except some great cause let, that they begin at the lowest and
most manifest causes, and so ascend up to the highest (as Paul in his Epistle
to the Romans, which is the right order and way to proceed in matters of
divinity, from the law, goes to remission of sins, and thence by steps,
he mounteth, till he come to the highest degree) or else let them consist in
that point, which is most agreeable to the text or matter, which they have in
hand, rather then contrariwise to begin at the very top of this mystery, and
so come to the foot. For the brightness of Gods majesty, suddeinly presented
to the eyes, does so dim and dazzle the sight, that afterward, if they be
not through long continuance accustomed to the same, they wax blind when they
should see other things.

What then remains? That whether they begin beneath and ascend upward, or
contrariwise above, and come downward to the lowest degree, they take always
heed, lest omitting that which ought to be in midst, they leap from one
extremity to another, as from the eternal purpose to salvation, and much more
from salvation, to the eternal purpose; Likewise from Gods eternal counsel
to damnation, or backward, from damnation to his purpose, leaving the near and
evident causes of Gods judgment. Except perchance they have to do with open
blasphemers, and contemners of God, who have need of nothing else, but the
sharp pricks of Gods judgment: or else with men so trained and exercised in
Gods word, that there be no suspicion of any offense. Finally, that they never
so propound this doctrine, as if it should be applied to any one man
particularly, (although men must be used after diverse sorts, some by
gentleness, and some by sharpness) unless some Prophet of God be admonished
by some especial revelation. Which thing because it is out of course, and not
usual, ought not lightly to be believed. When the Ministers also visit the
sick, or use familiar and private admonitions, it is their duty to lift up
and comfort the afflicted conscience, with the testimonial of their election;
And again, to wound and pearce the wicked and stubborn, with the fearful
judgment of God. So that they keep a mean, refraining ever from that last
sentence, which admits no exception nor condition. For this right and
jurisdiction, only appertains to God.

Notes and proofs.
The Preachers ought to take diligent heed, that in steed of Gods pure and
simple truth, they bring not forth vain and curious speculations.

1. Tim. 6. 3. If any man teach otherwise, and consents not to the wholesome
words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to
godliness, he is puffed up and knows nothing, but doateth about questions and
strife of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, vain
disputations of men of corrupt minds and destitute of the truth.

2. Tim. 2. 14. 16. Of these things put them in remembrance and protest before
the Lord, that they strive not about words which is to noprofit, but to the
perverting of the hearers. Stay profane and vain bablings, for they shall
increase unto more ungodliness.

Verse. 23. Put away foolish and unlearned questions, knowing that they
engender strife.

Mat. 28. 20. Teaching men to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded
you.

Which thing they cannot choose but do, which go about to compass and accord
these secret judgments of God with man's wisdom.

Mat. 23. The whole chapter.

John. 8. 44. Ye are of your father the devil, who abode not in the truth,
because there is no truth in him. When he speaks a lie, then speakeh he of
his own, for he is a lier, and the father thereof.

Furthermore, there must be good respect had unto the hearers, wherein also we
must put a difference, betwixt the malicious and the rude, be twixt the wilful
and ignorant.

John. 9. 41. Jesus said unto them, If ye were blind ye should not have sin,
but now ye say; We see, therefore your sin remains. And chap. 10. 26. 27.
But ye believe not; For ye are not of my sheeepe, as I said unto you. My sheep
hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.

Luke. 20. 46. 47. Beware of the scribes which desire to go in long robes, and
love salutations in the markets, and the highest states in the sinagogues, and
the chief rooms at feasts, Which devour widows houses even under a color
of long praying, these shall receive greater damnation.

Mat. 23. 37. Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and stonest
them which are sent to thee, how often would I have gathered thy children
together, as the hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would
net?

But the other must be led by little and little, to the knowledge of the truth.

1. Cor. 3. 2. I gave you milk to drink, and not meat, for ye were not yet
able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able, for ye are carnal.

Romans 14 1. Him that is weak in the faith, receive unto you, but for
controversies of disputations.

Never so propound this doctrine, as if it should be applied to any one man
particularly.

John. 8. 23. 24. And he said unto them; Ye are from beneath, I am from above;
Ye are of this world, I am not of this world; I said therefore unto you, that
ye shall die in your sins.

Phil. 3. 2. Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision.

John. 6. 64. But there are some of you that believe not, for Jesus knew from
the beginning which they were that believed not, and who should betraie him.

Although men must be used after diverse sorts, some by gentleness, and some by
sharpness.

2. Tim. 2. 24. But the servant of the Lord must not strive, but must be
gentle toward all men, apt to teach, suffering the evil men patiently.
Instructing them with meekness, that are contrary minded, proving if God at
any time will give them repentance.

Mat. 3. 7. O generations of vipers, etc.

Esaias. 1. 10. O Princes of Sodom, and people of Gomorrha.

The eight Chapter.
How every man may with profit apply this universal doctrine to himself.
IT is most evident, that they which teach, that man's salvation Justification
by faith is unprofitable, if it be separate from election.
either in part or wholly, depends or is grounded in works, destroy the
foundation of the Gospel of God. And contrariwise, they that teach
Justification freely by faith, ground on a sure foundation, but so, that they
build upon that eternal counsel of God, whereupon Christ himself, and the
Apostle Paul following Christ his steps, groundeth his doctrine. For seeing
perseverance in faith is requisite to salvation, to what purpose shall faith
serve me, except I be sure of the gift of perseverance? Nor we need not fear,
lest Peace of conscience, depends on Predestination.
this doctrine make us negligent or dissolute. For this peace of conscience
whereof we speak, ought to be distinct and separate from foolish security,
and he that is the son of god, seeing he is moved and governed by the spirit of
God, will never through the consideration of Gods benefit, take occasion of
negligence and dissolution. Then if by this doctrine we had but this one
commodity, that we might learn to assure and confirm our faith against all
brunts that might happen, it is manifest, that they which speak against and
resist this artickle of religion, either through their wickedness, or else
through ignorance, or some foolish blind zeal, (which happens when men will
measure God according to the capacity of their own wits) subvert and destroy
the principal ground and foundation of our salvation. And in very deed
although some (as I must confess) do it not purposely, yet do they open
notwithstanding, the door to all superstition and impiety. As for them, which
now adays maliciously oppugn the truth, I beseech the Lord, even from the
heart, either to turn their minds (if so be they appertain to the elect) or
else to send them a most speedy destruction, that by their own example, they
may confirm and establish that doctrine, which so maliciously they resist.
These other, I will desire most instantly, and require them in the name of GOD,
that they would better advise themselves what they do.

Now to touch breefely, how this doctrine may be applied, let us mark that all
the works of GOD, even the least of all, are such, that men cannot judge of
them, but in two sorts. That is, either when they are done, or else by
foreseeing them to come to pass, by the disposition of the second and manifest
causes, whose effects have bin diligently, and by long use observed. As men
accustom in natural things to do, wherein notwithstanding men are wonderfully
blind. In this matter then, which is most obscure of all others, it is no
marvel, if man's wit be driven into this strait, what is determined as
touching himself, in this secret counsel of God. But because these are most
high mysteries, and therefore stand in the observation of those causes which
pass all natural things, we mnst needs seek further and come to Gods word;
which, forasmuch, as without all comparison, it is more certain then man's
conjectures, so it can best direct us herein, and assure us.

The scripture then witnesses, that all those that God How a man may have
assurance of his election.
has according to his counsel predestinate, to be adopted his children
through Jesus Christ, are also called in their time appointed, yea and so
effectually, that they hear the voice of him that calls, and believe it, so
that being justified and sanctified in Jesus Christ, they are also glorified.
Will thou then, whosoever thou art, be assured of thy predestination, and so
in order of thy salvation, which thou look for, against all the assaults of
Satan? Assured I say, not by doubtful conjectures, or our own fancy, but by
arguments and conclusions, no less true and certain, then if thou were
ascended into heaven, and had heard of Gods own mouth, his eternal decree and
purpose? Beware thou begin not at that most high degree, for so thou should
not be able to sustain the most shining light of Gods majesty. Begin
therefore beneath at the lowest order, and when thou shall hear the voice of
god sound in thine ears, and in thy heart, which calls thee to Christ the
only Mediator, consider by little and little, and try By what signs faith is
known
diligently if thou be justified and sanctified in Christ through faith. For
these two be the effects or fruits, whereby the faith is known which is their
cause. As for this, thou shall partly know by the spirit of adoption, which
cries within thee, Abba father; and partly by the virtue and effect of ye same
spirit which is wrought in thee. As if thou fall, and so declare indeed, that
although sin dwell in thee, yet it does no more reign in thee. For is not the
holy Ghost he that causes us not to let slip the bridle, and give liberty
willingly to our naughty and vile concupiscences, as they are accustomed,
whose eyes the prince of this world blinds; or else who moves us to pray
when we are cold and dull, and slothful? Who stirs up in us those
unspeakable gronings? Who is he that when we have sinned (yea and sometimes
wittingly and willingly) ingendereth in us an hate of the sin committed, and
not for the fear of punishment which we have therefore deserved, but because
we have offended our most merciful father? Who is he I say, that testifies
unto us, that our sighings are heard, and also moves us to call daily, God our
God, and our father, even at that time, when we have trespassed against him? Is
it The assurance of the vocation is known by faith, and so by the vocation,
the election.
not that spirit, which is freely given to us as a gift, for a sure and
certain pledge of our adoption? Wherefore if we can gather by these effects,
that we have faith, it follows that we are called, and drawn effecttually.
And again, by this vocation which we have declared properly to belong to the
children of God, that is evidently proved, which we took in hand to show,
that is, forasmuch as we were predestinate by the eternal counsel and decree
of God (the which he had determined in himself) to be adopted in his son,
therefore we were given to him. Whereof the conclusion The confidence to
persevere and to be saved, is sure and certain.
follows, that since by the most constant will of God, which only is
grounded on it self, and depends on none other thing, we are predestinate,
and no man can take us out of the hand of the son: Also seeing that to
continue and persevere in the faith is necessary, it follows I say, that the
hope of our perseueraunce, is certain, and so consequently our salvation, so
that to doubt any more of it, is evil, and wicked. So far then it is
against reason to say, that this doctrine makes men negligent or dissolute,
that contrariwise this alone does open us the way, search out and understand by
the power of the holy Ghost, Gods deep secrets, as the Apostle plainly
teaches, to the end that when we know them (albeit, we know them here in
this world but after a sort, so that we must daily fight with the spiritual
armor against distrust) we may learn to behave our selves not idely, but
rather to persevere valiantly to serve and honor God, to love him, to fear
him, to call upon him, that daily more and more as says Saint Peter, as much as
in us lies, we may make our vocation and election certain. Moreover, how
shall he stand sure and constant against so many grievous temptations, both
within and without, and against so many assaults of fortune (as the world does
term it) that is not well resolved in this point, which is most true; That is,
that God according to his goodwill, does all things whatsoever they be, and
what instruments and means soever he uses in working of the same, for the
commodity of his elect. Of the which number he is, that finds himself The
election only does comfort us in all afflictions.
in this danger and trouble. As touching the other point, which concerns
Reprobation, because no man can call to mind the determinate purpose of
election, but at the same inistant the contrary will come to remembrance,
(besides that in the holy scripture these two are oftentimes joined together)
it must needs be, that such as esteem this part curious or unprofitable, and
therefore not to be talked off, The doctrine of Reprobation, cught not to be
suppressed, neither applied to any particular company, but wisely handled.
do great injury to the spirit of God. Therefore this part is to be waied and
considered, but with such modesty, that the height of gods judgments may at
all times bridle our curious fancies, in such sort, that we do not apply it
particularly to any man, nor to any certain company. For in this also it
differs from election, because election (as has been said) is revealed to us
by the spirit of God within our selves, not in others, whose hearts we cannot
know. And Reprobatiou is ever hid from men, except it be disclosed by God,
contrary to the common course of things. For who can tell, if god have
determined to show mercy at the last hour of death, to him which has spent
all his life past lewdely and wickedly? But this trust ought not to encourage
any man to maintain, and continue in his sin and ungodliness. For I speak
of those things which we ought to consider in others; for the examples of such
mercy of god are very rare, neither any man that is wise, will promise to
himself through a vain security and trust, that thing which is not in his
own power. It is therefore sufficient if we understand generally, that there
be vessels prepared to perdition. The which seeing, God does not reveal unto
us who they are, we ought both in example of life and prayer, diligently
endeavor to win and recover to their salvation, yea even very such, of whom
by seeing their horrible vices, we almost We must labor to win all men.
despair. And if we observe this order, we shall receive great fruit of this
doctrine. For,

First by the knowledge hereof, we shall learn humbly The doctrine of
Reprobation, makes men humble.
to submit our selves to the majesty of God, so that the more we shall fear
and reverence him, the more we ought to labor, to confirm in our selves the
testimony of our election in Christ. It makes the grace of God, to be better
known of the Elect.


Secondly, when we shalldiligently consider the difference, which through the
mercy of God is betwixt men, which are all a like subject to the self same
course and malediction, it cannot be, but we must acknowledge and embrace more
earnestly the singular goodness of GOD, then if we did make this grace common
to all men indifferenly, or else referred the cause of the inequality of this
grace to men. It brings a Godly care.


Thirdly, when we know that faith is an especial gift of God, shall we not
receive it more willingly when it is offered, and be more careful to have the
same to increase, then if we should imagine (as some do) that it is in every
man's power, to turn and repent when he will, because (they say) the Lord would
that all men should be saved, and will not the death of a sinner?

Fourthly, when we see the doctrine of the Gospel not only despised of all the
world, but also cruelly persecuted; It does confirm us, against all offenses.
and when we see so great falsehood and rebellion among men, what thing can
better confirm and fortify us, then to be assured that nothing chances by
fortune, that God knows his, and that they which commit these things (except
GOD turn their hearts) are those which are destinate, not by chance, but by
the sure and eternal counsel of God, to be as it were a glass, wherein the
anger and power of God does appear.

Truth it is, these things can never be so commodiously and perfectly treated
of, that man's reason and wit cannot find out some thing, to reply always to
the contrary, yea and so kindles with desire of contradiction, that it is
ready to bring an action against god, and to accuse and blame him as chief
author of all things. But let the devil roar and discontent himself, and the
wicked kick and winse: yet their own conscience shall reprove and condemn
them, when as ours, being confirmed in the truth, by the grace and mercy of
god, shall deliver and free us in the day of Christ. To whom with the father,
and the holy ghost, praise, glory, and honor be given for ever. So be it.

Notes and proofs.
To ground our righteousness upon works, destroieth the foundation of the
Gospel, but the sure foundation is to be grounded on faith, if faith be builded
upon the eternal counsel of God.

Gal. 2. 21. I do not abrogate the grace of God, for if righteousness be by
the law, then Christ died without a cause.

Romans 10. 4. For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness unto every
one that believes. And chapter 11. 5. 6. Even so then at this present time, is
there a remnant through the election of grace; And if it be of grace, it is no
more of works, or else were grace, no more grace; but if it be of works, it
is no more grace; or else were work no more work.

Ephe. 2. 4. 5. 8. 9. 10. But God which is rich in mercy, through his great
love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead by sins, has quickened
us together in Christ, by whose grace ye are saved. For by grace are ye saved
through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of god. Not of
works, least any man should boast himself. But that we should be careful to
show forth good works, therefore he speaks in the next verse. Verse. 10.
For we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God
has ordained that we should walk in them.

1. Tim. 1. 9. Who has saved us and called us, with an holy calling, not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace which was
given to us through Christ Jesus before the world was.

1. Pet. 2. 12. And have your conversation honest among the gentiles, that they
which speak evil of you as of evil doers, may by your good works which they
shall see, glorifle god in the day of the visitation.

Perseverance in faith, is requisite unto salvation.

Mat. 10. 22. And ye shall be hated of all men, for my name; But he that
endures to to the end, shall be saved.

Mat. 24. 45. Blessed is that servant whom his master shall find so doing.

Now we need not fear, lest this doctrine make us negligent or dissolute. For
this peace of conscience whereof we speak, ought to be distinct and separate,
from foolish security, and he that is the son of God, seeing he is moved and
governed by the spirit of God, will never through the consideration of Gods
benefit, take occasion of negligence and dissolution.

Romans 5. 1. 2. Then being justified by faith, we have peace toward god, through
our Lord Jesus Christ. By whom also we have access through faith, unto this
grace wherein we stand, and rejoice under the hope of the glory of god.

Romans 8. 12. 13. 14. 15. Therefore brethren, we are debtors not to the flesh, to
live after the flesh; For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye
mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit, ye shall live. For as many as are
led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God.

Ephe. 1 4. A^ he has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world,
that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love.

2. Tim. 1. 7. For God has not given to us the spirit of fear, but of power,
and of love, and of a sound mind.

1. John. 3. 20. 21. 24. If our heart condemn us, God is greater then our
hearts, and knows all things. Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then
have we boldness toward God. For he that keeps his commandments, dwells
in him, and he in him. And hereby we know, that he abides in us, even by the
spirit which he has given us.

This matter of Predestination, is obscure above all others, unto the wit of
man, but opened and revealed unto us by the word of God. The Scripture therefore
witnesses, that they that are predestinate unto salvation, are first called,
and that so effectually, that they hear, and believe, and fructify, then
also, are they justified and sanctified, and in the life to come, glorified.

John. 6. 44 45. No man can come unto me, except the father which has sent me,
draw him (by the force of gods word, and by the secret working of his spirit).
And I will raise him up at the last day. As it is written in the Prophets. And
they shall be taught of God. Every man therefore that has heard, and has
learned of the father, comes to me.

Acts. 2. 47. And the Lord added to the Church (by the Apostles preaching) from
day to day, such as should be saved.

John. 10. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. ^ee believe not, for ye are not of my sheep, as
I said unto you. My sheep, hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow
me. And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall ueuer perish, neither
shall any pluck them out of my hand. My father which gave them me, is greater
then all, and none is able to take them out of my fathers hand.

Acts. 13. 48. And when the Gentiles heard it, they were glad, and glorified
the word of the Lord, and as many as were ordained unto eternal life,
believed. And chap. 16. 14. And a certain woman named Lidia, a celler of
purple of the city of the Thyatirians, which worshipped God heard us, whose
heart the Lord opened, that she attended unto the things that Paul spoke.

Hebr. 3. 7. 8. Wherefore as the holy Ghost says; To day if ye shall hear his
voice, harden not your hearts as in the provocation, according to the day of
temptation in the wilderness. And. chapt. 42. For unto us was the Gospel
preached, as also unto them; but the word that they heard, profited not them,
because it was not mixed with faith, in those that heard it.

Consider by little and little, and try diligenly, if thou be justified, and
sanctified in Christ, through faith. For these two be the effects or ftuites,
whereby the faith is known, which is their cause.

2. Cor. 13. 5. Prove your selves whether ye are in the faith, examine your
selves, know ye not your own selves except ye be reprobates.

Romans 8. 30. Moreover, whom he predestinate, them also he called; and whom he
called, them also he justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified.

As for this, thou shall partly know by the spirit of Adopion, which cries
within thee, Abba father.

Gal. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. That he might redeem them which were under the law,
that we might receive the adoption of sons. And because ye are sons, God
has sent forth the spirit of his son into your hearts, which cries, Abba
father: Wherefore thou art no more a servant but a son; Now if thou be a
son, thou art also the heir of GOD, through Christ.

Romans 8. 15. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again,
but ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba father.

And partly, by the virtue, and effect, of the same spirit which is wrought in
thee.

Romans 16. 17. The same spirit, bears witness with our spirit, that we are
the children of God. If we be children, we are also heirs, even the heirs of
god, and heirs annexed with Christ.

1. John. 3. 24. For he that keeps his commandments, dwells in him, and he
in him. And hereby we know that he abides in us, even by the spirit which
he has given us.

The first effect is; As if thou fall, and so declare indeed, that although
sin dwell in thee, yet it does no more reign in thee.

Which matter is sufficiently handled in the whole sixth chapter of the epistle
to the Romans, especially verse 11. 12.

Romans 7. For I allow not that which I do; For what I would, that do I not;
but what I hate, that do I. If I do then that which I would not, I consent to
the law, that it is good. Now then, it is no more I that do it, but the sin
that dwells in me. I delight in the law of GOD, concerning the inner man;
But I see an other law, rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me
captive unto the law of sin. O wretched man that I am!

The second effect of the spirit of God in us, is, that it causes us not to
let slip the bridle, and give liberty willingly, to our naughty and vile
concupiscences.

Hebr. 3. 12. Take heed brethren, least at any time, there be in any of you
an evil heart, and unfaithful, to depart away from the living God.

1. John. 3 8. He that committeh sin, is of the devil; Verse. 9. Whosoever
is borne of God sins not, for his seed remains in him, neither can he
sin, because he is borne of God. Verse. 20. If our heart condemn us, God is
greater then our heart, and so forth.

2 Timothy 2. 19. The foundation of God remains sure, and has this seal; The
Lord knows who are his; And let every one that calls on the name of the
Lord, depart from iniquity.

Ephe. 4 82. Let him that stole, steal no more; And 30. And grieve not the
holy spirit of GOD, by whom ye are sealed unto the day of redemption.

As they are accustomed, whose eyes the prince of this world blinds.

2. Timo. 2. 26. And that they may come to a mendement out of the snare of the
devil, which are taken of him at his will.

Ephe. 2. ^. Being dead, intrespasses and sins, wherein, in time past, ye
walked according to the course of this world, and after the prince that culeth
in the air; even the spirit, that works in the children of disobedience.
And chapter. 4. 17. Walk not as other Gentiles walk, in vanity of their mind,
having their cogitations darkened, and being strangers, from the life of GOD,
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardness of their
heart. Which being past feeling, have given themselu^s unto wantonness, to
work all uncleanness even with greediness. But ye have not so learned
Christ. And Chap. 2. 12. Without Christ, and aliants from the common wealth of
Israel, and strangers from the couenaunts of promise, and have no hope, and
are without God in the world.

Romans 1. 29. Being full of all unrighteousness, fornication, coueteusnesse
wickedness, malitiousnesse.

1. Pet. 4. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. That ye henceforth, should as much time as
remains in ye flesh, live not after the lusts of men, but after the will of
God. For it is sufficient for us, that we have spent the time past of the life,
after the lust of the Gentiles, walking in wantonness, lusts, drunckennesse,
in gluttony, and in abominable idolatries.

Wherein it seems to the^ strange, that ye run not with them unto the same
excess of riot, therefore speak they evil of you, which shall give accounts
to him, that is ready to judge quick and dead.

The third effect of the spirit of God is, that it moves us to pray, when we
are cold and slothful, who stirs up in us unspeakable gronings.

To. 8. 26. 27. Likewise the spirit also helps our infirmities. For we know
not what to pray as we ought, but the spirit it self, makes request for us
with sighs, which cannot be expressed.

The fourth effect is, that when we have sinned, yea and sometimes wittingly
and willingly, it ingendereth in us a hate of the sin committed, and not for
the fear of punishment which we have therefore deserved, but because we have
offended our most merciful father.

Romans 7. 15. I allow not that which I do: for what I would, ye do I not; but
what I hate; ye do I, and so forth as above.

The fifth effect is, that it testifies that our sighings are heard, and also
moves us to call daily, God, our God, and our Father, even at that time when
we have trespassed against him.

Romans 8. 27. But he that searches the hearts, knows what is the meaning of
the spirit: for he makes request for the saints according to the will of God.
And. verse. 15. Ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba
father. And. verse. 32. Who spared not his own son, but gave him for us all
to death: How shall he not with him give us all things also? John. 14. And.
16. 23. 24.

The sixth effect is, that it does assure us of our adoption, because it is
given us as an earnest penny and certain pledge, to the same purpose.

For proof whereof, look for this mark (8) in the margent toward the latter
end of the notes of the sixth chapter.

Wherefore, if we can gather by these effects, that we have faith, it
follows, that we are called and drawn effectually.

Romans 11. 29. For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance.

We are therefore predestinate by the constant will of God, which is grounded
on it self, and depends on none other thing, and no man can take us out of
the hands of the son. Also seeing that to continue, and persevere in the
faith, is necessery; it follows I say, that the hope of our perseverance is
certain, and so consequently, our salvation. So that to doubt any more of it,
is evil and wicked.

Hebre. 6. 17. 18. So, God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of
promise, the stablenesse of his counsel, bound himself by an oath, that by
two immutable things, wherein it is impossible that God should lie, we might
have strong consolation, which have our refuge, to hold fast the hope that is
set before us.

John. 10. 27. 28. 29. 30. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they
follow me. And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any pluck them out of mine hand. My father which gave them me,
is greater then all, and none is able to take them out of my fathers hand.

1. John. 3. 9. Whosoever is borne of God, sins not, for his seed remains
in him: neither can he sin, because he is borne of God. And therefore
perseuereth and endures to the end.

John. 3. 33. He that has received his testimony, has sealed, that God is
true.

Romans 4. 20. 21. Neither did Abraham doubt of the promise of God through
unbelief, but was strengthened in the faith, and gave glory to God. Being fully
assured, that he which had promised, was also able to do it.

Ephe. 3. 11. 12. According to the eternal purpose, which he wrought in Christ
Jesus our Lord. By whom we have boldness and entrance, with confidence by
faith in him.

1. These. 5. 24. Faithful is he which calls you, which will also do it.

Hebr. 10. 23. Let us keep the profession of our hope, without wavering (for
he is faithful that promised.)

Romans 8. 38. 39. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels,
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. And therefore, I cannot,
nor I may not, doubt of my salvation.

So far then it is against reason, to say that this doctrine makes men
negligent, or dissolute, that contrariwise this alone does open us the way, to
search out and understand by the power of the holy Ghost, Gods deep secrets.

1. Cor. 2. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. The things which eye has not seen, neither
ear has heard, neither came into man's heart, are, which God has prepared for
them that love him. But God has revealed them unto us by his spirit. For the
spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God. For what man knows
the things of a man, save the spirit of a man which is in him? Even so the
things of God, knows no man, but the spirit of God. Now we have received not
the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God, that we might know the
things that are given to us of God.

It makes us painful in good works.

Ephe. 2. 10. For we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, which God has ordained that we should walk in them.

1. John. 3. 24. For he that keeps his commandments dwells in him, and he
in him, and thereby we know, that he abides in us, even by the spirit that he
has given us.

Gal. 5. 17. For the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against
the flesh, and these are contrary one to the other, so that we cannot do the
same things that we would. Knowing this infirmity to be in us, it stirs us
to good works. And chap. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. Be not deceined, God is not
mocked; For whatsoever a man sows, that also shall he reap. For he that
sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption. And he that sows to
the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting.

Romans 6. 1. What shall we say then? Shall we continue still in sin, that grace
may abound? God forbid.

Hebr. 10. 24. And let vsconsider one an other, to provoke unto love and to
good works.

Iam. 3. 17. The wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then pe^^eable,
gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good works, without judging,
and without hypocrisy.

It makes us invincible against all temptations and vexations. For how shall
he stand sure and constant against so many grievous temptations both within and
without, and against so many assaults of fortune (as the world does term it)
that is not well resolved in this point of Gods predestination toward him, and
of his election in Christ.

Job. 13. 15. Lo though he slaie me, yet will I trust in him.

Romans 8. 28. Also we know that all things work together for the best unto them
that love God, even to them that are called of his purpose. Verse. 31. What
shall we then say to these things? If God be on our side, who can be against
us? Verse. 35. 37. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall
tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or
sword? In all which things we are more then conquerours, through him that loved
us.

John. 16. 33. Marvel not though the world hate you. In the world ye shall
have affliction, but in me ye shall have peace. Be of good comfort, I have
chosen you out of ye world, and none shall take you out of my hands.

Romans 15. 3. Through Christ we rejoice in tribulations, that we may say with
the Apostle; We are persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but we perish not.

Ia. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. My brethren, count it exceeding joy when ye fall into
diverse temptations, knowing that the trying of your faith, brings forth
patience. And let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and
entire, lacking nothing.

Of the which number of the elect, he is, that finds himself in this danger
and trouble.

Romans 8. 16. 17. 18. The same spirit, bears witness with our spirit, that we
are the children of God. If we be children, we are also heirs, even the heirs
of God, and heirs annexed with Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that
we may also be glorified with him. For I count that the afflictions of this
present time, are not worthy of the glory which shall be showed unto us.

Luke. 23. 43. Jesus said to the thief on the cross; Verily I say unto thee;
To day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

This part is to be considered and weighed, and that with great modesty,
principally in these

two considerations;
First, that the height of Gods judgments may at all times bridle our curious
fancies. Secondly, that we do not apply it to any man particularly, or any
certain company.
For the first, let it be sufficient that we understand generally, that there
be vessels prepared by Gods judgment and appointed to destruction. The which,
seeing God does not reveal unto us, who they are, we ought both in example of
life and prayer, diligently to endeavor to win and recover to their
salvation, yea even very such, of whom by seeing their horible vices, we almost
despair.

Mat. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your father which is in heaven.

1. Pet. 2. 12. Have your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that they
which speak evil of you as of evil dooers, may by your good works which they
shall see, glorify God in the day of the visitation. And chap. 3. 15. 16.
Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to give an answer
to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you. And that with
meekness and reverence, having a good conscience, that when they speak evil
of you as of evil dooers, they may be ashamed which blame your good
conversation in Christ.

1. Cor. 9. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. For though I be free from all men, yet have
I made my self servant unto all men, that I might win the more. And unto the
Jews I become as a Jew, that I may win the Jews; to them that are under
the law, as though I were under the law, that I may win them that are under
the law; to them that are without the law, as though I were without the law,
(when I am not without the law as pertaining to God, but am in the law
through Christ) that I may win them that are without the law; to the weak,
I become as weak, that I may win the weak. I am made all things to all men,
that I might by all means save some. And this I do for the Gospel sake.

Romans 1. 14. I am debtor both to the Grecians and to the Barbarians, both to
the wise men and unto the unwise.

Philip. 2. 12. 13. Make an end of your own salvation with fear and
trembling, (lest that through the deceit of sin ye should fall away, or else
lest ye be any offense to the weak) For it is God that works in you both the
will the deed, even of his good pleasure.

Concerning the second, that we do not apply this doctrine to any man
particularly, or to any certain company. For in this also it differs from
election; Because election (as has been said) is revealed to us by the spirit
of God, within our selves, not in others, whose hearts we cannot know. And
Reprobation is ever hid from men, except it be disclosed by God, contrary to
the common course of things. For who can tell, if God have determined to show
mercy at the last hour of death, to him which has spent all his life past,
lewdly and wickedly. But this trust ought not to encourage any man, to
maintain and continue in his sin and ungodliness. For I speak of those
things which we ought to consider in others. For the examples of such mercy of
God, are very rare. Neither any man that is wise, will promise to himself,
through a vain security and trust, that thing which is not in his own power.

Iam. 4. 13. 14. 15. 16. Go too now, ye that say; To day or to morrow, we
will go into such a city, and continue there a year, and buy and sell, and
get gain. And yet ye cannot tell what shall be to morrow. For what is your
life? It is even a vapor that appears for a little time, and afterward vanish
away. For that ye ought to say; If the Lord will, and if we live, we will do
this or that.

Now if we cannot promise the continuance of life, unto our selves, how much
less may we assure our selves of Gods mercy at our pleasure.

Luke. 12. 19. 20. The rich man said unto his soul; Soul, thou have much good
lain up for many years, live, take ease, eat, drink, and take thy pastime.
But God said unto him; O fool, this night will they setch away thy soul from
thee.

2. Tim. 2. 25. The minister is willed to instruct the evil disposed, with
meekness, and such as are contrary minded, proving if GOD at any time will
give them repentance. Therefore repentance is not at our pleasure, or leisure.

1. Pe. 1. 14. 15. 16 17. 18. 19. Fashioning not your selves unto the former
lusts of your ignorance. But as he which has called you is holy, so be ye
holy in all manner of conversation. And if ye call him father, which without
respect of persons, judges according to every man's work, pass the time of
your dwelling here in fear. Knowing that ye were not redeemed with silver
and gold, and such corruptible things.

Hebr. 12. 14. Follow peace with all men and holiness, without the which, no
man shall see the Lord.

And if we observe this order, we shall receive great fruit of this doctrine,
especially in these four considerations.

First, it makes men humble, and to submit themselves to God. Secondly, it
makes the grace of God, to be better known of the elect, seeing it is not
common to all. Thirdly, it brings a godly care, to receive faith when it is
offered, and to labor to increase it. Fourthly, it does confirm us against
all offenses. All which reasons, are more plainly set down in the last part of
this eight chapter.
Deo gratia.
A Prayer for the Queens most excellent Majesty.
O Most gracious God and heavenly Father, by whose disposition, Kingdoms and
Kealmes are governed, and by whose power Kings and Princes reign; we give thee
hearty thanks, that in thy great mercy, thou have set such a Prince and Queen
over us, under whose godly and peaceable government, we enjoy glad tidings of
thy Gospel, and the truth of thy word, in manifest sort delivered unto us,
with peace and quietness, and other worldly great blessings of thine, in a
plentiful measure. Endue her so with heavenly gifts, that her heart may be
always framed to the obedience of thy will, that by her godly and gracious
government, thy name may be glorified, thy Church edified, the poor members of
Christ relieved, virtue advanced, and vice beaten down and punished; that so
in wealth she may surpass that prosperity y^ was in the days of King
Solomon, and that in life and health, she may so be preserved long among us, to
thy glory, and our comfort; that the years of her royal fathers government,
may be doubled upon her. And although we for our parts have and do daily
provoke thy wrath against us, and have worthily in respect of thy blessings,
deserved the contrary; as for the heavenly vlessings of thy Gospel and truth,
ignorance, idolatry, and superstition; for wealth and prosperity, penury, and
scarcity; for peace and quietness, troubles and wars; for our health, and
the continuance of our life, diseases and death: yet in thy mercy be favorable
unto us, mollify our hard and stony hearts, that we may repent; mortify
sin in us, that there may be seen amendment in our lives and conversation;
that we may yield our souls and bodies to the obedience of thy blessed will
and commandments, whereby thy manifold and good blessings and benefits may be
both increased and continued toward us. That the heavens may send down their
rain, that the earth may give forth her plentiful increase; that our garners
may be full and plenteous with all manner of store; that our sheep may bring
forth thousands; that our oxen may be strong to labor; that there be no
decaie, no leading into captivity, and no complaining in our streets; wherein
we shall be blessed, who have the Lord for our God. As for her enemies who
seek her destruction, let them fall into the pit, that they have dug for
others; and let their own shame light upon them. And let thy crown flourish
upon her head, whom thou have anointed, that in the maintenance of thy truth
and of thy people, it may be known, that though the heathen rage so furiously
together, and the Kings of the earth stand up in arms against thee and against
thine anointed; that thou breakest the bow, and knappest the spear in
pieces; that thou art able to turn the swords of her enemies, to murder
themselves. And though the horse be prepared unto the battle, yet the
victory is from thee, who can mightily confound her foes, and put a hook in
their nosthrilles, and turn them back the same way they came. The strange
deliverances which thou have wrought in her behalf, both from the secret and
malicious conspiracies, treasons, and trecheries, of unnatural subjects, and
from the savage cruelties of foreign foes, do give sufficient cause, not only
to us, but even to the enemy also to say; That there is no God that can
deliver after this sort, but only the Almighty that has established her.
All these benefits O Lord, we confess do proceed from thy goodness, and
from thy mercy toward us. To thee belongs praise, and honor, and power, but
to us shame and confusion. Yet grant unto us good Lord, that we may both
receive these thy benifits thankfully, and that we may perform our duties
accordingly. Increase her days, continue her government, defend her from her
enemies, keep her in thy fear, and after this life, grant her all happiness,
even to rule and reign with thee for ever, among the blessed souls. Grant
also to us that we may have the benifit of thy truth and Gospel long among us,
and that thy blessings of peace and prosperity may be seen in this land. So
shall we be bound more and more to praise and magnify thy name, for thy great
and infinite goodness toward us For her Maiesrie, and for us thy servants and
her faithful subjects, thus we conclude our prayers. O Lord bless and keep us;
O Lord make thy face to shine upon us, and be merciful unto us; O Lord lift
thou up thy countenance upon us, and give us thy peace. All which benifits and
blessings, we beg of thee, O heavenly Father, for Jesus Christ his sake, in
that form of prater which he himself has taught us, saying; Our Father, etc.

A secret Meditation to God, before the delivery of the word.
LEt the words of my mouth O Lord, and the meditation of my heart, be always
acceptable in thy sight. Set thou a watch before my mouth, and so keep the
door of my lips, that speaking before this congregation assembled here in
thy holy name, I may specially entreat of those things, which tend to thy
glory, the good of thy Church, the discharge of my duty, the comfort of the
afflicted conscience, the euerthrow of sin, and the advancement of virtue,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. So be it.

I. D.

A publque form of Prayer.
O Most mighty God, most gracious and merciful father, we stand before thy
majesty, defiled with the filthiness of many and most grievous sins,
whereof we confess we are not able to answer thee one of a thousand, if thou
O Lord should enter into judgment with us. For in sin were we conceived
and borne, and therefore are guilty of original corruption: and in sin have
we lived and continued, and therefore stand guilty of actual transgression:
which has broken forth upon us in thought, word, and deed, from time to
time continually, even unto this present. Wherefore we humbly crave thy mercy,
and the grace of forgiveness in Jesus Christ, for therein we confess,
stands the only hope of our comfort and welfare. And forasmuch as it has
pleased thee to give thine own son to be a flaine sacrifice for our sins,
and to offer the grace of reconciliation, by the preaching of the Gospel to
all them that repent and believe the same: good Lord we beseech thee, vouchsafe
to make us of that blessed number, work true repentance in our hearts,
increase our faith, and give us grare to bring forth the fruits thereof, that
so it may appear, that we have not received thy holy grace in vain. And for
this purpose, good Lord we beseech thee, bless the Ministry of thy word, at
this present, gius me grace to speak it, as it ought to be spoken, sincerely
and boldly: give grace to this people to he are it attentively and reverently:
give grace to us all to believe it steadfastly, to follow it obediently, and
constantly to continue even to the end. That serving thee faithfully in this
life, we may live and reign with thee for ever in the life to come, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
The Prayer which M. Deering used before his Lectures.
O Lord God, which have left unto us thy holy word, to be a lantern unto our
feet, and a light unto our steps, give unto us all, thy holy spirit, that
out of the same word, we may learn, what is thy eternal will, and frame our
lives in all obedience to the same, to thy honor and glory, and increase of
our faith, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
An excellent speech of M. Deering, a little before his death; whereby thou
may clearly see and learn, that there is a sweet peace in death, to all
such as painfully serve the Lord in life. For he being raised up in bed, and
his friend requesting him to speak, the Sun shone on his face, and thereby
took occasion thus to say:
THere is but one Sun that gives light to the world, there is but one
righteousness, there is but one communion of Saints. If I were the
excellentest creature in the world, If I were as righteous as Abraham, Isaac,
and Sa^ob, (for they were excellent men in the world) yet we must all confess
that we are great sinners, and that there ^^^o salvation but in the
righteousness of Jesus Christ. And we have all need of the grace of God. And
for my part, as concerning death, I feel such joy of spirit, that if I should
have the sentence of life on the one side, and the sentence of death on the
other side, I had rather choose a thousand times (seeing God has appointed the
separation) the sentence of death, then the sentence of life.

Soli Deo laus and gloria and gratia.
IN every Sermon for the most part, these points are to be used. The
declaration of the order of the text, by opening the circumstances. The
division. The doctrine. The confutation. The use and application. Exhortation,
or reprehension, or both. The Conclusion, wherein the cheifest matters must be
remembered and briefly collected, that the auditorie may the better keep and
carry away those things, which are necessary and for their use. All which,
although I have not used, I have left the matter to the discretion of them,
that shall have knowledge better to handle their matters, then I have handled
mine. Let thy text be applied to thy auditorie, and have care to utter those
things that are most weighty to be touched, and of thy auditorie to be
remembered. Be circumspect, wise, and discreet. Endeavor to be brief and
pithie.

There is an other Method as profitable, which Master Vdall uses in his
Commentary upon the Lamentations of Jeremy; Consisting on these three points:

the
Doctrine. Reason. Use.
Some only learn for knowledge sake,
but that is curiosity:
And some for praise, great pains do take,
but that is foolish vanity.
Some learn for gain, but lightly those,
do leave the text, and use the gloze.
But learning joined, with virtues lore,
does lead to Christianity:
The glory of God, and people taught,
the way is to eternity.
To the Right Worshipful, and one of great account, Master Rowland Barker
Esquire, Justice of peace and quorum, in the County of Salop: S. I. wishes
the blessings of God in this life, and the joys of that which is to come.
RIght Worshipful, I cannot write unto you but as unto a stranger; yet such a
stranger, in whom I have perceived great good will and kindness toward me. So
that I may resolve with my self, to make account of you, as of my friend;
whereof I have some trial, in that you have given a great token, in the
preferment of my sister, for the which, both she and I am bound to give you
hearty thanks. And yet great reason there is, that you should be strange,
because as yet I have showed no duty, whereby I might in some sort, warrant my
self of your favor and friendship. The godly mind wherewith Gods spirit no
doubt has endued you, may be some cause, to procure your favor toward me, if
it were but for my profession sake. And so much the more, because you carry a
name in Shropshire to be a great favorer of the Gospel, and if I should add
the peoples report, of a good Iusticer, I might be judged to flatter. And yet
there is no cause. For where the word of God has taken deep root, there of
necessity follows all uprightness, both in life and office. To procure your
Worships good will toward me, I have at this time, though boldly, offered unto
your view, some part of my labor, which as you like it, so I hope you will
accept it, and your good liking shall give it both countenance and credit
enough. And seeing your credit is great in the furtherance of the Gospel, so I
would humbly request you, to promote and further the same more and more, to the
utmost of your power. Though it be my request, yet is it Gods cause and his
glory, which may both stir you up, and also encourage you, who need not my
persuasion, being forward enough of your own disposition and good nature.
Doubtless, God woorketh excellently in notable men, at whose hands he
requires worthy matters, even at the hands of famous men, and men of
renown. Whom he has greatly advanced, furthered and furnished unto such
works. And unto whom much is given, of them also shall much be required.
King David would have built a Temple unto the Lord God of Israel, but God
appointed his son King Solomon to do it. Many Kings in Judah, yet none but
Hezekiah caused the brazen Serpent to be pulled down, and GOD wrought with
him, and he prospered and flourished, and God sent him a miraculous and famous
deliverance, from the hands of his enemies. Josiah was famous for Religion,
and none more zealous; the solemn keeping of the Passover, that was in his
days, does declare it. King Cyrus he is appointed of God, to deliver the
Jews, from their captivity and thraldom. Many Heathen Kings there were in
the world, yet it pleased God that his glory should be set forth by none so
much, as by King Nabuchodonosor, who wondrously set forth the praises of God;
was a notable mean to deface idolatry; that God only might be truly
served. And although notable men, be not all Kings, yet under Kings, great
matters are committed unto them, and they are rulers under Princes, and in the
places where GOD has seated them, he does give them honor as is meet for
them, and agreeable to their estate. Especially he crowns them with honor,
which honor him. What work more notable, then the preaching of the Gospel?
and that the Nobility, and also Gentlemen of good calling and credit, might
see it performed, in the places where they dwell, and about them. I would to
God the reverend Fathers of the land, of whom the Prince makes choice, as of
notable men, and men of renown, had that care as Bishop Hooper, and Bishop
Latimer had, to see the people taught and instructed in every parish
throughout their Diocese, and I doubt not but that they have the selfsame
care, howsoever oftentimes it falls out otherwise, contrary to their wills.
Most gentlemen are set against it, because they know not the worthiness of it,
as also the glittering show of this deceivable world, has utterly blinded
the^, together with their corrupt affections, which are so far from correction
or amendment, that they cannot abide to hear any reproof, or counsel, or so
much as to acknowledge their fault, and therefore co^seque^tly, notable men they
must needs be, that favor it. Who in so doing, procure unto themselves the
favor of God, and the hearts and good reports of men, whis is a great honor,
that God does crown them withal. May I not write unto your Worship, as I
read in the Revelation, chapter 3. 11. is written to every Christian. Behold I
come shortly, hold that which thou have, that no man take thy Crown. And
again, verse 21. To him that overcomes (and continues) will I grant to sit
with me in my throne. I have been too tedious, and here I must stay, and so I
humbly take my leave; praying your Woorship to remember my humblesute, I have
made unto you, (not long since) so far forth as conveniently you may, neither
is it reason, we should press upon you too far. Wherein if you vouchsafe to
pleasure us, we shall all of us be bound to pray to God, for your prosperous
estate; and that you may live long, to Gods glory, your own comfort and
contentment, to the joy of your friends, and admiration of your enemies.

Your Worships in his prayers to God, for you and yours. S. I.

A Pattern of Sanctification.
Titus. 2. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. For the grace of God that brings salvation
unto all men, has appeared. And teaches us that we should deny ungodliness
and wordly lusts, and that we should live soberly, and righteously, and godly,
in this present world. Looking for the blessed hope, and appearing of the glory
of the mighty God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ. Who gave himself for us,
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar
people unto himself, zealous of goodworkes.
This text stands on four parts.
1 A general proposition. The grace of God has appeared unto all. 2 The
effect of this grace, consisting in Sanctification, which has two parts.
Mortification. And teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts.
Vivification. And that we should live, soberly, and righteously, and godly.
3 A persuasion unto this Sanctification. Looking for the blessed hope, and
appearing of our Lord and Savior. 4 The cause of this Sanctification, which is
Christ. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us.
THe Apostle writing to the Corinthians of this grace of God, which is nothing
else but his favor, his mercy, and loving kindness, whereby we are freely
beloved by ye means of Jesus Christ, calls this grace, the wisdom of God,
and calls it also a mystery. Well may it be called the wisdom of God, both
in respect of God himself, who intends and performs nothing, but that
which is wondrous wise; and also in respect of us, who cannot enter into the
depth of Gods counsels, nor any way of our selves, can we attane unto the
knowledge of his works, it may also well be termed a mystery; For flesh and
blood cannot conceive the things which are of God, which only are known and
perceived by the spirit of God. We speak wisdom among them that are perfect,
not the wisdom of this world, neither of the princes of this world, which come
to naught. But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hid wisdom,
which God had determined before the world unto our glory. Which none of the
princes of this world has known; For had they known, it they would not have
crucified the Lord of glory. When our first parents had offended, thy hid
themselves from God, because this grace and mercy was hid from the^, until God
revealed it unto them, saying: The seed of ye woman should break the serpents
head. This grace of God is hid from the wise, who makes account to be saved by
their works, and who also are puffed up with the same conceit of their own
wisdom. For the Scribes and the Pharisees, and the Doctors of the law,
refused, yea, and condemned the grace of God to them offered. From whom the
grace of God was hid, who had eyes to see and would not see it. According as we
read in the 9. tha* of ye gospel after S. Ioh. V. 41. If ye were blind, says
our Savior Christ to ye Pharisees, ye should not have sin; but now ye say we
see, therefore your sin remains. Which is the just judgment of God upon
those ye are wilfully blind, and will not be partaker, either of ye grace of
god, or of their own salvation. Ioh. 9. 39. I am come says Christ, unto
judgment into this world, ye they which see not, might see, and that they
which see, might be made blind. Indeed this grace of god is offered unto al,
but few there be y^ do receive it, and therefore few shall be saved. Yet so ye
this matter comes to pass through their own fault, and the whole world is
left without excuse, and they especially, who have eyes to see, and see not, or
rather will not see, whose damnation in time to come will be most just. But how
has this grace of God appeared? It has appeared not only when men least
looked for it, but also in such a time, when it might do most good, and when
it might best be accepted. As if Christians being under the Turkish slavery
might be set free, when as they looked for nothing but perpetual misery, and
in the time of most cruel extremity; or as if one lying in a dangerous
sickness, looking for nothing but death, should have remedy eue^ then, when al
hope were past; or as one being taken of the enemy and presently to be slain,
and yet should be rescued and set free. And what greater slavery then ye
thraldom of ye diuill? and what greater death, then ye death of y^ soul? and
what greaenemy, then he whose hatred never ends? Yet such is the mercy of
god, y^ when we have deserved death and damnation, he comes with these glad
tidings; Repent and amend, for the kingdom of God is at hand. The Angels sing
it, Luke 2. 14. Glory be to God in the high heavens, and peace in earth, and
toward men good will. Hereunto do all ye prophets witness, as says ye Apostle
S. Peter, preaching unto Cornelius. Act. 10. That through the name of Christ,
all that believe in him should receive forgiveness of sins. Yea our savior
Christ appeared unto ye Apostle S Paul from heaven, as we read, Act. 26.
Sending hun forth to open ye eyes of ye people, y^ they might return from
darkness to light, and from y^ power of satan unto god, y^ they might receive
forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them y^ are sanctified by faith.
Which thing he witnessed most earnestly unto ye Ephesians. Act. 20. 18. Ye know
says he, from the first day that I came into Asia, after what manner I have bin
with you at all seasons, serving ye Lord with all modesty, and with many tears
and tentations, which came unto me by the laying await of the Jews. And how I
kept back nothing that was profitable, but have showed you and taught you
openly, and throughout every house. Witnessing both to ye Jews and to the
Grecians, meaning thereby all sorts of people, repentance toward God, and faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Yea he is very careful y^ this grace of God
might be preached unto all, to their bettering, and to their profit, in that
he warns Timothy, and by him all other ministers, preachers, and teachers,
counsailing him and them, to instruct with meekness them that are contrary
minded, proving, if at any time they may receive this grace. And that they may
come to amendment out of the snare of the devil, which are taken of him at his
will. Tit 3. 3. We our selves also, says the Apostle, were in times past,
unwise, disobedient, deceived, serving the lusts, and diverse pleasures, living
in maliciousness and envy, hateful, and hating one an other. But when the
bountifulness and love of God our Savior, toward man apreared, not by the
works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he
saved us, by the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost.
Which he shead on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our savior; that we
being justified by his grace, should be made heirs according to the hope of
eternal life. Without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness,
which is, God is manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of
Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received up
in glory. Which mystery, although it lay in the beginning of the world, as hid
and unknown, yet now is revealed, and has appeared, and this saving health
has now showed it self, and the grace of God which brings salvation unto
all, has been made manifest unto all. That which was foretold by the prophets
and holy men, and was revealed but to a few, has appeared as glorious, as ye
sun in his brightness, whose beams are spread over the world, this great
grace has been, and must be, preached to all nations, and to the end of the
world is like to be offered unto all. It appears unto all, yet all ^^ not
receive it. Christ came to save sinners, and his mer^^^^ preached unto them,
they are negligent, wilful, and (...), they make little or no account, and
only the repentent, they are partakers of this grace. For this is the
condemnation of the world, that light being come into the world, men loved
darkness rather then light, because in the works of darkness, all their
delight was set. And how can this grace being offered, take any place in our
hearts, before we have remorce of our wicked ways; before we feel and
perceive the greeuousnesse of our sins; and have a desire to leave and
forsake them, before we hunger and thirst for this grace? This is even ye light
of the world, which did shine abroad, and yet the world knew it not, Christ
came unto his own, and his own received him not. Oh how secret are God his
judgments, that his grace is hid from some, and appears unto other! And yet
how is this grace hid? But from them, that make more account of their
pleasures and fulfilling of their lusts, who make more account of their wealth
and riches (as it is set down in the parable of the seed cast in the earth)
then they do of this grace, yea, of this rich grace, who cleave unto the world,
and love the world more then God. In whose minds and hearts, the God of this
world, that is to say, the diuil, does reign by his temptations. As the
Apostle witnesses, writing to the Corinthians. 2. Cor. 4. 4. If our gospel,
and if this grace of God be hid, it is hid to them that are lost. In whom, the
God of this world has blinded the minds, that the light of the glorious
gospel of Christ, should not shine unto them. And as the world knew him not,
and his own people to whom he was sent, received him not, so as many as did
receive him, to them he gave power to be the sons of God, even to them that
believe in his name, and so are partakers of his grace. Which are borne not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. Which
grace, although it has bine a mystery, hid since the world began, and from
all ages, yet now is made manifest to his saints, to his beloved, and those
that do receive him. To whom God would make known, what is the riches of this
glorious mystery among the gentiles; which riches is Christ, the hope of glory,
in every one of us that are saved. Whom we preach says the Apostle,
admonishing every one, and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may
present every man perfect in Christ Jesus, and that every one may be capable of
this grace. For God that commanded the light to shine out of darkness, is
he, which has shined in our hearts, to give the light of ye knowledge of the
glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ, and has sent us forth to preach,
that this his grace, may every where appear. Which does appear and show it
self to all, but so, that the repentant sinners, the faithful believers, and
those only that are made righteous in Christ, do receive ye same. Who as by
this grace they are received into the favor of God, their sins being
forgiven them, so are they not in any sort to take a liberty unto themselves
to sin again. The law entered hereupon, that the offense should abound and
be made notorious, nevertheless where sin abounded, their grace abounded
much more. That as sin had reigned unto death, so might grace also reign by
righteousness unto eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. What shall we
say then? Shall we continue still in sin, y^ grace may abound? God forbid.
How shall we y^ are dead to sin, live yet therein? After the Apostle had
showed, that by grace and the mercy of god we were saved, freely beloved,
freely justified and made righteous, he shows also how we are sanctified,
and that is by practisiing all good works, and so continning in this grace. As
we read. Tit. 3. 8. This is a true saying, and these things I will thou
should affirm and teach, that they which have believed in god, might be
careful to show forth gods works. The good spirit of god, and his grace, it
teaches us, how we should be sanctified, and that is, by denieng all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and also by living soverly, and righteously,
and godly, in this present world. They who believe, are also justified and made
righteous; and they who are justified, y^ is, made righteous, are also
sanctified and made holy. This work therefore of sanctification, proceeding
from the grace of god, is lively expressed in this text which I have read unto
you. And so much for the general proposition; The grace of God has appeared
unto (...). Unto this general proposition, may be added three other principal
parts of this text. As first, what is the effct of this Diuisic^.
grace, that is sanctification; and wherein this sanctification consists,
which is mortification, and vivification, or y^ I may use more plain and
evident terms, in utterly foresaking the lusts of our flesh, and our own will
and desires, and embracing all ye is good, and leading a life agreeable to God
his will. Which part is set down in these words, and teaches us to deny
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and y^ we should live soberly, and
righteously, and godly, in this present world. The second part, is a persuasion
and reason, moving us to this sanctification, and that is, the glorious
inheritance of ye kingdom of god, set down by ye circumstance of Christ his
coming. At which time, the godly shall be received in to the kingdom of god;
in these words, looking for the blessed hope, and appearing of ye glory of the
mighty god, and of our savior Jesus Christ. The third part, sets down the
cause of this sanctification, and y^ is Christ, who has redeemed and purged us
to his purpose; y^ we might perform all good works, in these words; Who gave
himself for us, y^ he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us to be
a peculiar people unto himself, zealous of good works. The grace of god has
appeared unto all, and teaches us. In the life of man there are two teachers.
There is the wicked spirit of the diuil, being accompanied The e^fect of this
grace.
with our be ^ra^eng flesh, and ye naughty examples, and wicked (...) of ye
world, and this teacher moves us to all (...) and worldly lu^ts which fight
against ye soul; and this (...) has an (...) multitude of scholars. The
other teacher is ye spirit of God, ye grace of God, which has but a few
followers, because y^ few embrace the godly (...) Mortification.
which (...). Of which distinction, I might (...) stand on and bring (...)
matter of godly edifieng, but I leave (...). The grace of God teaches us how
far heretofore we have gone astray, and opens unto us how lo^t (...) but
^aies have been, wherein we have so ^elighted, and how greatly we have
offended GOD. Whereas otherwise the eyes of our understanding are shut up, and
we together with the world and wicked company, are carried away. And first it
shows us how greatly we have offended concerning religion and the service of
God, mentioned in these words; Teaching us to deny vngodtinesse, which has
respect to that duty we owe unto God, comprehended in the four first
commandments. God has created us to serve and to worship him, and to come to
the knowledge of his will, as he has appeinted us in the fourth commandment,
to keep holy the Sabbath day, and therein Profane.
to hear and meditate in his word. But few there are that have this care, as
they ought to have, nay, are there not many that say in their hearts; Let God
depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of his ways. Job. 21. Who is
the Almighty that we should serve him, and what profit shall we have, if we
pray unto him? They that have no inward taste and feeling of Gods benefits, and
from whence all goodness comes, but are puffed up with the conceit of their
wealth and worldly helps, they carry this ungodly mind, as though they had it
not from Gods hand. Haus not I built this house, for the honor of my majesty
says Nabuchodonosor? Who is the Lord, says King Pharao, Exodus 5. 2. that I
should hear his voice? I know not the Lord. Again, some perceiving that their
prayers are not presently heard, grow to this ungodliness as to say; What
profit shall we have, if we pray unto him? Certain it is that God does not
hear all requests, but those that are agreeable to his will. And therefore
the Apostle S. James does well take them up. Ye ask says he, and receive
not, because ye ask amiss, that ye might consume it on your lusts. The
Prophet David also puts in this eaueat; That the Lord does only hear the
prayer ^ and requests of them that fear him. Some thinking y^ there is no
resurrection, give over the mselues to all ungodliness* and (...) ^^^^nesse.
Wisd. 2. As the wise man utters their speech^^* The (...) godly say, as they
falsely imagine with themselves, Our life is short and tedious, and in the death
of a man there is no recovery, neither was any known, that has returned from
the grave. For we are borne at all adventure, and we shall be hereafter as
though we had never been. The breath is a smoke in our nosthrils, and the
words as a spark raised out of our heart, which being extinguished, the
body is turned into ashes, and the spirit vanishes as the soft air. Our
life shall pass away like the trace of a cloud, and come to naught as the
mist that is driven away with the beams of the Sun. Our name also shall be
forgotten in time, and no man shall have our works in remembrance. Our time
passes away as a shaddowe. Come therefore, and let us enjoy the pleasures that
are present; Let us fill our selves with costly wine and ointment, and let not
the flower of life and youth pass by us. Let us crown our selves with rose
buddes, before they be withered. Let us be partakers of our wantonness, and let
us leave some token of our pleasure in every place. For that is our portion,
and this is our lot. Let us oppress the poor that is righteous. Let us not
spare the widow, nor reverence the white hairs of the aged, that have lived
many years. Let our strength be the law of unrighteousness. Concerning the
latter day of judgment, this ungodliness shall be in the mind of many, that
they shall think there is no such day, nor no such time. 2. Pet. 3. 3. This
first understand, that there shall come in the last days mockers, which will
walk after their lusts, and say; Where is the promise of his coming? For
since the Fathers died, all things continue alike, from the beginning of the
creation. For this they willingly know not, that the heavens and earth are
reserved unto fire, against the day of judgment, and of the destruction of
ungodly men. No god, no heaven, no judgment, no hell. This is the mind of
many. If any thing fall out amiss with us, if any cross or affliction come
upon us, we are ready with Iobes wife to murmr against God; If the world
go well with us, and if we be in prosperity, we attribute all our welfare not
to Gods good blessing, but to blind fortune and chance. If our enemies do
hurt us, and do us any wrong and injury, we are stirred up and inflamed as it
were in a rage, to revenge it to the utmost. This ungodliness is rife in the
world and rules in our corrupt nature. But the grace of God does teach us, and
persuade our hearts, to deny this and all other kind of ungodliness, and to
have a reverent opinion of all matters which concern God and godliness.

The grace of God, it teaches, that there is no heavenly gift where with we
are endued, but comes of God, who is the fountain, from whence godliness,
learning, wisdom, and all other excellent gifts do flow. When Gods outward
blessings be in abundance with us, by his grace we know, that his providence
does enrich us, and not our labor, our wisdom, or wealth, but the bountiful
hand of God which is all in all. Whereby we are persuaded to love and fear
God, to have a reverent regard of him, to make our prayers unto him, seeing all
our welfare and good estate depends on his blessings. Whereas being void of
Gods grace, and wanting his holy spirit to direct us and our thoughts, with
king Pharao, we ask who is God? and with the wicked sort, we say; What profit
shall we have, if we serve him, and pray unto him, because our unlawful and
ungodly requests, be not granted us. Being thoroughly instructed by Gods spirit,
we then learn that there is no mean so effectual to make God our friend as
prayer is, especially if it be well and rightly used as it ought to be. And
when the fear of God, by his grace is planted in our hearts, then begin we to
know, that there is a heaven, and the joys of heaven reserved for those that
do well; and hell and grievous torments, prepared for them that follow evil
ways, and are delighted with doing evil. And when we know and are taught by
Gods spirit, that all, both heavenly and worldly benefits come to us from God,
so also we learn, that when any cross, or any affliction, and trouble, and
loss, and casualtie does befall us, that it is gods hand and his pleasure, to
strike and to punish us for our sins. It is the powerful effect of gods
grace, to breed in us a charitable mind, even toward our enemies, and which
teaches us, that it is Gods will and commandment, that we should forgive
others, as we our selves would be forgiven. But if this alteration and
sanctification be not bred in us by Gods grace, that teaches us to deny
ungodliness, how were it possible, but that with the world we should be most
profanely minded, and as a people without God, in this present world.

This word ungodliness, touches not only the profaneness of our minds, and
our heathenish imaginations, but has respect also unto superstition and all
heresies in religion. For the darkness of our deceived minds does herein go
far astray, and are so mightily overcome by it, that diverse, nay insinite
multitudes, are utterly overthrown hereby. As we read in the gospel, that
toward the latter end of the world, heresies and error shall so abound, that
if it were not for Gods grace, and his instructing spirits, even the elect
should be deceived, and together with the rest, should be danmed. For
damnation is the effect of superstition and heresy, and the devil blinding
us, and deceiving us, does use that forcible mean to draw us from the
knowledge of God, and of our own salvation. Which thing, the Apostle writing
to the Thessalonians, 2. Epistle chapter 2. does witness unto us, that false
teachers shall come unto us to deceive us ^y the working of the devil. But
among whom shall they prevail? among none but them that perish, because they
received not the laue of the truth that they might be ^^ued. And therefore God
shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe lies, and that all
they might be damned, which believed not the truth. Many are the heresies that
are sprung up in the world, and where the word of God is not their guide, and
the spirit of God does not teach them, there is nothing but wandering and going
astray in ye vanity of their thoghts. For the true God, the heathen worship
the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars; the Turk his Mahomet, another people fall
down before Images, creep to crosses, go in pilgrimage to the relics of
Saints, put the only hope of their salvation in their good works, and if that
serve not, they make account that the prayers of them that are living, shall
do them good after they be dead, and release them being in torments. They make
their prayers unto Saints, and think by pardons and indulgences, and such
means, to have their sins forgiven them, be they never so many, so great,
so heinous, and so grievous. But when the grace of God does teach us, instruct
us, and lighten our minds, then all blind superstitions and ungodly heresies,
vanish away at the trial of the truth, even as the fogges and mistes do
break away when the Sun appears in his force. And well may such false
opinions vanish away, because they are but vanities. Copper bears a show of
gold, and may be flourished over to deceive the eye of the simple, but when
it comes to be tried by the touchstone, it appears to be a vain thing,
and a thing of no account in comparison of gold. So all superstition and
heresies, may go for true religion in the minds of simple and ignorant
people, but when they come to the touchstone, the true trial, I mean the word
of God, then if the grace of God do work in our hearts, by the reading and
hearing of the word, then we begin to deny the ungodliness of false
religion, and daily more and more we grow in this grace and in the knowledge
of his truth. The ignorant minds of the Heathen, worshipping the Sun, the
Moon, and the Stars, when GOD grants them of his knowledge, as no doubt
GOD vouchsafes some, they shall understand that the Sun, the Moon, and the
Stars, are but Gods creatures, and that there is a Creator that made them,
and a Redeemer that died for them. For the mercy of God shall be preached
throughout the world, and then shall the end of the world come. The Turks,
although many of them, and that the most part of them mock and scoff at our
crucified Christ, yet the seal of God remains sure, and some are called to
the knowledge of the truth, and God forbid y^ the grace of God should be denied
unto them, although thousands of them do perish. They may be inwardly touched,
and God may vouchsafe them of favor, and make them partakers of his mercy, and
they may believe, although they make not so ample profession of their faith and
belief. Those whom we call Papists, who are deceived concerning the truth of
religion, and the certainty of their salvation, and give their names and
consent unto falsehood, before they have had just trial of the truth, many of
them are not persuaded, nor ever will yield to be persuaded, because the grace
of god to them has not as yet appeared. For why? they are carried away with
high conceits of their own deceived minds. They think their own inventions
and traditions, to be of equal force with Gods word, whereas they should in
all humble sort, submit themselves the^ unto, they think so highly of
themselves, that by their own good works they may deserve heaven, so that the
salvation of God which comes by his grace and mercy, is trodden under their
feet. What are pilgrimages, and relics, and prayers to saints, and
purgatory, but man's inventions? Which they can never approve to be good,
neither shall they ever find warrant for them in Gods word. The grace of God
teaches them to deny the ungodliness of men's devices, inventions, and
traditions; and so much the more, because God has pronounced a curse to them
that shall add, or put too, or diminish, and take away any thing from his
word. I protest says the spirit of of God unto every man ( Reu. 22. 18. 19.)
that hears the words of the Prophecy of this book, if any man shall add
unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this
book. And if any man shall diminish of the words of the book of this
prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of
the holy city, and from those things which are written in this book.
Dangerous therefore are the devices and traditions of men, and likewise in a
most dangerous estate are they who are ruled by them, because that in them are
contained many things that are contrary to the will of God and to his word.
What is it for us to be persuaded that we shall be saved by our good works,
(although good works be necessary and commanded) when the truth of Gods word
shall direct us, that only by the grace and mercy of God we are saved, and not
by good works; let them bear never so glorious and glistering a show in the
sight of men, and seem never so much to be approved. Ephe. 2. 8. By grace are
ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God, not
of works, least any man should boast himself. The most righteous men next
unto our savior Christ that ever lived, when they make their prayers unto God,
what say they? Say they with the Pharisee, I fast twice a week, I give alms
to ye poor, I pay tithe of all that ever I possess. No, they come not in with
such titles and with so glorious a style. B^t as we read Dan. 9. O Lord be
merciful unto us that have sinned, we have committed iniquity and done
wickedly, yea we have rebelled and departed from thy commandments. O Lord,
righteousness belongs unto thee, and unto us, open shame. As Daniel, so also
righteous Abraham, confesses of him self; I am but dust and ashes, and as one
of no account. God regards the humble, and those that confess their sins,
as for the proud, and them that vaunt and boast, and make so great account of
their good works, God beholds them a far off. A lowly, an humble, and
contrite spirit, is the only sacrifice that god accepts. The grace of god
works lowliness and humbleness in our hearts; it frames us to confess our
sins, and by all means to endeavor to amend, and never boast our selves of
our good works, or to trust to be saved by them, but rather by the mercy of
god. Although questionless, they that do not practice good works, and as much
as in them lies, labor to lead a holy and godly life, shall never enter into
the kingdom of god, nor into the rest of blessed souls.

And therefore it follows very well in my text. The grace of God teaches us
to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts. Which are nothing else but the works
of the flesh, which cannot agree, or at lestwise ought not to be seen in them
that are sanctified by the grace of God. These worldly lusts and works of the
flesh, are such, that no man can be ignorant of, and they are too too manifest.
Which are as the Apostle reckneth them up, adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
wantonness, idolatry, witcheraft, hatred, debate, emulatio^s, wrath, contention,
seditions, heresies, envy, murders, drunkenness, gluttony, and such like.
Whereof says he, I told you before, as I also have told you before, that they
which do such things, shall not inherit the kingdom of god. For the performance
of our inordinate affections and evil concupiscences, the wrath of god comes.
If we be led by ye works of the flesh, we shall die the death. Well are they
called in the Epistle to the Ephesians, 4. 22. Deceivable lusts, because they
deceive us in the end. In the beginning is joy and pleasure, but in the end, is
destruction. According as we read, Prou. 14. 12. There is a way which seems
right to a man, but the issues thereof, are the ways of death. Let every one of
us think, that the grace of god does thus persuade us, that forasmuch as
Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, we should arm our selves with the
same mind, as to mortify the deeds of the flesh, and to cease from sin.
That henceforth we should live as much time as remains in the flesh, not
after the lusts of men, but after the will of god. For it is sufficient, and
more then should have been, that we have spent the time past, as the wicked
do in this world. Wherein it will seem strange to them, that we run not
with them unto the same excess of riot. And therefore they will not spare to
speak evil of us, to defame us, and to cast out many slanders against us.
Wherein let us be patient, and refer the matter to God, they shall answer
for their ill deeds, and give accounts to him that is ready to judge them. All
the punishments of this life, death, and death again in another world, the
severe judgment of God, who is it that has any spark of grace, that will not
relent and have remorce? that will not now learn to deny their worldly lusts,
knowing that it shall cost them dear? Who in this life would leap into the
sea knowing he shall be drowned? Who is it that would throw himself into the
fire, knowing that he shall be consumed? All worldly lusts, are understood by
the uncleanness of the flesh, because principally and above the rest, we are
given thereunto. And therefore 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. This is the will of God, even
our sanctification, and that we should abstain from fornication. That cuerie
one of us should know how to possess his vessel, that is his body, in
holiness and honor, and not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the
Gentiles, and Heathen, and wicked persons, which know not God. 1. Cor. 3. 16.
Know ye not that we are the Temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwells
in us? If any of us destroy the temple of God, him shall God destroy. For the
temple of God is holy, which we are. For our souls, our hearts, and
consciences, are the place wherein God should dwell. They that follow their
worldly lusts, and delight in the works of the flesh and are led by them, it
is a token that they are past grace, and that God has delivered them up to a
reprobate mind. Romans 1. So when we do refrain and frame our selves another
way, it is a token that gods grace does work with us. And that we may say as
the Apostle, that no fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, buggerers,
thieves, railers, extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God. And such
were some of us, yea such by nature are we all, and who can say, that either he
is not, or at leastwise was not in the number? So that if it be otherwise, we
are washed, we are sanctied, and made clean, in the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and by the spirit of our gracious God, who sends his grace into our
hearts. For such is the virtue of that spiritual fellowship which we have with
Christ, that as the soul naturally joined to the body, brings forth her
effects, so Christ dwelling in us by faith, and by the holy Ghost, after a
spiritual manner, and by a spiritual virtue, does show his power in us, to
enable us to resist sin, and to bridle the corrupt desires of the flesh.
Christ by his death has abated the power of sin, that it can no longer be
rank in us, to do what we will, but does by little and little die, until it
be wasted and worn away. For as when y^ heart of a man has received a deadly
wound, he is accounted for dead, although he live a while, because he cannot
escape death; so sin in the death of Christ, has received a deadly wound.
And by reason of that near conjunction, which by faith we have with Christ, we
are said to be dead with him unto sin. I beseech you therefore brethren, says
the Apostle, Romans 12* by the mercies of God, that you give up your bodies a
living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God. As indeed it cannot be, that
where the grace of God does work effectually, but that we should deny our
worldly lusts, or at leastwise, by little and little cause them to die in us.
They who by a true faith lay hold of Christ and his merits, and do apply unto
themselves the death of Christ with all his benefits, are also desirous to
offer themselves acceptable unto god. For they that by the grace of god are
made righteous, by the same grace are also made holy, seeing that Christ is
made unto us, both righteousness, and sanctification, as we read, 1. Cor. 1.
30. Holiness is a necessary consequent of the grace of god, whereby they that
are truly touched, in all thankful sort show themselves to god, and do
approve themselves unto him, in all uprightness and innocence of life. Our
minds, our hearts, our affections, and dispositions, the body and all the
actions thereof now are changed, the whole man, is now framed to a new man,
as though he were cast in a new mould. Worldly lusts, have their warning to be
packing, and to go into exile and banishment, and now are good and godly ways
embraced. The feeling of sin, and their former evil life, breeds a hatred
thereof, and the love of God, of virtue and goodness, which are arguments and
tokens of Gods good grace, begin to have the upper hand. And how joyful a
thing is it, for him that by sickness was almost brought to his death, to come
to health and enjoy life. A life in sin, is but a sick life, a languishing
life, and death it self; so that when we leave it, and the custom thereof, we
rise again as it were from the nethermost pit, and clap our hands for joy,
that we see life, before we were utterly dead. And herehence, follows a true
amendment of our life, whereby we dedicate, and give our selves to the service
of God, as in time past we gave our selves to the service of ye devil; now
righteousness and holiness is our delight, where before we served sin and
iniquity. They, who by ye grace of God are brought so far, as to deny their
worldly lusts, they do daily more and more, hate and fly from their sins, as
from a serpent which would sting the^ to death. Yea, there is also a sorrow in
their minds, that they have so highly displeased and offended god. Which their
sorrow, ye Apostle does lively express. 1. Cor. 7. 11. For behold says he
this thing, that ye have been godly sorry, what great care it has wrought in
you? yea what indignation? yea what fear? yea, how great desire? yea, what
zeal? yea, what punishment? Yea, then shall we know and feel also the
working of Gods grace, in denying our worldly lusts, when there is a true
sorrow according to God in our hearts and consciences, for every thing which we
know to be forbidden by God, yea the least matters, as all light oaths, idle
words, profitable lies, or vain actions; and when we feel a study and an
endeavor in our selves, to avoid ye first motions that creep in our minds.
When there is a clearing of ourselves from all suspicion, by avoiding all
appearance of evil, when there is an indignation and anger for all such things
past, and a fear, lest through our corruption they should fall out again, when
there is a great desire to prevent them, a zeal against them, and a punishing
of them, by exercising all due authority which God has given us against
sin, and finally, when there is a great desire in us, to spend all the rest
of our time, not according to the will and commandments of God. The denying
of our worldly lusts, is nothing but the hatred of our sinful ways, which by
these three reasons, will grow to be most forcible and effectual in us.

As first, if we consider that it is the greatest pleasure that can be to the
devil, to see men and women who were created to the image of God, to delight
more in the works of darkness then of light, and so with might and maine as
they say, to make speed to their own destruction.

Secondly, if we consider what harm sin brings, and how much it hurts,
not our selves only, but others also through our example. According to that
saying; Mat. 18. 7. Woe be to the world, because of offenses; necessary it is
that offenses fall out, but woe to them by whom they fall out; and better it
were that a millstone were hanged about their necks, and they thrown into the
bottom of the sca.

The third and last reason by the which the hatred of sin shall grow effectual
in us, is, when we call to mind how foul and horrible a thing it is, to
grieve the holy spirit, who dwells as a guest within us, and by the which we
are sealed as it were with a sure pledge, against the day of Redemption, and of
the accomplishment of our salvation. 1. John. 3. 24. Hereby we know, that god
by his grace dwells in us, even by his sanctifying spirit which he has
given, which teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
Soberly, Righteously, and Godly, in this present world.

Three good effects and apparent tokens of Gods good Soberl^.
grace, sobriety, righteousness, and godliness. For whereas before we were
given to all excess and riot, following our desires, in drunkenness,
gluttony, lechery, in pride and brave apparel, in gathering, and heaping,
and couetting other men's goods, in carrying a mind altogether not contented
with our estate, when the grace of God has fully persuaded our minds, to deny
all worldly lusts, then we begin to frame our minds to a mean and to a
measure, knowing that as Gods blessing is in the use of his creatures, so in
the abuse and sinful using of them, they turn to our curse, and unless we
amend, to our condemnation.

The property of our sinful lusts, is in all excess, and Lusts.
therefore it is well said, that they that are bewitched with the devils
temptations, follow their lusts with greediness, but they whose minds are
renewed, frame themselus to a godly mean, and as we say, to a golden mean,
that is wondrous well and in good sort, soberly. For Sobriety is nothing else,
but the right use of Gods creatures. Nature is content with a little, sobriety
asks no more; and when we exceed, nature is ouerpressed, sobriety is
disgraced, and we in so doing, by the judgments of all, contemned and
despised. Great difference there is, betwixt necessity, and superfluity, even
as much as betwixt life and death. Who knows it not, that of drunkenness,
gouts and dropsies, and such diseases grow, which make a man loathsome to other,
yea to himself, and he is aweary of his life, and so at last, his painful
and languishing days are cut off, who might have lived longer many a fair
day? What does gluttony bring, but surfettings, and oftentimes a speedy
riddance? Therefore, it was well said of a wise man. Plures gula qua^ gladio
periere. That is, more die by surfeiting and distemperature, then by the sword
and by violent death. What seeking there is to the physician in such cases?
whereas sobriety might be our physician, if we would follow the rule thereof,
which is nothing else, but to use a me^ne. Who lives longer then the ploughman
and the country man, whose diet and fare, is but to serve his turn and no
more. Bibbing and bowling, carousing, and gurmundizing, this is the devils
vadge, and the messenger of death. Sobriety teaches us, that meat and drink
was ordained of God for the sustenaunce of our bodies, that we may be the
better able to perform those duties, which God has appointed to every one of
us in our vocation, and not to the satisfying of our pleasures. And therefore
we are commanded to pray; O Lord give us our daily bread; and they that know
the right use thereof, will be also ready to give thanks to God, when they have
refreshed themselves. Whereas they that are given to their pleasures, are like
to swine, that are greedy of the maste, so that their flesh being prompt,
their lusts may abound. In the Epistle to the Gal. where other sins are noted
by one name, the sin of lechery is expressed by diverse names, as adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, to note unto us the pronesse of man's
nature, and their greedy desire to sin. Watching and waking night and day,
devising and casting how to bring their naughty purpose to pass, making only
account of them that shall further them in their desires, and serve their
turns, spending all their wealth nay further then that, wasting al their
strength, and yet more, laying their souls to pawn, for the enjoying of a
little pleasure; until their wealth be turned to poverty, their strength to
weakness, sickness, and loathsome diseases, until all hope be turned to
despair, life to death, and salvation, to damnation. Wherefore the holi^
spirit of God, knowing the sinful hastiness, and insatiable desire of mankind
herein, draws the excess into a mean, and for extremity, enioyneth us
sobriety; and for avoiding all mischiefs, does set us down a remedy. For
sobriety is the moderatour of the mind, and does restrain our unbridled
affections. It is a gift, that does keep the mind from pleasures altogether,
and in those that be lawful, it keeps us from the excess and abuse of them.
The gift of chastity is rare, and the contrary is to rife, which causes the
Apostle to use these words; Good it were for a man not to touch a woman and I
could wish it were with other as it is with my self, nevertheless, to avoid
fornication, let every man have his wife, and every, woman her own husband.
And again, if they cannot abstain, let them marry, for it is better to marry
then to burn. And that they might use the benifit of marriage soberly, and not
in excess, as a remedy to their concupiscence, and not as a liberty to the
flesh, he gives counsel further. This I say brethren, because the time is
short, Let them that have wives, be as though they had none. Unto the which,
agrees that of the Apostle. S. Peter. 1. Epi. 4. 7. Now the end of all things
is at hand, be ye therefore sober and watching in prayer. As if he had said, as
much as is possible, let the whole time of our life be spent in holiness,
knowing this, that no unclean thing shall enter into the kingdom of God. Let
us walk honestly, not in gluttony and drunkenness, neither in chambering and
wantonness, but let us put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and be clothed with the
garment of holiness, neither let us take thought for the flesh, to fulfill the
lusts of it. I beseech you, receive not the grace of God in vain.

Pride and bravery in apparel, excess in building, no Apparel.
measure in expenses, this is the fashion of the world. And the overplus and
ouerlashing that every one is given unto, declares how far we are by
nature from sobriety, and that sobriety and a measure, is the gift of the
grace of God. True it is, that men are too too given to pride and brave
apparel, and many do set their glory and their felicity therein; whose
glory is to their shame, and whose felicity and happiness is sinful.
Lightly they are but scorned and contemned in the sight of others, who shall
behold their vanity, while they think thereby to be honored. And as we
read, that God regards the humble, so he beholds the proud afar of. The
prophet Esaias, and the apostle S. Paul, seeing the excess of apparel, and this
vice of pride more to abound in women, does especially note it and rebuke it
in them. The Prophet Esaias in his third chapter, shows the vanity of the
women in his days, and how God would punish their excessive desires; his
words are these. The Lord also says, Because the daughters of Sion are hautie
and walk with stretched out necks and with wandering eyes, walking and musing
as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet, Therefore shall the Lord
make the heads of the daughters of Sion bald. In that day shall the Lord take
away the ornament of the slippers, and the calls, and the round tiers, the
sweet balls, and the bracelets, and the bonnets, the tiers of the head, the
tablets and the earings, the ringes, and the muflers, the costly apparel, and
the vailes, and the wimples, and the crisping pinnes, and the glasses, and the
fine linen, and the hoods, and the launes. And in steed of sweet savor,
their shall be stincke; and in steed of a girdle, a rent; and in steed of
dressing of the hair, baldness; and in steed of a stomacher, a gir^ing of
sackcloath; and burning, in steed of beauty. No man can be ignorant that
apparel was ordained to cover our nakedness, to keep us warm, and to
preserve our health, and not to show our bravery, or to spend our thrift
thereon. And because the Apostle did perceive, that women were more faulty
herein, therefore he counsaileth them 1. Tim. 2. 5. That if they will be
accounted to be godly and sober, that they should lay aside all bravery, and
array themselves in comely apparel, with shamefastness and modesty, not with
broidered hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly garments, but as becomes women
that profess ye fear of God, that they should deck themselves with good works,
and show their bravery in their alms, and relieuing those y^ stand in need.
The Apostle S. Pet. 1. Epi. 3. 3. Likewise has almost the same words, and
gives a little more light to this persuasion. The apparrelling of women, let
it not be so much outward says he, in breivered hair, and gold put about,
and in glorious apparel. But if they will be commended for their modesty and
sobriety, let the hid man of their hearts be vncorrupt, with a meek and quiet
spirit, which is before God a thing much set by. And if they delight in brave
apparel, let this be their apparel and no other. For even after this
manner in time past, did the holy woman which trusted in God tier themselves,
and were subject to their husbands. A note well put in. And were subject to
their husbands. For many of them, being too wilful, and too stately,
altogether against the wills of their husbands, and beyond their husbands power
and ability, bring them into debt, and poverty, and make them oftentimes to
use unlawful means, to maintain their bravery. Which is a token of
incontinency, that they had rather please the eyes of others, then their own
husbands. For commonly, lewd women are noted by their brave attire. Brave
without, and foul within, painted sepulchers and rotten bones. Better it were,
brave within, and comely without, modest and sober, at home and abroad, in
every place.

To this warning which is given to women to moderate themselves, men also ought
to have regard, as where men in other respects are warned, there women also
must have care. For what is spoken to the one, is spoken to the other also. And
this moderation here spoken of, and whereunto by the Apostles and servants of
God we are warned, is not in men and women as of themselves, except the grace
of God does first work it.

Next unto pride and bravery of apparel, may follow the Building.
bravery of building, wherein the richer and wealthier sort are given much to
abound. And every one almost has this in his mind, if not in his mouth, which
king Nabuchodonosor vaunted of; Dan. 4. 27. Is not this great Babel, that I
have built, for the house of the kingdom, by the might of my power, and for
the honor of my majesty? These stately buildings, make stately minds, and
draw on the owners to excessive expenses, to maintain the port thereof, and
sobriety is shut out and banished, which should have all the room within. God
foreseeing what hinderance it would work in the minds and hearts of his
people, if they should build them costly houses, and lest they should be too
much wedded unto this world, commanded them to dwell in tents that they might
be put in mind as the Apostle says, Heb. 11. That here they have no dwelling
places to continue, but are as pilgrims and strangers on the earth. Whereas
they that have all their hope and all their joy in this world, delight to build
gorgious houses, as though they should never die, and call their lands after
their own names. What profit had the Canaanites of their goodly houses, when as
others were made the owners. In the 28. chap. of Deu. a curse was fortold and
denounced against them that did not fear God, that although they built houses,
yet they should not dwell therein. A just judgment for them that spend their
goods supersluously, whereas they should bestow them otherwise. Stately Babel
which was purposed to be built up to heaven, was not finished; and I could wish
that such Babel buildings might have a fall, or some gazing impediment, for
every one to behold and to point at, much like to suppressed Abbeys, that the
owners might come to some sobriety, and learn to employ their wealth and
riches, not to honor themselves, but to honor God thereby. Somewhat also might
be said of lauishing expenses, were it not that debt and poverty, and such
shreud afterclaps, Expenses.
did make the^ sober against their wills, and too late to wish, that they had
kept a mean, being brought now to extremite.

Sobriety also has his use in withdrawing the mind from the gredie desire of
covetousness, where with many are Covetousness.
carried away headlong, and think they shall never have enough. Heaping, and
gathering, and scraping, much like to the wont or mole, whose continual
practice is to scrape under the earth, so are their minds earthly, though they
were made to be heavenly. Being made the good creatures of God, they have made
themselves monsters, their hands turned into nets, their fingers into
limetwigs, their heart, and their head, and all the rest of their bedie being
turned into metal, as though they were hewn out of some golden or silver
mine. Their minds being no better then their bodies, a lump of clay. The
barrein womb is not satisfied, the earth has not enough, hell is
bottomless, and the mind of the covetous is insatiable. What a plague is it
for us to be drudges, when we may be free, and to make wealth and riches our
masters, which should be our servants. What a cross and misery is this
(unless one would kill himself) for a man to spend all his life in carking and
pining, and scraping. Therefore covetousness may well Prou. 13. 7.
be called misery, and the covetous miserable, for they are miserable indeed.
Of them which seem to be wise, there be no such fools in the world, as they
that love money more then themselves. This is a grievous sickness, which makes
people dead being alive, that makes them wander up and down with pale faces
and pined bodies, and withered carcasses as though they were goasts. And no
marvel; For they that drink quicksilver die a languishing death, and wear
away by little and little. What physic, what wisdom, what joy and happiness,
what life and liberty then do they find, who by the grace of God have
learned sobriety, who has always contentation to bear her company. Which
moderateth and staieth the min^, when their is inongh, and breeds a full
persuasion and a resolution. And so much the more, because it has ground and
assurance from the promise of God. As we may read, Heb. 13. Let your
connersation be without covetousness, for it is said, I will not leave thee,
nor forsake thee. If we had but the word of some wealthy man to assure unto us
a sufficiency, how would it comfort our hearts, and lessen our labors and
cares; Behold the words of the highest, for him that is content with that he
has. O then do far away covetousness, and desire and covet no more then that
as may serve thy turn and relieve thy present necessity. God has appointed
thee to get thy living by thy labor, add thereunto thy earnest prayers, that it
would please God to bless thy labor, so shall not covetousness like a hungry
devil enter within thee and possess thee. For if thou have enough, what
need thou to have more? Then shall God send down his grace to endue thy
mind with sobriety, when once thou have learned y^ god has enough for us all.
And as sobriety gives a lesson to the poor to content themselves with that
portion which y^ Lord has sent them, so also may the rich hold themselves
contented, and remember that they have their bounds appointed them, and the to
acquaint their affections, to find contentation and a moderate sufficiency,
which is a rich portion. So shall they truly according to their bounden duty,
be thankful to God for the same. For in very deed, these hearts of ours, must
find them in their own persuasion provided for, ere they shall in truth and
vnfainednesse be joyful in the Lord. It is not covetousness that can keep
thee from poverty, if God lay his hand upon thee, neither can it make thee
rich, if God has otherwise ordained. Only the blessing of God it makes rich,
and he adds no sorrow unto it. All things fall out unto the best unto the
godly, come wealth, come woe, come poverty, come riches. The rich must learn
to be poor, and with contentation of heart to undergo a poor estate, yea to
assure himself to find the Lords blessing and comfort in it. Frame and
acquaint thy mind always to the liking of a lower estate. Behold a meditation
in riches, and a lesson that is of all men to be studied, and not that only but
perfectly learned also, and thoroughly taken out, that if their estate should
yet be poorer, they should persuade themselves to find the Lord good unto them
in that their condition. And therefore before we should make our reckoning of it
by much meditation, and yet therein notwithstanding to find a rich blessing,
even a quiet and contented mind. And this would further the account of our
present estate, if we should assure our selves to be in good case if our
estate were yet lower. Neither ought we so to learn this as a lesson, not
likely to come to practice, but even so as the practice thereof were not like
long to be deferred. That we may be always ready to say with S. Paul, Phil.
4. (though heretofore it could never sink in my heart, yet now has sobriety
the the gift of Gods good grace taught me) and now I have learned to be rich
and to be poor, to abound, and to have want, and in what state it shall
please God to place me in, therewith to be content. For a mind truly
contented, wherein sobriety has taken up her seat, esteems as well of
poverty as of riches. This lesson has in it a very necessary use to try us
by. For whatsoever he be that cannot bear a low estate laid upon him by the
Lord, if he have a higher, he will abuse that in like manner. For he that
is ashamed of poverty, will be proud of wealth, and he that is impatient
when he is humbled, will be insolent when he is exalted. And what can bind him
to true duty, if it be not conscience unto God? Which if he dare dispense
withal in poverty, he will not greatly regard it in abundance. Thus we see
for a man to learn to be rich, it is expedient he learn to be poor.

This Sobriety then that keeps the mind from being ouercharged with the
desire of wealth and riches, is principally and chiefly required in a
Christian; yea it reaches further, and contains within it y^ kind of
people, who albeit they be not greatly seeking after another or better estate,
yet be they too much wrapped and entangled in the cares and delights of yt they
presently possess. This does the Apostle note unto us, 1. Cor. 7. 29. This I
say brethren, because the time is short, hereafter that both they which have
wives, be as though they had none, and they y^ rejoice, as though they reioiced
not, and they that buy, as though they possessed not, and they y^ use the
world, as though they used it not. For the fashion of ye world goes away. He
does not only open ye disease, but also gives us the remedy for it, which is
the consideration of the shortness of this life and the speedy passage thereof.
Which remedy, he would have to season our joy, to ceason our delights, and to
moderate our present estate. As if he should say, there were no place of right
joy, right contentment, where the consideration of the shortness of this life,
and the possession of another life, did not step in to stay our minds, and
to keep them upright. And how needful it is, that we should even in lawful
things, have our affections temperate, the parable in Luke. 14. apparantlie
declare. Lawefull it is to buy a farm, to prove oxen, to marry, and to be
married, the overmuch care and delight in these things, keept us from the
kingdom of heaven. How expedient therefore and necessary, is sobriety, which
keeps us from surfeiting of these transitory things. And even as sault which
seasoneth every meat, so is sobriety the moderatour of the whole course of
our lives, and the actions thereof. If this will not restrain us, from our
intangling delights, let us call to mind the watchword which is given us by
our Savior Christ, Luke. 21. Take heed, least at any time your hearts be
oppressed, with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and least
the latter day come on you unawares.

An other excess that by nature we are given unto, is Coffeehouse.
not to be content with that estate which God has placed us in. The servant
would be a master, the subject would be a magistrate, the poor grudge, that
they are not as well able to live as the rich. The proverb is, that no man
lives content with his estate, so rare it is to see men stayed, because their
miuds are fickle. Many will give out that they are content with their estate,
because of necessity it falls out so, yet are their minds and inward
hearts, like the waves of the sea that feign would ouerflowe. What may be the
cause of robberies, murders, outrages, mischiefs, but the want of a mind
contented? Wherefore are laws made, if not to restrain them which live
without a law. I have been young and now am old says the prophet, and yet
saw I never the righteous forsaken, because they lived contented with their
estate. Discontented people, are lighly such that never can be pleased, and
such that cannot satisfy themselves, who cast themselves into diverse miseries,
because they think they can never be well enough. Lucifer could not think
himself well, when he was an Angel, until through his busy head, being cast
into hell, it repented him that he was not contented. Adam and Eve they were as
saints, and yet they would be gods, but their climing minds did bereave them
of their happiness and brought them to a cursed estate. Well are such people
called malcontents; for their contentment stands in being not content.
Troubled heads, evil subjects, desperate traitors, poor purses, proud hearts,
mischievous thieves, beggarly gentlemen, tossepot ruffians, and raunging
rouers, a little time they have, and full ill they spend it, their discontented
minds running upon extremities, for the most part a shameful death they come
unto, and had I wist, comes never into their minds, before it be too late, to
teach other to beware, and to keep themselves in compass. Let sobriety
therefore be our schoolemaister, and let us learn betime to be content with
our estate, and to hold that as a certain rule, let us not be likened to
drunken men that stagger too and fro, and which are not in their right senses,
to bear themselves upright. For he that has no sure rule nor stay, shall be so
tossed of his affections, and so carried hither and thither, as he shall never
find a time to say, it behooves me to hold my self here within my bounds.
Well it were, if every one could take up good liking of their present estate,
and let us take heed, that we be not forgetful to be thankful to God in this
respect, while the unquiet desire of increasing our condition, may steal all
comfort from us, which comfort, must be the matter of true thankfulness. Oh that
every one of us were so settled, and so stayed, and soberly minded, that we
could truly say unto our hearts. This is thy lot appointed thee of the Lord,
here are thy bounds, this estate has the Lord distributed unto thee. There is
good cause not only to be content, but also most glad with it. We must learn
our hearts to be content with it, nay to take it as a rich and liberal
portion what ever it be, and as a bar to hold in our affections from raunging
into greedy desire. For our affections are as gulfes that are most insatiable,
which would never rest, with contentation in any thing, but still be inflamed
with the desire of more, and draw and hale us forward, and so hold us in
continual torment. The remedy whereof, the Lord has appointed our own
estate to be, whatsoever it is, that it might appease our affections, and
settle them with rest, peace, and good liking, as in the seat which our good
God has seen to be convenient for us, and therefore has set us in it, to
find ease, quiet, comfort, and contentment therein. For if thine heart be not
settled in thine estate with good liking and contentation, as in a good
provision, it is impossible that ever thou should become thankful for it.
For to seem to joy without joy, is to play the hipocrite, and to dissemble
with God. Now if there be any of us, who are so laden with infirmities, and
overcome of their own weakness, that this godly sobriety cannot take place
in every respect as it ought, let him or them become earnest suitors unto the
Lord, to prevail against their corruption, which does so abound, that it
cannot, neither will of it own accord, entertain sobriety and contentation.
And let them be well assured, that the unfeigned petition and prayer of them
that are so laden with the burden of their wants, their prayers being
continued, cannot return empty from that God, who by name calls out such to
come unto him, with promise that he will hear him and them whosoever. For he
that has begun this grace within them, will also in good time make it
perfect. So that all unseemly behavior, all uncleanness, pride and excess,
covetous desires, and discontentments, shall vanish away by little and little,
when as the grace of God has fully taught us to live soberly.

2.
After we be fully persuaded to live soberly, then also Righteously.
shall we be desirous to live both righteously, and godly. For the grace of God
cannot be without his true effects. To live righteously, is so to order our
life, as every man may have his own at our hands, for justice and equity, is
a virtue, that gives to every one his due. This virtue, does first and
principally touch Kings and Princes, Magistrates, Judges, and Lawiers, whom
God has made the Lords and Rulers of right, and to minister true justice unto
the people. Secondarily and more nearly, it concerns every one particulerly,
and namely, by this general rule of Right; that we should wish and do to every
one, as we would that King.
other should wish and do to us. The King and Prince in a realm, ought chiefly
to take care, that he make and ordain no laws, whereby his subjects should be
injured and wronged, and that it may be said of him as it was of King David,
who ruled the people committed to his charge, prudently, with all his power.
And that the King might deal uprightly, therefore God commanded, that his law
should be written in a book, that the King might have it always before his
eyes, and that in ruling well and uprightly, he might prosper. According to
that we read, Ier. 22. concerning the King Iehoiakim, Shall thou reign says
the Prophet to Iehoiakim, because thou closest thy self in Cedar? Did not thy
father eat, drink, and prosper, when he executed justice and judgment? when
he judged the cause of the poor, he prospered. Was not this because he knew me
says the Lord? But thy eyes and thy heart, are only for covetousness and for
oppression. Therefore thus says the Lord of Iehoiakim, he shall be buried as
an ass is buried. Prou. 20. 8. A King that sits in the throne of judgment,
chaseth away all evil with his eyes. The care of justice shall preserve the
King, and establish him in his throne. For a King by judgment maintains the
country, ( Prou. 29. 4.) yea so much the more ought the King to have care
hereof, because his whole land shall be punished for the want of it; as where
it is used, the land shall prosper the better for it. Justice and judgment,
they are the strong holds and fenced places of the land, they are the keys of
the country, and they keep us better, then all the block-houses or places of
defense whersoeuer. They are better able to encounter with our enemies, then
any garrison of men, how well practiced or prepared soever they may be. But
contrariwise, the neglect of justice, is worse then rebellion, it pulls
Princes out of their throanes, makes the land cast out her inhabitants,
joins with foreign power, opens the gates of all our castles and holds,
takes the weapon from the warrior, the heart from the valiant soldier,
wisdom and forecast from the wise counsailour, and poisoneth al our munition.
What is it for Kings and Princes, to take care for a mighty navy, or a
valiant army, or forcastles and bulwarks, for shot and ordinance? if Gods
ordinances be not fulfilled accordingly, and justice and equity be not
executed in the land? For God can give over a great number into the hands of a
few, and make things impossible, seem very easy.

Next to the King and Prince, are they to look to the Judge.
due ministration of justice, whom the King does put in his place, and whom he
does put in trust to see all things rightly performed. That they may have
regard to be men of courage, to fear God, to deal truly, and to hate
covetousness. Yea such as that godly King Iehoshaphat would have to be under
him, as we read, 2. Chro. 19. whom he did unto his great commendation,
worthily exhort unto their duty, that through the counsel and countenance of
the King, they might have heart to do it. And he said to the Judges, whom he
had set in the land throughout all the strong cities, city by city. Take
heed what ye do, for ye execute not the judgments of man, but of the Lord; and
he will be with you in the cause and judgment. Wherefore now let the fear of
the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it, for there is no iniquity with the
Lord our God, neither respect of persons, nor receiving of reward. That the
Judges should not be danted or corrupted, they know, seeing they are men of
reverend gravity and great wisdom, that they bear the person of the King,
as though the King himself were there in presence. The Princes arms are hung
over them, the best of the shire do homage and reverence unto them, they
countenance them out before the people, the Sheriff waits upon them with
all his power. Yea more then this, God has appointed them in his seat, and
calls them by his own name, Gods, that they may be put in mind, that God in
all rightful causes, will maintain them, defend them, and stand with them.
But if they swerve, they must remember, that the presence of God is no small
matter, who has made notable men offending, notable examples also of his
wrath. As it is in the Psalm. And he smote down the chosen men of Israel,
famous and men of renown. The presence of God is about them, to give them
honor, and to defend them; but if they do otherwise then well, to depose them,
and to dispossess them, both of their lives, and of their honors. Again, that
they should not be corrupted, the King and crown, has granted them a most
large and liberal pension, to the end that gifts and bribes should not blind
their eyes, nor pervert true judgment. And because God is the God of justice
and judgment, and righteousness, therefore he has regard and is mindful of the
Judges, and let them think with themselves and also be fully persuaded, that
this is spoken unto them from God. I am thy exceeding great reward.

The Lawier he must deal justly, and give every man Lawi^er.
his own. For he points out men their inheritance, and shows them their
right and title, how far it goes, and so breaks off the controversy. He
tells every one in his doubtful cause, where his claim and title lies,
what law and equity will bear him in, and where it will forsake him. He is the
living land-marke, which by true opening of the laws, boundeth every man
within the compass of his own title. And because of that, does highly deserve
of the commo^wealth, as a most necessary and profitable member thereof. Such
men are ye common treasure house of the land, whereunto the evidences of every
man's live load are committed, and they put in trust withal, to reserve for
every man his right and title. That when he is incombred for that which of
right belongs unto him, they should out of that treasure house of the law,
bring good evidence for him, and so forthwith clear his innocence. The law
is the house of every man, who being tossed with many storms abroad, he
finds a place to hide his head in, and being in safety, does boldly
contemn both wind and weather, and also quietly take his rest. For being
tossed with injuries, either in body, goods, or name, we have no house of
refuge and rest beside the law, no sanctuary in our unjust vexation besides
that. The place which they serve God in, who are ministers of the law is very
high and honorable, the good they may do is very much, if God give them
conscience and care of it. The hurt in like manner is exceeding great, where
the fear of God does not rule. For is it not a marvelous mischief, to
remove the land-marke of any man? It is that sin that had a solemn curse (
Deuteronomy. 7.) against it, called for by the ministry of the Le^ites, whereunto all
the people were commanded to say, Amen.

And what diversity or difference is there between him that remoueth the
land-marke, and thereby boundeth a man shorter, and him that either by wresting
of the law, or hiding the true meaning of it, is an occasion of cutting short,
or impairing the title of any man. Every man will grant, that if a man of no
conscience, had the custody of all the evidences of this land, he might do
much mischief, by cancelling, crossing, interliuing, putting in and out at his
pleasure, hiding or showing, renting or reserving, as him lists. And is not
this performed, while the law is made to speak, that which they knew in truth
it did never mean, as also to bury that in silence, which it was appointed to
give testimony and witness unto? And if all this were nothing, what can be so
miserable, as when a man has been all the day abroad in the storms and
tempests, at night when he comes home, to find his house in that case, that
it can hold out neither wind nor rain? And do not many who are forced by
reason of the storms and tempests abroad, to betake them to this their house
and harbor, I mean the law, find the tempest often, as grievous there, as
before they did in the plain? Would to God there were none turned out of their
own doors in the midst of the storm, without any hope at all of harbor from
thence? Or if a man that had been dogged to his own doors by thieves, and
having gotten his house upon his head, begins to breathe himself, and to
rejoice for his good escape, thinking all to be safe, and suspecting no harm,
who could sufficiently bewail him, if in the midst of his triumph, they be
found in his own house, that fall upon him and murder him? And is not the
law the house of the troubled and vexed man? Yea Westminster Hall, is the
poor man's house. And therefore does he pay tax and subsidy, that it might be
an house of defense unto him, able to keep out wind and weather, how
tempesteous soever it be. If a man that is oppressed and wronged, abroad in
any part of this land, shall bring his matter unto hearing at
Westminster Hall, look that ye be good unto him in his own house. Let him
take no harm at home, his grief is great enough abroad. It has always even
by the laws of man, been counted an heinous offense, to vex and annoy a man
in his own house. What ye think of the matter I cannot tell, this I am assured
of, it is his due, to be well dealt withal there. And ye are to answer the
Lord, not only for denying, but also for Del^^^.
delaying and deferring of judgment. For why? the man has right and title in
his good cause, unto as speedy a dispdtch at your hands, as possibly may be
had. And therefore Job professed ( Job. 31. 16.) that he had wearied the eyes
of the widow, with waiting long for help before it came. It is a true saying
of the Heathen man; He doubleth his gift, that gives it speedily. It was a
grief to Iethro, Moses father in law, to see the people stand from morning to
evening about Moses, waiting for dispatch. How would he have taken it, if he
had seen men (which commonly happens here among us) to wait from term to
term, nay from year to year, from seven year, to seven year, unto the end
of their lives. It is our part therefore to pray for our Magistrates and those
that be in place of justice, that they may look to the cause of the widow,
fatherless and oppressed, that they may purge the land of blood, by taking
punishment upon male factors, that they may have courage and the fear of God,
and that they may hate covetousness. So shall our Prince sit sure among us,
our holds strongly fortified, our state still vpholden, so may we long enjoy
peace, to the better honoring of our God, and safety of the land. According
to that we read in the prophecy of Esaias, cap. 5. where the Lord under the
comparison and similitude of a vine, does most lively declare, how he will
deal with his people, when judgment and righteousness cannot be found among
them. That is, he will break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden
down, he will take away the hedge, and it shall be eaten up. By the vine, is
understood the commonweal, by the wall, and by the hedge, fortresses and
castles, and bulwarks, which shall be of no greater force with us to defend
us, if justice be not ministered in the land, then the walls of Ierico, which
fell down of their own accord, no man touching them, but only God appointing
it to be so. We see then what cause Magistrates have to watch over evil, and
what occasion we have to commend unto God by fervent prayer, that they may
sincerely serve the Lord in so great a calling, lest the whole land should be
arrained before the judgment seat of the highest, and all found guilty, and
all punished.

Thus ye have heard generally, what is meant by living Every one particularly
to another.
righteously, being set down in the duties of them to whom principally it
pertains. Secondarily and more nearly, it touches the state of every one
particularly. For we are all of us severally and particularly to deal
righteously with our brethren, in all our conversation with them, whereby we
should declare the love we bear unto them. And the Lord has appointed us, not
only to show this love unto them, but also the things that be dear unto them,
as goods and good name, even to these has the Lord bound us, as well as to
their persons. For we must intermedle one with another, and find succor one
from another. And their name and goods by his appointment go through our hands
and charge, as well as his person, and must find succor there. This is the
charge from God, that when any thing of theirs passes through our hands, it
find that affection toward it, which may give testimony of our brotherly good
will to them, and witness our obedience unto God. And the same God that
forbids ye murder of his body, forbids also ye stealth of his goods.
And ye same God ye has bound our love and good affection over to his body,
has in like manner done it toward his goods. Hardly shall any man be
persuaded, that he is loving unto him, who is impairing him in any thing that
is dear unto him, always gaining by his loss. The poor man, whose money must
pass through the hands of the merchant, the farmer, the draper, mercer, and
such like, by that time that every one ouerselling his commodities, has gotten
a fliece, he brings the sweat of his brows, that is his blood, which he has
plenteously powered out, and made no spare of it throughout the whole year,
into a narrow room. Neither can he give a true report, of any love he found
at their hands, more then one might find at the hand of a Turk or Infidel.
In the 25. chapter of Leuiticus, the people of God are charged, not to oppress
one an other in buying and selling. Wherein the law of conscience and equity
should be showed, so that a man should not too much regard himself only and
his own commodity, but also the estate and welfare of an other. By which
commandment of God it is apparent, that it was not lawful for a man to take
whatsoever he could get, without regard what a bargain his neighbor was like
to have at his hands. We are exhorted by the Apostle, to make conscience of
such matters, in the 1 Thessalonians. 4. Let no man oppress or defraud his brother in
anything, for even the Lord is a revenger of such things. Know ye not says
Saint Paul, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God. 1.
Cor. 6. 9. And what right has any man to another man's money, not giving him
the value or worth of it, in wares or merchandise? Be not deceived says the
holy Ghost, in the same place, neither thieves, covetous persons, nor
extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God. The want and and default of
equity and conscience in this behalf, is notably taxed and touched by
Solomon. Prouer. 20. It is naught, it is naught, says the buyer, but when he
is gone apart, he boasts. Such is our natural corruption, through the which
every man would have regard only of himself, even without any respect of
another. When not only his own thoughts, but even his own words also, do
oftentimes condemn his dealing, both of injury and dissimulation. Better it
were for us, if our conscience were more upright. For our careful walking in
the ways of righteousness, have plentiful promises of blessings from the
Lord. So that if his word be of any credit with us, we may be well assured,
that by such dealings our gains will grow to be the greatest. He that
walks in his integrity says Solomon, Prou. 20. 7. is just, and blessed
shall his children be after him. And 20. 21. He that follows after
righteousness and mercy, shall find, life, righteousness, and glory. And 28.
20. A faithful man shall abound in blessings. But let us mark what follows;
But he that makes haste to be rich, shall not be innocent. Noting thereby,
that sudden wealth and riches, lightly comes never by honest dealing, but
for the most part, by injury and oppression, whereby although they be rich and
wealthy, yet are they hated.

The order that is here observed in the text, may in no wise be neglected; For
sobriety is set before righteousness in this place. We must live soberly and
righteously, says the Apostle. Without sobriety and temperance, righteous and
just dealing, cannot be holden up and maintained. For if a man have not learned
to be rich and to be poor, he shall never hold out the course of justice and
righteous dealing. He shall never buy and sell with conscience, that has not
accounted with himself to carry a low sail, and lower then he has done, if
God see it good so. The fashion of the world is, that when the matter lies
upon the loss of favor, credit, wealth, or countenance, then conscience, and
equity, and justice, and righteous dealing, is stretched out and made to
serve, where it should not. Sobriety is banished, where righteous dealing
cannot take place. For if we could be contented to be humbled in the world, if
God could not otherwise be served, or a good conscience maintained, we should
have more power to do justice, and to live uprightly in our calling
whatsoever. But while we are so drowned in profits, pleasures, and honors in
the world, we are never put to any strait, but we must borrow an ace and go
beyond compass. Let us embrace temperance and sobriety, and so shall justice
and righteousness shine in our dealings, and God shall be glorified in our
conversation. Many good laws are made to cause us to live justly one with
another, but little fruit of them, and our unrighteous dealing is above the
laws, because it prevails more. And again our excess, which is ye root of
unrighteous dealing, is not touched. For why? we have taken so large a measure
of port and countenance, being void of sobriety, that the cloth of righteous
dealing must needs be cut thereafter. The sobriety that pleased our fathers,
in attire, in fair port and moderate couutenance, will not serve our turn;
their measure will not serve us, who are grown out of measure. This makes
rentes to be raised, revenues to be increased, the prices of wares augmented,
our pains dearer, our gifts greater, our pleasuring of men better considered
and more rewarded; our liberality to the poor or to any good purpose
lessened, our compassion abated, and so our fathers good report altered in us,
and altogether decayed. Let every man taste more of temperance and sobriety,
and so shall he be able to afford a better penniworth of righteous and upright
dealing in his calling. It shall be in vain to make laws against injurious and
vnrighteons practices, if before, this great excess and intemperancie, that
rules in all estates, be not repressed. For if that in no case may be abated,
how can it be, but that the old ordinary dealings in righteousness and
equity, must be racked, set upon the tainters, and excessiuely stretched? The
great want of sobriety that is eueriwhere, speaks and tells, that there is
much unrighteousness in the land, and so consequently, does plainly and
evidently prophecy unto us, that the righteous God, has a quarrel with the
inhabitants of this our country, for the unrighteousness thereof, which
increases in every kingdom, as moderation and sobriety abafeth. Now, how
sobriety deca^eth, and intemperancie is daily agmented, it is too manifest,
and cannot be denied. And this great intemperancie tells us, that the
burden of vnrighteonsnesse which this land bears, is grown to such a
weight, as cannot long be sustained, if our reformation herein, be not
speedily attempted and taken in hand. Which the Lord in mercy grant, may be
thoroughly thought upon, especially of them in whose hands it lies to redress
it.

To live righteously is the request of our God. The graces of God offer
themselves to take up their consideration in our righteous conversation. They
crave that our upright dealing may speak what regard we have to them, how we
think our selves beholden vuto them, they have set over the pleasuring of them
to upright living, there they would have it seen, how they are valued, prized,
and esteemed of us. Let us then behold a Christian meditation for all men of
all callings and trades, when they deal in the work of their callings, to
move them to equity, conscience, and regard of those, with whom they deal.
Behold my God calls me to witness to the world my thankfulness for his
benefits; he calls me now forth to value his deseruings, and to leave a
record behind, how highly or basely I esteem of his goodness. Who for the
recompense of his kindness, has turned and set over the same, to be answered
in obedience to his will, and upright dealing one with another. And now I am to
signify unto the world, how I think my self indebted unto God for the
benefit of redemption, for the benefit of his word, for honor, for wealth,
health, friends, wife and children, and quietness.

As the Apostle says; Let all things be done honestly and in good order, so
may I exhort you, that all things may be done soberly, and righteously, and so
shall we be sure to come near unto God, and to be accounted godly. Which Godly.
qualities be good means to further godliness, and to make us live godly.
Which is the third effect and virtue of ye grace of God, mentioned in my text.
Godliness is necessarily joined to righteousness. For it were but a vain
thing to be precise in giving man his right, and then to withhold from the Lord
that which of right we owe unto him. And seeing God has created us especially
for his glory, and that we should serve him, what part of our time can better
be spent, then in frequenting the service of God? Unto ye which, Frequenting
divine service
even the custom of idolatrous people, and their example may greatly persuade
us: to see how careful and diligent they were from time to time, from day to
day, yea in the night, at morning and at evening, and at all times, to come to
church, to offer themselves to God. Their meaning say they was well, though
indeed they took not a right course, because they served God otherwise, then
God had commanded in his word. Creeping and bowing themselves to images,
praying unto them, going a pilgrimage to the relics of Saints, and besides
all this, making an idol of Gods blessed Sacrament, which was ordained to put
us in remembrance of his death, and ho^^ after a spiritual and heavenly sort,
we are made the members of his body, and not to kneel down to a piece of
bread; falsely imagining that our Savior Christ is there in body, flesh and
blood. For his bodily presence is in heaven, neither shall we have sight thereof
until ye day of judgment, when he shall show himself with thousands of
Angels. All their godliness, all their serving of God, which they thought
foolishly did tend to their comfort and to their salvation, was the way to
their confusion, and to their destruction. For God has said; Thou shall not
make any graven Image, nor reverence them: and has added a curse and a
punishment, and how can we think we please God in so doing? As God is a
spirit, so he will be worshipped in spirit and truth. If we go the right way,
we go a safe way, he that goes a byway, may wander far and be deceived.
What if we travel never so hard in going out of the way, what may it prevail
us? And if we worship God never so earnestly and never so devoutly, if it be
not in such order and manner as God would have it, and as he has set it down
in his word how it shall be; how can we think that gods favor is toward
us? or how can we warrant our conscience in so doing? And how can we hope for
heaven, unless we perform that, and nothing else but that, which the God of
heaven has appointed. Yet nevertheless in this were they highly to be
commended, and to be preferred before us, nay I fear me they shall rise in
judgment and condemn us, because they were careful to come to church, and
that with most willing minds and glad hearts. But who are they among us that
can so testify of themselves, nay rather may we not justly condemn our
selves for our negligence and slacknesse herein, and for our grudging hearts
and unwilling Hearing and reading of Gods word.
minds. The reading and hearing of Gods word, is the mean to draw us unto
godliness, howsoever we think we have no such need of it. Certainly we ought
to submit our selves to the often and earnest use of Gods word, and with
conscience and care to reform our ways, by the counsel and instruction, by
the promises and threatenings thereof. For if this Prayer and fafling.
be not godliness, what can we say y^ godliness is? To the reading and
hearing of Gods word, we ought to join often and continual prayer, and
preparing our selves more effectually, by taming our body and bringing it in
subjection, by using the great help of fasting. For both the body thereby shall
be more apt and able to endure, and the soul shall be ye more heavenly disposed,
having not the lusts of the flesh to hinder it in so great and godly an action.
Great and most necessary is the cause of prayer, not only that God would
c^ntinue his benefits, gifts, and graces toward us, which we stand in need of
continually from time to time, but also that God would keep us from evil,
unto the which we are most prone, and whereof by our fleshly and natural
corruption we are most desirous. And if it were so that we were. not desirous
nor prone thereunto, yet mightily should we be provoked by the secret
temptations of the devil, and by the evil examples of the world^, and by the
naughty counsel of those that are ill disposed. From all which mischiefs,
by prayer we are delivered; besides that, in the exercise of prayer, we have
the company of GOD, we talk with God, and God with us. And being so
Thankfulness.
heavenly exercised, what can be more godly? Thanfulnesse also is godliness,
when we are not unmindful of Gods benifits, neither forgetful to show our
duty both in heart and in word, and in open profession, and in doing good to
others, to testify to the world Gods goodness toward us, and so to be
thankful. Too thankful we cannot be, because we can never make recompense.
According to that the Apostle says; In all things give thanks. By nature we
are too ungrateful, but the grace of God does change our minds, and learn
them to be thankful. Upon thankfulness, Contentation.
will also follow contentation, that is, a mind satisfied and contented with
that portion which God has sent. They that are not contented, can never be
satisfied, neither can they be thankful; and they that can neither ^e content
nor thankful, it can hardly be said, that there is godliness in them. For
godliness is great gain, if a man be content with that he has. There is
none of us all that brought any thing into the world, and certain it is, we
shall carry nothing out. Therefore we may find our selves well contented, if
we have food and raiment, wherewithal to serve our turn. But if this will
not serve, mark what may follow. They that will be rich, they fall into
temptations and snares, and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown
men in perdition and destruction. Remember who it was that said; All these will
I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. He that makes gold his
God, shall surely be beguiled. As destruction often follows the great desire
of riches, so godliness which is seen in contentation, is the high way unto
salvation. They that are discontent, have many cares, and desires, and
troubles, and vexations, to hinder them from God and godliness. Of all which
cares, troubles, desires, and vexatio^s, they are disburthened, which carry
contented minds, and most free they are by that means unto the service of God.
From thankfulness and a mind contented, proceeds a good will, love, and a
charitable desire, yea, and a fellow-feeling of the wants Charitable deeds.
and necessities of others, so far, that it provoke us not only to pity
them and their estate, but also to help and relieve them to the uttermost of
our power. Charge them that are rich says the Apostle, that they trust not in
their uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us abundantly all
things to enjoy. And yet his charge stretches further, that is, that they
should do good, and be rich in good works, and ready to distribute and
communicate, and give to others. And this is the gain that brings godliness
with it, and this godliness has great gain. For thereby, we lay up in store
a good foundation against the time to come. And he that so lays out his
goods, gives them not to the poor but unto GOD. And as God has given unto
us, so let them whom God has commended unto us, I mean the godly poor, the
fatherless, the widow, and the stranger, be partakers with us of Gods
blessings. Lest it may so fall out, that we may say, that God has o^^en, and
God has taken away. And if there be any good works else, as more there be
then I can name, even all the good works that are, are we bound to perform,
if godliness be bound and found in our hearts. For good works is
godliness, and godliness desires to show it self in them. And who is it
not, that know^^ not what it is to live godly? but who can say my knowledge is
turned into practice, my heart is turned to embrace godliness, and to follow
good ways, unless the grace of God has first thus wrought it?

And yet there is another kind of godliness more hard then all the former,
which is patiently to suffer Patience.
losses, wrongs, injuries, persecution, yea and death it self, for the
steadfast profession of Gods truth and his service. As we read; They that will
live godly, must suffer persecution. For GOD does thereby try us, and by
little and little he does bring us to contemn the world, and to desire
heaven. If thou have loss of goods or friends, or any other help taken from
thee, godliness exhorts to take it patiently, not grudgingly, and to say, as
God has taken, so God may give, and forgive me my sins, and restore unto
me again at pleasure. If thy enemy has done thee injury and wrong, say not
with the world, he shall starve before I relieve him; he shall be hanged
before I will do him any good; but godliness is charitable, and teaches
thee to do good to thine enemies, that thy enemies heart may be turned
toward thee, to wish thee well, and that god may bless thee. If thy patience
be seen in thy persecution and death for gods truth, blessed shall thou be,
and thy reward shall be great in heaven. As the Apostle says; In all
things give thanks, because for the most part we are forgetful; so also may
it well be said; In all things be patient, because our nature is such, and
so far from patience. Coffeehouse, grudging, envying, murmuring, revenge,
these are matters almost inseparable from us, and patience cannot grow in our
hearts, before gods grace has watered them, that they may bring forth this
fruit. Cast not away patience which has great recompense of reward. For ye
have need of patience says the Apostle, that after ye have done the will of
God, ye might receive the promise of an enduring inheritance. For yet a very
little while, and he that shall Perseverance.
come, will come, and will not tarry. Let no man be weary of well doing;
For in due season we shall reap, if we fainte not. Let none of us deceive
our selves, God will not be mocked. For if our life be godly, we shall
hereafter reap life and joys eternal; If otherwise, death stands at the
door. The crop must be sowed in this world, the harvest must be in another
world, and then shall the Angels be the reapers; For they shall separate
and divide the good from the bad.

The grace of God teaches us to live soberly, righteously, Present world
and godly, in this present world. For all the doubt is in this present world,
where it is a hard matter for us to go upright, and to behave our selves in
the fear of God as we ought to do. For the life of man may well be compared
unto the passage of a ship in the sea, which through tempestuous weather may be
ouerturned by the mounting waves of the sea, or torn in pieces by the gunshot
of the enemy, and theeuish and mischievous pirates, or else may be dashed in
pieces against the rocks, or suddenly sunk in ye quick sands, or unawares
taken within the compass of a whirlpoole, and by the force and strength
thereof, carried violently into the bottom; but after it has once arrived at
the haven, there is no such doubt, there is no such fear. So is our life in
this present world, subject to many an overthrow, (the life of the body I
mean not, but the life of the soul, whereof we ought to have especial care)
sin within us abounding like the force of the enemy, the pirate, or the
mounting waves, frailties and infirmities, like the quick soft sands, evil
examples of other and their wicked counsels, like the dashing of the rocks,
the temptations and snares of the devil, like the force of a whirlepoole, which
never leave until we be brought to the bottom. If any of these take hold of
us in this present world, so that they prevail against us, we are gone.
Therefore thrice happy is he who by a godly life can avoid all these, and at
last arrive at the haven and take up his everlasting rest in heaven. Oh that we
could be godly and watchful in this present world, for in the world to come,
we shall have no hinderance, and nothing to let, but that most freely we may
serve God, and lead a godly life. Let us pray, that the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ may be with us, and that it may abound, who gave himself for the
sacrifice and satisfaction of our sins, that he might deliver us from this
present evil world. Gal. 1. Before that he suffered his passion, he prayed
for us, John. 17. that in this present evil world, we should not fall away from
God. I pray not says he, that thou should take them out of the world, but
that thou keep them from evil. And herehence grows the exhortation of the
Apostle, written to the Phil. chapter 2. 15. whereby he warns them, and us
also by them, that we should behave our selves blameless and pure, as the
sons of God, without rebuke, and that we should endeavor to shine as lights
in this present wicked world, dwelling in the midst of naughty and bad people.
Who by our example of godly life, may be won to be godly, in the day of Gods
visitation, whom the grace of God shall teach and touch their hearts, and call
them thoroughly. A great comfort we have, and a great encouragement to be godly,
because we are not under the law, but under grace, that is, we are free from
the curse of the law, that we may the more cheerfully give obedience thereunto,
being furthered and assisted by the grace of God, which strengthens us to do
his will. For the law is not given to the righteous, but to the unholy and to
the profane. The curse to the one, and the blessing to the other. Let us be
sanctified and holy, and keep our hearts from an evil conscience; let us hold
out our profession without wavering, seeing that we look for the performance
of great promises, which he has made unto us, that will not deceive us. The
deceit of sin is ready to harden our hearts, and make us continually fall
away. The best are mightily tempted, and much adoo they have to keep and hold
their own. How necessary therefore is it for every one of us, to provoke one
another to love and to good works. Let every one of us strive above our
strength, with prayer for Gods assistance, and so much the more, because the
day of the Lord and the coming of Christ, draws near. And i^ this do not
persuade us, yet that which may follow and fall out through our backsliding, may
through fear enforce us. For if we sin willingly, after that we have
undertaken the course of a godly life, there remains for us a fearful
looking for of judgment, which God in his wrath and heavy vengeance shall
power out. And better it had been for us not to have known the way of
godliness, then after we have known it to turn away. Rather let us be
stirred up and encouraged by the words of the Apostle S. Peter 2. Epist. 1. 10.
11. Wherefore brethren, give rather diligence, to make your calling and
election sure by your holy life and godly connersation. For if ye do these
things, ye shall never fall. And furthermore, by these means, an entering
shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ. And if we find that we are risen with Christ, let us
seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of
God. Our affections must be above and not on things beneath, which are on the
earth. And if we be dead unto sin, our life is hid with Christ in God. So
that when Christ which is our life shall appear, then shall we also appear
with him in glory.

Thus by gods help I have set down unto you the effect, of sanctification,
contained in these words of the Apostle. The grace of God has appeared,
teaching us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously, and godly, in this present world. Now follows the second part of
my division, noted in the text, which is a persuasion and a reason moving us to
this santification, A persuasion unto sanctification.
and that is, the glorious inheritance of the kingdom of God, expressed by ye
circumstance of Christ his coming, at which time the godly shall be received
into the kingdom of heaven, their joyful dwelling place; gathered out of
these words. Looking for the blessed hope, and appearing of the glory of the
mighty God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ. We cannot give our selves unto
the duties of godliness, unless we shall be in the expectation and looking
after the hope of another life, and therefore very fitly does the Apostle join
unto ye duties of a godly life, this speech. Waiting for ye blessed hope, etc.
Faith must give us assurance of greater glory from god, ere we can let go ye
hold we have here beneath. Therefore it is made a special note of gods
children, and necessarily toyned unto his worship to be in expectation of the
latter day, and the glory, and of Christ his coming, who shall bestow this
benefit upon the godly, as to deliver them from the wrath to come. The Apostle
going about to persuade the Thessalonians, takes his effectual reason from
that which was in most reverence and regard with them, and likewise to bring
them into ye earnest consideration of his words, framing his speech thus. 2.
These. 2. I beseech you brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
our gathering together and uniting unto him. So that the looking for of the
last day, seems to him to be in great reverence, regard, and assured
expectation among them. And when he labors to lift them off the earth,
commonly he reareth them up with no other instrument then this, that is, the
waiting for the glory and hope of another life. And in the third to the Phil.
opening the mean of their stay from hunting after worldly and transitory
matters, with the false Apostles which minded earthly things, he says thus;
But our conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for a savior, even the
Lord Jesus, who shall change our vile body, that it may be like his glorious
body. In the 11. to the Heb. the obedience of Abraham in leaving his own
country, not knowing whither he should go, nor what should become of him, is
ascribed to this, that he waited for a city that had a foundation, whose
builder and maker is God. For all things in the world are subject to
corruption and alteration. The great things that are spoken of Moses in
accomp^ing the rebuke of Christ to be of more value than the treasures of
Egypt, and his not fearing the fury of the king, is only imputed to this,
that he was as if he had seen him that is invisible. The coming of the glory
of ye great God was always before his eyes. The greatness of the thing, and
the excellency of it, is noted in these words. The glory of the great God our
savior Christ. The same glory which ye great God our savior Christ inheriteth,
is that which we wait for, and hepe in due time according to our measure, to
be partakers of. Most worthy it is the waiting for, and great cause there is
why we should be moved to sanctification and holiness of life, having so great
things in expectation. We beseech you says S. Paul, 1. These. 2. 12. that ye
would walk worthy of God, who vouchsafes to call you unto his own kingdom
and glory. The glory of this world dazeleth our cies, and therefore must we be
drawn up by meditation of greater things, before we shall be able to let these
be of small reckning and account with us. The greatness of the glory once
thoroughly digested, would set these in a base and low place, it would make the
things of this life vanish as smoke from our presence. While in mind and
inward thought we behold and look, not on the things which are seen, but on
the things which are not seen. For the things which are seen, are temporal,
but the things which are not seen, are eternal. If it be but the expectation
of a transitory kingdom, when it is once devoured and digested by hope, we
see it makes men neglect lives, goods, lands, friends, wife, and children,
and so to hazard all. The Merchant that is in expectation of some great gain,
we see into what unknown countries, into what dangers by sea he will commit
himself. The great regard and care that is had every where to the things here
below, the greedy following after them, the careful pursuing of pleasures,
profits, and honors, do plainly speak, that the hope of another life is not
yet settled in the hearts of a number; and that is the cause that godliness and
a holy life is so little practiced and performed. Let us call to remembrance,
how that in this life is our day to wait, and this is our time to serve, and we
must assure our selves with the holy Apostle S. Paul, 2. Tim. 4. that we have
fought a good fight against our ghostly enemies, sin, the world, and the
devil, and that we have led our lives in the fear of God, before we can, or
shall truly say, and our conscience witness unto us, that from henceforth is
laid up for me the crown of righteousness. And if our consciences and the
good spirit of God can warrant our hearts herein, without all doubt and fear,
then when Christ which is our life shall appear, shall be glorious and appear
with him in glory. There is no pleasure in this world, which the Lord has not
matched with some grief and pain, to take away and remove (if it might be)
our delight, and to place it in things of greater estimation, and which shall be
more sure unto us. If the glory of God cannot prevail against us, ^^ it
cannot change our taste, and that the pleasures of this life be more sweet
unto us, this sweet shall not always (...), but as after a fair day comes a
foul, and after a calm a tempest, and so misery in the world to come shall
follow earthly delights, and this our transitory worldly happiness. If so
great hire as is Gods own glory cannot allure us, brutish and senseless must
then our nature needs be; what a greater argument and proof can we have of
our blockishnesse, then that so great things can get no more attendance of us?
The truth is, that we are too much persuaded of the excellency of these
worldly matters, as pleasures, honors, riches and such like. And therefore in
all places that are alleged, and which speak of the waiting for of Christ his
coming, there the benefit is set sorth with it, and the greatness thereof
remembered: which points at our darkness and unbelief herein, and tells us,
that the glory of this world stands as a cloud between the great glory which
is to come, and our blinded sight. Wherefore let ve enlarge our hope, and by
meditation and prayer, enter into some serious and weighty consideration of
the length, breadth, and depth of that glory. So shall we see such a portion of
it, as will comfort us, even in our great afflictions and deepest extremities,
counting ^^ a great honor, that we are vouchsafed his service, as the Apostles
heretofore have rejoiced herein. And if the waiting for of that glory be so
great, as shall swallow up all grief and sorrow, which afflictions may bring
with them; how much more shall the same encourage us to a holy and sanctified
life, and to all duties of godliness?

And now am I come to the last part of my text, which I purpose God willing in
a few words to end, least ye should be (...) much wearied, and too forgetful.
This third part sets down the cause of our sanctification in these words;
Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purge us to be a peculiar people, zealous of good works. The cause of our
sanctification lies The cause of sanctification.
partly in the death and passion of Christ, and partly in the power of his
holy spirit, who is his vicegerent, and deputy here on earth. Before it
pleased our savior to die for us, and by the shedding of his precious blood to
cleanse us from our sins, we were altogether polluted, and as the Prophet
says, lying in our blood. Grievous sins in the sight of God, miserable
wretches appointed to death, because through our just deserts, we were to
look for nothing else but eternal torments. In which miserable and woeful
estate, our pitiful Savior seeing us to be in, gave himself and offered
himself most willingly to do us all the good he could, and to make us of a
defiled and vnclean^ people clean and holy. And because in the law of Moses,
sacrifices were offered up for the sins of the people, and beasts slain and
blood shed, (as we read Heb. 9. 22. All things were by the law purged with
blood, and without shedding of blood is no remission and forgiveness)
therefore it pleased our Savior Christ to shed his dearest blood, that as the
Prophet Esaias, ca. 53. says; by his stripes we were healed, so by his blood we
might be cleansed. Which thing the Prophet David means in his 51. Psalm. which
is the Psalm of his repentance, wherein he shows his hearty grief, and his
unfeigned sorrow for those heinous sins, whereby he had provoked Gods wrath
against him. Have mercy upon me O God according to thy loving kindness,
according to thy compassions put away mine iniquities. Wash me thoroughly from
mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. Purge me with hisope, and I
shall be clean, wash me and I shall be whiter then snow. Now, if the blood of
bulls and goats and heiffers, in the time of Moses law, (which law God
ordained, though Moses was the minister) if the blood of these beasts in Moses
law, sprinckling them that were unclean, did sanctify and cleanse them by an
outward kind of clensing and sanctification? How much more says the Apostle,
Heb. 9. 14. shall the blood of Christ, that most perfect and absolute
sacrifice, who through the eternal spirit, offered himself without spot to
God, purge your consciences from dead works, to serve the living God. At the
time of his death and passion this matter was most notably declared, when as
his side being pierced through with a spear, there issued out from thence both
water and blood; to give out a most effectual signification, that he was the
cause of our sanctification and cleansing from our sins. Which is proved by
that which we read. I. Corinth. 6. Know ye not (says the Apostle) that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither
fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor buggerers, nor
thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkardes, nor railers, nor extortioners shall
inherit the kingdom of God. And such were some of you, and who can say, my
heart is clear? But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified and made clean in
the name of the Lord Jesus, that is, by the shedding of his blood, and also we
are sanctified and made clean (says he) by the spirit of our God. According
to that of the Prophet David in the Psalm aforesaid: Wash me thoroughly, and
cleanse me from my sin, and establish me with thy free spirit, which may
assure me that I am drawn out of the slavery of sin, and that my guiltiness
shall be no more laid to my charge. The law entered thereupon, that the offense
should abound; that is, ye it might be known to be notorious: nevertheless
where sin abounded, there grace abounded much more. That as sin had reigned
unto death, so might grace also reign by righteousness and sanctification unto
eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. The which grace, that is, the
forgiveness of our sins through the blood of Christ, the good spirit of God
the holy Ghost does certify unto our hearts. And therefore it is well said to
be the comfortor, as our Savior Christ promised, that after his ascension up
into heaven, he would send the comfortour. Ib. 14. 16. and 16. 7. By the
virtue of which spirit, the power of sin is beaten down, and our hearts are
renewed, our minds altered, our lives changed, and we become new creatures,
which before were foul and filthy, ougly, and loathsome, through the
deformity of sin, and now are we sanctified and made holy.

But wherefore has Christ redeemed us from all our (...) of good works.
iniquity, and purged us, that we might be a peculiar people unto himself, if
it be not to this intent and purpose, that we should be zealous of good
works. A thankful mind would ask how so great benefits might be requited,
and if no recompense could be made, as certainly it cannot, it would be
desirous to know how part of a mends might be made, and would be marvelous
ready to put in practice any duty which might show the thankfulness
thereof. Thou need not in this matter to go far to enquire and search it
out, only this is required of thee, that thou may show thy thankfulness,
be zealous of good works. For we are the workmanship of God, esperially by
grace, created anew in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has ordained
that we should walk in them. Here are all carnal gospellers condemned, who
live in hope, that under the countenance of their profession, all liberty of
life will be borne out well enough. Who turn the grace of God into
wantonness, and make their profession their shame, making Christ his death to
be nothing else, but as it were a boude unto their lewd life. Here may we
see, that the Lord has not laid down his life, to purchase no other thing at
our hands besides a profession of the truth, but that he bought with his blood
a zealous addicting of our selves to Christian conversation. It is a wonder to
see how the wicked will boast of the benefit of Christ his blood, how mighty
it is to merit, how sufficient to save from sin. But for all that, they will
not give over any liberty of life, that before they have enjoyed, whereas the
life of Christ was given to purchase a new conversation, as well as a new
profession. For he gave himself for us, that we might give our selves unto
him, being a peculiar people, zealous of good works. Let us mark it then my
brethren, that he gave himself for us, that our life might be let out to
honor him. He made not so slender a purchase with so great a price, as if he
had a deep and sorrowful sigh, or a good word at our last breath, that would
suffice him; no, his life was given for the purchase of a zealous giving of our
lives to those works. And therefore does the Apostle tell us, that we are not
our own, as to frame our lives after our own liking, but we are to serve the
Lord both with our body and with our spirit, because they are the Lords, who
has bought them with a price. If we humble not not our selves to a zealous
following of good works, we withhold the Lords due, for he has paid a great
price, to purchase a good life at our hands, and dearly paid for a life led
in zealous obedience unto his word. For we are not barely to give some good
words, either to show some good countenance toward religion and Christian
conversation, but to have our conversation declare, that we are affected with
the same, and become studious of such an estate of life. And such are they
which declare themselves to be the peculiar people, for whom the Lord laid
out his life. As for those who walk so indifferently, between true religion
and false, that a man cannot discern whether they are more inclined unto, as
also those that walk so even between a eiuill life and a Christianlike
behavior, that the difference is not easily perceived, they do declare
themselves as yet not to be affected in desire toward those duties, which the
Lord has laid upon his people to perform. Now where this purchase of his has
taken place and effect, they are become a peculiar people, zealous of good
works. And if cold and lukewarm christians, may have but little comfort from
the death of Christ, what shall become of them who are sworn enemies either to
true religion, or else to a good life and christian behavior? It is said here,
that we must be purged, and so the Apostle would have us to become a peculiar
people unto our God, zealous of good works. Which agrees with that of S. Peter
1. Ep. 2. 9. Ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a
peculiar people, that ye should show forth the virtues of him that has called
you out of darkness, into his marvelous light. Which in time past were not a
people, yet are now the people of God; which in time past were not under me
rcie, but now have obtained mercy. He gave himself to purge us, which office
of purging, the holy ghost performs, not by miracle, but by means, as I have
said before.

Which spirit of God, pray we that it may so work together with his grace in
our hearts, y^ we may be thoroughly taught, and also persuaded utterly to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, as we have made a vow and faithful promise
thereof in our baptism, so that we may live soberly without excess and riot,
righteously without doing injury and wrong, and godly with a care to do all
good works, whereby we may please God, and live in favor and credit among
men. Spending as much time as remains in this life, not after the lusts of
the flesh, or the vanities of the world, or after the temptations of the
devil, but after the will of God: knowing this, that if we live after the
flesh we shall die; but if we mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit, we
shall live. And what though some should mock at us for our reformed life, and
godly and holy conversation, (for the devil will stir us up enemies enough)
for all such matters we must be pr^uided, and prepare our selves beforehand. And
this is a great comfort unto us in that matter, to teach us not to be dismayed,
but still to hold on our course constantly, considering that they that are so
wilfully and so maliciously bent against us, shall give account of their
doings, to him that is ready to judge them. Rather let us be contrarily minded
unto them, and let us learn to set out our selves against all worldly
hinderaunces whatsoever, framing our selves to be such, as look for the
blessed hope and appearing of the glory of the Almighty God, and of our
Savior Jesus Christ. And let us not make the death of Christ of so small
account, as not to be zealous and careful of good works, seeing he took upon
him a bitter death for our sakes, not only to deliver us from our ^innes, but
also that we should lead a godly, a holy, and sanctified life. Which God
grant, and give us the grace that we may so do. And the Lord guide our
hearts, to the love of God, and to the waiting for of Christ. To God the
Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, three persons, and one
everliving God, be rendered all praise, dominion and power, now and for evermore.

Amen. Deo gratia solique gloria.
Here ends the Pattern of Sanctification.
To the Right Worshipful and one of his chiefest friends, M. Francis Newport
Esquire, Justice of Peace and Quorum, in the County of Salop, S. I. wishes
blessings of God, in this life, and the joys of that which is to come.
THe remembrance of your former courtesies, (Right Worshipful) makes me that I
cannot forget you, when I remember my chiefest friends. Wherefore devising with
my self, how I might in some sort show my thankful mind toward you, I could
not do it otherwise, then by presenting this slender gift of my study before
your eyes, wishing and praying, that the effect and meaning thereof, might take
so deep a consideration in your heart, that it may work your heavenly
consolation and assurance. Whose patronage likewise I humbly desire, may give
credit and countenance thereunto. I should have remembered the right worshipful
my Lady your mother, but the matters of learning, are more fit to be directed
to men of knowledge, then unto that sex, which is not so well acquainted
therewith. Only this I may say, to show my good will from my heart, and to give
unto her Ladyship her due, that although her estate be worshipful, yet is her
report and remembrance honorable. As long as she lives she shall increase it,
and when it shall please God to take her to himself, she shall not loose it.
God requite unto her, and comfort her in her most need, as she has
bountifully relieved and comforted my father and mother, and us his children,
even all the household of us. And I doubt not, but that many housholdes in
Shropshire, especially in Shrewesbury, may say the same. Yet ought this so
much to be her comfort, as that her only stay, I mean her salvation, is
wrought by the death and precious blood-sheading of Jesus Christ our Savior,
only of his mercy, without any desert of ours, and by no other means
whatsoever. I would to God that many, both honorable and worshipful women in
the land, (whom God has enriched, no doubt to do good to others, and to
supply the wants of those that stand in need) would take her course, that they
might deserve the like commendation, and have the prayers and hearts of the
people, which is more worth, then all their lands and treasures, or any
other comfort in the world. And thus having signified my good will, and
testified my duty, praying your worship, to vouchsafe the reading of that
wherein I have taken some pains, although it be not so much worth, I commit
you to the tuition of the Almighty, and humbly take my leave.

Your Worships in his prayers to God, for you and yours. S. I.

The Comfort of ADOPTION.
Romans 8. 15. 16. 17. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear
again: but ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba,
Father. The same spirit bears witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God. If we be children, we are also heirs, even the heirs of
God, and heirs annexed with Christ.
This Text stands on three parts.
1 The greatness of this benefit, by comparison of contrariety. Ye have not
received the spirit of bondage, but of adoption. 2 The assurance of adoption.
The same spirit bears witness with our spirit. 3 The worthiness of
adoption. If we be children, we are also heirs.
THe Method that the Apostle uses in this Epistle to the Romans, is first
concerning Justification and Righteousness. Secondly, concerning
Sanctification and Holiness. And after that, according to his order, he
entreats of Adoption, which is a gift, a privilege and dignity, added to
the former. Through repentance and a lively faith, taking hold of the promises
of God, we are made righteous, and so taken, and so accounted before God, by ye
means of Christ, and being made righteous, we are also endued with a measure of
Gods spirit and grace, to holiness of life. So ye having received these two
excellent gifts, we have a full assurance of Gods favor toward us, and that is
performed by adoption. Which is a seal and certain token unto us, that we
delivered from ye curse of the law, which is the ministration of death and
condemnation. Whereas the assurance and full persuasion of our adoption, is the
ministry and doctrine of all comfort and consolation. The text which I have
read unto you, may be divided into three several parts. Whereof the first
contains the greatness of the benifit of adoption, in consideration of the
freedom we reap thereby, being delivered from ye slavery and fear of the law,
in these words. Ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again; but
the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba father. The second part
contains the assurance of our adoption in these words. The same spirit
bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God. The third
part shows the worthiness of our adoption, in these words. If we be
children, we are also heirs, even the heirs of God, and heirs annexed with
Christ. The greatness of the benefit of adoption, in consideration of the
freedom we reap thereby, being delivered from the slavery and fear of the
law, is very well expressed by that place of scripture, set down in the
Epistle to the Heb. 12 (agreeing with this; For ye have not received the spirit
of bondage to fear again, but the spirit of adoption) ye are not come says
the Apostle to the mount that might be touched, nor unto burning fire, nor to
blackness and darkness, and tempest. Neither unto the sound of a trumpet, and
the voice of words, which they that heard excused themselves, that ye word
should not be spoken to them any more, (for they were not able to abide that
which was commanded. And so terrible was ye sight which appeared, that Moses
said; I fear and quake). But ye are come unto the mount Sion, and to the city
of the living God, the celestial Jerusalem, and to the company of innumerable
Angels, and to the congregation of the first borne, which are written in
heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just and perfect
men. They that are under the law, are also under the curse of the law, and
where the curse is, there is nothing to be looked for but death and
condemnation, which brings forth trembling and fear. And so much the more
are we in fear, in bondage, and slavery, subject to the curse and condemnation
of the law, to death and gods dreadful judgment, because we are borne the
children of wrath. Wherefore God sent his natural son Christ into the world,
that through his grace, he might adopt unto himself many children of us, which
otherwise were but miserable castawaies. Who by the grace and free favor of
God being adopted, have not only their sins pardoned and forgiven, but also
are cladde with the innocence and righteousness of Christ, whereby they are
brought into favor, and are made of fearful captives, being under the
bondage of sin and Satan, the joyful sons and children of God, set at
liberty to do the works of God, and to live in his holy obedience. What
greater fear can there be to our consciences, then when this is pronounced
against us? Cursed is he that continues not in all the works of the law to
do them. And he that offends in one point of the law, is guilty of all.
Who is it amongst us all, that can say my heart is clean? And who is it, that
cannot justly condemn himself in the breach of every particular point of Gods
law and of his commandments? And if our heart condemn us, God is greater
then our hearts, and knows all. Here hence therefore can nothing arise but
fear, and such a fear which is beyond measure, leading us unto desperation,
making us to think no better of our selves, then as miserable wretches,
forlorn and destitute of all comfort, as Cain was, who in fearful sort went
always mourning and crying out, saying; My sin is heavier then I can bear.
The punishment of God is still upon me, and my conscience is never at rest. So
is ye sinful and fearful conscience always in the estate of a servant, still
fearing the whip and the scourge, and as a gally-slaue under Turkish thraldom,
whose life is no better then a torment. And if ye delivery of the law were so
fearful, that he that had least cause to fear, and was beloned of God, did
tremble and quake, how much more fearful and terrible shall ye execution of
that law be. Moses the blessed servant of God in a fright, ye only beloved son
of God in deep agonies, the one trembles, the other for anguish sweateth
blood. And how should not the children of wrath be overwhelmed with horror,
considering our heavy burden of sin, which breeds within us (especially them
that are truly touched) as it were a sea of sorrow, whose waves, as they
cannot be numbered, so are our sorrows never at an end until God send freedom,
one wave still ouertaking another, and one fear in the neck of another. Being
possessed with the spirit of bondage, how may it be that we may avoid our
doleful dumpes. So is it with them that have any feeling of that fearful
estate y^ hangs over their heads. Whereas by nature we are all of us given to
wicked ways with greediness, and are so subject to the bondage and slavery of
the devil and of sin, that we think no way better then the broad way that
leads to destruction, thinking that heaven is in this world, and that hell is
but an old wives tale, saying unto our selves, Peace, peace, and all is in
safety, when suddenly either death shall overtake us, or the latter day bring
us to judgment. True it is, that which the eye sees not, the heart rueth not,
and the devil has diverse devices to blind the eyes of our understanding, to
make us still to run on, until it be too late to turn back. Being destitute
of the grace of God, and not as yet regenerate, we are holden under the evil
spirit of bondage, setting all our delight in earthly and transitory things,
yielding up our selves to our fleshly desires, being strangers from God and
strangers from our redeemer, strangers from the life to come, and altogether
unacquainted with his grace. Whereby although we may think, we are in the estate
of freedom and as freemen, yet are we of no better account then ye basest
servants that live, and again under such a master, whose service is nothing
else but tyranny, shaddowed over with flattery, a roaring lion seeking after
his pray, and a greedy wolf clothed in a sheep skin. But as Christ came into
ye world to destroy the works of ye devil, so has he caused his grace to be
published, and sent his spirit into our hearts, to open the eyes of our
understanding, to turn our hearts, and make them relent, to make us see how
cruel our master is whom we serve, and how dangerous an estate we are in,
being nothing but bondage and slavery, death and destruction. And this is ye
peculiar effect of the spirit of God, and of his grace, to show us our
miserable estate by ye law of God, to strike our consciences with the
rememembrance of our sins, that we may understand, that we are in a desperate
estate, unless we fly to Christ for succor. Wherefore being directed by ye
spirit of god, our stubburn hearts are made to yield, and to shed abundance of
tears, in consideration we have offended God. Which spirit of freedom,
provoke us to fly unto Christ our only succor, and by a steadfast faith, to
take hold of ye promises of gods mercy, through the death of Christ, whereby it
comes to pass, y^ our sins are forgiven, and although we are unworthy
thereof, are we accounted and numbered among the children of God. This is that
spirit of adoption, that makes us rejoice under the glorious liberty of the
sons of GOD. Which makes our joy so much the more abundant, in
consideration of our fearful estate, whereby we were so miserable. So that
we may boldly triumph with the Apostle, saying; Reioyee in the Lord always,
and again I say rejoice. For what greater joy can there be, then the joy and
peace of a quiet conscience, being fully resolved of forgiveness of sins,
and of the favor of God, who has advanced us to so high a dignity, as of
his enemies to make us his sons and children. Wherefore in meditation of our
former estate, let us follow the Apostles counsel, 1. Pet. 1. 17. Pass the
time of your dwelling here in fear, and live not carelessly, as thongh we might
do what we list, much like to wanton children, which had need continually to
be corrected with the rod. But as the Apostle says, Brethren be not children
in understanding, but as concerning maliciousness be children, but in
understanding be of a ripe age; so many I say brethren as concerning
wickedness and ungodly behavior, let us be children, but as concerning the
fear of God, let us grow from strength to strength, until we be of a ripe
age. A dutiful servant stands always in fear and distrust, that that
which he does to his master be not perfitly and sufficiently done, as one
desirous to continue his masters favor and good liking toward him. So also a
dutiful child, should be careful still to please his father, for fear not
only of loosing his fathers good will, but also of hindering himself from ye
which otherwise his father would leave him and do for him. How much more should
an adopted child look unto himself and to his ways, because he is taken in
but of favor without any desert, and only upon pity and compassion, rather
then upon any other consideration. Wherefore it is not for us to make a triumph
of our adoption, and to make our boast and vaunt of it, but rather in a godly
sort to humble our selves through fear, forecasting with our selves how to
continue Gods good will toward us, which through our negligence and careless
behavior may be removed. For as they that come to goods, to lands, and
possessions, by favor and friendship and by adoption, through their own
foolishnes may dispossess themselves of all: so if a godly wisdom be not
used, the benefit of adoption may greatly be disgraced in us, and we may bring
our selves into that case, as justly to think that we are none of Gods
children. So did that godly king David, and that holy blessed Apostle S. Peter
by their infamous sins, so alter the certainty of their adoption, as though
they had quite been forsaken of God. So ye it is not without great cause, that
ye Apostle uses these words; Let him y^ stands, take heed least he fall. As
if he had said, let the adopted children of God take heed, lest they offend
God, and let the testimony of a good conscience, be always a rejoicing unto
them, and that the certainty of our adoption may always be warranted unto us.
Where is therefore our joy, or where is our chiefest care grounded and settled?
not in the things of this world, neither in this world. Better it is to be in
the house of mourning, then to be in the house of laughter; better it is to
mourn for our ^innes past, then in worldly sort to rejoice of our adoptions.
Considering that when Adam and Eve were in the chiefest worldly joy, and
thought themselves in the estate of Angels, and in high favor with God, they
procured themselves to be mimiserable wretches, and not worthy the name of
gods children. Who before had a blessing, if they had continued in the favor
and grace of God, and could have perceived their happy estate, or if at
lestwise they could have foreseen the danger that would have followed; but
insteede of a blessing, they received a curse; and instead of favor, great
displeasure. Although we may be certified of our adoption, yet it beh^ueth us
so long as we dwell in this world, and are compassed with this our sinful
flesh, to be circumspect and wise, to be wary and watchful, knowing that the
broad way is as near unto us as the narrow way, the right hand as near as
the left, the devil tempting, the world enticing, the flesh yielding, nay
fighting and resisting the good spirit of God, and taking scorn of all good
counsel and friendly admonition. Work forth your salvation with fear and
trembling, still standing in doubt, that thou have not performed thy duty as
thou ^ughtest. Fearing also least we should fall into such foul faults, as in
the time of our ignorance and sinful course of (...), we did please our selves
and highly offended god. And so much the more, because we shall be void of all
excuse, knowing what is well pleasing to God, and also what is detestable in
his sight, and yet forsaking the right hand and taking the left; I mean
refusing that which is good, and taking the way which leads to destruction.
We which by nature were the grafts of the wild olive tree, I mean the
children of Gods wrath, are by a supernatural working and most wonderful
favor, grafted into the right and true olive, and by adoption and grace, made
and accounted the children of God. And seeing by grace and favor thou stand
and art accepted, be not high minded, but fear; boast not thy self of Gods
gift, which is given unto thee through faith in Jesus Christ, but rather show
thy self mindful and careful for his benefit, having the fear of God
always before thy eyes, to keep thee from all evil ways. Why thou will say,
if God has made me his child, and adopted me through faith in Christ, I shall
never do amiss. But know, that our life in this world is but a trial, and
that it is as a castle beset and besieged with many enemies, and if in this
life and al thy life, thou do not hold on a good course, and persevere and
continue therein unto thy end, thy great persuasion of ye dignity, as to be
called and accounted ye child of God, may fail, and all thy safety, and all
thy rejoicing, may be nothing else, but as the proverb is, A ^astle come
down. For if God spared not the Angels, which kept not their first estate, but
has reserved them in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment
of ye great day, how shall we think to be spared, if we abuse Gods blessing of
adoption, turning the grace of God into wantonness, and instead of obedient
children, making our selves wilful wantons, for whom there is nothing so fit,
as is the rod, and correction, and punishment? But if we will needs boast that
we are the adopted children of God, let our boasting and rejoicing be seen in
this, as to rejoice of our infirmities, and to rejoice that by Gods grace we
are rid from many foul faults, whereunto in former times we were inclined,
and before we were the adopted children of God, and that by the force, and
effect, and power, of Gods good spirit, such matters are overcome in us. If we
will rejoice of our adoption, let us rejoice that through the means of our
redeemer, we are delivered and freed from Gods displeasure, from damnation, and
from the devil, from hell, and from hell torments. According to that we read,
Hebr. 2. 14. 15. Forasmuch then as the children were partakers of flesh and
blood, he also himself likewise took part with them, that he might destroy
through death, him that had the power of death, that is, the devil. And that
he might deliver all them, which for fear of death, were all their life time
subject to bondage. But now by Gods grace, having received so great a
privilege, as to be his adopted children, although it be good for us to fear,
yet our fear is not such, as may proceed from the spirit of bondage. Neither
let us be dismayed, seeing that our consciences are quieted, and we thoroughly
persuaded of the forgiveness of our sins, but rather let us rejoice, with
the exceeding comfort of the holy Ghost, which powers forth sweet joys into
the hearts of Gods children, and fills them with joy; let us I say rejoice,
that we may with boldness approach to the throne of grace, and with meekness
and cheerfulness of spirit, call God our loving and merciful father. For we
have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again, but we have received
the spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, that is to say, Father.

Where by the way, it may not seem impertinent or beside How we are adopted.
the purpose, to know the order and manner how we are made and adopted the
children of God, to put a difference betwixt that adoption which is used in
this world, and the heavenly adoption which comes from God. That adoption
which is used among us, is in respect of alliance and kindred, as having no
children of our own, we take their children to be ours, which are next of
kindred, or sometimes if we fancy any of our friends children, or peradventure
strangers; we endowe them with goods and lands, and call them by our names.
Again, for some consideration which we see to be in them, whom we adopt and
make our children, whereby we think them in some sort, worthy of favor; as
beauty and comely personage, wisdom, courage, and manliness, eloquence,
sobriety, decent and civil behauior, and such like; which matters are admired
and highly esteemed among men, which win their hearts, and make them show favor.
But in this our heavenly adoption, there is no such matter, it is not flesh and
blood which God respects, no although they proceed from the loins and lineage
of Abraham and his posterity, unto whom the promises were made, but they only
that are of the faith of Abraham. For as the circumcisition of the heart is
esteemed of God, then that which is outward, so are they the sons and
children of God, not which appear to the world, (for the world knows them
not) but who by the mercy and favor of God, are drawn from the filth of the
world, and are purified and cleansed by the blood of Jesus Christ. Which are
borne not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man but of
God: who by the preaching of his word, are begotten unto him, and who by a
lively faith have received him, to such has God given power to be his adopted
children, even to them which believe in his name. Among us lightly we make our
kindred, or friends, or peradventure strangers our adopted children, but who
is it that will make that choice of his enemies? But such is the pity and
compassion of our merciful God, who makes us his children, who by nature
would be none of his children, and who are given rather to hate, then to love
God. What is it therefore that God can see in us, wherefore he should adopt us?
surely nothing, but that which may make a separation; but that God is so
careful of us, that he sends us his word, even the word of reconciliation,
that we might be partakers of his adoption. It is not our good works, which are
too light in the balance, it is not any desert of ours, whereby we should be
received into favor? Enough there is in us, and rather too much, to make us to
be refused and hated, but that which should procure Gods favor toward us,
there is nothing but that which is his, and none of ours. Which is his mercy
and loving kindness, whereby he calls us, imbraceth us, closes and adopteth
us, as those for whom he reserueth a kingdom.

So much for the first part of this text, that as touching the greatness of of
the benefit of adoption, in consideration of the freedom we reap thereby,
being delivered from the slavery and fear of the law, and being altogether
eased of the burden,which comes by ye spirit of bondage. Where also you have
heard, how and in what order and manner, we are made and adopted the children
of God.

2.
The second part shows the assurance of our adoption, The assurance of
adoption.
in these words. The same spirit (meaning the spirit of adoption) bears
witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God. And very necessary
is it, that the weak spirits and doubting minds of Gods children, should thus
be strengthened and confirmed, who have many a thousand thought, to cast them
beside the steadfastness of their hope, still given to wavering, still given to
distrusting. For how can it be otherwise, seeing the devil has diverse
policies to cast us into fears, which unless we were mightily sustained by
the spirit of God, were enough utterly to overthrow us, our minds and
consciences being most easy to be cast down. Because as the Apostle
witnesses to the Heb. cap. 2. 15. All their life time, they were subject to
bondage, for fear of death, sitting in darkness and in the shadow of death,
looking rather for their destruction, then for their salvation. Carnal
Gospellers and wordly professors, can persuade themselves any thing, but they
that are truly touched and humbled in so joyful a change, as from the fear of
destruction to be made partakers of adoption, live as it were betwixt fear and
hope, wondering how they should be made partakers of so excellent an estate, as
from the children of captivity, to be made the children of freedom, from the
the children of wrath, to be mads the children of mercy. Weak minds and faint
hearts, until ye assuredness of faith has banished all distrust. The
testimony of their adoption, may be somewhat settled in them, and although not
in all, yet in most of them, it is but weak and can scarcely be perceived, by
reason that they find in themselves a great strength of sin, and feeling also
the grace of God to be in a small measure, as it were a few sparks under a
great heap of ashes; and which as yet is more the continual accusations of
the devil, moving our consciences to despair. The strength of sin was so
great, in that elect vessel of God S. Paul, (who had such an evident token of
Gods adoption, that he was wrapped into the heavens and saw those things which
were not to be uttered, so that the love of God was confirmed toward him in
miraculous sort) the strength of sin was so great in him, that he was in a
manner violently drawn to do that which he hated. What I would (says he) that
do I not, but that which I hate, that do I. And I find such motions in my
sinful flesh, rebelling against the law of my mind, which prevail so far
with me, that they lead me captive unto the law of sin. The reward and wages
whereof, we know is death. By which reason, it seems we should be greatly
daunted and dismayed, in respect of our adoption unto life. Again the want of
the feeling of the graces of God, does work such a coldness of spirit, and
such a dullness in our senses, which may well breed a doubfulnesse in our
minds, and to make a wavering conscience to plead against it self. Which
made the Prophet David, who was so highly in favor with God, greatly to faint,
because the graces of God in respect of his grievous sins, lay as it were
buried within him. So that with grief of mind, he cried out for so great a
want; O Lord create in me a clean heart, and renew thy graces within me.
Restore me to the joy of thy salvation, hide thy face from my sins, and put
away all mine iniquities, make me to hear of joy and gladness, and let the
certainty of thy adoption and of my comfort, be established in my heart.
Finally, the devil moving our consciences to despair, may breed the greatest
doubt in our hearts, and make us believe, that though we are adopted, yet that
we are not Gods children, but rather that we are forsaken of him. Wherein we
must always remember the property of the devil, which is, that he goes
about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour. Whom says the Apostle,
Resist, being steadfast in faith, and hold fast the hope of your adoption. It is
satan's desire, to wi^^ow us as wheat, but he that has procured us to be
adopted, and by whose means we are made the sons and children of God, prays
for us y^ we might be strengthened, and also sends his spirit into our hearts,
to help us in our prayers, and makes requests for us with sighs which cannot
be expressed. Wherefore although the accusations of of the devil, be of great
force to throw us down, yet are the helps which it pleases God to grant us,
more auailable to raise us up again. Whereby it comes to pass, that our
hearts and consciences being settled in the assurance of the forgiveness of our
sins, and we being sanctified by the blood of Christ, are inwardly and fully
persuaded of our adoption, in such sort, that all doubting is removed away, and
all distrust banished. Yet nevertheless, because by the means aforesaid, that
is, by the strength of sin which dwells within us, the weakness of gods
graces, the troublesome accusations of the devil, the steadfastness of our
adoption, may sometime or other be called in question: therefore God of his
goodness to support our feeble spirits and weak thoughts, has given us his
own spirit, to be a fellow witness with our spirit, fully to persuade and
assure us. For the elect and chosen children of God, have in themselves the
spirit of Jesus Christ, testifying unto them, and persuading them, that they
are the adopted children of god. The same spirit of god, his fatherly
goodness, and that he will be a father unto us, and that he would have us so to
account of him, bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of
god. For this cause, amongst diverse other names wherewith the holy ghost is
entitled, this is one especial name and title, that it is called the spirit
of adoption, because it works in us the assurance of our adoption. Also it is
called a pawn or earnest, as we may read, 2. Corinthians. 1. 22. It is God who
has sealed us, and has given the earnest of the spirit in our hearts. Thus by
two most effectual parables ^ similitudes, are ye children of god confirmed in
the certainty of their adoption, by the parable of an earnest penny, and by
the parable of a seal. In making of a bargain, when part of the price is
paid and laid down in earnest, then assurance is made, that all the rest y^
remains behind, shall be well and truly paid. And as when an indenture or lease
is made, for ye peaceable possession of any lands and tenements, for the term
of a man's life, or for long time, the seal of ye landlord is put too, to make
the matter most certain and sure; so when ye child of god has received thus
much from ye holy ghest, as to be persuaded that he is adopted and chosen in
Christ, he may be in good hope, and is already put in good assurance, fully to
e^io^ eternal life in the kingdom of heaven. So familiar is God with us, as
to bring us to be persuaded of his good will, by such means as are most usual
with us. For what is more usual with us, then either the order of an earnest
penny or a seal, to put us out of all doubt, and to warrant that thing which
we have undertaken. Therefore ye Apostle in an other place does give us great
comfort, showing forth the determinate purpose of god, concerning this matter.
God says he, sent forth his son, and made him subi^^ unto the curse of the
la^^, that by undergoing the penalty and punishment, which that curse and
wrath of God did import, he might redeem them, which were under ye
condemnation of the law, and under the bondage of sin, and ^athan and hell,
that being released and delivered, they might receive the adoption of sons.
Wherefore says he, and ye most cheerfully, thou art no more a servant, but a
son. Now if thou be a son, thou art also the heir of God through Christ.
This assurance of gods holy spirit, is then most effectual, when it shall yield
us greatest comfort, and that is at the time of our departure out of this
world, and in ye hour of death. When all worldly comforts shall vanish, the^
shall this come in place, gods blessings in this world shall shall then take
their leave, wealth and possessions, wife and children, friends and
acquaintance, and we shall go naked out as we came naked in, only this
glorious apparel and this heavenly raiment shall remain, that we are the
adopted children of God, and that being along time strangers and pilgrims here
on earth, we shall now come to our home, and to our inheritance, reserved in
heaven for us. Here also shall the greatness and the sweetness of the comfort
appear, that when the devil shall be most busy with us, to lay our sins to
our charge, and when death shall approach, and the time of our passage draw
near, and when he shall use all means possible, to put us beside the assured
hope of our adoption, then shall the comfort of Gods good spirit, so strengthen
our hearts and consciences against the assaults of ye devil, that he shall go
away vanquished, and we imboldned. The^ shall our minds be lifted up with
cheerfulness, knowing that our redemption shall fully be accomplished, and our
adoption sealed and perfectly confirmed unto us. Contrariwise, the wicked at
the hour of death, How Adoption respects the wicked.
which in their life time have flattered themselves with the hope of their
adoption, shall then feel no certeintie, neither any comfort of the holy
Ghost, but in steed of comfort, they shall feel the horrible and dreadful
accusations of the devil, then to take place and be of force against them. The
wicked and reprobate, cannot have the testimony and witness of gods good
spirit to assure them, that they are the children of God, although for a time
their va^ne imaginations may deceive themselves, as also ye devil imitating the
spirit of god, does usually persuade carnal men and hipocrites, that they are
adopted, and that they shall be saved. But this persuasion of ye devil, is but an
illution, and their deceived hearts are not established by the assurance of
Gods spirit, which fills the heart with joy. Whereas their hearts are full of
doubtfulnesse, full of distrust, full of despair. It may be they may believe
for a time, but as for that st^dfast and enduring faith, whereby they may
truly say that God is their father, this is only in the elect children of
God, and those that are adopted. Whose perfect regeneration, it pleases God to
begin in this world, by sowing in their hearts the immortal seed of life,
whereby he does so certainly seal unto them the grace of his adoption, that it
shall continue firm unto the end. In the mean time the faithful are
admonished, carefully and humbly to examine themselves, least in steed of a
true faith, concerning their adoption, a carnal kind of security creep into
their minds and grow upon them, and compass them about, even as the Iuie does
the Oak. The wicked have never the feeling of gods grace, but after a confused
sort, taking hold as it were, rather of a shadow, then of a body. Because the
spirit of God, does truly and properly seal the forgiveness of their sins,
only in the hearts of the godly and the elect, that they may apply the same,
by an especial gift of faith, unto their comfort. Confusedly I say, the
ungodly receive the grace of God, not that they are partakers together with
the children of God of regeneration, but because they seem to have a ground of
faith after a common sort, which is hid with a veil and covering of
hypocrisy. Yet notwithstanding it may not be denied, that God does lighten
their minds, so far as they may ackowledge his grace and goodness toward
them, but this common sense and feeling of his grace, is so distinguished from
that comfortable assurance of gods spirit, which is in the elect, that the
wicked come never to that sound comfort and joy, which adoption brings with
it. For God does not so far show himself favorable unto them, as to take
them into his guarde and keeping, as though they were quite delivered from the
punishment of their sins, and from the fear of eternal death and damnation,
but only for the present time, God does give them a taste of his mercy.
Neither is it amiss, that God does lighten the minds of the wicked, with some
feeling of his gracious favor, the which anon withers and vanishes away,
through the hardness of their hearts, through their unsteadfast minds, and
through their own unthankfulness and backsliding, whereby they make themselves
more culpable, and the more inexcusable, all which is wonderfully brought to
pass, by the manifold wisdom of God.

That spirit of ours, which the Apostle talks off, is a renewed heart and a
sanctified mind, that fully and perfectly receives the benefit of adoption,
and unto which spirit of ours, gods spirit does also bear witness, that out
of all doubt, we are the adopted children of god. The ungodly, they have but as
it were a glimse, but unto the godly, this great benefit and high dignity is
fully revealed in such sort, that they do testify even to the end of their
lives, that they look for and earnestly desire the full accomplishment hereof.
Whereas the course of a good life, is soon altered in the ungodly, who with
the Dog return to his vomit, and with the Sow that was washed, to her
wallowing in the mire. Showing and giving manifest proof, that the hope of
adoption was never surely and certainly settled in them, deceiving others, much
more themselves, with shows and shadows, embracing the comfort of the world,
and setting light by the comfort of Gods good spirit, which they should
desire, even as hungry hearts, which thirst for pleasant waterbrookes.

There remain diverse other notes and marks, betwixt Notes of the assurance
of adoption.
the godly and ungodly, concerning adoption, to know who are adopted, and who
are not, amongst the rest, these two especially. The first is hearty and
fervent prayer to god, in the name of Christ. The second is, that they which
have an especial testimony and witness from the spirit of god, of their
adoption, have also in their hearts, the same affections to god, which children
have to their fathers, and which the godly do owe one to an other. The same
spirit that testifies to us, that we are the adopchildren of god, does also
make us to utter our prayers to Prayer.
Almighty GOD, with feruencie of heart and mind. Now this hearty, fervent,
and loud crying in the ears of God, can the devil give to no hipocrite,
neither to any ungodly person. For it is the special mark of the spirit of
God. Yea it is the thing that the devil hates most, whereby we resist the
devil, and whereby also he is driven back from us, which is a part of that
spiritual armor, whereby we are defended from him. In all places, where by
the counsel of Christ and his Apostles, we are admonished to take heed, these
are their words; Watch and pray, lest ye enter into temptation; For the devil
goes about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour. This is such a
weighty matter, to overthrow the works of the devil, that he has especial
care, by all means to keep his children the ungodly from it. Mark the
ungodly at any time, and see whether they have any mind and zeal to pray, or
if they do it at any time, it is rather for fashion sake, or any other
consideration, then willingly, rather upon an extraordinary necessity, and
extremity, then upon any ordinary duty, or dutiful affection. Which is to
small effect; for not every one that can say, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven. Mark if they be not given to any thing else, then to
submit themselves to so godly an exercise. Diverse hindrances can the devil
lay before us, to withdraw us from prayer. And in the ungodly, especially the
guiltiness of their consciences, does make them afraid to remember God. Or if
at any time they can find in their hearts to pray, the remembrance of Gods
judgments, and punishments for their heinous and usual offenses, hanging over
their heads, does make them to think of Gods presence no otherwise, then as
of the presence of a fearful judge. How then can they call him father, whose
consciences cannot as yet be thoroughly certified of the forgiveness of their
sins. Yea so far off is it, that the wicked and ungodly should be given to
prayer, that even the godly, are oftentimes backward therein. And therefore the
spirits of God, which bears witness to the hearts and consciences of the
godly, that they are the children of God, I say, the same spirit helps our
infirmities, and remoueth our backwardness, and by good motions does stir us
up and encourage us thereunto, directing also our requests, according to the
will of God. Yea although we know not how to pray, or what to pray as we ought,
or with what earnestness of mind, (for all these matters are strange to
flesh and blood) yet the spirit of God, it self makes request for us, and
that with such sighs and groans which cannot be expressed. We see therefore,
how that prayer is a true mark of the certainty of our adoption, and so much
the more, by that we shall feel our selves often given thereunto, and often to
use it, in all reverence, and humility, and earnestness, especially when we
feel the motions of Gods good spirit to move us thereunto. As also the wicked
and ungodly may know themselves to be far from adoption, because they neither
feel any such motions, being overcome of the devils temptations, and are also
most backward and most unwilling to bow their knees, and to humble their
hearts.

The second especial note or mark, whereby they that are the adopted children
of God, are discerned and known from them which are not adopted, is that in
the hearts of the adopted, there are such affections to godward, which children
Godly and Christian affections.
ought to bear to their fathers. Namely, love, fear, reverence, obedience,
thankfulness. For they call not upon god as upon a terrible judge, but as upon
a merciful and loving father. And these affections they have not, whom
sathanilludeth, and abuses with a fantastical imagination of their
salvation. For it may be, that through hypocrisy, or through custom, they may
call god father, but in truth and from the heart, they cannot do so: deceiving
themselves, thinking that they belong to god, when as another day they shall
find clean contrary. For the trial of these things, I mean whether we love
and fear god aright as we ought to do, and as it becomes the adopted
children of god, is perceived in a godly and Christian life. For they that
feel their hearts set to seek Gods honor, and who study to know his will
and commandementes, and frame themselves thereunto, leading their lives, not
after the desire of ye flesh to serve ye devil by sin, but set their minds to
love, honor, obey and serve God, for Gods own sake, and for his sake also to
love their neighbors, whether they be friends or foes, doing good to every
one, as opportunity serves, and willingly hurting no man: such may well rejoice
in God, perceiving by the trade of their lives, that they unfeignedly have the
right knowledge of God, a lively faith, a steadfast faith, a true and upright
and sincere fear of God, by which fruits, they give certain declaration of
that adoption, whereby they are sealed unto God. But they that cast away the
yoke of Gods commandementes from their neck, and give themselves to live
without true repentance, after their own sensual minds and pleasures, not
regarding to know Gods word, and much less to live thereafter, such see not
their own hearts, thinking that they love God, and fear him and trust in him,
taking themselves to be the adopted children of God, yet are far wide, and
their foolish heart does lead them far astray. What is it for us to think we
belong to God, and yet live in sin? what is it if we come to the church, and in
an outward show of good works, would have others to think us to be Gods dear
children, when neither our own hearts and consciences, neither yet the
spirit of God, can testify that we are such, as we would seem to be, both
before God and in the sight of men? S. John says plainly (1. Ioh. 1.) If we
say that we have any company with God, and walk in darkness, doing that
which displeases God, we lie and the truth is not in us. Love and obedience
to God show forth our adoption, but they that pass not for the commandementes
of God, show that there is no love and obedience in them. 1. Ioh. He that says
he knows and love God, and yet keeps not his commandments is a lier. Some
falsely persuaded themselves, that they love God, when they hate their
neighbors, but the same Apostle tells them; If any man say I love God, and
yet hates his brother, he is a liar. He that says he is the light, and hates
his brother, he is still in darkness; he that loves his brother, dwells in
the light, but he that hates him, walks in darkness, and knows not
whither he goes, for darkness has blinded his eyes. And moreover he says;
Hereby we manifestly know ye children of god, from ye children of the devil, he
that does not righteously, is not ye child of god, neither he that hates his
brother. As the tree is known by his fruit, so is our adoption made known
unto us, by godly and christian affections. Let us not therefore any further
deceive our selves, in thinking we are the adopted children of god, when as yet
we have a greater delight in sin, then in god. For then our sinful lives shall
declare the contrary against us, and shall make us to be ashamed of our
boasting, whatsoever we shall think or say for our selves. It is not our fond
and vain imaginations, that the spirit of god does witness unto, but a
sanctified heart, and a clean soul, and a pure life, is the house that ye
spirit of god does dwell in, and which also does give such manner of people a
full assurance, that they pertain to god, and that as they are the sons of
god in this life, so shall they be the saints of god in another life. Also this
is no small token of our adoption, when we feel our hearts inclined, and our
minds marvelous desirous, Hearing God^ word.
to hear the word of god preached. According as we read, John. 8. He that is
of God, hears Gods words, ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of
God. For who do more scorn and disdain to hear gods word, and do make a jest
of it, then they who as we term the^, are graceless, and make little reckoning
whether they be accounted ye children of god or no. So that by the contrary,
it may evidently appear, that they in whom the grace of god has taken
effect, do greatly reverence, and greatly regard the word of god. Because not
only from time to time, it is a mean to seal gods promises in our hearts, and
to make us more and more to rejoice in the Lord, but also by little and little
(...) the selfsame mark in their foreheads. And although I might recite more,
I will add but one other token of Gods adoption in his children, and that is,
that they are sorry Sorry to see others offend.
when they see other do wickedly, and endeavor to withdraw them from their
wicked ways, giving them counsel, and admonishing them to the contrary,
hating their sins, and loving their souls. Exhorting also their brethren and
sisters, to continue in the grace of God, according to the counsel of the
Apostle; Let us exhort one another, and provoke unto good works. Take heed
brethren, lest at any time there be in any of you, an evil heart and
unfaithful, to depart away from the living God. But exhort one an other daily,
while it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin. Praying continually, that the spirit of God, which
has assured us of our adoption, may rule and reign in us; and that from so
holy a root, may spring godly blossoms, as faith, love, mercy, patience,
humility, chastity, desire of Gods word, hearty good will to his ministers,
diligence in prayer, together with all increase of righteousness. They that
earnestly and with a good heart hear Gods word, and bring forth worthy
fruits, they that reverence and regard the ministers of Gods word, they that
exercise themselves in all good works, they whose delight is in them that
fear God, and who make much of the Godly, and who also are sorry to see
others fall from God; they no doubt are such, who may certainly assure
themselves of their adoption, and of the love and favor of God.

So much for the second part of this text, noting out unto us the assurance of
our adoption, and confirming us in the same, set down in these words. The same
spirit, bears witness wiih our spirit, that we are the children of God.

3.
The third part which follows, is nothing else, but joy and comfort, honor
and dignity. If we be children, we are also heirs, even the heirs of God and
heirs annexed with The worthiness of adoption.
Christ. In which words are contained the worthiness of our adoption, and that
in as high degree of honor as may be. Now we are no more servants subject
under the fear and bondage of the law, but the sons of God, having obtained
his favor through the means of our elder brother Christ Jesus. If sons, we
are more then sons, and that is heirs, and that not of an earthly
patrimony, Heirs.
but of the kingdom of heaven. Heirs of kings or emperors? nay more then
that, heirs of God, yea and fellow heirs with Christ our Savior, which
sits at the right hand of God, far above al principallitie, and might and
power, and dominion, in most excellent dignity. A servant lightly is never
preferred to that dignity, as to be made an heir, and how should it come to
pass, y^ we being servants and bondslaues, under ye spirit of bondage and
fear, should obtain so great a freedom and dignity, as to be the heirs of
God, but only through the bountifulness of God, which passes all the
pre-eminence and dignity y^ man can gine, or is, or would be willing to give,
especially to a servant. And how should we that are servants and sinners,
persuade our selves of so great a dignity, as to be made heirs, if it were
not that the spirit of God did assure our hearts, y^ our reconciled God, had
made us his children, his sons, and of sons, heirs. It is not a thing
usual in the world, that the sons of any one man should all be heirs, no
although their progenitors were nobles. Our proverb is, that a man of small
wealth, is called bnt ayonger brother, be it that he be a gentleman and of a
good house, yet he may be far, both from the title and from the possession of
an heir. Which makes younger brothers oftentimes to come to hard and miserable
ends, while they seek evil ways to maintain their gentry and their state,
and to hold up their port and countenance, which by their pride comes to a
fall, and which by humility, would have bin both increased and exalted. The
humble in soul and conscience god regards, and he makes the^ heirs, who
think full basely of themselves. God oftentimes takes the poor out of the
mire, and places him among the princes. And the poor and sorrowful spirit,
the repentant and sanctified mind, is royally furnished, even as Mordecay was
clothed in royal apparel, because he had the favor of the king, and had
the crown royal set on his head, who looked to have his head smitten from his
shoulders. The whip and stripes belong to a servant, and yoonger graceless
brethren come never to inheritance. So we being servants to sin, and
graceless in the sight of God, should never have come to the royalty of
heirs, if god by his mercy had not granted us repentance unto life, and sowed
the seed of his grace in our hearts, establishing our weak spirits with a
sound faith, and confirming the same with the certainty of this hope, that we
shall be heirs. Heirs not one or two, but even all heirs, as many as are his
sons and children, heirs of that inheritance, which cannot be taken from us,
unless through our own fault and negligence, we fall away from it, before we
come to the full possession thereof. Father I have sinned against heaven and
before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son. The father accepting
his repentance, caused the best robe to be brought forth, and put upon him, a
ring to be put on his finger, and shoes on his feet, and killed the Yoongest.
fatted calfe, and rejoiced and was merry. What could he have done more for his
son, even the eldest son, the heir? making the yoongest son an heir
too, as well as his eldest brother. Indeed the eldest in every common weal,
does carry away inheritance: neither is the yoonger pertaker with him. But as
the Prophet says, God sees not as man, neither is his judgment as man's is.
The first borne in earth has the honor and the wealth, but in Gods account it
falls not out so always. It is not impossible for the rich to be saved, and
for the eldest to be heirs, even Gods heirs; yet the yoongest have often
prevailed with God, and been most accounted. Jacob have I loved and Esa^ have I
hated, Ismael the heir in fight, but Isaac was the true heir, even the heir
of promise by gods appointment. Despised Joseph came to honor and to a
kingdom, although the youngest of all his brethren, when as it was said to
Reuben the eldest brother, thou shall not be excellent, thy dignity is gone.
The woman of Canaan received, and strangers honored; and they that thought
themselves to be the only children of God debarred, and they that thought
themselves nothing else but heirs, shut out from the kingdom of heaven.
Promotion comes neither from the East nor from the West, but God pulls
down one, and sets up an other. Yea there shall come many from the East and
from the West, and from the North, and from the South, and shall sit at table
in the kingdom of heaven. And behold there are last, which shall be first, and
there are first which shall be last. None think you but the children of Zebedeus
to be heirs? whose mother made request for them unto Christ, that her sons
might sit, the one at his right hand, and the other at his left hand, in the
kingdom. Nay says Christ, that may not be granted, but it shall be ginen to
them, for whom it is prepared of my father. He is not a true Israelite which
is one outward, neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh; but
he is the true Israelite, which is one within, and the circumcision is of the
heart, in the spirit, not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of
God. So not all are heirs, which seem to be heirs, but happy are they
whosoever, that have the seal of Gods spirit within them, and warranting their
hearts, that they are heirs, heirs by promise, and heirs of al Gods precious
promises. The worldlings which carry a fair show, may be far from this
inheritance, because what through pleasures, and what through cares of worldly
desires, they are hindered from seeking after this inheritance. The rich they
made excuses, when as the poor, the halt, the maimed, and the blind, yea and
the beggars in the street, were made partakers of the marriage feast. God
calls by his word and by his grace, from day to day, from time to time, such
as are despised in the world, and such as are reckoned to be the offscouring of
all, such as make least account of themselves, even such and so many, as
shall be saved, so many as shall be heirs. Go says Christ to John's disciples;
Math. 11. and show John what things ye have heard and seen. The blind receive
their sight, and the halt go, the leapers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the
dead are raised up, and the poor receive the gospel. The poor and humble in
spirit, receive the inheritance, which no man thought should ever have been
heirs. This is Gods doing, and it is marvelous in our sight. Hearken my
beloved brethren, says the Apostle S. James. cap. 2. 5. Has not God chosen
the poor of the world, that they should be rich in faith, and heirs of the
kingdom, which he has promised to them that love him? Let not the poorest be
dismayed, who though they have no inheritance in this world, yet if they be
rich in god, rich in faith, rich in all holy obedience to Gods will, if here
they have none inheritance, no not so much as the breadth of a foot, yet shall
their lot and portion fall out in a large room in the kingdom of heaven, so
that they may say with joy, that they have a large inheritance. Their rags
and poor estatehere, shall be requited with roial robes elsewhere, and they
shall be heirs in heaven, which shall far surmount the estate and dignity of
a king here on earth, although it be as glorious and glistering, as ever was
that of Solomon. Whose estate seems to be expressed by the words of the
Prophet: Although ye have lien among the pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of
a dove, that is covered with silver wings, and her feathers like gold. Again,
they that think themselves the heirs of God, and the eldest in holiness of
life, shall come far short; such as hypocrites are, and whose holiness is
but counterfeite; and publicanes, and harlots shall go before them into the
kingdom of God, because repentance is seen in the one sort, the other think
that they need no repentance, yea they think that heaven is their due, and
that they have deserved it, and think that they shall have great wrong, if
they be put beside it. Are the eldest therefore always heirs? or do not the
youngest sometimes take place? Doubtless the youngest are often heirs, and the
last are accepted as first; I mean sinners are made heirs, such in whom is
repentance and faith, for whom it might be thought, that there is no room,
nor any place kept and reserved for them in heaven.

But how falls it out, that seeing God has an heir of his glorious
inheritance, Jesus Christ the son of God, of whom he pronounces; This is
my well-beloved son, in whom I am well pleased; how falls it out that their
should be more heirs, and that we should be heirs. Surely as God amongst all
creatures, made most account of mankind, and seeing that al were lost by just
desert, yet in mercy it pleased him to make some his children, and for the
further setting forth of his glory, to make them also heirs. In the nature of
man he had no children, because all were gone astray, all had corrupted their
ways, and were strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel. Yet as his wisdom
was and is most infinite, so the way to his mercy was evident to him, although
hid from the world, and impossible to flesh and blood, which sat in darkness,
and in the shadow of death. For God so loved ye world, that he has given his
only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but
have everlasting life. And God sent not his son into the world, that he
should condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved. So it
falls out with us, after the custom of men, that yoonger brethren come not
to inheritance, without the death and decease of the elder. Neither in any
respect and worldly consideration, may we know how we come to our inheirita^ce,
as by the comparison of ye death of ye elder brother, which does fitly show
unto us, how and by what means we are made heirs. Who is it among the sons
of men, that would willingly die, that his brethren might enter into his
inheritance? nay is it not their chief desire, that their days may be
prolonged, that they may enjoy their treasures and pleasures, and live in their
possessions. Which the wise man notes in these words; O death, how bitter is
the remembrance of thee, to a man that lives at rest in his possessions, unto
the man that has nothing to vex him, and that has prosperity in all things,
yea unto him, that is yet able to receive meat? Who is it not that says unto
his soul, as the rich man in the Gospel. Soul thou have much good, laid up
for many years, take thy rest. Who would leave this life if he might keep,
especially enjoying possessions, and being an heir? But behold the
liberallitie and bountifulness, the wonderful charity, and great good will
of our elder brother, who desires, yea and rejoices to have us to be fellow
heirs with him, and rather then his life should be any hinderaunce to our
inheritance, he is content to sheade his dearest blood, and to loose his life
for our good, even in the flower of his age, and in his best years, he gave
himself to death, to make us heirs. This is our elder brother, who disdaineth
not to call us brethren. For he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified,
are all one. Wherefore he is not ashamed says the Apostle, Hebr. 2. 11. to
call them brethren. How great is our dignity, in that we have Christ to be our
brother, who after he had suffered his passion, and rose the third day, said
unto the women, unto whom he appeared, and unto whom it pleased him to show
himself. Go (says he) and tell my brethren. Altogether contrary to the
course of the world, for the rich are so far from calling the poor their
brethren, that they disdain them; and so far from giving them inheritance
with their children, that they cannot vouchsafe they should keep them company.
Well, with God there is no respect of persons, and the poor are as dear to him
as the rich, nay oftentimes he has greater care for them, and provides for
them a greater and larger inheritance, if not in this world, yet in another. A
wealthy man that has great lands and possessions, if he have but one son,
is never awhit displeased, neither does he seek after more, to adopt them, and
to make them partners with his son. But rather rejoices in his mind, that
his son shall not in time to come, be constrained to divide the inheritance
with his brethren. Whereby the love of god abounds toward us, who having
one beloved son, would yet have more to bear him company, and more on whom
he might bestow this royalty, as to make them heirs with his son. Setting
forth ye riches of his grace, as also how much we are bound unto him, making us
of sinners, citizens of heaven, and heirs with his beloved. This heavenly
inheritance, is never awhit diminished, although many thousands be partakers,
(as we read in the Revelation, of such and such a Tribe were sealed twelve
thousand; and besides these, lo a great multitude (which no man can number) of
all nations and people, and tongues) but rather it appears in greater glory;
whereas this earthly inheritance being parted and divided, would breed strife
and impouerishment, and it so falls out in ye world, that division is with
hatred. Our greedy minds being such, that they run all on this point; All
or none. But in the heavenly inheritance, we shall rejoice one at another
preferment, neither shall we grudge or think too much, that which other have.
And as we are willed, In giving honor, go one before another, so in this
inheritance, we shall be glad that other also are heirs, and we shall be ready
and willing, to give eueryone his place. For all shall be satisfied, and the best
shall be preferred, and placed, some at the right hand, and some at the left
hand, in the kingdom of the father, for whom it is reserved. And it was
promised unto Joshua, who was made the eldest of all gods children (because it
pleased god to promote him unto the highest honor, and place of credit,
account, and dignity) that he should divide ye inheritance among the people.
Josh. 1. 6. and among his brethren; so to comfort his disciples, and in them
all the rest of the godly, Christ our elder brother, he says; Let not your
hearts be troubled, what misery soever fall out unto you in this world. Ye
believe in God, believe also in me, For in my fathers house are many dwelling
places. John. 14. 1. If it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare
a place for you, and every one of you, that all may be heirs, and that every
one may receive his inheritance. Which is so certain, that it is prepared for
us, before the beginning of the world, and before the foundations of the world
were laid.

The elder brother to forgo his inheritance, and to give it to strangers, we
should hardly believe it, were it not that he had given so manifest a trial,
in that he gave his life for us, which is more then his inheritance. How then
shall he not therewith give us all things also? He that has made us Lords
over all his creatures here on earth, should we doubt that he will not
vouchsafe us an heavenly dignity? The Angels are they not all ministering
spirits, sent forth to minister for their sakes, which shall be heirs of
salvation? Hebr. 1. 14. He that has appointed the Angels in this life to
watch to our good, to guide and to guard us, shall he not also in the life to
come, make us fellows and companions with the Angels? The Angels are
servant, and we are brethren. ^rethren, nay crowned Kings, because the
kingdom of heaven shall be our inheritance. According as the Apostle Saint
Peter. 1. Epistle 2. 9. informs us; Ye are (says he) a chosen generation, a
royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, graced forth with a
singular excellency and pre-eminence, in that we are said to be the thrones
of God, and that we shall fit upon throanes. What comfort then is it for us
all, that of the sons of darkness, we are made the sons of light; of the
enemies of God, reconciled friends; of the servants and children of the devil,
of Gods wrath, being altogether fearful and doubtful, of the children of this
world, and of everlasting perdition; that we are made the servants of God,
fully partakers of his grace; and certainly stayed and confirmed therein,
citizens of heaven; and heirs of everlasting consolation.

Which serves mightily, and stands us greatly in steed, to raise up our
weak minds and faint hearts, which are cast down through the remembrance
of our grievous sins, and which shall keep us from falling into despair;
that when Satan, together with our own guilty consciences, shall persuade
us, that we are none of Gods children, even then, that the spirit of God
shall certify our hearts, that we be heirs of the kingdom of God.

This that we are heirs, has two profitable lessons, to lift up our minds,
and also to humble us, lest we be too much exalted. For this inheritance
comes not unto us by desert, but through grace and mercy, that we may rather
give God the praise and thanks, then boast in our selves, who have nothing,
but that which is given and granted, nothing but that whereof we be vouchsafed.
To humble us, being put in mind of our duty, as the Apostle warns us. 1.
Peter. 1. 17. And if we call him father, which without respect of persons,
judges according to every man's work, let us pass the time of our dwelling
here in fear. And seeing God has made us his sons by adoption, so much the
more are we bound, to fear and obedience, because he has adopted us of his
only favor, when he might worthily have cast us off, and put us by for our
unthankfulness.

Unto these two profitable lessons, we may add two singular comfortes; the one
concerning our afflictions and troubles, and distresses, in this transitory
life: the other, concerning our blottes and blemishes, our sins and offenses.
And therefore very fitly and very well, says a godly writer in this respect.
All things, yea grievous afflictions, and sin it self, turn to their good
and bettering, who are chosen to be heirs. Afflictions, sin, death, are very
profitable unto them, how hurtful soever they be in their own nature. Death
which seems to be the worst of all, yea most terrible, is not an entrance
into hell, as it is to the worst sort and to the ungodly, but to them it is a
narrow gate to let them in, into everlasting life, and therefore most joyfully
and most cheerfully they undertook it, being glad that the time of their
dissolution does approach, and that their miseries shall have an end, and that
the course of sin shall be cut off.

As for afflictions, unless they did tend to the good of the godly, and the
adopted children of God, God would not lay them upon them, and put them to such
hazardes and distresses. Yea the godly are so affected, that with Job they can
say; If God do kill me, yet will I put my trust in him: And because his love
is shead abroad in our hearts, therefore shall no discomfort utterly dismay us.
Wherein also this comfort our hearts, that God will lay no more upon us,
then that he will make us able to bear; and further that he will give a
joyful issue to all our troubles and vexations, and temptations. For in that
he suffered and was tempted, he is able to succor and to help them that
suffer affliction and are tempted. So that we may look for comfort at Gods
hand, even such as shall be grounded upon the certain and infallible promises of
God, and such as shall be answerable to the measure of our afflictions, troubles,
vexations and temptations. If we be children, we are also heirs, even the
heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ, if so be that we suffer with
him, that we may also be glorified with him: For I count says the Apostle,
that the afflictions of this present time, and of this present transitory
life, are not worthy y^ glory which shall be revealed and showed unto us, and
whereof in due time we shall be partakers.

Now as for our sins, it is so far off, that they shall The remembrance of
sins, no hurt to the adopted, to dismay them, and to put them beside their hope.
breed any trouble, unquietness or vexation of mind, to remove us from the
hope of our inheritance, that the remembrance thereof, shall be as a goade or a
spur, to hasten us on to persorme all good works. And as we have given our
members as weapons of unrighteousness to sin, so shall we with all
readiness give our selves unto God, as they that are alive from the dead, and
as they who by the power of Christ their savior, have fully triumphed over the
world and the flesh, and the devil, over sin, and death, and hell. For
behold this thing, that we have been great offenders, what care it will work
in us, least we should fall into sin again; what holy anger and indignation
against our selves, for our sins past; what a desire to please God; what a
zeal and forwardness in all goodness; and greatly indeuouring also the
contrary to those sins, wherein we have greatly offended. If in drunkenness,
avoiding all occasions, and using all sobriety; if in filthiness and
uncleanness, in whoredom and wantonness, hating the sin, avoiding the means
of our fall, and framing our selves to all holiness and christian
conversation: and so likewise in all other sins. After king David had
committed adultery and murder, how did he repent him? how zealous was he in
all goodness? after that God had given him a new heart: insomuch that the
scripture testifies of him, that he was a man after Gods own heart. The
Apostle S. Paul, the remembrance of his earnest and cruel persecution, made
him most earnest in his office and profession. I thank God, says he, which
has made me valiant to fight under his banner, and strong to endure all
trouble and persecution, when as before, I was a blasphemer, and a persecutor,
and an oppressor. And again. 1. Cor. 19. 9. 10. I am the least of the
Apostles, which am not meet to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the
church of God. But yet by the grace of God, I am, that I am, and his grace
which is in me was not in vain, for I labored more abundantly then they all,
yet not I, but the grace of God which is with me. The remembrance of our sins
is no hinderance to godliness, but it makes us the more forward. If I have
done any wrong to any man says Zacheus, I restore him fourefold. This effect
also had the remembrance of sin in that sinful woman Marie Magdalene, out
of whom our Savior Christ cast seven devils, even she that was notorious for
her lewd and light behavior. Who as by repentance she died unto sin, so the
memory of her sin is dead and buried unto her, in this respect, because she
lives still in the glorious remembrance of that righteousness which penitent
sinners obtain by faith. She is honorably mentioned, wheresoever the gospel
of Christ is read and heard of, all men speak of her tears, of her sins no
one is mentioned and known. But touching ye remembrance of her former sins,
see what it wrought. The precious oil wherewith she was wont to anoint her
self, y^ she might be more pleasant to the senses of her lovers, she now
pours out, and for loves sake, bestows it upon her Savior. The eyes which
were wont to cast wanton looks upon the dissolute, did now gush out with
water, and served as conduits at ye feet of Christ. The hair which before had
been wrapped in gold, had been colored, pleated, and broidered, laid out and
beset with pearls, was now employed to a far other use, that the honor
received from the feet of Jesus, might put out ye shame which before it had
taken, from the eyes of leaud and amorous beholders. Having washed and dried,
she could not satisfy her self, till she had also kissed her saviors feet,
whose mercy now had eased her heart of that deadly sting, which the lips of
wantons had imprinted and left behind them. The remembrance of sins past is
grievous, that virtue practiced in steed thereof, may be more comfortable. The
one burdensome, the other joyful. Yea what is it that should procure our
trouble, seeing we are vouchsafed so great a privilege, as to be accounted of
God to be his children. What joy should it be unto us, that we are lifted up
unto this high dignity, as to be the saints of God, temples of the holy ghost,
members of Christ, Lords over all (the Angels of God to be our friends, our
helpers and aiders, the watchmen appointed of God to watch over us, that no
hurt should come unto us, otherwise then it pleases our good and gracious God,
who as we may fully persuade our selves, does all for our good, and all for the
best) citizens of heaven, thrones of God, heirs of God, brethren and sisters
of Christ, and fellow heirs with him in the kingdom of heaven. Finally,
whether it be the world, or life, or death, whether it be Angels,
principalities, or powers, whether they be things present, or things to come,
even all ours, and we Christ's, and Christ Gods. And yet behold, this is not
the one half of that dignity, the one half of that excellent glory,
whereunto hereafter we shall attain, being heirs with Christ, and members of
his body. For where the head is, there shall the members be. And as we have
received of the fullness of his grace, so shall we also be partakers of the
fullness of his glory. Having given us an assurance thereof already, because
he is gone to prepare us everlasting dwelling places, in such sort, that in
time to come, when all things are prepared for us, he will come again, John
14. 3. to receive us unto himself, and to entertain us most friendly, most
bountifully, most honorably, most roially. Dearly beloved says Saint John.
1. Epistle 3. 2. now are we the sons of God, but yet it does not appear
what we shall be. And we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like
him, being glorious members of a glorious head. The certainty of our adoption,
and this dignity, that we are heirs in hope, and shall be hereafter in sure
possession, is a step to our glorification. The full fruition and enjoying
whereof, we shall not receive, till this life be ended. For by death we must
be translated, to the possession of so great and weighty matters, and of such
a wonderful glory. Our life is hid with Christ, and until we come to Christ,
(as the Apostle S. Paul desired to have his body dissolved and to be with
Christ) our life and our glory shall not appear. And every one that has this
hope in himself, purges himself even as he is pure. Touch none unclean
thing and I will receive you, and I will be a father unto you, and ye shall be
my sons and daughters, sath the Lord Almighty. Seeing then we have these
promises dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness, both
of the flesh and spirit, and grow up unto full holiness in the fear of God,
remembering that we are heirs, let nothing hinder or bar us from our
inheritance, which is so glorious, that it shall exceed in glory. Being heirs
of that salvation which is most precious, of that kingdom which is most
glorious, of those joys which ever shall be endless. Unto the which, the Lord
in his good time bring us, and whereof in his saving and gracious mercies, it
may please him to make us partakers. To God the Father, God the son, and God
the holy Ghost, three persons, and one everliving God, be rendered all praise,
dominion, and power, now and for evermore.

Amen. Gratia Deo, solique gloria.
TO THE RIGHT REVEREND AND venerable Minister of Gods Church, Master Alexander
Nowell, Deane of Paul's, S. I. wishes all the blessings of God in this life,
and in the life to come, perpetual joys.
Weak meats are fittest for weak stomakes, and strong meat for valiant
people, and bitter potions, are most welcome to them, that know and
understand, what their effect and operation is. To write of the remedy of
sorrow, and to persuade to the bearing and enduring of bitter, sorrow, might
seem a paradoxe in most men's minds, were it not that your Worship knew these
matters better, then I am able to set them down and express them. But I
thought good to direct these unskillful Treatises unto you, not only for the
friendship I have found at your Worships hands, but also because this kind of
doctrine, cannot better be received, then of resolute minds, and of such
hearts, which are thoroughly established in the truth. Profitable also it may
be for others, not only to prepare their minds against the time of
adversity, but also to lift them up again, and to comfort them with the
consideration of God his goodness, who will recompense their unjust sorrows,
with unspeakable joys. A time there is for all things, though it may be long
first ere it come. Whereof in this place I might speak much, if in the
handling of the text, I had not satisfied the Readers mind. I would the
briefnesse of this Preface, might make recompense for the tediousness of the
Treatises. Wherein I am to desire the Reader to pardon me, persuading my self,
that it shall be to his great good and bettering, if he shall vouchsafe, not
only to read them, but also to keep them in remembrance, to meditate thereon,
and thoroughly to digest them. Considering this with himself, that Nulla
remedia tam sunt salutaria* quam quae dolorem faciunt: Nullaque gaudia tam esse
cordi, ta^toque in pretio, quam quae sequuntur dolorem. I have troubled your
Worship, though in few words, yet it may be somewhat too long, considering
your weighty business, that can hardly spare any time to extraordinary
matters; praying God, to keep such men as your self, long among us, to the
great good example of the Ministers, the comfortable relief of the poor, and
them that are in distress, to the maintenance of learning and poor Scholars,
to your own hearts desire and comfort, to the commodity, welfare, and
furtherance of this Commonweal, and especially to the glory of God.

Your Worships, in his prayers to God, for you and yours. S. I.

A REMEDY FOR SORROW* HANDled in three parts or Treatises.
John. 16. 20. 21. 22. 23. Verily, verily, I say unto you, that ye shall weep
and lament, and the world shall rejoice: and ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow
shall be turned to joy. A woman when she trauelleth, has sorrow, because her
hour is come: but as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembers no
more the anguish, for joy that a man is borne into the world. And ye now
therefore are in sorrow: but I will see you again, and your hearts shall
rejoice, and your joy shall no man take from you.
In which text, are ha^deled three especial matters.
1 The burden imposed. Ye shall weep and lament. 2 The difference betwixt the
godly and the wicked, concerning sorrow and joy. The world shall rejoice, and
ye shall sorrow. 3 A remedy full of all comfort, consisting on A Proposition.
Your sorrow shall be turned into joy. Confirmation, by way of illustration,
drawn from a fit comparison. In which confirmation, are to be noted, the
Comparison it self, declaring the estate of a woman in childbirth, respecting
her Throes. A woman when she trauelleth, etc Joys. But as soon, etc.
Application, furnished with three proofs. I will see you again. Your hearts
shall rejoice. Your joy shall no no man take from you.



Our Savior Christ, showing his Disciples that had enjoyed his comfortable
presence, to their great contentation, that he must depart from them: and also
that they should be left to the injury of the wicked world, which would put
them to all trouble, and to death it self; does therefore forewarne them, that
for no trouble, no not for death it self, that they shrink from him. Because
it was their lot, and they were not to look for better entertainment of the
world, then he him self had. Wherefore they mnst either join with the world,
or cleave unto him; love the one, and forsake the other. And if they did look
to live in joy with him, they should endure some sorrow, yea heaps of sorrow.
For nothing that is excellent, is gotten with ease. The world shall procure ye
sorrow enough, the world shall hasten your death, which is but your trial; yea
they shall do these things toward you, with such an earnestness, and such a
blind zeal, that although they most wrongfully and most spitefully, and that
most cruelly kill ye, yet will they think they do God service. No marvel
therefore that these dumps of Christ his departure, and of the worlds
troublesome and cruel behavior, did bring them sorrow enough. As Christ
confesses himself; Because I have said and showed you these things, your
hearts are full of sorrow. In these words which I have read unto unto you,
three principal matters may be noted worthy of your consideration. The first
is, the burden imposed and laid upon the disciples, as also upon all the
godly. Verily, verily, I say unto you, that ye shall weep and lament. In the
second part, is noted out the joy of the wicked, wherein by reason of the words
following, may also be comprehended a difference betwixt the godly and the
wicked, concerning joy and sorrow. The word shall rejoice, and ye shall sorrow.
The third principal matter, sets down a remedy full of all comfort to the
godly, that their sorrows, and troubles, and crosses, shall be requited and
recompensed with joy, and such joy, that shall not be taken from them.

When any sorrowful matter was toward a people, or a nation, and it pleased
God to let them understand thereof by his Prophets, their heavy message, they
term it a Burden. Burden.
No doubt a burden too heavy to bear, but yet such as could not be avoided.
And such in this place is the burden which our Savior Christ lays upon his
disciples and all the godly, so certain and so sure, that Christ himself
confirms it with an oath. Verily, verily, I say unto you, that ye shall weep
and lament. Which is enough to cast a wordling beside the practice of all
godliness, seeing that sorrow and grief is joined therewith. The young man
spoken of in the Gospel would follow Christ, but when he must part with his
goods, he departed from Christ, being sad and heavy. When godliness has
the countenance of the world, every one will be godly, but when the hatred of
the world is joined therewith, that makes many make a pause. We cannot serve
God and riches, so neither can we serve God and the world, they be two
masters. Every one desires joy, but joy with weeping and lamentation they
will none. The sons of Zebedeus look for heaven and the highest rooms, but
it was first told them that they must taste of a bitter cup, and take up the
cross. Our hasty desires cannot be satisfied, neither can we presently fly
into heaven, a heavy burden must first be borne, much sorrow must first be
endured. No man willingly desires a burden, it must not therefore be sought
after, but borne, when we cannot avoid it. Christ sweat blood before he was
taken up into heaven, neither is it enough to shead tears, but we must go
through many matters that cause tears, before that we shall be received where we
would wish to be.

Being thus framed to perfection, as much as in this life may be, and restored
to the image of God, in such a measure as it shall please God to enable us, God
has so appointed, that we shall be tried by many sorrows, by many temptations,
before that our happy desire shall be accomplished. The silver and the gold by
the furnace is purified from all dross, and those sorrows, temptations, and
afflictions, that shall please God to try us withal, shall be worthy means to
purge us, and to purify us, and to cleanse us; for no unclean thing shall
enter there. Fine manchet has many labors before it come to be set on the
table; beaten forth with the flaile from the hus^e, winnowed from the chafe,
grinded in the mill, si^ted in the sine, baked in the oven. Many are the
troubles and sorrows of the righteous, and who can name them? or who is
worthy to know them? and all must be suffered, and all must be undertaken,
before we can be prepared to be as fine as manchet set on the Lords table.
Necessity has no law, and must has no remedy. And they that will live
godly in this world, must suffer troubles and vexations, and sorrows, and there
is no end till death make an end. Verily, verily, ye shall weep and lament.

But before I enter into the consideration of these sorrows, A general
consideration of sorrow.
which this text does specify, and of that bitter cup of persecution which
Christ foretold his Disciples, they should drink of, let us a little behold
those sorrows generally, which are incident in this world to the life of man,
especially to the godly. Whereof although heretofore I have discoursed, yet
will it not be much amiss in this place also to make remembrance of them. Man
that is borne of a woman (says Iobe) is of short continuance, and full of
trouble. He said so, because he found it to be true. King Solomon also,
beholding all the pleasures and joys of this vanishing world, having had
trial thereof, does truly pronounce of them, that they are but mere
vanities. Vanity of vanities, vanity of vanities, and all is but vanity. It
is a temptation says a learned man, not to be tempted; neither is that counted
the life of a Christian, which is not either seasoned or sowred with sorrow.
God laying this condition upon us, does it to this purpose, even to try our
obedience, as also to make our patience perfect, or to make us perfect through
patience. Look how many wantes, so many sorrows; how many losses, so many
sorrows; how many chaunges, and how many troubles, so many sorrows. And
many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord in time gives ease to
them all. Our Savior Christ was never seen to laugh, but to weep, signifying
that the life of them that should be made like unto his image, should be
rather weeping and lamentation, then rejoicing. It is good (says Saint Peter
to Christ) to be here, let us therefore build three tabernaces, one for
thee, another for Moses, another for Elias, but he forgot himself and knew
not what he said. For that joyful presence was but for a moment, and they
were but foreshewers of troubles and sorrows to come. God commanded the
Israelites to dwell in Tents, to put them in mind still of remoouing, as
though there were no joy in this life, but still it would have his change. The
Israelites were the people whom God appointed to be heirs of his heavenly
kingdom, but by their earthly peregrination into the land of Canaan, God
showed them, and us by them, how full of sorrows this life is, before we
shall come to heaven. For God brought not the Israelites straightway into the
land of promise, that goodly land flowing with milk and honey, and abounding
with all things, which he had sworn unto their fathers that they should
possess, but led them up and down, too and fro in the wilderness, by the
space of forty years, enduring many sorrows. By that means holding them in
continual obedience, and teaching them to forsake the world, and only to
depend upon him from whose holy spirit comes all comfort. It is a rare thing,
that a ship passing on the sea, should still have fair weather and a quiet
calm to her iournies end. Yea rather storms and tempests, surges and waves,
shelues and sands, rocks, and whirlepooles, and some of these it lightly
meets withal. And how can the life of man be without sorrow? Yea the wicked
themselves, who seem to have all the joys and pleasures of this world,
(according to Christ's words; The world shall rejoice) Sorrow of the wicked.
they also sometimes feel smart and sorrow, and weeping also comes to them,
but full sore against their wills. And where by this means God tries the
patience of the godly, so also in these sorrows of the wicked, their rebellion
and impatiencie does utter itself, grudging and murmuring, fretting and
suming, cursing and swearing, being rather monsters out of shape, then men
according to Gods making, bearing the image not of God, but of the devil. The
sorrows of the unfaithful and of the ungodly do rather hurt them, then
prepare them unto God. In as much as their impatiencie is increased, and they
through their own fault are brought to desperation and damnation. But the
sorrows of the godly are so far from hindering their felicity and
happiness in heaven, as that usually they be helps and furtherances
thereunto, and they make a benefit of them, which the other can neither see
nor behold. According to that the patriarcke Jacob foresaw, that his posterity
should have many sorrows, troubles, crosses and afflictions, but his faith
and settled hope was, that the gracious hand of god should never be wanting. O
Lord I have waited for thy salvation.

Wealthy Job as I have said, saw sorrows enough, and wise Solomon saw no
certain joys, as though the joys The sorrows of the Patriarckes.
themselves, were nothing else but vanity and vexation of mind: but especially
we may see it in the lives of the Patriarckes. Abraham in fear of death for
the beauty of his Abraham.
wife, like to come to great trouble and grief of mind, through the discord
of his and Lots servants, and to great dislike betwixt them and their
families, almost to hatred and heart-burning and manslaughter, if in godly
wisdom he had not prevented it. Trouble by hazard of wars to rescue Lot and
his company. Great discord betwixt his wife and Hagar his maid-seruaunt, whom
he so greatly favored. His heart in manner rent in pieces, to see that he
must slay his only son, believed and liked, and his greatest worldly joy,
whom he had so desired, wished and earnestly prayed for, saying. O Lord God
what will thou give me, seeing I go childlesse? What bitter sorrow and grief
of mind think you was it, to depart from so great a joy? Isaac like to be cut
off in his Isaac.
youth, and to perish in the sloure of his age; tried also with famine in a
strange land. This thought of mind grieved him being among strangers, whose
dispesition he knew not, but shrewdly did suspect what would fall out. It may
be says he to his wife, I shall die for thee, because some other would
possess thy beauty. So he persuaded her to call him brother. His last, and no
doubt not the least sorrow, was to see his desire prevented. For he thought to
pour abundance of blessings on his eldest son Esau, but God turned it
otherwise. What passions and seas of sorrow possessed his heart, to hear his
son Esau whom he made so great account of, to cry out in bitter tears, and
that out of measure. Insomuch, that betwixt fear and anger, his mind was sore
vexed. For he was stricken with a maru^lious great fear, and his anger
enforced him to say, who and where is he? And after long absence, when Jacob
came to see his father, we read not of any comfortable words that his father
gave him. Yet was this Jacob for all his fathers Jacob.
blessing, a pattern of sorrow, Iobe and Jacob all one. The very first time
of his sorrow, two mighty distresses, the hazard of his fathers curse, and
the fear of death by his brother Esaus sword. Next, he that should be heir of
so great possessions and blessings, must under go a servile life for seven
years and for seven, watching night and day in heat and cold; a faithful
servant, and yet mistrusted to be false; he that should have been most
plentifully rewarded, groind and grudged at, and pursued with hatred. His heart
and cheifest joy, for whom he served fourteen years, taken away in bitter
sorrow of childbirth. His sorrow increased with w^^ull grief, to see his
eldest son Reubin to commit incest, his daughter Dina to be de^loured by a
stranger. Two other of his sons, imbruing their hands with murder, and
thereby putting him in fear of his life. Pincht with famine, and brought into
a strange country, where his posterity should live in sorrow. And if his
youngest son Benjamin, be taken from him, then do they bring his hear head
with sorrow to the grave. As though he had begun and ended his life in
sorrow. Joseph put Joseph.
in fear of his life among his own brethren, sold unto merchants, and as it
were utterly bannished from the presence of his father and all his kindred,
falsely accused and slaundered, cast out of favor, and thrown into prison in a
strange country, where was no hope of help to be looked for. Moses in his youth
like to be cast away and drowned, like Moses.
to be put to death by withstanding the mighty king Pharao, hated of his own
people, who being sent for their deliverance, thought him to be ye cause of
their oppression, whom they grudged against, saying; Why have thou brought us
into the wilderness to slay us, enuies and reprochfully used, especially of
Core, Dathan, and Abiram, the princes of the people? My pen would fail me,
and I should be too tedious unto you, if I should write this matter to the
full. And what should I more say? for the time will not serve me to tell of
David and all his troubles, being worst thought on, David.
of whom he best deserved; his guiltless blood sought for of him, whose
honor and life he had preserved; ready to be cast out of his throne by him,
whom he could have vouchsafed his throne, his rebellious son Absolon, and
for whom he wept bitterly. Murder and incest among his own children; Oh
sorrows more then tragical! Jobs sorrows Job.
are known to every one, loss of goods, the untimely death of his children,
grievous sores on his body from top to toe, the heavy temptation of his wife,
the strangeness of his familiars, enmity of his friends. Yea his sorrow was
so great, that he cursed the day of his birth. Michaiah, Jeremiah, Daniel, and
all the prophets, examples of sorrow to Prophets. Christ.
succeeding ages. Our savior Christ fainting, and as it were overcome of
sorrow, his sorrows being surpassing great, Apostles.
and more then strange and wonderful. The Apostles appointed hereeunto,
especially the Apostle S. Paul, who may stand for all the rest, and in whom
you may perceive all the sorrows that might befall them. As is worthily set
down 2. Cor. 11. 23. In stripes above measure, in Paul.
prison plentiously, in death often, once stoned and left for dead, night and day
in the deep sea, and almost cast away by shipwreck. In perils of waters, in
perils of robbers, in perils of mine own nation, in perils among the Gentiles,
in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils among false
brethren. In weariness, and painfulnesse, in watching often, in hunger and
thirst, in fastings often, in cold, and in nakedness. A learned man writing of
the sorrows of the godly in this world, compares them unto a ship tossed
on the sea, having always weather and wind against them. Our life is but
short, and in this shortness, good Lord how many chaunges, how many storms,
and how many tempests? Abel, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, the Israelites,
chasticed in the wilderness of the Lord, and in continual storms, war, and
battle, before they could be placed in the land of Canaan. And when they were
come thither, and long had dwelt there, in the end their temple was spoiled,
their people murdered, their cities rased, and they led captives into strange
countries.

Let every one look into himself, and behold, what cause of sorrow our own
rebellious and disordered desires, which never suffer us to enjoy any long rest
of mind, and which bring us sometimes more sorrow the^ we can put off, move us
unto, Some are troubled with one unquietness, some with an other. Some cannot
rest for cares of ye world, some swel with pride, and come to their fall; some
boil in rancer and consume themselves; some fry in lust, and end their days
in sorrowful diseases, being spectacles of sorrow; some carried away headlong
with anger, and sleep goes from their eyes, to think how they may be
revenged. Such procure sorrow to themselves, and need no sorrow to be laid
upon them. The days of this world to the godly, are nothing else in a manner,
but dismal days, and sorrowful times, yea, the estate of all in this world
is but sorrowful. Either we are hated of the world, or else which is worse, of
God; assaulted of Satan, subject to the manifold diseases both of body and
soul, the one miserable, the other most dangerous and intolerable. Many in
number, and diverse in nature, are the sorrows that fall out in the world. Some
are afflicted by exile and banishment, some by captivity and imprisonment,
some by famine and nakedness, some by peril and persecution, some by slander
and reproachful contumely, some by rackings and tearing in pieces, some by
slaughter and sword, some by fire and faggot, some by sores of body, and sundry
diseases, some suffer in themselves, some are afflicted in their friends, in
their wives, in their children, some in their goods, some in their bodies, some
in their credits, some by sea, some by land, some at home, ome abroad, some by
open enemies, some by counterfeit friends, some by cruel oppression, some by
manifest injuries, some by force, some by fraud, some afflicted by one means,
some by an other. So many kinds of sorrows there are. Man never continues in
one state, to day in his princely throne, to morrow in his dustie grave, to day
placed in great authority, to morrow cast out of countenance, to day in high
favor, to morrow in high displeasure, now rich, now poor, now in wealth, now
in woe, now sound, now sick, now joyful, now full of sorrow, to day a man, to
morrow nothing. O how short, how chaungeable, and how miserable is the state of
mortal men! And happy are they, who can make this lesson of the sorrows of
this world, as by meditation thereof, to long after heaven. Sorrow there is
enough, because no joy in respect; and if the world afford any joy, it is not
true, sound, and certain. For what joy or pleasure soever there is in the
world, it is mingled with some sorrow. To teach us to withdraw our minds from
the things of this world, and to long after those pleasures and those joys,
which are in an other world, which only are steadfast and without change,
without wearisomenesse, bitterness, or any sorrow. In this life nothing sure,
nothing steadfast, nothing sweet, but has his sour. The latin verse serves
well to this purpose.

Postimbres fructus, post maxima gaudia luctus. Being Englished, is this in
effect.

Rain brings floods, and joy brings woe,
Sorrow follows comfort,
Too often we find it so.
When Jacob was free from Esau, then his uncle Laban used him hardly; when
Laban could do him no more hurt, then Esau met him, who had vowed his death. In
whom we may see the life of a faithful and godly man. Fear after comfort, and
comfort after fear; ebbings and flowings, risings and fallings, so we go
along, and so we shall end. Your riches, your honors, friends, picasures,
wife, children, and such like, are taken from you, in part or in all. You
marvel at it, and think peradventure you are quite out of ye Lords favor,
for else this great change in your estate would not be. Here you see a sorrow,
mark also a secret, and a mystery, and let every one lay it to their heart.
For the reason why the Lord does so is, because we should not perish. While we
euioyed them, we forgot our selves, and God by this means does put us in mind,
that we should not forget him. God draws us away from these matters, lest his
judgments should overtake us as well as others. Yea he draws us forcibly, by
want of these benefits. Let us not be dismayed, or hang down ye head for
sorrow, knowing for what end God works these sorrows, all to our good, and
all for the best. Ye shall weep and lament, and the world in these masters
shall rejoice, but their joy shall be turned into sorrow. For all these worldly
comforts shall perish, and they with them, because they rather abused them,
then used them as they ought. Your sorrows also in these matters shall have
some recompense when God sees good, and if it be also for your good, and you
shall be comforted with riches, honors, friends, pleasures, wife, children,
and every needful thing. Then shall ye find it true which the Prophet David
assures you, Psalm. 84. No good thing shall he withhold from them that lead a
godly life. Therefore weep, as Sorrow of sla^der.
though ye wept not. Yet is the loss of good name and fame by slander and
evil reports more bitter, then these losses, and more heavily taken; and the
sorrow sinketh deeper. Some are free from it, but not all; and this is a
known truth, that the more that every one does excel in virtue and
goodness, the more they are hated, envied, and slaundered. Because ye follow
not excess and riot, says Saint Peter, therefore the world hates you. But
this is a comfort as the same Apostle says; 2. Epistle 4. 5. They shall give
account to him that is ready to judge quick and dead, the Judge stands at
the door, and his judgment is near. The best of all, Christ our Savior, was
worst spoken off. They are not the best that bring up slanders, but the worser
sort, whose good reports are but little worth, as also their slanders are not
to be regarded. It is a thing worthy a Prince, (says a famous Monarch of the
world, being slaundered and evil spoken off) when thou haste done well, to
hear ill. They that are famous and of renown, have peevish pesaunts to
disgrace them, whose tongues were never exercised in saying well. This is a
sorrow which must be endured: and furthermore, thou must pray for them, and
bless them which bring this sorrow upon thee, and so overcome them, which by
no other means The particular sorrow of Persecution, which is especially meant
in this text.
can be won.

But above all sorrows on the earth, there seems none to be compared to the
loss of life, for life is sweet. Yet this is the sorrow which here is meant,
and in this place commanded, and which we must endure, if we look to be the
heirs of heaven. As the Apostle witnesses writing to the Romans, who putting
them in mind of great privileges, does also persuade them to the patient
enduring of all troubles and persecutions. If ye be children, ye are heirs,
if heirs, the heirs of God, and fellow heirs with Christ, if so be ye
suffer with him, that ye may also be gloried with him. Ye shall weep and
lament, because that grievous persecution is your lot, and the loss of life
the thing that you must look for. And how can it but make frail flesh to
weep and lament, seeing that to live is the greatest joy in the world, and
nothing more against our nature, then to hear of persecution and of death. And
no marvel though the Disciples and the godly shead tears, when this matter
caused our Savior Christ Jesus, through anguish of mind to sweat blood, and
How backward by nature we are in this business, and how ready we should be.
to desire that this cup might pass from him. In the Apostle S. Peter, we
may perceive the mind of a natural man, loath to undertake so great a matter,
who when he heard Christ our Savior to foretell of his persecution and death,
saying; that he must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the Elders, and
of the high Priests and Scribes, and be slain, then did he take him aside, and
began to rebuke him, saying; Master pity thy self, this thing shall not
be unto thee. But so far off is it, that we should be loath and tardie, that
we should be most forward and ready. Mark the mind but of a worldly man,
that accounhimselfe greatly beholding to another, is not this his courage, that
he could find in his heart to die in his quarrel, and to offer his service
before he commanded thereunto? The readiness of our Savior Christ, whose
example, if it be too high for imitation, yet that of the Apostle Saint Paul
herein is notable; and able to give the weakest mind great courage. Get thee
behind me Satan, says Christ unto Peter, thou art an offense unto me,
because thou understand not the things that are of God, but the things that
are of men. The Prophet Agabus, Act. 21. took Paul's girdle and bound his own
hands and feet, and said; Thus says the holy Ghost; So shall the Jews at
Jerusalem bind the man that owes this girdle, and shall deliver him into the
hands of the Gentiles. Then his friends persuaded him, and besought him with
tears, that he would not go up to Jerusalem. To whom Paul answered and said;
What do ye weeping and breaking my heart? for I am ready not to be bound
only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. And in an
other place; And now behold, I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem, and
know not what things shall come unto me there; Save that the holy Ghost
witnesses in every city, saying; that bands and afflictions abide me in
Jerusalem, but I pass not at all, neither is my life dear unto my self. This
is a notable example of encouragement, beside the promise of exceeding great
reward; He that loses his life for my sake, shall find ^^* But weak minds
are soon offended, and frail flesh cannot bear out these bitter brunts,
neither stand to the trial of so worthy a cause, when we shall behold as it
were great mountain to fall upon us, and great surges ready to swallow us up.
No doubt we shall meet with hindrances inow, and those mighty hindrances, yet
greater renown it is to overcome our selves, then to win a city, both are
hard to do and to accomplish, but the first most hard, and to flesh and blood
impossible. True it is, that we should cast off all hindrances in this so
weighty a matter, and deny our selves, and in this combat betwixt the spirit
and flesh and blood, we should show our selves conquerers, but our hearts for
the most part are so faint, that strawes can make us stumble. We bl^nch at the
least matters, and are astund even at the very name of persecution. When King
Hezechiah heard of his death he wept sore, and so do many of us carry the like
affliction, that in no sort we can brook affliction. The pur^^^ion is too
bitter, although health and immortallitie be the effect of it. Why is it that
we are ready to put finger in the eye, when we hear that we must endure
trouble, but that the world, a^desh, and blood, do carry more sway with us,
then Gods spirit, and that the joy of this life can abide no sorrow. Although
God has appointed this to be our lot, Ye shall weep and lament, yea
furthermore, although we hear that our sorrow shall be turned into joy. Gladly
we would be at peace with the world, but when the world shall hate us, that
begins to break us, then are we surprised of sorrow, and for the time
swallowed up of grief. The Prophet Jeremy, a man of great courage, patience,
and constancy, before he could frame himself to drink of this bitter cup,
as one most passionate, breaks out into these words, and in the presence of
God; Cursed be the day wherein I was borne, oh that my mother had been my grave,
or her womb a perpetual eonception! How is it that I came forth of the womb
to see labor and sorrow? And again, chapter 19. Woe is me my mother, that
thou have borne me a contentious man, and a man that strives with the whole
earth, I have done them neither hurt nor wrong, yet every one does curse me.
According to that of the Prophet David, They hated me without any cause, and
that thou o God know. Yet should this matter be so far from moving us to
heaviness, that therein we should rejoice. As the Apostle S. Paul does move
us by his example, Gal. 6. 14. God forbid (says he) that I should rejoice in
any thing but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the world is
crucified unto me and I unto the world. Our Savior Christ has foretold, us
that we should be hated of all men for his name, and for the profession of his
truth. And lest any of us should faint, he adds further; But he or they that
endure to the end, they shall be saved. What if the world, and the mightiest in
the world hate ve? what if they seek our blood? Fear not their fear (says
the Apostle) neither be troubled, but sanctify the Lord in your hearts. Fear
not them (says our Savior) which have power over your bodies, and whose fury
and rage can go no further, but rather fear him, who after the body is
distroied by death, can cast both soul and body in hell.

God has commanded us unto this weeping and lamentation, Four principal^
reasons to pers^^d^ ^s to undertake perse^cution, w^ (...) the first is, Gods
Commandment.
and appointed us unto this trouble and sorrow, and persecution; let us not
therefore fear men, to avoid gods commandment, but rather glorify God, by
withstan^^ng evil men, and such as are bent to resist, and deface, to
suppress and utterly to root out gods truth. And because the world is given
to nothing more, then to oppress gods truth, therefore ought we the more to
maintain it, and not to regard our lives in respect of the defense thereof.
Strive for y^ truth unto death, says the wise man, Eccle. 4. 28. And defend
justice for thy life. God has created us for his glory, and if we love God,
and his love be settled in our hearts, we ought to the utmost of our power to
maintain his glory. Dearly beloved (says the blessed Apostle) think it not
strange, concerning the fiery trial. It pleases God to try you by the
extremities of this wicked world, whether ye will like valiant soldiers stand
to the defense of his cause. We count it a glorious matter, and worthy of
immortal fame, to spend our lives in the defense of our prince and country,
yet is it more glorious, if we be called thereunto, not to refuse any torment
and extremity, in showing our duty, and our love to God and his Church. Re.
2. 10. Unto the Angel of the church of Smirna it was said; Fear none of those
things which thou shall suffer; behold it shall come to pass, that the devil
shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall have
tribulation ten days, (that is a long time.) Be thou faithful unto the
death, and I will give thee the crown of life. He that overcomes, shall not
be hurt of the second death. Satan has a throne in this world, but Hell is
his seat, and everlasting death is his due. Be not deceived, for the amity of
the world, is the enmity of God. The world loves his own, and they that
will stand to the trial of the truth in despite of the world, they shall be
excommunicated and in utter disgrace with the world, yea it shall so come to
pass, that the sheading of innocent blood shall be thought a thing of nothing
in their sight. Behold (says Christ, Mat. 23. 34.) I send unto you Prophets,
and wise men, and Scribes, and of them ye shall kill and crucify, and of them
shall you scourge in your Synagogues, and persecute from city, to city. That
upon you may come all the righteous blood. Beware of men, Mat. 10. for they will
deliver you up to the councels, and will scourge you in their Synagogues. And
ye shall be (mark this word, ye shall be) brought to the governors and kings
for my sake, in witness to them and to the Gentiles. If any man come to me
(says Christ, Luke 14. 26.) and hate not his father and mother, and wife and
children, and brethren and sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot be
my disciple. Christ and the cross, I mean persecution and trouble are so
nearly joined together, that nothing must part them. And therefore Christ
says; He that will follow me, must take up his cross and follow me: and if
any look for a seat in heaven, they must taste of a bitter cup here on earth.
The Apostle knowing how near the love of God, and the cross and persecution
were joined together, shows us how we should put forth our selves unto the
trial. Romans 8. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall
tribulation, or anguish, or persecution? and so forth. The devil that has but
a short time on earth, will raise us up innumerable troubles, and we are subject
to the same, so long as we live in this world. Ye shall weep and lament,
therefore settle your selves to abide it, and to endure it. For ye shall be
betrayed of your parents, and of your brethren, Acts. 14. 22. 23. 11. Act. 9.
16. 1. Th^s. 3. 3. 4.
and kinsmen, and friends, and some of you shall they put to death. And look to
be hated every where. Yet comfort your selves, for a hair of your head shall not
perish. By your patience possess your souls. And lay up these things in your
hearts and provide for the^. Behold I have told you before. Ca^ ye children of
ye marriage chamber mourn, as long as ye bridegroom is with them? But the
days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken from them; and then shall
they fast, and then shall they mourn. When Christ slept in the ship, then
waves, and tempests, and scourges. It pleases God to absent himself, and God
leaves us awhile, to see what account we will make of him, to see whether we
can find in our hearts, to leave and forsake parents, and kinsfolk, and
friends, wife and children, and that which we hold dearest in this world, our
own life for his sake, and whether there be courage, patience, strength and
constancy, to fight under the banner of persecution. Well here we see what
Gods commandment is, and how he has laid trouble and persecution upon our
loins, and put adnesse into our hearts, and heaviness into our minds, and
happy is he, yea happy are all they, that can find in their hearts,
willingly to fulfill his will, and to perform his commandment, and patiently
to submit themselves to whatsoever shall fall out, if God see it good for his
glory and our profit.

Yet doubtless we shall perceive a mighty striving within The second reason is
drawn from the punishment that may ensue.
our selves, before we shall find in our hearts to obey. If God appoint
trouble, shall we seek case? If God ask our life, shall we deny it? If his
blessed truth be called in hazard, and like to be defaced unless thou offer
thy self to stand to the maintenance and in the defense thereof, before kings
and rulers, and against their unlawful decrees and wicked statutes, will thou
shrink? Thou must yield to the one or to the other, either thou must deny God
and his truth, for the countenance of the world, and the enjoying of this life,
and the comfortes of this world, or else thou must forsake, yea and hate the
world, and the comforts thereof, and despise thy life in this respect. Choose
which thou will take, fire and water is set before thee, life and death, good
and evil, stretch out thy hand to whether thou will, leave the one, embrace
the other. Now deceive not thy self, and think thou have the choice, for thou
art not at thy liberty, God has commanded to endure all trouble, yea and
death it self rather then to forsake his truth and the maintenance of the same.
If we must pass through the fire, shall we look for water? If we be
commanded not to fear the sword, shall we be desirous to sleep in a whole
skin? That which seems to be good to us is evil, and that which we think
to be life, we shall find to be death. Seek not to save thy life, for thou
must loose it; and better to loose it in this world then in the world to come.
If thou refuse, thou shall be refused; if thou deny, thou shall be denied. Mat.
16. 26. Alas what shall it profit a man, or any of us all, though we should be
Kings and Emperors, and though we should win the whole world, if we leese
our own souls? Or what what shall a man give for the recompense of his soul?
The^ farewell life, lest death follow, and keep thy soul, lest it be plunged
in hell torments. For whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words, among
this adulterous and sinful generation, of him shall the son of man be
ashamed also, when he comes in the glory of his father, with all his holy
Angels. Mar. 8. 38. Mat. 10. 33. And whosoever shall deny me (says Christ)
him will I deny before my father which is in heaven, and when he thinks to
have everlasting comfort, he shall have everlasting sorrow, and in steed of
heaven, he shall find hell. Mark therefore the punishment that will follow,
if Gods commandment in this behalf be not performed on thy part, and
tremble. A heavy sentence there is, if thou refuse to bear this burden.

Set before thy eyes the comfortable presence of a Savior, The third reason is
drawn from the reward.
and the fearful countenance of a judge. And let the holy martyr S. Steuens
comfort fill thy heart, who in the midst of his persecution, saw the glory of
God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God, the heavens being open to
receive him into his inheritance, the Angels being at hand to carry his soul
into heaven. And most certain it is, that there is no way more ready to enter
into the kingdom of God, then by trouble, affliction, and persecution.
According to that our Savior Christ has set down Mat. 5. Who preaching unto
the people of happiness and blessedness, concludes and shuts up the treatise
of blessedness, with the worthy estate of them that suffer persecution for
the truth. As though none were more renowned then they, as though they above
all other, should have the garland and wear the crown. Blessed are they which
suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven. Blessed are ye when men revile you, and persecute you, and say all
manner of evil against you for my sake falfly. Rejoice and be glad, for great is
your reward in heaven. For the extremest torments that we may be put to, and
which we may undertake in this life, are not worthy of that glorious crown,
which we shall receive after the conquest, and after our trial, and after our
triumph. Therefore the Apostle does well term all punishments, and all
afflictions, and all extremities, to be light, because they endure but a
moment, as also in respect of ye reward which is beyond all comparison, seeing
they shall procure unto us a far more excellent and an eternal weight of glory.
While we look not on the things ye are seen, but on the things which are not
seen. For the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are
not seen, are eternal. Mark but one president and worthy matter, in the
afflictions and persecutions of the Apostle S. Paul. Act. 23. 11. who after he
had like to have been pulled in pieces among them, the night following, the
Lord stood by him and said; Be of good courage Paul, for as thou have testified
of me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness also at Rome. The comfortable
voice of God, whether by himself, or by the means of an Angel, which was most
likely, this passes all persuasions.

Nevertheless, that nothing be wanting from the strengthening The fourth
reason is set down by induction of examples.
and encouraging of our weak minds, let us take a view, and behold the
valiant exploits, of them that have borne the brunt of the battle, and that
have shed their blood and spent their lives, in the cause and quarrel of Gods
truth, and of a Christian profession. We are not the first that have been put
to bitter persecution, and if the valiant captains have stood to it, why
should the soldiers shrincke? Examples we have many, the Prophets that were
before Christ, Christ himself, and the Apostles that followed Christ, as also
a multitude of Martyrs, who through their example, have yielded themselves to
bitter death and extreme torments at all times, and in all ages, even as a
rare and new Phoenix does spring out of the ashes of the old. And therefore it
is well said; Sanguis martyrum, semen ecclesiae. The blood of the Martyrs, is
the seed of the church, and one Martyr makes many. What hope is so sure and
certain, that well they may be slain, and death they will not refuse; yet is
it impossible they should be overcome. Abel was murdered of Cain, and the
cry of his blood went up to heaven for vengeance; Elias was persecuted to
death by that idolatrous Iezabel. Zachary the son of righteous Iehoida,
stoned to death by that reuolting King Ioas; Amos smitten with a clubbe on the
temples of the head, and so brained; Esaias sawed in two parts with a wooden
saw; Jeremy persecuted often, imprisoned very sore, thrown down into the
deep, filthy, and miry dungeon, and at length stoned to death in Egypt of his
own people; Ezechiel slain at Babylon by the Duke of the people; John Baptist
beheaded. Of our Savior Christ, although I might entreat at large of his
persecution and intolerable death, because in soul he felt and suffered the
torments of hell, yet because the matter is so apparent, I think it needless.
Only I will recite the words of the Apostle to the Heb. 12. 2. Let us look
unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set
before him, endured the cross, and despiced the shame, and is set at the right
hand of ye throne of God. Consider therefore him that endured such speaking
against of sinners, least ye should be wearied and fainte in your minds. And
although ye have not resisted unto blood, yet your own blood must be nothing
in your sight. Faint not, heaven and earth shall vanish away, but Gods promise
shall have no end, which is this; Great is your reward in heaven. Next to
Christ, let us behold his Apostles, whether they drank not of the same cup.
Peter was crucified, and Paul beheaded at Rome, under Nero, that I speak
nothing of their whipping and scourging, bands and imprisonment, which they
suffered before their death. Battholomew was slain alive in India, and after
his skin was pulled over his ears, beheaded. Steven was stoned; The
discourse of whose persecution and death, is notably set down, Act. 7. and
worthy often to be read and to be remembered. As for the examples of Martyrs
they are infinite, and that famous book of the Acts and Monuments of the
Church, shall satisfy thee in this point. Stories at large, and I think it
tedious here to bring in many. If thou desire but one story, and one example
for all, look upon that famous and wonderful example of the seven brethren,
mentioned 2. Macc. 7. who only is able to confirm the weakest heart. Which
Chapter when I read, and thinking to recite somewhat above the rest more
notable, I saw I could not do it, unless I set down the whole Chapter, unto
the which I refer thee, as also to the sixth Chapter of the same book,
concerning Eleazarus, And let us all pray, that God would enable us, with the
like strength, when time shall come that God lay this burden upon us.

These arguments, first of Gods commandment; Secondly, of the fearful
punishment that shall ensue, if we refuse or deny; Thirdly, the great and
infinite blessings which come unto us if we do perform that which is required
at our hands; And fourthly, the examples of y^ prophets, Christ and his
Apostles, and Martyrs, to encourage us, are of sufficient weight to persuade
to this worthy work. Yet furthermore, Six o her reasons or arguments briefly
collected.
let me briefly and in a word, add these reasons. First, that though torments
be bitter, yet the joys that follow are unspeakable. Secondly, all the joys
of this world are but for a moment, and nothing more sure then death. Thirdly,
that by enduring persecution and death we maintain gods glory, and confirm
his truth, whereby we shall please God and die in his favor. Fourthly, we
shall be witnesses against the unbelieving world, as also by our constancy and
courage, we shall establish the wavering minds, which by our fra^ltie are like
to fall, we shall win others to the kingdom of God, by professing his truth to
the death. According to that of the Apostle S. Paul Philip. 1. 12. I would you
understood brethren, that the things which have come unto me, are turned rather
to the furthering of the Gospel. So that my bands in Christ, are famous
throughout all the judgment hall, and in all other places; In so much, that
many of the brethren in the Lord, are boldned through my bands, and dare more
franckly speak the word. Yea the adversary king Agrippa himself, was almost
become a Christian. Fifthly, our constancy and courage shall be a cause of greater
condemnation to our enemies, whose consciences are by this means made without
excuse. As the same Apostle in the chapter recited says; In nothing fear your
adversaries and enemies, which is a token to them of perdition and destruction,
and to you a token of salvation, and that of God. For unto you it is given for
Christ, that not only ye should believe in him, but also suffer for his sake.
Sixthly and lastly, we shall confound the kingdom of the devil, which is only
established by lies and untruth.

All which persuasions are forcible in^ugh to prepare us, Not to be over rash.
and to make us offer our selves as Peter did; and me thinks I hear every one
say, They are ready. Mat. 20. 31. Christ said unto his Disciples; All ye shall be
offended by me this night; but Peter answered and said unto him, though all men
should be offended by thee, yet will I never be offended. Jesus said unto
him; Verily I say unto thee, that this night before the Cock crow, thou shall
deny me thrice. Peter said unto him, though I should die with thee, yet will I
not deny thee; Likewise also said they all. Yet for all that, all of them were
either offended, or they denied, or were scattered, and Peter the foremost man,
denied and fors^ore Christ. See the event of foolish rashness, and indiscreet
boldness. Go to now, ye that are so hasty, and so hardy, and so ready. All
such boasting is in vain. For that ye ought to say, if the Lord will, and if
the Lord give strength, we will do so. Know ye not that your wills are wavering,
and flesh is frail, and satan is subtle, and the world is tyrannous and
cruel, and again ye know not how all things will fall out. Promise nothing
before the time, but pray to God to make thee able. Sit down first and cast thy
accounts, bethink thy self of the force of thy enemies, the devils
potentates, of thy weakness, which of it self cannot stand, and many the like
matters. This will ask a long time, to consult and deliberate with thy self.
Who sees not that they that are most cowardly in the battle, are most valiant
before they come to the field. Great boasters may well be compared to barking
dogs, which have no courage to fight when they be set upon. Our savior Christ
moves us to great wisdom in this matter, for he knew what was in man, how
that the boldest would be ready enough to draw backward. For after that he had
exhorted to ye bearing of his cross, and ye enduring of persecution, he put
forth a parable to make every one fully to bethink themselves, lest they
should revolt after they were resolved. Luke. 14. Which of you (says he)
minding to build a tower, sits not down before, and counts the cost
whether we have sufficient to perform it? lest that after he has laid the
foundation and is not able to perform it, all that behold him, begin to mock
at him, saying; This man began to build and was not able to make an end. Be
not rash without wisdom, and ^ast with thy self what may fall out. If thou
be courageous and venterous, then behold, flattery, fair means, and sugared
promises. As King Antiochus went about to persuade the poungest of the seven
brethren, not only with words, but swore also unto him by an oath, that he
would make him rich and wealthy, if he would forsake the laws of his fathers,
and that he would take him as a friend, and give him offices. If there be any
show of faintness to be perceived in thee, then come thundering, threatenings,
like thunderbolts to cast thee down. Besides, although thou be never so
innocent and guiltless and without fault, yet be sure thou shall have false
reports raised up, mischeeuous accusations, intolerable and devilish
slanders devised against thee, and laid to thy charge. These are they which
subvert the state of the world, and here they are; they observe not the kings
laws, therefore it is not the kings profit to suffer them. When the Jews led
Christ to Pilate, they did accuse him (but falsely and undeservedly) saying; We
have found this man perverting the people, and forbidding to pay tribute to
Caesar, saying that he is Christ a king. The malicious Jews laid hands on the
Apostle Saint Paul, and moved the people. Crying, Men of Israel, help: this
is the man that teaches all men every where against the people, and the law,
and this place. Certainly says Tertullus the Orator, (accusing the Apostle
before Felix the Governor) we have found this man a pestilent fellow, and a
moouer of sedition among all the Jews throughout the world. Look to these
matters, cast thy count, prepare thy mind, least after thou have appointed
with thy self to be constant, thou become wavering. Many fears to hold us
back, flesh and blood loath to depart from worldly comforts, life sweet, and
death bitter. Thy enemies shall be they of thine own household, and of thy own
kindred, no trust in ye world, no comfort in the earth. Be not too bold of thy
own strength, mighty pillars have fallen down. Peter an Apostle, and one of
the chiefest and most bold and venterous, yet in time of trial was found
nothing so, but rather weak and childish. Shall I present unto you a
domestical example of one of our own nation, being had in reverent regard and
renoume of the enemy himself; Doctor Cranmer archbishop of Canterbury, and in
high office and estimation, with king Henry the eight, of famous memory,
dearly beloved of the king, although he did contrary his proceedinges in many
matters. Who was so constant in the profession of Christ his truth and
christian religien, that no threatninges could quail him, no torments fear
him. Yet mark and perceive, how flattery and fair means, and sweet promises
for the time overcame him, until God by his grace did lift him up after his
fall. According to the sweet saying of the Prophet David. Psalm. 37. 32. The
wicked watches the righteous, and seeks occasion to slay him; but the Lord
will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is judged.

It may be thought a needless work, to set down word by word the Siren song
and eloquent and forcible persuasion, that made so excellent a member and so
constant a martyr to fall. Again, if I should refer the Reader to the book,
either the book may not be in place, because it is not of so easy a price, or
it may be the readers leisure may not serve. The matter is so notable, that
although I be judged too tedious, yet I must set it down: and when you have
read it, I hope you will think never a whit the worse of me. The matter is set
down as follows.

All this while, the queen and the bishops, who had kept This may serve for
private reading but not otherwise.
the archbishop almost now three years in prison, seeing by no means they
could prevail with him, to turn him from his religion, did secretly suborne
certain men, which when they could not overthrow him by arguments and
disputation, should by entreaty and fair promises, or any other means allure
him to recantation. For these men, wily enough for their own profit, perceived
how great a wound they should receive, if the archbishop had stood steadfast in
his sentence: and contrariwise how great profit they should get if he as the
principal standard bearer should sing a retreit. By reason whereof, the wily
papists, flocked about him, laboring by threatening, flattering, entreating,
and promising, and all other means, especially Henry Sydall, and Friar John a
Spaniard, De villa baccina, that they might drive him from his former sentence
to recantation. They set forth how acceptable it would be both to the King and
Queen, and especially how gainful to him, and for his souls health it would
be. They added moreover, how the Council and Noble men bear him good will.
They put him in hope, that he should not only have his life, but also be
restored to his ancient dignity. Saying it was but a small matter, an so
easy, that they required him to do, only that he would subscribe to a few
words with his own hand. Which if he did, there should be nothing in the realm,
that the Queen would not easily grant him, whether he would have riches or
dignity, or else if he had rather lead a private life in quiet rest, in what
place soever he listed, without all public ministry, only that he would set
his name in two words to a little leaf of paper. But if he refused, there was
no hope of health and pardon; for the Queen was so purposed, that she would
have Cranmer a Catholic, or else no Cranmer at all. Therefore he should
choose, whether he thought it better to end his life shortly in the flambes
and firebrands now ready to be kindled, then with much honor to prolong his
life, until the course of nature did call him. For there was no middle way.
Moreover they exhorted him, that he would look to his wealth, his estimation
and quietness, saying he was not so old, but that many years yet remained in
this his so lusty age. And if he would not do it in respect of the Queen, yet
he should do it for respect of his own life, and not suffer that other men
should be more careful for his health, then he was himself. Saying that this
was agreeable to his notable learning and virtues, which being adjoined with
his life, would be profitable both to himself, and to many other. But being
extinct by death, should be fruitful to no man; that he should take good
heed, that he went not too far, yet there was time enough to restore all
things safe, and nothing wanted, if he wanted not to himself. Therefore they
would have him to lay hold upon the occasion of his health while it was
offered, lest if he would now refuse it while it was offered, he might
hereafter seek it, when he could not have it. Finally if the desire of life
did nothing move him, yet he should remember, that to die is grievous in all
ages, and specially in these his years and flower of dignity, it were more
grievous; but to die in the fire and such torments, is most grievous of all.

With these and the like prouocations, these fair flatterers ceased not to
solicit and urge him, using all Compare this Archbishop with Eleazar the
Scribe, 2. Mac. 6. 18. and no doubt thou shall be much moved.
means they could to draw him to their side, whose force his manly constancy
did a great while resist. But at last, when they made none end of calling and
criing upon him, the Archbishop being overcome, whether through their
importunity, or by his own imbecillitie, or of what mind I cannot tell, at
length gave his hand. It might be supposed, that it was done for the hope of
life and better days to come. But as we may since perceive by a letter of his
sent unto a lawier, the greatest cause why he desired his time to be delaied,
was that he would make an end of Marcus Anthonius, which he had begun. But as
it was manifestly plain, howsoever it was done, it was plain against his
conscience. How be it so it pleases God, that so great virtues in this
Archbishop, should not be had into much admiration of us without some blemish;
or else that the falsehood of the popish generation, by this means might be
made more evident; or else to minish the confidence of our strength, that in
him should appear an example of man's weak imbecilitie.

See how under the bait the hook was hidden, how honny was mixed with
sorcerie, and how poison was offered in a golden cup. Peter a chief Apostle,
Cranmer a peer of the realm, and a pillar of Christianity. O Lord how are
the mighty overtaken, I had almost said overthrown? Let none therefore
presume of their own strength, but rather ask strength and courage of God by
prayer, because as the Apostle says, As to believe, so also to suffer is Gods
gift. Philip. 1. Setting before our eyes the examples of Peter and John, who
perceiving what was like to come to pass, betook themselves to prayer,
saying; And no^ o Lord behold their threatenings, and grant unto thy servants,
with all boldness to speak thy word. Whose prayer (the place being shaken
where they were assembled, in token of Gods presence) the Lord heard. In so
much that with great power the Apostles gave witness of the resurrection of
the Lord Jesus, and great grace was upon them all, and being filled with the
holy Ghost, they spoke the word of God beldly. Act. 29. Courage without fear,
constancy without wavering, patience without offense, hope without distrust,
are no small matters. The Apostles prayed, yea Christ himself prayed, and that
with such feruencie, that the very blood trickled down, and Gods Angel was
feign to comfort him. Let us all therefore as many as be so minded, prepared,
and ready, to this dangerous matter, pray with the Apostles; O Lord increase
our faith, let no kind of 1. Macca. 2. 21.
wavering ouerturne us; O Lord give boldness and constancy, courage and
strength. And in so doing, let us commit our selves, souls and bodies, to our
heavenly father Jesus Christ, as unto a faithful Creator, and an assured
preserver, and a most steadfast performer of all his promises.

And so much for the burden imposed: Ye shall weep and lament. Which although
we ought not to wish for, yet being laid on our shoulders, we must both
patiently and thankfully bear it. According to the answers of Ely the Priest,
and Hezekiah the King, though in an other case. It is the Lord, let him do
what seems him good. The Iere. 10. 19.
word of the Lord is good, which thou have spoken. The will of the Lord be
done. Act. 21. 14.

2.
The next thing mentioned in the text, is the difference betwixt the godly and
the wicked concerning joy and sorrow, in these words: And the world shall
rejoice, and ye shall sorrow. Wherein it is worthy the consideration, to know
and understand what is meant by this word world. What is meant by this word
world.
Which generally is taken for the heaven, the earth, the sea, and all things
therein contained. Yet more nearly it is taken for the people* that dwell in
the world. Also the customs and fashions of the people, are meant by this word
world. According to our proverb and usual phrase; This is the world, that is,
this is the dealing of the men in the world, and this is practiced now adays.
Again, it is taken for a speech of wonder. It is a world to see, that is, it
is a marvelous matter. Also for those chief desires wherewith men are much led
and overtaken in the world, as honor, dignity and promotion, riches,
pleasures. All which are of chiefest account, and do most reign in the world.
Confirmed by S. John. 1. Ep. cap. 2. ver. 15. Love not the world, neither the
things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the
father is not in him. For all that is in the world, as the lust of the flesh,
the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life (that is, ambition, promotion, and
honor) is not of the father, but is of the world. And the world passes away,
and the lust thereof, but he that fulfilleth the will of God abides for ever.
Elsewhere it signifies the wisdom of worldly minded men. 1. Cor. 1. 21. For
seeing the world by wisdom knew not God in the wisdom of God, it pleased God
by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. and ca. 26. And we
speak wisdom among them that are perfect, not the wisdom of this world,
neither of the Princes and great men of this world which come to naught.
Sometimes it is taken for the elect people of God, according to that we read,
John 3. 16. God so loved the world that he has given his only begotten son,
that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have life everlasting.
And although it be manifest that Christ his death is sufficient for all, yet
this benefit of his death does rather properly pertain to the elect, that is
to them that truly and unfeignedly have repented them of their sins, applying
the mercies of God in Ieus Christ to the comfort of their distressed souls,
and relying and depending wholly upon Gods promises. But most commonly it is
taken for the worser sort of the people in the world. As it is said that Satan
is the prince of this world. 2. Cor. 4. 4. Nay the God of the world, because
the most part serve him more then then God, and in whose hearts and minds and
consciences he does both rule and reign. The godly are against him and against
his proceedinges, and therefore by this word world, the godly in the world are
not meant, but rather opposed against them that live in the world. Which is
confirmed by the speech of our Savior in his prayer to God for the elect and
godly. John 17. I pray for them which have known me and believed in me, I pray
not for the world. The world has hated them, because they are not of the
world, as I am not of the world. And in ye fifteenth chapter of the same
Gospel, verse. 19. If ye were of the world, the world would love his own; but
because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hates you. And in this last sense, this word World, is
taken for wicked and naughty men, for the haters and persecutors of Gods truth
and his Gospel. We know we are of God (says Saint John, 1. Epist. cap. 5.
19.) and the whole world lies buried in wickedness, and is given over to
evil doing. In the world (says Christ) ye shall have trouble, affliction, and
persecution, ye shall be hated of al men for my sake and the Gospels, be of good
comfort, I have ouercom the world.

Having opened unto you, what is meant by the world, The joy of the world, and
of the wicked.
it follows that I should show you ye difference concerning joy and sorrow,
betwixt them that are of the world, and them that are not of the world. The
world has many things wherein it rejoices, but it is an usurped and a
cou^erfeit joy, no true and sound joy. For the kingdom of God is not meat or
drink, or any thing that the world yields, but righteousness and peace, and
joy in the holy Ghost. To. 14. VVorldly matters.
17. As they are of the world, so are worldly matters the cheifest cause of
their joy, as to be in honor and high promotion with Haman and Absolon,
although they know not how near they are to the fall; to swim in wealth and
riches, to fare deliciously every day, and to go in purple and fine silk with
the rich glutton spoken of in the Gospel, to enjoy large dominions and great
possessions, fair houses, and pleasant orchiards, sweet gardens, with all
things that may satisfy the eye, and fill the soul with pleasure; like to
King Nabuchodonosor, that b^sted of his beautiful palace. Yea they imagine
such continuance, that they call their houses and lands after their own names,
as though they should endure for ever. The viole and tabret, singing and
dancing, feasting, banqueting, riot, and bravery, this is the life and the joy
of the world, while the troubles of Joseph are not remembered, and the poor
altogether forgotten in their sight. This was the sin of Sodom, Pride,
idleness, fulness of bread, contempt of the poor and needy. So that although
the people of Sodom be consumed with fire and brimstone from heaven, yet it
seems that their posterity remains and will remain until the words
end, till fire come down from heaven the second time, and make a woeful and
final destruction. The iestures also and dispositions of the world, are given
up to foolish rejoicing, and if any be sober and sad, they are not for their
company. Childish and peevish gigling, profane laughter, dissolute mirth,
wanton striking out, disordered lifting up the voice, and mirth with
incontinencie in every place. All their life is spent in meriment and pastime,
as though God had not called every one to painfulnesse and labor, in that
course of life wherein he has placed them. In time of divine service, when we
should there be present to offer up our prayer to God, and to sing forth his
praises; in the Churches there are handfulles, and at stages and beare-baitings
multitudes. Which shows where the hearts of the world are set, and wherein
their rejoicing consists. Well were it if they could remember that the way to
heaven is narrow, and that few find it, and that the way to hell is broad,
and that many pass by it, nay rather thrust and throng into it. This if they
could consider, would abate their worldly rejoicing, and make them withdraw
themselves from such pastimes which are so hurtful, and make them turn their
rejoicing into heaviness, and their mirth into mourning. But as the Heathen
painted their imagined fortune blind, so is the wilful world blind; and
knows not, or at least wise will not see, that their mirth shall end in
heaviness. And because they have eyes to see and will not see, and ears to
hear and will not be admonished, hearts to conceive, and will not relent,
therefore their sin remains. The world lies in sin and wickedness,
Sinful matters.
and all their rejoicing is in sinful matters, as though they had not only
been conceived, but bred and brought up in sin. The Usurer laugheth in his
sleeue at his extreme extortion, and delights himself in his sweet or
bitter gain, and in the overthrow of others. For if other be undone he cares
not, so that his turn be served; the adulterers and adulteresses, rejoice in
their uncleanness; the proud person in his bravery; the glutton in his
riotousnesse; the covetous man in his miserableness; the envious in his
malice; the liar in his falsehood; the blasphemer in his vain swearing; the
slaunderer in his backbiting; the thief in his stealing; the robber in his
spoiling; the crafty in his deceiving; the pilferer in his purloyning; the
corrupt person in his receiving of bribes; and the rest of the ungodly rout,
rejoice and sport themselves in their manifold iniquities. So that every one
runs on the race of his own desires, and Ezec. 11. 3. Amos 6. 3.
though Gods punishment follow us at the heels, yet put we off the evil day
from us, with the blockish Israelites, and approach and draw near to the
seat of iniquity.

They rejoice in speaking ill of government, despising all good orders and
wholesome laws, seeking their own licentious liberty, neither fearing God,
nor honoring the king. And as for the service of God and true religion, they
make a mock thereof, making it their only sport and table talk, to jest and
scoff at all godliness, and at the professors thereof. When they should weep
and lament for their sins, and for the grievous punishments and judgments
which hang over their heads, then is there nothing so rife with them as iolitie
and joy. According as it was in the days of the Prophet Esaias, cap. 22. 12. For
in that day that the Lord of hosts did call them unto weeping and mourning,
behold joy and gladness, slaying oxen and killing sheep, eating flesh, and
drinking wine, eating and drinking for to morrow we Joy continued.
shall die. As though they had made a covenant with death, and fully agreed
with the devil to enjoy the world at their pleasure, foolishly imagining that
their mirth should never have a change, and that their joy should always
continue. Psalm. 49. 11. and 10. 6.
With which foolish conceit, the prophet David was blinded, till God by his
chasticements showed him the contrary. Ps. 30. 6. And in my prosperity, I
said, I shall never be removed, thou Lord of thy goodness had made my hill so
strong. But after a while he had learned another lesson; Before I was troubled
I went wrong, and therefore it is good for me that I have been troubled. Not
remembering, or at lestwise little considering, that worldly matters, and
worldly joys, may well be compared to the chaunges of the Moon, which is now
at the full, now in the wane, as also to the sea which is now aflote, and anon
at an ebb. Diverse means there are to take their joy away, loss of goods by
thieves, loss of friends by death, poverty, sickness, and the ougly
countenance, and lean and pale visage of death it self.

The world shall rejoice and give them leave so to do, Greatest joy before
greatest sorrow.
they have but their time, ye bullock ye is fed to the slaughter how wanton
it is. Rejoice young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the
days of thy youth, and let the wicked walk in the ways of their heart, and
in the sight of their eyes; but let them know and assure themselves, that for
all these things God will bring them to indgement. But this of all other is
worthy the marking, that the wicked are never more given to joy, then when
their destruction is nearest at hand. As by the examples of the old world, in
the days of Noah and of Lot, may be perceived, as also by the example of
Belshasar the king, who rejoicing greatly among his concubines and drinking
wine in bowls, shortly after had both his crown and his life taken from him.
Which thing the prophet Esaias chap. 18. 5. expresses in these words; For before
the harvest, when the flower is finished and the fruit is riping in the
flower, then he shall cut down the branches with hooks, and shall take away
and cut off the boughs. When the ungodly (says ye psalm) are green as the
grass, and when all the works of wickedness do flourish, then shall they be
destroyed for ever.

Yet of all the joys that the wicked and the world takes Joy in persecuting.
delight in, this is chief, the hurting of ye good, hating, despising,
persecuting, and cruelly tormenting the godly, even to death. Which is notably
declared in ye book of Wisdom, Chap. 2. Come say they, let us enjoy our
pleasures, and fill our selves with costly wine and ointments, let us crown
our selves with rose buds, and let us be partakers of our wantonness. Yet all
these did not so much rejoice them, as to oppress the poor that was
righteous, and to vex them that were just. Therefore let us defraud ye
righteous say they, for he is not for our profit, and he is contrary to our
doings; he checketh us for offending against the law, and blames us as
transgressors against discipline, he is made to reprove our thoughts, and it
greeueth us to look upon him. Let us examine him with rebukes and torments,
that we may know his meekness, and prove his patience, and let us condemn
him unto a shameful death. Wherein do hipocrites more rejoice, then in the
false and counterfeit service of God, and they that kill the godly, shall
think they do God service. The wealth of the Israelites enriched the
Chaldeans, but to mock at their Saboths, that rejoiced them, and to make a
jest of their excercises of religion, was unto them as their meat and drink.
Let us devour them say they, certainly this is the day y^ we looked for, we
have found and seen it. Yea they counted so basely of the Israelites, that
they would not vouchsafe to touch them, saying; Depart ye polluted, depart,
depart, touch not. All our enemies says the prophet, have opened their mouth
against us. Lam. cap. 1. and. 2. and. 3. 61.
Thou have heard their reproach O Lord, and all their imaginations against me.
The lips also of those y^ rose against me, and their whispering against me
continually. Behold their sitting down, and their rising up, how I am their
song. Thus does the world sollace themselves, and rejoice at ye sorrows of ye
godly. And if they see any cross or punishment Rash in their iudgementi
against the godly.
laid upon them, straightway they are ready to judge the worst, as the
Barbarians when they saw a viper hung on Paul's hand, surely say they, this
man is a murderer. As the prophet Esaias 53. reports of our Savior Christ; He
is despised and rejected of me^, we hid our faces from him, he was despised and
we esteemed him not; yea we judged him as plagued and smitten of God and
humbled. The children of fools and vilaines (says Iobe cap. 30. 8.) and such
as were more vile then the earth have made me their song, and I am their talk.
They abhor me and fly far from me, and spare not to spit in my face; because
that God has loosed my cord and humbled me, they have loosed the bridle before
me, and in my misery they are impudent and licentious. The punishments and
sorrows of the godly, are the arguments and reasons which caruall and worldly
men through ye sight of afflictions do make against the children of God,
especially against those whom covertly they hate. Seeking thereby to quench the
rage of their furious minds, under ye color and cloak of the justice of God.
Like hawks they pry and behold, and like lions they tear in pieces. And if it
be but the least fault, that they can find, they amplify it severely and
tragically, and paint it out to the utmost. As if they had said, with our
tongues we Biting in their tannts and scoffing in their behavior.
will prevail, and who is Lord over us? Their lying lips are given cruelly,
disdainfully, and despitefully to speak against the righteous, and when they
see them, they laugh them to scorn, they shoot out their lips and shake
their heads. In mine adversity says the prophet, they rejoiced and gathered
themselves together, yea the very abiects came together against me unawares,
making mowes at me, and ceased not. With ye flatterers were busy mockers,
which gnashed upon me with their teeth, rejoicing greatly at my trouble,
saying; Aha, Aha, there, there, so would we have it. My enemies live and are
mighty, and they y^ hate me wrongfully, are many in number, they also ye
reward evil for good are against me, because I follow the thing that good is. I
wept and chastened my self with fasting, and that was turned to my reproof; I
put on sackcloth, and they iested upon me. They y^ sit Ezekil. 25. 3. 7. and.
26. 2. Joy to see them oppressed and murdered.
in the gate and are rulers, they speak against me, poor and rich despise me,
and make a sport of my trouble. Not only in jesting and scoffing at the godly,
do they rejoice, but also to see them oppressed, yea they delight in the
overthrow and murdering of Gods saints. Herod and Pilot are made friends in
persecuting Christ. And K. Antiochus, 2. Mac. 7. makes the blood of ye Martyrs
his spectacle. Herod he kills James the brother of John with y^ sword; and
when he saw y^ it pleased the Jews, he proceeded further, Act. 12. 2. Many
other examples might be alleged, but y^ I have bin tedious. And this may
suffice to have showed how and wherein ye world reioiceth.

It may seem some what impertinent to entreat in this The joys of of the Godly
place of the joy of the godly, but only that by contrarieties, matters are
made more plain and evident. Among the joys of the godly this is one of the
chiefest, to have ye joy and quietness of conscience, unto the which they have a
special regard. The Apostle S. Paul being brought to his trial and
examination, A good conscience.
first of all alleges this for himself, Acts. 23. 1. Men and brethren, I have
in all good conscience, served God until this day. Writing to the Corinthians,
2. Epist. cap. 1. 12. Our rejoicing is this (says he) the testmony of our
conscience, that in simplicity and godly pureness, by the grace of God we
have had our conversation in the world. The Prophet Samuel 1. Samu. 12. 3.
taking his leave of the people, had nothing wherein he might so greatly rejoice
before them, as in the testimony of a good conscience. I have walked before you
(says he) from my childhood unto this day? Behold here I am, bear record of
me, before the Lord, and before his anointed; whose ox have I taken? or whose
ass have I taken? or whom have I done wrong to? or whom have I hurt? or of
whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith, and I will
restore it you? Then they said, thou have done us no wrong, nor have hurt us,
neither have thou taken ought of any man's hand. And he said unto them; The Lord
is witness against you, and his anointed is witness this day, that ye have
found naught in my hands. And they answered, he is witness. See how he
doubles it, and almost trebles it, and makes it all his song, and the crown of
his reioicing. Whose example the Apostle S. Paul following, at his departure
from the Ephesians, excellently set down, Act. 20. 17. amongst the rest has
these words. And now brethren I commend you to God, and to the word of his
grace, which is able to build further, and to give you an inheritance among all
them which are sanctified, I have coueted no man's silver nor gold, nor
apparel, yea you know that these hands have ministered unto my necessities.
I have showed you all things, and have kept back nothing, but have showed you
all the counsel of God. Wherefore I take you to reccord this day, that I am
pure from the blood of all men. And not only the soul of man which is the
chiefest part within him, rejoices at the testimony of a good conscience, but
also this joy is seen in his countenance, and in his lovely behavior, which
is meant by that saying set down, Prou. 15. 13. A joyful heart, makes a
cheerful countenance. This is it whereby we are holy temples unto the Lord,
and whereby we sanctify the Lord as the Apostle S. Peter speaks. 1. Pet. 3.
15. Who also in the same chapter sets down two notable effects of a good
conscience, which cannot but bring great joy to the godly. The one is, that
when we be evil spoken of without desert, then is the testimony of our
conscience the chiefest comfort. The other is, concerning prayer; A good
conscience makes request unto God, and when we have an evil conscience, with
what heart shall we offer up our prayers to God, or how shall they be accepted
at gods hand? According to that we read, Job. 11. 13. If thou prepare thine
heart, and stretch out thine hand toward him, if iniquity be in thine hand,
put it far away. And therefore Mardocheus is bold to come into Gods presence,
under the warrant of a good conscience (Hester 13. 12.) Thou know (says he)
all things, and thou know Lord, that it was neither of malice nor
presumption, nor for any desire of glory, that I did this, and not bow down
to proud Haman. For I would have been content with a good will, for the
salvation of Israel, to have kissed the sole of his feet. But I did it because I
would not prefer the honor of a man above the glory of God, and would not
worship any but only thee my Lord. And this have I not done of pride. Seeing
therefore the joy of a good conscience is so great, well might the wise man
say, Pro. 15. 15. A good conscience is a continual feast, and the greatest
comfort in the greatest trouble, and such a comfort that the world cannot give.
The joy and comfort whereof, may appear by the contrary in the wicked. For
where the want of a good conscience is, there is neither joy nor comfort, but
fear and sorrow. As we read, Prou. 15. 13. A joyful heart makes a cheerful
countenance, but by the sorrow of the heart, the mind is heavy. And Job. 11.
20. The eyes of the wicked shall fail, and their refuge shall perish, and
their hope shall be sorrow of mind. An ill conscience brings great dumpes,
and the heart of the people is filled therewith. And this is one of the
chiefest judgments that God does lay upon the wicked, as we may read Wisd.
17. That they were sick and died for fear, and they swounded when a sudden
fear, not looked for came upon them. For it is a fearful thing when malice
is condemned by her own testimony, and a conscience that is touched does ever
forecast cruel things. By the which fear, the succors which reason offers
are betrayed: for indeed no reason can allay the force thereof, but only the
grace and good spirit of God, which is far from the obstinate and
unrepentant sinner. Whose hope the less it is within, the greater do the
torments to come seem unto them. Wickedness is full of fear and gives
testimony of damnation against it self, and a troubled conscience always
suspecteth cruel matters to be imminent, and to hang over it self, as it
makes account to have descrued. The miserable estate of a wicked man's
conscience is also lively described, Job. 15 in these words. A wicked man is
proved all the days of his life, though time be uncertain how long he shall
play the tyrant. The sound of terror and fear is always in his ears, and
although it be in time of peace, yet he always suspecteth some treason against
him, expecting on every side the sword to come upon him. When he sits down
to eat he remembers that the day of darkness is ready at hand for him,
tribulation terrifieth him, and anguish enuironeth him, even as a king is
environed with soldiers, when he goes to war. What can be more miserable then
that man, that has such a butchery and slaughterhouse within his own heart?
What are his fearee, how great are his anguishes? Suspecting all things,
doubting their own shadows, fearing every little noise, thinking every one to
come against them that come toward them, and others that talk together to
talk of them and their sins. Such a thing sin is, that it bewraieth it self,
though no man accuse it, it condemns it self, though no man bear witness
against it. Pro. 28. The wicked man flies though no man pursue him. And why
does he fly? Because that he has within his conscience an accuser pursuing
him, whom always he carries about him. And as he cannot fly from himself,
so cannot he fly from his accuser, but wheresoever he goes he is pursued and
whipped by the same, and his wonnd incurable. And wherehence grows all this
fear, but only because our consciences shall be our greatest accusers at the day
of judgment, as we read Revel. 20. 12: And I saw the dead both great and
small stand before God, and the books (of their consciences) were opened, and
the dead were judged of those things which were written in those books
according to their works. Now therefore it appears, that one of the chiefest
joys of the godly is the testimony of a good conscience, which is only proper
to the godly, and unto the which the wicked can in no sort attain. Without the
which there is nothing but the fear of death and damnation. Wherefore let
every one have care to make a good conscience his only joy, and let all our
works be ruled thereby, without the which all things no doubt, shall go far
out of square.

The joy also of the godly consists in this, that they The glory of God.
turn all their joy to the setting forth of Gods glory. According to the
example Hamah the mother of Samuel, who being in great sorrow of mind,
because she was barren and wanted the joy of children, she made her humble and
earnest request unto god to make her a joyful mother. Promising therewithal,
that if God would vouchsafe to grant her a child, that she would him to the
Lord and consecrate him to his service. Contrary to the course of the wirked,
and the fashion of the world which perishes, who refer and apply all their
joy, to the fulfilling of their pleasures, and the saisfying of their lusts.
Which thing the Apostle Saint James does worthily reprove in them. Chap. 4. 3.
4. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye might consume it
on your lusts. Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the amity of
the world, is the enmity of God? Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the
world, makes himself the enemy of God. Look what ye sow ye shall reap, if
ye seek Gods glory, ye shall reap honor; and if your joy be settled in
worldly and sinful matters, your joy shall be turned into shame.

And herehence arises another kind of joy of the godly, Heavenly blessings.
who counting worldly joys but sin and shame, or at lestwise but frivolous
and vain, have resolved with themselves to settle all their delight in
heavenly blessings and inward comforts, and in such things wherein the wicked
has no delight. As in prayer to God, in singing Psalms, in hearing his word,
in reading his law. Blessed is the man whose delight is in the law of the
Lord, and who meditateth therein day and night. And seeing they are risen with
Christ, they seek those things which are above, their treasure is in heaven
where their heart is. As for the earth, they see that nothing is so rife there,
as corruption, sin, and vanity, desiring to be delivered from this body of
sin, and from this vale of misery. Let him that has bought a yoke of oxen
rejoice to prove them; let him that has purchased a farm, make have to
furnish it, and to possess it; let him that has newly married a wife, weary
himself in his blind pleasure; let him that has store of corn, take care to
build new barnes; let him that has wealth and riches and great store, rest
himself thereupon. But let as many as are well minded, with the Prophet David
say:

The greater sort crave worldly goods,
and riches do embrace:
But Lord grant us thy countenance,
thy favor and thy grace.
For thou thereby shall make my heart,
more joyful and more glad:
Then they that of their corn and wine,
full great increase have had.
The Apostles wishing joy to them that they wrote unto, mention not any worldly
matters, but the things that they wish unto them are; Grace, mercy and peace
from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ. They pray that God would
open the eyes of their mind, and increase his knowledge in them. How without
our desert he has chosen us unto life before the foundations of the world, how
through his mercy and precious death of his dear son, we are redeemed and
saved. How of the enemies of God we are made his dear children by adoption,
how by his grace and holy spirit, we are not only called, but also directed
into newness and holiness of life; how by his providence he suffers us not
to want, as also by the same, how he turns away all hurtful things from us;
and lastly, how he nourishes and cherishes within us, the steadfast hope of
the life to come. That we may rejoice with the Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 2. Blessed be
God, even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings, in heavenly things in Christ.

Wherein although our chiefest joy ought to be placed in heavenly things, yet
are we to be advised that we do not make too base account, and too vile a
reckoning of those comforts and blessings, which God has granted to us in
this world. As to enjoy public peace, and quietness, to have obedient wives,
and tractable children, trusty servants, and faithful friends; and such like
tokens of Gods favor toward us. And therefore has God granted us wisdom to
esteem of every thing in his due place. For if concerning those creatures of
God, which we think to be altogether unprofitable, the wise man wills us, not
curiously and disdainfully to ask; What is this? wherefore is that? For God
has made all things for their own use; how much more concerning the
blessings of this life, ought we reverently to be affected, and also thankfully
to accept of them. But al ye joy of the godly concerning these worldly matters
and blessings of this life, is in ye sober and moderat use of them, whereas the
wicked do abuse them to riot and excess. Wresting them from those ends for the
which God has appointed them; which are, his glory, our comfort, and the
mutual benefit one of an other. Wherein the Apostle 1. Cor. 7. 29. does wisely
counsel us. This say I brethren, because the time is short, hereafter that
both they which have wives, be as though they had none, and they that rejoice,
as they that rejoiced not, and they that buy, as though they possessed not, and
they that use this world, as though they used it not. For the fashion of this
world goes away, and here we have no certain dwelling place. Whereas the joy
of the wicked in these worldly blessings (which are no blessings to them, but
matters of further condemnation for their abusing of them) is out of measure,
and altogether sinful. Such as was in the days of Noah, they ate, they drank,
they married, and gave in marriage; and such as was in the days of Lot, they
bought, they sold, they planted, they built, their hearts being oppressed with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and they altogether overcome and drowned in the
cares of this life, even then, when the latter day, and the day of their
destruction, did suddeinly come upon them.

To these may be added another joy, as comfortable to the Rejoice in
infirmities.
soul and conscience of a godly man, as any of the rest. And ye is when they
rejoice of their infirmities. Not y^ any should rejoice in their sins, but y^
by the grace of God, and by the power of his holy spirit, we have the mastry
over those sins, whereof we have manifest proof in our selves, y^ they would
have the mastry over us, whereby we should become y^ bondslaues of y^ devil, and
whereby we should throw our selves headlong into hell. Wicked inclinations grow
with us even from the cradle, which as time and age, and years, proceed and
come on, take strength and begin to master us, and rule us. Our field is all
grown over with thistles and thorns, and our life is nothing else but a
platform of vices. And as ye four complexions in man are mingled in the
constitution of ye nature of man, yet one quallitie is predominant and rules
the rest; (for either we are sanguine and pleasant, or choleric and angry, or
melancholicke and sad, or phlegmatic and heavy:) so is the soul of man
infected with the pollution of sin, and with the mingle mangle of naughty
corruptions, that he can discern no remnant of that perfection wherein it was
first created, that you may well say, the soul of man is now become a mixture
of sins, yet one sin among the rest, challenges the cheifest room, and
bears the greatest sway. One is given to pride, and every one notes him by
that vice, another to drunkenness, and he is known to be a tosseposse;
another to theft and robbery, and he is pointed at and privily marked for that;
another to fighting, and he is called a slasher and a swingbuckler; another to
whoredom, and the beast is spued at, and his company loathed for suspicion of
a French disease; and so in all vices, if a man list to run through them.
Wherein the wicked follow the course of their wicked nature, and y^ with a great
delight and felicity, as though it were ye only joy to be desired, and y^ with
such greedines, as though they could never be satisfied, and withal, such
blindness and headlong affection, that may well be pitied, but it is a doubt it
will never be amended, y^ in mercy they might be saved. That ye Apostle might
well say of them, 2. Tim. 2. 26. that they are in ye snare of ye devil and are
taken of him at his will. Yea they rejoice in his service, and will by no means
be delivered, although they be never so much persuaded thereunto, no not after
seven and seven years, but offer their ears to be bored through, in token of
perpetual service, and sell themselves to work wickedness, as Achab did that
wicked King of Israel.

Some will say it is an eafie matter for a man to overcome his sinful
affections, and we may do well if we will. But I ask them who was more able
and better furnished, then the blessed Apostle S. Paul, yet he finds the
matter so hard to perform, that he confesses it to the whole world. Romans 11.
22. I delight in the law of God concerning the inner man, but I see an other
law in my members, rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me
captive unto the law of sin which is in my members, that is in all the
senses, and in all the parts of my body. Yea he sees it to be a matter so
impossible, that he is feign to cry out; O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me? And sees no other mean of deliverance, but only prayer for Gods
help, that it would please God to beat down the power of sin in him. I
besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me. And answer was made;
My grace is sufficient for thee, and my power is made perfect through thy
weakness. For that which is impossible to man, is most easy for God to bring
to pass. Most truly therefore might he say; Very gladly will I rejoice, rather
in mine infirmities, that the power of Christ may dwell in me, and master and
mortify sin, which would full feign have the better hand over me. Many will
not be known of their sins, when they be admonished of them, because they
are loath to leave them, yet some of a better mind and more tractable, will
acknowledge them, and in their mind will mislike them, and also will not
stick to confess that they would feign leave them, and would think
themselves happy, if they might be rid of them, yet find in themselves no
power at all to forgo them. No marvel then though the Apostle Heb. 12.
persuades us to cast off sin, which cleaneth unto us and hangs on so fast.
But how may we forgo them? how may we be rid of them? we cannot, it is
impossible to us. Crave it and beg it as the apostle did, once, twice, thrice,
yea often and ever, at the hands of God, in earnest and humble prayer, and he
will perform it unto thee, and after a while thou shall perceive how weak the
power of sin will begin to be in thee. So that thou shall be daily less
proud, less given to drunkenness, to theft, to whoredom, and the like, till
thou growest at the last to hate that sin, that troubled thy soul so much,
till in time thou have gathered that strength, that thou may dispossess and
throw out that strong man. Behold then how great cause the godly have to
rejoice at their infirmities, in that not only the power of their ruling sins
is abated, but also by the power of Gods good spirit, and by the grace of
Christ who dwells in the hearts of the godly, they are quite overcome and
overthrown. Whereby we may gather these two comforts; First that this is a
sure token unto us, that we appertain unto God; and secondly, that the devil
shall have no power to destroy us, seeing that we have escaped his snares, and
that his bands that held us in so fast, are loosed, burst, and broken.

I will add but one joy more, which is most pertinent To do good for evil.
and for the present purpose. And that is, that the godly rejoice to do the
wicked good, as the wicked rejoice to hurt them, and sport and solace
themselves in their sorrows. At the conuertion of the sinner and wicked, the
Angels in heaven rejoice, and it is not to be doubted, but that the godly bear
them company herein, and are as greatly joyful. The enemy of the Prophet
Eliseus sought his death, but he set bread and water before them, and sent them
away in peace, when they were al in his hand, and at his word they might have
been put to death. When David might have saline Saul, yet he rejoiced in
preserving his life. The Prophet Jeremy, counseled the Israelies to pray for
the life of King Nabuchodonosor, who held them in captivity, although he were
a wicked and an idolatrous King. Our Savior Christ prayed for the life of his
persecutors; O Lord lay not this sin to their charge, for they know not what
they do. So did the blessed Martyr S. Stenen, when the stones flue thick about
his ears. Thus do they pray for them that persecute them, that God would turn
his wrath from them, and that in mercy he would call them, as the Apostle Saint
Paul was called from persecution, to profession; thus do they speak well of
them that hate them, bless them that curse them; thus do they good for evil,
and seek the preservation of their lives, who greedily hunt after their
overthrow and death. According to the examples of the Apostles, 1. Cor. 4. 12.
We are reviled and yet we bless; we are persecuted and suffer it; we are evil
spoken of, and we pray. I say the truth in Christ, (says S. Paul,) Romans 9. 1.
I lie not, my conscience bearing me witness in the holy Ghost, that I have
great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart. For I would wish my self to
be separate from Christ for my brethren that are my kinsmen according to the
flesh: but his professed and utter enemies by persecution. Yet he calls them
brethren. Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they
might be saved. Accounting the good and welfare of his enemies, the greatest
joy that might befall him.

More might be said, but I have stood upon this point of the joy of the godly
somewhat too long.

Wherefore as a matter more proper to the godly, I will The sorrow of the godly.
return unto the words of my text, and entreat once again of their sorrow.
The world shall rejoice, and ye shall sorrow: as if they were both borne and
bred to it, and should end their lives in the same. For as the oxen appointed
to the slaughter are let run a fatting at their pleasure, and other oxen kept
under daily labor of the yoke, so fares it with the godly, that are exercised
with trouble all the days of their life, while the wicked escape and run at
randam, gathering fat, and growing gross, and dying shortly, nay more then
that, eternally. If the godly have any comfort in this world, it continues not
long, and therefore their life may well be said, to be a mixture of sweet and
sour, and a continual interchange of sorrow and comfort, comfort and sorrow.
Which if they consider well, is a benefit unto them, so far forth as to draw
their minds from earth to heaven, from y^ world to God. Whereunto they are ye
more moved, because ye world makes a wonder of them, a gazing stock, a matter
of contempt and derision. As the Apostle 1. Cor. 4. 13. has foretold; We are
counted as the filth of the world, and the ofscouring of all things unto this
time, and a gazing stock unto the world. In the time of ye Prophet Zachariah,
they that followed the word of ye Lord were continued in the world, and
esteemed as monsters. Hear now, (says the Prophet Zachariah, cap. 3. 8.)
Hear now, o Iehoshua the high priest, thou and thy fellows that sit before
thee, for they are monstrous persons. So likewise was it in ye days of Esaias
the Prophet, cap. 8. 18. Behold I and the children whom the Lord has given me,
are as signs, and as wonders in Israel, and such as are thought not worthy to
live. Moreover their estate in worldly matters, what is it but hunger, thirst,
nakedness, imprisonment, to be buffetted, to have no certain dwelling place.
Be not dismayed at this estate, but rather with Moses frame thy self to take
part with the godly in their sorrow, yea although thou might live in y^
palaces of princes. For he that will live godly, must look and make account
of sorrow, and seek for no joy. When Baruch was sorry because he could not be
partaker of his desire and of his joy, he had this answer from God, by the
mouth of the Prophet Jeremiah; Seek thou great things for thy self, seek
them not. Let us remember what Christ said; My kingdom is not of this world.
And why should the desire of joy so tickle our minds? or sorrow daunt us, and
throw us down? or any grief discourage us? When all things go according to
our will, then do we easily slide into the forgetfulness of God, but sorrow
and misery makes us know God and our selves. I said in my prosperity
(says David) I should never be cast down; But it is good for me that I
have been troubled. And many there are, who have given God more thanks for
their sorrow and misery, then for all the prosperity that ever they enjoyed.
So greatly it did instruct them, and so great good it did them. See how
profitable it is, to have sorrow rather then joy. If our estate be joyful, and
sorrow does not assault us, yet let us weep with them that weep, and pray to
God to turn away his heavy hand from them on whom he has laid sorrow. Let
there be fellow-feeling in thee of the sorrows of others, as if the case were
our own, and let us help to bear their burden.

Consider if thou can be without sorrow, if thou countest thy self amongst
the number of those that are godly. Record with thy self what duties and good
things thou have omitted which thou should have done, either to God or man,
either to our selves or others, to our own charge, committed to our hands, and
to our government, as wife, children, servants, or to strangers, to our
friends, or to our enemies. Let us call to mind what evil we have done, whereby
God has been dishonored, our neighbors iniuried, our selves defiled, other
by our example allured to wickedness. Let us not be wilfully forgetful, that we
have omitted our duty in prayer and invocation to God, and in performing our
humble service unto him. That we have omitted the ministering to the necessity
of the Saints, and the help we should have showed to the needy brethren; that
we have omitted many good opportunities which have been offered for the
increase of our virtues, faith, patience, mercy, and such like. That we have
neglected the careful visiting of the poor destitute, which lie in our
streets and complain for their great miseries, and are ready to perish
before our eyes for lack of relief. That we have omitted many exercises of
prayer, of preaching, of reading and meditating in the law of God; that we have
omitted many things which appertain to godliness and true sanctification.
Again, let us remember on the other side, that we have committed much
wickedness privately, publicly, openly, secretly, in our souls, in our
bodies, at home and abroad, against God and men, in our conversation, and in
our communication. All which being duly considered, have we not just cause to
chastise our selves by sorrow, and to afflict our selves by weeping?

How can thou but grieve in mind, to see the wicked flourish, and they that
are most against God and godliness, The wicked to flourish.
and against the godly, to bear the greatest sway in the world, and they that
indeed ought to be vile and of no account with us, (yea although their
personages and places, and wealth, and riches, be great) to see them in
greatest estimation, and most honored of the people. This made the prophet
Jeremy to muse and to wonder, and the prophet David almost to fall from God. My
feet had welny flipt. Read the ps. 73. and 37. Job. 21. Where this matter is
excellenly set down and resolved. The Prophet Jeremy, 2. Esd. 3. 21. and. 4. 1.
in his 12. chap.. ver. 1. O Lord if I dispute with thee thou art righteous,
yet let me talk with thee of thy indgements. Wherefore does the way of the
wicked prosper? Why are they in wealth that rebelliously transgress? They do
not only live when ye good are taken away, but also to the great admiration and
grief many times of Gods children, they greatly flourish, they live and wax
old, and grow in wealth, and their seed is established in their sight with
them, and their generation before their eyes, their houses are peaceable
without fear, and gods rod is not upon them, neither are they in trouble and
plauged as other men, whom God more favors, and therefore keeps them from
the wantonuesse of this sinful world. Lest as the world is lulleda sleep, till
their last sleep come upon them, so also they might grow in such forgetfulness,
as to doubt whether there were a God that ruled the earth, whether ever they
should be taken from ye earth by death, whether there were a judgment day, in
the which they should be called to an account, whether there were a heaven for
the godly or a hell for the wicked. As though the world should endnre for
ever, and the flonrishing estate of the wicked should never have an end. I
saw says the wiseman Eccle. 8. 10. the wicked buried and they returned (that
is other came in their places as bad as they) and they that came from the holy
place were yet forgotten in the city where they had done right. This also is
vanity: yet though a sinner do evil anhundred times, and God prolongeth his
days, I know it shall be well with them that fear the Lord and do reverence
before him. But it shall not be well to the wicked, neither shall he prolong
his days, he shall be like a shadow because he fears not before God. In this
world it comes to the righteous according to the work of the righteous. This
has troubled many in all ages, not only of the weaker sort, but many of them
also which have been stronger, Job, David, Jeremy, even such as have been
partakers of Gods secrets. And why should not the same matter move thee to
sorrow also? When the wicked rise up men hide themselves, but when they perish,
the righteous increase. Prou. 28. 28. When the righteous are in authority, the
people rejoice, but when the wicked bears rule, the people sigh.

If it vex thy mind to see the wicked in great prosperity The godly to be
oppressed.
and to flourish, much more ought it to grieve thee to see the good oppressed,
trodden under foot, despised, yea and destroyed. Which made the Prophet Abacuc
to cry out and say; O Lord how long shall I cry, and thou will not hear?
even cry out unto thee for violence, and thou will not help? Why do thou
show me iniquity, and cause me to behold sorrow? for spoiling and violence
are before me, and there are that raise up strife and contention. Therefore
the law is dissolved, and judgment does never go forth. For the wicked does
compass about the righteous, therefore wrong judgment proceeds. The
oppression of the poor and of the godly is a crying sin, and pierces the
clouds, and how can it but pierce thy heart to hear of it, much more to
behold it? This made Queen Hester when she heard of the cruel decree against
the Jews to be so sad and heavy, yea furthermore, to venture her life for
the safeguard of her people. If I perish (says she) I perish. Alas how can I
suffer and see the evil that shall come upon my people? So she spoke for them
unto the King and prevailed. The Prophet Jeremiah being cast into the dungeon
and like to perish, it grieved Ebedmelech the blackmore, and he pitied his
case, and spoke for him unto the King, and did himself help him out of the
prison. My Lord the King says he, these men have done evil in all that they
have done to Jeremiah the Prophet, whom they have cast into the dungeon, and he
dies for hunger in the place where he is, for there is no more bread in the
city. W^e is me says Mattathias the Priest, wherefore was I borne to see this
destruction of my people? Macc. 2. 7. 13. 14. What helps it us to live any
longer? And he rent his clothes and put on sackcloth and mourned very sore.
If in a country says the wise man, Eccle. 5. 7. thou see the oppression of
the poor, and the defrauding of judgment and justice, be not astonished at the
matter. For he that is higher then the highest regards, and there be higher
then they. He does not forbid them to grieve and mourn at it, but wills them
not to be dismayed, nor utterly to be discouraged and discomforted, because that
God did regard it. And in the fourth chap. ver. 1. So I turned and considered
all the oppressions y^ are wrought under the sun, and behold the tears of y^
oppressed, and none comfort them. And ^o the strength is of the hand of them
that oppress them, and none comfort the^. And if ye world do not regard it,
should not y^ godly pity it? and pray for the comfort of the afflicted, and
put to their helping hands to relieve them? If one member of ye body rejoice,
al ye members rejoice with it, and likewise is it so in grief and pain. Now if
we be members of Christ his body, why should not the miserable estate of
others grieve us as if it were our own?

Again, what more apparent cause may there be of grief Sin to be so rife and
unpunished.
and sorrow in the godly, then to see sin so rife and unpunished. Mine eyes
gush out with tears (says David) because Psalm. 119. 158.
the ungodly keep not thy law. When we not only hear but see and behold the
cruel dealings of the world, their intolerable pride, their filthiness of
the flesh, and riotousnesse of life, their great falsehood, lying, deceit,
undermining one of an other, their envy, hatred, malice, their slanders,
reproaches, backbiting, and all iniquity, which now reigns Ez^. 9. 4. 2.
Kin 22. 19. Esd. 8. 70. 71.
in our whole life, merciful God what fountains and what wells of tears
should it cause in us? Hos. 4. 1. Hear the word of the Lord (says the
prophet) ye children of Israel, for the Lord has a controversy with the
inhabitants of the land. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and
whoring, they break out, and blood touches blood, therefore shall the land
mourn. And if the sense less creaturres be so affected, how should not we be
moved? They that endeavor to live well, are a pray unto others, and wicked men
are countenanced out, and mighty sins are borne withal, theft, robbery,
adultery, murder. O Lord that a murderer should find any one friend in a
christian common weal. But of nobles, of Judges, of magistrates, it were too
intolerable. A poor thief packs to tiburne, but a manqueller and a murderer
can shift his legs out of the shackles, and his neck out of the haulter. Oh
that the chiefest were not guilty in all the trespasses aforesaid? The
multitude of offendoures does prove them to be guilty. And a fearful thing it
is and a lamentable, for want of due punishment and due execution of laws,
will pull down gods vengeance on the land. All which do move us, not only to
be sorry and agreeued, but to pray that God would turn his wrath from us,
because of those grievous sins wherewith the whole land is overflowed.

Where hence arises another great sorrow, to see that Gods threatenings not to
be regarded, nor his mercies accepted.
Gods threatenings are not regarded, neither are his mercies accepted. For if
they were, our lives should not be unreformed, and sins should not go
unpunished. This made the prophet Jonas aweary of the ministry, and provoked
Christ himself to shed forth tears for Jerusalem. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
how often would I have gathered thee together, as a hen gathers her chickens
under her wings and ye would not? Oh if thou had known at the least in this
thy day, those things which belong unto thy peace, but now are they hid from
thy eyes. For where Gods mercy, patience, and long sufferance, can take no
place, neither yet the threatenings of his judgments prevail, then do
grievous punishments hang over ye heads of that people, and it is to be feared
and doubted, howsoone God will power down his wrath upon them. A prudent man
sees the plague and hides himself, but the foolish go on still and Ezekiel. 11.
13.
are punished. The pitiful man and the godly minded, foreseeth heavy
punishments, and prays for ye offenders. Oh that my head were full of water
(says the prophet Jeremy chap. Iere. 14. 17.
9. 1.) and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night
for the slain of the daughter of my people. This destruction was not yet come,
but the Prophet foresawe that it would come, and therefore he wept for sorrow.

But one of the greatest griefs and sorrows is, to see religion Religion and
the fear of god to be scorned.
mocked at, and them to be scorned, whose desire is to live according to Gods
will and commandments. And this is a great cause of the fall of many, that
otherwise would do well, let them that use it refrain it, they know not what
hurt they do. The least of us are ready to fall away, and therefore the
Apostle wills us to exhort and Esd. 10. 50.
provoke one another unto good works daily. This mocking and taunting, the
Apostle doubts not to call by the name of persecution, wherewith Isaac was
vexed by Ismael. In consideration whereof, it greeueth the godly, that they are
alive among the wicked, whose reproachful speeches and ungodly behavior, have
bin pricks in their sides, and thorns in their eyes, if not knines to their
throats, and as grievous as the point of a dagger to their hearts. For if they
look into the world, and take a view of the fashion of men amongst whom they
must live, they shall see the malice of Caine revived, the hatred of Esau set
on foot, flattering tongues like Ioab, but murdering minds. Some as proud and
as devilish as Haman, some as treacherous as Judas, some as cruel as Iezabel,
as incroching and greedily hunting after other men's mainteuance and livings, if
not their lives withal, as ever was wicked Achab Naboths vineard, little
kindness and much churlishness, as bad or worse then that of Nabal, many
dissemblers as Ananias, and where is the man that speaks the truth from his
heart?

For the most part all the conversation of ye wicked, stanvpon Uncleanness to
bear so great asway.
baudry and uncleanness. Just Lot was vexed with the uncleanly conversation of
the wicked. For he being righteous and dwelling among them, in seeing and
hearing, vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds.
In respect of all which snares and incombrances, the godly are vexed with
sorrow eue^ to the death. I am aweary of my life for the daughters of Heth,
says Rebeccay, Abraham's wife. It is enough now O Lord, take my soul, for I am
no better then my fathers, seeing I only am alive and the rest has forsaken
thee, says Elias. Woe is me says the Prophet David, Ps. 120. 5. that I must
dwell with Mesech, and have mine habitation among the tents of Cedar. My soul
has too long dwelt among them. Yet has God so appointed, that we should shine
as glistring stars amongst a naughty generation. Whose behavior shall make
us more wary and circumspect, as also our good works which they shall see and
behold, shall turn either to their happy conversion, or most just confusion and
endless condemnation. The weak minds which are not as yet thoroughly
strengthened, wish daily and continually although it be godly and well, with the
Apostle, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is best of all.

Hitherto of the sorrows of the godly. And y^ I may make perfect this part,
touching the difference betwixt the godly and the wicked, concerning joy and
sorrow; as also that ye may be the better comforted and encouraged to undertake
and endure sorrow, I will let you understand how that the world has his
sorrow also. And seeing I have begun to be tedious, bear with me a while, I
hope you will not think your labor altogether lost in reading, which may be
at your leisure, though it cost me some study to gather it.

Who would think that the wicked should have any sorrow in this world,
howsoever they are like to speed in the world to come, seeing they have the
world at will, and as the Prophet says, they come in no misfortune like other
men. And yet it falls out sometimes, that they have sorrow, but what is the
cause of their sorrow? No other but for worldly matters, for temporal losses,
and that their transitory joys are abated and diminished. As for example,
when their goods are taken by pirates, their wealth consumed by shipwreck,
their houses burnt with fire, their lands taken from them by violent
oppression, their riches wasted by usury, their liberty restrained by
imprisonment, their children to miscarry suddeinly, their friends either to die
or to fall away from them daily, as the wise man says; In prosperity a friend
cannot be known, and in adversity and calamity, a man's very friend will
fall away from him, and forsake him. Now when these miseries, and these worldly
calamities come upon them, what crying, what wringing of hands, what
lamenting, what weeping is there among them? But that God by their wickedness
is offended, his name through them blasphemed, his law and holy word
contemned, his patience and long sufferance daily provoked and abused, his
threatenings, his admonitions, his counsels neglected; his loving mercies
forgotten, and his great benefits not remembered; that many good things
pertaining to our duty, have bin through our follies omitted; and many
wickednesses whereof we should have been clear, committed by us, who weepeth
for these matters? who lamenteth for these causes? The world rejoices in
hurting the godly, and if their mischief and their malice be prevented, then
are they sorry for nothing more, then that they can do no more hurt, nor any
more mischief, where the godly pray for them and their conversion. How do they
envy and malign those persons in who^ they see Gods gifts and graces? This was
ye cause y^ Joseph's brethren hated him, that Core, Dathan, and Abiram, did set
themselves against Moses, that king Saul did envy and seek the destruction of
David, Whereat the godly are not to take any discomfort, for their envy shall
not hurt them, no more then Joseph and Moses and David was hurt. For God shall
turn all to his glory and their good, as is in his good pleasure determined of
them. And as they cannot abide the godly, so secretly in their hearts they hate
God, as their deeds and works declare; for if the love of God were in them,
the fruits thereof would also appear. For who are more backward to hear Gods
word, to be present at his divine service, who make less account of christian
profession? yea they hate it, they scoff and scorn it, and they that counsel
them to religion and goodness are their chiefest enemies. King David bearing
the person of the godly, was otherwise minded, who counted it his great sorrow,
that he was debarred for a time from Gods service. Ps. 48. 3. O Lord of hosts,
how amiable are thy tabernacles! my soul longs, yea and faints for the
courts of the Lord, for my heart and my flesh rejoice in the living God. Yea
the sparrow has found her an house, and the swallow a neast for her, where she
may lay her young ones, even by the altars o Lord of hosts, my king and my
God. But because the wicked are so set against God, and good men, therefore the
Prophet said truly of them. Many are the sorrows and great are the plagues
that remain for the wicked. Psa. 32. 10. Which is most effectually set down,
Eccles. 40. Great travel is created for all men, and an heavy yoke upon the
sons of Adam, from the day that they go out of their mothers womb, til the
day they return to the mother of all things. Namely, their thoughts and fear
of the heart, and the imagination of the things they wait for, and the day of
death. From him that fitteth upon the glorious throne, unto him that is beneath
in the earth and ashes. Wrath and envy, trouble, and unquietness, and fear of
death, and rigor and strife. And in the time of rest, the sleep in the night
upon his bed change his knowledge. A little or nothing is his rest, and
afterward in sleeping, he is as in a watchtower in the day. He is troubled
with the visions of his heart, as one that runs out of a battle. And when
all is safe, he awaketh and maruelleth that the fear was nothing. Such things
come unto all flesh, but seuenfold to the ungodly. There is no peace (says the
Lord) unto the wicked: Yea though they seek peace and rest by many means, and
endeavor to cast al troublesome fear from them, now by instruments of music,
now by merrinesse of company, now by diuersitle of repastes and pastimes, now
by drinking of wine and banqueting; yea though they shoot out fear, as by a
double canon, and seem to remove all disquietnesse far from them, and as it
were, send it into banishment, yet it reconcileth and furneth back upon them.
So that in their mirth there is sorrow, in their laughter there is grief, and
in their joy there is heaviness, which vexes their hearts continually. This
touches the inward sorrow of their hearts and minds, and as for any outward
sorrow, they had rather be cut off by present death then to endure it. King
Zedekiah being told by the Prophet Jeremy, that if he went into captivity,
and would endure some sorrow, he should save his life; the thought of sorrow
was so intolerable unto him, that he had rather suffer present death, then to
abide the least taste thereof. Iere. 8. 3. And death (says the Prophet,) shall
rather be desired then life, of all the residue that remains of this wicked
family, because of the afflictions that God would send upon them.

Furthermore, their sorrows are expressed in the scripture by this word Woe.
Christ says to the godly, Ye shall VVoe.
weep and lament; but he says not unto them any where, Woe be unto you. And
I beheld (says S John in his Reu. 8. 13.) and heard an angel flying through
the midst of heaven, saying with a loud voice; Woe, woe, woe unto the
inhabitanies of the earth. Which he said not concerning the good and godly, who
as he says, were sealed in their foreheades, and whose names were written in
the book of life; but of the wicked world, whose sorrows should be mightily
increased. Blessed are ye (says Christ) when men revile ye, and speak evil
of ye for my names sake. But unto them of the world he says; Woe be unto you
when all men speak well of you. That is, because they favor the wicked of the
world, and go after the world, and seek friendship of the world, therefore
the friendship of the world departs from them. So true is that which Saint
James says; The amity of the world, is the enmity of God. Woe be to you
that now laugh, for you shall wail and weep. The weeping of the godly is with
comfort, but the world and the wicked weep without hope, thinking of Gods
judgments to come, which drive them to despair, because they are fully
persuaded, the woeful and everlasting weeping and gnashing of teeth, shall come
upon them, and shall be their portion. The Prophet Esaias. 24. speaks of them
of his time. The mirth of the world is gone away, because they did not use Gods
benefits aright. And after a while the lives of the world went away. Then what
a sorrow is it to leave their lusts and their pleasures, to leave the world,
their friends, their wife and children; their lands and possessions? And yet
behold this is but the beginning of their sorrows. In the midst of all their
iolitie, the very thought of death does strike such a dumpe into their minds,
that makes their excessive joy to vanish into wo^ull sorrow and mourning. Oh
how bitter is the remembrance of death, to him that lives at rest in his
possessions, that has nothing to vex him, and that has prosperity in all
things. When the sorrow of death comes in place, all our joys are gone
which endured but for a moment of time, and were as a thing of nothing, but the
thing is far worse. For after these joys, come sorrows, and never joy
again. And this is one of the ^^^fest sorrows of worldly minded men, whose
minds and hearts had never any taste and feeling of heaven and heavenly joys,
that when death begins to look them in the face (whom they would avoid, if
possibly they could) this I say is their sorrow, that they shall depart from
their earthly happiness, that they shall never see the face of their joys,
pleasures, and vanities, any more. The pain of the body, the fear of death,
the sight of thildren, the weeping of the wife, the flattery of the world, the
temptation of the devil, the dissembling physician, who for gain does put
him in hope of life. See how his joys are turned into sorrow, and yet this is
but the beginning of his sorrow. For at the point of death these worldly
griefs do not so much vex his mind, as the fearful remembrance of an
evil life past, the day of judgment, and that they shall be called to an
account; the ougly sight of hell in their consciences, and the intolerable
pains and torments which they shall hereafter suffer. The sorrow of these
things, at the very instant of their death, does overcome the grief of their
disease and all other sorrows, yea and hasteneth on their death which
otherwise might be prolonged. Whereas the godly as it is in the Psalm. 142.
rejoice and sing loud in their beds, having a quiet conscience, and that they
shall pass unto unspeakable joys, from this vale of misery, and troublesome
persecuting world. Greatly rejoicing, that neither sin, nor satan, nor hell,
nor the torments thereof, shall prevail against them, shall touch them, or
come near them, to hurt them. So much for the sorrow of the worldly, which may
be some joy to the godly to ease their heart, to see and know, that the world
has also sorrow to sour their joys withal.

These two matters of the joy of the godly, and the sorrow of the wicked, may
seem impertinent for this text, which may be read or passed over at thy
discretion.

3.
The third part of this text is taken out of these words. But your sorrow
shall be turned into joy. Which words contain a remedy full of all comfort, and
may be divided into two parts. A proposition; Your sorrow shall be turned into
joy. Secondly, a confirmation, by way of illustration, drawn from a similitude
and comparison, of a woman in childbirth, respecting her Throes and her joy. A
woman when she trauelleth, etc. Which confirmation by a similitude is more
apparent in the application, which is the second part of the similitude, being
furnished with three proofs. Whereof the first is, That he would see them
again. The second, That their hearts should rejoice. The third, That their joy
should no man take away from them.

Ye shall weep and lament. But the Apostles counsel is Proposition.
comfortable; Weep as though ye wept not. And Christ his words are heavenly;
Your sortow shall be turned into joy. He speaks not of the sorrow of the
wicked, that their sorrow shall be turned into joy, for their sorrows shall
remain. Many shall be their sorrows, and great shall be their plagues. And
although they have been young and lusty as an heifer of three years old,
which never felt sorrow but lived in pleasure, yet when their sorrow and
mourning shall come, it shall be so grievous, that they shall be given to
skritch and cry out, yea it shall pity the hearts of others, and they shall
move others to weep for them. Their gladness and joy shall be taken away
says the Prophet Esaias. 16. 9. 10. there shall be no singing nor shouting for
joy, for I have caused their rejoicing to cease. So likewise the prophet
Jeremy. 48. 33. speaks of the joy of the Moabites. Joy and gladness is taken
from the beautiful field, and from the land of Moab, and I have caused wine to
fail from the wine press, none shall tread with shouting. My heart shall
sound says the prophet for Moab like a shamne. As the custom was to play
heavy and grave tunes at burialls.

Those evils and sorrows which happen to the godly The worldly sorrows of the
godly turned into joys
in this life, God turns to our good, and as the Apostle says; All things
fall out to the best to them that love God, so that we may rejoice, though for
a season we be in heaviness. This is God able to do, because he is almighty,
and most ready and willing; because he is most gracious unto his people. How
long was patient Job troubled, yet his troubles and sorrows had a happy end,
and his losses recompensed to his great contentment and joy of heart. The
people of Israel how grievous was their affliction in Egypt, and that for the
space of many years, until that the cry of their sore oppression came up
into the presence of God. And God heard their cry and sent them relief. For
it pleased God to remember his holy promise, so that in his due time he brought
forth his people with joy, and his chosen with gladness, and he gave them the
lands of the heathen, and they took the labors of the people in possession.
The portion of the godly is to have many troubles, and so to pass along this
life toward the kingdom of rest and joy. After vexation some rest, after
trouble peace, after pain, pleasure does ensue, to the praise of Gods mercy,
who in time shall moderat what is amiss, and send us some comfort for our
recreation. For as he sees our griefs and notes our wrongs, so when most
need is, he will comfort us, and send us joy in our heaviness. Through the
feeling whereof, the Prophet David utters these words; The Lord is my
strength and my shield, my heart has trusted in him, and I am helped: therefore
my heart daunceth for joy, and in my song will I praise him. True obedience
wants no crosses in this world to wait upon it, yet crosses have their crowns.
Joseph a just man and one that feared God from his youth, being subject to
sorrow and misery, upon false accusation was cast into prison, whose feet they
hurt in the stocks, the iron entered into his soul. Until the time came y^
this cause was known, when as the word of the Lord tried him. The king sent
and delivered him, the prince of the people let him go free. He made him Lord
also of his house and ruler of all his substance. That he might inform his
princes and teach his senators wisdom. Joseph had honor and great wealth, as
well as liberty, when God his time was come to turn his sorrow into joy.
Whose posterity when they were in a manner tired through slavery and bondage,
and pinched with extreme poverty, in a time unlooked for, God brought them
forth. With great substance, and gave them favor in the sight of their
enemies, so that they carried away from them their jewels of silver and gold.
See and consider the end of the troubles of the godly when God will not only
had his oppressed people liberty but also great substance, happy passage,
mighty deliverance, infinite good turns, if they had had eyes to see his
miraculous and bountiful working in their behalf, that in their songs they
might have praised him, and in their hearts they might have given sufficient
credit to all his promises. But to their great hurt they gave no credit unto
his word, but thought scorn of that pleasant land. Shadrake, Meshake, and
Abednago, because they would not worship the golden image, which Nabuchodonozor
the King had set up, they were cast into the fiery furnace. But behold in their
extreme sorrow, the comfortable presence of Gods Angel, then followed the
favor of the King, who before did so greatly hate them, and after that,
promotion and dignity, and the chiefest offices in the realm. Joy upon joy to
make sorrow to be forgotten. Fear not the issue then of your woe whatsoever it
is, if you cleave to God, and hold fast by the word of his promise. So true is
that in 126. ps. v. 6. 7. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. And he
y^ now goes on his way weping, and bears forth good seed, shall doubtless
come again with joy, and bring his sheaues with him. Bondage in Egypt, a
wearisome pilgrimage in the desert, after the bondage; but after their
wearisome pilgrimage, followed y^ joyful possession of y^ plentiful land of of
Canaan. Then was their mouth filled with laughter, and their tongue with joy.
Then said they among the heathen, the Lord has done great things for them.
The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we rejoice. Such as their
bondage in Egypt was, so grievous also was their captivity under king
Nabuchodonozor and the Chaldeans, yet it pleased God to remember his poor
afflicted and beloved remnant. Go ye out of Babel, fly ye from the Chaldeans
with a voice of joy. Baruc. 4. I sent you out with weeping and mourning, but
with joy and perpetual gladness will I bring you again. And like as the
neighbors of Sion saw your captivity, so also shall they shortly see your
salvation from God which shall come with great glory and brightness from the
everlasting, and they shall gather them from the East to the West, to the
praise of his honor. O Jerusalem behold the joy that comes unto thee from thy
God. For I will set mine eyes upon them for good, and I will bring them again to
this land, and I will build them, and not destroy them; and I will plant them,
and not root them out, says the Lord. Therefore they shall come and rejoice in
the height of Sion, and shall run to ye bountifulness of the Lord, even for
the wheat, and for the wine, and for ye oil, and for ye increase of sheep and
bullocks: and their soul shall be as a watered garden, and they shall have no
more sorrow. Then shall ye virgin rejoice in ye dance, and the young men and the
old me^ together: for I will turn their mourning into joy, and will comfort them,
and give them joy for their sorrows. And y^ voice of joy, and ye voice of
gladness, and the voice of ye bridegroom, and ye voice of ye bride, shall be
heard in their streets; as also ye voice of them y^ shall say; Praise ye Lord of
hosts, because ye Lord is good, for his mercy endures for ever. Hagar
Abraham's handmaid, being ready to weep out her heart, with sad and mournful
tears, and pittious and lamentable cries, God caused her to behold joy, and
gave her ye life of her infant, when it was ready to die with thirst, and
promised her moreover, yt of him should come a great people. What trobles did
king David endure when he was a subject under king Saul? who continually sought
his death, and most cruelly and undeservedly to shead his innocent blood, how
many fears, how many flights, how many dangers? Where death was, God made life
appear; where contempt was, God gave credit; and when his crosses were ended,
God gave him his crown to rejoice him. Which made him thankful to God,
saying; Thou have turned my mourning into joy, thou have loosed my sackcloth,
and girded me with gladness. Therefore shall my tongue praise thee, and not
cease. O Lord my God I will give thanks unto thee for ever. Jeremiah the
Prophet, beaten, cast into prison, ready to starve for hunger, like to be put
to death, but the Lord hi^ him. Who had regard of his trouble and of his
sorrow, and sent him joy with great credit. For in the sight of them that were
led into captivity, Zabuzaradan the chief steward, according to the
commandment of king Nabuchodonozor (who willed him to look well unto him,
and to do him no harm, but even as he himself would desire to be dealt
withal) loosed him from the chains which were on his hands, and entreated him
most kindly, saying; If it please thee to come with me into Babel, come, and I
will look well unto thee, but if it please thee not to come with me into Babel,
tarry still. Behold all the land is before thee; whither it seems good and
convenient for thee to go, thither go. So the chief steward gave him vittailes
and a reward, and let him go. If we look upon the deathfull sorrow of chaste
Susanna, do we not in reading her story rejoice with her, to see what joy of
heart God sent her. The Apostle Saint Peter being in prison, his bands were
loosed, the prison door set wide open, and he by an Angel willed to come
forth, so was his joy increased upon the sudden beyond expectation. Tolet go
other examples, I will use but this one. King Ashuerus through the accusations
of wicked Haman, gave out his letters, that the Jews should be slain
throughout his dominions. A pitiful thing it was, to see and hear the
outcries of the poor distressed Jews, Mardocheus grievously mourning, yea
Hester the Queen her self fainted and fell down in a swoune. Yet behold, after
a while ye kings heart and mind is changed, after a while life and joy, yea and
a solemn and a yearly remembrance of that joy, throughout their posterities
and generations. After a tempest a calm, after stormy weather fair.

All which examples ought to be sufficient encouragements unto us, not to be
daunted or dismayed for any sorrow, but rather to sustain our selves with the
hope of joy to come. After poverty may come wealth, after sickness, Psalm 107.
41.
health; after imprisonment, liberty; after shame by false reports, credit
again; after misery, dignity; after hatred, good will; after sorrow, joy;
and who knows what a day may bring forth? The servant that endures much
drudgery, that is beaten undeservedly, that continues painfully, that
performs faithfully, is in time released, and with riches, store, and
plenty, blessed, when as to remember what great misery he has abidden and
gone through, is one of his chief joys. Experience proves this to be true,
and the example of Jacobs service under Laban unrequited, by his grudging
master, but plentifully rewarded by God himself, does show how thy
sorrows may be turned into joy. Fear not says Tobit to his son, though
thou be poor, for thou have many things if thou fear God. For indeed all
Gods blessings, especially pertain to them that fear him, though otherwise
enjoyed by usurpation, and an easy thing it is with God, suddeinly to make a
poor man rich. The sorrows of sickness, may end in joyful health; King
Hezekiah had fifteen years added to his days, and it rejoiced him more then
his kingdom. Compare Joseph's imprisonment with his honor, and Susannais
credit with her shame, and Mordecais misery with his dignity, and Esaus
hatred Pro. 16. 7.
toward Jacob, altered to good will and loving affection, and see whither it be
not true, that Christ has said and set down in the behalf and respect of the
godly; Ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. It was a
benefit and a joy to Hezekiah to have his days prolonged, and it was promised
to king Josiah for a great blessing to have his days cut off. But the cause of
this blessing and joy, was the great sorrow that he took, considering the
great plagues that were to come upon his people. As it was answered by Hulda
the Prophetess: These evils which you have heard read unto you, shall come
upon this land because of their idolatry. But to the king that sent you, thus
shall you say; Thus says the Lord, because thy heart did melt when thou
heardst what was spoken against this place, and did rent thy clothes and
weep before me, I have heard it says the Lord. Behold therefore I will gather
Esaias. 57. 1.
thee to thy fathers, and thou shall be put in thy grave in peace, and thine
eyes shall not see all the evil which I will bring upon this place, Moses
weepeth and mourns to himself, that he could not be partaker of his desire,
as to enter into that promised plentiful pleasant land, that he could not see
that goodly mountain and Lebanon, and was angry with his people who were the
cause that he was bereaved of his joy: but in that he was taken up into
paradise and placed in the heavens, were not all sorrows think you fully and
most abundantly requited with joy? The world has many dumps and amidst their
joys do often weep, but the sorrows of the godly are such, that neither
make them to break their sleep, nor yet to be heavy hearted. For Paul and
Silas being in prison in fetters and cold iron. Act. 16. Sung a Psalm and
praised God. The reason that may move them both so to do is great and
weighty; the one remembering that their joys shall end in perpetual sorrows;
the other rejoice, knowing that their sorrows shall not always last, and y^
their cross and their crown are joined both together as matters inseparable.
For of all other they were the most miserable if their hope were only in this
life. Mat. 5. 4. Blessed are they that mourn for they shall be comforted. Luke
6. 21. Blessed are they that weep now, for they shall laugh. Look upon
Lazarus weeping on earth, and rejoicing in heaven. In the midst and in ye
multitude of my sorrows that I had in my heart (says the Prophet). Psalm. 44.
19. Thy comfortes have refreshed and rejoiced my soul. In the Lords word will
I comfort me, which is so full of heavenly promises.

Phil. 4. 4. Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice, The sorrows
of persecution turned into joys.
let your patient mind be knowue unto all men: The Lord is at hand, to succor
you and to give you joy. What breeds patience in troubles so much, as that
when they know that their sorrows shall be turned into joy. Ye sorrowed with me
for my bands (says the Apostle) Heb. 10. 34. and suffered also with joy the
spoiling of your own goods, knowing in your selves how that ye have in heaven
a better and enduring substance. Whosoever shall forsake houses, or brethren,
or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands and
possessions for my names sake, he shall receive a hundred f^^d more, and shall
inherit everlasting life. And who would not be patient in trouble and
persecution, seeing it shall be requited with such icy. No trouble so bitter, as
the trouble of persecution, yet this is the comfort that it is but short,
though it seem unto us long. Else the Apostle would not have used this speech;
Yet a while, and that a very little while, and that shall come, will come, and
will not tarry, yea and bring his rewards with him. The flesh is frail and
rebellious, the world is cruel, persecution is most grievous, and therefore ye
have great need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God ye might
receine the promise. Through which, and other like weighty causes and
considerations, the same Apostle being moved, prayed for the Collossians, that
they might be strengthened with all might, through the glorious power of God,
unto all patience and long sufferance, and that with ioyfulnesse. Which
ioyfulnesse he himself expressed in his own person most lively, speaking
thereof more then once and twice. To the Collossians, chapter 1. 24. Now
rejoice in my sufferings: and to the Cor 2. epist 7. he writes thus. Ye are in
our hearts to die and live together, I use great boldness of speech toward
you, I rejoice greatly in you, I am filled with comfort, and am exceeding
joyous in all our tribulation. For if there be any bitterness in persecution,
as certain it is that it is most great, it is altogether swallowed up of
spiritual joy; for worldly joy cannot attain to that strength as to endure
it. Through faith we have access unto this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice
under the hope of the glory of God; neither do we so only, but also we rejoice
in tribulations. For when we are most weak, then is God most strong, and able
to give us strength to endure our trial. 2. Cor. 4. 8. We are afflicted on
every side, yet are we not in distress; in poverty, but not overcome of
poverty. We are persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but we perish not.
Neither do we faint, though our inward man perish, because our inward man is
renewed daily, and strengthened and comforted in hope, which makes us not
ashamed, although the world would lay shame inogh upon us. And in an other
place, he speaks of himself, and of all the faithful, 2. Cor. 6. 8. We must
approve our selves as those that have hope in God, by honor and dishonor, by
evil report, and good report, as deceivers, and yet true; as unknown, and yet
known; as dying, and behold we live; as chastened, and yet not killed; as
sorrowing, and yet always rejoicing. The vine the more it is pressed, the more
it rises; the spice y^ more it is beaten, the sweeter it smells; the fire y^
more it is kept under, the more it bursteth out; the Israelites the more they
were oppressed, the more they multiplied; and so is it with ye godly, the more
their outward sorrows be, the more are their inward joys. In this matter ye
Apostle S. James is of ye same mind with ye Apostle S. Paul, who in the
beginning of his epist. makes persecution one of his cheifest matters to speak
of, giving it a great co^mendatio^, encouraging other therein, by showing them
what shall ensue. My brethren count it exceeding joy, when ye fall into this
especial temptation of affliction and persecution. Exceeding joy he terms
it, because no earthly joy may be compared to that, which they that are
afflicted and persecuted, both feel and shall also be partakers of. As in the
same chapter is declared. Blessed is the man that suffers temptation, that
is, affliction and persecution, for when he is is tried he shall receive the
crown of life, because the Lord has promised. That he may be bold to say, I
have run my race, I have fought a good fight, and henceforth is laid up for
me the crown of righteousness. And because of this joy, which was fully
settled in their minds and hearts, Saint Peter and the rest of the Apostles as
we shall read, Acts 5. 41. when they were reviled, threatened and beaten,
departed, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for his
name. The world (says Christ) shall hate and excommunicate you, and think
they please God highly in killing you. And because I have said these things
unto you, your hearts are full of sorrow. But mark again another speech of
his, and see how he does raise us up in comfort and in joy. He that will
follow me, must take up his cross and follow me, and whosoever shall forsake
houses, or brethren, or sisters, father, mother, wife, children, lands,
possessions, yea bid farewell to the world, and hate and despise his own life
for my sake, he shall receive an hundredth fold more, and shall inherit
everlasting life. For the joy of conscience which Gods children feel even in
their afflictions, is a thousand fold more worth then all worldly treasure.
These things (says Christ) have I spoken unto you that my joy might remain in
you, and that your joy might be full.

The prince of our peace and salvation, was consecrated unto God through
affliction and persecution. Whereby the Apostle signifies, that there could be
no work more acceptable in the sight of God then that. The captain in war
shows himself most venterously, and if he die he is resolved. What is his
comfort and his joy? this, that he cannot please his prince and country
better. The soldiers likewise through the captains valiant exploits are
encouraged, having the selfsame comfort and joy with their captain. And a
valiant soldier aims at nothing more, then at honor and renown. How should
the extremity of sorrow, or the dint and horror of death pull us back, seeing
the recompense is so glorious; honor, renown and joy? But many are loath to
venture, fearing their own frailty and weakness. Good it is to be advised, and
to cast al circumstances, to pray to God for strength, and when thou art
resolved, doubt not that God will lay more upon thee then thou art able to
bear, neither will God suffer us to be afflicted above our power, but in the
bitter hest of persecution, and in the smarting sorrow of death approaching, he
will give a comfortable issue, and fill thy heart with sweet joys. Comfort in
war makes death seem nothing so sorrowful, and seeing in affliction and
persecution, many have suffered before thee, and thou art not like to be the
last, be not faint-harted, yea although thou might escape, knowing that thou
shall receive a better resurrection. Moreover it is not the least comfort, that
the faithful and the godly, yea and Christ himself does help us with their
prayers, whereby the extremity of pain is mitigated unto us, or sufficient
strength and courage granted us to endure even to the end, and in the end. For
this cause says the Apostle to the Colloss. cap. 1. We cease not to pray for
you, that ye might be strengthened with all might, through his glorious power;
and adds this comfortable clause. Giving thanks unto the father, which has
made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light. And if
as yet thou desire greater comfort^ more abundant joy, if thou might have
thy choice, thou can not make a better choice, then ye quietness of
conscience, and joy of ye holy Ghost. Can a mother forget her children? if she
could or would, yet ye Lord will not forget us, being unto him as the signet
upon his right hand, and therefore in continual remembrance, and as the apple of
his eye, and therefore most tender. So that the prophet David had great cause to
say to ye great comfort and joy of the godly. Right dear in the sight of the
Lord is the death of his Saints. Psalm. 116. 15. Knowing therefore that the cause
is Gods cause and his glory, and that it is his will we should suffer; in
fulfilling his will, let us commit our souls unto him in weldooing as unto a
faithful creator. Let me add a constant Martyr his exhortation in verse, who
neither feared nor doubted, but most willingly and joyfully was to give up his
life, for the profession of the truth, and maintenance of the Gospel.

Content thy self with patience,
with Christ to bear the cross of pain:
Who can and will thee recompense,
A thousand fold with joys again.
Let nothing cause thy heart to quail,
Launch out thy boat haul up thy sail,
Put from the shore:
And at the length thou shall attain,
Unto the port that shall remain,
For evermore.
Thus if it please God that they shall be put to the shedding of their blood,
and the loss of their lives for the testimony of a good conscience, for the
profession of his truth, and maintenance of his Gospel, ye see that it is a
matter that brings heaps of joys, so that although there be great sorrows,
yet this persecution and trial of their faith, makes them in a manner not to
appear. Else how could it have bin true which the Apostle reports of the
churches of Macedonia. 2. Cor. 8. 2. that in ye great trial of affliction,
their joy abounded. As though in their extremity they had felt no sorrow, nor
perceived any discomfort. In token whereof, the Apostle wills ye Philippians
to be so bold, that in nothing they should fear their adversaries, which is
says he to them, a toke^ of perdition, but to you a toke^ of salvation, and ye
of god. And that which furthereth ^ur salvation, with what joy is it undertaken
and performed?

Nevertheless God seeing our hearts and knowing our readiness, does not
always put us to the trial, and yet accepts our readiness as though we had
been tried, does send us comfort and joy, and that after such a sort as we
least looked for. That we might praise him in his judgments, and wonder at
his mercies, and give him thanks for his goodness, that works so great
deliverances for his people. And to increase our joy the more, God works our
deliverance Joy by deliverance. Their enemies being destroyed.
by the destruction of our enemies. The Israelites being delivered, saw the
Egyptians their enemies drowned in the red Sea, and their dead careases lying
on the Sea shore. Then sung Moses and the children of Israel. When the Jews
were delivered from the cruel massacre Eze. 38. 16. 21. 22. 23.
and bloody slaughter, which was devised and pretended and purposed against
them, and almost put in mischievous execution, through the means of that proud
and wicked Haman, Haman himself was destroyed and hanged, and fell into the
pit that he had made for others. Then had the Jews rest and joy, and they
remembered it for ever. This also is plainly set down in the story of godly
Tobit. chap. 1. If king Senacharib had slain any when he fled from Judea, I
buried them privily, but the bodies were not found when they were sought for of
the king. Therefore when a certain Niniuite had accused me to the king because
I did bury them, I hid my self, and because I knew that I was sought to be
s^aine, I withdrew my self for fear. Then all my goods were spoiled, neither
was there any thing left me besides my wife Anna, and my son Tobias.
Nevertheless within five and fifty days two of his sennes killed him, and
another of his sons reigning in his steed, appointed Achiacharus my brothers
son, to be the ouerseer of his accountes, who made request for me, and I came
again to Niniuie. When Herod was dead who sought Christ his death, then he
being a babe and infant, was brought again into the land of Israe^. Presently
after the death of King Herod mentioned Acts. 12. the bloody tyrant being
punished by Gods judgment, and that after a strange sort, then the word of God
grew and multiplied and flourished, and God gave his servants liberty. If we
ask an example in our own realm, Queen Mary and mischievous Gardener bishop
of Winchester, being taken away and strooken by the hand of God, our gracions
Soueraign (whom God long preserve, to his glory and our comfort) came then to
her joy and to her crown, who was full near her death. The greatness of our
peril, can be no stop to our deliverance, because the power of our deliverer is
infinite. Indeed we see that men are altogether amazed, and in a manner berest
of wit and understanding, when they feel themselves daungerously tossed too
and fro. But do we not also see, that when they cry unto the Lord in their
trouble, he brings them out of distress, he turns the storm to calm, so
that the waves thereof are still? Do we not see how that they pass through
tribulations to the kingdom of heaven? and through stormy tempests are
brought to the haven where they would be? This the Lord does that we might
confess his loving kindness before him, and his wonderful works before the
sons of men. God for diverse secret causes leads his church through many
bitter afflictions, as it were to no other purpose, then by trying them by the
cross, to make them true to his crown, and then either in death does give
them patience and constancy, or by deliverance does send them ease and
liberty. Psalm 38. 19. Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord
delivers him out of them all. It is even the time of Jacobs trouble (says
the Lord) yet shall he be delivered from it, and shall be in rest and
prosperity, and none shall make him afraid. And there shall be a day Zacha.
14. 7. (it is known to the Lord) neither day nor night, but about the evening
time it shall be light. And lo in the evening there is trouble, but before the
morning it is gone, Esaias. 17. 14. The wrath of the Lord endures but the
twinkling of an eye, and his pleasure is life, heaviness may endure for a
night, but joy comes in the morning, Ps. 30. 5. The thoughts of the Lord are
thoughts of peace, and not of trouble, to give you an end and your hope,
Jeremy 29. 10. Then shall ye cry unto me and I will hear you, ye shall seek
me and find me, because ye shall seek me with all your heart. And if he come
out presently at our call, it is most meet and convenient that we should
wait his pleasure. Know thou not? or have thou not heard that the
everlasting God the Lord has created the ends of the earth? neither faints
nor is weary, there is no searching of his understanding. But he gives
strength to him that faints, and unto him that has no strength he increases
power. Even the young men shall faint and be weary, and they shall stumble and
fall. Eut they yt wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall
lift up their wings as the eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they
shall walk and not faint.

Sometimes it pleases God to send his people deliverance, by turning the hearts
of the percecutors. So was the fiery and fierce wrath of Nabuchodonozor, turned
to great good will toward Shadrake, Meshake, and Abednago. Saul breathing out
threatenings and slaughter against the saints of God, was converted
miraculously, and Saul a persecutor, became Paul the professor, and then had
the churches rest in those days. King Agrippa began to yield, and from
judging, was ready to defend Paul. Pontius Pilate spoke for Christ, when all
the Jews were against him, saying; I find no fault in him at all.

Sometimes by sending danger and trouble to the persecutors Themselves in
danger.
themselves. As when David was almost taken, and like to come into the hands of
Saul his enemy, then he heard that the Philistines had invaded his land.

Lastly, God sends comfort and joy by pouring forth Gods ven g^ance being
powered out.
his vengeance on their enemies. Vengeance is mine, I will repay faith the
Lord. God in time will revenge our cause. According to that we read in the
prophet Jeremy, against king Nabuchodonozor and his land, Iere. 50. 22. Acrie
of Eze. 25. 17. and 26. 5. and 28. 22. 23.
battle is in the land and of great destruction. How is the hammer of the
whole world destroyed and broken? how is Babel become desolate among the
nations.? At the noise of the winning of Babel the earth is moved, moved, and
the cry is heard among the nations. Make bright the arrows, gather the
shields, the Lord has raised up ye spirit of the king of Medes. For his
purpose is against Babel to destroy it, because it is the vengeance of the
Lord, and the vengeance of his temple. Iere. 5. 11. Re. 16. 19. Great Babylon
came in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the
fierceness of his wrath and 18. 20. Oheauen rejoice of her, and ye holy
Apostles and Prophets, For God has given your judgment on her, and revenged
your cause in punishing her, and in one hour she is made desolate.

But let us come a little nearer, and behold Gods judgments upon persecutors,
and the overthrow not of the And his judgments being put in execution.
meanest, but of the greatest and mightiest in the world, kings and emperors.
Ioas slain of his servants, after he had caused Zachariah to be put to death
by stoning. Senacharib murdered by two of his own sons, after that he Eze.
28. 26. and 35. 11. and. ca. 39. 21. 22.
had blasphemed God, and done his worst against godly Ezekiah. Antiochus
perished by grievous torments in the bowels, so that worms came out of his
body in abundance, and being alive, his flesh fell from him for pain and
torment, and all his army was grieved at his smell, yea and he himself might
not abide his own stink. When Nero one of the Emperors of Rome, went about
by all means to extinguish and blot out for ever the religion of Christ, and
had caused both Paul and Peter, and many holy martyrs to be murdered: at length
he also received reward according to his cruelty. For being left of all his
provinces, soldiers and acquaintance, being judged of the Roman Senate an
ennemie, and condemned by most ignominious death to suffer; flying at midnight
with Sporus his page, there fell before bis feet a thunderbolt, whereat
afraid, and hiding himself, and falling into utter despair, he uttered these
words; Filthily have I lived, and worse shall I die; and so taking his dagger,
with the help of Sporus, he cut his own throat, and perished. What
punishments Domitian, Traiane, Antoninus Verus, Seuerus, Maximinus, Decius,
Valerianus, Emperors, yet bloody and cruel persecutors of Gods church have
suffered; time would fail to declare unto you. Most evident it is, that
Aurelian for his cruelty against the Saints, was slain of his servant; that
Dioclesian after he had shead much Christian blood, druncke poison in extreme
desperation, and so perished; that Maximian was hanged at Massilia, by
Constantine, and Maximine strooken for his cruelty, with Antiochus his
disease, worms growing in body and devouring him up. Infinite the like
examples might be alleged of ye just judgments of almighty God, upon such as
have afflicted his church, whom albeit for a time, he now and then suffer to
run on, yet in the end his revenging hand does overtake them and they perish.
Wherefore we may well say with the Prophet David, Psalm. 58. 10. 11. The
righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance, he shall wash his
footesteps in the blood of the ungodly. So that a man shall say, Verily there
is a reward for the righteous, doubtless there is a God that judges the
earth. Seeing the^ we see in all times and ages, that almighty God auengeth
the blood of his saints, in whose cies their ^^ath is precious, the continual
recording and recounting thereof with our selves, shall make us account it
exceeding joy, when afflictions and persecutions come upon us by Gods
appointment. For then we shall be assured that all our sorrows shall be turned
into joys. Verily, verily, I say unto you, that ye shall weep and lament, and
the world shall rejoice, and ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned
into joy.

The proposition being ended, contained in these words; Confirmation.
Your sorrow shall be turned into joy: It follows that I should speak of the
confirmation and reason, which is added for the proof of the proposition.
Which confirmation is drawn from a similitude and comparison of a woman in
childbirth, respecting her throes and her joys. A woman when she trauaileth
has sorrow, because her hour is come: but as soon as she is delivered of the
child, she remembers no more the anguish, for joy that a man is borne into
the world. Wherein first it see meth good, by comparison to set down the
throes of a traveling woman, and secondly, the joys. For first comes
sorrow, and then joy, that joy may be the more accepted. Among women the
yoongest, or at lestwise they that never felt the sorrow before, are most
impatient in their throes, and they are as grievous unto them Throes.
as pangs of death, and oftentimes choose and wish for death, rather then to
endure them. Trouble and affliction to them that have lived in joy and at ease,
Oh how bitter is this trial? and how intolerable are their passions and
grief for a time? So that it seems not to be spoken without cause, which
the Prophet Jeremy says; Lam. 3. 27. It is good for a man that he bear the
yoke in his youth. Because we can never begin too timely to be exercised under
the cross; that when our afflictions grow greater and greater, our patience
also by experience may be stronger and stronger. Young heads want resolution,
and great matters must not be taken in hand without aduisement. The hasty man
never wants woe, and likewise rashness has his fall. At the first what
alteration, what recantations, what exclamations? How many doubtful matters
trouble our heads, before we can get up to the top of the hill and settle our
selves to resolution. Happy is the man that has not fallen from his hope in
the time of his trial. The Apostles were first offended, then scattered, and
long it was before they could thoroughly frame themselves to the trial. Lord
what a fight betwixt the spirit and the flesh, before we can present our selves
in the battle, and in the face of the enemy to get a prize and win the
crown. Again, it is not one pangue and one throe, and then deliverance; so
many are the troubles of the righteous, before God deliver them out of all.
Some more, some less, according to every ones ability or weakness, and as
God has given the grace and strength to bear and to endure them. Fuily
persuading with our selves, that God in mercy will lay no more upon us, then
we are able to endure. Some more, some less, and lightly then thickest, when
the hour of deliverance is nearest and at hand. And let us comfort our selves,
for when our troubles are thickest, then are they shortest. For nothing that is
violent is of long continuance. Our Savior Christ in the greatest extremities,
throes and pangues, and in the infinite number and huge heap of them, as the
sand of the sea, and who can express hell torments; cries out, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? But anon after, he quietly gave up the ghost,
saying most comfortably, in the hearing of all the standers by; All is
finished. Great and extreme are the pangues and throes of women, but lightly a
day or two ends them. Our afflictions and sorrows are but for a moment, and
then an entrance into glory. The traveling woman in respect of her manifold
throes, sigheth and groneth much before she be delivered, and heartily wishes
that her time were come; so the godly in the trebled sorrows of their
persecutions, sigh and groan, and that with sighs which cannot be expressed,
desiring much to be dissolved and to be with Christ, the earth and all the
creatures that are therein bearing them company. It is now enough says Elias
the Prophet, O Lord take my soul, for I am no better then my father. And
therefore we sigh says the Apostle, 2. ^or. 5. 2. desiring to be clothed with
our house which is from heaven, knowing that whiles we are at home in the
body, we are absent from the Lord, making it our especial choice, to remove
out of the body, that we may dwell with the Lord. The diverse throes which
come without intermission, procure great fear, but it is only in a womanly
heart. Flesh and blood is always trembling, and where courage wants, there
are great fears. Fears, yea and crying out, and skritching most pittiously,
that it would grieve ones heart to hear it. Like as a woman with child says
y^ Prophet, Esaias cap. 26. 17. that draws near to the travel, is in sorrow
and cries in her pains, so have we been in thy sight O Lord. And here the
patient mind of the godly, passes in extremity of persecution, who beyond
all expectation can rejoice and clap their hands, when as the wicked being put
to the like, tremble and quake at the sight, and roar out for pain, when they
feel the smart. The reason is, that as God in justice increases the pains of
the one, so in love and mercy, he mitigateth and asswageth the sorrows of the
other, that although in their own nature, they be bitter and extreme, yet in a
manner they are not felt. Which is sometimes also seen in the travel of a
woman, that when matters are thought to be impossible, not only to her but to
the midwife and the standers by, so that all hope of life does vanish; when
groaning and crying is turned to fainting, then behold the sudden help of God
to relieve her, and to bring her again from death to life, to increase ye
wonder in the beholders, and to give them all cause to give God the praise and
thanks. For when we are weakest, then is he strongest. When shipwreck is made,
what shift is then used to recover and get to the shore, for fear of death
which is at hand, and they yt could never swim before, how do they catch hold
of boords, and practice and labor to swim; the cowardly soldier when he is in
his enemies danger, and like to be murdered, how does he bestir himself, and
in necessity show himself valiant, and all for fear of death. So is life
sweet to the woman in travel, and she strives and takes great pains, in hope
that in time she shall be delivered and avoid death. But when at last she sees
all her pains taking in vain, and that she cannot be delivered, but of force
must yield her last breath, alas what lamentation and grief she makes for
death approaching. Again, as some take great pains, so some of them either
dare not, or will not put to their strength to endure it, and for lack of
courage fall away. In sorrow, and especially in distress of persecution, let
us play the men, and be as painful as the woman in travel, if it be no more
but for this, to save our lives, I mean the life to come, which is won by
painfulnesse and courage, and also lost by faintness. For the nearer the
travel, the greater is the woman's grief and fear; and the nearer the trial
of our death is, the more the flesh is frail. The children are come to the
birth says the Prophet, and there is no strength to bring forth, unless God
give strength. So we when we are brought to trial by death, then a hundredth to
one, but we faint and are feeble, till God give constancy and courage, which
through fearfulness and faintness of courage we revolt, then death
approaches, yea a fearful kind of death. For they says Christ, that seek to
save their life shall loose it, and they that are desirous to enjoy this world,
shall perish in an other. And then what pittious outcries shall we make,
weeping, and woe, and great lamentation? The woman that must needs die, through
the sore anguish that she has endured, yet if she be delivered and see her
child live, it is her great joy; but through faintness of courage and for
lack of pains taking, oftentimes it fails out, that the child dies within
her, and with her. The constant Martyrs, that are delivered by death, in the
sorest anguish and agony of death, this comfort them, and that out of
measure, that their hope is with God, their good report with the faithful, and
that their labors shall follow them, and nothing shall be lost. But if either
the love of the world, lands, possessions, wife, and children, kinsfolk,
friends and acquaintance hinder us, or life it self, and fear of death, let
us then assure our selves that we have lost all. All the glory of our christian
profession, our confident boasting that we made to endure persecution, the good
report and joy of the godly, which by our constancy might have been so much
the more comforted and confirmed, and especially our hope with God, I would I
could not say, that all these excellent matters fall to the ground, are void
and decayed, and that they all die together within them and with them. Let none
take away thy crown from thee, let nothing keep thee from thy exceeding
rejoicing, knowing yt God has promised unto thee to be thy exceeding great
reward. This is y^ sorrow that God has laid upon women; and persecutions are
ye burden that God would have men, and all sorts, and al degrees, yea and manly
and courageous women also to bear, and in no sort to refuse in pain of death,
and let them take heed of damnation.

An office she weth y^ inward qualities of a man, and brings Joys.
that to proof which lay hid in him long before; whether he were given to
oppression and corruption, or to innocence and uprightness, whether he have
more regard of his own private estate and gain, then of the public
commodity and welfare of the people. The one ends in shame and contempt, the
other is crowned with glory. Persecution is the office that the godly and
faithful are called and promoted unto, and now it shall be known whether
they love God more the^ themselves? or whether the glory of God be of more
account with them then their own estimation, although they might live in the
highest rooms in ye world, and with Shadrake, Meshake, and Abednago, be set
over the chiefest provinces in any Emperors large dominions. God has ordained
persecution, to bring forth patience, constancy, courage, and all the virtues
and graces of the godly, and that to their great praise and commendation, which
otherwise would lie hid and altogether unknown. When the man is exalted, he is
tried says Solomon, but we being tried by persecution, are exalted even to
the highest heavens. Blessed is he that endures temptation and trial, and
sorrow, and trouble, and persecution; For when he is tried, he shall receive
the crown of life. In the fight and combat there is sorrow and hazard, but
after the victory, triumph and rejoicing. And certainly after persecution and
death, comes life and joy. And now let us a little behold the joys of a
traveling woman. One joy is, the hope that she shall be delivered, which
makes her the more patiently to endure her trouble, still looking when her
hour will come, and waiting for the good hour that God shall send. For they
that put their trust in the Lord, shall surely have help and deliverance, so
far as he sees good for his glory and their comfort. Wait thou the Lords
leisure, and he shall give thee thy hearts desire. And because of impatiencie,
God often turns away his face, and leaves us to our selves and to our
troubles, to sink or to swim, get out how we can. But the patient abiding of
Gods promises, makes things impossible most comfortable, and distressed cases
to have gladsome issues. It was a great persecution for the three children,
that they should be cast into a hot fiery furnance, but how great was their
hope, that God would bid them come forth, either out of the furnace, or out of
this troublesome life to receive joy, either by credit and fame among men, or
which was more meet, by receiving joy from God. The hope of Joseph's
deliverance was with joy. Which fell out according to his hope, being brought
from the dungeon, to the seat of honor. The Israelites that groned long under
their oppression, s^aied themselves upon Gods promises, that they should be
delivered. Being in the desert and waste wilderness, and the time of their
enteraunce into Canaan long delaied, through their fault of impatiencie, God
caused many to die there, but they that rested upon the hope of Gods promises,
God made them partakers of their desire. They that wait on the Lord, see what
comfort the Prophet Esaias gives them, chap. 66. 8. 9. Shall I cause to travel
and not to bring forth? As if he had said; Shall I lay sorrow, and take away
joy? yea I will comfort you, and yt to your contentment, and y^ hand of the Lord
shall be known among his servants.

God has appointed the woman to this sorrow, and therefore it ought to be a
joy, to show her obedience in perfourming Gods will. And if she pertain to
God, this she may boldly say with the Apostle, that if she live, she lives to
the Lord: if she die, she dies to the Lord. Wherefore, whether she live or die,
she is the Lords. Come life, come death, if Gods will be obeyed, it is life
and joy, what ever falls out. Such also ought our resolution to be, with that
of the Apostles: We received the sentence of death within our selves, knowing
that we are appointed to these things as sheep for the slaughter. And if things
come to pass beyond our expectation, the more shall we have experience of Gods
mercy and favor, which imbraceth us even as the tender kindness of a father to
a child, who while he beats, weepeth over us, as Christ did over Jerusalem,
for loving affection, his good will toward us is such and so great. We are in
the Lords hand, who in his good time will send joy, what burden soever of
sorrow he lay upon us in the mean time. There is the hour of throes, there
is also the instant of deliverance; the sorrow is not so great, but the joy
also exceeceedeth in greatness. And what are the afflictions and persecutions of
the godly in this world? is not the continuance thereof compared to a moment,
which is afterward recompensed with an eternal weight of glory? If the time
of her deliverance be long ere it comes, yet is not too long that comes at
last. According to that we read, Pro. 13. 12. The hope that is deferred, is
the fainting of the heart; but when the desire comes, it is a tree of life.
The joy of the godly although they long wayt for it, yet when it is come, it
brings comfort enough even at the sudden change, and at the very first taste
thereof. There is a great passion, and we are moved much at the first knowledge
of sorrow or of joy, which in time abateth more and more. King Belchasar at
the first when that he did see the hand writing on the wall, his countenance
changed, and the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees did smite
one against the other. Likewise also king Agag, at the first thought of joy,
that his life should be preserved, came forth pleasantly and said. Truly the
bitterness of death is passed. The very time of deliverance does bring with it
the chiefest part of rejoicing. Yea her rejoicing is so great, that presently
upon the feeling of this joy, all sorrow is forgotten, not only that she
finds present ease, but that she is safe and well delivered. Why therefore
should we not suffer sorrow and affliction patiently, seeing that a moment of
joy will make us forget all sorrow, yea in a manner, that we had any sorrow at
all. And what can be more safe and more sure, then that which God keeps, then
that which God gives warrant for? I know to whom I have committed my self,
says the Apostle, 2. Tim. 2. 12. And the Lord will deliver and will preserve
me unto his heavenly kingdom, to whom be praise for ever and ever, Amen. 2.
Tim. 4. 18.

Pharao made a cruel edict against the Israelites, that the men children
should be slain, and the Midwiues that were appointed for that cruel decree,
refrained and gave answer, that the women of the Hebrews were not as the women
of Egypt, for they were lively and were delivered ere the Midwiues came at
them. In like sort also is the deliverance that God shows toward the godly.
For oftentimes by Gods mercy and gracious providence, they are delivered from
great and mighty dangers, without the help of man, God taking the matter into
his own hands. The Israelites delivered from the Egiptians in the red sea,
for God gave passage; the three children in the fiery furnace, for God sent
help.

Only this is to be marked and to be amended, that presently upon joy, we do
not only forget all sorrow, but also forget to give him thanks, who is the
author and sender of our joy. Are there not ten leapers healed, but where are
the nine? Good reason it is that we be kept so long from joy, because we are so
forgetful to be thankful therefore. The Prophet Moses, Deu. 8. 10.
forewarned the Israelites of this forgetfulness, against they came into the
land of Can^an, as if he had leene and perceived how forgetful they would be.
And when thou have eaten and filled thy self (says he) thou shall bless the
Lord thy God for the good land which he has given thee. He lays a
commandment upon them. Furthermore, he gives them this caveat; Beware that
thou forget not the Lord thy God, not keeping his commandments and his laws,
and his ordinances, which I command thee this day for thy wealth. And that they
might be the more circumspect, he shows them how they are like to fall into
this fault. Lest (says he) when thou have eaten and filled thy self, and have
built goodly houses and dwelt therein, and thy beasts and thy sheep are
increased, and thy s^iuer and gold is multiplied, and all that thou have is
increased. Then thy heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord which brought
thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage. Learn therefore to
give thanks for deliverance, when God sends it, impute it not to fortune and
chance, to midwiues and to men, whem often, but not always, God uses for thy
help; have principally an eye to Gods gracious providence and furtherance.

Many comforts and joys are outward, as when the women rejoice to see her well
delivered, the midwife, that the matter to come to so good a pass, the
husband, that he has receined his wife, as it were from death to life. But
Prou. 14. 10.
all this joy is not so much, as that which the woman her self feels within
her, her heart so greatly abounding with joy. This joy also God does add to
the joys of the godly, that the sweetness of joy that they perceive within
themselves, and none knows it so well as themselves, is so excellent, that of
all other joys this does surmount. Which joy S. John in his Revelation
expresses, chapter 14. 3. in these words. And they sung as it were a new
long, before the throne and the elders, and no man could learn that song but
the hundredth sortie and four thousand which were bought from the earth. To
them also was given a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which
no man knew, saving they only that received it. Re. 2. 17. Which stone and Re.
19. 12.
name I may compare to the seal Emanuel, which is lawful for none to use, but
the prince only. Such princely prerogatives are granted them.

But the only joy of the woman being delivered, and which the text does
specify is, at the birth of a man child. Man child.
To be delivered of her child is a joy, but to be delivered of a man child is
a greater joy. To have women children of the 2. Esd. 9. 38.
Israelites, did not so much vex Pharaos mind, but the men children the hope
and joy of their parents and their strength, they must die the death. Among
the innocents, Herod caused the men children to be slain, fearing least one
of them should wear his crown, and put him or his beside their princely
roialtie.

The chiefest deliverances that ever God wrought for his people, it may be,
somewhat he brought to pass by women, but most of all by men. And therefore
was Moses preserved, that he might in time deliver his people. The victory
and the honor thereof did belong to Barake, but because he feared and doubted,
the honor thereof was ^iuen to a woman. Judges 4. 9. This journey shall not be
for thine honor: For the Lord shall sell Sisera into the hand of a woman. Iael
the wife of Heber the Benite shall be blessed above other women, blessed shall
she be above women dwelling in tents. Chapt. 5. 24. Unto whom was it said:
Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the pappes that gave thee suck: but
to the man child; What could the midwife, or the rest of the women say more
to comfort the distressed soul of the wife of Phinehas Elias son, but this;
Fear not for thou have borne a son, yet would she not be comforted,
because the glory of God was departed. O Lord God (says Abraham, Genesis 15.)
what will thou give me, seeing I have no heir? It is not so much the woman's
comfort, but the midwife or other women run to the father, to tell him that a
man child is borne unto him, and well is she that can bring that gladsome
tidinges. The grudgeing minds of some when they have daughters borne, (whereas
indeed they should be contented with Gods appointment) do show how joyful
and acceptable a thing it is when God sends a man child. Children are Gods
blessings, and why should we account otherwise of our daughters. It pleases
God oftentimes, to send us more comfort by our daughters then by our sons, to
disprooue the vanity of their minds, which cannot be content with that which
God sendes. Yet nevertheless it so falls out, that the men children are more
accounted of then women children, whether it be that they are the weaker
vessels, and God has given man the honor, or else because women are oftentimes
the occasions of the falls and overthrow of men, according to the course of
their graundmother Eve, (as we read 1, Timoth. 2. 14. Adam was not deceived
but the woman was deciued, and was in the transgression) howsoever the case
stands, or for what cause it is, I leave it to your judgment; yet so it is.

In the scripture for the most part there is never mention made of women
children, unless it be to express matters to be considered and thought on,
showing rather evil then good. As Iepthe his daughter to express the rash vow
of her father, Lots daughters to show their fathers offense, the daughters of
Moab to make the sin of the Israelites known, the daughter of Herodias to
show forth the mothers malice in the death of John Baptist. Eve had two
children and both men; Sara one child, and that a son, and that an heir of
the whole earth, because all the kindreds of the earth should be blessed in
him, Hannah the mother of Samuel, prayed that God would take away her report
and reproach of barrenness, and give there a child* and God (...) a man child.
The wife of Zocharias being (...), at last God sent them a child, a man* child,
yea and that a great Prophet. An Angel tells him, that his wife should bear
a son, and that he should have joy and gladness, and that many should
rejoice at his birth; Because he should be great in the sight of the Lord.
Jacob amongst so many men children, had but one Dinah, the daughter of Leah,
but what trouble and mischief was raised up through her means? No doubt, men
children breed much trouble and sorrow to the hearts of the parents oftentimes,
but see how the scripture, rather notes the care and grief that comes by
the woman-child. Eccle. 42. 9. The daughter makes the father to watch
secretly, and the carfulness that he has for her, takes away his sleep. In
her youth, least she should pass the slower of her age, and when she has an
husband, lest she should be hated. In her virginity, lest she should be
defiled, or gotten with child in her fathers house, and when she is with her
husband, least she misbehaue her self. If thy daughter be unshamefast, keep her
straightly, least she cause thy enemies to laugh thee to scorn, and make thee
a common talk in the city, and defame thee among the people, and bring thee
to public shame. It may be thy daughter is not shamefast, watch and lie in
wait to perceive it, and cause that other may give thee intelligence. If it be
so, hold her straightly, lest she abuse her self, through overmuch liberty,
as Dinah did, to see fashions, and lost her virginity. When we ask
men-children, we ask not as Hamah the mother of Samuel, that it may be for
Gods glory, but for our own private joy, and worldly respects, and therefore
God sends, I say not women children, but wicked and ungodly children, whether
they be sons or daughters. And because thou neglectest thy duty in bringing
up thy children in the fear of the Lord, therefore God sends trouble with
thy children, and great grief and sorrow, to recompense thy foolish and
unadvised joy. Make not thy choice either of son or daughter, but desire that
(...) may be tone, let thy chiefest care be, that God may (...) ^lorified in
them, and by them. Which especially is performed by prayer for them, and in
bringing them up in Gods fear, and so shall thou have great joy of thy
children, when other have sorrow. And happy are those parents, that have such
children as may procure their joy.

Of all the considerations why the joy of a man-child should be so great, I
may recite these two. The one is, that the men-children are more likely to come
in place of preferment, or to great wealth, whereby they may be a help and a
state to their kindred, if not, by their wisdom and counsel they may do them
furtherance. Not but that the women children come often to the like, yet that
not by themselves, but by the means of their husbands, who are to do nothing
but that their husbands shall think well of and allow, at whose direction,
both themselves and that which was given with them is. The second is, that by
the man-child the name is continued, and the posterity increased. Which is a
Job. 18. 17. 19.
great blessing of God, as we may see in ye exhortation which King David
delivered to his son Solomon, who recited the promise of God unto him,
saying; If thy sons take heed to their way, that they walk before me in
truth with all their hearts, and with all their souls, thou shall not (said he)
want one of thy posterity upon the throne of Israel. So also because the
Rechabites kept the commandment of their father, their continuance by
posterity was their blessing, as we read, Iere 35. 18. 19. which God caused
to be pronounced unto them, by the mouth of the Prophet Jeremiah. Thus says
the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Because ye have obeyed the commandment
of Ionadab your father, and kept all his precepts, and done according to all
that he has commanded you, Therefore (says the Lord of hosts, the God of
Israel) Ionadab the son of Rachab, shall not want a man to stand before me
for ever, but his posterity shall continue, and be continually in my favor.

What greater preserment can come to the godly to requi^e their sorrows
withal, then that it pleased God to make them all men-children, and also
heirs of his heavenly kingdom; if so be they can frame themselves to be
content to suffer with him, else are they in no sort worthy to be glorified
with him. For all the sorrows and afflictions of this life are nothing to the
glory that shall be revealed. They may also be well said to be heirs of ye
crown, which is not so lightly obtained, for oftentimes such a matter costeth
many a man his life. And how many dangers are undertaken, before we may be
capable of this royalty, or thought worthy to be princes fellows? All things
that are excellent have a dear price, and he that would be a prince must
persuade himself it shall cost him full dear. Yet a worthy mind thinks no
labor too painful, no danger impossible, and all sorrows to be sweet, which
have so sweet a recompense. Reu. 4. 4. I saw round about the throne four and
twenty seats, and upon the seats four and twenty elders, sitting clothed
in white raiment, and had on their heads crowns of gold. Reu. 3. 11. Behold I
come shortly, hold that which thou have, that no man take thy crown.

To the preferment of the godly this also may be added, N^me.
that their name and good report shall live for ever, whereas (...) 39. 13.
the remembrance of the wicked rot. Many things are done by the wicked for a
name, but it turns clean contrary. For the credit of their name shall be but
shame; and discredit shall be their glory. They that built the tower of Babel
got themselves a name, but with d^risition of their folly, and as good have no
name as such a name. But the name that the godly leave after their death is
precious, and the constant Martirs that gave up their lives for the profession
of Christ his truth, are remembered with reverence. Their bodies although they
have been put to extremities and grievous punishments, yet shall their names
live for evermore. The congregation shall talk of their praise, and although
they be dead, they shall leave a greater fame then a thousand. The doting
foolishness of the world is such, ever to neglect heaven, and to seek for a
name in earth, where nothing is firm, nothing continues, but sadeth away, and
perishes as a thought. What is a name of great wisdom, of great wealth, of
great eloquence, of warlike prowess, yea of the princes favor? In the world
they are obtained, in the world they are enjoyed, and to the world they must be
left. Besides this, the name of the godly is more durable and of longer
continuance, he that will loose his life shall save it, he that esteems more
of the favor of God, then the favor of the world, shall in this life have
sorrows and persecutions, but in the life come joys. Their names are defaced
on Re^. 2. ^7*
earth among the wicked, but they are written in heaven and registered in
everlasting remembrance. Rejoice (says Christ) that your names are written in
heaven. Yea let them rejoice with joy unspeakable, because that none shall be
saved at the dreadful day of judgment but they, whose names are sound in the
writing of Israel, and recorded in the book of life. For whosoever was not
found written in the book of life, Reuelat. 20. 15. was cast into the lake of
fire, where is nothing else, but burning and brimstone, weeping and gnashing of
teeth, and woeful lamentation without any compassion.

The former part of the similitude and comparison being Application. I will see
you again.
ended, now follows the second, consisting in application, set down in these
words. And ye now are in sorrow, but I will see you again, and your hearts
shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man take from you. This application John.
1. 51. and 14. 19.
as you see is furnished with three proofs; whereof the first is, I will see
you again. The woman when she trauelleth has sorrow, but when she is
delivered of a manchild, her sorrow is turned, yea and swallowed up of joy. I
will see you again. So still he performs his word and promise; Your sorrow
shall be turned into joy.

When the Apostle Saint Paul took his leave and his last farewell of the
Church of Ephesus, kneeling down and praying with them, they wept all
abundantly, and fell on Paul's necite and ^^^ssed him. Being sorry for nothing
so much, as for the words which he spoke. That they should see his face no
more. How then could the Apostles choose but be sorry and weep abundantly at
the departure of our Savior Christ, which was so dear a friend unto them, and
whose presence they had so long enjoyed, to their great comfort and
contentment. Departure of loving friends breeds pain, and taking of leave is
often with great heaviness. As we see when one is to depart from his friends,
and to take his journey into some far country, this grief of departing is
joined with sheading of tears. But when there is departure by death, the^ what
weeping, what wringing of hands, what outcries and lamentation? The reason of
this their excessius sorrow, for the departure of their friends, is, that they
are without hope. Who although they sh^l ^ee their face no more, yet ought they
to be assured, that their souls shall be at rest, and in the hands of God, and
that no torments shall touch them. They that are thus persuaded leave their
sorrow, and are contented with Gods will, and are also thankful, that it has
pleased God to take them to his mercy, and that he has released them out of
the troubles of this miserable world. Yet are there some that are of opinion,
that even in heaven also they shall have knowledge, and see their friends again
which are departed in the Lord, which is a matter to abate all sorrow.
Nevertheless we may not imagine any worldly knowledge; For greater things are
reserved for the saints of God. According to that we read, 2. Cor. 5. 16.
Wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh, yea though we had known
Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more. Our Savior
Christ when he departed from his Apostles, and was taken away by death, he
took his leave of them, but not his last farewell. After a while ye shall not
see me, and yet after a while ye shall see me. Did not the holy Martyr S.
Stephen see Jesus standing at the right hand of God? And shall not the time
come, that all the godly shall sit with him in the kingdom of heaven? A friend
being departed far out of sight and abiding in a strange land, our heart and
delight being settled upon him, how earnest is our desire to see him, and to
talk with him, and to be in his presence, yea if we can hear but any talk or
tidings of him, or receive any token from him, how greatly does it rejoice us?
And all is, because of the doubt and fear that holds our minds that we
shall see him no more. But if our friend being desirous of our welfare, and for
the bettering of our estate do send us word, what a fruitful soil he dwells
in, and how he can provide us if we will come unto him, a place to dwell in,
so that it shall be to our great contentment and good liking: not only the joy
of our friends presence will move our hearts, but also the bettering of our
estate shall cause us to undertake a long journey, and that without
wearisomenesse and fainting. And when we meet, what kissing, what joy, what
embracing?

Ye shall see me a while (says Christ) and after a while ye shall not see
me, for I go to the father. Therefore he put forth this parable. A certain
noble man went into a far country, to receive for himself a kingdom, and so
to come again, bringing rewards with him. For them, who by continuance in
well-doing, have fought for glory, and honor, and immortality, and eternal
life. Wherefore went Christ to his father, but to draw us unto his father,
that where the head is, there might the members be, and where he is, there
might we be also. He went to receive for himself a kingdom, but when he was
gone, did he forget us? after the manner of the world. Out of sight, out of
mind. No he is most careful for us. And although a mother may forget her child,
yet will he not forget us whom he has written in ye palm of his hand, and
whom he remembers and beholds as the signet on his right hand. Ioh. 14. 2.
In my fathers house are many dwelling places, if it were not so I would have
told you, I go to prepare a place for you (also as well as for my self.) And
though I go to prepare a place, for you, I will come again and receive you
unto my self, that where I am there may ye be also. Now though he be absent
from us, yet he remembers us, and sends us many tokens of his love, to put
us in mind, that we shall come to his sight, to our great comfort. Which
tokens, are his gifts and graces, benefits and blessings, daily poured upon us.
But of all tokens this is the surest, that he has sent his holy spirit into
our hearts, to witness unto our spirtite, that we are his children, and shall
also in time to come be heirs of the kingdom. Whom although we do not
presently see, yet are we in good hope that we shall see, and in the mean
time, we must with patience abide for it.

They shall see him which put him to death, and pierced Mat. 23. 39.
him through, but it shall be little to their comfort. But when we shall see him,
then shall our sorrow be turned into joy, then shall we be caught up into the
clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we be ever with the Lord.
Wherefore comfort your selves says ye Apostle, one another, with these words.
And though as yet we cannot see Christ, yet the time shall come that we shall
see him face to face. In whose presence is the fullness of joy, and at whose
right hand are pleasures for evermore.

The next place of proof is in these words; And your Your hearts shall rejoice.
hearts shall rejoice. With how great joy it is, may be perceived by these
words of the wise man Eccle. 25. 14 The greatest heaviness, is the heaviness
of the heart. Give me any plague save the plague of the heart. For grief and
sorrow, and taking thought, does make them pine away which be young, lusty and
strong, and by the course of nature are like to live many years. The reason
is, because that the heart thereby does diminish, and wear away by little and
little, until the vital spirits be spent, which have all their comfort and
strength from the heart. Your hearts which have been cast down with sorrow,
shall be raised up again with joy, even at the sight of my presence. In the
sad and sorrowful winter, all things decay and come to nothing, but when
the joyful countenance of the sun at the spring time appears, then every
thing that lay dead and buried, peereth out of the ground and takes heart, and
grows to strength, and comes to perfection: So in the sorrowful days of
this world, the godly are abased, but in the joyful time of deliverance, when
Christ their only comforter shall appear in glory, then shall their dead
hearts receive life, and comfort and joy. In respect whereof, Christ comforted
his disciples saying; Let not your heart be troubled. Confirming them by three
reasons. The first from his love, and the certainty of his promises. Ye
believe in God, believe also in me; which am ready not only to promise, but
also to perform what ever shall be for your good. In the world ye shall
have trouble and affliction, in me ye shall have peace, be of good comfort,
and let not your heart be dismayed, I have overcome the world.

The second reason is drawn from the friendly care, that he had to provide
for his Disciples and for all the godly. In my fathers house are many
dwellinges places, and I go to prepare a place for you, even for every one of
you. And if it had not been so, ye should have known it long ere this. The
third reason seems most forcible, because of the perfourmaunce, and present,
and full possession of his promises. When I have prepared, then will I come
again and establishe every one of you in his everlasting habitation, and
receive you unto my self, that where I am, there may ye be also. All which
reasons are set down in the fourteenth chapter of Saint John and the three
first verses. What can keep the heart more from comfort and rejoicing, then a
troubled mind, and an unquiet conscience? the which among all the miseries and
afflictions of this world the godly are free from. Which comfort of heart,
Christ perfourmeth unto them. John 14. 27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I
give unto you, not as the world gives, give I unto you. Therefore let not your
heart be troubled nor fear. The world can give but outward comforts, if it
show never so much favor, but as for the inward comfort of the mind and
conscience, it cannot reach thereinto, it is past the power thereof, and must
let that alone to the working of an other. And if it were not for the heavenly
comfort, the heart of the godly would soon fall away. And unless our Savior
Christ had perceived such weakness, and such doubtfulnesse in the feeble and
unconstant nature of man, he would not have uttered these words to make their
comfort steadfast and sure in him. Ye have heard (says he) how I said unto you,
I go away and will come unto you. If ye loved me ye would verily teioyce,
because I said I go unto the father, for my father is greater then I. As if
he had said, If ye loved me thoroughly, and my love were steadfast in you,
your hearts would rejoice, and no troubles should move you, and no
discomfortes should persuade you to the contrary. This have I spoken unto you
before it come, that when it is come to pass, ye might believe, and your
hearts then might abound with joy. For surely those things which I have
promised, shall come to pass, and therefore doubt nothing, and let your hearts
be confirmed and settled in joy. Over and besides, I will send the comforter
unto you, my holy spirit, the comforter of the elect and chosen, which shall
not suffer your hearts to fail, but still shall raise them up in comfort in
their greatest griefs and sorrows. What cause therefore have the godly,
seeing these great comforts, as mighty proppes may stay them from falling,
though in ye sight of the world there be great cause of sorrow, but seeing they
are we aned from the world, and are not of the world, what cause have they I
say, to cast down their hearts with sorrow and pen^^uenesse? Wherefore let the
counsel of the wise man take place with them; Give not over thy mind to
heaninesse. The joy of the heart is the life of man, and a man's gladness is
the prolonging of his days. Grief and sorrow shorten the time, and bring age
before the time. Wherefore comfort thy heart, and drive sorrow far from thee.
For sorrow has slain many, and there is no profit therein. Sorrow did slaie
the hearts of the Canaanites, because God had weakened their hearts. According
to the confession of Rahab, of whom we read, Josh. 2. when she talked with the
spies; I know (says she) that the Lord has given you the land, and that the
fear of you is fallen upon us, and that all the inhabitants of the land faint
because of you. And when we heard of you, our hearts did faint, and there
remained no more courage in any of us all. This is one of Gods great
punishments, toward them that do not live in his fear and obedience, that he
will give them a trembling heart, and a sorrowful mind, Le. 26. 36.
to throw them out of their possessions, and to make them have no joy of their
goods. Which we may partly see in the example of churlish Nabal, denying to
give comfort to them that were greatly distressed. Who when his wife had told
him what heavy things were toward him, his heart died within him, and he was
like a stone. For the Lord smote Nabal with that sorrow that he died. Samu.
25. 38.

But seeing in all well-doing. God does comfort our hearts, why should we be
enemies to our selves, and to our own welfare. With the Apostles imprisoned
let us sing Psalms, to testify the joy of our heart to Godward. Speaking unto
our selves in Psalms and himnes, and spiritual songs, singing and making
melody to the Lord in our hearts. And seeing all our hope is, or ought to be
in God, who is our only treasure, why should not our hearts be there also?
Saying with the blessed virgin, My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit
has rejoiced in God, my Savior. Who although he be absent from us, yet has
he promised to come again and to see us, and to comfort our hearts and to make
them rejoice. So that when your redemption shall draw nigh, then lift up your
heads, and when your joy shall approach, let your hearts also be lifted up with
excellent comfort. Considering what has been fortold long agone by the
Prophet Esaias. 65. 13. 14. Concerning the sorrow of the wicked and the joy of
the Godly. Thus says the Lord God, Behold my servants shall eat, and ye
shall be hungry; Behold my servants shall drink, and ye shall be thirs^ie; Behold
my servants shall rejoice, and ye shall be ashamed: Behold my servants shall
sing for joy of heart, and ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall houle
for vexation of mind. Four times, Behold, for the certainty thereof, and in
token of admiration, as also to establish the hearts of the godly with joy.

As for all worldly joy, which does not agree with God and godliness, let us
utterly abandon it, and banish it far from us, neither let our hearts in any
sort delight therein. Because they be means to draw us from God. All these
will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. Wherefore if thou
might be set upon the highest mountain, there to behold the joy of earthly
majesty, if thou might be possessed and inthroned in the glory thereof, yet
far is it, that thy heart should be settled in any certain comfort. Take hold
of that comfort and joy, which Christ thy savior and redeemer has promised,
which though thou can not see as yet, in due time thou shall be partaker
thereof. Let thy heart therefore rest upon this and despise the other; for the
one shall vanish, the other shall never deca^e. Which is very well confirmed,
by the last place of proof in the application; Your joy shall no man take from
you.

I will see you again; your hearts shall rejoice; and your Your joy shall no
man take away from you.
joy shall no man take from you. Which toy is so much the more esteemed,
because it is no common joy, no worldly joy, where sorrow and trouble may
follow as a change. For worldly joys are often taken away, and have diverse
ellipses, alterations, and chaunges. Soon come, and soon gone, soon ripe,
and soon rotten. Moses could not see that goodly mountain and Lebanon, which
if he had seen, the sorrow and trouble of the backsliding people, would have
danted his joy. Besides, his longing would soon have been satisfied, and there
is a kind of glut in worldly joys. But although he could not see that goodly
mountain of Lebanon, yet he was brought into the highest mountain, far more
goodly, beautiful, and pleasant, then all the mountains of the world, being
full of olive branches for Noah's doves. Where such joys are settled, and are
hereafter to be seen, which suffer no change, no alteration, no blemish; the
which the more we desire, the more we may, and our longing shall never be
satisfied. Behold the joys of the world, and see whether they be as durable as
ye Moon, which changes every month. When the Sun arises, the beautiful
flower withers, and ye place thereof shall know it no more. Glorious Tyrus
shall be robbed of her riches, Ezech. 26. and they shall spoil her merchandise,
her walls shall be broken down, and they shall destroy her pleasant houses,
and they shall cast thy stones and thy timber, and thy dust, into the midst of
the water, and thou shall be built no more; For I the Lord have spoken it. Thus
will I cause the sound of thy songs to cease, and the sound of thy harpes shall
be no more heard. Reu. 18. O beautiful Babylon, the apples Eze. 26. 21. and
27. 36. and 28. 9.
that thy soul lusted after, and those things which thou louedst best, are
departed from thee, and al things which were fat and excellent are gone, and
thou shall find them no more. And they that wondered at her beauty, and
shouted for joy, to see the great city, that was clothed in fine linen, and
purple, and skarlet, and gilded with gold and precious stone, and pearls,
even for her shall they weep and lament, saying; Alas, Alas. With great
violence shall the great city Babylon be destroyed and cast away, and shall be
found no more. The voice of harpers, and musicians, and of vipers, and
trumpetters, shall be heard no more in thee, and no craftsman of whatsoever
craft he be, shall be found any more in thee, and the sound of a millstone shall
be heard no more in thee. And the light of a candle shall shine no more in
thee. And the voice of the Bridegroom and of the Bride, shall be heard no more
in thee. What is it to have the joy of the world, to see the multitude of
children, increase of cattle, to live in outward peace, to rejoice in the
sound of organes and pleasant instruments, and suddenly to go down to the
grave, and that without all hope. Who though he be dead and gone, yet is he
kept unto the day of destruction, and shall be brought forth to the day of
wrath. Wordly comforts and outward joys shall be taken away. But the joys of
the godly are such, which are not seen, and which this world is not worthy
of, and which shall not be taken away, for God has so promised. Let this word
be thy warrant, and a steadfast belief thy anchor-hold. Esaias. 3 5. Strengthen
the weak hands says the Lord by his Prophet, and comfort the feeble knees.
Say unto them that are fearful (of sorrow and trouble, and persecution)
behold your God comes with vengeance, even God with a recompense, he will
come and save you. Then shall the eyes of the blind be lightened, and the ears
of the deaf be opened; then shall the lame man leap as an heart, and the
dumb man's tongue shall sing. Therefore the redeemed of the Lord, shall return
and come Eze. 28. 25. 26.
to Sion, with praise, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads; they
shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and mourning shall fly away. Lift
up your eyes says the Prophet Esaias 51. 3. 6. to the heavens, and look upon
the earth beneath, for heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall
wax old like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall perish in like manner.
But as for the desolations of Sion, they shall be restored, and she shall be
built up, and her stones shall be laid with the carbuncie; her wridernesse shall
become like the gardein of Eden, and more plentiful then paradise it self,
which God at the first created. Joy and gladness shall be found therein,
praise and the voice of singing. And if thou would behold that joy, that
shall not be taken away, be hold it in these three matters. The joy of the holy
Ghost, which is unspeakable and indeterminable; the hope of promised reward,
which is immovable; the reward it self, which is most glorious. Which
arguments hear touched, heareafter may more fully be enlarged.

Your joy shall no man take from you, no nor the devil himself, with all his
legions and millions of companies, who have done us spite enough, and would as
yet to the end and in the end put us from all comfort, and keep us back that
we should not be partakers of any joy. Who though he has thrown us out of the
earthly paradise, yet out of the heavenly Jerusalem shall he never be able to
cast us, although he endeavor never so much and labor might and maine. For his
labors shall be like the buildings of Babel, which were without effect and
altogether in vain; and in the height of his strength he shall be cast down
like lightning. He that has undertaken to be our help and to keep us, will
never fail us, John. 6. 39. This is the fathers will, which has sent me says
Christ, that of all which he has given me I should leese nothing, but should
raise it up again at the last day, and that every one of them should receive
everlasting life, when as death and damnation, the power of the devil and hell
torments shall utterly be broken. John. 10. 28. I give unto them eternal life,
and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand. For
my father which gave them me, is greater then all (and mightier then the
mighty) and none is able to take them out of my fathers hand. I and my father
are one. Re^e. 20. 4. And I saw seats, and they sat upon them, and judgment
was given unto them, and I saw the souls of them that were be headed for the
witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which did not worship the
beasts, neither his image, neither had taken his mark upon their for heads, or
on their hands; and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand year, as if
he had said ten thousand worlds. And againt, cap. 7. 13. One of the Elders
which appeared unto S. John in a vision, said unto him; What are these, which
are arraied in long white robes, whence came they? And he said unto him, Lord
thou know. Who answered, these are they which came out of great tribulation,
and have washed their long robes, and have made their long robes white in the
blood of the lamb. Therefore are they now in the presence of God, who now has
wiped away all tears from their eyes. For the former things are passed, and
there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall
there be any more pain and grief. And him that overcomes, will I make a
pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out, and I will write
upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, which is the
new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from my God, and I will write
upon him my new name.

Mary has chosen the better part which shall never be taken from her; he that
drinks of the fountain of life, shall never thirst again. The despised of
the world and the beloved of the Lord, shall be to the Lord for a name, and for
an everlasting sign, that shall not be taken away. He will make them an
eternal glory, and a joy, from generation to generation, the Lord shall be
their everlasting light, and God their glory. For God shall appoint comfort to
them that mourn, and give them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning, the garment of gladness, for the spirit of heaviness, Esaias. 61. 2.
3. For their shame and unworthy reproach, they shall receive double, even
abundant recompense, and for confusion, they shall rejoice in their portion.
In the holiest land of all, where none but the chosen shall dwell, they shall
possess the double, everlasting joy be unto them. This is the heritage ^. Esd.
2. 27.
of the Lords servant. It is a joy that their miseries shall have an end,
and their sorrow shall quite be taken away; but how much more may they
rejoice, that their joy when it comes, shall never be taken away. And all
that have this hope, may well say with the Apostle, with great comfort and
gladness of heart; Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall
tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril,
or sword? As it is written; For thy sake are we killed all day long, we are
counted as sheep for the slaughter. Nevertheless in all these things we are
more then conquerours, through him that loved us. Wherefore I am now persuaded
and fully resolved, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principallities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate me from
the love of GOD, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

To conclude, let us with all love and zealous affection, undergo this
burden, that it shall please God to lay upon us, how heavy so ever. For
God will not fail those that trust in him, but will give them a comfortable
issue, neither will he lay any more upon us, then he will make us able to
bear. Admit the burden be very heavy, yet seeing we are sure to be well
paid for our labor, and again, that we have but a little way to bear the
same, and shall after a while, and that a little while, be eased; who is it,
that would not strain himself greatly to go through to his ways end, rather
then for sparing so short and so small a labor, to loose so great and so
present a reward. We are kept by the power of God, through faith unto
salvation, which is prepared to be showed in the last time and at the day of
judgment. Wherein we rejoice, though now for a season (if need require) we
are in sorrow and heaviness, through manifold temptations. That the trial of
our faith being much more precious then gold that perishes, (though it be
tried with fire) might be found unto our praise, and honor, and glory, at
the appearing of Jesus Christ. Who has purchased an inheritance immortal and
undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for us. And if through
hope and patience, being strengthened by Gods spirit, we hold out in all
sorrows, troubles, extremities, and persecutions, we may be well assured, that
all our sorrow shall be turned into joy, and such joy that shall never be taken
from us. All which virtues, and supernatural, and celestial qualities, which
is the glory and crown of the godly, God in mercy bestow upon us. Which glory
having received, we may surrender it into his hands that gave it us, and in all
humility, with the Elders spoken of in the Revelation, we may cast down our
crowns before the throne, saying; Praise and honor, and glory, and power, be
unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for evermore.

Amen.
A mean to moderate our joy, and to abate the excess thereof, and to move us
to preparation of mind.
R. T.
IF we consider how the malice of the whole world, and ye hatred of the
greatest princes and men of might is kindled and inflamed against us, partly
through envy of our wealth, and partly for the hate they have to true
religion, and how they are confederate and have combined themselves against ye
truth of God, and against the Lords anointed, for ye defense of the same, who
by secret conspiracies and open attempts of horrible treason, by raising the
subjects against the Prince, and the people against their lawful sovereign,
have at many times by diverse ways endeavored, the death of her royal person,
decay of religion, destruction and calamity of this our native country; shall
not our laughter be turned into mourning, and our joy into heaviness? Whose
determination, had they effected according to their minds, our streets had run
with streams of blood, our children had been slain before our faces, our
daughters ravished in our sights, our wives abused before our eyes, our houses
on flaming fire in our presence, our selves finally murdered in most cruel
manner, Gods truth had perished from among us, religion and the gospel had
been put to flight, romish superstition had invaded this land again, to the
destruction of innumerable souls. When with careful diligence we recount
these dangers, and with thankful hearts for that miraculous deliverance out
of the jaws of so cruel lions, and grateful memory to God for so wonderful
safety from so bloody enemies, we shall remember these things, shall not
our laughter be turned to mourning, and our joy into heaviness?

When we consider besides this, that the hope of our happiness, the state of
our wealth, the continuance of the Gospel (in man's opinion) with us, the term
and time of our peace, the prolonging of our prosperity, stands in the life
of one most tender woman and virtuous Princes, under the shadow of whose
wings, by the great providence of God, we have these thirty seven years been
shrouded from many dangers, and mightily protected from sudden perilles, at
home and abroad; by our open professed enemies, and our own unnatural
Countrymen: by whose godly zeal, religion has been erected, the truth of
Gods word established, the glorious Gospel of Christ maintained; though the
princes of the world have snuffed and raged, fretted and fumed, stamped and
stared thereat; by whose gracious government, every man has hitherto in peace
eaten the fruits of his own orchiard, the grapes of his own vine, the
commodity of his own land (not the least of Gods blessings among men) without
either hostile invasion, or civil discention to any great damage: whose term
of days cannot be but the end of our prosperity; whose day of death, shall
be the beginning of our woeful wretchedness; whose rest with God in eternal
peace, our entrance into troubles in this Commonwealth; her yielding to
nature (which the Lord defer long to his glory, and her endless comfort)
the first step and degree as it were to our miserable calamity: this I say
when we do consider, shall not our laughter be turned into mourning, and our
joy into heaviness, to see the uncertain, ticklish, and hard condition,
whereinto we are driven?

Gloria Deo, soli and gratia.
FINIS.
LONDON Printed by Tho. Creed, dwelling in Thames street at the sign of the
Katheren-wheele, near the old Swanne.

1595.


