CALLIRHOE, THE NYMPH OF ABERDENE, RESVSCITAT BY WILLIAM BARCLAY M. of Art, and
Doctor of Physic.

What diseases may be cured by drinking of the Well at Aberdene, and what is
the true use thereof.

Printed by ANDRO HEART, ANNO DOM. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Sr. ROBERT KEITH of Benholme Rnight. WILLIAM BARCLAY
DOCTOR OF PHYSIC wishes health.
RIGHT Worshipful, Demades, an Orator of Athens was wont to say to the people,
that they never treated of peace, but in their mourning garments, when the
enemy had killed their principal kinsemen. So the people of this Realm enter
never in consideration of their health, but when they are overthrown with
diseases. I would have your Worship to shun this blame, being so civil, so
circumspect, so careful in all your other adoes: it were a blotte to the worth
of your many virtues, to neglect the remembrance of your health, even in the
perfect possession of your health, that you may prevent the battle of
diseases, when you are in the (...) the other side. First then I divided so
much of the land as I choosed to consider, in High-land and Low-land: and I
found the High-land to nourish strong, rude, cruel, long living, laborious,
and lecherous men: and that by reason of their food: milk, cheese, butter,
fleshes, oate bread, much exercise. (I will remit the matter of Aqua vitae to
another place.) And as I mused on these Highland men, I remembered that in our
history of Scotland it is reported, that no diseases were known to this holy
Island in time of our fathers, but the Gravel, the Cold, which Physicians call
Catarrhus. For proof of which was there never a man in Strethspey vexed with
the Tertian ague, while the year 1613. years: when that disease became in
Murray and sundry other parts of this Realm epidemicall or contagious. But
leaving these High-land diseases to their impostors, and barbarous leeches. I
return to our low and civil pa^ts: where the inhabitants being more delicatly
trained up, as subject to greater diseases, the situation of the soil being
toward the North and lying open to the East: the ground which they labor, must
be cold and moist: the diseases of their bodies, Catarrhes, Grauels,
Diarrhaees, Guts* Colickes, Apoplexies, Paralysies, and such like: and because
the winds are boisterous and cold, the maladies of their minds are much worse
then the diseases of their bodies, Pride, Anger, Hatred, Envy, Cruelty,
Inhumanitie, Inconstancy: neither will I proceed farther in this matter,
reserving without flattery the true commendation of Aberdene, whose
inhabitants beyond the nature of their soil, and in spite of AEOLVS and all
his winds, do so ciuilize their burgh, with the continual practice of virtue
and learning, and so replenish their hearts with courteous behavior, that if
their soil were not more barren and barbarous then their souls, even a French
man himself might judge Aberdene to be the Lutetiola, or little Paris of this
Septentrionall corner of North Britanne. The third thing which a Physician
should consider, is the water, which within the limits that I have chosen for
to examine, is not so far from the best waters of the world, as it is from
the worse: And in most parts of this North, it is wholesome and good, and
needs not to be ashamed to abide the trial of HIPPOCRATES rule. But leaving
to treat more largely of this common suall vwater, I will lauell in my
discourse, at the medicinal water which not only orneth the town of Aberdene,
but blesses the territory about it with a treasure of health, more worth the^
the wealth of CRAESVS. I will not report the Antiquity of such Physic,
neither shall I reckon the number of such famous fountains as have had virtue
to cure innumerable diseases: but I will in few terms describe the nature and
virtues of the Well which springs at Aberdene. And before I enter to dye my
lips in that sacred liquour, I will make a suit to that more sauoury water
then the poetical Castalian^ fountain: that as I wish all people to haunt and
honor thy streams, so Dasecura tui, sit mihi sana suis. and I being preserved
by thy virtue from such diseases, as I am persuaded thou can cure, Tu fueris
Musis Pegasus unda meis. Thus having premitted my protestation to that
Aberdonian Nymphe, I will begin to reueile the secrets of her birth, and
dig under that hill, that I may discover the original of her spring. I will
set down (that my discourse may carry a method) the true nature of that
water, how to know if that water have such specificke and magneticall virtues
as I allege: and what are the effects of that water: and lastly, in what manner
that water should be used and drunken. I lay then as a ground, that of all
liquours, there is none more apt then water to receive the qualities and
virtues of any simple: for which cause the Physicians most ordinarily make
their infusions and decoctions in water: the reason of this is, because water
of it self is void of taste, and so much the more fit to receive both the
taste* and all other second qualities from all simples: yea, not only second
qualities, which are manifest and known by the senses, but also hidden and
occult qualities, of which, some do alter the taste: as the infusion of
Rheubarbe: some do not alter the taste, as the infusion of Antimonium, or the
decoction of gold. Notwithstanding that water be a fit subject to receive
the impression of diverse tastes, yet does it not receive so commodiously the
diversity of odours: and in that respect the perfumers do not infuse their
sweet odoriferous drogges in water, but in oil, which we call oleum
Balaninum, which oil is as void it self of all odours, as water is of
sapours: this is the reason also why the dainty, delicate and saucy
victuallers or cooks in their restoring and Venerian pasties put the root
called Petatos, which of it self is tastelesse and unsavory to receive the
temper and pickle of all the other spices and nourishing aliments. Having then
settled as a principle in Physic that water is a commodious matter to receive
the accidental forms of all simples, I conclude that this water of the Well of
Aberdene has received qualities and virtues from such minerals as it flows
through: which are Iron and Vitriol: for the effects do argue the mixtio^ of
these two. In so much that I dare affirm this Aberdonian Nymphe to be sister
Germane to the Well of Forges in Normandy, and may well work as many worthy
cures as it, if it were as wisely used, and as frequently. There is no
dogmaticke Physician in Europe, which does not allow the use of Iron and
Vitriol in the cures of many diseases: so that Nature her self in this water
having intermingled so prudently the qualities of these two simples, it
stands with reason that this water being embrued with the most thick
slimie humors, the passages of the liver ditted with indigest chyle, it were a
rash and careless boldness to hazard our health, seeing this water runs
through the channel of our veins, with such impetuositie that it carries
with it, whatsoever cruditie it encountreth in the way.

-- Non alius per pinguia culta,
In mare purpureum violentior instuit amnis.
No water natural or artificial can pass more swiftly through man's body to
the bladder, where the sea of all our humidities are collected, than does this
vitriolicall liquour. But hereafter shall be declared by what means the
patient shall dispose and prepare his body, that is, to crave aid and relief
at the hands of this courteous and cristaline Aberdonian Nymphe.

For better understanding of the following discourse, I will premit two things.
First, that there is no dis^ase that chances to man's body, that can receive
any great detriment from the right use of this water, except it be the diseases
of the lights: because this water moves the cough, and increases the dolor
to the pulmonickes.

Secondly, this water is a present and sure remedy against all obstructions,
which are the mothers and authors of most part of our diseases. Now I call
obstruction a ditting or stopping of any passag^ of the body, which obstruction
comes most ordinarily in the small veins of the mesentere and liver, in the
passages of the gall, in the vreters or passages of the bladder, in the veins
which open toward the matrix or mother, through which ditted and obstructed
ways this water pierces without any harm or detriment by a detersiue and
penetrant virtue, and takes away the slimie, thick, glewie, teugh matter,
which sticks to the banckes of the channels, while this water as another
Nilus washes away those corrupted excrements from this hidden interior Egypt
of our bowels. This water works not with every one after one sort: for if the
matter be in the neires, the vreters or bladder, it expels the humors by
vrines: if the cause of the disease be in the melt, in the mesentere or the
liver, this water works by the passage of the stool: if the matter be in the
matrix, the water works by the ordinary purgation of that part. And yet
albeit this water be such a justiciar, as executes her sentence against the
diseases of every part, by banishing the material causes, through their own
passages, yet she disburdeneth the greatest part of all the morbificke causes
by the vrines. I have seen sundry men and women cured of great and tedious
diseases by vomiting after the drinking of this water.

This Nymphe beyond the custom of all her sex, refreshes and augmenteth the
weary and dull spirits of any patient, she corroborateth and an art. I saw
at London in the late Queen ELIZABETH'S days an impostor hanged, because he
avouched that he was the son of God, and had sent his supposed prophets
through the country, to vaunt of his coming. This Irlandish impostor does
imitate that pseudochrist, and sends through the country, his prophets to
abuse the people with a false rumor. I protest before God, I envy not his
estate, but I would wish that he could do the thing that he says: but I
cannot abide such abuse of that art, wherein I have spent many years under
the discipline of the most learned Physicians of France. Yet albeit this water
cannot dissolve such a stone, it does much good to those that are vexed
therewith: for it fortifieth the bladder, and washes away the slime which is
about the stone, the which slime makes the stone greater then it is indeed,
and riueth the wound too much at the cutting.

The second question is, whether this water has any virtue to cure the
hydropsie or not. To which I answer, First that of all remedies this is the
surest to prevent the dropsy, and to correct the disposition from whence the
Dropsy proceeds: which ordinarily is weakness of the liver, through
exorbitant heat: I know that hydropsie flows at times from a cold liver
also, but the most frequent cause is hot. Doctor MARTINE at Paris, one of the
most learned men of Europe, not in Physic only, but in languages and all
other sort of literature, finding himself inclined to hydropsie, postponing
all other sort of medicament, he took resolution to pass to the Well of
Forges, not far from Rouvan in Normandy, which Well is sister Germane to our
Nymph, with hope to return from thence in health, or then never to see Paris
again, and in this resolution he took leave from threscore of Physicians his
colleagues, and went to Forges where he recovered his health, and lived many
years thereafter, I answer secondly, that a man being perfectly hydroped,
his hydropsie being caused of an obstruction and hot intemperie of the liver
or melt: this water will cure him, or nothing else will cure him, because it
corrects the intemperie, it opens the obstructions, and it voydeth water
out of the belly.

The third question is, whether this water has any force to help those that
are subject to the Arthritis or general or particular gout. For by this
discourse it appears that this water opens the passages, and gives place
to the serous and watrie humors, to go to the joyntes and lithts, where the
gout is formed: for it is called the gout, because the watrie humors guttatim
cadunt in articulos. I answer that this water opens the passages of the
mesentere, the liver, the melt, the reins, but I think that it takes no
leisure in the body, to go to the joints, because it passes so suddenly
through the first and second region of the body, that it stays not to go to
the third region, and albeit it did go, it fortifieth the ways: for it has
not only an opening force, but a roborating virtue also, and besides that,
draws water out of the joints, rather then fills them with water, and
because a hot intemperie of the liver, is the original cause of Arthritis,
this water curing that intemperie, it must of force cut away the spring of that
disease.

At last now I think expedient to declare how the patients should behave
themselves toward this Nymphe, to the effect they have no just occasion to
think evil, either of her or me: the meetest time to drink of this water is,
when the weather is hotest and driest, as it is in June, July, and a part of
August, because then the water is lightest, and of easiest digestion, the
superfluous vapors being drawn out of the earth by the heat of the sun.
Before we enter to drink of this medicinal water, it is meetest that our
bodies be prepared and purged by the advice of some learned Physician, and
when I say a learned Physician, I seclude barbarous apothecares, Highland
leeches, impostors, and montbankes, Mercuriall medicines, that is to say,
rubbers with quick silver, and all those which can give no reason of their
calling.

Amongst the Lacedaemonians he was accounted the most gallant man that could
steal most, providing that he were not apprehended flagranti delicto. In
Britain he is esteemed the best Physician, who kills most, providing that
he be not accused. But if there were such search here as is in France or
Italy, the people would be better served, and the King have more subjects. I
saw a weighty matter pleaded before the court of Parliament at Paris. The
history was this, A Physician had prescribed to a noble man a certain
quantity of confectio Alchermes, it chances that the patient died within a
little space. This confectio Alchermes had colored all the chyle in his
stomach like skarlet, which should be white. The Chirurgian which bowelled the
man, alleged that the patient was poisoned, the Parents accused the Physician,
so it went to the Bar. And at last both parties heard, and all alledgance
ponderate and considered, the Physician was absolved, and the Chirurgian
condemned as ignorant, and to pay a Fine, and to restore the Physician to his
honor again.

But returning to our purpose again: Whosoever disposes himself to drink of
this water, his body must be prepared by the counsel and advise of some learned
Physician* by taking clysters and some purgative medicines: I will not here
prescribe the forms, because I will not minister occasion to ignorant leeches
to the abuse of men's health. In the mean space that they are drinking this
water, it were meet to keep a good diet, and eat such meat as leave no
cruditie, and does resist melancholy: their drink at their ordinare may be
white wine, moderately drunken, mixed with water, and not with the water of
this Well, as sundry do to their own hinder and prejudice: because this
water used with their meat, helps to carry the meat to the neares and
bladder before it be perfectly digested. After dinner and supper it shall not
be amiss to use a digestive powder for to dissipate the wind, and close the
stomach.

Also it is sufficient to drink every day once of this water, and that in the
morning some two or three hours after the rising of the sun. As concerning
the quantity which ought to be drunken, it should be according to the disease
and nature of every one: at the beginning they should use moderately, and every
day ascend while they arrive at the highest of that which they may drink,
neither has it been found, that the drinking of four or five pounds have done
any harm, albeit there be many men and women, that can not reach to that
quantity. Always it is better to drink longer and less, then to drink a
great quantity in few days.

This is the sum of that which may be said concerning the nature and use of
that water, neither will I weary the Lector with any longer discourse,
beseeching him only to hear me patiently in few terms rander thanks to
God, which for the benefit of our poor diseased persons in this I Will has
revealed this secrecy, and that in such a part, that the ingine of man could
not have devised it better: not in the Higlands and Wilderness, not in some
country beggarly village, as Spae and Forges are, but amongst the most civil,
and courteous, and charitable people of this Realm, where the poor may be
assisted with alms, and with Physicians, where the rich may be harbored,
according to their estates, and where all sort of ranckes may have fit
company, honest recreation, good example, great piety, and all kind of eases
and commodities that any man or woman can desire, Blessed and honored be that
Omnipotent and beneficial Father, Author of all health, and the first of all
Physicians.

FINIS.

