A SERMON PREACHED AT S. MARY'S IN OXFORD UPON THE FEAST OF EPIPHANY CONCERNING
THE TRVE COMFORT OF GOD HIS CHVRCH TRVLY MILLITANT AND Apology of the same.

January 6. 1589.

By Edward Hutchins Master of Arts, and fellow of Brazennose College in
Oxford.

IMPRINTED AT OXFORD BY Joseph Barnes, and are to be sold in Paul's Church
yeard, at the sign of the Tygres head.

TO THE RIGHT WOORSHIPFVLL MASTER THOMAS EGERTON, sollicitour to her Majesty.
Grace and peace in Christ Jesus.
CONSIDERING with my self (Right Worshipful) on the one side, the painful
and profitable pains of the learned and godly set forth from time to time: but
never more fully and clearly then in this our accepted day: (to God be the
glory) so that in that respect nothing can be written, that has not bin
written: and on the other side, mine own exility or rather nothing to all; in
self knowledge (as one speaks) more needing to read than to write. I was
persuaded and set, to commit no more then I have done, to the press.
Notwithstanding, I may not be mine own nor follow my self: but as I have
heretofore been ouer-ruled: so have I been now again, at the earnest and
importunate suit of my dear frinds in Christ, to yield this sermon to the
print. Whereupon as in general I desire the favorable judgment of the
reader: so of special duty (in token of my thankful mind) I am boulde to
dedicate it to your Woorshippe, humbly craving your favorable acceptaunce of
the same, and of that truth and true comfort, which I have therein, though
according to my manner and small talent, yet faithfully delivered. And so in
wish of all prosperity in Christ unto you, I commit your Woorship and all
yours, to the Almighty, who bless you in all your ways and send you many
good days, to his good will and pleasure, Amen.

Your Worships ever in Christ to command. E. H.

It is written in the 7. Verse of the 4. Chapter of the song of Solomon. Thou
art al fair my love, and there is no spot in thee.
HAVING heretofore at three several times (Right worshipful and dearly beloved
in Christ our dear Savior) spoken out of this place of this text: of the name
and appellation of Christ's Church here named by the name of a love: of the
reasons of that name: active and passive: active, respectu fidei, respectu
facti: passive, respectu naturae, respectu gratiae, quoad esse and been esse:
of the appropriation of this name: of a caveat that it was not to be taken by
way of exclusion: as though the church were not the love of God the father and
of the holy Ghost: but yet by some way of specialty appropriate to Christ,
because he alone of all the three persons was promissus and missus to witness
the love of God unto her etc. Having also handled the commendatio^ of this
love, that she is first commended to be fair: Secondly to be fair actually and
presently: Thirdly in generality, for better sifting whereof yet I stood upon
three negatiues: First, that she is not here commended to be al fair, either
doctrinaliter, as though she could not err in matters of faith, or moraliter,
as though she did not er in matters of fact: or in respect of her condition and
state in the world; thus far proceeding, it remains now that I come to the
affirmative general, that where you have hard how she is not, I may at length
resolve how this love is said to be fair, to be al fair. In which respect the
principal conclusion and proposition is this: that the Church this love of our
Savior has present and perfect beuty: is fair and all fair in respect of
her Christ, in whom (though not by grace infused, as heretofore you have heard)
yet of grace and therefore gratis (as the schoolmen have well defined: Gratia
non est gratia vllo modo, si not sit gratuita omni modo. Psalm. 32.2. Job 141.
) of grace and therefore gratuitally or else no way of grace, (as Saint
Augustine truly argued) imputed therefore, no stain may be found. For albeit
in consideration of her frailty and weakness for the time of this life or rather
her warfare, against the world, sin and satan she do carry her wounds and
does oftentimes fail and defile her self: though the law in that respect be
the glass of God, Ansel. supr. 8. cap. epist. ad Romans
that discovers her spots unto her: so that her stro^gest wrastler, her best
Jacob might stand in fear of his moral halt, of his fall, if he should regard
the same in course of justice: Yet the law is answered by the gospel: Colos.
1.19. 1 Ioh. 3.8. Luc. 15.5.9.
in the gospel by Christ, in whom the godly are, as strong though weak, as
rich though poor, as clothed though naked: as recovered though lost: as free
though bound: as sound though sore, so clean though foul: for in this point we
must distinguish the state of them that are Christ's, and in Christ, which may
be considered two ways. Either a posteriori or a priori: a posteriori quoad
factum, a priori quoad faedus and pactum: quoad factu^: in respect of duty
performed and deeds of life they are not al fair but foul and that, 1. Ioh. 1.
vlt. Job. 9 3. Job. 14.4.
peccato either acto or contracto (as the schoolmen well speak:) by sin
therefore personally committed or at least naturally derived. And thus this
love is as she says she is: I am not all fair but black ye daughters of
Jerusalem, even as black as ever were the tents of Kedar; which is true, Cant.
1.4.
not only in respect of affliction but natural corruption and corrupt
condition, as truth bears it: where as yet quoad foedus and pactum, which
serves to purge, either immediate (as infantes who belong to the kingdom of
christ:) or medi ante fide (mediatly by faith) as they adult, she may say as
she said: Cant. 1.4.
I am not foul but fair, comely, al fair, ye daughters of Jerusalem, even as
comely and al as comely, as ever were the curteyns of Solomon: and in fine
answer her Christ of her self as Christ by way of comme^dation says of her
unto her here, Esa. 9.6.
in Solomon a type of him, the King of Salem Prince of peace: I am al fair my
love, and there is no spotte in me. The truth and proof whereof appears to
be true two ways: ex part sponsae and ex part sponsi: ex part sponsae, and
therefore to this purpose in scripture she is compared to a groat: Luc. 15.9.
but yet not lost but found: accepted, fair and al fair in the eye of that
gracious woman (the very mirror of grace) that took the pains to light the
candle of mercy, to sweep, to seek, to find, to save the same: to this
purpose she is compared to the man of Ierico but yet not foul but fair, by the
Samaritanes grace not sore but made sound: to this purpose she is compared to
a chicken but yet not vnfethered or naked but covered with the wings of the
Hen: Luc. 13.34.
in conclusion: to this point she is compared to a Lamb but yet not so fleeced
but covered and clothed with the white wool of favor and mercy 'fair and al
fair, free from al spot in Christ her spotles lamb, spotles though man, Ioh.
1.29. Mat. 1.20. and 27.4. Bern. in psalm. qui habitat. ser. 9. Ioh 1.9. Esa.
49.6. Mat. 9.12. Mat. 9.12. Ier. 30.23. Luc. 2.30. Ioh. 11.25. Os. 13.14. Luc.
2.30. Mat. 1.21. Tertul. de carne christ. lib. page 26. 1. Cor. 1.30.
that she might be al fair without spot. Secondly, this general commendation
appears to be true ex part sponsi: and therefore to this purpose Christ in
Scripture is called her lux: her light therefore he is: and ergo darkness may
as soon be found in the light; her medicus, or rather medicina and sanitas: and
ergo sickness may as well be in health: her vita: her life therefore: and therefore
death may as soon be found in life: her salus, her safety, as appears by the
name of Jesus, and ergo destruction may as easily be found in salvation: her
redemption and ergo bondage may as well be in liberty: her iustitia and ergo sin
may as soon be found in justice (which yet cannot be) as she be charged with
any sin, with any filth or foulenes in Christ Jesus; in Christ Jesus? For (as
Tertullian speaks in another case) so say I in this: that this love of Christ
is not only ecclesia Christi but Christus: not only ergo to be considered as
the church of Christ, but as Christ: as Christ, who as well may be said to stray
though the way; to be deceived though wisdom: Ioh. 14 6. Luc 11.49. Mat. 23.34.
1. Cor. 24. Baruc. 3.37. Ioh. 14.6.
to er or to ly though truth; to be infirm, though omnipotent, though the very
arm of the power of God; to be foul, though pure, though purity it self, as
his true church to be foul (considered in him:) in him? in whom her old man is
destroyed sin drowned, satan answered and her infirmities so removed, Romans
8.33.34.
that he cannot charge her with any sin, with any stain or foulnes. A
mystery, a paradoxe I confess to flesh and blood, that one and the self
same should be foul and so fair: subject to sin and yet so fair, as al
fair; al fair, because free from al foulenes, free from al sin: But yet so
it is: and where reason does not or cannot, yet faith persuades it: faith which
apprehends in Christ, not only the grace of pardon to pardon, but also of
perfect imputation of his justice to justify al them, that are by the covenant
of grace incorporate into him: In his book called, dux peccatorum.
and not only by nature (as Granate^sis well speaks) one with him as man but by
grace also at one with God by him: who in him and for his sake forgiues and
forgets the sins of them that are his, yea as though they had never sinned.
In which respect albeit the devil would, yet can he not accuse them: or if he
do presume (as he is a presumptuous spirit) yet the godly may soon cut him
of and quit themselves in Christ, Isa. 11.8.9. Mat. 16.18.
in whom they are quit from sin, from all uncleanness. Nay in this point
the spirit of adoption does assure the sons of God, that their sins are
condemned in Christ his son, who was condemned for their sin: Romans 8. v. 3.
and 32.
and that by his sufferings their sins (as an old writer speaks, though
darkly, yet scholastically, and fitly) have suum esse without male esse: they
have therefore their manner of being without evil being: because they are taken
away (as S. Augustine well speaks) vt non obsint, licet sint: that therefore they
be not hurting, though they have their kind of being: or (as another speaks)
quoad morsum. i. mortem, licet non quoad morbum: and al: because sin cannot
be mortal to them, Romans 6.23.
though sin in and of self nature mortal, be within them. Nay, above all this
to set forth this matter more fully: in spiritual warfare, when the godly are
grieved with touch of conscience for the foulness of their imperfections and
infirmities, the scripture it self does thus yeald them the truth, their
comfort, to the truth of this text; as for example: the foulness of the sin
of intemperance may trouble the soul of a Noah: but yet the fairenes of Christ,
his fasting and abstinence: the foulnes of the sin of impatience may grieve the
conscience of a Job: but yet the fairnes of Christ, his patience and passions:
the foulnes of the sin of murder and oppression may disquiet the soul of a
David: but yet the fairenes of Christ, his love and charity: the foulnes of the
sin of ambition may move the Apost: to dream of a primacy: but yet the
fairnes of Christ, his meeknes and humility: Esa. 42.1. Mat. 18.11. c. 4.11.29.
Mat. 26.70.72.74.
the foulnes of the sin of self-love and respect made Peter in his frailty to
forswear himself, to say, to swear, to swear with a curse that he knew not
Christ, but yet the fairnes of christ, his gracious love and pity: Romans 7.23.
1. Pet. 2.2.
the foulnes of the law of the members may torment a Paul, any godly man: but
yet the fairenes, the satisfaction of Christ may be and is through faith a
sufficient stay against al temptation grounded upon the foulnes of his
imperfection whatsoever. To be short: where the godly are any way short of
themselves; where satan obiecteth to the church, to this love her want of
obedience, her foulness, for supply of fairnes, she may say (as once S.
Bernard said) quod ex me mihi deest vsurpo ex visecribus domini: she might
as well answer to the course of this text, Avoid satan: for I am not so foul
but that I am fair and al fair in the bowels and blood of my Christ; 1 Cor.
15.59
in whose mercy my merit (mine freely because it is his mercy that his merit is
mine) I am purged from al sin and ergo al fair: if therefore thou can lay
any thing to the charge of my Christ: either folly where he is my wisdom: or
infirmity where he is my strength: Damascen. orthod. fid. li. 3. cap. 1.
or guile where he is my Dove: or pride where he is my humble la^b: or malice,
where he is my love: or any work of darkness where he is my light: or any
foulnes, any sin, where he is my sanctus sanctorum, my holy of holyes, not only
sanctificatus secundum carnem but sanctificans quoad diuinitate^, Orig. 1.
part. homil. xi. super. nun. d. Tert. de car. christ. pa. 33. Jbidem. De
noctur. illusionibus. collat. 22. cap. 9.11.12.
(as one well speaks) not only sanctified according to the flesh but sanctifieng
according to the power of his godhead: or (as Origin speaks) qui sanctus est
non efficitur: who is a saint not made a saint: or (as Abbat Theonas, qui
sanctus est, nay not only that, but immaculatus: not only a saint as the godly
now be, but a saint without sin (which the godly for the time of this life
cannot be) then charge me with sin: otherwise as verily as christ my Christ,
was foul and al foul, because sin for me: 2. Cor. 5. Ciril. tom. 1. page 235.
so am I not foul but fair and al fair: righteous al righteous, because the
righteousness of god in him, whom thou can not charge with any sin. Indeed if
I were left to my self, my feet are foul but yet avoid satan, where my christ
has washed them: of my self my wounds are filthy, many and mighty but yet
avoid satan, where my christ has cleansed and cured them: truth it is, my sins
are many, great and grievous but yet the grace of my Christ, is an almighty
grace; greater and stronger then they be; in whom their foulnes and filth is
purged away and their greatness come to nothing. Thus dearly beloved the church,
this love may comfort her self, though foul by the wood yet (as one speaks, an
unknown author) fair and al fair by her all comely crucifixe that died upon
the wood: though foul in her own folly, yet al fair in her wisdom: though foul
in her own frailties, Romans ^. Zach. 14.11* Mich. 4.11.12.13. Job. 8.34. Ciril.
tom. 2.111. Bern. in Epi. sermon. 1.
yet al fair in her might: though foul in her own bondage and captiuities,
yet al fair, because al free in her freedom: though foul in her sins, yet al
fair without spot in christ her spotles pascal, once and but once slain to make
her clean from al her sins, and foulnes. From al foulnes; as any may easily
perceive, if she do but refer her self to the cross of her paschal: thither,
where she may behold her alone and full acquittance from al sin, from al her
foulnes: thither, where she may leap into the very side of her christ as into
a well and wash her self fair and al clean in his blood, Damascen. orthod.
fid. li. 4. cap. 10.
the water of life yt alone sprang out of his precious side, that heavenly
fou^tain, to represent her al fair: thither, where she may run between the
arms of her savior, spread upon the tree to embrace, to cover her from all her
foulnes, from all her infirmities: thither where (as one speaks the full
comfort, to the approofe and proof of this text) she may wash her foul head in
the blood of his head, her foul hands in the blood of his hands, her foul feet
in the blood of his feet, her foul side in the blood of his side: her foul
heart in the blood of his heart: Ioh. 19.34. Revel. 1.5. Mat. 26.28. Ephesians.
25.26.27.29.
her foul body in the pure, precious blood that colored his body from head to
foot: and her soul in his innocent soul, yet pressed to the very sorrows of
hell for the filth of her sins, to represent her al fair. Thus the church
truly millitant, the godly may answer the devil in all trial of conscience to
the truth of these words; that she is al fair. Which is indeed the chief
felicity and hap of the church, that in all satan's attempts she is so able by
faith to cover her self with the white garments of Christ: Revel. 1.13.
by faith so to shield her self, as in christ her plenty to deny al want: Col.
2.3. 1. Cor. 3.11.12. 1. Cor. 10.3.4. Esa. 8.14.15. Cor. 2.12.32.34. 1. Cor.
2.8. 1. Ioh. 2.2.2.
in christ her morning star, to deny al darkness: in christ her precious
pearl and treasure to deny al vileness: in christ her foundation and rock to
deny al weakness: in Christ her glory to deny all shame: in christ her purgation
and acquittance from sin to deny all filthiness and blame, that otherwise in
course of justice, justly therefore might be imputed to her, in his goodness to
deny her foulnes, to defy the devil and al he can against this commendation
that she is not al fair. So much the more do I marvel at them, and blame them,
that teach in this behalf discomfort for truth, nay (I had almost said truth)
despeyre for comfort. That the church this love of our savior is not otherwise
fair and al fair then by the inhere^t grace, by perfection of duty, and that
this imputed beuty in true account, is no way real but imaginary: and ergo do
not only deny it but cry out against it. For answer to whom the proof of the
negative heretofore has proved, Prou. 20.9. Isa. 41.29 and 53.12. 1. Ioh. 11.
that she is not actually, no, neither can possibly for the time of this life
be said to be fair, al fair in respect of good life; but that she is foul:
foul, because steined with sin: with sin: as Leuchettus well notes upon the
master of the sentences, his 3. book. Did. 27. quaest vnica, according to the
scripture. Whereupon it follows, that where she is here commended to be fair
and al fair: and that not only for the time of the next life: (as S. Bern.
would have it: and truly, though somewhat restraintly:) but also for the time of
this life, as the word approves: and yet that cannot be by infused, that it
must needs be true by grace alone and grace only imputed. Which imputation is
not res opinaria but solida (as Athanasius speaks in a like case) no
imagination therefore (as they write and as of late I have seen the point
charged in private schroles, which are abroad:) but a point of truth, and as
real as was the imputation of our foulnes, of sin to our Christ: who was not
counted a sinner, nay sin in the cause of his church by imagination, though by
only imputation. For the gospel is no fable but a truth: even the word of
Christ: as therefore the word of this loves wisdom: 1. Cot. 1.24. 1. Ioh.
2.2. Ciril. tom. 3. 108 6. Romans 5.1.2. Esa. 2.2. Act. 10.36. 1. Cor. 1.30. Ioh.
14.6. Ioh. 17.17.
for christ is her wisdom: as the word of her reco^ciliation: for christ is
here peace: as the word of her righteousness: for Christ is her justice: as
the word of her life, for christ is her life: so to make al these comforts
good and this commendation true, it is no les then verbum veritatis, the word
of truth: for Christ is truth: who spoke the truth general of the word, when he
spoke to the father thy word is the truth. And what is the truth special of the
gospel, if this be not that truth: that the church, this love is al fair and
freed from her foulnes, not ex propria dignitate but ex imputata dignatione:
not of self desert therefore but of undeserved, of imputed mercy, whereby
Christ became bound to free her, and foul, by his foulnes to beutifie, to make
her al fair. For the truth is alike in respect of Christ and his church:
between whom through grace thence has been ever, is and shall be such
intercourse and change, such communication or rather communion by gratuital
vnio^ and no way but by imputatio^: which whether it be real or not real,
true or not true, because only imputed, I dare and I do put it to the
conscience of any that have any conscience to consider of truth. Thus ergo as
really and verily, as Christ was accounted for us accursed, though God blessed
for ever: a sinner a very devil as the devil himself could testify of him: as
he was reputed among the wicked and died as a malefactor above the wicked,
where yet he did never hurt, never brake the law of love but being love it
self performed both tables of love: so is it true in the gospel of grace to
the comfort of all, that are within the compass of the covenant of everlasting
mercy and favor, that they are no more wretched then the seed of the blessing,
their blessing: ecclesia (says Ireneus) est semen Abrahami: the church is the
seed of Abraham: blessed ergo in Christ that seed of Abraham, that seed of
the blessing: no more ergo wretched by the foulnes of life, the^ Christ, the^
the seed of Abraham, the seed of the blessing, their blessing: no more unholy,
the^ ye holy one of god: Mar. 5.7. 1. Cor. 1.30.
no more are the godly to be charged with sin, then justice, the justice of God,
then Christ, their justice, whom many did but none justly could charge with sin
any way; but only in respect of grace, in respect of the merciful appointment
of his heavenly father, who preordeined in and of his goodness to save man:
Damas. orth. fid. l. 3. ca. 1. 1. Ioh. 4.19. Deuteronomy. 7.7 and 10.15. Iraen. ad
here li. 5. page 323 Bas. inso. 48. Damascen. orthod. fid. li. 1. cap. 2. and
li. 3. cap. 1. 1. Cor. 13.4. Heb 9.14. Genesis 3 6. Orig. supr. leuit. homil. Romans
5 12.3. ca. 3. a notable place. Gal. 4.3. Tertul. adu^. Iudae. p. 131. Ansel
supr. 1. Cor. 15.
and to that end to satisfy justice. Which where it could not be done but by
obedience as infinite in perfection as sin was in offense: and therefore not by
any creature but by very God: nor by god only: because God was and man had
offended: and ergo as by very God of very God, so by very man of very man: and
yet not by any man but by a man without sin and offense, that he himself
might not need, but by his patience and passions in his manhood, work the
salvation of man by the power of his godhead; I easily find man either in
miserable case and yet under the law quoad culpam and reatum: or else quitte a
culpa because a culpae reatu, in the imputed obedience of Christ, who alone was
God and therefore able: and made man and ergo apt to be man's mediator, by
taking man's sin upon him: man's at the first by voluntary choice, al men's in the
first man by hereditary right, no way Christ's (the 2. Adams the 2. for the 1.
sake, man pure from sin to make this his love al fair, Bern. in dom. in ramis
palm. ser. 3.
though all foul by reason of sin) whether by action or inclination but by
mercy, not putatiue (as our adversaries blasphemosly do insinuate in the point
of the gospel) but scriptural: real therefore and true, though imputative;
nether is the church truly millitant only al fair in Christ her messiah and
mediator, Ioh. 8.30.
because he was without sin, quia nunquam peccauit (which Hugo de s: victore
does note to have bin the judgment of some in his time) but also propter
impeccantiam (as the commentator upon Damascen speaks) or rather, Ansel supr.
cap. 8. epist. ad Romans
quia fint impeccabilis, as most of the schoolmen use to speak: not only erg.
because he was not but also because he could not be foul, he could not sin. For
in Christ there was no sin, Ber. sermon. de pass. dom.
nether could there be sin, quoad actum quoad habitu^ or somite^) as the phrase
of the schols is) neither was nether could he in truth be charged with sin in
effect or affect, in act or possibility, being like man but yet the first man
in this point before he did fall: pure ergo from sin: or like man after his fall,
T. Acq. upon the 5. of the 2. to the Cor. lect. 5. Tert. de carne christ. lib.
page 27. Tert. in the same place and page.
not only erg. in statu but in ruina (as Hugo de vict. well speaks) but yet
like him in all things secu^du^carne^ peccati, in respect er of the flesh of sin
(as Tertullian well speaks and truly (or rather sinful flesh (as the Apostles
expou^ds ye point more warily:) but no way secu^du^ peccatu^ carnis, according
to the sin of the flesh, whether it were of omission or commission: committed
outwardly, conceived inwardly or contracted lineally from Adam. Bas. sermon de
humana chr. generatione.
So much the better ground has this fair love of Christ, of this her general
comme^dation: because she is fair and al fair only and wholly in him, Damas.
orth. fid. li. 3. ca. 27 Ioh. 1.29. Reu. 5.8. Ciril. tom. 2. page 48. Romans 5.
Tertul. de. praesc. haeres. page 87.
who neither did neither could sin, being appointed to save her from sin: who
ergo neither was nor could be any way foul, being that Lamb of God, slain
from the beginning effectually, at length upon the cross visibly to take away
the sin of the world: of the world, that is, of the elect: of the elect: whose
sins were his: his? which yet were not his by desert but by love, by love and
not by inherence but by imputation only. Romans 4.2. Heb. 9.12. Job. 3. Ioh.
8.24. Damascen. orthod. fid. li. 3. cap. 27. 1 Pet. 2. Ioh. 1.
This is the gospel and to this purpose the Apostle is so plain and express
that often I fall to a wonder at them, that will needs imagine this to be but an
imagination, and so easily can as they think and so commonly do, without
cause or probability in their books and late flying schrowles revile and
declaime against this heavenly and most evident doctrine as not only some way
improbable but absurd in all divinity, yea (and in Campians argument) in natural
reason. But (by your good leave and patience, though somewhat darkely yet in a
word and as I may plainly) to stand upon the folly of their reasons, which
they take to be reason: they go about by philosophy to confute divinity or
rather by sophistry, cauillation and slaundering to keep under the truth,
which yet will have the conquest and the victory It is absurd (say they) in all
divinity, in philosophy and nature to call any thing white or black, fair, or
foul, by the whiteness or blacknes, by the fairnes or foulnes, that is not in
it but without it. To resolve therefore the church to be fair, al fair by the
fairness and beauty of Christ, in him and not in her or hers but because
imputed to her. For the ground of which their argument I answer first, that
albeit the most proper be, yet that al true predications be not drawn from
inherence. College walls can answer so much to their shame, that can no
better object. 2. I answer that this their argument is grounded upon a
misconstruction of our article or rather a wilful cauil or slander against the
truth, where thy cannot confute our truth. For we never defended this loves
beuty and fairenes to be only eternal and without her. For though the grace
of this love be twofold: the one present: the other future and to come: though
by grace present, she be alone fair and al fair in the grace of her Christ; not
in her but without her: without her, and yet hers by faith, which apprehends
and applies his full beuty unto her as her own, as by mercy wrought for her,
so through faith imputed unto her for her own: Damas orth. fid. li. 4. ca. 10
Gal. 5.6.
though this be thus, yet this former beuty is not idle but active, the root of
a second for faith causes love and love shows it self by good life: and in
respect of that life, in scripture, for the time of this life she is counted
fair, called just, just: Yea and that according to the rule of philosophy (as
in this case they urge) by justice inherent, by justice performed of her:
called justice yet but not as justified or justifiable by the law, Luc. 1.6.
Gal. 3.22. Mandata dei facta deputantur qua^ od quicquid, non fit, ignoscitur.
as they would have it, but rather and truly (as S. Augustine defined of it)
because so accounted in the gospel of grace, which accounts that for done,
which man wants of frailty, repents unfeignedly, and God pardons of his
gracious goodness and mercy: and thus the last time I noted that the church
this love of Christ is fair even by inherent justice, to the shame of them
all, that say and urge untruly and falsely, that we, against al divinity and
sense, defend the justice of the godly, this loves beuty to be merely external
and without her. 3. I answer by way of just condition and demand: what if
it were otherwise in philosophy, yet what is that to divinity? If otherwise in
nature? Yet the argument is not always necessary from nature to scripture? For
(to keep my self within my compass) first of all, touching predications:
theologica scientia, the Scripture has such, as philosophy, as nature cannot
admit, no nor animalis homo perceive or conceive at al. As for example: in the
point of incarnation which is (the very radix and fundamentu^ christianae
religionis, as the fathers well call it, verbum carofactum est: the word became
flesh: which is, as the schoolmen well call it, inusitata predicatio: an unusual
manner of predication: but, what? Shall this very root of religion be cut off?
The very ground of christianity be shaken? Shall this be false in scripture
(the word of truth) because there is not like example in all philosophy or
nature to be found that may justify the same? As again in the point of
Christ's passion (a principal article of the foundation) Deus gloriae
crucifixus est, which is also, as they well call it, praedicatio communicata,
unusual, true yet by communion or union hominitatis and Deitatis, of the
manhood and Godhead in one Christ: as (in conclusion) among the rest is this
commendation of this fair love of Christ (grounded upon the two former) that
she is fair and al fair, not in se ipsa but in suo sponso: even as christ was
foul and al foul, not in seipso but in sua sponsa: yt she therefore was al fair
in him as he was al foul in her: which is praedicatio inusitata but yet vera,
vera though imputata. But what? Shall these, the very grounds and comforts of
true christianity be false in scripture, because the like examples of
predication to justify the same, are not to be found in all philosophy and
nature? Absurd. Howebeit I answer by way of retorsion: that our adversaries
themselves confess how that this their consequence is nothing from philosophy
to divinity, from nature to scripture. For otherwise (to demand of them all)
what becomes of their false named sacrifice or use of the same. Of their
sacrifice? For in that they say there is something round, something white etc.
But not by inherence, not by order or rule of philosophy or nature (eue^ as al
papists by catholic consent do except of accide^ts in the case of the
sacrament, where it does not (as they say) inesse: why then will they measure
the predications of divinity by nature and philosophy (they in general holding
this for divinity, against al truth of true philosophy? touching the use of
their mass if al be imaginary that is by imputatio^, then how lives the very
soul of their religion? How do their masses profit not only the living but
also the dead? But to add a third point: all our adversaries grant that there
is a double justification: and in both they all grant and must defend the
point of imputation. In the first justification they say and hold that
infants and new conuertes (immediately departing) are justified and saved alone
by the grace of Christ imputed: and in this respect they commend and
consequently defend that proposition of Luthers or rather principal principle
of the scriptures, sola gratia sine operibus iustificat and iustificatos
seruat: so Bunderius, so Eckius, so Cocleus, so Costerus, so others, so all do
say and defend, that be of any account: why then do these late men declame
thus against imputation? Touching the second justification and mean to
glorification they hold that the merits of saints triumphant (which they call
the churches treasure (are imputable and imputed to saints not only living but
departed. Whereupon popish pardons and satisfactions are grounded: but if this
were true, why is imputatio^ an imagination? but thus it is, it must be truth
in case of error whatsoever they imagine to be truth: they have frewil and free
tongs to affirm, where in proof they fail. Nay (as in diverse other points) so
in this themselves they disprove as you have heard: and may more truly (as
truth requires exclame and cry out against their own fancies in the point of
imputation, which tend to maintain error and heresy) then against us, who
(according to the truth of the gospel) flee from our own folly and
foulness to the book of wisdom, to the gospel; and therein to the Grace of
Christ. in whom our nakedness only and wholly is covered and the church this
love is fair and al fair and has no spot or stain that may be imputed to
her. In conclusion if any man look in Harding, Roffensis, Cocleus, Gratian,
the censure of Colen, yea the Rhemish testament or the like authors or books:
he shall find these propositions among them and in them, that aliena fidei (as
some speak) or fides ecclesiae (as others speak) does save an infant: and,
that satisfactio vnius valet pro alio: that the satisfaction of one auailteh
another. But if imputation be not real but imaginary, how can this stand?
Where are the very sinews, the soul of popish religion? Here they cannot
answer themselves and for themselves and therefore I answer for them and
against them: that this their imputation is but an imagination: De incarnatione
verbi.
and what they do utter falsely of Saints, that do I truly pronounce of
Christ the saint of al saints (as Athanasius well calls him:) that the church
millitant is fair and alfair not by the imputed satisfaction of any but only
of him, in whom she is wholly fair, where of her self she can no way be fair
(as Pelagius dreamed) no nor in her self, by grace infused, be all fair for
the time of this life. Well and well did he know this who was as fair as any
man, a man after the very heart of God: and yet so foul that he knew not how
foul he was: dilicta quis intelligit? Ab occaltis delictis munda me domine?
Psalm. 19.12.
O Lord who knows his sins? His foulnes? Lord ergo cleanse me from mine
unknown foulnes? Well did he know this, who was as fair as ever man was and
yet so foul, 1 Cor. 5. T. Acq. upon the same lect. 1. Look also Cip. in tract.
de singularitaie cler. page 599. S. Paul. ad To. Gal. etc 2. Cor. 8. Mat. 27.28.
that rather al foul then any way fair: and ergo stood in fear not only of
some but of all his works. Well and very well did he know this who was so
fair, that he could say: nihil nihil conscius sum and yet could ande: in hoc
tamen iustificatus non sum. Oh how well did he know this that taught so fully
that man is justified and saved not by works but freely, through faith in Jesus
Christ, whose poverty avails only by imputation to enrich, his contempt to
glorify, his pains to ease, his hands to loose, 1. Pet. 2.24. Mat. 26.28.
Ephesians. 1.9.10.11. Epes. 2.5 6.
his stripes to heal, his death to quicken, his bloodshedding to cleanse them al
and al fair, that in gods merciful purpose have portion in him and are
appointed to be saved by him. Why but that were no justice (say they) to account
one just, because another is just: the church, this love all fair because her
Christ is al fair. I answer to them that thus argue, that although it stand
not with the reason of the natural man, Colos. 1.20. Romans 5.25. 1 Ioh. 2.1.2.
and 4.10. Ber. in ser. de pass. dom. T. Acq. upon the 3. of the 2. to the Cor.
Phil. 2.8. Romans 5.6.8. Ioh. 3.16. Ephesians. 2.4. 1. Ioh. 4.10. Dam. orth. fid. l.
3. cap. 1. 1. Ioh. 3.5. Romans 4.25. 1. Pet. 2.4. Gal. 1.4. 1. Tim. 1.15.
yet stands it with faith: which faith, which finds justice satisfied in
Christ for this love, and this love quit by the meriting mercy and merciful
merit of Jesus Christ, which God accepts for a full and through recompense of
and for man's sin and offense. And albeit God were iniust, if he should repute
man for just: just? yea without desert: yet where he considers not man in
himself but in his dear son Christ, who of his favor and grace performed
for man til it came to the very death, what the law demanded of man: Gods
mercy and justice are both apparent and manifest. For no cause there was but
love that moved him to accept man to favor, who by sin had so displeased him:
and yet of justice or rather just love and mercy he accounts them for just,
that belong to Christ his son, who being dilectus a patre immerito nos dilexit:
(as Ciprian well speaks de baptismo Christi:) and upon the tree took their
person and state upon him and spared even to spare himself spared not, even to
spend his hearts sweet blood to represent this true church his love, Heb. 10.9.
Ber. in ser. do pass. dom. Act. 2.23. Romans 10.4.
fair and al fair in the eyes of his heavenly father, who of his mercy had
appointed him to work such a wonder of mercy. So is it said, that christ is the
fulfilling of the law to the^ that believe: the fulfilling of the law? the law
ergo cannot charge them with sin, with any foulnes: Gal. 3.10.
in him ergo we are fair and al fair: so is it said, that we are the
rightousnes of god in him: the righteousness of God cannot be charged with sin,
2. Cor. 5.21.
with any foulnes: in him ergo we are fair and al fair: so is it said that
Christ is the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world, the foulnes
of the church, this his love: in him ergo she is fair and all fair: so is it
said: Ioh. 1.29. 1. Ioh. 1.7.
that the blood of Jesus Christ the son of God cleanses us from al sin: not
ergo from some but from al foulnes of sin: in him ergo we are fair and al
fair. Al these propositions and infinite like, they are the sum of the gospel,
the sentences of grace, which concern this fair love of christ, the godly not
in themselves but in their Christ, not in their own frailties but in his
mercies, Romans 7.23.
not in any imperfect perfection but in his perfect propitiatio^, in his
satispassio^, which has answered justice and swallowed judgment so for the^
that their sins shall never come in accou^ts but are and shall be as cyphars and
this lones spots and filthiness are and shall be so drowned, Esa. 1.18.
that they shall never be imputed but she be ever reputed fair and al fair
according to this co^me^datio^ here delivered of her why, but if christ shed
not his precius blood to wash her al clear, how stands your exposition, that
she is fair and al fair in the blood of her Christ? Whereunto I answer, as
before I have answered, that Christ spent his precious blood, not to cleanse
her from sin, but from all her sins. 1. These. 5.9. Act. 4.12.
Insomuch, that where she is chargeable with none, she owes all the thanks to
God in Jesus Christ alone, who by himself did (as he was to that purpose
appointed) offer not only 7. times his blood to remove from this his love her
7. mortal sins and no more (as diverse of our adversaries speak too short in the
gospel) and that he therefore left her by due satisfaction, either of her own
perfourmance or of others for her to cleanse her self from the rest: but all
the verity and virtue of this commendation is only and wholly and ever and of
al and of al things most thankfully to be ascribed to Christ, Cipr. de caena
dom. sermo. page 447. Bern. de pas. dom. ser. and dom. in ramis palm. ser. 3.
in whom alone she is so al fair, that there are in her no spots to be found:
none to be found, because they are al purged away in his precious blood, which
he spared not but spent for all her sins. And indeed set aside the blood of
Christ, and his propitiation in any respect: if the church were left to cleanse
her self from any sin and cannot be all fair, unless she do by due
satisfaction perform the same, then is she no way al fair, she cannot be
without spot. For none of her obedience can be sufficient to recompense God
for the lest sin of al: Bas. int reg. monar. ca. 18.
which (being an infinite offense) cannot be removed by her finite or rather
faulting obedience: so faulty? That although they dare talk of her fairenes,
al fairnes, yea and of her overplus that way: of her works, of her merits of
congruence, dignity and condignity, nay (more then all this) superogatory: yet I
say not only as Hugo Cardinalis (who bears the name) does note upon the
Psalms, that man's misery it is, that he knows not his merits (which
proves their faith of satisfaction to be all uncertain: uncertain and
therefore no faith: All our adversaries grant the conclusion.
) but also (as Ferus well notes against the will of our adversaries upon the
epistle to the Romans:) That man is miserable who cannot better weigh what be
his demerits: and account more truly of sin, then as of a sore that according
to the meetered creed of our adversaries, by almesgiuing or fasting or praieng
or knocking of the breast or by pilgrimaging or by aspersion of water or
episcopal benediction or by such fancied means may be cleansed: Where the
scripture in general describes sin to be a sore, so loathsome, that none could
represent this love fair without spot in the eyes of God but only Christ by
washing her from al sin in his precious blood: whereunto therefore all the
effect of this commendation is ascribed. Although therefore the church be
subject to sin: to foulnes in this life: yet notwithstanding she is precious
and pure: glorious, fair and all fair without spot in the eyes of her God,
whose eyes be not, as the eyes of flesh and blood (which are deceived:) but
true and pure and do behold her pure because purified in his own dear son,
whose blood does ever and alone cover all her spots and blemishes from him.
In which respect yet, to satisfy the natural man and all such as sometimes
yealde him the hearing: (as Saint Bernard said of Christ, so say I of her:) we
must distinguish inter oculum and aurem: for si oculus attendat, quid
apparebat? Quomodo formosus erat Christus etc. To the eye what did christ
appear? How was he al fair or fair? For what saw the ey in Christ but
blacknes and deformity? When his hands were spread upon the tree and he was
put to despisal among the wicked, to pains by his enemies: when he, that was to
be honored of al and could have put an amaze and fear in the hearts of al,
yet was a contempt and laughing stock to al? But we must (says he)
distinguish inter oculum and aurem: for oculus did pronunciaere Christu^
infirmum, oculus foedum etc. To the eye therefore Christ was weak, to the eye
foul foul, because miserable, foul because condemned to die a most shameful
death: but yet auri, to the ear, he was Dei filius: auri formosus, prae filijs
hominum formosus innotuit. To the ear he was the son of God, to the ear he
was fair and al fair: so say I of the church: she is put to despisal and pains
in the world: she is no better then a stone of offense: she is not fair but al
foul: haeretica, maligna, maculata with sin: and how is she not charged by
the wicked? But yet auri, to the ear, she is the love, the bride, the spouse
of Jesus Christ: she is his house, his temple, his delight, the very white of
his eye: she is (as here you do here) fair and all fair: And as for them
ye otherwise judge, (as multituds ever have don and do now adays) esteeming
the church by her outward state and other frailtes, they are such me^, as do
plus tribuere oculo qua^ oraculo, i. carnis sensui quam verbo Dei: they ascribe
more to sense then to faith, as Saint Bernarde speaks. Otherwise as Christ was
niger oculis persequentium, niger reputatione Herodis: and yet was formosus
confessione latronis, fide centurionis: black ergo in the eyes of his
persecuting enemies, black in Herod's eye: and yet fair and al fair to the
thief confessing, to the Centurion believing: so the church this love of our
savior is carnal, co^temptible, foul, what less then all foul in the eyes of
Turks, Jews, Epicures, Atheists, Papists, and all the wicked, where yet she is
no less then fair and al fair in the eyes of all the faithful, who,
believing, do by faith behold her all fair in the blood of her spotles
Christ: to end in a word: according to the truth of this her commendation
where with I began: that she is al fair and that there is in her no spot to be
found.

FINIS.

