A Joyful Song of the Royal receiving of the Queens most excellent Majesty
into her highness Camp at Tilsburie in Essex: on Thursday and Friday the
eight and ninth of August, 1588.
To the Tune of Triumph and Joy.


GOod English men whose valiant hearts,
With courage great and manly parts,
Do mind to daunt the ouerthwarts,
of any foe to England.
Attend a while and you shall hear,
What love and kindness does appear,
From the princely mind of our love dear,
Elizabeth Queen of England.
To cheer her soldiers one and all,
Of honor great or title small,
(...) by what name you will them call,
(...) of England.
The time being dangerous now ye know,
That foreign enemies to and fro,
For to invade us make a show,
and our good Queen of England.
Her Majesty by grave advise,
Considering how the danger lies,
By all good means she can devise,
for the safety of all England.
Has pointed men of honor right,
With all the speed they could or might,
A Camp of men there should be pight,
on Tilsburie hill in England.
Her grace being given to understand,
The mighty power of this her land,
And the willing hearts therein she fand,
from every shire in England.
The mighty troops have showed the same,
That day by day to London came,
From shires and towns too long to name,
to serve the Queen of England.
Her grace to glad their hearts again,
In princely person took the pain,
To honor the troops and Martial train,
in Tilsburie camp in England.
On Thursday the eight of August last,
Her Majesty by water past,
When storms of wind did blew so fast,
would fear some folk in England.
And at her forte she went on land,
That near to Tilsburie (strong) does stand,
Where all things furnished there she fand,
for the safe defense of England.
The great shot then, did rage and roar,
Replied by a forte on the other shore,
Whose poudred peilets what wo^^^ ye have more,
would fear any foe to England
Her highness then to the camp did go,
The order there to see and know:
Which, her Lord general did dutifully show,
in Tilsburie camp in England.
And every Captain to her came,
And every Officer of fame,
To show their duty and their name.
to their sovereign Queen of England.
Of tents and cabins, thousands three,
Some built with bows and many a tree,
And many of canuasse she might see.
in Tilsburie camp in England.
Each Captain had his colors brave,
Set over his tent in wind to wave,
With them their officers there they have,
to serve the Queen of England.
The other lodginges had their sign,
For soldiers where to sup and dine,
And for to sleep: with orders fine,
in Tilsburie Camp in England.
And vittaling boothes, there plenty were,
Where they sold meat, bread, cheese and beer.
One should have been hanged for selling too dear
in Tilsburie camp in England.
To tell the joy of all and some,
When that her Majesty was come,
Such playing on phiphes and many a drum,
to welcome the Queen of England.
Displaying of Ensigns very brave,
Such throwing of hats what would ye have,
Such cries of joy, God keep and save,
our noble Queen of England.
And then to bid her grace good night,
Great Ordenance shot with pellets pight,
Fourteen fair pieces of great might,
to feaze the foes of England.
Her Majesty went then away,
To the Court, where that her highness lay,
And came again on the next day,
to Tilsburie camp in England.
The Captains yerly did prepare,
To have their battle set out fair,
Against her highness coming there,
to Tilsburie camp in England
And long before her highness came,
Each point was ordered so in frame,
Which served to set forth the fame,
of a royal camp in England.
The gallant horsemen mounted brave,
With stomachs stout that courage have,
Whose countenance stern might well deprave
in fight, the foe of England.
The armde men, bowmen, and the shot,
Of Muskets and Caliuers hot,
None of these wanted well I wot,
in Tilsburie camp in England.
Fifty ensigns spread there were,
Of several colors fine and fair,
Of drums and phyp^es, great numbers there.
in Tilsburie camp in England.
The battle placed in order due,
mighty host (...) tell you true,
A famous sight it was to view.
that royal camp in England.
The host thus set in battle ray,
In brauer sort then I can say,
For want of knowledge to display,
so goodly a camp in England.
How the maine battle, and the wings,
The vauntgarde, rearewarde, and such things,
The horsemen whose sharp lances stinges,
in fight the foe of England.
The Noble men, and men of fame,
In duty bound did show the same,
To wait when that her highness came,
our sovereign Queen of England.
And the being come into the field,
A martial staff, my Lord did yield,
Unto her highness, being our shield,
and marshall chiese of England.
Then rode she along the camp to see,
To every Captain orderly,
Amid the ranks so royally,
the marshall thief of England.
What princely words her grace declarde,
What gracious thanks in every ward,
To every soldier none she sparde,
that served any where for England.
With princely promise none should lack,
Meat or drink, or cloth for back,
Gold and silver should not slack,
to her marshall men of England.
Then might she see the hats to fly
And every soldier shouted hye,
For our good Queen we will fight or dye,
on any foe to England.
And many a Captain kissed her hand
As the past forth through every band,
And lest her train far off to stand,
from her marshall men of England.
Two hours she spent among them there,
Her princely pleasure to declare,
Where many a one did say and swear,
to live and dye for England.
And would not ask one penny pay,
To charge her highness any way,
But of their own would find a stay,
to serve her grace for England.
To my Lords pauilion then she went
A sumptuous fair and famous tent,
Where dinner time her highness spent,
with martial men of England.
In the evening when the tide was come,
Her highhnesse thankt them all and some,
With trumpets shrile and sound of drum,
returned the queen of England.
To the blockhouse where she took her barge,
There diverse Captains had their charge,
Then shot the cannons off at large.
to honor the queen of England.
And thus her highness went away,
For whose long life all England pray,
King Henry's daughter, and our stay,
Elizabeth queen of England.
What subject would not spend his life,
And all he has to stay the strife,
Of foreign foe that seeks so rife,
to invade this realm of England.
Therefore dear country men I say,
With heart to God let us all pray,
To bless our Armies night and day,
that serve our Queen for England.
FINIS.
T. I.

LONDON Printed by John W^^^^ for Richard Jones. 1588.


